Security of Healthcare Data Using Blockchains: A Survey 

Mayank Pandey1*, Rachit Agarwal2, Sandeep K. Shukla2, Nishchal K. Verma1 

1 Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, U.P., India 
2 Department of CSE, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, U.P., India 
{pandeym, nishchal}@iitk.ac.in, {rachitag, sandeeps}@cse.iitk.ac.in 

* Corresponding author 

Abstract:  The  advancement  in  the  healthcare  sector  is  entering  into  a  new  era  in  the  form  of 
Health 4.0. The integration of innovative technologies like Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), Big 
Data, Cloud Computing, Machine Learning, and Blockchain with Healthcare services has led to 
improved  performance  and  efficiency  through  data-based  learning  and  interconnection  of 
systems. On the other hand, it has also increased complexities and has brought its own share of 
vulnerabilities due to the heavy influx, sharing, and storage of healthcare data. The protection of 
the same from cyber-attacks along with privacy preservation through authenticated access is one 
of  the  significant  challenges  for  the  healthcare  sector.  For  this  purpose,  the  use  of  blockchain-
based  networks  can  lead  to  a  considerable  reduction  in  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  healthcare 
systems and secure their data. This chapter explores blockchain's role in strengthening healthcare 
data security by answering the questions related to what data use, when we need, why we need, 
who needs, and how state-of-the-art techniques use blockchains to secure healthcare data. As a 
case  study,  we  also  explore  and  analyze  the  state-of-the-art  implementations  for  blockchain  in 
healthcare  data  security  for  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  In  order  to  provide  a  path  to  future 
research  directions,  we  identify  and  discuss  the  technical  limitations  and  regulatory  challenges 
associated with blockchain-based healthcare data security implementation.  

Keywords: Blockchain, Healthcare, Cyber-Security, Authentication, Decentralized networks, 
Data security, Data integrity, Trusted data sharing.  

1 

Introduction 

With  the  advancements  in  technology,  various  tools  and  methodologies  exist  that  facilitate  the 
healthcare  sector's  efficient  and  effective  functioning.  The  influx  of  large  volumes  of  data 
coming  from  healthcare-related  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  based  devices  further  catalyzes  the 
functioning.  For example,  IoT devices provide a way to  transform  hand-written diagnostic and 
other related reports into digital reports. They also provide a way to make the storage and sharing 
of such reports convenient with different stakeholders (such as patients, doctors, pharmaceutical 
suppliers,  health  insurance  people,  and  healthcare  administrators).  On  top  of  this,  analytics  on 
healthcare-related data paves the way for many related services to co-exist. For example, in the 
case of a pandemic like COVID-19, the vaccine's development is based on the available genetic 
data  (Le  et  al.,  2020),  while  the  use  of  Remdesivir  for  treatment  is  based  on  clinical  trial  data 
(Beigel et  al.,  2020). Further, as another example, in  (Brown et  al.,  2020), the authors propose 

    
using smartphones to capture and analyze cough sounds for identifying potential infection with 
COVID-19.  Apart  from  this,  analysis  of  the  day-to-day  healthcare  data  provides  policymakers 
necessary inputs to make policies. 

A  significant  healthcare  data  component  comprises  the  Electronic  Healthcare  Records  (EHR) 
(Stafford & Treiblmaier, 2020). EHR contains private medical diagnosis information of a patient. 
Apart  from  EHR,  there  are  various  other  types  of  healthcare  data.  These  include:  (a)  personal 
health record (PHR)  (Bietz et  al.,  2016) that contains  the data such as the physiological  health 
parameters  and  allergies  information  of  the  patient,  (b)  pharmaceutical/medicine  data  that 
includes information on the manufactured medications and its clinical trial data (Burbidge et al., 
2001), (c) health insurance data that comprises of information related to the insurance policy of 
the  patient,  payment  information  and  data  on  the  availed  insurance-related  services  (Moulis  et 
al.,  2015),  and  (d)  data  generated  and  used  for  research  in  healthcare  such  as  those  of  cough 
sounds  for  COVID-19  detection(Brown  et  al.,  2020)  and  X-ray  images  for  pneumonia 
classification  (Stephen  et  al.,  2019). Such immense data help doctors gain  more understanding 
about  their  patients  and  provide  better  healthcare  services  to  them.  Nonetheless,  different 
stakeholders  exploit  different  healthcare  data  for  (a)  enhancing  their  services,  such  as 
pharmaceutical  representatives  influencing  doctors  (Fugh-Berman  &  Ahari,  2007)  or  (b)  doing 
illegal activities such as drug abuse (Berenson & Rahman, 2011). 

A major challenge with such healthcare data is to ensure its security from various cyber-attacks 
such as unauthorized access and tampering. In (Kumar & Walker, 2017), the authors provide in-
depth analysis of: (a) what threats exist (such as EHR in hospitals are not being well protected) 
for the healthcare data, (b) how many people and organizations providing healthcare services are 
affected  by  the  breach  (such  as  Athena  group  hack),  and  (c)  the  behavior  responsible  for  the 
success of such attacks (such as the habit of personal Internet surfing and social media access on 
workplace  computers  along  with  low  cybersecurity  awareness).  Security  of  the  healthcare  data 
has recently been the focus of many policymakers due to various cyber-attack incidents, such as 
the one on the University of Vermont (UVM) Medical Centre and the Ryuk ransomware attack 
in  October  2020.  In  (Dyrda,  2020),  the  author  provides  an  analysis  of  the  significant  cyber-
attacks  that  happened  in  2020  on  healthcare  data  and  reiterates  the  necessity  of  data  security 
education and awareness among the people working in the healthcare sector.  

As the threats to such data increase, preventive measures and research to improve healthcare data 
security are highly critical. One viable solution for improving healthcare data security is  to use 
Blockchain  technology,  which  ensures  the  integrity,  immutability,  and  traceability  of  the  data. 
Blockchain technology was first introduced in 2008 (Nakamato, 2008) with the introduction of 
Bitcoin  as  an  alternative  to  the  existing  centralized  banking  and  payment  structures.  Here,  the 
author  presented  blockchain  as  a  decentralized  ledger  with  the  capability  of  storing  the 
transaction records in blocks that are serially and sequentially connected. Blockchain operates as 
a decentralized peer-to-peer network, where the participants (or the nodes in the network) carry 

out transactions, transaction verification, and mining, and willing participants have a copy of the 
blockchain stored with them, providing redundancy.  

In  healthcare,  applications  of  blockchain  technology  are  in  the  field  of  data  management  and 
sharing (Hölbl et al., 2018), pharmaceutical supply chain management (Khezr et al., 2019), and 
secure medical data storage; and log management (De Aguiar et al., 2020). In (Shi et al., 2020), 
the  authors  survey  and  discover  the  research  opportunities  regarding  the  collaboration  of 
blockchain technology with other emerging technologies such as big data, machine learning, and 
IoT. In (Tariq et al., 2020), the authors examine blockchain technology’s role in the data security 
of  resource-constrained  medical  IoT  devices.  The  authors  identify  that  such  devices  are 
vulnerable  to  attacks  such  as  forgery  and  data  tampering.  They  also  survey  blockchain-based 
solutions  that  address  the  security  issues  faced  by  the  healthcare  systems.  In  (Hardin  &  Kotz, 
2019),  the  authors  provide  an  analysis  of  the  challenges  faced  during  the  implementation  of 
blockchain  technology  in  healthcare  systems  in  terms  of  security  parameters  such  as  integrity, 
confidentiality,  access  control,  and  interoperability.  The  authors  identify  that  such  technology 
benefits for healthcare security come with their own sets of challenges, such as deciding on data 
requirements  and  individual  privacy.  In  (Radanović  &  Likić,  2018),  the  authors  explore  the 
opportunities for blockchain technology in medicine and argue that such technology can mitigate 
the shortcomings related to different types of data such as EHR. They also provide a discussion 
on  the  benefits  of  blockchain  technology  not  only  with  respect  to  data  security  but  also  with 
respect to other factors such as processing time reduction, cost reduction, and transparency. Note 
that, henceforth, in this chapter, we refer to blockchain technology as blockchain.  

In  terms  of  healthcare  data  security,  all  the  aforementioned  work  focuses  on  the  solutions  for 
securing EHR data. Pharmaceuticals, administration, and health insurance are also useful as the 
organizations  relevant  to  these  components  are  part  of  the  healthcare  domain  and  are  actively 
involved  in  sharing,  accessing,  and  using  the  generated  data.  Healthcare  data  security  also 
encompasses  protecting  information  such  as  medical  diagnosis  data,  health  insurance  data, 
pharma supply chain data, and biomedical research data. 

In  this  chapter,  we  assess  the  role  of  the  blockchain  in  strengthening  healthcare  data  security 
through  the  fundamental  questions:  why,  what,  who,  when,  and  how,  i.e.,  4W  and  1H.  More 
specifically,  we  answer  why  we  need  a  blockchain  for  the  security  of  healthcare  data?  What 
(Which type) are the healthcare data areas we need a blockchain for implementing? Who (Which 
organizations and individuals) need a blockchain for protecting their healthcare data? When do 
we need a blockchain for the security of healthcare data, and how to implement a blockchain for 
the same? 

Based on the above questions, our key contributions through this chapter are: 

●  Survey: Using the 4W1H methodology, we present an understanding on what data, when 
we need, why we need, who needs, and how state-of-the-art techniques use blockchains 

to secure healthcare data. We also identify the gaps present in the state-of-the-art methods 
related  to  the  implementation  of  blockchain  in  healthcare  data  from  the  security 
perspective  and  survey  them.  We  also  provide  a  survey  of  technical  and  regulatory 
challenges  faced  in  the  process  of  implementation  of  blockchain-based  healthcare  data 
security  systems.  We  identify  that  a  proper  user  interface  for  the  blockchain-based 
systems  is  warranted.  Also,  the  immutability  of  data  on  the  blockchain  is  in  direct 
contention with the right to be forgotten, which comes under the right to privacy.  

●  Application-Specific:  We  explore  blockchain's  role  towards  healthcare  data  security  in 

pandemic situations like COVID-19. 

●  Research-Perspectives: Based on the survey, we provide prospective future research and 

development directions that can benefit authorities and researchers in the field.   

The remaining chapter is organized as follows. First, via section 2, we provide an understanding 
of  the  healthcare  data  types  and  their  managing  institutions.  Then,  in  section  3,  we  provide 
services  that  are  rendered  using  such  healthcare  data.  In  section  4,  we  discuss  and  explain  the 
different  security  issues  present  when  using  conventional  healthcare  data  storage  and 
management systems. In section 5 and section 6, we provide the security parameters required for 
healthcare data protection and an overview of healthcare-relevant blockchain functionalities and 
advantages,  respectively.  In  section  7,  we  discuss  the  functionality  of  different  state-of-the-art 
blockchain-based  solutions  that  enable  data  security.  In  sections  8  and  9,  we  present  various 
technical limitations and regulatory challenges that exist while implementing a blockchain-based 
solution for healthcare data security, respectively. In section 10, as a case study, we study how 
blockchains can help in achieving data security in the case of a pandemic such as COVID-19. In 
the end, in section 11, we present the conclusion and perspective to future research directions. 

2 

Types of healthcare data systems and managing institutions  

The  healthcare  data  is  a  pool  of  all  the  information  relevant  to  the  organizations  and  people 
associated  with  the  healthcare  sector.  Before  we  discuss  blockchain  implementation  for 
healthcare  data  security,  we  provide  the  details  of  the  healthcare  sector  data.  This  section 
provides  a  brief  discussion  on  the  different  categories  of  data  associated  with  the  healthcare 
sector and their managing institutions. In the healthcare sector, the data systems operate through 
the functionalities comprising the generation, access control, and individual health data storage. 

We  broadly  categorize  the  healthcare  data  into  three  categories:  personal  data,  pharmaceutical 
data, and insurance-based data. We further classify personal data into patient data and healthcare 
professional  data.  Among  the  patient  data,  the  most  common  and  frequently  generated  patient 
records are the Electronic Health Records (EHRs) (Hayrinen et al., 2008).  An EHR contains 
personal details, physiological health parameters, medical history, laboratory-generated medical 
test  results,  and  pharmaceutical  prescription  data  of  a  patient.  Healthcare  institutions  such  as 
hospitals and clinics generate EHR data based on the healthcare professionals' and laboratories’ 

    
diagnoses.  Specialist  third-party  companies  and  vendors  generally  do  the  storage  and 
management  of  the  EHRs,  while  the  healthcare  institutions  and  professionals  are  their  clients 
(Mandl & Kohane, 2012).  

Other than EHRs, Personal Health Records (PHRs) are the records generated and owned by the 
patients (Win et al., 2006) where each patient provides access to his PHR information based on 
the need. A PHR is usually generated using smartphones and various other IoT-based wearable 
medical  devices.  It  contains  information  on  the  general  well-being  of  a  patient,  including  data 
about  blood  pressure,  heart  rate,  body  temperature,  allergies,  vaccination  history,  and  previous 
surgeries. PHRs pave the way for remote assistance and decrease the response time in case of an 
emergency.    The  healthcare  professionals  render  their  advice  to  the  patients  based  on  the  data 
available in  both  EHR and PHR. PHR data is  managed by the individuals themselves with the 
help  of  specialized  third-party  tools.  For  example,  the  use  of  smartphone-based  applications, 
web-based  storage  services  (such  as  HealthVault  (Sunyaev  et  al.,  2010)),  and  specialized 
software for data storage (Carrion et al., 2011). 

In  the  personal  data  category,  another  type  of  data  is  the  information  about  the  healthcare 
professionals, administrative staff, and researchers (Fugh-Berman & Ahari, 2007). This data 
contains  personal  details,  professional  qualifications,  work  timings,  and  the  details  of  their 
professional  tasks.  The  data  encompassing  these  details  is  vital  for  the  smooth  day-to-day 
operations  of  healthcare  organizations.  The  respective  institutions  to  which  the  person  is 
affiliated manage the storage and management of such personal information.   

Besides  the personal  data, the  data on pharmaceuticals is  also  vital.  The pharmaceutical  data 
have  different  attributes,  such  as  those  related  to  clinical  trial  data,  medication  manufacturing 
information, and pharma supply chain data containing the distribution information. The clinical 
trial data is essential for the invention of new treatment methods in the form of medications and 
vaccines.  The  medication  manufacturing  information  includes  the  medication's  composition, 
information  related  to  side  effects  and  allergies,  and  clinical  trial  data  for  research  and 
development  activities.  In  addition,  data  on  manufacturing  date,  expiry  date,  and  dosage 
information  for  manufactured  medications  is  also  critical.  The  information  on  medications  for 
various ailments is essential for doctors to proceed with treatment. On the other hand, the supply 
chain is also a crucial part of the pharmaceutical industry. The supply chain data is essential in 
the distribution of raw material and the final product. It constitutes information such as the list of 
distributors,  quantity,  distribution,  product  storage,  and 
transportation-related  condition 
information. Such pharmaceutical data is stored and managed by the pharmaceutical companies 
either by themselves or through specialist third-party organizations.  

For smooth processing of patient treatment, health insurance information and the related data 
are also essential (Pitacco, 2014). Such data is usually shared between insurance companies and 
hospitals.  This  data  contains  both  health  and  financial  information  of  a  patient  along  with  the 

information on availed insurance facilities. More specifically, it includes details such as personal 
details,  medical  history,  and  insurance  plan  preference.  Such  data  is  stored  and  managed  by 
insurance companies.  

Figure 1: Healthcare Data Types 

In summary, in this section, we discussed different healthcare data types (summarized in Figure 
1: Healthcare Data Types) and the institutions that store and manage the same. Here, we see that 
the scope of healthcare data goes beyond just the medical diagnosis reports and personal health 
information  and involves  data belonging to  pharma, health insurance, and details  of healthcare 
professionals.  

3  Healthcare data related services 

In  section  2,  we  detailed  different  healthcare  data  categories.  Since  the  healthcare  data  goes 
beyond just the medical reports and the personal health information, the related services also go 
beyond  diagnosis  by  doctors  and  medical  tests.  The  scope  of  these  services  is  diverse.  They 
range  from  individual patients  via diagnosis  to  organizational  and national  level  via healthcare 
resource  deployment.  Apart  from  this,  the  functioning  of  the  services  related  to  healthcare 

 
research programs, pharmaceutical distribution, and health insurance procedures require diverse 
healthcare  data  as  a  vital  input.  The  healthcare  data-related  services  are  broadly  classified  as 
medical-related  services,  distribution  services,  and  commercial  activity-related  services.  In  this 
section, we discuss such healthcare data-related services in detail.   

The most significant healthcare service (medical-related service) based on the healthcare data is 
the patient diagnosis and treatment plan. The doctors affiliated to a hospital or operating in an 
individual  capacity  assisted  by  nurses  primarily  provide  such  services  (Hayrinen  et  al.,  2008). 
The doctors thus require data from the sources such as EHRs and PHRs to prescribe treatment 
through methods such as medication and surgery.   

Healthcare Research and Development (R&D) plays a vital role in developing healthcare-
related  services  (medical-related  services)  based  on  healthcare  data.  Apart  from  the  primary 
task  of  diagnosis,  doctors  and  other  researchers  contribute  to  the  healthcare  research  activities 
based on their domain expertise and daily experience (such as mobile health applications, as in 
(Brown  et  al.,  2020)).  For  the  pharmaceutical  companies,  research  for  new  medications  is  an 
essential  component  of  their  operations,  along  with  clinical  trials  for  new  medications.  These 
trials  generate  large  quantities  of  data  vital  to  the  discovery  of  new  forms  of  medication  and 
treatment.  Data  such  as  EHR  and  pharmaceutical  research  data  in  the  healthcare  domain  are 
essential for improving the medication for various ailments, healthcare monitoring devices, and 
even  the  guidelines  related  to  daily  functioning  lifestyle  (Koh  &  Tan,  2005).  Also,  healthcare 
data is an essential input for artificial intelligence (AI) based research in the healthcare domain. 
For example, the use of surgical robots, which find their utility through minimally invasive and 
precise  incisions  during  the  surgery  process  (Bergeles  &  Yang,  2014).  Another  example  is  the 
application  of  IBM  Watson,  a  supercomputer  for  clinical  decision  support  systems  (M.  N. 
Ahmed  et  al.,  2017).  In  addition  to  new  treatments,  healthcare  data  aids  the  research  on 
discovering new diseases, bacteria, and viruses. 

In  addition  to  the  data  described  in  section  2,  the  aforementioned  services  also  contribute  a 
significant  amount  of  healthcare  data  (Dash  et  al.,  2019).  In  (Dash  et  al.,  2019),  the  authors 
discuss the commercial big data analytics services platforms operating in the healthcare sector, 
such as Ayasdi1, IBM Watson Health2 , and Enlitic,3 that use and generate a significant amount 
of  healthcare  data  for  both  medical-related  and  commercial  services.  These  platforms  provide 
services  in  a  number  of  applications  such  as  healthcare  monitoring,  prediction,  knowledge, 
and recommendation systems (Bahri et al., 2019).  

1 Ayasdi Care is a software package for healthcare solutions with respect to providing efficient data-based 
patient care strategies for doctors and hospitals. 
2 IBM Watson Health combines human experts and AI to help healthcare researchers provide patient care 
decisions based on big data analytics. 
3 Enlitic company uses deep learning algorithms on clinical data to help radiologists with illness diagnosis. 

 
Figure 2: Healthcare Data related Services. Here, color encoding represents the three classes: 
medical-related services (red), distribution services (green), and commercial activity related 
(blue). 

Apart from such services, there are services related to the supply chain in the healthcare sector 
and  resource  deployment.  The  EHR  and  PHR  data  of  different  patients  from  a  specific 
geographical  region  consolidates  to  provide  an  overview  of  the  health  conditions  prevailing  in 
that  region.  Healthcare  institutes  and  professionals  deploy  their  resources  to  perform  medical-
related services based on the requirement deduced from the local EHR and PHR data (Landry et 
al.,  2016).  For  example,  the  overwhelming  number  of  patients  due  to  community  transfer  of 
COVID-19 prompted an increase in intensive care units (ICU) capacity. The doctors and nursing 
staff  were  redeployed  to  provide  medical  services  such  as  critical  care  units  with  immediate 
training  (Lee  et  al.,  2020).  In  another  similar  approach,  in  Ethiopia,  the  government  deployed 
medical staff based on healthcare data such as child immunization, child mortality rate, maternal 
mortality  rate,  and  presence  of  skilled  manpower  in  different  areas  of  the  country  
(Teklehaimanot  &  Teklehaimanot,  2013).  The  resource  deployment's  objective  was  to  achieve 
the results according to the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Millennium development goals. 
The  consolidated  EHR  and  PHR  data,  along  with  pharmaceuticals  manufacturing  data,  is  an 
essential  input  for  the  pharmaceutical  companies  for  the  distribution  services,  marketing, 
manufacturing, sales, and distribution for healthcare-related products (Jaberidoost et al., 2013).  

Another  commercial  activity  service  related  to  the  healthcare  sector  is  the  Health  Insurance 
Service  (Pitacco, 2014). Different  health  insurance-related decisions such as  premium  amount, 
healthcare insurance plan, and whether to offer insurance or not for a patient is based on his/her 
healthcare  data  components  such  as  medical  history,  ailments,  allergies,  and  previous  claim 
history. 

 
In  summary,  in  this  section,  we  classified  various  healthcare  data-related  services  into  three 
classes  (also  summarized  in  Figure  2  using  different  color  codes).  We  further  identify  that 
doctors play an essential role in  diagnosis  services. The non-medical  professionals  also  form  a 
significant part of the healthcare workforce and are involved in various other related services. All 
the  aforementioned  services  require  storage  of  different  types  of  healthcare  data  as  well  as 
sharing amongst  themselves. As such services are essential and critical,  it is important  that the 
healthcare-related  organizations,  which  are  both  public  and  private,  receive  accurate  data  and 
take proper measures to secure the data they generate.       

4 

 Security issues in conventional Healthcare data storage systems 

In  sections  2  and  3,  we  discussed  different  healthcare  data  types  and  the  services  built  using 
them,  respectively.  Due  to  the  sensitive  nature  of  the  data  involved,  its  security  is  of  utmost 
importance.  As  there  is  a  significant  increase  in  healthcare  data  generation,  the  data  storage 
systems  have  transformed  from  paper-based  record  keeping  to  cloud-based  storage.  However, 
there  are  still  security  issues  that  are  storage-centric,  device-centric,  and  services-centric.  In 
(Filkins, 2014), the author analyzed the cyber threat to healthcare organizations in terms of the 
level  of  compromise  and  malicious  traffic.  Most  of  such  malicious  activities  mainly  affect 
healthcare  providers  such  as  hospitals  (72%),  health  insurance  (6.9%),  and  pharmaceuticals 
(2.9%).  The  total  cost  of  the  compromised  healthcare  data,  including  the  factors  such  as 
recovery, legal actions, and new security investments, was more than 142 million dollars in 2013 
for the US healthcare sector. The compromise in PHR and health insurance data resulted in the 
loss  of  12  billion  dollars  for  2  million  US  citizens  in  2013.  The  main  factors  behind  the 
compromise  of  healthcare  data  were  identified  as  unsecured  medical  devices  network,  storage, 
and lack of data security awareness among general citizens. We discuss the security issues and 
challenges faced towards healthcare data storage and management as we proceed. 

The storage-centric security issues arise primarily due to centralized storage and management by 
healthcare-related  organizations  and  are  further  classified  into  vulnerabilities  and  threats.  A 
significant  security limitation  with  respect  to  centralized healthcare data storage systems  is  the 
vulnerability  due  to  a  single  point  of  control.  Since  the  healthcare  data  also  consists  of 
personal and critical information of a patient and healthcare professionals, such control points are 
always  on  the  cyber-criminals  target.  Stealing  such  healthcare  data  and  selling  it  illegitimately 
for  financial  gains  is  the  prime  motivation  for  cyber-criminals  (Fugh-Berman  &  Ahari,  2007) 
(Hathaliya & Tanwar, 2020). A successful cyber-attack on the control point can compromise the 
data integrity and confidentiality of all the associated systems.  

Ambiguity  in  the  patient  data  ownership  causes  privacy-related  issues  and  the  problem  of 
unauthorized access to stored data. For example,   an EHR, although generated by the hospitals 
and the doctors, concerns a patient. Currently, such data is also managed by specialist third-party 
companies (Mandl & Kohane, 2012). Thereby it raises an issue of who owns the data (doctors, 

hospitals,  or  patients).    Similarly,  the  patients'  health  insurance  data  is  managed  either  by  the 
insurance  companies  themselves  or  through  specialist  cloud-based  storage  companies.  This 
brings up the privacy issue related to who owns the data (insurance companies or patients) and in 
what  sense  the  data  can  be  used.  The  ownership  decisions  related  to  healthcare  data,  such  as 
access  control,  access  rights,  and  modification  privileges,  are  a  significant  issue  affecting  the 
security and privacy of healthcare data storage systems (Huda et al., 2009). 

Due  to  such  vulnerabilities,  cloud-based  healthcare  data  storage  systems  are  under  constant 
threat  of  various  cyber-attacks.  The  attempt  to  gain  unauthorized  access  is  through  different 
methods such as Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks, password attacks, malware attacks, and social 
engineering  attacks  (Dogaru  &  Dumitrache,  2017).  Attackers  perform  the  Denial-of-Service 
attacks  (Hussain  et  al.,  2003)  to  shut  down  a  hospital’s  network  by  flooding  it  with  false 
requests. Similarly, attackers do a social engineering attack (Krombholz et al., 2015) to carry out 
insurance  fraud  and  steal  patient  records  through  a  careless  insider.  Further,  attackers  steal  the 
passwords  (Raza  et  al.,  2012)  through  techniques  such  as  brute  force  and  phishing  to  gain 
unauthorized access to patient’s healthcare records. Moreover, in the malware attack (Spence et 
al.,  2018),  the  attackers  plant  malicious  code  in  either  the  healthcare  data  storage  systems  or 
medical  devices  to  disrupt  the  functioning.  A  significant  malware  attack  was  the  wannacry 
ransomware attack (Hsiao & Kao, 2018) which took place worldwide. It locked the files in the 
systems  which  were  using  the  older  Windows  operating  system  and  demanded  payment  of 
bitcoin  cryptocurrency  to  unlock  them.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  COVID-19  outbreak,  the 
attackers have performed several similar attacks on hospitals (Muthuppalaniappan & Stevenson, 
2021). In (Seh et al., 2020), the authors analyze financial losses suffered by the USA's healthcare 
sector due to data breaches owing to these attacks. They report that, in the last 15 years, around 
249 million people were affected due to different data breach incidents. In 2019, 2013 incidents 
were reported in 86 countries. The average cost of a healthcare data breach is 6.45 million dollars 
worldwide, with cost in the USA being highest around 15 million dollars, according to an IBM 
report  (Alder,  2019).  Such  a  large-scale  financial  loss  prompts  proper  measures  to  secure  the 
healthcare system. 

Apart from the attacks from the outside of the healthcare system, malicious insiders are also a 
significant  issue threatening  healthcare data security  (Hathaliya &  Tanwar, 2020). The  attempt 
for  unauthorized  access  to  medical  information  is  either  carried  out  by  someone  inside  the 
system  or  from  outside  the  system  taking  advantage  of  a  careless  insider.  An  insider  with  the 
required  credentials  but  not  the  authorization  to  see  the  healthcare  data  can  misuse  his/her 
privilege.  

Apart from the storage-related issues, there are threats to healthcare data due to vulnerabilities 
present  in  specialized  or  related  healthcare  devices  (such  as  CT  scanners,  X-ray  machines, 
and MRI machines (Dogaru & Dumitrache, 2017) and those involved in mobile health or more 
commonly known as mHealth). A major device-centric security issue related to healthcare data 

protection is the vulnerability of such devices and the data generated using them. For example, 
the  procedure  to  send  the  data  involves  connecting  these  devices  to  the  cloud,  where  the 
aggregated  information  is  stored  and  managed  (Plachkinova  et  al.,  2015).  On  top  of,  these 
devices are vulnerable to potential network-based attacks, such as false data injection attacks (M. 
Ahmed  &  Ullah,  2018),  Denial  of  Service  attack,  and  medjacking  attack  (Djenna  &  Eddine 
Saidouni, 2018). The individuals using these devices to record and send their physiological and 
healthcare  data  generally  lack  awareness  about  cybersecurity,  making  their  device  and  data 
vulnerable.  In  (Kawamoto,  2017),  the  author  analyses  the  incidents  of  data  breaches  in  IoT 
devices  through  a  survey  where  about  47.2%  of  the  respondents  from  the  healthcare  sector 
accepted data breaches from their medical IoT devices.  

In addition to the storage and device-related data security challenges, service-centric issues also 
cause healthcare data threats.  Several issues arise in the big data analytics-based services in the 
healthcare domain (Abouelmehdi et al., 2018). These issues are due to parallel data storage and 
analysis  across  multiple  servers.  The  computations  on  the  same  also  run  parallelly  at  multiple 
clusters. The compromise of even one such cluster can lead to wrong analysis (Gahi et al., 2016). 
Therefore,  in  addition  to  storage,  the  vulnerability  of  computational  analysis  algorithms  is 
also a significant security issue.  

In addition to medical data security issues, the protection of pharmaceutical supply chain data is 
also  challenging.  The pharmaceutical  products  are distributed to  hospitals, clinics, and medical 
stores through a wide network of supply chains. For pharmaceutical companies, the protection of 
their  supply  chain  information  to  prevent  pharmaceutical  counterfeiting  is  a  significant 
challenge  (Coustasse  et  al.,  2010).  The  data  on  manufactured  medications,  including 
composition,  manufacturing  date,  expiry  date,  and  supply  information,  is  vulnerable  due  to  a 
single point of its storage and access. Pharmaceutical companies must mitigate the risks of data 
breach  attempts  from  outside  as  well  as  inside  the  system  to  ensure  the  smooth  operation  of 
their  services  (Jaberidoost  et  al.,  2013).  Any  breach  of  the  product  distribution  information 
enables the activities such as stealing for misuse and counterfeiting of the drugs (Urciuoli et al., 
2013). Therefore, the protection of pharmaceutical supply chain information is essential for the 
healthcare sector's proper functioning. The same applies to the companies producing biomedical 
devices for hospitals and doctors. 

This section discussed healthcare data-related security issues around various healthcare affiliated 
organizations  and  their  tasks  (also  summarized  in  Figure  3).  We  identify  that  the  healthcare 
sector's  vulnerabilities  related  to  data  security  can  either  be  storage-based,  device-based,  or 
services-based. The storage-based vulnerabilities arise primarily due to centralized control, while 
the  device-based  vulnerabilities  owe  their  presence  to  the  security  resource-constrained 
specialized  medical  devices.  The  services-related  vulnerabilities  occur  due  to  reasons  such  as 
parallel  data  storage  and  computation  requirements.  To  mitigate  the  security  threats  caused  by 
vulnerabilities, in the next section, we describe security parameters that are essential. 

Figure 3: Healthcare Data Security Issues 

5 

 Types of security parameters vis-à-vis healthcare sector 

The  security  of  healthcare  data  is  essential  for  the  stakeholders  in  the  healthcare  sector.  The 
overall  healthcare  data  protection  encompasses  a  range  of  security  parameters  such  as  access 
control, data integrity, and traceability (Hardin & Kotz, 2019). In this section, we describe these 
parameters in detail.   

An essential security parameter in the healthcare sector is access control to preserve healthcare 
data privacy  (Abouelmehdi  et  al.,  2017). The medical  records of a particular patient  should be 
accessed only by doctors who are involved in the treatment of the individual in question. Apart 
from the doctors, healthcare organizations' administrative staff access patient data from time to 
time for billing and insurance-related processing. Different countries have different data privacy 
laws, such as the HIPAA act in the USA specifically for healthcare data, general data protection 
laws like Personal Information Protection and electronic documents act in Canada, and General 

 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in European Union. These laws mandate the organizations 
storing  healthcare  data  to  get  the  concerned  person's  consent  through  a  disclosure  form  before 
using his/her data and enforce the data privacy. They make access control of the healthcare data 
essential so that any unauthorized access can be prevented (Dagher et al., 2018). Therefore, the 
healthcare data storage and management systems should have proper access control measures to 
comply with the privacy laws enforced in the country in which they operate. The same applies to 
healthcare  insurance  companies,  medical  research  organizations,  pharmaceutical  companies 
trying to access the medical data for their functioning and research activities. The consent of a 
patient for healthcare data access is also essential in such cases to prevent its misuse.   

Currently,  many  patients  consult  different  doctors  across  multiple  hospitals  either  for  different 
ailments  or  for  taking  a  second  opinion  for  the  same  condition.  Further,  various  healthcare-
related  organizations  collaborate  for  different  data-related  services.  For  example, 
the 
collaboration  between  the  University  of  Oxford  and  AstraZeneca  pharmaceutical  company  for 
developing  a  vaccine  for  prevention  against  COVID-19  (Mullard,  2020).  Such  aspects  need  a 
common platform where data is secure, interoperable, and has proper access control (Iroju et 
al., 2013).  

In addition to access control, preserving data integrity is an essential parameter for healthcare 
data  security  (Pandey  et  al.,  2020).  Data  integrity  refers  to  the  process  of  maintaining  the 
accuracy  and  reliability  of  data  over  its  entire  utility  cycle.  In  the  healthcare  domain,  this 
includes  maintaining  the  accuracy  and  integrity  of  the  healthcare  data,  which,  if  lost,  is 
catastrophic.  Thus,  the  authorities  should  regulate  any  unauthorized  modification  in  the 
healthcare data.  

To identify the source of data in healthcare data storage and management systems, traceability 
and  auditability  (Hardin  &  Kotz,  2019)  of  the  stored  information  are  essential  security 
parameters. Every day, a considerable amount of healthcare data either gets created or updated. 
Even  after  the  proper  measures,  some  of  this  data  might  be  unauthorized  and  malicious.  For 
instance, someone with credentials to access the healthcare data storage systems inserts incorrect 
information in the records file. Therefore, a secure healthcare data storage system must have the 
provisions for identifying the source of each new entry and modification in it. 

Finally,  protection  against  cyber-attacks  is  the  most  significant  security  parameter  for 
healthcare  data  storage  and  management  systems.  There  are  several  security  threats  to  the 
healthcare  sector  in  the  form  of  cyber-attacks  discussed  in  section  4.  The  objective  of  such 
attacks  is  diverse,  including  stealing  data  through  unauthorized  access,  corrupting  the  data, 
making  the  network  inaccessible,  or  causing  system  malfunctioning.  Any  successful  attack 
causes  a  significant  amount  of  damage  due  to  the  sensitive  nature  of  the  data.  Therefore,  the 
healthcare data management systems must be robust enough to thwart such attacks successfully. 

In this section, we summarized the various security parameters that are essential while creating 
the  healthcare  data  storage  and  management  systems.  The  access  control  for  healthcare  data 
management  systems  should  be  strictly  requirements-based  such  as  doctors  for  diagnosis, 
administrative  staff  for  billing  to  preserve  healthcare  data  privacy.  A  proper  design  for  inter-
organizational operability should be there for the smooth operating of healthcare-related services 
without  compromising  on  data  security.  Besides,  healthcare  organizations  must  have  adequate 
auditing  mechanisms  for  their  stored  data.  Finally,  the  system  must  be  robust  enough  to  resist 
outsider  as  well  as  malicious  insider  attacks  successfully.  As  we  proceed,  we  discuss 
blockchain's utility in implementing these parameters for data security in the healthcare sector. 

6  Blockchain components and properties for improvement in data security 

Blockchain technology is based on decentralized networks introduced initially as a channel for 
cryptocurrency generation and payments (Nakamato, 2008). A blockchain is a distributed ledger 
consisting  of  data  stored  in  the  form  of  blocks  sequentially  linked  to  each  other  through  hash 
values of block data. Once the data gets recorded on the ledger, it is hard to modify it due to its 
immutability  property.  It  prevents  unauthorized  modification  as  well  as  provides  for 
traceability of healthcare data. There is  no centralized storage of the blockchain  data.  Instead, 
each participating node in the decentralized network maintains a copy of the blockchain stored 
with  it.  At  present,  many  applications  use  blockchain  technology,  including  healthcare 
(Engelhardt, 2017). The use of blockchain in the healthcare sector has the potential to improve 
the transparency and security of healthcare data (Agbo et al., 2019).  

The  security  of  a  blockchain  network  is  linked  to  the  permission  level  for  new  participants. 
Based  on  the  permission  rules  for  new  participants  joining,  there  are  two  categories  of  a 
blockchain-enabled  platform:  permissionless  and  permissioned  blockchain  (Wust  &  Gervais, 
2018).  In  a  permissionless  blockchain,  any  person  is  allowed  to  join  and  transact  with  other 
users  without  any  pre-authentication  and  a  central  authority.  For  permissionless  blockchains, 
there is no single point of control, and hence the scenario of system malfunctioning due to the 
failure  of  a  centralized  administrator  is  not  present.  The  blockchain  for  bitcoin  cryptocurrency 
was  the  first  instance  of  a  permissionless  blockchain  (Nakamato,  2008).  A  permissionless 
blockchain is always public. On the other hand, a permissioned blockchain is for a single group 
or  organization  only.  Here  a  central  authority  is  present  for  the  tasks  such  as  providing 
permission to join, assigning roles, and granting privileges to the network's nodes. However, the 
other operations are carried out internally without interference from the authority. For example, 
Walmart Canada uses  a  permissioned blockchain  for food supply chain  management  (Smith  et 
al., 2020) using the Hyperledger Fabric framework (Androulaki et al., 2018). Since the number 
of  nodes  able  to  participate  is  limited  in  number,  the  time  required  to  verify  data  and  create  a 
block is  lesser than a permissionless  blockchain.  A permissioned blockchain  is  either a private 
permissioned  blockchain  or  a  public  permissioned  blockchain.  A  private  permissioned 
blockchain has the criteria for  entry  as well as roles and specified tasks  for each user. On the 

other  hand,  a  public  permissioned  blockchain  (Ruiz,  2020)  has  entry  criteria  but  no 
discrimination over access. An example of a public-permissioned blockchain is Alastria (Ibáñez 
&  Moccia,  2020),  a  non-profit  multi-sector  blockchain-based  organization.  A  permissioned 
blockchain between multiple organizations is a consortium blockchain (A. Zhang & Lin, 2018). 

The  blockchain  participants  carry  out  the  addition  of  new  data  in  the  form  of  blocks  to  the 
agreed-upon blockchain through the consensus protocol. The objective is to get rid of a single 
controlling  authority  with  respect  to  decisions  related  to  healthcare  data  storage  and 
management.  A  proper  consensus  protocol  should  be  resilient  enough  to  function  correctly 
against the issues  such as failure of nodes, malicious  nodes, delay in  communication, and data 
corruption. In a consensus mechanism, a participant is selected either through a competition like 
solving a puzzle or through a randomized selection  process.  In  (Xiao et  al.,  2020), the  authors 
provide  a  detailed  survey  on  consensus  protocols  in  the  blockchain.  Among  these  protocols, 
Proof  of  Work  (PoW)  is  the  first  significant  consensus  procedure  (Nakamato,  2008).  In  this 
case, the participant nodes compete amongst themselves to find the solution to a cryptographic 
puzzle through a brute-force-based process. In another consensus protocol, Proof of stake (PoS), 
a node is selected from a group of validators for the block formation with selection probability 
depending  on  cryptocurrency  units  staked  into  the  network  (Saleh,  2021).  Both  PoW  and  PoS 
work in both permissionless and permissioned blockchains. Practical byzantine fault tolerance 
(PBFT) (Hao et al., 2018) and the Raft consensus protocol (Ongaro, D.; Ousterhout, 2014) are 
the  consensus  mechanisms  designed  only  for  the  permissioned  and  consortium  blockchain 
platforms  with  the  property  of  byzantine  fault  tolerance  (Castro  &  Liskov,  2002).  Their 
functioning involves one node selected as the leader to initiate the block formation based on the 
feedback from the rest of the follower nodes regarding the validity of transactions. The objective 
is  to  reach  a  consensus  with  the  correct  information  despite  the  malicious  and  faulty  nodes 
present and sending false information. The blockchain-based networks use several other methods 
such as Proof of Authority (PoA), Proof of capacity (PoC), and Tendermint. 

Another critical function of the blockchain is hashing of the data through hash algorithms. A 
hash  algorithm  converts  a  data  string  of  any  length  into  a  fixed  output  of  binary  data.  For 
blockchain, the hash algorithms used are SHA-256 (Gueron et al., 2011) and ethash (Han et al., 
2019). It is nearly impossible to predict the input data from the hashed output. In a blockchain, 
each  block  has  the  previous  block  hash  value  stored  as  part  of  its  data.  The  property  of  hash-
based  linking  of  blocks  makes  it  difficult  to  alter  the  block  data  by  predicting  the  ever-
increasing chain of hash values. Apart from this, blockchain also uses public-key cryptography 
to  create  node  addresses  and  digitally  signing  transactions.  Some  of  the  encryption  techniques 
used for transactions  in  blockchain  networks are elliptic curve cryptography  (Hankerson  et  al., 
2006), zero-knowledge proof (Partala et al., 2020), and ring signatures. 

Blockchain  technology  is  constantly  evolving  since  its  introduction.  A  significant  stage  in 
evolution  is  the  conception  of  blockchain  2.0  through  the  Ethereum  blockchain  platform. 

Blockchain  2.0  identifies  and  implements  blockchain  as  a  programmable  decentralized  trust 
platform  (Kehrli,  2016)  by  introducing  Smart  Contracts  (Ulieru,  2016).  Smart  contracts  are 
self-enforceable  autonomous  programs  containing  predefined  conditions  for  executing  a 
transaction  on  Ethereum  Virtual  Machine.  Smart  contracts  provide  an  agreement  between  the 
nodes participating in blockchain transactions. Once they get added to the blockchain, no one is 
able  to  modify  them.  When  a  smart  contract  is  called  for  carrying  out  a  transaction,  each 
validating node executes it to verify the transaction's correctness and reach a consensus. Due to 
verification by each node, a smart contract should be deterministic and verifiable. The conditions 
executed  through  smart  contracts  get  recorded  as  transactions  during  addition  into  the 
blockchain. 

As  discussed  in  section  4,  there  are  different  types  of  services  such  as  medical  diagnosis, 
conducting medical tests, and administrative tasks in healthcare. The assigning of different roles 
and privileges to the participating nodes based on which service they carry out is essential in this 
case. Therefore, permissioned blockchains are deemed more suited for healthcare data security. 
While  implementing  blockchain  in  the  healthcare  sector  for  data  security,  one  requires  several 
initialization operations.  One such operation is  assigning predefined roles  and privileges to  the 
entities such as doctors, staff, and patients. In addition to initialization, there are tasks related to 
the functioning after implementation, such as adding, modifying, and accessing healthcare data.  

By defining healthcare data access control through smart contracts, blockchain  enables patient 
ownership  and  control  over  his/her  data.  A  patient  is  able  to  see  the  history  of  his  data 
concerning the activities such as addition and access of the records. In addition to patients, if the 
different  hospitals  use  blockchain  for  inter-organizational  interaction  and  sharing  of  healthcare 
data, it enables a secure standard format for efficient processing of healthcare-related services. 
The  integration  of  hospitals  with  pharmaceutical  and  health  insurance  companies  through 
blockchain  provides  a  secure  platform  for  efficiently  carrying  out  services  such  as  medication 
distribution chain and insurance claim processing. 

Estonia  is  one  of  the  first  countries  that  is  officially  incorporating  blockchain  in  its  healthcare 
sector functioning (Heston, 2017) to ensure data security and its ease of availability for patients. 
For doing so, Estonia collaborates with Guardtime (a private data security company) to secure its 
citizens’  health  records  through  blockchain.  The  government-authorized  entities  do  the 
decentralized  storage.  Auditing  is  error-free  due  to  the  blockchain's  immutability  property. 
Within  the  blockchain,  the  medical  researchers  get  anonymized  data  rewards  in  exchange  for 
mining services.  

Next,  we  answer  the  fundamental  questions  related  to  what,  who,  when,  and  why  (4W) 
blockchain  technology.  We  first  answer  “what”  and  “why”  questions.  For  securing  the 
healthcare  data  such  as  EHR,  PHR,  pharmaceutical  data,  health  insurance  data,  and  data 
generated  by  the  services  (discussed  in  section  3),  blockchain  technology  is  one  solution. 

in  a  centralized  manner.  The  healthcare 

Blockchains  provide  access  control,  integrity,  traceability,  and  immutability  to  the  healthcare 
data,  which  is  currently  missing  from  the  traditional  healthcare  system  that  usually  stores  the 
data 
institutions  such  as  hospitals,  clinics, 
pharmaceutical companies, and health insurance companies that manage data should implement 
blockchain-based solutions and are thus the ones who need blockchain to secure the healthcare 
data they are storing and the data their services are generating. Finally, we answer the  “when” 
question.  To  carry  out  healthcare-related  services,  the  people  involved,  such  as  doctors,  staff 
members,  and  patients,  perform  different  tasks  such  as  uploading,  modifying,  and  accessing 
healthcare data  components.  When used in  the healthcare sector, blockchain  securely  performs 
these tasks, leading to improved healthcare data security. 

In a blockchain, copies of data get distributed across the nodes of the network. This distribution, 
along with immutability, creates the problem of maintaining the privacy of data. The blockchain 
embedded encryption technique enables user privacy, but it does not guarantee the data's privacy. 
In the healthcare segment, as the data contains the medical history, diagnostic information, and 
medical test reports in the form of text and images, it has a large volume and is sensitive. For this 
reason, as a solution, only lightweight  values such as hashes, pointers, and metadata are stored 
on  the  ledger.  Additionally,  to  enable  privacy  protection  in  a  blockchain-based  healthcare 
data storage system, different encryption and authentication techniques are used on top of 
blockchain-provided encryption. 

This  section  discussed  the  advantages  of  blockchain  and  its  properties  vital  in  establishing 
healthcare data security. The immutability of blockchain prevents any unauthorized modification 
of healthcare data. The ability to operate without a centralized authority by establishing a general 
majority-based  consensus  procedure  provides  for  a  transparent  functioning  of  the  healthcare 
sector. Proper use of smart contract functionality enforces the security parameters, such as access 
control  for  the  healthcare-related  services,  inter-organizational  operability  of  healthcare 
organizations, and traceability of healthcare data. In the next  section, we answer  how different 
state-of-the-art approaches implement blockchain for improving healthcare data security. 

7  Blockchain for improvement in healthcare data security 

In  this  section,  we  survey  different  proposed  systems  that  implement  blockchain  to  improve 
healthcare data security through its inherent properties and functionalities.  

In (Zhuang et al., 2020), the authors propose a permissioned blockchain framework for creating a 
patient-centric  health  information  exchange  system  with  an  objective  to  provide  patients  the 
control of their data. In the proposed system, the EHR reports are encrypted and stored on the 
respective  hospital's  servers,  while  their  hash  values  are  stored  on  the  ledger  to  prevent 
tampering.  The  hospital  administrators  also  create  the  pointers  to  each  patient’s  EHR  data 
referred  to  as  touchpoints  and  store  them  on  the  ledger.  The  patient  provides  data  access  to  a 
doctor  by  adding  him/her  to  the  “allowed  list”  through  the  smart  contract.  Any  mismatch 

between the stored records and their hash values on the blockchain gets marked. Like (Zhuang et 
al.,  2020),  in  (Shahnaz  et  al.,  2019),  the  authors  use  the  permissioned  blockchain  and  smart 
contracts to secure healthcare records by defining access rules. The EHR data is stored using 
the  interplanetary  file  system  (IPFS)  protocol  (Benet,  2014),  while  the  ledger  stores  the  hash 
values  of  the  EHRs.  In  the  proposed  system,  smart  contracts  define  patient,  doctor,  and 
administrator  roles  in  the  healthcare  network  and  implement  the  health  records'  storage  and 
management  functions.  A  blockchain  transaction  in  the  proposed  system  defines  the  roles, 
adding, viewing, updating, and deleting health records. The administrator provides entry to the 
doctors  in  the  system  through  a  transaction.  Once  assigned  as  a  doctor,  a  node  performs  the 
transactions related to  adding,  viewing,  and updating the EHR data. The access  control for the 
transaction activities is directly related to the defined roles. Any form of unauthorized tampering 
traces back to the user who performed the said transaction.  

Similarly,  in  (Shen  et  al.,  2020),  the  authors  propose  a  system  for  the  secure  sharing  of 
collaborative healthcare data. The system consists of three stakeholders, third-party, data owners, 
and  miners  operating  on  a  consortium  blockchain.  Here,  the  third-party  is  referred  to  as  the 
entities that perform data analysis-related tasks based on the requests and charge for them. The 
requested data is stored on the blockchain by the owners and accessed by the authorized third-
party.  The  data  owners  and  miners  receive  their  share  of  services’  generated  revenue  through 
smart  contracts  and  a  revenue  model  based  on  the  Shapley  value  method  (An  et  al.,  2019).  It 
provides for a secure and predefined incentive mechanism for healthcare data analysis services. 
In  another  similar  work,  in  (Qiao  et  al.,  2020),  the  authors  propose  a  solution  for  the  secure 
sharing  of  medical  data  between  organizations  from  different  regions  using  cross-chain 
communication between multiple consortium medical blockchains.  

In addition  to  organization-centric data security, blockchain  technology  is  also  used for  secure 
storage and management solutions for home-based healthcare monitoring devices. In (Li et 
al.,  2020),  the  authors  propose  ChainSDI  (Chain  software-defined  infrastructure),  combining 
permissioned  blockchain  with  SDI  for  healthcare  to  ensure  regulation  compliance  by  medical 
institutions.  The  compliance  system  is  used  for  patient-generated  sensor  data  from  wearable 
devices in  addition to EHR data. The authors claim that their system is  compliant with the US 
government's  Health  Insurance  Portability  and  Accountability  Act  (HIPAA).  In  the  proposed 
system, the stakeholders are the admins that manage the data storage, data user (e.g., researcher), 
and patients. Their system invokes direct communication between a patient and the data user for 
access rights. The admin nodes verify whether the data user and patient are on the list registered 
on  the  blockchain.  The  admin  node  grants  a  data  user’s  request  to  access  data  after  receiving 
approval from the concerned patient. All these activities are enabled through smart contracts and 
get recorded on the ledger as transactions.  

Third-party  independence  is  another  parameter  using  which  healthcare  data  security  is 
improved.  In  (S.  Wang  et  al.,  2019),  the  authors  combine  blockchain  with  attribute-based 

encryption  and  cloud  storage  to  enable  PHR  sharing  without  relying  on  a  third-party.  The 
hash values of encrypted PHR data get stored on the blockchain, along with index linking to the 
patients'  ID  and  data  stored  in  the  smart  contract.  The  stakeholders  of  the  system  are  patients, 
users,  and  cloud  server  organizations.  The  PHR  data  stored  is  encrypted  using  attribute-based 
encryption (Bethencourt et al., 2007). When a user requests a patient for data access, the patient 
generates  attribute-based  keys  according  to  user  requirements.  This  key  enables  the  user  to 
access  the  required  data  stored  on  the  server.  Therefore,  it  allows  the  patients  to  have 
requirement-based access control on their data without relying on a third-party.  

Similarly, in (Madine et al., 2020), the authors propose a system for patient-controlled secure 
PHR  management  without  dependence  on  the  third-party.  Their  solution  works  on  both 
permissioned  and  permissionless  blockchains  and  uses  an  IPFS  system  for  data  storage.  The 
patients,  doctors,  hospitals,  and  other  healthcare-related  organizations  are  registered  on  the 
blockchain  as  nodes  through  a  controller  smart  contract.  The  request  and  permission  for 
accessing  records  are  enabled  through  smart  contracts  and  get  stored  as  transactions  on  the 
ledger. The system enables the patient to generate a symmetric key used to encrypt his/her PHR 
data.  Then  the  blockchain-provided  public  key  is  used  to  encrypt  the  symmetric  key.  While 
granting access, the patient’s private key is combined with the doctor's public key to generate a 
re-encryption key. This re-encryption key is used to encrypt the symmetric key. The symmetric 
key is then obtained using the doctor’s blockchain-provided private key followed by the doctor 
accessing  the  requested  data.  Therefore,  the  proposed  system  provides  an  extra  layer  of  data 
privacy  and  enhances  security.  The  hash  values  of  PHR  are  stored  on  the  blockchain,  and  any 
unauthorized  change  gets  detected.  Similarly,  in  (Meena  et  al.,  2019),  the  authors  propose  a 
hyperledger  fabric-based  healthcare  ecosystem  consisting  of  hospitals,  insurance  companies, 
pharmacies, and patients. The objective is to establish the patient’s control over his/her data. A 
vital component of the proposed system is maintaining user and data privacy while forwarding 
the shared data in a computationally efficient manner through a proxy re-encryption algorithm. 

Besides  the  techniques  mentioned  above,  there  are  often  emergencies  when  a  patient  is  not  in 
his/her senses to provide consent for access to PHR data. In such a case, access to the same is 
critical for emergency response staff and doctors involved in treatment, thereby needing secure 
temporary  access  for  emergency  cases.  In  (Rajput  et  al.,  2019),  the  authors  propose  a 
Hyperledger  fabric-based  emergency  access  control  management  system  (EACMS)  for  such 
situations. In EACMS, the patients grant emergency rights for access of their data to emergency 
doctors through smart  contracts  at  the time of registration in  the system.  In EACMS, there  are 
three registered stakeholders: a patient, a doctor, and an emergency doctor (ED), apart from the 
system administrator. Here a doctor is referred to as the regular doctor. During an emergency, the 
administrator assigns a registered ED to the concerned patient. After verifying the authenticity, 
the tasks done by ED, such as accessing patient records and doing modifications, are recorded as 
transactions on the blockchain and are immutable. There is no dependence on a third-party for 

emergency  access  procedures  in  the  proposed  system  as  the  registered  patients  have  already 
defined the access policy through the smart contract.  

In (Y. Wang et al., 2019), the authors propose a consortium-based blockchain along with cloud-
assisted  storage  of  EHRs  to  prevent  unauthorized  access.  Their  proposed  system  has  four 
stakeholders, the data owners (DO), which are patients; data providers (DP), which are doctors; 
cloud servers (CS); and data requesters (DR). The health records are encrypted and uploaded on 
the  cloud  by  DP  after  getting  authorization  from  the  concerned  DO.  The  DP  creates  the 
keywords and index of data and stores them on the blockchain. The DR requests data through the 
keywords  provided  by  the  DP  to  locate  the  relevant  EHR  index  on  the  blockchain.  Then  DO 
authorizes the access request.   

Besides  access  control  and  data  management,  blockchain  also  finds  its  usage  for  securing 
mutual  communication  between  patients  and  data  sharing  between  doctors  from  different 
hospitals  (Liu  et al.,  2019). Here, a typical  transaction stored on the blockchain  consists of the 
medical  data  shared  along  with  the  granter  and  requester  node's  ID.  In  the  approach,  there  are 
three  stakeholders:  the  system  manager,  hospitals,  and  the  users  such  as  doctors  and  patients. 
This  solution  uses  an  improved  version  of  delegated  proof  of  stake  (DPoS)  consensus.  In  the 
consensus  mechanism,  the  doctors  act  as  delegates  in  DPoS  while  the  hospital  server  acts  as 
verifier  supernode.  For  each  doctor,  a  score  based  on  shared  records'  authenticity  is  also 
calculated and stored on the ledger. 

Apart  from  the  access  control,  secure  inter-organization  authentication  is  an  essential 
parameter for secure sharing of healthcare data because patients often visit multiple doctors and 
hospitals for either different ailments or to get a second opinion. In (Yazdinejad et al., 2020), the 
authors  propose  a  public  blockchain-based  authentication  system  for  distributed  hospital 
networks. The hospital nodes act as validators and perform the task of adding members such as 
staff and patients  to  the blockchain  and generating encryption keys for them.  The creating and 
sharing of the keys are done based on the authentication of the concerned patient’s device MAC 
address. The same encryption keys get used for migration across the hospitals. The transaction 
data  recorded  on  the  blockchain  includes  the  patient  health  data  linked  with  the  registration 
information. Such a mechanism removes the dependency on the third-parties as well as decreases 
the time required for authentication.  

Note  that  the  solutions  mentioned  above  do  not  consider  the  direct  participation  of  medical 
devices  in  sharing  the  data.  In  (Zghaibeh  et  al.,  2020),  the  authors  propose  SHealth,  which 
overcomes this limitation and allows direct participation of medical devices. SHealth is a private 
multi-layered  Hyperledger  based  blockchain  system.  Here,  the  nodes  are  classified  into  five 
groups  based  on  the  privileges.  Group  1  includes  partners  as  the  government,  while  group  2 
consists of providers such as hospitals and pharmacies. Group 3 comprises all individual users 
such as doctors, nurses, and patients. While nodes that belong to group 4 and group 5 nodes are 

the addresses of stored records and IoT terminals, respectively. User privileges assigning and full 
data  storage  are  done  by  nodes  in  group  1,  while  group  2  nodes  maintain  the  blockchain  and 
participate in the consensus process. The group 3 nodes are the service consumer nodes and use 
smart  contracts  related  to  health  records  access.  All  the  stakeholders  access  the  relevant  data 
without  compromise  on  authenticity.  Patients  also  use  smart  contracts  for  requests  and  queries 
related  to  appointments,  prescriptions,  and  medical  history.  The  proposed  system  enables  the 
confidentiality  of  the  activities  such  as  doctor  visitation  and  enables  secure  and  smooth  data 
portability among healthcare organizations.  

In  (Nguyen  et  al.,  2019),  the  authors  discuss  the  security  of  medical  data  exchanging  through 
mobile  devices  by  enabling  blockchain-based  transactions.  In  the  proposed  system,  the  mobile 
data (i.e., EHR, PHR, wearable devices data) gets stored in a distributed IPFS file system. The 
patient nodes are provided with an area ID based on their location, while each area has an EHR 
manager  node.  The  blockchain  stores  the  tuple  (containing  patient  ID,  patient  area  ID, 
transaction type, and mobile data hash). The transaction types involve uploading, modification, 
and access of EHR data. Smart contracts define and enable the functioning of these transactions. 
In the proposed system, admin nodes provide access to the EHR manager nodes and define their 
access roles. EHR managers upload encrypted EHR data of their patients in the IPFS file system 
after receiving data. The data storing process gets recorded as the transactions. 

Other  than  the  access  control,  the  interaction  between  wearable  devices  and  associated 
smartphone applications also needs to be secured. In (Tomaz et al., 2020), the authors provide 
a  lightweight  non-interactive  zero-knowledge  proof  authentication  mechanism  for  resource-
constrained  mobile  healthcare  devices.  The  proposed  blockchain-based  system  shares  medical 
data  for  remote  health  monitoring  along  with  the  provision  of  attribute-based  encryption  for 
patient-controlled data privacy. The metadata of health records is stored on the blockchain, while 
the authenticity of accessing nodes is established through smart contracts. 

In  (J.  Xu  et  al.,  2019),  the  authors  propose  a  blockchain-based  solution  called  Healthchain  for 
protecting  the  privacy  of  large-scale  health  data  uploaded  through  medical  IoT  devices.  It 
consists  of  two  sub-blockchains,  Userchain,  which  is  public,  and  Docchain,  which  is  a 
consortium blockchain.  The Docchain  records doctors’ diagnoses  and contains  the transactions 
regarding  the  same.  The  userchain  records  the  transactions  related  to  uploading  medical  IoT 
devices data and accessing own diagnosis records. The transactions on these chains include data 
from  IoT  devices,  keys  for  access  control,  and  doctors'  diagnoses.  It  protects  the  interest  of 
patients  by  keeping  the  information  confidential  and  ensuring  accountability  through  record 
keeping. 

The  healthcare  sector  is  regarded  as  an  essential  service.  The  healthcare  data  is  sensitive  and 
crucial for the smooth  functioning  of medical  facilities. Such aspects  cause the healthcare data 
storage and management systems to be constantly under attack from outside as well as inside the 

system.  The  objective  of  such  attacks  varies  from  data  theft  to  denial-of-service.  The  threat  is 
much more severe in the case of medical IoT device networks. In (Meng et al., 2020), the authors 
propose a blockchain-based solution for protection against malicious attacks. Here, they focus 
on  collaborative  Intrusion  Detection  Systems  (IDS)  based  trust  management  for  preventing 
insider  attacks.  Each  user  has  the  IDS  system  installed  on  its  device,  having  traffic  monitor 
components,  communication  components,  and  a  blacklist  of  malicious  nodes.  In  the  proposed 
system, there are two layers: the medical smartphone network (MSN) layer and the chain layer. 
The MSN layer deals  with  the interaction of smartphone devices with  centralized storage. The 
chain  layer  consists  of  a  consortium  blockchain  that  helps  users  upload  the  unwanted  and 
malicious feature/data packets information. Based on the provided information, the central server 
calculates dynamic trust values through Bayesian inference (Sun et al., 2006). Based on the trust 
values,  each  user  can  record  its  own  blacklist  of  malicious  nodes.  The  data  recorded  on  the 
blockchain  is  immutable,  and  hence  the  list  of  malicious  nodes  cannot  be  manipulated  by 
anyone. 

In  (Zhu  et  al.,  2020),  the  authors  propose  a  solution  to  prevent  counterfeiting  medication 
information  in  the  supply  chain.  Here,  blockchain  technology  is  used  to  track  the  medication 
distribution  within  the  nodes  comprising  manufacturers,  distributors,  pharmacies,  hospitals, 
doctors, and regulators. If an issue gets detected at any stage of the supply chain, it is traced to 
the source of origin using the blockchain's stored information. 

In  another  solution  targeting  malicious  activities  (Saldamli  et  al.,  2020),  the  authors  use 
blockchain  for  insurance  fraud  detection.  The  authors  point  out  the  lack  of  coordination 
between  health  insurance  companies  with  respect  to  data  sharing  and  show  that  most  of  the 
financial  loss  is  due  to  instances  of  fraud  claims  through  fake  healthcare  information.  In 
(Saldamli et al., 2020), the authors propose linking insurance claims data using BigchainDB to 
create a distributed database on blockchain concepts. For the patients, they propose two different 
identifications, patient ID and billing ID. The billing ID is linked to a patient ID and is unique for 
each healthcare service the patient has availed. Whenever a health insurance company processes 
a claim with respect to a billing ID, it gets recorded on the ledger. Then the amount in the claims 
file  and  billing  file  is  compared  to  check  for  authenticity  of  the  insurance  claim.  Due  to 
blockchain data's immutability, it is impossible to avail insurance for the same billing ID twice. 
However, the proposed work assumes that the billing information generated from the healthcare 
service provider is  authentic. Therefore, the development  of methodology  of verifying  medical 
bills' authenticity is a potential future research problem. 

We provide a summary of the blockchain-based solutions for healthcare data security in Table 1. 
In Table 1, we summarize and discuss the specific issues present in the state-of-the-art solutions. 
Besides  the  specific  issues,  there  are  general  blockchain-based  limitations  that  are  common 
across all the proposed solutions. We discuss those limitations in the next section. In summary, 
in  this  section,  we  discuss  how  blockchain  technology  is  applied  to  achieve  healthcare  data 

security.  The  use  of  blockchain  enables  security-based  functionalities  such  as  access  control, 
inter-organizational operability, and preventing counterfeiting. Regarding user and data privacy, 
proposed  blockchain-based  systems  use  additional  data  encryption  techniques  for  enabling 
privacy preservation. 

Blockchain 

Functionality 

e
g
a
r
o
t
S

e
g
a
r
o
t
S

e
g
n
a
h
c
x
E

s
e
p
y
T

e
c
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n

I

s
e
v
i
t
n
e
c
n

I

y
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

y
c
a
v
i
r
P

n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
d
s
u
o
i
c
i
l

a
M

d
e
s
a
b
-
e
c
i
v
e
D
T
o

I

Issues 

Pr 

- 

Pr 

⸸ 

⸸ 

⸸ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓  ✓  ✓   

is 

required 

Setup 
to  be 
installed  at  each  healthcare 
facility. 

  No  defined  specification  of 
organizational involvement. 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓   

C 

† 

✓  ✓  ✓  ✓   

Approaches  

(Zhuang 
al., 2020) 

et 

(Shahnaz  et 
al., 2019) 

(Nguyen 
al., 2019) 

et 

(Shen  et  al., 
2020) 

(Qiao  et  al., 
2020) 

C.C 

⸸ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

(Li  et  al., 
2020) 

(S.  Wang  et 
al., 2019) 

C 

⸸ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓   

- 

⸸ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

(Madine 
al., 2020) 

et 

Pu+Pr 

⸸ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

for 

clarity  on 

Solution 
low-network 
latency  in  wearable  devices 
networks not provided. 
Multiple 
transactions  are 
required  for  each  sharing 
request  due  to  the  massive 
volume of data. 
The  analysis  provided  is  on 
a  limited  scale  with  few 
number  of  nodes.  There  is 
real-time 
no 
performance  and  the  cost  of 
building the system. 
Databases  storing  healthcare 
to  be 
data  are  assumed 
privacy 
(HIPAA) 
compliant. 
There  is  no  mechanism  to 
verify  cloud  server  response 
to the requirement related to 
PHR data management. 
Multiple deployments  of the 
same  smart  contract  are 
required for it to work across 
countries.  No 
different 
integration  of  a  patient’s 
PHR in case of consultations 

laws 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Rajput 
al., 2019) 

et 

Pr 

⸸ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓   

(Y. Wang et 
al., 2019) 

C 

⸸ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

(Zghaibeh  et 
al., 2020) 

Pr 

⸸ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓   

(Liu et al., 
2019) 

(Tomaz 
al., 2020) 

et 

Pr 

‡ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓   

- 

⸸ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓  ✓   

(J.  Xu  et  al., 
2019) 

Pu+C 

⸸ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓  ✓   

(Meena 
al., 2019) 

et 

Pr 

‡ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓     

in other countries. 

of 

The system assumes that the 
person  given  access  to  PHR 
data in case of emergency is 
not malicious. 
computational 
The 
smart 
performance 
contract  algorithms  depends 
on  the  length  of  EHR  data 
keywords  (pointers)  stored 
on the blockchain. 
A  new  node  joins  through  a 
bureaucratic  procedure  that 
involves  government  nodes 
the 
physically 
candidate 
a 
government  database.  A 
patient can get his/her health 
record  updated  through  a 
partner,  which  refers  to  a 
insurance 
health 
organization. 
Medical  data  to  be  shared 
must  be  lightweight  due  to 
on-chain sharing. 

verifying 
against 

a 

in 

The  proposed  system  works 
on  the  assumption  that  the 
initial  device  registration  is 
done 
secure 
environment. 
The system assumes that any 
adversary  working  to  crack 
the  encryption  key  has 
limited  computing  power. 
Also,  the  off-chain  channel 
and 
between 
medical 
is 
assumed to be secure. 
The  money  transfer  is  done 
outside  the  network,  while 
the insurance and pharmacy-

patients 
IoT  devices 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
⸸ 

‡ 

C 

is 

Pu 

✓ 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓  ✓  ✓   

(Yazdinejad 
et al., 2020) 

(Meng et al., 
2020) 

related bills are stored on the 
ledger. 
Patient  control  over  his/her 
healthcare 
not 
data 
present. 
The 
impact  of  external 
attacks  such  as  DoS  on  the 
system  is  not  considered. 
Also,  the  experiment  and 
analysis are done with a very 
limited number of nodes. 
system 
proposed 
The 
assumes  that  the  medication 
information  uploaded on the 
blockchain  is  authentic,  and 
each node is honest. 
The  blockchain  technology 
used (BigchainDB) does not 
have  a  stable  version  and 
community support. 
Table 1: List of Proposed state-of-the-art blockchain-based solutions for healthcare data 
security. Here, Pr: Private blockchain, Pu: Public blockchain, C.: Consortium based 
blockchain, C.C.: Cross Consortium based blockchain, -:  “no mention of”, ⸸: only hashes 
and transactions stored on-chain, †: only shared data and transactions stored on-chain, and 
“‡”: all data and transactions stored on-chain. 

(Saldamli  et 
al., 2020) 

(Zhu et al., 
2020) 

✓  ✓  ✓   

✓  ✓  ✓   

Pu+Pr 

✓ 

✓ 

Pu 

⸸ 

‡ 

8  Technical limitations in the implementation of blockchain in healthcare 

For healthcare data security, blockchain's use provides a significant edge over cloud-based data 
storage  and  management  systems.  However,  its  implementation  in  the  healthcare  sector  has 
several  challenges  and  limitations.  Some  of  these  challenges  are  generic,  i.e.,  applicable  to 
blockchain regardless of the application, while some are healthcare-sector specific. This section 
discusses  the  technological  limitations  in  the  current  blockchain-based  systems  concerning  the 
healthcare sector. 

The scalability issues for the large networks are one of the blockchain technology's functional 
limitations (Yli-Huumo et al., 2016).  This issue is much more severe in the case of healthcare 
data storage. In the healthcare sector, the data generated is much more in volume than financial 
transaction  data  due  to  the  presence  of  images  such  as  X-Ray  and  CT  scans  (Esposito  et  al., 
2018). Storage of such a large amount of data at every node is cumbersome. To resolve such an 
issue, in (Xia et al., 2017), the authors propose to store only partial data such as metadata, hash 
values, and pointers on the blockchain while other data on the servers.  

Apart from scalability, another issue is healthcare data privacy (Nawari & Ravindran, 2019). As 
a blockchain operates in a distributed network, each node stores a copy of the ledger. However, it 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is not in the interest of a patient to have copies of his/her medical diagnosis reports shared across 
the  network.  Therefore,  the  issue  of  data  privacy  is  also  one  of  the  reasons  for  a  blockchain-
based  hybrid  data  storage  system  in  the  healthcare  sector.  However,  even  if  whole  data  is  not 
shared  across  the  network,  the  transaction  information  linked  to  the  nodes’  ID  is  available  for 
everybody  on  the  blockchain.  Therefore,  the  blockchain  by  itself  cannot  protect  the  privacy  of 
activities  carried  out  by  nodes.  As  we  discussed  in  the  previous  section,  several  encryption 
techniques  are  applied  in  addition  to  blockchain-based  encryption  to  achieve  user  privacy. 
Various  policies  related  to  access  control  are  defined  in  state-of-the-art  blockchain-based 
systems  to  address  data  privacy  limitations.  Although  these  policies  get  embedded  into  the 
system  through  storage  on  the  blocks,  there  is  no  way  to  enforce  them  within  the  network 
without functionalities outside the blockchain properties (Hardin & Kotz, 2019). To handle such 
limitations,  some  nodes  are  given  more  privileges  than  the  rest  by  giving  them  administrative 
powers.  Such  a  requirement  of  providing  some  nodes  more  privilege  than  the  others  is  one 
reason  why  most  of  the  proposed  frameworks  for  healthcare  data  security  are  based  on 
permissioned  blockchains.  This  leads  to  centralization  within  the  blockchain-based  networks 
(Nawari & Ravindran, 2019). 

Apart  from  the  overall  functionality  limitations,  there  are  also  specific  limitations  associated 
with  various  consensus  algorithms  used  in  blockchain  (S.  Zhang  &  Lee,  2020),  which  are 
generic and equally applicable to blockchain in healthcare applications. The proof of work needs 
computational resources, which in most cases is outside the scope of individual patients as well 
as some small hospitals. The requirement of computational resources works against the principle 
of participants' equality, even for the permissioned blockchains. For the PBFT consensus used in 
Hyperledger  blockchain,  the  large  number  of  messages  required  to  be  sent  between  the  nodes 
causes  network  congestion.  Nowadays,  patients  send  their  personal  healthcare  data  recorded 
through  various  medical  IoT  devices  and  smartphones.  The  requirements  for  full  participation 
force  these  resource-constrained  devices  to  be  mere  spectators  in  the  blockchain  networks. 
Similarly,  proof  of  stake  consensus  favors  financially  strong  healthcare  institutions.  The 
disadvantage  of  such  favor  gives  disproportionate  power  to  big  institutions  with  respect  to 
discretion regarding inclusion or exclusion of certain transactions.  

The  functions  like  access  control,  privacy,  recording,  modification,  and  seeing  the  healthcare 
data  get  executed  through  smart  contracts.  Smart  contracts  play  an  essential  role  in  the 
automation  of  tasks.  However,  there  are  several  smart  contract  limitations  (Zou  et  al.,  2019) 
that  directly  affect  the  functioning  of  healthcare  data  security.  Once  a  smart  contract  gets 
recorded  on  the  blockchain,  no  one  can  change  its  code.  Due  to  this,  the  developers  need  to 
check for vulnerabilities before deploying. Anytime these contracts are called to execute a task, 
every validating node runs it to verify the transactions. It again creates a privacy issue as every 
node  has  access  to  all  the  data  used  by  the  code.  Therefore,  extra  care  must  be  taken  while 
developing a smart contract in deciding how much data and the encryption keys to provide. 

Due to the above limitations, there are several security risks associated with blockchains, such 
as  double  spending  (a  participant  creates  a  parallel  transfer  of  the  same  data  to  two  different 
participants leading to an invalid transaction), 51% attacks (occur when a participant or a group 
controls  most  computational  resources  and  tries  to  tamper  with  the  blockchain  data),  and  risks 
associated with encryption techniques used in blockchain (Nawari & Ravindran, 2019). The risks 
related  to  the  encryption  techniques  are  due  to  the  progress  of  computational  technology.  For 
instance,  quantum  computing's  fast  progress  has  the  potential  to  make  current  blockchain 
encryption  techniques  obsolete  against  quantum  attacks  (Fernandez-Carames  &  Fraga-Lamas, 
2020). 

In this section, we discussed the technology-related limitations of blockchain implementation for 
healthcare data security. These include the blockchain's limitations in general and the constraints 
due to the healthcare data structure and functioning. The two main issues are scalability and data 
privacy, for which additional measures such as hybrid storage model and re-encryption of data 
are additionally applied, as discussed in the previous section.  

9  Regulatory challenges for blockchain in healthcare data security 

Apart  from  the  technology-based  limitations,  there  are  several  legal  and  regulatory  challenges 
while  applying  blockchain  to  improve  healthcare  data  security.  From  the  perspective  of 
governments and their relevant departments, there are many issues to be resolved. 

A significant one amongst these is related to the issue of privacy. If an individual patient or an 
organization  decides  to  leave  the  blockchain-based  network,  their  previous  data  can  not  get 
erased  due  to  its  immutability  property.  It  goes  against  the  structure  of  the  “right  to  be 
forgotten” granted under privacy rights in most countries (Gabison, 2016). This right explicitly 
enables an individual to get his/her data removed in the event of opting out of the organization. It 
creates a regulatory challenge for the stakeholders involved. 

Blockchain-based  healthcare  data  storage  systems  are  not  yet  officially  standardized  (Yeoh, 
2017).  The  different  state-of-the-art  systems  get  adopted  by  the  organizations  following  their 
requirements.  The  healthcare  organizations  using  blockchain  have  their  specific  data  storage 
format,  encryption  techniques,  and  consensus  algorithms.  It  leads  to  interoperability  issues 
across  the  blockchains,  causing  it  to  become  difficult  for  hospitals  and  other  healthcare 
organizations to collaborate. It becomes an issue for the patients due to the need to migrate their 
data across the chains. Therefore, standard guidelines for blockchain operations are warranted. 

There is also the issue of jurisdiction for permissionless blockchains that go beyond national 
boundaries (Yeoh, 2017). It is a general issue of blockchain but is equally affecting healthcare as 
any other sector. In the systems operating through permissionless blockchains, a patient can get a 
diagnosis from a doctor of different countries, and the information gets stored on the ledger. The 
jurisdiction  regarding  ownership  of  healthcare  data,  payment  information,  and  taxation  is  not 

defined for such cases. Although only the metadata or hash values get stored on the blockchain 
in most cases, the issue of ownership is still present. To avoid  this issue, most of the proposed 
systems run on permissioned blockchains. However, even for permissioned blockchains, a clear 
regulatory  code  specifying  the  laws  of  functioning,  data  ownership,  compliance,  etc.,  is 
warranted for most nations. It reduces blockchain to an experimental and assisting technology 
for existing healthcare data management systems. 

A significant issue in the way of widespread adaptation of blockchain for healthcare data security 
is  the  lack  of  training  and  awareness  (Kramer,  2019).  From  the  perspective  of  healthcare 
organizations  such  as  hospitals,  they  have  their  share  of  concerns  regarding  the  adoption  of 
blockchain  for  data  security.  For  migrating  to  the  blockchain,  the  patients,  doctors,  and 
administrative  staff  need  to  undergo  training  to  learn  the  secure  usage  for  data  storage  and 
access.  With  the  technology  still  evolving,  the  proper  user  interfaces  for  blockchain-based 
systems are still not in place, making it challenging for non-technical personnel to adjust to its 
functioning.  The  stakeholders  must  learn  about  the  security  aspects  like  the  use  of  encryption 
keys, calling proper smart contract functions, and protection of their information to ensure data 
security. Hence, adequate training is essential for the widespread adoption of blockchain.  

Overall,  the  healthcare  organizations,  government  departments,  and  blockchain  developing 
organizations  need  to  coordinate  amongst  themselves  for  making  blockchain  a  mainstream 
technology in healthcare.  

10  Blockchain  role  in  pandemics  like  COVID-19  for  large-scale  data  security  and 

management 

In current times, all the nations are struggling to cope with the pandemic caused by coronavirus 
disease  (COVID-19),  known  as  severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus-2  (SARS-CoV-
2). It first got detected in the Wuhan region of China in December 2019. Since then, it has found 
its way into almost all nations worldwide due to its infectious nature of spreading through close 
contact  and  respiration.  It  was  declared  a  worldwide  pandemic  by  the  WHO  in  March  2020 
(Kalla et al., 2020). At the time of writing, the total detected infections had crossed 100 million 
worldwide,  causing  more  than  2  million  deaths.  It  has  caused  an  unprecedented  strain  on  the 
economies worldwide, with the healthcare sector being most affected. To counter and wipe out 
the  virus,  efforts  are  being  made  on  all  fronts  in  healthcare,  including  emergency  services, 
treatment  facilities,  medication,  and  research  on  dealing  with  such  pandemics  through 
vaccination. All the mentioned fields require dealing with the data for their functioning. The data 
includes the components, such as patient's health records, data on hospital resources, information 
on persons infected with coronavirus, research data for developing medication and vaccines. The 
security of this data generated on such a large-scale is a challenge for governments, healthcare 
organizations,  and  research  laboratories.  In  this  regard,  blockchain  performs  a  key  role  in 
managing the COVID-19-related healthcare data. 

A  significant  application  where  blockchain  finds  its  use  is  contact  tracing  for  COVID-19.  A 
patient’s anonymity is preserved using blockchain-generated IDs while alerting the persons who 
were in close contact through Bluetooth-based technology. For this purpose, the authors in  (H. 
Xu et al., 2021) propose a blockchain-based contact tracing solution named BeepTrace. 

The traceability property also provides for tracking passenger movements. To facilitate the same, 
a  blockchain-based  solution  for  issuing  immunity  certificates  has  been  proposed  (Hasan  et  al., 
2020). Using smart contracts, it issues medical passports for people resulting in a negative in the 
COVID-19 medical test.  Combined with an interplanetary file system, it ensures the security of 
patient  data.  Since  blockchain  data  is  immutable,  it  cannot  be  manipulated  by  either  of  the 
stakeholders.  Apart  from  this,  by  using  smart  contracts,  the  procedure  for  health  insurance 
approval is made faster with lower processing costs. 

A  blockchain-based  app  Civitas  (Wright,  2020),  is  used  in  Canada  to  control  the  impact  of 
COVID-19. It maps people to blockchain to find out whether they are in quarantine or not. It also 
aids with the ideal time to go out of the house for essential tasks. 

Besides, blockchain also aids in research for finding medication and vaccines to prevent and treat 
coronavirus  disease.  Currently,  the  medical  records  for  COVID-19  are  managed  by  each 
healthcare institution independently. In (Yu et al., 2021), the authors provide a blockchain-based 
secure  data  sharing  platform  for  carrying  out  collaborative  medical  research  and  clinical  trials. 
The hospitals  and medical  research institutions are the nodes in  the decentralized network. All 
data  is  attached  to  blockchain-based  pseudonyms  instead  of  real-world  identities  to  protect  the 
patient's privacy. 

Overall,  blockchain  plays  a  vital  role  in  ensuring  the  security  of  healthcare-data-related 
operations  for  pandemic  situations.  It  prevents  information  manipulation  and  provides  the 
patients with the control of their data without relying on an independent third-party. 

11  Conclusion and Perspective on Future Research Directions 

The  decentralization  of  systemic  functioning  has  become  a  major  objective  for  healthcare 
systems to achieve complete security, privacy, and accountability for the relevant data. The use 
of  blockchain-based  peer-to-peer  networks  plays  a  significant  role  in  accomplishing  the  same. 
The  requirement  of  cryptographic  verification  and  majority  consensus  before  adding  new 
blockchain  blocks  brings  transparency  and  joint  accountability  in  the  healthcare  system  where 
sensitive patient data is involved. It has several benefits to the patients in terms of monitoring the 
access and use of their data. It also streamlines the operations of doctors, healthcare institutions, 
and  medical  research  centers  in  terms  of  acquiring  the  relevant  information  by  removing  the 
bottlenecks  associated  with  the  system's  centralized  functioning.  For  the  security  of  the  data, 
blockchain  puts  the  responsibility  on  all  the  stakeholders  through  individual  encryption  and 
removes the need for a trusted third-party.  

However, none of the proposed blockchain-based networks functioning in the healthcare sector 
are entirely decentralized. These systems have interference in the form of administrative nodes, 
which  warrants  the  research  required  to  achieve  pure  decentralization  for  full  transparency. 
Blockchain-based systems  in  the healthcare sector also  need  a sustainable incentive generation 
scheme  and  sharing  for  the  miners/validators  to  keep  the  network  running.  Specific  to  the 
healthcare sector, it is currently cumbersome to store all the data on the blockchain. Besides, data 
privacy is equally crucial. Therefore, instead of storing all healthcare data, only the metadata and 
hash  values  are  stored  on  the  blockchain.  For  data  privacy  in  such  conditions,  additional  data 
encryption  gets  applied  above  the  blockchain-provided  encryption.  With  the  requirement  of 
continuous  research  on  scalability  and  encryption  techniques,  blockchain-based  networks  can 
play  a  vital  role  in  data  security  for  next-generation  healthcare  systems.  Apart  from  the 
technology-based  challenges,  there  are  regulatory  questions  such  as  jurisdiction  regarding 
ownership of healthcare data and a standard inter-organizational functioning format requirement.  

Technologically, we need an overhaul in the blockchain structure and functioning, specific to the 
healthcare sector's data types, functioning hierarchy, and security issues.  Our recommendation 
for the researchers and  developers working towards achieving healthcare data security through 
blockchain  is  to  first  collaborate with  the policymakers, healthcare organizations,  and different 
stakeholders on a large-scale (e.g., country-scale) to understand the ever-changing global needs 
rather  than  providing  healthcare  data  security  solutions  for  a  specific  organization  with  a 
particular need. As we understand, data privacy is a significant issue to be addressed to achieve 
healthcare data security. It warrants the need to incorporate additional privacy measures within 
blockchain architecture.  One research direction that researchers could focus on is to modify the 
blockchain  architecture  to  include  a  privacy  module.  Besides,  blockchain  functioning  is 
computationally expensive. Developing countries or third-world countries lack the resources for 
such  a  large-scale  implementation  of  blockchain.  Another  research  direction  is  to  develop  a 
resource-efficient blockchain that could guarantee the privacy of healthcare data as well. Also, a 
properly defined incentive scheme is required for the miners/validators to motivate them towards 
active  participation.  These  incentives  could  be  altruistic  or  financial  aid  from  the  government. 
The researchers could look into different incentive schemes and revenue sharing models. Finally, 
the acceptance of blockchain for healthcare data security depends on the people's willingness to 
adopt  it  as  a  solution.  Therefore,  proper  training  and  awareness  among  the  stakeholders  are 
required for it to become a success.  

Acknowledgements 

This work is partially funded by the National Blockchain Project at IIT Kanpur sponsored by the 
National Cyber Security Coordinator's office of the Government of India and partially by the C3i 
Center funding from the Science and Engineering Research Board of the Government of India. 

References 

Abouelmehdi, K., Beni-Hessane, A., & Khaloufi, H. (2018). Big healthcare data: preserving 

security and privacy. Journal of Big Data, 5(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-017-
0110-7 

Abouelmehdi, K., Beni-Hssane, A., Khaloufi, H., & Saadi, M. (2017). Big data security and 

privacy in healthcare: A Review. Procedia Computer Science, 113, 73–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2017.08.292 

Agbo, C., Mahmoud, Q., & Eklund, J. (2019). Blockchain Technology in Healthcare: A 

Systematic Review. Healthcare, 7(2), 56 (1-30). https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare7020056 

Ahmed, M. N., Toor, A. S., O’Neil, K., & Friedland, D. (2017). Cognitive Computing and the 
Future of Health Care Cognitive Computing and the Future of Healthcare: The Cognitive 
Power of IBM Watson Has the Potential to Transform Global Personalized Medicine. IEEE 
Pulse, 8(3), 4–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/MPUL.2017.2678098 

Ahmed, M., & Ullah, A. S. S. M. B. (2018). False Data Injection Attacks in Healthcare (pp. 

192–202). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-0292-3_12 

Alder, S. (2019). 2019 Cost of A Data Breach Study Reveals Increase in U.S. Healthcare Data 
Breach Costs. HIPAA JOURNAL. https://www.hipaajournal.com/2019-cost-of-a-data-
breach-study-healthcare-data-breach-costs/ 

An, Q., Wen, Y., Ding, T., & Li, Y. (2019). Resource sharing and payoff allocation in a three-

stage system: Integrating network DEA with the Shapley value method. Omega, 85, 16–25. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2018.05.008 

Androulaki, E., Barger, A., Bortnikov, V., Cachin, C., Christidis, K., De Caro, A., Enyeart, D., 
Ferris, C., Laventman, G., Manevich, Y., Muralidharan, S., Murthy, C., Nguyen, B., Sethi, 
M., Singh, G., Smith, K., Sorniotti, A., Stathakopoulou, C., Vukolić, M., … Yellick, J. 
(2018). Hyperledger fabric: a distributed operating system for permissioned blockchains. 
Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference, 1–15. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3190508.3190538 

Bahri, S., Zoghlami, N., Abed, M., & Tavares, J. M. R. S. (2019). BIG DATA for Healthcare: A 
Survey. IEEE Access, 7, 7397–7408. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2889180 

Beigel, J. H., Tomashek, K. M., Dodd, L. E., Mehta, A. K., Zingman, B. S., Kalil, A. C., 

Hohmann, E., Chu, H. Y., Luetkemeyer, A., Kline, S., Lopez de Castilla, D., Finberg, R. 
W., Dierberg, K., Tapson, V., Hsieh, L., Patterson, T. F., Paredes, R., Sweeney, D. A., 
Short, W. R., … Lane, H. C. (2020). Remdesivir for the Treatment of Covid-19 — Final 
Report. New England Journal of Medicine, 383(19), 1813–1826. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2007764 

Benet, J. (2014). IPFS - Content Addressed, Versioned, P2P File System. 1–11. 

http://arxiv.org/abs/1407.3561 

Berenson, A. B., & Rahman, M. (2011). Prevalence and Correlates of Prescription Drug Misuse 

Among Young, Low-Income Women Receiving Public Healthcare. Journal of Addictive 
Diseases, 30(3), 203–215. https://doi.org/10.1080/10550887.2011.581984 

Bergeles, C., & Yang, G.-Z. (2014). From Passive Tool Holders to Microsurgeons: Safer, 

Smaller, Smarter Surgical Robots. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 61(5), 
1565–1576. https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2013.2293815 

Bethencourt, J., Sahai, A., & Waters, B. (2007). Ciphertext-Policy Attribute-Based Encryption. 

2007 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP ’07), 321–334. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2007.11 

Bietz, M. J., Bloss, C. S., Calvert, S., Godino, J. G., Gregory, J., Claffey, M. P., Sheehan, J., & 

Patrick, K. (2016). Opportunities and challenges in the use of personal health data for health 
research. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 23(e1), e42–e48. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocv118 

Brown, C., Chauhan, J., Grammenos, A., Han, J., Hasthanasombat, A., Spathis, D., Xia, T., 
Cicuta, P., & Mascolo, C. (2020). Exploring Automatic Diagnosis of COVID-19 from 
Crowdsourced Respiratory Sound Data. Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD 
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 3474–3484. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3412865 

Burbidge, R., Trotter, M., Buxton, B., & Holden, S. (2001). Drug design by machine learning: 
support vector machines for pharmaceutical data analysis. Computers & Chemistry, 26(1), 
5–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0097-8485(01)00094-8 

Carrion, I., Aleman, J. L. F., & Toval, A. (2011). Assessing the HIPAA standard in practice: 

PHR privacy policies. 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society, 2380–2383. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6090664 

Castro, M., & Liskov, B. (2002). Practical byzantine fault tolerance and proactive recovery. 

ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, 20(4), 398–461. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/571637.571640 

Coustasse, A., Arvidson, C., & Rutsohn, P. (2010). Pharmaceutical Counterfeiting and the RFID 
Technology Intervention. Journal of Hospital Marketing & Public Relations, 20(2), 100–
115. https://doi.org/10.1080/15390942.2010.493369 

Dagher, G. G., Mohler, J., Milojkovic, M., & Marella, P. B. (2018). Ancile: Privacy-preserving 
framework for access control and interoperability of electronic health records using 
blockchain technology. Sustainable Cities and Society, 39, 283–297. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2018.02.014 

Dash, S., Shakyawar, S. K., Sharma, M., & Kaushik, S. (2019). Big data in healthcare: 
management, analysis and future prospects. Journal of Big Data, 6(1), 1–25. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0217-0 

De Aguiar, E. J., Faiçal, B. S., Krishnamachari, B., & Ueyama, J. (2020). A Survey of 

Blockchain-Based Strategies for Healthcare. ACM Computing Surveys, 53(2), 1–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3376915 

Djenna, A., & Eddine Saidouni, D. (2018). Cyber Attacks Classification in IoT-Based-

Healthcare Infrastructure. 2018 2nd Cyber Security in Networking Conference (CSNet), 1–
4. https://doi.org/10.1109/CSNET.2018.8602974 

Dogaru, D. I., & Dumitrache, I. (2017). Cyber security in healthcare networks. 2017 E-Health 

and Bioengineering Conference (EHB), 414–417. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/EHB.2017.7995449 

Dyrda, L. (2020). The 5 most significant cyberattacks in healthcare for 2020. Becker’s Hospital 
Review. https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/cybersecurity/the-5-most-significant-
cyberattacks-in-healthcare-for-2020.html 

Engelhardt, M. A. (2017). Hitching Healthcare to the Chain: An Introduction to Blockchain 

Technology in the Healthcare Sector. Technology Innovation Management Review, 7(10), 
22–34. https://doi.org/10.22215/timreview/1111 

Esposito, C., De Santis, A., Tortora, G., Chang, H., & Choo, K.-K. R. (2018). Blockchain: A 

Panacea for Healthcare Cloud-Based Data Security and Privacy? IEEE Cloud Computing, 
5(1), 31–37. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCC.2018.011791712 

Fernandez-Carames, T. M., & Fraga-Lamas, P. (2020). Towards Post-Quantum Blockchain: A 
Review on Blockchain Cryptography Resistant to Quantum Computing Attacks. IEEE 
Access, 8, 21091–21116. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2968985 

Filkins, B. (2014). Health Care Cyberthreat Report: Widespread Compromises Detected, 

Compliance Nightmare on Horizon. 
https://www.redwoodmednet.org/projects/events/20150731/docs/Norse-SANS-Healthcare-
Cyberthreat-Report2014.pdf 

Fugh-Berman, A., & Ahari, S. (2007). Following the Script: How Drug Reps Make Friends and 

Influence Doctors. PLoS Medicine, 4(4), e150. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0040150 

Gabison, G. (2016). Policy Considerations for the BlockchainTechnology Public and Private 

Applications. Science and Technology Law Review, 19(3), 327–350. 
https://scholar.smu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1043&context=scitech 

Gahi, Y., Guennoun, M., & Mouftah, H. T. (2016). Big Data Analytics: Security and privacy 
challenges. 2016 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communication (ISCC), 952–957. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCC.2016.7543859 

Gueron, S., Johnson, S., & Walker, J. (2011). SHA-512/256. 2011 Eighth International 

Conference on Information Technology: New Generations, 354–358. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ITNG.2011.69 

Han, R., Foutris, N., & Kotselidis, C. (2019). Demystifying Crypto-Mining: Analysis and 

Optimizations of Memory-Hard PoW Algorithms. 2019 IEEE International Symposium on 
Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS), 22–33. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISPASS.2019.00011 

Hankerson, D., Menezes, A. J., & Vanstone, S. (2006). Guide to Elliptic Curve Cryptography. 

Springer-Verlag. https://doi.org/10.1007/b97644 

Hao, X., Yu, L., Zhiqiang, L., Zhen, L., & Dawu, G. (2018). Dynamic Practical Byzantine Fault 
Tolerance. 2018 IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security (CNS), 1–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CNS.2018.8433150 

Hardin, T., & Kotz, D. (2019). Blockchain in Health Data Systems: A Survey. 2019 Sixth 
International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security 
(IOTSMS), 490–497. https://doi.org/10.1109/IOTSMS48152.2019.8939174 

Hasan, H. R., Salah, K., Jayaraman, R., Arshad, J., Yaqoob, I., Omar, M., & Ellahham, S. 

(2020). Blockchain-Based Solution for COVID-19 Digital Medical Passports and Immunity 
Certificates. IEEE Access, 8, 222093–222108. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3043350 

Hathaliya, J. J., & Tanwar, S. (2020). An exhaustive survey on security and privacy issues in 

Healthcare 4.0. Computer Communications, 153, 311–335. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2020.02.018 

Hayrinen, K., Saranto, K., & Nykanen, P. (2008). Definition, structure, content, use and impacts 
of electronic health records: A review of the research literature. International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, 77(5), 291–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2007.09.001 

Heston, T. (2017). A Case Study in Blockchain Healthcare Innovation 

(AUTHOREA_213011_3643634). 

Hölbl, M., Kompara, M., Kamišalić, A., & Nemec Zlatolas, L. (2018). A Systematic Review of 

the Use of Blockchain in Healthcare. Symmetry, 10(10), 470. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/sym10100470 

Hsiao, S.-C., & Kao, D.-Y. (2018). The static analysis of WannaCry ransomware. 2018 20th 
International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), 153–158. 
https://doi.org/10.23919/ICACT.2018.8323680 

Huda, M. N., Sonehara, N., & Yamada, S. (2009). A Privacy Management Architecture For 

Patient-Controlled Personal Health Record System. Journal of Engineering Science and 
Technology (JESTEC), 4(2), 154–170. 

Hussain, A., Heidemann, J., & Papadopoulos, C. (2003). A framework for classifying denial of 
service attacks. Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on Applications, Technologies, 
Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communications - SIGCOMM ’03, 99. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/863955.863968 

Ibáñez, J. W., & Moccia, S. (2020). Designing the Architecture of a Blockchain Platform: The 
Case of Alastria, a National Public Permissioned Blockchain. International Journal of 
Enterprise Information Systems, 16(3), 34–48. https://doi.org/10.4018/IJEIS.2020070103 

Iroju, O., Soriyan, A., Gambo, I., J, & Olaleke. (2013). Interoperability in Healthcare: Benefits, 
Challenges and Resolutions. International Journal of Innovation and Applied Studies, 3(1), 
262–270. 

Jaberidoost, M., Nikfar, S., Abdollahiasl, A., & Dinarvand, R. (2013). Pharmaceutical supply 
chain risks: a systematic review. DARU Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 21(1), 69. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/2008-2231-21-69 

Kalla, A., Hewa, T., Mishra, R. A., Ylianttila, M., & Liyanage, M. (2020). The Role of 

Blockchain to Fight Against COVID-19. IEEE Engineering Management Review, 48(3), 
85–96. https://doi.org/10.1109/EMR.2020.3014052 

Kawamoto, D. (2017). IoT Security Incidents Rampant and Costly. Dark Reading. 

https://www.darkreading.com/vulnerabilities---threats/iot-security-incidents-rampant-and-
costly/d/d-id/1329367 

Kehrli, J. (2016). Blockchain 2.0-from bitcoin transactions to smart contract applications. 

NiceIdeas. https://www.niceideas.ch/roller2/badtrash/entry/blockchain-2-0-from-bitcoin 

Khezr, S., Moniruzzaman, M., Yassine, A., & Benlamri, R. (2019). Blockchain Technology in 
Healthcare: A Comprehensive Review and Directions for Future Research. Applied 
Sciences, 9(9), 1736. https://doi.org/10.3390/app9091736 

Koh, H. C., & Tan, G. (2005). Data mining applications in healthcare. Journal of Healthcare 

Information Management : JHIM, 19(2), 64–72. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15869215 

Kramer, M. (2019). An Overview of Blockchain Technology Based on a Study of Public 

Awareness. Global Journal of Business Research, 13(1), 83–91. 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3381119 

Krombholz, K., Hobel, H., Huber, M., & Weippl, E. (2015). Advanced social engineering 

attacks. Journal of Information Security and Applications, 22, 113–122. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2014.09.005 

Kumar, V., & Walker, C. (2017). Cyber-Attacks: Rising Threat to Healthcare. Vascular Disease 

Management, 14(3). 

Landry, S., Beaulieu, M., & Roy, J. (2016). Strategy deployment in healthcare services: A case 

study approach. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 113, 429–437. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.09.006 

Le, T. T., Andreadakis, Z., Kumar, A., Gómez Román, R., Tollefsen, S., Saville, M., & Mayhew, 

S. (2020). The COVID-19 vaccine development landscape. Nature Reviews Drug 

Discovery, 19(5), 305–306. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41573-020-00073-5 

Lee, C. C. M., Thampi, S., Lewin, B., Lim, T. J. D., Rippin, B., Wong, W. H., & Agrawal, R. V. 

(2020). Battling COVID‐19: critical care and peri‐operative healthcare resource 
management strategies in a tertiary academic medical centre in Singapore. Anaesthesia, 
75(7), 861–871. https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.15074 

Li, P., Xu, C., Jin, H., Hu, C., Luo, Y., Cao, Y., Mathew, J., & Ma, Y. (2020). ChainSDI: A 
Software-Defined Infrastructure for Regulation-Compliant Home-Based Healthcare 
Services Secured by Blockchains. IEEE Systems Journal, 14(2), 2042–2053. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSYST.2019.2937930 

Liu, X., Wang, Z., Jin, C., Li, F., & Li, G. (2019). A Blockchain-Based Medical Data Sharing 

and Protection Scheme. IEEE Access, 7, 118943–118953. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2937685 

Madine, M. M., Battah, A. A., Yaqoob, I., Salah, K., Jayaraman, R., Al-Hammadi, Y., Pesic, S., 
& Ellahham, S. (2020). Blockchain for Giving Patients Control Over Their Medical 
Records. IEEE Access, 8, 193102–193115. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3032553 

Mandl, K. D., & Kohane, I. S. (2012). Escaping the EHR Trap — The Future of Health IT. New 

England Journal of Medicine, 366(24), 2240–2242. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1203102 

Meena, D. K., Dwivedi, R., & Shukla, S. (2019). Preserving Patient’s Privacy using Proxy Re-

encryption in Permissioned Blockchain. 2019 Sixth International Conference on Internet of 
Things: Systems, Management and Security (IOTSMS), 450–457. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IOTSMS48152.2019.8939226 

Meng, W., Li, W., & Zhu, L. (2020). Enhancing Medical Smartphone Networks via Blockchain-
Based Trust Management Against Insider Attacks. IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Management, 67(4), 1377–1386. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2019.2921736 

Moulis, G., Lapeyre-Mestre, M., Palmaro, A., Pugnet, G., Montastruc, J.-L., & Sailler, L. (2015). 

French health insurance databases: What interest for medical research? La Revue de 
Médecine Interne, 36(6), 411–417. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2014.11.009 

Mullard, A. (2020). COVID-19 vaccine development pipeline gears up. The Lancet, 395(10239), 

1751–1752. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31252-6 

Muthuppalaniappan, M., & Stevenson, K. (2021). Healthcare cyber-attacks and the COVID-19 
pandemic: an urgent threat to global health. International Journal for Quality in Health 
Care, 33(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzaa117 

Nakamato, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. 

https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf 

Nawari, N. O., & Ravindran, S. (2019). Blockchain and the built environment: Potentials and 

limitations. Journal of Building Engineering, 25, 100832 (1-16). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2019.100832 

Nguyen, D. C., Pathirana, P. N., Ding, M., & Seneviratne, A. (2019). Blockchain for Secure 

EHRs Sharing of Mobile Cloud Based E-Health Systems. IEEE Access, 7, 66792–66806. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2917555 

Ongaro, D.; Ousterhout, J. (2014). In Search of an Understandable Consensus Algorithm. 

Proceedings of USENIX ATC ’14: 2014 USENIX Annual Technical Conference., 305–319. 
https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/atc14/atc14-paper-ongaro.pdf 

Pandey, A. K., Khan, A. I., Abushark, Y. B., Alam, M. M., Agrawal, A., Kumar, R., & Khan, R. 
A. (2020). Key Issues in Healthcare Data Integrity: Analysis and Recommendations. IEEE 
Access, 8, 40612–40628. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2976687 

Partala, J., Nguyen, T. H., & Pirttikangas, S. (2020). Non-Interactive Zero-Knowledge for 

Blockchain: A Survey. IEEE Access, 8, 227945–227961. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3046025 

Pitacco, E. (2014). Health Insurance. Springer International Publishing. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-12235-9 

Plachkinova, M., Andres, S., & Chatterjee, S. (2015). A Taxonomy of mHealth Apps -- Security 
and Privacy Concerns. 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
3187–3196. https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2015.385 

Qiao, R., Luo, X.-Y., Zhu, S.-F., Liu, A.-D., Yan, X.-Q., & Wang, Q.-X. (2020). Dynamic 

Autonomous Cross Consortium Chain Mechanism in e-Healthcare. IEEE Journal of 
Biomedical and Health Informatics, 24(8), 2157–2168. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2019.2963437 

Radanović, I., & Likić, R. (2018). Opportunities for Use of Blockchain Technology in Medicine. 

Applied Health Economics and Health Policy, 16(5), 583–590. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40258-018-0412-8 

Rajput, A. R., Li, Q., Taleby Ahvanooey, M., & Masood, I. (2019). EACMS: Emergency Access 
Control Management System for Personal Health Record Based on Blockchain. IEEE 
Access, 7, 84304–84317. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2917976 

Raza, M., Iqbal, M., Sharif, M., & Haider, W. (2012). A survey of password attacks and 
comparative analysis on methods for secure authentication. World Applied Sciences 
Journal, 19(4), 439–444. https://doi.org/10.5829/idosi.wasj.2012.19.04.1837 

Ruiz, J. (2020). Public-Permissioned blockchains as Common-Pool Resources. Linkedin. 

https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/public-permissioned-blockchains-common-pool-resources-
jesus-ruiz/ 

Saldamli, G., Reddy, V., Bojja, K. S., Gururaja, M. K., Doddaveerappa, Y., & Tawalbeh, L. 
(2020). Health Care Insurance Fraud Detection Using Blockchain. 2020 Seventh 

International Conference on Software Defined Systems (SDS), 145–152. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/SDS49854.2020.9143900 

Saleh, F. (2021). Blockchain without Waste: Proof-of-Stake. The Review of Financial Studies, 

34(3), 1156–1190. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhaa075 

Seh, A. H., Zarour, M., Alenezi, M., Sarkar, A. K., Agrawal, A., Kumar, R., & Ahmad Khan, R. 
(2020). Healthcare Data Breaches: Insights and Implications. Healthcare, 8(2), 133. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare8020133 

Shahnaz, A., Qamar, U., & Khalid, A. (2019). Using Blockchain for Electronic Health Records. 

IEEE Access, 7, 147782–147795. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2946373 

Shen, M., Duan, J., Zhu, L., Zhang, J., Du, X., & Guizani, M. (2020). Blockchain-Based 

Incentives for Secure and Collaborative Data Sharing in Multiple Clouds. IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications, 38(6), 1229–1241. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSAC.2020.2986619 

Shi, S., He, D., Li, L., Kumar, N., Khan, M. K., & Choo, K.-K. R. (2020). Applications of 
blockchain in ensuring the security and privacy of electronic health record systems: A 
survey. Computers & Security, 97, 101966. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.101966 

Smith, B., Xiong, J., & Medlin, D. (2020). Case Study of Blockchain Applications in Supply 

Chain Management- Opportunities andChallenges. 2020 Proceedings of the Conference on 
Information Systems Applied Research Virtual Conference, 1501–1508. 

Stafford, T. F., & Treiblmaier, H. (2020). Characteristics of a Blockchain Ecosystem for Secure 

and Sharable Electronic Medical Records. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 
67(4), 1340–1362. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.2973095 

Stephen, O., Sain, M., Maduh, U. J., & Jeong, D.-U. (2019). An Efficient Deep Learning 

Approach to Pneumonia Classification in Healthcare. Journal of Healthcare Engineering, 
2019, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/4180949 

Sun, Y. L., Wei, Y., Zhu, H., & Liu, K. J. R. (2006). Information theoretic framework of trust 
modeling and evaluation for ad hoc networks. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications, 24(2), 305–317. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSAC.2005.861389 

Sunyaev, A., Chornyi, D., Mauro, C., & Krcmar, H. (2010). Evaluation Framework for Personal 
Health Records: Microsoft HealthVault Vs. Google Health. 2010 43rd Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2010.192 

Tariq, N., Qamar, A., Asim, M., & Khan, F. A. (2020). Blockchain and Smart Healthcare 

Security: A Survey. Procedia Computer Science, 175, 615–620. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2020.07.089 

Teklehaimanot, H. D., & Teklehaimanot, A. (2013). Human resource development for a 

community-based health extension program: a case study from Ethiopia. Human Resources 

for Health, 11(1), 39. https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-11-39 

Tomaz, A. E. B., Nascimento, J. C. Do, Hafid, A. S., & De Souza, J. N. (2020). Preserving 
Privacy in Mobile Health Systems Using Non-Interactive Zero-Knowledge Proof and 
Blockchain. IEEE Access, 8, 204441–204458. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3036811 

Ulieru, M. (2016). Blockchain 2.0 and Beyond: Adhocracies. In Banking Beyond Banks and 
Money (pp. 297–303). Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-42448-4_15 

Urciuoli, L., Männistö, T., Hintsa, J., & Khan, T. (2013). Supply Chain Cyber Security – 
Potential Threats. Information & Security: An International Journal, 29, 51–68. 
https://doi.org/10.11610/isij.2904 

Wang, S., Zhang, D., & Zhang, Y. (2019). Blockchain-Based Personal Health Records Sharing 

Scheme With Data Integrity Verifiable. IEEE Access, 7, 102887–102901. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2931531 

Wang, Y., Zhang, A., Zhang, P., & Wang, H. (2019). Cloud-Assisted EHR Sharing With 

Security and Privacy Preservation via Consortium Blockchain. IEEE Access, 7, 136704–
136719. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2943153 

Win, K. T., Susilo, W., & Mu, Y. (2006). Personal Health Record Systems and Their Security 
Protection. Journal of Medical Systems, 30(4), 309–315. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-
006-9019-y 

Wright, T. (2020). Blockchain App Used to Track COVID-19 Cases in Latin America. Coin 

Telegraph: The Future of Money. https://cointelegraph.com/news/blockchain-app-used-to-
track-covid-19-cases-in-latin-america 

Wust, K., & Gervais, A. (2018). Do you Need a Blockchain? 2018 Crypto Valley Conference on 
Blockchain Technology (CVCBT), 45–54. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVCBT.2018.00011 

Xia, Q., Sifah, E., Smahi, A., Amofa, S., & Zhang, X. (2017). BBDS: Blockchain-Based Data 

Sharing for Electronic Medical Records in Cloud Environments. Information, 8(2), 44. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/info8020044 

Xiao, Y., Zhang, N., Lou, W., & Hou, Y. T. (2020). A Survey of Distributed Consensus 

Protocols for Blockchain Networks. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 22(2), 
1432–1465. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2020.2969706 

Xu, H., Zhang, L., Onireti, O., Fang, Y., Buchanan, W. J., & Imran, M. A. (2021). BeepTrace: 

Blockchain-Enabled Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing for COVID-19 Pandemic and 
Beyond. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 8(5), 3915–3929. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3025953 

Xu, J., Xue, K., Li, S., Tian, H., Hong, J., Hong, P., & Yu, N. (2019). Healthchain: A 

Blockchain-Based Privacy Preserving Scheme for Large-Scale Health Data. IEEE Internet 

of Things Journal, 6(5), 8770–8781. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2019.2923525 

Yazdinejad, A., Srivastava, G., Parizi, R. M., Dehghantanha, A., Choo, K.-K. R., & Aledhari, M. 
(2020). Decentralized Authentication of Distributed Patients in Hospital Networks Using 
Blockchain. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 24(8), 2146–2156. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2020.2969648 

Yeoh, P. (2017). Regulatory issues in blockchain technology. Journal of Financial Regulation 

and Compliance, 25(2), 196–208. https://doi.org/10.1108/JFRC-08-2016-0068 

Yli-Huumo, J., Ko, D., Choi, S., Park, S., & Smolander, K. (2016). Where is current research on 

Blockchain technology? - A systematic review. PLoS ONE, 11(10), 1–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0163477 

Yu, K., Tan, L., Shang, X., Huang, J., Srivastava, G., & Chatterjee, P. (2021). Efficient and 

Privacy-Preserving Medical Research Support Platform Against COVID-19: A Blockchain-
Based Approach. IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, 10(2), 111–120. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCE.2020.3035520 

Zghaibeh, M., Farooq, U., Hasan, N. U., & Baig, I. (2020). SHealth: A Blockchain-Based Health 

System With Smart Contracts Capabilities. IEEE Access, 8, 70030–70043. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2986789 

Zhang, A., & Lin, X. (2018). Towards Secure and Privacy-Preserving Data Sharing in e-Health 

Systems via Consortium Blockchain. Journal of Medical Systems, 42(8), 1–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-018-0995-5 

Zhang, S., & Lee, J.-H. (2020). Analysis of the main consensus protocols of blockchain. ICT 

Express, 6(2), 93–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icte.2019.08.001 

Zhu, P., Hu, J., Zhang, Y., & Li, X. (2020). A Blockchain Based Solution for Medication Anti-

Counterfeiting and Traceability. IEEE Access, 8, 184256–184272. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3029196 

Zhuang, Y., Sheets, L. R., Chen, Y.-W., Shae, Z.-Y., Tsai, J. J. P., & Shyu, C.-R. (2020). A 

Patient-Centric Health Information Exchange Framework Using Blockchain Technology. 
IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 24(8), 2169–2176. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2020.2993072 

Zou, W., Lo, D., Kochhar, P. S., Le, X.-B. D., Xia, X., Feng, Y., Chen, Z., & Xu, B. (2019). 
Smart Contract Development: Challenges and Opportunities. IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering, 1–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2019.2942301 

 
 
