Defining, Evaluating, Preparing for and Responding to a Cyber Pearl Harbor 

Jeremy Straub 
Institute for Cybersecurity Education and Research 
North Dakota State University 

1320 Albrecht Blvd., Room 258 
Fargo, ND 58102 

Em: jeremy.straub@ndsu.edu 
Ph: +1-701-231-8196 
Fx: +1-701-231-8255 

Abstract 
Despite not having a clear meaning, public perception and awareness makes the term cyber Pearl 
Harbor an important part of the public discourse.  This paper considers what the term has meant and 
proposes its decomposition based on three different aspects of the historical Pearl Harbor attack, 
allowing the lessons from Pearl Harbor to be applied to threats and subjects that may not align with all 
aspects of the 1941 attack.  Using these three definitions, prior attacks and current threats are assessed 
and preparation for and response to cyber Pearl Harbor events is discussed. 

Keywords: cyber Pearl Harbor, cyber warfare, information warfare, influence warfare, multi-modal 
warfare 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 

Pearl Harbor is a seminal moment in U.S. military history and in U.S. history, more generally.  Roosevelt 
proclaimed the day of the attack "a date which will live in infamy" [1] quite accurately, as nearly 80 years 
later this attack is still part of the national discourse and shaping U.S. national perception of present-day 
events.   

The information technology revolution, which has resulted in a significant reliance on computers and 
computing equipment (such as Internet of things devices) in nearly every aspect of society, has raised 
the concern that new types of attacks are now possible.  Whether carried out by criminals, terrorists or 
nation-states, these attacks may represent attempts to impair individuals’ daily lives potentially as an 
attempt to directly achieve a political goal, to impair military readiness or as part of a combined cyber 
and conventional attack.  Because of the surprise factor, the potential that a weaker force might use 
such an attack to target a stronger one and other potential similarities, these attacks have been 
commonly referred to as cyber Pearl Harbor attacks.  Famously, former Defense Secretary Leon Panetta 
[2] cautioned that a future cyber-attack “could be a cyber Pearl Harbor; an attack that would cause 
physical destruction and the loss of life.  In fact, it would paralyze and shock the nation and create a 
new, profound sense of vulnerability.” 

This paper considers the concept of a cyber Pearl Harbor.  It reviews the 1941 attack and what was 
learned from it, in hindsight.  It considers what characteristics a cyber version of such an attack might 
have, discussing the multiple prior uses and definitions of the cyber Pearl Harbor term.  To facilitate 
analysis, the cyber Pearl Harbor concept is divided into three components.  These components are used 
to consider whether attacks significant and relevant enough to evoke comparison to Pearl Harbor have 
already occurred and to define the characteristics that a future cyber Pearl Harbor attack may have.   
How to prevent, prepare for and respond to such an attack are all considered.  Additionally, the 
application of the term to attacks against other nations is briefly discussed. 

2. Background 

A full understanding of the cyber Pearl Harbor term requires consideration of three elements, which are 
discussed in this section.  First, the challenges posed by cyber threats and opportunities posed by cyber 
capabilities are discussed.  Next, the historic Pearl Harbor attack is reviewed.  Finally, the history of the 
cyber Pearl Harbor term is reviewed. 

2.1. The cyber threat challenge and opportunity 

The context for any discussion of cyber threats must be the benefits that computing technologies bring 
and the harm that their interruption, error, failure or unavailability can cause.  Computing technology 
has dramatically changed the way that those in high-technology-use countries live and work.  It has 
enhanced education [3] and been used to facilitate relationships between the elderly [4].  It has 
enhanced how health care is provided and its quality [5], reducing costs [6] and facilitating in-home 
treatment [7], in some cases.  It has increased access for those with disabilities [8], improved tourism [9] 
and generally raised standards of living and improved individuals day-to-day lives [10]. 

Many of these benefits have come through inserting information technology into virtually every process 
in society.  In some cases, information technology is augmentative with its removal or malfunction 
simply reducing capabilities.  In other cases, the technology is integral to functionality so that devices, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vehicles and even entire power grids can be rendered non-functional by its failure and individuals 
injured by its maloperation.  Technology systems can be attacked by insiders [11], criminals [12] and 
even nation-states [13].  These attacks can stop or cause maloperation of medical devices [14] and 
otherwise interfere with patient treatment and impact patient safety [15].  They interfere with 
individuals’ privacy [16] as well as with the devices that individuals and businesses use and the networks 
that transfer data [17].  Most problematically, the number of breaches and records breached is growing 
with 56% year-over-year growth in the first quarter of 2019 [18] and 4.1 billion records compromised 
through 3,800 reported breaches in the first half of 2019 alone [19].  While these numbers are 
staggering, they refer mostly to conventional breaches.  Individuals have gotten so used to these 
breaches that they now pay limited attention to the notifications of them [20] and display symptoms of 
fatigue in managing their online privacy [21]. 

2.2. The Pearl Harbor attack 

There is some dispute as to what Pearl Harbor actually was, in the context of World War II and American 
consciousness.  It has clearly been memorable, as its continued use as a point of reference to the 
modern day [22,23] demonstrates.  Panetta, when evoking Pearl Harbor in the cyber context, sought to 
convey the idea of a “a devastating digital attack on critical national infrastructure” and to “shake up 
ordinary citizens, to awaken them to the seriousness of the situation” [22].  He described the threat as 
one of having the “potential for a paralyzing attack” [22]. 

Some, though, would disagree with this characterization of Pearl Harbor.  There seems to be little 
dispute that the attack was a surprise.  Despite declining relations with Japan [24,25], the monitoring of 
Japanese communications [26] and breaking many of their codes [26], the attack was not predicted by 
U.S. intelligence.  Even the signs that were present were dismissed due to a belief that the superiority of 
U.S. forces would deter this type of an attack [25].  Wirtz [25] notes that commanders at Pearl Harbor 
failed to heed “’war warnings’, last minute indications of an approaching enemy, and even reports of an 
engagement with enemy forces” for this reason.  Mueller [27] contends that, despite the surprise factor, 
the impact of the attack was a “military inconvenience” rather than a disaster as most of the damaged 
equipment was either already nearly obsolete or quickly repaired.  Further, he suggests that the 
equipment production response quickly eclipsed what was lost to the attack [27].  The attack awoke the 
United States to the Japanese threat; however, this was (Mueller [27] contends) to the definite 
detriment of Japan and the potential detriment of the United States (which he suggests might have 
been better served by adopting a containment doctrine rather than the direct engagement that 
ensued). 

Importantly, while the common perception of Pearl Harbor may be one of devastation, a more nuanced 
look may suggest that the event is best defined by the reaction that it produced.  It unified and engaged 
the country in opposing Japan [27].  Mueller, though, suggests that this is the opposite of what Japan 
sought.  He contends that the Japanese goal was to impair or eliminate the United States public’s will to 
fight. 

Thus, a Pearl Harbor-type event can be considered to be an event that is devastating and unexpected.  It 
can be thought of as an attack that spurs anger and a desire to fight the enemy.  Or, it can be thought of 
as an attempt to attack the enemy’s will to fight.  All three of these perspectives are key to consider 
when attempting to define a cyber Pearl Harbor. 

2.3. A cyber Pearl Harbor 

 
 
 
 
 
 
There has been significant discussion around the use of the cyber Pearl Harbor term.  Discussion has 
ranged from who coined the term (with Hamre, Marsh, Bidzos and Schwartau all having some claim to 
its development and evolution [28] and Hamre, Deutch [28] and Panetta [23] involved in publicizing it) 
to the impact of its use on U.S. domestic and foreign policy. 

Over time sentiment has changed significantly.  In 1998, Smith [29] contended that an “electronic Pearl 
Harbor” was a form of hype and that many cyber threats were “the modern equivalent of ghost stories.”  
A number of the actions he predicted as unlikely or unimpactful have occurred; however, even at 
present many regard the impact of cyber-attacks as minimal, with Lawson and Middleton [28] recently 
arguing that, referring to Russian cyber-attacks as part of their Crimea annexation, “the immediate 
effects of these attacks were limited, as have been the effects of cyber-attacks on the shape of the 
military conflict more generally.”  Since 1998, there have been thousands of data breaches 
compromising millions and millions of records of data.  The Equifax breach [30] alone revealed 
information for over 100 million Americans.  Clearly, cyber threats cannot be dismissed any more; 
however, their prospective use and precise efficacy in warfare still remains a subject of significant 
debate. 

While Lawson and Middleton [28] contend that the cyber Pearl Harbor term “has had a largely stable 
meaning” which they say is of “catastrophic physical impacts from cyber-attacks on critical 
infrastructure” other uses are prevalent.  Wirtz [25] provides an aligned, but more nuanced definition 
where a “militarily inferior opponent will utilize a cyber-attack in conjunction with conventional military 
operations to present the United States with a fait accompli” which might be a surprise both from a 
timing and technical perspective.  In any case he notes that it will “incapacitate extraordinarily powerful 
forces developed and deployed at enormous expense” with an attack “undertaken at relatively minimal 
cost” [25].   

Not all uses conform with Lawson and Middleton’s definition, however.  Smith’s [29] 1998 “electronic 
Pearl Harbor” article describes a scenario where “blackouts occur nationwide, the digital information 
that constitutes the national treasury is looted electronically, telephones stop ringing, and emergency 
services become unresponsive” without invoking “physical impacts.”   

Loui and Loui [31] suggest, instead, that the term is “a reminder of the risks of feeling invulnerable and 
being unprepared for – even complacent toward or doubtful of – an attack of this scale and nature.”  
They also discuss [31] how the term could relate to a “vulnerability of a system’s defense, particularly 
when faced with a paradigm shift.”  Smith and Erickson [32], alternately, suggest that “the term ‘Pearl 
Harbor’ has come to denote the concepts of an infrastructure left completely undefended and how only 
a massive attack makes society take that exposure seriously.” 

Lawson and Middleton [28] explain that the definition and use of the term is important due to “the 
importance of language, including metaphor and analogy, for correctly framing and responding to 
national security threats.”  They contend that the term has had “real, negative impacts” as it is “not 
merely used by officials in public speeches” but also in “internal cyber security discourse and 
strategizing” and has “distracted us from the real threats we face” [28].  They suggest that the term may 
best be discontinued or perhaps redefined to better align national interest with real threats. 

3. What would define a cyber Pearl Harbor? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There have been numerous suggestions as to what a cyber Pearl Harbor is.  These range from the large 
catastrophic attack discussed by Smith [29] to Wirtz’s [25] combined cyber and conventional warfare 
attack to Lawson and Middleton’s [28] suggestion of it best being used to describe “many small attacks, 
or even large attacks, that occur but somehow go unnoticed.”  Clarke [28,33] has even suggested that 
the metaphor might be evoked as “daily digital Pearl Harbors.” 

The problem with all of these approaches is that they fail to separate the elements of the Pearl Harbor 
attack: attacker intent, the actual attack event and the impact of the attack.  While the historic Pearl 
Harbor attack, of course, had specific characteristics for all three, a modern cyber-attack might have 
characteristics similar to only one or two of the three.  Thus, a comparison to the Pearl Harbor attack 
might be warranted (in that it is useful for aiding understanding or conveying impact); however, more 
nuance in the use of the term could aid in identifying what parts of the metaphor were being invoked. 

For the purposes of the analysis herein, and more generally, the cyber Pearl Harbor analogy is 
decomposed into three parts: goal, event and impact.  This decomposition is depicted in Figure 1 and 
each component is now discussed. 

Figure 1. Cyber Pearl Harbor analogy components. 

The cyber Pearl Harbor goal (CPH-G) term refers to the intent of the attackers.  Historically, Mueller [27] 
notes that this was “inflicting psychological shock,” turning public sentiment against the war and 
destroying the U.S. will to fight.  Thus, CPH-G can be defined as an adversary having a goal of deterring 
future conflict due to the fear and/or damage caused by a strike. 

The cyber Pearl Harbor event (CPH-E) term refers to the actual event itself.  Historically, this was the 
attack on the Pearl Harbor base.  There are multiple lessons that can be derived from this historical 
attack: the importance of intelligence, not disregarding information because of a believed superiority 
and even how actions taken in response to one perceived threat can make another more devastating 
when it actualizes.  The CPH-E term will be defined as an event that though perhaps projected, still has a 
surprising and large-scale outcome. 

Finally, the cyber Pearl Harbor impact (CPH-I) term refers to the actual result of the attack.  Historically, 
this was mobilizing and unifying America in support of the war effort.  As Mueller [27] notes “the attack 
on Pearl Harbor was phenomenally successful in its shock effect, but the shock was exactly the opposite 
of the one the Japanese hoped for.”  Thus, the CPH-I term will refer to the impact of an event that 
awakens the public (or groups) to the need to take action in response to cyber threats. 

4. Has a cyber Pearl Harbor or near-cyber Pearl Harbor occurred? 

Cyber Pearl Harbor AnalogyCyber Pearl Harbor GoalCPH-GCyber Pearl Harbor EventCPH-ECyber Pearl Harbor ImpactCPH-I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this section, seven incidents will be reviewed to ascertain whether they meet the standards as a CPH-
G, CPH-E or CPH-I.  These seven incidents are the Yahoo data breach, the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) breach, the Equifax breach, the Sony breach and the Marriott breach as well as the 
Stuxnet attack and the Russian invasion of Crimea.  Six of the seven are on CSO Magazine’s list of the 18 
largest data breaches [34].  First, each of the seven incidents is described.  Then, in the subsections that 
follow, each of the CPH types is more thoroughly defined and each of the seven incidents is assessed 
relative to the presented definition. 

The Yahoo breach [35] is the most impactful breach identified by CSO Magazine [34] and is actually a 
combination of breaches that exposed 3 billion records [36].  The series of attacks is believed to have 
started in 2013.  The theft of 500 million records was discovered in 2014.  An earlier attack was 
discovered in 2017, where it was initially believed that approximately one-billion records were stolen in 
2013 [35].  Yahoo admitted a failure to properly investigate the 2014 breach [35], which it believed was 
targeted at 26 users and was conducted by a “state-sponsored hacker” [35].  Data stolen included 
password hashes, email addresses and phone numbers [35]. 

The OPM breach is likely one of the best documented data breaches in history, as the subject of a 
congressional report [37] of over 200 pages.  While the breach was far smaller than many others, 
affecting only 22 million individuals’ records, the stolen information included 21.5 million background 
investigation data files [38], which are perhaps the most robust caches of personal information in the 
United States.  There is also derivative impact, as these files contain names, addresses and other 
information for relatives and other associates of the individuals whose data was compromised.  This 
attack was believed to be perpetuated by the Chinese Government [38] and has the potential use of 
identifying those with access to classified U.S. material, their associates and their personal secrets.  It 
has also been suggested [37] that these details could be used to recruit U.S. intelligence operatives for 
the Chinese Government and to identify possible U.S. operatives in China through association and co-
location.  The breach started in 2012 and was not detected until 2014 [38].  Another related breach 
occurred in 2014 which was detected in 2015 [38]. 

The Equifax breach resulted in the theft of information for 148 million individuals [39]. The breach 
occurred between May and July of 2017 and resulted in the disclosure of social security numbers, birth 
dates, addresses and some credit card numbers, driver’s license numbers and dispute documentation 
[39].  The exact details of the attack remain unclear; however, Terrasi [40] claims that it is “the most 
serious in history” due to a “grossly inadequate response” including a delay in the disclosure of the 
issue.  Martindale [41] notes that the attack was responsible for “severely compromising the identity of 
hundreds of thousands” and “left the majority of the country vulnerable to fraud.” 

The Sony breach is included as it was called a cyber Pearl Harbor by the National Security Agency 
director [28].  However, it didn’t make Terrasi’s top five list [40] or Armerding’s top 18 list [34].  The 
Sony attack included a number of unusual elements.  First, the company appears to have been attacked 
by a nation-state (North Korea) to stop the distribution of a film [42] (i.e., a form of speech).  Second, 
the United States Government directly intervened, threatening action and potentially cutting North 
Korea off from the Internet for a period of time [42].  Third, Sony directly and aggressively responded, 
conducting denial of service attacks on those with its content and posting files online to attempt to 
misdirect those searching for the stolen content [42].  Wolff [42] contends that the Sony attack was 
notable due to the publicity it generated at the time, the U.S. government involvement on Sony’s behalf 
and Sony’s own actions in response. 

 
 
 
 
 
The Marriott breach has been argued [43] to be an action of the Chinese Ministry of State Security as 
part of an attempt to gain information about “executives and American government officials with 
security clearances.”  In this regard, Sanger, et al. [43] state that it is related to attacks on health 
insurance companies and the OPM breach.  The stolen data includes identifying information, credit card 
numbers and passport numbers.  Monaco proffered that the passport details “would be particularly 
valuable in tracking who is crossing borders and what they look like” while Lewis argued that they were 
“seeking to identify American spies – and the Chinese people talking to them” [43].  Alperovitch goes 
even further suggesting that the data “can be used for counterintelligence, recruiting new assets, 
anticorruption campaigns or future targeting of individuals or organizations” [43].  Armerding [34] 
identified the breach as the second most impactful of all time. 

Though Armerding [34] considers it to be only the fifteenth most impactful breach of all time, Stuxnet 
was an attack by two nation-states on a third.  It was also significant because it damaged or destroyed 
not only physical equipment but equipment that was being used to create munitions.  Armerding [34], 
further, notes that it will “serve as a template for real-world intrusion and service disruption of power 
grids, water supplies or public transportation systems” in the future.  Stuxnet was developed to prevent 
or delay Iranian nuclear weapon capability development [44].  To do this, it targeted particular Siemens 
programmable logic controllers in a particular configuration and has minimal impact on computers 
without these controllers.  The Stuxnet worm was developed by U.S. and Israeli intelligence agencies to 
target Iranian centrifuges [44].  Not only did it alter commands to the controllers, it also masked itself by 
sending false data about controller / centrifuge performance, making everything look like it was working 
until the centrifuge was damaged.  The program was code-named Operation Olympic Games and was 
designed to prevent the need for Israeli airstrikes against Iranian nuclear facilities (if it appeared that 
Iran was close to developing a nuclear weapon) which could start a war in the region [44].   

The Russian invasion of Crimea and other Russian activities in the Ukraine are perhaps the most 
pronounced examples of the use of cyber capabilities in support of real-world attacks.  In the Crimea 
invasion, Russian forces utilized a combination of conventional forces, cyber-attacks and social 
engineering [45] to facilitate their annexation of the region, which already had strong Russian support.  
This move was part of a broader Russian strategy to regain prominence within the global political 
landscape and secure its leading position within the former USSR region [46].  This campaign has 
included two cyber-attack induced blackouts [46] as well as a number of more conventional attacks 
against websites and software systems [45].  These attacks follow a pattern of cyber-attacks in support 
of Russian positions that has included previous similar efforts in Estonia and Georgia [46].  In the 
Georgia attack, cyber and conventional attacks were coordinated, and the cyber-attack supported the 
objectives of the conventional one [46].   According to Greenberg [47], cyber activities since the Crimea 
annexation have “systematically undermined practically every sector of Ukraine: media, finance, 
transportation, military, politics, energy.”  Geers noted that “you can’t really find a space in Ukraine 
where there hasn’t been an attack” [47].  Ukraine has become such a “test lab” that cybersecurity 
professionals for around the world – both from the private sector and governments – are setting up 
presences there to analyze attacks before they see them closer to home. 

It is important to note that these are contemporary incidents and that additional – and potentially 
corrected – details may emerge over time.  Given this, the assessment that follows is based on the 
current understanding of the incident based upon the cited sources.  If details of the incident change, 
this analysis still serves to demonstrate the CPH-G, CHP-E and CPH-I classifications, though the 
appropriate classification for a given incident may change.  Table 1 presents and overview of the 
classifications and the following subsections describe the classifications in more detail. 

 
 
 
Table 1. Overview of Classification. 

Yahoo data breach  
Office of Personnel 
Management 
Equifax breach 
Sony breach 
Marriott breach 
Stuxnet attack 
Russian invasion of Crimea 

CPH-G 

CHP-E 
M 

CPH-I 

M 

Y 

Y 

Y 
Y 

Y 
Y 

Y 

Key: Y=Yes, M=Marginal 

4.1. Cyber Pearl Harbor Goals 

CPH goals mirror the goals of the Pearl Harbor attack.  Namely, CPH-Gs are to create a deterrent against 
to the attack recipient’s future actions.  With the Pearl Harbor attack (as described in Section 2), the 
Japanese intended to deter United States involvement both through the destruction of warfighting 
capability and through creating fear about the cost of engagement in the conflict.  Note that goals do 
not need to be realized in order to be classified as CPH-Gs, they simply need to be stated or implicit 
objectives of the attacker. 

The Yahoo data breach, Equifax breach and Marriott breach do not have currently known deterrent 
goals.  Published reports (including those described earlier in this section) do not identify, for example, 
that attackers sought to deter users from using Yahoo or prospective guests from staying at a Marriott 
hotel.  Equifax’s primary business is not providing services to consumers; however, there was also no 
suggestion that attackers sought to deter businesses from using their services in the future. 

Conversely, the Sony attack was thought to be a direct attempt to deter the company from releasing 
(and retaliation for releasing) a movie critical of North Korean leaders.  The Stuxnet attack was designed 
to prevent or delay Iran’s development of nuclear weapons.  The Russian invasion of Crimea is more 
nuanced; however, the cyber attacks had at least the impact of impairing Ukrainian warfighting efforts, 
if not also deterring action to retake the Crimea region.  Finally, the OPM breach may have a deterrent 
goal of knowing that an adversary has access to all of the personal information taken.  This information 
could prospectively be used in the future (or perhaps even already has been used) for blackmailing, 
coercing or recruiting compromised individuals as spies. 

4.2. Cyber Pearl Harbor Events 

CPH events mirror the Pearl Harbor event in that they are defined as having characteristics including 
being unexpected (perhaps despite their being indications that they could happen), paradigm shifting 
and damaging to operational capabilities.  Examples of a CPH-E in the cyber space include the 
development of a new exploit (perhaps based on a known vulnerability) as well as attacks against new 
targets and new types of targets and attacks that utilize new techniques.  Attacks may also be CPH-Es 
because of the scope or scale of the attack, when the scope/scale is unexpected. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Stuxnet attack introduced a new paradigm of attacking the physical world and air-gapped facilities 
through computer viruses and can be classified as a CPH-E for several reasons.  In particular it is a 
paradigm-changer in that it shows that equipment of a type and in a configuration that was previously 
thought to be safe is actually vulnerable. 

The Crimea invasion is similarly a paradigm changer through showing the effectiveness of the 
integration of cyber and physical world attacks which support each other.  It also has the similarity of 
having the attacker’s goals and ambitions known in advance but seeming unlikely for action to be taken 
to achieve them.  

The OPM attack can be marginally classified as a CPH-E due to the information that was taken and being 
a direct and consequential attack against the United States government.  Given the potential for 
retaliation from the United States, there were likely many that did not expect an adversary to be this 
brazen.  Due to the significant impact on national security, there was a real potential for retaliation 
(including a physical world retaliation) that would not be invoked by most other attacks 

The Yahoo attack can be marginally classified as a CPH-E due to its sheer size and the magnitude of data 
compromised.  Beyond this trait, the attack lacks other CPH-E characteristics.  The Equifax, Sony and 
Marriott breaches, while all impactful, lack unexpectedness, a paradigm shifting nature and significant 
technical advancement and are not classified as CPH-Es. 

4.3. Cyber Pearl Harbor Impacts 

CPH impacts are born out of incidents that awaken the general public to a new threat or to a threat that 
they were previously not concerned about and/or galvanize the public in support of an action to 
respond to, retaliate against or resolve the issue.  It is important to note that a CPH-I does not need to 
have an attacker intend to awaken the public or generate support.  In fact, the CPH-I may be exactly the 
opposite of what an attacker sought (if it had CPH-Gs). 

The Crimea annexation is a good example of this as, within the region, it demonstrated the Russian 
threat and triggered a significant response.  While the cyber element is only a part of what caused the 
public to become aware of and support actions to respond to the attack, it is non-the-less an example of 
a CPH-I 

While the Marriott, Equifax, Yahoo, OPM and Sony breaches all attracted some public attention, none 
drove public awareness or interest in responding in a way similar to the Pearl Harbor attack.  The 
Stuxnet attack clearly generated awareness in security and computing circles; however, it only minimally 
entered the public consciousness and has had nowhere near the level of impact as the Pearl Harbor 
attacks. 

4.4. Summary 

By defining the cyber Pearl Harbor incident classification into three sub-classifications, more nuanced 
evaluation, preparation and response can result.  An incident could be described as an across-the-board 
CPH or one of the CPH categories, which is most appropriate, could be identified as its classification 
(instead of just the general CPH classification).  There is a simple definition for what is required to be 
classified as a CPH-G, CPH-E or CPH-I presented in Table 2. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Cyber Pearl Harbor sub-classifications 

CPH-G 

CPH-E 

CPH-I 

Goal of launching an attack with an intent to prevent, limit or delay the 
target entity or country in carrying out its mission and tasks 
An event which is unexpected, damaging and potentially includes and 
uses a technical innovation. 
An incident that has CPH-I characteristics will have the result of 
increasing public interest in cybersecurity and / or a the public’s 
willingness to devote resources to retaliating, responding or taking 
action to prevent future similar attacks. 

5. Cyber Pearl Harbor scenarios for other nations 

While Pearl Harbor doesn’t have the same place in the national consciousness for other nations around 
the world, the core concept of CPH-Gs, CPH-Es and CPH-Is is equally applicable.  In fact, one of the best 
examples of an incident combining both CPH-Gs and a CPH-E is the Russian invasion of Crimea in the 
Ukraine.  While the cyber aspects of the Crimea invasion were in combination with and in support of a 
human invasion and occupation, the Crimea invasion also has elements of CPI-Is.  These are not to the 
same level, necessarily, as the actual Pearl Harbor impact and the cyber aspects of the incident 
contribute only a fraction of the impact. 

Given this, though the terminology used to describe it may not be the same, CPH-Gs, CPH-Es and CPH-Is 
can occur anywhere.  Moreover, identifying goals, events and impact of this type could be a useful tool, 
in many cases, to understanding what has occurred and its implications and either understanding or 
predicting (if the analysis is conducted during the incident) reaction.  In light of this, CPH-G, CPH-E and 
CPH-I based analysis may also be useful for those planning a cyber-attack to help them shape what 
impact an attack might have. 

6. Preparing form responding to and preventing a cyber Pearl Harbor 

When discussing preparing for, responding to, and preventing a CPH, the considerations vary by 
whether one is considering a CPH-G, CPH-E or CPH-I.  A nation state would ideally prevent other nations 
from having CPH-Gs which could lead to CPH-Es.  States would also seek to prevent CPH-Es in their own 
right, in case a nation attacked due to CPH-Gs that were not prevented or for a non-CPH-G reason.  
Conversely, nation states will typically look to prevent CPH-Is in their opponents – not their own – 
populations.  Each is now discussed and the relationship between the different CPH types and activities 
is depicted in Figure 2. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Relationship between CPH-G/-E/-I and preparations, prevention and response activities. 

6.1. Preparing  

Preparation for a CPH incident will vary dramatically based on whether one is preparing for a CPH-G, 
CPH-E or CPH-I.  Relative to an adversary with CPH goals, preparation may be multi-faceted.  First, this 
may consist of activities designed to identify adversaries that may have CPH-Gs towards the nation 
through intelligence and diplomatic activities.  Second, preparation may include taking actions designed 
to reduce the desire of the prospective adversary or adversary to have these goals against the state 
(though this may fall more into the preventing category, discussed below).  Third, preparations will need 

Cyber Pearl Harbor GoalCPH-GCyber Pearl Harbor EventCPH-ECyber Pearl Harbor ImpactCPH-IPrior Acts & InteractionsPrepareAttempt to PreventRespondAttempt to PreventPrepareRespondAttempt to PreventPrepareRespond 
 
 
to include the activities required to prepare to conduct response activities if a CPH event or a non-CPH-E 
in support of CPH goals occurs.  It is important to note, in this regard, that an adversary with CPH goals 
may express these in ways other than a CPH event.  These may lead to a CPH-E or take other forms. 

For an adversary likely to conduct a CPH event, preparation will focus on activities designed at 
prevention (discussed below) as well as to facilitate response to the CPH-E.  Note, in this regard, that the 
very nature of CPH-Es makes preparation for response difficult.  A CPH-E is characterized by being 
unexpected (but possibly with activities that may be detectable in advance as a warning).  General 
preparedness for cyber-attacks, as opposed to preparing only for the things that are deemed most likely, 
may be the most effective strategy for CPH-E preparations.  A state would also benefit from broadening 
its specifically targeted preparations to include preparations for events that seem less likely, but which 
would have significant strategic benefit to an adversary or prospective adversary.  This is particularly 
necessary for powerful states where an adversary may see a surprise attack as the only potential 
advantage that it has over the larger state’s more robust offensive and defensive capabilities [25]. 

The Pearl Harbor attack also demonstrated that preparations for one potential type of attack or incident 
can create vulnerabilities to others.  In the historical attack, the movement of the fleet and orientation 
of aircraft made the United States more vulnerable to the attack than would have existed without these 
actions [25].  Similarly, developing network defenses and security mechanisms for one sort of planned 
cyber attack (or combined cyber and physical attack) may create opportunities for an adversary to 
exploit to launch an alternate type of an attack.  Thus, preparations should be critically assessed for 
other vulnerabilities that they may create. 

Preparations for CPH impact could take two forms.  First, a state may wish to consider what the result of 
an attack causing CPH-I in its own citizens would be.  Conceivably, this may be undesirable if it drags a 
nation into a drawn out, expensive and even potentially unwinnable war.  Preparation, in this case, may 
be to prepare the public for an incident to attempt to mitigate a CPH-I from occurring or to channel the 
public response to it.  Alternately, a state looking to go to war (or engage in conflict with an adversary) 
may prepare to channel the public anger of a CPH-I into support for this effort. 

Second, a state may wish to prepare for CPH-I in its adversary.  Part of these preparation activities may 
be attempting to prevent or reduce the likelihood of a CPH-I occurring (either in response to a planned 
or inadvertent attack against the adversary).  This could potentially be accomplished through a 
propaganda campaign.  Preparation for dealing with an adversary with an engaged population in 
support of a conflict against the state would be another potential scenario to prepare for.  This 
preparation could include increased defenses as well as preparation for attacks from individuals and 
groups that are loosely affiliated with the adversary, in addition to the state adversary itself. 

6.2. Preventing 

Similar to preparing, preventing CPH-Gs, CPH-Es and CPH-Is varies significantly.  The prevention of an 
adversary developing CPH-Gs can be accomplished in multiple ways.  First, intelligence, propaganda and 
democracy efforts can be used to prevent the adversarial relationship necessary to foster CPH goals 
from developing.  National policies that could potentially lead conflict could also be avoided.  A variety 
of studies have suggested, for example, that U.S. policies have led to the development of current 
adversaries [48–50].  While accurately predicting the outcomes of every effort is difficult, if not 
impossible, efforts can be made to maintain relationships that prevent hostility from developing.  Trade, 
for example, has been identified by many (e.g., [51]) as a way of reducing the likelihood of hostilities.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternately, a state can position itself to have response and retaliatory capabilities that deter the 
execution of activities in support of CPH goals, if not the formation of the goals themselves. 

Prevention or deterrence of CPH events is similarly two-fold.  First, a state can prepare its defenses and 
conduct intelligence activities to remove opportunities for successful adversary action and increase the 
likelihood of becoming aware of the activity in the planning stages.  Second, a state can develop 
retaliatory capabilities that deter an attack due to fear of the state’s response.  This is the foundation of 
the mutual assured destruction paradigm [52] that has, so far, been successful in preventing significant 
conflict between nuclear powers.  This same concept has been applied to cyber conflict [53,54]. 

Preventing or deterring CPH impacts, like preparation for them, must consider CPH-I in both adversaries 
and a state’s own citizens.  Preventing CPH-I in an adversary can combine attack development (such as 
to avoid targets and levels of impact that would have a galvanizing effect), propaganda and diplomatic 
efforts.  CPH-I in an adversary can potentially also be prevented, or the formation of it deterred, by 
possessing a significant enough fighting and retaliatory capability such as to make an attack against the 
state seem unlikely or impossible to succeed.  This can prospectively be accomplished via actual 
capability development and propaganda to project awareness of the strength of the state’s capabilities. 
Notably, the Japanese had hoped that the U.S. would be deterred by the Pearl Harbor attack, not 
galvanized into action by it; however (as discussed in Section 2) this was a critical miscalculation. 

Preventing or deterring CPH-Is in a state’s own population may be desirable if the state’s leaders do not 
desire to go to war (potentially because they do not see a way to win it, or for other reasons).  This can 
be accomplished, prospectively, through the use of intra-state propaganda, before an attack, and 
defusing activities, after an attack. 

6.3. Responding 

Responding to CPH-Gs, CPH-Es and CPH-Is is also quite different.  In the case of CPH-Gs, response is 
really a preparation or prevention activity.  There is no specific response to an adversary having CPH 
goals, other than to attempt to dissuade them from holding them or prepare for an attack in support of 
them achieving the goal objectives. 

For CPH events, response is a paramount consideration.  This response will typically have multiple 
components.  These, in most cases, will include immediate response activities that prevent additional 
damage, tend to any human injuries and physical damage and attempt to restore computer system 
functionality.  This, in many cases, will need to be followed by a rebuilding phase where more 
permanent solutions to the damage are implemented (e.g., restoring the full functionality of affected 
systems and restoring them to their full pre-attack capabilities).  Also, mitigation activities against future 
attacks should be undertaken based on the knowledge gained from analysis of the attack vector used, 
system vulnerabilities and the attack’s results.  These phases follow typical response patterns to natural 
disasters [55], as illustrated in Figure 3.  In addition, retaliation activities will typically be warranted and 
desired in response to a CPH-E, particularly if it creates a CPH-I.  The exact nature of the response and 
retaliation activities will obviously vary from event to event and circumstance to circumstance. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Model of a four-phase approach for dealing with emergency management. 

Response for CPH impacts will typically vary significantly by the circumstance.  If a state’s own citizens 
experience a CPH-I then it is likely that this will lead to some sort of response (such as an attack on the 
adversary) action, similar to the responses for a CPH-E.  Note that a CPH-E can occur without producing 
a CPH-I; however, it would be very difficult for a CPH-I to occur without a CPH-E.  One possible scenario 
is where numerous smaller attacks over time combine to create CPH-I without a single large CPH-E 
incident. 

If an adversary’s citizens have CPH-I, then the response action required would be to prepare for and 
defend against the likely attack that will ensue.  Again, the exact nature of such a response is highly 
situation dependent. 

7. Using the CPH-G/-E/-I classification system 

The utility of the CPH sub-classifications (goal, event and impact) is that they can be used as a model for 
preventing an adversary from producing CPH results or a model to create a CPH style impact against an 
adversary.  In particular, a state that has CPH goals, may wish to launch an attack that is a CPH event 
without causing the CPH impact that could lead to extreme retaliation.  

Figure 4. Pathways Including CPH-G, CPH-E and CPI-Is. 

RecoveryResponseMitigationPreparationCyber Pearl Harbor GoalCPH-GCould FormCyber Pearl Harbor EventCPH-ECyber Pearl Harbor ImpactCPH-IAssess CapabilitiesDeterrence and DiplomacyAdversary ExistsYesAssess WillYesFirst Strike Strategy?Engagement Desired?YesYesEffective?Cyber Pearl Harbor GoalCPH-GNoNo CPH-GNoNo CPH-GYesNon CPH-G Attack GoalNoAdversary Considers StrategyCPH Capability?Effective Deterrence?Alternate Attack StrategyAlternate Attack StrategyNoYesCyber Pearl Harbor EventCPH-EPlannedYesNoEffective Execution?YesNon-CPH-E IncidentNoAndAndImportant Target?Public Awareness?Attack Upsets or Scares?And 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As another example, upon the occurrence of a CPH-E, a state may desire to create CPH impact, if 
galvanizing the public to support a war effort is desirable.  Alternately, it may seek to prevent this from 
occurring if it does not plan to enter conflict or prefers a smaller-scale engagement.  A state may also 
seek to launch an attack, which has CPH-E characteristics, against an enemy and, previously, 
simultaneously or subsequently, take action to mitigate the changes that it will create CPH impact. 

Figure 4 depicts how an adversary, or a state, can move from a pre-engagement status to having CPH 
goals to deploying an attack that creates a CPH event to creating CPH impact.  Notably, there are 
multiple decision points along the way (even in this simplified model) that can prospectively prevent 
CPH-Gs, CPH-Es and CPH-Is, providing an opportunity for both the state and its adversary to encourage 
the occurrence of these or their prevention as desired and dictated by their respective strategies. 

8. CPH-G/-E/-I and considerations of attribution and non-state actors 

Attribution and non-state actors impact the use of the CPH-G/-E/-I classifications and decision-making 
model.  Attribution considerations can make deterrence problematic.  If a would-be attacker believes 
they can achieve their goal without the attacked state being certain enough of who attacked to 
retaliate, virtually all deterrence-based prevention and response techniques are no longer applicable.  
Additionally, even temporary delays in attribution determination can impair the deterrence value of 
retaliation (as the attacker would potentially be able to achieve subsequent goals during this period).  
The potential for so-called ‘false flag’ attacks, where the attacker pretends to be another adversary (or 
an entity that was not previously thought to be an adversary) can be very problematic as they can 
remove the deterrence of retaliation and actually trigger retaliation by the incorrectly-retaliated-against 
party. 

Attribution limitations can also make it difficult to conduct intelligence or to determine what entity may 
be planning a CPH-E or may have CPH-Gs, based on intercepted communications or other signals.  This 
can, thus, impact preparation and prevention activities and prospectively reduce their effectiveness. 

Non-state actors can also be very problematic as it can be difficult to determine the membership (which 
may be frequently changing) of loosely affiliated groups, which can impair intelligence activities and thus 
preparation and prevention.  The lack of a target (i.e., because non-state actors don’t have 
infrastructure or territory to attack) may also impair retaliation-based deterrence and response 
activities. 

Both attribution and non-state actors present unique considerations.  Their impact on CPH scenarios 
and the prospective role of non-state actors in state versus state conflicts remains a key topic for future 
study. 

9. Conclusions and future work 

This paper has discussed the concept of a cyber Pearl Harbor.  The term, which springs from the Pearl 
Harbor attack by Japanese forces that led to U.S. involvement in World War II, denotes different things 
depending on its use, context and the individual using it.  Herein, the term was presented as having 
three meanings, related to goals, events and impact.  A definition for each was supplied and the three 
classifications were used to assess seven contemporary cyber attacks to identify if each had a goal, 
event type or impact similar to the Pearl Harbor attack.  The relevance of the three classifications for 
planning and preparing for, responding to and attempting to prevent attacks was discussed.  From this 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis, it was shown that the strategic and military lessons of Pearl Harbor are still relevant today and 
are very relevant to the cyber domain, if somewhat different in certain details due to the cyber context. 

References 

[1] 
[2] 

[3] 

F.D. Roosevelt, Infamy Speech, (1941). 
L.E. Panetta, Transcript: Remarks by Secretary Panetta on Cybersecurity to the Business 
Executives for National Security, New York City, Dep. Def. Website. (2012). 
https://archive.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=5136 (accessed September 
2, 2019). 
C. Perrotta, Do school-level factors influence the educational benefits of digital technology? A 
critical analysis of teachers’ perceptions, Br. J. Educ. Technol. 44 (2013) 314–327. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2012.01304.x. 

[4]  W.J. Chopik, The Benefits of Social Technology Use Among Older Adults Are Mediated by 

Reduced Loneliness, Cyberpsychology, Behav. Soc. Netw. 19 (2016) 551–556. 
doi:10.1089/cyber.2016.0151. 

[5]  M.B. Buntin, M.F. Burke, M.C. Hoaglin, D. Blumenthal, The Benefits Of Health Information 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

Technology: A Review Of The Recent Literature Shows Predominantly Positive Results, Health Aff. 
30 (2011) 464–471. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0178. 
D. Bu, E. Pan, J. Walker, J. Adler-Milstein, D. Kendrick, J.M. Hook, C.M. Cusack, D.W. Bates, B. 
Middleton, Benefits of Information Technology–Enabled Diabetes Management, Diabetes Care. 
30 (2007) 1137–1142. doi:10.2337/DC06-2101. 
F. Whittaker, V. Wade, The costs and benefits of technology-enabled, home-based cardiac 
rehabilitation measured in a randomised controlled trial, J. Telemed. Telecare. 20 (2014) 419–
422. doi:10.1177/1357633X14552376. 
D. McNaughton, J. Light, The iPad and Mobile Technology Revolution: Benefits and Challenges for 
Individuals who require Augmentative and Alternative Communication, Augment. Altern. 
Commun. 29 (2013) 107–116. doi:10.3109/07434618.2013.784930. 
D. Buhalis, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED TOURISM 
ENTERPRISES: ADAPTATION AND BENEFITS, Inf. Technol. Tour. 2 (1999) 79–95. 
https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/cog/itt/1999/00000002/00000002/art00002 
(accessed September 8, 2019). 

[10]  R.D. Atkinson, D. Castro, Digital Quality of Life: Understanding the Personal and Social Benefits of 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

the Information Technology Revolution, SSRN Electron. J. (2008). doi:10.2139/ssrn.1278185. 
F.L. Greitzer, A.P. Moore, D.M. Cappelli, D.H. Andrews, L.A. Carroll, T.D. Hull, Combating the 
Insider Cyber Threat, IEEE Secur. Priv. Mag. 6 (2008) 61–64. doi:10.1109/MSP.2008.8. 
T.J. Holt, A.M. Bossler, An Assessment of the Current State of Cybercrime Scholarship, Deviant 
Behav. 35 (2014) 20–40. doi:10.1080/01639625.2013.822209. 
J.L. Contreras, L. DeNardis, M. Teplinsky, Mapping Today’s Cybersecurity Landscape America the 
Virtual: Security, Privacy, and Interoperability in an Interconnected World: Foreword, Am. Univ. 
Law Rev. 62 (2013) 1113–1130. 
https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?collection=journals&handle=hein.journals/aulr62&id=1161&m
en_tab=srchresults (accessed September 8, 2019). 
P.A. Williams, A.J. Woodward, Cybersecurity vulnerabilities in medical devices: a complex 
environment and multifaceted problem, Med. Devices (Auckl). 8 (2015) 305–16. 
doi:10.2147/MDER.S50048. 

[15]  G. Martin, J. Kinross, C. Hankin, Effective cybersecurity is fundamental to patient safety., BMJ. 

357 (2017) j2375. doi:10.1136/bmj.j2375. 

 
 
[16]  C. Landwehr, D. Boneh, J.C. Mitchell, S.M. Bellovin, S. Landau, M.E. Lesk, Privacy and 

Cybersecurity: The Next 100 Years, Proc. IEEE. 100 (2012) 1659–1673. 
doi:10.1109/JPROC.2012.2189794. 

[17]  N. Schneidewind, Metrics for mitigating cybersecurity threats to networks, IEEE Internet Comput. 

14 (2010) 64–71. doi:10.1109/MIC.2010.14. 

[18]  Data Breach Trends In 2019, Secur. Mag. (2019). 

https://www.securitymagazine.com/articles/90207-data-breach-trends-in-2019 (accessed 
September 8, 2019). 

[19]  D. Winder, Data Breaches Expose 4.1 Billion Records In First Six Months Of 2019, Forbes. (2019). 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/daveywinder/2019/08/20/data-breaches-expose-41-billion-
records-in-first-six-months-of-2019/#2c8f09c6bd54 (accessed September 8, 2019). 
L. Ablon, P. HEaton, D.C. Lavery, S. Romanosky, Consumer attitudes toward data breach 
notifications and loss of personal information, Rand Corporation, 2016. 

[20] 

[21]  H. Choi, J. Park, Y. Jung, The role of privacy fatigue in online privacy behavior, Comput. Human 

Behav. 81 (2018) 42–51. doi:10.1016/J.CHB.2017.12.001. 

[22]  A. Stone, How Leon Panetta’s ‘Cyber Pearl Harbor’ warning shaped Cyber Command, Fifth 

[23] 

Domain. (2019). https://www.fifthdomain.com/opinion/2019/07/30/how-leon-panettas-cyber-
pearl-harbor-warning-shaped-cyber-command/ (accessed September 1, 2019). 
E. Bumiller, T. Shanker, Panetta Warns of Dire Threat of Cyberattack on U.S. - The New York 
Times, New York Times. (2012). https://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/12/world/panetta-warns-of-
dire-threat-of-cyberattack.html (accessed September 1, 2019). 

[24]  R. Higgs, How U.S. Economic Warfare Provoked Japan’s Attack on Pearl Harbor, Synergy. 

[25] 

December (2014) 41–46. http://cenjows.in (accessed September 1, 2019). 
J.J. Wirtz, The Cyber Pearl Harbor, Intell. Natl. Secur. 32 (2017) 758–767. 
doi:10.1080/02684527.2017.1294379. 

[26]  D. Kahn, PEARL HARBOR AND THE INADEQUACY OF CRYPTANALYSIS, Cryptologia. 15 (1991) 273–

[27] 

[28] 

294. doi:10.1080/0161-119191865948. 
J. Mueller, Pearl Harbor: Military Inconvenience, Political Disaster, Int. Secur. 16 (n.d.) 172–203. 
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/447286/summary (accessed September 1, 2019). 
S. Lawson, M.K. Middleton, Cyber Pearl Harbor: Analogy, fear, and the framing of cyber security 
threats in the United States, 1991-2016, First Monday. 24 (2019). doi:10.5210/fm.v24i3.9623. 

[29]  G. SMITH, An Electronic Pearl Harbor? Not Likely, Issues Sci. Technol. 15 (1998) 68–73. 

doi:10.2307/43311853. 

[30]  M. Weinberger, The Equifax security breach in 2017 was worse than we thought - Business 

Insider, (2018). http://www.businessinsider.com/equifax-breach-check-details-update-2018-5 
(accessed May 8, 2018). 

[31]  R.P. Loui, T.D. Loui, How to Survive a Cyber Pearl Harbor, Computer (Long. Beach. Calif). 49 

[32] 

[33] 
[34] 

(2016) 31–37. doi:10.1109/MC.2016.186. 
S.W. Smith, J.S. Erickson, Never Mind Pearl Harbor--What about a Cyber Love Canal?, IEEE Secur. 
Priv. 13 (2015) 94–98. doi:10.1109/MSP.2015.37. 
T. Stevens, Cyber Security and the Politics of Time, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2016. 
T. Armerding, The 18 biggest data breaches of the 21st century, CSO Mag. (2018). 
https://www.csoonline.com/article/2130877/the-biggest-data-breaches-of-the-21st-
century.html (accessed September 2, 2019). 

[35]  M. Kan, Yahoo execs botched its response to 2014 breach, investigation finds, PCWorld. (2017). 
https://www.pcworld.com/article/3176306/yahoo-execs-botched-its-response-to-2014-breach-
investigation-finds.html (accessed September 2, 2019). 
J. Stempel, J. Finkle, Yahoo says all three billion accounts hacked in 2013 data theft, Reuters. 

[36] 

[37] 

[38] 

[39] 

[40] 

[41] 

[42] 

(2017). https://www.reuters.com/article/us-yahoo-cyber/yahoo-says-all-three-billion-accounts-
hacked-in-2013-data-theft-idUSKCN1C82O1 (accessed September 2, 2019). 
114th Congress Committee on Oversight and Government Reform of the U.S. House of 
Representatives, The OPM Data Breach: How the Government Jeopardized Our National Security 
for More than a Generation, 2016. 
https://archive.org/details/ReportFromTheCommitteeOnOversightAndGovernmentReformOnTh
eOPMBreach (accessed September 2, 2019). 
T. Armerding, The OPM breach report: A long time coming, CSO Mag. (2016). 
https://www.csoonline.com/article/3130682/the-opm-breach-report-a-long-time-coming.html 
(accessed September 2, 2019). 
S. Ragan, Equifax says website vulnerability exposed 143 million US consumers, CSO Mag. (2017). 
https://www.csoonline.com/article/3223229/equifax-says-website-vulnerability-exposed-143-
million-us-consumers.html (accessed September 2, 2019). 
J. Terrasi, The 5 Biggest Data Hacks of All Time, Digit. Trends. (2019). 
https://www.digitaltrends.com/computing/biggest-data-hacks-of-all-time/ (accessed September 
2, 2019). 
J. Martindale, Credit union hacks continue with Equifax and TrnsUnion malware attacks, Digit. 
Trends. (2017). https://www.digitaltrends.com/computing/equifax-transunion-malware-hack/ 
(accessed September 2, 2019). 
J. Wolff, An Epic Nightmare, Slate Futur. Tense. (2018). 
https://slate.com/technology/2018/11/north-korea-sony-pictures-hack-humiliation-
response.html (accessed September 2, 2019). 

[43]  D.E. Sanger, N. Perlroth, G. Thrush, A. Rappeport, Marriott Data Breach Is Traced to Chinese 

Hackers as U.S. Readies Crackdown on Beijing, New York Times. (2018). 
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/11/us/politics/trump-china-trade.html (accessed September 
2, 2019). 
J. Fruhlinger, What is Stuxnet, who created it and how does it work?, CSO Mag. (2017). 
https://www.csoonline.com/article/3218104/what-is-stuxnet-who-created-it-and-how-does-it-
work.html (accessed September 3, 2019). 

[44] 

[45]  M. Holloway, How Russia Weaponized Social Media in Crimea, RealClear Def. (2017). 

https://www.realcleardefense.com/articles/2017/05/10/how_russia_weaponized_social_media_
in_crimea_111352.html (accessed September 4, 2019). 

[46]  D. Park, J. Summers, M. Walstrom, Cyberattack on Critical Infrastructure: Russia and the 

Ukrainian Power Grid Attacks, Univ. Washingt. Website. (2017). 
https://jsis.washington.edu/news/cyberattack-critical-infrastructure-russia-ukrainian-power-
grid-attacks/ (accessed December 11, 2018). 

[47]  A. Greenberg, How an entire nation became Russia’s test lab for cyberwar, Wired. (2017). 

https://www.wired.com/story/russian-hackers-attack-ukraine/ (accessed December 11, 2018). 

[48]  D.L. Byman, Al-Qaeda as an Adversary do We Understand Our Enemy, World Polit. 56 (2003). 

https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/wpot56&id=156&div=9&collection=jour
nals (accessed September 8, 2019). 

[50] 

[49]  M.C. Hudson, To Play the Hegemon: Fifty Years of US Policy toward the Middle East, Middle East 
J. 50 (1996). https://www.questia.com/library/journal/1P3-10032997/to-play-the-hegemon-fifty-
years-of-us-policy-toward (accessed September 8, 2019). 
S. Amin, U.S. Imperialism, Europe, and the Middle East, Mon. Rev. 56 (2004) 13. 
doi:10.14452/MR-056-06-2004-10_2. 
T.J. Schoenbaum, D.C.K. Chow, The Peril of Economic Nationalism and a Proposed Pathway to 
Trade Harmony, Stanford Law Pol. Rev. 30 (2019) 115–196. 

[51] 

https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?collection=journals&handle=hein.journals/stanlp30&id=126&
men_tab=srchresults (accessed September 8, 2019). 

[52]  R. Jervis, Mutual Assured Destruction, Foreign Policy. 133 (2002) 40–42. 

[53] 

[54] 

[55] 

https://search.proquest.com/openview/c4171c1b37ec91abf594ab74209ed748/1?cbl=47510&pq
-origsite=gscholar (accessed January 21, 2019). 
E. Geist, Deterrence Stability in the Cyber Age, Strateg. Stud. Q. (2015) 44–62. 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/844c/3953aca2af0ce578ca13a9e9d25dd80adae3.pdf (accessed 
September 8, 2019). 
J. Straub, Mutual assured destruction in information, influence and cyber warfare: Comparing, 
contrasting and combining relevant scenarios, Technol. Soc. 59 (2019) 101177. 
doi:10.1016/J.TECHSOC.2019.101177. 
L. Hu-sheng, Research on new model of the emergency management phase theory, J. Saf. Sci. 
Technol. 5 (2010). http://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTotal-LDBK201005005.htm (accessed 
September 8, 2019). 

 
