Methodology for Detecting Cyber Intrusions in e-Learning Systems during 
COVID-19 Pandemic 

Ivan Cvitić1,*[0000-0003-3728-6711], Dragan Peraković1[0000-0002-0476-9373], Marko Periša1[0000-0002-1775-0735] and Anca D. 
Jurcut2[0000-0002-2705-1823]  

1 University of Zagreb, Faculty of Transport and Traffic Sciences, Vukelićeva 4, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia  
2 University College Dublin, School of Computer Science and Informatics Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland 

Corresponding author’s e-mail: ivan.cvitic@fpz.unizg.hr 

Abstract. In the scenarios of specific conditions and crises such as the coronavirus pandemic, the availability 
of  e-learning  ecosystem  elements  is  further  highlighted.  The  growing  importance  for  securing  such  an 
ecosystem can be seen from DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service) attacks on e-learning components of the 
Croatian e-learning system. The negative impact of the conducted attack is visible in numerous users who were 
prevented from participating in and implementing the planned teaching process. Network anomalies such as 
conducted DDoS attacks were identified as one of the crucial threats to the e-learning systems. In this paper, 
an overview of the network anomaly phenomenon was given and  botnets' role in generating DDoS attacks, 
especially IoT device  impact. The paper analyzes the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on  the e-learning 
systems in Croatia. Based on the conclusions, a research methodology has been proposed to develop a cyber-
threat  detection  model  that  considers  the  specifics  of  the  application  of  e-learning  systems  in  crisis, 
distinguishing flash crowd events from anomalies in the communication network. The proposed methodology 
includes establishing a theoretical basis on DDoS and flash crowd event traffic, defining a laboratory testbed 
setup for data acquisition, development of DDoS detection model, and testing the applicability of the developed 
model on  the  case  study. The implementation  of  the proposed  methodology  can  improve the quality of  the 
teaching  process  through  timely  DDoS  detection  and  it  gives  other  socio-economic  contributions  such  as 
developing  a  specific  research  domain,  publicly  available  dataset  of  network  traffic,  and  raising  the  cyber-
security of the e-learning systems. 

Keywords: availability, cyber-threats, DDoS, SARS-CoV-2, e-learning 

Declarations 

Funding: This research is funded by the University of Zagreb through the Grants for core financing of scientific 
and  artistic  activities  of  the  University  of  Zagreb  in  the  academic  year  2019/2020  under  the  project  (555-1) 
"Challenges  of  Information  and  Communication  Networks  and  Technologies,  services,  and  user  equipment  in 
establishing the Society 5.0 environment." 
Conflicts of interest/Competing interests: Not applicable 
Availability of data and material: Not applicable 
Code availability: Not applicable 
Authors' contribution: Conceptualization: Ivan Cvitić and Dragan Peraković; Methodology: Ivan Cvitić, Dragan 
Peraković, Marko Periša and Anca D. Jurcut; Formal analysis: Ivan Cvitić, Dragan Peraković, Marko Periša and 
Anca D. Jurcut; Investigation: Ivan Cvitić; Supervision: Dragan Peraković; Visualization: Ivan Cvitić and Marko 
Periša; Writing – original draft: Ivan Cvitić; Writing  – review & editing: Dragan Peraković, Marko Periša and 
Anca D. Jurcut 

1 

Introduction  

Anomaly  represents  samples  in  the  data  that  deviate  from  the  previously  defined  normal  behavior  of  the 
observed  phenomenon.  Observed  from  the  aspect  of  information  and  communication  system,  anomalies  in 
communication, i.e. network traffic, are generally generated by one or several network devices. This is often a 
result from illegitimate network activities in the system, with the anomalies of network traffic having the potential 
of negatively affecting the operation of the information and communication system or services  [1]. One of the 
frequent causes of anomalies in the network traffic is DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service) attack. Over the last 
two decades numerous studies have been directed to the development of methods, models and systems that can 
detect DDoS traffic in real time. Nevertheless, the number of DDoS attacks and the amount of DDoS traffic is 

1 

 
 
constantly increasing, which why further research in the area of the detection of security threats of this kind is 
necessary [2]. Despite continuous research of network traffic anomalies, cyber attacks such as DDoS attacks are 
still  frequent  and  can  have  numerous  negative  effects  on  the  predicted  performance  of  Information  and 
Communication (IC) systems and IC service availability. The coronavirus pandemic (SARS-CoV-2) highlighted 
the importance of the availability of e-learning systems and services. E-learning systems as part of an academic 
open approach are exposed to security threats and feature numerous vulnerabilities and are often the target of cyber 
attacks [5]. This problem is further highlighted by the increased need to use e-leraning as a result of the COVID-
19 pandemic. Cyber threats and attacks are still present, but the current pandemic points to the need to intensify 
research on detecting cyber attacks in e-learning systems because it has been observed that cyber attacks in crises 
have a potentially far greater negative impact than under normal circumstances. 

This research's motivation came from a DDoS attack conducted on AAI@EduHr, an authentication service for 
e-learning users in the Republic of Croatia that  occurred in March 2020 while  the  education process migrated 
online  during  coronavirus  caused  lockdown  [3].  The  problem  of  DDoS  attacks  on  e-learning  systems  during 
coronavirus pandemic was identified by Kaspersky as well, where they noticed an increase from 350% to 550% 
of  such  attacks  compared  to  the  same  month  in  2019  [4].  Accordingly,  they  emphasized  the  importance  of 
researching DDoS detection and mitigation on e-learning systems during the pandemic like crises where e-learning 
has no alternative for conducting the education process. This research aims to propose a research methodology for 
developing DDoS traffic detection models at the attack target in a scenario where flash crowd events-generated 
traffic represents legitimate traffic, such as e-learning services during the COVID-19 pandemic. Special focus in 
this paper is on the  e-learning system cyber security, which, with the  advent of the COVID-19 pandemic, has 
become the primary way of conducting teaching and other administrative processes.  

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  in  Section  2  related  research  was  analyzed  in  DDoS  attack 
detection and flash crowd distinguishing. Section 3 gives an overview of the network traffic anomalies from the 
aspect of DDoS attacks as one of the most disruptive way of IC resources availability attacks. At the end of the 
Section  the  impact  of  COVID-19  pandemic  on  the  availability  of  e-learning  systems  with  case  studies  in  the 
Republic of Croatia is analyzed. The analysis considers and discusses the problem of flash crowd appearance and 
DDoS in the same scenario. Flash crowd represents a legitimate event or series of legitimate events or network 
traffic unusually high intensity that can disrupt the availability of online service or communication resources. In 
Section 4 a research methodology for network traffic anomalies detection model development is proposed. Such a 
model would be appropriate in the crisis scenarios such as the current pandemic where the flash crowd and DDoS 
attack  phenomena  occur  in  the  same  scenario  on  e-learning  system  without  an  alternative  for  conducting  the 
educational process.  

2 

Related work 

Previous studies define several approaches to DDoS traffic detection. They can be generally divided into two 
basic categories; those based on the samples and those based on the anomalies [6]. Research [7], apart from the 
previous ones, identifies also the approach based on entropy, and research [8] mentions the possibilities of applying 
the hybrid approach to DDoS traffic detection. The methods based on the sample apply the comparison of the 
incoming traffic with the pre-defined profiles and samples of the known network anomalies [9]. The detection of 
DDoS attack based on the sample can be carried out in three ways; based on the known attack signature, based on 
the rule (if-then), and based on the condition and transition [10]. The advantage of this detection method is a high 
rate of detection of the already known DDoS attacks with a low number of false positive and false negative results. 
The drawback is the impossibility of detecting new and unknown attacks, i.e. those not included in the database, 
which  is  used  for  comparison  with  the  incoming  traffic  samples.  Because  of  the  problem  area  dynamics,  the 
detection methods must detect unknown samples of DDoS traffic [6]. 

On  the  contrary,  the  approach  based  on  the  detection  of  the  network  traffic  anomalies uses  the  pre-defined 
models of normal traffic which are then used to compare the incoming traffic [8]. This approach to detection has 
been developed to overcome the drawbacks of the detection approach based on the samples [7]. If the incoming 
traffic  significantly  differs  from  the  defined  model  of normal  traffic,  then  the  incoming  traffic  is  identified  as 
anomaly,  i.e.  DDoS  traffic  [11].  The  advantage  of  detecting  network  traffic  anomalies  related  to  the  detection 
based on samples is the possibility of discovering unknown attacks. The main drawback of detection based on 
anomalies  is  determining  the  threshold  values  between  normal  traffic  and  anomaly  [8,  12].  The  anomalies  of 
network  traffic  are  detected  when  the  current  traffic  flow  values  or  other  selected  parameters  exceed  the  pre-
defined threshold of the normal traffic model. A low defined threshold results in a large number of false positive 
results,  and  high  defined  threshold  leads  to  a  large  number  of  false  negative  results  [13].  Numerous  scientific 

2 

 
methods have been used for the detection of DDoS traffic [14]. The current academic literature most frequently 
applies the statistical methods, machine learning methods, and softcomputing methods [14–16]. In today's big data 
concept environments, high cyber attack detection and response performances are demonstrated by the machine 
learning and artificial intelligence methods. The impact of botnet (network of infected end devices) in generating 
DDoS traffic is analyzed with the focus on the rising trends and widespread application of IoT devices and the 
impact of DDoS traffic on the e-learning system in the Republic of Croatia during COVID-19 pandemic.  

The pandemic impact on e-leaning was already studied in [17], where the authors concluded that the pandemic 
acts as a boost for e-learning development. The importance of e-learning system in education during the COVID-
19 pandemic and similar crisis situations is well proven in several studies, such as [18–20]. Because of the crucial 
role of e-learning, the research in preventing and reacting to cyber threats directed towards such a system needs to 
be intensified.  

3 

Availability of e-learning system in pandemic scenario 

3.1  Overview of network traffic anomaly phenomenon  

The  anomaly  represents  patterns  in  the  data  that  do  not  correspond  to  the  observed  phenomenon  of  the 
previously defined normal behavior. Data are generally generated from one or more processes that may reflect the 
system  activity  or  observations  collected  about  entities  [21].  Unusual  behavior  of  the  data-generating  process 
creates  anomalies  in  the  data.  Thus,  an  anomaly  in  data  often  contains  useful  information  about  abnormal 
characteristics of a system or entity that affect the  data  generation process. Recognizing such features that are 
uncommon provides useful insights into a variety of applications. Examples of anomaly detection application are 
visible through numerous studies in different areas of application [21, 22]. Many IC systems collect different data 
types about the operating system operation, network traffic, or user activity or phishing e-mails [23]. Such data 
may indicate unusual behavior, i.e. anomalies caused by illegitimate activities. Credit card fraud is becoming more 
common due to the greater ease with which sensitive data such as credit card numbers can be compromised. In 
many cases unauthorized use of a credit card can show different patterns, such as a sudden increase in spending 
from certain locations (buying sprees) or very large transactions. Such forms can be used to detect extreme values 
in credit card transaction data. Sensors are often used to monitor various environmental and location parameters 
in many real-world applications. Sudden changes in the basic patterns can be events of interest. Event detection is 
one of the primary motivational applications in the field of sensor networks. In a number of medical applications, 
data  are  collected  using  a  variety  of  devices  such  as  Magnetic  Resonance  imaging  (MR),  Positron  Emission 
Tomography (PET), or time series Electrocardiograms (ECG). Unusual patterns or anomalies in such data reflect 
the patient's disease condition. 

In  the  above  application  examples,  a  model  of  normal  data  is  defined  from  the  collected  data,  where  the 
anomalies  are  identified  as  deviations  from  such  a  model.  Certain  applications  such  as  the  detection  of 
unauthorized intrusion into the IC system or the detection of fraud anomalies correspond to a sequence of multiple 
data points instead of a single data point. Sequence specificity is relevant for identifying events that represent an 
anomaly. Such anomalies are also called collective anomalies in the literature because they can be collectively 
derived from a set or sequence of data points. 

Detection of anomalies in the data generally gives two types of results (outcomes): the level of the anomaly and 
the binary indication. Most anomaly detection methods evaluate the anomaly level of each data point. The obtained 
levels  can  be  used  to  rank  the  data  points  according  to  their  tendency  to  become  anomalies.  Binary  notations 
indicate whether a data point is an anomaly or not. Anomaly levels can also be transformed into binary notations 
using cut-off values that are selected based on, for example, the statistical distribution of levels assigned to all the 
data in the observed set. 

Figure 1 shows an example of data anomalies in a two-dimensional dataset. The data have two normal regions 
labeled N1 and N2 since most of the observations lie in these regions. Points that are far enough from the marked 
regions, such as o1 and o2 and the set of points in the O3 region represent anomalies [24]. 

3 

 
 
Figure 1 - Representation of an anomaly in a two-dimensional dataset [24] 

Observed from the communication network aspect, anomalies can occur in the network data traffic that occurs 
as  a  result  of  the  communication  activities  of  terminal  or  network  devices.  According  to  [25],  the  causes  of 
anomalies in the communication network can occur due to unexpected communication activities, a sudden increase 
in the demand for legitimate users' service (flash crowd) or illegitimate activities. According to [26], anomalies 
can  be  observed  through  three  basic  categories,  (1)  individual  anomalies,  (2)  contextual  anomalies,  and  (3) 
collective anomalies. 

Individual anomalies are those in which the individual data represent an anomaly in relation to other data. These 
are the simplest form of anomaly and a number of anomaly detection solutions presuppose this type of anomaly. 
The term contextual anomaly refers to the deviation of features that represent data of a given context. The context 
can be temporal, spatial, or given depending on the problem area [27]. According to [28] and [29], a collective 
anomaly  represents  groups  of  data  that  behave  normally  at  the  individual  level,  but  as  a  group  represent  an 
anomaly. 

Detection of various anomalies caused by illegitimate activities and security incidents in the computer network 
is  one  of  the  most  significant  challenges  for  researchers,  but  also  for  the  network  administrators  and  security 
experts. One of the growing causes of network traffic anomalies is, according to numerous studies, the DDoS 
attack. DDoS attacks have been the subject of research since the beginning of 2000, when Yahoo, Ebay, Amazon 
and similar portals owned by multinational companies became targets, that even then invested large resources in 
the security of their IC systems. DDoS attacks already then showed that this is a type of attack that is difficult to 
detect and from which it is difficult to protect oneself [30, 31].   

Most illegitimate activities that take place in the IC system seek to violate one of the three basic principles of 
security, where the violation of the principle of availability means denying access to the IC service, system, or any 
resource to legitimate users [32]. In doing so, a legitimate user is presented as a user who has a certain level of 
authority to use the IC system resources and does not exceed that authority by unauthorized activities. A Denial 
of Service (DoS) attack is a general class of attacks aimed at the availability of IC resources. 

According to the method of distribution, DoS attacks can be divided into two categories  [33]: single source 
attacks, Single Source Denial of Service (SDoS) and multi-source attacks or Distributed Denial of Service attack 
(DDoS). The source of an SDoS attack is a single computer or device on the network. A DDoS is a coordinated 
illegitimate activity aimed at exploiting the available capacity of devices to process or transmit network traffic in 
order to prevent access to IC resources to legitimate users. For the purpose of carrying out an attack, a large number 
of devices in the network are used (most often terminal devices) to generate illegitimate DDoS traffic to the target 
of the attack. 

The UML state and transition diagram in Figure 2 shows the states in which the IC system or service may be 
located as well as the conditions that lead to the transition to individual states or retention of the existing state. 
Normal operation is a state that is maintained in conditions where the intensity of requests (𝝀) is less than the 
server capacity or less than the processing speed of incoming requests (µ). If the request intensity is higher than 
the server capacity, the system enters a congestion state and remains in that state until the server queue occupancy 

4 

 
 
reaches a maximum or until the intensity of incoming  requests decreases. In the first case, when the maximum 
filling of the serving tail is reached, the system goes into a state of unavailability, while in the second case, the 
system returns to the state of normal operation. 

Figure 2 - UML diagram of the state of IC resources and services [34] 

A DDoS attack exploits the shortcomings of the Internet network architecture. An Internet network is designed 
to  provide  functionality  where  security  of  communication  is  not  considered.  Studies  [8,  35,  36]  highlight  the 
shortcomings of  the  Internet network design that enable successful implementation of DDoS attacks. The first 
disadvantage is reflected in the limited capacity of networked devices that can be completely depleted. Also, as 
one  of  the  problems,  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  vulnerability  to  a  DDoS  attack  does  not  depend on  the  level  of 
protection of the devices in the network that is the target of the attack. It depends on the security of the global 
Internet network. The increase in the number of devices and the amount of traffic transmitted through the network 
results in the upgrade of high-bandwidth links in the communication network core segment. This makes it possible 
to use such a configuration to deliver a traffic intensity exceeding 1Tbps towards the attack ultimate target. Failure 
to authenticate an individual IP packet enables the implementation of DDoS attacks with fake source IP addresses, 
which makes a strong mechanism for anonymizing the source of the attack. Finally, one of the more significant 
problems is the distributed management and control methods in the Internet network. Any local network connected 
to the Internet can operate according to the policy defined by the administrator. Consequently, there is no way to 
implement  and  enforce  global  security  mechanisms  or  policies  that  make  it  impossible  to  investigate  traffic 
behavior between diverse networks.  

3.2 

Impact of botnets on the generation of DDoS attacks 

The concept of a botnet as a network of remotely managed vulnerable devices has been known for more than 
20 years. However, its application in the IoT concept environment is relatively new. Creating a botnet requires the 
implementation of malicious software in a target device that will allow remote management. According to  [37–
40] due to the known limitations of IoT devices, many malicious software are aimed at this type of device in order 
to create a botnet network through which it is possible to conduct DDoS attacks that generate DDoS traffic of high 
intensity (above 1Tbps) [41]. According to research by Bitdefender, in 2018, 78% of illegitimate activity was led 
by IoT botnets [42]. Although the possibility of forming a botnet using IoT devices has been known since 2009, 
when the first such DDoS attack was performed, it was in 2016 that there was the first publicly exposed DDoS 
botnet  attack  called  Mirai  [43].  Mirai  is  malicious  software  from  the  class  of  computer  worms  that  detects 
vulnerable devices in the network, exploits their vulnerabilities to install malicious code and further propagates 
through the network. Several studies have analyzed the Mirai malware and botnet network in order to discover 
how it works and the effects on devices and the DDoS traffic generated through that botnet. Research [44] shows 
the working principle of the Mirai botnet, shown in Figure 3. 

5 

 
 
 
 
Figure 3 - Sequential UML diagram of the Mirai botnet working principle [44] 

  According to Figure 3, Mirai malware works in two phases: scanning and brute-force. In the implementation of 
the  first  phase,  the  pseudorandom  range  of  IPv4  addresses  is  scanned  using  the  TCP  SYN  method  on  the 
communication ports used by the telnet network service (TCP 23 and TCP 2323). After an active IoT device is 
detected in the network that has an open communication port 23 or 2323, the second phase of operation begins. 

The second phase uses a brute-force attempt to illegally access a vulnerable device via a telnet service and a list 
of  62  potential  usernames  and  passwords.  After  successfully  accessing  the  device,  Mirai  sends  the  device  IP 
address and the associated access data to the control server. The control server implements a program code (loader 
program) in the vulnerable device, whose role is to detect the device operating system based on which the malicious 
software  specific  to  the  identified  operating  system  is  implemented.  Implemented  malicious  code  allows  the 
control server to remotely control the device in the form of forwarding instructions for generating DDoS traffic 
(type of attack, traffic intensity, protocol, target of the attack) [44,45].  

According to research [37], the Mirai botnet consisted of approximately 500,000 IoT devices from 164 countries 
whose  purpose  was  to  generate  DDoS  traffic  to  many  destinations,  the  most  prominent  of  which  were  the 
KerbsOnSecurity.com web server, the Dyn DNS service and the French web hosting provider OVH [43, 46]. The 
characteristics of DDoS attacks using the Mirai botnet are shown in Table 1. 

Table 1 - The most significant DDoS attacks conducted through the Mirai botnet 

Attack target 

Number of devices 

DDoS traffic intensity 

Botnet 

KrebsOnSecurity.com 

24,000 

Dyn DNS 

OVH 

100,000 

145,607 

623 Gb/s 

1,2 Tb/s 

Mirai 

Mirai 

1,1 – 1,5 Tb/s 

Mirai/Bashlight 

In addition to the Mirai botnet,  as the most important representative and indicator of the importance and 
impact  of  DDoS  attacks  based  on  SHIoT  devices,  research  also  indicates  many  other  botnets  that  use  SHIoT 
devices to generate DDoS traffic [37, 43, 45–49].  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
  Table 2 shows the existing malicious software whose purpose is to create a SHIoT botnet to generate DDoS 
traffic. In addition to malicious software, the types of DDoS traffic are listed in terms of the protocols used that 
individual botnets can generate. 

Table 2 - Malicious software used to create an IoT botnet to generate DDoS traffic [46] 

Malicious software 

Type of generated DDoS traffic 

Linux.Hydra 

Psyb0t 

Tsunami, Kaiten 

Aidra, LightAidra, Zendran 

Spike, Dofloo, MrBlack, 
Wrkatk, Sotdas, AES.DDoS 

BASHLITE, Lizkebab, 

Elknot, BillGates 

XOR.DDoS 

LUABOT 

SYN Flood, UDP Flood 

SYN Flood, UDP Flood, ICMP Flood 

SYN Flood, UDP Flood, ACK Flood 
SYN  Flood,  UDP  Flood,  ACK-PUSH  Flood,  HTTP  Layer  7  Flood,  TCP 
XMAS 

SYN Flood, ACK Flood 

SYN Flood, UDP Flood, ICMP Flood, DNS Query  Flood, HTTP Layer 7 
Flood 
SYN Flood, UDP Flood, ACK Flood 

SYN Flood, UDP Flood, ICMP Flood, Flood, DNS Amplification, HTTP 
Layer 7 Flood, other TCP Floods 

HTTP Layer 7 Flood 

Remaiten, KTN-RM 

SYN Flood, UDP Flood, ACK Flood, HTTP Layer 7 Flood 

NewAidra, Linux.IRCTelne 

SYN Flood, ACK Flood, ACK-PUSH Flood, TCP XMAS, TCP Floods 

Mirai 

Flood, 

SYN 
UDP 
Flood,  DNS  Water  Torture,  GRE 
Flood, HTTP Layer 7 Flood 

Flood, 

ACK 

Flood, 

Query 
IP  Flood,  GRE  ETH 

VSE 

  From all the above, it is possible to conclude that, generically speaking, DDoS attacks and thus DDoS traffic as 
a product of such attacks are a growing security threat to IC resources and service availability. This is confirmed 
by  numerous  studies  that  indicate  an  increase  in  the  sophistication  of  this  threat  in  terms  of  the  diversity  of 
protocols used to generate DDoS traffic. 
  An additional factor in the growth of this problem is undoubtedly the emergence and growth and development 
of the concept of smart home and IoT devices which due to their limitations and security shortcomings allow the 
creation of botnets with a much larger number of remotely controlled devices that have the potential to generate 
DDoS traffic.  

3.3  Analysis of COVID-19 pandemic impact on the e-learning system  

Despite continuous research into network traffic anomalies, cyber attacks such as DDoS attacks are still frequent 
and can have numerous negative effects on the IC system predicted performance and the availability of IC services. 
The pandemic of coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) highlighted the importance of the availability of e-learning systems 
and  services.  Crises  such  as 
isolation  of  users 
(students/teachers/administrators) whereby education and the supporting processes rely on the reliable work of the 
e-learning  system  and  all  its  elements.  On  March  16th,  2020,  a  DDoS  attack  on  AAI@EduHr  system  was 
responsible for authenticating the users to access various e-learning services (Merlin, webinar, e-learning center, 
Dabar, Hrčak, filesender and others) in the Republic of Croatia [3]. The conducted attack indicated the need to 
research and find solutions for cyber threats (primarily DDoS) applicable in specific scenarios. 

the  mentioned  pandemic  result 

the  need  for 

in 

According to data from the Croatian University Computing Center (Srce) during March 2020, in the month in 
which remote education began due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the AAI@EduHr system recorded 11,214,236 
successful authentications for 517,453 unique users (Figure 4). For comparison, in March 2019, the AAI@EduHr 
system had a total of 3,220,212 successful authentications of 252,974 unique users, which can be seen in Figure 
5. Authentication through AAI@EduHr was most commonly used to access MS Office 365 systems for schools, 
Loomen, and Srce systems: Merlin - a remote learning system for students and teachers ISVU Information System 

7 

 
 
 
for Higher Education (primary the Studomat module) [50]. In two and a half days trough e-learning system Merlin 
webinar 420 lectures longer than 15 minutes were held with 2,594 participants.  

Figure 4 - Number of successful authentications in March 2020 by day [50] 

The  presented  data  indicate  the  occurrence  of  the  flash  crowd  phenomenon.  This  occurs  when  legitimate 
requests  to  access  a  web-based  service  exceed  the  statistically  normal  number  of  legitimate  requests  [51]. 
Accordingly,  flash  crowds  may  adversely  affect  the  performance  of  DDoS  attack  detection  models  based  on 
machine  learning  methods  that  use  datasets  created  during  the  period  when  the  number  of  service  requests  is 
common. Such models are often detecting flash crowd traffic as a DDoS attack traffic, even though it represents a 
legitimate service request. Some authors research solutions that can differentiate flash crowd and DDoS traffic by 
using human behavior and interaction, but such solutions are not acceptable to users [52]. 

Figure 5 - Number of successful authentications of March 2019 and 2020 comparison [50] 

To achieve effective detection of DDoS and thus for reaction to such attacks in specific cases of flash crowd 
phenomena under crises such as a coronavirus pandemic, the detection model should be based on distinguishing 
between DDoS traffic and traffic generated under flash crowd conditions. One of the research directions followed 
by this project proposal is identifying the unique characteristic of flash crowd traffic vis-à-vis DDoS traffic as a 
basis for the development of DDoS traffic detection model [53]. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
4  Methodology for developing DDoS traffic detection model  

The implementation of efficient and effective research for dealing with  the described problem requires well-

structured research methodology [54]. 

Figure 6 - UML activity diagram of activities through research phases [54]  

Research implementation through four-phase methodology, and the activities shown in Figure 6 are proposed 
as follows: (1) analysis of the existing elements of the e-learning ecosystem and establishing the theoretical basis 
and differences between DDoS and flash crowd traffic, (2) forming of a laboratory environment, the collection of 
network traffic, processing and preparation of the collected data for further analysis, (3) development of DDoS 
traffic detection model, validation and performance evaluation of the developed DDoS traffic detection model, (4) 
analysis of the applicability of the developed anomaly detection model and the reaction capabilities based on the 
operation of the developed model.  

4.1  Establishing the theoretical basis and differences between DDoS and flash crowd traffic 

In the first phase of the research the current scientific literature will be analyzed to identify the elements of the 
e-learning ecosystem, architecture, communication topologies and technologies, and other relevant characteristics 
of  such  environments.  The  purpose  of  the  aforementioned  research  activities  is  to  provide  adequate 
recommendations and guidelines in the last phase of the research to ensure the availability of e-learning services 
and minimize the negative impacts of the emergence and realization of cyber threats such as DDoS attacks. The 
current scientific literature analysis will also determine the current research findings related to the characteristics 
of the network traffic generated as a result of flash crowd activity and current research achievements regarding the 
development of models and systems that can distinguish DDoS and flash crowd traffic. 

4.2 

Formation of laboratory environment and data collection 

Second phase  should  include establishing  a  laboratory  environment  for generating  and  collecting  legitimate 
(flash  crowd)  and  illegitimate  (DDoS)  traffic.  The  laboratory  environment  is  planned  to  be  established  at  the 
Department of Information and Communication Traffic at the FPZ within the Laboratory for Security and Forensic 
Analysis  of  the  Information  and  Communication  System  (LSF).  Flash  crowd  and  DDoS  traffic  generation  is 
planned with the implementation of the dedicated hardware platform. Such a platform can simulate realistic flash 
crowd and DDoS traffic and provide advanced management and define features of the generated traffic at different 
OSI layers (Open Systems Interconnection) model. The next planned activity is to collect and store the generated 

9 

 
 
 
 
traffic on the dedicated computers in .pcap format files, which is suitable for further manipulation in the form of 
analysis and extraction of the traffic feature values. 

Further research activities in  this phase are related  to the pre-processing and  preparation of data  for further 
analysis. This implies filtering the collected data and extraction of the network traffic features that can be used in 
network anomaly detection model and adequate labeling of feature vectors. Considered will be exclusively the 
packet header values, i.e. statistical features of traffic while the packet content will not be considered because of 
the application of cryptographic methods in the communication processes. In this phase, the independent traffic 
features will be selected based on which it is possible to differentiate the observed traffic on legitimate and DDoS. 
Also, the level of connection with the dependent feature will be determined and those independent features with 
the highest level of connection with the dependent feature will be selected. The selected features will be used  to 
define the model in the next research phase. The final output of the second phase will be the datasets containing 
legitimate traffic generated as a result of flash crowd activities on the e-learning ecosystem elements (simulated 
through  dedicated network  generator hardware)  and  DDoS traffic  as  a network  traffic  anomaly  generated  as  a 
result  of  DDoS  attack  (simulated  through  dedicated  network  traffic  generator  hardware).  By  collecting  the 
generated legitimate and illegitimate traffic, a unique dataset will be formed. Such a dataset will be published on 
a publicly available server (on FPZ servers) in original and in the processed form for the academic community to 
further research detection and reaction on DDoS attacks in specific scenarios.  

4.3  Development of DDoS traffic detection model 

The previously carried out activities laid the foundation for the third phase of the planned research. This phase 
encompasses the development of the network traffic anomalies detection model. The first step in this phase is to 
analyze and select the adequate supervised machine learning method from the set of ensemble methods that will 
suit the solving of binary classification problem. In solving such a problem, the objective is to check the generated 
new  traffic  sample  congruence  with  the  sample  of  the  legitimate  traffic.  The  incongruity  of  the  traffic  feature 
values with the values of legitimate traffic features above the defined threshold will mean that the device generates 
DDoS traffic within the observed time. The following activity is the development of network anomaly detection 
model using the supervised machine learning methods. For the implementation of the chosen method available 
machine learning platform will be used such as TensorFlow, Weka, KNIME, Orange, Hadoop, Apache Spark, 
Neo4ji, R or similar. The last step in this phase is to validate the model performances through standard validation 
measures for the classification models (accuracy, precision, specificity, kappa coefficient, rate of false and true 
positive results, confusion matrix, etc.).  

4.4  Applicability of the developed anomaly detection model 

In the final, fourth research phase, the developed model applicability in real scenario through case study will be 
analyzed.  The guidelines  and  recommendations  for  the  response  to  the  anomalies  detected  with  the  developed 
model will be defined. The purpose of this activity is  to minimize the negative effects of cyber threats such as 
DDoS on the availability of e-learning services particularly in the crises such as pandemic of SARS-CoV-2 virus 
when such services are critical for the undisturbed running of the educational and supporting processes. 

5 

Discussion and conclusion 

Under the coronavirus pandemic influence, the e-learning systems have become a model for implementing the 
teaching process with no alternative. In such crisis circumstances, e-learning system availability is emphasized, 
which  can  be  very  easily  reduced  by  using  DDoS  attacks.  DDoS  attacks  are  easy  to  implement,  and  their 
effectiveness  is  high.  As  the  number  of  users  requiring  a  particular  resource  increases,  so  does  the  risk  that 
malicious users will carry out DDoS attacks that will reduce or completely disable  such system availability to 
legitimate users. Kaspersky's report also supports this thesis, pointing out that in Q1 2020, the number of DDoS 
attacks on the e-learning systems increased by 350% compared to the same period in 2019. Also, the importance 
of the e-learning system availability can be seen from the example of a DDoS attack on the authentication system 
of the e-learning system users (AAI@EduHr) in the Republic of Croatia at the time when the entire educational 
process was transferred online. The specificity of the observed scenario of the implementation of DDoS attacks on 
the e-learning systems in the pandemic circumstances is reflected in the sudden increase in the demand by a large 
number  of  users  for  e-learning  services.  That  is  a  phenomenon  called  the  flash  crowd  event,  representing  a 
significant increase in the number of legitimate requests. When a flash crowd event and a DDoS attack coincide, 

10 

 
a specific scenario is created that requires models and systems that can distinguish between two types of generated 
requests and network traffic that are approximately the same in terms of characteristics.  

In this paper, we proposed a research methodology customized for finding solutions to preserve the availability 
of  e-learning  systems  from  DDoS  attacks  in  the  crises  in which  such  systems  have  no alternative,  such  as  the 
current  coronavirus  pandemic.  Using  the  proposed  methodology  for  developing  DDoS  detection  model  and 
guidelines  and  recommendations  for  the  reaction  to  the  detected  network  anomalies  provide  the  potential  for 
further  practical  application  and  substantial  socio-economic  benefits  from  several  aspects.  The  research 
implementation within the framework of the proposed project is significant for developing the research area since 
it  considers  the  challenges  in  a  specific  scenario  of  using  e-learning  services  resulting  from  the  COVID-19 
pandemic. The proposed research is planned to form open and public dataset repositories containing network traffic 
(in  raw  and  preprocessed  format)  generated  by  simulating  flash  crowd  scenarios  and  DDoS  attacks.  Such 
repository will benefit other researchers for further research of behaving flash crowd traffic and distinguish it from 
other types of traffic such as DDoS or some other types of traffic anomalies. The planned extensive use of machine 
learning,  especially  ensemble  type  of  machine  learning methods,  will  result  in  a  developed  anomaly detection 
model that can proactively detect cyber threat and adequately react to such a threat. In that way, it will give the 
possibility to secure the availability of e-learning ecosystems and services when needed most, and that is in crisis 
scenarios such as pandemic of coronavirus and similar. Securing  the availability of e-learning services that are 
becoming  critical  will  increase  user  satisfaction  on  every  level  (students/teachers/administrators)  and  allow 
undisturbed running of educational and supporting processes. Furthermore, this kind of research would open  a 
variety of related research problems and it would enable knowledge transfer between diverse research teams and 
e-learning system operators as a response to high-risk situations and crisis scenarios that may occur in the future. 
Future research is planned to implement  the proposed methodology and develop a  cyber intrusion detection 
model at the conceptual, prototype, and pilot levels. Also, future research is planned to identify the possibilities of 
protecting e-learning systems from the detected cyber threats.   

References 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

| 

Srce 

from 

IEEE 

sustava 

Available 

[Internet]. 

opterećenje 

AAI@EduHr 

Chaabouni N, Mosbah M, Zemmari A, Sauvignac C, Faruki P. Network Intrusion Detection for IoT Security Based on 
Learning Techniques. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials. 2019;21(3):2671–701.  
Deka  RK,  Bhattacharyya  DK.  Self-similarity  based  DDoS  attack  detection  using  Hurst  parameter.  Security  and 
Communication  Networks.  2016;9(17):4468–81.  Available  from  http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/sec.1639  [accessed 
2017 Jun 16] 
Povećano 
https://www.srce.unizg.hr/vijesti/povecano-opterecenje-sustava-aaieduhr/objav2020-03-16 [accessed 2020 Apr 4] 
Kaspersky. DDoS attacks against educational resources increased by more than 350% this spring [Internet]. 2020. 
Available  from  https://www.kaspersky.com/about/press-releases/2020_ddos-attacks-against-educational-resources-
increased-by-more-than-350-this-spring [accessed 2020 Oct 10] 
Huu  Phuoc  Dai  N,  Kerti  A,  Rajnai  Z.  E-Learning  Security  Risks  and  its  Countermeasures.  Journal  of  Emerging 
research and solutions in ICT. 2016;1(1):17–25.  
Tan Z, Jamdagni A, He X, Nanda P, Liu RP, Hu J. Detection of Denial-of-Service Attacks Based on Computer Vision 
Techniques. 
from 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=6967763 
David J, Thomas C. DDoS Attack Detection Using Fast Entropy Approach on Flow- Based Network Traffic. Procedia 
Computer Science. 2015;50:30–6. Available from http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1877050915005086 
Mirkovic  J,  Reiher  P.  A  taxonomy  of  DDoS  attack  and  DDoS  defense  mechanisms.  ACM  SIGCOMM  Computer 
Communication Review. 2004;34(2):39. Available from http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=997150.997156 
Bhuyan  MH,  Bhattacharyya  DK,  Kalita  JK.  Network  Anomaly  Detection:  Methods,  Systems  and  Tools.  IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials. 2014;16(1):303–36.  
Bhattacharyya DK, Kalita JK. DDoS Attacks: Evolution, Detection, Prevention, Reaction and Tolerance. Boca Raton, 
USA: CRC Press; 2016.  
Zeb K, AsSadhan B, Al-Muhtadi J, Alshebeili S. Anomaly detection using Wavelet-based estimation of LRD in packet 
and byte count of control traffic. In: 2016 7th International Conference on Information and Communication Systems 
(ICICS). IEEE; 2016. p. 316–21.  
Xiang Y, Li K, Zhou W. Low-rate DDoS attacks detection and traceback by using new information metrics. IEEE 
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security. 2011;6(2):426–37.  
Zargar ST, Joshi J, Tipper D. A survey of defense mechanisms against distributed denial of service (DDOS) flooding 

2014;(MAY):1–1. 

Transactions 

Computers. 

Available 

on 

11 

 
 
[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 

[24] 
[25] 

[26] 

[27] 

[28] 

[29] 

[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

[33] 

[34] 

[35] 

[36] 

[37] 

- 

2017. 

379–384 

Available 

PROMET 

p.  Available 

2019;31(4):453–64. 

Traffic&Transportation. 

attacks. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials. 2013;15(4):2046–69.  
Cvitić  I,  Peraković  D,  Periša  M,  Husnjak  S.  An  Overview  of  Distributed  Denial  of  Service  Traffic  Detection 
Approaches. 
from 
https://traffic.fpz.hr/index.php/PROMTT/article/view/3082 
Cvitić I, Peraković D, Periša M, Botica M.  Novel approach for detection of IoT generated DDoS traffic. Wireless 
Networks. 2019; Available from https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-019-02043-1 
Peraković D, Periša M, Cvitić I, Husnjak S. Model for detection and classification of DDoS traffic based on artificial 
neural network. Telfor Journal. 2017;9(1).  
Ebner  M,  Schön  S,  Braun  C,  Ebner  M,  Grigoriadis  Y,  Haas  M,  et  al.  COVID-19  Epidemic as E-Learning Boost? 
Chronological  Development  and  Effects  at  an  Austrian  University  against  the  Background  of  the  Concept  of  “E-
Learning Readiness.” Future Internet. 2020;12(6):94. Available from https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/12/6/94 
Soni  VD.  Global  Impact of  E-learning during  COVID 19. SSRN  Electronic  Journal.  2020;(June).  Available  from 
https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=3630073 
Adzovie DE, Jibril AB, Holm R, Nyieku IE. E-Learning Resulting From Covid-19 Pandemic: A Conceptual Study 
From  a  Developing  Country  Perspective  Daniel.  In:  7th  European  Conference  on  Social  Media  ECSM  2020. 
Academic Conferences and Publishing International Limited; 2020. p. 1689–99.  
Radha R, Mahalakshmi K, Kumar VS, Saravanakumar AR. E-Learning during Lockdown of Covid-19 Pandemic: A 
Global Perspective. International Journal of Control and Automation. 2020;13(4):1088–99.  
Aggarwal  CC.  Outlier  Analysis  [Internet].  Vol.  24,  Artificial  Intelligence  Review.  Cham:  Springer  International 
Publishing; 
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-18123-
from 
3%0Ahttp://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-40415-8%0Ahttp://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-53480-
0%0Ahttp://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-55753-3%0Ahttp://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319- 
Hayward C, Madill A. A Survey of Outlier Detection Methodologies. Artificial Intelligence Review. 2004;22(2):85–
126.  
Jain AK, Gupta BB. A novel approach to protect against phishing attacks at client side using auto-updated white-list. 
Eurasip Journal on Information Security. 2016;2016(1).  
Chandola V, Banerjee A, Kumar V. Anomaly detection. ACM Computing Surveys. 2009;41(3):1–58.  
Bhattacharyya DK, Kalita JK. Network Anomaly Detection: A Machine Learning Perspective. Boca Raton, USA: CRC 
Press; 2014.  
Ahmed M, Naser Mahmood A, Hu J.  A survey of network anomaly detection techniques. Journal of Network and 
Computer Applications. 2016;60:19–31. Available from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2015.11.016 
Baddar SHA, Merlo A, Migliardi M. Anomaly detection in computer networks: A state-of-the-art review. Journal of 
Wireless Mobile Networks, Ubiquitous Computing, and Dependable Applications. 2014;(December).  
Xiong L, Póczos B, Schneider J. Group anomaly detection using Flexible Genre Models. In: Proceedings of the 24th 
International  Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing  Systems.  2011.  p.  1071–9.  Available  from 
https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2986579 
Difallah DE, Cudre-Mauroux P, McKenna SA.  Scalable anomaly detection for smart city infrastructure networks. 
IEEE Internet Computing. 2013;17(6):39–47.  
Bhardwaj  K,  Miranda  JC,  Gavrilovska  A.  Towards  IoT-DDoS  Prevention  Using  Edge  Computing.  USENIX 
Workshop on  Hot  Topics  in  Edge  Computing  (HotEdge  18).  2018;  Available  from https://www.usenix.org/biblio-
1765 
Gupta BB, Badve OP. Taxonomy of DoS and DDoS attacks and desirable defense mechanism in a Cloud computing 
environment. Neural Computing and Applications. 2017;28(12):3655–82.  
Tripathi N, Mehtre B. DoS and DDos Attacks: Impact, Analysis and Countermeasures. In: Proceedings of National 
Conference on Advances in Computing, Networking and Security. 2013. p. 1–6.  
Hussain A, Heidemann J, Papadopoulos C. A Framework for Classifying Denial of Service Attacks. In: Applications 
technologies architectures and protocols for computer communications (SIGCOMM 03). New York, USA; 2003. p. 
99–110.  
Cvitić I. Network Traffic Anomaly Detection Based on Traffic Characteristics and Device Class Affiliation. Doctoral 
thesis University of Zagreb; 2020.  
De  Donno  M,  Giaretta  A,  Dragoni  N,  Spognardi  A.  A  taxonomy of distributed denial of  service  attacks.  In:  2017 
International  Conference  on  Information  Society  (i-Society).  IEEE;  2017.  p.  100–7.  Available  from 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8354681/ 
Douligeris C, Mitrokotsa A. DDoS attacks and defense mechanisms: Classification and state-of-the-art. Computer 
Networks. 2004;44(5):643–66.  
Hallman  R,  Bryan  J,  Palavicini G,  Divita  J,  Romero-Mariona  J.  IoDDoS  —  The  Internet  of  Distributed  Denial of 
Sevice Attacks - A Case Study of the Mirai Malware and IoT-Based Botnets. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International 

12 

 
[38] 

[39] 

[40] 

[41] 

[42] 

[43] 

[44] 

[45] 

[46] 

[47] 
[48] 
[49] 

[50] 

[51] 

[52] 

[53] 

[54] 

of 

the 

Security 

Symposium. 

26th  USENIX 

Conference on Internet of Things, Big Data and Security. 2017. p. 47–58.  
Adat V, Gupta BB. Security in Internet of Things: issues, challenges, taxonomy, and architecture. Telecommunication 
Systems. 2018;67(3):423–41.  
Stergiou C, Psannis KE, Gupta BB, Ishibashi Y. Security, privacy & efficiency of sustainable Cloud Computing for 
Big Data & IoT. Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems. 2018;19:174–84.  
Stergiou CL, Psannis KE, Gupta BB. IoT-based Big Data secure management in the Fog over a 6G Wireless Network. 
IEEE Internet of Things Journal. 2020;1–1. Available from https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9239366/ 
Tewari A, Gupta BB. Security, privacy and trust of different layers in Internet-of-Things (IoTs) framework. Future 
Generation Computer Systems. 2020;108:909–20.  
Bitdefender. 78% of Malware Activity in 2018 Driven by IoT Botnets, NOKIA Finds - Bitdefender BOX Blog [Internet]. 
Available from https://www.bitdefender.com/box/blog/iot-news/78-malware-activity-2018-driven-iot-botnets-nokia-
finds/ [accessed 2019 Apr 1] 
Angrishi K. Turning Internet of Things(IoT) into Internet of Vulnerabilities (IoV) : IoT Botnets. Mind and Language. 
2017;19(2):113–46. Available from http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.03681 
Antonakakis  M,  April  T,  Bailey M,  Bursztein E,  Cochran  J,  Durumeric  Z,  et  al.  Understanding  the  Mirai  Botnet. 
Proceedings 
from 
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity17/technical-sessions/presentation/antonakakis 
Kolias C, Kambourakis G, Stavrou A, Voas J. DDoS in the IoT: Mirai and Other Botnets. Computer. 2017;50(7):80–
4. Available from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7971869/ 
De Donno M, Dragoni N, Giaretta A, Spognardi A. DDoS-Capable IoT Malwares: Comparative Analysis and Mirai 
Investigation. Security and Communication Networks. 2018;2018.  
Vlajic N, Zhou D. IoT as a Land of Opportunity for DDoS Hackers. Computer. 2018;51(7):26–34.  
Bertino E, Islam N. Botnets and Internet of Things Security. Computer. 2017;50(2):76–9.  
Spognardi A, Donno M De, Dragoni N, Giaretta A.  Analysis of DDoS-Capable IoT Malwares. Proceedings of the 
2017 Federated Conference on Computer Science and Information Systems. 2017;11(September):807–16.  
Rekordan  broj  autentikacija  putem  SSO  servisa  sustava  AAI@EduHr  |  Srce  [Internet].  Available  from 
https://www.srce.unizg.hr/vijesti/rekordan-broj-autentikacija-putem-sso-servisa-sustava-aaieduhr/objav2020-04-02 
[accessed 2020 Apr 4] 
Behal  S,  Kumar  K,  Sachdeva  M.  Discriminating  flash  events  from  DDoS  attacks:  A  comprehensive  review. 
International Journal of Network Security. 2017;19(5):734–41.  
Yu S, Zhou W, Jia W, Guo S, Xiang Y, Tang F. Discriminating DDoS attacks from flash crowds using flow correlation 
coefficient. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems. 2012;23(6):1073–80.  
Bhandari A, Sangal AL, Kumar K. Characterizing flash events and distributed denial-of-service attacks: an empirical 
investigation. 
from 
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/sec.1472 
Cvitić I, Peraković D, Periša M, Jurcut AD. Methodology proposal for proactive detection of network anomalies in e-
learning system during the COVID-19 scenario. In: Proceedings of 5th EAI International Conference on Management 
of Manufacturing Systems (in print). 2020.  

2017;1093–110.  Available 

2016;9:2222–39. 

Communication 

Networks. 

Available 

Security 

and 

13 

 
 
 
