Spooﬁng Attacks Against Vehicular FMCW Radar

Rony Komissarov
School of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
Ramat Aviv, 69978, Israel
ronykom@gmail.com

Avishai Wool
School of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
Ramat Aviv, 69978, Israel
yash@eng.tau.ac.il

1
2
0
2

r
p
A
7
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
1
3
3
1
.
4
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The safety and security of the passengers in
vehicles in the face of cyber attacks is a key element in
the automotive industry, especially with the emergence of
the Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) and the
vast improvement in Autonomous Vehicles (AVs). Such
platforms use various sensors, including cameras, LiDAR
and mmWave radar. These sensors themselves may present
a potential security hazard if exploited by an attacker.

In this paper we propose a system to attack an au-
tomotive FMCW mmWave radar, that uses fast chirp
modulation. Using a single rogue radar, our attack system
is capable of spooﬁng the distance and velocity measured
by the victim vehicle simultaneously, presenting phantom
measurements coherent with the laws of physics governing
vehicle motion. The attacking radar controls the delay in
order to spoof its distance, and uses phase compensation
and control in order to spoof its velocity. After developing
the attack theory, we demonstrate the spooﬁng attack by
building a proof-of-concept hardware-based system, using
a Software Deﬁned Radio. We successfully demonstrate
two real world scenarios in which the victim radar is
spoofed to detect either a phantom emergency stop or a
phantom acceleration, while measuring coherent range and
velocity. We also discuss several countermeasures to the
attack, in order to propose ways to mitigate the described
attack.

I. INTRODUCTION

A. Background

The safety and security of the passengers in vehicles in
the face of cyber attacks is a key element in the automo-
tive industry, especially with the emergence of the Ad-
vanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) and the vast
improvement in Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) [30]. The
main sensors available on modern self-driving cars are
Ultrasonic sensors, mmWave (Millimeter Wave) radars,
cameras, and LiDAR [26], [5]. These sensors are used for
sensing the physical environment and for safety-critical
decisions, such as collision avoidance and intersection
management. Adversarial sensor attacks manipulate the

input signals to the sensors in order to produce incorrect
environment views with the goal of causing unsafe
actions. These attacks can be organized into two main
categories: Spooﬁng and Jamming [28]. While the latter
attack can be easily detected, mitigating a spooﬁng attack
usually requires more intelligent countermeasures [10].
Spooﬁng makes it very difﬁcult for the sensor system to
recognize that it is under attack, as it provides the victim
sensor with seemingly legitimate but actually false data.
In this work we focus on spooﬁng a vehicle’s mmWave
radar.

B. Related Work

Various sensors of autonomous vehicle are vulnerable
to spooﬁng attacks. Prior work mainly focused on the
study of security in perception sensors, primarily the
LiDAR and camera. Physical world camera attacks were
demonstrated by fooling Deep Neural Networks (DNNs),
making objects mislabeled or ignored [21], [4]. For
example, in [4], the researchers caused a “STOP” sign
disappear in the eyes of the detector, by adding adversar-
ial stickers onto the sign. Attacks against LiDAR-based
perception systems in AVs appear in [2], [3]. The authors
found that simply spooﬁng the LiDAR using common
methods is not sufﬁcient due to the use of machine learn-
ing object detection models. To mount an attack they
leveraged an optimization method to generate adversarial
examples to fool a real world working LiDAR.

Some work has also been done to attack and spoof
ranging systems, such as Radar and Ultrasonic sen-
sors [24]. Due to the fact that the mmWave radar is
in bad weather conditions, an attack to fool
crucial
its measured distance is a critical physical security
threat [7], [20]. Speciﬁcally, a distance-only spooﬁng
attack [16], [18] was presented on a mmWave Frequency
Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) radar. The sys-
tem used a weak Arduino platform against an FMCW
radar which used the less-common triangular waveform.

 
 
 
 
 
 
The attackers synchronised to the victim via half-chirp
modulation, and were able to control the delay measured
by a victim radar to spoof the range. However, beyond
measuring range, FMCW radars are typically used to
measure velocity, which they can achieve with high
precision [5]. The attack method in [16] does not spoof
the velocity measured by the victim at all.

Recently, the researches in [23] constructed several
attack scenarios in order to spoof a mmWave radar of
a Lincoln MKZ-based AV testbed, using a Software
Deﬁned Radio (SDR) transceiver system from National
Instruments. The attack strategies involved synchronised
attack radars on both sides of the road, using a com-
plex setup. Furthermore, the method the attackers used
to spoof velocity measurements was by spooﬁng the
distance at subsequent
time intervals. Since modern
mmWave radars have the ability to measure velocity
independently from distance, even a simple intra-radar
sensor fusion approach can mitigate the attacks de-
scribed, since the measured range and velocity are not
coherent [9].

C. Our Contribution

In this work we demonstrate an adversarial radar based
on a SDR, which can simultaneously manipulate the
range and velocity measured by a victim radar used by
an ADAS or AV platform.

The adversarial radar we designed utilizes the ad-
vantages of a complex baseband FMCW radar: beyond
controlling the delay to spoof the range, we are able to
manipulate the signal phase received at the victim radar’s
Rx antenna, to spoof the velocity.

Unlike [16], [18], which focused on radars using a
triangular chirp waveform, our system addresses the
modern saw-tooth waveform (so called “fast chirps”),
as this chirp waveform is frequently found in contempo-
rary FMCW radars in the AV industry [14], [25]. And
unlike [23], we only require a single rogue radar within
a vehicle in front of the victim.

After developing the attack theory, we demonstrate the
spooﬁng attack by building a proof-of-concept hardware-
based system, using a bladeRF Software Deﬁned Radio.
Using the ability to manipulate the velocity and the
range measured by the victim radar, we demonstrate two
realistic automotive attack scenarios: spooﬁng a phantom
emergency break, and spooﬁng a phantom acceleration.
In both cases, the range and velocity measured by the
victim radar are coherent and ﬁt the laws of physics
governing vehicular motion.

Fig. 1. Range measurement using FMCW radar: (a) Spectrogram
of a frame of saw-tooth chirps with a chirp duration TC . (b) The
spectrogram reﬂected from the object of interest with returned chirps
showing a delay of td. (c) The spectrogram of the IF signal at the
receiver, with a beat frequency of fb. (d) Demonstration of range-FFT
in order to ﬁnd the range corresponding to the beat frequency.

II. THE FMCW RADAR

Generally, Radars emit electromagnetic waves and
receive the reﬂection to measure the time of ﬂight.
Speciﬁcally, in FMCW radar solutions, the transmitted
signal is a linear frequency modulated continuous wave
(FMCW) chirp [15]. FMCW radars are common in a
variety of industries and applications, such as naval
navigation radars, smart ammunition sensors, industrial
radars, and in particular automotive radars [22], [13],
[11].

Since the frequency component of the chirp is non
constant in time, it is usually described as a frequency
over time spectrogram, as described in Figure 1(a). The
description of the chirp development in time is given in
Figure 2(a).

Modern systems use a saw-tooth waveform chirp with
slope S = df
dt and bandwidth parameters depending on
the distance and velocity of the object of interest [27],
[25]. The state of the art FMCW radars integrated
in commercial vehicles use the 76-81 GHz frequency
band [6]. Typical FMCW Radar implementations include
a Voltage Controlled Oscillator (VCO) which is used to
create the necessary chirp waveform. The output of the
VCO is ampliﬁed by the Power Ampliﬁer (PA), and then
transmitted through the Antenna. In order to improve the
precision of the physical measurements, a series of N
chirps (a frame) is averaged. The number of chirps N is
usually in the range of 50 to 1000 [14].

1) Measuring Range Using FMCW Radar: The trans-
mitted FMCW signal is reﬂected by the object of interest,
and gets back to the Rx antenna of the radar after a

2

Fig. 3. The attack scenario. The victim vehicle is behind the
attacker’s vehicle, on the same trafﬁc lane. The attacker sends a
spooﬁng signal to the victim in order to perform the attack.

is practically constant between the chirps in the same
frame, due to the Doppler effect and the fast chirp
modulation. Similarly to the range measurement, the IF
signal Bi(t) (Figure 2(c)) corresponding to each returned
chirp Ri(t) = T (t−td) is sampled and further processed,
this time in order to calculate its phase, again using
range-FFT. The relative velocity v of the moving object
to the radar can be derived from the phase difference
∆ϕi+1,i between adjacent chirps’ IF signals Bi+1, Bi:

v =

λ∆ϕi+1,i
4πTc

where Tc and λ are the chirp duration and the radar
signal wavelength, respectively (see [8]).

III. THE ADVERSARIAL FMCW RADAR MODEL

A. Attack Model

In our scenario the victim vehicle is behind the
attacker’s vehicle and has an FMCW radar installed,
facing forward, as depicted in Figure 3. We assume the
attacker has a modiﬁed radar system in his vehicle facing
back. The attacker can send a much more powerful
signal compared to the real reﬂected signal arriving at
the victim. This assumption easily holds, even without
extra ampliﬁcation, as the attacker’s signal only needs
to traverse half of the distance, compared to the victim
radar’s signal. We assume that the victim radar param-
eters are known to the attacker. Moreover, the victim’s
true relative distance d and relative velocity v from the
attacker are already measured by the attacker’s radar, in
order to be able to perform the attack.

B. Attack System Architecture

The adversarial system is depicted in Figure 4. The ad-
versarial radar is a modiﬁed version of the victim radar:
essentially the only change is the additional delay and
phase control logic. Our system is a complex baseband

Fig. 2. Velocity measurement using FMCW radar: (a) Time represen-
tation of a chirp. The chirp is transmitted with an initial phase ϕ0. (b)
Two consecutive returned chirps R1(t), R2(t). (c) Two consecutive
IF signals B1(t), B2(t) with the same beat frequency. The velocity
of the object is proportional to the phase difference ∆ϕ21 between
the phases of the IF signals.

total delay time td, as seen in Figure 1(b). The received
chirp is then mixed with the currently transmitted signal.
The product of the mixing process is called an IF
(Intermediate Frequency) signal, and it exhibits a single
beat frequency of fb (Figures 1(c),(d)). Finally, the IF
signal is sampled by the ADC and further processed by
a DSP or MCU. The range d of the object of interest
is related to the beat frequency fb by the following
equation:

d =

c · fb
2S

where S is the slope of the Tx chirp and c is the speed
of light.

to convert

There are several ways to extract the beat frequency
of the IF signal. A common way is to use a fast Fourier
transform (Range-FFT),
the time domain
signal into a spectrum with a peak at fb, as depicted
in Figure 1(d). Typical IF frequencies are in the range
of a few hundred kHz for objects within 100m. Thus,
there is no requirement for a relatively high speed ADC.
2) Measuring Velocity Using FMCW Radar: To mea-
sure velocity, the radar utilizes pairs of chirps T (t) that
are transmitted consecutively, as depicted in Figure 2(b).
The calculation of the velocity relies on the fact that
the change in the beat frequency between adjacent IF
signals in the frame is negligible compared to the phase
shift of the IF signal. This assumption holds since
the phase of the mmWave signal is more sensitive to
object movement, in contrast to the return delay, which

3

Fig. 4. The Adversarial FMCW System: The original radar signal is received from the victim. Then, it is mixed with an internal synchronised
chirp, to calculate the phase differences ∆ϕc and ∆ϕt between each consecutive pair of IF signals. The Adversary transmitter uses a
quadrature modulator to control the transmitted phase and timing of each adversary chirp, to manipulate the victims measured velocity and
range simultaneously. It sets the delay to ta and sets the phase to ϕa compensating for ∆ϕc and ∆ϕt so the victim radar measures distance
ˆd and velocity ˆv.

(quadrature) radar that simultaneously controls the delay
(to spoof range measurements) and phase (to spoof the
velocity).

At a high level, the adversarial radar starts by gen-
erating internal chirps with the same parameters as the
victim, but without transmitting them. Once it receives
the chirps transmitted by the victim radar, it mixes the
ﬁrst n chirps out of the frame with its internal chirps to
produce its own IF signal. The attack system utilizes this
IF signal to synchronise to the victim, and tune the attack
parameters. Once it is synchronised and tuned, the attack
radar ignores the victim’s remaining chirps in the frame,
and instead actively transmits N − n spoofed return
signals. The synchronization and tuning techniques we
use are explained below.

C. Range Manipulation

By precisely controlling the time the spoofed signal is
received at the victim radar, the attacker can manipulate
the victim radar to measure a delay ta, which is different
than the original delay td, leading to an error in the

calculated distance. In order to spoof the victim radar to
measure an arbitrary distance ˆd, the attacker should know
the exact transmit time of the current frame of chirps.
To achieve synchronisation with the victim’s transmit
time, the attacker estimates the arrival time to his Rx
antenna of the ﬁrst n chirps in the frame. Since the
ﬁrst n chirps are used in order to synchronise to the
victim, only the remaining N − n chirps in the frame
are used for the range and velocity manipulation itself.
Due to the fact that N (cid:29) n, the chirps used for syn-
chronisation have little effect on the manipulated range
and velocity measured by the victim, since it is done
by averaging the measurements of each frame, or by
using two dimensional range-FFT [14]. The transmition
time can be estimated by down-converting the arriving
signal and estimating the TOA (Time of Arrival) using a
relatively high speed ADC, or by using HCM (Half Chirp
Modulation) [7]. Considering that
the chirp duration
Tc, the true distance d and also the true delay td are
known, the attacker knows when the next chirp will
be transmitted, and thus can decide when to emit an

4

adversarial set of chirps, which will modify the delay
measured by the victim radar. The attacker can force
the victim to measure a distance ˆd corresponding to a
speciﬁc adversary delay ta, by delaying or preceding
the returned signal the victim senses. Since the adver-
sarial radar is actively transmitting, its spoofed signals
will overpower the legitimate echos reﬂected from the
adversarial vehicle.

D. Manipulating The Velocity

As depicted in Figure 2, in normal operation, the
phase difference the victim radar measures between two
consecutive chirps is given by:

∆ϕ21 = (cid:54) B2(t) − (cid:54) B1(t)

= (ϕ2 − ϕ0) − (ϕ1 − ϕ0) = ϕ2 − ϕ1

where ϕ2 and ϕ1 are the phases (cid:54) B1(t)|t=t1 and
(cid:54) B2(t)|t=t2 of two consecutive IF signals from two con-
secutive chirps, and t1, t2 are the delays corresponding
to each chirp. As seen in Figure 2(b), the victim FMCW
radar expects to receive a delayed cloned version of the
signal it sends, i.e., with the same phase ϕ0, when it hits
the Rx antenna. The method for velocity manipulation
we propose takes advantage of this fact. To manipulate
the velocity, the attacker transmits a frame of chirps with
changing phases. The difference ∆ϕ21 is known to the
attacker because the true velocity of the victim is known.
Therefore, by changing the phase ϕ0 of the spoofed
return signal separately for each chirp, it is possible for
the attacker to control the velocity the victim measures.
This can be done regardless of the victim radar’s current
transmitting chirp phase: the victim’s measured phase
difference depends only on the phase difference between
consecutive attacker-generated returned chirps, and does
not depend on the victim radar itself.

Controlling The Phase: As demonstrated in Figure 4,
the attacker should send a sequence of chirps with
the attacker utilizes the
changing phases. To do so,
quadrature manner of the complex baseband radar in
order to control the phase of the transmitted chirp, sim-
ilarly to PSK (Phase Shift Keying) techniques. In order
to make the victim radar measure a speciﬁc velocity ˆv,
the phase of each chirp of the signal transmitted by the
attacker should change with each consecutive chirp. The
manipulated phase between consecutive chirps ∆ϕi+1,i
is given by:

∆ϕi+1,i =

4πˆvTc
λ

IV. THE PROCESS OF ATTACKING A VICTIM RADAR

A. Range Manipulation

Beyond Figure 4, Figure 5 shows the evolution of
the attack signal. First, the adversarial radar enters a
“waiting for trigger” mode. When it receives the ﬁrst
chirp, it synchronises with the victim radar using esti-
mation of TOA of the signal, or using an internal HCM.
This synchronisation occurs only once in the whole
process of position and velocity manipulation. As seen
in Figure 4, when the attacker is synchronised to the
victim, it can generate an IF signal Bi(t) by mixing an
internal synchronised version of the victim radar chirp
with the incoming signal. This IF signal is depicted in
Figure 5(a). Now, it can manipulate the range the victim
radar measures by precisely controlling the adversarial
delay ta = td + tm, where td is the actual time of ﬂight
(TOF) and tm is the manipulated delay the attacker adds.
Since the legitimate round trip is td, the attacker should
transmit the spooﬁng signal at td/2 + tm, taking into
account that the spooﬁng signal should still traverse the
return path, which adds a delay of td/2. This is depicted
in Figure 5(c).

B. Velocity Manipulation

Although the victim radar and the adversarial radar are
both using the same central frequency and sweep band-
width, there is some difference between them, because of
the TCXO (Temperature Controlled Crystal Oscillator)
frequency tolerance. Therefore, there is an accumulated
phase ∆ϕc with each internal IF signal Bi(t − nTc) in
the attackers’ radar. Furthermore, there is another phase
accumulation ∆ϕt, due to the true velocity difference
v between the victim and the adversary. The effect of
the phases ∆ϕc and ∆ϕt on the internal IF signals
Bi(t − nTc) is depicted in Figure 5 (b). The attacker
takes these phases into account, and compensates them
when manipulating the velocity. The total adversarial
phase increment ∆ϕa = ∆ϕc + ∆ϕt + ϕm of each
chirp the attacker sends back consists the compensation
of the phases ∆ϕc and ∆ϕt, and the manipulating
phase ϕm. The manipulating phase ϕm, is the phase
determining the current measurement change in relative
velocity the victim will measure. By changing this
phase with each chirp that the adversary transmits, it
can precisely control the velocity ˆv measured by the
victim, as described in Figure 5(d). Velocity and distance
spooﬁng can occur independently, as the phase and the
timing of the returned chirps are not related to each
other. Therefore, the adversarial radar can manipulate

5

both of them simultaneously. The adversary signal SAdv
transmitted by the attacker in order to manipulate both
range and velocity is the concatenation (sum) of the
N − n manipulated chirps:

which is above an arbitrary threshold of noise. The
center frequency fc used in the setup was 1GHz, the full
bandwidth of the radar was 28MHz, the chirp duration
Tc was set to 1ms, and n was set to 2 chirps.

SAdv =

N
(cid:88)

i=n+1

T (t − (

td
2

+ tm + i · Tc)) · ej·i∆ϕa

VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Where T (t) is the chirp transmitted by the victim radar,
and i is an index iterating over the N − n manipulated
chirps.

V. THE PROOF OF CONCEPT SETUP

The setup we implemented (see Figure 6) consists of
two Software Deﬁned Radios (SDR): one is the attack
radar, and the other represents the victim. Both SDRs are
models of bladeRF 2.0 micro. The bladeRF 2.0 micro
is a 2x2 MIMO, 47MHz to 6 GHz frequency range,
USB 3.0 Software Deﬁned Radio [19]. It provides a
powerful waveform development platform. We used the
xA9 model to build the attack radar, and for the victim
FMCW radar we used the xA4 model. The libbladeRF
open source library was used for communicating with
the devices, from a Windows machine. The interface we
selected is the bladeRF Synchronous Interface, which
allows transmitting bursts of samples at a speciﬁed
timestamp. The timestamp is a free-running counter in
the FPGA, incremented at the sample rate deﬁned, with
each outgoing sample. For the ease of prototyping, the
victim Tx and Rx were connected the attacker’s Rx and
Tx respectively by 15m-long RF cables. To simulate
greater and more realistic distances between vehicles
with these cables, a one-time calibration process was
carried out. In this process, the victim radar transmitted
a set of chirps and the attack radar immediately returned
the signal it received. Then, a ﬁxed delay was added to
the response time of the attacker, so the victim radar
measured a distance d = 60m. Due to the fact that the
length of the cable imitating the distance was ﬁxed, the
relative velocity v simulated between the victim radar
and the attacker was ﬁxed to zero.

To add an arbitrary phase shift ∆ϕ to the transmitted
spoofed signal, we used the quadrature modulator of
the attacking SDR. The attacker controls the transmitted
chirps’ phases by utilizing Euler’s formula

We simulated two scenarios: a sudden phantom stop
and a sudden phantom acceleration. Each scenario was
simulated 15 times. Simultaneous spooﬁng of distance
and velocity is demonstrated in Figure 7.

Figure 7(a) describes a scenario where the attacking
radar simultaneously spoofs the distance and velocity
representing a phantom emergency break in the ad-
versary’s vehicle in front of it: the victim’s measured
relative velocity ˆv drops at a constant deceleration of
−10 m/sec2 spooﬁng a loss of 120 km/h, and the
measured relative distance drops at a quadratic rate from
60m to 0 over about 3.5 sec: This rate of deceleration
represents an emergency brake with ABS assistance [12].
Note that the errors are in the order of the bandwidth
resolution limit of FMCW, and only limited by the SDR
relatively low bandwidth capabilities. Such a scenario
will probably trigger an emergency break by the victim.
Figure 7(b) demonstrates another security hazard: the
vehicle in front of the victim is made to appear accelerat-
ing, when it actually remains at a ﬁxed distance d = 60m
and a ﬁxed relative velocity v = 0. In such a case,
the victim car might decide it can accelerate, leading
to an accident and injuries to the driver and passengers
inside of the car. The ﬁgure shows that
the victim
measures a velocity that mimics a ﬁxed acceleration
of 10 m/sec2, and the range measurements increase
quadratically, matching the desired curve.

Note that in both scenarios the desired spoofed orange
curves are within the measured error range, and in
particular the measured velocities are very close to the
intended values.

These attacks are very difﬁcult for detection, since
they are indistinct from a real scenario from the per-
spective of the victim vehicle. They cannot be mitigated
by intra-radar sensor-fusion, since the range and velocity
measurements are coherent with each other and consis-
tent with the laws of physics.

A(t) · ej·∆ϕ = A(t) · cos ∆ϕ + jA(t) · sin ∆ϕ

VII. COUNTERMEASURES

and multiplying the in-phase and quadrature-phase parts
of the modulator with the controlled amplitudes.

In order to synchronise to the victim, we estimated
the TOA, by sensing the ﬁrst sample of the IF signal

Our experiments showed the feasibility of simulta-
neous spooﬁng of the distance and velocity, and the
security threats to the FMCW system. There are several
countermeasures that can be used:

6

Fig. 5. The Process of Range and Velocity Spooﬁng: (a) The received chirp at the adversary radar (orange) and the synchronised internal
chirp (blue). (b) The changing phase between each internal measured IF signal in the adversary radar. ∆ϕc is the phase accumulated because
of frequency difference from the victim, and ∆ϕt is the phase change caused by the relative velocity. (c) The transmitted adversary signal
spectrogram, with the controlled delay ta = td/2 + tm corresponding to the spoofed distance ˆd. (d) The initial phase of each adversarial
chirp emitted from the attacker as function of time. The phase is composed of the compensation for the phases ∆ϕc and ∆ϕt, and the
controlled phase ϕm corresponding to the spoofed velocity ˆv.

suring the same physical variable to create redundancy.
Then it is used to estimate the real measurements and
mitigate a physical level attack on sensor level. However,
there are scenarios, such as bad weather conditions,
where the only reliable sensor in the car is the mmWave
radar. In such cases, sensor fusion can mislead the
vehicle to believe that it has no danger ahead, while it
is actually about to collide with the car in front of it, or,
conversely, to halt when no emergency exists.

2) Phase Randomization: The velocity spooﬁng at-
tack relies on the fact that the victim radar is expecting
the returned signal to arrive with the same phase it
was transmitted at. To break this assumption, one can
send chirp signals with a randomized phases, which
are known to the victim radar. Since the phases are
randomized, the adversarial radar can’t compensate the
phase difference. This approach requires more complex
circuity, e.g., another quadrature mixer, and therefore
increases the cost of the radar. Moreover, sending another
phase with each chirp adds another phase error to an
environment that is already very error-prone.

3) Frequency Randomization: Another

possible
method to countermeasure the proposed attacks is to
use random frequency hoping. This approach will make
the attack radar measure a high beat frequency when

Fig. 6. The attack radar (xA9) below and the victim radar (xA4)
above. The two radars are connected by 15m RF cables beyond the
photo’s right margin.

1) Sensor fusion with LiDAR/camera: Since modern
vehicles are equipped with several range and velocity
sensors, sensor fusion with non-radar sensors may mit-
igate the attack. I.e., when the mmWave sensor warns
against impending collision, other sensors should agree.
For example, in [29], the authors are proposing a sensor
fusion framework that uses multiple sensors for mea-

7

Fig. 7. Results of Simultaneous Spooﬁng of Distance and Velocity: The green line shows the true range and velocity. The orange curve
shows the desired manipulated range and velocity and the blue dots show the average values measured by the victim. The time between the
measurements is 250ms. The shaded area shows the errors (+/- one standard deviation). (a) Spooﬁng an emergency brake. (b) Spooﬁng a
scenario where an obstacle appears to be moving away from the victim radar.

that uses

implementing the proposed attack, and therefore will
make it hard to synchronise to the victim radar. The
BlueFMCW for example is a novel frequency hoping
frequency randomization in order
radar,
to countermeasure attacks [17]. In [18],
the authors
also propose a random-chirp modulation based on
randomization of frequency. Both mitigation systems
require additional hardware in order to cope with the
attack.

The authors of [17], [18] provide only numeric sim-
ulation level results for the countermeasures, and still
require further work on a real equipment in order to
convince their effectiveness. Furthermore, even in non-
adversarial environments, the large number of vehicles
on the same road already leads to frequency spectrum
density. Therefore, frequent changes in frequency may
help not only countermeasure the described attacks, but
can also offer interference mitigation [1].

4) RSSI Measurements: Since the attacker assumes it
will overpower the legitimate echos reﬂected from his
vehicle with his adversarial signal, the victim can use
the Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) to coun-
termeasure the attack. For instance, the victim should
look for a pattern of n weak chirps out of the total N
chirps in the frame. This approach may fail, when there
is a legitimate change in the power of the signal received,
due to weather conditions or a fading channel.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS

The security of the ADAS and autonomous vehicles
sensors in the face of cyber attacks is crucial for the

future of the automotive industry. In this paper, we pro-
posed a system to attack an automotive FMCW mmWave
radar, that uses fast chirp modulation. Our attack system
is capable of spooﬁng the distance and velocity measured
by the victim vehicle simultaneously, presenting phan-
tom measurements coherent with the laws of physics
governing vehicle motion. The attacking radar controls
the delay in order to spoof its distance, and uses phase
compensation and control in order to spoof its velocity.
We demonstrated the spooﬁng attack by building a proof-
of-concept hardware-based system, using a Software
Deﬁned Radio. We successfully demonstrated two real
world scenarios, in which the victim radar is spoofed to
detect either a phantom emergency stop or a phantom
acceleration, measuring coherent range and velocity. We
believe that with the proliferation of vehicular FMCW
radars,
the demonstrated attack system could pose a
threat to AV and ADAS safety, and we propose several
possible mitigations.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Bourdoux, K. Parashar, and M. Bauduin, “Phenomenology of
mutual interference of FMCW and PMCW automotive radars,”
in 2017 IEEE Radar Conference (RadarConf).
IEEE, 2017,
pp. 1709–1714.

[2] Y. Cao, C. Xiao, B. Cyr, Y. Zhou, W. Park, S. Rampazzi, Q. A.
Chen, K. Fu, and Z. M. Mao, “Adversarial sensor attack on
LiDAR-based perception in autonomous driving,” in Proceed-
ings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, 2019, pp. 2267–2281.

[3] R. Changalvala and H. Malik, “LiDAR data integrity veriﬁca-
tion for autonomous vehicle,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 138 018–
138 031, 2019.

8

[21] D. Song, K. Eykholt, I. Evtimov, E. Fernandes, B. Li, A. Rah-
mati, F. Tramer, A. Prakash, and T. Kohno, “Physical adversarial
examples for object detectors,” in 12th USENIX Workshop on
Offensive Technologies (WOOT’18), 2018.

[22] A. G. Stove, “Linear FMCW radar techniques,” in IEE Proceed-
ings F (Radar and Signal Processing), vol. 139, no. 5.
IET,
1992, pp. 343–350.

[23] Z. Sun, S. Balakrishnan, L. Su, A. Bhuyan, P. Wang, and
C. Qiao, “Who is in control? practical physical layer attack and
defense for mmWave based sensing in autonomous vehicles,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10947, 2020.

[24] V. L. Thing and J. Wu, “Autonomous vehicle security: A
taxonomy of attacks and defences,” in 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green
Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber,
Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart
Data (SmartData).

IEEE, 2016, pp. 164–170.

[25] Z. Tong, R. Renter, and M. Fujimoto, “Fast chirp FMCW
radar in automotive applications,” in IET International Radar
Conference 2015.

IET, 2015, pp. 1–4.
[26] Z. Wang, Y. Wu, and Q. Niu, “Multi-sensor fusion in automated
driving: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 2847–2868, 2019.
[27] V. Winkler, “Range Doppler detection for automotive FMCW
IEEE, 2007, pp.

radars,” in 2007 European Radar Conference.
166–169.

[28] C. Yan, W. Xu, and J. Liu, “Can you trust autonomous vehicles:
Contactless attacks against sensors of self-driving vehicle,” DEF
CON, vol. 24, no. 8, p. 109, 2016.

[29] T. Yang and C. Lv, “A secure sensor fusion framework for
connected and automated vehicles under sensor attacks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.00883, 2021.

[30] A. Ziebinski, R. Cupek, H. Erdogan, and S. Waechter, “A
survey of ADAS technologies for the future perspective of
sensor fusion,” in International Conference on Computational
Collective Intelligence. Springer, 2016, pp. 135–146.

[4] K. Eykholt, I. Evtimov, E. Fernandes, B. Li, A. Rahmati,
C. Xiao, A. Prakash, T. Kohno, and D. Song, “Robust physical-
world attacks on deep learning visual classiﬁcation,” in Pro-
ceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 1625–1634.

[5] M. L. Fung, M. Z. Chen, and Y. H. Chen, “Sensor fusion:
A review of methods and applications,” in 2017 29th Chinese
Control And Decision Conference (CCDC).
IEEE, 2017, pp.
3853–3860.

[6] X. Gao, G. Xing, S. Roy, and H. Liu, “Experiments with
mmwave automotive radar test-bed,” in 2019 53rd Asilomar
Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers.
IEEE, 2019,
pp. 1–6.

[7] C. Goodin, D. Carruth, M. Doude, and C. Hudson, “Predicting
the inﬂuence of rain on LiDAR in ADAS,” Electronics, vol. 8,
no. 1, p. 89, 2019.

[8] C. Iovescu and S. Rao, “The fundamentals of millimeter wave
sensors,” Texas Instruments, pp. 1–8, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mouser.ee/pdfdocs/mmwavewhitepaper.pdf

[9] M. Jagielski, N. Jones, C.-W. Lin, C. Nita-Rotaru, and S. Shi-
raishi, “Threat detection for collaborative adaptive cruise control
in connected cars,” in Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference
on Security & Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks, 2018,
pp. 184–189.

[10] P. Kapoor, A. Vora, and K.-D. Kang, “Detecting and mitigating
spooﬁng attack against an automotive radar,” in 2018 IEEE 88th
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall).
IEEE, 2018, pp.
1–6.

[11] R. Komissarov, V. Kozlov, D. Filonov, and P. Ginzburg, “Par-
tially coherent radar unties range resolution from bandwidth
limitations,” Nature communications, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–9,
2019.

[12] N. Kudarauskas, “Analysis of emergency braking of a vehicle,”

Transport, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 154–159, 2007.

[13] J.-J. Lin, Y.-P. Li, W.-C. Hsu, and T.-S. Lee, “Design of an
FMCW radar baseband signal processing system for automotive
application,” SpringerPlus, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 42, 2016.

[14] S. Lutz, D. Ellenrieder, T. Walter, and R. Weigel, “On fast
chirp modulations and compressed sensing for automotive radar
applications,” in 2014 15th International Radar Symposium
(IRS).

IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–6.

[15] T. Mitomo, N. Ono, H. Hoshino, Y. Yoshihara, O. Watanabe,
and I. Seto, “A 77 GHz 90 nm CMOS transceiver for FMCW
radar applications,” IEEE journal of solid-state circuits, vol. 45,
no. 4, pp. 928–937, 2010.

[16] N. Miura, T. Machida, K. Matsuda, M. Nagata, S. Nashimoto,
and D. Suzuki, “A low-cost replica-based distance-spooﬁng
attack on mmwave FMCW radar,” in Proceedings of the 3rd
ACM Workshop on Attacks and Solutions in Hardware Security
Workshop, 2019, pp. 95–100.

[17] T. Moon, J. Park, and S. Kim, “BlueFMCW: Random frequency
hopping radar for mitigation of interference and spooﬁng,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.00624, 2020.

[18] S. Nashimoto, D. Suzuki, N. Miura, T. Machida, K. Matsuda,
and M. Nagata, “Low-cost distance-spooﬁng attack on FMCW
radar and its feasibility study on countermeasure,” Journal of
Cryptographic Engineering, pp. 1–10, 2021.

[19] Nuand bladeRF, USB, “3.0 software deﬁned radio manual,”

2016.

[20] A. Ranganathan, B. Danev, A. Francillon, and S. Capkun,
“Physical-layer attacks on chirp-based ranging systems,” in
Proceedings of
the ﬁfth ACM conference on Security and
Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks, 2012, pp. 15–26.

9

