1
2
0
2

r
p
A
2
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
9
1
3
1
.
4
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Research Communities in cyber security:
A Comprehensive Literature Review

Sotirios Katsikeasa,∗, Pontus Johnsona, Mathias Ekstedta, Robert Lagerstr¨oma

aKTH Royal Institute of Technology
Division of Network and Systems Engineering
Teknikringen 33, ﬂoor 3, SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden

Abstract

In order to provide a coherent overview of cyber security research, the Scopus

academic abstract and citation database was mined to create a citation graph

of 98,373 authors active in the ﬁeld between 1949 and early 2020. The Louvain

community detection algorithm was applied to the graph in order to identify

existing research communities. The analysis discovered twelve top-level commu-

nities: access control, authentication, biometrics, cryptography (I & II), cyber-

physical systems, information hiding, intrusion detection, malwares, quantum

cryptography, sensor networks, and usable security. These top-level communi-

ties were in turn composed of a total of 80 sub-communities. The analysis results

are presented for each community in descriptive text, sub-community graphs,

and tables with, for example, the most-cited papers and authors. A comparison

between the detected communities and topical areas deﬁned by other related

work, is also presented, demonstrating a greater researcher emphasis on cryp-

tography, quantum cryptography, information hiding and biometrics, at the

expense of laws and regulation, risk management and governance, and security

software lifecycle.

Keywords: Security, Clustering, Community, Systematic Literature

Review

∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: sotkat@kth.se (Sotirios Katsikeas), pontusj@kth.se (Pontus

Johnson), mekstedt@kth.se (Mathias Ekstedt), robetl@kth.se (Robert Lagerstr¨om)

Preprint submitted to Computer Science Review

April 28, 2021

 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Introduction

The cyber security research community is an eclectic group, addressing a

diverse set of research questions, based on multifarious theories and deploying

sundry methods, making it diﬃcult to obtain a comprehensive grasp of this

league. Using quantitative methods, the present work aims to summarize the

activities of this group of researchers in a coherent manner. In a citation graph

of 98,373 authors active in the ﬁeld of cyber security between 1949 and early

2020, we identify twelve distinct communities focusing on various topics, such

as Malware, Usable Security, Intrusion Detection and Access Control. Each

community is described e.g. in terms of research foci, publication fora, and sub-

community evolution. Ever since Thomas Kuhn’s seminal work The structure of

scientiﬁc revolutions [1], philosophers of science have been aware of the impact

of social organization on the scientiﬁc endeavor. It is therefore not surprising

to discover that cyber security research communities and sub-communities are

not solely explained by their topical foci, but sometimes by other factors, such

as geography.

Section 2 details the methods used to collect and analyze the abstract and

citation data on which the article is based. In Section 3, an overview of the

collected data is done and some metadata are presented. Section 4 contains

the results of the analysis, presenting in some detail each of the twelve research

communities. This is followed by related works, including a comparison with

other attempts to summarize the ﬁeld. Section 6 consists of a discussion of

the results, considering validity and reliability. The article is concluded with a

summary in Section 7.

2. Method

2.1. Scopus as data source

Scopus was selected as our data source, ﬁrst, because of its comprehensive

content, since it contains more than 25,000 active titles from 7,000 publishers

2

that are reviewed and selected by an independent review board.1 According to

the oﬃcial Scopus website, “over the past 3 years, Scopus has added over 195

million more cited references, dating back to 1970, to complement the database’s

existing records that date back to 1788 and further increase the depth of con-

tent.”2 Compared with other academic publication databases, such as IEEE

Xplore and ACM Digital Library, Scopus is one of the most comprehensive [2]

and includes data from both IEEE and ACM publications (among others). Sco-

pus has almost the same database size as Web of Science but oﬀers a more

ﬂexible and powerful open-access API.

2.2. Data retrieval and processing

The Scopus API was used in a Python script to search and collect meta-

information about a set of articles that were obtained using a custom search

query. This meta-information was then pre-processed and stored on Google

Cloud Datastore for post-processing and analysis. After the data retrieval phase,

which required approximately two weeks, the data could easily and promptly

be retrieved from Datastore in under 4 minutes, so that the analysis could be

performed.

In the analysis, the main author graph was generated and then

partitioned, as will be described later, and then the information and graphs for

each of the communities obtained were calculated and provided to the user.

2.3. Search criteria

As mentioned in the introduction, our goal is to analyze the cyber secu-

rity research community. Accordingly, any published article related to either

information security or cyber security should be initially considered to be

of interest. These two keywords were the starting search criteria in our study

because they are usually (albeit inaccurately) used as synonyms in research.

These two terms were expected to capture a suﬃcient number of articles to

allow us to collect the relevant keywords for the next phase.

1https://www.elsevier.com/solutions/scopus/how-scopus-works
2https://www.elsevier.com/solutions/scopus/how-scopus-works/content

3

2.3.1. Initial scoping by keywords

Initially, articles containing the keywords information security or cyber

security in their title, abstract, or keywords were searched for, and 27,654

documents were retrieved. The keywords most commonly used in these articles

were subsequently ordered in descending frequency. Among these, those deemed

excessively generic to ﬁt in the domain of information and cyber security (e.g.,

Internet), were discarded, resulting in the following set of top 21 keywords.

Access Control

Authentication

Computer Crime

Computer Security

Computer Viruses

Cryptography

Cyber Security

Cyber-attacks

Cybersecurity

Digital Watermarking

Information Security

Intrusion Detection

Malware

Privacy

Mobile Security

Network Security

Security Of Data

Security Policy

Security Requirements

Security Systems

Steganography

2.3.2. Fine-tuning the keywords

The top 25 articles for each of these keywords were manually examined to

detect possible outliers. If such articles were detected, the search query was ﬁne-

tuned to exclude them. The results of this examination are presented below.

The Access Control keyword resulted in a large number of articles that

were not security-related; these were primarily concerned with media or physi-

cal access control. To handle this, the AND TITLE-ABS-KEY ("Security") ﬁl-

ter was applied on the Access Control term to discard these articles. For

validation, a search for (KEY ("Access Control") AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY

("Security")) was also performed, resulting in 17,778 articles, the great ma-

jority of which were not security-related. The same approach was followed for

the Privacy keyword.

It should also be noted that Scopus handles the keywords provided inside

double quotation marks in a particular manner (called “search for a loose or

approximate phrase”) whereby issues related to capitalisation, singular, plural,

or hyphenated words are eliminated. Furthermore, multi-word keywords such

4

as Data Privacy are covered by simpler ones such as Privacy. To ensure that

this is indeed the case, we performed two searches for these two keywords, and

we concluded that the results of KEY ("Privacy") include all the results of KEY

("Data privacy").

When we examined the Mobile Security keyword, we were surprised by

the fact that there were 577 results related to “cytology.” To eliminate them

from the results of the main query, we applied the AND NOT KEY ("Cytology")

ﬁlter on the keyword term. We opted to exclude them at scraping time to reduce

the time required to ﬁlter them out during the subsequent analysis.

Finally, AND TITLE-ABS-KEY ("Security") was also applied on Digital

Watermarking because 5,832 results of that term were related to watermarking

but not for security purposes.

2.3.3. Collecting 59,782 articles

The top 21 relevant keywords together with the improvements explained

above were used in a logical disjunction (security of data OR network security

OR ...) as the core of the main search in the Scopus database in a search query

that was also restricted (in terms of subject area) to computer science, engineer-

ing, social sciences, decision sciences, multidisciplinary, or undeﬁned (to exclude

articles clearly oﬀ topic), and restricted to the English language. The full query

that was used can be found at 3.

This search query resulted in 320,907 articles. Unfortunately, owing to the

search quota limitations of the Scopus API, we were forced to limit the results to

the top 5,000 most cited articles for large queries. Thus, we performed a distinct

search for each year. To avoid under-representing the years with a large number

of articles (e.g., selecting all 4,374 articles from 2001, but only approximately

19% of the 26,642 articles produced in 2016), we selected the same fraction of

articles for each year, with the peak of the 5,000 most-cited articles from the

peak year of 2019, when 33,884 articles were produced. Hence, for each year,

3https://git.io/JvRam

5

the 19.9% most-cited articles were collected. In total, this resulted in a dataset

of 59,782 articles.

2.4. Collected meta-data

For each article, the following meta-data were collected: (i) EID (unique

academic work identiﬁer in Scopus), (ii) authors, (iii) title, (iv) source, (v) key-

words, (vi) publication date, and (vii) references.

For each author, the following information was gathered: (i) Scopus author

ID, (ii) surname, (iii) given name, and (iv) aﬃliation.

Finally, for each aﬃliation, the following information was gathered: (i) Sco-

pus aﬃliation ID, (ii) name, and (iii) country.

2.5. Producing the author graph

Based on the collected data, a citation graph was generated, in which all

authors are linked to each other according to citations. In the graph, authors

are represented by nodes, and undirected edges between nodes indicate that at

least one author has cited the other at least once, and the size of the nodes is

related to the number of citations each author has. The main author graph is

shown in Figure 1 (to reduce its size, the graph only contains the authors that

have more than 12 citations globally, and the edges are hidden).

2.6. Community detection

The author graph is a social graph, in the sense that it represents relations

between people. A signiﬁcant amount of research on the analysis of such graphs

has been conducted, particularly on community detection. One of the best-

performing algorithms for community detection in large graphs is the Louvain

method, proposed by Blondel et al. [3]. As the authors write,

“The problem of community detection requires the partition of a network

into communities of densely connected nodes, with the nodes belonging to dif-

ferent communities being only sparsely connected. Precise formulations of this

6

optimization problem are known to be computationally intractable. Several al-

gorithms have therefore been proposed to ﬁnd reasonably good partitions in a

reasonably fast way.”

The algorithm aims to ﬁnd a graph partition that maximizes modularity,

which is a scalar value between -1 and 1 that “measures the density of links inside

communities as compared to links between communities,” deﬁned as follows:

Q =

1
2m

(cid:88)

[Aij −

i,j

kikj
2m

]δ(ci, cj)

where Aij represents the weight of the edge between vertices i and j, ki =

(cid:80)

j Aij is the sum of the weights of the edges attached to vertex i, ci is the
community to which vertex i is assigned, the δ-function δ(u, v) is 1 if u = v and

0 otherwise, and m = 1
2

(cid:80)

i,j Aij.

The Louvain community detection algorithm operates as follows (in the

words of the authors):

Our algorithm is divided in two phases that are repeated iteratively.

Assume that we start with a weighted network of N nodes. First,

we assign a diﬀerent community to each node of the network. So,

in this initial partition there are as many communities as there are

nodes. Then, for each node i we consider the neighbours j of i and

we evaluate the gain of modularity that would take place by remov-

ing i from its community and by placing it in the community of j.

The node i is then placed in the community for which this gain is

maximum (in case of a tie we use a breaking rule), but only if this

gain is positive. If no positive gain is possible, i stays in its origi-

nal community. This process is applied repeatedly and sequentially

for all nodes until no further improvement can be achieved and the

ﬁrst phase is then complete. [...] The second phase of the algorithm

consists in building a new network whose nodes are now the com-

munities found during the ﬁrst phase. To do so, the weights of the

links between the new nodes are given by the sum of the weight

7

of the links between nodes in the corresponding two communities.

Once this second phase is completed, it is then possible to reapply

the ﬁrst phase of the algorithm to the resulting weighted network

and to iterate. Let us denote by “pass” a combination of these two

phases. By construction, the number of meta-communities decreases

at each pass, and as a consequence most of the computing time is

used in the ﬁrst pass. The passes are iterated [...] until there are no

more changes and a maximum of modularity is attained.

Opting for an unweighted network, we used an open-source Python imple-

mentation of this algorithm, developed by Thomas Aynaud 4.

Because the order in which the nodes are evaluated may aﬀect the outcome,

we performed the partitioning process for 300 diﬀerent random orderings, se-

lecting the partition that resulted in the greatest modularity.

In our case, a

modularity of 0.525158 was achieved.

Some authors contribute to more than one research community. This may

happen because the author’s research focus is of interest to multiple communi-

ties, or because the author has published on several diﬀerent topics. Regardless

of the reason, the employed community detection algorithm will place such au-

thors in the community to which they are most tightly connected. Such authors’

will strengthen the relations between the concerned communities.

2.7. Community graph

Using the spring layout algorithm in the NetworkX Python library 5, a

graph (Figure 2) was generated, where nodes correspond to communities, node

size to community size, and edge width and node distance depend on inter-

community coupling.

In most cases, the name of each community was given

by the most inﬂuential unique keyword, i.e. the top keyword that is used in

the articles with the most citations. In a few cases, however, the names were

4https://github.com/taynaud
5https://networkx.github.io

8

changed by the authors so that the topic of the community could be better

reﬂected, but even in those cases a topic from the rest of the most inﬂuential

community keyword list was selected. The only exception to this are the names

of the cryptography I and II communities that were assigned in an arbitrary

manner based on the contained articles. (The following common keywords were

not unique to any community: cyber security, cyber-attacks, security breaches,

security, information security, cybersecurity, computer security, cyber threats,

network security and intrusion detection systems.)

2.8. Sub-community detection and description

For each community, the above process was repeated: An author graph was

generated, sub-communities were detected using the Louvain algorithm, sub-

community graphs were generated (Figures 4–26), and each sub-community

was summarized in terms of most common keywords, most-cited authors, top

publication fora, etc.

3. Data

In this section, information regarding the employed raw data is presented.

In total, we have 59,782 articles published from 1949 until early 2020 that are

authored by 98,373 authors fully recorded in the database; they contain 148,202

keywords. We also have 835,664 articles recorded as citations (i.e., we only have

article title, author surname, and publication year). All the data was acquired

from the Scopus database at the end of February 2020. The most-cited articles

among them are presented in Table 1, whereas the most common keywords are

the following:

1. security

2. privacy

3. authentication

4. cloud computing

5. cryptography

6. cyber security

7. intrusion detection (systems)

8. anomaly detection

9. internet of things (iot)

10. access control

9

Figure 1: Author graph of the research communities in cyber security. Each node represents

an author, colors denote research communities and the size of each node is proportional to

the number of citations.

The top ﬁve aﬃliations (in terms of number of papers produced) are: Mas-

sachusetts Institute of Technology (including MIT Computer Science and Artiﬁ-

cial Intelligence Laboratory), University of California Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon

University, Purdue University, and Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Finally, the

ﬁve most-cited country aﬃliations are: the United States, China, India, United

Kingdom and Germany.

Finally, the top ten publication fora globally are presented in Table 2. It is

worth noting that only four out of the top ten publication outlets are conferences

while the rest are journals. Therefore, the majority of the collected articles is

found on journal publications.

10

Author

Paper title

Table 1: Most-cited articles globally.

Rivest, R.

A Method for Obtaining Digital Signatures and Public-Key

Cryptosystems (1978) [4]

Boneh, D.

Identity-based encryption from the weil pairing (2001) [5]

Diﬃe, W.

New Directions in Cryptography (1976) [6]

Menezes, A.

Handbook of Applied Cryptography (1996) [7]

Shamir, A.

How to Share a Secret (1979) [8]

Kocher, P.

Diﬀerential power analysis (1999) [9]

Shamir, A.

Identity-Based Cryptosystems and Signature Schemes (1985)

[10]

ElGamal, T. A Public Key Cryptosystem and a Signature Scheme Based on

Discrete Logarithms (1985) [11]

Bellare, M.

Random oracles are practical: a paradigm for designing eﬃ-

cient protocols (1993) [12]

Paillier, P.

Public-key cryptosystems based on composite degree residuos-

ity classes (1999) [13]

4. Results & Analysis

In this section, we present the identiﬁed community clusters. In total, 12

communities were identiﬁed, as shown in Figure 2. The presentation of each

community follows the same structure. First, we address the community topic.

In this section, we provide an overview of the most prominent topics in the

community.

It must be reminded that the clustering is based on individuals

and their papers’ referencing. Thus we cannot claim that clusters really rep-

resent topics in some formal way (as it is done when using topic modeling),

every individual can of course cover multiple topics throughout a career, but

we do however ﬁnd a fair cohesiveness with respect to the topics within the

communities that is interesting to report. The ambition here is thus to convey

an intuitive feel for the topic(s) of the community. To this end, we list the

11

Table 2: Top publication fora globally.

Publication forum

Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-

nications Security

IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security - Jour-

nal

Computers and Security - Journal

Future Generation Computer Systems - Journal

Multimedia Tools and Applications - Journal

Proceedings - IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy

Proceedings of SPIE - The International Society for Optical En-

gineering

Information Sciences - Journal

Sensors (Switzerland) - Journal

Proceedings - IEEE INFOCOM

most-cited articles produced by members of the community. Furthermore, the

sub-communities of each community are also presented and described.

Secondly, properties related to the people and the network of the community

are described. Here, we present the most productive countries in the commu-

nity, the most-cited members of the community, the most popular journals and

conferences for dissemination, the most important inﬂuences from other commu-

nities in terms of most-cited external papers, as well as the historical evolution

of the community in terms of papers produced per year. In the dissemination

outlet list, general publisher series (e.g., Springer Lecture Notes on Computer

Science and ACM International Conference Proceedings Series) have been re-

moved because they represent an excessively large and fuzzy set of conferences

and workshops.

Finally, in Figure 3 the growth of all the detected communities over the last

27 years is presented in terms of the articles included in our analysis. The order

12

Figure 2: The security research community graph generated from the analyzed data.

in which the communities will be presented below is based on how active each

one of them is today, as shown in Figure 3.

4.1. Cryptography I & II

The Louvain clustering algorithm identiﬁed two communities concerned with

cryptography. However, as they are closely related, their joint presentation al-

lows a more coherent description. Even though cryptography has thousands of

years of history, the academic discipline emerged in the 1970s with the creation

of a public encryption standard (DES) and the invention of public-key cryptog-

raphy. This community completely dominated cyber security research in the

1980s and 1990s, producing approximately 70% of all published papers in 1985

and 1986. Even though it has maintained its position as the most productive

community, and its absolute number of publications continues to rise, its rel-

ative share of publications dropped to slightly above 20% in 2018 and 2019.

13

Figure 3: Growth of the detected communities over time.

Considering contributing countries, the United States dwarfs all other nations

in terms of the number of publications and even more in terms of the number

of citations.

At the core of this topic is provable security. The corresponding sub-

community is concerned with the fundamental mathematical assumptions and

abstractions used in cryptography, such as the random oracle model [14] and

universal composability [15]. Another sub-community is concerned with prov-

able data possession, which is close to provable security but focuses more

on the fundamentals of data integrity and authenticity veriﬁcation, and on pro-

tocols that provide probabilistic proof that ﬁles are stored. As in the case of

provable security, the sub-community concerned with public-key cryptogra-

phy has its origins in the 1970s, producing notable contributions such as the

RSA cryptographic scheme [4], the ElGamal cryptographic scheme [11], and,

later, identity-based encryption [5].

In parallel, a sub-community concerned

14

with symmetric ciphers and cryptanalysis emerged. This sub-community fo-

cuses on the construction of block ciphers, such as DES [16] and AES [17], as

well as on the successful breaking of these cryptographic systems, most notably

DES [18].

A common approach to cryptanalysis is to employ side-channel attacks, thus

attempting to reveal secrets by measuring unintended side-eﬀects of crypto-

graphic computation. The most interesting side-channel attack is diﬀerential

power analysis, for which there is a dedicated sub-community. Detecting small

variations in power consumption patterns during cryptographic operations can

be used to ﬁnd secret keys from otherwise tamper-resistant devices [9]. As pro-

posed by Agrawal et al.

[19], side-channel information can be used to detect

hardware trojans, that is, malicious alterations to integrated circuits [20].

In the ﬁrst decade of the 21st century, a sub-community related to this topic

emerged. Other approaches to detecting hardware trojans include the use of

physical unclonable functions (PUFs). PUFs are primitives for deriving

secrets from complex physical characteristics of integrated circuits rather than

storing the secrets in digital memory. PUFs make use of random variations

during the fabrication process of an integrated circuit, and thus the secret is

diﬃcult to predict or extract [21].

The sub-community concerned with elliptic curve emerged in the late

1980s, with the independent co-discovery of that cryptographic system by Victor

Miller [22] and Neil Koblitz [23].

A useful feature of an encryption system is that it allows operations on

the encrypted data without revealing their content. This is the topic of fully

homomorphic encryption sub-community, dominated by Craig Gentry, the

creator of the ﬁrst fully homomorphic encryption scheme [24]. A sub-community

with similarities to the homomorphic encryption group is the one on privacy

preserving schemes, which is related to issues such as searchable encryption

[25] and diﬀerential privacy [26].

The sub-community concerned with attribute-based encryption has, only

the last decade, dominated the cryptographic community. As in the case of ho-

15

Figure 4: Cryptography I sub-community graph.

momorphic and privacy-preserving encryption, attribute-based encryption aims

to develop methods that allow multiple users to access diﬀerent parts or aspects

of the encrypted data. This is achieved by using attributes to describe the en-

crypted data or user credentials [27]. The growth of this sub-community has

been staggering, amounting to almost 40% of all cryptography publications in

2018 and 2019.

Finally, the most recently appeared sub-community is concerned with blockchain,

which is directly connected with cryptography, as it is a growing collection of

blocks, eﬀectively a chain, each of which is based on the cryptographic hash of

the previous block. This sub-community started to make signiﬁcant contribu-

tions around 2012.

16

Figure 5: Growth of the detected cryptography I sub-communities over time.

Table 3: Most-cited articles produced by the Cryptography communities.

Author

Paper title

Boneh, D.

Identity-based encryption from the weil pairing (2001) [5]

Bellare, M.

Random oracles are practical: a paradigm for designing eﬃ-

cient protocols (1993) [12]

Shamir, A.

Identity-Based Cryptosystems and Signature Schemes (1985)

[10]

Shamir, A.

How to Share a Secret (1979) [8]

Rivest, R.

A Method for Obtaining Digital Signatures and Public-Key

Cryptosystems (1978) [4]

4.2. Sensor networks

Sensor networks are currently attracting great attention; they represent the

largest and most active community (if we consider cryptography I and II sepa-

17

Figure 6: Cryptography II sub-community graph.

Table 4: Top publication fora in the Cryptography communities.

Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-

nications Security

IEEE Access

Information Sciences

Future Generation Computer Systems

IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security

rately) in our analysis. This community appeared in the late 1970s (i.e., 1978

and 1979).

In 1980, the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects

Agency started the Distributed Sensor Network program to explore the chal-

lenges in implementing distributed/wireless sensor networks [28].

Since its appearance, the community has followed a continuous increase in

publications. In 2002, the community started growing rapidly until 2011, and

18

Figure 7: Growth of the detected cryptography II sub-communities over time.

Table 5: Most-cited authors (top 5) in the Cryptography communities.

Author

Boneh, Dan

Waters, Brent R.

Shamir, A.

Sahai, Amit

Bellare, Mihir

Citations

8076

7414

7368

6057

5592

in 2014 the same growth resumed.

Figure 8 shows the nine sub-communities. We can further divide them into

topics. First, we have applications: internet of things, vehicular commu-

nications, and implantable devices. Then, we have network technologies:

wireless sensor networks and ad hoc networks. Finally, we have security

mechanisms and attacks: physical layer security, content-based security,

19

Table 6: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the Cryptography community.

Country

United States

China

Israel

France

Germany

Citations

271064

44484

36752

27303

24381

jamming, and spooﬁng attacks.

The most active sub-community overall is that concerned with the internet

of things. The term “internet of things” was introduced around 1999. One

of the earliest important articles of this community, however, appeared in 2005

[29] and describes an end-to-end security architecture for constrained embedded

devices.

As all the top ﬁve community articles (Table 7) are related to security mech-

anisms, it is no surprise that the sub-community concerned with physical-layer

security is also on the top of the list of the most productive sub-communities.

The most cited article produced by this sub-community is [30], in which the

problem of conﬁdentiality over wireless channels is mathematically formulated.

Another common problem in sensor networks is how new nodes can be added

to the network and be able to communicate securely with the existing ones. To

resolve this, a key-management system is required, as that described in [31].

Then, a content-based security mechanism can be used so that each wireless

sensor node can only have access to speciﬁc content even though the messages

are available to all the nodes.

Another topic that is currently attracting attention is vehicular communi-

cations, where one is interested in the communication between vehicles and be-

tween vehicles and the road infrastructure. This area started developing dramat-

ically after 2008 and continues to grow owing to its relation to autonomous ve-

hicles and smart cities. The most cited article produced by this sub-community

20

Figure 8: Sensor networks sub-community graph.

is [32].

The most inﬂuential aﬃliation country is the United States leading with a

big diﬀerence from the second which is China while Canada is following closely

in the third place. Then Switzerland and United Kingdom also follow with a

distance gap.

The sensor networks community is closely related to the cryptography,

malwares, and intrusion detection communities. This can be explained by

the need for authentication and encryption methods in sensor networks. This

relation can also be seen from the existence of the physical-layer security

sub-community within the sensor networks community.

4.3. Information Hiding

The information hiding community is to a large extent interested in

steganography and this is the same topic that represents the history and back-

21

Figure 9: Growth of the detected sensor networks sub-communities over time.

Table 7: Most-cited articles produced by the sensor networks community.

Author

Paper title

Perrig, A.

SPINS: Security protocols for sensor networks (2002) [33]

Eschenauer,

A key-management scheme for distributed sensor networks

L.

(2002) [31]

Karlof, C.

Secure routing in wireless sensor networks: Attacks and coun-

termeasures (2003) [34]

Chan, H.

Random key predistribution schemes for sensor networks

(2003) [35]

Douceur, J.

The sybil attack (2002) [36]

R.

ground of this community. Steganography is concerned with disguising infor-

mation in data available to unwanted eavesdroppers. In contrast with cryptog-

22

Table 8: Top publication fora in the sensor networks community.

IEEE Access

IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology

IEEE Internet of Things Journal

IEEE Communications Magazine

IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

Table 9: Most-cited authors (top ﬁve) in the sensor networks community.

Author

Perrig, Adrian

Shen, Xuemin

Ning, Peng

Lin, Xiaodong

Lu, Rongxing

Citations

5477

2599

1955

1945

1816

Table 10: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the sensor networks community.

Country

United States

China

Canada

Switzerland

United Kingdom

Citations

87336

17937

13599

6357

6126

raphy, where it is evident that there is a message sent, in steganography the

challenge is to conceal the transmission of a message. This subject stems from

information theory. The general principle is to identify redundant bits in data in

a cover medium and to encode the secret message in a produced stego medium.

As in the case of cryptography, the concept of steganography dates back long

in history, with examples from ancient Greece, Rome, and China. As a scientiﬁc

discipline, its foundation was laid in Shannon’s paper “Communication Theory

23

of Secrecy Systems” [37], which was published in 1949. To complement the

ﬁeld of cryptography, Shannon introduced “[...] true secrecy systems where the

meaning of the message is concealed by cipher, code, etc., although its existence

is not hidden, and the enemy is assumed to have any special equipment necessary

to intercept and record the transmitted signal.”

Despite its early birth, the community had only minor activity until the

1990s. However, since then, it has steadily grown into a large community, with

its publication trend pointing upward.

Steganography represents the largest sub-community within this commu-

nity, and it is concerned with both encoding and information hiding. As already

mentioned, this is the core of this community and the ﬁrst, historically, topic

of interest. It gained momentum in the late 1990s and has since exhibited a

steady increase in article production.

Normally regarded as a complementary approach to steganography, water-

marking has become one of the largest information hiding sub-communities.

The term watermarking relates to a paper-making technique for keeping track

of provenance. Watermarking is similar to steganography in that it embeds and

hides information in a source data ﬁle. However, it also diﬀers signiﬁcantly.

Watermarking has a robustness requirement:

it should not be possible to re-

move (e.g., by image cropping, scaling, and rotation, or through conversion or

compression). A watermark is not necessarily hidden, but, as in the case of

Kerkhoﬀs’ principle for cryptosystems, it should be diﬃcult to remove even if

the algorithm that generated it is known. The general concept of watermarking

has a long history, but digital watermarking was born in the early 1990s [38].

Even though it is possible to describe the diﬀerence between the watermarking

and the steganography sub-communities, their separation in terms of individu-

als appears less clear. There are people in the steganography group that have

produced articles on watermarking.

In the information hiding community, there are also a number of sub-communities

concerned with encryption for information hiding purposes.

The ﬁrst is chaos-based image encryption. This sub-community is con-

24

cerned with encryption techniques based on chaos theory. This approach is

based on that chaotic systems are suitable for encryption, as they are sensitive

to initial conditions. Authors in this community also note that Shannon, who

became a member of this community, already in 1949 [37] (before the devel-

opment of chaos theory) outlined the fundamental principles for the domain.

Despite the old roots of the sub-community, the number of produced papers

increased signiﬁcantly only in the second half of the 2000s. Currently, this

sub-domain is one of the two largest, with China dominating the production.

The sub-community of selective encryption is concerned with combining

compression/decompression with encryption/decryption for multimedia data

(video and audio). A fundamental challenge in this ﬁeld is that encryption

and decryption should be performed on large volumes of data and in real time.

To balance this trade-oﬀ, videos are encrypted only partially and selectively,

hence the name. The community grew with wide availability of the internet

and the advent of services such as video-on-demand. It has been and remains a

small community but with a fairly steady production rate.

In visual cryptography, the fundamental principle for hiding data in im-

ages is to divide a secret image into diﬀerent shadow images, called shares. The

shares are devised so that if certain subsets are combined, the original secret

image is recovered, whereas individual shares or combinations of unqualiﬁed

shares contain no information. The community is fairly small and steady-sized,

with Taiwan and China in the front.

As the name implies, the sub-community of optical image encryption is

concerned with optical ﬁlters that diﬀuse the original image to noise, and then

recover it back. These diﬀusers operate both in the space as well as in the spatial

frequency domains, the latter using various mathematical transforms, such as

Fourier, Fresnel, and Gyrator. It should be noted that this sub-community is

perhaps best considered to belong to an optics community (not studied here)

rather than to computer security.

Finally, there is a sub-community concerned with reversible data hiding.

This group focuses on techniques that insert information by modifying the orig-

25

Figure 10: Information hiding sub-community graph.

inal ﬁle or signal, but they enable the exact restoration of the original after the

extraction of the embedded information. A few articles in the community date

back to the 1990s; however, our data suggest that it materialized in the second

half of the ﬁrst decade of the 21st century, and it is now established as a small

community, with China in the lead.

In general, China dominates the information hiding community, and Taiwan

has also a strong position. The US is the second most inﬂuential country. Not

surprisingly, it has strong academic relationships with cryptography.

4.4. Intrusion Detection

This community came into being in the late 1990s.

It has since experi-

enced uninterrupted growth in productivity, and it was one of the ﬁve most

productive communities in 2019. The community initially focused on general

intrusion/anomaly detection systems and attack graphs. Important early

26

Figure 11: Growth of the detected information hiding sub-communities over time.

Table 11: Most-cited articles produced by the information hiding community.

Author

Paper title

Chen, G.

A symmetric image encryption scheme based on 3D chaotic

cat maps (2004) [39]

Tian, J.

Reversible Data Embedding Using a Diﬀerence Expansion

(2003) [40]

Cox, I. J.

Secure spread spectrum watermarking for multimedia (1997)

[41]

Petitcolas,

Information hiding - a survey (1999) [42]

F. A. P.

Shannon, C.

Communication theory of secrecy systems (1949) [37]

E.

27

Table 12: Top publication fora in the information hiding community.

Multimedia Tools and Applications

Optics Communications

IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security

Optics and Lasers in Engineering

Proceedings of SPIE - The International Society for Optical En-

gineering

Table 13: Most-cited authors (top ﬁve) in the information hiding community.

Author

Fridrich, Jiri

Chang, C. C.

Wang, Xing-yuan

Anderson, R. J.

Kilian, Joe

Citations

3495

2267

1762

1692

1399

Table 14: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the information hiding community.

Country

China

United States

Taiwan

India

United Kingdom

Citations

61045

38209

18324

9728

4688

articles were [43], which presented a method for anomaly detection, and [44],

concerned with modeling the relations between various attacker actions. The

sub-community concerned with machine learning anomaly detection ap-

peared at the same time and focuses on a topic similar to that of the anomaly

detection sub-community. This is expressed in Dorothy Denning’s paper An

Intrusion Detection Model from 1987 [45]: “[...] the hypothesis that security

28

violations can be detected by monitoring a system’s audit records for abnor-

mal patterns of system usage.” The machine learning anomaly detection sub-

community is the dominant sub-community as of the writing of this article,

producing approximately 30% of the total number of articles in the intrusion

detection community.

Around 2000, a sub-community grew around a particular type of network

attacks, namely, distributed denial-of-service attacks, as exempliﬁed by

[46].

In the middle of the ﬁrst decade of the 21st century, as the interest

in attack graphs, anomaly detection, and DDoS attacks increased, new sub-

communities also emerged. A sub-community developed around signature-based

deep packet inspection, as described in, for example, [47]. Another sub-

community, which also appeared at the same time, is concerned with infor-

mation visualization and developed methods for visualizing security-related

network data to facilitate manual intrusion detection, as exempliﬁed by [48].

Around 2010, the interest in cloud computing reached its peak. This is

one of only two exceptions to the American dominance of the intrusion detection

community, as the most inﬂuential country, in terms of citations, in the cloud

computing sub-community is India. A characteristic article is [49], in which

diﬀerent intrusion techniques aﬀecting availability, conﬁdentiality, and integrity

of cloud resources and services are surveyed. The second sub-community in

which the US is not dominant, which also peaked around 2010, is concerned

with traﬃc classiﬁcation using machine learning.

Its focus appears to be

the same as that of the anomaly detection sub-community. Here, Canada

and Spain are among the most inﬂuential countries, and publication forums are

generally concerned more with topics related to networks and communications.

Since 2010, the sub-community concerned with software-deﬁned net-

working (SDN) has signiﬁcantly increased in terms output.

It focuses on

multiple security concerns in the SDN domain, including intrusion detection

(e.g., [50]) as well as control-plane saturation attacks [51].

Most closely connected with the malwares community, the intrusion de-

tection community has also connections with the sensor networks commu-

29

Figure 12: Intrusion detection sub-community graph.

Table 15: Most-cited articles produced by the intrusion detection community.

Author

Paper title

Denning, D.

An Intrusion-Detection Model (1987) [45]

Mchugh, J.

Testing Intrusion Detection Systems (2000) [52]

Forrest, S.

Sense of self for unix processes (1996) [43]

Sheyner, O.

Automated generation and analysis of attack graphs (2002)

[53]

Lippmann,

Evaluating intrusion detection systems (2000) [54]

R. P.

nity.

30

Figure 13: Growth of the detected intrusion detection sub-communities over time.

Table 16: Top publication fora in the intrusion detection community.

Computers and Security

IEEE Access

Computer Networks

Journal of Network and Computer Applications

Expert Systems with Applications

4.5. Malwares

The malwares community has been active since 1973. Malware research is

focused on discovering, preventing, and stopping malicious software, including

viruses, trojans, ransomware, and spyware. Early papers produced by members

of this community were related to secure information ﬂow [55] and the modeling

of security policies [56]. Thus, this community is closely related to other cyber

security communities such as intrusion detection. More fundamental work was

31

Table 17: Most-cited authors (top ﬁve) in the intrusion detection community.

Author

Jajodia, Sushil

Stolfo, Salvatore J.

Forrest, Stephanie

Denning, Dorothy E.

Lippmann, R. P.

Citations

2091

1124

935

778

658

Table 18: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the intrusion detection community.

Country

United States

China

Australia

India

Canada

Citations

58718

7359

5762

4579

4196

carried out slightly later, with, for example, Fred Cohen from Lehigh University,

presenting early theory and experiments on computer viruses [57]. Another

inﬂuential paper (from 1991) used directed-graph epidemiological models for

the spread of computer viruses [58].

The community started publishing slowly, with a few papers per year in the

70s and 80s. This increased up to a few hundred of papers per year in the

90s and continued to rise in the 2000s until peaking with 695 papers in 2018.

Although there are some early inﬂuential papers, the most cited were published

around 2010, with the most cited paper being “TaintDroid: An information-

ﬂow tracking system for real-time privacy monitoring on smartphones” (2014)

by William Enck et al. [59].

Figure 14 shows the eight malware sub-communities. The two largest are

malware detection and android, which are currently the most active. The

most cited paper in malware detection is [60] and represents the community

32

well, with its focus on ﬁnding patterns and detecting new malicious executa-

bles. Regarding the android community, the focus is on ﬁnding malware in

Android applications, which are open source and thus suitable for analysis. In

the most cited paper of this sub-community, the authors collected more than

1,200 malware samples in the Android platform and tested four security ap-

plications, demonstrating that these could only detect 20–80% of the existing

malware [61]. Both sub-communities are dominated by researchers active in the

US, followed by Germany.

One sub-community is concerned with the topic of malicious network traﬃc

analysis, as for example communication between botnets and malwares. The

information ﬂow sub-community is concerned with information ﬂow analysis,

which is the information theoretical study of securing data used by computer

systems.

The study of botnets, computer viruses, and virtualization techniques for

operating systems that enhance security, follow with slightly less publications.

Finally, adversarial learning represents a novel research ﬁeld that came into

existence only after 2000 and employs machine learning techniques to model

adversaries so that attack simulations can then be performed, as described in

[62].

The malwares community is closely related to the intrusion detection,

sensor networks, and cryptography communities.

4.6. Biometrics

The biometrics community is one of the largest communities in our analysis,

in terms of community members. It appeared in the early 1980s, almost two

decades after the introduction of the ﬁrst semi-automatic face recognition system

by Woodrow Bledsoe in 1968.

It followed a slow but steady productivity growth; currently, it is exactly in

the middle among all communities in terms of productivity.

As seen in Figure 16, the biometrics community has eight sub-communities,

which can be divided into three research domains. The ﬁrst focuses on appli-

33

Figure 14: Malwares sub-community graph.

Table 19: Most-cited articles produced by the malwares community.

Author

Paper title

Enck, W.

TaintDroid: An information-ﬂow tracking system for realtime

privacy monitoring on smartphones (2014) [59]

Zhou, Y.

Dissecting Android malware: Characterization and evolution

(2012) [61]

Sabelfeld, A.

Language-based information-ﬂow security (2003) [63]

Felt, A. P.

Android permissions demystiﬁed (2011) [64]

Enck, W.

On lightweight mobile phone application certiﬁcation (2009)

[65]

cations: biometric ﬁngerprinting and surveillance systems. The second

is concerned with authentication schemes: keystroke dynamics and biomet-

ric authentication. The third is concerned with methods: face recognition,

34

Figure 15: Growth of the detected malwares sub-communities over time.

Table 20: Top publication fora in the Malwares community.

Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-

nications Security

Proceedings - IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy

Computers and Security

Proceedings - Annual Computer Security Applications Confer-

ence, ACSAC

IEEE Access

gait recognition, person re-identiﬁcation, and background subtraction.

Overall, the most active and oldest sub-community is that concerned with

biometric ﬁngerprinting. Articles in this community primarily focus on the

general design of biometric systems and their procedures, as for example in [66].

The most interesting older article is [67], which is a study on secure, oﬀ-line,

35

Table 21: Most-cited authors (top ﬁve) in the Malwares community.

Author

Wagner, David

Song, Dawn Xiaodong

Kruegel, Christopher

Lee, Wenke

McDaniel, Patrick

Citations

3767

3562

2090

2059

1511

Table 22: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the malwares community.

Country

United States

Germany

China

Italy

United Kingdom

Citations

124853

14456

9242

8035

4871

authenticated user-identiﬁcation schemes based on a biometric system.

The surveillance systems sub-community is not only related to identifying

persons but also to privacy concerns regarding such systems, as presented in [68].

The biometric ﬁngerprinting sub-community is closely related to both

the biometric authentication and the keystroke dynamics sub-community.

The biometric authentication sub-community is concerned with all possible

types of biometric features, such as neural activity and brainwaves. Interest-

ingly, the keystroke dynamics sub-community began publishing in 1990 and

is currently the second most active sub-community. One of the earliest and

most cited articles is [69], which described a user authentication/identiﬁcation

method by studying keyboard typing habits.

Another research topic in biometrics that is currently attracting great atten-

tion is person re-identiﬁcation, which is the process of associating images of

a person captured from diﬀerent cameras or from the same camera in diﬀerent

36

Figure 16: Biometrics sub-community graph.

environments. As expected, this is also related to face recognition.

Finally, background subtraction is a technique that removes the back-

ground of an image or video to study only useful content, something that is

used in biometrics recognition. Gait recognition is the study of human mo-

tion, which can be considered a biometric feature, and can be used to identify

people.

The most inﬂuential aﬃliation country is once more, the United States lead-

ing with a signiﬁcant diﬀerence from the second one which is China, while Italy

is following closely. Then United Kingdom and South Korea follow in some

distance.

The biometrics community appears distantly related to the other commu-

nities in our analysis, but it is closer to the information hiding community.

37

Figure 17: Growth of the detected biometrics sub-communities over time.

Table 23: Most-cited articles produced by the biometrics community.

Author

Paper title

Jain, A. K.

An Introduction to Biometric Recognition (2004) [70]

Juels, A.

Fuzzy commitment scheme (1999) [71]

Ratha, N. K. Enhancing security and privacy in biometrics-based authenti-

cation systems (2001) [72]

Ratha, N. K. Generating cancelable ﬁngerprint templates (2007) [73]

Uludag, U.

Biometric cryptosystems: Issues and challenges (2004) [66]

4.7. Cyber-Physical Systems

The cyber-physical systems community is a medium-sized community,

which is relatively new, as it came into existence approximately 25 years ago. It

has experienced a steady growth and is currently the seventh most productive

community.

38

Table 24: Top publication fora in the biometrics community.

IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security

IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology

Pattern Recognition

Proceedings of SPIE - The International Society for Optical En-

gineering

Pattern Recognition Letters

Table 25: Most-cited authors (top ﬁve) in the biometrics community.

Author

Jain, Anil K.

Pankanti, Sharath

Bolle, Ruud

Ross, Arun

Connell, J. H.

Citations

1342

624

524

501

490

Table 26: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the biometrics community.

Country

United States

China

Italy

United Kingdom

South Korea

Citations

20721

5364

4194

2411

1912

Figure 18 indicates two main research domains. The ﬁrst is concerned with

existing infrastructures and possible methods for defending them: smart grids,

power grids, communication-system security, and intrusion detection

systems. The second is concerned with attacks on such systems: false data

injection attacks, cyber-physical attacks, and vulnerability analysis.

Owing to the move from simple control systems towards IT systems, the

39

intrusion detection systems and vulnerability analysis sub-communities,

which are primarily IT-related, are found within the cyber-physical systems

community. The most important article published by the intrusion detection

systems sub-community, which is the most active one, is [74], in which the

signiﬁcance of cyber infrastructure security within the power domain, to prevent,

mitigate, and tolerate cyber-attacks, is highlighted.

The false data injection attacks sub-community is currently the second

most active. The majority of publications in this sub-community appeared

after 2009, and one of the earliest important articles is [75], in which false

data injection attacks against power grids were introduced. Such attacks are

performed when an attacker maliciously introduces crafted errors into certain

system state variables with the aim of manipulating the system.

Another of the most active sub-communities is concerned with cyber-physical

attacks. In the most cited article [76] a mathematical framework for cyber-

physical systems, attacks, and monitors is proposed, and then centralized or

distributed attack detection and identiﬁcation systems are designed.

The other infrastructure-related sub-communities are concerned with smart

grids, power grids and communication-system security. The term smart

grid was ﬁrst deﬁned by the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007

(EISA-2007) in the US, and around 2010 the ﬁrst related papers appeared.

The power grids sub-community adds one more attack vector to the domain,

namely, cascading failures, in which the failure of one component leads to the

failure of other components in an interconnected system, are primarily studied

by this sub-community.

Finally, the most important article in the communication system secu-

rity sub-community is [77]. This article is important because it is an experimen-

tal security analysis of a mix of industrial-grade networks and cyber-physical

systems, which are found not only in vehicles but also in the energy domain.

The most inﬂuential aﬃliation country is the United States leading with a

big diﬀerence from the second which is China while the United Kingdom and

Sweden are following in the third and fourth position.

40

Figure 18: Cyber-physical systems sub-community graph.

One observation is that this community is equally concerned with attacks

on state estimators for power grids, as also with attacks on the wider industrial

control systems (ICS).

The cyber-physical systems community is closely related to the sensor

networks community, as sensors and sensor networks are becoming a standard

in modern power grids. Additionally, it is also related to the intrusion detec-

tion community. This is due to the fact that vulnerability analysis of power

grid infrastructures is becoming increasingly widespread.

4.8. Authentication

The authentication community is a relatively small-size community al-

though it is one of the oldest communities in our analysis.

It started in the

late 1970s with research on authentication (using passwords) and authenticated

encryption systems for computers. The Diﬃe–Hellman key exchange [6] is a

41

Figure 19: Growth of the detected Cyber-physical systems sub-communities over time.

Table 27: Most-cited articles produced by the cyber-physical systems community.

Author

Paper title

Liu, Y.

False data injection attacks against state estimation in electric

power grids (2009) [75]

Koscher, K.

Experimental security analysis of a modern automobile (2010)

[77]

Kosut, O.

Malicious data attacks on the smart grid (2011) [78]

Sridhar, S.

Cyber-physical system security for the electric power grid

(2012) [74]

Pasqualetti,

Attack detection and identiﬁcation in cyber-physical systems

F.

(2013) [76]

characteristic example.

This community followed a steady growth in productivity, except for the

42

Table 28: Top publication fora in the cyber-physical systems community.

IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid

IEEE Transactions on Power Systems

IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics

Reliability Engineering and System Safety

IEEE Access

Table 29: Most-cited authors (top ﬁve) in the cyber-physical systems community.

Author

Reiter, Michael K.

Kohno, Tadayoshi

Liu, Yao

Sastry, S.

C´ardenas, Alvaro A.

Citations

1221

1002

488

451

395

Table 30: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the cyber-physical systems community.

Country

United States

China

United Kingdom

Sweden

Italy

Citations

24938

2886

1633

1410

1131

period 2012–2016, during which it remained static. Currently, it is the eighth

out of the twelve communities in terms of productivity.

As seen in Figure 20, it has six sub-communities. Among them, the mutual

authentication sub-community is currently the most active.

It is primarily

concerned with “two-factor authentication” (also called mutual authentication),

which is commonly achieved by using a hardware authentication device (such

as a OTP (one-time password) generator or OTP device). The majority of

43

publications in this sub-community were made after 2006, and one of the earliest

important articles was [79], in which a two-factor authentication protocol for

wireless sensor networks was proposed.

However, one of the most active sub-communities in the past was the pass-

word sub-community. A characteristic example is [80], which proposes a secure

password authentication method that is immune to eavesdropping and tamper-

ing by an attacker. This method, which is currently widely used, involves the

use of hashed passwords. In more recent articles, a close relation to the mutual

authentication sister sub-community can be seen.

Authentication mechanisms can also be used in tandem with conﬁden-

tiality mechanisms and achieve key agreement; these are two homonymous

sub-communities. The subcommunity concerned with conﬁdentiality is cur-

rently the second most active. Finally, rﬁd (radio-frequency identiﬁcation) is

another hardware solution that can be used as a two-factor authentication token,

hence it exists as a sub-community on the authentication community.

The most inﬂuential aﬃliation country is China, leading with a small diﬀer-

ence from the second one which is Taiwan, while the United States is following

closely.

The authentication community is closely related to the cryptography

community. This is because authentication uses cryptographical elements, hence

the cryptographic protocols sub-community. For example, the Diﬃe–Hellman

key exchange, mentioned previously, uses public-key cryptography for both en-

cryption and authentication. Authentication is also closely related to the

sensor networks community, as sensors and sensors networks require authen-

tication and security methods. This relation can also be seen from the physical

layer security sub-community within the sensor networks community.

4.9. Usable Security

The Usable security community has been active since 1973, but at that

time, it was concerned more with protection motivation theory, which aims

to clarify fear appeals and proposes that people protect themselves based on a

44

Figure 20: Authentication sub-community graph.

Table 31: Most-cited articles produced by the authentication community.

Author

Paper title

Dolev, D.

On The Security of Public Key Protocols (1981) [81]

Diﬃe, W.

New Directions in Cryptography (1976) [6]

Lamport, L.

Password Authentication with Insecure Communication (1981)

[80]

Messerges,

Examining smart-card security under the threat of power anal-

T. S.

ysis attacks (2002) [82]

Burrows, M. A logic of Authentication (1990) [83]

number of diﬀerent factors. Then, in the late 1980s, the term phishing came

into existence and research that is more related to phishing, usable secu-

rity, and information security awareness began to appear. Phishing relates

to fraudulent techniques for obtaining sensitive information by disguising as a

45

Figure 21: Growth of the detected authentication sub-communities over time.

Table 32: Top publication fora in the authentication community.

Journal of Medical Systems

Security and Communication Networks

IEEE Access

Wireless Personal Communications

International Journal of Communication Systems

trustworthy entity. The earliest important article is [84], in which the protec-

tion motivation theory was founded.

Initially, the community produced a few papers per year, but after 2002, it

experienced greater growth. Currently, it is one of the smallest communities in

terms of size, and tenth out of twelve in terms of productivity.

Figure 22 shows the six sub-communities. The two largest ones are concerned

with password security and phishing. The former focuses on the study of

46

Table 33: Most-cited authors (top ﬁve) in the authentication community.

Author

Hwang, Min-Shiang

Diﬃe, Whitﬁeld

Abadi, Martin

Hellman, Martin E.

Khan, Muhammad Khurram

Citations

1906

1786

1729

1657

1423

Table 34: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the authentication community.

Country

China

Taiwan

United States

India

South Korea

Citations

21642

20289

16858

10270

5889

password habits, graphical passwords, and other password-related topics.

The phishing sub-community is concerned with both phishing and mitiga-

tion techniques for phishing (anti-phishing), which is a very modern topic of

research.

The protection motivation theory sub-community, which was histori-

cally the largest one until 2009, focuses on information security awareness and

information security policy compliance.

The cybercrime sub-community appeared in 2002 and is concerned with

studying the social networks of malware writers and hackers, the social behavior

in online black markets, and the creation of attacker proﬁles among others.

The reason for having such a sub-community is no other than the fact that

cybercrime can also be the result of low information security awareness and

phishing attacks.

Finally, the economics sub-community is concerned with the economic ef-

47

Figure 22: Usable security sub-community graph.

fect of phishing attacks and the economics of security investments, whereas the

trust sub-community with trust issues in IT systems.

Once more, the most inﬂuential aﬃliation country is the United States,

while United Kingdom comes second, and Canada is in the third place. Then

Germany and Finland are also following.

The usable security community is closely related to the malwares and

intrusion detection communities.

4.10. Access Control

The access control community is currently one of the smallest (in terms of

size) and least active. It began publishing in the middle 1970s and was primarily

concerned with role-based access control and access-control policies. One

of the most important early articles is [90], which is also the most cited in the

community. This article focuses on a certain type of access control, namely,

48

Figure 23: Growth of the detected usable security sub-communities over time.

Table 35: Most-cited articles produced by the usable security community.

Author

Paper title

Straub, D.

Coping with systems risk: Security planning models for man-

W.

agement decision making (1998) [85]

Dhamija, R. Why phishing works (2006) [86]

Herath, T.

Protection motivation and deterrence: A framework for secu-

rity policy compliance in organisations (2009) [87]

Bulgurcu, B.

Information security policy compliance: An empirical study

of rationality-based beliefs and information security awareness

(2010) [88]

Johnston, A.

Fear appeals and information security behaviors: An empirical

C.

study (2010) [89]

49

Table 36: Top publication fora in the usable security community.

Computers and Security

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceed-

ings

Computers in Human Behavior

Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-

nications Security

Decision Support Systems

Table 37: Most-cited authors (top ﬁve) in the usable security community.

Author

van Oorschot, Paul C.

Cranor, Lorrie Faith

Siponen, Mikko T.

Hong, Jason I.

Furnell, S. M.

Citations

2314

1081

647

574

488

Table 38: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the usable security community.

Country

United States

United Kingdom

Canada

Germany

Finland

Citations

35537

5444

5333

2714

1503

role-based access control (RBAC), and describes a framework in which the use

and management of RBAC can become easier and more eﬀective.

Until 2009, its member count was slowly increasing. Subsequently, it shrank,

and in the last six years, it has remained steady.

Figure 24 shows the six sub-communities. Among them, the privacy com-

50

munity has been one of the most active. However, its size has also shrunk,

following the parent community. This sub-community is concerned more with

trust and privacy issues in software applications, but it also conducts research

on policy and privacy management as well as solution enforcement. The most

important article is [91], which presented a new, at that time, trust management

system, called Policy Maker.

The security requirements sub-community is currently the second most

active. It is concerned with the study, analysis, and/or modeling of the security

and privacy requirements of existing applications, as presented, for example,

in [92]. Then, the context-aware computing sub-community is concerned

with access control mechanisms for ubiquitous computing. Finally, the grid

computing sub-community is concerned with access-control systems in grid

computing.

The most inﬂuential aﬃliation country of the whole community is the United

States leading with a signiﬁcant diﬀerence from the second one which is Italy,

while United Kingdom is following very closely.

The access control community is closely related to the cryptography and

malwares communities. The ﬁrst relation could be explained because together

with access control an authentication mechanism is needed. Malwares on the

other hand are related to access control systems because many times they can

bypass them.

4.11. Quantum Cryptography

Quantum cryptography uses quantum mechanics to perform cryptographic

tasks. The best-known example of quantum cryptography is quantum key

distribution. In our analysis, it corresponds to the smallest and least active

community. The community came into existence in the early 1980s. One of

the earliest important articles is [95], which is also one of the most cited in the

community. In this article, the fundamental requirements for achieving quan-

tum key distribution are described. The community has followed a slow but

steady growth in productivity.

51

Figure 24: Access control sub-community graph.

Table 39: Most-cited articles produced by the access control community.

Author

Paper title

Sandhu, R.

Role-based access control models (1996) [90]

Ferraiolo, D.

Proposed NIST Standard for Role-Based Access Control

F.

(2001) [93]

Blaze, M.

Decentralized trust management (1996) [91]

Sindre, G.

Eliciting security requirements by misuse cases (2000) [92]

Bertino, E.

TRBAC: A Temporal Role-Based Access Control Model (2001)

[94]

Figure 26 shows the three sub-communities. The quantum secure direct

communication sub-community is the most active. The majority of publica-

tions in this sub-community were made after 2004 and are related to achieving

secure direct communication, which is secret information that can be transmit-

52

Figure 25: Growth of the detected access control sub-communities over time.

Table 40: Top publication fora in the access control community.

Proceedings of ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and

Technologies, SACMAT

ACM Transactions on Information and System Security

Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-

nications Security

Computers and Security

Future Generation Computer Systems

ted directly through a quantum channel without the use of a private key, as for

example in [96].

The quantum key distribution sub-community is the second most active

and is concerned with key generation and distribution between two parties over

quantum communication channels.

53

Table 41: Most-cited authors (top ﬁve) in the access control community.

Author

Sandhu, Ravinderpal S.

Bertino, Elisa

Samarati, Pierangela

Li, Ninghui

Ahn, Gail-Joon

Citations

2054

1711

1128

892

738

Table 42: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the access control community.

Country

United States

Italy

United Kingdom

Germany

Canada

Citations

24210

5731

4174

2032

1015

The privacy ampliﬁcation sub-community is concerned with encryption

techniques using quantum mechanics, as for example in [97].

The absence of a “post-quantum cryptography” sub-community might be

obvious but there is an explanation for that. Since homomorphic encryption is

usually based on lattice-based methods and post-quantum encryption, the post-

quantum sub-community is absorbed and split among the fully homomorphic

encryption and McEliece cryptosystem sub-communities, which are found

within the two cryptography communities.

The most inﬂuential aﬃliation country is China, second is the United States

while Canada is following closely in the third place.

This community is closely related to the cryptography communities and

less closely related to the sensor networks and steganography communities.

54

Figure 26: Quantum cryptography sub-community graph.

Table 43: Most-cited articles produced by the quantum cryptography community.

Author

Paper title

Bennett, C.

Quantum cryptography: Public key distribution and coin toss-

H.

ing (2014) [98]

Gisin, N.

Quantum cryptography (2002) [99]

Bennett, C.

Quantum cryptography using any two nonorthogonal states

H.

(1992) [95]

Shor, P. W.

Simple proof of security of the BB84 quantum key distribution

protocol (2000) [100]

Bennett, C.

Experimental quantum cryptography (1992) [97]

H.

55

Figure 27: Growth of the detected quantum cryptography sub-communities over time.

Table 44: Top publication fora in the quantum cryptography community.

Quantum Information Processing

Optics Communications

IEEE Photonics Technology Letters

International Journal of Theoretical Physics

Quantum Science and Technology

5. Related Work

The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge (CyBOK) [101] is an ambitious at-

tempt to identify the foundational knowledge areas of the cyber security sector

and inform both academia and practitioners about them. CyBOK diﬀers from

the current work in both subject and method. CyBOK aims to organize the

cyber security knowledge rather than to understand the research community.

56

Table 45: Most-cited authors (top ﬁve) in the quantum cryptography community.

Author

Brassard, Gilles

Bennett, Charles H.

Crepeau, Claude

Salvail, Louis

Lo, Hoi-Kwong

Citations

997

866

689

332

194

Table 46: Most-cited countries (top ﬁve) in the quantum cryptography community.

Country

China

United States

Canada

Switzerland

United Kingdom

Citations

4152

3280

2931

1109

511

It employs consultation workshops with experts and online surveys as com-

pared to the present work’s quantitative analysis based on abstract and citation

databases. Finally, CyBOK aims for a balance of inputs from academia and

practitioners rather than targeting the research community. Nevertheless, there

are many interesting commonalities between the knowledge areas of CyBOK and

the researcher communities of the present work. The similarities and diﬀerences

are discussed in greater detail below.

Another recently published study by Aniqua Baset and Tamara Denning

[102] used Latent Dirichlet Allocation on a corpus of scientiﬁc articles to detect

research areas, which were then clustered into topic categories to be further

analyzed.

It diﬀers from the current work in terms of volume (3,062 papers

as compared to the 59,782 analyzed in the present work), time (1980-2015 as

compared to 1949-2020 for the present work), its focus on the abstract topics

rather than the researcher communities, and the employed analysis methods.

57

However, the presented topics have similarities with the communities discovered

in the present work. As with CyBOK, [102] and the present work are compared

below.

In addition to the two aforementioned works spanning the whole topic of

cyber security, there exist a number of literature reviews focusing on speciﬁc

subtopics, such as cross-site scripting [103], information security management

[104], security awareness [105], security and privacy in health [106], cloud com-

puting risk [107], information security policy compliance [108], cyber situational

awareness [109], digital forensics [110], phishing [111], threat modeling [112], and

security requirements engineering [113].

There is also work employing similar methods as the current, but targeting

other research areas. An example of such work is [114], where a similar au-

tomated approach for collecting and analyzing abstract and citation data was

used.

5.1. Comparison to CyBoK

Since CyBoK [101] aims to identify the top knowledge areas (KAs) of cyber

security, it constitutes a relevant object of comparison.

In Figure 28, a comparison matrix between CyBoK and our work is pre-

sented. While there is a large overlap between the CyBOK knowledge areas

and the researcher communities identiﬁed in the current work, there are some

notable diﬀerences.

The quantum cryptography community is not found under any CyBOK

knowledge area or knowledge area sub-category. Furthermore, information

hiding and biometrics constitute signiﬁcant research communities, but fea-

tures less prominently in CyBOK. It is also noteworthy that cryptography is

the overwhelmingly dominant research community, but does not appear to hold

a similar position in CyBOK.

As compared to CyBOK, precious little research was identiﬁed in the ﬁelds

of laws and regulation, as this topic did not even qualify for a sub-community.

Additional CyBoK KAs that are only sparsely represented by the detected com-

58

Figure 28: Comparison matrix between CyBoK and our Communities in cyber security.

59

CyBoK vs. Reseach Communities in CybersecurityCryptography (I & II)Sensor NetworksInformation HidingIntrusion DetectionMalwaresBiometricsCyber-physical SystemsAuthenticationUsable SecurityAccess ControlQuantum CryptographyHuman, Organisational & Regulatory AspectsRisk Management & GovernanceLaw & RegulationHuman FactorsPrivacy & Online RightsAttacks & DefensesMalware & Attack TechnologiesAdverarial BehavioursSecurity Operations & Incident ManagementForensicsSystem SecurityCryptographyOperating Systems & Virtualisation SecurityDistributed Systems SecurityAuthentication, Authorisation & AccountabilitySoftware Platform SecuritySoftware SecurityWeb & Mobile SecuritySecure Software LifecycleInfrastructure SecurityNetwork SecurityHardware SecurityCyber Physical SystemsPhysical Layer & Telecommunications SecurityExists as a Knowledge Area (KA)Exists as a sub-category of a KAOnly a part of it found under a sub-category of a KANot found under any KA or sub-categoryKA is represented by a sub-communitiy in Research CommunitiesKA is sparsely represented (by few articles) in Research CommunitiesKA is not represented in Research CommunitiesCyBoK KA CategoriesLegend1. Mapping from Research Communities in Cybersecurity to CyBoK2. Mapping from CyBoK to Research Communities in Cybersecuritymunities include risk management and governance and security software lifecy-

cle.

Finally, the mid-sized malwares community covers aspects of several Cy-

BOK knowledge areas, including malware & attack technologies, adversarial

behaviors, forensics, operating systems & virtualization security, and software

security, thus indicating another diﬀerence in emphasis between the research

communities and CyBOK.

5.2. Comparison to Baset and Denning

As mentioned above, Baset and Denning [102] uses Latent Dirichlet Alloca-

tion to identify the topics in security and privacy research. In their article, 95

research topics were identiﬁed and categorized in 20 topic categories.

In Figure 29, a comparison matrix between Baset and Denning [102] and our

work is presented. The matrix demonstrates that all of Baset and Dennings’

topics are either fully or partially represented by at least one sub-community.

Considering the coverage of Baset and Denning’s topics, we note that quantum

cryptography was not present in any of their topic categories, which was also the

case for CyBOK [101]. There is perfect alignment between the present and Baset

and Denning’s work for the “crypto” and “malware” topic categories. Consid-

ering the researcher communities’ coverage of Baset and Denning’s topics, the

“formalism” and “methods” topics are the least represented by the communities

detected on our work. It appears that these topics are distributed over many

diﬀerent communities.

It is not surprising that there are diﬀerences between the present and Baset

and Denning’s work. Latent Dirichlet Allocation considers the textual content

of articles, while community detection is focused on the authors of those articles.

One beneﬁt of Latent Dirichlet Allocation is precisely the ability to abstract from

the research process and organization, solely considering the produced results.

Ideally, this approach would produce something similar to CyBOK, which also

focuses on the abstract subject areas.

The citation relationships between researchers as presented in the present

60

Figure 29: Comparison matrix between Baset and Denning [102] and here reported commu-

nities in cyber security.

61

Data-driven reflection on 36 years of security and privacy research vs. Reseach Communities in CybersecurityCryptography (I & II)Sensor NetworksInformation HidingIntrusion DetectionMalwaresBiometricsCyber-physical SystemsAuthenticationUsable SecurityAccess ControlQuantum CryptographyCrypto(graphy)TrustFormalismSystemHardwareNetworksWebAuth(entication)ComputationDataMalwareProgramsInformation LeakageInternetMobileCrime & fraudAnonymity & CensorshipVirtualMiscellaneousMethodsTopic exists as a community in Research CommunitiesTopic is represented by a sub-communitiy in Research CommunitiesTopic is sparsely represented (by few articles) in Research CommunitiesTopic is not represented in Research CommunitiesLegendMapping from 36 years of security and privacy to Research Communities in Cybersecuritywork is complementary to that of CyBOK and Baset and Denning.

It pro-

vides information on the inﬂuence of one ﬁeld on another, on the evolution of

ideas, as well as on occasional topically inexplicable researcher behavior, such as

why similar sub-communities sometimes maintain a distance. It also provides

information on the geographical and organizational inﬂuence on diﬀerent ﬁelds.

6. Discussion

There are a number of potential objections to the reliability and validity of

the results presented in this article. That we only included the 59,782 most

cited of the 320,907 articles might aﬀect the results of the study. However, most

of the omitted articles have less than a single digit number of citations and are

therefore arguably unlikely to aﬀect the community detection procedure.

Another threat to the validity of this study may be that older articles have

received more citations than newer, simply because time has provided them

more possibilities to be cited. This bias emphasizes older research over newer,

and may thus also emphasize old research communities over newer ones. Time-

normalizing citation counts is, however, not trivial, as citations are not neces-

sarily a linear function of time - some articles continue to be cited long after

publishing, while others do not, for instance. However, the results section pro-

vides plots of the annual article count per sub-community. These plots, such as

Figure 3, inform about the relative importance of sub-communities at diﬀerent

points in time, allowing an unbiased determination of the research emphasis in

recent years.

There is also the question of where the line is drawn for what constitutes a

sub-community. We have deﬁned it by a lower limit to the number of included

authors. It would be possible to use other or additional criteria, such as the

total number of citations.

Finally, the selection of Scopus as the (single) source of data has surely

aﬀected the results in terms of completeness. However, in addition to its broad

coverage, Scopus also provides the application programming interface access

62

which was required for this study.

7. Summary

By analyzing the most-cited scientiﬁc articles of 98,373 authors in the cyber

security and information security domains, we were able to detect 12 research

communities and sort them based on their current activity level: cryptography

(I & II), sensor networks, information hiding, intrusion detection, malwares, bio-

metrics, cyber-physical systems, authentication, usable security, access control,

and quantum cryptography.

For each of these communities, we presented, among others, an overview

of their topics, a discussion on their evolution over time, the sub-communities

involved, and the most-cited articles.

As compared to related work aiming to represent both academia and practi-

tioners, the presented research communities appear to place a greater emphasis

on cryptography, quantum cryptography, information hiding and biometrics,

at the expense of laws and regulation, risk management and governance, and

security software lifecycle.

References

[1] T. S. Kuhn, The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions, University of Chicago

Press, 1970.

[2] M. Gusenbauer, N. R. Haddaway, Which academic search sys-

tems are suitable for systematic reviews or meta-analyses?

eval-

uating

retrieval qualities

of

google

scholar,

pubmed,

and 26

other resources, Research Synthesis Methods n/a (n/a).

arXiv:

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/jrsm.1378,

doi:10.1002/jrsm.1378.

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jrsm.

URL

1378

63

[3] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, E. Lefebvre, Fast unfolding

of communities in large networks, Journal of statistical mechanics: theory

and experiment 2008 (10) (2008) P10008.

[4] R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, L. Adleman, A method for obtaining digital

signatures and public-key cryptosystems, Commun. ACM 21 (2) (1978)

120–126. doi:10.1145/359340.359342.

URL https://doi-org.focus.lib.kth.se/10.1145/359340.359342

[5] D. Boneh, M. Franklin, Identity-based encryption from the weil pairing,

in: J. Kilian (Ed.), Advances in Cryptology — CRYPTO 2001, Springer

Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001, pp. 213–229.

[6] W. Diﬃe, M. Hellman, New directions in cryptography, IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theor. 22 (6) (2006) 644–654. doi:10.1109/TIT.1976.1055638.

URL

https://doi-org.focus.lib.kth.se/10.1109/TIT.1976.

1055638

[7] A. J. Menezes, S. A. Vanstone, P. C. V. Oorschot, Handbook of Applied

Cryptography, 1st Edition, CRC Press, Inc., USA, 1996.

[8] A. Shamir, How to share a secret, Commun. ACM 22 (11) (1979) 612–613.

doi:10.1145/359168.359176.

URL https://doi-org.focus.lib.kth.se/10.1145/359168.359176

[9] P. Kocher, J. Jaﬀe, B. Jun, Diﬀerential power analysis, in: M. Wiener

(Ed.), Advances in Cryptology — CRYPTO’ 99, Springer Berlin Heidel-

berg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1999, pp. 388–397.

[10] A. Shamir, Identity-based cryptosystems and signature schemes, in: Pro-

ceedings of CRYPTO 84 on Advances in Cryptology, Springer-Verlag,

Berlin, Heidelberg, 1985, p. 47–53.

[11] T. Elgamal, A public key cryptosystem and a signature scheme based

on discrete logarithms, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 31 (4)

(1985) 469–472. doi:10.1109/TIT.1985.1057074.

64

[12] M. Bellare, P. Rogaway, Random oracles are practical: A paradigm for

designing eﬃcient protocols, in: Proceedings of the 1st ACM Conference

on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’93, Association for

Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1993, p. 62–73. doi:10.

1145/168588.168596.

URL https://doi-org.focus.lib.kth.se/10.1145/168588.168596

[13] P. Paillier, Public-key cryptosystems based on composite degree residuos-

ity classes, in: J. Stern (Ed.), Advances in Cryptology — EUROCRYPT

’99, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1999, pp. 223–238.

[14] S. Goldwasser, Probabilistic encryption: Theory and applications (par-

tial information, factoring, pseudo random bit generation), Ph.D. thesis,

aAI8512835 (1984).

[15] R. Canetti, Universally composable security: a new paradigm for cryp-

tographic protocols, in: Proceedings 42nd IEEE Symposium on Founda-

tions of Computer Science, 2001, pp. 136–145. doi:10.1109/SFCS.2001.

959888.

[16] H. Feistel, Cryptography and Computer Privacy, Scientiﬁc American,

1973.

URL https://books.google.se/books?id=0iYEzQEACAAJ

[17] J. Daemen, V. Rijmen, The Design of Rijndael, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

Heidelberg, 2002.

[18] M. Matsui, Linear cryptanalysis method for des cipher, in: Workshop on

the Theory and Application of Cryptographic Techniques on Advances in

Cryptology, EUROCRYPT ’93, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1994,

p. 386–397.

[19] D. Agrawal, S. Baktir, D. Karakoyunlu, P. Rohatgi, B. Sunar, Trojan

detection using ic ﬁngerprinting, in: Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE Sym-

posium on Security and Privacy, SP ’07, IEEE Computer Society, USA,

65

2007, p. 296–310. doi:10.1109/SP.2007.36.

URL https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2007.36

[20] M. Tehranipoor, F. Koushanfar, A survey of hardware trojan taxonomy

and detection, IEEE Des. Test 27 (1) (2010) 10–25. doi:10.1109/MDT.

2010.7.

URL https://doi.org/10.1109/MDT.2010.7

[21] G. E. Suh, S. Devadas, Physical unclonable functions for device authen-

tication and secret key generation, in: Proceedings of the 44th Annual

Design Automation Conference, DAC ’07, Association for Computing Ma-

chinery, New York, NY, USA, 2007, p. 9–14. doi:10.1145/1278480.

1278484.

URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1278480.1278484

[22] V. S. Miller, Use of elliptic curves in cryptography, in: Lecture Notes

in Computer Sciences; 218 on Advances in Cryptology—CRYPTO 85,

Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1986, p. 417–426.

[23] N. Koblitz, Elliptic curve cryptosystems, Mathematics of computation

48 (177) (1987) 203–209.

[24] C. Gentry, Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices, in: Pro-

ceedings of the Forty-First Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Com-

puting, STOC ’09, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,

USA, 2009, p. 169–178. doi:10.1145/1536414.1536440.

URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1536414.1536440

[25] D. Boneh, G. Di Crescenzo, R. Ostrovsky, G. Persiano, Public key encryp-

tion with keyword search, in: C. Cachin, J. L. Camenisch (Eds.), Advances

in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2004, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,

Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 506–522.

[26] L. Sweeney, K-anonymity: A model for protecting privacy, Int. J. Un-

certain. Fuzziness Knowl.-Based Syst. 10 (5) (2002) 557–570.

doi:

66

10.1142/S0218488502001648.

URL https://doi.org/10.1142/S0218488502001648

[27] J. Bethencourt, A. Sahai, B. Waters, Ciphertext-policy attribute-based

encryption, in: Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE Symposium on Security

and Privacy, SP ’07, IEEE Computer Society, USA, 2007, p. 321–334.

doi:10.1109/SP.2007.11.

URL https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2007.11

[28] A. Beneﬁt, The evolution of wireless sensor networks (2013).

URL

https://www.silabs.com/documents/public/white-papers/

evolution-of-wireless-sensor-networks.pdf

[29] Vipul Gupta, M. Millard, S. Fung, Y. Zhu, N. Gura, H. Eberle, S. C.

Shantz, Sizzle: a standards-based end-to-end security architecture for

the embedded internet,

in: Third IEEE International Conference on

Pervasive Computing and Communications, 2005, pp. 247–256. doi:

10.1109/PERCOM.2005.41.

[30] M. Bloch, J. Barros, M. R. Rodrigues, S. W. McLaughlin, Wireless

information-theoretic security, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theor. 54 (6) (2008)

2515–2534. doi:10.1109/TIT.2008.921908.

URL https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2008.921908

[31] L. Eschenauer, V. D. Gligor, A key-management scheme for distributed

sensor networks, in: Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Computer

and Communications Security, CCS ’02, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2002,

pp. 41–47. doi:10.1145/586110.586117.

URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/586110.586117

[32] M. Raya, J.-P. Hubaux, Securing vehicular ad hoc networks, J. Comput.

Secur. 15 (1) (2007) 39–68.

[33] A. Perrig, R. Szewczyk, J. Tygar, V. Wen, D. E. Culler, Spins: Security

protocols for sensor networks, Wireless Networks 8 (5) (2002) 521–534.

67

doi:10.1023/A:1016598314198.

URL https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1016598314198

[34] C. Karlof, D. Wagner, Secure routing in wireless sensor networks: attacks

and countermeasures, in: Proceedings of the First IEEE International

Workshop on Sensor Network Protocols and Applications, 2003., 2003,

pp. 113–127. doi:10.1109/SNPA.2003.1203362.

[35] Haowen Chan, A. Perrig, D. Song, Random key predistribution schemes

for sensor networks, in: 2003 Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2003.,

2003, pp. 197–213. doi:10.1109/SECPRI.2003.1199337.

[36] J. R. Douceur, The sybil attack, in: P. Druschel, F. Kaashoek, A. Row-

stron (Eds.), Peer-to-Peer Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,

Heidelberg, 2002, pp. 251–260.

[37] C. E. Shannon, Communication theory of secrecy systems, The Bell

System Technical Journal 28 (4) (1949) 656–715.

doi:10.1002/j.

1538-7305.1949.tb00928.x.

[38] F. Hartung, M. Kutter, Multimedia watermarking techniques, Proceed-

ings of the IEEE 87 (7) (1999) 1079–1107. doi:10.1109/5.771066.

[39] G. Chen, Y. Mao, C. K. Chui, A symmetric image encryption scheme

based on 3d chaotic cat maps, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 21 (3) (2004)

749 – 761. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2003.12.022.

URL

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

S0960077903006672

[40] Jun Tian, Reversible data embedding using a diﬀerence expansion, IEEE

Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 13 (8) (2003)

890–896. doi:10.1109/TCSVT.2003.815962.

[41] I. J. Cox, J. Kilian, F. T. Leighton, T. Shamoon, Secure spread spectrum

watermarking for multimedia, IEEE transactions on image processing : a

publication of the IEEE Signal Processing Society 6 12 (1997) 1673–87.

68

[42] F. A. P. Petitcolas, R. J. Anderson, M. G. Kuhn, Information hiding-a

survey, Proceedings of the IEEE 87 (7) (1999) 1062–1078. doi:10.1109/

5.771065.

[43] S. Forrest, S. A. Hofmeyr, A. Somayaji, T. A. Longstaﬀ, A sense of self for

unix processes, in: Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Security

and Privacy, SP ’96, IEEE Computer Society, USA, 1996, p. 120.

[44] P. Ammann, D. Wijesekera, S. Kaushik, Scalable, graph-based network

vulnerability analysis, in: Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on

Computer and Communications Security, ACM, 2002, pp. 217–224.

[45] D. E. Denning, An intrusion-detection model, IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng.

13 (2) (1987) 222–232. doi:10.1109/TSE.1987.232894.

URL https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.1987.232894

[46] S. Savage, D. Wetherall, A. Karlin, T. Anderson, Practical network sup-

port for ip traceback, in: ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication

Review, Vol. 30, ACM, 2000, pp. 295–306.

[47] S. Dharmapurikar, P. Krishnamurthy, T. S. Sproull, J. W. Lockwood,

Deep packet inspection using parallel bloom ﬁlters, IEEE Micro 24 (1)

(2004) 52–61. doi:10.1109/MM.2004.1268997.

URL https://doi.org/10.1109/MM.2004.1268997

[48] K. Lakkaraju, W. Yurcik, A. J. Lee, Nvisionip: Netﬂow visualizations of

system state for security situational awareness, in: Proceedings of the 2004

ACM Workshop on Visualization and Data Mining for Computer Security,

VizSEC/DMSEC ’04, Association for Computing Machinery, New York,

NY, USA, 2004, p. 65–72. doi:10.1145/1029208.1029219.

URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1029208.1029219

[49] C. Modi, D. Patel, B. Borisaniya, H. Patel, A. Patel, M. Rajarajan, Re-

view: A survey of intrusion detection techniques in cloud, J. Netw. Com-

69

put. Appl. 36 (1) (2013) 42–57. doi:10.1016/j.jnca.2012.05.003.

URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2012.05.003

[50] R. Braga, Braga, E. Mota, Mota, A. Passito, Passito, Lightweight ddos

ﬂooding attack detection using nox/openﬂow, in: Proceedings of the 2010

IEEE 35th Conference on Local Computer Networks, LCN ’10, IEEE

Computer Society, USA, 2010, p. 408–415.

doi:10.1109/LCN.2010.

5735752.

URL https://doi.org/10.1109/LCN.2010.5735752

[51] S. Shin, V. Yegneswaran, P. Porras, G. Gu, Avant-guard: Scalable and

vigilant switch ﬂow management in software-deﬁned networks, in: Pro-

ceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer & Commu-

nications Security, CCS ’13, Association for Computing Machinery, New

York, NY, USA, 2013, p. 413–424. doi:10.1145/2508859.2516684.

URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2508859.2516684

[52] J. McHugh, Testing intrusion detection systems: A critique of the 1998

and 1999 darpa intrusion detection system evaluations as performed by

lincoln laboratory, ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur. 3 (4) (2000) 262–294.

doi:10.1145/382912.382923.

URL https://doi.org/10.1145/382912.382923

[53] O. Sheyner, J. Haines, S. Jha, R. Lippmann, J. M. Wing, Automated gen-

eration and analysis of attack graphs, in: Proceedings 2002 IEEE Sympo-

sium on Security and Privacy, 2002, pp. 273–284. doi:10.1109/SECPRI.

2002.1004377.

[54] R. P. Lippmann, D. J. Fried, I. Graf, J. W. Haines, K. R. Kendall, D. Mc-

Clung, D. Weber, S. E. Webster, D. Wyschogrod, R. K. Cunningham,

M. A. Zissman, Evaluating intrusion detection systems: the 1998 darpa

oﬀ-line intrusion detection evaluation, in: Proceedings DARPA Informa-

tion Survivability Conference and Exposition. DISCEX’00, Vol. 2, 2000,

pp. 12–26 vol.2. doi:10.1109/DISCEX.2000.821506.

70

[55] D. E. Denning, P. J. Denning, Certiﬁcation of programs for secure infor-

mation ﬂow, Communications of the ACM 20 (7) (1977) 504–513.

[56] J. A. Goguen, J. Meseguer, Security policies and security models, in: 1982

IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, IEEE, 1982, pp. 11–11.

[57] F. Cohen, Computer viruses: theory and experiments, Computers & se-

curity 6 (1) (1987) 22–35.

[58] J. O. Kephart, S. R. White, Directed-graph epidemiological models of

computer viruses, in: Computation: the micro and the macro view, World

Scientiﬁc, 1992, pp. 71–102.

[59] W. Enck, P. Gilbert, S. Han, V. Tendulkar, B.-G. Chun, L. P. Cox, J. Jung,

P. McDaniel, A. N. Sheth, Taintdroid: an information-ﬂow tracking sys-

tem for realtime privacy monitoring on smartphones, ACM Transactions

on Computer Systems (TOCS) 32 (2) (2014) 5.

[60] M. G. Schultz, E. Eskin, F. Zadok, S. J. Stolfo, Data mining methods

for detection of new malicious executables, in: Proceedings 2001 IEEE

Symposium on Security and Privacy. S&P 2001, IEEE, 2000, pp. 38–49.

[61] Y. Zhou, X. Jiang, Dissecting android malware: Characterization and

evolution, in: 2012 IEEE symposium on security and privacy, IEEE, 2012,

pp. 95–109.

[62] L. Huang, A. D. Joseph, B. Nelson, B. I. Rubinstein, J. D. Tygar,

Adversarial machine learning, in: Proceedings of the 4th ACM Work-

shop on Security and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AISec ’11, Association for

Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2011, p. 43–58.

doi:

10.1145/2046684.2046692.

URL https://doi-org.focus.lib.kth.se/10.1145/2046684.2046692

[63] A. Sabelfeld, A. C. Myers, Language-based information-ﬂow security,

IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 21 (1) (2003) 5–19.

doi:10.1109/JSAC.2002.806121.

71

[64] A. P. Felt, E. Chin, S. Hanna, D. Song, D. Wagner, Android permissions

demystiﬁed, in: Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer

and Communications Security, CCS ’11, Association for Computing Ma-

chinery, New York, NY, USA, 2011, p. 627–638. doi:10.1145/2046707.

2046779.

URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2046707.2046779

[65] W. Enck, M. Ongtang, P. McDaniel, On lightweight mobile phone ap-

plication certiﬁcation, in: Proceedings of the 16th ACM conference on

Computer and communications security, ACM, 2009, pp. 235–245.

[66] U. Uludag, S. Pankanti, S. Prabhakar, A. K. Jain, Biometric cryptosys-

tems: issues and challenges, Proceedings of the IEEE 92 (6) (2004) 948–

960. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2004.827372.

[67] G. I. Davida, Y. Frankel, B. J. Matt, On enabling secure applications

through oﬀ-line biometric identiﬁcation, in: Proceedings. 1998 IEEE Sym-

posium on Security and Privacy (Cat. No.98CB36186), 1998, pp. 148–157.

doi:10.1109/SECPRI.1998.674831.

[68] J. Schiﬀ, M. Meingast, D. K. Mulligan, S. Sastry, K. Goldberg, Respect-

ful Cameras: Detecting Visual Markers in Real-Time to Address Privacy

Concerns, Springer London, London, 2009, pp. 65–89.

[69] R. Joyce, G. Gupta, Identity authentication based on keystroke latencies,

Commun. ACM 33 (2) (1990) 168–176. doi:10.1145/75577.75582.

URL https://doi.org/10.1145/75577.75582

[70] A. K. Jain, A. Ross, S. Prabhakar, An introduction to biometric recog-

nition, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology

14 (1) (2004) 4–20. doi:10.1109/TCSVT.2003.818349.

[71] A. Juels, M. Wattenberg, A fuzzy commitment scheme, in: Proceedings

of the 6th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security,

CCS ’99, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1999, pp. 28–36. doi:10.1145/

72

319709.319714.

URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/319709.319714

[72] N. K. Ratha, J. H. Connell, R. M. Bolle, Enhancing security and privacy

in biometrics-based authentication systems, IBM systems Journal 40 (3)

(2001) 614–634.

[73] N. K. Ratha, S. Chikkerur, J. H. Connell, R. M. Bolle, Generating can-

celable ﬁngerprint templates, IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and

machine intelligence 29 (4) (2007) 561–572.

[74] S. Sridhar, A. Hahn, M. Govindarasu, Cyber–physical system security for

the electric power grid, Proceedings of the IEEE 100 (1) (2012) 210–224.

doi:10.1109/JPROC.2011.2165269.

[75] Y. Liu, P. Ning, M. K. Reiter, False data injection attacks against state

estimation in electric power grids, in: Proceedings of the 16th ACM Con-

ference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’09, ACM, New

York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 21–32. doi:10.1145/1653662.1653666.

URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1653662.1653666

[76] F. Pasqualetti, F. D¨orﬂer, F. Bullo, Attack detection and identiﬁcation in

cyber-physical systems, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 58 (11)

(2013) 2715–2729. doi:10.1109/TAC.2013.2266831.

[77] K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, S. Patel, T. Kohno, S. Checkoway,

D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. Shacham, et al., Experimental

security analysis of a modern automobile, in: Security and Privacy (SP),

2010 IEEE Symposium on, IEEE, 2010, pp. 447–462.

[78] O. Kosut, L. Jia, R. J. Thomas, L. Tong, Malicious data attacks on the

smart grid, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 2 (4) (2011) 645–658. doi:

10.1109/TSG.2011.2163807.

[79] M. L. Das, Two-factor user authentication in wireless sensor networks,

Trans. Wireless. Comm. 8 (3) (2009) 1086–1090. doi:10.1109/TWC.2008.

73

080128.

URL https://doi.org/10.1109/TWC.2008.080128

[80] L. Lamport, Password authentication with insecure communication, Com-

mun. ACM 24 (11) (1981) 770–772. doi:10.1145/358790.358797.

URL https://doi.org/10.1145/358790.358797

[81] D. Dolev, A. Yao, On the security of public key protocols, IEEE Transac-

tions on information theory 29 (2) (1983) 198–208.

[82] T. S. Messerges, E. A. Dabbish, R. H. Sloan, Examining smart-card se-

curity under the threat of power analysis attacks, IEEE transactions on

computers 51 (5) (2002) 541–552.

[83] M. Burrows, M. Abadi, R. Needham, A logic of authentication, ACM

Trans. Comput. Syst. 8 (1) (1990) 18–36. doi:10.1145/77648.77649.

URL https://doi-org.focus.lib.kth.se/10.1145/77648.77649

[84] R. W. Rogers, A protection motivation theory of fear appeals and atti-

tude change1, The Journal of Psychology 91 (1) (1975) 93–114, pMID:

28136248. doi:10.1080/00223980.1975.9915803.

URL https://doi.org/10.1080/00223980.1975.9915803

[85] D. W. Straub, R. J. Welke, Coping with systems risk: security planning

models for management decision making, MIS quarterly (1998) 441–469.

[86] R. Dhamija, J. D. Tygar, M. Hearst, Why phishing works, in: Proceedings

of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems, ACM,

2006, pp. 581–590.

[87] T. Herath, H. R. Rao, Protection motivation and deterrence: a frame-

work for security policy compliance in organisations, European Journal of

Information Systems 18 (2) (2009) 106–125. doi:10.1057/ejis.2009.6.

[88] B. Bulgurcu, H. Cavusoglu, I. Benbasat, Information security policy

compliance: An empirical study of rationality-based beliefs and infor-

74

mation security awareness, MIS Quarterly 34 (2010) 523–548.

doi:

10.2307/25750690.

[89] A. C. Johnston, M. Warkentin, Fear appeals and information security

behaviors: An empirical study, MIS Q. 34 (3) (2010) 549–566.

[90] R. S. Sandhu, E. J. Coyne, H. L. Feinstein, C. E. Youman, Role-based

access control models, Computer 29 (2) (1996) 38–47. doi:10.1109/2.

485845.

URL https://doi-org.focus.lib.kth.se/10.1109/2.485845

[91] M. Blaze, J. Feigenbaum, J. Lacy, Decentralized trust management, in:

Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Conference on Security and Privacy, SP’96,

IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 1996, pp. 164–173.

URL

http://dl.acm.org.focus.lib.kth.se/citation.cfm?id=

1947337.1947361

[92] G. Sindre, A. L. Opdahl, Eliciting security requirements by misuse cases,

in: Proceedings 37th International Conference on Technology of Object-

Oriented Languages and Systems. TOOLS-Paciﬁc 2000, 2000, pp. 120–

131. doi:10.1109/TOOLS.2000.891363.

[93] D. F. Ferraiolo, R. Sandhu, S. Gavrila, D. R. Kuhn, R. Chandramouli,

Proposed nist standard for role-based access control, ACM Trans. Inf.

Syst. Secur. 4 (3) (2001) 224–274. doi:10.1145/501978.501980.

http://doi.acm.org.focus.lib.kth.se/10.1145/501978.

URL

501980

[94] E. Bertino, P. A. Bonatti, E. Ferrari, Trbac: A temporal role-based

access control model, ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur. 4 (3) (2001) 191–233.

doi:10.1145/501978.501979.

http://doi.acm.org.focus.lib.kth.se/10.1145/501978.

URL

501979

75

[95] C. H. Bennett, Quantum cryptography using any two nonorthogo-

nal states, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 (1992) 3121–3124.

doi:10.1103/

PhysRevLett.68.3121.

URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.68.3121

[96] F.-G. Deng, G. L. Long, Secure direct communication with a quantum one-

time pad, Physical Review A 69 (5). doi:10.1103/physreva.69.052319.

URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.69.052319

[97] C. H. Bennett, F. Bessette, G. Brassard, L. Salvail, J. Smolin, Experi-

mental quantum cryptography, Journal of Cryptology 5 (1) (1992) 3–28.

doi:10.1007/BF00191318.

URL https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00191318

[98] C. Bennett, D. Zekrifa, Quantum cryptography: Public key distribution

and coin tossing. in proceedings of ieee international conference on com-

puters, systems and signal processing (2014) 175–179.

[99] N. Gisin, G. Ribordy, W. Tittel, H. Zbinden, Quantum cryptography,

Rev. Mod. Phys. 74 (2002) 145–195. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.74.145.

URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.74.145

[100] P. W. Shor, J. Preskill, Simple proof of security of the bb84 quantum key

distribution protocol, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 441–444. doi:10.1103/

PhysRevLett.85.441.

URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.85.441

[101] J. Hallett, R. Larson, A. Rashid, Mirror, mirror, on the wall: What are

we teaching them all? characterising the focus of cybersecurity curricular

frameworks,

in:

2018 USENIX Workshop on Advances in Security

Education (ASE 18), USENIX Association, Baltimore, MD, 2018.

URL

https://www.usenix.org/conference/ase18/presentation/

hallett

76

[102] A. Baset, T. Denning, A data-driven reﬂection on 36 years of security

and privacy research, in: 12th USENIX Workshop on Cyber Security

Experimentation and Test (CSET 19), USENIX Association, Santa

Clara, CA, 2019.

URL

https://www.usenix.org/conference/cset19/presentation/

baset

[103] I. Hydara, A. B. M. Sultan, H. Zulzalil, N. Admodisastro, Current state

of research on cross-site scripting (xss)–a systematic literature review,

Information and Software Technology 58 (2015) 170–186.

[104] Z. A. Soomro, M. H. Shah, J. Ahmed, Information security management

needs more holistic approach: A literature review, International Journal

of Information Management 36 (2) (2016) 215–225.

[105] B. Lebek, J. Uﬀen, M. H. Breitner, M. Neumann, B. Hohler, Employ-

ees’ information security awareness and behavior: A literature review, in:

System Sciences (HICSS), 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on,

IEEE, 2013, pp. 2978–2987.

[106] J. L. Fern´andez-Alem´an, I. C. Se˜nor, P. ´A. O. Lozoya, A. Toval, Security

and privacy in electronic health records: A systematic literature review,

Journal of biomedical informatics 46 (3) (2013) 541–562.

[107] R. Latif, H. Abbas, S. Assar, Q. Ali, Cloud computing risk assessment: a

systematic literature review, in: Future Information Technology, Springer,

2014, pp. 285–295.

[108] T. Sommestad, J. Hallberg, K. Lundholm, J. Bengtsson, Variables in-

ﬂuencing information security policy compliance: a systematic review

of quantitative studies, Information Management & Computer Security

22 (1) (2014) 42–75.

[109] U. Franke, J. Brynielsson, Cyber situational awareness–a systematic re-

view of the literature, Computers & security 46 (2014) 18–31.

77

[110] S. Alharbi, J. Weber-Jahnke, I. Traore, The proactive and reactive digital

forensics investigation process: A systematic literature review, in:

In-

ternational Conference on Information Security and Assurance, Springer,

2011, pp. 87–100.

[111] S. Das, A. Kim, Z. Tingle, C. Nippert-Eng, All about phishing: Explor-

ing user research through a systematic literature review, arXiv preprint

arXiv:1908.05897.

[112] W. Xiong, R. Lagerstr¨om, Threat modeling–a systematic literature re-

view, Computers & Security.

[113] D. Mellado, C. Blanco, L. E. S´anchez, E. Fern´andez-Medina, A system-

atic review of security requirements engineering, Computer Standards &

Interfaces 32 (4) (2010) 153–165.

[114] M. V. M¨antyl¨a, D. Graziotin, M. Kuutila, The evolution of sentiment anal-

ysis—a review of research topics, venues, and top cited papers, Computer

Science Review 27 (2018) 16–32. doi:10.1016/j.cosrev.2017.10.002.

URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2017.10.002

78

