Program Behavior Analysis and Clustering using Performance
Counters
Akella Kartheek∗
BITS-Pilani Hyderabad, India
sukruthkartheek@gmail.com

Tram Truong-Huu
I2R, A*STAR, Singapore
truonght@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Sai Praveen Kadiyala
I2R, A*STAR, Singapore
saipk@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

1
2
0
2

r
p
A
4

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
1
5
1
0
.
4
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Understanding the dynamic behavior of computer programs during
normal working conditions is an important task, which has mul-
tiple security benefits such as the development of behavior-based
anomaly detection, vulnerability discovery, and patching. Existing
works achieved this goal by collecting and analyzing various data
including network traffic, system calls, instruction traces, etc. In
this paper, we explore the use of a new type of data, performance
counters, to analyze the dynamic behavior of programs. Using ex-
isting primitives, we develop a tool named perfextract to capture
data from different performance counters for a program during its
startup time, thus forming multiple time series to represent the
dynamic behavior of the program. We analyze the collected data
and develop a semi-supervised clustering algorithm that allows us
to classify each program using its performance counter time series
into a specific group and to identify the intrinsic behavior of that
group. We carry out extensive experiments with 18 real-world pro-
grams that belong to 4 groups including web browsers, text editors,
image viewers, and audio players. The experimental results show
that the examined programs can be accurately differentiated based
on their performance counter data regardless of whether programs
are run in physical or virtual environments.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy → Malware and its mitigation; Intru-
sion/anomaly detection and malware mitigation.

KEYWORDS
Performance counters, Dynamic behavior analysis, Time series
clustering

ACM Reference Format:
Sai Praveen Kadiyala, Akella Kartheek, and Tram Truong-Huu. 2020. Pro-
gram Behavior Analysis and Clustering using Performance Counters. In
DYNAMICS 2020: DYnamic and Novel Advances in Machine Learning and Intel-
ligent Cyber Security (DYNAMICS) Workshop, Dec. 07, 2020, Texas, USA. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

∗This work has been done when the author was with I2R, A*STAR, Singapore.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
DYNAMICS 2020, Dec. 07, 2020, Texas, USA
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
The latest trends in program analysis show an increase in empha-
sis on the dynamic approach compared to the static approach [7].
In the dynamic approach, programs are executed in a controlled
environment and their behavior is observed during the execution
time. The interaction of programs with the operating system (OS)
and generated data during the execution are collected and analyzed.
High-level features such as application programming interface (API)
calls, network traffic and registry changes have demonstrated the
effectiveness [2, 6, 10, 15]. However, programs are increasingly
sophisticated, especially malicious programs (malware), which usu-
ally exhibit evasive behavior when being run in a controlled ex-
ecution environment. This motivates the research community to
explore the use of low-level features such as performance counters
as they are more resistant to external attacks [4, 5, 11]. Perfor-
mance counters have been initially introduced for the purpose of
analyzing complex systems for debugging related issues. With the
help of available digital logic that increments the counters after the
occurrence of a specific event, these counters keep track of vari-
ous micro-architectural events, thus enabling dynamic monitoring
of program behavior. We believe that performance counter-based
profilers give deeper insights into system dynamics with lower
overhead compared to their software profiler counterparts. Never-
theless, performance counter data also has its own drawback related
to the non-determinism characteristic: several performance coun-
ters generate different values at different execution times [3]. This
makes the program analysis task based on performance counters
more challenging, thus requiring a more robust approach.

Advocating the use of performance counters, we carry out in
this work an empirical study on program behavior analysis using
a machine learning technique. We propose a data collection ap-
proach that could overcome the drawback of performance counter
data discussed above. Precisely, rather than collecting performance
counters data just at only one time instant and use this data as the
sole input for analysis, we propose to collect performance counters
of a program over a long period (e.g., during startup time of the
program), thus forming a time series for each performance counter.
We note that while there exist a large number of performance coun-
ters, we focus on per-program performance counters, which count
the number of micro-architectural events triggered by a specific
program. We use a machine learning technique to learn not only
the correlation between performance counters but also the change
in the pattern of a specific performance counter over time. This ap-
proach allows us simultaneously to represent the spatial-temporal
correlation and to identify the intrinsic dynamic behavior of each
program through its performance counter time series. While col-
lecting performance counter data is an easy task, labeling data to
use in supervised learning techniques is not straightforward due to

 
 
 
 
 
 
DYNAMICS 2020, Dec. 07, 2020, Texas, USA

Praveen Kadiyala, et al.

the involvement of large man-hours and the requirement of specific
domain knowledge. Thus, we adopt a clustering algorithm, which
is a semi-supervised learning technique, to classify programs based
on their performance counter time series into different groups, each
having different dynamic behavior. The contribution of our work
is summarized as follows.

• We develop a tool named perfextract using existing prim-
itives (TypePerf1) to collect data from various performance
counters during a specific time window, e.g., during startup
time of programs. We note that while TypePerf has been
developed to collect data from a performance counter at
a given time instant, perfextract allows us to simultane-
ously collect data from various performance counters and
form time series for each counter. This allows us to capture
the behavior of each performance counter over time. We
also note that there exist 28 per-program performance coun-
ters in Windows operating systems, we collect data from 23
counters since the remaining 5 counters are not useful for
our work.

• We use a semi-supervised clustering algorithm, seeded 𝑘-
means clustering, to classify programs, each being repre-
sented by multiple time series of performance counters, into
different groups. We also adopt seeded 𝑘-means clustering to
develop a new algorithm that detects whether a new program
has been installed or deviated from its “normal” behavior. We
analyze the dynamic behavior of each program group based
on the changes in each performance counter over time.
• We carry out extensive experiments with 18 real-world Win-
dows programs belonging to 4 groups: web browsers, text
editors, image viewers, and audio players. We run these pro-
grams in both physical and virtual environments and use
perfextract to collect data before doing analysis.

The rest of paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss
related work on dynamic analysis of programs using both high-level
and low-level features. In Section 3, we describe our data collection
framework and dynamic behavior analysis technique. In Section 4,
we present the experiments with various scenarios and analysis of
results before we conclude the paper in Section 5.

2 RELATED WORK
Characterizing the behavior of programs based on their dynamic
features is an established methodology in the field of system se-
curity. In [10], Salehi et al. used API call return value recorded
during the runtime of a program as features in modeling the pro-
gram behavior. In a novel fashion, Zhaoqi et al. used API calls along
with their arguments for analyzing program behavior [15]. In [2],
Das et al. developed a semantics-based online malware detection
approach based on API call sequences. In [6], an RNN-LSTM model
has been developed for program analysis. The authors used the
top-ranked API call sequences based on their Term Frequency and
Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF).

There also exist several works that used low-level features for
program behavior analysis. In [4], Dinkarrao et al. used performance
counter data to craft adversarial attacks on malware detectors. The
authors focused on malware in Linux operating systems (OS), which

1TypePerf: https://ss64.com/nt/typeperf.html

has less attraction compared to Windows OS. In [5], Harris et al.
used the performance counter data for understanding the cyclic
interference caused by cache contention, thereby detecting external
attacks. In [11], the authors proposed to use performance counter
data for profiling of web browsers during their runtime and detect-
ing obfuscation codes hidden in web browsers. The authors demon-
strated the effectiveness of the proposed approach with Linux OS.
In [9], Nisarg et al. used performance counters along with machine
learning models for malware detection in Linux OS. The authors
used a statistical-based methodology to select the performance
counters that are to be monitored. Similarly, in [8], Ozosoy et al.
developed a malware-aware processor (MAP), which has a dedi-
cated component to detect malware based on performance counters.
In [12], Tang et al. used performance counter data to differentiate
the behavior of two Windows applications: Internet Explorer
and Adobe Acrobat Reader. On one hand, most of the above
works (except [12]) focused on Linux OS. On the other hand, they
did not consider the changes in performance counters over time.
In this work, we consider programs running in Windows OS and
develop an approach that considers the spatial-temporal correlation
of performance counter data in the form of time series. This may
overcome the effect of non-determinism of performance counter
data.

3 PROGRAM BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS AND

CLUSTERING FRAMEWORK

In this section, we present the proposed framework for program
behavior analysis and clustering. We start with an overview descrip-
tion and then describe the details of framework implementation
and algorithm.

3.1 Framework Overview
In Fig. 1, we depict the proposed framework, which consists of two
components: data collection and program clustering. In the data col-
lection component, we build up a program execution environment
(e.g., a Windows virtual machine running in Oracle VirtualBox)
with the perfextract tool integrated. This allows us to quickly
refresh the environment after completing the analysis of each pro-
gram. Given a program to be analyzed, we detonate the program
in the execution environment and trigger the perfextract tool
to collect performance counter data. The output of the data collec-
tion component is a set of time series that will be analyzed by a
clustering algorithm.

We advocate for clustering algorithms to classify programs into
different groups since they do not need a labeled dataset, which
could be hard to obtain in practice. We adopt 𝑘-means clustering
to classify each program based on its time series of performance
counters into different groups. We assume that there would be a
normal working period that all the programs exhibit their normal
behavior. The collected data during this normal working period
creates the seeding clusters (e.g., the three clusters as shown on the
right side of Fig. 1 and allows us to process new samples during the
inference phase). Given a new data sample, the clustering algorithm
will identify the best cluster that the sample belongs to. If the
distance to the nearest cluster is larger than a threshold, the sample
will form a new cluster, indicating that the program has not been

Program Behavior Analysis and Clustering using Performance Counters

DYNAMICS 2020, Dec. 07, 2020, Texas, USA

Figure 1: Framework overview.

recognized by the clustering algorithm. This can be due to two
reasons: either the program has been newly installed in the system
and it was run for the first time or the program has changed its
behavior due to updates or security attacks.

3.2 Extraction of Performance Counter Data
We now present the details of the extraction of performance counter
data using the perfextract tool. We note that the number of per-
formance counters could vary depending on the operating system
run on the analyzing host. In Windows OS, there is a total of 28
per-program performance counters that can be collected. However,
during our experiments, we realized that there are 5 counters whose
values do not change over time. We decided to not collect the data
from those counters as they do not contribute to differentiating
the programs. The description of the remaining 23 performance
counters is given in Table 1.

For each performance counter, perfextract periodically col-
lects its value using a primitive available for Windows OS, i.e.,
TypePerf. The time interval between collection instants is prede-
fined (e.g., every 1 second) so as to not cause significant overhead
(i.e., query the values too frequently) or miss the behavior changes
of the counter (i.e., the interval is too long). We also define a time
window for the collection duration so that the performance coun-
ters of each program will be collected in a specific duration, e.g., 30
seconds. It is worth mentioning that it may be useful to collect the
data for the entire execution duration of the program as the more
data collected, the better the representation of program behavior.
However, the execution duration of each program depends on the
nature of its application and usage behavior of users, leading to
heterogeneous execution duration of programs. For instance, a user
may use a web browser for a few minutes for entertainment but
he may use a text editor for hours to work. Nevertheless, if the
time window is too short we may not have sufficient data for ana-
lyzing program behavior. Furthermore, to avoid the bias from the
usage behavior of users, we collect the performance counter data
during the start time of programs, e.g., during the first 30 seconds
when programs are launched. In actual implementation, we can
use a program monitor to trigger perfextract when a program is
started. Collection of performance counter data at the start time
of programs may work well with benign programs that do not ex-
hibit evasive behavior. Thus, there is a need for a more advanced
approach (e.g., using a random collection) to avoid such an evasive
behavior. We keep this task for future work when we work with
malware samples.

Consequently, we obtain 23 time series, each having multiple
values (e.g., 30 values collected over 30 seconds) representing the
temporal evolution of a performance counter. By analyzing the time
series, we analyze the temporal behavior of performance counters
rather than comparing a particular value of performance counter
among programs. While two programs may have the same tem-
poral behavior of certain performance counters, they may differ
from each other by the time series from the other performance
counters. With the support of machine learning that could learn
the correlation from multi-dimensional data with both temporal
and spatial correlation, we use performance counter time series to
cluster programs into different groups, each having similar behav-
ior. As discussed in the introduction, this could help one to identify
unauthorized programs installed in the systems or detect abnor-
mal behavior of a particular program, which has been previously
installed and run in the system.

3.3 Program Clustering and Fingerprinting
In this section, we present an algorithm that analyzes the data
collected from performance counters as presented in the previ-
ous section to perform program clustering and fingerprinting. By
clustering, we mean that computer programs are classified into
different groups based on their functionalities tied to the perfor-
mance counter values, e.g., text editors, web browsers, audio players,
and image viewers. We refer to this clustering approach as coarse-
grained clustering. By fingerprinting, we perform fine-grained clus-
tering of data samples (i.e., each data sample is a set of time series)
collected at different time instants of a particular program so as
to identify the program by its performance counter data. Obvi-
ously, the number of groups (clusters) in the fine-grained clustering
approach is much larger compared to that of the coarse-grained
approach. Given the number of program groups and the total num-
ber of programs installed in the system, we use a conventional
clustering algorithm such as 𝑘-means clustering to process the data.
We note that 𝑘-means clustering algorithm aims at minimizing the
total distance of every data sample to its cluster centroid. Given
a dataset to be classified into 𝑘 groups where 𝑘 is provided as an
input, the partition of the samples in the dataset is achieved by
minimizing the following objective function:

𝑘
∑︁

∑︁

𝑖=1

𝑥 ∈ G𝑖

||𝑥 − 𝜇𝑖 ||2

(1)

DYNAMICS 2020, Dec. 07, 2020, Texas, USA

Praveen Kadiyala, et al.

Table 1: Description of Per-program Performance Counters

No. Performance Counter Description

The rate of read and write IO operations

Percentage of elapsed time that the program spent for executing code in privileged mode
%Privileged Time
1
The total number of handles currently opened
Handle Count
2
IO Read Operations/sec
The rate of read operations issued by the program
3
IO Write Operations/sec The rate of write operations issued by the program
4
IO Data Operations/sec
5
IO Other Operations/sec The rate of IO operations other than read and write operations issued by the program
6
IO Read Bytes/sec
7
IO Write Bytes/sec
8
IO Data Bytes/sec
9
IO Other Bytes/sec
10
Page Faults/sec
11
Page File Bytes Peak
12
Page File Bytes
13
Pool Paged Bytes
14
Pool Non-paged Bytes
15
Private Bytes
16
Priority Base
17
Thread Count
18
Virtual Bytes Peak
19
20
Virtual Bytes
21 Working Set Peak
22 Working Set
23 Working Set - Private

The byte rate of read IO operations
The byte rate write IO operations
The byte rate of read and write IO operations
The byte rate of IO operations other than read and write issued by the program
The rate of page faults occurred during its execution
Maximum number of bytes used in the paging file(s)
Current number of bytes used in the paging file(s)
Current number of bytes in the paged pool
Current number of bytes in the non-paged pool
Current number of bytes that are not shared with other programs
Current base priority of the program
Number of threads currently active in the program
Maximum number of bytes of virtual address space used by the program
Current number of bytes of the virtual address space used by the program
Maximum number of bytes in the set of memory pages touched by the program
Current number of bytes in the set of memory pages touched by the program
Current number of bytes in the set of memory pages exclusively touched by the programs

Algorithm 1 clusterProgram(X)
Require: X
Require: D
Ensure: C

⊲ time series of performance counter data
⊲ existing labeled data samples
⊲ Cluster of the input sample

Add sample X to cluster G

1: {G, 𝑑 } ← getNearestCluster(X, D)
2: if 𝑑 < 𝛽 then
3:
4: else
5:
6: end if

Create a new cluster

⊲ 𝛽 is a predefined threshold

where 𝜇𝑖 is the centroid of cluster G𝑖 . Seeded 𝑘-means [1] is a semi-
supervised clustering algorithm based on 𝑘-means. It used a small
set of labeled data to initialize 𝑘-means in computing the centroids
rather than choosing a random number of clusters.

In Algorithm 1, we present the adopted clustering algorithm
for program clustering. Given a data sample that includes 23 time
series of 23 respective performance counters, the algorithm starts
by identifying the nearest cluster for the sample based on the dis-
tance from the sample to the centroid of the cluster. This step is
performed by line 1 in Algorithm 1. The output of the function
getNearestCluster(X, D) is the index of the nearest cluster (G),
and the distance between the sample and the centroid of the cluster
(𝑑), normalized based on the samples in the nearest cluster. If the
distance is smaller than a predefined threshold (𝛽), the sample is
considered part of the cluster. Otherwise, it will form a new clus-
ter, which indicates that a new program has been executed or a

previously-seen program has deviated from its normal behavior.
It is to be noted that the function getNearestCluster(X, D) will
compute the distance from sample X to all the seeding clusters.
There may exist multiple seeding clusters that are close to sample X
with a distance smaller than 𝛽. The function will return the closest
cluster to the sample. The challenging issue is how to determine
the threshold to decide whether a program is newly-installed in the
system or it deviates from its previous behavior. A naive approach is
to set 𝛽 = 1, corresponding to the distance from the centroid to the
farthest data sample of the nearest cluster. However, this approach
may not work well in practice due to the non-linear characteristic
of the multi-modal data and the clusters are not in a spherical shape.
There exist in the literature other approaches that can be used to
compute the distance from a samples to a cluster centroid such as
Euclidean distance or 𝑧-score [13]. We note that Algorithm 1 can
be used for both cases: coarse-grained clustering and fine-grained
clustering with a minor change in the parameter 𝑘 of the seeded
𝑘-means clustering algorithm.

4 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we present various experiments carried out to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. We first
present the experimental setup and the programs used in our ex-
periments before we present the analysis of results.

4.1 Experimental Setup and Programs
We carried out all the experiments in a virtual machine with 16GB
RAM and Windows 10 Operating System using Oracle VirtualBox.

Program Behavior Analysis and Clustering using Performance Counters

DYNAMICS 2020, Dec. 07, 2020, Texas, USA

Table 2: Programs Used in Experiments

No. Domain

1

Text editor

2 Web browser

3

4

Image viewer

Audio player

Programs
Atom, gVim, Notepad,
Notepad++, Sublime Text
Brave, Google Chrome,
Internet Explorer, Vivaldi,
Firefox
WildBit, ImageGlass,
FastStone, MS Paint,
XnView
Clementine,
foobar2000, VLC

#Samples

20 each

20 each

20 each

20 each

(a) Time series of Handle Counts

(b) Time series of page file bytes

Figure 2: Time series of performance counter data of various
programs.

We implemented perfextract in Python, which also provides var-
ious libraries for data processing and analysis. We used 18 popular
programs belonging to 4 application domains including text edi-
tors, web browsers, image viewers, and audio players. The selected
programs are presented in Table 2. For each of the programs, we col-
lected 20 data samples by launching the program with 20 different
input arguments, e.g., opening a web browser with 20 randomly-
chosen websites or launching a text editor with 20 different text

(a) Coarse-grained intra-cluster distance.

(b) Coarse-grained inter-cluster distance.

Figure 3: Box plot representation for intra-cluster and inter-
cluster distances with coarse-grained approach.

files. It is worth mentioning again that each data sample includes
23 time series of performance counters presented in Table 1, each
having 30 values for a duration of 30 seconds. Furthermore, to
reduce the bias of the data to any particular run, for each input
argument, we executed the monitored program (e.g., text editor,
web browser) ten times, each commencing at a random instance in
time. This increases the randomness of data so that the machine
learning algorithms will learn the data pattern (i.e., the temporal
behavior of programs) rather than a particular value. Consequently,
we have collected 3600 (18 × 20 × 10) data samples for 18 pro-
grams, which will be used for the experiments. In Fig. 2, we plot
the time series of two performance counters (i.e., Handle Counts
and Page File Bytes) of various programs. We see that there is a
significant separation in the behavior of the performance counter
data among programs. This allows machine learning algorithms to
learn program behavior and differentiate them efficiently.

4.2 Analysis of Results
4.2.1 Coarse-grained and Fine-grained Clustering. In this exper-
iment, we fed all 3600 data samples to the clustering algorithm
(𝑘-mean clustering), given the number of clusters (i.e., 4 clusters

051015202530Time instants2004006008001000Handle CountgVimNotepadBraveGoogle Chrome051015202530Time instants1234567Page File Bytes1e7gVimNotepadBraveGoogle Chrome1234Cluster Index123456789Intra Cluster Distance1234Cluster Index123456789Inter Cluster Distance DYNAMICS 2020, Dec. 07, 2020, Texas, USA

Praveen Kadiyala, et al.

(a) Fine-grained intra-cluster distance.

(a) Coarse-grained clustering

(b) Fine-grained inter-cluster distance.

Figure 4: Box plot representation for intra-cluster and inter-
cluster distances with fine-grained approach.

(b) Fine-grained clustering

in case of coarse-grained clustering and 18 clusters in case of fine-
grained clustering). In Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, we present the box plot
representation of intra-cluster and inter-cluster distances for the
clusters resulted from the clustering algorithm. The intra-cluster
distance of a cluster is computed as the mean of the distance from all
the samples belonging to the cluster to its centroid. The inter-cluster
distance of a cluster is computed as the mean of the distance from
its centroid to the centroid of the remaining clusters. As expected,
the intra-cluster distance of most of the clusters is smaller than
the inter-cluster distance. We also obtained a very small standard
deviation of the distances with the fine-grained clustering scenario.
This demonstrates that data samples belonging to the same cluster
have similar behavior that allows the clustering algorithm to learn
their similarity and pattern.

To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our clustering ap-
proach, we use t-SNE [14] to produce the two-dimensional scatter
plots of the clustering results using coarse-grained and fine-grained
approaches. We note that t-SNE is a technique for visualization
of high-dimensional data by applying dimensionality reduction
to the data before plotting to a two or three-dimensional plot. In
Fig. 5, the results show that even though each group of programs is

Figure 5: t-SNE two-dimensional plots for results obtained
by clustering.

distributed at different locations, there is a clear separation among
clusters of programs and application types. This insight provides
us the motivation to develop the algorithm to detect new programs
installed in the system or behavior deviation of existing programs.

Identification of Unknown Programs. In this experiment, we
4.2.2
evaluate the capability of the proposed approach to detect unknown
programs. Given the 18 programs used for our experiments, we
randomly selected 4 programs, among them 3 programs are consid-
ered as seeding clusters and the remaining program is considered
as an unknown program. With seeding clusters, we mean that all
the data samples of the 3 programs are analyzed by the clustering
algorithm forming 3 different clusters whose labels are known a
priori. Given a data sample of the unknown program, we used Al-
gorithm 1 to compute the distance between the data sample and
the centroids of the 3 seeding clusters and determine whether a
new cluster is formed or not. If a new cluster is formed, it indicates
that the proposed approach is able to detect the unknown program
executed in the system. Otherwise, it fails to do so.

123456789101112131415161718Cluster Index0246810121416Intra Cluster Distance 123456789101112131415161718Cluster Index0246810121416Inter cluster Distance 6040200204060tsne-2d-one80604020020406080tsne-2d-twoText editorWeb browserImage viewerAudio player604020020406080tsne-2d-one7550250255075tsne-2d-twoAtomgVimNotepadNotepad++Sublime TextBraveGoogle ChromeFirefoxInternet ExplorerVivaldiWildBitFastStoneImageGlassM S PaintXnViewClementinefoobar2000VLCProgram Behavior Analysis and Clustering using Performance Counters

DYNAMICS 2020, Dec. 07, 2020, Texas, USA

Table 3: Selected Instances for Testing of Clustering Model

No.

1
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Experimental Instances

Seeding Clusters
gVim, Notepad, Notepad++
Atom, Brave, Google Chrome
Sublime Text, Google Chrome,
Vivaldi
Atom, Firefox, Vivaldi
Brave, Google Chrome,
Vivaldi

Test
Atom
gVim

Result

Detected
Detected

Notepad

Detected

Notepad++ Detected
Sublime
Text

Detected

gVim, Vivaldi, Clementine

Brave

Notepad, Internet Explorer,
WildBit
Atom, Vivaldi, Clementine

gVim, Firefox, VLC

Notepad++, FastStone,
foobar2000
Atom, Brave, Clementine
Sublime Text, Brave,
Google Chrome
Atom, Notepad, Vivaldi
Clementine, Google Chrome,
Internet Explorer
Atom, Brave, Vivaldi

Vivaldi

Detected

WildBit

Detected

FastStone

Detected

ImageGlass Detected

MS Paint

Detected

XnView

Detected

Not
Detected

Detected

Detected
Not
Detected

(a) Separation among Atom, Brave, WildBit and Clementine

Google
Chrome
Firefox
Internet
Explorer

With 18 programs, there are 12240 = (cid:0)18
3

(cid:1) × 15 experimental
instances that could be examined. We carried out the experiments
with 5000 random instances, resulting in a detection ratio of 98.7%.
In Table 3, we present 15 such experimental instances, among which
the proposed approach fails to detect the unknown program in two
instances. Analyzing the data of these two instances, we observed
that performance counter data of Vivaldi and Brave (i.e., the in-
stance in row 6) are very close. Similar trends were also observed
in the case of row 9 between Firefox and Internet Explorer. In rea-
son of this behavior could be the fact that all the web browsers
use the same rendering engine. In Fig. 6, we present several two-
dimensional scatter plots of data points randomly selected from
4 programs using t-SNE. We observe that there is a clear separa-
tion among clusters. We verified the cluster index obtained by the
clustering algorithm against ground truth data. To determine the
value of parameter 𝛽 (i.e., the distance threshold of deviation), we
performed a grid search in the range [0, 1] and selected the value
that yields the best performance.

We also performed experiments of the detection of unknown
programs at the coarse-grained and fine-grained levels. At the
coarse-grained level, we considered all the seeding programs are
clustered into 3 clusters while the unknown program should form
the fourth cluster. At the fine-grained level, there will be 17 seeding
clusters and the unknown program should form the 18th cluster. In
Fig. 7, we present the t-SNE plots for these two experiments with
labels obtained from our clustering algorithm. The results show
that in both cases, the unknown program forms a new cluster that
is well separated from the seeding clusters.

(b) Separation among Vivaldi, Clementine, foobar2000 and VLC

Figure 6: Two-dimensional scatter plots of various clusters
using t-SNE.

4.2.3 Detection of Behavior Deviation. As we discussed earlier, ex-
isting programs (that have been installed in the systems) could
change their normal behavior due to various reasons such as up-
dates or being tampered by viruses or attackers. While program up-
dates may not cause any harmful consequences, programs tampered
by viruses or attackers may lead to data loss. Thus, it is beneficial
to detect such deviation as earlier as possible. In this experiment,
we demonstrate that the proposed approach could detect such a
behavior deviation. We introduced a deviation in Google Chrome
with a custom extension, which consecutively opens many photos
on the Amazon website. In Fig. 8, we present the deviation of perfor-
mance counter data (i.e., Page File Bytes, I/O Data Operations,
Handle Counts and Pool Paged Bytes) in comparison with one
of the data samples collected during its normal working conditions,
i.e., the data samples collected with Google Chrome when opening
the Amazon website without the customized extension. We used
Algorithm 1 to determine whether a data sample of a program has
“significantly” deviated from its normal behavior. We have also run

402002040tsne-2d-one402002040tsne-2d-twoAtomBraveWildBitClementine302010010203040tsne-2d-one402002040tsne-2d-twoVivaldiClementinefoobar2000VLCDYNAMICS 2020, Dec. 07, 2020, Texas, USA

Praveen Kadiyala, et al.

(a) Web browser samples at the coarse-grained level.

(a) Handle Counts Time Series.

(b) Firefox samples at the fine-grained level.

Figure 7: t-SNE visualization.

(b) Page File Bytes.

Figure 9: Difference in performance counter values in vir-
tual and physical environment for two separate runs.

the original 𝑘-means clustering algorithm on the dataset of Google
Chrome that included the data samples collected during normal
working conditions and the samples that are collected with the cus-
tom extension. The clustering results show that the data samples
are separately clustered into two groups. As the label of the samples
collected during normal conditions is known, the remaining clus-
ter includes all the data samples collected with custom extension,
representing the behavior deviation of Google Chrome.

4.2.4 Bare-metal vs Virtual Environment. While we have done all
the experiments in a virtual environment (i.e., executing the pro-
grams in a virtual machine and collect performance counter time
series for analysis), the proposed approach can also be applied to
a bare-metal environment. To demonstrate this, we have run the
perfextract tool in a physical host and collected the performance
counter time series of the programs. In Fig. 9, we plot the time se-
ries of two performance counters (Handle Counts and Page File
Bytes) of Google Chrome when running in a virtual machine and
in a bare-metal environment. We can observe that there is a change
in the values of the performance counters (i.e., the number of events
of Handle Counts and Page File Bytes in the virtual machine is

(a) Page File Bytes

(b) I/O Data Operations

(c) Handle Counts

(d) Pool Paged Bytes

Figure 8: Various performance counter time series for nor-
mal and deviated versions of Google Chrome.

7550250255075tsne-2d-one10050050100tsne-2d-twoothersWeb browser604020020406080tsne-2d-one806040200204060tsne-2d-twoothersFirefox0510152025Time instants3.54.04.55.05.56.0Page File Bytes1e7normaldeviated0510152025Time instants0.00.20.40.60.81.0I/O data operations1e4normaldeviated0510152025Time instants1.01.11.21.31.4Handle Count1e3normaldeviated0510152025Time instants7.58.08.59.09.5Pool Paged Bytes1e5normaldeviated051015202530Time instants1.01.11.21.31.4Handle Counts1e3physical_1physical_2virtual_1virtual_2051015202530Time instants3.63.84.04.24.44.64.85.05.2Page File Bytes1e7physical_1physical_2virtual_1virtual_2Program Behavior Analysis and Clustering using Performance Counters

DYNAMICS 2020, Dec. 07, 2020, Texas, USA

fewer than that in a bare-metal environment). However, evolution
trends remain the same for both environments. As we discussed
earlier, the proposed approach learns not only the dynamic behav-
ior of a program from the values of performance counters but also
the correlation among the values through its changing trends (i.e.,
evolution trends) over time. Thus, the clustering model when de-
ployed to the bare metal environment may need to be retrained on
the data collected in this environment so as to adapt to the new
data distribution and achieve the desired performance.

5 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we presented a clustering-based approach to analyze
program behavior in a given environment using performance coun-
ters. We collected the data from various performance counters as
time series and analyzed program behavior based on temporal and
spatial correlations represented by the time series. We developed a
tool to ease the collection of data using existing primitives provided
by the operation systems (e.g., Windows OS provides TypePerf to
collect the current value of a performance counter). We adopted a
conventional clustering algorithm, 𝑘-means clustering, to cluster
programs at both coarse-grained level (i.e., based on type of pro-
grams) and fine-grained level (i.e., differentiating among programs).
We also adopted the algorithm to detect new/unknown programs
installed in the system, as well as behavior deviation of existing pro-
grams due to software updates or tampering activities. We carried
out experiments with 18 programs that belong to 4 different groups
(web browsers, text editors, image viewers and audio players). The
experimental results show that the proposed approach manages
to accurately cluster programs into their respective groups. The
results also demonstrate that the proposed approach can be used to
detect whether a new program emerges (i.e., it is a newly-installed
program) or an existing program has deviated from its normal be-
havior. For future work, we aim at further developing the proposed
approach to perform malware detection using performance counter
time series.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by the Agency for Science, Technology
and Research (A*STAR) under its RIE2020 AME Core Funds (SERC
Grant No. A1916g2047). We would like to thank Partha Pratim

Kundu, Sin G. Teo and Vasudha Ramnath for their valuable feedback
and fruitful discussion during the implementation of this work.

REFERENCES
[1] S. Basu, A. Banerjee, and R. J. Mooney. 2002. Semi-supervised Clustering by

Seeding. In Proc. ICML 2002. PRML, Sydney, Australia, 27–34.

[2] Sanjeev Das, Yang Liu, Wei Zhang, and Mahintham Chandramohan. 2016.
Semantics-based online malware detection: Towards efficient real-time protection
against malware. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 11, 2 (Feb. 2016), 289–302.
[3] Sanjeev Das, Jan Werner, Manos Antonakakis, Michalis Polychronakis, and Fabian
Monrose. 2019. SoK: The challenges, pitfalls, and perils of using hardware
performance counters for security. In Proc. 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (S&P). IEEE, San Francisco, USA, 20–38.

[4] Sai Manoj Pudukotai Dinakarrao, Sairaj Amberkar, Sahil Bhat, Abhijitt Dhavlle,
Hossein Sayadi, Avesta Sasan, Houman Homayoun, and Setareh Rafatirad. 2019.
Adversarial attack on microarchitectural events based malware detectors. In Proc.
2009 56th Annual Design Automation Conference. IEEE, San Franscisco, USA, 1–6.
[5] Austin Harris, Shijia Wei, Prateek Sahu, Pranav Kumar, Todd Austin, and Mohit Ti-
wari. 2019. Cyclone: detecting contention-based cache information leaks through
cyclic interference. In Proc. 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture. IEEE, Columbus, OH, USA, 57–72.

[6] J Mathew and MA Ajay Kumara. 2018. API Call Based Malware Detection Ap-
proach Using Recurrent Neural Network—LSTM. In Proc. International Conference
on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications. Springer, Vellore, India, 87–99.
[7] Ori Or-Meir, Nir Nissim, Yuval Elovici, and Lior Rokach. 2019. Dynamic malware
analysis in the modern era—A state of the art survey. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR) 52, 5 (2019), 1–48.

[8] Meltem Ozsoy, Khaled N Khasawneh, Caleb Donovick, Iakov Gorelik, Nael Abu-
Ghazaleh, and Dmitry Ponomarev. 2016. Hardware-based malware detection
using low-level architectural features. IEEE Trans. Comput. 65, 11 (Mar. 2016),
3332–3344.

[9] Nisarg Patel, Avesta Sasan, and Houman Homayoun. 2017. Analyzing hard-
ware based malware detectors. In Proc. 54th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation
Conference (DAC). IEEE, Austin, TX, USA, 1–6.

[10] Zahra Salehi, Ashkan Sami, and Mahboobe Ghiasi. 2017. MAAR: Robust features
to detect malicious activity based on API calls, their arguments and return values.
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 59 (2017), 93–102.

[11] Rashid Tahir, Sultan Durrani, Faizan Ahmed, Hammas Saeed, Fareed Zaffar, and
Saqib Ilyas. 2019. The browsers strike back: Countering cryptojacking and para-
sitic miners on the web. In Proc. IEEE Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM 2019). IEEE, Paris, France, 703–711.

[12] Adrian Tang, Simha Sethumadhavan, and Salvatore J Stolfo. 2014. Unsupervised
anomaly-based malware detection using hardware features. In Proc. Interna-
tional Workshop on Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection. Springer, Gothenburg,
Sweden, 109–129.

[13] Vijayanand Thangavelu, Dinil Mon Divakaran, Rishi Sairam, Suman Sankar
Bhunia, and Mohan Gurusamy. 2019. DEFT: A Distributed IoT Fingerprinting
Technique. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6, 1 (Feb. 2019), 940–952.

[14] L.J.P. van der Maaten and G.E. Hinton. 2008. Visualizing High-Dimensional Data
Using t-SNE. Journal of Machine Learning Research 9 (Nov. 2008), 2579–2605.
[15] Zhaoqi Zhang, Panpan Qi, and Wei Wang. 2020. Dynamic Malware Analysis
with Feature Engineering and Feature Learning. In Proc. 34th AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence. AAAI Press, Palo Alto, California, USA, 1210–1217.

