Perspective
Cybersecurity in Power Grids: Challenges and Opportunities

Tim Krause 1, Raphael Ernst 1, Benedikt Klaer 2,3, Immanuel Hacker 2,3

and Martin Henze 1,*

1 Cyber Analysis & Defense, Fraunhofer FKIE, 53343 Wachtberg, Germany;

tim.krause@fkie.fraunhofer.de (T.K.); raphael.ernst@fkie.fraunhofer.de (R.E.)

2 Digital Energy, Fraunhofer FIT, 52056 Aachen, Germany; benedikt.klaer@ﬁt.fraunhofer.de (B.K.);

immanuel.hacker@ﬁt.fraunhofer.de (I.H.)

3 High Voltage Equipment and Grids, Digitalisation and Power Economics, RWTH Aachen University,

52056 Aachen, Germany

* Correspondence: martin.henze@fkie.fraunhofer.de

Abstract: Increasing volatilities within power transmission and distribution force power grid op-
erators to amplify their use of communication infrastructure to monitor and control their grid.
The resulting increase in communication creates a larger attack surface for malicious actors. Indeed,
cyber attacks on power grids have already succeeded in causing temporary, large-scale blackouts
in the recent past. In this paper, we analyze the communication infrastructure of power grids to
derive resulting fundamental challenges of power grids with respect to cybersecurity. Based on
these challenges, we identify a broad set of resulting attack vectors and attack scenarios that threaten
the security of power grids. To address these challenges, we propose to rely on a defense-in-depth
strategy, which encompasses measures for (i) device and application security, (ii) network security,
and (iii) physical security, as well as (iv) policies, procedures, and awareness. For each of these
categories, we distill and discuss a comprehensive set of state-of-the art approaches, as well as
identify further opportunities to strengthen cybersecurity in interconnected power grids.

Keywords: critical infrastructure; cyber-physical security; cybersecurity; power grid; power
system communication

1. Introduction

Historically, power grids have grown from simple, localized grids to large, physically
wide-spread grids, often spanning multiple nations or even whole continents [1]. Despite its
importance to modern society, the energy sector has adapted slower than other industries to
digital technology due to its size and need for high system availability. This is also reﬂected
by a legislative point of view, with power grids being classiﬁed as critical infrastructure
in many countries [2–5]. Because of the need for more efﬁciency, digital technology gets
more widespread, and new technologies in the energy grid heavily rely on high-frequency
monitoring cycles and adaptation to bottlenecks in the grid [6]. This trend is boosted with
the rise of renewable energy (ranging from large off-shore wind farms matching the power
generation of traditional power plants to a single household feeding solar energy into
the grid) [7,8], which leads to power generation becoming more distributed and, thus,
less reliable, resulting in difﬁcult to organize transmission and distribution of energy [9,10].
This results in a less controllable situation than in the past, when only a small number
of bulk power production plants were required. While increasing power demands can be
satisﬁed with more traditional or renewable power plants, the grid itself needs to support
the transportation of the generated power. However, extending the grid by adding new
lines is prohibitively expensive and often slowed down, e.g., by regulations or resistance
of residents. Fortunately, digital technology can aid in better utilizing the existing grid,
leading to an increased deployment of digital technology to control, monitor, and maintain
transmission and distribution of power [2,11].

Citation: Krause, T.; Ernst, R.; Klaer,

B.; Hacker, I.; Henze, M.

Cybersecurity in Power Grids:

Challenges and Opportunities.

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225. https://

doi.org/10.3390/s21186225

Academic Editors: Ethiopia Nigussie

and Habtamu Abie

Received: 24 August 2021

Accepted: 14 September 2021

Published: 16 September 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21186225

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

sensors(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

2 of 19

This increasing use of digital technology requires more and more networking ca-
pabilities and connects previously isolated components with larger communication net-
works [12–14], resulting in a large variety of new dataﬂows [15]. The resulting increasing
interconnection of power grids, which constitute critical infrastructure [2–5,16] requiring
special protection, raises severe security concerns [17]: Protocols and systems originally
developed for power grids were not designed with security in mind. Yet, these systems
are still used alongside modern technology and increasingly exposed to outside networks,
such as the Internet. Likewise, the increasing use of digital and decentralized technology
provides a larger attack surface [18–20]. Indeed, different cyber attacks have successfully
targeted essential parts of the power grid [21,22]. Resulting disruptions and wide-scale
outages of electrical power have extensive social and economic consequences [23].

Contributions

This paper speciﬁcally targets the security challenges originating from the increasing
interconnection of power grids, especially at the transmission and distribution level. To this
end, we motivate the need for cybersecurity when operating power grids and outline
promising approaches to provide security at different levels of abstraction. More speciﬁcally,
our contributions in this paper are:

1. We provide a high-level overview over the communication infrastructure of power
grids and derive resulting fundamental challenges w.r.t. cybersecurity risks (Section 2).
2. As a foundation to secure power grids, we identify a comprehensive set of attack

vectors and scenarios based on these security challenges (Section 3).

3. We distill and discuss promising approaches to provide security for interconnected
power grids to protect against serious attack vectors and scenarios (Section 4).

Extending upon previous works on surveying various aspects of cybersecurity chal-
lenges in power grids and smart grid environments [16,24–26], this paper provides a unique
perspective on cybersecurity challenges and opportunities in power grids by combining
the viewpoints of cybersecurity and communication network researchers with those of
electrical engineers and power grid operators. As such, our contributions are relevant both
for cybersecurity researchers, who are usually not familiar with the processes and termi-
nology of electrical engineering, as well as electrical engineers and power grid operators,
who have a decent understanding of power grids but are often unaware of the extent and
speciﬁcs of cybersecurity challenges.

2. Communication Infrastructure of Power Grids and Resulting Security Challenges

With the increasing digitalization of power grids, operators are confronted with rapid
changes in the amount of communication necessary and the means through which this
communication is conducted. As a result, more and more communication is introduced to
power grids. In the following, we ﬁrst describe the communication infrastructure of power
grids, before focusing on the fundamental security challenges resulting from an increasing
interconnection of power grids.

We use the term grid exclusively to refer to the power grid and the term network for
digital communication networks. Furthermore, the information contained in this paper
is mainly focused on European power grids. However, many of the proposed changes
to cybersecurity also apply to other regions. In this context, we deﬁne the transmission
of power as the transportation of energy over long distances (e.g., between distant cities,
not within a city) and the distribution of power as the transportation on a local scale,
such as a single city or small region. The transmission of power is overseen by transmission
system operators (TSO), while the distribution of power is carried out by distribution system
operators (DSO).

2.1. Communication Infrastructure of Power Grids

To illustrate the typical communication infrastructure found in power grids, we pro-
vide a simpliﬁed view of a grid operator network, i.e., a TSO or DSO, in Figure 1. Typical

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

3 of 19

to the network of a grid operator is the separation between ofﬁce network and process con-
trol network (PCN). The ofﬁce network is similar to any usual corporate network with,
e.g., email trafﬁc or data processing. Contrary, the PCN connects the control room of grid
operation companies with their substations and ﬁeld devices, typically using DNP3 [27]
(North America and parts of Asia) or IEC 60870-5-104 [28] (rest of the world) as protocol.
Resulting control messages are usually interpreted by a programmable logic controller (PLC)
and then passed to the process layer. The control room typically contains a human-machine
interface (HMI), a database (DB) server managing grid information, and a simulation server
for pre-computing the effects of grid changes. Furthermore, the control room is connected
to multiple substations (each containing at least a gateway, an HMI, and multiple PLCs)
and can be coupled with other TSO/DSO SCADA systems for mutual control.

Data exchange between ofﬁce network and PCN should only be handled through
a dedicated data exchange server, where every ﬁle is checked for malware before being
passed through. Sometimes, though, as seen in the Ukraine attacks [21], there are other
communication channels, such as VPNs, which allow direct communication between the
ofﬁce network and the PCN or remote maintenance lines for vendors or contractors.

Figure 1. A simpliﬁed view of a TSO/DSO network, separated into ofﬁce network (connected to the Internet, typical data
processing tasks) and process control network (SCADA trafﬁc, connecting the control room with substations and ﬁeld
devices). While data should only be exchanged through a dedicated data exchange server, in reality, these networks are
often interconnected, e.g., with VPNs.

2.2. Fundamental Cybersecurity Challenges

While the increasing digitalization of power grids is necessary to deal with changing
power demands and generation, it raises fundamental security challenges, especially when
considering that power grids are an essential part of critical infrastructure [2–5]. In the
following, we introduce and highlight the most important challenges or mechanisms in
electrical power grids impacting cybersecurity.

2.2.1. CIA Triad: Availability Is Key

The triad of conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) [29] as the fundamental
concept of information security has to be interpreted slightly differently in the energy
sector. In traditional cybersecurity, it is generally preferable to ensure conﬁdentiality and
integrity and possibly sacriﬁce (some) availability. In power grids, however, availability is
by far the most important measure of the triad, as the consequences of downtime can be
severe [23]. The longer a blackout lasts and the more of the grid is affected, the harder it is
to rebuild the grid [30]. To illustrate the race for availability, the German power grid had
an end-consumer availability of 99.9995% in 2017 [31], compared to the allegedly highly
available Google services with 99.978% (no scheduled downtime) [32]. When measured in
time, the power grid has a more than 45-fold higher availability. As availability is the most

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

4 of 19

important measure in power grids, any measures ensuring the conﬁdentiality and integrity
of systems should never interfere with the availability of power delivery.

2.2.2. Balancing Generation and Consumption

Electrical power grids rely on a stable grid frequency of either 50 Hz or 60 Hz due to
the use of alternating current. The frequency is only stable if power generation and con-
sumption are at an equilibrium. If more power is generated than consumed, the frequency
rises, and vice versa.

The operation reserve ensures the equilibrium between production and consumption
at any given time. In Europe, the operation reserve is separated in three different stages:
primary operation reserve, secondary-reserve, and minute reserve. The primary control
is a continuous frequency load control, where the controller is implemented as an droop
control distributed to different power plants. Thereby, the amount of primary operation
reserve is 3 GW which is the power rating of two mayor generation units (e.g., nuclear
power plants). The secondary-reserve and minute-reserve will be activated if the frequency
derivation holds on. More speciﬁcally, the secondary reserve has to be activated after 5 min
of frequency derivation and will be replaced by the minute reserve after 15 min. These are
both activated centrally by the grid operator in whose grid area the power deviation
occurred. However, at deviations of 1 Hz, either some consumers or, possibly, multiple
cities have to be disconnected from the grid (in case of decreased grid frequency) or power
plants have to be downregulated to save the generators from damage [33,34].

The sensitive equilibrium between generation and consumption can be exploited by
attackers, as they only need to control a comparably small amount of consumption or
generation to use cascading effects within the grid to create a system-wide blackout [35,36],
as power generation and consumption in the operating reserve have time delays.

2.2.3. Decentralization of Power Generation

The rise of renewable energy has empowered many individuals and companies to
enter the energy sector [37]. For example, individual households can now feed their
excess solar energy into the grid. Naturally, the security of their systems is not as tightly
controlled as those of traditional energy companies. As a result, the hardware and software
use by individuals to operate power generation are often not as secure as it should be or
misconﬁgured [38], potentially impacting transmission and distribution in the grid.

Assuming a vulnerability in a large number of, e.g., solar installations is found,
attackers may control the power fed into the grid. Consequently, an attacker can do
considerable damage even when controlling only a comparably small amount of energy by
exploiting cascading effects (see above) [37]. By controlling the feeding of power into the
grid, an attacker could exploit these cascading effects with the goal to cause a system-wide
blackout, impacting distribution and transmission [35,36].

2.2.4. No Security in Process Control Networks

Most devices used in power grids, such as protection devices or PLCs, are designed for
multiple-decade use. Often, they are neither patched nor replaced. The most widespread
protocols are DNP3 [27] (mostly used in North America and parts of Asia) and IEC 60870-
5-104 [28] (predominantly used by the rest of the world). These protocols have been
developed more than 20 years ago with no security concerns in mind [39]. Despite their
wide-spread use by DSOs and TSOs, neither protocol supports basic security mechanisms,
such as authentication or integrity protection, which have been taken for granted for years
in other commercial sectors [40]. For example, IEC 60870-5-104 [28], as used by DSOs and
TSOs in Europe and other parts of the world, is susceptible to man-in-the-middle, denial-of-
service, replay, and spooﬁng attacks [41–43]. Similar observations have been made for the
DNP3 [27] protocol used in North America and parts of Asia [44–46]. While the standard
IEC 62351 provides additional cybersecurity concepts [47], it is usually not implemented.

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

5 of 19

As grid operators often use their own separated networks over dedicated physical
cables, they could neglect further security mechanisms in the past, leading to networks
which do not necessarily use cryptography, authentication, or integrity checks. Past attacks
have shown that ofﬁce networks (connected to the Internet) are often not sufﬁciently sepa-
rated from the PCN, allowing attackers lateral movement between the two [21]. Once an
attacker gains access to an unsecured PCN, simple tools enabling communication in the
speciﬁc protocol may be used to control devices crucial for grid operation.

2.2.5. Difﬁculty of Physical Network Changes

Field devices in power grids have planned lifetimes which are measured not in years
but decades [48]. Information technology has much faster development cycles, allowing
the development of attacks for devices which may have to be in use for many more years.
It is very unlikely that all energy companies will be able to always follow current security
best-practices by simply exchanging devices for newer models, which, e.g., support more
modern protocols, such as IEC 61850 [49].

If possible at all, modern security mechanisms have to be implemented in software
only and run on the available hardware or be able to interface directly with the specialized
devices used by grid operation companies, without affecting the availability of electricity
supply. However, many devices in use may not have the computational power to support
additional security functionality [50–54]. Even if certain devices are eventually exchanged
or upgraded with new software, they are often required to support legacy protocols to
be able to communicate with older devices still relying on these protocols. Consequently,
distribution and transmission system operators suffer from the well-known problem of
insecurity by inheritance [55].

2.2.6. Weakest Link Problem

For attacks to have devastating consequences, an attacker does not have to target the
largest grid operator. As long as the victim of an attack has control over enough power
to affect the grid frequency, the attacker can leverage cascading effects to affect the whole
power grid. As smaller operators often lack the means to harden their systems as much as
larger operators, such targets may be more attractive to attackers. Furthermore, attacks
do not have to be limited to grid operators: An attacker controlling a larger number of
consumer electronics, e.g., solar power cells, might still be able to inﬂuence the frequency
within the grid [36].

As a result, there is a need to develop solutions which can be used by all relevant
actors in interconnected power grids and are not only deployable by larger grid operators.

3. Attack Vectors and Scenarios

Practical cybersecurity in interconnected power grids is impacted by a diverse set of
fundamental security challenges. As a foundation to overcome these challenges and, thus,
provide security for distribution and transmission systems, we now identify attack vectors
and attack scenarios that result from the fundamental security challenges. In the following,
we ﬁrst discuss the most important attack vectors before we present the attack scenarios
enabled by these vectors.

3.1. Attack Vectors in Distribution and Transmission Grids

Attackers can leverage different attack vectors to compromise the network of a trans-
mission or distribution system operator with the goal of causing a blackout or at least
considerable disturbance in the power grid. To achieve this goal, an attacker will likely aim
to compromise the PCN of the target system. From there, the attacker can compromise
substations or ﬁeld devices, potentially leading to a blackout. In the following, we discuss
the most important attack vectors an attacker can exploit to access a PCN. We provide a
summary of our classiﬁcation of attack vectors in Table 1.

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

6 of 19

Table 1. Classiﬁcation of attack vectors speciﬁc for the energy sector.

Lateral Movement
Physical Access
Remote Maintenance Access
Third-Party Exploit
Overcoming Air Gap
Insider Attack
Cascading Effects

Scope

Difﬁculty

Impact

Examples

Single Operator
Local
Multiple Operators
Multiple Operators
Local
Single Operator
Multiple Operators

High
Medium
High
High
High
Low
High

High
Medium
High
Medium
Medium
High
High

[21,56,57]
[24,58–60]
[61–63]
[22,64,65]
[56,57]
[24,66]
[35,36]

3.1.1. Lateral Movement from the Ofﬁce Network

In the attacks on Ukrainian grid operators in 2015 [21], attackers gained access to
the PCN through lateral movement from the ofﬁce network (cf. Figure 1). Allowing com-
munications between PCN-connected devices and the ofﬁce network might be necessary,
e.g., to transfer certain information, such as environment data between ofﬁce network and
control room. An attacker can comprise an ofﬁce network, e.g., by sending spear phishing
emails to certain employees or by exploiting vulnerabilities in applications, such as web
browsers or ofﬁce suites [67]. Once access to a machine in the ofﬁce network has been
gained, the attacker can passively listen for user credentials and search for, e.g., a VPN
tunnel to the PCN. Lateral movement from the ofﬁce network is one of the most dangerous
attack vectors for power system operators. An attack would, however, be limited to a
single network.

3.1.2. Physical Access

Energy providers often use their own dedicated cable networks for PCN communi-
cations (cf. Section 2.2.4). While this certainly provides an extra level of security, it does
not offer any protection once an attacker has gained physical access to one device in the
network. For example, substations are usually connected to the PCN and are controlled
remotely without personnel being present. Therefore, an attacker can gain physical access
to the network by breaking into a substation and then manually use available systems
or connect its own device to the PCN [24]. Break-ins in substations already happen to-
day [58,59], although mostly with the intention to steal and then sell copper cables [24,60].
Hence, such a theft could be used as camouﬂage by cyber attackers to deter grid operators
from even looking for traces of a cyber attack. Such an attack could have a large inﬂuence
on grid operations but does not scale well, as it necessitates physical presence at (possibly
multiple) substations.

3.1.3. Remote Maintenance Access

Manufacturers of control room software and hardware usually have a maintenance
contract with the grid operators using their systems. To be able to debug these systems
remotely or to deploy software updates, these systems are typically equipped with some
form of remote maintenance access [61]. Depending on the technology used and security
measures in place, attackers may try to exploit this maintenance access to gain access to the
PCN. Such maintenance access is typically hardened against cyber attacks. However, if a
vulnerability is found, an attack could have a considerable impact at multiple operators and
wide-ranging control over the PCN is likely. As an example, in 2014 ICS-CERT reported
on a security breach at a public utility where the attacker used standard brute forcing
techniques to gain access to a password-protected remote access [62]. The risk of this attack
vector is further illustrated by an incident from 2013, in which attackers compromised a
vendor of a large power producer in the U.S. and Canada to exﬁltrate passwords potentially
used for remote maintenance access [63].

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

7 of 19

3.1.4. Third-Party Exploit

Attack vectors are not limited to the premises of grid operators. In fact, exploit-
ing third-parties, such as suppliers or subcontractors, is one of the most dangerous and
hard to control attack vectors. For example, the actors behind the Dragonﬂy malware,
which speciﬁcally targets energy supplies, compromised three different manufacturers of
ICS equipment and inserted their malware into software available on the manufacturers’
websites [64]. Likewise, for the attack on the Ukrainian power grid in 2016 [22], attackers
compromised manufacturers of ﬁeld devices and manipulated ﬁrmware update installers
on the publicly available websites of the manufacturers. Employees at the affected DSO
then downloaded and deployed these updates, consequently unknowingly installing the
attackers’ malware which allowed the attackers to gain access to PCN-connected devices.
Moreover, in case the manufacturer of the control room software is compromised, attackers
may have direct access to the remote maintenance access of multiple grid operators. This be-
comes especially relevant when relying on cloud resources [48,68,69]. In a different case,
the turbine control system of a power company in the United State was unintentionally
infected with a virus through a infected USB drive plugged in by a third-party technician
during maintenance [65]. A special case of a third-party exploit would be a compromise of
the supply chain during the manufacturing of ﬁeld devices. If attackers are able to tamper
with devices before they are installed at the grid operator, they might, e.g., install a covert
channel for remote access. The impact of such an attack would be high and could result in
extensive access to the PCN. A single exploit could be used to gain control over multiple
grid operators.

3.1.5. Overcoming Air Gap

Even if PCNs are air-gapped, i.e., physically isolated from other networks, such as
the ofﬁce network to prevent lateral movement, attackers can still try to attack a PCN by
strategically placing USB drives containing malware around a facility they are targeting.
Consequently, curious or helpful employees may unknowingly compromise air-gapped
systems by connecting such drives to devices in company networks. Such an attack would
likely be local in scope with a medium impact, as attackers could only execute previously
determined attacks. Because of the air gap, there will be no immediate feedback on the
attacks’ success to an adversary. Indeed, malware-infected USB drive are one suspected
attack vector of Stuxnet [56,57]. Notably, air-gapped systems in areas with even stronger
security requirements, such as military bases [70] or the international space station [71],
have shown to be susceptible to such attacks, especially using USB drives.

3.1.6. Insider Attack

If an attacker already works within the energy sector or compromises an employee of
a grid operator, the attacker might have direct access to the control room or ﬁeld devices
and could, therefore, directly control devices or introduce malware, even to air-gapped
systems. Insider attacks are hard to predict and protect against. In the case of an insider,
no further compromise of systems may be necessary, as the attacker has legitimate access
to the PCN. Different examples of disgruntled employees misusing their authority have
been reported by Brdiczka [66]. For example, a disgruntled employee caused a power
outage during the 2002 Winter Olympics by knocking out a substation in Salt Lake City [24].
An insider attack can have a high impact on the grid, especially since insiders typically
have decent knowledge of the inner workings of grids and potential security measures in
place, thus being able to carefully pick their target.

3.1.7. Cascading Effects

Instead of having to compromise the network of one or more grid operators, an attacker
may leverage cascading effects in the power grid to cause a power outage (cf. Section 2).
For example, by remotely gaining control over a large number of consumer electronics,
such as solar power cells [72], an attacker can take advantage of the mechanics of the oper-

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

8 of 19

ating reserve to inﬂuence the frequency within the grid [36]. There are also companies that
centrally manage many distributed solar or wind plants, e.g., within the scope of a virtual
power plant [73]. A compromise at one of these service providers may allow attackers to
leverage similar effects. An attack exploiting cascading effects could be global in scale with
a medium to high impact (depending on the amount of power under the attackers’ control)
but has a high technical difﬁculty, as a comparably large number of devices has to be
exploited and controlled simultaneously. However, already today, larger botnets, e.g., Con-
ﬁcker, Hajime, or WannaCry, control hundreds of thousands to millions of devices [74–77]
making such attacks less unlikely than it appears. The problem might further exaggerate
with the rise of electric mobility, as electric cars, as well as their charging infrastructure [78],
will be networked, facing their own cybersecurity risks combined with a high amount of
energy consumption under their control.

3.2. Attack Scenarios

Different vectors can be used to attack distribution and transmission systems to
disrupt vital control systems. We assume an attacker accessing a PCN to aim at disrupting
the power grid and do not speciﬁcally consider pure passive attacks, such as industrial
espionage. In the following, we brieﬂy discuss the three most important methods an
attacker with access to the PCN can employ.

3.2.1. Disconnecting Resources

If an attacker has gained full access to the PCN, we can assume that the attacker is
able to send arbitrary control commands to connected control systems. This allows an
attacker, e.g., to control switches in substations which disconnect entire power lines or
power plants from the grid, possibly leading to an immediate loss of the energy supply to
consumers. In the attack on Ukraine in 2015, 225,000 consumers were disconnected from
the grid, as attackers were able to control switches in multiple substations [21].

3.2.2. Injecting False Information

If an attacker can only gain control over a small subset of ﬁeld devices, he can still
indirectly inﬂuence the power grid, e.g., by sending forged or manipulated sensor readings
to the control room [25,79,80]. The operators in the control room may act on the wrong
data and take steps to correct a non-existent problem [81,82], which may lead to disruption
in the power grid, e.g., unintentionally overloading a power line because sensor readings
show a normal load. Depending on the sophistication of the attack, SCADA software may
be able to identify a problem through bad data detection algorithms. However, these have
been shown to not always be effective [83].

3.2.3. Denial of Service

Even if attackers neither have full access to the PCN nor can inject (false) informa-
tion, they may still be able to manipulate certain devices and effectively render them
non-functional to launch a denial of service attack against parts of the power grid [25].
For example, in the attacks on the Ukraine power grid in 2016 [22], the CRASHOVERRIDE
malware used by the attackers was able to disable Siemens SIPROTEC devices, manipulate
the ﬁrmware of serial-to-Ethernet devices, and hence disrupt crucial substation functions,
such as protection, automation, or measurement. In future attacks, similar methods could,
e.g., allow attackers to overload power lines even if these are secured by protection devices,
potentially leading to physical damage.

In addition, from a communication networks perspective, power grids and their PCNs
can be prone to denial of service attacks on their communication infrastructure, potentially
disrupting vital control systems [84,85]. In such a denial of service attack on the com-
munication infrastructure of power grids, an attacker strives to overload critical systems,
e.g., a VPN entry point for remote maintenance (cf. Section 2.1), by creating an excessively
high load [86], e.g., by performing a Ping of Death, TCP SYN ﬂood, or UDP ﬂood attack [87].

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

9 of 19

In a distributed denial of service attack, the malicious trafﬁc originates from various sources,
e.g., an Internet-wide botnet under the control of the attacker (cf. Section 3.1.7) relying on
attack tools, such as Trinoo, Tribe Flood Network, or Stacheldraht [88]. To further amplify
the impact of an attack with given resources, a distributed reﬂected denial of service attack
sends requests with forged origin information to benign Internet services, such as DNS and
NTP, with the goal to overload the target system with the corresponding responses [86].
Different works have shown that protocols typically used in PCNs of power grids, such as
DNP3 or IEC 60870-5-104 (cf. Section 2.1), as well as different components found in such
PCNs, are prone to various kinds of denial of service attacks [43,85,89].

4. Providing Cybersecurity for Interconnected Power Grids

Given the tremendous threats resulting from the diverse set of attack vectors and
scenarios, providing security for power transmission and distribution within the grid as a
critical infrastructure is a paramount objective. In our perspective, future improvements in
the security of power grids will have to be a combination of technical approaches, awareness
measures, and closer collaboration between the electrical engineering community and
cybersecurity experts. To provide a way forward for security in interconnected power grids,
thus, we identify a set of diverse security solutions and approaches, including both security
software, as well as organizational measures, such as security training, which complement
each other nicely. More speciﬁcally, we draw from the principle of defense-in-depth [90–92],
as illustrated in Figure 2, to provide a comprehensive set of security measures at different
layers. These measures encompass approaches for (i) device and application security,
(ii) network security, (iii) physical security, and (iv) policies, procedures, and awareness.
While discussing all four aspects in more detail in the following, we speciﬁcally focus on
approaches to provide network security, since the need to protect communication becomes
especially important with an increasing interconnection of power grids.

Figure 2. Following the principle of defense-in-depth, providing security for interconnected power
grids needs to encompass a comprehensive set of measures for (i) device and application security,
(ii) network security, (iii) physical security, as well as (iv) policies, procedures, and awareness.

4.1. Device & Application Security

As a foundation to provide defense-in-depth, all devices and applications deployed
in power grids have to be secured. This becomes especially important considering an
increasing interconnection in power grids, thus exposing potentially vulnerable devices
and applications to larger attack surfaces. Especially, in the context of interconnected power
grids, one promising approach consists of device and application diversity, i.e., using a
wide range of different hardware and software to thwart a worst-case scenario where
malware pervasively compromises all equipment [93]. Before integrating new devices
into the network or deploying updates to devices, static ﬁrmware analysis [94] can be
used to detect susceptibility to vulnerabilities, as well as malware and default credentials
contained in a ﬁrmware image. Following a different direction, security assessments
allow to additionally detect insecure conﬁgurations, as well as test for vulnerabilities at
runtime [95–97]. Such approaches also show promising beneﬁts for device and application
security in power grids [98–100].

Once ﬁrmware has been analyzed, assessed for security, and subsequently deployed
on devices controlling the power grid, such as PLCs, operators have to ensure that the appli-

Policies, Procedures & AwarenessPhysical SecurityNetwork SecurityDevice & Application SecuritySensors 2021, 21, 6225

10 of 19

cations running on these devices do not get compromised. To this end, different approaches
for hardware-based [101] or software-based [102] remote code attestation allow to verify the
integrity of code, its execution, and updates. Within the context of interconnected power
grids, remote attestation can, e.g., be used to detect compromised devices based on changes
in their physical memory [93,103]. Likewise, hardware performance counters can be uti-
lized to detect modiﬁcations in ﬁrmware of critical infrastructure components [104]. From a
different angle, and complementing approaches to provide network security, deploying
security agents to individual components, such as PLCs, aids in applying security patches,
and maintaining end-to-end-security, as well as managing alarms [105–107].

4.2. Network Security

The increasing use of digital technology in power grids demands for more and more
networking capabilities, resulting in the connection of previously isolated components to
larger communication networks [12,14]. To address resulting security concerns, we require
methods, to proactively prevent security incidents, most prominently using network separa-
tion, as well as to detect security incidents that successfully bypassed preventive measures
using intrusion detection systems.

4.2.1. Network Separation

Traditional network separation through demilitarized zones (DMZ) and virtual net-
works is a standard tool for securing networks. These techniques make it harder for
attackers to get a comprehensive view of the network through simple reconnaissance
methods and restrict lateral movement within the network. DMZ and virtual networks are
already used today by grid operators [98], and their deployment is often enforced through
laws [108]. More recently, software-deﬁned networking (SDN) has been providing a more
ﬂexible alternative to DMZ and virtual networks, which are usually conﬁgured once at the
creation of a network and cannot easily be changed during operation. With SDN, changes
to network separation can be conﬁgured quickly, e.g., to counter cyber attacks. Likewise,
SDN can be used to enforce network compliant behavior, e.g., speciﬁed using communica-
tion rules by the operator of the communication network [109,110]. Dong et al. [111] and
White et al. [112] provide more information on the opportunities and challenges of using
SDN for smart grid resilience. The main challenge of SDN approaches for securing power
grids result from availability concerns of grid operators.

4.2.2. Intrusion Detection Systems

Intrusion detection systems (IDS) are used in most company networks to detect
attackers through suspicious network activities [113,114]. While not all companies in the
energy sector are using IDS to secure their PCNs today, often citing availability concerns,
we believe that IDS are especially well-suited to provide security in interconnected power
grids: In contrast to ofﬁce networks of large companies, trafﬁc in PCNs is well deﬁned
as only certain protocols are used and, in most cases, any piece of software or hardware
communicating over the network is known in advance [115]. An IDS in a PCN can,
therefore, be much more restrictive without affecting operations than in an ofﬁce network,
where a large number of protocols and devices might communicate with each other and
unknown Internet endpoints. Still, an attacker doing active reconnaissance (e.g., a port
scan) could even easily be detected by a simple traditional IDS which is not specialized on
industrial control systems.

Existing IDS deployments can be classiﬁed into network-based and host-based ap-
proaches [91]. In our opinion, both approaches should be used to secure PCNs. Further-
more, distributed and process-aware IDS allow to further strengthen security in intercon-
nected power grids. In the following, we discuss the different approaches for IDS and their
application to the energy sector.

Most of the communication in a PCN in the energy sector is conducted between the
control room and substations or ﬁeld devices. Consequently, a network-based IDS (NIDS)

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

11 of 19

should be deployed at nodes in the network, such as switches, to be able to monitor any
trafﬁc within the PCN, especially those sent from the control room or towards it. Such an
IDS can then easily detect reconnaissance measures, e.g., port scans. Moreover, as trafﬁc in
PCNs is well deﬁned, a network-based IDS can detect further suspicious network activity,
e.g., an increase in the number of packets sent from a network node or communication
between network nodes that have not communicated beforehand. An emerging challenge
in NIDS within a PCN is the question of how to cope with the ever changing and dynamic
smart grid environment [79,113].

A host-based IDS (HIDS) runs on a single host in a networked environment and is,
therefore, only able to monitor the incoming and outgoing trafﬁc on this device. However,
in contrast to NIDS, HIDS also monitor log ﬁles, system policies, and other relevant data
concerning the host it is installed on [116]. These systems should be used wherever possible
to supplement network-based IDS in the PCN. Not all switches in a network may offer a
monitoring port or there might be other restrictions, why network-based systems cannot
be used for parts of the network. In such cases, host-based IDS can be used to still monitor
most parts of the trafﬁc. Host-based IDS can, e.g., detect and block a denial-of-service
attack targeting a device within the PCN. However, within a PCN a challenge for HIDS
are the specialized hardware used. It will only be possible to install host-based IDS on a
certain subset of systems. For highly at-risk hardware, e.g., some PLCs, a host-based IDS
could be implemented by using a gateway between the network and the PLC to monitor
any incoming and outgoing trafﬁc [117].

A distributed IDS for the power grid combines network-based and host-based IDS
and centrally aggregates and correlates data provided by the systems distributed within
the PCN [118]. Such a distributed IDS allows a more complete view on the trafﬁc within
the PCN compared to many individual systems. Attacks from multiple points within
the network can be correlated and dealt with more speciﬁcally. Moreover, compromised
devices may be more easily identiﬁed. The collected data can be processed at a central
location and could be used to help the operators in the control room to make informed
decisions. A major challenge for distributed IDS within a PCN is the placement of the
nodes as this inﬂuences the quality of the aggregated data.

A process-aware IDS employs context information about the environment in which
it is placed. Chromik et al. [119] recently developed such a system for local substation
networks. In their approach, which employs the event-based network security monitor
Bro (now Zeek) [120], they check incoming control commands for consistency with safety
requirements and physical constraints. Their approach maintains a model of the local
system, which is updated through sensor readings and commands sent through the IEC
60870-5-104 protocol. At the current stage, inconsistent commands yield an alert message,
which has to be acted on manually. Such systems could, e.g., be extended to block com-
mands if their execution would lead to an inconsistent state, especially when adapted to
more modern grid communication protocols.

The concept of process-aware IDS is especially interesting in a SCADA and industrial
control systems (ICS) environment, where valid trafﬁc is well-deﬁned and commands lead
to physical changes in the controlled system [121]. In combination with a distributed IDS,
such approaches can lead to substantially more secure power grids, while introducing
a minimum of extra hardware into the PCN. However, the main challenge in deploying
such a system lies in the considerable knowledge which is required about the individual
environment. Future work is required to automatically adapt to the differences between
grid operators, as the used hardware, software, and protocols will be different.

In contrast to an IDS, which targets to detect attacks, an intrusion prevention system
(IPS) operates similarly to identify attacks but, instead of merely raising an alarm, directly
blocks any detected suspicious (network) activity and, thus, strives to prevent (and not
only detect) potentially disastrous attacks [122]. While IPS appear promising to secure
power grids as they can be used to automatically thwart attacks [123], they come with
the risk of mistakenly blocking legitimate, potentially safety-critical communication as

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

12 of 19

it is prevalent in PCNs. For example, an IPS might falsely classify seldom disturbance
scenarios in a substation protection system [124] as attacks and, thus, prevent important
reactive measurements from the control room. Consequently, automatically blocking
potentially suspicious activity, e.g., using an IPS, should be restricted to non safety-critical
communication. However, when applied to, e.g., a VPN entry point used for remote
maintenance (cf. Section 2.1), IPS can nicely complement other security measures with their
ability to directly block suspicious activity.

4.3. Physical Security

As grid operators often use their own physical networks for communication, physical
security is directly related to cybersecurity. For example, a motivated attacker could break
into a substation and infect local devices with malware or otherwise tamper with the
available access to the PCN. Physical security for substations differs widely between grid
operators but might be as low as a wire fence and no means of surveillance or access
control [58]. Recommended measures to ensure physical security for substations include
the protection of information on substations, such as engineering drawings and power ﬂow
models, and surveillance and monitoring measures, such as video cameras and motion
detectors, as well as the restriction of physical access [59].

More sophisticated physical security may not only deter attackers but also act as
a part of a general IDS. For example, if a physical security violation is detected at a
substation [125], subsequent malicious activities in the PCN could be correlated with the
physical security violation, helping in attack response. A major challenge will be integrating
(automatically) detected physical security violations [125] into an overall security solution
involving IDS on the network side. With an increasing integration of novel, easily-accessible
assets, such as smart meters [16] and charging infrastructure for electronic vehicles [78,126],
into the communication infrastructure of smart grids, the challenge of physical security is
further exaggerated.

4.4. Policies, Procedures & Awareness

To date, the most devastating cyber attacks on power grids all speciﬁcally exploited
human behavior either through spear-phishing, most prominently using emails, or ma-
nipulated downloads [21,22]. These problems cannot solely be solved by using more
sophisticated security technology. Consequently, employees need to be trained to increase
awareness towards security-related behavior [127].

Especially, workers who have direct access to vital equipment need to be aware of
social engineering techniques and empowered to detect simple attacks, such as spear-
phishing. For example, phishing experiments are valuable to raise employees’ awareness
for spear-phishing at companies in the electrical power domain [128]. However, as long
as ofﬁce networks and operational networks are not completely separated (which might
be difﬁcult to achieve), a general increase in security awareness is necessary to increase
overall security. A challenge of security-related awareness training is its adaptation to the
constantly changing cyber attack landscape.

Additionally, even with the best security measures and awareness trainings in place,
eventually a (potential) security incident will occur [129]. As such, corresponding incident
response plans and guidelines need to be created, maintained, and trained. However,
most existing guidelines for responding to security incidents are mainly concerned with
information chains and organizational processes [130,131] and not with actually remedying
security incidents.

Consequently, grid operators need to develop and maintain actionable incident re-
sponse plans and guidelines, supporting their employees with precise instructions also
at the technical level on how to react to security incidents. To further decrease incident
response times, it is recommended to keep the number of involved parties small, e.g., by op-
erating own networks, andthus , thus, reduce the need for synchronization and commu-
nication during incident response [129]. Notably, proper preparation for cybersecurity

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

13 of 19

incidents also requires to regularly train the response to cybersecurity incidents, e.g., using
a corresponding training simulator [132,133]. To be valuable for training employees of
grid operators, such training environments need to closely model typical process control
network as found in power grids [17,134].

5. Conclusions

With increasing digitization and decentralization, grid operators are faced with rapid
changes in the amount of communication necessary and how this communication is
conducted. As a result, more networking is introduced, creating a wider attack space for
attackers. In this paper, we highlighted resulting fundamental security problems and attack
vectors, which still have to be addressed in the coming years in order to maintain a high
level of security and availability of power grids as a critical infrastructure [2–5].

To provide security in interconnected power grids, we discussed a set of diverse secu-
rity solutions and approaches. Depending on the country and the speciﬁc grid operation
company, current security measures range from non-existent to state-of-the-art. However,
even if attackers are only able to control a small fraction of the power connected to the grid,
they can still leverage mechanisms inherent to today’s large power grids to cause consid-
erable damage. Thus, only an overall increase in the security of a country’s power grid
provides an effective defense against sophisticated attacks. Consequently, we identiﬁed
a combination of software and organizational approaches, including intrusion detection
systems, software-deﬁned networking, and awareness training, as promising candidates
for achieving this goal.

With the increasing move towards smart grids as, e.g., evidenced by the advancing
deployment of smart meters [16] and charging infrastructure for electronic vehicles [78,126],
further security challenges, but also research trends and cyber innovations addressing
these challenges, arise [26]. Currently, one of the most prominent research ﬁelds in smart
grid security is the challenge of appropriately employing blockchain and distributed ledger
technology, and the research community addresses this challenge from various angles.
With a focus directly on smart grid security, approaches promise to realize distributed
security for smart grids at a national and international level [135], secure the supply
chain for assets in the grid [136], automate the veriﬁcation of assets in the grid [137],
or persistently store security audits [138]. Furthermore, different streams of research
address the challenge of decentralized management and control of the grid, e.g., by realizing
ﬂexible, decentralized local energy markets to securely and efﬁciently integrate renewable
energies into today’s rather static energy markets [139,140] or by forecasting demands for
the grid and self-adjusting the consumption of power based on surges or drops in energy
prices [137]. However, to date, it remains unclear whether and to what extent blockchain
and distributed ledger technology indeed can capitalize on the promise to strengthen
cybersecurity in power grids, especially considering strict regulatory requirements for
critical infrastructures, such as power grids [137].

The cyber landscape within power grids as a critical infrastructure [2–5] is drastically
changing: To continually provide ubiquitous power, new cybersecurity threats have to
be taken into consideration and protected against. Achieving these goals requires tight
collaboration between cybersecurity experts and grid operators to develop and implement
cybersecurity solutions that are tailored to the unique requirements of power grids. To this
end, our theoretical contributions consolidated in this perspective paper provide the
foundation for deeper practical research and experimental studies to pave the way forward
to provide a high level of cybersecurity for interconnected power grids.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.K., R.E., B.K. and M.H.; methodology, T.K. and B.K.;
investigation, T.K., B.K. and I.H.; writing—original draft preparation, T.K.; writing—review and
editing, M.H., R.E., B.K. and I.H.; visualization, T.K.; supervision, R.E. and M.H. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

14 of 19

Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

Abbreviations

The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:

Conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability
CIA
Database
DB
Demilitarized zone
DMZ
Distribution system operator
DSO
Host-based intrusion detection system
HIDS
Human-machine interface
HMI
Industrial control systems
ICS
Intrusion detection system
IDS
Intrusion prevention system
IPS
Network-based intrusion detection system
NIDS
Process control network
PCN
PLC
Programmable logic controller
SCADA Supervisory control and data acquisition
Software-deﬁned networking
SDN
Transmission system operator
TSO
Virtual private network
VPN

References

1. He, X.; Qiu, R.C.; Ai, Q.; Chu, L.; Xu, X.; Ling, Z. Designing for situation awareness of future power grids: An indicator system

2.

3.

4.

5.

based on linear eigenvalue statistics of large random matrices. IEEE Access 2016, 4, 3557–3568. [CrossRef]
Suciu, G.; Sachian, M.A.; Vulpe, A.; Vochin, M.; Farao, A.; Koutroumpouchos, N.; Xenakis, C. SealedGRID: Secure and
Interoperable Platform for Smart GRID Applications. Sensors 2021, 21, 5448. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008 on the Identiﬁcation and Designation of European Critical Infrastructures
and the Assessment of the Need to Improve Their Protection. Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/
ALL/?uri=CELEX:32008L0114 (accessed on 1 September 2021).
Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the Resilience of Critical Entities COM/2020/829 Final.
Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM:2020:829:FIN (accessed on 1 September 2021).
Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-21—Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience. Available online: https://obamawhitehouse.
archives.gov/the-press-ofﬁce/2013/02/12/presidential-policy-directive-critical-infrastructure-security-and-resil (accessed on
1 September 2021).

6. Wang, T.; Long, Q.; Gu, X.; Chai, W. Information Flow Modeling and Performance Evaluation of Communication Networks

7.

8.

9.

Serving Power Grids. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 13735–13747. [CrossRef]
Javaid, N.; Hafeez, G.; Iqbal, S.; Alrajeh, N.; Alabed, M.S.; Guizani, M. Energy efﬁcient integration of renewable energy sources in
the smart grid for demand side management. IEEE Access 2018, 6, 77077–77096. [CrossRef]
Figueroa-Acevedo, A.L.; Tsai, C.H.; Gruchalla, K.; Claes, Z.; Foley, S.; Bakke, J.; Okullo, J.; Prabhakar, A.J. Visualizing the Impacts
of Renewable Energy Growth in the U.S. Midcontinent. IEEE Open Access J. Power Energy 2020, 7, 91–99. [CrossRef]
Phuangpornpitak, N.; Tia, S. Opportunities and Challenges of Integrating Renewable Energy in Smart Grid System.
Energy Procedia 2013, 34, 282–290. [CrossRef]

10. Ahmed, S.D.; Al-Ismail, F.S.; Shaﬁullah, M.; Al-Sulaiman, F.A.; El-Amin, I.M. Grid Integration Challenges of Wind Energy:

A Review. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 10857–10878. [CrossRef]

11. Klaer, B.; Sen, Ö.; van der Velde, D.; Hacker, I.; Andres, M.; Henze, M. Graph-based Model of Smart Grid Architectures.
In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Smart Energy Systems and Technologies (SEST), Istanbul, Turkey,
7–9 September 2020; [CrossRef]

12. Henze, M.; Hiller, J.; Hummen, R.; Matzutt, R.; Wehrle, K.; Ziegeldorf, J.H. Network Security and Privacy for Cyber-Physical
Systems. In Security and Privacy in Cyber-Physical Systems: Foundations, Principles, and Applications; Wiley-IEEE Press: Chichester,
UK; Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2017. [CrossRef]

13. Pennekamp, J.; Glebke, R.; Henze, M.; Meisen, T.; Quix, C.; Hai, R.; Gleim, L.; Niemietz, P.; Rudack, M.; Knape, S.; et al. Towards
an Infrastructure Enabling the Internet of Production. In Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International Conference on Industrial
Cyber-Physical Systems (ICPS), Taipei, Taiwan, 6–9 May 2019. [CrossRef]

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

15 of 19

14. Hiller, J.; Komanns, K.; Dahlmanns, M.; Wehrle, K. Regaining Insight and Control on SMGW-based Secure Communication in
Smart Grids. In Proceedings of the 2019 AEIT International Annual Conference (AEIT), Florence, Italy, 18–20 September 2019.
[CrossRef]

15. Pennekamp, J.; Henze, M.; Schmidt, S.; Niemietz, P.; Fey, M.; Trauth, D.; Bergs, T.; Brecher, C.; Wehrle, K. Dataﬂow Challenges
in an Internet of Production: A Security & Privacy Perspective. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Workshop on Cyber-Physical
Systems Security and PrivaCy (CPS-SPC), London, UK, 11 November 2019. [CrossRef]

16. Khurana, H.; Hadley, M.; Lu, N.; Frincke, D.A. Smart-Grid Security Issues. IEEE Secur. Priv. 2010, 8, 81–85. [CrossRef]
17. van der Velde, D.; Henze, M.; Kathmann, P.; Wassermann, E.; Andres, M.; Bracht, D.; Ernst, R.; Hallak, G.; Klaer, B.;
Linnartz, P.; et al. Methods for Actors in the Electric Power System to Prevent, Detect and React to ICT Attacks and Fail-
ures. In Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Energy Conference (ENERGYCON), Gammarth, Tunisia, 28 September–1
October 2020. [CrossRef]

18. Zhang, H.; Jin, X.; Li, Y.; Jiang, Z.; Liang, Y.; Jin, Z.; Wen, Q. A Multi-Step Attack Detection Model Based on Alerts of Smart Grid

Monitoring System. IEEE Access 2019, 8, 1031–1047. [CrossRef]

19. Karimipour, H.; Dehghantanha, A.; Parizi, R.M.; Choo, K.K.R.; Leung, H. A deep and scalable unsupervised machine learning

20.

system for cyber-attack detection in large-scale smart grids. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 80778–80788. [CrossRef]
Serror, M.; Hack, S.; Henze, M.; Schuba, M.; Wehrle, K. Challenges and Opportunities in Securing the Industrial Internet of
Things. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2020, 17, 2985–2996. [CrossRef]

21. E-ISAC. Analysis of the Cyber Attack on the Ukrainian Power Grid. Available online: https://media.kasperskycontenthub.com/
wp-content/uploads/sites/43/2016/05/20081514/E-ISAC_SANS_Ukraine_DUC_5.pdf (accessed on 1 September 2021).
22. Dragos. CRASHOVERRIDE—Analysis of the Threat to Electric Grid Operations. Available online: https://www.dragos.com/

wp-content/uploads/CrashOverride-01.pdf (accessed on 1 September 2021).

23. Petermann, T.; Bradke, H.; Lüllmann, A.; Poetzsch, M.; Riehm, U. What Happens during a Blackout: Consequences of a Prolonged and

Wide-Ranging Power Outage; BoD: Norderstedt, Germany, 2014.

24. Xie, J.; Stefanov, A.; Liu, C.C. Physical and cyber security in a smart grid environment. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Energy Environ.

2016, 5, 519–542. [CrossRef]

25. Li, X.; Liang, X.; Lu, R.; Shen, X.; Lin, X.; Zhu, H. Securing Smart Grid: Cyber Attacks, Countermeasures, and Challenges.

IEEE Commun. Mag. 2012, 50, 38–45. [CrossRef]

26. Gunduz, M.Z.; Das, R. Cyber-security on smart grid: Threats and potential solutions. Comput. Netw. 2020, 169, 107094. [CrossRef]
Segall, A. Distributed Network Protocol (DNP3). IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory. 1983, 29, 23–35. 2012.10.1109/IEEESTD.2012.6327578.
27.
[CrossRef]
International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC 60870-5-104 Standard. Available online: https://webstore.iec.ch/p-preview/
info_iec60870-5-104%7Bed1.0%7Den_d.pdf (accessed on 1 September 2021).

28.

29. Andress, J. The Basics of Information Security: Understanding the Fundamentals of InfoSec in Theory and Practice; Syngress: Amsterdam,

The Netherlands, 2014. [CrossRef]

30. Knight, U.G. Power Systems in Emergencies: From Contingency Planning to Crisis Management; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2001.

[CrossRef]

31. Bundesnetzagentur—Security of Supply. Available online: https://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/EN/Areas/Energy/Companies/

SecurityOfSupply/QualityOfSupply/QualityOfSupply_node.html (accessed on 1 September 2021).

32. Google. Reliability. Available online: https://support.google.com/googlecloud/answer/6056635 (accessed on 1 September

2021).

33. ENTSO-E. Operation Handbook. Available online: https://www.ucte.org/resources/publications/ophandbook/ (accessed on

1 September 2021) .

34. Wang, J.; Wang, X.; Wu, Y. Operating Reserve Model in the Power Market. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2005, 20, 223–229. [CrossRef]
35. Amini, S.; Pasqualetti, F.; Mohsenian-Rad, H. Dynamic Load Altering Attacks Against Power System Stability: Attack Models

and Protection Schemes. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2018, 9, 2862–2872. [CrossRef]

36. Dabrowski, A.; Ullrich, J.; Weippl, E.R. Grid Shock: Coordinated Load-Changing Attacks on Power Grids. In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC), Orlando, FL, USA, 4–8 December 2017. [CrossRef]
37. Kenyon, R.W.; Maguire, J.; Present, E.; Christensen, D.; Hodge, B.M. Bulk Electric Power System Risks from Coordinated Edge

Devices. IEEE Open Access J. Power Energy 2021, 8, 35–44. [CrossRef]

38. Dahlmanns, M.; Lohmöller, J.; Fink, I.B.; Pennekamp, J.; Wehrle, K.; Henze, M. Easing the Conscience with OPC UA: An
Internet-Wide Study on Insecure Deployments. In Proceedings of the Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), Virtual Event,
27–29 October 2020. [CrossRef]

39. Chapman, J.P.; Ofner, S.; Pauksztelo, P. Key factors in industrial control system security.

In Proceedings of the IEEE 41st
Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN), Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 7–10 November 2016; pp. 551–554. [CrossRef]
Istiaque Ahmed, K.; Tahir, M.; Hadi Habaebi, M.; Lun Lau, S.; Ahad, A. Machine Learning for Authentication and Authorization
in IoT: Taxonomy, Challenges and Future Research Direction. Sensors 2021, 21, 5122. [CrossRef]

40.

41. Maynard, P.; McLaughlin, K.; Haberler, B. Towards Understanding Man-In-The-Middle Attacks on IEC 60870-5-104 SCADA
Networks. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium for ICS & SCADA Cyber Security Research (ICS-CSR), St. Pölten,
Austria, 11–12 September 2014. [CrossRef]

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

16 of 19

42. Hodo, E.; Grebeniuk, S.; Ruotsalainen, H.; Tavolato, P. Anomaly Detection for Simulated IEC-60870-5-104 Trafﬁc. In Proceedings of
the 12th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES), Reggio Calabria, Italy, 29 August–1 September
2017. [CrossRef]

43. Radoglou-Grammatikis, P.; Sarigiannidis, P.; Giannoulakis, I.; Kafetzakis, E.; Panaousis, E. Attacking IEC-60870-5-104 SCADA
Systems. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE World Congress on Services (SERVICES), Milan, Italy, 8–13 July 2019; Volume 2642.
[CrossRef]

44. Robinson, M. The SCADA Threat Landscape. In Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium for ICS & SCADA Cyber

Security Research (ICS-CSR), Leicester, UK, 16–17 September 2013. [CrossRef]

45. Darwish, I.; Igbe, O.; Celebi, O.; Saadawi, T.; Soryal, J. Smart Grid DNP3 Vulnerability Analysis and Experimentation. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE 2nd International Conference on Cyber Security and Cloud Computing, New York, NY, USA, 3–5 November
2015. [CrossRef]

46. Xu, Y.; Yang, Y.; Li, T.; Ju, J.; Wang, Q. Review on Cyber Vulnerabilities of Communication Protocols in Industrial Control
Systems. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Conference on Energy Internet and Energy System Integration (EI2), Beijing, China,
26–28 November 2017. [CrossRef]
International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC 62351 Standard. Available online: https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/63742
(accessed on 1 September 2021).

47.

48. Henze, M. The Quest for Secure and Privacy-preserving Cloud-based Industrial Cooperation. In Proceedings of the 6th IEEE

49.

International Workshop on Security and Privacy in the Cloud (SPC), Avignon, France, 29 June–1 July 2020. [CrossRef]
International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC 61850 Standard. Available online: https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/20082
(accessed on 1 September 2021)

50. Hummen, R.; Hiller, J.; Henze, M.; Wehrle, K. Slimﬁt—A HIP DEX Compression Layer for the IP-based Internet of Things. In
Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Internet of Things Communications and Technologies (IoT), Lyon, France,
7–9 October 2013. [CrossRef]

51. Hummen, R.; Hiller, J.; Wirtz, H.; Henze, M.; Shafagh, H.; Wehrle, K. 6LoWPAN Fragmentation Attacks and Mitigation
Mechanisms. In Proceedings of the Sixth ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks (WiSec),
Budapest, Hungary, 17–19 April 2013. [CrossRef]

52. Hiller, J.; Henze, M.; Serror, M.; Wagner, E.; Richter, J.N.; Wehrle, K. Secure Low Latency Communication for Constrained
Industrial IoT Scenarios. In Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN), Chicago, IL, USA,
1–4 October 2018. [CrossRef]

53. Hiller, J.; Pennekamp, J.; Dahlmanns, M.; Henze, M.; Panchenko, A.; Wehrle, K. Tailoring Onion Routing to the Internet of Things:
Security and Privacy in Untrusted Environments. In Proceedings of the 27th IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols
(ICNP), Chicago, IL, USA, 8–10 October 2019. [CrossRef]

54. Wagner, E.; Bauer, J.; Henze, M. Take a Bite of the Reality Sandwich: Revisiting the Security of Progressive Message Authentication

Codes. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2103.08560.

55. Ackermann, P. Industrial Cybersecurity: Efﬁciently Secure Critical Infrastructure Systems; Packt: Birmingham, UK, 2017.
56.
57.
58.

Falliere, N.; Murchu, L.O.; Chien, E. W32.Stuxnet Dossier. Symantec Secur. Response 2011, 5, 29.
Farwell, J.P.; Rohozinski, R. Stuxnet and the Future of Cyber War. Survival 2011, 53, 23–40. [CrossRef]
Florida Public Service Commission, Ofﬁce of Auditing and Performance Analysis. Review of Physical Security Protection
of Utility Substations and Control Centers. Available online: https://www.psc.state.ﬂ.us/Files/PDF/Publications/Reports/
General/Electricgas/Cyber_Physical_Security.pdf (accessed on 1 September 2021).

59. Parfomak, P.W. Physical Security of the U.S. Power Grid: High-Voltage Transformer Substations; Congressional Research Service:

Washington, DC, USA, 2014.

60. Ofﬁce of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, U.S. Department of Energy. An Assessment of Copper Wire Thefts from
Electric Utilities. 2007. Available online: https://www.oe.netl.doe.gov/docs/copper042707.pdf (accessed on 1 September 2021).
61. Kaspersky Lab ICS CERT. Threats Posed by Using RATs in ICS. Available online: https://securelist.com/threats-posed-by-

62.

using-rats-in-ics/ (accessed on 1 September 2021).
ICS-CERT. Internet Accessible Control Systems at Risk. ICS-CERT Monitor Newsletter ICS-MM201404. 2014. Available online:
https://us-cert.cisa.gov/ics/monitors/ICS-MM201404 (accessed on 1 September 2021).

63. Lee, R.M.; Assante, M.J.; Conway, T. ICS Defense Use Case (DUC) # 4: Analysis of the Recent Reports of Attacks on US Infrastructure by

64.

65.

Iranian Actors; SANS ICS: North Bethesda, MD, USA, 2016.
Symantec. Dragonﬂy: Cyberespionage Attacks against Energy Suppliers. Available online: https://docs.broadcom.com/doc/
dragonﬂy_threat_against_western_energy_suppliers (accessed on 1 September 2021).
ICS-CERT. Malware Infections in the Control Environment. ICS-CERT Monitor Newsletter ICS-MM201212. 2012. Available
online: https://us-cert.cisa.gov/ics/monitors/ICS-MM201212 (accessed on 1 September 2021).

66. Brdiczka, O. Insider Attacks Pose a Serious Threat to Critical U.S. Infrastructure. Available online: https://blog.vectra.ai/blog/

insider-threats-in-critical-us-infrastructure (accessed on 1 September 2021).

67. Ligh, M.; Adair, S.; Hartstein, B.; Richard, M. Malware Analyst’s Cookbook: Tools and Techniques for Fighting Malicious Code; Wiley:

Indiana, IN, USA, 2010.

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

17 of 19

68. Henze, M.; Matzutt, R.; Hiller, J.; Mühmer, E.; Ziegeldorf, J.H.; van der Giet, J.; Wehrle, K. Practical Data Compliance for Cloud
In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E), Vancouver, BC, Canada,

Storage.
4–7 April 2017. [CrossRef]

69. Henze, M.; Matzutt, R.; Hiller, J.; Mühmer, E.; Ziegeldorf, J.H.; van der Giet, J.; Wehrle, K. Complying with Data Handling

Requirements in Cloud Storage Systems. IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. 2020. [CrossRef]

70. Lynn, W.F., III. Defending a New Domain: The Pentagon’s Cyberstrategy. Foreign Aff. 2010, 89, 97–108.
71. Hannan, N. An Assessment of Supply-Chain Cyber Resilience for the International Space Station. RUSI J. 2018, 163, 28–32.

[CrossRef]

72. Cardenas, D.J.S.; Hahn, A.; Liu, C.C. Assessing Cyber-Physical Risks of IoT-Based Energy Devices in Grid Operations. IEEE Access

2020, 8, 61161–61173. [CrossRef]

73. Pudjianto, D.; Ramsay, C.; Strbac, G. Virtual power plant and system integration of distributed energy resources. IET Renew.

Power Gener. 2007, 1, 10–16. [CrossRef]

74. Rossow, C.; Andriesse, D.; Werner, T.; Stone-Gross, B.; Plohmann, D.; Dietrich, C.J.; Bos, H. SoK: P2PWNED—Modeling and
Evaluating the Resilience of Peer-to-Peer Botnets. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, Berkeley,
CA, USA, 19–22 May 2013. [CrossRef]

75. Asghari, H.; Ciere, M.; van Eeten, M.J. Post-Mortem of a Zombie: Conﬁcker Cleanup After Six Years. In Proceedings of the 24th

USENIX Security Symposium, Washington, DC, USA, 12–14 August 2015.

76. ThaiCERT. WannaCry Ransomware. TLP:WHITE. 2017. Available online: https://www.nksc.lt/doc/ENISA-WannaCry-v1.0.pdf

(accessed on 1 September 2021).

78.

77. Herwig, S.; Harvey, K.; Hughey, G.; Roberts, R.; Levin, D. Measurement and Analysis of Hajime, a Peer-to-peer IoT Botnet.
In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), San Diego, CA, USA,
24–27 February 2019. [CrossRef]
Falk, R.; Fries, S. Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure – Security Considerations and Approaches. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet (INTERNET), Venice, Italy, 24–29 June 2012.
Sridhar, S.; Hahn, A.; Govindarasu, M. Cyber-Physical System Security for the Electric Power Grid. Proc. IEEE 2012, 100, 210–224.
[CrossRef]

79.

80. Hittini, H.; Abdrabou, A.; Zhang, L. FDIPP: False Data Injection Prevention Protocol for Smart Grid Distribution Systems. Sensors

2020, 20, 679. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

81. Acosta, M.R.C.; Ahmed, S.; Garcia, C.E.; Koo, I. Extremely Randomized Trees-Based Scheme for Stealthy Cyber-Attack Detection

in Smart Grid Networks. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 19921–19933. [CrossRef]

82. Xue, D.; Jing, X.; Liu, H. Detection of False Data Injection Attacks in Smart Grid Utilizing ELM-Based OCON Framework.

IEEE Access 2019, 7, 31762–31773. [CrossRef]

83. Liu, Y.; Ning, P.; Reiter, M.K. False data injection attacks against state estimation in electric power grids. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.

Secur. (TISSEC) 2011, 14, 13. [CrossRef]

84. Radoglou Grammatikis, P.; Sarigiannidis, P.; Efstathopoulos, G.; Panaousis, E. ARIES: A Novel Multivariate Intrusion Detection

System for Smart Grid. Sensors 2020, 20, 5305. [CrossRef]

85. Huseinovi´c, A.; Mrdovi´c, S.; Bicakci, K.; Uludag, S. A Survey of Denial-of-Service Attacks and Solutions in the Smart Grid.

IEEE Access 2020, 8, 177447–177470. [CrossRef]

86. Rossow, C. Ampliﬁcation Hell: Revisiting Network Protocols for DDoS Abuse. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Network and

Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), San Diego, CA, USA, 23–26 February 2014.

87. Yusof, M.A.M.; Ali, F.H.M.; Darus, M.Y. Detection and Defense Algorithms of Different Types of DDoS Attacks. Int. J. Eng. Technol.

88.

89.

2017, 9, 410. [CrossRef]
Srivastava, A.; Gupta, B.; Tyagi, A.; Sharma, A.; Mishra, A. A Recent Survey on DDoS Attacks and Defense Mechanisms. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Parallel Distributed Computing Technologies and Applications; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2011; pp. 570–580.
Jin, D.; Nicol, D.M.; Yan, G. An event buffer ﬂooding attack in DNP3 controlled SCADA systems. In Proceedings of the 2011
Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), Phoenix, AZ, USA, 11–14 December 2011; pp. 2614–2626.

90. Kuipers, D.; Fabro, M. Control Systems Cyber Security: Defense in Depth Strategies; Technical Report INL/EXT-06-11478; Idaho Na-

tional Laboratory: Idaho Falls, ID, USA, 2006.

91. Pranggono, B.; McLaughlin, K.; Yang, Y.; Sezer, S. Intrusion Detection System for Critical Infrastructure. In The State of the Art in

Intrusion Prevention and Detection; CRC Press: Florida, FL, USA, 2014. [CrossRef]

92. Ashok, A.; Govindarasu, M.; Wang, J. Cyber–Physical Attack-Resilient Wide-Area Monitoring, Protection, and Control for the

Power Grid. Proc. IEEE 2017, 105, 1389–1407. [CrossRef]

93. Mo, Y.; Kim, T.H.J.; Brancik, K.; Dickinson, D.; Lee, H.; Perrig, A.; Sinopoli, B. Cyber-physical Security of a Smart Grid

94.

Infrastructure. Proc. IEEE 2011, 100, 195–209. [CrossRef]
Fraunhofer FKIE. FACT—The Firmware Analysis and Comparison Tool. Available online: https://fkie-cad.github.io/FACT_
core/ (accessed on 1 September 2021).

95. Caselli, M.; Kargl, F. A Security Assessment Methodology for Critical Infrastructures. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Critical Information Infrastructures Security (CRITIS), Limassol, Cyprus, 13–15 October 2014. [CrossRef]

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

18 of 19

96. Combs-Ford, M. Security Assessment of Industrial Control Supervisory and Process Control Zones. In Proceedings of the 17th
Annual Conference on Information Technology Education and the 5th Annual Conference on Research in Information Technology
(SIGITE/RIIT), Boston, MA, USA, 28 September–1 October 2016. [CrossRef]

97. Roepert, L.; Dahlmanns, M.; Fink, I.B.; Pennekamp, J.; Henze, M. Assessing the Security of OPC UA Deployments. In Proceedings

of the 1st ITG Workshop on IT Security (ITSec), Tübingen, Germany, 2–3 April 2020. [CrossRef]

98. McBride, A.J.; McGee, A.R. Assessing Smart Grid Security. Bell Labs Tech. J. 2012, 17, 87–103. [CrossRef]
99. Winter, E.; Rademacher, M. Fuzzing of SCADA Protocols used in Smart Grids. Energy Inform. 2020, 3 (Suppl. 2), 1–3. [CrossRef]
100. Reda, H.T.; Ray, B.; Peidaee, P.; Anwar, A.; Mahmood, A.; Kalam, A.; Islam, N. Vulnerability and Impact Analysis of the IEC

61850 GOOSE Protocol in the Smart Grid. Sensors 2021, 21, 1554. [CrossRef]

101. Henze, M.; Hiller, J.; Hohlfeld, O.; Wehrle, K. Moving Privacy-Sensitive Services from Public Clouds to Decentralized Private
Clouds. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E) Workshops, Berlin, Germany,
4–8 April 2016. [CrossRef]

102. Shah, A.; Perrig, A.; Sinopoli, B. Mechanisms to Provide Integrity in SCADA and PCS devices. In Proceedings of the International

Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems-Challenges and Applications (CPS-CA), Santorini Island, Greece, 11 June 2008.

103. Yang, X.; He, X.; Yu, W.; Lin, J.; Li, R.; Yang, Q.; Song, H. Towards a Low-cost Remote Memory Attestation for the Smart Grid.

Sensors 2015, 15, 20799–20824. [CrossRef]

104. Wang, X.; Konstantinou, C.; Maniatakos, M.; Karri, R. ConFirm: Detecting Firmware Modiﬁcations in Embedded Systemsusing
Hardware Performance Counters. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design
(ICCAD), Austin, TX, USA, 2–6 November 2015. [CrossRef]

105. Wei, D.; Lu, Y.; Jafari, M.; Skare, P.M.; Rohde, K. Protecting Smart Grid Automation Systems Against Cyberattacks. IEEE Trans.

Smart Grid 2011, 2, 782–795. [CrossRef]

106. Anwar, A.; Mahmood, A.N. Cyber Security of Smart Grid Infrastructure. In The State of the Art in Intrusion Prevention and Detection;

CRC Press: Florida, FL, USA, 2014.

107. Dahlmanns, M.; Pennekamp, J.; Fink, I.B.; Schoolmann, B.; Wehrle, K.; Henze, M. Transparent End-to-End Security for
Publish/Subscribe Communication in Cyber-Physical Systems. In Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on Secure and Trustworthy
Cyber-Physical Systems (SaT-CPS), Virtual Event USA, 28 April 2021. [CrossRef]

108. Federal Republic of Germany. Energiewirtschaftsgesetz (EnWG), § 11. Available online: https://www.buzer.de/gesetz/2151/v214

074-2018-12-21.htm (accessed on 1 September 2021).

109. Serror, M.; Henze, M.; Hack, S.; Schuba, M.; Wehrle, K. Towards In-Network Security for Smart Homes. In Proceedings of the
2nd International Workshop on Security and Forensics of IoT (IoT-SECFOR), Hamburg, Germany, 27–30 August 2018. [CrossRef]
110. Rademacher, M.; Jonas, K.; Siebertz, F.; Rzyska, A.; Schlebusch, M.; Kessel, M. Software-Deﬁned Wireless Mesh Networking:

Current Status and Challenges. Comput. J. 2017, 60, 1520–1535. [CrossRef]

111. Dong, X.; Lin, H.; Tan, R.; Iyer, R.K.; Kalbarczyk, Z. Software-Deﬁned Networking for Smart Grid Resilience: Opportunities
and Challenges. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM Workshop on Cyber-Physical System Security (CPSS), Singapore, 14 April 2015.
[CrossRef]

112. White, K.J.; Pezaros, D.P.; Johnson, C.W. Using Programmable Data Networks to Detect Critical Infrastructure Challenges.
In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Critical Information Infrastructures Security (CRITIS), Limassol, Cyprus,
13–15 October 2014. [CrossRef]

113. Radoglou-Grammatikis, P.I.; Sarigiannidis, P.G. Securing the Smart Grid: A Comprehensive Compilation of Intrusion Detection

and Prevention Systems. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 46595–46620. [CrossRef]

114. Northcutt, S.; Novak, J. Network Intrusion Detection; New Riders: San Francisco, CA, USA, 2002.
115. Wolsing, K.; Wagner, E.; Henze, M. Poster: Facilitating Protocol-independent Industrial Intrusion Detection Systems.

In
Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), Virtual Event USA,
9–13 November 2020. [CrossRef]

116. Uetz, R.; Hemminghaus, C.; Hackländer, L.; Schlipper, P.; Henze, M. Reproducible and Adaptable Log Data Generation for Sound
Cybersecurity Experiments. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC), Austin,
TX, USA, 6–10 December 2021.

117. Wei, D.; Lu, Y.; Jafari, M.; Skare, P.; Rohde, K. An Integrated Security System of Protecting Smart Grid against Cyber Attacks. In

Proceedings of the 2010 Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT), Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 19–21 January 2010. [CrossRef]

118. Snapp, S.R.; Brentano, J.; Dias, G.; Goan, T.L.; Heberlein, L.T.; Ho, C.L.; Levitt, K.N. DIDS (Distributed Intrusion Detection
System)—Motivation, Architecture, and An Early Prototype. 2017. Available online: http://dl.lib.mrt.ac.lk/handle/123/12232
(accessed on 1 September 2021).

119. Chromik, J.J.; Remke, A.; Haverkort, B.R. Bro in SCADA: Dynamic intrusion detection policies based on a system model. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium for ICS & SCADA Cyber Security Research (ICS-CSR), Hamburg, Germany,
29–30 August 2018. [CrossRef]

120. Zeek Network Security Monitor. Available online: https://www.zeek.org/ (accessed on 1 September 2021).
121. Appiah-Kubi, J.; Liu, C.C. Decentralized Intrusion Prevention (DIP) Against Co-Ordinated Cyberattacks on Distribution

Automation Systems. IEEE Open Access J. Power Energy 2020, 7, 389–402. [CrossRef]

122. Newman, R.C. Computer Security: Protecting Digital Resources; Jones & Bartlett Publishers: Burlington, MA, USA, 2009.

Sensors 2021, 21, 6225

19 of 19

123. Liu, C.C.; Stefanov, A.; Hong, J.; Panciatici, P. Intruders in the Grid. IEEE Power Energy Mag. 2011, 10, 58–66. [CrossRef]
124. Biswas, P.P.; Tan, H.C.; Zhu, Q.; Li, Y.; Mashima, D.; Chen, B. A Synthesized Dataset for Cybersecurity Study of IEC 61850 based
Substation. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing Technologies
for Smart Grids (SmartGridComm), Beijing, China, 21–23 October 2019; pp. 1–7.

125. Cheh, C.; Thakore, U.; Chen, B.; Temple, W.G.; Sanders, W.H. Leveraging Physical Access Logs to Identify Tailgating: Limi-
tations and Solutions. In Proceedings of the 2019 15th European Dependable Computing Conference (EDCC), Naples, Italy,
17–20 September 2019. [CrossRef]

126. Palomino, A.; Parvania, M. Data-Driven Risk Analysis of Joint Electric Vehicle and Solar Operation in Distribution Networks.

IEEE Open Access J. Power Energy 2020, 7, 141–150. [CrossRef]

127. Clemente, J.F. Cyber Security for Critical Energy Infrastructure; Technical Report; Naval Postgraduate School Monterey: Monterey,

CA, USA, 2018.

128. Holm, H.; Flores, W.R.; Ericsson, G. Cyber Security for a Smart Grid—What About Phishing? In Proceedings of the IEEE PES
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT Europe), Lyngby, Denmark, 6–9 October 2013. [CrossRef]
129. Metke, A.R.; Ekl, R.L. Security Technology for Smart Grid Networks. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2010, 1, 99–107. [CrossRef]
130. Information Technology—Security Techniques—Information Security Management Systems—Requirements. ISO/IEC 27001.
Available online: https://standards.iteh.ai/catalog/standards/cen/bf42d158-59e2-4f06-8272-4b19c986c443/en-iso-iec-27001-
2017 (accessed on 1 September 2021).

131. German Bundestag. Gesetz zur Erhöhung der Sicherheit Informationstechnischer Systeme (IT-Sicherheitsgesetz). Bundesgesetzblatt

2015, 1, 1324–1331.

132. Vellaithurai, C.; Srivastava, A.; Zonouz, S. SECPSIM: A Training Simulator for Cyber-Power Infrastructure Security.

In
Proceedings of the IEEE Fourth International Conference on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), Vancouver,
BC, Canada, 21–24 October 2013. [CrossRef]

133. Uetz, R.; Benthin, L.; Hemminghaus, C.; Krebs, S.; Yilmaz, T. BREACH: A Framework for the Simulation of Cyber Attacks
In Proceedings of the Digital Forensics Research Conference Europe, Lake Constance, Germany,

on Company’s Networks.
21–23 March 2017.

134. Henze, M.; Bader, L.; Filter, J.; Lamberts, O.; Ofner, S.; van der Velde, D. Poster: Cybersecurity Research and Training for Power
Distribution Grids—A Blueprint. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security (CCS), Virtual Event USA, New York, NY, USA, 9–13 November 2020. [CrossRef]

135. Kim, S.K.; Huh, J.H. A Study on the Improvement of Smart Grid Security Performance and Blockchain Smart Grid Perspective.

Energies 2018, 11, 1973. [CrossRef]

136. Pennekamp, J.; Bader, L.; Matzutt, R.; Niemietz, P.; Trauth, D.; Henze, M.; Bergs, T.; Wehrle, K. Private Multi-Hop Accountability
for Supply Chains. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Blockchain for IoT and Cyber-Physical Systems (BIoTCPS), Dublin,
Ireland, 7–11 June 2020. [CrossRef]

137. Alladi, T.; Chamola, V.; Rodrigues, J.J.; Kozlov, S.A. Blockchain in Smart Grids: A Review on Different Use Cases. Sensors 2019,

19, 4862. [CrossRef]

138. Marín-López, A.; Chica-Manjarrez, S.; Arroyo, D.; Almenares-Mendoza, F.; Díaz-Sánchez, D. Security Information Sharing in

Smart Grids: Persisting Security Audits to the Blockchain. Electronics 2020, 9, 1865. [CrossRef]

139. Groß, S.; Lankes, S.; Ponci, F.; Monti, A., Datenmonetarisierung im Energiesystem und dessen Rolle bei der Entwicklung eines
kundenorientierten Stromnetzes. In Monetarisierung von Technischen Daten: Innovationen aus Industrie und Forschung; Trauth, D.,
Bergs, T., Prinz, W., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2021; pp. 659–669. [CrossRef]

140. Mengelkamp, E.; Notheisen, B.; Beer, C.; Dauer, D.; Weinhardt, C. A blockchain-based smart grid: towards sustainable local

energy markets. Comput. Sci. Res. Dev. 2018, 33, 207–214. [CrossRef]

