Towards Trusted and Intelligent Cyber-Physical
Systems: A Security-by-Design Approach

Sabah Suhail and Raja Jurdak, Senior Member, IEEE

1

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

3
v
6
8
8
8
0
.
5
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The complexity of cyberattacks in Cyber-Physical
Systems (CPSs) calls for a mechanism that can evaluate the
operational behaviour and security without negatively affecting
the operation of live systems. In this regard, Digital Twins (DTs)
are revolutionizing the CPSs. DTs strengthen the security of CPSs
throughout the product lifecycle, while assuming that the DT data
is trusted, providing agility to predict and respond to real-time
changes. However, existing DTs solutions in CPS are constrained
with untrustworthy data dissemination among multiple stake-
holders and timely course correction. Such limitations reinforce
the signiﬁcance of designing trustworthy distributed solutions
with the ability to create actionable insights in real-time. To do so,
we propose a framework that focuses on trusted and intelligent
DT by integrating blockchain and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI).
Following a hybrid approach, the proposed framework not only
acquires process knowledge from the speciﬁcations of the CPS,
but also relies on AI to learn security threats based on sensor
data. Furthermore, we integrate blockchain to safeguard product
lifecycle data. We discuss the applicability of the proposed
framework for the automotive industry as a CPS use case. Finally,
we identify the open challenges that impede the implementation
of intelligence-driven architectures in CPSs.

Index Terms—Blockchain, Cyber-Physical System (CPS), Dig-
ital Twin (DT), Industrial Control System (ICS), Intrusion
Detection, Threat Intelligence (TI).

I. INTRODUCTION

I N the paradigm of Industry 4.0, traditional Industrial Con-

trol Systems (ICSs) that include Operational Technology
(OT) are increasingly integrated with general-purpose Infor-
mation Technology (IT) systems [1]. Whereas integrating IT
and OT systems in Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) provides
promising solutions in a plethora of ubiquitous industrial
ecosystems, it introduces novel attack vectors [2] such as
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM). Usually, in IT/OT-system oper-
ational functionality outweighs security [1]. Furthermore, if
addressed at all, security is often added retrospectively during
the operation phase of the asset rather than at
the initial
design phase. Thus, loopholes in the system infrastructure
enable attackers to gain deep knowledge of system behavior
and launch covert attacks or Advanced Persistent Threats
(APTs). Considering human-machine collaboration scenarios,
such attacks not only degrade the overall system performance
but may pose human safety risks. One such example of ICS-
tailored malware is Stuxnet [3], where, without being detected,
a malicious code can intercept and modify the data sent to and
from Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs).

S. Suhail is with Vienna University of Economics and Business, Vienna,

Austria (e-mail: sabah.suhail@wu.ac.at).

R. Jurdak is with Queensland University of Technology, Australia (e-mail:

r.jurdak@qut.edu.au).

Considering speciﬁcally designed covert and long-term at-
tacks like APTs that access and exﬁltrate information from
systems, essential measures to fortify CPS involve: (1) evaluat-
ing the functional behaviour of the system, and (2) conducting
security attacks on the system to identify vulnerabilities or
threats. Since CPSs can not be deactivated for carrying out
such analysis, assessing the system’s security level calls for
online solutions that accurately reﬂect the actual CPS in oper-
ation while avoiding any interference or implications of testing
on the live systems. In this regard, Intrusion Detection System
(IDS) (signature- or anomaly-based) is a promising approach
to uncover malicious activities by identifying deviations or
patterns from a deﬁned benign behavior [4]. However, false
alarms may raise human safety concerns, and attack scenarios
are hard to reproduce [12]. Another potential solution involves
deploying testbeds as a controllable cyber prototype for testing
the functional requirements and operational behavior of the
system; nevertheless, a testbed setup and maintenance can
be time-consuming and cost-intensive [5]. Most importantly,
attackers may harm the CPS infrastructure as mere detection
of attacks by testbed-based solutions often leads to delayed
countermeasures. Moreover, such solutions may not cover the
entire lifecycle of the product (including design and develop-
ment, operation and maintenance, and decommissioning).

To address the above-mentioned issues requires a solution
with the following characteristics: (i) able to analyze and opti-
mize the physical processes within CPS before their real-world
implementation, (ii) can evaluate and connect the entire prod-
uct lifecycle, and (iii) can prevent and detect security loopholes
in the CPS without obstructing the ongoing operations. Digital
Twins (DTs) are considered one such solution. Driven by
asset-centric data, DTs are virtual replicas of physical systems
that mirror every facet of a product or process and can
provide actionable insights through monitoring, optimization,
and prediction [6], [7]. During industrial physical processes,
DTs collect and integrate data from multiple sources, such
as sensor and actuator data from the factory ﬂoor, historical
production data derived from product
lifecycle data, and
domain knowledge to generate outputs in the form of models,
simulations, replications, or behavioral analytics. Following a
closed-loop, the DTs inspect for data inconsistencies between
the physical entity and virtual entity (as shown in Fig. 1),
and feedback the simulation data to the physical entity to
adopt better calibration and testing strategies. Such recurrent
processes evolve DT models and their physical counterparts to
support more accurate estimation, prediction, and optimization
of the industrial processes.

The lifecycle of DTs spans different phases where multiple

 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I: Information security domain: Obtaining process knowledge for digital twins.

2

Process
knowledge

Speciﬁcation-based

ML-based

Hybrid

Ref.

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[10]

[17]

(cid:53)

Ł

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

[18]
Proposed (cid:51)

Data
variety

Trusted
sources

Data fu-
sion

S&S

Data
storage

Framework/
POC/
Emulation

Objective

Ł

Ł

Ł

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

Ł

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

Ł

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

Ł

Ł

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

Ł

(cid:53)

(cid:53)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

Ł

(cid:53)

POC

POC

Detect rule violations

State-based intrusion detection

Framework

Risk assessment, Incident handling

POC

Incident analysis

Framework

Secure data sharing

Emulation

Process-aware intrusion detection

POC

Intrusion detection

Framework

Vulnerability detection

(cid:51)
(cid:53) Not covered; Ł Partially covered; (cid:51) Covered; Proof of Concept (POC)

Framework

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

Situational awareness

stakeholders (i.e., owners, manufacturers, distributors, and
maintainers) carry out various operations [2]. Some of these
critical operations require recording changes to detect devia-
tions throughout the process cycle, for instance, trustworthy
state of twin software [8], update commands to PLCs [9], or
time-dependent modiﬁcation to the process variables [10]. The
disparate data silos act as a barrier in orchestrating the data
in a digital thread that requires linking DT data throughout
various phases of the product lifecycle [2], therefore, the cen-
tralized data management architectures are not well suited for
such environments. Additionally, it is essential to capture the
trustworthiness of data as the accumulated data accounts for
rational decision making. Enabling the distributed storage of
information with no single point-of-control can be established
through blockchain, which can facilitate data provenance.
Moreover, provenance-enabled blockchain-based digital twins
can aid in identifying the faulty node in the network. Thus,
combining DTs and blockchain can reshape the CPSs where
blockchain acts as a trustworthy data dissemination source to
physical processes while DTs extract actionable insights for
predictive maintenance and situational-awareness [11].

Fig. 1: Building digital twins: A simple illustration.

For greater agility, industrial processes demand automation
to trigger timely and seamless actions. Considering the dy-
namism of CPSs, the overarching question is how to automate
cyber-physical situational awareness while providing online
threat intelligence (TI)? TI provides information on attacker
behaviour that security analysts can use to recognize the
indicators of compromise (IOCs) on time [19]. To ensure
sustainable protection against attacks, it is necessary to au-
tomate extracting TI and evidence-based insights from data

sources. While keeping up with the complexity and adaptabil-
ity of current cybersecurity threats, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)-
driven security solutions provide automated security solutions
to detect zero-day threats [20]. In this regard, we utilize
intelligence-driven solutions (such as data analytics and TI)
in DTs that can help to identify existing vulnerabilities,
faulty models, malicious actors, and potential attack vectors,
thereby minimizing the threat landscape and improving the
CPSs. In the information security domain, the concept of
building the process knowledge of DTs can be seen from
two perspectives. Firstly, utilizing CPS speciﬁcation to model
the physical counterpart based on engineering artifacts [12]–
[14]. Secondly, utilizing Machine Learning (ML) methods
to learn security-related aspects based on sensor data [17],
[18] without obtaining process knowledge from DTs. Both
solutions lack either real-time breach detection or potential
ability to model the correct behavior of physical counterparts.
Furthermore, present works do not consider whether data
sources are trustworthy, which is critical to ensure the quality
of input data to DTs. Similarly, the need for data storage and
data integration and interoperability are also not given due
attention while proposing the frameworks or POCs (as shown
in Table I).

To address the above limitations, this article proposes an
AI-aided blockchain-based DT framework (shown in Fig. 2) to
secure CPSs. Our framework adopts a hybrid approach to build
DTs, where in addition to acquiring process knowledge from
the speciﬁcation of the CPS on the logic/network layer, we
also rely on TI to learn and prevent attacks. Most importantly,
we integrate blockchain to safeguard product lifecycle data.

Our main contributions are as follows:
• To secure CPSs, we adopt a hybrid approach to build
DTs, where we acquire process knowledge from the
speciﬁcation of the CPS and TI to learn and prevent
attacks.

• We

leverage blockchain for

safeguarding product
lifecycle. Furthermore,
recording/retrieving data from
blockchain ensure trustworthy environment for CPS and
DTs, which act as a source of input data for CPS.

• We discuss the feasibility of the proposed framework for

the automotive industry as a CPS use case.

Real-time sensor data and historical dataPhysical EntityVirtual EntityData Inconsistencies?Feedback loop: predictive insights3

Without considering the requirement of data storage, data
integration, and interoperability, both types of solutions lack
either real-time breach detection or the potential ability to
exploit
the correct behaviour of physical counterparts (as
shown in Table I). Considering both solutions, we adopt a
hybrid approach to build DTs. In addition to acquiring process
knowledge from the speciﬁcation of the CPS, we also rely
on TI to learn and prevent attacks. Moreover, to safeguard
the product
lifecycle data, a blockchain-based solution is
integrated.

III. TOWARDS TRUSTED AND INTELLIGENT
CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS

This section overviews the components of the framework
for secure CPSs. The framework presented in Fig. 3 com-
prises four key components including (i) data integration
and interoperability, (ii) physical asset and its replica, (iii)
blockchain ledger, and (iv) threat intelligence (TI). The data
integration and interoperability is responsible for cleaning
invalid, duplicate, or missing data, converting heterogeneous
data formats into a uniﬁed data structure, and aggregating
data to generate a consistent interpretation of a certain object
before inputting data into the physical space. The physical
asset and its clone counterpart must be constantly connected
to continuously perform the digital-physical mapping between
the predeﬁned system performance parameters retrieved from
the storage, and real-time sensor data from the manufacturing
unit, to verify data consistency. The blockchain ledger enforces
secure data management by storing data and recalling events.
TI identiﬁes vulnerabilities,
threats, existing and potential
attack vectors to minimize the threat landscape. The TI module
can be further utilized by Security Information and Event
Management (SIEM) [15] and/or threat hunting. The DTs are
build by acquiring process knowledge from the speciﬁcations
of CPS and TI.

Fig. 3 represents the detailed working of the main compo-
nents presented in Fig. 2. We divide the data ﬂow throughout
the system into three types of processes: (1) the initial input
is provided to the data wrangler and data fusion methods;
(2) to stay consistent with the requirement of the underlying
application, the continuous process updates the data or system
state based on a deﬁned time period; and (3) the system-
speciﬁc process is scheduled based on the underlying events
or triggered depending on cyber situational awareness of the
CPSs. The steps shown in Fig. 3 can be summarized as
follows: The participating entities (such as sensors, machines,
and humans) register as authorized entities on the blockchain
(step 1). The multimodal and heterogeneous sensors or actu-
ator data from physical assets (step 2a) and system-speciﬁc
input knowledge such as engineering and domain knowledge
(step 2b) are cleaned and converted to a uniﬁed format at the
data wrangler. The data from multiple sources, for instance,
auxiliary data (step 3a), multiple DT instances data (step 3b),
and uniﬁed sensory data (step 3c) is aggregated by data fusion
and is inputted to the physical asset to support consistent and
comprehensive representation of data (step 3d). To facilitate
track and trace solutions, the provenance data is recorded on

Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed framework.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
covers the related work in the context of creating DTs for
situational awareness. Motivated by the security challenges of
the CPSs, we propose a framework in Section III. Section IV
maps the proposed framework to an automotive industry use
case. Finally, Section V concludes the paper with future
research directions.

II. RELATED WORK
This section primarily focuses on the research that covers
the initial development phase of DTs, which comprises of ob-
taining process knowledge either through system speciﬁcation
and/or ML-based approaches. Most importantly, we narrow
down the existing works based on the objective of using DTs,
i.e., an enabler of cyber situational awareness (state-based or
process-based). Table I summarizes the comparative analysis
of the existing works.

The speciﬁcation-based approaches (for instance, [10], [12],
[13], [15], [16]) leverage the technical, topological, and control
artifacts of the underlying system that are maintained through-
out
the system engineering process. With a traceable and
well-documented system speciﬁcation support, this strategy of
building DTs provides an automatic and scalable solution for
generating a virtual environment [12]. However, in comparison
to ML-based solutions,
they are not able to create future
scenarios. In the existing literature, most of the papers in this
category focus on the initial development of DTs. However,
the consideration of data variety, data trustworthiness, data
storage/retrieval, and data fusion are missing. In case of ML-
based approaches (for instance, [17], [18]), DTs are not aware
of any control logic per se as process knowledge can merely
be learned through ML-based methods [5].

The works on blockchain-based DTs [2], [21]–[23] cover
various aspects of traceability, storage, retrieval, and sharing
of DT data among the involved parties in addition to other
security aspects (such as quantum resistance, encryption, ac-
cess control, etc.). Other than [16], the other blockchain-based
schemes lack the details on how the DTs are constructed and
how DT security operation modes can be used to create future
scenarios in the absence of direct observation data. Further-
more, they vary in terms of utilizing DTs and are therefore
beyond the scope of this paper. However, our previous work
in [2] provides a comprehensive review of the design and
implementation issues in blockchain-based DTs.

Threat Intelligence SIEM / Threat HuntingDigital-PhysicalmappingStore/Retrieve dataDigital TwinsBlockchainData Integration & Interoperability Physical AssetFuseddata CPS specification data,  ML-based methodsRetrieve dataProcess Knowledge Store/Retrieve dataSimulation  Replication 4

Fig. 3: Securing Cyber-Physical Systems: A threat intelligence-aided blockchain-based digital twin framework.

the ledger (step 4). Provenance records a complete lineage
of data along with a set of actions performed on data [24].
The DTs have two security operation modes, i.e., simulation
and replication that support monitoring and replaying of CPS
events. In the replication mode, the states or events from the
physical environment are continuously recorded (step 6a) and
are periodically replayed at DTs (step 6b). The purpose of
this operation is to track data inconsistencies (as shown in
Fig. 1). To do this, an time-dependent digital-physical mapping
is performed using the data sync method step 6c. During the
process, any essential data (such as Safety & Security (S&S)
rules) can be accessed by the blockchain (step 5). S&S rules
deﬁne thresholds and consistency checks to detect attacks and
thus can aid in tracking rule violations. In the simulation
mode, the states or events are monitored independently of
the physical space and can be used to update the twin (step
8) and eventually the physical asset. For preventing eventual
failures that may be caused by security breaches or suspicious
ﬂows, the future state of a physical asset must be forecast
to trigger necessary actions, such as maintenance. Therefore,
to effectively use sensors real-time data streams in DTs, TI
accesses data from data sync (through replication mode step
7a) and DT (through simulation mode (step 7b). The ML-
based solutions can preemptively detect failures and call the
corresponding scheduling services (in the physical space) or
model calibration services (in the virtual space) to carry out the
necessary measures such as conﬁguring the machine settings
based on tool wear data or tuning model parameters to simulate
the physical counterpart with high ﬁdelity. The updated models
upon calibration (step 9a) and S&S rules must be stored and
retrieved from the ledger to ensure their reliability (step 9b)
and thus strengthen the rationale for integrating blockchain
with DTs.

In the following, we discuss each component of the TI-aided

blockchain-based DT framework in detail.

A. Data Integration and Interoperability

Challenge #1: How to avoid the insertion of erroneous data

into the physical asset and its twin?

The integration and interoperability of data from multimodal
and heterogeneous sensors are signiﬁcant prerequisites of DT
implementation. This process begins by inputting sensory data
from physical assets to the data wrangler. In our proposed
framework,
the data wrangler is responsible for cleaning
invalid, duplicate, or missing data, converting heterogeneous
data formats into a uniﬁed data structure. AI-enabled data
curation helps in improving the data quality by implementing
intelligent automated methods to ﬁll in the missing data and to
clean the data (such as data denoising, data de-duplication) [2].
While stringent security guarantees are inherited from the
blockchain, ensuring the trustworthiness of data-generating
sources is equally important for critical infrastructures. Be-
cause the data is input to other entities (such as DTs, TI)
to make decisions, ignoring such measures may lead to the
insertion of false data into the system resulting in Garbage-In,
Garbage-Out (GIGO) problem [11]. Therefore, three-fold In-
tegrity Checking Mechanisms (ICMs) (engineering knowledge
and domain knowledge) is established by: (i) collecting data
only from registered devices; (ii) cross-validating the device
data against threshold values; and (iii) minimizing the Age of
Information (AoI) based on time elapsed since the generation
of latest status update received at destination. Given that
blockchain mechanisms do not guarantee the trustworthiness
of data at the origin, we can rely on utilizing a blockchain-
based layered trust architecture [25] for sensor data cross-
validation. Engineering knowledge describes the design spec-
iﬁcations of the underlying CPS at the network/logic layer:
(i) system-level components (specifying device conﬁguration
details and control logic), (ii) network-level information (spec-
ifying the topology and communication path through logical
connections and endpoints), and (iii) the relationship among
components (specifying process-level data aggregation, ﬁne-
grained policies and constraints) [12]. Such explicit deﬁnitions
of the technical, topological, and control artifacts can help to
generate the network setup of the virtual environment [12].
Furthermore, such engineering knowledge can also serve as a

3a. Auxiliary data 1. Register authorizedparticipating entities9a. Store updated model6b. Verify/Update 5. Access data4. Store provenance dataData Sync2a. Input sensory dataData WranglerThreshold monitoringBlockchainS & S rulesData FusionPhysical AssetAging managementAoIComposabilityAggregated DTsDigital TwinSimulation dataData consistency7a. Access/retrieve dataand generate alerts3c. Unifiedsensory dataReplicationRisk assessment9b. Store/access updated S&S rules/data2b. Engineering knowledge and domain knowledge3b. Multiple DTs6c. Time-dependent record& replay of statesThreat IntelligenceData Integration &Interoperability3d. Inputfused dataModelsIPS & IDS6a. Verify/Update Training and Testing8. Assessing, monitoringand updating system/device Continuous processInitial inputSystem-specific processSimulationTesting Configurations7b. Access/retrieve data basis for implicit security rules. For instance, deﬁning a safe
state based on normal operations of devices or speciﬁc services
provided by the process, deriving a whitelist from network-
level monitoring based on the authorized addressing and
routing information, detecting unknown devices or unidentiﬁed
connections, identifying abnormal changes in the control logic,
etc [12]. In addition to these measures, Internet of Things (IoT)
sensors are calibrated periodically for ageing management
and fault diagnosis at the initial stages of data collection.
In addition to specifying engineering knowledge, the frame-
work also includes domain-speciﬁc knowledge from experts
in various ﬁelds such as engineers (electrical, mechanical,
instrumentation, and control), supply chain entities, security
professionals, etc. Once generated, the domain knowledge can
be used as a reference by different organizations and can be
tailored to meet their speciﬁc needs.

Next, to facilitate an abstract view of the overall phenomena,
DTs must support the correlation of different instances of
DTs associated with different physical sub-components. For
this purpose, multiple instances of DTs, where each instance
mirrors a physical asset and/or activity, can be aggregated
at composability to mimic the bigger picture of the physical
world. Moreover, auxiliary data (user- or application-speciﬁc
data) can also be provided. Finally, the fused data is inputted
to the physical asset to carry out the physical-digital mapping
through data sync. Thus, data interoperability and integration
provide a more consistent, comprehensive, and accurate rep-
resentation than the single perspective of data.

B. Digital Twins

Challenge #2: How to accurately reﬂect the behavior of
CPS while operating virtually in an isolated environment
disjointed from live systems throughout the product lifecycle?
DT is a virtual representation of a real-world system that
utilizes real-time and historical data to analyze, predict, and
optimize operations without interfering with the actual envi-
ronment and with lifecycle security. DTs have two operation
modes (i) replication and (ii) simulation. The replication mode
provides digital tracing of real-world events by mirroring data
from the physical environment. For replication mode, DTs
and their physical counterparts must be constantly connected
in a sense that the virtual replica must continuously reﬂect
the physical object through log ﬁles, sensor measurements,
network communication, etc. Depending on the application re-
quirements, data can be collected from the physical space after
a certain time interval or even ofﬂine. To facilitate the trial and
error approach, the simulation mode runs independently of its
physical counterpart. In addition to being reproducible, this
mode allows running tests repeatedly by resetting the model
through a broad range of speciﬁed conditions to support the
comprehension of emergent system behavior. The simulation
mode supports security by design approach through which it
facilitates analyzing process changes, test devices, or detect
misconﬁgurations by performing security tests within the
virtual environment.

5

C. Blockchain Empowered Digital Twins

Challenge #3: How to ensure integrity and trustworthiness
of data collected from the physical world that are then fed
into the DTs?

Although DTs provide powerful means to control, govern,
and program the lifecycle of physical resources for supporting
the provision of product servitization to end-users,
these
beneﬁts of DTs are based on an assumption about data trust,
integrity, and security. Data trustworthiness is considered to be
more critical regarding the integration and interoperability of
multiple components or subcomponents among different DTs
to provide an aggregated view of the complex physical system.
Nevertheless, in real-life scenarios, data breaches could occur
due to several reasons, both maliciously or mistakenly [2].
Therefore, curating and mining actionable insights from the
collected data calls for a data storage infrastructure that can
manifest the dissemination of trustworthy and secure data [11].
In this regard, provenance-enabled blockchain-based DTs can
facilitate digital identity and data traceability from disparate
data repositories while reasoning about the current state and
the chained actions on a data object (such as who, when, where,
and how), thereby ensuring trustworthy DTs throughout the
product lifecycle [11].

Considering the infrastructure-related blockchain design
challenges,
there exists no ideal solution that efﬁciently
supports CPSs ranging from throughput, scalability, storage
efﬁciency, and security. To gain practical insights in CPSs,
blockchain-related design challenges may cover deployment of
blockchains, blockchain types, consensus mechanisms, scala-
bility, and storage. The deployment of blockchain may vary
based on the underlying architecture. Considering resource-
constrained IoT devices, deploying blockchain on fog or edge
nodes to carry out resource-intensive tasks (such as running a
consensus algorithm or executing smart contracts) can provide
a trade-off between trust centralization and overhead. Addi-
tionally, we limit the frequent time-consuming access to the
blockchain-based storage system by explicitly separating the
real-time dynamic (or behavioral) data and the less dynamic
(or static) data [11] due to time-sensitive tasks in CPSs.
This strategy is adopted due to the fact that the real-time
data evolves frequently with each lifecycle phase and usually
amasses in intervals ranging from minutes to milliseconds,
such as deployed sensors and actuators data providing asset’s
actual state, while static data changes infrequently with time
along the lifecycle of the real-world counterpart, such as
provenance data, system historical data, device conﬁguration
settings, access levels, and policies. Thus,
in addition to
application- or user-speciﬁc requirements, critical data and
sources that can facilitate the track and trace solutions for
data-driven CPS must be considered. The selection of apro-
pos blockchain further depends on scalable solutions that
become critical due to the growing number of actors and
activities in the CPSs. To enforce scalable solutions, on-
chain solutions based on the data structure of blockchain, i.e.,
DAG-structured blockchains, are better options than chain-
structured blockchains. In terms of implementation, most of
the DAG-structured blockchains may not be mature enough for

mass adoption yet. Therefore, chain-structured blockchains,
for instance, Hyperledger, with the cost of off-chain solutions
to address scalability can be adopted. However, most of the
chain-structured blockchains are not quantum-safe.

In the following, we discuss safety and security (S&S)
rules, one of the signiﬁcant and critical components for
securing CPSs through the blockchain-based DT framework.
S&S rules are generated based on threshold data (upper and
lower bounds), consistency checks (pre-deﬁned performance
parameters), and ﬁne- and coarse-grained constraints (data
accessibility and auditability based on ownership, roles, and
access levels). S&S rules can be deﬁned at device level, such
as device conﬁguration details, predeﬁned performance param-
eters, network level, such as topology, communication path, or
process-level, such as data aggregation, relationship between
entities. S&S rules support monitoring the actions and events
of the participating entities inside the virtual environment,
thereby supplementing safety instrumented systems (SIS).
Safety rules, for instance, conditional limits for device data
(e.g., minimum and maximum temperature), trends/patterns
(e.g., excessive vibration or heat), consistency checks (speed-
variable), etc. and security rules, for instance, data integrity,
access control (authentication and authorization), or correla-
tion of different DTs associated with different physical sub-
components can be stated and integrated. Such IT/OT-system
speciﬁcations are represented by means of standardized data
formats, such as Automation Markup Language (AML), that
consider the syntactical and semantic levels to describe the
data objects [12].

Malicious or accidental, S&S rules must be integrated to
detect misconﬁgurations and to mitigate the outcomes of
malfunctioning components and malicious activities in a CPS.
Inability to impose such rules leads to devastating results on
the system in the form of cyberattacks or APTs. Furthermore,
introducing S&S rules at the design phase can help to lower
security and incident response costs, thereby making later
lifecycle phases less prone to errors and incidents [1]. The
S&S rules can be deployed through smart contracts (executable
code running on the blockchain) to invoke the appropriate
defense mechanisms automatically [2]. Additionally, to track
an accountable entity generating or updating rules for a given
asset are also recorded. Depending on the cyber situation,
S&S rules can be updated either during or after the operation
or process. For instance, in any abnormal event during the
ongoing process, the system needs to respond effectively and
update the corresponding S&S rules to avoid long-term loss.
To strengthen the rationale for integrating blockchain with
DTs, the S&S rules must be stored and retrieved from the
ledger to ensure their reliability. For instance, a provenance-
aware blockchain-based system can track and trace the ac-
countable entity by adding or updating the S&S rules.

D. Combining Digital Twins with Threat Intelligence

Challenge #4: Why we need TI in the presence of DTs for

predictive maintenance and situational awareness?

While DT security-operation modes offer a variety of
advantages, they may pose limitations. For the replication

6

mode, the time-dependent record and replay of states may not
create future scenarios. The synchronization issues between
the physical object and its different replicas are essential
whereas the state replication accuracy depends on the trade-
off between budget and ﬁdelity [26]. Additionally, the input
knowledge (events) is required in advance to produce the
same stimuli. Similarly, for simulation mode, since the current
physical state of the system is not known, hence it has to rely
on user-speciﬁed settings and parameters. Considering these
shortcomings, we envision how TI provides auxiliary support
for predictive maintenance and situational awareness.

Creating future scenarios, particularly in the absence of
direct observation data, is challenging for DTs [27]. To predict
anomaly detection and perform risk assessment, the predictive
capability of ML-based solutions available through the TI
module can play a key role. Thus, TI can provide additional
support for DTs to secure CPSs. Furthermore, the quality of
the data matters at par with quantity for ensuring precise
predictions and decision-making. Such requirement matters
more in the presence of a complex and ever-changing threat
landscape and high volume, velocity, and variety of big data.
Therefore, we propose a TI module that can learn useful
patterns from the collected big data to prevent/detect anomalies
and to predict the system behavior in course of disruptions
or thwart the attack cycle. Furthermore, the TI module can
be integrated into the organizational security management
framework, such as SIEM [15] (as shown in Fig. 2), to deduce
and to check the adherence of security rules. The TI data set
can also provide valuable clues (such as unknown IP address
or unusual network trafﬁc) to carry out a system-wide search
for bad actors during threat hunting.

Data-driven TI exploits data from DTs security operation
modes to achieve predictive powers and situational awareness.
In the following, we explore how DT security operation modes
operate in combination with TI and under which settings such
modes are desirable? The replication mode along with TI can
perform Prognostics and Health Management (PHM) where
DT of the equipment supported by data is used to detect
failures or repair needs. By using ML algorithms such as Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Support Vector Machine
(SVM), the condition of the given asset is predicted based
on performance constraints or tool wear data [17], [27]. If the
asset state data might lead to failure situations, it schedules
the maintenance of the physical asset. TI can access data
from data sync. The reason for accessing data from this
module is that it mirrors the sync states of both physical and
virtual objects, hence can analyze the behavior of both spaces.
While TI predicts existing and potential threats, data sync can
also retrieve data from TI to ﬁgure out the reason for data
inconsistencies.

The simulation mode along with TI can serve as a training
and testing platform to improve the security of the infrastruc-
ture. Through DTs, attack scenarios can be simulated to ana-
lyze the system behavior under attack. Collecting data during
such events can help to derive patterns to be formulated, tested,
and transmitted to real-world systems. Moreover, DTs can aid
security professionals by providing red-blue team exercises for
cybersecurity training opportunities [29] (i.e., the offensive red

7

welding spot measured through Sensor3: Current and Sensor4:
Pressure. Another sensor (Sensor5: Temperature) measures
the temperature during the welding process and is bounded
by a threshold to avoid material deterioration. To monitor
tool wear data,
the robotic arm is equipped with sensors
(such as vibration, force cutting, and acoustic emission).
During manufacturing processes, machine unavailability (due
to equipment deterioration or machine malfunctioning) and
uncertain disturbances (due to urgent job arrival or job tardi-
ness) usually occur, leading to performance and production
disruption. Therefore, we keep monitoring tool wear data
of the robotic arm. Recording such data ensures continuous
assembly line operation while triggering a suitable time for
machine maintenance or timely rescheduling for dynamic job-
shop scheduling. We calculate tool wear data based on the
number of objects (chassis) being welded by the robotic arm.
To command and control physical processes (for instance,
turning the motor and robotic arm on/off, setting velocity of
the motor, or setting current and pressure of the robotic arm,
etc.) through the belt and robotic arm PLC1, HMI1, PLC2,
HMI2 are used.

Before starting the production process, the necessary details
mentioned in Section III-A can be performed as follows:
(i) The participating entities (sensors, actuators, robotic arm,
PLCs, HMIs, etc.) registered at the blockchain (Fig. 3 step
1); (ii) The input sensory data (Fig. 3 step 2a) is mapped
to the ICMs (Fig. 3 step 2b); (iii) The auxiliary data (Fig. 3
step 3a) such as, supply chain data including consignment
information, material stock, production quantity, etc. is fused
with the uniﬁed sensory data (Fig. 3 step 3c). The twined
data from other physical processes, for instance, assemblage
of components, may also be integrated (Fig. 3 step 3b). Fur-
thermore, for tracking data generating source, the provenance
data is also stored in blockchain (Fig. 3 step 4).

To monitor and analyze the production processes, depending
the DTs security
on the application-speciﬁc requirements,
mode operations, i.e., simulation and/or replication can be
used. Through the simulation mode, we may achieve optimal
operating conditions for the following subprocesses (i) how
to maintain a safe distance between adjacent chassis on the
conveyor belt?, (ii) how to maintain a temperature bounded by
a threshold to avoid material deterioration during the welding
process by robotic arm?, and (iii) how to deal with incident
handling during assemblage of vehicle parts performed by a
robotic arm? All such tasks must be monitored and conﬁgured
ﬁrst based on simulation setting artifacts to deal with incident
handling (Fig. 3 step 8). Along with TI, the incident data
(including log data, provenance data, etc.) can evaluate the
risk assessment in terms of detection reliability and severity
to enable incident investigation (Fig. 3 step 7b). Based on the
incident data, S&S rules are constructed or improved and are
updated on blockchain (Fig. 3 step 9a and step 9b). Thus,
enforced through S&S rules, such proactive strategies can
help detect safety- or security-related attacks instantly during
the actual manufacturing of vehicles and hence can radically
reduce maintenance overheads to alleviate product defects and
support secure and trusted manufacturing.

Through replication mode, we may achieve mirrored op-

Fig. 4: Automotive assembly line: A scenario speciﬁcation.

team launch attacks to uncover system weaknesses while the
defensive blue team implements adequate solutions). Together
with TI, it can predict the possibility of attacks or system
malfunctioning (i.e., risk assessment) to carry out what-if
and cost-beneﬁt analysis. To do so, ML algorithms such
as K-means and autoencoders are ideal solutions for trafﬁc
inspection [17]. Based on the inputted parameters that are
mapped to the training data, TI learns about the presence of an
attack or abnormal situation, and hence generates S&S rules.
These rules are then veriﬁed on the testing data. Thus, DT
replication modes together with TI can gain insights into the
root cause that leads the system to unexpected behavior.

In the case of a known threat or attack, alerts are triggered to
take further actions, such as executing S&S rules to activate the
corresponding mitigation strategies. In the case of an advanced
stealthy threat or attack, TI may not be able to generate
an alarm instantly. Such prediction errors are caused due to
model errors coupled with the bias in the data. Under such
circumstances, depending on attack intensity, either the device
or network log data can be analyzed by using threat hunting
to identify the root cause of attacks or switch off the affected
device or service.

IV. A CPS USE CASE: FROM DESIGN TO DISMISSAL

This section discusses a CPS use case of an assembly line in
the automotive industry where we map an exemplary physical
process (Fig. 4) to our proposed framework (Fig. 3). The as-
sembly line has multiple stations equipped with machinery for
performing dedicated tasks. The motor-driven conveyor system
can move the objects (chassis) from Station A (chassis loading
point) to Station B (chassis welding point) for performing a
physical task (such as spot welding and parts assemblage).
Initially, the motor is off. Firstly, the chassis are required
to be loaded on the belt at Station A and their presence
is being detected by a proximity sensor (Sensor1: Object
Detection). To do so, the velocity (Sensor2: Velocity) of the
conveyor system must be monitored against a certain threshold
based on the following conditions: (i) detect and load only a
speciﬁc number of chassis on the belt, and (ii) maintain a safe
distance to avoid collision between two adjacent chassis on the
assembly line. Based on a predeﬁned task duration, the chassis
at Station A can be moved to Station B, while more chassis can
be loaded at Station A. Secondly, the welding operation on the
chassis is performed by a robotic arm at Station B. To do so,
the welding gun applies appropriate current and pressure at the

Station BStation AHMI1RoboticarmAutomotive Assembly LineVelocity25Conveyor BeltPLC1HMI2ONManualAuto FunctionsAxisOFFONOFFONOFFbeltbeltmotor controlPLC2Auto_ONOFFactionactionsensorsSafe distancetimeSensor1: VelocitySensor2: Object DetectionSensor3: CurrentSensor4: PressureSensorsSensor5: TemperatureMotorerating conditions for the following subprocesses (i) how to
monitor the velocity of the motor-driven conveyor system
against a certain threshold (deﬁned in S&S rules) to avoid
attacks (such as MITM) targeting the manipulation of the
conveyor speed?, (ii) based on tool wear data how to estimate
the asset capacity for the next production process?, and (iii)
based on machine performance data how to to predict fault
diagnosis to minimize the makespan and production cost?
To do so,
the data sync method makes use of the input
knowledge from (i) the live physical asset current state or
events recorded through sensors (Fig. 3 step 6a) and (ii)
ICMs from blockchain (Fig. 3 step 5) to reproduce the same
stimuli in DTs (Fig. 3 step 6b). Furthermore, data sync keeps
replicated state information (Fig. 3 step 6c) that can be access
by TI (Fig. 3 step 7a) to continuously monitor the erratic
behavior of ongoing operations based on the relationships
between the dynamic variables and historical variables for any
rule violations.

The process of collecting and analyzing data continues even
after the vehicle production process. To optimize operational
control, fault diagnostics, and prognostic health management,
the sensors attached to the connected vehicle (such as camera,
GPS, infrared detectors, etc.) collect data during or after the
drive. The accumulated data is then fed to the DTs, which
self-adapts to the asset and extracts new knowledge for model
calibration for the next production processes. Furthermore,
such data can be used by TI to study the adversarial space
and to update S&S rules for detecting advanced attacks.

The dismissal of the object is followed by the decommis-
sioning of the DT because of obsolescence or other reasons.
At this stage, the product lifecycle data are backed up and
made available to other objects or domain experts to optimize
the production of future devices [2].

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

This article focuses on securing CPSs by integrating TI
and blockchain for intelligent and trusted DTs. Implementing
intelligence-driven architectures enables greater visibility of
cyber threats and minimizes the threat landscape; however,
it necessitates methodological and theoretical solutions to
address longstanding challenges. For instance,

• Being the virtual replicas of their physical counterparts,
DTs share commonalities in implementation and oper-
ational behavior. Due to this fact, DTs may act as a
source of data breach,
leading to the abuse case of
DTs [5] where attackers may launch covert attacks on
the physical system by exploiting the valuable system
knowledge available through DTs. For example, attackers
may sabotage the system by manipulating DTs data
such that the physical counterpart may not indicate data
inconsistencies. Attacks instigated through DTs may have
similar repercussions as that of directly attacking real
ﬁeld devices. This problem may raise the question: how
the security of DTs can be accessed? One possible
solution to assess the security of DTs is to launch attacks
on DTs from the cyber range (i.e., virtual environments
that provide hands-on cyber skills and security posture

8

testing). Some of the pointers for this future research
direction include gamiﬁcation strategies that not only
serves for training and testing purposes [28], [29] but can
also evaluate the security of DTs and eventually physical
asset. Furthermore, blockchain-based DTs can deﬁne data
accessibility and auditability based on ownership, role,
and access levels.

• DTs must exhibit sufﬁcient ﬁdelity to protect against fail-
ures of the real CPS. However, uncertain scenarios may
occur due to the dynamism and complexity of underlying
(sub) systems, for instance, machinery malfunctioning,
hidden vulnerabilities, erroneous data, knowledge gaps,
etc. This problem may raise the question: how accurately
DTs are required to follow the states of their physical
counterparts? Determining the desired ﬁdelity of DTs
for realizing the underlying use case requires further
investigation with the focus on cost-efﬁcient development
of DTs [26]. Additionally, relying on the proposed frame-
work (Fig. 3) can help to obtain the process knowledge
from DTs as well as ML methods to learn security- and
privacy-related aspects based on sensor data.

• On the one hand, due to the black-box nature of AI
models,
the decisions made by the resulting systems
suffer from a loss of transparency and comprehensibility,
hence leading to a negative impact on the system’s
trustworthiness. However, on the other hand, complete
transparency into the inner working of AI models may
expose them to adversarial attacks by allowing them to
make inferences from live cyber data or executing model
poisoning into the training workﬂows. Attackers may
begin with AI reconnaissance (i.e., observe the model’s
behavior and learn the decision logic or knowledge bases
to morph the malicious payloads) and, without being
detected, can feed their adversarial data to launch data
exﬁltration attacks. In this regard, blockchain can support
transparency for AI operations by assuring the traceability
and solidity of data and algorithms, thereby establishing
more understanding and conﬁdence in the decisions made
by the underlying systems [30].

The proposed framework highlights various

security-
enhancing use cases of DTs in conjunction with TI, albeit it
has the following limitations: (i) how the proposed framework
can still work if a well-versed adversary steers the CPS into
an insecure state by manipulating the benign behaviour of
DTs or exploiting the cyclic state update (from the physical
process to DTs or vice versa) during replication mode, (ii)
how to improve the resilience of underlying physical processes
during an attack, and (iii) most importantly, investigating the
practicality of the concept in a real-world setting.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Dietz and G. Pernul, “Unleashing the digital twin’s potential for ICS
security,” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 20–27, 2020.
[2] S. Suhail, R. Hussain, R. Jurdak, A. Oracevic, K. Salah, R. Matuleviˇcius,
and C. S. Hong, “Blockchain-based digital
twins: Research trends,
issues, and future challenges,” 2021, arXiv: 1709.10000. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.11585.

[3] R. Langner, “To kill a centrifuge: A technical analysis of what
stuxnet’s creators tried to achieve,” 2013. [Online]. Available: https://
www.langner.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/to-kill-a-centrifuge.pdf

9

future trends of secure provenance schemes,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 94, pp. 50–68, 2017.

[25] V. Dedeoglu, R. Jurdak, G. D. Putra, A. Dorri, and S. S. Kanhere,
“A trust architecture for blockchain in iot,” in Proceedings of the
16th EAI International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems:
Computing, Networking and Services, ser. MobiQuitous ’19. New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, p.
190–199. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3360774.3360822
[26] R. Bitton, T. Gluck, O. Stan, M. Inokuchi, Y. Ohta, Y. Yamada, T. Yagyu,
Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Deriving a cost-effective digital twin of
an ics to facilitate security evaluation,” in European Symposium on
Research in Computer Security. Cham: Springer, 2018, pp. 533–554.
[27] A. Rasheed, O. San, and T. Kvamsdal, “Digital twin: Values, challenges
and enablers from a modeling perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
21 980–22 012, 2020.

[28] M. Vielberth, M. Glas, M. Dietz, S. Karagiannis, E. Magkos, and
G. Pernul, “A digital twin-based cyber range for SOC analysts,” in
Data and Applications Security and Privacy XXXV, K. Barker and
K. Ghazinour, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021,
pp. 293–311.

[29] A. B´ecue, Y. Fourastier, I. Prac¸a, A. Savarit, C. Baron, B. Gradussofs,
E. Pouille, and C. Thomas, “Cyberfactory#1 — securing the industry 4.0
with cyber-ranges and digital twins,” in 2018 14th IEEE International
Workshop on Factory Communication Systems (WFCS), 2018, pp. 1–4.
[30] T. N. Dinh and M. T. Thai, “AI and blockchain: A disruptive integration,”

Computer, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 48–53, 2018.

[4] H.-J. Liao, C.-H. Richard Lin, Y.-C. Lin, and K.-Y. Tung, “Review: In-
trusion detection system: A comprehensive review,” Journal of Network
and Computer Applications, vol. 36, no. 1, p. 16–24, Jan. 2013.
[5] M. Eckhart and A. Ekelhart, Digital Twins for Cyber-Physical Systems
Security: State of the Art and Outlook. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2019, pp. 383–412.

[6] F. Tao and Q. Qi, “Make more digital twins,” Nature, vol. 573, pp.

490–491, 2019.

[7] F. Tao, H. Zhang, A. Liu, and A. Y. Nee, “Digital twin in industry:
State-of-the-art,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15,
no. 4, pp. 2405–2415, 2018.

[8] C. Gehrmann and M. Gunnarsson, “A digital twin based industrial
automation and control system security architecture,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 669–680, 2020.

[9] D. Hadˇziosmanovi´c, R. Sommer, E. Zambon, and P. H. Hartel,
“Through the eye of
the plc: Semantic security monitoring for
industrial processes,” in Proceedings of the 30th Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference, ser. ACSAC ’14. New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, p. 126–135.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2664243.2664277

[10] A. Patel, T. Schenk, S. Knorn, H. Patzlaff, D. Obradovic, and A. B.
Halblaub, “Real-time, simulation-based identiﬁcation of cyber-security
attacks of industrial plants,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Cyber Security and Resilience (CSR), 2021, pp. 267–272.

[11] S. Suhail, R. Hussain, R. Jurdak, and C. S. Hong, “Trustworthy
internet of things with blockchain,”
[Online]. Available:

digital
IEEE Internet Computing, pp. 1–10, 2021.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIC.2021.3059320

twins in the industrial

[12] M. Eckhart and A. Ekelhart, “Towards security-aware virtual environ-
ments for digital twins,” in Proceedings of the 4th ACM Workshop on
Cyber-Physical System Security, ser. CPSS ’18. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 61–72.

[13] ——, “A speciﬁcation-based state replication approach for digital
twins,” in Proceedings of the 2018 Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems
Security and PrivaCy, ser. CPS-SPC ’18. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 36–47.
[Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3264888.3264892

[14] M. Eckhart, A. Ekelhart, and E. Weippl, “Enhancing cyber situational
awareness for cyber-physical systems through digital twins,” in 2019
24th IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and
Factory Automation (ETFA), 2019, pp. 1222–1225.

[15] M. Dietz, M. Vielberth, and G. Pernul, “Integrating digital twin security
simulations in the security operations center,” in Proceedings of the
15th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security,
ser. ARES ’20. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3407023.
3407039

[16] M. Dietz, B. Putz, and G. Pernul, “A distributed ledger approach to
digital twin secure data sharing,” in IFIP Annual Conference on Data
and Applications Security and Privacy, vol. 11559. Cham: Springer,
2019, pp. 281–300.

[17] M. Groshev, C. Guimar˜aes, J. Mart´ın-P´erez, and A. de la Oliva,
“Toward intelligent cyber-physical systems: Digital twin meets artiﬁcial
intelligence,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 14–
20, 2021.

[18] V. Damjanovic-Behrendt, “A digital twin-based privacy enhancement
mechanism for the automotive industry,” in 2018 International Con-
ference on Intelligent Systems (IS), 2018, pp. 272–279.

[19] X. Bouwman, H. Grifﬁoen, J. Egbers, C. Doerr, B. Klievink, and
M. Van Eeten, A Different Cup of TI? The Added Value of Commercial
Threat Intelligence. USA: USENIX Association, 2020.

[20] A. Ibrahim, D. Thiruvady, J.-G. Schneider, and M. Abdelrazek, “The
challenges of leveraging threat
intelligence to stop data breaches,”
Frontiers in Computer Science, vol. 2, p. 36, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fcomp.2020.00036

[21] A. Khan, F. Shahid, C. Maple, A. Ahmad, and G. Jeon, “Towards smart
manufacturing using spiral digital twin framework and twinchain,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[22] C. Mandolla, A. M. Petruzzelli, G. Percoco, and A. Urbinati, “Building
a digital twin for additive manufacturing through the exploitation of
blockchain: A case analysis of the aircraft industry,” Computers in
industry, vol. 109, pp. 134–152, 2019.

[23] B. Putz, M. Dietz, P. Empl, and G. Pernul, “Ethertwin: Blockchain-based
secure digital twin information management,” Information Processing &
Management, vol. 58, no. 1, p. 102425, 2021.

[24] F. Zafar, A. Khan, S. Suhail, I. Ahmed, K. Hameed, H. M. Khan,
F. Jabeen, and A. Anjum, “Trustworthy data: A survey, taxonomy and

