IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

1

Hash-MAC-DSDV: Mutual Authentication for
Intelligent IoT-Based Cyber-Physical Systems
Muhammad Adil (Student, Member, IEEE), Mian Ahmad Jan∗ (Senior Member, IEEE),
Spyridon Mastorakis (Member, IEEE), Houbing Song (Senior Member, IEEE), Muhammad Mohsin Jadoon
(Member, IEEE), Saﬁa Abbas, Ahmed Farouk (Member, IEEE)

1
2
0
2

y
a
M
7
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
1
7
7
0
.
5
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) connected in the form
of Internet of Things (IoT) are vulnerable to various security
threats, due to the infrastructure-less deployment of IoT devices.
Device-to-Device (D2D) authentication of these networks ensures
the integrity, authenticity, and conﬁdentiality of information in
the deployed area. The literature suggests different approaches
to address security issues in CPS technologies. However, they are
mostly based on centralized techniques or speciﬁc system deploy-
ments with higher cost of computation and communication. It is
therefore necessary to develop an effective scheme that can re-
solve the security problems in CPS technologies of IoT devices. In
this paper, a lightweight Hash-MAC-DSDV (Hash Media Access
Control Destination Sequence Distance Vector) routing scheme
is proposed to resolve authentication issues in CPS technologies,
connected in the form of IoT networks. For this purpose, a CPS
of IoT devices (multi-WSNs) is developed from the local-chain
and public chain, respectively. The proposed scheme ensures
D2D authentication by the Hash-MAC-DSDV mutual scheme,
where the MAC addresses of individual devices are registered
in the ﬁrst phase and advertised in the network in the second
phase. The proposed scheme allows legitimate devices to modify
their routing table and unicast the one-way hash authentication
mechanism to transfer their captured data from source towards
the destination. Our evaluation results demonstrate that Hash-
MAC-DSDV outweighs the existing schemes in terms of attack
detection, energy consumption and communication metrics.

Index Terms—Internet of Things (IoT), security, Hash-MAC-
DSDV, Device to Device authentication, Local and public chains.

I. INTRODUCTION

Muhammad Adil

is with the Department of Computer Science, Vir-
tual University of Pakistan, 54–Lawrence Road, Lahore 54000, Pakistan
(email:ms170401318@vu.edu.pk).

Mian Ahmad Jan is with the Department of Computer Science, Abdul Wali

Khan University Mardan, Pakistan (mail:mianjan@awkum.edu.pk).

Spyridon Mastorakis is with the Computer Science Department, University

of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, USA (email:smastorakis@unomaha.edu).

Houbing Song is with the Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, USA
(Email:h.song@ieee.org).

Muhammad Mohsin Jadoon is with the Department of Radiology and
imaging, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA and Department of Elec-
trical Engineering, International Islamic University Islamabad (Email ad-
dress:muhammedmohsin.khan@yale.edu/mohsin.khan@iiu.edu.pk)

Saﬁa Abbas is with the Computer Science Department, Princess NourahBint

Abdulrahman University, KSA (email:samahmoud@pnu.edu.sa).

Ahmed Farouk is with the Computer Science and Physics Department,

Wilfrid Laurier University (email:Afarouk@wlu.ca).

Computer Science and Physics Department, Wilfrid Laurier University

(Email address:Afarouk@wlu.ca)

Corresponding author:Mian Ahmad Jan

I NTERNET of Things (IoT) is the latest and emerging

trend in the current era of Information and Communications
Technology (ICT). IoT has numerous applications in the real
world that include disaster management, military surveillance,
healthcare, smart farming, and industrial automation among
others [1-3]. The network architecture of IoT is mainly based
on distributed and centralized communication infrastructures
[1]–[4]. In the distributed infrastructure, the clients directly
extract data from the deployed sensor devices, while in the
centralized infrastructure, the sensor devices in the deployed
area process the data collected via a concerned base station.
For the IoT connectivity, multiple Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSNs) collaborate to deliver services to the end users. It is
therefore essential for these networks to manage the identity
of sensor devices in a secured environment [5]–[8]. In most
the deployment of WSN and IoT infrastructure is
cases,
challenging, so Device-to-Device (D2D) authentication is a
viable option in these scenarios. In the existing literature, the
D2D authentication schemes used for IoT are mostly used in
a centralized fashion [9], [10]. However, in a centralized D2D
authentication, legitimate sensor devices rely on third parties,
e.g. authentication servers, for their veriﬁcation and network
participation. This increases the likelihood of failures since
all participating devices depend on a single point for their
authentication. The distributed or decentralized authentication
resolves this issue in these networks. Authentication of IoT
networks connected in the form of multi-WSNs is an emerging
decentralized approach used to address the issues associated
with a centralized authentication [8]-[11].

The interconnection of multi-WSNs brings numerous chal-
lenges in terms of network security, architecture, lifetime, and
communication metrics, due to its continuous emergence [11]–
[14]. Data conﬁdentiality and integrity are the crucial as-
pects of IoT networks because they ensure the legitimacy of
a network. Therefore, D2D authentication of IoT networks
interconnecting multi-WSNs is mainly focused on the topo-
logical structure and routing protocols to create a secured
communication infrastructure. The existing techniques use the
peer-to-peer authentication through nodes, servers or base
stations, which is mostly based on centralized communication.
In addition, the centralized communication of these sensitive
networks is not reliable because failure of a centralized device
may disrupt the operation of interconnected sites and may
create network overhead in terms of shifting complete load
to the neighboring servers or controllers, which degrades the
network performance. To resolve the authentication issue in

This paper has been accepted for publication by the IEEE Internet of Things Journal. The copyright is with the IEEE.

 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

2

these networks, we have proposed a decentralized approach in
this research, which is effective in terms of various authenti-
cation modes. The main contributions of this research are as
follow.

A. Research contributions

In this paper, we propose a Hash-MAC based mutual
authentication scheme for Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) with
embedded sensor devices connected in the form of multi-
WSNs topology of IoT. Unlike the existing studies, we focus
on decentralized authentication, where a D2D approach is
adopted to verify the authenticity of participating devices.
Moreover,
the proposed model uses a hash function with
MAC addresses to create a secured authentication key for
the deployed IoT devices. We have developed the IoT net-
work infrastructure by interconnected multi-WSNs, which are
further built into various components like base station (BS),
cluster head (CH) and ordinary sensor devices. The legitimate
devices of the network register their MAC addresses in a
local chain with a concerned CH node followed by BS in
the public chain. In the next step, the BS broadcasts the
MAC addresses of registered devices in the public chain by
adding a hash function. Likewise, BS(s) connected in the
public chain receives this information and forwards it to the
local chain through CH nodes followed by legitimate devices.
Consequently,
the embedded devices of CPS in the local
chain update their routing table and follows this information
for unicast communication or one-way authentication in the
network.
The major contributions of our scheme are as follows:

1) To reduce the computation and communication costs,
the CH nodes and BS(s) have been provided with
sufﬁcient power and control to manage the MAC ad-
dress registration of legitimate devices, hash functioning
and route advertisement for creating a congestion-free
communication environment with a better lifespan of
legitimate devices.

2) The authenticity of participating devices is ensured by
continuously advertising their authentication information
in the local and public chain. In addition, the legiti-
mate devices in the local chain follow the advertised
information with a one-way Hash MAC authentication
process to ensure the legitimacy of requesting devices
by matching Hash MAC with their MAC address table.
3) The D2D authentication is achieved by utilizing minimal
network resources in our proposed model, because most
of the computation is performed by BS and CH nodes,
which improve the result statistics in terms of compar-
ative metrics over the existing schemes. In addition, the
network overhead is minimized up to a remarkable level
in terms of throughput, packet lost ratio, and network
lifetime, because the participating device follows only
the advertised information of the concerned CH node
and BS, respectively, to send their data from source to
destination.

Beside that, we want to acknowledge that our proposed model
presents a secured communication environment with robust

MAC address registration to ensure their legitimacy. Thus, the
proposed HASH MAC scheme applies to any IoT application
that has legitimate device authentication and secure com-
munication requirements e.g. industrial automation, military,
internet of vehicles (IoV), agriculture, smart homes etc.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents the related work followed by the proposed model of
authenticating the IoT devices in CPS in Section 3. Section 4
presents the formal security analysis followed by experimental
results in Section 5. Finally, section 6 concludes our paper.

II. LITERATURE REVIEW

Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) and Internet of Things
(IoT) are susceptible to various security threats, due to the
deployed environment and their dynamic communication be-
havior. Therefore, security of these networks is considered as
primary concerns for research community that needs to be
implemented at the deployment stage [15] [16]. In order to
combat security threats faced by these networks, the limited
resources and critical applications of IoT require the research
community to devise new techniques or modify existing tech-
niques. Therefore, the literature suggests different schemes for
countering various type of attacks faced by these networks.

Khalid et al. [17] proposed a decentralized authentication
scheme for IoT-based communication infrastructure of multi-
WSNs, where they used fog computing as a public authenti-
cation process to verify the legitimacy of participating sensor
devices. Tonyali et al. [18] proposed a privacy preserved
protocol for wireless mesh networks of Smart Grid to collect
data in a secured communication environment. Moreover,
they used Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) and Secure
multiparty Computation (SMPC) techniques in their model
to aggregate data in a secured communication environment.
A comprehensive survey of secure services composition and
data aggregation for WSNs was carried out by Aloqaily et
al. [19]. Baker et al. [20] proposed the toolbox authentication
scheme for blockchain wireless sensor networks. In the pro-
posed model, they used a key feature for the authenticity and
identity of communicating sensor devices. Moreover, they used
the signature and cryptographic approaches in their cloud-
based infrastructure of blockchain wireless networks. Rathee
et al. [21] proposed a blockchain authentication scheme for
autonomous vehicular communication infrastructure.

The challenges associated with the security of IoT network
communication infrastructure was expansively overviewed by
Tariq et al. [22] in their survey article. Moreover, the authors
comprehensively discussed the well-established approaches to
counter these threats in an operational network. However,
the survey was adopted speciﬁcally against fog computing
IoT network communication environment. The two-factor
lightweight privacy-preserving authentication scheme for IoT
devices connected in the form of multi-WSNs was proposed by
Gope et al. [23]. The authors used the physical functionality of
IoT devices as an authentication factor to verify the legitimacy
of participating devices. However, later on, their scheme was
ﬂawed, because every time the assessment of the physical
properties of IoT devices is not possible. Feng et al. [24]

IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

3

was proposed the lightweight attestation and authentication
scheme for the IoT network. They used the memory and clone-
able functions of sensor devices with the help of software-
deﬁne infrastructure to verify the authenticity of participating
devices in the network. The CreditCoin based authentication
scheme for blockchain vehicular wireless sensor networks was
proposed by Li et al. [25]. The limitation of this scheme was
its speciﬁc system implementation with a complex model.

Cui et al. [26] used a deep learning technique to identify
malware variants in the deployed WSNs. In the proposed
scheme, the authors used malicious codes in the conversion
of grayscale images to verify the legitimacy of their scheme.
The scheme was effective to identify malware variants in
the network, but it was limited to homogeneous networks,
which minimizes its use in the real deployment. Aitzhan et
al. [27] proposed a third party decentralized authentication
scheme for smart grid energy system. Moreover,
the au-
thors used blockchain technology infrastructure in their model
with multi-signature anonymous encryption message streams
to ensure the security of deployed IoT. A detailed survey
on blockchain technology in coordination of a centralized
approach to overview the security performance of deployed
WSNs infrastructure is carried out by Salman et al. [28].
Cui et al. [29] was proposed the ensemble bat algorithm (BA)
approach for large scale optimization problems by integrating
ideas. Edge Chain named blockchain communication envi-
ronment for IoT networks was proposed by Pan et al. [30].
The basic idea of the proposed model was to integrate the
blockchain of WSNs and link them through edge cloud for
secure information exchange. The three-tier security archi-
tecture for IoT networks was suggested by Bao et al. [31].
The authors used the blockchain layer, authentication layer,
and application layer in combination to resolve the security
issues of IoT networks. Won et al. [32] was proposed the Cer-
tiﬁcateless Signcryption Tag Key Encapsulation Mechanism
(eCLSC-TKEM) to resolve the security issue of city-based
drone communication infrastructure. The proposed model was
capable to verify the authenticity of participating devices in
terms of relationships such as one-to-one authentication, one
to many, and many to one.

A. Limitation of Existing Schemes.

CPS is extremely vulnerable to a variety of internal and
external attacks, due to their unrestricted area deployment
and complex communication activities. As a consequence,
efﬁcient use of CPS networks enriches their productivity and
adaptability. CPS is made up of hundreds of thousands of
sensor nodes that are exposed to numerous forms of attacks,
i.e. jamming, black hole attacks, Sybil attacks, server-side
attacks, and so on. Various methodologies had been demon-
strated in the recent past to mitigate these types of attacks and
resolve the authentication problem in CPS, but the majority of
them are speciﬁc to the communication environment, system
deployment, or software relevancy.
The following are some of the major disadvantages correlated
with the current literature:

1) The majority of the authentication approaches discussed
in the literature are difﬁcult to execute in a real deploy-
ment, due to their complexity.

2) Some of the discussed techniques are successful for
unique network attacks, which limits their use in real-
world applications because CPS is susceptible to numer-
ous network attacks.

3) Some present literature employs a convoluted authenti-
cation mechanism, which adds to network overhead and
reduces network capability in terms of computation and
communication costs.

III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY: HASH-MAC-DSDV
SCHEME
A. Assumptions and System Model

Let us assume an IoT network of sensor devices, CH nodes,
and BSs. The sensor devices have limited resources in terms
of storage, transmission, processing, and onboard power. Such
resources require efﬁcient utilization for better results and
prolonged network lifetime. To this end,
in our proposed
model, most computation is performed by CH nodes and BS(s)
to maximize the lifetime of sensor devices. The sensor devices
are components of CPS connected in the form of IoT networks.
Moreover, these devices are deployed at a designated location
to collect and process information in the network according
to their assigned task. The CH nodes process the gathered
information of sensor devices in the local chain and transmit
it to the BS(s) for further processing. Each CH is a special
device with higher processing and memory capabilities, as
well as onboard power. Therefore, they process the data in an
effective way in the local chain as well as in the public chain
associated with the BS. The BS connects multi-WSNs of CPS
to form a heterogeneous network. Moreover, the BS works as
a point of interest for sub-networks, because it manages the
sub-networks in terms of security and data processing.

Figure 1 represents the architectural diagram of our pro-
posed approach. The connectivity between legitimate devices
and cluster heads is shown by light blue lines whereas, the
green lines show intra-connectivity among the BSs, while
the orange lines represent the connectivity of BSs and net-
work cloud. The black lines in the ﬁgure show the D2D
communication among different clusters. The sensor devices
in each cluster gather data according to their designated
task and process it via the concerned CH in the network.
Similarly, each CH node uses an associated BS to transmit
the gathered information to remote destinations within the
network. Moreover, as shown in the ﬁgure, the legitimate
devices of one cluster can communicate with another cluster’s
device, if they verify the security parameters of the proposed
model by matching the MAC addresses. The multi-WSNs of
CPS, as shown in the ﬁgure, establish a heterogeneous IoT
network.

B. Authentication Mechanism

The authentication mechanism adopted in the proposed
model includes the following phases: initialization, registra-
tion, and authentication.

IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

4

Fig. 1: Architecture overview of local and Public chain of our scheme

1) Initialization and Registration Phases: The initialization
phase is mainly concerned with the BSs as they initiate
the Hash-MAC-DSDV mutual authentication scheme on sub-
networks using the local and public chain connectivity. All
the participating sub-network devices ﬁrst register their MAC
addresses with a BS in an ofﬂine phase within the public
chain va a concerned CH (local chain). The BS adds MD5
Hash function with the registered MAC address and broadcasts
it within the public chain following the Hash-MAC-DSDV
routing scheme. The CH connected with the BS passes on this
information to the local chain, where the legitimate devices
update their routing table according to the advertised informa-
tion. Similarly, the connected devices in the network follow
their routing table information to transmit data from source
to destination via concerned CH and BS. However, before
transmission, a one-way-authentication process is carried out
to verify the legitimacy of each requesting device by matching
its MAC address in the device MAC table, CH, or BS,
respectively.

Theorem-1: An ordinary device Di generates a MAC
address registration request with concerned Sj through CH,
where Dj is the speciﬁed BS. Di communicate in the network,
if Di MAC address ∈ (Dj) public chain.
Proof: Let us assume that an attacker device Ak generates
a registration request directly with BS by sending its MAC
address. Dj checks the MAC address of requesting device by

triggering a lookup with connected CH or local chain network.
After, a through check, the MAC-address of Ak did not match
with any local chain of Sj. Hence, the MAC address of Ak
cannot be registered by concerned Dj in the public chain.
Moreover, the registration request of Ak is denied by Dj.
Conversely, if the legitimate device Di generated a registration
request with the concerned Dj through CH or local chain,
then its MAC address will be veriﬁed successfully in terms
of Di ∈ member(Dj, i) , where the ith term in Dj,i denotes
the total number of registered MAC addresses of legitimate
devices in Dj, which is further classiﬁed as i=(1,2,3,4,.......n-
1), in our proposed multi-WSNs network. Hence, Dj registers
only those devices that approached through local chain or CH
in the initial phase of registration (ofﬂine phase).

Algorithm 1 describes the registration phase of the proposed
model. Initially, Di devices generate RREQ messages to regis-
ter their MAC addresses with Dj that checks the local chain of
requesting device. If the local chain (CH) ∈ Dj, then, the Dj
registers the MAC addresses of requesting devices, else they
deny the registration request of these devices. Likewise, the Dj
advertises the information of registered devices in public chain
through connected Dj and local chain through CH nodes for
other legitimate connected devices. All connected devices in
the local chain and public chain update their routing table for
communication in the network. Finally, Dj represents the list
of registered MAC Addresses. Please note that only registered

Base StationCHSensor DeviceSensor DeviceSensor DeviceSensor DeviceLocal ChainCHSensor DeviceSensor DeviceSensor DeviceSensor DeviceLocal ChainMulti-WSNs of CPS, connected in the form of IoT Network Base StationSensor DeviceSensor DeviceSensor DeviceSensor DeviceLocal ChainSensor DeviceSensor DeviceSensor DeviceSensor DeviceLocal ChainCHCHPublic Chain formation of CPS IoT Network  Sensor DeviceCHBase StationCommunication ChannelNetwork CloudIEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

5

Algorithm 1 Registration of ordinary devices Di with Dj via
the speciﬁed CH
Require: Registration of legitimate Di with concerned Dj.
Ensure: Registration of legitimate Di in the local and public

chains.

1: Di generate registration RREQ with Dj
2: Di forward registration RREQ ←− through CH
3: Dj ←− Receives Di RREQ through CH, where,

i=1,2,3......n-1

for (i=0; i = n-1; i++)

Dj check local chain (CH) ←− of Di

if
Di RREQ ∈ local chain of Dj
then,
Dj registers Di MAC address in their MAC table

Else
Dj Denies Di registration request

end if
Dj broadcast

public chain

the registered MAC address in the

CH ←− Share information of public chain in local chain

ordinary devices update their routing table according to

4:

5:
6:
7:
8:
9:

10:
11:
12:
13:

14:

15:

Dj

16: return : List of registered Di devices MAC addresses

devices can process their request through concerned CH in the
public chain.

The ﬂow chart of Figure 2 depicts the registration process of
our proposed Hash-MAC-DSDV algorithm. The participating
devices Di share their MAC addresses with Dj
through
a CH, which we call local chain in the proposed model.
However, once Dj
receives a registration request from a
CH for an ordinary device Di, the Dj registers the MAC
address of requesting Di and uses the MD5 hash algorithm
to broadcast the MAC address of Di in the network via other
Dj interconnected small WSNs, consequently, the Dj further
broadcast this information to connected CH nodes in the local
chains. When the participating devices in the local chain
receive the CH broadcast message, they update their routing
table. Similarly, these devices follow their routing information
to transmit messages in the network and make authentication
possible between D2D in the local chains, device to CH, and
CH to Dj by means of the proposed scheme. To elaborate
further, the devices connected in the local chain follow their
routing table information to forward or receive communication
requests. Moreover, these information contains the adjacent
devices hop-count, distance, and MAC address etc. which
ensures the effectiveness of proposed scheme. Likewise, the
Dj maintains a record of the local chains in terms of clusters
(CH) with their Di devices MAC address information and the
CH maintains a record of legitimate devices. Consequently,
the connected Di of the network follows the rule of Hash-
MAC-DSDV protocol for communication in the network.

2) Authentication Phase: Let us assume that a legitimate
device Di, where Di ∈ local chain of the CH, initiates an
authentication request with Dj to process the collected data in
the public chain. Di processes its data through the local chain
using the CH, which checks and matches the requesting device
ID in terms of MAC addresses in their MAC table to verify
its authenticity in the local chain. If MAC address of (Di) ∈
CH list, then the CH processes the Di’s request for further
processing in the network. Once Dj receives Di’s request for
communication in the network, Dj matches Di’s MAC address
in its routing table by following the public chain mechanism
for the speciﬁed CH (local chain). Dj matches the requesting
Di’s MAC address in its routing table, if Di’s MAC address ∈
Dj MAC address list for a speciﬁed local chain, Dj allows Di
to communication through the public chain. Hence, Dj veriﬁes
the authenticity of requesting Di devices and processes their
information in the network.

Figure 3 illustrates the step by step authentication for a
device registered in the network. The proposed model works
on the basis of chains: local and public. Similarly, a number of
small WSNs of CPS are interconnected in the network to form
a heterogeneous IoT network. Di initiates a message exchange
request in the network. Di needs an authentication in the local
chain to move forward in the public chain. Therefore, Di’s
message contains information such as device ID and MAC
address. This information is checked by the CH in the local
chain to verify its authenticity. The Di’s message is veriﬁed
by the CH via matching its MAC address in the local chain.
If Di’s MAC address ∈ CH’s MAC address list, then the CH
successfully authenticates Di and processes Di’s request in
the public chain. Likewise, Di’s message request goes to the
public chain, where Dj checks and matches the MAC address
of Di in its MAC address table. If Di’s MAC address ∈ Dj
MAC address table, the authentication of Di is completed
successfully and it is allowed to communicate in the network.

C. Device to Device Authentication in Local Chain

The proposed model

is effective in D2D authentication
because all the MAC addresses of legitimate Di are broadcast
by the respective Dj
in the public chain. The connected
CH nodes pass this information to the local chain and the
participating devices in the local chain update their routing
table according to the advertised information of Dj. The
devices follow their routing information to communicate with
neighboring devices or process their collected data through
these devices and CH nodes, if they are at the next hop.

Let us assume that Di devices generate an authentication
or message exchange request with another Di ∈ Dn−1, where
the ith term represents the number of legitimate devices in
the local chain such that,
i=(1,2,3,4,......,n-1) devices. The
receiving device checks the MAC address of Di in its MAC
address table. If Di’s MAC address ∈ Dn−1 MAC address
list, the receiving device will process Di request in the local
chain. Otherwise, Dn−1 device denies Di’s authentication
request and broadcasts an alarm message in the network to
acknowledge the existence of a malicious device Ak)in the
network.

IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

6

Fig. 2: Legitimate devices registration step by step process in the proposed model

Fig. 3: Authentication Flow chart diagram of Hash-MAC-DSDV protocol

D. Authentication of Attacker Devices

The authentication of an attacker device in an operational
network ensures the reliability and performance of a proto-
col or security scheme. Therefore, the proposed Hash-MAC-
DSDV scheme is effective in terms of identifying malicious
devices in the network.

1) Authentication of attackers in the local chain in terms of

D2D:

Let us assume that an attacker Ak initiates an authentication
request. Ak’s request is received by a legitimate device Di in
the cluster (local chain), where the ith term i= (1,2,3,4,......,n-
1), represents the legitimate devices in the cluster. Once Di
receives Ak’s message request, it matches the MAC address
of Ai in their MAC address table. Likewise, if Ak’s MAC
address /∈ Di’s MAC address, Di denies Ak’s authentication
request in the local chain and avoid attacks in the local chain.
2) Authentication of attackers in the local chain by CH:
It is a major concern when Ak initiates a message request
with a CH node in the local chain to compromise its security.

However, in case of direct communication with CH nodes,
when a CH receives Ak’s message request, it checks the MAC
address of Ak in its MAC address list. If Ak’s MAC address ∈
CH MAC address list, the CH allows Ak to communication in
the network. Otherwise, CH denies Ak’s request and advertises
an alarm message to notify others about the existence of an
attacker in the network.

3) Authentication of attackers in the local chain by Dj:

There is a possibility that Ak will compromise the security
of the public chain by communicating directly with a Dj. The
proposed model is effective to combat a direct connectivity
request from Ak to Dj through accurate identiﬁcation. Once
the Ak generates an authentication request to Dj directly in
public chain, Dj matches Ak’s MAC address in their MAC
address list. If Ak’s MAC address /∈ Dj MAC address list, Ak
is accurately identiﬁed and detected by Dj. At this stage, Dj
broadcasts an alarm message in the local chain through CH
nodes to acknowledge the existence of a malicious device in
the network’s public and local chains.

IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

7

IV. EVALUATION

The feasibility of Hash-MAC-DSDV scheme was evaluated
using OMNeT++. The parameters used to implement our
scheme are shown in Table I. Although, we have evaluated our
scheme in a simulation environment, the results of OMNeT++
are an approximation of the real environment in terms of op-
eration. Throughout our simulation study, we tested numerous
criteria for the proposed scheme to check its feasibility for the
real-world implementation. Moreover, the results are validated
through formal safety analysis in the context of different
threats to the network. We computed the computation and
communication cost, packet losses, and latency, respectively.
In addition, we compared the energy consumption of Hash-
MAC-DSDV to the legacy DSDV routing protocol. A descrip-
tion of our ﬁndings is presented in the following subsections.

TABLE I: Parameters used for Hash-MAC-DSDV setup.

Parameter Description

Value of the parameters

Sensor Devices

300, 600, 1000, 1500, 2000

Number of Base Stations

Routing Protocol

Number of Cluster Heads
Initial Energy of devices (Ei)
Simulation Tool

3 , 6, 10. 15, 20

Hash-MAC-DSDV

15, 30, 50, 60, 90

60,000 mAh

OMNeT ++

Energy Consumption during Normal state

Energy Consumption during transmission

Energy Consumption during Sleep mode

Transmission interval of devices

Energy Consumption during reception
Residual Energy of a device (Er)
Network Trafﬁc type

Packet Size

1.03 mW

70.1 mW
0.50 µ W
14 µSec

44.6 mW
Ei - Ec
UDP

128 Bytes

Communication Pattern

broadcast/ unicast

A. Formal Security Analysis of Hash-MAC-DSDV

In this section, we ﬁrst evaluate different threats and analyze
our scheme by comparing against the existing ones. A brief
overview of formal security analysis is shown in Table II.

1) Eavesdropping Attack: In an eavesdropping attack, an
adversary Ak steals sensitive data transmitted through an
insecured communication channel. Assume that a legitimate
device Di ∈ Dn−1 transmits data through the local chain. Ak
tries to capture this data over the communication channel and
access the information. In our model, Ak needs 2128 iterations
to access a message digest and 2512 iterations to access the
block of messages, which is virtually impossible for sensor
devices due to their limited computing and memory resources,
as well as onboard power. Therefore, the Hash-MAC-DSDV
scheme efﬁciently safeguard against the eavesdropping attack.
2) Sensing Device Impersonation Attack: In this form of
attack, Ak impersonates as a valid device on the network.
However, our Hash-MAC-ASDV scheme is effective against
this attack because the one-way authentication model does not
allow Ak to usurp the security of an individual legitimate
device in the network. Let us assume that Ak initiates an

authentication request to Di in its close vicinity. Once Di re-
ceives Ak’s authentication request, it checks the MAC address
of Ak in its MAC address list. If Ak’s MAC address /∈ Di
MAC-Address list, Di will not respond to Ak’s authentication
request. In other words, Di will deny Ak’s authentication
request
in an operational network to avoid impersonation
attack.

3) Sybil Attacks: Our Hash-MAC-DSDV scheme is highly
resilient against Sybil attack, since each device has a distinct
MAC address recorded in the local chain as well as in the
public chain. Therefore, the usurpation of the protection of
the Di device needs to deﬁne its MAC-Address with MD5
hash function, but sensor device as an adversary has limited
resources to identify the MAC address of legitimate devices
by following 2128 iterations. Therefore, our model protects
against Sybil attacks.

4) Spooﬁng Attacks: Spooﬁng attack is another disruptive
assault intended to compromise the security of a network.
Assume that Ak tries to spoof the MAC address of Di by
launching an attack. For that, Ak needs to know the MAC
address of Di. Likewise, Ak needs to know the MAC address
of any Di /∈ Dn−1 in the network. Consequently, Ak will
need to hijack an individual device (CHi or Dj) to get the
MAC address of a legitimate device. This is not possible in
the proposed model, due to D2D, local chain, and public
chain authentication. The authentication request of Ak in the
proposed scheme will always be identiﬁed successfully to
prevent spooﬁng attacks against the deployed network.

5) Denial of Service Attack (DoS): To elaborate on our
scheme against DoS, assume that Ak launches a DoS attack
towards Di
in the network. Once Di receives Ak’s ﬁrst
message request, it matches the MAC address of Ak in its
registered MAC address list. If the MAC address of Ak /∈ Di’s
MAC address list, Di will deny Ak’s request and blacklist Ak
in its directory.

6) Forward and backward secrecy: Hash-MAC-DSDV can
offer forward and backward secrecy because the legitimate Di
, CHi and Dj react only to those devices listed in the local
and the public chains. These devices ﬁrst match the MAC
addresses of the requesting devices in their MAC address list.
Consequently, the tests of our scheme against this type of
attack allow access to only legitimate devices.

7) Base Station (BS) Impersonation Attacks: The Hash-
MAC-DSDV scheme also showed effectiveness against BS
impersonation attacks. Assume Ak tries to communicate di-
rectly with BS and compromise its security. Ak generates
communication request with the nearest Dj. Upon reception
of Ak message request, Dj checks the MAC address of
requesting device in its local chain MAC-Address list. The
MAC address of Ak /∈ Dj local chain MAC-Address list.
So, Dj will
identify Ak successfully and will avoid BS
impersonation attacks in the network. Therefore, our scheme
has better results against the impersonation attack.

B. Computation Cost Comparative Analysis

The computation results can easily be evaluated from the
proposed model execution time in terms of processing, energy

IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

8

TABLE II: Statistical results analysis for different security
threats

Type of Attack

Our
Scheme [17]

[23]

[30]

Eavesdropping Attack

Sensing Device Impersonate Attack

Sybil Attacks

Spooﬁng Attacks

Denial of Service Attack (DoS)

Spooﬁng Attacks

Perfect forward and backward se-
crecy

Base Station (BS) impersonate At-
tacks

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

consumption and memory utilization. The operation of the
model, furthermore, depicts that most of the computation is
performed at the cluster head and base station, which have
higher processing power. Similarly, upon registration of MAC
the base station Dj, each Dj advertises the
addresses at
information in the public chain followed by CH nodes in
the local chain. Consequently, the legitimate devices in the
local chain update their routing table according to CH adver-
tised information. The legitimate devices follow routing table
information to transmit their collected data in the network.
However, this is a one-way process, because the legitimate
devices transmit
their data in a unicast fashion following
their routing table information, which not only minimizes the
energy consumption, but also minimizes the calculation or
processing of legitimate devices and as a whole, improves the
network performance. Therefore, the computation cost of the
proposed model is better than the existing schemes of [17],
[23], and [30]. Khalid et al. [17] scheme has high computation
because the next hop update is the responsibility of an individ-
ual participating device. Therefore, it consumes more energy
with network overhead and higher computation cost. Likewise,
Gope et al. [23], scheme has also higher computation cost
in comparison to our scheme, because they used two factor
authentication model in their scheme with physical assessment
of IoT devices. Moreover, the participating devices of the
network updated their routing table after deﬁne interval of
time, which also creates contention with higher computation
cost. The complex model implementation of [30] increases its
computation cost in an operational environment.

C. Communication Cost Comparative Analysis

The communication cost

is another important aspect

to
consider while designing a new protocol or modifying existing
protocols. Therefore, the communication cost of any IoT net-
work determines its capacity, performance, and reliability. The
communication cost of the proposed model shall be assessed
with a pricing structure based on the following statement:
1) The identity of legitimate device as its MAC address
2) MD5 Hash function with message digest
3) Time stamp for key sharing via CH and base station

4) Authentication procedure
The simple registration and authentication mechanism of
legitimate devices in the proposed model minimizes the com-
munication costs up-to signiﬁcant level in the presence of
rivals schemes. Moreover, the rival schemes of [17], [23], and
[30], use an authentication process between BS/Edge devices
or device to exchange information in the network, every time.
Keeping in view,
the authentication procedure adopted by
the existing schemes, our proposed model has the simplest
authentication process with minimal resource consumption and
better results.

D. Comparative Analysis on the Accuracy of Threat Detection

The proposed model was assessed with its competitor
schemes based on accurate threat detection in an operational
network. The Hash-MAC-DSDV scheme’s utmost objective
is to detect and report malicious activity in the deployed
network. Although the competitor schemes resolve the le-
they
gitimate device authentication issue to some extent,
were ﬂawed in addressing issues like D2D, device-to-CH,
device-to-BS, and CH-to-BS authentication at the same time.
In our scheme’s simulation environment, we have evaluated
the proposed model for aforementioned attacks. Moreover,
we have also launched attacks on legitimate devices, CH(s)
and BS(s) to verify the effectiveness of our scheme. The
detection rate of malicious device in the proposed model was
98.2%, which showed an average 15% improvement over the
existing schemes. Likewise, during simulation analysis, we
have changed the number of malicious devices, fake packets,
target area such as participating devices, CH nodes, and BS(s)
to overview our scheme’s reliability. Overall, the performance
of the proposed model was signiﬁcant compared to existing
rival schemes to combat malicious attacks in IoT networks
connected in the form of multi-WSNs. Results for our scheme
and other schemes are presented in Figure 4. In addition,
in Figures 5, 6, and 7, the results for individual network
components such as devices, CH and BS against malicious
activity in an operating network are presented.

Fig. 4: Comparative statistical analysis of our scheme with
rival schemes for threat detections

E. Energy Consumption

Sensor devices are sensitive and have limited resources
memory, and energy, therefore, efﬁcient utilization of these

0200400600800100002004006008001000Average Attack Detection (%) RatioTotal Number of Attacks Launched HASH-MAC-DSDV Khalid et al. [21] Gope et al. [27] Pan et al. [34]IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

9

the network. Therefore, device participation in our scheme
surpasses ordinary DSDV protocol by 11% improvement in
an operational network as observed during simulation analysis.
The results of both routing protocols are shown in Figure 8.

Fig. 5: Statistical analysis of legitimate devices to detect
malicious attacks in an operational network

Fig. 6: Statistical analysis of CH node to detect malicious
attacks in an operational network

Fig. 8: Energy consumption statistical analysis of Hash-MAC-
DSDV and ordinary DSDV protocol

F. Latency Results Statistical Analysis

Latency is an important aspect of wireless networks when
designing protocols. We therefore considered consistency in
time during the design stage of our scheme in order to
exchange information effectively throughout the network. In
the simulation environment, the number of devices and lo-
cal chains is gradually increased to overview the duration
of the exchange of messages in the network. Subsequently,
malicious devices were introduced in the network with a
fake authentication request in the local chain as well as in
the public chain to observe the latency of legitimate device
messages. Although, during the presence of malicious devices,
network trafﬁc was at its peak, the legitimate device showed
consistency while exchanging data on the network. The unique
pattern of communication among the legitimate devices in
the proposed model played a vital role in ensuring time-
consistency during the exchange of messages. The results of
the proposed scheme are compared with competing schemes
and are presented in Figure 9.

Fig. 7: Statistical analysis of BS to detect malicious attacks in
an operational network

devices increases its productivity in terms of network lifespan.
Therefore, while designing Hash-MAC-DSDV mutual authen-
tication scheme for multi-WSNs connected in the form of IoT
network, we considered limited resources of sensor devices.
The proposed model’s energy consumption was evaluated
with ordinary DSDV protocol in simulation environment. The
results statistics captured during Hash-MAC-DSDV protocol
simulation showed improvement in the lifetime of ordinary
devices working in the network over the ordinary DSDV pro-
tocol. Likewise, while evaluating DSDV protocol, participating
devices consume more energy as compared to our scheme, due
to continued route update with neighbor devices. Conversely,
in our scheme, the legitimate device updates its routing table
to local and public chain information to exchange data in

Fig. 9: Latency Results statistical analysis of Hash-MAC-
DSDV scheme with its rival schemes

G. Packet lost Ratio Statistical Results Analysis

Wireless communication is susceptible to various attacks
and environmental factors. Therefore, packet lost ratio is given

200400600800100002004006008001000Total Number of Attacks Detected (%)Total Number of Attacks Launched Total Nuber of attacks on Legitimae devices Attacks Detected by Legitimate Devices1002003004005000100200300400500Total Number of Attacks Detected (%)Total Number of Attacks Launched Total Nuber of attacks on CH Attacks Detected by CH50100150200250050100150200250Total Number of Attacks Detected (%)Total Number of Attacks Launched Total Nuber of attacks on BS Attacks Detected by BS1000020000300004000050000600000100200300400500600Node Average Time of Participation in Network (Minutes)Total Energy of an Ordinay Node (mAH) Time of Participation of node for DSDV  Time of Participation of node for HASh-MAC_DSDV 020040060080010001200140016001800200022000.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.22.42.6Latency Results Statistical Analysis (milisecond)Total Number of Packets Sent HASH-MAC-DSDV Khalid et al. [21] Gope et al. [27] Pan et al. [34]IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

10

preference to deﬁne the performance reliability of any wireless
network. During simulation of Hash-MAC-DSDV protocol the
PLR was quantiﬁed through the following formula:

P LR = P acket sent − P acket received

(1)

The network trafﬁc was increased in simulation and we
quantiﬁed the ratio between packets sent and received, which
showed reliable results during analysis. Moreover, the consis-
tency of PLR was veriﬁed by targeting devices during trafﬁc
congestion in an operational network. Our results showed only
7 % PLR for the proposed model during peak trafﬁc, verifying
the signiﬁcance of our scheme over the compared schemes.
The statistical analysis for PLR is shown in Figure 10.

Fig. 10: PLR Results statistical analysis for Hash-MAC-DSDV
scheme with competitors schemes

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we proposed Hash-MAC-DSDV, a mutual
authentication scheme for CPS connected to form an IoT
network. We modiﬁed the DSDV protocol to enable mutual
authentication among participating devices via hop count
communication. Initially, all legitimate devices registered their
MAC addresses with the base stations via concerned cluster
heads to form local and public chains, respectively. Upon
registration, the base station applies MD5 hash algorithm to
the registered MAC addresses for advertisement in the public
chain, where a number of cluster heads are involved. These
cluster heads advertised the base station information in the
local chain and the devices update their routing table according
to the advertised information. Likewise, each legitimate device
uses its routing table information to send data to a destination.
However,
to verify the legitimacy of adjacent devices or
cluster head during hop-count authentication, matching of
MAC addresses is followed by each device. Our proposed
scheme outperforms existing approaches in terms of attack
detection rate, computation cost, communication cost, energy
consumption, PLR, and latency. The unicast communication
and one-way-hash authentication of our model increases its
applicability in real deployments with minimal resource con-
sumption overhead.

In the future, we are looking to implement the proposed
model in the real environment, where a number of local and
public chains network should be interconnect to verify the
performance reliability and consistency ratio.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

is

partially

This work

supported
(CNS-2016714),

the NIH
by
(P20GM109090), NSF
the Nebraska
University Collaboration Initiative, and the Nebraska Tobacco
Settlement Biomedical Research Development Funds. This
research is also partially funded by the Deanship of Scientiﬁc
Research at Princess Nourah Bint Abdul Rahman University
through the Fast-track Research Funding Program.

REFERENCES

[1] Jayavardhana Gubbi, Rajkumar Buyya, Slaven Marusic, and Marimuthu
Palaniswami. Internet of things (iot): A vision, architectural elements,
and future directions. Future generation computer systems, 29(7):1645–
1660, 2013.

[2] Fazlullah Khan, Mian Ahmad Jan, Ateeq Ur Rehman, Spyridon Mas-
torakis, Mamoun Alazab, and Paul Watters. A secured and intelligent
communication scheme for iiot-enabled pervasive edge computing. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2020.

[3] Mian Ahmad Jan, Jinjin Cai, Xiang-Chuan Gao, Fazlullah Khan, Spyri-
don Mastorakis, Muhammad Usman, Mamoun Alazab, and Paul Watters.
Security and blockchain convergence with internet of multimedia things:
Current trends, research challenges and future directions. Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, page 102918, 2020.

[4] Spyridon Mastorakis, Abderrahmen Mtibaa, Jonathan Lee, and Satya-
jayant Misra. Icedge: When edge computing meets information-centric
networking. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(5):4203–4217, 2020.

[5] Minhaj Ahmad Khan and Khaled Salah. Iot security: Review, blockchain
solutions, and open challenges. Future Generation Computer Systems,
82:395–411, 2018.

[6] Xin Zhong, Pei-Chi Huang, Spyridon Mastorakis, and Frank Y Shih.
An automated and robust image watermarking scheme based on deep
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02460, 2020.

[7] Mian Ahmad Jan, Fazlullah Khan, Rahim Khan, Spyridon Mastorakis,
Varun G Menon, Paul Watters, and Mamoun Alazab. A lightweight
mutual authentication and privacy-preservation scheme for intelligent
IEEE Transactions on Industrial
wearable devices in industrial-cps.
Informatics, 2020.

[8] Susmit Shannigrahi, Spyridon Mastorakis, and Francisco R Ortega.
Next-generation networking and edge computing for mixed reality real-
In 2020 IEEE International Conference on
time interactive systems.
Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2020.
[9] Md Jubayer al Mahmod and Ujjwal Guin. A robust, low-cost and secure
authentication scheme for iot applications. Cryptography, 4(1):8, 2020.
[10] Mohamed Amine Ferrag, Leandros Maglaras, and Ahmed Ahmim.
Privacy-preserving schemes for ad hoc social networks: A survey. IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 19(4):3015–3045, 2017.

[11] Rehmat Ullah, Muhammad Atif Ur Rehman, Muhammad Ali Naeem,
Byung-Seo Kim, and Spyridon Mastorakis.
Icn with edge for 5g:
Exploiting in-network caching in icn-based edge computing for 5g
networks. Future Generation Computer Systems, 111:159–174, 2020.

[12] Spyridon Mastorakis, Tianxiang Li, and Lixia Zhang. DAPES: Named
Data for Off-the-Grid File Sharing with Peer-to-Peer
Interactions.
40th IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
(ICDCS), 2020.

[13] Muhammad Atif Ur Rehman, Rehmat Ullah, Byung-Seo Kim, Boubakr
Nour, and Spyridon Mastorakis. Ccic-wsn: An architecture for sin-
gle channel cluster-based information-centric wireless sensor networks.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[14] Tianxiang Li, Zhaoning Kong, Spyridon Mastorakis, and Lixia Zhang.
Distributed dataset synchronization in disruptive networks. In 2019 IEEE
16th International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Systems
(MASS), pages 428–437. IEEE, 2019.

[15] A Yu, Jia-Jia Ji, Yuan Wang, Hong-Bing Sun, et al. Wireless monitoring
system for corrosion degree of reinforcement in concrete. Journal of
Nanoelectronics and Optoelectronics, 14(6):887–893, 2019.

[16] Muhammad Adil, Mohammed Amin Almaiah, Alhuseen Omar Alsayed,
and Omar Almomani. An anonymous channel categorization scheme
of edge nodes to detect jamming attacks in wireless sensor networks.
Sensors, 20(8):2311, 2020.

[17] Umair Khalid, Muhammad Asim, Thar Baker, Patrick CK Hung,
Muhammad Adnan Tariq, and Laura Rafferty.
A decentralized
lightweight blockchain-based authentication mechanism for iot systems.
Cluster Computing, pages 1–21, 2020.

05000100001500020000250003000002004006008001000120014001600Average Results Statistics for Packet Lost Ratio (%)Traffic (Total Number of Messages Sent) HASH-MAC-DSDV Khalid et al. [21] Gope et al. [27] Pan et al. [34]IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

11

MIAN AHMAD JAN (Senior Member, IEEE) re-
ceived the Ph.D. degree in computer systems from
the University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Aus-
tralia, in 2016. He is an Assistant Professor with
Abdul Wai Khan University Mardan, Pakistan. His
research articles have been published in various
prestigious IEEE TRANSACTIONS and journals
(Elsevier). His research interests include security
and privacy in the Internet of Things and wire-
less sensor networks. He had been the recipient of
various prestigious scholarships during his studies,
notably the International Research Scholarship (IRS) from the UTS, Australia,
and the Commonwealth Scientiﬁc Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO)
Scholarships. He was awarded the Best Researcher Award from the UTS
in 2014. He was the General Co-Chair of Springer/EAI Second International
Conference on Future Intelligent Vehicular Technologies in 2017. He has been
a Guest Editor of numerous special issues in various prestigious journals such
as Future Generation Computing Systems (Elsevier), Mobile Networks and
Applications (MONET) (Springer), Ad Hoc and Sensor Wireless Networks,
and Information (MDPI).

Spyridon Mastorakis (Member, IEEE) is an Assis-
tant Professor in Computer Science at the Univer-
sity of Nebraska Omaha. He received his Ph.D. in
Computer Science from the University of California,
Los Angeles (UCLA) in 2019. He also received an
M.S. in Computer Science from UCLA in 2017 and
a 5-year diploma (equivalent to M.Eng.) in Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering from the National
Technical University of Athens (NTUA) in 2014. His
research interests include network systems and pro-
tocols, Internet architectures (such as Information-
Centric Networking and Named-Data Networking), edge computing, and IoT.

Houbing Song (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
M.S. degree in civil engineering from the University
of Texas, El Paso, TX, USA, in December 2006,
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA,
in August 2012. In August 2017, he joined the
Department of Electrical, Computer, Software, and
Systems Engineering, Embry–Riddle Aeronautical
University, Daytona Beach, FL, USA, where he is
currently an Assistant Professor and the Director
of the Security and Optimization for Networked
Globe Laboratory. His research has been featured by popular news media
including IEEE GlobalSpec’s Engineering360, USA Today, U.S.
outlets,
News & World Report, Fox News, the Association for Unmanned Vehicle
Systems International, Forbes, WFTV, and New Atlas. His research inter-
ests include cyber–physical systems, cyber security and privacy, Internet of
Things, edge computing, AI/machine learning, big data analytics, unmanned
aircraft systems, connected vehicle, smart and connected health, and wireless
communications and networking.

MUHAMMAD MOHSIN JADOON received his
B.S. and M.S. degrees in Electronic engineering
from COMSATS University Islamabad, and Interna-
tional Islamic University Islamabad (IIUI),Pakistan,
in 2007 and 2011, respectively. Dr. M Mohsin
Jadoon did PhD in Split degree programs i.e. course
work from IIUI and research from Queen Merry
University (QMU) London, UK in 2018. Currently,
he is post-doctorate research fellow at Department of
Radiology and Imaging processing, Yale university,
New Haven, CT, USA. He is also Lecturer with
the Electrical Engineering Department, International Islamic University Is-
lamabad. His research interests include Signal & Processing, Sensors and
biomedical Imaging.

[18] Samet Tonyali, Kemal Akkaya, Nico Saputro, A Selcuk Uluagac, and
Mehrdad Nojoumian.
Privacy-preserving protocols for secure and
reliable data aggregation in iot-enabled smart metering systems. Future
Generation Computer Systems, 78:547–557, 2018.

[19] Moayad Aloqaily, Ismaeel Al Ridhawi, Haythem Bany Salameh, and
Yaser Jararweh. Data and service management in densely crowded
environments: Challenges, opportunities, and recent developments. IEEE
Communications Magazine, 57(4):81–87, 2019.

[20] Thar Baker, Muhammad Asim,

´Aine MacDermott, Farkhund Iqbal,
Faouzi Kamoun, Babar Shah, Omar Alfandi, and Mohammad Ham-
moudeh. A secure fog-based platform for scada-based iot critical
infrastructure. Software: Practice and Experience, 50(5):503–518, 2020.
[21] Geetanjali Rathee, Ashutosh Sharma, Razi Iqbal, Moayad Aloqaily,
Naveen Jaglan, and Rajiv Kumar. A blockchain framework for securing
connected and autonomous vehicles. Sensors, 19(14):3165, 2019.
[22] Noshina Tariq, Muhammad Asim, Feras Al-Obeidat, Muhammad
Zubair Farooqi, Thar Baker, Mohammad Hammoudeh, and Ibrahim
Ghaﬁr. The security of big data in fog-enabled iot applications including
blockchain: a survey. Sensors, 19(8):1788, 2019.

[23] Prosanta Gope and Biplab Sikdar. Lightweight and privacy-preserving
two-factor authentication scheme for iot devices. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 6(1):580–589, 2018.

[24] Wei Feng, Yu Qin, Shijun Zhao, and Dengguo Feng. Aaot: Lightweight
attestation and authentication of low-resource things in iot and cps.
Computer Networks, 134:167–182, 2018.

[25] Lun Li, Jiqiang Liu, Lichen Cheng, Shuo Qiu, Wei Wang, Xian-
gliang Zhang, and Zonghua Zhang. Creditcoin: A privacy-preserving
blockchain-based incentive announcement network for communications
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
of smart vehicles.
Systems, 19(7):2204–2220, 2018.

[26] Zhihua Cui, Fei Xue, Xingjuan Cai, Yang Cao, Gai-ge Wang, and Jinjun
Chen. Detection of malicious code variants based on deep learning.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 14(7):3187–3196, 2018.

[27] Nurzhan Zhumabekuly Aitzhan and Davor Svetinovic.

Security
and privacy in decentralized energy trading through multi-signatures,
blockchain and anonymous messaging streams. IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing, 15(5):840–852, 2016.

[28] Tara Salman, Maede Zolanvari, Aiman Erbad, Raj Jain, and Mohammed
Samaka. Security services using blockchains: A state of the art survey.
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 21(1):858–880, 2018.
[29] Xingjuan Cai, Jiangjiang Zhang, Hao Liang, Lei Wang, and Qidi Wu.
An ensemble bat algorithm for large-scale optimization. International
Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 10(11):3099–3113, 2019.
[30] Jianli Pan, Jianyu Wang, Austin Hester, Ismail Alqerm, Yuanni Liu, and
Ying Zhao. Edgechain: An edge-iot framework and prototype based
IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
on blockchain and smart contracts.
6(3):4719–4732, 2018.

[31] Zijian Bao, Wenbo Shi, Debiao He, and Kim-Kwang Raymond Chood.
Iotchain: A three-tier blockchain-based iot security architecture. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.02008, 2018.

[32] Jongho Won, Seung-Hyun Seo, and Elisa Bertino. Certiﬁcateless
cryptographic protocols for efﬁcient drone-based smart city applications.
IEEE Access, 5:3721–3749, 2017.

BIOGRAPHIES

Muhammad Adil received his Associate Engineer
degree in Electronics form the school of Electronic
associated with civil aviation Pakistan in 2010. Mr.
Adil received his Bachelor of Science in Computer
Science (4 years programs) and Master of Sci-
ence in Computer Sciences (2 years program) with
specialization in Computer Networks from Virtual
University of Lahore, Pakistan in 2016 and 2019,
respectively. He has CCNA and CCNP certiﬁcation.
He is currently a PhD Candidate. His research area
includes different routing protocols, Security, and
Load Balancing in WSN, IoT, and ad hoc networks. Moreover, Mr. Adil is also
interested in Dynamic Wireless Charging of Electric Vehicles connected in
network topological infrastructure with Machine learning techniques. He has
many publications in prestigious journals such as IEEE Access, IEEE Sensors,
Computer Networks Elsevier, CMC-Computer Material & Continua and
MDPI Sensor etc. In addition, he is IEEE Student member. He is reviewing
for prestigious journals, such as IEEE Access, IEEE Sensors, IEEE Systems,
IEEE Internet of Things, IEEE Transaction of Industrial Informatics, IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, MDPI Sensors
and Computer Networks Elsevier Journals, Telecommunication System, and
IEEE Wireless Communication Letters.

IEEE JOURNAL OF INTERNET OF THINGS,

12

Saﬁa Abbas works as associate professor with the
Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Com-
puter and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah-
bintAbdulrahman University, KSA, during 2019-
2021, and University of Ain Shams, Cairo, Egypt
during 2016-2018. During 2006-2011, she received
the Ph.D. from the Graduate School of Science
and Technology, Niigata University, Japan. A strong
theme of her work is in the swarm optimizers, and
security in cloud, Medical Diagnosis using machine
learning and Data mining.

Ahmed Farouk (Member, IEEE) is currently as-
sistant professor, before that he was a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow at Wilfrid Laurier University and
Ryerson University, Canada. He received his M.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees from Mansoura University, Egypt.
He is one of the Top 20 technical co-founders of
the Quantum Machine Learning Program by Cre-
ative Destruction Lab at the University of Toronto.
Furthermore, he is selected as Top 25 of Innovate
TO 150 Canada to showcase the best of Toronto’s
next generation of change-makers, innovators, and
entrepreneurs. He is exceptionally well known for his seminal contributions
to theories of Quantum Information, Communication, and Cryptography. He
published 62 papers in reputed and high impact journals like Nature Scientiﬁc
Reports and Physical Review A. The exceptional quality of his research is
recognized nationally and internationally. He selected by the scientiﬁc review
panel of the Council for the Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings to participate in
the 70th Lindau Nobel Laureate Meeting. His volunteering work is apparent
since he appointed as chair of the IEEE computer chapter for the Waterloo-
Kitchener area and editorial board for many reputed journals like Nature
Scientiﬁc Reports, IET Quantum Communication, and IEEE Access.

