Computational Intelligence based Intrusion Detection 
Systems for Wireless Communication and Pervasive 
Computing networks

Abhishek Gupta1, Om Jee Pandey1, Mahendra 
Shukla1, Anjali Dadhich2, Samar Mathur3 
Dept. of ECE1, Dept. of IT2 
Jaipur Engineering College and Research Centre  
Jaipur, India 
guptaabhi3@gmail.com, anjalidadhich.it@jecrc.ac.in  

Anup Ingle4 
Dept. of E&TC4 
Vishwakarma Institute of Information Technology4 
Pune, India 
anupingle@yahoo.com 

Abstract—  The  emerging  trend  of  ubiquitous  and  pervasive 
computing  aims  at  embedding  everyday  devices  such  as  wrist-
watches,  smart  phones,  home  video  systems,  autofocus  cameras, 
intelligent  vehicles,  musical  instruments,  kitchen  appliances  etc. 
with  microprocessors  and 
them  with  wireless 
communication  capability.  This  advanced  computing  paradigm, 
also  known  as  the  Internet  of  Things  or  cyber-physical 
computing,  leads  internet  and  computing  to  appear  everywhere 
and  anywhere  using  any  device  and  location.  With  maximum 
appreciation and due regards to the evolutionary arc, depth and 
scope  of  ceaseless  internet  utilities,  it  is  equally  necessary  to 
envisage the security and data confidentiality challenges posed by 
the free and ubiquitous availability of internet.  

imparts 

Wireless communication, by virtue of a plethora of networked 
devices,  is  severely  prone  to  illegal  use,  unauthorized  access, 
protocol  tunneling,  eavesdropping,  and  denial  of  service  attacks 
as  these  devices  are  unknowingly  exposed  to  illegal  access  from 
undefined  locations.  Amidst  the  rapidly  expanding  arena  of 
cybercrime,  banks,  stock  exchanges,  business  transactions  and 
shopping firms such as Amazon and eBay are heavily dependent 
on  internet.  The  freedom  offered  by  wireless  and  3G  based 
internet  communication  and  its  open  character  has  led  to  many 
incidences  of  abuse  of  technology.  Unrestricted  accessibility  to 
internet  has  intensified  the  likelihood  of  sophisticated  attacks, 
malicious 
inflicting 
intrusions  and  malware,  capable  of 
widespread  damage  on  modern  human  life  and  economy.  The 
classical  intrusion  detection  systems  have  been  found  to  be  less 
equipped  to  handle  the  magnitude  and  complexity  of  wireless 
networks due to enormous user activities and constantly varying 
behavior patterns. This paper analyses the role of computational 
intelligence techniques to design adaptive and cognitive intrusion 
detection  systems  that  can  efficiently  detect  malicious  network 
activities and proposes novel three-tier architecture for designing 
intelligent intrusion detection systems for wireless networks. 

Index  Terms—  Pervasive  computing,  wireless  integration, 
intelligence, 

intrusion  detection, 

computational 

attacks, 
adaptation, IP address, MAC address. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Miniaturization  of  electronic  devices  and  integration  of 
wireless  communication  with  microprocessors  has  led  to 

computers  being  embedded  into  everyday  objects,  breaking 
away  from  the  traditional  notion  of  desktop  and  laptop 
computers  [12].  This  remarkable  feat  of  pervasive  computing 
has been described by IBM Chairman, Mr. Lou Gerstner as the 
post-PC  era  where  a  billion  people  interact  with  a  million  e-
businesses through a trillion interconnected intelligent devices. 
A  vast  majority  of  this  huge  number  of  intelligent  devices 
comprises  of  popular  daily  use  commodities  such  as  CD 
players,  cameras,  washing  machines,  vehicles,  smart  phones 
etc.  This  transition  to  ubiquitous  availability  of  internet  and 
cyberphysical systems, though appearing quantitative, is more 
complex  in  nature,  with  quantitative  changes  of  such  huge 
orders  of  magnitude  also  implying  significant  qualitative 
changes [12]. 

information 

The  security  of  such  integrated  networks  still  remains  an 
integrity  and 
active  area  of  research.  The  authenticity, 
confidentiality  of 
transferred  over  wireless 
network  needs  to  be  monitored  and  implemented  effectively. 
Cryptography and information encryption is often considered a 
strong network security measurement, but they can be breached 
by sophisticated mathematical attacks or corrupted by bugs. As 
threats from internet have become progressively sophisticated, 
the  traditional  intrusion  prevention  mechanisms  such  as 
firewalls and other access control mechanisms have not able to 
render  computer  networks  entirely  safe. This  has  implied  that 
these  internet  outages  and  attacks  need  to  be  detected  before 
they  could  cause  any  damage  [14].  The  mechanism  of 
detecting unauthorized access to a computer network is known 
as intrusion detection [10]. As the magnitude of computers has 
grown  approximately  a  hundred  times  with  introduction  of 
pervasive and wireless networks, the traditional IDS solutions 
do  not  scale 
the  same  way.  There  has  been  a 
multidimensional  system  development,  and  has  rendered 
wireless  networks  prone  to  many  old  as  well  as  new 
vulnerabilities  [4].  The  wireless  security  is  emerging  as  an 
altogether  separate  domain  of  research  because  the  wireless 
networks  are  inherently  vulnerable  to  those  basic  security 
lapses from which the wired networks are easily exempted. In 
traditional  network  intrusion, the  intruder  specifically  needs  a 
good computer with sufficient computational power to intrude 

in 

 
 
into  a  protected  network,  but  with  the  openness  of  wireless 
networks and setting up of virtually unlimited wireless access 
points,  the  intruder  can  potentially  access  a  network  from 
anywhere without getting easily noticed or traced [3]. 

In  this  paper  we  have  observed  various  security  breaches 
that the wireless networks are prone to. To defend against such 
attacks and intrusions, the wireless IDS (WIDS) must work in 
real  time  and  must  be  able  to  detect  previously  unknown 
attacks and extend beyond password-based user authentication 
methods  [4].  We  have  analyzed  the  advantages  offered  by 
computational intelligence (CI) techniques that can be used to 
design adaptive and intelligent IDS to detect intrusions in real-
time.  The  paper  introduces  novel  three-tier  architecture  to 
design computationally intelligent WIDS. The rest of the paper 
is  organized  as  follows:  The  next  section  highlights  the  IDS 
requirements  for  wireless  networks,  with  respect  to  the 
structure  of  wireless  networks  and  subtleties  involved  in  data 
transfer.  Section  three  outlines  some  of  the  most  common 
attacks  the  wireless  networks  are  prone  to.  The  subsequent 
sections  four  and  five  introduce  the  CI  paradigms  and  how 
these  nature-mimicking  techniques  can  be  used  to  provide 
cognitive abilities to WIDS. Section six introduces novel three-
tier  architecture  to  represent  the  design  of  intelligent  WIDS, 
and  their  communication  abilities  with  other  WIDS  on  the 
network.  Finally,  some  conclusions  are  offered  and  future 
research work is stimulated. 

II. WIRELESS INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS   

Wireless  communication  need  not  necessarily  take  place 
only from desktop and laptop computers situated in homes and 
office  environments.  With  wireless  capable  silicon  chips 
getting  integrated  into  everyday  devices,  internet  can  be 
accessed from any location such as a moving train, a restaurant 
or a park [12]. This amounts to vast and random distribution of 
mobile  nodes  that  automatically  self-configure  without  the 
involvement of a central authority responsible for management 
of infrastructure [2]. Intrusions on these systems is defined as 
unauthorized  access  to  these  devices  via  hacks  and  bits  of 
malicious  code,  intended  to  either  compromise  with  sensitive 
and personal user information or to deny bandwidth access to 
authorized users [3].  

Whereas  some  of  the  network  attacks  and  intrusions  are 
well-funded governmental activities carried out in order to test 
the reliability of systems and  for intelligence gathering, many 
other intrusions and attacks are autonomous and profit related. 
The attacks could be potentially destructive, effectively cutting 
the internet access for considerable periods, denying access to 
e-mails and other personal online accounts, misuse proprietary 
information,  hacking  online  banking  accounts,  forwarding 
spam  through  e-mail  servers,  impeding  news  agencies  or 
ceasing  the  ATMs  to  work.  Over  wireless  networks,  the 
magnitude of such malicious behavior increases manifold [2]. 

IDS designed to detect malicious activities and intrusions in 
wireless  networks  need  to  work  in  real-time  to  defend  the 
user’s device against intrusions, both the known as well as new 
kind of attacks. Instead of being deployed as separate entities, 
WIDS  must  be  integrated  with  the  clients  performing  data 

routing  and  management 

collection in cooperating  with other servers and agents on the 
network [3]. If implemented as traditional signature-based IDS 
working on a set of known rules, these systems fail to respond 
to  the  environments  where  new  intrusions  evolve  constantly 
and  the  network  traffic  profiles  vary  regularly  [6].  WIDS 
require to be built around wireless agents, sensors, distributed 
these 
servers  and 
components  form  the  core  of  wireless  network  infrastructure, 
with  all  devices  being  vulnerable  to  intrusions.  Also,  with  a 
huge  number  of  users  getting  introduced  to  wireless  devices 
and networks, there is a lack of exact or well-defined boundary 
between  a  legitimate  activity  and  a  malicious  attack.  As  the 
wireless 
intruder  can  attack  untraced  and  unseen  from 
anywhere, therefore the border of defense becomes unclear and 
vaguely defined [13]. 

tools,  as 

[13]  proposed  a  WIDS  mechanism  coupled  together  with 
wireless  authentication  and  encryption  systems  defined  under 
the IEEE 802.11 protocol. This WIDS resulted in frequent false 
alarms  and  failed  to  adjust  to  the  environments  where  new 
types of attacks are often unleashed and uncovered. 

this  knowledge-based  analysis 

[7]  deployed  a  distributed  and  collaborative  knowledge 
based  WIDS  where  each  node  having  WIDS  participates  in 
detecting  intrusion  cooperatively  with  other  nodes. The  nodes 
were hierarchically arranged in multi-layered networks divided 
into various clusters with each cluster responsible for a specific 
task.  Each  WIDS  at  a  node  has  a  detection  element  and  a 
correlation  handler.  Detection  elements  are  composed  of 
several  detection  components  that  monitor  their  own  sub-
network and generate alerts. The correlation handler transforms 
the  alerts  into  a  verified  report  of  an  attack.  [11]  proposed  to 
extend 
to  behavior-based 
analysis that could recognize both the legitimate user behavior 
as well as a behavior deviation. This behavior based WIDS was 
designed  as  a  self-learning  expert  system  that  used  a  specific 
set  of  rules rather  than  explicit  and  pre-defined  knowledge  to 
distinguish between network activities. Due to the vast range of 
activities on the wireless network, the rule base soon proved to 
be  insufficient  and  the  WIDS  led  to  random  false  alarms. 
Carrying  these  works  further,  we  propose  a  computationally 
intelligent  WIDS  architecture  that  can  adapt  to  the  huge 
magnitude of wireless network activities and also discern new 
evolving attacks. We propose our WIDS to be built around CI 
techniques  that  provide  the  WIDS  with  cognitive  as  well  as 
perception  abilities  to  respond  to  network  activities  [7],  [11], 
[13]. 

III. WIRELESS SPECIFIC ATTACKS 

The recent pervasive computing and wireless devices aimed 
at the home consumer market combine a network switch with a 
few  requisite  ports,  an  in  built  self-configurable  access  point 
(AP), a router and an inbuilt modem connecting to the Internet 
at large. The AP is connected to the switch. Primarily, attacks 
on  wireless  networks  occur  when  an  intruder  eavesdrops  on 
network traffic armed with wireless network adaptor that helps 
the eavesdropper to capture network traffic for analysis [13]. A 
part  of  wireless  communication  takes  place  on  unlicensed 
public  frequencies  that  can  be  used  by  anyone,  therefore 

                                                      wireless  network  are  more  susceptible  to  attacks  than  wired 
networks.  These  attacks  and  intrusions  are  easy  to  be  carried 
out  as  these  attacks  can  be  performed  using  just  a  personal 
computer,  other  computing  hardware  and  freely  available 
software  [8].  This  section  outlines  some  common  attacks 
observed in wireless networks. These attacks include: 

A. Access control attacks  

Access  control  attacks  are  an  attempt  to  penetrate  into  a 
wireless  network  by  evading  weakly  laid  WLAN  access 
control measures, such as 802.1X port access controls and AP 
filters [9]. Various types of access control attacks include. 

• 

802.1X  RADIUS  Cracking:  -  This  attack  involves 
recovering  RADIUS  keys  and  passwords  by  brute 
force.  This  attack  is  fairly  simple  to  execute  by 
tools  on  LAN  paths 
installing  packet  capture 
anywhere between target AP and RADIUS server. 
•  Ad  Hoc  Associations:  -  Here,  an  attacker  connects 
directly to an unsecured and openly available wireless 
station circumventing the AP security mechanisms. 

•  MAC  Spoofing:  -  In 

the  attacker 
reconfigures  his  MAC  addresses  to  masquerade  and 
appear as an authorized AP to legitimate users. 

this  attack, 

•  Rogue  Access  Points:  -  In  this  attack,  the  attacker 
installs  an  unsecured  AP  inside  an  existing  firewall; 
secretly  creating  open  backdoors  into  otherwise 
protected and well-trusted networks. 

•  War  Driving:  - The  attacker constantly  monitors  and 
discovers wireless LANs by listening to beacons or by 
continually  sending  probe  requests,  providing  launch 
point for further sophisticated attacks [9]. 

used  to  launch  session  hijacking  attacks  where  an 
attacker causes the user to lose his connection, and the 
attacker takes on the user’s identity and privileges for 
a  certain  period  of  time.  The  user’s  system  is 
temporarily  disabled  using  a  DoS  attack  or  a  buffer 
overflow  exploit.  Users  often  fail  to  notice  the 
interruption  as  it  lasts  no  more  than  a  few  seconds. 
Corporate  wireless  networks  are  set  up  such  that  the 
user is directed to an authentication server to attempt a 
connection  with  an  AP.  Once  authenticated,  the 
attacker employs the session hijacking using spoofed 
MAC addresses. 

•  WEP Key Cracking: - The attacker captures user data 
to construct or to recover a WEP key using active or 
passive methods [9]. 

C. Integrity attacks  

These  attacks  send  forged  data  frames  over  wireless 
networks to either mislead the recipient or to form a ground to 
facilitate launching another type of attack [9]. 

• 

• 

• 

802.11  Data  Replay:  -  The  attacker  captures  802.11 
data frames and replays them after a time interval with 
some modifications. 
802.11  Frame  Injection:  -  The  attacker  crafts  and 
sends  forged  802.11  frames  to  recipients,  leading 
them  to  appear  on  networks  not  designed  otherwise 
for those users. 
802.1X EAP Replay/RADIUS Replay: - The attacker 
captures  802.1X  Extensible  Authentication  Protocols 
EAP/  RADIUS  access  messages  and  replays  them 
later with mild or severe modifications [9]. 

B. Confidentiality attacks  

D. Authentication attacks 

This  category  of  attacks  imply  an  attempt  to  illegally 
intercept  the  private  and  confidential  information  sent  over 
wireless associations, both in unencrypted as well as encrypted 
form using 802.11 or other encryption protocols. These attacks 
allow  a  remote  attacker  to  recover  the  WEP  PIN  and  a 
network's WPA/WPA2 pre-shared keys [9]. These attacks can 
be further classified as: 

•  AP Phishing: - The attacker runs a fake portal or web 
server on an evil twin AP and phishes for user logins, 
passwords  keys  and  sensitive  information  such  as 
bank account details and credit card numbers. 

•  Eavesdropping: 

and 
-  Hideously 
deciphering unprotected network traffic to gain access 
to potentially sensitive information.  

capturing 

•  Evil  Twin  AP:  -  In  this  attack,  the  attacker  appears 
masqueraded as an authorized AP and lures legitimate 
users  into  utilizing  this  channel  by  beaconing  the 
WLAN's service set identifier (SSID). Once the users 
utilize  this  channel  for  data  transfer,  the  data  is 
captured by the attacker. 

•  Man  in  the  Middle:  -  The  most  common  form  of 
confidentiality  attack  is  running  the  traditional  man-
in-the-middle  attack  tools  on  an  evil  twin  AP  to 
intercept  TCP  sessions.  MITM  attacks  are  further 

Intruders make use of these attacks to steal legitimate user 
identities  and  credentials  to  access  otherwise  confidential  and 
private networks and services [9]. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

802.1X EAP Downgrade: - In this attack, the attacker 
to  offer  a  weaker 
forces  an  802.1X  server 
authentication measure using forged EAP response. 
802.1X Identity Theft: - This attack involves illegally 
capturing  the  user  identities  from  802.1X  Identity 
Response Packets (IRP). 
802.1X  LEAP  Cracking:  -  This  attack  involves 
recovering  user  credentials  from  captured  802.1X 
Lightweight EAP (LEAP) packets using sophisticated 
dictionary attack tools. 
802.1X Password Guessing: - The attacker here uses a 
captured  identity  and  repeatedly  attempts  802.1X 
authentication to guess the user's password. 

•  Application  Login  Theft:  -  This  is  the  simplest 
authentication attack, where the attacker captures user 
credentials from wireless application protocols. 
•  Domain  Login  Cracking:  -  This  attack  involves 
recovering  user  credentials  stored  in  wireless  servers 
by  cracking  NetBIOS  password  hashes  using 
dictionary attacks. 

                                                      •  Shared Key Guessing: - The attacker attempts 802.11 
Shared Key Authentication using dictionary attacks or 
cracked WEP keys. 

•  VPN  Login  Cracking:  -  Intruders  attack  Virtual 
Private  Networks  (VPN)  to  recover  user  credentials 
by running brute-force attacks on VPN authentication 
protocols [9] [13]. 

E. Availability attacks 

Availability attacks are a class of Denial of Service (DoS) 
attacks restricting a wireless server from providing services to 
resource  exhaustion  by 
authorized  clients  because  of 
unauthorized clients [9]. 

• 

• 

• 

sending  out 

802.11  Associate  /  Authenticate  Flood:  -  This  attack 
involves 
forged  authenticates  or 
associates from random MAC addresses to fill a target 
AP's association table. 
802.11  Beacon  Flood:  -  In  this  attack,  the  attacker 
generates  numerous  counterfeit  802.11  beacons  and 
makes it tough for stations to locate a legitimate AP. 
802.1X  EAP  Length  Attacks:  -  In  this  attack,  the 
attacker  sends  EAP  type-specific  messages  with 
illegal  length  fields  in  order  to  crash  an  AP  or 
RADIUS server, thus denying the service. 
802.1X  EAP  Failure:  -  In  this  attack,  the  attacker 
keeps  track  of  a  valid  802.1X  EAP  exchange,  and 
sends a forged EAP-Failure message to that station.  
802.1X  EAP-of-Death:  -  Here,  the  attacker  sends 
malformed 802.1X EAP Identity responses. 
802.1X EAP Start Flood: - In this attack, the attacker 
floods an AP with EAP-Start messages that consume 
available network resources or crash the target. 
•  AP Theft: - This attack involves physically removing 

• 

• 

• 

a valid AP. 

•  Flooding with Associations: - The data supplied by a 
wireless  station  is  stored  in  the  association  table 
maintained  by  the  AP.  The  IEEE  802.11  protocol 
specifies a maximum of 2007 concurrent associations 
to  an  AP.  In  this  attack,  the  attacker  authenticates 
several  non-existing 
randomly 
generated  MAC  addresses  and  sends  a  flood  of 
spoofed associate requests so that the association table 
overflows and crashes. 

stations  using 

•  Forged  Dissociation  and  Deauthentication:  -  In  this 
attack, the attacker sets the source MAC address same 
as that of the AP. The target station, though authentic, 
needs to reassociate and the attacker continues to send 
disassociation  frames  for  a  desired  period,  thus 
leading to DoS. 
the  Air  Waves:  -  Devices  such  as 
Jamming 
microwave ovens and cordless phones operate on the 
unregulated 2.4GHz radio frequency. In this attack, an 
advanced  attacker  unleashes  a  large  amount  of  noise 
using these devices and jams the airwaves so that the 
wireless LAN ceases to function. 

• 

•  Queensland DoS: - In this attack, the attacker makes a 
channel appear busy by exploiting the communication 

channel,  usually 
assessment mechanism [9]. 

the  CSMA/CA  clear  channel 

to 

The security mechanisms to counter intrusion attempts tend 
to  evolve  with  time,  but  so  do  the  methods  adopted  by  the 
attackers  [10].  Intrusion  Detection  is  defined  as  a  security 
technology  employed  to  monitor  individual  computers  or 
computer networks to identify abnormal activities classified as 
computer  attacks.  IDS  complement  conventional  security 
mechanisms.  IDS  have  become  a  basic  component  of  every 
security  infrastructure,  and  are  widely  implemented  as  a  last 
line  of  defense 
identify  malevolent  behavior.  Two 
fundamental  characteristics  of  IDS  are  Detection  Rate  (DR), 
which  must  be  as  high  as  possible,  and  False  Alarm  Rate 
(FAR),  which  must  be  low.  DR  is  the  ratio  of  the  correctly 
detected attacks to total number of attacks. FAR is the ratio of 
number of normal or legitimate actions misclassified as attacks 
to  the  total  number  of  legitimate  actions  [13].  With  growing 
number  of  new  attacks,  IDS  must  be  intelligent  to  identify 
previously  unseen  attacks.  The  traditional  hard  computing 
based IDS have shown high recognition rates for known attack 
patterns but have been of little use for unknown attacks. WIDS 
need to be conceptualized with an ability to learn and evolve in 
order to to be more accurate and efficient in face of enormous 
unpredictable attacks [1] [10]. 

IV. COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE 

A  number  of  technological  paradigms  and  algorithms  to 
solve complex problems have been contrived from the studies 
of  natural  and  biological  systems.  These  algorithms  are 
presented  under  the  heading  of  Computational  Intelligence. 
Considerable  accomplishments  have  been  actualized  as  a 
consequence  of  modeling  biological  and  natural  intelligence, 
giving rise to intelligent systems. CI makes IDS a lot easier and 
flexible.  It  has  been  established  that  conventional  attack 
analysis  and  IDS  design  methods  can  be  replaced  with  CI 
techniques  to  create  more  robust  IDS  to  adapt  to  wireless 
network  environments.  Other  than  high  computation  speeds 
and adaptation to changing environments, CI offers many other 
significant  advantages  such  as  tolerance  to  imprecision, 
uncertainty,  and  approximation,  low  overhead,  improved 
latency and can be made to learn preferences.  

CI  based  systems  exhibit  adaptability,  an  ability  to  learn 
and  to  take  care  of  new  situations  by  applying  reasoning, 
generalization,  association,  discovery  and  abstraction  without 
relying  on  precise  human  knowledge.  CI  is  a  consortium  of 
techniques  oriented  towards  the  analysis  and  design  of 
intelligent  systems.  CI  paradigms  are  basically  aimed  at 
formalizing  the  miraculous  human  ability  to  take  rational 
decisions in an uncertain and imprecise environment. Whereas 
imprecision  and  uncertainty  are  to  be  avoided  in  traditional 
hard computing, these are exploited in CI to arrive at a decent 
solution. The  most  popular  and  frequently  used  CI paradigms 
are  Artificial  Neural  Networks 
(ANN),  Evolutionary 
Computation  (EC),  Artificial  Immune  Systems  (AIS),  Swarm 
Intelligence (SI) and Fuzzy Logic (FL) [1]. All these methods 
inherit inspiration from nature, as shown in Fig. 1. 

                                                       
provide  IDS  with  the  ability  to  learn  the  network,  analyze 
evolving user behaviors and only report valid intrusions [1].  

VI. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE FOR WIRELESS IDS 

tasks 

Intrusion  detection  functions 

include  monitoring  and 
analyzing  user  activities,  assessing  system  integrity,  system 
increase 
configurations  and  vulnerabilities.  These 
manifold  when  an  IDS  is  deployed  in  a  wireless  pervasive 
network with a huge number of networked devices in use. We 
propose  novel  three-tier  architecture  to  build  intelligent  IDS 
suitable  for  pervasive  wireless  networks.  The  proposed 
architecture  (Fig.  2)  consists  of  a  built-in  mechanism  to  be 
integrated  in  wireless  networks  and  can  also  be  deployed  on 
individual  nodes,  i.e.  it  will  be  suitable  to  work  both  as 
Network based IDS (NIDS) as well as Host based IDS (HIDS) 
[8]. The first level of the architecture consists of a mechanism 
to locate the current Internet Protocol (IP) address of the device 
on  which  the  WIDS  is  installed.  As  the  IP  addresses  update 
regularly depending on the wireless network in use, the WIDS 
needs to keep a track of IP address that identified the device for 
a  period  of  time.  This  is  termed  as  location-sensing  and 
surround-sensing,  that  would  enable  the  WIDS  to  discern 
fake/forged  IP  addresses,  in  case  an  intruder  uses  them  [11]. 
The information unit is a permanent memory in the WIDS that 
cognitively remembers the user behavior pattern on a particular 
IP address. Each WIDS is capable to store its devices’ behavior 
pattern,  and  then  learn  neighboring  or  other  user  patterns  by 
linking  with  other  WIDS  intelligently.  Thus,  an  individual 
WIDS  would  not  be  limited  to  the  knowledge  about  a 
particular  environment  but  would  be  aware  of  the  intense 
activity pattern over the internet [10].  

The surround sensors in the WIDS trace the current situation 
of the computing device under scanner and location sensors are 
IP  tunneling  devices  that  trace  the  IP  address  of  the  source 
from  where packets originate. A database monitors and stores 
all  IP  addresses  and  their  patterns.  The  source  information  is 
important  for  passive  safety  of  the  wireless  communication 
devices.  The  surround  sensors  provide  information  not  only 
about  the  source  of  packets  but  also  about  their  environment, 
i.e. a market place or a secluded place. The data retrieval unit 
stores  the  IP  address  and  can  be  referred  to  later  to  interpret 
information such as where is attack detected, the dynamics of 
the source, the kind of thing is detected etc. Even though these 
questions  look  quite  general  and  superfluous,  they  form  a 
primary part of detecting attacks as this information is provided 
to  the  network  behavior  analysis  unit.  Behavior  analysis  and 
classifier  units  need  reliable  information  and  stable  data  with 
little preprocessing [7]. 

The Information Processing Unit in collaboration with SI is 
comprised  of  the  network’s  files  and  is  responsible  for 
to  public  records  over  IP  addresses. 
obtaining  access 
Information processing forwards a detected behavior pattern to 
all  the  WIDS  installed  on  the  network  using  SI  optimization 
algorithm.  This  saves  time  in  training  each  WIDS  about 
network  behavior  and  thus  enhances  self-learning  among 
the  required 
WIDS.  Data  retrieval 

involves  extracting 

Fig. 1. Computational Intelligence paradigms [1] 

V. NEED OF COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE IN DESIGNING 
WIRELESS IDS 

The fundamental reason behind using CI to design WIDS is 
the  outright  incapability  of  cryptography,  encryption  and 
Wireless Encryption Protocol (WEP) methods to design WIDS. 
Some  of  the  WIDS  implemented  on  wireless  nodes  refuse  to 
properly connect to any WEP enabled AP/router. Even if they 
connect,  they  do  not  acquire  an  IP  address  unless  their  WEP 
passphrase  is  converted  to  hexadecimal  format  manually.  As 
the passphrase concept is not standardized for WEP, the WEP 
based  WIDS  fail  to  authenticate  at  a  number  of  occasions. 
When successful, WEP still rely on a single shared key among 
multiple  users  often 
in  handling 
compromises,  and  was  heavily  susceptible  to  eavesdropping. 
WEP 
inherently  flawed  with  various 
discrepancies,  and  has  been  long  deprecated  in  favor  of  new 
protocols and standards [14]. 

to  problems 

is  shown 

leading 

to  be 

to  be 

 Another reason that motivates WIDS design to be handled 
intelligently  and  in  real-time  is  the  lack  of  any  benchmark 
dataset  that  characterizes  the  attack  patterns  observed  in 
wireless  networks.  As  opposed  to  wired  networks,  for  which 
we  do  have  the  highly  successful,  multidimensional  KDD  99 
dataset  that  is  used  even  today  by  researchers  globally  to  test 
IDS,  no  such  benchmark  exists  for  wireless  networks  [13]. 
WIDS  need  to  be  developed  as  integrated  components  of 
wireless  communication  networks.  Capable 
run 
continuously with minimum human supervision, WIDS need to 
be survivable and fault tolerant [2]. In case of a system crash, 
the WIDS must be able to quickly recover and resume. Rather 
than  being  tailored  to  a  particular  network,  WIDS  needs  to 
constantly  adapt  to  changes in  user behavior  and  system  over 
time.  WIDS  must  recognize  most  of  the  intrusions  with 
minimum number of false-positives. Due to huge magnitude of 
activities on wireless networks, WIDS need to be self-protected 
in case of illegal modification by an attacker [3]. CI allows for 
identifying  user  behavioral  patterns  and  deviations  from  such 
patterns.  With  this  strategy,  we  can  cover  a  wider  range  of 
unknown  attacks.  Basically,  intrusion  detection  is  a  security 
management  system  for  computers  and  networks  which  is 
supposed to gather and analyze information over a network or 
at a device to identify possible security breaches. CI techniques 

                                                       
information the database for further analysis in form of reports 
and queries [7]. 

The  optional  classifier  unit  and  rule  base  would  enable  the 
WIDs to store some activities that show up occasionally; these 
could be subject to prolonged scrutiny before raising an alarm. 
The same information and the set of rules could be transmitted 
to  other  WIDs  and  could  be  dealt  with  in  a  collaborative 
manner using swarm intelligence algorithm [1]. The next block 
of  the  architecture  represents  CI  algorithms  on  which  the 
WIDS  and  communication  chips  would  be  based.  These 
algorithms  would  facilitate  cognitive  behavior  among  the 
network  of  WIDS,  with  the  complexity  of  the  algorithm 
deciding  on  the  number  of  WIDS  an  individual  WIDS  can 
collaborate  and  exchange  information  with.  The  last  level  of 
the  architecture  relies  on  the  cognitive  abilities  provided  to 

WIDS  by  CI  techniques  and  helps  to  report  intrusions.  The 
clustering  block  clusters  various  sets  of  user  behavior  and 
activities  and  identifies  outliers  [14].  Overall,  the  proposed 
architecture  integrates  computational  intelligence,  wireless 
communication  and  intrusion  detection  systems  on  a  single 
platform  leading  to  faster  and  robust  IDS  for  wireless 
communication systems. 

Finally,  the  requirements  of  WIDS  are  developed  with  an 
integration  of  the  three  levels,  with  all  the  layers  working 
concurrently. As a future work, the authors are looking forward 
to build a prototype of the model using Matlab Simulink and to 
define  the  system  formally  using  formalization  language 
known as Calculus of Context-aware Ambients (CCA) [5]. 

Fig. 2 Three-tier architecture with concurrently working components to design intelligent WIDS 

VII. ADVANTAGES OF THE PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 

The advantages of designing computational intelligence based 
intrusion  detection  systems  for  pervasive  and 
wireless 
ubiquitous computing networks are enlisted below: 

•  The  proposed  WIDS  is  based  on  computational 
intelligence  (CI)  which  leads  to  fewer  errors.  By 
virtue of the Swarm Intelligence (SI) paradigm which 
inherently  deals  with  multiple  particles,  a  number  of 
pervasive  and  wireless  computing  systems  can  be 
connected intelligently. 

•  Complex  intrusions  and  malicious  activities  can  be 
detected  in  new  environments  in  considerably  lesser 
duration  compared  with  the  time  it  would  otherwise 
take in the absence of intelligent detection methods. 
•  CI  imparts  a  thought  process  to  the  WIDS  to  detect 
new  attacks  and  behaviors,  thus  the  need  of  a  bulky 
rule base is avoided. SI algorithms, particularly ACO 

and  PSO  make  it  possible  for  the  WIDS  to  take 
intelligent decisions on its own. 

•  The proposed methodology connects various wireless 
networks  and  an  intrusion/malicious  activity  taking 
place on one device can be learnt by WIDS installed 
on  all  other  devices  on  the  network.  This  simplifies 
the  future  IDS  architecture  which  is  capable  of 
learning,  reasoning  and  self-analysis,  i.e.  capable  of 
detecting  the  attacks  it  is  not  preprogrammed  to 
perform and can discover unexplored attacks. 

•  The  proposed  method  serves  as  an  efficient 
complement  to  the  previous  works  carried  out  to 
design  IDS  for  various  networks.  Considering  the 
large  numbers  of  wireless  and  pervasive  computing 
systems,  it  is  a  feasible  and  economical  approach  to 
have a policy where the IDS can learn new patterns by 
communication  with  neighboring  IDS  thus  adding  to 
its intelligence. 

                                                       
 
 
 
• 

Intrusions  appear  in  a continuous  stream  in  a  system 
and each of these disturbances give rise to a chain of 
such  activities.  The  proposed  work  gives  a  complete 
picture  of  the  state  of  WIDS  where  each  WIDS 
installed  on  internet  capable  devices  will  be  able  to 
communicate intelligently with each other.  

•  When WIDS networks are completely interconnected 
then  it  gets  integrated  into  the  internet  architecture 
with  less  complexity.  This  stresses  the  idea  that  the 
combination  of  wireless  communication,  network 
security intelligence and SI is a possible phenomenon 
and proposed the next stage of evolution. 

•  The  proposed  method  makes  intelligent  and  faster 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The  authors  express  heartfelt  gratitude  to  Dr.  Aditya 
Abhyankar,  Dean  (Research),  Vishwakarma  Institute  of 
Information  Technology  for  motivating  us  to  commence  this 
project.  We  are  thankful  to  Dr.  Abhyankar  for  constantly 
providing us with significant insights and valuable knowledge 
that  have  been  an  immense  source  of  help  in  carrying  on  the 
project. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  A,P. Engelbrecht. Computational Intelligence:  An Introduction. 

2nd ed. Chichester : Wiley. 2007.  

[2]  B.  Dahill,  and  J,  Kennedy.  “A  Secure  Protocol  for  Ad  Hoc 

WIDS a much simpler phenomenon. 

Networks”, IEEE ICNP, 2002. 

•  The  approach  would  diminish  the  need  of  separate 
IDs  for  devices  and  would  make  IDS  an  inherent 
built-in  phenomenon  in  pervasive  and  ubiquitous 
wireless 
to 
improvement in online security measures. 

communication 

systems, 

leading 

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In  this  study,  we  have  concluded  that  regardless  of  the 
implemented  security  and  encryption  protocols,  the  wireless 
networks continue to remain potentially insecure as the intruder 
can  listen  in  without  gaining  physical  access.  Thus,  the 
protocol  designs  prove  to  be security-naive.  We  have  pointed 
out  several  mechanisms  and  tools  that  allow  the  intruder  to 
implement attacks by exploiting the weaknesses in the protocol 
designs.  The  integration  of  wireless  networks  into  existing 
networks also has also led to increased network vulnerabilities. 
The study also analyzed several practices in use to mitigate the 
insecurities  in  wireless  networks  and  their  drawbacks  were 
studied.  Major  security  flaws  in  wireless  networks  are  also 
presented in the paper. 

We arrive at a conclusion that amidst the evolving network 
environment,  WIDS  need  to  be  supported  with  CI  techniques 
and  propose  novel  three-tier  architecture  to  design  intelligent 
WIDS.  The  authors  are  looking  forward  to  implement  the 
design.  In  the  future,  the  authors  also  propose  to  extend  the 
architecture  to  cloud  computing  networks.  As  an  immediate 
future  work,  the  authors  look  forward  to  implement  the 
simulation  in  Matlab  Simulink  and  formalize  the  system  in 
CCA. In the future, the proposed architecture will be extended 
into  a  prototype  consisting  of  a  handful  of  wireless  devices 
spread  over  a  small  area.  A  similar  IDS  architecture  will  be 
developed  for  cloud  computing  networks  for  data  security, 
including middleware. 

[3]  D, Djenouri, L, Khelladi and N, Badache. “A Survey of Security 
Issues  in  Mobile  Ad-hoc  and  Sensor  Networks,”  Computer 
Journal of IEEE Communications Surveys, 7(4), pp. 1-15, 2005. 
[4]  D.Liu and P.Neng, “Establishing Pair wise Keys in Distributed 
Sensor Networks,” Proc. ACM. Security (CCS’03), 2003.  
[5]  F. Siewe, H. Zedan, and A. Cau. The Calculus of Context-aware 
Ambients. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 77(4), pp. 
597- 620, 2011. 

[6]  H,  Kcng. 

“Security  Guidelines 
Implementation.” SAN Institure, 2003.  

for  Wireless  LAN 

[7]  I, Onat and A, Miri. An intrusion detection system for wireless 
and mobile computing and communications. IEEE International 
Conference on Communications, vol.3, pp.253-259, 2005. 
[8]  L.  Lazos  and  R.  Poovendran.  Secure  range-independent 
localization for wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings of the 
2004 ACM Workshop on Wireless Security, pp. 21-30, 2004. 
[9]  Lisa  Phifer.  Wireless  Network  intrusions  and  attacks: 
http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/contributor/Lisa-
Phifer 

[10] N.B. 

Idris  and  B.  Shanmugam,  “Artificial 

Intelligence 
Techniques  Applied  to  Intrusion  Detection,”  Proc.  IEEE  India 
Conf. (Indicon) Conf., IEEE Press, pp. 52–55, 2005. 

[11] P.  Kyasanur  and  N.  Vaidya.  Detection  and  handling  of  MAC 
layer misbehaviour in wireless networks. In: Proceedings of the 
IEEE  International  Conference  on  Dependable  Systems  and 
Networks, pp. 173-182, 2003. 

[12] R,  Abowd  and  E.D.  Mynatt.  Charting  past,  present,  and  future 
research  in  ubiquitous  computing:  Addison  Wesley,  pp.  513-
536, 2002..  

[13] S  Khanum  and  M  Usman,  Mobile  agent  based  hierarchical 
intrusion  detection  systems  in  wireless  networks  International 
Journal of Computer Science Issues, IJCSI, pp. 9-16. 2012. 
[14] S,  Siddiqui.  And  and  S,  Hong.  “Security  Issues  in  Wireless 
Mesh  Networks” 
in:  Proceedings  of  IEEE  International 
Conference  on  Multimedia  and  Ubiquitous  Engineering,  pp. 
178-182, 2007. 

                                                       
