DEIS: Dependability Engineering Innova-
tion for industrial CPS 

E. Armengaud, G. Macher, A. Massoner, S. Frager, R. Adler, D. Schneider, 
S. Longo, M. Melis, R. Groppo, F. Villa, P. O’Leary, K. Bambury, A. 
Finnegan, M. Zeller, K. Höfig, Y. Papadopoulos, R. Hawkins, T. Kelly 

{eric.armengaud, Georg.macher, alexander.massoner, sebastian.frager}@avl.com, AVL List   
{rasmus.adler, daniel.schneider}@iese.fraunhofer.de, Fraunhofer IESE 
{simone.longo, massimiliano.melis}@gm.com, General Motors - Global Propulsion System 
riccardo.groppo@ideasandmotion.com, Ideas&Motion SRL 
federica.villa@polimi.it , Politecnico di Milano 
{padraig, kevin}@portablemedicaltechnology.com, Portable Medical Technology Ltd 
anita.finnegan@dkit.ie, RSRC at Dundalk Institute of Technology 
{marc.zeller, kai.hoefig}@siemens.com, Siemens AG 
Y.I.Papadopoulos@hull.ac.uk, University of Hull  
{richard.hawkins, tim.kelly}@york.ac.uk, University of York 

Abstract    

The open and cooperative nature of Cyber-Physical-Systems (CPS) poses new 
challenges in assuring dependability. The DEIS project1 addresses these challeng-
es by developing technologies that form  a science of dependable system integra-
tion. In the core of these technologies lies the concept of a  Digital Dependability 
Identity (DDI) of a component or system. DDIs are modular, composable, and ex-
ecutable  in  the  field  facilitating  (a)  efficient  synthesis  of  component  and  system 
dependability  information  over  the  supply  chain  and  (b)  effective  evaluation  of 
this information in-the-field for safe and secure composition of highly distributed 
and autonomous  CPS.  The paper  outlines  the DDI  concept  and  opportunities  for 
application in four industrial use cases.  

1 

Introduction 

Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) harbor the potential for vast economic and soci-
etal impact in domains such as mobility, home automation and delivery of health. 

1  Dependability  Engineering  Innovation  for  automotive  CPS.  This  project  has 
received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innova-
tion programme under grant agreement No 732242, see www.deis-project.eu 

 
                                                           
2  

At the same time, if such systems fail they may harm people and lead to temporary 
collapse of important infrastructures with catastrophic results for industry and so-
ciety.  CPS  is  the  key  to  unlocking  their  full  potential  and  enabling  industries  to 
develop confidently business models that will nurture their societal uptake. Using 
currently  available  approaches,  however,  it  is  generally  infeasible  to  assure  the 
dependability of Cyber-Physical Systems. CPS are typically loosely connected and 
come together as temporary configurations of smaller systems which dissolve and 
give place to other configurations. The key problem in assessing the dependability 
of CPS is that the configurations a CPS may assume over its lifetime are unknown 
and potentially infinite. State-of-the-art dependability analysis techniques are cur-
rently applied during design phase and require a priori knowledge of the configu-
rations that provide the basis of the analysis of systems. Such techniques are not 
directly applicable, can limit runtime flexibility, and cannot scale up to CPS. 

The DEIS project addresses these important and unsolved challenges by devel-
oping  technologies  that  form  a  science  of  dependable  system  integration.  In  the 
core  of  these  technologies  lies  the  concept  of  a  Digital  Dependability  Identity 
(DDI [1]) of a component or system. The DDI targets (1) improving the efficiency 
of generating consistent dependability argumentation over the supply chain during 
de-sign  time,  and  (2)  laying  the  foundation  for  runtime  certification  of  ad-hoc 
networks of embedded-systems. Main contributions of this paper are the introduc-
tion of the DDI concept and opportunity analysis for the use of DDI  in four rele-
vant industrial use cases from three different domains.  The paper is organized as 
follows: Section 2 introduces the DDI concept, while in Section 3 the four indus-
trial use cases are presented. In Section 4, the opportunities for using the DDI are 
summarized, and finally Section 5 concludes this paper.  

2 

  The Digital Dependability Identity (DDI) concept 

In  general,  a  Digital  Identity  is  defined  as  “the  data  that  uniquely  describes  a 
person  or  a  thing  and  contains  information  about  the  subject's  relationships”[2]. 
Applying this idea, a DDI contains all the information that uniquely describes the 
dependability  characteristics  of  a  system  or  component.  This  includes  attributes 
that  describe  the  system’s  or  component’s  dependability  behavior,  such  as  fault 
propagations, as well as requirements on how the component interacts with other 
entities in a dependable way and the level of trust and assurance, respectively.  In 
general,  A DDI is a living model-based modular dependability assurance case. It 
contains  an  expression  of  dependability  requirements  for  the  respective  compo-
nent or system, arguments of how these requirements are met, and evidence in the 
form  of  safety  analysis  artifacts  that  substantiate  arguments.  A  DDI  is  produced 
during  design,  issued  when  the  component  is  released,  and  is  then  continually 
maintained over the complete lifetime  of a  component or system. DDIs are used 
for the integration of components to systems during development as well as for the  

3 

dynamic integration of systems to "systems of systems" in the field.  

A pre-requisite is the availability of a common and machine readable commu-
nication  language  which  shall  be  independent  from  specific  development  ap-
proaches and tools, and  finally  enables collaboration between actors in the  value 
chain. Although progress has been achieved with dependability meta-models, e.g. 
within  architecture  description  languages  like  EAST-ADL  and  AADL,  there  is 
still  a  lack  of  a  common  model  for  the  communication  of  dependability  infor-
mation. The recently released Structured Assurance Case Metamodel (SACM) [3] 
defines a meta-model for representing structured assurance cases, i.e. a set of au-
ditable claims, arguments, and evidence created to support the claim that a defined 
system/service will satisfy the particular requirements. The SACM will be the me-
ta model for the externally visible DDI interface, whereas the internal “logic” will 
be described by other, already existing approaches. 

Managing  the  variability  of  a  system  is  a  key  challenge  in  the  industrial  con-
text, e.g., during different development iterations or for the management of prod-
uct variants. This requires that DDIs support change impact analyses that enable a 
prediction  about  whether  a  component  will  fit  into  multiple  product  variants,  to 
help reduce re-assurance effort. As these models would be modularized in the lev-
el of components, DDI would allow to conduct such analyses across different DDI 
employing different techniques (such as C2FTs or Hip-HOPS [5] [6]).  

In  connected  CPS, dependability cannot be fully assured prior to deployment, 
because systems will dynamically interconnect  (with 3rd party systems) and form 
systems of systems with largely unpredictable consequences for dependability. In 
order to assure the dependability of such in-field integrations we propose automat-
ed  DDI-based  dependability  checks  at  integration  time.  DDIs  therefore  must  be-
come  executable  specifications  accompanying  systems  through  their  complete 
lifecycle, not simply digital artifacts that cease in their utility after deployment of 
the system.  

A  central  question  is,  however,  to  which  extent  “safety  intelligence”  can  be 
shifted from development time into runtime (see Fig 1). A possible first step is to 
use  runtime  certificates  such  as  ConSerts  [4].  In  this  case,  the  assurance  case  is 
still  completely  designed  and  managed  at  development  time,  only  series  of  un-
known context-dependencies are formalized and shifted into runtime, “known un-
knowns”. The next step would be to deal with “unknown unknowns” at the design 
level,  with  the  requirements  and  thus  the  safety  goals  still  being  determined  by 
human  engineers.  While  SafetyCases@Runtime  would  be  capable  to  run  prede-
fined validation and verification activities at runtime to obtain required evidences, 
V&V-Models@Runtime  additionally  support  the  modification  of  V&V  models, 
e.g., the modification of test cases or pass/fail criteria. As soon as the adaptation to 
‘unknown unknowns’ also requires an adaptation of requirements, it is additional-
ly necessary to adapt the hazard and risk analysis and the resulting safety goals at 
runtime.  With  that  last  step,  a  crosscutting  aspect  of  the  whole  dependability 
lifecycle would be shifted into runtime, which is today hardly conceivable.  

To achieve this vision, in DEIS we develop DDIs as modular, composable, and 
executable  model-based assurance cases  with interfaces  expressed in SACM and 

4  

internal logic that may include fault trees, state automata, Bayesian networks and 
fuzzy models for representing uncertainty. Modularity means DDIs apply to units 
at different levels of design, including the system itself, its subsystems and com-
ponents. By being composable, the DDI of a unit can be derived in part from its 
constituent elements. To simplify DDI construction and synthesis, in DEIS we ex-
periment with techniques for automatic, model-based construction of DDIs via au-
tomatic  allocation  of  safety  requirements  and  auto-generated  model-based  de-
pendability  analyses  [5].    To  enable  executability,  we  explore  the  use  of  the 
models that represent the internal logic of DDIs for  dynamic detection and prog-
nosis of risks, considering among other factors limitations in observability and en-
vironmental uncertainties [4][6]. Within the scope of DDI modelling, we include 
examination of implications of security breaches on safety. 

Fig. 1.   The different levels of safety variability  

3 

  The four industrial use cases in DEIS project 

3.1 Automotive: development of a stand-alone system for intelligent physio-
logical parameter monitoring 

Global healthcare is worth 1.5$ trillion, and a part of that, around 11$ billion, is 
focusing  on  physiological  portable  monitor  system  (e.g.  wearable  and  quantified 
self)  [8],  [9].  Moreover,  a  recent  New  AAA  Foundation  report  reveals  drivers 
spend an average of  more than 17,600 minutes behind the  wheel each  year2. Fu-
ture  frontiers of  smart mobility rise the need to measure physiological parameter 
of the driver and passengers  and  to evaluate  the health of  the occupants. This to 
enable  autonomous  driving  features  according  to  driver  health  state,  and  enable 
potential B2B and B2C opportunities.  

 
                                                           
 
5 

DDIs are a revolutionary concept for the automotive domain and can open up 
new  prospects,  providing  means  for  ensuring  dependability  among  CPS  and  im-
proving  safety  of  driver  and  passengers,  taking  actions  (supporting  with  autono-
mous  drive  and/or  health  services)  in  case  of  emergency/needs.  The  aim  of  this 
use case is the introduction of a dependable physiological monitoring system ap-
plied to a  connected vehicle, capable to identify physiological parameters and to 
evaluate the health of driver and other occupants. The proposed environment (see 
Fig 2) contains a comprehensive package of  technologies, tools and services that 
support the drive session in evaluating driver health state, and enable autonomous 
driving  features  according  to  the  needs.  The  same  acquired  parameters  are  also 
transmitted to a cloud-based system  for online support and health analysis  which 
is provided back to the customer as additional  service.  

Whilst there is an opportunity to improve safety, at the same time the system is 
potentially prone to security attack. One of the challenges will be to maximize the 
Confidentiality  of  health  data  transmitted,  and  guarantee  Safety  and  Plausibility 
analysis on acquired signals, as well as Integrity on communication among differ-
ent CPSs.  

Fig. 2.  

Intelligent physiological parameter monitoring – overview 

Application of DDIs shall help protection of sensitive information sent through 
the  network,  granting  the  authenticity  on  actors  involved,  senders  and  receivers. 
Crypto methodologies should be used to avoid tampering and prevent corruption 
during transmission. The DDI shall also help to guarantee a certain level of priva-
cy on the sensitive physiological data collected and transmitted. The Cloud-based 
system shall collect all data of each CPS and keep data in synch for each session. 
Overall,  the  system  shall  be  capable  to  access  all  the  services  and  send/receive 
DDIs in any operative and network conditions. The physiological monitor system 
shall be representative of the true driver health condition and noise resistant. This 
is  because,  depending  on  the  driver  health  condition,  the  system  should  react 
promptly  activating  a  predefined  action,  minimizing  delays  or  applying  worka-
rounds  to  possible  network  unavailability.  The  physical  system  should  remain 
compliant with the automotive standard (ISO 26262) in the case that autonomous 
drive action is enabled. 

 
6  

3.2 Automotive: enhancement of an advanced driver simulator for evaluation 
of automated driving functions 

This use case introduces a novel driver simulator based on AVL VSM3 for the 
comprehensive  evaluation  of  complex  autonomous  driving  functions.  The  pro-
posed environment contains an extensive package  of tools and services that sup-
port the OEM in the prediction of vehicle behavior, and enables improvement of 
various vehicle attributes from the initial concept to the testing phase. 

An  approach  for  the  optimal  control  of  a  fully  electric  vehicle  and  its  power-
train approaching a road segment with Multiple Traffic Lights (TL) has been pre-
sented in [10]. A system referred to as the Traffic Light Assistant (TLA) was de-
veloped to in order to take over longitudinal control of the vehicle, optimizing the 
velocity  trajectory  when  approaching  multiple  traffic  lights  in  traffic.  The  main 
aims of the system are to reduce energy consumption and CO2 emission,  reduce 
the number of vehicle stops and waiting times, and introduce smoother speed pro-
files (see Fig. 3). The presented TLA approach has since been further developed to 
work  with  other  powertrain  topologies  [11]  [12]  and  was  demonstrated  in  real-
time for conventional vehicles on the powertrain testbed within the FFG Austrian 
Funded R&D Project TASTE (Traffic Assistant Simulation and Testing Environ-
ment).  

Fig. 3.   The  connected  powertrain  and  autonomous  driving  functions  allow  increased  energy 
efficiency (reduction of fuel consumption, emissions) 

Previous work has focused on controlling an “ego vehicle” equipped with TLA, 
assuming  complete  knowledge  about  the  road  conditions  and  traffic  light  signal 
phasing. In reality, not all information may be accessible at all times to every ve-
hicle. For example, if the current state of a traffic light or a pedestrian at the side 
of a crossing is observed by an on-board camera or local V2I communication, the 
information  would  only  be  available  to  a  vehicle  close  by.  Such  a  vehicle,  if 
equipped  with automated driving functions,  would adapt its velocity accordingly 
to stop in front of the traffic light, or to safely let the pedestrian pass. However, a 

3 https://www.avl.com/-/avl-vsm-vehicle-simulation 

 
 
 
                                                           
7 

following  vehicle  might  not  directly  see  the  traffic  light  or  the  pedestrian  and 
therefore could not anticipate the behavior of the preceding vehicle. In this case, a 
reaction can only occur based on observation of the behavior of the preceding ve-
hicle. It is possible to improve energy efficiency, if the state of traffic light or the 
presence of pedestrian are known in advance. 

Once more the opportunity for increased efficiency and safety comes with in-
creased  security  threats.  Thus,  DDIs  will  explore  how  to  improve  control  strate-
gies to increase energy efficiency while ensuring safety at the same time. Equally 
important  would  be  to  analyze  and  evaluate  the  impact  of  possible  security  at-
tacks, and further define strategies to avoid these attacks or mitigate their effects 
[13].  

3.3 Railway: Enabling Plug-and-play scenarios for heterogeneous railway 
systems  

With a total market volume of 47 billion € and nearly 400,000 employees in the 
European rail industry (by 2014), the rail industry plays a key role in mobility in 
the EU [14].  The European railway domain has to cope with the challenging situ-
ation  of  heterogeneous  systems  of  systems  with  different  standards  and  system 
qualities,  e.g.  interoperability  between  train  side  and  track  side  systems.  Moreo-
ver,  railway  systems  typically  comprise  both  legacy  systems  and  systems  at  the 
cutting edge of technology, which are potentially not designed to be integrated but 
need to interact in operation.  

The  European Commission’s long-term objective  is to achieve a  Single Euro-
pean Railway Area to deliver the benefits of market opening and interoperability 
as  well  as  to  reduce  the  life-cycle  costs  (i.e.  the  costs  of  developing,  building, 
maintaining,  operating,  renewing  and  dismantling)  of  rolling  stock  and  on-board 
signalling  systems  (50%  reduction  by  2030)  [15].  The  challenges  to  reach  this 
goal not only include harmonizing technical interfaces, but also a common signal-
ling system. 

The  European Train  Control  System  (ETCS)  provides  standardized  train  con-
trol in Europe and eases travelling with trains crossing the borders of all countries 
in Europe. Due to historical reasons, different trains and also different track side 
solutions (such as balises, track circuits or GSM-R transmission) are often present 
even within one country. To overcome the challenges, the EC fosters the technical 
harmonization within the European railway sector ensuring interoperability in the 
railway domain. Thus, enabling “plug & play” of railway systems scenarios as a 
long-term objective [16]. However, in such “plug & play” scenarios guaranteeing 
system  dependability requirements pose new challenges. Consequently, certifica-
tion  activities  (w.r.t.  CENELEC  standards  EN  50126  &  50129)  require  accurate 
planning  and  must  react  quickly  to  changes  within  the  system  development  pro-
cess.  Systems  of  systems  in  the  railway  domain  are  also  produced  by  various 
stakeholders in the value chain (such as national or even regional public transport 
authorities, national safety authorities, railway undertaking, OEMs, suppliers, etc.) 

8  

and,  therefore,  safety  information  about  components  and  subsystems  (rolling 
stock, track-side and railway systems) need to be interoperable and exchangeable. 

Fig. 4.   ERTMS/ETCS Reference Architecture 

As illustrated in Fig 4, ETCS consists of an on-board and a trackside system. 
Both  sub-systems  must  fulfill  the  safety  requirement  as  defined  in  the 
ERTMS/ETCS specification. Thereby, specific hazards a`s  well as tolerable haz-
ard  rates  are  apportioned  to  each  system.  Moreover,  trackside  and  on-board  sys-
tem  are  often  provided  by  different  vendors.  ETCS  on-board  and  trackside  sys-
tems must meet the specified safety requirements specified in the specification in 
order to be safely integrated in any interoperable railway system.  

In  this  use  case,  we  use  DDIs  to  interchange  safety-relevant  information  (in-
cluding  e.g.  safety  requirements,  models,  and  assessments)  during  the  develop-
ment life-cycle of the trackside and the on-board ETCS units. We thereby target to 
demonstrate the improvement of interoperability in the area of safety engineering 
across companies, railway operators as well as safety authorities. Hence, we show 

 
how time and effort in the certification of systems (or sub-systems) can be reduced 
significantly  by  interchanging  and  reusing  dependability  information  across  the 
value chain of the railway domain.  

9 

3.4 Healthcare: enhancement of clinical decision app for oncology 
professional  

The healthcare industry globally is moving towards Electronic Health Records 
(EHR’s) for the management and storage of patient data4. ONCOassist5 is a clini-
cal decision support app for oncology professionals, see Fig 5. It contains all the 
key oncology decision support tools oncology professionals need and makes them 
available in an easy to access and interactive format at point of care. It is CE ap-
proved, meaning it is classified as a medical device and was developed in a regu-
lated environment using ISO13485 and IEC62304.  

Fig. 5.   ONCOAssist - Clinical decision support app for oncology professionals  

The demand for clinical decision support apps is growing rapidly because of (a) 
genomic sequencing, (b) aging populations, and (c) new targeted therapies. These 
changes in the market mean the decision making process for oncology profession-
als is becoming more difficult and complex and they need systems to support them 
with this. ONCOassist is addressing this market need by putting key decision sup-
port information and tools in the palm of the hand of the oncology professionals. 
The ability to transfer new dependability-relevant data from service provider to a 
data  repository  is  increasingly  important.  This  new  dependability-relevant  infor-
mation could be integrated in an existing data record within the data repository in 
a  way  that  preserves  the  intended  meaning  of  the  information  being  transferred. 
The  service  provides  dependability  information  in  form  of  DDIs  and  exchanges 
them  with  the  data  repository.  When  the  systems  meet  at  runtime,  they  use  the 
DDI’s to check if they can provide together new services in a dependable way. If 

4 

http://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/precision-medicine-growth-hinges-

electronic-health-records  
5 http://oncoassist.com/  

 
                                                           
10  

this check is positive, then they start collaborating and providing the service, ex-
changing data  and information.  This in turn  means  that  we can provide new ser-
vices with confidence on the integrity of information handled. DDIs in this context 
can result in ad-hoc (in the wild) integration of ONCOassist with EHRs and hospi-
tal information systems, in turn leading to context aware decision support for cli-
nicians. 

4 

  Opportunities for DDI applications 

As an outcome of the analysis of the use cases presented in section 3, four sce-

narios for the usage of DDI in industrial application were identified 

Sc1:  Creation  of  integrated  system  assurance  case  for  distributed  develop-

ment of dependable systems  

In a supply chain, the OEM provides system dependability requirements which 
must be taken into account by suppliers. The component supplier engineers create 
an assurance argument  for their component including the  definition of assurance 
claims for the component, evidence relating to those claims and argument explain-
ing how the evidence supports the claims. Information and evidence from the as-
surance case is translated into an SACM model for exchange as a DDI. This activ-
ity  may  be  automated  for  component  and  system  models  used  in  the  assurance 
case. Once the translation to DDIs is complete the higher-level assurance case for 
the  system  is  created  by  the  OEM  via  analysing  and  integrating  information  ex-
changed in the DDIs. This activity may be at least partially automated in order to 
support  dynamic  assurance  case  creation  at  run-time.  Expected  result  is  a  strong 
efficiency  increase  by  compiling  and  updating  complex  system  assurance  cases 
thanks to the availability of the SACM standard, the DDI framework and the relat-
ed tools that automate part of the task. 

Sc2: Runtime monitoring and optimization with respect to dependability 

In an open system of systems, loosely connected systems collaborate to provide 
dependable services to users. Service are enabled by the collaboration and adapted 
at  runtime  to  fulfill  certain  dependability  requirements.  When  systems  meet  at 
runtime, the DDIs (set-up during development time) are used to check if they can 
provide together new  services in a dependable  way. If this  check is passed, then 
collaboration can occur. To assure and maintain dependability properties, DDI are 
continually executed to adapt the collaboration accordingly. Expected results shall 
impact the deployment and adaptation of complex systems of systems to maxim-
ize functionalities and performances, while securing dependability.  

Sc3: Next Generation Connected Dependable Functionalities 

In the next generation of connected vehicles, infrastructure- and 3rd-party soft-
ware  providers  will  be  delivering  situation-dependent  services  or  additional  ser-

 
 
 
11 

vices like apps for smart phones. In this context, DDIs will support the dependa-
bility  of  dynamic  implementations  which  are  based  on  service  oriented  architec-
tures, thus enabling novel situation dependent features for example in the context 
of autonomous and automated driving 

Sc4: Dependable runtime integration for exchange of information 

In this scenario, DDIs oversee the transfer of dependability-relevant data from 
a service provider to a data repository in an open system where the connection be-
tween provider and repository is dynamically redefined. Data integrity and securi-
ty are the prime concerns addressed here.  

5 

  Conclusions 

The physical and digital worlds are currently merging, leading to a largely con-
nected  globe.  However,  developments  like  IoT  and  CPS  pose  enormous  ethical, 
economic and related technical questions which we should address responsibly in 
the  traditions  of  scientific  method.    A  key  challenge  that  we  identified  and  dis-
cussed here is that it is currently  impossible to assure the dependability of smart 
CPS such as autonomous cars, swarms of drones, or networks of telehealth devic-
es. Such systems are loosely connected and come together as temporary configura-
tions  of  smaller  systems  which  dissolve  and  give  place  to  other  configurations. 
The  configurations  a  CPS  may  assume  are  unknown  and  potentially  infinite.  In 
addition, as systems connect, emergent system behaviours may arise in ways that 
are  difficult  to  predict  from  simple  superposition  of  the  behaviour  of  individual 
system  elements.  State-of-the-art  dependability  analysis  techniques  are  currently 
applied during the design phase and require full a priori knowledge of system con-
figurations.  Such  techniques  are  not  directly  applicable  to open  and  dynamically 
reconfigured CPS. 

Moving beyond the challenge, we introduced the DEIS H2020 research project, 
an  effort  focusing  on  the  problems  discussed  above.  The project  is  developing  a 
foundation  of  methods  and  tools  that  lays  the  groundwork  for  assuring  the  de-
pendability of CPS.  In the core of this work lies the novel concept of a DDI for 
components  and  systems.  DDIs  are  planned  as  an  evolution  of  current  modular 
dependability specifications and model aspects of the safety, reliability and securi-
ty  "identity"  of  the  component.  They  are  produced  during  the  design  phase  and 
their profiles are stored in the "cloud" to enable checks by third parties. They are 
composable and executable, and facilitate dependable integration of systems into 
"systems of systems". The paper introduced early work in this area and discussed 
a wide range of cross-sectoral opportunities for industrial application. We hope to 
be able to report soon providing reflections on case studies and results of evalua-
tions.  

 
12  

6 

  References 

[1]   Schneider,  D.,  Trapp,  M.,  Papadopoulos,  Y.,  Armengaud,  E.,  Zeller,  M.,  & 
Höfig,  K.  (2015).  WAP:  Digital  dependability  identities.  26th  International 
Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE'15), (pp. 324-329) 

[2]  Windley, P., “Digital Identity,” O'Reilly Media, 2005 
[3]  Structured  Assurance  Case  Metamodel  (SACM),  version  2.0,  Object 
at 
(OMG), 

Managment 
http://www.omg.org/spec/SACM/2.0/Beta1/PDF/  

available 

Group 

2016, 

[4]  Schneider, D., & Trapp, M. (2013). Conditional Safety Certification of 
Open Adaptive Systems. ACM Trans. Auton. Adapt. Syst. 8, 2, Article 
8 (July 2013), (p. 20). 

[5]  Azevedo, L.; Parker, D.; Walker, M.; Papadopoulos, Y.; Esteves Araujo, R.: 
Assisted  Assignment  of  Automotive  Safety  Requirements.  IEEE  Software, 
31(1), pp. 62-68, 2014 

[6]  Dheedan A., Papadopoulos Y., Multi-Agent Safety Monitoring System, IFAC 

Proceedings, 43(4):84-89, 2010 

[7]  Luckham, D.: The Power of Events: an Introduction to Complex Event Pro-

cessing in Distributed Enterprise Systems. Addison-Wesley, 2001 

[8]  HRI  analysis  and  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  National 

Health Expenditures (2012) 

[9]  PwC Health Research Institute, New Health entrants 2015 - Global health’s 

new entrants: Meeting the world’s consumer, 2015, available at 
https://www.pwc.com/mx/es/industrias/archivo/2015-02-global-healthcare-
new-entrants.pdf  

[10] Ferreira-Parrilla, A., et. al.: Traffic Light Assistant System for Optimized En-

ergy Consumption in an Electric Vehicle, ICCVE, 2014. 

[11] Jones, S. et.al., V2X Based Traffic Light Assistant for Increased Efficiency of 
Hybrid & Electric Vehicles, Automotive meets Electronics Congress, Confer-
ence Paper, 2016. 

[12] Jones, S. et.al., V2X Based Traffic Light Assistant for Increased Efficiency of 
Hybrid & Electric Vehicles, VDI Wissensforum, Conference Paper, 2016. 
[13] Armengaud, E., Höller, A., Kreiner, C., Macher, G., & Sporer, H. (2015).  A 
Combined Safety-Hazards and Security-Threat Analysis Method for Automo-
tive Systems. SAFECOMP international conference on computer safety, reli-
ability and security. 

[14] UNIFE. (2014). European Rail Industry Guide, available at 

http://www.unife.org/index.php?option=com_attachments&task=download&i
d=499  

[15] EC. (2011). Roadmap to a Single European Transport Area - Towards a com-
petitive and resource efficient transport system. European Commission. 
[16] Shift2Rail. (2015). Shift2Rail Strategic Master Plan. Shift2Rail., available at 

https://ec.europa.eu/transport/sites/transport/files/modes/rail/doc/2015-03-31-
decisionn4-2015-adoption-s2r-masterplan.pdf  

7 

  Full Authors’ Information 

13 

Eric Armengaud, Georg Macher, Alexander Massoner, Sebastian Frager 
AVL List GmbH,  
Hans List Platz 1, 8020 Graz, Austria 
{eric.armengaud, georg.macher , alexander.massoner, sebastian.frager}@avl.com 

Daniel Schneider, Rasmus Adler  
Fraunhofer IESE,  
Fraunhofer Platz 1, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany 
{daniel.schneider,  rasmus.adler}@iese.fhg.de 

Simone Longo, Massimiliano Melis 
General Motors - Global Propulsion System 
Corso Castelfidardo, 36, 10138 Torino, Italy 
{simone.longo, massimiliano.melis}@gm.com  

Riccardo Groppo 
Ideas & Motion SRL 
Via Moglia 19, 12062 Cherasco (CN), Italy 
riccardo.groppo@ideasandmotion.com 

Federica Villa 
Politecnico di Milano 
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133 Milano, Italy 
federica.villa@polimi.it  

Padraig O’Leary, Kevin  
Portable Medical Technology Ltd 
Google Campus, 4-5 Bonhill St, London EC2A 4BX, United Kingdom 
{padraig, kevin}@portablemedicaltechnology.com 

Anita Finnegan 
RSRC at Dundalk Institute of Technology  
Marshes Upper, Dundalk, Co. Louth, Irland 
anita.finnegan@dkit.ie  

Marc Zeller, Kai Höfig  
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology 
Otto-Hahn-Ring 6, 81739 Munich, Germany 
{marc.zeller, kai.hoefig}@siemens.com  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14  

Yiannis Papadopoulos 
University of Hull 
Cottingham Rd, Hull HU6 7RX, United Kingdom 
Y.I.Papadopoulos@hull.ac.uk  

Richard Hawkins, Tim Kelly 
University of York 
Heslington, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom 
{richard.hawkins, tim.kelly}@york.ac.uk  

8   Keywords 

Safety,  security,  Digital  Dependability  Identity  (DDI),  automotive,  railways, 
healthcare  

 
 
