Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3093442

A Systematic Review of Bio-Cyber
Interface Technologies and Security Issues
for Internet of Bio-Nano Things

SIDRA ZAFAR1, MOHSIN NAZIR1, TAIMUR BAKHSHI2, HASAN ALI KHATTAK3, (Senior
Member, IEEE), SARMADULLAH KHAN4, MUHAMMAD BILAL5,*, (Senior Member,
IEEE), KIM-KWANG RAYMOND CHOO6, (Senior Member, IEEE) KYUNG-SUP KWAK7,*
(Life Senior Member, IEEE) and ANEEQA SABAH8
1Department of Computer Science, Lahore College for Women University, Lahore 54000, Pakistan (email:
sidra.zafar@lcwu.edu.pk, mohsin.nazir@lcwu.edu.pk)
2 Center for Information Management & Cyber Security, National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences, Lahore,
Pakistan. (email: taimur.bakhshi@nu.edu.pk)
3School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), Islamabad,
Pakistan (email: hasan.alikhattak@seecs.edu.pk)
4School of Computer Science and Informatics, De Montfort University Leicaster, LE1 9BH, UK.; (email:
sarmadullah.khan@dmu.ac.uk)
5Deptartment of Computer Engineering, Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do, 17035, Korea.; (email:
mbilal@hufs.ac.kr)
6Department of Information Systems and Cyber Security, University of Texas at San Antonio TX 78249, USA. (email:
raymond.choo@fulbrightmail.org)
7Department of Information and Communication Engineering, Inha University, Incheon, 22212, Korea (email: kskwak@inha.ac.kr)
8Department of Physics, Lahore College for Women University,Lahore,54000, Pakistan (email:aneeqas29@gmail.com)

Corresponding authors: Muhammad Bilal and Kyung-Sup Kwak

This work was supported by National Research Foundation of Korea-Grant funded by the Korean Government
(Ministry of Science and ICT)-NRF-2020R1A2B5B02002478).

ABSTRACT Advances in synthetic biology and nanotechnology have contributed to the design of
tools that can be used to control, reuse, modify, and re-engineer cells’ structure, as well as enabling
engineers to eﬀectively use biological cells as programmable substrates to realize Bio-NanoThings
(biological embedded computing devices). Bio-NanoThings are generally tiny, non-intrusive, and
concealable devices that can be used for in-vivo applications such as intra-body sensing and
actuation networks, where the use of artiﬁcial devices can be detrimental. Such (nano-scale)
devices can be used in various healthcare settings such as continuous health monitoring, targeted
drug delivery, and nano-surgeries. These services can also be grouped to form a collaborative
network (i.e., nanonetwork), whose performance can potentially be improved when connected to
higher bandwidth external networks such as the Internet, say via 5G. However, to realize the
IoBNT paradigm, it is also important to seamlessly connect the biological environment with the
technological landscape by having a dynamic interface design to convert biochemical signals from
the human body into an equivalent electromagnetic signal (and vice versa). This, unfortunately,
risks the exposure of internal biological mechanisms to cyber-based sensing and medical actuation,
with potential security and privacy implications. This paper comprehensively reviews bio-cyber
interface for IoBNT architecture, focusing on bio-cyber interfacing options for IoBNT like bio-
logically inspired bio-electronic devices, RFID enabled implantable chips, and electronic tattoos.
This study also identiﬁes known and potential security and privacy vulnerabilities and mitigation
strategies for consideration in future IoBNT designs and implementations.

INDEX TERMS Bio-cyber interface, Internet of Bio-Nano Things, Bio-electronic device security,
Bio-inspired security approaches

1
2
0
2

n
u
J

7
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
7
2
4
1
.
6
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

VOLUME 4, 2021

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION
With recent pandemics and the associated lockdown
regime, there has been renewed,
if not accelerated,
interest, in exploring electronic and remote delivery of
healthcare services. One of the recent trends is in the
Internet of Bio-Nano Things (IoBNT) systems, which
comprise biological nanonetworks that sense biological
and chemical changes in the environment (i.e., human
body) and send the collected data over the Internet to
data centers for further processing. These nanonetworks
can also perform medical actuation from the commands
sent remotely by the relevant healthcare providers. Typ-
ically, biological nanonetworks consist of nanosized com-
puting devices (also referred to as ’Bio-Nano Things’),
which work collaboratively to achieve sensing and actu-
ation tasks within the deployed environment [1]–[8].

Supported tasks

include targeted drug delivery
(TDD), continuous health monitoring, tissue engineer-
ing, and tumor detection [9]–[16]. Conventional wireless
communication technologies are generally not suitable to
support communications within the nanonetworks due
to limitations in transceiver size, computation capabil-
ity, and propagation channel of the bio-nano things. This
necessitates the design of novel communication tech-
nologies for these nanonetworks [17], [18], and examples
include molecular communication (MC) [19], [20], nano
electromagnetic (EM) communication at Tera Hz band,
acoustic and nanomechanical communication [21], [22].
To ensure the smooth operation of IoBNT devices and
systems, seamless connections of intra body nanonet-
works and external networks (such as the Internet)
are essential
in supporting more complex, real-world
healthcare applications. External access to intrabody
nanonetworks requires a hybrid interface device that
understands both paradigms’ communication protocols,
speciﬁcally biochemical signals generated by intrabody
nanonetworks and electromagnetic signals received from
the Internet. Bio-cyber interfacing can be summarily
deﬁned as a set of operations performed in sequence
to convert biochemical signals received from intra-body
nanonetworks into electrical signals for the cyber do-
main of Internet and vice versa [23]. In other words,
the design and modeling of the bio-cyber interface are
crucial yet challenging in IoBNT implementation.

Interdisciplinary research eﬀorts devoted to the devel-
opment of these bio-electronic devices have resulted in
frameworks such as second skin [24], bio-cyber interface
[25], and bio driver [26]. Bio-electronic interfaces may
be composed of materials characterized by electromag-
netic properties, which can alter their formation in the
presence of biological molecular complexes and accord-
ingly modulate current in the electrical circuit. Popular
examples of bio-electronic interfacing include wireless
chemical sensors, RFID devices, and electronic tattoos.
Wireless chemical sensors sense the changes in levels
of chemical substrates of the object and send them

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

wirelessly over the Internet to processing applications
[35]–[37]. Similarly, inkjet printable electronics which
use nanomaterials based ink, have been utilized to facil-
itate fabrication of RFID enabled implantable devices
that sense bodily parameters and send them to some
nearby devices (e.g., mobile devices) via radio-frequency
identiﬁcation (RFID) [38]. Moreover, electronic tattoo
based stick-able sensors can be skin-mounted to collect
epidermal and sweat gland information, which can be
used to facilitate continuous patient monitoring [39].

One of the many challenges in designing bio-cyber
interfaces is how to accurately model molecular infor-
mation collected by intra-body sensors into an equiva-
lent electromagnetic signal. Several factors are limiting
the wider adoption of these devices, for example, data
security and user safety. For example, the capability
to access our human body through IoBNT applications
can be exploited to carry out "bio-cyber terrorism" [25],
where attackers can identify and exploit vulnerabilities
in these IoBNT applications and/or their underpin-
ning infrastructure to directly manipulate human body
functionality, (covertly) exﬁltrate user information, or
cause the human body to malfunction. The feasibility
of conventional, as well as novel security measures,
needs to be established for these (resource-constrained)
devices, and lack of trust in security and privacy will
limit the adoption of such systems. This necessitates the
design of security measures to minimize the impact of
a cyber-attack and unlawful proﬁling and surveillance
of individuals. This work is a step towards providing a
roadmap showing what has been done in IoBNT security
and what needs to be done.

A. EXISTING LITERATURE REVIEWS AND SURVEYS
The idea of integrating biological cells into the commu-
nication engineering perspective was ﬁrst proposed by
Akyldiz et al. [25]. The authors described the architec-
ture of IoBNT and its potential applications, such as
collecting vital physiological parameters from the human
body and transmitting them to the remote healthcare
provider. They also described the enabling technologies
to realize the IoBNT paradigm and focused on molecular
communication as the most promising intrabody com-
munication technology. Furthermore, the challenges in
developing safe and eﬃcient techniques for the exchange
of information and the development interface between
the biological and cyber world (i.e., bio-cyber interface).
Challenges and opportunities were presented.

Another article [27] overviews Nano communica-
tions, BAN (Body Area Network) communications,
and the potential mechanisms that can be used for
the interfacing between nano-micro-macro communi-
cations. This survey article identiﬁes speciﬁc materi-
als and molecules such as Light stimulated channel-
rhodopsins, BRET(Bioluminescence Resonance Energy
Transfer), ATP(Adenosine Triphosphate), Photodetec-

2

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

Table 1: The comparison of existing literature and surveys on IoBNT

Ref Networking Domain Main Focus

Bio Cyber In-
terfacing

Security Description

[27]

Nano Communication
Networks, Body Area
Networks

Interfacing
options
nano-micro
communication

for

Wireless Body Area
Networks

[28]

Security

(cid:216)

X

Molecular Communi-
cation(MC)

[29]

Security in MC

X

IoNT

[22]

Roadmap paper X

[30]

[31]

IoNT
centric networking

and

body-

Survey paper

(cid:216)

5G oriented IoNT

Artiﬁcial
Intelli-
gence and secu-
rity in IoNT

X

6G and next genera-
tion wireless networks

[32]

Roadmap paper

*

IoMT

[33]

Review paper

*

Electronic Tattoos

Review paper

*

[34]

IoBNT

Our
study

Review paper

(cid:216)

-Legends (cid:216)= Completely addressed X = Not addressed * =
Partially addressed

X

(cid:216)

(cid:216)

X

*

(cid:216)

X

X

X

(cid:216)

potential materials
that

and
Identiﬁes
molecules
can be used for
interfacing between Nano and micro
communication technologies.

Description of Four-tiered architecture
of WBAN, presentation of security is-
sues in each layer.

Comprehensive discussion on security
and privacy issues of Molecular Com-
munication and their potential counter-
measures.

Early investigation of
IoNT to ex-
plore enabling technologies, architec-
ture, challanges and opportunities in
IoNT

Overview of IoNT technology, and in-
troduction of hybrid communication
scheme for nano micro interfacing.

This article provides a critical overview
of the IoNT considering the main ap-
plication areas, architecture,
limita-
tions, and design factors. Comprehen-
sive overview of employing Artiﬁcial
Intelligence for IoNT. Moreover, a brief
discussion of attack types and attackers
on IoNT.

Usecases,enabling technologies and key
drivers for 6g and beyound technologies
i.e., IoNT, IoBNT and quantum com-
puting

The technological challenges & solu-
tions for wearable bio-electronics for
patient monitoring and domiciliary hos-
pitalization

The materials and engineering require-
ments, fabrication developments, and
sensing and therapeutic advances in
electronic tattoos

Interdisciplinary research on bio cy-
ber interfacing options for IoBNT. -
Security for IoBNT

VOLUME 4, 2021

3

tors, and SPR (Surface Plasmon Resonance), which can
be used as part of bio cyber interface to achieve the
overall interfacing between nano and micro networking
domains. Unlike our work, this survey article does not
provide any insights into the bio cyber interface’s com-
plete design and prospective components. Moreover, this
article does not discuss the security perspective of the
communication between nano-micro and macro devices.
A roadmap paper has been presented in [32], which
surveys the key enabling technologies of next generation
wireless communications. This paper provides a detailed
insight into the vital technologies that will play an
integral role in 6G networks and beyond, provides use
cases of applications that will be enabled by 6G and the
open research challenges in this domain. Moreover, this
paper also review the early stage technologies such as
Internet of Nano Things (IoNT), Internet of Bio Nano
Things (IoBNT), and quantum communication, which
are expected to beneﬁt from 6G and beyond commu-
nications. This paper presents an overall picture of the
next generation wireless technologies, discussing every
enabling technology in general, whereas our research
speciﬁcally focuses on a detailed and comprehensive
overview of one of the 6G enabling technologies i.e.,
IoBNT.

Other surveys from related ﬁelds include those focus-
ing on Internet of Nano-Things (IoNT) [22]. The au-
thors introduced the IoNT architecture, and explained
the individual components and functionality from an
information-theoretic perspective. Also, it presents re-
search challenges in terms of channel modeling, infor-
mation encoding and protocols for nanonetworks and
IoNT were presented.

Another survey on IoNT in the context of body centric
communication was presented in [30]. Speciﬁcally, the
authors described the IoNT architecture and proposed
a novel hybrid communication medium for body centric
networks. The hybrid communication scheme proposed
using both MC and EM communication in parallel,
for nano micro interfacing, to achieve eﬃcient results.
The authors also brieﬂy discussed existing security ap-
proaches for IoNT.

Qadri et al [40] discussed the possible emerging tech-
nologies for healthcare IoT (H-IoT), the options for
enabling H-IoT (e.g., IoNT was identiﬁed as one of the
enablers for healthcare applications). Another review
on healthcare applications of IoNT was presented by
Pramanik et al. [41], who presented a taxonomy of nan-
otechonolgy, nanoparticles and nanozymes, types and
fabrication options for biosensors, and bionanosensors
for healthcare applications of IoNT.

In the ﬁeld of electronic tattoos, a review paper [34]
presents the materials and engineering requirements,
fabrication developments, and sensing and therapeutic
advancements of electronic tattoos. According to the
authors, there are three components of a theragnostic-

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

based electronic tattoo i.e., Sensing components for di-
agnostics, supporting electronics for data transmission,
and drug delivery component.

Another survey paper [42] that presents state-of-the-
art in security and safety issues of the Brain Computer
Interaction. This work thoroughly identiﬁes some novel
cyberattacks, thier impact on security and safety and
their countermeasures. Some of the attacks like mislead-
ing stimuli are strictly related to BCI as it indicates
alteration of the nuerosignals generated by the patient.
Other attacks and counter measures are generic for the
ﬁelds of IoT, IMD, and even IoBNT. This paper is
provides exceptional insights into the security aspect.
The main diﬀerence in our study and this survey paper
is that the purpose of our study is to cover some very
important architectural and design aspects of IoBNT,
speciﬁcally bio cyber interfaces, along with security
issues of IoBNT.

To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there is no
comprehensive review of IoBNT security solutions in
the literature; nevertheless, the following research from
similar ﬁelds such as IoMT and BCI (Brain Computer
Interaction) provide some preliminary insights into the
security challenges. Keeping in view the recent pandemic
and COVID-19 situation a review paper [33] has been
published recently, which discusses the technological
challenges and solutions for wearable bio-electronics for
patient monitoring and domiciliary hospitalization. In
the end, they have presented a case study application of
the Internet of Medical Things(IoMT) for domiciliary
hospitalization of COVID 19 patients.

However, there have been no uniﬁed works that have
presented a uniﬁed view of the protocol stack models
[40]. A survey on WBAN (Wireless Body Area Net-
works) was presented in [28], which focuses only on
the security aspects. The authors proposed a four-tier
architecture for WBAN and identiﬁed communication
technologies for each tier. The communication technolo-
gies and devices of WBAN are similar to that of IoBNT.

Molecular communication is the key and most promis-
ing enabling technology for the healthcare applications
of IoBNT [43]. A comprehensive review paper is pre-
sented by authors in [29]. This paper presents a layered
architecture of Molecular Communication and identiﬁes
the possible attack types and possible counter measures
in each layer.

In [31], the authors studied the security of big 5G-
oriented IoNT and the potential utility of machine
learning to deal with the (big) data generated by the
large number of IoNT devices. The authors outlined
the potential security attackers and attack types. The
comparison of the existing surveys and this study is
presented in Table 1.

4

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

B. PAPER SCOPE AND CONTRIBUTIONS
This paper provides a comprehensive review of pub-
lished research on IoBNT and the security and privacy
considerations that it raises. To do so, relevant keywords
were used to search published papers in databases such
as IEEExplore, Science Direct, ACM Digital Library,
and Google Scholar. The main keywords or combination
of keywords used were "Internet of Bio Nano Things",
"Bio cyber Interface", "Electronic Tattoos", "Wearable
Internet of Things (IoT)", "Radio Frequency Identiﬁca-
tion (RFID)", "IoBNT Security, and privacy", "Cyberat-
tacks in IoT", and "Nano networks security", published
within 2010-2020 timeline. This resulted in around 80
papers after ﬁltering by categories, topic relevance, time
of publication, and contributions.

The distribution of papers across journals shows that
the papers were mainly published in journals that
cover interdisciplinary topics such as electrochemistry,
biotechnology, wireless communication, theragnostics,
and optogenetics. While there have been a number
of survey and review articles on closely related ﬁelds
(i.e., IoNT,IoMT and WBAN) (see Section I-A), as
well as those on the underlying communication engi-
neering principles (e.g., channel modeling, modulation
techniques, enabling and communication technologies,
and other networking protocols which are applicable to
IoBNT) [30], [31], [41], there has been no survey or

review article that focuses on IoBNT challenges and
research opportunities.

This paper identiﬁes and highlights the key design
issues in the IoBNT implementations (e.g.,
interface
design options between the biological and cyber world)
and the related security challenges. A lot of prominent
researches in the ﬁeld of IoBNT and next generation
technologies have emphasized on interdisciplinary re-
search eﬀorts to make these novel systems holistic and
practical [25], [27], [32]. Therefore, this article’s main
contributions are to bring together insights from dis-
ciplines like physics, biology, optogenetics, and elec-
trochemitry to explore more potential bio interfacing
mechanisms that are being used in these ﬁelds and their
applicability to IoBNT domain.

In summary this work aims to make following contri-

butions:

• To provide a detailed design of the potential bio
cyber interfacing device for IoBNT applications.
• To survey three diﬀerent bio cyber interfacing tech-
nologies namely, biological bio cyber interface, elec-
tronic tattoos and RFID based bio cyber interface.
• To discuss various security issues and concerns that
are speciﬁc to each bio cyber interfacing technology.
• To provide detailed discussion on security of IoBNT
and individuating attacks and threats in IoBNT
components i.e., nanonetworks and bio cyber inter-

VOLUME 4, 2021

5

Figure 1: Overview of topics covered in this article.

Internet of Bio Nano Things(IoBNT) Bio cyber interface Nanonetworks Security proposals in literature Attack Types Detailed design of potential Bio cyber interface Types of Bio cyber interfacing technologies  f RFID based bio cyber interface  Mitigation Strategies Main focus of this study Components of IoBNT chosen for review Topics covered for each component of IoBNT. Electronic Tattoos and Transdermal patches Biological bio cyber interface  Attack Types Open issues and Research challenges face.

• To provide novel and potential mitigation strategies

for the security of IoBNT.

• To present open issues, challenges, and future re-
search directions involving IoBNT and its security.

A detailed elaboration of the contributions and cov-

ered topics in this article is depicted in Figure 1.

C. ARTICLE STRUCTURE
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The
architecture of IoBNT is described in the next section.
The bio-cyber interface and the taxonomy of bio-cyber
interface devices are introduced in Sections III and IV,
respectively. The potential security threats and mitiga-
tion techniques connected with IoBNT are discussed in
Sections V and VI, respectively. The last two sections
address the problems and future research prospects, as
well as the paper conclusion. Figure 2 depicts the overall
taxonomy of this paper.

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

II. INTERNET OF BIO NANO THINGS
ARCHITECTURE
As previously discussed, the IoBNT network helps to
sense biological and chemical changes around the en-
vironment and send the aggregated data to the data
center for further processing [44]. To realize IoBNT,
heterogeneous devices need to collaboratively work to-
gether at nano- to macro-scale, via some interfaces
between the electrical domain of the Internet and the
biochemical domain of the IoBNT networks [25]. For
example, as shown in Fig. 3, the major components in a
IoBNT communication network include bio-nano things,
nanonetwork, bio-cyber interface, gateway devices, and
some medical server(s). The components of IoBNT ar-
chitecture are elaborated below:

A. BIO-NANO THINGS
Bio-nano things are nanodevices that are not only
a computing machine that can be reduced to a few
nanometers in size, but also a device that uses the

Figure 2: Taxonomy of Systematic Review of Bio-Cyber Interface Technologies and Security Issues in the Internet of Bio-Nano
Things.

6

VOLUME 4, 2021

IoBNT Architecture Design of bio cyber interface Security in IoBNT Possible Mitigation strategies Taxonomy of this article Bio-Nano Things Bio cyber interface Gateway devices Medical Server Transduction unit Nano network communication  Internet connectivity BioFET based Classification of bio cyber interface Power supply Electronic Tattoos and  transdermal patches RFID based bio cyber interafce Biological  bio cyber interafce Adhesion system Electromagnetic To Biochemical Signal Conversion Unit Biochemical to Electromagnetic Signal Conversion Unit EM Communication Molecular Communication Bluetooth LE ZIGBEE IEEE 802.15.6 NFC RFID Optical to chemical  Redox interfacer FRET based Attack types in nanonetwroks Attack types in bio cyber interface Eavesdropping Blackhole Sentry Spoofing, alteration Eavesdropping Replay MITM Resource Depletion Injection Device Tampering Malware Firmware Cryptographic primitives Device Hardening Delegation to external devices Intrusion Detection Access Control Communication technology solutions Hardware based solutions Consumer training Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

Figure 3: A Typical Internet of Bio-Nano Things Architecture, where a bio-chemical signal from inside the human body is converted
into electromagnetic signal via bio cyber interface, and transmitted through Bluetooth or equivalent technology towards medical
server for further analysis and processing

unique properties of nanocells and nanoparticles to de-
tect and measure new types of phenomena at nanoscale.
For example, nanodevices can detect chemical com-
pounds in a fraction of a billion.
[46], or the
presence of diﬀerent infectious agents such as virus or
harmful bacteria [47], [48].

[45],

Nanodevice is essentially comprise of a number of
hardware constituents and all the software and program-
ming of the nanodevice is included in the information
processing unit. There are two types of Nanodevices,
electronic nanodevice, and biological nanodevice. Elec-
tronic nanodevices use novel nanotechnology materials
like Carbon Nano Tubes (CNT) [49], [50] and Graphene
Nano Ribbons [17] for device construction. Biological
nanodevices are built using the tools from nanotechnol-
ogy and synthetic biology.

Biological nanodevices can be fabricated by repro-
gramming biological materials [51], [52] like cells [53],
viruses [54], [55], bacteria [56], bacteriophage [57], ery-
throcytes (i.e., a red blood cell), leukocytes (a type of
white blood cell) and stem cells [58], [59] or by artiﬁcially
synthesizing biomolecules like liposome, nanosphere,
nanocapsule, micelle, dendrimer, fullerene and deoxyri-
bonucleic (DNA) capsule. Moreover, hybrid nanodevices
can be fabricated by applying both the above-mentioned
approaches. The size of nano devices may range from
macro molecule to typical biological cell.

The material used to compose nano devices can be
only biological [60] (proteins, DNA sequences, lipids,
biological cell) or they can be synthesized with non-

biological materials such as magnetic particles and gold
nanorods. There are a number of naturally occurring
nano devices e-g protein motors that bind certain types
of molecule on cargo transport them through ﬁlaments
and unbind them at destination, liposomes capable of
storing and releasing certain types of molecules, biologi-
cal cells coated with non-biological material for non-cell
native functions(e-g absorbing mercury). An envsioned
bio-nano thing is presented in Figure 4.

B. NANO NETWORK

Nano network is comprised of several nano-scale devices
such as nano transmitter, nano receiver, nano router,
and other specialized nanodevices to perform exclusive
tasks like sensing, actuation, monitoring, and control.
Intra-body nanonetwork is generally deployed in the
environment (e.g., human body orally or through in-
jection) to realize invivo biomedical applications. The
nanonetwork consists of devices (e.g., nanomachine,
nano router, and nano micro interface) at the nanoscale
(1-100 nm), which work collaboratively to achieve sens-
ing and actuation tasks [17]. Nanomachines can be inter-
connected to execute collaborative tasks in a distributed
manner. The size of nanodevices makes them feasible for
in vivo applications, where these non-invasive machines
can easily be placed in hard-to-access areas (e.g., deep
inside tissue) and perform therapeutic operations.

VOLUME 4, 2021

7

NanonetworkBio-Nano ThingGateway deviceBio cyber interfaceMedical serverS. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

Figure 4: Bio-nano thing : A mapping between the components of a typical IoT embedded computing device, and the elements of
a biological cell.

C. BIO CYBER INTERFACE
Nano micro interface is mediating device between nano
and micro scale communication; it is referred to as bio-
cyber interface and bio electronics device throughout
this article to keep the generality. Basically, this device
converts electrical signals received as commands from
the medical server of healthcare providers into biochem-
ical signals understandable by intra-body nanonetworks
and vice versa [61]. A detailed description of bio cyber
interface design is presented in Section III

D. GATEWAY DEVICES
Gateway devices are now an integral part of most IoT
applications, where they function as a relay device
between sensors and the Internet. Gateway devices are
computing devices such as smartphones, tablets, lap-
tops, or mini-computers. A gateway device supports the
mobility of patients and ensures eﬃcient signal reception
of low transmission range technologies (NFC, RFID,
Bluetooth LE, etc). The wearable bio-electronic devices
are usually designed to be compatible with the operat-
ing system requirements of smartphones [35], [62]. For
RFID enabled applications,smartphones integrated with
the RFID readout unit, which eliminates the need for
external RFID tag readers. Similarly, for bio-electronic
devices enabled with Bluetooth LE as the communica-
tion modality, smartphones are the ideal choice. Access
point can be a cellular base station or a WiFi access
point, which helps to route the body sensor‘s traﬃc to
the medical server.

E. MEDICAL SERVER
Medical server acts as a repository in which all the sen-
sory data collected and sent from the patient‘s body is
stored, analyzed and processed. This server may act as a
terminal for real-time and continuous health monitoring,
where emergency situations can be mitigated by sending
alert messages. Only authorized entities can access this
server to send commands and receive collected data, due
to the critical nature of biomedical applications.

III. A DETAILED DESIGN OF POTENTIAL BIO CYBER
INTERFACE DEVICE
Bio-cyber interface is the hybrid and most sophisti-
cated device, that is capable of communicating be-
tween nanoscale and microscale devices [22], [25], [44].
This device receives aggregated data from nanonetwork,
processes nanoscale data in its transduction unit to
convert it into a format suitable for the conventional
network (e-g Internet) and sends it microscale devices.
The components of envisioned bio-cyber interface are
described in detail below:

A. TRANSDUCTION UNIT
The transduction unit in the bio-cyber interface per-
forms the operation of converting electrical signals from
external devices into biochemical signals readable by
Bio-Nano Things [63]. Transduction properties in bio-
cyber interface can be achieved by engineering devices
using biomaterials, artiﬁcially synthesized biomaterials,
non-bio materials or by combining all the approaches
to create hybrid design [64]. The transduction unit is

8

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

further divided into two constituent parts, Electro-bio
transduction unit, and Bioelectro transduction unit.

1) ELECTROMAGNETIC TO BIOCHEMICAL SIGNAL
CONVERSION UNIT
Electro – Bio Transduction Unit converts the electrical
signals, received from external devices into biochemical
signals, and transmits them to intra-body nanonetwork
for further processing. This unit consists of a decoder,
a drug storage unit, an external physical eﬀect source,
and an injection chamber. The decoder receives the
signal transmitted from an external device and derives
logic gates. The logic gates are binary commands that
produce some physical eﬀect in the environment like
thermal, optical or magnetic radio-frequency (RF) sig-
nals. The physical eﬀect source (thermal, optical or
magnetic ﬁeld) placed around the drug storage unit,
stimulates the nanomachines to release their content in
response to external changes in the environment. The
injection chamber injects the released molecules into the
blood vessel network.

The drug storage compartment of the bio-cyber inter-
face contains nanomachines that are fabricated with ma-
terials sensitive to external physical eﬀects like changes
in light, temperature, pH or enzymes [65]. The injected
nanomachines traverse the blood vessel network and
are anchored at the targeted site due to high aﬃn-
ity. The nanomachines are equipped with ligands (i.e.,
signaling molecules in the MC channel) that bind to
reciprocal receptors (i.e., receiving molecule) and are
only expressed at the targeted site [63]. The process
of electromagnetic to bio chemical signal conversion is
depicted in Fig 5 [63]. Bio and non-bio materials can
be used to engineer nanomachine, like liposomes that
are drug nanocarriersfabricated with a coating that is
sensitive to external environmental factors [64].

Photosensitive materials release encapsulated molecules

when stimulated by light at certain wavelength emitted
from an external
laser source [66]. The process of
photoisomerization destabilizes the bilayer membrane
of liposome upon light illumination and allows the re-
lease of photoresponsive molecules. For example, caged
compounds release molecules by bond breaking [67] and
gold nanorods generate heat as a response to their
conformational change [63], [68].

Temperature-sensitive materials release their contents
upon a nonlinear sharp change in temperature of the
environment such as temperature-sensitive liposomes
[69], [70] and dendrimers [71]. Such a sharp change in
temperature triggers the thermo-responsive liposomes
to release encapsulated molecules in the environment.
Thermoresponsive liposomes should ideally maintain
their load at body temperature ( 37°C) and deliver
the encapsulated drug only upon an increase intra-body
temperature [63].

Magnetic particles release their contents in response
to magnetic radio-frequency signals generated by an
external source. For example, gold nanocrystals at-
tached to DNA molecules induce the hybridization of
the DNA molecules [72], generating double-stranded or
signal stranded DNA molecules. An architecture for
bio-cyber interface has been proposed in [63] which
uses two kinds of liposomes that react to variations
in light and temperature. According to the proposal
when the decoded binary command from the external
device is 011, thermal responsive liposomes release their
contents. When the decoded command is 111 photosen-
sitive liposomes release their contents. Another proposal
[64] has performed a wet laboratory experiment to
engineer artiﬁcially synthesized materials (ART) using
polystyrene bead, to operate as in-messaging nanoma-
chine to forward messages to intra-bodynanonetwork
The functionality in the ART based nano device is
not yet implemented and is reserved for future research
work.

An information-theoretic model for glucose monitor-
ing as an application of IoBNT has been proposed in
[73]. The model utilizes pancreatic beta-cell to transmit
insulin molecules into the intra-body network via blood
vessel channel according to commands received from
the healthcare provider. The feedback of glucose level is
transmitted by muscle cells towards the beta cell to be
transmitted towards the healthcare provider. The model
is currently designed for intra-body nanonetworks in this
proposal and can be made online for continuous health
monitoring by using cyber-interfaced beta cells.

Figure 5: Schematic illustration of Electromagnetic to Bio-
chemical signal conversation unit. The binary code is received
from medical server, the decoder converts the binary signal and
pass it to physical eﬀect source which in turn activates the drug
storage unit and release the drug.

VOLUME 4, 2021

9

2) BIOCHEMICAL TO ELECTROMAGNETIC SIGNAL
CONVERSION UNIT
The bio electro transduction unit detects the concentra-
tion of received molecules and converts the molecular
signals into electrical form. According to [63], this unit
employs a cell structure to be used as a bioluminescence
bioreporter. The bioreporter works on the principle bio-
luminescence reaction that produces a reporter protein
upon excitation from an analyte.

The analyte here can be transmitted information
molecules, moving towards the receiving nanomachines
and the reporter protein is Luciferase (LU). Biolumi-
nescence is the production and emission of light by
living organisms as a result of a chemical reaction during
which chemical energy is converted into light energy.
When the two chemical enzymes Luciferin (L) and
Luciferase (LU), catalyze oxygen in the presence of ATP,
a chemical reaction releases energy in the form of light.
Fluorescence molecules such as rhodamine derivatives
are another form of luminescent materials that can be
used to produce light energy [64].

These materials emit ﬂuorescence upon excitation
from microbiological conditions, which can be detected
by external devices with the help of ﬂuorescence mi-
croscopy. The emitted light energy is detected by
a nanoscale light-sensitive sensor, which produces an
in response. The electrical
equivalent electric signal
signal drives the transmitter to send the derived infor-
mation through the wireless channel. Research contri-
butions towards the realization of bio-cyber interface
have resulted in some excellent theoretical frameworks
for the Bio electrotransduction unit. The transduction
unit for bio-cyber interface can be designed using nat-
ural/synthesized biological materials or novel nanotech-
nology materials like carbon and graphene.

B. COMMUNICATION UNIT
The connection of the human body with the Internet
is the basic notion behind the IoBNT paradigm. bio-
cyber interface can be used as a module for connecting
the human body to the Internet. bio-cyber interface
must possess the capability to wirelessly transmit the
aggregated intra-body data to the healthcare provider.
Bio cyber interface is responsible for communication
with the intra body nano networks as well as with the
internet. Therefore, it must contain two communication
units i.e.,one for intra body communication and one for
external communication with the internet.

1) NANO NETWORK COMMUNICATION
As discussed earlier the intrabody nano network commu-
nication cannot be realized through the traditional wire-
less communication technologies due to the minute size
of nano transceivers inside the human body. Therefore,
novel enabling technologies have been investigated that
are feasible for communication inside the human body

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

and provides an interface to access the human body.
These technologies include molecular communication
[43] and nano-electromagnetic communication at the
THz band. Both of these technologies are discussed in
detail below:

a: MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION (MC)
Molecular communication performs the exchange of
messages between bio-nano machines through informa-
tion encoded molecules [20], [74]. To generalize MC into
a communication engineering perspective, researchers
have deﬁned an architecture of MC that consists of
key communication concepts and processes [74]. The
basic components of MC architecture include the sender
bio nanomachine, receiver bio nanomachine, and the
propagation medium. The sender bio nanomachine en-
codes the information molecules, usually in the form of
molecular concentration (i.e., the number of informa-
tion molecules per unit volume of solvent molecules)
modulated over time or some other form according to
application. The encoded information is then released
into the environment through unbinding from the sender
bio nanomachine.

The propagation medium for in-vivo applications is
an aqueous medium that allows the ﬂow of molecules
towards the destination. The process of molecule prop-
agation can be active or passive. In active or walk-
way based propagation, molecules are encapsulated in
vesicles and are transported through molecular motors
towards the destination. Whereas in passive or diﬀusion-
based propagation [75], information molecules diﬀuse
away into the environment and are transported towards
the destination through guide molecules. The receiver
bio nanomachine captures the information molecules
form the propagation medium and decodes them into
some chemical reaction. Chemical reactions may include
the production of some signal for other molecules, per-
forming some simple task or producing other molecules.
In [20] state-of-the-art in MC have been presented,
discussing architecture, theoretical and physical model-
ing and challenges and opportunities in the development
of MC based systems. Some researchers have also related
MC with traditional networking protocols such as [19]
proposed a TCP like molecular communication which is
a connectionoriented protocol. Moreover, another pro-
posal
[74] presents an OSI like layered architecture
for MC. The functionality of each layer and relevant
research challenges and opportunities according to each
have been discussed in detail.

In [76], a comprehensive survey on recent advance-
ments on MC according to communication, perspective
has been presented, which provides a detail discussion
on the transmitter, receiver and propagation medium of
MC systems. Some other works on the development of
MC systems include the transmitter and receiver design
[77]–[79] modulation techniques [80]–[83], channel mod-

10

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

eling and noise analysis [84]–[88]. The most prominent
application area of MC is healthcare and nanomedicine.
In this direction, a comprehensive survey paper [89]on
the medical applications of MC has been proposed that
discusses a taxonomy of potential medical applications
of MC, challenges, and opportunities in realizing them
and future directions. Among the medical applications
of MC, Targeted Drug Delivery (TDD) has got the
most attention from the research community. A very
comprehensive survey paper on the MC based TDD that
discusses system models and design requirements/ chal-
lenges for MC based TDD systems have been conducted
by authors in [90].

Other work on MC based TDD can be found in [91]–
[96]. MC is the most promising IoBNT technology due
to its bio-inspired nature [25] and suitability for bio
medical applications. Therefore most of the work in
nanocommunication and IoBNT domain is dominanted
by MC.

b: NANO ELECTROMAGNETIC (EM) COMMUNICATION
Nano EM communication at THz band is another
communication option for intr-abody communication,
whose feasibility was ﬁrst discussed in [17]. In this
technology, EM waves are used as an information carrier
between source and destination. The advancement in
novel nanomaterials such as Carbon nanotubes (CNT)
and graphene derivatives such as graphene nanoribbons
(GNR) has opened up doors for EM communication at
the nanoscale [21]. The THz spectrum is less vulnerable
to propagation eﬀects such as scattering, which makes
it ideal for intrabody communication due to its safety
for biological tissue i.e., non ionization [97].

The state-of-the-art in EM nano communication was
proposed by Akyildiz et al [21], which discusses the com-
ponents, architecture and manufacturing possibilities of
nanosensors for nano EM communication. Moreover,
this paper also discusses the potential application areas
of nano EM networks and challenges in realizing them.
A new channel modeling scheme for nano EM networks
based on radiative transfer theory is proposed in [98].
This paper also investigated the channel capacity of THz
band based EM communication using diﬀerent power
allocation schemes. A state-of-the-art review paper that
discusses possible biomedical applications of THz EM
communication, current models and possible antenna
designs, is proposed by Abbassi et al [99].

2) COMMUNICATION WITH THE INTERNET
For better signal reception and to increase the mobility
of patients with bio-cyber implants, smartphone de-
vices are used as gateway devices to the internet [63].
Smartphone devices have now become an integral part
of many IoT applications due to its ubiquity, advanced
computational capabilities and opensource [100]. Wire-
less Body Area Networks (WBANs), Wireless Chemical

Sensors (WCS) and other body area sensors are now
being developed to be compatible with the operating
system of the smartphone.

This section includes wireless technologies that are
feasible for the connection between bio-cyber interface
and smartphone device. Wireless Body Area Networks
(WBANs) is a similar ﬁeld of IoBNT which utilize im-
planted sensor devices to wirelessly transmit, measured
human body parameters to healthcare applications via
the Internet [101]. Research in WBANs is relatively
mature as compared to IoBNT, therefore, a literature
survey from WBANs has been included in this section.
Moreover, researchers in the ﬁeld of chemical engineer-
ing have been working on wireless chemical sensors
(WCS) for more than a decade now [26].

WCSs are wearable patches that are capable of trans-
mitting sensed bodily chemical values to the connected
smartphone for analysis and processing by healthcare
applications. The wireless communication technologies
that are suitable with bio-cyber interface design are
identiﬁed through a literature review of relevant do-
mains such as WBANs and WCSs. This work also
go through some of the important factors to consider
when designing a bio-cyber interface, such as size, power
supply requirements, data rate, real-time vs. on-demand
data transfer, transmission range, and warning capa-
bility. Selection of suitable wireless technology depends
upon the bio-cyber interface application system require-
ments and the underlying mode of operation of the
wireless technology.

There are a number of active and passive wire-
less technologies available today to establish human-
Internet connectivity. Active wireless technologies con-
tain transponders able to transmit and receive radio
frequency waves at high data rates and long-distance.
Active wireless technologies require a continuous battery
supply for transmission and to power the circuitry. Ex-
amples of active wireless technologies include Zigbee and
Bluetooth, and IEEE 802.15.6. While passive wireless
technologies include RFID and Near Field Communi-
cation (NFC). These technologies are brieﬂy explained
below and are illustrated in Table 2.

a: BLUETOOTH LOW ENERGY (LE) COMMUNICATION
Bluetooth (LE) Low Energy technology was introduced
to wirelessly connect small low power devices to mobile
terminals. This technology is ideal to be integrated with
implants for healthcare applications as it supports ultra-
low power consumption [102]. It contains tiny Bluetooth
radio to actively send and receive messages from nearby
smartphone devices. The transmission range of Blue-
tooth LE is up to 10 m, the data rate is 1 Mbps and
the frequency band is 2.4 GHz ISM [103]. Pairing time
with other devices is in milliseconds, which is appropri-
ate for alarm and emergency conditions in healthcare
applications [104].

VOLUME 4, 2021

11

b: ZIGBEE
ZigBee has an active transmitter able to communicate
with mobile devices over a distance of 10-100 m. Zigbee
is considered the most cost-eﬀective technology due to
its low power and low data rates. ZigBee can operate on
three ISM bands with data rates from 20 Kbps to 250
Kbps [104]. Although ZigBee provides a large transmis-
sion range, it is not a good candidate for continuous
health monitoring applications due to its low data rates
[101].

c: IEEE 802.15.6 STANDARD
The rapid popularity of Wireless Body Area Networks
(WBANs) and Consumer Electronics called for a stan-
dard communication medium to address the special
needs of the WBANs such as low power, low cost, low
complexity, high throughput and short-range wireless
communication in and around the human body. IEEE
standards association established the IEEE 802.15 Task
Group 6 for the standardization of WBAN [105], [106].
It quotes: “The IEEE 802.15 Task Group 6 (BAN)
is developing a communication standard optimized for
low power devices and operation on, in or around the
human body (but not limited to humans) to serve a
variety of applications including medical, consumer elec-
tronics personal entertainment and other”[IEEE 802.15
WPAN Task Group 6 Body Area Networks. 2011].
IEEE.802.15.6 has diﬀerent frequency bands in diﬀerent
countries ranging from 16- 27 MHz [107].

Medical Implant Communications Service (MICS)
band is a licensed band used for implant communication
and has the same frequency range (402-405 MHz) in
most of the countries [105]. MICS band is suitable to be
integrated for bio-cyber interface as it deﬁnes protocols
that are compatible with system requirements of bio-
cyber interface. IEEE.802.15.6 can operate within a
transmission range of 3 m with data rates up to 10 Mbps
[108].

IEEE.802.15.6 has also been recognized to be used
as a standard for Human Body Communication (HBC).
HBC uses the human body as signal propagation
medium, therefore certain concerns must be taken into
account such as increased mobility of the patient, lower
power consumption, small battery size yet life to span
around a time several months, and management to
aggregate burst data in presence of continuous trig-
gers from physiological data. Considering these HBC
concerns [109] proposed a medium access method for
statistical frame-based time division multiple access (S-
TDMA) protocol that demonstrates lower data latency,
lower power consumption, and higher transmission eﬃ-
ciency.

d: NEAR FIELD TECHNOLOGY (NFC)
NFC is a passive communication designed to operate in
the ultra-low transmission range of up to 20 cm. NFC

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

technology contains NFC tag similar to the RFID tag,
which is powered by a readout device. Communication
in NFC requires devices to touch each other or be
in close vicinity to each other. Smartphone transmits
power wirelessly to resonant circuits through inductive
coupling which turns “ON” the NFC tag. Once the
transmission session is complete, the tag is marked as
“OFF” and becomes unreadable [110].

This technology is ideal for implantable devices with
a low power source as the communication is powered by
the reader device (in our case smartphone). Ultra-Low
transmission range in NFC is not a drawback, rather it
is a strength as it provides rapid connection [101].

e: RFID (ISO/IEC 18000-6)
RFID is a passive wireless technology that consists of a
transponder (tag) to be read by an RFID reader. RFID
based implants are feasible in situations where battery
supply is a major issue [101]. Entire transmission in
passive RFID systems is powered by the reader side
[111], which in our case can be RFID reader enabled
smartphone devices. The read range of RFID is 1- 100
m with the data rate of 10- 100Kbps [104]. Battery-
powered RFIDs with active radio transmitters are avail-
able which comes with a high cost yet low data rates.

C. POWER SUPPLY
Bio cyber interfaces need a continuous power supply
for data collection, processing, and transmission. The
battery is mass vise the largest unit in the bio-cyber in-
terface and other body implants. Although considerable
progress has been done in lithium rechargeable batteries,
yet they cannot keep pace with the novel technology
requirements and size constraints. Miniaturization of
a battery source, energy harvesting methods based on
human body movements, and wireless battery recharge
techniques have been explored by researchers of MIT for
implants in Wireless Body Area Networks (WBANs).

Evanescent waves have been considered in [112] to
wirelessly power the electronic devices over a short
distance. Other eﬀorts include solar rechargeable bat-
teries [113], piezoelectric nanogenerators [114], micro-
supercapacitors [115] and endocochlear potential-based
bio batteries [116]. Implantable devices in IoBNT need
a continuous power supply and prolong battery life,
for this purpose mechanism has been investigated to
scavenge power supply from the epidermal
layer of
the wearer [116]. These energy scavenging batteries
are called biofuel cells (BFC), which convert chemical
energy into electrical energy through biocatalytic re-
actions [117]–[119]. Researchers from the University of
California San Diego have demonstrated an epidermal
BFC [120] to scavenge continuous energy from human
preparation. Lactate is used as biofuel as it is present
in human sweat in an abundant amount [120]. Similarly,
energy scavenging techniques from the human body can

12

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

Table 2: Communication Mechanisms for the Internet Connectivity of Bio-Electronic Devices.

Technology

Data Rate

Transmission
Range

Bluetooth LE
ZigBee
IEEE 802.15.6
RFID
NFC

1 Mbps
250 Kbps
10 Kbps-10 Mbps
10-100 Kbps
< 424Kbps

10 m
10-100 m
3 m
1-100 m
< 20 cm

RF Band

2.4 GHz ISM
2.4 GHz
16-27 MHz
860-960 MHz
13.56 MHZ

Exemplary
References

[102], [103]
] [101], [104]
[105]–[109]
[101], [104], [111]
[101], [104], [110]

be adapted for power supply in the bio-cyber interface.
A detailed energy model for nanoscale devices has been
demonstrated in [121] which discusses the power con-
sumption of each component in the nanonetwork.

D. ADHESION SYSTEM
This section brieﬂy discusses the patch material, as bio-
cyber interface is envisioned to be a wearable/stick-
able bio-electronic device. The adhesive material for the
patch is under high interdisciplinary research investiga-
tion as human skin is extraordinarily stretchable ((cid:15) >
100%where(cid:15) is the strain), highly rough (superlative
height 40 µm), and generally covered with sweat and
hairs [122]. Hence, delivering adequate adhesion of skin
patches against human skin persists to be a challenging
task. Adhesion materials should be carefully chosen to
prevent issues like cytotoxicity (i.e., condition of being
toxic), skin contamination, damages, risks of infection,
and loss of wet adhesion make them less eﬀective.
Adhesion materials using electronic materials are exten-
sively reviewed in [35] and bio-inspired approaches for
adhesion like gecko-/beetle-inspired mushroom-shaped
architectures, endoparasite-like microneedles, octopus
inspired suction cups and slug-like adhesive with energy
dissipation layer, has been keenly investigated in [122].
Special measures should be taken into account while
selecting the adhesive material to prevent data loss and
wireless connection due to strain and physical pressure
on the patch while patient movement, wrinkling of skin
or other factors.

E. SUMMARY OF BIO CYBER INTERFACE
There exist a few proposals in the literature that present
interface either using nano EM or MC communication.
In the nano EM domain [123] have proposed an archi-
tecture of nanonetworks-based Coronary Heart Disease
(CHD) monitoring system. The proposed model consists
of nanomacro interface (NM) and nanodevice-embedded
Drug Eluting Stents (DESs), termed as nanoDESs. The
algorithm exploits the periodic change in mean dis-
tance between a nanoDES, inserted inside the aﬀected
coronary artery, and the NM, ﬁtted in the intercostal
space of the rib cage of a patient suﬀering from a CHD
utilizing THz band. Another paper proposes a straight
forward communication scheme utilizing the TeraHertz

Band. The architecture consists of nano nodes and nano
router, deployed in the dorsum of the human hand. Nano
nodes circulate in the blood vessel for the collection
of medical data and transmit the aggregated data to
the nano router. Nanorouter then transmits the data to
BAN (Body Area Network) device through THz band
communication, which is then relayed to the Internet.
Some theoretical models have adopted MC paradigm for
the design of bio-cyber interface device. For example,
authors in [64] have conducted a wet-lab experiment by
utilizing artiﬁcially synthesized materials as an interface
between the biological and electrical world. The proposal
employs optical sensitive molecules(pH rodo molecules)
that activate upon expression of ﬂuorescence through
ﬂuorescent microscopy.

The above-mentioned proposals that utilize nano
nodes and nanoDES in THz communication, may not
be biocompatible due to the non-biological nature of
these devices. Secondly, the use of external devices
like a ﬂuorescent microscope can also cause mobility
issues for the patient, which negates the whole notion of
IoBNT. A novel hybrid approach is presented [30], which
suggests utilizing MC based communication inside the
human body for its biocompatible and noninvasive
properties. The MC can communicate with graphene-
based nanosensor, implanted over the human body for
communication with external devices. The nano micro
interface will, therefore, consist of a THz based antenna
and micro/macro antenna. The idea is to limit the non-
bio devices inside the human body and to read the intra-
body parameters eﬃciently outside the body.

IV. CLASSIFICATION OF BIO CYBER INTERFACING
TECHNOLOGIES AND THEIR SECURITY ISSUES
The design of a bio-cyber interface is a major chal-
lenge in the realization of IoBNT. In the introductory
paper of IoBNT, Akyildiz et al highlighted the design
challenges of bio-cyber interface and the possibility of
using electronic tattoos, and RFID based sensors as bio-
cyber interface. In order to study the possibilities of
electronic tattoos and RFID-based tattoos as bio-cyber
interfaces, previous proposals on electronic tattoos and
RFID-based tattoos are evaluated below. Furthermore,
some preliminary work on a biologically-inspired bio-

VOLUME 4, 2021

13

cyber interface presented by the notable MC engineering
research community is discussed.

A. ELECTRONIC TATTOOS AND TRANSDERMAL
PATCHES
Flexible and stretchable wearable electronics are getting
interdisciplinary research attention as they promise to
deliver continuous patient monitoring [23], [124] while
circumventing the possible discomfort caused by regular
wearable electronics. There are a number of biomedical
conditions that require frequent monitoring of patients
at regular intervals, for example, glucose monitoring for
diabetic patients, ﬁtness monitoring of athletes, real-
time detection of pathogens in bioﬂuids for the plausible
onset of disease [125]. Traditional methods to measure
these chemical analytes require extracting fresh blood
or other bodily samples every time. This continuous
and invasive blood sampling can cause discomfort to
the patient’s especially elderly patients and homophobic
patients.
To address some of these concerns, researchers have
ventured into the development of wearable sensors which
provide non-invasive ways to continuously sense the
patient’s vital signs and transmit the collected data to
data centers for further processing. Researchers have
devised non-invasive ways of drawing out samples by
utilizing the epidermal layer of the human skin [126].

Human skin contains several electrolytes that pro-
vide clinically useful information about patients’ over-
all health such as temperature, physiological, electro-
physiological and biochemical parameters [127]. Human
perspiration is also an information-rich epidermal secre-
tion that is readily available and can be used to extract
information about chemical compositions like metallic
ions, minerals, glucose, lactose, lactic acid, urea, volatile
organic compounds,
in the human body [128]. Vari-
ously, human epidermis experiences continuous bending,
stretching, and deformation while performing daily life
physical activities.
The mechanical properties of wearable electronics might
mismatch with unique mechanophysiology of the human
skin and can cause degradation of device capability and
discomfort to the wearer. Novel fabrication techniques
for developing ﬂexible and comfortable wearable devices
are trending in academic and industrial research [35],
[122], [129].

To overcome the aforementioned issue, wearable elec-
tronics are now being fabricated by adapting the design
principles of temporary tattoos. Temporary tattoos are
a form of body art that ﬁrmly attaches to the skin as
“secondary skin”, while their presence is barely noticed
by the wearer. Tattoos are comfortable to be worn and
provide ease of performing daily life activities to the
wearer, by bearing mechanical stress, washing, and other
harsh conditions. These favorable properties of tattoos
have attracted researchers of wearable electronics to

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

develop tattoo based electronics. The electronic tattoos
typically include sensors, memory, electronic circuits,
and drug reservoir units [130]. The electronic tattoos
analyze the sensed information to determine the dose
and release timing of the drug contained in the unit.

Screen printing techniques can be used to print elec-
tronic tattoos of desirable shape capable of extract-
ing rich chemical information from our epidermis and
transmit these analytical data wirelessly to a smart-
phone. Moreover, dry free form cut and paste technology
[131], [132] is also been introduced for electronic tattoo
fabrication. A summarization of existing proposals for
electronic tattoos in healthcare monitoring is presented
in Table 3.

Traditional methods of drug delivery through oral in-
take of medicine and via injections are now quickly being
replaced by transdermal drug delivery patches. These
patches are good alternatives to traditional methods as
they promise minimally invasive and painless drug de-
livery. The transdermal patch is usually made of ﬂexible
and stretchable material that contains microneedles on
the sticking side of the patch. Microneedles are actually
drug containers that release their payload upon ex-
ternal stimulation. Fourth-generation transdermal drug
delivery systems [133] are now capable to release con-
trolled amounts of the drug upon receiving commands
wirelessly through the internet. A number of wearable
electronic patches based therapeutic stimulators and
drug delivery patches are available now that have proven
to provide accurate results when compared with regular
laboratory equipment.

1) SECURITY CONCERNS IN ELECTRONIC TATTOOS
AND TRANS DERMAL PATCHES
Electronic tattoos and transdermal patches can be
exposed to security threats as they are continuously
connected with the wireless technology.The following
are some of the threats that electronic tattoos and
transdermal patches may encounter.

a: WIRELESS COMMUNICATION RISKS
Electronic tattoos and transdermal patches need con-
tinous wireless network supply in order to receive and
send information to the healthcare provider. Mainly the
electronic tattoos are connected with a gateway device
(smart phone) that relays the information over the inter-
net. In the currently published literature for electronic
tattoos, it is noticed that most of the proposals have
used Bluetooth or BLE as communication mechanisms
between electronic tattoo and gateway device. Bluetooth
technology works within close proximity and is consid-
ered safe as attacker must be present within the patient’s
vicinity to launch an attack. However, Bluetooth version
5.0 has a transmission range of upto 400m moreover, the
range can be magniﬁed up to a mile through omni direc-

14

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

tional antennas. Researchers from Singapore University
of Technology and design have discovered 12 diﬀerent
Bluetooth bugs which can aﬀect 450 type of IoT devices
including implantable medical devices. Moreover, the
security ﬂaw named "SweynTooth" associated with BLE
can crash the device, deadlock the device or bypass
security to access device functionality. Another critical
threat to Bluetooth technology is Blueborne attack. In
this attack, hackers infect the devices with malwares
and gains access to the device to execute malicious
operations [134].

b: PHYSICAL HARM
The electronic tattoos currently manufactured are tested
rigorously to withstand mechanical deformation caused
by external strain. However, in cases of long term use
and extreme physical stress conditions, the device abil-
ities might be degraded and cause unwanted behaviour.
The bio-electronic devices which are presently designed
in the form of electronic tattoo and implantable patches
that do not require any surgical procedures to aﬃx
on the human body. Non-medical professionals can ap-
ply these devices easily on human skin like stickers.
This nonsurgical relaxation can be exploited by local
attackers to replace the bio-electronic device with an
illegitimate device on an unconscious patient. The ille-
gitimate device now becomes part of the communication
and can launch several passive and active attacks like
eavesdropping, replay attack, and data modiﬁcation,
etc.
Countermeasures:Some of the possible countermeasures
for above mentioned attacks are Tamper-prooﬁng and
self destruction:Use of tamper proof package for sensing
devices and enable self destruction mode upon coun-
tering an intruder attack. Minimize information leak-
age: Protective measures like generating artiﬁcial noise,
shielding and adding randomized delay can be taken to
minimize information leakage. [135] Run-time attesta-
tion: Generation of proof about updation of ﬁrmware
by a remote entity. [135].

B. RFID TAG SENSORS AS BIO-ELECTRONIC DEVICE
RFID tags are utilized for the identiﬁcation of objects
in many IoT and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) due
to their wireless communication capability and easy
integration in the Internet cloud system [139]. RFID
tag sensors have already been extensively studied for
industrial applications like food safety, logistics, health-
care, public transport, fake medicine and environmental
pollution [38].
The role of RFID sensors in envisioned healthcare appli-
cations IoBNT is promising due to their easy integration
with implanted interfaces for communication with the
Internet. RFID enabled technology is being used for
several healthcare applications like real-time tracking
of patients, improving their safety, and in management

and medical supplies in hospitals [140]–[147]. RFID is a
wireless technology that utilizes RF signals to identify
objects with RFID tags. RFID system has two com-
ponents: a tag which is a microchip to store electronic
information and radio antenna to receive signals. There
are two types of RFID systems, passive that require
no battery and are powered by the reader, and an
active RFID system that has a battery to power the
transmission on its own [38].
Passive RFID tags are ideal for IoBNT applications due
to their properties of cost-eﬀectiveness, long battery life,
and low power consumption. RFID technology can be
used as sensors [148], for sensing applications of IoBNT
and can be used as a bio-electronic interface on its
own. RFID antennas that are sensitive to environmental
changes like gas [149], moisture [150] and temperature
[151], have already been developed. The sensing capa-
bilities of the RFID system can be exploited to measure
the chemical and biological values of the human body.
13.56 MHz) or ultrahigh-frequency (UHF, 400 MHz)
bands, has proven adequate in powering the adaptive
threshold rectiﬁer. The HF band is for patch sensors,
whereas the UHF band supports’ implantable sensors
[30]. The sensor consumes 12 µ W to implement an
electrocardiogram analog front end, and an analog-to-
digital converter (ADC). The envisioned Bio-electronic
interface with RFID enabled technology is likely to
have the following components to be operational in the
IoBNT domain. RFID sensor tags that contain chem-
ically coated thin- ﬁlm resonant sensing antenna for
sensing target chemical substances in the environment.
Recent RFID tags are thin and ﬂexible, allowing them
to be embedded easily in the human body for health
monitoring purposes [37].
RFID sensors can be integrated with sensing materials
such as water-absorbing molecules to sense humidity
and carbon nanostructures as gas sensors [152]. The
chemical, physical, or electrical reaction of the sensing
materials in the presence of the sensed parameters mod-
ify their electrical properties (permittivity, conductivity)
resulting in easy-to-observe electrical metrics, such as
a shift of the resonant frequency of the RFID tag
antenna, verifying the simplicity and power eﬃciency of
RFID-enabled sensors [153]. Moreover, RFID tag sen-
sors contain IC microchips to store and process sensed
data. Novel methods for the fabrication of electronic
devices through inkjet printing are getting research
attention in Consumer Electronics (CE). Nanomaterials
like graphene, carbon nanotubes, silver, gold and copper
nanoparticles, conductive polymer and their based ma-
terials are used as inkjet ink to print electronic devices.

A comprehensive review of inkjet-printed nanomaterial-

based ﬂexible radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID)
tag sensors for the Internet of nano things has been
presented in [38]. According to the review, inkjet printed
nanomaterials are cheaper and ﬂexible to be used as

VOLUME 4, 2021

15

Table 3: Summarization of Electronic Tattos and Patches

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

Ref

Device Type

Functionality

Electronic Tattoo

Glucose
Alcohol Sensing

Sensing,

[136]

Communication
Unit

2.4 GHz BLE

Electronic Tattoo

Sodium Sensing

Bluetooth Radio

Electronic Tattoo

Alcohol Sensing

Bluetooth radio

[125]

[137]

Electronic Tattoo

Temperature
light-sensing

and

NFC

[131]

Drug delivery im-
plant

[138]

Bluetooth

Remote
drug
enalapril
of
methotrexate

control
delivery
and

Description

An epidermal biosensing system for
continuous sampling and analysis of
two bioﬂuids i.e., glucose and alcohol.
The electronic tattoo is screen printed
which facilitates sweat stimulations at
anode and ISF at the cathode.

An electronic tattoo with wireless
transmitting capabilities to measure
and transmit sodium levels from per-
spiration of athletes during training.

An iontophoretic-biosensing
system
has been integrated in electronic tattoo
to monitor alcohol consumptions in
patients. An alcohol-oxidase enzyme
and the Prussian Blue
electrode
transducer is used for the detection of
ethanol in the induced sweat.

The tattoo can sense the temperature
and light variations in the human skin
and send it wirelessly to NFC enabled
through NFC technology smartphone

The implant
is capable to deliver
two kinds of drugs namely enalapril
and methotrexate for hypertension and
arthritis patients respectively. The dif-
fusion of drugs across the Nanoﬂuidic
membrane is accomplished through a
low-intensity electric ﬁeld.

wearable electronics as long as they do not interfere
with the biological signaling capability of the human
body. In context of IoT applications, Kassal et al
[36] demonstrates a low-power RFID tag sensor for
potentiometric sensitivity. The RFID tag has the ability
to measure and store the potential of electrode, which
is then wirelessly transferred to a smartphone by near
ﬁeld communication (NFC). The RFID / NFC tagged
chemical sensor is suitable for detecting pH or ion
selective electrodes as part of a network of chemical
sensors for IoT. The practical application of the RFID /
NFC tagging sensor was tested to detect deterioration of
milk by monitoring the pH value of milk over a period of
6 days. The measurements showed the ﬂuctuation of pH
value between 5.89 and 6.10 over the 5 days, averaged
to a pH of 6.03. Therefore, RFID/NFC tag sensors show
potential for IoT applications. Another smart health
proposal using RFID technology has been presented in

[62], where smart bandage manages chronic wounds by
wirelessly transmitting wound pH status to an external
readout unit in the smartphone, using radiofrequency
identiﬁcation (RFID). This is a lightweight, noninvasive
bandage proposal that saves the patient from regular
hospital visits for dressing change. The pH assessment
calculated in smart bandage shows high precision and
accurate results when compared with regular pH meter
in the laboratory. An RFID enabled adhesive skin patch
is demonstrated in [154] which monitors important
biomarkers in sweat and surface temperature. In this
demonstration, a commercial RFID chip is adapted with
minimum components to allow potentiometric sensing of
solutes in sweat, and surface temperature, as read by an
Android smartphone app with 96% accuracy at 50 mM
N a+ (in vitro tests).

16

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

1) SECURITY CONCERNS IN RFID based BIO CYBER
INTERFACE
RFID tags, when used with interconnected devices in
environments like IoT and IoBNT can be easily compro-
mised by attackers. Following are a few possible security
threats that must be considered when using RFID based
technology as bio cyber interfacing option [135]. More
attack types for all types of bio cyber interfaces are
presented in Section V-B

a: HARDWARE TROJAN
Hardware trojans can modify IC of the tag hardware to
allow attacker an access to its software components. This
attack can be launched internally at the design phase of
the RFID tag and can be launched externally through
some sensors or antenna.

b: SIDE CHANNEL ATTACKS
Attacker can use specialized tool to intercept informa-
tion exchange between RFID Tag and its reader and use
it for malicious purpose. This attack can take place even
when the messages are encrypted.

c: TAG CLONING
Attacker can clone the tag and steal sensitive informa-
tion from the tag and even impersonate the tag for
communication with the reader.

d: TAG COUNTERFEITING
In this type of attack, attacker gains access to tag and
modiﬁes its identity using tag manipulation techniques.
Unlike tag cloning this attack can be launched with very
less information.

e: TAG TRACKING
Each RFID tag has a unique identiﬁer number. Attacker
can read the tag identiﬁer attached to a person and track
his/her location at any time.

by using privacy bit technique. Setting the privacy bit
to ’1’ means public scanning of tag is not possible [155].
Anonymous tag: To prevent tracking of the RFID tag
from hackers, an anonymous ID is asssigned to the RFID
tag. Mapping between anonymous ID and genuine ID
should be stored in a look up table [156].
Distance estimation:Identiﬁcation of distance between
tag and reader using signal to noise ratio [157].

C. BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED BIO CYBER INTERFACE
The domain of IoBNT is biologically inspired and
adapts the design of devices and their communication
mechanisms from nature. Therefore researchers are
investigating methods to develop skin-mounted bio-
electronics that support the seamless integration of
biological materials with electrical components of the
IoBNT network. In this direction, some proposals have
been presented by exploiting the biochemical proper-
ties of biologically engineered materials and synthetic
artiﬁcial cells to be used as device components. The
device called bio-cyber interface [25], [63] is not only
capable of sensing but also contains drug reservoirs to
release controlled amounts of the drug upon commands
received from external devices. A bioresorbable device
[158] was fabricated using naturally occurring silk as
the ﬁrst step towards the development of remote control
implantable devices. This device biodegradable device is
used to eliminate Staphylococcus aureus infection from
in-vitro environments by triggering thermal stimulations
and targeted drug delivery operations. The device has
the wireless capability to be turned on wirelessly and
it disappears once it has performed the required task,
thus eliminating the need to remove the device through
surgical procedures.The use of biologically inspired ma-
terials for transmission processes in bio-cyber interfaces
is described in the following scholarly works. A summa-
rization of biologically inspired bio-cyber interfaces is
presented in Table 4.

f: TAG INVENTORYING
RFID tags also contain meta information about the
tag like product code and manufacturers code. This
information contains the type and purpose of RFID tag.
For example in medical applications attacker can get
access to what type of disease a person is suﬀering from,
through tag inventorying attack.
Counter measures Some of the possible countermeasures
for RFID tags are
Side channel analysis:Using side channel signal i.e., tim-
ing, power and spatial temperature to detect hardware
Trojans and malicious ﬁrmware.
Isolating: Protecting RFID tags from external EM waves
through active radio jammers or other isolation tech-
niques [135].
Blocking: Restricting access to the tag by public readers

a: BIOFET BASED MOLECULAR RECIEVER
Field-eﬀect transistors (FETs) are a type of transistors
that use an electric ﬁeld to control the ﬂow of current.
FETs consist of three electrodes namely source, drain,
and gate. In traditional FETs, voltage is applied to the
gate electrode which in turn modulates the conductance
between source and drain electrodes. The conductance is
reﬂected as the voltage-current alteration in the output
channel. FET based technology is now being utilized
for aﬃnity-based electrical sensing using nanomaterials
(nanowires, nanotubes, and graphene) as transducer
[159]. FET transistors can be utilized for
unit [30],
biosensing by replacing the gate electrode with a bio-
functionalized surface called Biorecognition Unit (BU),
for the detection of target molecules in the environment
[79].

VOLUME 4, 2021

17

The BU contains receptors on the surface of the
FET channel which binds ligands with intrinsic charges
which result in accumulation depletion of carriers
in the semiconductor channel, and hence modulation
of conductance and current. The addition of BU in
conventional FETs for molecular recognition makes
them bio-inspired and is therefore called BioFETs.
The bioFETs work on the principle of ligand-receptor
pairing i.e., binding of a ligand (signaling molecule)
to its receptor (receiving molecule) and to produce
a response e.g., signal transmission. There a number
of ligand-receptor pairs that can be used in modeling
BU of bioFETS e.g., antibody-antigen, aptamer-natural
ligand, natural receptor/ligand [160] depending upon
the target molecule. Semiconductor materials like NW
[161], single-walled carbon nanotubes(SWCNT) [162],
graphene [163], molybdenum polymers(MoS2) [164]
and organic nanomaterials like conducting polymers
[165] can be used as transducer channel of bioFETs.
Among NW materials, Silicon nanowire (SiNW) has
been proven to be the best ﬁt for bioFETs due to
their low power consumption, high-speed sampling, high
[166],
integration density, and high sensitivity [140],
[167].
In this direction, Kuscu et al [78] have proposed SiNW
bioFET based molecular antenna which receives infor-
mation molecules as biochemical signals and converts
them into equivalent electrical signals. The proposed
model employs the theory of ligand-receptor binding
and considers microﬂuidic advection-diﬀusion channel
for the propagation of information ligands. The receiver
model consists of three functional units. The Biorecog-
nition Unit (BU) works as the interface for sensing
the concentration of ligands. In the Transducer Unit
ligand-receptor regulates the gate potential of
(TU),
the FET through the ﬁeldeﬀect resultant from their
built-in current charges. The output unit shows the
current ﬂow as a result of the modulated gate potential.
Moreover, an analysis and optimization framework has
been presented by providing a closed-form expression
for fundamental performance metrics, such as SNR
and SEP. The proposed SiNW bioFET is capable of
providing eﬃcient in-device, label free and continuous
processing of sensed molecules.

b: OPTICAL TO CHEMICAL BIOLOGICAL INTERFACE
Grebenstein et al [168] proposed a microscale modulator
to transduce optical signals into chemical signals. The
modulator is realized using synthetically engineered
E.Coli bacteria that express protons into the environ-
ment upon stimulation from an external light source.
Light-emitting diode (LED) of the modulator uses
proton pump gloeorhodopsin (GR) to express light. The
E.Coli bacteria change the pH level of their surrounding
environment as a chemical reaction to an external light

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

source. The proposed testbed achieves higher data rates
on the order of 1 bit/min as opposed to previous
proposals with data rates of 1 bit/hour.

c: REDOX BASED CHEMICAL TO ELECTRICAL
INTERFACE
New research in biology has recommends the usage
of redox as a global signaling modality. Authors in
[169] have adopted an approach that is inspired by
sonar, which access the redox information through
collaborative electrochemical probing. Authors further
utilize attuned electrical inputs that are coupled with
diﬀusible redox mediators (electron shuttles) to access
redox information in a local environment and generate
complex but interpretable electrical output signatures.
Redox (Oxidation-Reduction) reaction is also utilized
for biochemical-electronic transduction mechanisms in
a number of proposals [170]–[174]. A wet lab interface
prototype has been proposed recently in [173] for trans-
ducing chemical signals into electrical signals by the
virtue of redox modality. The nterface prototype device
consists of a dual ﬁlm with inner ﬁlm contains hydrogel-
based ﬁlm entrapping E.Coli bacteria and the outer ﬁlm
consists of a redox capacitor to amplify electrical signals.
These cells are engineered as reporters, which respond
to the presence of a certain molecule (signaling molecule
AI-2) by converting the redox inactive substrate 4-
Aminophenyl β-D-galactopyranoside (PAPG) molecules
into redox-active p-aminophenol (PAP).

d: FRET BASED UPLINK/DOWNLINK BIO CYBER
INTERFACE
FRET (Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer) mech-
anism has been adopted by El-atty et al [175] to model
uplink/downlink bio-cyber interface for the Internet of
bio nano things. In FRET-based optical sensing, bio-
cyber interface is designed for targeted drug delivery
applications of IoBNT. The downlink of bio-cyber in-
terface is designed by adopting spreading principals of
SIR (Susceptible, Infected, Recovered) epidemic scheme
and decode forward (DF) basis. Three types of nanoma-
chines are used in the downlink model to realize the
targeted drug delivery namely nanoreciever, nano trans-
mitter (Infected) and nanorelay(Susceptible) according
to SIR epidemic scheme. The recovered nanomachines
are ones that have transmitted their exciton to the
nano receiver. The uplink is designed by considering
two types of nanomachines namely nanosensors and
nanoactuators. Uplink signal notiﬁes the medical server
about successful drug delivery through bioluminescence
reaction.

18

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

1) SECURITY CONCERNS IN BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED
BIO CYBER INTERFACE
Currently the research bio cyber interface security is
immature and there is a minimum published literature
in this ﬁeld. [176] have presented the possibility of ML
based adversarial attacks for biologically inspired bio
cyber interface which are presented below. Details of
possible generic attacks on bio cyber interfaces can be
found in Section V-B.

a: MACHINE LEARNING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS
In the case of bio-luminescent or thermal signaling
based bio cyber interface adversaries might launch an
attack by manipulating the internet-enabled parame-
ters. By manipulating the parameters, attackers can
cause inappropriate amount of drug release, initiate self-
annihilation of drug molecules and modify monitoring
information provide by bio chemical processes. In redox
based bio cyber interfaces, changing the input electrical
signal can lead the capacitor charging and unwanted
redox activity such as activating/deactivating the redox
substrate to aﬀect enzyme production. Bio FETs work
on the principals of ligand binding through charging
of electrodes. The attacker can launch sentry attack to
repel required ligands or black hole attack to attract
unwanted ligands to bind to the receptor to aﬀect the
current control. The changes in external current control
can cause the Bio FET based bio cyber interface to
exhibit unwanted behavior.
Countermeasures The attacks related to biologically
inspired bio cyber interfaces can be categorized as ML-
adversarial attacks. Possible countermeasures to ML
adversarial attacks are [42]
Data sanitization: This process refers to pre-processing,
validating all the input data, and rejecting the harmful
samples.
Adversarial training: Inclusion of adversary information
in the training samples to recognize attack vector.
Defence distillation: Creating secondary ML model with
less sensitivity and more general results.
Diﬀerentail privacy: A cryptographic mechanism of
adding noise to susceptible features of data. Hormonic
encryption. A cryptographic mechanism to perform
computations over ciphered data to generate encrypted
result.

D. SUMMARY OF BIO CYBER INTERFACE
CLASSIFICATION
It is obvious from the above-mentioned literature that
there are a lot of possibilities for designing a bio-cyber
interface. The design model of the bio-cyber interface
primarily depends on the application scenario. For ex-
ample, a bio-cyber interface design and components for
sensing applications will be diﬀerent from drug delivery
applications. Our take on the choice of bio-cyber inter-
face option goes in the favor of bio-inspired interfaces.

The reason being biocompatible in nature and the re-
search in these interfaces in line with the direction of
IoBNT. Extensive in-vitro and wet-lab experiments are
required to validate the theoretical proposals for the bio-
cyber interface.

V. SECURITY IN IOBNT
The advent of skin implanted bio-electronics and the
IoBNT paradigm will not only open up a plethora of
novel biomedical applications but also its wireless con-
nection capability will enable the adversaries to utilize it
malevolently. Connecting the intra-body biological envi-
ronment with the cyber domain through bio-electronic
devices will provide the attackers with an apparent
opportunity to devise new terrorist mechanisms to harm
the patient remotely. Maliciously accessing the human
body through the internet to steal personal informa-
tion or to create new types of diseases by malevolent
programming of bio-electronic devices and intra-body
nanonetworks is termed as bio-cyber terrorism [25]. Bio-
cyber terrorism can take advantage of wirelessly access-
ing the human body to launch fatal and life-threatening
attacks from a remote site. Therefore security features
have to be embedded either in a separate component of
the bio-electronic device, which may enlarge the size of
the device or might be infeasible in some applications.
Another possibility is to delegate security services to
external devices in close proximity with sophisticated
resources as compared to bioelectronics devices. For
example, in a similar ﬁeld of IMD (Implantable Medical
Device), some researchers propose to assign security
functionality to an external device like Cloaker or Med-
Mon [177]. Nonetheless, the bio-electronic device must
execute a lightweight authentication mechanism at least
once to establish a secure connection with external
devices. Bio-electronic devices will also be linked to a
gateway device (such as a smartphone) to send and
receive information from the healthcare practitioner.
Because of the technological diﬀerences, this section
discusses the security needs for nanonetworks and bio-
cyber interfaces separately. The security goals, regard-
less of the underlying technological variations, remain
the same. The STRIDE threat approach can be used
to model security threats against IoBNT. STRIDE is
the acronym for Spooﬁng, Tampering, Repudiation, and
Information Disclosure, Denial of Service and Elevation
of privilege. These six categories present a broad classi-
ﬁcation of threats and can be further divided into other
related threats. Each threat category is related to a secu-
rity goal: Spooﬁng-Authentication, Tampering-Integrity,
Repudiation, Non-Repudiation, Information Disclosur,
Conﬁdentiality, Denial of Service- Availability, and El-
evation of privileges-Authorization [178], which is pre-
sented in Table. 5.
Authentication (Au): Authentication ensures that the
identity of each communicating party is established be-

VOLUME 4, 2021

19

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

Table 4: Existing proposals for Biologically Inspired Interface Devices in Academic Literature

Name of Device

Transduction Mechanism

Description

Biologically Inspired Bio Cyber In-
terface [63]

to

Electrical
signal
biomolecules.
responsive
Biochemical
through
phenomenon.

biochemical
through Photoresponsive
Thermal
-
biomolecules
electrical
signal
Bioluminescence

and

the

to

SiNW bioFET based Molecular re-
ceiver [78]

Biological to electrical signal conver-
sion through bioFET technology.

Biological Optical-to-Chemical Sig-
nal Conversion Interface [168]

Optical to chemical signal through
illumination eﬀects.

Redox based Chemical to Electrical
Interface [173]

Chemical to electrical signal conver-
sion through redox modality.

FRET-based
[175]

biocyber

interface

Optical to electrical and vice versa
signal conversion through FRET
Technology

- A theoretical model for bio cy-
ber interface has been proposed as
an interface between biological and
electrical domains. The model com-
prises of transduction units that
convert an electrical signal into bio-
chemical signals through the bio-
luminescence process and biochem-
ical signals into electrical signals
through photoresponsive and ther-
mal responsive biomolecules.

- The Silicon Nanowire (SiNW) is
used as the conductive nanomaterial
for a molecular antenna. Microﬂu-
idic channel has been considered as
a propagation medium for informa-
tion molecules to ﬂow from trans-
mitter to receiver in unidirectionally
through diﬀusion.

- A biological signal conversion in-
terface is designed based on E Coli
bacteria that can change the pH of
the surroundings by pumping pro-
tons in response to external
light
stimuli.

- The interface prototype device
consists of a dual ﬁlm with inner
ﬁlm contains hydrogel-based ﬁlm
entrapping E.Coli bacteria and the
outer ﬁlm consists of a redox capac-
itor to amplify electrical signals.

- FRET technology has been uti-
lized to model the uplink/downlink
biocyber interface for targeted drug
delivery applications of IoBNT. SIR
epidemic model is adopted to model
downlink and the bioluminescent re-
action has been utilized to generate
an uplink signal.

20

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

Table 5: STRIDE Threat Model Categories, related Security Goals and Attack Possibilities in IoBNT

Security Goal

Possible IoBNT Scenario

Threat

Spooﬁng

Authentication

Tampering

Integrity

Repudiation

Non-Repudiation

Information Disclosure

Conﬁdentiality

Denial of Service

Availability

Elevation of Privileges

Authorization

Security breach by interception of communica-
tion between bio-electronic device and the smart-
phone.

The dosage prescribed by the medical server can
be altered during transmission by the attacker
and drug is released according to altered values.

Deletion of access logs to remove traces of mali-
cious user activities.

Security breach by interception of communication
between bio-electronic device and smartphone.

Inability to transmit irregular vital signs of an
elderly or unconscious patient who is solely de-
pendant on the bio-electronic device for commu-
nication with the medical server.

An internal attacker can misuse access privileges
to steal or tamper information.

fore executing any operation. Moreover, authentication
also ensures that the data is coming from the authorized
source and unauthorized users cannot access or modify
the data. Authentication needs to be done on users as
well as a message [29], [179].
Integrity (I): Integrity ensures that the message ex-
changed between legitimate entities is not tampered or
modiﬁed by unauthorized entities.
Non- Repudiation (NR): In the traditional networking
paradigm, all the communication transactions are logged
to track the network anomalies and gain the attacker’s
proﬁle in case the attacker tries to misuse his/her priv-
ileges. Nonrepudiation can be violated if the attacker
gets access to the logs and delete the records to remove
traces.
Conﬁdentiality (C): Conﬁdentiality ensures that the
attacker should not learn the content of the message
exchanged between the sender and receiver. The data
must only be accessible to authorized personnel upon
authentication through some mechanism priory.
Availability (A): This goal ensures that the services and
communication of the device are always available on
request.
Authorization (Auth): Authorization property ensures
that only those entities can execute a speciﬁc operation
that has privileges to order it. Authorization requires
that an entity must have been authenticated previously
through the regular login (ID, password) procedure to
establish the identiﬁcation.

A. ATTACK TYPES IN NANONETWORKS
This section presents the possible attacks and existing
proposals related to the nanonetworks. A summarization
of security proposals for nanonetworks is presented in
Table 6.

1) EAVESDROPPING
Eavesdropping refers to passively listening to the trans-
mission between two nodes. The listened information
can be stored and later used maliciously to launch
attacks. Eavesdropping in nanonetworks can take place
when two legitimate nanomachines are exchanging mes-
senger molecules and a nearby malicious nanomachine
intercepts the messenger molecules silently. The passive
eavesdropper can be detected in nanonetworks by a
mechanism such as stochastic geometry, distance esti-
mation techniques. The active eavesdropper might ab-
sorb the messenger molecules in the case where MC is
used as a communication medium, this attack might be
prevented through secrecy capacity. Other anticipated
eavesdropping prevention mechanisms include beam-
forming, game theory (collation formation games), and
artiﬁcial noise generation.
Several proposals have been demonstrated to detect
eavesdropper location and secure the nano communica-
tion paradigm from eavesdropping attacks.
Islam et al [180] proposed a secure channel for Molecu-
lar communication. Firstly, a Diﬃe–Hellman algorithm-
based secure key is exchanged between sender nanoma-
chine and receiver nanomachine. Then hardware cipher-

VOLUME 4, 2021

21

ing is performed using the secret key. As MC is a
resource-constrained paradigm, therefore, Exclusive OR
(XOR) cipher is used in this work due to its simple im-
plementation and inexpensive computation. Moreover,
hardware ciphering used in this work further reduces the
associated time, instead of its software counterpart. The
results are presented through simulation. In our opinion,
the proposed method is simple and computationally less
expensive but the overall security is compromised as MC
needs more mathematically resilient models for security.
Guo et al [181] have proposed a mathematical model
for eavesdropper detection and localization in a random
walk channel. This is the only work in MC that con-
siders the detection of an absorbing malicious receiver
in a random walk channel. The authors have chosen
transmitter side detection of the eavesdropper because
the MC channels are 1-D and receivers cannot aﬀect
the transmission and secondly the molecules absorbed at
the receiver are quite small that do not aid in detecting
eavesdropper presence. Simulation has shown accurate
results in detecting the eavesdropper’s presence.
Recently a proposal for physical layer authentication for
Diﬀusion Based Molecular Communication (DbMC) has
een proposed in [182]. The channel impulse response of
1-D DbMC has been exploited to detect transmitting
eavesdropper in the transmission region.

2) BLACKHOLE ATTACK
Blackhole attack refers to the attack where malicious
nodes spread attractant molecules to draw the network
traﬃc towards a diﬀerent location from the intended
target. Blackhole attack is similar to sinkhole attack
in WSNs but the sinkhole attack disrupts the routing
process while the blackhole attack physically moves
legitimate nodes away from the target. When it comes to
blackhole attacks in nanonetworks, there are a variety of
approaches that can be taken. For example in scenario of
artiﬁcial immune system support application, the white
blood cells that are responsible for detecting and tack-
ling with the infection, can be attracted by malicious
nodes to stop them from detecting an infection in the
host system.
Blackhole attack and its countermeasure using two ap-
proaches, Bayes rule and simple threshold approach for
MC have been proposed in [183]. Blackhole attacks
are type of DoS (Denial of Service) attack in which
nanomachines can be drawn away for target e-g in case
of targeted drug delivery the actuator nodes might not
reach the target due to Blackhole attack.

3) SENTRY ATTACK
Sentry attacks are opposite to Blackhole attacks where
legitimate nanomachines are impeded away from the
target, due to a large number of repellent molecules
spread around the target location by malicious nodes.
This kind of attack can be fatal in medical applications

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

where instant lifesaving action needs to be taken e-
g nanorobots that are designated to prevent bleeding
by repairing veins are attacked by a sentry to im-
pede from reaching the target. Sentry attack and its
countermeasure using two approaches, Bayes rule, and
simple threshold approach have been proposed in [183].
Giaretta et al [183] have proposed a blackhole attack
and sentry attack for MC. The authors have described
two scenarios where (L-BNTs) Legitimate Bio-Nano
Things are repelled from reaching the targeted site in
targeted drug delivery application, thus keeping Bio-
Nano Things from performing the normal operation.
In the second scenario called black hole attack, M-
BNTs (Malicious Bio-Nano Things) are attracted to the
targeted site which can lead in a delivery unwanted
dosage of medication in the targeted area. Next,
in
the proposal, a countermeasure that enables the Bio-
NanoThings to make decisions and cooperate in or-
der to overcome blackhole and sentry attacks during
target localization is proposed. The mechanisms are
based on known cellular decision processes using Bayes’
rule as well as artiﬁcially designed genetic circuits that
evaluate chemical signal threshold (this will be known
as Thresholdbased decision process), which are both
lightweight enabling them to be easily implementable
on resourceconstrained Bio- NanoThings. Results show
that the proposed countermeasure is eﬀective against
the attack, where L-BNTs successfully move towards the
target.

4) SPOOFED, ALTERED, REPLAY MESSAGE ATTACK
This attack can be launched by malicious nodes by
spooﬁng legitimate nodes identities to become trustable
and enter the network. Furthermore, the malicious nodes
then send fake messages in the network and alter the
data. In the case of nanonetworks, consider an exem-
plary communication scenario where a legtimate node
’Alice’ is transmitting messages to receiver ’Bob’. Attack
can be launched by an intruder ’Eave" impersonates to
be Alice and tries to control Bob by sending malicious
commands.

A distance-dependent path loss based authentication
scheme for nanonetworks using the terahertz band has
been proposed in [184] for spooﬁng attacks. Mahboob
et al
[184] have proposed an authentication scheme
for terahertz band EMbased nanonetworks. This work
exploits physical layer attribute i.e., distance-dependent
path loss for authentication at nano receiver. More-
over, an algorithmic solution has been proposed for
the authentication scheme. Experimentation veriﬁcation
of authentication scheme via tera hertz time-domain
spectroscopy setup at QMUL, UK.

B. ATTACK TYPES IN BIO CYBER INTERFACE
To ensure an end-to-end protection of IoBNT applica-
tions, the security of these bio-electronic devices is a pre-

22

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

Table 6: SECURITY PROPOSALS FOR NANONETWORKS IN LITERATURE

Ref.

Communication Medium

Type of Attack

Proposal Description

Secure
for
Communications [180].

Channel
Molecular

Molecular
tion

Eavesdropper localization
in random walk channels
[181]

Molecular
tion

Congestion Control
in
Molecular Cyber-Physical
Systems [185].

Molecular
tion

Communica-

Eavesdropping

Communica-

Eavesdropping

Communica-

Congestion

Encryption
using
Diﬃe–Hellman algorithm.

Eavesdropper
detection
and localization by reverse
estimating its location.

Congestion detection algo-
rithm for Diﬀusion Based
MC.

Vulnerabilities
Security
and
Countermeasures
for Target Localization
Bio-NanoThings
in
Communication Networks
[183].

Physical Layer Authenti-
cation in Nano Networks
at Terahertz Frequencies
for Biomedical Applica-
tions [184]

Molecular
tion

Communica-

Black hole, Sentry Attacks Construction of decision
two
rule
threshold
the
legitimate

process
approaches, Bayes
simple
and
approach
robustness of
nanomachines.

using

for

Nano
Communications

Electromagnetic

Spoofed, Altered, Replay
message attack.

distance-dependent
based

A
path
loss
authentication scheme.

In-sequence molecule de-
livery over an aqueous
medium [186]

Molecular
tion

Communica-

Desynchronization

Molecular
tion

Communica-

Eavesdropping

Impulse
Channel
Response-based Physical
Layer Authentication in a
Diﬀusion-based Molecular
Communication
System
[182]

A formal model
for in-
sequence message delivery
for MC which can pos-
sibly prevent Desynchro-
nization attack.

impulse re-
The channel
sponse of
the physical
layer has been exploited to
propose an authentication
scheme for the detection of
transmitting eavesdropper
in the broadcast region.

requisite. In order to pursue a preliminary investigation
for types of attacks that are possible in bio-electronic
devices, the attack vectors are explored in related ﬁelds
like WBAN. (Wireless Body Area Network) [28], IMD
(Implantable Medical Devices) [178] and Wireless sensor
networks [187]. This investigation has helped us to indi-
viduate attacks that are likely to occur in bio-electronic
devices. The major objective of a bio-electronic device
in the IoBNT healthcare application is to enable two-
way communication between intra-body nanonetworks
and healthcare provider. The communication mode is
divided into two categories:
inbound and outbound,
making it easier to recognize and categorize attacks.

Figure 6 presents possible attack types in case of bio
cyber interface.

1) EAVESDROPPING
Eavesdropping is a passive attack that enables the at-
tacker to covertly gain access to conﬁdential informa-
tion. The bio-electronic device might possess critical in-
formation like patient identiﬁcation information, clinical
history, disease detail, treatment detail, patient location,
and battery status, etc. This conﬁdential information
can be exploited not only to breach a patient’s privacy,
but also to launch other types of active attacks. Eaves-
dropping can be realized during the communication of

VOLUME 4, 2021

23

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

Figure 6: Types of possible attacks for Bio Cyber Interface

bio-electronic devices with biological nanonetworks and
during communication with the gateway devices.
Countermeasures:Traditional networking paradigms em-
ploy encryption schemes like RSA and DES, to pre-
vent against eavesdropping attacks. These encryption
schemes are eﬀective for the prevention of eavesdropping
attacks, but these are computationally expensive and
must be adopted after analyzing the resources of bio-
electronic devices [188]. Lightweight encryption schemes
like Elliptic Curve cryptography has been proven to be
eﬀective for resource-constrained devices [189], also a
review on other lightweight encryption schemes has been
presented in [190].

2) REPLAY ATTACK
This type of attack can be launched after a successful
eavesdropping attempt. The eavesdropped authentica-
tion sequence of the legitimate devices can be replayed
to get illegitimate access into the communication chan-
nel. Moreover, an attacker can copy previously sent
commands from legitimate users to replay the message
again which in the case of bio-electronic can have a
number of consequences like drug release multiple times
which harm patient’s health, unnecessary and repeated
queries for patients physiological values to engage and
deplete the resources, etc.
Countermeasures: Authentication schemes, Intrusion de-

tection, delegate authentication to external devices. (See
Section VI)

3) MAN-IN-THE-MIDDLE (MITM) ATTACK
A MITM attack is projected through illegitimate devices
when they become part of communication between le-
gitimate transmitting devices, and legitimate devices are
spoofed to believe that they are communicating with the
authorized device. In the case of bio-electronic devices,
the attacker must be in the vicinity of the patient to
launch the MITM attack. From the communication per-
spective, the MITM attack can be achieved by replaying
the legitimate authentication sequence to get access to
the communication channel. MITM is the type of an
active eavesdropping attack where the attacker not only
listens to the communication but also alters the data
and communication sequence.
Countermeasures:Traditionally MITM is prevented us-
ing encryption schemes. A lightweight scheme to pre-
vent implantable medical devices from MITM attacks
has been proposed that utilize chaotic generators for
randomness and a signature algorithm to prevent third-
party interference [191].

4) RESOURCE DEPLETION (RD)
Bio-electronic devices are essentially capable of perform-
ing in-situ [77] operations and for this purpose they con-

24

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

tain built-in processing unit, memory unit, and power
unit. However, these units are only able to perform
trivial tasks due to resource limitation in terms of space,
power consumption and computation complexity, which
comes with their minute size. The attacker can cause
resource depletion by sending multiple authentication
messages with the wrong credentials to occupy the pro-
cesser. Each authentication request is processed which
exploits the memory to create access logs and drains
the battery. Moreover, bogus communication packets
sent by MITM can utilize and drain the resources.
Countermeasures: Access control mechanisms,Anomaly
detection system,user notiﬁcation,and use of recharge-
able batteries. Moreover, mitigation from resource de-
pletion attacks can be achieved by using passive wireless
communication media like RF signals and the use of
novel energy preserving techniques like ZPD (ZeroPower
Defence) [192].

5) INJECTION ATTACKS
Injection attack can be performed by the illegitimate
users in three ways, insertion, alteration and replication
[135]. In insertion attack, hacker generates new seem-
ingly legitimate data packet into the communication
channel. In alteration attack, hacker captures the data
packet from communication link, tamper the values of
dosage commands from the inbound channel and alter
the values of bodily parameters in the outbound chan-
nel. In replication attack, attacker re-sends previously
executed commands into the system. Insecure commu-
nication between bio-electronic and gateway devices can
result in an injection attack. This attack can have fatal
consequences on the patient. For example in a scenario
where a diabetic patient is fully dependent on wirelessly
controlled insulin and glucose monitoring pump [73],
the alteration in dosage values received from health
care provider can result in hazardous consequences like
underdose can cause hyperglycemia and overdose can
result in hypoglycemia both of which can be fatal [193].
. Countermeasures: Careful mitigation strategies are
needed to be designed which include authentication
protocols [194], access control mechanisms [178]Intru-
sion Detection, Input validation,and Authorization tech-
niques.

6) DEVICE TAMPERING
This attack is majorly launched in the bio-electronic de-
vices by local attackers, due to low transmission range of
bio-electronic devices. The device can be reprogrammed
or physically replaced to perform the malicious tasks
that are not intended by the device in the ﬁrst place.
This attack can also be launched by accessing the device
remotely by sending fake ﬁrmware update and device
upgrade message that alter the software conﬁguration
of the device to perform maliciously [195]. This at-
tacker can alter the original treatment prescribed by the

healthcare provider and replace it with false treatment
which can cause life threatening consequences. Counter-
measures:Tamper prooﬁng and self destruction, device
hardening, and Physically unclonable Function (PUF).

7) DENIAL OF SERVICE (DOS) ATTACK
Denial of service attack causes disruption and blockage
of information ﬂow between legitimate communicating
parties. An attacker tries to suspend services of the bio-
electronic device to make it unavailable for communica-
tion and processing. DoS can be launched in the form
of any of the above-mentioned attacks. The DoS attacks
such as battery drainage, sleep deprivation and outage
attacks can be performed by hackers after getting access
to the devices. As the power source of these devices is
limited and attackers can send an unlimited number of
messages, causing the battery to drain. In outage attacks
the device can be made unavailable by stopping it from
carrying its essential functions, behaving abnormally or
premature shutdown. These types of attacks can pose
serious consequences for the patients [135] . Moreover,
the hacker can intentionally drop the forwarded packets,
making the recipient deprived of requested data. Coun-
termeasures: Intrusion Detection

8) MALWARE ATTACKS
Malware attack is another type of network attack that
is common in IoT based applications. Malware attack
is used to remote control a distant device maliciously,
steal sensitive information from a device and use it to
launch further malware attacks. A system infected with
malware attack may start running certain programs
automatically like sending messages, re-conﬁguring in-
ternal software and turning of anti virus. In case of
IoBNT application an infected bio cyber interface might
start dispensing inappropriate amount of drugs, thus
causing harm to the patient. Some of the popular mal-
ware attacks that are still active in IoT environments
are Mirai, Echobot, Reaper, Emotet, Gamut and Nucer
[196]. There diﬀerent types of malware attacks, but
malware attacks speciﬁc to IoBNT applications can be
botnets, rootkit, ransomware,and keylogger attack.
Botnets: In this type of attack, attacker gains access to
a number interconnected devices by launching malware
and further control them to steal information, launch
DDoS (Destributed Denial of Service) attack to launch
unplanned system downtime and even sell network ac-
cess to other cyber criminals.
Ransomeware: The attacker gets hold of the device by
encrypting user’s data and locks the device,thus, re-
stricting access of the owner to the device. The attacker
than demands for some ransome amount by displaying
messages on the device screen.
Keylogger: It is a malicious piece of code that records
the keystrokes of user to gain access to ID and pass-
words. This attack is dangerous than brute force attacks

VOLUME 4, 2021

25

and strong passwords does not provide prtection against
this malware.
Rootkit: A malicious piece of code is installed on IoT
device that hides its identity to steal data, reconﬁgure
the device, or control the system by executing mali-
cious commands. This kind of attack is most dangerous
as it bypasses all the security mechanisms and suc-
cessfully hides its presence. Countermeasures: Access
control, device hardening and system monitoring, An-
tivirus,Intrusion Detection. (See Section VI)

9) FIRMWARE ATTACKS
Firmware updates are necessary in order to ensure
proper device functioning. The ﬁrmware updates can
be done remotely or directly(through usb port). An
advertisement is usually broadcast on the network when-
ever a new version of the ﬁrmware update is available.
Hackers can send false ﬁrmware update requests to
the users in order to access the ﬁrmware and pro-
gram it with malicious code. Fake ﬁrmware updates
can cause fatal consequences to the patients. Coun-
termeasures: Firmware Encryption, periodic ﬁrmware
updates,malicious ﬁrmware detection

C. SUMMARY ON THE SECURITY OF IOBNT
The protection of IoBNT based systems is crucial as
the consequences of security compromise can be detri-
mental. A summarization of existing security proposals
for nanonetworks is presented in Table 6. Apart from
the software attacks mentioned in the above section,
there exist some other attributes can eﬀect the security
of IoBNT. The origin from where the attack has been
instantiated can help in providing some insights into the
proﬁle and goals of the attacker. Local attacks require
the attacker to be close to the physical location of the
patient. Local attackers can replace the bio-electronics
device with a maliciously programmed device, can eaves-
drop the communication between bio-electronic devices
and gateway devices to gather information to launch
an active attack remotely. Remote attacks are launched
outside the premises of the bio-electronic devices. These
attacks can be launched by accessing the smartphone of
the patient that is delegated a gateway device, to send
malware and reconﬁguration requests to reprogram the
device. In wireless communication, attackers can evade
the system in two possible ways: active and passive.
Passive attack is launched by an attacker silently with-
out revealing their presence in the system. A passive
attack can violate the privacy of the patient and can
reveal conﬁdential information about the device. By just
intercepting the communication, a passive attacker can
gather information like the patient’s location, diagnosed
disease, type of treatment, etc. This information can be
used to further mount active attacks. Active attacker not
only enables the attacker to read the transmission but
also uses this information to disrupt the communication.

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

The active attacker can modify the messages in transit,
drop the messages so they do not arrive at the desti-
nation, block the communication, reprogram the device
and even induce a shock to the patient by manipulating
the device. As the major application of area of IoBNT
is bio medicine, therefore, breach in security means life
threatening consequences.

VI. POTENTIAL MITIGATION STRATEGIES
This section discusses the network security methods
employed in typical wireless networks, as well as the
potential for each measure to be applied to the domain
of bio-electronic devices.

A. CRYPTOGRAPHIC MECHANISMS
Cryptographic primitives are eﬃcient security mecha-
nisms that protect the wireless channel from attacks
that cause device tampering and information disclo-
sure. Moreover, cryptographic mechanisms enforce ac-
cess control to ensure that information is accessible
to authorized entities only. Cryptographic solutions de-
pend upon key management and distribution. There
are three possible ways in which key distribution can
take place i.e., unkeyed, symmetric key and public-key
cryptography. Unkeyed cryptography does not use any
key and is mainly implemented as hash functions or
one-way permutations. This scheme can be implemented
using Message Authentication Codes, pseudorandom
sequences, block ciphers, and identiﬁcation primitives
[178]. In asymmetric key distribution schemes, a secret
key is shared between communicating parties which is
used to generate an authentication token. The authenti-
cation token is used to access the device and to encrypt
the communication. In symmetric cryptography key
distribution can take in two ways; pre key distribution
and on-demand key distribution. In pre key distribution,
key is pre-loaded inside the communicating entities. Pre
key distribution is eﬃcient in the environments where
number of communication parties is less and ﬁxed. On
demand key distribution is suitable for distributed and
scalable environments. In asymmetric or public cryptog-
raphy two sets of keys i.e., public and private, need to
be shared among communicating entities. This scheme
depends upon high message exchange for authentication
procedure which makes it expensive in terms of com-
putation and power consumption. Additionally, ciphers
in this scheme result in complex circuits that demand
high computation resources [197], [198]. Due to these
limitations, public-key cryptography is not feasible for
resource-constrained devices. The feasibility and appli-
cation of cryptographic schemes for bio-electronic device
security are questionable. The envisioned bio-electronic
devices have limited memory and maximum of which
will be occupied by biomedical functionality. Inclusion
of expensive security primitives is not possible in the
current situation; however additional memory chips can

26

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

be integrated into the device for security functionality.
This might also not be recommendable as it will increase
the size of the device [178].

B. DEVICE HARDENING
Device hardening and system monitoring has been
pointed out in [199] to mitigate malware attacks. The
device hardening refers to restrict unauthorized access
to the device by blocking unused communication ports
and denying access to unknown IP addresses, blocking
reboot from alternate media. In security monitoring the
event logs of network traﬃc to and from bio cyber
interface must be continuously monitored to detect an
anomaly at early stages.

C. DELEGATION TO EXTERNAL DEVICES
As discussed above that
limited memory of bio-
electronic devices restraint them from executing sophis-
ticated security solutions. Some authors in a similar
domain of resource-constrained devices have suggested
delegating a part or all of the security functionality
to external devices. These devices will not be part of
the human body but can be thought of as wearable
bracelets, watches or even a smartphone that patient
carries all the time. Delegation of security to an ex-
ternal device will allow using expensive encryption,
cryptographic and accessing control mechanisms. These
external devices will work as an authenticating device
that checks the incoming requests before transmitting
them to the bio-electronic device. Some proposals in this
direction can be found for security in IMD like MedMon
[177], IMD Cloaker [200] and RFID Guardian [201]. The
idea of using an external device has some drawbacks
as well. The external device can itself be compromised
and impersonated by malicious entities to communicate
with the bio-electronic device. Moreover, if the device
is lost the bio-electronic device will become unavail-
able to queries and commands from remote healthcare
providers.

D. INTRUSION DETECTION (ID)
There are two types of intrusion detection schemes;
signature-based intrusion detection and anomaly-based
intrusion detection. In signature-based ID schemes new
data is confronted with the pre-recorded intrusions
dataset and in case of match countermeasure mecha-
nisms are activated. Intrusion detection techniques are
used as a classical security solution to thwart DoS
attacks. DoS attack can be launched in bio-electronic
devices by depleting the limited resources and ultimately
making the device unavailable. Anomaly detection in
wireless communication is generally performed by eval-
uating observable wireless patterns (time, frequency,
location, etc.). Hei et. al. [202] have proposed a Sup-
port Vector Machine (SVM) based algorithm to defend
against RD and DoS attacks. The application runs

on the patient’s smartphone and takes ﬁve types of
input data to carry out detection: reader action, a time
interval of reader action, time of the day, location, day of
the week. The classiﬁer is trained with regular input pat-
terns. When the new request comes in, SVM validates
the input data and reply accordingly. Access is granted
if the data is valid, access is denied if the credential
is wrong and if a request is repeated frequently with
wrong credentials, the application sends sleep command
to IMD and turns oﬀ to external requests. Similar to pro-
posals of IMD and other resource-constrained devices,
intrusion detection techniques can be implemented for
bio-electronic that employ active jamming techniques to
deny access to an adversary. Research eﬀorts in security
are now utilizing Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) for intrusion
detection systems. There are three main catagories of AI
that can be utilized to detect intrusions in a system.
Supervised learning category can include techniques
based on SVM and naïve bayes classiﬁer, the second
category is the semi supervised learning that includes
techniques such as K-means and K-nearest neighbours
and the third category id deep learning. A review on AI
based ID techniques for software deﬁned wireless sensor
netwroks can be found in [203]. An intrusion detection
system for wireless nanosensors has been proposed [204]
that aims at detecting malicious nodes and data. This
proposal is based on a literature survey and does not
provide satisfactory experimental results.

E. ACCESS CONTROL
Access control mechanisms enforce rules and policies to
prevent unauthorized access to the devices. Most of the
access control schemes revolve around the concepts of a
subject, object, and rights. A subject is an entity that
requests to access the device, an object is an entity that
needs to be accessed e.g., ﬁle, data, image, etc. Rights
are the permissible operations that can be performed by
a subject e.g., read, write, modify, etc. Access control
policies are applied to the subjects after authentication,
which provides the identiﬁcation of requester and access
grant decision is made on the basis of requestor identity.
Two popular access control methods are ACLs (Access
Control Lists) and PKI (Public Key Infrastructure)
[178]. ACL is based on discretionary access control that
provides a matrix containing subjects, objects they can
access and rights that they possess over the objects.
While PKI is a certiﬁcate-based solution, the requester
receives an authentication certiﬁcate in each session of
connection establishment with the object. The most
popular authentication schemes in access control are
RBAC(Role based Access Control) and ABAC(Role
based Access Control). In RBAC, access is granted over
the object according to the rights of roles. Where as
in ABAC access to an objected is granted after evalu-
ating attributes of the requester. Another light weight
authentication sceme for IoT environments is ACE

VOLUME 4, 2021

27

(Authentication and Authorization for Constrained En-
vironments) [205]. Access control mechanisms can be
used in parallel with other encryption or cryptographic
measures.

F. COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY SPECIFIC
SECURITY
Bio cyber interfaces can communicate with gateway
devices using a number of communication technologies
such as Bluetooth, 4G and other next generation tech-
nologies,BLE, and Wi-Fi, to name a few. Each com-
munication technology poses security threat to user’s.
Therefore, security in communication technologies must
be preserved.

G. HARDWARE BASED SOLUTIONS
To counter the device tampering attack, some hard-
ware based solution can be implemented [135]. Tam-
per prooﬁng and self destruction: Use of tamper proof
packages for bio electronic devices and execution of
self destruction mode upon encountering a physical
attack. PUF(Physically Unclonable Function): PUF is
a function in which a noisy fuction is added to the
IC(Intergrated Circuit) of the device. PUF is unclonable
and tamper-proof. Moreover, PUFs has unique object
identiﬁcation and authentication which can detect un-
intentended changes in the IC.

H. CONSUMER TRAINING
End users i.e., patients,clinicians or care takers must be
given training and demo sessions about the possible risks
of this technology [42]. Moreover, users must be notiﬁed
if an attack is detected to take part in defense by turning
of the device.

I. SUMMARY OF ATTACK MITIGATION TECHNIQUES
Along with the implementation of countermeasures, be-
low are listed some of the general security guidelines for
a secure holistic IoBNT eco-system [135].

• IoBNT is envisioned to use the IoT communnica-
tion backbone for communication via internet. The
already established ﬁeld of IoT provides security so-
lutions for each layer i.e., link layer, transport layer
and network layer [135]. These security solutions
are equally application for IoBNT applications.
• Secure boot process for the device is a critical secu-
rity requirement as hackers might add a malicious
patch which leads to replacing device’s ﬁrmware
with mailicious one.

• Multi-factor authentication schemes like biometric
information of the patient and strong access control
mechanisms will make the access challenging to the
hackers.

• Creating logs of device activity and access events
will aid in detecting the anomalies both malicious
and unintentional.

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

• Initiatives for user awareness and risk factors of
this novel technology will deﬁnitely aid in a secure
IoBNT system.

VII. CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
This section provides a detailed discussion on the chal-
lenges and opportunities for IoBNT and its security.

A. CHALLENGES FOR IOBNT
The knowledge of computer scientists is far from being
complete in the ﬁeld of biology, electrochemistry, me-
chanical engineering, and physics. The seamless inter-
face between biological and electrical world is only pos-
sible when researchers form interdisciplinary ﬁeldwork in
close integration. These devices need a collaboration of
researchers for the above-mentioned disciplines to make
them a reality. In this direction, research groups from
chemical engineering, mechanical engineering, biological
sciences, and computer sciences are already working
individually.

1) NANO NETWORKS CHALLENGES
The functionality of nanomachines can be heavily af-
fected by changes in surrounding environmental factors
such as pH levels and temperature etc. An attacker
might alter the environmental factors with malicious
intent to make the communication ineﬀective. Moreover,
if an attacker gains physical access to the human body
there are some possible attacks that an attacker can
launch to disturb the functionality of nanomachines. For
example, attackers might inject reprogrammed nanoma-
chines to destroy the previous therapeutic nanonetwork.
The physical medium in which the nanonetworks are
deployed poses unique ﬂuidic medium physical attacks
that are speciﬁc to the surrounding environment where
nanonetwork is deployed. For example attacks such as:
• Viruses in the human body might compromise the
communication between deployed nanomachines.
• Inherent Human Immune System of the patient’s
body may try to destroy the nanomachines by
interpreting them as intruders.

• Data might become unreliable due to signal propa-
gation and changes in the propagation medium.
Other speciﬁc nanonetworking challenges are listed

below:

a: TRANSMITTER AND RECIEVER DESIGN
The design of nano transceivers is the preliminary step
towards the realization of fully operational nanonet-
works. There are two approaches found in theory that
can be adopted for the development of envisioned nano
transceivers; biological structures enabled by synthetic
biology and nanomaterials based structures. The MC
theory still relies on assumptions as there is no imple-
mentation of artiﬁcial nano/microsystem to date, yet

28

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

Table 7: Attack types, Counter measures and compromised security goals in Bio cyber interface

Attack Type

Possible Countermeasure

Compromised goal

Eavesdropping

Access Control Strong cryptographic
schemes

Non-Repudition Conﬁdentiality Autho-
rization

Replay

MITM

Resource Depletion

Device Tempering

DoS

Malware

Intrusion detection Delegate authenti-
cation to external devices

Authentication Conﬁdentiality

Cryptographic primitives

Availability Authentication

Access control mechanisms Anomaly
detection system User notiﬁcation Use
rechargeable batteries

Availability

Tamper prooﬁng and self destruction
Device Hardening Physically unclon-
able Function (PUF)

All

Intrusion Detection Analysis of the
physical medium Use of directional an-
tennas

Access control Device hardening and
system monitoring Antivirus Intrusion
Detection

Intergrity Availability Non-Repudition
Authorization

Conﬁdentiality Integrity Availability
Authentication

Firmware attack

Firmware
Periodic
Encryption
Firmware updates Malicious Firmware
detection

All

Injection Attacks

Intrusion Detection Input Validation
Authorization Techniques

Integrity Non-Repudiation Authoriza-
tion

the theory is loaded with a plethora of design options
for nano transmitters and receivers, the feasibility of
which could not be validated. There is a clear discrep-
ancy between theory and practice, further research, in
theory, should be coupled with experimental validation.
Particularly, in-vitro wet labs should be envisioned for
healthcare applications that will be subjected to further
clinical trials.

b: ADDRESSING IN NANONETWORK
Another major challenge related to nanonetworks is
the naming and addressing of nanomachines. There are
a huge number of nanomachines in a nano network,
addressing each nanomachine with a unique identity is
not feasible. However, novel addressing schemes such as
FCNN (Function Centric Nano Networking) [206] is an
option for dealing with the addressing issue. Instead of
addressing each and every node, FCNN based approach
assigns addresses to functions and location of the body.

c: POWERING NANOMACHINES
The issue of power source is very crucial in nanoma-
chines, as nanomachines are not connected to an exter-

nal power source. Moreover, the battery unit is mass
wise the largest unit which may increase the size of
nanomachines which is undesirable. Therefore, energy
scavenging schemes for drawing energy from inside the
body needs to be investigated.

d: SAFETY CHALLENGES
Physical protection of patients is very crucial so that the
attacker might not be able to access the patient’s body
with malicious intent. Physical attacks can be launched
via administering the medicine orally that contains ma-
liciously programmed nanomachines or injecting mali-
cious nanomachines into the patient’s body. Moreover,
the use of THz wave on the human skin can cause heat
and eﬀect the tissue of skin, therefore a communication
and sensing standard should be maintained.

2) BIO CYBER INTERFACE CHALLENGES
Despite having made tremendous research, wearable
bioelectronic devices face challenges in the way of wide
acceptance and adoption. There are just a few ex-
amples of fully functional, successfully deployed and

VOLUME 4, 2021

29

FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved bio-
electronic devices found in the literature. Some pro-
posals are demonstrated through theoretical models,
models of some devices are being simulated and some
are under clinical trials. The research in these de-
vices needs collaborations between university research
teams, clinical organizations, community health service
providers, small companies emerging with speciﬁc tech-
nology oﬀerings, and large worldwide corporations inter-
ested to inﬂuence their existing technologies into new
market oﬀerings. This section provides challenges and
their possible solutions towards the overall challenges in
IoBNT domain and its security. Main goal of bio cyber
interface is to accurately read and convert chemical
and biological processes from inside body into electri-
cal signals. For this goal, possible solutions might be
found in chemical, physical and biological sensors which
promise unprecedented sensing abilities. Therefore, for
biologically inspired bio cyber interfaces challanges like
ligand-receptor selection,realistic ICT-based modeling of
artiﬁcial structures and, biological circuits complexity
must be addressed. Moreover,these devices are intended
to operate directly in contact with the epidermal bi-
ological environment. The issues of biocompatibility,
biodegradability, stretchability, and biofouling must be
taken into account while designing these devices. When
these devices are implanted the body may perceive it as
a foreign agent and biological plaque starts building up
around the sensor device, which causes degradation of
sensor performance. Therefore, bio-inspired approaches
and material must be considered while designing these
devices. Enhancing comfort while minimizing the size of
the device will increase the likelihood of device adop-
tion. Flexible materials based on CNT [207], [208] and
graphene [209], [210] are constantly being investigated
for the fabrication of these devices. Electronic tattoos
are body-compliant wearable devices that combine an
attractive performance of electrochemical devices with a
favorable substrate-skin elasticity of temporary tattoos
and resistance to mechanical stress. The realization of
these electronic tattoos and their integration with a do-
main like IoBNT will open up a plethora of applications
in the healthcare domain. The currently developed elec-
tronic tattoos are able to withstand strain and deforma-
tions without deteriorating the device performance. The
tattoos are used temporarily as compared to other coun-
terpart bio-electronic devices; hence leaching reagents
(i.e., detaching from its carrier) is not a critical issue.
However to use these electronic tattoos for long term use
issues like leaching reagents, need for re-calibration, ef-
fects of washing and increased stretchability for wearers
comfort must be revisited and addressed. The devices
currently manufactured are tested rigorously to with-
stand mechanical deformation caused by external strain.
However, in cases of long term use and extreme physical
stress conditions, the device abilities might be degraded.

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

To counter this deformation eﬀect, self-healing [211]–
[213] devices are being manufactured [214] that utilize
healing agents encapsulated in microcapsules [215]. The
healing agents quickly dissolve the crack in the device
by ﬁlling it with agents like hexyl acetate. Summing
up, the interface design encompasses expertise from
the diﬀerent disciplines such as wireless communication,
physics, biology and optogenetics. Moreover, there is a
need to take a step ahead from theoratical research and
computer simulations towards experimental research.
Wet labs are currently not available or ae extremely
costly to perform experimental validation of healthcare
applications of IoBNT.

3) BIG DATA ANALYTICS
Realization of Internet of Bio-Nano Things leads to
the interconnection of millions of devices from nano to
macro scale. The interconnection of these devices means
the generation of big data in large volume, velocity,
and variety [216]. Eﬃcient monitoring and diagnostic in
IoBNT critically depend upon the quality of collected
sensory data and management of this big data is im-
portant to obtain clean data for further analysis. Cur-
rently, bio-electronics are being developed using diver-
gent technology, equipment, and services. This diversity
of technology yields in data generation of having diverse
formats and transfer protocols. A uniﬁed solution is
needed which provides some standard for light data
formats and protocols for better eﬃciency of real-time
health monitoring applications [217]. Another issue with
an increased amount of data is increased noisy data and
erroneous and missing values. This bad quality of data
aﬀects performance analytics and may lead to incorrect
ﬁndings. New data validation and big data analytics
algorithms are the need of time to improve the quality
of raw data.
Data aggregation of intra-body nanosensors and data
collected from subsequent smart hops is also an issue.
New rules of data aggregation are also needed to be
developed to ensure smooth processing, sharing, and
analysis of data. Early detection and prevention of dis-
ease can only be achieved when intelligent knowledge ex-
traction techniques are applied to collected sensory big
data. For real-time monitoring, bio-electronic devices
must provide high data rates, which require powerful
data storage and processing ability. Keeping in mind
the small size of these devices, the above-mentioned
capabilities cannot be implemented in these devices.
Therefore researchers are exploring cloud-enabled in-
tegration [218], [219] with these devices to store and
process raw sensory data in cloud platforms.

B. CHALLENGES IN SECURITY OF IOBNT
The leverage to connect and control the human body
through the internet not only opens up exciting IoBNT
applications but also open up gateways for hackers to

30

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

use the same with malicious intent. This event will pose
a serious security threat to the patients termed as “Bio
cyber terrorism” in [25]. Security is, therefore, the most
important and critical challenge for the implementation
and adoption of bio-electronic devices. Data generated
by these devices is highly conﬁdential as it reveals the
most sensitive information of the patient. Hackers and
adversaries can launch a number of attacks by misusing
this data which can lead to fatal consequences. Data
tampering and alteration by the middle man (hacker)
can lead to incorrect physiological values, which in turn
results in an erroneous analysis of the patient’s condition
and ﬂawed prescriptions from healthcare provider. The
overall communication route from device to healthcare
provider needs protection from security breaches down
the way. Solutions to security issues of IoBNT cannot
be found in existing mechanisms of traditional wireless
networking. As the networking domain of IoBNT is
itself novel and has diverse system requirements. The
security mechanisms and access control [220] methods
for IoBNT must be lightweight and compatible with
resource-constrained [221] IoBNT devices and nanonet-
work.

a: CRYPTOGRAPHIC PRIMITIVES
As IoBNT deals with sensitive physiological parameters
of patients, strong cryptographic mechanisms must be
implemented to ensure user privacy. Considering the
resource-constrained environment of IoBNT, symmetric
and asymmetric cryptographic systems are computa-
tionally very expensive. The selection of a feasible cryp-
tographic system for IoBNT depends upon the following
characteristics of cryptosystems; Energy, memory and
execution time. A novel ﬁeld of bio-chemical cryptog-
raphy has been proposed by Dressler and Kargl [222]
which seems promising for nanonetworks. Biochemi-
cal cryptography techniques proposed so far use DNA
molecules for encryption. There a number of proposals
using DNA cryptography as an encryption scheme [223]–
[230].

b: AUTHENTICATION
Authentication and access control schemes might not
be possible for intra body nanonetworks. However, the
source of data and messges communicated to the gate-
way devices must be authenticated before forwarding to
intra body nanonetworks.
Nano communication mediums i.e., MC, nanoelectro-
magnetic communication, and nano-acoustic communi-
cation should be considered separately when designing
authentication schemes. An authentication scheme for
nano-electromagnetic communication has been proposed
[184] recently which exploits distance-dependent path
loss as a device ﬁngerprint to discriminate the data
sent by legitimate transmitter and intruder. In the
case of MC, this authentication scheme might not be

feasible due to underlying communication diﬀerences.
For MC the emerging ﬁeld of biochemical cryptography
[222] i.e., the use of biological molecules such as DNA
and Ribonucleic Acid (RNA) as a source of encryption
might be explored to solve authentication problems of
molecular communications at nano-scale. However, it
comes with entirely new challenges for the researchers
and collaboration of biologists, computer scientists and
biochemists might be required for investigation innova-
tive ways [28].

c: ENCRYPTION
Key management is still a major challenge in nanonet-
works whether it be pre-distribution before network
deployment or pro-active distribution before data trans-
mission. Both the schemes have their drawbacks at the
nano-scale, pre-distribution is not feasible as storing a
large number of pairwise keys is not possible considering
the limited storage capacity of nano-devices. Pro-active
or ondemand key distribution needs online access to the
devices, which are not feasible in-vivo nanonetwork ap-
plications where online access to nanonetwork is limited.
Some researchers have proposed ECC (Elliptic Curve
Cryptography) [231]–[233] for resource-constrained de-
vices, but in real-time ECC based primitives are still ex-
pensive in terms of time complexity. Moreover, quantum
based cryptographic algorithms in resource constrained
devices have proven to eﬃcient [234].
In nanocommu-
nication networks, the use of public-key cryptography
is not very realistic due to the very high resource
limitations, however biochemical cryptography [222] or
DNA cryptography [227] might be potentially suitable
cryptography mechanisms at the nano-scale.
Bio-inspired algorithms are now being adopted for com-
puting and networking problems, which work on the
principle of nature-inspired solutions [235], [236]. Bio-
inspired computing is a research ﬁeld that ﬁnds princi-
ples of problem-solving in nature and maps them into
algorithms for computing domain. A subclass of this
domain is bio-inspired algorithms for security, which
provides algorithms involving techniques adopted by
nature to defend against intruders [237], [238]. The most
popular natural defense system is the human immune
system, which ﬁghts against intruders and external
viruses to prevent them from entering the body. In
this direction, some proposals have been presented to
improve cyber security in the ﬁeld of wireless sensor
networks. Bio-inspired algorithms such as Artiﬁcial Im-
mune System (AIS) [239], Genetic mutation [240] and
Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) [241] are utilized to
mitigate against certain cyber-attacks.

The bio-inspired algorithms are a promising novel se-
curity approach that is scalable and robust and provides
plenty of algorithms that can be adopted to mitigate
against attacks in IoBNT. One of the goals for future

VOLUME 4, 2021

31

work is to use bio-inspired algorithms to provide security
solutions for IoBNT.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS
IoBNT is an emerging research domain that holds signif-
icant promises in various healthcare applications. These
applications range from early symptom detection to
remote diagnosis to treatments of patients (e.g., via
targeted drug delivery), and so on. The design and
integration of device components are dependent on in-
dividual IoBNT deployment requirements and settings
(e.g., in sensing applications, relevant sensors must be
integrated to sense individual biochemical substances
like pH, sodium, and calcium). However, there are a
number of challenges such as those identiﬁed and dis-
cussed in this paper and the challenges moving forward
are interdisciplinary (e.g., physics, chemical engineering,
biology, mechanical engineering, and computer science).
In addition to these challenges, this research highlights
prospective research avenues for future researchers as
well as IoBNT hardware and software designers and
engineers.

The ﬁeld of security in to IoBNT technologies is not
yet mature, generating opportunities for attackers, even
non-sophisticated attacks can have a signiﬁcant impact
on both IoBNT technologies and users’ safety. There
is a current opportunity for standardization initiatives
to unify IoBNT in terms of information security. The
well established ﬁelds like IoT, WBANs and IMDs have
been helpful in identifying attack types in IoBNT. Apart
from software and hardware security mechanisms, there
is a need for user’s training and awareness for wide
adoption of these novel technologies. One of the future
plans is to build and implement systems that can detect
and mitigate security attacks aﬀecting the theragnostics
process in real time.

IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research work is intended to be included in the
Ph.D. thesis of Sidra Zafar, supervised by Dr.Mohsin
Nazir and Dr.Aneeqa Sabah. We thank all the other co-
authors for their contributions in this research work.

References

[1] E. B. Steager, M. Selman Sakar, C. Magee, M. Kennedy,
A. Cowley, and V. Kumar, “Automated biomanipulation of
single cells using magnetic microrobots,” The International
Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 346–359, 2013.
[2] D.-H. Kim, P. K. Wong, J. Park, A. Levchenko, and Y. Sun,
“Microengineered platforms for cell mechanobiology,” Annual
review of biomedical engineering, vol. 11, pp. 203–233, 2009.
[3] O. Ergeneman, G. Dogangil, M. P. Kummer, J. J. Abbott,
M. K. Nazeeruddin, and B. J. Nelson, “A magnetically con-
trolled wireless optical oxygen sensor for intraocular measure-
ments,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 29–37, 2008.
[4] T. Nakamura and A. Terano, “Capsule endoscopy: past,
present, and future,” Journal of gastroenterology, vol. 43, no. 2,
pp. 93–99, 2008.

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

[5] J. M. Dubach, D. I. Harjes, and H. A. Clark, “Fluorescent ion-
selective nanosensors for intracellular analysis with improved
lifetime and size,” Nano Letters, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 1827–1831,
2007.

[6] C.-J. Chen, Y. Haik, and J. Chatterjee, “Development of
nanotechnology for biomedical applications,” in Conference,
Taipei, Taiwan:
Emerging Information Technology 2005.
IEEE, 2005, pp. 4–pp.

[7] R. W. Carlsen and M. Sitti, “Bio-hybrid cell-based actuators
for microsystems,” Small, vol. 10, no. 19, pp. 3831–3851, 2014.
[8] J. W. Aylott, “Optical nanosensors—an enabling technology for
intracellular measurements,” Analyst, vol. 128, no. 4, pp. 309–
312, 2003.

[9] B. P. Timko, T. Dvir, and D. S. Kohane, “Remotely triggerable
drug delivery systems,” Advanced materials, vol. 22, no. 44, pp.
4925–4943, 2010.

[10] G. Pan and L. Wang, “Swallowable wireless capsule endoscopy:
Progress and technical challenges,” Gastroenterology research
and practice, vol. 2012, pp. 841 691–841 691, 2011.

[11] R. Fernández-Pacheco, C. Marquina, J. G. Valdivia, M. Gutiér-
rez, M. S. Romero, R. Cornudella, A. Laborda, A. Viloria,
T. Higuera, A. García et al., “Magnetic nanoparticles for local
drug delivery using magnetic implants,” Journal of Magnetism
and Magnetic Materials, vol. 311, no. 1, pp. 318–322, 2007.
[12] Z. Liao, R. Gao, C. Xu, and Z.-S. Li, “Indications and detec-
tion, completion, and retention rates of small-bowel capsule
endoscopy: a systematic review,” Gastrointestinal endoscopy,
vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 280–286, 2010.

[13] J. Li, T. Peng, and Y. Peng, “A cholesterol biosensor based
on entrapment of cholesterol oxidase in a silicic sol-gel matrix
at a prussian blue modiﬁed electrode,” Electroanalysis: An
International Journal Devoted to Fundamental and Practical
Aspects of Electroanalysis, vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 1031–1037, 2003.
[14] T. Kawahara, M. Sugita, M. Hagiwara, F. Arai, H. Kawano,
I. Shihira-Ishikawa, and A. Miyawaki, “On-chip microrobot
for investigating the response of aquatic microorganisms to
mechanical stimulation,” Lab on a Chip, vol. 13, no. 6, pp.
1070–1078, 2013.

[15] M. Fluckiger and B. J. Nelson, “Ultrasound emitter localization
in heterogeneous media,” in 2007 29th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society.

,: IEEE, 2007, pp. 2867–2870.

[16] R. A. Freitas, “Pharmacytes: An ideal vehicle for targeted drug
delivery,” Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, vol. 6,
no. 9-10, pp. 2769–2775, 2006.

[17] I. F. Akyildiz, F. Brunetti, and C. Blázquez, “Nanonetworks:
A new communication paradigm,” Computer Networks, vol. 52,
no. 12, pp. 2260–2279, 2008.

[18] J. L. Marzo, J. M. Jornet, and M. Pierobon, “Nanonetworks in
biomedical applications,” Current drug targets, vol. 20, no. 8,
pp. 800–807, 2019.

[19] L. Felicetti, M. Femminella, G. Reali, T. Nakano, and A. V.
Vasilakos, “Tcp-like molecular communications,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 2354–
2367, 2014.

[20] T. Nakano, M. J. Moore, F. Wei, A. V. Vasilakos, and J. Shuai,
“Molecular communication and networking: Opportunities and
challenges,” IEEE transactions on nanobioscience, vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 135–148, 2012.

[21] I. F. Akyildiz and J. M. Jornet, “Electromagnetic wireless
nanosensor networks,” Nano Communication Networks, vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 3–19, 2010.

[22] I. F. Akyildiz and J. M. Jornet,, “The internet of nano-things,”
IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 58–63, 2010.
[23] E. Velloso, D. Cardador, K. Vega, W. Ugulino, A. Bulling,
H. Gellersen, and H. Fuks, “The web of things as an infrastruc-
ture for improving users’ health and wellbeing,” in II Workshop
of the Brazilian Institute for Web Science Research, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, 2011.

[24] F. Michel and M. Folcher, “Optogenerapy: When bio-electronic
implant enters the modern syringe era,” Porto Biomedical
Journal, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 145–149, 2017.

32

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

Table 8: Summarization of challenges in Internet of Bio Nano Things

Area of Concentration

Brief Description

Research Initiatives

Nano Network Challanges

-Transmitter and Receiver Design
-Addressing in nanonetwork
-Powering Nanomachines
-Safety Challenges

Bio Cyber
langes

Interface Chal-

-Need to accurately read and convert
chemical and biological processes into
chemical signals.
-Interdisciplinary research
-Experimental validation.
-Bio compatible design

Big Data Analytics

-Unavailability of realistic data for fea-
ture selection in ML algorithms.
-Data produced is in diverse formats
and transfer protocols

Security in IoBNT

-Compromise of devices and data
-Compromise of patient privacy and
safety

validate

and
the

ICT-based modeling

simulations
to

-Stochastic
experiments
performance.
-Realistic
artiﬁcial structures.
-Function Centric Nano Network-
ing(FCNN) based approach assigns
addresses to functions and location of
the body.

of

for

-Exploration of potential materials and
mechanisms
interfacing between
nano,micro and macro communications
Needs collaborations between univer-
sity research teams(Wireless commu-
nication, physics, biotechnology disci-
plines), clinical organizations, commu-
nity health service providers.
-Wet lab experiments
Use of biological materials to pre-
vent biofouling and formation of plaque
around the device surface.

-Use of deep learning techniques to au-
tomate feature selection
-A uniﬁed solution is needed which pro-
vides some standard for light data for-
mats and protocols for better eﬃciency
of real-time health monitoring applica-
tions

-Design and validation procedures that
address Conﬁdentiality, Integrity, and
Availability.
-Access control methods to limit unau-
thorized access. -newline -Development
of novel security frameworks for re-
source constraint devices.

[25] I. F. Akyildiz, M. Pierobon, S. Balasubramaniam, and
Y. Koucheryavy, “The internet of bio-nano things,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 32–40, 2015.
[26] R. Kirichek, R. Pirmagomedov, R. Glushakov, and A. Kouch-
eryavy, “Live substance in cyberspace—biodriver system,” in
2016 18th International Conference on Advanced Communica-
tion Technology (ICACT). Pyeongchang, South Korea: IEEE,
2016, pp. 274–278.

[27] P. Kulakowski, K. Turbic, and L. M. Correia, “From nano-
communications to body area networks: A perspective on truly
personal communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 159 839–
159 853, 2020.

[28] M. Usman, M. R. Asghar, I. S. Ansari, and M. Qaraqe,
“Security in wireless body area networks: From in-body to oﬀ-
body communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 58 064–58 074,
2018.

[29] V. Loscri, C. Marchal, N. Mitton, G. Fortino, and A. V. Vasi-

lakos, “Security and privacy in molecular communication and
networking: Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE transactions
on nanobioscience, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 198–207, 2014.

[30] K. Yang, D. Bi, Y. Deng, R. Zhang, M. Rahman, N. A. Ali,
M. A. Imran, J. M. Jornet, Q. H. Abbasi, and A. Alomainy, “A
comprehensive survey on hybrid communication for internet of
nano-things in context of body-centric communications,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.09424, 2019.

[31] F. Al-Turjman, “Intelligence and security in big 5g-oriented
iont: An overview,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol.
102, pp. 357–368, 2020.

[32] I. F. Akyildiz, A. Kak, and S. Nie, “6g and beyond: The future
of wireless communications systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
133 995–134 030, 2020.

[33] A. F. Silva and M. Tavakoli, “Domiciliary hospitalization
through wearable biomonitoring patches: Recent advances,
technical challenges, and the relation to covid-19,” Sensors,

VOLUME 4, 2021

33

Table 9: Summary of Notations

Full Form

Artiﬁcial Immune System
Adenosine Triphosphate
Body Area Network
Biofuel Cell
Bioluminescence Resonance Energy
Transfer
Coronary Heart Disease
Carbon Nano Tubes
Cyber Physical System
Diﬀusion Based Molecular Communica-
tion
Drug Eluting Stents
Deoxyribonucleic Acid
Denial of Service
Elliptic Curve Cryptography
Electromagnetic Communication
Functional Electric Stimulations
Field Eﬀect Transistor
Fluorescence Resonance Energy Trans-
fer
Human Immune System
Integrated Circuit
Information and Communication Tech-
nology
Implantable Medical Device
Internet of Bio Nano Things
Internet of Medical Things
Internet of Nano Things
Internet of Things
Luciferin
Luciferase
Medical Implant Communications Ser-
vice
Man-In-The-Middle
Molecular Communication
Near-Field-Communication
Open Systems Interconnection
Personal Digital Assistant
Radio-frequency IDentiﬁcation
Reciever
Susceptible, Infected,Recovered
Surface Plasmon Resonance
Support Vector Machine
Transmission
col/Internet Protocol
Targeted Drug Delivery
Tera Hertz
Transmitter
Wireless Body Area Network
Wireless Chemical Sensor

Control

Proto-

Abbr.

AIS
ATP
BAN
BFC
BRET

CHD
CNT
CPS
DbMC

DES
DNA
DoS
ECC
EM
FES
FET
FRET

HIS
IC
ICT

IMD
IoBNT
IoMt
IoNT
IoT
L
LU
MICS

MITM
MC
NFC
OSI
PDA
RFID
Rx
SIR
SPR
SVM
TCP/IP

TDD
THz
Tx
WBAN
WCS

34

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

vol. 20, no. 23, p. 6835, 2020.

[34] N. X. Williams and A. D. Franklin, “Electronic tattoos: A
promising approach to real-time theragnostics,” Journal of
Dermatology and Skin Science, vol. 2, no. 1, 2020.

[35] J. Y. Oh and Z. Bao, “Second skin enabled by advanced
electronics,” Advanced Science, vol. 6, no. 11, p. 1900186, 2019.
[36] P. Kassal, I. M. Steinberg, and M. D. Steinberg, “Wireless smart
tag with potentiometric input for ultra low-power chemical
sensing,” Sensors and actuators B: chemical, vol. 184, pp. 254–
259, 2013.

[37] P. Kassal, M. D. Steinberg, and I. M. Steinberg, “Wireless
chemical sensors and biosensors: A review,” Sensors and Ac-
tuators B: Chemical, vol. 266, pp. 228–245, 2018.

[38] R. Singh, E. Singh, and H. S. Nalwa, “Inkjet printed nano-
material based ﬂexible radio frequency identiﬁcation (rﬁd) tag
sensors for the internet of nano things,” RSC advances, vol. 7,
no. 77, pp. 48 597–48 630, 2017.

[39] A. J. Bandodkar, W. Jia, and J. Wang, “Tattoo-based wearable
electrochemical devices: A review,” Electroanalysis, vol. 27,
no. 3, pp. 562–572, 2015.

[40] Y. A. Qadri, A. Nauman, Y. B. Zikria, A. V. Vasilakos,
and S. W. Kim, “The future of healthcare internet of things:
A survey of emerging technologies,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1121–1167, 2020.
[41] P. K. D. Pramanik, A. Solanki, A. Debnath, A. Nayyar, S. El-
Sappagh, and K.-S. Kwak, “Advancing modern healthcare with
nanotechnology, nanobiosensors, and internet of nano things:
Taxonomies, applications, architecture, and challenges,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 65 230–65 266, 2020.

[42] S. L. Bernal, A. H. Celdrán, G. M. Pérez, M. T. Barros, and
S. Balasubramaniam, “Security in brain-computer interfaces:
State-of-the-art, opportunities, and future challenges,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.03536, 2019.

[43] M. B. Dissanayak and N. Ekanayake, “On the exact perfor-
mance analysis of molecular communication via diﬀusion for
internet of bio-nano things.” IEEE Transactions on Nanobio-
science, 2021.

[44] F. Al-Turjman, “A cognitive routing protocol for bio-inspired
networking in the internet of nano-things (iont),” Mobile Net-
works and Applications, vol. :, pp. 1–15, 2017.

[45] C. Roman, F. Ciontu, and B. Courtois, “Single molecule
detection and macromolecular weighting using an all-carbon-
nanotube nanoelectromechanical sensor,” in 4th IEEE Confer-
ence on Nanotechnology, 2004.

,: IEEE, 2004, pp. 263–266.

[46] F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. Hill, P. Blake,
M. Katsnelson, and K. S. Novoselov, “Detection of individual
gas molecules adsorbed on graphene,” Nature materials, vol. 6,
no. 9, pp. 652–655, 2007.

[47] P. Tallury, A. Malhotra, L. M. Byrne, and S. Santra,
“Nanobioimaging and sensing of infectious diseases,” Advanced
drug delivery reviews, vol. 62, no. 4-5, pp. 424–437, 2010.
[48] H.-Y. Yeh, M. V. Yates, W. Chen, and A. Mulchandani,
“Real-time molecular methods to detect infectious viruses,” in
Seminars in cell & developmental biology, vol. 20.
,: Elsevier,
2009, pp. 49–54.

[49] F. Büther, F.-L. Lau, M. Stelzner, and S. Ebers, “A formal
deﬁnition for nanorobots and nanonetworks,” in Internet of
Things, Smart Spaces, and Next Generation Networks and
Systems. St. Petersburg,Russia: Springer, 2017, pp. 214–226.
[50] L. F. Pereira and M. S. Ferreira, “Electronic transport on car-
bon nanotube networks: A multiscale computational approach,”
Nano Communication Networks, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 25–38, 2011.
[51] J.-W. Yoo, D. J. Irvine, D. E. Discher, and S. Mitragotri, “Bio-
inspired, bioengineered and biomimetic drug delivery carriers,”
Nature reviews Drug discovery, vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 521–535,
2011.

[52] Y. Nishimura, J. Ishii, C. Ogino, and A. Kondo, “Genetic
engineering of bio-nanoparticles for drug delivery: A review,”
Journal of Biomedical Nanotechnology, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 2063–
2085, 2014.

[53] S. Tan, T. Wu, D. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “Cell or cell membrane-
based drug delivery systems,” Theranostics, vol. 5, no. 8, p. 863,
2015.

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

[54] D. Lockney, S. Franzen, and S. Lommel, “Viruses as nanoma-
,:
terials for drug delivery,” in Biomedical Nanotechnology.
Springer, 2011, pp. 207–221.

[55] N. Esfandiari, M. K. Arzanani, M. Soleimani, M. Kohi-Habibi,
and W. E. Svendsen, “A new application of plant virus nanopar-
ticles as drug delivery in breast cancer,” Tumor Biology, vol. 37,
no. 1, pp. 1229–1236, 2016.

[56] L. Steidler, “Live genetically modiﬁed bacteria as drug delivery

tools: at the doorstep of a new pharmacology?” 2004.

[57] I. Yacoby, H. Bar, and I. Benhar, “Targeted drug-carrying
bacteriophages as antibacterial nanomedicines,” Antimicrobial
agents and chemotherapy, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 2156–2163, 2007.
[58] E. V. Batrakova, H. E. Gendelman, and A. V. Kabanov,
“Cell-mediated drug delivery,” Expert opinion on drug delivery,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 415–433, 2011.

[59] Y. Su, Z. Xie, G. B. Kim, C. Dong, and J. Yang, “Design
strategies and applications of circulating cell-mediated drug
delivery systems,” ACS biomaterials science & engineering,
vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 201–217, 2015.

[60] G. Strobel and J. Mittnacht, “Richard, are we there yet?-an
internet of nano things information system architecture,” in
Proceedings of the 54th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, 2021, p. 4578.

[61] Y. Koucheryavy, A. Yastrebova, D. P. Martins, and S. Bal-
asubramaniam, “A review on bio-cyber interfaces for in-
trabody molecular communications systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.14944, 2021.

[62] P. Kassal, M. Zubak, G. Scheipl, G. J. Mohr, M. D. Steinberg,
and I. M. Steinberg, “Smart bandage with wireless connectiv-
ity for optical monitoring of ph,” Sensors and Actuators B:
Chemical, vol. 246, pp. 455–460, 2017.

[63] U. A. Chude-Okonkwo, R. Malekian, and B. T. Maharaj, “Bio-
logically inspired bio-cyber interface architecture and model for
internet of bio-nanothings applications,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 3444–3455, 2016.

[64] T. Nakano, S. Kobayashi, T. Suda, Y. Okaie, Y. Hiraoka, and
T. Haraguchi, “Externally controllable molecular communica-
tion,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 2417–2431, 2014.

[65] Q. Hu, P. S. Katti, and Z. Gu, “Enzyme-responsive nanomate-
rials for controlled drug delivery,” Nanoscale, vol. 6, no. 21, pp.
12 273–12 286, 2014.

[66] Y. I. Wu, D. Frey, O. I. Lungu, A. Jaehrig, I. Schlichting,
B. Kuhlman, and K. M. Hahn, “A genetically encoded pho-
toactivatable rac controls the motility of living cells,” Nature,
vol. 461, no. 7260, pp. 104–108, 2009.

[67] G. C. Ellis-Davies, “Caged compounds: photorelease technol-
ogy for control of cellular chemistry and physiology,” Nature
methods, vol. 4, no. 8, pp. 619–628, 2007.

[68] L. Dykman and N. Khlebtsov, “Gold nanoparticles in biomed-
ical applications: recent advances and perspectives,” Chemical
Society Reviews, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 2256–2282, 2012.

[69] D. Needham, G. Anyarambhatla, G. Kong, and M. W. De-
whirst, “A new temperature-sensitive liposome for use with
mild hyperthermia: characterization and testing in a human
tumor xenograft model,” Cancer research, vol. 60, no. 5, pp.
1197–1201, 2000.

[70] B. M. Dicheva, T. L. t. Hagen, L. Li, D. Schipper, A. L.
Seynhaeve, G. C. v. Rhoon, A. M. Eggermont, L. H. Lindner,
and G. A. Koning, “Cationic thermosensitive liposomes: a
novel dual targeted heat-triggered drug delivery approach for
endothelial and tumor cells,” Nano letters, vol. 13, no. 6, pp.
2324–2331, 2013.

[71] K. Kono, T. Miyoshi, Y. Haba, E. Murakami, C. Kojima, and
A. Harada, “Temperature sensitivity control of alkylamide-
terminated poly (amidoamine) dendrimers induced by guest
molecule binding,” Journal of the American Chemical Society,
vol. 129, no. 23, pp. 7222–7223, 2007.

[72] K. Hamad-Schiﬀerli, J. J. Schwartz, A. T. Santos, S. Zhang, and
J. M. Jacobson, “Remote electronic control of dna hybridization
through inductive coupling to an attached metal nanocrystal
antenna,” Nature, vol. 415, no. 6868, pp. 152–155, 2002.
[73] N. A. Abbasi and O. B. Akan, “An information theoretical
analysis of human insulin-glucose system toward the internet

of bio-nano things,” IEEE transactions on nanobioscience,
vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 783–791, 2017.

[74] T. Nakano, T. Suda, Y. Okaie, M. J. Moore, and A. V. Vasi-
lakos, “Molecular communication among biological nanoma-
chines: A layered architecture and research issues,” IEEE
transactions on nanobioscience, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 169–197,
2014.

[75] H. K. Rudsari, M. R. Javan, M. Orooji, N. Mokari, and E. A.
Jorswieck, “Tdma-mtmr-based molecular communication with
ligand-binding reception,” IEEE Transactions on Molecular,
Biological and Multi-Scale Communications, 2021.

[76] N. Farsad, H. B. Yilmaz, A. Eckford, C.-B. Chae, and W. Guo,
“A comprehensive survey of recent advancements in molecular
communication,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1887–1919, 2016.

[77] M. Kuscu, E. Dinc, B. A. Bilgin, H. Ramezani, and O. B.
Akan, “Transmitter and receiver architectures for molecular
communications: A survey on physical design with modulation,
coding, and detection techniques,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 1302–1341, 2019.

[78] M. Kuscu and O. B. Akan, “Modeling and analysis of sinw fet-
based molecular communication receiver,” IEEE Transactions
on Communications, vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 3708–3721, 2016.
[79] Kuscu, Murat and Akan, Ozgur B, “On the physical design of
molecular communication receiver based on nanoscale biosen-
sors,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 2228–2243,
2016.

[80] N.-R. Kim and C.-B. Chae, “Novel modulation techniques
using isomers as messenger molecules for nano communication
networks via diﬀusion,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 847–856, 2013.

[81] M. Ş. Kuran, H. B. Yilmaz, T. Tugcu, and B. Özerman, “Energy
model for communication via diﬀusion in nanonetworks,” Nano
Communication Networks, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 86–95, 2010.
[82] N. Garralda, I. Llatser, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, E. Alarcón, and
M. Pierobon, “Diﬀusion-based physical channel identiﬁcation
in molecular nanonetworks,” Nano Communication Networks,
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 196–204, 2011.

[83] M. S. Kuran, H. B. Yilmaz, T. Tugcu, and I. F. Akyildiz,
“Modulation techniques for communication via diﬀusion in
nanonetworks,” in 2011 IEEE international conference on
communications (ICC). Kyoto, Japan: IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–5.
[84] N. Farsad, N.-R. Kim, A. W. Eckford, and C.-B. Chae, “Chan-
nel and noise models for nonlinear molecular communication
systems,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 2392–2401, 2014.

[85] I. Llatser, I. Pascual, N. Garralda, A. Cabellos-Aparicio,
M. Pierobon, E. Alarcón, and J. Solé-Pareta, “Exploring the
physical channel of diﬀusion-based molecular communication
by simulation,” in 2011 IEEE Global Telecommunications
Conference-GLOBECOM 2011. Houston, TX, USA, USA:
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–5.

[86] C. T. Chou, “Extended master equation models for molecu-
lar communication networks,” IEEE transactions on nanobio-
science, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 79–92, 2013.

[87] A. Noel, K. C. Cheung, and R. Schober, “Improving receiver
performance of diﬀusive molecular communication with en-
zymes,” IEEE Transactions on NanoBioscience, vol. 13, no. 1,
pp. 31–43, 2014.

[88] M. Pierobon and I. F. Akyildiz, “A physical end-to-end model
for molecular communication in nanonetworks,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 602–
611, 2010.

[89] L. Felicetti, M. Femminella, G. Reali, and P. Liò, “Applications
of molecular communications to medicine: A survey,” Nano
Communication Networks, vol. 7, pp. 27–45, 2016.

[90] U. A. Chude-Okonkwo, R. Malekian, B. T. Maharaj, and
A. V. Vasilakos, “Molecular communication and nanonetwork
for targeted drug delivery: A survey,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 3046–3096, 2017.
[91] U. A. Chude-Okonkwo, R. Malekian, and B. S. Maharaj,
“Molecular communication model for targeted drug delivery in
multiple disease sites with diversely expressed enzymes,” IEEE

VOLUME 4, 2021

35

transactions on nanobioscience, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 230–245,
2016.

high mobility interference scenarios,” Wireless Engineering and
Technology, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 34–48, 2018.

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

[92] U. Chude-Okonkwo, R. Malekian, and B. Maharaj, “Nanosys-
tems and devices for advanced targeted nanomedical applica-
tions,” in Advanced Targeted Nanomedicine.
,: Springer, 2019,
pp. 39–58.

[93] Y. Chahibi, I. F. Akyildiz, and S. O. Song, “Antibody-based
molecular communication for targeted drug delivery systems,”
in 2014 36th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. Chicago, IL,
USA: IEEE, 2014, pp. 5707–5710.

[94] Y. Chahibi and I. F. Akyildiz, “Molecular communication noise
and capacity analysis for particulate drug delivery systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 62, no. 11, pp.
3891–3903, 2014.

[95] Y. Chahibi, I. F. Akyildiz, S. Balasubramaniam, and Y. Kouch-
eryavy, “Molecular communication modeling of antibody-
mediated drug delivery systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1683–1695, 2015.

[96] Y. Chahibi, M. Pierobon, and I. F. Akyildiz, “Pharmacokinetic
modeling and biodistribution estimation through the molecular
communication paradigm,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 2410–2420, 2015.

[97] G. Piro, K. Yang, G. Boggia, N. Chopra, L. A. Grieco, and
A. Alomainy, “Terahertz communications in human tissues at
the nanoscale for healthcare applications,” IEEE Transactions
on Nanotechnology, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 404–406, 2015.

[98] J. M. Jornet and I. F. Akyildiz, “Channel modeling and
capacity analysis for electromagnetic wireless nanonetworks in
the terahertz band,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Commu-
nications, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 3211–3221, 2011.

[99] Q. H. Abbasi, K. Yang, N. Chopra, J. M. Jornet, N. A. Abuali,
K. A. Qaraqe, and A. Alomainy, “Nano-communication for
biomedical applications: A review on the state-of-the-art from
physical layers to novel networking concepts,” IEEE Access,
vol. 4, pp. 3920–3935, 2016.

[100] D. Zhang and Q. Liu, “Biosensors and bioelectronics on smart-
phone for portable biochemical detection,” Biosensors and
Bioelectronics, vol. 75, pp. 273–284, 2016.

[101] S. Movassaghi, P. Arab, and M. Abolhasan, “Wireless technolo-
gies for body area networks: Characteristics and challenges,” in
2012 International Symposium on Communications and Infor-
mation Technologies (ISCIT). Gold Coast, QLD, Australia:
IEEE, 2012, pp. 42–47.

[102] H. H. Strey, P. Richman, R. Rozensky, S. Smith, and L. Endee,
“Bluetooth low energy technologies for applications in health
care: proximity and physiological signals monitors,” in 2013
10th International Conference and Expo on Emerging Tech-
nologies for a Smarter World (CEWIT). Melville, NY, USA:
IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–4.

[103] E. Georgakakis, S. A. Nikolidakis, D. D. Vergados, and
C. Douligeris, “An analysis of bluetooth, zigbee and bluetooth
low energy and their use in wbans,” in International Confer-
ence on Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare.
,:
Springer, 2010, pp. 168–175.

[104] H. Cao, V. Leung, C. Chow, and H. Chan, “Enabling technolo-
gies for wireless body area networks: A survey and outlook,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 12, pp. 84–93,
2009.

[105] J. H. Kurunathan, “Study and overview on wban under ieee
802.15. 6,” U. Porto Journal of Engineering, vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
11–21, 2015.

[106] I.

. W. Group et al., “Ieee standard for

information
technology–telecommunications and information exchange be-
tween systems–local and metropolitan area networks–speciﬁc
requirements–part 11: Wireless lan medium access control
(mac) and physical
layer (phy) speciﬁcations amendment
6: Wireless access in vehicular environments,” IEEE, Tech.
Rep. 11, 2010.

[107] D. Lewis, “Ieee p802. 15.6/d0 draft standard for body area

network (vol. 6),” IEEE, Tech. Rep., 2010.

[108] A. Mile, G. Okeyo, and A. Kibe, “Hybrid ieee 802.15. 6
wireless body area networks interference mitigation model for

[109] Z. Nie, Z. Li, R. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Li, and L. Wang, “A
statistical frame based tdma protocol for human body commu-
nication,” Biomedical engineering online, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 65,
2015.

[110] S. Jena, A. Gupta, R. K. Pippara, P. Pal et al., “Wireless
sensing systems: A review,” in Sensors for Automotive and
Aerospace Applications.

,: Springer, 2019, pp. 143–192.

[111] J. Grosinger, “Feasibility of backscatter rﬁd systems on the
human body,” EURASIP journal on embedded systems, vol.
2013, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2013.

[112] A. Kurs, A. Karalis, R. Moﬀatt, J. D. Joannopoulos, P. Fisher,
and M. Soljačić, “Wireless power transfer via strongly coupled
magnetic resonances,” science, vol. 317, no. 5834, pp. 83–86,
2007.

[113] Y.-H. Lee, J.-S. Kim, J. Noh, I. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Seo,
S. Jeon, T.-S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee et al., “Wearable textile battery
rechargeable by solar energy,” Nano letters, vol. 13, no. 11, pp.
5753–5761, 2013.

[114] J.-H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, M. K. Gupta, T. Y. Kim, D.-Y. Lee,
J. Oh, C. Ryu, W. J. Yoo, C.-Y. Kang, S.-J. Yoon et al.,
“Highly stretchable piezoelectric-pyroelectric hybrid nanogen-
erator,” Advanced Materials, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 765–769, 2014.
[115] J. Bae, M. K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, M. Liu, and Z. L.
Wang, “Fiber supercapacitors made of nanowire-ﬁber hybrid
structures for wearable/ﬂexible energy storage,” Angewandte
Chemie International Edition, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 1683–1687,
2011.

[116] P. P. Mercier, A. C. Lysaght, S. Bandyopadhyay, A. P. Chan-
drakasan, and K. M. Stankovic, “Energy extraction from the
biologic battery in the inner ear,” Nature biotechnology, vol. 30,
no. 12, pp. 1240–1243, 2012.

[117] M. T. Meredith and S. D. Minteer, “Biofuel cells: enhanced
enzymatic bioelectrocatalysis,” Annual review of analytical
chemistry, vol. 5, pp. 157–179, 2012.

[118] A. Zebda, C. Gondran, A. Le Goﬀ, M. Holzinger, P. Cinquin,
and S. Cosnier, “Mediatorless high-power glucose biofuel cells
based on compressed carbon nanotube-enzyme electrodes,”
Nature communications, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2011.

[119] L. Halámková, J. Halámek, V. Bocharova, A. Szczupak, L. Al-
fonta, and E. Katz, “Implanted biofuel cell operating in a living
snail,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 134,
no. 11, pp. 5040–5043, 2012.

[120] W. Jia, G. Valdés-Ramírez, A. J. Bandodkar, J. R. Windmiller,
and J. Wang, “Epidermal biofuel cells: energy harvesting from
human perspiration,” Angewandte Chemie International Edi-
tion, vol. 52, no. 28, pp. 7233–7236, 2013.

[121] S. Canovas-Carrasco, A.-J. Garcia-Sanchez, and J. Garcia-
Haro, “A nanoscale communication network scheme and energy
model
for a human hand scenario,” Nano communication
networks, vol. 15, pp. 17–27, 2018.

[122] S. Baik, H. J. Lee, D. W. Kim, J. W. Kim, Y. Lee, and
C. Pang, “Bioinspired adhesive architectures: from skin patch to
integrated bioelectronics,” Advanced Materials, vol. 31, no. 34,
p. 1803309, 2019.

[123] N. Islam and S. Misra, ““catch the pendulum”: The problem
of asymmetric data delivery in electromagnetic nanonetworks,”
IEEE transactions on nanobioscience, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 576–
584, 2016.

[124] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things:
A survey,” Computer networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805,
2010.

[125] A. J. Bandodkar, D. Molinnus, O. Mirza, T. Guinovart, J. R.
Windmiller, G. Valdés-Ramírez, F. J. Andrade, M. J. Schöning,
and J. Wang, “Epidermal tattoo potentiometric sodium sensors
with wireless signal transduction for continuous non-invasive
sweat monitoring,” Biosensors and bioelectronics, vol. 54, pp.
603–609, 2014.

[126] A. J. Bandodkar and J. Wang, “Non-invasive wearable electro-
chemical sensors: a review,” Trends in biotechnology, vol. 32,
no. 7, pp. 363–371, 2014.

36

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

[127] E. K. Lee, M. K. Kim, and C. H. Lee, “Skin-mountable biosen-
sors and therapeutics: a review,” Annual Review of Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 21, pp. 299–323, 2019.

[146] A. A. A. Asaimi, M. I. Razzak, and R. Alshammari, “Develop-
ing ontology for rﬁd based infant protection system,” Advanced
Science Letters, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 2759–2763, 2016.

[128] H. Jin, Y. S. Abu-Raya, and H. Haick, “Advanced materials for
health monitoring with skin-based wearable devices,” Advanced
healthcare materials, vol. 6, no. 11, p. 1700024, 2017.

[129] J. R. Windmiller, A. J. Bandodkar, G. Valdés-Ramírez,
S. Parkhomovsky, A. G. Martinez, and J. Wang, “Electrochem-
ical sensing based on printable temporary transfer tattoos,”
Chemical Communications, vol. 48, no. 54, pp. 6794–6796,
2012.

[130] J. Di, S. Yao, Y. Ye, Z. Cui, J. Yu, T. K. Ghosh, Y. Zhu, and
Z. Gu, “Stretch-triggered drug delivery from wearable elastomer
ﬁlms containing therapeutic depots,” ACS nano, vol. 9, no. 9,
pp. 9407–9415, 2015.

[131] H. Jeong, T. Ha, I. Kuang, L. Shen, Z. Dai, N. Sun, and N. Lu,
“Nfc-enabled, tattoo-like stretchable biosensor manufactured
by “cut-and-paste” method,” in 2017 39th Annual Interna-
tional Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBC).

,: IEEE, 2017, pp. 4094–4097.

[132] H. Jeong and N. Lu, “Electronic tattoos: the most multifunc-
tional but imperceptible wearables,” in Smart Biomedical and
Physiological Sensor Technology XV, vol. 11020.
,: Interna-
tional Society for Optics and Photonics, 2019, p. 110200P.
[133] H. Lee, C. Song, S. Baik, D. Kim, T. Hyeon, and D.-H. Kim,
“Device-assisted transdermal drug delivery,” Advanced drug
delivery reviews, vol. 127, pp. 35–45, 2018.

[134] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, B. C. Bajpai, S. Zeadally et al., “Se-
curity issues in implantable medical devices: Fact or ﬁction?”
Sustainable Cities and Society, p. 102552, 2020.

[135] H. A. Abdul-Ghani and D. Konstantas, “A comprehensive
study of security and privacy guidelines, threats, and counter-
measures: An iot perspective,” Journal of Sensor and Actuator
Networks, vol. 8, no. 2, p. 22, 2019.

[136] W. Jia, A. J. Bandodkar, G. Valdes-Ramirez, J. R. Windmiller,
Z. Yang, J. Ramírez, G. Chan, and J. Wang, “Electrochemical
tattoo biosensors for real-time noninvasive lactate monitoring
in human perspiration,” Analytical chemistry, vol. 85, no. 14,
pp. 6553–6560, 2013.

[137] J. Kim, I. Jeerapan, S. Imani, T. N. Cho, A. Bandodkar,
S. Cinti, P. P. Mercier, and J. Wang, “Noninvasive alcohol mon-
itoring using a wearable tattoo-based iontophoretic-biosensing
system,” Acs Sensors, vol. 1, no. 8, pp. 1011–1019, 2016.
[138] N. Di Trani, A. Silvestri, G. Bruno, T. Geninatti, C. Y. X.
Chua, A. Gilbert, G. Rizzo, C. S. Filgueira, D. Demarchi,
and A. Grattoni, “Remotely controlled nanoﬂuidic implantable
platform for tunable drug delivery,” Lab on a Chip, vol. 19,
no. 13, pp. 2192–2204, 2019.

[139] R. Lodato and G. Marrocco, “Close integration of a uhf-rﬁd
transponder into a limb prosthesis for tracking and sensing,”
IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1806–1813, 2015.

[140] K.-I. Chen, B.-R. Li, and Y.-T. Chen, “Silicon nanowire ﬁeld-
eﬀect transistor-based biosensors for biomedical diagnosis and
cellular recording investigation,” Nano today, vol. 6, no. 2, pp.
131–154, 2011.

[141] N. Kumar, K. Kaur, S. C. Misra, and R. Iqbal, “An intelligent
rﬁd-enabled authentication scheme for healthcare applications
in vehicular mobile cloud,” Peer-to-Peer Networking and Ap-
plications, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 824–840, 2016.

[142] J. Zhang, G. Y. Tian, A. M. Marindra, A. I. Sunny, and A. B.
Zhao, “A review of passive rﬁd tag antenna-based sensors and
systems for structural health monitoring applications,” Sensors,
vol. 17, no. 2, p. 265, 2017.

[143] S. Kumar, G. Livermont, and G. Mckewan, “Stage implementa-
tion of rﬁd in hospitals,” Technology and Health Care, vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 31–46, 2010.

[144] A. Cangialosi, J. E. Monaly, and S. C. Yang, “Leveraging rﬁd
in hospitals: Patient life cycle and mobility perspectives,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 18–23, 2007.

[145] A. Dey, B. Vijayaraman, and J. H. Choi, “RFID in US hospitals:
an exploratory investigation of technology adoption,” Manage-
ment Research Review, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 399–424, 2016.

[147] R. Baptista, G. Morris, R. Jones, N. Ridley, G. Kushinga,
A. Arshad, J. Douglas, A. Ricketts, and D. Moss, “Radio
frequency identiﬁcation (rﬁd) as a solution for track and trace
of cryogenically-stored cell and gene therapies,” Cytotherapy,
vol. 19, no. 5, p. S122, 2017.

[148] S. Manzari and G. Marrocco, “Modeling and applications of a
chemical-loaded uhf rﬁd sensing antenna with tuning capabil-
ity,” IEEE transactions on antennas and propagation, vol. 62,
no. 1, pp. 94–101, 2013.

[149] R. A. Potyrailo and C. Surman, “A passive radio-frequency
identiﬁcation (rﬁd) gas sensor with self-correction against ﬂuc-
tuations of ambient temperature,” Sensors and Actuators B:
Chemical, vol. 185, pp. 587–593, 2013.

[150] J. Virtanen, L. Ukkonen, T. Bjorninen, A. Z. Elsherbeni, and
L. Sydänheimo, “Inkjet-printed humidity sensor for passive
uhf rﬁd systems,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and
Measurement, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2768–2777, 2011.

[151] J.

J. Martínez-Martínez, F.

and
G. Galindo-Romera, “Design and characterization of a passive
temperature sensor based on a printed miw delay line,” IEEE
Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 22, pp. 7884–7891, 2016.

J. Herraiz-Martínez,

[152] S. Kim, C. Mariotti, F. Alimenti, P. Mezzanotte, A. Georgiadis,
A. Collado, L. Roselli, and M. M. Tentzeris, “No battery
required: Perpetual rﬁd-enabled wireless sensors for cognitive
intelligence applications,” IEEE Microwave magazine, vol. 14,
no. 5, pp. 66–77, 2013.

[153] R. Vyas, V. Lakafosis, H. Lee, G. Shaker, L. Yang, G. Orecchini,
A. Traille, M. M. Tentzeris, and L. Roselli, “Inkjet printed,
self powered, wireless sensors for environmental, gas, and
authentication-based sensing,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 11,
no. 12, pp. 3139–3152, 2011.

[154] D. P. Rose, M. E. Ratterman, D. K. Griﬃn, L. Hou, N. Kelley-
Loughnane, R. R. Naik, J. A. Hagen, I. Papautsky, and J. C.
Heikenfeld, “Adhesive rﬁd sensor patch for monitoring of sweat
electrolytes,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 1457–1465, 2014.

[155] A. Juels, R. L. Rivest, and M. Szydlo, “The blocker tag: Selec-
tive blocking of rﬁd tags for consumer privacy,” in Proceedings
of the 10th ACM conference on Computer and communications
security, 2003, pp. 103–111.

[156] Y.-Y. Chen, J.-C. Lu, S.-I. Chen, and J.-K. Jan, “A low-cost rﬁd
authentication protocol with location privacy protection,” in
2009 Fifth International Conference on Information Assurance
and Security, vol. 2.

IEEE, 2009, pp. 109–113.

[157] A. Juels, “Rﬁd security and privacy: A research survey,” IEEE
journal on selected areas in communications, vol. 24, no. 2, pp.
381–394, 2006.

[158] H. Tao, S.-W. Hwang, B. Marelli, B. An, J. E. Moreau, M. Yang,
M. A. Brenckle, S. Kim, D. L. Kaplan, J. A. Rogers et al.,
“Silk-based resorbable electronic devices for remotely controlled
therapy and in vivo infection abatement,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, vol. 111, no. 49, pp. 17 385–
17 389, 2014.

[159] M. Curreli, R. Zhang, F. N. Ishikawa, H.-K. Chang, R. J.
Cote, C. Zhou, and M. E. Thompson, “Real-time, label-free
detection of biological entities using nanowire-based fets,” IEEE
Transactions on Nanotechnology, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 651–667,
2008.

[160] R. A. Robergs, F. Ghiasvand, and D. Parker, “Biochemistry
of exercise-induced metabolic acidosis,” American Journal of
Physiology-Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiol-
ogy, vol. 287, no. 3, pp. R502–R516, 2004.

[161] F. Patolsky, G. Zheng, and C. M. Lieber, “Nanowire-based
biosensors,” Analytical chemistry (Washington, DC), vol. 78,
no. 13, pp. 4260–4269, 2006.

[162] B. Kim, H. S. Song, H. J. Jin, E. J. Park, S. H. Lee, B. Y.
Lee, T. H. Park, and S. Hong, “Highly selective and sensitive
detection of neurotransmitters using receptor-modiﬁed single-
walled carbon nanotube sensors,” Nanotechnology, vol. 24,
no. 28, p. 285501, 2013.

VOLUME 4, 2021

37

[163] Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi, and K. Matsumoto, “Label-free biosen-
sors based on aptamer-modiﬁed graphene ﬁeld-eﬀect transis-
tors,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 132,
no. 51, pp. 18 012–18 013, 2010.

[164] J. Shan, J. Li, X. Chu, M. Xu, F. Jin, X. Wang, L. Ma, X. Fang,
Z. Wei, and X. Wang, “High sensitivity glucose detection at
extremely low concentrations using a mos 2-based ﬁeld-eﬀect
transistor,” RSC advances, vol. 8, no. 15, pp. 7942–7948, 2018.
[165] L. Torsi, M. Magliulo, K. Manoli, and G. Palazzo, “Organic
ﬁeld-eﬀect transistor sensors: a tutorial review,” Chemical So-
ciety Reviews, vol. 42, no. 22, pp. 8612–8628, 2013.

[166] X. Duan, Y. Li, N. K. Rajan, D. A. Routenberg, Y. Modis, and
M. A. Reed, “Quantiﬁcation of the aﬃnities and kinetics of
protein interactions using silicon nanowire biosensors,” Nature
nanotechnology, vol. 7, no. 6, p. 401, 2012.

[167] D. P. Tran, M. A. Winter, B. Wolfrum, R. Stockmann, C.-
T. Yang, M. Pourhassan-Moghaddam, A. Oﬀenhausser, and
B. Thierry, “Toward intraoperative detection of disseminated
tumor cells in lymph nodes with silicon nanowire ﬁeld eﬀect
transistors,” ACS nano, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 2357–2364, 2016.

[168] L. Grebenstein, J. Kirchner, R. S. Peixoto, W. Zimmermann,
F. Irnstorfer, W. Wicke, A. Ahmadzadeh, V. Jamali, G. Fischer,
R. Weigel et al., “Biological optical-to-chemical signal conver-
sion interface: A small-scale modulator for molecular communi-
cations,” IEEE transactions on nanobioscience, vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 31–42, 2018.

[169] Y. Liu, E. Kim, J. Li, M. Kang, W. E. Bentley, and G. F.
Payne, “Electrochemistry for bio-device molecular communi-
cation: The potential to characterize, analyze and actuate
biological systems,” Nano Communication Networks, vol. 11,
pp. 76–89, 2017.

[170] Y. Liu, J. Li, T. Tschirhart, J. L. Terrell, E. Kim, C.-Y. Tsao,
D. L. Kelly, W. E. Bentley, and G. F. Payne, “Connecting
biology to electronics: Molecular communication via redox
modality,” Advanced Healthcare Materials, vol. 6, no. 24, p.
1700789, 2017.

[171] Y. Liu, C.-Y. Tsao, E. Kim, T. Tschirhart, J. L. Terrell, W. E.
Bentley, and G. F. Payne, “Using a redox modality to connect
synthetic biology to electronics: Hydrogel-based chemo-electro
signal transduction for molecular communication,” Advanced
healthcare materials, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 1600908, 2017.

[172] E. Kim, J. Li, M. Kang, D. L. Kelly, S. Chen, A. Napolitano,
L. Panzella, X. Shi, K. Yan, S. Wu et al., “Redox is a global
biodevice information processing modality,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 1402–1424, 2019.

[173] M. Kang, E. Kim, J. Li, W. E. Bentley, and G. F. Payne, “Re-
dox: Electron-based approach to bio-device molecular commu-
nication,” in 2018 IEEE 19th International Workshop on Signal
Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC).
,: IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.

[174] Y. Liu, J. S. McGrath, J. H. Moore, G. L. Kolling, J. A. Papin,
and N. S. Swami, “Electrofabricated biomaterial-based capac-
itor on nanoporous gold for enhanced redox ampliﬁcation,”
Electrochimica Acta, vol. 318, pp. 828–836, 2019.

[175] S. M. Abd El-atty, R. Bidar, and E.-S. M. El-Rabaie, “Molcom
system with downlink/uplink biocyber interface for internet
of bio-nanothings,” International Journal of Communication
Systems, vol. 33, no. 1, p. e4171, 2020.

[176] T. Bakhshi and S. Shahid, “Securing internet of bio-nano
things: Ml-enabled parameter proﬁling of bio-cyber interfaces,”
in 2019 22nd International Multitopic Conference (INMIC).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8.

[177] M. Zhang, A. Raghunathan, and N. K. Jha, “Medmon: Secur-
ing medical devices through wireless monitoring and anomaly
detection,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical circuits and
Systems, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 871–881, 2013.

[178] C. Camara, P. Peris-Lopez, and J. E. Tapiador, “Security and
privacy issues in implantable medical devices: A comprehensive
survey,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 55, pp. 272–
289, 2015.

[179] P. Kumar and H.-J. Lee, “Security issues in healthcare ap-
plications using wireless medical sensor networks: A survey,”
sensors, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 55–91, 2012.

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

[180] S. R. Islam, F. Ali, H. Moon, and K.-S. Kwak, “Secure
channel for molecular communications,” in 2017 International
Conference on Information and Communication Technology
Convergence (ICTC).

,: IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–4.

[181] W. Guo, Y. Deng, B. Li, C. Zhao, and A. Nallanathan,
“Eavesdropper localization in random walk channels,” IEEE
Communications Letters, vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1776–1779, 2016.

[182] S. Zafar, W. Aman, M. M. U. Rahman, A. Alomainy, and
Q. H. Abbasi, “Channel impulse response-based physical layer
authentication in a diﬀusion-based molecular communication
system,” in 2019 UK/China Emerging Technologies (UCET).
Glasgow, United Kingdom, United Kingdom: IEEE, 2019, pp.
1–2.

[183] A. Giaretta, S. Balasubramaniam, and M. Conti, “Security
vulnerabilities and countermeasures for target localization in
bio-nanothings communication networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 665–
676, 2015.

[184] M. M. U. Rahman, Q. H. Abbasi, N. Chopra, K. Qaraqe, and
A. Alomainy, “Physical layer authentication in nano networks
at terahertz frequencies for biomedical applications,” IEEE
Access, vol. 5, pp. 7808–7815, 2017.

[185] L. Felicetti, M. Femminella, and G. Reali, “Congestion control
in molecular cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp.
10 000–10 011, 2017.

[186] T. Nakano and M. Moore, “In-sequence molecule delivery over
an aqueous medium,” Nano Communication Networks, vol. 1,
no. 3, pp. 181–188, 2010.

[187] G. Sharma, S. Bala, and A. K. Verma, “Security frameworks for
wireless sensor networks-review,” Procedia Technology, vol. 6,
pp. 978–987, 2012.

[188] M. Zhang, A. Raghunathan, and N. K. Jha, “Trustworthiness
of medical devices and body area networks,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 102, no. 8, pp. 1174–1188, 2014.

[189] N. Ye, Y. Zhu, R.-c. Wang, R. Malekian, and L. Qiao-min,
“An eﬃcient authentication and access control scheme for
perception layer of internet of things,” Appl. Math, vol. 8, no. 4,
pp. 1–59, 2014.

[190] S. Singh, P. K. Sharma, S. Y. Moon, and J. H. Park, “Ad-
vanced lightweight encryption algorithms for iot devices: survey,
challenges and solutions,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence and
Humanized Computing, vol. 4, pp. 1–18, 2017.

[191] T. Belkhouja, A. Mohamedz, A. K. Al-Aliz, X. Dux, and
M. Guizani, “Light-Weight Solution to Defend Implantable
Medical Devices against Man-In-The-Middle Attack,” in IEEE
Abu
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM).
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, United Arab Emirates: IEEE,
2018, pp. 1–5.

[192] M. A. Siddiqi and C. Strydis, “Towards realistic battery-dos
protection of implantable medical devices,” in Proceedings of
the 16th ACM international conference on computing frontiers.
Alghero, Italy: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, pp.
42–49.

[193] H. Anhalt and N. J. Bohannon, “Insulin patch pumps: their
development and future in closed-loop systems,” Diabetes tech-
nology & therapeutics, vol. 12, no. S1, pp. S–51, 2010.

[194] S. Al-Janabi, I. Al-Shourbaji, M. Shojafar, and S. Shamshir-
band, “Survey of main challenges (security and privacy) in wire-
less body area networks for healthcare applications,” Egyptian
Informatics Journal, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 113–122, 2017.
[195] M. Kintzlinger and N. Nissim, “Keep an eye on your personal
belongings! the security of personal medical devices and their
ecosystems,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 95, p.
103233, 2019.

[196] M. Wazid, A. K. Das, J. J. Rodrigues, S. Shetty, and Y. Park,
“Iomt malware detection approaches: Analysis and research
challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 182 459–182 476, 2019.

[197] S. Gollakota, H. Hassanieh, B. Ransford, D. Katabi, and K. Fu,
“They can hear your heartbeats: non-invasive security for
implantable medical devices,” in SIGCOMM ’11 Proceedings
of the ACM SIGCOMM. Toronto: ACM, 2011, pp. 2–13.
[198] Y. K. Lee, K. Sakiyama, L. Batina, and I. Verbauwhede,
“Elliptic-curve-based security processor for rﬁd,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Computers, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 1514–1527, 2008.

38

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

[199] S.-K. Choi, C.-H. Yang, and J. Kwak, “System hardening and
security monitoring for iot devices to mitigate iot security
vulnerabilities and threats.” KSII Transactions on Internet &
Information Systems, vol. 12, no. 2, 2018.

[200] S. Son, K. Lee, D. Won, and S. Kim, “U-healthcare system pro-
tecting privacy based on cloaker,” in 2010 IEEE International
Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine Workshops
(BIBMW). Hong, Kong, China: IEEE, 2010, pp. 417–423.

[201] M. R. Rieback, B. Crispo, and A. S. Tanenbaum, “Rﬁd
guardian: A battery-powered mobile device for rﬁd privacy
management,” in Australasian Conference on Information Se-
curity and Privacy. Brisbane, Australia: Springer, 2005, pp.
184–194.

[202] X. Hei and X. Du, “The resource depletion attack and defense
scheme,” in Security for Wireless Implantable Medical Devices.
,: Springer, 2013, pp. 9–18.

[203] S. M. W. Umba, A. M. Abu-Mahfouz, T. Ramotsoela, and
G. P. Hancke, “A review of artiﬁcial intelligence based intrusion
detection for software-deﬁned wireless sensor networks,” in 2019
IEEE 28th International Symposium on Industrial Electronics
(ISIE).

ancouver, BC, Canada: IEEE, 2019, pp. 1277–1282.

[204] A. Rahim and P. Malone, “Intrusion detection system for
wireless nano sensor networks,” in 8th International Conference
for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions (ICITST-
2013). London, UK: IEEE, 2013, pp. 327–330.

[205] S. Aragon, M. Tiloca, M. Maass, M. Hollick, and S. Raza,
“Ace of spades in the iot security game: A ﬂexible ipsec
security proﬁle for access control,” in 2018 IEEE Conference on
Communications and Network Security (CNS).
IEEE, 2018,
pp. 1–9.

[206] M. Stelzner, F. Dressler, and S. Fischer, “Function centric nano-
networking: Addressing nano machines in a medical application
scenario,” Nano communication networks, vol. 14, pp. 29–39,
2017.

[207] L. Liu, L. Ding, D. Zhong, J. Han, S. Wang, Q. Meng, C. Qiu,
X. Zhang, L.-M. Peng, and Z. Zhang, “Carbon nanotube com-
plementary gigahertz integrated circuits and their applications
on wireless sensor interface systems,” ACS nano, vol. 13, no. 2,
pp. 2526–2535, 2019.

[208] C. Wang, K. Xia, H. Wang, X. Liang, Z. Yin, and Y. Zhang,
“Advanced carbon for ﬂexible and wearable electronics,” Ad-
vanced materials, vol. 31, no. 9, p. 1801072, 2019.

[209] H. Huang, S. Su, N. Wu, H. Wan, S. Wan, H. Bi, and L. Sun,
“Graphene-based sensors for human health monitoring,” Fron-
tiers in chemistry, vol. 7, p. 399, 2019.

[210] S. Kabiri Ameri, R. Ho, H. Jang, L. Tao, Y. Wang, L. Wang,
D. M. Schnyer, D. Akinwande, and N. Lu, “Graphene electronic
tattoo sensors,” ACS nano, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 7634–7641, 2017.
[211] P. Cordier, F. Tournilhac, C. Soulié-Ziakovic, and L. Leibler,
“Self-healing and thermoreversible rubber from supramolecular
assembly,” Nature, vol. 451, no. 7181, pp. 977–980, 2008.
[212] B. C. Tee, C. Wang, R. Allen, and Z. Bao, “An electrically and
mechanically self-healing composite with pressure-and ﬂexion-
sensitive properties for electronic skin applications,” Nature
nanotechnology, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 825–832, 2012.

[213] Y. Yang, B. Zhu, D. Yin, J. Wei, Z. Wang, R. Xiong, J. Shi,
Z. Liu, and Q. Lei, “Flexible self-healing nanocomposites for
recoverable motion sensor,” Nano Energy, vol. 17, pp. 1–9, 2015.
[214] A. J. Bandodkar, I. Jeerapan, and J. Wang, “Wearable chemical
sensors: Present challenges and future prospects,” Acs Sensors,
vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 464–482, 2016.

[215] A. J. Bandodkar, V. Mohan, C. S. López, J. Ramírez, and
J. Wang, “Self-healing inks for autonomous repair of printable
electrochemical devices,” Advanced Electronic Materials, vol. 1,
no. 12, p. 1500289, 2015.

[216] A. Rizwan, A. Zoha, R. Zhang, W. Ahmad, K. Arshad, N. A.
Ali, A. Alomainy, M. A. Imran, and Q. H. Abbasi, “A review on
the role of nano-communication in future healthcare systems: A
big data analytics perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 41 903–
41 920, 2018.

[217] A. Z. Shirazi, S. M. Mazinani, and S. K. Eghbal, “Protocol
stack for nano networks,” in 2012 International Symposium on
Computer, Consumer and Control. Taichung, Taiwan: IEEE,
2012, pp. 849–853.

[218] C. Doukas and I. Maglogiannis, “Managing wearable sensor
data through cloud computing,” in 2011 IEEE Third In-
ternational Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and
Science. Athen, Greece: IEEE, 2011, pp. 440–445.

[219] C. Liu, C. Yang, X. Zhang, and J. Chen, “External integrity
veriﬁcation for outsourced big data in cloud and iot: A big
picture,” Future generation computer systems, vol. 49, pp. 58–
67, 2015.

[220] C. Zhang, C. Li, and J. Zhang, “A secure privacy-preserving
data aggregation model in wearable wireless sensor networks,”
Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering, vol. 2015, pp.
1–9, 2015.

[221] C. Lin, P. Wang, H. Song, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, and G. Wu, “A
diﬀerential privacy protection scheme for sensitive big data in
body sensor networks,” Annals of Telecommunications, vol. 71,
no. 9-10, pp. 465–475, 2016.

[222] F. Dressler and F. Kargl, “Towards

security in nano-
communication: Challenges and opportunities,” Nano commu-
nication networks, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 151–160, 2012.

[223] S. Dhawan and A. Saini, “Secure data transmission techniques
based on dna cryptography,” International Journal of Emerg-
ing Technologies in Computational and Applied Sciences, vol. 2,
pp. 95–100, 2012.

[224] G. Cui, L. Qin, Y. Wang, and X. Zhang, “An encryption scheme
using dna technology,” in 2008 3rd International Conference on
Bio-Inspired Computing: Theories and Applications.
,: IEEE,
2008, pp. 37–42.

[225] M. Rusia and R. H. Makwana, “Review on dna based encryp-
tion algorithm for text and image data,” International Journal
of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT), vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 3182–3186, 2014.

[226] Y. Zhang and L. B. Fu, “Research on dna cryptography,” in
,: Rijeka,

Applied cryptography and network security, vol. 357.
2012, pp. 10–5772.

[227] G. Jacob, “Dna based cryptography: An overview and analysis,”
International Journal of Emerging Sciences, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 36,
2013.

[228] G. Jacob and A. Murugan, “An encryption scheme with dna
technology and jpeg zigzag coding for secure transmission of
images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1305.1270, 2013.

[229] T. Gao and Z. Chen, “A new image encryption algorithm based
on hyper-chaos,” Physics Letters A, vol. 372, no. 4, pp. 394–400,
2008.

[230] A. Gehani, T. LaBean, and J. Reif, “Dna-based cryptography,”
,: Springer, 2003, pp.

in Aspects of Molecular Computing.
167–188.

[231] K. Malasri and L. Wang, “Design and implementation of a
securewireless mote-based medical sensor network,” Sensors,
vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 6273–6297, 2009.

[232] S. C. Seo, D.-G. Han, and S. Hong, “Tinyecck16: An eﬃcient
ﬁeld multiplication algorithm on 16-bit environment and its
application to tmote sky sensor motes,” IEICE transactions on
information and systems, vol. 92, no. 5, pp. 918–928, 2009.

[233] K. Malasri and L. Wang, “Snap: an architecture for secure
medical sensor networks,” in 2006 2nd IEEE Workshop on
Wireless Mesh Networks. Reston, VA, USA: IEEE, 2006, pp.
160–162.

[234] T. M. Fernández-Caramés, “From pre-quantum to post-
quantum iot security: A survey on quantum-resistant cryp-
tosystems for the internet of things,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6457–6480, 2019.

[235] F. Dressler and O. B. Akan, “Bio-inspired networking: from
theory to practice,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 48,
no. 11, pp. 176–183, 2010.

[236] Dressler, Falko and Akan, Ozgur B, “A survey on bio-inspired
networking,” Computer networks, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 881–900,
2010.

[237] U. Rauf, “A taxonomy of bio-inspired cyber security ap-
proaches: existing techniques and future directions,” Arabian
Journal for Science and Engineering, vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 6693–
6708, 2018.

[238] F. Dressler, “Bio-inspired mechanisms for eﬃcient and adaptive
network security mechanisms,” in Service Management and
Self-Organization in IP-based Networks, ser. Dagstuhl Seminar

VOLUME 4, 2021

39

S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakshi, HA. Khattak et al.:

Proceedings, M. Bossardt, G. Carle, D. Hutchison, H. de Meer,
and B. Plattner, Eds., no. 04411. Dagstuhl, Germany: Inter-
nationales Begegnungs- und Forschungszentrum für Informatik
(IBFI), Schloss Dagstuhl, Germany, 2005, pp. 1–6.

[239] E. B. Noeparast and T. Banirostam, “A cognitive model of
immune system for increasing security in distributed systems,”
in 2012 UKSim 14th International Conference on Computer
Modelling and Simulation. Cambridge, UK: IEEE, 2012, pp.
181–186.

[240] E. W. Fulp, H. D. Gage, D. J. John, M. R. McNiece, W. H.
Turkett, and X. Zhou, “An evolutionary strategy for resilient
cyber defense,” in 2015 IEEE Global Communications Confer-
ence (GLOBECOM).

,: IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.

[241] S. Bitam, S. Zeadally, and A. Mellouk, “Bio-inspired cyber-
security for wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 68–74, 2016.

HASAN ALI KHATTAK received his Ph.D.
in Electrical and Computer Engineering de-
gree from Politecnico di Bari, Bari, Italy
on April 2015, Master’s degree in Informa-
tion Engineering from Politecnico di Torino,
Torino, Italy, in 2011, and B.CS. degree in
Computer Science from the University of
Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan in 2006. He
is currently serving as Associate Professor -
School of Electrical Engineering and Com-
puter Science, National University of Sciences and Technology -
Pakistan since October 2020. His current research interests focus
on Future Internet Architectures such as the Web of Things and
leveraging Data Sciences and Social Engineering for Future Smart
Cities.

SIDRA ZAFAR is a Ph.D. scholar at Lahore
College for Women University (LCWU), La-
hore, Pakistan. She received her MS (Com-
puter Science) from LCWU in 2012. She
did her BS (Software Engineering) from
International Islamic University Islamabad,
Pakistan. She has presented her work at the
International Conference. Her research in-
terests include the Internet of Nano Things,
Nano Communication Network, Security in

Nanonetworks, Access Control.

MOHSIN NAZIR did his Ph.D. from Asian
Institute of Technology (AIT), Thailand
in 2011. He is working in Lahore College
for Women University as Associate Profes-
sor since 2012. He is a member of various
renowned research societies. His research in-
terests include Cooperative Cognitive Wire-
less Communications, Game Theory, Evo-
lutionary Game Theory, Graph Theory,
Smart Energy Grids, Nano Communica-

tions, Cloud Computing, QoS, and 4G network.

TAIMUR BAKHSHI holds a Ph.D. in com-
puter science, specializing in software de-
ﬁned networking from the Department of
Computing & Mathematics, University of
Plymouth, UK. His academic credentials
also include an M.Sc. in network systems
engineering completed with distinction from
University of Plymouth and a B.Sc. in elec-
tronic engineering from Pakistan. Prior to
starting his academic career, Dr. Bakhshi
worked for more than ﬁve years in IT incident management and
network engineering roles for BlackBerry Ltd. and Orange SA
(France Telecom). He holds Associate Fellowship of the Higher
Education Academy (HEA), U.K and is a professional member of
the British Computer Society (BCS) and the Institute of Electrical
and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). His present research focuses
on software deﬁned networking, network measurements, Internet
traﬃc classiﬁcation, and systems security.

SARMADULLAH KHAN received the M.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees from Politecnico di
Torino, Italy,
in 2009 and 2013, respec-
tively, all in electronics and telecommunica-
tion engineering. He was an Assistant Pro-
fessor with the CECOS University of IT
and Emerging Science, Peshawar, Pakistan,
from 2013 to 2017. He is currently a Lec-
turer with De Montfort University, U.K. He
is also a Program Leader of M.Sc. cyber
technology and its pathways. Dr. Khan is a member of academic
board of studies, curriculum revision committee, program manage-
ment board, and school management group. His current research
interests include the Internet of things security, content centric
networks security, cryptographic key establishment and manage-
ment, and wireless sensor networks security. He is a guest editor
of two special issues in the journal of wireless communication and
mobile computing.

MUHAMMAD BILAL received the B.Sc. de-
gree in computer systems engineering from
the University of Engineering and Tech-
nology, Peshawar, Pakistan,
in 2008, the
M.S. degree in computer engineering from
the Chosun University, Gwangju, South Ko-
rea, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree in in-
formation and communication network en-
gineering from the School of Electronics
and Telecommunications Research Institute
(ETRI), Korea University of Science and Technology, in 2017.
He is an Assistant Professor with the Division of Computer and
Electronic Systems Engineering, Hankuk University of Foreign
Studies, Yongin, South Korea. Prior to joining Hankuk University
of Foreign Studies, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at Smart
Quantum Communication Center, Korea University, Seoul, South
Korea, in 2017. His research interests include design and analysis
of network protocols, network architecture, network security, IoT,
named data networking, Blockchain, cryptology, and Neural Net-
works. He is an editor of IEEE Future Directions Ethics and Policy
in Technology Newsletter and IEEE Internet Policy Newsletter.

40

VOLUME 4, 2021

Security in the Internet of Bio-Nano Things: Challenges and Research Opportunities

KIM-KWANG RAYMOND CHOO (Senior
Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
in information security from the Queens-
land University of Technology, Australia, in
2006. He currently holds the Cloud Technol-
ogy Endowed Professorship at The Univer-
sity of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA). He
is the founding co-editor-in-chief of ACM’s
Distributed Ledger Technologies: Research
& Practice, and founding chair of IEEE
Technology and Engineering Management Society’s Technical
Committee on Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technologies.
He is also the recipient of the 2019 IEEE Technical Committee on
Scalable Computing Award for Excellence in Scalable Computing
(Middle Career Researcher), the 2018 UTSA College of Business
Col. Jean Piccione and Lt. Col. Philip Piccione Endowed Research
Award for Tenured Faculty, the Outstanding Associate Editor of
2018 for IEEE Access, the British Computer Society’s 2019 Wilkes
Award Runner-up, the 2014 Highly Commended Award by the
KYUNG-SUP KWAK (Life Senior Mem-
ber, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from
the University of California. He was with
Hughes Network Systems and IBM Network
Analysis Center, USA. He was with Inha
University, South Korea, as a Professor. He
was also the Dean of the Graduate School
of Information Technology and Telecom-
munications and the Director of the UWB
Wireless Communications Research Center.
In 2008, he was an Inha Fellow Professor (IFP). He is currently
an Inha Hanlim Fellow Professor. His research interests include
UWB radio systems, wireless body area network and nano and
molecular communications. In 2006, he was the President of the
Korean Institute of Communication Sciences (KICS) and the
Korea Institute of Intelligent Transport Systems (KITS) in 2009.
He received the oﬃcial commendations for achievements of UWB
radio technology R/D from the Korean President in 2009.

Australia New Zealand Policing Advisory Agency, the Fulbright
Scholarship in 2009, the 2008 Australia Day Achievement Medal-
lion, and the British Computer Society’s Wilkes Award in 2008. He
has received best paper awards from the IEEE Systems Journal in
2021, IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine for 2020, EURASIP
Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking in 2019,
IEEE TrustCom 2018, and ESORICS 2015; the Korea Information
Processing Society’s Journal of Information Processing Systems
Outstanding Research Award (Most-cited Paper) for 2020 and
Survey Paper Award (Gold) in 2019; the IEEE Blockchain 2019
Outstanding Paper Award; and Best Student Paper Awards from
Inscrypt 2019 and ACISP 2005.

ANEEQA SABAH is currently working as
an Assistant professor in physics depart-
ment LCWU. She has been Awarded for
Overseas Scholarship for PhD degree in the
ﬁeld of Nanotechnology by HEC (Higher
education commission), Pakistan. It was a
successful project. She has been supervis-
ing the several projects on BS, MS, and
PhD level, based on nano fabrication, nano
ﬁlms and membranes, quantum dots, hybrid
materials, spectroscopy, composites, and metal doped sensing.
She has published many research papers in high impact factor
journals, journal of physical chemistry and ACS, and involved in
participating and organizing seminar and conferences in respec-
tive departments. Her expertise is nano synthesis, self-assembly
and organization, colloids, one dimensional nano materials, green
chemistry, and quantum dots.

VOLUME 4, 2021

41

