Towards anomaly detection in smart grids by 
combining Complex Events Processing and SNMP 
objects  

Massimiliano Leone Itria 
ResilTech S.r.l.  
Pontedera (PI), Italy 
massimiliano.itria@resiltech.com  

Enrico Schiavone 
ResilTech S.r.l. 
Pontedera (PI), Italy 
enrico.schiavone@resiltech.com 

Nicola Nostro 
ResilTech S.r.l.  
Pontedera (PI), Italy 
nicola.nostro@resiltech.com 

Abstract—  This  paper  describes  the  architecture  and  the 
fundamental  methodology  of  an  anomaly  detector,  which  by 
continuously  monitoring  Simple  Network  Management 
Protocol data and by processing it as complex-events, is able to 
timely recognize patterns of faults and relevant cyber-attacks. 
This solution has been applied in the context of smart grids, and 
in particular as part of a security and resilience component of 
the  Information  and  Communication  Technologies  (ICT) 
Gateway, a middleware-based architecture that correlates and 
fuses measurement data from different sources (e.g., Inverters, 
Smart  Meters)  to  provide  control  coordination  and  to  enable 
grid observability applications. The detector has been evaluated 
through  experiments,  where  we  selected  some  representative 
anomalies  that  can  occur  on  the  ICT  side  of  the  energy 
distribution  infrastructure:  non-malicious  faults  (indicated  by 
patterns  in  the  system  resources  usage),  as  well  as  effects  of 
typical cyber-attacks directed to the smart grid infrastructure. 
The  results  show  that  the  detection  is  promisingly  fast  and 
efficient. 

Keywords—  Anomaly  Detection,  Cyber-security,  Complex 
Event Processing, Simple Network Management Protocol, Smart 
Grids. 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

A  smart  grid  is  an  electricity  supply  network  based  on 
Information  and  Communication  Technologies  (ICT)  and 
digital information, which connects suppliers and prosumers 
allowing monitoring, analysis and control of many aspects of 
production  and  distribution  of  electricity  [1].  Smart  grids 
represent one of the systems, among the emerging ones, which 
show  a  certain  degree  of  criticality  where  the  effective  and 
prompt detection of both malfunctions and intentional cyber-
attack  attempts  is  of  critical  importance  [2].  Nowadays,  in 
fact, cyber security in smart grid systems is becoming a major 
concern, since there is a wide list of cyber-attacks that can be 
conducted  against  them  [3],  and  some  of  them  have  been 
already  demonstrated  to  be  actually  feasible  [4].  Solutions 
have  been  proposed  which  promise  to  mitigate  the  risk  of 
cyber-attacks [4][5][6] and faults [7], but we believe that there 
is still space for new methods capable of timely detecting the 
occurrence of undesired events caused by intentional attacks 
or  faults  in  the  system,  and  we  cannot  rely  on  existing 
mitigations forever due to a continuously evolving landscape 
in cyber security and technology (e.g., emerging threats). 

In this work, we present a general approach for fault and 
attack  detection  in  ICT  networks,  specifically  designed  for 
being  applicable  to  smart  grid  systems,  which  exploits 

anomaly  detection  [8]  to  find  irregular  values  in  monitored 
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) [9] data, and 
combines it with Complex Event Processing (CEP)  [10] for 
correlating  those  anomalous  values  to  known  cyber-attacks 
and faults. 

The  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  Section  II  reports 
background concepts of SNMP and CEP. Section III gives an 
overview  of  the  context  in  which  the  solution  has  been 
designed.  Section  IV  describes  the  proposed  approach. 
Section V reports the experiments executed and their results. 
Finally, Section 0 draws conclusion and outlines future work. 

II.  BACKGROUND: SNMP AND CEP 

A.  The SNMP  

The SNMP Protocol [9] is an Internet Standard protocol 
for the management and monitoring of network and computer 
equipment. 

It  is  supported  by  many  typical  network  devices  (e.g., 
routers, hubs, bridges, switches, servers, modem and racks). 
SNMP standard includes an application layer protocol based 
on  a  manager  entity  (i.e.  management  system)  that  is 
responsible to communicate with the agents implemented in 
the network devices. The management system is able to get 
relevant information, called SNMP objects [9] (e.g., resource 
usage, running processes,  number of  packets  sent/received), 
from the network devices that support the protocol.  

The  use  of  SNMP  data  has  been  proposed  as  means  to 
detect Denial of Service (DoS) attacks in computer network 
through  statistical  algorithms  [11].  The  advantage  of  using 
SNMP data is that this information is easily available as the 
protocol is enabled in the involved network equipment to be 
monitored. 

B.  The Complex Event Processing  

CEP [10] is a set of concepts and techniques that consists 
in  the  real-time  or  nearly  real-time  processing  of  events 
generated by the combination of data from multiple sources 
and  aggregated  in  complex-events  representing  something 
occurred  in a  system.  Common  event  processing  operations 
include  reading,  creating,  transforming  and  deleting  events. 
CEP is the means that allows to: i) filter and extract relevant 
events  from  several  data  streams  belonging  to  event 
producers; ii) identify relationships; iii) correlate such events, 
and;  iv)  aggregate  the  information  in  complex-events. 
Therefore, the most important feature of CEP is its ability to 

 
 
 
analyze  many  events  and  possibly  recognize  patterns  of 
spotted complex events very quickly [12]. 

III.  THE APPLICATION CONTEXT: THE ICT GATEWAY 

This  section  introduces  the  overall  architecture  and  the 
application context for the use of the proposed solution. The 
ICT Gateway (ICT GW) is a software system that acts as a 
mediator  between  data  sources  (i.e.,  headends)  and  grid 
actuators, providing services for smart energy distribution and 
ensuring security and resilience of the system.  

from  measurement 

The  middleware-based  architecture  for  data  fusion, 
referred as ICT  GW [13], is Fig. 1. The ICT GW leverages 
smart grid topology information jointly with data provided by 
measurement devices deployed in the field, for achieving grid 
observability.  It  uses  existing  communication  technologies 
and off-the-shelf computing hardware to obtain novel control 
coordination 
functionality.  The 
measurements  from  different  headends,  such  as  Inverters, 
Smart  Meters,  via 
(Advanced  Metering 
an  AMI 
Infrastructure),  and  Electrical  Measurement  in  general,  are 
correlated  with  data  originating  in  existing  Distribution 
System  Operator  (DSO)  subsystems,  such  as  the  grid 
topology,  enabling  and  developing  novel  grid  observability 
applications  (e.g.,  for  outage  detection  and  diagnosis,  grid 
operation efficiency, and voltage quality) [14][15]. Then, the 
gained  observability  can  be  exploited 
to  control  and 
coordinate, thanks to the actuation capabilities offered by the 
inverters  and  together  with  existing  DSO  actuation,  to 
enhance  voltage  quality  and  minimize  losses  in  the  Low 
Voltage (LV) grid [16]. 

The ICT  GW is thus a middleware layer that provides a 
unique  framework  for  domain-oriented  applications  by 
abstracting specific details regarding subsystem interface into 
a common and harmonized data model. One of the roles of the 
ICT GW is also to take care of reliability and security issues 
through  the  Security  &  Resilience  component  where  the 
anomaly and attack detector proposed in this work takes place. 

IV.  THE PROPOSED DETECTION APPROACH 

The approach adopted in this work involves the runtime 
analysis and correlation of SNMP objects through a correlator 
engine, allowing the DSO, or the ICT network administrator, 
to  implement  detection  patterns  and  enable  them  for 
monitoring the network in near real-time. 

Fig. 1. Architecture of the ICT Gateway [13] 

The idea is to monitor the trends of a set of selected SNMP 
objects and to correlate them based on detection patterns, thus 
allowing  to  recognize  anomalies  or  faults  occurring  in  the 
network. 

Leveraging the CEP, once either a fault or an attack pattern 
is recognized a warning is immediately raised for activating 
the recovery system in charge of actuating the proper reaction 
to solve or mitigate the emergent criticality. 

A.  Architecture of the Anomaly Detector 
The idea behind the anomaly detector introduced in this work 
starts  from  continuously  monitoring  SNMP  objects  of  the 
ICT  Network  (i.e.,  the  ICT  GW  in  our  context).  The 
information  obtained  through  SNMP  objects  is  compared 
with  fault  and  attack  detection  patterns  by  means  of  CEP 
technology. Patterns can be defined by studying the effect of 
the  attacks  on  the  SNMP  objects  trend  and  identifying 
relationships between measures and thresholds. It is possible 
to define several patterns for the same type of attack.  
In  this  work,  attacks  have  been  reproduced  in  lab  and  an 
injection activity has been conducted in order to analyze the 
variation  in  SNMP  objects  and  deduce  representative, 
general, patterns.  

Fig. 2. The Security and Resilience (S&R) component architecture 

 
 
Finally,  after  the deployment of  the  anomaly detector, a 
new  set  of  attacks  has  been  injected  in  order  to  verify  the 
effectiveness in detection.  

The  anomaly  detection  is  implemented  as  part  of  the 
Security and Resilience (S&R) functionalities. The S&R is a 
component  that performs both attack and fault detection for 
the ICT GW. As depicted in Fig. 2., the S&R takes in input 
SNMP  objects,  converts  them  into  events,  and forwards the 
events to the CEP engine, namely the Esper Correlator [17].  

The  Esper  Correlator  works,  to  a  certain  extent,  as  a 
reversed database: instead of storing data and running queries 
on data, it allows applications to store queries and run them on 
the data streams. The Correlator receives SNMP objects from 
the  ICT  GW,  applies  queries  to  the  data  stream  and  raises 
alerts when conditions occur that match the queries. Queries 
are expressed through the Event Processing Language (EPL) 
[17], a domain specific language designed for similarity with 
SQL  (Structured  Query  Language),  with  the  difference  that 
EPL uses stream views rather than tables, and thus allows for 
the  processing  of  several  streams  within  a  single  query. 
Detection patterns are implemented as Esper queries activated 
on the SNMP objects stream. 

In the Correlator, each query is activated in a Listener, i.e. 
a software module in charge of applying the query on the input 
data.  Once  a  query  matches,  the  listener  triggers  the  Data 
Aggregator that provides in output to the Operator the related 
alert describing the anomaly originating it. 

V.  EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION AND RESULTS 

Intentional malicious actions, as well as accidental faults, 
for  example  caused  by  HW  failures,  SW  bugs,  inadeguate 
maintencance, etc., occurring in the ICT side of the electrical 
distribution infrastructure, could manifest themselves through 
deviations from the expected behavior. 

Therefore,  monitoring  system  resources  (e.g.,  RAM 
(Random  Access  Memory)  usage,  storage  requests,  CPU 
(Central  Processing  Unit)  workload)  can  help  detecting 
dangerous,  non-malicious,  situations  before  malfunctions 
occur or at worst before the service disruption. On the other 
hand, anomalies in system resources (e.g., CPU and/or RAM 
overload)  can  also  indicate  intrusions  which  exploited  a 
vulnerability. In both cases, patterns for resources monitoring 
allow  the  detector  to  detect  when  a  system  resource  is 
overloaded  and  can  be  a  good  indicator  of  a  dangerous 
situation to be taken into consideration. 

Together with system resources, anomalies in the network 
activity may be as well indicative of deviations from nominal 
behaviors.  

Among many  types  of  attacks  affecting  smart grids  ICT 
infrastructure  [3][4][18],  we focused on  DoS  attacks,  which 
are  one  of  the  main  threats  to  smart  grids  communications 
[19][20].  However,  the  proposed  approach  is  suitable  for 
identifying and predicting several type of attacks. Indeed, by 
means  of  specific  SNMP  objects,  it  is  possible  to  monitor 
network  access  points,  resource  usage  and  active  processes 
(e.g.,  memory,  storage,  kernel  processes),  thus  allowing  to 
detect and prevent network intrusion attempts, malicious code 
corruption or malicious code activation, which could allow the 
attacker to gain control of the system. 

For demonstration purposes only, the TCP (Transmission 
Control Protocol) Reset attack and the ICMP (Internet Control 

Message  Protocol)  Flooding  attack  have  been  selected  as 
representatives  of  a  large  number  of  common  DoS  attacks 
[21][22] and used for the experimental evaluations presented 
in this paper.  

The  TCP  Reset  attack  has  the  purpose  of  breaking  an 
existing connection between two victim hosts and spoofing a 
single TCP RST (details are given section B) packet may be 
sufficient  to  achieve  the  goal  [22].  In  the  case  of  an  ICMP 
Flooding, an attacker sends a large number of spoofed ICMP 
packets from a very large set of source IP. When a server is 
flooded with massive amounts of spoofed ICMP packets, its 
resources  are  exhausted  in  trying  to  process  these  requests. 
This overload reboots the server or has a huge impact on its 
performance [21]. 

The  experiments  have  been  performed  using  a  physical 
machine on which both the ICT GW and the S&R component 
run.  On  the  other  hand,  a  virtual  machine  simulated  the 
attacker’s  endpoint  from  where  the  attacks  have  been 
launched. 

In our experiments, the detector has been implemented and 
trained by injecting two representative attacks and observing 
patterns and changes in the SNMP objects while the attacks 
where  occurring.  The  results  of  this  preliminary  campaign 
have been used to define the detection queries to be included 
in the correlator. 

Afterwards, attacks different from the ones injected during 
the  design  of  the  detector,  but  belonging  to  the  same 
categories, where injected to test the detection effectiveness. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  injection  campaign  aimed  at 
validating  the  solution  has  been  performed  by  means  of 
different tools and configurations. 

However, different or additional patterns and objects can 
be adopted to improve the detection capabilities. In fact, the 
operator can  adjust  thresholds  according to  the  evolution  of 
known attacks or introduce completely new patterns for start 
detecting other ones. 

A.  System Resources Anomaly Detection 

The  tests  conducted  to  detect  resources  overload  were 

performed considering three different SNMP objects. 

• 

• 

• 

hrProcessorLoad for alerting when the CPU usage is 
over a predefined threshold that can cause  services 
slowing down. 

hrStorageUsed  for  detecting  RAM  overload  by 
setting  a  threshold  on  the  maximum  amount  of 
usable  memory  that  allows  the  system  to  operate 
without slowing down. 

hrSystemProcesses  for  tracing  the  number  of  tasks 
activated simultaneously on the machine. 

These  three  objects  are  sufficient  to  detect  the  faults 
referred in this study, but this does not exclude that different 
SNMP  objects  can  be  combined  to  detect  the  same  type  of 
faults. 

In  our  tests,  based  on  heuristic  approach,  we  set 
hrProcessorLoad  threshold  to  90%,  considered  a  balanced 
amount  of  CPU  usage  that  allows  the  ICT  GW  to  operate 
efficiently  without  slowing  down.  Similar  tests  have  been 
executed on hrStorageUsed for determining the RAM limits. 

In  normal  conditions,  several  processes  are  activated  on 
the ICT GW, either tasks related to the services or tasks related 
to the operating system running on the machine where the ICT 
GW is placed. Therefore, the number of tasks varies over time 
mainly because the operating system schedules automatically 
processes  that  do  not  depend  on  the  services.  However,  we 
experienced that, under normal conditions, this number does 
not exceed 40 simultaneously active tasks. In this experiment, 
an alert has been raised by the S&R when hrSystemProcesses 
was above the 40 tasks threshold. 

These  alerts  represent  anomalies  occurred  in  the  system 
and they cannot be associated a priori with specific accidental 
faults  or  malicious  intentional  actions.  However,  such 
anomalies  are  symptoms  that should not  be underestimated. 
Once  an  anomaly  is  detected,  the  possible  consequent 
damages  can  be  avoided  or  mitigated  by  carrying  out 
necessary countermeasures. 

B.  The TCP Reset Attack Detection 

The  TCP  Reset  Attack  exploits an intrinsic  weakness  of 
the TCP protocol whose packets expose a header containing 
bits  representing  commands  for  the  network  interface.  The 
TCP header, which is the initial part of an IP packet, contains 
a code of six bits, each of which is used for different purposes 
(e.g., SYN, FIN and RST are related to connection). TCP also 
manages  to  reorder  the  segments  arriving  at  the  recipient 
through a field of its header called sequence number [22]. As 
soon as a TCP RST packet with a coherent sequence number 
is  received,  the  connection  is  broken.  This  RST  packet  is 
usually used when some errors are detected or in emergency 
situations. 

 The  attacker  observes  the  TCP  packets  of  a  specific 
connection  between  the  two  endpoints  and  then  sends 
“forged” packets with the TCP reset flag enabled. The headers 
of the forged packet indicates, falsely, that it came from  the 
genuine  endpoint,  not  the  forger  (IP  spoofing).  In  order  to 
perform this kind of attack, the attacker must know the IP and 
the port where to send the forged packets. Properly formatted 
and  forged,  the  TCP  reset  can  be  a  very  effective  way  to 
disrupt any TCP connection the forger can monitor. 

Fig.  4  shows  with  a  sequence  diagram  how  the  attack 
works:  while  the  nodes  A  and  B  are  communicating,  the 
attacker  periodically  sends  forged  packets  to  node  A.  The 
forged packet, with a supposed sequence number and the RST 
bit enabled, is dropped if it does not have a sequence number 
such that the packet can be reordered together with the other 
packets  received.  However,  if  it  has  a  sequence  number 

 Fig. 3. The tcpEstabResets anomaly during the TCP Reset 
Attack 

consistent with the last received packets, it is accepted causing 
the connection to be interrupted. 

The TCP Reset Attack is basically detected by monitoring 
the tcpEstabResets measure; the SNMP agent increments this 
counter each time a connection is closed due to the reception 
of a TCP reset packet. 

Since the attack can last for a relatively long time before 
the forged packet is accepted and the tcpEstabResets counter 
is  updated,  we  monitored  also  an  additional  measure: 
tcpRetransSegs,  representing  the  number  of  retransmissions 
executed  by  the  ICT  GW  correlating  it  with  a  Socket 
Exception event. In this way, the attack is timely detected in 
both the following cases: i) a forged TCP RST packet deceives 
the ICT GW in few seconds, ii) the attack takes more time to 
trigger the reset but, due to the flooding effect, the connection 
is significantly slowed down. 

In  case  of  the  RST  packet  deceives  the  receiver  in  few 
seconds, the tcpEstabResets value depicted in Fig. 3 grows by 
7 units in about 1 second. Multiple resets happen because the 
ICT  GW  tries  to  reconnect  to  its  destination  but  the  attack 
persists  and  interrupts  any  reconnection  until  it  causes  a 
timeout that stops the communication service. The anomaly is 
correctly detected. 

In case the attack takes more time to trigger the reset, since 
it does not break the connection yet and the tcpEstabResets is 
not affected, a successful detection of the attack is performed 
by  monitoring  the  tcpRetransSegs,  as  shown  in  Fig.  5;  the 
detection occurs in about 3 seconds, just after the prevention 
of communication and the occurrence of a Socket Exception. 

Fig. 4. The TCP Reset Attack sequence diagram 

Fig. 5. The tcpRetransSegs anomaly during the TCP Reset 
Attack 

 
 
  
 
Name 

EPL Code 

Memory Overload 

select * from pattern [ every e=Event 
(e.getAdapterFlag()=false)] where 
(e.getSNMPvalue(‘hrStorageUsed’)>62000) 

CPU 
Overload 

select * from pattern [every e=Event 
(e.getAdapterFlag()=false)] where (e.getSNMPvalue 
(‘hrProcessorLoad’)>90) 

Tasks 
Number 
Overcoming 

select * from pattern [every 
e=Event(e.getMeasure()=’hrSystemProcesses’] where 
(e.getSNMPvalue()>40) 

ICMP Flooding 
Attack 

select irstream * from pattern [every 
(e1=Event(e1.getMeasure()=’icmpInEchos’)  
 -> e2=Event(e2.getMeasure()=’icmpInEchos’)) where 
timer:within(1 sec)] where (e2.getSNMPvalue()-
e1.getSNMPvalue()>3) 

Reasoning 
This pattern matches when 
the currently used RAM 
overcomes the specified 
threshold 
This pattern checks if a 
core processor workload 
overcomes the 90% 
threshold. 
This pattern checks 
anomalies in the 
hrSystemProcesses 
number. When the number 
of processes overcomes 41 
an anomaly is detected. 
When a flood is ongoing, 
the counter icmpInEchos 
grows up very quickly. If 
icmpInEchos grows over 3 
ICMP messages in 1 
second, the fault is 
detected. 

TCP Reset Attack 

select * from pattern [every e1=Event (e1.getMeasure()=’ 
tcpEstabResets’ -> e2= Event(e2.getMeasure()=’ 
tcpEstabResets’) or e3=Event(e3.getMeasure()=’ 
tcpEstabResets’ -> e4=Event(e4.getMeasure()=’ 
tcpEstabResets’) and e5=Event (e5.getAdapterFlag()= 
false)] win:time(15 sec) where (e2.getSNMPvalue()-
e1.getSNMPvalue()>0 and e4.getSNMPvalue()-
e3.getSNMPvalue() >4 and 
e5.getSNMPvalue()='SocketException') 

This pattern recognizes a 
TCP reset attack when the 
counter tcpEstabResets 
grows up of at least 1 in 
15 secs or tcpRetransSegs 
grows up at least of 5 in 
the same time window and 
a communication 
exception occurs. 

TABLE I.  

DETECTION PATTERNS AND EPL QUERIES DEFINED FOR THE EXPERIMENTS 

In  our  experiments,  during  the  normal  working  of  the 
system,  the  growth  of  tcpEstabReset  and  tcpRetransSegs 
always remained below the thresholds and no false negatives 
have occurred. 

C.  The ICMP Flood Attack Detection 

layer  protocol  used  by  network  devices 

By  means  of  ICMP  Flood  Attack,  also  known  as  ping 
flood  attack,  the  attacker  attempts  to  overwhelm  a  targeted 
device with ICMP echo-request packets, causing the target to 
become  inaccessible  to  normal  traffic.  The  ICMP,  is  an 
Internet 
to 
communicate.  The  network  diagnostic  tools  operate  using 
ICMP.  Commonly,  ICMP  echo-request  and  echo-reply 
messages are used to ping a network device for diagnosing its 
health or to test the connectivity between the sender and the 
device. During an attack, however, they are used to overload 
a target network with data packets. Executing a ping flood is 
dependent on attacker knowing the IP address of the target but 
it  does  not  depend  on  knowing  ports  where  services  are 
deployed. Configuring the firewall to disallow pings can block 
attacks  originating  from  outside  of  the  network.  However, 

blocking  ping  requests  can  have  unintended  consequences, 
including the inability to diagnose server problems. 

 The sequence diagram in Fig. 6 depicts the execution of 
an ICMP flooding on the node A while it is transmitting data 
to the node B. The attack produces ICMP requests with high 
frequency  sent  to  the  node  A  which  tries  to  reply  to  the 
attacker emitting a series of ICMP replies. Due to the overload 
affecting the communication channel, data packets destinated 
to  node  B  may  not  be  emitted  or  may  not  reach  their 
destination. 

This  attack  is  detected  monitoring  the  SNMP  counter 
named icmpInEchos, whose threshold is set to 3 ping/s after 
having  experienced  that  this  measure  grows  by  around  100 
pings  in  30  seconds  in  case  of  a  moderate  flood  of  ping 
requests.  Performing  some  similar  experiments,  we  noticed 
that if the attack is active for a short time (i.e., 2 or 3 seconds) 
the communication between the data source and the ICT GW 
is not interrupted, and it is restored after the end of the attack. 
However,  having  set  the  threshold  in  this  way,  permits  to 
detect also ICMP flooding attacks of short duration. If instead 

Fig. 6. The ICMP Flooding Attack 

Fig. 7. The icmpInEchos anomaly during the ICMP flooding 
attack 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  attack  lasts  for  more  than  3  seconds,  the  connection 
between the two nodes will certainly be broken. Fig. 7 shows 
the  anomaly  during  a  strong  ICMP  flooding  attack.  In  this 
case, the icmpInEchoes counter is incremented approximately 
of 0.4*105 per second. 

D.  Detection Patterns 

Table 1 reports the detection pattern names used during the 
experiments,  the related EPL code,  and  a  short  summary of 
the reasoning about the detection strategy. 

VI.  CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 

The fault and attack detection approach described in this 
paper  combines  the  potentialities  of  SNMP  with  the  CEP 
correlation capabilities. SNMP is able to provide online a huge 
set of different measurements  with  a  secure  communication 
protocol, while CEP allows to apply detection patterns with 
measurements correlation. 

For brevity, we examined the most representative attacks 
affecting smart grids, the DoS attacks. Actually, the described 
approach allows to define countless attack detection patterns. 
New  attack  techniques  can  be  thwarted  by  defining  related 
new detection patters or attack evolutions can be addressed by 
modifying existing patterns. This feature makes it possible to 
organize  an  immediate  reaction  to  attacks  evolution  in  the 
application  domain  without  making  changes  to  the  security 
infrastructure. 

In  addition,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  experiments 
described  have  considered  only  one  node  of  the  network 
consisting  of  a  single  networked  machine.  Although  the 
approach, being extensible to many heterogeneous elements 
in  the  network,  promises  to  be  further  enhanced  for  greater 
control  of  the  network  with  greater  capability  in  detecting 
faults. With reference to the current ICT technologies applied 
to  smart  grids,  we  are  conducting  a  study  aimed  at 
understanding how the extension of this approach to the whole 
grid can interfere with communications performances. Since 
only few messages per minute are required to monitor a smart 
grid device and the SNMP messages relatively limited (e.g., 
484 bytes) they do not interfere with the availability of the ICT 
infrastructure  producing  low  impact  on  communication 
performances.  However, 
this  will  be  planned  and 
experimented in further developments. 

Finally,  knowing  the  topology  of  the  network,  the 
anomalies correlation will also allow the location of accidental 
or malicious faults in the network. This is a study that will be 
deepened in the future and applied in the smart grid context. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This  work  has  received  funding  from  the  European 
Union's  Horizon  2020  research  and  innovation  programme 
under grant agreement No 774145 for the Net2DG Project. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  DOE’s  Office  of  Electricity  Delivery  and  Energy  Reliability,  “The 

Smart Grid: An Introduction,” 2009. 

[2]  S. M. Amin and A. M. Giacomoni, "Smart Grid, Safe Grid," in IEEE 
Power and Energy Magazine, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 33-40, Jan.-Feb. 2012, 
doi: 10.1109/MPE.2011.943112. 

[3]  Gunduz, M. Z., & Das, R. (2018, September). Analysis of cyber-attacks 
on smart grid applications. In Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and 
Data Processing (IDAP) (pp. 1-5). 

[4]  B.  Khelifa  and  S.  Abla,  “Security  concerns  in  smart  grids:  Threats, 
vulnerabilities  and  countermeasures,”  in  3rd  Int.  Renewable  and 
Sustainable Energy Conf. (IRSEC), pp. 1-6, 2015. 

[5]  E. B. Rice, A. AlMajali, “Mitigating the Risk of Cyber Attack on Smart 
Grid  Systems”,  Procedia  Computer  Science,  Vol.  28,  2014,  pp  575-
582, ISSN 1877-0509. 

[6]  N.  Nostro,  K.  Shahid,  A.  Bondavalli  and  H.  Schwefel,  “Resilient 
Access to Heterogeneous Measurement Data for Grid Observability” 
15th European Dependable Comp. Conf., 2019. 

[7]  L Langer, M. Kammerstetter, Chapter 3 “The Evolution of the Smart 
Grid  Threat  Landscape  and  Cross-Domain  Risk  Assessment”, 
Editor(s): F. Skopik, P. Smith, in Smart Grid Security, Syngress, 2015, 
pp 49-77, ISBN 9780128021224, 

[8]  V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar. 2009. “Anomaly detection: 
A survey.” ACM Comput. Surv. 41, 3, Article 15 (July 2009), 58 pages. 
[9]  Net-SNMP, “About SNMP”. http://www.net-snmp.org, Last accessed 

March 2021. 

[10]  O.  Etzion and  P.  Niblett,  “Event  Processing in  Action”,  MANNING 

Greenwich (74° w. long.), 2011, pp.68-73. 

[11]  M.  A.  Hoque, B. Chakraborty, “Anomaly  Based  Intrusion  Detection 
Systems Using SNMP Data” in Int. Journal of Computer Science Eng 
and Tech. 2015, Vol 5, Issue 3, 44-47.  

[12]  G. Frankowski, M. Jerzak, M. Miłostan, T. Nowak, and M. Pawłowski, 
“Application  of  the  Complex  Event  Processing  system  for  anomaly 
detection  and  network  monitoring”. Computer  Science, 16(4)),  351-
371, 2015. 

[13]  Net2DG,  “Deliverable  D3.1  –  ICT  Analysis  and  Gateway  Design,” 

2018. 

[14]  H. -P. Schwefel, J. G. Rasmussen, R. L. Olsen and N. Silva, "On the 
Impact  of  Measurement  Errors  on  Loss  Calculations  in  Distribution 
Grids," 2019  15th  European  Dependable  Computing  Conference 
(EDCC), 
doi: 
10.1109/EDCC.2019.00039. 

159-164, 

Naples, 

2019, 

Italy, 

pp. 

[15]  Pombo,  D.  V.,  Martin-Loeches,  R.  S.,  Iov,  F.,  &  Silva,  N. 
(2019). Unleashing  Surveillance  and  Control  Potential  in  Smart 
Distribution  Systems  –  The  NET2DG  Approach.  In Proceedings  of 
25th 
on  Electricity  Distribution, 
CIRED [1786]  AIM  -  Electrical  Engineers  Association  of  the 
Montefiore  Institute.  International  Conference  and  Exhibition  on 
Electricity 
CIRED https://www.cired-
repository.org/handle/20.500.12455/574 

International  Conference 

Distribution, 

[16]  Gui, Y., Bendtsen, J. D., & Stoustrup, J. (2020). Coordinated Control 
of  PV  Inverters  in  Distribution  Grid  Using  Local  and  Centralized 
Control. In Proceedings - IECON 2020: 46th Annual Conference of the 
IEEE Industrial Electronics Society (pp. 1773-1778). [9254512] IEEE. 
Proceedings  of  the  Annual  Conference  of  the  IEEE  Industrial 
Electronics 
Society https://doi.org/10.1109/IECON43393.2020.9254512 

[17]  EsperTech,  “Esper”.  http://www.espertech.com/esper/,  Last  accessed 

March 2021. 

[18]  K. Kimani, V. Oduol, K. Langat, “Cyber security challenges for IoT-
based  smart  grid  networks”,  Int.  Journal  of  Critical  Infrastructure 
Protection, Vol. 25, 2019, pp 36-49. 

[19]  Dharmesh  Faquir,  Nestoras  Chouliaras,  Vlachou  Sofia,  Kalopoulou 
Olga, Leandros Maglaras. Cybersecurity in smart grids, challenges and 
solutions[J]. AIMS Electronics and Electrical Engineering, 2021, 5(1): 
24-37. doi:10.3934/electreng.2021002. 

[20]  Rossella Mattioli, Konstantinos Moulinos,  "Communication  network 
interdependencies in smart grids. Methodology for the identification of 
Critical Communication Networks Links and Components", European 
Union Agency for Cybersecurity, 2016-12-05, DOI:10.2824/949547. 

[21]  JAVAPIPE, 

“35  Types 

of  DDoS 

attacks 

explained”. 

https://javapipe.com/blog/ddos-types/. Last accessed June 2020. 
[22]  W.  Du.  “Computer  Security:  A  Hands-on  Approach",  Chap.  13 

“Attacks on the TCP Protocol”. 2019. 

 
 
