Cyber Crossroads

A Global Research Collaborative on Cyber Risk Governance

Cybersecurity is  
at a Crossroads

Spending on cybersecurity products and services is expected 
to top $123 billion for 2020, more than double the $55 
billion spent in 2011.1 In that same period, cyber breaches 
quadrupled.2 Organizations globally face increasing liabilities, 
while boards of directors grapple with a seemingly Sisyphean 
challenge. Cyber Crossroads was born out of these alarming 
trends and a realization that the world cannot go on funneling 
finite resources into an indefinite, intractable problem. 

Cyber Crossroads brings together expertise from across the 
world, spanning aspects of the cyber problem (including 
technology, legal, risk, and economic) with the goal of creating 
a Cyber Standard of Care built through a global, not-for-profit 
research collaborative with no commercial interests. A Cyber 
Standard of Care should be applicable across industries and 
regardless of the organization size. It should be practical 
and implementable, with no requirement to purchase any 
product/service. Cyber Standard of Care should be woven 
into the existing governance fabric of the organization and it 
should not be yet another technical checklist, but a process/
governance framework that can stand over time. 

1 Gartner | 2 Verizon Data Breach Report

To achieve this, we engaged with cyber risk experts and 
practitioners with a variety of relevant expertise, secured 
the advice/guidance of regulators and legal experts across 
jurisdictions, and interviewed leaders from 56 organizations 
globally to understand their challenges and identify 
best practices. 

Given that the risk and insurance industry is a thought 
leader in cyber risk, we secured sponsorship from leading 
companies in the sector, which also provided strategic 
guidance. In order to maintain research integrity, we did 
not incorporate sponsor’s perspectives into the research; 
however, the research would not have been successful 
without their guidance and support. 

We want to thank all members of the research team and 
all of the interlocutors who gave their valuable time and 
guidance. We hope this Cyber Crossroads report initiates the 
next phase of the world’s cyber risk journey and provides a 
foundation for future research on managing cyber risk. 

Cyber Crossroads

2

Contents

Introduction 

The Need for the Cyber Standard of Care 
Building a Foundation 

Current State of Cyber Risk Management    

The Role of Directors and Officers 

Mounting Pressure and Requirements for Cybersecurity 

Existing Standards for Cyber Risk Management 

Complex Organizational Structures Obscure Cybersecurity Accountability 

Principles for the Cyber Standard of Care 
The Medical Standard of Care as an Inspiration 

Components of a Cyber Standard of Care 

Success Criteria to Meet a Standard of Care 

Implementing the Cyber Standard of Care 
Sample Cyber Standard of Care 

The Spectrum of Cyber Risk Governance 

The Cyber Standard of Care Journey 

Benefits of the Cyber Standard of Care 

Conclusion 

Appendices 

Authors/Reviewers  

Sponsors  

04

05
 06

 07

 10

 10

 11

 11

12
 12

 13

 14

15
 17

 19

 20

24

26

27

35

37

Cyber Crossroads

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Imagine a patient 
presenting to a doctor 
with an unusual set  
of symptoms. 

The doctor recalls a similar case from many years ago, 
but knows that treatment protocols have evolved.  
They consult the literature, speak with an expert, and 
begin a course of treatment reflecting the changes. 
Sadly, the patient fails to respond, and dies.

A review board finds the doctor met the standard of care, 
and takes no disciplinary action. In fact, the patient’s 
family briefly discusses a lawsuit, but their attorney sees  
that the doctor met the medical standard of care,  
and does not sue.

Now imagine an organization under cyber-attack from 
a threat actor wielding ransomware. A single laptop is 
infected, and the employee reports to their manager, 
who suggests rebooting. Soon a PC in the office displays 
the same ransom note, and then another before 
someone contacts local IT support. A similar scene plays 
out in one of the company’s offices in another state, and 
then another. It takes a few days for the organization to 
connect all the dots. By then, the damage is severe, and 
the company’s share price takes a hit.

The lawsuits that follow zero in on the lack of 
coordinated planning, the slow response time, and 
the board of directors’ inadequate oversight. The 
reputational damage is a boon to competitors.

What if there had been a Cyber Standard of Care for 
the company to follow, in much the same way a doctor 
abides by a medical standard of care? Just like with the 
doctor, there is no guarantee the company would have 
thwarted the attack, but there is a chance it could have 
minimized damage, established a clear rationale — and 
possibly a legal defense — for its response, and helped 
limit damage to its reputation.  

Put simply, a Cyber Standard of Care is a governance 
framework for organizations to help them manage their 
cyber risk. At the moment, such a standard of care 
simply does not exist.

In this paper, Cyber Crossroads proposes a foundational 
Cyber Standard of Care inspired by the development 
of such standards in other disciplines, particularly 
medicine. We offer a systematic approach to ensure that 
any organization — across industries and size classes — 
can meet reasonable cybersecurity standards.
It is important to be clear what we mean by cyber 
risk and cybersecurity. Our focus is the vulnerability 
of organizations to malicious attacks and employee 
errors that in one way or another threaten to damage 
their business. We are not concerned with day-to-day 
operational issues such as the stability, administration, 
and maintenance of systems.

Cyber Crossroads and the Cyber Standard of Care are 
the product of extensive collaboration involving world-
renowned cybersecurity experts, corporate leaders, 
legal advisors, national regulators, and global insurers. 
Reflected throughout this report are the insights from 
interviews we conducted with senior executives at 56 
organizations globally.

We hope this guide can help generate discussion  
and accelerate the cyber risk governance journey for  
all organizations.

Cyber Crossroads
Introduction

4

The Need for the 
Cyber Standard  
of Care

Current efforts to manage cyber risk are not keeping 
pace with the growing cyber threat. Despite organizations 
spending increasing amounts on cybersecurity products 
and services, cyber-attacks and resulting losses are 
becoming more frequent and severe. 

Managers and organizational leaders responsible for 
cybersecurity lack an objective standard of care that 
offers guidance on how they should discharge their 
obligations. They would benefit from a clear standard 
for responsible cybersecurity management to which 
shareholders, customers, employees, regulators, 
courts, and even the court of public opinion could refer 
to evaluate their performance. 

Directors and officers who are not specialists in cyber 
risk need clearer guidelines so they can marshal 
appropriate personnel, identify critical cyber risk 
factors, and allocate institutional resources effectively. 
Likewise, regulators and investors need a standard 
of care to use as they evaluate the performance of 
directors and officers. 

In many commercial practice areas, when risks cannot 
be fully eliminated it is standard procedure to establish 
foundational principles and processes to guide risk 
management and mitigation. However, this has yet to 
be done for cyber risk management. 

The C-Suite View*: 
Improving Cost 
Effectiveness

82% said that cybersecurity spending 

will come under increased scrutiny and should 
align with identified risks to the business.

*The insight from interviews conducted with 56 
organizations globally are reflected throughout the  
report as the “C-Suite View".

Cyber Crossroads
The Need for the Cyber Standard of Care

5

Adopting the Cyber Standard of Care will help 
organizations and their stakeholders: 

• Become more effective at managing cyber risk.

• Improve the cost-effectiveness of their cyber risk 

management practices.

• Enhance accountability, and help reduce 

organizational liability. 

• Reduce governance friction across organizations 
and their stakeholders (for example, regulators, 
vendors, and clients) when managing cyber risk.

Organizations trying to protect themselves from 
cyber-attacks are not lacking for advice. They are 
inundated with guidance from standard-setting bodies, 
government agencies, and regulators, and solicitations 
from a range of suppliers of cybersecurity products 
and services. The growing number and severity of 
cyber-attacks is fueling demand for these products and 
services, but there remain many questions concerning 
their overall effectiveness. It is becoming increasingly 
difficult for organizations and their stakeholders to feel 
confident that they are deploying resources efficiently.

The problem is exacerbated by the daunting scope 
of cyber risk. The US Council of Economic Advisers 
concluded that US firms lost 0.8% of their market  
value in the seven days following news of a breach 
(averaging $498 million per adverse event for the 186 
firms in their study). 

Building a Foundation
The Cyber Crossroads foundational Cyber Standard 
of Care is inspired by the development of such 
standards in other disciplines — particularly medicine. 
Our goal is to provide a governance framework to 
help organizations manage their cyber risk. The Cyber 
Standard of Care as presented in this paper focuses 
on organizational cyber risk management processes 
that should occur regularly. The emphasis is on what a 
governance process should look like before an attack 
occurs. As we move ahead, there is work to be done 
regarding how to expand upon the principles expressed 
in the Cyber Standard of Care to address governance 
processes relevant to cyber incident responses 
following a cyber-attack. 

This paper presents a step-by-step approach to 
ensuring that reasonable cybersecurity standards can 
be met by any organization, of any size, in any industry. 

In addition, the Cyber Standard of Care we propose: 

• Engages every department and stakeholder in the 

organization to identify cyber risks so that the 
process of cyber governance is pervasive.

• Facilitates cyber risk visibility across the 

organization so that business users and leadership 
are appropriately informed.

• Ensures that actions taken to mitigate cyber risks are 

reasonable and address relevant circumstances.

• Establishes accountability within each organization 

for cyber risk mitigation.

• Encourages continuous improvement throughout 

all divisions of an organization.

• Provides every board of directors with a  

governance model for oversight and monitoring  
of cyber risk management.

The Need for the Cyber Standard of Care

6

Cyber CrossroadsCurrent State of Cyber Risk Management 
Cybersecurity is a growing concern for organizations 
large and small, public and private, and across the 
information technology and operational technology 
domains. When organizations do not meet security 
expectations, potential consequences include direct 
financial losses, reputational damage, business 
interruption, reduced client and investor confidence, 
and financial penalties stemming from regulatory fines 
or lawsuits. A major cyber-attack will also typically 
demand a great deal of senior management’s time 
and attention, imposing heavy opportunity costs. As 
a result, cybersecurity has become a top priority for 
directors and officers, who may be held accountable  
for failures, regardless of their lack of expertise. 

A variety of costs can stem from a cyber-attack (see 
Figure 1). Their composition will depend on the nature 
and purpose of the attack. For example, ransomware 
attacks can generate sizeable business interruption 
expenses, whereas phishing attacks that target 
sensitive data may result in high forensics costs to 
identify and plug the breach, as well as expenses to 
notify customers, in compliance with applicable data 
breach laws. 

The C-Suite View: 
Make Cyber 
Governance 
Pervasive
85% said accountability for cyber risks 

should be distributed throughout the organization.

66% said efforts should be made to 

educate the business on cyber risk.

55% said involving the business will  

help IT departments better identify and  
quantify exposures.

The Need for the Cyber Standard of Care

7

Cyber CrossroadsFIGURE 1
How the Costs of a Cyber-Attack Mount
Cost categories, in order typically incurred

Management Time 

Business 
interruption 

Incident 
response (forensics, 
notifications, 
call centers, etc.) 

Litigation from 
customers 

Regulatory 
actions and 
litigation from 
investors 

Loss of customers 

Despite considerable and growing expenditure on security products and services and 
the extensive guidance on managing cybersecurity risk offered by regulatory agencies 
and standards bodies, the number of successful cyber-attacks continues to rise (Beazley 
2020). Many explanations have been offered for the apparent failure of these interventions 
to reduce the incidence and severity of cyber-attacks, ranging from organizations not 
purchasing the products and services appropriate to their specific needs, to the confusing 
nature of the different, yet overlapping, standards. At present, there is no agreed upon 
mechanism by which organizational leadership can demonstrate that the actions they are 
taking are both appropriate and adequate to reduce security risks given the organization’s 
specific circumstances. 

Large data breaches affecting many users naturally generate litigation on the part of 
at least some of the customers of the companies affected (see Figure 2). In the US, 
this litigation often takes the form of class action lawsuits, which at times garner large 
settlements (see Figure 3).

The Need for the Cyber Standard of Care

8

Cyber CrossroadsFIGURE 2
Biggest Data Breaches of the 21st Century as 
Measured by Users Impacted

Company Name

Yahoo

Sina Weibo

Marriott International

Adult Friend Finder

MySpace

NetEase

Zynga

LinkedIn

Dubsmash

Adobe

Company Activity

Web services company

Microblogging

Hotel chains

Adult dating site

Social media

Provider of online mailbox services

Online game producer

Users Impacted

3,000,000,000

538,000,000

500,000,000

402,200,000

360,000,000

235,000,000

218,000,000

Social network for business professionals

165,000,000

Video messaging services

Design software

MyFitnessPal

Fitness app owned by Under Armour

Equifax

eBay

Canva

Credit bureau

Online auctioneer

Graphic design tool company

Heartland Payment Systems

Payment card transaction processor

Source: CSO Online, 2020

162,000,000

153,000,000

150,000,000

147,900,000

145,000,000

137,000,000

134,000,000

FIGURE 3
Major Settlements for Class Action Lawsuits  
Triggered by Data Breaches

Company Name

Anthem

Target

Home Depot

Settlement Amount (US$)

$115 million

$28.5 million ($18.5 million for states, $10 million for consumers)

$19.5 million

Sony (PlayStation network breach)

$15 million

Ashley Madison

$12.8 million ($11.6 million for consumers, $1.2 million for states and the  
Federal Trade Commission)

Sony (employee information breach)

$8 million

Stanford University Hospital and Clinics

$4.1 million

AvMed Inc.

$3.1 million

Source: Morgan and Morgan, 2018

The Need for the Cyber Standard of Care

9

Cyber CrossroadsTo address these issues, many  
organizations are moving toward 
implementing a governance framework 
regarding the management of their  
cyber risk. 

However, these often maintain a traditional focus 
on investments in cybersecurity products and on 
decisions made by a chief information security 
officer (CISO). We believe the emphasis should be on 
broadening responsibility for cybersecurity throughout 
the organization, and on actions focused on processes 
and people, rather than purely technology.

The Cyber Standard of Care can help support a positive 
relationship between the CISO and other parts of 
the business. The CISO cannot do the job alone — for 
example, staff in front line operations need to ensure 
that they understand how a cyber event might impact 
on their day-to-day operations, procurement staff 
need to understand how cyber risk can be managed 
in the supply chain, and HR staff need to understand 
the important role that they have to play in ensuring 
that access to systems and data is only available to 
authorized personnel.

In addressing both technological and human factors, 
the Cyber Standard of Care will provide a template for 
those organizations looking to establish a state-of-
the-art cyber risk management governance process, 
and will also allow for consistent risk governance 
benchmarking across organizations. 

The Role of Directors and Officers
Directors and officers are increasingly playing a central 
role in their organizations’ cyber risk management, a 
responsibility historically reserved for the CISO. Given 
the scale of the damage that cyber risk can cause to an 
organization, management of this risk must be viewed as 
an enterprise-wide problem rather than simply an IT one.

Nevertheless, cyber risk remains alien territory for 
many outside of the IT and security departments. 
Although surveys place cyber risk near the top of 
boardroom concerns, board members often have a 
poor understanding of its complexity and scale (World 
Economic Forum 2019). Anecdotally, many boards 
struggle to provide effective oversight regarding 
cyber risk because they view it as a technical problem 
requiring a technical solution. In reality, cybersecurity 
is as much a governance issue as an operational one 
(Marsh and Microsoft 2018). 

In many instances, the losses associated with cyber-
attacks affect reputations and profits. As the financial 
stewards of a company, directors and officers are 
responsible to shareholders for these losses. Directors' 
and officers' potential liability for cyber risk has 
increased markedly as cybersecurity risk management 
has come to be seen as a governance responsibility. 
It is not easy to quantify the extent to which this has 
driven recent increases in the price of Directors' and 
officers' liability (D&O) insurance, but it is likely to have 
been a factor. 

Organizations have faced, and will likely continue 
to face, litigation in connection with cybersecurity 
issues. Lawsuits against companies in all sectors 
— including finance, hospitality, technology, and 
more — have made headlines in recent years. While 
some lawsuits have yet to result in liability, even an 
unsuccessful action presents potential exposure in 
terms of defense costs, distraction for management 
and board members, and reputation. As boards’ roles in 
cybersecurity risk management evolve, such lawsuits 
may also evolve, potentially becoming more successful. 
Clearly, the current litigation landscape suggests that 
organizational leaders need to be proactive in their 
approach to organizational cyber governance. 

Mounting Pressure and Requirements  
for Cybersecurity
In recent years, laws and regulations concerning 
cybersecurity and data privacy have proliferated. 
Furthermore, many countries have introduced new 
enforcement arms to oversee these regulations. 
For example, the United States Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) has a cyber unit within 
its enforcement division to pursue cyber-related 
misconduct. An investigation conducted by the unit led 
in 2018 to Yahoo agreeing to pay a $35 million penalty 
to settle charges brought by the SEC that it failed to 
disclose in its public filings, for nearly two years, a major 
data breach. (Yahoo had only released information 
about the breach during the sale of its operating  
unit to Verizon). 

The European Union’s General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR), which came into force in 2018, has 
been at the forefront of global privacy regulation. Its 
scope is broad, extending to organizations that are 
not physically established in the EU but that offer 
goods and services to data subjects in the EU, or that 
monitor data subjects’ behavior in the EU (Skadden 
2018). Between May 25, 2018, when the regulation 

The Need for the Cyber Standard of Care

10

Cyber Crossroadsstandard-setting bodies can be high, and some have 
cited it as a major barrier to adoption for the NIST 
standard (Tenable 2016). 

Cyber Crossroads describes a flexible management 
process and governance structure that can be overlaid 
on existing organizational activities in implementing 
cybersecurity technology and practices.

Complex Organizational Structures  
Obscure Cybersecurity Accountability 
The often-complex structure of large organizations 
complicates the challenge of achieving effective 
cybersecurity in the absence of an overarching 
standard of care. For example, the boards and 
management committees of subsidiary companies 
can play a critical role in determining and identifying 
reasonable actions that can decrease risk for the 
parent company. Subsidiary entities will generally 
need to consider local regulatory requirements 
and legislation specific to the jurisdictions in which 
they operate. Subsidiaries that operate largely 
independently of their parent companies face different 
risk profiles from those that make extensive use of 
group-level IT and other services. 

As far as regulators are concerned, subsidiaries have 
the same responsibilities as independent companies. 
Regulators may therefore expect subsidiary entities to 
treat centralized group-level services in the same way 
that they would treat any third-party service provider. 
This has the potential to introduce a different type 
of dynamic into the group-subsidiary relationship. 
Enacting the Cyber Standard of Care will clarify where 
accountability lies, and how such accountability should 
be enforced across the different legal entities.

came into force, and November 30, 2019, 22 supervisory 
authorities in EU and European Economic Area states 
issued approximately 785 fines under the GDPR (EDPB 
2020). The Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) 
in the UK levied the largest fine announced to date, 
against British Airways, which initially exceeded $200 
million (Information Commissioner’s Office 2019).

Beyond lawsuits, there is pressure to improve security 
in an effort to maintain customer confidence. A study 
published by IBM Security in 2019 that quantified the 
costs from data breaches across 16 countries, found 
that lost business — which comprised revenue losses, 
business disruption, system downtime, and new 
customer acquisition — was the largest of four major 
cost categories ensuing from a data breach, averaging 
36% of total costs (IBM 2019.)4 

The global nature of modern supply chains has also 
added to cybersecurity challenges. Organizations 
increasingly expect their vendors and others they do 
business with to have rigorous cybersecurity protocols 
in place, in part to avoid costly business interruption 
losses in the event of an attack. 

Existing Standards for Cyber  
Risk Management
Multiple sources of guidance exist to help organizations 
reduce their cyber risk. For example, reputable 
standard-setting bodies including the International 
Standards Organization (ISO) and the National Institute 
of Standards and Technology (NIST) have issued 
extensive recommendations. 

Many security experts acknowledge standards 
such as NIST 800-53 as best practice. However, the 
standards landscape for cybersecurity is anything but 
straightforward. For some sectors, the landscape is so 
complicated that a “guide to the guidance” is required. 
For example with respect to financial services firms 
in the United States, the Financial Services Sector 
Coordinating Council (FSSCC) created a mapping tool 
to help organizations navigate the various requirements 
and directives (FSSCC 2020). (A summary of the leading 
cybersecurity guidance and standards is included in 
Appendix 2.)

Many organizations have adopted one or more 
standards in a “best effort” fashion. In doing so, they 
presumably hope these are the most appropriate 
measures for their risk exposure, but they cannot 
be sure. The costs of implementing guidance from 

The Need for the Cyber Standard of Care

11

Cyber CrossroadsPrinciples for the 
Cyber Standard  
of Care

The Cyber Crossroads team reviewed professional 
standards of care in other fields, including construction, 
manufacturing, and medicine. Among these, the medical 
field has a particularly strong emphasis on a process-
oriented approach to setting a standard of care as a 
governance matter. No single document summarizes 
the medical standard of care; however, various court 
cases have shaped its development over time. Some of 
these cases are described below, along with the “success 
criteria” they helped to set. 

The Medical Standard of Care  
as an Inspiration
Doctors and other medical personnel handle situations 
in which there is often some likelihood of a patient’s 
death. The medical standard of care is not meant to 
replace the many guidelines, technologies, or standards 
in various medical sub-fields, nor does it prescribe how 
medical practitioners should care for their patients. 
Rather, it describes a responsible process for choosing 
which existing standards of practice to employ, as 
described in scientific journals and medical texts. 
The medical standard of care also does not describe 
success criteria. Rather, it defines a process for 
choosing among professional practices that, if followed, 
will help avoid failure (which can be characterized as 
“malpractice”). It therefore offers a set of criteria that 
medical workers can apply to the choice of treatment 
protocols, technologies, or vendors. 

A crucial aspect of the medical standard of care is that 
medical practitioners are not legally judged in terms 
of patient outcome, be it life or death. Instead, they 
are accountable for whether the decision process they 
followed was sound. 

Clearly, there are important differences between 
medicine and cybersecurity. However, the main 
elements of the medical standard of care that have 
been derived from court cases are instructive and can 
be applied to cyber risk management.1 

1 The court cases referenced in this report occurred in the US and UK, but the concept 

of a medical standard of care is certainly not limited to those countries. Other countries 

have their own variations. For example, in February 2013 , Germany enacted the Gesetz 

zur Verbesserung der Rechte von Patientinnen und Patienten (Patients’ Rights Act), which 

embodies many similar concepts to those found in US and UK law.

Cyber Crossroads
Principles for the Cyber Standard of Care

12

Components of a Cyber Standard of Care

Our analysis of court cases (referenced below) that have helped define a professional standard of medical 
care identified four key components that can be incorporated into the Cyber Standard of Care. These are: 
circumstances, discovery, actions, and outcomes.

Circumstances

There are circumstances that aggravate risk. These will derive from an organization’s business practices and its external operating 

environment. It is critical to identify the circumstances that give rise to risk and identify appropriate risk management responses. 

This component derives from the 1957 UK case of Bolam vs. Friern Hospital Management Committee. The court found  

that a medical practitioner falls below the minimum standard of care if they fail to take actions that are reasonable given  

the circumstances.

Discovery

A qualified individual must be the one to determine the source of a problem or the immediate risk. This individual must have 

the proper background education, knowledge, and skill to assess the situation. Without firsthand, expert knowledge of the 

conditions, it is impossible to make an accurate assessment of risk. 

This element of the medical standard of care derives from the 1964 UK ruling on Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. v Heller & Partners Ltd. In 

that case, the court introduced the notion of “reasonable reliance,” which indicates that a person can reasonably rely on another 

for guidance if the person being relied upon possesses the requisite expert knowledge. 

Actions

Actions taken must be reasonable given the circumstances. Reasonableness is defined by whether peer practitioners would  

take similar action in similar circumstances, or if there is a case study or experiment that indicates the scientific validity of  

such an action. 

This component derives from the 1985 US case Hall v. Hilburn. The courts determined that negligence is not present if others 

with similar expertise would have taken the same action given the circumstances.

Outcomes

Actions have outcomes. Often the outcomes are intentional, but not always. Even if actions are reasonable, it is still possible to 

have unintended outcomes that are beyond an organization’s control. 

This component derives from the 2015 UK case Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board. This case requires medical practitioners 

to warn patients of potential unintended outcomes that may result from medical procedures, despite there being no fault on the 

part of the medical professionals performing such procedures. 

Principles for the Cyber Standard of Care

13

Cyber CrossroadsElements of a Medical Standard of Care that are 
Relevant to the Cyber Standard of Care

Circumstances giving rise to risk

Discovery

Actions taken to manage risk

Outcomes from actions taken

What in the organization’s business 
practices or external operating 
environment exposes it to cyber risk?

Has a qualified individual 
evaluated the risk?

Are they reasonable?
Would peer practitioners do the same?

Did the actions work as intended? 
Were there any unintended effects?

Have lessons been documented 
and integrated into future 
practices?

Success Criteria to Meet  
a Standard of Care

Organizations need success criteria in order to assess 
their progress in implementing the standard of care. 
An organization should satisfy the following set of 
criteria regarding cyber governance before it can be 
considered to have met the Cyber Standard of Care. 

Accountable: An organization should give its 
employees the knowledge and skills needed to 
participate in meeting the organization’s cybersecurity 
goals. They also should give them specific, measurable 
targets to meet. Clear lines of responsibility are key 
to successful risk mitigation and remediation. There 
should be incentives or consequences to encourage 
and enforce accountability. 

Pervasive: An organization’s cyber risk management 
process should engage the entire organization and 
its closely tied external partners. Each department 
contributes to, and can help to manage, the 
organization’s aggregate cyber risk. Therefore, it is 
important for business users across all departments to 
identify and understand organizational cyber risks. 

Continuous Improvement: The fact that an 
organization’s threat landscape is constantly changing 
is a prime reason that cybersecurity is a continuing 
concern. Cyber risk management is not a one-time 
operation. Organizations should study their past 
cyber risk management successes and failures and 
incorporate their lessons into future training. 

Informed: The entire organization must be aware of 
its current and future cyber risks and make decisions 
in line with a holistic perspective of the risks they face. 
Awareness and training exercises about the cyber  
risks that directly pertain to employees’ operational 
roles can facilitate the education required to enable  
an informed organization. 

Oversight and Monitoring: The process of cyber 
risk management needs to be monitored carefully. 
This should be part of the responsibility of senior 
management in the organization. Investments in 
cybersecurity must be managed purposefully,  
and adjusted based on evolving organizational  
security needs.

Reasonable: Organizations must take actions that are 
directly relevant to the cyber risks that they face and 
that have been proven generally valid and effective. 
Validity can be established based on empirical evidence, 
where available, demonstrating the success of actions 
in mitigating given cyber risks. Alternatively, it can be 
demonstrated through peer organizations’ experience 
employing the same actions over time. Actions must 
be proportionate to the risks the organization faces. 
For example, meeting relevant technical/operational 
standards could help to demonstrate reasonableness, 
but may not always be sufficient. Likewise, it may be 
possible to demonstrate reasonableness without 
meeting a particular standard in full. 

The C-Suite View: 
Scope for 
Improvement in 
Assessing Cyber 
Exposures
69% said that determining organizations 

cyber risk exposure requires a business context 
beyond what is accessible to the CISO and 
security team.

Cyber Crossroads
Principles for the Cyber Standard of Care

14

Implementing the 
Cyber Standard  
of Care

In the spirit of the medical standard of care and the 
previously described success criteria, following is a 
sample implementation of the Cyber Standard of Care. 
The proposed implementation, which can be completed 
as a desktop exercise, can be highly beneficial in managing 
cyber risk. 

We created the sample implementation after 
interviewing organizations from different industries 
about their existing cyber risk governance process (see 
Figure 4). Their collective processes were subsequently 
mapped to the Cyber Standard of Care principles.

Organizations should implement the Cyber Standard 
of Care on a regular timetable aligned to enterprise-
wide business processes. The sample discussed below 
follows a quarterly cadence. 

The sample implementation uses a hierarchical 
approach to employing the Cyber Standard of 
Care, which may not be consistent with how some 
organizations operate. Each organization determines its 
business hierarchy, governance and risk management 
structure, and roles and responsibilities of its senior 
management based on its business characteristics and 
the challenges it is facing, such as digitalization. Each 
organization should have its unique structure when it 

implements the Cyber Standard of Care. The maturity of 
each organization, culture, or even regional preferences 
may also result in the differences in risk management 
structure. Therefore, we encourage organizations to 
adapt the Cyber Standard of Care in such a way that its 
implementation would be consistent with their existing 
process and governance style.

The Cyber Standard of Care builds on the components 
identified in the medical standard of care. 
Organizations cannot afford to wait decades for a 
standard to evolve through court cases, as occurred 
in the medical field. The Cyber Standard of Care can 
be implemented swiftly. The four main elements 
comprising the standard — circumstances, discovery, 
actions, and outcomes — are reflected in the process. 

Cyber Crossroads
Implementing the Cyber Standard of Care

15

FIGURE 4
Elements of the Cyber Standard of Care

Setting up oversight  
mechanisms

9

Board and management team review 
quarterly progress; approve associated 
consequences.

8

At quarter’s end, CISO and cyber risk council 
review outcomes and send to board and 
management team.

Implementing plan

7

Stakeholders designated as action  
owners act on the plan and document  
their progress.

6

Cyber risk plan escalated to the  
management team of the company  
and the board of directors.

5

Cyber risk council drafts cyber risk plan containing 
actions to be taken to manage cyber risk for the 
upcoming quarter.

Preparing for  
upcoming 
quarter

4

Cyber risk council analyzes circumstances 
that could cause cyber risks and determines 
organization’s appetite for these risks.

3

Cyber risk council convenes, consisting of the 
security champions from each department,  
the CISO, and chaired by a senior sponsor.

2

Security champions and stakeholders identify 
local circumstances that contribute to the 
organization’s cyber risk.

1

Each department in the organization identifies 
a security champion and cybersecurity 
departmental stakeholders.

Repeat for next quarter

Implementing the Cyber Standard of Care

16

Cyber CrossroadsSample Cyber Standard of Care
The steps outlined in Figure 4 are described in more 
detail below.

Step 1
At the beginning of each quarter, each department in 
the organization identifies a cybersecurity champion 
and departmental stakeholders involved in making 
operational decisions. A cybersecurity champion 
should be knowledgeable about the span of operations 
across the department, hold relationships with 
stakeholders across the department’s functions, 
and have an interest in cybersecurity. Designating 
departmental champions and stakeholders will aid in 
the discovery process for identifying cyber risks in the 
organization. Because these stakeholders are involved 
in departmental decisions, they should be qualified to 
identify the cyber risks to the organization that result 
from these decisions.

Success Criterion Addressed: Pervasive

Step 2
Security champions and stakeholders from across 
the organization identify local circumstances that 
contribute to the organization’s cyber risk. These might 
relate to activities undertaken by the department 
that could increase cyber risk for the rest of the 
organization (for example, developing a new application 
or service, entering a new business partnership, or 
taking action that could create disgruntled employees). 
We refer to these as “risks from” the department’s 
activities. Alternatively, circumstances might relate to 
heightened risk exposure to the department’s business 
activities due to factors unique to that department 
— we refer to these as “risks to” the department’s 
activities. Cyber Crossroads has established a list of 
questions that departmental stakeholders should 
consider as they identify potential “risks from” and 
“risks to” the business (see page 21).

Success Criteria Addressed: Pervasive and Informed

Step 3
After establishing local circumstances for each 
department, the organization should create a cyber risk 
council consisting of the security champions from each 
department, the CISO, and chaired by a senior sponsor 
in the organization. The cyber risk council’s responsibility 
is to review all circumstances that the stakeholders and 
security champions have documented for the quarter. 
Upon convening, the cyber risk council should consider 
additional circumstances that the stakeholders have not 

identified, including imminent future risks. These could 
include circumstances beyond the purview of any single 
department, such as changes in the evolving political 
climate or the emergence of previously unsuspected 
attack vectors.  

The cyber risk council should not operate in a cyber 
risk silo, and should consult other individuals in the 
organization who are familiar with its cyber risk, 
including those who lead the organization’s risk 
management, insurance, compliance, and internal audit 
functions. 

Success Criterion Addressed: Informed

Step 4 
The primary role of the cyber risk council after 
reviewing and documenting additional risk 
circumstances is to determine the organization’s cyber 
risk appetite. Clearly, a “boil the ocean” approach to 
protecting the organization against every conceivable 
cyber threat is not feasible: the cyber risk council must 
make choices grounded in their knowledge of the 
organization’s operations. Documenting these priorities 
will form the core of the cyber risk plan established for 
the quarter.

Success Criteria Addressed: Informed and Reasonable

Step 5 
After determining the circumstances that need to 
be addressed based on risk appetite, the cyber risk 
council must determine what actions should be taken 
for the quarter. This is the critical point in the decision-
making cycle. Skill and judgement need to be applied 
to ensure that the actions proposed are appropriate to 
the business internal and external operating context 
and directly related to minimizing the risk for the 
circumstances that were selected as priorities. The 
key term is “reasonable,” which means that the actions 
proposed need to be validated to reduce the cyber risk, 
for example by evidence-based studies or anecdotally 
from peers. Each action should be assigned an owner, 
and accountability for delivery should be directly 
embedded within the established mechanisms that 
the organization uses to make sure that things get 
done. Actions should be specific and measurable, 
there should be consequences on action owners 
should delivery fail, and line management should be 
responsible for ensuring that these consequences 
are applied. These measures will help to drive 
accountability for the actions. The actions, owners, and 
consequences will be added to the cyber risk plan for 

Implementing the Cyber Standard of Care

17

Cyber Crossroads 
 
the quarter. Cyber Crossroads has established a list 
of questions to help the cyber risk council evaluate 
reasonable actions for given circumstances (see page 22). 

Success Criterion Addressed: Reasonable

Step 6 
After the cyber risk council agrees on its draft of the 
cyber risk plan, they will escalate it to the company’s 
management team and board of directors. The CISO will 
present to the board and a representative of the board 
will agree to the plan. The CISO will then turn over the 
relevant parts of the plan to the security champions 
and relevant managers in accordance with the 
accountability mechanisms used within the company. 
This step demonstrates that there is appropriate 
oversight and monitoring by the directors and officers.

Success Criteria Addressed: Oversight and Monitoring

Step 7
The stakeholders designated as the action plan owners 
will document their progress toward defined targets 
and report in a centralized fashion to the security 
champion and the CISO. When an owner completes 
an action, they will mark it as such. The owner will 
also document outcomes of the action taken, which 
includes any potential positive results, for example, 
attacks foiled, cyber events, or side effects related to 
the action. 

Success Criteria Addressed: Pervasive, Informed, and 
Accountable

Step 8 
At the end of each quarter, the CISO and the relevant 
stakeholder’s managers will review the outcomes. 
Those actions that were not completed will be 
evaluated to determine if consequences should be 
levied on the security stakeholder. This will be at the 
discretion of the relevant managers in accordance 
with the accountability mechanisms used within the 
company. The CISO will collate a report of the actions 
taken and present the results to the board of directors 
and management team. 

Success Criteria Addressed: Reasonable  
and Accountable

Step 9
The board of directors and management team will agree 
to the quarterly progress report delivered by the CISO 
and approve any associated consequences. At this 
stage, the CISO will make recommendations for priority 
key risk indicators (KRIs) or circumstances that were not 
addressed to focus on for next quarter’s planning cycle. 
Budgeting and investment in the governance process 
will be managed and adjusted accordingly based on 
the past cycle. Cyber Crossroads has established a list 
of questions for the board and management team to 
determine whether the Cyber Standard of Care was met 
(see page 23). The process described is not unlike that 
of sales forecasting and planning.

Success Criteria Addressed: Continuous Improvement 
and Oversight and Monitoring

The C-Suite View: 
Need for a Cyber 
Risk Council, 
More Planning

96% support the establishment of a 

cyber risk council to oversee cyber risk.

80% say cyber risk planning should 

take place more than once a year.

Implementing the Cyber Standard of Care

18

Cyber Crossroads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Spectrum of Cyber Risk Governance
In the course of our interviews with senior executives, it became clear that cyber risk 
governance means different things to different organizations. Some organizations have 
just begun their cyber risk governance journey. Others are highly advanced and mature; 
we believe they are already meeting a cyber standard equivalent to what we propose. 

The following table compares those only beginning their cyber risk governance journey 
to those that meet the Cyber Standard of Care across the success criteria we have 
identified. The “low” and “high” maturity descriptions reflect responses from  
interviewed organizations. 

Maturity Across the Cyber Standard of Care Spectrum

Success 
Criterion

Pervasive

Informed

Reasonable

Low Maturity

High Maturity

Organization centralizes 
responsibility for 
identifying cyber risk 
issues in the CISO’s office.

The planning process is distributed throughout the organization and is inherently 
pervasive because the entire organization is involved in the discovery process. During 
discovery, each department assigns a security champion, and engages employees to 
identify the cyber risks that are a result of departmental operations and decisions. 

Mandatory security and 
compliance training is 
the only mechanism to 
ensure all stakeholders 
are involved in cyber risk 
management.

The planning process charges departmental stakeholders and security champions 
with determining how their department’s business functions contribute to cyber risk. 
The act of documenting circumstances ensures that everyone is engaged in identifying 
risks and organizational circumstances that contribute to cyber risk. This makes for 
informed employees at all levels of the organization and fosters a culture of cyber 
security across the organization.

Actions taken to manage 
cyber risk are largely 
reactive to current 
threats and do not look 
ahead to future threats.

The planning process requires directly linking actions to established circumstances 
that contribute to cyber risk. This ensures that actions are relevant to the pressing 
organizational cyber risk issues. The cyber security council selected these actions 
because they have been demonstrably effective or are consistent with their peers’ 
recommendations. This process helps to ensure the reasonable use of resources to 
address cyber challenges.

Accountable

The primary party 
accountable for all cyber 
risk is the CISO and their 
IT/Security team.

Continuous 
Improvement

There are no clear 
mechanisms for 
drawing lessons from 
the organization’s 
experience with cyber 
risks or for adjusting 
future behavior.

Planning broadens accountability through the development and documentation of 
a quarterly plan. Senior management and the board approve the plan, immediately 
instilling some accountability at the organizational leadership level. The plan defines 
“action owners” across all departments. Each action has success criteria, and 
consequences, if actions are not implemented. By documenting cyber risk management 
efforts in a leadership-approved plan and establishing owners for each action and 
consequences for inaction, accountability becomes distributed across the organization.

The quarterly planning process supports continuous improvement, with planned 
actions changing based on newly identified circumstances. When actions are reviewed, 
the organization is encouraged to learn from experience and adjust future behavior 
accordingly. The documentation of circumstances each quarter, review by the cyber 
risk council, and agreement to the plan facilitates learning across the organization.

Oversight and 
Monitoring

Boards of directors do 
not have the same insight 
into cyber risk as they 
have into other types of 
organizational risks.

Directors and officers oversee and monitor the organization’s cyber risk management 
efforts. There is active engagement of leadership. As the quarter concludes, leadership 
reviews the actions taken and makes decisions concerning where to direct risk mitigation 
efforts. The process embodies how and why the organization enacts cyber standards 
and industry best practices, consistent with how boards oversee other major risks.

Implementing the Cyber Standard of Care

19

Cyber CrossroadsThe Cyber Standard of Care Journey
Given the need for various groups across an organization to engage in developing a cyber risk governance 
process, Cyber Crossroads developed a series of questions to help make progress toward meeting the criteria. 
Each set of questions targets a different line of defense within the organization, including departmental 
stakeholders, the cyber risk council, and the board of directors. These question sets should help organizations 
navigate the journey towards the Cyber Standard of Care.

Depending on the organization’s maturity, some questions will be more relevant than others. Some aspects of 
an organization’s maturity may be a function of cultural differences across geographies. Organizations that find 
themselves on the “low maturity” spectrum may find the question set for the departmental stakeholders most 
immediately relevant, as compared with those that find themselves at a “high maturity” level. 

The Cyber Standard of Care Includes  
Four Components:

Circumstances

Discovery

Actions

Outcomes

Identifying the unique 

contextual factors that 

contribute to cyber risk for 

an organization.

Appointing qualified 

assessors to pinpoint 

the precise cyber 

risks throughout the 

organization. 

Specifying risk mitigation 

procedures that directly 

address the organization’s 

unique circumstances.

Reviewing outcomes and 

sharing lessons, while 

acknowledging that 

adverse outcomes can 

occur even in the best-

managed organizations.

Implementing the Cyber Standard of Care

20

Cyber CrossroadsQuestion List for Departmental Stakeholders
As noted in step two of the proposed implementation of the Cyber Standard of 
Care, departmental stakeholders will need to enumerate the possible operating 
circumstances that could generate serious cyber risks for their organization. 
Departmental stakeholders can use the following questions as a starting point. 

Departmental Stakeholders’ List of Questions

What are the 
potential cyber 
risks to our 
departmental 
business 
operations?

What potential 
cyber risks does 
the organization 
face arising from 
our departmental 
business 
operations?

How well are we 
managing cyber 
risk within the 
department?

• What sensitive data sets do we hold? Have there been additions in the 

past quarter?

• Who do we share sensitive data with (internally and externally)?

• What are our critical services, and what is the nature of their 

dependence on IT systems? How would a sustained outage affect these 
services? Have these vulnerabilities increased in the past quarter?

• Who are our critical third-party service providers? What would the 

impact be if there were a sustained interruption in their services? To 
what extent does their cybersecurity impact our own?

• What activities are we undertaking that could attract adverse external 

attention to the department or to the rest of the organization? 

• Are we operating in any particularly high-risk geographies? 

• Is there any reason why we might be facing a heightened risk from 

disgruntled internal employees (or contractors)?

• What IT applications do we have that are unique to the department, and 
do these present contagion risk to other organizational infrastructure?

• Do we have a cyber champion and are they equipped to perform this 

role?

• Have all of the circumstances that can contribute to cyber risk been 

accurately recorded and monitored? Are we complying with all relevant 
organizational IT/security policies? Where there are exceptions, have 
these been authorized and how are we mitigating residual risks?

• Are we achieving the right levels of cyber assurance from our third-party 

service providers?

• Do we have crisis response plans in place, and have we tested them?

• Are our specific departmental requirements adequately addressed in 

the organization-level cyber plan? If not, what additional local 
mitigations are required? 

Implementing the Cyber Standard of Care

21

Cyber CrossroadsQuestion List for Cyber Risk Councils
As noted in step five of the proposed implementation of the Cyber Standard of Care, 
a cyber risk council will be responsible for determining if the actions selected are 
appropriate and reasonable for their circumstances and for regulatory requirements. 
The following questions can be used as a starting point for the cyber risk council. 

Cyber Risk Council’s List of Questions

Are we meeting 
the minimum 
standards 
required?

Are we confident 
that we have 
accurately 
captured our 
organization’s 
circumstances?

Is our 
implementation 
appropriate to our 
circumstances?

Are we making the 
right scheduling 
and trade-off 
decisions?

Are our actions 
in line with the 
priorities and risk 
appetite that have 
been set by the 
board?

• Are there specific regulatory standards that we need to meet?

• Are we compliant with the requirements of our customers? 

• Are we compliant with the requirements of our insurance policies?

• Have departments provided credible descriptions of the risks that 

relate to their business operations?

• Are there any significant changes to the organization’s wider operating 
circumstances (including major P&L issues, new products and services, 
new markets, and M&A) that could affect our cyber risk profile? 

• Are there any significant changes to the external threat environment, 

now or in the immediate future?

• Have any significant incidents occurred to others in our sector, or 

beyond, that should cause us to reconsider our actions and priorities?

• Is the implementation of each of our key controls comparable to good 

practice within our sector? 

• Are we able to provide a logical rationale for our choices? 

• Do we face either exceptionally high risk exposure (or exceptional low 
risk tolerance) relative to our sector? What additional measures might 
be expected of us given these exceptions?

• Are we able to demonstrate that we have responded effectively to 

changes in our internal or external circumstances?

• Where are we outside our comfort zone for cyber risk?

• Can we demonstrate that the sequencing of our mitigation steps is 

optimized against our risk reduction targets?

• Have we communicated the rationale for our decisions effectively to  

the board?

• Does the board understand the extent to which our actions have been 

effective, and do they appreciate the residual risks that we are running? 

• Have we provided the board with the assurance they need that our 

discovery and decision-making processes are fit for purpose?

Implementing the Cyber Standard of Care

22

Cyber CrossroadsQuestion List for the Board of Directors 
As noted in step nine of the proposed implementation of the Cyber Standard of Care, 
the board of directors will be responsible for determining if their organization’s cyber 
risk management efforts meet the standard by comparing their process to the success 
criteria described. The following questions can be used as a starting point for the board. 

Board of Directors’ List of Questions

Pervasive

• Are all the departments across the organization engaged in the 

discovery of cyber risk?

Informed

• How are business users across the organization equipped to identify 

circumstances contributing to cyber risk?

Reasonable

• How are actions defined to specifically address the  

circumstances identified?

Accountable

• How well implemented is the plan of action? Does it have the right 

targets, owners and incentives?

Continuous 
Improvement

• How are departments/employees learning from each other and  

building capacity and expertise from past circumstances, actions,  
plans, and incidents?

Oversight and 
Monitoring

• How is the organization investing in the governance of its cybersecurity 

program/spending to provide both assurance and justification? 

Cyber Crossroads
Implementing the Cyber Standard of Care

23

Benefits of the Cyber 
Standard of Care

Cyber Crossroads recommends the Cyber Standard of 
Care as a means to overcome current deficiencies in the 
cybersecurity governance ecosystem. There are four major 
benefits of enacting the Cyber Standard of Care:

1. Improve the Effectiveness of Cyber  
Risk Management.
The Cyber Standard of Care, as proposed, will improve 
the effectiveness of cyber risk governance processes. 
Specifically, it will improve visibility of cyber risks across 
the organization. Further, the Cyber Standard of Care 
will provide organizations a reporting structure they 
can consistently follow and escalate to organizational 
leadership. The information collected as part of the 
quarterly plan will empower stakeholders to take 
actions — such as selecting cyber tools or services 
— that are directly tied to their circumstances. Also, 
evidence of precautions taken will be accessible to 
external regulators or insurers that are part of the 
organization’s risk management ecosystem. 

2. Improve the Cost Management of Cyber 
Risk Investments.
The Cyber Standard of Care necessitates a structured 
approach to enumerating risks and acting on them in 
a logical fashion. While there will be cost associated 
with implementing a robust cyber governance process, 
there will be offsetting financial benefits. Organizations 
are making large investments in cybersecurity: it would 
not be unreasonable to spend 5% of a cybersecurity 
budget on governance to ensure the other 95% is spent 
efficiently. A cyber governance process that requires 
actions to directly link to circumstances also provides 
a clearer picture for external parties to assess an 
organization’s responsible spending on cyber risk. 

Cyber insurance coverage has proven to be a critical 
protection for organizations of all sizes, and premiums 
have been rising. Clear documentation concerning a 
thoughtful process in selecting cyber risk solutions 
could help to better position an organization as an 
insurance risk and potentially help garner better 
results in negotiating insurance protection than might 
otherwise be available. Insurance is only one aspect 
of an organization’s total cost of risk. Self-insured 
retentions and losses that exceed the policy’s limits 
also contribute to the cost of cyber risk. If through the 
Cyber Standard of Care, organizations can reduce, or 
eliminate, the impact of cyber-attacks, these costs 
could also fall.

Cyber Crossroads
Benefits of the Cyber Standard of Care

24

3. Improve Accountability and  
Reduce Liability.
The Cyber Standard of Care will help organizations 
allocate accountability for cybersecurity appropriately. 
This is particularly pertinent at large organizations 
where subsidiaries operate in widely varying regulatory 
environments. In these organizations, relationships with 
local regulators are likely to be enhanced by a coherent, 
group-wide approach to cyber risk management that 
emphasizes local accountability.

Additionally, the liability of directors and officers could 
potentially be reduced should the Cyber Standard of 
Care be successfully implemented. Implementing the 
Cyber Standard of Care, with its extensive audit trail as 
described in the sample implementation, could serve 
to demonstrate that the organization took “due care” to 
mitigate cyber risk and could aid in the defense of suits 
brought against the directors and officers in the event 
of a cyber incident. 

4. Reduce Governance Friction.
The Cyber Standard of Care will not only benefit 
organizations themselves, but also their regulators 
and insurers. The Cyber Standard of Care provides a 
common language and approach to implementing a 
wide range of options available to manage cyber risk. 
Because the Cyber Standard of Care does not specify 
what needs to be done at the technical or operational 
level, it is jurisdictionally agnostic. It specifies a 
process-oriented approach that can build on, and be 
adapted to satisfy, the guidance provided by authorities 
and standards organizations in different locales. 
The value of a single overarching framework for 
exercising oversight of cyber risk management should 
not be underestimated. The framework could serve to 
consistently report cyber risk management processes 
to clients, and could equally be requested of vendors. 
Since many companies now operate on a global scale, 
and the insurance industry underwrites organizational 
risk spanning multiple countries, there is a need for 
a common understanding of how the directors and 
officers of organizations will be expected to perform 
their oversight functions. The process approach 
embodied in the Cyber Standard of Care fills that void 
and thereby reduces friction otherwise present when 
managing cyber risk. 

Benefits of the Cyber Standard of Care

25

Cyber Crossroads 
Conclusion

The management of many of the risks that 
organizations confront has, over the years, become 
increasingly codified, sometimes in legislation.

For example, Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
following Enron’s collapse in 2002, requiring companies 
to implement processes to protect against fraud, with 
directors and officers accountable for implementation. 
Groups such as the US Department of Homeland 
Security Solarium Commission have suggested 
expanding SOX to include the governance of cyber risk 
(Solarium 2020). The Cyber Standard of Care, however, 
could do the job without legislative action and could 
prove a better solution. 

Processes and procedures, not just technical standards, 
need to be spelled out, something that standard-setting 
bodies are not well equipped to do. The Cyber Standard 
of Care would take the guesswork out of organizational 
efforts to make smart, cost-effective investments 
in cybersecurity. It would facilitate the creation of 
a cybersecurity culture in organizations by infusing 
cyber risk thinking into normal business operations 
and processes. It could also assist organizations and 
their directors and officers in rebutting subsequent 
challenges to the adequacy of cyber governance efforts, 
whether by regulators or litigants. 

Cyber Crossroads
Conclusion

26

Appendices

Appendix 1 
Methodology
The Cyber Crossroads team approached this 
undertaking with the intention of establishing a set 
of guiding principles for the Cyber Standard of Care 
and a roadmap to implement it. To establish the Cyber 
Standard of Care principles, a literature review was 
conducted across existing cyber standards, guidelines, 
and practices (see Appendix 3) and across the medical 
standard of care. From the existing literature, a draft 
set of principles was created, consisting of two parts 
— the components of a standard of care and success 
criteria for the standard of care. The Cyber Crossroads 
team then reviewed the principles with financial and 
insurance regulators who provided feedback. 

Regulators suggested that providing general principles 
for a Cyber Standard of Care would not be sufficient.  
To facilitate adoption, it was recommended that a 
sample prescriptive implementation be provided  
to organizations. 

The Cyber Crossroads team then interviewed senior 
executives actively engaged in cyber risk management 
at over at 56 industry leading organizations globally 
to understand their current cyber risk governance 
processes. Interviewees included CISOs, chief risk 
officers (CROs), general counsels, and chief operating 
officers (COOs). Industries represented in the sample 
included consumer goods, energy, financial services, 
health care, media/entertainment, professional 
services, retail, technology, hospitality, and utilities. 

These interviews enabled the Cyber Crossroads 
team to compare existing processes to the principles 
we had identified for the Cyber Standard of Care. 
Combining both the governance processes from the 
interviews and the principles, the Cyber Crossroads 
team established a sample implementation of the 
Cyber Standard of Care. The sample implementation is 
intended to help organizations determine how one may 
approach enacting the Cyber Standard of Care.

Appendices

Appendix 2 
Board Resources for Cyber Risk
A wide variety of publications offer board-level support 
on issues of cybersecurity. These range from targeted 
reports (Grant Thornton 2019), to standards (BS 
31111:2018), guidance (NCSC UK 2019, NCSC NZ 2019), 
and frameworks (FERMA and ECIIA 2018, WEF 2017). 
Given its relative novelty, the sources of guidance 
available to boards are more variable and less mature 
than for topics that have been boardroom agenda 
items for far longer. A brief overview of the main existing 
support resources is described below.

These boardroom resources are strategically helpful, 
orienting boards towards general best practices and 
the importance of cyber risk for the organization. They 
are lacking in proposing a clear governance system that 
could be employed to help achieve control over the 
organization’s cyber risk. The Cyber Crossroads Cyber 
Standard of Care helps to fill this gap.

World Economic Forum (WEF) Report on 
Advancing Cyber Resilience
Through this publication, the WEF (2017) introduced 
a boardroom-oriented cybersecurity framework and 
a range of “toolkits.” The document cites a perceived 
demand for board-level support and tools on this issue, 
based on primary data collected by WEF. In response 
to this demand, the 10 principles of the framework 
are introduced which serve as an expression of 
broader corporate governance objectives such as 
accountability, transparency, and awareness. More 
specifically, the framework addresses the allocation 
of board-level responsibility for cybersecurity, the 
availability of required capabilities, the integration of 
cyber resilience in the broader business strategy, and 
the development of a strategy for planning, reviewing, 
and improving the cybersecurity performance of 
the organization. Each principle is associated with a 
series of proposed questions (toolkits) designed to 
enable self-assessment and nurture the necessary 
conversations between governance and management 
functions. The document also includes a number of 
references to notable cybersecurity frameworks, while 
also integrating the concepts of resilience and risk in a 
cybersecurity context. This includes the introduction of 
risk matrices and broader risk management principles, 
while also referencing the WEF’s previously introduced 
Cyber Risk Framework (WEF 2017:18). 

27

Cyber CrossroadsThe United Kingdom and New Zealand’s 
National Cyber Security Centers  
(NCSC UK 2019, NCSC NZ 2019)
The importance of board-level support on issues of 
cyber risk has been the focus of efforts from national 
bodies, like the UK’s and New Zealand’s National Cyber 
Security Centers (NCSC UK 2019, NCSC NZ 2019). As a 
result, the former has developed the Cyber Security 
Toolkit for Boards, characterized by its accessible 
approach and tone. It attempts to provide a high-
level overview of cybersecurity governance, while also 
introducing tangible actions at a board-level and at 
an organizational level. This approach is reflected 
structurally, with each of its central themes including 
actions, and a framing of ‘what good looks like’ through 
a series of self-assessment questions. The guidance 
covers a series of themes that range from approaches 
to cybersecurity expertise growth, to cyber risk 
management, collaboration, and incident response 
planning. Furthermore, the content leverages NCSC 
UK’s portfolio of resources and available guidance, 
while also referencing the (limited) cybersecurity 
regulation applicable to its core national audience. 
NCSC NZ’s (2019) board and senior executive guidance 
comes in the form of its “Charting Your Course: 
Cyber Security Governance” framework. The output 
employs a six-stage approach to cyber resilience, 
which, similar to the previous examples, addresses 
culture, roles, risk management, collaboration, cyber 
program development, and resilience measurement. 
Each stage introduces a series of associated concepts 
and is accompanied by specific guidance. Broader 
cyber governance actions, structures, roles and 
responsibilities, which can span beyond the board of 
directors, are also recommended.

Association Publications
At a European level, the Federation of European 
Risk Management (FERMA) and the European 
Confederation of Internal Auditing (ECIIA) (2018) 
have addressed the intersection between corporate 
governance and cybersecurity in their proposed 
cyber risk governance model entitled “At the Junction 
of Corporate Governance & Cybersecurity” (FERMA 
& ECIIA 2018). The output employs a conception of 
cyber risk based on an integration of the Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
Digital Security Risk Management principles in their 
Digital Security Risk Management for Economic and 
Social Prosperity and FERMA and ECIIA’s “Three Lines 
of Defense” model as described in their report entitled 
Guidance on the 8th EU Company Law Directive (OECD 
2015, FERMA & ECIIA 2010). The former is consistent 
with similar documents and provides guidance on a set 
of common cyber risk issues. These range from social 

factors, such as awareness, skills and cooperation, 
to more technical/operational topics such as risk 
assessments, security measures, and resilience. In 
contrast, the Three Lines of Defense model defines 
domains of responsibility, which place holistic oversight 
of cyber risk at a board level. The resulting cyber 
governance model includes a prescriptive, risk-centric 
overview of relevant organizational functions (IT, 
data management, HR), actors (risk managers, data 
protection officer, CISO, finance officer, and compliance 
officer), audit activities, and relationships with external 
stakeholders (such as insurers, regulators, and 
vendors). Guidance is also provided on the interaction 
between risk managers and internal auditors. As part of 
its appendices, the document includes a comparative 
overview of the Network and Information Security 
Directive and General Data Protection Regulation — 
the two key European Union regulatory initiatives that 
interact with and impact organizational cybersecurity 
(European Union Agency for Cybersecurity 2016, 
European Union 2016).

BS 31111:2018: “Cyber Risk and Resilience 
— Guidance for the Governing Body and 
Executive Management”
As one of the first standards to explicitly focus 
on cyber risk and resilience from a governance/
executive management perspective, British Standard 
31111:2018 provides a broadly applicable base of 
non-technical guidance. It attempts to promote the 
development of cyber resilience by aligning the focus 
and understanding of executive management on a 
series of key principles. These principles are derived 
from “other management standards or frameworks,” 
and broadly relate to organizational resilience, 
risk management and information security. More 
specifically, they are structured around four central 
themes (clauses): Building Cyber Resilience: Core 
Principles; The Organizational Foundations of Cyber 
Risk and Resilience; Building Cyber Risk Management 
and Resilience Capability; and Assessing the Resilience 
of the Organization. Each is accompanied by sub-
themes, which outline a series of recommended 
actions and responsibilities for executive management. 
The document also includes a series of informative 
appendices that offer guidance on improving assurance 
and governance, and understanding cyber culture. 
In line with other similar resources, the standard 
also includes a series of self-assessment questions 
addressed to corporate governance actors that reflect 
its central themes.

                                           ***

Appendices

28

Cyber Crossroads 
In summary, the importance of board-specific 
resources on cybersecurity is increasingly recognized 
by a number of leading bodies. This is reflected in the 
growing range of publications that seek to complement 
traditional, high-granularity, prescriptive cybersecurity 
frameworks by focusing on corporate governance 
support. These have evolved from offering a localized, 
functional view of cybersecurity towards a holistic, 
organizational perspective. That said, none suggest a 
clear process that directors and officers can oversee 
or a mechanism for evaluating the efficacy of the cyber 
risk management program in place. Such a process 
could be covered by the Cyber Standard of Care.

Cybersecurity Frameworks

The NIST Cybersecurity Framework 
Since its initial release by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) in 2014, the NIST 
Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure 
Cybersecurity, has gathered widespread support. The 
framework is comprised of three dimensions: 

1. A “core” that defines activities, outcomes, and 
references based on five cybersecurity “functions” — 
identify, protect, detect, respond, recover. 

2. A four-tier structure that attempts to facilitate the 
qualitative self-assessment of an organization’s cyber 
risk management efforts. 

3. A “profile” component that aligns the framework core 
with the business context and enables contrasting 
current and target states.

The framework’s latest version (1.1, NIST 2018) 
supplements the original structure with a series of 
incremental changes — most notably, an increased 
emphasis on cyber supply chain risk management. 
Overall, the framework is designed to support and 
structure cybersecurity efforts and resources in a 
manner that reflects the organization’s environment, 
baseline capabilities and development aspirations. 
While only implicit in v.1.1, “Governance and Enterprise 
Risk Management” is identified as one of the high-
priority development areas within the framework’s 
roadmap (NIST 2019a). 

As an initial measure in this direction, NIST adapted 
its Baldridge Excellence Framework to create the 
Baldridge Cybersecurity Excellence Builder (NIST 
2019b) — a self-assessment tool designed to better 
understand an organization’s cybersecurity (risk) 
performance in its operational and strategic context.

The Cyber Security Framework (CSF) is also central 
to the second revision of NIST SP 800-37 “Risk 
Management Framework for Information Systems 
and Organizations” (NIST 2019c), suggesting a stronger 
integration between the CSF and NIST’s SP 800 Series. 
However, its recommended resources and references 
include other compatible frameworks such as ISO27K 
and COBIT, discussed below. 

The ISO/IEC 27K Family of Standards 
Through its breadth, the ISO/IEC 27K family of 
standards addresses a variety of dimensions of IT 
security. With guidelines pertaining to Information 
Security Risk Management (ISO/IEC 27005:2018), 
Governance of Information Security (ISO/IEC 
27014:2013) and Guidelines for Cybersecurity (ISO/
IEC 27032:2012), the main standard for which 
certification can be provided is ISO/IEC 27001:2013 
(Information Security Management Systems, or ISMS). 
Its normative requirements integrate information 
security management and risk management, and 
outline a framework for establishing, evaluating, and 
improving a Security Management System based on 
the organization’s context. In line with the terminology 
proposed in ISO/IEC 27000:2018, the ISMS standard 
prescribes an explicit role for “top management,” which 
is defined based on organizational direction-setting 
and control, exemplified through C-suite roles. It is also 
accompanied by a series of prescriptive controls, which 
are further expanded in ISO/IEC27002:2013. Finally, 
the structure, principles and approaches employed 
throughout the family of standards are consistent with 
and refer to the broader ISO portfolio (for example, 
Quality Management Systems — ISO 9000:2015, 
Risk Management — ISO 31000:2018, and Corporate 
Governance — ISO 37000/38500). Thus, despite a 
limited immediate orientation towards supporting 
board-level engagement with cybersecurity, some 
valuable guidance is provided.

COBIT 2019 Enterprise Governance of 
Information and Technology Framework 
The COBIT 2019 Enterprise Governance of Information 
and Technology framework from the Information 
Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) 
addresses information security in the broader context of 
IT Governance, with a primary focus on “value creation.” 
Its core model is structured around “domains” that 
differentiate governance and management objectives. 
In this explicitly prescriptive model, 40 objectives are 
proposed in association with each of the domains 
(COBIT 2019b:17). The framework also introduces a series 
of governance system design factors, each accompanied 
by a normative outline of its recommended dimensions. 

Appendices

29

Cyber Crossroads 
Despite its prescriptive depth, emphasis on holism, and 
relatively distinct approach to information security as a 
secondary dimension of wider IT governance, the COBIT 
framework adopts compatibility with other standards 
(including ISO and NIST) as a core objective. As a result, 
each of its suggested components is accompanied by 
references to “related guidance,” comprising references 
to relevant standards, regulatory requirements and 
other frameworks. Where appropriate, the COBIT 
framework also proposes example metrics, process 
overviews based on a range of capability-based 
activity models, recommended actor involvement 
based on organizational roles, as well as potential 
dependencies in information flows and items — such 
as inputs and outputs from/to other components 
(COBIT 2019a, COBIT 2019b).

Other Frameworks
Two other noteworthy inclusions in the cybersecurity 
framework landscape, based on their recognition and 
adoption rates, are the Center for Internet Security (CIS)
Controls (2019), and the Payment Card Industry’s Data 
Security Standard (2018). The former aims to provide 
a systematic approach for prioritizing security actions 
based on the organization’s profile. It proposes 20 
security controls, categorized as basic, foundational or 
organizational, each with a series of sub-controls that 
are prescribed based on the “implementation groups” 
model. Descriptions, rationales, and entity relationship 
diagrams are also provided for each of the main 
controls, resulting in a general, robust, yet functionally 
confined prescriptive model of cybersecurity actions, 
with little reference to or explicit support for corporate 
governance. In contrast, PCI DSS (2018) is a technical 
standard aimed at all actors that are either involved in 
payment card processing or interact with cardholder 
data. It provides a certification system, a range of 
implementation best practices, and an explicit set 
of requirements, guidance and testing procedures. 
Despite its relatively limited scope, PCI DSS introduces 
a thorough prescriptive data security model that, while 
centered on payment card data, can have broader 
effects on an organization’s cybersecurity stance. 

Appendices

30

Cyber Crossroads 
Appendix 3 References

1. APRA (2019) Prudential Standard CPS 234: Information Security [online] available from: <https://www.apra.gov.au/
sites/default/files/cps_234_july_2019_for_public_release.pdf> [1 January 2020]

2. BaFin (2017) Circular 10/2017 (BA): Supervisory Requirements for IT in Financial Institutions [online] available from: 
<https://www.bafin.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/Rundschreiben/dl_rs_1710_ba_BAIT_en.html>

3. Beazley (2020). Beazley Breach Briefing – 2020 [online] available from: <https://www.beazley.com/news/2020/
beazley_breach_briefing_2020.html> [25 June 2020]

4. Berkman, H. et al. (2018) ‘Cybersecurity awareness and market valuations’, Journal of Accounting and Public Policy. 
Elsevier, 37(6), pp. 508–526. doi: 10.1016/j.jaccpubpol.2018.10.003

5. BIS (2018) Cyber-resilience: Range of practices [online] available from: <https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d454.pdf> [1 
January 2020]

6. Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee [1957] 1 WLR 582

7. BRC (2017) Cyber Security Toolkit: A Guide for Retailers [online] available from: <https://brc.org.uk/media/382900/brc-
cyber-security-toolkit-final.pdf> [1 January 2020]

8. BSI (2018) Cyber risk and resilience. Guidance for the governing body and executive management. BS 31111:2018. 
London: BSI

9. Carter, W. A., and Crumpler, W. D. (2019) Financial Sector Cybersecurity Requirements in the Asia-Pacific Region 
[online] available from: <https://www.csis.org/analysis/financial-sector-cybersecurity-requirements-asia-pacific-region> 
[1 January 2020]

10. CIS (2019) CIS Controls v7.1 [online] available from: <https://learn.cisecurity.org/cis-controls-download> [1 January 
2020]

11. ClassAction.com (2018). Data Breach Lawsuit. [online] available from: https://www.classaction.com/data-breach/
lawsuit/ [25 June 2020]

12. COBIT (2019a) COBIT 2019 Framework: Introduction and Methodology [online] available from: <http://www.isaca.org/
COBIT/Pages/COBIT-2019-Framework-Introduction-and-Methodology.aspx> [1 January 2020]

13. COBIT (2019b) COBIT 2019 Framework: Governance and Management Objectives [online] available from: <http://m.
isaca.org/Knowledge-Center/Research/Documents/COBIT-2019-Framework-Governance-and-Management-
Objectives_res_eng_1118.pdf> [1 January 2020]

14. Cyberspace Solarium Commission (2020). The Cyberspace Solarium Commission Report [online] available from: 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ryMCIL_dZ30QyjFqFkkf10MxIXJGT4yv/view [25 June 2020]

15. Dimensional Research (2016) Trends in Security Framework Adoption: A Survey of IT and Security Professionals 
[online] available from: <https://lookbook.tenable.com/api/pdfproxy?id=8864> [1 January 2020]

16. EDPB (2020) Contribution of the EDPB to the evaluation of the GDPR under Article 97 [online] available from: https://
edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_contributiongdprevaluation_20200218.pdf [25 June 2020]

17. European Union (2016) General Data Protection Regulation. [online] available from: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679 [25 June 2020]

Appendices

31

Cyber Crossroads18. European Union Agency For Cybersecurity (2016) Network Information Security Directive [online] available from: 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2016/1148/oj [25 June 2020]

19. FERMA, and ECIIA (2010) Guidance on the 8th EU Company Law Directive [online] available from: https://www.iia.nl/
SiteFiles/ECIIA%20FERMA.pdf [25 June 2020]

20. FERMA, and ECIIA (2018) At the Junction of Corporate Governance & Cybersecurity [online] available from: <https://
www.eciia.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/FERMA-Perspectives-Cyber-risk-governance-09.10.2018_0.pdf> [1 January 
2020]

21. FSSCC (2020). ‘Financial Services Sector Cybersecurity Profile’ [online] available from: https://fsscc.org/Financial-
Sector-Cybersecurity-Profile [25 June 2020]

22. GOV UK (2018) Cyber Essentials Scheme: Overview [online] available from: <https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/cyber-essentials-scheme-overview> [1 January 2020]

23. Grant Thornton (2019) Cyber security: the board report [online] available from: <https://www.grantthornton.co.uk/
globalassets/1.-member-firms/united-kingdom/pdf/documents/cyber-security-the-board-report.pdf> [1 January 2020]

24. Greenwald, J. (2019) ‘D&O Rates Skyrocket in Hardening Market’. Business Insurance. [online] available from: https://
www.businessinsurance.com/article/20190625/NEWS06/912329208/D&O-rates-skyrocket-in-hardening-market# [25 
June 2020]

25. Hall v. Hilburn (1985) 466 So. 2d 856 

26. Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. v Heller & Partners Ltd. (1964) AC 465

27. Information Commissioner’s Office (2019) Intention to fine British Airways £183.39m under GDPR for data breach 
[online] available from: https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/news-and-events/news-and-blogs/2019/07/ico-announces-
intention-to-fine-british-airways/#:~:text=Following%20an%20extensive%20investigation%20the,Data%20
Protection%20Regulation%20(GDPR).&text=Personal%20data%20of%20approximately%20500%2C000,have%20
begun%20in%20June%202018 [25 June 2020]

28. IASME Consortium (2018) The IASME Governance Standard for Information and Cyber Security [online] available 
from: <https://iasme.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/IASMEStandardv5.pdf> [1 January 2020]

29. IBM (2019) Cost of a Data Breach Report [online] available from: https://databreachcalculator.mybluemix.net/
complete-findings [25 June 2020]

30. IDC (2019) Worldwide Semiannual Security Spending Guide. [online] available from: <https://www.idc.com/getdoc.
jsp?containerId=prUS44935119> [20 March 2019]

31. ISO (2015) Quality management systems - Fundamentals and vocabulary. ISO 9000:2015. Geneva: ISO

32. ISO (2018) Risk management - Guidelines. ISO 31000:2018. Geneva: ISO

33. ISO/IEC (2012) Information technology - Security techniques - Guidelines for cybersecurity. ISO/IEC 27032:2012. 
Geneva: ISO

34. ISO/IEC (2013) Information technology - Security techniques - Governance of information security. ISO/IEC 
27014:2013. Geneva: ISO

35. ISO/IEC (2013) Information technology - Security techniques - Information security management systems - 
Requirements. ISO/IEC 27001:2013. Geneva: ISO

Appendices

32

Cyber Crossroads36. ISO/IEC (2018) Information technology - Security Techniques - Information security management systems - Overview 
and vocabulary. ISO/IEC 27000: 2018. Geneva: ISO

37. ISO/IEC (2018) Information technology – Security techniques – Information security risk management. ISO/IEC 27005: 
2018. Geneva: ISO

38. LaCroix, K. (2020). ‘Equifax Data Breach-Related Securities Suit Settled for $149 Million’. D&O Diary. [online] available 
from: https://www.dandodiary.com/2020/02/articles/securities-litigation/equifax-data-breach-related-securities-suit-
settled-for-149-million/ [25 June 2020]

39. Marsh (2020) Global Insurance Market Index - 2020 Q1 [online] available from: https://www.marsh.com/us/insights/
research/global-insurance-market-index-q1-2020.html [25 June 2020]

40. Marsh and Microsoft. (2018) By the Numbers: Global Cyber Risk Perception Survey [online] available from: https://
www.marsh.com/us/insights/research/global-cyber-risk-perception-survey.html [25 June 2020]

41. Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board (2015) UKSC 11

42. Moore, T., Dynes, S. and Chang, F. R. (2015) ‘Identifying How Firms Manage Cybersecurity Investment’, in Workshop on 
the Economics of Information Security (WEIS), Berkeley, CA, June 13–14, 2015, pp. 1–27

43. NCSC New Zealand (2019) Charting Your Course: Cyber Security Governance [online] available from: <https://www.
ncsc.govt.nz/guidance/charting-your-course-cyber-security-governance/> [1 January 2020]

44. NCSC UK (2019) Board Toolkit [online] available from: <https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/collection/board-toolkit> [1 January 
2020]

45. NISSTC (2019) Introduction of Cyber Security National Standards [online] available from: <https://www.sesec.eu/
app/uploads/2019/06/Annex-III-Introduction-of-Cyber-Security-Standardization-by-SAC-TC-260.pdf> [1 January 2020]

46. NIST (2018) Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity v1.1 [online] available from: <https://www.
nist.gov/cyberframework/framework> [1 January 2020]

47. NIST (2019a) NIST Roadmap for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity Version 1.1 [online] available from: 
<https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/2019/04/25/csf-roadmap-1.1-final-042519.pdf [1 January 2020]

48. NIST (2019b) Baldridge Cybersecurity Excellence Builder v1.1 [online] available from: <https://www.nist.gov/baldrige/
products-services/baldrige-cybersecurity-initiative#bceb> [1 January 2020]

49. NIST (2019c) Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and Organizations. NIST SP800-37:2019. 
Gaithersburg: NIST

50. Nolan, C., Lawyer, G. and Dodd, R. M. (2019) ‘Cybersecurity: today’s most pressing governance issue’, Journal of Cyber 
Policy. Taylor & Francis, 4(3), pp. 425–441. doi: 10.1080/23738871.2019.1673458

51. OECD (2015) Digital Security Risk Management for Economic and Social Prosperity [online] available from: https://
www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/digital-security-risk-management.pdf [25 June 2020]

52. PCI Security Standards Council (2018) Data Security Standard: Requirements and Security Assessment Procedures 
v3.2.1. [online] available from: <https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/document_library> [1 January 2020]

53. Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP (2018) Cross-Border Investigations Update [online] available from: https://
www.skadden.com/insights/publications/2018/08/cross-border-investigations-update#general [25 June 2020]

Appendices

33

Cyber Crossroads54. Swinhoe, D. (2020). ‘The 15 Biggest Data Breaches of the 21st Century’. CSO Online [online] available from: https://
www.csoonline.com/article/2130877/the-biggest-data-breaches-of-the-21st-century.html [25 June 2020] 

55. Tenable (2016). NIST Cybersecurity Framework Adoption Linked to Higher Security Confidence According to New 
Research from Tenable Network Security [online] available from: https://www.tenable.com/press-releases/nist-
cybersecurity-framework-adoption-linked-to-higher-security-confidence-according [25 June 2020]

56. The Council of Economic Advisors (2018) The Cost of Malicious Cyber Activity to the U.S. Economy. [online] available 
from: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/The-Cost-of-Malicious-Cyber-Activity-to-the-U.S.-
Economy.pdf [1 January 2020]

57. RBI (2016) Cyber Security Framework in Banks [online] available from: <https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/
NotificationUser.aspx?Id=10435&Mode=0> [1 January 2020]

58. Rothrock, R. A., Kaplan, J., and Van Der Oord, F. (2018) ‘The Board’s Role in Managing Cybersecurity Risks’, MIT Sloan 
Management Review, Winter, pp 12-15

59. World Economic Forum (2017) Advancing Cyber Resilience: Principles and Tools for Boards [online] available from: 
<http://www3.weforum.org/docs/IP/2017/Adv_Cyber_Resilience_Principles-Tools.pdf> [1 January 2020]

60. World Economic Forum (2019) Regional Risks Doing Business Report 2019. [online] available from: http://www3.
weforum.org/docs/WEF_Regional_Risks_Doing_Business_report_2019.pdf [25 June 2020]

61. Weill, P., Apel, T., Werner, S. L, and Banner, J. S. (2019) ‘It Pays to Have a Digitally Savvy Board’, MIT Sloan Management 
Review, Spring, pp. 41-45

Appendices

34

Cyber CrossroadsAuthors/Reviewers

Cyber Crossroads Founder/Director: 
Arvind Parthasarathi 

Cyber Crossroads Principal Investigator: 
Dr. Gregory Falco, Stanford University

Arvind Parthasarathi is the Founder and Director of 
Cyber Crossroads, which he conceptualized when 
discussions on cyber risk with executives around 
the world kept coming back to the same themes on 
governance. He was previously the Founder and CEO of 
Cyence (now merged with NYSE: GWRE), which created 
a cyber risk analytics platform to quantify the financial 
impact of cybersecurity risks. Before that, he was 
President/CEO of Yarcdata (now merged with NYSE: 
HPE), which created a platform for data discovery. 
He was previously Senior Vice President and General 
Manager of Informatica (Nasdaq: INFA).

Professor Paul Cornish, 
London School of Economics

Professor Cornish is Visiting Professor at LSE 
IDEAS, the foreign policy think tank at the London 
School of Economics. He has advised several 
national cybersecurity strategies, contributed to the 
International Telecommunication Union Guide to 
Developing a National Cybersecurity Strategy, and was 
instrumental in the establishment of the Oceania Cyber 
Security Centre in Melbourne, Australia. Previously, he 
was Co-Director of the Cyber Security Capacity Centre 
at Oxford University and Professorial Fellow in Cyber 
Security at the Australian National University. 

Professor Madeline Carr, 
University College London

Madeline Carr is Professor of Engineering Science 
at University College, London, and the Director of 
the UK-wide Research Institute in Sociotechnical 
Cyber Security (RISCS), which looks at the human and 
organizational factors of cybersecurity. She is also the 
Director of the Digital Technologies Policy Lab, which 
supports policymaking to adapt to the pace of change 
in society’s integration of digital technologies. 

Gregory Falco is a Cyber Risk Research Fellow at 
Stanford University’s Cyber Policy Center, where 
his research focuses on cyber risk governance and 
management. He is also a Research Affiliate at MIT’s 
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
and a Cyber Research Fellow at Harvard University’s 
Belfer Center for Science and Technology. Prior to his 
PhD in Cybersecurity at MIT, he co-founded and led 
Accenture’s Smart City Strategy business.

Professor Sadie Creese, 
Oxford University

Sadie Creese is Professor of Cyber Security in the 
Department of Computer Science at the University of 
Oxford and a member of the faculty of the Blavatnik 
School Executive Public Leaders Programme, where 
she lectures on cybersecurity topics. She is the 
founding Director of the Global Cyber Security Capacity 
Centre (GCSCC) at the Oxford Martin School, where 
she continues to serve as a Director, conducting 
research into what constitutes national cybersecurity 
capacity. She leads the Oxford team’s collaboration 
with the World Economic Forum’s Shaping the Future 
of Cybersecurity and Digital Trust Platform. She is also 
Co-Chair of the Lloyds Register Foundation sponsored 
Foresight review of Cyber Security for the Industrial 
Internet of Things (IIoT). 

Dr. Myriam Dunn Cavelty, 
ETH/Swiss Federal Institute of Technology

Myriam Dunn Cavelty is a Senior Lecturer in  
Security Studies and Deputy for Research and  
Teaching at the Center for Security Studies. She was a 
Visiting Fellow at the Watson Institute for International  
Studies at Brown University and a Fellow at the 
Stiftung Neue Verantwortung in Berlin, Germany. She 
advises governments, international institutions, and 
companies in the areas of cybersecurity, cyber warfare, 
critical infrastructure protection, risk analysis, and 
strategic foresight.

Authors/Reviewers

35

Cyber Crossroads 
Professor Claudia Eckert, 
Technical University of Munich

Dr. Herbert Lin, 
Stanford University

Claudia Eckert is Professor of IT Security at the 
Technical University of Munich. Her research focuses 
on new concepts, methods, and technologies to 
increase security and trustworthiness of IT-based 
systems and applications. She is also Director of the 
Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Integrated Security, 
which supports firms from all industries and service 
sectors in securing their systems, infrastructures, 
products, and offerings.

Professor Gen Goto, 
University of Tokyo

Gen Goto is Professor of Law at the University of Tokyo 
Graduate Schools for Law and Politics. He was a visiting 
Professor at the National University of Singapore and 
Harvard Law School and is a Director of the Japanese 
Law and Economics Association. His main field of 
research is comparative corporate governance, with 
a recent focus on the role of shareholders in the 
Japanese context. 

Andrew Grotto, 
Stanford University

Andrew Grotto is Director of the Stanford Cyber 
Policy Center’s Program on Geopolitics, Technology, 
and Governance. He is a William J. Perry International 
Security Fellow at the Freeman Spogli Institute 
for International Studies and a Visiting Fellow at 
the Hoover Institution, both at Stanford University. 
Previously, he was the Senior Director for Cybersecurity 
Policy on the National Security Council at the White 
House, in both the Obama and Trump Administrations. 

Sean Kanuck, 
Stanford University

Sean Kanuck is an Affiliate at the Center for 
International Security and Cooperation at Stanford 
University. Previously he served as the first US National 
Intelligence Officer for Cyber Issues from 2011 to 2016, 
after a decade with the CIA’s Information Operations 
Center and the White House National Security Council. 
Previously, he was Director for Cyber, Space & Future 
Conflict at the International Institute for Strategic 
Studies in London, Distinguished Visiting Fellow at 
Nanyang Technological University in Singapore, and 
Distinguished Fellow with the Observer Research 
Foundation in India. He is CEO of Exedec, a cyber 
strategy advisory firm that advises financial sector 
clients on the future of information technology and 
associated risks.

Herbert Lin is Senior Research Scholar for cyber policy 
and security at the Center for International Security 
and Cooperation and Hank J. Holland Fellow in Cyber 
Policy and Security at the Hoover Institution, both at 
Stanford University. He is also Chief Scientist, Emeritus 
for the Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board, National Research Council (NRC). His research 
interests focus on the policy and national security 
dimensions of cybersecurity and cyberspace. In 2016, 
he served on President Obama’s Commission on 
Enhancing National Cybersecurity. 

Dr. Jamie Saunders, 
Oxford University/University College London

Jamie Saunders is Fellow at the Oxford Martin School 
at Oxford University and a Visiting Professor at 
University College London. He served for 29 years in UK 
Government including GCHQ and the Cabinet Office. 
Most recently, he was Director of the National Cyber 
Crime Unit, part of the UK’s National Crime Agency and 
previously Director of International Cyber Policy at the 
UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Dr. Howard Shrobe, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Howard Shrobe is a Principal Research Scientist at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Computer 
Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL). 
He served twice as the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) program manager, leading 
programs in cybersecurity and software engineering. 
He has served as an Associate Director of CSAIL and of 
the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory and was Vice 
President of Technology at Symbolics Inc. Dr. Shrobe 
is a thought leader in developing trustworthy, assured, 
and explainable systems and AI for government 
agencies and defense organizations. 

Prof. Larry Susskind, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Lawrence Susskind is Ford Professor of Urban and 
Environmental Planning at the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, where he heads the Science Impact 
Collaborative and is Director of the Cyber Urban 
Critical Infrastructure program, where students are 
trained in matters of urban critical infrastructure 
security and have the opportunity to directly help 
critical infrastructure organizations and municipalities. 
Professor Susskind is the author or co-author of twenty 
books in eight languages and in 2020 was the winner of 
MIT’s Digital Technology Teaching Award.

Authors/Reviewers

36

Cyber CrossroadsSponsors

Cyber Crossroads thanks the following organizations 
for their sponsorship of the research.

www.aig.com

www.axaxl.com

www.beazley.com

www.marsh.com

www.spglobal.com/ratings

www.tokiomarine.com

In order to maintain the independence and integrity of Cyber Crossroads, sponsors were not  
involved in the research process or outputs. Sponsors did, however, provide directional guidance  
and feedback to ensure the findings were relevant and the recommendations were practical.

Sponsors

37

Cyber Crossroads