Ukwandu et al.

SURVEY

Cyber-Security Challenges in Aviation Industry:
A Review of Current and Future Trends
Elochukwu Ukwandu1, Mohamed Amine Ben Farah2, Hanan Hindy3, Miroslav Bures4, Robert Atkinson2,
Christos Tachtatzis2 and Xavier Bellekens2*

*Correspondence:
xavier.bellekens@strath.ac.uk
2Department of Electronic and
Electrical Engineering, University
of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland,
UK
Full list of author information is
available at the end of the article

1
2
0
2

l
u
J

0
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
1
9
4
0
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

The integration of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) tools into
mechanical devices found in aviation industry has raised security concerns. The
more integrated the system, the more vulnerable due to the inherent
vulnerabilities found in ICT tools and software that drives the system. The
security concerns have become more heightened as the concept of
electronic-enabled aircraft and smart airports get reﬁned and implemented
underway. In line with the above, this paper undertakes a review of cyber-security
incidence in the aviation sector over the last 20 years. The essence is to
understand the common threat actors, their motivations, the type of attacks,
aviation infrastructure that is commonly attacked and then match these so as to
provide insight on the current state of the cyber-security in the aviation sector.
The review showed that the industry’s threats come mainly from Advance
Persistent Threat (APT) groups that work in collaboration with some state
actors to steal intellectual property and intelligence, in order to advance their
domestic aerospace capabilities as well as possibly monitor, inﬁltrate and subvert
other nations’ capabilities. The segment of the aviation industry commonly
attacked is the Information Technology infrastructure, and the prominent type of
attacks is malicious hacking activities that aim at gaining unauthorised access
using known malicious password cracking techniques such as Brute force attacks,
Dictionary attacks and so on. The review further analysed the diﬀerent attack
surfaces that exist in aviation industry, threat dynamics, and use these dynamics
to predict future trends of cyber-attacks in the industry. The aim is to provide
information for the cyber-security professionals and aviation stakeholders for
proactive actions in protecting these critical infrastructures against
cyber-incidence for an optimal customer service oriented industry.

Keywords: Aviation industry; Cyber-Security; Threat dynamics; Information and
Communication Technology; Cyber-incidence

1 Introduction
The critical issues of cyber-security have attracted much attention in the avia-
tion industry, since the emergent of current eﬀorts at integrating Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) tools into mechanical devices found in aviation
industry. Thus, forming part of the ongoing eﬀorts of making the aviation industry
compliant to the emerging 4th industrial revolution through smart airports and
e-enabled aircraft projects [1].

Because of the strategic position the aviation industry plays as well as being
the gateway to other nations and the sensitive nature of the system, mistakes are

 
 
 
 
 
 
Ukwandu et al.

Page 2 of 25

deemed very costly. Minor errors or oversights may lead to fatality, loss or exposure
of stakeholders’, staﬀ and customers’ personally identiﬁable information, creden-
tials and intellectual properties and intelligence theft. As major threat actors in
the industry are found to be working in collaboration with state actors with the
aim to steal intellectual property and intelligence, in order to advance their domes-
tic aerospace capabilities as well as possibly monitor, inﬁltrate and subvert other
nations’ capabilities. Thus commensurable cyber-defense strategies become imper-
ative.

Monteagudo [2] suggests that industry players should employ micro-segmentation
strategies in cyber-defense design and implementation. As micro-segmentation en-
ables aviation network infrastructure to be divided into multiple micro-segments
and to apply separate access privileges. The approach opined, helps to contain any
compromise or data breach to its speciﬁc segment. Others such as Bellekens et
al.[3] proposed a deception solution for ensuring early detection of breaches in the
aerospace and other critical infrastructure sectors.

In this manuscript, we explore the cyber-security situation in civil aviation in-
dustry. The term civil aviation is used to describe a category of ﬂight operations
that are non-military in nature, covering both private and commercial areas of the
industry. This includes all parts of the aviation ecosystem, which also extend to the
whole system of avionics, air-traﬃc controls, airlines, and airports. The essence is
to take critical review of the current trends and using same to predict future trends
in the industry with the introduction of modern Information Technology (IT) tools;
such as Internet of Things (IoTs) devices, machine learning, cloud storage and cloud
computing in aviation industry.

In the rest of the paper, Section 2 explored available literature on cyber-threats
in civil aviation industry, the threat actors and their motivations. Section 3 focuses
on the documented cyber-attacks in civil aviation in the last 20 years. Section 4
provides feasible attack surfaces a malicious attacker can exploit at the airport or
aircraft systems and ways they can be mitigated. Section 5 contains insight into
types of cyber-attacks and reasons for such attacks in private and commercial ﬂight
operations and airports. Section 6 gives the future of civil aviation as it relates to
smart airports and e-enabled aircraft. While Section 7 is about threat dynamics
and their implications on the future of civil aviation industry. The paper concluded
in Section 8.

2 A Systematic Literature Review
This section explores available literature on cyber-threats in civil aviation industry,
the threat actors and what motivates them.

2.1 Cyber threats in civil aviation industry
The use and reliance on cyber-technologies have become an integral part of the
aviation ecosystem, which also extend to the whole system of avionics, air-traﬃc
controls, airlines, and airports [4] [2]. The impacts range from improving on the

Ukwandu et al.

Page 3 of 25

ground, air-borne or in-space operations, customer services; such as but not limited
to ticket bookings, in-ﬂight entertainments system, ﬂights checking in and out, se-
curity screening of passengers, and use of aircraft cabin wireless network internet
services [4] [5]. It is also of no doubt that these technologies have been of great pos-
itive impacts to the aviation control systems, provided better aviation operations,
safety, and performance [6] [2] [7][5] [8]. In the same vein, the negative impacts
have, in no measure, been quite devastating [2] [8] [9] and hence this section focuses
on the review of previous literature in areas of cyber-security issues in civil aviation
industry over the last 20 years.

In 2018, Corretjer [10] undertook a research to analyse the available cyber-security
practices within the United States aviation industry (civil and military). The author
also investigated eﬀorts of the US government and private entities to protect the
industry against cyber-attacks. The research summarised its ﬁndings by suggesting
that although government’s Federal Airport Authority (FAA) and the private sec-
tor are putting in great eﬀorts to tame the tides of cyber-attacks, more eﬀorts are
needed with regards to providing proactive measures against this menace during
design, acquisition, operations and maintenance of aviation navigation systems.

With the introduction of modern IT tools such as IoT devices, machine learning,
cloud storage and cloud computing in aviation industry, Kagalwalla and Churi [11]
are of the view that much attentions are needed in aviation cyber-security due to
their inherent vulnerabilities. In the same vein, Duchamp, Bayram and Korhani [1]
agree but added that the increase in the number of travellers, building of new mod-
ern airports, and complexities in new aircraft have brought with them an increase
in cyber-attacks in civil aviation industry.

On the other hand, Lehto [12] stated that the advancements in cyber-attack tools
and methods as well as the increased exposures and motivation of the attackers
have led to the current trend in these cyber-attacks thus aﬀecting airlines, aircraft
manufacturers and authorities. Cyber Risk International [13] submits that the rise
in cyber-security challenges in the aviation industry is a result of the combination
of digital transformation, connectivity, segmentation, and complexity currently be-
ing experienced in the industry due to surge in global travels. This further makes
the industry to rely heavily on IT facilities to keep up with the pace, needs and
transformations, thus getting it exposed to barrage of cyber-attacks. In all, they
are of the opinion that with multiple entry and exit in aviation industry, creating
a watertight defense is becoming a herculean task. Moreover, having lots of Legacy
IT issues and fragmentation in the industry have in no measure increased the com-
plexities as much of the IT systems in use were not designed to cope with modern
challenges of cyber-crime [2].

Kagalwalla and Churi [11] went further to say that in terms of securing the avia-
tion industry against cyber-attacks factors like lack of resources, funds, and skilled
staﬀ have become part of the challenges. All the same, the issues of insider threats,
procuring modern day operational technologies, like Supervisory Control and Data

Ukwandu et al.

Page 4 of 25

Acquisition (SCADA), Inter-Communication System (ICS), etc, remain part of it
all. It ﬁnally oﬀers solutions such as building strong security culture, implement-
ing good preventing, and proactive measures as ways of confronting these challenges.

2.2 Threat actors and their motivations
The Fireeye Incorporated [14] provided what they have observed as the major threat
actors in aerospace industry and the motives behind these attacks. They went on to
say that the industry cyber threats come mainly from Advance Persistent Threat
(APT) groups that work in collaboration with state actors to steal intellectual
property and intelligence, in order to advance their domestic aerospace capabilities
as well as possibly monitor, inﬁltrate and subvert other nations’ capabilities. They
also aim to develop countermeasures and produce technologies for sale on the global
arms market they alleged.

They further support their claim, the authors provided information that through
their threat intelligence have observed at least 24 APT compromise of organisation
in diﬀerent aerospace industry as well as the type of data stolen from the indus-
try. This type of data range from budget information, business communications,
equipment maintenance records and speciﬁcations. They also include Organisational
Charts and Company Directories, Personally Identiﬁable Information, Product De-
signs, Product Blueprints, Production Processes and Proprietary Product or Service
Information. Also included are, Research Reports, Safety Procedures, System Log
Files and Testing Results and Reports.

Furthermore, Kessler and Craiger [15] categorised the threat actors according to
their motivations such as cyber-criminals, whose activities cost above 450 billion dol-
lars annually to the global economy. While Cyber-activists/hacktivists, whose mo-
tives are mainly that of philosophy, politics, and non-monetary goals. Cyber-spies,
on the other hand, are motivated by ﬁnancial, industrial, political, and diplomatic
espionage. Cyber-terrorists are driven by political, religious, ideological, or social
violence. Finally, that Cyber-warriors are mainly attack by a nation-state in order
to advance strategic goals. Abeyratne [16], added that according to adopted Res-
olution A40-10 at International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) 40th General
Assembly, threat actors have malicious intent focused in causing business disrup-
tions, stealing information for political, as well as ﬁnancial gains.

Based on the analysed literature, there are likelihood of rise in cyber-threats in
civil aviation industry as global travel rate increases leading to reliance in IT tools
to help keep up with the pace. Also, with embedded systems being deployed to help
improve aviation services, a larger attack surface is provided due to the integration
of hardware and software. Furthermore, with the threat actors having diﬀerent mo-
tivational factors, it is therefore pertinent to state that there are high tendencies
of increase in cyber-threats in civil aviation industry, alongside the dimension and
type. This will depend on the actors involved, thus giving room for research and
innovation to mitigate these risks, dissuade the actors by perhaps using proactive

Ukwandu et al.

Page 5 of 25

approaches of cyber-security by design in developing these IT tools.

3 Documented Cyber-Attacks in Aviation Industry (2000-2020)
The reliance on technology, especially cyber-technology systems, have increasingly
become part of the modern society. This reliance has in no doubt brought in-
creased eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness in day-to-day life, but it has also some attendant
risks [17]. The reliance on cyber-enabled technologies have increased the safety and
eﬃciency of air transport systems. In the same vein, a cyber-incident in one airport
could pose a transnational problem with social and economic consequences [1], due
to high connectivity of human migration and the hyper-connectivity in aviation
industry.

It is on the bases of the above that this section uses Tables 1 to present reviews
of documented cyber-threats in civil aviation industry over the last 20 years (2000-
2020), as cyber incidents in aviation sector documented by for instance, Viveros
in [18] covered from 1997-2014.

Table 1: Cyber-Attacks in Civil Aviation Industry
Incident

Location

Class Ref Year
2003
[19]
C

Slammer
Worm attack

USA

Description
One of the FAA’s administrative server was com-
promised through a slammer worm attack. This
attack shut down Internet service in some parts
of Asia and slowed connections worldwide.

A

[20]

2006

Cyber-
Attack

C

[20]

2008 Malicious

hacking
attack

C

C

[21]

2009 Malicious

hacking
attack
2013 Malware at-
tack

[22]

Oklahoma,
USA

Alaska, USA Two separate attacks on US Federal Aviation Ad-
ministration (FAA) internet services that forced
it to shut down some of its air traﬃc control sys-
tems.
Hackers stole administrative password of FAA’s
interconnected networks when they took control
of their system. By gaining access to the domain
controller in the Western Paciﬁc region, they were
able to access more than 40,000 login credentials
used to control part of the FAA’s mission-support
network.
A malicious hacking attack on FAA’s computer,
which gave them access to personal information
on 48,000 current and former FAA employees.
Shutting down of passport control system at
the departure terminals of Istanbul Ataturk and
Sabiha Gokcen airports due to malware attack,
leading to the delay of many ﬂights.

Istanbul,
Turkey

USA

Continued on next page

Ukwandu et al.

Page 6 of 25

Table 1 – continued from previous page

Class Ref Year
2013
[23]
C

Location

USA

Incident
Hacking and
Phishing at-
tacks

A

[24]

2015

DDoS attack Poland

I

[25]

2016

Vietnam

Hacking,
phishing
attacks

A

A

C

C

C

[26]

2016

Cyber-
attack

Boryspil,
Ukraine

[25]

2017

Human error United King-

dom

[27]

2018

Data breach

Hong Kong

[28]

2018

Data breach

[29]

2018

Data breach

United King-
dom
USA

A

[30]

2018

Ransomware
attack

Bristol Air-
port, UK

C

[31]

2018 Mobile

app

data breach

Air Canada,
Canada

Description
Malicious hacking and phishing attacks that tar-
geted about 75 airports. These major cyber-
attacks were alleged to have been carried out by
an undisclosed nation-state sought to breach US
commercial aviation networks.
A Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) IT Net-
work attack by cyber-criminals that aﬀected LOT
Polish Airlines ﬂight-plan systems at the Warsaw
Chopin airport. The attack made LOT’s system
computers unable to send ﬂight plans to the air-
craft, thus grounding at least 10 ﬂights, leaving
about 1,400 passengers stranded.
The defacement of website belonging to Vietnam
airlines and ﬂight information screens at Ho Chi
Minh City and the capital, Hanoi, displaying mes-
sages of supportive China’s maritime claims in
the South China Sea by Pro-Beijing hackers.
A malware attack was detected in a computer in
the IT network of Kiev’s main airport, which in-
cludes the airport’s air traﬃc control system.
British ﬂag-carrier computer
failure
caused by disconnecting and reconnection of the
data-center power supply by a contracted engi-
neer. This accident left about 75,000 passengers
of British Airways stranded.
Cathay Paciﬁc Airways data breach of about 9.4
million customers’ personal identiﬁable informa-
tion.
British Airways Data breach of about 380,000
Customers’ personal identiﬁable information.
Delta Air Lines Inc. and Sears Departmental
stores reported a data breach of about 100, 000
customers’ payment information through third
party.
An attack on electronic ﬂight information screens
at Bristol Airport. This resulted to the screen be-
ing taken oﬄine and replaced with whiteboard
information. There was no known adverse eﬀect
from this attack.
Air Canada reported a mobile app data breach
aﬀecting the personal data of 20,000 people.

systems

Continued on next page

Ukwandu et al.

Page 7 of 25

Table 1 – continued from previous page

Class Ref Year
2018
[32]
C

Incident

Location
Data breach Washington

DC, USA

C

A

A

C

[33]

2018

Ransomware
attack

Chicago,
USA

[15]

2018

Cyber-
attack

Sweden

[34]

2019

Bot attacks

[35]

2019

Cyber-
Incident

Ben Gurion
Airport,
Is-
rael
Toulouse,
France

Description
Data breach on NASA server that led to possi-
ble compromise of stored personally identiﬁable
information (PII) of employees on October, 23,
2018.
Boeing was hit by the WannaCry computer virus.
The attack was reported to have minimal damage
to the company’s internal systems.
Cyber-attack launched by Russian APT group
(APT28) that jammed Sweden’s air traﬃc control
capabilities, grounding hundreds of ﬂights over a
5-day period.
About 3 million bots attacks were blocked in
a day by Israel’s airport authority as they at-
tempted to breach airport systems.
A cyber incident that resulted to an unauthorised
access to Airbus “Commercial Aircraft business”
information systems. There was no known impact
according to the report on airbus’ commercial op-
erations.

C

[36]

2019

Ransomware
attack

C

[37]

2019

Crypto min-
ing Malware
infection

C

[38]

2019

Phishing at-
tack

C

[39]

2020

Ransomware
attack

Albany, USA Albany International Airport experienced a ran-
somware attack on Christmas of 2019. The at-
tackers successfully encrypted the entire database
of the airport forcing the authorities to pay a ran-
som in exchange of the decryption key to a threat
actor.
A discovery through Cyberbit’s Endpoint De-
tection and Response (EDR) by Cyberbit re-
searchers that showed an installation of crypto
mining software infection that infected more than
50% of the European airport workstations.

Europe

New Zealand A phishing attack targeted at Air New Zealand
Airpoints customers. This attack compromised
approximately
information of
the personal
112,000 customers, with names, details and Air-
points numbers among the data exposed.

Denver, USA A cyber-incident that involved the attacker ac-
cessing and stealing company data. The stolen
data were later leaked online.

Continued on next page

Ukwandu et al.

Page 8 of 25

Table 1 – continued from previous page

Class Ref Year
2020
[40]
C

Incident
Ransomware
attack

Location
San Antonio,
USA

I

[41]

2021

Human
Error

Birmingham,
United King-
dom

Description
ST Engineering’s aerospace subsidiary in the
USA suﬀered a data breach, which involved Maze
Cyber-criminal gaining unauthorised access to its
IT network and thus launched a ransomware at-
tack.
A ﬂaw in the IT system used by the operator to
produce the load sheet, meant that an incorrect
takeoﬀ weight was passed to the ﬂight crew.

Legend: C = Conﬁdentiality, I = Integrity, A = Availability

3.1 Analysis and Critical Reviews of Table 1
From Figure 1, attacks focusing on stealing login details such as administrative
passwords, malicious hacking to gain unauthorised access in IT infrastructure are
major focus of cyber-attackers in Aviation industry over the last 20 years with
about 71%. The second focuses on denial of service such as Distributed Denial of
Services (DoS) to hinder data availability to prospective customers at 25%, and
the third are attacks that tends to undermine the integrity of ﬁles, by intercepting
them while on transit or at rest so as to corrupt the contents with 4%. These results
provide credence to assertions in subsection 2.2, which posits that the major moti-
vation of threat actors is to steal intellectual properties and intelligence, in order to
advance their domestic aerospace capabilities as well as possibly monitor, inﬁltrate
and subvert other nations’ capabilities.

Figure 1: Cyber-Attack Class based on Security Triad

Results drawn from cyber attack by types in Figure 2 supports the evidence pro-
vided in Figure 1, by showing that malicious hacking activities top the list of types
of cyber-attacks with 26%, which tends to gain unauthorised access to IT infras-
tructure by breaking into it using known malicious password cracking techniques

Ukwandu et al.

Page 9 of 25

Figure 2: Cyber-Attacks by Types

Figure 3: Cyber-Attacks by Location

such as Brute force attacks, Dictionary attacks and so on. Data breach and Ran-
somware attacks are second with 14% each, while attacks related to Phishing and
Malware are third with 11% each. Cyber incidents like Human error, Bot attacks,

No Of PersonsAﬀected MoneyLost

Table 2: Cost of Cyber-Attacks in Aviation Industry Per Year
Lost FlightHours
Year
NA
2003
NA
2006
NA
2008
NA
2009
NA
2013
NA
2015
NA
2016
NA
2017
120
2018
NA
2019
NA
2020

Airports ShutDown
NA
2
NA
NA
77
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

NA
NA
40000
48000
NA
1400
NA
75000
94500000
112000
NA

NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Legend: NA = Record Not Available

Ukwandu et al.

Page 10 of 25

Worms and DDoS attacks are least with 4% each.

Figure 3 results showed that cyber-attacks in Aviation industry are more in North
America, with 11 out 12 recorded incidents coming from the United States of Amer-
ica (USA), and 1 only from Canada. This may not be unconnected with the large
number of airports in the USA, as according to Mazareanu [42] in 2019, USA has
about 5,080 public airports and about 14,556 private airports. Europe comes second
with 44% rate of the attack incidents with Britain topping the list of the countries
in Europe frequently attacked. Countries in Asia continent come third with 8% and
least with countries in Africa with no known cyber-attacks recorded in their airports.

Table 2 results deal with the number of persons aﬀected by cyber-incidents in
aviation industry, monetary values lost either as compensations or as ransoms,
number of times airports were shut down during cyber-attack incidents, and num-
ber of days air-crafts were grounded due to cyber-incidents at the airports. From
the Table, 2018 remains top on the chart with highest rate of cyber-attacks in
aviation industry, where about 94, 500, 000 persons were aﬀected by cyber-attacks
with about 5 days running of air-craft being grounded due to cyber-attack inci-
dents at the airports. There was also a disturbing incident in 2019, as a result of
Crypto mining Malware infection. This discovery was made by Cyberbit researchers
through their Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) software that showed an
installation of crypto mining software infection that infected more than 50% of the
European airport workstations.

One major issue found with aviation cyber-security incidence is lack of trans-
parency in record keeping, documentation and publication of these incidents for
public knowledge. Take for instance, monies lost due to cyber-incidence were never
publicised nor documented, especially the values paid by the industry as compen-
sations to victims of these attacks. Other records not transparently disclosed are
the number of shutdowns experienced by the various airports that were attacked as
well as the lost ﬂight hours during cyber-incidence.

4 Cyber-Attack Surfaces and Vulnerabilities in Civil Aviation

Industry

According to Paganini [43], only an attacker with a broad understanding on how
an aircraft or aviation system works can successfully disrupt its normal operation.
Thus, alluding to the fact that it is not an easy task to attack an entire aircraft
or aviation system. on the other hand, Haass, Sampigethaya and Capezzuto [4],
highlighted that cyber-technologies like Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi), Internet proto-
cols, IoT devices such as sensors, Global Positioning System (GPS), Open-source
operating systems, Virtualisation, and Cloud computing services have assisted in
aviation operations, making it cheaper, faster, and inter-operable. These systems,
due to their diﬀerent inherent vulnerabilities, can be targeted remotely by cyber-
attackers, this position is also supported by [44] [2], and Lykou et al. [5]. All the
same, Lykou et al. [5] added that the practise of Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)

Ukwandu et al.

Page 11 of 25

by airport customers, travellers and employee have also constituted an attack sur-
face to the industry.

Duchamp, Bayram and Korhani [1], Kessler et al. [15], and Abeyratne [16] are of
the view that reliance in use of computer-based system in day-to-day management
of aviation industry, which gave rise to improved sophistication in air navigation
system, on-board aircraft control and communication system are some cyber-attack
targets by malicious attackers. Also listed are, airport ground system, which includes
ﬂight information, security screening and day-to-day data management systems. It is
based on these that this section presents some of the known feasible attack surfaces
in Civil Aviation Industry (CAI), their known vulnerabilities and possible solutions.

In 2014, Santamarta [45] discovered security ﬂaws in Inmarsat and Iridium Satel-
lite Communication (SATCOM) terminals, which are also in use in aviation in-
dustry. In the paper, the researcher concluded that malicious attackers have the
potentials of exploiting the vulnerabilities inherent in the design of this system
such as what appeared to be backdoors during their experiment. Also, exploitable
are hardcoded credentials, insecure protocol, and weak encryption algorithms found
in the system.

In 2017, Biesecker [46] reported that a demonstration by a team of government,
industry and academic oﬃcials showed that a legacy Boeing 757 commercial plane
was successfully hacked remotely in a non-laboratory setting by accessing the air-
craft’s systems through radio frequency communications.

4.1 Aerospace and Avionic Systems
Aerospace systems embody much of software and hardware integration, being much
of embedded-computing system technology. In view of this, the system is prone
to software vulnerabilities as result of the combination as ensuring that embedded
system is exempt from security ﬂaws is a diﬃcult one according to Dessiatnikof et al.
in [47] and Papp et al. [48]. The researchers in [47] went further to assert from their
ﬁndings that attacks on aerospace systems can originate from the lower layers such
as Operating System (OS) kernel, protection mechanisms, and context switching as
it is diﬃcult even when formal veriﬁcation methods are applied to prove absence
of vulnerabilities in embedded systems. They concluded by saying that attacks
against aerospace computer systems can be categorised based on the attacker’s
skills and aims. While one of the aims is usually to corrupt the computing system’s
core functions; the other on fault-tolerance mechanisms such as error detection and
recovery systems.

On the other hand, aircraft avionics systems are critical to the safe operation of
an airplane by crew members and pilots as it provides weather information, posi-
tioning data, and communications systems [49]. Avionics is coined by combining
aviation with electronics, which are made up of embedded systems used in aircraft
design, development and operation [50]. Avionic systems through external sensors
gather data such as speed, direction, and external temperature and route them to

Ukwandu et al.

Page 12 of 25

other components of aircraft using avionic network [51].

In recent times, in a bid to leverage on low cost Commercial-Oﬀ-The-Shelf (COTS)
equipment and software technology to increase bandwidth and reduce cost, Ether-
net networks such as Avionics Full DupleX Switched Ethernet (AFDX) have been
used in avionic network communication system. It is an IEEE 802.11 protocol-based
Wireless Flight Management System (WFMS).

While this avionic communication network provide a secure wired network that is
not easy for malicious users to access and inject false data, making it to provide a
high degree of reliability and safety [52] [53], Avionics Wireless Network (AWN) in
the other hand, brings with it new challenges related to assurance, reliability and
security [54] [55].

Aircraft avionics provide passenger entertainment on-board an aircraft, but be-
yond this, they implement control of ﬂight functions, navigation, control, guidance,
communication, system operation, and monitoring through its software to hard-
ware integrated systems. Because of this integration, some cyber-security concerns
abounds, take for instance in Communications, where Voice over the Radio (VoR)
was used to communicate with pilots and controllers. The major disadvantage of
VoR is the time delay to receive the signal, especially in the case of multiple com-
munications. it is of no doubt that radio communication may give rise to several
issues, such as the interruption of the signal or the misunderstanding between con-
troller and pilot due to noise addition. The solution is to use the Controller Pilot
Data Link (CPDLC), which has the ability to send or receive the information as
a digital signal. The air carrier ﬂight operations centres are synchronised with the
ﬂight deck to receive the same signal at the same time, allowing a maximum risk
awareness and better decisions made.

Now, the aviation community is concentrated in creating modernised National
Airspace System (NAS) and a new communication system that will be able to im-
prove the interaction between the aircraft and the ground system.

More detailed attack surfaces on diﬀerent aerospace and avionic components will

be provided in the following sub-subsections.

4.1.1 Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System

(ACARS)

Aeronautical Radio, Incorporated (ARINC) introduced ACARS datalink protocol
to help reduce crew workload and improve data integrity. ACARS is an ARINC
618-based air-to-ground protocols to transfer data between on-board avionics sys-
tems and ground-based ACARS networks [56].

The ACARS system is made up of a Control Display Unit (CDU) and ACARS
Management Unit (MU). While MU is to send and receive digital messages from

Ukwandu et al.

Page 13 of 25

the ground using existing very high frequency (VHF) radios. On the ground, the
ACARS system (network of radio transceivers), receive (or transmit) the datalink
messages, as well as route them to various airlines on the network.

Smith et al. in [57] and [58] stated that current use of ACARS by stakeholders
are beyond its original intention as conceived to serve as ﬂight trackers and on
crew automated timekeeping system. While in [57] and [58] their works consisted
of demonstrating how current ACARS usage systematically breaches location pri-
vacy, in [57] showed how sensitive information sent with ACARS over a wireless
channel can potentially lead to a privacy breach for users, supporting a known
fact that ACARS message is susceptible to eavesdropping attack. While they con-
cluded in [57] by proposing a privacy framework, and in [58] recommended use of
encryption and policy measures to tackle the known eavesdropping attack on the
communication channel.

4.1.2 Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B)
Aircraft automatically transmits (ADS-B Out) and/or receives (ADS-B In) identiﬁ-
cation and positional data in a broadcast mode through a data link using Automatic
Dependent Surveillance Broadcast (ADS-B). Through this means, the safety and ca-
pacity of airport surveillance are improved, thus enhancing situational awareness of
airborne and ground surveillance in airports [59]. Ali et al. [60] in 2017 went further
to support this claim by stating that ADS-B out provides varying ground applica-
tions support, which includes Air Traﬃc Control (ATC) surveillance in both radar
and non-radar airspace on the airport surface. Thus, enabling enhanced surveil-
lance applications by strengthening the capabilities of aircraft to receive ADS-B
out message from other aircraft within their coverage (ADS-B In) areas. Sequel to
this, the safety and credibility of ADS-B system is paramount as it plays its role in
supporting various ground and airborne applications [61].

Furthermore, Manesh and Kaabouch in [62] stated that in order to generate
precise air picture for air traﬃc management, ADS-B employs global satellite navi-
gation systems. As the system is designed to broadcast detailed information about
aircraft, their positions, velocities, and other data over unencrypted data links, the
security of ADS-B has become a major concern.

Tabassum [63] analysed the performance of ADS-B data received from Grand
Fork International Airport. The data format is in raw and archived Global Data
Link (GDL-90) data format. GDL-90 is designed to transmit, receive and decode
ADS-B messages via on-board datalink by combining GPS satellite navigation with
datalink communications. The experiment was aimed at detecting anomalies in the
data and quantifying the associated potential risk. In the course of the research,
dropout, low conﬁdent data, message loss, data jump, and altitude discrepancy
were identiﬁed as ﬁve diﬀerent anomalies but the focus was on two - dropouts
and altitude deviations. At the end of the analysis, the author concluded that all
failures relating to the anomalies have potential of aﬀecting ATC operation either

Ukwandu et al.

Page 14 of 25

from airspace perspective, such as Dropout, low conﬁdent data or from Aircraft
perspective, such as Data jump, Partial message loss and Altitude discrepancy. In
all these portend some level of attack surfaces, which an attacker can leverage on
to carry out malicious intents such as Eavesdropping, Jamming attack, Message
Injection, Message Deletion, and Message Modiﬁcation [64] [62].

4.2 Electronic Flight Bag
Electronic Flight Bag (EFB) is used to display digital documentation, such as nav-
igational charts, operations manuals, and airplane checklists by the ﬂight crew. It
can also be used by the crew members to perform basic ﬂight planning calculations.
All the same, advanced EFB now exist for performing many complex ﬂight-planning
task. This are integrated into ﬂight management systems alongside other avionic
systems for use in displaying an airplane’s position on navigational charts, with
real-time weather information[49].

Wolf, Minzlaﬀ and Moser in [65] stated that EFBs are attractive elements as they
have replaced former paper references carried on board as part of the ﬂight man-
agement system, thus bringing reduced weight to the aircraft system. Currently, as
advanced EFBs are integrated into ﬂight management systems, unlike the previous
ones that were stand-alone, they present an attack surface to the ﬂight management
system. Take for instance, a malware infected EFB could enable denial-of-service
attacks to other connected on-board systems [49]. This position, as stated above, is
supported by [65], [66], and [67] but they added that such infection is possible only
with stand-alone EFBs.

4.3 Summarised Attack Surfaces in Civil Aviation Industry
Table 3 below contains available cyber-attack surfaces in civil aviation industry and
our recommended ways to mitigate them.

Table 3: Attack Surfaces and Components in Civil Aviation Industry

Class
C,I

Ref
[45]

Component
SATCOM
terminals

C,I

[47][48] Aerospace

systems

Attack Surface
Hardcoded credentials,
protocol,
insecure
weak
encryption
algorithms

kernel,

OS
switching,
mechanisms

context
protection

Mitigation

Description

Consistent
patching
and software updates,
use of legacy encryp-
tion
algorithm and
network protocols.
Consistent patching of
OS, use of legacy en-
cryption algorithm.

SATCOM
minals
exploited
some design ﬂaws.

ter-
be
through

can

Attackers based on
skills can exploit is-
sues with integra-
tion of OS in em-
bedded systems.

Continued on next page

Ukwandu et al.

Page 15 of 25

Table 3 – continued from previous page

Class
I

Component

Ref
[57][58] ACARS

Attack Surface
Communication chan-
nel

Mitigation
Use of legacy encryp-
tion algorithm and pol-
icy measures.

I

I

[63]

ADS-B

Communication chan-
nel

Use of legacy encryp-
tion algorithm

[54][55] AWN

Communication chan-
nel

of

Use
legacy
algorithm

strong

and
encryption

Description

commu-
ACARS
channel
nication
is
to
susceptible
eavesdropping and
privacy breach.
commu-
ADS-B
nication
channel
is prone to eaves-
dropping, Jamming
attack,
Message
injection, deletion
and Modiﬁcation.
Avionic
Wireless
commu-
Network
nication
channel
is prone to data
integrity problems
such as data as-
reliability
surance,
and security.

Legend: C = Conﬁdentiality, I = Integrity, A = Availability

5 Cyber-Security in Civil Aviation Industry
Civil aviation as stated earlier, includes private and commercial ﬂight operations
categorised into scheduled air transport and general aviation. Civil aviation industry
plays very signiﬁcant role in the global transportation and migration networks [68].
Thus, the need to review the role of cyber-security in the industry, in relation to ef-
forts being put in place to mitigate the attendant risks occasioned by cyber-attacks.

Cyber-attacks in aviation industry revolve around phishing and network attacks
such as Eavesdropping, DoS, Man in the middle and spooﬁng attacks [68]. Dis-
tributed Denial of Service (DDoS) and DoS attacks on network assets at the airport,
especially Vulnerability Bandwidth Depletion DDoS Attacks (VBDDA) according
to Ugwoke et al. [69] could be mitigated by their proposed embedded Stateful Packet
Inspection (SPI) based on OpenFlow Application Centric Infrastructure (OACI).
Their focus was in using this technique to mitigate such attacks on the Airport
Information Resource Management Systems (AIRMS). An enterprise cloud-based
resource management system used in some airports. But Delainet al. [70] are of
the position that DDoS could rather be prevented through Volumetric protection,
providing an alternative secondary Internet connection, as well as implementing
high performance hardware devices. The latter is to permanently monitor logging

Ukwandu et al.

Page 16 of 25

activities and traﬃc to improve the eﬃciency of the protection mechanism.

Clark and Hakim [71], Martellini [72] and Singer and Friedman[73] posit the use
of Airport intelligence classiﬁcation to protect airport assets and infrastructure
from cyber-attacks. This method they proposed has been classiﬁed as of good tech-
nical practice for high level security issues. The practice in real terms consist of
good cyber-hygiene culture such as system and anti-virus regular updates, cyber-
education for new employees, regular data backup and password management.

The use of encoding has been posited by Efe et al. [74] as a measure to forestall
cyber-attacks on ADS-B data used for airborne and ground surveillance in airports.
They authors went further to say that the use of random blurring technique on
aircraft data from ADS-B within a permissible error bounds for the purpose of Air
Traﬃc Control (ATC), can be used to limit and monitor the level of interference
of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) on ADS-B data using aircraft information at
the airport.

6 Future of Civil Aviation Industry and their cyber-security

challenges

The concept of smartness in aviation industry is as a result of recent advance-
ments in digitalisation eﬀorts by integrating IoT enabled devices such as sensors
in physical systems, use of Blockchain, AI, Cloud and Big Data technologies in
service delivery. The essence is to provide optimal services, enhanced customer ex-
perience in a reliable and sustainable manner, and by working around the domains
of growth, increase on eﬃciency, safety and security [6]. As increase in automation
brings more attack surfaces due to increased IT integration into operation technolo-
gies, this section therefore looks at levels of cyber-security implementations, threats
that evolved due to IoT and smart device integration, risk scenario analysis and
possible mitigation as resilience measures.

6.1 Smart Airport
Smart Airport system is an integrated digital transformation within the airport
ecosystem using new technologies such as IoT devices (sensors, actuators), Big Data,
Cloud, and Blockchain technologies. Zamoranoet al. in [75] included technologies
like Code Bars Technology, Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID), Geolocation
technologies, Immersive Realities, Biometric Systems and Robotics as driving force
in smart airport system. On the other hand, Koroniotis et al. in [76] are of the
view that advances in IoT device integration in aviation sector infrastructure have
given rise to the emergence of smart airport. In all, its services are developed and
processed to deliver good customer experience with improved eﬃciency in daily op-
eration. It is also aimed at enhancing robustness, eﬃciency, and control in service
delivery according to [76]. This it does by gathering real-time customer data through
interactions with every object at the airport and use same to analyse passenger’s
proﬁle and generate ancillary revenues [77]. In a nutshell, it is a data-rich environ-
ment, with equipment laced with range of sensors, actuators and other embedded

Ukwandu et al.

Page 17 of 25

devices, that provide customers a user-interface to interact with cyber-physical de-
vices across the airport.

Georgia Lykou et al. [6] categorised threats against IoT applications in smart air-
ports into Network and communication attacks, Malicious software and tampering
with Airport smart devices. Others are misuse of authorisation; social engineering
and phishing attacks. In all, the paper was focused on dealing with a complete
scenario analysis of likely malicious attacks in smart airports with regards to IoT
technologies, smart applications, mitigating actions, resilience measures and so on.

Koroniotis et al. in [76] posits that IoT systems and networks due to likely hard-
ware constraints, software ﬂaws or IoT misconﬁgurations, IoT devices are prone
to APT attacks. They suggest that the use of AI-enabled techniques such as Ma-
chine Learning can help in addressing the challenge of IoT-based cyber-attacks, and
thus provide good cyber-defense to smart airport, strengthen reliability of services,
and mitigate against service disruptions, travelling cancellations, or loss of sensitive
information.

6.2 E-Enabled Aircraft
To make the aircraft more eﬃcient, the use of electronic data exchange and digital
network connectivity are paramount, according to Wolf et al. [65] and in a bid
to achieve this, IoT devices will play important role. This section reviews relevant
works on the role of e-enabled devices in enhancing digital network connectivity and
electronic data exchange in future e-enable aircraft. It also focuses on the poten-
tials of these devices in shaping the future of aircraft industry with their attendant
vulnerabilities, attack surfaces and possible mitigating factors.

Mahmoud et al. in 2010 [78] undertook the designing of a proposed adaptive se-
curity architecture of future network connected aircraft system otherwise known as
e-enabled aircraft. Other such works in related area were done by Neumann [79],
Sampigethaya et al. [80], Sampigethaya et al. [81]. While Mahmoud et al. [78] pro-
posal is on a secure system topology for the embedded aircraft system network
known as SecMan for application in Fiber-like aircraft Satellite Telecommunica-
tions. Sampigethaya et al. through this [80] surveyed current and future security of
embedded system in e-enabled aircraft network systems. In [81], Sampigethaya et
al. provided evidence that the safety, security, eﬃciency, etc of e-enabled aircraft
will depend highly on the security capabilities of the communications, network and
cyber-physical systems.

Because of the capabilities of e-enabled aircraft in having advance sensing, highly
computerised systems, enhanced communication between on-ground and on-board
systems, on-board system integration and some smart software-enabled interfaces,
attack surface will likely increase. Such surfaces like exploiting internal cyber-
physical system remotely through radio frequency jamming, node impersonation,
passive eavesdropping, etc [81].

Ukwandu et al.

Page 18 of 25

There is no doubt that the integration of IT services into aircraft mechanical de-
vices will improve eﬃciency in service delivery. All the same, it will also increase the
attack surfaces and with the recent application of artiﬁcial intelligence techniques
by cyber-attackers in automating their attack processes [82], [83], there is therefore
need to work towards the use of AI-enabled cyber-defense strategies in the future
e-enabled aircraft.

7 Threat Dynamics and Analysis
With the increasing integration of IT to Operational Technology (OT) with the
aid of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) techniques by relying on data collected through
sensors, thus giving OTs the ability to learn and operate in semi-autonomous or full
autonomous states, this section aims to provide through available literature cyber-
threat dynamics and their related analysis. While the dynamics provides recent
advances in the automation of cyber-attacks using AI and Bio-inspired systems, the
analysis is to determine the potential of threats, weaknesses, and vulnerabilities that
can be exploited to achieve malicious goals using these modern attack technologies.
In order to strengthen its focus, further attack classiﬁcations were provided using
Table 4. This section therefore provides an understanding of the possible threats
and their characteristics, so as to inform relevant stakeholders on the optimum
prevention and mitigation measures.

7.1 Threat Dynamics
7.1.1 AI-based Attacks
The recent advances in AI have been embraced by cyber-criminals to automate at-
tack processes [82], [83], taking advantage of technologically enhanced learning and
automation capabilities oﬀered by deep and reinforcement learning. The trend has
necessitated the pressing need to develop appropriate cyber-situational awareness,
cyber-hygiene, training methods, scenarios and technologies in response.

Kaloudi and Li [82] reported a list of existing AI-enhanced cyber-attacks; (1) Next
Generational Malware such as DeepLocker [84] and Smart Malware [85]. (2) Voice
Synthesis such as Stealthy Spyware [86]. (3) Password-based Attacks such as Next-
generation password brute-force attack [87] and PassGAN [88]. (4) Social Bots
such as: SNAP R [89], DeepPhish [90] and Fake reviews attack [91]. (5) Adver-
sarial Training such as MalGAN [92], DeepDGA [93] and DeepHack. The majority
of these attacks targeted interconnected and software dependent new generational
embedded systems known as Smart Cyber Physical Systems such as smart traf-
ﬁc management systems, smart healthcare systems, smart grids, smart buildings,
autonomous automotive systems, autonomous ships, robots, smart homes and in-
telligent transport systems.

7.1.2 Bio-Inspired Attacks
The Backtracking Search Optimisation Algorithm (BSA) and Particle Swarm Opti-
misation (PSO) are two Active System Identiﬁcation attacks developed by [94] using
bio-inspired meta-heuristics [95] and tested in a controlled environment. The goal
was to highlight the potential impacts of automated attacks, especially their degree

Ukwandu et al.

Page 19 of 25

of accuracy in damaging the Network Controlled Systems, as a stimulus to develop
solutions that counter this attack class. Chen et al. [96] coined the term ‘A Bio-
inspired Transmissive Attack’, a scenario exempliﬁed in Stuxnet [97], [98], [99], [100],
best described as a stealthy breach utilising a biological epidemic model in the com-
munication system to propagate the attack. In addition to the hidden nature of the
attack, the hacker need not be conversant with the network topology to succeed.
Hence, the linkage between transmissive attacks and epidemic models.

7.2 Threat Analysis
The essence of threat analysis is to determine the potential threats, weaknesses,
and vulnerabilities that can be exploited to achieve malicious goals [101]. An un-
derstanding of the possible threats and their characteristics informs on the optimum
prevention, and mitigation measures. The optimum response is also governed by
the existing risk mitigation policies for a speciﬁc architecture, functionality, and
conﬁguration as deﬁned by regulating bodies. One of the challenging requirements
is the metrics to be used to determine the status of the network security perfor-
mance, the basis to deﬁne approaches to increase its robustness.

Table 4 provides some tabulated analysis on cyber-attacks by classifying them

into domain of attacks, experimental tests, scenarios and tools for analysis.

7.2.1 Modelling-based Approach
The aim is to predict the behaviour of unknown attacks and to create models able to
prevent threats. The actual vulnerability and security default of the system is core
in order to conceptualise such a model. The conﬁguration and architecture of the
local network is a requirement in the development of a cyber-threat detection model.

Ibrahim et al. [102] proposed the use of a formal logic known as Secure Temporal
Logic of Action [S-TLA.sup+] as a modelling-based approach for reconstructing
evidence of Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP) malicious attacks. The goal of the
research was to generate related additional evidence and to measure the consistency
against existing approaches using the [S-TLA.sup+] model checker.

Mace et al. [103] reported on a multi-modelling-based approach to assessing the
security of smart buildings. The approach was based on an Integrated Tool Chain for
Model-based Design of Cyber-Physical Systems (INTO-CPS), a suite of modelling,
simulation, and analysis tools for designing cyber-physical systems. The study was
motivated by the evolution to smart buildings controlled by multiple systems that
provide critical services such as heating, ventilation, lighting, and access control,
all highly susceptible to cyber-attacks. The stages of a systemic methodology to
assessing the security when subjected to Man-in-the-Middle attacks on the data
connections between system components by using a fan coil unit case study was
presented.

Ukwandu et al.

Page 20 of 25

Table 4: Attack Classiﬁcations

Domain

Ref

[104]

IoT

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

Experimental tests / Scenarios
Network mapping attack/Implementation
of proﬁling module (Training and testing
algorithm)
Discrete-time Markov Chain model
(DTMC): Analysing the capacity of the
block chain
Manual test: Analysis and attacks of each
device, Automated test: process testing of
diﬀerent IoT device
DoS
Data/Abnormal code/System crash
Real-world attack scenarios: internal and
external network attacks

traﬁc/Transfert

massif

[109]

Anomaly intrusion/ Attacks traﬃc

[110]

Command injection attack

[111]

SWaT/WADI datasets:Normal and attack
scenario

[112] Man-in-the-middle attack

Smart Grid

[113]

[114]

[115]

[117]

[118]

LAUP algorithm(authentication)/ key
distribution test
Oﬄine co-simulation Test-bed: DoS/FDI
attacks
Access to communication link ([116]) at-
tack model
Deep packet inspection
Power
supply
tack/Physical damage attack

interruption

At-

[119] MMS/GOOSE/SV implementation

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

HIL simulation/ proof-of-concept valida-
tion
DoS/Man in the middle attacks/TCP
SYN Flood Attack
Recording network traﬃc/Poisoning At-
tack
Timing Intrusion Attack

Test of cyber-physical sensor: IREST

[125] MITM attack/DoS attack

Cloud

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[130]

[131]

[132]

[133]

traﬃc

malicious

Flood
(ICMP/HTTP/SYN)
Considering small messages (about1–2
KBytes): Fast ﬁlling of the buﬀers
UNM database: Malicious tracing logs
Test of memory usage before/after in-
stance creation
Evaluation of performance metrics of
NDN/edge cloud computing
Adding defaults: broken interconnec-
tion/Abnormal extruder
Side channel attacks/ stealthy data exﬁl-
tration
SQL Injection attack

[134]

Testing traﬃc scenarios

[135]
[136]

Time inference attacks
DDoS attack

Tools

TestStad/ Machine Learning Algorithm

Block mining algorithm and Ethereum
protocol

Open Source MS

DTM by Triangle Micro Works

SDN/network function virtualisation

Machine Learning Algorithm/ Feature
Extraction
Machine Learning Algorithm/ PLC pro-
gramming by Ladder language

Machine Learning Algorithm

SDN /Python

COOJA simulator

OMNET++

OPAL-RT

Software Deﬁned Networks/OpenFMB
Real world power system/Machine learn-
ing
IEC 61850 Protocol/Ethernet Raspber-
ryPi 3B+

Python

DeterLab/Security Experimentation En-
viRonment (SEER)

Real Time Digital Simulator (RTDS)

Field End-to-End Calibrator/ Gold PMU
Idaho CPS
SCADA Cybersecurity
(ISAAC) testbed
Open source
FLEP-SGS
VMware Esxi hypervisor/A vCenter
server/VMs

software/Raspberry Pis.

MOM4Cloud architectural model.

KVM2.6.27 hypervisor/ Python3.4
OpenStack: Open-Source cloud operating
system

Cloud VM

server/TFTP

Server/HTTP

MTComm: Online Machine Tool Commu-
nication
DHCP
Server/MQTT Server
OpenStack implementation/Python
Openﬂow
troller/OpenvSwitch/Network
alization agent
Software Deﬁned Network
OpenStack environment

con-
virtu-

8 Conclusion
With the emerging industrial revolution, the need for every sector of human endeav-
ours to automate service delivery has become very prominent in both research, in-
dustry and service sectors. This paper focused on cyber-attack incidents in aviation
industry for the last 20 years by ﬁrst reviewing diﬀerent records on cyber-attacks in
civil aviation industry and the motives of the threat actors. From the review results
of documented cyber-attacks in aviation industry within the years under review,
the industry cyber threats as alleged come mainly from APT groups that work

Ukwandu et al.

Page 21 of 25

in collaboration with state actors to steal intellectual property and intelligence, in
order to advance their domestic aerospace capabilities as well as possibly monitor,
inﬁltrate and subvert other nations’ capabilities.

With the high demand for automation, the use of IoT devices has become promi-
nent in order to engender high network connectivity between onground and onboard
systems as well as provide Aircraft with advanced sensing capabilities. Furthermore,
its integration in smart airport concept is aimed at delivering good customer ex-
perience with improved eﬃciency in daily operation. It is also aimed at enhancing
robustness, eﬃciency, and control in service delivery. With this high-level integra-
tion and connectivity, cyber-attack surfaces are meant to increase as well. More
worrisome is the ability of attackers to automate their attack processes using AI
techniques, and hence this paper posits that to provide holistic cyber-defense strate-
gies in the emerging Smart Airport and e-enable aircraft, the application of machine
learning techniques in attack defense has become essential and exigent. This is be-
cause there are chances that APT group could advance beyond attacking only
airport facilities to onboard and on the air Aircraft by using sophisticated remote
attack tools.

Funding

(cid:70)

(cid:70)

(cid:70)

(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:70)

(cid:70) (cid:70) (cid:70)

(cid:70)

(cid:70)

(cid:70)

The research is supported by the European Union Horizon 2020 Programme under Grant Agreement no.

833673. The content reﬂects the authors’ view only and the Agency is not responsible for any use that may be made
of the information within the paper.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Consent for publication
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Authors’ contributions
This paper was conceptualised and formally analysed by Elochukwu Ukwandu, Mohamed Amine Ben-Farah, Hanan
Hindy, and Xavier Bellekens. While Elochukwu Ukwandu and Hanan Hindy carried out the investigation. The
methodology was developed by Elochukwu Ukwandu, Xavier Bellekens and Hanan Hindy. Furthermore, the
administration and supervision of this paper were carried out by Xavier Bellekens, while Miroslav Bures, Elochukwu
Ukwandu, Richard Atkinson, Christos Tachtatzis and Xavier Bellekens did the validation. Formal writing of the
paper that produced original draft were done by Elochukwu Ukwandu and Hanan Hindy. Miroslav Bures, Elochukwu
Ukwandu, Hanan Hindy, Mohamed Amine Ben-Farah, Richard Atkinson, Christos Tachtatzis and Xavier Bellekens
reviewed and edited the paper. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Author details
1Department of Computer Science, Cardiﬀ School of Technologies, Cardiﬀ Metropolitan University, Cardiﬀ, Wales,
UK. 2Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.
3Division of Cyber-Security, Abertay University, Dundee, Scotland, UK. 4Department of Computer Science, Faculty
of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czechia.

References

1. Duchamp, H., Bayram, I., Korhani, R.: Cyber-security, a new challenge for the aviation and automotive

industries. In: Seminar in Information Systems: Applied Cybersecurity Strategy for Managers, pp. 1–4 (2016)

2. Monteagudo, J.: Aviation Cybersecurity – High Level Analysis, Major Challenges and Where the Industry is

Heading. Smartrev Cybersec (2020). https://tinyurl.com/yye6mhyb,Dateaccessed26/09/2020
3. Bellekens, X., Jayasekara, G., Hindy, H., Bures, M., Brosset, D., Tachtatzis, C., Atkinson, R.: From

cyber-security deception to manipulation and gratiﬁcation through gamiﬁcation. In: International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 99–114 (2019). Springer

4. Haass, J., Sampigethaya, R., Capezzuto, V.: Aviation and cybersecurity: opportunities for applied research. TR

News (304), 39 (2016)

5. Lykou, G., Anagnostopoulou, A., Gritzalis, D.: Implementing cyber-security measures in airports to improve

cyber-resilience. In: 2018 Global Internet of Things Summit (GIoTS), pp. 1–6 (2018). IEEE

Ukwandu et al.

Page 22 of 25

6. Lykou, G., Anagnostopoulou, A., Gritzalis, D.: Smart airport cybersecurity: Threat mitigation and cyber

resilience controls. Sensors 19(1), 19 (2019)

7. Gopalakrishnan, K., Govindarasu, M., Jacobson, D.W., Phares, B.M.: Cyber security for airports. International

Journal for Traﬃc and Transport Engineering 3(4), 365–376 (2013)

8. Mathew, A.R.: Airport cyber security and cyber resilience controls. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09894 (2019)
9. Suciu, G., Scheianu, A., Vulpe, A., Petre, I., Suciu, V.: Cyber-attacks–the impact over airports security and
prevention modalities. In: World Conference on Information Systems and Technologies, pp. 154–162 (2018).
Springer

10. Corretjer, P.J.: A cybersecurity analysis of today’s commercial aircrafts and aviation industry systems. MsT,

22 (2018)

11. Kagalwalla, N., Churi, P.P.: Cybersecurity in aviation: An intrinsic review. In: 2019 5th International

Conference On Computing, Communication, Control And Automation (ICCUBEA), pp. 1–6 (2019). IEEE
12. Lehto, M.: Cyber security in aviation, maritime and automotive. In: Computation and Big Data for Transport,

pp. 19–32. Springer, ??? (2020)

13. CyberRisk, I.: Cyber threats to the aviation industry. Cyber Risk International (2020).

https://tinyurl.com/y47qg3gx,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

14. Fireeye: Cyber threats to the aerospace and defense industries. FireEye Inc. (2016).

https://tinyurl.com/y5lkz4jh,Dateaccessed24/09/2020

15. Kessler, G.C., Craiger, J.P.: Aviation cybersecurity: An overview (2018)
16. Abeyratne, R.: Aviation and cybersecurity in the digital world. In: Aviation in the Digital Age, pp. 173–211.

Springer, ??? (2020)

17. Arampatzis, A.: The State of Civil Aviation Cybersecurity. Tripwire (2020).

https://tinyurl.com/yyvq944t,Dateaccessed30/09/2020

18. Viveros, C.A.P.: Analysis of the cyber attacks against ads-b perspective of aviation experts. PhD thesis,

Master’s thesis, University of Tartu (2016)

19. Gross, G.: FAA: Slammer didn’t hurt us, but other attacks coming. Network World (2003).

https://tinyurl.com/y2fsea3w,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

20. Goodin, D.: US air traﬃc faces ’serious harm’ from cyber attackers. The Register (2009).

https://tinyurl.com/y5twfz7u,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

21. Ellinor, M.: Report: Hackers broke into FAA air traﬃc control systems. Cnet (2009).

https://tinyurl.com/y3yb2lmc,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

22. Paganini, P.: Istanbul Ataturk International Airport targeted by a cyber-attack. Security Aﬀairs (2013).

https://tinyurl.com/yyv25hfy,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

23. Welsh, W.: Phishing Scam Targeted 75 US Airports. InformationWeek (2014).

https://tinyurl.com/y5okxsah,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

24. Brewster, T.: Attack On LOT Polish Airline Grounds 10 Flights. Forbes (2015).

https://tinyurl.com/yxz2rvn3,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

25. Kirkliauskaite, K.: Main Cyber-Security Challenges in Aviation. Aerotime Hub (2020).

https://tinyurl.com/y2cxcpba,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

26. Polityuk, P., Prentice, A.: Ukraine says to review cyber defenses after airport targeted from Russia. Reuters

(2016). https://tinyurl.com/yxrvvmn2,Dateaccessed06/10/2020

27. Park, K.: Cathay Paciﬁc Cyber Attack Is World’s Biggest Airline Data Breach. Insurance Journal (2018).

https://tinyurl.com/y683fage,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

28. Sandle, P.: British Airways Says ‘Sophisticated’ Hacker Stole Data on 380,000 Customers. Insurance Journal

(2018). https://tinyurl.com/y5z9bqnc,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

29. Singh, K.: Delta, Sears Report Data Breach by Service Provider. Insurance Journal (2018).

https://tinyurl.com/y4yfwhdm,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

30. Leyden, J.: Brit airport pulls ﬂight info system oﬄine after attack by ’online crims’. The Register (2018).

https://tinyurl.com/y3tneb9f,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

31. Sandle, T.: Air Canada suﬀers major app data breach of 20,000 customers. Digital Journal (2018).

https://tinyurl.com/y59yud68,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

32. Gibbs, B.: Potential Personally Identiﬁable Information (PII) Compromise of NASA Servers. NASA (2018).

https://tinyurl.com/y4es6ecq,Dateaccessed22/09/2020

33. Gates, D.: Boeing hit by WannaCry virus, but says attack caused little damage. The Seattle Times (2018).

https://tinyurl.com/y8huvuel,Dateaccessed22/09/2020

34. Solomon, S.: Israeli airports fend oﬀ 3 million attempted attacks a day, cyber head says. The Times of Israel

(2019). https://tinyurl.com/y6enbu5f,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

35. Duvelleroy, M.: Airbus Statement on Cyber Incident. Airbus (2019).
https://tinyurl.com/y5tfx9c2,Dateaccessed22/09/2020

36. Goud, N.: Ransomware attack on Albany Airport on Christmas 2019. Cybersecurity Insiders (2019).

https://tinyurl.com/y4oqx8y9,Dateaccessed25/09/2020

37. Team, N.: Cryptocurrency miners infected more than 50% of the European airport workstations. Cyber

Defence Magazine (2019). https://tinyurl.com/y4979num,Dateaccessed25/09/2020

38. Narendra, M.: Privacy: Air New Zealand experiences data breach. PrivSec Report (2019).

https://tinyurl.com/y2x3fnm7,Dateaccessed25/09/2020

39. Montalbano, E.: DoppelPaymer Ransomware Used to Steal Data from Supplier to SpaceX, Tesla. Threat Post

(2020). https://tinyurl.com/vvsdyf7,Dateaccessed22/09/2020

40. Chua, A.: Ransomware attack hits ST Engineering’s USA aerospace unit. Flight Global (2020).

https://tinyurl.com/yxfwut8m,Dateaccessed23/09/2020

41. Claburn, T.: Airline software super-bug: Flight loads miscalculated because women using ’Miss’ were treated

as children. TheRegister (2021). https://tinyurl.com/3uscn39n,accessed:09/04/2021

42. Mazareanu, E.: Number of public and private airports in the United States from 1990 to 2019*. Statista

Ukwandu et al.

Page 23 of 25

(2020). https://tinyurl.com/y3dc4ou2,accessed:28/11/2020

43. Paganini, P.: Cyber Threats against the Aviation Industry. Infosec (2014).

https://tinyurl.com/y6cu9ep8,Dateaccessed19/09/2020

44. Thales: Overcoming the Cyber Threat in Aviation. Thales Group (2016).

https://tinyurl.com/y67vyjsc,Dateaccessed24/09/2020

45. Santamarta, R.: A wake-up call for satcom security. Technical White Paper (2014. Accessed 19/09/2020)
46. Biesecker, C.: Boeing 757 testing shows airplanes vulnerable to hacking, DHS says (2017)
47. Dessiatnikoﬀ, A., Deswarte, Y., Alata, E., Nicomette, V.: Potential attacks on onboard aerospace systems.

IEEE Security & Privacy 10(4), 71–74 (2012)

48. Papp, D., Ma, Z., Buttyan, L.: Embedded systems security: Threats, vulnerabilities, and attack taxonomy. In:

2015 13th Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), pp. 145–152 (2015). IEEE

49. GAO: Aviation Cybersecurity. GAO (2020). https://tinyurl.com/yyvwzc46
50. Meyers, R.A., et al.: Encyclopedia of Physical Science and Technology. Academic Press, ??? (1987)
51. Smith, B.: System and method for data collection in an avionics network. Google Patents. US Patent App.

11/092,470 (2006)

52. Akram, R.N., Markantonakis, K., Holloway, R., Kariyawasam, S., Ayub, S., Seeam, A., Atkinson, R.:

Challenges of security and trust in avionics wireless networks. In: 2015 IEEE/AIAA 34th Digital Avionics
Systems Conference (DASC), pp. 4–11 (2015). IEEE

53. Akram, R.N., Markantonakis, K., Mayes, K., Bonnefoi, P.-F., Sauveron, D., Chaumette, S.: An eﬃcient,

secure and trusted channel protocol for avionics wireless networks. In: 2016 IEEE/AIAA 35th Digital Avionics
Systems Conference (DASC), pp. 1–10 (2016). IEEE

54. Akram, R.N., Markantonakis, K., Mayes, K., Bonnefoi, P.-F., Sauveron, D., Chaumette, S.: Security and
performance comparison of diﬀerent secure channel protocols for avionics wireless networks. In: 2016
IEEE/AIAA 35th Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), pp. 1–8 (2016). IEEE

55. Markantonakis, K., Akram, R.N., Holloway, R.: A secure and trusted boot process for avionics wireless

networks. In: 2016 Integrated Communications Navigation and Surveillance (ICNS), pp. 1–31 (2016). IEEE
56. Bellamy III, W.: How ACARS Will Evolve, Not Disappear, With Transition to IPS. Aviation Today (2018).

https://tinyurl.com/y3tuz39c,Dateaccessed28/09/2020

57. Smith, M., Moser, D., Strohmeier, M., Lenders, V., Martinovic, I.: Analyzing privacy breaches in the aircraft

communications addressing and reporting system (acars). arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07065 (2017)
58. Smith, M., Moser, D., Strohmeier, M., Lenders, V., Martinovic, I.: Undermining privacy in the aircraft

communications addressing and reporting system (acars). Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies
2018(3), 105–122 (2018)

59. Ali, B.S.: A safety assessment framework for automatic dependent surveillance broadcast (ads-b) and its

potential impact on aviation safety. PhD thesis, Centre for Transport studies, Department of Civil and
Environmental . . . (2013)

60. Ali, B.S., Schuster, W., Ochieng, W.Y.: Evaluation of the capability of automatic dependent surveillance

broadcast to meet the requirements of future airborne surveillance applications. The Journal of Navigation
70(1), 49 (2017)

61. Ali, B.S., Ochieng, W.Y., Schuster, W., Majumdar, A., Chiew, T.K.: A safety assessment framework for the

automatic dependent surveillance broadcast (ads-b) system. Safety science 78, 91–100 (2015)

62. Manesh, M.R., Kaabouch, N.: Analysis of vulnerabilities, attacks, countermeasures and overall risk of the
automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ads-b) system. International Journal of Critical Infrastructure
Protection 19, 16–31 (2017)

63. Tabassum, A.: Performance analysis of automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ads-b) and breakdown of

anomalies (2017)

64. Strohmeier, M., Lenders, V., Martinovic, I.: On the security of the automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast

protocol. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 17(2), 1066–1087 (2014)

65. Wolf, M., Minzlaﬀ, M., Moser, M.: Information technology security threats to modern e-enabled aircraft: A

cautionary note. Journal of Aerospace Information Systems 11(7), 447–457 (2014)

66. Howard, E.C.: Dell and Airbus deliver Electronic Flight Bag services to airlines worldwide. Intelligent

Aerospace (2013). https://tinyurl.com/10r0y01u,accessed:12/02/2021

67. Keller, J.: Fokker Services certiﬁes iPad electronic ﬂight bag (EFB) for Bombardier Dash 8 twin-engine

passenger turboprop. Intelligent Aerospace (2013). https://tinyurl.com/ysph7kv2,accessed:12/02/2021

68. Taleqani, A.R., Nygard, K.E., Bridgelall, R., Hough, J.: Machine learning approach to cyber security in

aviation. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Electro/Information Technology (EIT), pp. 0147–0152
(2018). IEEE

69. Ugwoke, F., Okafor, K., Chijindu, V.: Security qos proﬁling against cyber terrorism in airport network systems.

In: 2015 International Conference on Cyberspace (CYBER-Abuja), pp. 241–251 (2015). IEEE

70. Delain, O., Ruhlmann, O., Vautier, E., Johnson, C., Shreeve, M., Sirko, P., Prozserin, V.: Cyber-security

application for SESAR OFA 05.01.01 - Final Report. Reuters (2016). https://tinyurl.com/y6tshxcc

71. Clark, R.M., Hakim, S.: Cyber-physical Security: Protecting Critical Infrastructure at the State and Local

Level vol. 3. Springer, ??? (2016)

72. Martellini, M.: Cyber Security: Deterrence and IT Protection for Critical Infrastructures. Springer, ??? (2013)
73. Singer, P.W., Friedman, A.: Cybersecurity: What Everyone Needs to Know. oup usa, ??? (2014)
74. Efe, A., Tuzlupınar, B., Cavlan, A.C.: Air traﬃc security against cyber threats. Bilge International Journal of

Science and Technology Research 3(2), 135–143

75. Zamorano, M.M., Fern´andez-Laso, M.C., de Esteban Curiel, J.: Smart airports: Acceptance of technology by

passengers. Cuadernos de Turismo (45), 567–570 (2020)

76. Koroniotis, N., Moustafa, N., Schiliro, F., Gauravaram, P., Janicke, H.: A holistic review of cybersecurity and

reliability perspectives in smart airports. IEEE Access (2020)

77. AKAR, I.N., YAQOOBI, M.H.: Smart airport: How iot and new technologies shaping the future of airport

Ukwandu et al.

Page 24 of 25

industry

78. Mahmoud, M.S.B., Larrieu, N., Pirovano, A., Varet, A.: An adaptive security architecture for future aircraft

communications. In: 29th Digital Avionics Systems Conference, p. 3 (2010). IEEE

79. Neumann, P.G.: Computer security in aviation: Vulnerabilities, threats, and risks. In: International Conference

on Aviation Safety in the 21st Century. White House Commission on Safety and Security and George
Washington University (1997)

80. Sampigethaya, K., Poovendran, R., Bushnell, L.: Secure operation, control, and maintenance of future

e-enabled airplanes. Proceedings of the IEEE 96(12), 1992–2007 (2008)

81. Sampigethaya, K., Poovendran, R., Shetty, S., Davis, T., Royalty, C.: Future e-enabled aircraft

communications and security: The next 20 years and beyond. Proceedings of the IEEE 99(11), 2040–2055
(2011)

82. Kaloudi, N., Li, J.: The ai-based cyber threat landscape: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 53(1),

1–34 (2020)

83. Brundage, M., Avin, S., Clark, J., Toner, H., Eckersley, P., Garﬁnkel, B., Dafoe, A., Scharre, P., Zeitzoﬀ, T.,
Filar, B., et al.: The malicious use of artiﬁcial intelligence: Forecasting, prevention, and mitigation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.07228 (2018)

84. Kirat, D., Jang, J., Stoecklin, M.: Deeplocker–concealing targeted attacks with ai locksmithing. Blackhat USA

(2018)

85. Cohen, F.: Simulating cyber attacks, defences, and consequences. Computers & Security 18(6), 479–518

(1999)

86. Zhang, R., Chen, X., Lu, J., Wen, S., Nepal, S., Xiang, Y.: Using ai to hack ia: A new stealthy spyware

against voice assistance functions in smart phones. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06187 (2018)

87. Trieu, K., Yang, Y.: Artiﬁcial intelligence-based password brute force attacks (2018)
88. Hitaj, B., Gasti, P., Ateniese, G., Perez-Cruz, F.: Passgan: A deep learning approach for password guessing. In:

International Conference on Applied Cryptography and Network Security, pp. 217–237 (2019). Springer

89. Seymour, J., Tully, P.: Weaponizing data science for social engineering: Automated e2e spear phishing on

twitter. Black Hat USA 37, 1–39 (2016)

90. Bahnsen, A.C., Torroledo, I., Camacho, L.D., Villegas, S.: Deepphish: Simulating malicious ai. In: 2018 APWG

Symposium on Electronic Crime Research (eCrime), pp. 1–8 (2018)

91. Yao, Y., Viswanath, B., Cryan, J., Zheng, H., Zhao, B.Y.: Automated crowdturﬁng attacks and defenses in

online review systems. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, pp. 1143–1158 (2017)

92. Hu, W., Tan, Y.: Generating adversarial malware examples for black-box attacks based on gan. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1702.05983 (2017)

93. Anderson, H.S., Woodbridge, J., Filar, B.: Deepdga: Adversarially-tuned domain generation and detection. In:

Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Security, pp. 13–21 (2016)
94. de Sa, A.O., da Costa Carmo, L.F.R., Machado, R.C.S.: Bio-inspired active attack for identiﬁcation of
networked control systems. In: 10th EAI International Conference on Bio-Inspired Information and
Communications Technologies, p. 88 (2017). European Alliance for Innovation (EAI)

95. Farah, M.B., Farah, A., Farah, T.: An image encryption scheme based on a new hybrid chaotic map and

optimized substitution box. Nonlinear Dynamics, 1–24 (2019)

96. Chen, P.-Y., Lin, C.-C., Cheng, S.-M., Hsiao, H.-C., Huang, C.-Y.: Decapitation via digital epidemics: A

bio-inspired transmissive attack. IEEE Communications Magazine 54(6), 75–81 (2016)

97. Langner, R.: Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon. IEEE Security & Privacy 9(3), 49–51 (2011)
98. Farwell, J.P., Rohozinski, R.: Stuxnet and the future of cyber war. Survival 53(1), 23–40 (2011)
99. Chen, T.M., Abu-Nimeh, S.: Lessons from stuxnet. Computer 44(4), 91–93 (2011)

100. Lindsay, J.R.: Stuxnet and the limits of cyber warfare. Security Studies 22(3), 365–404 (2013)
101. Stango, A., Prasad, N.R., Kyriazanos, D.M.: A threat analysis methodology for security evaluation and

enhancement planning. In: 2009 Third International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems
and Technologies, pp. 262–267 (2009). IEEE
Ibrahim, M., Dehghantanha, A., et al.: Modelling based approach for reconstructing evidence of voip malicious
attacks. International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF) 3(4), 183–199 (2014)

102.

103. Mace, J., Morisset, C., Pierce, K., Gamble, C., Maple, C., Fitzgerald, J.: A multi-modelling based approach to

assessing the security of smart buildings (2018)

104. Siboni, S., Sachidananda, V., Shabtai, A., Elovici, Y.: Security testbed for the internet of things. arXiv

preprint arXiv:1610.05971 (2016)

105. Wang, X., Yu, G., Zha, X., Ni, W., Liu, R.P., Guo, Y.J., Zheng, K., Niu, X.: Capacity of blockchain based

internet-of-things: testbed and analysis. Internet of Things, 100109 (2019)

106. Waraga, O.A., Bettayeb, M., Nasir, Q., Talib, M.A.: Design and implementation of automated iot security

testbed. Computers & Security 88, 101648 (2020)

107. Lee, S., Lee, S., Yoo, H., Kwon, S., Shon, T.: Design and implementation of cybersecurity testbed for

industrial iot systems. The Journal of Supercomputing 74(9), 4506–4520 (2018)

108. Kim, Y., Nam, J., Park, T., Scott-Hayward, S., Shin, S.: Soda: A software-deﬁned security framework for iot

environments. Computer Networks 163, 106889 (2019)

109. Shaﬁq, M., Tian, Z., Sun, Y., Du, X., Guizani, M.: Selection of eﬀective machine learning algorithm and

bot-iot attacks traﬃc identiﬁcation for internet of things in smart city. Future Generation Computer Systems
(2020)

110. Zolanvari, M., Teixeira, M.A., Jain, R.: Eﬀect of imbalanced datasets on security of industrial iot using

machine learning. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), pp.
112–117 (2018). IEEE

111. Elnour, M., Meskin, N., Khan, K., Jain, R.: A dual-isolation-forests-based attack detection framework for

industrial control systems. IEEE Access 8, 36639–36651 (2020)

Ukwandu et al.

Page 25 of 25

112. Molina Zarca, A., Bernal Bernabe, J., Farris, I., Khettab, Y., Taleb, T., Skarmeta, A.: Enhancing iot security
through network softwarization and virtual security appliances. International Journal of Network Management
28(5), 2038 (2018)

113. Arockia Baskaran, A.G.R., Nanda, P., Nepal, S., He, S.: Testbed evaluation of lightweight authentication

protocol (laup) for 6lowpan wireless sensor networks. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience
31(23), 4868 (2019)

114. Hammad, E., Ezeme, M., Farraj, A.: Implementation and development of an oﬄine co-simulation testbed for

studies of power systems cyber security and control veriﬁcation. International Journal of Electrical Power &
Energy Systems 104, 817–826 (2019)

115. Poudel, S., Ni, Z., Malla, N.: Real-time cyber physical system testbed for power system security and control.

International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 124–133 (2017)

116. Hahn, A., Ashok, A., Sridhar, S., Govindarasu, M.: Cyber-physical security testbeds: Architecture, application,

and evaluation for smart grid. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 4(2), 847–855 (2013)

117. De La Torre, G., Rad, P., Choo, K.-K.R.: Implementation of deep packet inspection in smart grids and

industrial internet of things: Challenges and opportunities. Journal of Network and Computer Applications
(2019)

118. Adepu, S., Kandasamy, N.K., Mathur, A.: Epic: An electric power testbed for research and training in cyber

physical systems security. In: Computer Security, pp. 37–52. Springer, ??? (2018)

119. Fujdiak, R., Blazek, P., Chmelar, P., Dittrich, P., Voznak, M., Mlynek, P., Slacik, J., Musil, P., Jurka, P.,
Misurec, J.: Communication model of smart substation for cyber-detection systems. In: International
Conference on Computer Networks, pp. 256–271 (2019). Springer

120. Cheng, Z., Chow, M.-Y.: The development and application of a dc microgrid testbed for distributed microgrid
energy management system. In: IECON 2018-44th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics
Society, pp. 300–305 (2018). IEEE

121. Liu, R., Srivastava, A.: Integrated simulation to analyze the impact of cyber-attacks on the power grid. In:

2015 Workshop on Modeling and Simulation of Cyber-Physical Energy Systems (MSCPES), pp. 1–6 (2015).
IEEE

122. Oyewumi, I.A., Jillepalli, A.A., Richardson, P., Ashrafuzzaman, M., Johnson, B.K., Chakhchoukh, Y., Haney,

M.A., Sheldon, F.T., de Leon, D.C.: Isaac: The idaho cps smart grid cybersecurity testbed. In: 2019 IEEE
Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC), pp. 1–6 (2019). IEEE

123. Kezunovic, M., Qian, C., Seidl, C., Ren, J.: Testbed for timing intrusion evaluation and tools for lab and ﬁeld
testing of synchrophasor system. In: 2019 International Conference on Smart Grid Synchronized Measurements
and Analytics (SGSMA), pp. 1–8 (2019). IEEE

124. Marino, D.L., Wickramasinghe, C.S., Amarasinghe, K., Challa, H., Richardson, P., Jillepalli, A.A., Johnson,

B.K., Rieger, C., Manic, M.: Cyber and physical anomaly detection in smart-grids (2019)

125. Konstantinou, C., Sazos, M., Maniatakos, M.: Flep-sgs 2: a ﬂexible and low-cost evaluation platform for smart

grid systems security. In: 2019 IEEE Power & Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference
(ISGT), pp. 1–5 (2019). IEEE

126. Patil, R., Dudeja, H., Modi, C.: Designing an eﬃcient security framework for detecting intrusions in virtual

network of cloud computing. Computers & Security 85, 402–422 (2019)

127. Celesti, A., Fazio, M., Galletta, A., Carnevale, L., Wan, J., Villari, M.: An approach for the secure

management of hybrid cloud–edge environments. Future Generation Computer Systems 90, 1–19 (2019)
128. Mishra, P., Verma, I., Gupta, S.: Kvminspector: Kvm based introspection approach to detect malware in cloud

environment. Journal of Information Security and Applications 51, 102460 (2020)

129. Van, V.N., Long, N.Q., Nguyen, G.N., Le, D.-N., et al.: A performance analysis of openstack open-source

solution for iaas cloud computing. In: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Computer and
Communication Technologies, pp. 141–150 (2016). Springer

130. Ullah, R., Rehman, M.A.U., Kim, B.-S.: Design and implementation of an open source framework and

prototype for named data networking-based edge cloud computing system. IEEE Access 7, 57741–57759
(2019)

131. Al Sunny, S.N., Liu, X., Shahriar, M.R.: Remote monitoring and online testing of machine tools for fault
diagnosis and maintenance using mtcomm in a cyber-physical manufacturing cloud. In: 2018 IEEE 11th
International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), pp. 532–539 (2018). IEEE

132. Sanatinia, A., Deshpande, S., Munshi, A., Kohlbrenner, D., Yessaillian, M., Symonds, S., Chan, A., Noubir,

G.: Hyperdrive: a ﬂexible cloud testbed for research and education. In: 2017 IEEE International Symposium on
Technologies for Homeland Security (HST), pp. 1–4 (2017). IEEE

133. Frank, M., Leitner, M., Pahi, T.: Design considerations for cyber security testbeds: A case study on a cyber
security testbed for education. In: 2017 IEEE 15th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure
Computing, 15th Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 3rd Intl Conf on Big Data Intelligence
and Computing and Cyber Science and Technology Congress (DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech), pp.
38–46 (2017). IEEE

134. Gao, H., Peng, Y., Jia, K., Wen, Z., Li, H.: Cyber-physical systems testbed based on cloud computing and

software deﬁned network. In: 2015 International Conference on Intelligent Information Hiding and Multimedia
Signal Processing (IIH-MSP), pp. 337–340 (2015). IEEE

135. Khorsandroo, S., Tosun, A.S.: Time inference attacks on software deﬁned networks: Challenges and

countermeasures. In: 2018 IEEE 11th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), pp. 342–349
(2018). IEEE

136. Kalliola, A., Lal, S., Ahola, K., Oliver, I., Miche, Y., Holtmanns, S.: Testbed for security orchestration in a
network function virtualization environment. In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Network Function Virtualization
and Software Deﬁned Networks (NFV-SDN), pp. 1–4 (2017). IEEE

