In the Proceeding of the 20th European Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security (ECCWS 2021) 

Digital Forensic Readiness Implementation in SDN: Issues and Challenges 

1Nickson M. Karie* and 2Craig Valli** 
1,2Cyber Security Cooperative Research Centre, Australia 
1,2Security Research Institute, Edith Cowan University, WA, Australia. 
 nickson.karie@cybersecuritycrc.org.au*,  
c.valli@ecu.edu.au** 

Abstract:  The  continued  evolution  in  computer  network  technologies  has  seen  the  introduction  of  new 
paradigms like Software Defined Networking (SDN) which has altered many traditional networking principles in 
today’s business environments. SDN has brought about unprecedented change to the way organisations plan, 
develop,  and  enact  their  networking  technology  and  infrastructure  strategies.  However,  SDN  does  not  only 
offer new opportunities and abilities for organisations to redesign their entire network infrastructure but also 
presents  a  different  set  of  issues  and  challenges  that  need  to  be  resolved.  One  such  challenge  is  the 
implementation  of  Digital  Forensic  Readiness  (DFR)  in  SDN  environments.  This  paper,  therefore,  examines 
existing  literature and highlights  the different  issues and challenges  impacting the implementation of DFR in 
SDN.  However,  the  paper  also  goes  further  to  offer  insights  on  the  different  countermeasures  that 
organisations can embrace to enhance their ability to respond to cybersecurity incidents as well as help them 
in implementing DFR in SDN environments. 

Keywords:  Digital  Forensic  Readiness,  Software  Defined  Networking,  Issues  and  Challenges,  Cyber  Security 
Incidents, Countermeasures 

1.  Introduction 

Software-defined networking (SDN) can be defined as “an approach to networking that uses software-based 
controllers  or  application  programming 
interfaces  to  communicate  with  the  underlying  hardware 
infrastructure  and  direct  traffic  on  a  network”  (VMware,  2021).  According  to  Kandoi  and  Antikainen,  (2015) 
SDN has recently gained significant momentum in many organisations. Amin, Reisslein, and Shah, (2018) adds 
that  SDN  gives  organisations  the  power  to  decouple  the  control  plane  from  the  data  plane  of  forwarding 
devices  thus  simplifying  network  management  and  control,  making  computer  networks  agile  and  flexible. 
However,  Mugitama,  Cahyani,  and  Sukamo  (2020)  state  that  since  its  inception, the  SDN  architecture  which 
mainly  abstracts  different,  distinguishable  layers  of  a  network  was  not  designed  with  a  focus  on  network 
security.  For this reason, the centralized control nature of SDN introduces some  security vulnerabilities that 
can be exploited, for example, using Denial of Service (DoS) attacks to cause packet overload or race condition 
on the controller.  

Another known security vulnerability at the SDN controller level is the topology poisoning attack. This attack 
utilizes spoofed packets and exploits the Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP) packets in the network. Topology 
poisoning attack is one among many  other malicious activities  and security vulnerabilities that makes Digital 
Forensic  Investigation  (DFI)  a  challenging  process  in  SDN  environments.  Also,  the  lack  of  standardised 
approaches specifically designed to help forensic investigators in SDN environments adds to the complexity of 
conducting digital forensic investigations in SDN.  

As  organisations  continue  to  embrace  SDN,  many  of  them  are  likely  to  be  targeted  or  abused  by  malicious 
actors to facilitate malicious cyber activities (Kebande, et.al, 2020). The ability to execute malicious activities in 
SDN  environments  to  cause  harm  or  abuse  makes  SDN  forensics  an  increasingly  important  process  and 
reinforces the importance of implementing DFR in organisations (Karie and Karume, 2017). 

This paper, therefore, examines existing literature and highlights the different issues and challenges impacting 
the implementation of DFR in SDN environments. Further, this paper highlights different countermeasures that 
organisations can embrace to enhance their ability to respond to cybersecurity incidents as well as help them 
in implementing DFR in SDN environments. Note at this point also that this paper utilised purposive sampling 
research methodology where the authors relied on their own judgment to choose the literature examined and 
used in this study. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As for the remaining part of this paper: Section 2 introduces the literature review as background while Section 
3  presents  related  work.  Thereafter,  Section  4  discusses  the 
impacting  the 
implementation of DFR in SDN.  Section 5 presents different countermeasures that organisations can embrace 
to enhance their ability to respond to cybersecurity incidents as well as help them in implementing DFR in SDN 
environments before concluding the paper in Section 6 and makes mention of the future work. 

issues  and  challenges 

2.  Background 

This  section  provides  a  literature  background  on  the  following  areas:  digital  forensics,  Digital  Forensic 
Readiness (DFR), and Software-Defined Networking (SDN). Digital forensics helps to understand the scientific 
process  used  for  conducting  digital  forensic  investigations  while  DFR  is  discussed  as  a  way  that  can  help 
organisations  record  activities  and  data  in  such  a  manner  that  the  records  are  sufficient  in  their  extent  for 
subsequent forensic purposes thus minimizing digital forensic investigation costs (Mohay, 2005). Finally, SDN is 
discussed  to  help  understand  the  concept  of  physical  separation  of  the  network  control  plane  from  the 
forwarding plane and how the control plane is used to control different devices in the network. 

1.1  Digital Forensics 

Continued malicious activities in  the cyberspace makes digital forensics an essential process for investigating 
and  prosecuting  cybercriminals  misusing  digital  devices  such  as  computer  systems,  network  devices,  mobile 
devices,  and  storage  devices  (Selamat,  Yusof,  and  Sahib,  2008).  For  this  reason,  digital  forensics  can  be 
described as a scientific process of investigation that deals with extracting and analysing digital artefacts from 
digital devices. According to Ademu, Imafidon, and Preston (2011), digital forensics provides tools, techniques, 
and  scientifically  proven  methods  that  can  be  used  to  acquire  and  analyse  digital  artefacts.  The  acquired  or 
extracted digital artefacts can be used to reconstruct events for purposes of creating a hypothesis that can be 
useful in a court of law or any civil proceedings (Karie and Kebande, 2016).  

Any  successful  digital  forensic  investigation  process  involves  a  thorough  forensic  examination  of  digital 
artefacts  by  forensic  analysts  with  the  primary  objective  being  to  unearth  information  that  will  assist 
practitioners and law enforcement agencies in the presentation of digital evidence in a court of law or any civil 
proceedings. In this regard, Karie and Kebande (2016) add that digital forensics thus expands simply from the 
crime  scene  through  digital  forensic  analysts  to  the  courtroom.  This  also  implies  that,  if  the  outcome  of  an 
investigation is to be presented in a court of law as evidence, the digital forensic investigation process must 
always  adhere  to  some  important  scientifically  proven  and  accepted  methods  or  processes  that  must  be 
considered  and  taken  (Köhn,  Olivier,  and  Eloff,  2006).  For  a  comprehensive  reading  on  digital  forensic 
investigation processes, the reader is advised to consult Valjarevic, and Venter, (2015), Valjarevic and Venter, 
(2012),  and  Köhn,  Olivier,  and  Eloff,  (2006).  The  next  subsection  presents  the  concept  of  digital  forensic 
readiness. 

1.2  Digital Forensic Readiness (DFR) 

Based on the definitions and description of digital forensics, the digital forensic investigation process is usually 
employed  as  a  post-event  response  to  cybersecurity  incidents  (Rowlingson,  2004).  However,  for  an 
organisation to benefit from the ability to gather and preserve digital evidence before an incident occurs, DFR 
is  inevitable.  DFR  can  be  defined  as  “the  ability  of  an  organisation  to  maximize  its  potential  to  use  digital 
evidence whilst minimizing the costs of an investigation” (Rowlingson, 2004). From this definition, DFR allows 
an organisation to regain control and limit the damage and costs from any security incident (KPMG, 2015) as 
well as demonstrate due diligence with regulations, conduct digital forensic investigations, and produce digital 
artefacts that can be used in a court of law or civil proceedings as evidence (DFMAG, 2020). This also implies 
that DFR can help organisations record activities and data in such a manner that the records are sufficient in 
their  extent  for  subsequent  forensic  purposes  thus  minimizing  digital  forensic  investigation  costs  (Mohay, 
2005). 

Antonio  and  Labuschagne  (2013)  add  that  a  carefully  considered  and  planned  legally  contextualized  DFR 
strategy can provide organisations with an increased ability to respond to security incidents while maintaining 
the  integrity  of  the  evidence  gathered  and  keeping  investigative  costs  low.  DFR  can  also  help  organisations 
with quicker recovery, improved business continuity, and compliance, as well as an improved success rate in 

 
 
 
 
 
legal actions by having available the collected digital artefacts for use as evidence (Andre, 2014). From this DFR 
description, the authors agree with the sentiments echoed by Elyas, Ahmad, Maynard, and Lonie, (2015) that 
implementing  DFR  in  SDN  environments  can  help  organisations  to  comply  with  their  legal,  contractual, 
regulatory, security, and operational obligations. The concept of SDN is covered in the next subsection. 

1.3  Software-Defined Networking (SDN) 

SDN  is  an  emerging  networking  technology  offering  centralised  control  of  computer  networks  (Mugitama, 
Cahyani,  and  Sukamo,  2020)  that  allows  network  operators  to  dynamically  configure  and  manage  their 
infrastructures. The primary difference between SDN and traditional networking is that SDN is software-based, 
while  traditional  networking  is  hardware-based  (VMware,  2021).  Because  of  the  programmability  of  SDN, 
organisations can experience more advantages of having SDN than traditional networking techniques. Some of 
the primary advantages of SDN are increased control with greater speed and flexibility, customizable network 
infrastructure as well as robust security.  

The goal of SDN however as stated by Rosencrance, English, and Burke, (2020) is to “improve network control 
by enabling enterprises and service providers to respond quickly to changing business requirements”. This is 
backed up by the fact that in SDN, “a network engineer or administrator can shape traffic from a centralized 
control  console  without  having  to  touch  individual  switches  in  the  network.  Besides,  a  centralized  SDN 
controller will direct the switches or routers to deliver network services wherever they are needed, regardless 
of the specific connections between a  server and devices” (Rosencrance, English, and Burke, 2020). Figure 1 
shows a simplified SDN architecture. 

Figure 1: Software-Defined Network (SDN) Architecture 
Source: (https://electronicsguide4u.com/sdn-network-software-defined-network-openflow-protocol-what-is-sdn/) 

Infer  from  Figure  1  that  SDN  can  be  divided  into  three-tier  architecture  with  three  primary  layers. 
Communication through interfaces between the different tiers or layers is usually handled by the northbound 
and  southbound  interfaces  as  shown  in  Figure  1.  The  three  basic  layers  of  SDN  are  brief  explained  in  the 
following subsections. 

1.3.1  Application Layer 

The  application  layer  as  shown  in  Figure  1  hosts  the  SDN  applications  or  network  applications  which  are 
programs  designed  to  perform  different  tasks.  SDN  applications  explicitly,  directly,  and  programmatically 
communicate  their  network  requirements  and  desired  network  behaviour  to  the  SDN  controller  via  a 
northbound interface (ONF, 2013). The northbound interface (NBI) in this case serves as a communication link 
between  SDN  applications  and  the  SDN  controller.  Again,  the  NBI  provides  an  abstract  network  view  that 
enables the direct expression of network behaviour and requirements. Examples of SDN applications  include 

 
 
 
 
 
 
networking  management,  analytics  as  well  as  other  business  applications  used  mostly  in  data  centres  (SDx, 
2015). 

1.3.2  Control Layer 

The  control  layer  oversees  the  network  intelligence  and  hosts  the  control  logic  for  managing  the  network 
services. The SDN controller which also acts as the brain of the entire network manages and manipulates flow 
entries  to  and  from  multiple  devices  (Aric,  2020).  As  seen  from  Figure  1  the  control  layer  houses  the  SDN 
controller which is a logically centralized entity. According to ONF (2013), some of the functions of the control 
layer include but are not limited to translating the requirements from the application layer to the data paths 
and providing SDN applications with an abstract view of the network (ONF, 2013). Note that the SDN data path 
is  a  software-based  representation  of  a  network  device  in  SDN  environments  (Kemp,2020)  that  exposes 
visibility and uncontested control over its advertised forwarding and data processing capabilities (ONF, 2013). 

1.3.3  Infrastructure Layer 

The infrastructure layer which also forms the physical layer of the network consists of various network devices 
(network  switches  and  routers)  or  networking  equipment  (Aric,  2020)  and  forms  the  underlying  network  to 
forward  network  traffic.  The  network  devices  found  in  the  infrastructure  layer  are  responsible  for  handling 
network packets based on the rules provided by the SDN controller. The next section presents related works. 

3.  Related Works 

Several related research work from different researchers exists and have made valuable contributions to the 
study presented in this paper. In this section, a summary of some of the most prominent efforts is presented. 

To  begin  with,  Munkhondya,  Ikuesan,  and  Venter,  (2019)  proposed  a  DFR  approach  for  potential  evidence 
preservation  in  SDN.  However,  their  research  focused  on  developing  a  proactive  mechanism  for  the 
identification,  handling,  collection,  and  preservation  of  digital  artefacts  in  SDN.  Also,  their  proposed 
mechanism was meant to integrate the DFR approach to the acquisition and preservation of volatile artefacts. 
Their  research  however  did  not  capture  the  specific  issues  and  challenges  impacting  the  implementation  of 
DFR in SDN environments as is the case of this current study. 

Another  effort  by  Lagrasse,  Singh,  Munkhondya,  Ikuesan,  and  Venter,  (2020)  proposed  “a  proactive  DFR 
framework  for  SDN  with  a  trigger-based  automated  collection  mechanism.  Their  proposed  mechanism 
integrated an intrusion detection system and an SDN controller”. Their research mainly concentrated on how 
best to collect digital artefacts in SDN environments without regard to the issues and challenges impacting the 
implementation  of  DFR  in  SDN.  The  current  study  in  this  paper,  however,  investigates  this  research  gap  by 
discussing the issues and challenges impacting the implementation of DFR in SDN environments. 

Sezer, et.al. (2013) raised the question of how to achieve a successful carrier-grade network with SDN. In their 
research,  however,  Sezer,  et.al.  (2013)  only  focus  on  the  challenges  of  network  performance,  scalability, 
security,  and  interoperability  with  the  proposal  of  potential  solution  directions.  Their  research  had  no 
reference  to  the  issues  and  challenges  impacting  the  implementation  of  DFR  in  SDN  environments  as  is  the 
case discussed in this current paper.  

Efforts by Munkhondya, Ikuesan, and Venter, (2020) presented a case for a dynamic approach to DFR in SDN 
environments.  Their  research  argues  that  “the  DFR  approach  mostly  employed  has  been  limited  to  static 
potential digital evidence collection which contrasts the dynamic nature of SDN environments” (Munkhondya, 
Ikuesan,  and  Venter,  2020).  They  then  go  ahead  and  discuss  the  pitfalls  of  the  static  DFR  approach  which 
underscores  the  need  for  a  dynamic  DFR  approach.  The  current  paper  however  focuses  on  discussing  the 
different issues and challenges impacting the implementation of DFR in SDN environments. 

Research by Park, et al. (2018) designed a digital forensic readiness model for a cloud computing-based smart 
work environment considering the current changes in cloud computing.  Their research work was purely based 
on  a  cloud  computing-based  smart  work  environment  and  not  on  issues  and  challenges  impacting  the 
implementation of DFR in SDN environments. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spiekermann  and  Eggendorfer,  (2016)  analysed  different  challenges  in  investigating  virtual  networks.  As 
opposed  to  the  current  study  in  this  paper,  their  research  proposed  a  classification  in  several  different 
categories  to  help  in  developing  new  methods  and  possible  solutions  to  simplify  investigations  in  virtual 
network environments and not necessarily SDN. Karie and Karume, (2017) also presented different issues and 
challenges  surrounding  the  implementation  of  digital  forensic  readiness  in  organisations.  Their  research, 
however, was generic and did not point out any specific implementation of DFR in SDN environments. Though 
the  focus  of  the  current  paper  is  on  SDN,  the  authors  acknowledge  that  some  of  the  different  sentiments 
discussed by Karie and Karume, (2017) are also applicable to SDN environments. 

Other related  works exist  on issues and challenges surrounding DFR in SDN environments, however,  neither 
those nor the cited references in this paper have presented  the specific  issues and challenges impacting the 
implementation of DFR in SDN environments in the way that is discussed in this paper. However, the authors 
acknowledge the fact that the previous research works have offered valuable insights toward the study in this 
paper.  The  next  section  presents  a  detailed  discussion  of  the  different  issues  and  challenges  impacting  the 
implementation of DFR in SDN environments. 

4.  Issues and challenges Impacting DFR Implementation in SDN 

In  this  section  of the  paper,  the  authors  discuss  some  of the  identified  issues  and  challenges  impacting  DFR 
implementation  in  SDN  environments.  Note  that  as  mentioned  earlier  this  study  employed  purposeful 
sampling and for this reason, the issues and challenges identified in this section were only selected to facilitate 
this study based on the literature sampled by the authors and do not by any means constitute an exhaustive 
list.  Besides, some of the issues and challenges discussed are native to SDN environments hence, more specific 
issues and challenges can and should be added as technology evolves.  

4.1  Lack of Standards Focusing on DFR Implementation in SDN. 

Like any other existing standard, the primary reason for having internationally recognised DFR standards is “to 
promote  good  practise  methods  and  processes  for  forensic  capture  and  investigation  of  digital  artefacts” 
(ISO/IEC 27037, 2012). This  also  implies that standards are generally  accepted as good, however, due to the 
relative  newness  of  SDN  infrastructure,  as  well  as  having  recently  gained  significant  momentum  in  many 
organisations (Kandoi and Antikainen, 2015) international standards that focus purely on DFR implementation 
in  SDN  environments  are  yet  to  be  realised.  The  lack  of  international  standards  specifically  focusing  on  DFR 
implementation in SDN is therefore a challenge that according to Khan et al. (2016), calls for a comprehensive 
forensic mechanism or standard to help in investigating the different forms of attacks in SDN environments as 
well as facilitate future forensic investigations.  

4.2  Lack of DFR Implementation Policies for SDN  

To achieve business objectives many organisations, make use of policies. In the context of  a legacy network 
system,  policies  are  a  collection  of  rules,  conditions,  constraints,  and  settings  defined  by  network 
administrators to govern the behaviours of network devices or designate who is authorised to connect to the 
network  and  the  circumstances  under  which  they  can  or  cannot  connect  (Microsoft,  2020).  In  the  SDN 
environment, a DFR implementation policy can thus be understood as a document that details the immediate 
procedures to be employed to support DFR in an organisation and any future forensic investigation of digital 
artefacts.  Such  a  policy  provides  a  systematic,  standardised,  and  legal  basis  for  the  admissibility  of  digital 
evidence  that  may  be  required  from  a  formal  dispute  or  legal  process  (Karie  and  Karume,  2017).  However, 
correctly setting up and enforcing DFR implementation policies in SDN may require accurate, fine-grained, and 
trusted information of user applications generating network traffic which may not be available upfront in new 
SDN  environments.  A  Lack  of  DFR  implementation  policies  in  SDN  environments,  therefore,  makes  the 
development and implementation of any SDN DFR frameworks a very challenging process. 

4.3  Budget Constraints for Implementing DFR in SDN  

Knowing that SDN is still considered relatively new, and that security was not initially a key characteristic of the 
SDN  architecture  according  to  Khan  et  al.  (2016),  implementing  DFR  may  be  subject  to  budgetary  or  cost 
constraints which may not be known upfront. Moreover, as stated by Reddy, Venter, and Olivier, (2012), a DFR 
program consists of several activities that should be chosen and managed  for the cost constraints and risk of 

 
 
 
the organisation. However,  as  organisations opt  for  cheaper options to  be implemented in the  place of DFR 
because of budget constraints, some of the alternatives implemented make digital forensic investigation costly 
and challenging. 

4.4  Fear of Network Downtime 

When operating on legacy network systems, which in most cases is used to support client business, migrating 
to  SDN  means  a  part  of  the  entire  legacy  network  will  have  to  be  shut  down  for  some  time  causing  client 
business needs to be shut down for the length of the specified downtime as well. This scenario may affect the 
implementation of DFR in SDN environments especially in an organisation where the process involved cannot 
be  fully  automated  to  facilitate  the  integration  of  the  legacy  network  systems  into  SDN  environments  while 
maintaining  backward  compatibility  (QuoteColo,  2016).  The  fear  of  network  downtime,  therefore,  is  a 
challenge when an organisation is considering a move to SDN.  

4.5  Lack of Skilled Personnel 

In many business environments, it is expected that the skills offered by the personnel match the skills wanted 
by  organisations  to  meet  their  objectives.  However,  in  most  cases,  this  is  always  not  the  case.  According  to 
Desai et al. (2009), for some time now knowledgeable and skilled digital forensic personnel are hard to find. 
The  shortage  of  skilled  personnel  poses  a  challenge  in  many  different  environments  including  the 
implementation  of  DFR  in  SDN.  This,  therefore,  calls  for  organisations  to  address  skill  shortages  to  cover 
existing gaps through training or workshops which can also have other budget or cost implications. 

4.6  SDN Scalability Challenge 

As businesses grow, so is their networking environment. Large SDN environments with volumes of networking 
requests can overwhelm SDN controllers making the management of information flow between the separate 
data  plane  and  control  plane  a  challenge  to  SDN.  One  possible  solution  is  for  organisations  to  embrace 
decentralized  control  architecture  as  well  as  more  intelligence  implemented  to  the  data  control  plane  to 
intersperse data between multiple control planes. This will also help in monitoring and ensure network device 
accountability  and  network  latency  between  connected  planes.  However,  decentralized  control  architecture 
can make implementing DFR a challenge to some organisations. 

4.7  DFR Implementation as a Challenge 

Existing standards like the ISO/IEC 27043 are more generic and not application specific according to Kebande, 
Mudau,  Ikuesan,  Venter,  and  Choo,  (2020).  Compared  to  legacy  network  systems,  SDN  has  some  level  of 
complexity hence implement SDN technology without reinventing the whole architecture with its aspects and 
related components can be challenging according to Galis et al., (2013). The lack of standards as well as the 
complexity of the SDN environment makes implementing DFR a challenge to some organisations. 

Considering  the  newness  of  SDN  and  its  complexity,  other  issues  and  challenges  that  may  also  directly  or 
indirectly impact the DFR implementation in any SDN environment are: 

Interoperability,  

• 
•  Reliability,  
• 
• 

Controller Placement (Controller Bottleneck) and  
Performance.  

Note  that  these  issues  and  challenges  are  also  native  to  SDN  but  may  in  one  way  or  the  other  have  some 
impact on how DFR is implemented. The next section highlights some of the suggested countermeasures that 
organisations can embrace to enhance their ability to respond to cybersecurity incidents as well as help them 
in DFR implementation in SDN environments. 

5.  Suggested Countermeasures to the Issues and challenges Impacting DFR 

Implementation in SDN 

With reference to the issues and challenges identified and discussed in this study, this section offers insights 
into  some  of  the  potential  countermeasures  that  organisations  can  embrace  to  enhance  their  ability  to 
respond  to  the  issues  and  challenges  impacting  DFR  implementation  in  SDN  environments.  However,  the 

 
 
 
authors also acknowledge at this point that the countermeasures discussed in this section are because of the 
purposeful  sampled  literature  and  not  in  any  way  a  comprehensive  list.  Research  still  needs  to  be  done  to 
enhance or add to this list. 

5.1  Develop DFR Implementation Policies. 

Policies  are  mostly  used  to  set  the  directional  tone  for  different  areas  of  a  business  organisation.  However, 
because  SDN  is  still  considered  new  technology,  policy  development  for  DFR  implementation  needs  careful 
planning as well as needs identification. Organisations need to gather as much information before any policy 
development  process.  The  gathered  information  helps  in  drafting  and  reviewing  the  policy  before  the  final 
implementation  and  subsequent  reviews.    A  Well-defined  SDN  implementation  policy  can  be  a  key  asset  to 
providing  the  basis  for  an  organisation  to  analyse  how  to  get  from  their  existing  legacy  network  systems  to 
having a fully functional forensic-ready SDN environment. 

5.2  Develop SDN standards. 

In  this  context,  the  authors  believe  that,  developing  internationally  accepted  SDN  standards  can  help 
organisations  and  other  industry  in  applying  world  best  practices.  This,  therefore,  calls  for  collaboration 
between business  organisations and different  industry stakeholders  to  develop internationally accepted SDN 
standards  that  can  ease  the  process  of  implementing  DFR  in  SDN  environments.  Standards  will  also  help 
organisations  manage  cybersecurity  incidents  with  easy  as  well  as  maximize  the  potential  use  of  digital 
evidence while minimizing digital forensic investigation costs in SDN environments. 

5.3  Managing Backward Compatibility and Avoiding Lengthy Downtime. 

With the advancement in technology, backward compatibility allows for interoperability with older but existing 
legacy network systems.  This is important because organisations can leverage the power of their new systems 
while  still  able  to  transact  using  old  legacy  network  systems.  For  this  reason,  business  organisations  should 
consider,  backward  compatibility  when  considering  a  transition  to  help  reduce  the  cost  associated  with 
network  downtown,  limit  service  disruption,  and  reduce  possible  network  security  risks  (QuoteColo,  2016) 
especially during the process of implementing DFR.   Besides backward compatibility,  creating redundancy as 
well  as  preparing  an  organisation  for  disaster  recovery  ahead  of  time  can  help  avoid  lengthy  downtimes  as 
redundancy can help increase reliability as well as system performance. 

5.4  Consider Cost-benefit Analysis for DFR Implementation 

With cost-benefit analysis, organisations can estimate the strengths and weaknesses of alternative approaches 
to implementing DFR in SDN environments. This way organisations can determine what different options exist 
that can provide the best approach to achieving DFR implementation while managing their budget constraints 
as well as preserving savings. 

5.5  Training of Personnel 

Both  old  and  new  personnel  should  continually  be  trained  as  new  technology  emerge.  Training  helps 
organisation  personnel  comply  with  new  forensic  readiness  best  practices  that  help  them  address  existing 
issues and challenges impacting the implementation of DFR in SDN. Training also ensures that personnel are 
aware of any existing or new standards, policies, and procedures to be used before, during, and after a digital 
investigation  process.  More  countermeasures  exist  beyond  what  is  discussed  in  this  paper  and  every 
organisation should consider and explore other existing options including those not mentioned in this study. 
The next section concludes this paper. 

6.  Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, the authors have discussed different issues and challenges impacting the implementation of DFR 
in  SDN  environments.  However,  the  paper  has  also  highlighted  the  different  countermeasures  that 
organisations can embrace to enhance their ability to respond to cybersecurity incidents as well as help them 
during  the  transition  process  to  SDN  and  more  especially  during  DFR  implementation  in  SDN  environments. 
The presentation in this paper can, for example, help digital forensic practitioners, law enforcement agencies, 
as  well  as  organisations  in  developing  dynamic  and  proactive  countermeasures  to  deal  with  the  identified 

 
 
issues  and  challenges  impacting  DFR  implementation  in  SDN.  However,  more  research  is  still  needed  to 
provide directions on all the identified issues and challenges as well as the suggested countermeasures to the 
issues and challenges  impacting DFR  implementation in SDN. As part of future  research, the authors plan  to 
develop  a  DFR  framework  that  can  help  ease  the  implementation  of  DFR  in  SDN  as  well  as  show  how  well 
organisations can deal with some of the identified issues and challenges in this study. 

Acknowledgements 

The  work  has  been  supported  by  the  Cyber  Security  Research  Centre  Limited  whose  activities  are  partially 
funded by the Australian Government’s Cooperative Research Centres Programme 

Reference 

Available 

Readiness. 

at: 
[Accessed  on 

Ademu, I. O., Imafidon, C. O., & Preston, D. S. (2011). A new approach of the digital forensic model for digital 
forensic investigation. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl, 2(12), 175-178. 
Amin, R., Reisslein, M., and Shah, N. (2018). "Hybrid SDN Networks: A Survey of Existing Approaches," in IEEE 
Communications  Surveys  &  Tutorials,  vol.  20,  no.  4,  pp.  3259-3306,  Fourth  quarter  2018,  DOI: 
10.1109/COMST.2018.2837161. 
Antonio P., and Labuschagne, L., (2012). A conceptual model for digital forensic readiness. Proceedings of the 
ISSA Conference; 2012Aug. 15-17, Johannesburg, SA. IEEE Publishers, 2012; pp.1-8 
Aric, T., (2020) SDN Network (Software Defined Network OpenFlow Protocol) Overview – The Ultimate Guide!! 
(What Is SDN And How It Really Works?). Available at: https://electronicsguide4u.com/sdn-network-software-
defined-network-openflow-protocol-what-is-sdn/ [Accessed on 29th January 2021] 
Desai, A.M, Fitzgerald, D., Hoanca, B., (2009). Offering a digital forensics course in Anchorage, Alaska. Inform 
Syst Edu J 2009;7(35); http: //isedj.org/ 7 / 35/ 
Forensic 
(2020). 
DFMAG 
https://digitalforensicsmagazine.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=916 
28th January 2021] 
Elyas, M., Ahmad, A., Maynard, S. B., & Lonie, A. (2015).  Digital forensic readiness: Expert  perspectives on a 
theoretical framework. Computers & Security, 52, 70-89. 
Galis A, Clayman S, Mamatas L, Rubio Loyola J, Manzalini A, Kuklinski S, Serrat J, Zahariadis T. Softwarization of 
Future  Networks  and  Services  -  Programmable  Enabled  Networks  as  Next  Generation  Software  Defined 
Networks. IEEE SDN for Future Networks and Services (SDN4FNS) 2013.  
ISO/IEC  27037:2012  —  Information  technology  —  Security  techniques  —  Guidelines  for  identification, 
collection, acquisition, and preservation of digital evidence. 
Kandoi, R., and Antikainen, M. (2015). "Denial-of-service attacks in OpenFlow SDN networks," 2015 IFIP/IEEE 
International  Symposium  on  Integrated  Network  Management  (IM),  Ottawa,  ON,  2015,  pp.  1322-1326,  DOI: 
10.1109/INM.2015.7140489. 
Karie,  N.  M.,  &  Karume,  S.  M.  (2017).  Digital  forensic  readiness  in  organisations:  Issues  and  challenges. The 
Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law: JDFSL, 12(4), 43-53. 
Karie,  N.  M.,  &  Kebande,  V.  R.  (2016).  Building  ontologies  for  digital  forensic  terminologies.  International 
Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics, (IJCSDF) 5(2), pp.75-83. 
Kebande,  V.  R.,  Mudau,  P.  P.,  Ikuesan,  R.  A.,  Venter,  H.  S.,  &  Choo,  K.  K.  R.  (2020).  Holistic  digital  forensic 
readiness framework for IoT-enabled organisations. Forensic Science International: Reports, 2, 100117. 
Kemp, 
[Accessed on 29th January 2020] 
Khan, S., Gani, A., Wahab, A. W. A., Abdelaziz, A., Ko, K., Khan, M. K., & Guizani, M. (2016). Software-defined 
network forensics: Motivation, potential locations, requirements, and challenges. IEEE Network, 30(6), 6-13. 
Köhn, M., Olivier, M. S., & Eloff, J. H. (2006, July). Framework for a Digital Forensic Investigation. In ISSA (pp. 1-
7). 
KPMG, 
https://assets.kpmg/content/dam/kpmg/pdf/2016/03/Achieving-Digital-Forensic-Readiness-12-9-2015.pdf 
[Accessed on 28th 01, 2021] 
Lagrasse,  M.,  Singh,  A.,  Munkhondya,  H.,  Ikuesan,  A.,  &  Venter,  H.  (2020,  March).  Digital  forensic  readiness 
framework for software-defined networks using a trigger-based collection mechanism.’’. In Proceedings of the 
15th International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security, ICCWS (pp. 296-305). 

(2020).  SDN  Datapath.  Available  at:  https://kemptechnologies.com/au/glossary/sdn-datapath/ 

Readiness. 

Achieving 

Available 

Forensic 

(2015). 

Digital 

at: 

 
 
at: 

pp. 

1-6, 

2020, 

Policies. 

(ICoICT), 

Available 

Indonesia, 

Technology 

(2020).  Network 

https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-

Microsoft 
server/networking/technologies/nps/nps-np-overview [Accessed on 16th February 2021] 
Mohay, G. (2005). Technical challenges and directions for digital forensics. In First International Workshop on 
Systematic Approaches to Digital Forensic Engineering (SADFE'05) (pp. 155-161). IEEE. 
Mugitama,  S.  A.,  Cahyani,  N.  D.  W.,  and  Sukamo,  P.  (2020).  "An  Evidence-Based  Technical  Process  for 
OpenFlow-Based SDN Forensics," In the proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Information and 
Communication 
DOI: 
Yogyakarta, 
10.1109/ICoICT49345.2020.9166215. 
Munkhondya,  H.,  Ikuesan,  A.  R.,  &  Venter,  H.  S.  (2020).  A  case  for  a  dynamic  approach  to  digital  forensic 
readiness  in  an  SDN  platform.  In  International  Conference  on  Cyber  Warfare  and  Security  (pp.  584-XVIII). 
Academic Conferences International Limited. 
Munkhondya, H., Ikuesan, A., & Venter, H. (2019,  February). Digital forensic readiness approach for potential 
evidence preservation in software-defined networks. In ICCWS 2019 14th International Conference on Cyber 
Warfare and Security: ICCWS (Vol. 268). 
ONF  (2013).  SDN  Architecture  Overview.  Version  1.0.  Available  at:  https://opennetworking.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/SDN-architecture-overview-1.0.pdf [Accessed on 29th January 2021] 
Park, S., Kim, Y., Park, G., Na, O., & Chang, H. (2018). Research on digital forensic readiness design in a cloud 
computing-based smart work environment. Sustainability, 10(4), 1203. 
QuoteColo  (2016).  Top  Five  Challenges  Facing  SDN.  available  at:  https://www.quotecolo.com/top-five-
challenges-facing-sdn/ [Accessed on 16th February 2021] 
Reddy,  K.,  Venter,  H.S.  &  Olivier,  M.S.  Using  time-driven  activity-based  costing  to  manage  digital  forensic 
readiness  in  large  organisations.  Inf  Syst  Front  14,  1061–1077  (2012).  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-011-
9333-x 
Rosencrance,  L.,  English,  J.,  and  Burke,  J.  (2020).  software-defined  networking  (SDN).  Available  at: 
https://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/definition/software-defined-networking-SDN#  [Accessed  on  29th 
January 2021] 
Rowlingson, R. (2004). A ten-step process for forensic readiness. International Journal of Digital Evidence, 2(3), 
1-28. 
SDx,  (2015).  Understanding  the  SDN  Architecture  -  SDN  Control  Plane  &  SDN  Data  Plane.  Available  at: 
https://www.sdxcentral.com/networking/sdn/definitions/inside-sdn-architecture/# [Accessed on 29th January 
2021] 
Selamat,  S.  R.,  Yusof,  R.,  &  Sahib,  S.  (2008).  Mapping  process  of  digital  forensic  investigation  framework. 
International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, 8(10), 163-169. 
Sezer, S., Scott-Hayward, S., Chouhan, P. K., Fraser, B., Lake, D., Finnegan, J., ... & Rao, N. (2013). Are we ready 
for  SDN?  Implementation  challenges  for  software-defined  networks.  IEEE  Communications  Magazine,  51(7), 
36-43. 
Spiekermann,  D.,  &  Eggendorfer,  T.  (2016).  Challenges  of  network  forensic  investigation  in  virtual  networks. 
Journal of Cyber Security and Mobility, 15-46. 
Valjarevic, A., & Venter, H. S. (2012, August). Harmonised digital forensic investigation process model. In 2012 
Information Security for South Africa (pp. 1-10). IEEE. 
Valjarevic, A., & Venter, H. S. (2015). A comprehensive and harmonized digital forensic investigation process 
model. Journal of forensic sciences, 60(6), 1467-1483. 
VMware 
at: 
https://www.vmware.com/topics/glossary/content/software-defined-networking  [Accessed  on  27th  January 
2021] 

Software-Defined 

Networking 

Available 

(2021). 

(SDN). 

 
 
