1
2
0
2

l
u
J

9

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
0
5
4
0
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

SherLOCKED: A Detective-themed Serious
Game for Cyber Security Education (cid:63)

Alice Jaﬀray, Conor Finn, and Jason R.C. Nurse

University of Kent, UK
J.R.C.Nurse@kent.ac.uk

Abstract. Gamiﬁcation and Serious Games are progressively being used
over a host of ﬁelds, particularly to support education. Such games
provide a new way to engage students with content and can comple-
ment more traditional approaches to learning. This article proposes Sher-
LOCKED, a new serious game created in the style of a 2D top-down
puzzle adventure. The game is situated in the context of an undergradu-
ate cyber security course, and is used to consolidate students’ knowledge
of foundational security concepts (e.g. the CIA triad, security threats
and attacks and risk management). SherLOCKED was built based on
a review of existing serious games and a study of common gamiﬁcation
principles. It was subsequently implemented within an undergraduate
course, and evaluated with 112 students. We found the game to be an ef-
fective, attractive and fun solution for allowing further engagement with
content that students were introduced to during lectures. This research
lends additional evidence to the use of serious games in supporting learn-
ing about cyber security.

Keywords: Cyber security · Gamiﬁcation · Serious Games · Education ·
University · Puzzle · Detective · COVID-19 · Emergency Online Learning

1

Introduction

Serious games are a unique opportunity for educators as they provide another,
potentially more appealing, way to engage students with course content. The
concept of a serious game has existed for decades and while many deﬁnitions
exist, these games can be regarded as those with “an explicit and carefully
thought-out educational purpose and are not intended to be played primarily for
amusement” [1]. A salient point about serious games is that although amusement
is not a primary objective, striking a good balance between being entertaining
and educational can increase the game’s appeal in learning settings. This appeal

(cid:63) This is the author version of the article: Jaﬀray A., Finn C., Nurse J.R.C. (2021)
SherLOCKED: A Detective-Themed Serious Game for Cyber Security Education. In:
Furnell S., Clarke N. (eds) Human Aspects of Information Security and Assurance.
HAISA 2021. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, vol
613. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-81111-2 4

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

A. Jaﬀray et al.

may allow educators to reach students who may be less interested in traditional
forms of teaching and revision.

There have been numerous research eﬀorts exploring the development and use
of games to educate individuals about cyber security. These have concentrated
on game designs including table-top exercises, tower defence games, role playing
games, simulations and puzzles [10,12,14]. These approaches have had varying
levels of success and impact in educational and awareness settings.

This paper seeks to complement current research into gamiﬁcation for cyber
security education through the proposal and evaluation of a new serious game,
namely SherLOCKED, targeted at undergraduate computer science university
students. SherLOCKED is created in the style of a 2D top-down puzzle adventure
meant to support further engagement with content delivered via lectures. We
draw our primary novelty from two areas.

The ﬁrst is contextual and is grounded in the fact that in-person learning
has been drastically reduced due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Educators and
students have had to switch suddenly to online learning (also termed, emer-
gency online learning [2]), a reality that has impacted student motivation and
cognitive engagement [2]. We sought to support students during this diﬃcult
time, and therefore developed and deployed SherLOCKED on an undergraduate
course. This paper is therefore the ﬁrst to our knowledge to engage in a trial
and evaluation of a serious game in such a unique context.

The second key contribution of our work is in the reasonably large sample size
for such an evaluation. Serious games for teaching security explored in current
literature [6,10,14,17,18,21] often interact with small numbers of university stu-
dents (e.g. N<30) which impacts the inferences that can be made. SherLOCKED
is evaluated through a survey of 112 university students, where we collect feed-
back through quantitative and qualitative data. This therefore acts as one of
the largest studies to date examining the perception and use of a serious game
within an undergraduate cyber security cohort.

The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews pre-
vious salient attempts at gamiﬁcation. In Section 3, we introduce SherLOCKED
and present the principles guiding its creation. The user study is outlined and
discussed in Section 4, before concluding the report in Section 5.

2 Literature Review

Gamiﬁcation has been explored to various extents in prior work. Serious games
for general security awareness are arguably the most popular. Anti-phishing
Phil [19] for instance is one of the most well-known games that has sought to
educate people about detecting phishing attacks. The domain of phishing at-
tracts a large amount of gamiﬁcation research [16], likely due to the prominence
of phishing and its perception as a user-oriented threat. Beyond phishing, topics
such as password security and cryptography also feature. Sholeﬁeld and Shep-
herd [17] design a role-playing quiz application (RPG) to educate the general
population about good password practices. Their evaluation highlights the im-

SherLOCKED: A Serious Game for Security Education

3

portance of games as an enjoyable way to learn, but also the diﬃculties in such
pursuits (e.g. challenges in implementing eﬀective leader boards). Similar posi-
tive ﬁndings are found by Deeb and Hickey [6] as they explore the use of a 3D
escape room game to teach students about cryptography.

Oﬄine serious games present another way to engage individuals. Riskio is a
tabletop game to raise awareness of cyber security concepts for those in business
and for those studying security at university [10]. It is oriented around playing
the roles of attackers and defenders within an organisational security context.
Crypto Go is another physical card game proposed which can be used for ed-
ucating about security, particularly cryptography [9]. Through user workshops,
researchers found that the game improved motivation to study the topic and the
understanding of the ﬁeld.

Focusing speciﬁcally on formal teaching contexts, Jin et al. [12] situate their
research on the growing need for a security workforce and use games to educate
high school students. They propose and evaluate four cyber security education
games (e.g. using virtual reality and tower defence) to teach topics such as se-
curity foundations, secure online behaviour, cyber-attack and defense methods
and social engineering. Results were highly positive, and games were favoured
by students and staﬀ. Mostafa et al. [14] also explore multiple games for teach-
ing security through their testing of six games and how well they were received
by university students. The games spanned topics such as network attacks, key
management and web security, were implemented as image puzzles, simulations,
role playing and action/adventure genres. Based on a user study, they conclude
that the games could contribute greatly to the educational process.

Lastly, capture the ﬂag (CTF) games and exercises are extremely popular in
cyber security. They allow participants (many of which may be students new to
the ﬁeld) to learn about the technical aspects of security, including ﬁnding and
exploiting vulnerabilities (thus capturing ‘ﬂags’). ˇSv´abensk`y et al. [20] provide a
recent overview of the ﬁeld and highlight the various types of challenges imple-
mented to teach security. A key ﬁnding of their work is that while CTFs clearly
are an attractive proposition alongside traditional lectures, they currently pre-
dominately focus on technical knowledge but often neglect the human aspects
of security; this is clearly a shortcoming given how much cybercriminals use
these factors [15]. More speciﬁcally, we have seen CTFs applied for introducing
new students to security [7], formative assessment [5], and as part of teaching in
online universities [4]. This spread of application areas demonstrate the use of
these exercises within education.

3 SherLOCKED: A Detective-themed Serious Game for

Security Education

3.1 Game Context

SherLOCKED aims to provide a game-based platform to support students in
learning about cyber security. We targeted our game at consolidating content

4

A. Jaﬀray et al.

presented in undergraduate lectures. Therefore students could attend lectures
and then play the game to check and refresh their understanding on certain
topics. The game was conceived and deployed during the COVID-19 pandemic
speciﬁcally to help address the challenges of low student motivation and poor
cognitive engagement with online teaching [2]. This was a notable issue based on
our own internal student consultations where there was a signiﬁcant diﬃculty in
ﬁnding the motivation to watch lecture recordings, attend live online sessions,
or study more generally.

A series of in-game questions form the basis of SherLOCKED and dictate
how players progress. These questions have been created using lecture content
from the ﬁrst half of an introductory cyber security module at the University of
Kent, UK. This focus was motivated by the fact that the concepts included in
these lectures form the building blocks for the remainder of the module.

There are three levels, each containing topics aligned with the lectures of the
module. For the ﬁrst level, the focus is placed on the Conﬁdentiality, Integrity
and Availability (CIA) triad, and understanding the meaning of key cyber se-
curity terms. The questions for the second level are centred on security attacks
and their types, and related security services. The third level broadens the topic
base and poses questions about the activities within the security risk manage-
ment life-cycle (i.e., identify, analyse, treat and monitor). This allows students
to learn more about cyber risk and the ways it can be managed and mitigated.

3.2 The Game

SherLOCKED is a multi-level, top-down 2D detective-themed game which in-
volves the player assuming the role of a detective navigating through a house.
The player controls the movement of the detective (using arrow keys or WASD)
and, as they move around each level, they have to ﬁnd the questions attached
to objects in each room and answer them. The game was designed using various
gamiﬁcation principles [8] and built using the Unity game engine1—a decision
made especially due to its cross-platform game deployment capabilities. Below
we explain our motivation in support of key design decisions.

Theme A primary decision in designing a game is the theme on which to base
it. Reﬂecting on current literature, we found that role-playing games often per-
formed well and were preferred by students [14,17]. We then considered various
types of roles and settled on a detective theme with an animated detective as
the player’s character and three cases to solve, based on the three levels (and
areas of content) identiﬁed earlier. This theme was also, in part, motivated by
discovery and detective games, and had a retro interface given the popularity of
such games of late [11].

Narrative A strong and compelling narrative can help players become im-
mersed in the game, which can in turn support their learning. Gamiﬁcation

1 https://unity.com/solutions/game

SherLOCKED: A Serious Game for Security Education

5

principles point to the key value of narratives in providing meaning to actions
and in building a player’s commitment to the game’s tasks [8]. SherLOCKED’s
plot follows a detective named Sherry, the player character, helping the victim
of a hacking, named Ginny. Figures 1 and 2 show the opening two screens.

Fig. 1: Introducing the player to the
game’s narrative. Sherry (left) is cur-
rently speaking to Ginny (right) about
the cases.

Fig. 2: The game’s 2D interface. The
‘E’ in the bottom left highlights a clue
has been found. A mini-map is de-
picted in the bottom right.

The narrative is told through the questions asked in the game. In the ﬁrst
case, the detective meets the victim and will go through the hacked home looking
for clues. A clue is a question about cyber security that the player (Sherry) must
answer to prove to Ginny that she’s up to the task. As Sherry traverses the house,
there are also various locked rooms, each room represents a new case that can
only be accessed by answering enough questions correctly on the current level.
In the second case, Sherry is in the computer room. Here, she tries to learn
more about the hacker’s targeting of Ginny, and as such the questions are based
around cyber-attacks and how they might compromise security services. The
third case involves the detective walking around the various rooms with the goal
of securing the house from the risk of future hacking attacks; questions therefore
are about cyber risk and high-level risk treatment solutions.

Feedback Similar to a traditional educational context, feedback within serious
games is critical in supporting learning. Feedback allows students to feel respon-
sible for achievements, and to gauge their progress towards the preset goal (e.g.
solving the case or learning about certain security topics) [8]. We implemented
this in various ways across SherLOCKED. For instance, when a player answers
a question they are always provided with informative feedback, and we provide
wider progress monitoring feedback as well, as outlined later.

More speciﬁcally, if players answer a question correctly, they are informed as
such and the answer button they selected turns green (Figure 3). If they answer

6

A. Jaﬀray et al.

Fig. 3: Correct answer with praise and
Intuition points given

Fig. 4: Incorrect answer with feedback
and Reputation points lost

incorrectly, the answer button they selected will turn red, the correct answer
button will become green, and they will be given feedback on their selection
(Figure 4). This answer feedback is written to be constructive to aid learning.
One study found that positive feedback was more eﬀective than negative feed-
back when repair could not be made [22]. Questions can only be answered once,
so positive feedback is given when a question is answered incorrectly. In Figure 4
for instance, we gently nudge the player to reﬂect on the CIA triad—given their
answer suggests that the student has mixed up some concepts—before playing
the level again.

Progress Reporting Studies have found that progress reporting is a power-
ful gamiﬁcation principle to motivate students [3,8]. The game implements two
progress-typed bars to support this, and the use of levels implemented via dif-
ferent cases. The intuition bar represents how good the player is at picking up
on clues and the reputation bar represents the player’s reputation as a detective.
At the beginning of each level, the intuition bar is empty and the reputation bar
is full. When a question is answered incorrectly, the player (Sherry’s role) loses
reputation experience points (XPs) and when a question is answered correctly,
they gain intuition XPs (see top left and right in Figure 3 and Figure 4).

If all intuition XPs are gained, the player is shown their score and a notiﬁ-
cation that they have “closed” the case on that level (Figure 5). This presents
an achievement within the game and allows them to progress. If all reputation
points are lost, the level is over and the player is shown their score and a notiﬁ-
cation they have been “ﬁred” by Ginny from the case (Figure 6).

Competition Competition allows players to compare their achievements and
progress against others. A common way that games implement this is using leader
boards [8,13]. In SherLOCKED, when a player ﬁnishes a level, they are presented
with a score value (number of questions they answered correctly) and the time
taken to complete a level (e.g. Figure 5). This allows for the creation of leader

SherLOCKED: A Serious Game for Security Education

7

Fig. 5: Case closed as the player has
answered suﬃcient questions correctly
on that level to proceed.

Fig. 6: Player ﬁred due to too many
wrong answers on the case (and a full
loss of reputation).

boards and for players to post and compare scores, which creates competition;
driving players to achieve better scores within the game and improving their
learning of the covered topics.

4 User Study and Discussion

4.1 Study Design

To investigate the use of SherLOCKED at supporting student learning, we con-
ducted a user study. The study took the form of an anonymous online survey
which was disseminated to undergraduate students within an introduction to cy-
ber security module, oﬀered to second and ﬁnal year students, at the University
of Kent, UK. The study received ethical approval by the university and informed
consent was sought from all participants before completing the survey.

As the game covered the ﬁrst series of lectures, the study was conducted two
weeks after the last of that content was delivered. Students attending the online
teaching session where we launched the survey were briefed about the purpose
of the game, the study and what we were aiming to achieve. They were also
informed that the game would stay open for the remainder of the term if they
wanted to use it to help prepare for exams.

Before playing the game, we asked students about how conﬁdent they were in
their understanding of the lecture material (using a 5-point Likert scale, with 1
as not very conﬁdent and 5 as very conﬁdent), their preferred learning methods,
and what features they thought were most important when playing a game. We
then provided them with an online link to the game and allowed approximately
30 minutes of play time. After they had played the game, they were asked to
conduct a post-test survey which again asked the conﬁdence questions but also
requested further feedback on the game and their experience.

8

A. Jaﬀray et al.

4.2 Results and Discussion

A total of 112 students completed the survey, out of a potential 198 that were in
the live lecture support session. While low (57%), this was already encouraging
given response rates for such optional, anonymous university surveys is often 20-
30% (pre-COVID-19). Considering that a main aim of the game was to support
learning, we ﬁrst assessed their perceptions on whether the game had an impact
on how much they understood about lecture material and how conﬁdent they
were about syllabus content after playing it.

We found that 87.5% (98) of students felt that the game helped improve their
understanding of lecture content and as depicted in Figure 7, student’s conﬁdence
levels increased after they played SherLOCKED. It was also encouraging to ﬁnd
that 65.2% (73) stated that they would return to SherLOCKED to help revise
for the exam and more generally, that 84.8% (95) saw playing serious games as
a good way to help them to learn. These positive points align well with other
existing research about the current and future value of gamiﬁcation when applied
to higher education learning [14].

Fig. 7: Conﬁdence levels of students before and after playing SherLOCKED. This
presents results on a 5-point Likert scale, with 1 as not very conﬁdent and 5 as
very conﬁdent.

When asked about their most liked part of the game, students reported en-
joying its simplicity and ‘retro’ feel. One participant stated the game was “more
engaging than reading notes” and that it “reinforced knowledge that I had, [and]
helped to show areas that I was unsure about”. Another commented that it was
particularly “helpful where some of the deﬁnitions are similar and makes you
think about which is the right one”. This highlights the importance of the game
to be interesting and simple but still focused on adequately engaging students
with content. To further note the fun nature of the game, we had included a
small number of obviously incorrect answers. A participant picked up on this
expressing, “I like how sometimes the answer is obvious as other options are
hilarious. It helps me when I’m unsure about the answer and acts as a revision”.

SherLOCKED: A Serious Game for Security Education

9

Again, this is a useful point for future research in this domain as it ensures that
games keep a good balance between being serious and enjoyable.

Students also valued the instantaneous feedback after answering questions.
As was hinted at in the quotes above, these helped direct them to relevant
materials and to discover areas where their understanding or knowledge may
be lacking. We also noted the signiﬁcant importance of the game’s theme and
narrative to students. To summarise with one student’s comment, “The setting
ﬁts the theme of the game. It makes sense to teach cyber sec concepts in a
detective setting so it doesn’t feel completely out of place like some learning
games”. A key takeaway point therefore is that serious games may be better
tailored to the subject context instead of being generic.

Some other general ﬁndings were of note as well. Firstly, students reported
that their preferred learning styles were primarily attending lectures (33% of
respondents, i.e., 37 students) and engaging in question-answer sessions (46%,
52). Reading notes and textbooks (11%, 13) or writing notes (9%, 10) were not
favoured. For serious games in university contexts therefore, this may be an
opportunity to pair games (or levels) with individual (or groups of) lectures. We
also found that when playing a game, if students had to choose one feature to
represent the most important feature, feedback on actions (27% of respondents,
i.e., 30 students), competition (24%, 27) and narrative (23%, 26) were key. Less
so were character customisation (2%, 2), a consistent theme (e.g. RPG) (4%, 5),
an informative tutorial (8%, 9) and progress reporting (12%, 13). While all of
these are ideal in a game and we would certainly encourage educators to strive
for them, this can help prioritise features/principles if time or resources are low.
There were some areas for improvement in our work that were identiﬁed by
participants. This arose through a query where we asked what they liked least
about the game. The main theme which emerged from a few participants was
about the simplicity of the game; a notable point given its simplicity was praised
by others. Here, a participant stated “the gameplay was quite boring, being just
walk to object, interact, answer quiz, go to next object, with not much reward
(apart from not losing)”. This links to another participant comments on how it
“would be cool with gold coins to collect”. These are clearly valid points and
ones that could make the game more engaging. We are currently exploring the
feasibility of diﬀerent interface designs (e.g. integrating the ability to track a
hacker), diﬀerent style questions (e.g. a puzzle instead of multiple choice), and
how badges or coins may be used (e.g. a badge for fastest time, or receiving
in-game Bitcoin for successfully ﬁnding out information about the hacker).

5 Conclusion and Future Work

While serious games have been discussed for decades, their uptake in higher
education seems to be limited. These games however can oﬀer a great deal to
a student’s learning experience. Considering this value, this article proposed
SherLOCKED, a new serious game created in the style of a 2D top-down detec-
tive adventure. SherLOCKED was designed to be used within an undergraduate

10

A. Jaﬀray et al.

cyber security course to complement lecture materials and content. A key mo-
tivation of the game was to overcome the challenges that students were facing
with online-only learning because of the COVID-19 pandemic, including a lack
of motivation and cognitive engagement with materials.

From our user study with a cohort of 112 university students, we found that
the game was successful at providing a more enticing form of interaction which
also assisted student’s understanding and conﬁdence with lecture content. We
were also able to identify a number of key take away points for research in
this domain more generally, including the importance of a strong narrative, the
balance of informative and fun interfaces, game stories that are tailored to the
subject context, and actionable and immediate feedback.

There are various avenues for future work, but there are two of particular
interest. The ﬁrst is to extend upon the game concept currently built. Currently
the game only covers the initial lectures in the module, and therefore the others
will need to be designed and implemented. Additionally, as mentioned above we
would aim to explore ways to make the game more engaging and avoid issues of
boredom (e.g. badges, interfaces and question styles). The second goal is to setup
a long-term study to explore whether the expanded game results in better actual
ongoing student engagement with content and actual student performance. This
aims to tackle the current reliance on self-report data which can be biased. We
believe that while the current version of SherLOCKED performed well, with
improvements in the interface and via an extended user study, the game will be
one that can be used within the undergraduate module for years to come.

References

1. Abt, C.C.: Serious games. University press of America (1987)
2. Aguilera-Hermida, A.P.: College students’ use and acceptance of emergency online
learning due to covid-19. International Journal of Educational Research Open 1,
100011 (2020)

3. Barata, G., Gama, S., Jorge, J., Gon¸calves, D.: Engaging engineering students with
gamiﬁcation. In: 2013 5th International Conference on Games and Virtual Worlds
for Serious Applications (VS-GAMES). pp. 1–8. IEEE (2013)

4. Chicone, R., Burton, T.M., Huston, J.A.: Using facebook’s open source capture
the ﬂag platform as a hands-on learning and assessment tool for cybersecurity
education. International Journal of Conceptual Structures and Smart Applications
(IJCSSA) 6(1), 18–32 (2018)

5. Chothia, T., Novakovic, C.: An oﬄine capture the ﬂag-style virtual machine
and an assessment of its value for cybersecurity education. In: 2015 USENIX
Summit on Gaming, Games, and Gamiﬁcation in Security Education (3GSE
15). USENIX Association (2015), https://www.usenix.org/conference/3gse15/
summit-program/presentation/chothia

6. Deeb, F.A., Hickey, T.J.: Teaching introductory cryptography using a 3d escape-
the-room game. In: 2019 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE). pp. 1–6.
IEEE (2019)

7. Ford, V., Siraj, A., Haynes, A., Brown, E.: Capture the ﬂag unplugged: an oﬄine
cyber competition. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCSE Technical Sympo-
sium on Computer Science Education. pp. 225–230 (2017)

SherLOCKED: A Serious Game for Security Education

11

8. Fortes Tondello, G., Premsukh, H., Nacke, L.: A theory of gamiﬁcation principles
through goal-setting theory. In: 51st Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (2018)

9. Gonz´alez-Tablas, A.I., Gonz´alez Vasco, M.I., Cascos, I., Planet Palomino, ´A.: Shuf-
ﬂe, cut, and learn: Crypto go, a card game for teaching cryptography. Mathematics
8(11), 1993 (2020)

10. Hart, S., Margheri, A., Paci, F., Sassone, V.: Riskio: A serious game for cyber
security awareness and education. Computers & Security 95, 101827 (2020)
11. Heubl, B.: Retro-gaming boom during lockdown (2020), https://eandt.theiet.
(Ac-

org/content/articles/2020/05/retro-gaming-boom-during-lockdown/
cessed on 16 February 2021)

12. Jin, G., Tu, M., Kim, T.H., Heﬀron, J., White, J.: Evaluation of game-based learn-
ing in cybersecurity education for high school students. Journal of Education and
Learning (EduLearn) 12(1), 150–158 (2018)

13. Marczewski, A.: Periodic Table of Gamiﬁcation Elements (2020), https://www.
gamified.uk/user-types/gamification-mechanics-elements/ (Accessed on 16
February 2021)

14. Mostafa, M., Faragallah, O.S.: Development of serious games for teaching infor-

mation security courses. IEEE Access 7, 169293–169305 (2019)

15. Nurse, J.R.C.: Cybercrime and you: How criminals attack and the human factors
that they seek to exploit. In: The Oxford Handbook of Cyberpsychology. OUP
(2019)

16. Roepke, R., Koehler, K., Drury, V., Schroeder, U., Wolf, M.R., Meyer, U.: A pond
full of phishing games-analysis of learning games for anti-phishing education. In:
International Workshop on Model-Driven Simulation and Training Environments
for Cybersecurity. pp. 41–60. Springer (2020)

17. Scholeﬁeld, S., Shepherd, L.A.: Gamiﬁcation techniques for raising cyber security
awareness. In: International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. pp. 191–
203. Springer (2019)

18. Schreuders, Z.C., Butterﬁeld, E.: Gamiﬁcation for teaching and learning computer
security in higher education. In: 2016 USENIX Workshop on Advances in Security
Education (ASE 16) (2016)

19. Sheng, S., Magnien, B., Kumaraguru, P., Acquisti, A., Cranor, L.F., Hong, J.,
Nunge, E.: Anti-phishing phil: the design and evaluation of a game that teaches
people not to fall for phish. In: Proceedings of the 3rd symposium on Usable privacy
and security. pp. 88–99 (2007)

20. ˇSv´abensk`y, V., ˇCeleda, P., Vykopal, J., Briˇs´akov´a, S.: Cybersecurity knowledge
and skills taught in capture the ﬂag challenges. Computers & Security 102, 102154
(2021)

21. ˇSv´abensk`y, V., Vykopal, J., Cermak, M., Laˇstoviˇcka, M.: Enhancing cybersecurity
skills by creating serious games. In: Proceedings of the 23rd Annual ACM Confer-
ence on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education. pp. 194–199
(2018)

22. Welbers, K., Konijn, E.A., Burgers, C., de Vaate, A.B., Eden, A., Brugman, B.C.:
Gamiﬁcation as a tool for engaging student learning: A ﬁeld experiment with a
gamiﬁed app. E-Learning and Digital Media 16(2), 92–109 (2019)

