Social engineering: Concepts, Techniques and 
Security Countermeasures 

Adib Mohammed Syed

Abstract— The purpose of this report is to research the topic 
called  Social  Engineering  in  Cyber  Security  and  present  the 
explanation of the meaning, concepts, techniques, and security 
countermeasures  of  Social  Engineering  based  on  factual 
academic research. 

Keywords—social engineer, cyber attacks, computer network, 

malware. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

We live in a technological era where the use of the internet 
is prevalent this is because the internet is beneficial and vital 
to  all  of  us  in  the  world.  The  internet  makes  our  lives  easy 
because  internet  allows  us  to  communicate  using  different 
social  media  platforms  such  as  WhatsApp,  Facebook,  and 
other  social  media  platform.  We  can  also  access  online 
banking,  shopping  and  more  which  means  that  it  saves  our 
time  by  avoiding  travelling  to  bank  or  shop  [1].  The 
information or data we input is crucial, the information/data 
can  be  private  conversation,  bank  details,  and  personal 
medical  information.  However,  there  is  main  issue  that  the 
cybercriminal uses the internet to take advantage of innocent 
information. 
people  by  stealing  confidential  sensitive 
Cybercriminals  use  many  different  techniques  for  example 
social engineering and phishing, that are used to carry out the 
attack on business organisation, people and more [2,3].  

Therefore, we need cyber security to deal with those attack 
techniques  as  it  is  the  process  of  protecting  data,  computer 
systems  including  hardware  and  software,  networks  and 
servers from malicious attack, unauthorised access, damage, 
and the risk of losing the vital confidential data. Without cyber 
security, our data in computer systems will be at risk of losing 
to the hands of cybercriminals. 

In this report, I will be explaining the concepts of social 
engineering,  how  it  works  and  why  attackers  use  this 
technique  to  take  advantages  on  people  and  business 
organisation. I will also explain the examples of this technique 
in  social  engineering  and  discuss  how  to  prevent  social 
engineers from attacking people and the organisation. 

II.  CONCEPTS OF SOCIAL ENGINEERING 

The definition of Social Engineering in cyber security is 
one of the malicious activities for cybercriminals that uses the 
form  of  psychological  manipulation  to  manipulate  innocent 
people, which results in them losing their sensitive personal 
information or data to the attacker [4]. The attacker tends to 
persuade and gain trust from the victim instead of using any 
threats, the social engineer depends on the victim’s error and 
this  puts  the  victim  in  the  bad  situation.  The  cybercriminal 
uses  social  engineer  tactics  rather  than  hacking  into  the 
software because it is really easy to manipulate the victim to 
give  the  confidential  information  to  the  attacker  rather  than 

hacking  the  victim’s  password  to  get  information  in  the 
difficult  way  [5,6].  The  sensitive  information  can  be  bank 
account numbers, passport information, credit and debit card 
numbers and other data that is confidential and crucial. 

The attackers know exactly how to use social engineering 
effectively and they always have their easy target to aim on 
victims such as: 

Elderly  people  –  The  attacker  uses  communication 
technology such as email or telephone to communicate with 
elderly people and deceive them in order to gain access to their 
confidential  data  such  as  bank  details.  Elderly  people  are 
common  targets  for the  attacker  as  many  elderly  people are 
struggling  to  adapt  to  using  modern  technology  such  as 
smartphones, laptops, and personal computers. Other reason 
that could be is that older people often to live at home alone 
with no people around to protect and support. 

Children – Children under the age of 18 years old are also 
common  targets  for  the  attackers  as  they  have  lack  of 
knowledge  regarding  the  internet.    Most  children  in  the 
modern  era  often  create  online  accounts  without  asking  for 
parent’s permission, this means that they are using weak login 
that the attacker can break in the account easily and accessing 
to their parent’s personal information such as bank details or 
login details [7]. Another issue that could happen is that the 
attacker  on online  such  as  Facebook or online  games easily 
tricks  children,  which  means  the  attacker  can  access  to  the 
children’s personal information. 

Organisation – People and organisations with outdated and 
weak  security  such  as  Firewall,  antivirus  and  other  security 
measured are easy for the attacker to access, the data such as 
employee’s  personal  data  or  financial  details  [8,9].  The 
reasons could be that the organisation cannot afford to upgrade 
the security or people in organisation with lack of knowledge 
can easily give an easy opportunity for the attacker to access 
by using the techniques of social engineer. Therefore, this will 
affect  the  organisation,  as  they  will  receive  punishment  by 
Data Protection Act 2018 for breaching the law regulation for 
not protecting the data properly, it can cause them bankruptcy, 
especially if they are unable to pay the fine as the price of these 
fines  are  very  high  and  this  can  affect  organisation’s 
reputation. 

Social  engineer  attacks  are  effective  for 

targeting 
exploiting  a  human’s  behaviour  traits  such  as  excitement, 
greed,  curiosity,  fear,  anger  and  sad  to  give  the  attacker  an 
opportunity to attack [10]. For example, the attacker sends a 
fake email to the target stating that “Congrats, you have won 
£250,000 and to claim the prize, please fill the form with your 
details.”.  This  will  make  the  target  feel  excited  or  greedy, 
believing that this is legitimate and fills the form that asks for 
bank  details  including  name,  account  number  and  security 

 
 
 
therefore the attacker will get the bank information from the 
target. Another example is that a scammer poses itself as the 
banker sends fake message to the customers that look like they 
have come from the bank [11]. The fake message to inform 
the target that their bank account is disabled and asks the target 
to click the link to restore the bank account. This forces the 
target to click the link as they are scared and input their ban 
details. The scammer’s goal is getting the target to reply with 
financial information. 

Fig. 1. 

Social Engineer Cycle Attack Diagram 

As you can see the diagram above that I have created, this 
is the diagram of social engineer cycle and it is known as the 
attack cycle [12]. This attack cycle diagram helps the attacker 
to follow those steps to avoid any confusion and try to achieve 
their  target  such  as  stealing  the  information  or  damage  the 
system. It has four stages in social engineer cycle that includes 
the following, which I will explain each: 

Information  Gathering  –  The  first  step  is  information 
gathering and this stage is when the attacker must take their 
time to research and collect the information about their target 
such as organisation or people before planning their attack. It 
could take many weeks or months depending on the situation. 
The  attacker  will  find  the  information  about  their  target  by 
researching  resources  such  as  on  organisation’s  website  or 
person’s  online  profile  from  social  media  like  Facebook  or 
Instagram  to  know  more  about  them.  This  is  the  most 
important stage as this stage allows the attacker to take their 
time and collect the amount of information for their planning 
depends  on  the  size  of  their  target  such  as  organisation  or 
people  and  their  security  systems  so  they  can  assess  and 
identify what routes they could access to their target’s data or 
information  [13,14].  The  attacker  must  have  accurate 
information  by  accessing 
the 
organisation or person otherwise, they will not able to succeed 
if their information is not accurate or incorrect. Therefore, this 
stage  helps  to  make  the  attacker  becomes  comfortable  and 
know how to deal with the target. 

information 

from 

the 

Developing  relationship  –  After  the attacker  collects  the 
correct  relevant  information  about  their  target,  which  is 
helpful and required for their plan to attack, the attacker will 
have  to  start  developing  a  relationship  with  the  target.  The 
attacker  must  be  smart  and  patient  with  having  the 
conversation  with  the  target  to  get  the  target’s  trust. 
Otherwise, they will not able to achieve the target’s trust. This 
can  be  done  by  the  attacker  by  misrepresenting  their  fake 
identification,  using  relevant  collected  information,  and 
showing a support for assistance [15]. Therefore, the attacker 
will do everything to gain the target by creating a conversation 

with the target on a personal level so this will make the target  
have more confidence and start believing in the attacker. The 
communication can be done through emails, social medias, or 
phone calls [16]. The attacker must take time and maintain the 
relationship with the target until the trust in between in both 
parties  is  settled.  For  example,  this  can  happen  when  the 
attacker builds an online relationship with the target through a 
fake profile on a social media by sharing pictures, messages, 
and stories. Once the target trusts the attacker then that is when 
the attacker will move onto the next step. 

Exploitation – The third step is exploitation after the target 
starts trusting the attacker, this is when the attacker steps up to 
takes  an  advantage  to  use  the  collected  information  and 
relationship  to engage  with  their  target  to continue  to  make 
their  relationship  stronger  [17,18].  The  tactical  idea  of  this 
stage is for the attacker to try encouraging or manipulating the 
target  to reveal  the confidential  information or data  such as 
login  details  or  bank  details  without  raising  any  suspicious 
moves, this term is also called pre-texting. For example, the 
target  reveals  bank  security  number  to  the  attacker  on  the 
phone  call.  After  the  target  give  away  their  sensitive 
information  to  the  attacker,  the  security  is  exposed  and  left 
open for the attacker to sneak in easily and gain access to the 
authorised system. 

Execution - Once the attacker has managed to access the 
system, the attacker will cause a lot of problems for the target 
such  as  organisation  or  individual  by  attacking  them.  The 
attacks  can  be  done  by  sending  them  the  phishing  emails 
which  contains  malware  harmful  files  or  link  or  other 
attachments. At this stage, the attacker should able to succeed 
its goals such as stealing desired information such as financial 
details  or other confidential  details  with  the  help  from  their 
target.  This  will  affect  the  organisation  as  they  lost  their 
sensitive information or data therefore, they will be punished 
by  Data  Protection  Act  2018  which  it  will  lead  them  to 
bankruptcy [19].  Once the attack is accomplished, the attacker 
must end the interaction with the target and leave  the attack 
scene to avoid leaving any kind of unnecessary suspicious to 
the target therefore the target is unaware of the attacks. The 
attacker will remove all the traces of the attack having taken 
place  and  will  also  make  sure  that  they  did  not  leave  any 
evidence  or  proof  behind  otherwise  their  identity  and  their 
action will be exposed by the investigators. After the attacker 
successfully  removing  any  evidence,  this  will  cause  the 
organisations to investigate longer which will lead them to the 
difficult situation such as fines or reputation damage. This is 
also  giving  an  advantage  to  the  attacker  if  their  identity  is 
remained hidden and no suspicious occurred then this means 
that the attacker will return in the future to repeat with using 
the same process [20]. 

There are possible reasons why it motivates cybercriminal 
to use social engineer to attack their target to accomplish their 
goals  such  as  financial  gain,  revenge,  entertainment, 
challenge, ego, and espionage. 

III.  TECHNIQUES 

Social  engineer  has  many  techniques  that  works  over 
email, phone call or social media. The possible reasons why 
the  victims  give  away  their  confidential  information  to  the 
techniques  of  social  engineer  easily  is  due  their  greed, 
curiosity, or fear. There are so many techniques that uses in 

2 

 
 
 
social engineer which I will include the most common used 
technique and explain the purpose of each technique: 

Phishing  – This  technique  is one of  most  popular  social 
engineer that used in emails or text messages that is aimed to 
create  feeling  a  sense  of  fear,  panic,  greed,  can  curiosity  in 
victims [21]. When the attacker sends the phishing email or 
text message to their target which contains malicious link that 
the  takes  the  target  to  the  fake  website  such  as  fake  bank 
website  which  will  ask  the  target  for  bank  details  such  as 
password,  account  number  and  security  number.  This  will 
affect the target as their confidential information will get lost 
or it sends viruses into the target’s device such as smartphone 
or computer to damage it and steal the information. 

Baiting – This technique depends on human’s behaviour, 
such as greed or curiosity which causes the victim to lose their 
sensitive information [22]. For example, the attacker sends a 
fake email to the target offering a free iPad and asks them to 
input their personal information, including bank details. The 
target loses their money due to baiting. Baiting can be found 
on  emails  or  text  messages  or  websites.  In  essence,  the 
attacker offers something the target wants or is interested in 
and the target falls for it, taking the bait.  

Vishing  –  vishing  is  one  of  the  techniques  in  social 
engineering  which  does  not  need  internet  to  manipulate  the 
victims - it is known as voice phishing, which is usually used 
on phone calls. For example, the attacker poses himself as a 
banker asking the customer for bank details including security 
questions  and  answers,  account  numbers  and  security 
numbers.  

Scareware – The purpose of this technique is to make the 
target feel scared and to manipulate the target to make them 
believe  that  their  device,  such  as  computer  or  laptop,  is 
infected by a virus or malware [23,24]. This gives the attacker 
an opportunity to offer a solution to the target that will fix the 
fake issues. However, the target will fall for it as the attacker 
asks  the  target  to  download  the  files  that  contains  malware 
which gives a breakthrough for the attacker to sneak in and 
steal information or damage the target’s systems. This works 
for the attacker by using the exchange of pretending to help to 
fix the target’s problems as a way to collect their confidential 
information. 

IV.  SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES 

Social engineering attacks can occur to innocent victims 
as the cybercriminal has these targets to aim at such as elderly 
targets  over 
people,  children,  organisation,  and  other 
technology, such as email, phone calls or online.  

This happened to the sixty-five years old man called Steve 
who lost two hundred thousand United State dollar (USD) to 
an investment scam. Steve lived alone at his retirement place; 
he received a phone call about an investment opportunity. He 
was  not  unaware  that  it  was  an  attacker  on  the  phone,  the 
attacker  was  acting  professional  and  seemed  to  have  good 
knowledge of investment, this made Steve believe that it was 
a legitimate investment. Steve did not have enough funds, so 
he  decided  to  accept  the  new  investment  opportunity  [25]. 
Steve made several transfers to the attacker starting from ten 
thousand  dollars.  Steve  was  given  a  link  to  access  to  the 
‘professional’ website and was asked to create a login account 
which displayed that his value of money was increasing and 
the  ‘market  went  up’  which  made  Steve  to  trust  the    fake 
website.  So,  he  invested  more  money  up  to  two  hundred 

thousand  dollars.  When  the  ‘fake’  website  went  down,  he 
realised that the investment was a scam as he couldn't contact 
to the attacker on the phone or couldn’t access his account. He 
also did some research and discovered that the fake company 
was  not  registered  on  Australian  Securities  Investment 
Commission  (ASIC).  (Anonymous.  Undated.  Investment 
scam:  How  Steve  lost  $200  000  to  an  investment  scam. 
Retrieved from https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/get-help/real-
life-stories/investment-scam-how-steve-lost-200-000-to-an-
investment-scam) 

On  this  content,  I  will  make  a  list  and  explain  how  to 
prevent social engineering attacks to avoid losing the sensitive 
information to the attacker or getting attacked by the attacker. 

Do  not  click  on  links  or  attachments  in  the  emails  or 
messages and do not share sensitive information – the email 
address could be fake but as it is sent from the company such 
as  banks  or  shops  it  looks  legitimate,  but  is  created  by  the 
attacker [26,27]. If you do not know who the sender is, never 
open the email or never click the link. If you are unsure, the 
best way is to verify and authenticate with the company. For 
example,  the  attacker  poses  itself  as  staff  member  from 
Amazon sends you a URL link, find the URL link from the 
official  website  of  Amazon  and  compare,  it  will  show  the 
difference.  Never  share  your  personal  information  such  as 
password, bank details or phone number and always check the 
link before clicking on it. 

Education, awareness, and training – This method is good 
for  the  organisation  as  it  allows  to  train  and  educate  the 
employees  how  to  deal  with  techniques  used  by  social 
engineers  and  raise  awareness.  This  will  protect 
the 
organisation  and  it  can  also  save  the  organisation  time  and 
money by reducing the risk of the social engineering attack. 
Set up the security protocols which will explain how to handle 
data security. Encourage the employees to set up a multi factor 
authentication that includes password and biometric  such as 
fingerprints,  this  can  be  used  before  payments  or  before 
performing  a  sensitive  action.  Create  an  organisational 
security  policy  which  allows  the  employees  to  follow  the 
regulation to avoid any troubles [28]. 

Secure your devices and service – It is important to keep 
the  device  safe.  The  device  can  be  a  laptop,  computer, 
smartphone, etc. Install firewall and antivirus, keep them up 
to date and scan the system to detect the possible  infection. 
Make sure that software of the device is up to date [29]. Use 
strong  password  in  logins  including  longer  password, 
uppercase,  numbers  and  symbols.  Install  a  spam  filter  that 
allows  to  stop  every  phishing  email  or  messages  which 
reduces the risk of a social engineer attack, the organisation 
must have a spam filter which will protect their business. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

Overall, cyber security is more important than ever as the 
usage  of  internet  is  increasing  which  means  cyber  attackers 
using social engineering are also increasing such as phishing, 
data theft and other attacks. One of the authors mentioned on 
the book in Chapter 4, page 94 called ‘Cyber security culture: 
counteracting  cyber  threats  through  organizational  learning 
and  training’  which  the  author  states  “The  journey  that  we 
have  embarked  upon  is  uncertain  and  may  be  more 
problematic than we first thought; however, our determination 
and combined strength will ensure that adequate disaster and 
emergency plans are put in place”. I agree with this quote as a 
user needs to be prepare for the disaster situation and needs to 

3 

 
Technology, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering. Phuket: Springer 
International Publishing, vol. 362, pp. 73-80, 9, 2016. 

[20]  Kaspersky.  2020.  What  is  Social  Engineering?.  Available  at: 
<https://www.kaspersky.co.uk/resource-center/definitions/what-is-
social-engineering>. 

[21]  I. Ghafir and V. Prenosil, “Malicious File Hash Detection and Drive-
by  Download  Attacks,”  International  Conference  on  Computer  and 
Communication Technologies, series Advances in Intelligent Systems 
and Computing. Hyderabad: Springer, vol. 379, pp. 661-669, 2016. 
[22]  Kastner, E. 2019. Who Do Hackers Target?. Soscanhelp. Available at: 

<https://www.soscanhelp.com/blog/who-do-hackers-target>. 

[23]  Khagram, A. 2017. The motivations of a hacker. Swcomms. Available 
at:  <https://www.swcomms.co.uk/blog/article/the-motivations-of-a-
hacker/#:~:text=A%20primary%20motivation%20for%20hackers,or
%20on%20the%20dark%20web>. 

[24]  I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, M. Hammoudeh and U. Raza, “Malicious SSL 
Certificate  Detection:  A  Step  Towards  Advanced  Persistent  Threat 
Defence,”  International  Conference  on  Future  Networks  and 
Distributed Systems. Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2017. 

[25]  Nyirak,  A.  n.d. The  Attack  Cycle  -  Security  Through  Education. 
Security  Through  Education.  Available  at:  <https://www.social-
engineer.org/framework/attack-vectors/attack-cycle/>. 

[26]  I. Ghafir, M. Husak and V. Prenosil, “A Survey on Intrusion Detection 
and  Prevention  Systems,”  IEEE/UREL  conference,  Zvule,  Czech 
Republic, pp. 10-14, 2014. 

[27]  Totaldefense.  n.d.  Who do  hackers  target  the  most?  |  Total  Defense. 
Available  at:  <https://www.totaldefense.com/security-blog/who-do-
hackers-target-the-most>. 

[28]  Trim,  P  &  Upton,  D.  (2013).  Cyber  security  culture:  counteracting 

cyber threats through organizational learning and training. 

[29]  I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, J. Svoboda and M. Hammoudeh, “A Survey on 
Network Security Monitoring Systems,” International Conference on 
Future Internet of Things and Cloud, Vienna, Austria, pp. 77-82, 2016. 

be aware of how to deal with social engineers to protect their 
personal information. 

REFERENCES 

[3] 

[2] 

[1]  Bacon,  M.  2018.  What  is  social  engineering?.  SearchSecurity. 
Available  at:  <https://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/social-
engineering>. 
I.  Ghafir,  M.  Hammoudeh,  V.  Prenosil,  L.  Han  and  R.  Hegarty,  K. 
Rabie and F. J. Aparicio-Navarro, “Detection of Advanced Persistent 
Threat  Using  Machine-Learning  Correlation  Analysis,”  Future 
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 89, pp. 349-359, 2018. 
I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, M. Hammoudeh, T. Baker, S. Jabbar, S. Khalid 
and  S.  Jaf,  “BotDet:  A  System  for  Real  Time  Botnet Command and 
Control Traffic Detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1-12, 2018. 
[4]  Best, R.  n.d.  What  You  Need  to  Know  About  Social  Engineering  & 
Phishing.  Infotech.  Available  at:  <https://www.infotech.co.uk/social-
engineering-and-phishing-definitive-guide>. 
I. Ghafir, J. Saleem, M. Hammoudeh, H. Faour, V. Prenosil, S. Jaf, S. 
Jabbar and T. Baker, “Security Threats to Critical Infrastructure: The 
Human Factor,” The Journal of Supercomputing, vol. 74(10), pp. 1-17, 
2018. 

[5] 

[6]  S. Eltanani and I. Ghafir. "Coverage Optimisation for Aerial Wireless 
Networks." 2020  14th  International  Conference  on  Innovations  in 
Information Technology (IIT). IEEE, 2020. 

[7]  Calyptix  Security.  2017.  What  Motivates  Hackers?  Money,  Secrets, 
and  Fun.  [online]  Available  at:  <https://www.calyptix.com/top-
threats/motivates-hackers-money-secrets-fun/>. 
I.  Ghafir,  V.  Prenosil,  A.  Alhejailan  and  M.  Hammoudeh,  “Social 
Engineering Attack Strategies and Defence Approaches.” International 
Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud. Vienna, Austria, 
pp. 145-149, 2016. 

[8] 

[9]  J. Svoboda, I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, “Network Monitoring Approaches: 
An  Overview,”  International  Journal  of  Advances  in  Computer 
Networks and Its Security (IJCNS), vol. 5(2), pp. 88-93, 2015. 
[10]  Chizari,  H.  2015.  Social  Engineering  Attack  Cycle.  Researchgate. 
<https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Social-

Available 
Engineering-Attack-Cycle_fig1_307606034>. 

at: 

[11]  I.  Ghafir  and  V.  Prenosil,  “Advanced  Persistent  Threat  and  Spear 
Phishing  Emails.”  International  Conference  Distance  Learning, 
Simulation  and  Communication.  Brno,  Czech  Republic,  pp.  34-41, 
2015. 

[12]  U. Raza, J. Lomax, I. Ghafir, R. Kharel and B. Whiteside, “An IoT and 
Business Processes Based Approach for the Monitoring and Control of 
High  Value-Added  Manufacturing  Processes,” 
International 
Conference on Future Networks and Distributed Systems. Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, 2017. 

[13]  De Groot, J. 2020. What is Cyber Security? Definition, Best Practices 
at: 

& 
<https://digitalguardian.com/blog/what-cyber-security>. 

Guardian. 

Available 

Digital 

More. 

[14]  I.  Ghafir,  V.  Prenosil,  and  M.  Hammoudeh,  “Botnet  Command  and 
Control Traffic Detection Challenges: A Correlation-based Solution.” 
International  Journal  of  Advances  in  Computer  Networks  and  Its 
Security (IJCNS), vol. 7(2), pp. 27-31, 2017. 

[15]  Fruhlinger,  J.  2019.  Social  engineering  explained:  How  criminals 
at: 

behavior.  CSO  Online.  Available 

exploit 
<https://www.csoonline.com/article/2124681/what-is-social-
engineering.html>. 

human 

[16]  I.  Ghafir,  V.  Prenosil,  M.  Hammoudeh,  F.  J.  Aparicio-Navarro,  K. 
Rabie and A. Jabban, “Disguised Executable Files in Spear-Phishing 
Emails: Detecting the Point of Entry in Advanced Persistent Threat.” 
International Conference on Future Networks and Distributed Systems. 
Amman, Jordan, 2018. 

[17]  Hsbc. n.d. Received a text? | Security Centre - HSBC UK. Available at: 
<https://www.hsbc.co.uk/help/security-centre/received-a-text/>. 

[18]  Kaspersky.  2020.  What 

is  Cyber  Security?.  Available  at: 

<https://www.kaspersky.co.uk/resource-center/definitions/what-is-
cyber-security>. 

[19]  I.  Ghafir  and  V.  Prenosil.  “Proposed  Approach  for  Targeted  Attacks 
Detection,”  Advanced  Computer  and  Communication  Engineering 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

 
 
 
 
 
