1
2
0
2

l
u
J

8

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
0
9
3
0
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Remote Working Pre- and Post-COVID-19:
An Analysis of New Threats and Risks to
Security and Privacy ⋆

Jason R.C. Nurse1, Nikki Williams2, Emily Collins3, Niki Panteli4,
John Blythe5, and Ben Koppelman6

1 University of Kent, UK
J.R.C.Nurse@kent.ac.uk
2 Cranﬁeld University, UK
3 Cardiﬀ University, UK
4 Royal Holloway, University of London, UK
5 CybSafe, London, UK
6 CyberSmart, London, UK

Abstract. COVID-19 has radically changed society as we know it. To
reduce the spread of the virus, millions across the globe have been forced
to work remotely, often in make-shift home oﬃces, and using a plethora
of new, unfamiliar digital technologies. In this article, we critically anal-
yse cyber security and privacy concerns arising due to remote working
during the coronavirus pandemic. Through our work, we discover a se-
ries of security risks emerging because of the realities of this period. For
instance, lack of remote-working security training, heightened stress and
anxiety, rushed technology deployment, and the presence of untrusted
individuals in a remote-working environment (e.g., in ﬂatshares), can
result in new cyber-risk. Simultaneously, we ﬁnd that as organisations
look to manage these and other risks posed by their remote workforces,
employee’s privacy (including personal information and activities) is of-
ten compromised. This is apparent in the signiﬁcant adoption of remote
workplace monitoring, management and surveillance technologies. Such
technologies raise several privacy and ethical questions, and further high-
light the tension between security and privacy going forward.

Keywords: Remote working · Working from home · Coronavirus · Cy-
ber security · Privacy · Human Factors · Workplace surveillance · Ethics
· Human Computer Interaction

⋆

This is the author version of the article: Nurse J.R.C., Williams N., Collins E.,
Panteli N., Blythe J., Koppelman B. (2021) Remote Working Pre- and Post-
COVID-19: An Analysis of New Threats and Risks to Security and Privacy. In:
Stephanidis C., Antona M., Ntoa S. (eds) HCI International 2021. HCII 2021.
Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol 1421. Springer, Cham.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78645-8 74

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

1

Nurse et al.

Introduction

The impact that COVID-19 has had on society is undeniable. Countries, com-
panies and individuals have had to drastically change the way they engage and
operate to preserve life and prioritise safety [20]. Technology-enabled remote
working, in particular, has seen a substantial increase with millions across the
globe being forced to work from at home. While remote working is not novel,
the extent and speed at which it has been implemented over the last year is
noteworthy as there are several compounded HCI, security and privacy implica-
tions for individuals and their employers. For instance, new forms of cybercrime
and misinformation have emerged during the pandemic—both at the point of
the initial spread (with online fraud and scams exploiting increased anxiety and
poor mental health), and now as vaccines are being administered (with online
anti-vax campaigns) [10,11].

In this paper, we report on a critical analysis of the technology-related se-
curity and privacy issues arising due to the large-scale move to remote working
as a result of COVID-19. This is based on openly available reports, media and
academic articles. We consider risks that have arisen due to the increase in make-
shift oﬃces at home, the extent of distractions accompanying remote-working
environments, and the abrupt adoption of various forms of new technology/apps
to interact (e.g., Zoom, Microsoft Teams, Clubhouse, Houseparty). Of particular
interest is how cyber security concerns and solutions have shifted before and af-
ter COVID-19. This incorporates the upsurge in attacks targeting remote work
forces and challenges companies have had securing remote workforces (some of
which pertain to diﬃculties in human use of new technology) [4,8]. Finally, we
discuss security implications for the future as remote working and the technolo-
gies that support it are likely to become further embedded into society, including
workplaces, education institutions and business.

2 Research Methodology

The methodology that we adopt for this research is based on a critical review
of current literature, particularly reports from industry over the last year. To
direct our study into the actual security and privacy risks to remote working
pre- and post-COVID-19, we conduct an online search for current reports and
articles around three core areas. The ﬁrst area seeks to consider the character-
istics and features of work-from-home scenarios, and the impact of COVID-19
on employees. The second area examines the security risks that emerge due to
characteristics and features of remote working scenarios and COVID-19. The
last area pays attention to the privacy risks emerging and the tensions with or-
ganisations aiming to secure remote systems, and employees seeking to maintain
some privacy in their home environments. Once these articles were identiﬁed,
they were then assessed to extract key issues, especially ones that have surfaced
due to the pandemic. The sections below report the key ﬁndings and results from
these analyses.

Remote Working Security and Privacy Risks

3

3 Remote Working since COVID-19

Remote working, and working from home, have become the norm for many
due to the pandemic. Such working has been required by governments due to
various national and regional lockdowns, and many companies have encouraged
this practice even after governmental mandates. Remote working is, of course,
not new and has existed for a long time due to its many advantages including
ﬂexible working, increased time with family, and better work-life balance [19].
From our research we found that many of these advantages were upheld during
the pandemic. There were also some new additions such as an increased feeling
of safety, due to lack of the need to commute to work or enter an oﬃce or public
space, which may put one’s health at risk.

The reported concerns accompanying remote working vastly outweighed the
beneﬁts in literature. The most commonly appearing were distractions from
home life (e.g., family members, pets, chores) and friends, feelings of isolation,
diﬃculties in communicating and team working with colleagues, overworking due
to the desire to prove that one is working, technology problems, lack of visibility
of staﬀ, and diﬃculty ﬁnding an appropriate work-life balance [6,9,16]; all of
which can impact productivity.

Assessing the inﬂuence of COVID-19 on remote working, we found that the
pandemic exacerbated many of the existing challenges with this type of work.
Isolation, burnout, and diﬃculties managing and supporting remote teams were
high on the list of organisational and employee issues. There were some key dif-
ferences in remote working due to COVID-19 however. For instance, COVID-19
forced employees to work from home, instead of it being a voluntary decision;
this led to a completely new working experience for millions who had never
worked remotely before [7,17]. Also, employers and employees had little time to
prepare for the mass need for remote working [17]. This meant that technol-
ogy facilities (e.g., laptops, home oﬃces or teleworking software) were often not
in place, some technologies had to be rapidly adopted without proper testing
(therefore increasing demands on technical support staﬀ as well), and that other
important concerns such as family commitments (e.g., new childcare or elderly-
care demands) and well-being (both mental and physical) were neglected. These
issues were particularly salient given the overall increased negative impact on
mental health, job security and ﬁnances due to the pandemic [18].

4 Security Risks

Cyber security has been a key concern during the pandemic as companies have
been rushed into migrating to new technology platforms and services to com-
municate, allow remote working (and remote access to corporate systems) and
for business engagement. Cyber criminals have kept track of the various issues
caused by remote working, as well as the general pandemic, to increase their va-
riety and number of attacks [10]. We examined the challenges to remote working
in the context of security vulnerabilities and threats to identify a set of notewor-
thy risks emerging speciﬁcally due to, or greatly exacerbated by, the COVID-19

4

Nurse et al.

pandemic. These are arranged into two main areas, security risks associated with
employees working remotely, and those related to the technologies that have been
in use during the pandemic.

Employee-related security risks are focused on those issues that may target or
be caused (intentionally or unintentionally) by an employee. We list exemplars
of the key risks below.

– Increased likelihood of falling victim to cyber-attacks (e.g., phishing) because
of a lack of concentration or distractions caused by a home-working space.
This may link to family responsibilities or household needs that are new
because of the pandemic (e.g., home schooling, entire families or ﬂatmates
at home for extended periods).

– Lack of remote-working security training resulting in poor security practices
that increase the potential of a compromising cyber-attack. Many organisa-
tions were not able to train employees adequately before they were forced to
work from home, which compounds this risk.

– De-prioritisation of security as a key concern because of heightened anxi-
ety, stress, depression, burnout and poor mental health generally motivated
by the pandemic. As individual employees focus more on basic needs (e.g.,
safety, health, job security), they may be less cognisant of workplace security
concerns.

– Reduced access to information/knowledge that causes poor security practices,
for instance, diﬃculty in quickly speaking with a work colleague about ap-
propriate security behaviours when faced with a security-related decision.
This issue is exacerbated by the length of time at which employees have
had to work remotely, and the psychological diﬀerences of ‘popping by’ a
colleague’s desk or ‘disrupting their work’ by requesting a video call.

– Trusted/untrusted individuals in the remote-working environment (or house-
hold) may exploit new access to corporate data or services (e.g., using an
unlocked laptop or phone, or listening to a conﬁdential phone call). The
reality is that these environments may be shared with unknown ﬂatmates
or others that may use this extended home-working period for malevolent
purposes.

– Employees now experiencing minimal management monitoring or oversight
may use that opportunity to steal conﬁdential information from their em-
ployer or misuse corporate services. This may be further motivated by per-
ceived job insecurity due to the pandemic; a period where many have been
laid oﬀ, made redundant or furloughed.

Technology-related security risks are also a noteworthy concern. Exemplars

are presented below.

– Rushed technology adoption due to national

lockdowns leading to the de-
ployment of untested or unreliable technologies. Such technologies may not
work well and therefore give rise to employees adopting potentially danger-
ous shadow IT practices, e.g., not using Virtual Private Network (VPN)

Remote Working Security and Privacy Risks

5

adequately, poor connection resulting in preferring insecure WiFi networks
with better connection speeds, use of third-party services such as Dropbox,
Google Drive for conﬁdential work ﬁles.

– Unfamiliarity (or lack of proﬁciency) with new remote-working technology
(e.g., Microsoft Teams, Zoom, etc.) leading to mistakes in the use and man-
agement of security features. The speed at which these technologies have
been implemented because of the pandemic places a technical burden on in-
dividuals, at a time when they are already in stressful and tense situations.
– Security issues with remote-working and remote communication technologies
can expose an organisation to increased risk. As highlighted above, the rush
in adoption of new platforms to operate during COVID-19 also exposed
enterprises to a range of new threats accompanying such technologies. For
instance, we have seen several attacks targeting Zoom and Microsoft over
the last year.

– Intentional or inadvertent use of work devices for personal matters, therefore
opening work devices to additional risk. For instance, using work devices to
watch ﬁlms on illegitimate websites or download malicious attachments from
personal emails, social media or gaming websites.

– Work devices may be stolen from the home or remote-working environment.
If these devices are not appropriately encrypted, they pose a risk to corpo-
rate data and services. This risk is increased during the pandemic because
criminals are aware that most individuals are working remotely and therefore
are likely to have more mobile technology at home.

– Employees returning to work after a long period of remote working may bring
infected devices in to the corporate network. Home networks are much more
likely to be compromised than corporate networks, and therefore the ex-
tended period of remote working caused due to lockdowns, can increase the
possibility of this risk.

As can be seen from the examples above, security risks can originate from
various areas. A primary diﬀerence with these risks in a post-COVID world is
that they are exacerbated by the physical and mental impact that COVID-19
has had on people’s lives.

5 Privacy Risks and Workplace Surveillance

While security risks and discussions dominated business concerns during the pan-
demic, privacy was a salient factor for employees. We analysed a series of current
reports and articles exploring this issue, and noted an increasing prominence of
discussions pertaining to workplace surveillance in remote-working setups. This
was driven largely by employers and their worries about employee productivity,
and secondly in an attempt to secure corporate data and systems. Below, we
present exemplars of the primary risks to privacy emerging from our review.

– The potential infringement of employee’s privacy caused by a dramatic surge
in employer usage of (remote) workplace surveillance/monitoring technolo-

6

Nurse et al.

gies. This could include monitoring of keystrokes, screens and websites vis-
ited (e.g., [3]). A signiﬁcant reality is that in some cases, employees may be
using their own technologies (smartphones, iPads, laptops) for remote work-
ing, thereby giving employers—or the companies they outsource to—access
to vast amounts of personal employees data.

– New forms of technology emerging during the pandemic that are able to mon-
itor employee emotional state (e.g., as smart technologies [1]) could also
violate privacy. For example, such emotional and psychological data, if not
properly protected, may be used to proﬁle employees according to their well-
being, and thus impact employment or future career prospects.

– Exposure of personal information as a result of how remote working and
communication technologies are used. For instance, exposing home (living
room, bedroom, oﬃce) backgrounds in video calls, or posting photos online
of home oﬃces can leak personal data (e.g., interest, hobbies) [15] which can
be further used as the basis for cybercrime. This touches on the common
issue of oversharing online and its link to cyber risk [12]; an issue overlooked
in the pandemic as individuals focus primary on staying connected through
online services.

6 Discussion and Conclusion

A number of salient risks were identiﬁed in our reﬂection above, and it is im-
portant that organisations now reﬂect on the choices made during an emergency
to keep the business going, and ensure they match their business as usual secu-
rity posture and risk tolerance. Where new software has been adopted there is
now an opportunity to update training to remedy lack of proﬁciency issues, and
review conﬁgurations to ensure any risks introduced during the pandemic are
minimised. Most organisations have cyber security training for employees and
it is important for this to include how to minimise security risks whilst working
remotely. The training should cover taking sensible precautions to protect pri-
vacy, how to protect devices in public spaces (the home is not a public space
but it may have untrusted people in it, so can, on occasion, be considered from
this perspective), use of non-corporate networks, and the importance of using
company sanctioned options for ﬁle transfer and access of company resources.

Looking forward, another key risk is related to bringing infected devices back
to the corporate network. Prior to COVID-19 many organisations will have as-
sumed that employee devices, which predominantly connect to the corporate
network, are trusted devices and unlikely to be bringing infections into the net-
work. A separate guest network may also be available for external visitors. It
seems likely that in the future the default will be a Zero Trust architecture (where
there is no trust in devices by default) [14]. Therefore, so long as this remains
usable for employees, this would eliminate the need to run multiple networks
with diﬀerent levels of trust, and would result in a greater level of security.

Many organisations have indicated they do not expect employees to return
to the oﬃce full time [2]. There is now time to reﬂect on how to best support this

Remote Working Security and Privacy Risks

7

way of working in the future. To facilitate remote working, more employees will
be issued with laptops, to avoid the need for them to use personal devices for
work; though this does not address the issue of using work devices for personal
activities. Whilst remote working is not new to most organisations, the move to
more extensive home working also means employees need to be able to access a
wide range of corporate systems and resources remotely in the long term. Now
organisations should evaluate whether existing solutions meet future needs, and
to identify alternatives if not. Once a solution has been chosen it is also vital to
conﬁgure it correctly and ensure appropriate employee training is in place.

Some risks are universal, including an increase in COVID-19-related phishing
attacks and the need to keep software up to date, and everyone should be taking
proactive steps to address them. Some of these steps may also include explor-
ing the utility of cyber insurance, which can oﬀer some level of protection and
support after incidents [13]. Other risks, for example the likelihood of conﬁden-
tial conversations being overheard, are context speciﬁc, and this highlights the
importance of asking people to consider the nature of their work and new work
environment. Some jobs require a substantial number of video calls with external
contacts, and for these workers the privacy related recommendations are more
important than for someone only communicating with other employees.

In terms of privacy, there is a clear tension between an employee’s wish
for privacy in their own home, and the employer’s goal to be able to monitor
productivity while workers are not co-located with them. Sometimes monitoring
is introduced as a preventative measure, without there being any evidence to
indicate it is needed. There is limited evidence to show employees are doing
less work whilst at home, in fact some research shows the opposite [5], and the
introduction of additional monitoring adds to the perception that employees are
not trusted. A perception of a lack of trust coupled with intrusive monitoring
may weaken the relationship between the organisation and such individuals.

The pandemic has increased acceptance of ﬂexible work schedules, and this
has been a substantial advancement in terms of inclusivity, particularly for those
with caring responsibilities who might wish to complete their work according to
their own schedule. In order to maintain trust between employers and employees
it is important to identify the minimum level of monitoring that could be used
to give adequate assurance, and this will vary depending on the roles being
undertaken. It is likely that cultural norms around levels of monitoring will
develop, similar to expectations around realities such as time recording, which
is commonplace in some sectors.

Acknowledgements

Funding for this research was received by SPRITE+: The Security, Privacy, Iden-
tity, and Trust Engagement NetworkPlus (EPSRC Grant reference EP/S035869/1).

8

Nurse et al.

References

tells your boss

1. BBC: A wristband that

2. BBC: No plan for a return to the oﬃce for millions of

if you are unhappy (2020),
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-55637328 (Accessed on 14 March 2021)
staﬀ (2020),
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-53901310 (Accessed on 14 March 2021)
3. Bloomberg: Bosses Panic-Buy Spy Software to Keep Tabs on Remote Work-
ers (2020), https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2020-03-27/bosses-panic-
buy-spy-software-to-keep-tabs-on-remote-workers (Accessed on 14 March 2021)
4. Buil-Gil, D., Mir´o-Llinares, F., Moneva, A., Kemp, S., D´ıaz-Casta˜no, N.: Cyber-
crime and shifts in opportunities during covid-19: a preliminary analysis in the uk.
European Societies 23(sup1), 47–59 (2021)

5. Business Wire: Productivity Has Increased, Led By Remote Workers (2020),

https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20200519005295/en/

6. Green, N., Tappin, D., Bentley, T.: Working from home before, during and after
the covid-19 pandemic: implications for workers and organisations. New Zealand
Journal of Employment Relations 45(2), 5–16 (2020)

7. IBM:

IBM

Security

Work

From

Home

Study

(2020),

https://newsroom.ibm.com/2020-06-22-IBM-Security-Study-Finds-Employees-
New-to-Working-from-Home-Pose-Security-Risk (Accessed on 14 March 2021)
8. Infosecurity Magazine: 21% of UK Workers Feel More Vulnerable to Cybercrime
During COVID-19 (2020), https://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/news/uk-
workers-vulnerable-cybercrime/ (Accessed on 14 March 2021)

9. Insider: 9 of the most challenging things about working remotely, according
to people who do it (2019), https://www.businessinsider.com/working-remote-
challenges-work-from-home-2019-10 (Accessed on 14 March 2021)

10. Lallie, H.S., Shepherd, L.A., Nurse, J.R.C., Erola, A., Epiphaniou, G., Maple, C.,
Bellekens, X.: Cyber Security in the Age of COVID-19: A Timeline and Analysis
of Cyber-Crime and Cyber-Attacks during the Pandemic. Computers & Security
(102248) (2021)

11. Naidoo, R.: A multi-level inﬂuence model of covid-19 themed cybercrime. European

Journal of Information Systems 29(3), 306–321 (2020)

12. Nurse, J.R.C.: Cybercrime and You: How Criminals Attack and the Human Factors
That They Seek to Exploit. In: The Oxford Handbook of Cyberpsychology (2019)
13. Sullivan, J., Nurse, J.R.C.: Cyber Security Incentives and the Role of Cyber
Insurance (Royal United Services Institute (RUSI) Emerging Insights Paper)
(2020), https://rusi.org/publication/emerging-insights/cyber-security-incentives-
and-role-cyber-insurance (Accessed on 14 March 2021)

14. ThreatPost: Work-for-Home

Shift: What We

Learned

(2020),

https://threatpost.com/2020-work-for-home-shift-learned/162595/

15. ThreatPost: Home-Oﬃce Photos: A Ripe Cyberattack Vector

(2021),

https://threatpost.com/home-office-photos-cyberattack-vector/164460/
(Accessed on 14 March 2021)

16. Tremblay, D.G., Thomsin, L.: Telework and mobile working: analysis of its beneﬁts
and drawbacks. International Journal of Work Innovation 1(1), 100–113 (2012)
17. Waizenegger, L., McKenna, B., Cai, W., Bendz, T.: An aﬀordance perspective of
team collaboration and enforced working from home during covid-19. European
Journal of Information Systems 29(4), 429–442 (2020)

18. Wilson, J.M., Lee, J., Fitzgerald, H.N., Oosterhoﬀ, B., Sevi, B., Shook, N.J.: Job
insecurity and ﬁnancial concern during the covid-19 pandemic are associated with

Remote Working Security and Privacy Risks

9

worse mental health. Journal of occupational and environmental medicine 62(9),
686–691 (2020)

Economic

employ-
19. World
ers
(2020),
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/06/coronavirus-covid19-remote-working-
oﬃce-employees-employers (Accessed on 14 March 2021)

show
remote working

Forum:
really

6
think

employees

charts

about

what

that

and

20. World Health Organisation (WHO): Impact of COVID-19 on people’s livelihoods,
their health and our food systems (2020), https://www.who.int/news/item/13-10-
2020-impact-of-covid-19-on-people’s-livelihoods-their-health-and-our-food-systems
(Accessed on 14 March 2021)

