1
2
0
2

p
e
S
9
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
8
7
5
4
1
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Winning the Ransomware Lottery (cid:63)
A Game-Theoretic Approach to Preventing Ransomware
Attacks

Erick Galinkin1,2[0000−0003−1268−9258]

1 Rapid7, Boston MA 02114, USA
2 Drexel University, Philadelphia PA 19104, USA
erick galinkin@rapid7.com

Abstract. Ransomware is a growing threat to individuals and enter-
prises alike, constituting a major factor in cyber insurance and in the
security planning of every organization. Although the game theoretic
lens often frames the game as a competition between equals – a proﬁt
maximizing attacker and a loss minimizing defender – the reality of
many situations is that ransomware organizations are not playing a non-
cooperative game, they are playing a lottery. The wanton behavior of
attackers creates a situation where many victims are hit more than once
by ransomware operators, sometimes even by the same group. If defend-
ers wish to combat malware, they must then seek to remove the incentives
of it. In this work, we construct an expected value model based on data
from actual ransomware attacks and identify three variables: the value of
payments, the cost of an attack, and the probability of payment. Using
this model, we consider the potential to manipulate these variables to
reduce the proﬁt motive associated with ransomware attack. Based on
the model, we present mitigations to encourage an environment that is
hostile to ransomware operators. In particular, we ﬁnd that oﬀ-site back-
ups and government incentives for their adoption are the most fruitful
avenue for combating ransomware.

Keywords: Security · Malware · Economics · Ransomware · Incentives
· Backups

1

Introduction

Ransomware is a family of malware that encrypts ﬁles on a system and demands
payment for the ability to decrypt these ﬁles. Although proof of concept ran-
somware has existed since at least 1996 [35], modern ransomware tactics result
from CryptoLocker’s revolutionary use of Bitcoin for payment [14]. This inno-
vation has allowed ransomware actors to perpetrate increasingly sophisticated
attacks, including the 2017 WannaCry attack [16] – an attack whose eﬀects,

(cid:63) Funded in part by the Auerbach Berger Chair in Cybersecurity held by Spiros Man-

coridis, at Drexel University

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

E. Galinkin

according to ransomware payment tracker Ransomwhere3 are still being felt to-
day. We have seen a pivot in targeting, from the wanton use of exploit kits and
watering hole attacks that largely aﬀected end users to the current increase in
enterprise victims [22] by way of malicious loaders and initial access brokers [12].
The threat of ransomware grows larger year after year, with a spate of re-
cent attacks including on the Colonial pipeline [18] and the Kaseya supply chain
attack [23] demonstrating the devastation and real-world impact of the issues.
The Ransomware Task Force report [9] identiﬁes the goal of disrupting the ran-
somware business model as an important goal. This goal is uniquely important,
since ransomware is so often an attack of opportunity – akin to a mugging or
kidnapping – and not the sort of highly-targeted attack that is often expected
from sophisticated adversaries. We frame the problem in a new way, as the at-
tacker is not playing a single game against a single defender. Rather, attackers
seek to ﬁnd vulnerable victims wherever they may be, and so instead of playing
a game with attackers, we view the problem from the attacker point of view. To
this end, we suggest that defenders should consider the problem of ransomware
and ransomware payments in particular as analogous to an attacker playing a
lottery instead of a strategic game between equals.

2 Related Work

In recent years, considerable research has been done on the game theory of
ransomware payments. The earliest relevant work on the topic appears to be by
Spyridopoulos et al. [27], who found a Nash equilibrium balancing potential costs
of mitigation with the cost of a successful attack. Leveraging epidemiologically-
inspired models of malware spread, this work considered the equilibria of avail-
able defender strategies. The game is constructed under a uniﬁed proliferation
model, with infection, immunization, and disinfection rates that informed the
strategies of the players. These player’s payoﬀs were then computed for a set
of strategies given the parameters controlled by the attacker and the defender
– the infection rate, patch rate, removal rate, and the rate of both patching
and removal. Spryidopoulos et al.’s work informed defenders how to approach
ransomware worm attacks and deﬁned the optimal strategy for the defender.

The work of Laszka et al. [13] was the ﬁrst to consider the economics of
ransomware using models that reﬂect the similarity of ransomware to kidnapping
and ransom. They developed an economic model of the interaction between
attackers and victim organizations, and studied that model to minimize the
economic impact to those organizations. Primarily, the work focused on the cost-
beneﬁt of investing in backup solutions, a recommendation that is still widely
regarded as the best way to prepare for ransomware attacks [9]. Laszka et al. also
showed how coordinated backup investments can deter ransomware attackers
in particular – a novel insight in the literature. Our work borrows from their
recommendations and builds on this existing literature, but we diﬀer in our
approach to the game-theoretic model.

3 https://ransomwhe.re

Winning the Ransomware Lottery

3

Caporusso et al. [5] also built upon the kidnap and ransom literature, lever-
aging a negotiation model represented as an extensive-form game. This work
dealt with ransomware in cases where renegotiation of the ransom is possible, a
surprisingly common phenomenon that has been seen with some ransomware op-
erators [17] – though other ransomware operators refuse to negotiate. Caporusso
et al. identiﬁed the post-attack dynamics between the human victim and the
human ransomware operator, acknowledging that there are substantial human
factors outside of ransom negotiation to be made in the decision making process.
Cartwright et al. [6] grappled with the question of whether or not to pay a
ransom at all. Their work largely built upon the earlier paper of Laszka et al.
and framed the problem of ransomware under the lens of kidnap and ransom.
It did so by building upon two existing kidnapping models, those of Selten [25],
and Lapan and Sandler [11]. The Selten model informed the optimal ransom to
be set by the attacker, while the model of Lapan and Sandler aided in deciding
whether or not victims should take action to deter the kidnapping in the ﬁrst
place. In contrast to this work, we present a novel approach to the game and
develop a model under a diﬀering set of assumptions.

3 Probability and Lotteries

In common parlance, “lottery” typically refers to a form of gambling where
a player purchases a ticket at some nominal cost with a ﬁxed set of diﬀerent
numbers. Then, another set of numbers with the same size is drawn at random
without replacement. After this draw, some reward that confers some amount of
utility may be given depending on how many numbers in the randomly drawn
set match the set on the purchased ticket.

Mathematically, we can formalize a lottery as follows: Let X be a set of prizes,
X = {x1, ..., xn}, that confers some utility. From this set of prizes, we deﬁne a
lottery L = {pi, ..., pn} over the set of prizes such that for each xi ∈ X, there is
a corresponding pi ≥ 0, and (cid:80)n
i=1 pi = 1. There is also some cost c ≥ 0 to enter
the lottery. Then, for each of the prizes, there is some utility u(xi) that the agent
derives from receiving that prize, and their expected utility over the lottery is
then (cid:80)n
i=1 piu(xi) − c. In the ransomware context, a prize x corresponds to a
payment to a ransomware operator, and p is the probability that a victim will
pay that amount.

The optimal ransom value for x has been explored in other work [6] so we
instead deal with the binary probability that a victim will pay or not pay, as-
suming that the optimal ransom value is set. In our ransomware lottery, we thus
deﬁne 2 probabilities: pwin, when a victim pays a ransom and plose = 1 − pwin,
when a victim does not. For simplicity in this initial model, we incorporate the
probability that the attack is not successful into plose. There is, as mentioned,
also some small cost c associated with launching the ransomware attack.

Conveniently for ransomware operators, c is quite small, and xwin can be
quite large, as we discuss in Section 4. By contrast, xlose = 0, since there is
no chance that ransomware operators will have to pay more than the cost to

4

E. Galinkin

launch the attack – the victim will simply ignore the attack because they do not
value the information which has been ransomed or have some mitigation such
as those outlined in Section 5. In total, this means that the game played, from
the perspective of ransomware operators, is as follows:

L = {pwin, plose}
X = {xwin, 0}

and therefore, the expected utility for a single successful attack is:

E[u(x)] =

(cid:88)

pi(xi − c)

i={win,lose}

= (pwin(xwin − c)) + (plose(0 − c))
= pwinxwin − (pwinc + plosec)
= pwinxwin − c

(1)

Since xlose = 0 and plose = 1 − pwin, for the sake of simplicity and readability,
we use x and p in the remainder of the paper to represent the case when a victim
pays. We can see from Equation 1 that ransomware operators are incentivized
to continue operating for as long as the value of px > c, since they will proﬁt
from each attack, on average. Research by Kaspersky Labs [10] shows that 56%
of ransomware victims pay the ransom to restore access to their data. At this
rate of payment, the cost of an average ransomware attack would need to be
1.7857 times – nearly double – the optimal payment to remove the incentive.

We can see that probabilistically, this is equivalent to betting on a biased coin
ﬂip. Since E[u(x)] is a function of the random variable x, it is itself a random
variable, which we denote Y . Given a cost to make a bet c, we ﬂip a biased coin
with win probability p and receive payout x at that rate. Let b be the amount of
capital available to the bettor – our attacker – and let b > c. We initialize b0 to
be the amount of capital available before any bets are cast and bi the available
capital to the bettor at trial i. Then after the ﬁrst trial, our possible values for
b1 are b1 = b0 − c or b1 = b0 − c + x. Our expected value of b1 = (b0 − c) + px,
as in Equation 1.

By the linearity of expectation, our expected bank at trial k is:

bk = b0 + E[Yk] = b0 + k(px − c)

We can see that if px > c, then the expected value of each trial is positive, and
so for the player making the bet,

lim
k→∞

E[Yk] = k(px − c) = ∞

(2)

This suggests that any player who can participate in the game is highly incen-
tivized to play as many rounds as possible, since the potential payoﬀ is inﬁnite.
Note that this expected value only holds in an idealized world with inﬁnite

Winning the Ransomware Lottery

5

money and no law enforcement, so it does not capture the intricate relationships
of the real world. It does, however, demonstrate that since the expectation is not
ﬁnite, there is no optimal stopping time. Therefore, there is no incentive for any
attacker to ever stop conducting ransomware attacks when px − c is reasonably
large.

To demonstrate this, we construct three simple simulations, shown in Fig-
ure 1. We set our payout value x = 170404 and cost c = 4200 based on analysis in
Section 4. Then, for three diﬀerent values of p: 0.1, 0.3024, and 0.5, we run 1000
trials. With probability p, the player receives value x − c, and with probabiltiy
1 − p, the player receives value −c. We can see that overall, the accumulated
value is linear with respect to p, as we would expect from Equation 1.

Fig. 1. Plot of simulation demonstrating accumulated utility at p=0.1, p=0.3024, and
p=0.5

4 Paying to Play

The cost of running a ransomware attack is very opaque and highly variable.
Some cybercriminal organizations are sophisticated operations that develop their
malware in-house [31]. These organizations have software development lifecycles,
version control, testing, and pay staﬀ to perform all of these functions. Other

6

E. Galinkin

organizations simply purchase ransomware-as-a-service [15] (RaaS) or piece to-
gether their arsenal from so-called darknet markets. A 2017 study [30] found that
prices ranged from $0.50 to $3,000 for ransomware products, at a median price
of $10.50. In contrast to these prices, most RaaS providers take a percentage of
the ransom, rather than providing an executable for a ﬂat fee.

In order to infect an endpoint with ransomware, however, one needs to gain
initial access. Furthermore, most ransomware operators leverage a loader – a
small program designed to install another malware on a target system – to actu-
ally get the ransomware onto the endpoint. Nearly all ransomware variants [20]
rely on phishing, commodity malware, exploit kits, and vulnerable services –
particularly the remote desktop protocol – to deliver their malware. This factors
in to the overall cost of operation, but is challenging to estimate, since cyber-
criminals are not forthcoming with this information. A technical report issued
by Deloitte [1] found the cost of initial access to be between $70 and $400 per
1000 machines depending on geographic region, and the cost of a loader to range
from $3 to $4,000, depending on functionality. The United States demanded the
highest fee for an initial access at $400. At this time, the US is also the nation
which demands the highest ransoms, and so in the interest of creating a conser-
vative but accurate estimate, we use this number. The highest average monthly
cost of a loader was $800, which is the ﬁgure we use moving forward. We thus
estimate the cost of an attack at c = 3000 + 400 + 800 = 4200.

This cost of $4,200 means at at a payment rate of p = 0.56, the minimal
ransom to turn a proﬁt is $7,500. However, this payment rate is too large, since it
assumes that the attack has been successful. According to Sophos [26], only 54%
of attacks actually encrypt data. Given that a successful attack is a precondition
for being a paying victim, the joint probability of the attack being successful and
the ransom being paid, which we deﬁned in Equation 1 as pwin is the product of
these two probabilities. Our joint probability for a successful attack where the
victim pays the ransom is therefore:

p = P (paid|success) · P (success) = 0.56 · 0.54 = 0.3024

This suggests that at a cost of $4,200, per attack the minimal ransom an
attacker must request to remain proﬁtable is $13,888.89. As of March 2021,
the average value of ransomware a payout for a compromised organization was
$312,493 [8], around 22 times the minimal value needed to incentivize the attacks.
We note that other estimates, such as those by Sophos [26] are a more modest
$170,404 for mid-sized organizations in the United states, a value which is still
around 12 times the minimum to create positive expected value for these attacks.
We treat these as a “reasonable average range” in our subsequent analysis.

There are three variables in this problem that may disincentivize the perpe-

tration of ransomware attacks:

1. Lowering the value of the payments
2. Increasing the cost of operating ransomware
3. Decreasing the probability of payment

Winning the Ransomware Lottery

7

We discuss the feasibility of using each of these three variables to disincen-

tivize ransomware attacks in turn.

4.1 Lowering the Value of Payments

Today, there are few options for lowering the value of a payment. Since nearly
all payments for ransomware are rendered in cryptocurrency, a steep decline in
the value of cryptocurrency or the inability to exchange it for other goods or
services would remove the eﬀective value of a successful attack. To date, some
proposals have been made to ban [7], or regulate cryptocurrencies [19,24], though
the eﬀect of these bans and proposed regulations on the price of cryptocurrency
remains to be seen. Moreover, even if cryptocurrency were regulated into obso-
lescence, ransoms could be paid in gift cards or other hard to track currency
equivalents. This suggests that lowering the value of payments is not a viable
path for removing the incentive.

4.2 Increasing Costs

The onus for increasing costs falls on the ransomware developers and operators
themselves, and so there is likely a cost ceiling. If the marketplace eﬃciencies
of initial access brokers and ransomware-as-a-service were removed entirely, the
cost of conducting an attack would be the cost of development plus the cost
of deployment and maintenance of the infrastructure. This would require more
technical skill and initial investment than relatively low-skill ransomware op-
erators would be capable of, but after the initial investment, would likely cost
less per-attack than the $3,000 high-end ﬁgure from [30]. This may, on balance,
reduce the overall prevalence of malware attacks. However, this would also re-
quire the takedown of nearly all darknet marketplaces. Despite a number of
high-proﬁle takedowns, ransomware continues to ﬂourish on these marketplaces.
Thus, the options for increasing costs to operators are also limited.

4.3 Decreasing Payment Probability

Since the probability of payment is the one thing out of the control of the
attackers, it stands to reason that it is where defenders can exercise the most
control. In our model, decreasing the probability of a successful attack that
gets paid linearly reduces the expected value of an attack. This means that
organizations have two options available to them to reduce an attack’s expected
value. Decreasing the success of launched attacks will prevent the victim having
to decide whether or not to pay the ransom in the ﬁrst place. Assuming an attack
is successful, decreasing the chance that the ransom is paid will also reduce the
attacker’s value.

Given our average payout value range of x = [170, 404, 312493], the expected
value of an attack at current payment rates is in the range [47, 300.17, 170, 798.08].
A 50% reduction in probability of payout to p = 0.28 against a cost of c =

8

E. Galinkin

4200, with attack success rates held equal yields an expected value range of
[21565.08, 43048.94] – an amount that a would-be ransomware operator could
make as a software engineer in Europe [21] instead of perpetrating ransomware
attacks. Given the ﬁnancial motivation of most ransomware operators [2], it
stands to reason that a comparable salary is a perfectly substitutable good for
rational actors. To eliminate proﬁt entirely, assuming current attack success rates
and suﬃcient economies of scale, payment probability would need to decrease
to 2.489% on the high-end of average payments and 4.564% on the low-end of
payments – a dramatic reduction from today’s payment rates.

Despite that “break-even” probability, ransomware operators are likely to
turn to some other income stream before proﬁts hit zero due to law enforce-
ment activities surrounding cybercrime. In particular, the US Federal Bureau of
Investigations and the UK National Cyber Security Centre have pursued cyber-
criminals abroad [28], indicting and sanctioning ransomware operators. However,
in order to drastically reduce the payout rate of ransomware, organizations will
need to have a reason not to pay the ransoms.

5 Lowering the Stakes

In order to lower the probability of payment and create an environment where
attackers are not incentivized to continue launching ransomware attacks, victims
must be incentivized not to pay the ransom. An eﬀective strategy for lowering
the probability of payment ultimately consists of one where the victim’s options
for restoration are meaningfully less costly than paying the ransom. Considerable
work has been done on quantifying these diﬀerences and we point to the article
by Cluley [8] for details, as the speciﬁc rates will diﬀer from organization to
organization. Since the use of ransomware is illegal, there are external, non-
ﬁnancial mechanisms for reducing attacker incentives such as arrest, seizure of
assets, indictment, and sanctions. We do not address these mechanisms in our
framework and reserve their impact for future work.

In order to reduce attacker incentives, we consider the potential impact of

four commonly discussed strategies:

1. Decreasing Attack Success
2. Cyber Insurance
3. Use of Decrypters
4. Oﬀ-Site Backups

5.1 Decreasing Attack Success

Decreasing attack success is the goal of any organizational information security
program. The success of attacks has myriad factors, ranging from human factors
such as insider threats and phishing to software vulnerabilities and misconﬁg-
urations. Modern antivirus technologies can assist in catching the loaders that
often deliver the ransomware, and some endpoint security solutions can even de-
tect exploitation of vulnerabilities. In addition, training programs for phishing

Winning the Ransomware Lottery

9

emails and advising customers not to open attachments from unknown senders
are widely used to attempt to mitigate these attacks. A comprehensive listing
of ways to reduce an organization’s attack surface is out of the scope of this
paper, but a 2020 report by Deloitte and the Financial Services Information
Sharing and Analysis Center [4] showed that on average, 10% of an organiza-
tion’s information technology budget – approximately 0.2% of company revenue
– is dedicated to cybersecurity. In light of the increasing threats associated with
ransomware, this amount may not be suﬃcient to reduce the probability that
an attack is successful.

The ﬁgure in Equation 1 only holds for cases where a ransomware infection
has been successful and does not account for failed attacks – only payments.
Reducing the incidence of these attacks through other means such as the use
of application allowlists, strong spam ﬁlters, protection of exposed ports and
services, and other well-known security hygiene methods can serve to reduce the
success of these attacks. Since the cost to an attacker is undertaken whether
or not the attack is successful, the failure of these attacks will discourage these
attackers. In order to isolate the inﬂuence of payment probability, our analysis
assumed that all attacks are successful – a naive assumption that suggests the
1.5% payout probability derived in Section 4.3 is the probability of payment
overall, not merely the conditional probability of payment given a successful
attack.

5.2 Cyber Insurance

Cyber insurance is a strategy that is often mentioned as an organizational solu-
tion in the context of ransomware. This can help to protect businesses from the
cost of ransomware attacks, covering the cost to restore encrypted data. However,
in cases where cyber insurance alleviates the burden to victims, attackers are
still paid, doing nothing to remove the incentives surrounding ransomware. Con-
sequently, from an attacker incentive perspective, cyber insurance does nothing
to alleviate the overall problem of ransomware.

5.3 Use of Decrypters

The use of decrypters is a signiﬁcant way to allow victims to ignore the eﬀects
of ransomware. Although decrypters for some of the most popular strains of
ransomware today are not available, organizations like No More Ransom!4 oﬀers
free decrypters for more than 150 families of ransomware. Widespread knowledge
of these utilities and increased investment by security researchers on developing
these utilities could allow victims to decrypt their own ﬁles without paying a
ransom. Note that when decrypters become available or kill-switches as seen
in WannaCry [16] shut down operations, ransomware operators will patch their
malware [3] to continue operations.

4 https://www.nomoreransom.org

10

E. Galinkin

5.4 Oﬀ-Site Backups

The most commonly proposed solution for organizations to avoid the impacts
of ransomware and conﬁdently be able to not pay a ransom is the use of oﬀ-site
backups. An oﬀ-site backup can be used to restore systems to pre-ransomware
conﬁgurations and tends to cost signiﬁcantly less than paying the ransom. Re-
search by Wood et al. [34] acknowledges the diﬃculties of backup deployments.
Although they develop their recovery from a disaster preparedness perspective,
their cost estimates show that both cloud-based and colocation for backups can
allow for high uptime at a fraction of the cost associated with paying a ransom.
Additionally, having a backup that allows for restoration reduces the cost to re-
mediate possible residual traces of the attacker, reduces time to remediate, and
mitigates much of the reputational damage associated with paying a ransom.

5.5 Impact of Mitigations

The aforementioned approaches may allow victims to choose not to pay, but
as Cartwright et al. [6] demonstrate, victims will have diﬀerent willingness to
pay given some set ransom. This willingness to pay depends on the size of the
ransom and therefore encourages the victim to mitigate the attack. When victims
pay, they usually – though not always [26] – get their ﬁles back, a factor which
discourages paying. However, there is some cost to deterrence, and if that is too
high, the victim will instead accept their chances of being infected.

There are also factors at play external to the relationship between the cost
of a ransom versus the cost of mitigation. For example, in the United States,
ransom payments can be written oﬀ [33] as “ordinary, necessary, and reason-
able” expenses for tax purposes. This factor actually incentivizes victims to pay,
and discourages additional investments into mitigation. Wheeler and Martin [32]
point out that in the current regulatory environment of the United States, there
is a misalignment between public interests to discourage ransomware and private
interests to recover data and resume operations at the lowest cost. We conclude
then, that government and regulatory organizations interested in preventing ran-
somware should create ﬁnancial incentives for organizations and individuals to
invest in backups that allow for ransoms not to be paid. Further, policy solutions
to change the tax incentives associated with paying ransoms could be pursued
to improve the chance that companies will invest in security technologies.

6 Conclusion

Ransomware remains a signiﬁcant problem in the world, and our analysis demon-
strates why – there is eﬀectively unlimited incentive to use ransomware. Since the
cost is relatively low and the potential payouts are high, ﬁnancially-motivated
actors are encouraged to pursue this line of attack. Additionally, the victims
of successful attacks are more likely to pay than not for a variety of factors,
including the ability to write-oﬀ the ransom as a business expense.

Winning the Ransomware Lottery

11

If we wish to eliminate the threat of ransomware, we cannot attack the market
itself, as the actors are aware that their actions are illegal but have accepted that
risk. Instead, we must see that attackers are engaged in a simple game where
they do not need to account for the strategies of their victims. Where defenders
have power to aﬀect ransomware is largely on the front of actually paying the
ransoms.

We outlined a handful of commonly-discussed solutions and conclude that oﬀ-
site backups remain the most eﬀective way to ignore the impact of ransomware
attacks. In order to encourage organizations to pursue these policies, we conclude
that governmental and regulatory organizations will need to provide incentives
for organizations to invest in these backup solutions. Short of encouraging these
solutions and allowing victims not to pay ransoms, we can reasonably expect the
ransomware threat to continue to grow.

The model used here leveraged a probabilistic model and expected utility the-
ory to identify incentives and explore the security impacts of those incentives.
In future work, we seek to explore a more realistic model of the risk behaviors
these attackers and defenders exhibit based on their subjective beliefs. Further-
more, there are meaningful non-ﬁnancial mechanisms such as those mentioned
in Section 5, and inclusion of those mechanisms would require a more complex
model. This could be done by representing uncertainty via cumulative prospect
theory [29], as has been done in the economic literature. In particular, there is
a signiﬁcant amount of uncertainty on the part of attackers about whether or
not an attack will be successful. Similarly, there is signiﬁcant uncertainty for
defenders about how, when, and where they will be attacked. By representing
the choice under uncertainty more richly than in an expected utility model, we
may better model the true behaviors of attackers and defenders.

References

1. Analytics, D.T.I..: Black-market ecosystem: Estimating the cost of “pwnership”.
Deloitte Technical Report (2018), https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/
risk/articles/vigilant-threat-studies-deloitte-us.html

2. Anderson, R.: Security engineering: a guide to building dependable distributed

systems. John Wiley & Sons (2020)

I.:

“patched”

SecurityWeek

wannacry
(2017),

3. Arghire,
switch.
patched-wannacry-ransomware-has-no-kill-switch
Nicholson, M.:
Technical

4. Bernard,
scape.
deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/financial-services/
cybersecurity-maturity-financial-institutions-cyber-risk.html

Reshaping
Report

J.,
Deloitte

the
(2020),

cybersecurity

ransomware
kill-
has
https://www.securityweek.com/

land-
https://www2.

no

5. Caporusso, N., Chea, S., Abukhaled, R.: A game-theoretical model of ransomware.
In: International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics. pp. 69–
78. Springer (2018)

6. Cartwright, E., Hernandez Castro, J., Cartwright, A.: To pay or not: game theoretic

models of ransomware. Journal of Cybersecurity 5(1), tyz009 (2019)

12

E. Galinkin

7. Clark, M.: What we
Vox

down.
china-crypto-crackdown-bitcoin-mining-sichuan-ban-hydro-cryptocurrency-trading

(2021),

know about
crack-
https://www.theverge.com/2021/6/23/22544367/

cryptocurrency

china’s

8. Cluley, G.: Average ransomware payouts shoot up 171% to over $300,000. Tripwire
– The State of Security (2021), https://www.tripwire.com/state-of-security/
featured/average-ransomware-payouts-shoot-up/

9. Force, R.T.: Combating ransomware (2021)

10. labs, K.: Consumer appetite versus action: the state of data privacy amid
growing digital dependency. Kaspersky Consumer IT Security Risks Report
2021 (2021), https://media.kasperskydaily.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/
92/2021/03/16090300/consumer-appetite-versus-action-report.pdf

11. Lapan, H.E., Sandler, T.: To bargain or not to bargain: That is the question. The

American Economic Review 78(2), 16–21 (1988)

12. Larson, S., Blackford, D., G, G.: The ﬁrst step: Initial access leads to ran-
somware. Proofpoint Threat Insight (2021), https://www.proofpoint.com/us/
blog/threat-insight/first-step-initial-access-leads-ransomware

13. Laszka, A., Farhang, S., Grossklags, J.: On the economics of ransomware. In: In-
ternational Conference on Decision and Game Theory for Security. pp. 397–417.
Springer (2017)

14. Liao, K., Zhao, Z., Doup´e, A., Ahn, G.J.: Behind closed doors: measurement and
analysis of cryptolocker ransoms in bitcoin. In: 2016 APWG symposium on elec-
tronic crime research (eCrime). pp. 1–13. IEEE (2016)

15. Meland, P.H., Bayoumy, Y.F.F.,

ransomware-as-a-
service economy within the darknet. Computers & Security 92, 101762
(2020).
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.101762,
https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404820300468

Sindre, G.: The

16. Mohurle, S., Patil, M.: A brief study of wannacry threat: Ransomware attack 2017.
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science 8(5), 1938–1940
(2017)

17. Monroe, R.: How to negotiate with ransomware hackers. The New
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/06/07/

(2021),

Yorker
how-to-negotiate-with-ransomware-hackers

18. Morrison,
som.
(2021),
ransomeware-pipeline-colonial-darkside-gas-prices

S.: How
Vox

ran-
oil
https://www.vox.com/recode/22428774/

a major

pipeline

held

got

for

19. Nabilou, H.: How to regulate bitcoin? decentralized regulation for a decentralized
cryptocurrency. International Journal of Law and Information Technology 27(3),
266–291 (2019)

20. Networks, P.A.: Ransomware threat report, 2021. Palo Alto Networks Tech-
nical Report (2021), https://www.paloaltonetworks.com/resources/research/
unit42-ransomware-threat-report-2021

21. Orosz, G.: The trimodal nature of software engineering salaries in the netherlands
and europe. Pragmatic Engineer (2021), https://blog.pragmaticengineer.com/
software-engineering-salaries-in-the-netherlands-and-europe/

22. O’Gorman, B., Wueest, C., O’Brien, D., Cleary, G.: Symantec internet security
threat report. Symantec Corp., Mountain View, CA, USA, Tech. Rep (2019)

23. Press, A.:
emerge.
scale-details-of-massive-kaseya-ransomware-attack-emerge

attack
https://www.npr.org/2021/07/05/1013117515/

of massive

ransomware

(2021),

details

kaseya

Scale,

NPR

Winning the Ransomware Lottery

13

24. Schaupp, L.C., Festa, M.: Cryptocurrency adoption and the road to regulation. In:
Proceedings of the 19th Annual International Conference on Digital Government
Research: Governance in the Data Age. pp. 1–9 (2018)

25. Selten, R.: Models of strategic rationality, vol. 2. Springer Science & Business

Media (2013)

26. Sophos: Sophos state of ransomware 2021. Sophos Technical Report (2021),

https://secure2.sophos.com/en-us/medialibrary/pdfs/whitepaper/
sophos-state-of-ransomware-2021-wp.pdf

27. Spyridopoulos, T., Maraslis, K., Mylonas, A., Tryfonas, T., Oikonomou, G.: A game
theoretical method for cost-beneﬁt analysis of malware dissemination prevention.
Information Security Journal: A Global Perspective 24(4-6), 164–176 (2015)
28. Tidy, J.: The ransomware surge ruining lives. BBC (2021), https://www.bbc.com/

news/technology-56933733

29. Tversky, A., Kahneman, D.: Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representa-

tion of uncertainty. Journal of Risk and uncertainty 5(4), 297–323 (1992)

30. Unit, C.B.T.A.: Dark web ransomware economy growing at an annual rate of
2,500%. Carbon Black Threat Research (2017), https://www.carbonblack.com/
2017/10/11/dark-web-ransomware-economy-growing-annual-rate-2500/
31. U.S. Attorney’s Oﬃce, Western District of Washington: High-level organizer of
notorious hacking group ﬁn7 sentenced to ten years in prison for scheme that
compromised tens of millions of debit and credit cards (2021)

32. Wheeler, T., Martin, C.: Should ransomware payments be banned? The Brook-
ings Institute Tech Stream (2021), https://www.brookings.edu/techstream/
should-ransomware-payments-be-banned/

$10m ransom payment,

33. Wood, R.: Garmin hack’s

$10m tax deduc-
tion. Forbes (2020), https://www.forbes.com/sites/robertwood/2020/07/27/
garmin-hacks-10m-ransom-payment-10m-tax-deduction/?sh=4452ae4712c5
34. Wood, T., Cecchet, E., Ramakrishnan, K.K., Shenoy, P.J., van der Merwe, J.E.,
Venkataramani, A.: Disaster recovery as a cloud service: economic beneﬁts & de-
ployment challenges. HotCloud 10, 8–15 (2010)

35. Young, A., Yung, M.: Cryptovirology: extortion-based security threats and coun-
termeasures. In: Proceedings 1996 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. pp.
129–140. IEEE (1996)

