1
2
0
2

g
u
A
9
2

]

C
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
7
7
2
1
.
8
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Towards Reference Architectures for Trustworthy
Collaborative Cyber-Physical Systems: Reference
Architectures as Boundary Objects

Muhammad Rusyadi Ramli, Fredrik Asplund, and Martin T¨orngren
Department of Machine Design
Mechatronics and Embedded Control Systems
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Email: (ramli2, fasplund, martint)@kth.se

Abstract—This paper presents our work-in-progress study
on reference architectures as boundary objects for realizing
trustworthy collaborative Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS). Fur-
thermore, the preliminary results from interviews with systems
engineering experts from industry and academia are also dis-
cussed. The interview results reveal challenges in using reference
architectures during the system development process. Further-
more, exactly which trustworthiness attributes (security, avail-
ability, reliability, etc.) should be addressed to realize trustworthy
collaborative CPS is identiﬁed as an open question, which we will
address in our future work.

Index Terms—Reference architectures, stakeholders, collabo-

rative CPS, trustworthiness, dependability.

I. INTRODUCTION

In recent years, Cyber-physical Systems (CPS) has evolved
to become more complex in the attempt to provide them with
increasingly sophisticated capabilities [1]. This trend motivates
industry and academia to investigate solutions to handle this
increasing complexity. Many of today’s CPS applications are
developed as collaborative systems in which the systems in-
teract with other systems, forming systems-of-systems (SoS).
SoS is commonly characterised by ﬁve principal features; op-
erational independence, managerial independence, geographic
distribution, evolutionary development, and emergent behavior
[2]. Furthermore, the systems interact more with their en-
vironment. The systems may also work autonomously most
of the time by relying on artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). These
mentioned aspects provide new challenges for collaborative
CPS, because their structure and behavior are exposed and
could be inﬂuenced by external parties. In this paper we are
mainly concerned with industrial CPS that are mission or
safety critical. For such systems, it is a challenge to establish
a trustworthy collaborative CPS (i.e. a CPSoS) that can ensure
key properties such as safety and security, while also relying
on AI to provide new functionalities and enhance performance.
The emergence of edge computing may have a major impact
in expediting the development of collaborative CPS. The
advancement of network devices (e.g., switch, router, bridge),
embedded devices equipped with AI chips, telecommunication
technology (5G), micro-services, containers, etc. make it fea-
sible to support collaboration by computational tasks, data and

models at the edge instead of the cloud [3]. Edge computing
can reduce network latency compared to cloud computing due
to its locality. Furthermore, edge computing can enable AI to
bring its peak potential for collaborative CPS applications.

Trustworthiness is frequently raised as an essential aspect
for future systems, and collaborative CPS is not the excep-
tion. Trustworthiness has for example been put forward from
the perspectives of AI, human-machine interaction and CPS.
Just like the concept of dependability, trustworthiness is an
umbrella term. However, trustworthiness tends to be used
as an even more multifaceted property, referring to qualities
such as security, safety, and predictability [4] and a set of
ethical properties, e.g., transparency and human oversight [5].
Nonetheless, the deﬁnition of trustworthiness and its attributes
are still evolving. The broad scope of trustworthiness and
the interdependencies (and trade-offs) between the involved
qualities makes it difﬁcult to determine proper trustworthi-
ness attributes for realizing collaborative CPS. We believe
that architecture guidelines represent one important means to
improve on this situation. The architectural guidance can be
used to ensure the trustworthiness attributes are addressed from
the early process of system development.

Architectural guidance has a relation to all relevant stake-
holders (e.g., business, consumer, and technical) involved in
the development and integration of collaborative CPS. The
need for architectural guidance becomes even more impor-
tant with the increasing system complexity, shorter time-to-
markets, and system development involving multiple teams
and organizations [6]. Reference architectures have the pur-
pose to provide such architectural guidance during the devel-
opment of novel system architectures [7]. Reference archi-
tectures accomplish this by containing essential architectural
patterns, the use of standards and often implicitly domain
knowledge that constrains system design [7]. Therefore, ref-
erence architectures can be used to guide the alignment over
the system and subsystem interactions and integration as well
as help to integrate all stakeholders who are involved in the
system development (in terms of establishing shared views of
the same system).

In order to utilize the most of it, reference architectures

 
 
 
 
 
 
should be able to provide the same architecture understanding
to all stakeholders. For instance, the architect can communicate
effectively with other architects or other stakeholders during
the system development when they share the same archi-
tectural understanding. Furthermore, the work can be more
efﬁcient and ﬂexible when the architects or other stakeholders
recognize the same boundaries between functions, processes,
and subsystems, speak the same language and use the same
standards. This cooperation can moreover be achieved through
the use of a common language, standards, viewpoints, and
architecture patterns.

We are interested in the role and use of reference architec-
tures for realizing trustworthy collaborative CPS. We consider
intelligent transportation systems (ITS) as our main domain
since it
is well representative for collaborative CPS. Our
research involves two steps; (1) studying how people and orga-
nizations understand and make use of reference architectures,
and how they treat trustworthiness attributes when working
with reference architectures, and (2) investigating how to
represent knowledge, especially the trustworthiness attributes
in the reference architecture. After conducting these two steps,
we will summarize our research ﬁndings and prioritize follow
up research, to be evaluated in an ITS setting. As part of
our ﬁrst step, we currently investigate the role of reference
architecture as boundary objects for realizing trustworthy
collaborative CPS.

II. RELATED WORKS

The knowledge transfer plays an important role in the
collaborative work environment where people with various
backgrounds are involved. Nowadays, it is necessary for engi-
neers to have a ”cross-boundary” skills to enable collaboration
work effectively. Hence, there have been extensive studies
focusing on knowledge transfer. For instance, [8] pointed that
the knowledge transfer should be treated as a process in order
to analyse it. The study therefore presented the process model
of knowledge transfer. Furthermore, boundary spanning can be
utilised as a useful method for knowledge transfer. As stated in
[9], boundary spanning is the act of searching for knowledge
from outside the current domain. Authors in [10] conducted
a qualitative systematic review on boundary spanning and
engineering.

In relation to knowledge transfer and development of CPS,
[11] conducted a study on the viewpoints integration in the
development of mechatronic products. In [12] investigated on
how design contracts can facilitate the interaction between
control and embedded software engineers for building CPS.

III. REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE AS BOUNDARY OBJECT
FOR TRUSTWORTHY CPS

The organizations that develop a collaborative CPS, such
as an ITS,
typically strive to adopt systems engineering
approaches to increase their work effectiveness. The organi-
zations performing systems engineering can be conceived as
a network of actors that have multiple goals. Also, they may
use shared resources during the development process.

Boundary objects represent a concept for facilitating and
enabling collaboration between various groups of actors (later
we refer to such a group as a community of practice, CoP).
There have been studies that investigate boundary objects in
software and systems engineering. For instance, the study
in [13] evaluated the use of reference architecture in the
context of agile systems engineering in which the automotive
domain is considered as the domain of study. [14] investigated
architectural descriptions as boundary objects in systems en-
gineering where they also speciﬁed the requirements for the
creation of architectural descriptions. Recently, the study in
[15] utilized reference architecture as boundary objects for the
alignment of cross-domain stakeholders’ for the development
of collaborative SoS. Unlike existing studies, we are focusing
on how people in practices deal with trustworthiness attributes
to create reference architectures for trustworthy collaborative
CPS. In addition, The idea for this, came when coming across
more and more proposed reference architectures e.g. in the
context of Internet of things, smart CPS, etc., and noting
that they tended to focus more or less entirely on functional
aspects. Therefore, the reference architecture can be used as
a practical boundary objects to align stakeholder’s ideas in
realizing trustworthy collaborative CPS.

A. Boundary objects theory

Star and Griesemer introduced the concept of boundary
objects in 1989. They deﬁned boundary objects as ”objects
that are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and the
constraints of the several parties employing them, yet robust
enough to maintain a common identity across sites” [16].
And these objects have different interpretations in different
communities of practice (CoP). However, their structures are
understandable enough to more than one community, thus
making them recognizable through translation and interpre-
tation [17]. Furthermore, these objects have different forms
(e.g., physical or digital objects), and they carry information
that can be implicit or explicit. For instance, the physical
objects can be documents containing diagrams or descriptions
of system architecture. Digital objects can be any documents
in electronic form such as e-mail.

Objects become boundary objects when used at different
CoP to transfer and share information without leaving the
important context of information. CoP is a group where
understanding, sense-making, and knowledge are shared across
the people in the group [18]. For instance, a CoP has a shared
understanding of what their community does and how they
relate it to other communities and their practices. Essentially,
boundary objects exist and are used at the interfaces between
these CoPs.

B. Challenges to realize trustworthy ITS

ITS are expected to contribute signiﬁcantly to fostering
road and trafﬁc safety, energy efﬁciency, and reduced en-
vironmental pollution [19]. Trustworthiness attributes form
essential requirements to address during the development of

ITS. It is because most ITS tasks are dealing with safety-
critical situations. Furthermore, some standards play a vital
role for the ITS, particularly in the automotive domain, such as
ISO 262626 [20] for ensuring the safety and ISO/SAE 21434
[21] for ensuring cybersecurity. However, proper guidance
(e.g., reference architecture documentation) is still required to
ensure trustworthiness attributes are addressed during system
development.

ITS development processes involve collaboration between
many stakeholders from various disciplines (e.g., software
engineering, electronic engineering, mechanical engineering,
economics, etc.). Thus, aside from the technical aspects the
process of knowledge transfer also play an important role in
developing a complex system such as ITS successfully. For
instance, when designing software architecture of intelligent
trafﬁc lights, it may be a challenge to document and describe
such a system so that key information, including context
and rationale, can be shared effectively across organizational
boundaries.

C. Research method

We conducted our ﬁrst round of interviews with systems
engineering experts from industry and academia. In this round
of interviews, we only considered systems engineer experts
who have enough knowledge and experience in using reference
architectures as our respondents. The purpose of the interviews
is to study the concepts and practice related to reference
architectures. Therefore, our research question is how do
systems engineering experts perceive reference architectures?
In particular, we wanted to gather inputs on how the
reference architectures for trustworthy CPS are perceived
from a systems engineering perspective. We also wanted to
collect information about the challenges of using reference
architectures as well as what attributes should be captured to
realize trustworthy systems.

D. Survey questions

As mentioned previously, we focused on the concept and
practice of reference architecture towards trustworthy collab-
orative CPS. The interview questions were as follows:

• SQ1: What is the deﬁnition of reference architectures?
• SQ2: Who are the intended users of reference architec-

tures?

• SQ3: How to design reference architectures?
• SQ4: How to manage reference architectures?
• SQ5: What aspect should be captured in the reference

architecture for trustworthy collaborative CPS?

In the interview, we also asked our respondents about
their personal information and experience related to systems
engineering and reference architectures.

E. Data collection

The respondents for the interview are ﬁve people, all having
a background and strong experience in systems engineering. In
particular, three of the respondents are working in industry and
the rest are working in academia. In particular, our respondents

from industry work in the domain of defense, control, and
automotive. The interviews were conducted using a semi-
structured approach. Each interview was performed for a one-
hour duration. The respondents are aware that their answers
may be used as part of research publications.

F. Results and analysis

1) Deﬁnition of reference architectures: We received sim-
ilar responses about the deﬁnition of reference architectures
from our respondents. They all agreed that reference archi-
tecture ”is a document” containing essential information (e.g.,
design patterns, standards). This information can be used to
guide stakeholders during system development, for instance,
for determining which design patterns that should be promoted
or demoted. The reference architecture can also be used to
guide system development in the future and make the process
more effective.

In terms of systems management aspects, reference archi-
tectures enable cooperation across stakeholders to be more
effective. It can solve the problems of sharing development
resources. Reference architectures are also capable of creating
consistency across distributed teams. One of our respondents
pointed out that the use of reference architectures can increase
the efﬁcient use of personnel during the development pro-
cess. The ﬂow of personnel during the system development
is dynamic, i.e., the project member may leave during the
development process, and a new person comes. A reference
architecture can be used as guidance to help this new member
understand what is going on in the project.

2) The intended users of reference architectures: We got
valuable inputs from our respondents about the intended users
of reference architectures. The intended users include all mem-
bers who are involved in the development of systems. This
response leads to the challenge of using reference architecture
in practices. During the project, junior members sometimes
may not understand the content of a reference architecture.
In this case, they may come back to ask a chief engineer to
get guidance. In order to utilize a reference architecture as
a boundary objects, it is supposed to be understandable to all
stakeholders. The solution may come by adding rationale in the
reference architecture documentation to tackle this challenge.
Another challenge is that the fact that the more diverse the
group, the more challenging adoption is.

3) Design reference architectures: In this aspect, the person
who is responsible for designing reference architectures is the
architect. The main reason is that the architects have the ca-
pability to capture information and design patterns. Capturing
the patterns is a challenging task to conduct. However, it is
sometimes challenging to capture tacit knowledge (implicit
knowledge) from the people. For instance, it is difﬁcult to
get insight out of experienced people. Also, capturing past
knowledge is challenging. As for the solution to capture the
information, seminars or work-groups can be considered to
capture the information. However, it needs particular ability to
capture the implicit knowledge during the discussions. Further-

more, conceptual models (e.g., workﬂow, system partitioning)
can be also considered to capture the information.

We also asked our respondents about transparency. Specif-
ically, we asked whether transparency among stakeholders
is essential for creating good documentation of reference
architectures. We got a variety of responses, also inﬂuenced
by the domain where our respondents work. Some domains
are opaque in terms of giving information (e.g., defense and
military). In practice, the architects must cope with the fact
that there are boundaries between stakeholders. To capture the
implicit information, then we need to reconstruct, guess, and
ﬁnd a way to validate it.

4) Manage reference architectures: We also questioned our
respondents on how to manage reference architectures to keep
it ”alive” such that it can be used for the future system
development. In this aspect, the reference architectures should
not be updated too often. The reference architecture will be
update only when it is necessary, such as the emergence of
new technology or standards that are suitable for the systems.
Another feedback was to avoid to use speciﬁc tools and only
consider accessible tools such as the ofﬁce tools to create a
documentation of reference architectures.

5) Trustworthiness attributes to realize trustworthy collab-
orative CPS: As mentioned previously, the terms of trustwor-
thiness and its attributes are still somewhat unclear. Hence,
we asked our respondents what they perceive as trustworthy
systems and what attributes should be captured for trustworthy
collaborative CPS. Our respondents had similar answers; they
perceived trustworthy systems as similar to dependable sys-
tems and treat trustworthiness attributes as a set of qualities
such as safety, security, reliability, etc. However, one open
question remains whether the ethical aspects should be cap-
tured as essential attributes to realize trustworthy CPS. One
main reason is that most of the collaborative CPS nowadays
incorporate AI in various forms, so it would be reasonable to
consider some ethical aspects of AI, such as explainability and
respect for human autonomy.

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We have conducted interviews as part of our ﬁrst step
towards reference architectures for trustworthy collaborative
CPS. The inputs we have obtained are helpful in guiding
the next stage of our study. We have identiﬁed essential
aspects that should be considered when designing reference
architectures that can be used as effective boundary objects.
In the next step, we will conduct interviews with industrial
experts focusing on how industry deals with trustworthiness
attributes when making use of reference architectures.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors acknowledge support

from KTH based
TECoSA research center (funded by Vinnova) and InSecTT
ECSEL project. InSecTT (www.insectt.eu) has received fund-
ing from the ECSEL Joint Undertaking (JU) under grant agree-
ment No 876038. The JU receives support from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme

and Austria, Sweden, Spain, Italy, France, Portugal, Ireland,
Finland, Slovenia, Poland, Netherlands, Turkey. The document
reﬂects only the author’s view and the Commission is not
responsible for any use that may be made of the information
it contains.

REFERENCES

[1] M. T¨orngren and P. T. Grogan, “How to deal with the complexity of

future cyber-physical systems?” Designs, vol. 2, no. 4, 2018.

[2] M. Maier, “Research challenges for systems-of-systems,” in 2005 IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, vol. 4, 2005,
pp. 3149–3154.

[3] M. Caprolu, R. Di Pietro, F. Lombardi, and S. Raponi, “Edge computing
perspectives: Architectures, technologies, and open security issues,” in
2019 IEEE International Conference on Edge Computing (EDGE), 2019,
pp. 116–123.

[4] A. Avizienis, J.-C. Laprie, B. Randell, and C. Landwehr, “Basic concepts
and taxonomy of dependable and secure computing,” IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 11–33, 2004.
[5] High-Level Expert Group on AI of European Commission. (2019)
Ethics guidelines for trustworthy ai. Brussels. [Online]. Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai

[6] B. van der Sanden and A. Vasenev, “Architectural guidance in automo-
tive for privacy and security: Survey and classiﬁcation,” in 2020 IEEE
International Systems Conference (SysCon), 2020, pp. 1–8.

[7] R. Cloutier, G. Muller, D. Verma, R. Nilchiani, E. Hole, and M. Bone,
“The concept of reference architectures,” Syst. Eng., vol. 13, no. 1, p.
14–27, Feb. 2010.

[8] G. Szulanski, “The process of knowledge transfer: A diachronic analysis
of stickiness,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 9–27, 2000.

[9] A. Nerkar and K. A. Miceli, Boundary Spanning. London: Palgrave

Macmillan UK, 2016, pp. 1–7.

[10] B. K. Jesiek, A. Mazzurco, N. T. Buswell, and J. D. Thompson,
“Boundary spanning and engineering: A qualitative systematic review,”
Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 107, no. 3, pp. 380–413, 2018.
[11] M. T¨orngren, A. Qamar, M. Biehl, F. Loiret, and J. El-khoury, “In-
tegrating viewpoints in the development of mechatronic products,”
Mechatronics, vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 745–762, 2014.

[12] P. Derler, E. A. Lee, M. T¨orngren, and S. Tripakis, “Cyber-physical
system design contracts,” in 2013 ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), 2013, pp. 109–118.

[13] R. Wohlrab, P. Pelliccione, E. Knauss, and M. Larsson, “Boundary
objects and their use in agile systems engineering,” Journal of Software:
Evolution and Process, vol. 31, no. 5, p. e2166, 2019.

[14] L. Pareto, P. Eriksson, and S. Ehnebom, “Architectural descriptions
as boundary objects in system and design work,” in Model Driven
Engineering Languages and Systems, D. C. Petriu, N. Rouquette, and
Ø. Haugen, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010,
pp. 406–419.

[15] J. Kohlke, S. Hanna, and J. Sch¨utz, “Cross-domain stakeholder-
in collaborative sos -lego® serious play® as a boundary
alignment
object,” in 16th Annual Systems of Systems Engineering Conference,
06 2021.

[16] S. L. Star and J. R. Griesemer, “Institutional ecology, ‘translations’ and
boundary objects: Amateurs and professionals in berkeley’s museum of
vertebrate zoology, 1907-39,” Social Studies of Science, vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 387–420, 1989.

[17] A. Fong, R. Valerdi, and J. Srinivasan, “Boundary objects as a framework
to understand the role of systems integrators,” Systems Research Forum,
vol. 02, no. 01, pp. 11–18, 2007.

[18] J. S. Brown and P. Duguid, “Knowledge and organization: A social-
practice perspective,” Organization Science, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 198–213,
2001.

[19] T. Yuan, W. B. Da Rocha Neto, C. E. Rothenberg, K. Obraczka,
C. Barakat, and T. Turletti, “Machine Learning for Next-Generation
Intelligent Transportation Systems: A Survey,” Nov. 2020, working
paper or preprint. [Online]. Available: https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02284820

[20] ISO. (2011) Road vehicles - functional safety. iso 262626:2011.
[21] ISO/SAE. (2020) Road vehicles - cybersecurity engineering.

iso/sae

21434:2020.

This figure "EDCC1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2108.12771v1

This figure "EDCC2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2108.12771v1

This figure "EDCC3.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2108.12771v1

