Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

FRAMEWORK FOR MANAGING CYBERCRIME RISKS IN NIGERIAN 
UNIVERSITIES 

Bukhari Badamasi, American University of Nigeria, bukhari.badamasi@aun.edu.ng 

Samuel C. Avemaria Utulu, American University of Nigeria, samuel.otulu@aun.edu.ng 

Abstract:  Universities in developing countries, including those in Nigeria, experience cybercrime 
risks due to poor management of their cyber spaces and resources. The outcome of these 
cybercrimes  are  threats  and  breaches  of  universities’  cyber  security.  The  threats  and 
breaches have resulted in substantial financial, social, and intellectual property losses. 
In the recent past, Nigerian universities have started to respond to these cyber-attacks. 
Many  of  them  now  invest  in  anti-cybercrime  tools  and  programs  to  mitigate  cyber 
security threats and breaches. Despite this, the number of times Nigerian universities 
suffer  from  cyber-attacks  and  the  losses  that  result  from  them  keeps  increasing.  Our 
observation, however, indicates that most Nigerian universities run their cyber security 
without using scientifically derived frameworks that  spell out  how to  manage threats 
and breaches that emanate from within and outside them. We consider this a problem to 
ongoing  efforts  made  by  Nigerian  universities  to  mitigate  cyber  security  threats  and 
breaches. The study reported in this paper was therefore, carried out to explicate how 
Nigerian universities can develop actionable frameworks that can help them to mitigate 
cyber security threats and breaches. The study is based on literature review and propose 
how  an  actionable  framework  that  Nigerian  Universities  can  adopt  to  setoff 
cybersecurity  programs  can  be  developed.  The  process  comprises  of  problem 
identification, description of objectives, designing and developing the artefact, testing, 
and  evaluating  the  artefact,  and  communicating  the  result.  We  conclude  that  the 
framework provides a lucrative starting point for Nigerian universities to setoff efficient 
and effective cyber security program. 

Keywords: Cybercrime, Cybersecurity, Cybersecurity Management Framework, Nigerian 
Universities. 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

that 

include 

information 

Universities  are  highly  dependent  on  the  Internet  and  cyberspaces  within  it  to  actualize  their 
statutory responsibilities. According to Li et al. (2018), cyberspace refers to an interconnected and 
interdependent 
the  Internet, 
technology  (IT)  based  networks 
telecommunication networks, computer systems,  and social systems.  Aheleroff et  al.  (2021;  p.5) 
also stated that “cyberspace has emerged as a powerful interconnected digital technology with the 
ability  to  achieve  the  most  complex  manufacturing  paradigms  due  to  the  advancement  features 
associated with Big Data, Internet of Thing, and Blockchain technology”. Cyberspaces have evolved 
tremendously over the years, providing a variety of digital platforms universities need to manage 
teaching,  learning,  research,  community  development  and  administration  (Taylor,  2017). 
Cyberspaces have helped universities to manage admission processes, students’ life issues, finance, 
examinations and records, and to facilitate academic processes (Hunton, 2011). It follows that every 
contemporary  university  carries  out  its  statutory  responsibilities  and  provide  services  to  staff, 
students, parents and guardians, funding agencies, government, accreditation agencies, and other 
stakeholders using cyber spaces. Despite the advantages of cyberspaces offer universities, they also 
pose critical threats and challenges to their well-being and operations. This is given the evolution of 
cybercrimes and their growth in the recent past. Reports in the extant literature show that a variety 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  853 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

of  culprits  that  have  become  very  challenging  to  identify  and  apprehend  have  emerged  within 
cyberspaces universities use to actualize their statutory responsibilities.  

Recent  incidences  of  cybercrimes  in  universities  has  resulted  to  a  new  understanding  among 
cybersecurity scholars that cybercrime is not limited to financial and related institutions. Demers et 
al. (2017) for instance, revealed that cybercrimes perpetrated against universities is increasing at an 
alarming rate. Demers and his colleagues argued that the education sector is second in the league of 
industries that suffer cybersecurity threats and breaches. According to France-Presse (2020), the FBI 
and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) both announced that organizations 
researching  COVID-19,  particularly  universities,  were  at  risk  given  China’s  attempt  to  steal 
coronavirus research data. Attempts were made by Chinese government-affiliated organizations and 
others to unlawfully acquire valuable intellectual property and public health data related to vaccines, 
treatments,  and testing  (Xie, 2020). Walker  (2020) also  reported that the United Kingdom  (UK) 
Security  Minister  alleged  that  he  was  more  than  ninety  five  percent  certain  that  state-sponsored 
hackers  backed  by  Russian  Government  targeted  organizations  and  universities  in  the  UK  and 
Canadian  that  were  working  on  a  coronavirus  vaccine.  There  are  similar  reports  in  the  extant 
literature indicating that the National Cyber Security Agency (NCSA) in Nigeria and its counterparts 
in other countries were adamant that the attacks on drug companies and research groups were carried 
out by “Russian Intelligence Agency” (Parsons, 2020). Sobers (2021) further stated that universities 
were ranked as the most dangerous place for an individual to reveal sensitive information. Opinions 
propagated by Demers et al. (2017) and Sobers (2021) fits into recent occurrences of cybercrime 
experiences of Nigerian universities.  

Examples of cybercrime cases in universities in Nigeria include the incidence of Denial of Service 
(DoS) attack in which an unknown person abused the Network Time Protocol (NTP) server in the 
Federal  University  of  Technology  Akure  (Mojeed,  2020).  Madonna  University  in  the  Eastern 
Nigeria also reported that hackers accessed and tempered with over 25,000 data in their database 
(Egbunike,  2019).  In  2016,  2017,  and  2018,  Ahmadu  Bello  University,  Zaria,  Nigeria  disclosed 
incidents  that  potentially  exposed  a  serious  breach  in  the  university  website  that    resulted  in  a 
compromise of students and staff data (Bukhari, 2018). In another incident, a university staff was 
found compromising the admission records and printing fake admission letters for some applicants. 
In a similar incident, a staff of the Management Information System (MIS) Unit was apprehended 
for breaching the security protocols and conniving with some students of the University to illegally 
allocate rooms and print admission letters (Bukhari, 2018). All these challenges are good examples 
of cyber security issues Nigerian universities contend with.  

Studies have however, shown that to manage cyber security risks, there is the need to plan for them 
(Clausen,  2019;  Mamogale,  2011).  Planning  for  cyber  security  risks  requires  putting  in  place 
adequate measures to avoid cyber-attacks and/or to manage their effects if they eventually occur 
(Alpert, 2012; S. T. Clausen, 2019; Kuusikallio, 2017; Mamogale, 2011). It is therefore, follows 
that, that major challenge confronting Nigerian universities is the need to develop frameworks that 
will  serve  as  guides  to  programs  they  develop  to  avert  cybercrimes  and  to  reduce  the  effects  of 
cybercrimes when they are perpetrated. In developed countries, a good number of universities, have 
cyber risk management frameworks, this however, cannot be said about Nigerian universities and 
most universities in developing countries (Singh & Joshi, 2017). The case in Nigeria, with regards 
to  the  small  number  of  universities  that  have  frameworks  for  managing  cybercrimes,  is  unique. 
Ryder and Madhavan (2019) opinion that strategies used to fight cybercrime in developing countries 
are weighted towards short-term responses and IT challenges and that the strategies do not always 
spell  out  how  to  manage  the  consequences  of  cybercrime  incidences  succinctly  captures  the 
situations in Nigeria.  

In our opinion, a good cybercrime management framework should be weighted towards long-terms 
responses and should provide grounds for the careful monitoring of cyberspace before, during and 
after cybercrime occurs. The indication is that a cybercrime management framework must be holistic 
and must bring into bear every aspects of cyberspace management. This is given that cybercrime 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  854 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

management involves different tasks and skills and diverse stages. Our study is an ongoing large 
scale and longitudinal study that is being carried out in the Nigerian university context. The study 
is relevant because Nigerian universities are among universities in developing country contexts with 
high risk of cybercrime incidents (Eboibi, 2020). Consequently, the research study reported in this 
paper is a part of the large scale and longitudinal study. This particularly study was informed by the 
question,  how  perspectives  in  the  design  science  method  can  facilitate  the  development  of 
cybersecurity  management  framework  for  Nigerian  universities.  To  answer  this  question,  five 
specific questions derived from the design science method process were raised including: what are 
the cybersecurity problems Nigerian universities are facing and what are the likely problems they 
will face in the future?  What should the objectives of cybersecurity programs of Nigeria universities 
be?  How  can  appropriate  cybersecurity  program  be  designed  and  implemented  by  Nigerian 
universities?  How  can  the  appropriateness  and  adequacy  of  Nigerian  universities’  cybersecurity 
programs  be  tested  and  evaluated?  How  can  cybersecurity  programs  of  Nigerian  universities  be 
communicated to necessary stakeholders? The paper aims to develop a cybersecurity management 
framework that is useful to Nigerian universities and universities in other developing countries that 
operate in socio-technical environments that are similar to those in the Nigerian university system. 
The  remaining  part  of  the  paper  includes  review  of  related  literature,  methodology,  proposed 
framework, and conclusion and limitations.   

2. 

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE 

  Cybercrime 

2.1  
Cybercrime has become the world's second-largest man-made risk (Soomro & Hussain, 2019). It 
encompasses  all  illegal  activities  perpetrated  by  scammers,  hackers,  and  internet  fraudsters.  The 
illegal  activities  may  include  human  activities  carried  out  to  gain  illegal  access  to  data  and 
information  or  sending  spam,  malware,  worms  into  devices,  networks,  or  even  organizational 
information systems and global connection to make them malfunction (Mary, 2016). Cybercrimes 
have had debilitating effects on individuals, governments, organizations, and universities (Adesina 
&  Ingirige,  2019).  It  has  cost  billions  of  dollars’  worth  of  damages,  data  loss,  and  website 
defacement.  It  has  sent  many  governments,  organizations,  and  individuals  into  bankruptcy  and 
global  shock  (De  Paoli  et  al.,  2020).  Cybercrime  has  remained  a  major  threat  to  universities, 
particularly as it touches that core mandates of teaching, learning, research, community services, 
and  administration  and  management  of  staff  and  student  records  (Bukhari,  2018).  There  are 
indications in the extant literature that the COVID-19 era is likely to result in a surge in the number 
of  cybercrimes  perpetrated  against  universities.  Traxler  et  al.  (2020)  for  instance,  opined  that 
COVID-19  has  forced  an  increase  in  the  dependence  on  cyberspace  for  both  individuals  and 
organizations and that this is likely to result in cybersecurity threats and risks. Morgan (2020) also 
observed  that  more  than  four  thousand  malicious  COVID-19  related  websites  appeared  on  the 
internet within months of the first COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. He argued that the occurrence of 
cybercrime in 2021 would be in every eleven seconds; a fit that is almost four times the average in 
2020 (every nineteen seconds) and almost twice the pace in 2019 (every forty seconds) (Morgan, 
2020). Meanwhile, cybercrime is projected to cost the global economy $6 trillion yearly from 2021, 
up from $3 trillion in 2015. While from 2025, cybercrime will cost $10.5 trillion annually. Besides 
the  United  States  and  China,  cybercrime  would  eventually  be  the  world's  third-largest  economy 
(Sausalito, 2020). Losses to ransomware are projected to cost the world $20 billion by 2021, which 
is 57 times what they were in 2015 ($325 million)  (Chapman, 2019; Morgan, 2020). As a result, 
ransomware  is  the  fastest-growing  form  of  cybercrime  even  in  universities.  Furthermore,  spear-
phishing emails are used in 91 percent of cyberattacks, infecting organizations and universities. 

There is no doubt that insights in the extant literature indicate the need for a robust cybersecurity 
management framework that can provide actionable knowledge to organizations and universities. In 
its entirety, cybercrime risk management frameworks provide a multiplicity of guiding principles 
and action plans aimed at addressing cybercrime and its related incidents. In Nigeria, the Office of 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  855 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

the National Security Adviser (NSA) in collaboration with the National Information and Technology 
Development Agency (NITDA) shares similar views with Microsoft and the National Institutes of 
Standards  and  Technology  on  the  threats  to  be  addressed  through  the  implementation  of  a 
consolidated  cybersecurity  framework  (Osho  &  Onoja,  2015).  Although,  this  is  mainly  for 
organizations like the financial sector, oil and gas, and other conglomerates. This situation makes 
our  attempt  at  producing  an  actionable  cybersecurity  framework  for  Nigerian  universities  a 
worthwhile venture. 

2.2    Cybersecurity issues in Universities 
Cybersecurity is derived from two words: cyber and security. According to Valeriano and Maness 
(2015), cyber is related to the technology which contains systems, network and programs or data 
(Valeriano  &  Maness,  2015).  On  the  other  hand,  Schneier  (2009)  argued  that  security  relates  to 
protection  of  systems,  network,  application,  and  information.  Sanoo  (2018)  further  described 
cybersecurity as the protection of interconnected systems, including hardware, software, and data 
from  cyber-attacks.  One  important  factor  that  Valeriano  and  Maness  (2015),  Sanoo  (2018)  and 
Schneier  (2009)  did  not  include  in  their  definitions  is  the  social:  values,  norms  and  cultures 
conjectured  by  organizations  as  suitable  and  logical  ways  of  behaving  and  relating  with  others. 
Consequently, we take cybersecurity to be primarily about people and the social structures and work 
processes  they  create,  and  technologies  they  put  together  to  encompass  the  full  range  of  threat 
reduction,  vulnerability  reduction,  deterrence,  international  engagement,  incident  response, 
resiliency, and recovery policies and activities, including computer network operations, information 
assurance, law enforcement. Some authors have proposed similar view about cybersecurity in the 
extant  literature.  These  authors  argued  that  the  body  of  technologies,  processes,  and  practices 
designed to protect networks, devices, programs, and data from attack, theft, damage, modification 
or unauthorized access constitute cybersecurity management protocols (Abu-Taieh, 2017; Rashid et 
al., 2018; Sanoo, 2018). Cybersecurity is used in different areas in universities, and each university 
has its area of usage or application. Most universities in the world has deployed cybersecurity to 
protect their network, and data on the cyberspace. Universities in the developed countries such as 
University  of  Arizona,  University  of  Edinburgh,  University  of  Bristol,  University  of  Sheffield, 
Princeton University, University of Illinois, University of Leicester, Carnegie Mellon University, 
and University of Pittsburg uses different cybersecurity frameworks to manage cybersecurity risk. 
The framework deployed helps to facilitate the strategic vision of the universities and facilitate the 
protection  of  information  systems  against  compromise  of  its  confidentiality,  integrity,  and 
availability (Webb & Hume, 2018). Whilst doing this, it recognizes the ability to discover, develop, 
and  share  knowledge  among  employees.  While  Nigerian  universities  are  reluctant  about 
cybersecurity framework. 

Several  studies  were  conducted  to  examine  issues  concerning  cyber  security  threats  in  Nigerian 
Universities. A study conducted by Ekpoh et al. (2020) in which factors that served as cybersecurity 
threats to universities were examined at University of Lagos, it was found in the study that there 
existed a strong positive relationship between location, culture, facilities and personnel security of 
universities,  while  a  weak,  positive  correlation  existed  between  school  climate  and  personnel 
security.  The  study  concluded  that  indiscipline,  poor  staff  and  student’s  safety  and  security 
awareness,  inadequate capacity building for security personnel, poor  funding of institutions, and 
outdated  security  framework,  were  the  major  determinants  of  security  lapses  in  Nigerian 
Universities. A study was conducted by Dagogo (2005) on the role of security agents in curbing 
cybercrimes in Universities in the North-East Nigeria using seven tertiary institutions. The study 
revealed that training and re-training of security personnel and cybersecurity expert significantly 
affect their level of service delivery. Statistically, Nigerian universities ranked 43 in Europe, the 
Middle East and Africa and ranked third among the nations that commit cybercrime in the world 
(Makeri, 2017). 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  856 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

  Cyber Security Framework 

2.3 
Cyber  security  management  framework  has  to  do  with  mitigating  cybersecurity  risks.  It  is  a 
relatively new and growing aspect of risk management in organizations. Organizations, including 
universities, face risks due to natural occurrences, human resource failures, third-party contractors, 
financial mayhem, chaotic conditions, and security breaches. Risk is an unpredictable occurrence of 
an incident or situation in organizations or universities that has  negative impact, such as time, cost, 
or quality (Mikkola et al., 2020). A risk may have one or more triggers or causes, and if it happens, 
it may have diverse effects. Every facet of universities' information systems and technical and social 
environments  can  face  diverse  risks  which  are  likely  to  be  caused  by  poor  preparation  and 
management procedures, and lack of centralized management systems (Hollis, 2015). Consequently, 
risk management (RM) has become an important and integral part of cybersecurity management in 
organizations  over  the  last  few  decades  (Whitehead,  2020).  It  encompasses  the  mechanisms 
involved in hazard preparation, assessment, interpretation, reactions, and threat management and 
regulation (Purohit et al., 2018), which is further described as a role that enables and adds value to 
organizations while increasing the likelihood of achieving strategic objectives. Meanwhile, every 
organization  that  wants  to  excel,  must  develop  strong  capabilities  to  handle  complex  risks. 
Contemporary  organizations  must  build  an  empowering  atmosphere  that  reduces  the  negative 
consequences of risk. The idea that it is advisable that universities have cybersecurity frameworks 
stems from insights propagated in the RM domain. this is given  the relationship between critical 
aspects of RM and those of cybersecurity frameworks namely, techniques, processes, and resources 
used to define and manage risks (Aven & Renn, 2010).  

There  are  several  cybersecurity  frameworks  in  use  across  the  world,  depending  on  person  or 
organizational preference and adaptation (Pattinson et al., 2018). Defense in Depth and Defense in 
Breath, NIST Cybersecurity Framework, The Lockheed Martin Kill Chain, Specified Frameworks, 
Global Cybersecurity Index, and Cybersecurity Risk Framework (Smith, 2019). However, the most 
widely  used  framework  developed  by  the  US  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology 
(NIST),  offers  a  high-level  taxonomy  of  cybersecurity  outcomes  as  well  as  a  methodology  for 
assessing  and  managing  them.  According  to  NIST  (2020),  the  NIST  Cyber  Security  Framework 
(CSF)  describes  five  core  functions  that  organizations  should  address  to  pro-actively  manage 
cybersecurity threats to their business operations; identification, detection, protection, reaction, and 
recovery.  Another  cybersecurity  framework  widely  used  in  organizations  is  the  Global 
Cybersecurity Index (GCI) conceptual framework designed by the International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU) in  collaboration with  ABI research institutes  (ITU, 2015).  The framework seeks to 
evaluate a country or organization’s development in cybersecurity systematically. The objective of 
this framework is  for cybersecurity to  be a focal point in  information  systems organizations and 
users  of  those  systems  (ITU,  2015).  Five  critical  factors  were  identified  as  the  constructs  which 
determines the dimension of cybersecurity within organizations (ITU, 2015; Maarten et al., 2015; 
Stein, 2008). These constructs include technical measures, legal measures, capacity building, co-
operation, and organizational measures. 

Although  existing  frameworks  are  simple  and  actionable,  most  of  them  do  not  directly  address 
cybersecurity issues faced by universities. The peculiarities of universities in developing country 
contexts also raises concerns that are not directly addressed in existing international frameworks. 
To control cybersecurity threats, universities must have a thorough understanding of their socio-
technical contexts, operations, drivers, and security issues. Since the threats, goals, and processes of 
each university are distinct, the techniques and approaches used to achieve the objectives that inform 
cybersecurity frameworks usually  differ.  As a result, this study invites  Nigerian universities and 
universities in similar developing country context to be clear about their socio-technical contexts, 
operations, drivers, and security issues. To achieve this clarity of purpose, Nigeria universities must 
provide answers to the questions raised in this study namely: what are the cybersecurity problems 
Nigerian universities are facing and what are the likely problems they will face in the future?  What 
should the objectives of cybersecurity programs of Nigeria universities be? How can appropriate 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  857 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

cybersecurity  program  be  designed  and  implemented  by  Nigerian  universities?  How  can  the 
appropriateness  and  adequacy  of  Nigerian  universities’  cybersecurity  programs  be  tested  and 
evaluated? How can cybersecurity programs of Nigerian universities be communicated to necessary 
stakeholders?  Painstaking  and  scientifically  derived  answers  will  provide  grounds  for  a  unique 
cybersecurity framework. 

3.  METHODOLOGY 
The  study  adopted  the  interpretive  philosophy.  The  Interpretivist  philosophy  will  have  scholars 
believe  that  social  realities,  such  as  cybercrime  and  cybersecurity,  and  IS  artefacts  including 
frameworks, are socially constructed, that is manmade (Ngwenyama, 2014). It also makes scholars 
to work with the assumption that the human actors involved in the use of IT and the IT itself are 
subjective and act based on socially constructed notions (Utulu & Ngwenyama, 2017). The method 
adopted for the study is the literature review method. Extensive review of the literature was carried 
out  on  themes  relating  to  cybercrime,  cybersecurity,  and  design  science  research  approach.  The 
literature review method adopted in the study was more like the snowball technique, where works 
cited by the works we consider primary to our debate and the works that cited them were selected 
and  used  to  come  up  with  the  arguments  that  we  presented  in  the  paper.  This  literature  review 
method  has  been  used  by  Avgerou  (2008),  Heeks  (2017)  and  Olagunju  and  Utulu  (2021).  The 
literature reviews method is  unlike the systematic literature  review or  grounded theory literature 
review that are based on premeditated procedures  (Okoli & Schabram,  2010;  Utulu  et  al.,  2013; 
Wolfswinkel et al., 2013). Theoretical perspectives of the design science research approach were 
used to come up with the cybersecurity management framework that we proposed. Baskerville et al. 
(2018), argue that design science method involves the creation of an artefact, framework, model, or 
theory in which the current state of practice can be improved together with the existing knowledge. 
Hevner  and  Chatterjee  (2010)  further  stated  that  design  science  method  is  a  problem-solving 
paradigm which results, among others, in the development of models or frameworks that are useful 
to solving practical problems. 

4. 

PROPOSED FRAMEWORK 

4.1       Identifying Cybersecurity Threats Nigerian Universities are likely to face  
The primary tasks of universities are production and dissemination of scientific knowledge research 
and  scientific  knowledge  publication.  Globally,  universities  are  vulnerable  to  diverse  forms  of 
cybersecurity problems,  including theft of intellectual property, compromise of student and staff 
records and hacking of university portal (Oliver, 2010). Moreover, different forms of cybercrime 
ranging from admission falsification, impersonation, illegal room allocation, website defacement, 
hacking  of  log-in  details,  printing  of  fake  admission  letters  among  others  are  the  cybersecurity 
challenges facing Nigerian universities (Bukhari, 2018; Igba et al., 2018; Okeshola & Adeta, 2013). 
The emerging problems that Nigerian Universities may face are numerous. Some of the problems 
include  beneficiary  of  a  will  scam.  According  to  Bian  et  al.  (2018),  will  scam  occurs  when 
cybercriminal send e-mail to claim that the victim is the named beneficiary in the will of an estranged 
and stands to inherit and estate worth millions. Another emerging cybersecurity challenge is online 
charity. In online charity, cybercriminals host websites as if they are charity organizations. They use 
the  websites  to  solicit  for  monetary  and  material  donations  (Saulawa  &  Abubakar,  2014).  The 
possibility that cybercriminal can set up fake websites and lure donors to donate to universities is 
high. Another cybercrime Nigerian Universities suffer from is computer/Internet service time theft. 
Culprits  develop  means  of  connecting  privately  owned  cyber  cafes  to  networks  owned  by 
universities  in  ways  that  are  difficult  to  detect  and  thereby  run  their  cafés  at  the  expense  of  the 
universities (Oliver, 2010).   

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  858 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

4.2        Setting Objectives for Nigerian Universities’ Cybersecurity Programs 
The  main  objectives  of  cybersecurity  programs  are  to  help  Nigerian  universities  reduce  the 
vulnerability of the information systems and networks they operate in cyberspaces. Setting adequate 
and appropriate objectives for cybersecurity programs can be a very complex task for universities, 
including Nigerian universities (Igba et al., 2018). This is because the extent to which cybersecurity 
programs  of  Nigerian  universities  can  reach  is  highly  dependent  on  the  objectives  the  set. 
Consequently,  the  values  cybersecurity  objectives  of  Nigerian  universities  are  funtions  of  their 
understanding of cyber security threats they face, the extent they  are able to articulate and share 
information about the cybersecurity threats with necessary stakeholders and the ways they are able 
to translate their understanding of the cybersecurity threats to cybersecurity management policies 
and  practices  (Bian  et  al.,  2018;  Saulawa  &  Abubakar,  2014).  The  extent  nigerian  universities 
collaboratively  work  with  public,  private,  and  international  entities  with  regards  to  their 
cybersecurity programs is also a function of the adequacy and appropriateness of the cybersecurity 
objectives  they  set.  Cybersecurity  objectives  provide  the  framework  of  reference  that  helps 
organizations  to  understand  current  trends  in  cybercrimes  and  solutions  that  are  effective  and 
efficient  in  tackling  them.  Cybersecurity  objectives  also  provide  grounds  the  measure  levels  of 
integrity, reliability and efficiency of cybersecurity programs.  

4.3  Techniques for Managing Cyberattacks by Nigerian Universities 
Cybersecurity  policy  framework  is  the  first  point  of  action  for  managing  cybersecurity  threats. 
Although it evolves from cybersecurity objectives set by universities, it spells out what Nigerian 
universities should do and how to do what they have to do with regards to cybersecurity threats. 
Each universities cybersecurity policy should be integrated with other universities and organizations 
and should provide room for determine other universities and organizations should policy to avert 
or  management  cybersecurity  attacks  (Makeri,  2017).  An  appropriate  cybersecurity  framework 
should  also  define  required  cybersecurity  education  and  training  universities  need  to  provide 
members  of  university  communities.  It  is  also  necessary  to  educate  members  of  university 
communities  and  various  organizations  universities  deal  with  in  the  best  practice  for  effective 
cybersecurity  management.  It  should  also  spell  out  cybersecurity  requirements  of  other 
organizations the universities deal with. For example, some universities in the developed countries 
have a policy that all systems in their purview must meet strict security guidelines (Ekpoh et al., 
2020). Automated updates are sent to all computers and servers on the internal network, and no new 
system  is  allowed  online  until  it  conforms  to  the  security  policy  (Iriqat  &  Molok,  2019). 
Cybersecurity management resources required to avert or manage cybersecurity attacks are also to 
be  spelt  out  in  cybersecurity  policy  frameworks.  Cybersecurity  policy  frameworks  Nigerian 
universities use should also spell out the role ISPs are to play within universities’ cyberspace and 
how  to  ensure  high  level  of  security  at  servers  in  order  to  keep  clients  secure  from  all  types  of 
cyberattacks (Odinma, 2010).  

4.4  Cybersecurity Programs Appropriateness and Adequacy Assessment 
An important part of the cybersecurity management framework proposed in this paper is making 
room  to  assess  the  appropriateness  and  adequacy  of  the  entire  cybersecurity  management 
framework.  This  could  be  done  in  two  way  (Pavol  Zavarsky  &  CISM,  2014).  First,  is 
appropriateness  and  adequacy  assessment  that  is  based  on  assumptions  (Armenia  et  al.,  2021). 
Second, is the appropriateness and adequacy assessment that is based on experience (Glantz et al., 
2016). The first option occurs given that appropriateness and adequacy are determined before the 
occurrence of cyberattack. The second option occurs after a cyberattack when a university assesses 
its cybersecurity management framework vis-à-vis the nature and strategy cyberattack it suffered. 
The  attack  may  not  be  a  serious  attack,  but  it  provides  avenue  for  cybersecurity  management 
framework  appropriateness  and  adequacy  assessment.  These  two  approaches  to  assessing  the 
appropriateness and adequacy of universities’ cybersecurity management frameworks can help those 
concerned to modify existing cybersecurity management frameworks. They help to open avenue for 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  859 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

constructive  feedbacks  from  those  concerned.  The  use  of  stakeholders’  feedbacks  and 
recommendations are made possible by cybersecurity appropriateness and adequacy assessment.  

4.5  Communicating Cyberattack and Management Outcomes to Stakeholders 
This requirement is important, and can be used during two different situations. The first situation is 
pre-cyberattack  situation  while  the  second  situation  is  post-cyberattack  situation.  During  the 
pre-cyberattack  situation,  universities  are  expected  to  communicate  how  their  cybersecurity 
management  framework  works  and  the  role  of  each  stakeholder  group.  In  the  second  situation, 
universities are to communicate loopholes in the cybersecurity management framework that resulted 
to the cyberattack experienced and how the updated cybersecurity management framework solves 
the problems that resulted from the loopholes. Communicating ideas across large organization is a 
complex task (Smith, 2019). Heide et al. (2018; p. 2) in his article “Expanding the Scope of Strategic 
Communication:  Towards  a  Holistic  Understanding  of  Organizational  Complexity”,  describes 
strategic communication as an academic movement that has been formulated as an ambition to break 
down  the  silos  surrounding  closely  related  communication  disciplines  and  create  unifying 
relations,  organizational  communication,  marketing 
framework 
communications and other areas” Organizations should communicate strategically to purposefully 
fulfill their overall missions. This complexity is also applicable to efforts made by organizations to 
communicate cybersecurity management framework across the length and breadth of organizations. 
The  complex  nature  of  cybersecurity  threats  and  the  difficulty  in  knowing  the  perpetrators  and 
understanding  their  motives  makes  the  act  of  communicating  cybersecurity  management 
frameworks across the length and breadth of organizations a complex endeavor. Aside this, some 
aspects  of  cybersecurity  management  frameworks  that  universities  may  use  may  be  made 
clandestine.  So,  it  is  important  to  know  and  understand  those  that  these  aspects  should  be 

integrates  public 

that 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  860 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

communicated  to  and  how  to  effectively  and  efficiently  do  this  without  jeopardizing  the  overall 
cybersecurity management program. 

5.  CONCLUSION AND LIMITATION 
The rapid expansion of cyberspaces and universities transfer of their major activities and operations 
into  cyberspaces  have  led  to  the  increase  of  cybercrime  perpetrated  against  universities.  The 
frequency in which universities across the globe suffers from cybersecurity attacks indicate the need 
for  Nigerian  universities  to  develop  cybersecurity  management  frameworks  that  they  ae  use  to 
coordinate their cybersecurity management programs. This is not to say that Nigerian universities 
do not have cybersecurity strategies they use. It however, indicates that they need to make concerted  

Pre-cyberattack 
Readiness 

Cyberattack  
Management 

Post-cyberattack 
Activities  

Develop Policies and 
Strategies 

 University Wide 

Policies & Strategies. 

 Sectional policies & 

Strategies  

 Integrated Policies-

with other Universities 
& Organizations 

Gather Cybersecurity 
Management Resources  

 IT Based Resources  
o Access Security  
o Physical Security   

 Social Resources 
o Education  
o Training  
o Social Marketing  

 Collaborations   

o Other Universities  
o Service Organizations  
o Security Agencies  

Deploy Cybersecurity 
Management 
Resources 

Assess & Understand 
Cyberattack 

Assess & Deploy 
Available Cyberattack 
Management Resources 

Trace Cyber Attackers & 
Culprits 

Halt Cyberattack as 
Quickly as Possible 

Assess & Understand 
Cyberattack Damages 

Assess & Understand Cyber 
Attackers & Culprits 
Motives & Strategies 

Pre-cyberattack 
Readiness 

Cyberattack  
Management 

Review Weak 
Cybersecurity 
Management Links 

Communicate Weak 
Cybersecurity 
Management Links with 
Appropriate Stakeholders 

Review Cybersecurity 
Management Policies 

Update Cybersecurity 
Management Resources 

Fine-tune Cybersecurity 
Management 
Collaboration 

Re-train & Re-
Educate necessary 
Stakeholders 

Post-cyberattack 
Act 
ivities  

Figure 1: Nigerian Universities’ Cybersecurity Management Framework 

efforts  towards  formalizing  and  documenting  their  cybersecurity  management  strategies  into 
actionable frameworks. This paper presents a proposed framework that provides good grounds for 
Nigerian  universities  to  set  off  their  actions  towards  developing  actionable  cybersecurity 
frameworks.  The  paper  proposes  three-stage  based  cybersecurity  management  framework  for 
Nigerian  universities  namely,  pre-cybersecurity  readiness,  cyberattack  management  and  post-
cyberattack activities. Each stage was broken down into actionable processes. The limitation of the 
framework and by extension this paper, is that it is not based on empirical research study. It is based 
on literature review. An empirical study would have provide empirically derived insights on how 
the proposed cybersecurity management framework will work in real life situations. However, the 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  861 
 
 
 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

paper  and  the  proposed  framework  provide  grounds  for  conducting  empirical  studies  on 
cybersecurity management framework for universities. 

REFERENCES 

Abu-Taieh,  E.  M.  (2017).  Cyber  security  body  of  knowledge.  2017  IEEE  7th  International 

Symposium on Cloud and Service Computing (SC2),  

Adesina, R., & Ingirige, B. (2019). Dismantling barriers to effective disaster management in nigeria. 
14th  International  Postgraduate  research  conference  2019:  Contemporary  and  Future 
Directions in the Built Environment,   

Aheleroff, S., Xu, X., Zhong, R. Y., & Lu, Y. (2021). Digital twin as a service (DTaaS) in industry 
4.0: an architecture reference model. Advanced Engineering Informatics, 47, 101225.  

Alpert, B. S. (2012). College and University Disaster Management: The Impact of Leader Behavior 

on Response and Recovery from Disaster  

Armenia,  S.,  Angelini,  M.,  Nonino,  F.,  Palombi,  G.,  &  Schlitzer,  M.  F.  (2021).  A  dynamic 
simulation  approach  to  support  the  evaluation  of  cyber  risks  and  security  investments  in 
SMEs. Decision Support Systems, 113580.    

Aven, T., & Renn, O. (2010). Risk management. In Risk Management and Governance (pp. 121-

158). Springer.  

Avgerou, C. (2008). Information systems in developing countries: a critical research review. Journal 

of information Technology, 23(3), 133-146.   

Baskerville, R., Baiyere, A., Gregor, S., Hevner, A., & Rossi, M. (2018). Design science research 
contributions: finding a balance between artifact and theory. Journal of the Association for 
Information Systems, 19(5), 3.  

Bian, S., Deng, Z., Li, F., Monroe, W., Shi, P., Sun, Z., Wu, W., Wang, S., Wang, W. Y., & Yuan, 
A.  (2018).  Icorating:  A  deep-learning  system  for  scam  ico  identification.  arXiv  preprint 
arXiv:1803.03670.  

Bukhari, B. (2018). Effects of Security Protocols on Cybercrme in Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria 

[Academic Masters, University of KwaZulu Natal, South Africa].    

Chapman, J. (2019). How safe is your data? Cyber-security in higher education. Higher Education 

Policy Institute Policy.  

Clausen. (2019). Justifying military intervention: Yemen as a failed state. Third World Quarterly, 

40(3), 488-502.  

Clausen, S. T. (2019). Enabling the Implementation of Drones into Local Disaster Preparedness Key 

considerations from challenges and lessons learned in Chile.  

De Paoli, S., Johnstone, J., Coull, N., Ferguson, I., Sinclair, G., Tomkins, P., Brown, M., & Martin, 
R.  (2020).  A  Qualitative  Exploratory  Study  of  the  Knowledge,  Forensic,  and  Legal 
Challenges from the Perspective of Police Cybercrime Specialists.  Policing: A Journal of 
Policy and Practice.    

Demers,  G., Harrington, S., Cianci,  M., & Green, N. (2017). Protecting Colleges  & Universities 
Against  Real  Losses  in  a  Virtual  World,  33  J.  Marshall  J.  Info.  Tech.  &  Privacy  L.  101 
(2017). The John Marshall Journal of Information Technology & Privacy Law, 33(2), 3.    

Eboibi, F. E. (2020). Concerns of cyber criminality in South Africa, Ghana, Ethiopia and Nigeria: 
accountability. 

implementation 

institutional 

and 

rethinking 
cybercrime  policy 
Commonwealth Law Bulletin, 46(1), 78-109.  

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  862 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

Egbunike,  N.  (2019).  Nigerian  students  face  cybercrime  charges  for  criticising  their  university 
online.  https://globalvoices.org/2019/07/11/nigerian-students-face-cybercrime-charges-for-
criticising-their-university-online/ 

Ekpoh, U. I., Edet, A. O., & Ukpong, N. N. (2020). Security Challenges in Universities: Implications 
for Safe School Environment. Journal of Educational and Social Research, 10(6), 112-112. 

France-Presse,  A.  (2020).  US  Says  China  Trying  to  Steal  COVID-19  Vaccine  Research. 
https://www.voanews.com/covid-19-pandemic/us-says-china-trying-steal-covid-19-
vaccine-research 

Glantz, C., Somasundaram, S., Mylrea, M., Underhill, R., & Nicholls, A. (2016). Evaluating the 
maturity of cybersecurity programs for building control systems. US Department of Energy 
Office of Scientific and Technical Information.  

Heeks, R. (2017). Decent work and the digital gig economy: a developing country perspective on 
employment  impacts  and  standards  in  online  outsourcing,  crowdwork,  etc.  Development 
Informatics Working Paper(71).  

Heide, M., von Platen, S., Simonsson, C., & Falkheimer, J. (2018). Expanding the scope of strategic 
communication:  Towards  a  holistic  understanding  of  organizational  complexity. 
International Journal of Strategic Communication, 12(4), 452-468.  

Hevner,  A.,  &  Chatterjee,  S.  (2010).  Design  science  research  in  information  systems.  In  Design 

research in information systems (pp. 9-22). Springer.  

Hollis, S. (2015). The role of regional organizations in disaster risk management. In  The Role of 

Regional Organizations in Disaster Risk Management (pp. 1-12). Springer.  

Hunton,  P.  (2011).  A  rigorous  approach  to  formalising  the  technical  investigation  stages  of 
law  enforcement  environment.  Digital 

cybercrime  and  criminality  within  a  UK 
investigation, 7(3-4), 105-113.  

Igba, D., Elizabeth, C., & Nwambam, A. S. (2018). Cybercrime among University Undergraduates: 
Implications on their Academic Achievement. International Journal of Applied Engineering 
Research, 13(2), 1144-1154.   

Iriqat, Y. M., & Molok, N. N. A. (2019). Information security policy perceived compliance among 
staff in palestine universities: an empirical pilot study. 2019 IEEE Jordan International Joint 
Conference on Electrical Engineering and Information Technology (JEEIT),  

ITU. (2015). Global cybersecurity index & cyberwellness profiles report (Cybersecurity, Issue. I. 

T. Union. https://www.itu.int/pub/D-STR-SECU-2015 

Kuusikallio, V. (2017). Community-based disaster preparedness in The Kimbilio Women´ s Shelter 

and Education Center.  

Li, F., Li, Z., Han, W., Wu, T., Chen, L., Guo, Y., & Chen, J. (2018). Cyberspace-oriented access 
control: A cyberspace characteristics-based model and its policies. IEEE Internet of Things 
Journal, 6(2), 1471-1483.  

Maarten,  G.,  Artur,  U.,  Erik,  F.,  &  Michel,  R.  (2015).  A  meta-analysis  of  threats,  trends,  and 
responses  to  cyber  attacks  (Assessing  Cyber  Security,  Issue.  T.  H.  C.  f.  S.  Studies. 
https://hoffmannbv.nl/sites/default/files/Report%20Assessing%20Cyber%20Security%201
6%20april%202015.pdf. 

Makeri, Y. A. (2017). Cyber Security Issues in Nigeria and Challenges. International Journal, 7(4). 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  863 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

Mamogale,  H.  (2011).  Assessing  disaster  preparedness  of  learners  and  educators  in  Soshanguve 
North  schools.  Bloemfontein,  South  Africa:  The  Disaster  Management  Training  and 
Education Centre for Africa, the University of the Free State.  

Mary, L. (2016). IT Security and Privacy.  

Mikkola, M., Oksanen, A., Kaakinen, M., Miller, B. L., Savolainen, I., Sirola, A., Zych, I., & Paek, 
H.-J.  (2020).  Situational  and  Individual  Risk  Factors  for  Cybercrime  Victimization  in  a 
Cross-national  Context.  International  Journal  of  Offender  Therapy  and  Comparative 
Criminology, 0306624X20981041.    

Mojeed, M. (2020). How Nigerian University Launched Massive Cyberattacks Against Premium 

Times. https://allafrica.com/stories/202007280025.html  

Morgan, S. (2020). Cybercrime To Cost The World $10.5 Trillion Annually By 2025 Cybercrime 

Magazine. In. 

Ngwenyama, O. (2014). Logical foundations of social science research. In Advances in Research 

Methods for Information Systems Research (pp. 7-13). Springer.  

NIST. 

(2020). 

CYBERSECURITY 

FRAMEWORK. 

https://www.tenable.com/lp/campaigns/20/whitepapers/adhering-to-the-nist-framework-
with-tenable-ot/?utm_campaign=gs-{9662775243}-{100779850978}-
{426501511627}_00021238_fy21q1&utm_promoter=tenable-indegy-nb-
00021238&utm_source=google&utm_term=%2Bnist%20%2Bframework&utm_medium=
cpc&utm_geo=emea&gclid=EAIaIQobChMIjbXbsunm7wIVAtWyCh2j7g6IEAAYASAA
EgIu0PD_BwE 

Odinma, A. (2010). Cybercrime & Cert: Issues & Probable Policies for Nigeria. DBI Presentation, 

Nov, 1-2.  

Okeshola, F. B., & Adeta, A. K. (2013). The nature, causes and consequences of cyber crime in 
tertiary  institutions  in  Zaria-Kaduna  state,  Nigeria.  American  International  Journal  of 
Contemporary Research, 3(9), 98-114.  

Okoli,  C.,  &  Schabram,  K.  (2010).  A  guide  to  conducting  a  systematic  literature  review  of 

information systems research.  

Olagunju, M., & Utulu, S. (2021). Money Market Digitization Consequences on Financial Inclusion 
of  Businesses  at  the  Base  of  the  Pyramid  in  Nigeria.  the  digital  distruption  of  financial 
services: international perspectives, Ewa Lechman & Adam Marszk (Eds.).  

Oliver, E. (2010). Being Lecture Delivered at DBI/George Mason University Conferenceon Cyber 
Security  holding.  In:  Department  of  Information  Management  Technology  Federal 
University of …. 

Osho,  O.,  &  Onoja,  A.  D.  (2015).  National  Cyber  Security  Policy  and  Strategy  of  Nigeria:  A 

Qualitative Analysis. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 9(1).  

Parsons, S. (2020). The Duke of Cambridge visits the laboratory in Oxford where a potential vaccine 
has been produced.  https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jul/17/russian-hackers-steal-
coronavirus-vaccine-uk-minister-cyber-attack  

Pattinson, M. R., Butavicius, M. A., Ciccarello, B., Lillie, M., Parsons, K., Calic, D., & McCormac, 

A. (2018). Adapting Cyber-Security Training to Your Employees. HAISA,  

Pavol Zavarsky, C., & CISM, C. (2014). Step-by-step guidance on how to establish, implement and 

operate cybersecurity management system (ISMS).   

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  864 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

Purohit,  D.  P.,  Siddiqui,  N.,  Nandan,  A.,  &  Yadav,  B.  P.  (2018).  Hazard  identification  and  risk 
assessment in construction industry. International Journal of Applied Engineering Research, 
13(10), 7639-7667.  

Rashid,  A.,  Danezis,  G.,  Chivers,  H.,  Lupu,  E.,  Martin,  A.,  Lewis,  M.,  &  Peersman,  C.  (2018). 

Scoping the cyber security body of knowledge. IEEE Security & Privacy, 16(3), 96-102.   

Ryder, R. D., & Madhavan, A. (2019). Cyber Crisis Management: Overcoming the Challenges in 

Cyberspace. Bloomsbury Publishing.  

Sanoo, 

J. 

(2018). 

Cyber 

Security 

Tutorials. 

Retrieved 

26/06/2020 

from 

https://www.javatpoint.com/cyber-security-introduction 

Saulawa, M. a. A., & Abubakar, M. (2014). Cybercrime in nigeria: An overview of cybercrime act 

2013. JL Pol'y & Globalization, 32, 23.  

Sausalito, C. (2020). Cybercrime To Cost The World $10.5 Trillion Annually By 2025. Cybercrime. 

https://cybersecurityventures.com/hackerpocalypse-cybercrime-report-
2016/#:~:text=Cybersecurity%20Ventures%20expects%20global%20cybercrime,%243%2
0trillion%20USD%20in%202015  

Schneier, B. (2009). Schneier on security. John Wiley & Sons.  

Singh, U. K., & Joshi, C. (2017). Information Security Risk Management Framework for University 

Computing Environment. IJ Network Security, 19(5), 742-751.  

Smith, W. (2019). A comprehensive cybersecurity defense framework for large organizations.  

Sobers, 

R. 

(2021). 

134 

Cybersecurity 

Statistics 

and 

Trends 

for 

2021. 

https://www.varonis.com/blog/cybersecurity-statistics/ 

Soomro, T. R., & Hussain, M. (2019). Social media-related cybercrimes and techniques for their 

prevention. Applied Computer Systems, 24(1), 9-17.  

Stein,  S.  (2008).  ITU  Global  Cybersecurity  Agenda  (GCA)  High-Level  Experts  Group  (HLEG) 
Global  strategic  report.  ITU.  https://www.itu.int/en/action/cybersecurity/Documents/gca-
chairman-report.pdf. 

Taylor, L. (2017). What is data justice? The case for connecting digital rights and freedoms globally. 

Big Data & Society, 4(2), 2053951717736335.  

Utulu, S., Sewchurran, K., & Dwolatzky, B. (2013). Systematic and Grounded Theory Literature 
Reviews  of  Software  Process  Improvement  Phenomena:  Implications  for  IS  Research. 
Proceedings of the Informing Science and Information Technology Education Conference,  

Utulu,  S.  C.  A.,  &  Ngwenyama,  O.  (2017).  Model  for  constructing  institutional  framework  for 
scientific knowledge management systems: Nigerian institutional repository innovation case 
applicable to developing countries. In Catalyzing Development through ICT Adoption (pp. 
149-174). Springer.  

Valeriano,  B.,  &  Maness,  R.  C.  (2015).  Cyber  war  versus  cyber  realities:  Cyber  conflict  in  the 

international system. Oxford University Press, USA.  

Walker,  A.  (2020).  UK  '95%  sure'  Russian  hackers  tried  to  steal  coronavirus  vaccine  research. 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jul/17/russian-hackers-steal-coronavirus-
vaccine-uk-minister-cyber-attack  

Webb,  J.,  &  Hume,  D.  (2018).  Campus  IoT  collaboration  and  governance  using  the  NIST 

cybersecurity framework.  

Whitehead, G. (2020). Investigation of factors influencing cybersecurity decision making in Irish 

SME's from a senior manager/owner perspective Dublin, National College of Ireland].  

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  865 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Badamasi & Utulu                                                                      Framework for Managing Cybercrime Risks in Nigerian Universities 

Wolfswinkel, J. F., Furtmueller, E., & Wilderom, C. P. (2013). Using grounded theory as a method 
for rigorously reviewing literature. European Journal of Information Systems, 22(1), 45-55. 

Xie, J. (2020). In Coronavirus Vaccine Hunt, a Race to Be First.  

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  866 
 
 
 
 
 
 
