A Review on Cybersecurity in Smart Local Energy Systems: 
Requirements, Challenges, and Standards 

Siyuan Dong*a, Jun Caob, Zhong Fana 
aSchool of Computer and Mathematics, Keele University, Keele, Newcastle ST5 5BG  
bSchool of Geography, Geology and the Environment, Keele University, Keele, Newcastle ST5 5BG  
*Corresponding author: s.dong@keele.ac.uk (Siyuan Dong) 

Abstract 

from  the  complex 

localised  operation,  benefited 

Smart  local  energy  system  (SLES)  is  considered  as  a  promising  pathway  facilitating  a  more 
effective  and 
information  and 
communication technology (ICT) infrastructures and Internet of things (IoT) technologies. As 
a  part  of  the  critical  infrastructure,  it  is  important  to  not  only  put  effective  detection  and 
management to tackle potential cybersecurity issues, but also require considerable numbers 
of standards to ensure the security of the internet of things system to minimise the risks. This 
study  aims  to  review  the  existing  standards,  investigate  how  the  compatibility  with  SLES 
development, and identify the area to focus on in the future. Although existing standards and 
protocols  are  highly  fragmented,  our  findings  suggest  that  many  of  them  can  meet  the 
requirements of the applications and infrastructures of SLES. Additionally, many standards 
have  been  introduced  to  protect  information  security  and  personal  privacy  due  to  their 
increasing importance. The research also suggests that the industry needs to produce more 
affordable  and  cyber-secured  devices  and  services.  For  the  government  and  regulators, 
relevant  guidelines  on  the  minimum  function  and  security  requirements  for  applications 
should be provided. Additionally, compliance testing and certifications should be in place and 
carried out by an independent third party to ensure the components of SLES ecosystem with 
a satisfied security level by design.   

Keywords: Cybersecurity, Standards, Smart Local Energy System, Distributed Energy Resource 

(Word Count: 6230) 

List of Abbreviations 

SLES 

DER 

ICT 

IoT 

SCADA 

RTU 

Smart Local Energy System  

Distributed Energy Resource 

Information and Communication Technology 

Internet of Things 

Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 

Remote Terminal Units 

PLC 

MTU 

HMI 

AMI 

HAN 

WAN 

Programmable Logic Controllers 

Master Terminal Unit 

Human-Machine Interfaces 

Advanced Metering Infrastructure 

Home Area Network 

Wide Area Network 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 

In the past few years, distributed energy resources (DERs) have been widely adopted due to 
the collective goal in tackling climate change. They emerged as a promising solution to reduce 
the carbon emissions and help the transmission of existing energy industry towards a cleaner 
and more decentralised manner. The proportion of the renewables has significantly increased 
in the total energy production mix in the UK in the recent years [1], such as offshore wind. 
Similar to most countries, the UK’s energy system is based upon the “supplier hub model” [2], 
which means the electricity is generated from energy suppliers, transmitted via transmission 
and distribution networks, and finally consumed by end-users. The newly built large-scale DER 
sites are usually far away from the consumer end. Together with increasing energy demand, 
they  pose  new  challenges  to  the  existing  energy  system,  which  may  require  additional 
expensive generation assets and network reinforcement and expansion [3]. However, there 
is an alternative approach, solving the problem at the near-consumer side.  

The demand for more active energy management and more affordable energy supply have 
contributed to the rapid growth in DER deployments at the near-user end [4]. The network 
operators  must  seek  for  new  solutions  to  the  problems  and  challenges  brought  by  the 
increasing  penetration  of  DERs.  Meanwhile,  they  also  need  to  make  the  best  use  of  the 
enormous flexibility that potentially benefits the whole system. For the better integration, 
some potential solutions have been proposed to embrace the idea of localising energy supply 
and also provide additional flexibility and resilience, such as virtual power plants [5], local 
energy market [6], and aggregators [7].  

Amongst all potential solutions, SLES is considered as a promising pathway facilitating a more 
effective and localised operation. Previous study [8] identified the benefits of SLES, including 
effective  provision  of  energy  service,  enabling  flexibility  within  and  across  energy  vectors, 
improved resilience and ability to cope with failure, etc. SLES substantially benefits from its 
complex information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructures that can provide 
enhanced observability and distributed control on DERs. The smart elements, consisted of 
various IoT technologies, have enhanced the interoperation of the grid system by providing 
multi-directional information flow with adequate data from users, substations, transmission 
and  generation  sides  [9].  These  smart  devices  contribute  to  the  provision  of  a  real-time 
balance, monitoring, and control at high granularity and accuracy.  

However, there is an outstanding concern regarding the security, because of the competing 
interests  of  different  parties  or  stakeholders,  high  level  of  interdependence,  and  social 
complexity [10]. A study suggested that existing standards and guidelines have not provided 
any clear definition of roles that different parties play, and a common understanding of key 
security requirements is yet to be shared [11]. Additionally, the inherent vulnerabilities may 
potentially  expose  the  system  to  potential  attacks  [12],  because  the  controlling  and 
monitoring is undertaken based on internet-protocols and off-the-shelf solutions. Similar to 
smart grid, the nature of SLES can be considered as a part of critical infrastructures, which will 
likely draw unwanted attention and become the target of cyber-attack. It therefore is vital to 
undertake thorough examination on the components and identify existing vulnerabilities to 
ensure the main security objectives are met. In order to protect the IoT from the potential 
external cyberattacks, it requires not only effective threat detection and management, but 

 
 
 
 
also a considerable number of well-designed standards are necessary to ensure the security 
of the IoT system to minimise the risks. It is therefore worth investigating and reviewing the 
currently existing standards and identify the area to focus on in the future.  

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, the background of SLES is described, 
including  its  key  components,  features  and  benefits,  and  potential  challenges  and  risks; 
Section 3 introduces general cybersecurity objectives and requirements for SLES and general 
energy  system,  and  also  reviews  the  existing  standards  related  to  cybersecurity;  Section  4 
discusses and explains the main findings from the review and proposes several suggestions 
for  SLES  planning  and  development;  and  conclusions  and  future  works  are  summarised  in 
Section 5.  

2. Background of SLES 

In  general,  there  are  many  key  components  comprising  an  energy  system,  including 
production, conversion, transmission, distribution and consumption [13]. This structure also 
works for a small energy system at a local level, such as a community or a building, and SLES. 
SLES can transmit electric and information flow during the operation. The electric flow starts 
from energy producers and finish at end users in the traditional system. However, in SLES, 
through  a  bi-directional 
different 
communication flow, with the assistance of substantial number of sensors, actuators other 
smart objects. Although there has not been any clear definitions or explicit frameworks for 
SLES, some key elements and functions have been identified in the previous study [8].  

shareholders  and  components  communicate 

2.1. 

Key Components of SLES 

In order to deliver features described previously, a localised and highly automated system 
infrastructure  is  required.  Many  components  are  connected  to  the  SLES  for  operating, 
monitoring and controlling electricity flow and measurements. The SLES requires involvement 
of  different  stakeholders  comprising  of  various  domains,  such  as  service  provider  domain, 
communication  network,  grid  domain,  advanced  metering  infrastructure  and  customer 
domains, which are similar to the smart grid structure defined in [14]. The SLES is a desired 
solution to deliver more interactive operation and localised energy supply and control, which 
will  be  increasingly  challenging  for  the  existing  system  setup.  The  existing  cybersecurity 
techniques and standards may no longer meet the requirements of the SLES. Therefore, a 
SLES has different objectives and features to provide reliable communication architecture and 
power supply. Here are the key components of a SLES: 

Grid  Domain  is  a  critical  part  of  the  SLES,  managing  the  bulk  energy  generation  and 
distribution. In the grid domain, a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system 
plays an important role, which is a type of industrial control system that can monitor and 
control  assets  over  large  geographical  areas  with  the  help  of  control  equipment.  The 
decentralised  automation  management  and  remote  control  are  helpful  to  ensure  the 
reliability of power supply and lower the maintenance costs of the network. There are four 
main parts in a typical SCADA system [15], a) data interface appliance like remote terminal 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
units (RTUs) and programmable logic controllers (PLCs); b) communication network; c) central 
master  terminal  unit  (MTU);  and  d)  human-machine  interfaces  (HMIs).  RTU  is  extremely 
important in SCADA system connecting many sensors and metres, which are responsible for 
collecting  information  and  proceed  with  commands  sent  from  central  MTU.  The  MTU 
communicates  with  RTUs  through  a  secured  communication  network  to  perform  control, 
alarming and other operations.  

Figure 1 An potential layout of SLES adapted from [16] 

Advanced  Metering  Infrastructure  (AMI)  plays  a  vital  role  in  the  SLES,  acting  as  the 
connection between control centre and meters. It consists of home-area (HAN) and wide-
area communication network (WAN), smart meter and data concentrators, and metre data 
management system [17]. The bi-directional communication between the central system and 
smart meters becomes easier due to the increasing penetration of IoT based technologies. 
The increasing installation of smart meter technologies enables the distribution networks to 
capture precise consumers’ electricity usage along with other information. In this way, smart 
meters can collect and transmit data back to utility operators for better understanding of the 
energy consumption pattens. Smart meters can action upon request or in response to some 
events to the utility. In addition, smart meters are also found to be helpful for consumers to 
understand and improve energy consumption [18].  

IoT-based Communication Network is considered one of the fundamental elements in the 
SLES. It enables the interaction between service provide domain and customer domain. The 
development of SLES is substantially contributed by IoT technologies that enable data flowing 
through  the  networks.  Within  the  communication  network,  the  utilisation  of  standard 
communication protocol enables each device or object to be individually addressed, and the 
communication  between  them  can  be  near-real  time.  Therefore,  different  devices  can  be 
sensed  and  controlled  remotely  via  a  scalable  communication  network,  enabling  further 
integration of physical grid devices and computer-based control system. As the result, the 
IoT-based network can make system control and operation more efficient and accurate [19]. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  increasing  adoption  of  IoT  devices  also  poses  a  challenge  on  the 

 
 
 
 
system  with  regards  to  the  physical  and  cyber  security  of  the  infrastructure  [20],  which 
requires more complicated regulatory and technical measures. 

Customer  Domain  includes  smart  appliances,  premises  networks  and  distributed  energy 
resources.  DERs  are  becoming  increasingly  popular  in  recent  years,  as  they  can  efficiently 
provide end users more localised and cost-effective energy supply with technologies such as 
PV, wind turbine in tandem with energy storage. The consumers can manage the operation 
of DERs and smart appliances through the premise’s networks, either HAN or WAN. However, 
the introduction of DERs results in bi-directional electricity flow, which creates some issues 
for the distribution network operators. The problem can be solved in an active approach by 
modifying the SCADA system to reconfigure distribution network based on changes in power 
flow.  It  requires  a  substantial  amount  of  data  from  installed  sensors  that  monitor  system 
conditions  such  as  faults  and  status  of  switches,  significantly  facilitated  by  the  IoT-based 
network.  Such  an  integration  with  the  external  power  grid  can  enhance  the  active  energy 
management from the consumer end and add greater reliability and resilience to the system. 

Service  Provider  Domain  includes  markets,  operators  and  service  providers.  It  uses  the 
communication network to coordinates the functions of energy generators, distribution and 
transmission network operators and consumers. The market creates a platform for all actors 
to  participate  and  maintain  the  energy  balance  between  the  supply  and  demand.  The 
operators  ensure  the  delivery  of  service  through  the  energy  network  provided  by  service 
providers. In the SLES, there may be more diversified actors in the service provider domain, 
as  the  results  of  localised  governance  and  regulatory.  Local  authorities  can  take  more 
responsibilities to govern the operation and the consumers may more actively participate in 
local  energy  market,  where  the  local  energy  network  operators  will  play  a  more 
transformative roles as a local system operator.  

2.2. 

Key Features and Benefits of SLES 

Similar to other local systems with DERs, a SLES aims to achieve local balancing, which means 
that it maximises the utilisation of energy produced locally to reduce the consumers’ energy 
import from the external power grid [21]. In addition to electricity consumption, it is also able 
to integrate other services, such as heating and transport, to enable the local balancing across 
different sectors. The smart technologies are the fundamental attributes to realising more 
locality  and  flexibility  in  a  SLES  system.  Smart  elements  are  able  to  contribute  to  more 
accurate  measurements  and  more  digitalised  and  interactive  management,  and  ultimately 
more autonomous operation. It enables the system to manage bi-directional information and 
electricity flows automatically, and therefore to provide greater capacity and resilience. For 
consumers, the smart elements can also provide consumers richer data and help them with 
better decision-making [22]. Therefore, these intelligent elements can make the best use of 
the  information  to  optimise  the  system  control  and  hence  maximise  the  benefits  for  all 
stakeholders.  

The other important feature of SLES is the localness. A SLES enables a more localised system 
management, operation and government based on their needs and system setup. Different 
from the traditional system, the ownership of a SLES can be more flexible and diverse, which 

 
 
 
 
 
 
may encourage more active participation and engagement of the local authorities, network 
operators and consumers [8]. Therefore, the SLES is very helpful to deliver more affordable 
energy and a fairer energy system. Additionally, local decision-making process will also make 
the service providers put more focus on consumers and quality of service, which can provide 
local customers an easy access to the system and address the desire to tackle the climate 
change locally. In this way, the locality of the SLES can not only help us exploit the value of 
system better, but also provide a location-specific solution to the energy transition.  

Table 1 Comparison between traditional grid and SLES [8,20] 

Parameters 

Existing Grid 

SLES 

Generation 

Centralised 

Decentralised 

Communication 

None/one way 

Two-way, real-time 

Customer Interaction 

Limited 

Extensive 

Metering 

Operation 

Maintenance 

Electro-mechanical meters  

Digital meters 

Manual equipment checks and 
maintenance 

Remote monitoring, predictive, 
time-based maintenance 

Network operated by centralised 
network operators 

Local authorities actively manage 
the SLES operation. 

Power Flow Control 

Limited 

Comprehensive and automated 

Reliability 

Restoration Following 
Disturbance 

Prone to failures and cascading 
outages 

Automated, prevents outages before 
they start 

Manual 

Self-healing 

System Topology 

Radial. Power flows one-way 

Network. Power flows multiple 
paths 

Distributed Generation 

Limited grid accessibility  

Full and efficient grid accessibility 

2.3. 

Challenges and Potential Risks 

As mentioned previously, a lack of understanding in SLES’s framework and operation, hinder 
the development of SLES. However, it has some similarities to smart cities. For example, both 
are part of the key public infrastructure and both heavily reliant upon the participation of 
private companies and consumers. In traditional systems, the utility companies usually have 
the  ownership  of  the  entire  infrastructures  or  utilise  a  managed  service.  Therefore,  the 
cybersecurity  may  be  prioritised  during  system  acquisition  so  that  the  correct  security 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
measures can be in place. The emerging technologies, especially built upon IoT, are usually 
designed for the easy adoption so that the consumers can operate the devices through HAN 
or WAN. For this reason, the number of consumer-owned smart devices can easily exceed 
those  owned  and  operated  by  the  utilities.  However,  most  consumers  may  not  have  the 
technical  expertise  or  incentives  to  prioritise  or  maintain  the  infrastructure  security.  The 
divided administration makes the utility or system operators hard to monitor and manage 
devices,  leading  to  a  disparity  in  security  protection.  Therefore,  administrative  boundaries 
must be broken by interconnecting different networks to ensure the utility companies can 
operate smart devices and DERs together with consumers in a collaborative manner.  

Most  IoT-based  devices  adopted  in  the  SLES  are  manufactured  by  third  parties  or  private 
companies.  Lu  et  al.  [23]  acknowledged  that  the  secure  operation  of  the  power  system  is 
based  on  a  stable  ICT  supply  chain,  and  any  disruption  on  its  components  can  lead  to 
unwanted  and  serious  disruptive  impacts  on  the  whole  system.  Another  study  [24]  also 
suggests  that  many  security  concerns  and  incidents  can  trace  back  to  the  inadequate 
management and risk of manufacturers and suppliers. In most of the real-life deployments, 
third parties or private companies are given access to key infrastructure assets and critical 
information without thorough reviews. Although such arrangement may help the developer 
deliver  service  faster  and  integrate  with  existing  systems  more  easily,  this  may  lead  to 
catastrophic impacts if without proper management [25].   

In addition, the utilisation of HAN and WAN provide an easy and flexible access to the system 
management.  It  enables  users  and  utility  companies  to  obtain  more  accurate  consumer 
demand and status of DER production in higher resolution and participate in more complex 
system  operation,  such  as  demand  side  response.  However,  exposing  the  system  to  the 
external WAN may also increase the attack surfaces, leading to private data breach, device 
compromise, and even instability of the whole system [26]. The substantial growth in smart 
appliances and DERs in the SLES will essentially increase the cyber-physical interdependencies.  
The operation therefore will no longer merely depend upon the secure physical status of the 
infrastructure, bringing the importance of cybersecurity to an unprecedented level.  

3. Cybersecurity of Smart Local Energy Systems 

The  added  ICT  dimension  to  the  classical  power  grid,  introduced  new  security  issues  and 
challenges  that  have  not  been  well  addressed  on  the  classical  power  grid.    These  security 
issues and challenges could hinder the rapid deployment and adoption by end-users of the 
IoT-based smart grid and future SLES.  

3.1. 

Cybersecurity Objectives and Requirements 

According  to  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technologies  (NIST),  there  are  three 
cybersecurity objectives to protect information being stolen, compromised or attacked. The 
objectives include confidentiality, integrity and availability, also known as the CIA triads [27]. 
In  most  IT  systems,  confidentiality  has  been  considered  being  of  the  greatest  importance. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, in SLES, the priority is to ensure the availability of system and secure energy supply 
and integrity is the next important security objective followed by confidentiality.  

Availability is to ensure the information is available when authorised users need to access it. 
In  traditional  power  gird,  utilities  use  limited  information  to  estimate  meter  readings  and 
hence the data availability is unlikely to cause serious impacts on the grid. However, in the 
SLES, the safe operation of systems is heavily reliant upon the real-time and near real-time 
data from the sensors across the SLES, AMI and control signals exchanged between multiple 
entities.  As  mentioned  in  previous  section,  the  application  of  AMI  not  only  provides 
consumer’s data with higher resolution, but also transmits outage alarms and manage critical 
functions,  such  as  distribution  automation.  Availability  is  therefore  the  primary  security 
objective in the SLES to ensure the timely transmission of data, even when the network is 
under  attack  and  flooded  traffic  [28].  The  availability  of  data  in  the  SLES  needs  a  secure 
collection of network layers, including application layer, transport layer, network layer and 
physical  layer  [29].  Any  threats  or  attacks  on  single  or  multiple  layers  in  the  network  may 
cause unwanted disruptions on the communication and operations. Therefore, availability is 
considered as the priority in the SLES.  

Integrity aims to protect data and keep it in a correct state from any accidental or malicious 
modification of data [27]. The data must not be changed in an unauthorised or undetectable 
manner. It involves maintaining the consistency, accuracy and trustworthiness of data during 
storage, transmission, and usage. In the context of SLES, the data integrity can be targeted by 
attackers who attempt to alternate critical data such as metre reading, billing information and 
control  demand.  Therefore,  authentication,  certification  and  attestation  are  commonly 
adopted as protection measures [30]. The components in the SLES needs to authenticate each 
other so that impersonation can be detected and avoided. Then the data certificate keeps the 
message  exchanges  from  any  alternation  and  changes  during  the  data  transmission. 
Substations use attestation to confirm that the memory contents on a smart device have not 
been changed. In general, public-key cryptography are used to ensure the integrity and the 
services are usually provided by a trusted third party hosting a key management service.  

Confidentiality  refers  to  protecting  personal  privacy  and  proprietary  information  from 
unauthorised  access  [27].  It  emphasises  the  need  for  information  protection,  requiring 
relevant measures to ensure only authorised people being allowed to obtain the information. 
Attacks targeting confidentiality do not necessarily cause substantial impacts on the system 
operation but can be a preparatory step to more damaging attacks. With the rollout of smart 
meters,  some concerns regarding the consumers’ privacy have also been addressed in recent 
years [31–33] . Customers fear that the data leakage may potentially be used by unauthorised 
parties or marketing firms. In the future, a SLES will involve with frequent interaction between 
consumers,  network  operators  and  local  authorities  comparing  to  the  traditional  energy 
system, which will make confidentiality one of the most prominent issues.    

3.2. 

The Development of Cybersecurity Standards 

Although there are not sufficient studies and guidelines for SLES, similarities to the smart grids 
are helpful to understand the potential cybersecurity requirements that may be needed in a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SLES.  Therefore,  this  section  aims  to  review  the  existing  security  standards  and  protocols 
related and provide an insight on how they can be applied in the context of SLES. There are 
around 100 existing standards addressing the cyber security issues, but this section we only 
review some of them that reflecting the main trend of the development in the chronological 
order. The full list of standards reviewed in the research can be found in the appendix.  

The development of cybersecurity standards mirrors the trend of technological advancement. 
Initially,  there  were  not  any  intelligent  or  smart  control  systems  or  devices  in  the  system. 
Therefore, in the 1990s the cybersecurity protection was mainly addressed by enhancing the 
security of the physical assets. For instance, IEEE 1264 Guide for Animal Deterrents for Electric 
Power  Supply  Substations  was  proposed  [34].  It  defines  types  of  intrusions  and  identified 
subsequent  problems  and  impacts,  evaluated  by  several  parameters,  such  as  intrusion 
location  and  seriousness  of  impacts.  Correspondingly,  relevant  precaution  and  prevention 
measures are provided, such as physical obstacles and enclosure, security patrol and video 
surveillance.  Later  in  2000,  IEEE  1402  Guide  for  Electric  Power  Substation  Physical  and 
Electronic  Security  [35]  was  introduced  and  complemented  the  security  protection  from 
human intrusion. Besides existing measures against animal intrusion, IEEE 1402 also includes 
protection measures for electronics, such as virus scans, encrypting and dial-back verification. 
However, these protective measures are only briefly mentioned without details in depth.   

With the development of cybersecurity protection, most standards focused on the design and 
management  at  a  macro  systematic  level  or  a  domain-specific  level.  DHS  Cyber  Security 
Procurement Language for Control System [36] is an important documentation that combines 
many  requirements  into  11  high-level  topics,  such  as  system  design,  account  and  access 
control, end device management, physical and cyber threat and vulnerability detection. Each 
topic addresses a specific issue or concern in a control system, and also describes a rationale, 
from specification language to factory and site acceptance test measures. In addition, NISTIR 
7268 Guideline or Smart Grid Cyber Security [37] specifies a comprehensive framework for 
smart grid. The guideline includes five steps: use case selection, risk assessment, boundaries 
setting,  proposing  security  requirements,  and  testing  and  certification.  The  NISTIR  7268 
emphasises  four  high-priority  challenges:  more  cost-effective  and  secure  devices,  more 
advanced cryptography and key management, more robust system, and easier networking. 
North American Electric Reliability Corporation Critical Infrastructure Protection (NERC CIP) 
[38] standards are compulsory for the whole electric system. The NERC CIP standard series 
highlight the importance of cybersecurity of the assets that should undertake regular security 
risk and vulnerability assessment and equip with mandatory minimum security management 
controls  and  recovery  plans.  It  is  also  worth  mentioning  that  NERC  CIP  emphasises  the 
significance of training authorised personnel with a sufficient cybersecurity awareness. In the 
UK, The British Standards Institution (BSI) issued PAS 555 Cyber security risk - Governance and 
management – Specification in 2013 [39]. It provides several guidelines on cybersecurity and 
describes the outcomes as the result of good cybersecurity practice. PAS 555 applies to all 
types of organisations and businesses, including the energy industry. It considers not only the 
technical aspects of cyber security, but also the physical, cultural and behavioural aspects, 
alongside effective leadership and governance.  

The  protection  of  communication  network  as  part  of  industrial  control  and  automation 
system  was  also  addressed  due  to  the  proliferation  of  the  Internet.  In  2014,  IEEE  C37.240 

 
 
 
Standard  Cybersecurity  Requirements  for  Substation  Automation,  Protection,  and  Control 
Systems  [40]  was  developed  and  published  to  present  a  set  of  baseline  cybersecurity 
requirements  dedicated  to  the  communication  system.  It  aims  to  protect  the  security  of 
interface  between  control  systems  and  standardise  the  foundational  requirements  for 
communication  components,  such  as  access  and  use  control,  data 
integrity  and 
confidentiality,  network  resource  availability  and  timely  response  to  events.  Most 
importantly, it reemphasises the importance of monitoring and auditing security events and 
policies, and also conducting periodic security tests. Another instance is IEC 62443 Industrial 
communication  networks  -  IT  security  for  networks  and  systems,  launched  in  2010  [41].  It 
provides  a  detailed  description  regarding  the  elements  and  the  development  process  of  a 
cybersecurity management system for a control system and automaton technology. It also 
lists seven requirements, overlapped with the foundational requirements in IEEE C37.240, to 
achieve  higher  security  levels.  The  security  levels  are  considered  as  the  functional 
requirements  for  the  system,  protecting  from  accidental  information  disclosure  and 
unauthorised access and different level varies with the attacking method and activeness used 
by the attackers.  

The increasing complex electronic devices implemented then shifted the focus towards the 
specific component or technology in the system. IEEE 1686 Standard for Intelligent Electronic 
Devices Cyber Security Capabilities was published in 2013 [42]. The standard series describes 
various compulsory requirements for the electronic devices, such as an interface to change 
user accounts, keeping full sequential audit history, and monitoring security-related events. 
The standard also requires that all electric devices should have certain level of cryptographic 
features to ensure the device functionality and secure communication. Another example is 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure System Security Requirement [43] issued in 2008 in the US.  
It  aims  to  provide  a  set  of  security  requirements  to  ensure  the  high  level  of  information 
assurance,  availability  and  security  necessary  to  maintain  a  reliable  system  and  consumer 
confidence. The requirements in the document can be generalised into three categories: a) 
primary security services (aims to protect confidentiality and privacy, integrity, availability, 
identification,  authentication  and  authorization);  b)  supporting  security  services  (such  as 
detection, risk assessment, cryptography and certificate); and c) assurance services (such as 
accountability, and access control). Similar standards can also be found, such as CEN/CLC/JTC 
13 N 468 Protection Profile for Smart Meter [44] in the UK and Privacy and Security of the 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure [45] in Netherlands.   

The surge of electronic devices has markedly facilitated the digitalisation of energy system 
that needs to handle with substantial amount of information and data exchange. Therefore, 
joint  efforts  by  academia  and  industry  have  been  trying  to  propose  relevant  standards  or 
protocols to ensure the data and information security. IEEE 1363 Standard Specifications for 
Public-Key  Cryptography  was  firstly  introduced  in  2004  [46],  aiming  to  produce  a 
comprehensive document defining a range of common public-key techniques, including key 
agreement,  public-key  encryption  and  digital  signatures.  It  describes  different  types  of 
cryptographic  techniques  such  as 
lattice-based 
techniques and discusses relevant security and implementation considerations. IEEE P1912 
Standard for Privacy and Security Framework for Consumer Wireless Devices [47] also focuses 
on  data  privacy  and  security.  It  provides  a  definition  of  private  data,  which  can  refer  to 
personal identifiable information. Different types of privacy data are recommended to apply 

identity-based,  password-based  and 

  
 
relevant necessary data settings, which is of great importance for the future applications at 
the end-user side. Meanwhile, more risk management guidelines are introduced to enhance 
the information security. For example, ISO/IEC TR 27019 Information technology — Security 
techniques  —  Information  security  management  guidelines  based  on  ISO/IEC  27002  for 
process control systems specific to the energy utility industry [48]. It suggests that security 
requirements  analysis  and  a  complementary  individual  risk  analysis  should  be  undertaken 
before  the  use  of  control  devices  or  software.  IEEE  2144.1  Standard  for  Cryptographic 
Protection of Data on Blockchain-Oriented Storage Devices [49] also presents a trusted IoT 
data management framework integrate with application, function and trusted carrier layers. 
The framework is applicable for data management in blockchain and IoT technologies and to 
business scenarios that employing internal data collection, change and sharing with external 
parties.  IEEE  Std  11073-40101  Cybersecurity—Processes  for  vulnerability  assessment  [50] 
proposing  an  auditable  approach  to  identification  and  assessment  of  cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities and estimation of risks, which is an useful tool and can be used as reference 
method for future smart devices development.  

4. Discussion and Suggestion 

4.1. 

Findings in the Review of Existing Standards 

The previous section has reviewed the development of cybersecurity standards and protocols 
that  were  defined  and  specified  by  industry  and  standard  bodies.  Many  of  them  were 
developed to address security and privacy concerns and requirements in either control and 
wireless  system  and  devices,  or  management  strategy  of  cybersecurity  issues.  The 
requirements included in the standards differ from each other, in terms of technical details, 
the scope and the thematic coverage. It is also worth noting that some standards extend or 
partially  repeat  requirements  from  other  standards,  and  some  are  only  supplementary 
documents to others.  

Our  findings  suggest  that  there  is  a  considerable  number  of  standards  or  protocols  pre-
existing  that  would  apply  to  the  application  and  infrastructure  of  SLES,  such  as  industry 
automated and control system [51], electric vehicles  [52] , and intelligent electronic devices 
[53]. Many standard bodies from different countries have contributed to the knowledge, such 
as  BSI  from  the  UK,  IEEE  and  ANSI  from  the  US.  These  standards  are  applicable  to  some 
specific  component  or  industry  of  the  infrastructure.  For  example,  the  majority  of  the 
standards proposed by IEEE defines and specifies very detailed technical security elements 
for the IoT. The works are applicable to many aspects and components in the SLES, including 
IoT architectural frameworks, physical and medium access control and wireless devices with 
end-to-end security.  

Another  finding  is  that  the  standards  are  not  comprehensive  and  some  only  address 
cybersecurity to some certain extent. The existing standards are highly fragmented that are 
specific  to  certain  industry,  such  as  NERC  CIP  for  electric  utility  and  IEC  62443  for  general 
industry automation and control systems, while some security frameworks providing general 
guidelines applicable to any industry or organisation without technical details, such as PAS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
555. Majority of the standards only focus on securing one or a few components or security 
features in the system by the design or for the operation. Researchers have already addressed 
the ambiguous definition still hinders the application of the smart city [54]. Therefore, the 
lack  of  comprehensive  understanding  of  SLES  makes  it  even  harder  to  provide  a  set  of 
comprehensive guidelines on cybersecurity for SLES, because of the differences between SLES 
and  smart  cities,  such  as  more  localised  governance  bodies  and  more  active  prosumers’ 
participation in energy supply. SLES will be heavily reliant upon substantial integration of IoT 
technologies  and  automated  control  and  communication  networks,  which  will  make 
cybersecurity one of the primary goals. However, it would depend on clear definitions of SLES 
and explicit guidelines on its operation and governance. Therefore, relevant necessary and 
essential measures can be adopted to construct a robust and sophisticated smart local energy 
network in a more systematic fashion.  

In addition, our findings also suggest that the information security is becoming increasingly 
important due to the growing penetration of IoT and digitalisation of the energy industry. 
Different  standards  were  put  in  place  to  standardise  the  data  encryption,  transmission, 
storage and format to enhance the interoperability between different system components. 
Additionally, relevant standards were also designed to protect personal data and privacy via 
both algorithm and edge device design. The complex requirements are introduced to ensure 
certain levels of security measures embedded in the electronic devices by the manufacturers 
to  protect  the  cybersecurity  of  both  the  system  and  users.  However,  HP  conducted  an 
assessment on 10 common IoT devices and they found each device had 25 vulnerabilities on 
average [55]. For this reason, we would recommend an adherence to certain standards must 
become  as  the  norm  of  smart  device  development  and  sufficient  and  comprehensive 
standards are needed to be considered as the baseline standards that provides principles to 
ensure the scalability and flexible interpretability, which is also in line with the suggestions 
provided in [26].  

For  this  reason,  the  findings  from  the  review  can  help  us  understand  how  the  existing 
standards can integrate with the SLES. For example, the substantial amount of data will be 
collected and exchanged during the daily operation, which makes the data safety and privacy 
protection extremely important. The potential peer-to-peer energy trading within the SLES 
can make the best use of the blockchain technologies and existing relevant standards such as 
IEEE 2144.1 that ensure the data security in the devices and entities. Furthermore, standards 
similar  to  PAS  555  can  help  us  comprehend  the  critical  role  of  cybersecurity  and  build  an 
effective framework to assess and manage potential cyber threat, vulnerability and attacks. 
As the result, a more active cyber threat prevention and detection mechanism will be added 
to the existing protection measure, further enhancing the cybersecurity of the SLES.    

4.2. 

Cybersecurity Suggestions for SLES Planning and Deployment 

In  the  light  of  the  emerging  SLES,  energy  utilities  have  been  exposed  to  ever  substantial 
challenges, especially cyber challenges, which may cause catastrophic impacts on the whole 
value  chain  of  the  energy  network.  The  legacy  generation  systems  and  clean-energy 
infrastructure without sufficient security design will likely suffer serious disruption of service 
and  ransomware  attacks  against  generation  assets.  The  physical  security  weaknesses  may 

 
 
 
 
 
possibly lead to unauthorised access to the grid control system and hence result in large-scale 
disruption of power to customers through remotely disconnecting services. At distribution 
level, limited security measures built into SCADA systems can cause disruption of reginal loss 
and disruption of service to customers. At network and end-user side, large attack surface of 
IoT  devices  such  as  smart  meters,  electric  vehicles  and  other  smart  appliances,  will  also 
possibly lead to theft of customer information, fraud, and service disruption.  

The SLES aims to achieve an automated and local energy supply with high participation of 
prosumers  with  the  help  of  highly  penetrated  IoT  technologies.  The  difference  in  the 
operation and management of SLES and traditional power grid will contribute to the merging 
of information and operation technologies. For this reason, the challenges are brand-new and 
unprecedent, and can hardly be solved by using traditional cyber threat management strategy. 
Therefore, the researchers from academia and industry need to work on several things and 
we have made following recommendations.  

Due to interdependency between the physical and cyber infrastructures, the cybersecurity of 
SLES should focus on protecting measures on both physical and cyber aspects. It is hard to 
detail  every  cybersecurity  requirement  here,  but  a  good  comprehensive  cybersecurity 
guideline  should  include  following  15  aspects:  access  control,  audit  and  accountability, 
configuration  management,  identification  and  authentication,  incident  response,  media 
protection,  planning,  personnel  security,  information  system  and  service  acquisition  and 
integrity,  awareness  and  training,  security  assessment  and  authorisation,  information  and 
document  management,  physical  and  environmental  security,  risk  assessment  and 
management, and communication system protection.  

In addition, for the industry, more efforts are needed to provide more affordable and cyber-
secured devices and services and more innovative technologies should also be encouraged to 
apply  in  real  applications.  Technologies,  such  as  blockchain  and  OpenFMB,  can  not  only 
facilitate scaling up the SLES applications with secured assurance, but also can improve the 
integration with legacy infrastructures with enhanced data interoperability. A good balance 
between the affordability and quality of cybersecurity should be achieved so that IoT products 
can  be  more  easily  accessed  by  consumers.  In  comparison,  the  government  and  regulator 
should  introduce  clear  guidelines  or  regulatory  documents  on  baselines  cybersecurity 
requirements and other relevant issues on data management. Therefore, clear definitions and 
guidelines  on  SLES  should  be  considered  as  priority.  A  tailored  cybersecurity  management 
strategy needs to be designed based upon good comprehension of a system setup, operation, 
and  governance.  A  few  baseline  standards  are  needed  to  address  the  system’s  baseline 
security requirements, so that relevant components or technologies can then be adopted to 
meet the minimum function and security requirements.  

At  last,  compliance  testing  and  certifications  should  also  play  an  important  role  in  SLES. 
Although  there  may  be  technical  standards  already  in  place  to  ensure  the  security  at  the 
design or development stage, the consistency should come across the whole SLES ecosystem. 
For this reason, it is necessary to conduct testing and certification by an independent party, 
which  can  assure  the  regulators  that  a  satisfied  security  level  is  provided  in  key  SLES 
ecosystem actors by design. 

 
 
 
 
 
5. Conclusion 

In  this  report,  a  review  on  existing  technical  standards  addressing  cybersecurity  issues  is 
carried out. Our findings suggest that a considerable number of standards or protocols pre-
existing  that  would  meet  the  requirements  of  the  application  and  infrastructure  of  SLES. 
However, the standards are not comprehensive and some only address cybersecurity to some 
certain  extent.  The  existing  standards  are  highly  fragmented  that  are  specific  to  certain 
industry,  while  some  security  frameworks  providing  general  guidelines  applicable  to  any 
industry or organisation without technical details. Majority of the standards only focus on 
securing one or a few components or security features in the system by the design or for the 
operation. Additionally, we also find that the information security is becoming increasingly 
important, and many standards are introduced to protect information security and personal 
privacy.  

However, the successful development of SLES still needs more effort from multiple sides. A 
detailed cybersecurity guideline should include 15 main topics described in previous section. 
More  efforts  are  needed  from  the  industry  to  provide  more  affordable  and  cyber-secured 
devices  and  services  to  apply  in  real  applications.  The  governments  and  regulators  should 
demonstrate a few baseline standards to address the system’s baseline security requirements, 
so that relevant components or technologies can therefore be adopted to meet the minimum 
function and security requirements. Additionally, compliance testing and certifications should 
also be in place and carried out by an independent third party to ensure the components of 
SLES ecosystem with a satisfied security level by design.   

Based on our findings and suggestions produced from this research, it is important to extend 
the research and further investigate how they can contribute to the design and operation of 
SLES. The future work will focus on proposing a framework for the detection and treatment 
to ensure the cybersecurity of SLES. The first part of the framework results in an assessment 
tool that aims to identify the potential cybersecurity vulnerabilities, threats, and attacks. The 
evaluation on the threats will be determined via various metrics, such as the type of threats, 
location in the cyber and physical architecture, and responsible stakeholders. The assessment 
results will then result in a strategic response. The threat metrics are used to prioritise the 
tasks  based  on  the  urgency  and  seriousness  level  of  the  threat.  Relevant  solutions  and 
techniques  are  then  provided  to  respond  and  prevent  the  system  from  potential  threats 
throughout the cyber, physical devices or utility layers to ensure the cyber-secured operation.  

Acknowledgement 

This work was partially supported by the EPSRC EnergyREV project (EP/S031863/1). We would 
like to thank Elena Gaura, Nandor Verba, David Flynn and Rameez Asif for helpful insights and 
expertise that greatly assisted the research. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference 

[1] 

Elliott  D.  Renewable  Energy  in  the  UK.  vol.  2004.  Cham:  Springer  International 
Publishing; 2019. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-04765-8. 

[2]  Ofgem. Future supply market arrangements – call for evidence 2017:1–9. 
[3] 
[4] 

UK Power Networks. Smarter Network Storage - business model consultation 2013. 
Department  of  Business  Energy  and  Industry  Strategy,  Office  of  Gas  and  Electricity 
Markets. Upgrading Our Energy System. 2017. 
Rodríguez-Molina J, Martínez-Núñez M, Martínez J-F, Pérez-Aguiar W. Business Models 
in the Smart Grid: Challenges, Opportunities and Proposals for Prosumer Profitability. 
Energies 2014;7:6142–71. https://doi.org/10.3390/en7096142. 

[5] 

[8] 

[7] 

Renew 

electricity 

[6]  Mengelkamp E, Bose S, Kremers E, Eberbach J, Hoffmann B, Weinhardt C. Increasing 
the efficiency of local energy markets through residential demand response. Energy 
Informatics 2018;1:1–18. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42162-018-0017-3. 
Burger S, Chaves-Ávila JP, Batlle C, Pérez-Arriaga IJ. A review of the value of aggregators 
in 
2017;77:395–405. 
Sustain 
systems. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.04.014. 
Ford R, Maidment C, Vigurs C, Fell MJ, Morris M. Smart local energy systems (SLES): A 
framework for exploring transition, context, and impacts. Technol Forecast Soc Change 
2021;166:120612. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.120612. 
Laura Sandys, Richard Dobson, Eric Brown, Gordon Graham, Rebecca Lane, Jake Verma. 
A  strategy  for  a  Modern  Digitalised  Energy  System  Energy  Data  Taskforce  report. 
London: 2019. 
Jurcut A, Niculcea T, Ranaweera P, Le-Khac N-A. Security Considerations for Internet of 
Things:  A  Survey.  SN  Comput  Sci  2020;1:193.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-020-
00201-3. 

Energy 

[10] 

Rev 

[9] 

[11]  Labib  NS,  Brust  MR,  Danoy  G,  Bouvry  P.  Trustworthiness  in  IoT  -  A  Standards  Gap 
Analysis  on  Security,  Data  Protection  and  Privacy.  2019  IEEE  Conf.  Stand.  Commun. 
Networking, 
1–7. 
CSCN 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CSCN.2019.8931393. 

2019, 

2019, 

IEEE; 

p. 

[12]  Sha K, Wei W, Andrew Yang T, Wang Z, Shi W. On security challenges and open issues 
in 
2018;83:326–37. 
Futur  Gener 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2018.01.059. 

Internet 

Comput 

Things. 

Syst 

of 

[13]  Alanne K, Saari A. Distributed energy generation and sustainable development. Renew 

Sustain Energy Rev 2006;10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2004.11.004. 

[14]  National Institute of Standards and Technology. Guidelines for smart grid cybersecurity. 

Gaithersburg, MD: 2014. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.7628r1. 

[15]  Akhtar T, Gupta BB, Yamaguchi S. Malware propagation effects on SCADA system and 
smart power grid. 2018 IEEE Int Conf Consum Electron ICCE 2018 2018;2018-Janua:1–
6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCE.2018.8326281. 

[16]  Electronics Projects Focus. Smart Grid Technology Working Operation and Applications 
https://www.elprocus.com/overview-smart-grid-technology-operation-

2020. 
application-existing-power-system/ (accessed June 30, 2021). 

[17]  Bayliss CR, Hardy BJ. Smart Grids. Transm. Distrib. Electr. Eng., Elsevier; 2012, p. 1059–

74. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-096912-1.00027-7. 

[18]  Manbachi  M.  Impact  of  Distributed  Energy  Resource  Penetrations  on  Smart  Grid 
Adaptive  Energy  Conservation  and  Optimization  Solutions.  Oper.  Distrib.  Energy 

 
Resour. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814891-4.00005-9. 

Networks, 

Distrib. 

Smart 

Elsevier; 

2018, 

p. 

101–38. 

[19]  Mocrii D, Chen Y, Musilek P. IoT-based smart homes: A review of system architecture, 
software, communications, privacy and security. Internet of Things 2018;1–2:81–98. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2018.08.009. 

[20]  Alotaibi I, Abido MA, Khalid M, Savkin A V. A comprehensive review of recent advances 
in  smart  grids:  A  sustainable  future  with  renewable  energy  resources.  Energies 
2020;13:6269. https://doi.org/10.3390/en13236269. 

[21]  Menniti  D,  Pinnarelli  A,  Sorrentino  N,  Vizza  P,  Burgio  A,  Brusco  G,  et  al.  A  Real-Life 
Application of an Efficient Energy Management Method for a Local Energy System in 
Presence of Energy Storage Systems. Proc. - 2018 IEEE Int. Conf. Environ. Electr. Eng. 
2018 
Ind.  Commer.  Power  Syst.  Eur.  EEEIC/I  CPS  Eur.  2018,  2018. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/EEEIC.2018.8494629. 

IEEE 

[22]  Ding  Y,  Decker  C,  Vassileva  I,  Wallin  F,  Beigl  M.  A  Smart  Energy  system:  Distributed 
resource management, control and optimization. IEEE PES Innov. Smart Grid Technol. 
Conf. Eur., 2011. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISGTEurope.2011.6162720. 

[23]  Lu T, Guo X, Xu B, Zhao L, Peng Y, Yang H. Next big thing in big data: The security of the 
2013:1066–73. 

2013 

Proc 

Soc 

- 
ICT 
https://doi.org/10.1109/SocialCom.2013.172. 

supply 

chain. 

[24]  Boyson S. Cyber supply chain risk management: Revolutionizing the strategic control 
2014;34:342–53. 

Technovation 

systems. 

critical 

of 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2014.02.001. 

IT 

[25]  Omitola T, Wills G. Towards Mapping the security Challenges of the Internet of Things 
(IoT)  supply  Chain.  Procedia  Comput.  Sci.,  vol.  126,  Elsevier  B.V.;  2018,  p.  441–50. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procS.2018.07.278. 

[26]  Pishva D. Internet of Things: Security and privacy issues and possible solution. Int. Conf. 
Adv.  Commun.  Technol.  ICACT,  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers  Inc.; 
2017, p. 797–808. https://doi.org/10.23919/ICACT.2017.7890229. 

[27]  Brooks  S,  Garcia  M,  Lefkovitz  N,  Lightman  S,  Nadeau  E.  An  introduction  to  privacy 
engineering  and  risk  management  in  federal  systems.  Gaithersburg,  MD:  2017. 
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8062. 

[28]  Cleveland FM. Cyber security issues for Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI). IEEE 
Power Energy Soc. 2008 Gen. Meet. Convers. Deliv. Electr. Energy 21st Century, PES, 
IEEE; 2008, p. 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/PES.2008.4596535. 

topics. 

[29]  Lu  Y,  Xu  L  Da.  Internet  of  things  (IoT)  cybersecurity  research:  A  review  of  current 
research 
2019;6:2103–15. 
Internet 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2869847. 
Jing Q, Vasilakos A V., Wan J, Lu J, Qiu D. Security of the Internet of Things: perspectives 
and challenges. Wirel Networks 2014;20:2481–501. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-
014-0761-7. 

Things 

IEEE 

[30] 

J 

[31]  Kalogridis  G,  Sooriyabandara  M,  Fan  Z,  Mustafa  MA.  Toward  unified  security  and 
IEEE  Syst  J  2014;8:641–54. 

for  smart  meter  networks. 

privacy  protection 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSYST.2013.2260940. 

[32]  Eibl G, Engel D. Influence of data granularity on smart meter privacy. IEEE Trans Smart 

Grid 2015;6:930–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2014.2376613. 

[33]  Alabdulkarim  L,  Lukszo  Z.  Impact  of  privacy  concerns  on  consumers’  acceptance  of 
smart metering in the Netherlands. 2011 Int. Conf. Networking, Sens. Control. ICNSC 

[34] 

[35] 

2011, 2011, p. 287–92. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNSC.2011.5874919. 
IEEE STANDARD. IEEE 1264-2015 - IEEE Guide for Animal Deterrents for Electric Power 
Supply 
1993;1993:54–9. 
Substations. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.1993.119208. 
IEEE-SA  Standards  Board.  IEEE  Guide  for  Electric  Power  Substation  Physical  and 
Electronic Security. Group 2000;2000. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2000.91305. 

Stand 

Ieee 

[36]  Department of Homeland Security. Cyber Security Procurement Language for Control 

Systems 2009. 

[37]  National Institute of Standards and Technology. Nist framework and roadmap for smart 
interoperability  standards,  release  1.0.  Smart  Grid  Cybersecurity  Guidel. 

grid 
Interoperability Stand., vol. 0, 2012, p. 19–133. 

[38]  North  American 

n.d. 
https://www.nerc.com/pa/Stand/Pages/CIPStandards.aspx (accessed June 15, 2021). 

Corporation. 

Standards 

Reliability 

Electric 

CIP 

[39]  BSI. PAS 555:2013 Cyber security risk – Governance and management. 2013. 
[40] 

IEEE.  C37.240-2014  -  IEEE  Standard  Cybersecurity  Requirements  for  Substation 
Automation,  Protection,  and  Control  Systems  |  IEEE  Standard  |  IEEE  Xplore  2014. 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7024885 (accessed June 15, 2021). 
International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC 62443-4-1:2018 Security for industrial 
automation  and  control  systems    2018.  https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/33615 
(accessed June 15, 2021). 
IEEE.  IEEE  Std  1686-2013  Standard  for  Intelligent  Electronic  Devices  Cyber  Security 
Capabilities. IEEE 2013;2013. 

[41] 

[42] 

[43]  AMI-SECTF. AMI System Security Requirements. OpenSG 2008;1:111. 
[44]  BSI.  CEN/CLC/JTC  13  N  468  Protection  Profile  for  Smart  Meter  -  Minimum  Security 
requirements  2021.  https://standardsdevelopment.bsigroup.com/projects/9021-
05045#/section (accessed June 15, 2021). 

[45]  Smart  Energy  International.  AMI  security  and  privacy  requirements  released  in 
https://www.smart-

Netherlands 
energy.com/regional-news/europe-uk/ami-security-and-privacy-requirements-
released-in-netherlands/ (accessed June 29, 2021). 

International 

Energy 

Smart 

2010. 

| 

[46]  Committee of the IEEE Computer Society M. IEEE Standard Specification for Public Key 
Cryptographic Techniques Based on Hard Problems over Lattices. IEEE Std 13631-2008 
2009:1–81. 
IEEE.  P1912  -  Standard  for  Privacy  and  Security  Framework  for  Consumer  Wireless 
Devices 2020. 

[47] 

[48]  British Standards Institute. Information Technology - Security Techniques - Information 
Security Management Guidelines Based on ISO/IEC 27002 for Process Control Systems 
Specific to the Energy Utility Industry. 2013. 
IEEE.  2144.1-2020  -  IEEE  Standard  for  Framework  of  Blockchain-based  Internet  of 
Things (IoT ) Data Management 2020. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9329260 
(accessed June 15, 2021). 

[49] 

[50]  Committee of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine S, Society B. IEEE Std 11073-40101TM-
interoperability—Part  40101:  Foundational—

2020,  Health 
Cybersecurity—Processes for vulnerability assessment. 2021. 

informatics—Device 

[51]  Stouffer  K,  Pillitteri  V,  Lightman  S,  Abrams  M,  Hahn  A.  Guide  to  Industrial  Control 
Systems (ICS) Security. Gaithersburg, MD: 2015. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-
82r2. 

[52] 

International  Organization  for  Standardisation.  ISO  -  ISO/SAE  FDIS  21434  -  Road 
vehicles 
2021. 
engineering 
https://www.iso.org/standard/70918.html (accessed June 28, 2021). 

Cybersecurity 

— 

[53]  Committee S, Transmission T, Committee of the IEEE Power D, Society E. IEEE Standard 
for  Intelligent  Electronic  Devices  Cyber  Security  Capabilities  IEEE  Power  and  Energy 
Society n.d. 

[54]  Cavada  M,  Rogers  C,  Hunt  D.  Smart  Cities:  Contradicting  Definitions  and  Unclear 
Measures. Proc. 4th World Sustain. Forum, Basel, Switzerland: MDPI; 2014, p. f004. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/wsf-4-f004. 

[55]  HP. HP Study Finds Alarming Vulnerabilities with Internet of Things (IoT) Home Security 
Systems.  Strateg  Focus  Software,  Corp  News  Financ  Prod  Serv  2015. 
https://www.hp.com/us-en/hp-news/press-release.html?id=1909050#.YMd94TZKhgE 
(accessed June 14, 2021). 
IEEE. IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks: Media Access Control 
(MAC) Bridges. IEEE Std 8021D-2004 (Revision IEEE Std 8021D-1998) 2004:1–277. 

[56] 

2 

[57]  American  National  Standards 
ansi 

Institute.  NEMA  ANSI  C12.18:2006  -  Protocol 
2006. 
optical 

type 

port 

for 

specification 
https://webstore.ansi.org/Standards/NEMA/NEMAANSIC12182006?source=preview 
(accessed June 28, 2021). 
[58]  American  National  Standards 

Institute.  ANSI  C12.21-2006  (R2016)  -  Protocol 
2006. 
Specification 
https://webstore.ansi.org/standards/nema/ansic12212006r2016  (accessed  June  28, 
2021). 
IEEE.  IEEE  Standard  for  Cryptographic  Protection  of  Data  on  Block-Oriented  Storage 
Devices. IEEE Std 1619-2007 2008:1–40. 
IEEE. IEEE Standard for Information Technology: Hardcopy Device and System Security. 
IEEE Std 2600-2008 2008:c1-177. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2008.4556653. 

Communication 

[59] 

[60] 

Telephone 

Modem 

for 

for 

for 

[63] 

Data 

Utility 

Tables 

Device 

Industry 

to  Data  Communication  Networks 

[62]  American  National  Standards 
Interfacing 

[61]  American  National  Standards  Institute.  ANSI  C12.19-2012  -  American  National 
Standard 
2012. 
End 
https://webstore.ansi.org/Standards/NEMA/ANSIC12192012 (accessed June 28, 2021). 
Institute.  ANSI  C12.22-2012  (R2020)  -  Protocol 
2012. 
Specification 
https://webstore.ansi.org/Standards/NEMA/ANSIC12222012R2020 (accessed June 28, 
2021). 
IEEE.  IEEE  1703-2012  -  IEEE  Standard  for  Local  Area  Network/Wide  Area  Network 
(LAN/WAN)  Node  Communication  Protocol  to  Complement  the  Utility  Industry  End 
Device  Data  Tables  2012.  https://standards.ieee.org/standard/1703-2012.html 
(accessed June 28, 2021). 
IEEE.  IEEE  1363.3-2013  -  IEEE  Standard  for  Identity-Based  Cryptographic  Techniques 
using Pairings 2013. https://standards.ieee.org/standard/1363_3-2013.html (accessed 
June 28, 2021). 
Smart  Device  Communications; 
[65]  Telecommunications 
SecurityAspects 
2013. 
https://global.ihs.com/doc_detail.cfm?&csf=TIA&item_s_key=00601749&item_key_d
ate=861031 (accessed June 28, 2021). 
IEEE Communications Society. IEEE 2410-2019 Standard for Biometric Open Protocol 
2019;2015. 

Industry  Association. 

[64] 

[66] 

[67] 

[68] 

[69] 

IEEE. IEEE 2413-2019 - IEEE Standard for an Architectural Framework for the Internet 
of  Things  (IoT)  2019.  https://standards.ieee.org/standard/2413-2019.html  (accessed 
June 28, 2021). 
International  Electrotechnical  Commission.  IEC  61969-1:2020  Mechanical  structures 
for electrical and electronic equipment - Outdoor enclosures - Part 1: Design guidelines 
2020. https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/60856 (accessed June 28, 2021). 
International  Electrotechnical  Commission.  IEC  61970-1:2005  Energy  management 
2005. 
(EMS-API) 
program 
system 
https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/6208 (accessed June 28, 2021). 

application 

interface 

[71] 

[70]  Department  of  Homeland  Security  U.  DHS  Announces  New  Cybersecurity 
Requirements for Critical Pipeline Owners and Operators | Homeland Security 2021. 
https://www.dhs.gov/news/2021/05/27/dhs-announces-new-cybersecurity-
requirements-critical-pipeline-owners-and-operators (accessed June 28, 2021). 
IEEE.  IEEE  Standard  Specifications  for  Public-Key  Cryptography  Amendment  1: 
Additional Techniques. vol. 13. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers; 2012. 
ISO.  ISO  16484-1:2010  -  Building  automation  and  control  systems  (BACS)  —  Part  1: 
Project 
2004. 
and 
https://www.iso.org/standard/37300.html (accessed June 28, 2021). 
International  Electrotechnical  Commission.  IEC  61850  Communication  networks  and 
systems for power utility automation 2009. 

implementation 

specification 

[73] 

[72] 

 
 
 
Appendix: Cybersecurity Standards Reviewed in the Study  

Standard 

Year 

Description 

Coverage 

Purpose 

Highlights 

IEEE Std 1264 
[34] 

1993 

IEEE Guide for Animal 
Deterrents for Electric 
Power Supply Substations 

Substation, 
Nonhuman 
intrusion 

Counteract animals’ 
intrusions 

1) Define type of animal intrusions and possible problems; 2) Precaution and prevention measures, 
such as barriers and enclosures 

IEEE Std 1402 
[35] 

2000 

IEEE Guide for Electric 
Power Substation Physical 
and Electronic Security 

Substation, 
human intrusion 

Counteract human intrusions 

1) Define type of intrusions, including pedestrian, vehicular, projectile, electronic; 2) Define 
parameters and events influencing intrusions and subsequent problems; 3) Security criteria and 
management are proposed. 

IEEE 802.1AE 
[56] 

2006 

Standard for Local and 
Metropolitan Area 
Networks: Media Access 
Control (MAC) Security 

Metropolitan 
Area Networks 

Specifying provision of 
connectionless user data 
confidentiality, frame data 
integrity, and data origin 
authenticity  

ANSI C12.18 
[57] 

2006 

Protocol Specification for 
ANSI 
Type 2 Optical Port 

Communication 
between end-
device and clients 
via optical port 

To detail the criteria for the 
communication and details 
for implementing OSI 7-layer 
model. 

Specifies 1) requirements that devices need to comply with; 2) requirements for and definitions of 
MAC security; 3) management strategy of MAC security. 

Specify the use of ANSI type 2 optical port for meter communications 

ANSI C12.21 
[58] 

2006 

IEEE std 1619 
[59] 

2008 

American National 
Standard for Protocol 
Specification for 
Telephone Modem 
Communication 

Standard for 
Cryptographic Protection 
of Data on Block-Oriented 
Storage Devices 

Utility 
communication 
over telephone 
modem 

To specify requirements for 
communication amongst 
users and devices over 
switched telephone modem 

Specify the use of telephone modem for meter communications 

Data encryption 
in sector-based 
devices 

Providing a cryptographic 
protection for data stored in 
constant length blocks. 

1) Defines specific of an architecture for cryptographically protecting data stored in constant 
length blocks; 2) provides an additional and improved tool for implementation of secure and 
interoperable protection of data residing in storage. 

IEEE std 2600 
[60] 

2008 

Standard for Information 
Technology: Hardcopy 
Device and System 
Security 

Security 
requirements for 
hard-copy devices 

Providing a guidance on 
security requirements for 
hard copy devices during 
manufacture, installation, 
and applications. 

1) To provide guidance in the secure architecture, design, and out-of-box configuration of HCDs for 
manufacturers; 2) To provide guidance in the secure installation, configuration, and use of HCDs 
for end users and their supporting organizations. 

 
ANSI C12.19 
[61] 

2008 

ANSI C12.22 
[62]  

2012 

IEEE 802.21a 
[56] 

2012 

IEEE Std 1703   
[63] 

2012 

American National 
Standard for Utility 
Industry End Device Data 
Tables 

American National 
Standard for Protocol 
Specification for 
Interfacing to Data 
Communication Networks 

Standard for Local and 
Metropolitan Area 
Networks: Media 
Independent Handover 
Services - Amendment for 
Security Extensions to 
Media Independent 
Handover Services and 
Protocol 

IEEE Standard for Local 
Area Network/Wide Area 
Network (LAN/WAN) 
Node Communication 
Protocol to Complement 
the Utility Industry End 
Device Data Tables 

Utility data table 
structure 

Defining structures for 
transporting data to and 
from end devices 

Defines a table structure for utility application data to be passed between an end device and a 
computer. Does not define device design criteria nor specify the language or protocol used to 
transport that data. 

Utility data 
interoperability 
and security 

Metropolitan 
Area Networks 

Specify the transportation of 
data over various networks 
to advance interoperability 
and security amongst 
communication modules and 
meters. 

Protecting media 
independent handover 
services and mechanisms; 
Assisting  proactive 
authentication to reduce the 
latency due to media access 
authentication and key 
establishment with the 
target network. 

Interoperability 
among 
communications 
modules and 
meters 

Accommodating the network 
messaging requirements of 
an advanced metering 
infrastructure 

1) Describes the process of transporting C12.19 table data over a variety of networks; 2) Uses AES 
encryption to enable strong, secure Smart Grid communications, including confidentiality and data 
integrity, and is also fully extensible to support additional security mechanisms the industry may 
require in the future. 

1) to protect MIH messages, (D)TLS based protection when a PKI involved and EAP based 
authentication are introduced. 2) to reduce the latency, three key distribution mechanisms are 
introduced. 

1) it uses advanced encryption standard to enable strong secure communications to protect 
confidentiality and data integrity. 2) the security model is extensible to support new security 
mechanism, but the cipher model cannot secret non-standard short messages. 

IEEE 1686 
[53] 

2013 

IEEE Standard for 
Intelligent Electronic 
Devices Cyber Security 
Capabilities 

IED 

Addresses security regarding 
the access, operation, 
configuration, firmware 
revision and data retrieval 
from an IED, and 
communication encryption. 

1) IEDs should have open and documented interface to change user accounts, passwords, and 
roles. 2) IEDs should keep full sequential record of audit history (at least 2048 events). 3) IEDs 
should monitor security-related activities and inform SCADA through a real-time protocol. 4) IEDs 
should have certain cryptographic features to ensure the communication and functionality with 
the help of various techniques. 5) Firmware quality assurance shall follow IEEE std C37.231 

IEEE Std 
1363.3 [64] 

2013 

Standard for Identity-
Based Cryptographic 
Techniques using Pairings 

Identity-based 
cryptographic 
schemes based on 
the bilinear 
mappings over 
elliptic curve 

Specify identity-based 
cryptographic techniques 
based on pairings. 

Techniques for identity-based encryption, signatures, inscription, key agreement, and proxy re-
encryption, all based on bilinear pairings. 

PAS 555 [39] 

2013 

Cyber security risk. 
Governance and 
management. 
Specification 

A business-led, 
holistic approach 
to cyber security 

Define the overall outcomes 
of effective cyber security 

PAS 555 enables any organization to choose how it achieves the specified outcomes, whether 
through its own defined processes or the adoption of other standards and management systems. 
PAS 555 enables organizations to 1) Focus investment in the most appropriate way; 2) Minimize 
potential loss; 3) Improve operational effectiveness and efficiency; 4) Develop organizational 
resilience; 5) Improve loss prevention and incident management; 6) Identify and mitigate cyber 
security risk throughout the organization 

TIA TSB-4940 
[65] 

2013 

Smart Device 
Communications; Security 
Aspects 

ICT operation 
security 

ISO/IEC 27001 
-27005 [48] 

2013 

Information technology 
— Security techniques — 
Information security risk 
management 

Information 
security risk 
management 

IEEE C37.240 
[40] 

2014 

IEEE Standard 
Cybersecurity 
Requirements for 
Substation Automation, 
Protection, and Control 
Systems 

Substation, 
interfaces 

Addressing only the 
management of cyber 
security related risk derived 
from or associated with the 
operation and use of 
information technology  

Assisting the satisfactory 
implementation of 
information security in all 
types of organisations based 
on a risk management 
approach. 

Provide a framework that can protect communication security, including assessing external threat, 
vulnerability assets, and relevant approach to protect vulnerable assets. 

It specifies how to 1) identify and assess the risks; 2) deal with the risks; 3) monitor the risks and 
risk treatments; 4) Keep stakeholders informed throughout the process. 

Minimum requirements for a 
substation program. Any 
utility's CS programme must 
balance technical, economic, 
and operational feasibility. 

1) Foundational requirements: access control, use control, data integrity, data confidentiality, 
restrict data flow, timely response to event, network work recourse availability. 2) Physical 
Security needs to ensure the secure access to the cyber assets. 3) Protection of data at the rest 
including file-type of IEDs (configuration files, data files, etc) and hard copy information (IED 
instruction manuals, station drawings) 

IEEE 2410 
[66] 

2015 

Standard for Biometric 
Open Protocol 

Biometric Open 
Protocol Standard 

IEC 27019 
[48] 

2017 

Information technology 
— Security techniques — 
Information security 
controls for the energy 
utility industry 

Energy 
management 
cybersecurity 

The Biometric Open Protocol 
Standard (BOPS) provides 
identity assertion, role 
gathering, multilevel access 
control, assurance, and 
auditing. 

Guidance on process control 
systems for utility industry 
for controlling and 
monitoring the production 
and generation, T&D 

1) BOPS introduces the security considerations, including identity assertion, role gathering, access 
control, audit and assurance; 2) how BOPS is realised in applications and relevant requirements. 

Specifies the cybersecurity requirements for several components, including central and distributed 
process control, monitoring, communication technology, advanced metering infrastructure, energy 
management system, software, firmware and remote maintenance system 

IEEE P2413 
[67] 

2019 

Standard for an 
architectural framework 
for the Internet of Things 

IoT architectural 
framework 

Promoting cross-domain 
interaction and system 
interoperability and 
functional compatibility and 
accelerating the growth of 
IoT market 

1) recognizes the evolving transformational integration and convergence across technology and 
application domains; 2) to provide an extensible integrated architectural framework that will 
continue to evolve and unify the standards creation effort; 3) also provide enough flexibility for 
different industries to adapt the acritude based on different needs. 

IEEE Std 
11073-40101 
[50] 

2020 

Cybersecurity—Processes 
for vulnerability 
assessment 

Personal Health 
Devices and 
Point-of-Care 
Devices 

Proposing an auditable 
approach to identification 
and assessment of CS 
vulnerabilities and 
estimation of risks 

1) emphasise the role of device manufacturers that should provide a device with sufficient security 
protection measures and without any hidden and undocumented functions; 2) Provide two good 
threat modelling approaches data flow diagram and STRIDE classification scheme (Spoofing, 
Tampering, Repudiation, Information Disclosure, Denial of Service and Elevation of Privilege) 3) A 
scoring system is proposed to quantify vulnerabilities, which provides a rank and priority to each 
vulnerability. 

IEEE 2144.1 
[49] 

2020 

Standard for 
Cryptographic Protection 
of Data on Blockchain-
Oriented Storage Devices 

IoT, Blockchain, 
data 

Proposing a framework of 
blockchain-based IoT data 
management 

1) define the roles of stakeholders in a IoT system, including data owner, data consumer, service 
provider, regulator/policy maker, etc. 2) specify blockchain-based data management lifecycle; 3) 
proposing trusted IoT data management framework integrate with 3 layers: application, function 
and trusted carrier layers, which all communicated and controlled by management and control 
panel. 

IEC 61969 
[68]  

2011- 
2020 

Mechanical structures for 
electrical and electronic 
equipment - Outdoor 
enclosures 

Design standard 
for outdoor 
enclosure 

Establish basic 
environmental performance 
criteria for outdoor 
enclosure compliance 

Defining design guidelines for outdoor enclosures and is applicable over mechanical, 
electromechanical and electronic equipment and its installation 

IEC 61970 
[69] 

2005-
2020 

Energy management 
system application 
program interface 

Common 
Information 
Model for 
transmission 
network domain 

Standardising the data 
format and enhance 
interoperability at 
transmission network level 

301 contains a standard data model defining the semantics of the information exchanged in a 
broad range of energy management system applications and later version 302 intended to ensure 
the data interoperability among transient stability software products. Later versions such as 45x, 
452 and 453 tend to standardise the data profiles for state estimation and diagram layout profiles 
for data exchange. 

ISO/SAE 
21434 [52] 

2020 

Road vehicles -
Cybersecurity engineering 

Road Vehicle  

Proposing a technical 
standard for automotive 
development that can 
demonstrate compliance 
with regulations in EU.  

The standard provides guidelines on how to manage cybersecurity strategies in different stages, 
including: overall management, during concept phase, during product development, and during 
production, operation and maintenance.  

IEEE P1912 
[47] 

2021 

Standard for Privacy and 
Security Framework for 
Consumer Wireless 
Devices 

Privacy and 
security, 
consumer 
wireless device 

Data privacy and security at 
end-user side 

1) Define a privacy scale applied to data collected, processed or shared amongst services or 
network. 2) the input of privacy data contributes to assessment tools to apply relevant necessary 
setting to the data. 

DHS 
cybersecurity 
[70] 

2021 

Cybersecurity 
Requirements for Critical 
Pipeline Owners and 
Operators 

Pipeline owners 
and operators 

Details basic requirements 
for pipeline owners and 
operators 

1) Owners and operators must report confirmed and potential cybersecurity incidents.  2) Owners 
and operators must designate a Cybersecurity Coordinator to be available 24 hours a day, seven 
days a week.; 3) Owners and operators must review current practices to identify and remediate 
gaps related to cyber risk and report all findings to both TSA and CISA within 30 days. 

IEEE Std 1363 
series 
[46,64,71] 

2004- 
2008 

IEEE Standard 
Specifications for Public-
Key Cryptography 

public-key 
cryptography 
techniques 

Electronic privacy and 
authenticity 

Introducing types of cryptographic techniques and speciation’s of key agreement schemes, 
signature schemes, encryption schemes. 

ISO 16484 
[72] 

2004- 
2020 

Building Automation 
Controls network 

Communication 
across devices 

Enhancing interoperability 
amongst different vendors 
and equipment 

1) Specify guiding principles for project design and implementation and integration of other 
systems into automation and control system; 2) specifies the requirements for the hardware to 
perform the tasks; 3) specifies the reequipments for overall functionality and engineering service; 
4) defines data communication services and protocols for computer equipment used for building 
systems. 

IEC 62443 
[41] 

2009- 
2020 

Industrial communication 
networks - IT security for 
networks and systems 

Industrial and 
automation 
systems 
cybersecurity 

Addressing and mitigating 
current and future security 
vulnerabilities in industrial 
automation and control 
systems 

1) Specifies process requirements for the secure development of products used in an IACS and 
defines a secure development life cycle for developing and maintaining secure products;  2) Details 
the cybersecurity technical requirements for components making up an industrial automation and 
control system, including embedded devices, network, host and software applications; 3) specifies 
security capabilities enabling a component to mitigate threats for a given security level without 
compensating countermeasures; 

NIST SP 800-
82 [51]  

2011- 
2021 

Guide to Industrial 
Control 
Systems (ICS) Security 

Industrial control 
system security 

Securing industrial control 
system, while addressing 
their unique performance, 
reliability, and safety 
requirements 

The document provides an overview of ICS and typical system topologies, identifies typical threats 
and vulnerabilities to these systems, and provides recommended security countermeasures to 
mitigate the associated risks 

IEC 61850 
[73] 

2009- 
2021 

Communication networks 
and systems for power 
utility automation 

Communication 
network, 
Substation 

Specifying communication 
network at substation 

1) Using a data and object model to specify data format in system and devices; 2) establishing 
multi-vendor interoperability 

 
