Secure solutions for Smart City 
Command Control Centre using AIOT 

S. Balachandar 
Research Scholar, VTU-RC, Department of MCA 
 CMR Institute of Technology 
Bengaluru – 560 037,  INDIA 
aaathibala@gmail.com  

Dr. R. Chinnaiyan 
Associate Professor, 
Department of Information Science & Engineering 
CMR Institute of Technology 
Bengaluru- 560 037 - INDIA 
vijayachinns@gmail.com, chinnaiyan.r@cmrit.ac.in  

Abstract: To build a robust secure solution for smart city’s IOT network from any Cyber-attacks using Artificial 

Intelligence (AI). In Smart City’s IOT network, data collected from different log collectors or direct sources from 

cloud or edge should harness the potential of AI.  The smart city command and control center team will leverage 

these models and deploy it in different city’s IOT network to help on intrusion prediction, network packet surge, 

potential  botnet  attacks  from  external  network.  Some  of  the  vital  use  cases  considered  based  on  the  users  of 

command-and-control center.  

Keywords- Artificial Intelligence, Internet of Things, Smart City, IOT Security, Smart City command and control 

center 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The Internet of Things market will grow from 170 Billion devices (as on 2017) to 561 Billion devices by 2020 as 

reply.com [1]. It communicates a loud and clear message to both consumer IOT and Industrial IOT players in the 

market. It will bring more niche devices like Smart Home appliances, Smart Home Security, Digital Assistants 

and Home Robots from different providers.  It also raises the concern on its security as per recent survey. The 

Artificial Intelligence (AI) growth is phenomenal since last five years, the industry research report clearly states 

that AI market is expected grow significantly between 2020 to 2030. as per Grandview paper [2]. It indicates that 

AI is integral part of other technologies like Big Data, IOT, Cyber Security, Cyber-physical systems. In this paper 

we will be discussing how IOT will harness the potential of AI in the IOT Command center use cases for a Smart 

City  platform  [3].  The  data  collected  from  either  IOT  Edge  devices,  IOT  Aggregators  or  Gateways  or  cloud 

platform  will  be  used  by  the  AI  (Deep  Learning/Machine  Learning  models,  Chatbots,  Voice  to Text  message 

conversion, Smart Assistants for Support Staffs) which helps to monitor, control, and predict the IOT devices or 

sensors, or equipment used across the city network. The unification of AI with IOT will reap the benefits for the 

control  room  staffs  or  engineers  to  take  informed  decision  and  other  activities  such  as  “Failure  Prediction”, 

“Remote Troubleshooting”, Optimized “Planned & Preventive Maintenance”, “Predictive Maintenance” for the 

connected things from the command center. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In  Section  II  we  will  elaborate  the  current  and  historical  information  including  practical  findings  as  well  as 

hypothetical  and  methodological  contributions  regarding  IOT  Data  Collection,  Smart  City  Command  Center 

functions and roles, Role of AI models being used in IOT Traffic and log data and what are the different models 

which are best suited for Predictive Maintenance and Preventive Maintenance of “Things” which are connected 

in the Smart City command center. In section III, we elaborate the functional needs and data flow of this approach. 

In section IV we provided details regarding components and how IOT and AI are integrated well within the Smart 

City Network and Command Center. In section V we will mention about problem relevancy with different use 

cases and its approaches being evaluated. We will share the experiment and results in section VI. The deployment 

considerations and issues  are highlighted  in section VII. We  will present our significance of this research and 

share our recommendations and conclusion in Section VIII. 

II. 

LITERATURE REVIEW 

In  the  “Artificial  Intelligence  for  Securing  IoT  Services  in  Edge  Computing:  A  Survey  [4]”  research  journal 

published by “Zhanyang Xu”, “Wentao Liu”, “Jingwang Huang”, “Chenyi Yang”, “Jiawei Lu” and “Haozhe Tan” 

on 14 Sep 2020, they explained and detailed out the following on their survey. 

1.  Smart Cities is one of their application of IOT in the “Edge Computing” and the usage of IOT Edge to 

use to examine and troubleshoot key incidents or actions. 

2.  Data Privacy protection for IOT Edge devices and services with Artificial Intelligence: The need of data 

security (e.g., data puzzlement, encoding) methods to safeguard the data privacy while transferring the 

data between devices or cloud or edge network.  

3.  Lightweight  privacy  preservation  using  “Artificial  Intelligence”:  They  have  explained  two  important 

deep learning model CNN (convolutional neural network) and deep neural network (DNN) models which 

are further being analyzed. CNN uses “LAYRNT” and Modified CNN Inference Module algorithms for 

“Privacy Preservation”, both are proven with high accuracy of 91% and 92.6% however it expects high 

computing power to process this algorithm. 

4.  Device  authentication,  authorization  management,  IOT  Data  sharing  can  also  be  solved  through 

“Blockchain for IOT Edge enabled devices.” 

5.  The key messages out of this journal mentioned about “Deep Learning” will require extensive compute 

for such IOT security analytics use case and it may fail to uncover intruders or cyber-attacks accurately 

due to too many parameters (features) or not enough (complex) data points, where as the “Reinforced-

Learning” usually learns from grass root stage  and sometimes it also lacks the competence to prevent 

cyber threats or attacks at the early stage. 

Based on their research it does not mention about how smart city command center leverages these deep learning 

algorithms to prevent the IOT attack and the information related to predictive maintenance of these devices is not 

yet addressed and how well we need to secure the edge devices firmware and it does not talk about threat modeling 

needs for command center to prevent DDOS attacks. We analyzed further papers below to understand.  

 
 
 
 
 
As mentioned by Jyoti Deogirikar, Amarsinh Vidhate in “Security attacks in IoT: A survey paper” of  IEEE [5], 

various types of security attacks in IOT (Network attack, Firmware attack, Botnet attack, Physical Device attack, 

embedded software attack, Injection attack) and their survey details about comparison of different IOT attacks 

(Inserting Malicious nodes, Routing, Malicious code, and side channel information). They stressed the importance 

of detection chances and its damage level while analyzing different attacks.  

In  the  “Deep  Learning  and  Big  Data  Technologies  for  IoT  Security”  [6]  paper  shared  by  “Mohamed  Ahzam 

Amanullaha, Riyaz Ahamed Ariyaluran Habeebb, Fariza Hanum Nasaruddinc, Abdullah Ganid, Ejaz Ahmede, 

Abdul  Salam  Mohamed  Nainarf,  Nazihah  Md  Akimb,  Muhammad  Imrang”  are  deliberate  more  about  the 

unification “Big Data”, “Deep Learning” and “IOT Security”. Following the key observations which helps us to 

continue  the  research  more  on  how  AI  plays  important  role  for  “IOT”  and  “Edge  Network”  for  Smart  City 

command center.  

1.  They have picked key uses case for IoT security and its usage of deep learning and big data technology, 

we correlated the use cases with Smart City command centers.  

Use case  

IOT Security Facet 

Applicable  to  our  Research  on 

SirenJack 

Intrusion Detection 

Using Anomaly detection with 

Smart  City  Command  Centre 

area  

help of Neural network model 

(e.g., RBM (Restricted 

Boltzmann Machine) are used for 

Smart Grid data network to 

identify the Intrusion detection 

(using RNN (Recurrent Neural 

Network model) at Command 

Center. 

DDOS 

Attack 

- 

DDOS (Distributed Denial of Service)  This  use  case  is  vital  for  Smart 

Turning Up the Freeze 

[6] 

Buildings  which  are  managed  by 

government or private groups that 

are  monitored  centrally 

from 

command  center.  If  we  see  UDP 

data  flooding  or  broadcast  attack 

or  barrage  attack 

from 

IOT 

Network 

(Gateway  or  direct 

devices  or  edge  network)  from 

these  buildings,  then  it  can  be 

easily  detected  and  prevented  at 

command  center  using  deep 

learning  model  which  is  built 

using  DRNN  (Dense  Random 

Neural Network) 

Attack  on  Dyn 

(a 

DDOS (Distributed Denial of Service)  This is another area where plenty 

leading DNS provider) 

of DNS servers are maintained for 

Smart  Parking,  Smart  Lights, 

Smart 

Building, 

and 

e-

Governance  related  application, 

usually  these  DNS  servers  will 

interact  with 

lot  of  Mobile 

applications and Wearable devices 

which  might  fall  into  “DDOS” 

attack. Command center team can 

collect  these  DNS  Logs  data  as 

mentioned in their paper and it can 

be 

prevented 

by 

looking 

anomalous  data  behavior  within 

the  respective  DNS  server.  We 

planned 

to 

leverage 

Discriminative 

Restricted 

Boltzmann  Machines  [7]  (DBRM) 

model 

to  predict 

the  DDOS 

attacks through DNS Log data. 

Table 1: Use cases matching with Smart City Command Center 

2.  We are focusing  more on the Network layer  which is critical for smart city command center team to 

monitor  IOT  Edge,  Gateway  and  IOT  Edge  to  cloud  network  communications  however  the  IOT 

Application  security  area  is  not  limited  to  analyze  the  data  available  across  networks  to  prevent  host 

intrusion,  Botnet  attack  detection  and  network  intrusion  using  different  deep  learning  models 

recommended in above Table 1. 

In this “Integrated Command and Control Center Maturity Assessment Framework and Toolkit [8] document shared 

by Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs India” has got how integrated command center collects different IOT 

sensor data and the role of “Command and Control Centre” focuses mainly on the following functions. 

1.  User interface and Visualization to generate the reports and dashboard with integrated smart city 

data. 

2.  Device Control & Monitoring – Remote monitoring and controlling of devices and event processing 

of large IOT data, device diagnostics.  

3.  Data Management where it takes of complete data operations (data transformation,  metering, and 

control)  and  service  management  emphasis  more  on  service  management,  API  Management  and 

Policy management  

4.  User management stress the importance of User life cycle management, Access, and Authorization 

management   

 
 
 
In their paper they mentioned about security of Integrated Command and Control Centre and what should be done 

to avoid cyber threats and they have elaborated their Cybersecurity framework and security by design and Security 

during operations. It uses various security policy framework recommended by Government of India and IT Act 

however their recommendation did not emphasize the role of “Artificial Intelligence” or “Deep Learning” specific 

model to prevent or predict such cyber threats or attacks. In this paper we will try overcoming that limitation by 

analyzing different AI model could be used at command-and-control center.  

III. 

FUNCTIONAL NEEDS  

Based on the above findings & limitations from different research paper that we need to focus more deeper on 

the IOT Security analytics for Smart City command Centre.  

Problem Statement: We are going to discuss key IOT Security use cases of AI in smart city command centers. 

The following use cases are highlighted in Table 2. We will be explaining the detailed approaches in Section V. 

Use Case# 

Use Case Name 

1 

2 

Identification of anomalous traffic surges between IOT Edge and IOT Devices 

Real-time intrusion Detection at IOT Gateway using Event Log data 

Table2: Functional Use cases (Identified) 

IV. 

SMART CITY COMMAND CENTER AND IOT NETWORK 

The IOT network in Smart city are classified into three categories. The following are. 

a) Device to City Cloud communication 

b) Device to Gateway communication 

c) Device to Edge/Fog communication 

a)  Device to City Cloud communication: In Device to City cloud (Private) communication, the IOT 

Sensors (Temperature, Humidity, Pressure, Air Quality Index, Fire, Water Leaks, Power shutdown, 

Building HVAC systems), Physical devices (Drones to monitor citizen security, Drones for watching 

public  accidents  or  traffic  congestions),  Wearables  (Smart  Watches,  Wearables  for  Citizens  who 

wants  to  leverage  city  services  directly  from  City  applications  (e.g.  City  Hospital  Network, 

Recommended Monuments and places, Recommended Parks and Parking availability for their two 

or four wheelers) ) are directly connected to City’s own cloud or Public cloud where city allowed to 

communicate these devices or sensors to share the data to them. The smart city command and control 

team collects these directly from their cloud network or IOT Microcontroller. The data coming from 

actual devices are constantly monitored from both the directions (directly from microcontroller logs 

as  well  City  Cloud  data  coming  from  different  IOT  devices)  as  mentioned  in  below  diagram 

(Figure1) 

 
 
Figure 1: Device to Cloud communication using VPN network. 

Here Control Centre team will closely monitor the data coming from micro controller through IP 
network which are directly connected with in the Virtual Private Network of City.  

b)  Device  to  Gateway  Communication:  IoT  gateway  in  Smart  City  network  helps  with  array  of 
communication protocols between different sensors or devices that are part of City network (e.g., 
Smart  Building,  Smart  Parking  Space,  Smart  Light  poles,  Public  WIFI  Routers,  Weather  station 
sensor,  Drones,  etc..).  It  also  keeps  track  the  IOT  sensors,  devices  and  it  helps  to  do  protocol 
translation, data processing, data filtering and securing the devices. Below diagram (Figure 2) will 
show the data flow different IOT Sensors, Devices to IOT Gateway. 

Figure 2: Device to Gateway communication 

In this model, command and control Centre will collect data IOT Gateway devices and IOT Cloud. 
The monitoring and troubleshooting are feasible directly connecting to IOT Gateway IP Address. 

c)  Device to Edge communication: In this model, Edge network plays an important role for monitoring 
and controlling the device and it adds intelligence to the device to predict any anomalies or traffic 
surge  from  the  sensors  or  devices  that  are  intricately  connected.  The  aggregated  data  from  edge 
network will be transmitted to IOT Gateway for better translation, filtering and further aggregation 
required at gateway level. The gateway will communicate directly with the city’s cloud. Similarly, 
the IOT Edge can also communicate with cloud if required. The command & control Centre team 
closely monitor the IOT security attacks across gateway, IOT Edge network and directly from Cloud.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  command  &  control  Centre  team  will  take  care  of  following  types  of  data  across  different  smart  city 
application, this table 3 explains the level of data security analysis required for each application. 

Figure 3: Device to Edge communication 

Functional  Area  of 
Smart City 
Smart Street Light 

Smart Parking & Public 
Space management 

Smart 
Management 

Water 

Public Safety  

Smart Meters & Grid 

Smart e-Governance 

Smart  Transport  & 
Traffic Management 

Smart 
Management 

Healthcare 

Type of Data 

Potential AI Model for IOT Network/Data/Applications 

Light Sensing Photocells, Geo 
Location,  Solar  Panel  Details, 
Edge  Node  and  Cloud  server 
details.  
Parking  Location  details,  Geo 
Location,  Payment  Gateway, 
Vehicle  Details  (Car,  Van, 
Truck,  etc..),  Vehicle  Owner 
details,  Building  and  parking 
lot details  
Water  Meter  Sensors,  Water 
level sensor at different tanks, 
sumps  and  dams  and  lakes, 
water allocation data. 
CCTV  camera,  street  camera, 
for  Security 
body  camera 
officials,  Drone  System  for 
Surveillance. 
Grid Details, Meter Details and 
Geo  Location,  Smart  Plugs, 
Smart  Switches  and  Panel 
Board  which  give  physical 
locations 
Smart 
Transformer  and  Distribution 
Boxes.  
Inter  Department  applications 
and its data.  
Citizen’s data  
Traffic  Signal  Sensor  data, 
Traffic  Cameras,  Smart  Bus, 
Government 
and 
Traffic  Police  Vehicle  Geo 
Traffic 
details, 
Location 
Control Room data.  
Wearables 
Government 

by 
hospitals, 

provided 

Trucks 

and 

Predictive Maintenance and traffic surge  

Intrusion Detection  
DDOS attacks 
Forecasting of Network Traffic Surge  

Intrusion Detection  
DDOS attacks 
Predictive Maintenance 

Predictive Maintenance 
Forecasting of Network Traffic Surge  
DNS Spoofing or DNS Hijacking 

Predictive Maintenance 
Forecasting of Network Traffic Surge  
GPS Spoofing 

DNS Spoofing or DNS Hijacking 
DDOS attacks 

DNS Spoofing or DNS Hijacking 
DDOS attacks 
Predictive Maintenance 
GPS Spoofing 

DNS Spoofing or DNS Hijacking 
DDOS attacks 

 
 
 
 
Smart 
Crowd Management 

Tourism  & 

Hospital  details,  ambulance 
tracking  data  and  ambulance 
geo  location  details,  hospital 
services data, doctors network. 
Tourist  arrival  and  departure 
data,  Wearables  recorded  by 
Tourists  or  provided  by 
Government 
better 
tracking,  Public  Monument 
and  Park  details  and  CCTV 
Camera  to  track  the  crowd 
density and occupancy level at 
different places. 

for 

DDOS attacks 
Intrusion Detection  

Table 3: Smart City Application’s AI Model in IOT network 

The detailed logs for different layers of smart city network (e.g., Device/Edge, Fog, Cloud and Web Application) 
are  usually  collected  in  Enterprise  Log  Software  like  (Splunk,  LogDNA,  Elastic  Stack,  Sumo  Logic,  Fluentd, 
Loggly). These log database or applications will help on analyzing the logs through its catalogue of Indexes and 
relates real-time data  in  a  searchable logs of event  store from  which it can generate  meaningful insights (e.g., 
reports and dashboards). 

The below diagram shows how IOT application and network logs can be collected and analyzed by Command & 
Control  Centre  team.  It  will  act  as  one  of  the  important  sources  for  building  AI  based  model  to  predict  the 
following. 

a.  Network Traffic flow analysis  
b.  Network Intrusion detection & DDOS attack  
c.  TCP/UDP packet analysis for (Behavioral analytics) 
d.  Prediction of lateral movement using Domain Controller Logs 
e.  Malware analysis and user level calls 
f.  DNS Spoofing analysis  

Figure 4: IOT Data Collect through Event Log Collector 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Layer 

Types of Log Data 

Purpose 

Sensors and Actuator Layer 

Event Log from Devices  

Network Layer 

IOT  Edge  Server  and  Gateway  Way 
Server Event Log 
Network Packet Log 

Application Layer (Cloud) 

Application Event Logs 
Cloud Server Logs  

It  used  to  detect  the  heartbeat  of  the 
sensor or device and will failover easily 
when  one  of  the  devices  is  down  or 
inactive. 
It  used  to  analyze  the  health  of  IOT 
Edge,  and  Gateway  server  and  the 
network  packet  log  helps  to  detect  the 
pattern  or  unexpected  surge  in  the 
network traffic using packet log. 
It helps to detect the malware addresses 
and  helps  to  support  from  known 
allowed  and  unpublished  addresses.  It 
helps  to  block  traffic  and  monitoring 
suspected malware addresses. 

Following are the common Artificial model used in the context of Cyber Security, these AI models are agnostic 
to use at different network layers of IOT from the smart city context. 

a.  Classification:  It  is  used  to  types  of  similar  attacks  such  as  different  pieces  of  malware  be 
associated  to  the  similar  group  which  has  related  characteristics  and  behavior  even  if  their 
signatures are different.   

b.  Clustering:  Cluster  and  Understand  the  different  types  of  attacks  in  a  TCP  or  UDP  packets, 
Once  the  network  (e.g.,  TCP/UDP)  packets  are  classified  into  Normal  and  Attack  using 
classification models, it is essential to understand the behavior relationship between each attack 
type using Clustering algorithms. Examples are Backdoors, DoS (Denial of Services), Exploits, 
Flood and Worms, etc. 

c.  Predictive Models: Using Deep Learning (Neural Networks), its feasible to identify the threat 
as they occur. The dynamic approach will allow multiple algorithms to optimize the learning 
(i.e., using Auto Learning or Self Learning) capabilities routinely.  

d.  User  Behavior  Analysis:  Identification  of  attack’s  attempt  at  compromising  or  fraud  by 

malicious users at the movement when they occur.  

V. 

USE CASES & HIGH-LEVEL APPROACH 

Use Case#1: Identification of anomalous traffic surges between IOT Edge and IOT Devices: 

In this use case the data coming from different IOT devices, sensors used across the smart city network. The 

data communication between IOT Edge and devices are happening through its native protocol [9]. In the below 

example  we  have  shown  the  data  flow  from  IOT  Edge  network  and  IOT  Gateway  network  to  Smart  city 

control Centre.  

 
 
 
Figure 5: Use Case1: Data Flow from IOT Network to Command-and-Control Center 

Illustration of technologies used for above use case mentioned in the following table 4. 

Device/Edge/Sensor Gateway  Technology/Platform 

Details 

Probable  IOT  Security 

Device (e.g., Smart Street Light 

Communication  Protocol 

Photocells 

identify 

if 

Intruders 

potentially 

[10]) - Light dependent resistor 

[11]: IEEE 802.15.4 ZigBee 

streetlight  [12]  is  needed  to  be 

overflow  the  IOT  Edge 

Attack 

(Mid-Range RF Protocol to 

turn  on  When  the  light  is  too 

Switch  Buffer  limit.  The 

handle 

communication 

low, the sensor communicates 

Edge Network Switch send 

between  Device  to  IOT 

with  the  computing  device  in 

the  alert  to  command  & 

Gateway  in  the  IOT  Edge 

streetlight 

to  activate 

the 

control  center 

that 

its 

network. 

electricity  from  solar  panel 

reached  buffer  overflow 

which  sits  on  top  of  the  lamp 

limit. 

It 

post.  When 

the  photocell 

communicating 

stops 

with 

identifies 

light, 

the  sensor 

Gateway  which  does  not 

inside  the  streetlight  post  or 

give the streetlight status to 

device will deactivate the light 

command & control center.  

based on the photocell values. 

Smart Cameras used in Traffic 

Communication  Protocol: 

Closed-Circuit 

Television 

DoS (Denial of Service) is 

Poles/Public  Safety  Cameras 

IEEE 

802.11.x  Wi-Fi 

(CCTV)  Example  PTZ  (Pan 

a type of security attack [14] 

[13]. 

(Mid-Range) Protocol with 

Tilt  Zoom)  and  Fix  box 

that seeks in ingesting Wi-

2.4GHZ/5GHz  frequency 

cameras  to  capture  vehicle 

Fi  Bandwidth  which  are 

to  handle  communication 

crossing each signal across the 

required for Cameras. Due 

between CCTV Camera [15] 

city. 

to  DOS  attack,  the  camera 

 
                                                 
    
to Edge Router in the Edge 

Face  Recognition  cameras 

content  is  not  visible  or 

Network.  Also,  it  will  be 

installed at sensitive areas will 

even 

it  will  not  send 

able to manage video flow 

help  identify  miscreants  or 

necessary  packets  to  IOT 

from  IP  cameras  as  RTSP 

offenders.  

streams [13] 

Edge  Gateway.  Attackers 

use  UDP  Traffic  Surge  or 

Flooding 

attack  where 

Various  UDP  datagrams 

are spawned typically by a 

bot.  It  defeats  the  purpose 

of monitoring stops sharing 

the  necessary  details 

to 

command-and-control 

Centre 

team  who 

are 

supposed  to  monitor  for 

any  specific  public  safety 

incidents 

(e.g., 

theft, 

vandalism).  

Smart 

Water 

Tank 

Communication  Protocol: 

It  is  used  spotting  that  Water 

Routing  attack  is  possible 

Communication [16] 

The  water  detection  level 

level in the water tank is above 

as many water tanks across 

sensor  uses  IEEE  802.15 

or  below 

from 

specified 

city 

relate 

to  common 

LoRa  (Low  Power  Wide 

threshold (e.g., 2 Feet or 5 Feet 

LPWAN Network.  

Area 

Network) 

for 

or  10  Feet)  and  It  constantly 

Sybil  Attack  or  Sinkhole 

communication 

between 

examine  whether  the  water 

attack  are  high  probable 

sub tanks and main tank, it 

level  is  up  or  down  from  the 

where  they  could  create 

supports 

Long 

range 

level  that  the  sensor  reports. 

numerous  fake 

identities 

wireless  data  transmission 

The central water tank decides 

and 

simulates 

to 

be 

(10-15km) 

whether  to  stop  the  data  or 

different 

peer-to-peer 

send  the  data  based  on  the 

networks  across  the  Water 

sensor  reading, 

the  central 

Taps,  Water 

Tanks 

water  tank  details  will  be 

connected 

in 

the 

IOT 

constantly  monitored 

at 

Network. 

Command & Control Centre to 

fulfil  if  any  complaint  from 

Citizen on water leak or “No” 

water  

Table 4: Use Case1: Technology, Probable IOT Security Attacks 

Here we referred the Wi-Fi Sensor Gateway and Wi-Fi Router with below configuration for above devices if it 

needs to connect through Wi-Fi. 

 
Wireless Sensor Gateway 

2.4Ghz,  100m  range,  physical  interface,  include 

Wi-Fi Router 

RS232, Ethernet and Zigbee communications, capable 

of supporting 400+ concurrent sensor nodes 

2.4GHz, Wi-Fi 100m + range outdoor. 

From above use case it demands for the Identification of anomalous traffic flows between IOT Device and IOT 

Edge/Gateway Server. The detailed experiments and model details are covered in section VI. 

Use Case#2: Real-time intrusion Detection at IOT Gateway using Event Log data: 

In this use case, the command-and-control center’s log server (e.g., Splunk [17] or Elastic Search [18] or any logging 

software like BMC Patrol [19], Windows or Unix server logs) which continuously receives the event log of IOT 

Devices (Sensors) from IOT Gateway (Gateway Devices). The sufficient data protection & intrusion prevention 

mechanism should be done as pre-requisite (i.e., disabling root access to IOT Gateway server and resetting default 

root password and ensure the IOT devices are registered in the IOT Device registry and established sophisticated 

firewall IOT Gateway and Edge  and Cloud network). Intrusion  prevention system contributes as an additional 

layer of protection to the system to prevent from m the reactive intrusions or threats whereas Intrusion detection 

system tries to detect a threat and inform the command & control Centre network administrator to take appropriate 

action in proactive manner. This AI based real-time analytics [20] [21] helps command and control Centre [22] team 

to identify the intrusion proactively and take spot decision based on the prediction results against the network 

event logs. The detailed experiments and model details are covered in section VI. 

VI. 

RESEARCH APPROACH & EXPERIMENTS 

In this section we describe the procedures followed for  couple of use cases mentioned above including model 
creation and dataset used for data preprocessing, experimental scenario, results, and explanations. 

Use Case#1 Identification of anomalous traffic surges between IOT Edge and IOT Devices: 

We approached an AI model for estimating the traffic amounts in different directions in the IOT network, we need 

to identify if there is sudden surge in traffic [23] in unusual directions. Identification of security threats on volume 

for source or destination will help us to know the attacks clearly. the below process being used to deploy the AI 

Model for network traffic flow prediction. Following dataset are used for experimenting the network traffic surge. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dataset Name 

Features 

Smart City Use case  Relevancy to this research  

Unified 

Host 

and 

  Network 

Event 

Parking 

Sensor, 

Intricately links with IOT network dataset 

Network Data Set [24] 

Data (11) 

Smart  Street  Lights 

and ideal for spotting various kinds of time 

  Host  Event  Data 

and Water Meters 

series  surges  in  the  data  and  identifying 

(21) 

outliers,  suggesting  to  the  command  & 

control  center  team,  and  then  can  be 

further analyzed 

MERL 

(Mitsubishi 

 

200 wireless motion 

Public 

Safety, 

Identification  of  security 

threats  on 

Electric  Research  Labs) 

sensors 

Crowd Management 

volume  for  destination  (e.g.,  a  street  or 

[25] 

public place like Zoo or Monuments)  

Intel Lab Data [26]  

  Total  of  fifty-four 

Smart Buildings 

Links  different  sensors  used  with  in  the 

building to identify any DDOS attacks for 

specific IOT Gateway or IOT Edge server. 

IOT 

Sensors 

installed in the Intel 

Berkeley  Research 

lab 

and 

it  has 

around  eight  data 

features 

Table 5: Use Case1: Data Set analyzed 

The below diagram explains the step-by-step process of building forecasting model for IOT network traffic surge 

from IOT Gateway or IOT Edge server. 

Figure 6: Use Case1: Model Life Cycle 

RAW Data Collection: The source data from different IOT Gateway or Sensor networks will be ingested through 

a code-based technology (e.g., Python or R) or tool-based technologies like Azure Data Factory or AWS glue or 

Google Data Flow based on the cloud environment  which  supports the direct connectivity  with IOT Gateway 

 
 
 
through REST API or other connectors like XML/JSON. The RAW data needs to be parsed and features needs to 

be selected for model building. Usually, we face following issues in the RAW data collection step. 

a.  Data  Quality  Errors  (poor  data  from  the  identified  features  which  could  not  help  us  to  interpret  any 

meaningful results) 

b.  Data skewness: It primarily refers to a non-uniform distribution in a dataset, particularly for forecasting 

kind of model data needs to undergo Seasonality and Stationary Testing. 

Data Exploration: Post data collection, we used machine learning feature selection methods (e.g., High Correlation 

filter,  Missing  Value  Ratio  and  Low  Variance 

filter  and) 

to  decide 

the  X 

(Time  Stamp  – 

Months/Weeks/Days/Hours) and Y axis (Forward Pockets). 

Model Building: Before building the model, we need to de-duplicate the data that are collected which helps to 

filter  and  aggregate  the  data  (e.g.,  milliseconds  to  seconds  or  seconds  to  minutes  transaction  roll-up)  and  do 

conversion  of  categorical  to  numerical  data  if  applicable.  We  evaluated  different  time  series  AI  model  [27]  to 

forecast the network surge. 

Time 

Series 

Holt-Winters 

MA 

ARIMA 

Linear 

LSTM 

RNN 

Model Aspect 

Model 

Regression 

(Recurrent 

Neural 

Network) 

Number of Series 

1 

1 

1 

1 or more 

1 or more 

Time Series Length  14-200 

12-200 

12-200 

14-200 

From 200 and more 

Patterns 

Seasonality  and 

Stationary  Stationary 

Seasonality 

Any 

Pattern 

or Trend 

and 

or 

(Stationary/Seasonality) 

MAPE 

(mean 

Moderate 

High 

High 

Moderate 

Low 

Trend 

absolute 

percentage error) 

We initially evaluated MA (Moving Average) and Holt Winters Model The below diagram shows the seasonality 

Checks done against the “Unified Host and Network Data Set” for 20 weeks data.  

Table 6: Time Series Model Comparison  

 
 
Seasonality Validation 

Confidence 

Interval 

Figure 7: Use Case1: Seasonality Variation using Holt Winter’s model 

We evaluated confidence interval (CI) using the below formula.  

s 

X ± Z 

√(n) 

S – standard deviation 

n – Number of observations or experiments 

X is the mean number of TCP Packets for 4 weeks sample. 

Z - Z Score value from below table 7. 

80% 

85% 

90% 

95% 

99% 

99.5% 

99.9% 

Z 

1.282 

1.440 

1.645 

1.960 

2.576 

2.807 

3.291 

Table 7: Z Score 

The confidence interval value is highlighted in Oval in below diagram.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidence Interval 

Figure 8: Use Case1: Confidence Interval from Holt Winter’s Model 

We Compared Holt-Winters and MA (Moving Average) model, Holt Winters having a better fit due to seasonal 

characteristic of the dataset. This is consistent  with the  use case as traffic data  has tendency towards seasonal 

characteristic. We continue tested another AI Model LTSM RNN model to fine tune the confidence and increase 

the accuracy level. 

LSTM RNN Model: We evaluated all the above models however we did a deep analysis on LSTM RNN Model 

[32]. Long short-term  memory (LSTM) is part of recurrent neural  network (RNN) architecture used  mainly  for 

Deep Learning models. LSTM networks are well-suited to building prediction model for time series data. 

RNN Model: as per towardsdatascience.com science paper “Recurrent means the output at the current time step 

becomes the input to the next time step. At each element of the sequence, the model considers not just the current 

input, but what it remembers about the preceding elements.”  

Figure 9: RNN Model (Neural Network) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This memory lets the network to understand long-term dependencies in a sequence that means it take up the whole 

perspective into account while creating a prediction model, whether that be the next packet in a network traffic 

data.  

Model Analysis Output are shown below, the Colab screenshots are captured here. 

Time Series start and end date details are shown below. 

LTSM RNN Model: 

define the shape of the input dataset: Since we are only using one feature of Fwd Pkt Len Avg. 

 
 
 
The test dataset using LSTM shows MSE (Mean Squared Error) as “0.0000034526”. While the baseline model 

has MSE of “0.00003428”. The current LSTM model performs better than the previous (baseline) model.  

How this model can be deployed at Edge server and continuously learn: The aforementioned code is developed 

using python and it can be compiled and built it in a docker and it can be exported to dockerhub as a “packaged” 

container which can be reused for further deployments, if we install a docker in the IOT edge server which could 

 
 
 
 
able to pull the docker image from docker hub and able to run independently or it could be orchestrated using 

Kubernetes (orchestration tools) using minkube using kubectl command at the IOT Edge. 

How Command and Control team get benefited: if this model proven for set of IOT Gateway or IOT Edge servers, 

it can be auto deployed using “DevOps [28]” tools like Jenkin/GitHub and SonarQube. Also using these forecasted 

network surge, they could clearly understand which IOT Gateway is potentially going to be weak from the attack 

and they can ensure by taking actions (e.g., firmware update, password reset, adding additional firewall, protecting 

the devices using encrypted protocol) 

Use Case#2: Real-time intrusion Detection at IOT Gateway using Event Log data 

The below diagram explains the step-by-step process of building real-time log analytics detect the Host based 

Intrusion using Event Logs data. 

Figure 10: Use Case2: Model Lifecycle  

Step#  Activities 

Tools/Technologies 

Remarks  

Referred [29][30][31][32][33] 

1 

IOT  Gateway:  Smart  City  will 

Splunk  Agent 

or  API 

Here we referred Kepware as IOT 

have different IOT Gateway server 

/Kepware/IOT 

Gateway 

Gateway 

software 

which 

in different locations to support the 

Devices (Hardware) 

translates  the  protocol  and  takes 

data coming different IOT devices 

(e.g.,  smart  streetlights,  smart 

parking  sensors,  building  alarms, 

CCTV  camera  event  logs,  smart 

wearables)  and  public  WIFI 

Router 

care  of  translation,  aggregation 

and  sending 

to 

the  Gateway 

Server. 

2 

Event Log Collector: collects all 

Splunk/Elastic  Search  with 

This  supports  streaming  of  logs 

the  different  logs  through  log 

Active  MQ 

or  Kafka 

from different IOT gateway. 

syncing mechanism (e.g., syncing 

(Message Broker)  

from  client  to  server  like  BMC 

Patrol  or  Splunk)  and  it  will  be 

 
 
 
 
kept  in  the  log  collector  software 

storage or central data storage like 

data lake. 

3 

Data  Ingestion:  ingestion  of  log 

AWS  Kinesis/Google  Clod 

stream  accepts  the  inbound  input 

Data 

Flow/Azure  Event 

and 

performs 

minor 

Hub/Azure 

Data 

transformations and channels data 

Factory/Custom  code  written 

through  the  real-time  prediction’s 

in Python or Java. 

module. 

persisted 

the 

output 

to 

We  can  build  Real-time 

Unstructured  Storage  like  Data 

dashboards either through the 

Lake  (e.g.,  ADLS,  Google  Cloud 

log collector tool like Splunk 

Storage or AWS S3 Bucket) 

or  open-source 

tool 

like 

Real-time  Dashboard:  Alerts  & 

Grafana/Kibana/Banana 

Notification: 

based  on  the  Log  collection 

The real-time data will go to smart 

software (e.g., Elastic Search, 

city  command  Centre  team  to 

Solr, Fluentd) 

monitor  the  logs  in  parallel  and 

they 

can 

build 

alerts 

and 

dashboards to see if there are any 

abnormal  events  or  unusual  IP 

addresses.  

4 

Data 

Cleansing 

& 

Pre-Built 

tools  from  Log 

Transformation:  

collector tool (e.g., Splunk) or 

  Unwanted 

will 

be 

Custom  code  to  cleanse  and 

cleansed  from  the  Logs 

transform  the  data  through 

dataset. 

Python/R/Matlab. 

  Symbolization 

(Vectorization/Encoding) 

will  be  done  on 

the 

cleansed dataset. 

  Aggregation of data (roll-

up  to  second  if  the  data 

comes 

from 

milliseconds) 

5 

Data Model: 

Deep Learning Tools: 

Example: 

The 

corner 

Supervised learning technique  for 

Apache  Spark  MLlib/Tensor 

classification  algorithm 

(CC4) 

identifying  various  classification 

Flow/Pytorch/Keras 

used 

for  notorious 

intrusion 

methods  to  classify  the  threats. 

Identifying  important  feature  and 

attacks 

 
 
 
classification into various buckets 

so  that  a  new  threat  could  be 

identified. 

6 

Real-time  Prediction  Output:  It 

Same as Step 3 

will be merged  with the real-time 

dashboard built in step 3 and it will 

indicate  the  command  &  control 

Centre 

team 

to  predict 

the 

Intrusion  of  any  specific  IOT 

Gateway  network  (i.e.,  known 

packets  or  unknown  packets  or 

Attack packets)   

Table 9: Use Case2: Detailed Steps 

Though we could not experiment this use case due to non-availability of “Real-time” data however it could be 

tried with a IOT Event Data simulator once it is available. 

VII. 

DEPLOYMENT CONSIDERATIONS 

Following are the key deployment considerations for deploying the model for smart city’s command-and-control 
center team [34][35][36][37] to get the real benefit of AI from the IOT data that are going to be collected from different 
IOT network or application or devices. 

a)  Capability assessment for IOT Edge Servers in Smart City network based on its compute power (e.g., 

RAM, CPU or GPU) and whether it  will be able to hold any AI model to support threat detection or 

prediction. 

b)  Prioritize the IOT network which collects sensitive data or privacy data where it flows from a particular 

Smart  City  application  (e.g.,  CCTV  Camera,  Wearable  or  Payment  Channel  which  hold  Citizen’s 

sensitive and confidential information). Based on that list of IOT Gateway or IOT Edge or Devices, we 

need to deploy the AI model (either real-time or near real-time).  

c)  While  we  choose  the  Deep  Learning  model,  we  need  to  consider  the  following  parameter  from 

deployment perspective even though they give high accuracy with test data, sometimes it may run out of 

resources during continuous learning at IOT Edge. 

1.  Model Size (Number of Layers) 

2.  Parameter Size (100,000,000+) 

3.  Time and Cost (Upto Weeks and sometime up to months) 

4.  Hardware (Graphical Processor Unit) 

5.  Framework – Distributed.  

d)  As  the  volume  of  IOT  network  and  number  of  devices  are  significantly  high  for  Smart  City  kind  of 

applications which needs more robust method of deploying the model automatically.  

e)  The network complexity, latency, and threshold data of IOT network should be collected before we target 

the model for a specific set of IOT Edge or Gateway servers. 

 
 
 
f)  City command & control center should already have Intrusion Detection System apart from this model 

and it should help to monitor based on the intrusion specific rules (e.g., port range, firewall rules, IP 

network ranges, Device Registry, Router and Switch metadata, Firmware providers and details) 

g)  We should eliminate hard coded passwords of  Wi-Fi Routers, Gateway Server or know IOT Devices 

based on the provider details. Root Accounts  for all logins should be disabled for vendors  who keep 

update their software remotely, we should supply different user account for them. 

h)  Keep Antivirus software and virus definitions and firewall rules up to date.  

i)  Enablement of Device or IOT Edge or IOT Gateway logs centrally to monitor the data transmission for 

better  troubleshooting  and  do  root  cause  analysis.  This  could  be  achieved  by  installing  “Log”  agents 

which synchronize the data at the “Central” Log server (e.g., Splunk or BMC Patrol or Nagios) 

VIII. 

SIGNIFICANCE OF THIS RESEARCH & RECOMMENDATIONS 

The population of IoT devices are significantly growing for Smart City platforms, IOT devices are  exposed to 

Security outbreaks such as Intrusion, Flooding, Denial of Services, etc. Also, IOT devices are going to produce 

large dataset (structured and unstructured (e.g., Images)) which needs “AI” to go along with IOT network to help 

predict, detect, forecast the network attacks seamlessly from Smart City command & control center. Its time to 

harmonize the power of “AI” (Artificial Intelligence) at the IOT to protect and safeguard from Cyber-attacks. Due 

to computing power limitations,  we trained the  model only for  selected use cases with limited number of IOT 

Devices. The above models can be further optimized and deployed on to IOT Edge or Gateway automatically with 

niche tools in the market.  

IX. 

REFERENCES 

1. 

IOT 
Trends: 
internet-of-things 

https://www.reply.com/en/topics/internet-of-things/the-evolution-of-the-consumer-

2.  Artificial Intelligence Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis Report by Solution (Hardware, Software, 
Services), By Technology (Deep Learning, Machine Learning), By End Use, By Region, And Segment 
Forecasts, 2020 – 2027, https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/artificial-intelligence-ai-
market 

3.  Sarbeswar Praharaj, Development Challenges for Big Data Command and Control Centres for Smart 

Cities in India, January 2020, DOI:  10.1007/978-3-030-12180-8_4, In book: Data-driven Multivalence 
in the Built Environment 

4.  Artificial Intelligence for Securing IoT Services in Edge Computing: A Survey 

Zhanyang Xu, Wentao Liu, Jingwang Huang, Chenyi Yang, Jiawei Lu, and Haozhe Tan, Published 14 
September 2020, Volume 2020, Article ID 8872586, 13 pages 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8872586 

5.  Security attacks in IoT: A survey, Jyoti Deogirikar, A. Vidhate, Published 2017, Engineering 

2017 International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC), 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8058363 

6.  Deep Learning and Big Data Technologies for IoT Security, Mohamed Ahzam Amanullaha, Riyaz 
Ahamed Ariyaluran Habeebb, Fariza Hanum Nasaruddinc, Abdullah Ganid, Ejaz Ahmede, Abdul 
Salam Mohamed Nainarf, Nazihah Md Akimb, Muhammad Imrang, Article in Computer 
Communications · February 2020 DOI:  10.1016/j.comcom.2020.01.016, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/338523843 

7.  Network  anomaly  detection  with  the  restricted  Boltzmann  machine,  a  Centro  di  Ateneo  per  i  Servizi 
  Dipartimento  di  Ingegneria 

Informativi,  Università  di  Napoli  Federico  II,  Napoli,  Italy, 

 
 
 
 
 
Italy, 

Salerno, 

Fisciano, 

dell'Informazione, Seconda Università di Napoli, Aversa, Italy, Dipartimento di Informatica, Università 
di 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2012.11.050, 
https://www.covert.io/research-papers/deep-learning-
security/Network%20anomaly%20detection%20with%20the%20restricted%20Boltzmann%20machine
.pdf 
Integrated  Command  and  Control  Center  Maturity  Assessment  Framework  and  Toolkit,  Maturity 
Assessment Framework and Toolkit to unlock the potential of Integrated Command and Control Centers 
(ICCCs),  Ministry 
2018 
https://smartnet.niua.org/sites/default/files/resources/iccc_maturity_assessment_framework_toolkit_vf2
11218.pdf 

of  Housing  &  Urban  Affairs 

(MoHUA)  December 

8. 

9.  Husam Rajab, Tibor Cinkelr, “IoT based Smart Cities” in 2018 International Symposium on Networks, 
Italy, 

(ISNCC) 

Rome, 

and 

At: 

Computers 
Communications 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISNCC.2018.8530997 

10.  Mohamed Abdel-Basset, Gunasekaran Manogaran, Mai Mohamed, Ehab Rushdy, Internet of things in 
the  decision-making  process 

smart 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324952543_Internet_of_things_in_smart_education_environ
ment_Supportive_framework_in_the_decision-making_process 

environment:  Supportive 

framework 

education 

in 

11.  Byungseok Kang, Daecheon Kim, Hyunseung Choo, Internet of Everything: A Large-Scale Autonomic 
IoT Gateway in “July 2017 IEEE Transactions on Multi-Scale Computing Systems 3(3):206-214” 

12.  Noriaki Yoshiura Naoya Ohta, Smart street light system with energy saving function based on the sensor 

network, DOI: 10.1145/2487166.2487202, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/262352965 

13.  Arif  Pribadi1,  Fachrul  Kurniawan,  Mochamad  Hariadi,  Supeno  Mardi,  Susiki  Nugroho,  Urban 
Distribution  CCTV  for  Smart  City  Using  Decision  Tree  Methods,  2017  International  Seminar  on 
Intelligent Technology and Its Application,  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320148770 
14.  Analysis of Different IoT Protocols for Heterogeneous Devices and Cloud, Deepak Priyadarshi School 
of Computer Engineering, KIIT deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India, Ashutosh Behura 
School of Computer Engineering, KIIT deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India Platform, 
IEEE, 3-5 April 2018, https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8524531 

15.  Luis Valent, Sergio A. Serrano, Reinier Oves Garcıa, Anibal Andrade, Miguel A. Palacios-Alonso, L. 
Enrique Sucar, A CLOUD-BASED ARCHITECTURE FOR SMART VIDEO SURVEILLANCE, The 
International  Archives  of  the  Photogrammetry,  Remote  Sensing  and  Spatial  Information  Sciences, 
Volume XLII-4/W3, 2017 2nd International Conference on Smart Data and Smart Cities, 4–6 October 
2017,  Puebla,  Mexico,  https://www.int-arch-photogramm-remote-sens-spatial-inf-sci.net/XLII-4-
W3/99/2017/isprs-archives-XLII-4-W3-99-2017.pdf 

16.  Sheetal Wireless Technologies Pvt. Ltd, WIRELESS DATA COMMUNICATION FOR OVERHEAD 
WATER TANK LEVEL MONITERING, http://www.sheetalwireless.net/media/I-O%20Transmission-
Water%20Utility.pdf 

17.  Log  Collection  Software: 

https://www.logdna.com/blog/5-splunk-alternatives-for-logging-their-

benefits-shortcomings-and-which-one-to-choose 

18.  Elastic Search: https://www.elastic.co/what-is/elasticsearch 

19.  BMC Patrol: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/netcoolomnibus/8?topic=integrations-bmc-patrol-v9 

20.  Shahid Raza, Linus Wallgren, Thiemo Voigt, Real-time intrusion detection in the Internet of Things, 

Ad Hoc Netw. (2013), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2013.04.014 

21.  SESHA  SAI  GOUTAM  MYLAVARAPU,  REAL  TIME  HYBRID  INTRUSION  DETECTION 

SYSTEM USING APACHE STORM, May 2015 

22.  Detailed Project Report (DPR) Integrated Command and Control Centre 

https://pmidc.punjab.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Revised-DPR-of-ICCC-Project-for-Jalandhar-
City-28.11.2018.pdf 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.  SYED RAMEEM ZAHRA AND MOHAMMAD AHSAN CHISHTI, ASSESSING THE SERVICES, 
SECURITY  THREATS,  CHALLENGES  AND  SOLUTIONS  IN  THE  INTERNET  OF  THINGS, 
Volume 20, Number 3, pp. 457–484. DOI 10.12694/scpe.v20i3.1544 

24.  ARCS Data Sets, Comprehensive, Multi-Source Cyber-Security Events, Unified Host and Network Data 

Set, https://csr.lanl.gov/data/2017/ 

25.  Mitsubishi 

Electric 

Research 

Labs 

- 

MERL 

Sense 

Data, 

https://sites.google.com/a/drwren.com/wmd/home?authuser=0 

26.  Intel  Labs  Data:  Intel  Berkeley  Research  lab  between  February  28th  and  April  5th,  2004 

https://www.kaggle.com/divyansh22/intel-berkeley-research-lab-sensor-data/version/1 

27.  Mohammed Ali Al-Garadi, Amr Mohamed, Abdulla Al-Ali, Xiaojiang Du, Mohsen Guizani, A Survey 
of  Machine  and  Deep  Learning  Methods  for  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  Security,  20th  Apr  2020,  DOI: 
10.1109/COMST.2020.2988293, https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9072101 

28.  John  Arundel  & 

Justin  Domingus, 

  Cloud  Native  DevOps  with  Kubernetes, 

https://get.oreilly.com/rs/107-FMS-070/images/Next-Architecture.pdf?  

29.  Amazon Kinesis: https://aws.amazon.com/kinesis/ 

30.  Splunk: https://www.splunk.com/ 

31.  Kepware: 

https://www.kepware.com/getattachment/c5c35697-8a91-4273-8077-b28fe5d60d8c/iot-

gateway-manual.pdf 

32.  Google Cloud Dataflow: https://cloud.google.com/dataflow 

33.  Solr vs Elastic Search: https://solr-vs-elasticsearch.com/ 

34.  Dong  Jina,  Christopher  Hannona,  Zhiyi  Lib,  Pablo  Cortesa,  Srinivasan  Ramarajua,  Patrick  Burgess, 
Nathan Buch, Mohammad Shahidehpour, Smart street lighting system: A platform for innovative smart 
city applications and a new frontier for cyber-security, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tej.2016.11.011 

35.  Sarbeswar Praharaj, Development Challenges  for Big Data  Command and  Control Centres for Smart 

Cities in India, 02 July 2019, https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-12180-8_4 

36.  Design and Implementation of a Smart IoT Gateway, Shang Guoqiang; Chen Yanming; Zuo Chao; Zhu 

Yanxu, 12 December 2013, https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6682144/metrics#metrics 

37.  The  Use  of  MQTT  in  M2M  and  IoT  Systems:  A  Survey,  Biswajeeban  Mishra;  Attila  Kertesz, 

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9247996 

38.  Balachandar  S.,  Chinnaiyan  R.  (2019)  Reliable  Digital  Twin  for  Connected  Footballer.  In:  Smys  S., 
Bestak  R.,  Chen  JZ.,  Kotuliak  I.  (eds)  International  Conference  on  Computer  Networks  and 
Communication Technologies. Lecture Notes on Data Engineering and Communications Technologies, 
vol 15. Springer, Singapore 

39.  Balachandar  S.,  Chinnaiyan  R.  (2019)  Centralized  Reliability  and  Security  Management  of  Data  in 
Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  with  Rule  Builder.  In:  Smys  S.,  Bestak  R.,  Chen  JZ.,  Kotuliak  I.  (eds) 
International Conference on Computer Networks and Communication Technologies. Lecture Notes on 
Data Engineering and Communications Technologies, vol 15. Springer, Singapore 

40.  G. Sabarmathi and R. Chinnaiyan, "Reliable Machine Learning Approach to Predict Patient Satisfaction 
for  Optimal  Decision  Making  and  Quality  Health  Care,"  2019  International  Conference  on 
Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES), Coimbatore, India, 2019, pp. 1489-1493 

41.  G.  Sabarmathi  and  R.  Chinnaiyan,  "Investigations  on  big  data  features  research  challenges  and 
applications," 2017 International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Control Systems (ICICCS), 
Madurai, 2017, pp. 782-786 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42.  G. Sabarmathi and R. Chinnaiyan, "Big Data Analytics Framework for Opinion Mining of Patient Health 
Care  Experience,"  2020  Fourth  International  Conference  on  Computing  Methodologies  and 
Communication (ICCMC), Erode, India, 2020, pp. 352-357 

43.  Sabarmathi G., Chinnaiyan R. (2020) Envisagation and Analysis of Mosquito Borne Fevers: A Health 
Monitoring System by Envisagative Computing Using Big Data Analytics. In: Pandian A., Senjyu T., 
Islam S., Wang H. (eds) Proceeding of the International Conference on Computer Networks, Big Data 
and  IoT  (ICCBI  -  2018).  ICCBI  2018.  Lecture  Notes  on  Data  Engineering  and  Communications 
Technologies, vol 31. Springer, Cham. 

44.  R. Chinnaiyan and S. Alex, "Machine Learning Approaches for Early Diagnosis and Prediction of Fetal 
Abnormalities," 2021 International Conference on Computer Communication and Informatics (ICCCI), 
2021, pp. 1-3, doi: 10.1109/ICCCI50826.2021.9402317 

45.  H.  P.  A,  M.  Latha,  A.  M.  S  and  R.  Chinnaiyan,  "BlockchainAs  a  Service  (BaaS)  Framework  for 
Government Funded Projects e-Tendering Process Administration and Quality Assurance using Smart 
Contracts,"  2021  International  Conference  on  Computer  Communication  and  Informatics  (ICCCI), 
2021, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/ICCCI50826.2021.9402348. 

46.  H. P. A, M. Senthilmurugan, P. R. K and R. Chinnaiyan, "IoT and Machine Learning based Peer to Peer 
Platform  for  Crop  Growth  and  Disease  Monitoring  System  using  Blockchain,"  2021  International 
Conference  on  Computer  Communication  and 
(ICCCI),  2021,  pp.  1-5,  doi: 
10.1109/ICCCI50826.2021.9402435. 

Informatics 

47.  V.  B,  S.  N.  Dass,  S.  R  and  R.  Chinnaiyan,  "A  Blockchain  based  Electronic  Medical  Health  Records 
Framework using Smart Contracts," 2021 International Conference on Computer Communication and 
Informatics (ICCCI), 2021, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.1109/ICCCI50826.2021.9402689. 

48.  R.Chinnaiyan,  S.Somasundaram(2010)  “Evaluating  the  Reliability  of  Component  Based  Software 
Systems “ ,International Journal of Quality and Reliability Management , Vol. 27, No. 1., pp. 78-88 

 
