Outlier Detection in Smart Grid Communication

Nelson Makau Mutua
Faculty of Information Technology
Brno University of Technology
Brno, Czech Republic
Email: imutua@ﬁt.vut.cz

Petr Matouˇsek
Faculty of Information Technology
Brno University of Technology
Brno, Czech Republic
Email: matousp@ﬁt.vutbr.cz

1
2
0
2

g
u
A
9
2

]

C
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
8
7
2
1
.
8
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Industrial Control System (ICS) networks transmit
control and monitoring data in critical environments such as
smart grid. Cyber attacks on smart grid communication may
cause fatal consequences on energy production, distribution, and
eventually the lives of people. Since the attacks can be initiated
from both the inside and outside of the network, traditional smart
grid security tools like ﬁrewalls or Intrusion Detection Systems
(IDS), which are typically deployed on the edge of the network,
are not able to detect internal threats. For this reason, we also
need to analyze behavior of internal ICS communication.

Due to its nature, ICS trafﬁc exhibits stable and predictable
communication patterns. These patterns can be described using
statistical models. By observing selected features of ICS network
communication like packet inter arrival times, we can create a
statistical proﬁle of the communication based on the patterns
observed in the normal communication trafﬁc. This technique is
effective, fast and easy to implement. As our experiments show,
statistical-based anomaly detection is able to detect common
security incidents in ICS communication. This paper employs
selected network packet attributes to create a statistical model
for anomaly detection using the Local Outlier Factor (LOF)
algorithm. The proof-of-concept is demonstrated on IEC 60870-
5-104 (a.k.a. IEC 104) protocol.

Index Terms- anomaly detection, communication pattern,

smart grid, IEC104, statistical model, ICS.

I. INTRODUCTION

ICS communication provides proper functioning of critical
infrastructure systems. These systems are naturally exposed
to external
threats including cyber attacks [1]. Tradition-
ally, industrial systems are well protected against external
threats through the use of ﬁrewalls and IDS devices that
ﬁlter communication between ICS systems and Internet trafﬁc,
making direct attacks on smart grid communication a rare case.
However, attackers can gain access to the system by sending
malware to a user via an infected e-mail attachment [2].

The importance of the research is motivated by recent
cyber attacks against critical infrastructure systems. One of
the attacks against Ukrainian power company happened in
December 23, 2015 when BlackEnergy malware caused power
disruption to 225,000 customers, lasting up to 6 hours [2]. This
attack included multiple stages starting with “spear phishing”
e-mails targeting a staff to gain access to the corporate network
of the power company. Once inside the power company
network, attackers gathered credentials and used VPNs to get
access to the internal network. More recent ransomware attack
against the Colonial Gas Pipeline in the U.S. happened in May

2021 [3]. Similarly to BlackEnergy attack, it was also initiated
from an infected internal station.

Compared to standard information and communication sys-
tems, smart grid communication exhibits stable, periodical,
and regular communication patterns since the communication
occurs between devices with no or little human interference.
Typically, a controlling station periodically requests status data
from a ﬁeld device like the Programmable Logical Controller
(PLC) or Remote Terminal Unit (RTU) in order to provide a
real-time view on industrial processes.

To detect internal threats, we need (i) to regularly monitor
smart grid communication and (ii) observe suspicious patterns
that occur in the network trafﬁc. One solution is to employ ICS
monitoring using extended IPFIX protocol[4] that retrieves
monitoring data about active ICS communication. To detect
unknown adverse events or unusual behavior, we can observe
statistical patterns using ICS ﬂow data.

In this research, we closely examine statistical distribution
of inter-arrival times of IEC 104 packets. This is a part of my
PhD study that is focused on anomaly detection of ICS com-
munication using statistical methods. The main idea behind the
research comes out from stable communication patterns that
are typical for ICS communication and can be observed on
packet and ﬂow levels. Within the PhD. research, we plan to
apply various statistical methods on smart grid communication
and evaluate their efﬁciency for covering common ICS attack
vectors deﬁned by MITRE ATT&CK for ICS matrix1.

A. Contribution

This research paper presents a proof-of-concept to outlier
detection in smart grid communication. We observe packet
inter-arrival times of IEC 104 communication and create a
statistical proﬁle of the normal trafﬁc. Then we apply the
Local Outlier Factor (LOF) algorithm to detect outliers which
represent anomalies. Our preliminary results proves viability
of this approach for statistical-based anomaly detection in ICS
communication.

B. Structure of the Paper

This paper is structured as follows. In Section II we give
an overview of published works related to statistical anomaly
detection in ICS networks. Next, we brieﬂy introduce IEC 104

1See https://collaborate.mitre.org/attackics/index.php/Main Page [06/2021]

 
 
 
 
 
 
protocol, statistical features and the LOF algorithm. Section IV
shows our preliminary results. The last section concludes the
work and discusses future steps.

II. RELATED WORK

Exploitation of timing attributes such as average packet
inter-arrival times and the number of packets or bytes trans-
mitted in a certain interval for anomaly detection has been
studied in the past. Barbosa et al. [5], [6] investigated the use
of spectral analysis to uncover trafﬁc periodicity. Udd et al.
[7] examined a TCP sequence prediction attack for the IEC
104 protocol. Other works mostly focused on ﬂooding and
DoS attacks [8]. We explore what attack vectors described by
MITRE ATT&CK for ICS can be covered by LOF method.

To enhance detection ability of cyber attack, deep packet
inspection (DPI) implemented in IDS tools and timing models
have been proposed. Sayegh et al. [9] modelled the inter-arrival
times between signatures (i.e., packet sequences) and validated
this technique with large amount of injected signatures. Bar-
bosa et al. [10] proposed to model the period of repeated
requests in an orderless group. They evaluated the approach
on Modbus and MMS datasets without attacks and set relaxed
thresholds to avoid high false positive rates. This prevents the
detection of subtle changes within a single period which is
covered by our approach.

More recently, sequence-aware approaches have been ex-
plored. Yang et al. [11], Goldenberg and Wool [12], and Klein-
mann and Wool [13] used ﬁnite automata to model message
sequences of IEC 104, Modbus TCP and S7 respectively.
Casselli et al. [14] modelled a sequence of messages using
discrete-time Markov chains in order to detect sequence at-
tacks. These approaches observe the order of messages. Since
they require deep packet analysis, they have high demands
on processing. Modeling of statistical behavior as proposed in
this paper is fast and simple for implementation while giving
comparable results.

III. ANOMALY DETECTION IN SMART GRID NETWORKS

A. Smart Grid Communication

Industrial protocols used in smart grid communication in-
clude protocol IEC 61850 (GOOSE, MMS), Modbus, IEC
104, DNP3, DLMS, and others [15]. These protocols transmit
control and status data from industrial processes running on
RTUs or IEDs. Protocols like IEC 104, DNP3, MMS or DLSM
communicate using a client-server model. A master (control-
ling) station sends commands to a RTU slave (controlled
station) in control direction while the slave delivers monitoring
data in monitor direction. Protocols like GOOSE or Modbus
use a publish-subscribe mechanism in which an application
writes data into a local buffer, which is then periodically
transmitted to a subscribed agent via L2 multicast.

1) IEC 104: IEC 104 protocol is an application protocol
that consists of Application Protocol Control Information
(APCI) and Application Service Data Unit (ASDU) sub-layers.
It is implemented over TCP but for monitoring purposes we
observe so-called virtual ﬂows that represent records with a

single ASDU packet transmitted on wire. We focus on inter-
arrival times but there are additional attributes that can be
used for statistical model: ASDU size which is also stable for
speciﬁc IEC 104 commands, frequency of selected commands,
e.g., spontaneous events, activations, packet size, etc.

2) Packets inter-arrival

time: Packets inter-arrival

time
is the time taken between the arrival of two subsequent
packets. It is computed as a difference between timestamps
of two these packets. Inter-arrival time is characteristic for
ICS transmissions and exhibits stable and predictable patterns.
Changes in inter-arrival times indicate an anomaly on the
communication channel. As demonstrated in our previous
research [16], additional features like packet size or modeling
of exact IEC 104 commands do not improve the accuracy of
the statistical approach. We plan to conﬁrm this observation
time of
by future experiments. For modelling inter-arrival
industrial protocols with master-slave communication proﬁle,
it is natural to observe statistical distribution of bi-directional
transmissions as depicted in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1. Observing inter-arrival times in IEC 104 communication.

3) Dataset: In our experiments, we work with the IEC 104
protocol that is commonly used in smart grids for substation
control. We utilise four datasets obtained from the Brno
University of Technology testbed, see Tab. I. In order to test
the ability of attack detection we created a set of ICS ﬂow
records with emulated attack and a AD testing tool 2.

Dataset
10122018-104Mega
13122018-mega104
mega104-14-12-18
mega104-17-12-18

Packets
104,534
1,460,829
14,597
58,931
TABLE I
IEC 104 DATASETS FOR EXPERIMENTS.

Duration
4h 53min
71h 17min
15h 38min
67h 55min

Devices
4
14
2
2

B. Statistical Outlier Detection

Outlier detection is a statistical technique that discovers data
points that are inconsistent with the rest of the data. In general,
outliers and inliers are determined using a data distribution
model. This paper focuses on unsupervised outlier detection.
Unsupervised methods do not require data labels. As a
result, they are more adaptable. The fundamental idea behind

2The tool and dataset are available at https://github.com/nelsonmakau/

anomaly-detection-in-smart-grid-communication.

MasterSlaveΔt1Δt2Δt3Δt4Δt5IEC 104 ActIEC 104  ActConfIEC 104  InterrogIEC 104 ActTermIEC 104 SpontIEC 104 Spontunsupervised outlier detection is to score data points solely on
the essential characteristics of the dataset. In general, density
or distance are used to determine whether a data point is an
inlier (normal) or outlier (anomaly). In this proof-of-concept
study, we apply Local Outlier Factor (LOF) method [17].

The scientiﬁc research on statistical outlier detection pro-
vides two approaches to handle outliers in a dataset. First,
outliers must be identiﬁed for further investigative process.
Second, the data model should be designed to handle outlier
data points accurately.

C. Detecting Outliers in Smart Grid

Outlier detection is a statistical procedure that ﬁnds suspi-
cious events or items that differ from a dataset’s normal form.
Outliers are detected as data points that have a signiﬁcantly
lower density than their neighbors. The purpose of outlier
detection is to detect rare events or unusual activities that
differ from the majority of data points in a dataset [18].
Outlier detection can detect global or local outliers. For a
global outlier, outlier detection considers all data points, and
the data point is considered an outlier if it is far away from
all other data points. The local outlier detection covers a
small subset of data points at a time. A local outlier is
based on the probability of data point being an outlier as
compared to its local neighborhood which is measured by
the k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) algorithm. LOF is a density-
based unsupervised anomaly detection method that computes
a given data point’s local density deviation with respect to
its neighbors. LOF scores are computed for all data points
according to parameter k (the number of nearest neighbors)
as follows [19]:

Deﬁnition 1: d(p, o) is the Euclidean distance between two
data points p and o. The distance between two data points p
and o is calculated using an Euclidean n-dimensional space:
(cid:118)
(cid:117)
(cid:117)
(cid:116)

(pi − oi)2

d(p, o) =

n
(cid:88)

(1)

i=1

Let D be a dataset and k a positive integer. For a data point
p, the k-distance (p) is the distance d(p,o) between p and the
farthest neighbor data point o by the following conditions:

1) At

the least, k data points (records) o(cid:48) ∈ D\{p}

maintains that d(p, o(cid:48)) ≤ d(p, o).

2) At the most, k − 1 data points (records) o(cid:48) ∈ D\{p}

maintains that d(p, o(cid:48)) < d(p, o).

Deﬁnition 2: k-Nearest Neighbors of p. The meaning of
k-Nearest Neighbors of p is any data point q whose distance
to the p data point is not greater than the k-distance(p).Those
k-nearest neighbors of q form the so called k-distance neigh-
borhood of p, as described below:

The principle of LOF reachability is depicted in Fig. 2,

further details are available at [17].

Fig. 2. Reachability distance for different data points

IV. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
We created a prototype2 tool implementing LOF algorithm.
We applied LOF on IEC 104 inter-arrival times in order to
check if LOF modeling is suitable for ICS communication. We
used LOF algorithm to learn inter-arrival time distribution of
the transmitted IEC 104 packets by computing the k-distance,
reachability distance and density of data points. The algorithm
uses the learned model to raise an alarm for packets that
signiﬁcantly differ from the model. Figures 3 and 4 present a
graphical representation of inter-arrival times of two datasets.
The red points denote inter-arrival time distribution detected
as anomaly (outliers) while the blue points represent normal
communication.

Fig. 3. Anomaly detection in 10122018-104Mega PCAP ﬁle

Nk−distance(p)(p) = {q(cid:15)D/{p}|d(p, q) ≤ k − distance(p)} (2)

Deﬁnition 3: Reachability distance of p with respect to o.
Let k be a positive integer. The reachability distance of data
point p with regard to o is as follows:

reach − distk(p, o) = max{k − distance(o), d(p, o)}

(3)

We discovered that applying LOF to a large data stream
is extremely computationally inefﬁcient and may lead to
incorrect prediction results. We then applied the LOF on time
windows where each data block contains 5000 inter-arrival
time records.

The main advantage of the LOF algorithm is that it works
well with stream data and detects outliers with respect to

The results are part of my PhD research that focused on
statistical-based anomaly detection in ICS protocols. In the
future work, we focus is extending detection model to common
cyber attacks deﬁned by MITRE ATT&CK ICS matrix.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The work is supported by the Brno University of Technol-
ogy project ”Application of AI methods to cyber security and
control systems”, no. FIT-S-20-6293.

REFERENCES

[1] H. Leith and J. W. Piper, “Identiﬁcation and application of security
measures for petrochemical industrial control systems,” Journal of Loss
Prevention in the Process Industries, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 982–993, 2013.
[2] R. M. Lee, M. J. Assante, and T. Conway, “Analysis of the Cyber
Attack on the Ukrainian Power Grid. Defense Use Case,” Electricity
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, Tech. Rep., March 2016.
[3] J. Tidy, “Us fuel pipeline ’paid hackers $5m in ransom’,” 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.bbc.com/news/business-57112371
[4] P. Matouˇsek, O. Ryˇsav´y, and M. Gr´egr, “Increasing Visibility of IEC 104
Communication in the Smart Grid,” in The 6th International Symposium
for ICS & SCADA Cyber Security Research 2019. BCS Learning and
Development Ltd, 2019, pp. 21–30.

[5] R. R. R. Barbosa, R. Sadre, and A. Pras, “A ﬁrst look into SCADA
network trafﬁc,” in 2012 IEEE Network Operations and Management
Symposium, April 2012, pp. 518–521.

[6] R. R. R. Barbosa, “Anomaly detection in SCADA systems: a network
based approach,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Twente, 4 2014.
[7] R. Udd, M. Asplund, S. Nadjm-Tehrani, M. Kazemtabrizi, and M. Ek-
stedt, “Exploiting bro for intrusion detection in a scada system,” in
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International Workshop on Cyber-Physical
System Security, 2016, pp. 44–51.

[8] S. Bhatia, N. S. Kush, C. Djamaludin, A. J. Akande, and E. Foo,
“Practical Modbus ﬂooding attack and detection,” in Proceedings of
the 12th Australasian Information Security Conference.
Australian
Computer Society, Inc., 2014, pp. 57–65.

[9] N. Sayegh, I. H. Elhajj, A. Kayssi, and A. Chehab, “Scada intrusion
detection system based on temporal behavior of frequent patterns,”
in MELECON 2014-2014 17th IEEE Mediterranean Electrotechnical
Conference.

IEEE, 2014, pp. 432–438.

[10] R. R. R. Barbosa, R. Sadre, and A. Pras, “Exploiting trafﬁc periodicity
in industrial control networks,” International journal of critical infras-
tructure protection, vol. 13, pp. 52–62, 2016.

[11] Y. Yang, K. McLaughlin, S. Sezer, Y. Yuan, and W. Huang, “Stateful
intrusion detection for iec 60870-5-104 scada security,” in 2014 IEEE
PES General Meeting.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–5.

[12] N. Goldenberg and A. Wool, “Accurate modeling of modbus/tcp for
intrusion detection in scada systems,” international journal of critical
infrastructure protection, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 63–75, 2013.

[13] A. Kleinmann and A. Wool, “Automatic construction of statechart-
based anomaly detection models for multi-threaded scada via spectral
analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Workshop on Cyber-Physical
Systems Security and Privacy, 2016, pp. 1–12.

[14] M. Caselli, E. Zambon, and F. Kargl, “Sequence-aware intrusion de-
tection in industrial control systems,” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM
Workshop on Cyber-Physical System Security, 2015, pp. 13–24.
[15] E. D. Knapp and J. T. Langill, Industrial Network Security: Securing
infrastructure networks for smart grid, SCADA, and other

critical
Industrial Control Systems. Syngress, 2014.

[16] P. Matouˇsek, V. Havlena, and L. Hol´ık, “Efﬁcient modelling of ics
communication for anomaly detection using probabilistic automata,” in
IFIP/IEEE Int. Symposium on Integrated Network Management, 2021.
[17] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying

Density-Based Local Outliers,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2, 2000.

[18] A. Boukerche, L. Zheng, and O. Alfandi, “Outlier detection: Methods,
models, and classiﬁcation,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 53,
no. 3, pp. 1–37, 2020.

[19] O. Alghushairy, R. Alsini, T. Soule, and X. Ma, “A Review of Local
Outlier Factor Algorithms for Outlier Detection in Big Data Streams,”
Big Data and Cognitive Computing, vol. 5, no. 1, 2021.

Fig. 4. Anomaly detection in mega104-14-12-18 PCAP ﬁle

density of their neighbouring data records. Also, this algorithm
is able to detect outliers regardless of the data distribution of
normal behavior, since it does not make any assumptions about
the distribution of data records. Our preliminary results show
that the proposed method works well with ICS data and is
easy to operate.

Validation tests were applied to determine the viability of
the proposed technique. We tested the stability of the approach
using our datasets. For our validation tests, we divided normal
communication into two parts. We used the ﬁrst two thirds
of the communication to train the model. Then, we tested
these ranges on the last
third of data. After testing, we
classiﬁed all testing packets as normal communication. The
results demonstrate high accuracy of the proposed approach.
The method did not produce any false positive during the test.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented a proof-of-concept method
for anomaly detection of smart grid control protocols. We
observed inter-arrival times of IEC 104 communication and
applied LOF algorithm for outlier detection. The preliminary
results show that LOF creates a stable statistical model for
ICS trafﬁc and is able to detect outliers caused by cyber
attacks. The proposed security mechanism was tested and
validated using our IEC 104 datasets. Experiments show the
suitability, usability and high accuracy of the proposed method
on smart grid communication. In the future work we plan to
apply this approach to other ICS protocols like GOOSE, MMS
and DLMS. We also plan to observe other statistical features
like packet or ﬂow size. Although our key goal was to test
the applicability of the proposed solution, we also tested the
performance of the developed tool. We gathered basic time
statistics. The processing time of extracting key attributes from
the PCAP ﬁle into a CSV ﬁle took an average of one minute
and 10 seconds. This time had small deviations because it
takes time to initialize Tshark. The time to learn a CSV ﬁle
depends on the number of packets. At average, to learn 5,000
packets, 20 seconds were required.

