The Impact of Network Design Interventions on CPS Security

Pradeep Sharma Oruganti, Parinaz Naghizadeh, and Qadeer Ahmed

1
2
0
2

p
e
S
9
2

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
5
5
5
4
1
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— We study a game-theoretic model of the inter-
actions between a Cyber-Physical System’s (CPS) operator
(the defender) against an attacker who launches stepping-stone
attacks to reach critical assets within the CPS. We consider
that,
in addition to optimally allocating its security budget
to protect the assets, the defender may choose to modify the
CPS through network design interventions. In particular, we
propose and motivate four ways in which the defender can
introduce additional nodes in the CPS: these nodes may be
intended as additional safeguards, be added for functional or
structural redundancies, or introduce additional functionalities
in the system. We analyze the security implications of each
of these design interventions, and evaluate their impacts on
the security of an automotive network as our case study. We
motivate the choice of the attack graph for this case study and
elaborate how the parameters in the resulting security game
are selected using the CVSS metrics and the ISO-26262 ASIL
ratings as guidance. We then use numerical experiments to
verify and evaluate how our proposed network interventions
may be used to guide improvements in automotive security.

I. INTRODUCTION

Modern Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) are increasingly
targeted by attackers who use information about existing
vulnerabilities in the system’s components, and exploit those
to launch sophisticated attacks on its safety-critical functions.
A strong coupling between software and hardware compo-
nents, and the (cyber-)connectivity between multiple units,
leads to opportunities for attacks that can be initiated and
choreographed over multiple assets in the network, with the
attackers remaining undetected for long stretches of time as
they work their way to the most critical network assets [1],
[2], [3]. As a result, CPS operators aim to optimally allocate
their often limited security resources over different locations
in the network to provide safety assurances.

In this context, game-theoretic modeling and analysis
can provide insights and recommendations for the CPS
operators’ optimal security decisions, as they can capture
the contradicting goals and actions of the attackers and
the defenders. There have been a number of works which
have used game theoretic models to look at attack detection,
state estimation, and optimal control of dynamic systems in
presence of adversarial attacks [4], [5], [6]. There has also
been signiﬁcant work on security games on networks for
attack detection and improving resilience [7], [8], [9], [10],
[11], [12], [13], [14]. A number of these works have used

Pradeep Oruganti

and Qadeer Ahmed are with the Mechani-
cal and Aerospace Engineering Department, The Ohio State Univer-
sity, oruganti.6@osu.edu, ahmed.358@osu.edu. Parinaz
Naghizadeh is with the Integrated System Engineering and Electrical
and Computer Engineering Departments, The Ohio State University,
naghizadeh.1@osu.edu.

“attack graph” models to study attacks on inter-connected
CPS. The motivation for these models is that, to success-
fully compromise targets internal to the network, attackers
generally initiate stepping-stone attacks from external nodes,
and gradually work their way to the critical assets. As
such, the nodes in the attack graph are used to represent
the CPS assets, while the connectivity between them shows
all the components that an attacker needs to (sequentially)
compromise in order to reach the CPS’s most critical assets.
In this paper, we similarly use an attack graph model
to analyze how a single defender can optimally deploy its
security budget to best protect a CPS against a worst-case
attacker. However, contrary to these existing works, we also
consider an orthogonal set of defender actions, in the form
of network design interventions. In this regard, the authors
have only come across [9] which looks at hiding or revealing
edges of an attack graph to change an attacker’s perception,
while the original network is not modiﬁed.

Speciﬁcally, we focus on four possible re-design actions
that can be taken by a CPS operator, which result in the
introduction of additional nodes in the attack graph:
(a) Adding a node in series with existing nodes in the
graph. Examples include adding an encryption device,
or requiring stronger passwords.

(b) Adding a node in parallel with an existing node. Exam-
ples include adding an additional user to the CPS.
(c) A hybrid case of simultaneously adding a series and
a parallel node to an existing node. Examples include
adding an additional sensor to provide redundant infor-
mation for anomaly detection.

(d) Adding additional input nodes. Examples include intro-
ducing an additional functionality in the system, such
as adding Bluetooth connectivity to a device.

We will consider each of these interventions when applied
to a base network. We ﬁnd the equilibrium outcomes of the
security game on the modiﬁed attack graph, and compare the
resulting expected network losses against that of the base
network to elaborate on the security implications of each
design intervention.

We begin by presenting the attack graph model and the
security game framework in Section II. Our framework is
largely similar to those of [11], [12]. Following this, in
Section III, we show that the analysis of the security game
on a given attack graph G can be simpliﬁed by reducing
the attack graph to an equivalent attack graph Gr. This
reduction involves substituting nodes in series stretches in
the graph with a single representative node, and subsequently
replacing any parallel paths with common starting and ending
nodes with one of the paths in that group. We show that

 
 
 
 
 
 
this equivalent graph Gr has the same optimal investments,
and the same optimal expected equilibrium loss, as the
original graph G (Proposition 1). As Gr can be a signiﬁcantly
smaller graph than G, this simpliﬁes the security game’s
analysis. We then outline and analyze the four network
design interventions described above in Section IV. We ﬁnd
that interventions (a) and (c) can lead to lower expected
losses, while re-designs (b) and (d) are only justiﬁable if
there is sufﬁcient standalone beneﬁts to the added nodes,
as their introduction increases the expected losses of the
defender at the new security game equilibrium.

Putting together the reduction proposed in Section III, with
the effective re-design interventions identiﬁed in Section IV
(i.e., those that can improve the network’s security), we
consider the attack graph of an automotive network as our
case study in Section V. We motivate the choice of the
attack graph for this case study and elaborate how the
parameters in the resulting security game are selected using
the CVSS metrics [15] and the ISO-26262 ASIL ratings [16]
as guidance. We then use numerical experiments to verify
and evaluate how our proposed network interventions can
improve the vehicle’s security. We discuss how the system’s
security is impacted by the accessibility of nodes, their role in
safety-critical applications, the location in which additional
safeguards are introduced in the network, and the level of
information redundancy across components.

II. SECURITY GAME SETUP

This section introduces the security game framework,
which includes the attack graph and the goals and capabilities
of the attacker and the defender.

A. The Attack Graph

To assess the security of a given cyber-physical system,
we represent its components as nodes in a directed acyclic
graph, G = {V, E}, where V represents the set of nodes and
E represents the set of edges of the graph. A directed edge
(vi, vj) ∈ E from node i to node j (i.e., i → j) indicates that
an attack on j can be launched once i is compromised. All
the nodes that can be reached from a node v ∈ V (through
one or more steps) are denoted as P ost(v), and all the
nodes from which v can be reached are denoted P re(v). The
attacks can be launched from any of the outermost entry or
source nodes of the graph, and are ultimately aiming to reach
some target or goal asset. We assume that a given graph G
can have multiple entry nodes Vs ⊆ V from where attacks
can be initiated, and a unique target node vg ∈ V. We use
Pg to represent the set of paths from all sources to the target
asset. Each node has an associated (ﬁnancial or functional)
loss Li ≥ 0, which is incurred if it is compromised. Further,
it is assumed that Lg > 0, where Lg is the loss associated
with the unique target vg.

B. The Security Game

investment on node vi, and x = [x1, x2, . . . , x|V|] denote the
vector of investments on all nodes. We assume that given an
investment xi, the probability of successful attack on node
vi is given by:

i e−xi
i ∈ [0, 1] is the default probability that vi can be

where p0
compromised in the absence of security investments.

pi(xi) = p0

(1)

B ≥ 0, i.e., such that (cid:80)|V|

The defender has to choose x subject to a security budget
i=1 xi ≤ B.
2) Attacker’s actions: We consider a rational adversary
whose action consists of selecting a path for performing
stepping stone attacks. This means that the attacker selects
one path in Pg to initiate a sequence of attacks starting from
some v ∈ Vs with the goal to reach and compromise vg.

3) The security game: The attacker chooses a path so as
to maximize the expected loss inﬂicted on the system, i.e.,

L = max
P ∈Pg

(cid:88)

Li

(cid:89)

vi∈P

vj ∈P ∩P re(vj )

pj(xj) .

(2)

The goal of the defender is to minimize L using the set of
actions described above. The attacker acts after the defender.
Both players are assumed to have perfect information.

III. ANALYZING THE SECURITY GAME THROUGH
ATTACK GRAPH REDUCTIONS

In this section, we present our approach for simplifying
the analysis of the optimal security investment decisions for
the security games of Section II. We show that the analysis
can be carried out by simplifying the attack graph through a
sequence of modiﬁcations leading to a smaller attack graph
with the same investment strategies and optimal costs of the
starting graph. These reductions will also form the basis of
our analysis of network design interventions in Section IV
and our case study in Section V. Before proposing the rules
for reducing a given attack graph, we formalize our notion
of equivalent networks.

Deﬁnition 1: In the security game framework introduced
in Section II, we say two networks G1 and G2 are equivalent
if they have the same optimal investment strategies, as well
as the same loss L under the optimal strategies. We denote
this with G1 ≡ G2.

The analysis of the optimal security investments on a gen-
eral network G is possible by the reduction to an equivalent
network Gr, as described below. Note that in large attack
graphs where |Vr| << |V|, this reduction can signiﬁcantly
reduce the number of decision variables and speed up the
computation of the optimal investment proﬁles.

Proposition 1: Given a network G, construct its reduced

network Gr by applying the following steps:

1) In G, identify stretches of series connections of the
form {vi → vi+1 → . . . → vi+k}. Replace each with
t=i p0
a single node v(cid:48)
t .
Denote this by G(cid:48).

i with loss L(cid:48)

i := (cid:80)i+k

l=i Ll

(cid:81)l

1) Defender’s actions: To improve the security of a given
system, a defender can allocate her resources to strengthen
the security of its assets V. Let xi ∈ R≥0 denote the security

2) In G(cid:48), identify the set of parallel paths Pp,i→k, all
originating from a common node vi and terminating in
a common node vk. Given the reduction in the previous

step, these paths are of the form {vi → vj → vk}.
Replace all paths in Pp,i→k with the path Pj with
j (Lj + p0
j ∈ arg maxP ∈Pp,i→k p0

kLk).

Then, G ≡ Gr.

We prove this through the two Lemmas 1 and 2, which
show that performing any of the two steps described above
will result in an equivalent network. Lemma 1 shows that
a stretch of assets connected in series can be equivalently
represented by a single asset, with an appropriately modiﬁed
cost. Lemma 2 then shows how to obtain an equivalent graph
by substituting a set of parallel paths with one of the paths.

Lemma 1: Consider an attack graph G containing a se-
quence of nodes connected in series, {vi → vi+1 → . . . →
vi+k}. Deﬁne a modiﬁed attack graph G(cid:48), which is the same
as G, except that the path {vi → vi+1 → . . . → vi+k}
is replaced by a node v(cid:48)
t=i p0
i with loss L(cid:48)
t .
Then, G ≡ G(cid:48).

i = (cid:80)i+k

l=i Ll

(cid:81)l

Lemma 2: Consider an attack graph G which contains a
set of parallel paths Pp,i→k, all originating from a common
node vi and terminating in a common node vk. Deﬁne a
modiﬁed attack graph G(cid:48), which is the same as G, except
that all paths Pp,i→k are replaced by the path Pj with j ∈
(cid:81)
t . Then, G ≡ G(cid:48).
arg maxP ∈Pp,i→k

vt∈P re(vl) p0

vl∈P Ll

(cid:80)

It is interesting to note that these reductions resemble
those used in simplifying resistor networks/circuits. Similar
reductions have been observed in an alternative model for
studying network security in [17]. We refer interested readers
to the appendix for the proofs.

IV. NETWORK DESIGN INTERVENTIONS

In the previous section, we considered attack graph reduc-
tions to ﬁnd the security investment decisions of a defender
protecting a given network. Our goal in this paper is to
evaluate the security implications of an orthogonal set of
defender actions: interventions through network re-design.

To this end, we begin with the base network of Fig-
ure 1. Our base network is chosen to capture the minimal
components needed for an attack graph in our context: an
entry point, a target asset, and a node in between (as the
target is assumed to be a key internal asset of the system
which is not directly accessible from entry nodes). Further,
by Proposition 1, general attack graphs can be signiﬁcantly
reduced to smaller, equivalent attack graphs. This motivates
our focus on a simple base network.

We will motivate and assess the effects of network inter-
ventions in the four re-designed networks shown in Figure 2.
These networks depict possible ways of adding a new node
to the base network.1 They are: (a) Adding a node in series;
(b) Adding a node in parallel; (c) A hybrid case of networks

Fig. 1: Base network

Fig. 2: Network design intervention alternatives

(a) and (b); (d) Adding an additional input node. For each
of these cases, we evaluate the equilibrium outcomes of the
security game, and compare the resulting network losses
against the base network.

A note on node’s beneﬁts vs costs: We note that each
added node va presents both a standalone loss La, as well as
a potential standalone beneﬁt Ua. Our analysis here focuses
on the equilibrium loss Lcase in each case, obtained as the
solution of (2) (this incorporates the standalone loss La).
The difference Lcase − Lbase then gives the (security) cost of
performing the intervention. If the overall loss increases by
the introduction of va (i.e., if Lcase > Lbase), the re-design
may still be adopted as long as Ua ≥ Lcase − Lbase.

The base network: The base network is shown in
Figure 1. The target node will remain the same in all
formations. For ease of exposition, we let p0
i = p0, ∀i, in this
section; all results and interpretations hold for heterogeneous
p0
i at the expense of more involved notation.
By Lemma 1, given a security budget B, the optimal
security investment strategy in this case is x∗ = [B, 0, 0],
i.e., all of the investment goes on the initial node so as to
achieve the maximum security beneﬁt throughout the attack
path. The loss under the optimal investment on this network
is therefore Lbase = (L1p0 + L2p2

0 + L3p3

0)e−B.

A. Series connection: increased endurance

We begin with the case of an additional node, Node-4,
added in series with existing nodes after the entry node.
This represents a case where the defender has introduced
additional safeguards in the network, such as an additional
encryption device, or adding a stronger password require-
ment. As such, the attacker now has to compromise an extra
node to get to vg along a given attack path.

Similar to the base network, this formation consists of
only one attack path, with all nodes in series. Therefore, by
Lemma 1, given budget B, the optimal investment strategy
for this network is x = [B, 0, 0, 0], resulting in a loss
Lseries = (L1p0 + L2p2

0 + L3p4

0 + L4p3

0)e−B.

1Another form of design intervention may involve adding/removing links
in the system. Under the current framework this would mean changing the
behaviour of the system; we however assume that the goal is to re-design
without removing or altering existing system functionalities. In contrast,
additional nodes serve only to improve the security or introduce new
functionalities in an existing system.

We conclude that while a node added in series over a given
attack path does not change the optimal defense strategy, it
does affect the cost incurred from a successful attack on the
target. In particular, nodes added in series can be interpreted
as methods to increase the endurance of the system: denoting

the additional node by va, their introduction reduces the
probability of successful attack on all nodes in P ost(va)
by a factor pa(xa). When the standalone loss La of va is
sufﬁciently small, this means that Lseries ≤ Lbase.

factor pa(xa). Compared to the base network, the optimal
loss depends on the security characteristics of va and/or vg:
if the added va has at most the same loss as its parallel
counterpart, or if Lg sufﬁciently large, then Lhybrid < Lbase.

B. Parallel connection: structural redundancy

D. Additional input: new functionalities

We next introduce the additional Node-4 in parallel with
Node-2. This may be viewed as a network in which there
is structural redundancy. A structurally redundant path cap-
tures situations where completely independent assets perform
the same function. Although a security compromise of one of
the parallel nodes does not lead to complete system failure,
the attacker still has the opportunity to launch an attack on
the subsequent nodes. As an example, nodes 2 and 4 can be
interpreted as different users of the CPS.

Lastly, we consider the additional node, Node-4, appearing
as an added input node. This case captures network modiﬁca-
tions that introduce additional functionalities which can lead
to an increased attack surface. For example, adding Wi-Fi
access in addition to Bluetooth may increase the functionality
of a component, but adds new vulnerabilities.

Compared to the base network, the set of input nodes is
now Vs = {1, 4}, creating an additional attack path that leads
to v3. The defender’s objective is given by

Here, by Lemma 2, given the security budget B,
the
optimal investment strategy is x∗ = [B, 0, 0, 0], indicat-
ing that the full budget should be deployed on the entry
node. The loss under this proﬁle is therefore Lparallel =
0)}e−B.
max{(L1p0 + L2p2
This means that, despite not affecting the optimal secu-
rity investment strategy, the parallel node could impact the
defender’s incurred loss. In particular, the equilibrium loss
may either increase or remain the same, depending on if
the additional node has a higher or lower standalone loss
compared to the node it is parallel with.

0), (L1p0 + L4p2

0 + L3p3

0 + L3p3

C. Hybrid connection: functional redundancy

Next, we consider a hybrid of the series and parallel cases.
This network re-design is introduced so as to assess the
impact of introducing functional redundancy in a system. A
functionally redundant component can be used to carry out
the same tasks as an existing node; for instance an additional
sensor can be added to attain signals for health monitoring,
or anomaly detection and isolation. While functioning inde-
pendently, information from such components is generally
used in unison for decision making.

Typically, redundancy would be represented as a parallel
path similar to case (b). However, given that input from
both components are ultimately used in unison for decision
making by subsequent components, a successful attacker
would need to compromise both nodes (as least to some
extent) to proceed in the stepping stone attack towards vg.
This consideration is incorporated in this network formation
as the additional nodes, Node-2’ and Node-4’, following
the parallel nodes. We assume these nodes do not have any
standalone loss associated with them, and that the probability
of successful attack on each node is p0.

Following the reduction in Proposition 1,

the optimal
investment strategy for this network is x∗ = [B, 0, 0, 0],
leading to defender’s loss Lhybrid = max{(L1p0 + L2p2
0 +
L3p4

0)}e−B.
0), (L1p0 + L4p2
Like the parallel connection, the optimal investment strat-
egy remains the same while the equilibrium cost depends
on the losses over the newly introduced attack path. Addi-
tionally, similar to the series connection, the probability of
successful attack on all nodes in P ost(va) is reduced by a

0 + L3p4

min
x

loss L1 = L4 = L,

0e−x1−x2 + L3p3
0e−x4−x2 + L3p3

max{(L1p0e−x1 + L2p2
(L4p0e−x4 + L2p2

0e−x1−x2−x3),
0e−x4−x2−x3)}
Assuming that
the initial nodes have the same stan-
dalone
in-
to budget B is x∗ =
vestment
), 0, 0.5(B +
{0.5(B + log(
0L3, and is x∗ =
log(
{0.5B, 0, 0.5B, 0} otherwise. Consider the former case; this
is when the standalone loss from the entry nodes is not higher
than that of subsequent nodes combined. The loss under this
investment is Ladd-input = 2p0e−B/2(cid:112)p0LL2 + p2

p0L2+p2
))} when L ≤ p0L2 + p2

strategy subject

the optimal

)), − log(

p0L2+p2

p0L2+p2

0L3

0L3

0L3

0LL3.

L

L

L

For this case, we observe that having additional inputs can
signiﬁcantly impact the optimal investment strategy when
compared to the previous networks. Speciﬁcally, in addition
to investments on the two input nodes (as done in prior cases,
too), a signiﬁcant investment can also be placed on Node-
2. In addition, the defender’s equilibrium loss is higher in
this case, i.e. Ladd-input > Lbase; this is consistent with the
expectation that adding components that increase that attack
surface make the system harder to secure.

V. APPLICATIONS IN AUTOMOTIVE SECURITY

In this section, our proposed methodology is applied onto
the analysis of interventions in the network of an automotive
system. We begin by describing our proposed attack graph
for this case study, illustrated in Figure 3, and elaborate how
the parameters in the resulting security game are selected
using the CVSS metrics [15] and the ISO-26262 ASIL rat-
ings [16] as guidance. We then use numerical experiments to
verify and evaluate how our proposed network interventions
may improve the vehicle’s security.

A. The Attack Graph: Accessing a Vehicle’s CAN through
the IVI module

The attack surface for a Connected and Autonomous
Vehicle (CAV) is quite large. A typical vehicle consists of
close to 100 Electronic Control Units (ECUs), connected via
multiple different protocols with varying degrees of security.
Additionally, many of the internal components are designed
by multiple suppliers and vendors.

TABLE I: Probability of attack p0 (translated from CVSSv3
exploitability (EX) metric) and Loss L associated with each
node (based on safety-criticality)

Node
CELL
TELE
WiFi
BT
USB
IVI
CG
CAN

AV
N
A
A
A
P
A
A
A

AC
H
H
L
L
L
H
H
L

PR
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L

UI
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

EX
1.62
1.19
2.07
2.07
0.67
1.19
1.19
2.07

p0
0.162
0.119
0.207
0.207
0.067
0.119
0.119
0.207

L
1
10
1
1
1
10
50
100

Fig. 3: Attack graph for CAN access via. the
In-Vehicle-Infotainment (IVI) module

Over the past decade, multiple studies have successfully
demonstrated attacks targeting automotive systems’ safety-
critical functions [18], [19]. These attacks typically involve
the attackers reaching the vehicle’s internal Controller Area
Network (CAN). Moreover, the increasing implementations
of connectivity features on the vehicles increase the number
of entry points for attackers, who can remotely gain access
and manipulate messages on the CAN bus; one such attack
was famously demonstrated in [2]. We therefore consider the
CAN as the target node, or crown-jewel, of the attack graph.
We consider remote attacks carried out through the In-
Vehicle Infotainment (IVI) system. A typical IVI module
provides local connectivity options viz. Wi-Fi, bluetooth
(BT), and USB. Additionally if present, the telematics com-
ponent (TELE) is connected to an external cellular communi-
cations (CELL) and GPS for general connectivity, location,
and remote update services. Further, via the gateway unit
(CG), the IVI unit is connected to the internal CAN lines
connected to ECUs which may provide Advanced Driver
Assistance (ADAS) or other chassis ECUs. An attacker can
thus trigger a safety hazard by remotely gaining access to
this network by compromising the IVI module [20], [21]. A
basic attack graph G for such an attack is shown in Figure 3.

B. Setting the Security Game Parameters

i and Li, i ∈ V. To quantify p0

In this paper, we use the CVSS metrics [15] and the
ISO-26262 ASIL ratings [16] as guidance to assign values
to p0
i , we look at a
node’s Exploitability (EX) which is obtained from its Attack
Vector (AV), Attack Complexity (AC), Privileges Required
(PR), and User Interaction (UI) metrics. The Automotive
Safety & Integrity Levels (ASIL) are used to gauge the
relative criticality of the components in-view of safety with
a higher rated (ASIL-A < ASIL-B < ASIL-C < ASIL-D)
node receiving a higher loss. The derived p0 and L values
associated with each node are shown in Tables I. Additional
details are given in the appendix.

C. Effects of Design Interventions on the Vehicle’s Security

We ﬁrst apply (2) directly to obtain the expected loss for
the system. It is assumed that the designer has a budget

Fig. 4: Reduced attack graph of attack shown in Fig. 3.

investment proﬁle is x∗ =
B of 10 units. The optimal
[2.53, 0, 2.36, 2.36, 1.23, 1.52, 0, 0],
leading to an optimal
loss, Lbase of 0.0289 units. Next, applying Proposition 1, we
get the reduced graph, Gr for this system, shown in Figure 4.
The replaced equivalent nodes EN1 and EN2 represent the
CELL and IVI nodes respectively with the modiﬁed loss
terms following Lemma 1. The target node vg is grayed out
as there is no investment on this node. The expected loss
for Gr, calculated from (2), and the corresponding optimal
investments, comes out to be the same as G, concluding that
Gr ≡ G. The number of decision variables is reduced from
8 in G to 5 in Gr.

1) Impacts of the entry nodes (functionalities): We begin
by looking at how the entry nodes affect the optimal invest-
ment proﬁle and the expected loss. We consider the following
scenarios: (Case I) the base conﬁguration in Figure 4; (Case
II) no mobile communication by removing the CELL and
TELE nodes; (Case III) no physical access by removing the
USB node; (Case IV) one additional entry node with low
standalone loss; and (Case V) one additional entry node with
high standalone loss. Figures 5 and 6 depict the variation in
the investment on nodes and optimal loss for each case.

Cases II and III have a smaller attack surface (number
of entry nodes) compared to Cases IV and V. This trans-
lates to a higher expected loss compared to Lbase, as the
limited security resources must now be stretched across a
higher number of inputs, with each input receiving a lower
investment. This matches with the expectation that a “smart”
vehicle with many connectivity elements is more vulnerable.
there two distinct features of
the added nodes that impact how much they increase the
expected losses by demanding a higher share of the limited
security budget: (1) an input node with higher accessibility

We further observe that

Fig. 5: Security investment on each asset when input nodes
change, for different conﬁgurations of entry nodes.

Fig. 6: Change in expected loss when input nodes change,
for different conﬁgurations of entry nodes.

(low p0 in our model) demands a higher investment (compare
Case II: removing the CELL node with Case III: removing
the USB node), and (2) a more sophisticated added node
which has higher standalone losses (higher L in our model),
demands higher investments (compare Case IV with Case V).
A node with any of these two characteristics will be more
detrimental to the overall vehicle security. This indicates that
while entry nodes may be beneﬁcial for connectivity reasons,
having them perform even minor safety-critical functions
may not be desirable.

While protecting/“closing” these entry points may be one
of the solutions to improve the vehicle’s security, in many
cases the presence of these nodes is dictated by factors
beyond the control of the security designers. In such cases
it becomes important to introduce security measures down-
stream of the graph to improve its security. Such measures
show up as series nodes on the attack graph as they are an
additional item to compromise for the attacker. We consider
these design interventions next.

2) Addition of downstream defensive measures: We con-
sider defense measures such as the introduction of trust
zones, encrypting messages, secure memory access, and the
like. The probability of attack on these security mechanisms,
psec and their corresponding standalone loss, Lsec, depends
on the mechanisms introduced. Figure 7 shows the effect
of introducing such nodes at three different locations on G:
before the TELE node, before the IVI node, and before the
CAN node. Further, we consider the effect of varying the
security characteristics of the introduced measures.

As expected, security mechanisms which require physical

Fig. 7: Change in expected loss when a defensive measure
is added in different locations in the network.

access or high user interaction have a lower psec and generally
reduce Lsys. However, this effect becomes negligible when
the safeguards are introduced closer to the ﬁnal target: it can
be seen that the expected loss for this system Lsys is mostly
ﬂat when the security measure is introduced before the
CAN. In other words, security measures implemented further
upstream can inﬂuence the loss much more than those intro-
duced closer to the target; this is consistent with the tendency
to encourage perimeter defenses (e.g. ﬁrewalls). Further,
we note that endowing the added security mechanism with
additional safety-critical responsibilities (higher Lsec) may
not be advisable. This can be seen from Fig. 7 where a high
Lsec leads to Lsys ≥ Lbase irrespective of psec. This argues
in favour of implementation of passive security measures vs.
active measures which take on additional functionalities or
interact with other assets in the system.

3) Functional (information) redundancy for better secu-
rity: The two types of interventions we have considered so
far (modifying entry nodes, and adding downstream safe-
guards) have called for direct redesign of the Infotainment
Module. However, typically, these modules are acquired from
third-party suppliers, and guaranteeing security across the
supply chain is hard for the OEM. In such a case, it is up to
the OEM to design the vehicle’s internal architecture to be
resilient to security attacks. We next consider such choices.
Consider a remote attack launched via. the Infotainment
Module with the goal of sending malicious sensor messages
over the vehicles internal network. Such message integrity
attacks can cause safety hazards if the messages are used
for decision-making or control synthesis in safety-critical
functionalities. In this case, the designer can use functionally

considering a limited budget for the attacker and the study
of other attacker behaviour models.

REFERENCES

[1] N. Falliere, L. O. Murchu, and E. Chien, “W32. stuxnet dossier,” White
paper, Symantec Corp., Security Response, vol. 5, no. 6, p. 29, 2011.
[2] A. Greenberg, “Hackers remotely kill a jeep on the highway—with

me in it,” Wired, vol. 7, p. 21, 2015.

[3] J. Slay and M. Miller, “Lessons learned from the maroochy water
breach,” in International conference on critical infrastructure protec-
tion. Springer, 2007, pp. 73–82.

[4] A. Gupta, C. Langbort, and T. Bas¸ar, “Optimal control in the presence
of an intelligent jammer with limited actions,” in 49th IEEE Confer-
ence on Decision and Control (CDC).
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1096–1101.
[5] H. Fawzi, P. Tabuada, and S. Diggavi, “Secure estimation and control
for cyber-physical systems under adversarial attacks,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Automatic control, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 1454–1467, 2014.
[6] F. Pasqualetti, F. D¨orﬂer, and F. Bullo, “Attack detection and identi-
ﬁcation in cyber-physical systems,” IEEE transactions on automatic
control, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 2715–2729, 2013.

[7] M. Pirani, J. A. Taylor, and B. Sinopoli, “Strategic sensor placement
on graphs,” Systems & Control Letters, vol. 148, p. 104855, 2021.
[8] S. Amin, G. A. Schwartz, and S. S. Sastry, “Security of interdependent
and identical networked control systems,” Automatica, vol. 49, no. 1,
pp. 186–192, 2013.

[9] S. Milani, W. Shen, K. S. Chan, S. Venkatesan, N. O. Leslie,
C. Kamhoua, and F. Fang, “Harnessing the power of deception in
attack graph-based security games,” in International Conference on
Decision and Game Theory for Security. Springer, 2020.

[10] T. H. Nguyen, M. Wright, M. P. Wellman, and S. Baveja, “Multi-stage
attack graph security games: Heuristic strategies, with empirical game-
theoretic analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2017 Workshop on Moving
Target Defense, 2017, pp. 87–97.

[11] A. R. Hota, A. A. Clements, S. Bagchi, and S. Sundaram, “A game-
theoretic framework for securing interdependent assets in networks,”
in Game Theory for Security and Risk Management. Springer, 2018.
[12] M. Abdallah, P. Naghizadeh, A. R. Hota, T. Cason, S. Bagchi, and
S. Sundaram, “Behavioral and game-theoretic security investments in
interdependent systems modeled by attack graphs,” IEEE Transactions
on Control of Network Systems, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1585–1596, 2020.
[13] J. C. Smith and Y. Song, “A survey of network interdiction models
and algorithms,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 283,
no. 3, pp. 797–811, 2020.

[14] J. Zeng, S. Wu, Y. Chen, R. Zeng, and C. Wu, “Survey of attack
graph analysis methods from the perspective of data and knowledge
processing,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2019, 2019.
Speciﬁcation
system v3.1:
https://www.ﬁrst.org/cvss/v3.1/

scoring
vulnerability
[Online]. Available:

[15] Common
document.
speciﬁcation-document

[16] “Road vehicles — Functional safety — Part 9: Automotive safety
integrity level (ASIL)-oriented and safety-oriented analyses,” Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization, Tech. Rep., Dec. 2018.
[17] N. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, and W. Liu, “Security assessment for
communication networks of power control systems using attack graph
and mcdm,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 25, no. 3, pp.
1492–1500, 2010.

[18] S. Checkoway, D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. Shacham,
S. Savage, K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, T. Kohno et al.,
“Comprehensive experimental analyses of automotive attack surfaces.”
in USENIX Security Symposium, vol. 4, 2011, pp. 447–462.

[19] K. Koscher, S. Savage, F. Roesner, S. Patel, T. Kohno, A. Czeskis,
D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. Shacham et al., “Experimental
security analysis of a modern automobile,” in 2010 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy.
IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 447–462.
[20] D. P. M¨oller and R. E. Haas, Guide to Automotive Connectivity and

Cybersecurity. Springer, 2019.

[21] Y. Kawanishi, H. Nishihara, D. Souma, H. Yoshida, and Y. Hata,
“A comparative study of jaso tp15002-based security risk assessment
methods for connected vehicle system design,” Security and Commu-
nication Networks, vol. 2019, 2019.

Fig. 8: Attack graph with improved security through
introduction of functional redundancy

TABLE II: Impacts of adding redundant sensors

Description

Sensor attack probability

Base conﬁguration
1 redundant sensor
2 redundant sensors
3 redundant sensors

0.207
(0.207,0.252)
(0.207,0.252,0.144)
(0.207,0.252, 0.144, 0.144)

Larch

0.0125
0.0121
0.0120
0.0119

redundant sensors to improve the security status of the
system (shown in Figure 8). As an example, this modiﬁed
attack graph could reﬂect that some state information, such
as the vehicle’s speed, is obtained from various sources such
as GPS, wheel speed sensors, and engine speed, with all
the information used by the control module. Such functional
redundancy forces the attacker to compromise all sensors to
gain access to the control module undetected.

Table II compares the expected loss as the redundancy
in the system is increased. Firstly, we note the choice of
different probabilities of attack for different sensors. This
is intended to capture differences in the attack require-
ments. For example, a sensor may be hard-wired to the
control module and require physical access for measurement
manipulation. Such sensor’s measurements are hardest to
manipulate considering its physical attack vector. We notice
that in the case when a single redundant sensor is introduced,
improves the
although its attack probability is higher,
overall security of the system. With further increase in
redundancy, the expected loss decreases. Note that the rate
of this decrease is itself decreasing (i.e. the ﬁrst redundant
sensor improves security more than any subsequent sensors).

it

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We studied how network design interventions impact the
security of a CPS network modeled by an attack graph.
Speciﬁcally, we considered four alternatives for introducing
new nodes in the system: in series (added safeguards), in par-
allel (structural redundancy), a hybrid of series and parallel
connections (functional redundancy), and as an additional
input (added functionalities). We identiﬁed their impacts
on the overall network security, by analyzing the changes
in the defender’s optimal
investment strategies following
the introduction of these nodes, and the changes in the
adversary’s attack strategies and inﬂicted losses. Finally, we
showed how this approach could help guide network re-
design strategies on a simple automotive application with
practical design restrictions. Future research avenues include

APPENDIX

PROOF OF LEMMA 1

ment proﬁle x∗, x∗

Proof: We begin by showing that in the optimal invest-
j = 0, ∀j = i + 1, . . . , i + k.
First, note that the loss over this stretch of assets under a

i ≥ 0 and x∗

proﬁle of investments x is given by:

Li→i+k(x) :=

i+k
(cid:88)

l=i

Ll(

l
(cid:89)

t=i

t e−xt) =
p0

i+k
(cid:88)

l=i

Lle− (cid:80)l

t=i xt

l
(cid:89)

t=i

p0
t

investment
Assume in contradiction that
proﬁle x∗
j > 0 for some j (cid:54)= i. Consider an alternative proﬁle
˜x built from x∗ where this investment is shifted to vi, i.e.
that ˜xi = x∗

in the optimal

j and ˜xj = 0. Then,

i + x∗

Li→i+k(˜x) − Li→i+k(x∗)

done in ˜x, would increase the investments on Pl and
reduce its loss, contradicting the optimality of x∗.
This means that in an optimal investment proﬁle, security
investments (if any) will only be placed on the common
origin node of the paths in Pp,i→k.

We conclude that all paths in Pp,i→k have the same total
investment on them at the optimal solution. Therefore, if
the attacker’s selected worst-case attack path passes through
one of the P ∈ Pp,i→k, it will be the one which has the
higher compound loss (cid:80)
vl∈P Ll
t and would
therefore maximize the attacker’s payoff. All other paths can
be ignored in the evaluation of the optimal cost of G, and
this will be the same as the optimal cost on G(cid:48) under x∗.

vt∈P re(vl) p0

(cid:81)

ADDITIONAL DETAILS ON THE DERIVATION OF THE GAME
PARAMETERS

i+k
(cid:88)

l=i
i+k
(cid:88)

=

=

Lle− (cid:80)l

t=i ˜xt

l
(cid:89)

t=i

p0
t −

i+k
(cid:88)

l=i

Lle− (cid:80)l

t=i x∗

t

l
(cid:89)

t=i

p0
t

Tables III and IV provide additional details on the deriva-
tion of the game parameters in Table I for our numerical
experiments.

l
(cid:89)

(cid:16)

p0
t

Ll

e− (cid:80)l

t=i ˜xt − e− (cid:80)l

t=i x∗

t

(cid:17)

< 0 .

TABLE III: Attack ease metrics based on CVSSv3

Metric
Attack Vector (AV)

Value
Rank
0.85
Network (N)
0.62
Adjacent (A)
0.55
Local (L)
0.2
Physical (P)
0.77
Low (L)
0.44
High (H)
0.85
None (N)
0.62 (scope unchanged)
Low (L)
0.27 (scope unchanged)
High (H)
0.85
High (H)
0.62
Required (R)
Exploitability (EX) = 8.22 x AV x AC x PR x UI

Attack Complexity (AC)

Privileges Required (PR)

User Interaction (UI)

TABLE IV: Impact metrics based on CVSSv3

Metric
Impact-Conﬁdentiality (ImC)/
Impact-Integrity (ImI)/
Impact-Availability (ImA)

Rank
High (H)
Low (L)
None (N)

Value
0.56
0.22
0

Impact (Im) = 6.42 x [1 - ( (1-ImC) x (1-ImI) x (1-ImA) )]

l=i

t=i

The last line follow from the fact that (cid:80)l
t=i ˜xt > (cid:80)l
t=i x∗
t
for l < j, and (cid:80)l
t for l ≥ j. Therefore,
˜x achieves a lower cost than the optimal x∗, which is a
contradiction.

t=i ˜xt = (cid:80)l

t=i x∗

We conclude that any investments in the optimal proﬁle
for G will only be placed on node vi. Therefore, ignoring
all remaining nodes {vi+1 → vi+2 → . . . → vi+k}, graphs
G and G(cid:48) are the same, and therefore have the same optimal
investments proﬁle x∗.

Further, in G, the effect of the stretch of nodes {vi →

vi+1 → . . . → vi+k} on the optimal cost is given by

Li→i+k(x∗) =

i+k
(cid:88)

l=i

Lle− (cid:80)l

t=i xt

l
(cid:89)

t=i

t = e−x∗
p0

i

i+k
(cid:88)

Ll

l
(cid:89)

l=i

t=i

p0
t .

This is the same as the loss in G(cid:48) under proﬁle x∗. Therefore,
the two attack graphs have the same loss under and the same
investment proﬁle, and are therefore equivalent.

PROOF OF LEMMA 2

i ≥ 0, and x∗

Proof: We begin by showing that in the optimal invest-
ment proﬁle x∗, x∗
j = 0, ∀vj ∈ Pp,i→k, j (cid:54)= i.
Assume, by contradiction, that there is a node vj in one of
the parallel paths, Pj ∈ Pp,i→k such that x∗
j > 0. Deﬁne an
alternative proﬁle ˜x that is the same as x∗, except that the
investment on vj is shifted to vi, i.e. that ˜xi = x∗
j and
˜xj = 0. Consider the two following cases:

i + x∗

1) Pj is the path with the highest loss among all parallel
paths Pp,i→k under the investment proﬁle x∗: Then,
by the same arguments as in Lemma 1, the alternative
proﬁle ˜x would achieve a lower loss than x∗, which
would be a contradiction.

2) There is a Pl ∈ Pp,i→k with a higher loss than Pj
under the investment proﬁle x∗: Then, shifting the
investment from vj to the common origin node vi, as

