1
2
0
2

p
e
S
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
3
7
0
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Good, The Bad and The Missing: A
Narrative Review of Cyber-security
Implications for Australian Small Businesses

Tracy Tam, Asha Rao and Joanne Hall

RMIT University,
124 Latrobe St,
Melbourne 3000,
Australia.

Abstract

Small businesses (0-19 employees) are becoming attractive targets
for cyber-criminals, but struggle to implement cyber-security measures
that large businesses routinely deploy. There is an urgent need for
eﬀective and suitable cyber-security solutions for small businesses as
they employ a signiﬁcant proportion of the workforce.

In this paper, we consider the small business cyber-security chal-
lenges not currently addressed by research or products, contextualised
via an Australian lens. We also highlight some unique characteristics
of small businesses conducive to cyber-security actions.

Small business cyber-security discussions to date have been nar-
row in focus and lack re-usability beyond speciﬁc circumstances. Our
study uses global evidence from industry, government and research
communities across multiple disciplines. We explore the technical and
non-technical factors negatively impacting a small business’ ability to
safeguard itself, such as resource constraints, organisational process
maturity, and legal structures. Our research shows that some small
business characteristics, such as agility, large cohort size, and piece-
meal IT architecture, could allow for increased cyber-security.

We conclude that there is a gap in current research in small busi-
ness cyber-security. In addition, legal and policy work are needed to
help small businesses become cyber-resilient.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: Cyber-security, Small Business, SME, Security Culture, Lit-

erature Review

1

Introduction

Businesses around the world are under pressure to use and adopt technology,
with the COVID-19 pandemic accelerating this need [1]. At the same time,
cyber-crimes are becoming increasingly sophisticated [2] with the Australian
Government [3] estimating the cost of cyber-crime to the Australian economy
at over AU$15 billion annually. Small businesses employ nearly half of the
Australian private sector workforce [4] and need to be supported against
cyber-criminals.

Anecdotes [5, 6, 7], industry [8, 2] and government [9] studies indicate
that small businesses and individuals are increasingly becoming cyber-crime
targets. A small business can lose data and customers, and incurs compliance
penalties from a cyber-security incident. These penalties include ﬁnes greater
of 4% of global turnover or 20 million for non-compliance to the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [10] in the European Union, and levies up to
US$1.8 million per violation [11] of HIPAA [12] in the US. In Australia, most
small businesses with less than AU$3 million turnover are exempt from the
Privacy Act [13], but this exemption may not remain in the future [14, 15].
Beyond these penalties, the importance and practicalities of small businesses
preparing for and recovering from cyber-incidents are still poorly articulated
and communicated.

Previous research has considered the Australian small and medium en-
terprise (SME) cyber-security situation from diﬀerent perspectives. Valli et
al [16] survey Western Australian SMEs and call for cyber-security educa-
[17, 18, 19] highlight the inﬂuence of
tion for SMEs, while Dojkovki et al.
Australian culture on SME cyber-security. Internationally, reviews of SME
cyber-security (albeit with diﬀerent size deﬁnitions) emphasise ineﬀective se-
curity management practices [20] and diﬀerences between SMEs and large
corporations [21, 22]. Other research oﬀers global insights into culture [23],
strategies [24], policies [25] and speciﬁc technologies [26]. Several surveys on
cyber-security, for example [9, 27, 28], focus on self-reported data on cyber-
security from Australian SMEs.

This paper uses existing global research as well as evidence from multiple
disciplines to identify gaps and opportunities for Australian small business

2

cyber-security. We look in detail at the characteristics of Australian small
businesses that may be impeding their cyber-security posture. We ﬁnd that
certain characteristics could help small businesses better secure themselves.
The deﬁnition we use here, of 0-19 employees, covers a signiﬁcant propor-
tion of business communities around the world. In 2015, around 29 million
US ﬁrms employed 0-19 employees [29, 30], while in 2019, in the UK over
98% of private sector businesses employed 0-49 people [31]. Thus, this re-
search has relevance to small businesses from other countries with similar
societal proﬁles to Australia [32, 33], since human owners run small busi-
nesses [34, 35].

This paper is structured as follows: In the next section we examine the
background to business cyber-security and the Australian small business con-
text. Section 3 looks at existing review articles and compares them to our
study. Section 4 discusses the diﬃculties in research and data collection for
small business cyber-security. Section 5 looks at the constraints faced by
small businesses in implementing cyber-security, while section 6 highlights
potential opportunities that unique small business characteristics present
with respect to cyber-security. We end with a conclusion and suggestions
for future work.

2 Background to Small Business Cyber-security

Small business cyber-security has some commonalities with large business
cyber-security. The traditional aim of cyber-security is to protect business
IT infrastructure, and the information essential for the business’ day to day
operations. However evidence has since emerged that the beneﬁt of business
cyber-security extends beyond this, to its people, processes and assets.

The cyber-security industry is currently worth over US$100 billion glob-
ally [36]. While cyber-security previously focused on maintaining the con-
ﬁdentiality, integrity and availability [37] of information systems and data,
current best practice includes non-technical aspects such as the people using
the information (security culture) [38, 39]. A one-size-ﬁts-all cyber-security
solution does not exist [40, 41, 42]. Large businesses have adopted a variety of
measures to secure their information and IT assets [43] against cyber-security
threats.

The beneﬁts of securing a business extends beyond protecting the assets
owned directly by the business. The disruptions to individuals from data

3

breaches such as Equifax [44] and Ticketmaster [45] highlight the societal
cost. The ﬁnancial cost of an incident can severely disrupt the personal lives
of small business owners, putting livelihoods in jeopardy [46]. The high level
of codependency between people, technologies and processes has resulted in
modern security standards/frameworks including “processes, organisational
structures, policies and procedures, information ﬂows, culture and behaviors,
skills and infrastructure” [47, P.13].

2.1 The Australian Small Business Context

In Australia, over 40% of private sector employment is from micro (0-4 em-
ployees) and small (5-19 employees) businesses [4]. The Australian Bureau
of Statistics (ABS) deﬁnes a small business as one with 0-19 employees [48].
In 2016, 42% of Australian small businesses believed limiting online presence
protected their business [28]. In the 2018/19 ﬁnancial year, only 40.3% of
small businesses received orders via the Internet1 [49].

Technology avoidance is no longer a feasible strategy for managing cyber-
security risks. Online sales are becoming more attractive, inﬂuenced by mar-
ket forces and oﬃcial bodies [50] with the social distancing requirements of
COVID-19 only hastening this [1, 51].

With nearly half of Australian small businesses allocating less than AU$500
annually to cyber-security [9], they cannot aﬀord cyber-security expertise.
Without external help, small businesses cannot secure themselves, and not
just in times of emergency [52].

3 Existing Reviews

There is considerable literature, both academic and industry, on small and
medium business (or SME) cyber-security. Here we identify the literature
examining cyber-security challenges.

3.1 Search Method

A keyword search was conducted within 5 academic search engines, namely
Scopus, ProQuest, Science Direct, SpringerLink and IEEE Xplore. The key-

1Note: This includes any sale of services or goods that have been committed to/ordered

via the Internet.

4

words used were kept broad to maximise the number of results returned and
constructed from the core concepts of “small business”, “cyber-security” and
“literature review”. These are listed below:

1. Small business - “small business”, “small enterprise” or “SME”.

2. Cyber security - Various spellings of “cyber-security”, “IT security” or

“information security”.

3. Literature review - “review” or “survey” with “literature”

The keyword pertaining to “literature review” (3) was replaced with a search
ﬁlter of review articles where this option was oﬀered by the database. Where
possible, the search was limited to title, abstract and keywords. To ensure
relevance to today’s context, the search was restricted to publications dated
on or after 2016. No ﬁltering was done based on journal or conference rank-
ing.

Due to the general nature of the keywords, the initial searches returned
a total of 2759 papers. Each of these papers was examined to determine
whether the primary focus was small business (or SME) cyber-security. Most
importantly, we looked for papers that exclusively discussed their cyber-
security topic in a small business/SME context, rather than treating the
cohort as a sub-discussion. Based on this criteria 22 papers were shortlisted.
A detailed examination of these papers gave us one very relevant review
paper [20], and three partially relevant papers [21, 53, 26].

3.2 Comparing Research Aims

Table 1 compares the aims of our paper to the selected review papers, based
on the following contexts:

A Restricts context to small business.

B Critical examines landscape of existing small business cyber-security

research.

C Examines potential technical issues with small business use of cyber-

security solutions.

D Examines potential human issues for small business.

E Identiﬁes structural opportunities for small businesses.

5

Table 1: Existing Literature, Reviews and Focus Comparison on Small Busi-
ness Cyber-security.
denotes areas addressed. ˜denotes areas partially
(
addressed. Blank denotes areas not addressed.)
(cid:8)
See page 5 for criteria used for comparison.

E

˜

Paper

Literature
Type

Focus

A

B

C

D

Alahmari &
Duncan [20]

Academic

Review

Heidt et al.
[21]

Academic

IT Security In-
vestment

Academic

Suryotrisongko
& Musashi
[53]

Cyber-security
Research Tax-
onomy Review

˜

˜

Salleh et al.
[26]

Academic

Cloud Adoption
in SME

˜

(cid:8)

˜

Our Paper

Academic
& Industry

Small Business
Cyber-security

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

From Table 1, the shortlisted reviews do not distinguish small business
as a separate cohort, despite the large proportion of small businesses present
in global economies. Small business is often grouped together with medium
businesses in the wider cyber-security context. In this article, we examine
the problems arising from such grouping.

Alahmari and Duncan [20] provide an overview of existing research on
cyber-security risk management within the SME cohort. They identify lack
of skills/knowledge, lack of appropriate management behaviours and sub-par
defence as common themes, but do not explore how such situations arise. In
this paper, we trace these symptoms back to possible contributing factors,
which could enable better security solutions.

Heidt et al. [21] point out that diﬀerences between SME and their larger
cousins potentially contributes to diﬃculties in generalising cyber-security re-

6

sults to SMEs. They ﬁnd that data is often obtained from non-representative
enterprises (e.g. larger or industry speciﬁc groups). We re-examine the sam-
pling issue within the industry context and ﬁnd this trend extends beyond
academia to industry and government. Given the lack of industry standard
terminologies, we discuss how both cyber-security self-reporting and lack of
agreed deﬁnitions are contributing to confusion.

As demonstrated by Suryotrisongko & Musashi [53], there are a wide
variety of topic areas and technologies within the study of cyber-security.
Reviews that focus on speciﬁc topics [24, 23, 25, 26] provide little room for
exploration of alternative solutions, e.g. a technical problem solved via a
process. In this paper, we explore cross ﬁeld opportunities in the context of
small business cyber-security.

In conclusion, there are no broad-based reviews exploring small business
organisational characteristics that can impact their cyber-security posture,
both negatively and positively. We address these gaps in this paper.

4 Research Data Challenges

Given the importance of micro/small business in global economies, there is
limited research into the cyber-security posture of, and corresponding solu-
tions for small businesses in the 0-19 employee range. While there is much
research in large enterprise cyber-security from various countries, the trans-
ferability of this research to small business is problematic.

Each developed country is at a diﬀerent stage in the small business cyber-
security research journey.
In the USA, CISA (Cyber-security and Infras-
tructure Security Agency) conducted an online survey in 2019, on providing
assistance with cyber-security issues, to small businesses [54], but results
In Europe, Eurostat breaks down enterprise size across
are still awaited.
multiple variables in its most recent 2020 ICT Security in Enterprise secu-
rity report [55]. Businesses with 0-9 employees are excluded from the above
Eurostat report, highlighting the research data gap within the small busi-
ness cohort. This lack of inclusion also occurs in the Australian Bureau of
Statistics’ business characteristics surveys [48]. These surveys ask IT and
cyber-security questions, but explicitly exclude non-employers/sole traders
from the respondent pool.

The cyber-security surveys conducted in Australia include:
• The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) annual business character-

7

istics survey asks detailed IT usage and cyber incident questions [48].

• The NSW small business commissioner CyberAware survey studied
SME cyber-security [28] in 2017, in collaboration with various small
business related commissions around Australia.

• The Australian Cyber Security Centre’s (ACSC) online survey in 2019,

looked at the usage of IT, security incidents and knowledge [9].

Each of the above surveys has its own focus, producing results within its
own scope. Some of these scopes overlap. Some results appear to contradict
others. For example, in answer to whether small businesses have encountered
a breach/attack/cyber-crime, the percentage of people that answered in the
aﬃrmative varied based on the survey (Table 2).

Table 2: Small Business Self-Reported Breach Results.

Source

Percentage of
respondents answer-
ing aﬃrmative/neutral for experienc-
ing breaches

Reference

ACSC Small Busi-
ness Survey

62%

Business Charac-
teristics Survey

Micro Businesses: 8.7%
(+17.4% “Don’t know”)

Small Businesses: 13.4%
(+17.1% “Don’t know”)

[9]

[48]

The discrepancies are not necessarily due to deliberate actions or errors.
They appear to be a symptom of the diﬃculty in reaching and obtaining
comparable data from the disparate and technically inexperienced cohort
that is small business.

Discrepancies in the survey results also extend past national borders. In
the Hiscox report [8], the average business cyber-security spend in Euro-
pean countries for organisations with 9 or less employees was US$7,000. In
contrast, the ACSC survey [9] found close to half of Australian small busi-
nesses spent less than AU$500 annually on cyber-security. This order of
magnitude diﬀerence in expenditure from seemingly similar socio-economic

8

cohorts requires further analysis. While there is speculation [56] that com-
plexity within the cyber-security ﬁeld accounts for the disparity in results,
it is possible these are due to challenges in getting accurate data from small
businesses.

4.1 The Elusive Cohort

The inability to gather data from diverse small businesses is a signiﬁcant
barrier to cyber-security research [16, 57, 58, 59, 22]. Consistently low re-
sponse rates to broad-based voluntary surveys highlight the diﬃculty in ob-
taining a comprehensive sample. This is exacerbated by a lack of public
domain data, especially where mandatory breach reporting regulations are
immature. There is dis-incentive to self-reporting due to fear of reputational
damage [60], given the low possibility of prosecution [61, Fig 6.7].

This diﬃculty in reaching the small business cohort could result in conve-
nience sampling, which is known to introduce its own set of limitations and
challenges [62, 63]. The impact and bias arising from such sampling must be
accounted for and discussed in research ﬁndings.

4.2 Disparate Technical Terms

Numerous industry cyber-security reports address the gap in business cyber-
security [43, 64, 8, 2, 65]. However, there are few standard deﬁnitions, struc-
tures and classiﬁcations within cyber-security. Data and ﬁndings are of-
ten adhoc, incomplete and focused on headline worthy items. For example,
Symantec reports [2] that globally, in 2018, small and medium businesses were
more likely to be hit with “Formjacking”. Formjacking is Symantec’s term
for “use of malicious JavaScript code to steal credit card details and other
information from payment forms on the checkout web pages of e-commerce
sites” [2]. Formjacking is a subset of code injection attacks [66], where code
is injected for various purposes, and not just on e-commerce sites. The use of
specialised terms such as “formjacking” makes comparisons between diﬀerent
reports diﬃcult.

4.3 Size Does Matter

The diﬀering deﬁnitions of small buisness worldwide makes data comparison
diﬃcult, see Table 3.

9

Table 3: Small Business Deﬁnitions Around the World

0 Employees Micro Business

Small Business

Sources

Oﬃcial
Business
Labels

Australia

Sole Traders

0-4

UK

1-9

No-
Employee
Business

European
Union1

Not Appli-
cable

0-9

5-19

10-49

10-49

US

Not Appli-
cable

Not Applicable

<250 or 1,500 or
industry
speciﬁc
annual receipt2

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

1 Prior to 2020, all European Union data includes the UK. Any data 2020 and beyond,

does not include UK statistics. Where relevant, this is noted in the discussion.

2 Industry dependent.

Each research entity adopts the local small business convention or presents
a brand new deﬁnition [58]. This disparity across the globe changes the
context of ﬁndings. Clearly, an organisation managing 200 employees oper-
ates and communicates very diﬀerently to one with less than 10 employees
[71, 72, 73]. Given the signiﬁcant inﬂuence communication and human fac-
tors have on attacks such as phishing, email fraud, etc, size matters in any
cyber-security discussion.

Few researchers acknowledge the potential complexity of the large range
of small business sizes. The Ponemon Institute’s data breach report [64] ex-
trapolates small business data breach costs from incident costs for businesses
employing 500-1000. This cost ﬁgure is discussed as the cost for “smaller or-
ganisations”. The bundling of small businesses with larger (in size) cohorts
hampers the ability to action the lessons learnt.

10

4.4 Self-Reporting Fallacies

Self-reporting of data is another problem. The accuracy of self-reported
cyber-incidents by small business owners needs examining. Non-technical
persons ﬁnd it diﬃcult to report subtle cyber attacks. In addition, there are
psychological self-reporting biases [74, 75]. Thus, self-reported breaches can
only be a starting point data set for analysis.

Self-reporting surveys require business owners to be aware of cyber breaches.

Common detectable symptoms of an incident, from a non-technical user’s
perspective, are unavailability of computer systems or data. For example,
ransomware renders a computer unusable. Many attacks have no obvious
symptoms. Active monitoring is required for subtle attacks such as data ex-
ﬁltration, man in the middle, spyware etc. System owners may not be aware
of a breach for months or even years [64, 76, 60]. While large enterprises
can detect subtle attacks using active traﬃc monitoring systems, few small
businesses can aﬀord this monitoring [9]. The under-detection can be exac-
erbated by the lack of technical knowledge among small business owners (see
section 5.2).

In Australia, the Privacy Act, the main legislation governing data, does
not apply to organisations with less than AU$3 million annual turnover [13],
i.e. most Australian small businesses. As such there are no legislative reper-
cussions or ﬁnancial incentives to report any breaches or cyber-incidents.
Embarrassment in victims of online fraud [77] is another powerful reason for
Australian small businesses not reporting incidents.

Symantec [2] avoids this self-reporting gap by using known threat detec-
tion software installed within an end user’s computer. Eliminating human
interaction increases accuracy by recording incident details automatically.
However, the proprietary nature of this software and reporting results in
only Symantec customers and devices being included. This leads to a bias
towards people willing (and able) to pay for Symantec’s services. Detailed
analysis and strategy design requires a more comprehensive small business
sector view.

In conclusion, alternative data collection strategies are needed to supple-

ment existing self-reporting surveys.

11

4.5 Business versus IT Perspectives

The under-representation of non-technical respondents in online surveys de-
serves scrutiny. Studies targeting technically savvy businesses often reach
very diﬀerent conclusions to those including a broader range.

Cyber-security research relies heavily on online surveys due to logistical
ease, and the assumption potential respondents use the internet for business
purposes. In contrast, less than 40% of Australian small and micro-businesses
used the internet for business development or monitoring market information
in the 2017-18 ﬁnancial year [48].

Self-selection bias is enhanced by a particular group’s comfort level to a
survey method. More respondents are likely to complete surveys that use fa-
miliar technology [78]. Cyber-security studies tracking industry breakdowns
show IT/technical industry respondents are over-represented [8, 28, 22].

Challenges exist around demographic representation in samples with on-
line surveys as the sole method of data collection. “Younger, male, avid
Internet users, and those with greater technological sophistication” [79] are
more likely to complete online surveys compared to surveys done via tra-
ditional mail.
In contrast, in 2016, over half of small business owners in
Australia were over 45 [80].

A survey with more technically literate respondents can introduce sig-
niﬁcant biases in results. Studies with input from technical experts [17, 81,
82] identiﬁed diﬀerent concerns compared to general small business owners
[83, 84, 85, 86]. A series of interviews from a single study [87] shows that
small scale IT users have constraints in security decision making that are
not expected by technical security providers. Australian small businesses in
information, media and telecommunication, and professional, scientiﬁc and
technical services categories made up less than 14% of all businesses, by
business count, in 2019 [88].

In summary, the majority of small business owners in Australia can-
not be assumed to intuitively understand the technical fundamentals central
to cyber-security. Exclusively sourcing data from voluntary online surveys
favours respondents comfortable with technology. Results from surveys must
account for and reconcile any gaps between sample respondents versus small
business proﬁles, from both demographic and technology literacy perspec-
tives.

12

5 Challenges Faced by Small Businesses

Large enterprises have been amongst the earliest adopters of cyber-security
technologies. Current business cyber-security solutions favour these busi-
nesses in terms of scale, cost and usage.

Today’s cyber-security lessons and conventions are a result of early large-
scale incidents e.g. NotPetya, Equifax, Wikileaks etc aﬀecting mostly large
organisations. With new threats constantly emerging, large enterprises are
ideal customers for vendors, with a higher likelihood of return on investment.
Consequently cyber-security industry best practices, standards and products
are heavily inﬂuenced by the needs of larger organisations.

Small business cyber-security cannot be “cut and paste” from large scale
solutions. Resource availability, technical landscape and operational pro-
cesses of small business need careful consideration. Small businesses face
some common challenges that need to be accounted for in cyber-security
strategies since cyber-criminals are looking for smaller targets [2, 89, 90].

5.1 Technical Challenges

The technical landscape of a small business can potentially be very diﬀerent
to that of a large enterprise [22], making it impractical to apply solutions for
the larger enterprises to smaller scale users. The small business IT technical
landscape (“architecture”) in which the cyber-security solution must function
is a barrier to adopting a solution.

Current industry practice tests changes in an environment separate from
customer-facing sites and systems to ensure the changes do not impact IT
system availability for live customers. A test or staging environment is a copy
that mirrors the customer-facing (“live”) business system in hardware, soft-
ware and conﬁguration. Testing in a separate environment is recommended
by many application providers before software upgrade processes [91, 92].
This testing ensures unintended consequences of changes/tests do not aﬀect
the business’ live systems, keeping them “safe” and operational. A test envi-
ronment can be used to conduct destructive testing such as disaster recovery
scenarios.

Cyber-security solutions designed to test a response to debilitating events
require a safe testing environment. For example, denial of service (DoS) sim-
ulation tools [93, 94] simulate a service overwhelmed with requests resulting
in legitimate requests not getting through. A DoS simulator, if implemented

13

on a live system, would render the business IT infrastructure, e.g. website,
unavailable to customers, or worse, jeopardise overall system integrity. Live
environments cannot be used for stress-inducing tests. Consequently, busi-
nesses without a test environment will never be able to test the full suite of
catastrophic scenarios as part of their incident response training.

A test environment requires substantial technical knowledge, time and
ongoing maintenance. Australian and New Zealand small and medium en-
terprises spend only 6% of their total revenue [58] on IT. For 2016, the
median Australian small business had an average turnover of AU$125,000
[80], translating to an annual IT spend of about AU$7,500. This budget
covers all IT spend, including hardware, software, network services, IT per-
sonnel and other incidentals, making a test environment just one of many
competing priorities. While cloud technologies have reduced costs associated
with test environments, the technical knowledge required is still substantial.
Less than a quarter of Australian small businesses have in-house, qualiﬁed
IT support personnel (with roughly a third using contractors/consultants as
needed) [48]. There is no mention of small business testing environments for
oﬀ-line testing in the literature.

The small business move towards cloud infrastructure and services makes
large enterprise cyber-security solutions unsuitable. Over a third of micro
businesses and half of small businesses used cloud based services in 2018
[48]. This demand is expected to increase [95] and accelerated due to the
COVID19 pandemic [96]. While oﬃcial statistics on cloud services adoption
during the pandemic are still pending, anecdotally the uptake of third party
IT services in general has increased substantially [97], many of which are
enabled through the cloud [98]. This move away from private, or on premise,
infrastructure (i.e. IT equipment set up and owned by the business) is driven
by the associated set-up and maintenance costs [95], a proposition especially
attractive for resource constrained smaller businesses.

Cloud infrastructure presents challenges for traditional cyber-security prod-

ucts. For example, general network scanning [99] assumes the infrastructure
is local and/or reachable for scanning purposes, an assumption valid only for
private infrastructure. The increasing suite of cloud-based network perimeter
scanning services [100, 101, 102] require explicit input from users on the tar-
get devices to be scanned. Targeted device scanning is a subset of a complete
network scanning solution and cannot discover private assets (e.g. printers)
with external interfaces left accidentally unsecured. This potential gap could
be addressed by other technical or process remedies, and needs further exam-

14

ination by individual businesses - a task requiring technical knowledge and
resources that many small businesses do not have.

Scanning in the cloud is a challenge for shared computing resources. Any
customer sharing the same target computing resource will be aﬀected if the
targeted application is overwhelmed. Cloud infrastructure providers impose
strict conditions on security-related testing activities [103, 104], with the
notable exception being Google Cloud [105].

Nearly 90% [48] of small business cloud users utilise software in the cloud.
Many application providers explicitly prohibit activities interfering with their
service, preventing customers from pro-actively discovering any vulnerability
in their service provider. Indemnity and liability around use of an outsourced
function needs clariﬁcation [106, 107].

It is necessary to address when testing and monitoring of privately owned
devices is permissible. Mixed-use personal and company-owned assets, e.g.
mobile devices, are common amongst small businesses [108, 85, 22]. Mobile
device management (MDM) software [109, 110] allows businesses to monitor
data and software residing on and transiting through devices. MDM can
freeze certain functions and/or data, and, if needed, reset the entire device.
Many large enterprises routinely deploy MDM on devices issued to staﬀ. The
level of access that MDM requires raises questions of the extent of non-work
information shared with work IT administrators [111] when a device is not a
work exclusive device.

To address the privacy concerns of MDM, mobile application management
(MAM) oﬀers a subset of the functions of MDM [112, 113]. MAM functions
require business trade-oﬀs and must be paired with mitigating policies based
on the sensitivity of business data. This requires expert guidance and is at
odds with other revenue generating priorities for a small business.

Clearly, re-using cyber-security solutions designed for large scale infras-
tructures is not a feasible strategy for small businesses. More appropriate
cyber-security products are needed for small business given their mix of stand
alone and shared IT resources. The liability arising from small business’ use
of cloud service needs clariﬁcation.

5.2 Human Challenges

Small business cyber-security human resources are very diﬀerent to those of
large enterprises. A qualiﬁed and accountable IT department is common in
large enterprises but not in small businesses.

15

In a European & US survey [84] less than 30% of small businesses, and less
than 5% of micro businesses, indicated existence of a security administrator
or any formal IT security qualiﬁcations. Approximately 10-25% of Australian
micro and small businesses have no IT support at all [48].

In Australia, most small business support comes from external contrac-
tor/consultants, suppliers of software/hardware or non-IT qualiﬁed staﬀ [48].
External contractors are engaged for speciﬁc tasks. They do not undertake
cyber-security risk assessments unless contracted speciﬁcally. Suppliers only
support supplied software and/or hardware, unless an extra support con-
tract has been purchased. Small businesses’ constrained resources and the
low number of devices used imply support contracts are unlikely.

Cyber-security requires risk analysis and mitigation of the entire IT sys-
tem, not just individual components. The small IT budgets of small busi-
nesses do not cover the salary of an IT administrator [114].

Furthermore, small business owners are at a knowledge disadvantage in
advocating for their cyber-security needs. In the start-up phase of a small
business, owner-managers have to perform any functions that they cannot
aﬀord ﬁnancially, or haven’t had the time, to outsource or hire. As discussed
previously, given small business’ small IT budget, these include being the IT
support person, and by extension the cyber-security person. Some tasks, such
as cleaning, physical security etc. can conceivably be done by a person with
limited experience. A cyber-security assessment cannot be done eﬀectively
by a novice.

The age demographic of Australian small business owners indicates less
exposure to technology. Nearly 60% of Australian small business owners
were born before 1971 [80] - well before publicly available Internet [115].
This technical skills gap is reﬂected in OECD testing [116] with less than
40% of Australian adults scoring within levels 2 or 3 (out of maximum 3
levels) of OECD’s computer problem-solving skills scale. This percentage
falls to 17.2% within the 55-65 age group.

The timing of technology introduction places Australian business owners
at a disadvantage when dealing with cyber-security. Assistance must be
designed taking into account this lack of experience and cater to non-technical
small business owners. However, training in a receptive format is well received
by small businesses [117]. In section 6.1 we discuss the advantages inherent
in this demographic.

16

5.3 Organisational/Process Maturity

Cyber-security requires ongoing eﬀort in education, process and investment
and is eﬀected by the IT maturity of organisations. In Australia, approxi-
mately a third of small businesses operating in June 2015 did not survive to
June 2019 [88]. The small business sector constantly has new entrants. Small
businesses in early inception and survival stages do not focus on processes
[118]. In these early phases, owners/managers usually have direct oversight
of business tasks with formal processes coming in as the business matures
and expands. This is at odds with a well-rounded cyber defence posture [119]
requiring business policies and controls. This lack of clarity on process details
(for example on IT ﬁx times and speciﬁc responsibilities around patching)
leaves the organisation exposed to opportunistic cyber-criminals.

Research on small business behaviour in the early stages of business is
required. Any cyber-security solutions or policies for small business must
consider that the business’ focus may not be on the management of cyber-
security processes and rules.

5.4

Industry Standards

The bewildering variety and complexity of industry standards is a challenge
that small business owners face. Some examples of cyber-security standards
and frameworks include:

• NIST [120]

• COBIT [121]

• ISO27001 [122]

• Australian Government Information Security Manual [123]

When used by a technical stakeholder such as a Chief Information Oﬃcer,
these guidelines and standards ﬁt any business wishing to protect itself from
cyber attackers. The base assumption of many standards is a technically
literate person being available to guide the business through analysis and
implementation. Few small businesses can justify such a resource especially
in the initial phase of setting up the business. Simpliﬁed versions of the
above standards are available [124], for example, the Australian Signals Di-
rectorate’s (ASD) Essential 8 [125] and the small business cyber-security

17

guide [126]. However, the range of available summarised resources vary in
depth and format. More importantly, these resources have limited compara-
bility between each other or existing security standards. It is unclear how a
small business’ cyber-security work ﬁts in with other advice and standards
once one list is completed.

The complex relationships between the diﬀerent standards leaves non-
technical small business owners with a very low sense of self-eﬃcacy, or
sense of control. The relationship between self-eﬃcacy and action is a well-
established driver of human behaviour [127]. In addition, low self-eﬃcacy in
cyber-security could be a factor in an owner rationalising inaction [128].

Industry bodies have recognised the diﬃculties faced by small businesses.
ISACA, the governing body for COBIT, indicates small and medium en-
terprises will be catered for as part of their COBIT 2019 standards [129].
Unfortunately, to date, this focus area is still under review and not available.
Until cyber-security standards recognise small business’ constraints, small
business will ﬁnd it hard to contextualise cyber-security within their own
business, or implement the necessary controls.

5.5 Cyber Insurance

Cyber insurance is a challenge for smaller businesses. Traditionally, insurance
policies are used to protect a business against disruption or loss, ranging
from natural disasters to theft. Business cyber insurance is a relatively new
phenomenon, with many variations oﬀered by diﬀerent providers.

Various providers in Australia oﬀer cyber insurance to their small business
customers [130]. Each insurer appears to require slightly diﬀerent levels of
due diligence from the small business, while each policy provides coverage
based on disparate internal standards and policies [131, 132, 133]. Further
study and research is needed to provide clarity to small businesses around
standards applied across insurers.

Cyber insurance coverage has been called into question. One highly publi-
cised debate [134, 135] surrounds the insurance exemption for “act of war” or
“terrorism”. In most politically stable countries, a clause to exclude coverage
of catastrophic events, e.g. war/terrorism is employed to manage underwrit-
ing exposure [135]. Most insurance policy takers usually accept an act of war
in a developed country to be a remote, acceptable business risk.

The eﬀectiveness of such cyber insurance came under scrutiny when Mon-
delez submitted a claim on suﬀering US$700 million in damage from NotPetya

18

malware in 2017 [134]. Zurich Insurance denied the claim, citing the attack
as an act of terrorism, as NotPetya was designed to cause maximum damage
as opposed to ﬁnancial gain. The situation was further exacerbated when
the US government attributed NotPetya to Russian origins. The ongoing
conﬂict between Russia and Ukraine further strengthened the terrorism case
as Mondelez had infrastructure in Ukraine. The decision by Zurich continues
to be challenged in court by Mondelez, and other insured companies. The
issue of terrorism is so contentious that Lloyd’s of London [136] explicitly
excludes terrorism related scenarios in its cyber insurance cost analysis.

“It is diﬃcult to attribute a cyber-attack to a particular group or actor”
[136, P.17]. The diﬃculty stems partly from code from one malware author
being reused by another. When malware code is examined forensically, it may
contain artefacts of authors other than the criminal. For example, the Not-
Petya malware contains code stolen from the US National Security Agency
(NSA) [137]. Thus the malware contains signatures indicative of US origin,
despite the attack being attributed to Russia. Accurate attack attribution is
out of reach of the average organisation, especially small business. This lack
of attribution makes it diﬃcult to prove an insurance claim as non-terrorism.
Small businesses and personal computers are often collateral damage of
large scale cyber-attacks. The NotPetya malware wiped clean 10% of all
computers in Ukraine [134], along with many other international companies
(including bouncing back into a company in Russia itself [137]). Many small
businesses were highly likely to have been caught up in this fallout. Numerous
Australian SME and large corporations were impacted by the 2016 Petya
attack [28], from which the NotPetya malware is derived.

In addition to the Mondolez owned Cadbury factory in Hobart, NotPetya
aﬀected companies with an Australian presence such as DLA Piper, Maersk,
TNT etc [138, 139]. Unfortunately, following the Australian government’s
attribution of NotPetya to Russia, and NotPetya’s classsiﬁcation as malware
[140], any Australian businesses’ with an act of terrorism insurance exception
would reasonably ﬁnd themselves not covered by their cyber insurance policy.
The battles still being fought through the international judicial system
indicate that cyber insurance is not mature enough for Australian small
businesses to use eﬀectively. For cyber insurance to be a risk mitigation
tool for small business, signiﬁcant industry, regulatory and assistance eﬀorts
are needed to clarify and provide adequate coverage to small businesses in
case of a breach.

19

5.6 Legal Remediation

Despite the act of breaking into computers being covered under various leg-
islations in diﬀerent countries [61], cyber-criminals continue to operate with
impunity. One reason for this perceived lack of consequences is the legal
complexity of investigating and prosecuting cyber-crimes.

Criminal and remediation processes are complicated when the pepetrators
are under a diﬀerent legal jurisdiction to the victims and properties and
hence, subject to diﬀerent legal processes and laws. The ease with which
attacks can be launched over the internet makes cross-jurisdictional cyber-
crime possible for criminals with minimal resources. Over half the countries
responding to a 2013 United Nation’s (UN) survey described a transnational
element in the majority of the cyber-crimes reported [61, P.117].

This cross jurisdictional complication is discussed in the 2014 Australian
government [141] study on online fraud. The negative impact of transna-
tional barriers on investigations and judicial outcomes for victims continues
today [46]. Jurisdictional complications possibly contribute to the overall
low conviction rate (10%) of police recorded cyber-crimes [61, P.172]. How-
ever, international co-operation in ﬁghting cyber-crime is beneﬁcial [142] in
overcoming structural barriers to prosecuting international cyber-crime.

The low conviction rate is exacerbated by the low rate of reporting. Most
In Australia, the
cyber-crimes are not likely to be reported [61, P.119].
top 3 reasons [77] for non-reporting of online fraud include embarrassment,
belief police cannot ﬁnd oﬀender and uncertainty of right reporting authority.
Given these factors, the overall redress that actually occurs is even smaller.
Even in the remote event a cyber-crime results in a conviction, the loss
of conﬁdentiality of data is a major issue. Once a receiver has stolen data,
this knowledge/data cannot be removed from the receiver. Even where data
can be located, the ease with which copies can be made and distributed
makes containment diﬃcult. One such example is the classiﬁed data taken
from the United States National Security Agency (NSA) by an insider [143].
Despite investigations and knowledge of the locations of the document caches,
information from this breach is still available on the Internet [144].

Outside of legislative penalties, there is little incentive for Australian
small businesses to report cyber-crime. With low remediation rates and
investigative diﬃculties, reporting to authorities is replaced by the priority
of recovering from the cyber-incident. Without dedicated legal personnel
to follow up and navigate the complex systems involved, legal remediation

20

remains out of reach of most small businesses.

Substantial work is still needed on the cyber-crime legal framework to
convince small businesses that it is eﬀective in delivering remediation when
needed.

5.7 Cost of a Data Breach

The gap in knowledge of the cost of inaction makes investing in cyber-security
a diﬃcult decision for small businesses. A small business needs to weigh
up each investment decision against perceived beneﬁts/loss. Existing data
breach costing studies around the globe have primarily focused on larger
businesses [43, 60, 64].

Small businesses (1-49 employees) suﬀer an average loss of US$14,000 per
year per ﬁrm [8] across the US and some European countries. Despite a
low small business sample size, a US Government report [60] speculates the
impact/cost of a breach on small business is possibly more devastating than
for a large business due to the loss of customers. There is no data available
for Australian businesses in the 0-19 employee range. In a survey by ACSC
[9], about half of small business owners predicted it would take a few days
to recover from a hypothetical cyber attack.

Until relevant cyber-breach cost data is available, it will be hard to per-
suade small business owners to invest in managing cyber-security risks [3].
Scientiﬁc and industry research is needed to examine ways of determining
actual costs to small businesses from cyber breaches, similar to larger enter-
prises [60, 64].

6 Advantages For Small Businesses

The small business cohort has advantages over larger enterprises, despite the
many challenges they face. With the right assistance, a small business can
become a less attractive target to cyber-criminals.

6.1 Small Business Agility

Two advantages for small businesses over their larger counterparts are their
ﬂexibility and willingness to learn. The COVID-19 pandemic showcased the
agility with which small businesses adapted to ﬂuid situations [145, 146, 147,

21

148, 149]. Small business owners possess qualities allowing them to react
with agility [150, 151].

The older demographic of small business owners comes with advantages.
Creative and critical thinking related digital skills actually improve faster
within older age groups with this improvement attributed to everyday hands-
on experience of working with technology [152].

Flexibility, willingness to learn and creative thinking are important cyber-
security skills [153, 154, 155]. However small business owners, dominated by
older but adventurous learners [156, 34], still struggle with cyber-security
[86, 128]. Creative thinking skills cannot be used eﬀectively when the basic
information needed to create solutions is unavailable in an accessible for-
mat. Unlike conventional IT knowledge, e.g. productivity software and
mass-market hardware, cyber-security knowledge is still highly technical and
In Australia, small business owners are largely
inaccessible to the public.
oﬀered adhoc cyber-security workshops and resources via disparate small
business training and communication channels, e.g.
[124, 157, 158]. With
research showing that cyber-security needs to be a gradual, ongoing and per-
suasive eﬀort [159, 160], alternative formats and continuous approaches to
small business cyber-security training need to be examined.

A targeted capacity building curriculum, encompassing both prevention
and response, can be used to take advantage of small businesses’ agility.
Building practical coping skills appeals to creative problem solvers like small
business owners, without relying on formal processes [151]. A good starting
point would be cyber-security advice for small businesses focusing on pre-
vention, e.g. password policies, spotting phishing etc. This advice should
extend to other aspects of a cyber-incident’s lifecycle such as incident re-
sponse, record keeping, technical recovery strategies etc.

Victim assistance facilities (as part of incident response) like IDCare [161],
ACSC Report [162], Scamwatch [163] etc do exist in Australia but public
awareness is not ubiquitous [77]. Increased education around crime reporting
processes and forensic practices will improve response to breaches by small
business owners.

Further research is needed to enable cyber-security education to take
advantage of small business owners’ agility. Solutions need to be tailored to
[117], and take advantage of, the unique abilities of small business owners.

22

6.2 Small Business Networking and Alliances

An alliance between small business owners would enable data collection and
advanced intelligence sharing, as well as peer support. This real time knowl-
edge of trending threats and attack methods would help small businesses to
be vigilant to emerging threats.

International large enterprises [164, 165] have formed cyber-security al-
liances allowing members to gain advanced intelligence and work collabora-
tively, and forming a cyber-security feedback loop. In Australia, alliances be-
tween industry, government and research such as AusCERT [166] and ACSC
Partners [167] exist. Unfortunately these alliances target organisations with
dedicated cyber-security IT personnel/budgets. For small businesses such
an alliance would provide easily accessible intelligence and aﬀordable skills.
[168].

A cyber-security alliance of small business owners could allow law en-
forcement, legislators and technical support companies to respond rapidly to
emerging threats. Each small business could contribute cyber-security inci-
dents and intelligence into a central database providing cyber-security peer
support to each other. Education and awareness act as extensions of such
an alliance, leading to it becoming a trusted authority on small business
cyber-security.

Technical and administrative facilitators are needed to overcome existing
communication barriers between small businesses and facilitate such an al-
liance. The exact facilitation and support needed to start and maintain such
a new alliance needs to be researched and clariﬁed.

6.3 Advantages of Zero Trust Model

Suitable security models diﬀer due to the scale of organisations. The low
requirement for IT homogeneity makes zero trust security models [169] a
prime framework for small business. Small businesses have limited large
scale technical legacy to undo and their scattered IT operations suit a zero
trust model.

The traditional network perimeter safeguards an IT eco-system that is
relatively obstacle-free internally, leading to the analogy of a hard shell en-
closing a chewy centre [170]. The problem of an attacker having free reign
once a perimeter is bypassed has been demonstrated in large scale breaches
[44, 171].

23

Google [172], as well as other stakeholders [173], have recognised the futil-
ity of safeguarding an ever changing network perimeter [174, 175], and have
adopted zero trust principles in their services in their BeyondCorp design.
The zero trust security model [176] is a network model for defence that pre-
sumes an attacker has gained access inside the hardened perimeter. In a zero
trust model, access control is no longer performed at the network surround-
ing the IT systems, but focused on authentication and authorisation of user
access to individual services.

Small businesses have diﬃculty with perimeter defence as they don’t own
many of the IT services used. In many ways, the zero trust architecture is one
small businesses have been managing for many years. Zero trust allows focus
on individual service protection, thus limiting impacts even if an individual
service gets breached.

However, small businesses need assistance with implementing a zero trust
model. Each new device needs arduous processes of set-up for multiple ser-
vices rather than one perimeter [177]. Abstracting security into a layer/functional
component [178] allows standardisation and re-use across multiple businesses.
This creates an opportunity for a reusable design/platform that small busi-
nesses can implement in their unique IT environments.

Currently there are very few products and little research in this context.
Despite implementation within large international companies such as Google
and Akamai, zero trust has yet to see signiﬁcant momentum within the Aus-
tralian business landscape. Development of zero trust IT ecosystems for
small business could bring high returns due the large number of end users.

6.4 Open Source Cyber-security Tools

Open source software & hardware (OSSH) is developed and (usually) released
for free by a community of software makers and hardware designers. OSSH is
an option used by IT professionals when paid IT products, including cyber-
security products, do not meet technical or cost requirements. In embracing
OSSH, Australian small businesses would be following in the footsteps of
Australian government authorities. Various Australian government depart-
ments have encouraged use of OSS software as well as making software open
source in general [179, 180, 181, 182]. However, a lack of technical expertise
has hampered small business’ ability to take advantage of free OSSH security
solutions [183, 184, 185].

The ethos of open contribution by volunteers results in OSSH products

24

being released under broad licenses (e.g. GNU general public use [186], cre-
ative commons license[187] etc.) that permit most uses. In some cases, this
includes commercial use with nothing more than attribution. OSSH has
produced popular projects such as the MySQL database, Fedora Linux oper-
ating system, Arduino microcontroller etc which enable the development of
commercial products. A variety of free OSSH cyber-security tools are now
available [188].

However, characterising OSSH as free or low cost ignores the overall cost
of ownership beyond initial ﬁnancial outlay for supporting equipment and
setup eﬀort [189]. Both the Equifax breach [44] and industry standards like
ITIL [190] have demonstrated the critical role played by post-implementation
operational support in securing an IT environment.

To enable ongoing maintenance, enterprise versions of OSSH are sold
by third party vendors including items such as on-going support, updates,
certiﬁcations etc. For example, RedHat Enterprise Linux is based on OSSH
Fedora Linux [191] and oﬀers the support options that Fedora does not. In
larger businesses, where enterprise level OSSH products may not exist, in-
house support is enabled by internal staﬀ with dedicated responsibilities. A
lack of technical expertise and ﬁnancial resources in a small business is an
impediment to the use of OSSH.

OSSH presents an opportunity for technical security solutions for small
business owners. OSSH provides many beneﬁts for small businesses including:

• On-going reviews minimising security vulnerabilities from human error

[192].

• Reducing vendor lock-in [189].

• Being part of the software community with a stake as users in the

software development [193].

• Encouraging good cyber-security hygiene habits by enabling adoption

in the early stages of the business lifecycle.

Australian small businesses could leverage the expertise of developers active
in open source development. They could participate in local open source
communities like PyCon [194] and Linux Australia [195] to make their busi-
ness needs met and their voices heard. Building bridges between the OSSH
and small business communities could provide value for both.

25

Given the importance of cyber-security in business, further research is
needed to analyse the suitability of OSSH security products into the Aus-
tralian small business landscape and the obstacles to be negotiated to remove
entry barriers.

7 Discussion

There are few reviews dedicated to the small business cyber-security land-
scape. Our research reveals many constraints in small business adoption of
cyber-security practices, but also advantages in the cohort that should be
leveraged.

7.1 Data Collection

As Table 4 illustrates, data collection in small business cyber-security re-
search requires improvements in regards to scope, consistency and respondent
range.

26

Table 4: Cyber-security Data Collection Practice Issues and Desired Out-
comes

Section Current Challenge

Proposed Solution

4 &

4.1

Lack of focus [55, 48] on mi-
cro businesses in research.

4.2

4.3

4.4

Use of novel technical
terminologies.

[2]

Use of disparate [58] group-
ing sizes.

Unaccounted self-reporting
bias [74, 75] in results.

the

Focused research on <20
employee businesses to cap-
ture the operational be-
haviour of small businesses.
terminologies
Standard
used to ensure language
describes
same phe-
nomenon.
Acknowledgement of group
size range impacts in ﬁnd-
ings.
and
Social
adjustments
awareness
self-
into
incorporated
to
statistics
reported
from
account
bias
collection method,
both
technical and psychological.

desirability

for

Over reliance on surveys [9,
28, 48] as a data gathering
instrument.

4.5

instruments

Survey
[78]
favouring technically savvy
[8, 28] cohorts.

on

Detection based small busi-
ness monitoring to reduce
reliance
self-reported
statistics.
Demographically represen-
tative respondents of the
landscape
small business
sourced to obtain relevant
understanding of gaps and
priorities.

Proposed
Responsi-
ble Bodies

Government;
Research

Standards
Bodies;
Industry

Industry;
Research

Statistical
Collection;
Research

Industry;
Govern-
ment

Government;
Statistical
Collection

Note: In the rapidly evolving ﬁeld of cyber-security, research is advanced by a combination
of diﬀerent parties: scientiﬁc, government, industry, journalistic etc. The“research” bodies
referenced here, and in subsequent tables, include all who investigate the cyber-security
challenge in question.

27

From our review of the literature, current cyber-security research lacks
representative results and insights on small business only cohorts due to be-
ing bundled with better resourced medium businesses. Comparison between
widely disparate groups introduces diﬃculties in producing focused learnings
that can be applied to micro businesses and sole traders. Further research is
needed on the sub 20 employee cohort to produce targeted ﬁndings.

Our research shows that the wide variety of language and deﬁnitions
used within the cyber-security industry poses issues with interpretation of
survey/research ﬁndings. Mismatched cohort sizes make comparisons diﬃ-
cult, and sometimes misleading. Standardisation of both group deﬁnitions
and terminologies is needed within cyber-security research and industry to
enable useful comparison and longitudinal use of research data.

The heavy use of self-reported surveys introduces social desirability and
awareness bias in results. Rather than relying solely on self-reported data for
small business research on quantitative matters e.g. breach rate, technology
involved, we suggest a wider deployment of detection based collection. For
qualitative research, researchers should actively account and compensate for
self-reporting bias, if possible, as part of their results.

Finally as our research highlights, distortion in research results is wors-
ened by the technical methods by which many surveys are conducted. Tech-
nical data collection channels such as online surveys, result in samples biased
towards respondents comfortable with using technology. Demographic data
shows small business owners are not all technically savvy. Surveys need to be
accessible and promoted towards both technically savvy and non-technical
respondents to ensure all types of business owners are represented.

7.2 Small Business Challenges

In addition to the research challenges listed above that being a small business
poses many hurdles in understanding and implementing cyber-security, as
summarised in Table 5.

28

Table 5: Cyber-security Challenges for Small Businesses

Section Current Situation

The Way Forward

5.1

Lack of clarity on applica-
tion user liability [106, 107]
in the event of a breach.

Clariﬁcation of breach lia-
bility if small business uses
an external IT service.

tailored

Small business mode of op-
eration research and prod-
uct development that recog-
nises the need for hybrid IT
environments.
common
Small
business
research
IT architecture
and
resources
built for small businesses
leading to ﬁt-for-purpose
cyber-security
and
advice.
Development
of material
suitable for small business
knowledge level and mode
of learning

tools

Small number of
cyber-
security solutions that take
into account mixed physical
ownership [108, 85] IT envi-
ronments.
Eﬀective reuse of current
cyber-security solutions are
prevented by existing dif-
ferences between large and
small enterprise IT architec-
tures [Section 5.1].

Small business owners have
several challenges in techni-
cal knowledge to eﬀectively
use cyber-security informa-
tion today.
Small businesses are likely
to be in an inception state
[88] with immature pro-
organisation
cesses
[118].

and

5.2

5.3

Best Re-
sponsible
Bodies

Professional
Bodies;
Govern-
ment
Research;
Industry

Research;
Govern-
ment

Government

development

Further
of
standards and tools that
takes organisational imma-
turity into account.

Industry;
Research

29

Section Current Situation

The Way Forward

5.4

5.5

5.6

5.7

[120,
Industry standards
121, 122, 123] require a high
level of technical expertise
to follow.

Lack of clarity [134] around
insurance requirements and
coverage.

Lack of small business self-
eﬃcacy around legal
re-
mediation [61] from cyber-
crime.

Lack of relevant data [60] on
costs associated with cyber
breaches for small business.

Standards that are targeted
towards a small business au-
dience recognising external
constraints [129] with a mi-
gration path to existing full
standards.
Further research, product
development and guidance
for small business on all as-
pects of cyber insurance to
enable informed choices and
adequate coverage.
re-
Further
development
search
of
aspects
around legal
cyber-crime
associ-
ated remediation for small
businesses.
Further research to clarify
the cost of data breaches for
comparable small business
cohort, to enable accurate
risk based decisions making
from small business.

clariﬁcation,
and

and

Best Re-
sponsible
Bodies
Standards
Bodies;
Research;
Govern-
ment

Research;
Govern-
ment

Government

Research;
Statistical
Collection

Our research found that small businesses tend to operate diﬀerently from
large corporations due to their size, leading to diﬀerent IT usage pattern. One
phenomenon is the tendency to mix personal and business use in devices and
securing these devices using traditional security solutions such as MDM and
MAM pose ethical and logistical dilemmas. The rising use of cloud services
by small business also raises questions around liability and the control and
visibility a small business actually has over its IT security.
Through demographic statistics we found that small businesses and their
owners are at a disadvantage in regards to experience with and knowledge
of technology. Given the older demographic, the majority of small business

30

owners have spent a smaller proportion of their working lives on the internet,
when compared to younger generations. This lower level of technical literacy
needs to be accounted for in training and standards.
It is unrealistic to
expect non-technical people to self-drive and implement the highly technical
security standards available today.
Small businesses’ tendency to be at an inception stage is also at odds with the
process and oversight driven cyber-security standards, with research showing
early stage businesses do not have many established processes and manage-
ment practices. Standards and solutions for small businesses need to factor
in this mode of operation.
The general lack of maturity around cyber insurance, judicial processes and
cost data all contribute to the state of confusion in cyber-security for small
businesses. The ongoing litigation between insurance providers and larger
corporations shows cyber insurance is not yet an eﬀective risk management
tool for small business. Furthermore, the lack of comparable cyber-incident
data leaves business owners with little understanding of the potential loss
they are insuring against. Compounding this are the general diﬃculties in
successfully prosecuting cyber-criminals, leaving small business owners with
a lack of self-eﬃcacy in the judicial system. The low sense of self-eﬃcacy
leads to inaction and is reﬂected in the low rate of reporting. Unfortunately,
a low rate of reporting leads to cyber-criminals continuing to operate with
impunity.
Our examination reveals the need to better understand small business IT
usage, demographics, mode of operation and structural constraints. By un-
derstanding the diﬀerences and challenges involved, the discussion around
cyber-security could match small business users’ needs and expectations.

7.3 Opportunities

By taking a step back to look at small business as a whole, our research (sum-
marised in Table 7) found opportunities for small business with regards to
cyber-security. These opportunities take advantage of the unique landscape
and characteristics of small businesses and their owners, and if leveraged,
would lead to more resilient small businesses.

31

Best Responsi-
ble Bodies

Government

Government

Research; Indus-
try

Research

Table 7: Small Business Cyber-security Advantages

Section Advantages

Opportunities

6.1

6.2

6.3

6.4

Agility and resilience of
small businesses [150, 151]
in the face of challenges
- take advantage of tradi-
tional ﬂexibility that small
businesses present.
Cohort size - leverage the
large number of small busi-
nesses.

[170]

Zero Trust Model
-
make use of similarities be-
tween zero trust model and
common small business ar-
chitecture.

Open Source Security Prod-
ucts [183, 184, 185] - repur-
pose existing low cost solu-
tions to ﬁt small business
needs.

Support [117] for small busi-
ness
to develop capabili-
ties around ongoing cyber
hygiene and response to
breaches.

Further research into fea-
sibility and assistance re-
quired in forming networks
[164, 165] that can be an
early warning system within
small business cohort. Shar-
ing of knowledge to enable
peer support.
Further technical research
to clarify how the use of zero
trust principles can ﬁt into
small business’ highly hy-
bridised IT environments;
Identiﬁcation of opportuni-
ties and development of so-
lutions to leverage overlaps.
Further research into the
possibilities and logistics re-
quired to leverage open
source security products to
match small business’ op-
erating model and con-
straints, making use of ad-
vantages [192, 189, 193] that
open source oﬀers.

32

Our research found a small business owner’s agility and responsiveness could
lead to better cyber-security responses. Rather than focus on formal and
process based security standards, a more eﬀective method would be to teach
the skills/capabilities a small business needs to both protect itself as well as
respond to an incident. Focusing on the skills needed taps into the natural
ways in which small businesses excel at solving problems.
Small businesses could use their large numbers to their advantage by estab-
lishing alliances. Cyber-security alliances are not new and have been shown
to beneﬁt members. To date, alliances have formed between large organisa-
tions. Small business would obtain deﬁnite advantages from such an alliance,
especially in terms of peer support, early intelligence and education.
Our research identiﬁed a couple of technical cyber-security solutions that
could be leveraged for small business cyber-security with the right collabo-
ration and product development. A zero trust model, by assuming no safe
network boundaries, aligns the base IT architecture closer to the small busi-
nesses mode of operation. By discarding a need to ring-fence disparate IT
systems, a zero trust model would drive a realistic security architecture plan
to protect small businesses. In a similar manner, open source cyber-security
software would give small businesses opportunities both in overcoming ﬁnan-
cial barriers to entry and having their needs met.

7.4

International Implications

In this study we detailed the eﬀects of cyber-security decisions/actions by
organisations (legal or otherwise) on countries outside their geographical
boundaries. Within countries with similar societal proﬁle to Australia, such
as UK and US, a similarity in cyber-security has been observed in the evi-
dence produced. The parallels ranged from research approaches e.g. survey,
interviews, sole trader/micro business exclusion, to government actions e.g.
advisories, frameworks etc. These similarities extended to small business
dominance of economy, owners’ awareness of cyber-security knowledge gaps,
as well as comparable technology skill levels.
Given technology landscapes are also very similar across these countries, it is
not inconceivable that small businesses in other countries with similar societal
proﬁles to Australia, such as the UK and US, share similar human struggles
with cyber-security. As such any solutions shown to work in Australia would
merit further examinations in other such countries.
The important role of human inﬂuence on small business cyber-security leads

33

us to conclude that the small business challenges and characteristics discussed
in this paper are not unique to Australian small businesses.

8 Conclusion

The urgent need to protect small businesses from cyber-criminals is driven
by increasing pressures on small businesses to use technology. Small busi-
nesses face pressure to adopt technology from multiple fronts, ranging from
customer expectations to world events. Through our examination of evidence
from both research and industry, we have identiﬁed gaps in the pursuit of
cyber-security for small businesses at multiple levels.
At a data level, further eﬀorts are needed to clarify and improve understand-
ing around small and micro businesses’ ways of working, their IT architecture
and real world small business breach loss statistics. The understanding must
be gained through representative small and micro business samples and com-
municated using standardised security terminologies, so that data and lessons
can be transferred in a wider context.
In addition, we discussed small business constraints that impacts on small
business’s ability to protect themselves. These range from availability of
technical knowledge within the business, organisational maturity and mixed
IT ownership. Uncertainties around external factors such as cyber-insurance,
legal remediation and cost of cyber-incidents also make small business deci-
sions around cyber-security diﬃcult.
Through our overview approach, opportunities to apply non-traditional solu-
tions to cyber-security are also becoming apparent. Promising characteristics
including alliances, a new security paradigm and open source community for
helping small businesses to build up their defences were also identiﬁed.
With the right research and support, a more coherent understanding of small
business cyber-security needs and risks can lead to more resilient small busi-
nesses.
It is through a combination of these insights that cyber-security
solutions can be made accessible to ﬁt better with small businesses, rather
than expect small businesses to ﬁt into current cyber-security solutions. In-
dustry, government and society at large also beneﬁt from the reduced in-
vestigative and human costs of cyber-incidents. Supporting small business
cyber-security has far reaching beneﬁts, to the economy, the community and
national security.

34

9 Acknowledgement

This research is supported by an Australian Government Research Training
Program (RTP) Scholarship.

10 Authors Biographies

Tracy Tam is a doctoral candidate (Mathematical Science) within the
School of Science at RMIT University. She holds a Bachelor degree (with
Honours) in Telecommunications Engineering from Monash University. She
worked for a decade as an engineer within the IT industry. She also has ex-
perience in managing her own small business. Her research interests include
cyber-security within small business context, cyber-security human factors
and security risk management.
Prof. Asha Rao is Professor and Associate Dean (Mathematical Sciences)
within the School of Science at RMIT University, Australia. She is an Aus-
tralian 2019-2020 Superstar of STEM. She has won over AUD 3.5M in grants
since 2007 from Government and Industry to research a variety of issues in-
cluding insider threat and continuous authentication. As a trans-disciplinary
researcher, she works on a variety of problems, ranging from designing bet-
ter codes for communication, exploring the mathematics behind quantum
cryptography, ﬁnding links between various combinatorial structures, to cy-
bersecurity problems such as risk management for SME, detecting insider
threats, and money laundering.
Joanne Hall is a Senior Lecturer in mathematics and cybersecurity at
RMIT. With a background in abstract algebra, her research is on quantum
key distribution and post quantum cryptography. Dr Hall completed her
PhD at RMIT in 2011 on quantum key distribution. She has held research
and teaching positions at Charles University in Prague and the Queensland
University of Technology. As the internships coordinator for the Master of
Cybersecurity Degree, Dr Hall has a keen interest in the cybersecurity needs
of businesses.

References

[1] ABC News,

“NT Chief Minister Delivers Emotional Address
to Territorians About Coronavirus Shutdown — ABC News

35

2020.
Video,”
watch?v=QBV1gfcectU

[Online]. Available:

https://www.youtube.com/

“Internet Security Threat Report,”

[2] Symantec,
Available:
c9e5-43b8-a6ee-417a08608b60%7D ISTR 24 2019 April en.pdf

[Online].
https://img03.en25.com/Web/Symantec/%7B984e78e2-

2019.

[3] Australian Government, “Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy -
Enabling innovation, growth and prosperity,” 2016. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://cybersecuritystrategy.homeaﬀairs.gov.au/AssetLibrary/
dist/assets/images/PMC-Cyber-Strategy.pdf

[4] Department of Parliamentary Services, “Small Business Sector
Contribution to the Australian Economy,” 2018.
[Online]. Avail-
able: https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/library/prspub/
6272043/upload binary/6272043.pdf

It

Lost My

[5] D. Armstrong,
Took

“I
Six Years

Fraudster,
the Mess,”
and
[Online]. Avail-
vol. 2019, Aug 2019.
Bloom. Businessweek,
able:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-08-12/i-lost-
my-identity-to-a-fraudster-and-it-took-six-years-to-clean-up-the-mess

to
Clean Up

Identity

to

a

[6] BBC News, “Margaret Atwood says thieves targeted Handmaid’s
https:

Tale sequel,” BBC News, Sep 2019.
//www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-49635236

[Online]. Available:

[7] A.

and

Bainbridge

Vig-
Avail-
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-09-20/puppy-scams-cost-

ilantes,”
able:
australians-1.3m-but-victims-are-ﬁghting-back/12611646?nw=0

Florance,
Sep

“Victims

[Online].

News,

2020.

ABC

L.

to

[8] Hiscox, “Hiscox Cyber Readiness Report 2019,” p. 20, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.hiscox.co.uk/sites/uk/ﬁles/documents/2019-
04/Hiscox Cyber Readiness Report 2019.PDF

[9] Australian Cyber Security Centre and Australian Signals Directorate,
[On-
“Cyber Security and Australian Small Businesses,” 2020.
line]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/ﬁles/2020-
07/ACSCSmallBusinessSurveyReport.pdf

36

[10] Council of The European Union, “GDPR Legislative Act,” 2016. [On-
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/

line]. Available:
PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN

[11] A. Azar, “Department of Health and Human Services, Annual Civil
Monetary Penalties Inﬂation Adjustment,” in Fed. Regist. / Friday,
January 17, 2020 / Rules Regul., 2020, vol. 85, no. 12, pp. 2869–2887.
[Online]. Available: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-
01-17/pdf/2020-00738.pdf

[12] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA),” 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.cdc.gov/phlp/publications/topic/hipaa.html

[13] Oﬃce of Parliarmentary Counsel, “Privacy Act 1988,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2019C00241

[14] A. Kelkar and A. Rao, “Co-designing compliance to the Anti-Money
Laundering Act within the small and medium enterprise sector,” J.
Financ. Regul. Compliance, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 84–101, 2013.

[15] M. Newbury, “Designated non-ﬁnancial businesses and professions:
The weak link in Australia’s AML/CTF regime,” J. Money Laund.
Control, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 247–261, 2017.

[16] C. Valli, I. Martinus, and M. Johnstone, “Small to Medium Enterprise
Cyber Security Awareness: an initial survey of Western Australian
Business,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Secur. Manag., C. Valli, Ed., 2014, p. 1.

[17] S. Dojkovski, S. Lichenstein, and M. Warren, “Enabling Information
Security Culture:
Inﬂuences and Challenges for Australian SMEs,”
in Australas. Conf. Inf. Syst., vol. 61. Association for Information
Systems (AISeL), 2010. [Online]. Available: http://aisel.aisnet.org/
acis2010/61

[18] ——, “Fostering Information Security Culture in Small and Medium
Size Enterprises: An Interpretive Study in Australia,” in Eur.
Conf. Inf. Syst., vol. 120. Association for Information Systems
Electronic Library (AISeL), 2007, pp. 1560–1571. [Online]. Available:
http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2007/120

37

[19] S. Dojkovski,

S. Lichtenstein,

“Challenges
in fostering an information security culture in australian small
and medium sized enterprises,”
Inf. Warf.
[Online]. Available:
Secur. 2006, ECIW 2006, pp. 31–40, 2006.
http://hdl.handle.net/10536/DRO/DU:30006079

and M. Warren,

5th Eur. Conf.

[20] A. Alahmari and B. Duncan, “Cybersecurity Risk Management in
Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises: A Systematic Review of Recent
Evidence,” 2020 Int. Conf. Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Anal.
Assessment, Cyber SA 2020, 2020.

[21] M. Heidt, J. P. Gerlach, and P. Buxmann, “Investigating the Security
Divide between SME and Large Companies: How SME Characteristics
Inﬂuence Organizational IT Security Investments,” Inf. Syst. Front.,
vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1285–1305, 2019.

[22] E. Osborn and A. Simpson, “On small-scale IT users’ system
architectures and cyber security: A UK case study,” Comput.
https:
Secur., vol. 70, pp. 27–50, 2017.
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2017.05.001

[Online]. Available:

[23] Z. Ruhwanya and J. Ophoﬀ, Information Security Culture Assessment
Springer
of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises in Tanzania.
International Publishing, 2019, vol. 551. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18400-1 63

[24] L. L. Bryan, “Eﬀective Information Security Strategies for Small Busi-
ness,” Int. J. Cyber Criminol., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 341–360, 2020.

[25] F. Almeida, I. Carvalho, and F. Cruz, “Structure and Challenges of a
Security Policy on Small and Medium Enterprises,” KSII Trans. Inter-
net Inf. Syst., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 747–763, 2018.

[26] N. A. Salleh, H. Hussin, M. A. Suhaimi, and A. Md Ali, “A Systematic
Literature Review of Cloud Computing Adoption and Impacts Among
Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs),” Proc. - Int. Conf. Inf. Commun.
Technol. Muslim World 2018, ICT4M 2018, pp. 278–284, 2018.

[27] Cynch Security, Deakin University, RMIT University, and AustCyber,
“Big cyber security questions for small business The state of cyber

38

ﬁtness in Australian small businesses,” 2021.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/576a6006f5e23175ba4e41d8/
t/601b2bcc8724d11f1c78b95c/1612393427067/Cynch+-+Big+cyber+
security+questions+for+small+business+-+White+paper.pdf

[Online]. Available:

[28] NSW Government,

[Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.smallbusiness.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/ﬁles/2019-
07/Cyber-Aware-full-report.pdf

“Cyber Aware,”

2017.

[29] A. Luque, R. Bhaskar, J. Noon, K. Rinz, and Victoria Udalova,
“Nonemployer Statistics by Demographics
(NES-D): Using Ad-
ministrative and Census Records Data in Business Statistics,”
2019.
https://www2.census.gov/ces/wp/2019/
CES-WP-19-01.pdf

[Online]. Available:

[30] US Census,

“2015 SUSB Annual Datasets by Establishment
[On-
https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/susb/

Industry - Data by Enterprise Employment Size,” 2015.
line]. Available:
datasets/2015/us state 6digitnaics 2015.txt

[31] British Crown,

“Business

Population

and

Regions

UK
2019,”
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment data/ﬁle/852919/Business Population
Estimates for the UK and regions - 2019 Statistical Release.pdf

2019.

Estimates
[Online].

the
for
Available:

[32] G. H. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences : Comparing Values, Behav-
iors, Institutions, and Organizations Across Nations, 2nd ed. Thou-
sand Oaks, Calif.: Sage Publications, 2001.

[33] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
“Key Facts Survey of Adult Skills ( PIAAC ): Full Selection of
Indicator - UK, US, Australia and OECD Data Table,” 2018. [Online].
Available: https://gpseducation.oecd.org/IndicatorExplorer

[34] P. Moran, “Personality Characteristics and Growth-orientation of the
Small Business Owner-manager,” Int. Small Bus. J. Res. Entrepeursh.,
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 17–38, 1998.
http://
hjb.sagepub.com.proxy.lib.umich.edu/content/9/2/183.full.pdf+html

[Online]. Available:

39

[35] J. Kickul and L. Gundry, “Prospecting for Strategic Advantage: The
Proactive Entrepreneurial Personality and Small Firm Innovation,” J.
Small Bus. Manag., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 85–97, 2002.

[36] IDC, “Worldwide Spending on Security Solutions Forecast to Reach
$103.1 Billion in 2019, According to New IDC Spending Guide,” 2019.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=
prUS44150518

[37] J. Kaur and N. Mustafa, “Examining the Eﬀects of Knowledge, At-
titude and Behaviour on Information Security Awareness: A Case on
IEEE,
SME,” in Int. Conf. Res. Innov. Inf. Syst. ICRIIS, vol. 2013.
2013, pp. 286–290.

[38] L. Cheng, Y. Li, W. Li, E. Holm, and Q. Zhai, “Understanding
the Violation of IS Security Policy in Organizations: An Integrated
Model Based on Social Control and Deterrence Theory,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 39, no. PART B, pp. 447–459, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2013.09.009

[39] Y. Sawaya, M. Sharif, N. Christin, A. Kubota, A. Nakarai, and A. Ya-
mada, “Self-Conﬁdence Trumps Knowledge : A Cross-Cultural Study
of Security Behavior,” in Proc. 2017 CHI Conf. Hum. Factors Comput.
Syst., Denver, 2017, pp. 2202–2214.

[40] B. Von Solms and R. Von Solms, “The 10 Deadly Sins of Information
Security Management,” Comput. Secur., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 371–376,
2004.

[41] J. D’Arcy and A. Hovav, “Does One Size Fit All? Examining the
Diﬀerential Eﬀects of Is Security Countermeasures,” J. Bus. Ethics,
vol. 89, no. SUPPL. 1, pp. 59–71, 2009.

[42] I. Bernik and K. Prislan, “Measuring information security performance
with 10 by 10 model for holistic state evaluation,” PLoS One, vol. 11,
no. 9, pp. 1–33, 2016.

[43] Deloitte,

“The Future of Cyber Survey 2019,”

[On-
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/advisory/

2019.

line]. Available:
articles/future-of-cyber-survey.html

40

[44] 115th Congress Oversight & Government Reform Committee, “Con-
gressional Report, The Equifax Data Breach, Majority Staﬀ Report,”
2018.
https://republicans-oversight.house.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Equifax-Report.pdf

[Online]. Available:

[45] D.

Chau,
been

“Ticketmaster
in

details may
stolen
[Online].
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-06-28/ticketmaster-

have
Available:
contacts-customers-personal-details-data-breach/9919124

hack,” ABC News,

customer

admits

2018.

[46] A. Bainbridge and L. Florance, “Tradies Frustrated by Banks as Busi-

ness Email Scam Costs Them $51000,” ABC News, Nov 2020.

[47] ISACA, COBIT 2019 Framework: Introduction and methodology, 2019.

[48] Australian Bureau of Statistics, “8167.0 Selected Characteristics
of Australian Business,”
https:
2019.
//www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/allprimarymainfeatures/
C575766838376FA0CA2573E1000E3F2F?opendocument

[Online]. Available:

[49] ——,

“8167.0
Business,

Aus-
Avail-
https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/technology-and-

tralian
able:
innovation/characteristics-australian-business/latest-release

Characteristics
2020.

of
[Online].

2018-19,”

-

[50] Australian Productivity Commission and New Zealand Productivity
Commission, “Growing the Digital Economy in Australia and
New Zealand. Maximising Opportunities for SMEs,” 2019.
[On-
line]. Available: https://www.pc.gov.au/research/completed/growing-
digital-economy/growing-digital-economy.pdf

[51] State Government of Victoria, “Stage 4 restrictions,” pp. 1–7, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.dhhs.vic.gov.au/stage-4-restrictions-
covid-19

[52] T. Woschke, H. Haase, and J. Kratzer, “Resource Scarcity in SMEs:
Eﬀects on Incremental and Radical Innovations,” Manag. Res. Rev.,
vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 195–217, 2017.

41

[53] H. Suryotrisongko and Y. Musashi, “Review of Cybersecurity Re-
search Topics, Taxonomy and Challenges: Interdisciplinary Perspec-
tive,” Proc. 2019 IEEE 12th Conf. Serv. Comput. Appl. SOCA 2019,
pp. 162–167, 2019.

[54] US Small Business Administration, “Participants Sought For Survey
On Small And Mid-Size Business Cybersecurity Issues,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://advocacy.sba.gov/2019/10/21/participants-sought-
for-survey-on-small-and-mid-size-business-cybersecurity-issues/

[55] Eurostat, “ICT Security in Enterprises,” 2020.

[Online]. Avail-
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/pdfscache/

able:
9132.pdf

[56] T. Sommestad, J. Hallberg, K. Lundholm, and J. Bengtsson, “Variables
Inﬂuencing Information Security Policy Compliance: A Systematic Re-
view of Quantitative Studies,” Inf. Manag. Comput. Secur., vol. 22,
no. 1, pp. 42–75, 2014.

[57] A. A. Abid, M. Rahim, and H. Scheepers, “Experienced Beneﬁts
and Barriers of e-Business Technology Adoption by SME Suppliers,”
Commun. IBIMA, vol. 2011, no. October, pp. 1–11, 2011. [Online].
Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260426111

[58] Deloitte Australia, “SMBs In the Digital Race for the Customer,”
[Online]. Available: http://www2.deloitte.com/au/en/pages/

2016.
economics/articles/SMBs-race-digital-customer.html

[59] A. Gupta and R. Hammond, “Information Systems Security Issues
and Decisions for Small Businesses: An Empirical Examination,” Inf.
Manag. Comput. Secur., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 297–310, 2005.

[60] US Government,

“The Cost of Malicious Cyber Activity to
[Online].
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/

the U.S. Economy,” Tech. Rep. February,
Available:
02/The-Cost-of-Malicious-Cyber-Activity-to-the-U.S.-Economy.pdf

2018.

[61] United Nations Oﬃce

“Com-
Crime,
[Online]. Avail-
http://www.unodc.org/documents/organized-crime/UNODC

prehensive
able:
CCPCJ EG.4 2013/CYBERCRIME STUDY 210213.pdf

on Cybercrime,”

on Drugs

and
2013.

Study

42

[62] C. D. Kam, J. R. Wilking, and E. J. Zechmeister, “Beyond the ”Narrow
Data Base”: Another Convenience Sample for Experimental Research,”
Polit. Behav., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 415–440, 2007.

[63] Y. Acar, C. Stransky, D. Wermke, M. L. Mazurek, and S. Fahl, “Se-
curity Developer Studies With GitHub Users: Exploring a Conve-
nience Sample,” Proc. 13th Symp. Usable Priv. Secur. SOUPS 2017,
no. Soups, pp. 81–95, 2019.

[64] Ponemon Institute and IBM Security, “Cost of a Data Breach
[Online].

Report,” Ponemon Institute,
Available: https://www.ibm.com/security/data-breach

IBM, Tech. Rep., 2019.

[65] Vistage, Cisco, and National Center

for The Middle Market,
“Cyberthreats and Solutions for Small and Midsize Businesses,” 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sap.com/uk/solution/sme-business-
software/analytics.html

[66] C. Watson, T. Zaw,

I. Andriushchenko, G. M. Justiniano, and
M. Tesauro, OWASP Automated Threat Handbook Web Applications.
Bel Air, United States: OWASP, 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.owasp.org/images/3/33/Automated-threat-handbook.pdf

[67] Australian Bureau of Statistics, “1321.0 - Small Business in Australia,
2001,” 2001. [Online]. Available: https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/
abs@.nsf/mf/1321.0

[68] British

Crown,

“Small
London,

SME
Employers,”
Available:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment data/ﬁle/414963/bis-15-151-small-business-
survey-2014-sme-employers v1.pdf

Business
2015.

[Online].

Survey

2014:

[69] Eurostat, “Small and medium-sized enterprises

(SMEs),” 2020.
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/structural-

[Online]. Available:
business-statistics/structural-business-statistics/sme

[70] U.S. Small Business Administration, “Table of Small Business
Standards Matched to North American Industry Classiﬁcation System
Codes,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/
ﬁles/ﬁles/Size Standards Table 2017.pdf

43

[71] M. Cruz, F. Boster, and J. Rodriguez, “The Impact of Group Size and
Proportion of Shared Information on the Exchange and Integration of
Information in Groups,” Communic. Res., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 291–313,
1997.

[72] R. F. Bales, F. L. Strodtbeck, T. M. Mills, and M. E. Roseborough,
“Channels of Communication in Small Groups,” Am. Sociol. Rev.,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 461–468, 1951.

[73] B. Steinheider and S. Al-Hawamdeh, “Team Coordination, Communi-
cation and Knowledge Sharing in Smes and Large Organisations,” J.
Inf. Knowl. Manag., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 223–232, 2004.

[74] S. I. Donaldson and E. J. Grant-Vallone, “Understanding Self-Report
Bias in Organizational Behavior Research,” J. Bus. Psychol., vol. 17,
no. 2, pp. 245–260, 2002.

[75] R. Fisher and J. Katz, “Social-Desirability Bias and the Validity of
Self-Reported Values,” Psychol. Mark., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 105–120,
2000.

[76] Redscan, “Most ICO Data Breach Reports Late and Incomplete
[Online]. Avail-
https://www.redscan.com/press-release/most-ico-data-breach-

Prior to GDPR, Reveals Redscan FOI,” 2019.
able:
reports-late-and-incomplete-prior-to-gdpr-reveals-redscan-foi/

[77] C. Emami, R. G. Smith, and P. Jorna, “Online Fraud Victimisation
[Online].
https://www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/ﬁles/2020-05/rr16

in Australia:
Available:
online fraud victimisation in australia-v3.pdf

Risks and Protective Factors,”

2019.

[78] P. M. Boynton, “Administering, Analysing, and Reporting Your
Questionnaire,” BMJ(Clinical Res. Ed., vol. 328, no. 7452, pp.
1372–1375, 2004. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC420299/

[79] N. Kwak and B. Radler, “A Comparison Between Mail and Web Sur-
veys: Response Pattern, Respondent Proﬁle, and Data Quality,” J.
Oﬀ. Stat., vol. 18, no. 2, p. 257, 2002.

44

[80] Commonwealth

of Australia

and Family Enterprise Ombudsman,

ness
Counts,
[Online]. Available:
Small Business Statistical Report-Final.pdf

and Australian

Small Busi-
“Small Business
2019.
http://www.asbfeo.gov.au/sites/default/ﬁles/

in the Australian Economy,”

Small Business

[81] J. Coertze and R. Von Solms, “A Software Gateway to Aﬀordable and
Eﬀective Information Security Governance in SMMEs,” in 2013 Inf.
Secur. South Africa - Proc. ISSA 2013 Conf.

IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–8.

[82] M. Panjwani, M. Jantti, and J. Sormunen, “IT Service Management
From a Perspective of Small and Medium Sized Companies,” in Proc.
- 2016 10th Int. Conf. Qual. Inf. Commun. Technol. QUATIC 2016.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 210–215.

[83] M. Bada and J. Nurse, “Developing Cybersecurity Education and
Awareness Programmes for Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprises
(SMEs),” Inf. Comput. Secur., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 393–410, 2019.

[84] V. Dimopoulos, S. Furnell, M. Jennex, and I. Kritharas, “Ap-
proaches to IT Security in Small and Medium Enterprises,” in
Proc. 2nd Aust. Inf. Secur. Manag. Conf. Secur. Futur. Perth,
[Online].
West. Aust. Novemb. 26th, 2004,
Available:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221148270
Approaches to IT Security in Small and Medium Enterprises

2004, pp. 73–82.

[85] D. Almubayedh, M. A. Khalis, G. Alazman, M. Alabdali, R. Al-Refai,
and N. Nagy, “Security Related Issues in Saudi Arabia Small Organiza-
tions: A Saudi Case Study,” in 21st Saudi Comput. Soc. Natl. Comput.
Conf. NCC 2018. Ar Riyad, Saudi Arabia: IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.

[86] E. Laleh, Y. Masoudi, F. Fathy, and S. Ghorbani, “Inﬂuencing Factors
of Information Security Management in Small- and Medium- Sized En-
terprises and Organizations,” in Proc. - 2013 Int. Conf. Commun. Syst.
Netw. Technol. CSNT 2013.

IEEE, 2013, pp. 445–449.

[87] E. Osborn and A. Simpson, “Risk and the Small-Scale Cyber Security
Decision Making Dialogue - A UK Case Study,” Comput. J., vol. 61,
no. 4, pp. 472–495, 2018.

45

[88] Australian Bureau of Statistics, “8165.0 - Counts of Australian
including Entries and Exits, June 2015 to June 2019,”
https://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/

Businesses,
2020.
abs@.nsf/DetailsPage/8165.0June2015toJune2019?OpenDocument

[Online]. Available:

[89] M. Smith,

“Huge Rise

in Hack Attacks as Cyber-Criminals
[Online]. Avail-
Target Small Businesses,” Guard., Feb 2016.
https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/
able:
feb/08/huge-rise-hack-attacks-cyber-criminals-target-small-businesses

[90] C. McDonald, “A Whopping 78% of Small Business Are Being Targeted
[Online].
by Cyber Criminals. Here’s How to Stay Ahead,” 2019.
Available: https://www.smartcompany.com.au/ﬁnance/fraud/cyber-
crime-stay-ahead/

[91] Microsoft,

Staging,
“Planning
and Production Environments,”
[Online]. Available:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/biztalk/technical-guides/planning-
the-development-testing-staging-and-production-environments

the Development,

Testing,

2017.

[92] H. Raul, “Setting up Systems for a Staged Upgrade,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://docs.bmc.com/docs/brid91/en/setting-up-systems-
for-a-staged-upgrade-825210729.html

[93] B. Iyamuremye and H. Shima, “Network Security Testing Tools for
SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises),” in Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf.
Appl. Syst. Innov. 2018, ICASI 2018.

IEEE, 2018, pp. 414–417.

[94] Rapid7, “Metasploit Framework,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https:

//metasploit.help.rapid7.com/docs/msf-overview

[95] Deloitte, “The economic value of cloud services in Australia,”
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/
Deloitte/au/Documents/Economics/deloitte-au-economics-value-
cloud-services-australia-230719.pdf

[96] Gartner Inc, “Gartner Forecasts Worldwide Public Cloud End-User
[Online]. Available:

Spending to Grow 18% in 2021,”
https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2020-11-17-
gartner-forecasts-worldwide-public-cloud-end-user-spending-to-grow-
18-percent-in-2021

2020.

46

[97] M.

“Uber

Chiappetta,

To
Soars Due
[Online]. Avail-
https://www.forbes.com/sites/marcochiappetta/2020/03/25/

COVID-19
able:
uber-eats-demand-soars-due-to-covid-19-crisis

Eats Demand
2020.

Forbes, Mar

Crisis,”

[98] L. Dignan,

“Uber

vs. Lyft:

Cloud, AI, and Machine Learning,” ZDNet, May 2019.
line]. Available:
the-rivals-approach-cloud-ai-machine-learning/

How the Rivals Approach
[On-
https://www.zdnet.com/article/uber-vs-lyft-how-

[99] K. O. Detken, M. Jahnke, H. Birkholz, and C. Dwertmann, “Design
and Implementation of Virtual Security Appliances (VSA) for SME,”
in Proc. 2013 IEEE 7th Int. Conf. Intell. Data Acquis. Adv. Comput.
Syst. IDAACS 2013, vol. 1, no. September.

IEEE, 2013, pp. 30–35.

[100] Spyse, “Spyse Subscriptions,” 2020.

[Online]. Available:

https:

//spyse.com/user/subscription

[101] Tenable, “Purchase Tenable Solutions,” 2020.

[Online]. Available:

https://www.tenable.com/buy

[102] Intruder, “External Vulnerability Scanner,” 2020. [Online]. Available:

https://www.intruder.io/

[103] Amazon AWS, “AWS Customer Support Policy for Penetration
[Online].

Customer Service Policy for Penetration Testing,” 2020.
Available: https://aws.amazon.com/security/penetration-testing/

[104] Microsoft, “Microsoft Cloud Penetration Testing Rules of Engage-
ment,” pp. 1–3, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/
en-us/msrc/pentest-rules-of-engagement?rtc=1

[105] Google, “Cloud Security FAQ,” 2020.

[Online]. Available: https:

//support.google.com/cloud/answer/6262505?hl=en

[106] T. August and T. I. Tunca, “Who Should Be Responsible for Software
Security? a Comparative Analysis of Liability Policies in Network En-
vironments,” Manage. Sci., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 934–959, 2011.

[107] L. Selznick and C. LaMacchia, “Cybersecurity Liability: How Techni-
cally Savvy Can We Expect Small Business Owners to Be?” J. Bus.
Technol. Law, vol. 13, no. 2, p. 217, 2018.

47

[108] Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA), “The
[Online].

Connected Business - ACMA research snapshot,” 2013.
Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=etjjds2PIN0

[109] M. A. Harris and K. P. Patten, “Mobile Device Security Considera-
tions for Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprise Business Mobility,” Inf.
Manag. Comput. Secur., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 97–114, 2014.

[110] Google, “GSuite by Google Cloud Endpoint Management,” 2020. [On-
line]. Available: https://gsuite.google.com/products/admin/endpoint/

[111] S. Perez, “Apple Is Making Corporate ‘BYOD’ Programs Less
Invasive to User Privacy,” TechCrunch, Jun 2019.
[Online]. Avail-
able: https://techcrunch.com/2019/06/10/apple-is-making-corporate-
byod-programs-less-invasive-to-user-privacy/

[112] Microsoft, “Technology decisions for BYOD with EMS — Microsoft
Docs,” pp. 1–5, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://docs.microsoft.com/
en-gb/intune/fundamentals/byod-technology-decisions

[113] Google, “Overview : Manage devices with Google endpoint manage-
ment Tailor your basic mobile device management,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://support.google.com/a/answer/1734200?hl=en-AU

[114] Glassdoor, “Average IT Administrator Salaries,” 2019.

[Online].
https://www.glassdoor.com.au/Salaries/it-administrator-

Available:
salary-SRCH KO0,16.htm

[115] L. Taylor, “Happy 25 years of the internet, Australia,” SBS News,
Jun 2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/
2014/06/24/happy-25-years-internet-australia

[116] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
indicators,”
https://gpseducation.oecd.org/

“Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC): Full selection of
Paris, 2019.
IndicatorExplorer

[Online]. Available:

[117] E. Walker, J. Redmond, B. Webster, and M. Le Clus, “Small Business
Owners: Too Busy to Train?” J. Small Bus. Enterp. Dev., vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 294–306, 2007.

48

[118] M. Scott and R. Bruce, “Five Stages of Growth in Small Business,”

Long Range Plann., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 45–52, 1987.

[119] J. Alqatawna, “The Challenge of Implementing Information Security
Standards in Small and Medium e-Business Enterprises,” J. Softw.
Eng. Appl., vol. 7, no. 10, p. 883, 2014.

[120] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “NIST Framework
for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity,” 2018. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.04162018

[121] ISACA, “COBIT 2019 Publications & Resources,” 2019.

[On-
line]. Available: http://www.isaca.org/COBIT/Pages/COBIT-2019-
Publications-Resources.aspx

[122] Standards Australia Limited, “AS ISO/IEC 27001 Australian Standard
Information Technology - Security Techniques - Information Security
Management Systems - Requirements,” 2015.

[123] Australian Signals Directorate and Australian Cyber Security
Centre, “Australian Government Information Security Manual,” Jun
2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/
ﬁles/2020-06/AustralianGovernmentInformationSecurityManual%
28June2020%29.pdf

[124] Commonwealth of Australia,
The Small
Avail-
Best
https://www.asbfeo.gov.au/sites/default/ﬁles/documents/

Business
able:
ASBFEO-cyber-security-research-report.pdf

Practice Guide,”

“Cyber Security:

[Online].

2017.

[125] Australian Cyber Security Centre,

“Australian Signal Direc-
torate Essential Eight Maturity Model,” 2019.
[Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/publications/
essential-eight-maturity-model

[126] ——, “Small Business Cyber Security Guide,” 2020. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/publications/
small-business-cyber-security-guide

49

[127] J. E. Maddux and R. W. Rogers, “Protection Motivation and Self-
Eﬃcacy: A Revised Theory of Fear Appeals and Attitude Change,” J.
Exp. Soc. Psychol., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 469–479, 1983.

[128] K. Renaud, “How Smaller Businesses Struggle With Security Advice,”
Comput. Fraud Secur., vol. 2016, no. 8, pp. 10–18, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1361-3723(16)30062-8

[129] ISACA, COBIT 2019 : Design Guide Designing an Information and
Technology Governance Solution, Information Systems Audit and Con-
trol Association, Ed. Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA, 2019.

[130] Insurance Business Australia, “Cyber Insurance Products,” pp. 1–4,
[Online]. Available: https://www.insurancebusinessmag.com/

2020.
au/commercial-insurance-coverage-area/cyber-12/

[131] Cyber
Quote
www.cyberinsuranceaustralia.com.au/

Australia,
2020.

Insurance
Form,”

[Online].

“Cyber

Insurance

Available:

Australia
https://

[132] BizCover, “Fact sheet Cyber Liability Insurance,” 2019.

[Online].
https://www.bizcover.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/

Available:
12/BC1243 FactSheet CyberLiability Nov19 FINAL-5.pdf

[133] A. Davenport, “Is Cyber Insurance Really Worth It?” CRN Mag., Feb
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.crn.com.au/feature/is-cyber-
insurance-really-worth-it-451442/page0

[134] A. Satariano and N. Perlroth,

In-
- The
surance Covered a Cyberattack. They May Be Wrong.
New York Times,” New York Times, pp. 3–5,
[On-
line]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/15/technology/
cyberinsurance-notpetya-attack.html

“Big Companies Thought

2019.

[135] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
“Enhancing the Role of Insurance in Cyber Risk Management,” 2017.

[136] Lloyds of London, “Counting the Cost: Cyber Exposure Decoded,”
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.lloyds.com/news-and-insight/
risk-insight/library/technology/countingthecost

50

[137] A. Greenberg, “The Untold Story of NotPetya, the Most Devastating
[Online]. Avail-
https://www.wired.com/story/notpetya-cyberattack-ukraine-

Cyberattack in History,” Wired, Aug 2018.
able:
russia-code-crashed-the-world/

[138] ABC News, “Petya Cyber Attack: Ransomware Virus Hits Computer
Servers Across Globe, Australian Oﬃce Aﬀected,” ABC News, Jun
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-06-28/
ransomware-virus-hits-computer-servers-across-the-globe/8657626

[139] R. Crozier,

“DLA Piper Paid 15000 Hours of

IT Overtime
[Online]. Avail-
after NotPetya Attack,”
able: https://www.itnews.com.au/news/dla-piper-paid-15000-hours-
of-it-overtime-after-notpetya-attack-490495

ITNews, Mar 2018.

[140] A.

Taylor,

“Australian Government

of
the
[Online].
https://www.dfat.gov.au/sites/default/ﬁles/australia-

attribution
2018.

Russia,”

incident

to

cyber

’NotPetya’
Available:
attributes-cyber-incident-to-russia.pdf

[141] C. Cross, R. G. Smith, and K. Richards, “Challenges of Responding
to Online Fraud Victimisation in Australia,” 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/ﬁles/2020-05/tandi474.pdf

[142] T. Reitano, T. Oerting, and M. Hunter, “Innovations in international
cooperation to counter cybercrime: The Joint Cybercrime Action Task-
force,” Eur. Rev. Organ. Crime, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 142–154, 2015.

[143] J. Bamford, “The Most Wanted Man in The World,” Wired Mag., Jun
2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.wired.com/2014/08/edward-
snowden/

[144] P. Szoldra, “This Is Everything Edward Snowden Revealed in One
Year of Unprecedented Top-Secret Leaks,” Bus. Insid. India, Sep
2016.
https://www.businessinsider.in/This-is-
everything-Edward-Snowden-revealed-in-one-year-of-unprecedented-
top-secret-leaks/articleshow/54367926.cms

[Online]. Available:

[145] N. Khadem,
dustry

as

“Coronavirus wreaks

havoc

on wedding

Chinese

factories

remain

closed

and

51

in-
work-

quarantined,” ABC News,

[Online]. Avail-
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-02-27/coronavirus-closes-

ers
able:
chinese-factories-aﬀecting-wedding-industry/12002854

2020.

Feb

[146] Broadsheet,

“Live
to Takeaway Due
able:
melbourne-restaurants-pivoting-takeaway-due-coronavirus

Melbourne Restaurants Pivoting
[Online]. Avail-
https://www.broadsheet.com.au/melbourne/guides/live-list-

List:
to Coronavirus,”

2020.

[147] N. Gallagher, “One of KC’s Best Craft Cocktail Bars Adapts
With Bottled Drinks and Kits During Coronavirus Quarantine,”
https://
Kansas City Mag., Mar 2020.
www.kansascitymag.com/cocktail-hour-during-coronavirus-outbreak/

[Online]. Available:

[148] J. Longbottom, “Coronavirus forces businesses to adapt to survive
the COVID-19 pandemic,” ABC News, Mar 2020.
[Online].
Available: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-03-19/how-businesses-
adapting-to-survive-covid-19-coronavirus/12068696

[149] D. Gray, “Craft Brewer Pivots to Hand Sanitiser as Firms Rise to
Virus Challenge,” Age (Omaha)., Mar 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.theage.com.au/business/companies/craft-brewer-pivots-to-
hand-sanitiser-as-ﬁrms-rise-to-virus-challenge-20200327-p54ehh.html

[150] H. De Vries and M. Shields, “Towards a Theory of Entrepreneurial
Resilience : A Case Study Analysis of New Zealand SME Owner Op-
erators,” Appl. Res. J., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 33–44, 2006.

[151] L. J. Branicki, B. Sullivan-Taylor, and S. R. Livschitz, “How En-
trepreneurial Resilience Generates Resilient SMEs,” Int. J. Entrep.
Behav. Res., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 1244–1263, 2018.

[152] Y. Eshet-Alkalai and E. Chajut, “You Can Teach Old Dogs New Tricks:
The Factors That Aﬀect Changes over Time in Digital Literacy,” J.
Inf. Technol. Educ. Res., vol. 9, pp. 173–181, 2010.

[153] S. E. Freed, “Examination of Personality Characteristics Among
Cybersecurity and Information Technology Professionals,” Masters,
University of Tennessee at Chattanoog, 2014.
[Online]. Available:
https://scholar.utc.edu/theses/127/

52

[154] M. Bashir, A. Lambert, J. M. C. Wee, and B. Guo, “An Examination
of the Vocational and Psychological Characteristics of Cybersecurity
Competition Participants,” USENIX Summit Gaming, Games, Gami-
ﬁcation Secur. Educ., pp. 1–8, 2015.

[155] J. L. Hall and A. Rao, “Non-Technical Skills Needed by Cyber Security
Graduates,” in IEEE Educ. Conf. Porto, Portugal: IEEE Education
Society, 2020, pp. 14–18.

[156] H. Zhao and S. E. Seibert, “The Big Five Personality Dimensions and
Entrepreneurial Status: A Meta-Analytical Review,” J. Appl. Psychol.,
vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 259–271, 2006.

[157] Business Victoria, “Small Business Workshops and Events,” 2019.

[Online]. Available: https://www.business.vic.gov.au/events

[158] Australian Cyber Security Centre, “Small Business Cyber Security
Guide,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/
default/ﬁles/2019-10/SmallBusinessCyberSecurityGuide.pdf

[159] C. Vroom and R. Von Solms, “Towards Information Security Be-
havioural Compliance,” Comput. Secur., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 191–198,
2004.

[160] R. Von Solms and J. Van Niekerk, “From Information Security to
Cyber Security,” Comput. Secur., vol. 38, pp. 97–102, 2013. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2013.04.004

[161] IDCare, “IDCare,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.idcare.org

[162] Australian Cyber Security Centre, “ReportCyber, Are You a Victim
of Cybercrime?” [Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/
report

[163] Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, “ScamWatch,”

2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/

[164] Verizon, “2019 Data Breach Investigations Report,” 2019.

[On-
https://enterprise.verizon.com/resources/reports/

line]. Available:
2019-data-breach-investigations-report.pdf

53

[165] F. Abolhassan, Cyber Security. Simply. Make it Happen. Leveraging
Digitization Through IT Security, 1st ed. Springer International Pub-
lishing : Imprint: Springer, 2017.

[166] AusCERT, “AusCERT Become a Member,” 2019. [Online]. Available:

https://www.auscert.org.au/become-a-member/

[167] Australian Cyber Security Centre, “Become a Partner,” 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/partner-hub/become-
a-partner#no-back

[168] T. Yanpiboon and L. Schjoedt, “The Eﬀect of Strategic Alliance on
Small Business Performance: A Meta- Analysis,” in ICSB World Conf.
Proc., Washington, 2017.

[169] S. Rose, O. Borchert, S. Mitchell, and S. Connelly, “Zero Trust Ar-
[Online].
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/

chitecture - NIST Special Publication 800-207,” 2020.
Available:
NIST.SP.800-207-draft2.pdf

“No More Chewy Centers:

[170] J. Kindervag,
Model Of
chitecture And Operations Playbook,”
able:
forrester-zero-trust-model-information-security.pdf

The Zero Trust
The Security Ar-
[Online]. Avail-
http://crystaltechnologies.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/

Information Security Vision:

2016.

[171] Australian National University, “Incident Report on the Breach of
the Australian National University Administrative Systems,” 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://imagedepot.anu.edu.au/scapa/Website/
SCAPA190209 Public report web 2.pdf

[172] BeyondCorp, “Beyondcorp : A New Approach to Enterprise Security,”

2014. [Online]. Available: www.beyondcorp.com

[173] J. Curran, “Chaﬀetz Urges ’Zero-Trust Model’ For Network Security,”

Cybersecurity Policy Rep., Sep 2016.

[174] R. Ward and B. Beyer, “Beyondcorp : A New Approach to Enterprise
Security,” ;login Mag. USENIX SAGE, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 6–11, 2014.
[Online]. Available: https://storage.googleapis.com/pub-tools-public-
publication-data/pdf/43231.pdf

54

[175] SE Radio,

“SE Radio:

Episode 385:

Doug Barth on Zero-Trust Networks,” 2019.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ES-6zAQo1WU

Evan Gilman and
[Online]. Available:

[176] J. Kindervag, “Build Security Into Your Network’s DNA: The Zero
http://

Trust Network Architecture,” 2010.
www.virtualstarmedia.com/downloads/Forrester zero trust DNA.pdf

[Online]. Available:

[177] V. Escobedo, B. Beyer, M. Saltonstall,

and F. Zyzniewski,
“BeyondCorp 5: The User Experience,” ;login Mag. USENIX
SAGE, vol.
[Online]. Avail-
38–43,
https://storage.googleapis.com/pub-tools-public-publication-
able:
data/pdf/c8da594124dab1f91e6750995e2b7805403b19f1.pdf

2017.

pp.

no.

42,

3,

[178] L. Cittadini, B. Spear, B. Beyer, and M. Saltonstall, “BeyondCorp
Part III: The Access Proxy,” ;login Mag. USENIX SAGE, pp. 28–33,
2016. [Online]. Available: https://storage.googleapis.com/pub-tools-
public-publication-data/pdf/45728.pdf

[179] Queensland Government, “Open source software guideline Guideline,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.qgcio.qld.gov.au/documents/
open-source-software-guideline

[180] Digital Transformation Agency, “Simple,

services.” [Online]. Available:
advice/digital-service-standard/digital-service-standard-criteria

clear and fast public
https://www.dta.gov.au/help-and-

[181] Victorian Government, “Vic Open Source Policy.pdf.” [Online].
https://www.vic.gov.au/make-your-project-open-source-

Available:
digital-standards

[182] Australian Government Information Management Oﬃce, “A Guide
to Open Source Software for Australian Government Agencies,”
https://www.ghdonline.org/uploads/
[Online]. Available:
2011.
AGuidetoOpenSourceSoftware.pdf

[183] Cisco, “Snort Intrusion Detection System,” 2020. [Online]. Available:

https://www.snort.org/

[184] H. Welte and P. N. Ayuso, “The netﬁlter.org Project,” 2014. [Online].

Available: https://netﬁlter.org/

55

[185] G. Lyon, “NMap Tool,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://nmap.org/

[186] Free Software Foundation, “GNU General Public License,” 2007.
[Online]. Available: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html

[187] Creative Commons, “Creative Commons,” pp. 1–7, 2020. [Online].

Available: https://creativecommons.org/

[188] CyberX, “Free CyberSecurity Tools : The Ultimate List (2018),” 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://cyberx.tech/free-cybersecurity-tools/

[189] K. Ven, J. Verelst, and H. Mannaert, “Should You Adopt Open Source

Software?” IEEE Softw., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 54–59, 2008.

[190] M. A. Alojail, “ITIL usage, and use of ITIL recommended practices and
the IT outsourcing relationship quality,” Ph.D. dissertation, RMIT,
2013.

[191] RedHat, “What’s the diﬀerence between Fedora and Red Hat Enter-
prise Linux?” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.redhat.com/en/
topics/linux/fedora-vs-red-hat-enterprise-linux

[192] C. Ebart, “Open Source Software in Industry,” IEEE Softw., vol. 25,

no. 3, pp. 52–53, 2008.

[193] J. Wesselius, “The Bazaar inside the Cathedral: Business Models for
Internal Markets,” IEEE Softw., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 60–66, 2008.

[194] PyCon AU, “Pyconlineau,”

2021.

[Online]. Available:

https:

//2021.pycon.org.au/

[195] Linux Australia, “Linux Australia.” [Online]. Available:

https:

//linux.org.au/

56

