Cyber-Security in the Emerging World of ’Smart 
Everything’ 

1st Elochukwu A. Ukwandu 
Department of Computer Science, 
Cardiff School of Technologies, 
Cardiff Metropolitan University, Cardiff 

Wales, United Kingdom. 
eaukwandu@cardiffmet.ac.uk 

2nd Ephraim N.C. Okafor 
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 
School of Engineering and Engineering Technology 
Federal University of Technology, Owerri. 
Imo State, Nigeria. 
ephraimnc.okafor@futo.edu.ng 

3rd Charles Ikerionwu 
Department of Software Engineering, 
School of Information and Communication Technology 
Federal University of Technology, Owerri. 
Imo State, Nigeria. 
charles.ikerionwu@futo.edu.ng 

4th Comfort Olebara 

5th Celestine Ugwu 

Department of Computer Science, Department of Computer Science, 

Faculty of Physical Science 
Imo State University, Owerri. 

Faculty of Physical Science 
University of Nigeria, Nsukka. 

Imo State, Nigeria. 
chy_prime@yahoo.com 

Enugu State, Nigeria. 
celestine.ugwu@unn.edu.ng 

Correspondent author: Elochukwu A. Ukwandu email 
address: eaukwandu@cardiffmet.ac.uk 

Index Terms—Cyber-Security, Internet of Things, Industrial Internet 
of  Things,  Artificial  Intelligence,  Machine  Learning,  Automation, 
Cyber-Attacks, 4th industrial revolution. 

largely  rely  on  high-speed 

Abstract—The  fourth  industrial  revolution  (4IR)  widely  known  as 
Industry 4.0 is a revolution many authors believe have come to stay. 
It is a revolution that has been fast blurring the line between physical, 
digital,  and  biological  technologies.  These  disruptive  innovative 
revolutionary  technologies 
internet 
connectivity,  Cloud  technologies,  Augmented  Reality,  Additive 
Intelligence.  Most 
Manufacturing,  Data  science,  and  Artificial 
developed  economies  have  embraced  the  revolution  while  the 
developing economies are struggling to adopt 4IR because they lack 
the  requisite  skills,  knowledge,  and  technology.  Thus,  this  study 
investigates  Nigeria  as  one  of  the  developing  economies  to 
understand  her  readiness  for  4IR  and  the  level  of  preparedness  to 
mitigate  the  sophisticated  cyber-attacks  that  comes  with  the 
revolution. The investigation adopted quantitative research approach 
and developed an online questionnaire that was shared amongst the 
population of interest that includes academic, industry experts, and 
relevant  stakeholders.  The  questionnaire  returned  116  valid 
responses  which  were  analysed  with  descriptive  statistical  tools  in 
SPSS. Results suggest that 60% of the respondents are of the opinion 
that  the  Nigerian  government  at  all  levels  are  not  showing  enough 
evidence  to  demonstrate  her  preparedness  to  leverage  these 
laws,  strong 
promised  potentials  by  developing  4IR  relevant 
institutional 
lack  significant 
development  capacity  to  mitigate  risks  associated  with  digital 
ecosystem and cyber ecosystem that are ushered in by the 4IR. In the 
universities,  52%  of  the  courses  offered  at  the  undergraduate  and 
42% at the post-graduate levels are relevant in the development of 
skills  required  in  the  revolution.  The  study  recommends  that  the 
government  at  all  levels  make  adequate  efforts  in  developing  the 
country’s intangible assets such as educational and social capitals as 
well  as  strong  institutional  frameworks,  policies  and  laws  that  will 
form the basis for knowledge development, ownership and retention. 
In all, this paper posits that successful implementation of these could 
equip Nigeria to embrace the 4IR in all its aspects. 

frameworks  and  policies.  They 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

technology, 

Additive  manufacturing, 

The  emerging  fourth  industrial  revolution  technologies  as 
envisaged  in  [1],  [2],  [3],  [4],  [5]  are  largely  driven  by  high-
speed  internet  connectivity  [2],  Cloud  technologies,  Data 
science and technologies. It will also rely heavily on Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) technologies and its sub-fields of Machine 
Learning, Robotics engineering and technologies, Augmented 
Reality 
Smart 
internetdriven  devices  such  as  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  and 
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) devices [6]. The implications 
of this emerging world as foreseen are likely major disruption 
in  human  way  of  living  as  day-to-day  activities  may  be 
predominantly  virtual  and  smart.  There  are  likelihood  of 
continuous  reduction  of  geographical  boundaries  through 
video conferencing, tele-medicine, virtual meetings, software 
driven  Virtual  learning  environment,  virtual  conferencing, 
machine-to-machine  communication  [4],  machine-to-human 
communication  [3]  and  so  on.  These  will  in  no  doubt  bring 
about  demand  for  new  skill-sets  to  help  manage  evolving 
nearly  and  full  autonomous  systems,  artificially  intelligent 
embedded devices, highly connected smart devices, networks 
and Cloud-dependent technologies. 

This also has large implications in Cyber-Security [2] with the 
emergent of sophistication in cyber-attack landscapes through 
bio-inspired  and  Artificial  Intelligent  (AI)-based  cyber-attacks 
[7].  Furthermore,  it  will  in  no  small  measure  affect  teaching 
and learning [8], [9] and hence a demand for content-shift in 

 
 
 
curriculum and programmes that will support fusion of Cyber-
Security  and  Data  Science,  Cyber-Ranges  and  Security  Test-
Beds,  interconnection  of  Information  Technology  (IT)  to 
Operational  Technology  (OT)  [4]  [3]  leading  to  smart  and 
additive  manufacturing,  smart  everything  –  city,  hospital, 
transport and so on. In lieu of these dynamism, there will be 
needs to re-define Privacy for AI efficiency, provide broad AI 
ethics, practices such as Cyber-hygiene [2] as well as existing 
laws and regulations. This is because it is projected that in the 
nearer  future,  internet  may  have  more  information  about  a 
person than families and closest relatives should have [2]. The 
possibilities of new field of studies are expected such as Cyber-
Microbiome,  Cyber-Anthropology,  Cyber-Psychology,  Cyber-
Data Science and so on. 

Beyond  recognising  these  foreseeable  implications  of  the 
emerging  technologies,  this  study  aims  to  assess  how  ready 
academia in developing economies like Nigeria  are prepared 
to  leverage  the  potentials  of  this  high-technologies  in  this 
emerging new world so as to leapfrog her social, educational, 
political development indices. In doing this, the authors of this 
paper recognises the importance of education as being central 
to  this  emerging  world  by  enabling  the  development  of 
required intangible assets that form the breeding ground for 
this  emerging  highly  technological  and  knowledge-driven 
economy [10]. In view of this, a survey is designed with the aim 
of eliciting knowledge on the readiness of Nigerian academics 
of  this  emerging  new  world  viz-a-viz  the  conceptualisation, 
understanding of the implications to teaching and learning as 
well as research and knowledge development. The efforts in 
requisite  classroom  administration, 
preparing 
manpower  needs,  existing  or  emerging  legal  and  policy 
frameworks to supports the application of these technologies 
in improving our industries, protect and promote intellectual 
properties  alongside  existing 
infrastructure  to  support 
learning and practice of this emerging new way of doing things. 

the 

for 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organised  as  follows:  Section  II 
focused on critically reviewing relevant literature to ascertain 
the requisite knowledge gap, while Section III explored existing 
knowledge on the practises in the industry in relation to cyber-
security culture especially within the dynamics of cyber-attack 
landscape. Section V provides information on how education 
is being transformed by the emerging world, the requisite skill-
sets  that  will  dominate  the  new  world  and  the  views  of  the 
stakeholders  that  providing  these  new  skills  will  enable  the 
society to benefit from the potentials of the new era. Section 
VI provided information on the survey materials and method 
such  as  population  sample  and  the  ways  and  manner  the 
survey were carried out, while Section VII provided the survey 
results using Table and Figure for proper visualisation. These 
were  followed  with  detailed  analysis  and  discussion  on  the 
results obtained. The paper concluded with Section VIII, where 

authors  views  and  findings  on  the  paper  were  laid  with 
relevant recommendations based on the results. 

II.  REVIEW OF RELATED WORKS 

Industry  4.0 

to  Catal  and 
is  premised  according 
Tekinerdogan  in  [11]  on  emerging  new  technologies  that 
include Internet of Things, Data Science, Artificial Intelligence 
and her sub-fields of Deep Learning, Augmented Reality, Edge 
computing and Digital twins. The authors posit that these bring 
with  it  new  opportunities  with  attendant  challenges  and 
solutions in many domains of human endeavours. In relation 
to  these  disruptive  technologies  they  further  stated  that 
requisite  set  of  academic  curriculum  are  needed  to  tackle 
them  and  hence  the  need  to  provide  frameworks  that  can 
support  education  in  the  emerging  new  context  of  Industry 
4.0.  The  study  provided  a  customised  academic  courses 
related  to  Industry  4.0  for  Wageningen  University  in  the 
Netherlands  as  a  result  of  their  strategic  position  in  World 
University  ranking  in  Agriculture  by  applying  project-based 
evaluations.  The  result  of  the  study  as  claimed,  beside 
developing academic courses and their curriculum that have 
paradigm shift in content befitting of Industry 4.0 era, issues 
like  skills  in  critical  thinking,  creativity,  and  problem-solving 
were addressed by it. 

Fitsilis, Tsoutsa and Gerogiannis in their paper in [12] were 
of the view that due to the perceived disruptive nature of the 
emerging industry 4.0, the demand to study the competency 
and  knowledge  need  of  the  emerging  industry  has  become 
prominent. Through their study, they presented a competence 
model to outline the knowledge dimensions and skills of the 
future,  which  they  classified  into  technical,  behavioural  and 
contextual.  Karampidis  et  al.  in  [13],  beyond  describing  the 
rationale,  aims  and  objectives  of 
InCyS  4.0  (Industrial 
CyberSecurity 4.0), outlines the proposed course material for 
it based on the outcome of their research. InCyS 4.0 is a 2-year 
industrial 
education  programme 
production 
cyber-security 
in 
vulnerabilities  in  entreprises  based  in  European  member 
nations. The project aims at creating open source educational 
material  that  will  help  address  perceived  training  needs  of 
these  class  of  personnel.  The  interesting  aspect  of  InCyS  4.0 
project  according to the authors is that the programme  was 
designed  based  on  empirical  evidence  from  the  survey 
conducted  on  the  security  weaknesses  of  the  participating 
enterprises and the extraction of the profile of the industrial 
Information  Technology  engineers  that  made  it  adapt  the 
training content to its feedback. 

targetted  at 

technicians 

handling 

training 

Furthermore, Onar et al. in [14] provided a definition of the 
new  education  requirements  suitable  for  industry  4.0,  they 

also  showed  the  emerging  patterns  and  similarities 
in 
engineering education that will take care of these requirement 
needs. Mian et al. in [15] worked on how university education 
can  be  sustained  based  on  different  factors  capable  of 
influencing  the  progression  and  enactment  of  the  system  in 
emerging industry 4.0 era. The results of their study showed 
some  fundamental  requirements  for  universities  in  Industry 
4.0.  These  include  skilled  staff,  effective  financial  planning, 
advanced  infrastructure,  increased  industrial  partnerships, 
revised curricula and carefully tailored insightful workshops. 

From  the  reviews  of  relevant  extant  literature,  there  are 
commendable interests of the academia in preparing for the 
emerging  disruptively  innovative  technologies  by  providing 
relevant  contents,  and  requisite  paradigm  shifts  in  content 
delivery in the developed economies. Majority of the papers 
focused 
in  the  area  of  engineering  such  as  InCyS  4.0 
programme,  but  literatures  suggest  that  none  has  been  on 
in  developing 
Cyber-Security  preparedness  especially 
economies.  The  reason  for  our 
in  developing 
economies like Nigeria is the perceived potentials of academia 
to lead in leapfrogging all the indices of social, education and 
political developments by keying into the emerging disruptive 
technologies,  which  is  highly  knowledge  and  technologically 
driven. Furthermore, there are strong indications that Cyber-
Security skills will be one of  the very demanding skill-sets in 
the emerging world as the more connected the world becomes 
by  blurring  the  line  between  physical,  digital  and  biological 
technologies using IoT, IIoT devices, embedded systems, etc, 
the  more  vulnerable  and  hence  the  need  for  professionals 
capable of managing the situation. 

interest 

III. 

INDUSTRY 4.0 AND CYBER-SECURITY 

Xu et al. in [2] opined that industry 4.0 will bring about quite 
a  lot  of  paradigm  shifts  in  the  way  life  is  lived  and  activities 
conducted.  Far  above  this,  it  has  appreciable  implication  in 
cyber-security as the more connected we become, the more 
conscious we will be to unethical hackers and cyber-risks as the 
use of IoT will definitely lead to increase in vulnerabilities in 
any  network  and  hence  calls 
for  greater  awareness, 
preparedness and enhanced skill-sets in cyber-security. 

One of the competitive advantage a business can have is the 
ability to proactively analyse and have fore knowledge of the 
vulnerability status of main critical assets. These assets need 
to  be  protected  against  cyber-attacks  because  of  their 
potential business impacts according to Corallo, Lazoi and Lezzi 
in [16]. The study proposed a structural classification of critical 
assets of industries within industry 4.0 alongside the potential 
adverse  effects  their  cyber-security  breaches  will  have  on 
business performance. They also stated that this outcome can 

be leveraged by academia and industry players in conducting 
future analysis and investigation in cyber-security. 

The  challenges  industry  4.0  sets  to  higher  education  and 
professional  qualification  were  studied  by  James  and 
Szymanezyk 
in  [17]  using  University  of  Lincoln,  United 
Kingdom as case study. The study proposed the use of what 
they referred to as Comprehensive, Partial and Merged models 
of  delivery.  Thus  they  posit  that  the  strategy  will  effectively 
prepare students with effective relevant industry skills that will 
make them stand out in Computer Science and Cyber-Security 
fields. 

Threat  Sophistication,  Landscapes  and  Industry  4.0:  This 
section reviews prominent cyber-attack landscape as knowing 
the  landscape  and  dynamics  will  help  predict  the  likely 
evolving nature in the emerging industry 4.0. The review will 
help bring to the fore, the needed knowledge on the evolving 
attack landscape, predict the future and get prepared through 
evolving  education  curriculum,  teaching,  learning  methods, 
research  and  knowledge  development  in  Cyber  Security  in 
order to leverage the potentials of this disruptive technologies 
for the good of our society rather than being caught unawares. 
One of such fast rising attack landscape is in the weaponisation 
of cyber-attacks using artificial intelligence. 

Cyber-Attack Sophistication: 
•  AI-based  Attacks  The  recent  advances  in  AI  have  been 
leveraged by cyber-criminals to automate attack processes 
[18], 
[19],  by  taking  advantage  of  technologically 
enhanced learning, and automation capabilities offered by 
machine 
its  subsets.  The  trend  has 
necessitated  the  pressing  need  to  develop  appropriate 
education curriculum, policies, programmes with focused 
contents, training methods and technologies. 

learning  and 

cyber-attacks 

in  medicine, 

Kaloudi  and  Li  in  [18]  reported  a  list  of  existing  AI-
enhanced  cyber-attacks,  while  Yamin,  Ullah  and  Katt  in 
[20] extensively discussed the extent AI has been used to 
weaponised 
traffic 
management and so on. It is worthy to note that majority 
of  these  attacks  targeted  interconnected  and  software 
dependent new generational embedded systems. This is 
as a result of the integration of information technologies 
into  operational  technologies  thus  narrowing  down  the 
line  of  differentiation  between  the  once  two  separate 
technologies and these have wider application in traffic 
management,  healthcare,  power,  buildings,  automotive 
systems, ships, robots, homes and transport systems. 

•  Bio-Inspired  Attacks  Stuxnet  attack  of 

2010

in 

 
Iran  [21],  [22],  [23],  [24]  is  believed  by  cyber-security 
stakeholders as an attack that changed the dynamics of 
cyber-threats. Stuxnet is a malicious computer work that 
targets supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) 
systems.  Because  the  worm  stealthily  breach  computer 
system  utilising  a  biological  epidemic  model  in  the 
communication system to propagate the attack, Chen et 
al.  [25]  coined  the  term  ‘A  Bio-inspired  Transmissive 
Attack’ to describe the scenario as exemplified in Stuxnet. 
In addition to the hidden nature of the attack, the hacker 
need  not  be  conversant  with  the  network  topology  to 
succeed.  Hence,  the 
linkage  between  transmissive 
attacks and epidemic models. 

In  the  same  vein,  de  Sa  et  al.  in  [26]  developed  the 
Backtracking  Search  Optimisation  Algorithm  (BSA)  and 
Particle  Swarm  Optimisation  (PSO).  This  is  a  two  Active 
System  Identification  attacks  developed  by  using  bio-
inspired meta-heuristics of Farah, Farah and Farah in [27] 
and tested it in a controlled environment. The goal was 
to highlight the potential impacts of automated attacks, 
especially  their  degree  of  accuracy  in  damaging  the 
Network  Controlled  Systems,  as  a  stimulus  to  develop 
solutions  that  counter  this  attack  class.  In  a  bid  to 
improve on the accuracy of the estimated models using 
BSA,  de  Sa,  Carmo  and  Machadoa  in  [28]  proposed 
statistical  refinement  for  the  outcomes  of  the  two 
optimization algorithms. 

IV. 

INTANGIBLE ASSETS AND KNOWLEDGE-BASED ECONOMY OF 

INDUSTRY 4.0 

Wealth that cannot be physically quantified in simple terms 
are referred to as Intangible assets. This is because the wealth 
in focus here are not physical in nature. The work of Bailey in 
[10], categorised it into Educational and Social capitals. While 
educational  capital  consists  of  human  capital,  including  raw 
labour in addition to the sum of knowledge, skills and know-
how of the population. Social capital in the other hand, come 
in form of beliefs, levels of trust, attitudes, behaviours and the 
quality  of  formal  and  informal  institutional  infrastructure, 
which  includes  level  of  national  stability,  transparency  and 
other  associated  elements.  Ferreira  and  Hamilton  in  [29] 
supported these views and further posit that the level of trust 
among  people  in  a  society,  the  efficiency  of  her  judiciary 
system, clear property rights and effectiveness of government 
are the yardsticks for measuring intangible assets of a nation. 
They  also  went  further  to  strengthen  their  position  by 
asserting  that  intangible  capital  boosts  the  productivity  of 
labour and results in higher total wealth as well as constitute 
the largest share of wealth in virtually all countries. 

In  the  same  vein,  while  the  rule  of  law  index  remains  the 
most suitable way of measuring the level of Social capital of a 
nation translated as a tool utilised to measure the quality of 
governance and institutions, and contributes about 57% of rich 
countries’  capital.  In  the  other  hand,  Education  (human 
capital)  is  measured  through  schooling  years  per  capita  [30] 
and provides about 36% of rich nation’s intangible assets [10], 
[29].  According  to  Cobb  in  [30]  studies  have  shown  that 
nation’s  with  well-educated  population  as  well  as  stable 
investment-friendly  environment  have  the  potentials  of 
producing greater national wealth as against that with under-
educated and unstable societies. 

Education, according to Ilori and Ajagunna in [31] especially 
higher education with requisite attention and investments has 
been  source  of  innovation,  policy  and  legal  frameworks, 
knowledge  development  and  a  great  national  asset  through 
empirical studies, knowledge creation and dissemination using 
appropriate  tools.  These  in  turn  strengthens  the  position  by 
the  authors  of  this  paper  that  one  of  the  major  ways  digital 
economy as driven by knowledge can be maximised are when 
efforts of government and relevant national stakeholders are 
geared towards providing strong national institutions, quality 
and accessible education to the citizens. As these assure the 
promotion  and  protection  of  intellectual  properties,  such  as 
patents,  trademarks  and  copyrights  as  well  as  brand 
recognition  that  are  major  drivers  of  the  digital  eco-system 
around the world. This position is supported by the works of 
Gancia  and  Zilibotti  in  [32],  Chen,  Niebel  and  Saam  in  [25], 
Cardona,  Kretschmer  and  Strobel  in  [33]  and  Kretschmer  in 
[34]. 

V.  EDUCATION CURRICULUM AND INDUSTRY 4.0 

Education,  especially  higher  education  with  requisite 
attention  and  investments  has  been  source  of  innovation, 
policy,  knowledge  development  and  a  great  national  asset 
[31]. According to Xu et al in [2], the potentials of Industry 4.0 
is disruptively innovative with likely impacts on core industries 
and  sectors  like  education,  healthcare  and  business.  Within 
the context of industry 4.0, education as a service industry will 
shift  its  focus  from  a  customer  learning  model  of  the  third 
industrial  revolution.  This  is  largely  because  of  the  blurring 
technological  lines  between  physical,  digital  and  biological 
technologies as shown in [2], [3] and hence will change the way 
in 
of  content  delivery.  This  change  will  have 
educational  curriculum,  teaching  techniques  and  mode  of 
deliveries with focus changing from mode of teaching to mode 
of  learning.  In  all,  teaching  and  learning  model  will  be 
in  approach  by  combining  the 
predominantly  blended 
traditional  face-to-face  teaching  and  learning  model  with 
virtual  teaching  and  learning  model  using  software  driven 

impact 

learning  environment 

virtual 
is  delivered  and 
administered over the internet, which the authors refer to as 
’phy-digital’ teaching and learning environment. 

that 

For  this  emerging  non-reversible  revolution  [35]  to  be 
largely  positive  in  such  a  manner  as  to  benefit  our  social, 
environmental, economic and political lives will depend largely 
on  the  efforts  of  the  stakeholders  -  researchers,  educators, 
developers  and  regulators  in keying  into  this  proactively  [3]. 
This  anticipated  collaboration  will  be  geared  towards 
developing  understanding  and  skills  commiserate  and  fit 
enough to help navigate an increasingly convergent complex 
unfolding  landscape  of  industry  4.0  through  an  overhaul  of 
educational  curriculum,  teaching  and 
learning  methods, 
administrative  technologies,  legal  and  policy  frameworks, 
value systems and cultural landscapes. 

VI.  METHOD AND SURVEY MATERIALS 

This paper aims to ascertain the information gap in the area 
of  teaching  and  learning,  skill  development,  policy  and  legal 
frameworks  in  Cyber  Security  with  regards  to  the  emerging 
industry  4.0  in  a  developing  economy,  such  as  Nigeria.  The 
research  design  followed  a  quantitative  approach  and 
administered  an  online  questionnaire  to  the  academic, 
industry  players,  researchers  and  requisite  stakeholders  to 
elicit  the  level  of  awareness,  preparedness  and  skills  been 
bequeathed in relation to the emerging disruptive industry 4.0 
era.  The  survey  focuses  on 
level  of 
awareness,  understanding,  preparedness  through  projected 
in  Nigerian 
curriculum,  technologies,  and  administration 
universities. Additionally, it investigated the research interests 
and direction being propagated by the relevant stakeholders 
to help in the dissemination of knowledge, requisite skill-sets. 
It  also  extends  to  the  development  of  the  policy  and  legal 
frameworks  that  would  be  used  in  mitigating  this  emerging 
dynamic cyber-threat landscapes as posited by Xu et al. in [2]. 

investigating  the 

The questionnaire considered 21 questions bordering on the 
main  objective  of  this  study.  Probable  respondents  were 
identified from the industry and academia ranging from Union 
leaders, Head of Departments, Directors, Senior and Middle-
level  career  personnel.  Although  the  scope  of  the  study  is 
limited to Nigeria, seven Technology Universities, one premier 
university, two conventional universities and an Agency in the 
Ministry of Communication and Digital Economy were selected 
because of their respective areas of specialisations in science, 
technology,  and  engineering.  The  Agency  was  selected  as  a 
result of her mandate in human capacity development both in 
the  academia,  government  Ministries,  Departments  and 
Agencies  in  the  areas  of  computer  literacy,  digital  soft  skills 
and  economic  development.  The  questionnaire  was 
distributed to the industry experts through their emails, which 

were obtained from their websites and several inquiries made 
through  their  respective  customer  service  officers.  Similarly, 
contacts where established in each of these universities and 
through  them,  the  questionnaire  was  shared  through  their 
WhatsApp groups. 

VII.  ANALYSIS, RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 

In  order  to  achieve  the  main  objective  of  this  study,  two 

research questions were considered: 

1)  To  what  extent  is  Nigeria  prepared  in  leveraging  the 
emerging  fourth  industrial  revolution  to  leapfrog  her 
requisite development indices. 

2)  To  what  extent  of  readiness  are  relevant  industries 
prepared  to  mitigate  the  attendant  cyber-attack 
sophistication  that  comes  with  high  level  network 
connectivity as expected in fourth industrial revolution 
of nearly ’smart everything’ 

After two months of sharing the questionnaire, a total of 
116  valid  responses  were  received.  Statistical  tools  in  SPSS 
were  used  to  perform  analysis  on  the  data  received  using 
Descriptive statistics. Tables I-VIII present the results from the 
valid  responses  from  the  questionnaire  and  indicates  the 
number of participants from the sample size of 116 that have: 

•  Result  1:  knowledge  (aware)  of  the  emerging  4th 

industrial revolution 

•  Result  2:  conducted  4IR  compliant  research  in  their 
respective  fields  such  as  an  application  of  Machine 
learning in automating a process for enhanced outputs 
•  Result 3: taught or teaching 4IR compliant subjects such 
as  Additive  manufacturing,  Cyber  Security,  etc.  Above 
that,  the  number  of  participants 
in  the  academic 
institutions that have 

•  Result  4:  attended  training  in  any  of  the  emerging  new 

fields. Furthermore, the number of: 

•  Result 5: first degree and graduate degree programmes 
that  are  4IR  relevant  being  offered  in  their  respective 
institutions. Finally on their assessment of: 

•  Result  6:  Nigerian  universities, 

and 
government  institutions  -  Ministries,  Departments  and 
Agencies readiness for the emerging new world. 

industries 

A.  Result  1:  Respondents  with  knowledge  (aware)  of  the 
emerging 4th industrial revolution. 

Valid 

Frequency 

Table I 
THOSE AWARE OF EMERGING 4IR 
Percent 

Valid Percent 

Cumulative 
Percent 

No 
Yes 
Total 

45 
70 
116 

38.5 
59.8 
98.3 

39.1 
60.9 
100 

39.1 
100 

Figure 1. Number of participants aware of emerging 4IR 

Results  from  Table  I  and  Figure  1  show  that  60%  of  the 
respondents  have  knowledge  (aware)  of  the  concept  -  4th 
industrial revolution. This therefore provides room for further 
interrogations on what they understand, their views on what 
the concept entails and the levels of preparedness envisaged 
in both University, industry and the nation in general. 

manufacturing, Augmented Reality and so on. This implies that 
despite  having  greater  percentage  of  the  respondents 
agreeing  to  know  about  the  concept,  there  is  no  significant 
contribution from the academic world in providing empirical 
results that will guide in developing appropriate policies in line 
with  the  requirements  of  the  emerging  4th 
industrial 
revolution.  Since  17%  of  the  respondents  agreed  to  have 
conducted such relevant research, their contributions are not 
to be deemed sufficient and hence conclude that not much are 
being  done 
in  developing  requisite  knowledge  through 
empirical studies in these domains in Nigeria. 

Result  3:  The  number  of  respondents  that  have  are 

C. 
teaching or may have taught 4IR compliant subjects such as 
Additive manufacturing, Cyber Security, etc 

Table III 
TEACHING 4IR RELEVANT SUBJECTS 

Valid 

Frequency 

Percent 

Valid Percent 

No 
Yes 
Total 

84 
32 
116 

72.4 
27.6 
100 

72.4 
27.6 
100 

Cumulative 
Percent 

72.4 
100 

Figure 3. Number of participants that are teaching 4IR relevant courses 

Table IV 
WHEN ATTENDED A 4IR RELEVANT TRAINING 

Table II 

NUMBER OF INSTITUTIONAL BASED RESEARCH RELEVANT TO 4IR 

Valid 

Frequency 

Percent 

Valid Percent 

No 
In Process 
Yes 
Total 

91 
5 
5 
116 

79 
4.3 
16.7 
100 

79 
4.3 
16.7 
100 

Cumulative 
Percent 

79 
83.3 
100 

Figure 2. Number of participants that have conducted 4IR relevant research 

Valid 

Frequency 

Percent 

Valid Percent 

B. 
Result  2:  The  number  of  respondents  that  have 
conducted  4IR  compliant  research  in  their  respective  fields 
such  as  an  application  of  Machine  learning  in  automating  a 
process for enhanced outputs. 

From  Table  II  with  visualisation  in  Figure  2,  79%  of  the 
respondents have not conducted any 4IR related research such 
as  in  the  areas  of  Machine  Learning,  Robotics,  Addictive 

None 
<1yr 
1-2yrs 
3-4yrs 
Total 

41 
37 
23 
15 
116 

35.3 
31.9 
19.8 
13.0 
100 

35.3 
31.9 
19.8 
13.0 
100 

Cumulative 
Percent 

35.3 
67.2 
87.0 
100 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 

116 

100 

100 

Figure 5. Number of 4IR relevant degree programme in their respective 
Universities 

Table VI 
NUMBER OF GRADUATE DEGREE PROGRAMMES THAT ARE 4IR RELEVANT IN THEIR 
RESPECTIVE UNIVERSITIES 
Valid Percent 

Frequency 

Percent 

Valid 

Cumulative 
Percent 

None 
1-2 
3-4 
5+ 
Total 

53 
32 
14 
17 
116 

45.7 
27.6 
12.0 
14.7 
100 

45.7 
27.6 
12.0 
14.7 
100 

45.7 
73.3 
85.3 
100 

Figure 6. Number of 4IR relevant graduate degree programmes in their 
respective Universities 

that 

their  various 

With  59%  of  the  respondents  in  Table  V  and  Figure  5 
institutions  offer  varying 
agreeing 
undergraduate  degree  programmes  in  4IR  relevant  areas;  as 
29% confirmed offering 1-2 undergraduate programmes, while 
12% offer about 3-4 of such programmes and 18% of from 5 
programmes and above. This percentage surpasses the 41% of 
the respondents who said their institutions are not in any way 
offering any 4IR compliant undergraduate programmes. 

The above results are similar to the responses received with 
regards  to  graduate  programmes  undertaken  by  various 
institutions of higher learning in Nigeria. From the responses, 
54%  as  shown  in  Table  VI  and  Figure  6  offer  various  4IR 
compliant graduate degree programmes. Of these responses 
27%  posit  that  their  institutions  have  about  1-2  graduate 
degrees being awarded in 4IR relevant fields, while about 12% 

Figure 4. The last time participants attended 4IR relevant training 

D. 
Result  4:  The  number  of  respondents  that  have 
attended training in any of the emerging new fields in the last 
couple of years. 

Table III and Figure 3 from the survey results show that only 
28%  of  the  academics  agree  they  are  teaching  4IR  relevant 
subjects in their various institutions of higher learning. While 
72%  are  of  the  opinion  that  they  are  not  teaching  anything 
relevant  to  the  emerging  world.  These  results  suggest  that 
relevant educational stakeholders in Nigeria appear not to be 
doing  much  with  regards  to developing  requisite  subjects  or 
courses and curriculum tailored in manpower training in the 
emerging  new  technologies.  The  implications  of  these  are 
enormous  and  cannot  be  over-emphasised  as  not  having 
requisite  manpower  in  the  emerging  domains  of  human 
endeavours will limit the opportunities of the citizens and the 
nation  in  leveraging  the  potentials  offered  by  these  smart 
technologies. 

However, with about 37% of the respondents in Table IV as 
visualised  in  Figure  4  agreeing  to  have  attended  training 
relevant to the emerging world in recent times in comparison 
with  20%  obtained  in  the  last  2-3  years  and  13%  in  the  3-4 
years.  These  show  an  increasing  awareness,  training  and 
activities in developing the requisite skill-sets and by extension 
manpower  required  to  fill  in  the  gap  in  the  coming  years  in 
Nigeria. 

E. 
Result  5:  The  number  of  degree  programmes  and 
graduate degrees that are 4IR relevant being offered in their 
respective institutions. 

Table V 
NUMBER OF DEGREE PROGRAMME THAT ARE 4IR RELEVANT IN 
THEIR RESPECTIVE UNIVERSITIES 
Valid Percent 
Percent 

Frequency 

Cumulative 
Percent 

48 
33 
14 
21 

41.4 
28.4 
12.1 
18.1 

41.4 
28.4 
12.1 
18.1 

41.4 
69.8 
81.9 
100 

Valid 

None 
1-2 
3-4 
5+ 

 
 
 
 
 
consent to having 3-4 of such programmes and 15% shows the 
availability of 5 and above of such graduate degrees. 

Comparing the results from Tables V, VI and Figures 5, 6 with 
that of Tables II, III and Figures 2, 3 provide good insight for 
further  analysis.  The  elements  of  first  degree  or  graduates 
degree programmes any where in the world are the subjects 
or  courses  they  contain.  That  is  to  say,  each  programme  is 
made of subjects or courses with curriculum tailored to meet 
its  aim  and  objectives  in  manpower  development  through 
impacting requisite skill-sets in line with the discipline’s core 
mandates.  A  closer  look  at  responses  from  Table  III  as 
elaborated in Figure 3 show that the institutions represented 
are not doing much in teaching requisite subjects or courses 
that  are  4IR  compliant.  It  therefore  suggests  that  if  a  good 
number  of  programmes  in  4IR  relevant  fields  exist  without 
having  requisite  subjects  or  courses  being  taught  in  these 
fields  or  disciplines,  the  programmes  being  undertaken  in 
these institutions may be deemed as more of buzz words or 
nomenclatures. 

F.  Result  6:  Measuring  Nigerian  universities,  industries  and 
government institutions readiness for the emerging new world 
through the opinions of the major stakeholders. 

Table VII 
VIEWS ON UNIVERSITIES READINESS FOR 4IR COMPLIANCE 
Frequency 

Valid Percent 

Percent 

Cumulative 
Percent 

70 
17 
29 
116 

60.3 
14.7 
25.0 
100 

60.3 
14.7 
25.0 
100 

60.3 
75.0 
100 

Valid 

No 
Maybe 
Yes 
Total 

With about 60% of the respondents in Table VII, Figure 7 and 
60%  of  the  respondents  in  Table  VIII  and  Figure  8  indicating 
that higher educational institutions in Nigeria,  industries and 
government  are  not  showing  strong  commitment 
in 
developing programmes, policies and laws that will enable her 
leverage the advantages of the emerging fields in closing their 

Table VIII 
VIEWS ON NIGERIAN’S READINESS FOR 4IR COMPLIANCE 

Valid 

Frequency 

Percent 

Valid Percent 

No 
Maybe 
Yes 
Total 

69 
26 
21 
116 

59.5 
22.5 
18.0 
100 

59.5 
22.5 
18.0 
100 

Cumulative 
Percent 

59.5 
82 
100 

Figure 8. Figure showing views on Nigerian’s readiness for 4IR compliance 

development gaps. It is therefore the opinion of the authors 
that  the  above  results  and  discussions  provide  empirical 
evidence to answer these research questions: 

•  how  prepared  Nigeria  is  in  leveraging  the  emerging 
fourth  industrial  revolution  to  leapfrog  her  requisite 
development indices? and 

•  how  prepared  the  relevant  industries  are  in  mitigating 
the  attendant  cyber-attack  sophistication  that  comes 
with high level network connectivity as expected in fourth 
industrial revolution of nearly ’smart everything’. 

VIII.  CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

The  emerging  fourth 

industrial  revolution  has  been 
predicted  to  be  very  disruptive  in  ways  and  manner  human 
conduct daily life activities. It has also been predicted to be a 
mixture of virtual and real-life activities with modern machine-
to-machine communications, which will largely reduce human 
interventions in production industry and service deliveries. It 
is  in  line  with  the  foregoing,  this  research  was  premised.  It 
focuses  on  finding  out  how  prepared  developing  economies 
like  Nigeria  is  in  tapping  into  the  promised  potentials  of  the 
budding new world so as to create better living conditions to 
her largely youthful population. It went further to examine the 
level  of  preparedness 
foreseeable 
proliferation  of  threats,  especially  computer-based  threats 
such  as  cyber-attacks  that  come  with  highly  connected 
computer systems, networks and devices. 

in  mitigating 

the 

Figure 7.  Figure showing views on Universities’ readiness for 4IR 
compliance 

This work was able to answer two research questions on the 
level of Nigerians preparedness in tapping into the promises of 
4IR to better the living conditions of her citizens as well as that 
of capacity development in standing up against the attendant 

 
 
 
 
risks. From the survey conducted, 60% of the respondents are 
of  the  view  that  Nigerian  governments  at  all  levels  are  not 
showing  enough  evidence  to  demonstrate  her  preparedness 
to  leverage  these  promised  potentials  as  well  as  making 
adequate  efforts  in  developing  capacity  to  mitigate  risks 
associated with digital eco-system. 

In  line  with  developing  requisite  skill-sets  commensurate 
with  the  emerging  technologies  by  the  higher  educational 
institutions,  available  results  suggest  that  a  good  number 
programmes  in  4IR  relevant  fields  are  being  offered  in  both 
undergraduate (52%) and post-graduate (47%) degree levels. 
But  in  the  contrary  there  are  few  relevant  and  compulsory 
courses  (32%)  in  these  areas  being  taught  in  the  respective 
disciplines in these institutions, which is casting doubt about 
the efficacy of these programmes and the ability to produce 
relevant skill-sets that will match the emerging technological 
know-hows as well as meet various aim and and objectives of 
in  manpower  development.  However, 
these  disciplines 
responses  suggest  that,  there  are  increasing  awareness  and 
training over the last five years by the academic stakeholders 
in these directions. 

Thus, this paper recommends that these tempo on training 
be sustained. Moreso, the academic community should focus 
more attention in conducting deep rooted scientific research 
around  the  emerging  new  field  as  a  way  of  developing  their 
own  capacities  to  impact  relevant  skill-sets  and  as  a  way  of 
influencing policy directions, strengthening the development 
of legal and policy frameworks needed to protect intellectual 
properties,  copyrights,  and  conducive  environment.  This 
would  encourage  the  development  of 
intangible  assets 
required to spur high skilled knowledge development required 
in the emerging disruptive world. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

FUNDING 

Not applicable. 

Not applicable. 

ABBREVIATIONS  All  acronyms 

were properly defined in the paper. 

AVAILABILITY OF DATA AND MATERIALS 

All data analysed and used in this paper are both secondary 
and primary, while the secondary data were publicly available 
data, the primary were collected using an online questionnaire 
administered to selected respondents. 

COMPETING INTERESTS 

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION 

All authors have read and agreed to the published version of 

the manuscript. 

AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTIONS 

This  paper  was  conceptualised  and  formally  analysed  by 
Elochukwu  Ukwandu  and  Ephraim  Okafor.  While  Elochukwu 
Ukwandu and Charles Ikerionwu carried out the investigation. 
The methodology was developed by Elochukwu Ukwandu and 
Comfort  Olebara.  Furthermore,  the  administration  and 
supervision  of  this  paper  were  carried  out  by  Elochukwu 
Ukwandu, Ephraim Okafor, Celestine Ugwu, Comfort Olebara, 
and Charles Ikerionwu. Comfort Olebara did the data analysis 
and Celestine Ugwu did the result validation. Formal writing of 
the  paper  that  produced  original  draft  were  done  by 
Elochukwu  Ukwandu  and  Charles 
Ikerionwu.  Elochukwu 
Ukwandu,  Charles 
Ikerionwu,  Ephraim  Okafor,  Comfort 
Olebara and Celestine Ugwu reviewed and edited the paper. 
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of 
the manuscript. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  K. Schwab, The fourth industrial revolution. 
[2]  M.  Xu,  J.  M.  David,  S.  H.  Kim  et  al.,  “The  fourth  industrial  revolution: 
journal  of  financial 

International 

Currency, 2017. 

Opportunities  and  challenges,” 
research, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 90–95, 2018. 

[3]  A.  D.  Maynard,  “Navigating  the  fourth  industrial  revolution,”  Nature 

[4] 

nanotechnology, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 1005–1006, 2015. 
J. Bloem, M. Van Doorn, S. Duivestein, D. Excoffier, R. Maas, and E. Van 
Ommeren, “The fourth industrial revolution,” Things Tighten, vol. 8, pp. 
11–15, 2014. 

[5]  T.  Philbeck  and N.  Davis,  “The  fourth industrial  revolution,”  Journal  of 

International Affairs, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 17–22, 2018. 

[6]  G.  Li,  Y.  Hou,  and  A.  Wu,  “Fourth  industrial  revolution:  technological 
drivers,  impacts  and  coping  methods,”  Chinese  Geographical  Science, 
vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 626–637, 2017. 

[7]  E.  Ukwandu,  M.  A.  B.  Farah,  H.  Hindy,  D.  Brosset,  D.  Kavallieros,  R. 
Atkinson,  C.  Tachtatzis,  M.  Bures,  I.  Andonovic,  and  X.  Bellekens,  “A 
review  of  cyber-ranges  and  test-beds:  Current  and  future  trends,” 
Sensors, vol. 20, no. 24, p. 7148, 2020. 

[8]  B. E. Penprase, “The fourth industrial revolution and higher education,” 
Higher education in the era of the fourth industrial revolution, vol. 10, pp. 
978–981, 2018. 
J. Butler-Adam, “The fourth industrial revolution and education,” South 
African Journal of Science, vol. 114, no. 5-6, pp. 1–1, 2018. 

[9] 

[10]  R. Bailey, “The secrets of intangible wealth,” Wall Street Journal, p. A9, 

2007. 

[11]  C.  Catal  and B.  Tekinerdogan,  “Aligning  education for  the  life  sciences 
domain to  support  digitalization and  industry  4.0,”  Procedia  computer 
science, vol. 158, pp. 99–106, 2019. 

[12]  P.  Fitsilis,  P.  Tsoutsa,  and  V.  Gerogiannis,  “Industry  4.0:  Required 
personnel competences,” Industry 4.0, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 130–133, 2018. 
[13]  K.  Karampidis,  S.  Panagiotakis,  M.  Vasilakis,  E.  K.  Markakis,  and  G. 
Papadourakis,  “Industrial  cybersecurity  4.0:  Preparing  the  operational 
technicians for industry 4.0,” in 2019 IEEE 24th International Workshop 

on  Computer  Aided  Modeling  and  Design  of  Communication  Links and 
Networks (CAMAD). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6. 

[14]  S. C. Onar, A. Ustundag, Ç. Kadaifci, and B. Oztaysi, “The changing role of 

engineering education in industry 4.0 era,” in Industry 4.0: 
managing the digital transformation.  Springer, 2018, pp. 137–151. 
[15]  S.  H.  Mian,  B.  Salah,  W.  Ameen,  K.  Moiduddin,  and  H.  Alkhalefah, 
“Adapting  universities  for  sustainability  education  in  industry  4.0: 
Channel of challenges and opportunities,” Sustainability, vol. 12, no. 15, 
p. 6100, 2020. 

[16]  A.  Corallo,  M.  Lazoi,  and  M.  Lezzi,  “Cybersecurity  in  the  context  of 
industry  4.0:  A  structured  classification  of  critical  assets  and  business 
impacts,” Computers in industry, vol. 114, p. 103165, 2020. 

[17]  Y. James and O. Szymanezyk, “The challenges of integrating industry 4.0 
in cyber  security—a perspective,”  International  Journal  of  Information 
and Education Technology, vol. 11, no. 5, 2021. 

[18]  N.  Kaloudi  and  J.  Li,  “The  ai-based  cyber  threat  landscape:  A  survey,” 

ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 2020. 

[19]  M.  Brundage,  S.  Avin,  J.  Clark,  H.  Toner,  P.  Eckersley,  B.  Garfinkel,  A. 
Dafoe, P. Scharre, T. Zeitzoff, B. Filar et al., “The malicious use of artificial 
intelligence:  Forecasting,  prevention,  and  mitigation,”  arXiv  preprint 
arXiv:1802.07228, 2018. 

[20]  M. M. Yamin, M. Ullah, H. Ullah, and B. Katt, “Weaponized ai for cyber 
attacks,”  Journal  of  Information  Security  and  Applications,  vol.  57,  p. 
102722, 2021. 

[21]  R. Langner, “Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon,” IEEE Security 

& Privacy, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 49–51, 2011. 

[22]  J. P. Farwell and R. Rohozinski, “Stuxnet and the future of cyber war,” 

Survival, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 23–40, 2011. 

[23]  T. M. Chen and S. Abu-Nimeh, “Lessons from stuxnet,” Computer, vol. 

44, no. 4, pp. 91–93, 2011. 

[24]  J. R. Lindsay, “Stuxnet and the limits of cyber warfare,” Security Studies, 

vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 365–404, 2013. 

[25]  P.-Y.  Chen,  C.-C.  Lin,  S.-M.  Cheng,  H.-C.  Hsiao,  and  C.-Y.  Huang, 
“Decapitation via digital epidemics: A bio-inspired transmissive attack,” 
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 75–81, 2016. 
[26]  A. O. de Sa, L. F. R. da Costa Carmo, and R. C. S. Machado, “Bioinspired 
active  attack  for  identification of  networked control  systems,”  in  10th 
EAI 
Information  and 
Communications  Technologies.  European  Alliance  for  Innovation  (EAI), 
2017, p. 88. 

International  Conference  on  Bio-Inspired 

[27]  M. B. Farah, A. Farah, and T. Farah, “An image encryption scheme based 
on a new hybrid chaotic map and optimized substitution box,” Nonlinear 
Dynamics, pp. 1–24, 2019. 

[28]  A. O. de Sá, L. F. d. C. Carmo, and R. C. Machado, “Bio-inspired active 
system identification: a cyber-physical intelligence attack in networked 
control systems,” Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 
1944–1957, 2020. 

[29]  S. Ferreira and K. Hamilton, “Comprehensive wealth, intangible capital, 
and  development,”  Intangible  Capital,  and  Development  (October  1, 
2010). World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, no. 5452, 2010. 
[30]  S. M. Cobb, “Quantifying the wealth of nations: The impact of intangible 
implications  for  policy  formulation,”  Amazon  News: 

capital  and 
https://tinyurl.com/sc5n94cx, p. 4, 2008. 

[31]  M. O. Ilori and I. Ajagunna, “Re-imagining the future of education in the 
era  of  the  fourth  industrial  revolution,”  Worldwide  Hospitality  and 
Tourism Themes, 2020. 

[32]  G.  Gancia  and  F.  Zilibotti,  “Technological  change  and  the  wealth  of 

nations,” Annu. Rev. Econ., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 93–120, 2009. 

[33]  M.  Cardona,  T.  Kretschmer,  and  T.  Strobel,  “Ict  and  productivity: 
conclusions from the empirical  literature,”  Information Economics and 
Policy, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 109–125, 2013. 

[34]  T.  Kretschmer,  “Information  and  communication  technologies  and 
productivity growth: a survey of the literature,” OECD iLibrary, 2012. 
[35]  L.  Goode,  “Everything  is  connected,  and  there’s  no  going  back,”  The 

Verge, 2018. 

 
