This paper is a preprint; it has been accepted for publication in 2019 IEEE World Congress on Services 
(SERVICES), 8-13 July 2019, Milan, Italy.  

IEEE copyright notice 
© 2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all 
other  uses,  in  any  current  or  future  media,  including  reprinting/republishing  this  material  for 
advertising  or promotional  purposes,  creating  new  collective  works, for resale  or  redistribution to 
servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

Blockchain Security by Design Framework for Trust 
and Adoption in IoT Environment 

Gohar Sargsyan, Nicolas Castellon, Raymond Binnendijk, Peter Cozijnsen   

CGI, The Netherlands, Email: gohar.sargsyan@cgi.com, nicolas.castellon@cgi.com, raymond.binnendijk@cgi.com, 
peter.cozijnsen@cgi.com 

Abstract—With the recent advances of IoT (Internet of Things) 
new and more robust security frameworks are needed to detect 
and mitigate new forms of cyber-attacks, which exploit complex 
and  heterogeneity  IoT  networks,  as  well  as,  the  existence  of 
many vulnerabilities in IoT devices. With the rise of block chain 
technologies  service  providers  pay  considerable  attention  to 
better  understand and adopt blockchain technologies in order 
to have better secure and trusted systems for own organisations 
and their customers. The present paper introduces a high level 
guide  for  the  senior  officials  and  decision  makers  in  the 
organisations and technology managers for blockchain security 
framework  by  design  principle  for  trust  and  adoption  in  IoT 
environments.  The  paper  discusses  Cyber-Trust  project’s 
blockchain  technology  development  as  a  representative  case 
study for offered security framework. Security and privacy by 
design approach is introduced as an important consideration in 
setting up the framework.  

Keywords—blockchain  security,  cybersecurity,  trust  and 

adoption, data protection, Internet of Things.  

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The recent advances in IoT (Internet of Things)  requires 
more  robust  frameworks  and  approaches  for  services  and 
systems to detect and mitigate more complex forms of cyber-
attacks  exploiting  the  complexity  and  heterogeneity  of  IoT 
networks. The increase in inter collectivity of consumer IoT 
devices rises more risks for the users. The rise in cyber threats 
and  cybercrime  incidents,  given  these  products  come  with 
different levels of embedded security features depending on 
the country of their origin or sale, the lack of standardisation 
in the communication protocols and practices followed in the 
operation  of  Internet of Things  (IoT)  devices  as  well  as  the 
absence of monetary incentives for manufacturers to fabricate 
more secure devices [1]. Designing new services and systems 
requires more careful consideration of all aspects of security.  
With  the  current  rise  in  popularity  of  blockchain,  more 
organizations aiming at designing solutions and services for 
consumers in IoT environments are beginning to consider this 
technology to innovate their own IT environments in the first 
place  and  then  the  services  they  offer.  With  every  new 
technology,  security  risks  are  amplified  or  diminished 
depending  on  its  characteristics.  Security  and  Privacy  by 
design approach became even more important due to new and 
more strict European Union legislations on data protection and 
security.  This  paper  offers  a  blockchain  security  by  design 
framework for IoT environments. This framework is offered 
to  be  used  by  decision  makers  in  organizations  that  are 
planning to adopt blockchain technology. The  framework is 
meant  to  be  a  high-level  practical  guide  of  the  top  security 
concerns an organization should consider when starting their 
own blockchain application or migrating a current application 

to this new environment. The paper provides insight on Cyber-
Trust  project 
the  proposed 
for  better  understanding 
framework.  One  of  the  key  considerations  is  security  by 
design approach which sets strong basis from the start of any 
technology/service development.    

II.  BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY AND SECURITY 

  and  organisations’  own 

in  conventional  databases, 

Blockchain has become a fast-rising technological trend. 
Though the origins of its popularity are in cryptocurrencies, 
we  are  now  starting  to  appreciate  this  technology  for  the 
changes it can bring in many different technologies, systems, 
IT  environments.  
services 
Blockchain technology provides some advantages that are not 
available 
IT  systems  or 
applications.  It  offers  the  possibility  to  avoid  a  central 
intermediaries,  provides  real-time 
authority,  eliminates 
settlement, reduces operational costs, and has high levels of 
transparency. These are just some of the potential advantages 
that  this  new  technology  can  contribute  to  any  new 
technologies  and  environments.  Although  since  blockchain 
can be used to enhance security, the challenage can potentially 
be 
the  performance  and  scalability.  With  every  new 
technology, also come new perspectives to security risks. In 
this way, blockchain technology is no different than any other 
modern technology- such as Cloud (Edge) computing or the 
IoT. All technology is vulnerable to security risks. 

Identifying  risks  for  new  technologies  entails examining 
the  technology  and  assessing  how  it  can  amplify  or  reduce 
certain  risks.  As  more  organizations  begin  to  consider 
blockchain technology as a possible solution to offer tot heir 
customers or innovate their own IT infrastructure, applications 
and services, it is important to consider the security risks of 
this new environment. For blockchain, this will concern risks 
brought by its key characteristics. These characteristics are its 
distributed nature, its cryptographic seal, its immutability, its 
transparency,  and  scalability  to  name  a  few.  These  new 
characteristics are at the core to understand what the security 
risks,  the  implementation  and  design  compexity  are  for  this 
new technology.  

It is important to note that blockchain technology is not a 
new technology. It’s often used to describe distributed ledger 
technologies  (DLT).  However,  understanding  the  security 
risks  of  the  complexity  of  DLT/blockchain  with  the  recent 
advancement  and  rapid  technological  evolution,  is  at  rather 
early stage.  

For  the  purposes  of  this  framework,  we  have  defined 
blockchain technology as an immutable distributed ledger of 
cryptographically signed sets of records or transactions that a 
number of parties want to continuously use and extend. These 

 
 
 
 
 
updates, or sets of updates, are saved on the ledger in the form 
of a “block”. Each of the new updates to the ledger is linked 
to  the  preceding  block  and  is  timestamped,  establishing  an 
order for the records. Blockchain technology makes use of two 
proprietary  characteristics  -  the  use  of  validation  rules  and 
their  enforcement.  Validation  rules  define  the  conditions  in 
which  the  records  and  blocks  will  be  included  in  the 
blockchain and the enforcement of validation rules work in the 
way of an algorithm or protocol that enforces rules that have 
been  entrusted  by  all  parties  that  contribute  data  to  the 
blockchain.   

of the attack surface, while decentralization means losing the 
control and authority over data, on the other handm it means 
distributed trust. Though these are presented as security risks, 
these characteristics may make a chain more secure, such as 
scalability providing  more resilience  for  the application and 
decentralization spreads the risk of a  single point of failure. 
Taking this dilemma into account, we encourage the user of 
blockchain technology to use the security of the blockchain as 
a parameter to measure the attributes and characteristics of this 
technology,  especially  when  using  data  linked  to personally 
identifiable information.  

New Perspectives to Security Concerns   

Do you Really Need a Blockchain? 

Blockchain can be simply described to be the orchestration 
of three technologies- the Internet, private key cryptography 
and a protocol governing incentives [2]. This all results in a 
secure  system  for  digital  interaction  without  the  need  for  a 
trusted  third  party  to  facilitate  digital  relationships.  In  this 
way, blockchain technology should be seen as a consortium of 
current technologies applied in a modern innovative way. As 
mentioned earlier, this technology is not suitable for all use-
cases. In order to determine if blockchain technology is ideal 
for the IT system or process in question, we suggest using the 
diagram bellow developed by IEEE [3]. The Figure 1 walks 
the  user  through  the  different  considerations  to  take  into 
account when wanting to adopt blockchain technology more 
generally. These considerations include the satisfaction with 
using  traditional  databases,  the  number  of  participants  that 
will contribute data, the level of trust among participants, and 
the level of privacy and control needed over the data.  

As  previously  stated,  blockchain  technology  presents  a 
new  perspective  on  security  issues.  Two  considerable 
attributes of this technology are it scalable and decentralized 
natures.  These  two  characteristics  of  blockchain  provide 
major  advantages  for  its  use.  These  advantages  may  also 
present  strains  on  the  security  of  the  technology.  The 
Blockchain Trilemma  is a concept that exemplifies how the 
characteristics  of  this  technology  may  pose  a  strain  on  its 
security. The blockchain trilemma is a concept that explains 
how 
scalability, 
decentralization, and security of the technology. Though this 
concept  is  not  widely  agreed  upon,  it  will  be  used  as  an 
analogy to explain how the different unique characteristics of 
this  technology  have  consequences  on  the  security  of  the 
application.  

tension  between 

is  a 

there 

the 

Decentralization:  This  is  the  attribute  at  the  core  of 
blockchain  and  the  main  tenant  upon  which  communities 
around  this  technology  were  built.  Its  decentralized  nature 
means  there  is  no  central  body  that  is  in  control  of  the 
information  being  handled.  This  means  it  is  censorship-
resistance and allows for a nearly democratic participation of 
users in the ecosystem.  

Scalability: This refers to the capability of a single node 
on  a  blockchain  network  to  handle  a  growing  amount  of 
transactions per second and thus be enlarged to accommodate 
that growth. A node can be considered scalable if it is capable 
of increasing the total output under an increase in transactions 
per  second  when  it  is  scaled  horizontally  or  vertically. 
done 
can 
Scalability 
horizontally, instantiating the same 
again so two or more nodes can 
the  increased  load.  Scalability 
also  be  achieved  vertically  by 
adding more resources such 
as  additional  memory  or 
Computer Processing Units 
(CPU) to the single node. 

node 
handle 
can 

be 

Security: This attribute 

Security 

the  Confidentiality, 

concerns  the  risks  that  particular 
blockchain technology is susceptible to. In a general sense, the 
security  concerns 
Integrity,  and 
Availability of the technology. For blockchain, confidentiality 
means  the  authentication  of  the  user  or  node  on  the  chain; 
integrity  means  the  data  on  the  chain  is  immutable  and 
authentic, and availability means the reliable use of the data 
stored and handled by the blockchain.  

The blockchain trilemma suggests that increasing any two 
of these attributes will have a decrease on the third. Choosing 
to have a highly scalable blockchain may mean the widening 

Figure 1: IEEE blockchain decision Tree (2017)  

Consensus Mechanisms  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain 

technologies  make  use  of  consensus 
mechanisms to achieve an agreement on a single data value 
without  a  centralized  authority.  Two  of  the  most  prominent 
consensus  mechanisms  are  known  as Proof of Work (PoW) 
and Proof of Stake (PoS). There are many other widely used 
consensus  mechanisms  at  the  moment,  including  Proof  of 
Identity,  Proof  of  Capacity,  Proof  of  Burn,  and  Proof  of 
Authority  (PoA).  Consensus  mechanisms  ensure  that  all 
transactions within a block are agreed upon before adding a 
new  block.  As  part  of  this  wider  verification,  blockchain 
technology makes use of miners that create new blocks and to 
verify these transactions, very much in the same way we may 
hire an accountant to review financial information. Miners are 
selected in accordance with the chosen consensus mechanism, 
and  the  miners  who  successfully  respond  will  verify 
transactions  and  also  create  new  blocks  on  the  blockchain. 
Various consensus mechanisms will do this in different ways. 

Proof of Work does this by letting miners solve encrypted 
puzzles.  The  first  miner  to  solve  the  encrypted  puzzle  will 
verify the transaction, create a new block, and announces the 
solution  to  the  entire  network.  In  return  for  this  work,  the 
miner gets a reward in the form of an amount of the crypto-
currency being transacted. Without the reward system, miners 
would not be willing to solve the puzzles, so it is important to 
be aware of the importance of the reward system. Hardware to 
mine  transactions  is  expensive  and  requires  a  significant 
amount of electricity to power. This leads to miners operating 
in  consortiums  known  as  Mining  Pools.  These  offer  miners 
the opportunities to pool resources to mine a block, spread the 
risks, and split the rewards.  

Proof of Stake differs significantly from a proof of work 
system.  Instead of building blocks through work output, the 
share or stake in a cryptocurrency determines the creator of a 
block. In other words, the bigger the share that a miner owns, 
the more mining capabilities a miner will have.  This allows a 
miner to only mine  a percentage of the transactions that are 
similar to its own share.  

 Public, Private and Hybrid Blockchains 

Blockchain technology can be explained in terms of access 
to  a  transaction,  defining  public,  private,  and  hybrid 
blockchains,  and  can  be  defined  by  access  to  transaction 
processing  creating  the  distinction  between  permission  and 
permissionless blockchainblock chain network.   

Permissionless Blockchain: In permissionless networks, 
any user is able to join and begin interacting with the network, 
such as submitting transactions, adding entries to the ledger, 
running nodes on the system, and verifying transactions.  

Permissioned Blockchain: In a permissioned blockchain, 
the network owner decides who can join the network and only 
a few members are allowed to verify blocks.  

Public Blockchain: A public blockchain has entirely an 
open read access and anyone can join and write in the network. 
Public blockchains often work with Proof of Work consensus 
mechanisms to incentivize participation.  

Private  Blockchain:  A  private  blockchain  often  is  the 
opposite  of  a  public  blockchain  and  only  authorized 
participants  have  read  access  and  can  write  and  join  the 
network. Often this requires an invitation to join, subsequently 
either  the  network  starter  or  a  set  of  rules  put  in  place, 
determine if someone is fit to join.  

Hybrid Blockchain: A hybrid blockchain, also known as 
a  consortium blockchain,  uses attributes of both private  and 
public  chains.  It  refers  to  a  closed  environment  in  which 
various parties work together in sharing data and transactions. 
Members can also determine which transactions can remain 
public and which have to be restricted to a smaller group of 
members.  The Table 1 below provides a quick overview of 
the differences between public and private blockchain types 
and their characteristics. 

Table 1: Comparison between Public and Private blockchain 

Blockchain Security Framework  

Like all other technologies, blockchain faces a number of 
security risks that are amplified and minimized accordingly to 
its unique characteristics. An example of this can be seen in 
blockchain’s  consensus  mechanism,  where  it both amplifies 
and  reduces  different  security  risks.  In  terms  of  amplifying 
threats,  consensus  mechanisms  may  make  certain  types  of 
blockchains vulnerable to a 51% attack where an attacker can 
overpower  the  network  and  effectively  monopolize  and 
control the application. By controlling the network, attackers 
would  be  able  to  prevent  new  transactions  from  gaining 
confirmations, allowing them to halt payments between some 
or all users. They would also be able to reverse transactions 
that were completed while they were in control of the network, 
meaning they could double-spend cryptocurrencies. In terms 
of  minimizing  security  risks,  this  attribute  ensured  that 
altering data on a chain is significantly more difficult as the 
data has been encrypted and cross-checked by other peers in 
the  network.  There  are  several  more  examples  of  this  sort, 
where blockchains specific characteristics can reduce and at 
the  same  time  increase  security  risks.  For  this  reason,  it  is 
recommended to assess this technology with a minimum set 
of security controls.  

information  systems, 

This  minimum  set  of  controls  take  care  of  common 
security risks ranging from operational such as access control 
and secure system development, to strategic such as security 
policies  for  your  organization.  If  an  organization  is  not 
is 
developing  or  maintaining 
recommended to have a basic level of understanding of what 
are  common  security  good  practices.  This  understanding 
allows  organizations  to  challenge  IT  suppliers  on  how  they 
implement  security  controls  for  the  applications  that  are 
requested.  For  a  high-level  overview  of  these  security 
controls,  it  is  recommended  to  use  ISO/IEC  27001:2013  or 
NIST version 1.1 as a baseline. This framework presents 14 
security considerations for secure blockchain applications, of 
which are divided into four categories:  

it 

Blockchain specific: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This category  will  describe  security  issues  that are  most 
amplified by blockchain technology. The issues presented in 
this category are not unique to blockchain technology but are 
amplified  by  the  technologies  characteristics.  These  will 
include smart contracts, forks, cryptographic algorithms, and 
cryptographic key management.  

Network and Infrastructure: 

This  category  will  describe  how  blockchain  should  be 
considered  for  operations  and  the  general  IT  infrastructure. 
These considerations will consist of access control, scalability, 
intrusion  detection,  targeted  attack  resistance,  and  data 
propagation attack resistance.  

Operational and Organizational: 

This category will highlight security issues that affect an 
organization at an operational and organizational level. These 
security considerations are not unique to blockchain, but must 
not  be  forgotten  when  implementing  or  adopting  this 
technology.  These  include  operations  and  communications 
security,  system  acquisition,  development  and  maintenance, 
asset  management,  human  resource  security,  and  supplier 
relationships.  

Management-level:  

This  category  will  highlight  considerations  for  an 
organization’s management level. They are also not unique to 
this  technology  but  are  crucial  for  establishing  a  culture  of 
secure  development,  implementation,  and  operation  of  this 
information 
technology.  These  include  organization  of 
security,  information  security  policies,  and  external  and 
internal compliance.  

The  Table  2  gives  an  overview  of  the  level  of  influence  an 
organisation  can  have  in  mitigation  the  blockchain  security 
considerations[4]. 

Table 2: Comparison between Public and Private blockchain 

Blockchain technology Risks when Migrating  

Migrating  an  application  or  process  to  a  blockchain 
architecture  will  require  an  additional  list  of  topics  to  be 
considered.  Though  blockchain  has  attributes  that  make  it 
different than other technologies and architectures, it should 
be assessed like any other technology. The following is a list 
of comprehensive operational security risk considerations. It 
is  important  to  note  that  the  considerations  have  been 
formulated  under  the  assumption  that  organizations  will  be 
adopting  a  blockchain  technology  and  not  developing  a 
proprietary  chain:  choosing  the  right  blockchain,  special 
considerations 
training,  
contingency  planning,  simplicity  as  a  security  measure  and 
privacy. [4]. 

awareness 

testing, 

and 

for 

Considerations for Privacy  

to 

linked 

illustrating 

It is a current trend for privacy concerns in Europe to be 
the  General  Data  Protection 
automatically 
Regulation (GDPR), which became directly applicable in all 
member states on 25 May 2018. Given its importance, we will 
focus  on 
the  GDPR, 
understanding 
the  roles  of  Data  Processor  and  Data 
Controllers in this context, and the risks to personal data [5]. 
This  chapter  will  take  a  closer  look  at  the  roles  of  the  data 
processor and data controller, the preferred type of blockchain 
in  terms  of  privacy,  the  rights  of  the  data  subjects  in  the 
context of a blockchain application, and will discuss hashes in 
the context of the GDPR.   

the  applicability  of 

this  obligation 

The GDPR poses serious challenges for organizations that 
have to comply in order to avoid fines.  Blockchain technology 
if  personal  or 
is  not  exempted  from 
pseudonymous data is involved in the process. One has to be 
aware of the fact that the GDPR still causes uncertainty about 
the interpretation of certain articles in it. Organizations face 
the  same  challenges  with  blockchain  applications.  When 
considering  blockchain  technologies,  it  is  important  to 
consider the relationship between controller and processor and 
the user’s rights.  

 Controller vs. Processor 

The  first  main  concern  lies  in  defining  the  roles  of 
controller and processor for the blockchain application. In the 
GDPR the controller is defined as the natural or legal person, 
public authority, agency or other body which, alone or jointly 
with  others,  determines  the  purposes  and  means  of  the 
processing of personal data [5]. The processor can be defined 
as the natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other 
body which processes personal data on behalf of the controller 
[5].The  processing  of  personal  data  within  a  blockchain 
presumes that there is no hierarchical relationship between the 
participants.  Each  participant  is  therefore  equal  and  able  to 
contribute and make use of the date as seen fit [6]. If there are 
other  agreements  in  place,  this  could  prove  to  be  the 
exception.  

For blockchain applications, a controller can be defined as 
the participants of a blockchain who have the right to write on 
the  chain and who decide to send data for validation by the 
miners [7]. More specifically, a controller can be more closely 
defined  as  a participant  that  is  seen  as  a  natural person that 
processes  personal  data  related 
to  a  professional  or 
commercial activity or when a participant is a legal person that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
registers personal data in a blockchain [7]. In other words, the 
participants that define the purpose and means of processing 
are  the  controllers,  thus  excluding  miners  from  being  a 
controller. The controller has different obligations under the 
GDPR, such as reporting a data leak. If a group of participants 
decides  to  carry  out  processing  operations  with  a  common 
purpose,  this  would  lead  to  practical  issues  with  regard  to 
governing these responsibilities. This should be addressed in 
various  ways.  One  way  to  do  this  is  by  identifying  one 
participant as the decision maker by reaching an agreement on 
how to govern as joint controllers. Another way to achieve this 
is  by  creating  a  legal  persona  such  as  an  economic  interest 
group or association [7]. This issue can likely be solved within 
a blockchain that is governed by one or a few parties.  

If parties that do not necessarily exchange personal data, 
but are contributing as nodes to the blockchain network, it can 
be assumed that these parties can be considered processors [7]. 
In other words, one could say that all the nodes that are not 
specifically defined as being controllers could be considered 
processors  since  they  all  contribute  as  a  node  to  the 
processing, creation, and maintenance of the data on the chain. 
Consequently,  all  the  controllers  have  to  enter  into  a 
processing  contract  with  the  processors.  In  a  small  private 
blockchain this is quite manageable, yet in a larger private or 
public  blockchains,  this  is  a  more  complicated  matter. 
Organizations  should  be  aware  that  there  is  no  legal 
precedence on this matter, thus European case law could lead 
to different interpretations. For this same reason, it is currently 
unclear  what  the  definition  of  processors  could  mean  for 
public blockchains and what legal obligations controllers have 
with regard to processors.  

From  a  privacy  perspective,  permissioned  and  private 
blockchain applications are the safe choice for organizations 
wanting  to  adopt  this  technology.  These  two  types  of 
blockchain  make  it  easier  to  identify  controllers  and 
processors.  In  return,  this  makes  the  governance  of  legal 
obligations for controllers and processors more manageable, 
as well as taking care of the contractual obligations between 
controllers and processors. It is very difficult to identify all the 
controllers and processors in a public blockchain,  making it 
questionable  if  it  is  legally  possible  to  adhere  to  the  GDPR 
when using a public blockchain.  

 Data Subject Rights  

An important component of the GDPR concerns the data 
subject rights. A data subject has six different rights under the 
GDPR:  the  right  of  access  and  rectification,  the  right  of 
erasure,  the  right  to  restrict  processing,  the  right  of  data 
portability, the right to object, and the right to not be subject 
to automated processing [5]. 

We will be focusing on three of these rights and how they 
present challenges to the use of blockchain technology. These 
three rights are the right to erasure, the right to rectification, 
and the right to limit processing. Data subject rights are at the 
core of the GDPR and present the biggest concerns as there 
are no exemptions to their compliance.  

Regarding Hashes and Personal Data  

It  is  worth  mentioning  that  at  this  moment,  a  hash  is 
considered to be personal data. The Dutch DPA provides three 
important reasons why a hash is considered as personal data 
[8]. Firstly, because the source data is often still available and 
the hash is then used in combination with a linking table; this 

leads to pseudonymization and not anonymization of the data. 
Secondly, it is theoretically feasible that hash values can be 
reproduced  using  a  brute-force  attack.  Although  it  is  rather 
difficult to brute-force a hash value back to the original data, 
this  notion  postulates  that  is  technically  possible.  Thirdly, 
organizations  often  store  the  hashes  with  other  additional 
information.  The  combination  of  those  two  could  make  it 
possible to link a person to a hash. Two of the three mentioned 
factors can be  limited by  fully  separating the  hash  from  the 
source information and other additional information, which is 
a measure that is mentioned before when discussing the data 
subject rights. 

 Compliance Beyond the GDPR 

All in all, this section highlights some specific issues to be 
taken into account when discussing personal data  processed 
on a blockchain application. Besides GDPR compliance, there 
are also  other  legal considerations  that  should be  taken into 
consideration when working with a blockchain application in 
general.  A  whitepaper  from  Pels  Rijcken  &  Droogleever 
highlights a few of these legal considerations, such as how to 
define  the  applicable  national  law  for  an  international 
blockchain,  how  to  define  legally  the  ownership  of  a 
blockchain,  legal  issues  with  regard  to  identity  within  a 
blockchain – which especially applies to public blockchains, 
legal  issues  with  regard  to  smart  contracts,  and  legal  issues 
concerning  the  monitoring  of  blockchains.i It  is  sensible  to 
delve into this matters, to make sure that a blockchain adheres 
to certain legal obligations. In addition, it is crucial to always 
take  specific  legislation  into  account,  which  is  already 
applicable to the sector in which the blockchain will be used 
[6].  Taking  these  considerations  into  account  will  bring 
organizations one step closer to adhere to its legal obligations 
when using a blockchain application.  

III.  BLOCKCHAIN AND IOT 

Quite some time blockchain is increasingly being looked 
upon in an IoT context. Blockchains have many benefits. They 
are not the answer to all challenges of the digital economy as 
sometimes  is  said  but  it’s  certain  that  they  will  play  an 
increasing role in the IoT. The intersection of blockchain and 
IoT is becoming  more  emerging  topic. What  happens  when 
the distributed IoT meets Distributed Ledger Technology. As 
IoT applications are by definition distributed it’s only normal 
that  the  distributed  ledger  technology,  which  blockchain  is, 
will  play  a  role  in  how  devices  will  communicate  directly 
between eachother (keeping a ledger and thus trail of not just 
devices but also how they interact and, potentially, in which 
state they are and how they are ‘handled’ in the case of tagged 
goods). Blockchain is designed as a basis for applications that 
involve transaction and interactions. These can include smart 
contracts,  which  are  contracts  that  are  automatically  carried 
out when a  specific  condition is met,  for instance regarding 
the conditions of goods or environmental conditions or other 
smart  applications  that  support  specific  IoT  processes.  This 
way blockchain technology can improve not just compliance 
in the IoT but also IoT features and cost-efficiency. 

IV.  CASE STUDY: CYBER-TRUST PROJECT 

The Cyber-Trust project [9] aims to develop an innovative 
cyber-threat intelligence gathering, detection, and mitigation 
platform to tackle the grand challenges towards securing the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ecosystem of IoT devices. The security problems arising from 
the flawed design of legacy hardware and embedded devices 
allows cyber-criminals to easily compromise them and launch 
large-scale  attacks 
toward  critical  cyber-infrastructures. 
Cyber-Trust  is  designed  especially  for  application  in  IoT 
domain. In particular, in order to address the challenges in the 
forensic  evidence  collection,  preservation  and  investigation 
process, for IoT environments in the smart home domain, by 
exploiting the advanced intrusion detection, distributed ledger 
technology  (DLT)  and  attack  mitigation  solutions  that  are 
being developed in the context of the Cyber-Trust project.  

Cyber-Trust offers sound solution for the monitoring and 
safeguarding  of  end-user  devices,  combining  a  range  of 
technologies  with  a  loosely-coupled,  multi-tier  and  modular 
architecture. Limitations and restrictions for its operation are 
subject  to  the  end-users'  setup  and  compatibility  between 
monitored devices. The method of architecture design applied 
within  Cyber-Trust  is  the  proven  Risk-  and  Cost-Driven 
Architecture  (RCDA)  approach.  The  advantage  of  applying 
this  method  is  that  it  supports  just-in-time  just-enough 
architectural    and  design  decision  making  throughout  the 
whole design process.  Concerns and decisions are weighed 
throughout the design process and stakeholders’ requirements 
are constantly validated against the design. The design process 
is  iterative  to  ensure  high  quality  results.  As  a  part  of  a 
complex  solution  blockchain  security  by  design  principles 
have  been  applied  to  secure  more  robust  architecture.  In 
addition, legal experts are envolved continuously at all stages: 
requirements, design and implementation.The project Cyber-
Trust  is  still  ongoing  and  development  continues.  The 
consortium  partners  has  already  shown  remarkable progress 
in achieving its goals.  

   The  integrated  Cyber-Trust  prototype  solution  will  be 
released  in  early  2020  to  undergo  two  piloting  cycles, 
capturing the needs of its major stakeholders. The first piloting 
cycle  is  planned  to  last  four  months  and  will  focus  on  the 
platform’s capability in the detection and mitigation of cyber-
attacks  and  the  solution’s  impact  when  deployed  in  a  large 
scale by an Internet Service Provider (ISP). After the end of 
this phase, the integrated platform will be refined with further 
fixes and updates, as these emerge from the needs of the ISP. 
The final version of the platform will then be tested to its full 
capabilities,  for  a  two-month  period,  by  also  involving  the 
second  key  Cyber-Trust  stakeholder,  a  LEA.  Cyber-Trust 
committed to the delivery of advanced cyber intelligence tools 
to  the open-source  community  will  publish its  final  product 
publicly on GitHub.  

We will witness the application side of the offered block 
chain security framework during the execution of the pilots. 
To date, the partners are confident that this is the way to go 
and secure more robust architecture of the system.  

V.  CONCLUSION 
   In principle, with more connectedness of  IoT (Internet 
of Things) new more robust security frameworks are needed 
to  detect  and  mitigate  new  forms  of  cyber-attacks.  Among 
other  secure  technologies,  the  importance  of  blockchain 

technologies is gaining momentum for technology companies, 
service  providers  for  their  own  IT  systems  and  also  for 
applications and services they offer to their customers. In the 
current  papers  we  introduced  the  blockchain  technology 
security framework, the security by design considerations in 
blockchainblock  chain 
trust  and  adoption 
principles, security and privacy by design principle [10] and 
data privacy. The paper is aims to be a high level guide for the 
senior  security  officials  and  decision  makers 
the 
organisations, technology, application and service providers. 
The paper also discusses a real case study, Cyber-Trust project 
applying and adopting the approach.     

technology, 

in 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This project has received funding from the European 
Union’s  Horizon  2020  research  and  innovation 
programme  under  grant  agreement  no.  786698.  This  work 
reflects authors’ view and Agency is not responsible for any 
use that may be made of the information it contains.  

[1] 

 [2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

REFERENCES 

S.  Brotsis  et  all  "Blockchain  solutions  for  forensic  evidence 
preservation in IoT environments" IEEE NetSoft 2019 

N. Baurle "What is blochchain technology?" CoinDesk. 

if 

M.E.  Peck  "Do  you  need a blockchain?  This interactive  can tell 
you 
problem"  
can 
https://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/networks/do-you-need-a-
blockchain  IEEE Spectrum, 29 September 2017 

blockchain 

solve 

your 

N.  Castellon,  P. Cozijnsen,  T.  Van Goor  "Blockchain  Security", 
for Corportae Networks; Dutch Blockchain Coalition 2018 

Article 4(7) - (EU) 2016/679 ("GDPR" - (Genral Data Protection 
Regulation) regulation in EU law on data protection and privacy 
for  all  individuals  citizens  of  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  the 
European  Economic  Area  (EEA),  Article  4(7),  Article  4  (8), 
Article 12, Article 13 

Pels Rijken artcle "Legal aspects of blockchains", page 9 2017 

CNIL  -  French  National  Commisiosn  on  Communication  and 
liberties position "Blockchain - Solutions for a responsible use of 
the blockchain in the context of personal data "- French National 
Commisiosn on Communication and liberties, page 1-3  

[8]           Dutch DPA(Data Protection Authority) 

https://autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/nl/onderwerpen/beveiliging/
beveiliging-van-persoonsgegevens 

[9]          Cyber-Trust project https://cyber-trust.eu/  

[10] 

A. Cavoukian, “Privacy by design: origins, meaning, and prospects 
for assuring privacy and trust in the information era,” in Privacy 
protection measures and technologies in business organizations: 
aspects and standards, IGI Global, 2012, pp. 170–208. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
