Leveraging Open Threat Exchange (OTX) to Understand
Spatio-Temporal Trends of Cyber Threats: Covid-19 Case Study

Othmane Cherqi 1

2 , Hicham Hammouchi 1

2 , Mounir Ghogho 1 , Houda Benbrahim2

1 Universit´e Internationale de Rabat, Faculty of Informatics and Logistics, TICLab
2 Mohammed V University, ENSIAS
Emails: {othmane.cherqi, hicham.hammouchi, mounir.ghogho}@uir.ac.ma, benbrahimh@hotmail.com

1
2
0
2

p
e
S
3

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
5
2
1
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Understanding the properties exhibited by Spatial-
temporal evolution of cyber attacks improve cyber threat intel-
ligence. In addition, better understanding on threats patterns
is a key feature for cyber threats prevention, detection, and
management and for enhancing defenses. In this work, we study
different aspects of emerging threats in the wild shared by
160,000 global participants form all industries. First, we perform
an exploratory data analysis of the collected cyber threats. We
investigate the most targeted countries, most common malwares
and the distribution of attacks frequency by localisation. Second,
we extract attacks’ spreading patterns at country level. We
model these behaviors using transition graphs decorated with
probabilities of switching from a country to another. Finally, we
analyse the extent to which cyber threats have been affected
by the COVID-19 outbreak and sanitary measures imposed by
governments to prevent the virus from spreading.
Index Terms—Cyber attack analysis, Threat

intelligence,
Spatial-temporal data analysis for cyber-crime analysis, Cyber
threats forecasting, COVID-19.

I. INTRODUCTION

Cyber threats and vulnerabilities are constantly emerging
and are becoming complex and diverse with the evolution of
technology. These emerging threats can lead to devastating
attacks causing loss of conﬁdential data, money and reputation
damage [1]. In addition, due to the current covid-19 pandemic
witnessed an explosion in the number of cyber attacks as most
activities moved to operate online, affecting both individuals
and organizations. This urges organizations to work towards
a community driven approach to enable a strong exchange of
information, knowledge and intelligence about these threats. In
this sense, organizations are joining forces and sharing Cyber
Threat Intelligence (CTI) through various platforms such as
CINS score1, Blocklist.de2, Abuse.ch3, and Alienvault OTX4.
As organizations increasingly adhere to this process, the
number of events and incidents shared is increasing exponen-
tially. Hence, automated mining and analysis of information
on these platforms is of vital importance. Understanding the
speciﬁcs of shared information and turning them into action-
able insights would help organizations anticipate cyberattacks
and mitigate their adverse effects [2].

Cyber Attacks in the Era of Covid-19: The fast spread of
COVID-19 has led to the use of certain technologies in a rapid

1https://cinsscore.com/
2http://www.blocklist.de/en/
3https://abuse.ch/
4https://otx.alienvault.com/

and unusual manner. E-learning and home-ofﬁce, for example,
have increased the number of users of certain platforms
such as Zoom and Microsoft Team as well as other video
conferencing softwares. This sudden surge of users has created
an environment favorable to the spread of cyber attacks.

In this work, we leverage information and intelligence
covering different threats targeting various countries shared on
AlienVault Open Threat Exchange (OTX). OTX is one of the
largest platforms used to share cyber threats. By the time of our
study, this platform contained 155K shared threats and 160K
global users from 144 different countries. We explore different
trends and patterns related to speciﬁc countries and malware
families. We discuss campaign (mass) and targeted attacks,
explore clusters of countries with the same characteristics,
and analyze spatial-temporal trends of these threats and their
spreading patterns across countries/organizations. In addition,
analyze in depth the period of COVID-19 and investigate the
most impacting threats.

This work attempts to answer several questions such as:
• What are the most targeted countries and common used

malware families ?

• How these attacks spread between countries?
• What are the main differences between the the pre-covid

and covid era cyberspace?

This type of analysis would help organizations better under-
stand and anticipate threats. Integrating this information would
help them understand the different techniques cybercriminals
use against them based on the different proﬁles established.
In addition, the more knowledge organizations have about the
threats in the covid era, the better they can strengthen their
defenses in the post-covid era.

The present paper is structured as follows: Next section
provides a review of the related work to this study. Section IV
presents an exploratory analysis of the cyber attacks. Section
III is a presentation of the data set used. In section V, we
identify countries clusters. Finally, in section VI, we analyse
the extent to which cyber threats trend have been affected by
the COVID-19 outbreak and sanitary measures imposed by
governments. Section VII concludes the paper.

II. RELATED WORK

Cyber attacks targeting industrial, companies and govern-
mental organizations have become widespread and several
attacks have made headlines in the last decade [3]. Recent
cyber attacks have demonstrated the growing evolution of

 
 
 
 
 
 
security incidents and the immense damage they cause: loss
of intellectual property, productivity, money and reputation [4]
[5]. Security professionals are increasingly willing to share
information about the current threats and attacks they face.
This information sharing appears to be a promising form of
early warning [6], which can be used to take preventive mea-
sures to protect information systems. It is not surprising that
both researchers and practitioners have taken the initiative to
create methods and build tools that would allow the automated
exchange of security information and use it to increase the
level of protection and threat anticipation.

Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) has become a hot topic
and researchers have worked on analyzing sharing platforms
content. Abu et al [7] identiﬁed several issues for threat data
quality on sharing platform. The study includes a survey of
common language and tools available in CTI. Sauerwein et al.
[8] proposed an exploratory study of software vendors of threat
intelligence sharing platforms. The study identiﬁed a growing
interest towards threat intelligence sharing and a lack on the
consistence of shared threats. Gschwandtner et al. [9] proposed
a framework for integrating threat intelligence within existing
information systems. They evaluated the framework and its
reliability with information security practitioners by studying
its ability to generate a vulnerability report, prioritizing critical
vulnerabilities and related mitigation activities.

Few studies explored the spatio-temporel dependencies of
cyber threats. Dowling et al. [10] analyzed temporal and spatial
large-scale cyber attacks. The paper demonstrate a favorable
correlation between the recorded activity and the established
probability. On the other hand Du et al. [11] proposed a
work ﬂow for identifying attack sources belonging to the same
coordinated attack groups.

Our work generalizes the approach in [10], [11] by con-
structing graphs for each spatial source of attacks (IPs) over
time, in order to uncover the general threat patterns followed
by attackers, and to predict incidents rates at the country level.
Cyber Security in the Age of COVID-19: The COVID-19
crisis is associated with drastic, unprecedented changes in
people’s daily live, especially related to the use of multime-
dia (E-learning, home ofﬁce...).This can lead to new crime
opportunities [12]. Online fraud and cyber-attacks have con-
siderably increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. Cyber-
threats rates have been particularly high during the periods
were the lockdown policies were the strictest [13]. Also during
the pandemic, cyber criminals have used Advanced Persistent
Threat (APT) targeted vulnerable user and systems taking
advantage of the new domestic use of technology [14] [15].

A. Data Collection

III. DATA SET

Open Threat Exchange (OTX) is a free to use crowd-
sourced computer-security platform. It is the world largest
platform of this kind with more than 160K participants in
144 countries. This data set contains incidents that targeted
particular industries and organizations in different regions of
the world. We developed our own web crawler and stored all

the incidents as raw HTML pages. We were able to extract over
than 13000 unique security events occurred between 2015 and
Sep. 2020.

B. Data Preprocessing

In this section we will brieﬂy describe how we reduced
into a structured form containing
scraped HTML ﬁles
the relevant
information about attacks. We used the semi
structured form of HTML and the tags speciﬁc to each ﬁeld to
be able to ﬁnd more easily the information we needed on each
web page. The main information we have extracted about
the incidents are: incident description, incident title, targeted
country, date of the incident and the adversary responsible of
the attack. As our goal is to predict security incidents’ rates
over governments, we need a geographical view outlining
the evolution and transition of attacks from one country/state
to another, which we ﬁnd in this dataset. The parsed pages
containing shared threats as entered by the stakeholders need
to be processed since countries names are usually misspelled.
In addition, since our approach is geographically driven, we
need to unify countries name spelling. To this end, we the
Levenshtein distance [16] to compare two strings as given by
Equation 1:

leva,b(i, j) =




min








max(i, j)

if min(i, j) = 0

leva,b(i − 1, j) + 1
leva,b(i, j − 1) + 1
leva,b(i − 1, j − 1) + 1(ai(cid:54)=bj )

otherwise.

(1)

This distance measures the difference between two strings
by examining the number of changes (i.e. insertions, deletions
or substitutions) made to a character to change one word into
another. This approach is widely used in text mining and
Natural Language Processing ﬁelds [17]. We used a dictionary
containing all the country names written correctly and use the
algorithm above to obtain a data set with homogeneous and
correct country names.

IV. ATTACKS EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS

In this section, we analyze the collected incidents data in
order to gain insight into the underlying patterns such as which
countries are most targeted, the frequency of attacks, and how
these attacks spread from country to country.

A. Most Targeted Countries

We begin by aggregating the attacks reported for each
country. That is, we aggregate the threats posted by country
name and we count the number of incidents for each one.
Fig. 1 shows a heatmap of the most attacked countries (dark
color) to the less attacked countries. Also, we observe that
the most targeted countries are, as excepted, USA, China and
Russia alongside. We can conclude that attackers tend to target
most powerful countries known as super power: USA, China,
Russia. European Union (E.U) countries combined were hit
by 31% of all the attacks. United States is subject to nearly
22.2% of the attacks. Furthermore, among 140 countries, only
17 attract 80% of the threats and 45 countries attract 99% of

it as shown by the cumulative distribution function in Figure
2.

Fig. 1. Heat map of the reported cyber incidents over countries (2016-2020)

Fig. 3. Threats evolution’s time series (2015-2020)

TABLE I
TOP 5 MOST COMMON MALWARE FAMILIES IN THE LAST 3 YEARS

Year

2019

2020

2021

Top malwares
Emotet
trojan:win32/nukesped
Dridex
ransom:win32/wannacrypt
trojan:win64/turla
Emotet
Phishing
backdoor:php/webshell
trojan:win32/qakbot

Type
Banking trojan
Ransomware
Banking trojan
Ransomware
Trojan Spy (espionage)
Banking trojan
Phishing
Backdoor
Backdoor trojan

w97m/downldr.ie.gen!eldorado MS Word macro trojan

Cobalt Strike
fp539598-vbs/loveletter.bt
revil
win32:dangeroussig
win.packed.agentino-9863792-0

Penetration tool
Mass-mailing worm
Ransomware
Trojan
Trojan

Fig. 2. Attacks cumulative percentage by countries)

C. Attacks Spreading Pattern

B. Attacks Evolution

In order to study the frequency of attacks between 2016
and 2020, we construct a time series of number of attacks.
As shown in ﬁg. 3, we observe that the time series of the
attacks is quite stationary except for the two peaks in March
and August 2017, and slight increase in January and April
2019. The two spikes of 2017 could be explained by two major
attacks, namely, WannaCry in May 2017 and the Apache Struts
vulnerability in March 2017. As for the increase in 2019, this
coincides with the Facebook user data leaks (wich came almost
exactly one year after the Cambridge Analytica scandal). Also,
the big increase in 2020 could be highly related to the covid-19
pandemic and its governmental measures.

In the same vein, looking at the most used malware families
illustrated in the table I, we observe that 2019 was character-
ized by ransomware attacks that are primarily motivated by
ﬁnancial gain. As for 2020 and with the pandemic, the attacks
began to shift from ﬁnancial gain to information seeking by
using spyware to obtain sensitive information.

In this section, we model the spreading of cyber attacks us-
ing transition probability matrix to generate transition graphs.
We assess the relationship between countries by determining
the probability of transition of the same attack from a country
to another, then, we identify ways attacks spread geographi-
cally.

1) Most Targeted Tuples: Here we try to identify the
country pairs that often appear in the same attack campaigns.
Thus the Figure 4 shows that it is generally neighbouring
countries that are often affected by the same attacks. However,
we also see that the United States is also linked to several
countries. This is explained by the fact that it is by far the
most attacked country as seen in Section IV-A.

2) Attacks’ Transition Graph: An attack can be character-
ized by 3 major elements: targeted country, adversary, and
attack type. Our objective is to analyze for each type of
attack the geographical propagation behavior. Therefore, we
only take into account two characteristics: the type of attack
and the country being attacked. Graphs are generated by
aggregating data by type of incident. We then calculate the
number of occurrences of countries in the same attack. The

concerned by wilder campaigns such as spamming campaigns
or probing (i.e, broad attacks campaigns).

(a) Targeted attack pattern on Cluster 0.

Fig. 4. Most frequent attacked pairs of countries

totals obtained are then normalized to obtain the probability
of occurrence of each tuple given the following transition
probability matrix P where pcicj is the probability of an attack
to spread from a country i to a country j :

P =









pc1c1
pc2c1
.
.
pcnc1

pc1c2
pc2c2
.
.
pcnc2









pc1cn
pc2cn
.
.

...
...
.
.
... pcncn

(2)

(b) Probing pattern on Cluster 2.

Thus pcicj

(cid:62) 1 and for all i, we have

Fig. 5. A sample of attacks pattern graphs. The size of the vertices corre-
sponds to the number of common attacks experienced by targeted countries.

n
(cid:88)

ck=1

pcick =

n
(cid:88)

ck=1

P (cm+1 = ck|cm = ci) = 1

(3)

This is because, given that an attack targeted a country ci, the
next country targeted must be one of the possible states. Thus,
when we sum over all the possible values of k, we should get
one. Hence, the sum of each row of the transition probability
matrix must be 1.
For each incident i our transition graph Gi(Vi, Ei), in which Vi
is the set of countries targeted by incident i and Ei represents
the probabilities of these countries appearing during a same
incident. Figure 5 shows a sample of attacks occurrence’s
graph. Figure 5a and Figure 5b represent the probability of
an attack to target two countries from the same country. The
two graphs differ from each other by two main components:
the number of node that corresponds to the targeted country
and the number of edges describing the attack behavior. The
two graphs bring to light two different attack’s pattern. We see
that for cluster 0 the number of targeted country is lower than
cluster 1 and the probability of two countries to be attacked
together is higher. This can mean that countries of cluster 0 are
victim of targeted attacks, aiming to hurt the same countries
each time. In the other hand cluster 2 countries may be more

V. SELF TUNED COUNTRY CLUSTERING AND OPTIMAL
NUMBER OF CLUSTERS

In this section, we do the clustering of the countries that
have been identiﬁed as having been subjected to a cyber
security incident. We do so to use this clustering to identify
homogeneous structures of countries sharing the same proper-
ties.

We choose to use Spectral clustering over K-means because
of the nature of our data. The goal of spectral clustering is to
cluster data that is connected but not necessarily compact or
clustered within convex boundaries. While k-means is more
appropriate for data close to each other (from an Euclidean
point of view).

A. Spectral Clustering Result

It is clear from this clustering that the countries belonging
to the same cluster are very close geographically. This follows
the logic that mass attacks generally target groups of border
countries. There is geographical logic behind the clustering
that appear from the results shown in Figure 6 for example :
France, UK, Italy , Sweden and Norway or Morocco, Tunisia,
Egypt and Sudan. We also see that Russia appeared alone in

AustraliaCanada0.40United States0.600.12France0.14Germany0.20Italy0.13Poland0.09Russia0.10Sweden0.07Switzerland0.08Ukraine0.081.001.00United Kingdom0.110.120.290.090.170.110.10ArgentinaChile0.50Mexico0.50Panama1.000.38Peru0.330.29Brazil0.180.20India0.22Japan0.200.19South Korea1.000.380.32Vietnam0.290.530.47SingaporeTaiwan0.490.51Turkey0.560.44Jordan1.00Ecuador0.500.50South Africa0.500.50Philippines1.00Spain0.110.150.130.110.100.100.100.100.10Nepal1.00its cluster and the USA and Canada appeared in the same
cluster as the great powers of the EU. Also the countries of
Eastern Europe are grouped together in a same cluster. The
same is true for Latin American countries. These results add
more evidences to our hypothesis that it is possible to highlight
a geographical pattern of cyber attacks.

VI. COVID-19 CASE STUDY
Since the beginning of the covid-19 pandemic in late 2019
and with the resulted curfew and lockdown policies, many
activities moved to operate online. This led to a dramatic
increase in cyber attacks targeting both individuals and or-
ganizations [15]. In this section we study the threats shared
between January 2020 and June 2021 and look at different
aspects that characterized the covid-19 era.

A. Shared threats during Covid-19

With the pandemic, governments imposed many sanitary
measures to limit the spread of the virus or begin the pro-
duction of the vaccine. As Fig. 8 illustrates, we observe an
increase in cyber threats after the launch of the vaccine clinical
trials, after the vaccination campaign have begun and recently
the increase could be attributed to the anti-lockdown protests.
This shows that covid-19 and its different events and measures
had an impact on the increase of cyber attacks around the
world.

Fig. 6. Countries Clustering using Spectral Clustering

B. Threats Time Series correlation analysis

(a) Pearson r absolute value heat
map of countries time series at-
tack

(b) Pearson r absolute value heat
map using a cross-correlation of 7
days widow size

Fig. 7. Comparison of point-wise correlation and cross-correlation

The last step of the exploratory analysis is to investigate
whether there is a pattern concerning the time factor in the
propagation of attacks. For this reason we have looked to
the correlation between the time series of attacks of different
countries by computing the Pearson Correlation Coefﬁcient.
The more the two time series are correlated, the closer the
Pearson value will be to 1 or -1, and the less they will
be, the closer the value will be to 0. Figure 7a shows the
heat map of the absolute value of Person correlation for all
countries listed. We can see that most of them are not very
correlated. And those correlated belong to the same cluster. On
the other hand, Figure 7b shows that by using a 7 days time
lag, correlation between the attacks is on clearly increasing
for most of the countries. This indicates that in addition to the
geographical link ,there is also a considerable link between
countries concerning the occurrence of security incidents with
a time lag of 7 days.

Fig. 8. Covid related events and OTX shared threats between Jan 2020 and
Aug 2021

B. Attacks targeting vaccine development

Since the launch of the research about the vaccine develop-
ment in many countries, particularly in the USA, Germany,
UK, etc. threats witnessed an increase. This increase was
mainly attributed to APT29 5 group targeting mostly countries
invloved in vaccine developement in order to spy on the pro-
duction process and breach development data. In this section,
we focus on APT29, analyze its related attack vectors and
characteristics. MITRE ATT&CK attributed several attacks ids
as techinques used by APT29 6. We used these techniques
ids to ﬁlter only shared threats related to APT29. Doing so,
we look for top malware families used by APT29, affected
industries and targeted countries. Table II shows the top 5
malware families which are mostly penetration and spying
malwares. In addition, government and manufacturing featured
as the most targeted sectors as they are related directly to the
vaccine development. As for the top targeted countries, we
found that these countries are among the ﬁrst to begin vaccine
research and production.

5https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/advisory-apt29-targets-covid-19-vaccine-

development

6https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0016/

REFERENCES

[1] E. Johns, “Cyber security breaches survey 2020,” London: Department

for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport, 2020.

[2] T. D. Wagner, K. Mahbub, E. Palomar, and A. E. Abdallah, “Cyber
threat intelligence sharing: Survey and research directions,” Computers
& Security, vol. 87, p. 101589, 2019.

[3] T. Guardian. ’petya’ ransomware attack: what is it and how can it be
stopped? [Online]. Available: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/
2017/jun/27/petya-ransomware-cyber-attack-who-what-why-how
[4] P. W. Coopers, “The global state of information security survey 2018,”

Price Waterhouse Coopers, 2014.

[5] L. Marinos, A. Belmonte, and E. Rekleitis, “Enisa threat landscape
2015,” European Union Agency for Network and Information Security,
p. 18, 2016.

[6] M. Hus´ak and P. ˇCeleda, “Predictions of network attacks in collaborative
environment,” in NOMS 2020-2020 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and
Management Symposium.

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.

[7] M. S. Abu, S. R. Selamat, A. Arifﬁn, and R. Yusof, “Cyber threat
intelligence–issue and challenges,” Indonesian Journal of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 371–379, 2018.
[8] C. Sauerwein, C. Sillaber, A. Mussmann, and R. Breu, “Threat intelli-
gence sharing platforms: An exploratory study of software vendors and
research perspectives,” INFORMATION PRIVACY AND INFORMATION
SECURITY, 2017.

[9] M. Gschwandtner, L. Demetz, M. Gander, and R. Maier, “Integrating
threat intelligence to enhance an organization’s information security
management,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on
Availability, Reliability and Security, 2018, pp. 1–8.

[10] S. Dowling, M. Schukat, and H. Melvin, “Using analysis of temporal
variances within a honeypot dataset to better predict attack type prob-
ability,” in 2017 12th International Conference for Internet Technology
and Secured Transactions (ICITST).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 349–354.

[11] H. Du and S. J. Yang, “Temporal and spatial analyses for large-
scale cyber attacks,” in Handbook of Computational Approaches to
Counterterrorism. Springer, 2013, pp. 559–578.

[12] I. C. Eian, L. K. Yong, M. Y. X. Li, Y. H. Qi, and Z. Fatima, “Cyber
attacks in the era of covid-19 and possible solution domains,” 2020,
https://www.preprints.org/manuscript/202009.0630/v1.

[13] D. Buil-Gil, F. Mir´o-Llinares, A. Moneva, S. Kemp, and N. D´ıaz-
Casta˜no, “Cybercrime and shifts in opportunities during covid-19: a
preliminary analysis in the uk,” European Societies, vol. 23, no. sup1,
pp. S47–S59, 2021.

[14] B. Pranggono and A. Arabo, “Covid-19 pandemic cybersecurity issues,”

Internet Technology Letters, vol. 4, no. 2, p. e247, 2021.

[15] H. S. Lallie, L. A. Shepherd, J. R. Nurse, A. Erola, G. Epiphaniou,
C. Maple, and X. Bellekens, “Cyber security in the age of covid-19:
A timeline and analysis of cyber-crime and cyber-attacks during the
pandemic,” Computers & Security, vol. 105, p. 102248, 2021.

[16] L. Yujian and L. Bo, “A normalized levenshtein distance metric,” IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 29, no. 6,
pp. 1091–1095, 2007.

[17] W. J. Heeringa, “Measuring dialect pronunciation differences using
levenshtein distance,” Ph.D. dissertation, University Library Gronin-
gen][Host], 2004.

TABLE II
TOP 5 INDICATORS FEATURED IN APT29 AND RELATED ATTACKS

Category

Malware

Industry

Country ranking

Top 5
Cobalt Strike (Penetration tool)
TrickBot (Stealing trojan)
XMRig (cryptominer - trojan-ransom)
Ryuk (ransomware)
Agent Tesla - S0331 (spyware)
Government
Finance
Manufacturing
Defense
Technology
United States of America
Germany
Republic of Korea
India
China and United Kingdom

Moreover these countries are being targeted usually together
by the same attacks, as shown by the high probabilities of
transition in Figure 9. We can see for example that 47% of the
cases where UK (Astrazeneca) have been targeted by APT29;,
USA (Pﬁzer, Moderna and Jansen) have been targeted too.
Also in 33% of the cases Germany(Pﬁzer) is targeted when UK
is. Also the fact that few countries have been targeted shows
that this attacks are targeted attacks and not broad campaign.

Fig. 9. Propagation of APT29 related attacks during COVID-19 Pandemic

VII. CONCLUSION

This work presented an exploratory data analysis performed
on 155k shared threats including 10k cyber threat related to
COVID-19. The investigation of this data has highlighted the
existence of a spatio-temporal trend of cyber threats between
countries and that they can be classiﬁed into clusters. It also
showed that there is an evolution over years on top malware
types used. Our study showed that abnormal event relative to
COVID-19 appear to have a loose correlation with the increase
of cyber-attack campaigns. Our research presents opportunity
for further investigations. This research has shown what can
best be described as a loose direct relationship between
COVID-19 related events and cyber-attacks. Further research
should investigate this phenomenon and outline whether a
predictive model can be used to conﬁrm this relationships and
patterns.

AustraliaCanadaChileFranceGermany1.00IndiaMexicoSpainUnited States0.090.140.090.110.240.110.080.14Italy1.00Russia1.00United Kingdom0.200.330.47China1.00