Privacy, Security, and Utility Analysis of
Differentially Private CPES Data

Md Tamjid Hossain, Shahriar Badsha, Haoting Shen
University of Nevada, Reno, NV, USA
Email: mdtamjidh@nevada.unr.edu,{sbadsha, hshen}@unr.edu

1
2
0
2

p
e
S
1
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
6
9
9
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Differential privacy (DP) has been widely used to
protect the privacy of conﬁdential cyber physical energy systems
(CPES) data. However, applying DP without analyzing the utility,
privacy, and security requirements can affect the data utility
as well as help the attacker to conduct integrity attacks (e.g.,
False Data Injection(FDI)) leveraging the differentially private
data. Existing anomaly-detection-based defense strategies against
data integrity attacks in DP-based smart grids fail to minimize
the attack impact while maximizing data privacy and utility.
To address this challenge, it is nontrivial to apply a defensive
approach during the design process. In this paper, we formulate
and develop the defense strategy as a part of the design process to
investigate data privacy, security, and utility in a DP-based smart
grid network. We have proposed a provable relationship among
the DP-parameters that enables the defender to design a fault-
tolerant system against FDI attacks. To experimentally evaluate
and prove the effectiveness of our proposed design approach, we
have simulated the FDI attack in a DP-based grid. The evaluation
indicates that the attack impact can be minimized if the designer
calibrates the privacy level according to the proposed correlation
of the DP-parameters to design the grid network. Moreover, we
analyze the feasibility of the DP mechanism and QoS of the smart
grid network in an adversarial setting. Our analysis suggests that
the DP mechanism is feasible over existing privacy-preserving
mechanisms in the smart grid domain. Also, the QoS of the
differentially private grid applications is found satisfactory in
adversarial presence.

Index Terms—Privacy, Security, Quality of Service (QoS),
Cyber Physical Energy System (CPES), Differential Privacy (DP),
Synchrophasor

I. INTRODUCTION

Cyber Physical Energy System (CPES) such as smart grid
data is used for various mission-critical (e.g., state estimation,
microgrid islanding, and synchronization, load balancing, etc.)
and non-mission-critical applications (e.g., energy consump-
tion prediction, power outage forecasting, etc.) [1]–[4]. The
granular level grid data with numerous features pave the way
for state-of-the-art security and privacy research. However,
grid data also carries the personal and conﬁdential informa-
tion of the customers. In most cases, releasing such data is
restricted due to security and legal issues [5]. Therefore, the
data needs privacy preservation, especially during data sharing
or data exchanging operations [6].

Over the years, several research works have been conducted
on the data privacy-preservation mechanisms (e.g., secure
multi-party communication, k-anonymization, l-diversity, etc.)
[7] and the privacy-violating attacks on those mechanisms
[8]–[10]. To overcome such privacy-violating attacks while

preserving data conﬁdentiality and maintaining a level of data
utility,
the concept of DP (Differential Privacy) has been
introduced by Dwork et al. [11]. The DP mechanism adds
sufﬁcient randomized noise to the aggregation result. This
randomized noise prevents the attacker from revealing the
identity of an entity by obscuring the contribution of a single
record. This privacy assurance can motivate the data providers
to provide open access to their differentially private databases
to the research community and others.

A. Motivations

Although the DP mechanism achieves a privacy guarantee, a
well-known drawback of it is the degradation of data utility
with the increments of the data privacy [11]. Moreover, from
recent research by Giraldo et al., we came to know that
differentially private data (i.e., DP-data) can be exploited by
the attacker to conduct False Data Injection (FDI) attacks on
a DP-based system in smart grid domain [12]. These data
integrity attacks on differentially private data have led us to
the question- “What should be the design approach to defend
a DP-based cyber physical energy systems (CPES) against
FDI attack?”. To answer these questions, it is essential to
ﬁnd out the factors that facilitate this FDI attack. Likewise, to
design a fault-tolerant, resilient, privacy-preserved, and well-
secured defense mechanism, a provable relationship among
these factors, outcomes, and parameters of the DP method
needs to be developed.

Besides, any active or passive attack degrades the overall
QoS of a system. So, it is also essential to raise and sub-
sequently answer the question- “What are the impacts of the
FDI attacks on the QoS of a DP-based system?”. Based on this
impact analysis of the FDI attack, the feasibility analysis of the
DP technique in the CPES domain needs to be carried out in an
adversarial setting. Successively, the feasibility analysis would
help the CPES designers to determine the proper applicable
areas of the DP mechanism.

As DP can be a tool for the attacker to conduct the FDI at-
tack, it should not be applied in the mission-critical operations
of any CPES just to enhance data privacy. On the contrary,
the method must be applied with proper security measures.
Otherwise, the entire CPES can be comprised by any malicious
actor. Our motivation behind this research comes from these
defense perspectives.

Earlier researches have focused on building robust anomaly
detection algorithms to either defend a DP-based CPES or

 
 
 
 
 
 
improve the accuracy of ML-based prediction algorithm [12]–
[14]. However, if the DP technique is applied in several layers
of the CPES network, then identifying the false data is very
difﬁcult (if not impossible) for the traditional anomaly detec-
tors. Therefore, novel defense strategies need to be devised
against FDI attacks in DP-based smart grid applications, and
for that more research should be carried out to analyze the
correlation among DP-parameters.

B. Contributions

In this paper, we address and analyze the concern of the
FDI attack exploiting the differentially private data through
adversarial analysis of the DP-based mechanisms into the
smart grid domain. Our main contributions in this research
work can be summarized as follows:

• We have demonstrated the formulation of a provable
relationship between the attack impact and the parameters
(data sensitivity, privacy loss, and attackers’ tolerance
to be detected) associated with DP mechanism. This
relationship enables the designer to design a robust and
fault-tolerant DP-based privacy-preserving system.

• We have experimentally evaluated as well as proved that
the maximum attack impact of the FDI attack could be
minimized if the designer uses our proposed approach to
design the process in the ﬁrst place.

• We have rigorously analyzed the feasibility of the DP
mechanism in CPES data under an adversarial setting
from a QoS point of view. We further evaluated the
usability of the data considering an attack scenario where
the attacker manipulates the data despite all the privacy
and security measures. The evaluation shows that the ma-
nipulated data are usable for many non-mission-critical
operations of CPESs like smart grids.

Section II of this paper covers a brief review of the related
works while section III outlines the research problem and
threat model. Section IV points out the objectives of the at-
tacker and the defender as well as develops correlation among
DP-parameters as a part of a defense against optimal FDI
attack. Section V analyzes the effectiveness of our proposed
model and correlation through QoS and feasibility analysis.
Finally, in section VI, we conclude the paper with some future
research directions.

II. LITERATURE REVIEW

To protect data conﬁdentiality, numerous privacy-preserving
techniques have been suggested and applied in the smart
grid domain over the last decades [15]–[17]. Some of them
use cryptographic encryption techniques (AES, RSA, etc.),
while others incorporate homomorphic encryption schemes,
pseudonymization, l-diversity, t-closeness, differential privacy,
etc. [7]. Each of them has its advantages and shortcomings.
The advantage of encryption is that it can transfer data without
noises while the drawbacks are the high resource utilization,
cryptographic key generation, and distribution complexity,
latency, etc. [18], [19]. Likewise,
the data anonymization
techniques also suffer from several drawbacks which include

the high possibility of being compromised by revealing actual
identities and impracticability of the method for data contain-
ing millions of records [8].

A. Countermeasures of Passive Attacks with DP technique

Unlike other privacy-preserving techniques, DP can preserve
data privacy more effectively by perturbing a small amount
of noise in the query result while making sure not to overly
degrade the data utility for many application scenarios. As a
consequence, researchers have proposed to use the DP mech-
anism in CPESs like smart grids, IoT networks, automated
vehicles, etc. to protect the data privacy [19], [20]. In the smart
grid domain, the DP technique has been proposed for smart
meters [19] and state estimations [20], power grid obfuscation
[5], PMUs (Phasor Measurement Units) and µPMUs [21]. All
of these works have proposed DP as a solution to passive
attacks (e.g., eavesdropping). However, none of these works
have considered the impact of the FDI attacks in their smart
grid schemes.

B. Countermeasures of Active Attacks in Smart Grid

Another related line of works focuses on the data integrity at-
tacks (e.g., FDI attack) on state estimation, future consumption
prediction, billing, and pricing, etc. in the smart grid domain
[22]. Several techniques have been proposed over the years
to prevent data integrity attacks using methods such as bad
data ﬁltration, blockchain, encryption, etc. [23]. In particular,
the integration of blockchain to achieve security and integrity
has been found effective in the smart grid sector [24]–[26].
Although these works have considered the active attacks in
their schemes, they have not formulated these attacks in any
DP-based system.

C. Adversarial Classiﬁcation of the DP technique

Several studies [27], [28] have considered the active attacks
(particularly, FDI attack) in a DP-based CPES (e.g., smart
grid, transportation systems, etc.). In [27], Giraldo et al. have
analyzed how an attacker can take advantage of the added
noise in DP to design stealthy attacks that maximize the
physical impact in the system. Following their research, [28]
shows that the level of guaranteed privacy times the level of
security equals or upper bounded by a constant. Nonetheless,
these works have mostly considered the defense mechanism
based on anomaly detection schemes.

The closest work to our own is [12], which has proposed
the optimal FDI attacks that degrade the anomaly detection
capabilities of the system while allowing the attacker to remain
undetected by “hiding” false data into the DP noise. The
authors also proposed a detection-based defense mechanism
to minimize the impact of such attacks. Contrarily to the
post-attack detection, we have developed the correlation that
facilitates the defense against FDI attacks. Our proposed
scheme will assist the system designer to design a robust DP-
based architecture considering adversarial presence.

In addition to work on the defense mechanism as a part of
the design process, our work is related to the feasibility and

QoS analysis of DP-based systems in an adversarial setting.
To date, little attention has been paid to this line of research
due to the provable privacy guarantee of the DP mechanism.
In [29], a QoS-aware personalized privacy protection model
has been proposed. However, their work considered privacy
attacks only. [30] has outlined the QoS requirements of smart
grid in terms of low latency, seamless data availability, high
data utility, and low complexity.

Nevertheless,

their architecture does not cover the DP
technique and the active attack scenarios. As DP can be a
tool for the attacker to conduct active attacks in the smart grid
domain, it is necessary to analyze the feasibility of applying
the DP mechanism in smart grid operations. At the same
time, it is also essential to carry out the QoS analysis of a
DP-based smart grid in the adversarial setting to determine
the most suitable applications where DP can be used as a
secured privacy-preserving tool. This work also focuses on
this particular issue and carries out the required QoS analysis
under an active attack scenario.

III. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND THREAT MODEL

In this section, the main research problem, as well as the
objectives of this research, are formulated. Also, a threat model
of the research problem is developed. Table I provides the
symbols and their description used in this paper.

A. Problem Statement

Fig. 1 depicts the basic operational principle of a DP-based
system. A mechanism is ε- indistinguishable if for all pairs
X, X (cid:48) ∈ Dn which differ in only one entry, for all adversaries
A, and for all transcripts t [11]:

ln

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

P r[TA(X) = t]
P r[TA(X (cid:48)) = t]

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

≤ ε

(1)

Equation (1) provides the privacy guarantee of DP mechanism.
Applying DP during a sum query over a database containing
{x1, x2, x3, .., xi, ..} as input, we get-

the sensitivity of the data. Larger noise yields a smaller value
of privacy loss and vice versa. However, more noise leads to
less data utility. Besides, applying large noise into the data for
ensuring better privacy provides an attacker the opportunity of
injecting false data into it. So, if the DP technique is applied in
several layers of a CPES network and an attacker injects a low
amount of false data into the DP-data (differentially private
data), then the traditional anomaly detectors cannot detect the
manipulation.

An alternative defense strategy that can minimize the attack
impact is to design and apply the DP technique targeting
minimum attack impact and maximum privacy. For this, a
veriﬁable correlation between the outcome (attack impact) and
the parameters of the DP method needs to be developed that
can enable the designer to design a resilient and privacy-
preserved system as a part of the defense mechanism.

The primary objective of our analysis is to enable the
defender to design a privacy-preserved and secured DP-based
system (e.g., synchrophasor network) against FDI attacks. The
secondary objective of our research is to analyze the feasibility
of the DP mechanism in synchrophasor networks considering
the vulnerability of the DP-based system against FDI attacks.
We also analyze the QoS of the DP-based synchrophasor
network in an adversarial setting. More precisely, we want
to raise and subsequently answer the following questions.

1) Design objective: Given a dataset (D), what will be the
value of scale parameter (b) and epsilon (ε) such that the
attack impact (µa) becomes equal or close to the actual query
result (i.e., µa = Q(D) ∨ µa → Q(D))

2) Feasibility analysis objective: Would the DP technique
remain feasible over other privacy-preserving mechanisms
(e.g., encryption, masking, anonymization, etc.) considering its
security challenges (i.e., the chance of FDI attacks exploiting
DP-noise)?

3) QoS analysis objective: What would be the QoS of the
DP-based synchrophasor network in terms of computational
overhead and data utility under the FDI attack?

xi + Y ; Y ∼ Lap(

∆f
ε

)

(cid:88)

i

(2)

B. Threat Model

Here, Lap represents the Laplacian distribution mechanism.
∆f is the sensitivity of the data which is inherent in the
dataset. For desired privacy, the noise is calibrated according to

The proposed threat model, as depicted in Fig. 1, considers
the FDI attack on the data packets while transferring from
one node to another node through the spooﬁng technique.
Throughout the attack, the attacker pretends to be an honest

TABLE I
LIST OF SYMBOLS AND THEIR DESCRIPTION

Symbols

Description

X
X (cid:48)
t
ε
∆f
Q
η
ηa
b
µa

Dataset contains all the measurement value
Dataset differs by a single record from X
Transcripts
Privacy loss
Data sensitivity
Differentially private data
Noise drawn from Laplace distribution
Noise drawn from Optimal attack distribution
Scale parameter of Laplace distribution
Attack impact

Symbols
µ∗
a
τ
V
f0
fa
f ∗
a
θ
k1
y
γ

Description

Optimal attack impact
Query result deviation threshold
Measured voltage by PMU
PDF of Laplace distribution
PDF of attack distribution
PDF of optimal attack distribution
Mean or location parameter of Laplace distribution
Kullback-Leibler divergence
Query result
Attackers’ tolerance to be detected

node to all other nodes and injects false measurement as a
form of noise into DP-data. The model is developed based on
an attack scenario, where the attacker can conduct the FDI
attack despite all the privacy and security measures. More
formally, for a DP-result of any aggregated query over a
database consisting of grid measurement, the FDI attack is
expressed as follows:

Qa = Q(D) + ηa s.t. Q(D) =

n
(cid:88)

i=1

vi + η ∀ vi ∈ V

(3)

where, V = {v1, v2, ..., vn} is the dataset containing n number
of measurement values obtained from a µPMU dataset, η is
the measure of Laplace noise, Q(D) is the non-manipulated
differentially private query result over database D, ηa is
injected by the attacker as a form
the false measurement
of noise and Qa is the manipulated query result. Moreover,
the Laplace noise, η is a random variable with a probability
distribution that satisﬁes the condition of the differential
privacy (as stated by (1)). Other than the Gaussian and the
Exponential distribution, the Laplace distribution is also a
good choice for extracting random noise as it satisﬁes (ε, 0)
or (ε, δ) – differential privacy. Also, the Probability Density
Function (PDF) of Laplace distribution has a fatter tail which
is why Laplacian noise provides better privacy. The Laplace
distribution with mean (θ = 0), variance (σ2 = 2b2) and PDF,
f0 can be described by (4).

(4)

f0 =

∆f
ε

s.t. b =

1
2b2 exp

− |y − θ|
b
Here, b is the scale parameter and can be represented as
the ratio between the sensitivity of the data (∆f ) and the
privacy loss (ε). We consider that
the attacker varies the
value of ηa according to her attack tolerance level (i.e., the
willingness to be detected or remain undetected). Now, if ηa
is sufﬁciently small, then it is unlikely for the recipient to
detect the manipulation without a well-designed and robust
anomaly detector. On the other hand, the anomaly detectors
also add extra latency to the network and slow down the
system performance. This is a potential threat to the system’s
performance that needs to be minimized.

IV. OPTIMAL ATTACK AND DEFENSE STRATEGY

In this section, we ﬁrst describe the attackers’ and the defend-
ers’ objectives. We then compute the correlation among the

Fig. 1. Differential privacy in an adversarial setting. Differentially private
query results are manipulated by a malicious actor and sent to the analyst.
Small amount of manipulation is difﬁcult to detect

DP-parameters to facilitate defense against the optimal attack.

A. Attackers’ Objective

An attacker can be a passive attacker or an active attacker.
A passive attacker eavesdrops on the communication path
while an active attacker directly interferes with the data (e.g.,
masquerades, modiﬁcation of messages, denial of services,
etc.). The DP mechanism gives protection against passive
attacks. However, the attacker can still modify the DP-data by
injecting false data into them, which becomes a concerning
security issue.

Generally, the attacker of our threat model has two major
objectives while carrying out the attack– “(a) maximum dam-
age (b) avoid detection”. These two goals are contradictory
with each other in the sense that it becomes difﬁcult for an
attacker to hide the attack or hide her identity if she wants to
carry out maximum devastation to the system.

B. Defenders’ Objective

Defenders’ objective is to defend the system against passive
and active attacks. The defense can be carried out from various
fronts of the system. One such technique can be setting up
the anomaly detectors to minimize the attack impact. But, this
would add extra latency to the system performance. Another
way could be designing the system as a speciﬁc fault-tolerant
in the ﬁrst place considering the possible FDI attacks in the
future. In our model, the defender has two major objectives-
“(a) design the process as fault-tolerant against FDI attacks
(b) preserve the data privacy and QoS of the system”.

These speciﬁc design requirements have led us to the quest
of ﬁnding a provable relationship among the DP-parameters
to achieve desired privacy, utility, security as well as the
feasibility of the DP mechanism.

C. Optimal Attack Strategy

An optimal attack would take place when the objectives of the
attacker are achieved with maximum possible payoffs. In [12],
Giraldo et al. have discussed this optimization problem. They
shows that an optimistic attacker would draw noise ηa from a
probability density function, f ∗
a , which can be represented as
follows:

f ∗
a =

1 − b2
k2
2bk2
1

exp

− |y − θ|
b

+

(y − θ)
k1

(5)

Here, b is the scale factor and θ is the location parameter.
k1 is a solution to KL (Kullback–Leibler) divergence between
two probability distributions DKL(fa || f0) and can be found
by solving below equation –

) = γ ∀ k1 > b

2b2
1 − b2 + ln(1 −
k2

b2
k2
1
Here, γ is the attackers’ tolerance to be detected. A large
γ would mean that the attacker does not care to be detected
whereas a small γ means hiding her entity is crucial for the
attacker. To achieve her second objective which is to remain
undetected as long as possible the value of γ should be as small
as zero. However, then the attackers’ probability distribution

(6)

would be similar to the original probability distribution of the
Laplace mechanism (i.e., f ∗
a (cid:39) f0). So, the attacker must
go for a trade-off between the two objectives. If the attacker
chooses a small value of γ, i.e., to remain undetected as to
fulﬁll the second objective, k1 approaches inﬁnity. Again, as
k1 approaches to inﬁnity, the PDF, f ∗
a as described by (5)
approaches to f0. The optimal attack impact is given by the
following formula [12].

(7)

µ∗

a =

Here, µ∗

b2(θ − 2k1) − θk2
1
b2 − k2
1
a is the amount of optimal bias introduced by the
attacker. It depends on four parameters (mean, θ; attacker’s
tolerance, γ; data sensitivity, ∆f and privacy loss, ε). The
optimal attack impacts (µ∗
a) largely vary with the privacy loss
and attackers’ tolerance. More speciﬁcally, a low privacy loss
(or a large amount of noise) and a high attackers’ tolerance
help the attacker to conduct a more devastating attack (i.e.,
the high value of µ∗
a) by injecting large false data and hiding
behind the large noise of differential privacy.

D. Parameter Design for Effective Defense Mechanism
Among the four parameters, the mean (θ, also called the ‘loca-
tion’ in PDF) and the data sensitivity (∆f ) can be calculated
from the targeted dataset. Hence, these two parameters are
not adjustable by the user as per the design requirements.
However, these parameters are crucial for tuning the noise
while applying differential privacy so that, either, the attack
impact cannot be large, or the attack can be easily detected.
the attackers’ tolerance (γ)
should be selected in such a way that considers the maximum
possible attack impact or deviation from the actual data. The
possible incidents that can take place are given below.

During the design process,

• The attacker chooses a very large γ to maximize the
attack impact without paying much attention to detection.
In that case, a carefully designed anomaly detector can
easily identify the attack.

• The attacker chooses a very small γ to minimize the
disclosure of her identity. In that case, the attack impact
or deviation would be negligible (as f ∗
a becomes equal
to f0) and can be ignored.

• The attacker chooses an optimal value of γ for an
optimal attack impact and identity disclosure. In that
case, the attack impact is not only tough to detect (if not
impossible) but also impractical to be neglected totally.
We elaborate and analyze this point in section V.
We are now ready to present one of the main contributions
(i.e., correlation among the DP-parameters considering adver-
sarial presence) of the paper.

Theorem 4.1: For any optimal attack strategy (stealthi-
ness: γ, attack impact: µ∗
a), the correlation among the DP-
parameters that solves the design problem stated by III-A1
can be represented as follows:

(cid:115)

ε =

∆f
b

s.t. b =

a − θ)

k2
1(µ∗
2k1 + (µ∗

a − θ)

∀ |µ∗

a − θ| ≥ 0

(8)

Proof : The scale factor, b needs to be greater than zero,
otherwise (4) becomes undeﬁned. Moreover, according to
the optimal attack strategy described in IV-C, the optimal
attack follows the Laplace distribution. Therefore, the absolute
deviation of the attack impact from the mean of the query data
(alternatively, Laplace density) cannot be less than zero (i.e.,
|µa − θ| ≥ 0)). Under these conditions, we solve for the scale
parameter, b from (7) following simple algebraic rules and
get–

(cid:115)

b =

a − θ)

k2
1(µ∗
2k1 + (µ∗

a − θ)

∀ |µ∗

a − θ| ≥ 0

(9)

Since it is an optimization problem in a constrained environ-
ment, we model k1 as a Lagrange multiplier and compute k1
numerically using (6) and (9). Thus, the general expression
of (6) can be rewritten as (10). Moreover, we can solve k1
numerically from (10) and successively compute ε from (11).

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

µ∗

+ ln

a − θ
k1

2k1
2k1 + (µ∗
∆f
b
We can further evaluate the proposed theorem through

a − θ)

(11)

(10)

= γ

ε =

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

boundary conditions.

Case-1 (lower bound, µ∗

a − θ → 0 (i.e.,
when we want to minimize the attack impact and make the
deviation zero), (10) becomes-

a − θ → 0): When µ∗

0 + ln

2k1
2k1 + 0

= γ =⇒ γ → 0

(12)

Here, γ → 0 indicates that the attacker does not want to be
detected at all and hence the payoff of the attacker (i.e., µ∗
a−θ)
approaches to zero. After rewriting (9), we can apply limit
(µ∗

a − θ)→ 0 as follows:

lim
a−θ)→0

(µ∗

b = lim
(µ∗

a−θ)→0

(cid:115)

k2
1
2k1
a−θ + 1
µ∗

=⇒ b → 0

(13)

Remark 4.1: When b → 0, then ε → ∞ since ε = ∆f
b
Equation (13) and Remark 4.1 indicates that if the privacy
loss, ε approaches to inﬁnity (alternatively, noise approaches
to zero) and the attacker does not want to be detected (γ → 0),
then the attack impact is minimum and the deviation from the
mean is close to zero (i.e., µ∗
Case-2 (upper bound, µ∗
a − θ → ∞): If we consider the
maximum attack impact (i.e., µ∗
a − θ → ∞), from (10), it can
be inferred that γ → ∞, which means the attacker does not
care about to be exposed and goes for maximum attack impact.
From IV-C, we know that, when γ → ∞, then k1 → 0. Now,
when k1 → 0 is very small and (µ∗
a − θ) → ∞, then the scale
factor (b) is very large.

a − θ → 0).

Remark 4.2: When b → ∞, then ε → 0 since ε = ∆f
b .
Therefore, if the privacy loss, ε approaches to zero (0) (al-
ternatively, noise approaches to inﬁnity) and the attacker does
not care to be exposed (γ → ∞), then the attack impact is

maximum and the deviation from the mean very large (i.e.,
µ∗

a − θ → ∞).
In summary, (9) – (11) can be used to adjust the privacy loss
(ε) for a given sensitivity, ∆f , an optimal attack impact, µ∗
a,
and a level of attackers’ tolerance, γ. The defender can use the
correlation of (9) and (11) to design a robust, fault-tolerant,
privacy-preserved, and well-secured DP-based system. We
discuss the effectiveness of our proposed design approach
analytically in section V.

E. Modelling the Criterion for Feasibility and QoS Analysis

Analyzing QoS (Quality of Service) of the DP-based system
under attack scenario is another key objective of our research.
Here, QoS refers to the measurement of the overall perfor-
mance of the system. To quantitatively measure the QoS of the
system, several parameters of the network are considered, such
as overall latency, congestion, data availability, data utility,
system complexity, network speed, operational overhead, data
redundancy, system resiliency, etc. As we have not considered
any data availability attacks (e.g., DDoS attack, delay attack,
etc.) in our model, we have eliminated the data availability
from our QoS criterion list. Moreover, the DP technique is a
better choice than other privacy-preserving techniques in terms
of system complexity, system resiliency, and operational over-
head. The cryptographic encryption techniques incorporate key
generation, key distribution, and third-party involvement while
the anonymization techniques require huge time for a large
dataset. Consequently, we measure the QoS of the attack-prone
DP-based synchrophasor network through overall data utility
along with the privacy and security cost of DP.

As for the feasibility analysis, it is an assessment of the
practicability of a proposed plan. The analysis is carried
out by asking and subsequently answering the question- “Is
the proposed method feasible?”. We analyze this feasibility
question under an adversarial scenario. A method is labeled as
feasible if it preserves the speciﬁc requirements (e.g., privacy,
security, etc.) as well as the QoS of the system. From this
perspective, the DP technique is feasible for the synchrophasor
network if it provides a substantial amount of data privacy,
does not violate the security of the system, and does not
degrade the QoS of the system below a satisfactory level. At
the same time, it is also necessary to compare the DP technique
with other existing privacy-preserving techniques in terms of
computational overhead. We carry out such a comparison in
section V of this paper.

V. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS

For the experimental purpose, we have used the same dataset
used by [31]. The dataset includes the real-time measurement
of dedicated PMUs connected on the medium voltage side of
the network secondary substations in a smart grid on the EPFL
campus. We have selected this data because similar data are
being used in various applications in the smart grid domain,
e.g., state estimation, modeling power network, predicting
future needs, etc. The data contains historical measurement
values from 5 PMUs starting from the year 2014 to 2019 with

a high data missing percentage. However, since the frequency
of the measurement is the fraction of seconds (ms), the size of
the dataset is sufﬁcient for the practical demonstration purpose
of our proposed model.

A. FDI Attack Simulation in a Synchrophasor Network

The FDI attack can take place in different nodes (master nodes,
fog nodes, edge nodes, etc.) of a synchrophasor network. The
attacker can conduct the attack either by compromising nodes
(or sensors) through direct access or by compromising the
communication channel through the traditional MITM (Man-
in-the-Middle) attack approach [32]. As physical access to a
grid network is difﬁcult for an attacker to achieve, an FDI
attack by physically accessing the node is unlikely to occur.
Therefore, for our proposed model we have considered the
FDI attacks conducted by compromising the communication
channel of the synchrophasor network.

In a synchrophasor network, the queries among the master
nodes (controller), fog nodes (PDCs-Phasor Data Concen-
trates), and edge nodes (PMUs) ﬂow from the master nodes
towards the edge nodes. When DP is applied over the
entire synchrophasor network, hierarchically,
the receiving
node (e.g., PDC) gets the DP-data from the lower-level nodes
(e.g., PMUs). However, as there are multiple layers in the
synchrophasor network, the DP technique adds random noise
multiple times in the same query result. So, it becomes difﬁcult
for the anomaly detectors to identify the false data.

In our experiment, the query is made to ﬁnd out the hourly
average of the user consumption, P (in KWh) recorded by
a PMU on a particular day. Fig. 2 depicts the differentially
private results (DP-results) of the query along with the actual
result for varying privacy loss (ε). The DP-results differ from
the actual query results due to the random Laplacian noise
added through the DP process. For demonstrating the FDI

Fig. 2. Hourly average user consumption (KWh) recorded by a PMU. Small
level of privacy loss (ε) leads to higher deviation. The DP-noise has been
drawn from a Laplace distribution with zero mean and 2b2 variance (θ =
0, σ2 = 2b2)

attack, some false measurement is injected deliberately as a
form of noise into the DP result. The false measurement is
drawn from the attackers’ probability distribution following
the optimal attack strategy of section IV-C. Corresponding
attack impact is illustrated in Fig. 3 for various level of ε.
The attack impact decreases for the following cases: (i) the
privacy loss increases, (ii) attacker’s tolerance decreases, and
(iii) data sensitivity decreases.

B. Privacy, Security, and Utility Analysis

According to the ε-indistinguishability condition, a DP-result
differs from the actual query result (Fig. 2). When the noise
is large (alternatively, ε is lower), the DP-result of average
user consumption deviates signiﬁcantly from the true result
and vice versa. The amount of random noise also depends
on the data sensitivity. Highly sensitive data requires a large
amount of noise to preserve data privacy. On the contrary, low
sensitive data needs a small amount of noise.

Consequently, for a small amount of noise (alternatively, a
high value of ε), the DP-result differs from the true result only
by small fractions (curve without DP and with ε = 1.0 in Fig.
2). So, for the non-critical applications requiring less sensitive
data in the smart grid domain, the required amount of noise
to preserve the data privacy is also low.

1) Correlation between the Attack Impact and the DP-
parameters: The data sensitivity level has an important role
in the DP mechanism. If the defender designs to add large
noise to highly sensitive data, then the attacker can conduct
devastating attacks. For example, in Fig. 3, the privacy is
very large when ε = 0.1. Also, for highly sensitive data
(e.g., ∆f = 2.0), if the defender keeps the privacy loss low
(ε = 0.1) to preserve privacy, the attack impact is as large
as 110. However, the attacker may not create a large attack to
avoid the attack detection; rather she would follow the optimal
attack distribution described by (5) for an optimal payoff.

In our experiment,

the true query result (true average
user consumption) is 33.18. Following the optimal attack
distribution interpreted by (5), the attacker can add maximum
noise of 76.82 if her tolerance level (γ) is 2.0. Now, if γ is
increased by 0.5 (e.g., 0.5 to 1.0) while ∆f remains same
(e.g., 0.5), the maximum possible attack impact is increased
by approximately 4.0 (e.g., 41.0 to 45.0). On the contrary, if
∆f rises by 0.5 (e.g., 0.5 to 1.0) while γ remains same (e.g.,

0.5), the attack impact increases by approximately 8.0 (e.g.,
41.0 to 49.0). So, it is perceived that the attack impact depends
more on ∆f than γ.

Moreover, we see that the actual mean (θ) has no signiﬁcant
effect on the attack impact. For any mean (θ), the attack
impact (µa) follows the same principle. That means if the
mean is lower than 33.18, the attack impact also decreases by
the same amount following the DP principle. Based on this
correlation between the data sensitivity (∆f ), the attackers’
tolerance (γ), and privacy loss (ε), the designer can design his
system targeting minimal attack impact, high data privacy, and
high data utility. More speciﬁcally, the designer can calibrate
the noise following (9)-(11) and adjust the tolerance of the
system up to the calculated attack impact value.

2) QoS of the DP-based Synchrophasor Network in Adver-
sarial Setting: We use the defense cost and the data utility
as indicators to evaluate the QoS of the DP-based system in
an adversarial setting. The defense cost is the overall cost that
arises from the defensive measures against cyber-attacks. It
represents the distance of the DP-data from actual data. It
is consists of two separate costs- the privacy cost and the
security cost. Privacy cost (i.e., the distance of the DP-data
from actual data due to privacy measures) takes place when
the DP technique is applied to the query result. It increases
with the number of times DP mechanism has been applied in
the nodes. On the other hand, the security cost is added to the
defense cost when the FDI attacks occur. Besides analyzing the
defense cost of a DP-based synchrophasor network under an
attack framework, we also measure the data utility in terms of
prediction accuracy. The data utility measurement is performed
with both the DP-data and the FDI-DP-data (i.e., the DP-data
that is manipulated by the FDI attack).

Motivated by [33], we build the proposed prediction model
to evaluate the above-mentioned properties. The model simply
executes a time-series prediction algorithm on the PMU dataset
for different levels of privacy loss (ε). The experiment is
conducted with the original data, the DP-data, and the FDI-DP-
data. After executing the experiment with DP-data, the defense
cost (i.e., the privacy and the security cost) is measured on
the predicted values. Next, the FDI attack is conducted delib-
erately on both datasets (with and without DP mechanism).
After that, the manipulated datasets are fed into the prediction
model. Finally, the security cost (i.e., the prediction deviation)

Fig. 3. Correlation between the attack impact (µa) and the DP-parameters. Attack impact (µa) decreases when- (i) privacy loss (ε) increases, (ii) attackers’
tolerance (γ) decreases, and (iii) data sensitivity (∆f ) decreases.

due to the FDI attack on the DP-data is measured.

We ﬁrst study the defense cost (i.e., the sum of privacy
cost and security cost) and ﬁnd that the privacy cost is higher
than the security cost when the attacker conducts a stealthy
attack (as shown in Fig. 4). However, the overall defense cost
reduces signiﬁcantly when the privacy loss (ε) is increased.
Then, we investigate the utility of both the DP-data and FDI-
DP-data through a time-series prediction algorithm. We ﬁnd
that the “DP: predicted” value is higher than the “Original:
predicted” value due to the privacy cost of DP mechanism as
shown in Fig. 5(a). After that, we deliberately conduct the FDI
attack (from “2018-10-14” to “2018-11-14” in Fig. 5(b) on the
original data. Note that the FDI attack has a signiﬁcant impact
on the predicted values. Finally, the same degree of FDI attack
is conducted intentionally on the DP-data to ﬁnd the changes
in the predicted values. The ﬁndings indicate that the distance
between prediction accuracy with DP-data and FDI-DP-data
is nominal as the security cost is very low (Fig. 5(c)). We ﬁnd
that the impact of the FDI attack for a short period of time
is low on the predicted values and can be negligible for the
non-critical applications of the smart grid domain.

3) Feasibility of DP mechanism in Synchrophasor Network:
The criterion for our feasibility analysis of DP mechanism
is the comparison of overall latency. The latency comparison
is carried out between the DP technique and the AES-256
encryption technique under an attack scenario. AES-256 is
chosen because it is computationally faster than most of the
other encryption techniques (e.g. RSA). Also, the anonymiza-
tion techniques incur more latency than AES-256 encryption
over the large dataset. So, for the feasibility analysis of the
DP technique under attack scenario, the latency comparison
between the DP and AES-256 technique should sufﬁce.

Both the passive and the active attacks add a latency burden
to the overall system performance. In the case of the FDI
attack,
the attacker manipulates the data by adding false
information. This process takes some time and adds latency
to data ﬂow speed. For any encryption technique, to avoid
detection, the attacker needs to decrypt the data, inject false
data and again encrypt the falsiﬁed data with the crypto-
graphic key. However, for DP technique, the attacker only
injects false data and remains undetected. As a consequence,
the DP mechanism does not add as much latency as AES-
256. Our experimental evaluation also supports this latency

comparison under the FDI attack scenario. We ﬁnd that the DP
technique is approximately 121.49 times faster (on an average)
than the AES-256 in the same adversarial setting (i.e., the
computational time of DP is only 0.0016 seconds whereas the
computational time of AES-256 is 0.1944).

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The DP mechanism can be exploited as a tool for conducting
the FDI attack. To overcome this challenge, numerous research
have been carried out on developing a defense mechanism
based on the anomaly detection schemes in a DP-based CPES.
However, the traditional anomaly detectors cannot detect the
bad data added by exploiting the DP mechanism in multiple
layers of the synchrophasor network. Addressing this, in this
paper, we formulate and develop the defense strategy as a part
of the design process. We have proposed a provable correlation
among the factors affecting DP mechanism which enables the
defender to design his DP-based system fault-tolerant against

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4. Utility cost analysis of DP method for varying privacy loss (ε). Privacy
cost is higher than the security cost. Moreover, the overall cost is small when
epsilon is large (i.e., ε = 0.9)

Fig. 5. QoS analysis of a DP-based system under attack scenario. (a) ’DP-
predicted’ vary from the ’original-predicted’ due to privacy cost (b) The attack
impact on the prediction accuracy is negligible for a short-time FDI attack
(circled in the graph) (c) The ’DP-FDI-predicted’ values are very close to the
’DP-predicted’ values as the security cost is low.

the FDI attacks. To experimentally evaluate and prove the
effectiveness of the proposed correlation, we have simulated
the FDI attack in a DP-based synchrophasor network. The
evaluation indicates that the attack can be minimized using the
proposed correlation in the design process. The QoS analysis
of the DP-based CPES indicates the applicability of the DP
mechanism in many non-critical operations. Furthermore, the
feasibility analysis of DP mechanism in the CPES domain
infers that the DP technique is feasible over other privacy-
preserving mechanisms in terms of computational overheads.
DP has the potential to preserve data privacy in other ﬁelds
also such as edge computing and cloud computing [34], [35].
We hope that
this research will contribute to those ﬁelds
too. Continuing this line of research, we hope to analyze the
impact of distributed active attacks on the DP-based system.
In particular, we want to investigate the impact of distributed
FDI attacks on personalized-privacy-aware grid architecture.
Additionally, we hope to extend our model from a game-
theoretic viewpoint where multiple defenders and attackers
play dynamic strategies in a repeated manner.

REFERENCES

[1] A.-R. Sadeghi, C. Wachsmann, and M. Waidner, “Security and pri-
things,” in 2015 52nd
IEEE, 2015,

vacy challenges in industrial
ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC).
pp. 1–6.

internet of

[2] C.-C. Sun, C.-C. Liu, and J. Xie, “Cyber-physical system security of a
power grid: State-of-the-art,” Electronics, vol. 5, no. 3, p. 40, 2016.
[3] R. F. Berriel, A. T. Lopes, A. Rodrigues, F. M. Varejao, and T. Oliveira-
Santos, “Monthly energy consumption forecast: A deep learning ap-
proach,” in 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 4283–4290.

[4] T. Liu, Z. Tan, C. Xu, H. Chen, and Z. Li, “Study on deep reinforce-
ment learning techniques for building energy consumption forecasting,”
Energy and Buildings, vol. 208, p. 109675, 2020.

[5] F. Fioretto, T. W. Mak, and P. Van Hentenryck, “Differential privacy
for power grid obfuscation,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 1356–1366, 2019.

[6] J. Giraldo, E. Sarkar, A. A. Cardenas, M. Maniatakos, and M. Kantar-
cioglu, “Security and privacy in cyber-physical systems: A survey of
surveys,” IEEE Design & Test, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 7–17, 2017.

[7] A. Kelarev, X. Yi, S. Badsha, X. Yang, L. Rylands, and J. Seberry, “A
multistage protocol for aggregated queries in distributed cloud databases
with privacy protection,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 90,
pp. 368–380, 2019.

[8] A. Narayanan and V. Shmatikov, “Robust de-anonymization of large
sparse datasets,” in 2008 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (sp
2008).

IEEE, 2008, pp. 111–125.

[9] L. Sweeney, “Simple demographics often identify people uniquely,”

Health (San Francisco), vol. 671, no. 2000, pp. 1–34, 2000.

[10] P. Ohm, “Broken promises of privacy: Responding to the surprising
failure of anonymization,” UCLA l. Rev., vol. 57, p. 1701, 2009.
[11] C. Dwork, F. McSherry, K. Nissim, and A. Smith, “Calibrating noise
to sensitivity in private data analysis,” in Theory of cryptography
conference. Springer, 2006, pp. 265–284.

[12] J. Giraldo, A. Cardenas, M. Kantarcioglu, and J. Katz, “Adversarial
classiﬁcation under differential privacy,” in Network and Distributed
Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium 2020, 2020.

[13] M. Lecuyer, V. Atlidakis, R. Geambasu, D. Hsu, and S. Jana, “Certiﬁed
robustness to adversarial examples with differential privacy,” in 2019
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 656–
672.

[15] Y. Liu, W. Guo, C.-I. Fan, L. Chang, and C. Cheng, “A practical
privacy-preserving data aggregation (3pda) scheme for smart grid,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1767–1774,
2018.

[16] M. A. Ferrag, L. A. Maglaras, H. Janicke, and J. Jiang, “A survey
on privacy-preserving schemes for smart grid communications,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.07722, 2016.

[17] R. Lu, X. Liang, X. Li, X. Lin, and X. Shen, “Eppa: An efﬁcient
and privacy-preserving aggregation scheme for secure smart grid com-
munications,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,
vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1621–1631, 2012.

[18] R. Lu, H. Zhu, X. Liu, J. K. Liu, and J. Shao, “Toward efﬁcient and
privacy-preserving computing in big data era,” IEEE Network, vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 46–50, 2014.

[19] P. Barbosa, A. Brito, and H. Almeida, “A technique to provide dif-
ferential privacy for appliance usage in smart metering,” Information
Sciences, vol. 370, pp. 355–367, 2016.

[20] H. Sandberg, G. D´an, and R. Thobaben, “Differentially private state
estimation in distribution networks with smart meters,” in 2015 54th
IEEE conference on decision and control (CDC).
IEEE, 2015, pp.
4492–4498.

[21] B. Pinte, M. Quinlan, and K. Reinhard, “Low voltage micro-phasor
measurement unit (µpmu),” in 2015 IEEE Power and Energy Conference
at Illinois (PECI).

IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–4.

[22] Y. Liu, P. Ning, and M. K. Reiter, “False data injection attacks against
state estimation in electric power grids,” ACM Transactions on Informa-
tion and System Security (TISSEC), vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–33, 2011.
[23] M. A. Rahman and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “False data injection attacks
against nonlinear state estimation in smart power grids,” in 2013 IEEE
Power & Energy Society General Meeting.

IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–5.

[24] A. Bhattacharjee, S. Badsha, A. R. Shahid, H. Livani, and S. Sengupta,
“Block-phasor: A decentralized blockchain framework to enhance se-
curity of synchrophasor,” in 2020 IEEE Kansas Power and Energy
Conference (KPEC).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[25] A. Bhattacharjee, S. Badsha, and S. Sengupta, “Blockchain-based secure
and reliable manufacturing system,” in 2020 International Conferences
on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Commu-
nications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing
(CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData) and IEEE Congress on
Cybermatics (Cybermatics).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 228–233.

[26] M. T. Hossain, S. Badsha, and H. Shen, “Porch: A novel consensus
mechanism for blockchain-enabled future scada systems in smart grids
and industry 4.0,” in 2020 IEEE International IOT, Electronics and
Mechatronics Conference (IEMTRONICS).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.

[27] J. Giraldo, A. A. Cardenas, and M. Kantarcioglu, “Security vs. privacy:
How integrity attacks can be masked by the noise of differential privacy,”
in 2017 American Control Conference (ACC).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1679–
1684.

[28] F. Farokhi and P. M. Esfahani, “Security versus privacy,” in 2018 IEEE
IEEE, 2018, pp. 7101–

Conference on Decision and Control (CDC).
7106.

[29] S. R. Pokhrel, Y. Qu, and L. Gao, “Qos-aware personalized privacy with
multipath tcp for industrial iot: Analysis and design,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 4849–4861, 2020.

[30] Y.-H. Jeon, “Qos requirements for the smart grid communications sys-
tem,” International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security,
vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 86–94, 2011.

[31] M. Pignati, M. Popovic, S. Barreto, R. Cherkaoui, G. D. Flores, J.-Y.
Le Boudec, M. Mohiuddin, M. Paolone, P. Romano, S. Sarri et al.,
“Real-time state estimation of the epﬂ-campus medium-voltage grid by
using pmus,” in 2015 IEEE Power & Energy Society Innovative Smart
Grid Technologies Conference (ISGT).

IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–5.

[32] Y. Yang, K. McLaughlin, T. Littler, S. Sezer, E. G. Im, Z. Yao, B. Prang-
gono, and H. Wang, “Man-in-the-middle attack test-bed investigating
cyber-security vulnerabilities in smart grid scada systems,” 2012.
[33] W. Yu, D. An, D. Grifﬁth, Q. Yang, and G. Xu, “Towards statistical
modeling and machine learning based energy usage forecasting in smart
grid,” ACM SIGAPP Applied Computing Review, vol. 15, no. 1, pp.
6–16, 2015.

[14] J. Cohen, E. Rosenfeld, and Z. Kolter, “Certiﬁed adversarial robustness
via randomized smoothing,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 2019, pp. 1310–1320.

[34] M. Du, K. Wang, Z. Xia, and Y. Zhang, “Differential privacy preserving
of training model in wireless big data with edge computing,” IEEE
transactions on big data, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 283–295, 2018.

[35] T. Wang, Y. Mei, W. Jia, X. Zheng, G. Wang, and M. Xie, “Edge-
based differential privacy computing for sensor–cloud systems,” Journal
of Parallel and Distributed computing, vol. 136, pp. 75–85, 2020.

