Realizing Forward Defense in the Cyber Domain∗

Sandeep Pisharody, Jonathan Bernays, Vijay Gadepally, Michael Jones,
Jeremy Kepner, Chad Meiners, Peter Michaleas, Adam Tse, Doug Stetson
MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington, MA, USA

1
2
0
2

t
c
O
4

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
9
4
1
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—With the recognition of cyberspace as an operating
domain, concerted effort is now being placed on addressing it
in the whole-of-domain manner found in land, sea, undersea,
air, and space domains. Among the ﬁrst steps in this effort is
applying the standard supporting concepts of security, defense,
and deterrence to the cyber domain. This paper presents an
architecture that helps realize forward defense in cyberspace,
wherein adversarial actions are repulsed as close to the origin as
possible. However, substantial work remains in making the archi-
tecture an operational reality including furthering fundamental
research cyber science, conducting design trade-off analysis, and
developing appropriate public policy frameworks.

Index Terms—cyberspace, phenomenology, defend forward,

cyberspace defense

I. INTRODUCTION

Current cyber network defenses are often focused on imple-
menting a perimeter defense (ﬁrewall) to block expected mali-
cious trafﬁc, by simultaneously monitoring trafﬁc that crosses
the ﬁrewall and identifying and mitigating cyber-attacks. This
approach puts cyber defenders at a signiﬁcant disadvantage,
since the ‘ﬁght’ between defenders and attackers is almost
always on the defenders cyber terrain (blue space), or very
close to it. Furthermore, this ﬁrewall approach offers zero to
limited advanced knowledge of attacks since observations are
from the limited vantage point of one’s own network, which
is unlikely to yield sufﬁcient information to isolate attackers
and respond with appropriate defensive cyber operations.

The observe-pursue-counter defend forward approach is
the foundation of defense systems in many domains [1] [2].
The defend forward approach in cyber, as deﬁned in the
Cyberspace Solarium Commission report [3], calls for the
collection and aggregation of trafﬁc to identify malicious
activity, making any and all actions dependent on observability.
It is only after the observe component is fully understood,
that we can lean on the detailed detection requirements driven
by pursue-counter elements [4] [5] [6]. Thus, in many de-
ployments, the observe component is the most technologically
challenging and resource intensive.

∗Invited Position Paper. Distribution Statement A: This material is based
upon work supported by the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and
Engineering under Air Force Contract No. FA8702-15-D-0001. Any opinions,
ﬁndings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the Under Secretary
of Defense for Research and Engineering. © 2021 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Delivered to the U.S. Government with Unlimited Rights, as
deﬁned in DFARS Part 252.227-7013 or 7014 (Feb 2014). Notwithstanding
any copyright notice, U.S. Government rights in this work are deﬁned by
DFARS 252.227-7013 or DFARS 252.227-7014 as detailed above. Use of
this work other than as speciﬁcally authorized by the U.S. Government may
violate any copyrights that exist in this work.

Broad data collection from multiple collection points pro-
vides a much more comprehensive view of concurrent IP
trafﬁc, and makes it possible to produce synoptic views with
meaningful insights. Consider, for example, botnet activity
targeted at blue space systems. Patterns of bot activity may
be either unobserved or less obvious from a purely local
vantage point, and will not be apparent without a broader view.
Furthermore, analysis of broad data collection helps identify
attacks that may take place against distant targets, and analysis
of those attacks can provide guidance to the Cyber Mission
Teams (CMTs) to be proactive in defense of blue space.

In light of this observation, we have created a reference
architecture for a prototype that seeks to conduct analysis of
multiple broad-aperture collections of network data to detect
adversarial activity – thereby advancing Observe capabilities
to enable the Pursue component of the defend forward ap-
proach. The capability, named CyPhER (Cyber Phenomenol-
ogy Exploitation and Reasoning), uses substantial and targeted
pruning of large packet captures along with mathematical and
computational advancements upending the broadly accepted
notion that a synoptic view of adversarial events is untenable
to achieve an over-the-ﬁrewall-horizon (OTFH) defense ca-
pability. Long range detection is enabled by focusing trafﬁc
characterization and anomaly detection on network trafﬁc
represented only as anonymized source/destination IP (Internet
Protocol) pairs that are readily obtainable and uniquely provide
observations of networks over largest temporal and spatial
scales.

The remainder of this document speciﬁes system architec-
ture and the building blocks to a robust, cost-effective tool that
can provide a synoptic view of adversarial events in global IP
trafﬁc. Throughout the design privacy is a primary goal and it
should be assumed that all data in the system are anonymized
unless other speciﬁed. The counters enabled from having this
synoptic view can be customized according to mission needs,
and can range from forensics, to early warning, and even cyber
deterrent actions. The architecture is general in nature, with
speciﬁc design choices highly dependent on the mission and
the mission concept of operations (CONOPS).

II. MOTIVATION

The ability to continuously monitor a complete operating
domain is a critical element of defense systems in most
domains. Its widely acknowledged that the absence of broad
aperture data analysis puts defenders at an asymmetric disad-
vantage allowing adversaries to amass resources undetected to
target the most vulnerable points. The ability for defenders to

 
 
 
 
 
 
get situational awareness, and get synoptic views of what is
happening goes a long way in being able to defend strategic
assets [7] [8].

Consider the air defense sector for example. In the 1930s,
the prevailing view that the “bomber always get through”
focused air defense on costly preemptive strikes and counter-
strikes requiring massive bomber ﬂeets. By the 1940s, long-
range radars and integrated air defense had changed the game
[9], and were used to detect incoming bombers before they
reached the protected air space, buying defenders valuable
time to orient and react, and possibly prevent the breach of air
space. We posit that cyber defense has a lot in common with
air defense in the 1930s, and there is a need for the appropriate
“radar” to enable an integrated cyber defense system that
enables speciﬁc actions to threats detected before the threat
is within our perimeter.

While the ability to collect and process massive quantities
of cyber data has long been considered a roadblock to wide
aperture data cyber data analysis, it is no larger than the
problems we routinely solve on our supercomputers today in
other domains. Through advances made in matrix mathematics
[10], super computing and insights from some fundamental
cyber phenomenology [11], we now have the ability to create
a tool that can dramatically increase the scope of cyber sensing
and enable left-of-launch defense strategies for cyber. The
ability to see into grey cyberspace will enable us to know
of adversarial actions against targets outside of blue space,
and will help inform defenses.

III. CYBER FORWARD DEFENSE VISION

While cyberspace has been treated as an operating domain
for years, addressing it in a whole-of-domain manner such
as in land, sea, undersea, air, and space is more recent de-
velopment [12]. Consistent with other domains, standardizing
cyberspace operating domain begins with applying the three
supporting elements that comprise domain protection: security,
defense, and deterrence. As deﬁned in the Dictionary of
Military and Associated Terms [13] for the cyber domain,
these are:

• Cyberspace Security: Actions taken within protected cy-
berspace to prevent unauthorized access to, exploitation
of, or damage to computers, electronic communications
systems, and other information technology,
including
platform information technology, as well as the informa-
tion contained therein, to ensure its availability, integrity,
authentication, conﬁdentiality, and nonrepudiation.

• Cyberspace Defense: Actions taken within protected cy-
berspace to defeat speciﬁc threats that have breached or
are threatening to breach cyberspace security measures
and include actions to detect, characterize, counter, and
mitigate threats, including malware or the unauthorized
activities of users, and to restore the system to a secure
conﬁguration.

• Cyberspace Deterrence: The prevention of action by the
existence of a credible threat of unacceptable counterac-

tion and/or belief that the cost of action outweighs the
perceived beneﬁts.

Fig. 1. Source-destination trafﬁc matrix view and associated standard domain
cyberspace terminology.

A critical element of domain defense systems analysis is
creating an effective picture of the operating domain that is
both understandable by decision makers and accurate to imple-
mentors. By condensing network trafﬁc to source-destination
IP pairs, we can use an xy-plane to represent all Internet trafﬁc
at a moment in time [12]. Assuming the lower values on the
x- and y-axis represent internal IPs and the higher values on
the x- and y-axis represent adversarial red-space, we can use
Figure 1 to visually separate areas where cyberspace security,
defense, and deterrence come into play.

Fig. 2. Notional cyber-attack detected (5) and cleansed (6) well after initial
infection (3).

Figure 2 represents a notional adversarial cyber attack using
Lockheed Martin’s Cyber Kill Chain [14] mapped to the trafﬁc
matrix view from Figure 1. The threat model being considered
in this notional scenario is a widely observed attack pattern.
Reconnaissance and weaponization, the ﬁrst two stages in the
kill chain correspond to planning in the adversarial domain
(1). The delivery stage corresponds to staging in neutral

CyberspaceDefenseProtected CyberspaceCyberspaceSecuritysourcesdestinationsAdversary CyberspaceCyberspace Deterrencesourcesdestinations152731.Plan2.Stage3.Infiltrate4.Move laterally5.Detect6.Cleanse7.Infiltrate46space (2). The exploitation stage of the kill chain follows
inﬁltration into the blue space as shown in (3). Once inside a
protected domain, spreading begins and expands the footprint
of adversarial capability (4) allowing for the remaining three
kill chain stages: installation, command and control (C2), and
actions on objectives. Any blue space action (5, 6) to limit
discovered adversary operations often do little to prevent the
adversary from continuing to explore further attack paths as
shown in (7).

Reducing the time to detect (tdetect) greatly enhances the
effectiveness of any domain defense system. Techniques that
move surveillance to IP space outside of protected enclave
not only shortens tdetect, but also provide cyber defenders
more lead time to secure blue cyber terrain prior to inﬁltration
by adversary. Figure 3 shows the CyPhER vision for such a
defensive system. While such an architecture is easy to hypoth-
esize, a detailed systems analysis is required to investigate the
practical feasibility of such an approach. Section IV lays out
a functional decomposition of what such a system could look
like.

Fig. 3. Notional cyber-attack detection (5) with defend forward techniques.

IV. ARCHITECTURAL FRAMEWORK

This Section discusses the functional decomposition of the
CyPhER cyber defense system that can serve as the reference
for future prototypes. The selected framework is based on an
open design architecture that emphasizes ﬂexibility to adapt
to multiple mission needs. An open design architecture em-
phasizes publicly shared design information that uses widely
available software where the ﬁnal product is shaped by the
mission and end users [15] [16] [17]. Furthermore, such an
architecture can address the needs of interfacing models from
multiple distinct organizations that might be responsible for
different portions of the mission.

The architectural framework for the prototype is depicted in
Figure 4. Since the architecture aims to allow for a prototype
to consume myriad data sources in a fast and inexpensive
manner; the architectural components are loosely coupled to
provide the most ﬂexibility for updating individual compo-
nents without completely tearing down the ingestion process.
Speciﬁc product recommendations (COTS, GOTS, or custom)

are dependent on mission needs and are outside the scope of
this paper.

A. Data Sources

To enable the prototype to be broadly deployable,
the
architecture is able to accept multiple internal and external
data feeds. Since these data sources might have different rates
of trafﬁc and different levels of ﬁdelity, it is important to ﬁlter
out the relevant pieces of information and curate/homogenize
inputs for processing [18]. This seamless merging and consol-
idation enables the analytics engines to process the disparate
sources as a single, large, homogenized dataset.

The ﬁltering process drops all but four key ﬁelds of infor-
mation about each packet: anonymized source IP, anonymized
destination IP, timestamp, and tap location. This dimension-
ality reduction reduces the amount of data to be processed,
and opens up the possibility of analyzing network trafﬁc at
the scale of global Internet trafﬁc, as demonstrated in [19].
Analysis of compute capacities required to analyze global
Internet trafﬁc is presented in [12]. The ﬁltered data ﬁelds,
source and destination IPs, are anonymized at the source prior
to ingestion into the data transformation module as shown for
“Data Source A” in Figure 5. In cases where the data sources
are raw, unanonymized, unﬁltered packet captures, or NetFlow
without anonymization, an optional data prep service can be
used to accept the data feed and anonymize/curate the raw
feed as needed, as shown for “Data Source B” in Figure 5.

Much of the value proposition of this work is realized
when network trafﬁc data from multiple collection points,
often controlled by different organizations, are aggregated and
analyzed (discussed in Section V-A). While anonymization is
not a requirement for the analysis algorithms to be effective,
there is tremendous value in privacy-preserving anonymiza-
tion, since it alleviates many data sharing concerns between
organizations. The use of trafﬁc matrix representations and
matrix based algorithms allows analysis to work independent
of anonymization, greatly simplifying the overall design and
implementation, while also enabling privacy.

B. Data Transformation

The data transformation module accepts incoming data
feeds in a number of different formats (pcap, csv, binary, etc.)
and transforms them into compressed ﬁles using a custom-built
MetatoolCore code suite, the functionality of which can be
implemented by any number of widely available capabilities.
These compressed binaries can be a) stored for long term
archival on storage systems that are expressive enough to
store streams of matrices that represent timestamped graphs
with nodes and edges evolving over time; and b) converted to
anonymized network trafﬁc matrices for processing using the
GraphBLAS [20] network analysis package. Figure 6 shows
the functional components of the data transformation module.

C. Data Analysis

The data analysis module is central to the unique value
offered by the CyPhER cyber defense capability. This module

sourcesdestinations1251.Plan2.Stage3.Infiltrate4.Move laterally5.Detect6.Cleanse7.InfiltrateFig. 4. High-level architecture framework for CyPhER cyber defense system.

Fig. 5. Collection, anonymization, and ﬁltering of data feeds prior to analysis
using the CyPhER prototype.

Fig. 6. Data transformation module of CyPhER prototype converts the
anonymized and ﬁltered network data stream to anonymized network trafﬁc
matrices for long term archival and statistical analysis.

takes in as input the anonymized and ﬁltered data streams,
and computes trafﬁc baselines (including variances from the
mean). The trafﬁc baselines are encoded as coefﬁcients of
a mathematical model representing “normal” trafﬁc, and are
continuously updated with new incoming network data. The
baseline trafﬁc is used to inform four different types of data
analyses, as shown in Figure 7:

• Categorization, which sorts IP address into clusters based
on their graph attributes. This type of analysis detects
scanning IPs, darkspace IPs, and nominally active IPs
and serves as foundational data for the other types of
analyses.

• Inferential analysis, or statistical study of network data
streams. This sub-module analyzes the incoming network
streams to detect deviations from expected trafﬁc patterns

as gleaned from trafﬁc baselines. While the architecture
maintains ﬂexibility in selecting the speciﬁc solution to
accomplish this task, the GraphBLAS [19] [20] package
is highly recommended because of its powerful parallel
graph algorithm and hypersparse matrix capabilities.
• Predictive analysis, wherein along with the network data
and trafﬁc baselines, historical data from long term
storage is used to identify adversarial infrastructure and
predict oncoming attacks. The predictive analysis module
leverages AI/ML techniques to identify clusters of IPs
that behave similarly, as well as detect patterns of activity
that precede known historical adversarial activity to warn
of oncoming attacks that follow similar strategy.

• Prescriptive analysis, which recommends courses of ac-
tion (COAs) to counter speciﬁc threats in line with the

BRAIDS -9SP 09/28/21CyPhERData SourcesData PrepData TransformationData AnalysisNetwork Data (Anonymized Traffic Matrix)Historical Network Data (Anonymized Traffic Matrix)Targeted enrichment information•Identified anomalous activity•Identified Adversarial Networks•Alerts to Potential Oncoming Attacks•COA RecommendationsAnonymized and Filtered Network Data StreamData Source ATap A1Tap A2Tap A3Collector: Combine (and deduplicate) data feedsAnonymize and filterData Source BTap B1Tap A2Tap B2Collector: Combine (and deduplicate) data feedsData PrepAnonymizeFilterCyPhERData TransformationMetatoolCoreSparse Matrix GenerationCompressed FilesLong Term StorageAnonymized and Filtered Network Data StreamNetwork Data (Anonymized Traffic Matrix)Historical Network Data (Anonymized Traffic Matrix)Fig. 7. Data analysis module in the CyPhER architecture.

persistent engagement doctrine [21] [22]. While many of
these COAs can be generated using anonymized data,
a communication channel with the collection point for
selective, targeted enrichment is available if needed. This
allows for speciﬁc subsets of the data to be deanonymized
as needed, while limiting it to determining COAs. Alter-
natively, the anonymization technique could be selected
after demonstrating that permitted COAs can be generated
using anonymized data.

While entirely customizable, the outputs from categorization
analysis are likely to be utilized by the inferential, predic-
tive, and prescriptive analysis sub-modules. However, data
exchange between other sub-modules are dependent on the
data separation policies and procedures in place between or-
ganizations tasked with inferential, predictive, and prescriptive
actions.

V. DESIGN TRADEOFFS AND CHALLENGES

The open design architecture discussed in Section IV pro-
vides the framework for implementing an observe-pursue-
counter capability using the CyPhER prototype. This Section
addresses some of the tradeoffs that need to be considered with
respect to addressing critical parameters such as the number of
data sources, locations of data taps, sampling intervals, format
of data to be collected and processed, etc.

A. Tap Location

There are a number observatories and outposts in operation
today. These sites are a mixture of academic, non-proﬁt, and
commercial efforts and provide different viewpoints into the
network landscape, as shown in Figure 8. Data from gateways
of protected space are commonly available to most organiza-
tions. Others such as data sets from Center for Applied Internet
Data Analysis (CAIDA) and Measurement and Analysis on
the WIDE Internet (MAWI) lie along major trunk lines in
grey space. And some are honeypots (GreyNoise), or dark
spaces (unassigned locations on the Internet) that see mostly
adversarial trafﬁc (CAIDA Telescope), or sunkholed botnet
command-and-control servers (ShadowServer).

Fig. 8. Examples of current observatories and outposts and their approximate
proximity to various network trafﬁc.

Collection points (taps) exist today to sample trafﬁc across
major portions of the entire internet, via high bandwidth taps
at strategic locations accessible to ISPs. Such taps make it
feasible to collect the data required as input into CyPhER.

One of the primary considerations that needs to be addressed
is the placement of taps that enable the necessary sampling of
trafﬁc to utilize the adversarial activity detection capability of
CyPhER. However, no deterministic method exists that helps
decide where taps should be placed. Placement of taps closer
to the blue network, will capture more targeted data (either
source or destination in the blue network). However, this is
more limiting and provides less time to react and less of a
synoptic view of adversarial activity in the overall topology.
Placing the taps in grey space, or in red-adjacent space can
capture a lot more data, much of it not destined for the blue
space. However, these taps have the potential to help capture
additional anomalous phenomenon by identifying adversarial
activity patterns that are subtly different and target a different
destination, thereby enabling the CyPhER prototype to be able
to thwart similar activity directed toward blue space.

Combining multiple correlated data sources from different
collection points away from blue space has the potential to
provide a live synoptic view of trafﬁc, expanding observability,
as well as providing forensic beneﬁts through identifying if
a) patterns of adversarial activity happened elsewhere; and
b) adversarial tactics changed.

Much like the aviation sector, where integrating sensor
outputs from multiple high-resolution local weather sensors
provides wide-area, high-resolution weather information that
has improved the safety and efﬁciency of air travel, we believe
capturing IP trafﬁc from multiple data collection points can
have a similar impact. Much of the beneﬁts of such analysis
can be gained by utilizing existing network trafﬁc taps around
IP spaces of interest instead of deploying new collection points
on backbone routers.

B. Number of Data Sources

An additional challenge is determining the number of
disparate data sources required as an input to the CyPhER
system for effective detection of adversarial threats. Initial

Data AnalysisInferentialAnalysisPredictive AnalysisPrescriptiveAnalysisNetwork Data (Anonymized Traffic Matrix)Identified anomalous activityIdentified Adversarial NetworksAlerts to Potential OncomingAttacksCOA RecommendationsTraffic BaseliningHistorical Network Data (Anonymized Traffic Matrix)CategorizationTargeted enrichment informationProtected CyberspacesourcesdestinationsAdversary Cyberspace1.Blue gateway2.MAWI trunk3.CAIDA trunk4.CAIDA Equinox trunk5.CAIDA dark gateway6.GreyNoise gateway7.Global Cyber Alliance gateway8.Shadowserver gateway12348567observations suggest that a modest number of collection points
can provide a synoptic view of global IP trafﬁc.

While the architectural framework presented in Section IV
is scalable, and can process multiple input data streams,
the number of data streams required is dependent on a) the
accuracy and precision desired from the detector; and b) the
correlation and/or overlap in the data between the collection
sources.

C. Data Format and Privacy

The extensibility and open design architecture being
adopted for the CyPhER prototype enables us to change the
types of data used for system inputs. While the algorithms
currently used to detect anomalies use deviations from base-
lines derived from matrices of source-destination IP pairs,
any added beneﬁts provided by using additional header ﬁelds
for anomaly detection needs to be examined. Any additional
value provided in adversarial activity detection or accuracy
and precision metrics would have to be weighed against the
additional cost of storing and processing multiple additional
ﬁelds of data.

Additionally, as mentioned in Section IV-A, there is tremen-
dous value in privacy-preserving anonymization, since it al-
leviates many data sharing concerns between organizations.
Anonymization, however, is not a requirement for the analysis
algorithms to be effective. Analysis of how much information
is obscured by the privacy-protection processes, and what
limitations are imposed by working solely with anonymized
data needs to be examined in detail.

VI. NEXT STEPS

There are several concrete next steps that need to be taken to
towards realizing a “defend forward” techniques in cyberspace.
• Further the fundamental research: While we have made
considerable advances in the fundamental research that
forms the core of the data analysis engine identiﬁed in
Section IV-C [23]–[26], substantial work remains prior to
having a deployable system. Developing broader heuris-
tics that can capture signatures of adversarial activity as
well as leveraging AI/ML techniques to learn adversarial
AI/ML infrastructures, and evolution of adversarial activ-
ity are a few of the areas where algorithm development
is needed.

• Complete analysis of design tradeoffs, beginning with
considerations identiﬁed in Section V. Primary amongst
these are determining the number of data sources required
to have true observe-pursue-counter OFTH capability.
While additional data points from sources can help with
the conﬁdence in the detected events, studies into iden-
tifying the point of optimal returns have yet to begin.
Further, algorithmic costs associated with correlating
multiple data ﬁelds (source/destination IP,
time) from
disparate data sources also has to be looked into more
rigorously.

• Extend support to observatories: Much of the gray cy-
berspace data currently collected and maintained are due

to the dedicated focus of a small underfunded community
of actors [12]. Since access to these data sets is vital, it
is critical that support for these collection capabilities be
continued, and expanded where possible.

• Developing appropriate policy framework: There are sev-
eral public policy questions identiﬁed in [12] that need
to be addressed prior to, or alongside the technology
development that is needed to achieve defend forward
capabilities.

VII. CONCLUSION

This document speciﬁes the framework of a privacy-aware
cyber defense tool named CyPhER, that takes in cyber data
from multiple sources and conducts multiple types of statis-
tical analysis on the data to detect adversarial activity. The
framework uses an Open Design architecture, where decisions
on speciﬁc design choices are postponed until proper mission
CONOPS are available.

The architectural framework, as described in Section IV,
allows a system that takes in anonymized source and des-
tination IP addresses from collection points for inferential
and predictive analysis of adversarial activity, and has the
ability to recommend COAs if needed through prescriptive
analysis. CyPhER strives to conduct most of its analysis using
anonymized data, using only targeted enrichment in cases
where it is essential for predictive or prescriptive analysis.
While the modular and extensible architecture described in
this document is ﬂexible, several tradeoff scenarios need to be
considered, as described in Section V.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors wish to acknowledge the following individuals
for their contributions and support: Daniel Andersen, William
Arcand, David Bestor, William Bergeron, Aydın Buluc¸, Bob
Bond, Chansup Byun, K Claffy, Timothy Davis, Paula Dono-
van, Jeff Gottschalk, Micheal Houle, Matthew Hubbell, Anna
Klein, Sarah McGuire, Lauren Milechin, Julie Mullen, Andrew
Prout, Albert Reuther, Steve Rejto, Antonio Rosa, Siddharth
Samsi, Charles Yee, and Marc Zissman

REFERENCES

[1] A. Deeks, “Defend Forward and Cyber Countermeasures,” Ashley Deeks,
Defend Forward and Cyber Countermeasures, Hoover Working Group
on National Security, Technology, and Law, Aegis Series Paper, no. 2004,
2020.

[2] J. Kosseff, “The Contours of ‘Defend Forward’ Under International
Law,” in 2019 11th International Conference on Cyber Conﬂict (CyCon),
vol. 900.

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–13.

[3] M. Montgomery, B. Jensen, E. Borghard, J. Costello, V. Cornfeld,
C. Simpson, and B. Valeriano, “Cyberspace Solarium Commission
Report,” 2020.

[4] B. Gold and C. M. Rader, “Digital Processing of Signals,” Digital

processing of signals, 1969.

[5] S. M. Kay, Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: PracticalAl-

gorithmDevelopment. Pearson Education, 2013, vol. 3.

[6] A. V. Oppenheim, Discrete-time Signal Processing. Pearson Education

India, 1999.

[7] M. R. Endsley, “Toward a Theory of Situation Awareness in Dynamic

Systems,” Human factors, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 32–64, 1995.

[8] P. Barford, M. Dacier, T. G. Dietterich, M. Fredrikson, J. Gifﬁn, S. Jajo-
dia, S. Jha, J. Li, P. Liu, P. Ning et al., “Cyber sa: Situational Awareness
for Cyber Defense,” in Cyber situational awareness.
Springer, 2010,
pp. 3–13.

[9] V. S. Chernyak and I. Y. Immoreev, “A brief history of radar,” IEEE
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, vol. 24, no. 9, pp. B1–
B32, 2009.

[10] J. Kepner, P. Aaltonen, D. Bader, A. Buluc¸, F. Franchetti, J. Gilbert,
D. Hutchison, M. Kumar, A. Lumsdaine, H. Meyerhenke et al., “Math-
ematical Foundations of the GraphBLAS,” in 2016 IEEE High Perfor-
mance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–9.
[11] J. Kepner, K. Cho, and K. Claffy, “New Phenomena in Large-Scale

Internet Trafﬁc,” arXiv preprint cs.NI/1904.04396, 2019.

[12] J. Kepner, J. Bernays, S. Buckley, K. Cho, C. Conrad, L. Daigle,
K. Erhardt, V. Gadepally, B. Greene, M. Jones, R. Knake, B. Maggs,
P. Michaleas, C. Meiners, A. Morris, A. Pentland, S. Pisharody,
S. Powazek, A. Prout, P. Reiner, K. Suzuki, K. Takahashi, T. Tauber,
L. Walker, and D. Stetson, “Zero Botnets: An Observe-Pursue-Counter
Approach,” Belfer Center Reports, vol. 6, 2021.

[13] W. E. Gortney, “DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms,”

2012.

[14] E. M. Hutchins, M. J. Cloppert, and R. M. Amin, “Intelligence-
driven Computer Network Defense Informed by Analysis of Adversary
Campaigns and Intrusion Kill Chains,” Leading Issues in Information
Warfare & Security Research, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 80, 2011.

[15] J. Bessen and A. Nuvolari, “Knowledge Sharing among Inventors: Some
Historical Perspectives,” Revolutionizing Innovation: Users, Communi-
ties and Open Innovation. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, 2016.

[16] T. J. Howard, S. Achiche, A. ¨Ozkil, T. C. McAloone et al., “Open Design
and Crowdsourcing: Maturity, Methodology and Business Models,” in
DS 70: Proceedings of DESIGN 2012, the 12th International Design
Conference, Dubrovnik, Croatia, 2012, pp. 181–190.

[17] J. Pearce, S. Albritton, G. Grant, G. Steed, and I. Zelenika, “A New
Model for Enabling Innovation in Appropriate Technology for Sustain-
able Development,” Sustainability: Science, Practice and Policy, vol. 8,
no. 2, pp. 42–53, 2012.

[18] N. Sawant and H. Shah, “Big Data Application Architecture,” in Big
data Application Architecture Q & A. Springer, 2013, pp. 9–28.

[19] J. Kepner, T. Davis, C. Byun, W. Arcand, D. Bestor, W. Bergeron,
V. Gadepally, M. Hubbell, M. Houle, M. Jones, A. Klein, P. Michaleas,
L. Milechin, J. Mullen, A. Prout, A. Rosa, S. Samsi, C. Yee, and
A. Reuther, “75,000,000,000 Streaming Inserts/Second using Hierar-
chical Hypersparse graphBLAS Matrices,” in 2020 IEEE International
Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 207–210.

[20] “GraphBLAS Repo.” [Online]. Available: https://graphblas.github.io
[21] U. C. Command, “Achieve and Maintain Cyberspace Superiority: Com-
mand Vision for US Cyber Command,” https://bit.ly/3i0HWEI, vol.
202018, 2018.

[22] M. Smeets, “US Cyber Strategy of Persistent Engagement & Defend
Forward: Implications for the Alliance and Intelligence Collection,”
Intelligence and National Security, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 444–453, 2020,
publisher: Taylor & Francis.

[23] J. Kepner, V. Gadepally, L. Milechin, S. Samsi, W. Arcand, D. Bestor,
W. Bergeron, C. Byun, M. Hubbell, M. Houle, M. Jones, A. Klein,
P. Michaleas, J. Mullen, A. Prout, A. Rosa, C. Yee, and A. Reuther,
“Streaming 1.9 Billion Hypersparse Network Updates per Second with
D4M,” in 2019 IEEE High Performance Extreme Computing Conference
(HPEC), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[24] J. Kepner, T. Davis, C. Byun, W. Arcand, D. Bestor, W. Bergeron,
V. Gadepally, M. Hubbell, M. Houle, M. Jones, A. Klein, P. Michaleas,
L. Milechin, J. Mullen, A. Prout, A. Rosa, S. Samsi, C. Yee,
and A. Reuther, 75,000,000,000 Streaming Inserts/Second Using
Hierarchical Hypersparse GraphBLAS Matrices, 2020,
eprint:
2001.06935. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.06935
[25] J. Kepner, K. Cho, K. Claffy, V. Gadepally, P. Michaleas, and
L. Milechin, “Hypersparse Neural Network Analysis of Large-Scale
Internet Trafﬁc,” 2019 IEEE High Performance Extreme Computing
Conference (HPEC), Sep. 2019, iSBN: 9781728150208 Publisher: IEEE.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPEC.2019.8916263
[26] J. Kepner, C. Meiners, C. Byun, S. McGuire, T. Davis, W. Arcand,
J. Bernays, D. Bestor, W. Bergeron, V. Gadepally, and others, “Multi-
Temporal Analysis and Scaling Relations of 100,000,000,000 Network
Packets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.00307, 2020.

