On the Integration of Course of Action Playbooks
into Shareable Cyber Threat Intelligence

Vasileios Mavroeidis
University of Oslo
Norway
vasileim@iﬁ.uio.no

Pavel Eis
Cesnet
Czech Republic
eis@cesnet.cz

Martin Zadnik
Cesnet
Czech Republic
zadnik@cesnet.cz

Marco Caselli
Siemens
Germany
marco.caselli@siemens.com

Bret Jordan
Broadcom
United States
bret.jordan@broadcom.com

1
2
0
2

v
o
N
2
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

5
v
0
4
5
0
1
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Motivated by the introduction of CACAO, the ﬁrst
open standard that harmonizes the way we document courses of
action in a machine-readable format for interoperability, and the
beneﬁts for cybersecurity operations derived from utilizing, and
coupling and sharing course of action playbooks with cyber threat
intelligence, we introduce a uniform metadata template that
supports managing and integrating course of action playbooks
into knowledge representation and knowledge management sys-
tems. We demonstrate the applicability of our approach through
two use-case implementations. We utilize the playbook metadata
template to introduce functionality and integrate course of action
playbooks, such as CACAO, into the MISP threat intelligence
platform and the OASIS Threat Actor Context ontology.

Index Terms—cyber threat intelligence, CTI, cyber threat
intelligence sharing, security playbooks, course of action, CACAO
playbooks, MISP, threat actor context ontology, TAC ontology

I. INTRODUCTION

To respond effectively and in a timely manner to cyber-
security events and incidents, defenders create and utilize
security playbooks, also known as course of action playbooks.
Security playbooks document processes and procedures that
can guide, coordinate, and speed up security operations and
incident response, ensure organizational policy and regulatory
framework compliance, or purely automate security functions.
CACAO is a security playbook standard developed by the
OASIS Collaborative Automated Course of Action Operations
Technical Committee (CACAO TC) [1]. CACAO deﬁnes a
playbook schema and a taxonomy that standardize the way we
create, document, and share course of action workﬂows [2].
A standard, machine-readable playbook schema like CACAO
allows sharing playbooks across organizational boundaries and
technological solutions seamlessly. Prior to CACAO, creating
executable security playbooks relied on proprietary technolo-
gies that prevented their programmatic cross-utilization and
sharing, also making it hard for users to compare generic
playbooks and understand which offer the best models to
leverage.

This

research has

received funding from the European Health
and Digital Executive Agency (HaDEA) under Grant Agreement No.
INEA/CEF/ICT/A2020/2373266 for the JCOP project. In addition, part of
this research has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation program under Grant Agreement No. 830927
(CONCORDIA project) and 833418 (SAPPAN project). Furthermore, this
research work was supported by the Research Council of Norway under Grant
Agreement No. 303585 for the CyberHunt project.

Cyber threat intelligence is evidence-based knowledge about
adversaries and their operations. It increases defenders’ threat
situational awareness, supports decision making, and drives
their proactive, active (i.e., active defense), and retroactive
postures against threats. From a defender’s point of view,
a course of action is a set of speciﬁc actions that could
be taken to prevent or respond to an attack [3]. From an
attacker’s point of view, a course of action is a set of speciﬁc
actions pertinent to accomplishing the adversary’s nefarious
goals. Available machine-readable cyber threat
intelligence
representation and sharing standards and threat intelligence
platforms provide textual course of action descriptions that
are far away from being adequately structured and executable.
With the introduction of CACAO, defenders can propel the
contextuality and actionability of cyber threat intelligence by
populating and sharing structured machine-readable course of
action playbooks.

In support of programmatically managing and sharing
course of action playbooks, this paper introduces a standard
metadata template to assist their integration into cyber-threat-
intelligence-focused knowledge representation and knowledge
management systems. We demonstrate the feasibility and
the beneﬁts derived from our standard templating approach
by providing two use-case implementations. We show how
security playbooks, such as CACAO, are integrated, managed,
and shared using the MISP threat
intelligence knowledge
management, analysis, and sharing platform [4] [5] and a cyber
threat intelligence ontology known as the Threat Actor Context
ontology (TAC ontology) [6] [7].

The rest of the paper is organized in the following way.
Section II introduces the CACAO security playbook standard.
Section III presents our proposed metadata template, which
functions as a contextual integration layer between security
playbooks and knowledge management systems. Sections IV
and V provide an overview of the MISP threat intelligence
platform and the TAC ontology and discuss how our metadata
template was utilized to introduce functionality for collecting,
organizing, managing, and sharing security playbooks. Section
VI concludes the paper.

II. CACAO SECURITY PLAYBOOKS

Security playbooks are a fundamental component of In-
tegrated Adaptive Cyberspace Defense (IACD) [8], guiding

 
 
 
 
 
 
systems, subsystems, and human agents on how to interoperate
to execute a course of action. Figure 1 illustrates an abstract
preventative playbook.

CACAO playbooks, among other command types, can en-
capsulate OpenC2 [9], [10], Sigma [11], and Kestrel [12]
commands to support interoperability at the actuator level,
making the playbooks require minimal modiﬁcations to map
to an organization’s own environment.

Fig. 1. Preventative security playbook (IoC handling).

A CACAO (Collaborative Automated Course of Action
Operations) playbook is a workﬂow for security orchestration
and automation represented in JavaScript Object Notation
(JSON) that contains a set of steps to perform based on a
logical process, similar to how Business Process Model and
Notation (BPMN) deﬁnes a playbook for business processes.
CACAO leveraged the design patterns of BPMN to introduce
a cybersecurity-speciﬁc JSON schema.

The execution of a CACAO playbook may be triggered by
an automated or manual event or observation or can be time-
dependent (e.g., on a regular basis or periodically).

At a high level, a CACAO playbook (Figure 2) comprises
metadata and workﬂow steps that integrate logic to control the
commands to be performed, a set of commands to perform,
targets that receive, process and execute the commands, data
markings that specify the playbook’s handling and sharing
requirements, and extensions that allow to granularly intro-
duce additional functionality. Furthermore, for integrity and
authenticity, CACAO playbooks can be digitally signed. The
signature design supports both including the signature in the
playbook itself and storing or releasing it separately as a
detached signature.

CACAO playbooks can support multiple functions of cy-
berspace defense, such as threat hunting, detection, investiga-
tion, prevention, mitigation, remediation, or attack emulation.

Fig. 2. Architecture and components of a CACAO security playbook.

III. A COMMON METADATA TEMPLATE FOR INTEGRATING
COURSE OF ACTION PLAYBOOKS INTO SHAREABLE
CYBER THREAT INTELLIGENCE
To integrate security playbooks into structured and shareable
cyber threat intelligence, create managed security playbook
knowledge bases, and manage security playbooks program-
matically based on a set of meaningful attributes, we pro-
pose a metadata template (Table I) that provides different
technological solutions with a uniform approach. Producers
and consumers of security playbooks can utilize the metadata
template to contextually enrich their playbooks with addi-
tional machine-processable information as they make them
available into their knowledge representation frameworks and
knowledge management systems. An up-to-date version of the
metadata template is available online1.

The metadata available in CACAO playbooks have greatly
inﬂuenced the development of the metadata template pre-
sented in this paper. Consequently, the metadata of a CACAO
playbook can map directly to the metadata of the proposed
template.

The proposed metadata template is not restricted to en-
capsulating only machine-readable and automated courses of
action. Similarly, it can provide other playbook representation
types with metadata, making them programmatically available
and manageable, such as a document describing a robust non-
automated course of action or a playbook graph (model), like
the one provided in Figure 1.

1https://github.com/Vasileios-Mavroeidis/coa-playbook-metadata

TABLE I
METADATA TEMPLATE FOR SECURITY PLAYBOOK MANAGEMENT

IV. USE CASE: INTRODUCING SECURITY PLAYBOOKS IN
MISP THREAT INTELLIGENCE PLATFORM

Element

id

created

modiﬁed

revoked

creator

valid from

valid until

description

label

impact

severity

priority

organization type

playbook type

playbook standard

playbook abstraction

playbook

playbook base64

Description
A value that uniquely identiﬁes the
playbook.
The time at which the playbook was
originally created.
The time that this particular version of the
playbook was last modiﬁed.
A boolean that identiﬁes if the playbook
creator deems that this playbook is no
longer valid.
The entity that created this playbook. It can
be, for example, a natural person or an
organization. It may be represented using
an id that identiﬁes the creator.
The time from which the playbook is
considered valid and the steps that it
contains can be executed.
The time at which this playbook should no
longer be considered a valid playbook to be
executed.
An explanation, details, and more context
about what this playbook does and tries to
accomplish.
An optional set of terms, labels, or tags
associated with this playbook (e.g., aliases
of adversary groups or malware
family/variant/name that this playbook is
related to).
From 0 to 100, an integer representing the
impact the playbook has on the
organization. A value of 0 means
speciﬁcally undeﬁned. Values range from 1,
the lowest impact, to a value of 100, the
highest. For example, a purely investigative
playbook that is non-invasive would have a
low impact value of 1. In contrast, a
playbook that performs changes such as
adding rules into a ﬁrewall would have a
higher impact value.
From 0 to 100, an integer representing the
seriousness of the conditions that this
playbook addresses. A value of 0 means
speciﬁcally undeﬁned. Values range from 1,
the lowest severity, to a value of 100, the
highest.
From 0 to 100, an integer representing the
priority of this playbook relative to other
deﬁned playbooks. A value of 0 means
speciﬁcally undeﬁned. Values range from 1,
the highest priority, to a value of 100, the
lowest.
The type of organization that the playbook
is intended for. This can be an industry
sector.
The security-related functions the playbook
addresses. A playbook may account for
multiple types (e.g., detection and
investigation). [’Notiﬁcation’, ’Detection’,
’Investigation’, ’Prevention’, ’Mitigation’,
’Remediation’, ’Attack’]
The standard the playbook conforms to
(e.g., CACAO).
The playbook’s level of abstraction.
[’Template’, ’Executable’]
The whole playbook in its native format
(e.g., CACAO JSON). Security playbook
producers and consumers use this property
to share and retrieve playbooks.
The whole playbook encoded in base64.
Security playbook producers and consumers
of playbooks use this property to share and
retrieve playbooks.

Allowing one organization’s detection to become another’s
prevention via intelligence sharing is a powerful paradigm
that can advance the overall security of organizations [13].
Emerging cybersecurity-focused knowledge management sys-
tems, otherwise known as Threat Intelligence Platforms (TIPs),
equip defenders with the ability to collect, store, process,
analyze, and share actionable information and intelligence in
meaningful times.

MISP (Malware Information Sharing Platform) [4] is an
open-source threat intelligence platform that has undergone
considerable development and increased functionality since
2011. Organizations use MISP to exchange cyber threat in-
telligence among trusted groups so that they can stay threat-
informed and support their decision-making processes.

The fundamental building block of MISP is a structured
core format for representing threat information and ensuring
interoperability between MISP instances and other threat in-
telligence platforms that utilize it [14]. One component of the
core format is the ability to create objects that serve as a
contextual bond between a list of attributes. The main purpose
of an object is to represent complex structures that could not
be described by single attributes. Each object is created using
an object template and carries the metadata of the template
used for its creation within.

The existing MISP course of action object (Table II) is used
to describe in a textual form a measure taken to prevent or
respond to an attack.

TABLE II
MISP COURSE OF ACTION OBJECT TEMPLATE

Object attribute

cost

description

efﬁcacy

impact

name

objective

stage

type

Description
The estimated cost of applying the course
of action. [’High’, ’Medium’, ’Low’,
’None’, ’Unknown’]
A description of the course of action.
The estimated efﬁcacy of applying the
course of action. [’High’, ’Medium’, ’Low’,
’None’, ’Unknown’]
The estimated impact of applying the
course of action. [’High’, ’Medium’, ’Low’,
’None’, ’Unknown’]
The name used to identify the course of
action.
The objective of the course of action.
The stage of the threat management
lifecycle that the course of action is
applicable to. [’Remedy’, ’Response’,
’Further Analysis Required’]
The type of the course of action.
[’Perimeter Blocking’, ’Internal Blocking’,
’Redirection’, ’Redirection (Honey Pot)’,
’Hardening’, ’Patching’, ’Eradication’,
’Rebuilding’, ’Training’, ’Monitoring’,
’Physical Access Restrictions’, ’Logical
Access Restrictions’, ’Public Disclosure’,
’Diplomatic Actions’, ’Policy Actions’,
’Other’]

Based on the common metadata template presented in
Table I (Section III) in support of programmatically managing
and sharing course of action playbooks, this research work
introduced a conforming MISP security playbook object tem-
plate that is the basis for creating shareable MISP security
playbook objects. The security playbook object is a wrapper
that encapsulates and makes available and shareable among
MISP instances course of action orchestration workﬂows, such
as CACAO security playbooks. A MISP security playbook
object can make use of semantic relationships and link to other
objects to improve the context around a playbook, such as
the attack pattern a playbook mitigates or encodes to execute
(attack emulation). An example is illustrated in Figure 3. The
MISP security playbook object template is available at the
ofﬁcial MISP GitHub repository2.

Fig. 3. Example illustration of MISP security playbook object.

V. USE CASE: INTRODUCING SECURITY PLAYBOOKS IN
THREAT ACTOR CONTEXT ONTOLOGY

Developed by the OASIS Threat Actor Context Technical
Committee (TAC TC), the TAC ontology is an open-source
modular knowledge representation framework that captures
the rich context around adversaries into a structured machine-
readable format.

The core outline of the TAC ontology that deﬁnes the
their relationships, and other semantics

primary concepts,

2https://github.com/MISP/misp-objects/blob/main/objects/security-

playbook/deﬁnition.json

around the context of adversaries (in Web Ontology Language
- OWL) is based on the STIX 2.1 standard, a model and a
language to represent and exchange cyber threat intelligence
(in JSON). The TAC ontology can operate as a knowledge
management system that, based on its underlying represen-
tation schema, can be used to conduct intelligence analysis,
fuse, store and share information, and perform logic-based
information inference using a reasoner.

The framework’s ﬂexibility permits introducing and extend-
ing the existing core ontology with additional concepts and
relationships, providing defenders with more extensive and
integrated machine-readable cyber threat intelligence coverage
and capability based on their organizations’ needs. This also
enhances the usability of STIX 2.1 by providing a bridge to
other representations which can altogether harmonize with the
TAC ontology. For example, in [2], the authors utilized a threat
actor typology to characterize adversaries and, based on the
adversaries deﬁning characteristics, automatically infer their
type (e.g., government cyberwarrior, cybercriminal). The on-
tology introduced in [2] demonstrates how their representation
schema for threat actors could supplement or replace the threat
actor concept/representation of the core TAC ontology as it is
represented by the STIX 2.1 standard.

The TAC ontology is fundamentally based on the STIX 2.1
standard and thus includes the concept of course of action.
According to the STIX 2.1 speciﬁcation, the object supports
basic use cases, like sharing prose courses of action, and does
not support the ability to represent automated courses of action
or contain properties to represent metadata about courses of
action (Table III). As annotated in the speciﬁcation, future
STIX 2 releases will introduce these capabilities.

TABLE III
STIX 2.1 COURSE OF ACTION OBJECT TEMPLATE (SPECIFIC
PROPERTIES)

Property Name

type

name

description

action (reserved)

Description
The value of this property MUST be
course-of-action.
A name used to identify the Course of
Action.
A description that provides more details
and context about the Course of Action,
potentially including its purpose and its key
characteristics.
RESERVED – To capture
structured/automated courses of action.

Based on the common metadata template presented in
Table I (Section III) in support of programmatically managing
and sharing course of action playbooks, this research work
introduced a conforming ontological representation in OWL.
The proposed ontology can be integrated with other ontologies
such as the TAC ontology to improve the context around
adversaries with relevant security playbooks or can be utilized
standalone to create a searchable (based on the properties
deﬁned in Table I) knowledge base of security playbooks.
The security playbook concept/ontology when integrated with

REFERENCES

[1] OASIS, “Collaborative Automated Course of Action Operations (CA-
CAO) Technical Committee,” Accessed: Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/cacao.

[2] B. Jordan and A. Thomson eds., “CACAO Security Playbooks Version

1.0,” OASIS, Committee Speciﬁcation 02, June 2021.

[3] V. Mavroeidis and S. Bromander, “Cyber threat intelligence model:
an evaluation of taxonomies, sharing standards, and ontologies within
cyber threat intelligence,” in 2017 European Intelligence and Security
Informatics Conference (EISIC).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 91–98.

[4] C. Wagner, A. Dulaunoy, G. Wagener, and A. Iklody, “Misp: The
intelligence
design and implementation of a collaborative threat
sharing platform,” in Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM on Workshop
on Information Sharing and Collaborative Security, ser. WISCS ’16.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, p.
49–56. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2994539.2994542
[5] “MISP - Open Source Threat Intelligence Platform & Open Standards
For Threat Information Sharing,” accessed: Oct. 2021. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.misp-project.org.

[6] OASIS, “Threat Actor Context (TAC) Technical Committee,” Accessed:
Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/
tac.

[7] OASIS Threat Actor Context Technical Committee, “Threat Actor
Context Ontology,” Accessed: Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//github.com/oasis-open/tac-ontology, 2021.

[8] B. K. Done, K. D. Willett, D. W. Viel, G. W. Tally, D. F. Sterne,
and B. Benjamin, “Towards a Capability-Based Architecture for Cy-
berspace Defense,” 2016, Concept Paper Approved for Public Release,
US Department of Homeland Security, US National Security Agency
Information Assurance Directorate, and the Johns Hopkins University
Applied Physics Laboratory, AOS-16-0099.

[9] V. Mavroeidis and J. Brule, “A nonproprietary language for the command
and control of cyber defenses – openc2,” Computers & Security, vol. 97,
2020.

[10] OASIS, “Open Command and Control (OpenC2) Technical Committee,”
accessed: Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.oasis-open.org/
committees/openc2.

[11] “SIGMA - Generic Signature Format for SIEM Systems,” Accessed:
Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma.
[12] “Kestrel Threat Hunting Language,” Accessed: Oct. 2021. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/opencybersecurityalliance/kestrel-lang.
[13] C. Johnson, L. Badger, D. Waltermire, J. Snyder, C. Skorupka et al.,
“Guide to cyber threat information sharing,” NIST Special Publication
800-150, 2016.

[14] A. Dulaunoy and A. I. eds., “MISP Core Format,” draft-00, Sep. 2021,
Accessed: Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.misp-standard.
org/rfc/misp-standard-core.html.

the TAC ontology ”inherits” the semantic relationships of the
course of action object as deﬁned in STIX 2.1 (Figure 4). The
ontology is maintained by the TAC TC3.

Fig. 4. Example illustration of TAC security playbook individual and its
semantic relationships as speciﬁed on the STIX 2.1 standard.

VI. CONCLUSION
While cyberspace defense continuously becomes more
automated and adaptive,
the need for sharing automated
courses of action across organizational boundaries becomes
apparent. CACAO is the ﬁrst open non-proprietary standard
that harmonizes the way we document executable courses of
action. This paper presented a common metadata template
that supports managing and integrating course of action
playbooks, such as CACAO or other more abstract or
proprietary,
like
intelligence platforms and threat-intelligence-focused
threat
knowledge representation approaches.

into knowledge management

systems

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Professor Audun Jøsang
(University of Oslo), Jane Ginn (Cyber Threat Intelligence
Network), Allan Thomson (Chief Architect Threat Defense
Avast), and Francisco Luis de Andr´es P´erez for providing
feedback on the paper.

3https://github.com/oasis-open/tac-ontology/blob/main/stix-semex/security-

playbook

