1
2
0
2

t
c
O
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
7
7
0
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Emerging Trends of Recently Published Datasets for Intrusion
Detection Systems (IDS): A Survey

Rishabh Jindal 1 and Adnan Anwar 2

1

School of IT, Deakin University

2 Centre for Cyber Security Research and Innovation, School of IT, Deakin University

Abstract

With the ubiquitous nature of information technology solutions that facilitate communication in the
modern world, cyber attacks are increasing in volume and becoming more sophisticated in nature. From
classic network-based Denial of Service (DoS) attacks to the more recent concerns of privacy compromises,
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are becoming an urgent need to safeguard the modern information
technology landscape. The development of these IDS relies on training and evaluation datasets that
must evolve with time and represent the contemporary threat landscape. The purpose of this analysis
is to explore such recent datasets, describe how they enable research endeavours and the development
of novel IDS. Speciﬁcally, 7 recent datasets published for IDS research have been reviewed along with
selected publications that have employed them. In doing so, the discussion emphasizes the need for the
publication of even more modern datasets, especially for emerging technologies such as the Internet of
Things (IoT) and smartphone devices, to ensure that modern networks and communication channels are
secured. Furthermore, a taxonomy based on the discussed datasets has been developed that can be used
to inform the dataset selection process for future research endeavours.

1

Introduction

Given the increasing digital footprint of human existence; even more so in the aftermath of the Covid-19
pandemic, the threat posed by cyber attacks is greater than ever. The cyber-attack landscape is constantly
evolving; with the number and types of attacks increasing regularly. In a recent survey, researchers identiﬁed
over 50 ill consequences of cyber attacks across 5 broad categories – Physical/Digital, Economic, Psycholog-
ical, Reputational and Social/Societal [1].

Such attacks can not only lead to individual and economic losses but can cause a great deal of damage to
society at large. An example of this is the attack on Ukraine’s power grid system in 2015. Attackers were
able to gain access to the system, control over 30 substations and leave over 230,000 people without light or
heat in the peak of winter [2]. Therefore, it is imperative to develop tools that can eﬀectively identify even
sophisticated attacks and notify the appropriate experts in a timely fashion.

Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are one set of such tools. The primary goal of IDS is to monitor networks
and identify malicious intrusions. These systems can broadly be classiﬁed into two categories based on how
they identify intrusions – signature-based methods scan the network for characteristics of known attacks,
whereas anomaly-based methods scan the network for traﬃc that deviates from the usual nature of traﬃc

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
on that network. There are also hybrid approaches that can combine strengths of both signature and
anomaly-based methods.

The modern information technology landscape is constantly evolving and so is the nature of communication
being facilitated by devices across the globe. With the advent of smart devices and the internet of things,
we live in a world where the number of networked devices far exceeds the number of people in the world.
However, novel research solutions in the area of intrusion detection are still disproportionately evaluated
on traditional datasets such as NSL-KDD, DARPA, etc, that do not accurately represent the nature of
threats in the modern IT landscape. This is in large part due to the lack of modern datasets that contain a
representative sample of attacks, especially for newer technologies such as the internet of things.

In this survey, we present a discussion of seven recently published modern datasets and the research en-
deavours that they have enabled in an eﬀort to highlight the need for more such datasets to ensure that the
intrusion detection research community can continue to thrive and be able to nip even the most sophisticated
threats in the bud.

Speciﬁcally, the highlights of the current work are that it provides a detailed discussion of recent datasets and
their importance in the advancement of IDS research, and the development of a taxonomy for IDS datasets.
The rest of this analysis is structured as follows: section 2 presents a discussion of related surveys; section 3
presents a brief overview of IDS; section 4 ﬁrst describes the dataset selection procedure and then presents
the discussion of the selected datasets and the research informed by them; section 5 presents a taxonomy of
the selected datasets and ﬁnally, concluding remarks as well as directions for future research are presented
in section 6.

2 Related surveys

This paper adopts a systematic approach to the review of intrusion detection datasets and includes a wide
range of datasets that have served as the benchmark in research over recent years. Although most intrusion
detection research has leveraged older and more traditional datasets, this paper focuses on discussing recent
datasets – published in or after the year 2017, to emphasize the importance of creating new datasets that
reﬂect the modern threat landscape and the research opportunities that are created by the publication of
such modern datasets. Most related surveys that address intrusion detection systems focus primarily on
the algorithms used and/or developing taxonomies of these techniques and the datasets used. The present
study is diﬀerent in its focus on the study of recent datasets and their suitability for use in the modern IT
environment. The speciﬁc contributions of this paper are described below:

1. One of the major aims of this survey is to examine the emerging datasets that have been published in
recent years (in or after the year 2017). A comprehensive discussion regarding the development and
suitability of each dataset is undertaken to emphasize the value delivered by modern datasets and the
need for more such modern and representative datasets to drive future research endeavours.

2. The study also aims to develop a comprehensive taxonomy of these IDS datasets. While existing
taxonomies have focussed on internet and network traﬃc data, this study broadens the scope and
includes datasets from the ﬁelds of IoT and smartphone malware to highlight the diﬀerence in the
underlying characteristics between categories and the need for custom-tailored IDS solutions for each.

The 2016 survey by Buczak et al. [3] presented an eﬀective overview of intrusion detection and the most
popular machine learning methods used for the same. The survey’s focus is to educate the reader about the
fundamentals of intrusion detection, machine learning and the metrics used to evaluate the performance of
various algorithms. Regarding datasets, a brief discussion is presented that provides only a description of
the datasets that are used in the algorithms discussed in the study. Therefore the present study is diﬀerent
in its focus on delivering a detailed discussion regarding the development of IDS datasets in recent years and

2

the need for more such datasets to be published, rather than the various machine learning and deep learning
algorithms that are built on top of them.

In the 2019 paper by Khraisat et al. [4], the authors present a taxonomy of diﬀerent IDS techniques, focusing
primarily on the underlying machine learning techniques with only a brief discussion of some popular network
traﬃc datasets irrespective of their year of publication. In contrast, the current survey presents a taxonomy of
the recent datasets that are used to study IDS techniques, broadening the scope to include datasets from the
IoT and smartphone malware ﬁelds in addition to the widely explored ﬁeld of network traﬃc. Furthermore,
by focussing on recent datasets, this study illustrates the increased validity and wider applications of such
datasets compared to older datasets that are becoming increasingly obsolete, and emphasizes the need for
the publication of even more modern datasets.

The 2020 study by Thakkar et al. [5] is focussed on IDS datasets and studies the recent CIC-IDS-2017 and
CSE-CIC-IDS-2018 datasets to analyse how IDS datasets have evolved over time. The present study builds
on this eﬀort and analyses more popular recent IDS datasets, highlighting the evolution of such datasets
and their increased validity and reliability to evaluate the performance of modern mitigation techniques in
real-world scenarios.

The 2019 study by Ring et al. [6] provides one of the most comprehensive reviews of IDS datasets that the
authors came across during their literature review. The study analyses 34 popular network traﬃc-based
datasets based on 15 parameters. The authors explore the structure and generation of each dataset to
identify the best-suited scenarios for its use and its limitations. The present study builds on this analysis by
analysing the situations in which such modern datasets have actually been deployed and how the publication
of such datasets can inform research endeavours in unexpected ways and thus lead to the rapid advancement
of the ﬁeld.

The 2020 study by Hindy et al. [7] presents taxonomies for IDS techniques, datasets and threats. Since
the study concerns itself with building taxonomies, the analysis of datasets is primarily a statistical one
that uncovers the distribution and frequency of various datasets in the literature and the nature of attacks
represented in those datasets. Therefore, the present study is diﬀerent in its greater focus on the study of
IDS datasets and its evaluation of the suitability and reliability of these datasets in the modern intrusion
threats environment.

The 2020 survey conducted by Aldweesh et al. [8] was more focused and provided a taxonomy of deep learning-
based IDS techniques with respect to factors such as “input data, detection, deployment and evaluation
strategies.” One of the conclusions that the authors reached was that the currently prevalent datasets are
either obsolete because they do not capture the wide range of modern attacks or do not eﬀectively simulate
real-world environments. The current survey aims to shed more light on this issue from another angle by
discussing the suitability and reliability of recently-developed datasets from a real-world perspective.

The 2020 study by Ferrag et al. [9] is another comprehensive study on IDS datasets. It describes 35 popular
IDS datasets and creates a taxonomy based on them, proposing 7 categories under which IDS datasets can be
classiﬁed. The study then analyses the performance of 7 deep learning techniques on 2 recent datasets (CSE-
CIC-IDS2018 and BoT-IoT) to evaluate the eﬃcacy of deep learning techniques for IDS. The present study
builds on the study of IDS datasets initiated by Ferrag et. al by evaluating the validity and reliability of recent
datasets to evaluate the performance of modern IDS techniques. Speciﬁcally, the present analysis conducts
a thorough investigation of recently developed IDS datasets to evaluate whether they are representative of
the wide gamut of modern intrusion attacks that are encountered in the real world.

3 Overview of Intrusion Detection

Intrusion detection refers to the process of monitoring a network or system to identify malicious activity.
The set of tools and techniques used for this purpose are known as Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS). There

3

Paper

Buczak et al.

Khraisat et al.

Thakkar et al.

Ring et al.

Hindy et al.

Aldweesh et al.

Ferrag et al.

Present study

Focus on recent datasets

Ideal use-case of each dataset Validity of datasets Taxonomy of datasets

Features

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

Partial

Partial

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Table 1: Summary of related surveys and present study.

are multiple types of IDS, as will be discussed shortly, however, the principle underlying all of them can be
described as follows: an IDS collects considerable amounts of data by logging all the traﬃc on a system or
network and attempts to identify malicious activity by cross-referencing such data across multiple sources.
Intrusion Detection Systems can be classiﬁed into three main categories based on the technique used to
identify malicious traﬃc.

3.1 Signature-based detection

A signature refers to the characteristics of a previously identiﬁed attack. Therefore, this technique aims
to identify malicious activity by comparing traﬃc data to the signatures of previously identiﬁed attacks.
However, this technique, also known as misuse detection, presents several challenges:

Since it relies on signatures of previously identiﬁed attacks, it cannot be to used identify novel or zero-day
attacks. It is often cumbersome to program the signatures of all previously identiﬁed attacks, rendering the
deployment of signature-based methods time-consuming and expensive.

3.2 Anomaly-based detection

An anomaly refers to a departure from normal behaviour, therefore, anomaly-based intrusion detection
techniques aim to learn the traﬃc patterns of a given system or network and identify malicious activity by
analysing any deviations from that normal pattern. The three primary strategies used to identify anomalies
are described below:

• Statistics-based techniques: Such techniques strive to identify anomalous activity by analysing statis-

tical indicators such as standard deviations, means and distributions.

• Knowledge-based techniques: Such techniques strive to identify anomalous activity based on previous

knowledge regarding normal and abnormal activity.

• Machine and Deep learning techniques: Such techniques involve the use of mathematical algorithms

to learn normal traﬃc patterns from past data without human intervention.

It is also important to note that since anomaly-based techniques do not rely on previously encountered
attacks, they can be used to identify novel or zero-day attacks.

4

3.3 Hybrid detection

Signature-based methods suﬀer from shortcomings such as their inability to identify new attacks and a lack
of dynamism owing to their hard-coded nature. On the other hand, anomaly-based methods pose their
own set of problems such as the high rate of false positives. Hybrid techniques aim to eﬀectively combine
signature-based and anomaly-based detection techniques such that each technique can be used to mitigate
the shortcomings of the other. Therefore, these techniques can oﬀer better performance against novel attacks
when compared to signature-based methods and produce a lower rate of false positives when compared to
anomaly-based techniques.

3.4 Deep learning vs. traditional machine learning for intrusion detection

Arthur Samuel, often credited as the father of machine learning, deﬁned it as a “ﬁeld of study that gives
computers the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed” [10]. Machine learning primarily
focusses on regression and classiﬁcation tasks, thus making it an appropriate tool for the purpose of intrusion
In traditional machine learning methods, the
detection because it is in essence a classiﬁcation problem.
data that is used to train various models must be curated by experts and in the case of classiﬁcation
tasks, distinctly labelled observations must be provided. This can become a time-consuming and arduous
procedure when large datasets like the ones observed in the modern information technology environment are
encountered. This is where modern deep learning techniques enter the frame and oﬀer considerable beneﬁts.

One of the foremost texts in the ﬁeld describes deep learning as “a particular kind of machine learning that
achieves great power and ﬂexibility by learning to represent the world as nested hierarchy of concepts, with
each concept deﬁned in relation to simpler concepts, and more abstract representations computed in terms of
less abstract ones” [11]. In other words, deep learning architectures have the ability to learn the relationships
between various features of the dataset through the use of abstractions and multiple layers and without the
need for human intervention. Therefore, such architectures are able to address one of the biggest challenges
of traditional machine learning methods, that is the need to provide models labelled training data.

Furthermore, from an intrusion detection perspective, deep learning architectures are well suited to the
dynamic and large-scale nature of datasets in the modern information technology environment and can
identify complex relationships between variables that would be impossible for humans to discern due to
sheer scale and dimensionality. Therefore, deep learning models are ideal tools to deploy anomaly-based
intrusion detection techniques through. They can analyse large amounts of historical data and classify
traﬃc as either normal or anomalous and even further classify anomalous traﬃc into various categories of
malicious attacks.

Although the theory behind deep learning has been around for decades, such techniques have historically
been largely impractical due to the sizable requirement of computational resources. However, recent advances
in hardware technology have made deep learning more accessible than ever before and thus there has been an
explosion of interest in the ﬁeld in recent years with innovative and remarkable applications across a myriad
of domains.

4 Recent datasets developed for intrusion detection research

4.1 Systematic Approach for Dataset selection

As stated earlier in our discussion, the present analysis is concerned with the exploration and evaluation of
recent datasets published for intrusion detection research. During the literature review process, the authors
noted that there was a signiﬁcant uptick in the number of such datasets being published in the year 2017

5

and after. Therefore, 2017 was selected as the cutoﬀ year to limit the scope of the analysis to a manageable
duration. The exact process that lead to the shortlisting of the 7 datasets that form the basis of the discussion
is described below.

In addition to the widely researched area of network traﬃc intrusion detection, the researchers wanted to
include discussions about areas that are gaining traction and represent an increasing amount of traﬃc in
the modern information technology landscape: IoT devices and smartphones. Furthermore, the authors also
wanted to include a discussion regarding the research in the area of privacy intrusion. As more and more
people begin using technology in their daily lives and generate the vast amounts of data that we observe
today, the threat to users’ privacy is perhaps greater than it has ever been before. Therefore, privacy
preservation is an active area of research in the intrusion detection community and the publication of more
comprehensive datasets is an indispensable requirement for the advancement of the ﬁeld.

Finally, the authors turned to some of the most reputable institutions in the intrusion detection research
community; such as the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity, the Center for Applied Internet Data Analysis
and UNSW Canberra, to explore which of their recent publications meet the outlined criteria. These insti-
tutions have a history of developing reliable and inﬂuential datasets in the past that have informed research
endeavours for many years and have had a signiﬁcant contribution in the evolution of the industry. Trusting
the pedigree of these institutions was highly successful as the analysed datasets are comprehensive, reliable
and have already formed the basis of many exciting and innovative research endeavours. This is highlighted
by our detailed discussion of each selected dataset in the next section.

4.2 Recent Datasets

4.2.1 TOR-nonTOR

Overview: With the rapid rate of advancement in information technologies and the widespread adoption
of the Internet across the world, the risk of privacy breaches is greater than ever before. Privacy is an active
research area and has attracted the interest of many cybersecurity researchers. As with intrusion detection
research, there is a pressing need for reliable and valid datasets that can be used to train and evaluate privacy
preserving and compromising techniques. One such dataset was published in 2017 by the researchers in [12].
The dataset contains labelled traﬃc over the Tor network and was developed as part of the researchers’
eﬀort to develop a technique to identify Tor traﬃc and classify it into one of eight categories – browsing,
chat, audio-streaming, video-streaming, mail, VOIP, P2P, and File Transfer. Tor is currently one of the
most popular tools used by internet users to encrypt and anonymize their traﬃc to avoid surveillance on the
internet. Identifying Tor traﬃc and being able to classify it into one of several categories as suggested by
the researchers represents a severe privacy risk for unsuspecting users. Thus, the researchers in [12] hope to
increase the level of privacy that can be achieved on the Tor network by publishing this dataset to facilitate
the study of its current vulnerabilities. The dataset generation process is discussed next.

The researchers set up a virtual box comprised of a workstation and a gateway to generate traﬃc across
8 categories (browsing, chat, audio-streaming, video-streaming, mail, VOIP, P2P, and File Transfer) over
18 relevant applications (Facebook, Spotify, Gmail, Skype, etc.). The traﬃc ﬂows between the workstation
and the gateway were represented by regular pcap ﬁles and the traﬃc ﬂows between the gateway and the
internet were represented by Tor pcap ﬁles. The Tor pcap ﬁles were then labelled based on sending only one
application’s traﬃc (regular pcap ﬁles) across the workstation and gateway at a time.The system architecture
is illustrated in Figure 1.

Related Literature: Even though Tor is primarily used by users to avoid being tracked and being served
targeted advertisements, it has also been employed by criminals as a means of conducting illegal activities
online without being traced. Therefore, techniques that can identify users on the Tor network may decrease
the level of privacy for an average user, yet they are an essential tool in the arsenal of cybersecurity and
law enforcement professionals to protect the interests of society at large. [13] uses the Tor-nonTor dataset

6

Figure 1: Architecture of data collection system

to evaluate and optimize the performance of several machine learning techniques with respect to Tor traﬃc
identiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, the researchers employed random oversampling and under sampling to mitigate
the class imbalance of the dataset and techniques such as K-fold cross-validation and Grid Search to optimize
the hyperparameters of the selected machine learning algorithms. Based on their experiments, the researchers
obtained the best results with the Random Forest algorithm and were able to achieve an accuracy of 98.68%
in identifying Tor traﬃc.

Another application of the Tor-nonTor dataset, that has been studied by researchers in [14], is identifying
nonTor traﬃc on a Tor network to shed light on the activities that when carried out on a Tor network can
downgrade privacy safeguards and thus put users at risk. Speciﬁcally, the study evaluated the performance of
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) and Support Vector Machines (SVM) at identifying nonTor traﬃc. Based
on their experiments, the researchers concluded that an ANN built on features derived through correlation-
based feature selection achieved the best results with a detection accuracy of 99.8% for nonTor traﬃc. The
discussed applications emphasize the versatility of the TOR-nonTOR dataset through the fact that it can
be used to inform research endeavours both to increase as well as decrease the privacy-level of users on the
Tor Network. As highlighted by our discussion thus far, both applications can be important based on the
context being studied.

4.2.2 CICAndMal2017

Overview: This dataset was published in 2017 in response to the lack of representative datasets of malicious
attacks on mobile devices. As noted by the founding researchers of the dataset; approximately 80% of the
world’s network traﬃc is generated by mobile devices [15]. Consequently, attackers are targeting mobile
devices at an increasing rate, and it is imperative that researchers have a representative dataset tailored
speciﬁcally to this scenario in order to develop eﬀective mitigating strategies. According to a 2017 report
by Symantec, the ratio of benign to malicious software on mobile devices is 80/20 [16]. This represents a
rather large proportion of malicious software and emphasises the need for datasets tailored speciﬁcally for
this use case. The CICAndMal2017 dataset is one of the most comprehensive eﬀorts toward this goal. It
is comprised of 42 types of malicious software across 4 broad categories – adware, ransomware, scareware,
and SMS malware along with benign records. Furthermore, the dataset is comprised of 80 traﬃc features
to allow researchers to conduct their own feature selection as per their speciﬁc application. The testbed
architecture of the dataset is described next.

Three Android smartphones (connected to laptops, to automate certain tasks) were used for the data gen-
eration process. 429 malware and 5065 benign apps were installed across the smartphones and the network
traﬃc generated by each was recorded. An emphasis was placed on recording traﬃc generated in three spe-
ciﬁc cases (based on prior knowledge of malware apps): immediately after installation, 15 minutes before the
phones were rebooted and 15 minutes after the phones were rebooted. The system architecture is illustrated
in Figure 2.

7

Figure 2: System architecture

Related Literature: The 2019 study by Noorbehbahani et al. [17] was one of the ﬁrst studies that employed
this dataset. The researchers were concerned with the evaluation of various machine learning techniques for
ransomware detection and cite two reasons for employing the CICAndMal2017 dataset for their analysis.
First, the fact that this dataset was generated using real smartphones and not emulators serves to boost
researchers’ conﬁdence in its validity and reliability. The other contributing factor for this choice is that
the dataset is large and comprehensive enough that even though the researchers were interested in investi-
gating only 1 of the 4 categories of malware captured in the dataset, there was enough volume within that
one category to still be useful for the intended purpose. Both these factors are indicative of the value of
the CICAndMal2017 dataset and the kind of questions that it allows researchers to investigate. Based on
their experiments with the CICAndMal2017 dataset, the researchers of [17] concluded that amongst vari-
ous machine learning techniques, random forest based models seem to be the most eﬀective at identifying
ransomware.

The 2021 study by Gohari et al. [18] was concerned with evaluating the eﬃcacy of deep learning techniques for
identifying malware on Android smartphones. The researchers also cite CICAndMal2017 dataset’s generation
using real smartphones as a major factor that informed their decision regarding the dataset to be employed,
similar to the researchers discussed above. Furthermore, the comprehensive nature of the dataset – the wide
variety of malware represented as well as the inclusion of 80 traﬃc features make it suitable for unsupervised
deep learning techniques where the algorithm need not be fed labelled training data and can perform relevant
feature selection on its own. Based on their experiments with the CICAndMal2017 dataset, the researchers
in [18] were able to create a CNN-LSTM deep learning model that achieved a malware category classiﬁcation
precision of 98.9% and a malware family classiﬁcation precision of 97.29%. The recent publication of this
study is an encouraging sign of the research opportunities that have been enabled by the CICAndMal2017
dataset and indicates that it will continue inform research endeavours for the foreseeable future.

4.2.3 Bot-IoT

Overview: The rise of IoT has created a new avenue that can be exploited by cyber attackers. Due to the
unique nature of the IoT, it is imperative to develop modern datasets that are representative of the nature of

8

traﬃc ﬂow on such networks and can therefore be used to study and evaluate the potential of novel intrusion
detection techniques aimed speciﬁcally at such networks. The Bot-IoT dataset is one eﬀort in this direction.
The dataset was published in 2018 by researchers at UNSW Canberra [19] and was created by simulating IoT
device traﬃc through virtual machines. Speciﬁcally, several virtual machines were instantiated and used to
simulate IoT sensors connected to a public IoT hub. The types of sensors that were simulated are described
below [19]:

1. Weather station generating datapoints on air pressure, humidity, and temperature.

2. Smart refrigerator that measures and regulates its temperature as required.

3. “Motion-activated lights which turn on or oﬀ based on a pseudo-random generated signal.”

4. “Remote-controlled garage door that opens and closes based on a probabilistic input.”

5. Smart thermostat that measures the temperature of a house and regulates it as required by turning

the air conditioning on or oﬀ.

By simulating these devices, the researchers were able to create over 72 million records of IoT traﬃc data
that is representative of the kind of traﬃc that can be observed on modern networks. Furthermore, the
dataset contains several attacks that can be encountered on a modern IoT network such as: DDoS, DoS, OS
and service scan, Keylogging and Data exﬁltration. It is clear from our discussion that the Bot-IoT dataset
is a comprehensive dataset that is representative of modern IoT networks and should serve as a much better
benchmark to evaluate the performance of novel IDS techniques envisioned for IoT networks rather than
older datasets that were not developed for the IoT and thus may not be representative of the nature of traﬃc
and attacks that are involved in such networks.

Related Literature: Since its publication in 2018, this dataset has been widely adopted for evaluation
of IDS techniques developed speciﬁcally for IoT networks. Let us examine two recent studies that have
used the Bot-IoT dataset in ways that serve as examples of its validity and wide applicability. The ﬁrst
such study [20] evaluates the performance of two deep learning techniques – Feed Forward Neural Networks
(FNN) and Self-Normalizing Neural Networks (SNN), by deriving adversarial samples from the Bot-IoT
dataset using IBM’s Adversarial Robustness Toolbox. The dataset’s “realistic representation” [20] of IoT
networks as well as its large size of heterogenous and malicious records aﬀord it a level of malleability that
was previously unattainable; even more so for newer network architectures such as that of IoT devices.
By deriving adversarial samples, the researchers were able to demonstrate that even with the immensely
popular FNNs there is a signiﬁcant drop in performance when evaluated solely on adversarial samples.
Speciﬁcally, the tested FNN achieved an accuracy of 95.1% on the standard data but an average accuracy of
only 24.33% on adversarial samples [20]. Their proposed SNN was able to bridge the gap partially but also
performed considerably worse on adversarial samples. This result highlights the need for more sophisticated
IDS techniques to be developed and tested on an increasing number of adversarial samples – a ﬁnding that
would have been impossible without the Bot-IoT dataset.

The next study that we will examine leverages the Bot-IoT dataset’s large number of available features to
deploy an information gain based strategy for the feature selection of a hybrid IDS technique [21]. The study
uses information gain to eﬀectively identify the most signiﬁcant features and uses them to build a hybrid IDS
that leverages both signature-based and anomaly-based techniques. The anomaly-based techniques were used
to recognize zero-day attacks and signature-based methods were used to identify well established attacks.
The results of the study are encouraging – the used methodology can attain signiﬁcant improvement in
detection accuracy and reveal the beneﬁts of both eﬀective feature selection and hybrid IDS techniques. The
contributions of this study with respect to the importance of feature selection is powered by the reliability
and variety of the Bot-IoT dataset and should serve as motivation to develop even more comprehensive,
reliable, and large-scale datasets to empower cybersecurity research.

9

4.2.4 Network TON IoT

Overview: This one of the most recent datasets that has been created speciﬁcally for IoT networks. The
dataset was published in 2021 and the motivation behind its development was the lack of credible datasets
for applications speciﬁc to IoT networks. The concerned researchers cite the “heterogeneity, complexity and
non-standardization of IoT networks” [22] as one of the main reasons for this discrepancy. To overcome
this challenge, the researchers propose a testbed architecture that is comprised of three layers that comprise
modern IoT networks – edge, fog, and cloud. The conﬁguration and purpose of each of these layers is
discussed below:

1. Edge: This layer consists of the end-user facing devices that generate raw data. These include devices

like routers, laptops and IoT devices like weather sensors, smart lights, etc.

2. Fog: This layer diﬀers from the edge layer in that it is not located at the point of data collection,
but rather constitutes the local area network on which edge devices communicate. Thus, this layer is
comprised of devices like servers and data management systems that are responsible for the smooth op-
eration of user devices. This layer implements Software Deﬁned Networks (SDN), Service Orchestration
(SO) and Network Function Virtualization (NFV) [22].

3. Cloud: This layer consists of cloud services such as the HIVE MQTT dashboard that enables the
collection and analysis of telemetry data from sensor devices and cloud data analysis services such as
Microsoft Azure and Amazon Web Services.

Using this architecture, the researchers were able to develop a comprehensive dataset that represents the
nature of benign and malicious traﬃc on IoT networks. The following attack types are represented in the
dataset: Scanning attack, DoS, DDoS, Ransomware, Backdoor, Injection, Cross-site scripting, Password
cracking and Man-In-The-Middle.

Related Literature: Since this is an extremely recent dataset, we were unable to ﬁnd any research papers
that have used this dataset for model evaluation. However, the researchers that have developed the dataset
also tested the performance of several machine learning models on it in [22]. These results are not indicative
of actual performance and have not been discussed extensively in this study because the researchers included
attributes like the IP addresses and ports that can signiﬁcantly boost detection accuracy. The researchers
have also noted this caveat in [22] and have recommended that future endeavours implement models without
using these features to ensure that the dataset represents the complexity and patterns of real-world data.
This dataset has been included in our discussion because despite its lack of implementation at the time
of writing, it represents one of the most comprehensive and versatile datasets developed speciﬁcally for
applications within IoT and serves as an excellent example for future datasets in other branching ﬁelds to
draw inspiration from.

4.2.5 CIC DoS

Overview: This dataset was published in 2017 by researchers at the Canadian Institute for Cybersecu-
rity [23]. The development of the dataset was motivated by the lack of suitable datasets for the development
and evaluation of detection techniques for application layer DoS attacks. Denial of Service (DoS) attacks are
one of the earliest kinds of intrusions and have taken several forms as the information technology landscape
has evolved. Application layer DoS attacks are one such variation of the traditional network layer DoS
attacks that by “Focusing on speciﬁc characteristics and vulnerabilities of application layer protocols, are
capable of inﬂicting the same level of impact as traditional ﬂooding DoS attacks at a much lower cost.” [23].
The researchers in [23] were concerned with investigating these application layer DoS attacks and decided
to create a new dataset for evaluation of their detection techniques due to the lack of suitable datasets.

10

The researchers set up a victim server and generated attacks modelled after the most common types of
application layer DoS attacks. Certain assumptions were made about the attacker that should be valid in
most real-world scenarios as well:

1. “The attacker knows exactly when and how much traﬃc to send to maximize attack damage.” [23]

2. The attack was stopped as soon as it was apparent that the attack had been successful – indicated by

the fact that the victim server had become unresponsive.

Finally, the generated attacks were combined with the benign traﬃc records from the 2012 ISCX dataset to
generate the ﬁnal CIC DoS dataset. This is an excellent example of how new datasets can be generated in a
timely and cost-eﬀective fashion for speciﬁc use cases by leveraging parts of older datasets that are deemed
to be relevant.

Related Literature: The publication of this dataset has prompted other researchers to investigate appli-
cation layer DoS attacks and provided them with an eﬀective tool to evaluate proposed detection techniques.
Researchers in [24] were interested in investigating a speciﬁc kind of application layer DoS attack – Low Rate
DDoS attacks (LR-DDoS). The evaluation of detection techniques speciﬁcally for LR-DDoS attacks would
not have been possible without the CIC DoS dataset as it is the only one – to the best of our knowledge, that
covers this class of attacks. Using this dataset, researchers were able to develop various machine learning
based detection techniques and achieve a detection rate of 95%. This is an exceptional achievement driven by
the CIC DoS dataset because application layer DoS attacks including LR-DDoS attacks have been notorious
in the cybersecurity community for being stealthy and especially hard to detect.

Another study published in 2019 [25] leveraged the CIC DoS dataset to determine the most suitable machine
learning techniques for detecting application layer DoS attacks. As stated earlier, the creation of the CIC
DoS dataset has encouraged research endeavours in the relatively understudied area of application layer DoS
attacks and should serve as an example to the research community at large. It is an exhibition of the fact
that new and valuable datasets in emerging ﬁelds can be created in a timely and cost-eﬀective manner by
leveraging older datasets instead of generating entirely new datasets from scratch. The researchers in [25]
experimented with several machine learning models and after evaluating the performance of each on the CIC
DoS dataset, came to the conclusion that Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LGBM) methods are the most
eﬀective at detecting application layer DoS attacks.

4.2.6 CICIDS2017

Overview: This dataset was published in 2017 as a solution to the lack of modern datasets for developing
and evaluating novel intrusion detection techniques.
It covers seven major modern attack types and is
available publicly to aid the research and development eﬀorts in the area. The architecture of the testbed is
described below [26]:

The dataset has been created by implementing two distinct networks: a victim network and an attacker
network. The victim network has been designed such that it incorporates elements of typical modern net-
works, speciﬁcally, the network consists of three servers, a router, a ﬁrewall, two switches and ten computers
interconnected through a domain controller and active directory. Furthermore, the computers use all three
of the most popular operating systems – Windows, Linux, and Mac. The attacker network is conﬁgured
such that it comprises of one router, one switch and four computers running the Kali Linux and Windows
8.1 operating systems.

One of the major attributes of this dataset that make it extremely useful in modern scenarios is its attention
to generating real world like benign traﬃc. The researchers developed a novel proﬁling system [27] that uses
machine learning to analyse how human behaviour and interaction is abstracted on connected networks to
generate benign traﬃc that simulates organic traﬃc as closely as possible. The created dataset contains

11

traﬃc recorded over a ﬁve-day period, instances of seven modern attacks (Brute force, Heartbleed, Botnet,
DoS, DDoS, Web, and Inﬁltration) and is comprised of 80 network ﬂow features.

Related Literature: Let us now examine some recent research papers that have used the CICIDS2017
dataset to investigate its suitability and reliability to evaluate modern IDS techniques. The ﬁrst paper we
will discuss is [28]. This work is concerned with developing a deep learning-based IDS technique for IoT
networks and uses the CICIDS2017 dataset to evaluate the model’s performance. It is an encouraging fact
that even though the CICIDS2017 dataset was not created speciﬁcally for IoT networks, it can be used
in this context – providing evidence for the wide range of attacks represented and possible applications.
The research paper was published in 2019 and the researchers cite the dataset’s resemblance to real-world
networks as the reason why CICIDS2017 was used for evaluation. The researchers implemented several deep
learning-based models, focussing primarily on DDoS attacks and obtained the highest precision of 98.44%
through an LSTM model. Their worst performing model was an MLP that achieved precision of 88.47%.
These performance metrics are relatively high and represent exceptional intrusion detection performance.
These results are encouraging because since the CICIDS2017 dataset is a reliable representation of real-world
network traﬃc, we can conclude that deep learning techniques provide an eﬀective tool for intrusion detection
and should be developed further.

Another study that uses the CICIDS2017 dataset for model evaluation is [29]. This study is unique in that
it not only uses CICIDS2017 to evaluate the performance of the proposed technique but also evaluates the
performance of historical models, going as far back as 2009, on the same dataset to enable fair comparisons.
The fact that the dataset can be used in this context to evaluate the performance of models that were
created almost a decade before the dataset is a testament to the wide variety and all-encompassing nature of
network traﬃc in this dataset. It is an important feature that should inform the creation of future datasets.
A modern dataset should not only capture the intricacies of modern network traﬃc prevalent at the time of
creation but should also incorporate enough historical patterns such that the relevance of older models can
be evaluated and the eﬃcacy of modern IDS techniques against older attack types can be conﬁrmed.

4.2.7 UCSD Network Telescope

Overview: The last dataset that we will discuss is The UCSD Network Telescope. Even though this dataset
was publsihed earlier than 2017, it merits inclusion in our analysis because it is a dynamic dataset that is
constantly evolving and is unique in its nature and sheer scale. It “consists of a globally routed, but lightly
utilized /8 network preﬁx” [30] and is one of the largest sources of private traﬃc in the world – capturing
1/256th of the entire IPv4 address space. The dataset is comprised of traﬃc traces and is made available
in near real-time in the form of one hour long compressed pcap ﬁles. The telescope has been in operation
since 2008 and collects over 3TB of data every day. This is one of the largest projects of its kind and has
been leveraged by researchers to generate insights that would not have been possible without such data.
Two recent examples of such research endeavours are discussed next to emphasize the value created by this
dataset and the importance of establishing more such resources to bolster research eﬀorts around the world.

Related Literature: The emergence and widespread adoption of IoT devices has inadvertently enabled the
execution of large-scale cyber-attacks by exploiting a large number of small IoT devices. The 2020 study by
Torabi et al. [31] proposed an innovative solution to this problem. By leveraging Big Data technologies and
the UCSD Network Telescope data, the researchers were able to develop a tool that can monitor network
traﬃc and identify compromised IoT devices that may be used for executing cyber-attacks. The tool was
able to process over 4TB of passive network data captured by the UCSD Network Telescope to “to identify
27,849 compromised IoT devices that generated more than 300 million unsolicited packets” [31].

The 2020 study by Lutscher et al. [32] is an example of how cybersecurity datasets can be used to inform
interdisciplinary research and generate valuable insights in other disciplines as well. The researchers in this
study were interested in the social and political impact of DoS attacks. Speciﬁcally, the researchers posited
that countries with nondemocratic forms of government would be more prone to DoS attacks around the

12

time of politically important events such as elections because such attacks are used by used by governments
to “censor regime-threatening information” and by activists to “publicly undermine the government’s au-
thority” [32]. Historical passive network data from the UCSD Network Telescope was used to identify various
DoS attacks across the world and the results indicated that indeed, the number of DoS attacks in authoritar-
ian countries spiked around the time of elections. However, the attacks were not directed internally within
the country but rather externally at institutions and organisations around the world that would serve as
news resources regarding the concerned country.

5 Taxonomy of recent datasets

Given the wide range of environments and applications of IDS datasets, it is a worthwhile endeavour to
develop a taxonomy that can help categorize and organize datasets such that high-level comparisons can be
made and an appropriate set of datasets as per the research objective can be shortlisted. In the current
analysis, we have created a taxonomy (Figure 3) based on the IT environment that the dataset has been
generated from and classiﬁed each of the 7 discussed datasets into 4 broad classes:

1. Tor Traﬃc Datasets: These datasets have been generated from traﬃc on the Tor network. The primary
application of such datasets is for privacy preservation research in online communications and decoding
patterns in the traﬃc to identify illegal activity.

2. Android Malware Datasets: These datasets pertain to traﬃc generated by smartphone applications.
As per Google, over 50% of internet traﬃc is generated by smartphone devices [33]. Therefore, it is
imperative for the IDS research community to study this environment and develop eﬀective solutions
to ensure that the security and privacy of smartphone users is protected.

3. IoT datasets: Another novel type of communications device that is becoming ubiquitous across modern
networks is the internet of things. It is estimated that there will be 43 billion IoT devices in the world
by 2023 [34]. This far exceeds the number of any other communications device on the planet and
provides an expansive new frontier for cyber criminals to exploit. Therefore, the development of IoT
traﬃc datasets to aid IDS research in the area is of utmost importance and should arguably be the
number one priority of the cyber security research community.

4. Network Traﬃc Datasets: This class refers to datasets that have been generated from traditional
network traﬃc. Even older datasets such as the NSL-KDD dataset would be classiﬁed under this
category, so there are plenty of datasets to choose from in this category. However, given the dynamic
nature of the cyber threats landscape, the development of new datasets that accurately encapsulate
the nature of attacks on modern networks is still of immense value to the research community.

Furthermore, the discussed datasets are summarized below in Table 2 to indicate their categorization in
the taxonomy, their attributes and their ideal use-cases. It is apparent from the discussion above that the
development of new datasets that represent the nature of traﬃc across newer technologies like smartphones
and IoT, as well as the ever-evolving nature of threats on modern networks is imperative to aid research
endeavours that can help ensure the highest standard of security and privacy for users across all forms of
networked communications.

13

Category

Dataset

Tor traﬃc

Tor-nonTor

Number
tributes

of

at-

Ideal use case

8 types of traﬃc from
more than 18 applica-
tions

preservation

Privacy
tech-
niques for online communica-
tion

Android mal-
ware

CICAndMal2017

IoT

Bot-IoT

4 broad malware cat-
egories and more than
80 network ﬂow at-
tributes

72mn records across 6
attack types

Network TON IoT

9 attack types

Network traﬃc

CIC DoS

4 types of attacks

CICIDS2017

80 network ﬂow at-
tributes

UCSD Network Tele-
scope

1/256th of the entire
IPv4 address space

Analysis of malware on modern
smartphones

Developing
models
detection

for

data

intensive
IoT intrusion

Developing versatile models for
IoT networks than can identify
wide gamut of attacks

Development of detection tech-
niques
for application layer
DoS attacks

versatile

tech-
Developing
niques for detection of wide
range of intrusions

data

Developing
intensive
models to uncover patterns in
global network communication

Table 2: Summary of discussed datasets

Figure 3: Taxonomy of recently developed datasets

14

6 Conclusion and directions for future research

In this survey we conducted an in-depth review of 7 datasets that have been published recently for in-
trusion detection research by reputable institutions in the research community. Through our discussions
we highlighted the rapid rate of development of the information technology industry and the evolution of
branching industries such as IoT and smartphone devices to such an extent where traditional IDS datasets
are no longer applicable for these speciﬁc use-cases. By exploring the solutions developed on the back of the
considered modern datasets, we have shed light on the need for the development of even more datasets that
are representative of the modern IT environment to ensure that intrusion detection research endeavours are
not limited by the lack of appropriate evaluation datasets. Speciﬁcally, future eﬀorts should aim to develop
even more datasets for underrepresented branching technologies such as IoT, smartphones, wearable sensor
devices, etc. for traﬃc based IDS. Furthermore, there is a pressing need for more datasets to be published
to enable research endeavours concerned with privacy-preservation in an increasingly online world.

15

References

[1] I. Agraﬁotis, J. R. Nurse, M. Goldsmith, S. Creese, and D. Upton, “A taxonomy of cyber-harms:
Deﬁning the impacts of cyber-attacks and understanding how they propagate,” Journal of Cybersecurity,
vol. 4, no. 1, p. tyy006, 2018.

[2] K. Zetter, “Inside the cunning, unprecedented hack of ukraine’s power grid,” Mar 2016. [Online].
Available: https://www.wired.com/2016/03/inside-cunning-unprecedented-hack-ukraines-power-grid/

[3] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and machine learning methods for cyber security
intrusion detection,” IEEE Communications surveys & tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176, 2015.

[4] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey of intrusion detection systems:

techniques, datasets and challenges,” Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2019.

[5] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “A review of the advancement in intrusion detection datasets,” Procedia

Computer Science, vol. 167, pp. 636–645, 2020.

[6] M. Ring, S. Wunderlich, D. Scheuring, D. Landes, and A. Hotho, “A survey of network-based intrusion

detection data sets,” Computers & Security, vol. 86, pp. 147–167, 2019.

[7] H. Hindy, D. Brosset, E. Bayne, A. K. Seeam, C. Tachtatzis, R. Atkinson, and X. Bellekens, “A
taxonomy of network threats and the eﬀect of current datasets on intrusion detection systems,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 104 650–104 675, 2020.

[8] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning approaches for anomaly-based intrusion
detection systems: A survey, taxonomy, and open issues,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 189, p. 105124,
2020.

[9] M. A. Ferrag, L. Maglaras, S. Moschoyiannis, and H. Janicke, “Deep learning for cyber security in-
trusion detection: Approaches, datasets, and comparative study,” Journal of Information Security and
Applications, vol. 50, p. 102419, 2020.

[10] A. L. Samuel, “Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers,” IBM Journal of research

and development, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 210–229, 1959.

[11] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning.

MIT Press, 2016, http://www.

deeplearningbook.org.

[12] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of tor traﬃc

using time based features.” in ICISSp, 2017, pp. 253–262.

[13] A. Gurunarayanan, A. Agrawal, A. Bhatia, and D. K. Vishwakarma, “Improving the performance
of machine learning algorithms for tor detection,” in 2021 International Conference on Information
Networking (ICOIN).

IEEE, 2021, pp. 439–444.

[14] E. Hodo, X. Bellekens, E. Iorkyase, A. Hamilton, C. Tachtatzis, and R. Atkinson, “Machine learn-
ing approach for detection of nontor traﬃc,” in Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Availability, Reliability and Security, 2017, pp. 1–6.

[15] A. H. Lashkari, A. F. A. Kadir, L. Taheri, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward developing a systematic
approach to generate benchmark android malware datasets and classiﬁcation,” in 2018 International
Carnahan Conference on Security Technology (ICCST).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–7.

[16] K. Chandrasekar, G. Cleary, O. Cox, H. Lau, B. Nahorney, B. O. Gorman, D. O’Brien,
S. Wallace, P. Wood, and C. Wueest, Internet Security Threat Report, Apr 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.broadcom.com/doc/istr-22-2017-en

16

[17] F. Noorbehbahani, F. Rasouli, and M. Saberi, “Analysis of machine learning techniques for ransomware
detection,” in 2019 16th International ISC (Iranian Society of Cryptology) Conference on Information
Security and Cryptology (ISCISC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 128–133.

[18] M. Gohari, S. Hashemi, and L. Abdi, “Android malware detection and classiﬁcation based on network
IEEE,

traﬃc using deep learning,” in 2021 7th International Conference on Web Research (ICWR).
2021, pp. 71–77.

[19] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards the development of realistic botnet
dataset in the internet of things for network forensic analytics: Bot-iot dataset,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 100, pp. 779–796, 2019.

[20] O. Ibitoye, O. Shaﬁq, and A. Matrawy, “Analyzing adversarial attacks against deep learning for intrusion
IEEE,

detection in iot networks,” in 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM).
2019, pp. 1–6.

[21] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, J. Kamruzzaman, and A. Alazab, “A novel ensemble of hybrid
intrusion detection system for detecting internet of things attacks,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 11, p. 1210,
2019.

[22] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating ai-based security systems at the edge:

Network ton iot datasets,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 72, p. 102994, 2021.

[23] H. H. Jazi, H. Gonzalez, N. Stakhanova, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Detecting http-based application layer
dos attacks on web servers in the presence of sampling,” Computer Networks, vol. 121, pp. 25–36, 2017.

[24] J. A. P´erez-D´ıaz, I. A. Valdovinos, K.-K. R. Choo, and D. Zhu, “A ﬂexible sdn-based architecture
for identifying and mitigating low-rate ddos attacks using machine learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
155 859–155 872, 2020.

[25] S. C¸ alı¸sır, R. Atay, M. K. Pehlivano˘glu, and N. Duru, “Intrusion detection using machine learning and
deep learning techniques,” in 2019 4th International Conference on Computer Science and Engineering
(UBMK).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 656–660.

[26] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a new intrusion detection

dataset and intrusion traﬃc characterization.” ICISSp, vol. 1, pp. 108–116, 2018.

[27] I. Sharafaldin, A. Gharib, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards a reliable intrusion detection

benchmark dataset,” Software Networking, vol. 2018, no. 1, pp. 177–200, 2018.

[28] M. Roopak, G. Y. Tian, and J. Chambers, “Deep learning models for cyber security in iot networks,”
IEEE,

in 2019 IEEE 9th annual computing and communication workshop and conference (CCWC).
2019, pp. 0452–0457.

[29] A. Ahmim, L. Maglaras, M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, and H. Janicke, “A novel hierarchical intrusion
detection system based on decision tree and rules-based models,” in 2019 15th International Conference
on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 228–233.

[30] “Historical and near-real-time ucsd network telescope traﬃc dataset,” Aug 2013. [Online]. Available:

https://www.caida.org/catalog/datasets/telescope-near-real-time dataset/

[31] S. Torabi, E. Bou-Harb, C. Assi, and M. Debbabi, “A scalable platform for enabling the forensic investi-
gation of exploited iot devices and their generated unsolicited activities,” Forensic Science International:
Digital Investigation, vol. 32, p. 300922, 2020.

[32] P. M. Lutscher, N. B. Weidmann, M. E. Roberts, M. Jonker, A. King, and A. Dainotti, “At home
and abroad: The use of denial-of-service attacks during elections in nondemocratic regimes,” Journal
of Conﬂict Resolution, vol. 64, no. 2-3, pp. 373–401, 2020.

17

[33] “Mobile web traﬃc statistics - think with google.” [Online]. Available: https://www.thinkwithgoogle.

com/marketing-strategies/app-and-mobile/mobile-web-traﬃc-statistics/

[34] F. Dahlqvist, M. Patel, A. Rajko,
things,”

2020.

ternet
private-equity-and-principal-investors/our-insights/growing-opportunities-in-the-internet-of-things

[Online]. Available:

Sep

of

and J. Shulman,

“Growing opportunities
in the in-
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/

18

