Detecting Timing Attack on PMU Data utilizing
Unwrapped Phase Angle and Low-Rank Henkel
Matrix Properties

Imtiaj Khan
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA, USA
imtiajkhan@vt.edu

Virgilio Centeno
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Virginia Tech

1
2
0
2

t
c
O
7

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
7
5
7
1
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Introduction of PMUs to cyber-physical system pro-
vides accurate data acquisition, while posing additional risk of
being the victim of cyber attack. Both False Data Injection
Attack (FDIA) and GPS-spooﬁng or timing attack can provide
malicious data to the cyber system, though these two attacks
require different post-attack contingency plan. Thus accurate
detection of timing attack and separating it from conventional
FDIA has become a very important research area. In this article,
a successful detection of timing attack mechanism is proposed.
Firstly, a method to distinguish timing attack and FDIA using
unwrapped phase angle data is developed. Secondly, utilizing
low rank Henkel matrix property to differentiate timing attack
from electrical events is also presented. Finally, an experimental
validation of proposed model is performed on IEEE 13 bus system
using simulated GPS-spooﬁng attack. It can be observed that the
timing attack can increase the rank 1 approximation error of
Henkel matrix of unwrapped angles by 700 % for 3 sec delay in
GPS time-stamp. The rank 1 approximation error is increased
by 500% for 2 sec delay and the increase is insigniﬁcant for 1
sec delay attack. FDIA doesnt show any signiﬁcant change in the
low rank approximation proﬁle of Henkel matrix.

Index Terms—FDIA, GPS-spooﬁng, PMU, Unwrapped, Henkel

matrix

I. INTRODUCTION

Inclusion of smart devices and integration of the physical
power system with cyber system have put the whole power
system at the risk of cyber attacks [1]. Phasor Measurement
Units (PMUs) are smart devices which measure signals at spe-
ciﬁc bus locations of the grid and provides time synchronized
voltage and current phasor data to Phasor Data Concentrator
(PDC) [2]. The time synchronization with the Coordinated
Universal Time reference (UTC) is done using a GPS 1 Pulse-
Per-Second (PPS) and a time-stamp. Most PMUs provide data
at rates between 30 and 120 sample per second with slower
rates available [3]. Due to its sophisticated nature, PMU data
is prone to unique malicious attack by hackers [4].
The most common types of attack is the False Data Injection
Attack (FDIA), where the attack deliberately inject falsiﬁed

measurements into the actual PMU measurements. These types
of attacks are aimed to force the control center into taking
wrong decision based on the received measurements [5].
Various researchers have proposed different FDIA detection
mechanisms, the most common types is residual based detec-
tion method, which is not robust against coordinated stealthy
FDIA [6]. Other methods have been proposed to detect stealthy
FDIA. In [7], a one cosine similarity metric based detection
method is proposed to compute the difference between the es-
timated values and the measurements. An adaptive cumulative
sum based method is proposed in [8], where the changes of
residual vector mean are detected.
Generally due to the low level security of the civilian GPS
signals, attackers superimpose falsiﬁed signal
to the GPS
is known as GPS-spooﬁng attacks. During GPS-
in what
spooﬁng, the attacker can manipulate GPS-clock and create
false timestamp or time shift the 1 PPS disrupting the PMU
time synchronization [9]. This types of attacks can be referred
as timing attack. Though the detection and prevention of False
Data Injection Attack are frequently covered in contemporary
literatures, timing attacks have received little attention. In this
work undetectable timing attack model has been developed
where the attack can be bypassed the conventional FDIA
detection method [10]. The timing attack is modeled as an
FDIA where only the phase angle data are manipulated by
the attacker, since GPS spooﬁng shifts the time-reference and
therefore changing the phase angle of voltage and current data.
The authors in [10] showed that at least two phase angle
data from two separate PMUs need to be manipulated to
create stealthy timing attack. The GPS spooﬁng can be easily
detected if the defender is connected to another trusted GPS
which contains encrypted military code [9]. This method is
not feasible for civilian infrastructure and large power grids.
Therefore accurate detection of timing attack or GPS spooﬁng
attack is necessary.
Timing attack can be detected using same method as FDIA
detection since timing attack can be considered as an FDIA
on phase angle data. However, this method fails to distinguish
between these two types of attacks. As the timing attack needs

 
 
 
 
 
 
different post-attack contingency plan than the FDIA, it is
imperative for the cyber system to know the attack type. More-
over, electrical events such as line outage, oscillation event,
frequency event, transformer faults can also cause incorrect
PMU data. Thus, timing attack needs to be separated from
electrical event too. Few research works have been carried
out to separate event from attack, such a decision tree based
method is proposed in [11] to differentiate bad data from
events. Utilizing low rank Henkel matrix property can also be
a possible solution toward separating event data from cyber
attack [12].
The aim of this paper is to successfully detect timing attack
and distinguish it from FDIA. Raw phase angle data don’t
provide enough insight for this purpose since both types of
attacks change the temporal relation between PMU channels.
Instead of using raw data, unwrapped phase angle data can
provide different temporal behavior for FDIA and for timing
attack. In order to know if the difference in the unwrapped
phase angle data is due to an attack and not due to the random
time-series variation, the low rank approximation of Henkel
matrix can be exploited. Therefore, the contributions of this
paper are as follows:

If the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of Y can be
written as Y = U ΣV ∗, then it can be approximated as a rank
r matrix ( r ¡ rank(Y) ). This is done by taking the ﬁrst r
largest singular values in Σ, which is another diagonal matrix
Σr. The low rank approximation error is:

er =

||U ΣrV ∗ − Y ||F
||Y ||F

× 100%

(1)

Ref [15] exploits the low rank approximation of measure-
ment vector Z received from PMUs to detect the unobservable
False Data Injection attack. However, this method fails to
address the time-series variation of PMU data under cyber
attack. In order to address the temporal variation of data under
attack, the low rank approximation of Henkel matrix can be
utilized.
A Hankel matrix is deﬁned as a square matrix which is
constructed in such a way that each ascending skew-diagonal
from left to right remains constant. Elements in each row
are right-shifted data-streams from the previous row. For the
datastream a0, a1, .....ak, the constructed Henkel matrix will
be:

• Using unwrapped phase angle data to differentiate be-



tween FDIA and timing attack.

• Utilizing low-rank approximation of Henkel matrix to
successfully detect the timing attack and to distinguish
it from electrical events.

• An experimental validation of proposed method is per-
formed where simulated GPS time-stamp is shifted to
model the timing attack. It has been found that timing
attack can change the low-rank approximation proﬁle of
Henkel matrix created with unwrapped phase angle data.

This paper is organized as follows: section II discusses the
low rank approximation technique of Henkel matrix. section
II discusses the use of unwrapped phase angle data in distin-
guishing timing attack from FDIA. Section IV describes the
proposed timing attack detection algorithm. The experimental
validation with IEEE 13 bus system is explained in section V.

II. LOW RANK HENKEL MATRIX STRUCTURE

Low rank approximation of synchrophaoor data has been
used in various applications such as recovering missing data
[13], event identiﬁcation [14] and cyber-attak detection [15].
For a PMU data-set with m channel and n measurements, the
matrix Y containing PMU measurement data can be expressed
as a m × n matrix as follows:

Y =









y11
y21
...
...
ym1

y12
y22
...
...
ym2

...
...
...
...
...









y1n
y2n
...
...
ymn

a0
a1
...
...

a1
a2
...
...

H =







ak/2+1 ak/2+2

... ak/2+1
... ak/2+2
...
...
...

...
...
ak









the temporal

Henkel matrix H is a (k/2 + 2) × (k/2 + 2) square
matrix. Henkel matrix has been proved to be useful for
analyzing time-series data and state-space representations.
The SVD of Henkel matrix can be utilized for decomposing
the signal into temporal and spatial variation of signal [16].
Low rank approximation of Henkel matrix can give insights
to the attack on the time-series PMU data.
During an electrical event, there is a positive correlation of
changes in phasor measurements between the neighboring
PMUs [17]. Therefore, a temporal relation exists between the
channels during electrical events. When a random column
relation will be
permutation is performed,
changed. As a result, the rank of the Henkel matrix will
be higher. During a False Data Injection Attack, only the
measurements of affected PMU will change, the neighboring
PMUs dont have any correlation with the affected PMU
and there is no temporal relation between PMUs. A random
column permutation wont change the rank of the Henkel
matrix in case of FDIA [12]. The step by step process is
explained in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 is useful to detect the FDIA and to differentiate it
from electrical events. Nevertheless, differentiating the FDIA
and timing attack is yet to be explored. During timing attack,
the phase angle values are modiﬁed and shifted. The FDIA
can also modify the phase angles by adding or subtracting
a speciﬁc amount from the phase angle measurements. As
a result, the conventional attack detection schemes, which

rely on the statistical deviation between the observed and
to distinguish the phase angle
actual measurements,
timing attacks. One
measurements after FDIA and after
possible solution can be observing the unwrapped phase
angle data instead of raw phase angle data.

fail

III. UNWRAPPED PHASE ANGLE DATA FOR TIMING
ATTACK DETECTION

The PMU phase angle data deviate largely due to the
ﬂuctuations of synchronized system frequency around 60 Hz.
To meet the IEEE C37.118 synchrophasor standard [18], the
phase angle must be between +π to −π. Thus the phase angle
data wrapped around for an amount of 2π radian whenever it
changes from +/ − π to −/ + π. To resolve this issue, angle
unwrapping techniques have been developed. An efﬁcient real-
time angle unwrapping technique was implemented in [19],
which suffers the problem of making the unwrapped phase
angle grow large over time. [20]. To avoid the problem of
unwrapped angle growing too large, a Roll-Over Counter
(ROC) based unwrapping algorithm was proposed in [20]. This
algorithm keeps track of the number of times the phase angle
shifts from +/ − π to −/ + π, which is deﬁned as ROC. ROC,
in turn, is used to calculate the unwrapped angle by adding
or subtracting an offset value which minimizes the difference
between two consecutive phase angle data.
If two consecutive phase angle data are θi and θi+1, then the
ROC will be added by a an integer N. The N is deﬁned to be
the following minimizer:

min
N

|θi+1 − θi + 360N |

ROC(i + 1) = ROC(i) + N

(2)

(3)

N is 1 when the phase angle face transition from +π to −π and
N is -1 when phase angle face transition from −π to +π. The
ROC(i+1) is calculated by adding the N with the previous ROC
value (eqn 3). Fig1a represents raw phase angle data from a
random PMU and Fig 1b represents corresponding unwrapped
phase angle data.
As mentioned before, unwrapped phase angle data is useful
to avoid the wrapping-up phase angle during the transition
of 360 o. Our goal is to observe the behavior of phase angle
unwrapping technique described in [20] during cyber attack on
a PMU. For the case of False Data Injection Attack (FDIA),
the attacker modiﬁes the measurement value directly. For the
time instance t, the attacker change the phase angle in eqn
2, changing θ(t) to θ(cid:48)(t)/ by adding an attack value a(t).
The attacker makes the similar change for the following time
instance t+1 by adding attack value a(t+1). Assuming original
θ(t) is ∼ +180 and θ(t + 1) is ∼ −180. The new phase angle
values will be as follows:

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: Raw (a) and unwrapped (b) phase angle data from a
random PMU

θ(cid:48)(t) = θ(t) + a(t)
θ(cid:48)(t + 1) = θ(t + 1) + a(t + 1)

(4)

From eqn 4 and ﬁg 1a, we can observe that adding an
attack vector to the phase angle data will increase or decrease
the angle value, but will not impact the instance when there
is a transition between positive half-cycle to a negative-half
cycle. Our assumption is that the attack will try to modify the
phase angle with a value which is not big enough to be easily
detected by the defender. As a result, the attacker wont change
the transition point between +180 to -180. From eqn 2, it is
evident that the N value remains same as the transition status
between positive and negative is not changed. Thus the ROC
value will be same, which makes the unwrapped angle graph
during FDIA similar to the unwrapped angle graph during
normal condition.

On the other hand, when there is a timing attack, the phase
angle value will be shifted toward the horizontal time axis.

Algorithm 1: Distinguishing cyber attack from elec-
trical event in PMU
Initialization Receive time-series measurements from
PMU as the matrix Y. m is the number of channel, n
is the data length of each PMU;
Step 1: Create a m(n/2 + 2) × (n/2 + 2) Henkel
matrix H;
Step 2: Calculate the low rank approximation error er
with varying rank r (r ≤ rank(H));
Step 3: Do a random column permutation on the
Henkel matrix H and create a new matrix ¯H;
Step 4: Calculate the low rank approximation error err
with varying rank r (r ≤ rank( ¯H));
Step 5: If err > er, it is an electrical event;
Step 6: else, it is a FDIA;

Therefore the transition point between +180 to -180 will no
longer be at the same point. If the time-shifted phase angle
value is θ(cid:48)(cid:48) and the original phase angle value is θ, we can
express the relation between θ(cid:48)(cid:48) and θ as follows:

θ(cid:48)(cid:48)(t) = θ(t + T )

(5)

T is the amount of time-delay occurred due to timing attack.
The data the Control Center receive at the tth sec is actually
the data that the power grid generated T seconds ago. Since
the transition point between +180 and -180 is changed, the
N value from eqn 2 will also change at the time instance t.
Different N will give different ROC value from eqn 3. As a
result the unwrapped angle curve from ﬁg 1b will not be able
to maintain the similar shape and will be distorted.
From the above discussion, it can be concluded that we can
exploit the behavior of the unwrapped phase angle curve to
distinguish between the FDIA and timing attack. If the curve
shape remain unchanged, even though the values of phase
angle might change, it implies FDIA. On the other hand, if
the unwrapped phase angle curve is distorted, we can conclude
that it is timing or GPS spooﬁng attack.

IV. USING LOW RANK HENKEL MATRIX PROPERTY TO
DETECT TIMING ATTACK

According to the discussion in section III, distortion in
the phase angle curve indicates timing attack. However, this
criterion alone is not enough for timing attack detection.
Distortion in phase angle curve may occur even in normal
condition. Such as the change in functionality of the BUS that
the corresponding PMU is connected to can lead to a variation
in unwrapped angle curve shape. Moreover, any electrical
event can change the phase angle data randomly, which may
cause distortion in unwrapped angle curve. So there is a need
to speciﬁcally identify the timing attack occurrence.
Random column permutation in low rank Henkel matrix can
distinguish between event and cyber attack. As mentioned in

section II, if the rank of Henkel matrix is different than its low
rank approximation after random column permutation, then it
is an event, and if the rank doesnt change after random column
permutation, then it is an attack.

TABLE I: Timing Attack Detection Criterion

Incident

Random column
permutation
in
Henkel matrix

Unwrapped
phase
curve distortion

angle

Event

Rank changes

Curve shape dis-
torted

FDIA

Rank
change

doesnt

Curve
undistorted

Timing
attack

Rank
change

doesn’t

Curve distorted

Combination
both

of

Higher rank after
column permuta-
tion on the dis-
torted unwrapped
phase angle curve
rank
Same
column
after
on
permutation
undistorted
the
unwrapped phase
angle
Henkel
Matrix
rank
Higher
column
after
on
permutation
the
distorted
unwrapped phase
angle
Henkel
Matrix

From table I, it can be observed that exploiting both the ran-
dom column permutation of Henkel matrix and the distortion
in unwrapped phase angle curve can help distinguishing the
timing attack from FDIA and electrical events. To identify the
unwrap angle curve distortion, the low rank approximation of
Henkel matrix can again be utilized. Since the FDIA doesn’t
change the shape of unwrap phase angle curve, the temporal
relation between all the PMU data remain same. However,
during timing attack, the affected PMU curve gets distorted.
As a result, the temporal relation between the affected PMU
and the other neighbouring PMUs doesn’t remain same any-
more. It leads to a higher value while performing low rank
approximation. The proposed method is described in algorithm
2.

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

The aforementioned timing attack detection method is tested
in the IEEE 13 bus system. The data used in this work spans
over 1 hour period. To simulate the timing attack, we have
created an experimental setup, where the GPS timestamp is
simulated using MATLAB datetime function. It provides a
series of universal time reference (UTC) timestamp beginning
from a speciﬁed point of date and time. In this work the time-
stamp midnight (00:00:00) with a sampling rate of 1/30 sec.
The ﬁrst data is at 00:00:00, the second data is at 00:00:0.033,
and so on. The last data of a single day is at 23:59:59.

The simulation of IEEE 13 Bus system has been done
with MATLAB SIMULINK. The PMUs have been added
at buses 632, 633, 634, 671, 672 and 692 (ﬁg 2). The
PMUs provide positive sequence voltage magnitude and angle,

Algorithm 2: Detection of Timing Attack
Initialization Receive time-series angular (voltage or
current) measurements from PMU as the matrix Y. m
is the number of channel, n is the data length of each
PMU;
Step 1: Create a m(n/2 + 2) × (n/2 + 2) Henkel
matrix H;
Step 2: Calculate the low rank approximation error er
with varying rank r (r ≤ rank(H));
Step 3: Do a random column permutation on the
Henkel matrix H and create a new matrix ¯H;
Step 4: Calculate the low rank approximation error err
with varying rank r (r ≤ rank( ¯H));
Step 5: If err > er, it is an electrical event. Go to step
1 with the next n data sample;
Step 6: else, it is an attack;
Step 7: Unwrap the angular data and create Henkel
matrix Hu similar to step 1;
Step 8: Calculate the low rank approximation error eru
with varying rank r (r ≤ rank(Hu));
Step 9: if the low rank approximation error eru > er,
then it is a timing attack;
Step 10: Else, it is FDIA

Fig. 3: Block diagram of the simulation setup to analyze timing
attack

Fig. 2: IEEE 13 Bus system

positive sequence current magnitude and angle and frequency
data. We have considered the positive sequence voltage angle
data and synchronized the data with simulated GPS time-stamp
mentioned before. After this step, we have shifted the GPS
time-stamp by a time T, so that the voltage angle values are
synchronized with incorrect and shifted time-stamp. In this
way the timing attack on PMU can be simulated. The block
diagram of proposed time-stamp generation and creating a
timing attack is illustrated in ﬁg 3.
A time shift of T = 3 sec is applied onto the GPS timestamp
to analyze timing attack. To demonstrate the FDIA, a random

Fig. 4: Unwrapped phase angle data during normal condition,
under timing attack and under False Data Injection Attack

attack vector a ranging from 0 to 30 has been added to the
PMU data-stream. In each case, the unwrapped angle has been
calculated and the corresponding behavior with respect to time
is observed.
From ﬁg 4 it is evident that during timing attack the phase
angle curve is distorted, whereas during FDIA the unwrap
angle curve maintains similar shape at the moment of attack
despite being shifted upward. From section IV, the distortion
alone cannot indicate if there is any kind of performance
issue in the grid i.e. event, FDIA or timing attack. Therefore
according to the step 7 of algorithm 2, a Henkel matrix is
created with PMU data. Here the total number of channels is
m = 6 and the data-length is n = 100. The number of rows
in Henkel matrix is 6 × (100/2 + 2) = 312. The low rank

VI. CONCLUSION

Introduction of PMUs to cyber-physical system provides
accurate data acquisition, while posing additional risk of
being the victim of cyber attack. Both False Data Injection
Attack (FDIA) and GPS-spooﬁng or timing attack can provide
malicious data to the cyber system, though these two attacks
require different post-attack contingency plan. Thus accurate
detection of timing attack and separating it from conventional
FDIA has become a very important research area. In this
article, a successful detection of timing attack mechanism
is proposed. Firstly, a method to distinguish timing attack
and FDIA using unwrapped phase angle data is developed.
Secondly, utilizing low rank Henkel matrix property to differ-
entiate timing attack from electrical events is also presented.
Finally, an experimental validation of proposed model
is
performed on IEEE 13 bus system using simulated GPS-
spooﬁng attack. It can be observed that the timing attack can
increase the rank 1 approximation error of Henkel matrix of
unwrapped angles by 700 % for 3 sec delay in GPS time-
stamp. The rank 1 approximation error is increased by 500%
for 2 sec delay and the increase is insigniﬁcant for 1 sec delay
attack. FDIA doesn’t show any signiﬁcant change in the low
rank approximation proﬁle of Henkel matrix.

REFERENCES

[1] X. Jin, W. M. Haddad, and T. Hayakawa, “An adaptive control archi-
tecture for cyber-physical system security in the face of sensor and
actuator attacks and exogenous stochastic disturbances,” in 2017 IEEE
56th Annual Conference on Decision and Control, CDC 2017, vol. 2018-
Janua, pp. 1380–1385, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Inc., 1 2018.

[2] A. G. Phadke and J. S. Thorp, “Synchronized Phasor Measurements and

Their Applications,” Springer, 2017.

[3] S. Mousavian, J. Valenzuela, and J. Wang, “A Probabilistic risk mitiga-
tion model for cyber-attacks to PMU networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 156–165, 2015.

[4] C. Tu, X. He, X. Liu, and P. Li, “Cyber-attacks in PMU-based power
network and countermeasures,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 65594–65603,
2018.

[5] C. Pei, Y. Xiao, W. Liang, and X. Han, “PMU Placement Protection
against Coordinated False Data Injection Attacks in Smart Grid,” IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 4381–4393,
2020.

[6] T. T. Kim and H. V. Poor, “Attacks on Power Grids,” IEEE Transactions

on Smart Grid, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 326–333, 2011.

[7] D. B. Rawat and C. Bajracharya, “Detection of false data injection
attacks in smart grid communication systems,” IEEE Signal Processing
Letters, vol. 22, pp. 1652–1656, 10 2015.

[8] Y. Huang, J. Tang, Y. Cheng, H. Li, K. A. Campbell, and Z. Han,
“Real-time detection of false data injection in smart grid networks: An
adaptive CUSUM method and analysis,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 10,
pp. 532–543, 6 2016.

[9] X. Jiang, J. Zhang, B. J. Harding, J. J. Makela, and A. D. Dom´ınguez-
Garc´ıa, “Spooﬁng GPS receiver clock offset of phasor measurement
units,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 3253–
3262, 2013.

[10] S. Barreto, M. Pignati, G. D´an, J. Y. Le Boudec, and M. Paolone, “Un-
detectable Timing-Attack on Linear State-Estimation by Using Rank-1
Approximation,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 9, pp. 3530–
3542, 7 2018.

Fig. 5: Low rank approximation error under normal condition,
under FDIA and under timing attack

Fig. 6: Low rank approximation error under normal condition,
under FDIA and under timing attack

approximation error proﬁle has been created as in eqn 1.
As the temporal relation between PMU channels get disrupted
after timing attack, the low rank approximation error should
be higher for timing attack, though the FDIA should exhibit
no change in the low rank approximation error proﬁle. Fig 5
conﬁrms this theory. Here the low rank approximation error
is higher for timing attack, where there is no visible change
during the FDIA.
For a 3 sec shift in the time-stamp reference, the low rank
approximation error increases by 700 % (ﬁg 5 for r = 1). This
increase gets reduced as the rank r increases. After r = 5, the
change in low rank approximation error is insigniﬁcant. The
increase in low rank approximation error is smaller for a 2 sec
shift in the time-stamp reference. One sec time shifting doesn’t
create signiﬁcant impact even at r = 1. Therefore, it can be
concluded that different timing attack will result in different
low rank approximation error of Henkel matrix.

[11] Z. Yang, H. Liu, T. Bi, and Q. Yang, “Bad Data Detection Algorithm for
PMU Based on Spectral Clustering,” Journal of Modern Power Systems
and Clean Energy, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 473–483, 2020.

[12] Y. Hao, M. Wang, J. H. Chow, E. Farantatos, and M. Patel, “Modelless
data quality improvement of streaming synchrophasor measurements by
exploiting the low-rank hankel structure,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 6966–6977, 2018.

[13] P. Gao, M. Wang, S. G. Ghiocel, J. H. Chow, B. Fardanesh, and G. Ste-
fopoulos, “Missing Data Recovery by Exploiting Low-Dimensionality
in Power System Synchrophasor Measurements,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 31, pp. 1006–1013, 3 2016.

[14] L. Xie, Y. Chen, and P. R. Kumar, “Dimensionality reduction of
synchrophasor data for early event detection: Linearized analysis,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 29, pp. 2784–2794, 11 2014.
[15] P. Gao, M. Wang, J. H. Chow, S. G. Ghiocel, B. Fardanesh, G. Stefopou-
los, and M. P. Razanousky, “Identiﬁcation of successive ’Unobservable’
cyber data attacks in power systems through matrix decomposition,”
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 64, pp. 5557–5570, 11
2016.

[16] M. Aoki, “Notes on economic time series analysis: System theoretic

perspectives,” Springer, vol. 220, 1983.

[17] M. Eissa and A. Kassem, “Hierarchical Clustering based optimal PMU
placement for power system fault observability,” Heliyon, vol. 4, p. 725,
2018.

[18] “C37.118.1-2011 - IEEE Standard for Synchrophasor Measurements for

Power Systems — IEEE Standard — IEEE Xplore.”

[19] M. V. Venkatasubramanian and R. Carroll, “Oscillation Monitor-
ing System .” https://www.naspi.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2016-10/08 wsu
oms synchrophasors mani 20081016%281%29.pdf/.

[20] V. Venkatasubramanian, “Real-Time Strategies for Unwrapping of
Synchrophasor Phase Angles,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 5033–5041, 2016.

