Volume 1, Issue 1, February 1, 2016

TC-CCPS Newsletter

(cid:109) ieee-cps.org

Page 1

1
2
0
2

t
c
O
5

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
5
2
2
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical Articles

Multi-Modal Attack Detection for Cyber-Physical Additive Manufacturing

Shih-Yuan Yu, Arnav Vaibhav Malawade, Mohammad Abdullah Al Faruque

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Irvine

1

Introduction

Cyber-Physical Additive Manufacturing (AM) constructs a physical 3D object layer-by-layer according to its digital
representation and has been vastly applied to fast prototyping and the manufacturing of functional end-products
across ﬁelds. The computerization of traditional production processes propels these technological advancements;
however, this also introduces new vulnerabilities, necessitating the study of cyberattacks on these systems [12]. The
AM Sabotage Attack is one kind of kinetic cyberattack that originates from the cyber domain and can eventually lead
to physical damage, injury, or even death [2]. By introducing inconspicuous yet damaging alterations in any speciﬁc
process of the AM digital process chain, the attackers can compromise the structural integrity of a manufactured
component in a manner that is invisible to a human observer. If the manufactured objects are critical for their
system, those attacks can even compromise the whole system’s structural integrity and pose a severe safety risk to
its users. For example, an inconspicuous void (less than 1 mm in dimension) placed in the 3D design of a tensile
test specimen can reduce its yield load by 14% [11]. However, security studies primarily focus on securing digital
assets [10], overlooking the fact that AM systems are CPSs.

The AM system, or the printer, is comprised of a set of connected hardware components, and thus can uninten-
tionally produce analog emissions during the operation of printing through different physical side-channels such as
acoustics, electromagnetic radiation, vibration, and power. In AM systems, the information ﬂow in the cyber domain
has at least one corresponding control signal sent to the physical domain. This signal ﬂow, in turn, actuates the physi-
cal processes accordingly, resulting in side-channel emissions that have a high degree of mutual information with the
digital control signals. This property allows our group to a series of research on utilizing the correlation between the
two domains and validating that physical domain signals match their cyber domain counterparts [4, 9, 1, 6, 7, 3, 8, 5].
Sabotaging the structural integrity of 3D objects requires the attacker to make subtle variations to one or more of the
sub-processes in the AM process chain, resulting in a change in the printer’s control parameters and a corresponding
change to its analog emissions. In this case, monitoring the operation of the targeted AM systems can be the most
direct defense [4]. To detect such modiﬁcations, our group proposes an attack detection system that continuously
monitors and analyzes the different side-channel information leaked during the operation of AM systems, allowing
us to identify unusual analog emissions resulting from potential sabotage attacks.

2 The AM Process Chain

The manufacturing of 3D objects in AM requires a chain of cyber-physical processes [12]. We primarily describe
the process chain for the Fused Deposition Model (FDM) based AM. As shown in Figure 1, the process chain be-
gins in the cyber domain with an idea for a 3D object. The ﬁrst item on the workﬂow is to substantiate the design
speciﬁcations using Computer-Aided Design (CAD) tools. Next, the generated CAD model gets converted into the
STereoLithography (STL) format that uses a series of triangles to model the surface geometry. In the Computer-
Aided Manufacturing (CAM) process, the slicing algorithms convert the STL ﬁles into a layer-by-layer description

(cid:109) ieee-cps.org

Page 2

ﬁle which instructs the printer on how to create the 3D object. The description ﬁle uses a Numerical Control Pro-
gramming Language called G/M-code. The G-codes describe the motion and ﬂow settings of the printer, determining
the speed of the nozzle along each axis and the amount of material to deposit at each printing step. As an example,
G1 F2100 X5 Y6 Z1.2 E2.1 represents a single line of G-code for controlling the movement of the nozzle, where G1
means coordinated linear motion, F deﬁnes travel feed rate (speed) which is measured in mm/min, and distance and
extrusion are measured in mm. On the other hand, the M-codes control the machine settings such as temperature,
coolant. Lastly, the printer’s ﬁrmware interprets each received G/M-code instruction into the corresponding control
signals to actuate the printer hardware and, in turn, print the object.

Figure 1: The AM process chain.

In the physical domain, the FDM-based printer uses thermoplastic ﬁlament materials to form 3D physical objects.
The printer uses motors and belts to control the heated nozzle to melt the materials, depositing the extrusion onto the
surface of the build plate at a precisely controlled rate. An array of stepper motors enables a ﬁne-grained degree of
control, each controlling movement along a single axis. These components act as a signiﬁcant source of information
leakage because of their analog emissions during printer operation. The analog emissions come from various side-
channels of the printer (vibration, acoustic, magnetic, and power side-channels), which are streams of information
outside of the primary data path containing information which can be correlated with the data in the primary path. In
this case, the primary data path includes the control signals sent to the printer. The stepper motors are a major source
of vibration and acoustic emissions due to the ﬂuctuating radial force and torque ripples working on the stator core of
the stepper motor. The varying electric ﬁeld in the stepper motors also leaks data to the magnetic side channel. The
power side-channel reveals the primary consumers of power in a 3D printer, such as the heating elements, stepper
motors, fans, bed heater, and the internal control circuitry. In short, through these side-channels, the unintentional
information leakage about the primary data path enables the inference of control signal values from side-channel
information.

3 Sabotage Attack Detection for AM Systems

As for the threat model, the attackers can exploit multiple attack surfaces on the AM process chain (Figure 1) to
sabotage manufactured parts. From the cyber domain, the adversaries can modify the intermediate forms of the 3D
object by altering the integrity of the tools, ﬁrmware, or computers in the process chain, eventually resulting in the
modiﬁcation of the printer’s control signals and the sabotage of the printed object. Cyber-security techniques can help
mitigate risks further upstream in the digital process chain; however, AM systems often have network connectivity
or physical access ports that can enable an adversary to exploit ﬁrmware vulnerabilities and compromise the system.
To this end, we focus our on detecting adversarial attacks to the printer ﬁrmware that modify the control parameters
directly. With this in mind, we assume that the G-codes sent to the AM system have not been previously tampered
with and are representative of the correct 3D object model. In this case, the movement of the AM machine’s internal
components during a sabotage attack will not match the movements described by the instructions given in the G-
code ﬁle, and thus, will result in different side-channel emissions. By utilizing these side-channel emissions with the
G-codes sent to the printer, we can infer the values of the control signals and then determine if the printer ﬁrmware
has been hacked.

(cid:109) ieee-cps.org

Page 3

CAD Models STL filesToolpath filesControl Signals3D Physical Objects3D Design or specificationsCyber-domain (AM Digital Process Chain)Physical-domainCADSoftware CAMSoftware Printer FirmwarePrinter HarwareAnalog EmissionsThe architecture of our proposed Sabotage Attack De-
tection System is described in Figure 2. To infer the control
signals, the System State Estimation Model learns the rela-
tionship between the various side-channel emissions and the
various control signals using supervised machine learning ap-
proaches. The dataset for training consists of the analog emis-
sions from the Benchmark Printer along with their corre-
sponding control signals, which are parsed from the G-codes.
Once the mapping between analog emissions and control sig-
nals has been learned, our system ﬁrst infers each control sig-
nal by continuously observing the analog emissions from the
Monitoring Printer. The Attack Detection Algorithm then
compares the unmodiﬁed control signals to the inferred sig-
nals to determine if a sabotage attack has occurred.

4 Results

Figure 2: System Architecture.

Our experimental setup is shown in Figure 3, consisting of an Ultimaker 3 3D-printer,
four microphones, three vibration sensors (accelerometers), three magnetic sensors
(magnetometers), and one current sensor. We use timestamps to match each G-code
to its corresponding side-channel emissions recorded from the sensors. To evaluate
the performance of our proposed detection system, we combined data from several
different 3D-prints to produce a 20-gigabyte dataset containing 60,959 rows with
18,276 features per row. In the following sections, the selected results for state esti-
mation and attack detection are shown (see [13] for more results).

Figure 3: Experimental setup

4.1 AM System State Estimation

The ability of our system to detect sabotage attacks depends on how precisely our system models the relationship
between side-channel information and the corresponding machine control parameters. To improve our system’s per-
formance, we use multiple modalities of side-channel data for control signal estimation. To evaluate our multi-modal
approach in comparison to single side-channel (unimodal) methods, we assessed the movement-axis prediction (Ax
and Ay) performance of our classiﬁers using data from each modality. The results of the highest accuracy classiﬁers
in each modality in comparison to our multi-modal approach and the single acoustic sensor approach presented in
[4] are shown in Figure 4. As shown in the ﬁgure, our multi-modal technique outperforms the uni-modal methods
as well as the technique from [4]. Notably, the acoustic and vibration modalities show the highest uni-modal accu-
racy and reach within 5% of the accuracy of the multi-modal technique. Overall, these results demonstrate that our
multi-modal technique results in performance improvement over uni-modal methods.

4.2 AM Sabotage Attack Detection

To evaluate our attack detection performance, we generate synthetic attacks by adding adversarial modiﬁcations to
G-Codes. Then, we pass the unmodiﬁed sensor data and the modiﬁed G-code ﬁles as inputs to our attack detection
system to evaluate its ability to detect mismatches. Our overall row-level accuracy is 99.17% for movement-axis pre-
diction. For axis-velocity prediction our average accuracy is 96.64%. Our overall attack detection accuracy for all
control parameters is 98.15%. Although these attacks are synthetic, they provide empirical benchmarks to demon-
strate the attack detection system’s capabilities.

To validate these results in a real scenario, we tested two real-world sabotage attacks: a gear and a wrench. Since
gears and wrenches are generally placed in high-stress scenarios, it is plausible that a kinetic cyberattack could
compromise their structural integrity and signiﬁcantly increase the chance of equipment failure. Moreover, these

(cid:109) ieee-cps.org

Page 4

Sabotage Attack Detection SystemSystem State Estimation ModelAttack Detection AlgorithmemissionsUnmodified Control SignalsBenchmark  Printer Benchmark  Printer Monitoring  Printer Monitoring  Printer Figure 4: The comparison of multimodal approach and unimodal approaches in axis movement prediction.

(a) Original and modiﬁed wrench.

(b) Original and modiﬁed gear.

(c) Adversarial modiﬁcations in details.

Figure 5: The adversarially modiﬁed objects used for real-world testing.

parts serve as analogues to other load-bearing 3D printed parts to demonstrate that our detection system can identify
kinetic cyberattacks on these types of components. The original and attacked wrenches are shown in Figure 5a, and
the adversarial modiﬁcations to the gear are shown in Figure 5b. Although these speciﬁc modiﬁcations are visible to
the human eye in the ﬁnal print, this was done primarily for demonstrative purposes. These modiﬁcations can easily
be concealed in internal layers of the print without modifying the outward appearance of the object, enabling it to
pass visual quality inspections done by both machines and employees. For both test cases, the detection system was
able to detect the attack successfully. These tests demonstrate that our methodology can be applied to real-world,
practical AM tasks.

5 Conclusion

AM systems are core to the future of manufacturing and Industry 4.0. Since these systems are advancing in terms of
complexity and connectivity as well as producing parts for increasingly critical and taxing applications, the security
of these systems is a signiﬁcant concern. Since AM systems are CPSs, they present a broad and diverse attack
surface, making attack detection and prevention a daunting task. Our proposed sabotage attack detection system has
demonstrated the ability to detect various attacks by correlating multiple forms of physical-domain emissions of the
AM system with cyber-domain information. We have achieved an overall detection accuracy of 98.15% on synthetic
benchmarks and demonstrated that our system could detect two real-world scenarios of sabotage attacks. Although
our solution addresses a signiﬁcant security risk in AM systems, more work is needed to address the broad scope of
potential AM vulnerabilities.

(cid:109) ieee-cps.org

Page 5

References

[1] M. A. Al Faruque, S. R. Chhetri, A. Canedo, and J. Wan. Forensics of thermal side-channel in additive manu-

facturing systems. University of California, Irvine, 2016.

[2] S. D. Applegate. The dawn of kinetic cyber. In 2013 5th international conference on cyber conﬂict (CYCON

2013), pages 1–15. IEEE, 2013.

[3] S. R. Chhetri and M. A. Al Faruque. Side channels of cyber-physical systems: Case study in additive manufac-

turing. IEEE Design & Test, 34(4):18–25, 2017.

[4] S. R. Chhetri, A. Canedo, and M. A. A. Faruque. Kcad: kinetic cyber-attack detection method for cyber-
physical additive manufacturing systems. In Proceedings of the 35th international conference on Computer-
Aided Design, page 74. ACM, 2016.

[5] S. R. Chhetri, S. Faezi, and M. A. Al Faruque.

Information leakage-aware computer-aided cyber-physical

manufacturing. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 13(9):2333–2344, 2018.

[6] S. R. Chhetri, S. Faezi, and M. A. A. Faruque. Fix the leak!: an information leakage aware secured cyber-
physical manufacturing system. In Proceedings of the Conference on Design, Automation & Test in Europe,
pages 1412–1417. European Design and Automation Association, 2017.

[7] S. R. Chhetri, N. Rashid, S. Faezi, and M. A. Al Faruque. Security trends and advances in manufacturing
systems in the era of industry 4.0. In 2017 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design
(ICCAD), pages 1039–1046. IEEE, 2017.

[8] S. Faezi, S. R. Chhetri, A. V. Malawade, J. C. Chaput, W. H. Grover, P. Brisk, and M. A. Al Faruque. Oligo-

snoop: A non-invasive side channel attack against dna synthesis machines. In NDSS, 2019.

[9] A. Faruque, M. Abdullah, S. R. Chhetri, A. Canedo, and J. Wan. Acoustic side-channel attacks on additive man-
ufacturing systems. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems, page 19.
IEEE Press, 2016.

[10] M. Holland, J. Stjepandi´c, and C. Nigischer.

Intellectual property protection of 3d print supply chain with
blockchain technology. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innovation
(ICE/ITMC), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2018.

[11] L. Sturm, C. Williams, J. Camelio, J. White, and R. Parker. Cyber-physical vunerabilities in additive manufac-

turing systems. Context, 7(2014):8, 2014.

[12] M. Yampolskiy, W. E. King, J. Gatlin, S. Belikovetsky, A. Brown, A. Skjellum, and Y. Elovici. Security of

additive manufacturing: Attack taxonomy and survey. Additive Manufacturing, 21:431–457, 2018.

[13] S. Yu, A. V. Malawade, S. R. Chhetri, and M. A. Al Faruque. Sabotage attack detection for additive manufac-

turing systems. IEEE Access, 8:27218–27231, 2020.

(cid:109) ieee-cps.org

Page 6

