This is the post-print of the following article: S. Pizzi, C. Suraci, A. Iera, A. Molinaro and G. Araniti, “A Sidelink-Aided Approach for Secure Multicast Service Delivery: from
Human-Oriented Multimedia Trafﬁc to Machine Type Communications,” in IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, doi: 10.1109/TBC.2020.2977512.
Article has been published in ﬁnal form at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9036866.
Copyright © 2020 IEEE.

A Sidelink-Aided Approach for Secure Multicast
Service Delivery: from Human-Oriented Multimedia
Trafﬁc to Machine Type Communications
S. Pizzi∗, C. Suraci∗, A. Iera†, A. Molinaro∗, G. Araniti∗
∗DIIES Dept., University “Mediterranea” of Reggio Calabria, Italy,
email: {sara.pizzi|chiara.suraci|antonella.molinaro|araniti}@unirc.it
†DIMES Dept., University of Calabria, Italy,
e-mail: antonio.iera@dimes.unical.it

Abstract—To date, group-oriented communications have been
mainly exploited for delivering multimedia services in human-
oriented communications while, in future ﬁfth generation (5G)
cellular networks, objects will be the main target. Internet of
Things (IoT) will undoubtedly play a key role in 5G networks,
wherein massive machine-type communications (mMTC) feature
a use case as crucial as challenging since cellular IoT connections
are predicted to grow heavily in the next future. To boost
capacity and energy efﬁciency, the 5G network can leverage
device-to-device (D2D) communications which are recognized as
an effective ofﬂoading technique. This is achieved thanks to the
fact that, in legacy D2D communications, data are directly sent
from one device to another, avoiding the crossing of the network.
Obviously, the distributed nature of such a communication
paradigm and the inherent broadcast nature of the wireless
channel make it necessary to think how to secure the so called
“sidelink” transmissions. This work proposes a protocol for the
efﬁcient and reliable management of multicast services in a 5G-
oriented IoT scenario, in which security is a crucial requirement
to be met. The proposed protocol is tailored to Narrowband IoT
(NB-IoT) and makes use of D2D communications with the aim of
improving network efﬁciency and optimizing network resource
utilization. In addition, cyber security and social trustworthiness
mechanisms are exploited to secure D2D communications.

Index Terms—5G, IoT, mMTC, group-oriented communica-

tions, NB-IoT, D2D, Security, Social Trustworthiness

I. INTRODUCTION

Fifth generation (5G) cellular systems will be hyper-
connected networks mostly consisting of pervasive smart
objects. If human communications have been the reference
target in previous generations of mobile networks, they will be
hugely overtaken by communications among objects in next-
generation cellular networks. The 3rd Generation Partnership
Project (3GPP) has speciﬁed a 5G system architecture aimed
to support a wide set of use cases, typically grouped into
three classes: enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), ultra
reliable and low latency communications (URLLC), and mas-
sive machine-type communications (mMTC) [1]. Focus of
this work are mMTC communications, given such soaring
demands for smart objects connectivity.

The number of cellular connections among objects be-
longing to the diversiﬁed world of the Internet of Things
(IoT) is expected to reach 4 billions by 2024 [2]. In fact,
“smart-things networks” are going to be exploited in the

more disparate ﬁelds spanning from healthcare to agriculture,
intelligent transportation system, education, industry, gaming,
and so on. It follows that IoT networks will be composed
of even-more-intelligent heterogeneous objects which, being
typically resource-constrained, have the common feature of
requiring a low energy consumption. This is why 3GPP
standardized the Narrowband-IoT (NB-IoT) technology, opti-
mized to guarantee longer battery life to resource-constrained
cellular devices.

In the road towards 5G systems, the increase in the number
of connected objects is complemented by the growth in
demands for group-oriented communications. In fact, although
several IoT applications primarily involve the uplink (UL)
direction, there are also many use cases, such as massive
media distribution and software update, that require the same
data to be sent from the network to groups of IoT devices, i.e.,
in the downlink (DL) direction. To date, group-oriented com-
munications have been mainly exploited for delivering mul-
timedia services in human-oriented communications, while,
in 5G networks, objects will be the main target. Although
typical trafﬁc ﬂows involving objects are related to sensing
and automation activities, multimedia applications have a
great potential
in the IoT ecosystem. This is testiﬁed by
the increasing interest towards the Internet of Multimedia
Things (IoMT), an innovative concept according to which
heterogeneous multimedia things can interact and cooperate to
achieve multimedia-based applications/services [3]. In fact, as
also stated in [4], the target of multimedia services is shifting
from traditional TV to streaming on connected devices, such
as mobile devices and monitoring devices. Very recently,
the feasibility of delivering less-demanding multimedia IoT
applications over NB-IoT has been investigated in [5].

Actually, multicast transmissions could allow to largely
weigh down latency and energy consumption of the receiving
IoT devices. The traditional way of serving multicast trafﬁc is
the Conventional Multicast Scheme (CMS), which assigns the
group data rate based on the device that experiences the worst
channel conditions. As stated in [6], guaranteeing all multicast
receivers a similar performance experience is as necessary
as challenging, since the instantaneous channel condition
of each device in the multicast group varies independently.
Despite using CMS all devices receive the same treatment, the

1
2
0
2

t
c
O
7

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
3
5
3
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
transmission is heavily constrained by the cell-edge users. As
a consequence, CMS fails to offer a high quality of experience
(QoE), which is the quality focus of 5G networks [7]. This
is the reason why it is necessary to design effective methods
for delivering multicast services over 5G networks.

The Single Cell Point to Multipoint (SC-PTM) architecture
and procedures have been standardized to deliver multicast
trafﬁc within a NB-IoT cell. Although NB-IoT and SC-PTM
are the current standards for IoT, still several features need
to be applied to further optimize the performance of IoT
data delivery. In this regard, Machine-type Multicast Service
(MtMS) is proposed in [8] to deﬁne the proper architecture
and transmission procedures to manage the MTC multicast
trafﬁc. Although this architecture is well-suited to IoT trafﬁc,
it does not take into account any security problems, even
though their undoubted importance in the 5G ecosystem.

Among the enabling technologies of future 5G networks,
device-to-device (D2D) communications stand out for the
advantages they can bring in terms of latency, data rate,
spectral and energy efﬁciency, thanks to the proximity be-
tween the communicating devices [9]. As in [10], D2D com-
munications are often established as an underlay to cellular
networks with the aim to meet the increasing demand for
mobile data services, achieve high data rates, and reduce
the trafﬁc load on the base station. On the other hand,
a clear weakness in 5G-oriented D2D communications is
undoubtedly the vulnerability to security attacks, during data
exchanges. Security is one the main requirements expected
for the next 5G mobile networks, mainly due to the fact that
many actors will be involved in the provision of services,
therefore, sensitive data will be exposed to different parties,
some of which may not be trusted. Moreover, softwarization
will be a key technique in the development of the 5G, hence,
technologies such as Multi-Access Edge Computing (MEC),
Network Function Virtualization (NFV) and Software-Deﬁned
Networking (SDN) are considered enabling for the future
generation networks. Despite the undoubted beneﬁts brought
by these technologies, they cause the network to be exposed to
many new security threats, which must be managed efﬁciently.
Side-channel attacks, data breaches, distributed denial of
service (DDoS) attacks, insecure interfaces and application
programming interfaces (APIs), isolation failure, and mali-
cious insiders are some of the most frequent attacks which
focus on the vulnerabilities of 5G virtualization technologies.
Many works in the literature deal with these problems and
potential solutions [11] [12] [13].

In IoT scenarios, where devices are often called upon to
transmit sensitive data through insecure wireless channels,
this ﬂaw pushes to look for highly effective mechanisms
for both data conﬁdentiality and integrity guarantee, user
authentication and authorization, and device protection. This
problem has been tackled in our previous work [14], where we
deﬁned a protocol intended to secure D2D communications,
in which D2D peers generate a private encryption key by
using a trusted version of the Difﬁe-Hellman Key Exchange
(DHKE) protocol. The public keys exchange is then mediated
by the base station that acts as a trusted third party. The main
drawback of the presented protocol is that there is no way to

2

disclose the bad nature of the nodes before they exhibit their
malicious behavior. Furthermore, the proposed protocol is not
properly tailored to the IoT domain, in which the presence of
resource-constrained devices poses speciﬁc challenges.

In this vein, this work proposes the Machine type Multicast
Service with secure and trust D2D (MtMS-stD2D) proto-
col, speciﬁcally designed for the highly reliable delivery of
multicast trafﬁc to a set of machines in IoT scenarios. It
leverages D2D communications over sidelinks, coupled to a
secure mechanism based on the DHKE protocol. It is worth
mentioning that sidelink is deﬁned in [15] as the interface
between UEs for sidelink communications, which also include
the D2Ds, thus it is the link over which the communication
between devices in proximity occurs.

The main contributions of this work are the following:
• the architecture presented in [8] is enhanced by the
inclusion of secure sidelinks, aimed at improving the per-
formance of the multicast transmission, while ensuring
protection of data transmitted in D2D;

• the security protocol described in [14] is strengthened
by the possibility to estimate the reliability of nodes
also before they perform a malicious behavior, thanks to
information on the social relationships established among
nodes in the network;

• an analysis of the protocol feasibility in terms of en-
ergy consumed to implement the proposed solution on
resource-constrained nodes of a NB-IoT network, such
as those that populate IoT scenarios, is carried out in
order to determine which kind of use case could take
advantage from the MtMS-stD2D architecture.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
section II, the research background is presented. Section III
illustrates the scenario under investigation, while section IV
describes in details all MtMS-stD2D procedures. Obtained
results are shown in section V, while conclusive remarks are
given in the last section.

II. BACKGROUND

In this section, we will provide the basics of NB-IoT, the
cellular technology which is the reference of our work. Then,
we will discuss how multicast transmissions are managed in
NB-IoT. Afterwards, research works related to security are
surveyed.

A. The Narrowband-Internet of Things (NB-IoT) technology

NB-IoT is a cellular technology, ﬁrst deﬁned in 3GPP
Release 13, designed to meet the requirements of low-cost
IoT devices located in weak-coverage signal areas. Energy
saving, coverage extension, and capacity increase are among
its main beneﬁts. In fact, it can extend device battery lifetime
by up to 10 years, improve coverage by 20 dBm compared to
Long Term Evolution (LTE), and manage the massive capacity
of IoT scenarios [16].
NB-IoT is not

the only solution in licensed spectrum
proposed for IoT applications, as two other alternative tech-
nologies actually exist: LTE for Machines (LTE-M), also
introduced in 3GPP Release 13, and Extended Coverage GSM

(EC-GSM), created from the GSM standard. NB-IoT stands
out for the reduced amount of required resources. In fact,
only 180 kHz of bandwidth can be used for both downlink
and uplink. This choice makes NB-IoT compatible with other
technologies. It can be implemented in a 200 kHz GSM carrier
or, within an LTE carrier, using a 180 kHz physical resource
block (PRB).

NB-IoT can be deployed by choosing among three different
operation modes: (i) in standalone mode, it is implemented as
a dedicated carrier, using one of GSM; (ii) in in-band mode,
it is deployed inside an LTE carrier, occupying one or more
PRBs; (iii) in guard band mode, it can use the frequencies
of the LTE carrier guard bands. As regards the in-band and
guard-band modes, resources must be properly assigned to
NB-IoT not to create interference with legacy LTE signals.
Therefore, although NB-IoT is an independent radio access
network technology, it is compatible with the previous ones,
because it offers a good ﬂexibility in the implementation.

The physical layer of NB-IoT is characterized by inno-
vative features, required for the management of the narrow
bandwidth. In Release 13, the Frequency Division Duplex-
ing (FDD) mode is required. Thus, in NB-IoT, uplink and
downlink are frequency divided. In addition, half-duplex mode
is supported by devices, that therefore can not simultane-
ously receive and transmit. In the downlink, NB-IoT supports
Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple Access (OFDMA)
with 15 kHz subcarrier spacing. A frame is composed of ten
subframes, each lasting 1 ms, and each subframe is composed
of two 0.5 ms slots. Therefore, the downlink transmission
scheme is the same as that of LTE. In the uplink direction,
the Single Carrier Frequency Division Multiple Access (SC-
FDMA) is used and both single-tone and multi-tone trans-
missions are feasible. For the single-tone transmission, it is
possible to choose between a 3.75 kHz or 15 kHz subcarrier
spacing. If the 3.75 kHz option is selected, slot will last 2 ms.
Multi-tone transmission modes are the same as those of the
LTE uplink: 15 kHz subcarrier spacing with 0.5 ms time slot
[17].

B. Multicast support in NB-IoT

SC-PTM has been standardized by 3GPP to manage multi-
cast transmissions in NB-IoT networks. It extends the Multi-
media Broadcast Multicast Services (MBMS) standard, from
which it inherits many features, including procedures.

The main nodes of the MBMS architecture are: the broad-
cast multicast-service center (BM-SC), which is the source of
the multicast content and is responsible for the initialization
of the MBMS session and for some security functions, such
as the management of the authorizations for the MBMS
subscribers; the MBMS-gateway (MBMS-GW), which is in
charge of forwarding MBMS packets to the base station (BS)
involved in service delivery; the multicell/multicast coordina-
tion entity (MCE), which has to manage admission control
and radio resource allocation to the BS [18].

MBMS service is subscription-based and it foresees the
implementation of the following procedures: subscription, ser-
vice announcement, joining, MBMS notiﬁcation, session start,

3

data transfer, session stop, and leaving. Devices subscribe to
the network their interest in receiving MBMS services and the
network periodically announces them the available services.
A device, interested in receiving a certain service, joins the
multicast group to which the service will be offered, through
the joining procedure. Subscribed devices must constantly
monitor the Multicast Control Channel (MCCH) for service
information and listen for future service announcements.
Despite the many advantages that MBMS can bring to cellular
networks [19], this latter aspect is one of the most critical for
IoT networks, since it can affect the Discontinuous Reception
(DRX) cycle of the IoT devices and, therefore, cause a rele-
vant energy wastage. For these reasons, SC-PTM procedures
have to be modiﬁed in order to properly meet the requirements
of the NB-IoT resource-constrained devices [20].

C. Securing communications

In [1], among the listed 5G requirements, improved secu-
rity mechanisms, that can work effectively in the presence
of a likely huge amount of data transmitted over cellular
networks, are recommended. In the IoT landscape, devices
often communicate sensitive data over the insecure wireless
channel, thus, security and privacy requirements have to be
satisﬁed to guarantee both data and device protection [21].
Many works in the literature deal with the security problem
in the next generation mobile networks, the most signiﬁcant
of which are collected in [22]. Among the different covered
topics, the authors highlight the most effective solutions pro-
posed in the literature to overcome some challenging security
issues. Solutions are grouped in access control, authentication,
communication, and encryption areas, the same targeted by
the protocol proposed in this paper.

In the 5G network, D2D communications are a widely
accepted technology for enhancing spectrum efﬁciency, im-
proving network resource utilization, and extending battery
lifetime [9]. However, as also stated in [24], the establishment
of secure D2D communications is a critical point, because
of the additional problems caused by the fact that data are
exchanged directly between devices in proximity. A malicious
transmitter may decide to drop the data packets directed to the
D2D receiver or may modify them, without the network or
recipient being aware of the misbehaviour.

Among proposals for securing D2D communication, an
interesting solution is presented in [25]. This is the work
that inspires the protocol presented in [14], which satisﬁes
many security requirements, such as non-repudiation, authen-
tication, authorization, conﬁdentiality, and integrity. It uses
some security mechanisms, such as encryption, HMAC, and
signature to manage the messages exchanged between the
two peers involved in direct communication. To this aim,
the encryption of transmitted data is performed through a
symmetric (i.e., private-key) encryption algorithm. The private
key is generated through an enhanced version of the DHKE
protocol. The enhancement consists in charging a trusted third
party (i.e., the BS) to manage the public keys necessary for the
generation of the secret key. In detail, the DHKE algorithm
states that each of the two peers, involved in the generation

4

of the secret key, produces a preliminary public key to be
sent to the other, so that it can calculate the same private key.
According to DHKE, the peer i can compute the secret key
Kij as follows:

careful selection of the D2D transmitters by considering, not
only the malicious behavior of the nodes that have already
played the role of relays, but also taking into account the
“social” reputation of the devices within the network.

j mod q = (αXj )Xi mod q = αXiXj mod q (1)
Kij = Y Xi
where, Yj = αXj mod q is the public key of peer j, α is
a ﬁxed primitive element of GF (q) and q is a prime number
(both known to the two involved peers), Xi and Xj are
independent random numbers respectively chosen and kept
secret by peer i and peer j. Similarly, peer j computes the
same secret key thanks to the knowledge of Yi, that is the
public key of peer i:

Kij = Y Xj

i mod q = (αXi)Xj mod q = αXiXj mod q (2)
In legacy DHKE, the peers directly exchange their public
keys. Differently, in the proposed enhanced version, each peer
sends its public key to the BS, which will forward it to
the other peer, following a request coming from it and only
after having veriﬁed its identity and legitimacy to request for
that information. The literature on the subject conﬁrms that
these design choices are well suited to IoT scenarios, like
the one examined in this paper. In fact, many research works
assume the intervention of a trusted third party in the key
generation mechanism between resource-constrained devices
[26] or of a centralized security framework to detect incoming
attacks [27]. In [28], the authors propose GT-QoSec, a game-
theoretic joint optimization of QoS and security in Heteroge-
neous Networks (HetNet) that can also serve a large number
of devices requesting various types of applications. In this
scenario, the eNodeB (eNB) implements intrusion detection
techniques to monitor threat levels of the network and plays
a key role in ensuring adequate security ranks to each device.
Regarding the choice of symmetric encryption, many works in
the literature conﬁrm that this is the best choice for resource-
constrained devices. Works [29] and [30] proposed symmetric
encryption algorithms, that are less demanding in terms of
energy consumption compared to an asymmetric approach.

So far, the advantages of the algorithm presented in [14]
have been illustrated in order to legitimize whether this algo-
rithm is partly used also in the protocol presented in this work.
In fact, similarly to [14], we exploit an enhanced version of
the DHKE protocol, where the BS acts as a trusted third party
in order to avoid the man-in-the-middle attack, a well-known
vulnerability of DHKE. In our proposal, the BS contributes to
the establishment of secure D2D communications and to the
detection of any malicious behaviour of devices, that may have
been intentionally deployed for breaching network security.
Since both DHKE and D2D communications are distributed
by nature, the BS (already in charge of delivering data from/to
devices) also exploits, at a global level, any security informa-
tion gathered by devices in local data exchanges. In order
to enhance the protocol presented in [14], it was necessary to
think about how to reduce the number of undetected malicious
devices selectable as D2D transmitters (or relay nodes). So, in
addition to [14], this work foresees that the BS implements a

III. SYSTEM MODEL

This work considers an IoT scenario, wherein the MTC
multicast trafﬁc is managed through the proposed algorithm,
named MtMS with secure and trust D2D (MtMS-stD2D).
D2D communications are established between devices directly
served by the BS and those terminals excluded from the multi-
cast transmission, because of their adverse channel conditions.
A secure protocol is implemented over sidelinks in order
to protect the transmitted data. The protocol aims to avoid
giving a forwarding role to devices that exhibited a malicious
behavior in the past. Since a node cannot be considered as
“not secure” (i.e. unreliable) until it behaves maliciously, the
protocol also estimates the reliability of network nodes by
leveraging a simple, yet effective, trust model available from
the literature and based on the Social IoT (SIoT) paradigm
[31]. Social relationships that can be established among nodes
are: parental object relationship (POR), among objects created
by the same producer in the same period; co-location object
relationship (C-LOR), that affects smart things that always
work in the same place; co-work object relationship (C-
WOR), between objects that collaborate to achieve a common
goal; ownership object relationship (OOR), that binds objects
owned by the same holder; social object relationship (SOR),
due to the meeting, sporadic or continuous, of the owners
of the objects, that consequently get in touch. Examples of
applicative use-cases that could beneﬁt from the presented
protocol are massive media distribution, software update of a
group of machines owned by a customer/tenant, or delivery
of alerting messages.

A common trend in cellular technology is to deploy fem-
tocells which are small, inexpensive, and low-power base
stations, that represent a cost-effective means of data traf-
ﬁc ofﬂoading from the macrocell. Femtocells are generally
consumer-deployed and connected to their own wired back-
haul connection. It is expected that 70% of wide-area IoT
devices will use cellular technology in 2022 [32]. Thus, it
appears clear that femtocells will play a signiﬁcant role in
the next-to-come scenario, and will drive the fast realization
of the IoT, because of their ability to provide high data rate
services in a less expensive manner [33]. For this reason,
we consider a femtocell, in which an home-evolved NodeB
(HeNB) provides connectivity to a small-cell of devices, thus
guaranteeing latency and energy consumption reductions and
improving coverage and reliability compared to the traditional
macrocell. In particular, NB-IoT is exploited for radio links
between the HeNB and devices, whereas proximity-based
transmissions (i.e., D2D) are established among devices in
mutual proximity. The idea we want to investigate is to ofﬂoad
the portion of trafﬁc that cannot be handled by NB-IoT via
short-range sidelinks. The motivation behind this choice is
that we want to utilize a low-power technology for reducing
energy consumption of the devices, even if we must obviate to

the lack of support of D2D communication in NB-IoT. Thus,
we assume that relay nodes are equipped with two radios:
a NB-IoT interface, connecting the relay node to the HeNB,
and an LTE-A radio, for the direct communication with cell-
edge users. This assumption is realistic since IoT devices are
currently equipped with a wide range of radio technologies,
that include both long- and short-range connectivity, such as
Long Range (LoRa), LTE, NB-IoT, Bluetooth, and LTE Cat-
M1. This requirement can be seen as a further “hardware
constraint” in the relay node selection process.

Our MtMS-stD2D architecture, depicted in Fig. 1, derives
from the MtMS architecture (deﬁned in [8]) and properly
enhances it to support secure D2D communications. It is
composed of the following nodes: the HeNB, which provides
connectivity to a small-cell of devices; HeNB gateway (HeNB-
GW), which aggregates control and data trafﬁc of various
HeNBs; MtMS serving center (MtMS-SC), implemented at the
service capability server (SCS), it is responsible for initializ-
ing the MtMS session, obtaining the multicast content and the
information about the receiving devices; MtMS coordination
entity (MtMS-CE), which manages the joining procedure by
paging the indicated devices; MtMS gateway (MtMS-GW),
which receives data from the MtMS-SC and forwards them to
the cells with paged devices. MtMS-GW and MtMS-CE are
implemented at the HeNB-GW.

Despite the proposed MtMS-stD2D architecture strictly
relies on the presence of the HeNB, it does not pose severe
scalability problems. First of all, the number of devices under
coverage of the HeNB is limited, since we are considering
femtocells. In addition, not all devices in the cell must imple-
ment the security protocol. In fact, only D2D communications,
that involve a limited portion of devices over the total number
of nodes in the femtocell, are designed to be secured.

In view of the goal of serving resource- and energy-
constrained IoT devices, we put a keen attention to the over-
head introduced by the proposed security mechanism, which
is then evaluated through an energy consumption analysis.

IV. MACHINE-TYPE MULTICAST SERVICE WITH SECURE
AND TRUST D2D

In our reference IoT environment, resource-constrained
devices have to receive multicast data from the network. In
many IoT scenarios, the UL direction is the most analyzed,
since IoT devices are assumed to have the task of sending
data to the network (sensing). Actually, use cases such as
massive media distribution, software update, and delivery of
alerting messages are equally important and frequent in IoT.
For this reason, this paper focuses on procedures for efﬁcient
and secure DL service delivery.

The procedures and sub-procedures of the MtMS-stD2D

protocol are described below and summarized in Table I.

A. Subscription

The subscription procedure is performed by the service
provider. For example, in the case of massive media distri-
bution, it is realistic to assume that the owner of devices
communicates to the network which devices must receive the

5

Fig. 1. Reference architecture.

TABLE I
PROCEDURES AND SUB-PROCEDURES.

Procedures

Sub-procedures

A) Subscription

B) Initialization

C) Joining

D) Data transfer

E) Session stop

1) Paging
2) Random access
3) D2D pairs selection
4) Service request
5) D2D pair announcement

1) Multicast transmission
2) stD2D communication
3) Report
4) Public key exchange
5) Alarm beacon or null

multimedia data. This allows energy saving, since it prevents
devices from interrupting their DRX cycle to monitor service
announcements.

B. Initialization

MtMS-SC is responsible for the initialization of the MtMS
session. It receives data from the service provider and for-
wards them to the MtMS-GW.

C. Joining

1) Paging: The joining procedure starts with paging, aimed
at waking up the subscriber devices before data transmission.
The MtMS-stD2D protocol includes an enhanced DRX-based
group paging, which consists in the creation of subgroups
of devices to be paged on the basis of their DRX cycle, at
different times. The HeNB is in charge of performing paging
to wake up target subgroups of devices, when necessary, since
it is assumed that the network is already informed on which
devices should receive the multicast data. This assumption

Control plane User plane S-GW MME P-GW Service Capability Server (SCS) MtMS-GW HeNB-GW MtMS-CE MtMS-SC HeNB D2D TX D2D RX Service provider INTERNET D2D communication Multicast transmission HeNB coverage area is realistic in IoT scenarios, since one of the main applica-
tions of group-oriented communications are massive media
distribution and software update. In these cases, the service
provider (e.g., the owner of the devices) can communicate
to the network which devices must receive the service. The
enhanced DRX-based group paging allows to: (i) minimize
the number of multicast
transmissions required to deliver
data to all devices in the cell, and (ii) prevent the waste of
energy caused by the interruption of the DRX cycle for service
announcements monitoring.

2) Random Access: Whenever a subgroup is paged, the
awakened devices must perform the random access procedure
to synchronize with the network. On this occasion, each
device also sends information about: (i) the conditions of
the direct channel towards the HeNB (i.e., channel quality
indicator (CQI)), (ii) the CQIs of the sidelinks which connect
it to the nearby nodes in the network (i.e., D2D CQIs), and
(iii) the values of social relationships with other network
nodes to allow HeNB estimating nodes’ reliability.

3) D2D pairs selection: This phase represents the heart of
our proposal, since it involves the use of social trustworthiness
and security metrics in the selection of D2D transmitters.
Based on their CQI, the network determines which devices
to serve directly and which to serve in D2D. In selecting the
best D2D transmitters for the given receivers, the network,
particularly the MtMS-CE, considers both the reliability of
the possible relays and the D2D CQIs. In [34], the authors
demonstrate the convenience of considering the conditions
of the D2D channel
in the selection process of the best
transmitter for a given receiver. First, the MtMS-CE computes
the reliability value for each possible relay as:

N RV t

k =

(cid:40)

SRF t
k,
M DC t−1

k

M DC t−1
M DC t−1

k = 0
(cid:54)= 0

k

(3)

,

where:
• N RV t

• SRF t

k at time instant t.

k is the Node’s Reliability Value referred to node

k is the Social Relationships Factor for node k at
time instant t. It derives from the social relationships
between node k and the other nodes of the network. In
fact, as in [35], a value ∈ [0, 1] is assigned to each type of
the ﬁve social relationships discussed in section III. The
kind of social relationship established between network
nodes affects their reputation as long as a node exhibits a
malicious behaviour when working as a D2D transmitter.
For this reason, the SRF value has a great impact on the
protocol performance especially in the early stages, when
very few D2D communications have been set up.

k

• M DC t−1

is the Malicious D2D-transmissions Counter
of node k before the current time instant. More details
on this counter will be given below. Brieﬂy, it may be a
value ∈ [0, ∞), representing a measure of non-reliability
of the node, since it tracks the number of times the node,
selected as a D2D transmitter, behaved maliciously.
The MtMS-CE bans as non-eligible for the role of relays all
nodes for which N RV > 1, because they evidently behaved
maliciously at least in one D2D transmission. Afterwards, it

6

splits eligible devices in three priority classes based on their
NRVs: high, medium, and low. The MtMS-CE checks the
D2D CQIs between the possible relays, belonging to the high
class (i.e., the most reliable), and the D2D receivers. If there
is a relay for each receiver, the selection ends. Otherwise,
MtMS-CE considers the medium priority class. Only if no
relay is found among the nodes with medium reliability
values, then MtMS-CE considers the low priority class. In
case MtMS-CE cannot ﬁnd a transmitter for each recipient,
D2D communications are not established and all network
nodes are served via CMS.

4) Service request: In order to guarantee conﬁdentiality
and integrity of data transmitted over sidelinks, a secret key
is generated by each transmitter and receiver by performing
the DHKE protocol, as in [25]. The exchange, between the
peers, of the public keys, required for the generation of
the same secret key, is always mediated by a trusted third
party, that is the HeNB. The D2D receiver, DEVi, sends
a service request message to the HeNB to communicate its
identity and the public key generated for the implementation
of the DHKE algorithm. In this and in the following messages
the use of
exchanged between a device and the HeNB,
message authentication (i.e., HMAC) is envisioned for the
integrity and authentication of each message.

5) D2D pair announcement: After receiving the service
request message, the HeNB authenticates the requesting de-
vice in the normal cellular communication mode, checking
if its ID is registered. In the positive case, the HeNB has to
perform the D2D pair announcement, informing both the D2D
receiver (i.e., DEVi) and the D2D transmitter (i.e., DEVj)
of their imminent communication. Thus, it sends to each peer
the identity of the other. Furthermore, it sends to DEVj the
public key received by DEVi during the service request step.

D. Data transfer

1) Multicast transmission: As previously mentioned, dur-
ing the initialization procedure, the service provider sends
multicast data to the MtMS-SC, which forwards them to the
MtMS-GW. The latter signs data before sending them to the
HeNB. This way, it will always be possible to recognize the
original data from the service provider. When data arrive at
the HeNB, it performs the multicast transmission to the ﬁrst
paged subgroup by using CMS.

2) Secure-D2D (sD2D) communication: When DEVj,
which belongs to the served subgroup, receives data from the
HeNB, it already knows it has to forward them to the previ-
ously notiﬁed D2D receiver; so it carries out all the operations
necessary to guarantee a secure D2D communication. In order
to ensure conﬁdentiality and integrity to data packets sent
over sidelink, it encrypts them with a symmetric encryption
algorithm using the secret key generated through the DHKE
algorithm. In addition, it reports in the message its identity
(i.e., IDj) and signs it before sending it to the D2D receiver.
This guarantees non-repudiation.

3) Report: As mentioned, the HeNB acts as a trusted third
party in the public keys exchange, required by the DHKE
algorithm for the two peers to generate the same secret key.

To this aim, the relay node sends the HeNB the public key
used in the previous step to derive the encryption key.

4) Public key exchange: After receiving data, DEVi ﬁrst
veriﬁes the identity of the transmitter. To this aim, it compares
the identity reported in the message received over sidelink
by DEVj (i.e., IDj) with that communicated by the HeNB.
If they do not match, the packet is dropped; otherwise, it
proceeds with next steps. Afterwards, it checks the signature
of the transmitter and, if it is valid, data are considered good
because sent by the entity corresponding to IDj. Once the
identity of the sender is veriﬁed, DEVi needs to generate the
decryption key to obtain the plaintext. Thus, it sends a public
key request message to HeNB.

if it

5) Alarm beacon: Thanks to the reception of the public
key, DEVi can get the private key and obtain the plaintext
data. To verify the origin of data, it also checks the signature
of the MtMS-GW and,
is valid, data are accepted.
Otherwise, it is possible that data have been tampered. In
this case, DEVi must send to the HeNB an alarm beacon as
the evidence of the fake message and to track the malicious
attacker. The HeNB waits for the beacon for a ∆T time
after sending the public key to DEVi. If any alarm beacon
arrives during this time interval, then the HeNB ﬁrst checks
the validity of the signature of the MtMS-GW. If the signature
is invalid, it assumes that the message did not come from the
service provider and may be fabricated by the transmitter.
So, HeNB also veriﬁes the validity of the signature of the
relay node to ensure that the fake message comes from the
entity corresponding to IDj. One counter is stored by the
HeNB to track any malicious behavior of D2D relay nodes:
the MDC. In case of a malicious transmission by DEVj,
HeNB increments its MDC by one. This counter contributes
to deﬁne the node’s reliability, as explained in section IV-C3.

E. Session stop

The MtMS session is completed when data are sent to all

devices initially subscribed by the service provider.

V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

A. Security analysis

The features of a D2D communication make it willing
to various security threats. 3GPP has released TS 33.303
in which it describes the security procedures that can be
implemented in Proximity-based Services (ProSe),
in par-
ticular for the public safety use case [36]. Our work aims
at optimizing the encryption key generation procedures also
making them eavesdroppers proof. Hence, we ﬁrst list the
security requirements for reliable D2D communications and,
then, we highlight which of these requirements are met by
our MtMS-stD2D protocol.

• Data conﬁdentiality and integrity. Conﬁdentiality pre-
vents data from being accessed by unauthorized entities.
Data integrity avoids an attacker from tampering data
transmitted in a private communication.

• Authentication. It is important for identifying the entities
that perform actions. It allows the association of identi-
fying credentials with the entity that owns them.

7

• Privacy. The protection of information relating to net-
work users concerns the privacy assurance. In the age
of General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), this is
a fundamental requirement in some contexts, such as
eHealth and smart wearables.

• Non-repudiation. The non-repudiation of an action is
important for the detection of malicious entities. If this
requirement is met, a malicious user cannot deny having
done a bad deed, so network can possibly punish it.
The main contribution to security offered by the MtMS-
stD2D protocol is the reliability assurance: thanks to the pro-
posed selection mechanism, it is very likely that a reliable and
efﬁcient relay will be selected to forward data through D2D
communications over sidelinks. As regards the protection of
data packets transmitted in D2D, their conﬁdentiality is guar-
anteed by the implemented symmetric encryption algorithm,
while their integrity is assured by the use of the HMAC.
The construction of the HMAC, in fact, implies that only
who knows the used private key (i.e., in our protocol, the
owner device and the HeNB) can modify the message; in
this way, also the authentication of the message is achieved,
because only the owner of the private key can have generated
it. Furthermore, thanks to the signature implementation, non-
repudiation is accomplished. This is particularly important
in the sD2D communication step (see subsection IV-D2),
when the relay has to sign data before transmitting it to the
D2D receiver. Once the signature has been checked, if it is
successful, the relay can not deny that it was the origin of
data transmission and, if it has been malicious, the network
is able to take into account its bad deed. Finally, it is worth
mentioning that, in our protocol, the exploitation of the BS
as a trusted third party is an additional security guarantee,
since, by centralizing the security control, it is possible to
avoid attacks by distributed devices, such as man-in-the-
middle and byzantine generals problem. The fact that the BS
is fundamental for the existence of the network implies that it
is also the most secure and protected node, lowering the risk
of central entity vulnerabilities.

B. Simulation results

We tested the performance of the proposed protocol via the

Matlab tool.

The considered scenario consists of 1000 devices dis-
tributed in the edge of a circular NB-IoT cell with a 1000
m radius. Inside the multicast group, including all terminals,
a portion of devices is served according to a CMS approach
through NB-IoT, while those in worst channel conditions
receive data via D2D connections.

According to NB-IoT speciﬁcations, a bandwidth of 180
kHz is available for the communication between HeNB and
device, and the in-band mode is deployed. As regards D2D
communications on LTE-A, a bandwidth of 20 MHz, which
corresponds to 100 RBs, is available. A TDD LTE frame type
2 conﬁguration 3 is used. Each slot (or Transmission Time
Interval, TTI) in the frame lasts 1 ms, so the entire frame
has a duration of 10 ms. The Inband D2D mode is chosen, so
uplink slots are reserved to D2D communications. In downlink
slots, the multicast transmission takes place.

Simulations are conducted by varying the percentage of
malicious devices and the dimension of the downloaded
ﬁle. In particular, ﬁle dimension varies from 5 kb to 10
MB in order to analyze the performance of the proposed
protocol (shown in the graphs as stD2D) in different use
cases, spanning from alert messaging to high dimension ﬁle
downloading. Security messages dimension is set according
to [25]. Finally, for purely simulation purposes, we consider
the almost ideal situation in which devices send to the HeNB
accurate values of trustworthiness, computed as in [37]. In
particular, values in the range [0,0.4] and [0,1] are respectively
assigned to malicious and non-malicious nodes. The ultimate
goal is to select the most reliable nodes to work as relays.

The following metrics are used to assess the performance

of the proposed protocol:

• Percentage of wasted capacity on the sidelink, caused by

the selection of unreliable transmitters.

• Mean number of non-corrupted received kbits, which
indicates the amount of data correctly downloaded in
D2D, as transmitted by non-malicious relays.

• Average wasted energy by D2D receivers. In the D2D
protocol (without security) the waste is caused by the re-
ception of data sent by malicious relays; in the proposed
protocol (stD2D) the waste is caused both by sending
the data necessary to secure D2D communications and
by receiving data sent by malicious relays.

• Percentage of energy consumed to secure D2D com-
munications, computed with respect to the total energy
required for the operation of D2D relays and receivers
in the proposed protocol.

• Energy consumed to download data, computed for the
stD2D protocol and in the case where data are sent
directly by the HeNB to the node,
in unicast mode
(without D2D and security).

All these metrics are related to security assurance, since
they measure at which extent the protocol is able to select
reliable relays and limit the resources wastage of the devices.
In Fig. 2 and 3 we compare three possible implemen-
tations of the D2D communication: in the D2D case, the
communication takes place without security; in the sD2D
case,
the reliability of network nodes keeps into account
only the respective stored MDCs; in the stD2D case, the
D2D communication is secure and the node’s reliability is
based both on security and social trustworthiness. We set the
dimension of the ﬁle to download to 500 kb.

Fig. 2 shows that considering both security and social
trustworthiness to evaluate the reliability of devices is the
winning strategy, as it guarantees practically no data loss.
Fig. 3 conﬁrms this claim. In fact, it shows that the proposed
protocol allows to download practically the whole ﬁle of
dimension 500 kb even with 60% of malicious devices.
This happens because almost only non-malicious relays are
selected as forwarding nodes towards D2D receivers.

Fig. 4 depicts the amount of energy wasted, on average,
by D2D receivers for operations other than receiving useful
data. The power consumption values are set as in [38]. In
particular, the energy in the D2D protocol (which does not
provide security in direct communication between devices) is

8

Fig. 2. % of wasted capacity vs. % of malicious devices.

Fig. 3. Amount of data correctly transmitted in D2D (i.e., by non-malicious
relays) vs. % of malicious devices.

wasted by the receiver that has to download useless data, as
transmitted by a malicious relay. It is computed as:

Ewasted, D2D =

Emalicious
Etotal

.

(4)

As regards the stD2D protocol, the energy waste is caused
by both the reception of useless data sent by a malicious relay,
and the transmission of the data needed to implement the
security mechanism to both HeNB and forwarding node. The
energy wasted in this case is calculated as:

Ewasted, stD2D =

Emalicious + Esecurity
Etotal

.

(5)

As shown in Fig. 4, the energy waste for D2D protocol
increases with the percentage of malicious devices in the
network, as the number of D2D malicious transmitters is
higher. Differently, stD2D exhibits a constant trend, indicating
that the energy waste is caused mostly by the contribution
Esecurity. In fact, unlike Emalicious, this does not depend on the
percentage of malicious devices.

Fig. 5 shows the total energy consumed by devices to
secure D2D communications in the stD2D protocol. Results
show, as expected, that securing D2D communications is a
high energy-consuming task. However, it is important to point
out that, without any security mechanism, some nodes will

9

Fig. 4. Avg. wasted energy by D2D receivers vs. % of malicious devices.

Fig. 6. Energy used to download data under increasing ﬁle dimension.

likely discharge their battery in the reception of corrupted
(thus non-useful) data. This can be inferred by Fig. 4. D2D
receivers must handle more security data with respect to relays
because our proposed protocol mainly requires the receivers to
exchange information with the HeNB. Hence, the total energy
consumption is greater for D2D receivers than for relays.

Fig. 5. % of energy consumed for data security vs. ﬁle dimension.

Fig. 6 shows the energy consumption computed for stD2D
and in the case of direct transmission (e.g., unicast), where
data are sent directly by the HeNB to cell-edge devices
(i.e., D2D links are not established). The graph shows that
the stD2D protocol can offer greater advantages in terms of
energy saving as the ﬁle dimension increases.

By summarizing, Fig.s 4, 5 and 6 highlight that stD2D
protocol
is able to guarantee the establishment of secure
D2D communications while being not energy demanding,
especially in case of large ﬁles.

It is worth noting that reliability, considered as the result of
both social trustworthiness and security, is the main parameter
that
the proposed MtMS-stD2D protocol considers in the
selection process of relay nodes. Despite our approach shows
the best performance results, there is the possibility that relay
nodes considered unreliable are not malicious, as well as the
opposite case. An ineffective relay selection can worsen the
performance of the D2D transmission, as efﬁcient relays could

be discarded, due to their low reputation, leading to possible
throughput wastage, or unreliable nodes could be selected as
data forwarders with a consequent data loss. We can afﬁrm
that the proposed protocol is 100% effective in the detection
of malicious relays when the NRV is based on the MDC value,
as only the nodes that have shown malicious behaviour in the
past are considered ineligible as D2D transmitters. Differently,
when NRV is based on the SRF, an error is possible in
the evaluation of the nature of the nodes, since the social
relationships, which determine their reputation, could provide
incorrect information.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

The Machine-Type Multicast Service with secure and
trust D2D (MtMS-stD2D) protocol, proposed in this paper,
manages the delivery of multicast data to a group of IoT
devices. Secure D2D communications to the edge-devices
are established, over sidelinks, to improve the performance
of the multicast
transmission for the entire network. The
security of D2D communications is guaranteed by using
various means. First, D2D relays are selected based on their
reliability, measured taking into account both security and
social trustworthiness factors. Second, the Difﬁe-Hellman Key
Exchange (DHKE) protocol is used to generate the secret
key used for encryption and decryption of data transmitted in
D2D. This guarantees data conﬁdentiality and integrity. Third,
the protocol includes an exchange of messages that allows
tracking any misbehaviour by malicious D2D transmitters.

Obtained simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness of
the protocol in making a better selection of D2D transmitters,
which allows to reduce data loss, thus guaranteeing almost
no waste of capacity and resources. Furthermore, MtMS-
stD2D proves to be not high demanding in terms of energy
consumption, especially when nodes have to download large
ﬁles, since it avoids that D2D receivers waste energy because
of the establishment of non-secure D2D communications, thus
representing an energy-efﬁcient solution with respect to the
direct transmission from the HeNB.

Since the introduction of a trustworthiness model showed
to be a signiﬁcant complement to security, because of the

10

[22] R. Khan, P. Kumar, D. N. K. Jayakody, and M. Liyanage, “A Survey on
Security and Privacy of 5G Technologies: Potential Solutions, Recent
Advancements and Future Directions,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, August 2019.

[23] Security Architecture and Procedures for 5G System, 3GPP TS 33.501,

Technical Speciﬁcation Group Services and System Aspects.

[24] M. Wang, and Z. Yan, “A Survey on Security in D2D Communications,
Mobile Networks and Applications Journal,” 22:2, pp. 195-208, April
2017.

[25] A. Zhang, J. Chen, R. Qingyang Hu, and Yi Qian, “SeDS: Secure
Data Sharing Strategy for D2D Communication in LTE-Advanced
Networks,” IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Tech., 65, pp. 2659-72, April
2016.

[26] P.K. Jamshiya, and D.M. Menon, “Design of a Trusted Third Party Key
Exchange Protocol for Secure Internet of Things (IoT),” International
Conference on Inventive Communication and Computational Technolo-
gies (ICICCT), April 2018.

[27] M. Pavloski, G. G¨orbil, and E. Gelenbe, “Bandwidth Usage—Based
Detection of Signaling Attacks,” Information Sciences and Systems
2015, 363, pp. 105-114, August 2015.

[28] Z. Md. Fadlullah, C. Wei, Z. Shi, and N. Kato, “GT-QoSec: A Game-
Theoretic Joint Optimization of QoS and Security for Differentiated
Services in Next Generation Heterogeneous Networks,” IEEE Trans.
on Wireless Communications, 16, pp. 1037-50, February 2017.
[29] T. Song, R. Li, B. Mei, J. Yu, X. Xing, and X. Cheng, “A Privacy
Preserving Communication Protocol for IoT Applications in Smart
Homes,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 4, pp. 1844-1852, December
2017.

[30] D. Rivera, A. Garc`ıa, M. L. Mart`ın-Ru`ız, B. Alarcos, J.R. Velasco,
and A. G`omez Oliva, “Secure Communications and Protected Data for
a Internet of Things Smart Toy Platform,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, January 2019.

[31] L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito, and M. Nitti, “The Social Internet of
Things (SIoT) - When Social Networks meet the Internet of Things:
Concept, Architecture and Network Characterization,” Elsevier Com-
puter Networks, 56, pp. 3594-3608, November 2012.

[32] Ericsson Mobility Report, November 2018.
[33] F. Al-Turjman, E. Ever, and Hadi Zahmatkesh, “Green Femtocells in
the IoT Era: Trafﬁc Modeling and Challenges - An Overview,” IEEE
Network, 31:6, November/December 2017.

[34] L. Militano, M. Condoluci, G. Araniti, A. Molinaro, A. Iera, and G. M.
Muntean, “Single Frequency-based Device-to-Device-enhanced Video
Delivery for Evolved Multimedia Broadcast and Multicast Services,”
IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, 61:2, June 2015.

[35] L. Militano, A. Orsino, G. Araniti, and A. Iera, “NB-IoT for D2D-
Enhanced Content Uploading with Social Trustworthiness in 5G Sys-
tems,” Elsevier Future Internet, 9, July 2017.

[36] “Proximity-based Services (ProSe); Security aspects,” 3GPP TS 33.303,

Technical Speciﬁcation Group Services and System Aspects.

[37] M. Nitti, R. Girau, L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “A subjective
model for trustworthiness evaluation in the social internet of things,” pp.
18-23, IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile
Radio Communications (PIMRC), September 2012.

[38] J. Huang, F. Qian, A. Gerber, Z. Mao, S. Sen, and O. Spatscheck, “A
close examination of performance and power characteristics of 4G LTE
networks,” 10th MobySis, June 2012.

it can bring, future
meaningful performance improvement
research work will be tailored to the deﬁnition of a more
accurate and realistic model for evaluating nodes’ reliability.

REFERENCES

[1] Ian F.Akyildiz, Shuai Nie, Shih-Chun Lin, and Manoj Chandrasekaran,
“5G roadmap: 10 key enabling technologies,” Elsevier Computer Net-
works, 106, pp. 17-48, September 2016.

[2] Ericsson Mobility Report, June 2019.
[3] S. A. Alvi, B. Afzal, G. A.Shah, L. Atzori, and W. Mahmood,
“Internet of multimedia things: Vision and challenges,” ElsevierAd Hoc
Networks, 33, pp. 87-111, 2015.

[4] A. Martin, J. Ega˜na, J. Fl´orez, J. Montalb´an, I. G. Olaizola, M.
Quartulli, R. Viola, and M. Zorrilla, “Network Resource Allocation
System for QoE-Aware Delivery of Media Services in 5G Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, 64:2, June 2018.

[5] A. Karaagac, E. Dalipi, P. Crombez, E. De Poorter, and J. Hoe-
beke, “Light-weight Streaming Protocol for the Internet of Multimedia
Things: Voice Streaming over NB-IoT,” Elsevier Pervasive and Mobile
Computing, 59, 2019.

[6] J. Bukhari and W. Yoon, “Multicasting in Next-Generation Software-
Deﬁned Heterogeneous Wireless Networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Broadcasting, 64:4, December 2018.

[7] J. Nightingale, P. Salva-Garcia, J. M. Alcaraz Calero, and Q. Wang,
“5G-QoE: QoE Modelling for Ultra-HD Video Streaming in 5G Net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, 64:2, June 2018.

[8] M. Condoluci, G. Araniti, T. Mahmoodi, and M. Dohler, “Enabling
the IoT Machine Age With 5G: Machine-Type Multicast Services for
Innovative Real-Time Applications,” IEEE Access, 4, pp. 5555-69, May
2016.

[9] A. Asadi, Q. Wang, and V. Mancuso, “A Survey on Device-to-Device
Communications in Cellular Networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, 16, pp. 1801-19, April 2014.

[10] A. Moubayed, A. Shami, and H. Lutﬁyya, “Wireless Resource Vir-
tualization With Device-to-Device Communication Underlaying LTE
Network,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, 61:4, December 2015.
[11] Y. Xiao, Y. Jia, C. Liu, X. Cheng, J. Yu, and W. Lv, “Edge Computing
Security: State of the Art and Challenges,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
pp. 1608-1631, 107:8, June 2019.

[12] A. Shaghaghi, M. Ali Kaafar, R. Buyya, and S. Jha, “Software-Deﬁned
Network (SDN) Data Plane Security: Issues, Solutions and Future
Directions,” Springer Handbook of Computer Networks and Cyber
Security, pp. 341-387, January 2020.

[13] S. Lal, T. Taleb, and A. Dutta, “NFV: Security Threats and Best
Practices,” IEEE Communications Magazine, pp. 211-217, 55:8, May
2017.

[14] C. Suraci, S. Pizzi, A. Iera, A. Molinaro, and G. Araniti, “Delivering
Multicast Content Through Secure D2D Communications in the Internet
of Things,” Wired/Wireless Internet Communications, pp. 182-193,
September 2019.

[15] “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA) and Evolved
Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN); Overall de-
scription; Stage 2 (Release 15),” 3GPP TS 36.300, Technical Speciﬁ-
cation Group Radio Access Network.

[16] L. Feltrin et al., “NarrowBand-IoT: A Survey on Downlink and Uplink
Perspectives,” IEEE Wireless Communications Magazine, 26:1, pp. 78-
86, February 2019.

[17] Y. P. E. Wang, X. Lin, A. Adhikary, A. Grovlen, Y. Sui, Y. Blankenship,
J. Bergman, and H. S. Razaghi, “A Primer on 3GPP Narrowband
Internet of Things,” IEEE Comm. Mag., 55, pp. 117-123, March 2017.
[18] G. Araniti, M. Condoluci, P. Scopelliti, A. Molinaro, and A. Iera, “Mul-
ticasting over Emerging 5G Networks: Challenges and Perspectives,”
IEEE Network, 31, pp. 80-89, March/April 2017.

[19] J. Guo, X. Gong, J. Liang, W. Wang, and X. Que, “An Optimized Hybrid
Unicast/Multicast Adaptive Video Streaming Scheme Over MBMS-
Enabled Wireless Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, 64:4,
December 2018.

[20] G. Tsoukaneri, M. Condoluci, T. Mahmoodi, M. Dohler, and M. K.
Marina, “Group Communications in Narrowband-IoT: Architecture,
Procedures, and Evaluation,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 5, pp.
1539-1549, June 2018.

[21] S. Sicari, A. Rizzardi, L. A. Grieco, A. Coen-Porisini, “Security, privacy
and trust in Internet of Things: The road ahead,” Elsevier Computer
Networks, 76, pp. 146-164, January 2015.

