Emergent Insight of the Cyber Security Management for Saudi Arabian 
Universities: A Content Analysis  

Hamzah Masmali and Shah J. Miah 

Newcastle Business School, University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia  

Email: shah.miah@newcastle.edu.au  

Abstract 

While  cyber  security  has  become  a  prominent  concept  of  emerging  information 

governance, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has been dealing with severe threats to individual and 

organizational IT systems for a long time. These risks have recently permeated into educational 

institutions,  thereby  undermining  the  confidentiality  of  information  as  well  as  the  delivery  of 

education.  Recent  research  has  identified  various  causes  and  possible  solutions  to  the  problem. 

However, most scholars have considered a reductionist approach, in which the ability of computer 

configurations  to  prevent  unwanted  intrusions  is  evaluated  by  breaking  them  down  to  their 

constituent parts. This method is inadequate at studying complex adaptive systems. Therefore, the 

proposed project is designed to utilize a holistic stance to assess the cybersecurity management and 

policies in Saudi Arabian universities. Qualitative research, entailing a thorough critical review of 

ten  public  universities,  will  be  utilized  to  investigate  the  subject  matter.  The  subsequent 

recommendations can be adopted to enhance the security of IT systems, not only in institutional 

settings but also in any other environment in which such structures are used.  

Keywords: Cyber security, public universities, cybercrime, educational institutes  

1 Introduction  

Information security is among the top concerns for virtually all organizations across the 

globe.  Firms  intending  to  protect  their  data  have  to  identify  all  gaps  that  may  increase  their 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
vulnerability, as well as procedures of averting the potential of misusing critical records (Dehlawi 

& Abokhodair, 2013). More importantly, the mere development and implementation of seemingly 

adequate data security policies and guidelines to safeguard themselves from potential risks are not 

enough. Organizations have to continuously create, maintain, and improve their security systems 

to  mitigate  both  internal  and  external  threats  (Reid  &  Van  Niekerk,  2014).  Nevertheless,  the 

proliferation  of  portable  storage,  wireless,  and  other  computing  technologies  has  significantly 

increased the cybersecurity risks that many companies face. 

Many universities in today’s world admit that they are struggling to deal with issues related 

to cybercrime, particularly on access to innovative ways of managing and protecting data (Cheung, 

Cohen, Lo, & Elia, 2011). The public-funded universities are particularly financially vulnerable 

compared  to  private  ones.  Consequently,  such  economically  challenged  institutions  are  open  to 

collaborative efforts. Besides, education facilities have limited or no control over the websites since 

they  are  accessible  to  students  and  teachers  who  can  even  login  using  their  devices  (Ramim  & 

Levy, 2006).  Furthermore, schools receive new students every  year while others complete their 

educations, therefore, building a tidal wave of cyber insecurities. To that effect, learning institutions 

should  come  up  with  a  holistic  move  towards  striking  a  balance  and  ensuring  data  is  protected 

without prohibiting or blocking students from accessing the platforms. While the region's education 

system is striving to provide world-class quality for learners' and teachers' experience, they seem 

to  lag  in  Information  Technology  (IT)  security  (Rezgui  &  Marks,  2008).  It  is  vital  that  they 

adequately invest in defending cybercrime incidences by adopting the right technologies. 

The  exponential  growth,  progress,  development  and  complex  possibilities  that  the 

cyberspace provides for all sectors have been the cause for concern in recent days. Cybercrimes 

are on the rise and breach of cybersecurity is a threat that needs to be handled ethically, legally, 

scientifically  and  quickly  since  our  lives  depend  on  cyberspace  (De  Bruijn  &  Janssen,  2017). 

Schools, colleges and universities have started to capitalize on the multiple options provided by 

2 

 
 
 
 
cyberspace and are using it extensively  for both academic works as well as all kinds of official 

work. With so much sensitive data being handled, authorities must focus on Cyber Security so that 

the  data  remains  safe and  out  of  reach  of  wrong  hands.  This  study  looks  into  the  cybersecurity 

management and policies of 10 selected universities in Saudi Arabia. 

The research focuses on the policies and approaches of the universities for maintaining the 

cybersecurity level. The cybersecurity awareness is important for the universities for protecting the 

information assets and maintaining the privacy of the management and students.  The knowledge 

and  application  of  the  global  policies  and  regulations  for  cybersecurity  can  be  useful  for  the 

university managements to overcome the impact of the hacking, malware attack, phishing of the 

data and misuse of the cloud storage. In addition to this, information and knowledge of the multi-

layer  cybersecurity  approach  is  the  best  way  to  protect  the  data  and  systematically  manage  the 

information. The research will make emphasis on the combination of firewalls, software and variety 

of tools that will help the universities to combat the situation of a cyber attack or consulting the 

experts for managing the digital attack on the university data (Pandey, and Misra, 2016). There are 

different  types  of  AI  tools  that  have  been  used  to  overcome  the  malicious  cyber  crimes.  The 

knowledge and understanding of the cyber policies and approaches will help the universities of 

Saudi Arabia to improve the level of security.  

2 Background of the study 

2.1 Cybersecurity      

Cybersecurity is the organisation and selection of tools, procedures and mechanisms used 

to secure sensitive information in cyberspace from unauthorized and criminals who might damage, 

misalign or harm organisations (Craigen, Diakun-Thibault, & Purse, 2014). This indicates that only 

authorised people can have access to sensitive information, such as software, hardware, data, and 

network  in  cyberspace.  This  is  a  clear  definition  relating  to  cybersecurity  management  in  the 

education  sector.  There  is  a  serious  need  to  examine  the  potential  cybersecurity  risks  that 

3 

 
organisations face, especially regarding confidential information (Slusky & Partow-Navid, 2012). 

Present-day's cyber configurations go beyond the hardware and software components. They also 

include systemic economic, social and political aspects that are so interconnected that it has become 

virtually  impossible  to  isolate  the  human  element  from  the  IT  systems  (Benson,  McAlaney,  & 

Frumkin, 2019). Although existing literature provides a wealth of knowledge on the social facet’s 

influence on cyber operations, it does little to explain its relationship to cybersecurity. 

According  to  (Alzahrani  &  Alomar,  2016),  cybersecurity  is  the  practice  of  defending 

computer, servers, mobile and electronic devices as well as networks from malicious attack. This 

type of term is known as information technology security and applied for a variety of context from 

the  business.  There  are  different  types  of  cybersecurity  functions  are  used  for  managing 

cybersecurity.  This  includes  network  security,  application  security,  information  security  and 

operational  security.  These  processes  are  having  a  significant  impact  on  the  promotion  of 

cybersecurity  and  influence  the  approach  of  businesses  and  organizations.  However,  there  are 

different  types  of  threats  that  are  influencing  the  approach  of  the  management  to  maintain  the 

effectiveness in cybersecurity. The education, medical and public entities are facing the various 

issues related to cybersecurity that influencing the data management and increasing the threats. The 

types of threats involve the cybercrime that includes targeting the system for financial gain. The 

second  form  of  threats  is  cyber-attacks  that  are  politically  motivated  for  the  gathering  of  the 

information for personal benefits. The third is cyber terrorism that is intended to undermine the 

electronic system to increase the fear in internet users. 

2.3 ICT Application and security issue 

The field of information and communication technology (ICT) has evolved with time. It 

has significantly increased any country’s responsibility concerning citizens’ security, in addition to 

having  both  peaceful  and  non-peaceful  uses  (Yeniyurt,  Wu,  Kim,  &  Cavusgil,  2019).  This 

technology helps provide easy and secure ways of reaching valid information. In contrast, it can 

also lead to identity theft or access to personal information without permission, i.e. cyber-attacks. 

4 

 
 
Cybersecurity is the term used for the security of data. While this field affects multiple disciplines, 

the most significant sector affected by ICT is education. In the current scenario, the universities are 

using the ICT tools for managing the educational activities that help to maintain the communication 

24*7.  The  online  communication  and  sharing  of  the  information  are  allowing  the  students  and 

professors  to  get  knowledge  of  process  and  issues.  The  implementation  of  ICT  in  education  is 

increasing the value to teach and learning by enhancing the effectiveness by utilizing the videos 

and audio files. People connected to the internet using different devices such as computers, tablets 

and smart phones (De Bruijn & Janssen, 2017). The networking system of universities involves the 

administrative, management and educational data. The protection of these kinds of data is the major 

priority  of  the  universities  as  it  can  harm  the  trust  and  reputation  of  the  organization.  The 

universities  are  become  more  concerned  about  cyber  issues  and  using  the  different  tools  and 

technologies to overcome the threats.  

The  issues  with  ICT  related  to  security  are  involving  the  privacy  means,  lack  of 

understanding of the utilization of the tools and applications for connecting with the portal of the 

university. The third-party vendor services and unauthorised access to the data is also a big security 

threat for universities that are using the ICT services. In addition to this, the lack of knowledge 

related  to  ethical  and  legal  policies  for  managing  the  data  and  security  level  is  influencing  the 

utilization of the technology. As per the views of the Ullah et al., (2019), the Distributed Denial of 

Services (DDoS) attacks are a most common type of cyber issues in ICT that affecting the level of 

education venue. The motive of such attack is to disruption to the institute’s network, system or 

data centre that harms the productivity and system approach of the university. The target of such 

attack is poorly managed and protected portals of the universities. Another issue related to security 

for ICT is data theft. This affects the level of education by stealing the data of the students and staff 

such  as  name,  mobile  numbers,  address,  bank  details  and  email.  The  hackers  are  selling  the 

information to the third party or used as a bargaining tool and extort money.                 

5 

 
 
The Internet, which is the flagship product of ICT, is a strong tool for cultural exchange 

and a source of wealth for human civilisation. The Internet offers people freedom never previously 

acquired a possibility of escape, but also of exchanges. While the relationship between different 

peoples  through  the  network  has  its  advantages,  it  is  also  dangerous  and  complex.  The  term 

Cybercrime was born at the end of the 90s, with the explosion of exchanges via ‘the net’. This 

period was marked by increasingly frequent infringements on the Internet, such as violations of the 

rights to privacy or confidentiality. The arrival of the Internet, from the top debit, has led to the 

emergence  of  a  new  criminality  category,  cybercrime.  Therefore,  it  was  necessary  to  set  up 

legislation to adapt to this new type of crime (Marcum & Higgins, 2019). 

In  the  current  scenario,  major  universities  are  offering  the  course  through  an  online 

platform  that  is  helping  in  engaging  the  students  and  staff  members.  The  online  classes  and 

workshops  help  provide  flexible  learning  and  maintain  communication  among  professors  and 

students. The universities have developed websites that offering information related to the course 

and providing the study material. The students can log in into the portal through personal email id. 

This kind of facility is having a framework for maintaining the security as personal information of 

students and university management may not be used for personal benefits. Apart from this, the 

issues related to cyber hacking and data manipulation harming the reputation of the universities. 

The challenges related to cybersecurity issues that universities are facing in the current scenario 

involve the regulatory compliance, third-party vendor services, lack of expertise for protecting the 

data  and  open  culture  (Tweneboah-Koduah,  Skouby,  and  Tadayoni,  2017).  These  issues  are 

affecting the approach and work of universities in Saudi Arabia. University management needs to 

improve  the  security  level  to maintain the effectiveness  and  trust  of  the  staff  and  students. The 

management  is  looking  for  improvement  in  cybersecurity  by  applying  the  new  technology  and 

verification codes that help in protecting the unauthorised access and hacking. 

Research questions 

6 

 
 
1. What are the major cyber threats for the universities of Saudi Arabia?  

2. Are the universities able to handle the threats?  

3.  What  are  the  policies  that  could  be  useful  for  the  universities  to  overcome  the  threats  of 

cybersecurity? 

This study empirically investigates and appraises the present state of cybersecurity management 

and  policies  of  ten  public  universities  in  Saudi  Arabian,  with  a  specific  focus  on  the  potential 

cybersecurity  breaches.  It  is  important  to  have  certain  supporting  objectives  to  complete  the 

assessment:  

  The first objective is identifying the risk and threat caused by cybercriminals against the 

universities in Saudi Arabia. There is a significant lack of risk and threat when it comes to 

cybersecurity for higher education regarding the importance and scale of a large volume of 

sensitive data.  

  Second objective by examining whether the universities are ready to handle the threats and 

risks they face. Preparation must be determined by the level of cybersecurity management 

in the universities. 

  Third  objective  by  suggesting  recommended  policies  to  enhance  the  management  of 

cybersecurity  in  the  universities.  The  process  of  selecting  and  identifying  specific 

recommendations will be driven by providing evidence including a recommendation in the 

context of research. 

The implementation of cybersecurity measures requires large investment for software and 

firewalls. In addition to this, cultural issues like bring your own devices to increase the challenges 

for  the  universities  to  develop  a  secure  wider  network.  By  providing  the  basic  training  to  the 

management and students for using the network and access of the personal portal can help secure 

the data. The management can provide a simple handbook for policies and tips for practising good 

7 

 
 
cybersecurity hygiene. This kind of training and sharing of the information can be useful for the 

users to protect the network and all access points that could reduce the issues related to cybercrime 

with their accounts. Another cost-effective approach to protecting the data is the implementation 

of multi-factor authorisation (Lamba et al., 2017). This will involve extra security steps for users 

to  login  into  their  account  onto  the  network.  This  will  prevent  unauthorised  access  and  help  to 

improve the security level. If the users follow the MFA tool for authentication can be helpful to 

improve the network security and managing the tasks according to the policies of the university.  

The  end-users  security  software  is  providing  the  facility  for  scanning  the  computer  for 

malicious codes and support to remove them from the computers. According to Pandey, and Misra, 

(2016), the Master Boot Record (MBR) technique is useful for the encryption of the data and hard 

drives and detecting the threats. The implementation of electronic security encryption is helpful for 

the  real-time  detection  of  the  malware  issues  through  analysis  of  the  heuristic  and  behavioural 

analysis of the program or code. The proper monitoring of the network and devices can be a good 

approach for protecting from the cyber issues and improves the security. The knowledge of the 

potential behaviour of the programs and devices is useful for identifying the issues that could lead 

to cybercrime.                                

2.5 Increasing the complexity of Cybercrime in the education sector 

As  stated  above,  universities  contain  a  large  amount  of  data  regarding  students’  personal 

information. The following research studies are the top cybersecurity factors that businesses or the 

education sector today must consider (Syed, Ahmad, Alaraifi, & Rafi, 2020) 

 

Increasing complexity, frequency, and scale of cybercrimes 

  Leakage of sensitive data, malicious or inadvertent 

  Loss of intellectual property 

  Strengthening of regulations 

 

Interconnection of company networks and process control networks 

8 

 
 
Employees'  cybersecurity  awareness  is  an  essential  factor  for  preventing  and  securing 

organisations from cyber threats and to be aware of security threats while using the Internet  (Li, 

Xu, He, Chen, & Chen, 2016). Employee’s usage of the Internet has become an integral part of any 

organisation’s  everyday  operations.  Technologies  also  provide  opportunities  to  exploit  new 

markets  and  respond  to  the  specific  needs  of  clients.    University  employees’  understanding  of 

cybersecurity awareness is essential considering their daily use of the Internet. Since the beginning 

of the technology revolution, higher education institutions start following technological innovation 

and digital transformation techniques (Syed et al., 2020).  

Universities  face  several  issues  in  changing  the  traditional  education  system  to  an  e-

learning  system.  Operational  risk  is  one  of  the  challenges  faced  in  this  transformation  process. 

There are some policies and tips for protecting from the cyber issues that involve timely update the 

software and operating system of the device and the network. This will help in implementing the 

latest security patches for improving the security level. In addition to this, the utilization of the anti-

virus software will be helpful for the management to identify and remove the potential threats from 

the computer that could harm the data and files. The trick and knowledge related to not opening 

the attachments from the unknown senders and links can be useful for protecting the devices from 

infected  malware  (Walker-Roberts et al.,  2020).  Moreover,  university  management  needs to  set 

strong passwords and validation codes for restricting unauthorised access.  

2.6 Prevention measures from cyber attack 

The universities need to craft improvement in the measures and policies to protect the data 

from  the  cyber  attack.  These  organizations  are  facing  various  issues  and  challenges  that  are 

affecting the reputation and trust of the stakeholders which directly affect the financial gain of the 

universities. According to Puthal et al., (2017), there are different types of approaches available for 

protecting  the  data  and  computer  from  the  cyber-attack  or  other  digital  crimes.  The  foremost 

approach for protecting the computer from the cyberbullying of attack is providing the knowledge 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
and information related to security principles of the management or other users of the network. 

This is an economical and simple step for improving cybersecurity. In addition to this, the use of 

firewalls for the internet connection can be useful to increase the level of security and overcome 

the  issues  related  to  data  theft.  This  is  a  major  issue  for  the  universities  to  maintain  the  secure 

network connection and check the IP addresses of users to identify the unauthorized access into the 

portal. Apart from this, it is necessary to secure the Wi-Fi network for improving the safety as it 

will  limit  the  access  of  the  network and  control the  unauthorized  access  into  the  network.  This 

could be useful for the universities to manage the security operation and  identifies the potential 

threats by optimizing the security checking.  The proper monitoring and standers approaches for 

login and access of the university data can help to craft improvement in the networking and offering 

the online education and information to the students and staff members. 

3. Research methodology 

For conducting the research successfully and in the right manner, the researcher needs to 

determine the method of the research. The selection of the right method is beneficial for achieving 

the goals and objectives. To choose the right method for the research, the consideration of three 

aspects is essential such as divers, barriers and segmentation. The method of research involves the 

quantitative and qualitative and mix type. Qualitative method of research is applied for collecting 

the data that influence the opinion of the people to examine and explaining the facts considering 

the aim and objectives of the research. This method is allowing the researcher to collect and analyse 

the secondary data from the authentic sources and critically  analyse the different aspects of the 

topic of the study (Mohajan, 2018). The quantitative method of research is applied to discussing 

the hypothesis derived from the theories. This kind of method is beneficial for the analysis of the 

objectives of the study. Apart from this, the mixed method of research is used for overcoming the 

drawbacks  of  both  qualitative  and  quantitative  methods  of  research  and  involve  theoretical  and 

10 

 
 
numerical data to improve the validity and reliability of the research and meet the objectives more 

professional manner (Basias, and Pollalis, 2018).  

For the current research, the researcher has applied the qualitative method for collecting 

the data and analysis. According to this method, the researcher has collected the non-numerical 

data from the websites of the universities of Saudi Arabia to critically analyse the policies related 

to cybersecurity. This has helped to gain the information related to management and cybersecurity 

concern  and  approach  of  the  universities  of  Saudi  Arabia  (See  Appendix  A  for  the  list  of  the 

universities). Apart from this, the researcher has observed the policies of the universities to get 

knowledge of the measures implemented for protecting the data and piracy of the management.        

3.1 Research Approach 

To conduct the research, there are two types of research approaches that have been used 

that  involve  the  inductive  and  deductive  types.  The  inductive  approach  of  research  is  used  for 

developing  theories  considering  data  analysis  and  observation.  Apart  from  this,  the  deductive 

approach  is  used  for  proving  the  theory  by  making  emphasis  on  the  aim  and  objectives  of  the 

research. This kind of approach is useful for discovering new phenomena considering the findings 

of the previous studies and analysing the different perspectives that could help in supporting the 

arguments of the current research. This is a good technique for identifying the gaps in the research 

and maintaining the focus on the current standards. However, the indicative research is more open 

and  helping  to  get  the  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  existing  situation  but  having  less 

concern over the past studies for developing the theory (Snyder, 2019).  

For the current research, the researcher has applied the deductive approach for analyzing 

the cybersecurity management and policies of the Saudi Arabian universities. The kind of approach 

has allowed the researcher to collect the primary data from the websites of the universities and 

compare the policies for managing cybersecurity. This kind of approach has also helped to develop 

a  valid  and  reliable  conclusion  by  using  the  data  available  through  the  authentic  sources  and 

explaining  the  concept  and  variables  that  have  influence  the  findings  of  the  study.  The 

11 

 
 
 
consideration of existing data and information has helped in proving the theory and satisfying the 

aim and objectives of the study to meet the desired outcome to analyze the issues that affecting the 

networking, data interchange and offering the information to management and students using the 

online portal of study in a secure manner. 

3.2 Research Design  

Research design is an important element for managing and systematically completing the 

study. This section of the study is providing the detail information related to the what questions 

need to be answered and when will be the study carried out as well as what type of data is going to 

be used for conducting the study. In addition to this, the research design is helping the researcher 

to select the technique for collecting and analysing the data according to the type of study. There 

are three types of designs have been used for managing the study that involves the descriptive, 

exploratory and casual. The descriptive design of the study is used for collecting and analysing the 

information related to large and specified groups by focusing on the two variables of the study. The 

exploratory design is used for analysing the issues by making emphasis on the objectives of the 

study. This design is flexible and supports the researcher to explore the new ideas and plan the 

actions  that  help  in  meeting  the  aim  of  the  study.  Moreover,  it  is  providing  insight  into  more 

subjective  matters  that  influence  current  policies  and  standards  of  the  chosen  topic  (Wiek,  and 

Lang, 2016). Apart from this, the casual design of the research is applied for analyzing the cause-

effect relationship of the study and determining the flow of the data collection approach using the 

various techniques. 

For managing the current research for analysing the cybersecurity management and policies 

of the Saudi Arabian universities, the researcher has selected the exploratory research design. This 

design  helps  complete  the  qualitative  research  and  gain  an  understanding  of  the  issues  and 

approaches a more professional manner. By using this design, the researcher has done the strategic 

planning for maintaining the research in a systematic manner that has saved the time for collecting 

the data from the websites of the universities. The utilization of flexible sources for completing the 

12 

 
 
research has also helped to invalidate the data and increasing the reliability as data is collected from 

the unbiased sources. Moreover, the researcher has involved the users and included the internal 

reports of the universities based on cybersecurity and threats to improving the authenticity of the 

study. This kind of design and approach has helped the researcher to conclude the study simply and 

more easily by focusing on the aim and objectives of the study. 

3.3 Data Collection  

Data  collection  is  an  important  aspect  of  the  study  that  driver  the  whole  research  and 

influences the overall actions and outcome of the research. To increase the validity and reliability 

of the research, the researcher needs to collect the authentic data and support the aim and objectives. 

However, this research collected the data from the websites of the Saudi Arabian universities to 

understand the policies and measures that applied by the management for overcoming the threats 

of  the  data  hacking,  phishing  and  unauthorised  access  into  the  portal.  Apart  from  this,  the 

consideration of information provided in the literature review has also helped in supporting the 

arguments and discussion of the finding. This kind of data collection approach of the researcher 

has also supported in minimizing the cost of the study and completing it in the estimated time.  

3.4 Sampling and data analysis  

To conduct the primary research, the researcher needs to define the sampling method and 

size of the sample. The prior identification and selection of the population and characteristics of 

the respondents are helpful for the researcher to develop a logical conclusion from the finding of 

the data analysis. For the sampling, there are two types of methods have been used that involve the 

probability and non-probability sampling. The probability sampling method is applied when the 

researcher knows the entire population. Apart from this, the non-probability methods are applied 

where the researcher is free for choosing the sample according to own convenience (Humphries, 

2017). Now, to complete the study about analysing the cybersecurity management and policies of 

13 

 
Saudi Arabian universities, the researcher has applied the non-probability method and selected the 

sample size of 10 universities of Saudi Arabia.  

Data analysis is the most important part of the research that helps in developing the valid 

conclusion  and  meets  the  objectives  and  aim  of  the  study.  The  current  study  is  based  on  the 

qualitative type and exploratory research design. Therefore, the researcher has chosen the thematic 

and  frequency  distribution  analysis  method  for  the  analysis  of  the  data  collected  through  the 

primary method. The researcher has developed the themes based on the questions and evaluated 

the  collected  data.  To  maintain  the  systematic  approach  for  the  presentation  of  the  data,  the 

researcher  has  developed  the  graphs  with  an  interpretation  of  the  respondents  related  to  the 

challenges  and  policies  of  the  universities.  This  kind  of  presentation  will  help  the  readers  to 

understand the response and approach of the analysis that used for evaluation of the data (Ulmer, 

2017). Moreover, this kind of approach is beneficial for maintaining transparency and offering the 

recommendations to maintain the effectiveness in the cybersecurity for the universities of Saudi 

Arabia. Apart from this, the researcher has provided a discussion over the findings of the analysis 

to satisfy the aim and objectives of the research.      

4 Data Analysis 

The important part of the research is the data analysis which provide the right information 

related  to  the  study  and  help  the  readers  to  understand  and  well  knowledge  the  process  of  the 

researcher evaluate the sample to meet the aim and objectives of the research. The researcher has 

developed different theme by focusing on the approaches of the selected universities and analysed 

of their websites and students portals. Furthermore, the researcher has observed the actions and 

approaches of the students and staff to get the access of the information using the websites of the 

universities. This can help to understand the related actions and issues of the universities as well as 

own experience by analysing through the cyber policies and standards of the universities. 

Theme 1: Experience of cybersecurity at university 

14 

 
 
There are many universities in Saudi Arabia that offering different types of courses and 

classes according to global standards and providing support to the students through the website. 

The management has developed a dynamic website that offers the information related to course, 

library and future activities in the time of Covid-19. According to the analysis of the 10 universities 

websites from Saudi Arabia, the leading universities like King Abdulaziz, Jazan University, King 

Faisal University and Qassim University have updated the privacy policies for the cybersecurity 

and  protection  of  the  data.  The  managements  have  developed  the  sites  that  have  protection  for 

unauthorized access and seeking for the registration before login into account of the university. The 

knowledge  is  the  legal  framework  and  follow  us  with  the  regulations  for  the  cybersecurity 

guidelines is supporting the universities to maintain the quality network and provide the safety for 

the users of the website. Apart from this, the King  Fahd University of petroleum and minerals, 

University of Hail and Taibah University are not secured according to the guidelines of the IT to 

protect the content and information of the visitors of the sites and students. The changes in the 

current  policies  and  guidelines  for  the  cybersecurity  are  not  updated  in  the  websites  if  the 

universities and having a negative impact on the privacy and leading towards the issues like hacking 

and phishing. Now, the management of the universities need to understand the challenges and get 

the support from the IT companies to increase the security level and maintain the good practices 

for storing and access of the accounts of the staff and students.  

Theme 2: Major issues observed 

According to the analysis of the online portal of the universities of Saudi Arabia, it can be 

considered  that  some  of  the  online  portals  are  having  good  practices  related  to  maintaining 

cybersecurity. The universities such as Jazan University, Qassim University, King Abdulaziz and 

King Khalid University have implemented the protocols and applied tools that are checking the IP 

addresses and approach of the users to maintain the security.  

The issues that identified in the online education process involve the phishing of the data, 

data  leakage  and  IoT  ransomware.  These  are  having  a  direct  impact  on  the  devices  that  are 

15 

 
 
connected with the network of the organization. The users are facing the challenges related to the 

stealing of personal information from their accounts and changes in the bio and other data without 

their permission. As per the analysis of the websites of the universities, the lack of monitoring and 

regular updating of the security versions the users are facing issues. Most of the issues have been 

found  in  King  Fahd  University  of  petroleum  and  minerals,  University  of  Hail  and  Taibah 

University.  The  users  have  a  complaint  about  these  but  lack  of  concern  and  response  from  the 

management is influencing the issues related to cybersecurity. 

The phishing of information about the passwords, usernames and payment details for the 

course  is  having  a  negative  impact  on  the  process  of  the  data  using  the  online  portals  of  the 

universities. The users are not trusting the entities and not providing the personal details through 

contact services of the websites of the universities. The lack of security measures is having a direct 

impact  on  the  reputation  of  the  educational  institutions  and  raising  the  questions  for  the 

management  to  maintain  the  standards.  Moreover,  the  evaluation  of  websites  related  to  cyber 

policies have highlighted the issues related to data privacy as there are no policies for cloud-based 

data  storage  and  access  to  it.  The  universities  are  not  following  the  General  Data  Protection 

Regulation that is defined by the IT authorities of the nation. The leakage of information is a major 

threat for the students and staff members as it can be used for personal benefits or fraud. The threat 

of stealing personal data is requiring strict actions from the universities to overcome the threats 

related to cybersecurity. In addition to this, the Distributed Denial of Services (DDoS) attacks are 

the most common type of cyber issues in ICT that affecting the level of education venue.  

16 

 
 
Figure 1: Cyber issues 

Theme 3: Awareness of the policies related to cybersecurity 

According to the evaluation of the websites of Saudi Arabian universities, it has carried out 

that only 3 out of every 10 students from different universities are having the knowledge of the 

policies  related  to  cybersecurity.  Most  of  the  network  users  are  not  aware  of  the  policies  and 

regulations that need to be considered for maintaining the protection of the data and information 

they are sharing through the network. Apart from this, the universities management is not offering 

any training and information related to the cyber policies that might help in increasing the safety 

of  the  data  and  support  in  protecting  the  data.  The  IT  facilities  are  operated  by  approval  of  the 

university management.  

According  to  the  analysis  of  websites  of  the  universities,  there  are  some  policies  and 

privacy-related regulations are mentioned that are helping the users to understand the approach for 

using  the  network.  The  Jazan  University,  Qassim  University,  King  Abdulaziz  and  King  Khalid 

University have implemented the protocols and applied tools and offering the information related 

to  the  utilization  of  the  cloud  services  and  use  of  the  protocols  for  managing  the  details  of  the 

individual. The universities are also offering information for the responsibilities of the individual 

for using the network and login to the portal. The policies are applied for users and devices of the 

17 

 
 
 
IT facilities and services and the IT team is configuring the computers and laptops that helping to 

protect the information and data from hacking and phishing. However, it is the responsibilities of 

people to get the knowledge and information of the policies and legal obligations to maintain their 

privacy and protection from the issues related to cybercrime. The management and students have 

to get the knowledge and understanding of the applicable statutory legislation for maintaining the 

standards and following the guidelines of the universities. In addition to this, the universities have 

to provide the information for attack and cyber issues that might cause problems for the individual 

through advertising and IT support.  

Figure 2: Awareness and experts 

Theme 4: Awareness of the policies related to cybersecurity 

There  are  various  sources  that  are  offering  information  and  knowledge  about  the 

cybersecurity approaches and framework for improving the protection level for the data. To gain 

the knowledge of cyber policies, the literature review and analysis of website have provided the 

name of sources such as online articles, discussion with the IT experts, focusing on the privacy 

18 

 
 
 
policies mentioned on the website of the universities and joining the workshop. All the users of 

university are not from the technical background and not having much understanding of the issues 

and cybersecurity. To gain knowledge after facing the issues, the users of the IoT and ICT services 

of universities are giving preference to reading the online articles and approaches to utilizing the 

particular software. This kind of approach has helped them to understand the operational process 

and developing the technical skills that might support in mitigating the vulnerabilities. 

The implementation of cyber securities is not having a direct impact on the approach of an 

individual as hackers are using the advance tools and techniques for phishing and stealing the data. 

According  to the analysis  of  the  policies  and  framework  if  university’s  cybersecurity,  it  can  be 

considered that major sources of gaining the knowledge of the policies and cybersecurity measures 

are online reading and follow up of the standards mentioned on the website of the university. The 

major  legislations  of  the  Saudi  Arabian  government  for  cybersecurity  involve  the  Telecom  Act 

2001, Anti-Cyber Crime Law 2009 and Electronic Transaction Law 2007. The management and 

students  of  the  universities  can  get  information  about  cybersecurity  and  approaches  by  reading 

these articles and improve practices for controlling, regulating and applying the legal framework 

for managing the online accounts.  

According to the analysis of the websites of universities, it can be considered that Jazan 

University, Qassim University, King Abdulaziz and King Khalid University, King Fahd University 

of petroleum and minerals, University of Hail and Taibah University have mentioned the policies 

and framework for the protection of the data of individual by following the policies. The websites 

of  these  universities  are  offering  the  knowledge  and  understanding  about  the  legal  information 

related to security and offering of the personal information to authorized links of the university. 

The management has clearly stated that the use of privacy control measures as per the government 

and university approaches for managing cybersecurity is helpful for overcoming the risks. 

19 

 
 
 
Figure 3: Knowledge 

Apart  from  this,  the  universities  are  getting  the  knowledge  and  understanding  from  the 

leading cyber companies for protecting their network, operating system and cloud data. As per the 

analysis,  the  major  universities  of  Saudi  Arabia  are  taking  assistance  from  the  United  States' 

National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  for  gaining  the  knowledge  about  the 

cybersecurity functions and improving the policies for the internet security. In addition to this, the 

USA organization is offering the knowledge and creating the awareness about the cloud computing 

that involves the identification of safe and private network for offering the learning and education 

to the students and providing the facility for the controlling the activities and managing the data 

safe and secure. Moreover, the organizations have to develop the IT expert desk for offering the 

information  related  to  the  policies  and  approach  for  the  individual  to  manage  the  cybersecurity 

operations. The comprehensive knowledge and information related to security policies will help to 

overcome  the  issues.  The  lacking  in  monitoring  and  understanding  of  the  policies  are  creating 

threats for Saudi Arabian universities to manage the cyber issues and improve security. 

Theme 5: Changes required for improving the cybersecurity   

The major changes that suggested by the respondents involve continues development and 

improvement in cyber defences, monitoring and review of the practices and activities of people 

20 

 
 
 
who involve in the unauthorized access of the data. Moreover, it is important for the universities to 

develop the risk audit and compliance committees that are responsible for the implementation of 

the practices and offering of the information to the management and users. The analysis of sites 

and cybersecurity policies of universities has suggested that overseeing of the cybersecurity and 

capability control is also essential for improving the approach of the universities for managing the 

IT facilities. The framework of universities is lacking and not meeting the standards of operational 

support facilities. The programmers and testing team is required for supervising and identifying the 

gaps  in  the  security  services  and  implementation  of  the  support  plan  to  fix  it.  According  to the 

principles of the data security, the changes that required for mitigating the issues of Saudi Arabian 

universities involve the adoption, compliance and regulatory management.  

There is the requirement of cloud security coordinator centre in Saudi Arabia that will look 

after the equipment and provide the training to the IT experts for creating the awareness about the 

issues  and  approaches  that  help  in  protecting  from  cybercrime.  As  per  the  analysis,  the  major 

requirement  for  strict  implementation  and  adherence  to  all  current  cybersecurity  laws  in  the 

universities and compulsory training for the management for better understanding of the cloud data 

and protection.  

5 Discussion and conclusion  

The  research  has  analysed  the  cybersecurity  management  and  policy  issues  in  Saudi 

Arabian Universities and identified that there are various issues that are influencing the approach 

of the staff and students to maintain the privacy and other security measures for data. According to 

analysis, the university is lacking in infrastructure development and continues improvement in the 

cyber policies and regulations. The students and management are also not aware of the policies and 

protection standards that required for improving the data security to maintain the safety of their 

personal  information  and  digital  learning  approaches.  The  research  has  also  identified  the 

computing technologies used by the universities for offering education and securing there data and 

activities over the network. In addition to this, the study has analyzed that the universities have 

21 

 
 
developed websites that offering information related to the course and providing the study material. 

The students can login into the portal through personal email id. 

In the current scenario, the higher educational institutions are using the digital technologies 

and devices for offering the learning and sharing of the study material with the students. This is 

helping to connect with the students and monitor their learning more effective manner. Moreover, 

this type of learning is also helping the students to get real-time support from the website of the 

universities  by  accessing  the library  by  creating  the  account.  However,  the cybersecurity  issues 

related to phishing, hacking attack of the various viruses and hacking is influencing the approaches 

of the individual. There is no awareness about the issues and policies for maintaining the standards 

of  the  security  which  influencing  the  management  approaches  and  implementation  of  good 

practices  (Cheung  et  al.,  2011).  The  knowledge  and  application  of  the  global  policies  and 

regulations for cybersecurity can be useful for the university managements to overcome the impact 

of the hacking, malware attack, phishing of the data and misuse of the cloud storage. The issues 

with ICT related to security are involving the privacy means, lack of understanding of the utilization 

of the tools and applications for connecting with the portal of the university. Moreover, information 

and knowledge of the multi-layer cybersecurity approach is the best way to protect the data and 

systematically manage the information.  

According to the analysis of the study, the universities of Saudi Arabia are looking to update 

the cybersecurity measures and policies to increase the standards of cyber activities and actions. 

As per the analysis, the implementation of the new technique is involving end-to-end protection. 

The implementation of electronic security encryption is helping for the real-time detection of the 

malware issues through analysis of the heuristic and behavioural analysis of the program or code. 

Apart  from  this,  the  study  has  identified  that  universities  of  Saudi  Arabia  are  using  different 

software and suits that are helping to increase the level of cybersecurity. In addition to this, the 

implementation of cloud-based security protection is helping the universities and management to 

secure the browsing and protecting from the virus attack as it blocked the site of links.  

22 

 
In  addition  to  this,  the  lack  of  implementation  of  intrusion  policies  for  detecting 

unauthorized access is also affecting the cybersecurity of the universities. The study has discussed 

and  provided  the  information  related  to  the  implementation  of  exceptions  policy  and  host 

integration that can be useful for the universities to protect the data and maintaining the security 

level. The exceptions policy provides the ability to exclude applications and processes from the 

detection of the virus and scan the data. In addition to this, host integration is helping the users and 

network providers to enforce and restore the security of the client computer that influence the level 

of the security and give the information about the implementation of protocols of accessing the 

portal. Apart from this, the research has identified the approaches that required the changes in the 

policies and framework for managing data security at the university level. 

By  considering  the  analysis  and  identification  of  cybersecurity  issues  and  management 

approaches of the Saudi Arabian universities, it can be considered that the identified 10 universities 

are facing different issues. The management has to look into the challenges and have to plan the 

development for the betterment of the secure network. The findings can be seen as a reinforcement 

of developing a software application artefact for information security officers. Any of the design 

science approaches (e.g. Miah, Gammack & McKay, 2019; Miah, Gammack & Kerr, 2012; Miah, 

Kerr, Gammack & Cowan, 2008) could be adopted for developing and evaluating a new purposeful 

security  solution  artefact  (e.g.  with  enhanced  accessibility  (Miah,  2004)  and  advanced  features 

(Miah,  2008; 2009;  Miah  &  Ahamed,  2011;  Miah &  Gammack,  2008).  Also  we  produce  some 

recommendations  that  could  be  useful  for  the  universities  to  manage  the  issues  and  craft 

improvement in the cyber policies and implement them strictly:  

  The universities can take support from the international agencies that are identifying the 

issues and developing the tools for protecting the data. The American companies are best 

in  this  business  and  offering  the  best  software  and  framework  that  could  help  the 

universities to improve the standards. The universities can contact with the NIST of USA 

23 

 
 
 
for  constancy  and  offering  the  support  for  continuous  improvement  in  the  policies  and 

infrastructure of the organizations  

  For protecting from the cyber issues and craft improvement in the services options and data 

management,  it  is  recommended  to  the  university  management  to  conduct  the  regular 

monitoring  of  the  servers,  devices,  network  and  approaches  of  the  users.  The  proper 

auditing  will  be  helpful  for  the  management  to  understand  the  factors  that  are  creating 

barriers and make real-time efforts to improve the services standards. 

  The management of universities has to develop the IT desk for protecting cyber issues. This 

kind of approach will help in influencing the security measures. The development of the IT 

expert  desk  for  offering  the  information  related  to  the  policies  and  approach  for  the 

individual  to  manage  the  cybersecurity  operations.  The  comprehensive  knowledge  and 

information related to security policies will help to overcome the issues. In addition to this, 

the use of AI tools and technology will be helpful for improving the protection which will 

monitor the approach of the users and functioning of the operating system. 

References  

Albugami, S., and Ahmed, V. (2015). Success Factors for ICT Implementation in Saudi Secondary 
Schools: From the Perspective of ICT Directors, Head Teachers, Teachers and Students, 
International Journal of Education and Development using Information and Communication 
Technology, 11(1), 36-54. Retrieved from 
https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&AuthType=shib&db=eric&AN=EJ106147
9&site=eds-live&custid=s1145751 

Alotaibi, F., Furnell, S., Stengel, I., and Papadaki, M. (2017). A survey of cyber-security awareness in 

Saudi Arabia. 

Alshuaibi, A. (2017). Technology as an important role in the implementation of Saudi Arabia’s vision 

2030. International Journal of Business, Humanities and Technology, 7(2), 52-62.  
Alsmadi, I., and Zarour, M. (2018). Cybersecurity programs in Saudi Arabia: issues and 

recommendations. Paper presented at the 2018 1st International Conference on Computer 
Applications & Information Security (ICCAIS). 

Alzahrani, A., and Alomar, K. (2016). Information security issues and threats in saudi arabia: A 

research survey. International Journal of Computer Science Issues (IJCSI), 13(6), 129.  
Atlam, H. F., Alenezi, A., Alassafi, M. O., Alshdadi, A. A., and Wills, G. B. (2020). Security, 

Cybercrime and Digital Forensics for IoT. In Principles of Internet of Things (IoT) Ecosystem: 
Insight Paradigm (pp. 551-577): Springer. 

Basamh, S. S., Qudaih, H. A., and Ibrahim, J. B. (2014). An Overview on cyber security awareness in 
Muslim countries. International Journal of Information and Communication Technology, 4(1). 
Pp. 34 

24 

 
Basias, N. and Pollalis, Y., (2018). Quantitative and qualitative research in business & technology: 

Justifying a suitable research methodology. Review of Integrative Business and Economics 
Research, 7, pp.91-105.  

Benson, V., McAlaney, J., and Frumkin, L. A. (2019). Emerging threats for the human element and 

countermeasures in current cyber security landscape. In Cyber Law, Privacy, and Security: 
Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 1264-1269): IGI Global. 

Bronk, C., and Tikk-Ringas, E. (2013). The cyber attack on Saudi Aramco. Survival, 55(2), 81-96.  
Camley, A. (2019). The Urgent Need to Improve Cybersecurity in the Education System,  Retrieved 

April 10, 2020, from https://krazytech.com/technical- 
education-system 

papers/cybersecurity-in-the-

Cheung, R. S., Cohen, J. P., Lo, H. Z., and Elia, F. (2011). Challenge based learning in cybersecurity 
education. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the International Conference on Security and 
Management (SAM). 

Chisita, C. T., and Chiparausha, B. (2019). Open Access initiatives in Zimbabwe: Case of academic 

libraries. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 45(5), 102047.  

Cordesman, A. H. (2009). Saudi Arabia: National security in a troubled region: ABC-CLIO. 
Craigen, D., Diakun-Thibault, N., and Purse, R. 2014. Defining cybersecurity. Technology Innovation 

Management Review, 4(10).  

De Bruijn, H., & Janssen, M. (2017). Building cybersecurity awareness: The need for evidence-based 

framing strategies. Government Information Quarterly, 34(1), 1-7.  

Dehlawi, Z., and Abokhodair, N. (2013). Saudi Arabia's response to cyber conflict: A case study of 

the Shamoon malware incident. Paper presented at the 2013 IEEE International Conference on 
Intelligence and Security Informatics. 

Fletcher, A.J., (2017). Applying critical realism in qualitative research: methodology meets 
method. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 20(2), pp.181-194. 

Gheyas, I.A. and Abdallah, A.E., (2016). Detection and prediction of insider threats to cyber security: 

a systematic literature review and meta-analysis. Big Data Analytics, 1(1), p.6. 

Gill, P., Marchment, Z., Corner, E., and Bouhana, N. (2020). Terrorist decision making in the context 

of risk, attack planning, and attack commission. Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, 43(2), 145-
160.  

Humphries, B., (2017). Re-thinking social research: anti-discriminatory approaches in research 

methodology. Taylor & Francis. 

Katkar, S. (2018). The Higher Education Review. Retrieved April 11, 2020, from 

  https://www.thehighereducationreview.com/magazine/why-must-education-sector-
  focus-on-cyber-security-ELYV450221111.html 

Kumar, R., (2019). Research methodology: A step-by-step guide for beginners. Sage Publications 

Limited. 

Lamba, A., Singh, S., Balvinder, S., Dutta, N. and Rela, S., (2017). Analyzing And Fixing Cyber 
Security Threats For Supply Chain Management. International Journal For Technological 
Research In Engineering, 4(5).  

Lamba, A., Singh, S., Dutta, N. and Rela, S., (2016). Identifying & Mitigating Cyber Security Threats 

In Vehicular Technologies. International Journal for Technological Research in 
Engineering, 3(7). 

Li, L., Xu, L., He, W., Chen, Y., and Chen, H. (2016). Cyber security awareness and its impact on 
employee’s behavior. Paper presented at the International Conference on Research and 
Practical Issues of Enterprise Information Systems. 

Marcum, C. D., and Higgins, G. E. (2019). Cybercrime. In Handbook on Crime and Deviance (pp. 

459-475): Springer. 

Miah, S.J., Gammack, J., and McKay, J. (2019). A Metadesign Theory for Tailorable Decision 

Support, Journal of Association for Information Systems, 20(5): 570-603 

Miah, S.J., Gammack, JG. & Kerr, DV. (2012). A Socio‑technical Approach to Designing and 

Evaluating Industry Oriented Applications, Electronic Journal of Information Systems 
Evaluation, 15 (2):163‑175 

25 

 
 
Miah, S. J. (2004) Accessibility improvement of multicultural educational Web interface by using the 
user centred design (UCD) approach. In Proceedings of the 2004 Informing Science and IT 
Education Joint Conference and Journal of issues in informing science and information 
technology, 4, 99-108. ISSN 1547-5859 

Miah, S. J. (2008). An ontology based design environment for rural decision support Unpublished 

PhD, Griffith Business School, Griffith University, QLD, Australia 

Miah, S. J. (2009). End user as application developer for decision support, In Proceedings of the 15th 
Americas Conference on Information Systems, AMCIS 2009, San Francisco, California, USA, 
August 6-9, 2009, p.1-10 

Miah, S. J., & Ahamed, R. (2011). A cloud-based DSS model for driver safety and monitoring on 

Australian roads. International Journal of Emerging Sciences, 1(4): 634. 

Miah, S.J., Kerr, D., Gammack, J. & Cowan, T. (2008). A generic design environment for the rural 

industry knowledge acquisition, Knowledge-Based Systems, 21 (8): 892-899 

Miah, S. J. & Gammack, J. (2008) A mashup architecture for Web end-user application designs. In: 
Second IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems and Technologies (IEEE DEST 
2008) : Phitsanulok, Thailand, 26-29 February 2008, pp. 532-537 

Mohajan, H.K. (2018). Qualitative research methodology in social sciences and related 

subjects. Journal of Economic Development, Environment and People, 7(1), pp.23-48. 
Narayanan, S.N., Ganesan, A., Joshi, K., Oates, T., Joshi, A. and Finin, T., (2018), October. Early 

detection of cybersecurity threats using collaborative cognition. In 2018 IEEE 4th international 
conference on collaboration and internet computing (CIC) (pp. 354-363). IEEE. 
Ngozwana, N., (2018). Ethical Dilemmas in Qualitative Research Methodology: Researcher's 
Reflections. International Journal of Educational Methodology, 4(1), pp.19-28. 

Pandey, R.K. and Misra, M., (2016). December. Cyber security threats—Smart grid infrastructure. 

In 2016 National Power Systems Conference (NPSC) (pp. 1-6). IEEE. 

Parsons, K., McCormac, A., Butavicius, M., Pattinson, M., and Jerram, C. (2014). Determining 

employee awareness using the human aspects of information security questionnaire (HAIS-Q). 
Computers & Security, 42, 165-176.  

Patel, K. K., and Patel, S. M. (2016). Internet of things-IOT: definition, characteristics, architecture, 
enabling technologies, application & future challenges. International Journal of Engineering 
Science and Computing, 6(5).  

Puthal, D., Mohanty, S.P., Nanda, P. and Choppali, U., (2017). Building security perimeters to protect 

network systems against cyber threats [future directions]. IEEE Consumer Electronics 
Magazine, 6(4), pp.24-27. 

Rabai, L. B. A., Jouini, M., Aissa, A. B., and Mili, A. (2013). A cybersecurity model in cloud 
computing environments. Journal of King Saud University-Computer and Information 
Sciences, 25(1), 63-75.  

Rahim, N. H. A., Hamid, S., Kiah, L. M., Shamshirband, S., and Furnell, S. (2015). A systematic 

review of approaches to assessing cybersecurity awareness. Kybernetes, 44(4), 606-622. 
doi:10.1108/K-12-2014-0283 

Ramim, M., and Levy, Y. (2006). Securing e-learning systems: A case of insider cyber attacks and 

novice IT management in a small university. Journal of Cases on Information Technology, 
8(4), 24-34.  

Reid, R., and Van Niekerk, J. (2014). From information security to cyber security cultures. Paper 

presented at the 2014 Information Security for South Africa. 

Rezgui, Y., and Marks, A. (2008). Information security awareness in higher education: An 

exploratory study, Computers & Security, 27(7-8), 241-253.  

Slusky, L., and Partow-Navid, P. (2012). Students information security practices and awareness. 

Journal of Information Privacy and Security, 8(4), 3-26.  

Snyder, H., (2019). Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and 

guidelines. Journal of Business Research, 104, pp.333-339. 

Syed, A. M., Ahmad, S., Alaraifi, A., and Rafi, W. (2020). Identification of operational risks 
impeding the implementation of eLearning in higher education system. Education and 
Information Technologies, 1-17.  

26 

 
Tweneboah-Koduah, S., Skouby, K.E. and Tadayoni, R. (2017). Cyber security threats to IoT 

applications and service domains. Wireless Personal Communications, 95(1), pp.169-185. 

Ullah, F., Naeem, H., Jabbar, S., Khalid, S., Latif, M.A., Al-Turjman, F. and Mostarda, L. (2019). 

Cyber security threats detection in internet of things using deep learning approach. IEEE 
Access, 7, pp.124379-124389. 

Ulmer, J.B. (2017). Posthumanism as research methodology: Inquiry in the 

Anthropocene. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 30(9), pp.832-848. 

Walker-Roberts, S., Hammoudeh, M., Aldabbas, O., Aydin, M. and Dehghantanha, A. (2020). Threats 
on the horizon: Understanding security threats in the era of cyber-physical systems. The 
Journal of Supercomputing, 76(4), pp.2643-2664. 

Wiek, A. and Lang, D.J. (2016). Transformational sustainability research methodology. 

In Sustainability science (pp. 31-41). Springer, Dordrecht. 

Yeniyurt, S., Wu, F., Kim, D., and Cavusgil, S. T. (2019). Information technology resources, 

innovativeness, and supply chain capabilities as drivers of business performance: A 
retrospective and future research directions. Industrial Marketing Management, 79, 46-52.  

Appendix A 
List of Universities  

1-  King Abdulaziz University 

https://www.kau.edu.sa/Home.aspx 

2-  King fahd university of petroleum and minerals 
http://www.kfupm.edu.sa/ar/Default.aspx 

3-  King Faisal University 

https://www.kfu.edu.sa/sites/Home/ 

4-  King Khalid University 
https://www.kku.edu.sa/ 

5-  King Saud University 

https://www.ksu.edu.sa/en/ 

6-  Qassim University 

https://www.qu.edu.sa/ 

7-  Taibah University 

https://www.taibahu.edu.sa/Pages/AR/Home.aspx 

8-  Taif University 

https://www.tu.edu.sa/ 

9-  University of Hail 

http://www.uoh.edu.sa/Pages/default.aspx 

10- Jazan University 

https://www.jazanu.edu.sa/ 

27 

 
 
