Sanctuary lost: a cyber-physical warfare in space

Rafal Graczyk∗, Paulo Esteves-Verissimo†, and Marcus Völp∗
∗University of Luxembourg, Interdisciplinary Center for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT) - CritiX group
†King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Resilient Computing and Cybersecurity Center (RC3)
∗{rafal.graczyk, marcus.voelp}@uni.lu †paulo.verissimo@kaust.edu.sa

1
2
0
2

t
c
O
2
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
7
8
5
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Over the last decades, space has grown from a
purely scientiﬁc struggle, fueled by the desire to demonstrate
superiority of one regime over the other, to an anchor point
of the economies of essentially all developed countries. Many
businesses depend crucially on satellite communication or data
acquisition, not only for defense purposes, but increasingly also
for day-to-day applications. However, although so far space faring
nations refrained from extending their earth-bound conﬂicts
into space, this critical infrastructure is not as invulnerable as
common knowledge suggests. In this paper, we analyze the threats
space vehicles are exposed to and what must change to mitigate
them. In particular, we shall focus on cyber threats, which may
well be mounted by small countries and terrorist organisations,
whose incentives do not necessarily include sustainability of the
space domain and who may not be susceptible to the threat of
mutual retaliation on the ground. We survey incidents, highlight
threats and raise awareness from general perparedness for
accidental faults, which is already widely spread within the space
community, to preparedness and tolerance of both accidental and
malicious faults (such as targeted attacks by cyber terrorists and
nation-state hackers).

Index Terms—space, satellite, cyberphysical, system, threat

vector, cybersafety, cybersecurity

I. INTRODUCTION

Space infrastructure in itself is not a very large business:
with 366 billion USD of global revenues [1], it constitutes
∼0.42% of the global economy of 87.5 trillion USD in 2019
[2], [3].

Space assets used to be of military origin, since the 80’s of
XX century, are increasingly civilian, starting from telecom-
munications,
then spreading to other ﬁelds of near space
exploitation. Today, many other sectors of our economy, even
if, apparently ground-based, crucially depend on the space
infrastructure, including [4]: mass media, global transport and
logistics, military, intelligence, utilities, agriculture, banking,
oil and mining. Activities from private companies such as
SpaceX with Starlink and OneWeb complement this list with
megaconstellations providing communication and fast internet
to remote locations.

This dependence turns space into an important resource, in
particular for the developed countries and their economies,
space faring and not, and a worthwhile target for protection.
Unfortunately several threats put the sustainable use of space
at risk, both as a foundation for military operations, but more
importantly for the economic applications that affect our daily
life.

In this paper, we review past incidents and derive a com-
prehensive threat-plane for space and the orbits therein as

sustainable resource to deploy satellites for a multitude of
purposes, but also for human and robotic scientiﬁc missions.
We consider both threats from accidental causes, but more im-
portantly also threads originating from intentionally malicious
activities, such as targeted cyber and/or physical attacks.

As we shall see, threats do not only originate from other
space-faring nations and their ability to damage, shoot down or
disrupt communication of other space-faring nation’s vehicles.
They may also originate from terrorist groups and the nation-
state hackers of less developed countries who would not suffer
from disrupting access to space for the upcoming decades
until effective debris-removal technologies become available.
In particular, not all of these groups are vulnerable to the
common threat of retaliation on the ground, which several
space faring nations formulated as balance of powers, should
space vehicles of that nation be attacked. Even the correct
attribution of attacks will be difﬁcult, as can be seen in some
of the recent cyber attacks that keep happening on ground.

We assume this topic may as well be interesting for a lay
audience, not necessarily proﬁcient in the details of space
ﬂight or in the way cyber attacks can manifest. In addition to
our threat-plane analysis, we shall therefore also introduce the
background necessary for understanding these aspects, inviting
the proﬁcient reader to skip these sections. Our contributions
include in Section III an analysis why space forms a critical
information infrastructure worth protecting, a taxonomy of
kinetic and non-kinetic threats space vehicles are exposed to
(in Section IV), which we shall apply in our survey of past
incidents during the various stages of space vehicle devel-
opment, deployment and operation (in Section VI). Where
appropriate, we suggest measures which may help overcome
some of these threats, however ultimately we recommend
leveraging on the care already taken to tolerate, survive and
repair the consequences of accidental faults and to extend this
care to also become resilient to intentionally malicious faults.
We begin by surveying space ﬂight and the foundations on
which it is based.

II. SPACE FLIGHT 101

Any projectile (ball, rock, axe) thrown at ground level,
tangential to a planet’s surface, will closer or farther fall down.
That’s what everyday experience tells us and this intuition is
generally true, unless the projectile is thrown so fast that it falls
at the same rate, that the ground recedes. The Earth is a geoid.
However, for our little thought experiment we approximate
it to be spherical, receding roughly 5 meters for every 8

 
 
 
 
 
 
km traveled along the tangent. The exact speed, required
for maintaining the hypothetical trajectory, following planet’s
surface, depends on the planet’s mass and is called ﬁrst cosmic
velocity. For Earth, this velocity is roughly 7.9 km/s.

Changing in our experimental setup the projectile to a
satellite, our throwing hand to a rocket and raising the target
altitude to above the atmosphere, where there are no buildings,
hills, weather and last, but most importantly, no atmospheric
drag, and we have entered the space domain and successfully
placed our satellite on a path called the orbit.

Raising the orbit’s altitude, we reduce the velocity required
to maintain a circular orbit (one with the same altitude above
Earth at all times). At the same time, we increase the orbital
period, which at low Earth orbits (LEOs) is about 90 minutes.
Orbital period is the time after which a satellite returns to
the same position above ground, here after 1.5 hours, not yet
compensating for the rotation of the Earth.

Observers on the ground will still notice the satellite several
hundreds if not thousands of kilometers west, although the
spacecraft returned to its initial position. This is because our
planet rotates at a linear velocity of 1670 km/h at the equator,
which decreases as the latitude increases (e.g., to 1180 km/h
at 45 degrees and to 0 km/h at the Poles, at 90 degrees).
For satellite operators this implies limited visibility of the
satellite and hence also limited communication possibilities.
Sometimes, depending on the exact location of the ground
station relative to the satellite’s orbit, convenient revisits may
happen only after days.

A satellite’s orbiting plane can be oriented in all possible
to the Earth’s rotation plane. Orbital
angles with respect
planes can be equatorial, so that satellites will travel over the
equator, or they can be more inclined, allowing satellites to
visit (observe/ communicate with) higher latitudes, up to polar
orbits where satellites will ﬂy over each of the Earth’s poles.

As mentioned before, the higher the altitude of a satellite’s
orbit, the longer its orbital period. At roughly 36,000 km above
Earth (about 10 % of the distance to the Moon), the orbital
period becomes almost 24 hours, the same length as Earth’s
rotation period. Satellite on such an orbit are geosynchronous
and will visit each place on its path at exactly the same
time of day. If geosynchronous orbits have an inclination of
zero degrees with respect to the equator, the orbit becomes
geostationary and satellites on this orbit stand still over the
same place on Earth, as they have the same angular velocity
as the Earth rotating below them. As this happens 36000 km
above the Earth’s surface, the whole planet’s hemisphere can
be in view, which is a neat feature for telecommunication
or observation purposes, with obvious drawbacks caused by
the distance from ground that these satellites must have: the
propagation of radio signals causes noticeable latency and
very sophisticated optical and attitude stabilization systems are
needed to maintain accurate satellite pointing. Typical orbits
and their applications are summarized in Table I.

A. Fuel and Power Considerations

Satellites above the atmosphere operate in vacuum, which
very quickly becomes very deep and provides so little residual
atmospheric drag that for precise satellite modeling purposes,
other factors begin to dominate, such as the inﬂuence of solar
radiation.

Satellites and probes do not necessarily need propulsion
to stay on orbit or to maneuver and change attitude. This is
obviously a bit of a too idealistic take on orbital mechanics,
as non-homogeneity of the gravitation ﬁeld, inﬂuence of other
celestial bodies, solar wind and pressure, changes of the
residual atmospheric drag (e.g., due to high Sun activity), etc.,
perturb the stability of the orbit, both in its plane arrangement
and in its altitude. In most parts however, it can be assumed
that bodies injected into a stable orbit will stay on this orbit
and that changing the orbit requires some kind of propulsion,
such as rocket engines, cold gas thrusters, resitojet thrusters,
and various kinds of electric engines (e.g., ion or Hall effect).
While particular implementations may vary signiﬁcantly,
generation of thrust requires mass to be ejected for the
spacecraft to experience a force in the opposite direction. The
bigger the mass times its ejection velocity, the bigger will be
the force that acts upon the spacecraft and also the acceleration
that the spacecraft experiences in the direction of this force.
Stored fuel and the spacecraft’s propulsion capacity to
change it’s velocity thus deﬁne how fast the craft can change
its orbit and ultimately constrains its mission and the maneu-
vers it can execute during that time.

Some changes of the orbit require only reasonable amounts
of fuel, especially raising and lowering the perigee or the
apogee of an orbit(i.e., the point closest to / farthest from the
Earth’s center). Both points can be adjusted using Hohmann
maneuvers, which require engine burns tangential to the or-
bit in one of these points to affect the opposite one (for
details refer to [9], [10], [11], [8]). Other maneuvers are
more demanding and thus affect mission time more severely.
For example, changing the inclination of a satellite requires
redirecting its momentum, most of which has been built
up at the launch and with the launch vehicle’s propulsion.
Not many of these maneuvers can be performed with the
limited fuel and propulsion capacity of the satellite. Spacecraft
injected by its launch vehicle or by its apogee motor into
an orbit are therefore typically left
in this orbit. Apogee
motors are typically found in GEO satellites to make the
orbit circular. Space plane concept, which theoretically, could
help to overcome satellite maneuverability limitations, at the
time of writing of this paper, is very immature technology in
practice [12], [13].

Spacecraft are also very constrained on the side of (electri-
cal) power supply. In practice, there are two primary power
sources - solar arrays (suitable for use in inner Solar System,
beyond Mars, up to asteroid belt) and radioisotope thermoelec-
tric generator (RTG). Solar arrays take sunlight and convert
(up to 30-35% of it) into electric power. Solar arrays in
order to reach higher power output need to occupy large

2

Type

Altitude [km]

Remarks

VLEO Very Low Earth Orbit

180 - 500

LEO Low Earth Orbit
SSO Sun-Synchronous Orbit

500 - 2000
same as LEO

MEO Medium Earth Orbit

2000 - 35786

HEO Highly Elliptical Orbit
GTO Geo Transfer Orbit

perigee and apogee vary
perigee and apogee vary

GEO Geosynchronous Orbit

35786

GEO Graveyard

∼36300

Earth observation (EO), very low communication latency; high imaging res-
olution with mildly sophisticated equipment; atmospheric drag causes the
satellite to require propulsion to maintain the altitude; operation altitude of
the International Space Station (ISS)
EO, low communication latency; popular for microsatellites
subtype of LEO; low, retrograde orbit, sun synchronous; revisits the same spot at
the same tame of day (the same shadows cast by objects), used for observation
satellites; if traveling along the terminator line (dawn-dusk orbit) satellite could
spent majority of time in sunlit conditions — a preferable arrangement for
power constrained satellites
used by Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) systems, some telecom-
munication constellations(i.e. SES O3b)
highly elliptical orbit, used for communication satellites or science equipment
subtype of HEO; used for accessing GEO and beyond (cis-lunar space, lunar
orbits and deeper into the Solar System)
telecommunication and observation satellites, if over equator, is Geostationary
Orbit
decommissioned GEO satellites shall end up here

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF MOST POPULAR ORBITS AND THEIR APPLICATIONS [5], [6], [7], [8]

areas which requires them to be deployable (they have to
reliably unfold), which in turn makes the attitude control
more challenging. RTG’s require heatsinks which are dead
mass which increases the launch cost, not to mention, that
application of this technology is limited by environmental and
political constraints [14], [15].

To sum up, both, electrical power, for supplying the space-
craft, and fuel, for managing the spacecraft orbit, are ultimate
currencies in which each spacecraft designer and operator has
to pay for owned vessel functions and capabilities. Since the
spacecraft design and operation concepts are the results of a
long and tedious process of architectural trade-offs it is usually
very hard to add new function to already operating systems
or to maneuver them in way that was not foreseen in the ﬁrst
place. Since placement in orbit, spacecraft is bound to follow
it’s preconceived destiny and the margins that could be used
for changing mission objectives are minimal, and, typically,
are left for emergency or fault contingency operations.

B. On Board Systems

Space systems operate in the harsh environment of outer
space, remotely and, during times when no direct connection
with ground stations is possible, with limited supervision. In
addition to operating the instruments required to fulﬁll the
satellites mission (sensors, cameras, communication relays,
etc.), which are called the payload part, the satellite must also
secure its own survival over the envisioned mission time and
beyond. Despite shorter initially foreseen lifetimes (e.g., of a
few months on low orbit, a few years for regular satellites or
15 years for GEO), due to limitations outlined in Section II-A,
satellite lifetimes can go far beyond this initial plan (e.g., 20
years and counting for the ISS [16] and 43 years and counting
for the two of Voyager spacecraft [17]).

The platform part assumes this role of securing a satellite
survival. More precisely, it ensures sufﬁcient resources remain
their mission.
available for the payload systems to fulﬁll

The platform also controls power & thermal management,
propulsion and thus orbit and attitude control as well as the
command and telemetry links .

Depending on the type of mission, payloads might require
more or less supervision, may have own communication links
(both, up- and down-links), but are otherwise isolated from the
platform part. The platform supplies the payload system with
resources, commands and receives telemetry in return. In all
other aspect, the platform remains separate from the payload
subsystem, as its ultimate role is to ensure the operational
safety of the satellite as a whole.

C. Space Systems beyond Space

Space operations consist not only of the vehicles deployed
in space (satellites, stations, spacecraft), but also include
systems on the ground for operation planning, control, tracking
and communication, as well as the launch vehicles required to
deploy spacecraft in space. The segments are called space,
ground and launch segment, respectively. Ground segment,
consists mainly of ground stations (used to establish com-
munication with spacecraft platform, payload or both) and
mission control facilities where commanding of spacecraft
takes places. Tracking facilities, used to be assumed as a part
of ground segment, but nowadays, due to signiﬁcant increase
in space congestion, trafﬁc management becomes recognized
as another, independent, segment of space system architecture.
Here, we shall return to speciﬁcs of the ground-space inter-
actions outlined at the beginning of this chapter, and remind
that any ground based facility is limited in it’s capability to
establish communication with (or track) the satellite. Likewise,
satellite is able to interact (i.e. provide the service) with entities
withing it’s ﬁeld of view, during the time of pass (with the
obvious advantage of geostationary satellites having constant
ﬁeld of view and capacity to provide a continuous service).
Hence, the ground-space interaction limitations impose that:

3

1) With a few exceptions, ground stations lose contact
once the satellite leaves their observation cone. Unless
the provider has access to geographically spread ground
stations to continuously track the satellite, the vehicle
must operate autonomously; and

2) Having observed the satellite, adversaries may predict
when it comes into range of a critical operation to
conceal their activity or to take countermeasures against
the satellite.

In addition, there is so called user segment, which consists
of user terminals for telecommunication services [18] but also
satellite navigation receivers [19], AIS [20] or ADS-B [21]
transmitters or other, similar, systems. Organizations, facilities
and infrastructure that is used to process or distribute acquired
information to interested parties are also considered as a part
of user segment.

D. Crewed vs Robotic

So far we discussed mainly about satellites, but spacecraft
can be capable of supporting human space ﬂight. Main dif-
ferences between crewed and robotic activities, are the stakes
(loss of life vs loss of equipment), complexity (life support
systems and operations), capabilities (crewed missions are
much more ﬂexible as utilize human invention) and purpose
(robotic are there to build infrastructure for services or explore
deep space, while crewed are for science, outreach). While
crewed operations are, for the time being, limited to few
stations orbiting the Earth on LEO [16], [22], this is expected
to change in the near feature with human expansion to cis-
lunar space [23], following the scientiﬁc steps of Apollo
program [24] and building foundations for sustained human
presence beyond Earth and extending technical and economic
activity to other celestial bodies. Today, crewed missions are
primarily limited to science missions and sophisticated repairs
where human ﬂexibility to react
to unforeseen situations
outweighs the additional weight and complexity of life-support
systems and the higher risks of the mission. Whereas loss of
equipment is an unfortunate but tolerable event, loss of life
remains unacceptable.

E. Life cycle

A peculiar aspect of space systems is the length of their
life cycle and associated costs. The time from conception and
preliminary design to the disposal of the ﬁrst unit of a future
space system (be it a satellite or a spacecraft) can easily span
2 or more decades. The last units remaining in operation can
be decommissioned after 3-4 decades since the time they
were designed.

This has several reasons: First, space projects are managed
by large governmental agencies which aim to minimize project
organizational and technical risks by enforcing bureaucratic
processes and adherence to space, industrial, standards [25],
[26] which typically require extensive documentation of the
work done and planned. While justiﬁed for crewed missions or
high proﬁle missions, these processes are not always necessary

for shorter, cheaper, experimental missions, which is the trend
already visible in the community and is described in greater
details in following section II-F. Stretching the design process
in time increases the costs of a mission, in particular in terms
of the staff required to follow these processes.

Second, design processes are limited to equipment

that
is built exclusively from qualiﬁed components, which are
carefully tested for their suitability for space. Component
qualiﬁcation involves a signiﬁcant number of tests, many of
which lead to the destruction of the units under test, and
require careful documentation. Again labor intensive tasks
have to be conducted for the purpose of providing assurance
to customers or stakeholders.

Third, these costs and manpower needs are further magni-
ﬁed by several levels of subcontracting and can easily lead to
a price factor of 10–100 compared to commercial of the shelf
(COTS) equipment or component that is not space graded.

A fourth aspect worth considering in the space segment
life cycle, is that changes to already established and qualiﬁed
designs nulliﬁes the qualiﬁcation status of this design and
requires repeating the above processes. Shortcuts in the form
of so called delta-qualiﬁcations are only possible if the change
is small and still requires re-testing of all critical aspects
related to that change.

This has two consequences:
1) Due to the high costs of the qualiﬁcation process, new
equipment gets subjected to it only if the additional
performance justiﬁes such expenses; and

2) Due to the time needed, space graded equipment often
lags 10–15, or more, years behind COTS equipment.
We shall return to this when reﬂecting about the threats to

which spacecrafts are exposed.

F. New Space

A careful reader will by now already have spotted vulner-
abilities due to inefﬁciencies in the classical way of develop-
ment and deployment of space vehicles and the infrastructure
they need on the ground. Let us therefore also introduce a
recent trend towards a more lean process for building space
infrastructure, whose risks and threats we will analyze as well:
NewSpace [27].

The NewSpace movement gains popularity due to its
promise of more affordable satellites and launchers. NewSpace
aims to build upon COTS technologies and components that,
if qualiﬁed at all, undergo a much more relaxed testing
regime [28], [29], accepting higher risks of failure for the sake
of improved performance. The promise of NewSpace applies
in particular to LEO, where harsh environmental inﬂuence is
present, but weaker, than in higher orbits.

While by no doubt, the trend is clear and hundreds of new
companies have already entered this market, which, as of 2020,
grew to 26.2 BUSD invested in space start-ups since 2015 (at
the scale of 36.7 BUSD invested since 2000) [30]. That is
truly enormous progress, but there are also few downsides
of such fast paced development process–the number of small
satellites (from sub-kg to 600 kg of mass) launched every year,

4

since 2017, is more than three hundred [31] and is increasing,
from 2010 to 2020, number of actively operating satellites has
grown 252% [32].

NewSpace in it’s dynamics and consequences is a process
of rapid economic expansion and unbounded exploitation of
resources, very similar to examples on Earth, which have
lead to overexploitation and environmental devastation. Outer
space, especially LEO, used to be free of debris, but is now
populated by a large number of new spacecrafts entering into
service, sometimes even from a single launch, with debris
(primarily from upper stage operations) starting to accumulate
beyond tolerable dimensions.

Increasing orbital congestion combined with a general disre-
gard of long term sustainability of the space environment (i.e.
failure to ensure fast deorbiting when satellites are disposed)
are ﬁrst steps towards Kessler’s syndrome [33] and we still
have no capacity to purge orbits from dead satellites and
debris.

let

Reduced costs also originate from higher turnaround times
of a few month between contract signature and orbit injection
rather than years. The lower costs and simpliﬁed quality
assurance results in, higher, than in Old Space, mission failure
rates. For example, Jacklin [34] found that around 40% of
all small satellite mission launched between 2009 and 2016
failed partially or fully. It
is also worth mentioning that
Jacklin excluded academic endeavors from this analysis as
their success if often deﬁned very broadly. It is also fair to
indicate that further industrialization of processes in NewSpace
domain will reduce expected failure rates, as it is already seen
with Starlink, trending towards 3% failure rate [35]. However,
special care must be exercised to not
the same time-
to-market mechanisms that are also present in other weakly
regulated ﬁelds cause security to be treated as an aftermath.
NewSpace is on course of enabling satellites to become
interconnected, creating orbital networks with many nodes and
numerous points of entry that are eventually connected to the
Internet. It leads to the creation of (mega-)constellations (i.e.,
formations of spacecrafts cooperating in achieving a common
goal, typically for telecommunication but also for real-time
Earth observation and similar activities [36]), which on the
one hand enables operators and users to utilize the greater
potential of these new services and increases the availability
and robustness against accidental faults. At the same time,
NewSpace approach, and use of large constellations in particu-
lar, also increases the attack surface, making it harder to defend
and maintain control on the system. The trend of increasing
the size of satellite constellation along with simplifying and
miniaturizing the satellites themselves starts to spill into the
traditional space industry [37], and most likely will become
even more signiﬁcant in the future.

G. Space sustainability

In Section II-F we have already mentioned that space near
Earth, especially LEO, is exploited beyond it’s capacity to
naturally clean itself from dead spacecraft and launch and
deployment debris (not to mention ﬁelds of debris resulting

Fig. 1. Number of new satellites launched each years. Data source: [38]

from collisions). The Kessler syndrome [33] is an existential
threat to humankind capability to use space as part economy
and explore space as a part of our destiny. In 2021, caused,
by both extensive utilization and debris creation, we are able
to track above 20 thousands objects in near-Earth space. In
Figure 1 it is also visible we’re already on exponential curve
of growth of number of new satellites [38]. What is even
worse, despite vastness of space, the object are placed on
orbits which are convenient or preferable for a given kind of
activity. By this, zones of heavy congestion are formed [39].
The described process increases the catastrophic failure risks
not only for regular LEO operations but also all mission
that in order to be deployed in deeper space, have to pass
through heavily congested and, debris ﬁlled, regions (refer
to Figure 2). While Kessler syndrome was conceived as
accidental phenomenon arising purely from orbital mechanics
and statistics, it can be negatively augmented by malicious
activity of competing space powers. Anti-satellite weapon tests
have already contributed signiﬁcantly to amounts of debris
humanity has to deal with [40].
What if collisions in space start becoming a result of inten-
tional weaponization of the satellites?

H. Understanding the space domain

.

By now, it shall be apparent to the reader that systems of
the space segment cannot be analyzed without taking into
consideration the environment
in which they operate. As
famous Robert Hainlein is often quoted: "Once you’re in orbit,
you’re halfway to anywhere". The reign of gravity can’t be
overcome, future satellite’s positions can be only tweaked and
will remain to large extent predictable. In space operations,
counter-intuitively, physical closeness is not a measure of
capability to link and physical separation is not a measure
of capability to interact [42]. The physical environment, or-
bital considerations, Sun activity, the Earth’s magnetosphere
and the electromagnetic spectrum deﬁnes all space segment
capabilities and limitations. The moment a satellite system is

5

damage. All
the vessels that require to be localized and
navigated, have to stop to prevent crashes. It is not that there
are no alternatives - they are, but it will take time to deploy
them in the safe manner. The economy will stop for some
time.

it

From the above example and the examples given in Sec-
is quite safe to write that most of our current
tion I,
and near future modern economy is in one way or another
dependent on uninterrupted access to space as a conduit
for information extraction and/or exchange. Crippling space
infrastructure therefore means interfering with these sectors or,
in less optimistic scenarios, disabling large parts of a country’s
economy (see Figure 3 for an overview of the dependence
of individual economy segments). It should be noted that this
dependence is particularly pronounced in developed countries,
which justiﬁes some of the adversary models we shall consider.
The danger of the current situation is that, both the degree
of dependency nations have on space infrastructure and the
depth of susceptibility of that infrastructure, are widely under-
estimated. Huge risks are looming from events (accidental or
intentionally malicious ones) that may cripple a nation’s access
to space and thereby its economy and in part also its defense
capabilities. Very little is done to increase the robustness and
resilience of the space systems we rely on. The risk of a
"Space Pearl Harbor" has been identiﬁed and announced as
early as in 2001 and now applies to a majority of developed
countries [47], [48].

This lack of resilience is partially caused by a phenomena
called the "High Ground Fallacy", a concept originating from
military doctrine of the old that armies would gain an ad-
vantage of being higher up and therefore unreachable by their
enemy. Today, space is often called the new high ground, even
in a civilian understanding of space systems. However, space
assets are not the fortresses to seek shelter from the enemy
or to descent on unprepared rivals. Instead, they are among
the most fragile, remote, outposts that support main forces
with information [42]. They are well reachable, both in the
cyber-space and physically, as we shall see in the remainder
of this survey. In particular, we shall see that they are reachable
by entities insusceptible to the threats of space access denial
or retaliation, which turns protecting space systems against
advanced and persistent threats, the only viable option.

IV. A TAXONOMY OF SPACE THREATS

Space systems are exposed to a variety of threats and there
are several ways to classify the latter. Previous analyses study
threats to space systems from the perspective of international
affairs, intelligence or military organizations, which tends to
introduce bias of threats and countermeasures towards compet-
ing countries, namely other space powers. Threats investigated
in that light are usually divided into two types: kinetic and
non-kinetic, pertaining to type of energy exchanged between
target and effector. An example threat classiﬁcations, which
follows the above principle, is summed up below:

• kinetic threats

– ground station physical attack [49]

Fig. 2. Congestion zones in LEO. Data source: [41]

injected into its orbit and set up for operation, the margins
for corrections and repairs have become very thin and are
often limited to what the satellite provides in the ﬁrst place.
In particular after the end of the Space Shuttle area, human
repair capabilities are severely limited and thus limited to
robotic refurbishing missions. Consequently, all malfunctions
that have not been taken into account during the design
process, put the mission at risk. While the space engineering
community has large appreciation for and prepares for tolerat-
ing accidental faults, there are still large gaps in understanding
the full consequences of malicious behavior. Accidental faults
follow well known statistics. In contrast, the drivers behind
intentionally malicious faults, such as targeted attacks, remain
the intention and incentives under which adversaries operate,
not the statistics. The gap in understanding the threats to space
systems and scale of societal and military dependence on
space technologies and equipment, turns space into a critical
infrastructure, which we analyze next in Section III.

III. SPACE IS A CRITICAL INFORMATION
INFRASTRUCTURE

In Section I we have already seen that despite space
infrastructure in itself not being a large business, large parts
of our economic wealth and growth depend on it.

Global economy thrives thanks to safe and efﬁcient navi-
gation on the high seas provided by GNSS systems, with the
help of AIS [43]. Aircraft, which move people and goods on
large distances, also depend on uninterrupted GNSS system
operations, supported by ADS-B reporting [44]. Oil rigs and
pipelines, report the telemetry via communication satellites
ensuring remote management of production [45]. Some mines
are already using autonomous equipment which relies on both
localization and communication capabilities provided from
space [46].

If any of the the space dependent services becomes dis-
rupted, chaos ensues. Without telemetry reports the whole
infrastructure
production facilities have to stop to prevent

6

Fig. 3. Global economy segments dependency on space infrastructure

– direct ascent anti-satellite weapons [49]
– co-orbital attack system, capable of launching projec-

tiles [49]

– collision with other satellites (both active and defunct),

debris, upper stages

• non-kinetic threats

– high altitude nuclear detonation [49]
– high-energy directed weapons [49]

∗ lasers [49]
∗ microwaves [49]

– electronic

∗ uplink jamming [49]
∗ downlink jamming [49]
∗ spooﬁng [49]

– cyber

∗ data intercept / monitoring [49]
∗ data corruption [49]
∗ seizure of control [49]

Threat classiﬁcations like the above, mainly due to the
interests and focus of the organizations that published them,
discuss threats in relation to global space powers (USA, Rus-
sia, China, India, perhaps, Japan, France, Israel, for some, also
Iran and North Korea,) that may implement them (compare
for example [7], [50], [51], [6], [49], [52]). The assumption
is that exercising these threats requires capabilities of limited
availability (typically only to nation states), including sophis-
ticated launcher technologies, state-of-the art navigation and
tracking (for kinetic attacks, but also, for ground based laser
attacks or co-orbital microwave attacks), robotic rendezvous
and proximity technologies (for orbital operations like the
deployment of inspector spacecrafts with intended missions
such as refueling, maintenance or operational life extension,
covering activities up to Geostationary Orbits, but which can
also be diverted from such objectives to bring down space
vehicles), and outstanding, close and far range GNSS signal
technology (e.g., for spooﬁng attacks). Table II summarizes
most notable nation-state space powers and their counterspace
capabilities, while [6], [49], [52] provide more detailed expla-

nations and examples.

It is understandable that most of the community attention
will be drawn to spectacular weapons, capable of tracking and
physically destroying or, at least, damaging space systems. As
mentioned before, there is not much that can be done about
preventing or avoiding such attempts or outmaneuvering them.
Yet, thankfully, we don’t see many of such events, which as of
to date are limited to technology demonstrations and targeted
only to a nation’s own vehicles.

There are several reasons for that: First, successfully in-
tercepting or damaging a rival’s orbital vehicle is considered
an attack to that rival’s territory. Space faring nations have
established a balance of powers agreement, threatening retal-
iation, including between the two large defensive packs, in
case space vehicles are attacked. The aggressor must therefore
expect retaliation on earth, which might well ignite a spiral of
uncontrollable escalation between the parties.

Second, physically destroying a vehicle multiplies the debris
that must be tracked and avoided because it would otherwise
destroy further space adding even more debris. The ultima-
ratio of this effect is, introduced in II-G, Kessler’s syndrome
and will render space unusable for generations to come,
cutting technologically advanced space-faring nations from the
military and civilian applications that space provides.

Third, but of minor importance due to weak enforcement
mechanisms, international space treaties would be violated that
aim at regulating a safe, secure and sustainable use of this
domain.

In developed countries, there is no real interest in actually
risking the destruction of one’s own infrastructure by clouds of
debris or even preventing future use of such orbits for decades
or until clean-up technologies become available. The kinetic
hit to kill philosophy in space is clearly a double edged sword.
In fact, weapons enabling near-space existential threats work
in a way like nuclear weapons — they are capable of affecting
everyone including those who yield them. In a similar fashion,
like nuclear warfare, Mutually Assured Destruction worked so
far to stabilize and build the balance between powers (however
not making the world a better place). The risk of rendering
near-space unusable has a chance to push the space powers

7

TABLE II
MOST-NOTABLE TECHNOLOGY EXAMPLES WITH ANTI-SATELLITE CAPABILITY

Technology

Examples

direct ascent vehicle

Prithvi Delivery Vehicle Mark-II, tested successfully in 2019,creating limited amount of debris [53]
Operation Burned Frost, removal of defunct satellite conducted by SM-3 vehicle [54]
Taking down of F¯engyún 1C defunct satellite by SC-19 intercept vehicle [55]

co-orbital vehicle

X-37B USAF unmanned spaceplane [12]
Chongfu Shiyong Shiyan Hangtian Qi reusable test spacecraft [13]
Aolong-1 active debris remove vehicle [56]
Kosmos 2519, 2521, 2523 small interceptor satellites performing randez-vous and proximity demonstrations [57]
Kosmos 2543 deployed Kosmos 2542, which in turn started to spy on U.S National Reconnaissance Ofﬁce’s US245
(with the NRO satellite performing maneuvers to steer off the adversarial inspector) [58]
SJ-17 experimental satellite performed very close proximity operations on dead and operating Chinese geostationary
satellites, showing capabilities for both peaceful and hostile actions [59]

projectile deployment

BX-1 deployment from Shehzhou-7 mothership and ISS pass within 25 km (seemingly out of control) [60]

high altitude nuclear detonation

Starﬁsh Prime was a nuclear explosion conducted at altitude 400 km, creating both electromagnetic pulse and artiﬁcial
radiation belts. At least 6 satellite failures, that occurred in months that followed, are attributed to this experiment [61]

high energy directed weapons

operational laser systems like Peresvet [62] or Sokol Eshelon [63]. The latter is an origin of successful (but temporary)
blinding of Japanese Earth observing satellite AJISAI [64]

communication eavesdropping

Olymp-K / Luch has been launched in 2014, as communication satellite. However, instead of maintaining its position
and performing typical operations, it started to wander around GEO belt. As of 2020 it has shifted its position about 19
times [49], targeting mainly communication satellites, both military and commercially operated. Both, traversing of the
GEO belt and close proximity operations sparked accusations of espionage and hostility (communication eavesdropping,
inspection) [65], [66], [67].

rivalry into domains of non-existential threats.

The peaceful utilization of outer space is also a concern
of the United Nations (UN), creating the UN Institute for
Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) for monitoring and classi-
fying all aspects related to international security and to assist
in disarmament processes. UNIDIR hast spent more than 40
years evaluating technology development and tracking global
activity in the context of space militarization. The Prevention
of an Arms Race in Outer Space (PAROS) program was very
successful in increasing and widely spreading awareness of
threats and risks associated with placing weapons in orbit,
much less in preventing space powers in exercising their space
access and utilizing their denial capabilities [51].

However, space powers and, as we shall see, also non-space
powers, less developed countries or even terrorist groups do
not need to target space systems in a direct kinetic manner.
Cyber- and electronic warfare allow for signiﬁcantly more
subtle, but still highly effective attacks that are much harder
to attribute [50] and that require signiﬁcantly less advanced
equipment. If the the careful reader reviews the threat sum-
maries referenced in this chapter, she will realize that majority
of those surveys do not capture the vast possibilities of cyber
or electronic attack on space infrastructure, which contributes
to serious underestimation of, probability and the criticality
of such event. Hacking a satellite grants adversaries control
over the payload system and the applications it supports.
Through it, they may spoof GNSS signals, disrupt, redirect,
or manipulate communication, or use on-board systems for
espionage. Hacking into the platform system or, for that matter,
into a satellite’s controlling ground station, grants full control
over the satellite, including its orbit and mass. The latter

two turn satellites into projectiles and kinetic weapons. The
equipment required to reach satellites in orbit is relatively
simple and,
in particular, does not require capabilities of
deploying or maintaining vehicles in space. An immediate
conclusion from the last two aspects is obviously that threats
of causing physical damage and ultimately Kessler’s syndrome
are not limited to developed countries, but also to countries and
organizations that may not be as dependent on space or that
may even beneﬁt from the inaccessibility of this domain. In
particular this includes asymmetric threats, which are naturally
immune to the threat of Mutually Assured Destruction. Very
few trusted and, proven to be effective, countermeasures exist
against cyber and electronic attacks, especially when compared
to kinetic domain (see Table 2 in [68]). It is not that the
adequate countermeasure cannot be conceived. The problem
lies in, perception of the threats, which we aim to change.

V. CYBER-PHYSICAL THREATS TO SPACE SYSTEMS

Spacecraft, space probes and space vehicles are cyber-
physical systems: Satellites operate remotely, either alone or,
to an increasing extent, in networked groups, but always in
contact with ground stations, leveraging algorithms on their
computer systems to control actuators, propulsion and sensors
in order to fulﬁll their missions. As such they can fall prey
to all threats more traditional cyber-physical systems (CPS)
are exposed to,
in addition to those originating from the
harsh environment in which they operate and those relayed
from the ground stations they communicate with. Concerns
include classical security and dependability questions, like the
conﬁdentiality and integrity of sampled or relayed data, or the
availability of subsystems, but also more speciﬁc ones, like

8

misuse of the vehicle, including as a projectile or impactor
[69].

In the following, we analyze the threat vectors spacecraft
and space infrastructure are exposed to, the agents that exploit
them and give examples of threats at various stages of the
mission. Fig. 4) gives an overview of the units involved in de-
ploying and operating spacecraft, which may be compromised
by adversaries and exploited for attacking other units [70].

A. Terms and deﬁnitions

Threat vectors describe possibilities through which agents
may gain access to system assets or resources [70]. A threat,
as deﬁned in the seminal work of Singer [71], is a product
of the estimated capabilities of malicious actors and their
intent. To defend a spacecraft against them, as many threats
as possible need to be identiﬁed and evaluated against the
abilities of potential malicious actors. Known weaknesses must
be ﬁxed, but since both identiﬁcation and patching remain
incomplete processes, spacecraft and supporting infrastructure
should ideally also be prepared to tolerate threats, such as
partially successful attacks, and return to a state at least as
secure as initially. In other words, they must be resilient to
accidental and intentionally malicious faults.

A vulnerability is a weakness or ﬂaw in the system, its
conﬁguration or operation,
that might be exploited when
reachable by adversaries to gain an advantage over the systems
and ultimately compromise it [70].

Exploited vulnerabilities lead to faults in the system, which
may manifest
in errors and ultimately lead to failure of
the system [72]. We distinguish accidental from intentionally
malicious faults. Whereas the natural processes that cause the
former, the probability distributions they follow and their low-
level effects are well understood, this is not the case for the
latter. Whether, when and how frequent intentionally malicious
attacks can be mounted are often just a question of the power
an adversary can muster and of the incentives it has. Some
adversaries operate with the resources of nation states, directly
provided to them.

The situation is further complicated by a vast variety of
weaponized software being available for analysis, re-purposing
and deploying on the adversary-owned systems, but more
importantly on systems of innocent users that have been
compromised.

The proliferation of commoditized,

low-cost space plat-
forms, with almost no trade restrictions, common architec-
tures and COTS technologies foreseen for NewSpace amplify
this situation and expands the window of vulnerability for
attacks [73].

B. Agents

The agents opposing space systems include governmental,
military or commercial actors, but also individuals or organiza-
tions that undertake attempts to explore selected threat vectors.
Since space systems require multidisciplinary knowledge and
the equipment and software comprising such systems used to
be rather rare and not easily obtainable, it was possible to

exclude the occasional hacker from this list of adversaries.
Other than that, the full spectrum of adversaries has to be
expected [74], [75]:

• sophisticated individuals
• insiders / untrustworthy or careless personnel
• competitors / dishonest or careless business partners
• hacktivists
• criminal organizations / guerrillas
• nation states

– state backed organizations
– intelligence
– military

Before analyzing the threats in further detail to which space
systems are exposed, let us review the evidence we have from
existing attacks, evaluated in section VI.

VI. REVIEW OF KNOWN ATTACKS

A. ROSAT failure

The earliest mention of counter satellite activity can be
traced back to 1998 when ROSAT failed. ROSAT was an
American-English-German scientiﬁc satellite that ﬁrst expe-
rienced a malfunctioning reaction wheel used for attitude
determination and, as a consequence, turned its instruments
directly towards sun which destroyed it [76]. The ROSAT
platform was plagued by faults and issues from its early days
on [118]. The possibility that hackers might be responsible was
raised a decade later by T. Talleur [77] in a conﬁdential report
along with a report on other malicious activities in the NASA
networks. While, at the present moment, the original article is
no longer available on-line (including in the Internet Archive),
and the report is not publicly available for obvious reasons, the
event has been reported by respected security researchers [119]
and US security NGOs [120]. Currently the article is backed
up on the author’s blog [121].

Since there is no direct evidence for the malicious activity
to be the root cause of ﬁnal failure of ROSAT and not one of
the existing other other plausible root causes, this incident has
to be taken with a grain of salt.

B. Skynet

As reported by Reuters and Time [78], in February 1999,
one of United Kingdom’s Ministry of Defence military
telecommunication satellites unexpectedly changed its orien-
tation. Soon after, as the initial story goes, the MoD received
a ransom request to gain back control over a critical piece of
infrastructure. Early March that year, all allegations of a satel-
lite hack and subsequent service interruption were denied by
ofﬁcials [79] and, in the end, ridiculed [122]. Whatever really
happened then, the event sparked panic among military and in-
telligence personnel, to the extent that some (mis)information
leaked to the public. If such an event actually took place, it
would be evidence of the signiﬁcant technical sophistication
of an adversary or of a signiﬁcant security misconduct on the
defending side [123]. It is not very probable, but in the light
of other, better documented cases, also potentially feasible.

9

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF PUBLICLY KNOWN SPACE INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY INCIDENTS [5], [6], [7]

Incident

ROSAT

Skynet

GPS jamming during military trials

Ames Research supercomputer
down to halt intrusion
TELSTAR-12 uplink jamming

shut

Sri Lankan rebels hijack satellite com-
munications
Data breach and multiple intrusions
Landsat-7
Landsat-7 & Terrasat EOS interference
Worm infecting laptops on ISS

JPL data breach and malware spreading
in NASA mission networks
BBC broadcast in Farsi disrupted
NASA Goddard Center
leaked
GPS jamming by N. Korea

information

NASA intrusions

NASA JPL breach
European communication satellite jam-
ming
NASA ISS command and control data
leak
JAXA H-2A Transfer Vehicle design
leak
NASA and ESA identity and authenti-
cation data hacked and published
JAXA Epsilon rocket design leak
DLR breach and data theft
Mulitple channels broadcast disrupted
over Ethiopia
NOAA satellite weather imagery ser-
vice disrupted
Turla satellite communication links hi-
jacks
APT28 hacked French TV5Monde tele-
vision
JPL intrusion

malware in ISRO launch segment
DoD contractors hacked

Advanced GPS signal spooﬁng in China
Successful attack on autonomous car
navigation by GPS spooﬁng
Worldwide advanced GPS signal spoof-
ing

Remarks

Scientiﬁc satellite payload permanent failure coincidental with cyber-intrusion to mission control
center, incident report classiﬁed [76], [77]
British military communication satellite allegedly taken over and ransom requested, lack of
solid, public, evidence of incident [78], [79]
British and US tank had navigation problems during Greek trials. GPS jammers deployed by
French security [80]
Swedish national persecuted, estimated costs > 1MUSD [81]

TELSTAR-12 uplink was jammed, by source located in Cuba, during Operation Iraqi Freedom
to prevent Voice of America broadcast over Iran [82]
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam broadcast pirated TV & radio services to several countries
[?]
NASA forced to block emails, Shuttle operations plans leaked [83], [84]
First unauthorized attempt to access the space segment [85], [86]
Very well documented hack attempt, large sophistication of adversary [85], [86]
Brought by a Russian astronaut on Windows XP laptop. Malware quickly spread among other
computers (although mission-critical equipment was safe) [87], [88]
Theft of 22GB of export-restricted data; thousands of connection set to external networks [89]

Telecommunication satellite jammed [90]
Paid Earth imagery datasets posted online for free [81]

Multiple locations affected in S. Korea including Incheon International Airport. Aircraft had
to rely on alternative navigation instruments. Incidents repeated couple of times in following
years [91]
Data destroyed or access restricted, 0.5 MUSD damage to Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS)
program [92]
Hackers gained full access to JPL systems [93], [92]
Deutsche Welle jammed on DeHotbird 8 satellite [94]

An un-encrypted NASA laptop was stolen. It contained the command sets, as well as, control
algorithms for ISS [95], [92]
Virus infected laptop containing critical data [96]

Around one thousand employees personal information leaked and posted in internet [97]

Virus infected laptop containing critical data [98]
Targeted malware found across DLR computers. Theft linked to China APT groups [99]
Arabsat telecommunication satellite jammed [100]

Data ﬂow from satellites affected by hack attributed to Chinese APT, systems forced ofﬂine
[101], [102]
Turla hacker group with links to FSB - hijacking internet services of older commercial satellites
[103], [104], [105]
A professional, coordinated attack that disabled the TV broadcaster for couple of hours. It took
months to fully replace destroyed equipment and return to regular operations [106]
500 MB of critical documents leaked, unauthorized access to deep space network, operations
affected for many months, [107], [108]
suspected, ISRO named it false positive [109], [110], [111]
Security breach with the possibility to exercise the control over satellite by hackers, data
trafﬁc disruptions. Additionally conﬁdential design data on submarines and high ﬁdelity satellite
imagery stolen [112], [113]
Ships GPS positions, reported by maritime satellite AIS system [114], [49]
[115]

Ships located physically in waters near Norway, Libya, Malaysia, and Russia reported via AIS
to sailing in circles off the San Francisco coast[116], [117]

Year

1998

1999

2000

2003

2003

2005

2006
2007
2008
2008

2009

2009
2009

2010

2010

2011
2011

2011

2011

2012

2012
2014
2014

2014

2015

2015

2018

2018
2018

2019
2019

2020

C. Landsat and Terrasat EOS

Turning to better documented incidents, in late 2007 and
2008 two US government remote sensing, Earth observation
satellites became subject to adversarial activity of unattributed
origin (with presumptive evidence leading to a global competi-
tor). In October 2007, Landsat-7 experienced about 12 minutes

of interference, which was only discovered following the anal-
ysis of a subsequent event 9 months later. This second attempt
to take over control over satellite was also not successful.
In June 2008, Terra EOS AM–1, became subject to about 2
minutes of interference. The adversary, managed to complete
all steps required for obtaining command authority over the

10

satellite but refrained from issuing rogue commands. Four
months later, the same satellite experienced a 9 minute hostile
take over attempt, with all the steps required to take over
control completed and again attackers restraining themselves
from issuing rogue commands. Those events, clearly show
the scale of threat and sophistication, as well as, the fact
that malicious actors possess advanced knowledge on system
operation details. Unlike the previous examples, the above
events are credibly documented by Economic and Security
Review Commission reporting to U.S. Congress [85], [86].

D. NASA JPL breaches

In November 2011, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab discovered
compromised accounts of several highly privileged users. The
hackers had full systems access, enabling them to copy, modify
and delete ﬁles as well as to create new user accounts. They
could as well have uploaded malware for further exploitation
of the NASA networks [93]. In the course of the investigation
it was revealed that for the past 2 years, NASA was subject to
signiﬁcant adversarial activity, aiming at accessing the internal
data networks, causing, both IP leaks and interruption of oper-
ations [92]. Unfortunately, the recommended strengthening of
NASA JPL’s defense posture was insufﬁcient, as information
that surfaced in June 2019 indicated another heavy network
security breach, that happened in the Agency’s ﬂagship labo-
ratory, 14 months earlier. This time an unauthorized Raspberry
Pi microcomputer was found plugged into the facility net-
work, providing cyber-access for adversarial activity, including
access to conﬁdential documentation and to the Deep Space
Network (DSN) - an array of radio-telescopes used for ranging,
telemetry acquisition and remote control of exploration probes
traversing the Solar System. The scale of that compromise
shall be alarming, as ofﬁcials admitted, the hackers gained
access to the gateway enabling them to take over or at least
affect the mission control centers, including to those related
to the human spaceﬂight program [107]. Malicious activity
went undetected for 10 months. Initial damage assessment
mentioned a leak of 500 MB of highly sensitive information,
some under ITAR restrictions, and vast, long lasting disruption
of network operation, including DSN and connections to other
NASA sites [108].

E. NOAA

In October 2014,

the ﬂow of meteorological data from
satellites operated by U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration has been temporarily disrupted by an internet-
sourced attack. Some forecasting services were disrupted,
while the systems were under an unscheduled maintenance
[101]. The incident analysis report stated that the organization
did not sufﬁciently implement security requirements despite
several audits that expressed this obligation. This lack of
protection,
left critical communication systems vulnerable,
namely the satellite data feed and interfaces to other parts
of critical infrastructure, including military [102].

F. Indian launch site malware infection

In December 2017, a malware XtremeRAT has been found
by Indian and French independent researchers in India’s Space
Research Organization (ISRO) Telemetry, Tracking and Com-
mand Networks (ISTRAC) used for control and support of
launch activities from the launcher ignition up to payload
orbital injection. The malware could even have been present
on a computer that was directly involved in launch operations
[109]. XtremeRAT is a standard and widely available offensive
tool used for accessing and taking control over a victim’s
system, often targeting critical infrastructure [110]. ISRO, after
conducting an internal investigation, declared the incident as
a false positive. The organization pointed to the fact that IS-
TRAC mission critical systems are air-gapped and thus secure
against this type of adversarial activity [111]. Air gapping
disconnects a computer from all external networks. History
has shown that this approach is a challenge for hackers, but
the one that can be, eventually, and, spectacularly, beaten as
in famous Stuxnet malware [124]. However, having to main-
tain wireless connection to space vehicles, air-gapping space
systems naturally remains incomplete, as the, reverse, space-
to-ground infection path feasibility shall be also considered.

G. GPS spooﬁng

There is a signiﬁcant number of cases where GPS signals
have been either jammed or spoofed, a fact which is not very
surprising given how weak those signals are when received
on the ground, easing malicious interference. It is also not
very surprising that adversaries have an incentive to mount
such attacks, given how large the dependence of our society,
economy and military on satellite navigation systems is. The
GNSS receiver market is more than 97 BUSD worldwide,
which is about one quarter of the global space economy
in 2019 [1]. GNSS signals have been subject of extensive
testing against jamming, meaconing or spooﬁng techniques for
couple of years already [125]), however, today’s receivers are
still extremely easy to be tricked into false position, velocity
and time reporting. GPS crop circles phenomena, sign of
advanced GPS spooﬁng technology, has been ﬁrst recorded in
2019 in several spots in China. As data received through the
satellite Automated Identiﬁcation System (AIS,[20]) indicate,
ships that entered the spooﬁng area reported their positions
as sailing in circles around arbitrary locations on land [114],
[49]. In the following year, similar incidents happened on a
worldwide scale, where a couple of ships around the world
have been tricked into recognizing (and further, reporting
through their AIS) its position off the coast of San Francisco
[116], [117]. It is worth mentioning, that GPS spooﬁng is not
only limited to close proximity of interfering equipment. Using
relatively cheap and widespread technology (e.g., Software
Deﬁned Radio and open source software stacks [126], [127])
spooﬁng ranges of up to tens of kilometers can be achieved
[128]. Using a large number of jamming devices, areas of the
size of entire countries can be equipped with counter-GNSS
technology [129]. In the near future, with more advanced
technical deployments, like Ekipazh nuclear powered in-orbit

11

electronic warfare satellites [130], [49], GNSS signal jamming
or spooﬁng (or communication links disruption) could possibly
affect much larger areas.

can not only stop or delay the program, but it may embed
vulnerabilities that lay the foundation for later, more elaborate
attacks on the developed ground or space system.

H. Communication links hacks: Turla and APT28

Since a signiﬁcant part of existing space telecommunication
infrastructure is based on analogue relays (bent-pipe concept)
it is easy to jam inputs of such satellites. Essentially, all the
adversary needs is to know the uplink frequency (which is
public information) and a strong, directional source of interfer-
ence. Unless, more complex, digital, regenerative payloads, are
used, the only countermeasure to this attack is to track down
the sources of interference and shut them down physically.
There are cases were satellite communication infrastructure
has been either target or conduit of more sophisticated attacks.
In 2015 a Turla group has started a large-scale hijacking of
satellite internet links in order to disguise their activity and
hide their physical presence (since end-user terminals can be
placed anywhere within the satellite service beam). Some of
this activity was simply purchasing bidirectional links as any
customer would do. However, to avoid the signiﬁcant cost
involved with this, Turla started to spoof packets of DVB-
S based Internet system users. It was easy, because unlike
its successor DVB-S2, DVB-S is not encrypted [103], [104],
[105]. The same year, TV5Monde experienced a devastating
cyberattack on a few of its broadcast facilities by hacker
group APT28. The service (all 12 channels) was down for
a couple of hours. It may not sound much, but broadcasters
have contract obligations on signal availability and contract
cancellation could jeopardize the company’s existence. The
attack was sophisticated and well prepared. Months earlier
adversaries mapped TV5Monde networks, understanding how
the broadcast process works and what equipment is involved.
For grand ﬁnale, a malicious software was deployed, targeting
critical broadcast devices and causing permanent hardware
damage [106].

VII. THREAT VECTORS

In the following subsections, we now analyze systematically
the threats to which space systems (see Fig 4) are exposed to in
the individual phases of their lifecycle. We distinguish physical
from cyber attacks, but highlight also where cyber attacks
inﬂuence the physical world. We investigate to which extent a
successful manifestation of these threats affect conﬁdentiality
or integrity of data, or, the availability of the spacecraft itself,
before we provide in Section VIII a general scheme for the
cyber-physical attacks on the space systems.

A. Early phase attacks

Before space infrastructure is even built and deployed in
space,
it undergoes long process of design, modiﬁcation,
assembly, integration and extensive testing. This is almost
always a collaborative effort, involving many parties bringing
different expertise, know-how and facilities. Hence, a large
attack surface must be expected. It is also very important
that as a single security compromise at those early stages,

Attack vectors in this early phase affect satellite system
design and development houses, component supply chains —
D&D in Fig 4 —, assembly (manufacturing of mechanisms,
electronic circuits), integration (assembling whole platform,
payload, satellites), veriﬁcation and validation (conducting the
functional and environmental tests on integrated equipment)
— AIVV in Fig 4. Vulnerabilities embedded at this stage may
remain in existence well beyond the time when the satellite is
ﬁnished, deployed into orbit and operated there.

At the early stage of system development, supply chain
attacks offer a ﬁrst interesting opportunity for adversaries to
learn about the systems’ capabilities. Moreover, state-backed
agents may inject trojan-horses and other malware, both, at
software and at hardware level, which constitutes an invaluable
opportunity for further compromise of units after they become
operational.

If the supply chain is of military grade, such attacks are not
trivial, but still possible [134]. If the supply chain includes
open source designs and components, as it is increasingly
popular New Space ([135], [136], [137], [138], [139]), tainting
of the design or its components seem easy at ﬁrst glance, but
are less trivial if they should both evade public analysis and
the later validation process.

Similar activities, dealing mainly with documentation theft,
unauthorized design alterations or simply deletion have to be
expected at the integration stage. Some of the documents that
are typically prepared in the course of developing satellite
systems are more crucial than others. For example, Failure
Modes, Effects and Criticality Analysis (FMECA) describe
known failure modes and their assessment. It explains what is
to be expected to go wrong and how the system is prepared
to face the challenge. Such a document falling into the hands
of adversaries informs them about the weakest link, which
may guide them in the selection of the subsystem they target.
More interesting even are the failure modes and effects which
have evaded FMECA, as they pave the way for exploiting
undocumented (and therefore likely untested) behaviors [133].
The test phase is another, very attractive epoch in the
development life cycle to learn about or affect space systems.
Knowledge about test procedures and methods for satellite
system veriﬁcation and validation, tells how a satellite sys-
tem shall be utilized and which behavior is to be expected
and which behavior constitutes anomalies. Adversaries could
attempt to avoid exhibiting the latter to disguise their activity.
Moreover, the test procedures themselves can be used to attack
the space system, for instance by manipulating test equipment
to leave critical functionality untested or by removing impor-
tant steps from the procedure itself. It is also worth noting that
failure of test equipment can destroy systems or delay their
deployment. Even if the system under test is not destroyed,
but pushed beyond the agreed range of operation, common
procedure is that they have to be considered as broken and
should not be deployed in space. The above threat vectors are

12

Fig. 4. Overview of space systems nodes

TABLE IV
CLASSIFICATION OF THREATS TO SPACE SYSTEMS - SUPPLY CHAIN, ASSEMBLY, INTEGRATION AND TESTS [75], [131], [132], [133], [49]

supply chain

assembly & integration

tests

Affecting

conﬁdentiality

f
o

s
s
o
l

integrity

design theft
speciﬁcation theft

component tainting
design modiﬁcation

documentation theft

test plan theft
test results disclosure

documentation modiﬁcation

test speciﬁcation modiﬁcation
test equipment settings modiﬁcation

availability

component supply disruption
design deletion

documentation deletion
integration facility unavailability

test equipment unavailability
test results deletion

summed up in Table IV.

B. Ground segment attacks

The ground segment forms a large part of space infras-
tructure. Ground stations (GS on Fig 4) are responsible for
communicating with space systems. Mission control centers
(MCC in Fig 4) initiate and supervise the systems’ operations
and disseminate gathered data or provide other services to
users (e.g., distribution of intelligence data, earth imaging
or feeding in the broadcast signals from stations). The exact
architecture of this segment will vary between systems but
also depending on type of activity performed by the space
systems. An important part of the ground segment is also
the space trafﬁc management or space situational awareness
(SAA on Fig 4) infrastructure, which is comprised of ground
facilities and responsible for tracking both, active and passive,

space systems. Data processing centers archive and distribute
ephemerids and conjecture assessment alerts to satellite system
operators to warn about the risk of collision.

Ground stations are often considered choke points of
the space system infrastructure [75], and are therefore most
obvious and desirable targets of cyberattacks. Eavesdropping,
at ﬁrst, is useful for identifying the satellites a given facility
communicates with. For ground stations this correlation is
straight forward by means of which satellites the station can
see. This is of course provided data is not relayed using
satellites in this window to reach to other satellites.

For mission control centers, if linked with a distributed
network of ground stations, more elaborate analysis is re-
quired. One needs to ﬁnd out at least which ground stations
are in the network. Breaking conﬁdentiality at this stage helps

13

TABLE V
CLASSIFICATION OF THREATS TO SPACE SYSTEMS - GROUND SEGMENTS [75], [131], [132], [133], [49]

Affecting

conﬁdentiality

f
o

s
s
o
l

integrity

availability

launch

ground station

mission control

space trafﬁc management

payload disclosure
tracking

eavesdropping
tracking

eavesdropping
(loss of encryption)

tracking

trajectory modiﬁcation
GNSS meaconing / spooﬁng

masquerading
message replay

modiﬁcation of data
modiﬁcation of commands

man-in-the-middle attack
tracked objects catalogue modiﬁcation

loss of launcher
no separation

denial of service
jamming

denial of service
facility unavailability

deletion of tracked objects catalogue
observing station disablement

adversaries ﬁnd out about physical (at GS i.e. RF signal
encoding, framing) or higher lever (at MCC) communication
protocols. Better prepared attackers can attempt to impersonate
legitimate ground stations to communicate on their own or at
least replay recorded communication. If attackers are able to
masquerade as a mission control center (e.g., by stealing the
center’s authorization keys), they may modify or forge com-
mands to obtain unconstrained access over a satellite system.
As of today, satellites have no means to verify the sanity and
safety consequences of received command streams. Hardest to
mount would be attacks on GS or MCC availability, leading
to the unavailability of the targeted facility. The spectrum of
such attacks is very wide and spans from physical attacks
to cyberattacks tempering with equipment in ground stations
(antenna rotors, radome and rotor heaters, power outage).
Cyberattacks on GS and MSS may deny the service of such
stations and classical electronic warfare like RF jamming, sat-
urating the station’s receivers with locally produced emission,
prevent reception or tracking of the satellite. Using directional
RF beams, adversaries may even interfere with commands
legitimately sent by a ground station.

them. SSA serves (or will serve, as it

Other, often overlooked, components of the ground segment
that are however equally prone to attacks are the space situa-
tional awareness (SSA) facilities (laser and radar stations,
telescopes) and the digital infrastructure (i.e. data centers)
that support
is in
an early stage of development) as space trafﬁc management
backbone, granting active spacecrafts the ability to avoid
collisions with other, active or defunct spacecraft and with
debris. The criticality of such a service for the safety of orbital
operations cannot be underestimated as every failure adds to
the complexity of the task it fulﬁlls.

Another, often overlooked threat vector are attacks on the
post-processing infrastructure of data relayed from satellites.
Mission Control Centers feed data from satellites to processing
facilities or to intermediary data operators, which process,
store and index data before disseminating the post-processed
data to end-users. A multitude of interfaces, network links, and
facilities are managed by third parties, offering a very large
attack surface for targeting the data stream. Attacks include
data theft, disclosure, modiﬁcation, deletion or corruption of
data or metadata (communicated or stored), but also denial of
service attacks on the data storage itself [133].

Trafﬁc information, satellite ephemerides or orbital conjunc-
tion alerts, are distributed to satellite systems operators where
this data is used for orbital corrections and most importantly
collision avoidance maneuvers. Many of those information
exchange systems are still using solutions from the 1970’s,
like Two Line Element’s sets (TLEs [140]). If, as it is often the
case, ephemeris data is sourced from just one organization, this
would give rise to man-in-the-middle type of attacks, ﬁddling
with the TLEs provided to satellite infrastructure operators, in
order to orchestrate unnecessary maneuvers, or worse, colli-
sions. Such an endeavor does not require signiﬁcant processing
power nor sophisticated equipment [141], which turns this
attack into a serious threat for space systems, in particular
for terrorist organizations and less developed countries, in
targets the limited resources satellites are
particular as it
deployed with.

This threat has already been identiﬁed by international
organizations, such as CCSDS, addressing the extremely low
security concerns of TLE messages by designing a modern
standard for orbital information dissemination, better prepared
to withstand conﬁdentiality and integrity attacks [142], [143]).
Similar effects can be achieved by, less sophisticated, unautho-
rized deletion of selected ephemerides or of critical collision
alerts.

The threat vectors of this subsection are summarized in

Table V.

C. Launch segment attacks

The launch segment comprises launch vehicles and tracking,
telemetry and command facilities which oversee the launch
process. Since the whole launch process is quite rapid, it will
be quite difﬁcult for adversaries to launch elaborate attacks
against the launched vehicle.

Attacks aim at revealing the launched payload, such as the
type of satellite and its capabilities, and the orbital injection
parameters, which can later be conﬁrmed with the help of
tracking capabilities in the hands of the adversary. Since the
launch vehicle guidance is autonomous, malicious trajectory
manipulation would have to target on-board computers before
launch, which will be difﬁcult, though not impossible. Also
the time-frame of the launch process makes attempts to attack
the launch trajectory by spooﬁng the GNSS receivers rather
unpractical, in particular because many on-board guidance

14

systems anyway rely on internal, inertial measurement units.
Interesting attack targeting the launch process, would be to
masquerade as a legitimate ground facility in order to issue
self-destruct or course change commands, or to masquerade
as a launch vehicle telemetry unit to report anomalous read-
outs, tricking the launch safety ofﬁcers into executing safety
procedures, which often lead to the destruction of the vehicle.
Perhaps, the simplest attacks on a launch systems are acts of
sabotage leading to loss of the launcher or preventing stages
or payload separation (such events happen as an accidental
human error [144], [145]). In many cases, such attacks require
physical access to the vehicle, but some can also be mounted
as a result of a cyberattacks, manipulating on-board systems
prior to the launch.

The described threat vectors are summarized in Table V.

D. Space segment attacks

As can be seen in Fig. 4, the space segment is comprised
of satellites (which, as described in Sec. II-B, are tradition-
ally divided into a platform and a payload part), some of
which assume the role of relaying units, and of groups of
interconnected satellites (constellations, formations, clusters).
Probes and deep-space exploration equipment would also fall
into the satellite category. The only difference is their the size,
in particular of the antennas required to remain in contact to
ground and the amount of power devoted to transmission for
successfully communicating with earth.

Depending on the exact space system application the sys-
tem’s architecture will differ signiﬁcantly. The range of ar-
chitectural possibilities spans from one satellite, connected to
one ground station, to constellations of satellites, comprised
of hundreds if not thousands of nodes. Constellation nodes
increasingly become capable of two-way communication with
numerous ground-based user terminals, but also, of com-
municating (node-hopping) with other satellites within the
constellation and of relaying information using inter-orbit
communication links. They are supported by an extensive
ground stations network, serving as an information exchange
gateway but also assisting in constellation control and man-
agement purposes [146].

Breaking conﬁdentiality in the course of an attack, regard-
less of whether the attack pertains to platform or payload
data, would be the most common way of taking unauthorized
advantage of a satellite. For example, in the telecommunication
domain, since satellites are used to provide services to vast
areas on Earth by means of relatively small terminals, eaves-
dropping (or even integrity attacks by tampering with mes-
sages) have a really low entry threshold [146]. In fact, many
heavily proliferated systems, have none or very weak, low-
level encryption and authentication mechanisms, like DVB-
S, with signiﬁcant, easily exploitable vulnerabilities [147].
The expectation is to provide security mechanisms at higher
levels of protocols [148], but this requirement will have to
ﬁght it’s way through countless trade-offs as terminal power
consumption, processing capabilities and overall complexity
will be affected by encryption.

On the platform side, a similar process takes place, but
the vision of total loss or platform takeover motivates bet-
ter precautions, at least among the concerned, military and
governmental, as well as international organizations. Again,
a lot of civilian, especially scientiﬁc systems utilize CCSDS
protocols, ensuring standardization (and thereby availability of
equipment) and interoperability between different stakeholders
and mission participants. An overview of how data systems
(usually used in civilian exploration probes or scientiﬁc or gen-
eral purpose satellites) are organized can be found here [149].
For example, the Space Packet Protocol [150] and the Space
Data Link Protocol [151] do not contain any security measures
(such as authentication, conﬁdentiality, or integrity ensuring
mechanisms) unless they are combined with the Space Data
Link Security Protocol [152], which is optional, although
encouraged. Obviously, in light of the examples shown in sec-
tion VI, one must also take into consideration that encryption
and authentication keys can be stolen or that a vulnerability
in the encryption algorithm, or its implementation, is found,
as has happened recently with SSL [153]. In such circum-
stances, adversaries not only become capable of eavesdrop-
ping communication. They may also access the spacecraft’s
internals and, if the adversary is sufﬁciently knowledgeable
(compare VII-A), issue unauthorized commands to take over
the vehicle (e.g., by installing new encryption keys) or to
inject faults. Such activities can result in satellite systems
switching to safe mode (reducing their functionality to what
is essential to survive, sometimes less) or loss of the system
or part of it (e.g., when adversaries points an Earth-observing
telescope to the Sun to permanently damage opto-electronic
components). Either way, availability of the system will be
severely compromised.

Unfortunately, a direct access to on-board systems of a
satellite, is not required to severely compromise availability
of space-based service, as evidenced by numerous examples
of electromagnetic interference attacks, collected in Table III.
RF jamming for, i.e. positioning system availability denial
requires unsophisticated transmitter, interfering at frequency
of interest with legitimate signals, saturating GNSS receiver
inputs and preventing correct reception of position. There
are even works available showing the possibility of selective
GNSS signal denial, providing similar results, but harder to
detect [154].

Jamming the communication satellite uplink channels (used
to be further broadcast) is feasible,
to receive the signal
requires high power transmitters with directional beams, but
it also requires them to be positioned relatively close to
operator’s transmitters (to target the high gain lobe of the
receiving antenna on the satellite). Jamming the downlink
might be easier on technical side (no pointing required, om-
nidirectional antennas and high power source of interference
signal
is sufﬁcient), but requires more jammers to cover
area of interest. Optical observation satellite payloads can be
temporarily disabled by using high energy lasers, in similar
manner as radio links are jammed.

The future of near-space exploitation open up new ways of

15

TABLE VI
CLASSIFICATION OF THREATS TO SPACE SYSTEMS - SPACE AND USER SEGMENTS [75], [131], [132], [133], [49]

Affecting

conﬁdentiality

f
o

s
s
o
l

integrity

availability

space: platform

unauthorized access

space: payload

space: formations

user terminal

unauthorized access

eavesdropping

eavesdropping
tracking??

unauthorized access and commanding
fault induction

unauthorized access and commanding
fault induction

masquerading

data modiﬁcation
beaconing and spooﬁng

jamming
platform failure

jamming
blinding

jamming
denial of service

jamming
service disruption

attacking the systems. The LEO megaconstellations, which are
being effectively deployed at the time of writing this paper,
assume that nodes in the network are heavily interconnected.
Such set-up offers extra opportunities for malicious behavior
including eavesdropping by means of co-orbital vehicles (or
masquerading as a valid network node that can be used for
message relay). More advanced attacker could attempt to forge
or to modify the messages in relay process, or simply drop
them at convenient moments [133]. While such possibility of
inter-satellite misbehavior can’t be precluded, it requires a lot
of technical efforts and such high level of sophistication, so
it is rather be implemented for highest criticality assess (most
likely in GEO, military or governmental communication re-
lays). On the other hand, despite still being on drawing boards,
satellite 5G communication networks are already scrutinized
as opening another venue of system abuse, through vastly
proliferated IoT devices [155].

The vectors of attack presented above (and summed up in
Table VI) require elaborate knowledge about space systems,
their construction and operation. Then, if executed properly,
attacks of the above kind may allow adversaries to take over
control, temporarily or permanently compromise the availabil-
ity of the spacecraft or even turn it into an instrument of their
purpose.

VIII. SCENARIO FOR CYBER-PHYSICAL THREAT TO
SPACE SYSTEMS

Outstanding in the presented threat classiﬁcation, as well
as, in provided body of evidence, for real attacks on space
infrastructure, is the fact, that ground stations along with the
mission control center(s), are critical choke points of the trust
in, and reliance on, satellite systems correct operation.

Indeed, many malicious activities are enabled if attacks can
be conducted through the ground segment. Of course, coun-
termeasures are available, in particular, air-gapping ground
stations and mission control. Such measures can only make
work of attackers a bit more challenging, but, will not prevent
them from setting up their own rogue infrastructure or creating
of targeted malware aimed at ground and space segment,
thrown over the air-gap.

The deep reconnaissance of ground-and spacebased oper-
ational technology, will be the basis of all the attacks. To
mount space system attacks, adversaries have to start by

acquiring knowledge about the hardware/software stack of the
satellite. This knowledge may be obtained from the bill-of-
materials, leaked system speciﬁcations, or theft of FMECA
documentation. Careful analysis of open hardware, open soft-
ware and documentation collected from NewSpace vendors
will help building up the required understanding of the space
systems’ capabilities, its limits and intended way of operation.
Investigation and review of software components will be
useful, especially if open source code is used on-board or on
ground systems of interest. Obtained code can be analyzed for
vulnerabilities or can be used for opening the supply chain
attack vector. At this stage it will be of great importance
to ﬁnd out about safe-modes and contingency procedures of
investigated systems. Attackers shall be interested in looking
the
for ways of inducing the safe-mode,
functionality of a system (in safe mode system ensuring their
own survival will very likely less secure than in nominal
modes) or to conceal the breach.

to either affect

The 2nd tier of cyberphysical attack requires obtaining ac-
cess to a ground station, either by establishing a rogue station
or by gaining an unauthorized access to an existing one. The
former requires perpetrators to have valid cryptographic keys,
full knowledge of the protocol stack and equipment capable
of acquiring and maintaining radio links to the satellite, while
the latter requires them to have access to the ground facility
and remain undetected for long enough to complete their
attack. With the advent of heavily distributed, Ground Station
as a Service ventures this path becomes easier, as the more
stakeholders mean more chances of some party not conforming
to security regulations. On the other hands, similar effect could
be achieved by tinkering with user terminals, especially if
are mass produced for Internet of Things, but many examples
show that industrial grade VSAT can be easily compromised
and provide unauthorized access to services.

Accessing the 3rd tier of cybyr-physical attack on space
system involves tracking the space system and monitoring
it’s behavior. Tracking reveals when the satellite is in the
communication windows with the compromised (or rogue)
ground station and for how long this window will remain
open. Information about the length of this visibility window
is crucial for select short slots (that might not be used by
operators) for test connections or to select the ones that are
sufﬁciently long to ﬁnalize the attack on the space system in

16

Fig. 5. Stages of space cyber-physical system attack

one attempt. Monitoring the system behavior requires reading
out telemetry reports and keeping track of system power input,
battery charge state, current loads, mode of operation, payload
status, reaction wheel speeds, is required to know what type
of attack is suitable and when the attack is most effective to
damage the vehicle(e.g. by draining the batteries by switching
on loads while in eclipse, changing attitude to burn optical
payload by directing it to Sun, attempting to change the orbit
by enabling the propulsion, switching to safe mode, if it is not
safe to do so).

By satisfying the requirements of ﬁrst

three stages,
adversaries will be well suited for conducing their attack
successfully,
the space vehicle and
inﬂicting damage to the system, or by leading it to destroy
itself or others.

taking control over

One inherent weakness in today’s operation of the space
segment is that vehicles in the latter accept commands and
tasks received from ground as fully trusted as long as they
can decode these commands correctly. Sanity checks and more
elaborate communication schemes that would prevent total
system takeover in case a ground facility is compromised are
rarely considered or applied.

Moreover, with the proliferation of standard hard- and
software components, targeted exploits not only affect single
spacecraft, but may bring down whole constellations of satel-
lites. We already see this effect on ground based systems where
homogeneity of automotive equipment bears a similar threat
of adversaries taking ov‘er entire ﬂeets. In all that, satellites

17

must be considered not only as digital assets but as cyber-
physical systems with all involved threats, both to the satellite
itself and to its environment if it gets under control of an
adversary [133], [156].

While attacks on the user segment are "low hanging fruits"
that can be relatively easily reaped beneﬁt from, attacks on
space segment require a more coordinated effort and substan-
tial resources.

Figure 5 shows the subsequent stages on which an attacker
has to focus to mount his/her space cyber-physical system
attack.

IX. WHAT MUST CHANGE?

Certainly, we should not ignore the possibility of future tar-
geted cyber attacks to space vehicles. However, unfortunately
the solutions we apply to protect ICT systems on the ground,
primarily following the arms race between new threats being
revealed and patches trying to ﬁx known vulnerabilities, only
apply to a limited extent to space vehicles (and they have
not be proven very effective in the past). We have to try to
anticipate attacks, assume they will be partially successful and
prepare the system for tolerating such attempts without already
causing damage in order to buy the time for other mechanisms
to return the space vehicle to a state at least as secure as before
the attack.

In light of threats yet to reveal themselves over the multi-
decade lifespan of many satellites, coupled with the virtually
non-existent (as of the moment of writing) physical access and
hardware upgrade capabilities to the satellites, once deployed,

it will be essential to prepare upfront for any form of recovery
that may have to be applied later.

A. Resources

Essentially the above strategy boils down to ensuring that
sufﬁcient resources will be available at all points in time
to throw out adversaries or compensate for occurrence of
complex, sometimes Byzantine faults, and return the system to
security and, most importantly, safety for both, the vehicle and
its environment. With care, these resources will be exclusively
computation resources, needed to improve the software stack
over time, but also to retain the degree of replication that is
already available to ensure safety despite accidental faults.

The critical element of the above sentence is availability,
in particular in the presence of targeted attacks. Loosing
static trust anchors (e.g., because of compromised ciphers)
will grant adversaries full control over the system (assuming
that the telecommand channel has already been taken over
by adversaries). On the other hand, when considering re-
conﬁgurable trust anchors, the same reconﬁguration interface,
required to build long-term security by continuously updating
said trust anchor, presents itself, as an attractive opportunity
for adversaries. This opportunity not only widens the satellites
attack surface, but also gives them the opportunity to install a
permanent foothold.

In the following, we review some of the resources of a space
vehicle to derive guidance for future system architectures and
their assurance processes.

B. Platform and Payload

As provided body of evidence shows, both platform and
payload can be attacked in cyber and physical domains. They
suffer from single point of failure syndromes, which despite
deploying extensively redundant architectures nowadays, are
inevitable (i.e. especially payloads are not expected be fully
redundant). Today,
the only known principle measures to
mitigate single point of failure syndromes are the construction
of components that cannot fail (a futile endeavor in highly
radioactive environments and with systems of not trivial com-
plexity) and the replication and distribution of functionality,
so that not all replicas fail simultaneously. Replication may
and shall happen at many levels: starting from components
constituting the system, to the systems (crafts, vehicles) up
to the system-of-systems (swarms, formations, constellations).
However, replication is necessary but not sufﬁcient to achieve
the goal of unconditional fault mitigation. If the replicas do
not cooperate actively to tolerate the failures or compromises,
the dedicated attacker or unfortunate accidental fault will
overcome the protections and posses the system. Hence, to
further eliminate the residual risk of compromise and,
in
particular, of fault propagation, outcomes of replicated system
shall be applied only after consensus on the outcome, has been
reached. Consensus becomes the last line of defense (e.g.,
after plausibility checks have conﬁrmed the validity of control
signals), especially when interfacing to actuators or while
accepting commands and appending the on-board schedule.

All that being said about replication, in space context, it is
not an absolute remedy for all safety and security concerns,
mainly due to power, mass, bandwidth and accessibility con-
straints that the space infrastructure exhibits. Therefore, we
advocate further research in ways of accommodating consen-
sus based replication, especially taking into account incoming
technology improvements (efﬁcient resource utilization) and
proliferation of distributed space systems.

C. Ciphers

Ciphers securing data, but more importantly command
streams, including the software or gateware updates and ﬁxes
are and will be required, we therefore have to anticipate that
the cipher, its implementation or the used keys need update,
possibly much more frequent than the remaining software
stack itself. Some of these elements can be constructed from
others (like session keys from a secret possessed and used to
authenticate a node, and the latter being derived from a host
key to limit how often this host key is exposed). However, the
root algorithm itself and the key used to receive it in case all
other levels are compromised, remain critical. To also replace
this root of trust, sufﬁcient resources must be provided to host
future replacements of the root encryption algorithm, including
sufﬁcient memory to hold the new root key. Then the root key
can be used to decrypt the received replacement, before the
vulnerability can be exploited, if necessary proactively, in case
the security of the root algorithm is at risk.

From this point onward, patches can be validated and
installed, and the subsequent command sequence authenticated
and applied.

D. Communication

Communication links, both ground and space ends, are crit-
ical points of entry that deserve special attention. First, those
subsystems are complex, thus inherently contain exploitable
vulnerabilities and are exposed directly to adversaries, in such
way we can’t prevent their attempts to tinker with defended
infrastructure.

In our opinion, the only viable solution can be found in
replication mechanism extending into time and space domains.
In time domain, it is outpacing adversaries in compromising
the critical communication links needed to patch subsystems
themselves if this enable bypassing the authentication and au-
thorization mechanisms.. This implies frequent resets of these
most critical communication systems, possibly in combination
with replication to circle through just repaired entities, which
the adversary would need to compromise again before she can
continue with its attack. In space domain, replication means
having mutually independent commanding paths (direct but
also relayed through other networks and nodes), commanding
centers (coordinating, among themselves, on the ground, the
commanding actions and schedules) and on-board decoders
capable of sharing collected inputs form mission controls
and exercising the consensus algorithms on them. While such
approach would improve the space infrastructure safety and

18

security enormously, as of the moment of writing, it has not
been implemented.

but to focus on Byzantine fault models instead and building
the systems with Byzantine fault tolerance.

E. Processes and Assurance

Of course, for all elements where speed is of essence, in par-
ticular ﬁxing vulnerabilities, existing validation and assurance
processes are simply too slow to outpace adversaries in their
doing. Pre-assured components may be a solution, but absolute
conﬁdentiality needs to be applied to ensure knowledge on
how to attack them is not leaked to the adversary. A possibly
better option would be to restrain components to the roles
they have to play and live with the residual risk of patches
introducing new vulnerabilities, which adversaries would still
need to identify before they can be exploited. Then, with
enough time outside the critical moments of the satellite
being under attack, patches can be hardened to improve their
correctness.

Restraining requires limiting access to resources to only
those essential for the purpose of a component and may, as
described for actuators as well beneﬁt from replication and
voted access to all conﬁguration possibilities.

X. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have surveyed existing and reported attacks
to develop a comprehensive survey of threats space systems
are exposed to. Unlike previous studies, the attacks we are
most worried about include cyber attacks possibly mounted
by small groups of hackers with relatively simple equipment
or leveraging the compromised equipment of space-faring
nations to take control over space vehicles with possibly
severe consequences on the defense capabilities, but more
importantly the economy of developed countries. Adversaries
compromising GNSS may impact navigation, logistics and
other businesses that depend on this service, and with satellite
control in the hands of such groups, they may even turn the
captured vehicle into a cyber-kinetic weapon, targeting other
space craft or ultimately triggering Kessler’s syndrome, which
would render space inaccessible to developed nations for the
upcoming decades until debris capture technology becomes
available.

In our opinion, such asymmetric threats are best countered
by leveraging on the already widely deployed accidental fault
tolerance mechanisms to prepare satellites to also tolerate
targeted attacks to buy the time required to rejuvenate them
to a state at
least as secure as initially. Clearly, such an
effort requires signiﬁcant changes, including of the assurance
processed deployed for “Old Space”, but more importantly
also for “New Space” equipment, but also increased situational
awareness and the will and resources (partially in space) to
achieve this tolerance.

We can predict fault and mitigate risks accordingly, but
some faults, even if obeying statistics might be Byzantine
for which the systems might not be ready. Byzantine fault
is accidental equivalent of malicious activities. It might be
interesting not to focus on safety only, or on security only,

In context of this paper it is interesting exercise to read
about vision of futuristic counterspace activities as written by
Zielinski et al. in the 90’s [157] for 20th century. What’s
striking during this lecture is that many of the predictions
became reality much sooner than anticipated (extreme minia-
turization, satellite cloaking, ground based high energy lasers,
proximity operations and satellite bodyguards, precise optical
and radar tracking) later became a reality with the rest of
the concepts quickly catching up. We believe, the same will
happen to cyber-physical warfare in space - once implausible,
unlikely,
in near future will
become everyday reality of space exploration and exploitation.

too expensive, not practical,

REFERENCES

[1] “The 2019 global

space economy at a glance,” Available at

https://brycetech.com/reports/report-documents/Bryce_2019_Global_
Space_Economy.png (2020/10/13).

[2] “Gross domestic product data ﬁles,” Available at https://data.
worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?year_high_desc=true
(2021/04/21).

[3] “List of countries by GDP (nominal),” Available at https://en.wikipedia.

org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_GDP_(nominal) (2021/04/21).
satellites

[4] R. Hollingham, “What would happen if all

stopped
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/

working?”
20130609-the-day-without-satellites (2021/04/21).

Available

at

[5] J. Fritz, “Satellite hacking: A guide for the perplexed,” in Culture
Mandala: Bulletin of the Centre for East-West Cultural and Eco-nomic
Studies, vol. 10, 2013.

[6] “Space scurity index,” Available at https://www.spacesecurityindex.org

(2020/10/14), Tech. Rep., 2019.

frontier,”

[7] M. Horovitz, M. Randles, and R. Levi, “Space cybersecurity’s
https://static1.squarespace.com/

ﬁnal
static/56d0212027d4bded627db544/t/56deb84c3c44d8eb68c68083/
1457436755011/LCS+June+Report-web.pdf
UK, Tech. Rep., Jun 2015.

(2020/20/14), London,

Available

at

[8] R. Reesman and J. R. Wilson, “The physics of

space war:
How orbital dynamics constrain space-to-space engagements,” The
Aerospace Corporation, Center for Space Policy and Strategy, Tech.
Rep., Oct 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://aerospace.org/paper/
physics-space-war-how-orbital-dynamics-constrain-space-space-engagements

[9] D. A. Vallado, Fundamentals of astrodynamics and applications,

4th ed. Hawthorne: Microcosm Press, 2013.

[10] C. A. C. A. Kluever, Space ﬂight dynamics, ser. Aerospace series

(Chichester, England), 2018.

InTechOpen, 2018.

[11] G. Dekoulis, Space Flight.
[12] M. Wall, “X-37B: The Air Force’s mysterious space plane,” Available
at https://www.space.com/25275-x37b-space-plane.html (2021/02/15).
[13] S. Clark, “China tests experimental reusable spacecraft shrouded
at https://spaceﬂightnow.com/2020/09/08/

in mystery,” Available
china-completes-test-ﬂight-of-experimental-reusable-spacecraft/
(2021/02/15).

[14] W. J. Larson and J. R. Wertz, Space mission analysis and design, ser.
Space technology library 1666421. Torrance: Microcosm, 1992.
[15] J. R. Wertz, D. F. Everett, and J. J. Puschell, Space mission engineering
: the new SMAD, ser. Space technology library v. 28. Hawthorne,
CA: Microcosm Press Sold and distributed worldwide by Microcosm
Astronautics Books, 2011.

[16] “International Space Station,” Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/

wiki/International_Space_Station (2021/09/01).

[17] “Voyager 1,” Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voyager_1

(2021/09/01).

[18] “Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT),” Available at https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Very-small-aperture_terminal (2021/09/01).
[19] “Satellite Navigation Device,” Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/

wiki/Satellite_navigation_device (2021/09/01).

[20] “Automatic Identiﬁcation System (AIS),” Available at https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_identiﬁcation_system (2021/09/01).

19

[21] “Automatic Dependent Surveillance–Broadcast (ADS-B),” Available
at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_Dependent_Surveillance%
E2%80%93Broadcast (2021/09/01).

[22] “Tiangong Space Station,” Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/

Tiangong_space_station (2021/09/01).

[23] “Aremis program,” Available at https://www.nasa.gov/artemisprogram

(2021/09/01).

[24] “Apollo program,” Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apollo_

program (2021/09/01).

[25] “European Cooperation for Space Standardization,” Available at http:

us-national-security-policy-toward-space-debate-should-end-wont/
(2020/11/04).
[49] T. Harrison, K.

“Space
J. Moye,
threat assessment 2021,” Available at https://www.csis.org/analysis/
space-threat-assessment-2021 (2020/04/28), Washington D.C., USA,
Tech. Rep., Apr 2021.

and M. Young,

Johnson,

[50] R.

P.

Rajagopalan,
space,”

and
in
cyber warfare
outer
https://unidir.org/publication/
at
electronic-and-cyber-warfare-outer-space (2020/10/13), Tech. Rep.,
May 2019.

“Electronic

Available

//ecss.nl/standards/active-standards/ (2021/09/02).

[51] B.

[26] “NASA Technical Standards System,” Available at https://standards.

nasa.gov/nasa-technical-standards (2021/09/02).

[27] “Let’s talk about NewSpace,” Available at https://blog.satsearch.co/

2019-02-26-lets-talk-about-newspace (2021/09/02).

[28] “Tailored ECSS engineering standards for in-orbit demonstration cube-
sat projects,” Available at https://copernicus-masters.com/wp-content/
uploads/2017/03/IOD_CubeSat_ECSS_Eng_Tailoring_Iss1_Rev3.pdf
(2021/09/02).

[29] “Cubesat 101: Basic concepts and processes for ﬁrst-time cubesat de-
velopers,” Available at https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/atoms/
ﬁles/nasa_csli_cubesat_101_508.pdf (2021/09/02).
at

2021,” Available

https://brycetech.

[30] “Start-up

report

space

com/reports/report-documents/Bryce_Start_Up_Space_2021.pdf
(2021/09/02).

[31] “Smallsats by the numbers, 2020,” Available at https://brycetech.com/
reports/report-documents/Bryce_Smallsats_2020.pdf (2020/10/27).
2021,” Available
industry

[32] “State

satellite

report,

the

of

at

https://brycetech.com/reports/report-documents/SIA_SSIR_2021.pdf
(2021/09/02).

[33] D. J. Kessler and B. G. Cour-Palais, “Collision frequency of artiﬁcial
satellites: The creation of a debris belt,” Journal of Geophysical
Research: Space Physics, vol. 83, no. A6, pp. 2637–2646, 1978.
[Online]. Available: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1029/JA083iA06p02637

[34] S. A. Jacklin, “Small-satellite mission failure rates,” Available at

https://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20190002705.pdf
(2020/10/07), Moffett Field, CA, Tech. Rep., Mar 2019.

[35] M. Williams,

at
“About
2020-10-starlink-satellites.html (2021/09/02).

3Available

https://phys.org/news/

[36] “Megaconstellation,” Available

at

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/

Satellite_internet_constellation (2021/09/02).

[37] “O3b mpower,” Available
mPOWER (2021/09/02).

at

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/O3b_

[38] “UCS satellite database,” Available

at https://www.ucsusa.org/

resources/satellite-database (2021/09/03), Tech. Rep., May 2021.
[39] S. Lemmens and F. Letizia, “ESA’s annual space environment re-
port,” Available at https://www.sdo.esoc.esa.int/environment_report/
Space_Environment_Report_latest.pdf (2021/09/03), Tech. Rep., May
2021.
[40] “2007

at
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2007_Chinese_anti-satellite_missile_test
(2021/09/03).

anti-satellite missile

Available

chinese

test,”

and

Porras,

Silverstein, D.

“Alternative
arms
space,” Available at https://unidir.org/publication/

approaches
race in outer
alternative-approaches-and-indicators-prevention-arms-race-outer-space
(2020/10/13), Tech. Rep., May 2020.

J.
prevention

indicators

and
the

Borrie,

for

an

of

[52] B. Weeden and V. Samson, “Global counterspace capabilities, an
open source assessment,” Available at https://swfound.org/media/
207141/swf_global_counterspace_capabilities_2021.pdf (2021/04/01),
Tech. Rep., Apr 2021.

[53] A.

J. Tellis,

Available
india-s-asat-test-incomplete-success-pub-78884 (2021/04/21), 2019.

“India’s ASAT test: An
at

success,”
https://carnegieendowment.org/2019/04/15/

incomplete

[54] P. J. Blount and J. I. Gabrynowicz, “USA-193: Selected document,”
Journal of Space Law, A Supplement, vol. 1, no. 1,
[Online]. Available: https://airandspacelaw.olemiss.edu/pdfs/

The
2009.
usa193-selected-documents.pdf

[55] M. C. Mineiro, “FY-1C and USA-193 ASAT intercepts: an assessment
of legal obligations under article IX of the outer space treaty.” Journal
of Space Law, vol. 34, no. 2, p. 356, 2008.

[56] K. Mizokami, “Is china’s space junk collector a weapon in disguise?”
https://www.popularmechanics.com/military/weapons/

Available
a21627/china-space-junk-collector-potential-weapon/ (2021/04/20).

at

seem so
https://www.space.com/

[57] M. Wall, “’very abnormal’

russian satellite doesn’t

at

experts

threatening,
say,” Available
41511-weird-russian-satellite-not-so-abnormal.html (2021/04/20).
[58] L. Grush, “Russia just tested satellite-destroying tech in space, US
Space Command claims,” Available at https://www.theverge.com/
2020/7/23/21335506/russia-anti-satellite-weapon-test-kosmos-2543
(2021/04/20).
CLark,

[59] C.

satellite

“China

wan-
https://breakingdefense.com/2018/04/

friendly

SJ-17,

derer?”
at
china-satellite-sj-17-friendly-wanderer/ (2021/04/20).

Available

[60] B. Weeden, “China’s BX-1 microsatellite: a litmus test for space
weaponization,” Available at https://thespacereview.com/article/1235/1
(2021/04/20).

[61] “Starﬁsh prime,” Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Starﬁsh_

Prime (2021/04/20).

[62] B. Hendrickx, “Peresvet: a russian mobile laser system to dazzle enemy
satellites,” Available at https://www.thespacereview.com/article/3967/1
(2021/04/20).

[63] D. A. Day, “Hubble in the crosshairs,” Available at https://www.

thespacereview.com/article/1865/1 (2021/04/20).

[64] “Sokol Eshelon,” Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sokol_

[41] “Bulk catalog for Low Earth Orbit,” Available at https://www.

Eshelon (2021/04/20).

space-track.org (2021/09/03).

[42] J. E. Oberg, Space Power Theory, 1st ed. US Air Force Academy,

1999.

[43] “Marine Trafﬁc - ship tracking and maritime intelligence,” Available

at https://www.marinetrafﬁc.com (2021/09/27).

[44] “Flight Radar - aircraft tracking,” Available at https://ﬂightradar24.com/

(2021/09/27).

[45] R. G. Burke, “China satellite SJ-17, friendly wanderer?” Available
https://www.offshore-mag.com/business-briefs/article/16759406/

at
satellite-communications-how-the-petroleum-industry-is-using-satellite-services
(2021/09/27).
[46] “Autonomous

systems

haulage

for mining

industry: Leading
at https://www.mining-technology.com/

manufacturers,” Available
mining-safety/autonomous-haulage-systems/ (2021/09/27).

[47] J.-M. Stoullig, “Rumsfeld commission warns against "space pearl har-
bor",” Available at https://www.spacedaily.com/news/bmdo-01b.html
(2021/04/22).

[48] B. Spring, “U.S. national security policy toward space: The debate
that should end but won’t,” Available at https://spacenews.com/

20

“Russian

[65] M. Gruss,
another
craft,” Available
russian-luch-satellite-relocates-next-to-another-intelsat-craft/
(2020/10/08).

relocates — next

to
https://spacenews.com/

satellite

intelsat

luch

at

at

[67] P.

[66] J. Leicester, S. Corbet, and A. Mehta, “’Espionage’: French
in space,”
https://www.defensenews.com/space/2018/09/07/

defense head charges Russia of dangerous games
Available
espionage-french-defense-head-charges-russia-of-dangerous-games-in-space/
(2020/10/08).
Tran,

governments
says

“Foreign
in
at

French
Avail-
https://www.defensenews.com/space/2018/01/26/

satellites
able
foreign-governments-are-approaching-french-satellites-in-orbit-says-space-commander/
(2020/10/14).
[68] T. Harrison, K.

approaching
commander,”

against
from
the
counterspace weapons,” Available at https://www.csis.org/analysis/
defense-against-dark-arts-space-protecting-space-systems-counterspace-weapons
(2021/04/02), Washington D.C., USA, Tech. Rep., Feb 2021.

Johnson,
in

and M. Young,

Protecting

“Defense

systems

space:

space

space

orbit,

dark

arts

are

[69] “Computer Security Resource Center Glossary: Cyber Threat,” Avail-
able at https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/Cyber_Threat (2021/03/25).
probability,” Available
https://www.professormesser.com/security-plus/sy0-401/

at
vulnerabilities-threat-vectors-and-probability/ (2021/03/10).

[70] “Vulnerabilities,

vectors,

threat

and

[71] J. D. Singer, “Threat-perception and the armament-tension dilemma,”
The Journal of Conﬂict RSesolution, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 90–105, 1958.
[72] A. Avizienis, J.-C. Laprie, B. Randell, and C. Landwehr, “Basic
concepts and taxonomy of dependable and secure computing,” IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
11–33, 2004.

[73] T. Wrightson, Advanced Persistent Threat Hacking, 1st ed. McGraw-

Hill, 2014.

[74] “Science
Available
cybersecurity-insider-threat (2021/03/25).

Technology,

and

Threat,”
https://www.dhs.gov/science-and-technology/

Cybersecurity,

Insider

at

[75] “Security threats against space missions,” The Consultative Committee
for Space Data Systems, Informational Report CCSDS-350-1-G-3,
Apr 2020. [Online]. Available: https://ccsds.org

[76] K. Epstein and B. Elgin, “Network security breaches plague nasa,”

November 2008.

[77] T. J. Talleur, “Russian domain attacks against nasa network systems,”
Classiﬁed as "For Ofﬁcial Use Only—No Foreign Dissemination",
Tech. Rep., January 1999.

[78] L. Grossmann, “Did hackers hijack a british military satellite?” Avail-
able at http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,20673,00.
html (2020/10/07).

[79] “Satellite hack raises security questions,” Available at https://www.cnet.
com/news/satellite-hack-raises-security-questions/ (2020/10/07).
[80] L. Grau, “Gps signals jammed during tank trials,” Military Review,

vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 12–16, 2001.

[81] P. K. Martin, “Letter to senators answering questions on status of
nasa cybersecurity incidents investigations,” Available at https://
oig.nasa.gov/audits/reports/FY12/Export_Control_Letter(1-25-12).pdf
(2020/10/14).

[82] M. Corneau, “Unprecedented. space-based information in operation

iraqi freedom,” Space Army Journal, pp. 48–63, 2003.

[83] A.

Boyle

and

J.

Oberg,
policy,” Available

“Security
at

conscious
NASA
http://www.nbcnews.

e-mail

tightens
com/id/16095705/ns/technology_and_science-security/t/
security-conscious-nasa-tightens-e-mail-policy/ (2020/10/15).

NASA

charged

for
at

Available

breaching

comput-
[84] “Hacker
ers,”
https://www.newscientist.com/article/
dn10723-hacker-charged-for-breaching-nasa-computers/ (2020/10/15).
[85] U. S.-C. Economic and S. R. Commission, “2011 annual report to
congress, chapter 2, section 3: The implications of china’s civil and
military space activities,” Available at https://www.uscc.gov/sites/
default/ﬁles/annual_reports/annual_report_full_11.pdf
(2020/10/07),
Tech. Rep., Nov 2011.

[86] ——, “2015 annual report to congress, chapter 2, section 2: China’s
space and counterspace programs,” Available at https://www.uscc.gov/
annual-report/2015-annual-report-congress (2020/10/07), Tech. Rep.,
Mar 2015.

[87] “Computer viruses make it to orbit,” Available at http://news.bbc.co.

uk/2/hi/technology/7583805.stm (2020/10/15).

[88] M. Moore, “Computer virus infects international space station laptops,”
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/3358263/

Available
Computer-virus-infects-International-Space-Station-laptops.html
(2020/10/15).

at

[89] P. K. Martin, “Inadequate security practices expose key NASA network
to cyber attack,” Available at https://oig.nasa.gov/audits/reports/FY11/
IG-11-017.pdf (2020/10/15).

[90] P. Horrocks, “Stop the blocking now,” Available at https://www.
bbc.co.uk/blogs/theeditors/2009/06/stop_the_blocking_now.html
(2020/10/15).

[91] K. Mizokami, “North korea is

signals,” Avail-
able at https://www.popularmechanics.com/military/weapons/a20289/
north-korea-jamming-gps-signals/ (2020/10/15).

jamming gps

[92] “NASA cybersecurity: An examination of the agency’s information
https://oig.nasa.gov/docs/FINAL_written_

security,” Available
statement_for_%20IT_%20hearing_February_26_edit_v2.pdf
(2020/10/07), Tech. Rep., Feb 2012.

at

[93] J. Finkle, I. Klotz, J. Menn, and J. Wolf, “NASA says was hacked
13 times last year,” Available at https://www.reuters.com/article/
us-nasa-cyberattack-idUSTRE8211G320120303 (2020/10/07).

[94] B.

Goertz,

“Deutsche

jammed,”

sions
Available
deutsche-welle-satellite-transmissions-jammed/a-14843697
(2020/10/15).

welle
at

satellite

transmis-
https://www.dw.com/en/

[95] R. C. Samples, “The state of NASA’s cybersecurity,” Available
http://www.spacesafetymagazine.com/media-entertainment/

at
state-nasas-cybersecurity/ (2020/10/15).

[96] T.

Colakov,

“JAXA computer

virus

adds

security concerns

cyber
spacesafetymagazine.com/aerospace-engineering/cyber-security/
jaxa-computer-virus-adds-growing-cyber-security-concerns-space/
(2020/10/15).

in space,” Available

to

growing
at http://www.

[97] E. Protalinski,
systems

“NASA, ESA conﬁrm hacks; The Unknowns
https://www.zdnet.com/
at
patched,” Available

says
article/nasa-esa-conﬁrm-hacks-the-unknowns-says-systems-patched/
(2020/10/15).

[98] M. Emanuelli, “Epsilon rocket data stolen by hackers,” Avail-
able at http://www.spacesafetymagazine.com/aerospace-engineering/
cyber-security/epsilon-rocket-data-stolen-hackers/ (2020/10/15).

“Hacker

Ahrens,
luft-

[99] K.
für
raumfahrt
//www.ingenieur.de/technik/wirtschaft/verbraucherschutz/
hacker-greifen-deutsches-zentrum-fuer-luft-raumfahrt-an/
(2020/10/15).

greifen
an,”

deutsches

Available

und

zentrum
https:

at

[100] P. B.

de Selding,

“Eutelsat
incidents
Available
40818eutelsat-blames-ethiopia-as-jamming-incidents-triple/
(2020/10/15).

blames Ethiopia

triple,”

jamming
as
https://spacenews.com/

at

longstanding deﬁciencies

[101] “Successful cyber attack highlights

in
NOAA’s IT security program,” Available at https://www.oig.doc.gov/
OIGPublications/OIG-16-043-A.pdf (2020/10/08), Tech. Rep., Aug
2016.
“NOAA admits
[102] M. Gruss,
Available
data
42561noaa-admits-to-cyberattack-on-satellite-data-networks/
(2020/10/08).

satellite
on
https://spacenews.com/

cyberattack

networks,”

to

at

“Russian

[103] K. Zetter,
steal
turla-russian-espionage-gang-hijacks-satellite-connections-to-steal-data/
(2020/10/12).

satellite
to
https://www.wired.com/2015/09/

gang
at

Available

hijacks

data,”

links

spy

[104] M. Lennon, “Russian-speaking turla attackers hijacking satellite
https://www.securityweek.com/

at

links,”

Available

internet
russian-speaking-turla-attackers-hijacking-satellite-internet-links
(2020/10/12).
Tanase,
in

trol
satellite-turla-apt-command-and-control-in-the-sky/72081/
(2020/10/12).

turla:
Available

“Satellite
sky,”

command

Apt

the

at

con-
and
https://securelist.com/

[105] S.

[106] G. Corera, “How france’s TV5 was almost destroyed by ’russian hack-
ers’,” Available at https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-37590375
(2020/10/12).
[107] D. Winder,

“Conﬁrmed: NASA has been hacked,” Available
https://www.forbes.com/sites/daveywinder/2019/06/20/

at
conﬁrmed-nasa-has-been-hacked/ (2020/10/07).

[108] “Cybersecurity management

Jet Propul-
sion Laboratory,” Available at https://oig.nasa.gov/docs/IG-19-022.pdf
(2020/10/07), Ofﬁce of Inspector General, Tech. Rep., Jun 2019.

and oversight

the

at

[109] M. K. Mithun,

“ISRO computer
researchers,”
say

had malware,

hacked,

been
at
//www.newindianexpress.com/cities/hyderabad/2018/mar/12/
isro-computer-had-malware-couldve-been-hacked-say-researchers-1785758.
html (2020/10/10).

Available

could’ve
https:

[110] N. Villeneuve

“Xtremerat: Nuisance or
threat?” Available at https://www.ﬁreeye.com/blog/threat-research/
2014/02/xtremerat-nuisance-or-threat.html (2020/10/12).

and J. T. Bennett,

[111] “Oninformation security incident of march 10, 2018,” Avail-
able at https://www.isro.gov.in/sites/default/ﬁles/on-is-incident-istrac.
pdf (2020/10/10).

Starks,
and

“Chinese

hackers

satel-
ﬁrms,
Avail-
https://www.politico.com/story/2018/06/19/

targeting
ﬁnd,”

researchers

defense
at

[112] T.
lite
able

21

chinese-hackers-targeted-satellite-and-defense-ﬁrms-researchers-ﬁnd-1442591
(2020/10/12).

[113] “China-based hacking campaign is said to have breached satellite,
defense companies,” Available at https://www.cnbc.com/2018/06/19/
china-based-hacking-breached-satellite-defense-companies-symantec.
html (2020/10/12).
Harris,
A

gold:
mystery
https://www.technologyreview.com/2019/11/15/131940/
ghost-ships-crop-circles-and-soft-gold-a-gps-mystery-in-shanghai/
(2020/10/12).

and
Available

shanghai,”

[114] M.

soft
at

circles,

“Ghost

ships,

GPS

crop

in

s
attacks

[115] “Tesla model
spooﬁng
road,
at
threat-of-gps-spooﬁng-for-autonomous-cars-seen-as-overblown
(2020/10/12).

to GPS
prove
car
off
navigation
Available
cyber
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-06-19/

and model
as
from

vulnerable
steers
shows,”

autopilot
regulus

research

3

in wide

“Mysterious GPS signals
off

[116] G. Spocchia,
sailing
at
gps-signals-phantom-ships-san-francisco-a9556966.html
(2020/10/12).

ships
ghost
coast,” Available
francisco
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/

circles

reveal

san

[117] H. Osborne, “Phantom boats drawing ’GPS crop circles’ keep appear-
ing off the coast of san francisco,” Available at https://www.newsweek.
com/ships-gps-crop-circles-san-francisco-1509012 (2020/10/12).
[118] D. M. Harland and R. D. Lorenz, Space Systems Failures Disasters
and Rescues of Satellites, Rockets and Space Probes. Springer, 2005.
at
https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2008/12/cyberattacks_ag.html
(2020/10/07).

“Cyberattacks

Available

Schneier,

[119] B.

against

nasa,”

[120] P.

[121] K.

of

“The

failures

and
at

trend
the

alarming
in

Rosenzweig,
breaches

cybersecu-
government,”
https://www.heritage.org/defense/report/

rity
Available
the-alarming-trend-cybersecurity-breaches-and-failures-the-us-government
(2020/10/07), May 2012.
Epstein,

“Network
at
nasa,”
network-security-breaches-plague-nasa/ (2020/10/07).

plague
http://www.kepstein.com/2008/11/20/

Available

breaches

security

u.s.

[122] D. Campbell, “Cyber sillies,” Available at https://www.theguardian.

com/uk/1999/may/20/military.defence (2020/10/07).

[123] “Did hackers hijack a british military satellite?” Available at http://

news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/288965.stm (2020/10/07).

[124] D. Albright, P. Brannan, and C. Walrond, “Did Stuxnet

take
out 1,000 centrifuges at
the Natanz Enrichment Plant?” Available
at https://isis-online.org/uploads/isis-reports/documents/stuxnet_FEP_
22Dec2010.pdf (2021/08/21), Tech. Rep., Dec 2010.

[125] G. Buesnel, J. Pottle, M. Holbrow, and P. Crampton, “Make it real.”

“GPS

GPS World, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 24 – 29, 2016.
beamforming with

[126] W. Myrick,
SDRs,”
presentations/gps_beamforming_with_low_cost_rtl_sdrs/
Wil-Myrick-GPS-Beamforming-with-Low-Cost-RTL-SDRs.pdf
(2020/10/14).

RTL-
https://www.gnuradio.org/grcon/grcon17/

low cost

Available

at

[127] ——, “GPS beamforming with low cost RTL-SDRs,” Available at https:

//github.com/B44D3R/SDR-GPS-SPOOF (2020/10/14).

[128] D. Hambling, “Ships fooled in GPS spooﬁng attack suggest russian
https://www.newscientist.com/article/

cyberweapon,” Available
2143499-ships-fooled-in-gps-spooﬁng-attack-suggest-russian-cyberweapon
(2020/10/14).

at

[129] A. Ramm and V. Zykov, “Ministry of defense will jam GPS from cell

towers,” Available at https://iz.ru/news/628766 (2020/10/13).

[130] B. Hendrickx, “Ekipazh: Russia’s top-secret nuclear-powered satellite,”

Available at https://thespacereview.com/article/3809/1 (2020/10/14).

[131] B. Bailey, R.

J. Speelman, P. Doshi, N. C. Cohen,

and
in the cyber domain,”
at https://aerospace.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2019-11/Bailey_
(2021/03/26), Tech. Rep., Nov

W. A. Wheeler, “Defending spacecraft
Available
DefendingSpacecraft_11052019.pdf
2019.

[132] B. Bailey, “Establishing space cybersecurity policy, standards, and risk
management practices,” Available at https://aerospace.org/sites/default/
ﬁles/2020-10/Bailey%20SPD5_20201010%20V2_formatted.pdf
(2021/04/28), Tech. Rep., Oct 2020.

[133] J. Oakley, Cybersecurity for Space: Protecting the Final Frontier,

1st ed., 2020.

22

[134] S. Skorobogatov, “Breakthrough silicon scanning discovers backdoor
in military chip,” in Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems
Workshop (CHES), 09 2012.

[135] N. Aeronautics and Administration, “NASA open source projects
repository: core Flight System,” Available at https://code.nasa.gov/?q=
core%20ﬂight (2021/09/28).

[136] ——, “core Flight System,” Available at https://cfs.gsfc.nasa.gov/

(2021/09/28).

[137] Amazon Web Services, “FreeRTOS,” Available at https://freertos.org/

(2021/09/28).

[138] “LibreCUBE,” Available at https://librecube.org/ (2021/09/28).
[139] “Libre Space Foundation projects,” Available at https://libre.space/

projects/ (2021/09/28).

[140] “Two-line element set,” Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/

Two-line_element_set (2021/04/24).

[141] J. Pavur and I. Martinovic, “The Cyber-ASAT: On the impact of cyber
weapons in outer space,” in 2019 11th International Conference on
Cyber Conﬂict (CyCon), vol. 900, 2019, pp. 1–18.

[142] “Orbit data messages,” The Consultative Committee for Space Data
Systems, Recommended Standard CCSDS 502.0-B-2, Nov 2009.
[Online]. Available: https://ccsds.org

to

[143] “Conjunction data messages,” The Consultative Committee for Space
Data Systems, Recommended Standard CCSDS 508.0-B-1, Jun 2013.
[Online]. Available: https://ccsds.org
“Roscosmos makes

Proton
[144] M. Azriel,
at
due
spacesafetymagazine.com/space-disasters/rocket-failure/
roscosmos-ofﬁcial-proton-downed-due-upside-sensors/ (2021/09/28).
[145] S. Clark, “Arianespace traces cause of vega launch failure to
at https://spaceﬂightnow.com/2020/11/

‘human error’,” Available
17/arianespace-traces-cause-of-vega-launch-failure-to-human-error/
(2021/09/28).

ofﬁcial:
it
sensors,” Available

downed
http://www.

upside

down

[146] G. Maral, M. Bousquet, and Z. Sun, Satellite communications systems
: systems, techniques and technology, sixth edition.. ed., 2020.
[147] J. Pavur, D. Moser, V. Lenders, and I. Martinovic, “Secrets in the sky:
On privacy and infrastructure security in DVB-S satellite broadband,”
in Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Security and Privacy in
Wireless and Mobile Networks, ser. WiSec ’19. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, p. 277–284. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3317549.3323418

[148] “CCSDS space link protocols over ETSI DVB-S2 standard,” The
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems, Recommended
Standard CCSDS 131.3-B-1, Mar 2013. [Online]. Available: https:
//ccsds.org

[149] “Security architecture for space data systems,” The Consultative
Committee for Space Data Systems, Recommended Practice CCSDS
351.0-M-1, Nov 2012. [Online]. Available: https://ccsds.org

[150] “Uniﬁed space data link protocol,” The Consultative Committee for
Space Data Systems, Recommended Standard CCSDS 732.1-B-1, Oct
2018. [Online]. Available: https://ccsds.org

[151] “Space packet protocol,” The Consultative Committee for Space
Data Systems, Recommended Standard CCSDS 133.0-B-2, Jun 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://ccsds.org

[152] “Space data link security protocol,” The Consultative Committee for
Space Data Systems, Recommended Standard CCSDS 355.0-B-1,
Sept 2015. [Online]. Available: https://ccsds.org

[153] A. Satapathy and J. Livingston, “A comprehensive survey on SSL/
TLS and their vulnerabilities,” International Journal of Computer
Applications, vol. 153, pp. 31–38, 11 2016.

[155] C. Gibson,

[154] G. Caparra, S. Ceccato, F. Formaggio, N. Laurenti, and S. Tomasin,
“Low power selective denial of service attacks against gnss,” 09 2018.
and satellite
age of 5g,”
security in the
https://www.trendmicro.com/en_us/research/18/f/

Available
attack-vectors-in-orbit-need-for-satellite-security-in-5g-iot.html
(2020/10/12).

“Iot
at

[156] Y. Afek, M. Merritt, and G. Taubenfeld, “Benign failure models for
shared memory,” in International Workshop on Distributed Algorithms.
Springer, 1993, pp. 69–83.

[157] R. H. Zielinski, I. Worley, Robert M, D. S. Black, S. A. Henderson,
frontier:
[Online].

and D. C.
Counterspace operations
Available: http://www.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA392588

tek - exploiting the ﬁnal
in 2025,” Tech. Rep., 1996.

Johnson, “Star

