An Energy Management System Approach for
Power System Cyber-Physical Resilience

Katherine R. Davis, Senior Member, IEEE

1

1
2
0
2

t
c
O
7

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
1
5
4
3
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Power systems are large scale cyber-physical critical
infrastructure that form the basis of modern society. The reliabil-
ity and resilience of the grid is dependent on the correct function-
ing of related subsystems, including computing, communications,
and control. The integration is widespread and has a profound
impact on the operation, reliability, and efﬁciency of the grid.
Technologies comprising these infrastructure can expose new
sources of threats. Mapping these threats to their grid resilience
impacts to stop them early requires a timely and detailed view of
the entire cyber-physical system. Grid resilience must therefore
be seen and addressed as a cyber-physical systems problem.
This short position paper presents several key preliminaries,
supported with evidence from experience,
to enable cyber-
physical situational awareness and intrusion response through
a cyber-physical energy management system.

I. INTRODUCTION

Power system infrastructures have long been rigorously
studied and analyzed. Historically, however, their cyber sys-
the interplay between cyber and physical, and the
tems,
potential impacts of loss of trustworthiness at any point, have
not been given the same level of attention. The current need
is that cyber-physical power systems must be able to “ride
through” extreme events, including human-perpetrated events,
while maintaining their critical societal functions. Part of the
challenge is these events fall outside the scope of normal daily
operations, so they require a new approach with new models
and tools to address.

Cyber-physical Resilient Energy Systems (CYPRES) [1] is
funded by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Cybersecurity
for Energy Delivery Systems (CEDS) to achieve its name.
CYPRES aims to transform the energy sector’s resilience
capabilities in cyber-physical power systems by designing a
new approach to energy management. A primary function is
to help electric utility industry stakeholders more effectively
prevent and detect cyber-attacks that threaten their opera-
tional environment, and recommend controls, by coupling
cyber-physical models and cyber-physical data.

CYPRES, as a new type of energy management system
(EMS), would provide cyber-physical grid analyses for stake-
holders over the entire life cycle of an event. The new EMS
must include the modeling and data analytic capabilities to
prepare for, endure, and respond to events (threats), as well
closing the loop to learn from these events (threats) and
plan the system better. This resilience life cycle approach is
critical to grid cyber-physical security. In fact, the importance
of security for critical infrastructure is completely rooted in

K. R. Davis is with Texas A&M University: katedavis@tamu.edu. Submit-
ted to Virtual Workshop on Cyber Experimentation and Science of Security
(CESOS) 2021

operational resilience. This perspective is a key strategy: it is
the way to create solutions that will be tractable: by prioritizing
security based on resilience.

The CYPRES techniques are being developed and validated
with respect to the following threat model: Advanced cyber
adversaries are targeting physical power system impact
through multi-stage attacks. Such threats require cohesive use
of cyber and physical data and models together to defend. The
elements of CYPRES help form the answer for how to achieve
this defense in the most effective coordinated manner.

II. CYBER-PHYSICAL RESILIENCE FRAMEWORK

CYPRES has been developing modeling and analytic tech-
niques and tools that comprise a proposed next generation
energy management system. The framework is cyber-physical
and inherently considers security and risk throughout
the
data ﬂow pipeline (monitoring, to analysis, to control). The
feasibility is supported by use of well-known (industry used)
data sources, coupled with the analytics that form its functional
modules (Fig. 1).

Resilience begins in the planning phase. The goal is always
to catch and prevent potential events early, while intentionally
planning for the inevitable imperfection of models and for the
inevitable imperfection of security defenses.
Model fusion. Hence, ﬁrst is cyber-physical model fusion, that
combines cyber and physical model information. To provide
cyber-physical situational awareness, a map is needed,
to
help stakeholders understand the system. The map includes
the power system topology, the cyber network topology, and
the part in between, where they intersect [2], [3]: A cyber
topology of the control network protects and thus affects
grid operational reliability; it encompasses control center and
substation networks. A power topology is how cyber-physical
interactions map to physical impact; topology and state are
essential to quantifying impacts. A threat model represents
the characteristics of cyber-physical threats that are critical
to design and test of the defense tools. Part of the challenge
is that these requirements are not historically well-known or
documented. This cannot be the case going forward, because
a stakeholder needs to understand the system to best defend
it. This major challenge is also where CYPRES helps: in
identifying, mapping, and characterizing the system.
Fused model mathematical representation. The model gen-
eration step incorporates the topologies and threat information
to create a state space representation for subsequent analyses.
It is updated when needed based on changes. The state space
embeds physical impact/operational reliability metrics speciﬁc
to the use case and threat model.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Figure 1. The CYPRES model and example of the cyber-physical energy management system workﬂow.

intrusion detection,

Dataﬂow integrity and security monitoring. Detection is an
indispensable component of situational awareness. Monitoring
for resilience is based on dataﬂows and their functions. This
ﬂow-based approach directly supports the collection and corre-
lation of data from cyber and physical components throughout
the networks. This enables use of the generated models with
available alerts to estimate the security state of the system.
Data fusion for ML-enhanced CPS state estimation. Next is
fusion of cyber and physical network data through techniques
with feature extraction enabling effective machine learning
(ML)-based cyber-physical
inferencing,
and/or state estimation. Alerts from sensors on the cyber side
are correlated with data from the physical side to infer what
is going on in the system [4], [5], [6], [7].
Preventative risk analyses for ahead-of-time mitigations.
Fused models and data enables cyber-physical risk analy-
ses [8], [9], [10], to ﬁnd potential events and identify com-
ponents that need more defense. Prevention also involves
planning: learning from past events, current state, and fused
models enables such studies. Specialized testbeds (such as our
Resilient Energy Systems Lab RESLab [11], a realistic emu-
lated cyber-physical grid environment) support the realism of
such studies without exposing or requiring the real stakeholder
network.
Adaptive risk analyses for online decision support. No se-
curity is perfect. Regardless of how well a system is defended,
response strategies are critical. Such a response plan is well-
informed by the other components and can be designed to
provide recommendations for response and mitigation.

The above components are primary functions of resilience.
These would run periodically in the cyber-physical energy
management system, updating as system state changes. With
well-deﬁned and consistent interfaces, each may be researched
and improved independently. Ideally, multiple (or all) func-
tions should be optimized together, e.g., reducing computa-
tional burden of modeling, monitoring, and control, and to
simplify system defenses (including its design) based on key
functions and their interdependencies. The framework also
facilitates comparison of two or more cyber-physical systems
against a given threat model.

ACKNOWLDEGMENTS
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under award DE-
OE0000895 and the National Science Foundation (NSF) sup-
port under awards ECCS-1916142 and ECCS-1808064, and
the work of the CYPRES team, are gratefully acknowledged.

REFERENCES

[1] “Deep Cyber Physical Situational Awareness for Energy Systems: A
Secure Foundation for Next-Generation Energy Management,” Cyber-
Physical Resilient Energy Systems, Sept. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://cypres.engr.tamu.edu/

[2] G. A. Weaver, K. Davis, C. M. Davis, E. J. Rogers, R. B. Bobba,
S. Zonouz, R. Berthier, P. W. Sauer, and D. M. Nicol, “Cyber-physical
models for power grid security analysis: 8-substation case,” in 2016
IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Communications (Smart-
GridComm).

IEEE, 2016, pp. 140–146.

[3] P. Wlazlo, K. Price, C. Veloz, A. Sahu, H. Huang, A. Goulart, K. Davis,
and S. Zounouz, “A cyber topology model for the texas 2000 synthetic
electric power grid,” in 2019 Principles, Systems and Applications of IP
Telecommunications (IPTComm), 2019, pp. 1–8.

[4] P. Wlazlo, A. Sahu, Z. Mao, H. Huang, A. Goulart, K. Davis, and
S. Zonouz, “Man-in-the-middle attacks and defence in a power system
cyber-physical testbed,” IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory & Appli-
cations, vol. 6, no. 3, 6 2021.

[5] A. Sahu, Z. Mao, P. Wlazlo, H. Huang, K. Davis, A. Goulart, and
S. Zonouz, “Multi-source multi-domain data fusion for cyberattack
detection in power systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 119 118–119 138,
2021.

[6] A. Kundu, A. Sahu, E. Serpedin, and K. Davis, “A3d: Attention-based
auto-encoder anomaly detector for false data injection attacks,” Electric
Power Systems Research, vol. 189, p. 106795, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378779620305988
[7] O. Boyaci, A. Umunnakwe, A. Sahu, M. R. Narimani, M. Ismail,
K. Davis, and E. Serpedin, “Graph neural networks based detection of
stealth false data injection attacks in smart grids,” IEEE Systems Journal
(accepted), 2021.

[8] S. Zonouz, C. Davis, K. Davis, R. Berthier, R. Bobba, and W. Sanders,
“SOCCA: A security-oriented cyber-physical contingency analysis in
power infrastructures,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 3–13, 2014.

[9] K. R. Davis, C. M. Davis, S. A. Zonouz, R. B. Bobba, R. Berthier,
L. Garcia, and P. W. Sauer, “A cyber-physical modeling and assessment
framework for power grid infrastructures,” IEEE Transactions on smart
grid, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2464–2475, 2015.

[10] A. Umunnakwe, A. Sahu, and K. Davis, “Multi-component risk assess-
ment using cyber-physical betweenness centrality,” in 2021 IEEE Madrid
PowerTech, 2021, pp. 1–6.

[11] A. Sahu, P. Wlazlo, Z. Mao, H. Huang, A. Goulart, K. Davis, and
S. Zonouz, “Design and evaluation of a cyber-physical resilient power
system testbed,” 11 2020. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2011.
13552

