False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A
Comprehensive Survey⋆

Muhammad Akbar Husnooa, Adnan Anwara,∗,2, Nasser Hosseinzadehb, Shama Naz Islamb, Abdun
Naser Mahmoodc and Robin Dossa,∗

aDeakin University, Geelong, Australia - Centre for Cyber Security Research and Innovation (CSRI)
bDeakin University, Geelong, Australia - Centre for Smart Power and Energy Research (CSPER)
cDepartment of Computer Science & IT, Latrobe University, Bundoora, VIC 3086, Australia

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
9
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
1
5
2
4
1
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Keywords:
False Data Injection Attack
Distribution System
Smart Meter
Advanced Metering Infrastructure
AMI
Smart Grid

With the proliferation of smart devices and revolutions in communications, electrical distribution
systems are gradually shifting from passive, manually-operated and inﬂexible ones, to a massively
interconnected cyber-physical smart grid to address the energy challenges of the future. However, the
integration of several cutting-edge technologies has introduced many security and privacy vulnera-
bilities due to the large-scale complexity and resource limitations of deployments. Recent research
trends have shown that False Data Injection (FDI) attacks are becoming one of the most malicious
cyber threats within the entire smart grid paradigm. Therefore, this paper presents a comprehensive
survey of the recent advances in FDI attacks within active distribution systems and proposes a taxon-
omy to classify the FDI threats with respect to smart grid targets. The related studies are contrasted
and summarized in terms of the attack methodologies and implications on the electrical power distri-
bution networks. Finally, we identify some research gaps and recommend a number of future research
directions to guide and motivate prospective researchers.

1. Introduction

In this new global economy, adequacy of uninterrupted
power supply to end-users has now become one of the main
priorities of the critical energy infrastructure of several na-
tions. In the past few years, traditional manually-operated
distribution systems have shifted to smart distribution sys-
tems to cope up with the increased power consumption de-
mands and operational reliability Pahwa (2015). Recently,
the growing trend of integrating distributed renewable en-
ergy sources into power systems have also shifted focus from
passive distribution systems into Active Distribution Sys-
tems (ADSs) in response to environmental concerns, power
sustainability and energy market economics Radwan, Zaki Diab,
Elsayed, Haes Alhelou and Siano (2020).

In line with the IEEE Grid Vision 2050, the main goal of
a smart grid is to enable eﬃcient and reliable bi-directional
communication through control and automation processes
applied through the diﬀerent components of a power grid
Simard (2013). This vision is being achieved by converting
the static grid into intelligent cyber-physical systems through
the integration of information and communication technolo-
gies. Modern technologies including Internet of Things (IoT),
and cloud computing are considered to be the foundations of

⋆ This work is the results of the research project funded by the Faculty
of Science, Engineering and Built Environment (SEBE), Deakin University
under the scheme ’Mini ARC Analogue Program (MAAP)’.

mahusnoo@deakin.edu.au (M.A. Husnoo); adnan.anwar@

deakin.edu.au (A. Anwar); nasser.hosseinzadeh@deakin.edu.au (N.
Hosseinzadeh); shama.i@deakin.edu.au (S.N. Islam);
A.Mahmood@latrobe.edu.au (A.N. Mahmood); robin.doss@deakin.edu.au (R.
Doss)

ORCID(s): 0000-0001-7908-8807 (M.A. Husnoo); 0000-0003-3916-1381
(A. Anwar); 0000-0002-2354-7960 (S.N. Islam); 0000-0001-7769-3384 (A.N.
Mahmood)

ADSs, which take full advantage of such cutting-edge tech-
nologies to proactively coordinate the renewable energy gen-
eration, energy storage and other distributed units in view of
achieving safe and economical operation of smart grids Yang
(2019).

There has been a massive shift of research focus from
transmission systems to distribution systems as the latter is
highly inﬂuenced by socio-economic and environmental pa-
rameters given its close proximity to end-users Musleh, Chen
and Dong (2020). However, the rush to integrate of a wide
variety of technologies and components with distribution sys-
tems has neglected the security aspects of ADSs. Further-
more, the bi-directional communication within ADSs brings
additional security and privacy challenges due to the large-
scale complexity and resource limitations of deployments
Jokar, Arianpoo and Leung (2016). Coupled with limited
cybersecurity research done on distribution networks, there
are growing concerns over massive threats potentially im-
pacting its integrity, reliability and stability. From a cyber-
physical perspective, the success of distribution systems is
heavily reliant on its physical components which is the power
network infrastructure, and its cyber components which in-
cludes information sensing, data analytics, etc Bienstock and
Verma (2009). As earlier mentioned, attacks on transmis-
sion systems have been well-studied in the past Dán and
Sandberg (2010). An interesting attack proposed by Soltan,
Yannakakis and Zussman (2018) that considers physical tam-
pering by disconnecting some power lines as well as cyber
manipulation by blocking the information ﬂow was used to
disrupt the grid operability. Indeed, such attacks concepts
may eventually be extended to distribution systems Bern-
stein, Bienstock, Hay, Uzunoglu and Zussman (2014). One
such notorious cyber-physical attack on distribution networks

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 1 of 25

 
 
 
 
 
 
False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Figure 1: Timeline of recent power grid attacks (A chronological timeline of the major power grid attacks that have occurred
throughout the globe starting from 2010 up until 2021).

happened on 23rd December 2015 at Kiev, Ukraine, where
perpetrators gained unauthorized access to the Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system and tam-
pered with circuit breakers which aﬀected more than 225,000
customers for several hours Liang, Weller, Zhao, Luo and
Dong (2017a). Figure 1 shows a timeline of the well-known
attacks that have occurred on power grid systems throughout
the recent years.

1.1. Motivation & Scope

With the integration of IoT-based devices into power grid
systems, cybersecurity is now a prominent aspect of smart
grids due to the wide array of security attacks. Attacks and
countermeasures within the transmission network of power
grids have been well studied in several previous literature
e.g. works conducted by the authors in Jokar et al. (2016);
Liu, Xiao, Li, Liang and Chen (2012); Deng, Xiao, Lu, Liang
and Vasilakos (2017). With the rise in the number of cyber-
related incidents on smart grids such as the Ukraine 2015
outage Liang et al. (2017a), it is obvious that such attacks
can have devastating consequences on ADSs. While cur-
rent research is mainly focused on the active applications of
cutting-edge technologies and the development of enhanced
communications methods within distribution networks, the
security risks introduced are seldom considered from the
perspective of adversaries. At present, very little work has
been done in relation to discovering the vulnerabilities of
distribution systems which leads to urgent calls in ensuring
the resilience of ADSs to diﬀerent types of emerging threats
and zero-day attacks.

In recent years, False Data Injection threats (FDI) have
surfaced as one of the most critical threats faced by distribu-
tion systems whereby an adversary deliberately introduces
corrupted noisy information into sensor measurements while
being as stealthy as possible. As earlier mentioned, FDI
threats in transmission systems have been studied and some
countermeasures have been proposed. Indeed, the security
aspects of ADSs have been previously neglected. Since schol-
ars and researchers are now shifting their focus on improv-
ing the emerging security and privacy aspects of ADSs, it is
critical to have an understanding of the characteristics of dis-
tribution systems which emphasise the needs and motivation
of ongoing research on FDI threats and countermeasures:

1. Lack of proper security mechanisms: Power distribution

networks consist of several ﬁeld devices including power
transformers, voltage regulators, remote terminal units and
so on. Such types of ﬁeld devices lack proper cyber and
physical security mechanisms Otuoze, Mustafa and Larik
(2018).
Indeed, without strong security measures, adver-
saries can easily gain access and construct data integrity threats,
speciﬁcally FDI attacks.

2. Communication Protocols: In a distribution system, Su-
pervisory Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA) and/or
Industrial IoT (IIoT) protocols such as ZIGBEE, Modbus,
etc. are widely used for substation communication or com-
munication between substation and ﬁeld devices Anwar, Mah-
mood, Tari and Kalam (2022). These protocols are vulnera-
ble to security threats. IEEE, IEC and other standard organi-
sations who have been involved in the development of proto-
cols are actively researching on increasing the resiliency of
these protocols against cyber threats. However, widely used
protocols, e.g. Modbus or Zigbee, still lack proper secu-
rity mechanisms. As a result, messages sent without proper
strong encryption or authentication mechanisms can be ex-
posed to FDI threats McLaughlin, Friedberg, Kang, May-
nard, Sezer and McWilliams (2015).

3. Distribution System Characteristics: As earlier highlighted,
power distribution systems have diﬀerent characteristics as
compared to transmission systems such as high R/X ratio, etc
Hammer, Fuhr, Hanson and Konigorski (2019). Therefore,
the formulation of FDI threats on transmission systems will
work diﬀerently in a distribution system. The assumption of
DC power ﬂow formulation is not valid for distribution sys-
tems. Moreover, the AC formulation for distribution systems
need to consider multi-phase power ﬂow models and distri-
bution state estimations Giraldo, Vergara, López, Nguyen
and Paterakis (2021). Hence, it is very important to inves-
tigate the both the attack construction and the detection of
FDI threats on distribution systems.

4. Heterogeneity: The wide array of IoT devices in modern
power distribution system e.g. smart homes, SCADA, ﬁeld
devices, sub-station devices, etc. along with the diﬀerent
communication protocols and diﬀerent stakeholders within a
single network increases the complexity of the network. For
maintenance and monitoring purposes, third party compa-
nies need to connect to the proprietary networks through in-
ternet, which also introduces more vulnerabilities He, Chen,

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 2 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Bu, Chan, Zhang and Guizani (2012); Renugadevi, Sara-
vanan and Naga Sudha (2021). Eventually, with increasing
complexity, the window of opportunities for FDI attacks in-
creases.

Therefore, the primary objective of this manuscript is to
provide an early systematic literature review and insight into
the FDI threats within active distribution systems to motivate
future researchers into exploring some of the emerging areas
within active ADSs.

1.2. Contributions

This manuscript covers a comprehensive survey of the
existing publications and reference materials on cyber threats
identiﬁed within the various domains of the smart grid dis-
tribution infrastructure. Our primary objective is to system-
atically and thoroughly analyze recent literature within the
last decade, and assess and contrast each proposed attack
methodology. In particular, the main contributions of our
article are listed as follows:

1. We identify the essential cybersecurity goals of active
distribution systems and provide some theoretical overview
of stealthy FDI attacks.

2. Following a comprehensive review of the relevant exist-
ing literature, we highlight their contributions and identify
the gaps as addressed by our survey. A detailed comparison
of previous works against ours can be found in Table 2.

3. We develop and propose a detailed taxonomy of FDI at-
tacks with respect to attack targets in active distribution sys-
tems as shown in Section 5.

4. We analyze the various state-of-the-art FDI threat model-
ing proposed by several independent studies, critically eval-
uate the approaches and summarize the results.

5. Lastly, we discuss some main research gaps in the exist-
ing FDI attack methodologies and provide some technical
recommendations for future research directions within the
related topic.

We strongly believe that an early systematic review of in-
dependently developed research will enable future researchers
to get a clear picture of the neglected security aspects of
AMI-based ADSs, thus contributing towards more resilient
distribution systems of the future.

1.3. Paper Structure

Following a brief introduction of the subject of interest of
this manuscript in Section 1, we discuss, compare and con-
trast previous related survey articles against ours in Section
2.2. The literature search methodology employed to gather,
assess and select the relevant papers to our topic is presented
in Section 3. Next, an overview of the cyber-physical secu-
rity aspect of Active Distribution Systems along with some
theoretical background of FDI attacks are highlighted in Sec-
tion 4. Section 5 provides a brief overview of the several
categories of attack targets within our proposed taxonomy.

Terminologies
Active Distri-
bution System
(ADS)

Advanced
Metering
frastructure
(AMI)

In-

Control Center

Cyber-physical
System

Man-in-The-
Middle Attack
(MiTM)

Smart Grid

Supervisory
and
control
data
acquisi-
tion (SCADA)
Zero-day Vul-
nerability

Deﬁnitions
Distribution system with operation
and control capabilities coupled with
distributed decentralized energy re-
sources.
Network of smart meters and data
management systems that allows bi-
directional communication between
the utility providers and the con-
sumers.
Consists of monitoring systems and
applications to ensure eﬃcient and
reliable power delivery operations.
sen-
System in which entities (e.g.
sors, etc.)
are connected to each
other and to the internet through
wired or wireless solutions.
Cyber-attack during which a perpe-
trator eavesdrops the communication
channel between two parties and of-
ten relays messages.
Modern power grid system with con-
trol and automation which enables
bi-directional ﬂow of electricity and
communication in real-time.
Control system consisting of techno-
logical resources which enable high-
level supervision of the power grid.

Broad terminology describing a newly
discovered form of vulnerability which
is exploited by black hats to attack
systems.

Table 1
Terminology Description

Sections 6-9 discuss the suggested taxonomy of FDI threats,
mainly from the adversarial point of view with reviews of
previously undertaken studies. In particular, Section 6 cov-
ers FDI attacks on the end user level, Section 7 explores sim-
ilar attacks on ﬁeld devices, Section 8 reviews those on the
control center, while integrity threats on energy pricing and
billing are covered under Section 9. Moreover, under Sec-
tion 10, we identify some shortcomings of the current liter-
ature and provide some recommendations and directions for
further research within this emerging ﬁeld. Lastly, Section
11 concludes this survey article.

2. Related Works

During the past couple of years, numerous amounts of
work have surfaced on FDI threats in power systems. In this
view, we ﬁrst present related works in terms of FDI threats
on power grids and how it can as well be extended to other
ﬁelds. Secondly, we present a comparison of existing litera-
ture against ours to highlight the need for a new review.

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 3 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

2.1. False Data Injection Threats

The concept of FDI attacks was ﬁrst coined by Liu, Ning
and Reiter (2009) and quickly became one of the stealthiest
and devastating attacks on power systems. Due to the shift
in paradigm from traditional power systems to smart grids,
a complex system of interconnected sensors continuously
gather data which are useful to ensure the safe and reliable
operation of the grids. However, in recent years, the energy
critical infrastructure has become an attractive attack target
for malicious adversaries whereby they attempt to corrupt
sensor readings to either disrupt the integrity or the avail-
ability of the system for their illicit gains Chaojun, Jirutiti-
jaroen and Motani (2015). Traditionally, Bad Data Detectors
(BDDs) have been employed to observe for corrupted infor-
mation in power grid systems by comparing residual thresh-
olds Sayghe, Hu, Zografopoulos, Liu, Dutta, Jin and Kon-
stantinou (2020). However, the speed of ongoing research
throughout this ﬁeld has brought about increasing stealthi-
ness of such FDI attacks which tends to easily bypass BDDs.
Following Liu et al. (2009)’s research, throughout the last
decade, a vast array of FDI attacks have been proposed in
relation to disrupting several facets of the smart grid sys-
tem. For instance, Xie, Mo and Sinopoli (2010) presented
a stealth FDI attack on state estimation in a deregulated en-
ergy market setting which successfully bypassed BDDs and
led to ﬁnancial gains of the adversary during virtual energy
bids. Another work by Rahman and Mohsenian-Rad (2012)
took a step further by proposing a more realistic FDI at-
tack whereby the adversary conducted a gray-box attack with
limited information in view of having similar impacts on
the power systems. An interesting work proposed by Ko-
sut, Jia, Thomas and Tong (2011) enable adversaries to op-
timize their attacks by balancing the trade-oﬀ between in-
creasing corruption of data and decreasing the probability
of detection of the attack such that energy is leaked. Fur-
thermore, Jia, Kim, Thomas and Tong (2014) investigated
the eﬀects of FDI attacks on real-time Locational Marginal
Price (LMP). While, throughout the previous decade there
has been several interesting FDI attacks proposed, within
this manuscript, we will be mostly reﬂecting on FDI threats
on Active Distribution Systems.

2.1.1. FDI Threats in other ﬁelds

Albeit the terminology of FDI attacks initially surfaced
from smart grid use-cases Liang, Zhao, Luo, Weller and
Dong (2017b), it is inherently pertinent to any other types of
IoT-based systems as FDI attacks generally focus on the ma-
nipulation of data to impact the integrity of a system. While
in the past, researchers have mostly concentrated on crafting
FDI attacks and developing countermeasures in the power
grid domain, some few recent literature Gu, Yu, Guo, Qiao
and Guo (2021); Yang, Feng, Zhang, He and Shi (2018) have
extended FDI studies to other ﬁelds. For example, the work
in Yang et al. (2018) proposed a novel attack construction
and defense mechanism against FDI threats in Networked
Radar Systems. Indeed, FDI attacks are relevant to critical
healthcare infrastructure Newaz, Sikder, Babun and Ulua-

gac (2020). Corrupted information injected in medical de-
vices and sensors can pose imminent dangers to the health
of individuals and can also cripple the healthcare industry
of a particular region. For instance, medical devices con-
sist of sensors that gather readings and health information
about patients. The injection of corrupted sensor readings
may lead to wrong medical diagnosis and thus jeopardize the
well-being of a patient. Similarly, within the transportation
infrastructure Almalki and Sheldon (2021), the imputation
of wrong information to sensor-based readings can eventu-
ally lead to several consequences such as traﬃc delays, acci-
dents, etc. Furthermore, FDI attacks stand out as being one
of the most aggressive threats on Industrial IoT (IIoT) sys-
tems where gross errors in sensor measurements can aﬀect
operations of machinery, etc Huang, Tao, Wang, Guo, Yang
and Gui (2022). Moreover, there could be other instances
and ﬁelds where FDI attacks could have potentially severe
consequences such as in the ﬁnance sector whereby the ma-
nipulation of data could lead to misleading credit scores, in
the military sector where drones can be hacked to inject false
information which can trigger attacks to false targets, so on
and so forth Newaz et al. (2020). Overall, it can be said that
FDI threats, even though it has been mostly studied in the
context of power systems, can be extended to several criti-
cal infrastructure and may cause adverse impacts in systems,
all while remaining undetected for very long times. There-
fore, it is highly necessary to have a better understanding of
FDI attacks in the view of developing eﬀective countermea-
sures. However, as aforementioned, within this manuscript,
we shall be reﬂecting entirely on the threats targeting AMI-
based distribution systems.

2.1.2. FDI Threats vs Other Types of Deception

Threats

Cybersecurity has now become a prominent aspect of In-
ternet of Things due to the wide array of security attacks on
IoT-based critical infrastructure. The wide array and hetero-
geneity of sensors present in IoT-based systems with each
simultaneously sensing diﬀerent types of data increases the
complexity of the systems. Furthermore, due to the increased
use of sensing devices in critical infrastructure, IoT-based
devices are often produced at mass extent without taking
into consideration security as a highest priority. Producers
of Industrial IoT solutions in recent years have focused more
on meeting demands rather that implementing strict digital
doors to prevent unauthorized access which enables hackers
with illicit intentions to carry out several types of deception
attacks such as FDI attacks with devastating impacts. Decep-
tion attacks can be of several types e.g. Denial-of-Service
(DoS) attacks, Trojan Attacks, Identity Deception, covert at-
tacks and other miscellaneous deception threats Rowe and
Custy (2017) . False Data Injection attack is one form of de-
ception attack which targets data integrity issues. However,
diﬀerent types of deception threats have their own charac-
teristics and impacts on a distribution system. For instance,
DoS attacks target availability of systems while FDI threats
are mostly related to data integrity issues. From an adver-

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 4 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

(cid:51): Included , (cid:55): Not Included,
(cid:61): Partially Included

Comparison Attributes

End User Level

Energy
Management

Advanced
Metering
Infrastructure

Energy Storage
Photo Voltaic
Systems
Smart Energy
Management
Communication
Networks
Smart
Meters

Field Devices
Voltage Regulators
Micro-PMU
Intelligent Field Devices
Control Center
Volt-var Control

Distribution
State
Estimation

Balanced
Single-phase
Unbalanced
Multi-phase

Energy Pricing & Trading
Distribution Locational
Marginal Pricing
Real-time Pricing (RTP)
Transactive Energy Market
Peer-to-peer Distributed
Energy Trading

Wang,
Guan,
Liu,
Gu,
Sun
and
Liu
(2013)
-
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

-
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-

(cid:55)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

Deng
Mrabet,
et
al.
Kaabouch,
(2017)
Ghazi
and
Ghazi
(2018)

Guan,
Sun,
Xu
and
Yang
(2015)

Liu
and Li
(2017)

Liang
et
(2017b)

al.

Our
Paper

Reda,
Anwar
and
Mah-
mood
(2021)

-
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:61)

(cid:61)

-
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-

(cid:55)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

-

(cid:55)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-
(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

-
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-

(cid:55)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

-
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:61)

(cid:61)

-

(cid:55)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

-
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:61)

(cid:61)

-

(cid:55)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

-
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

-

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

Table 2
Comparison of our survey against existing related surveys.

Attack
Target

sary’s perspective, based on the CIA triad, an FDI attack
tries to destabilize the integrity aspects of a distribution sys-
tem while other deception attacks may have varying natures
based on their own characteristics. To compare with a covert
deception attack, FDI attacks attempt to disrupt the system
within a short time interval for momentary gains while a
covert attack allows an adversary to feed false data into a sys-
tem such that the attack eﬀects usually happen in the long-
term de Sá, Carmo and Machado (2017). On the other hand,
the main diﬀerence between other types of deception attacks
is that deception threats may or may not be stealthy (e.g.,
DoS attacks are not stealthy) while FDI threats are catego-
rized as stealthy attacks.

2.2. Literature Review

The authors in Wang et al. (2013) reviewed some of the
early works on cyber threats in smart meters. The work by
Mrabet et al. (2018) surveyed the attacks on smart grids and

proposed a novel classiﬁcation of cyber threats to smart grids
based on methods used by hackers or penetration testers while
compromising the grid. Furthermore, the authors in Deng
et al. (2017) conducted a survey of data integrity attacks with
respect to three major security aspects namely the construc-
tion of FDI attacks, the impacts of FDI attacks on state esti-
mations for real-time electricity markets and lastly, defense
mechanisms against those attacks.

The work in Guan et al. (2015) comprehensively sur-
veyed FDI attacks with respect to power ﬂow models namely
Alternating Current and Direct Current. Liu and Li (2017)
reviewed the existing literature based on several attack mod-
els, ﬁnancial attack impacts and countermeasures within the
transmission, distribution and micro-grid network. Simi-
larly, research works in Liang et al. (2017b) discuss the FDI
attack models and their impacts on smart grid operations.
Diﬀerent to the previous work, Reda et al. (2021) surveyed
and classiﬁed the related works on FDI attacks within all

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 5 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Figure 3: Order of Priority of four NIST Principles in rela-
tion to Active Distribution Systems. (The highest priority for
ADSs is availability of the system while the lowest priority is
accountability of the system).

Figure 2: Survey Methodology employed (This ﬁgure describes
a systematic methodology employed by our survey manuscript
that incorporates six steps from formulating the research ques-
tions to review and conﬁrmation of gathered ﬁndings).

and CORE2 Education (2016) for conferences, to consider
prestigious and high quality studies. Following the conﬁr-
mation of high quality literature, steps 5 & 6 of Figure 2
were applied.

smart grids domains with respect to the attacks models, their
attacks and the impacts of such attacks on grids.

As opposed to the existing related works, our manuscript
attempts to present a thorough survey and review of the state-
of-the-art data integrity attacks and develops a detailed tax-
onomy of aforementioned attacks with respect to points of
attack across the modern distribution networks of power grids.
A more detailed comparison of our paper against other sur-
veys can be found in Table 2 above.

3. Literature Review Methodology

This work covers a comprehensive survey and review of
several independent studies on FDI threats in active distri-
bution systems. Therefore, within this section, we provide
an overview of our systematic literature search and selection
process as shown in Figure 2.

3.1. Search Process

Finding the relevant literature is vital to perform a com-
prehensive analysis of the topic. Therefore, we tackle this
tedious search process using a structured methodology pro-
posed by Kitchenham and Charters (2007). Relevant key-
words and year ﬁlters are used to perform backward and
forward searches on the academic databases to systemati-
cally identify high quality publications. Research databases
used during our search process included IEEE Xplore, ACM
Digital Library, Springer, Elsevier and others. The steps as
shown in Figure 2 are then applied to each dataset using key-
words such as "distribution system", "false data injection",
"attacks", etc.

3.2. Literature Assessment & Selection

To ensure that our literature search does not consist of
FDI articles related to other critical areas of research such
as transportation, we restrict our search to smart grid dis-
tribution systems. Furthermore, all literature found from
scholarly research sources deemed relevant to the subject in
matter were manually evaluated against the scientiﬁc rank-
ing platforms, namely SJR 1 Lab (2021) for journal articles

1SJR: Scientiﬁc Journal Ranking (Scimago)

4. Background

As part of the smart grid paradigm, ADSs are threatened
by FDI attacks by potential adversaries. Therefore, in this
section, we brieﬂy give an overview of the cybersecurity as-
pect of active distribution systems followed by a theoretical
background of FDI attacks.

4.1. Cyber-physical Security of Active

Distribution Systems

As mentioned earlier on, the growing trend in renewable
energy sources, predominantly installed on the distribution
level, is gradually transforming the operations of distribu-
tion networks to an active paradigm Ghiani, Pilo and Celli
(2018). Contemporary innovative and intelligent technolo-
gies and devices are being used to revolutionize the once
centralized, radial and "ﬁt-and-forget" power distribution ap-
proach to a bi-directional automated scheme where eﬃciency
and optimality of operations are guaranteed Pahwa (2015).
During the last few years, power system researchers around
the globe have been signiﬁcantly contributing to the shift
from passive distribution systems to active ones. However,
due to the conﬂicting nature of the objectives to be simulta-
neously optimized, research is still lagging behind to design
economical, reliable and yet, cyber-resilient ADSs of the fu-
ture Lakshmi and Ganguly (2018). Therefore, throughout
this section, we provide an overview of the main security
goals and attacks on ADSs.

4.1.1. Security Goals of Active Distribution Systems

While utility operators are mainly focused on optimal
and eﬃcient distribution of energy to customers, security has
taken the backseat and is now becoming a major concern.
Therefore, it is important to extend and ensure the basic four
NIST principles (refer to Figure 3 of smart grid cybersecu-
rity Committee (2014) to ADSs, namely:

1. Availability: Availability is the most crucial security goal
of ADSs to ensure uninterrupted supply of power to con-
sumers at any given time. Countermeasures to protect ADSs
against cyber-attacks must be within acceptable latency ranges
while minimally impacting availability.

2CORE: Computing Research and Education Association of Australa-

sia

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 6 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

2. Integrity: Being the second highest prioritized goal of
ADSs cybersecurity, integrity must ensure that data is not
illicitly altered and is from veriﬁable sources. The alteration
and/or destruction of the true data leads to a loss of data in-
tegrity. Indeed, as data integrity degrades, it negatively im-
pacts the reliability ad stability of the distribution system.

3. Conﬁdentiality: While conﬁdentiality may seem to be of
lesser importance in ensuring reliability of distribution net-
works, vulnerable Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI)
must be protected against unauthorized leakage of private
customer or proprietary information.

4. Accountability: The last security objective being account-
ability, relates to consumers being responsible for their ac-
tions such as during billing, consumption, etc.

4.1.2. Cyber-physical Attacks on Active Distribution

Systems

While Distributed Generation (DG) is a viable solution
to sustain the exponential growth in load demand, the inte-
gration of converter-based DG units including Photovoltaic
(PV) generators deteriorates the power quality through the
injection of harmonics to the distribution network Lakshmi
and Ganguly (2018). Coupled with the integration of non-
standardized DG units, the addition of contemporary tech-
nologies for eﬃcient and automated power distribution man-
agement greatly increases the complexity of distribution net-
works Jokar et al. (2016). This opens up several security vul-
nerabilities which can be exploited by potential adversaries
for both ﬁnancial and political gains.

4.2. False Data Injection Threats

Dubbed as one of the most critical malicious cyber-threats
in power systems, an adversary tends to deliberately compro-
mise sensor readings by orchestrating injection of false infor-
mation into sensor measurements. Speciﬁcally, during FDI
attacks, an attacker attempts to compromise sensor readings
stealthily such that gross errors are introduced into data or
aggregation procedures while evading detection. The objec-
tive of an attacker is to introduce an attack vector 𝑎 into the
data measurements while evading bad data detection by op-
erators. This results in maliciously compromising the state
variables across distribution networks. In simple words, dur-
ing a FDI attack, an adversary manipulates the real measur-
ing vector which can be mathematically denoted as 𝑧𝑎 =
𝑧+𝑎 where 𝑧 is the original sensor information, 𝑧𝑎
is the cor-
rupted measurement and 𝑎 is the attack vector. In any case,
corrupted information can be achieved by one of the follow-
ing: 1) Deletion of data from the original measurement in-
formation, 𝑧. 2) Change of data in the original measurement
information, 𝑧. 3) Addition of fake data to the original mea-
surement information, 𝑧. Furthermore, adversaries may be
subject to several inequality constraints that simultaneously
minimize the probability of detection of the launched attack
and minimize the probability of detection of such attacks.

Based on the security goals discussed earlier, integrity
is the second most prioritized security goal whereby a dis-
tribution system must ensure the accuracy of its information.

Figure 4: Overall architecture of FDI attacks in a connected
power distribution system grid. (While the information ﬂow
throughout a distribution system is depicted, an adversary can
inject corrupted information at the ﬁeld and pseudo measure-
ments, in the communication channels as well as in the SCADA
systems as main points of attacks.)

However, an FDI attack is a class of data integrity threat that
exploits sensor (e.g., smart meters of a distribution system)
measurements through the injection of corrupted informa-
tion. Traditionally, BDDs have been employed to detect cor-
rupted sensor readings by calculating the residual between
the measured and estimated system states which are obtained
from the state estimation process. Due to intelligent mech-
anisms used by adversaries to choose the attack vector, the
residual measurement becomes very close to the regular nor-
mal behaviour without any FDI threat. Hence, such type of
attack remains stealthy which adversely aﬀects the integrity
of the distribution system. As sensor data plays a critical
role in diﬀerent key operational modules Sun, Hahn and Liu
(2018), such corruption eventually impacts the operational
decisions of distribution systems. As shown in Figure 4, we
provide an overall architecture of FDI threats in a connected
smart grid which highlights the intrinsic relationship of FDI
threats on the integrity and reliability of the distribution sys-
tem.

As aforementioned, with latest developments within this
ﬁeld, FDI threats have become more stealthy such that now
they are able to completely circumvent BDDs as well as other
proposed countermeasures. Therefore, to preserve the stealth-
must remain in the
iness of FDI threats, the attack vector 𝑧𝑎
boundary conditions, 𝑧𝑚𝑖𝑛
. For any FDI attack vec-
tor, 𝑧𝑎

, it should circumvent BDDs if

and 𝑧𝑚𝑎𝑥

𝑧𝑎 = 𝑧 + 𝑎, 𝑧𝑚𝑖𝑛

≤ 𝑧𝑎

≥ 𝑧𝑚𝑎𝑥

(1)

where 𝑧𝑚𝑖𝑛

and 𝑧𝑚𝑎𝑥
versary Mode, Calyam and Hoque (2019).

is assumed to be known by the ad-

5. Proposed Taxonomy

Several studies on FDI threats to distribution systems
have been conducted by researchers. In this survey, we pro-
pose a taxonomy to classify threats on ADSs with respect to

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 7 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Figure 5: Taxonomy of threats on AMI-based distribution systems.

attack targets as shown in Figure 5 below. The four major
attack target levels are:

1. End-user Level: Edge devices based at the end-user side/customer
side are often prone to several cyber-threats due to the lack of
standardization and secure communication protocols. There-
fore, we address the related FDI threats within this attack
target level in Section 6.

6. Threats on End-User Level

The increase in complexity along with the bi-directional
communication provoked by renewable energy management
systems and advanced metering infrastructure at the end-
user level opens up several security vulnerabilities within
ADSs Rashed Mohassel, Fung, Mohammadi and Raahemi-
far (2014). In this view, we present the FDI threats on end-
user level as in Tables 3 and .4.

2. Field Devices: The integration of IoT-based devices in-
creases the complexity of the wireless ﬁeld area networks
which opens up security vulnerabilities and can impact the
grid. We discuss the FDI threats relevant to this category in
Section 7

3. Control Center: Network operation outsourcing and the
complexity of connection and communication of Supervi-
sory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) components
within the power distribution control center are prone to FDI
threats which can adversely impact the stable operation of
smart grids. FDI threats targeting the control center are dis-
cussed in Section 8.

4. Energy Pricing & Trading: The shift to a modern decen-
tralized supply and demand side management approach due
to power system restructuring and the integration of renew-
able power sources threatens the energy billing and trading
process for the adversaries’ malicious ﬁnancial gains. We
therefore address this category in Section 9.

6.1. Energy Management

The traditional power grid has shifted from a current cen-
tralized power generation paradigm to a distributed one re-
sulting from the integration of local sustainable power gen-
eration systems Petinrin and Shaaban (2012). To balance
the increasing demand for power, operators are deploying
renewable energy sources from diﬀerent vendors which in-
creases the complexity of power grids Balezentis, Streimikiene,
Mikalauskas and Shen (2021). Such increased complexity
increases the distribution systems to severe attacks that may
disrupt the operations of the grid. In this view, we present the
state-of-the-art threats on energy management within distri-
bution systems on three sub-categories namely:

6.1.1. Energy Storage

Renewable energy generated from decentralized produc-
tion do not often provide immediate response to demand
and therefore requires energy storage usually in the form of
batteries. The integration with several state-of-the-art tech-
nologies including IoT and cloud computing is increasing

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 8 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Category

Ref No

Attack Target

Energy Storage

Zhuang and Liang
(2021)

Battery Terminal
Voltage

Attack
Type
Sequential
data injec-
tion

Commercial

Photovoltaic
Inverters

Olowu,
masena,
and
(2020)

Dhar-
Jafari
Sarwat

Volt-
Volt-VAR,
Watt & Constant
power
of
Smart Inverters

factor

Short-
term data
injection.

Had-

Tertytchny,
Karbouj,
jidemetriou,
Charalambous,
Sazos
Michael,
and Maniatakos
(2020)
Barua
Faruque (2020)

and

PV
penetration
levels data packets

MiTM
and Short-
term data
injection

Hall sensor mea-
surement

DoS

Residential

Kandasamy
(2020)

Reactive Power in-
formation

Smart Energy
Management System

Lindström, Sasa-
hara, He, Sand-
berg and Johans-
son (2021)

Anuebunwa,
Rajamani,
Alhameed
Pillai (2018)

Abd-
and

Power penetration
data

Load & Pricing
data

Sajeev and Raja-
mani (2020)

Price data

Sethi, Mukherjee,
Singh, Misra and
Mohanty (2020)

Price data

Coordinated
MiTM at-
tack
Power
In-
jection At-
tack

DoS,
Phishing
attacks
& short-
term data
injection
Long-
term data
injection

MiTM
long-
term data
injection

Attack Mechanism

optimiza-
Constraint
tion based on Coulomb
Counting Method
to
inject
vectors
attack
post-attacking.
injected
Gross data is
to change the set-points
based on smart inverter
settings before and after
the attack.
Analysis of collected pack-
ets
to inject
corrupted measurements
which will overfeed the
Smart Inverter and cause
tripping.

in order

Non-invasive
physical
magnetic spooﬁng tech-
nique with
adversarial
control.
Physical Tampering with
the actuation command of
inverters.
Constraint Optimization
of cause maximal voltage
deviation with an attack
at one node in the ﬁnite
time interval
Genetic Algorithm Opti-
mization to inject cor-
rupted information into
load proﬁles.

Genetic Algorithm Opti-
mization for minimizing
the total electricity cost
drawn from grid
Bi-level
ming Optimization

linear program-

Table 3
Comparative View of threats on End-User Level - Energy Management

the complexity of energy management systems in the distri-
bution side. This increased complexity is however exposing
energy management systems to severe cyber threats. Zhuang
and Liang Zhuang and Liang (2021) proposed the static an-
alytical injection of corrupted State-of-Charge (SoC) infor-
mation with small magnitude into weighted least squares (WLS)-
based state estimators. Experimental validations revealed
that their formulated static sequential data integrity attack
drastically aﬀected the accuracy of the SoC estimation by
17% while still being able to circumvent state-of-the-art mea-
surement residual-based bad data detection algorithms and
innovation test.

6.1.2. Photovoltaic Inverters

The rapid technological integration of smart photovoltaic
inverters with Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) cou-
pled with environmental sustainability objectives has led to
the proliferation of inverter-based Distributed Energy Re-
sources (IBDERs) in electric power grids Yazdaninejadi, Hamidi,
Golshannavaz, Aminifar and Teimourzadeh (2019). How-
ever, the successful deployment of photovoltaic inverters is
still prone to security and privacy breaches which may have
devastating implications on distribution power systems Wankhede,
Paliwal and Kirar (2020). In this view, we present the related
recent state-of-the-art literature on threats against smart so-

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 9 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

lar inverters within two application scenarios namely:

1. Commercial Domain: Olowu et al. (2020) ﬁrst investi-
gated the impact of data integrity attacks to a commercial
distribution feeder by injecting false data to the three most
common Smart Inverters functionalities namely Volt-VAR,
Volt-Watt and Constant Power factor (CPF). Experimental
evaluation of their proposed attack revealed that the attacks
severely impacted the voltage proﬁle and the reactive power
injection from the capacitor. Similarly, Tertytchny et al. (2020)
proposed a man in the middle attack to overload a targeted
feeder by injecting false data to all packets between the smart
meter and the ancillary services controller. This trips the
overcurrent protection relay and in turn leads to a regional
blackout. After conducting further risk analysis, it was re-
vealed that the eﬃcacy of their proposed attack rose dras-
tically with increasing solar photovoltaic inverter capacity.
On the other hand, Barua and Faruque (2020) crafted a non-
invasive DoS attack whereby an adversary injects false mea-
surement data into hall sensors of solar inverters through
magnetic spooﬁng. The data integrity attack further prop-
agates to compromise the whole inverter eventually which
may cause grid instability and failures. As opposed to the
works presented in Olowu et al. (2020) and Tertytchny et al.
(2020), the false data injection in this case comes from phys-
ical domains by exploiting the external magnetic ﬁelds.

2. Residential Domain: Lindström et al. (2021) investigated
the consequences of a deceptive power injection attack against
the physical layer of a smart distribution grid with radial
topology. The adversary tends to maximize the voltage devi-
ation which impacts the inverter and eventually shuts down
part of a grid. Kandasamy (2020) demonstrated the eﬀect of
bias attacks in prosumer-based reactive power control. The
goal of the attacker is to inject gross errors to the actuation
commands of smart photovoltaic inverter which drastically
reduces its voltage and increases the current ﬂow. The over-
current leads to thermal tripping of the inverter and as a re-
sult of which, a regional blackout occurs.

6.1.3. Smart Energy Management System

The wide use of smart residential components and inte-
gration of IT has revolutionized residential homes into smart
ones. Further coupled with the incorporation of the two-
way communication with smart grids and advanced intelli-
gence in exchange for economic beneﬁts, Smart Home En-
ergy Management Systems (SHEMSs) can be considered as
systems that provide optimal energy management services in
view of eﬃciently monitoring and managing electricity gen-
eration, storage, and consumption in smart residential homes
Son and Moon (2010); Han, Choi, Park and Lee (2011).
However, SHEMSs are becoming more prone to cyber threats
which may have devastating impacts. Anuebunwa et al. (2018)
ﬁrst investigated the eﬀects of cyber attacks on SHEMSs by
launching DoS and phishing attacks in view of modifying the
load proﬁle data and the dynamic pricing information. The
researchers highlighted that such types of attacks can tem-
porarily disrupt the scheduling operation and can adversely

Figure 6: Block diagram providing an overview of the compo-
nents and networks within an Advanced Metering Infrastruc-
ture (AMI). The ﬁgure also depicts the bi-directional commu-
nication between the utility providers and the consumers.

aﬀect the energy pricing. Similarly, Sajeev and Rajamani
(2020) proposed a pricing attack on smart homes under a
third party aggregator system at diﬀerent attack points. The
authors concluded that the vulnerability of SHEMSs to pric-
ing attacks will impede its adoption in smart homes. In sim-
ilar line, Sethi et al. (2020) proposed the injection of cor-
rupted pricing data to disrupt scheduling and pricing opera-
tions. During this particular attack, the attacker, in perspec-
tive of a customer, plans to decrease the price of the electric-
ity bill from being originally at $2.11 to $1.79 and the grid
power import from 78.15kW to 76.99kW. While this diﬀer-
ence in pricing seems slight, corrupting electricity bills may
be proﬁtable to a customer in the long run and cause ﬁnancial
losses for the electricity utilities. For instance, depending on
how many households have increased their consumption, the
collective energy consumption may be considerable partic-
ularly if it happens in an unwanted period of time such as
peak consumption time.

6.2. Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI)

Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) is now regarded
as the backbone of smart grids enabling real-time communi-
cations between utility providers and customers Mohassel,
Fung, Mohammadi and Raahemifar (2014). However, the
increasing complexity of AMIs has signiﬁcantly resulted in
a rise in the number of cyber-threats on AMIs in recent years.
The highly sensitive data sensed and transmitted within the
AMI (as depicted in Figure 6 has empowered adversaries
to exploit the vulnerable points of an AMI. In this view, we
present the related recent state-of-the-art literature on threats
against AMIs at the two vulnerable points of entry namely:

6.2.1. Smart Meters

Energy theft has always been a major concern faced by
utility companies throughout the globe and dates as far as the
late 1800s Monteiro (2020). Physical interventions through
illegal connections and meter tampering contribute to sig-
niﬁcant revenue losses of utility providers Czechowski and
Kosek (2016). While the introduction of smart meters has
brought along an array of opportunities including accurate

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 10 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Category

Smart Meters

Ref No
Lo
(2013)

and Ansari

Attack Target
Energy Proﬁle

Attack Type
MiTM short-
data
term
injection

Khanna, Panigrahi
and Joshi (2016)

Fan, Li and Cao
(2017)
Wu, Chen, Weng,
Wei, Li, Qiu and
Liu (2019)

Smart meter en-
ergy
generation
data
Load Proﬁle

Short-term
data injection

Privacy attack

Energy Consump-
tion Data

False load at-
tack

Shaaban,
Ismail,
Naidu and Ser-
pedin (2020)

Smart meter en-
ergy
generation
data

Short-term
data injection

Communication
Networks

Yi, Zhu, Zhang,
Wu and Li (2014)

Communication
packets
between
smart meters and
utilities

Puppet DDoS
attacks

Boudko and Abie
(2018)

Communication
messages

MiTM Short
data
term
injection

Attack Mechanism
Dynamic
programming
optimization of the attack
formulation to a
coin
change problem.
Constraint Optimization
to maximize the power in-
jection of a bus.
Application signature ex-
traction & identiﬁcation.
Sending periodic circuit-
OFF signals to the IGBT
gate such that the circuit
is switched oﬀ when the
meter is sampling the cur-
rent reading.
The adversary manipu-
lates
to
claim higher supplied en-
ergy to the grid and hence
falsely overcharge the util-
ity company.
An adversary ﬂoods a
puppet node with data
packets so as to exhaust
the network communica-
tion bandwidth and node
energy.
Evolutionary game theory.

readings

their

Table 4
Comparative View of threats on End-User Level - Advanced Metering Infrastructure

load forecasting, network controllability, etc., researchers have
been investigating new attacks to compromise smart meters.
Lo and Ansari (2013) proposed a combination sum of en-
ergy proﬁles (CONSUMER) attack whereby an adversary
reduces its own energy consumption by injecting false data
into its own smart meter. Furthermore, to lower the changes
of fraud detection by the utility company, the attacker com-
pensates the discrepancy in measurement by injecting cor-
rupted data into least possible number of other smart me-
ters within the neighborhood area network. The authors in-
ferred that several machine learning detection schemes will
indeed fail to detect such alterations, especially if the ad-
versary injects corrupted data of small magnitude. Khanna
et al. (2016) developed a new attack for modifying the sys-
tem state to portray false increased energy exports by inject-
ing false data into smart meters at generator buses. The au-
thors claim that their attacks were successful at enabling an
adversary to gain momentary economic gains whilst attack-
ing the least number of smart meters. The researchers in
Fan et al. (2017) focus on the exploitation of reactive power
data from smart meters to infer power consumption of home
appliances by initially extracting a one-minute window of
the reactive power waveform to capture the essential charac-
teristics of appliances, ﬁltering deceptive events, detecting

real events and lastly identifying the appliances. Evaluation
results on real residential power consumption data revealed
that such attacks are highly eﬀective for violating the privacy
of residents. Wu et al. (2019) proposed the closing and open-
ing of a power main line (or its branch) synchronous to the
rate of sampling of the smart meter by injecting corrupted
signals to an insulated gate bipolar transistor. After valida-
tion, this attack is found to be immune to all standard secu-
rity countermeasures as well as very eﬀective in signiﬁcantly
reducing power consumption bills. Ismail et al. (2020) intro-
duced a setting whereby the malicious customers hack their
smart meters and increase the solar power generation read-
ings using several types of cyber attacks namely partial in-
crement attacks, minimum generation attacks and peak gen-
eration attack which resulted in the overcharging of utility
companies.

6.2.2. Communication Networks

Real-time two-way communication is of crucial impor-
tance in AMIs. As aforementioned, a high volume of ex-
tremely sensitive data is transmitted to and from the utility
provider and the end-user Mohassel et al. (2014). Nonethe-
less, the numerous advantages brought about by the two-way
communication also increases the vulnerability of an AMI
network to malicious attacks. Yi et al. (2014) introduced

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 11 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

a novel type of Denial-of-Service attack known as puppet
attacks on AMI networks by ﬂooding a puppet node with
adversarial route request packets so as to exhaust the band-
width of communication and the node energy. Experimen-
tal evaluations show that their proposed attack signiﬁcantly
decreases the performance of the AMI communication net-
work and the packet delivery rate reduces from 20% to 10%.
The authors in Boudko and Abie (2018) proposed a one-shot
evolutionary game theoretical framework to model data in-
tegrity attacks on AMIs nodes to allow adaptive selection of
strategies under resource constraints such that the node pay-
oﬀs are maximized. Results highlight that adversaries prefer
nodes with higher aggregation and the attacker uses most of
his budget to attack the Head-End System node.

7. Threats on Field Devices

With the increased deployment of ﬁeld devices along
distribution feeders and within substations, grids are now
able to smartly and eﬃciently perform distribution automa-
tion, automatic load shedding, outage management, etc Chhaya,
Sharma, Kumar and Bhagwatikar (2018). However, the im-
plementation of several such IoT-based devices increases the
complexity of the wireless ﬁeld area networks and there-
fore, exposes several security vulnerabilities which can be
exploited by adversaries. In this view, we survey the state-
of-the-art threats on ﬁeld devices as in Table 5:

7.1. Voltage Regulators

The multi-directional power ﬂow achieved from the in-
tegration of DERs along with the additional stress on volt-
age control devices caused by the stochastic and concen-
trated power proﬁles of Plug-in Electric Vehicles (PEVs) can
lead to over voltages, under voltages, high system losses, ex-
cessive tap operations and so on Canha, Pereira, Milbradt,
da Rosa Abaide, Kork Schmitt and de Abreu Antunes (2017).
Therefore, grid operators employ voltage regulation devices
such as on load tap changers (OLTC), ratio control trans-
formers (LRTs), Step Voltage Regulators (SVRs) and shunt
capacitors to mitigate the previously mentioned issues. How-
ever, the centralized nature of voltage regulation enables at-
tackers to create bottom-to-top attacks propagation which
can ultimately lead to severe outages Sun et al. (2018). There-
fore, Isozaki et al. (2014) proposed the falsiﬁcation of a lim-
ited number of sensor measurements through suppressing or
inducing tap changes at the LRT to maximize overvoltage
or undervoltage violations by an adversary with full knowl-
edge of the control algorithm. Simulation results on a distri-
bution network with one feeder modeled at a smaller scale
from a residential district in Japan with real-world data re-
vealed comparable results with two upward tap changes each
for cases with and without PVs which result in undervoltages
between 1.00 to 7.86 ×105at some nodes. The work in Teix-
eira et al. (2015) considered two types of attacks on known
as Voltage Reference Attack (VRA) where an adversary in-
jects false-data into the communication network and Voltage
Measurement Routing Attack (VMRA) where an adversary
redirects data to a wrong receiver bus within a network by

manipulating reference signals. The impact of the attacks
were further characterized based on control-theoretic tools
namely stability and input-output induced norm of linearized
systems. Numerical simulations resulted in a step change
in the voltage proﬁle ranging between 0.5% to 8% at the
buses during VRA and between −3% to 8% during VMRA.
Ma et al. (2017) extended the work in Teixeira et al. (2015)
by mostly focusing on the manipulation of sensor measure-
ments with similar approaches to characterize the impact of
the attacks. Experimental evaluations of an islanded four-
bus power distribution network with a line topology reveals
that the closed-loop system under attack is asymptotically
stable and the voltage deviation relates to falsiﬁcation ra-
tio, 𝛿, with an exponential decrease of 90% from 𝛿 = 0 to
𝛿 = 0.5 and a near linear increase of 30% from 𝛿 = 0.5 to
𝛿 = 1. Such attack whereby the adversary decreases the volt-
age measurement received by the droop controller has higher
impacts on the neighboring nodes within a line network.

7.2. Intelligent Electronic Devices

Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs) are widely used to
enhance automation within smart substations Hong and Liu
(2019). However, the vast spatial complexity and the com-
plex management hierarchy opens up potential vulnerabil-
ities that can be easily exploited by adversaries Wang and
Shi (2018). Radasky and Hoad Radasky and Hoad (2012)
studied the impacts of three High Power Electromagnetic
(HPEM) threats on IEDs namely Intentional Electromagnetic
Interference (IEMI) whereby an adversary deliberately in-
creases the electromagnetic disturbances, High Altitude Elec-
tromagnetic Pulse (HEMP) whereby an attacker create a 30
km high-altitude nuclear burst that produces intense elctro-
magnetic signals which reach the earth and lastly, Extreme
Geomagnetic Storms which is a natural disaster that cause
a signiﬁcant rapid distortion of the geomagnetic ﬁeld at the
earth’s surface. A fast rising and short 2.5∕2.5 ns electric
ﬁeld pulse during Early-time HEMP results in levels of the
order of 20kV to IEDs and can even trip protective relays
at substations. Similarly, other types of attacks distort and
damage IEDs present in sub-stations. Chattopadhyay et al.
(2018) studied the eﬀects of two types of implementation
attacks namely malicious low-cost fault injection attack by
underfeeding the micro-controller and hardware Trojan at-
tack on protective distribution relays in smart sub-stations.
Simulations on ARMv7-based micro-controller with 100 at-
tack executions revealed a signiﬁcant increase in the reaction
time to a trip signal of up to 9 times. Such attacks may even-
tually cause delays in tripping part of a power distribution
network. Any delays above a threshold may cause drastic
damage to some equipment including power network assets
such as power lines, transformers, etc.

7.3. Micro Phasor Measurement Units

The shift from a passive to an active distribution sys-
tem has overseen rapid developments in Micro Phasor Mea-
surement Units (𝜇-PMU) to guarantee real-time and accu-
rate synchronized phasor data measurements of electricity

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 12 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Main
gory

Cate-

Ref No.

Attack Target

Attack Type

Attack Mechanism

Voltage
Regulators

Yoshizawa,
Isozaki,
Fujimoto,
Ishii, Ono,
Onoda and Hayashi
(2014)
Teixeira,
Paridari,
Sandberg and Johans-
son (2015)

ratio
Load
trol
switch
measurement data

con-
sensor

Bus Voltage Measure-
ment

term data

Short
injection

Voltage reference
attack & Voltage
measurement
routing attack

Ma, Teixeira, van den
and Palensky
Berg
(2017)
Radasky
(2012)

and Hoad

Bus Voltage Measure-
ment

Short-term data
injection

Electromagnetic Field

Electromagnetic
Threats

Intelligent
Electronic
Devices (IEDs)

Chattopadhyay, Ukil,
Jap
Bhasin
(2018)

and

Faulty IEDs

Micro-Phasor
Measurement
Units (𝜇-PMU)

Santos and Orillaza
(2018)
Farajol-
Kamal,
lahi,
Nazaripouya
and Mohsenian-Rad
(2021)

Voltage & Angle mea-
surements
Phase angle channel
measurements

Implementation
attacks (malicious
fault injection at-
tacks & hardware
Trojan)
Short-term data
injection
Unsynchronized
&
synchronizedattacks

event-

Constraint Optimization
which enables
the at-
tacker to suppress/ induce
tap changes.
During the ﬁrst attack,
the adversary inputs cor-
rupted information to the
bus voltage measurements
while during the routing
the perpetrator
attack,
redirects voltage measure-
ments to another receiv-
ing bus in the network.
Multiplicative
bounded
scaling factor for crafting
attacks to one node only.
Electromagnetic Distur-
bances that may either be
produced deliberately or
is naturally occurring.
_

High Value FDI attack

During the ﬁrst attack,
the attacker is unable to
synchronize the FDI at-
tack with the occurrence
of pre-event and post-
event measurements as
opposed to during event-
synchronized attacks.

Table 5
Comparative View of threats on Field Devices.

including voltage, current, and frequency Shahsavari, Sadeghi-
Mobarakeh, Stewart, Cortez, Alvarez, Megala and Mohsenian-
Rad (2017). However, the ubiquitous nature of 𝜇-PMU in-
creases the attack surface of ADSs to adversaries Shukla,
Dutta and Sadhu (2021). Ren and Jordan Santos and Orillaza
(2018) proposed the injection of corrupted high value data
in 𝜇-PMU measurements (voltage and angles) to assess the
robustness of Weighted Least Absolute Value and Weighted
Least Squares (WLS) estimators. Simulations on an IEEE
37 Node Test Feeder with 𝜇-PMU buses revealed a stun-
ning 96.7% error in the measurement which in turn results
in the divergence of the WLS estimator. Furthermore, the
study undertaken in Kamal et al. (2021) developed two types
of false data injection threats namely event-unsynchronized
attacks and event-synchronized attacks on 𝜇-PMUs. Dur-
ing the event-unsynchronized attack, the attacker distorts the
data at the magnitude channel or the phase angle channel of
the micro-PMU while being unable to synchronize the attack
with the pre-event phasor measurements and the post-event

phasor measurements. On the other hand, during an event-
synchronized attack, the adversary may compromise the pre-
event phasor measurements and the post-event phasor mea-
surements, separately which can easily bypass bad data de-
tectors and be triggered only during event occurrences. Ex-
periments on an IEEE-33 bus test system followed by geo-
metric analysis revealed that event-synchronized attack re-
quire 20 times lesser injection of error measurements than
their event-unsynchronized counterparts and causes higher
impacts with a 50 times smaller fractional change in phasor
angle and voltage magnitude while still remaining stealthy.
Such a targeted attack could be limited in scope but result in
a major impact on the operation of the power grid by highly
deviating the outcome of the event-based methods.

8. Threats on Control Center

Following the Northeast blackout of 2003 Sweet (2003),
traditional power grids have been revamped with the inte-

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 13 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Main Cat-
egory

Sub Cate-
gory

Ref No.

Attack Target

Volt-var
Control

State
Estimation

Balanced
Single-
Phase
Distribu-
tion
Unbalanced
Multi-phase
Distribution

Dán,

Teixeira,
Sandberg,
Berthier,
Bobba
and Valdes (2014)
Ju and Lin (2018)

Voltage
measure- ments

node

Reactive power of
DER devices

Choeum and Choi
(2019)

Distribution feeder
voltage proﬁle

Shen, Liu, Xu and
Lu (2021)

Volatge & load in-
formation

Deng, Zhuang and
Liang (2019)

Meter measure-
ment information

Zhuang, Deng and
Liang (2019)

Bus voltage mea-
surements

Choeum and Choi
(2021)

Smart Meter Data

Table 6
Comparative View of threats on Control Center.

Attack
Type
MiTM
Stealth
attack

Short
Term Data
Injection
Short
Term Data
Injection
Load redis-
tribution
attack
Short
Term data
injection

Short
Term data
injection
Load redis-
tribution
attack

Attack Mechanism

voltage
Addition of Arbitrary
while subtracting attack vector
from capacitor conﬁgurations.

Topology-agnostic approach with
constraint optimization

Bilevel optimization problem us-
ing mixed integer linear program-
ming
Single-leader-multi-follower
bi-level mixed-integer
Optimization
Non-linear attack policy based on
weighted least squares optimiza-
tion

linear

Constraint optimization based on
proposed local state-based linear
DSSE
Bi-level
problem
optimization
transformation to a single-level
optimization problem based on
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker
conditions
of the lower level optimization
problem

distribution systems control center as in Table 6:

8.1. Volt-var Control

Distribution Automation Systems (DASs) have emerged
as eﬀective solutions to improve operational eﬃciency of
distribution systems with Volt-Var Control (VVC) being the
most cost-eﬀective solution to maintain adequate balance of
voltage and power factor Souran, Safa, Moghadam, Ghasem-
pour, Razeghi and Heravi (2016). The use of heterogeneous
equipment from several vendors to achieve a healthy balance
of voltage and power within acceptable range raises several
security issues which can be exploited by stealthy adver-
saries. As such, Teixeira et al. (2014) have proposed a white-
box stealthy attack model whereby an adversary intercepts
the communication between measurement devices and the
central controller to inject false data measurements which
successfully evades Bad data detectors such that the con-
troller issues sub-optimal commands to the Load Tap Changer
(LTC) and capacitors. Experimental results on an actual
distribution model using GridLab-D revealed that VVC re-
duces voltage with an error rate of 2% which is signiﬁcant
enough to disrupt the grid operation. The work in Ju and Lin
(2018) proposed the injection of corrupted reactive power
measurements into a set of DER devices with the attacker
having complete knowledge of the network topology in view
of causing severe voltage mismatch within the distribution

Figure 7: Block diagram depicting a typical distribution control
center system. (The ﬁgure represents the basic functionalities
performed by a control centre as well as the ﬂow of information
within a distribution system.)

gration of latest technologies which enables grid operators
to have more control and monitoring over the distribution
system of Energy (2019). However, network operation out-
sourcing and the complexity of connection and communica-
tion of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
components within power distribution control systems opens
up security vulnerabilities which can be exploited for ﬁnan-
cial or political welfare Tom and Sankaranarayanan (2017).
Therefore, we present a taxonomy of threats on the power

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 14 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

network. Simulations on a single-phase 12 kV 16-bus dis-
tribution feeder revealed that the proposed attack is not very
sensitive to the step size and voltage disruptions ﬂuctuating
up to 200% are achieved. Furthermore, the authors con-
cluded that a topology-agnostic attack can leverage legiti-
mate buses’ responses to further boost damages. Choeum
and Choi (2019)’s work focused on the manipulation of dis-
tribution feeder voltage proﬁles through the injection of mea-
surement data with gross errors into smart meters which is
formulated as an optimization problem using Mixed Inte-
ger Linear Programming (MILP). Evaluations on a modiﬁed
IEEE 33-bus distribution test system with one On-LTC, nine
Capacitor Banks (CBs), four PV systems and 32 smart me-
ters highlight that there is a 1% increase in the voltage mag-
nitude along with a 16% increase in the On-LTC tap posi-
tion which results in abnormal feeder voltage proﬁle in both
the physical and cyber layers. Shen et al. (2021) extended
the previous work by modeling a load redistribution attack
on VVC as a single-leader-multi-follower bi-level mixed-
integer linear programming (BMILP) model to maximize
voltage proﬁles and increase load curtailment costs. Real-
world experiments on a High-and-medium-voltage distribu-
tion system (HMVDS) in China demonstrate ﬂuctuations on
the reactive power support and voltage proﬁles by up to 83%.

8.2. State Estimation

While state estimation has been actively used within trans-
mission system, the transition to sustainable energy sources
introduced Distribution System State Estimation (DSSE) to
estimate distribution system variables in real-time with high-
est possible accuracy and monitor the distribution feeder op-
erations in power grids Primadianto and Lu (2017). How-
ever, extending traditional state estimation approaches to ac-
tive distribution systems poses several operational challenges
such as observability problem, unbalanced operations, etc.
as well as cyber security concerns Dehghanpour, Wang, Wang,
Yuan and Bu (2019). In this view, we present the state-of-
the-art threats on DSSE based in the two state estimation
phases namely:

8.2.1. Balanced Single-Phase Distribution

While distribution networks are often unbalanced and
single state estimations within such systems provide sub-
optimal results Brinkmann, Bicevskis, Scott and Negnevit-
sky (2017), it is worth noting that distribution feeders have
low 𝑥∕𝑟 ratio which is a reason why data integrity attacks
on DSSE have not much been explored Chihota and Gaunt
(2018). However, Deng et al. (2019) proposed a practical
non-linear false data injection on voltage measurements of
nodes to compromise DSSE while also enabling an adver-
sary to infer the system state from power ﬂow or power injec-
tion measurements without much hindrance. Simulations on
a single-phased balanced IEEE 56-node test feeder showed
that the approximation of system state is very close to the
accurate system state with a relative error of up to 7% for
voltage magnitude and 0.6% for voltage phase angle. Fur-
thermore, under the attack, the state estimation is success-
fully brought down by nearly 6% of its original value.

8.2.2. Unbalanced Multi-phase Distribution

As earlier mentioned, unbalanced multi-phase distribu-
tion (more speciﬁcally three-phase distribution) is the most
optimal state estimation solution. However, from the work
proposed by Deng et al. (2019), it can be seen how a sim-
ple corrupted measurement attack can negatively impact the
state estimation in balanced single-phase distributions. There-
fore, Zhuang et al. (2019) introduced a three-phased cou-
pled corrupted measurement injection attack on a local state-
based linear DSSE for multi-phase and unbalanced smart
distribution systems which considers the weak couplings among
phases to reduce the number of measurement modiﬁcations.
After evaluation of the proposed attack on an IEEE 13 and
IEEE 37 Bus Test Feeders shows that the DSSE under the
proposed attack results in approximately similar Largest Nor-
malized Residual (LNR) as that without attacks under 100
Monte-Carlo simulations. However, the DSSE under simple
attacks proves to be highly eﬀective by projecting a LNR
of 5 which is higher than the LNR threshold. On the other
hand, Choeum and Choi (2021) proposed a load redistri-
bution attack on a closed-loop conservation reduction in an
unbalanced three-phase distribution network integrated with
DERs using MILP to inject malicious measurements into
smart meters communication in view of rising the three-phase
active power ﬂow at the substation. Simulations on an IEEE
12-node test feeder with 1 OLTC, 2 PVs, 2 CBs and 17 smart
meters revealed the OLTC tap position increases by 4 after
the attack which increases the feeder voltage proﬁle and in
turn increases customer energy consumption. Furthermore,
at node 3, the voltage physical layer is 0.94 which slightly
violates below the minimum voltage limit and can therefore
result in premature breakdown of electrical appliances.

9. Threats on Energy Billing & Trading

Within the past two decades, traditional power systems
have transitioned from a centralized supply side approach to
a decentralized supply and demand side management due to
power system restructuring and integration of smart distri-
bution systems with renewable power sources Abidin, Aly,
Cleemput and Mustafa (2018). However, such increased com-
plexity exposes energy pricing and trading to cyber threats
from several adversaries for their own revenue gains or for
other malicious intentions Aitzhan and Svetinovic (2018).
Therefore, we present a taxonomy of threats on the energy
billing and trading process of smart grids as in Table 7.

9.1. Distribution Locational Marginal Pricing

Following the success of locational marginal pricing within

transmission systems Liyanapathirane, Khorasany and Raz-
zaghi (2021), the adoption of Distribution Locational Marginal
Pricing (DLMP) enables reduction in end-user energy costs,
eﬃcient peak-demand stress management on utilities and en-
hanced system sustainability Papavasiliou (2018). However,
degree of accuracy of DLMP is dependent on the integrity
of the Distribution System State Estimation data Zhang et al.
(2019b) which exposes DLMP to data integrity attacks. Zhuang
and Liang Zhuang and Liang (2019) were the ﬁrst to study

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 15 of 25

Main Category
Distribution Lo-
cational Margi-
nal Pricing

Real-time Prici-
ng

Transactive En-
ergy Market

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Ref No.

Attack Target

Attack Type

Attack Mechanism

and

Zhang, Wang and Li
(2019b)
Tan, Badrinath Krishna,
Yau
Kalbarczyk
(2013)
Mishra, Li, Pan, Kuhnle,
Thai and Seo (2017)
Zhang, Yang, Lin, Xu and
Yu (2017)
Giraldo, Cárdenas
Quijano (2017)
Krishnan, Zhang, Kaur,
Hahn,
and
Sindhu (2018)

Srivastava

and

Jhala, Natarajan, Pahwa
and Wu (2019)

Bus voltage mea-
surements
Price Data Pack-
ets

Price signals

Smart meter data

Price Signals

Cap
price, Bid
price, Demand &
Breaker
Opera-
tions
Electricity Prices

Short-term Data In-
jection
Scaling/ Delay

Short-term Data In-
jection
Short-term Data In-
jection
Long-term Scaling/
Delay/ Data Injection
Proxy Attacks

non-

Dinkelbach
convex optimization
Control-theoretic
clock manipulation

Stackelberg game

Lagrangian Optimiza-
tion
Control-theoretic Lin-
ear Optimization
Tampering with infor-
mation from controller

MiTM
Data Injection

Short-term

Barreto and Koutsoukos
(2019)

Customer Bids

Fake Bidding Injection

Barreto,
Koutsoukos (2020b)

Neema

and

Customer Bids

Short-term Data In-
jection

Barreto, Eghtesad, Eisele,
Laszka, Dubey and Kout-
soukos (2020a)

Gateway between
prosumers
and
system

Discard/Delay/ DDoS

P2P Distributed
Energy Trading

Islam, Mahmud and Oo
(2018)

Power generation
and usage patterns

Short-term Data In-
jection

Mohammadi, Eliassen and
Zhang (2020)

Demand

Demand Data Manip-
ulation

Table 7
Comparative View of Threats on Energy Billing & Trading.

for

least

square
de-
co-eﬃcients

Simple
approach
mand
Estimation
Approximation of ag-
gregate functions us-
ing market equilibrium
information.
Biased welfare func-
tion maximization us-
ing market equilibrium
information.
Approximation of ag-
gregate cost function
using quadratic opti-
mization
Constraint Optimiza-
tion to minimize en-
ergy demand and sale.
Game theory & Smart
Meter Tampering

the eﬀects of directly injecting corrupted data of small mag-
nitude to the bus voltage measurements of DLMP by formu-
lating a non-convex optimization problem, which is solved
by Dinkelbach’s algorithm. Experimental validations on a
modiﬁed multi-phase and unbalanced IEEE 13-bus test feeder
revealed that an adversary can heavily beneﬁt from a sharp
decrease in pricing (from 10.07¢/kWh to 0.76¢/kWh) at the
attacked bus while the total payment of all other customers
increases from 34873 cents to 35078 cents.

9.2. Real-time Pricing

One of the key price response mechanisms of demand
side management is Real-Time Pricing (RTP) which enables
eﬃcient power utilization and reduction in electricity costs
Dai, Gao, Gao and Zhu (2017). Due to the complex closed-
loop feedback control approach which is used to maintain
grid stability and performance Gusrialdi and Qu (2019) along
with market expansions for eﬃcient Demand Response pro-

grams Cioara, Anghel, Bertoncini, Salomie, Arnone, Mam-
mina, Velivassaki and Antal (2018), adversaries can easily
aﬀect energy markets through simple yet powerful attacks.
Tan et al. (2013) demonstrated the impacts of modifying the
incoming price signals to a group of customers during trans-
mission via either a reduction of values during scaling at-
tacks or providing old prices during delay attacks. Upon val-
idation of their proposed attacks on a normally-distributed
Constant Elasticity of Own-price (CEO) model for each cus-
tomer of New South Wales, Australia’s half-hourly total de-
mand load for 2013 as baseline load, the authors concluded
that under scaling attacks, excessive distribution line over-
load events occurred and system volatility was directly pro-
portional to the proportion of customers under attack and
inversely proportional to ampliﬁcation. Furthermore, delay
attacks increased the distribution line overload which causes
circuit breakers to open and eventually leads to marginal sys-
tem instability and regional blackouts.

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 16 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

perts fear that the participation of the prosumers at the edge
Zhang, Eisele, Dubey, Laszka and Srivastava (2019a) can
lead to several security and privacy concerns due to frauds,
unfair welfare maximization, etc.
In this view, Krishnan
et al. (2018) studied the eﬀects of three data integrity proxy
attacks namely the manipulation of cap price from 3.78$
to 0.01$, manipulation of bid price and quantity on total
demand, and lastly, the manipulation of the breaker opera-
tions by altering router at generator substation for a set-up of
thirty houses. After testing their proposed attack models on
TESP framework, the authors concluded that the the manip-
ulation of cap price as well as the alteration of bid price and
quantity on total demand resulted in a spike in cooling set-
point, ﬂuctuations in the HVAC controller loads and eventu-
ally impacts overall demand on the feeder. Furthermore, the
tripping of the breaker signiﬁcantly aﬀects the market price
and may result in ﬁnancial losses on behalf of the service
provider. The work in Jhala et al. (2019) focused changing
the integrity of electricity prices as a man-in-the-middle at-
tack during communication or as the manipulation of sensed
electricity usage data at smart meters within a transactive
energy market. Simulations on the IEEE 69-bus test sys-
tem revealed that attacks on electricity prices have higher
implications than attacks on consumption data by resulting
in higher demand ﬂuctuations and hence, higher voltage vi-
olations. More speciﬁcally, a 10% reduction of electricity
prices increases the magnitude of oscillation of energy de-
mand and distribution system voltage. Barreto and Kout-
soukos (2019) proposed the formulation of an adverse gen-
erator to manipulate the bids of other customers in the view
of shifting the transactive market equilibrium to maximize
welfare gains. Experimental validations on GridLAB-D and
PNNL set-ups demonstrate the attack’s success in increasing
the adversary’s monetary gains whilst also heavily impacting
the social welfare of other customers if attack parameters are
wrongly estimated. The authors in Barreto et al. (2020b) ex-
tended the same approach in Barreto and Koutsoukos (2019)
by imposing restrictions on the adverse generator such that
the adversary has to initially protect his own assets from op-
eration states and to hide a successful attack as long as possi-
ble to maximize proﬁt gains. After compromising 80% of the
HVAC systems, the electricity prices and total energy traded
increased signiﬁcantly, and the positive gains are upped with
increasing attack intensity causing ﬁnancial losses of other
customers. However, with increasing attack intensity comes
a decrease in the adversary’s marginal returns. Barreto et al.
(2020a) proposed three attack scenarios targeting the gate-
ways between prosumers and the system within a transactive
energy market. During the ﬁrst threat model, the attacker
gains access to a gateway in order to delay or discard the bids
based on bidding information, the second scenario involves
discarding or delaying selected bids without complete infor-
mation and thirdly, the adversary launches a Distributed De-
nial of Service (DDoS) attack. The authors concluded that
such simple attacks can eﬀectively alter the clearing price of
a blockchain-based transactive market.

Figure 8: Conceptual Model of a Transactive Energy Market.
Image adopted from Zia, Elbouchikhi, Benbouzid and Guerrero
(2019). The ﬁgure represents a block architecture of a Trans-
active Energy Market as a collection of economic and control
systems that enables the dynamic balance of supply and de-
mand of electricity across the entire electrical infrastructure
using value as a key operational parameter Hu, Yang, Kok,
Xue and Bindner (2017).

The work illustrated in Mishra et al. (2017) focuses on ar-
bitrarily increasing the price signals from the electric provider
to the smart meters with the aim of maximizing the mismatch
between energy supply and demand. Using real-world Sum-
mer 2004 Polish power ﬂow system dataset, Mishra et al.
(2017) concluded that such attacks heavily impact load shifts
and redistribution in the power grids which in turn over-
loads and heats up transmission lines to cause failures and
catastrophic blackouts. Zhang et al. (2017) proposed two
approaches known as Ex-ante attacks and Ex-post attacks
by injecting false information into demand-users or supply-
users before and after the price decision making process re-
spectively for maximizing welfare on the real-time pricing
schemes. Evaluations with 15 demand-users, 20 supply-users
and a traditional power system set-up, they concluded that
such cyber-threats can eﬀectively alter real-time prices to
the beneﬁt of the adversaries. The authors in Giraldo et al.
(2017) extended Tan et al. (2013)’s work by modeling a more
realistic attack model whereby an adversary can compromise
the integrity of price signals repeatedly over a long period of
time and at any moment as opposed to being constrained to
one-shot scaling or delay attacks in view of maximizing the
gap between generated and consumed power. Experimental
results highlight that their additive approach causes greater
damage to the market stability and is more powerful while
attacking sensed data by smart meters.

9.3. Transactive Energy Market

In recent years, transactive control Hu et al. (2017) has
been extensively studied to enable the integration of DERs
and Renewable Energy Sources (RES) with smart grids to
ensure safety and eﬃcient operability as it promises the ﬂex-
ibility of responsive assets in the grid and maintains a dy-
namic balance of energy supply and demand. However, ex-

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 17 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

9.4. Peer-to-peer Distributed Energy Trading

The decentralization of energy market models enables
local nodes to exchange surplus power in Peer-to-Peer (P2P)
setting which results in major ﬁnancial welfare for both the
prosumers and the utility company Guerrero, Chapman and
Verbič (2019). However, the complexity of such large scale
decentralized energy trades within untrusted and non-transparent
energy markets is highly vulnerable to several security and
privacy concerns Li, Kang, Yu, Ye, Deng and Zhang (2018).
In this view, Islam et al. (2018) developed an optimal false
data injection attack to enable adversaries to peak at the power
generation and usage patterns for extracting the maximum
beneﬁts from legitimate nodes while minimizing the gap be-
tween power sold and power purchased to avoid detection.
Results after validation of the proposed attack approach on
a residential micro grid with four households revealed that
the proposed attack signiﬁcantly impacts the proﬁts of legiti-
mate houses by 86% to 94%. The work in Mohammadi et al.
(2020) proposed the manipulation of prosumers’ demands
by a malicious supplier acting as a participating prosumer
to maximize their ﬁnancial welfare which can be achieved
either through smart meters tampering or communication
network interception. Experimental evaluations with a real
dataset from Austin, Texas revealed that attacking 70% of
prosumers decreases the average utility for prosumers by 2.7%
and the proﬁts of the external energy supplies by 10.6%.

10. Main Research Gaps & Future Directions
Since the topic of FDI threats within active distributions
systems is an emerging topic of research with very few re-
lated studies at the time of writing, we present the main ex-
isting research gaps and provide some recommendations for
fueling future research within this ﬁeld.

10.1. Existing Research Issues

In what follows, we discuss some of the main gaps in the
current FDI attack studies within active distribution systems.

1. Limited FDI threats studied in perspective of active dis-
tribution systems: While most research on FDI threats on
smart power grids have concentrated mostly on transmission
networks, there is currently a considerable lack of FDI at-
tacks proposed on ADSs. The literature surveyed within this
manuscript tried to cover most or if not all of the integrity
attacks on distribution networks. However, there are still
several open challenges with respect to the scope. For in-
stance, at the time of writing, only Zhuang and Liang (2021)
assessed the impact of FDI attacks on energy storage in-
frastructure and SoC information. Hence, it is vital for re-
searchers to extend the aforementioned work in the aim of
exposing the subtle extreme vulnerabilities of energy stor-
age systems. Similarly, our survey highlighted that not much
studies have been undertaken which properly assess the im-
pact of FDI threats on IEDs, 𝜇-PMUs, DLMP, etc.

2. Lack of realistic real-world experimentation: The FDI
threats on ADSs proposed by existing literature are produced

and evaluated within laboratory conﬁned settings with sev-
eral assumptions such as linearity. However, industrial stan-
dards diﬀer from those studies such that models may be non-
linear and are alternating current based systems. Therefore,
we believe that more realistic FDI attacks must be formu-
lated against large-scale realistic industrial networks/systems
with lesser assumptions.

3. Lack of corroboration of FDI attack evaluations: Even
though the FDI attacks proposed within the existing related
literature has successfully proven their impacts through nu-
merical evaluations against bench-marked test cases, there
is still a lack of experimental result validations on standard-
ized testbeds. Testbeds are vital for assessing the perfor-
mance of attacks on power grids which take into consider-
ation the architectures, security concepts, etc. Hence, we
believe that before researchers plan to carry further research
on this emerging topic, it is of high priority to initially set
some standardization which will enable easy comparison of
studies.

4. Lack of state-of-the-art methods to detect FDI attacks:
Over the years, several techniques have been proposed to
overcome the threats imposed by FDI attacks on smart grids.
For instance, Kullback Leibler distance method, fast go-decomposition,
unscented Kalman ﬁlter (UKF), Bayesian formulation, etc.
have been previously proposed as eﬀective countermeasures
against FDI attacks Sayghe et al. (2020). However, with the
increasing strength and stealthiness of recent FDI attacks,
several of the previously proposed solutions have become
ineﬀective and outdated. In this view, we believe that state-
of-the-art computer science techniques must be applied to
enable eﬀective detection of FDI threats. Some of the recent
works in the ﬁeld FDI counter defenses that have recently
surfaced include the use of state-of-the-art computer science
techniques such as:

• AI-based solutions: Artiﬁcial Intelligence has proven its
success in several ﬁelds and disciplines and has emerged
as one of the most successful technologies of the 21st cen-
tury. Traditional BDDs that usually calculate the norm of the
residuals between an attacked state and a normal state tend
to fail in presence of stealthy FDI attacks. In order to over-
come the FDI attack detection limitations posed by the use of
traditional BDDs Sayghe et al. (2020), researchers have also
developed several solutions by leveraging machine learning
and deep learning techniques to eﬀectively detect such cyber
threats. For instance, authors in Ozay, Esnaola, Yarman Vu-
ral, Kulkarni and Poor (2016), which is among one of the
earliest works, investigated the use of supervised machine
learning algorithms for FDIA detection. The authors pro-
posed the utilization of popular supervised and semi-supervised
learning algorithms to detect FDI attacks with better per-
formance than traditional BDDs. In response, other works
Mohammadpourfard, Sami and Weng (2018); Kumar, Sax-
ena and Choi (2021); Mohammadpourfard, Sami and Seiﬁ
(2017); Tabakhpour and Abdelaziz (2019) have followed which
employed several machine learning and deep learning tech-
niques for similar tasks. For instance, Kumar et al. Kumar

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 18 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

et al. (2021) similarly employed various machine and en-
semble learning mechanisms for FDI attack detection. Sev-
eral milestones have been achieved in developing FDI detec-
tion mechanisms through the use of machine learning tech-
nologies. However, throughout the past decade, there has
been increased interests and applications of deep learning
neural networks in several domains which have shown im-
proved accuracy rates over traditional machine learning al-
gorithms Massaoudi, Abu-Rub, Refaat, Chihi and Oueslati
(2021). Indeed, researchers within the ﬁeld of FDI attack
detection followed in the same footsteps. The work in Wei
and Mendis (2016) is one of the earliest to employ the use of
deep learning networks to analyze real-time measurements
from the geographically sparse PMUs. Another work pro-
posed by Haftu et al. Reda, Anwar, Mahmood and Chil-
amkurti (2022) developed a deep learning model for detec-
tion of false data injection attacks using a new using a new
data-driven State Estimation model. Similarly, several other
works Niu, Li, Sun and Tomsovic (2019); Zhang, Wang and
Chen (2021); Mode, Calyam and Hoque (2020); Ashrafuz-
zaman, Chakhchoukh, Jillepalli, Tosic, de Leon, Sheldon
and Johnson (2018) have been proposed with improved deep
neural networks.

• Graph Signal Processing-based solutions: While machine
learning and deep learning techniques have been studied for
FDI detection, the main prevailing issue with such approaches
is the need for historic datasets that also contain attacked
states which is extremely hard to obtain. Therefore, to over-
come such problem, recent trends in literature have high-
lighted the use of graph signal processing techniques to de-
tect FDI anomalies in power grid systems. Graph signal
processing is an emerging ﬁeld where classical signal pro-
cessing tools developed in the Euclidean domain have been
generalised to irregular domains such as graphs. Drayer and
Routtenberg (2020) ﬁrst proposed the use of anomaly ﬁl-
tering using Graph Fourier Transform to detect stealth FDI
threats. Similarly, the authors in Ramakrishna and Scaglione
(2019) developed a countermeasure to FDI threats in syn-
chrophasor measurements through empirical evidence that
PMU information are low-pass graph signals and the use
of the features of the PMU graph signal. Similarly, Boy-
aci, Umunnakwe, Sahu, Narimani, Ismail, Davis and Ser-
pedin (2022)’s study utilized a scalable Graph Neural Net-
work (GNN) for FDI attack detection. While most of the
work is based on transmission systems where the graphs are
connected in nature, it would be great to investigate the ex-
tension of the work more from a distribution system perspec-
tive where the topology is radial or tree like. As very few
studies have been undertaken within this area, we believe
that this is a very interesting research gap that can be further
explored.

• Hybrid solutions: Since real-time smart grid systems have
become highly susceptible to real-time FDI attacks, researchers
have began implementing hybrid countermeasures by lever-
aging hybrid solutions that enhances the chance of FDI at-
tack detection. Data-driven solutions tend to leverage spatio-
temporal correlations among multi-time-instant sensor mea-

surements to detect FDI outliers. A few works including
Chen, Wang, Cui, Zhao, Bi, Chen and Zhang (2022); Chen,
Chen, Zhao, Zhang, Ni and Ren (2021); Deb Roy, Debbarma
and Guerrero (2022) on data-driven FDI attack detection haven
been proposed in literature. For instance, the work in Chen
et al. (2022) design an unsupervised detection scheme to de-
tect the stealthy attack by employing a deep auto-encoding
Gaussian mixture model which also means the data imbal-
ance tolerance. While data-driven-based FDI defense mech-
anisms have been studied in the recent past, a new hybrid ap-
proach, namely physics-based solutions, has surfaced amongst
researchers within this topic. Jevtic, Zhang, Li and Ilic (2018)
is a pioneering work that uses a hybrid physics-based deep
learning approach for FDI threat detection in power systems.
In similar line, Trevizan, Ruben, Nagaraj, Ibukun, Starke,
Bretas, McNair and Zare (2019); Chamanbaz, Dabbene and
Bouﬀanais (2019); Xu, Higgins, Wang, Jaimoukha and Teng
(2022) are among the few works that employed the use of
physics-based methods for FDI attack detection.

5. Lack of investigation of FDI threats in black-box settings:
Traditionally, the crafting of FDI threats by an adversary
requires complete knowledge of the system. However, in
practice, it is extremely hard to obtain topologies and other
valuable characteristics of power systems as they are usu-
ally secured and encrypted to prevent unauthorized access.
As prior knowledge for crafting FDI attacks is diﬃcult to ob-
tain in real-life scenarios, researchers have been motivated to
contribute towards data-driven blind attack strategies based
on black-box modelling for smart grids. In that regard, some
few works Rahman and Mohsenian-Rad (2012); Zhang, Chu,
Sankar and Kosut (2018); Deng and Liang (2019); Zhang,
Chu, Sankar and Kosut (2016); Li and Wang (2019); Jiao,
Xun, Liu and Yan (2021) have demonstrated that even with
limited amount of information, successful FDI attacks have
been implemented on transmission systems. Furthermore,
the works in Anwar and Mahmood (2016); Anwar et al. (2022);
Anwar, Mahmood and Pickering (2016) contributed signiﬁ-
cantly towards the development of blind FDI attacks in black-
box based settings. Speciﬁcally, in a black-box setting as
shown in Figure 9, an attacker is able to construct stealthy
attack vectors which are based on the measurement subspace
of the sensor information, thus eliminating the need of prior
"known" system information. However, the mentioned stud-
ies have mostly been undertaken on transmission systems.
Therefore, due to the major diﬀerences in characteristics be-
tween power transmission and distribution systems, transmission-
based FDI attack construction mechanisms may not be ex-
tended to distribution systems. Very limited studies includ-
ing Guihai and Sikdar (2021) have been undertaken to in-
vestigate the crafting of black-box FDI attacks in distribution
systems. Thus, we believe that there exists a very critical gap
in the existing state-of-the-art to be addressed by researchers
as in the real world, adversaries often need to craft black-box
attacks as they lack valuable insights of a particular system.

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 19 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

(a) Demonstration of an FDI attack with known prior
information. (An adversary constructs a FDI attack using known
system information which produces a residual norm similar to a
normal behaviour scenario)

(b) Demonstration of an FDI attack without prior information.
(An adversary constructs a blind FDI attack using subspace
information of the measurement data.

Figure 9: Comparison between FDI attack construction with prior information vs.
(2017)).

in a black-box setting (referred from Anwar

10.2. Future Directions

With the number of cyber-threats constantly rising on
smart grids, securing modern active distribution networks is
becoming one of the top agendas of several nations. Within
this section, we recommend some future research prospects
in relevance to FDI threats on ADSs.

1. Secure Communication & Aggregation Protocols: Active
distribution networks feature bi-directional ﬂow of critical
data and messages. Throughout this review, we have uncov-
ered that AMI communications can easily be subverted to
inject corrupted measurements into the data Siqueira de Car-
valho, Kumar Sen, Nag Velaga, Feksa Ramos and Neves Canha
(2018). Furthermore, attackers are enable to actively partic-
ipate in the data aggregation process to input falsiﬁed data
into the network Wang and Lu (2013). The critical issue to
be addressed is how to accurately identify subtle false data
injection attacks and refrain adversaries from maliciously
gaining access to the network. How to design strong data
encryption and diﬀerentially private schemes with a healthy
trade-oﬀ between data utility and accuracy along the aggre-
gation path is also a challenging issue in smart grids.

2. Privacy Preservation Consideration: Most, if not all, of
the FDI threats proposed within the emerging ﬁeld of ac-
tive distribution systems are mainly concerned about com-
promising the stable operations of grids. However, we be-
lieve that researchers should actively research on privacy
breaching attacks and their countermeasures to expose and
resolve the vulnerabilities of future active distribution net-
works. One such solution is the application of collaborative
learning within the power distribution infrastructure.

3. FDI attacks on Blockchain-based distribution system so-
lutions: Since the rise of blockchain paradigm, energy sys-
tem researchers have been actively ﬁnding blockchain-based
solutions for smart grids, more speciﬁcally in the ﬁeld of dis-
tribution systems. While blockchain oﬀers several promis-

ing beneﬁts of security and complex interaction modeling,
FDI attacks on blockchain based solutions for distribution
networks must be thoroughly studied as it is itself a very new
research ﬁeld.

4. FDI threats on Distributed Energy Management: DERs
are changing the way of producing and managing electricity
in several countries. Rather than the generation of electric-
ity by centralized power stations, it is currently being gener-
ated through renewable energy units or systems that are com-
monly located at homes or businesses. Distributed Energy
Management is an emerging topic within the grid research
community and therefore, it is vital to study the emerging
FDI risks in its relation.

5. Lightweight security mechanisms: Within the smart grid
ecosystem, there are several resource-limited sensor devices
(e.g. smart meters, etc.) which consistently gather valu-
able data. Therefore, due to the lack of computational re-
sources, conventional security mechanisms are not suitable
for sensor nodes in the smart grid system. Therefore, to de-
fend against FDI threats, researchers must focus on develop-
ing light-weight defense solutions to overcome the resource-
limitation of sensor devices.

11. Conclusion

Active distribution systems in smart grids are being threat-

ened from an emerging class of cyber attacks known as False
Data Injection attacks. Through the injection of corrupted
measurement vectors, attackers can easily bypass bad data
detection countermeasures and compromise the availability,
integrity and conﬁdentiality of the data within ADSs. More-
over, properly coordinated and executed FDI cyberattacks
can have devastating impacts on not only the distribution
system, but on the overall smart grid due to large-scale power
system operation failures, regional blackouts, energy thefts,
and so on.

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 20 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Therefore, in this manuscript, we presented a survey of
of FDI attacks on active distribution systems and proposed
a taxonomy to classify the studies with respect to four attack
targets namely end-user level, ﬁeld devices, control center
and, energy pricing and trading. Finally, we identiﬁed some
main gaps in the existing research and provided some future
research directions for FDI attacks on active distribution sys-
tems.

References
Abidin, A., Aly, A., Cleemput, S., Mustafa, M.A., 2018. Secure and
privacy-friendly local electricity trading and billing in smart grid.
arXiv:1801.08354.

Aitzhan, N.Z., Svetinovic, D., 2018. Security and privacy in decentral-
ized energy trading through multi-signatures, blockchain and anony-
mous messaging streams. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing 15, 840–852.

Almalki, S.A., Sheldon, F.T., 2021. Deep learning to improve false data
injection attack detection in cooperative intelligent transportation sys-
tems, in: 2021 IEEE 12th Annual Information Technology, Electron-
ics and Mobile Communication Conference (IEMCON), pp. 1016–1021.
doi:10.1109/IEMCON53756.2021.9623153.

Anuebunwa, U.R., Rajamani, H.S., Abd-Alhameed, R., Pillai, P., 2018.
Investigating the impacts of cyber-attacks on pricing data of home en-
ergy management systems in demand response programs, in: 2018 IEEE
Power Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), IEEE, Portland, OR,
USA. pp. 1–5.
Anwar, A., 2017.
Smart Grid.
Wales. Australia.

Data-Driven Stealthy Injection Attacks on
thesis. The University of New South
URL: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/

Ph.D.

Adnan-Anwar/publication/328128183_Data-Driven_Stealthy_
Injection_Attacks_on_Smart_Grid/links/5bb950ba92851c7fde2fb8d6/
Data-Driven-Stealthy-Injection-Attacks-on-Smart-Grid.pdf.

Anwar, A., Mahmood, A.N., 2016. Stealthy and blind false injection attacks
on scada ems in the presence of gross errors, in: 2016 IEEE Power and
Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1–5. doi:10.1109/PESGM.
2016.7741557.

Anwar, A., Mahmood, A.N., Pickering, M., 2016. Data-Driven Stealthy In-
jection Attacks on Smart Grid with Incomplete Measurements. Springer
International Publishing, Cham. volume 9650.
p. 180–192. URL:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-31863-9_13, doi:10.1007/
978-3-319-31863-9_13.

Anwar, A., Mahmood, A.N., Tari, Z., Kalam, A., 2022. Measurement-
driven blind topology estimation for sparse data injection attack in
energy system. Electric Power Systems Research 202, 107593. URL:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0378779621005745,
doi:10.1016/j.epsr.2021.107593.

Ashrafuzzaman, M., Chakhchoukh, Y., Jillepalli, A.A., Tosic, P.T.,
de Leon, D.C., Sheldon, F.T., Johnson, B.K., 2018. Detecting stealthy
false data injection attacks in power grids using deep learning, in: 2018
14th International Wireless Communications & Mobile Computing
Conference (IWCMC), pp. 219–225. doi:10.1109/IWCMC.2018.8450487.
Balezentis, T., Streimikiene, D., Mikalauskas, I., Shen, Z., 2021. Towards
carbon free economy and electricity: The puzzle of energy costs, sustain-
ability and security based on willingness to pay. Energy 214, 119081.
Barreto, C., Eghtesad, T., Eisele, S., Laszka, A., Dubey, A., Koutsoukos,
X., 2020a. Cyber-attacks and mitigation in blockchain based transactive
energy systems, in: 2020 IEEE Conference on Industrial Cyberphysical
Systems (ICPS), pp. 129–136.

Barreto, C., Koutsoukos, X., 2019. Attacks on electricity markets, in:
2019 57th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and
Computing (Allerton), pp. 705–711.

Barreto, C., Neema, H., Koutsoukos, X., 2020b. Attacking electricity mar-

kets through iot devices. Computer 53, 55–62.

Barua, A., Faruque, M.A.A., 2020. Hall spooﬁng: A non-invasive dos
attack on grid-tied solar inverter, in: 29th USENIX Security Sympo-

sium (USENIX Security 20), USENIX Association, USA. pp. 1273–
1290.
URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/
presentation/barua.

Bernstein, A., Bienstock, D., Hay, D., Uzunoglu, M., Zussman, G., 2014.
Power grid vulnerability to geographically correlated failures — analysis
and control implications, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2014 - IEEE Conference
on Computer Communications, pp. 2634–2642. doi:10.1109/INFOCOM.
2014.6848211.

Bienstock, D., Verma, A., 2009. The n-k problem in power grids: New
models, formulations and numerical experiments (extended version).
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/0912.5233, doi:10.48550/ARXIV.0912.5233.
Boudko, S., Abie, H., 2018. An evolutionary game for integrity attacks
and defences for advanced metering infrastructure, in: Proceedings of
the 12th European Conference on Software Architecture: Companion
Proceedings, ACM, Madrid, Spain. p. 1–7. URL: https://dl.acm.org/
doi/10.1145/3241403.3241463.

Boyaci, O., Umunnakwe, A., Sahu, A., Narimani, M.R., Ismail, M., Davis,
K.R., Serpedin, E., 2022. Graph neural networks based detection of
stealth false data injection attacks in smart grids. IEEE Systems Journal
16, 2946–2957. doi:10.1109/JSYST.2021.3109082.

Brinkmann, B., Bicevskis, K., Scott, R., Negnevitsky, M., 2017. Evalua-
tion of single-and three-phase state estimation in distribution networks,
in: 2017 Australasian Universities Power Engineering Conference (AU-
PEC), pp. 1–5.

Canha, L.N., Pereira, P.R., Milbradt, R., da Rosa Abaide, A., Kork Schmitt,
K.E., de Abreu Antunes, M., 2017. Intelligent voltage regulator to dis-
tributed voltage control in smart grids, in: 2017 52nd International Uni-
versities Power Engineering Conference (UPEC), pp. 1–6.

Siqueira de Carvalho, R., Kumar Sen, P., Nag Velaga, Y., Feksa Ramos, L.,
Neves Canha, L., 2018. Communication system design for an advanced
metering infrastructure. Sensors 18, 3734.

Chamanbaz, M., Dabbene, F., Bouﬀanais, R., 2019. A physics-based at-
tack detection technique in cyber-physical systems: A model predictive
control co-design approach, in: 2019 Australian & New Zealand Con-
trol Conference (ANZCC), pp. 18–23. doi:10.1109/ANZCC47194.2019.
8945588.

Chaojun, G., Jirutitijaroen, P., Motani, M., 2015. Detecting false data in-
jection attacks in ac state estimation. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid
6, 2476–2483. doi:10.1109/TSG.2015.2388545.

Chattopadhyay, A., Ukil, A., Jap, D., Bhasin, S., 2018. Toward threat of
implementation attacks on substation security: Case study on fault de-
tection and isolation. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 14,
2442–2451.

Chen, C., Chen, Y., Zhao, J., Zhang, K., Ni, M., Ren, B., 2021. Data-
driven resilient automatic generation control against false data injection
attacks.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 17, 8092–8101.
doi:10.1109/TII.2021.3058413.

Chen, C., Wang, Y., Cui, M., Zhao, J., Bi, W., Chen, Y., Zhang, X.,
2022. Data-driven detection of stealthy false data injection attack against
power system state estimation. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Infor-
matics , 1–1doi:10.1109/TII.2022.3149106.

Chhaya, L., Sharma, P., Kumar, A., Bhagwatikar, G., 2018. Iot-based im-
plementation of ﬁeld area network using smart grid communication in-
frastructure. Smart Cities 1, 176–189.

Chihota, M., Gaunt, C., 2018. Transform for probabilistic voltage computa-
tion on distribution feeders with distributed generation, in: 2018 Power
Systems Computation Conference (PSCC), pp. 1–7.

Choeum, D., Choi, D.H., 2019. Oltc-induced false data injection attack on
volt/var optimization in distribution systems. IEEE Access 7, 34508–
34520.

Choeum, D., Choi, D.H., 2021. Vulnerability assessment of conservation
voltage reduction to load redistribution attack in unbalanced active dis-
tribution networks.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 17,
473–483.

Cioara, T., Anghel, I., Bertoncini, M., Salomie, I., Arnone, D., Mammina,
M., Velivassaki, T.H., Antal, M., 2018. Optimized ﬂexibility manage-
ment enacting data centres participation in smart demand response pro-
grams. Future Generation Computer Systems 78, 330–342.

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 21 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Committee, T.S.G.I.P.G.C., 2014. Guidelines for smart grid cybersecu-
rity. NIST IR 7628r1. URL: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/
2014/NIST.IR.7628r1.pdf.

Czechowski, R., Kosek, A.M., 2016. The most frequent energy theft tech-
niques and hazards in present power energy consumption, in: 2016 Joint
Workshop on Cyber- Physical Security and Resilience in Smart Grids
(CPSR-SG), IEEE, Vienna, Austria. p. 1–7. URL: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/7684098/.

Dai, Y., Gao, Y., Gao, H., Zhu, H., 2017. Real-time pricing scheme based
on stackelberg game in smart grid with multiple power retailers. Neuro-
computing 260, 149–156.

Deb Roy, S., Debbarma, S., Guerrero, J.M., 2022. A data-driven al-
gorithm to detect false data injections targeting both frequency regu-
lation and market operation in power systems.
International Journal
of Electrical Power & Energy Systems 143, 108409. URL: https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0142061522004215, doi:10.1016/
j.ijepes.2022.108409.

Dehghanpour, K., Wang, Z., Wang, J., Yuan, Y., Bu, F., 2019. A survey on
state estimation techniques and challenges in smart distribution systems.
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 10, 2312–2322.

Deng, R., Liang, H., 2019. False data injection attacks with limited sus-
ceptance information and new countermeasures in smart grid.
IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15, 1619–1628. doi:10.1109/TII.
2018.2863256.

Deng, R., Xiao, G., Lu, R., Liang, H., Vasilakos, A.V., 2017. False data
injection on state estimation in power systems—attacks, impacts, and
defense: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 13, 411–
423.

Deng, R., Zhuang, P., Liang, H., 2019. False data injection attacks against
IEEE Transactions on

state estimation in power distribution systems.
Smart Grid 10, 2871–2881.

Drayer, E., Routtenberg, T., 2020. Detection of false data injection attacks
in smart grids based on graph signal processing. IEEE Systems Journal
14, 1886–1896. doi:10.1109/JSYST.2019.2927469.

Dán, G., Sandberg, H., 2010. Stealth attacks and protection schemes for
state estimators in power systems, in: 2010 First IEEE International
Conference on Smart Grid Communications, pp. 214–219. doi:10.1109/
SMARTGRID.2010.5622046.

Education, C.R.., 2016. Core rankings portal. URL: https://www.core.edu.

au/conference-portal.

of Energy, U.D., 2019. Operation centers: The smart grid | smart-
grid.gov. URL: https://www.smartgrid.gov/the_smart_grid/operation_
centers.html.

Fan, J., Li, Q., Cao, G., 2017. Privacy disclosure through smart me-
ters: Reactive power based attack and defense, in: 2017 47th Annual
IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Net-
works (DSN), IEEE, Denver, Colorado, USA. p. 13–24. URL: http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8023107/.

Ghiani, E., Pilo, F., Celli, G., 2018. Deﬁnition of Smart Distribution
Networks. Elsevier. p. 1–23. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/B9780128148914000011.

Giraldo, J., Cárdenas, A., Quijano, N., 2017. Integrity attacks on real-time
pricing in smart grids: Impact and countermeasures. IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid 8, 2249–2257.

Giraldo, J.S., Vergara, P.P., López, J.C., Nguyen, P.H., Paterakis, N.G.,
2021. A linear ac-opf formulation for unbalanced distribution net-
works.
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 57, 4462–4472.
doi:10.1109/TIA.2021.3085799.

Gu, Y., Yu, X., Guo, K., Qiao, J., Guo, L., 2021. Detection, estimation, and
compensation of false data injection attack for uavs. Information Sci-
ences 546, 723–741. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0020025520308215, doi:10.1016/j.ins.2020.08.055.

Guan, Z., Sun, N., Xu, Y., Yang, T., 2015. A comprehensive survey of false
data injection in smart grid. Int. J. Wire. Mob. Comput. 8, 27–33. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1504/IJWMC.2015.066756.

Guerrero, J., Chapman, A.C., Verbič, G., 2019. Decentralized p2p energy
trading under network constraints in a low-voltage network. IEEE Trans-
actions on Smart Grid 10, 5163–5173.

Guihai, Z., Sikdar, B., 2021. Adversarial machine learning against false data
injection attack detection for smart grid demand response, in: 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing
Technologies for Smart Grids (SmartGridComm), pp. 352–357. doi:10.
1109/SmartGridComm51999.2021.9632316.

Gusrialdi, A., Qu, Z., 2019. Smart Grid Security: Attacks and Defenses.
p. 199–223.

Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland.
URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-98310-3_13.

Hammer, B., Fuhr, C., Hanson, J., Konigorski, U., 2019. Diﬀerences of
power ﬂows in transmission and distribution networks and implications
on inverter droop control, in: 2019 International Conference on Clean
Electrical Power (ICCEP), pp. 46–54.

Han, J., Choi, C.S., Park, W.K., Lee, I., 2011. Green home energy man-
agement system through comparison of energy usage between the same
kinds of home appliances, in: 2011 IEEE 15th International Symposium
on Consumer Electronics (ISCE), IEEE, Singapore. pp. 1–4.

He, D., Chen, C., Bu, J., Chan, S., Zhang, Y., Guizani, M., 2012. Secure
service provision in smart grid communications. IEEE Communications
Magazine 50, 53–61. doi:10.1109/MCOM.2012.6257527.

Hong, J., Liu, C.C., 2019. Intelligent electronic devices with collaborative
intrusion detection systems. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 10, 271–
281.

Hu, J., Yang, G., Kok, K., Xue, Y., Bindner, H.W., 2017. Transactive con-
trol: a framework for operating power systems characterized by high
penetration of distributed energy resources. Journal of Modern Power
Systems and Clean Energy 5, 451–464.

Huang, K., Tao, Z., Wang, C., Guo, T., Yang, C., Gui, W., 2022. Cloud-
edge collaborative method for industrial process monitoring based on
error-triggered dictionary learning. IEEE Transactions on Industrial In-
formatics , 1–1doi:10.1109/TII.2022.3161640.

Islam, S.N., Mahmud, M., Oo, A., 2018. Impact of optimal false data in-
jection attacks on local energy trading in a residential microgrid. ICT
Express 4, 30–34.

Ismail, M., Shaaban, M.F., Naidu, M., Serpedin, E., 2020. Deep learn-
ing detection of electricity theft cyber-attacks in renewable distributed
generation. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 11, 3428–3437.

Isozaki, Y., Yoshizawa, S., Fujimoto, Y., Ishii, H., Ono, I., Onoda, T.,
Hayashi, Y., 2014. On detection of cyber attacks against voltage con-
trol in distribution power grids, in: 2014 IEEE International Conference
on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), pp. 842–847.
Jevtic, A., Zhang, F., Li, Q., Ilic, M., 2018. Physics- and learning-based
detection and localization of false data injections in automatic gen-
IFAC-PapersOnLine 51, 702–707. URL: https://
eration control.
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2405896318335080, doi:10.1016/
j.ifacol.2018.11.787.

Jhala, K., Natarajan, B., Pahwa, A., Wu, H., 2019. Stability of transac-
tive energy market-based power distribution system under data integrity
attack. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15, 5541–5550.
Jia, L., Kim, J., Thomas, R.J., Tong, L., 2014. Impact of data quality on real-
time locational marginal price. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 29,
627–636. doi:10.1109/TPWRS.2013.2286992.

Jiao, R., Xun, G., Liu, X., Yan, G., 2021. A new ac false data injection attack
method without network information. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid
12, 5280–5289. doi:10.1109/TSG.2021.3102329.

Jokar, P., Arianpoo, N., Leung, V.C.M., 2016. A survey on security issues
in smart grids: A survey on security issues in sgs. Security and Com-
munication Networks 9, 262–273.

Ju, P., Lin, X., 2018. Adversarial attacks to distributed voltage con-
trol in power distribution networks with ders, in: Proceedings of the
Ninth International Conference on Future Energy Systems, Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 291–302. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3208903.3208912.

Kamal, M., Farajollahi, M., Nazaripouya, H., Mohsenian-Rad, H., 2021.
Cyberattacks against event-based analysis in micro-pmus: Attack mod-
els and counter measures. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 12, 1577–
1588.

Kandasamy, N.K., 2020. Prosumer site power interruption attacks: exploit-
ing the reactive power control feature in smart inverters. IET Generation,

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 22 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Transmission & Distribution 14, 5372–5380.

on Smart Grid 8, 1864–1875.

Khanna, K., Panigrahi, B.K., Joshi, A., 2016. Data integrity attack in smart
grid: optimised attack to gain momentary economic proﬁt. IET Gener-
ation, Transmission & Distribution 10, 4032–4039.

Kitchenham, B., Charters, S., 2007. Guidelines for performing systematic

literature reviews in software engineering.

Kosut, O., Jia, L., Thomas, R.J., Tong, L., 2011. Malicious data attacks on
the smart grid. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 2, 645–658. doi:10.
1109/TSG.2011.2163807.

Krishnan, V.V.G., Zhang, Y., Kaur, K., Hahn, A., Srivastava, A., Sindhu, S.,
2018. Cyber-security analysis of transactive energy systems, in: 2018
IEEE/PES Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exposition (T
D), pp. 1–9.

Kumar, A., Saxena, N., Choi, B.J., 2021. Machine learning algorithm for
detection of false data injection attack in power system, in: 2021 Inter-
national Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), pp. 385–390.
doi:10.1109/ICOIN50884.2021.9333913.

Lab, S., 2021. Scimago journal & country rank. URL: https://www.

scimagojr.com/journalrank.php.

Lakshmi, S., Ganguly, S., 2018. Transition of Power Distribution Sys-
tem Planning from Passive to Active Networks: A State-of-the-Art Re-
view and a New Proposal. Springer. Green Energy and Technology, p.
87–117. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-7188-1_4.

Li, Y., Wang, Y., 2019. False data injection attacks with incomplete network
topology information in smart grid. IEEE Access 7, 3656–3664. doi:10.
1109/ACCESS.2018.2888582.

Li, Z., Kang, J., Yu, R., Ye, D., Deng, Q., Zhang, Y., 2018. Consor-
tium blockchain for secure energy trading in industrial internet of things.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 14, 3690–3700.

Liang, G., Weller, S.R., Zhao, J., Luo, F., Dong, Z.Y., 2017a. The 2015
IEEE

ukraine blackout: Implications for false data injection attacks.
Transactions on Power Systems 32, 3317–3318.

Liang, G., Zhao, J., Luo, F., Weller, S.R., Dong, Z.Y., 2017b. A review of
false data injection attacks against modern power systems. IEEE Trans-
actions on Smart Grid 8, 1630–1638. doi:10.1109/TSG.2015.2495133.
Lindström, M., Sasahara, H., He, X., Sandberg, H., Johansson, K.H., 2021.
Power injection attacks in smart distribution grids with photovoltaics.
arXiv:2011.05829.

Liu, J., Xiao, Y., Li, S., Liang, W., Chen, C.L.P., 2012. Cyber security and
privacy issues in smart grids. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials
14, 981–997.

Liu, X., Li, Z., 2017. False data attack models, impact analyses and defense
strategies in the electricity grid. The Electricity Journal 30, 35–42.
Liu, Y., Ning, P., Reiter, M.K., 2009. False data injection attacks against
state estimation in electric power grids, in: Proceedings of the 16th ACM
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 21–32. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1653662.1653666.

Liyanapathirane, U., Khorasany, M., Razzaghi, R., 2021. Optimization of
economic eﬃciency in distribution grids using distribution locational
marginal pricing. IEEE Access 9, 60123–60135.

Lo, C.H., Ansari, N., 2013. Consumer: A novel hybrid intrusion detection
system for distribution networks in smart grid. IEEE Transactions on
Emerging Topics in Computing 1, 33–44.

Ma, M., Teixeira, A.M., van den Berg, J., Palensky, P., 2017. Voltage con-
trol in distributed generation under measurement falsiﬁcation attacks.
IFAC-PapersOnLine 50, 8379–8384.

Massaoudi, M., Abu-Rub, H., Refaat, S.S., Chihi, I., Oueslati, F.S., 2021.
Deep learning in smart grid technology: A review of recent advance-
ments and future prospects. IEEE Access 9, 54558–54578. doi:10.1109/
ACCESS.2021.3071269.

I., Kang, B., Maynard, P., Sezer, S.,
McLaughlin, K., Friedberg,
Secure Communications in Smart Grid:
McWilliams, G., 2015.
p. 113–148. URL: https:
Networking and Protocols. Elsevier.
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780128021224000055, doi:10.
1016/B978-0-12-802122-4.00005-5.

Mishra, S., Li, X., Pan, T., Kuhnle, A., Thai, M.T., Seo, J., 2017. Price mod-
iﬁcation attack and protection scheme in smart grid. IEEE Transactions

Mode, G.R., Calyam, P., Hoque, K.A., 2019. False data injection attacks in
internet of things and deep learning enabled predictive analytics. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01716, doi:10.48550/ARXIV.1910.01716.
Mode, G.R., Calyam, P., Hoque, K.A., 2020. Impact of false data injection
attacks on deep learning enabled predictive analytics, in: NOMS 2020 -
2020 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium, pp.
1–7. doi:10.1109/NOMS47738.2020.9110395.

Mohammadi, S., Eliassen, F., Zhang, Y., 2020. Eﬀects of false data in-
jection attacks on a local p2p energy trading market with prosumers,
in: 2020 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Europe (ISGT-
Europe), pp. 31–35.

Mohammadpourfard, M., Sami, A., Seiﬁ, A.R., 2017.

A statis-
tical unsupervised method against false data injection attacks: A
visualization-based approach.
Expert Systems with Applications
84, 242–261. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0957417417303317, doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2017.05.013.

Mohammadpourfard, M., Sami, A., Weng, Y., 2018. Identiﬁcation of false
data injection attacks with considering the impact of wind generation and
topology reconﬁgurations. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 9,
1349–1364. doi:10.1109/TSTE.2017.2782090.

Mohassel, R.R., Fung, A.S., Mohammadi, F., Raahemifar, K., 2014. A
survey on advanced metering infrastructure and its application in smart
grids, in: 2014 IEEE 27th Canadian Conference on Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering (CCECE), IEEE, Toronto, ON, Canada. p. 1–8. URL:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6901102/.

Monteiro, I., 2020. URL: https://www.sas.com/en_au/customers/cemig-br.

html.

Mrabet, Z.E., Kaabouch, N., Ghazi, H.E., Ghazi, H.E., 2018. Cyber-
security in smart grid: Survey and challenges. Computers & Electrical
Engineering 67, 469–482.

Musleh, A.S., Chen, G., Dong, Z.Y., 2020. A survey on the detection algo-
rithms for false data injection attacks in smart grids. IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid 11, 2218–2234.

Newaz, A.I., Sikder, A.K., Babun, L., Uluagac, A.S., 2020. Heka: A
novel intrusion detection system for attacks to personal medical devices,
in: 2020 IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security
(CNS), pp. 1–9. doi:10.1109/CNS48642.2020.9162311.

Niu, X., Li, J., Sun, J., Tomsovic, K., 2019. Dynamic detection of false
data injection attack in smart grid using deep learning, in: 2019 IEEE
Power & Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Confer-
ence (ISGT), pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/ISGT.2019.8791598.

Olowu, T.O., Dharmasena, S., Jafari, H., Sarwat, A., 2020. Investigation
of false data injection attacks on smart inverter settings, in: 2020 IEEE
CyberPELS (CyberPELS), IEEE, Miami, FL, USA. pp. 1–6.

Otuoze, A.O., Mustafa, M.W., Larik, R.M., 2018. Smart grids security
challenges: Classiﬁcation by sources of threats.
Journal of Electri-
cal Systems and Information Technology 5, 468–483. URL: https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2314717218300163, doi:10.1016/
j.jesit.2018.01.001.

Ozay, M., Esnaola, I., Yarman Vural, F.T., Kulkarni, S.R., Poor, H.V., 2016.
Machine learning methods for attack detection in the smart grid. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 27, 1773–1786.
doi:10.1109/TNNLS.2015.2404803.

Pahwa, A., 2015. Evolution of Smart Distribution Systems. Springer Inter-
national Publishing. p. 185–206. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-3-319-17190-6_7.

Papavasiliou, A., 2018. Analysis of distribution locational marginal prices.

IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 9, 4872–4882.

Petinrin, J.O., Shaaban, M., 2012. Smart power grid: Technologies and
applications, in: 2012 IEEE International Conference on Power and En-
ergy (PECon), pp. 892–897.

Primadianto, A., Lu, C.N., 2017. A review on distribution system state
estimation. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 32, 3875–3883.
Radasky, W.A., Hoad, R., 2012. An overview of the impacts of three high
power electromagnetic (hpem) threats on smart grids, in: International
Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility - EMC EUROPE, pp. 1–
6.

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 23 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Radwan, A.A., Zaki Diab, A.A., Elsayed, A.H.M., Haes Alhelou, H., Siano,
P., 2020. Active distribution network modeling for enhancing sustain-
able power system performance; a case study in egypt. Sustainability
12, 8991.

Rahman, M.A., Mohsenian-Rad, H., 2012. False data injection attacks with
incomplete information against smart power grids, in: 2012 IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 3153–3158. doi:10.
1109/GLOCOM.2012.6503599.

Ramakrishna, R., Scaglione, A., 2019. Detection of false data injection
attack using graph signal processing for the power grid, in: 2019 IEEE
Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing (GlobalSIP),
pp. 1–5. doi:10.1109/GlobalSIP45357.2019.8969373.

Rashed Mohassel, R., Fung, A., Mohammadi, F., Raahemifar, K., 2014.
A survey on advanced metering infrastructure. International Journal of
Electrical Power & Energy Systems 63, 473–484.

Reda, H.T., Anwar, A., Mahmood, A., 2021. Comprehensive survey and
taxonomies of false injection attacks in smart grid: Attack models, tar-
gets, and impacts. arXiv:2103.10594.

Reda, H.T., Anwar, A., Mahmood, A., Chilamkurti, N., 2022. Data-driven
approach for state prediction and detection of false data injection attacks
in smart grid. Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy ,
1–13doi:10.35833/MPCE.2020.000827.

Renugadevi, N., Saravanan, S., Naga Sudha, C., 2021.

Iot based smart
energy grid for sustainable cites. Materials Today: Proceedings ,
S2214785321013572URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S2214785321013572, doi:10.1016/j.matpr.2021.02.270.

Rowe, N.C., Custy, E.J., 2017. URL: https://faculty.nps.edu/ncrowe/

waroffdec.htm.

Sajeev, A., Rajamani, H.S., 2020. Cyber-attacks on smart home energy
management systems under aggregators, in: 2020 International Confer-
ence on Communications, Computing, Cybersecurity, and Informatics
(CCCI), IEEE, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates. pp. 1–5.

Santos, R.Z.S., Orillaza, J.R.C., 2018. Distribution system state estimator
using scada and 𝜇pmu measurements: An fdi attack vulnerability anal-
ysis, in: 2018 IEEE PES Asia-Paciﬁc Power and Energy Engineering
Conference (APPEEC), pp. 469–474.

Sayghe, A., Hu, Y., Zografopoulos, I., Liu, X., Dutta, R.G., Jin, Y.,
Survey of machine learning methods for
Konstantinou, C., 2020.
detecting false data injection attacks in power systems.
IET Smart
Grid 3, 581–595. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1049/
iet$-$stg.2020.0015, doi:10.1049/iet-stg.2020.0015.

Sethi, B.K., Mukherjee, D., Singh, D., Misra, R.K., Mohanty, S.R.,
2020. Smart home energy management system under false data in-
International Transactions on Electrical Energy Sys-
jection attack.
tems 30, 1–20. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/2050-7038.12411.

Shahsavari, A., Sadeghi-Mobarakeh, A., Stewart, E.M., Cortez, E., Al-
varez, L., Megala, F., Mohsenian-Rad, H., 2017. Distribution grid reli-
ability versus regulation market eﬃciency: An analysis based on micro-
pmu data. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 8, 2916–2925.

Shen, Z., Liu, M., Xu, L., Lu, W., 2021. Bi-level mixed-integer linear pro-
gramming algorithm for evaluating the impact of load-redistribution at-
tacks on volt-var optimization in high- and medium-voltage distribution
systems. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems
128, 106683.

Shukla, A., Dutta, S., Sadhu, P.K., 2021. An island detection approach by
𝜇-pmu with reduced chances of cyber attack. International Journal of
Electrical Power & Energy Systems 126, 106599.

Simard, G., 2013. Ieee grid vision 2050. IEEE Grid Vision 2050 , 1–93.
Soltan, S., Yannakakis, M., Zussman, G., 2018. Power grid state estimation
following a joint cyber and physical attack. IEEE Transactions on Con-
trol of Network Systems 5, 499–512. doi:10.1109/TCNS.2016.2620807.
Son, Y.S., Moon, K.D., 2010. Home energy management system based on
power line communication, in: 2010 Digest of Technical Papers Interna-
tional Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), IEEE, Las Vegas,
NV, USA. pp. 115–116.

Souran, D.M., Safa, H.H., Moghadam, B.G., Ghasempour, M., Razeghi, B.,
Heravi, P.T., 2016. An Overview of Automation in Distribution Systems.

Springer International Publishing. volume 357. p. 1353–1365. URL:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-18416-6_108.

Sun, C.C., Hahn, A., Liu, C.C., 2018. Cyber security of a power grid: State-
of-the-art. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems
99, 45–56.

Sweet, B., 2003. The blackout of 2003. URL: https://spectrum.ieee.org/

the-blackout-of-2003.

de Sá, A.O., Carmo, L.F.R.d.C., Machado, R.C.S., 2017. Covert attacks in
cyber-physical control systems. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Infor-
matics 13, 1641–1651. doi:10.1109/TII.2017.2676005.

Tabakhpour, A., Abdelaziz, M.M.A., 2019. Neural network model for false
data detection in power system state estimation, in: 2019 IEEE Canadian
Conference of Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE), pp. 1–5.
doi:10.1109/CCECE.2019.8861919.

Tan, R., Badrinath Krishna, V., Yau, D.K., Kalbarczyk, Z., 2013. Impact
of integrity attacks on real-time pricing in smart grids, in: Proceedings
of the q ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer &; Communications
Security, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
p. 439–450. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2508859.2516705.

Teixeira, A., Dán, G., Sandberg, H., Berthier, R., Bobba, R.B., Valdes, A.,
2014. Security of smart distribution grids: Data integrity attacks on inte-
grated volt/var control and countermeasures, in: 2014 American Control
Conference, pp. 4372–4378.

Teixeira, A., Paridari, K., Sandberg, H., Johansson, K.H., 2015. Voltage
control for interconnected microgrids under adversarial actions, in: 2015
IEEE 20th Conference on Emerging Technologies Factory Automation
(ETFA), pp. 1–8.

Tertytchny, G., Karbouj, H., Hadjidemetriou, L., Charalambous, C.,
Michael, M.K., Sazos, M., Maniatakos, M., 2020. Demonstration of
man in the middle attack on a commercial photovoltaic inverter provid-
ing ancillary services, in: 2020 IEEE CyberPELS (CyberPELS), IEEE,
Miami, FL, USA. p. 1–7. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9311531/.

Tom, R.J., Sankaranarayanan, S., 2017. Iot based scada integrated with fog
for power distribution automation, in: 2017 12th Iberian Conference on
Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), IEEE. p. 1–4. URL:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7975732/.

Trevizan, R.D., Ruben, C., Nagaraj, K., Ibukun, L.L., Starke, A.C., Bretas,
A.S., McNair, J., Zare, A., 2019. Data-driven physics-based solution
for false data injection diagnosis in smart grids, in: 2019 IEEE Power
& Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1–5. doi:10.1109/
PESGM40551.2019.8974027.

Wang, D., Guan, X., Liu, T., Gu, Y., Sun, Y., Liu, Y., 2013. A survey on
bad data injection attack in smart grid, in: 2013 IEEE PES Asia-Paciﬁc
Power and Energy Engineering Conference (APPEEC), pp. 1–6.

Wang, J., Shi, D., 2018. Cyber-attacks related to intelligent electronic de-
vices and their countermeasures: A review, in: 2018 53rd International
Universities Power Engineering Conference (UPEC), pp. 1–6.

Wang, W., Lu, Z., 2013. Cyber security in the smart grid: Survey and

challenges. Computer Networks 57, 1344–1371.

Wankhede, S.K., Paliwal, P., Kirar, M.K., 2020. Increasing penetration of
ders in smart grid framework: A state-of-the-art review on challenges,
mitigation techniques and role of smart inverters. Journal of Circuits,
Systems and Computers 29, 2030014.

Wei, J., Mendis, G.J., 2016. A deep learning-based cyber-physical strat-
egy to mitigate false data injection attack in smart grids, in: 2016 Joint
Workshop on Cyber- Physical Security and Resilience in Smart Grids
(CPSR-SG), pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/CPSRSG.2016.7684102.

Wu, Y., Chen, B., Weng, J., Wei, Z., Li, X., Qiu, B., Liu, N., 2019. False
load attack to smart meters by synchronously switching power circuits.
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 10, 2641–2649.

Xie, L., Mo, Y., Sinopoli, B., 2010. False data injection attacks in electricity
markets, in: 2010 First IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid
Communications, pp. 226–231. doi:10.1109/SMARTGRID.2010.5622048.
Xu, W., Higgins, M., Wang, J., Jaimoukha, I.M., Teng, F., 2022. Blending
data and physics against false data injection attack: An event-triggered
moving target defence approach. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.
12970, doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2204.12970.

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 24 of 25

False Data Injection Threats in Active Distribution Systems: A Comprehensive Survey

Yang, C., Feng, L., Zhang, H., He, S., Shi, Z., 2018. A novel data fu-
sion algorithm to combat false data injection attacks in networked radar
systems. IEEE Transactions on Signal and Information Processing over
Networks 4, 125–136. doi:10.1109/TSIPN.2018.2790361.

Yang, T., 2019. ICT technologies standards and protocols for active dis-
tribution network. Elsevier. p. 205–230. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780128121542000109.

Yazdaninejadi, A., Hamidi, A., Golshannavaz, S., Aminifar, F.,
Teimourzadeh, S., 2019. Impact of inverter-based ders integration on
protection, control, operation, and planning of electrical distribution
grids. The Electricity Journal 32, 43–56.

Yi, P., Zhu, T., Zhang, Q., Wu, Y., Li, J., 2014. A denial of service attack
in advanced metering infrastructure network, in: 2014 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Communications (ICC), IEEE, Sydney, NSW. p.
1029–1034. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6883456/.
Zhang, J., Chu, Z., Sankar, L., Kosut, O., 2016. False data injection attacks
on power system state estimation with limited information, in: 2016
IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1–5.
doi:10.1109/PESGM.2016.7741928.

Zhang, J., Chu, Z., Sankar, L., Kosut, O., 2018. Can attackers with limited
information exploit historical data to mount successful false data injec-
tion attacks on power systems? IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
33, 4775–4786. doi:10.1109/TPWRS.2018.2818746.

Zhang, X., Yang, X., Lin, J., Xu, G., Yu, W., 2017. On data integrity attacks
against real-time pricing in energy-based cyber-physical systems. IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 28, 170–187.

Zhang, Y., Eisele, S., Dubey, A., Laszka, A., Srivastava, A.K., 2019a.
Cyber-physical simulation platform for security assessment of transac-
tive energy systems, in: 2019 7th Workshop on Modeling and Simula-
tion of Cyber-Physical Energy Systems (MSCPES), pp. 1–6.

Zhang, Y., Wang, J., Chen, B., 2021. Detecting false data injection attacks
in smart grids: A semi-supervised deep learning approach. IEEE Trans-
actions on Smart Grid 12, 623–634. doi:10.1109/TSG.2020.3010510.
Zhang, Y., Wang, J., Li, Z., 2019b. Uncertainty modeling of dis-
tributed energy resources: Techniques and challenges. Current Sustain-
able/Renewable Energy Reports 6, 42–51.

Zhuang, P., Deng, R., Liang, H., 2019. False data injection attacks against
state estimation in multiphase and unbalanced smart distribution sys-
tems. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 10, 6000–6013.

Zhuang, P., Liang, H., 2019. Fdi attacks against real-time dlmp in cps-
based smart distribution systems, in: 2019 IEEE Global Communica-
tions Conference (GLOBECOM), IEEE, Waikoloa, HI, USA. p. 1–6.
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9014295/.

Zhuang, P., Liang, H., 2021. False data injection attacks against state-of-
charge estimation of battery energy storage systems in smart distribution
networks. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 12, 2566–2577.

Zia, M.F., Elbouchikhi, E., Benbouzid, M., Guerrero, J.M., 2019. Micro-
grid transactive energy systems: A perspective on design, technologies,
and energy markets, in: IECON 2019 - 45th Annual Conference of the
IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, pp. 5795–5800.

M. A. Husnoo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 25 of 25

