The Impact of Knowledge of the Issue of Identification and 
Authentication on the Information Security of Adolescents  
in the Virtual Space 

LJERKA LUIĆ, DRAŽENKA ŠVELEC-JURIČIĆ, PETAR MIŠEVIĆ 
Media and Communication 
University North 
Trg dr. Žarka Dolinara 1, Koprivnica 
CROATIA 

Abstract:  -  Information  security  in  the  context  of  digital  literacy  is  a  digital  skill  that  enables  safe  and 
purposeful movement through virtual space. Due to rapid and unstoppable technological progress, multiplying 
opportunities  and  pushing  the  boundaries  of  digital  technology  and  the  Internet,  the  interest  of  the  state  and 
institutions within the state is to raise digital competencies of citizens, with special emphasis on children and 
youth  as  the  most  vulnerable  groups  of  Internet users. The  age  limit  and  frequency  of  use of the  Internet  by 
young  generations  has  been  moved  back  a  year  due  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  and  the  concern  for 
information security of young people is increasingly emphasized. If, and to what extent, knowledge of the issue 
of identification and authentication affects the information security of high school students aged 16 to 19 in the 
virtual  space,  the  research  question  addressed  by  the  authors  of  this  paper  was  to  determine  which  student 
behaviors  pose  a  potential  danger  compromising  their  information  security  by  establishing  a  correlation 
between the variables that determine student behavior and the variables used to examine their level of security 
in a virtual environment. The research was conducted using a questionnaire on a sample of high school students 
in  the  Republic  of  Croatia,  the  results  of  which  showed  that  some  students  practice  behaviors  that  are 
potentially dangerous, make them vulnerable and easy targets of cyber predators and attackers, which  is why 
there is cause for concern and a need for a additional education of children of primary and secondary school 
age in the field of information security in the form of the introduction of the subject Digital Literacy. Based on 
the results, a model for assessing the level of digital literacy of adolescents that affect information literacy can 
be designed, but also further related research in the field of information literacy of children and youth can be 
conducted. 

Key-Words: - Identification, Authentication, Digital Literacy, Information Security, Knowledge, Adolescents 

Received: July 9, 2021.  Revised: September 24, 2021.  Accepted: September 27, 2021.  Published: October 1, 2021. 

1  Introduction 
In today’s fast-growing and rapidly evolving digital 
environment  where  reality  is  increasingly  being 
given  the  prefix  virtual,  the  aspect  of  information 
security  is  becoming  imperative  in  all  areas  of 
human  action  affected  by  digital  technology.  In 
recent years we have witnessed major cyber-attacks 
all  over  the  world,  bringing  information  security  to 
importance  in  the  public  space  while  at  the  same 
time raising awareness of the strong dependence on 
digital  technology.  [1]  The  ubiquitous  information 
and  communication  environment  and  awareness  of 
it  at  the  global  level  generates  the  necessity  of 
preparedness  for  digital 
threats  and  becomes 
extremely  important  for  all  organizational  systems. 
Although  it  is  not  possible  to  completely  eliminate 
all  threats  in  the  digital  space,  by  raising  digital 
identification  and 
education,  and 

thus 

risk 

incomparably 

management, appropriate techniques and processes, 
it is possible to raise the competence of systems to 
become  resistant  to  digital  threats.  [2].  With  the 
appearance of smartphones, social networks and 
mobile applications, the flow of information has 
become 
faster  and  easier, 
bringing  with  it  the  benefits  and  numerous 
opportunities  for  improvement  in  the  field  of 
business and private life. At the same time, new 
digital  technology,  due  to  its  limitlessness, 
raises  issues  related  to  security,  and  privacy, 
data  protection  and  data  abuse  are  becoming 
unavoidable  concepts  in  all  spheres  of  social 
life. [3] 

"National  Information  Security  Program  in  the 
Republic  of  Croatia" [4] is  linked  to the  guidelines 
of  the  European  Union's  e-Europe  2005  Program, 

WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on SYSTEMS and CONTROL DOI: 10.37394/23203.2021.16.49Ljerka Luić, Draženka Švelec-Juričić, Petar MiševićE-ISSN: 2224-2856527Volume 16, 2021 
 
 
 
confidentiality, 

information  security 

the e-South East Europe Initiative (eSEE Initiative) 
under  the  auspices  of  the  Stability  Pact  and  the 
NATO  Membership  Action  Plan,  and  defines  the 
goals  of  information  security,  competencies  and 
activities  of  institutions  operating  in  in  the  field  of 
information security and the method of coordination 
of  information  security  factors  in  the  Republic  of 
Croatia. The  program  envisages  the introduction  of 
information  security  measures  in  all  segments  of 
society over a period of four years.  
The  program  starts  from 

the  definition  of 
information  as  data  with  a  certain  meaning,  ie 
knowledge  that  can  be  transmitted  in  any  form 
(written,  audio,  visual,  electronic  or  otherwise), 
is  determined  by 
while 
maintaining 
and 
availability. The interpretation of these three aspects 
depends on the context in which they arise, but also 
the needs of members of a particular group and the 
the  digital 
rules 
that  determine  behaviors 
the 
to 
environment.  [5]  Confidentiality  refers 
security  of  the  system  that  information  will  be 
available only to those who have authorized access. 
Security 
is  achieved  by  user 
identification  and  authentication  thus  the  system 
restricts access to unauthorized users. Integrity is the 
area  of  security  by  which  the  system  defends  itself 
and resists possible attacks in such a way that users 
are  prevented  from  unauthorized  modification, 
deletion  or  destruction  of  content.  The  third  aspect 
is  availability,  which  implies  the  availability  of  the 
service to  authorized  users  and  its  role is to  ensure 
the  availability  of  information  and  content  to  users 
who have authorized access. [6] 

this  aspect 

integrity 

in 

in 

information 

communication, 

In  accordance  with  the  change  of  the  way  and 
channels  of 
is 
becoming  the  most  valuable  and  most  important 
currency,  and  therefore  the  issue  of  information 
security  in  all  countries  is perceived  at  the level  of 
the state and the law. As part of the development of 
digital  competencies  provided  for  the  Council  of 
Europe  by  the  document  "The  Digital  Competence 
Framework for Citizens DigComp 2.1." one of the 5 
dimensions of digital competencies is security. This 
the 
the  protection  of  devices, 
area 
the 
protection  of  personal  data  and  privacy, 
protection  of  health  and  well-being,  and 
the 
protection  of  the  environment.  [7]  Based  on  the 
document  of  the  Council  of  Europe,  national 
strategies  and  policies  of  EU  member  states  on 
raising  the level  of  digital competencies  of  citizens 
are  created,  thus  Austrian  Framework  "Digital 
Competence Framework for Austria DigComp 2.2." 
points  out  that  nothing    proposed  by  the  document 
can  happen  by  accident,  but  must  be  introduced 

includes 

on 

focused 

and 
systematically, 
sustainably,  including  a  range  of  measures  such  as 
the  establishment  of  appropriate  institutions  to 
implement 
digital 
improve 
competencies that can meet challenges. [8] 

objectives 

activities 

to 

In addition to European  documents, for free use 
there  are  tools  for  self-assessment  of  the  level  of 
digital competencies which examine the level of 21 
digital  competences  provided  for  in  the  Council  of 
Europe  document,  and  there  are  also  extended 
versions  (Austrian  version  of  the  self-assessment 
questionnaire)  where 
digital 
competences  is  tested  in  6  areas  through  3  levels. 
Elements  of  available  questionnaires  that  were 
partly  used  in  creating  the  questionnaire  for  the 
purposes of this research. 

level 

the 

of 

Given  that  digital  competencies,  digital  skills, 
Internet  security  and 
information  security  are 
inseparable  and  highly  contextual  concepts,  it  is 
necessary to develop them simultaneously and with 
the  same  dynamics  constantly  complementing  and 
following  the  development  of  technology  and  the 
scope of digital space. 

Information  security  must  be  built  into  systems 
and  processes  by  understanding  and  perceiving 
possible  threats  and  risks,  and  it  cannot  be  thought 
of only as a system of protection, setting barriers or 
setting a secure password. In any system or process, 
the weak points of information security do not arise 
from technological imperfections, but it is a person 
who,  despite  his  knowledge  and  competencies, 
endangers  his  own  information  security  with  his 
actions. [1] 

Information  security  is  user-oriented,  and  the 
basic  future  module  of  increasing  the  security 
framework should be based on the identification and 
authentication  of  users  of  certain  applications, 
assuming  that  the  system  recognizes  the  malicious 
person  trying  to  log  in.  The  identification  and 
authentication  process  are  an  integral  part  of  the 
interface  of  almost  every  application  used,  with 
some  data  to  be  accessed  requiring  a  strong 
password  composed  of  uppercase  and  lowercase 
letters, numbers and special characters. [11] 

Of  great  importance  is  the  speed  and  efficiency 
of resolving incidents related to information security 
of  users.  Cyber-attacks  often  cause  personal  and 
business data to be compromised, and are caused by 
viruses,  worms,  Trojan  horses,  spyware,  or  similar 
programs that can cause harm to Internet users. [12] 

2  Related Work 
Based on Council of Europe documents, in order to 
improve  the  digital  competences  of  civil  citizens 

WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on SYSTEMS and CONTROL DOI: 10.37394/23203.2021.16.49Ljerka Luić, Draženka Švelec-Juričić, Petar MiševićE-ISSN: 2224-2856528Volume 16, 2021 
 
and educational curricula, European countries define 
national  policies  for  the  development  of  digital 
competences  in  which  activities  to  improve  digital 
competences  for  children  and  young  people  are 
recognized as the most vulnerable group.  

A  study  conducted  in  2011  involving  25,242 
children  aged  9  to  16  from  25  European  countries 
showed that the average age of first internet access 
was  9  years  at  the  level  of  all  European  countries 
covered  by  the  study,  in  Denmark  and  Sweden  7 
years,  and  in  other  northern  countries  (Norway, 
Finland, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom) 8 
years. 

In  terms  of  Internet  access  frequency,  66%  of 
children are online every day and 33% once or more 
a  week,  while  on  average  they  spend  88  minutes  a 
day  online.  [9]  Such  data  are  certainly  worrying 
because  the  trend  of  using  computers  and  mobile 
devices and accessing the Internet is becoming more 
frequent and intense, especially in the last year due 
to the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Considering  that  school  education  curricula  are 
not  changing  at  the  same  rate  as  technology 
advances and the real need for children to access the 
Internet,  the  question  arises  as  to  whether  students 
are sufficiently educated in the field of information 
security in the virtual space. 

Adolescence  is  the  most  sensitive  period  of 
growing  up  of  a  human  being  when  it  is  important 
for  each  of  them  to  be  accepted  in  the  real  world, 
and  especially  in  a  virtual  environment  whose 
premise 
the  Internet  and 
developed digital communication. [10] 

the  presence  on 

is 

3  Methodology 
This  paper  starts  from  the  assumption  that  high 
school  students  aged  16  to  19  endanger  their 
information security by their behaviors in the online 
environment. 

The aim of the research was to determine which 
student  behaviors  pose  a  potential 
to 
information  security,  focusing  on  the  area  of 
personal  data  protection  through  identification  and 
authentication  as  the  first  line  of  defense  in  raising 
the level of information space security. 

threat 

Starting  from  the  problem  and  the  aim  of  the 
research,  the  research  question  was  asked  whether 
the  knowledge  of  the  issue  of  identification  and 
authentication  affects  the  information  security  of 
high  school  students  aged  16  to  19  in  the  virtual 
space. 

The  research  was  conducted  using  a  survey 
questionnaire on a sample of high school students in 
the  Republic  of  Croatia,  aged  16  to  19  years.  The 

questionnaire  explored  the  habits  of  high  school 
students  regarding  information  security  and  data 
protection in  a  virtual  environment,  observing  their 
activities  regardless  of 
the  context  of  school 
dynamics.  In  the  introductory  part,  along  with  the 
identification of the researcher, the purpose and aim 
of the research are presented. 

The survey contains 22 questions, of which three 
are  questions  of  socio-demographic  structure 
(gender,  grade,  type  of  high  school).  Closed-ended 
questions  are  a  combination  of  multiple  choice, 
dichotomous, and Likert-based 5-point scale, with a 
value of 1 (one) being the lowest value and 5 (five) 
being the highest. 

The survey was created in the form of a Google 
form.  The  research  was  conducted  in  the  period 
from 7 to 12 June 2021. The link to the survey was 
sent  to  high  school  students  of  the  Republic  of 
Croatia 
in  groups  on  social  networks.  Group 
members  sent  links  to  other  potential  respondents 
using digital communication channels. 

The data obtained from the research are shown in 
the tables in frequencies (f) and percentages (%). A 
descriptive-statistical  method 
graphical 
presentation  of  data  were  used  to  present  the 
processed  research  results.  Methods  of  induction, 
deduction,  analysis  and  synthesis  were  used  in 
drawing conclusions.  

and 

4  Results 
The  survey  was  completed  by  340  high  school 
students  in  the  Republic  of  Croatia,  of  which  75% 
were  women  and  25%  were  men.  Of  the  total 
number  of  respondents,  most  (49%)  attend  the  4th 
grade of high school (18 and 19 years of age), most 
high  school  students  who  completed  the  survey 
attend the gymnasium program (65%). 

for  Accessing 

Password  Strength 

4.1 
Services and Applications used by Students 
When  asked  what  password  they  use  to  access 
services  and  applications,  more  than  half  of  the 
respondents  (56%)  answered  that  they  use  a  10-
character  password that  is a  combination  of  letters, 
numbers  and  special  characters,  while  12%  use  a 
password that consists of more than 10 characters a 
letters,  numbers,  and  special 
combination  of 
characters. More than a third of students (32%) use 
simple passwords that provide weak protection such 
as  a  personal  name  from  the  family  environment, 
consecutive single-digit numbers or a word.  

WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on SYSTEMS and CONTROL DOI: 10.37394/23203.2021.16.49Ljerka Luić, Draženka Švelec-Juričić, Petar MiševićE-ISSN: 2224-2856529Volume 16, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Password Strength for Accessing 
Services and Applications used by Students 

Fig. 2: Security Levels of using Passwords to access 
internet services 

4.4  Password Change Frequency 
According  to  the  statements  of  the  respondents 
about the frequency of changing the password, 56% 
of  them  say  that  they  change  the  password  when 
they suspect the possibility of abuse. Almost a third 
of respondents (29%) do not change their password 
once while using a particular application or service. 
A  small  proportion  of  respondents  (15%)  change 
their  password  at  intervals  of  every  few  months  or 
once a year. 

Table 2. Password Change Frequency 

4.2  Password Storage Security Levels 
When  it  comes  to  dealing  with  forgetting  the 
password, 54% of students answer that in that case 
they  will  click  on  "Forgot  password"  to  get  a  new 
password  in  the  mail,  which  implies  that  the 
passwords  are  not  stored  anywhere,  but  they 
remember  them.  21%  of  students  have  all  their 
passwords  written  down  on  paper,  while  14%  of 
them  say  that  they  cannot  forget  their  password 
because it is related to their personal data. The most 
insecure  way  to  store  a  password  by  saving  it  to  a 
computer folder is used by 9% of students. 

Fig. 1: Password Storage Security Levels 

4.3  Security  Levels  of  using  Passwords  to 
Access Internet Services 
When  asked  if  they  use  different  passwords  to 
access  different  services  and  applications,  most 
respondents (52%)  answered  that  they  have  several 
passwords  that  they  use  to  access  all  services  and 
applications.  Almost  a  third  of  students  (28%)  use 
one password to access all services and applications, 
while  the  most  secure  way  of  behaving,  accessing 
each  service  or  application  with  a  different 
password, is used by only 20% of respondents. 

4.5  Level  of  Protection  of  the  Device  From 
Unwanted Access 
The results presented in the following table provide 
data on the respondents' responses to take protective 
actions  in  order  to  prevent  unwanted  access  to 
digital  devices.  When  asked  what  they  would  do if 
they  leave  their  device  in  a  room  where  they  are 
familiar people, most of them answer (74%) that all 
their devices are password protected so that no one 
can  access  them.  A  smaller  percentage  (14%),  but 
not  negligible,  states  that  they  leave  the  device 
turned  on  because  they  have  confidence  in  their 
friends and acquaintances. Only 8% of respondents 
state that, for security reasons, they will turn off the 
device  so  that  no  one  can  access  their  device  and 
data. 

WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on SYSTEMS and CONTROL DOI: 10.37394/23203.2021.16.49Ljerka Luić, Draženka Švelec-Juričić, Petar MiševićE-ISSN: 2224-2856530Volume 16, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Level of Protection of the Device from 
Unwanted Access 

4.6  Checking Email Compromise 
When  asked  if  they  check  the  compromise  of  their 
email address on the "Have I been pwned?" service 
almost  half  of  the  respondents  (45%)  answer  that 
they do not know about the existence of such a way 
of checking the security of the email address, while 
23%  of  the  respondents  answer  that  they  do  not 
check for possible compromise of the email address. 
A  small  proportion  of  respondents  (14%)  state  that 
they  check  only  when  they  suspect  a  possible 
compromise of their email address,  and 11% check 
when  they  receive  an  email  address  that  seems 
dangerous  or  harmful  to them.  Of  the  total  number 
of  high  school  students  who  participated  in  the 
survey,  only  6%  regularly  check  for  possible 
compromise of the email address. 

Fig. 3: Checking Email Compromise 

Analyzing  the  results  shown  in  Fig.  3, it can  be 
concluded that most of the high school students who 
participated  in  the  research  were  not  victims  of 
identity  theft  or  any  form  of  data  misuse.  A  small 
proportion  of  respondents (22%)  state  that they  are 
not sure whether they have been victims of personal 
data  theft  on  the  Internet,  while  13%  of  students 
state that they have been victims of personal data or 
identity theft or some other form of data misuse. 

Fig. 4: Proportion of victims of personal data theft. 

5  Discussion 
The  starting  point  of  the  research  was  the  research 
question  whether  the  knowledge  of  identification 
and  authentication  affects  the  information  security 
of  adolescents  in  the  virtual  space,  which  was 
obtained by analyzing the results of the research on 
a  sample  of  340  respondents.  The  analysis  of  the 
research results links the knowledge and application 
of the principles of identification and authentication 
in order to increase security in the virtual space with 
the  information  security  of  high  school  students 
aged  16  to  19  in  a  way  that  their  online  behavior 
determines their level of information security. 

More  than  a  third  of  respondents  use  simple 
passwords that provide poor protection and are easy 
to  detect  because  they  are  related  to  students' 
personal data (usually personal names) or consist of 
consecutive  numbers  or  some  frequent  words, 
making  them  vulnerable  in  the  virtual  space  and 
exposed  to  potential  threats  and  cyber-attacks.  As 
for the level of password storage security, almost a 
third  of  students  experience  potentially  dangerous 
behaviors through storing a password by saving it in 
a  computer  folder  or  creating  passwords  that  are 
associated  with  their  personal  names  and  therefore 
do not write them down. 

The  level  of  user  security  when  accessing 
Internet  services  is  also  determined  by  creating  a 
new password for each new  Internet service. Using 
the  same  password  to  access  all  existing  accounts 
and  services  compromises  the  security  of  users  on 
the Internet. Using the same password to access, for 
example,  an  email  address  and  a  bank  account 
makes  us  vulnerable  and  potential  victims  of 
personal  data  theft  and  misuse.  Almost  a  third  of 
students  (28%)  use  a  single  password  to  access  all 
services  and  applications,  which  endangers  the 
security  of  their  personal  data  in  the  virtual  space. 
Vulnerability  of  one  third  of  respondents  is  visible 
through  long-term  use  of  the  password  without  a 
tendency  for  the  password  to  be  changed  at  certain 

WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on SYSTEMS and CONTROL DOI: 10.37394/23203.2021.16.49Ljerka Luić, Draženka Švelec-Juričić, Petar MiševićE-ISSN: 2224-2856531Volume 16, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
set  time  intervals  or  when  there  is  a  suspicion  of 
data misuse. 

One  of  the  simplest  and  most  reliable  ways  to 
prevent potential vulnerability in the virtual space is 
to  regularly  check  the  compromise  of  the  email 
address  on  the  "Have  I  been  pwned?"  whose 
existence  is  not  known  to  as  many  as  45%  of 
respondents. A quarter of respondents (25%) check 
the compromised e-mail address only when there is 
a  suspicion  of  possible  vulnerability,  almost  as 
many (23%) do not check at all, while a worryingly 
small  percentage  of  students  (6%)  regularly  check 
the possible compromise of their e-mail address. 

Ultimately, the results show that 13% of the high 
school students who participated in the survey were 
either victims of identity theft or some other form of 
data  misuse.  Given  the  results  that  indicate  that  at 
least  one  third  of  students  in  virtual  space  practice 
behaviors that are potentially dangerous, make them 
vulnerable and easily accessible to victims of some 
form of cyberbullying, it can be concluded that the 
percentage  of students  who  have  experienced some 
form of violence in cyberspace is higher, as some of 
them state that they are not sure whether they have 
experienced some form of data misuse. 

6  Conclusion 
All  elements  of  the  aspect  of  confidentiality  in 
the context of information security examined by 
this  research,  such  as  knowledge  of  the  basic 
principles  of  implementation  of  identification 
and authentication processes in everyday use of 
digital  devices  in  virtual  space,  are  an  integral 
part  of  school  curricula 
in  primary  and 
secondary  school  in  Croatia.  Therefore,  to  a 
lesser  extent  we  can  talk  about  ignorance  of 
how to  protect  against unwanted actions aimed 
at  harming  users  and  given  the  fact  that  the 
survey  was  completed  by  65%  of  students 
attending high school and 49% of them aged 18 
and 19 years.  

The results of this  research can be observed 
through  the  prism  of  non-application  of  what 
has been learned, thus endangering adolescents' 
own  safe  and  efficient  movement  through 
digital  space.  Given  that  security  skills  in  the 
use  of  virtual  space  and  digital  literacy  are 
highly contextual concepts, such results suggest 
the need for additional education of primary and 
secondary 
terms  of 
strengthening  digital  competencies,  including 

school  children 

in 

the domain of security through the introduction 
of  Digital  Literacy  in  primary  education  in 
correlation  with  the  already  existing  subject 
Informatics. 

Digital devices are an integral part of growing up 
and  the  lives  of  younger  generations  and  they  are 
the cause of a different, faster, multitasking way of 
thinking  and  functioning  of  generations  of  digital 
natives. 

Adolescents  belong  to  the  generation  of  digital 
natives  who  were  born  and  raised  under  the 
ubiquitous  influence  of  the  Internet  and  modern 
technologies,  to  whom  multitasking  is  a  natural 
behavior  and  who  simultaneously  use  multiple 
sources  of  information  and  simultaneously  receive 
and  process  information  presented  by  text,  image, 
sound and movement. In order  to survive in such a 
technologically advanced world, digital natives live 
in  both  worlds  (virtual  and  real)  with  the  same 
intensity, integrating the experiences they gain with 
online  and  offline  stimuli.  The  reason  why  young 
people do not use their knowledge about the dangers 
of  Internet  world  can  be  found  in their intention to 
solve  the  situation  faster  and  easier,  or  in  the 
the  consequences  of 
insufficient  awareness  of 
possible cyber-attacks. 

The  results  of  this  research  could  be  of  great 
importance  for  teachers,  principals  and  authors  of 
educational curricula who will make their decisions 
based  on  awareness  of  the  dangers to  which  young 
people are exposed in the online world. 

The paper represents a significant contribution to 
the  field  of  information  security  by  identifying 
harmful  and  threatening  actions  and  behaviors  of 
adolescents during the process of identification and 
authentication  based  on  which  it  is  possible  to 
design  a  model  for  assessing  the  level  of  digital 
literacy affecting information security. 

Based  on  the  results  of  this  research,  it  is 
possible  to  conduct  related  research  in  the  field  of 
information  security  of  primary  school  children  or 
research  on  information  security  of  adolescents  in 
other  European  countries  in  order  to  obtain  a 
broader and comparative picture. 

References: 
[1]  C.  Laybats  and  L.  Tredinnick,  “Information 
security,”  Business  Information  Review,  vol. 
33(2), 2016, pp.76–80. 

[2]  D.  Galinec  and  L.  Luić,  L,  "Design  of 
Conceptual  Model  for  Raising  Awareness  of 
transactions  on 
Digital  Threats,"  WSEAS 

WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on SYSTEMS and CONTROL DOI: 10.37394/23203.2021.16.49Ljerka Luić, Draženka Švelec-Juričić, Petar MiševićE-ISSN: 2224-2856532Volume 16, 2021 
 
 
 
Contribution  of  Individual  Authors  to  the 
Creation of a Scientific Article (Ghostwriting 
Policy) 
Ljerka  Luić  has  managed  and  coordinated  research 
activity planning and execution.  
Draženka  Švelec-Juričić  has  created  questionnaire, 
developed  methodology  and  conducted  research 
process. 
Petar  Mišević  was  responsible  for  the  idea  and 
research goals. 

Sources  of  Funding  for  Research  Presented 
in  a  Scientific  Article  or  Scientific  Article 
Itself 
The  publication  of  this  paper  was  possible  by  the 
grant from the University North. 

Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 
(Attribution 4.0 International, CC BY 4.0) 
This  article  is  published  under  the  terms  of  the 
Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.en
_US 

environment  and  development,  16,  2020,  pp. 
493-504. 

[3]  T. Borovac, T. Velki and K. Šolić, Information 
Security  and  Privacy  Guide.  Osijek,  Croatia: 
Josip  Juraj  Strossmayer  University,  Faculty  of 
Education, 2018 

[4]  National  Information  Security  Program  in  the 
from 

Republic 
https://www.cis.hr/www.edicija/LinkedDocum
ents/CCERT-PUBDOC-2005-04-110.pdf, 
accessed: 15th June 2021. 

of  Croatia, 

retrieved 

[5]  M. Bishop, Computer security: Art and science. 

[6]  Integrated 

Boston, USA: Adison Wesley, 2002. 
framework 

and 
reliability,  CARNET  CERT,  retrieved  from 
https://www.cis.hr/www.edicija/LinkedDocum
ents/CCERT-PUBDOC-2001-03-02.pdf, 
accessed: 16th June 2021. 

security 

for 

[7]  S.  Carretero  Gomez,  R.  Vuorikari  and  Y. 
Punie, The Digital Competence Framework for 
Citizens  with  eight  proficiency  levels  and 
examples  of  use.  DigComp  2.1.,  Office  of  the 
European Union, 2017. 

[8]  Federal  Ministry  for  Digital  and  Economic 
Affairs,  Digital  Competence  Framework  for 
Austria  DigComp  2.2.  Vienna,  Austria: 
BMDW, 2020. 

[9]  S.  Livingstone,  L.  Haddon,  A.  Görzig  and  K. 
Ólafsson, "Risks and safety on the internet: the 
perspective of European children: full findings 
and  policy  implications  from  the  EU  Kids 
Online  survey  of  9  -  16  years  olds  and  their 
parents in 25 countries," London, 2012. 

[10] L.  Luić  and  J.  Lepoglavec,  "Netiquette  and 
cyberbullying  in  the  context  of  digital  public 
relations  of  schools,"  U:  Gómez-Chova,  L., 
López  Martínez,  A.,  Candel  Torres,  I.  (ed.) 
Proceedings  of  ICERI2019,  Seville,  Spain, 
2019. 

[11] A.  Vaish,  A.  Sharma,  A.  Sharma,  "Review 
Report  on  User  Authentication  Methods  in 
Cyber  Security",  WSEAS  Transactions  on 
Communications, 
1109-
2742/2224-2864,  Volume  19,  2020,  Art.#17, 
pp. 149-154. 

ISSN/E-ISSN: 

[12] R.  Trifonov,  S.  Manolov,  G.  Tsochev,  G. 
Pavlova,  "Automation  of  Cyber  Security 
Incident 
Artificial 
Intelligence  Methods",  WSEAS  Transactions 
on  Computers,  ISSN  /  E-ISSN:  1109-2750  / 
2224-2872,  Volume  18,  2019,  Art.  #35,  pp. 
274-280. 

Handling 

through 

WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on SYSTEMS and CONTROL DOI: 10.37394/23203.2021.16.49Ljerka Luić, Draženka Švelec-Juričić, Petar MiševićE-ISSN: 2224-2856533Volume 16, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
