Submitted to Springer Nature 

Explainable Artificial Intelligence for Smart City 
Application: A Secure and Trusted Platform 

M. Humayn Kabir1, Khondokar Fida Hasan2*, Mohammad Kamrul 
Hasan3, Keyvan Ansari4 

1School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Islamic University (IU), Kushtia, Bangladesh 
2School of Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, Australia 
3School of Computer Science, University of Information, Technology and Science (UITS), Dhaka, 
Bangladesh 
4School of Science, Technology, and Engineering, University of the Sunshine Coast (USC) 
*Corresponding Author, k.fidahasan@yahoo.com 

Abstract. Artificial Intelligence (AI) is one of the disruptive technologies that is 
shaping the future. It has growing applications for data-driven decisions in major 
smart  city  solutions,  including  transportation,  education,  healthcare,  public 
governance,  and  power  systems.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  gaining  popularity  in 
protecting critical cyber infrastructure from cyber threats, attacks, damages, or 
unauthorized access. However, one of the significant issues of those traditional 
AI technologies (e.g., deep learning) is that the rapid progress in complexity and 
sophistication  propelled  and  turned  out  to  be  uninterpretable  black  boxes.  On 
many  occasions,  it  is  very  challenging  to  understand  the  decision  and  bias  to 
control and trust systems’ unexpected or seemingly unpredictable outputs. It is 
acknowledged  that  the  loss  of  control  over  interpretability  of  decision-making 
becomes a critical issue for many data-driven automated applications. But how 
may it affect the system’s security and trustworthiness? This chapter conducts a 
comprehensive  study  of  machine  learning  applications  in  cybersecurity  to 
indicate the need for explainability to address this question. While doing that, this 
chapter  first  discusses  the  black-box  problems  of  AI  technologies  for 
Cybersecurity applications in smart city-based solutions. Later, considering the 
new  technological  paradigm,  Explainable  Artificial  Intelligence  (XAI),  this 
chapter discusses the transition from black-box to white-box. This chapter also 
discusses 
interpretability, 
transparency, understandability, and Explainability of AI-based technologies in 
applying different autonomous systems in smart cities. Finally, it has presented 
some  commercial  XAI  platforms  that  offer  explainability  over  traditional  AI 
technologies before presenting future challenges and opportunities. 

requirements  concerning 

transition 

the 

the 

Keywords.  Explainable  AI,  Machine  Learning,  Deep  Learning,  Cyber  Security, 
Privacy, Transparency.  

1 

Introduction 

In the urbanization process worldwide, the concept of smart city gains popularity that 
promises  to  offer  technology-based  services.  It  adds  merit  to  the  traditional  existed 
process;  for  example,  it  assists  in  reducing  environmental  footprint,  improves 
transportation,  increases  digital  equity,  introduces  new  flows  of  revenues,  improves 
public  utilities  and  infrastructure,  to  name  a  few.  Along  with  the  rapid  evolution  of 
intelligent technologies and hyper-connectivity, massive amounts of data are likely to 
be flown through different networks requiring special attention during implementation. 
The dependency on data and networks makes smart cities prone to cyber-attacks more 
vulnerable than ever. 

The rapid growth in the worldwide urban population and the increasing connectivity 
of this demographic make the cyber-security of smart cities more critical. This concept 

1 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

will  become  visible  adopting  AI  with  systems  and  devices.  Most  of  the  devices  are 
connected  with  the network and some of  them  are utilizing  the  cloud perform. As  a 
result, there is a high probability of scope to affect with cyber-attack. The explosive 
device  is  no  longer  considered  a  weapon  nowadays.  The  malicious  software  named 
malware can shut down, interrupt, or control the smart space systems. 

The scope and extent of cyberspace are increasing day by day. So it’s not a human-
scale  problem  to  analyze  and  improve  the  security  issues.  We  can  able  to  analyze 
millions of events and identify malware exploiting zero-day vulnerabilities.  The risk 
behavior leading to a phishing attack or malicious code can be easily identified with the 
help of AI and Machine Learning (ML) technology. The system can learn over time and 
utilize the past to identify new types of threats using ML. In traditional ML approaches, 
a data-specific model is developed from learning data. This type of model is applicable 
for serving  particular  tasks  in  a  given  environment. Due  to  the  rapid progress  in  the 
complexity  and  sophistication  of  AI-powered  systems,  it  becomes  difficult  to 
understand  the  complex  working  mechanisms  of  AI  systems  in  general  conditions. 
Sometimes  it  is  very  challenging  when  AI-based  systems  compute  outputs  that  are 
unexpected  or  seemingly  unpredictable.  For  some  ML  technology,  the  autonomy 
complexity  and  ambiguity  increase,  which  makes  the  adaptation  and  development 
process interrupted. This especially holds for opaque decision-making systems, which 
are  considered  complex  black-box  models.  To  overcome  these  flaws,  we  need  to 
transfer the classic black box models to white-box models, ensuring ML technology’s 
interpretability, transparency, understandability, and explainability. 

Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) is one of the emerging branches of AI that 
is gaining popularity. It refers to transparent, interpretable, and understandable methods 
that can produce accurate and explainable models so that humans can understand the 
offered results [1]. The goal of XAI  is to provide a way to explain the cause behind the 
produced  outcome.  Arguably,  a  new  generation  of  AI  approaches  is  emerging  using 
XAI.  XAI  fundamentally  establishes  a  relationship  between  the  model  features  and 
outcome.  XAI  proposes  a  set  of  ML  techniques  that  introduce  explainable  models, 
ensuring a high level of learning feedbacks. It maintains security privacy and trust for 
AI partners.  Unlike the classical machine learning approaches, two different elements: 
explanatory module and explanation interface module, are adopted in XAI. 

There  is  a  trade-off  between  explainability  and  accuracy.  Traditional  models  can 
provide better accuracy  and efficiency but it  has  lack  explainability.  Introducing  the 
XAI can offer the highest level of accuracy, efficiency and as well as explainability. 
Nowadays, several companies present platforms for Explainable Artificial Intelligence, 
including  IBM,  Google,  Darwin  AI,  Flowcast,  Imandra,  Kybdi,  and  Factmata,  are 
pioneering. According to a PwC survey reported in 2017, over 70% of the directors in 
the corporate world keep on the faith of utilizing the benefits of AI with their business. 
It also claims that AI will enhance the GDP up to $15 trillion by 2030 [2]. Thus, AI 
technology must become accountable and trustable are the growing demand, where XAI 
could be the proper choice for the AI community. 

At  first,  this  chapter  discusses  the  black-box  problems  of  AI  technologies  for 
Cybersecurity applications in smart city-based solutions. Later, this chapter discusses 
the transition and requirements from black-box to white-box to understand and ensure 
interpretability,  transparency,  understandability,  and  explainability  of  AI-based 
technologies in applying autonomous systems in smart cities. It presents some mention 
of commercial XAI platforms available to offer with traditional AI technologies before 
presenting XAI challenges and opportunities in the smart city domain. 

2 

Smart Cities: the Better Livings for Dwellers 

The  idea  of  smart  city  originally  indicates  an  enhancement  of  quality  in  urban  life 
through  technology-based  intelligent  solutions.  Nowadays,  about  half  of  the  world’s 

2 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

population lives in urban areas, and the rate of migration towards the urban areas is 
increasing significantly. Therefore, the dependency, efficiency, and availability of vital 
city services and infrastructures such as transport, energy, health care, water, and waste 
management  are  growing  issues.  Smart  city  aims  to  deal  with  all  those  challenges, 
including  the  capacity  of  city  transportation,  energy  consumption  efficiency, 
maintaining  a  green  environment,  improving  city  dwellers’  economic  and  living 
standards, are a few from the list. The concept of smart cities is acquiring increasing 
attention on the agenda of policymakers and gaining momentum. A typical smart city 
is constructed with several major enabling building blocks, as shown in Fig. 1. 

Fig. 1. Major enabling blocks of Smart City 

Primarily, Information and Communication Technology (ICT) equipped facilitates 
smart  cities  to  automate  and  manage  city  resources  and  services.  It  participates  in 
enhancing the city’s performance and the welfare of the citizens. Smart city solutions 
provide  intelligent  network  (Cellular,  WiFi,  Bluetooth,  and  Low  Power  Wide  Area 
(LPWAN)) connectivity and edge processing solutions in cities to connect and improve 
different infrastructures.  

Within  the  evolved  concept  of  smart  city,  data  can  move  freely  within  various 
connected  services.    For  example,  data  can  generate  in  the  transportation  system  in 
response to an emergency to travel to emergency services’ networks such as healthcare 
and  government  service.  Similarly,  public  utilities  (electricity,  water,  and  gas 
distribution) related data can be helpful to city service operations such as taxation. Such 
data flows require in development of meaningful processes.  

The  smart  city  concept  is  now  growing  hand  to  hand  with  the  rise  of  Artificial 
Intelligence (AI). The fundamental role of AI is to enable automated systems to increase 
the urban system’s efficiency and productivity, reduce cost and resource consumption, 
improve service quality, etc. AI technologies can also serve to overcome some of the 
burning smart city challenges such as traffic congestion, governance, cybersecurity, and 
privacy. Table 1 represents some mention of AI applications in different major smart 
city services. 

Table 1. Details of Smart City Building Block. 

Services 

Description of Service 

Smart 
Environment, 

Smart Environment, logistics, and IoT aim to 
provide 
the 
environment and logistics services, including 

real-time  monitoring  of 

Notable Application  
of AI 
•  Automated statistical 

information 
generating. 

3 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Logistics,  and 
IoT 

Smart 
Transportation 

Smart.  Govt. 
and 
Public 
Service 

Smart 
Education 

Smart 
Economy 

Submitted to Springer Nature 

infrastructure and dispersed asset monitoring. 
For example, different application types like 
water and air pollution monitoring and forest 
fire  detection, 
real-time 
remote 
monitoring of transported goods, a list of few 
that  connect  assets  from  anywhere  to  any 
place  to  make  our  lives  safe  and  more 
manageable [3-5]. 

and 

•  Predicting building 

energy consumption. 

•  Business Logic 
generating. 
•  Environment 
Prediction. 

advanced 

Smart  transportation  aims  to  monitor  and 
manage transportation networks and systems 
to  improve  safety  and  efficiency.  It  is  a 
combination  of  multi-functional  hyper-
connected  intelligent  transportation  systems 
and 
intelligent 
transportation information management. For 
instance,  some  applications  monitor  the 
vehicle 
trip  scheduling,  passenger 
entertainment, reservation, toll and ticketing 
systems,  a  list  of  applications  alerts  for 
and 
cornering, 
overspeeding, 
acceleration provide a safer road [6]. 

digital 

harsh 

load, 

Smart Govt. is a concept for the public sector 
that  provides  collection,  connection,  and 
analysis of big data generated and processed 
in real-time. It uses technologies to build e-
government 
includes  a  Service-oriented 
business platform and web applications. The 
applications  of  smart  government  are  G2C 
transactions,  civic  engagement  platforms, 
online  voting  systems 
to  stop  public 
gatherings [7].  

Smart  education  is  an  interactive  learning 
model  with  cloud-based  capabilities.    It  is 
designed  to  enhance  student  engagement 
with  teachers  so  that  teachers  can  adapt  to 
students’ interests and skills. It includes data-
centered  intelligent  education  facilities  for 
the  learners.  It  aims  to  provide  digital 
literacy, effective communication, innovative 
thinking  to  develop  high-impact  projects.  It 
concludes  some  applications 
like  video 
clavier, electronic text-books.[8] 

like 

approaches 

Smart economy concept combines economic 
features  in  sustainable  features  and  eco-
economic 
economic 
progress,  economic  prosperity,  sustainable 
jobs.  It  aims  to  improve  people’s  lives  and 
adapt 
to  social,  economic,  and 
environmental policies. It interconnects local 
and  global  markets.  It  provides  resource-
based  development 
improve  urban 
economic  productivity.  Smart  economy  can 

them 

to 

•  Signal Control and 
Dynamic route 
guidance 

•  Traffic Demand 
Modeling 
Identification of 
drivers based on their 
activities 

• 

•  Driver’s Emotion 

Detection 

•  Surrounding Object 

detection 

•  Public to interact with 
government 
through 
the  automated  virtual 
assistant 

•  Automatic Disaster 
detection and 
management 
•  Postdisaster 

reconnaissance and 
identification of 
affected areas 

•  Automated 

personalized learning. 

•  Differentiated and 
individualized 
learning 

•  AI-enabled voice 

assistant to interact 
with educational 
tools. 

• 

•  Monitoring economic 
growth and ensuring a 
sustainable 
employment rate. 
Increase Resource 
efficiency and 
elevated 
competitiveness 
through automated 
sharing services, 

4 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

be  applied  to  industry,  tourism,  maritime, 
mobility, payment, and banking [4].  

customer-tailored 
solutions. 

Smart 
Healthcare 
and living 

to 

IoT 

access 

Smart healthcare is a service system related 
to  health  that  uses  technology  such  as 
wearable  Sensor  networks,  Body  Area 
networks, 
information 
dynamically  and  connect  healthcare  people, 
materials,  and  institutions.  It  helps  in  the 
development  of  telemedicine  and  creates 
personalized  medical  services  universally. 
Smart  healthcare  is  broadly  used  to  assist 
medical  diagnosis  and  treatment,  health 
management,  disease  prevention, 
risk 
monitoring and management, and provide the 
patient’s result via an automated ledger and 
communication services [9].  

•  Assist physicians with 
differential diagnosis 
of diseases. 

•  Prediction model to 
check up diseases by 
analyzing patient’s 
electronic health 
records,  

•  Providing pre-primary 
care information and 
remote monitoring to 
minimize the life risk 

3 

Security Challenges in Smart City Cyber Domain 

In  the  smart  city  domain,  a  wide  variety  of  sensors  from  extended  networks  work 
together to enforce the desired service. Therefore, smart city infrastructure is expected 
to  consist  of  safe,  secure,  and  reliable  interconnected  devices  such  as  sensors  and 
actuators to gather, process, and communicate data to enable reliable and trusted city 
service. However, such network heterogeneity is a great concern for cyber security in 
the smart city realization always. As on many occasions, small low-end devices with 
limited capacity can participate in service-enabled communication. Due to processing 
and  storage  capacity  limitations,  such  devices  may  not  have  robust  security  features 
such  as  authentication  mechanisms or  cryptographic  ability.  This  leads  to  a possible 
attack surface for applications in smart city services.  

Therefore,  security  breaches  can  be  very  real  in  a  smart  city  cyber  domain.  An 
intruder  can  enter  the  system  through  cyber-physical  system  vulnerabilities.  A 
relationship among cyber issues that leads to a cyber threat is shown in Fig. 2. 

Fig. 2. Attack Surface: A relation among cyber security issues [10, 11]. 

Any system vulnerability can lead to an attack surface. Since in smart cities, both 
high-end and low-end devices in terms of their capability connect, any Attackers can 
exploit  low-end  systems  to  access  the  service  system.  Moreover,  any  mischief  can 
conduct some series of attacking attempts that reveal an open surface to hack the system 
unauthorizedly, which is shown in Fig. 2.  

In the context of smart cities, cybersecurity fundamentally deals with the security of 
connected and internet-based services since a large part of the assets are connected to 

5 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

the cloud. However, it also extends the idea to protect the computer system’s hardware 
and software system and the data flow between the networks. It makes the system steady 
and reliable. Cybersecurity is more effective in protecting external threats in real-time 
monitoring.  As  smart  cities  are  the  conversion  of  connected  cities,  there  is  a  huge 
amount of data exchange between the entities in this domain. Cities are converged into 
the digital world for a sustainable economy and environment. The inhabitants of the 
cities generate a huge amount of data to communicate with their soundings. Smart cities 
have to support these excessive services and resources. Nowadays, about 55% of the 
world’s population lives in urban areas, and it will increase up to 68% by 2050. The 
2018 revision of world urbanization prospects produced by the population division of 
the  UN  department  of  economic  and  social  affairs  (UN  DESA)  notes  that  due  to 
urbanization,  about  2.5  billion  world’s  population  shifted  to  urban  areas  by  2050. 
Among them, a 90% increase in population in the metropolitan area will occur in Asia 
and Africa [12]. 

To  face  the  needs  of  this  large  population,  cities  have  to  upgrade  the  traditional 
network with IoT technology with the adaptation of AI. This new infrastructure will be 
able  to  handle  supply  chains,  assets,  and  resources  management  efficiently.  It  is 
challenging to handle the sensor network, analysis of data, and reasoning algorithms. 
Some devices and systems that may not be cyber resilient can impose a threat to security 
and safety. It’s quite a cumbersome job to choose a proper mitigating method that can 
handle threats. The security issues on IoT devices are well known. There are no security 
requirements/regulations imposed posed on manufacturers. So, they are not aware of 
the role of security vulnerability which increases system attack surfaces [13]. The role 
of smart cities plays a positive impact on business, city services, and people. Middle 
Eastern  cities  are  now  leading  to  provide  smart  cities  services  to  their  dwellers.  For 
example,  Doha  is  preparing  to  host  the  2022  World  Cup  by  adopting  smart 
transportation and other smart services and applications. Assume that if a cyber-attack 
is imposed during World Cup 2022 in Doha, everything will be shut down because of 
a  lack  of  sufficient  safety  measures  [11].  Effective  collaboration  between  vendors, 
device manufacturers, and governments is needed to fix a security regulation among the 
IoT community. Emerging standards and guidelines must be adopted to ensure system 
security during design, testing, and installation. Moreover, the service operator must 
take steps to understand the security issues and mitigation methods before the incidents 
occur. 

4 

Classic  Artificial  Intelligence  Methods  for  Cyber  Security  in 
Smart City 

Fundamentally,  smart  cities  utilized  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  technologies  to  enable 
service  infrastructure  with  remote  monitoring  and  control  capabilities.  Such  cyber-
physical  infrastructure  gets  technical  smartness  with  automation  capabilities  by 
adopting  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI).  The  heterogeneity  of  the  network  in  smart  city 
implementation is the greatest threat. And cyber threats can be leading to failure and 
devastation. The scope of cyber threats is very large. Therefore, along with traditional 
security measures, machine learning-based AI has also been used to enable security to 
those  cyber-physical  systems.  A  study  of  ABI  research  reports  that  44%  of  the 
cybersecurity  expenditure  will  spend  on  energy,  healthcare,  public  safety, 
transportation, water, waste treatment, and other infrastructure management purpose in 
smart city projects [14]. Within this section's limited scope of the presentation, we will 
focus  on  some  of  the  potential  threat  that  deals  with  AI  before  stating  fundamental 
challenges. 

4.1 Fraud Detection 

Any  financial  sector  in  smart  city  development  is  one  of  the  indispensable  parts 

6 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

proportionate  to  the  urban  economic  growth.  And  this  sector  is  probably  the  most 
targeted sector for cyber attacks naturally. Fraud in the financial sector is a common 
cyber-attack related to financial and reputation problems. Such attacks can be caused 
by  data  leakage  and  credit  losses  by  unauthorized  persons.  There  are  several  ML 
approaches present to detect fraud. Authors in [15] presented an SVM classifier and 
multi-node  optimized-based  fraud  detection  model.  It  used  the  fraudulent  feature  to 
detect the source of fraud involved in e-commerce accurately. This AI-based solution 
also  offers  to  prevent  further  fraud.  Authors  in  [16]  proposed  a  Convolution  Neural 
Network (CNN) based fraud detection model, detecting 91% of online fraud activities 
utilizing online transaction data. They have used the transaction data of a commercial 
bank. Those are a few of many examples of AI-based approaches to control measures 
on cyber fraud. 

4.2 Intrusion Detection 

Many research works are noticeable on intrusion detection mechanisms using Artificial 
Neural Networks, such as Deep Learning (DL) methods. W.H. Lin et al. [17] proposed 
a cyber intrusion detection system based on the LeNet-5 model. They have utilized over 
10,000 training samples reaching an accuracy of 99.65%. Y. Dong et al. [18] presented 
the  Convolution  Neural  Network  (CNN)  based  AE-Alexnet  model  utilizing  the 
automatic encoder in real-time cyber intrusion detection system. Their model performs 
well in intrusion detection utilized the common KDD99 dataset achieve an accuracy of 
94.32%. R. U. Khan et al.[19] improved the CNN model for intrusion detection and 
achieved impressive accuracy of 99.23%, outperforming the DBN model. In this space, 
there are many successful efforts of utilizing ML to tackle cyber issues[20]. 

4.3 Spam Detection 

We  are  suffering  from  endless  threats  of  spam  which  are  unwanted  emails  received 
from various sources frequently to the users. Bosaeed, et al. proposed a system that can 
detect  short  message  service  spam  on  mobile  devices.  They  have  used  Naïve  Bayes 
(NB),  Naïve  Bayes  Multinomial  (NBM)  and  Support  Vector  Machine  (SVM) 
classifiers. For performance analysis, they have compared the outcome of all the three 
classifiers, and SVM performed the best among the three classifiers [21]. Meanwhile, 
deep  learning-based  spam  detection  gains  popularity.  Chetty  et  al.  [22]  proposed  a 
neural network-based spam detection model. The experimental results show that this 
model’s performance decreases as the number of datasets decreases. Sharmin et al. [23] 
proposed  another  spam  detection  system  using  the  Multi-Layer  Perceptron  (MLP), 
SVM, and CNN. They claim that the CNN model is suitable for detecting spam images 
with  an  accuracy  of  99.02%.  According  to  the  indication  of  future  work,  they  have 
concluded  that  Reinforce  Neural  Network  (RNN)  and  Long  Short  Term  Memory 
(LSTM) prove worthwhile in spam detection. 

4.4 Malware Detection 

As smart cities infrastructure is based on interconnecting networks, it is evident that 
malware is a significant threat that can access the network to compromise the system. 
Generally, malware is malicious software used to collect users’ personal data and digital 
belongings illegally. The types and threats, complexity, and harmful nature of malware 
have  been  devastating  day  by  day.  Ransomware,  crypto  miners  draw  attention  as 
widespread malware. Yuan et al. presented a malware classifier using Markov Images 
and Deep Convolution Neural Network (CNN). They have utilized two popular datasets 
of Microsoft and Drebin. The experimental result shows that the accuracy for Microsoft 
data  is  99.26%,  and  for  Drebin,  datasets  are  97.36%  [24].  Vinayakumar  et  al.[25] 

7 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

proposed a DNN based ransomware classifier that used malware datasets collected from 
tweets from Twitter. They have classified the ransomware malware into 25 classes. 

4.5 Traffic Analysis and Identification 

Mobile  devices  are  generating  massive  traffic  in  the  IoT  domain  while  using 
HTTP/HTTPS protocols, one of the prime agents of smart city realization. It is always 
challenging to identify and analyze any such traffic using traditional methods such as 
employing hostnames. It is also hard to find the signatures where devices frequently 
update the software versions. To tackle the traffic issue, Chen, Yu et al. [26] presented 
a supervised model based on CNN to tackle and identify mobile applications’ traffic 
flow  using HTTP  sample data  packets.  This  framework  gets  an  average  accuracy  of 
98%.  Wang  et  al. [27] presented  a  classifier with  an  intelligent Virtualized Network 
Functions  (VNF)  selection  model  using  Deep  Neural  Network  (DNN)  and  Multi-
Grained  Cascade  Forest.  This  model  was  successfully  used  to  schedule  the  cloud 
network for vehicular communication to identify the transmission priority of different 
data  packets.  Lotfollahi  et  al.  [28]  proposed  one-dimensional  CNN  for  cyber  traffic 
classifications tasks. They developed a framework based on CNN and Stacked Auto 
Encoder (SAE). The performance result shows a recall of 0.98 and 0.94 for recognition 
and traffic classification, respectively.  

Overall,  the  detection  of  cyber  incidences  (e.g.,  attacks  and  threats)  deploying 
traditional machine learning tools such as deep learning have been widespread in the 
area of cybersecurity over the last decade. Initially, it is started with conducting code 
analysis and deploying agents to perform signature-based detection, moving towards 
more self-learning and automated decompilation and extensive code analysis. It is also 
enabling the automated analysis and prediction of network monitoring. However, any 
entire  AI-based  automatic  threat  detection  is  becoming  difficult  to  realize  as  the 
complexity and sophistication of the detection system create an additional problem.  

Additionally, for  strategic  and  technical reasons,  AI-based  tools  may  mislead  and 
cannot  detect  actual  threats.  On  all  those  occasions,  it  may  requirer  filtering  out  all 
known  legit  network  activities  to  identify  the  threat  using  manual  analysis.  Since 
conventional AI-based system becomes a higher level of sophistication, it makes them 
a  black  box  that  drastically  reduces  the  amount  of  information  required  to  conduct 
manual analysis. This is the major challenge for conventional AI-based threat detection 
mechanisms.  It  remains  opaque,  and  it  is  impossible  to  understand  their  back-end 
function  and  the  process  of  inference.  Therefore,  explainability  is  required  that  can 
significantly enhance the detection capabilities with control and transparency. 

5 

Transition to Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) 

Machine  learning  predictive  models  are  treated  as  black  boxes  which  can  be 
automatically trained without worrying about the domain in which they are used. This 
opaqueness  raises  many  risks  that  are  difficult  to  foresee  during  the  model  building 
process.  Such  as  the  model’s  declining  performance  due  to  the  data  drift,  poor 
performance  on  the  out-of-domain  problems,  or  unfairly  discriminatory  behavior 
learned  on  historical  data.  The  growing  list  of  examples  where  black  boxes  fail 
spectacularly has increased interest in XAI methods. Such methods allow X-ray black-
boxes models for more detailed analysis on the local or global level. 

Adding 

to  machine 

interpretability 

learning  algorithms 

is  necessary  for 
Transportation, Smart Grid, Healthcare, Industrial applications. The general points of 
causality,  robustness,  reliability,  trust,  and  fairness  are  valid  in  all  domains. 
Interpretability is primarily a key to identifying causal relationships and increasing the 
reliability and robustness of scientific discoveries made with the help of ML algorithms. 
In all application domains, establishing the trust in and fairness of machine learning 

8 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

systems matters most in low-risk environments. In contrast, robustness and reliability 
are  critical  to  high-risk  environments  where  machines  take  over  decisions  with  far-
reaching consequences. 

A  general  Machine  Learning  workflow  is  shown  in  Fig.  3.  Firstly,  data  is 
preprocessed to train a model, and after that, the Learning function is built up using the 
Learning process. Then inputs are utilized to get the learned function which is used to 
predict the output. New inputs can be fed into the model after learning the function and 
the machine will return the desired prediction. 

Fig. 3. A comparative view of Traditional Machine Learning Workflow (Left) and Explainable 
Machine Learning Workflow (Right). 

The critical thing to note in traditional ML workflow is that its prediction is without 
informing the reason. It can confuse the user. Users can be misled and have to believe 
in the machine for making the correct selection. In contrast to the traditional approach, 
XAI follows an advanced procedure. This procedure provides us the decision with a 
proper  explanation  about  the  background  processes.  Here  the  user  gets  additional 
information  with  output  which  explains  the  reason  for  prediction.  An  extra  layer  is 
added, which can explain the model outcome, as shown in Fig. 3. The additional layer 
helps  to  ensure  impartiality  in  decision-making  because  of  having  an  explainability 
module. If any biases are detected in the datasets, then they can be corrected in this 
layer. Moreover, explainability discovers the predictions’ facts, which is beneficial for 
finding  out  weaknesses  in  outcomes.  The  methods  that  can  be  used  to  explain  the 
behavior  and  predictions  of  trained  ML  models  include,  Partial  Dependence  Plots 
(PDP),  Accumulated  Local  Effects  (ALE),  Permutation  Feature  Importance  (PMI), 
Leave-One-Covariate  out 
Interpretable  Model-agnostic 
Explanations (LIME). 

(LOCO),  and  Local 

The essence of explainability in AI tools in some major smart city enabling networks 

is discussed in the following sections. 

5.1 Transportation System 

According to the US Department of Transportation, Intelligent Transportation Systems 
(ITS)  combines  different  technologies  used  to  monitor,  evaluate,  and  manage 
transportation  systems  to  enhance  efficiency,  safety  and  cost  reduction.  Smart 
transportation  becomes  a  reality.  Several  cities  in  the  world  now  implement  this 
technology. Cities like New York have adopted smart transportation to build a smart 
cities. They have also made a testbed for connected vehicles in Wyoming, which is a 
corridor for the transportation of goods. Introducing smart transportation has improved 
the efficiency of the supply chain and does not require the driver for the long drive.  

9 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

Among  the  several  services  in  smart  transportation  systems,  we  will  focus  on  smart 
vehicles, Intelligent Public Transport (IPT) systems, and smart city traffic management.  
Smart  vehicles  can  communicate  and  exchange  data  with  other  vehicles  (V2V), 
pedestrians (V2P), or a generic network or infrastructure (V2N and V2I, respectively) 
[29]. The integration of IoT devices and 5G communication technologies help to make 
smart transportation services visible to the city inhabitants. IoT technology, together 
with  sensors  networks  and  embedded  controllers,  can  be  used  to  make  any  cyber-
physical system manage and control remotely.   

Smart self-driving cars are taking over decisions in the real world previously taken 
by  humans  and  can  involve  severe  and  sometimes  irreversible  consequences  using 
machine  learning  technology.  Advanced  Driver  Assistance  Systems  (ADASs) 
technology  provides  lane-keeping  and  braking  assistants  to  obtain  fully  autonomous 
driverless vehicles [30]. ML can also be an efficient tool for managing the vehicle, e.g., 
fuel  prediction  and  assessing  cybersecurity.  IPT  operators  are  also  implementing 
several cybersecurity measures. However, measures are very diverse as there are neither 
widely accepted cybersecurity standards that align with the needs of IPT nor widely 
used good practices [31, 32]. 

In self-driving vehicles, while deploying ML technology, we should be concerned 
about  the  algorithm’s  complexity  and  be  aware  of  the  fool  classifier  [33].  Time 
complexity is an important entity in designing the safety-critical context of mobility as 
it mostly uses embedded technology. Moreover, a false positive result of a classifier 
may not be  acceptable  in  the  case  of  autonomous  driving,  such  as  a  stop  sign  if  the 
classifier treated it as a speed limit [12]. In this case, explainable AI could be a solution 
that can help to take a decision describing the facts behind it. Explainability could be 
employed as a way to disclose models’ confidential data.  At the same time, it also helps 
to ensure the reliability and robustness of autonomous driving and thus makes it safe. 

A.  Rosenfeld  et  al.  [34]  presented  a  taxonomy  of  explainability  considering 
fundamental questions about Why, Who, What, When, and How of explainability. They 
have utilized this taxonomy in human-agent systems. M. Scalas et al. explore [29] the 
role of interpretable machine learning in the ecosystem of smart vehicles. They have 
figured out the terms of explanations that help to design secure vehicles. In [34] the 
authors define explainability from an engineering view by explaining the problem of 
AI  models.  They  have  identified  the  problem  of  AI  models  in  different  autonomous 
vehicles  domain  for  object  detection,  control,  and  perception.  They  proposed  to 
introduce  explainability  features  to  the  existing  AI  models.  E.  Soares  et  al.  [35] 
proposed  a  new  explainable  self-organizing  architecture  and  a  new  density-based 
feature  selection  method  for  the  autonomous  vehicle.  They  have  focused  on  a  self-
organizing neuro-fuzzy approach to learn interpretable models automatically. 

5.2 Healthcare 

Proper networking between city health services using ICT infrastructure can be helpful 
to view the health status of community residents. Mobile devices can collect personal 
health  data  and  can  support  private  healthcare  efficiently.  Users  can  utilize  a 
smartphone to collect health-related information using various Health apps. Moreover, 
users can get information about medical insurance packages, nutrition, fitness, drugs, 
and  doctors  browsing  websites.  The  patient’s  observation  and  monitoring  of  disease 
symptoms  and  behavioral  patterns  (activity,  sleep  disorder,  mobility  pattern,  phone 
conversation) become easy using the flavor of IoT. The mobile healthcare system can 
detect  the  changes  of  different  patient  symptoms  and  take  the  safety  measure 
accordingly both online and remotely [36]. Mobile devices can play an important role, 
from individual monitoring to community-level monitoring. A medical practitioner can 
keep important record notes on diagnosis for a patient. Severe and chronically ill people 
can  utilize  social  media  to  share  their  illness,  remedy  experiences,  and  support  the 
community. Some users may not prefer physical support; in that case, online support 

10 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

using mobile devices and IoT is helpful.  

People who are suffering from long or short-term chronic diseases can be tracked 
using mobile ICT. Users can also keep a record of their drug-taking schedule and can 
set  alarms  as  a  reminder.    Awareness  can  be  patronized  among  the  inhabitants  as 
prevention. Online medical technologies are getting popular among city dwellers using 
mobile devices and apps. Moreover, the integration of ambient sensors into smart city 
networks  makes  it  possible  to  provide  services  to  vulnerable  and  non-tech-savvy 
patients. City designers and researchers urge for integrating smart ICT and Healthcare. 
The  advancement  in  pervasive  computing  and  machine  learning  accelerates  the 
integration of smart healthcare in smart city technology.  Now vast amounts of personal 
health  data  are  shared;  as  a  result,  privacy  issues  arise.  Although  healthcare  system 
utilizing  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  has  shown,  it’s  competency  in  providing  cost-
effective and human-centric application. The performance of medical diagnosis, image-
video processing, resource tracking can be improved by introducing the power of AI. 
Therefore, the convergence of  AI technologies to healthcare is a demand of current 
application in the smart cities domain. 

Recent  advancement  in  AI  technology  demonstrates  remarkable  performance  in 
implementing AI and machine learning in healthcare. Healthcare requires a high level 
of accountability and transparency. Security and privacy are two main issues that are 
the barriers to accommodating technology in healthcare. The current ML solutions are 
mostly dark in nature based on the black-box model, which doesn’t become explainable. 
It  is  against  the  moral  responsibility  of  physicians  to  use  the  black-box  medical 
decision-making system [37]. This system can not provide the explanation behind the 
reasoning. In the case of consulting an expert AI system, the physician may ask which 
factors  are  considered  of  reasoning.  The  traditional  AI  system,  which  is  opaque  in 
nature, can not provide the background behind the reasoning outcome to the physician. 
In  order  to  provide  the  answer  of  the  physician,  the  expert  system  has  to  build  the 
knowledge  of  explanation  that  satisfies  the  physician.  Thus  explanation  provides 
reliability, improves transparency in the decision-making system.  

In [9], authors have presented suggestions for explainable medical AI systems. They 
explored the idea of explanation in view of human-centric orientation. S. Meacham et 
al.  [38]  have  designed  and  developed  a  web  system  to  predict  and  explain  patient 
readmittance  using  machines.  They  have  utilized  a  logistic  regression-based  ML 
algorithm  with  an  explainability  function  and  a  web  interface  corresponding  users’ 
interfaces. 

 5.3 Smart Grid 

The  increasing  population  in  cities  causes  a  decrease  in  fossil  energy  sources.  So 
renewable energy sources are the best solution for supporting the energy demand. About 
75-80%  of  the  energy  of  the  world  is  consumed  in  cities.  This  energy  consumption 
generates about 80% of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions [7]. Smart Grid (SG) is 
the key item of energy infrastructure for sustainable smart cities. It aims to reform fossil 
energy resources into renewable energy resources. SG plays a critical role in reducing 
environmental pollution due to the use of non-renewable energy resources. 
Moreover, it can provide lower energy costs and reliable energy service. The traditional 
non-smart grid lacks online monitoring and controlling facilities which is a flaw for a 
real-time solution. The smart city energy system should have facilities to connect each 
energy  system  and  grid  for  real-time  remote  control  and  monitoring.  This  ensures 
efficient energy generation and consumption. A prediction shows that the 15.8% smart 
energy  market  will  invest  around  US$248.36  billion  for  producing  smart  energy 
systems [39]. In a review paper [40], the smart plug technology is illustrated, potentially 
contributing  to  green  energy,  SG/microgrids,  and  smart  cities.  In  [41],  the  authors 
presented current state-of-the-art techniques used to predict advanced intelligent loads 
in SG. 

11 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

Smart  meters  provide  monitoring  of  the  exact  and  real-time  electricity  usage, 
offering  bill  information  adopting  Advanced  Metering  Infrastructure  (AMI).  It  also 
helps to insist on carbon emissions and assists in making intelligent decisions. Smart 
grids support Electric Vehicles (EVs) to detect and accept the produced/stored energy 
from the users’ side. Smart grid offers smart load and building automation, leading to 
increased  energy  efficiency,  safety,  and  comfort.  The  smart  city  project  of  Malaga, 
Spain, launched in 2009, aims to be the largest energy-smart city [42]. It utilized smart 
meters for remote management to improve energy efficiency. A light-emitting diode 
(LED) network  was  also  built  up  for  street  lighting.  Another project  of future  smart 
cities  started  in  2015  at  the  EU  named  Europe’s  future  smart  cities.  Eindhoven, 
Manchester,  and  Stavanger,  in  the  Netherlands,  UK,  and  Norway,  respectively,  are 
equipped with LED networks and serve as testbeds. The plan is to imply the findings to 
the  other  three  cities  Leipzig,  Sabadell,  and  Prague,  in  Germany,  Spain,  and  Czech 
Republic, respectively [38]. Several technologies related to energy, carbon emission, 
and air quality are imposed on this area, and the performance is closely observed. The 
main  focus  of  this  project  is  to  update  the  SGs  by  integrating  real-time  monitoring, 
automation, and self-controlling facilities. 

AI approaches have been applied to various smart grid applications, such as demand 
response,  predictive  maintenance,  and  load  forecasting.  However,  traditional  AI 
techniques  are  considered  a  ‘‘black-box’’  due  to  their  lack  of  explainability  and 
transparency. AI-based methods are utilized to predict the energy consumption aims to 
save energy [43]. Consider the case; a heating device could be turned off if the device 
fails to operate on the low power source. However, the heating device can also be turned 
off  to  save  energy  when  the  desired  ambient  temperature  is  reached  or  when  the 
predicted  energy  consumption  is  reached  above  the  threshold.  This  scenario  can  be 
modeled using XAI model only, which can explain the real fact why the heating device 
is turned off. In traditional black-box AI techniques, it is not possible to know the fact 
behind  the  reasoning.  XAI  could  be  an  interesting  research  idea  because  it  connects 
with  the  expert  to  the  finding  of  the  AI  system  by  explaining  the  cause  behind  the 
reasoning.  

In  [44],  the  authors  proposed  an  approach  to  introduce  XAI  in  ontologies  and 
semantic technology to provide autonomous car decision-making and energy efficiency 
solutions. M. Kuzlu et al. [11] utilize three XAI tools (LIME, SHAP, and ELI5) [33] to 
produce  high-level  explanations  about  the  outcome  of  the  system  in  smart  grid 
applications.  

6 

Commercial XAI Platforms 

XAI technology is emerging. Several commercial platforms are formed to support this 
increasing demand. In this section, we will look at some of the popular XAI platforms 
in brief. 

IBM. IBM is one of the pioneers of developing XAI platforms which has opened an 
advanced  cloud-based  AI  tool  using  XAI  technology.  It  aims  to  expose  the  causes 
behind  the  present  state  of  art  AI  recommendations.  They  conducted  an  extensive 
survey  that  reported  that  over  60%  of  its  executives  feel  uncomfortable  with  the  AI 
solution's traditional black-box approach. In other ways, such a survey inspires them to 
propel the explainability in their AI solutions [45].  

IBM ensures fairness, robustness, explainability, accountability, and value alignment 
in  AI  applications.  IBM  aimed  to  utilize  these  virtues  in  all  respects  to  the  whole 
lifecycle of their AI application. IBM integrated XAI frameworks and toolsets into the 
IBM Cloud Paks, which supports the data platform. They use AIx 360 toolkit, which 
includes  a  set  of  algorithms  that  cover  several  domains of  explanations. This  tool  is 

12 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

made for algorithmic research for different practices of domains. As a result, their AI 
technology  supports  businesses  in  a  controlled,  safe  and  measurable  way.  The  AI 
practitioner can build, run, and manage AI models and can optimize decisions anywhere 
on IBM Cloud named Paks® using IBM Watson® Studio for Data [46]. The application 
area of IBM using XAI is Healthcare, Financial Services, and Education. IBM Cloud 
Paks can increase the model accuracy by 15% to 30%. 

Google. Another XAI-enabled AI platform has been launched by tech giant Google, 
which explains the performance of several of Google’s features. The feature attributions 
are  generated  using  AutoML  Tables  and  AI  Platform  for  model  predictions  in  XAI 
solution platform. Whereas the model behavior can be investigated visually using the 
What-If Tool. The AI practitioner, such as data scientists, can explore to improve the 
usable  datasets  or  models.  The  model  performance  is  also  debugged  using  AI 
Explanations in AutoML Tables, AI platform predictions, and AI platform notebooks 
provided by Google. 

Moreover, the model behavior can be investigated using the What-If Tool minutely. 
The ultimate target is to build users’ trust and improve the transparency and fairness of 
machine  learning  models  through  human-interpretable  explanations.  We  can  predict 
deploying  an  AutoML  table  or  AI  platform,  providing  a  real-time  score  [47].  The 
ground truth of predictions input can be sampled using continuous evaluation capability 
from the trained ML models.  Mainly the XAI-enabled platform designed by google 
explains the image recognition and code sampling features of google. Arguably, Google 
has a pervasive influence on smart city realization from an intelligent car to smart home 
development. 

Darwin  AI.  Drawin  AI,  an  XAI  service  provider  company,  enables  enterprises  to 
structure AI on which they can stand. Darwin AI is active in building a process known 
as Generative synthesis. It aims to make the explainability real, granting the makers to 
realize the interior functions of deep neural networks. Within this framework, Darwin 
AI  employs  an  artificial  neural  network-based  deep  learning  method.  It  offers  an 
Explainability  toolkit  and  network  diagnostics  features.  Moreover,  it  also  provides 
some other network automation for connectivity applications. It focuses on detecting 
defects  and  adaptive  factory  automation,  one  of  the  significant  smart  infrastructure 
sectors. 

Flowcast.  Flowcast  is  an  API-based  solution  that  targets  bringing  out  the  black  box 
models  by  fusing  different  company  systems.  Flowcast  clarifies  the  relationships 
between  input  and  output  values  of  different  patterns  to  establish  explainability.  It 
utilizes  its  own  AI  technologies  to  develop  credit  assessment  models  with  the 
explainable  module.  Such  an  enhancement comes up  with  the  potential  to  transform 
credit regulations completely into the new ability of explainability. Among a selection 
of ML algorithms used by Flowcast, the boosted trees algorithm is an opaque variant; 
they had to find a way to explain system assessments clearly. Thus, explainability uses 
SHAP  along  with  NLP  to  provide  plaintext  phases  presenting  outputs  in  layman’s 
terms.  Therefore,  help  financial  institutions  adhere  to  regulatory  compliance  by 
reducing risk and unlocking credit for all. 
Imandra. Imandra is an automated reasoning technology that is a digitization and AI 
for  capital  market  APIs.  Imandra  democratizes  automated  reasoning  to  enable 
algorithms  to  be  explainable,  trustworthy.  They  present  the  Reasoning  as  a  Service 
(RAAS)  feature,  which  fetches  these  methods  nearer  to  those  except  a  specialized 
background in these areas. Initially, Imandra started with the financial sector and has 
worked with major investment players. It has focused on service designing, testing, and 
conducting AI-based audits of its complex trading systems, which has a great future in 
smart city applications.  

13 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

Kyndi. Kyndi is a pioneering text analytics company that utilizes an explainable natural 
language  processing  platform.  It  optimizes  human  cognitive  performance  by 
transforming  business  processes  through  auditable  AI  systems.  Kyndi  provides  the 
auditable trail of reasoning if the stakeholders of organizations seek an explanation of 
the  output.  Kyndi  uses  a  well-established  programming  language  called  Prolog  with 
RPA tools to build bots that automate fact, inference, and concept generation in almost 
any  vertical.  Its  expanded  model  aids  in  encoding  the  semantics  of  documents, 
repositories,  and  domains  in  query-able  knowledge  graphs.  Kyndi  aims  to  utilize  its 
tools  for  smart  city  application  in  association  with  different  stakeholders,  including 
federal government sectors, such as Defense, Intelligence, finance, healthcare, IT, and 
infrastructure. 

Factmata. Fake news is created maliciously to misinform people by generating more 
traffic  to  sites,  maybe  publishing  scandalous  headlines  or  politically  biased  content 
focusing  on  chaos.  Content  Moderation  performed  by  humans  is  time-consuming, 
repetitive, and open to errors. Factmata is an AI solution that makes AI power tools 
detect  problematic  content  from  inter.  Factmata  is  fighting  against  online  fake  news 
with XAI techniques to justify segregation [48]. 

7 

Opportunities and Challenges of XAI 

The Explainability model could significantly increase the detection competency, and 
the  prediction  result  could  be  trustworthy.  Many  of  the  application  domains  are 
handling personal and legal issues data. Hence aware should be taken to find the cause 
and issues behind the outcome of reasoning provided by the trained model. The model 
involved  in  explainability  should  not  generate  a  large  set  of  negative  results.  Much 
concentration  should  be  focused  on  explaining  the  trained  model  in  prediction  and 
classification applications. In open-source intelligence, explainability could provide a 
means for detecting attacks, impacting mitigating their influence [49]. 

Nowadays, ML models used in cyber security do not have an Explanations module. 
It is very important to find the cause behind reasoning because system administrators 
can demand more information other than informing only the binary decision.  A realistic 
threat model can be utilized to know about the strength of mitigation methods in the 
cyber-security domain. There are several XAI methods available nowadays. The good 
part  is  that  these  XAI  methods  can  expose  the  mode  of  processing  to  produce  the 
decision  of  trained  ML  models  to  some  extent.  Explainability  would  also  have  a 
significant impact on Adversarial Machine Learning as well.  

However,  several  research  challenges  exist  to  develop  methods  for  explainability 
from the technical, legal, and practical points of view. Technical challenges not only 
deal with XAI system development but also evaluation and interpretation. It is because 
the  XAI  system  must  include  an  explicit  representation  of  the  component  parts  to 
support  the  appropriate  and  systematic  interpretation  of  working  functions.  In  such 
cases, a set of semantics representations can help construct an explanation that a human 
receiver  understands.  It  is,  however,  may  still  tricky  for  a  human  to  interpret  the 
functioning of the XAI methods. Therefore, XAI systems should aim to deal with the 
role  of  the  learning  method.  It  should  have  a  set  of  open  procedures  to  reason  the 
inference  process.  Overall,  explanations  of  the  AI  model  are  needed  for  the  proper 
design and functioning of the correct decision-making system. Although, they are not 
the  ultimate  goal  of  designing  AI  system.  XAI  applies  knowledge  and  expertise  to 
design a sensible and transparent AI system. 

The application of XAI methods in any specific domain, on the other hand, can face 
the question of legitimacy. This can happen when handling data involving legal issues, 
decisions, life, and finance, gathering more intelligence on the people involved. The 
explainability module  in  a  learning  model utilizes  to  infer data  about  entities.  These 

14 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

allowed can produce significant data, underlying or hidden correlations, and causality 
is a challenge.  

The success of XAI depends on fruitful human-machine interaction. It is considered 
that both machines’ outcome human decision would be consistent irrespective of the 
ground truths. However, there is high uncertainty in the ground truth and cannot be fully 
explained.  Current  XAI  methods  and  techniques  predominantly  depend  on  input–
relevant parts and do not incorporate the human model’s notion [50]. Hence the concept 
of causability arises, which is a challenge for XAI realization.  

8 

Conclusion 

This  chapter  presented  an  overall  analysis  of  the  prospect  of  explainable  artificial 
intelligence in the cyber security domain of smart city applications. We conducted our 
study  to  portrait  the  opportunity  and  necessity  of  XAI  using  secondary  data. 
Undoubtedly, the advancement of AI is primarily dependent on the flourishment of ML 
techniques. It will pave the path to handle the high-frequency, real-time application for 
the smart city. It is, however, difficult to see how such methods work in underlining. 
This is very real to combat any cyber security issues. If any AI-based cyber security 
component does not have forensic value but remains as a black box, it certainly has less 
credibility than all. Therefore, XAI has a great role in ensuring smart city deployment's 
security, privacy, and trustworthiness.  

References 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

by 

Convolutional 

D.  V.  Carvalho,  E.  M.  Pereira,  and  J.  S.  J.  E.  Cardoso,  “Machine  learning 
interpretability: A survey on methods and metrics,” vol. 8, no. 8, p. 832, 2019. 
D. A. S. R. a. G. Verweij. “Sizing the prize What’s the real value of AI for your business 
and how can you capitalise?” https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/analytics/assets/pwc-
ai-analysis-sizing-the-prize-report.pdf (accessed. 
M. H. Kabir, M. R. Hoque, and S.-H. J. I. J. o. S. H. Yang, “Development of a smart 
home context-aware application: a machine learning based approach,” vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 
217-226, 2015. 
J.-L.  Briaud  et  al.,  “Realtime  monitoring  of  bridge  scour  using  remote  monitoring 
technology,” Texas Transportation Institute, 2011.  
K. F. Hasan, Y. Feng, and Y.-C. Tian, “GNSS time synchronization in vehicular ad-
hoc  networks:  Benefits  and  feasibility,”  IEEE  Transactions  on  Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 3915-3924, 2018. 
 C. B. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang and J. Xu, “Automatic Mobile Application Traffic 
Identification 
IEEE 
Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA, 2016, pp. 301-307, doi: 10.1109/TrustCom.2016.0077.  
 T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Smart city as urban innovation: Focusing on management, 
policy, and context,” in Proceedings of the 5th international conference on theory and 
practice of electronic governance, 2011, pp. 185-194.  
“Smart  City  Malaga.” 
habitat/energy/smartcity-malaga/ (accessed 2021/09/07. 
Y. Xie, G. Gao, and X. A. J. a. p. a. Chen, “Outlining the design space of explainable 
intelligent systems for medical diagnosis,” 2019. 
K.  Fida  Hasan,  A.  Overall,  K.  Ansari,  G.  Ramachandran,  and  R.  Jurdak,  “Security, 
Privacy  and  Trust:  Cognitive  Internet  of  Vehicles,”  arXiv  e-prints,  p.  arXiv: 
2104.12878, 2021. 
M.  Kuzlu,  U.  Cali,  V.  Sharma,  and  Ö.  J.  I.  A.  Güler,  “Gaining  insight  into  solar 
photovoltaic power generation forecasting utilizing explainable artificial intelligence 
tools,” vol. 8, pp. 187814-187823, 2020. 
U. D. o. E. a. S. A. U. DESA). “The Revision of the World Urbanization Prospects, 
Population 
Nations.” 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/2018-revision-of-world-
urbanization-prospects.html (accessed. 

https://malagasmart.malaga.eu/en/sustainable-and-safe-

Networks,” 

Division 

United 

Neural 

the 

of 

in 

15 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 

[24] 

[25] 

[26] 

[27] 

[28] 

[29] 

[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

[33] 

[34] 

[35] 

I. Butun, P. Österberg, H. J. I. C. S. Song, and Tutorials, “Security of the Internet of 
Things:  Vulnerabilities,  attacks,  and  countermeasures,”  vol.  22,  no.  1,  pp.  616-644, 
2019. 
J. Wilson and N. J. I. T. o. M. C. Patwari, “Radio tomographic imaging with wireless 
networks,” vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 621-632, 2010. 
A. S. Sadiq, H. Faris, A.-Z. Ala’M, S. Mirjalili, and K. Z. Ghafoor, “Fraud detection 
model based on multi-verse features extraction approach for smart city applications,” 
in Smart cities cybersecurity and privacy: Elsevier, 2019, pp. 241-251. 
Z. Zhang, X. Zhou, X. Zhang, L. Wang, P. J. S. Wang, and C. Networks, “A model 
based  on  convolutional  neural  network  for  online  transaction  fraud  detection,”  vol. 
2018, 2018. 
 W.-H. Lin, H.-C. Lin, P. Wang, B.-H. Wu, and J.-Y. Tsai, “Using convolutional neural 
networks to network intrusion detection for cyber threats,” in 2018 IEEE International 
Conference on Applied System Invention (ICASI), 2018: IEEE, pp. 1107-1110.  
 Y. Dong, R. Wang, and J. He, “Real-time network intrusion detection system based on 
deep learning,” in 2019 IEEE 10th International Conference on Software Engineering 
and Service Science (ICSESS), 2019: IEEE, pp. 1-4.  
 R. U. Khan, X. Zhang, M. Alazab, and R. Kumar, “An improved convolutional neural 
network  model  for  intrusion  detection  in  networks,”  in  2019  Cybersecurity  and 
cyberforensics conference (CCC), 2019: IEEE, pp. 74-77.  
 M.  Z.  Alom  and  T.  M.  Taha,  “Network  intrusion  detection  for  cyber  security  on 
neuromorphic computing system,” in 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural 
Networks (IJCNN), 2017: IEEE, pp. 3830-3837.  
 S. Bosaeed, I. Katib, and R. Mehmood, “A Fog-Augmented Machine Learning based 
SMS  Spam  Detection  and  Classification  System,”  in  2020  Fifth  International 
Conference on Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC), 2020: IEEE, pp. 325-330.  
 G. Chetty, H. Bui, and M. White, “Deep learning based spam detection system,” in 
2019 International Conference on Machine Learning and Data Engineering (iCMLDE), 
2019: IEEE, pp. 91-96.  
T. Sharmin, F. Di Troia, K. Potika, and M. J. I. S. J. A. G. P. Stamp, “Convolutional 
neural networks for image spam detection,” vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 103-117, 2020. 
S. Yang et al., “Scalable digital neuromorphic architecture for large-scale biophysically 
meaningful neural network with multi-compartment neurons,” %J IEEE transactions 
on neural networks learning systems, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 148-162, 2019. 
R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, K. Soman, P. Poornachandran, A. Al-Nemrat, and S. J. I. 
A. Venkatraman, “Deep learning approach for intelligent intrusion detection system,” 
vol. 7, pp. 41525-41550, 2019. 
 Z. Chen, B. Yu, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, and J. Xu, “Automatic mobile application traffic 
IEEE 
neural 
identification 
Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA, 2016: IEEE, pp. 301-307.  
J. Wang, B. He, J. Wang, and T. J. I. T. o. V. T. Li, “Intelligent VNFs selection based 
on traffic identification in vehicular cloud networks,” vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 4140-4147, 
2018. 
M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel 
approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” %J Soft Computing, 
vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999-2012, 2020. 
 M. Scalas and G. Giacinto, “On the Role of Explainable Machine Learning for Secure 
Smart Vehicles,” in 2020 AEIT International Conference of Electrical and Electronic 
Technologies for Automotive (AEIT AUTOMOTIVE), 2020: IEEE, pp. 1-6.  
N. Dasanayaka, K. F. Hasan, C. Wang, and Y. Feng, “Enhancing Vulnerable Road User 
Safety: A Survey of Existing Practices and Consideration for Using Mobile Devices 
for V2X Connections,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15502, 2020. 
K. F. Hasan, C. Wang, Y. Feng, and Y.-C. Tian, “Time synchronization in vehicular 
ad-hoc networks: A survey on theory and practice,” Vehicular Communications, vol. 
14, pp. 39-51, 2018. 
K.  F.  Hasan,  T.  Kaur,  M.  M.  Hasan,  and  Y.  Feng,  “Cognitive  internet  of  vehicles: 
motivation, layered architecture and security issues,” in 2019 International Conference 
on Sustainable Technologies for Industry 4.0 (STI), 2019: IEEE, pp. 1-6.  
T. Gu, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and S. J. a. p. a. Garg, “Badnets: Identifying vulnerabilities in 
the machine learning model supply chain,” 2017. 
F. Hussain, R. Hussain, and E. J. a. p. a. Hossain, “Explainable Artificial Intelligence 
(XAI): An Engineering Perspective,” 2021. 
 E. Soares, P. Angelov, D. Filev, B. Costa, M. Castro, and S. Nageshrao, “Explainable 
density-based  approach  for  self-driving  actions  classification,”  in  2019  18th  IEEE 

convolutional 

networks,” 

2016 

by 

in 

16 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
Submitted to Springer Nature 

[36] 

[37] 

[38] 

[39] 

[40] 

[41] 

[42] 

[43] 

[44] 

[45] 

[46] 

[47] 
[48] 

[49] 

[50] 

International  Conference  On  Machine  Learning  And  Applications  (ICMLA),  2019: 
IEEE, pp. 469-474.  
D.  J.  Cook,  G.  Duncan,  G.  Sprint,  and  R.  L.  J.  P.  o.  t.  I.  Fritz,  “Using  smart  city 
technology to make healthcare smarter,” vol. 106, no. 4, pp. 708-722, 2018. 
A. J. London, “Artificial intelligence and black‐box medical decisions: accuracy versus 
explainability,” J Hastings Center Report, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 15-21, 2019. 
 S. Meacham, G. Isaac, D. Nauck, and B. Virginas, “Towards explainable AI: design 
and  development  for  explanation  of  machine  learning  predictions  for  a  patient 
readmittance  medical  application,”  in  Intelligent  Computing-Proceedings  of  the 
Computing Conference, 2019: Springer, pp. 939-955.  
A. Gaviano, K. Weber, and C. J. E. P. Dirmeier, “Challenges and integration of PV and 
wind energy facilities from a smart grid point of view,” vol. 25, pp. 118-125, 2012. 
N. K. Suryadevara and G. R. Biswal, “Smart plugs: Paradigms and applications in the 
smart city-and-smart grid,” %J Energies, vol. 12, no. 10, p. 1957, 2019. 
S.  N.  Fallah,  R.  C.  Deo,  M.  Shojafar,  M.  Conti,  and  S.  J.  E.  Shamshirband, 
“Computational  intelligence  approaches  for  energy  load  forecasting  in  smart  energy 
management grids: state of the art, future challenges, and research directions,” vol. 11, 
no. 3, p. 596, 2018. 
 J.  L.  Y.  Wang,  Y.  Chen,  M.  Gruteser,  J.  Yang,  and  H.  Liu,  “E-eyes:  Device-free 
location-oriented activity identification using fine-grained WiFi signatures,” in Proc. 
Annu.  Int.  Conf.  Mob.  Comput.  Networking,  MOBICOM,  2014,  pp.  617-628,  doi: 
10.1145/2639108.2639143.  
N. Petrović and Đ. J. S. J. o. E. E. Kocić, “Data-driven framework for energy-efficient 
smart cities,” vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 41-63, 2020. 
N.  Petrović  and  M.  Tošić,  "EXPLAINABLE  ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  AND 
REASONING IN SMART CITIES OBJAŠNJIVA VEŠTAČKA INTELIGENCIJA I 
REZONOVANJE U PAMETNIM GRADOVIMA." 
 M.  De  Sanctis,  E.  Cianca,  S.  Di  Domenico,  D.  Provenziani,  G.  Bianchi,  and  M. 
Ruggieri,  “Wibecam:  Device  free  human  activity  recognition  through  wifi  beacon-
enabled  camera,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  2nd  workshop  on  Workshop  on  Physical 
Analytics, 2015, pp. 7-12.  
IBM. “Explainable AI. Available.” https://www.ibm.com/se-en/watson/explainable-ai 
(accessed 04-08-2021. 
G. Cloud. “Explainable AI.” https://cloud.google.com/explainable-ai (accessed. 
Factmata. 
“Helping 
https://www.factmata.com/ (accessed. 
S. M. Devine and N. D. Bastian, “Intelligent systems design for malware classification 
under adversarial conditions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.03149, 2019. 
A.  Holzinger,  G.  Langs,  H.  Denk,  K.  Zatloukal,  and  H.  Müller,  “Causability  and 
explainability of artificial intelligence in medicine,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: 
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 9, no. 4, p. e1312, 2019. 

Organizations 

Understand 

Content.” 

Online 

17 | P a g e  

1 s t   N o v   2 0 2 1  

 
 
 
 
