Understanding and Assessment of Mission-Centric Key Cyber Terrains for joint
Military Operations

´Alvaro Luis Mart´ıneza,∗, Jorge Maestre Vidala,∗, V´ıctor A. Villagr´a Gonz´alezb,∗

aIndra, Digital Labs, Avenida de Bruselas, 35, Alcobendas, 28108 Madrid, Spain
bUniversidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid. ETSI de Telecomunicaci´on. Departamento de Ingenier´ıa de Sistemas Telem´aticos, Madrid,
Spain

1
2
0
2

v
o
N
3
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
0
0
7
0
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Since the cyberspace consolidated as ﬁfth warfare dimension, the diﬀerent actors of the defense sector began an

arms race toward achieving cyber superiority, on which research, academic and industrial stakeholders contribute

from a dual vision, mostly linked to a large and heterogeneous heritage of developments and adoption of civilian

cybersecurity capabilities. In this context, augmenting the conscious of the context and warfare environment, risks

and impacts of cyber threats on kinetic actuations became a critical rule-changer that military decision-makers are

considering. A major challenge on acquiring mission-centric Cyber Situational Awareness (CSA) is the dynamic

inference and assessment of the vertical propagations from situations that occurred at the mission supportive

Information and Communications Technologies (ICT), up to their relevance at military tactical, operational and

strategical views. In order to contribute on acquiring CSA, this paper addresses a major gap in the cyber defence

state-of-the-art: the dynamic identiﬁcation of Key Cyber Terrains (KCT) on a mission-centric context. Accordingly,

the proposed KCT identiﬁcation approach explores the dependency degrees among tasks and assets deﬁned by

commanders as part of the assessment criteria. These are correlated with the discoveries on the operational network

and the asset vulnerabilities identiﬁed thorough the supported mission development. The proposal is presented as a

reference model that reveals key aspects for mission-centric KCT analysis and supports its enforcement and further

enforcement by including an illustrative application case.

Keywords: Key Cyber Terrain, Cyber Defence, Cyber Situational Awareness, Military Operations, Risk

Management

1. Introduction

The cyberspace is deﬁned as the global domain consisting of all interconnected communication, information

technology and other electronic systems, networks and their data; recently being consolidated as ﬁfth domain in the

modern theater of warfare, joining land, sea, air and space [1]. There, Joint Functions (JFs) like cyber maneuvers,

ﬁres, Command and Control (C2), intelligence, information, sustainment, or force protection are enforced in the

context of Defensive Cyberspace Operations (DCOs) and /or Oﬀensive Cyberspace Operations (OCOs); supporting

or supported by kinetic domain actuations. Despite these dependencies, the cyberspace is completely diﬀerent from

∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: aluism@indra.es ( ´Alvaro Luis Mart´ınez), jmaestre@indra.es (Jorge Maestre Vidal), victor.villagra@upm.es

(V´ıctor A. Villagr´a Gonz´alez)

Preprint submitted to ArXiv

November 16, 2021

 
 
 
 
 
 
kinetic domain mainly because a man-made nature, being partially nonphysical (digital) and exempt of conventional

geographical boundaries [2].

It is described by the high reachability of CIS (Communication and Information

System) assets, the short time eﬀects on cyber Courses of Action (CoAs) against their large preparatory time, the

growing asymmetrically of their impact (typically vertically/propagating to collateral hybrid dimensions), or their

intangibility; the later making diﬃcult the cyber damage assessment calculation [3].

In contrast with state-of-the-art dual use cybersecurity enablers, raw cyber defence eﬀectors suited for military

operations shall embrace a mission-centric vision, where cyber assessment and decisions must be complaint with

the military operational context, including among other mission goals and tasks on which the cyber actuations

act, their interdependencies, phasing, joint/combined actuations, vertical propagations between technical, tactical,

operational and strategic levels, etc. This demands a clear transposition between raw impact on Communication

and Information System (CIS) dimensions (typically Conﬁdentiality, Integrity and Availability) up to their mission-

level implications, being examples of the latter the potentially consequent delays in the execution of tasks, loss of

surprise factor, or reduction of the commander’s agility in making new decisions and planning CoAs [4].

Accordingly, an essential aspect on the eﬀectiveness of the capabilities for supporting cyber defence operations

is their ability to consider which mission dependencies are essential in order to adequately valuate/assess each cy-

bernetic or procedural asset, and the dynamically change of the valuation as the mission progress. In this context,

Key Cyber Terrains (KCTs) are deﬁned as systems, devices, protocols, data, software, processes, cyber personas,

and other networked entities that comprise, supervise, and control cyberspace [4], posing military advantage, and if

jeopardized, potentially causing mission failure [5]. But despite the relevance of the KCT concept, it was vaguely

publicly explored by the research community, where cultural and cross-domain misunderstanding has led to ambi-

guities and misperception, typically approached from an excessively civilian perspective; and mostly overlooking its

mission-centric implications.

With the motivation of contributing to the research on mission-centric KCT discovery and assessment, this

papers reviews and in-depth analyzes the KCT concept and its implications. This is conducted thorough a Cyber

Situational Awareness (CSA) perspective, and under the assumption that its relevance will increasingly grows

towards achieving and accurate cross-domain Common Operational Picture (COP) [6]. The conducted research

extends the work preliminary presented to the research community and cyber defence practitioners in [7], compiling

the widely received feedback and increasing its original scope from raw technological aspects up to the KCT mission

implications. Given the high interest it aroused, the paper strengthens the introduced KCT conceptualization,

extends the KCT discovery and assessment reference model, details its mission-centric implications and provides an

extended description of the analytical and empirical evaluations. The following enumerates the main contributions

of the conducted research.

• The paper presents an in-depth review of the current landscape on cyber defense and mission-centric cyber

risk management, emphasizing the existing eﬀorts towards KCT analysis.

• A reference framework for dynamically recognize critical assets on the cyberspace is proposed, which reveals

a subset of key pillars that may guide further research actions.

• The traceability between widely adopted kinetic terrain factors and their transposition to military operations

2

on the cyberspace, is explored.

• The proposal reviews the DOTMLPF-I (Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Logistics, Personnel,

Facilities, and Interoperability) dimensions for KCT assessment related capability development.

• The application of the proposal for KCT analysis at oﬀensive and defensive military thinking is discussed

• The proposal has been instantiated and analytically validated under an illustrative use case, which details all

the required data processing activities.

This paper is organized into seven sections, being the ﬁrst of them the present Introduction. Section II reviews the

state-of-the art on mission-centric cyber defence and KCT assessment. Section III presents the conducted research

design principles. Section IV introduces a novel dynamic KCT identiﬁcation scheme. Section V analyzes the foreseen

KCT assessment capability development dimensions. This section also discussed the proposal application at both

oﬀensive and defensive thinking. Section VI details the proposal application on a case of study. Finally, Section

VII presents the achieved conclusions and suggestions for future work,

2. Background

In recent decades a plethora of Risk Management (RM) and impact analysis frameworks have risen up in order

to prompt the organizational awareness against cyber threats on which their business depends, leading from a better

understanding that range from revealing potential attack paths and vulnerability mitigation plans, up to the analysis

of their operational consequences. In order to facilitate the understanding of the conducted research, the following

brieﬂy reviews the state-of-the-art on cyber risk management, their relationship with military solutions for acquiring

mission-centric Cyber Situational Awareness (CSA), and the existing capabilities for cyber asset assessment; the

latter including the discrimination of the essential cyber terrains for military actions.

2.1. Cyber Risk Management

According to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), a Risk Management Framework (RMF)

is a process to integrate security and risk management capabilities [8]. They comprise six major stages: 1) preparing

the organization towards managing risks; 2) categorizing the adopted information systems; 3) selecting the most

suitable security controls; 4) security controls implementation and documentation; 5) security control assessment;

authorization the information system operation; and 6) continuous monitoring the security controls eﬀectiveness,

as well as any system-level or environmental variation [9]. Beyond the NIST RMF approach, the cybersecurity

community has joint eﬀorts towards developing, integrating and validating complementary risk management solu-

tions, which are tailored to the diﬀerent operational and environmental contexts. This result in alternative widely

accepted and implemented frameworks, as is the case, among others, of NIST 800-30, OCTAVE Allegro, ISO 31000,

ISO 27005, MEHARI, or Magerit.

With a heavy focus on guiding the development of Risk Assessment (RA) actions, the NIST 800-30 reference

model highlights four mandatory steps [10]: 1) to scope the risk assessment process by identifying the model

application context [11]; 2) in order to calculate security risks assuming their uncertainly degree, the potential threats

3

and vulnerabilities shall be identiﬁed, including their related impact and occurrence likelihood [12]; 3) in order to

facilitate decision-making and countermeasure enforcement, the risk assessment results shall be communicated to

the convenient response actors [13] ; and 4) to support the related risk management activities by dynamically

monitoring and maintaining the risk assessment procedures [14].

Complementary, OCTAVE Allegro (Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation) entails

another example of widely adopted risk management framework, which aims on streamlining and optimizing the

process of assessing information security risks so that an organization can obtain suﬃcient results with a small

investment in time, people, and other limited resources [15]. This is conducted thorough a preliminary deﬁnition

of the risk measurement criteria, developing a tailored information asset proﬁle, identifying the organizational

information asset containers and their areas of concern, discovering the potential threat scenarios; and from them

conduct the risk analysis and selection of most suitable mitigation actions.

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) published its principles and generic guidelines on

managing risks faced by organizations through its 31000 family of standards [16]; which deﬁned risk management

as an integral process to be enforced by the protected organizations. In the ISO 27005 [17] the risk management

standards and guidelines are adapted to the Information System Security particularities. As answer to ISO/IEC

27005:2011 guidelines, proposals like MEHARI (Method for Harmonized Analysis of Risk) [18] facilitate an organi-

zation compliance for their Information Security Risk Management (ISRM) processs (e.g., ISO 27001 2013 revision),

providing both documental supports and practical tools for their enforcement.

Another world-wide spread AR and RM methodology, with signiﬁcant relevance for the military sector (e.g.,

NATO) is MAGERIT [19]. Developed by the Spanish Public Administration and supported by the EAR/PILAR

linked software, MAGERIT guides the ISO 31000 adoption and implementation based on each organization partic-

ularities. MAGERIT is based on six steps: to characterize assets and their inter-dependencies; to identify threats;

to estimate the impact; to estimate the risk deﬁned as the impact weighted by the likelihood of the threat; to select

safeguards and measure its eﬀectiveness; and to calculate residual impact and residual risk.

According to [12], the risk management approaches can be categorized as qualitative and quantitative, which

depends on the nature of the information on which security decisions rely. In this context, the qualitative models

focus on the analysis of the likelihood of a speciﬁc risk event occurs, as well as its impact on the overall business

operations and goals [20], being the approaches described above examples of qualitative-base RA/RM solutions. In

contrast, and with a much lower presence at design, adoption and standardization/harmonization RA/RM actions,

quantitative methods operate on numerical terms where Bayesian Decision Networks (BDN) [21] guide cybersecurity

beneﬁt-cost analytics. Anther examples of quantiative RA/RM are AVARCIBER [22] for extending the speciﬁc

parameters of ISO 27005 [17].

Despite the maturity of these methodologies on civilian applications, none of them has been conceived for

supporting mission-centric RM/RA by design, which evidences a huge gap between the military needs and the

background delivered by civilian industry and research institutions. Solutions like MAGERIT partially cover needs

related with the management of the CIS technological plane, but they do not properly support the assessment of

vertical propagation from cyber situations to the mission businesses and goals.

4

2.2. Mission-centric Cyber Situational Awareness

Situational Awareness (SA) is a human “brain state” that refers to being conscious of the operational context and

the development of planned/ongoing actions with the aim on selecting and planning more eﬀective reactive/proactive

CoAs. This term has been actively revisited by Mica Endsley, who proposed the most adopted SA model in

recent decades [23]. The Endlsey’s model layered the SA into three mayor phases: Perception of the operational

environment; Comprehension of the perceived information so the inference of new related knowledge is possible; and

the Projection of the SA at diﬀerent future time horizons. Other authors like Bedny and Meister [24] and Smith

and Hancock [25] proposed alternative models of SA, which have been widely modiﬁed since their publication. A

well-known abstraction of the SA paradigm is the OODA (Observe Orient Decide Act) loop model proposed by

former USAF colonel John Boyd [26] for supporting fast decision-making, actually constituting the core pillar of

the C2 solutions.

By following the coining SA philosophy, the research community has put signiﬁcantly eﬀort towards adapting

these cognitive models to the cyberspace, referring to the resultant mind state as Cyber Situation Awareness (CSA).

As Jajodia et al. stated in [27]: to protect critical network infrastructures and missions, we must understand not

only the vulnerabilities of each individual system, but also their inter-dependencies and how they support missions,

which gains diﬃculty when operating on emerging technological ecosystems [28, 29], combining the perception of

both insider and outsider threats [30] or facing adversarial evasion tactics [31, 32] . At the same time, they proposed

a framework to obtain mission-centric SA (Cauldron) combining data fusion, network paths of vulnerabilities, alert

correlation, mission impact analysis and recommended reactive/proactive mitigation actions [33, 34]. Based on the

three Endsley’s SA levels, McGuinness and Foy [35] added a fourth layer towards developing an alternative CSA

model grounded on Perception, Comprehension, Projection and Resolution. On the other hand, Lenders et al. [36]

made evolve the John Boyd’s OODA loop to a cyber perspective. Buckshaw et al. [37] proposed MORDA (Mission

Oriented Risk and Design Analysis of Critical Information) based on attack trees, adversary models, user models,

service provider models and analysis models to deﬁne a quantitative risk assessment and management by means of

Multiple Objective Decision Analysis algorithms and SMEs (Subject Matter Expert).

As response to the increasing need for standardized CSA solutions, MITRE developed a related framework ﬁtted

to the NATO Communications and Information Agency [38] which comprised Threat Intelligence, Dependency and

Impact Analysis, Analysis of Alternatives and Emerging Solutions module to be aware of threats and actors,

dependencies and possible countermeasures against discovered threats. Public convergence actions, as is the case

of the project H2020 PROTECTIVE, are exploring the context awareness to assess assets critically, the later

relying on three basic features: Mission Impact Management, Asset State Management, and Mission and Asset

Information Repositories. Complementary, research like [39] is exploring the deﬁnition of intelligence systems for

critical infrastructure protection under hybrid scenarios (physical and cyber data sources), the latter by taking

advantage of three main modules: Data Gathering, Data Analysis and Data Visualization. Finally, in [40] Franke

and Brynielsson analyzed both CSA approaches: on one hand industry control and critical infrastructure and

in other hand military. They concluded that ﬁrst approach has been widely researched whereas military CSA

application has much less bibliographical coverage.

5

2.3. Key Cyber Terrains

Occidental military doctrines deﬁne a Key Terrain as any locality, or area, the seizure or retention of which

aﬀords a marked advantage to either combatant [41]. This deﬁnition aligns with the SA purpose of being aware

of the environment and hostile actors in order to take some advantage to accomplish each mission goal. When

developing CSA, the Key Terrain concept embraces the cyber domain with the aim on identifying those cyber-

dependant components that play crucial roles for a mission development advantage. They are refered to as Key

Cyber Terrains (KCT). But in contrast with conventional kinetic terrains, KCTs are more diﬃcult not only to

defend but also to identify due to their ICT (Information and Communication Technology) nature [4], which aﬀects

reachability. For example, the location and temporal components that characterize physical environments might be

completely vanished in the digital World, where hostile actors may remotely gain control of critical infrastructure

from thousand kilometers, change systems policies in milliseconds and use advanced concealing techniques to avoid

being discovered by conventional Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) procedures.

Consequently, the cyberspace entails a fast and dynamic environment with a fuzzy sense of control. Therefore

its analysis should be addressed with a more complex and dynamic approach. For example, in [42] is suggested

a KCT identiﬁcation framework based on the traditional Key Terrain analysis OCOKA (Observation and Fields

of Fire, Cover and Concealment, Obstacles, Key Terrain and Avenues of approach) [43]. This KCT framework

deals with the identiﬁcation of the potential exploitable assets; identiﬁcation of avenues of approach, that is, attack

vectors; and the deployment of obstacles and camouﬂage techniques to limit avenues of approach. In [44] ﬁve levels

where KCT can be identiﬁed were deﬁned, thus extending those preliminary declared by the US DoD (Department

of Defense) on kinetic encounters: supervisor, cyberperson, logical, physic and geographical.

Price et al.

[45] suggested a mission-centered criticallity and dependency analysis to assist defence analysts

to acquire CSA via Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MADM) guided by the TOPSIS (Technique for Order of

Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) method. They conclude that families (sets of assets) are more relevant

for mission severity than the single asset assessment. In [46] three strategies for supporting Cyber-Physical Key

Terrains under simulated movement models were proposed: centrality analysis, dynamical systems (Markov Models)

and agent-based modelling. They concluded that although centrality and dynamical systems strategies can approach

agent-base modelling, the latter shows much more ﬂexibility to represent each use case model. Complementary, the

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) [47] remarked the importance of KCT discovery on military missions,

and suggested three diﬀerent for its proper development: manual identiﬁcation by SMEs; logs and network capacities

analysis; and perturbational analysis.

Beyond the theoretical frameworks and basic empirical demonstrations presented in the bibliography, the re-

search on KCT discovery and management presents an essential, but rarely explored topic. Few proposals addressed

the KCT related challenges from a mission-centric perspective, most of them heavily relying on up-to-down proce-

dures that diﬃculty adapt to the dynamism required on real operational environments. On the other hand, they

usually are not linked to mission assessment capabilities, so the vertically propagated impact on a KCT (technical

war plane) to the upper war levels (tactical, operational, strategy) have been barely taken into consideration; in

this way, failing when correlating the impact on KCTs regarding the mission goals.

6

3. Design Principles

This section describes the main consideration taken into account during the conducted research, highlighting

objectives, assumptions and limitations.

3.1. Objectives

The principal objective of the conducted research has been to design a system able to dynamically discover

and score assets deployed on the cyberspace considering the propagated criticality of them regarding the mission

tasks. As secondary goals, it was stated that: 1) when calculating the criticality score, the proposal shall be able

to consider the potential horizontal/vertical propagation between task and assets dependencies; 2) the assessment

process shall be continuous and dynamic, since it is assumed that the ICT ecosystem on which the mission depends

evolves over time; 3) the outcomes of the proposal shall be clear and understandable, so they can contribute to the

acquisition of cyber situational awareness.

3.2. Assumptions and requirements

The design requirements to develop the research are stated as follows:

• The proposal implementation will require to be able to reach the analyzed assets, since it shall relay on

well-known network discovery and port scanning applications.

• In order to perform a deep active scanning against cyber assets, the KCT discovery system requires to have

enough privileges. This is due that it must be allowed to perform advanced scanning options.

• The network scanning results are stored into the system by the scanning procedures as XML ﬁles (or other

common data representation formats). No data treatment policies were applied on them (e.g., anonymization,

ﬁltering, aggregation, etc.), so they can be processes in raw for further analytic actions.

3.3. Limitations

Some limitations have been foreseen at the early stage of the research, or during the core research actions,

highlighting:

• The Concept of Operation (COP) as a set of missions is not supported in the current system development

state. In further more mature versions it shall be properly aligned with the military standards and the Joint

Operations doctrines.

• The proposed model does not implement threats, risks nor impacts assessment process. In further develop-

ments, the system would work with these models due to the integration with impact assessment and risk

management modules.

• The proposal conﬁguration heavily relies on a top-to-down mission planning (similar to those in the state of

the art, and as suggested by the doctrines). It is expected that alternative approaches may imply a higher

degree of automatism (e.g., machine learning, prediction, etc.), which preliminary were out of the scope of

the conducted research due to the doctrinal barriers inherent in adopting unsupervised or semi-supervised

capabilities on military enablers.

7

4. Dynamic Key Cyber Terrain identiﬁcation scheme

The following describes a novel methodology for mission-centric KCT discovery, emphasizing its core elements,

the KCT discovery procedure steps, and the scoring system applied for inferring the criticality of each analyzed

cyber asset.

4.1. KCT Discovery Components

In the grounds of the design principles described in Section 3, the following introduces a novel KCT identiﬁ-

cation system able to dynamically value each cyber terrain. This is dynamically conducted from a mission-centric

perspective, by design assuming its application for supporting the acquisition of cyber situational awareness. The

proposal is decoupled into the following core modules as represented in Fig. 1:

4.1.1. Mission/Task Conﬁguration Module

The Mission/Task Conﬁguration Module (MTCM) feeds the KCT assessment functionalities with information

provided by mission planning enablers, Joint Command and Control (JC2) systems and/or any other capability

able to enrich the mission-centric vision of the operational environment [48]. Beyond linking theses capabilities with

the rest of the knowledge management eﬀectors, the MTCM is able to operate on an own abstraction of the mission

topology, thus reducing the dependencies with external functionalities to only communication of signiﬁcant events

concerning changes on the mission map (e.g., status of the mission lines of development, re-tasks, enforced CoAs,

etc.). This abstraction relies on dynamic sequences of tasks and phases represented via Business Process Model

and Notation (BPMN) [49], so it can be easily transposed to standardized representations, as is the case of the the

Military Scenario Deﬁnition Language (MSDL), Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) [50] or

dual-use approximations to modeling businesses for growing technological enablers [51]. Note that these abstractions

are not mandatory for the proper functioning of the proposed KCT Assessment method, but they signiﬁcantly

enhance its interoperability. On these grounds, the MTCM models the tasks, CIS-related operational assets, their

relationships, dependency degrees and planned/ongoing tasks’ severity. From this, the KCT Discovery Module

(KDM) will compute the mission-level severity propagation of the impact of cyber threats, between operational

dependencies

4.1.2. Assets Discovery Module

The Assets Discovery Module (ADM) comprises the functionalities related with automatically identifying and

mapping the cyber assets spotted on the mission operational network, in order to have a complete knowledge

about physical and virtual infrastructure on which the success on the planned/ongoing mission relies on. On these

grounds, the ADM main purpose is to automatically discover cyber assets in the mission operational network, like

devices or services running on the network through active port scanning. In order to be successfully identiﬁed, a

CPE (Common Platform Enumeration) should be extracted, which allows to use Vulnerabilities Database Access

Module (VDAM) for retrieving CVSS asset scores. Discovery events are reported by cyber sensors and telemetry

services grouped into four classes [14]: discovery, removal, modiﬁcation and notiﬁcation.

The Discovery events report situations related to incorporation of new assets, as is the case of instantiating

of new Virtual Network Functions (VNFs) or deploying new nodes. The ADM updates its asset inventory each

8

Figure 1: Architecture overview

time a Discovery event is communicated. As opposite, Removal events report situations related with their deletion,

which may be triggered by multiple causes ranging from intentional elimination of virtual resources up to the lost

of assets due to hostile actions. Each asset deletion implies its removal from the asset inventory. Since conducting

misison-centric KCT assessments requires that the ADM registers each asset modiﬁcation (not only instantiation

or removal) that may impact on its value for the mission purpose, the Modiﬁcation events continuously report and

refresh the ADM inventory based on changes like variations of the asset location, software updated, etc. Finally,

the Notiﬁcation events report to the ADM any other discoverable situation related with the assets that may be

useful for their valuation, as is the case of the presence of unused resources or detection of requests for special

conﬁgurations.

4.1.3. Traﬃc Analysis Module

The Traﬃc Analysis Module (TAM) is in charge of monitoring and analyzing traﬃc from the operational network

in order to infer CIS-level characteristic of the mission development that are not noticeable by the discovery reports

managed by the ADM. The TAM monitoring capabilities may deploy active or passive measurement tools able

to capture the traﬃc crossing monitoring points (e.g., packet-based, ﬂow-based, etc.) and/or host-based linked

information; and export them to standardized models that facilitate further management and analysis [52]. These

capabilities may be complemented by cyber sensors like Network-based Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS), Host-

based Intrusion Detection Systems (HIDS) or SIEM (Security Information and Event Management). In complex

operational contexts, the perception of the CIS environment may be supported by external Network Operations

Center (NOCs) or Security Operation Center (SOCs) [53]. It is worth to highlight that as a ﬁrst implementation of

the proposed solution, the conducted experimentation implemented basic telemetry services for network monitoring,

9

Operational NetworkMission Operational AssetsAsset DiscoveryTraffic AnalysisVulnerabilities Database AccessTraffic Analysis ModuleMission/Task ConfigurationExternal CTI SourcesCommanders and Cyber Defence ExpertsMonitorizationsMonitorizationsInternal RepositoryMission Planners and  JC2which exported packet-based observations as Pcap ﬁles. They allowed to assess whether or not each communication

between assets is encrypted by using protocols like TLS (Transport Layer Security), as wells as to determine if

an asset requires high availability. The Analytics conducted by the TAM may vary according to the operational

context and the analytical resource availability, typically addressing traﬃc prediction, traﬃc classiﬁcation, failure

management or detection/correlation of cyber threats.

It may aim on reactive or proactive targets, the second

facilitating the identiﬁcation and assessment of vertical/horizontal propagation of situations topologically, but also

in time (thus supporting the decision of anticipative CoAs) [33].

4.1.4. Vulnerabilities Database Access Module

As highligthed in [54] the new generation of cyber threats are rapidly evolving, resembling multi-vectored and

often multi-staged modus operandi. The ﬁrst refers to the possibility of horizontal/vertical propagation towards

infering diverse impacts, ranging from raw CIS-level consequences, up to complex strategical/operational hybrid

consequences across the Political, Military, Economic, Social, Informational and Infrastructure (PMESII) spectrum

[55]. On the other hand, multi-staged threats can be understood from the defensive perspective of a “kill chain” as

a sequence of stages required for an attacker to success. The proper detection, assessment and management of these

treats require a continuously adapted related knowledge-base, which shall guide the cyber defence automatism and

human decision-making. In this context, the Vulnerabilities Database Access Module (VDAM) of the proposal,

addressed the activities involved in feeding the rest of the KCT assessment functionalities with the needed Cyber

Threat Intelligence (CTI). This component intermediates between external CTI repositories (CERTs, Bug Hunting

Platforms, SOCs, etc.), by importing, updating and if needed removing the acquired knowledge. In the context of

the conducted experimentation, this module provided an interface to request to NIST’s NVD web service the CVEs

(Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures) and the CVSS (Common Vulnerability Scoring System) associated to the

assets discovered in the operational network.

4.1.5. KCT Discovery Module (KDM)

Based on the feeds of the aforementioned components, and by integrating the mission-level perspective at the

analysis of the CIS-level context, the KCT Discovery Module (KDM) conducts the calculations toward assessing

the critically of each mission operational asset. This process requires to retrieve topological information as well

as traﬃc and vulnerabilities metrics to obtain a ﬁnal score for the asset’s criticality for both tasks and mission

perspective. The result is represented in a dashboard via Graphical User Interface (GUI) for the commander to

be dynamically aware of the mission and tasks KCTs in order to make decisions. Since the KDM entails the core

capability of the proposed scheme, its will be discussed in more detail at Section 4.2.

4.1.6. Internal Repository (IR)

The Internal Repository (IR) of the proposal implements the capabilities for organizing, storing and retrieval

the acquired local knowledge, including its management, veriﬁcation and update. Given the dynamism inherent

in real operational environments, the databases that may comprise the IR shall consider the fast management and

retrieval of large information volumes, with high heterogeneity and high dimensionality; if required, distinguishing

natural/raw data lakes from persistence of analytical information storage and managers. For simplicity, in the

10

Figure 2: System ﬂow chart.

context of the conducted experimentation a relational database was implemented as persistence layer, which stored

and facilitates the retrieval of all information needed to compute the ﬁnal assets score: mission topology, dependen-

cies, severity, vulnerabilities, traﬃc information, etc. However, and beyond experimental purposes, advanced data

management architectures and systems should be considered [56] at real deployment, which shall adopt the data

security and classiﬁcation mechanism that guarantee the conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability of the information

to be analyzed (e.g., NATO STANAG 4774/4778 for security data labeling). In this regard, the defence community

is increasingly interested on adopting non perimeter-based data securization (e.g., zero trust, data-centric security,

etc.) [57].

4.2. KCT Discovery Methodology

The process of discovering KCT entails seven stages that cyclically iterate in convergence with the Observe-

Orient-Decide-Act (OODA) loop (see Fig. 2). Introduced by the USAF Colonel John Boyd, the OODA loop was

designed aiming on facilitating human decision-making at complex operational circumstances, as is the case of air

combat operations [58]. Accordingly, an Observe stage analogous to the Perception layer of the Endsley’s model [23]

gathers information from the operational environment, which is where the proposed KCT assessment methodology

is feed by CIS-level, mission-level and CTI data sources. Then the Orient conducts reasoning actions towards

inferring new knowledge from the preliminary one. This is when the main functionalities on ADM, MTCM, TAM

operate, creating a baseline that makes converge the acquired CIS-level operational picture regarding the mission-

centric context. At the Decide stage the KDM functionalities will calculate the mission-centric valuation per CIS

asset, revealing the critical terrains that can be tagged as KCT. Finally, at Act stage the proposal will notify to

commanders and linked cyber defence experts the KDM ﬁndings, these will be persistently recorded at the IR,

and if required, re-calibration indications may be communicated to cyber sensors and external data sources. The

following describes the implemented procedure step-by-step:

1. Monitorization. Aligned with the Perception layer of the Endsley’s model, these preliminary steps initiates

11

ObserveOrientDecideActFindings/ModellingFindings/ModellingEnvironmental Interaction and Querying Implicit Guidance and ControlAsset DiscoveryMonitorizationInternal RepositoryNotificationRisksKey KCTsObservationsValuationsContextCIS AssetNetwork statusMission StatusCTINetwork Traffic AnalysisMission/Task ConvergenceKCT AssessmentHypotehsisCalibration16234578the KCT discovery loop by continuous monitoring the operational environment, including network, mission

and the status related indicators of the deployed assets. This stage also includes the reception of feeds from

external data sources, among them CTI, and information from NOCs, SOCs etc. and other facilities linked

to the planned/ongoing mission.

2. Asset Discovery. During this step the ADM performs an active scan of the operational network to discover

the assets in the network. Once all machines have been discovered, a port scanning is initiated not only

to discover the service but also to determine the service version and even operating system. Applications

as Nmap, Nessus or OpenVAS would be suitable to implement this scanning, moreover they are capable to

retrieve assets’ Common Platform Enumeration (CPE) intel supported by the external intelligence collected

at Monitorization stage. Once the CPE is retrieved, a NIST National Vulnerability Database (NVD NIST)

allows to request the CVEs and CVSS scores associated. This request is arranged by VDAM with the

information extracted from the network scanning. At the end if the stage and from the perceived information,

new knowledge about the operational assets and their vulnerabilities and scores is inferred and stored in IR.

3. Mission/Tasks Conﬁguration. At this phase the cyber assets have been discovered and scored regarding their

published vulnerabilities.

In case some asset could not be identiﬁed automatically, the MTCM allows to

manually insert assets into the system according to its CPE name, WFN (Well-Formed CPE Name) [59]. The

MTCM main functionality is to let a commander build the mission topology within inter-dependencies, so it is

possible to deﬁne the operational tasks, its severity in the mission-centric context, and its inter-task relations

and dependency degrees. It is also needed to specify the assets used per mission task and CoA, including the

dependency degrees on them. Finally, in order to propagate intermediate computations for KCT discovery,

inter-assets dependencies shall be provided.

4. Traﬃc Analysis. Based on the feeds of the Monitoring phase, the TAM analyzes network operational traf-

ﬁc supported by CTI towards computing a traﬃc score regarding availability, conﬁdentiality and integrity

measures.

5. KCT Discovery.

In this step the KDM performs computations using task severity, task dependencies and

asset dependencies, in order to calculate the criticality of the assets, for which the traﬃc score and linked

vulnerability scores are considered. A deeper description of this calculation is described in the next section.

6. Internal Repository. Beyond the locally stored data that enables the calculations on the diﬀerent proposed

modules, at this stage the discovered assets and their criticality based on the mission context are permanently

stored by the IR.

7. Notiﬁcation. This phase includes the functionalities required to communicate the acquired cyber situational

awareness on the deployed assets and their degree of criticality. This facilitates the decision and planning of

related CoAs (if required), their inclusion on the Common Operational Picture (COP), the notiﬁcation of the

identiﬁed threats to the users, and if corresponds, their communication to external collaborators, stakeholders,

authorities (local and international cybersecurity agencies, CSIRTS, Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs), etc.)

in compliance with the assumed common cyber defence policies.

8. Calibration. If supported by the deployed infrastructure, this stage groups the functionalities related with

re-conﬁguring the monitorization and comprehension capabilities towards verifying, evidence collection and/or

12

presenting a more detailed analysis of the explored CIS terrains. For example, if a novel CIS asset is discovered

but the consumed CTI does not provide much detail, the calibration functionalities may demand to query

additional information on the external data sources.

4.3. KCT Scoring and decision-making

The conventional analysis of kinetic terrains tends to rely on the stages summarized by the KOCOA mnemonic

acronym: Key Terrain/Decisive Terrain; Observation and Fields of Fire; Concealment and Cover; Obstacles; and

Avenues of Approach/Withdrawal [60]; which shall converge towards describing a mission-centric network map

[61]. In analogy with the observation, concealment, recognition of obstacles and avenues of approach/withdrawal

(e.g., ﬁrewalls and port blocks); the existing advanced on cybersecurity have the potential of providing insight

about the ﬁeld (network and linked CIS asset), avenues of approach (by identifying nodes and links, which connect

endpoints to speciﬁc sites), their vulnerabilities and dependent risks sores, and the capability of cyber commands on

enforcing eﬀective countermeasures. According to widely adopted procedures, as is the adoption of the CVSS scoring

system, the raw CIS-level analysis has into account features like the adversarial skills required for weaponizing each

vulnerability, the supportive tools that the attackers require, potential collateral damage (vertical/horizontal hybrid

propagation), likelihood of an attack to success, or CIS-level valuation of the victim capabilities [62]. The Table

1 highlights the dimensions approached by the proposed methodology and the cyberspace factors to be considered

for a mission-centric KOCOA terrain analysis.

But as remarked in [63], ”a critical omission in previous research eﬀorts is the failure to tie key terrain to

objectives or missions”, which need to create a convergence system withing the role of each studied assets, the

aforementioned described of the cyber ﬁeld, and the capability of the attacker on vertically propagate threats from

the CIS asset to tactical, operational and strategic dimensions.

In order to close this state-of-the-art gap, the

following describes a global procedure for calculating the criticality of the mission terrains based on the operational

network traﬃc features, linked vulnerabilities and dependent mission objectives and tasks. This is addressed

thorough calculation of each asset linked Task Asset Criticality Score (TACS) and decisions made on them.

4.3.1. Task Asset Criticality of mission assets

Before establishing whether an asset is a KCT or not, they ought to be scored. The score system proposed is

formed by four main calculations: Traﬃc Base Score (TBS), Vulnerability Base Score (VBS), Asset-Task Aggre-

gated Score (ATAS), and Task Severity Aggregated Score (TSAS). These contributions make possible to deﬁne the

equation that indicates each asset criticality on a task, based on not only technical characteristics but also strongly

inﬂuenced over mission-oriented aspects. It is referred to as Task Asset Criticality Score (TACS), which is expressed

as follows:

T ACSa,t = T SASt · (

3
5

· AT ASa,t +

1
5

· T BSa +

1
5

· V BSa)

(1)

where a is the analyzed CIS operational asset and t is a mission task that depends on it. Note that for all of the

metrics, the possible range values are constrained between 0 and 1. Thus, the Task Asset Criticality Score (TACS)

13

KCT assessment considerations

Examples

Cyberspace

Factor

Key Terrain

and Decisive

Terrain

Observation

and Fields of

Fire

The cyber assets which MACS exceed the Mission

Threshold (MTH) are considered mission KCTs. Deci-

sive terrains are KCTs which MACSs reaches their max-

imum value, so if jeopardized the mission fails.

The TBS is computed in the TAM by analyzing the cyber

ﬁeld on which a planned/ongoing mission occurs (net-

work traﬃc), inferred from a CIS-level topology of the

operational environment.

Concealment

and Cover

The TBS considers the conﬁdentiality,

integrity and

availability dimensions that describe the ﬁeld capabili-

ties for addressing a secure use of the network.

Critical Lines of Communications

(LOCs), tactical cloudlets, cyber

command and control services, etc.

They may dynamically change as

the mission evolves.

Hosts, networks,

services, cyber

personas, etc.

and linked cyber

assets that may be jeopardized in

terms of conﬁdentiality, integrity or

availability.

Cyber

bulletproof

services,

anonymization,

cryptography,

of

security

policies,

intrusion

prevention systems, etc.

The calculation of VBS relies on vulnerability metrics

Black lists, sandboxes, access con-

that have into account barriers like the attack complexity

trol systems, ﬁrewalls, blockers, re-

Obstacles

by the analyzed vectors based on the deployed securiza-

covery services, etc. Any tech-

Avenues

of

Approach and

Withdrawal

Mission-

centric vertical

propagation

tion, degree of user interaction or privileges required (see

nological, organizational or human

CVSS base metrics [62])

thread prevention.

The VBS assesses each cyber terrain by taking into ac-

Vulnerabilities, open network re-

count the qualities intrinsic to the asset vulnerabilities,

gions, gateways.

DNS services,

evolution and how each potential attack surface may be

physical interfaces, network slices,

weaponized by the attacker.

multitenancy, etc.

The ATAS provides the ﬁnal dependency degree between

Dependencies between cyber assets

each asset and a given task. Based on this, the TSAS

(services, communication channels,

provides information about how important is a task based

databases, etc.) regarding mission

on commanders’ predeﬁned task severity in addition with

tasks and their impact (delays, loss

the propagated severity of its dependent tasks weighted

of surprise factor, reduced decision-

by the dependency degree paths.

making agility, etc.).

Table 1: KCT discovery and assessment factors

is a normalized score between 0 and 1 to assess the assets criticality. The next subsections describe in detail each

of the scores computed for composing the Task Asset Criticality Score (TACS).

4.3.2. Traﬃc Base Score

The considered Traﬃc Base Score (TBS) is computed in the TAM by analyzing the cyber ﬁeld on which a

planned/ongoing mission occurs: the network traﬃc. This may be served by well-known techniques like packet

analysis, pattern detection or events triggered from an IDS or SIEM. The TBS approaches the challenge of summa-

14

rizing the network status as a cyber ﬁeld based on its conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability during the supported

operation, being the TBS calculated as described below:

T BSa =

1
3

· Availa +

1
3

· Confa +

1
3

· Inta

(2)

where a is the CIST asset for which TBS is calculated, and the conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability dimensions

describe its capabilities for addressing a secure use of the network. Note that in the context of the conducted

experimentation, and since TBS may present a diverse scope of scoring procedures (as it can be calculated from

diverse sources of data), the TBS computation has been implemented in a simple but easily understandable way: by

inferring the risk dimensions from packet inspections of the incoming/ongoing traﬃc on the analyzed CIS operational

asset

In this context, the Availability (Avail ) metric aims on inferring the CIS operational asset needs for avail-

ability within the mission. The Availability computation is simpliﬁed by calculating the percentage of traﬃc and

asset that are being used during the mission. This traﬃc is identiﬁed by observing the tuple integrated by the

incoming/ongoing IP addresses and ports. They serve for tracking the packet-based traﬃc associated to the diﬀer-

ent network connections (identiﬁed by IP Address-port tuple) between the diﬀerent assets through the operational

network and allows to estimate a metric related to its availability needs. With experimental purpose, a sigmoid

function has been proposed, which is applied to the traﬃc volume in order to spread near low values for better

diﬀerentiation. A ranking-reward process has been applied in order to give more importance to the assets that are

being more used in the network. Accordingly:

for Sigmoid :

Availa =

3
5

· Sigmoid +

2
5

· RR

Sigmoid =

1
1 + 100 · e−0.1x

where x is the percentage of traﬃc. For the Ranking Reward (RR):

RR = Sigmoid + (1 −

Rank
Connections

) − Sigmoid · (1 −

Rank
Connections

)

(3)

(4)

(5)

where Rank is the position of the connection in the most-used connection ranking and Connections is the total

number of connections that are present in the network.

On the other hand, Conﬁdentiality (Conf ) serves as ﬂag that indicates the degree in which, whether or not,

protocols or mechanisms for assuring conﬁdentiality are implemented in the cyber communications of the analyzed

CIS operational asset.

In order to conduct a simple and easily understandable experimental implementation,

conﬁdentiality has been calculated based on the presence of TLS protocol in the communication while taking into

account whether or not the communication uses a Cipher Suite stated as conﬁdentiality secured [62]. Based on this,

the conﬁdentiality is expressed as follows:

Confa =

3
5

· Conf identiality T LS set +

2
5

· Conf identiality Secured

(6)

15

Figure 3: Top-level mission-centric dependecies.

where TLS set is a ﬂag that indicates if the connection is using TLS connection and Conﬁdentiality Secured is a

ﬂag activated if the TLS protocol is using a conﬁdentiality secured Cipher Suite.

Analogously, the network traﬃc Integrity (Int) indicates the degree in which the same mechanisms assure

integrity, so the presence of TLS integrity ﬂags and a Cipher Suite integrity secured will support the following

calculation:

Inta =

3
5

· Integrity T LS set +

2
5

· Integrity Secured

(7)

4.3.3. Vulnerability Base Score

The Vulnerability Base Score (VBS) is related with the kinetic KOCOA analysis on concealment and cover,

obstacles, and avenues of the enemy approach.

In the grounds of the CVSS scoring system (base metrics), the

VBS analyzes each cyber terrain by taking into account the qualities intrinsic to the asset vulnerabilities, their

expected evolution over lifetime, and how each potential attack surface may be weaponized by the attacker based

on elements like complexity or potential access vectors. During the conducted experimentation the VBS has been

directly retrieved from VDAM through requests to the NVD NIST CVE web service. In this repository each asset

(characterized by a CPE entity) is related to a list of vulnerabilities (CVE) and their scores (CVSS). In this approach

it is taken into account the maximum value of each of the CVSS Base Score value related to the asset identiﬁed as

follows:

V BSa =

1
10

M ax{CV SS Base Scorea,1, ..., CV SS Base Scorea,n}

(8)

where a is a considered cyber asset and n the number of CVSS associated to the asset a.

4.3.4. Asset-Task Aggregated Score

The Asset-Task Aggregated Score (ATAS) provides the ﬁnal dependency degree between each asset and a given

task, being computed at the KDM. ATAS takes into account the analyzed task’s dependency for each asset on

16

Equipment 1Services 2Services 1Information 1Information 2Information 3Mission Task 1Mission Task 2Objective 1Objective 2Equipment LayerServices LayerInformation LayerMission ObjectivesCIS DomainMission Domainwhich its proper execution relies on, as well as the linked assets’ inter-dependency paths. This dependency path is

computed as suggested in Book III of Magerit methodology [19], but bearing in mind the mission-centric aspects

(relationship between tasks and goal). In compliant with Magerit’s guidelines, the resulting dependency trees shall

consider information and services at the top, where the KDM includes two additional layers: Tasks and Objectives.

The resulting hierarchy is illustrated in Figure. 3, which may be varied by cyber defence experts if the circumstances

demand it. Alternatively, and if the top-level dependencies tree shall consider hybrid aspects (e.g., cyber persons,

social implications, etc.) [55], additional levels may be considered. Note that in order to facilitate the understanding

of the proposal, these hybrid elements were not considered during its implementation and empirical validations.

However, it is important to extend these graphs when strategically and operationally thinking on the cyberspace,

which is discussed in wider detail at Section 6. The asset-task dependencies may be direct (e.g., in Figure. 3,

Mission Task 1, → Information 1 ); which ocurr were there are not transitive assets to be taken into account; and

independent (e.g., in Figure. 3, Mission Task 1 ⇒) Equipment 1 ), where the degree of dependency is propagated.

The resulting Asset-Task Score (ATS) is propagated based on each dependent value and inter-dependencies, being

expressed as follows:

AT AS(t, x) = 1 −

i=p
(cid:89)

i

(1 − degree(t ⇒ x)i)

(9)

where x is a mission asset, t refers to the particular task on which ATAS is calculated, and n is the total number

of dependency path that connect t with x. In coherency with Magerit, the degree of dependency is modelled as a

continuum between 0.0 (independent assets) and 1.0 (fully dependent assets). This value is provided by the ADM

when the assets are discovered.

An example of ATAS calculation can be described from the example presented at Fig. 3. Based on this, let the

following paths:

degree(M ission T ask 1 → Inf ormation 1 → Services 1) = 0.3

degree(M ission T ask 1 → Inf ormation 2 → Services 1) = 0.5

it is possible to conclude that:

AT AS(M ission T ask 1, Services 1) = 1 − (1 − 0.3) × (1 − 0.5)

(10)

(11)

(12)

since these are the only dependency paths that deﬁne the dependencies between M ission T ask 1 and Services 1.

4.3.5. Task Severity Aggregated Score

The purpose of the Task Severity Aggregated Score (TSAS) is to evaluate the total severity associated with a

task, which will vary depending on the tasks that depend on it according to the degrees of mission-level dependencies

identiﬁed by the mission manager. TSAS presents values between 0 and 1, being calculated similarly to ATAS at

the KDM. This metric provides information about how important is a task based on commanders’ predeﬁned task

severity in addition with the propagated severity of its dependent tasks weighted by the dependency degree paths.

17

Let the mission task t, the TSAS correlates its cumulative severity against each other y task (CSt,y), which is

expressed as follows:

being T SASt calculated as described below:

CSt,y = severity(y) × degree(t ⇒ y)

T SASt = 1 − (1 − severity(t))

i=q
(cid:89)

i

(1 − CSt,i)

(13)

(14)

where q is the total number of tasks on which t relies on, hence CSt,i expressing the cumulative severity regarding

each of them.

4.3.6. Task/Mission Asset Criticality Score

As stated at the beginning of this section, the four metrics previously deﬁned, are used to compute the assets’

criticality for each task (TACS) (Equation 1). Once TACS is calculated for each task and asset, a basic Task

Threshold (TTH) is deﬁned in order to set whether an asset is critical and consequently a KCT for that task. The

assets which TACS is above that Task Threshold is identiﬁed as a task KCT.

T T Ht = Avg{T ACS1,t, ..., T ACSA,t}+

+ k · StdDev{T ACS1,j, ..., T ACSA,t}

(15)

where t is the task to calculate the threshold, A the total number of assets involved in the task t, and k is a tuning

parameter (between 0 and 1) used to adjust the sensitivity of the KCT identiﬁcation. k value should be selected in

the implementation depending on the commander’s chosen approach: optimistic (values around 1), medium (values

around 0.5) or pessimistic (values around 0). Selecting a medium approach it is more appropriate since it might

avoid possible false-negatives and false-positives.

From a global mission perspective, it is also suggested in this methodology to calculate the mission KCTs to

have an overview of critical assets in order to help commanders or decision-makers to select possible CoAs. Thus,

a Mission Threshold (MTH) is deﬁned in a similar way to TTH:

M T H = Avg{T T H1, ..., T T HT }+

+ k · StdDev{T T H1, ..., T T HT }

(16)

where T is the total number of tasks in the mission and k a tuning parameter with the same objective as stated

for the Task Threshold.

One asset has associated as much Task Asset Criticality Scores (TACS) as tasks using that asset. To calculate

Mission Asset Criticality Score (MACS) for the asset it is needed to select the maximum value of the scores set.

M ACSa = M ax{T ACS1, ..., T ACSM }

(17)

18

where M is the total number of tasks in which an asset a is used. Accordingly, in the context of the conducted

implementations and experimentation, every asset which MACS exceed the Mission Threshold (MTH) is considered

mission KCT. This criteria may be statically or adaptive modiﬁed based on the operational circumstances, and

even tailored to pessimistic, average or optimistic scenarios. For example, in the TACS Equation 1 described at

section 4.3.1, the weighs given to each element the assessment of Task-Active Dependencies is greater against other

metrics since it was assumed by design that the identiﬁcation of KCT should respond to a large extent to criteria

related to mission needs (

3
5

at AT ASa,t), resulting in a less weighing for the more technical aspects of the mission

(T BSa and V BSa), but without neglecting the latter. Hence alternative T ACSa,t computations may be built as

T ACSa,t = T SASt · (M w · AT ASa,t + Bw · T BSa + T w · V BSa)

(18)

where M w is the custom weight for AT ASa,t, Bw is the custom weight for T BSa, and T w is the custom weight for

V BSa; so M w, Bw, T w ∈ [0 · · · 1].

5. Capability development and military thinking

Beyond the technical eﬀectiveness achievable by the proposed mission-centric CKT analytics, their evolution

and end-user consideration are constrained by intrinsic tactical, operational and strategical challenges, returning

in beneﬁts and drawbacks that shall be explored and when possible, mitigated.

In order to contribute to this

exercise while facilitating a better understanding of the topics and novelties described above, the following presents

a challenge-directed KCT capability building analysis on the presented solutions. This is complemented with a

discussion on their potential relevance in terms of military oﬀensive and defensive thinking, the latter aiming on

facilitating the identiﬁcation of future doctrine-level implications and disruption.

5.1. KCT Capability Building Analysis

As widely adopted by defence practitioners, the DOTMLPF-I construct presents the most common measures of

the status of a military capability thorough the analysis of the Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Logistics,

Personnel, Facilities, and Interoperability of the targeted solution [64]. They are discussed as follows:

5.1.1. Doctrine

As pointed out in [65], there is a huge gap concerning the cyber defence doctrine, that ranges from cyber

related deﬁnitions and taxonomies, to Rules of Engagement (RoE), and just ad/in/post bellum considerations.

Despite of this, the concept Key Cyber Terrain is analogous to its preliminary meaning at kinetic operations,

which facilitates the understating of their commonalities. However, the NATO Joint Publication for Cyberspace

Operations [61] points out a pair of major diﬀerentiating aspects that may be complemented by other insights on

related doctrine, as is the case of the fact that an adversary may occupy the same terrain or use the same process

in cyberspace, potentially without knowing of the other’s presence; or the fact that each cyber terrain has a virtual

component, identiﬁed at logical network or even cyber-persona layers. Overall, joint mission planning shall foresee

the accessibility to key terrain in blue, gray, and red cyberspace for each plan. Similarly to [66], KCTs became

decisive terrains when their seizure and retention are mandatory for successful mission accomplishment.

19

5.1.2. Organization

As common in all cyber defence application, the proper discovery and assessment of cyber terrains require at

least to establish cross-functional entities and governance procedures for harnessing related expertise and informa-

tion. When supporting joint or combined operations, KCT discovery services shall address diﬃculties inherent in

monitoring and collecting information from CIS environments with multiple security domains and policies, where

related communication and informational procedures must be compliant with common harmonization, regulation

and standardization procedures. Based on this, the organization constitutes one of the most critical aspects of a

success KCT analysis, where additional factors may be considered, among them the potential need on involving

speciﬁc technical skills, the independence of the KCT analytical team from other resources, the fact that some

CIS assets on which the mission may directly or indirectly rely on shall be explored, or the need for assistance

by external actors (e.g., local CERTs, NOCs, SOCs, etc.) [67] . When closer to the strategic level, the need for

a stronger organizational ability increases. This tends to decrease when approaching to operational, tactical and

technological levels, the latter usually increasingly skills and more complex technological enablers.

5.1.3. Training

Against the growing global need for cybersecurity and cyber defence experts, there is an exacerbated shortage

of professionals with the Knowledge, Skills and Abilities (KSA) required for conducting military operations on

the cyberspace, where the proposed KCT is expected to contribute. Nowadays, cyber preparedness is mostly: 1)

traditional training and lifelong learning approaches, either using fully theoretical or limited hands-on adversarial

approaches, that fail to equip professionals with real-life KSA to understand a complex cyber operational picture;

2) limited access to advanced evidence-based cost and impact analyses, resulting in questionable selection of cyber-

security measures from the cost/level of protection; and 3) limited coverage of cyber education and training able

to transform mission-centric KCT user needs into tailored exercises and scenarios [68, 69] . A proper KCT analysis

also suggests the need for training professionals capable of bridging the gap between the technological, human, legal

and commercial aspects of the cyberspace, which depict the side context on which each cyber terrain operate [3].

5.1.4. Materiel

The material required for the proper adoption of the proposed methodology suggests the need for deploying

specialized third-party solutions, which are expected to be matured thorough years of development and adoption

by cybersecurity practitioners. For example, one of the main challenges for the cyber defence material is to enable

capabilities for monitoring and discovering the diﬀerent indicators (periodic reports, alerts, events, etc.)

from

both physical and virtual changes on the CIS environment [70]. They among others may bring functionalities for

discovering the incorporation of new assets on the operational environment while identifying their vertical/horizontal

dependencies, recognize removal or modiﬁcation events on them, and/or notify any other situation that may be

relevant for KCT analysis like bandwidth status, presence of unused resources or requests for special conﬁgurations.

On the other hand, the required material shall be able to detect threats and outliers and infer mission-centric risks on

the operational environment, thus demanding the connectivity with IDSs, SIEMS, SOCs, CERTs, mission planners

and any other related data source; the latter also including the support to the connectivity with external data

sources (API managers, Kubernetes, federated databases, etc.) [71]. Another example is the possibility on relying

20

on premade materiel able to facilitate the human understanding of the deployed assets while visually highlighting

KCT and their dependencies [6]. Although this paper presents the KCT discovery and assessment proposal as

abstracted as possible of its dependent technological background, it is assumed that the aforementioned cyber

sensors, aggregators and information exchange functionalities are available and fully operational on the theatre of

operations, so it can receive the adequate inputs on which its functionalities operate.

5.1.5. Leadership

At KCT assessment, the leadership factor signiﬁcantly diﬀers from the decisions and actuation skills inherent

to orchestrating incidence response teams at operational level. On the contrary, KCT assessment leaders shall

be able to coordinate the personnel involved in the management of the information feeds, their analysis, and the

transference and integration of the acquired knowledge to a common operational picture. As usual in cyber defence,

leaders involved in KCT assessment must have a strong background in security and be recognized for its technical

expertise [72] .

5.1.6. Personnel

The professionals involved in KCT assessment shall be part of well-trained teams deployed as close as possible to

the CIS environment on which the cyber operation occurs. As indicated at Organization, Training and Personnel,

they require the capabilities of understanding and adapting to the dynamic nature of the cyberspace, as well as

the multiplicity of factors that may impact on the data ﬂows to be processed, including their information security

and ethical implications [73]. Since the cooperation between military cyber experts and civilians is mandatory, the

KCT assessment involved personnel shall be familiar with the information exchange and good practices between

cross-sectorial teams, which as commented may include Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs), NOC

engineers and the military staﬀ involved in the ongoing/planned related operations. Given the well-known shortage

of cybersecurity suitably qualiﬁed staﬀ and the fast evolution of the sector, KCT assessment involved personnel

shall be continuously trained and specialized on the raising CIS enablers, information exchange procedures and

adversarial tactics for thwarting the network monitoring and analysis actions.

5.1.7. Facilities

The facilities that hold the physical and virtual infrastructure for KCT discovery and assessment must ensure a

proper safety and security condition, hence embracing conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability against both kinetic

situations (electrical issues, coverage against natural threats, etc.) up to cyber situations (miss conﬁgurations,

cyber attacks, data leaks, etc.). These facilitates may be external (e.g., assistant SOCs, NOCs, etc.) or owned (e.g.,

military CERTs, tactical bare-metal orchestrating cloudlets, antennas, etc.). In analogy with other cyber defence

capability, the man-made nature of the cyberspace and its well-known reachability and unpredictability features

depict an trend towards adopting distributed infrastructure able to distribute C3 services thorough the operational

edge while increasing their resiliency against healing, optimization and protection issues [74] .

5.1.8. Interoperability

the assessment of cyber terrains demands doctrinal and technical interoperability, which intensiﬁes when operat-

ing at cross-domain networks during joint, combined or military-civilian cooperative scenarios [75]. In this context,

21

cyber intelligence and information sharing is essential to infer a common cyber operational picture, which will reveal

the deployed CIS assets dependencies, status and mission-centric eﬀectiveness required for KCT analytics. From

the doctrinal and operational perspective, and as preliminary introduced in Doctrine, Leadership and Personnel,

the actors involved in KCT assessment must harmonize their modus operandi towards conducting agile, secure and

cross-domain singularity compliance joint functions. On the other hand, the technological interoperability demands

standardized, harmonized or certiﬁcated communication mechanisms (communication platforms, semantics, data

models, protocols, STANAGS, etc.).

5.2. KCT assesment at Oﬀensive thinking

According to the JP 3-12 [61], oﬀensive cyberspace operations are missions that intend to project power in

and through foreign cyberspace, which literally may exclusively target adversary cyberspace functions or create

ﬁrst-order eﬀects in cyberspace to initiate carefully controlled cascading eﬀects into the physical domains. On these

grounds, targeting KCTs and/or decisive terrains is prioritized, as long as the cost-beneﬁt results of the oﬀensive

actions allow it. This analysis requires their previous identiﬁcation and assessment in analogy with the method

described at previous sections, but transposing the ally mission-centric context to the adversarial regions on the

cyberspace (i.e. the enemy’s terrains). Based on this, some of the scoring metrics presented above have to be

slightly reframed as summarized in Table 2, where the enemy’s networks and CIS assets are enumerated and their

dependencies regarding the ally oﬀensive steps substitute the variables described at Section 4.

Based on [66], beyond the classical goals in oﬀensive missions (defeat, destroy, or gain control on tactical

objectives), commanders may target adversarial KCT for: 1) secure decisive ally kinetic or cyber terrains; 2)

deprive the enemy of the digital resources provided by the KCT; 3) gain information on assets linked to the KCT;

4) Deceive and divert a kinetic or cyber enemy force supplied by the KCT; 5) Fix an enemy force in position; 6)

disrupt an enemy attack by causing the triggering of contingency CoAs or power reduction; and 7) set the conditions

for successful future operations.

5.3. KCT assesment at Defensive thinking

Defensive cyberspace operations tend to focus on safeguarding the ongoing/planned mission assurance by im-

peding and recovering from adversarial actuations on the cyberspace [61], which may be approached by enforcing

internal and/or external cyber defensive measures. In both cases, the proper discovery and assessment of KCT

entails an essential success factor. At internal operations, KCTs are ally CIS assets within the protected perimeter,

so the proposed mission-centric analytics explore the signiﬁcance of each ally asset regarding the ally mission tasks

which proper execution relies on them. The Table 3 summarizes the adoption of the KCT scoring systems described

at Section 4 when applied to internal defensive measures.

On the other hand, external cyber defensive maneuvers are conducted out of ally network, in cyberspace re-

gions owned by neutral or hostile actors. These responses require very precise objectives, planning and Rules of

Engagement (ROE), since the hybrid propagation of the actors may be confused by just ad/in bellum by neutral

actor and/or diﬃcult further ally steps. When the external maneuvers entail to weaken the attacker power, KCTs

may be assessed as considered at oﬀensive cyber maneuvers (see Section 5.2) so the indications summarized in

22

KCT Score

Oﬀensive reframing

T ACSa,t

T BSa

V BSa

The Task Asset Criticality Score (TACS) is computed based on the oﬀensive mission

task t that targets the a CIS asset owned by the adversarial.

The Traﬃc Base Score (TBS) is computed based on the capabilities of the adversarial

for addressing a secure use of its network asset a.

The Vulnerability Base Score (VBS) analyzes the CIS asset a owned by the adversary

by taking into account the qualities intrinsic to the asset vulnerabilities, their expected

evolution over lifetime, and how each potential attack surface may be weaponized by

the ally forces.

The Asset-Task Aggregated Score (ATAS) shall provide the ﬁnal dependency degree

AT AS(t, x)

between the targeted adversarial asset x and a given t ally oﬀensive task, where a

0.0 score indicates non-relevance a 1.0 score reveals that x shall be jeopardized for t

success.

The Task Severity Aggregated Score (TSAS) shall compute the score that quantiﬁes

T SASt

the relevance of an ally oﬀensive task t based on the propagated severity degrees of

M ACSa

the dependent tasks on the same oﬀensive mission.

The Mission Asset Criticality Score (MACS) presents the most critical oﬀensive task

on which the enemy CIS asset a is targeted.

Table 2: KCT scoring at oﬀensive operations

KCT Score

Defensive reframing

The Task Asset Criticality Score (TACS) is computed based on the defensive mission

T ACSa,t

task t that aims on protecting or reinforcing the a CIS asset, which may be within

the ally network or external.

T BSa

V BSa

The Traﬃc Base Score (TBS) is computed based on the deployed capabilities for

safeguarding the usability of the protected network asset a,

The Vulnerability Base Score (VBS) analyzes the protected or reinforced CIS asset a

by taking into account the qualities intrinsic to the asset vulnerabilities, their expected

evolution over lifetime, and how each potential attack surface may be exploited by

the attacker.

The Asset-Task Aggregated Score (ATAS) shall provide the ﬁnal dependency degree

AT AS(t, x)

between the protected or reinforced asset x and the t defensive task, where a 0.0 score

non-dependence a 1.0 score reveals that x shall be completely protected t success.

The Task Severity Aggregated Score (TSAS) shall compute the score that quantiﬁes

T SASt

the relevance of the t defensive task based on the propagated severity degrees of the

dependent tasks on the same defensive mission.

M ACSa

The Mission Asset Criticality Score (MACS) presents the most critical defensive task

on which the CIS asset a shall be protected or reinforced.

Table 3: KCT scoring at defensive operations

23

Table 2 should be considered. On the opposite, when the external cyber maneuver aims on reinforcing the security

perimeter or deploying attack prevention countermeasures, the external terrains can be computed as own, so the

indications in Table 3 can be adopted individually, or together with those analyzed at external maneuvers [61].

6. Case of study: Oﬀensive Cyberspace Operation (OCO)

This section describes an illustrative use case that applies the proposed methodology in order to clarify how KCTs

are identiﬁed for a mission. The use cases is focused in hypothetical asset discovery, mission topology deﬁnition,

traﬃc analysis, and KCT discovery on real traﬃc traces. The scenario is developed to show both oﬀensive and

defensive thinking for the methodology validation approach.

6.1. Mission description

A military mission narrative is proposed below to set the context, objective, assets and tasks to be carried out

during the mission. In the context of an espionage operation against an enemy state, a mission is deﬁned to gather

information on the next actions that the enemy state is going to carry out in the coming months. To this end,

a mission is designed to inﬁltrate an enemy facilities where it will connect to the internal network to access and

transfer information from its servers. Beforehand, a UAV ﬂight is carried out to obtain photographs in order to

choose the possible inﬁltration routes.

6.2. Asset Discovery and VBS

Let us assume that during a multi-domain military operation, an operational network scanning using ADM

discovered six cyber assets: A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6. The VDAM has retrieved their CVSS Base Score [62] to

compute their VBS as summarized in Table 4.

Cyber Asset Vulnerability Base Score

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

0.65

0.95

0.33

0.64

0.26

0.62

Table 4: Vulnerability Base Scores (VBS)

6.3. Mission topology deﬁnition

After the asset discovery stage, the commander may deﬁne the mission topology (see Fig. 4) as depicted in the

MTCM. For the current mission six tasks with their associated severities and inter-task dependency degrees were

identiﬁed. In addition, relationships among assets and mission tasks, and the cyber assets inter-dependencies shall

be also deﬁned.

24

Figure 4: Mission topology and inter-dependencies.

6.4. Traﬃc analysis

A mission simulation considering both kinetic and cyber domains has been conducted in the grounds of Indra’s

Synthetic Mission Generator (ISMG) in order to analyze traﬃc-based characteristic as discussed in Section 4. On

these results, the TAM module detects traﬃc involving A1 and A2 is using a secure TLS Cipher Suite whereas A5

and A6 are using a TLS non-secure cipher suite. A3 and A4 are not using ciphered protocols. In addition, traﬃc

percentage is calculated to determine the availability requirements of the assets. Finally, with this information the

assets traﬃc scores are calculated as illustrated in Table 5, by implementing the Equation ??.

Cyber Asset Traﬃc Base Score

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

0.589

0.494

0.103

0.331

0.256

0.471

Table 5: Traﬃc Base Scores (TBS)

25

6.5. KCT Discovery

The last step to discover the KCTs is to calculate the Task/Mission Asset Criticality (TACS and MACS). This

step requires previously computed Traﬃc (TBS) and Vulnerability (VBS) scores, as well as computing Asset-Task

Aggregated Score (ATAS). By the use of these three metrics, the ﬁnal criticality asset score for the task is computed

weighted by the Task Severity Aggregated Score (TSAS).

Firstly, the Asset-Task Aggregated Score (ATAS) is calculated per asset and task (Table 6). The outcome indicates

how important the cyber asset is at that time snapshot, bearing in mind the cyber assets inter-dependencies.

Asset T1

T2

T3

T4

T5

T6

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

1.0

0.9

0

0

0

0

0.75

0.714

0.2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0.285

0.45

0.468

0.95

0

0

0.9

0.8

0.6

0

0.6

1

0

0

0

Table 6: Asset-Task Aggregated Scores (ATAS)

After that and taking into account the task severity inter-dependencies, the Task Severity Aggregated Score

(TSAS) is computed as illustrated in Section 4.3.4 (see Table 7).

Task Severity Task Severity Aggregated Score

T1

T2

T3

T4

T5

T6

0.7

0.2

0.4

0.8

0.6

0.3

0.889

0.272

0.633

0.842

0.672

0.300

Table 7: Task Severity Aggregated Scores (TSAS)

As a result of the previous metrics calculations (TBS, VBS, ATAS and TSAS), it is possible to obtain the ﬁnal

criticality score of each asset involved on each task. For that, the Equation 1 takes into place to compute the

Task Asset Criticality Score (TACS) (see Table 8). TACS is designed in order to strengthen the mission-centric

perspective of the asset’s criticality over asset’s technical characteristics.

Once TACS is calculated for each task and asset, the Task Threshold (TTH) might be computed in order to decide

whether or not an asset is KCT and thus is tagged as critical for the task success (see Table 8). The threshold

is calculated as deﬁned in Equation 15.

In section 4, was mention the need of setting the value for the tuning

parameter k in order to adjust the sensitivity of the system to identify KCTs. In this implementation a medium

approach is being performed (k = 0.5 ) to avoid possible false-positives and false-negatives (Equation 19).

26

Asset

T1

T2

T3

T4

T5

0.754

0.190

0.737

0.195

0.056

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

T6

0

0.195

0.206

0

0

0

0.231

0.391

0.319

0.426

0.087

0.392

0

0.510

0.389

0

0

0

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

0

0

0

0

TTH

0.751

0.186

0.398

0.510

0.387

0.204

Table 8: Task Asset Criticality Scores

T T H = Avg{T ACS, ...T ACS}+

+

1
2

· StdDev{T ACS, ...T ACS}

(19)

Finally, from a mission perspective, the Mission Criticality Asset Score (MACS) is obtained from the maximum

value of the asset for all tasks (see Table 9) and the Mission Threshold (MTH) is computed in an analog way as

followed for Task Threshold, using a medium approach (Equation 20).

M T H = Avg{T T H1, ..., T T HN }+

· StdDev{T T H1, ..., T T HN } = 0.511

+

1
2

(20)

In view of the results in Table 8 and Table 9, it is possible to state that the KCTs for the Task 1 is A1; for Task

2, are A1 and A2; for Task 3 is A5; for Task 4 is A6; for Task 5 is A6 and for Task 6 is A3.

From the global mission perspective, assets A1, A2 and A6 are identiﬁed as KCTs for the overall mission, which

represent the most valuable terrains to be taking into consideration at C2 and decision-making actions.

Cyber Asset MACS

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

0.754

0.737

0.206

0.391

0.426

0.638

Table 9: Mission Asset Criticality Scores (MACSs)

7. Conclusion

The identiﬁcation of Key Cyber Terrains (KCT) is crucial at cyber-oriented missions’ operation, since they allow

commanders and decision-makers to notice what might be essential to preserve with the objective of achieving a

27

mission success. An in-depth review of the state of the art revealed important gaps and challenges concerning the

assessment of each cyber asset critically while assuming mission-centric conditions in dynamic operational contexts.

As response, the conducted research introduced a novel approach for dynamically infer KCTs bearing in mind each

mission task and overall goals. However, and despite the foreseen eﬀectiveness of the solution, this paper describes

the outcomes of an early research that assumed important limitations, most of them being expected to be explored

as part of future works. On the other hand, emerging topics like adversarial machine learning may be studied as

potential weapons able to thwart the cyber terrain scoring systems targeting to mislead decision-makers. Although

the methodology is design purely for a military perspective it might be applied for a dual-use, not only for a military

application, but also for civil or emergencies since the model is aware of tasks regardless their purpose.

Disclaimer

The contents reported in the paper reﬂect the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the opinions

of the respective agencies, institutions or companies.

Acknowledgement

References

This research has received funding from the European Defence Industrial De-

velopment Programme (EDIDP) under the grant agreement Number EDIDP-

CSAMN-SSC-2019-022-ECYSAP (European Cyber Situational Awareness

Platform).

[1] S. Llopis Sanchez, R. Mazzolin, I. Kechaoglou, D. Wiemer, W. Mees, J. Muylaert, Handbook of Space Security,

Springer, Cham, 2019, Ch. Cybersecurity Space Operation Center: Countering Cyber Threats in the Space

Domain. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-22786-9_108-1.

[2] J. Maestre Vidal, M. Sotelo Monge, Denial of sustainability on military tactical clouds, in: Proceedings of the

15th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES), Dublin, Ireland, 2020, pp. 1–9.

[3] D. Sandoval Rodriguez-Bermejo, R. Daton Medenou, G. Ramis Pasqual de Riquelme, J. Maestre Vidal,

F. Torelli, S. Llopis S´anchez, Evaluation methodology for mission-centric cyber situational awareness capa-

bilities, in: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES),

Dublin, Ireland, 2020, pp. 1–9.

[4] D. Raymond, T. Cross, G. Conti, M. Nowatkowski, Key terrain in cyberspace: Seeking the high ground, in:

2014 6th International Conference On Cyber Conﬂict (CyCon 2014), IEEE, Tallin, Estonia, 2014, pp. 287–300,

iSSN: 2325-5366. doi:10.1109/CYCON.2014.6916409.

28

[5] Giorgio Bertoli, Stephen Raio, The elusive nature of “key cyber terrain”, CSIAC Journal 6.

URL https://www.csiac.org/journal-article/the-elusive-nature-of-key-cyber-terrain/

[6] S. Llopis, J. Hingant, I. Perez, M. Esteve, F. Carvajal, W. Mees, T. Debatty, A comparative analysis of

visualisation techniques to achieve cyber situational awareness in the military, in: Proceedings of the 2018

International Conference on Military Communications and Information Systems, Warsaw, Poland, 2018, pp.

1–7.

[7] A. Luis Martinez, V. Villagra Gonzalez, A novel automatic discovery system of critical assets in cyberspace-

oriented military missions, in: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Availability, Reliability

and Security (ARES), Dublin, Ireland, 2020, pp. 1–8.

[8] I. T. L. Computer Security Division, Risk management framework (rmf) overview - ﬁsma implementation

project |csrc, library Catalog: csrc.nist.gov (Nov. 2016).

URL

https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/risk-management/risk-management-framework-(RMF)

-Overview

[9] J. Maestre Vidal, L. Sotelo Monge, M.A.and Villalba, A Novel Pattern Recognition System for Detecting

Android Malware by Analyzing Suspicious Boot Sequences, Knowledge-Based Systems 150 (2018) 198–217.

[10] Joint Task Force Transformation Initiative, Guide for conducting risk assessments, Tech. Rep. NIST SP 800-

30r1, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, edition: 0 (2012).

URL https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-30r1.pdf

[11] A. Annarelli, F. Nonino, G. Palombi, Understanding the management of cyber resilient systems, Computers

& Industrial Engineering 149 (2020) 106829.

[12] I. Lee, Internet of things (iot) cybersecurity: Literature review and iot cyber risk management, Future Internet

12 (9).

[13] R. Knight, J. Nurse, A framework for eﬀective corporate communication after cyber security incidents, Com-

puters & Security 99 (2020) 102036.

[14] L. Barona Lopez, A. Valdivieso Caraguay, J. Maestre Vidal, M. Sotelo Monge, L. Villalba, Towards incidence

management in 5g based on situational awareness, Future Internet 9 (1).

[15] R. Caralli, J. Stevens, L. Young, W. Wilson, Introducing octave allegro: Improving the information security

risk assessment process, Tech. Rep. CMU/SEI-2007-TR-012, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon

University, Pittsburgh, PA (2007).

URL http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-view.cfm?AssetID=8419

[16] I. 262, ISO 31000:2018 Risk management — Guidelines (2018).

URL https://www.iso.org/obp/ui#iso:std:iso:31000:ed-2:v1:en

29

[17] ISO/IEC, ISO/IEC 27005:2018 (2018).

URL

https://www.iso.org/cms/render/live/en/sites/isoorg/contents/data/standard/07/52/

75281.html

[18] ENISA, Mehari (2016).

URL

https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/threat-risk-management/risk-management/

current-risk/risk-management-inventory/rm-ra-methods/m_mehari.html

[19] PAe, PAe - MAGERIT v.3 : Metodolog´ıa de An´alisis y Gesti´on de Riesgos de los Sistemas de Informaci´on

(2012).

URL https://administracionelectronica.gob.es/pae_Home/pae_Documentacion/pae_Metodolog/pae_

Magerit.html

[20] G. Kavallieratos, S. Katsikas, V. Gkioulos, Cybersecurity and safety co-engineering of cyberphysical systems

— a comprehensive survey, Future Internet 12 (4).

[21] A. Rea-Guaman, J. Mejia, T. San Feliu, J. Calvo-Manzano, Avarciber: a framework for assessing cybersecurity

risks, Cluster Computing 23 (2020) 1827–1843.

[22] L. Gordon, M. Loeb, L. Zhou, Integrating cost–beneﬁt analysis into the nist cybersecurity framework via the

gordon-loeb model, Journal of Cybersecurity 23.

[23] M. Endsley, Situation awareness global assessment technique (SAGAT), in: Proceedings of the IEEE 1988

National Aerospace and Electronics Conference, Vol. 3, IEEE, Dayton, OH, USA, 1988, pp. 789–795. doi:

10.1109/NAECON.1988.195097.

[24] G. Bedny, D. Meister, Theory of Activity and Situation Awareness, International Journal of Cognitive Er-

gonomics 3 (1) (1999) 63–72, publisher: Routledge

eprint: https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327566ijce0301 5.

doi:10.1207/s15327566ijce0301_5.

URL https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327566ijce0301_5

[25] K. Smith, P. A. Hancock, Situation Awareness Is Adaptive, Externally Directed Consciousness, Human Factors

37 (1) (1995) 137–148, publisher: SAGE Publications Inc. doi:10.1518/001872095779049444.

URL https://doi.org/10.1518/001872095779049444

[26] M. P. T. Jr, Shaping and adapting: Unlocking the power of Colonel John Boyd’s OODA Loop (Apr. 2015).

[27] S. Jajodia, S. Noel, P. Kalapa, M. Albanese, J. Williams, Cauldron: Mission-centric cyber situational aware-

ness with defense in depth, Proceedings - IEEE Military Communications Conference MILCOM (2011) 1339–

1344doi:10.1109/MILCOM.2011.6127490.

[28] J. Maestre Vidal, A. Orozco, L. Villalba, Adaptive artiﬁcial immune networks for mitigating DoS ﬂooding

attacks, Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 38 (2018) 94–108.

30

[29] K. Demertzis, N. Tziritas, P. Kikiras, S. Llopis Sanchez, L. Iliadis, The Next Generation Cognitive Security Op-

erations Center: Network Flow Forensics Using Cybersecurity Intelligence, Big Data and Cognitive Computing

2 (35).

[30] J. Maestre Vidal, M. Sotelo Monge, Obfuscation of Malicious Behaviors for Thwarting Masquerade Detection

Systems Based on Locality Features, Sensors 20(7) (2084).

[31] M. A. Sotelo Monge, J. Maestre Vidal, G. Mart´ınez P´erez, Detection of economic denial of sustainability (edos)

threats in self-organizing networks, Computer Communications 145 (2019) 284–308.

[32] K. Demertzis, N. Tziritas, P. Kikiras, S. Llopis Sanchez, L. Iliadis, The Next Generation Cognitive Security

Operations Center: Adaptive Analytic Lambda Architecture for Eﬃcient Defense against Adversarial Attacks,

Big Data and Cognitive Computing 3 (6).

[33] J. Maestre Vidal, M. Sotelo Monge, Framework for Anticipatory Self-Protective 5G Environments, in: Pro-

ceedings of the 14th nternational Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES).

[34] J. Maestre Vidal, M. Sotelo Monge, A novel Self-Organizing Network solution towards Crypto-ransomware Mit-

igation, in: Proceedings of the 13th nternational Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES).

[35] McGuinness, B., Foy, L., A Subjective Measure of SA: The Crew Awareness Rating Scale (CARS), in: 1st,

Human performance, situation awareness and automation conference; user-centered design for the new millen-

nium, SA Technologies, Savannah, GA, 2000, p. 6.

[36] V. Lenders, A. Tanner, A. Blarer, Gaining an Edge in Cyberspace with Advanced Situational Awareness, IEEE

Security Privacy 13 (2) (2015) 65–74, conference Name: IEEE Security Privacy. doi:10.1109/MSP.2015.30.

[37] D. Buckshaw, G. Parnell, W. Unkenholz, D. Parks, J. Wallner, O. Saydjari, Mission Oriented Risk and Design

Analysis of Critical Information Systems, Military Operations Research 10 (2005) 19–38. doi:10.5711/morj.

10.2.19.

[38] D. S. E. Noel, W. J. Heinbockel, An Overview of MITRE Cyber Situational Awareness Solutions, in: NATO

Cyber Defence Situational Awareness Solutions Conference, MITRE, Bucharest, Romania, 2015, p. 17.

URL https://www.mitre.org/publications/technical-papers/an-overview-of-mitre-cyber-situational-awareness-solutions

[39] J. Hingant G´omez, M. Zambrano, F. P´erez, I. Perez-Llopis, M. Esteve, HYBINT: A Hybrid Intelligence System

for Critical Infrastructures Protection, Security and Communication Networks 2018 (2018) 1–13. doi:10.1155/

2018/5625860.

[40] U. Franke, J. Brynielsson, Cyber situational awareness – A systematic review of the literature, Computers &

Security 46 (2014) 18–31. doi:10.1016/j.cose.2014.06.008.

URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404814001011

[41] Raymond T. Odierno, Field Manual 3-90-1: Oﬀense and Defense, Tech. Rep. FM 3-90-1, Department of the

Army (Mar. 2013).

31

[42] N. T. Pantin, Key terrain: application to the layers of cyberspace, Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey,

California, accepted: 2017-05-10T16:31:58Z (Mar. 2017).

URL https://calhoun.nps.edu/handle/10945/53030

[43] National Park Service, OCOKA Military Terrain Analysis.

[44] D. Raymond, G. Conti, T. Cross, R. Fanelli, A control measure framework to limit collateral damage and

propagation of cyber weapons, in: 2013 5th International Conference on Cyber Conﬂict (CYCON 2013),

IEEE, Tallinn, Estonia, 2013, pp. 1–16, iSSN: 2325-5366.

[45] P. Price, N. Leyba, M. Gondree, Z. Staples, T. Parker, Asset Criticality in Mission Reconﬁgurable Cyber Sys-

tems and its Contribution to Key Cyber Terrain, in: Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference

on System Sciences, Honolulu, Hawaii, 2017, p. 10. doi:10.24251/HICSS.2017.729.

[46] B. Thompson, R. Harang, Identifying Key Cyber-Physical Terrain, in: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM on In-

ternational Workshop on Security And Privacy Analytics, IWSPA ’17, Association for Computing Machinery,

Scottsdale, Arizona, USA, 2017, pp. 23–28. doi:10.1145/3041008.3041015.

URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3041008.3041015

[47] A. E. Schulz, M. C. Kotson, J. R. Zipkin, Cyber Network Mission Dependencies, Tech. Rep. TR-1189, Mas-

sachusetts Institute of Technology Lexington Lincoln Lab, Lexington, Massachusetts (Sep. 2015).

URL https://apps.dtic.mil/docs/citations/ADA635942

[48] X. Li, N. Bo, W. Pang, J. Tang, Software architecture of c2 mission system based on mas and soa for

manned/unmanned aerial vehicle formation, in: Proc. of the 8th IEEE International Conference on Software

Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), 2017, pp. 842–845.

[49] L. Sabatucci, M. Cossentino, Supporting dynamic workﬂows with automatic extraction of goals from bpmn,

ACM Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems 14 (2).

[50] S. I. S. Organization, Standard for military scenario deﬁnition language (siso-std-007-2008) (2008).

URL https://www.sisostds.org/ProductsPublications/Standards/SISOStandards.aspx

[51] M. Sotelo Monge, J. Maestre Vidal, L. Villalba, Reasoning and knowledge acquisition framework for 5g network

analytics, Sensors 17 (10).

[52] A. D’Alconzo, I. Drago, A. Morichetta, M. Mellia, P. Casas, A survey on big data for network traﬃc monitoring

and analysis, IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management 16 (3) (2019) 800–813.

[53] C. Onwubiko, Cyber security operations centre: Security monitoring for protecting business and supporting

cyber defense strategy, in: Proc. of the 2015 International Conference on Cyber Situational Awareness, Data

Analytics and Assessment (CyberSA), 2015, pp. 1–10.

[54] W. Tounsi, H. Rais, A survey on technical threat intelligence in the age of sophisticated cyber attacks, Com-

puters & Security 72 (2018) 212–233.

32

[55] Multinational

Capability

Development

Campaign

project,

Countering

hybrid

warfare

project:understanding

hybrid

warfare,

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/

countering-hybrid-warfare-project-understanding-hybrid-warfare (2017).

[56] A. Munshi, Y. Mohamed, Data lake lambda architecture for smart grids big data analytics, IEEE Access 6

(2018) 40463–40471.

[57] J. van der Geest, C. van den Broek, H. Bastiaansen, M. Schenk, Enabling a Big Data and AI Infrastructure

with a Data Centric and Microservice Approach: Challenges and Developments, in: Procceedings of the NATO

Specialist Meeting on Big Data & Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Military Decision Making, Bordeaux, France, 2019,

pp. 1–9.

[58] B. Brehmer, The dynamic OODA loop: Amalgamating Boyd’s OODA loop and the cybernetic approach

to command and control, in: Proceedings of the 10th International Command and Control Research and

Technology Symposium, MacLean, Virginia, USA, 2005, pp. 365–368.

[59] MITRE, CPE - Common Platform Enumeration: CPE Speciﬁcations (2013).

URL https://cpe.mitre.org/specification/

[60] D. Spennemann, Using kocoa military terrain analysis for the assessment of twentieth century battleﬁeld

landscapes, Heritage 3 (3) (2020) 753–781.

[61] NATO, Allied joint doctrine for cyberspace operation (ajp-3.20).

[62] Y. Nir, R. Salz, N. Sullivan, Transport Layer Security (TLS) Parameters (2020).

URL https://www.iana.org/assignments/tls-parameters/tls-parameters.xhtml

[63] S. Applegate, C. Carpenter, D. West, Searching for digital hilltops, Joint Force Quarterly 84 (1) (2017) 18–23.

[64] T. Tuukkanen, S. Couturier, B. Buchin, T. Br¨aysy, J. Krygier, E. Verheul, V. Le Nir, N. Smit, Assessment of

cognitive radio networks through military capability development viewpoint, in: Proceedings og the Interna-

tional Conference on Military Communications and Information Systems (ICMCIS), 2018, pp. 1–8.

[65] A. Rizwan, on cyber defence, The Three Swords Magazine 24 (2014) 32–47.

[66] US Army Doctrine Publication, Oﬀensive and defensive (3-90).

[67] M. G. Jaatun, L. Bodsberg, T. O. Grøtan, M. Elisabeth Gaup Moe, An empirical study of cert capacity in the

north sea, in: Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Cyber Security and Protection of Digital

Services (Cyber Security), 2020, pp. 1–8.

[68] W. Newhouse, S. Keith, B. Scribner, G. Witte, National initiative for cybersecurity education (nice) cyberse-

curity workforce framework, NIST special publication (800).

[69] S. Furnell, M. Bishop, Addressing cyber security skills: the spectrum, not the silo, Computer Fraud & Security

2020 (2) (2020) 6–11.

33

[70] D. Zhou, Z. Yan, Y. Fu, Z. Yao, A survey on network data collection, Journal of Network and Computer

Applications 116 (2018) 9–23.

[71] B. Zarpelao, R. Miani, C. Kawakani, S. Carlisto, A survey of intrusion detection in internet of things, Journal

of Network and Computer Applications 84 (2017) 25–37.

[72] N. Buchler, P. Rajivan, L. Marusich, L. Lightner, C. Gonzalez, Sociometrics and observational assessment of

teaming and leadership in a cyber security defense competition, Computers & Security 73 (2018) 114–136.

[73] M. Taddeo, L. Floridi, Regulate artiﬁcial intelligence to avert cyber arms race, Nature 556 (2019) 296–298.

[74] J. Burton, Nato’s cyber defence: strategic challenges and institutional adaptation, Defence Studies 15 (4)

(2015) 297–319.

[75] J. Kukkola, Civilian and military information infrastructure and the control of the russian segment of internet,

in: Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Military Communications and Information Systems

(ICMCIS), 2018, pp. 1–8.

34

