1
2
0
2

v
o
N
8
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
2
4
1
0
0
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

UNCOVERING IP ADDRESS HOSTING TYPES BEHIND
MALICIOUS WEBSITES

Nimesha Wickramasinghe∗, Mohamed Nabeel+,
Kenneth Thilakaratne∗, Chamath Keppitiyagama∗ , Kasun De Zoysa∗
∗University of Colombo School of Computing
+Qatar Computing Research Institute

ABSTRACT

Hundreds of thousands of malicious domains are created by miscreants everyday. These malicious
domains are hosted on a wide variety of network infrastructures. Traditionally, attackers utilize
bullet proof hosting services (e.g. MaxiDed, Cyber Bunker) to take advantage of relatively lenient
policies on what content they can host. However, these IP ranges are increasingly being blocked or
the services are taken down by law enforcement. Hence, attackers are moving towards utilizing IPs
from regular hosting providers while staying under the radar of these hosting providers. There are
several practical advantages of accurately knowing the type of IP used to host malicious domains. If
the IP is a dedicated IP (i.e. it is leased to a single entity), one may blacklist the IP to block domains
hosted on those IPs as welll as use as a way to identify other malicious domains hosted the same IP.
If the IP is a shared hosting IP, hosting providers may take measures to clean up such domains and
maintain a high reputation for their users.

Keywords IP hosting types, malicious domains, measurement

1

Introduction

Malicious websites rely on hosting infrastructures to launch their attackers. Traditionally, attackers utilized Bulletproof
Hosting Services (BPHS) such as MaxiDed and Cyber Bunker to take advantage of their relatively lenient policies on
what content they can host [1]. However, these IP address (IP) ranges are increasingly being blocked or the services are
taken down by law enforcement [2]. Hence, attackers are now moving towards utilizing IPs from regular hosting
providers while staying under the radar of these service providers [3]. Further, public hosting provides economies of
scale as well as allows to launch attacks at scale from multiple geographic locations. The lack of considerable effort to
collect information about the users who register with the service providers nor having proper security mechanisms to
detect or prevent these attacks make the life of attackers easier [4]. It is, however, not clear to what extent this transition
from BPHS to regular hosting services has been occurring.

Blocklists are a widely used network security mechanism to block undesired network trafﬁc based on IP reputation [5].
Blocklists can be applied at various points in a security architecture, such as a host, web proxy, DNS servers, email
server, ﬁrewall, directory servers or application authentication gateways [6]. While they are useful, such blocklists may
result in high collateral damage if the blocked IPs are co-hosting benign domains. Current blocklists do not make a
distinction between IP addresses solely used for malicious activities and IP addresses that co-host benign domains.

Domain threat intelligence services rely on hosting IPs of malicious domains to identify additional malicious domains
controlled by attackers [7]. Such co-hosting relationships yield favorable results only if those IP addresses host domains
belonging to the same entity. Identifying if an IP is associated with domains belonging to one entity is a challenging
task due to several reasons: (1) one needs to identify all the domains hosted on the IP address, (2) ownership of a
domain is often times not available or difﬁcult to ﬁnd, and (3) the domains hosted IPs change over time.

While the hosting type of an IP address is quite useful in practice, it is not readily available except for selected cases.
For example, major cloud service providers such as Amazon AWS [8], Microsoft Azure [9] and Google GCE [10], have

 
 
 
 
 
 
Different types of IP addresses

Figure 1: Overall Pipeline of Identifying Hosting Types of Malicious Domains

made their IP address ranges public, but there is a long tail of other hosting providers whose IP ranges are not readily
available. Further, third-party services that provide such information are either severely throttled or quite expensive [11].

In this work, we design machine learning models to solve the problem of identifying the hosting type of an IP address.
We ﬁrst make the distinction between hosting and non-hosting IP addresses. A hosting IP address belongs to a hosting
service and anyone may utilize, often with a usage fee, to host their domains whereas a non-hosting IP, as the name
suggests, are either not leased to third-party users or residential IP addresses belonging to ISPs. We further categorize
hosting IP addresses as either shared or dedicated. A shared hosting IP (shared IP for short) hosts domains belonging to
more than one user or organization, whereas a dedicated hosting IP (dedicated IPs for short) hosts domains belonging to
a single user or organization.

Based on the trained classiﬁers, we study the properties of IP addresses hosting malicious domains collected from
VirusTotal URL feed [12]. Our study identiﬁes that a vast majority (95.2%) of malicious websites are hosted on regular
hosting IPs and 97.1% of these malicious websites are co-hosted with other unrelated benign websites.

We make the following contributions in this work:

• We build a machine learning model to identify hosting IPs from non-hosting IPs with a precision of 98.03%,

recall of 96.89% and false positive rate (FPR) of 1.95%.

• We build another machine learning model to identify shared IP from dedicated IPs in the hosting IP category

with a precision of 94.22%, recall of 94.00% and FPR of 5.77%.

• We study the hosting IP types of IPs hosting malicious domains and show that overwhelming majority of

malicious domains utilize shared hosting environments.

2 Deﬁnitions

In this section, we formally deﬁne the different hosting types. Recall that we ﬁrst categorize all IPs in the wild into
hosting and non-hosting IPs. Hosting IPs are further categorized into shared and dedicated IPs.

Hosting IP: An IP address that belongs to a hosting provider which allows third parties to host on (E.g.: Amazon
AWS [13])

Non-hosting IP: An IP address that is not publicly offered to third-parties to host. These IPs typically include IP
ranges of ISPs who usually lease them to businesses or use them as resdiential IP blocks (E.g.: Verizon residential IP
addresses), and of large organizations/universities (E.g.: Facebook, MIT).

Dedicated IP: - A hosting IP that hosts domains belonging to one single entity. An entity can be either a user or an
organization.

Shared IP: A hosting IP that hosts domains belonging to two or more entities.

3 Study Design

In this section, we outline our study methodology and data collection.

2

Different types of IP addresses

3.1 Methodology

We ﬁrst collect hosting and non-hosting IPs distributed across the world. Then, our domain experts label a subset of
hosting IPs as shared and dedicated. Hosting classiﬁer takes a ground truth set of IPs along with their features, and
builds a machine learning model to classify IPs as hosting and non-hosting. Shared/Dedicated classiﬁer takes a ground
truth set of hosting IPs to build a machine learning model to classify IPs as shared and dedicated. Figure 1 shows
the ﬁnal pipeline of identifying the hosting types of malicious domains based on the above mentioned two trained
classiﬁers.

3.2 Data Collection and Labeling

In order to study and understand discriminative features, 400,000 IP addresses are collected, including 200,000
non-hosting IPs and 200,000 hosting IPs. The next section comprises the steps we follow to collect these IP addresses.

3.2.1 Non-hosting IP Collection

We ﬁrst collect a tentative diverse set of non-hosting IPs and perform additional checks to ascertain that they are in fact
non-hosting.

Universities, government and military organizations are highly likely to own huge subsets of IP addresses which are not
used for web hosting [7]. We extract IP blocks owned by these institution by keyword matching organization from
IP-ASN database from the MaxMind DB. We select a random subset of IPs from this collection and gather domains
hosted on these IP address utilizing Farsight Passive DNS service. We extract those those IPs whose owner is matching
with the owner of the websites. In order to diversify the non-hosting IPs, we also include 20,000 Residential IPs
obtained from a prior work [14]. Overall, we collect 200,000 non-hosting IP addresses.

3.2.2 Hosting IP Collection

We collect hosting IP addresses from publicly advertised hosting IP ranges from major hosting provides such as GCP,
AWS and Azure, and from MaxMind IP-ASN database for web hosting providers such as Dream Host, Host Monster,
GoDaddy, Bluehost, Host Dime, Host Gator, Liquid web and Host Europe. From nearly 80 million publicly advertised
hosting IP addresses, we selected a random sample of 200,000 to conduct our study.

3.2.3 Dedicated and Shared IP Collection

From the collected hosting IPs, we identify a ground truth set of dedicated and shared IPs. We ﬁrst collect the domains
hosted on each of these IP addresses using the Passive DNS service. We then collect WHOIS records for these domains.
It should be noted, as observed in prior research [15], we are only able to collect WHOIS record for a limited number of
domains and the registrant in most of these collected WHOIS records are either redacted or privacy protected. This
limits our ability to determine the domain ownership solely using WHOIS records. Hence, we follow the following
procedure to identify dedicated and shared IP addresses.

• If an IP is hosting only one domain, it is by deﬁnition a dedicated IP.

• If WHOIS records are available and the registrants are not redacted or privacy protected, we mark those hosting

IPs having same registrant for all domains as dedicated and otherwise shared.

• If all websites hosted on a given IP redirects to the same parent website, we mark it as dedicated as they are all

control by the same entity.

• For the remaining, we visually inspect the web page content to ﬁnd similarity in terms of information included,
trademark and contact information. If all websites hosted on an IP has similar content, we mark the IP as
dedicated.

3.2.4 Data Sources

We utilize Farsight Passive DNS service [16] to extract historical hosting information about domains and IPs. For the
400,000 IP addresses, we collected nearly 45 million Passive DNS records in Aug. 2020 and in Dec. 2020. In order to
diversify our ﬁndings, we collected Passive DNS records across different time intervals. VirusTotal URL Feed [12]
on the other hand, is used to identify malicious domains for this study. VirusTotal provides an aggregated report for
each URL containing results from 70+ scanners. Following best practices [17], we select those domains with at least
5 scanners detecting positive as our malicious domain corpus. Maxmind database [18] is utilized to extract IP ASN
information.

3

Different types of IP addresses

4 Classifying IP Addresses

4.1 Feature Engineering

According to our classiﬁcation hierarchy, the ﬁrst step is to identify features with high discriminative power to identify
if a given IP is a Hosting IP or a Non-hosting IP. The second step is to identify features to classify the hosting IPs as
dedicated or shared. The identiﬁed features for the two steps are describe in this section.

4.1.1 Features for the Hosting/Non-hosting IP Classiﬁer

Table 1: Hosting/Non-hosting classiﬁcation features

ID

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Feature Name
number of TLD+2
number of TLD+3
number of domains
percent DNS
mean TLD+3
max TLD+3
mean TLD+2
max TLD+2
number of owners
number of inetnums
max inetnum size
min inetnum size
size of inetnum
type of inetnum
most recent update
number of whois

Description

Number of TLD+2 domains resolved to the given IP
Number of TLD+3 domains resolved to the given IP
Number of domains resolved to the given IP
Percentage of IPs in /24 IP preﬁx with DNS records
Mean number of TLD+3 domains resolved to IPs in /24 IP preﬁx
Maximum number of TLD+3 domains resolved to IPs in /24 IP preﬁx
Mean number of TLD+2 domains resolved to IPs in /24 IP preﬁx
Maximum number of TLD+2 domains resolved to IPs in /24 IP preﬁx
Number of owners of the IP during the past 10 years
Number of unique historical inetnums (IP ranges) during the past 10 years
Maximum size of the inetnums during the past 10 years
Minimum size of the inetnums during the past 10 years
Size of the inetnums during the past 10 years
Assignment type of the current inetnum
Most recent WHOIS record update
Number of WHOIS records during the past 10 years

Type
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Categorical
Numerical
Numerical

Table 5 shows the features we utilize to train the hosting/non-hosting classiﬁer. We provide a brief intuition and
observations of these features below. Number of TLD+2/TLD+3/all domains resolved to a given IP describe the number
of second level, third level and all domains hosted on a given IP. Intuitively, as hosting providers need to host many
domains in a limited range of IP addresses compared to Non-hosting IP owners, it is highly likely for Hosting IPs to
host more domains per IP. The evaluation on the labeled set shows that Non-hosting IPs host 1.06, 0.56, 2.07 domains
on average for the three categories whereas Hosting IPs host 452.6, 40.3, and 691.45 domains.

Features 4 to 8 extract statistics of domains resolved to IPs in /24 IP preﬁx. Since IPs are allocated to different ISPs in
subnets, it is highly likely for /24 IP preﬁxes of Hosting IPs to have a higher number of domains mapped compared to
the number of /24 IP preﬁxes of Non-hosting IPs.

Features 9 to 14 are related to inetnums. An inetnum object describes a range of IP addresses and all its attributes. It is
known that hosting IPs are resold and reallocated more often to different vendors [9] compared to non-hosting IPs whose
owners are fairly stable. This observation is utilized and the historical ownership of IPs (Feature 9) to differentiate
between the two IP types. In the ground truth IPs, it is found that the average number of historical owners for Hosting
IPs is 6.8 whereas it is 1.2 for Non-hosting IPs. All inetnums are created in a hierarchical manner and therefore it forms
an inetnum tree. Since Feature 9 shows a signiﬁcant difference, it is likely the allocated inetnums differ too and this
behavior is captured with Feature 10. Features 11 to 13 represent maximum size/minimum size/size of the inetnums
respectively. Residential IPs under non-hosting IPs tend to have much more objects in inetnums. Though there is no
major difference between the maximum and minimum number: the size difference is signiﬁcant. For non-hosting IPs,
the average size of inetnum is 15,893,510.4 and 8,652,824.7 for Hosting IPs. Feature 14 identiﬁes the assignment type
of the current direct inetnum. WHOIS record of an IP address explains the NET TYPE of a given IP address. The
categories are: Direct Allocation (ISP), Direct Assignment (End user), Reallocated (downstream ISP customer), and
Reassigned (end user customer). It is observed that hosting IPs are mostly in the Direct Allocation category as they are
allocated for other hosting providers by Regional Internet Registries.

Features 15 and 16 are related to the timestamps of IP WHOIS records. As Hosting IPs are changing hands often,
intuitively they are likely to have more recent last update dates. Feature 15 capture this attribute. The average last
update date for Non-hosting IPs is on average 7 years whereas the same for hosting IPs is 2 years. Feature 16 measures
the number of WHOIS records of the last 10 years. The number of WHOIS records for Hosting IPs is likely to be more
than that for Non-hosting IPs as hosting IPs change frequently. We observe from our data that the average number of
WHOIS records associated with a Hosting IP is around 3.67 whereas it is 1.26 for a Non-hosting IP.

4

Different types of IP addresses

4.1.2 Features for Dedicated/Shared IP Classiﬁer

Table 2: Dedicated/Shared classiﬁcation features

ID

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Feature Name
number of TLD+2
number of TLD+3
number of domains
number of owners
number of whois
avg daily churn
std daily churn
avg duration
std duration

Description

Number of TLD+2 domains resolved to the given IP
Number of TLD+3 domains resolved to the given IP
Number of domains resolved to the given IP
Number of owners of the IP during the past 10 years
Number of WHOIS records in the past 10 years
The average daily churn of domains hosted on the IP
The standard deviation of daily churn
The average duration of the domains hosted on the IP
The standard deviation of the duration of the domains

Type
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical
Numerical

In this section, we describe the features we utilize for dedicated/shared IP classiﬁer. We ﬁnd that some of the features
utilized with hosting/non-hosting classiﬁer are quite useful for this classiﬁer. Speciﬁcally, as shown in Table 2, features
1 to 5 are reused but their proportions are different in the ground truth of dedicated and shared IPs.

Intuitively, Shared IPs need to host a higher number of domains belonging to different entities compared to Dedicated
IPs. The evaluation on the labeled set shows that Dedicated IPs host, on average 796.08, 43.25, 539.828 second, third
and all level domains whereas Shared IPs host, on average, 2624.18, 609.88, 1650.06 for the same.

Features 6 and 7 represent Mean and Standard deviation of the daily churn of domains hosted on a given IP address.
Shared IPs are likely to have more churn compared to the dedicated IPs due to its changing nature. We collect daily
hosted apexes on each IP for the last 60 days and measure the mean and the standard deviation. The average daily
churn for Dedicated IPs is 0.12, whereas it is 1.18 for Shared IPs. The average standard deviation is 0.68 and 5.91 for
Dedicated and Shared IPs respectively.

Features 8 and 9 measures the Mean and Standard deviation of the duration of domains hosted on a given IP address.
Domains hosted on Shared IPs are likely to be more ephemeral and likely to vary more across hosted domains compared
to those on Dedicated IPs. Our analysis shows that the average duration of all the Dedicated IPs is 2.3 years and it is 1.2
years for Shared IPs. The standard deviation for these two classes are 1.4 and 1.1 respectively.

4.1.3 Ground Truth and Feature Extraction

We utilize Passive DNS and historical IP WHOIS data to extract the features described in Setion 4.1.1. Features 1-8 in
hosting/non-hosting classiﬁer and Features 1-3 in dedicate/shared classiﬁer are derived from passive DNS. The rest of
the features are derived from historical IP WHOIS data.

In Jan. 2021, we collect features for two ground truth data sets H-GT1 and H-GT2 for Hosting/Non-Hosting IP classiﬁer.
IPs for these two data sets were selected randomly from the 400,000 IPs we studied initially. Each set has 1000 IPs
from each class along with the identiﬁed features. Similarly, we collect features for two ground truth datasets D-GT1
and D-GT2 for Dedicated/Shared IP classiﬁer. Each set has 400 IPs from each class.

4.2 Training Machine Learning Models

We train 8 classiﬁers (Support Vector Classiﬁcation (SV), Random Forest (RF), Extra Tree (ET), Logistic Regres-
sion(LR), Decision Tree (DT), Gradient Boosting (GB), AdaBoosting (AB) and K-Neighbors (KN) Classiﬁcation)
using the features Section 4.1. We test all these classiﬁers using 5-fold cross validation techniques and realized that RF
outperform others in our task. Hence, in the rest of the paper, we present results only from RF classiﬁer.

Figure 2 shows the ROC curves for the two ground truth datasets for Hosting/Non-Hosting Classiﬁer. We observe
consistently high performance across the two datasets. Table 3 shows the performance of the classiﬁer. Our classiﬁer
achieves a precision of 98.03%, a recall of 96.89% and FPR (false positive rate) of 1.95%. Figure 3 shows the importance

Table 3: Performance of Hosting/Non-Hosting Classiﬁer for the Two GT Sets

Dataset
H-GT1
H-GT2

Precision
97.98
98.03

FPR
2.00
1.95

Recall
96.68
96.89

5

Different types of IP addresses

(a) H-GT1

(b) H-GT2

Figure 2: ROC Curves for Hosing/Non-hosting Classiﬁer for the Two Ground Truth Sets

Table 4: Performance of Dedicated/Shared Classiﬁer for the Two GT Sets

Dataset
D-GT1
D-GT2

Precision
95.00
94.22

Recall
94.4
94.00

FPR
8.33
5.77

Table 5: Top Hosting Providers with the Highest Number of Benign and Malicious Domains

All Hosting

Wix.com Ltd
Google
Cloudﬂare Net
GoDaddy Inc.
Amazon-02

#AllDomains
18,411,677
14,679,240
12,786,921
11,114,352
9,948,052

Shared Hosting

Cloudﬂare Net
Amazon-02
Namecheap
Uniﬁed Layer
Hostinger

#MalDomains
22,473
14,139
654
450
249

Dedicated Hosting

Amazon-02
Cloudfare Net
DigitalOcean
OVH
Hostinger

#MalDomains
2,126
194
123
68
65

of each feature. The most recent WHOIS update, the number of owners and domains are the most discriminating
features.

Figure 4 shows the ROC curves for the two ground truth datasets for Dedicated/Shared Classiﬁer. We observe
consistently high performance across the two datasets. Table 4 shows the performance of the classiﬁer. Our classiﬁer
achieves a precision of 94.22%, a recall of 94.00% and FPR (false positive rate) of 5.77%. Figure 5 shows the
importance of each feature. The number of owners, domains and TLD+2s are the most discriminating features.

Figure 3: Feature Importance for Hosting/Non-Hosting Classiﬁer

6

Different types of IP addresses

(a) D-GT1

(b) D-GT2

Figure 4: ROC Curves for Dedicated/Shared Classiﬁer for the Two Ground Truth Sets

Figure 5: Feature Importance for Dedicated/Shared Classiﬁer

Figure 6: Number of Malicious and Overall Domains per Shared IP

5 Hosting Types of Malicious Domains

Using the trained classiﬁers, we analyze the hosting types of 174,701 malicious domains collected from VirusTotal
URL Feed in January 2021. We ﬁrst identify the hosting IP addresses for these websites. These domains are hosted on
73,441 IP addresses. We are able to collect features for 47,141 IP addresses. Hence, we study the hosting types of these
latter set of IPs where 143,316 malicious domains are hosted.

We ﬁrst use the trained Hosting/Non-hosting classiﬁer to predict hosting and non-hosting IPs in this set. With 95%
conﬁdence, we identify 44,890 (95.2%) hosting IPs and 2,251 (4.8%) non-hosting IPs. Out of the hosting IPs, our
Dedicate/Shared classiﬁer detects 43,605 (97.1%) shared IPs and 1,285 (2.9%) dedicated IPs.

7

Different types of IP addresses

Figure 6 shows the distribution of malicious and all domains on shared IPs. It shows that while there are more than 200
domains hosted on 70% of shared IPs, nearly 50% of these IPs host a handful of malicious domains. This shows that
attackers utilize large pool of unrelated domains making it difﬁcult to identify and block/take down. They also tend to
choose shared hosting due to to their low cost of renting and their poor security measures [19]. Hence, in the rest of the
paper, we present results only from RF classiﬁer.

Table 5 shows the top 5 hosting providers in terms of total number of domains hosted, total number of malicious
domains hosted on shared IPs and the total number of malicious domains hosted on dedicated IPs. It is concerning
to observe that Cloudﬂare and Amazon have the highest number of malicious domains hosted under both shared and
dedicated settings. Google as a hosting service provider, on the other hand, has much less number of malicious domains
in their infrastructure. We believe this information is quite useful in practice to make business decision to utilize either
dedicated or shared hosting and under which hosting provider.

6 Related Work

One may wonder if published IP address ranges could be used to identify hosting IPs [20, 8, 9] from Non-hosting IPs.
While they may help one identify a subset of hosting IPs, they are not exhaustive due to several reasons: (1) not all
cloud services make the IP address ranges readily available to access by the public, and (2) there is a long tail of hosting
providers supporting hosting IPs. In the prior work, IP address classiﬁcation is mainly used to efﬁciently allocate IPs to
different organizations and to improve the efﬁciency of routing IP packets between routers [21]. Xie et al. [22] propose
a technique to automatically classify IP addresses as dynamic, that is, DHCP allocated IPs, and static using Hotmail
server logs in order to identify spams. Their observation is that most of the spam email servers are hosted at dynamic IP
addresses. However, this observation is not reﬂected on the malicious domains we identiﬁed from VirusTotal URL feed
and, thus, a different categorization is required. Scott et al. [23] propose to capture the IP footprint of CDN (content
delivery network) deployments. While this work identiﬁes IPs of speciﬁc shared infrastructures of content delivery,
these IPs may not necessarily be public IPs the way we classify in our work in order to study the malicious hosting
types. Recently, Nabeel et al. [7] introduce the concept of shared and dedicated IPs in their domain inference algorithms.
We observe a higher number of false positives than reported in their work and we believe this is due to the fact they
do not make a distinction between hosting and non-hosting IPs. Recently, Xianghang et al. [14], design a machine
learning model to identify residential IP addresses. While their work is useful in identifying potential features, our work
is different from theirs as we categorize IPs to identify hosting and non-hosting IPs, where residential IPs are only a
subset.

7 Conclusions

In this paper, we build ﬁrst machine learning models to identify the hosting types of IP addresses. Speciﬁcally, we build
a classiﬁer to categorize IP addresses as hosting and non-hosting and a subsequent classiﬁer to categorize hosting IPs as
shared or dedicated. From a corpus of 143,316 malicious domains, we observe the concerning trend that attackers 97.1%
of the time utilize shared hosting IPs to host their malicious domains. Further, we show that majority of these shared
IPs host many potentially benign domains and only a handful of malicious domains. This makes reputation systems
that rely on hosting infrastructure properties less effective. We believe more should be done by hosting providers to
safeguard their shared hosting infrastructures.

References

[1] M. Goncharov. Criminal hideouts for lease: Bulletproof hosting services. Forward Looking Threat Research

(FTR), 2015.

[2] Brian Krebs.

Cyber

bunker

taken

down.

german-cops-raid-cyberbunker-2-0-arrest7-in-child-porn-dark-web-market-sting/,
Accessed: 17-04-2021.

https://krebsonsecurity.com/2019/09/
2019.

[3] Yin Pa, Katsunari Yoshioka, and Tsutomu Matsumoto. Detecting malicious domains and authoritative name
servers based on their distinct mappings to ip addresses. Journal of Information Processing, 23:623–632, 09 2015.

[4] Davide Canali, Davide Balzarotti, and Aurélien Francillon. The role of web hosting providers in detecting

compromised websites. 05 2013.

[5] Sivaramakrishnan Ramanathan, Jelena Mirkovic, and Minlan Yu. BLAG: Improving the accuracy of blacklists. In

NDSS, 2020.

8

Different types of IP addresses

[6] Timothy Shimeall and J.M. Spring. Introduction to information security: A strategic-based approach. Introduction

to Information Security: A Strategic-Based Approach, pages 1–360, 11 2013.

[7] Mohamed Nabeel, Issa Khalil, Bei Guan, and Ting Yu. Following passive dns traces to detect stealthy malicious

domains via graph inference. ACM Transactions on Privacy and Security, 23:1–36, 07 2020.

[8] Team AWS.

AWS Public IPs.

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/

using-instance-addressing.html/, 2021. Accessed: 17-02-2021.

[9] Team Azure. Microsoft Azure Public IP Ranges. https://github.com/bcoe/which-cloud/blob/master/

data/PublicIPs.xml, 2021. Accessed: 17-02-2021.

[10] Team Google. Google Public IP API. https://github.com/bcoe/gce-ips/blob/master/index.js, 2021.

Accessed: 17-02-2021.

[11] Team IpInfo. IP Lookup Service, howpublished = https://ipinfo.io, note = Accessed: 17-05-2021, year =

2021.

[12] VirusTotal. VirusTotal – Free Online Virus, Malware and URL Scanner. https://www.virustotal.com/,

2021. Accessed: 28-02-2021.

[13] Team AWS. Amazon Web Services. https://aws.amazon.com, 2020. Accessed: 17-05-2021.
[14] Xianghang Mi, Xuan Feng, Xiaojing Liao, Baojun Liu, XiaoFeng Wang, Feng Qian, Zhou Li, Sumayah Alrwais,
Limin Sun, and Ying Liu. Resident evil: Understanding residential ip proxy as a dark service. In 2019 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 1185–1201, 2019.

[15] Tobias Lauinger, Kaan Onarlioglu, Abdelberi Chaabane, William Robertson, and Engin Kirda. Whois lost in
translation: (mis)understanding domain name expiration and re-registration. In Proceedings of the 2016 Internet
Measurement Conference, IMC ’16, page 247–253, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing
Machinery.

[16] Farsight Security, Inc. DNS Database. https://www.dnsdb.info/, 2021. Accessed: 28-02-2021.
[17] Ravindu De Silva, Mohamed Nabeel, Charith Elvitigala, Issa Khalil, Ting Yu, and Chamath Keppitiyagama.
Compromised or attacker-owned: A large scale classiﬁcation and study of hosting domains of malicious urls. In
30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21). USENIX Association, August 2021.

[18] MaxMind, Inc. IP ASN Database. https://maxmind.com/, 2021. Accessed: 28-02-2021.
[19] Amirreza Niakanlahiji, Mir Mehedi Pritom, Bei-Tseng Chu, and Ehab Al-Shaer. Predicting zero-day malicious ip

addresses. New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.

[20] Team Google.

Google Public IPs, howpublished = https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/

ip-addresses/ephemeraladdress, note = Accessed: 17-02-2021, year = 2021.

[21] M. A. Ruiz-Sanchez, E. W. Biersack, and W. Dabbous. Survey and taxonomy of ip address lookup algorithms.

Magazine of Global Internetworking, 15(2):8–23, March 2001.

[22] Yinglian Xie, Fang Yu, Kannan Achan, Eliot Gillum, Moisés Goldszmidt, and Ted Wobber. How dynamic are
ip addresses? In The Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM), pages
301–312. ACM, 2007.

[23] Will Scott, Thomas Anderson, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. Satellite: Joint analysis of cdns
and network-level interference. In Proceedings of the 2016 USENIX Conference on Usenix Annual Technical
Conference, pages 195–208. USENIX Association, 2016.

9

