1

1
2
0
2

v
o
N
0
2

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
8
4
0
1
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Inter-Domain Fusion for Enhanced Intrusion Detection in Power
Systems: An Evidence Theoretic and Meta-Heuristic Approach

Abhijeet Sahu1, Student Member, IEEE Katherine Davis1, Senior Member, IEEE
1Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA

False alerts due to misconﬁgured or compromised intrusion detection systems (IDS) in industrial control system (ICS) networks can
lead to severe economic and operational damage. To solve this problem, research has focused on leveraging deep learning techniques
that would help reduce false alerts. However, a shortcoming is that these works often require or implicitly assume the physical and
cyber sensor data to be trustworthy. Implicit trust of data is a major problem with using artiﬁcial intelligence or machine learning
(AI/ML) for cyber-physical system (CPS) security, because the times when these solutions are needed most to detect an attack are
also the times when they are more at risk, with both greater likelihood and greater impact, of also being compromised. To address
this inevitable shortcoming, the problem can thus be reframed as how to make good decisions given uncertainty. Then, the decision
is detection, and the uncertainty includes whether or not the data that would be used in ML-based IDS is compromised. Thus,
this article presents an approach for reducing false alerts in cyber-physical power systems that addresses this critical problem of
dealing with uncertainty without the knowledge of prior distribution of the alerts. Speciﬁcally, an evidence theoretic based approach
leveraging Dempster Shafer (DS) combination rules and their variants is proposed for reducing false alerts. A multi-hypothesis mass
function model is designed that leverages probability scores obtained from various supervised-learning classiﬁers. Using this model,
a location-cum-domain based fusion framework is proposed to evaluate the intrusion detector’s performance using Disjunctive,
Conjunctive and Cautious Conjunctive rules of combinations, that fuse multiple piece of evidences from inter-domain and intra-
domain sensors. The approach is demonstrated in a cyber-physical power system testbed (RESLab), and the classiﬁers are trained
with datasets from Man-In-The-Middle attack emulation in a large-scale synthetic electric grid. For evaluating the performance, we
consider plausibility, belief, pignistic, general Bayesian theorem based metrics as decision functions. To improve the performance,
a multi-objective based genetic algorithm is proposed for feature selection considering the decision metrics as the ﬁtness function.
Finally, we present a software application to evaluate the DS fusion approaches with different parameters and architectures.

Index Terms—Dempster Shafer Theory, Intrusion Detection System

I. INTRODUCTION

The increase of advanced control and communication tech-
nologies within the electric power grid can make the system
more vulnerable to cyber intrusions. Several ICS-targeted
attacks such as Stuxnet
[1], Ukraine [2], Mumbai [3] are
well known for severe impacts with advanced concept of oper-
ations. The criticality of power grid infrastructure necessitates
the design of resilient detection and defense mechanisms to
prevent such attacks.

The behavior of cyber intrusions and their impact on a
network is stochastic in nature. This stochasticity is typically
modeled using Markov Processes, where the transition prob-
abilities depend on attributes represented graphically such as
the degree of the nodes and the prior distribution of the states
of the nodes [4]. Similarly, uncertainty is an innate feature
of any intrusion analysis. The uncertainty arises due to the
defender’s inability to completely view the adversary’s steps,
as the monitoring tools can only observe certain symptoms or
effects of malicious activities.

Stochasticity and uncertainty complicate cyber intrusion
detection and incident forensics. Intrusion Detection Systems
(IDS) commonly rely on rule-based policies (signature-based)
or deviations from a baseline (behavioral-based) to detect
cyber intrusions. These systems produce false alarms, both
false negatives and false positives. Signature-based IDSs result
in higher false negatives for stealthy [5] and zero-day attacks.
Behavioral-based IDSs, while based on statistics, often result
in high false positives. High false positives are detrimental to
an organization’s efﬁciency and effectiveness at threat response
because they cost time and money for security professionals
to investigate, and they erode an organization’s trust in the
system’s results. False negatives also pose a signiﬁcant threat,
since an undetected attack may escalate more privileges to
result in increased damage or loss to the organization’s assets.
For Industrial Control Systems (ICS), IDSs may be further

Corresponding author: A. Sahu (email: abhijeet ntpc@tamu.edu).

customized based on process-data analysis, control-command
analysis, and with help of an ICS physical model [6]. While
security tools such as IDSs and ﬁrewalls provide key functions,
they are typically assumed to be trustworthy. Furthermore,
obtaining the data needed for theoretical models to improve
the function of such security tools is a challenge, as even
behavioral-based IDSs do not have enough intrusion informa-
tion to build the statistical models [7]. The lack of trust in the
IDS creates uncertainty in the evidences from sensors.

To address these challenges due to stochasticity, uncertainty,
and lack of adequate data availability, we present a cyber-
physical power system intrusion detection system based on
the theory of uncertainty, which we call the Inter-Domain
Evidence theoretic Approach for Inference in cyber-physical
power systems (IDEA-I). We address the problem of high
false alarms in IDS, through the solution we develop that
works to leverage fusion of evidence by domain and location
using Dempster-Shafer (DS) rules of combination. IDEA-I is
based on an autonomous data fusion architecture [8], where
the features extracted are fed to the classiﬁers or estimators for
decision making before they are fused. This is decision-level
fusion, where each sensor performs individual processing to
produce an estimate, and then these estimates are combined in
the fusion process. There are numerous methods possible to
achieve the fusion process, such as voting methods, Bayesian
inference, DS methods, and generalized evidence processing
theory [8]. DS inference [9] is a fusion technique applicable to
the autonomous fusion architecture, and so is Bayesian [10]
inference, because these fusion algorithms are fed with the
probability distributions computed from the classiﬁers or the
estimators.

In IDEA-I, we propose the usage of Dempster-Shafer
Theory of Evidence (DSTE) for network detection in power
system control networks. This approach provides value in how
it handles uncertainty due to its ability to quantify unknowns.
Speciﬁcally, two advantages we achieve from D-S theory are
(1) its ability to deal with the lack of prior probabilities for

 
 
 
 
 
 
various events and (2) its ability to combine evidences from
multiple sources [11].

The major contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) A cyber-physical power system intrusion detection sys-
tem IDEA-I is proposed that improves intrusion detec-
tion by inferring cyber-physical state information to im-
prove situational awareness based on the fundamentals
of DSTE, various rules of fusion and decision criteria.
2) A method for computing mass functions for stochastic
cyber-physical parameters, from the detection probabil-
ity computed in our prior work on data fusion [12],
is proposed and evaluated in IDEA-I. The perfor-
mance based on two different architectures,
location
and location-cum-domain based fusion, using IDEA-I
is evaluated.

3) IDEA-I is extended to formulate a feature selection un-
constrained optimization problem and solved using Non-
dominating Sorted Genetic Algorithm (NSGA) [13], to
improve IDEA-I accuracy.

4) IDEA-I is developed as a software tool that includes the
development of a DSTE library in C#. The application is
used to evaluate the performance of the proposed fusion
algorithm for varying scenarios and parameters.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents
background on the DSTE approach. Section III describes
IDEA-I including how the method would need to work in
cyber-physical power systems with its rules of combinations
and their implications. A Genetic Algorithm (GA)-based opti-
mization problem is proposed in Section IV for feature selec-
tion to improve IDEA-I performance. Section V presents the
experimental setup in our cyber-physical power system testbed
RESLab, the use cases that were designed to test IDEA-I, and
their implementation. Then, Section V-F introduces the two
types of architecture proposed for the fusion. We compare
the approach and results with the centralized-based fusion and
other decision-level fusions such as Bayesian inference. The
overall results are discussed in Section VI, and Section VIII
concludes the paper.

II. BACKGROUND

DSTE is applied in many areas of machine learning and
deep learning. An unsupervised classiﬁcation problem in mul-
tisource remote sensing is formulated through DS theory,
as one can consider union of classes rather than individual
class [14]. A neural network based classiﬁer is proposed
where the DS computation of mass function or basic belief
assessment (BBA) and rules of combination are implemented
in two hidden layers respectively [15]. Majority of the research
are either centered towards wireless networks [16], network
security [17], or autonomous mobile robots [18].

DSTE is also being applied to network security. In [19],
multi-source alarm information is fused through DSTE which
is associated with nodes vulnerability information, integrated
with the severity of threats for situational assessment of
network security. A network anomaly detector with enhanced
reliability with low false alarms is proposed using DSTE [20].
An IDS is proposed in [17] where the mass function are
computed based on the incoming and outgoing trafﬁc ratio,
service rate and the prior knowledge in the domain of DDoS
attacks. A distributive and collaborative based IDS is proposed
using DSTE for fusion data from multiple nodes [21] where
the detection is done collaboratively and the decision is
distributed among all nodes.

The presented work, IDEA-I, is the ﬁrst to leverage DS the-
ory for the purpose of classiﬁcation based on the dataset [12]

2

generated from MiTM attacks in a cyber-physical power
system testbed [22].

Data fusion in a cyber-physical system should utilize data
from the physical (e.g., power) and cyber sensors as evi-
dences to generate belief functions for the hypothesis. Ex-
amples include root vulnerability exploitation or situational
awareness for attack prevention. Cyber-physical frameworks
for situational awareness [23]–[25] have been proposed that
identify critical assets and contingencies using power system
simulators, graph theories, dynamic programming, etc. For
example, one framework [23] builds a partially observable
Markov Decision Process (POMDP) model of the grid network
that represents all possible attack paths. The robustness of
such a framework primarily depends on fusion of informa-
tion like network access policies, ﬁrewall rulesets, physi-
cal sensors, etc. The transition probabilities of the security
states in the POMDP model depend on the amount of data
accrued in real-time. However, uncertainty is present due
to unavailability of complete view of the adversary’s steps
and monitoring limitations. The presented IDEA-I addresses
this gap through its use of DSTE for power system cyber-
physical situational awareness, that handles uncertainty due
to its ability of quantifying unknowns. Analogous to the
space situational awareness (SSA) paradigm [26], we improve
the cyber-physical situational awareness (CyPSA) framework
by accurately representing the state knowledge of objects in
the cyber-physical environment to provide better prediction
capabilities for potential threats.

DSTE suffers from major drawbacks of its computational
requirements and the challenges it encounters while eliciting
the probability masses from multiple evidence [27]. Hence,
to address this, we have proposed the use of formulating
an optimization problem, by taking the decision function
from DSTE as the objective function, for feature selection to
train the classiﬁer. Since there are multiple decision metrics,
we employ a multi-objective optimization problem and solve
using a meta-heuristic GA approach. GA has been used
extensively in network intrusion detection such as ﬂow-based
trafﬁc characterization [28], IDS rules generation [29], feature
selection [30], etc. GA in the DSTE framework was proposed
in the turbine maintenance optimization problem [27]. In this
work, we present GA with DSTE in cyber-physical security
for feature selection.

III. DEVELOPMENT OF IDEA-I FROM DEMPSTER SHAFER
THEORY & COMBINATION RULES
Uncertainty is classiﬁed into two categories based on knowl-
edge and behavior of the system: Aleatory and Epistemic
uncertainty [27]. Aleatory uncertainty is caused due to random
behavior of system, while Epistemic uncertainty is caused due
to lack of knowledge of the system. Under normal operation of
a SCADA or OT network, the trafﬁc are not random as in an
IT network, hence aleatory uncertainty rarely occurs. Under a
compromised situation, the system state is ignorant rather than
stochastic, hence the uncertainty in events is epistemic. For
example, a zero-day attack cannot be detected by knowledge-
based or signature-based IDS, due to lack of information about
the intrusions. Dempster and Shafer introduced the belief func-
tion for modeling epistemic uncertainty for reasoning under
uncertainty. Quantifying uncertainty with a precise measure is
difﬁcult, and hence a measure of probability as an interval
is considered. Three major frameworks for interval-based
representation of uncertainty are the following: a) Imprecise
probability, b) Possibility Theory, and c) Demspter Shafer
Theory of Evidence (DSTE). DSTE is preferred because of
its high degree of theoretical development, better relationship

with traditional probability theory, large engineering applica-
tions in the past few years, and the versatility of the theory to
represent and combine different types of evidences.

In evidence theory, logs at each sensor act as evidence that
are considered for reasoning of an event. Theoretically, there
are four types of evidence: a) Consonant, b) Consistent, c)
Arbitrary, and d) Disjoint [31]. The data of a control network
with an IDS for cyber intrusion detection and a bad data
detector for power system state estimation can be collectively
considered as Disjoint evidence due to their different purpose
of deployment. Traditional probability theory cannot handle
consonant, consistent, or arbitrary evidence without resorting
to assumptions in distributions. DSTE can handle all these
kinds by combining a notion of probability with the traditional
conception of sets.

The IDEA-I framework is illustrated in Fig. 1. The Datasets
are sensor data extracted from substation networking devices,
DNP3 Master and Outstations from the RESLab testbed [22].
DNP3 [32] is a protocol used in SCADA systems for mon-
itoring and controlling ﬁeld devices. Data Pre-processing is
performed before training the ML based IDS Classiﬁer. The
output from the classiﬁer from different sensors carries data
of varying timestamps which synchronized with the Mean
Value based Time Synchronization block. The calculations for
Mass Function Computation, DS Rules of Combination, and
the Decision Function blocks of DSTE are detailed in this
section. The decision function is used in the ﬁtness function
in the version 2 of NSGA i.e. NSGA-2 based Feature Selection
block (Section IV) to again ﬁlter the features in the Data
Pre-processing block. Each block in the ﬂow-chart is detailed
further.

Fig. 1. Sequence of operations, with feedback from DSTE decision function
for optimal feature selection using meta-heuristic algorithm.

A. Dempster Shafer Theory of Evidence (DSTE)
Fundamentally, DSTE can be separated from the basic
probability theory on the basis of the manner one distributes
the probability density or mass based on the type of random
variables. For example, probability theory assigns 0.5 to both
Head and T ail for the toss of an unbiased coin. However,
DS theory assigns a 0 belief to Head and T ail but assigns
a 1 belief to the set {Head, T ail}, i.e., “Either Head or

3

Tail.” DS does not compel picking a probability when there is
no evidence. This approach provides three kinds of answers:
Y es, N o, and Don’t Know. Allowing the third option, i.e.,
ignorance, can make evidential reasoning valuable when there
are not enough data to validate a hypothesis.

DSTE is concerned with bounds for probabilities of prov-
ability, rather than computing probabilities of truth. The two
bounds are called belief and plausibility. Equivalent to the
state space in probability, there is a set of mutually exclusive
and exhaustive hypotheses denoted by Ω, also called the Frame
of Discernment. The set of all possible subsets of Ω , including
itself and the null set Ø, is called a power set and designated
by 2Ω. Thus, the power set comprises all possible hypotheses
or so-called focal elements.

B. Basic Belief Assignment in DSTE
The basic belief assignment (BBA) function or the mass
distribution function (m), distributes the belief over the power
set of the frame of discernment. Subsets A of Ω such that
m(A) > 0 are called focal sets of m. This mass distribu-
tion function can be classiﬁed into N ormal, Subnormal,
Dogmatic, V acuous, Simple, Categorical, and Bayesian.
The deﬁnitions of each are presented in Appendix A.

A subnormal BBA can be transformed to a normal BBA

m∗ by the normalization operation deﬁned in Eq. 1:

m∗(A) =

(cid:26)k.m(A)

0

if A (cid:54)= 0
otherwise

(1)

However, the utmost care is required before normalization: the
authors in [9] explain a controversial issue in the normalization
of the upper and lower probabilities and its implication on the
rules of combination of the evidences. The different functions
considered in the Decision Function block of DSTE (Fig. 1)
for validating a hypothesis are presented in Appendix B.

C. Rules of Combination
The purpose of aggregation of information is to summarize
a collection of data, whether the data is coming from a single
source or from multiple sources.

1) Dempster’s Rules of Combination (DRC)
Dempster’s rules of combination is a procedure for com-
bining independent piece of evidence. The requirement for
establishing the independence of sources is an important
philosophical question. From a set theoretic standpoint, these
rules can potentially occupy a continuum between Conjunction
(AND-based on set intersection) and disjunction (OR-based
on set union) [33]. For a situation where all the evidences
are reliable, a conjunctive operation is appropriate, while for
one reliable source, disjunctive operation is preferred. Hence,
in the domain of intrusion detection, one cannot rely on all
the IDSs and network logs to give reliable information due to
the existence of false positives and negatives in the algorithms.
Thus, in these scenarios, one should prefer the disjunctive rule.
However, there are many other combination operations such
as A and B or C, A and C or B, etc. Prade [33] describes these
three types of combination as conjunctive pooling (A ∩ B, if
A ∩ B (cid:54)= Ø), disjunctive pooling (A ∪ B), and a tradeoff
of both of them. The original combination rule of multiple
basic probability assignments known as the Dempster rule is
a generalization of Bayes’ rule. This rule strongly empha-
sizes the agreement between multiple sources and ignores
all the conﬂicting evidence through a normalization factor.
The mathematical operation ⊕, corresponds to the normalized
conjunctive fusion rule:

m1,2(A) = (m1 ⊕ m2)(A)

=

1
1 − K

(cid:88)

B∩C=A(cid:54)=∅

m1(B) ∗ m2(C)

where

(cid:88)

K =

B∩C=∅

m1(B) ∗ m2(C)

The disjunctive rule of combination is given by:

m1,2(A) =

(cid:26) (cid:80)
0,

A=B∪C m1 (B) m2 (C) , A (cid:54)= ∅
A = ∅

(2)

(3)

(4)

2) Combine Cautious (CC)
The Combine Cautious rules of combination is based on the
work [34]. Conventional DS rules of combination require the
evidence from multiple source to be distinct or independent,
which may not be true in a realistic application. Many works
have developed mechanisms to overcome the limitations of the
distinctness assumptions, but they were limited to at most two
focal sets. These methods were extended to separable belief
functions, but since all belief functions are not separable, the
conventional method was not further extended. The operators
in these rules of combination, need to satisfy the mathematical
properties such as associative, commutative, and idempotency.
Many rules of combination that were developed either did
not obey those requirements, or they were not scalable for
large focal sets. Moreover, the conjunctive rule is based on
the assumption that the belief functions to be combined are
induced from reliable sources of information. Due to the above
challenges in the DRC, the CC method of combination is
considered.

In the DRC, combination rules belong to the credal level
where the evidence are aggregated, but the decisions rules are
implemented at the pignistic level [35]. In the CC, the weight
function are computed using the commonality function deﬁned
in Appendix B given by the following,
(cid:89)
q(B)(−1)|B|−|A|+1

w(A) =

B⊇A



=



(cid:81)
(cid:81)
(cid:81)
(cid:81)

B⊇A,|B| /∈2N q(B)
B⊇A,|B|∈2N q(B)
B⊇A,|B|∈2N q(B)
B⊇A,|B| /∈2N q(B)

(5)

if |A| ∈ 2N

otherwise

where 2N denotes the set of even natural numbers.

As per the Least Commitment Principle used in combine
cautious [34], the rules of combination are as follows: Let
m1 and m2 be two consonant BBA. The m is said to be
consonant, if its focal sets are nested i.e. pl(A ∪ B) = pl(A) ∨
∀A, B ⊆ Ω, where ∨ is the maximum operator),
pl(B),
and let q1 and q2 be their respective commonality functions.
Then, the consonant BBA m12 with commonality function
q12(A) = q1(A) ∧ q2(A)∀A ⊆ Ω is claimed to be the s-least
committed element in the set SS (m1) ∩ Ss (m2), where S
is the specialization matrix. Hence, the cautious combination
rule for the two nondogmatic BBAs is given by w12(A) =
w1(A) ∧ w2(A), ∀A ⊂ Ω, where ∧ is the minimum operator
and each w is the respective weight function.

D. Decision Criteria
1) Belief and Plausibility Scores
After the fused mass function are computed using disjunc-
tive, conjunctive and cautious combine rules, the belief and
plausibility scores are calculated using Eqns. 11 and 12, in
Appendix B.

4

2) Pignistic Scores
To take a rational decision, we propose to transform beliefs
into pignistic probability functions through the generalized
pignistic transformation (GPT) [35]. The pignistic transfor-
mation is based on the following equation,

P {A} =

(cid:88)

X∈2Θ

|X ∩ A|
|X|

m(X)

(6)

where |A| is the number of the worlds present in the set A,
and X are the other components in the frame of discernment.
Usually decisions are made by computing the expectation
over multiple simulations, using the pignistic P {.} as the
probability function needed to compute expectations. Usually,
one uses the maximum of the pignistic probability as decision
criterion. The max of P {.} is often considered as a prudent
betting decision criterion between the two other alternatives
such as max of plausibility or belief function.
3) General Bayesian Theorem (GBT)
The GBT is a generalization of Bayes’ theorem, except
the conditional probabilities in Eq. 7 are replaced by belief
functions, and the a priori belief function on Θ is vacuous.
GBT can be used for backward propagation of the belief
networks to compute the posterior probabilities induced on
Θ for any x ∈ X.

P (θi|x) =

P (x|θi) P0 (θi)
j P (x|θj) P0 (θj)

(cid:80)

∀θi ∈ Θ

(7)

IV. GENETIC ALGORITHM FOR FEATURE SELECTION

Feature selection is a challenging task, for intrusion de-
tection in a cyber physical system involves uncertainty in
intrusion events. The complexity of the CPS model increases
when the cyber and physical network models are deﬁned in
detail. Leveraging feature reduction techniques such as PCA
can assist in improving detection accuracy, but the feature
transformation can result in un-identiﬁcation of the decipher-
able features. Hence, it is crucial to adopt non-transformable
techniques in feature reduction using optimization techniques
while also considering system uncertainty.

The feature selection problem based on the stochastic
system, which relies on the epistemically uncertain param-
eters, can be formulated as a multi-objective optimization
problem with uncertain objective functions (i.e., the belief,
plausibility, pignistic scores of the hypothesis). In this context,
the objective of the present work is to propose a feature
selection technique by propagating the uncertainties of the
conventional classiﬁers onto the ﬁtness values and formulating
the solution of the GA as a binary encoding. GA was previ-
ously used in network intrusion detection such as ﬂow-based
trafﬁc characterization [28], IDS rules generation [29], feature
selection [30], etc.

In this work, a GA-based meta-heuristic approach is adopted
for feature selection, and the initial population consists of
chromosomes of randomly selected features. The detection
probabilities of these randomly selected features are computed
by training them through the classiﬁers. Then,
the ﬁtness
functions (belief, plausibility, and pignistic) are obtained for
the different evidences, which were further used for selection,
mutation and cross-over operation. Since there are multiple
hypothesis in this problem, a multiple objective problem is
formulated.

A. NSGA-2
A single ﬁtness function cannot provide an optimal solution
for the multiple decision metrics considered in the DSTE
framework. Hence, multi-objective GA algorithms need to be
explored. NSGA [13] has been found to solve multi-objective
problems efﬁciently. In this paper, a faster version of NSGA
(NSGA-2) has been adopted to solve the feature selection
problem.

The algorithm for NSGA-2 is given in Algorithm 1. It
involves primarily two steps: a) From the given population,
Pt, at iteration t, the offspring solution, Qt, is obtained using
the selection, mutation, and crossover operations (Line 12-15).
In the ﬁrst step, using the union of Pt and Qt, non-dominated
sorting is performed to obtain solutions at different pareto-
front levels (Line 2-3). Non-dominates sorting is a sorting done
between two solutions, say X and Y , where X is considered
to dominate Y , if and only if there is no objective of X worse
than that objective of Y and there is at least one objective
of X better than that objective of Y . Pareto-Front is a set
of non-dominated solutions, being chosen as optimal if no
objective can be improved without sacriﬁcing at least one other
objective. b) In the second step, while the next population
set Pt+1 is obtained by sequentially adding the elements in
the obtained pareto fronts, starting with 1 until the condition
|Pt+1| + |Fi| ≤ N is satisﬁed (where Fi is the solution in
the ith front, and N is the maximum size of the population),
for the selection of the elements in Fi, crowding-distance
computation using the ﬁtness function in each front (Line 6)
is performed to obtain diverse solutions (Line 5-9).

Ci ← crowd sourcing assignment(Fi)
Pt+1 ← Pt ∪ Fi
i = i + 1

Rt ← Pt ∪ Qt
F ← non dominated sorting(Rt)
Pt+1 ← φ; i ← 1
while |Pt+1| + |Fi| ≤ N do

Algorithm 1 Algorithm of NSGA-2
1: while termination criteria do
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16: end while

end while
Fi ← sort(Fi, Ci, desc)
Pt+1 ← Pt+1 ∪ Fi[1 : (N − |Pt+1|)]
Qt+1 ← selection(Pt+1, N )
Qt+1 ← mutation(Qt+1)
Qt+1 ← crossover(Qt+1)
t ← t + 1

B. Problem Formulation
The objective of the problem is to minimize the error with
reference to the attack labels A(t), over the sampled time
throughout the simulation, so as to identify the least number of
features that need to be considered for training the classiﬁers,
Nsim(cid:88)

min Fk =

|fk(t) − A(t)|

(8)

t=0
where k ∈ K, K is the set of all decision metrics such
as fused Belief, Plausibility, Pignistic, GBT functions, fk
is their corresponding scores after the fusion operations, as
presented in Section III-D and III, respectively, and Nsim
is the simulation duration. The decision variables are binary
encoded indicating whether a feature is selected for training
the classiﬁer or not. The fk(t) at time t depends on the feature

5

selected for training. A(t) ∈ 0, 1 depending on the attack
window, i.e., A(t) = 1 during attack or else A(t) = 0.

V. TESTBED & FUSION ARCHITECTURE
Before discussing the location-based fusion, it is essential
to understand the architecture of the RESLab testbed that is
producing the data during emulation of different Man-in-the-
Middle attacks.

A. Testbed Architecture
The RESLab emulation testbed consists of a network emu-
lator, a power system emulator, an OpenDNP3 master and a
RTAC based master, an intrusion detection system, and data
storage, fusion and visualization software, shown in Fig. 2.
A brief overview of each component is given below. The
detailed explanation of RESLab, including its architecture and
use cases, is provided in [22], [36]. Common Open Research
Emulator (CORE) is used to emulate the communication
network. PowerWorld Dynamic Studio (PWDS) is a real-
time simulation engine for operating the simulated power
system case in real-time as a server [37]. DNP3 Masters are
incorporated using open DNP3. Snort is used in the testbed as
the rule-based, open-source intrusion detection system (IDS).
The Elasticsearch, Logstash, and Kibana (ELK) stack is used
to probe and store all virtual and physical network interface
trafﬁc. A separate VM is deployed to operate the fusion engine
that collects network logs and Snort alerts from the ELK
stack using the Elasticsearch client and raw packet captures
from CORE using pyshark. The fusion engine constructs
cyber and physical features and merges them, using the time
stamps from different sources to ensure correct alignment
of information. Further, it pre-processes the features using
imputation, scaling, and encoding before training for intrusion
detection using supervised, unsupervised and semi-supervised
learning techniques. More details can be found in [12].

Fig. 2. RESLab Emulation Testbed Architecture showing three evidences
in three different locations: DNP3 Master (Evidence 1), Substation Router
(Evidence 2) and PowerWorld DS acting as DNP3 outstation (Evidence 3).

B. Modifying Measurements and Commands
The objective of the intruder is to disrupt grid operations.
Details on the sequence of actions that create the FCI and
FDI attacks and how they impact the power system side are
detailed in [22], [36]. These are four use cases:

Use Case 1 (U C 1): Branch Control Modiﬁcations. Each
binary direct operate command is changed from a CLOSE to a
TRIP command, with any other trafﬁc simply forwarded. The
change in the binary operate command introduces some pro-
cessing delay, which may cause the packet to be retransmitted.

2. Use Case 2 (U C 2): Generator Set-Point Modiﬁcation.
When the MiTM script is running, the analog point for the
generator is set to a lower value, which decreases the generator
setpoint from its current value.

3. Use Case 3 (U C 3): Measurement and Status Modiﬁ-
cation. U C 3 is a combination of false command and data
injection attacks. After each polling interval, the DNP3 master
will send a read request packet to each outstation, which then
sends a read response packet to the master. This read response
is ﬁlled with the all the binary input, analog input, binary
output, and analog output DNP3 points. Next, analog input
points in the read response packet are changed to a lower
value lower of 20 MW or 0 MW. The operator controlling the
DNP3 master is then forced to send an analog direct operate
command to bring the generators back to their original loaded
set points. However, when the operator sends this original set
point value to the generator, the MiTM script is programmed
to change the setpoint to 20 MW or 0 MW.

4. Use Case 4 (U C 4): Measurement and Status Modiﬁca-
tion. The adversary ﬁrst follows the steps of Use Case 3, then
modiﬁes the read response packet of the preceding packets,
based on the actual set point given by the master. Thus the
master is unaware of the contingency created.

C. Use Cases Implementation
For each use case, the polling intervals and the number
of polled DNP3 outstations are altered. The polling intervals
tested were 30 and 60 s, while the number of polled DNP3
outstations were ﬁve and ten. For instance,
the scenario
U C1 10 OS 30 indicates U se Case 1 with ten outstations
and a polling interval of 30 s is implemented.

In each scenario, the normal operation is conducted ﬁrst
without the MiTM attack. Then the operation is conducted
again with the attack to analyze its impact. Finally, the attack
is stopped and the network restored. The main reason for
choosing poll intervals of 30 and 60 s is that most DNP3
masters have polling rates of 30 s, 1 min, or 5 min, with a
maximum of 15 min. A poll interval more than two minutes
has little impact on attack strength because the adversary
processing time is less than 60 to 70 ms. Similarly, outstation
numbers of ﬁve and ten are considered, since the objective is to
study the communication dynamics of an impacted outstation,
and how the number of outstations becomes a limitation on
the attack success probability. The numbers of ﬁve and ten
coincide with our use cases in the Texas 2000-bus synthetic
model, where each utility control center is communicating with
at least two substations and at most 25 substations.

D. Mean Value Based Time Synchronization
The classiﬁer probability scores of detection and the time
stamp may vary for different locations. The sample times will
also vary. Hence, a time resolution window res is selected to
compute the average of the probability scores from samples
existing in that window and store the average probability score.
This ensures time synchronization for fusion by location. The
lower the window size, the higher the time resolution will be,
but more noise will be present in the decision function. The
impact of resolution is studied considering accuracy of the
fusion technique for res = 5, 10, 15, 20s.

E. Supervised learning based IDS
Different supervised learning based classiﬁer are used in
the Data Fusion Engine [12]. The probability scores based
on the classiﬁer’s output for each data point are considered

6

for computing the mass function from each evidence. In the
testbed, the IDSs are trained at three different locations in
the network: a) DNP3 outstation, b) DNP3 master, and the
c) substation router. Hence, adopting the autonomous fusion
architecture is appropriate, which is more decision-centric
fusion. Then location based fusion is considered using the
DS rules of combinations. Initially, seven types of supervised-
based classiﬁers are trained: a) Support Vector Classiﬁer
(SVC), b) K-Nearest Neighbor (kNN), c) Decision Tree (DT),
d) Random Forest (RF), e) Gaussian Naive Bayes (GNB), f)
Bernoulli Naive Bayes (BNB), and g) Multi-layer Perceptron
(MLP) to compute the probability scores for different use cases
with varying poll rates and polled number of outstations. Then,
the value of the decision function is used to evaluate the belief
mass to feed into the DS-based fusion engine. Further, the
mass distribution is computed based on the probability score.
The frame of discernment for the given IDS problem is given
by {attack}; {no attack}; {attack, no attack}; {∅}. If the
probability of intrusion for a data point t is say a, then the
dogmatic belief mass distribution is set to be the following,

mt(∅) = −1

2
(cid:88)

i=1

(mt(i) − 1/2)2

mt(attack) = a ∗ (1 − mt(∅))
mt(no attack) = (1 − a) ∗ (1 − mt(∅))

(9)

where the ﬁrst mass belief distribution mt(∅) quantiﬁes uncer-
tainty, as per the variance of the probability scores considered
in [38]. However, since most if not all states of belief are
based on imperfect and not entirely conclusive evidence, non-
dogmatic belief functions should be considered where m(Ω) is
very small [34], say (cid:15) and not zero. In this scenario, a different
belief mass distribution is proposed:

mt(∅) = −1

2
(cid:88)

i=1

(mt(i) − (1 − (cid:15))/2)2

mt(attack) = a ∗ (1 − mt(∅)) ∗ (1 − (cid:15))
mt(no attack) = (1 − a) ∗ (1 − mt(∅)) ∗ (1 − (cid:15))
mt(attack, no attack) = m(Ω) = (cid:15) ∗ (1 − mt(∅))

(10)

F. Fusion Architectures
Two types of fusion architectures are proposed and experi-

mented as shown in Fig. 3.

1) Fusion by Location (FL)
In the ﬁrst case, we explore the performance through fusion
by location based on the probability scores obtained from
classiﬁers trained with both cyber and physical features at the
substation router, DNP3 master, and outstation.
2) Fusion by Location and Domain (FLD)
In the second case, we fuse by location as well as domain,
utilizing the probability scores obtained from classiﬁers trained
with pure cyber and physical features.

VI. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
This section describes the experiments performed on eval-
uating the performance of IDEA-I on the data collected from
the sensors in the RESLab testbed [22], where different Man-
In-The-Middle attacks were implemented in the emulated syn-
thetic electric grid. Different rules of combination and decision
criteria are evaluated from the DSTE. Further, these criteria or

7

Fig. 3.

(Left) Fusion by location and domain from pure cyber and physical classiﬁers. (Right) Fusion by location from cyber-physical classiﬁers.

scores were used to compare different classiﬁers that must be
considered prior to incorporation of DS rules of combination.
Post combination, the scores are fed to the NSGA-2 algorithm
for feature selection to improve the performance. Based on the
selected classiﬁer, different types of fusion techniques used
in DSTE are evaluated. The performance of two architecture
introduced in the previous section that involves fusion by
location and domain are assessed. Finally,
the impact of
the time resolution in the fusion operation on its accuracy
alongwith the time complexity of the fusion algorithm is
analysed with varying number of hypothesis in the belief mass
distribution.

A. Decision Criteria Selection
In DSTE, different criteria or scores serve different pur-
poses. Hence, four decision criteria a) Belief score, b) Plausi-
bility score, c) Pignistic score, and d) Score based on General
Bayesian Theorem (GBT) presented earlier are evaluated. The
basic idea is to evaluate the accuracy under these different
criteria, for all
the use cases, while considering different
classiﬁers and cyber-physical features, and ﬁnally to select the
criteria that has the highest accuracy in the most scenarios.
For the evaluations, the time resolution res is assumed to be
15 s, and the disjunctive rule of combination is considered.
T P +T N +F P +F N , where
The accuracy is calculated based on
T P and T N are true positives and negatives, F P and F N are
false positives and negatives. It can be observed from Table I
that for seven classiﬁers and 14 use cases, the Pignistic score
has the highest accuracy under 78 scenarios. The Belief score,
Plausibility score, and GBT score have the highest accuracy
under 7, 7, and 8 scenarios respectively. Thus, results show the
pignistic score as a reliable criteria for evaluation. Fig. 4 shows
the decision metrics for the disjunctive fusion performed on
the evidence collected from router, master, and outstation IDS
with a decision tree classiﬁer. The pignistic score is a better
indicator for intrusion detection compared to the other scores.
These scores are also utilized to formulate the ﬁtness function
for the meta-heuristic based feature selection and to re-evaluate
the DS rules of fusion.

T P +T N

B. Comparison by Classiﬁer
A classiﬁer’s performance may vary based on the features
selected for training the learning engine. Certain use-cases

UC2

UC
UC1

PI
30
60
30
60
30
60
30
60
30
60
30
60
30
60

SVC
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
b
b
c
c
c
c

Scenarios
os
10
10
5
5
10
10
5
5
10
10
5
5
10
10

DT
c
c
c
d
a
a
c
a
c
c
a
a
d
c
TABLE I
DECISION CRITERIA WITH MAXIMUM ACCURACY EVALUATED ACCROSS
DIFFERENT SCENARIOS AND CLASSIFIERS (A = BELIEF SCORE, B=
PLAUSIBILITY SCORE, C= PIGNISTIC SCORE; D= GBT SCORE).

BNB MLP
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
a
b
b
c
d
c

K-NN
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c

Classiﬁers
RF
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c

GNB
b
c
c
c
c
b
c
c
c
c
d
c
d
c

b
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
d
d
d
a

UC3

UC4

Fig. 4. Plot of the decision criteria after distinctive fusion, with the probability
scores from decision tree classiﬁers for use case 1 with 10 polled outstation
and 30s poll interval

perform well with the use of linear classiﬁers such as SGD
or logistic regression, while some outperform with the use of
non-linear classiﬁers such as DT, RF, or SVM. Some cases
perform better with the use of deep learning based classiﬁers
such as CNN or RNN, depending on the spatial and temporal
nature of features and relationship with the labels. Here, the
seven classiﬁers are compared with the F L architecture of
fusion. Figs. 5(a), 5(b), 5(c), 5(d) show the comparison of
the classiﬁers used, prior to the disjunctive based fusion,

8

evaluated based on the precision, recall, F1-score and accuracy
calculated after disjunctive based location fusion. For UC-
1, UC-2, UC-3, and UC-4, the DT- and RF-based classiﬁers
are found to be better options with disjunctive-based fusion.
However, the precision scores for UC-1 and UC-2 were better
with SVM and k-NN classiﬁers, but accuracy and F1-score
are considered the major criteria here, so DT- and RF-based
classiﬁers are considered for further experiments.

G. Computation Analysis with Varying Number of Sensors
The DS rules of combination are dependent upon the size
of the frame of discernment as well as the number of mass
functions being combined [39]. The time complexity involved
in fusion algorithms varies based on the number of evidences
to fuse. It has been proven that as the set size of the frame of
discernment increases, the cautious combination rule is found
to be more effective [40].

C. Comparison of Rules of Combination
Disjunctive rules of combination requires at least one re-
liable evidence. Conjunctive rules perform well if the evi-
dences are independent and reliable. Cautious combination
rules perform better when the cardinality of the frame of
discernment is high. Hence, the comparison of conjunctive,
disjunctive, and cautious conjunctive fusion technique is per-
formed. Figs. 6(a), 6(b), 6(c) show the impact on the precision,
recall, F1-score, and accuracy scores computed with the pig-
nistic function for three different rules of combination. In the
experiment, the intruder compromises the substation network,
hence both the substation router and the DNP3 outstation are
compromised. Among the three sensors, with the assistance of
one source considered to be secure, i.e., the DNP3 master, the
disjunctive fusion with DT and RF classiﬁers performs better
in comparison to conjunctive and its cautious counterpart.

D. Comparison of Two Architectures
Feature-based fusion is performed prior to fusion by loca-
tion (FL). If the features from diverse domains are unable to
be fused due to lack of performance or due to lack of evidence
from any one domain, one needs to adopt the FLD architecture,
where fusion-by-location on the raw domain-speciﬁc features
are performed, prior to fusion-by-domain. Figs. 5(a), 5(b),5(c),
5(d) show the results for the FL architecture, while Figs.7(a),
7(b), 7(c), 7(d) show results from the FLD architecture. FLD-
based fusion outperforms FL-based fusion in many scenarios,
but in some cases there was not much inﬂuence. Hence, both
may be adopted depending on the scenario.

E. Impact of Time Resolution while Merging by Location
Since low time resolution results in noise in intrusion
detection, it is advisable to consider smoothening techniques.
The physical sensor and cyber sensor time intervals between
samples may vary; hence, it is essential for fusion to bring
the samples to the same time frame. This comparison evalu-
ates detection performance based on varying time resolution,
considered during time synchronization prior to fusion by
location. Figs. 8(a), 8(b), 8(c), 8(d), show the effect of different
resolutions res in the Mean Value based Time Synchronization
block, implemented for the probability scores obtained from
the DT classiﬁer for U C1 10 OS 30. Results show that
increasing the sample time lead to better decision scores,
except the GBT score. The GBT and the Belief scores are
same for all the time resolution except for the res = 5s.

F. Comparison with NSGA-2 based Feature Selection
Detection performance considering feature selection using
the NSGA-2 algorithm varies based on the selection of type
of classiﬁer. For all the classiﬁers, the results obtained with
the GA algorithm improve the detection performance. The
comparison of the results for RT and DF classiﬁers with and
without GA-based feature selection is shown in Fig. 9.

VII. DSTE EVALUATION FRAMEWORK

A desktop application for IDEA-I is developed for the eval-
uation of DSTE rules of combination for different use-cases
and parameters. Fig. 10 shows the application, visualizing the
decision metric for U C2 5OS 30poll for disjunctive fusion,
with only cyber features, and using a mean value based time
synchronization res of 15 sec. The check-box labeled “Merge
by Location and Domain?” is used to select either the F L- or
F LD-based architecture. The code for the DSTE evaluation
application is available in Github [41]. The datasets for the
evaluation of the IDEA-I are also publicly available at IEEE
Dataport [42].

VIII. CONCLUSION

An evidence theoretic based data fusion framework for
detecting cyber intrusion in power systems is presented. The
framework is evaluated by studying the performance of differ-
ent classiﬁers using DS rules of combination. Results show
the evidence from the Decision Tree and Random Forest
classiﬁers to be the best among other techniques. Results also
show that higher time resolution in mean-value based time
synchronization improves the decision metrics. The Pignistic
Function decision criteria is observed to be the best among
all the others for all the use-cases. The FLD (autonomous
architecture) outperforms the FL (centralized architecture)
based fusion in many scenarios, but in some there is not much
inﬂuence, so both techniques may be considered depending
on the scenarios. Among the different rules of combination,
the disjunctive rules performed the best when considered
with Decision Tree and Random Forest probability scores.
Finally, an application has been developed and presented
that performs these analyses and facilitates the DS theoretic
framework for the fusion of cyber and physical sensors in
power systems. The application is created, used, and made
available to evaluate the impact of fusion type, use-case, time-
resolution and architecture.

APPENDIX A
TYPES OF MASS FUNCTION

1) Normal: If Ø is not a focal set or m(Ø) = 0
2) Subnormal: If Ø is a focal set. In our experiments, the
null set in the focal set hence subnormal belief function
is considered.

3) Dogmatic: If Ω is not a focal set. In the experiments, Ω is
in the focal set hence it has nondogmatic belief function.
The combine cautious rule can only be implemented if
the mass distribution is nondogmatic.

4) Vacuous: If Ω is the only focal set. For certain timestamp
when there are no alerts, we also observe vacuous focal
set.

5) Simple: If it has at most two focal sets and, if it has

two, Ω is one of them.

6) Categorical: If it has only one focal set.
7) Bayesian: If its focal sets are singleton.

9

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 5. Precision, Recall, F1 score, Accuracy obtained based on the pignistic score from disjunctive based DS fusion performed from probability scores from
different classiﬁers with cyber-physical features combined using FL architecture in Fig. 3 for (a) UC1; (b) UC2; (c) UC3; (d) UC4 with 30 sec polling
interval and 10 polled outstations.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 6. Precision, Recall, F1 score, Accuracy obtained based on the pignistic score from three different rules of combination (a) Disjunctive; (b) Conjunctive;
(c) Cautious Conjunctive; tested with UC1, 30 sec polling interval and 10 polled outstations.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 7. Precision, Recall, F1 score, Accuracy obtained based on the pignistic score from disjunctive based DS fusion by location and domain performed from
probability scores from different classiﬁers with pure cyber and pure physical features combined using FLD architecture in Fig. 3 for (a) UC1; (b) UC2; (c)
UC3; (d) UC4 with 30 sec polling interval and 10 polled outstations.

APPENDIX B
DS FUNCTIONS

A. Belief Function
The belief function maps each hypotheses B to a value

bel(B) between 0 and 1, deﬁned in in Eq. 11:

bel(B) =

(cid:88)

m(Aj)

j:Aj ⊂B

(11)

In words, belief in a hypothesis B is the sum of masses of
elements which are subsets of A, Aj.

B. Plausibility Function
The plausibility function maps each hypotheses B to a value

pls(B) between 0 and 1, deﬁned in Eq. 12:

pls(B) =

(cid:88)

m(Aj)

j:Aj ∩B(cid:54)=Ø

(12)

In words, pls(B) is the sum of all the mass of the sets, Aj that
intersects with the set B. It has an alternate deﬁnition, i.e.,
the weight of evidence that does not refute B, and hence the
belief and plausibility are related by Eq.13.

pls(B) = 1 − bel(B)

(13)

C. Commonality Function
The commonality function maps each hypotheses B to a

value q(B) between 0 and 1, deﬁned in Eq. 14:

q(B) =

(cid:88)

m(Aj)

j:B∩Aj

(14)

D. Relationship among the function
Shafer showed that

there is one-to-one correspondence
among these m, bel, pls and q functions, where Eqs. 15 and
16 give examples:

bel(B) =

(cid:88)

(−1)|Aj |−|B|q(Aj), ∀B ⊆ Ω

m(B) =

j:Aj ⊇B
(cid:88)

(−1)|B|−|Aj |bel(Aj), ∀B ⊆ Ω

j:Aj ⊆B

(15)

(16)

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work described in this paper was supported by funds
from the National Academy of Sciences under award PO#
2000009323 titled Online Resilience Support System for
Cyber-Physical Situational Awareness and from US Depart-
ment of Energy’s (DoE) Cybersecurity for Energy Delivery
Systems program under award DE-OE0000895.

10

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 8. Precision, Recall, F1 score, Accuracy obtained based on the different decision criteria from disjunctive based DS fusion by location from probability
scores of Decision Tree classiﬁers with combined cyber-physical features and different time resolutions (a) res =5s; (b) res =10s; (c) res =15s; (d) res =20s

mobile ad hoc networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1025–1036, 2011.

[17] W. Hu, J. Li, and Q. Gao, “Intrusion detection engine based on dempster-
shafer’s theory of evidence,” in 2006 International Conference on
Communications, Circuits and Systems, vol. 3, 2006, pp. 1627–1631.

[18] R. R. Murphy, “Dempster-shafer theory for sensor fusion in autonomous
mobile robots,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation, vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 197–206, 1998.

[19] F. Xuewei, W. Dongxia, M. Guoqing, and L. Jin, “Security situation
assessment based on the ds theory,” in 2010 Second International
Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science, vol. 3, 2010,
pp. 352–356.

[20] L. Liu and Y. Liu, “Research on the technology of network intrusion
detection based on modiﬁed d-s evidence theory,” in 2009 WRI World
Congress on Software Engineering, vol. 2, 2009, pp. 447–450.

[21] A. Farroukh, N. Mukadam, E. Bassil, and I. H. Elhajj, “Distributed
and collaborative intrusion detection systems,” in 2008 IEEE Lebanon
Communications Workshop, 2008, pp. 41–45.

[22] A. Sahu, P. Wlazlo, Z. Mao, H. Huang, A. Goulart, K. Davis,
and S. Zonouz, “Design and evaluation of a cyber-physical testbed
systems,” IET Cyber-
for
Physical Systems: Theory & Applications.
[Online]. Available:
https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/cps2.12018

improving attack resilience of power

[23] K. R. Davis, C. M. Davis, S. A. Zonouz, R. B. Bobba, R. Berthier,
L. Garcia, and P. W. Sauer, “A cyber-physical modeling and assessment
framework for power grid infrastructures,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2464–2475, 2015.

[24] A. Sahu, H. Huang, K. Davis, and S. Zonouz, “A framework for cyber-
physical model creation and evaluation,” in 2019 20th International
Conference on Intelligent System Application to Power Systems (ISAP),
2019, pp. 1–8.

[25] S. Zonouz, C. M. Davis, K. R. Davis, R. Berthier, R. B. Bobba, and
W. H. Sanders, “Socca: A security-oriented cyber-physical contingency
analysis in power infrastructures,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 3–13, 2014.

[26] A. Jaunzemis, M. Holzinger, and K. Luu, “Sensor tasking for spacecraft
custody maintenance and anomaly detection using evidential reasoning,”
Journal of Aerospace Information Systems, vol. 15, pp. 1–26, 02 2018.
[27] M. Compare and E. Zio, “Genetic algorithms in the framework of
dempster-shafer theory of evidence for maintenance optimization prob-
lems,” IEEE Transactions on Reliability, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 645–660,
2015.

[28] A. H. Hamamoto, L. F. Carvalho, L. D. H. Sampaio, T. Abr˜ao, and
M. L. Proenc¸a, “Network anomaly detection system using genetic
algorithm and fuzzy logic,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 92,
pp. 390–402, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S095741741730619X

[29] P. Angelo and A. Drummond, “Adaptive anomaly-based intrusion detec-
tion system using genetic algorithm and proﬁling,” Security and Privacy,
vol. 1, 08 2018.

[30] M. Gauthama Raman, N. Somu, K. Kirthivasan, R. Liscano,
and V. Shankar Sriram, “An efﬁcient
intrusion detection system
based on hypergraph - genetic algorithm for parameter optimization
selection in support vector machine,” Knowledge-
and feature
Based Systems, vol. 134, pp. 1–12, 2017.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705117303209

[31] Y. Tang, N. Oren, S. Parsons, and K. Sycara, “Dempster-shafer argument
schemes,” 2013,
tenth International Workshop on Argumentation in
Multi-Agent Systems (ArgMAS 2013) ; Conference date: 06-05-2013
Through 10-05-2013.

[32] G. Clarke, D. Reynders, and E. Wright, Practical modern SCADA
protocols: DNP3, 60870.5 and related systems. Newnes, 2004.
Combination
Prade,
in Various Mathematical Frameworks.

[33] D.

Dubois

and

On

the

H.

Evidence
Springer Netherlands, 1992, pp. 213–241.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-2438-6 13

of
Dordrecht:
[Online]. Available:

[34] T. Denundeﬁnedux, “Conjunctive and disjunctive combination of belief
functions induced by nondistinct bodies of evidence,” Artif. Intell.,

Fig. 9. Comparison of the RF and DT based classiﬁer with and without the
use of GA-based feature selection.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Kushner, “The real story of stuxnet,” IEEE Spectrum, vol. 50, no. 3,

pp. 48–53, March 2013.

[2] R. M. Lee, M. J. Assante, and T. Conway, “Analysis of the cyber attack
on the ukrainian power grid,” E-ISAC, SANS, Washington DC, US, Mar
2016.

[3] Pierluigi Paganini. (2020, Nov) October Mumbai power outage may have
been caused by a cyber attack. [Online]. Available: https://securityaffairs.
co/wordpress/111209/hacking/mumbai-power-outage-cyber-attack.html
[4] S. Xu, W. Lu, and H. Li, “A stochastic model of active cyber defense

dynamics,” 2016.

[5] S. Patton, W. Yurcik, and D. Doss, “An achilles’ heel in signature-based

ids: Squealing false positives in snort,” 12 2001.

[6] Y. Hu, A. Yang, H. Li, Y. Sun, and L. Sun, “A survey of intrusion detec-
tion on industrial control systems,” International Journal of Distributed
Sensor Networks, vol. 14, p. 155014771879461, 08 2018.

[7] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey
of intrusion detection systems: techniques, datasets and challenges,”
Cybersecurity, vol. 2, 12 2019.

[8] D. Hall, Mathematical Techniques in Multisensor Data Fusion, 01 1992.
[9] L. A. Zadeh, “A simple view of the dempster-shafer theory of evidence
and its implication for the rule of combination,” AI Mag., vol. 7, no. 2,
p. 85–90, Jul. 1986.

[10] Peng Xie, J. H. Li, Xinming Ou, Peng Liu, and R. Levy, “Using bayesian
networks for cyber security analysis,” in 2010 IEEE/IFIP International
Conference on Dependable Systems Networks, 2010, pp. 211–220.
[11] L. Zomlot, S. C. Sundaramurthy, K. Luo, X. Ou, and S. R.
Rajagopalan, “Prioritizing intrusion analysis using dempster-shafer
theory,” in Proceedings of
the 4th ACM Workshop on Security
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, ser. AISec ’11. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2011, p. 59–70.
[Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2046684.2046694

[12] A. Sahu, Z. Mao, P. Wlazlo, H. Huang, K. Davis, A. Goulart, and
S. Zonouz, “Multi-source multi-domain data fusion for cyberattack
detection in power systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 119 118–119 138,
2021.

[13] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist
multiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii,” IEEE Transactions on Evo-
lutionary Computation, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, 2002.

[14] S. Le Hegarat-Mascle, I. Bloch, and D. Vidal-Madjar, “Application
of dempster-shafer evidence theory to unsupervised classiﬁcation in
multisource remote sensing,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 1018–1031, 1997.

[15] T. Denoeux, “A neural network classiﬁer based on dempster-shafer
theory,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part
A: Systems and Humans, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 131–150, 2000.

[16] S. Bu, F. R. Yu, X. P. Liu, P. Mason, and H. Tang, “Distributed combined
authentication and intrusion detection with data fusion in high-security

11

Fig. 10.

IDEA-I application for evaluating DSTE components for different scenarios, classiﬁers and fusion architectures.

vol. 172, no. 2–3, p. 234–264, Feb. 2008.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2007.05.008

[Online]. Available:

[35] P. Smets and R. Kennes, “The transferable belief model,” Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 191 – 234, 1994. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0004370294900264
[36] P. Wlazlo, A. Sahu, Z. Mao, H. Huang, A. Goulart, K. Davis,
and S. Zonouz, “Man-in-the-middle attacks and defence in a power
system cyber-physical testbed,” IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory &
Applications. [Online]. Available: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1049/cps2.12014

[37] Glover, T. Overbye, and Sarma, “Powerworld simulator.” [Online].

Available: https://www.powerworld.com/products/simulator/overview

[38] M. Raza, I. Gondal, D. Green, and R. L. Coppel, “Classiﬁer fusion using
dempster-shafer theory of evidence to predict breast cancer tumors,” in
TENCON 2006 - 2006 IEEE Region 10 Conference, 2006, pp. 1–4.
[39] P. Orponen, “Dempster’s rule of combination is #p-complete,” Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 245 – 253, 1990. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0004370290901037

[40] N. Wilson, “Algorithms for dempster-shafer theory,” 01 2000.
[41] A. Sahu, “Dempster shafer fusion graphical user interface,” https:
//github.com/Abhijeet1990/DempsterShafer Fusion GUI.git, 2021.
[42] A. Sahu, Z. Mao, P. Wlazlo, H. Huang, K. Davis, A. Goulart,
in
for mitm attacks
“Cyber-physical dataset
[Online]. Available: https:

and S. Zonouz,
power systems,” IEEE Dataport, 2021.
//dx.doi.org/10.21227/e4dd-2163

