Threat Scenarios and Monitoring Requirements for
Cyber-Physical Systems of Energy Flexibility Markets

Nils M¨uller, Kai Heussen
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby, Denmark
{nilmu; kh}@elektro.dtu.dk

Zeeshan Afzal, Mathias Ekstedt
Department of Computer Science
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
{zafzal; mekstedt}@kth.se

Per Eliasson
Foreseeti AB
Stockholm, Sweden
per.eliasson@foreseeti.com

1
2
0
2

v
o
N
5

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
0
0
3
3
0
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The ongoing integration of renewable generation
and distributed energy resources introduces new challenges to
distribution grid operation. Due to the increasing volatility and
uncertainty, distribution system operators are seeking concepts
to enable more active management and control. Flexibility
markets offer a platform for economically efﬁcient trading of
electricity ﬂexibility between distribution system operators and
other participants. The integration of cyber, physical and market
domains of multiple participants makes ﬂexibility markets a
system of cyber-physical systems. While cross-domain integration
sets the foundation for efﬁcient deployment of ﬂexibility,
it
introduces new physical and cyber vulnerabilities to participants.
This work provides a systematic overview of threat scenarios
for the cyber-physical systems of ﬂexibility markets. Results
reveal several remaining security challenges across all domains,
that require more attention. Based on the threat scenarios and
a novel generic monitoring requirements model, monitoring
concepts for secure participation of distribution system operators
in ﬂexibility markets are proposed. By highlighting approaches to
tackle identiﬁed challenges, this work provides new directions for
further investigations, and takes important steps towards secure
implementation of ﬂexibility markets.

Index Terms—distribution grids, ﬂexibility markets, threat sce-
narios, monitoring requirements, cyber-physical power systems

I. INTRODUCTION

To reach the European goal of carbon neutrality in 2050,
electricity generation and consumption must undergo radical
changes. While the share of renewable generation needs to
increase, electriﬁcation of other sectors through devices such
as electric vehicles (EVs) and heat pumpss (HPs) will drive
up and reshape electricity demand. This extensive installation
of distributed energy resources (DERs) on end user level will
introduce more uncertainty and volatility, and thus radically
change the requirements to the operation of distribution grids.
Originally designed for the supply of consumers based on
centralized generation, distribution grids will increasingly be
used as carriers of volatile and often bi-directional power ﬂows
[1]. Thus, the active management of distribution grids based
on the emerging smart grid techniques for monitoring, control,
and communication is seen as a requirement for distribution
system operators (DSOs) [2]. With the improving capability

This work is supported by the ERA-NET project HONOR, funded under

grant agreement No 646039 and No 7759750 (RegSys 2018).

and affordability of information and communication technol-
ogy (ICT), the utilization of end user ﬂexibility, commonly
referred to as demand response, is becoming more attractive.
By reducing equipment
loading during peak hours, DSOs
can use local ﬂexibility to delay or avoid investments for
reinforcement of transformers and power lines [3].

As a framework for the integration of local ﬂexibility, a
widely discussed approach are ﬂexibility markets (FMs) [4]–
[6]. FMs constitute a competitive trading platform for elec-
tricity ﬂexibility, typically in a geographically restricted area
such as neighborhoods or towns [7]. There exist a variety of
market designs and new concepts are still under development
[4]. However, a typical setup of market participants consists of
a DSO, a balance responsible party (BRP), several aggregators
and a market operator. Aggregators pool and manage multiple
small residential ﬂexibility assets. In this way, aggregators
enable end users to participate in the FM. Larger ﬂexibility
assets, such as industrial loads, can potentially also directly
participate in the market. In FMs, DSOs and BRPs typically
are ﬂexibility buyers, while aggregators constitute ﬂexibility
sellers. DSOs procure ﬂexibility for operational purposes,
such as congestion management or voltage control. BRPs
buy ﬂexibility for portfolio optimization. By adjusting the
power demand of the aggregated residential ﬂexibility assets,
aggregators make proﬁts according to ﬂexibility contracts.
The owners of ﬂexibility assets make proﬁts by providing a
DER, such as a HP or an EV, as a ﬂexibility asset to an
aggregator. FMs are promoted by EU legislators [8]. Reasons
include (i) FMs resolve potential conﬂicts of interest between
system operators, (ii) FMs require only minor adjustments in
the legislative framework, allowing to maintain the current
wholesale markets structure, and (iii) market competition
ensures efﬁcient allocation of resources and accurate pricing
for market participants.

The foundation of a FM is a strong integration of cyber,
physical and market domains of multiple actors, making it
a system of cyber-physical systems. While this cross-domain
integration sets the foundation for efﬁcient deployment of
ﬂexibility assets, it also introduces new vulnerabilities to the
involved participants and their systems. By applying end user
ﬂexibility to avoid critical grid states, DSO grid operation
the
becomes partly dependent on third parties. Moreover,

 
 
 
 
 
 
required use of ICT, including less secure public networks,
and the strong coupling with the physical and market domain
opens doors for cyber criminals, aiming at social or ﬁnancial
damage. In addition, incorporating home devices of end users
as ﬂexibility assets also requires transmission, storage and
processing of sensitive data.

To alleviate the above mentioned concerns, possible risks
ﬁrst must be identiﬁed and security requirements formulated.
In this context, understanding requirements for holistic moni-
toring of involved cyber-physical systems is a mainstay.

This work provides an overview of possible threat scenarios
for the cyber-physical systems of FMs. Based on the threat
scenarios and a novel generic monitoring requirements model,
monitoring concepts for secure participation of DSOs in FMs
are proposed.

A. Related work

As highlighted by [9] and [10], the inﬂuence of ﬂexibility on
power system security constitutes a research gap, since most
existing works only focus on beneﬁts of ﬂexibility utilization.
Some works shed light on speciﬁc physical threats, such as
uncertain customer behavior [11]–[13] or ﬁnancial threats, for
instance the ﬁnancial risk of aggregators due to the intermit-
tent nature of ﬂexibility assets [14]. Other works investigate
cyber threats which are introduced by the application of new
smart grid technologies, such as smart meters (SMs) and
advanced metering infrastructure [15]–[18]. In [19], a number
of cyber threats (divided into different groups) are identiﬁed
and mapped to grid assets and threat agents. The work also
addresses possible security controls to reduce exposure to
threats.

All listed works only focus on speciﬁc threats or threat
categories. Moreover, no work speciﬁcally addresses FMs, but
rather consider a more generic smart grid infrastructure.

In [10], Sperstad et al. discuss possible positive and negative
impacts of ﬂexibility on the security of supply from a physical
and a cyber perspective. A major physical threat is seen in the
rebound effect of ﬂexibility activations that may shift load
peaks, and result in even more severe situations than without
ﬂexibility activation. A ﬂexibility-induced cyber threat is seen
in load-altering attacks that may impact the bulk power system
without compromising better protected assets on transmission
level.

To the best of the authors knowledge, the work of Sperstad
et al. is the only work that provides cyber and physical threat
scenarios in the context of ﬂexibility. However, since threat
scenarios are no major concern of the work, it does not provide
a comprehensive and systematic overview. Moreover, it does
not take characteristics of FMs into account and does not
derive required security concepts from the described threat
scenarios.

B. Contribution and paper structure

The contribution of this paper is threefold:
• Systematic formulation and description of threat scenar-
ios for the cyber-physical systems of FMs. Scenarios

TABLE I
OVERVIEW AND DESCRIPTION OF THREAT ORIGINS.

Nr.

Threat origin

Group

Background

1
2
3
4
5

6

7

8
9

Device failure
Human error
Market actors
Insiders
Consumer behavior

Weather

Price signals

Organized cyber-criminals
State-sponsored actors

Internal
Internal
Internal
Internal
Internal

External

External

External
External

accidentally
accidentally
ﬁnancial gain
dissatisfaction
randomness
volatility,
randomness
volatility,
randomness
ﬁnancial gain
political

consider threat origins in various domains and emphasize
the interaction among the cyber, physical and market
domain.

• Introduction of a generic monitoring requirements model
for DSOs, developed for identiﬁcation of missing moni-
toring concepts.

• Identiﬁcation of required monitoring concepts of DSOs
for participation in FMs based on a mapping of threat
scenarios onto the developed generic monitoring require-
ments model.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section
II provides a systematic overview of threat scenarios for the
cyber-physical systems of FMs. Section III begins with the
description of the proposed generic monitoring requirements
model, followed by a proposal of monitoring concepts for
participation of DSOs in FMs. Finally, Section IV concludes
the paper and motivates future work.

II. THREAT SCENARIOS

This section is concerned with the systematic formula-
tion and categorization of threat scenarios for the cyber-
physical systems of FMs. Subsection II-A presents the scenario
formulation approach, followed by scenario descriptions in
Subsections II-B to II-J.

A. Threat scenario formulation

In order to describe and compare scenarios with various
backgrounds, a domain-neutral formulation is required, which
still captures key information. In Fig. 1,
the applied for-
mulation concept is schematically represented. Threat origin,
affected component and threat impact are selected as domain-
independent key information.

The threat origin comprises two groups, namely external
and internal. In Table I,
the considered origins are listed
and allocated to one of the two groups, supplemented by
information on their background. Table I indicates that a
broad spectrum of origins is considered, allowing for a holistic
investigation of threat scenarios.

Typically, a critical situation develops around a speciﬁc
component or component type in a system, independent of
the threat origin. A cyber attacker will most likely try to
manipulate a speciﬁc data stream or device to launch the

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the threat scenario formulation.

attack. A famous example is the Industroyer malware attack
on the Ukrainian power system, which targeted the control of
circuit breakers in substations [20]. An aggregator who falsely
determines the ﬂexibility potential of its portfolio will affect
a ﬂexibility service traded in the market. At the same time,
the affected components in most cases constitute interface
components between the different domains. As a result, threat
scenarios typically have an impact on multiple domains. As
an example, ﬂexibility services that are not provided according
to the contract will affect both the power system and market
operation. This dependency can be explained by the strong
cross-domain integration of FMs.

At the end of every scenario there is a potential negative
impact, which typically is of social or ﬁnancial nature. How-
ever, other impact, such as a loss of private information, are
taken into account. To allow for a better overview and to
demonstrate how fundamentally different threat origins can
result in similar critical situations, scenarios are grouped by
the affected component. Table II summarizes the scenarios,
including probable impacts and threat origins, which are given
as numbers referring to Table I.

B. SM-based scenarios

End users are increasingly equipped with SMs. Depending
on the FM architecture, SMs may provide data to aggregators
for ﬂexibility planning and veriﬁcation. Meters typically use
a programmable logic controller (PLC) interface to commu-
nicate with the utility and have capability to remotely switch
power on or off.

1) Unauthorized access and modiﬁcation of SM data:
Cyber-criminals could gain access to sensitive meter data such

as consumption, credentials (including keying material), and
ﬁrmware information by exploiting known software vulnera-
bilities or by decrypting PLC communication that uses weak
encryption. Additionally, if cyber-criminals can take over the
meter communication with the aggregator (e.g., by using the
encryption key), they can send wrong consumption data. The
asset owner could be ﬁned for not fulﬁlling ﬂexibility agree-
ments and eventually be removed from the portfolio. Having
a hold of private data and options for ﬁnancial damage, cyber-
criminals may aim at blackmailing ﬂexibility asset owners.

2) Accessing and controlling multiple SMs: As an exten-
sion of Scenario II-B1, cyber-criminals or state-sponsored
actors may aim at accessing and controlling multiple SMs.
Attackers may use common weaknesses of SMs, such as static
encryption keys. Typically, SMs deployed by a DSO share
the same encryption key. Thus, if attackers gain access to
the encryption key of one SM, they are also able to extract
useful information, such as the energy consumption behavior,
of entire neighborhoods. At this stage, attackers can also take
over SMs remote on/off switching. In [21], it is demonstrated
how attackers can cause line trips by exploiting the switching
capability of multiple SMs on a load bus to introduce load
oscillations. The result may be power outages, resulting in
high social and ﬁnancial cost. Another attack path to target
multiple SMs is to launch a remote or physical attack on meter
data concentrators.

C. Local controller-based scenarios

Various actors of FMs rely on local controllers. By inter-
facing the cyber and physical domain, they constitute critical
system components, introducing potential threats.

Cyber-physical systems of flexibility marketsExternalInternalSocialFinancialPrivacyThreat originThreat impactServicesDataDevicesAffected componentMarketICTPower system1) Modiﬁcation of substation controller: Primary and often
secondary substations are equipped with local controllers,
such as PLCs, remote terminal units (RTUs) and intelligent
electronic devices (IEDs). State-sponsored actors could place
infected rootkits onto one or multiple local controllers. By
sending malicious control signals to circuit breakers and
protection relays the attackers could damage grid facility and
disconnect customers. To hide the attack from the central
control room, normal operation values could be returned back.
In [22], it is demonstrated that attackers can create such false
data that will not raise an alarm by existing algorithms for bad
data detection.

2) Modiﬁcation of ﬂexibility asset controller: Small ﬂexi-
bility assets such as EVs or HPs are typically controlled by
home energy management systems (HEMS) [23]. These are
internet-connected systems that typically have remote control
capability and are based on off-the-shelf soft- and hardware,
making them vulnerable to cyber attacks and asset owner
modiﬁcation. Flexibility asset owners may modify setpoint
boundaries or increase setpoints before a service is activated.
In both scenarios they could make ﬁnancial gain and would
manipulate the ﬂexibility service of the aggregator. Organized
cyber-criminals could make use of weak password security
and encryption to gain access to individual HEMS. Attackers
may collect sensitive data, change setpoints to impair customer
comfort and degrade ﬂexibility assets, or increase costs by rais-
ing consumption or mitigating ﬂexibility activation, resulting
in non-compliance with ﬂexibility contracts. Hence, organized
cyber-criminals could blackmail customers for ﬁnancial gain.
State-sponsored actors could inﬁltrate the local controllers
of multiple small or individual large ﬂexibility assets. By
changing the setpoints or switching assets on or off, they could
introduce load peaks or oscillations that trigger transformer
protection, resulting in customer disconnection. A coordinated
attack affecting both ﬂexibility assets and grid protection
mechanisms simultaneously could result in severe physical
damage of grid facilities and blackouts.

3) Failure of large ﬂexibility asset controller: The activa-
tion of a large ﬂexibility asset could fail due to software or
hardware failures. Compared to activation failures of small
assets, the impact may be severe. An industrial plant could
provide ﬂexibility services by reducing production capacity
during times when many EVs are simultaneously charging to
beneﬁt from low prices. Under these conditions, an activation
failure could lead to congestion at the transformer.

D. Flexibility activation signal-based scenarios

Flexibility activation signals comprise activation requests
from ﬂexibility buyers to sellers, and activation signals from
aggregators to small ﬂexibility assets. The transmission is
typically conducted via public networks.

1) Tamper or disrupt ﬂexibility activation signals: Aggre-
gator employees may launch insider attacks, such as send-
ing activation signals at wrong times or preventing required
ﬂexibility activations. Insiders of DSOs may send wrong
activation requests. Flexibility activation signals could also

be manipulated by cyber-criminals or state-sponsored actors
through false data injection attacks by exploiting insecure
authentication or weak encryption. Attackers could also ﬂood
ﬂexibility assets with activation signals to disrupt the activation
process. In all
these scenarios, attackers could prevent or
temper required ﬂexibility activations to leave congestions or
voltage violations unresolved or even intensify them. More-
over, attackers could initiate critical situations by activation of
ﬂexibility assets. In both cases high social and ﬁnancial costs
are likely.

2) Unintentional wrong activation of ﬂexibility assets:
Besides intentional attacks on ﬂexibility activation signals,
wrong activation may occur accidentally. Human errors from
various actors, such as DSOs or aggregators, and in different
process steps, from determining required or available ﬂexibil-
ity to preparing and sending activation requests, could result in
wrong ﬂexibility activations. Equivalent to intentional attacks,
damage could be of social and ﬁnancial nature.

3) Parallel ﬂexibility activation with opposing or reinforc-
ing effects: Flexibility services can be requested by different
actors with distinct purposes. While a DSO may intend to
prevent congestion, a BRP may aim at portfolio optimization.
Therefore, ﬂexibility could be activated simultaneously from
different FM actors and with opposing effects. Such scenarios
can result in ﬁnancial damage, since services may be procured
without achieving the desired outcome. At the same time,
price-based demand response introduces additional ﬂexibility
activations in distribution grids. DSOs might be unaware of
future behavior of price-driven loads during ﬂexibility plan-
ning. Thus, a risk for network violations exists if the service
procured by a DSO results in over-activation of ﬂexible loads.

E. Historical data-based scenarios

Historical data is of high importance for several actors in
FMs. Threats emerge from potential data loss or manipulation.
1) Compromised data on DSO or aggregator data histo-
rian: Historical data provide necessary information for ﬂexi-
bility planning, activation and veriﬁcation. Typically, they are
not checked for integrity, after being stored. However, integrity
could be affected by human and transfer errors, compromised
hardware, and attacks. Model development based on compro-
mised data will weaken performance or might make the model
useless [24]. Financial damage for market participants may
result due to imprecise ﬂexibility planning and veriﬁcation.
In severe cases, techniques for power system monitoring may
fail, leaving critical grid conditions unresolved.

F. Flexibility request-based scenarios

To procure ﬂexibility, DSOs and BRPs need to submit
ﬂexibility requests to the FM. Depending on the market
concept, requests can be formulated from intraday to months
ahead.

1) High uncertainty in the determination of ﬂexibility needs:
Distribution grids face increasing volatility due to the depen-
dency of distributed energy resources on weather, consumer
behavior and price signals. At the same time, low-voltage

ﬁnancial

3,7

G. Flexibility offer-based scenarios

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF THE IDENTIFIED THREAT SCENARIOS.

Nr.

Threat scenario

Impact

Origin

SM-based scenarios

Unauthorized access and modiﬁ-
cation of SM data
Accessing and controlling multiple
SMs

privacy

social,
privacy

Local controller-based scenarios

Modiﬁcation of substation con-
troller
Modiﬁcation of ﬂexibility asset
controller
Failure of large ﬂexibility asset
controller

social,
ﬁnancial
social,
privacy
social,
ﬁnancial
Flexibility activation signal-based scenarios

Tamper or disrupt ﬂexibility acti-
vation signals
Unintentional wrong activation
of ﬂexibility assets
Parallel ﬂexibility activation with
opposing or reinforcing effects

social,
ﬁnancial
social,
ﬁnancial

3,8

8,9

9

3,8,9

1

4,8,9

2

Historical data-based scenarios

Compromised data on DSO or
aggregator data historian

ﬁnancial

1,2,4,9

Flexibility request-based scenarios

High uncertainty in the determi-
nation of ﬂexibility needs
Uncertainty about power system
states due to frequent ﬂexibility
activations
Parallel events resulting in sudden
change of ﬂexibility needs

ﬁnancial

5,6,7

social,
ﬁnancial

social,
ﬁnancial

3

1,2,7,9

Flexibility offer-based scenarios

social,
ﬁnancial

Place wrong ﬂexibility offers on
the FM
High uncertainty in the determi-
nation of ﬂexibility offers
Flexibility measurement or schedule-based scenarios
Disrupt or manipulate ﬂexibility
measurements and schedules

ﬁnancial,
privacy

ﬁnancial

4,9

5,6

3,8

Flexibility asset-based scenarios

Unavailability of ﬂexibility
assets

ﬁnancial

1,5,8,9

Vendor soft- and hardware-based scenarios

Compromise vendor provided soft-
ware and systems

social,
ﬁnancial

9

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

(LV) distribution grid states are highly underdetermined due
to low real-time meter device coverage (low observability).
The resulting uncertainty complicates forecasting of ﬂexibility
needs and requires DSOs to request larger ﬂexibility capaci-
ties, which increases costs.

2) Uncertainty about power system states due to frequent
ﬂexibility activations: DSOs want
to request and activate
ﬂexibility to avoid or postpone expensive grid extensions.
However, frequent activations may break correlation between
the few available measurements (e.g. primary substation and
weather data) and power system states at the end of LV feeders
[25]. Thus,
the implementation of FMs might deteriorate
the accuracy of LV state estimation, making critical states
potentially unobservable to DSOs. Based on inaccurate state
estimations a DSO might also activate unnecessary or even
counteracting ﬂexibility, resulting in ﬁnancial costs. In severe

cases, the triggering of protection mechanisms might cause
disconnection of customers.

3) Parallel events resulting in sudden change of ﬂexibility
needs: In distribution grids a variety of events, including line
failures or shut down of large industrial loads, can lead to a
sudden change of the grid condition. Additionally, new events,
such as load peaks due to simultaneous charging of EVs, will
be introduced to distribution grids in the upcoming years. If
they occur during an activation period, such events may change
grid condition in a way that ﬂexibility activation is not required
or even critical. Moreover, state-sponsored actors could launch
attacks on other systems, e.g. large battery energy storage
systems or industrial plants during ﬂexibility activation periods
to modify the grid condition. Due to the low observability
of distribution grids, the detection of such events may be
challenging.

To sell ﬂexibility, aggregators need to submit ﬂexibility
offers to the FM. Depending on the market scheme, ﬂexibility
can be offered for time frames reaching from intraday to
months ahead.

1) Place wrong ﬂexibility offers on the FM: Flexibility
offers are placed on the market by either aggregators or large
ﬂexibility asset owners. If ﬂexibility offers on the market do
not reﬂect the actual ﬂexibility potential, ﬂexibility activation
will likely not match the problem to solve. State-sponsored
actors or insiders could tamper ﬂexibility offers or place
wrong offers on the market in the name of veriﬁed market
participants. In less serious cases aggregators will have to
pay a refund. However, in severe cases critical grid conditions
might not be solved by a DSO due to dependency on a wrong
ﬂexibility offer.

2) High uncertainty in the determination of ﬂexibility offers:
Aggregator determination of ﬂexibility potential
is subject
to uncertainties. The capacity of an aggregator portfolio is
dependent on the comfort requirements of customers, weather,
customer behavior and other portfolio changes. In particular,
weather and customer behavior uncertainties directly translate
into uncertainty of ﬂexibility offers. Moreover, in most cases
the demand of small ﬂexibility assets can only be controlled
indirectly, by adjusting e.g. a temperature setpoint. As the
translation of temperature setpoints to power consumption is
dependent on external factors, additional uncertainties are in-
troduced during activation. Unreliable ﬂexibility offers mainly
result in reduced ﬁnancial proﬁt for aggregators. However,
severe uncertainties might make the use of ﬂexibility for DSOs
unreliable, and lead to more expensive but reliable alternatives,
such as grid extensions. In case a DSO relies on a ﬂexibility
offer to solve a critical condition, high uncertainty might result
in disconnection of end users.

H. Flexibility measurement or schedule-based scenarios

Reliable measurements of ﬂexibility assets are required
for service planning, activation and veriﬁcation. Besides SM
readings, additional data may come from devices such as

photovoltaic (PV) meters. To deﬁne the activation process,
aggregators and ﬂexibility asset owners typically agree on
ﬂexibility schedules.

1) Disrupt or manipulate ﬂexibility measurements and
schedules: Several actors might have an interest in manipulat-
ing ﬂexibility measurements and schedules either by gaming or
data tampering. Market actors such as aggregators or ﬂexibility
asset owners could manipulate ﬂexibility activation recordings
for ﬁnancial gain. Exemplary, for baseline services an asset
owner could increase consumption before an activation period,
to imitate a service by just returning to normal consumption
level. Also cyber-criminals that can sniff and modify data in
networks of aggregators or a service veriﬁcation responsible
party could compromise measurements, e.g. for blackmailing.
One way is the modiﬁcation of ﬂexibility portfolio record-
ings to disrupt the service veriﬁcation process. As a result,
aggregators might receive ﬁnes for not fulﬁlling contrac-
tual agreements. Attackers could also modify the ﬂexibility
schedules which aggregators send to the assets, resulting in
wrong ﬂexibility activations. In mild cases, aggregators will
be ﬁned. In severe cases, wrong activations might trigger grid
protection, resulting in disconnection of customers and thus
high social costs.

I. Flexibility asset-based scenarios

Flexibility assets constitute a heterogeneous group of DERs,
owned by multiple end users or companies. They can reach
from small loads such as refrigerators to large loads, including
industrial processes.

1) Unavailability of ﬂexibility assets: During an activation
period ﬂexibility assets may not be available for reasons
such as software failures, manual changes in the setpoint
limitations by the asset owner or unforeseeable changes in
the physical process of industrial ﬂexibility assets. Moreover,
cyber-criminals or state-sponsored actors could disturb com-
munication by denial-of-service attacks. Since ﬂexibility asset
owners break the contract in cases of a failed activation, such
scenarios would result in a ﬁnancial penalty. Especially in
case of large ﬂexibility assets, unavailability could also lead
to unresolved congestions and voltage violations.

J. Vendor soft- and hardware-based scenarios

All actors of FMs are dependent on services of third-parties,
such as vendors. An often inherent need for trust between
suppliers and users introduces potential threats.

1) Compromise vendor provided software and systems:
State-sponsored actors could install malicious code in the soft-
or hardware provided by a vendor. For example, an attacker
could install a backdoor in a PLC that is provided by a vendor
to the DSO. This backdoor can later be used to manipulate
DSO operation in many ways. The impact of such an event
may go beyond a single end user, as vendors of EVs or HPs
provide soft- or hardware to multiple ﬂexibility asset owners.
A real-world example of the severity of such a threat comes
from the recent SolarWinds hack [26].

III. MONITORING REQUIREMENTS AND CONCEPTS FOR A
DSO

This section addresses monitoring requirements and con-
cepts for DSOs participating in FMs. In Subsection III-A a
generic monitoring requirements model for the cyber-physical
system of a DSO is introduced. In Subsection III-B the model
is applied to systematically identify and propose required
monitoring concepts of DSOs which participate in FMs.

A. Monitoring requirements model

In Fig. 2 the proposed generic monitoring requirements
model for operation of the cyber-physical system of a DSO is
depicted. The DSO is represented as a typical cyber-physical
system architecture consisting of several system layers [27],
[28]. The model comprises multiple generic monitoring re-
quirements (colored ﬁelds), which are distributed across all
layers and domains of the DSO system. As a whole, the
included requirements are seen as a prerequisite to holistically
observe the operation of the cyber-physical system of a DSO.
The model distinguishes three types of information ﬂows,
represented by colored links. Red links constitute information
which is relevant for power system operation, such as control
signals or measurements. Black links represent information
which is not explicitly relevant for power system operation
but potentially required for fulﬁlling monitoring requirements
(e.g., network trafﬁc data or credentials). Yellow links indi-
cate reports of underlying monitoring concepts satisfying the
requirements. The origins of external information, such as FM
operator or weather service, are depicted as grey boxes. As
SMs in this work are assumed to be owned by the DSO, they
are considered part of the DSO’s cyber-physical system. The
following is a brief description of the monitoring requirements.
1) Process level integrity checking: Sensors and actuators
may collect wrong measurements or execute wrong control
signals, respectively, due to various internal or external rea-
sons, such as device or human errors, natural causes, and
physical or cyber attacks. Thus, monitoring of process level
data and devices is required, including indication of deviations
from normal operation and localization of error sources in
various domains. The integrity of process level data should
be monitored in a distributed manner, since centralized moni-
toring assumes trustworthiness of ﬁeld devices [29]. However,
cyber attackers might hide attacks by sending manipulated data
to the control center. A famous example is the Stuxnet virus
[30].

2) Authentication of external data sources: As operation of
distribution grids increasingly relies on external information,
such as ﬂexibility market communication, states of neighbor-
ing power systems or weather data, ensuring trustworthiness
of external data sources is a crucial requirement. Unlike many
other communication systems, timely authentication of up to a
few seconds is often necessary for power systems. At the same
time, communication in active distribution grids continuously
increases, which sets high requirements on authentication
performance. In [31], key requirements for authentication in
smart grids are formulated. These include, among others, low

Fig. 2. Generic multi-domain model of monitoring requirements for the cyber-physical system of a DSO.

execution and protocol delay, and resistance to attacks and
failures.

3) Internal communication network monitoring:

Internal
communication networks of DSOs transmit critical opera-
tional data between the perceptual execution layer and higher
layers. Due to new data sources, such as SMs and micro-
phasor measurement units (µPMUs), communication steadily
increases. A disruption of data transmission can result from
natural causes, device errors or attacks, and might provoke
system unobservability, leading to inadequate control actions.
Additionally, cyber attackers may observe, hide, create, or
change process data. Communication networks are protected
by several security measures, such as ﬁrewalls, authentication,
and encryption [32]. However, these security measures might
not prevent insider attacks or new attacks. Moreover, attackers
increasingly use encryption to hide attacks from security mea-
sures [33]. To detect attacks at an early stage and reconstruct
attack paths, intrusion detection systems should be located
across the communication network and its components. To

avoid delays in the face of increasing communication, and
since both DSOs and attackers increasingly use encryption,
intrusion detection mechanisms might need to be based on
network ﬂow data instead of the packet payload. However,
some attacks might be invisible by only observing the network
ﬂow [34].

4) Historical data integrity checking: With the deployment
of data-driven techniques for distribution system operation,
historical process data will play a more important role than to-
day. Based on historical data, models for critical applications,
such as state estimation, fault detection or load forecasting, can
be developed. As outlined in Subsection II-E1, compromised
historical data might arise for several reasons,
leading to
varying degrees of model performance deterioration. Cloud
storage and computing may further increase these risks for the
DSO, as third parties are involved in data management [35].
Therefore, the integrity of historical data should be monitored
throughout the process of uploading, storing and retrieving.

DSOCyber-physical architectureDecision Support LayerDistribution management systemDistribution management systemSupervisory Control LayerPerceptual Execution LayerData Transmission & Storage LayerAuthentication ServerCredentialsWeatherdataPrice informationLoad forecasts &grid statesFlexibility requestsClearing resultsUnverified supervisionof automated control decisionsGatewaysSecurely transmittedcontrol signalsSecurely transmitted internal & external dataUnverified state monitoring, decision options & automated control decisionsVerified decision support results for external communicationGrid states & load forecastsUnverified manual control decisionsSocial event & network dataNetwork traffic dataCommunication networksSecurely transmitted internal & external dataSecurely transmitted dataSecurely transmitted internal & external dataUnverified power system monitoringNetwork traffic dataSubstationSealed process level dataRaw measure-ments & local control signalsRaw measurementsRaw measurements &local control signalsSubstationRaw SM measurementsRaw SM measurementsSealed & integrity checked process level dataNeighborhoodSMSMIntegrity checkingparametersµPMUµPMURTUHistorianIntegrity checked historical data05482054820548205482Network traffic dataVerified control decisionsHuman-machine interfaceCredentialsUnverified system analysisVerified state monitoring,decision options & automated control decisionsMulti-domain system-wide condition & risk monitoringReportReportProcess level integrity checkingReportHistorical data integrity checkingReportReportPower system monitoringReportReportsReportVerification of manual control & supervision Field crewMaintenance activity informationIEDIEDSoftware updatesParameter & dataactuality & quantityDecision support verificationDER dataSoftwareactualityAccess & trafficinformationIntegrity checkingparametersControl room situationSoftwareactualityFM platformTSO & other DSOsSocial data providerEnergy marketsWeather serviceDER operatorVendorsAuthenticated externalinformationCredentialsReportAuthentication of external data sourcesInternal communication network monitoringProcess level integrity checkingProcess level integrity checking5) Power system monitoring: Due to the ongoing integra-
tion of DERs, DSOs are increasingly concerned with improv-
ing awareness of the system condition through techniques such
as state estimation or topology identiﬁcation. Low observabil-
ity in distribution grids sets speciﬁc requirements. Techniques
must be applied which maximize information extraction from
available data sources. This includes data fusion [36] as well
as using historical data for real-time monitoring. The lack of
observability also sets high requirements on robustness against
cyber attacks and failures, as model results cannot be validated
based on redundant measurements.

in critical control actions. Therefore,

6) Decision support veriﬁcation: Under certain conditions,
decision support tools for distribution system operation may
generate inaccurate or even wrong results. Reasons can be out-
dated model parameters, new or unseen power system states,
and cyber attacks. Some recent works have demonstrated that
already small input perturbations let several well-trained and
accurate machine learning models predict incorrect answers
with high conﬁdence [37]. Misleading decision support can
the possibility
result
of model veriﬁcation is desirable. To enable veriﬁcation,
a requirement is interpretability, which implies that human
operators can retrace the cause of model decisions. However,
especially in machine learning, models often constitute black
boxes, which is a major barrier for use in critical applica-
tions such as power system operation. Potential directions
to improve interpretability are seen in physics-aware models
[38], specialized veriﬁcation frameworks [39], and uncertainty
quantiﬁcation [40].

7) Multi-domain system-wide condition and risk monitor-
ing: The cyber-physical system of a DSO is becoming more
complex due to the increasing dependency between different
system domains, the ongoing distribution and automation of
control functions, and continuous installation of DERs. Thus,
retracing the cause of an anomaly or critical condition might
require correlation of multiple individual monitoring reports
(see Fig. 2). In this context, an example of increasing impor-
tance are coordinated attacks [41]. However, manually corre-
lating multiple reports for assessing the system-wide condition
becomes impractical. For this reason, a requirement is seen in
the automated correlation of individual reports in a system-
wide multi-domain condition analysis, as e.g. promoted in
[42]. Ideally, external information, such as weather conditions
or states of adjacent energy systems, are incorporated. This
would enable identiﬁcation of potential risks, introduced by
critical co-occurrence of speciﬁc system and external condi-
tions.

8) Veriﬁcation of manual control and supervision: In many
systems the human factor is seen as the greatest uncer-
tainty and threat [43]. Although distribution system operation
increasingly becomes automated, human operators will not
disappear from control rooms in the foreseeable future [44].
As humans by fault or on purpose can initiate or overlook
critical control actions, veriﬁcation is desirable. Risks in the
supervisory control layer include unauthorized accessing e.g.
through outdated passwords, presence of externals, social engi-

neering, new or disgruntled employees, and the out-of-the-loop
syndrome. Requirements for veriﬁcation of manual control
and supervision includes authentication and authorization of
operators, as well as veriﬁcation of taken control decisions.
Manual control decisions that are not consistent with the
decision support results should be identiﬁed. For future DSO
systems with a high degree of automation, manual decisions
will mainly be necessary in extreme situations where decision
support applications fail. Under these conditions, veriﬁcation
of manual control decisions becomes difﬁcult, as decision
support tools cannot provide information for the veriﬁcation
process.

B. Identiﬁcation of required monitoring concepts for DSO
participation in FMs

This Subsection proposes monitoring concepts for DSOs
participating in FMs. For this purpose, threat scenarios from
Section II are mapped onto the generic monitoring require-
ments model (Subsection III-A).

1) Quantifying ﬂexibility-induced uncertainty: Threat sce-
nario II-F2 discusses that frequent ﬂexibility activations could
introduce uncertainty to LV state estimation. At the same
time, ﬂexibility is used to operate power systems closer to
their capacity limits. Under these conditions, point estimation-
based monitoring might fails silently, affecting the DSO
decision-making process and potentially impacting critical
decisions. Thus, for power system monitoring (III-A5) quanti-
fying ﬂexibility-induced uncertainty is an important concept to
lower the risk of frequent triggering of protection mechanisms.
Uncertainty quantiﬁcation also improves veriﬁcation and se-
curity of decision support tools (III-A6). Models that increase
uncertainty under appearance of unseen ﬂexibility activation
events or system states provide human operators requirement
indicators for retraining models or including additional input
features. Moreover, models that provide uncertainty quantiﬁca-
tion, such as Bayesian neural networks, have shown robustness
against adversarial attacks [40].

Finally, uncertainty quantiﬁcation is beneﬁcial for analysing
the condition of the cyber-physical system (III-A7). If a critical
power system state is reported to the system-wide condition
monitor, the probability of its occurrence could be included.
By improving interpretability, the number of false alarms could
be reduced, enabling more reliable system-wide monitoring of
the cyber-physical system.

2) Flexibility activation detection: Several threat scenarios
(II-C2, II-D2, II-D3) demonstrate that ﬂexibility activations
can occur without the DSO being aware of it. Such activations
might occur intentionally by cyber attackers, unintentionally
due to human errors, or just by activation through other market
participants. However, especially ﬂexibility activations which
are not planned by the DSO have a risk of exceeding load and
voltage limitations. To allow for immediate counteractions in
case of critical activations, early detection is required. Thus,
for power system monitoring (III-A5) automated detection
of ﬂexibility activations is seen as an important monitoring
concept.

3) Flexibility scenario monitoring: In threat scenario II-F1
and II-F2, respectively, the difﬁculty of determining ﬂexibility
needs and ﬂexibility activation demand is described. Especially
under the aforementioned uncertainty and low observability of
distribution grids, ﬂexibility planning becomes a challenging
task for DSOs. Thus,
tools providing power system state
scenarios under various ﬂexibility services are considered
important concepts for power system monitoring (III-A5).
Depending on the market concept, tool requirements may look
different. For day or week-ahead procurement, tools will be
required to provide state forecasts under various ﬂexibility
services. Market concepts that include real-time procurement
of ﬂexibility require tools for mapping available ﬂexibility
offers onto the current grid state. Both scenarios involve
uncertainties, such as uncertainty about the exact location of
ﬂexibility assets and their effect on a speciﬁc critical grid state.
Thus, models capable of quantifying such uncertainty should
be developed.

4) Integration of multi-domain information: Many threat
scenarios demonstrate the strong dependence among the cyber,
physical and market domains introduced by FMs. Cyber
attackers may intend to cause physical damage (II-C2, II-D1,
II-E1) or disturb market actions (II-B1, II-G1, II-H1), while
insufﬁcient coordination on the FM platform may result in
physical impact due to parallel activations (II-D3). In such
scenarios, underlying events are likely to leave traces in
multiple domains. Moreover, the origin of a particular threat
scenario may be in different domains. As an example, failed
activation of a large ﬂexibility asset might be caused by a
hardware failure, cyber attack or end user manipulation. Thus,
a required monitoring concept is seen in the integration of
information from multiple domains and sources to i) improve
information extraction by incorporating all available traces and
ii) take possible threat origins in various domains into account.
This somewhat general concept could facilitate fulﬁllment
of multiple monitoring requirements across all layers of the
cyber-physical architecture of a DSO. Examples are process-
level integrity checking (III-A1), authentication of external
information (III-A2) and historical data integrity checking
(III-A4). For
internal communication network monitoring
(III-A3), combining information from the cyber and physical
domains is considered a particularly important concept. As
stated in Subsection III-A3, the increasing data volume and
encryption might require cyber intrusion and anomaly detec-
tion to be based only on network ﬂow data, which potentially
will make advanced attacks invisible. Especially for detection
of attacks which intend to have a physical impact, fusion of
network ﬂow information with physical process data might
improve performance. A central challenge for integration of
multi-domain information will be the fusion of heterogeneous
data.

5) Intrusion and anomaly detection for small ﬂexibility
assets: In threat scenario II-B2 and II-C2, respectively, it is
demonstrated that edge devices, such as SMs and HEMS, have
known security weaknesses (e.g., static encryption key) which
can be exploited by cyber attackers. The implementation of

FMs will make power system operation partly dependent on
such less protected devices. Thus, from the perspective of the
DSO, ﬂexibility asset intrusion and anomaly detection are con-
sidered important concepts for process level integrity checking
(III-A1). However, some challenges exist. As described in
Subsection III-A1, advanced attackers can hide manipulation
of local devices to central control rooms, making distributed
detection on edge devices necessary. As edge devices normally
come with computational constraints, detection tools must be
lightweight. At the same time, manipulation might be difﬁcult
to detect and requires incorporation of information from
various domains, increasing the demand for data computation,
communication and storage.

IV. CONCLUSION

In this work, threat scenarios of the cyber-physical systems
of FMs are systematically identiﬁed and presented. 17 threat
scenarios across all system domains are introduced, revealing
several remaining security challenges. Among others, scenar-
ios include simultaneous control of multiple ﬂexibility assets
by cyber attackers exploiting weak encryption, and high uncer-
tainty in the determination of ﬂexibility needs and offers due
to low meter coverage and high load variability in distribution
grids. Based on the threat scenarios and a novel generic mon-
itoring requirements model, monitoring concepts for secure
participation of DSOs in FMs are identiﬁed and proposed.
Proposals include distributed intrusion and anomaly detection
for small ﬂexibility assets, quantiﬁcation of ﬂexibility-induced
uncertainty, and integration of multi-domain information for
event detection. By proposing possible approaches to tackle
the identiﬁed challenges, new directions for further investiga-
tions are introduced. Future work will be directed towards
development of monitoring requirements models for other
market participants, such as aggregators and BRPs, to derive
required monitoring concepts for all FM actors. Moreover,
the introduced monitoring concepts for secure participation of
DSOs in FMs will be investigated.

REFERENCES

[1] C.-H. Lo and N. Ansari, “Decentralized controls and communications
for autonomous distribution networks in smart grid,” IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 66–77, 2013.

[2] J. Zhao, C. Wang, B. Zhao, F. Lin, Q. Zhou, and Y. Wang, “A review of
active management for distribution networks: current status and future
development trends,” Electric Power Components and Systems, vol. 42,
no. 3-4, pp. 280–293, 2014.

[3] K. Spiliotis, A. I. R. Gutierrez, and R. Belmans, “Demand ﬂexibility ver-
sus physical network expansions in distribution grids,” Applied Energy,
vol. 182, pp. 613–624, 2016.

[4] X. Jin, Q. Wu, and H. Jia, “Local ﬂexibility markets: Literature review
on concepts, models and clearing methods,” Applied Energy, vol. 261,
p. 114387, 2020.

[5] J. Villar, R. Bessa, and M. Matos, “Flexibility products and markets:
Literature review,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 154, pp. 329–
340, 2018.

[6] C. Ziras, C. Heinrich, and H. W. Bindner, “Why baselines are not
suited for local ﬂexibility markets,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, vol. 135, p. 110357, 2021.

[28] Q. Zhu, C. Rieger, and T. Bas¸ar, “A hierarchical security architecture
for cyber-physical systems,” in 2011 4th International Symposium on
Resilient Control Systems, pp. 15–20, 2011.

[29] J. Giraldo, D. Urbina, A. Cardenas, J. Valente, M. Faisal, J. Ruths, N. O.
Tippenhauer, H. Sandberg, and R. Candell, “A survey of physics-based
attack detection in cyber-physical systems,” ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1–36, 2018.

[30] R. Langner, “Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon,” IEEE Security

& Privacy, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 49–51, 2011.

[31] N. Saxena and B. J. Choi, “State of the art authentication, access control,
and secure integration in smart grid,” Energies, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 11883–
11915, 2015.

[32] J. Xie, A. Stefanov, and C.-C. Liu, “Physical and cyber security in a
smart grid environment,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and
Environment, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 519–542, 2016.

[33] Z. Afzal, A. Brunstrom, and S. Lindskog, “Using features of encrypted
network trafﬁc to detect malware,” in Nordic Conference on Secure IT
Systems, pp. 37–53, Springer, 2020.

[34] M. F. Umer, M. Sher, and Y. Bi, “Flow-based intrusion detection:
Techniques and challenges,” Computers & Security, vol. 70, pp. 238–
254, 2017.

[35] K. Ren, C. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Security challenges for the public
cloud,” IEEE Internet computing, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 69–73, 2012.
[36] L. Zhang, Y. Xie, L. Xidao, and X. Zhang, “Multi-source heterogeneous
data fusion,” in 2018 International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Big Data (ICAIBD), pp. 47–51, 2018.

[37] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing

adversarial examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.

[38] A. S. Zamzam and N. D. Sidiropoulos, “Physics-aware neural networks
for distribution system state estimation,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 4347–4356, 2020.

[39] A. Venzke and S. Chatzivasileiadis, “Veriﬁcation of neural network
behaviour: Formal guarantees for power system applications,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, 2020.

[40] M. Abdar, F. Pourpanah, S. Hussain, D. Rezazadegan, L. Liu,
M. Ghavamzadeh, P. Fieguth, X. Cao, A. Khosravi, U. R. Acharya, et al.,
“A review of uncertainty quantiﬁcation in deep learning: Techniques,
applications and challenges,” Information Fusion, 2021.

[41] Y. Xiang, L. Wang, and N. Liu, “Coordinated attacks on electric
power systems in a cyber-physical environment,” Electric Power Systems
Research, vol. 149, pp. 156–168, 2017.

[42] A. M. Kosek, “Contextual anomaly detection for cyber-physical security
in smart grids based on an artiﬁcial neural network model,” in 2016 Joint
Workshop on Cyber- Physical Security and Resilience in Smart Grids
(CPSR-SG), pp. 1–6, 2016.

[43] T. Ahram, Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Software and Systems
Engineering, vol. 1213. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021.
[44] A. M. Prostejovsky, C. Brosinsky, K. Heussen, D. Westermann,
J. Kreusel, and M. Marinelli, “The future role of human operators
in highly automated electric power systems,” Electric Power Systems
Research, vol. 175, p. 105883, 2019.

[7] P. Olivella-Rosell, E. Bullich-Massagu´e, M. Arag¨u´es-Pe˜nalba,
A. Sumper, S. Ø. Ottesen, J.-A. Vidal-Clos, and R. Villaf´aﬁla-
Robles, “Optimization problem for meeting distribution system operator
requests in local ﬂexibility markets with distributed energy resources,”
Applied energy, vol. 210, pp. 881–895, 2018.

[8] E. Commission, “Proposal for a directive of the european parliament
and the council on common rules for the internal market in electricity,”
Feb. 2017.

[9] M. Alizadeh, M. P. Moghaddam, N. Amjady, P. Siano, and M. Sheikh-
El-Eslami, “Flexibility in future power systems with high renewable
penetration: A review,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
vol. 57, pp. 1186–1193, 2016.

[10] I. B. Sperstad, M. Z. Degefa, and G. Kjølle, “The impact of ﬂexible
resources in distribution systems on the security of electricity supply: A
literature review,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 188, p. 106532,
2020.

[11] D. Liu, Y. Sun, Y. Qu, B. Li, and Y. Xu, “Analysis and accurate predic-
tion of user’s response behavior in incentive-based demand response,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 3170–3180, 2018.

[12] H.-G. Kwag and J.-O. Kim, “Reliability modeling of demand response
considering uncertainty of customer behavior,” Applied Energy, vol. 122,
pp. 24–33, 2014.

[13] B. Zeng, G. Wu, J. Wang, J. Zhang, and M. Zeng, “Impact of behavior-
driven demand response on supply adequacy in smart distribution
systems,” Applied Energy, vol. 202, pp. 125–137, 2017.

[14] T. Ghose, H. W. Pandey, and K. R. Gadham, “Risk assessment of micro-
grid aggregators considering demand response and uncertain renewable
energy sources,” Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy,
vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 1619–1631, 2019.

[15] A. Hansen, J. Staggs, and S. Shenoi, “Security analysis of an advanced
metering infrastructure,” Int. J. Crit. Infrastructure Prot., vol. 18, pp. 3–
19, 2017.

[16] M. Costache and V. Tudor, “Security aspects in the advanced meter-
ing infrastructure,” M.Sc. Thesis, Chalmers University of Technology,
Department of Civil and Environment, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2011.
[17] M. Costache, V. Tudor, M. Almgren, M. Papatriantaﬁlou, and C. Saun-
ders, “Remote control of smart meters: Friend or foe?,” in Seventh
European Conference on Computer Network Defense, EC2ND 2011,
Gothenburg, Sweden, September 6-7, 2011, pp. 49–56, IEEE Computer
Society.

[18] A. Chehri, I. Fofana, and X. Yang, “Security risk modeling in smart grid
critical infrastructures in the era of big data and artiﬁcial intelligence,”
Sustainability, vol. 13, no. 6, p. 3196, 2021.

[19] L. Marinos, “Smart grid threat landscape and good practice guide,” tech.
rep., The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA), Ethnikis
Antistaseos 72, Chalandri 15231, Attiki, Greece.

[20] N. Kshetri and J. Voas, “Hacking power grids: A current problem,”

Computer, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 91–95, 2017.

[21] F. Alanazi, J. Kim, and E. Cotilla-Sanchez, “Load oscillating attacks
of smart grids: Demand strategies and vulnerability analysis,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.00350, 2021.

[22] Y. Liu, P. Ning, and M. K. Reiter, “False data injection attacks against
state estimation in electric power grids,” ACM Transactions on Informa-
tion and System Security (TISSEC), vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–33, 2011.
[23] H. Shareef, M. S. Ahmed, A. Mohamed, and E. Al Hassan, “Review
on home energy management system considering demand responses,
smart technologies, and intelligent controllers,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
pp. 24498–24509, 2018.

[24] Y. Luo, Y. Xiao, L. Cheng, G. Peng, and D. Yao, “Deep learning-based
anomaly detection in cyber-physical systems: Progress and opportuni-
ties,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–36, 2021.
[25] N. M¨uller, S. Chevalier, C. Heinrich, K. Heussen, and C. Ziras, “Uncer-
tainty quantiﬁcation in lv state estimation under high shares of ﬂexible
resources,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04174, 2021.

[26] S. Peisert, B. Schneier, H. Okhravi, F. Massacci, T. Benzel, C. Landwehr,
M. Mannan, J. Mirkovic, A. Prakash, and J. B. Michael, “Perspectives
on the solarwinds incident,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 19, no. 02,
pp. 7–13, 2021.

[27] J. Sztipanovits, X. Koutsoukos, G. Karsai, N. Kottenstette, P. Antsaklis,
V. Gupta, B. Goodwine, J. Baras, and S. Wang, “Toward a science of
cyber–physical system integration,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100,
no. 1, pp. 29–44, 2012.

