RMIT Classification: Trusted 

Innovative System Design for Remote Air Traffic Control Simulation Training 

Liang, Man 

RMIT STEM College, RMIT University, Melbourne 3001, Victoria, Australia 

Abstract  

Conventional Air Traffic Control (ATC) simulation training is a stand-alone system. Trainees are required 
to  be  in  the  simulation room  to improve  their  practical  skills.  COVID  pandemic  challenges  the  current 
system and needs a new design to feed remote teaching and training. This research paper aims to introduce 
an innovative system design to support a sustainable ATC education on and beyond COVID. 

The proposed remote ATC simulation training involves two main parts, namely i) a social-distancing on-
campus simulation lab for students and ii) teaching by remote ATC instructors across States. We mirror the 
students’ real-time practice scenario on a remote computer screen that a remote ATC instructor can observe. 
At  the  same  time,  the  ATC  instructor  can  communicate  with  the  students  to  help  them  improve  their 
practical skills. There are several benefits associated with the application of remote ATC simulation training. 
Firstly,  the  remote  instructor  is  not  required  to  be  present  on  campus,  which  satisfies  COVID  social 
distancing and contactless requirements. Secondly, teaching ATC skills requires active engagement with 
ATC instructors who provide high quality and immediate feedback to students, resulting in a better learning 
experience.  Thirdly,  blended  face-to-face  and  remote  education  innovation  align  with  the  future  of 
education,  as  it  is more  flexible  and  dynamic  and improves  cost-efficiency.  However,  the  remote  ATC 
simulation  training  also  poses  challenges  to  universities  and  ATC  training  service  providers.  These 
challenges  include  the  need  for  infrastructure  design  to  feed  the  existing  on-site  training  materials  and 
software network design that considers cyber security risks due to online data sharing. 

Remote  ATC  simulation  training  is  an  emerging  technology  in  aviation  education  during  COVID. 
Professional training institutions can learn from others, whereas the experiences of developing remote ATC 
simulation teaching/training with the Start-up company ByteProTeq will be beneficial for the rest of the 
world  to  understand  the  differences  and  similarities  of  current  remote  training,  and  to  improve  their 
performance in building a safe and efficient remote training environment. In this paper, we will present 
three improvements to our remote ATC training: 1) infrastructure upgrading of hardware and software from 
an  existing  stand-alone  system  to  a  remote  network  that  considers  costs,  cyber  security,  system 
compatibility, et cetera; 2) quality of remote ATC simulation training, compared with traditional face-to-
face training, including students’ and instructors’ feedback; 3) enhancement of the current remote training 
system beyond COVID-19 regarding reliability, cyber security, and capacity. This foundation paper will 
support understanding of the current stage of remote ATC simulation training development with the Start-
up  company  ByteProTeq,  during  and  beyond  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  thereby  providing  an  excellent 
example for the rest of the world. 

Keywords  

Transport policy, education policies, emerging aviation technologies, remote air traffic control simulation 
training 

1 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
RMIT Classification: Trusted 

1.  Introduction 

Since COVID-19 travel restrictions were announced in Australia on 1 Feb 2020 for travellers from mainland 
China, until the date being, there have been a massive number of international students forced to stay in 
their own countries. Significant parts of international students are from China and India, which accounted 
for 58% of higher education enrolments in 2019. University finance data, as reported by DESE shows that 
fees  from  overseas  student  enrolments  accounted  for  26%  ($8.8  billion)  of  university  revenue  in  2018. 
Universities  that  highly  rely  on  international  students’  prices  have  fallen  heavily  during  COVID-19. 
According to the report published on 3 Feb 2021 by Universities Australia, Australian universities shed at 
least 17,300 jobs in 2020 and lost an estimated $1.8 billion in revenue compared to 2019. It is estimated to 
lose a further 5.5 per cent, or $2 billion, in 2021. On the other hand, onshore students still have difficulties 
physically attending lectures and tutorials due to periodic social distancing restrictions.  

Australian universities must think of more solutions to manage the courses resources and offer more options 
for  students  to  ensure  the  number  of  enrolments.  As  a  result,  education  mode  is  quickly  changing  and 
adapting to the pandemic challenges. The rise of online/remote teaching and learning during the COVID-
19 pandemic challenges all levels of education in different disciplines. In the aviation field, conventional 
Air Traffic Control (ATC) simulation training is being transformed into a remote training mode in higher 
education institutions and international ATC training providers.  

Researchers found that the COVID-19 pandemic forces people to make large-scale behavioural changes, 
placing  significant  psychological  burdens  on  individuals  [1].  In  the  education  field,  there  are  a  lot  of 
unknowns in the remote teaching mode. For example, large class lectures are offered online for students 
during social distancing for both onshore and offshore students. Instead of facing hundreds of students in 
the lecture theatre, the lecturer delivers the course via zoom in front of one or several computer screens. 
The intense feeling of self-talking is a dramatic change for lecturers. On the other side, the students could 
see the lecturer virtually online. However, the virtual teaching environment currently offered by zoom also 
makes students be isolated from their colleagues physically, and few social processes could be engaged 
quickly.    

As mentioned above, the proposed remote ATC simulation training in this paper involves two main parts, 
namely  i)  a  social-distancing  on-campus  simulation  lab  for  students  and  ii)  teaching  by  remote  ATC 
instructors across states. We mirror the students’ real-time practice scenario on a remote computer screen 
that a remote ATC instructor can observe. At the same time, the ATC instructor can communicate with the 
students  to  help  them  improve  their  practical  skills.  There  are  several  benefits  associated  with  the 
application of remote ATC simulation training. Firstly, the remote instructor is not required to be present 
on campus, which satisfies COVID social distancing and contactless requirements. Secondly, teaching ATC 
skills requires active engagement with ATC instructors who provide high quality and immediate feedback 
to students, resulting in a better learning experience. Thirdly, blended face-to-face and remote education 
innovation  align  with  the  future  of  education,  as  it  is  more  flexible  and  dynamic  and  improves  cost-
efficiency. However, the remote ATC simulation training also poses challenges to universities and ATC 
training service providers. These challenges include the need for infrastructure design to feed the existing 
on-site training materials and software network design that considers cyber security risks due to online data 
sharing. 

ATC simulation is an emerging technology and aviation education. Professional training institutions can 
learn from others, whereas the experiences of developing remote ATC simulation teaching/training in this 
paper will be beneficial for the rest of the world to understand the differences and similarities of current 

2 

 
 
 
RMIT Classification: Trusted 

remote  training,  and  to  improve  their  performance  in  building  a  safe  and  efficient  remote  training 
environment.  

2.  Innovative system design for remote ATC training system 

2.1 Pre-COVID stand-alone ATC training system 

Air traffic controllers manage the flow of aircraft into and out of the airport airspace, guide pilots during 
take-off and landing, and monitor aircraft as they travel through the skies. Their primary concern is safety, 
but  they  must  also  direct  aircraft  efficiently  to  minimize  delays.  According  to  the  standards  and 
recommended practices set by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), air traffic controllers 
must meet several specific requirements regarding their age, knowledge, experience, and medical fitness. 
For example, they need good spatial awareness and strong mathematical skills, excellent communication 
skills, the ability to work well under pressure and make quick, accurate decisions, and the capability to plan 
and adapt to changing situations [2].  

The training of air traffic controllers can be divided into several defined phases that cover both basic and 
advanced training. Pre-COVID ATC training worldwide is mainly delivered in face-to-face mode, mostly 
consisting  of  a  ratio  of  one  instructor  to  one  student.  The  training  includes  both  theory  and  practical 
components.  Practical  training  is  essential  for  student  air  traffic  controllers.  The  practical  training  is 
undertaken through an ATC simulator, i.e. a tool that provides a realistic imitation of the environment a 
controller  works  in.  The  ATC  Simulator  is  a  stand-alone  system  designed  to  provide  a  high-fidelity 
environment in which air traffic controllers can be trained from student controller through to rating and 
conversion and specialist applications such as emergency and unusual situations. Figure 1 illustrates the 
typical framework of a “stand-alone ATC simulator with two-position hardware configurations”. LAN is a 
local  area  network  that  is used to connect all types  of  stations  in  this  system.  On  the  bottom, there are 
Pseudo Pilot stations and two Controller Student stations. On the top there are Supervisor station, Host 
station and Excise editing station. 

Figure 1 Stand-alone ATC simulator with two-position hardware configurations 

At the University of South Australia (UniSA), a Pre-COVID, stand-alone ATC simulator system is used to 
help international and domestic students in Australia to explore an ATC career in the aviation industry, to 
strengthen their passion for aviation and to understand why and how an air traffic control system works. 
All assessment items for the course AERO 3019 Air Space Management are designed to support students 
to  develop  knowledge,  understanding  and  practical  skills  about  air  traffic  control.  ATC  Simulation 
scenarios are designed for students to apply their knowledge in practical situations. At UniSA, the ratio of 
students to instructors in the ATC simulation room is 6 to 1, which means that one instructor must observe 

3 

 
 
 
RMIT Classification: Trusted 

two ATC stations and two pilot stations. Four students on two ATC stations are doing a simulation exercise: 
one student acts as a controller and the other as a coordinator. Two students are on pilot stations, and they 
are responsible for following ATC instructions and updating aircraft trajectories. As shown in Figure 3 and 
Figure 4, the ATC simulator in the UniSA ATC simulator room is a stand-alone system that only contains 
the student controller station, pseudo pilot station, and supervisor station [3]. 

         Figure 3 Student controller role station                              Figure 4 Pseudo pilot station 

In Pre-COVID, the maximum capacity of this course is 30 students per semester. There is a maximum of 6 
students  in  each  session  at  one  time.  We  currently  only  have  two  stations  that  are  operational  and  one 
instructor on site. As a result, five sessions must be scheduled for different groups of students. In each 
session, students need to rotate to perform the controller’s role on controller position. Each student has 20-
30 minutes of practice time. As the exercise lasts typically 1 hour, students are not always doing the same 
exercise with their colleagues, and the practice time for each student is limited. Usually, the first student 
doing  the  exercise  feels  much  more  challenged  than  the  others,  as  they  need  more  effort  to  build  up 
situational awareness. 

2.2 Remote ATC training system development on COVID-19 

The  nature  of  ATC  skills  training  involves  many  practical  exercises  with  qualified  instructors.  Thus, 
simulation  courses  play  an  essential  role  in  training  air  traffic  controllers.  However,  the  availability  of 
instructors or Pseudo pilots could be a challenge for some aviation academies. It isn't easy to offer students 
the best opportunity for one-on-one, face-to-face teaching. Previous researchers investigated current and 
future uses of simulation in the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Academy’s ATC training program 
[4]. Their primary findings emphasize the importance of applying new technologies such as web-based 
training  methods  to  reduce  the  dependence  on  on-site  instructors  during  simulation  training.  Other 
researchers,  such  as  Dönmez,  Demirel  and  Özdemir,  solved  the  Pseudo-pilot  assignments  problem  via 
Mixed-integer  programming  (MIP),  by  considering  the  availability  Pseudo-pilot  in  terms  of  period, 
personal mental or physiological workloads [5].   

Remote  ATC  simulation  is  an  emerging  technology  in  aviation  education.  At  the  beginning  of  2020,  a 
teaching innovation grant was used to support the development of a small ATC tutoring project at UniSA. 
The principal aim of the teaching innovation project is to improve the students’ learning experience via 
remote tutoring to offer students the one-on-one skills training experience. The ‘Remote ATC tutoring tool’ 
or  the  ‘E-tutoring  tool’  aims  to  1)  lower  the  ratio  of  students  to  instructors  by  allowing  more  remote 
instructors to engage with students in the ATC practical exercises; 2) improve students’ learning experience 
in remote learning mode. In this project, there are limited financial resources available. Therefore we need 
to consider the cost, timeline, cyber security, and system compatibility with the university-wide network. 
In the end, we mainly focus on two changes: 1) infrastructure upgrading of hardware and software from an 

4 

 
 
 
 
RMIT Classification: Trusted 

existing stand-alone system to a remote system compatible with university network; 2) remote teaching 
course content design to assure a high quality of remote teaching. There are several challenges in the remote 
system design and implementation: Firstly, there is limited finance available for this project, redesigning 
the whole ATC simulation system is impossible. Therefore a plug-in implementation mode is considered 
to upgrade the software and hardware to support a virtual remote teaching environment in ATC simulation 
training. Some applications such as Microsoft Teams could be plugged in and support a remote teaching 
environment  with  multiple  functions,  however,  it  required  access  into  a  vast  network.  Secondly,  the 
standard university computer operating system is based on Windows, while the ATC simulation system is 
based on Unix. How to make two operating systems work together to offer virtual remote ATC training 
under budget is essential. There are several solutions, either via hardware upgrading or software upgrading, 
the costs are different. In addition, universities only offer standard IT hardware for hardware upgrading. 
The remote ATC simulation system must be compatible with university IT standards and requirements. 
Thirdly,  future  development  should  be  considered.  Modules  and  cloneable  solutions  will  be  much 
convenient.  

Figure 5 Remote ATC simulation training system framework 

Figure 6 Plug-in teaching software design for Remote ATC simulation training system 

In the end, the remote system framework and Plug-in software network design are shown in Figure 5 and 
Figure 6. In the framework, for each student controller, there is a remote tutor to support the learning. The 
remote tutor could be anywhere in the world if they have access to the internet. Student pilots and student 
controllers collaborate in the simulation room. These two stations are geographically separated from each 
other  in  isolation.  One  supervisor  could  manage  up  to  10  student  controllers  and  ten  student  pilots 

5 

 
 
 
 
RMIT Classification: Trusted 

simultaneously, named “a block”. If there is an extension in the future, then the cloneable block could be 
produced.  

In the university network, all stations are running under Windows operating systems which is a university 
standard. If there is a problem with the computer box, the university IT support team could replace it quickly. 
Then inside the window system, there are 1) virtual box to run the local ATC simulation system with Unix 
operating  system,  2)  Microsoft  teams  (license  required)  to  provide  remote  tutoring  supports  including 
virtual face contact, video/voice recording, remote control function from remote tutors, questionnaires etc., 
3)  Team  viewer  (license  required)  for  supervising  supports,  4)  other  sensor  systems  such  for  future 
development. In the remote location, the remote tutor should have a computer with Microsoft teams. That 
is  the  only  requirement.  Based  on  the  system  design,  all  the  hardware  needs  to  upgrade  to  university 
standards.  Then  there  are  challenges  about  handling  four  screens  on  the  student  controller  station, 
synchronising two sound inputs from Windows and Unix systems into one, and double network interface 
cards to support the Local Area Network (LAN) and Wide Area Network (WAN). The software updating 
collaborates with Adelaide based IT Start-up company ByteProTeq. Finally, the upgraded stations Human 
Machine Interfaces (HMIs) are shown in Figure 7.  In Figure 7(a), an additional screen on the top left for 
video communication will connect the remote tutor with student controllers.  Using the new system, the 
simulation practices can be conducted without the need for the student and instructor to be at the same 
location. The students’ real-time practice scenario can be mirrored to a remote computer screen, which a 
remote ATC instructor can observe. At the same time, the ATC instructors/tutors can communicate with 
the students to help them improve their practical skills. In addition, if remote instructors/tutors would like 
to demonstrate some functions in real-time, they could remote control the student controller station and 
show the correct actions. The remote instructor/tutor identification is shown in the student controller's main 
screen  with  red  and  circle  shapes,  see  Figure  7  (a)  right.  On  the  Pseudo  pilot  station,  students  are  not 
necessary to connect with remote instructors/tutors. They mainly communicate with student controllers. If 
they need any help, they could join Microsoft teams and request support from remote instructors/tutors (see 
Figure 7 (b). Meanwhile, with the support form application TeamViewer, the supervisor station could be 
remote-controlled, which offers the option to set up the exercise from any location in the states. 

a)  New student controller station HMI with four screens (Main screen with red colour and circle-

shaped remote tutor identification, mirrored to remote tutor) 

6 

 
 
 
RMIT Classification: Trusted 

b)  New student pilot station HMI (left side) and remote supervisor station HMI (right side) 

Figure 7 New remote ATC simulation training system HMI 

3.  Preliminary experiments and discussions 

3.1 Human-in-the-loop Experiments and survey results 

Due to financial limitations, only three experiments were organized. The first experiment was organized on 
1st June 2021. The second experiment was organized with 6 students involved on 17th June 2021 Thursday 
9:30-11:30  am,  and  the  last  experiment  finished  on  24  June  2021  14:00-17:00  with  the  same  students 
involved.  All  students  in  these  experiments  are  familiar  with  old  stand-alone  systems  and  have  some 
experience of initial ATC training. 4 of them have Private Pilot Licenses (PPL), 2 of them are aviation 
management students without PPL. 5 of them are male international students and only 1 female local student. 
They shifted their roles to be student controllers, student pilots, and remote tutors. After all experiments, 
surveys were distributed to all students to get the feedback about the quality of remote teaching and possible 
improvements of the system. The 10 questions are: 

1)  Are you comfortable with a remote tutoring environment? 
2)  How satisfied are you with the ability to integrate Remote tutor with on-campus ATC simulation 

training? 

3)  When you think about this remote ATC tutoring tool, do you think of it as something you need or 

don’t need to enhance learning experience? 

4)  How satisfied are you with the look and accessibility of this Remote ATC simulation training tool? 
5)  Are you happy to provide remote tutoring service for new students in the airspace management 

course if you are qualified? 

6)  How many hours would you like to provide a continuous remote tutoring service per day if you are 

qualified? 

7)  If you have the right to choose your tutor, what is the most critical skill you are looking for? 
8)  Overall, are you  satisfied or  dissatisfied  with the overall  quality  of the remote  ATC  simulation 

system? 

9)  One thing you liked most about the remote ATC simulation tutoring tool is? 
10) One thing you thought could have been better or was missing is? 

The results are listed in Figure 8 and Table 1. On average, all students are satisfied with the overall quality 
of the remote ATC simulation system. All students are comfortable with a remote tutoring environment for 
ATC  simulation  training  and  are  very  satisfied  with  integrating  remote  tutoring  with  on-campus  ATC 

7 

 
 
 
 
RMIT Classification: Trusted 

simulation training. It is a blended teaching/training mode for students. On one side, they could physically 
attend the simulation room and keep social distance from their colleagues. On the other side, the one-on-
one tutoring support is from a remote tutor. The majority of Students well understand the need for remote 
tutoring  systems  on  and  beyond  COVID-19.  We  are  encouraged  to  keep  all  the  education  activities 
happening  at  universities  as  much  as  possible,  so  the  accessibility  of  remote  ATC  simulation  training 
systems is critical.  

Remote ATC instructors or tutors are essential resources for the new system. By guiding a 1:2 ratio, students 
can  better  learn  in  an  environment  where  their  instructors/tutors  can  answer  questions  straight  away. 
Qualification  of  remote  ATC  instructors/tutors  is  a  crucial  component  in  high-quality  teaching.  With 
different levels of trainees, there should be different levels of ATC instructors or tutors. More than ten years’ 
experience ATC instructors are limited resources in South Australia. Still, if we would like to provide the 
initial  ATC  training  for  ab-initio  students,  then  a  pool  of  qualified  ATC  tutors  could  be  trained  by 
universities. Because in the experiments, most of the students are 3rd year international students and ready 
to graduate from Australian university. According to their feedback, they are very likely to provide the 
remote tutoring services for new ab-initio students and work for more than 2 hours per day to gain their 
working experiences in the aviation field. For open question 9 and 10 feedback, see Table 1; it is found that 
all the students are happy with instantaneous feedback from remote tutors. It is convenient to learn hands-
on  knowledge  directly  via  a  hidden  mode.  However,  it  is  also  found  that  operational  manuals, 
communication devices, and remote tutor qualifications are significant concerns for the quality of remote 
ATC simulation training. 

8 

 
 
 
 
RMIT Classification: Trusted 

Figure 8 Survey results 

Table 1 Open questions survey results 

Feedback  Question 9 

Question 10 

One thing you liked most about the remote 
ATC simulation tutoring tool is 

One thing you though could have been 
better or was missing is 

1  The ability to share screens with tutors will 
be invaluable when teaching. It will provide 
opportunities for instantaneous feedback and 
correction if necessary.   

A detailed list of instructions on how to 
successfully establish communication. This 
should accompany a manual detailing 
operation of Microsoft Teams software. 

2  The tutor can attend and supervise the class 

through Microsoft teams.  

3  Tutor can directly and remotely control the 
simulator through Microsoft Teams, which 
can offer students help whenever needed 

A way to integrate system sounds from both 
Unix system and Windows with a good 
quality. 

The microphone’s quality could be better. 

4  The tutor doesn’t need to show up, and since 
each tutor is going to instruct only one group, 
students will have more time to practice and 
can be better taken care of. 

To make the remote tutor method work 
well, the preconditions are the “tutors are 
trained properly” and the “students really 
understand those basic control buttons”. 

9 

 
 
 
 
RMIT Classification: Trusted 

5  Scalability of the concept. Remote tutoring 
provides tutors with the convenience of 
transferring knowledge to students from 
different locations.  Also, by providing 
guidance in a 1:2 ratio, students can better 
learn in an environment where questions can 
be answered straight away by their tutors.  

6  Can observe the students operating straight 

from the monitor, correct them from 
mistakes by remote control. 

Troubleshooting procedures can be 
introduced to tutors by including in the 
tutor’s manual. 

Experiments with new students involved are 
recommended for further system test.  

3.2 Discussions 

Emergency remote teaching soared during COVID-19. Higher education institutions are forced to make 
immediate changes from traditional face-to-face to more digital and remote mode. Conventional classroom 
lectures are replaced by virtual rooms using videoconferencing systems. At the same time, ATC simulation 
is more like a practical tutorial for students. Any video conferencing application could not simply replace 
it. A scenario-based ATC simulation training must be delivered via a blended teaching mode which consists 
of one part of teaching activities provided online and one part of learning activities happening on site. The 
learner’s interaction with remote tutors via the Internet to learn, find out information, or do air traffic control 
strategies.  

Online class is more challenging to handle than a traditional face-to-face class. A careful course design 
process should be organized in advance at least  six months. Especially, user’s manuals for student pilot 
stations,  student  controller  stations,  supervisor  stations,  and  remote  instructor/tutor  stations  should  be 
clearly drafted, including troubleshooting procedures due to  the high integration of technology. Remote 
tutors should get trained and qualified before providing the services. 

The number of students demanded for this course was doubled in the last year from 30 to 60, and it is 
predicted  to  100  in  the  coming  teaching  semester.  Surveys  also  were  widely  distributed  to  students  in 
Australia and offshore, the feedbacks was very positive. Therefore, enhancing the current remote training 
system beyond COVID-19 regarding reliability, cyber security, and capacity is also very important. Firstly, 
failure of the system could be malfunctions of hardware or software. Due to financial limitation, all used 
hardware  is  only  functional,  but  not  with  high-performance  requirements.  A  professional  IT  expert 
programs  the  software  integration.  The  reliability  of  software  systems  is  very  high;  only  the  hardware 
reliability needs to be validated in the future. Secondly, because of the remote ATC simulation system with 
video and voice recording functions, it provides online real-time teaching support. Thus the cyber security 
issue  must  be  considered.  Because  the  main  computer  boxes  used  in  current  remote  ATC  simulation 
systems  are  university  Windows  standards,  the  LAN  of  remote  ATC  simulation  systems  is  under  the 
umbrella  of  university  WAN.  Therefore,  the  cyber  security  level  currently  is  handled  on  WAN  level. 
Thirdly, the remote ATC simulation system is developed with a cloneable plug-in modular concept. It is 
very  convenient  to  increase  the  capacity  of  the  student  controller  stations  to  adapt  to  the  demand,  see 
Figure5. 

4.  Conclusion remarks 

ATC simulation is an emerging technology and aviation education. Professional training institutions can 
learn from others, whereas the experiences of developing remote ATC simulation teaching/training with 
the  Start-up  company  ByteProTeq  will  be  beneficial  for  the  rest  of  the  world  to  best  understand  the 

10 

 
 
 
RMIT Classification: Trusted 

differences and similarities of current remote training, and to improve their performance in building a safe 
and  efficient  remote  training  environment.  In  this  paper,  we  have  presented  three  improvements  to  our 
remote ATC training: 1) infrastructure upgrading of hardware and software from an existing stand-alone 
system to a remote network that considers costs, cyber security, system compatibility, et cetera; 2) quality 
of remote ATC simulation training, compared with traditional face-to-face training, including students’ and 
instructors’ feedback; 3) enhancement of the current remote training system beyond COVID-19 regarding 
reliability,  cyber  security,  and  capacity.  The  purpose  of  this  foundation  paper  is  to  provide  a  better 
understanding  of  the  current  state  of  remote  ATC  simulation  training  development  with  the  Start-up 
company ByteProTeq, during and beyond the COVID-19 pandemic, by giving an excellent example for the 
rest of the world and its leading role in developing advanced ATC training systems for application at a 
global level. 

References 

[1]  Bavel, J.J.V., Baicker, K., Boggio, P.S. et al. “Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 

pandemic response,” Nature Human Behaviour, vol.4, pp 460–471, 2020. 

[2]  Camp, Gino, et al. “Dynamic Problem Selection in Air Traffic Control Training: a Comparison between 

Performance, Mental Effort and Mental Efficiency,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 17, no. 5-6, pp. 575–
595, 2001. 

[3]  Koskela, Inka, and Palukka, Hannele. “Trainer Interventions as Instructional Strategies in Air Traffic Control 

Training,” The Journal of Workplace Learning, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 293–314, 2011. 

[4]  U. A. Jessica and J. Shafagh. "Optimization of Air Traffic Control Training at the Federal Aviation 

Administration Academy," Aerospace, vol.4, no. 4, pp 50, 2017. 

[5]  Dönmez, Kadir, et al. “Handling the Pseudo Pilot Assignment Problem in Air Traffic Control Training by Using 

NASA TLX,” Journal of Air Transport Management, vol. 89, pp. 101934, 2020. 

11 

 
 
 
