1
2
0
2

c
e
D
3
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
4
5
6
0
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Structured Analysis of Information Security Incidents in the
Maritime Sector

Monina Schwarz
Universität Hamburg
Hamburg, Germany
monina.schwarz@uni-hamburg.de

Matthias Marx
Universität Hamburg
Hamburg, Germany
matthias.marx@uni-hamburg.de

Hannes Federrath
Universität Hamburg
Hamburg, Germany
hannes.federrath@uni-hamburg.de

ABSTRACT
Cyber attacks in the maritime sector can have a major impact on
world economy. However, the severity of this threat can be under-
estimated because many attacks remain unknown or unnoticed.
We present an overview about the publicly known cyber incidents
in the maritime sector from the past 20 years. In total, we found 90
publicly reported attacks and 15 proof of concepts. Furthermore,
we interviewed five IT security experts from the maritime sector.
The interviews put the results of our research in perspective and
confirm that our view is comprehensive. However, the interviewees
highlight that there is a high dark figure of unreported incidents
and argue that threat information sharing may potentially be help-
ful for attack prevention. From these results, we extract threats for
players in the maritime sector.

1 MOTIVATION
A large part of the global trade in goods is transported by sea.
Thereby most cargo handling takes place in a few large ports world-
wide. Composed of participants like logistic companies consisting
of shipping companies and dockyards, ports are part of the maritime
sector, which is part of the transportation sector. While providing
opportunities for fast communication between distant participants,
interconnectivity also offers new attack vectors for criminals to
steal goods and data, sabotage systems and commit further crimes.
For criminals, targets are particularly lucrative where they can
get money or attract media attention, for example with critical
infrastructure. Depending on size and sub-sector, companies are
considered critical infrastructure. This includes, for example, ports
and port logistics companies above a certain size [27, 119]. How-
ever, the outage of smaller companies should not be neglected, as
the failure of many smaller participants can have the same severe
consequences as well.

Cyber attacks go through the media, such as the one on the Port
of Antwerp [9] from a gang of smugglers or the big outtage of
Maersk infrastructure in 2017 [97]. The cyber incidents targeting
the maritime sector reflect the diverse motivations of the attackers:

• weakening the economy of a country,
• protesting against political decisions,
• sabotaging opposition,
• spying out information,
• stealing money or cargo and
• smuggling.

Cyber incidents will come to light under certain circumstances.
German laws, for example, oblige critical infrastructure to report in-
cidents to the authorities [45]. According to EU’s General Data Pro-
tection Regulation, organizations must communicate data breaches

1

to supervisory authorities. Ad hoc and other capital market noti-
fications may also lead to publication of incidents. Other reasons
include that the impact is unconcealable or publication through
third-parties including the attackers themselves, researchers or
security companies. However, through personal experience and
discussions with insiders, we assume that only a small subset of
attacks on the maritime sector are publicly known. Companies
could benefit from the incident knowledge of other players from
the same sector. Nevertheless, most companies don’t want to share
or publish incidents, likely due to fear of bad publicity.

To illustrate the threats to the maritime sector and give an in-
centive to share threat information, we show our threat taxonomy
in section 3, present an overview about the publicly known cyber
incidents from the past 20 years in section 4 and evaluate our find-
ings by conclude the results from expert interviews with insiders in
section 5. We complement this part with the related work in section
2 and end with our conclusion in section 6.

2 RELATED WORK
Security incidents in critical infrastructures are perceived more by
the public than than attacks on non-critical infrastructure. This
happens not least because of governmental reporting requirements
for incidents in critical infrastructures. There are surveys and in-
vestigations targeting cyber incidents in the critical infrastruc-
ture [5, 73, 80]. Others target cyber security in the maritime sec-
tor [75].

The damage, that can occur in a scenario where more than one
actor from the maritime sector is affected, was examined 2019:
The so called Shen attack scenario [16] describes the impact of a
computer virus infection of Asia-Pacific ports. In the scenario, a
cargo management system is infected with a virus that spreads via
traveling ships to other ports and their cargo management systems.
As a result of the infection, these ports have to shut down their
computer systems. Depending on the number of closed ports, 6 to
15, the estimated damage range between 80 billion USD and 219
billion USD.

Miller et. al [73] classified SCADA incidents from the Repository
of Industrial Security Incidents (RISI) according to the following
classification factors: source sector, operation method, impact and
target sector. They attempted to give a standardized and comparable
terminology to determine incident severity levels.

Ogie [80] also investigated SCADA and critical infrastructure
related cyber incidents until 2014 using RISI data. He categorized
the attacks according to the parameters intent, method of operation
and perpetrator of the attack. By analysing 242 incidents, he gave a
good overview of their distribution in different countries.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Al-Mhiqani et. al [5] targeted cyber incidents in cyber-physical
systems in organization of Islamic cooperation countries until 2018.
They showed the main intentions in the attacks according to the tax-
onomy: type of attack, target sector, intention, impact and incident
categories.

Mrakovic et. al [75] gave an overview of the IT structure in ves-
sels and international regulations and guidelines. Based on selected
attacks, they showed digital risks that are specific to the maritime
sector and presented maritime cyber risk management. There are
case studies on maritime security in general. For example the Cen-
tre for Strategy & Evaluation Services examined political context
and security challenges of the maritime sector in a field study [42].
In 2011, D. Cimpean et. al analysed cyber security aspects in the
maritime sector. They used different interviews and workshops
to evaluate security and security measures in the maritime sector.
They concluded, that the awareness of cyber security, the consider-
ation of cyber security in regulations and a structured governance
context are insufficient [23].

In [6] participants of the maritime sector were interviewd by
researchers to find out their involvement in cyber security and cyber
incidents. Additionally, they included the maritime infrastructure,
cyber threats, cyber attacks on board and international regulations
into their analysis.
To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first that makes a
summary of all currently published cyber incidents in the maritime
sector and qualifies them through insider interviews.

3 THREAT MODEL AND METHODOLOGY
We have analysed publicly available data to find the most common
types of attacks on the maritime sector in recent years. We con-
sidered common published successful attacks, prevented attacks
and published Proof-of-Concepts (PoC) which are related to the
maritime sector. Prevented attacks and PoCs are included in our
statistic, because we wanted to create an overall picture of possible
attacks. An unknown number of incidents stays unpublished. To
estimate a real world distribution of attack vectors, we have to
take potential attacks, i.e. PoCs and prevented attacks, into con-
sideration. In order to organize the attacks, we divided them into
categories described in section 3.2. These categories might still pro-
vide an incomplete view of the threat landscape, which is why we
summarize our findings from this research in section 4 and compare
them later to information from non-public sources 5. In total, we
gathered information on 90 different attacks and 15 PoCs.

3.1 Digital Infrastructure
The maritime sector can be divided into different types of infras-
tructure. Roughly summarized, there are ports that consist of the
land part, which includes logistic companies and maritime service
providers and the sea part which includes ship owners with supply
industry and vessels. Looking at these participants’ infrastructure,
it consist of the following components:

• off-the-shelf components for everyday business (e.g. operat-

ing systems),

• network infrastructure components,
• custom made operational technology (OT) like cargo bridges,

• mixed information technology (IT) and OT systems like

ships.

The IT and OT systems in the land infrastructure are usually more
or less intertwined. Ships, the most IT-isolated group among the sea
component, used to have separate IT and OT on board and received
new data only by rare manual updates. Nowadays, ships have on-
board Internet and load new data like container information in
every port via USB flash drives. The shipping crew may bring their
own devices which connect with the ship’s intranet which opens
up to the internet. The IT and OT on ships and in the maritime
sector in general are merging with each other, which means that
more and more standard malware potentially can be found in every
component.

3.2 Threats
To bring the attacks analyzed in this paper into an order, we have
used the threat taxonomy introduced by the European Union Agency
for Cybersecurity (ENISA) in 2019 [39]. They derived sub-categories
of threats out of port hazards. Even though attack goal, source of
infection and other possible consequences may be linked back to
different threats, we use main threats to group the attacks. The
main threat categories are:

• abuse and theft of data,
• data manipulation,
• denial of service,
• geo-localisation signal spoofing and jamming,
• interception of emission,
• different malware-categories,
• man-in-the-middle,
• social engineering, phishing and identity theft,
• targeted attacks,
• unknown attack vectors and
• vulnerabilities exploitation of systems or devices.

The threat categories may not always match completely with
the threats caused by the attacks showed later on, as some of our
sources may be inaccurate, incomplete or incorrect. In some cases,
the threat category describes the attack itself and in others the effect
because we often only know one of the two clearly from the reports.
We never distinguish between the causes of infection because in
most cases we do not know it. For every attack, we create a profile
with the following information about the details, as far as we know
them: victim, perpetrator, year, threat category, threat name, state,
damage sum, impact and source. All online sources are archived
using the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine.

4 THREAT CATEGORIES
In total, we gathered 90 attacks and 15 PoCs from different public
sources. In the following we give a short description and one source
per event, grouped by threat category and ordered by year. We
categorized the attacks according to the main threat, although this
is sometimes not clearly possible due to the fact that we do not know
the way of intrusion, cause and impact about them. We marked all
PoCs with the follwing symbol: †.

2

4.1 Abuse and Theft of Data
For various reasons data from maritime participants can be valuable
for attackers. When hackers steal sensitive data or abuse certificates
used in port operations like customs, the availability and integrity
of these operations can be violated. In most cases, it was not clear
how the attackers got the data, whether by malware, credential
theft or by other attack vectors.

2012: Attackers gained access to systems operated by the Aus-
tralian Customs and Border protection which allowed the attackers
to check whether their shipping containers were regarded suspi-
cious by police or customs [120].

2013: Designs of the Littoral Combat Ship from the US Navy
and other weapon systems have been stolen. Chinese hackers were
suspected of having committed the crime [77].

2014: A person onboard a vessel had been uploading images
on Facebook, which provided a detailed look into the safety mea-
sures in place. This information leak could have led to attackers
gaining information about the ship, which would make it easier to
attack. This was discovered prior to entering the Gulf of Aden and
the vessel changed its course because they feared an attack from
pirates [32].

2016: The ISC-CERT warned about a SQL injection vulnerability
under active exploitation affecting web applications used by multi-
ple US organizations that could lead to data loss [53]. South Korea
suspects North Korea of having hacked Daewoo Shipbuilding Mar-
itime Engineering (DSME) and stealing blueprints of warships [22].
DSME may be victim of another data theft in 2020, but the hack is
not further described and still unconfirmed [43]. Also, the personal
data of thousands of US Navy soldiers were stolen by infiltrating a
service employee’s notebook [87]. Information on the details of six
submarines designed for the Indian Navy was stolen from the Naval
Group, a french defence contractor formerly known as DCNS. In to-
tal they lost over 22,000 pages containing confidential material [71].
Pirates infected the content management system of an unnamed
company to gather information about which container on a vessel
is valuable and could be robbed [85].

2017: Svitzer Australia detected that they leaked data through
the email accounts of three employees. The stolen data contained
personal information about the company’s employees [12]. Clark-
son was the target of a cyber security incident, where an unknown
attacker accessed internal systems and stole data. The attacker de-
manded ransom for the return of the stolen data [25]. An Australian
Defence subcontractor lost several gigabyte of sensitive documents,
related to allied defence projects like jet fighters and ship plans [95].
2018: Early in the year, a US Navy subcontractor was attacked
and 64 gigabyrte of data including confidential plans for supersonic
missile projects were stolen. The USA suspected the Chinese gov-
ernment of the hack [26]. Attackers attempted to sell material of
defence ship builder Austal on the Internet. Austal said they do not
intend to respond to that kind of ransom and thereby risked the
leak of the stolen data [108].

2019: Holland America Line noticed unauthorized third-party
access to email accounts containing personal information including
social security numbers, health-related information and financial
account information. The attackers likely got acces via phishing

emails [69]. A group named “Maze” hacked London Offshore Con-
sultants and asked them for ransom after a small selection of the
stolen files were leaked online. The hackers claimed that they stole
300 GB of information but LOC confirmed, that only a small number
of clients were affected [21].

2020: Unconfirmed sources described that South Korea’s ship-
builder DSME was hacked by unknown hackers that sold access to
DSME’s network [43].

2021: Attackers gained access to some of the internal systems
from Carnival Corporation and accessed data relating to employees
and guests of the company [44].

4.2 Data Manipulation
Shipping companies rely on their data sources about vessels and
customer information. Ships need reliable nautical data to navigate.
Manipulating data unnoticed or even visibly is attractive for attack-
ers to achieve goals including: finding valuable goods, sabotage
companies, or deface companies.

2014: The website of the Massachusetts Maritime Academy was
presumably hacked by an Islamist group. They replaced the content
of the website with Islamic messages. It is presumed that the Mo-
roccan Electronic Islamic Union group is responsible for hacking
the website [30].

4.3 Denial of Service
4 The aim of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks is to affect the avail-
ability of a system. Several sources can be involved in the same
DoS attack which then can be called a distributed DoS (DDoS) at-
tack. DDoS attacks are used for blackmailing but also as a political
weapon [70].

2001: The Port of Huston was attacked twice [67]: The first attack
in August was a DDoS attack from a US citizen. The second attack
was distributed ping flood attack, conducted in September by a
US teenager who used the Port of Houston as an instrument in a
personal revenge plan.

2013: The Port of Long Beach was a target of large scaled DDoS

attacks [34].

2017: The Port of Vancouver became a target. When asked for
details, Vancouver port’s spokeswoman said: “We cannot answer
this, as it could pose a security risk for the port” [82].

4.4 Geo-localisation Signals Spoofing and

Jamming

Geo-localisation signals (GPS) and navigation systems can be spoofed
or jammed in order to hinder navigation and change the trajectory
of a vessel [39]. In the following, GPS spoofing attacks related to
the maritime sector are listed.

2001: A vulnerability assesment of the U.S. transportation in-
frastructure discusses attacks on GPS related to the maritime sec-
tor [18].†

2009: To identifying the full effects of GPS jamming on safe
navigation at sea, researchers from the General Lighthouse Author-
ities of the United Kingdom and Ireland examined the effects from
unintentional interferences and jamming onto GPS [48].†

2010: South Korea reported GPS jamming by North Korea [65].

3

2012: South Korean officals said that 254 ships experienced GPS

interruptions over 16 days of jamming by North Korea [99].

2013: Researchers from the University of Texas at Austin suc-
cessfully demonstrated GPS spoofing for a super yacht at sea. With
small custom-made GPS devices, they tricked the yacht onto a
track hundreds of meters from its intended one. They also showed,
that this attack could be performed silently [64].†Trend Micro re-
searchers showed multiple ways to disturb and spoof ships’ AIS
systems. They achieved modification of ship details, creating nonex-
istent vessels, trigger collision warnings, create nonexistent search
and rescue helicopters, spoof the weather data and impersonate
maritime authorities to trick the vessel [32].†Targeting more than
GPS, a research team from IOActive described attacks on satellite
communication hardware on ships. They examined devices from
different vendors and found vulnerabilities in each of them. In re-
sult, they could cause a manipulation of communication structure
between ships [98].†

2016: More than 700 ships were affected of GPS jamming over a
period of five weeks. The signals originated from five North Korean
locations along the border to South Korea [54].

2017: All at once, the GPS navigation of more than 20 vessels
was spoofed at the same time in the Black Sea near Russia. The
effect lasted for a few days with different phenomena like loss of
position and wrong display of positions. [47].

2018: Another far reaching GPS spoofing was recorded between
2018 and 2019 in the Central and the Eastern Mediterranean Sea.
The loss of GPS signal obstructed the functions of (GPS-based)
navigation devices [79]. A proof of concept attack showed how
specially crafted malware can be used through various channels
such as USB-drives to alter data and attack the ECDIS navigation
system in Ships [90].†Researchers from the German police targeted
both, the ECDIS and GPS Systems of Ships, to show how vulnerable
the navigation is. The GPS is spoofed with cheap technical material
and the ECDIS maps are faked and shared to alter the position of
objects and the terrain information [52].†

2019: At the Port of Shanghai, ships Automatic identification
systems (AIS) and GPS systems were spoofed. The AIS showed
other ships on wrong positions and they appeared to congregate in
large circles. The origin of these dissruptions is still unclear [50].

4.5 Interception of Emission
For many reasons, hackers would like to intercept the commu-
nication between stakeholders like port and vessels. Often such
interceptions are used to trick victims into sending money to the
wrong target.

2014: The World Fuel Services (WFS) fell victim to a scam attack
where they lost 18 million USD. The attackers tricked WFS to buy
and deliver 17 000 metric tons of gas to alledged buyers [104].

4.6 Malware
Since electronic components with common operating systems are
part of ships and harbour control infrastructure, they can be infected
with malware that also infects company systems in other sectors.
The abilities and damage skills of malware vary and are therefore
divided into different sub-categories. Ransomware will have its own
part as its relevance has increased significantly in recent years.

4

Also a lot of malware infections are part of the attack vectors
from targeted attacks in section 4.9 therefore we do not mention
them again here. Most of the malware incidents we found were
caused by ransomware. In some other cases, too little information
is known to be able to say whether ransomware or other malware
was the cause.

Ransomware encrypts the targeted system and promises a de-
cryption in exchange for a ransom fee. Some offshoots additionally
extract data or only encrypt, without the opportunity to decrypt
the data.

2013: A smartphone was connected to the network of a drilling
unit, resulting in a not further described malware infection and a
shut down of the machine [59].

2017: A famous victim of the ransomware-like, destructive mal-
ware NotPetya is the Maersk Group. The destructive infection
was probably not targeted but cost the company over 300 mil-
lion USD [97, 121]. Other NotPetya victims are the Port of Rotter-
dam [78], Jawaharlal Nehru Port, Indias largest container port [36].
2018: Cosco Shipping fell victim to NotPetya as well [96]. The
Port of San Diego was hit with the SamSam ransomware and lost
more than 30 000 USD as they refused to pay the ransom [102]. An
email campaign spreading multiplatform Java Remote Access Tool
(RAT) took place [35]. This attack is simmilar to the MartyMcFly
campaign, see section 4.9.

2019: Early that year, a vessel near the Port of New York was in-
fected with Emotet that rendered much of its network unusable [94].
A not further named MTSA (Maritim Transportation Security Act)
regulated facility was infected with Ryuk ransomware. The ran-
somware most likely entered the company’s network via phishing
email [116]. Ryuk also infected Pitney Bowes [60, 83]. A research
team created and studied the Shen attack scenario [16] that we
described in section 2.†

2020: The ship management company Anglo-Eastern partly pre-
vented a ransomware attack. According to an Anglo-Eastern man-
ager, only 20 percent of the workstations and 10 percent of the
servers had been encrypted [20]. Toll Group was targeted by two at-
tacks: The first was a large scaled attack with Mailto/NetWalker and
the second occured with Nefilim. While there is no statement, how
NetWalker infected the companies IT, Nefilim malware was most
likely distributed via Remote Desktop Service [24, 28, 29]. The Blue
Water Shipping Company achieved to stop a ransomware attack
taking place in September before the ransomware could encrypt
major parts of the IT infrastructure [55]. MSC Cargo was hit by an
unnamed malware that caused the company to shut down servers
and stop part of their operation for a few days [61]. The cruiser
line operator Carnival was infected with a not further specified ran-
somware. The infection could have happened through vulnerable
end devices and accessed certain files [1, 17]. The Ragnar Locker
ransomware hit CMA CGM. Distributed via email attachments the
malware encrypted and exfiltrated data [13]. The Norwegian ship-
ping company Hurtiguren has been affected by a ransomware that
has infected and paralysed some of its systems that are part of its
global infrastructure [2].

2021: Through a prepared fake email, attackers delivered the
so called PortDoor backdoor to the submarine defence contractor
Rubin Design Bureau. According to researchers [63], the attack is
Chinese state-sponsored.

4.7 Man-in-the-Middle
In a Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) attack, an attacker inserts himself
into a communication and pretends to one or both communication
partners that they are talking directly to the other. Thereby the
attacker can normally read and modify the communication.

2013: Clearsky analysts in cooperation with CyberKeel examined
a bunkering scam attack from 2013 and 2014. They found that
more participants of the maritime industry are vulnerable to MitM
attacks in their business communication and could therefore fall
for bunkering scam attacks [32].†

2015: CyberKeel researchers found that websites of carriers are
vulnerable to a faked-website spoofing. With a perfect copy an
attacker could trick shipper into entering their sensitive information
into the faked website and then pretend to be the shipper [84].†

4.8 Social Engineering, Phishing and Identity

Theft

Through social engineering, attackers may trick people into giv-
ing away confidential information. This includes phishing where
attackers use email or websites to pretend to be someone else. So
called spear phishing attacks are tailored to the victims by imitating
familiar or trustworthy addresses and names.

2013: Messages with remittances where sent from a Singapore
shipping company to its bank from the companies managing direc-
tor’s email account but without his knowledge. There were four
transactions of in total 1.8 million USD [111].

2014: The maritime cyber security company CyberKeel tested the
eCommerce applications of different shipping carriers and found
weaknesses in the password policies what may allow them to brute-
force and access customers accounts [31].†

2015: Hackers tricked a shipping company based in Cyprus to
pay the money for a legitimate ongoing supply to a wrong banking
account and stole around 645 000 USD [10]. The Nautilus Minerals
company lost 10 million USD to an unknown party while thinking
they paid a charterer’s guarantee to the Marine Assets Corporation.
The exact reason for this failure is unpublished [51].

2016: A seaman fell victim to a honey trapping attack: A black-
mailer lured him into taking suggestive pictures of himself and sent
them to the attacker over a period of six weeks. Later the attacker
demanded a deposit of 10 000 USD to not show the pictures to his
family. Researchers warned that it seems like this kind of attack
happens more often in the Gulf of Guinea region [81]. A broad email
fraud campaign spotted by Clearsky Security targeted VersaCold
and Toll Group amongst others with real-looking and targeted fake
domains [10, 106].

2017: A Malaysian bunker fuel owner became victim of a fraud
where he lost 4.5 million Malaysian Ringgit to an unknown attacker.
To make the scam as credible as possible, the attacker obtained
copies of the victim’s email communication via spyware to mas-
querade a fake email [110]. Between 2017 an 2018, the business
email spoofing group Gold Galleon, likely from Nigeria, targeted
maritime actors and stole a minimum of 3.9 million USD. They
used among others tools for keylogging and password-stealing to
gain access to email accounts from where they carried out their
attacks [100].

5

2019: The US Coast Guard warned about phishing emails and
malware intrusion attacks targeting commercial vessels. The at-
tackers tried to gain sensitive information by disguising themselves
as official Port State Control [115].

2020: The Maritime Transportation System (MTS) and the Infor-
mation Sharing and Analysis Center (ISAC) warned Tug owners
about phising emails containing fake voicemail attachments [46].
The US Coast Guard warned in September about sophisticated email
spoofing attacks which lead to at least one network compromise.
The campaign used among others a faked Cost Guard address [117].
2021: During payment of a contract from the subsidiary Hammo-
nia Tanker Holding to the parent company Hammonia Schiffshold-
ing, the email traffic between the companies was manipulated in
such way that the payments in the amount 1 million USD went to
the attackers [68]. The International Transport Intermediaries Club
(ITIC) warned of an increased incidence of email fraud, citing a re-
cent incident as an example. In this case a shipbroker contacted his
usual bunker supplier but emails with faked payment details were
sent by attackers, whereupon the 300.000 USD were transferred to
the wrong account [37]. ITIC also presented another case where a
ship manager had arranged repairs with a shipyard. After a fake
email, the payment of 500.000 USD was sent to the attackers instead
of the shipyard [38]. The Red Sky Alliance warned of email frauds in
which the attackers are impersonating the Mediterranean Shipping
Company (MSC) to spread faked emails with dridex malware [107].

4.9 Targeted Attacks
Targeted attacks use infection strategies and attack vectors tailored
to one specific target and are usually scheduled over a longer period
of time. Often a combination of social engineering, phishing and
public knowledge about the target is used for infection with a broad
amount of tools ranging from data theft tools and remote-access
Trojans to destructive malware.

2011: The Iranian Shipping Line IRISL fell victim to a huge hack-
ing attack where its cargo data systems were damaged. Israel was
accoused of having committed this attack. The motivation of the
attacker was to discourage all people transporting material for the
Iran atom program [122]. Icefog is an Advanced Persistent Threat
(APT) targeting maritime and shipbuilding groups and other indus-
tries in Japan and South Korea since at least 2011. The attackers
relied on spear-phishing emails that attempt to trick the victim into
opening malicious attachments or websites [86]. From 2011 to 2013,
the Port of Antwerp was target of a persistent targeted attack from
drug smugglers, where they gained remote access to a terminal
system that gave them the opportunity to access, steal and erase
containers out of the shipping companies system [9].

2012: Danish maritime shipping authorites fell victim to a possi-
ble Chinese state sponsored attack with unnamed methods, possi-
bly a virus infected pdf file. The goal seemed to be espionage [62].
The operation Cleaver, a probably Iranian worldwide cyberwar-
fare operation between 2012 and 2014 targeted different unnamed
transportation companies. The infection contained compromising
of active directory domains, Cisco Edge switches and routers and
networking infrastructure [33].

2013: The so called Kimsuky APT group targeted mostly South
Korean organisations, among them the Hyundai Merchant Marine,

with malware. A dynamic link library was used as dropper for
further infection and espionage on the infected system [105].

2014: The so called Zombie Zero Attack was a broad ranged
targeted attack onto shipping companies. It was a supply chain
attack, barcode readers were delivered with embedded malware that
was able to open a backdoor for further attacks in which finance data
was stolen [112]. The hacker group named Leviathan, also known
as TEMP.Pericsope, launched first attacks onto the maritime sector.
One campaign was seen between November and January of the
following year. The group faked emails with malicious Microsoft
Office documents to US universities with military interests [8].

2015: More malware campaigns by the threat actor Leviathan
were reported. Some victims were connected to South Chinese Sea
issues [8, 101].

2017: Early 2017, a German container ship between Cyprus to
Djibouti was hacked, most likely by pirates. They took full control
over the navigation system to enter the ship [11].

2018: Different enterprises, among them Italian naval industries,
where targeted by an unknown group that deployed the remote-
access Trojan MartyMcFly and the remote access tool QuasaRAT
through specially crafted and targeted phishing emails [123]. End
of 2018, Russia seized Ukrainian ships. Before the attack, there were
multiple coordinated cyber attacks on Ukrainian government agen-
cies tied to Russia. One of these attacks was a phishing campaign,
with the aim of installing malware, exfiltrating data and taking con-
trol over computer functions. In another attack in November 2018,
Russian-linked Gamaredon Group delivered the windows tailored
backdoor Pterodo to Ukrainian government agencies. Presumably
the malware should have gathered information for the further at-
tack where Russia seizured the Ukrainian ships [113]. Once more,
attacks by Leviathan were noticed. Amongst others, victims were an
US shipbuilding company and, again, maritime entities connected
to South China Sea issues. The threat actor spread their malware
through spearphishing emails with Microsoft Office documents and
installed multiple backdoors and spyware tools to gather data from
the infected systems [41].

2019: In Kuwait, at least one transportation and shipping organi-
zation was victim of the xHunt Campaign. The attackers installed
a backdoor called Hisoka that gave them the opportunity to load
other exploitation tools onto the infected system [91].

2020: Iran claimed that a large scale targeted attack was carried
out on the infrastructure of the country’s ports. No further details
have been published so far [88]. Similar to the famous case in
Antwerp, in Hamburg a South American drug cartel smuggled
containers of cocaine. For this, an attacker with insider knowledge
hacked into the IT systems of a container company and caused the
containers to be delivered unnoticed [66].

4.10 Unknown Threats
In some cases, only the damage of the attack or the fact that an
attack took place are known. This can be triggered by the fact that
the attackers removed all evidence, the attack was not an attack but
an incident, the system monitoring is too incomplete to reconstruct
an attack or the company hides the investigation results for some
reasons. In most cases, the minimal damage is a temporary shut-
down of servers and other IT infrastructure.

6

2015: During the process of finding a new submarine shipbuilder
for Australia, the three competitors Germany’s TKMS and builders
from Japan and France received massive hacking attempts. That
forced them to carry out the deliveries of sensitive information by
hand [57].

2017: After an attack with unpublished attack vector, in which
the attacker had access to intranet systems, the BW Group had to
shut down multiple servers [74].

2018: An attack hit the Port of Barcelona but was repelled by

internal security meassurements [49].

2019: An unknown intrusion forced the UK-based marine ser-
vices provider James Fisher and Sons to shut down affected systems
after recognizing unauthorized access [109].

2020: The Shahid Rajaee Port of Bandar Abbas in Iran was the
target of an unspecified attack. Local authorities told that they could
repell most of the attack [56]. The U.N. International Maritime
Organization urged that they became the victim of an not further
specified attack [89].

2021: The offshore vessel owner Bourbon was victim of an un-
specified attack that affected and disabled parts of its internal com-
puter network [3]. Hyundai Merchant Marine (HMM) confirmed
an unidentified security breach, impacting some of the company’s
email server. HMM stated that no data had been leaked through
the attack [4].

4.11 Vulnerabilities Exploitation of Systems or

Devices

Unpatched security vulnerabilities, weak passwords and wrongly
configured systems offer a broad attack surface. A lot of systems
have known vulnerabilities, although patches for these have often
been available for a long time. If an attacker knows about these
vulnerabilities, all he has to do is find systems that are affected by
them. Shodan is one of the tools to simplify the search for vulnerable
systems worldwide.

2013: A US Navy team found vulnerabilities in the USS Freedom

while pentesting the vessels network [103].†

2014: The US Naval Sea Systems Command warned that parts of
vessel control systems, like a submarine’s Caterpillar-build backup
diesel engine, running outdated and vulnerable Windows XP ver-
sions with known vulnerabilities that could be abused to break into
the system [31].†

2015: Microsoft patched a vulnerability that could allow attackers
to take control of webservers. CyberKeel tested 50 different mar-
itime websites against this vulnerability. 37 percent of the tested
websites were vulnerable, beneath them websites from MSC, Hap-
pag Lloyd and Hamburg Süd [19].†

2017: A researcher from Pen Test Partners showed the take over
of control over a ship’s network by means of a vessel heading from
Malacca Strait to Tubarao in Brazil. With the help of Shodan he
found access to a VSAT modem that gave him information about
the crew on board and the network configuration. This got him
further into the ship’s network [76]. Another security researcher
named x0rz told that they had hacked into a ship and gained con-
trol of the ship’s VSAT systems. He said that they could see the
call history, change system setting and upload new firmware. In

addition, as in the previous attack, the access to the VSAT system
leaks information about the ship’s position [72].

2020: Researchers from Yangosat gained access to a vessel’s VSAT
system near a European capital city. They had access to information
about the system and would have been able to break the vessel’s
system completely [92].

4.12 Conclusion of Attacks
The most common detected attacks onto the maritime sector in the
last years are ransomware-based infections. The software used is
similar to the software used in attacks on other sectors and also the
path of infection is most common, via email. A lot of other malware
infections, affecting shipping companies and systems on vessels, are
standard malware infections with non-specialized software. There
are also examples of detected per-attack-cropped software in the
last years. One example for these targeted campaigns is email fraud,
with shipping-company specific fraud email addresses and content.
In addition, participants of the maritime sector were repeatedly
affected as collateral damage by broad targeted malware attacks on
system-relevant infrastructure. By comparison with figure 2 which
shows the number of incidents for the periods 2001 to 2016 and
2017 to 2021 per threat category, and figure 1 which shows the
distribution of attacks over the years, we see a clear trend towards
an increase in numbers of incidents, especially in ransomware. A
list of all incidents can be seen in the appendix table A.

Figure 1: Number of publicly reported incidents per year.

If one looks at the accused attackers, we find that global conflicts
between states [118] are reflected there: North Korea was accused
of being behind cyberattacks on South Korean companies [22, 99],
Russia was accused of attacking Ukrainian targets [113] and China
allegedly attacked various targets in the conflict over the South
China Sea [114].

4.13 Recommended Sources for Further

Information

During our research, we looked through more than a hundred ref-
erences. In this section, we want to highlight references that are
particularly detailed, entertaining or educational and well worth
reading. Some of them are summaries from IT security compa-
nies that regularly present their research and working experience.
Others are reports from security researchers or (former) employees.

7

Figure 2: Number of publicly reported incidents per threat
category for the periods 2001-2017 and 2018-2021.

We would like to recommend two sources about the NotPetya
incident at Maersk. First, the Wired article describing the incident
in detail [121] is worth mentioning. Second, a report by Gavin
Ashton, former Maersk employee, is remarkable. His report also
covers a period prior to the incident [7]. The Center for Advanced
Defense Studies published a detailed and nicely prepared report on
exposing GPS spoofing in Russia and Syria [15]. There are a lot of
extensive reports about APTs and specific campaigns. The APTnotes
repository [58] collected more than 500 publicly available reports
related to APTs. The repository is not specific to the maritime sector.
As an example, we mention the reports on the likely Nigerian threat
group Gold Galleon by Secureworks [100] and on the Kimsuky
operation by Kaspersky [105] because of their length and level of
detail.

5 EXPERT INTERVIEWS
The set of cyber incidents that we collected shows only a fraction
of all incidents that occured, as some incidents have not been de-
tected at all [40] and neither the affected company, nor the attacker
or a third party has disclosed the incident to the public [14, 93].
Furthermore, we might have missed publicly reported attacks.

To set our results in relation, we conducted five interviews with
experts from the maritime sector. Moreover, we use the interviews
to determine the level of coverage of the ENISA scenarios and to
gain insight in the role of threat information sharing.

5.1 Method
The interviews are based on a semi-structured questionnaire with
questions in four different categories:

(1) general context of the interviewee and their employer,
(2) incident disclosure strategies and threat information sharing,
(3) cyber incidents in the maritime sector in general,
(4) the interviewees’ perspective on the results presented in

section 4.

5.2 General Context
We interviewed representatives from five European companies
from the maritime sector. Among them were logistic companies,
shipyards and suppliers with a few hundred up to thousands of

20002005201020152020Year02468101214Number of Incidents0510152025Number of IncidentsAbuse and theft of dataDenial of service (DoS)GPS spoofing/jammingInterception of emissionsMalwareManipulation of dataSocial engineering, phishingTargeted attacksUnknown ThreatVulnerabilities exploitationThreat Category114414161022621587612001-20172018-2021employees. Some of them are part of critical infrastructure. The
interviewees were required to have insight in their company’s IT
security processes. Most have a full technical IT security position,
some have to deal with organizational aspects of IT security and
IT in general as well. In order to guarantee the anonymity of the
individual participants and companies, we will not release any more
precise data.

All interviewees report that the number of cybersecurity full-
time positions is small (one to ten employees). The number of
employees who have insight into the cyber attacks the company is
confronted with is always strictly limited and ranges from three
up to 45 people. Most of the interview partners stated, that their
companies see IT security as a relevant topic and have advanced
attack detection methods that go beyond firewalls. Two companies
have dedicated teams for OT security, which closely work together
with the IT security teams.

5.3 Thread Information Sharing
Only the critical infrastructure companies report incidents in order
to comply with reporting obligations under law. They don’t have
additional internal rules for reporting. Two of the interviewees
know unpublished cyber incidents from other companies.

The main reason for not publishing incidents are fear of image
loss and economic damage. Two companies participate in Threat In-
formation Sharing (TIS) platforms and gained useful information in
the past. The other three agree that it could be useful to participate
in TIS groups.

Reasons for not-participating are the inability to contribute own
incidents or distrust against the other TIS participants. Additionally,
the information gain from TIS groups may be bigger, when the
group is small, non-official and communicates verbally and informal.
To increase the efficiency of TIS groups, one interviewee proposed
that all incidents should be reported anonymously. This would
help to prevent image losses. Another suggestion was to filter and
categorize the threat information to allow a more targeted and
customized stream of information.

5.4 Cyber Attacks on the Maritime Sector
The interviewees state that from an attacker’s persepective the
most interesting attacks are media-effective or mass attacks like
email campaigns. The NotPetya attack on Maersk [97] was seen as
the worst incident in the maritime sector. In line with this, the most
serious type of attacks in the last years are ransomware attacks.

For defence, the companies take measures to protect endpoints
but also sensitize their employees because they are a key entry
point for malware. Only two of the companies keep statistics on IT
security incidents.

5.5 Comparison of Experience with our Results
The interviews put the results of our research in perspective. The
first point of criticism against our statistic is the differentiation
between the threats malware, targeted attacks, ransomware and
DDoS attacks because the transitions are fluent and not clear at
first glance. This emerged from the fact, that the public sources are
often vague and do not describe all the causes and consequences
exactly. Therefore it is hard to decide, in which threat category they

8

belong. Another point of criticism is, that we may have overseen
the threats CEO-fraud and malware infections via USB flash drive.
We don’t have examples for real world incidents like this, but they
occur in the wild. We covered CEO-fraud under the threat cate-
gory social engineering in section 4.8 and the USB-attack under
different categories, mostly malware, because first and foremost
this is an infection method and we do not distinguish according
to this. Additionally we cover attacks like AIS-spoofing under the
category geo-localisation signals spoofing and jamming in section
4.4. For a comprehensive analyses of attacks, we include proof of
concepts in our work, as they are possible attacks and should there-
fore be taken into account, even though we have not yet observed
any matching real world attacks. According to the statement of
two interviewees, we may cover maximum ten percent of all cy-
ber incidents in the maritime sector. Nevertheless, all participants
agree, that the distribution may be correct taking into account,
that the attack distribution has changed in recent years. It should
also be emphasized that reporting an incident to an authority or a
security company doesn’t imply that they occur in public statistics.
On the contrary, they are mostly confidential. However for infor-
mational and advertising purposes, these institutions sometimes
publish anonymized statistics about cyber security incidents, that
they handled. And so they found there way into our evaluation.
Lastly, most of our participants agree that it would help a lot if more
incidents were published. Not least by increasing the awareness
against cyber attacks, that is currently low.

6 CONCLUSION
Our survey shows that more and more information security inci-
dents are reported publicly, which also correspondents to a general
trend in any other industry. But in absolute terms, considering the
size of the maritime sector and estimates of unreported incidents,
still very few incidents are reported. The experts we interviewed
suspect that the number of successful attacks we found covers 10
percent at maximum.

Nowadays major malware campaigns delivered through email
can hit a maritime supplier in the same way as they affect any
other industry. This is amplified by the fact that there are more
opportunities for malware to spread because even systems that
used to be OT-based, such as ships, now have enough common IT
infrastructure on board to be infected by standard malware. We
can see this trend in the distribution of threats seen in the maritime
sector over the last twenty years. More untargeted and simple
malware attacks took place then, whereas more ransomware and
targeted attacks take place nowadays.

Most incidents we found belong to one of two kinds of attacks:
First, there are attacks that target companies and vulnerable systems
in general, and not specifically the maritime sector, for example to
make money via ransomware. Second, there are targeted attacks in
which specific maritime companies, such as shipyards, are targeted
for presumably espionage purposes or other political reasons. In
most of these cases it is suspected that state sponsored actors may
be involved, but in most cases there are no concrete public available
evidences.

In general the attribution for cyber attacks is difficult because
real evidence is rarely presented. There may be political reasons

to present a specific actor as attacker or there may be a desire
to disguise a configuration error. For this survey, we have taken
the information about the presumed attackers from the respective
sources. These information should be taken with a grain of salt.

There are few incidents where companies proactively publish
information voluntary or under duress. Often, the information is
not detailed. Rarely do companies themselves or insiders report in
particular detail on the cause and consequences of attacks. This is
among other things because the companies concerned are afraid of
bad publicity and competitive disadvantages. Detailed reports are
particularly valuable because everyone can learn from them: the
reports show what can happen, what went poorly and what went
well in responding to incidents.

All public information about incidents can be used by all compa-
nies to improve their IT security. There are concerns, that attackers
could also use these reports to attack other companies in the de-
scribed way, which can increase an already existing attack vector.
We argue that such report are more important in combating an
attack than in exacerbating it because a successful attacker could
already potentially attack anyone that uses similar infrastructure
if the attack vectors remain unfixed. We have highlighted partic-
ularly noteworthy reports in this paper and believe that it is very
important that companies continue to publish both prevented and
successful attacks in order to help other companies, independent
of their industry, to avoid the same kind of attacks and to increase
the overall awareness.

Our interviews suggest that the awareness of attacks has already
increased in large companies today whereas small companies tend
to consider themselves unattractive to attackers. Yet, for many com-
panies, regardless of their size, there is a tough trade-off between IT
security and cost. Policy makers in various countries support this
decision with requirements laid down in legislation. Also, while
some of our interviewees see the possibility of Thread Information
Sharing (TIS) as potentially helpful for attack prevention, there
are several reasons not to use this tool. These include distrust of
other TIS participants and fear of bad publicity. However, there are
also ideas to make TIS more attractive, for example by making the
participants anonymous.

Overall, the threats for participants of the maritime sector are
rising and therefore the individual parties should cooperate to hold
out against these threats. The attackers learned already how to
cooperate and the attack vectors are growing constantly.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank all experts who were available for
interviews. This work is partly funded by the German Federal Min-
istry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure as part of the IHATEC
program for the development of innovative port technologies.

REFERENCES

[4] Adis Ajdin. 2021. HMM confirms cyber attack. Splash247.com. Retrieved 17

June 2021 from https://splash247.com/hmm-confirms-cyber-attack/

[5] Mohammed Nasser Al-Mhiqani, Rabiah Ahmad, Warusia Yassin, Aslinda Hassan,
Zaheera Zainal Abidin, Nabeel Salih Ali, and Karrar Hameed Abdulkareem. 2018.
Cyber-security incidents: a review cases in cyber-physical systems. International
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 9, 1 (2018), 499–508.
[6] Juan Ignacio Alcaide and Ruth Garcia Llave. 2020. Critical infrastructures
cybersecurity and the maritime sector. Transportation Research Procedia 45
(2020), 547–554.

[7] Gavin Ashton. 2020. Maersk, me & notPetya. Retrieved 3 November 2020 from

https://gvnshtn.com/maersk-me-notpetya/

[8] Pierre T Axel F. 2017.

Leviathan: Espionage actor spearphishes mar-
Retrieved 1 October 2020
Proofpoint.
itime and defense targets.
from https://www.proofpoint.com/us/threat-insight/post/leviathan-espionage-
actor-spearphishes-maritime-and-defense-targets

[9] Tom Bateman. 2013. Police warning after drug traffickers’ cyber-attack. BBC.
Retrieved 27 October 2020 from https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-
24539417

[10] Kate B. Belmont. 2016. MARITIME CYBERSECURITY: Cyber Cases in the
Maritime Environment. American association of Port authorities. Retrieved 1
October 2020 from https://www.maritimecyberadvisors.com/services/

[11] Tanya Blake. 2017. Shipping must confront onboard systems’ cyber vulnerabili-
ties. Safety at Sea. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://safetyatsea.net/news/
2017/shipping-must-confront-onboard-systems-cyber-vulnerabilities/
[12] Ariel Bogle. 2018. Svitzer employee details stolen in data breach affecting
almost half of its Australian employees. ABC News. Retrieved 28 Octo-
ber 2020 from https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-03-15/sensitive-data-stolen-
from-global-shipping-company-svitzer/9552600

[13] Mariska Buitendijk. 2020. CMA CGM suspects data breach in recent cyber attack.
SWZ Maritime. Retrieved 1 November 2020 from https://www.swzmaritime.nl/
news/2020/10/01/cma-cgm-suspects-data-breach-in-recent-cyber-attack/
[14] Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik (BSI). 2019. Die Lage der

IT-Sicherheit in Deutschland 2019.

[15] C4ADS. 2020. Above Us Only Stars. Retrieved 3 November 2020 from https:

//www.c4reports.org/aboveusonlystars

[16] Cambridge Centre for Risk Studies. 2019. Shen attack Cyber risk in Asia Pacific
ports. CyRiM Report 2019. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://safety4sea.
com/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/Lloyds-Cyrim-report-2019-2019_11.pdf
[17] Carnival. 2020. Substitute Notice of Data Breach. Carnival. Retrieved 23 October
2020 from https://www.carnival.com/legal/substitute-notice-data-breach?icid=
advisory_substitute_notice_10132020

[18] James V Carroll. 2003. Vulnerability assessment of the US transportation infras-
tructure that relies on the global positioning system. The Journal of Navigation
56, 2 (2003), 185–193.

[19] Sam Chambers. 2015. Lack of patching leaves maritime sites open to remote
control risk. Splash. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://splash247.com/lack-
of-patching-leaves-maritime-sites-open-to-remote-control-risk/

[20] Sam Chambers. 2020. Anglo-Eastern suffers ransomware attack. Splash.
Retrieved 26 October 2020 from https://splash247.com/anglo-eastern-suffers-
ransomware-attack/

[21] Sam Chambers. 2020. London Offshore Consultants suffers ransomware attack.
Splash. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://splash247.com/london-offshore-
consultants-suffers-ransomware-attack/

[22] Haejin Choi. 2017. North Korea hacked Daewoo Shipbuilding, took warship
blueprints: South Korea lawmaker. Reuters. Retrieved 23 October 2020 from
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN1D00EX

[23] Dan Cimpean, Johan Meire, Vincent Bouckaert, Stijn Vande Casteele, Aurore
Pelle, and Luc Hellebooge. 2011. Analysis of cyber security aspects in the
maritime sector. (2011).

[24] CISOMAG. 2020. Mailto Ransomware Hits Toll Group, Deliveries Across Aus-
tralia Affected. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://cisomag.eccouncil.org/
mailto-ransomware-hits-toll-group-deliveries-across-australia-affected/
[25] Clarksons. 2018. Update on 2017 Data Breach - Regulatory Notice. Retrieved
26 October 2020 from https://www.clarksons.com/media/1142671/update_on_
2017_data_breach____regulatory_notice.pdf

[26] James Cook. 2018.

from US
Navy contractors.
Retrieved 26 October 2020
from https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2018/12/14/chinese-hackers-
steal-missile-plans-us-navy-contractors/

Chinese hackers ’steal missile plans’
The Telegraph.

[1] Lawrence Abrams. 2020. World’s largest cruise line operator Carnival
hit by ransomware.
Retrieved 23 October 2020
from https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/worlds-largest-cruise-
line-operator-carnival-hit-by-ransomware/

Bleeping Computer.

[2] AFP. 2020. Norwegian Cruise Company Hurtigruten Hit by Cyberattack. Secu-
rity Week. Retrieved 15 December 2020 from https://www.securityweek.com/
norwegian-cruise-company-hurtigruten-hit-cyberattack

[3] Adis Ajdin. 2021. Bourbon confirms cyber attack. Splash247.com. Retrieved 18

May 2021 from https://splash247.com/bourbon-confirms-cyber-attack/

[27] Council of the European Union. 2008. Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8
December 2008 on the identification and designation of European critical infras-
tructures and the assessment of the need to improve their protection. Retrieved
17 December 2020 from http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2008/114/oj

[28] Ry Crozier. 2020. Toll Group hit by "new variant" of Mailto ransomware. IT
News. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://www.itnews.com.au/news/toll-
group-hit-by-new-variant-of-mailto-ransomware-537537

[29] Ry Crozier. 2020. Toll Group suffers second ransomware attack this year. IT
News. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://www.itnews.com.au/news/toll-

9

group-suffers-second-ransomware-attack-this-year-547757

[30] CyberKeel. 2014. Marine Cyberwatch. Retrieved 12 August 2015 from http:

//cyberkeel.com/images/pdf-files/Nov2014.pdf

[31] Cyberkeel. 2014. Marine Cyberwatch.

Retrieved 22 November 2014 from

http://cyberkeel.com/images/pdf-files/Nov2014.pdf

[32] Cyberkeel. 2014. MARITIME CYBER-RISKS. Retrieved 15 October 2014 from

http://cyberkeel.com/images/pdf-files/Whitepaper.pdf

[33] Cylance. 2014. Operation Cleaver Report.

Retrieved 21 October 2020
from https://www.cylance.com/content/dam/cylance/pages/operation-cleaver/
Cylance_Operation_Cleaver_Report.pdf

[34] cytegic. 2018. Managing the Cyber Risk to the Global Shipping Industry Part I.
Retrieved 21 December 2018 from https://www.cytegic.com/managing-cyber-
risk-global-shipping-industry-part/

[35] Luca Mella Davide Testa, Luigi Martire. 2019. The Story of Manuel’s Java RAT.
Yoroi. Retrieved 21 October 2020 from https://yoroi.company/research/the-
story-of-manuels-java-rat/

[36] Jessica Davis. 2017.
tacking Europe.
from
ransomware-attacking-europe

Nuance knocked offline by ransomware at-
Retrieved 1 October 2020
https://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/nuance-knocked-offline-

Healthcare IT-News.

[37] Katerina Dimitropoulos. 2021. Counterfeit invoices and fake emails continue
to plague our industry, cautions ITIC. ITIC Press release. Retrieved 4 June
2021 from https://www.itic-insure.com/knowledge/press-release-counterfeit-
invoices-and-fake-emails-continue-to-plague-our-industry-cautions-itic-
155636/

The phone remains a useful weapon
[38] Katerina Dimitropoulos. 2021.
against fraud, advises ITIC.
Retrieved 4 June 2021
from https://www.itic-insure.com/who-we-are/news-events/press-release-the-
phone-remains-a-useful-weapon-against-fraud-advises-itic-153845/

ITIC Press release.

[39] ENISA (European Union Agency for Cybersecurity). 2019.

Port Cy-
bersecurity - Good practices for cybersecurity in the maritime sec-
tor.
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/port-cybersecurity-good-
practices-for-cybersecurity-in-the-maritime-sector

[40] Fire Eye. 2020. Deep Dive into Cyber Reality - Security Effectiveness Report
2020. https://www.fireeye.com/content/dam/fireeye-www/current-threats/
pdfs/rpt-security-effectiveness-report-2020-summary.pdf

[41] FireEye. 2018. Suspected Chinese Cyber Espionage Group (TEMP.Periscope)
Targeting U.S. Engineering and Maritime Industries. Retrieved 23 October 2020
from https://www.fireeye.com/blog/threat-research/2018/03/suspected-chinese-
espionage-group-targeting-maritime-and-engineering-industries.html
[42] Centre for Strategy and Evaluation Services. 2011. Maritime Security
https://ec.europa.eu/home-

and Surveillance - Case Study.
affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/e-library/documents/policies/security/pdf/
maritime_case_study_cses_en.pdf

(2011).

[43] Alon Gal. 2020. Threat actor claims he is salling... Twitter. Retrieved 25 Septem-
ber 2020 from https://twitter.com/UnderTheBreach/status/1305863617665957888
Carnival Cruise hit by data breach, warns of
[44] Sergiu Gatlan. 2021.
data misuse risk.
Retrieved 18 June 2021
from https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/carnival-cruise-hit-
by-data-breach-warns-of-data-misuse-risk/

Bleeping Computer.

[45] Gesetz über das Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik. 2021. §

8b IV BSIG.

[46] Naveen Goud. 2020. Cyber Threat to Maritime TUG Owners. Cybersecurity
Insiders. Retrieved 23 October 2020 from https://www.cybersecurity-insiders.
com/cyber-threat-to-maritime-tug-owners/

[47] Dana Goward. 2017. Mass GPS Spoofing Attack in Black Sea? The Maritime
Executive. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://www.maritime-executive.
com/editorials/mass-gps-spoofing-attack-in-black-sea

[48] Alan Grant, P. Williams, N. Ward, and S. Basker. 2009. GPS jamming and the

impact on maritime navigation. Journal. 62 (5 11 2009).

[49] Xavier Grau. 2018. El port de Barcelona pateix un ciberatac. Ara. Retrieved
21 October 2020 from https://www.ara.cat/economia/port-Barcelona-pateix-
ciberatac_0_2091990961.html

[50] Mark Harris. 2019. Ghost ships, crop circles, and soft gold: A GPS mys-
tery in Shanghai. MIT Technology Review.
Retrieved 1 October 2020
from https://www.technologyreview.com/2019/11/15/131940/ghost-ships-crop-
circles-and-soft-gold-a-gps-mystery-in-shanghai/

[51] Jamie Henry. 2015.

Cyber hack has company deposit 10M in wrong
Retrieved 1 October 2020
account.
from https://www.insurancebusinessmag.com/ca/news/marine/cyber-hack-
has-company-deposit-10m-in-wrong-account-48672.aspx

Insurance Business Canada.

[52] Wilfried Honekamp. 2018. Polizei-Informatik 2018. Rediroma-Verlag.
[53] ICS-CERT. 2016. Navis WebAccess SQL Injection Exploitation. Retrieved 27

October 2020 from https://us-cert.cisa.gov/ics/alerts/IR-ALERT-L-16-230-01

[54] Jonathan Saul Jack Kim. 2016. South Korea revives GPS backup project after
blaming North for jamming. Reuters. Retrieved 13 October 2020 from https:
//www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN0XT01T

10

[55] Ida Jacobsen. 2020. Blue Water hit by cyber attack. ShippingWatch. Retrieved
27 October 2020 from https://shippingwatch.com/logistics/article12414470.ece
[56] Ellen Nakashima Joby Warrick. 2020. Officials: Israel linked to a disruptive cyber-
attack on Iranian port facility. Washington Post. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/officials-israel-linked-to-
a-disruptive-cyberattack-on-iranian-port-facility/2020/05/18/9d1da866-9942-
11ea-89fd-28fb313d1886_story.html

[57] Sarah Kimmorley. 2015.

Foreign builders of Australia’s new submarines
their
Retrieved 23 October 2020 from

are using hand-delivered messages after hackers try to steal
plans.
https://www.businessinsider.com.au/foreign-builders-of-australias-new-
submarines-are-using-hand-delivered-messages-after-hackers-try-to-steal-
their-plans-2015-11

Business Insider Australia.

[58] Santiago Castro Kiran Bandla. 2020. APTnotes Repository.

Retrieved 2

December 2020 from https://github.com/aptnotes/data

Coast Guard Commandant on Cyber in the mar-
[59] Jodie Knox. 2015.
itime domain.
Retrieved 27 October 2020
from https://mariners.coastguard.dodlive.mil/2015/06/15/6152015-coast-guard-
commandant-on-cyber-in-the-maritime-domain/

Maritime Commons.

[60] Eduard Kovacs. 2019. Pitney Bowes Operations Disrupted by Ransomware At-
tack. Security Week. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://www.securityweek.
com/pitney-bowes-operations-disrupted-ransomware-attack

[61] Eduard Kovacs. 2020.

Shipping Giant MSC Confirms Outage Caused
Retrieved 1 October 2020 from

by Malware Attack.
https://www.securityweek.com/shipping-giant-msc-confirms-outage-
caused-malware-attack?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_
campaign=Feed:+Securityweek+(SecurityWeek+RSS+Feed)

Security Week.

[62] Tomas Kristiansen. 2014. Kina hackede sig ind i Søfartsstyrelsen. Shipping-
Watch. Retrieved 21 October 2020 from https://shippingwatch.dk/Rederier/
article7043149.ece

[63] Ravie Lakshmanan. 2021. New Chinese Malware Targeted Russia’s Largest Nu-
clear Submarine Designer. The Hacker News. Retrieved 7 May 2021 from https:
//thehackernews.com/2021/05/new-chinese-malware-targeted-russias.html

[64] Adrienne Lee. 2013. UT Austin Researchers Spoof Superyacht at Sea. Cockrell
school of engineering. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://www.engr.utexas.
edu/features/superyacht-gps-spoofing

[65] Sang Jeong Lee. 2013. GNSS Vulnerability Issues in Korea. http://www.unoosa.

org/pdf/icg/2013/wgB-subgroup/5.pdf

[66] Roman Lehberger. 2020.

Polizei und Zoll gehen gegen Kokain-
Retrieved 15 December 2020
https://www.spiegel.de/panorama/polizei-und-zoll-gehen-gegen-

Großdealer vor.
from
kokain-grossdealer-in-norddeutschland-vor-a-7534e5fb-2d58-4f28-9241-
37eaf047cdd0

Spiegel online.

[67] John Leyden. 2003. UK teenager accused of ‘electronic sabotage’ against US
port. The Register. Retrieved 21 October 2020 from https://www.theregister.co.
uk/2003/10/06/uk_teenager_accused_of_electronic/

[68] Dr. Karsten Liebing. 2021.

Finanzieller Schaden in Folge eines Betrugs-
Retrieved 25 May 2021 from

falles. HAMMONIA Schiffsholding AG.
https://www.hammonia-schiffsholding.de/index.php_nav_main=ir&nav_
main_sub=ir_unternehmensmitteilungen&nav_main_sub_1=ir_aktuelle_
unternehmensmitteilungen.html
[69] Holland America Line. 2020.

Holland America Line Statement on
Retrieved 1 October 2020 from

Cyber Incident.
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/holland-america-line-
statement-on-cyber-incident-301014662.html

prnewswire.

[70] Steve Mansfield-Devine. 2015. The growth and evolution of DDoS. Network

Security 2015, 10 (2015), 13–20.

[71] John Irish Matt Siegel. 2016. France’s DCNS says India submarine data leak
may be ’economic warfare’. Reuters. Retrieved 23 October 2020 from https:
//www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN10Z04G

[72] Mfame. 2017. Remote Attacker Can Hack Through Your Ships VSAT. Retrieved
23 October 2020 from https://mfame.guru/remote-attacker-can-hack-ships-
vsat/

[73] Bill Miller and Dale Rowe. 2012. A survey SCADA of and critical infrastructure
incidents. In Proceedings of the 1st Annual conference on Research in information
technology. 51–56.

[74] Sameer C. Mohindru. 2017. Shipping: BW Group’s computer systems hacked,
steps up cyber security. SP Global. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https:
//www.spglobal.com/platts/en/market-insights/latest-news/shipping/101317-
shipping-bw-groups-computer-systems-hacked-steps-up-cyber-security
[75] Ivan Mraković and Ranko Vojinović. 2019. Maritime Cyber Security Analysis–
How to Reduce Threats? Transactions on Maritime Science 8, 01 (2019), 132–139.
[76] Ken Munro. 2017. OSINT from ship satcoms. Pen Test Partners. Retrieved 1
October 2020 from https://www.pentestpartners.com/security-blog/osint-from-
ship-satcoms/

[77] Ellen Nakashima. 2013. Confidential report lists U.S. weapons system designs
compromised by Chinese cyberspies. The Washington Post.
Retrieved
23 October 2020 from https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-

com/news/2019/apr/10/city-lights-happened-ransomware-port-san-diego/

[103] Andrea Shalal-Esa. 2013. Cyber vulnerabilities found in Navy’s newest warship:
official. Reuters. Retrieved 23 October 2020 from https://www.reuters.com/
article/idUSBRE93N02X20130424

[104] Ship and Bunker. 2014. WFS In Court Over 18M Bunker Scam Claim. Retrieved
28 October 2020 from https://shipandbunker.com/news/world/670152-wfs-in-
court-over-18m-bunker-scam-claim

[105] Dmitry Tarakanov. 2013. The Kimsuky Operation: A North Korean APT?
Kaspersky Securelist. Retrieved 21 October 2020 from https://securelist.com/the-
kimsuky-operation-a-north-korean-apt/57915/

[106] ClearSky Research Team. 2016. Business Email Compromise fraud Against
Global Shipping Companies. ClearSky. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https:
//www.clearskysec.com/bec-shipping/

[107] Editorial Team. 2021. Recent maritime cyber threats. SAFETY4SEA. Retrieved
4 June 2021 from https://safety4sea.com/recent-maritime-cyber-threats/

[108] The Guardian. 2018.

Defence shipbuilder Austal hit with data
breach and extortion attempt.
Retrieved 1 October 2020 from
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/nov/02/defence-shipbuilder-
austal-hit-with-data-breach-and-extortion-attempt

[109] The Maritime Executive. 2019.

James Fisher and Sons Hit by Cyberattack.
Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/
james-fisher-and-sons-hit-by-cyberattack

[110] The Sun Daily. 2017. Kedah bunker fuel company loses RM4.5m to email scam.
Retrieved 28 April 2018 from http://www.thesundaily.my/news/2017/06/12/
kedah-bunker-fuel-company-loses-rm45m-email-scam

[111] Karnan Thirupathy. 2018. ’Whaling’ in Singapore. Kennedys. Retrieved 27
October 2020 from https://kennedyslaw.com/thought-leadership/case-review/
whaling-in-singapore/

[112] TrapX Security. 2014. Anatomy of the Attack: Zombie Zero.

Retrieved 1
October 2020 from http://www.trapx.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/TrapX_
ZOMBIE_Report_Final.pdf

[113] Patrick Tucker. 2018.

Russia Launched Cyber Attacks Against Ukraine
Before Ship Seizures, Firm Says. Nextgov.
Retrieved 26 October 2020
from https://www.nextgov.com/cybersecurity/2018/12/russia-launched-cyber-
attacks-against-ukraine-ship-seizures-firm-says/153387/

[114] David Tweed. 2018.

Chinese Hackers Hit U.S. Firms Linked to
South China Sea Dispute.
Retrieved 23 October 2020
from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-03-16/china-hackers-hit-
u-s-firms-linked-to-sea-dispute-fireeye-says

Bloomberg.

[115] U.S. Coast Guard. 2019. Marine Safety Information Bulletin: Cyber Adversaries
Targeting Commercial Vessels. Retrieved 28 October 2020 from https://www.
dco.uscg.mil/Portals/9/DCO_Documents/5p/MSIB/2019/MSIB_004_19.pdf
[116] U.S. Coast Guard. 2019. Marine SafetyInformation Bulletin. Retrieved 1 October
2020 from https://www.dco.uscg.mil/Portals/9/DCO_Documents/5p/MSIB/2019/
MSIB_10_19.pdf

[117] U.S. Coast Guard. 2020.

Marine Safety Information Bulletin: Ma-
licious Email Spoofing Incidents.
Retrieved 28 October 2020 from
https://www.dco.uscg.mil/Portals/9/DCO_Documents/5p/MSIB/2020/USCG-
MSIB-19-20-CYBER-SPOOFING.pdf?ver=wA9eQAS0GqUnT4Tu86-3Zg==

[118] US Council on Foreign Relations. 2020. Global Conflict Tracker. Retrieved 2

December 2020 from https://www.cfr.org/global-conflict-tracker/

[119] U.S. Department of Homeland Security. 2015. Transportation Systems Sector-
Specific Plan. Retrieved 17 December 2020 from https://www.cisa.gov/sites/
default/files/publications/nipp-ssp-transportation-systems-2015-508.pdf
[120] Luke Wheeler. 2018. Could you cyberattack a superyacht? Yachting Pages
Media Group. Retrieved 21 October 2020 from https://www.yachting-pages.
com/content/cyberattack-superyacht-guide.html

[121] Wired. 2018. The Untold Story of NotPetya, the Most Devastating Cyberattack in
History. https://www.wired.com/story/notpetya-cyberattack-ukraine-russia-
code-crashed-the-world/

[122] Jonathan Saul Yeganeh Torbati. 2012.
sanctions damage mounting. Reuters.
https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSBRE89L10X20121022

Iran’s top cargo shipping line says
Retrieved 7 November 2020 from

[123] Yoroi. 2018. Cyber-Espionage Campaign targeting the naval Industrie (MartyM-
cFly). Yoroi. Retrieved 30 October 2020 from https://yoroi.company/research/
cyber-espionage-campaign-targeting-the-naval-industry-martymcfly/

security/confidential-report-lists-us-weapons-system-designs-compromised-
by-chinese-cyberspies/2013/05/27/a42c3e1c-c2dd-11e2-8c3b-0b5e9247e8ca_
story.html

[78] NL Times. 2017. Rotterdamm Port, TNT hit in new ransomware attack. Re-
trieved 1 October 2020 from https://nltimes.nl/2017/06/28/rotterdam-port-tnt-
hit-new-ransomware-attack

[79] U.S. Department of Transportation Maritime Administration. 2019. MSCI Advi-
sory 2019-013-Eastern/Central Mediterranean Sea and Suez Canal-GPS Interfer-
ence. Retrieved 26 October 2020 from https://www.maritime.dot.gov/msci/2019-
013-easterncentral-mediterranean-sea-and-suez-canal-gps-interference
[80] Robert Ighodaro Ogie. 2017. Cyber security incidents on critical infrastructure
and industrial networks. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Computer and Automation Engineering. 254–258.

[81] Paul Berrill London. 2016. Honeytraps that can soon turn sour. Retrieved 27
October 2020 from https://www.tradewindsnews.com/weekly/honeytraps-that-
can-soon-turn-sour/1-1-1200770

[82] Dameon Pesanti. 2017. Port of Vancouver meeting hindered by cyberattack.
Columbian. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://www.columbian.com/news/
2017/mar/10/port-of-vancouver-meeting-hindered-by-cyberattack/

[83] Pitney Bowes. 2019. System Update. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https:

//www.pitneybowes.com/de/system-update.html

[84] Janet Porter. 2015. Top container lines at risk of cyber-jacking. Lloyds Loading
List. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://www.lloydsloadinglist.com/freight-
directory/news/Top-container-lines-at-risk-of-cyber-jacking/62430.htm#
.Xny6vy2ZPq0

[85] pzdupe2. 2016. High-tech pirates hacked a shipping company to figure out the
perfect vessels to plunder. businessinsider. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from
https://www.businessinsider.com/pirates-hacked-vessels-2016-3?r=DE&IR=T
[86] Kaspersky Lab Global Research and Analysis Team. 2013. The ICEFOG APT: A
Tale of Cloak and Three Daggers. Kaspersky. Retrieved 9 August 2014 from http:
//kasperskycontenthub.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/43/vlpdfs/icefog.pdf
[87] Reuters. 2016. Personal data for more than 130,000 sailors hacked: U.S. Navy.
Retrieved 27 October 2020 from https://de.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN13J001
[88] Reuters. 2020. Iran says one of two cyber attack targets was country’s ports -
news agency. Retrieved 26 October 2020 from https://www.reuters.com/article/
idUSKBN271135

[89] Reuters. 2020. UN shipping agency says cyber attack disables website. Retrieved
18 October 2020 from https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSL8N2GS38E

[90] Riviera. 2018. Bridge systems are not cyber-secure.

Retrieved 1 October
2020 from https://www.rivieramm.com/opinion/bridge-systems-are-not-cyber-
secure-24223

[91] Brittany Barbehenn Robert Falcone. 2019. xHunt Campaign: Attacks on Kuwait
Shipping and Transportation Organizations. Paloalto Networks. Retrieved
27 November 2020 from https://unit42.paloaltonetworks.com/xhunt-campaign-
attacks-on-kuwait-shipping-and-transportation-organizations/

[92] Ewan Robinson. 2020. Hacked - a real life story of exploiting vessel VSAT.
Retrieved 26 October 2020 from https://smartmaritimenetwork.com/2020/05/
25/hacked-a-real-life-story-of-exploiting-vessel-vsat/

[93] RSM. 2019. Catch 22: Digital transformation and its impact on cybersecurity.
[94] James Rundke. 2019. Coast Guard Details February Cyberattack on Ship. Re-
trieved 26 October 2020 from https://www.wsj.com/articles/coast-guard-details-
february-cyberattack-on-ship-11564133401

[95] Stuart Corner Ry Crozier. 2017.

Hacked Aussie Defence firm lost
fighter jet, bomb, ship plans.
Retrieved 23 October
2020 from https://www.itnews.com.au/news/hacked-aussie-defence-firm-lost-
fighter-jet-bomb-ship-plans-475211

iTnews.

[96] Safety 4 Sea. 2018. Cyber attack hits Cosco’s operations in US. Retrieved 1
October 2020 from https://safety4sea.com/cyber-attack-hits-coscos-operations-
in-us/

[97] Safety 4 Sea. 2018. Maersk Line: Surviving from a cyber attack. Retrieved 1
October 2020 from https://safety4sea.com/cm-maersk-line-surviving-from-a-
cyber-attack/

[98] Ruben Santamarta. 2014. A wake-up call for SATCOM security. Technical White
Paper. Retrieved 1 October 2020 from https://ioactive.com/pdfs/IOActive_
SATCOM_Security_WhitePaper.pdf

[99] Jonathan Saul. 2013. Governments confront rising threat to ships from signal
jamming. Reuters. Retrieved 21 October 2020 from https://www.reuters.com/
article/idUSL5N0E926V20130530

[100] Secureworks. 2018.

Gold Galleon: How a Nigerian Cyber Crew
Plunders the Shipping Industry-.
Retrieved 23 October 2020
from https://www.secureworks.com/research/gold-galleon-how-a-nigerian-
cyber-crew-plunders-the-shipping-industry

[101] Chris (Intel Security). 2015.

Stealthy Cyberespionage Campaign At-
tacks With Social Engineering.
Retrieved 4 Novem-
ber 2020 from https://community.spiceworks.com/topic/1028936-stealthy-
cyberespionage-campaign-attacks-with-social-engineering

Spiceworks.

[102] Thom Senzee. 2019. What happened in ransomware attack on Port of San Diego.
San Diego Reader. Retrieved 23 October 2020 from https://www.sandiegoreader.

11

A LIST OF PUBLICLY REPORTED INCIDENTS

Threat Category

Abuse and Theft
of Data

Data Manipulation

DDoS

Geo-localisation
Spoofing

Interception of
emissions

Malware

Year Target
2012 Australian Customs and Border protection
2013 General Dynamics
2014 Unknown
2016 US Navy Subcontractor
2016 DCNS
2016
Shipping company
Ports
2016
2016 DSME
2017 Australian Defence Subcontractor
2017 Clarksons
2017
2018 US Navy Subcontractor
2018 Austal
2019 Holland America Line
2019
2020 DSME
2021 Carnival
2014 Massachusetts Maritime Academy

London Offshore Consultants

Svitzer

Port of Houston
Port of Houston
Port of Long Beach
Port of Vancouver

2001
2001
2013
2017
2001 Unspecified
2009 Unspecified
2010
South Korea
2012 Unknown
2013 A single yacht
2013
2013 Generally Ships
2016 Generelly Ships
2017 Generally Ships
2018 Commercial Vessels
2018 Gernerally Ships
2018 Generally Ships
2019 Generally Ships
2014 World Fuel Services

Ship owners, Ship operators

JNPT

Pitney Bowes

Port of San Diego

Port of Rotterdam

2013 Mobile Offshore Drilling Unit
2017
2017 Maersk Line, APM Terminals, Damco
2017
2018 Cosco
2018
2018 Naval Industry
2019
2019 A single vessel
2019
Ports
2019 MTSA regulated facility
2020 Toll Group
2020 CGA CGM
2020 MSC Cargo
2020 Blue Water Shipping
2020 Carnival

12

Threat Actor
Crime Syndicate

BRpsd
North Korea

China

Maze Group

Moroccan Electronic
Islamic Union
UK Teenager
US Citizen

Proof of Concept
Proof of Concept
North Korea
North Korea
Proof of Concept
Proof of Concept
Proof of Concept

Proof of Concept
Proof of Concept

Sandworm
Sandworm
Sandworm
Sandworm
Iran

Proof of Concept

Source
[120]
[77]
[32]
[87]
[71]
[85]
[53]
[22]
[95]
[25]
[12]
[26]
[108]
[69]
[21]
[43]
[44]
[30]

[67]
[67]
[34]
[82]
[18]
[48]
[65]
[99]
[64]
[32]
[98]
[54]
[47]
[79]
[90]
[52]
[50]
[104]

[59]
[36]
[97]
[78]
[96]
[102]
[35]
[60, 83]
[94]
[16]
[116]
[24]
[13]
[61]
[55]
[1, 17]

Threat Category

Malware

Man in the
Middle

Year Target
2020 Anglo-Eastern
2020 Hurtigruten
2020 Toll Group
2021 Rubin Design Bureau
2013 Container carriers
2015 Container carriers
2013 Major Shipping & Trading Inc
2014 Container carriers
2015
Shipping company
2015 Nautilus Minerals, Marine Assets Corpora-

Threat Actor

Chinese APT
Proof of Concept
Proof of Concept

Proof of Concept

Social Engineering,
Phishing and
Identity Theft

Targeted Attack

Unknown Threat

Vulnerabilities

Ship broker; Bunker Supplier

tion
Seafarer
Shipping company
Shipping company

Shipping company
Port of Antwerp
Shipbuilding, Maritime Operations
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines

2016
2016
2017
2018 Bunker Fuel Company
2019 Commercial Vessels
2020 Tug Operating Organization
2020 Maritime Sector
2021
2021 MSC Cargo; Shipping company
2021 HAMMONIA Schiffsholding AG
2021
2011
2011
2011
2012 Danish Maritime Authorities
transportation companies
2012
2013 Hyundai Merchant Marine
2014
Logistic companies
2014 Maritime Sector
2015 Maritime Sector
2017 A single vessel
2018
2018 Government institutions
2018
2018 Government institutions
2019 Hamburg shipping company
2020
2020 Hamburger logistic company
2015 TKMS, DCNS, Mitsubishi, Kawasaki HI
2017 BW Group
2018
2019
2020
2020
2021 Bourbon
2021 Hyundai Merchant Marine
2013
Lockheed Martin
2014 US Navy
2015 Maritime Sector
2017 A single vessel
2017 VSAT systems
2020 A single vessel

Port of Barcelona
James Fisher and Sons
Shahid Rajaei Port
International Maritime Organization

Shipbuilding

Shipbuilder

Ports

13

Crime Syndicate
Icefog

China

Kimsuky

Leviathan
Leviathan

Carbanak Group
Leviathan
Gamaredon Group

Proof of Concept
Proof of Concept
Proof of Concept
Proof of Concept
Researcher
Researcher

Source
[20]
[2]
[29]
[63]
[32]
[84]
[111]
[30]
[10]
[51]

[81]
[10, 106]
[100]
[110]
[116]
[46]
[117]
[37]
[107]
[68]
[38]
[9]
[86]
[122]
[62]
[33]
[105]
[112]
[8]
[41, 101]
[11]
[123]
[113]
[41]
[113]
[91]
[88]
[66]
[57]
[74]
[49]
[109]
[56]
[89]
[3]
[4]
[103]
[30]
[19]
[76]
[72]
[92]

