A Blockchain-Enabled Incentivised Framework for
Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing in ICS

Kathy Nguyen∗, Shantanu Pal∗, Zahra Jadidi∗§, Ali Dorri∗, Raja Jurdak∗
∗School of Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia
§School of Information and Communication Technology, Grifﬁth University, Gold Coast Campus, QLD 4222, Australia
thihongthukathy.nguyen@connect.qut.edu.au, (shantanu.pal, zahra.jadidi, ali.dorri, r.jurdak)@qut.edu.au

1
2
0
2

c
e
D
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
6
2
0
0
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—In recent years Industrial Control Systems (ICS)
have been targeted increasingly by sophisticated cyberattacks.
Improving ICS security has drawn signiﬁcant attention in the
literature that emphasises the importance of Cyber Threat Intel-
ligence (CTI) sharing in accelerating detection, mitigation, and
prevention of cyberattacks. However, organisations are reluctant
to exchange CTI due to fear of exposure, reputational damage,
and lack of incentives. Furthermore, there has been limited
discussion about the factors inﬂuencing participation in sharing
CTI about ICS. The existing CTI-sharing platforms rely on
centralised trusted architectures that suffer from a single point of
failure and risk companies’ privacy as the central node maintains
CTI details. In this paper, we address the needs of organisations
involved in the management and protection of ICS and present a
novel framework that facilitates secure, private, and incentivised
exchange of CTI related to ICS using blockchain. We propose
a new blockchain-enabled framework that facilitates the secure
dissemination of CTI data among multiple stakeholders in ICS.
We provide the framework design, technical development and
evaluate the framework’s feasibility in a real-world application
environment using practical use-case scenarios. Our proposed
design shows a more practical and efﬁcient framework for
a CTI sharing network for ICS,
including the bestowal and
acknowledgment of data privacy, trust barriers, and security
issues ingrained in this domain.

I. INTRODUCTION

Technological advances in the last decades have brought
about profound changes to the network architecture and op-
eration of Industrial Control Systems (ICS) [1]. ICS is an
umbrella term that refers to a collection of interconnected con-
trol systems consisting of Supervisory Control and Data Ac-
quisition (SCADA) systems and Distributed Control Systems
(DCS). ICS operates industrial processes in critical infras-
tructures, including energy plants, transportation, and large-
scale industrial factories. With the emergence of the Internet
of Things (IoT), Industrial IoT (IIoT), cloud computing, and
ﬁfth-generation cellular network (5G) - ICS have become more
interconnected, robust, and exposed to the Internet [2]. From
a security point of view, there has been a surge of ransomware
and Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks against ICS
in critical infrastructures. For example, the Colonial Pipeline
attack in May 2021, causing the largest American pipeline
operator to shut down its entire fuel distribution network for
six days, sparking signiﬁcant gasoline shortages [3].

Since ICS are more interconnected than ever before, attacks
not only cause signiﬁcant economic damage for the affected
organisations but are also likely to impact other connected

systems and processes in the supply chain. This highlights the
need for cooperation and collaboration between ICS operators,
governments, and industry groups as a mean to collectively
reduce risks and facilitate early prevention of attacks [4].
Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) sharing is a promising infor-
mation exchange strategy that is used to collate evidence-based
knowledge about cyber threats in terms of potential and current
attacks, Indicators of Compromise (IoC), attackers’ motiva-
tions, intentions, characteristics and attack vectors, along with
their techniques, tactics, and procedures (TTPs) [5]. While it
is widely argued that CTI exchange is a highly valuable tool
to secure systems and networks, studies have observed that
organisations tend to refrain from engaging in this activity for
many reasons e.g., fear of exposure, reputational damage, and
lack of incentives for sharing the CTI among one another [6].
To encourage CTI sharing in ICS, we argue that the use
of blockchain is beneﬁcial. Given the blockchain’s salient
features of decentralisation, immutability, security, and au-
ditability, there is a fast-growing desire to use blockchain
in developing a network for CTI sharing [7]. However, to
the best of our knowledge, no attempts have been made that
include blockchain for CTI sharing in ICS for fair sharing
of high-quality CTI data. In this paper, we introduce an
approach for CTI sharing in ICS that leverages the advantages
of blockchain. Our motivation consists of the following two
objectives: i) to examine the need for blockchain-enabled CTI
sharing in ICS, and ii) to develop an incentivised framework
for the secure dissemination of CTI related to ICS using smart
contracts. Our approach motivates better engagement in the
exchange of CTI for ICS by employing incentives for entities
willing to participate in CTI sharing and their distribution over
the blockchain. The major contributions of the paper are:

• We present a comprehensive literature study on existing
CTI-sharing solutions and show their critical issues.
• We propose a blockchain-enabled CTI sharing framework
for ICS offering incentives to participate in the informa-
tion exchange process.

• We provide a complete design of the system and through
various use-case scenarios, demonstrate the suitability of
the proposed framework in real-world scenarios.

II. RELATED WORK

There are several existing solutions for CTI sharing that
leverage blockchain. In Table I, we provide a summary of

 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I
PREVIOUS PROPOSALS ON BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED CTI SHARING AND THEIR COMPARISON WITH OUR WORK.

Ref.

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[Our Work]

ICS
Focused
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)

Decentralised

Incentives

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)

Legal
Reporting
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)

Standardised
Format
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)

Quality
Assurance
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

Permissioned
Network
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

Identity

Privacy and

Veriﬁcation Conﬁdentiality

(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

those proposals in comparison with our current work. In [8],
the authors present a decentralised threat information sharing
system using smart contracts. While it ensured the relevance
and usability of information and decentralisation of decision
making, it did not provide any design for implementation.
Further, unlike our approach, their system has not considered
the need for economic incentives to encourage participation,
a standardised format for CTI, legal reporting requirements,
permissioned network requirement, identity veriﬁcation, and
privacy and conﬁdentiality of shared CTI. The authors in [9]
suggested a blockchain-based CTI-sharing network using par-
titioned ‘channels’ based on Trafﬁc Light Protocol (TLP).
However, once again, no design consideration was discussed.
It also lacked incentives and legal reporting features.

In [10] and [11], two blockchain-based CTI sharing solu-
tions were proposed, each of which recorded transactions and
CTI data in a permissioned network, thus achieving identity
veriﬁcation, veriﬁability and accountability of transactions,
and conﬁdentiality. However, unlike our motivation,
these
solutions failed to achieve decentralisation and depended on a
centralised entity that issued decryption keys and certiﬁcates.
Proposals [7], [12], and [13] discuss an incentive-based
approach to facilitate trustworthy CTI exchange. However,
unlike ours, they did not engage with current discourses on
legal reporting obligations, which we incorporate in our paper.
They also did not consider the requirement for channels in
which critical CTI could be shared privately between two or
more speciﬁc network members.

In [14], the authors proposed a CTI-sharing application pro-
totype implemented on a public blockchain platform. It facili-
tated the fulﬁlment of legal reporting obligations and provided
positive token-based incentives for reciprocated engagement
in the CTI exchange. It also involved a Critical Infrastructure
Component that allowed incident owners to report information
to legal authorities. While this component effectively addresses
the requirement of legal reporting, the authors suggest that the
platform would be used for the exchange of non-critical data
only, making it unsuitable for the exchange of highly critical
and sensitive CTI data about ICS. Further, unlike ours, their
solution is implemented in a permissionless network. Similar

to [14], proposal [15] sought to incentivise CTI contribution
with tokens and implement their solution in a permissionless
blockchain network, which is not appropriate for ICS due to
conﬁdentiality and privacy concerns.

In [16], a permissioned blockchain network architecture was
proposed to facilitate CTI exchange in a trusted environment.
CTI contributors were rewarded with increases in reputation
level - the higher the reputation level, the more reliable was
the CTI shared. Although the study brieﬂy suggested that
contributing participants are rewarded with access to ‘privi-
leged intelligence’, it did not explore the different levels of
reading access among the different reputation levels. Further,
while the architecture used a permissioned blockchain to
restrict membership and public and private channels for private
sharing, unlike ours, it did not include an identity veriﬁcation
mechanism to prevent inﬁltration by malicious users.

Overall, existing works have only focused on how
blockchain could be used to facilitate CTI exchange within
the ﬁeld of cyber security generally and failed to address
the needs and circumstances of ICS operators and relevant
stakeholders in the critical infrastructure sector. In comparison,
our proposed framework aims to comprehensively address all
identiﬁed design requirements for sharing CTI about ICS.
Speciﬁcally, we focus on facilitating the secure exchange of
highly sensitive CTI about ICS in a decentralised, permis-
sioned blockchain network. It also enables fulﬁlment of legal
reporting obligations e.g.,
those imposed upon the critical
infrastructure sector in the newly passed Australian Security
Legislation Amendment (Critical Infrastructure) Bill 2020
(Cth), as well as leveraging the TLP to allow users to privately
collaborate in channels. Moreover, our solution overcomes
the ﬁnancial challenges around the use of tokens in existing
solutions by opting for discount-based rewards to encourage
active sharing of CTI, thus making CTI more accessible to
small and medium-sized enterprises.

III. THE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK

In this section, we present

the proposed framework of
CTI sharing in ICS using blockchain and describe its various
components and interactions between the components.

A. System Components

As shown in Fig. 1 the proposed framework consists of
three components which are: (i) off-chain storage, (ii) on-chain
blockchain network, and (iii) users. The off-chain storage
component provides decentralised integrity-secured storage of
content-addressable exchange processes, CTI data, and decryp-
tion keys through the use of Distributed Hash Tables (DHTs).
For blockchain network, our design uses a permissioned
private blockchain as opposed to a permissionless public
blockchain so that users can be uniquely identiﬁed and authen-
ticated. The network handles user registration process, CTI
contribution and veriﬁcation process, and CTI consumption
process. This component also manages on-chain transaction
information and executes smart contract chain codes to enable
private exchange of CTI among subgroups of users. Users
are the entities that participate in the network, each of which
operates a node and interacts with a user interface to share,
verify, and consume CTI. The various users’ roles and their
associated functions are described as follows:

• CTI Consumer: a participating individual or organisation

that uses the network to ﬁnd and consume CTI.

• CTI Contributor: a participating individual or organisa-
tion that uses the network to contribute or share their
CTI with other users.

• Authority: a government authority e.g., the Australian
Cyber Security Centre (ACSC) or the Australian Signals
Directorate (ASD) that uses the network to receive reports
of ICS incidents.

• Insurer: an insurance company that needs access to CTI
to assess a cyber insurance claim following a speciﬁc
incident.

• Industry CERTs: industry associations and Cyber Emer-
gency Response Teams (CERTs), which provide advice
and support on cyber threats and vulnerabilities to organ-
isations affected by cyber security incidents.

• CTI Veriﬁer: a veriﬁed independent security expert or
researcher who evaluate the quality of CTI shared by a
CTI Contributor for the purpose of quality assurance.
• Analytics: security analytics providers that can collect
and analyse reported CTI to determine attack trends.
Note, a user can hold one or many roles based on the
requirements. For example, they can be both a CTI Consumer
and a CTI Contributor. Likewise, a CTI Veriﬁer can be a CTI
Contributor simultaneously. However, they will not be allowed
to verify their own CTI.

B. System Functionality

As depicted in Fig. 1, the implementation of the proposed
framework will be made up of three core components, they are
(i) the IPFS (InterPlanetary File System) distributed database
[17] for off-chain storage, (ii) the Hyperledger Fabric network
[18] for the blockchain network, and (iii) a decentralised
application based on Node.JS, and a user interface powered by
IPFS, HTML, and CSS for the users. We follow the speciﬁc
design choice of [14].

Fig. 1. The proposed Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) sharing framework.

The interaction between the IPFS-based database and the
Hyperledger Fabric network is bidirectional. Encrypted CTI
data is uploaded from the network to the database, while the
IPFS returns a unique hash for each piece of CTI data to be
stored on the network. Requests for the stored CTI data are
sent from the user interface to the blockchain network, which
retrieves the data based on their hash from the IPFS database.
Depending on user roles, the interactions between the network
and the users can be bidirectional or unidirectional. For
instance, an insurer might be in the network to consume CTI
for the purpose of claim assessment only. A CTI Veriﬁer
receives stored CTI for evaluation from the network, and in
turn, uploads their evaluation report back to the network.

In our development, we follow the concept of TLP within
the Hyperledger Fabric network as discussed in [9]. In partic-
ular, [9] uses red, amber and green for information disclosure.
Red indicates access restriction to pre-authorised users only.
Amber denotes restricted access to the users in the channel
only. Finally, green allows restricted disclosing of data to all
users in the network. We enhance this concept further with a
white channel, where data can be freely disclosed to entities
outside the network without any restrictions. This is because
disclosing incident information and threat warnings about ICS
to the public is strongly in the public interest, because ICS are
commonly part of critical infrastructures that exist to provide
vital services to the population, destruction of which would
compromise national security, public health, economy, and
public safety.

C. Technology Selection

Blockchain: As noted earlier, we plan to use a permissioned
private blockchain as opposed to a permissionless public
blockchain. Although we follow the design choice of [7]
and [14], our design uses Hyperledger Fabric instead of the
EOS public blockchain or Ethereum for multiple reasons. For
example, the proposed solution requires participants to be

Blockchain Network(User)CTI ConsumerCTI ContributorAuthorityInsurerIndustry CERTsCTI VerifierAnalyticsOff-Chain Storageoperator and/or ﬁts into the description of any of the user
roles. The identiﬁcation can be either a tax ﬁle number,
identity documents like driver license, business name and
number, or ofﬁcial government document.

• Step 2: The blockchain sends the provided ID to the
Authority for veriﬁcation. If a user wants to become a
Veriﬁer, they must obtain Veriﬁer Access. The blockchain
will request
the potential Veriﬁer to provide identity
documents and proof of their qualiﬁcations and expertise
to be a Veriﬁer e.g., industry certiﬁcations, degrees, and a
Veriﬁer Certiﬁcate that has been granted by the Authority.
• Step 3: If ID veriﬁcation is successful, the blockchain
requests payment for a ﬁxed subscription fee and initial
account registration fee from the user. Subscription can
be paid on a monthly or annual basis. The fees help to
prevent sybil attacks, because they represent a sizeable
accumulate amount of ﬁnancial costs for malicious actors
seeking to inﬁltrate the network. The amount is modest
enough to attract small and medium-sized organisations
with small budgets. Since every user is required to pay
the periodic subscription fees for as long as they want
unlimited access to CTI, the ‘free-rider’ problem is also
alleviated.

• Step 4: The user pays. If payment is successful, the
blockchain creates a user account, with the user’s chosen
username and password. The user may choose to stay
anonymous to the other users in the network. Their
physical identity is only known to the Authority (with
the unique ID provided at Steps 1 and 2).

CTI Contribution and Veriﬁcation:

the user’s end that

• Step 5: A CTI Contributor uploads pre-processed CTI
to the blockchain. Pre-processing is an internal process
at
involves formatting data into
human-readable format, anonymising personal informa-
tion, adding descriptive metadata and TLP, and encrypting
the CTI. The blockchain stores the CTI with a timestamp.
• Step 6: The blockchain initiates veriﬁcation process.
Three random Veriﬁers are selected, each is given a copy
of the CTI ﬁle. Each copy is encrypted with a different
symmetric key that is set up by the CTI Contributor.
The CTI Contributor ﬁrst encrypts the three copies of
the CTI with symmetric keys (just one key for each
Veriﬁer (kv1, kv2, kv3), then encrypts the symmetric
keys with the Veriﬁers’ public keys before uploading
the symmetric keys to the blockchain for distribution to
the Veriﬁers. This ensures that the Veriﬁers’ individual
access to the CTI is secure from each other and everyone
else. If someone gains unauthorised access to one of
the Contributor’s symmetric keys, they cannot access the
symmetric keys to decrypt the CTI without one of the
Veriﬁer’s private keys.

• Step 7: The Veriﬁers download and decrypt their respec-
tive key to the CTI using their private key, then rate the
CTI’s quality using platform-provided metrics in terms
of accuracy, usability, and relevance to ICS and submit

Fig. 2. The proposed Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) sharing process.

identiﬁed and approved before being given user credentials to
access the network. Since the number of users is restricted
and transactions are only visible to permissioned users, a
permissioned platform like Hyperledger Fabric achieves the
goals of conﬁdentiality and privacy. Further, channel support
is required to ensure the privacy of transaction data through
the implementation of the TLP, which EOS and Ethereum do
not support. Moreover, the platform’s consensus mechanism
can be ﬂexibly customised to meet the users’ shared goals
and agreed governance rules. Furthermore, Hyperledger Fabric
does not require the use of a cryptocurrency like EOS or
Ethereum, which ﬁts the proposed solution’s incentive model
that involves only the registration and subscription fees. Lastly,
compared to EOS and Ethereum, Hyperledger Fabric has
higher scalability due to having fewer nodes authorised to
verify and manage transactions.

Data Storage: Due to the blockchain’s immutability and
append-only nature, storing transactions data directly on the
blockchain can incur high maintenance costs and prevent new
nodes from joining the network [19]. The proposed network
uses IPFS as the off-chain storage system. As opposed to
the traditional location-based addressing method, IPFS uses
content-based addressing. Only the data’s unique IPFS trans-
action hash, which is only 46 bytes long [20], is stored in
the blockchain, reducing the storage space signiﬁcantly. With
IPFS in the proposed network, one node can request a copy of
the stored transaction data from another node, as long as they
have access to its unique IPFS hash. The hash is updated every
time the transaction content is changed. As long as the hash
of the copy matches the hash of the originally stored data, the
transaction data’s integrity is assured.

D. Process of CTI Sharing

In our framework, the CTI sharing process is divided into

the following three phases, as illustrated in Fig. 2.

User Registration:
• Step 1: A potential user sends a request to blockchain
to create an account. The blockchain requests the user to
provide identiﬁcation (ID) to prove that the user is an ICS

CTIContributorBlockchainUsersCTIVerifierAuthority(Account request) CTI ConsumerUser RegistrationCTI Contribution and VerificationStep1Step2(Verify ID) Step3(Request payment) Step4(Pay fees) Step6(Initiate verification) Step7(Rate CTI) Step5(Upload CTI) Step8(Place CTI order) Step9(Provide CTI, Key) Step10(Rate CTI) CTI Consumptiontheir reports to the blockchain. If the CTI is rated as
high-quality CTI, the blockchain gives the Veriﬁers and
the Contributors discount on the next subscription fee. If
the data is rated as low-quality or duplicated, only the
Veriﬁers receive a discount. The blockchain then uploads
the quality CTI to the public marketplace for consumption
and executes smart contracts chain codes as per TLP.

CTI Consumption:
• Step 8: A CTI Consumer selects a piece of CTI in the

marketplace and places an order.

• Step 9: The blockchain retrieves the encrypted CTI from
the database and sends the Consumer the encrypted CTI
ﬁle and either the Contributor’s symmetric key, or one of
the Veriﬁers’ public keys for decryption.

• Step 10: The Consumer uses one of the keys to decrypt
the encrypted ﬁle. If decryption is successful, the CTI
Consumer conﬁrms so with the blockchain and gives
a rating on the quality of the CTI. If decryption fails,
the Consumer requests another key from the blockchain,
which then obtains it from the remaining three keys from
the Veriﬁers.

IV. USE CASE SCENARIOS AND DISCUSSION

In this section, we discuss various practical use-case sce-
narios to examine the suitability of our proposed framework
in real-world applications.

Scenario 1: A user wants to exchange CTI about ICS
in a permissioned blockchain network that provides identity
veriﬁcation and conﬁdentiality, security, and privacy.

As discussed above, threat intelligence information about
ICS, especially ICS in critical infrastructures like power plants
and transportation systems, carries signiﬁcant values and can
have enormous impact on the economy, national security, and
public wellbeing. The proposed network is to be implemented
in a permissioned decentralised network based on Hyperledger
Fabric. Users who do not fall into one of the roles speciﬁed
and/or cannot provide unique identiﬁcation and/or insist on
being anonymous will not be permitted to join the network.
While this could represent a limitation in terms of the CTI
that could have been shared with the network by a non-user,
the security and privacy of the network is paramount.

Our solution ensures privacy and conﬁdentiality of CTI
by requiring that the CTI is encrypted using cryptography,
the CTI is shared privately in TLP-
while ensuring that
supported ‘channels’ with only the intended recipients. While
a compromise of the encryption technology might result in
compromise of the conﬁdentiality of the data stored on IPFS,
this scenario is considered unlikely on the assumption that the
encryption technology used will be the latest in the market.
This risk is not entirely impossible, since the user organisation
itself may be compromised, leading to the compromise of their
network credentials.

Scenario 2: A user wants to share sensitive CTI data with
the Authority as part of their legal reporting obligation in a
private channel.

ICS operators and other organisations that are required to
provide CTI to the Authority following an incident can do so in
the network by implementing the red protocol. The network’s
smart contract enforces a check on the TLP applicable to the
CTI before it is shared with the Authority. Users that are
not the original Contributor or the Authority cannot view or
join the private channel. Evidence of compliance with legal
reporting can be shown and traced through the timestamp that
is included in the CTI metadata.

Scenario 3: A user wants access to CTI that follows a

standardised format.

The format of shared CTI in the network is standardised
to ensure consistency (by the blockchain’s data governance
rules, as stated in pre-processing requirement before sharing).
CTI Contributors are expected to pre-process their data in the
required format, with the required metadata, and encrypted
before uploading to the network. The standardised format also
allows for a future implementation of ﬁltering in the user
interface application, which would allow CTI Consumers to
browse and search the marketplace for the most relevant CTI.
For example, they will be able to narrow the search results by
ﬁltering by industry, type of ICS, vulnerability, attacks, etc.

Scenario 4: A user wants to share CTI only with users that
have been uniquely identiﬁed and authorised to participate in
the network, not Sybil malicious accounts.

The framework requires all users to prove their physical
identity with unique identity documents (e.g., proof of business
name and ownership, or ofﬁcial government documents) and
pay a registration fee followed by periodic subscription fees
before joining the network. These rigorous measures present
signiﬁcant barriers for malicious actors to create Sybil ac-
counts, thus satisfying the permission requirement and secur-
ing the network against Sybil attacks.

Scenario 5: A user wants to have access to CTI at an
affordable price and be rewarded economically for sharing
CTI, thus encouraging reciprocated exchanges among users.
Compared to existing CTI-sharing platforms that incentivise
voluntary sharing through the use of tokens and transaction
fees, our solution is more inclusive of stakeholder organ-
isations that may not have the ﬁnancial capability to pay
for every piece of CTI. Alternatively, organisations may be
reluctant to use tokens, given the volatility and uncertainty of
the cryptocurrency market. Our solution opts for a sufﬁcient
but modest amount of periodic subscription fees instead, which
provides organisations unlimited access to CTI. This way,
the cost for CTI is made fairer, no matter the size of the
participating organisation. In terms of economic incentives,
the platform offers discounts on the periodic subscription fees
in return for quality CTI, which can encourage users to share
more CTI and enable them to offset the costs incurred in
the threat detection, data collection, and incident recovery
processes. Veriﬁers also receive the discounts for ensuring the
quality of CTI.

Scenario 6: A user wants access to high-quality CTI.
Our solution provides quality assurance in the veriﬁcation
process. Each piece of CTI must be evaluated by three

independent expert Veriﬁers before they are uploaded to the
marketplace. The Veriﬁers are selected at random, which can
make Veriﬁers’ collusion challenging. Veriﬁers’ free-riding is
prevented because CTI Consumers also provide a CTI rating,
which will be cross-checked with Veriﬁers’ reports should
there be a discrepancy. Veriﬁers are likely to be reluctant
to collude or submit fraudulent ratings, because they are
physically identiﬁed and can be removed from the network
through majority voting. The technical expertise of Veriﬁers
is guaranteed through the certiﬁcation scheme administered by
the Authority.

In summary, the work presented in this paper builds on
existing work to explore how a CTI-sharing solution can be
designed to motivate better engagement in the exchange of
CTI for ICS. While existing solutions focused on CTI-sharing
in cyber security generally, this work focuses on exploring the
requirements of stakeholders of ICS speciﬁcally. It presents a
solution that features several improvements that are tailored to
the identiﬁed requirements e.g., a permissioned network and
private communication channels based on TLP to facilitate
legal reporting of incidents and cooperation with government
authorities. Moreover, our solution addresses the ﬁnancial
challenges that some small and medium-sized organisations
may have by only requiring the payments of registration and
subscription fees without any transaction fees, thus making
the costs of participation fairer. It also removes uncertainty
around the ﬂuctuating value of cryptocurrency tokens and
offers subscription fee discount as the more stable, trustworthy
alternative of economic incentive for CTI contribution.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

This paper explores the factors inﬂuencing organisations’
decisions to exchange CTI about ICS and proposes a network
model that addresses such factors to encourage the secure
dissemination of CTI related to ICS. There is not yet a
platform that enables ICS stakeholders to engage in CTI
exchange efﬁciently and effectively. We argued that blockchain
is a promising solution for the development of such an ICS-
focused platform. This study, therefore, examined the designs
of existing solutions to identify features that would suit the
needs of ICS stakeholders. We proposed a framework based
on Hyperledger Fabric blockchain and IPFS distributed storage
built on and extended previous work. The proposed framework
can facilitate organisations’ compliance with legal reporting
obligations and promote the collaborative exchange of CTI
among ICS stakeholders using discount-based incentives and
quality assurance mechanisms through expert veriﬁcation. The
network was designed with conﬁdentiality and privacy in
mind through the application of Trafﬁc Light Protocol us-
ing Hyperledger Fabric’s channel capabilities, which allowed
users to exchange CTI in private sub-groups securely. The
framework was also designed with ﬂexibility in mind, in the
sense that a permissioned blockchain network that provides
similar features to those offered by Fabric can also be used
to implement it. However, Fabric has been shown to be one
of the most innovative enterprise-grade blockchain solutions

in the market. We have examined the proposed framework’s
suitability, relevance, and feasibility in real-world applications
scenarios. In future work, the solution will still be imple-
mented on Hyperledger Fabric to evaluate its performance,
viability, and practicality. Future work will also investigate
which quality evaluation metrics the CTI Veriﬁers must use.

REFERENCES

[1] T. Miller, A. Staves, S. Maesschalck, M. Sturdee, and B. Green,
“Looking back to look forward: Lessons learnt from cyber-attacks on
industrial control systems,” International Journal of Critical Infrastruc-
ture Protection, vol. 35, pp. 100464, 2021.

[2] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, and S. Zeadally, “Industrial control systems:
Cyberattack trends and countermeasures,” Computer Communications,
vol. 155, pp. 1–8, 2020.

[3] A. Hobbs, “The colonial pipeline hack: Exposing vulnerabilities in us
cybersecurity,” SAGE Publications, [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.
org/10.4135/9781529789768 (July 2021).

[4] D. Bhamare, M. Zolanvari, A. Erbad, R. Jain, K. Khan, and N. Meskin,
“Cybersecurity for industrial control systems: A survey,” computers &
security, vol. 89, pp. 101677, 2020.

[5] Z. Jadidi, A. Dorri, R. Jurdak, and C. Fidge, “Securing manufacturing
using blockchain,” in 19th International Conference on Trust, Security
and Privacy in Computing and Communications (TrustCom), IEEE, pp.
1920–1925, 2020.

[6] V. Mavroeidis and S. Bromander, “Cyber threat intelligence model: an
evaluation of taxonomies, sharing standards, and ontologies within cyber
threat intelligence,” in European Intelligence and Security Informatics
Conference (EISIC), IEEE, pp. 91–98, 2017.

[7] R. Riesco, X. Novo, and V. Villagr´a, “Cybersecurity threat intelligence
knowledge exchange based on blockchain,” Telecommunication Systems,
vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 259–288, 2020.

[8] E. ¨UBER and ¨O. S¸ AH˙ING ¨OZ, “Blockchain based information sharing
mechanism for cyber threat intelligence,” Balkan Journal of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 242–253, 2020.

[9] D. Homan, I. Shiel, and C. Thorpe, “A new network model for cyber
threat intelligence sharing using blockchain technology,” in 10th IFIP
International Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and Security
(NTMS), IEEE, pp. 1–6, 2019.

[10] J. Moubarak, C. Bassil, and J. Antoun, “On the dissemination of cyber
threat intelligence through hyperledger,” in 17th International Confer-
ence on the Design of Reliable Communication Networks (DRCN),
IEEE, pp. 1–6, 2021.

[11] D. Preuveneers, W. Joosen, J. Bernabe, and A. Skarmeta, “Distributed
security framework for reliable threat intelligence sharing,” Security and
Communication Networks, vol. 2020, 2020.

[12] S. He, J. Fu, W. Jiang, Y. Cheng, J. Chen, and Z. Guo, “Blotisrt:
Blockchain-based threat intelligence sharing and rating technology,” in
Int. Conf. on Cyberspace Innovation of Adv. Tech., pp. 524–534, 2020.
[13] S. Purohit, P. Calyam, S. Wang, R. Yempalla, and J. Varghese, “De-
fensechain: Consortium blockchain for cyber threat intelligence sharing
and defense,” in 2nd Conf. on Blockchain Research & Applications for
Innovative Networks and Services (BRAINS), IEEE, pp. 112–119, 2020.
[14] F. Menges, B. Putz, and G. Pernul, “Dealer: decentralized incentives
for threat intelligence reporting and exchange,” International Journal of
Information Security, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 741–761, 2021.

[15] S. Gong and C. Lee, “Blocis: blockchain-based cyber threat intelligence
sharing framework for sybil-resistance,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 3, pp.
521, 2020.

[16] R. Gonc¸alo, T. Pedrosa, and R. Lopes, “An architecture for sharing
cyber-intelligence based on blockchain,” in International Congress on
Blockchain and Applications, Springer, pp. 71–80, 2020.

[17] “The interplanetary ﬁle system (ipfs).” [Online]. Available: https:

//ipfs.io/(August2021)

[18] “Hyperledger – open source blockchain technologies.” [Online].

Available: https://www.hyperledger.org/(August2021)

[19] Q. Zheng, Y. Li, P. Chen, and X. Dong, “An innovative ipfs-based storage
model for blockchain,” in IEEE Web Intelligence Conf., pp. 704–708,
2018.

[20] R. Kumar and R. Tripathi, “Implementation of distributed ﬁle storage
and access framework using ipfs and blockchain,” in ICIIP Conf., IEEE,
pp. 246–251, 2019.

