1
2
0
2
c
e
D
6
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
3
0
9
0
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

“It was hard to find the words”: Using an Autoethnographic
Diary Study to Understand the Difficulties of Smart Home Cyber
Security Practices

Sarah Turner
Jason R.C. Nurse
Shujun Li
slt41@kent.ac.uk
j.r.c.nurse@kent.ac.uk
s.j.li@kent.ac.uk
Institute of Cyber Security for Society (iCSS) & School of Computing
University of Kent
Canterbury, Kent, UK

ABSTRACT
This study considers how well an autoethnographic diary study
helps as a method to explore why families might struggle in the ap-
plication of strong and cohesive cyber security measures within the
smart home. Combining two human-computer interaction (HCI) re-
search methods — the relatively unstructured process of autoethnog-
raphy and the more structured diary study — allowed the first au-
thor to reflect on the differences between researchers or experts, and
everyday users. Having a physical set of structured diary prompts
allowed for a period of “thinking as writing”, enabling reflection
upon how having expert knowledge may or may not translate into
useful knowledge when dealing with everyday life. This is particu-
larly beneficial in the context of home cyber security use, where
first-person narratives have not made up part of the research corpus
to date, despite a consistent recognition that users struggle to apply
strong cyber security methods in personal contexts. The framing
of the autoethnographic diary study contributes a very simple, but
extremely powerful, tool for anyone with more knowledge than
the average user of any technology, enabling the expert to reflect
upon how they themselves have fared when using, understanding
and discussing the technology in daily life.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in ubiq-
uitous and mobile computing; • Security and privacy → So-
cial aspects of security and privacy; Usability in security and
privacy.

KEYWORDS
cyber security, Internet of Things, IoT, families, children, autoethnog-
raphy, diary study, reflexivity, smart home, home

1 INTRODUCTION
Internet of Things (IoT) devices within the home setting are in-
creasingly ubiquitous: 2020 in particular saw a huge growth in the
purchases of such devices in the UK, attributed in no small part to
the amount of time people were required to stay in their homes
as part of public health lockdown measures due to COVID-19 [30].

Home IoT devices1 are often left in communal spaces [6], and, when
set up according to the manufacturer’s instructions, will collect
significant amounts of data about every person that is around them,
whether or not those people are aware of it — or consent to it [16].
Having an understanding of the risks that these devices pose should
be a fundamental part of the purchase and use process, however it
is not commonly the case that individuals understand these risks
or take steps to manage them [24], or that devices are necessarily
designed to make security easy to manage [5].

Cyber security risks that home IoT devices pose are different
to those risks that are posed through browsing the Internet on a
computer or smart phone [23]; data collected by these devices can be
misused in a number of ways, intentionally or otherwise. In addition,
the more devices that are connected to a home network, the greater
the threat posed to every part of the home through insecure devices,
whether specifically targeted or because of more mundane reasons
such as unsupported software [29]. Without broad understanding
of these risks, users — and in this case study, we will particularly
be considering the family unit — can be putting themselves in
harm’s way, unnecessarily. And yet, data and security breaches are
commonplace in home IoT devices, both as a result of vulnerabilities
in software (see, for example, the list in [28]), but also because users
may have failed to use security settings as intended [25].

This case study draws upon two established research methods
within the HCI field: that of the diary study, and also, the practice
of autoethnographical research. Cyber security is notorious for
its poor uptake amongst users; the difficulty of having a coherent
and logical cyber security set up within a home increases with the
number of users and devices in the household. Families struggle
not only to manage device use appropriately, but also to speak
and discuss cyber security in meaningful ways, or even use the
same language [15]. While researchers study home IoT devices in a
professional capacity [33], many of them also use home IoT devices
as a user in a personal capacity. Could an autoethnographic diary
study, intentionally applying the research lens to the home life of a
researcher, help to pick out the specific issues of engagement with

1Throughout this paper, “home IoT devices" will be used to mean those devices, and
those technologies and services that support them, covered in the UK’s Code of Conduct
for Consumer IoT devices [9].

 
 
 
 
 
 
the topic? Can it help to create a sense of empathy surrounding the
difficulties that non-expert users might have in their daily device
use? And what does that mean for how devices are intended to
be used, and — in this case — kept secure? By analysing ourselves
as device users during a period of autoethnographic diary study,
can we show where, not only as researchers, but also as device
manufacturers or even policy makers, we expect too much — or
too little — of everyday users?

This case study details the set up and execution of an autoethno-
graphic diary study, as a means of exploring the usefulness of first-
person, reflexive research into poorly understood areas of digital
technology use — in this case, cyber security habits and practices
in the home — and presents the lessons that have been learned
from undertaking it. Although the findings can help academic re-
searchers to consider how to approach not only their topic, but
also the users of the particular digital technology, in a more empa-
thetic manner prior to engagement, there are lessons that can also
be taken by product designers and also policy makers. All three
groups, as experts in their specific topics, can use the structured
diary prompts to consider how much of their personal experience
is guided by having more knowledge and information than the
average user of the product or device. They can also reflect upon
the extent to which expert knowledge fails when trying to navigate
discussions with family, or friends, or deal with real-life situations.
Furthermore, product designers — in this particular case, in the
home IoT space, but also more generally — may find analysis of
what they themselves, their children, friends or family may, or may
not, do or know about their product alters their design approach.
Policy makers could even apply this method to understand where
users may need more education, more support — or increased reg-
ulation or other policy tools to keep them as safe and secure as
intended, for example.

This case study starts with a brief review of related work and
concepts in Section 2. It goes on to describe the methodology in
Section 3, and findings in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the lessons
that can be taken from the work, prior to conclusions being drawn
in Section 6.

2 RELEVANT WORK AND CONCEPTS
The term “autoethnographic diary study” is used here to describe a
piece of first-person research exploring the topic in relation to the
broader societal and cultural setting, but using the feedback-style
recording method of a diary study with multiple participants. It
builds upon two research methods: the diary study and autoethnog-
raphy.

Diary studies are a commonly used method within the HCI and
CSCW research communities, as they allow for monitoring of par-
ticipants’ behavior or experiences over an extended period of time,
in the moment, rather than relying on recall of events in interview
settings. In recent years, diary studies have been used to understand
how adolescents (children aged 13-17) and parents manage online
harms [1, 20, 34], how new parents approach baby wearable technol-
ogy [31], how children with autism spectrum disorder use mobile
applications [26] and how social groups approach joint privacy
and security use of shared applications and devices [6, 32]. Garg
and Sengupta [13] used a diary study, capturing information from

Sarah Turner, Jason R.C. Nurse, and Shujun Li

parents with children aged 4-17, on their smart phone and speaker
use. Through the entries in the study, they found that there were
differences in how families used, managed and limited technology
use dependent upon their socio-economic and ethnic status.

The diary studies mentioned above ranged in duration from
two weeks to two months, allowing for significant data collection
to occur from the participants, both in paper format and using
online tools, with reminder capabilities built in. Watson et al. [32]
noted that the ability to track responses online was important, as
they needed to chase a number of participants with phone calls to
ensure they completed the diary. Hong et al. [14] found that paper
allowed for more flexibility in responses — although participants
found managing paper diaries with digital artefacts hard to manage.
Putnam and Mobasher [26] found different problems with the diary
study method: although the adult participants did not find the
method of filling in the diary itself problematic, getting the children
involved in the study to participate in a way that generated results
to discuss in the diaries proved extremely hard.

The type of personal reflection captured in a journal or diary is
core to autoethnographic work, although typically in a much less
structured manner than a diary study, capturing any reflections
on a specific theme over an extended period of time. Chang [7]
describes autoethnography as autobiographical writing that “com-
bines cultural analysis and interpretation with narrative details”,
and so is particularly relevant when considering the wider use of
digital technologies within different areas of society. Such works
can be challenging to understand, as they typically raise concerns
in relation to the independence, objectivity and generalizability
of the method [27]. However, the collection of personal thoughts
and reflections on a topic for a period of time by a researcher can
serve as a lightweight research method that, done well, gives the
ability to provide nuanced insights that can outweigh the obvi-
ous lack of generalizability [11]. Malinverni and Pares [18] used
autoethnography to determine the importance of how personal val-
ues shape their work as researchers, leading to more considered and
grounded future research, particularly in the participatory design
space. Analyzing personal use of devices can provide additional
levels of empathy towards users and research participants to be
taken forward in the design process [8, 22]; conversely, non-use of
devices can also provide insights in that it allows for questioning
and re-imagination of use [17]. Reflecting on the use of closely
related duoethnography as a research method, a 2019 paper high-
lights the importance of using personal experience to explore the
“interactions between diverse users, devices and data” in intimate
settings [12]; the family unit being one such example.

3 METHODOLOGY
Following the receipt of ethical approval from our institution’s
Ethics Committee in August 2020, the first author undertook the
research in her own home between 12 August and 31 October
2020. The study mostly focused upon interactions within the first
author’s immediate family (two children, aged 6 and 3) and hus-
band, although additional interactions with other family members
(such as the first author’s parents and parents-in-law) that stayed
in the home in this period were also captured when relevant. The

“It was hard to find the words”: An Autoethnographic Diary Study of Smart Home Cyber Security

additional awareness that both the first author and also her hus-
band, being a software engineer, had of cyber security as a topic of
household importance was considered to be relevant, as subsequent
analysis of the topics raised from the study could determine how
many were raised precisely because of this additional awareness.
Drawing upon the autoethnographic format, the first author com-
pleted the diary entries alone, based upon her interactions and
experiences with her family.

The diary study topic looked at how the cyber security of home
IoT devices was managed and discussed between parents, children
and any other relevant individuals within the home. Using a “feed-
back” style of diary [4] in order to elicit broad responses to consider
these answers, a set of daily diary prompts posed a series of open-
ended questions intended for the first author to reflect on the events
of each day pertaining to home IoT device use and cyber security.
The questions focused on what was said, done, and what emotions
events raised, not dissimilar to the type of responses received in
[34] (for example, “Was the conversation home IoT device use or
cyber security related?” “Were there any subjects relating to devices
or cyber security of those devices that you avoided talking about
today? If so, why?”). The daily diary prompts were printed and
kept in a purple folder, along with pens and sufficient additional
paper, next to the first author’s bed, in order to serve as a visual
reminder to log instances at the end of each day (see Figure 1a).
Entries were only to be recorded when there was something of
relevance to be captured during the day. For the full list of prompts,
see Appendix A.

The prompts did not change throughout the period, and daily
reflections were collected primarily on paper, not electronically
(see Figure 1b). This was for two reasons: the type of activities
being considered were unlikely to be done routinely, meaning that
using an electronic method for the purposes of eliciting immediate
responses through reminders would not be beneficial; also, the use
of paper allowed space for more reflection through unstructured
feedback [2]. The hand-written entries were typed up weekly. Any
relevant information that was seen online (for example, social media
posts) were treated as additional artefacts: they were collated and
saved electronically, printed as necessary and analyzed alongside
the typed-up diary entries. In the end, the finished diary comprised
of written entries, screenshots of social media, school curricula,
scans of text books and e-mails, as well as a list of all home IoT
devices (and those devices or digital technologies that interacted
with the devices) (see Figure 1c).

Once collated, the complete diary was subjected to thematic
analysis [3] by the first author. Following McDonald et al. [19], it
was determined that thematic analysis should only be performed
by the first author to preserve the personal and reflexive nature of
the research, with broader discussions around the results taking
place between all authors.

4 FINDINGS
4.1 How well did the feedback diary method

work?
Frequency of reporting. The pilot diary study lasted 80 days,
4.1.1
significantly longer than many documented diary studies, although
shorter than many autoethnographic pieces of work. It generated

30 individual diary entries; in addition to the written diary there
were 15 screenshots, two e-mails and the list of devices. Many of
the diary entries were between 100-300 words in length, with the
longest over 700. Despite placing the diary prompts in a conve-
nient location for writing up, the first author felt very aware of the
number of days where there was little to nothing to report, based
upon the prompts. Electronically saved information often had to be
additionally printed to ensure that the thoughts about them were
collected at the end of the day.

4.1.2 What was directly captured in the entries. The first author
found the feedback diary method, in particular with its open-ended
questions, helpful as a means of being able to consider and reflect
freely upon the situations arising during the diary period. The
completed diary covered an extensive range of events, from buying
new devices, to discussing reported security breaches and dealing
with family device problems, to reflections upon the use of specific
software on the first author’s smart phone.

Further analysis found that not all of the entries, however, di-
rectly contributed to the overall research questions. The entries and
artefacts show that two types of cyber security arose in the diary:
the “housework”, of cyber security that is directly applicable within
the home, typically relating to things like to device setup, and the
“wider universe”, reflecting interesting or concerning news stories
about cyber security issues that cannot either be directly managed
within the home, or that are not directly relevant. In particular, the
diary entries allowed the quantification of the time spent consid-
ering each type: reading about the cyber security “wider universe”
appeared in six entries; “housework” references to researching new
devices prior to purchase, installation of those devices, and device
management occurred four times in total.

Those entries that did reflect “housework” management of cy-
ber security within the immediate family showed an important
element: they were, typically, one-off events. For example, purchas-
ing a new eReader for the first author’s eldest child allowed for
discussion with the child about setting strong passwords, setting
WiFi access, and discussion about how and when books could be
purchased or borrowed; this was recorded at the time of setup, and
not subsequently.

Once set up in the home, however, questions of device security
did not come up. Repeated use of devices seemed to breed familiarity
and a level of comfort around its use. When devices were in situ
and just functioned as needed, there was no further consideration
about the invisible processes in the background that may need
further consideration or management. Diary entries discuss long-
used devices only in terms of the habitual nature of their use — both
by parents and children, once the device was considered part of the
family’s setup. “The kids are only used to streaming services, and so
will often ask to watch programmes via the Chromecast, which allows
for useful parental control of what they’re watching (as we turn off
autoplay). However, this also means that short programs...sees them
asking for the next episode almost before the prior one has begun. This
is tricky as it can see tired or impatient children grabbing the phone...”
— diary entry, 13 September.

The diaries also helped to reflect on the ability of children to
consider security, and what that meant for discussions and learning
opportunities. There were four detailed discussions about cyber

Sarah Turner, Jason R.C. Nurse, and Shujun Li

(a) Bright folder kept by the bed to prompt
daily reflection

(b) The pages of the diary prompts,
incorporating free writing

(c) The full printed diary, with diary entries
and printed artefacts

Figure 1: The diary study process and sample artefacts

security with the children — exclusively with the elder child. The
younger child was captured in the diary as showing awareness of
devices in the home,2 but had no concept of the need for security.
Some of these events allowed for moments of family discussion and
collective reflection: for example, password use being mentioned in
a television show allowed for a brief discussion of what a password
is. In total, passwords were discussed with children three times and
unauthorized purchasing once.

4.1.3 What was indirectly captured in the entries. The diary prompts
did not have questions that required the first author to consider
aspects of her role and status, both within the domestic setting and
also more broadly in terms of gender and economic status within
society. Despite this, both aspects were strongly present within the
diary entries, and add a further level of nuance to be included in
the analysis. Without a clear understanding of the space in which
the researcher inhabits, it may be hard to understand where their
experience differs from that of an average user.

Of particular note in this case was the economic status that the
first author’s family has. The amount spent on new devices and
security software in the period led to reflection upon how expen-
sive maintaining appropriate device hygiene can be. The ability to
replace those devices that are out of supported software life or use
paid-for cyber security software such as password managers may
well reflect best practice, but they are options that require sufficient
disposable income to make the decision to do so. For many, it could
well be a poor decision — or an impossibility — to replace otherwise
functional devices, or pay for cyber security services in a world
where data breaches are common, but obviously tangible downsides
are few.

4.2 How well did the autoethnographic aspect

work?

4.2.1 An additional level of knowledge. Using the autoethnographic
approach of having only the first author record diary entries was
important: in using the reflexive requirement of the study, would
it be possible to further deconstruct the reasons why users may
typically struggle with managing home IoT device cyber security?

2In particular the Google Chromecast that facilitated streaming TV shows.

The additional level of knowledge held by the first author about
requirements and risks associated with device use was clear in a
number of entries, giving an idea of privacy and security concerns
that might not be considered by those without an interest. Some-
times the entries explored the difficulties of trying to set up devices
in ways that are more privacy-preserving and allow for more con-
trolled security: “[The eReader] is defaulted to have WiFi on all the
time, with limited restrictions on access to the store. Switching off the
WiFi results in it warning you that it will cause problems...” — diary
entry, 15 October.

Other reported instances of acting out of a heightened interest
in security were triggered by external events: for example, trying to
find out more about a vulnerability, reported by a technology news
site, in microchips used in her and her husband’s smart phones:3
“We really felt that there was little we could do... we’d have to rely on
our phone’s manufacturer to manage the patching. It unnerved us a
bit, in thinking about it, that we found this in specialised press only
-— and certainly not in mainstream news sources. It’s tricky having a
little bit of knowledge: it often leaves you in a state of uncomfortable
inaction...!” — diary entry, 18 August.

4.2.2 Where knowledge did not help. Having the written diary
entry was helpful to contrast and explore the emotions felt when
cyber security was working as expected — and when it was proving
too complex. Negative sentiments were common throughout the
diary, with words like “infuriating”, “uncomfortable”, “frustrated”
and “frustrating” occurring three times each (in some 6,600 words
of the full diary). Dealing with situations that were unresolvable, or
that required significant time, knowledge and investment was hard
— even when, as in the first author’s case, there was an interest in
having the most appropriate security setup at home.

More positive words were less common — “amazing” occurred
once, “benefit” and “excellent” twice each. Interestingly, these more
positive records related to the potential use of devices, not aspects
associated with security — there were, in fact, no records comment-
ing that a device’s security ostensibly worked. These entries again,
help to underline the types of experiences that stick in the mind
when using devices as part of life: the first author was inclined to

3https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2020/08/snapdragon-chip-flaws-
put-1-billion-android-phones-at-risk-of-data-theft/

“It was hard to find the words”: An Autoethnographic Diary Study of Smart Home Cyber Security

think about security and go out of her way to apply techniques and
settings that she knew of, and even then, security activities were
framed negatively within the diary.

The diary entries recorded a number of instances where having
cyber security knowledge did not actually help resolve the situation
at hand. This was particularly the case when trying to help or
communicate about cyber security issues with others. Trying to
help a relative manage some unusual activity on a computer should
have been an opportunity to help them walk through and improve
their cyber security knowledge and use. Instead, the relative was
so overwhelmed by the situation, and happy once their bank had
confirmed no financial loss had occurred as a result of the activity,
that they did not listen further. “What struck us [first author and her
husband] was the complete lack of understanding, backed up with
a defensiveness about cyber security practices...Almost everything
we tried – both in terms of explanations of mitigating steps, and
practically looking at and reviewing the devices – failed.” — diary
entry, 17 August.

Similarly, the diary entries showed how having knowledge about
how to make devices safe did not help when trying to explain why it
was necessary to the children, even when they were keen to listen.
The concepts were too hard and too abstract. For example, the
children were particularly interested in the first author’s new smart
phone: “It was hard to find the words to explain why I had replaced it
– I wanted them to understand that phones are only expected to have
a life of around 3 years, but at the same time....they won’t understand
it! Not happy with the words that fell out of my mouth (‘because...it
could be dangerous.’). Not that they prodded further – they just loved
that the cover wasn’t black... They now don’t care.” — diary entry, 15
October. The smart phone had been replaced as it had reached the
end of its supported life: without guaranteed software updates, it
could pose a security risk. The complexity of these ideas, coupled
with the uncertainty of the risk (it could pose a risk, should there
be a particular set of circumstances), made it a conversation too
difficult to have.

Similarly, when the elder child asked what the router did, the
best the first author and her husband could do was say “well, it’s
how the Internet comes into the house”, which “felt useless even as
we said it...”. Even if the words were there, the attention span of
children for such discussions is extremely limited — the first author
concluded this entry in the diary with a feeling of relief at how
quickly the child “showed little interest...” — diary entry, 12 Sep-
tember. One of the artefacts collected alongside the diary entries
was the elder child’s school curriculum for the year, which detailed
the computing skills to be taught during the year. A combination
of using a computer (“how to use or navigate with a mouse”) and
learning about “the dangers that the Internet can portray” made it
clear how ubiquitous computing and the concepts associated with
it are not something that the children can hope to learn about at
school alongside encountering it at home.

5 LESSONS LEARNED
The autoethnographic diary study method has not previously been
used as a way of considering how users of home IoT devices manage
cyber security in their homes, and with their families, despite the
potential for reflection on day-to-day issues. Although the topic of

this study was cyber security, it could be applied to any situation
where adoption of understanding of a digital technology is poorer
than designers or researchers would hope.

Undertaking a diary study with prompts allowing free-form re-
sponses, and the addition of any relevant artefacts, enabled the
first author to reflect upon why users find cyber security difficult
and unimportant and consider specific reasons for the lack of en-
gagement. The use of a reflexive diary by someone with an expert
understanding of what can and should be done to use a digital tech-
nology of any kind as intended can be important to show where
the process might fail, or to understand those users who are less
interested or aware of the steps that might be necessary. Such a
method can be powerful in helping not only researchers, but also
device designers and policy makers, make recommendations, and
base their actions in the mundane of the everyday situation. In
particular:

• The frequency with with topics arise, and the emotions they
generate can help to understand how often a non-expert
user might consider the issues, and whether they may ac-
tively avoid processes or activities that feel uncomfortable
or unpleasant.

• Analysis of how and why a topic arises in the diary entry
provides some ability to consider how being an expert af-
fects being a user of a device. In particular, allowing for
free writing and the addition of artefacts helps to show how
and where topics arise: are they from situations and venues
non-expert users would encounter?

• Analyzing being a user can point out where being an expert
does not help. Things remain hard, unexpected, or impos-
sible, even for experts: learning from these experiences is
helpful to understand the limits of what users should be
expected to endure.

Below, we go into more detail on each of these points.

5.1 The frequency of reports
The inability of the first author to make daily diary entries felt like
a concern, when analysis was performed. As recorded, in the 80
days of the study, the first author produced 30 diary entries; a small
number compared with similar studies with more participants such
as Garg and Sengupta [13], where the average participant entry
rate over an eight-week period was 110, when asked to record
information about all types of device use. Furthermore, only six
of these entries captured active discussions with the immediate
family about cyber security in the context of device use. However,
in this respect, the autoethnographic diary method provides the
person undertaking the study with a helpful guide as to when and
how the topic fits into everyday life. If the individual performing
the diary study, who has more interest and specific knowledge
than an average user, reports infrequently, this in itself helps to get
into the mindset of an average user and stops assuming a level of
engagement that may not exist. In this case, for example: if cyber
security is only managed at key points of device use, how do you
ensure that those brief windows of time are maximized for the best
security setup?

5.2 How and why diary entries arise
Deciding to use diary prompts requiring answers written on paper,
rather than through an online system, facilitated what has been
referred to as “writing as thinking” [21]. When there is something
to report, having no limitations on the responses allows for a more
reflexive experience, a process referred to as “critical subjectivity”
in [12], even if some of the entries end up being outside of the topic
of interest at the point of analysis. In particular, when considering a
concept that is not widely understood by an average user — such as
cyber security — the process of writing about instances of dealing
with the concept as a more informed researcher helps to understand
whether it is reasonable for an average user to consider it too.
The majority of diary entries in this case covered wrestling with
considerations that came as a result of having researched, and being
concerned about, the area for a number of years, and did not spend
as much time upon non-specific actions to be taken in the home.
If the average user is unlikely to take action, to, for example, limit
device use to stop additional data collection, what policy measures
might be needed to keep such data safe and used appropriately?

Being able to add in artefacts was another benefit of having a
relatively unstructured reporting setup. As previously reported by
Hong et al. [14], keeping artefacts exclusively digitally was not
practical for ensuring inclusion and consideration in the wider
diary entries, so needed to be printed to ensure this happened. The
artefacts were of particular value, however, in bringing the outside
world into the home, and reminding the first author of the wider
cyber security environment. Again, the chance nature of seeing
news items, or social media posts should remind the individual
performing the diary study of their particular framing of the world
— would an average user see these posts, or regularly read the news
sources that the person performing the diary study considers part
of their everyday life?

5.3 Learning from unexpected and hard things
Even though performed in a period of enhanced social distancing
measures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the diary study
allowed for reporting not only of interactions with the first author’s
nuclear family, but also gave an interesting insight into how the
external world encroaches into the home. Giving space to explore
the unexpected events in a home setting can prepare researchers,
designers and policy makers to think more broadly about the con-
text that they are working in. Prior research has already shown
that individuals can find negotiating shared security difficult, even
when there is prior agreement as to the importance [32], and that
bystanders pose a particular set of security questions when con-
sidering home IoT devices. However, the lived difficulty of these
situations may not be truly understood. To consider two examples
from the diary study here: first, the situation where the relative
may or may not have had a compromised device with access to the
first author’s home network allowed for exploring the difficulties
of acting positively in emotive situations. If the victim of a security
issue acts defensively, there is little that anyone else can do, even
with a perfect knowledge of the theoretical steps to take.

Second, involving young children is hard. We know that adults
and children often use different languages to talk about cyber se-
curity [15], but when the concepts are too complex or too abstract

Sarah Turner, Jason R.C. Nurse, and Shujun Li

for either the adult to explain or the child to understand, how is
that knowledge transfer expected to happen? The diary entries
provided space for reflection on how frail the concept of security
within the home could be, and that hoping for users to manage
this themselves is hard. The artefacts — school curriculum and
text books — helped to put the inability to talk about this with the
children into context: as much as the first author and her husband
could not find the words for the cyber security issues they tried to
discuss with their children, so the educational system does not set
children up to learn about it in enough depth. It also underlines that
even when children have parents who understand the reasons for
and means of promoting good cyber security in the home, they will
not necessarily find the opportunity for discussion and learning
at home. This is particularly important to consider from a policy
perspective: home IoT devices are increasingly pervasive, yet it is
not reasonable to consider that parents have the correct knowledge
or vocabulary to discuss safe and secure use of such devices with
their children, yet the risks of such device use is not being taught
in schools in the UK in any substantive way [10].

6 CONCLUSIONS
This case study reports upon the use of an autoethnographic diary
study examining the ways the first author’s family manage and
discuss the cyber security of home IoT devices. Autoethnographic
studies and diary studies with multiple participants are relatively
common research methods within the HCI field: this case study
combined the format of feedback-style diary entries with the reflex-
ive nature of autoethnography. Although autoethnographic work is
not generalizable, it was hoped that the reflexivity afforded by such
a study might help to further not only understanding why cyber se-
curity is poorly understood and managed, but whether the process
of performing the diary study could be helpful in understanding
where the role of a researcher (or product designer or policy maker,
for example), and the role of a user, differs.

The first author found that the diary method, created as it was,
to be hand written at the end of every day, allowed for significant
opportunities for “thinking as writing”, unpackaging not only the
role of the researcher and the role of the user, but also the com-
plexity of emotions and language around the topic. Having the
physical diary entries allowed for analysis of not only the words
and language used, and the situations that such language was used,
but also for the types of entries, and the frequency of events that
were recorded.

This was particularly valuable in approaching the topic of cyber
security, where, despite a consistent recognition that users struggle
to apply strong cyber security methods, first-person narratives can
help explain the difficulties that even competent users can have with
applying good practices in the real world. These findings help to
show, in this instance, where cyber security is, and is not, important
in a family setting, which can help to frame considerations for
not only future research, but also for manufacturers and policy
makers. As such, the autoethnographic diary study, despite its
simple premise, could be an effective means of providing an expert
individual with the reflexive analysis required to unpick problems
where users do not act as hoped, by allowing the space for reflection

“It was hard to find the words”: An Autoethnographic Diary Study of Smart Home Cyber Security

of what it is reasonable for users to know and do, based on the
individual’s own experiences and reactions.

A DAILY DIARY PROMPTS

Table 1: Daily Diary Prompts

Prompt questions: home IoT device use and cyber security
discussions
How did it arise?
Was the conversation home IoT device use or cyber security related?
How long did it last?
Did everyone participate?
Did the children engage (ask questions, seem to take it in)?
What questions did they ask?
Did they use metaphors/examples? What were they and how did
they seem to relate to the topic being discussed?
Have you discussed this before?
Did you ask any questions?
Did you use metaphors/examples from other areas? What were
they?
Did this help in furthering the conversation or making a more
meaningful interaction?
Did you refer to anything else?
Was it a helpful conversation? What went well? What didn’t?
Were there any conversations on digital technologies or cyber se-
curity that you avoided having today? - About what? Why?

REFERENCES
[1] Zainab Agha, Reza Ghaiumy Anaraky, Karla Badillo-Urquiola, Bridget McHugh,
and Pamela Wisniewski. 2021. ‘Just-in-Time’ Parenting: A Two-Month Examina-
tion of the Bi-directional Influences Between Parental Mediation and Adolescent
Online Risk Exposure. In HCI for Cybersecurity, Privacy and Trust, Abbas Moallem
(Ed.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 261–280.

[2] Amid Ayobi, Tobias Sonne, Paul Marshall, and Anna L. Cox. 2018. Flexible and
Mindful Self-Tracking: Design Implications from Paper Bullet Journals. Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3173574.3173602

[3] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology.
Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 2 (Jan. 2006), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.
1191/1478088706qp063oa

[4] Scott Carter and Jennifer Mankoff. 2005. When Participants Do the Capturing:
The Role of Media in Diary Studies. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Portland, Oregon, USA) (CHI ’05).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 899–908. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1054972.1055098

[5] George Chalhoub, Ivan Flechais, Norbert Nthala, Ruba Abu-Salma, and Elie
Tom. 2020. Factoring User Experience into the Security and Privacy Design
of Smart Home Devices: A Case Study. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI
EA ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–9. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3382850

[6] George Chalhoub, Martin J Kraemer, Norbert Nthala, and Ivan Flechais. 2021. “It
Did Not Give Me an Option to Decline”: A Longitudinal Analysis of the User
Experience of Security and Privacy in Smart Home Products. In Proceedings of
the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 555, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445691

[7] Heewon Chang. 2016. Autoethnography as Method (1 ed.). Routledge, New York,

NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315433370

[8] Sally Jo Cunningham and Matt Jones. 2005. Autoethnography: A Tool for Practice
and Education. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI New Zealand Chapter’s
International Conference on Computer-Human Interaction: Making CHI Natural

(Auckland, New Zealand) (CHINZ ’05). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/1073943.1073944

[9] Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, UK Government. 2018. Code
of Practice for Consumer IoT Security. Technical Report. Department for Digital,
Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS), UK Government. 24 pages. https://www.gov.
uk/government/publications/code-of-practice-for-consumer-iot-security
[10] Department for Education, UK Government. 2013. National curriculum
Governmental report.

in England: computing programmes of study.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-
england-computing-programmes-of-study/national-curriculum-in-england-
computing-programmes-of-study

[11] Jordan Eschler. 2016. A Critical Reflection on Social Media Research Using an
Autoethnographic Approach. In Proceedings of the 2016 49th Hawaii Interna-
tional Conference on System Sciences (HICSS ’16). IEEE Computer Society, USA,
1871–1880. https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2016.238

[12] Patricia Garcia and Marika Cifor. 2019. Expanding Our Reflexive Toolbox: Collab-
orative Possibilities for Examining Socio-Technical Systems Using Duoethnogra-
phy. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW, Article
190 (Nov. 2019), 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359292

[13] Radhika Garg and Subhasree Sengupta. 2019. "When You Can Do It, Why Can’t
I?": Racial and Socioeconomic Differences in Family Technology Use and Non-
Use. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 3, CSCW, Article 63 (Nov. 2019), 22 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3359165

[14] Matthew K. Hong, Udaya Lakshmi, Kimberly Do, Sampath Prahalad, Thomas
Olson, Rosa I. Arriaga, and Lauren Wilcox. 2020. Using Diaries to Probe the
Illness Experiences of Adolescent Patients and Parental Caregivers. Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3313831.3376426

[15] Simon L. Jones, Emily I.M. Collins, Ana Levordashka, Kate Muir, and Adam
Joinson. 2019. What is ‘Cyber Security’? Differential Language of Cyber Security
Across the Lifespan. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI EA ’19). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article LBW0269, 6 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312786

[16] Vinay Koshy, Joon Sung Sung Park, Ti-Chung Cheng, and Karrie Karahalios. 2021.
“We Just Use What They Give Us”: Understanding Passenger User Perspectives
in Smart Homes. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
Article 41, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445598

[17] Andrés Lucero. 2018. Living Without a Mobile Phone: An Autoethnography.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Hong Kong,
China) (DIS ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
765–776. https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196731

[18] Laura Malinverni and Narcis Pares. 2016. An Autoethnographic Approach to
Guide Situated Ethical Decisions in Participatory Design with Teenagers. Interact-
ing with Computers 29, 3 (10 2016), 403–415. https://doi.org/10.1093/iwc/iww031
arXiv:https://academic.oup.com/iwc/article-pdf/29/3/403/11149061/iww031.pdf
[19] Nora McDonald, Sarita Schoenebeck, and Andrea Forte. 2019. Reliability and
Inter-Rater Reliability in Qualitative Research: Norms and Guidelines for CSCW
and HCI Practice. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3,
CSCW, Article 72 (Nov. 2019), 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359174
[20] Bridget Christine McHugh, Pamela J. Wisniewski, Mary Beth Rosson, Heng Xu,
and John M. Carroll. 2017. Most Teens Bounce Back: Using Diary Methods
to Examine How Quickly Teens Recover from Episodic Online Risk Exposure.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 1, CSCW, Article 76 (Dec. 2017), 19 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3134711

[21] Keith Oatley and Maja Djikic. 2008. Writing as Thinking. Review of General

Psychology 12, 1 (2008), 9–27. https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.12.1.9

[22] Aisling Ann O’Kane, Yvonne Rogers, and Ann E. Blandford. 2014. Gaining
Empathy for Non-Routine Mobile Device Use through Autoethnography. In
Proceedings of the 2014 SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CHI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 987–990. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557179

[23] Abiodun Esther Omolara, Abdullah Alabdulatif, Oludare Isaac Abiodun, Moatsum
Alawida, Abdulatif Alabdulatif, Wafa’ Hamdan Alshoura, and Humaira Arshad.
2021. THE INTERNET OF THINGS SECURITY: A SURVEY ENCOMPASSING
UNEXPLORED AREAS AND NEW INSIGHTS. Computers & Security 112, 102494
(2021), 31 pages. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102494

[24] Lisa Patterson, Sue Chard, Bryan Ng, and Ian Welch. 2021. Internet of Things
(IoT) Privacy and Security: A User-Focused Study of Aotearoa New Zealand
Home Users. In Proceedings of the 54th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (HICSS). Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS),
Honolulu, HI, USA, 11 pages. http://hdl.handle.net/10125/71152

[25] Kari Paul. 2020. Dozens sue Amazon’s Ring after camera hack leads to threats
and racial slurs. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/
dec/23/amazon-ring-camera-hack-lawsuit-threats

[26] Cynthia Putnam and Bamshad Mobasher. 2020. Children with Autism and
Technology Use: A Case Study of the Diary Method. In Extended Abstracts of

the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI,
USA) (CHI EA ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3375218

[27] Amon Rapp. 2018. Autoethnography in Human-Computer Interaction: Theory
and Practice.
In New Directions in Third Wave Human-Computer Interaction.
Springer International Publishing, Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-73374-6_3

[28] Rudra Srinivas. 2020. 10 IoT Security Incidents That Make You Feel Less Secure.
CISO Mag. https://cisomag.eccouncil.org/10-iot-security-incidents-that-make-
you-feel-less-secure/

[29] Madiha Tabassum, Tomasz Kosinski, and Heather Richter Lipford. 2019.

"I
don’t own the data": End User Perceptions of Smart Home Device Data Prac-
tices and Risks. In Fifteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS
2019). USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA, 435–450. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/soups2019/presentation/tabassum

[30] techUK and GfK. 2021. The State of the Connected Home 2021. Industry Report.
techUK. https://www.techuk.org/resource/the-state-of-the-connected-home-
2021-new-report-launch.html

Sarah Turner, Jason R.C. Nurse, and Shujun Li

[31] Junqing Wang, Aisling Ann O’Kane, Nikki Newhouse, Geraint Rhys Sethu-Jones,
and Kaya de Barbaro. 2017. Quantified Baby: Parenting and the Use of a Baby
Wearable in the Wild. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 1, CSCW, Article 108
(Dec. 2017), 19 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3134743

[32] Hue Watson, Eyitemi Moju-Igbene, Akanksha Kumari, and Sauvik Das. 2020.
“We Hold Each Other Accountable": Unpacking How Social Groups Approach
Cybersecurity and Privacy Together. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 478, 12 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376605

[33] Meredydd Williams, Jason R C Nurse, and Sadie Creese. 2019. Smartwatch games:
encouraging privacy-protective behaviour in a longitudinal study. Computers in
Human Behavior 99 (2019), 38–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.04.026
[34] Pamela Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, Daniel F. Perkins, and John M.
Carroll. 2016. Dear Diary: Teens Reflect on Their Weekly Online Risk Experiences.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3919–3930. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858317

