A tool to support the investigation and visualization of 
cyber and/or physical incidents  

Inês Macedo [0000-0002-0837-2410], Sinan Wanous [0000-0002-9711-4850], Nuno Oliveira [0000-0002-
5030-7751], Orlando Sousa [0000-0003-0779-3480], Isabel Praça [0000-0002-2519-9859] 
School of Engineering from the Polytechnic of Porto (ISEP) 
 Research Group on Intelligent Engineering and Computing for Advanced Innovation and De-
velopment (GECAD) 
{incar, sinai, nunal, oms, icp}@isep.pt 

Abstract. Investigating efficiently the data collected from a system’s activity can 
help to detect malicious attempts and better understand the context behind past 
incident occurrences. Nowadays, several solutions can be used to monitor system 
activities to detect probable abnormalities and malfunctions. However, most of 
these systems overwhelm their users with vast amounts of information, making 
it  harder  for  them  to  perceive  incident  occurrences  and  their  context.  Our  ap-
proach combines a dynamic and intuitive user interface with Machine Learning 
forecasts to provide an intelligent investigation tool that facilitates the security 
operator’s  work.  Our  system  can  also  act  as  an  enhanced  and  fully  automated 
decision  support  mechanism  that  provides  suggestions  about  possible  incident 
occurrences.  

Keywords: cyber and physical security, data visualization, investigation tool; 
machine learning 

1 

Introduction 

Security investigation aims to explore the cause of an attack and how much it threatened 
the security of the targeted property. In case the security of a system is compromised, 
investigating over the data collected during the monitoring phase can bring important 
insights, both to improve detection and prevention, and to support mitigation and reme-
diation  strategies.  Intrusion  detection  sensors  can  collect  additional  evidence,  in  the 
form of logs, related to system and network accesses, email services, file analysis, etc. 
In complex infrastructures, the number of systems can be huge, and thus the amount of 
data collected. The proper data visualization can be crucial to support the Security Op-
erators in analyzing all the evidence collected. If we consider domains where both cyber 
and physical security monitoring solutions are used, not only the data volume is bigger, 
also the analyses of both domains are crucial to understand how complex attacks can 
be triggered, benefiting from the combination of cyber and physical threats.  

In this work, we describe an investigation tool, that is based on the time series visu-
alization of cyber and physical attacks, and the way a machine learning and a visuali-
zation module are interconnected to support the detection and correlation of incidents. 

2 

The paper is divided into multiple sections that can be detailed as follows. Section 2 
provides an overview of related security frameworks, incident investigation research, 
and commercial security systems. Section 3 briefly describes the security ecosystem 
and our solution’s internal architecture. In Section 4, our system’s visualization com-
ponent is illustrated with more detail, specifying the main functionalities as well as the 
most relevant dashboards that can be accessed. Finally, Section 5 provides a conclusion 
about how our approach facilitates the SOC Operator’s work and enhances the overall 
security process. 

2 

Related Work 

Authors of Thakur, K., et al. [1] describe crucial issues in cybersecurity domains. They 
focus on the issues of cyber security threats and summarizes the existing security mod-
els and research directions in each field. Moreover, a basic network infrastructure for 
applications and systems vulnerability analysis is proposed in [2]. It aims to start cy-
bersecurity investigation in a real hardware manner. The goal of this infrastructure is to 
ensure secure systems, planning and operation, response, and support. However, in their 
work, Ussath, M., et al. [3] depict a concept for a security investigation framework to 
improve  the  efficiency  of  investigations  of  multi-stage  Advanced  Persistent  Threat 
(APT). The proposed concept utilizes automatic and semi-automatic functions and re-
quires core components such as parsing, visualization, meta information, and correla-
tion components. Also, it collects relevant information from different sources, such as 
log files, results of forensic investigations, and malware analysis reports. 

Another study explores the complex investigation of incidents in cloud-based envi-
ronments [4], in which the automated monitoring tools may implicate rather long lists 
of virtual machines and containers. The authors propose a visualization approach that 
aims at reducing the number of  VMs and containers awaiting forensic investigation. 
They conclude that, using the visualization tools, individuals were able to detect mal-
ware 70% of the time. Also, future combinations of visualizations with intelligent fo-
rensics might provide better results. Rondeau, C., et al. [5] try to improve pre-attack 
security  and  post-attack  forensic  methods  in  the  context  of  WirelessHART  -  IIoT 
(Wireless Highway Addressable Remote Transducer in support of Industrial Internet of 
Things). They investigate activity aimed at applying Time Domain Distinct Native At-
tribute (TD-DNA) fingerprinting and improving feature selection to increase computa-
tional efficiency and the potential for near-real time operational application. A mini-
track overview reports state-of-the-art in the emerging area of cybersecurity investiga-
tions and digital forensics  [6]. According to the authors, there are still pending chal-
lenges in this area. Challenges include the identification of solutions to handle complex 
investigations,  especially  those  that  involve  technology  such  as  smart  cities,  cyber-
physical systems, and Internet of Things (IoT) environments.  

According to Kebande, V., et al. [7] there is a lack of holistic and standardized ap-
proaches addressing the digital forensic investigations of IoT systems. In their paper, 
authors developed and validated a Digital Forensic Readiness (DFR) framework to be 

3 

used to implement a proactive forensic process in an organization. The presented frame-
work  is  compatible  with  the  ISO/IEC  27043:2015  standard  and  considers  organiza-
tional complexities and policy developments. On the other hand, a report by Horsman, 
G. [8] takes a step forward in the field-wide sharing of knowledge in digital forensics. 
He proposes a framework designed to set out the required elements for sharing reliable 
digital forensic knowledge, called the Capsule of Digital Evidence (CODE).  

Due to a study from 2015 by Sandia National Laboratories, USA [9], stakeholders 
of physical protection systems lack essential knowledge related to cyber-enabled phys-
ical attack scenarios. In this study, Sandia R&D team worked to support experiments 
of cyber-attacks  against Physical  Protection  Systems (PPS) components and subsys-
tems. Their research focuses on developing a reliable capability to investigate cyber-
enabled physical attack scenarios: identifying and understanding credible cyber threats 
to PPS.  

Furthermore,  an  emerging  sub-discipline  of  digital  forensics  was  described  [10]. 
This field covers Financial Technologies (or Fintech), and recognize investigations re-
lated to financial transactions and payment activities. In another context, there is a rise 
in cybercrimes related to automated programs, in which, existing tools and research are 
not capable enough to advance bot crime investigations [11]. In their paper, Rahman, 
R. U., el al. [11] propose a four-phase web forensic framework to guide forensic exam-
iners to verify that the crime was committed with automated bots. Authors of Adepu, 
S., et al. [12] introduce a study to investigate the impact of cyber-attacks on a Water 
Distribution (WADI) system. The developed tool was able to launch multiple attacks 
and led to a better understanding of attack propagation and behavior of WADI in re-
sponse to the attacks. 

Moreover, most investigation research is based on access and system log files, but 
these logs are often massive, have a flat structure, contain very basic and limited infor-
mation, and much of their data is not relevant to the investigation [11][13]. Neverthe-
less,  a  relatively  old  study from  2007  [13]  describes  an  automated  attack-tree-based 
algorithm for eliminating irrelevant information from system log files. The proposed 
approach also conducts systematic investigations of computer attacks. 

Besides research proposals and tools, commercial solutions are also available. Giga-
mon GigaSECURE [14] enables security teams to gain broad access to and control over 
network data [15]. It uses five security systems to 1) aggregate network traffic, 2) detect 
the threat and generate events, 3) evaluate events, 4) generate related alerts, 5) capture 
the resulting process, and 6) investigate the results. On the other hand, Google has in-
troduced a new security investigation tool, in 2018, as part of the Google workspace 
security center [16]. This tool aims to help admins and security analysts identify, clas-
sify, and take actions on their organization’s threats.   

Beyond that, there is also a lack of theoretical foundations and usage documentation 
to guide dashboard design, which a study conducted in 2019 tries to tackle. The “What 
Do We Talk About When We Talk About Dashboards?” report [17] performs a com-
prehensive analysis of dashboards by characterizing them and the practices surrounding 
them. This work is essential to support the correct design and implementation of differ-
ent types of dashboards. Another study from 2018 describes a framework to analyze 
and develop dashboard templates for enterprises [18]. It focuses on the event/business 

4 

operation, attribute list, visualization, dashboard capabilities, and the final evaluation 
of the dashboard.  

3 

Investigation Approach 

Our investigation approach  regards a specific security workflow and domain. Cyber 
sensors as well as physical sensors distributed across the system’s infrastructure, col-
lect, daily, vast amounts of events about system activity. To detect malicious behavior 
and probable attack attempts, event data must be first carefully processed in an efficient 
manner because it is impossible for a human to analyze such amount of data in an ef-
fective way. So, in order to solve  this issue, the events originated from the  multiple 
heterogeneous sources of the system are passed to a component designated as Correla-
tion  Engine.  The  Correlation  Engine  is  a  pattern  matching  mechanism  that  contains 
expert written rules which are periodically reviewed and updated under a strict protocol. 
When a set of events trigger a given rule, an alert is originated. Alerts are then sent to 
an Incident Management Portal (IMP) which provides a user-friendly interface for the 
SOC Operator. In the IMP, the SOC Operator can visualize generated alerts and query 
for more related information such as event details. The SOC, with the available infor-
mation classifies the alerts as either incidents or not triggering an appropriate security 
response to handle the abnormality. The described  systems and their interactions are 
represented in the UML diagram of Figure 1. 

Fig. 1. Containers View – Security Ecosystem 

The concerned security domain regards three key concepts: 
Event. Contains low-level information about system activity. Events can have mul-
tiple heterogeneous sources, which can be either physical, such as closed-circuit tel-
evision and access control management systems, or cyber, such as intrusion detec-
tion systems and firewall data. Dealing with events from heterogeneous sources is 
not a straightforward process and requires a lot of investment in terms of data repre-
sentation and parsing. 
Alert. Is originated when a set of events trigger a specific security rule. Alerts allow 
the  correlation  between  events  and  contain  summary  information  of  those  same 
events. They also include a brief justification about how they were generated. 
Incident. An Incident results of an alert classification by the SOC Operator. 

 
 
5 

3.1  Architecture 

Our solution, designated as SMS-I (Security Management Solutions – Investigation) 
is  an  investigation  tool  that  acts  as  an  enhanced,  fully-automated  decision  support 
mechanism. SMS-I gathers information from both alerts and events, producing incident 
probabilities based on Machine Learning models. It also provides a set of functionalities 
to the SOC Operator so that he can perform an in-depth inspection about alert occur-
rences, such as timeline-based dashboards, alert listing, and incident occurrence prob-
ability filters. Hence, the SOC Operator when presented with an alert can visualize the 
probability of it being an incident based on the Machine Learning predictions and can 
easily perform a thorough inspection of its occurrence, facilitating his work. The SMS-
I architecture is described in Figure 2. 

Fig. 2. Containers View – SMS-I Internal Architecture  

The SMS-I comprises several internal modules: 
Synchronization Mechanism. It is responsible for the data synchronization process, 
obtaining events and alerts from the Correlation Engine database and incidents from 
the  Incident  Management  Portal,  parsing  them  into  predefined  formats,  and  storing 
them in the Investigation Database. 
ML Engine. The ML Engine is responsible for executing Machine Learning models to 
determine the probability of each Alert being an Incident based both on its own features 
and on the features of its related events. This information is also stored in the Investi-
gation Database.  
Scheduler. The Scheduler orchestrates both Synchronization Mechanism and ML En-
gine triggering their execution given some constraint (E.g., time-based - every minute). 

 
 
 
6 

Investigation Database. It contains the data of our system: events, alerts, incidents and 
Machine Learning results. 
Kibana. Is the interface of the Investigation Database, it provides several visualization 
methods that we combined in order to produce intuitive and informative dashboards. 
Web Interface: It encapsulates the Kibana Dashboards and provides additional func-
tionalities such as interactive listings and filters. 

3.2  Machine Learning 

The ML Engine is a very important component of our architecture since it has the re-
sponsibility to execute the Machine Learning models and to store the produced results 
in the Investigation Database so that they can be accessed by both Web Interface and 
Kibana. In our work, Machine Learning is used from a supervised perspective and it 
can be detailed into two different processes, Learning and Predicting. 
Learning. In the learning phase, events, alerts, and incidents are collected offline and 
preprocessed into a clean dataset in tabular format. The alerts contain a set of features 
such as severity, detector and related asset which are enriched with additional features 
engineered from its related events. The  data from the IMP is used to label the alerts 
accordingly in order to identify which originated incidents and which did not. The pro-
duced dataset is then transformed into a comprehensible format so it can be used by the 
algorithm and split into three sets (train, validation and test) for evaluation purposes. 
After the training process, the model can use the broad patterns acquired from the data 
in order to recognize possible incidents on unseen alerts. Finally, the trained model is 
deployed into the ML Engine component. 
Predicting. When the ML Engine is executed, it fetches the alerts (and related event 
data) from the Investigation Database which were not yet inspected by the algorithm. 
The  Machine  Learning  model  computes  an  incident  probability  score  for  each  alert 
which are later stored in the Investigation Database. 
Several  algorithms  such  as  Random  Forest,  Multi-layer  Perceptron  and  Long  Short-
Term Memory were experimented. For a more  detailed  description of the employed 
methods readers can be redirected to [22]. 

4 

Visualization Approach 

A dashboard is a collection of visual displays of information used to quickly monitor 
conditions and increase general understanding [19]. 

Visualization dashboards are applied by almost every organization, including airport 
security centers, financial institutions, and healthcare providers, due to their increasing 
importance in a data-driven environment. Their application leads to improved decision-
making processes, operational efficiency, and data visibility [17]. While designing the 
dashboards, it is important to consider that 50% of SOC analysts receive less than 20 
hours of training for year [20]. Thus, there was a conscious effort to keep the visuali-
zations simple and inviting to help the analysts’ performance and their understanding 
of the investigation tool. 

 
 
7 

4.1  Dashboards 

Given their diversity, dashboards can have different purposes, audiences, and visual 
elements. In this section, the visualization dashboards developed to aid cyber-physical 
security processes will be presented and justified.   
Technology Used. Firstly, Elasticsearch is responsible for the analysis, normalization, 
enrichment and storage of alert and incident data, as well as data provided by machine 
learning algorithms. All this information is then accessed by Kibana to create new dash-
boards, which allows the user to search and visualize security data. Both tools belong 
to Elastic Stack, an open source framework and are easily integrated with one another. 
The decision to implement these tools is based on their flexibility and ease of installa-
tion, configuration, and execution.  
  Kibana represents the graphical interface of Elastic Stack. It applies and combines 
different visualization methods like graphics, tables, charts, and metrics to build dash-
boards. Furthermore, the Timelion plugin provided by Kibana allows the analysis of 
security data in a continuous timeline.  
Alerts Dashboard. The alerts dashboard includes all data related to security alerts gen-
erated by the different threat detection tools available in the  SOC. One of this dash-
board’s main goals is to monitor the quantity, nature, and severity of alerts, considering 
their incident prediction probability, which is calculated by the machine learning algo-
rithm. It is important to note that, in this solution, an incident can only have one corre-
sponding alert. However, an alert can be an incident, or it can be irrelevant. 

According to a report developed by CriticalStart in 2019, more than 70% of analysts 
feel overwhelmed with the number of alerts and incidents they need to investigate for 
a day [20]. In comparison, more than 50% of organizations receive over 10,000 alerts 
daily, which can lead to alert fatigue and neglect [21]. So, to maintain SOC efficiency 
and reduce the impact of the investigation on the responsible personnel, it is essential 
to  control  the  number  of  received  alerts.  The  objective  of  the  graphics  and  metrics 
shown in Figure 1 is to help avoid a sudden overload of alerts by monitoring the total 
number of cyber and physical alerts. An alert gauge was also developed to ensure that 
an overwhelming quantity of alerts is not reached.   

 Alert Quantity Monitoring. Figure 3 shows the first set of alert visualizations for the 

last sixty days.  

Fig. 3. Alerts Dashboard – Alert Quantity Monitoring Visualizations 

 
 
 
8 

The severity of an alert defines if it should be ignored or if there is a need to carry 
out a more thorough investigation. Four severity levels were defined, including high, 
medium, low, and info. Besides controlling the number of alerts for each severity level, 
to avoid the overburdening of SOC analysts, it is also possible to monitor the date of 
occurrence of alerts. This is useful to perform pattern and trend identification and to 
study previous incidents and preceding alerts. 

Alert Severity Monitoring. Figure 4 displays the second important set of visualiza-

tions, which monitor the severity of alerts. 

Fig. 4. Alerts Dashboard – Alert Severity Monitoring Visualizations 

The set of graphics and metrics that incorporate Figure 5 display, from 0% to 100%, 
the number of alerts that possess a certain probability of being an incident, as well as 
the average incident prediction probability. In the example shown, most alerts have an 
incident prediction probability lower than 35%, which leads to a low average probabil-
ity value. This means that overall, there probably is not any occurrence of an incident. 
Machine  Learning  Results.  Figure  5  shows  the  results  provided  by  the  machine 
learning algorithm. This includes the incident prediction probability, in other words, 
the likelihood of an alert representing an incident. 

Fig. 5. Alerts Dashboard – Incident Prediction Probability Visualizations 

Incidents Dashboard.  The incidents dashboard aggregates all detected incidents re-
lated to the organization’s security. This dashboard follows the structure of the alerts 
dashboard by monitoring the quantity, nature, and severity of incidents. However, since 

 
 
 
there  were  no  incidents  detected  by  the  incident  handling  tools  implemented  in  the 
SOC, there are no results to display on the dashboard. 

4.2  Web Interface 

9 

Fig. 6. Web Portal – Main Page 

To facilitate the security investigation process, we developed a web interface for the 
investigation tool to extend monitoring, visualization, and evaluation of events taking 
place within the system. The investigation tool web interface is a dedicated web appli-
cation that aims to grab all gathered information regarding security concerns and pre-
sent them through a unified portal. Figure 6 represents the web portal’s main page that 
contains intuitive links to its available high-level functionalities. Using this web app, 
security operations users can explore dashboards and information of different levels of 
details, including logical information, technical  specifications, and machine learning 
forecasting results.  

Implementation and Setup. The investigation tool web interface is a standalone web 
application built using MVC design pattern. It communicates with other internal mod-
ules using Restful APIs. The tool is a part of an internal secure network and provides 
limited access to a specific type of users, namely SOC operators, being authenticated 
using another sub-system.  

Main Features. Following are the main features of the Investigation web application: 

•  Authentication and authorization of logged-in users using a remote authentication 

module; 

•  Access to interactive dashboards provided by Kibana module, these dashboards are 
embedded within the investigation tool and include alerts dashboard and incidents 
dashboard; 

•  Access to a list of alerts of the highest probability to be incidents, provided by the 

Investigation Database module; 

•  Access to lists of open alerts, closed alerts, and alerts categorized as incidents, pro-

vided by the Investigation Database module; 

 
 
10 

•  Access to alert/incident specifications, including forecasting results retrieved from 
the Machine Learning Engine that are also stored in the Investigation Database; 
•  Access and control of user settings and manual trigger of the synchronization mech-

anism between other modules. 

5 

Conclusions 

With this work, we describe how we are using machine learning and the ELK Stack to 
contribute to the investigation of cyber and physical attacks. A Visualization tool based 
on Kibana and a web portal, were developed to support Security Operators dealing with 
the amounts of information coming from both cyber and physical security monitoring 
solutions. Moreover, we also introduce to the SOC operator machine learning sugges-
tions in order to help him to detect possible incidents. The ongoing work is now the 
application of this tool to different specific attack scenarios. 

References 

1.  Thakur, K., Qiu, M., Gai, K., Ali, M. L.: An Investigation on Cyber Security Threats and 
Security Models. In Proceedings  - 2nd IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security 
and  Cloud  Computing,  CSCloud  2015  -  IEEE  International Symposium of  Smart  Cloud, 
IEEE  SSC  2015  307–311  (Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers  Inc.,  2016). 
doi:10.1109/CSCloud.2015.71. 

2.  Nikolov, L. G., Slavyanov, V. O.: Network Infrastructure For Cybersecurity Analysis. Int. 

Sci. Conf. (2018). 

3.  Ussath, M., Cheng, F., Meinel, C.: Concept for a security investigation framework. in 2015 
7th International Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and Security - Proceedings of 
NTMS 2015 Conference and Workshops (2015). doi:10.1109/NTMS.2015.7266478. 

4.  Shropshire, J., Benton, R.: Container and VM Visualization for Rapid Forensic Analysis. In 
Proceedings  of  the  53rd  Hawaii  International  Conference  on  System  Sciences  (2020). 
doi:10.24251/hicss.2020.783. 

5.  Rondeau, C., Temple, M.: DNA Feature Selection for Discriminating WirelessHART IIoT 
Devices. in Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 
(2020). doi:10.24251/hicss.2020.782. 

6.  Glisson, W., Grispos, G., Choo, K.-K.: Cybersecurity Investigations and Digital Forensics: 
Mini-track Overview. In Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International Conference on Sys-
tem Sciences (2020). http://hdl.handle.net/10125/64523, last accessed 2020/11/20. 

7.  Kebande, V. R., Mudau, P. P., Ikuesan, R. A., Venter, H. S. & Choo, K.-K. R.: Holistic 
digital forensic readiness framework for IoT-enabled organizations. Forensic Sci. Int. Re-
ports (2020) doi:10.1016/j.fsir.2020.100117. 

8.  Horsman,  G.  Part  2:-  quality  assurance  mechanisms  for  digital  forensic  investigations: 
Knowledge sharing and the Capsule of Digital Evidence (CODE). Forensic Sci. Int. Reports 
(2020) doi:10.1016/j.fsir.2019.100035. 

9.  Clem, J., Atkins, W., Urias, V.: Investigation of Cyber-Enabled Physical Attack Scenarios. 
SAND2015-4202C  (Sandia  National  Laboratories,  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico,  USA) 
(2015). https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/1255768, last accessed 2020/11/24. 

11 

10.  Nikkel, B. Fintech forensics: Criminal investigation and digital evidence in financial tech-

nologies. Forensic Sci. Int. Digit. Investig. (2020) doi:10.1016/j.fsidi.2020.200908. 

11.  Rahman, R. U., Tomar, D. S.: A new web forensic framework for bot crime investigation. 

Forensic Sci. Int. Digit. Investig. (2020) doi:10.1016/j.fsidi.2020.300943. 

12.  Adepu, S., Palleti, V. R., Mishra, G., Mathur, A.: Investigation of cyber attacks on a water 

distribution system. arXiv (2019). 

13.  Poolsapassit, N., Ray, I.: Investigating computer attacks using attack trees. in IFIP Interna-
tional Federation for Information Processing (2007). doi:10.1007/978-0-387-73742-3_23. 
14.  GigaSECURE  Homepage,  https://www.gigamon.com/solutions/gigasecure-security-deliv-

ery-platform.html, last accessed 2020/11/20. 

15.  Hamm, J., Liu, A., Ohlhausen, B., Rosenthol, J.: SOC Automation of Threat Investigation 
[White Paper], Gigamon & Bluvector. https://www.gigamon.com/content/dam/resource-li-
brary/english/white-paper/wp-bluvector-soc-automation-of-threat-investigation.pdf 
16.  Google Workspace Homepage, https://workspace.google.com, last accessed 2020/11/20. 
17.  A. Sarikaya, M. Correll, L. Bartram, M. Tory, and D. Fisher, “What do we talk about when 
we talk about dashboards?,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., vol. 25, no. 1, 2019. 

18.  W.  Noonpakdee,  T.  Khunkornsiri,  A.  Phothichai,  and  K.  Danaisawat,  “A  framework  for 
analyzing and developing dashboard templates for small and medium enterprises,” 2018 5th 
Int. Conf. Ind. Eng. Appl. ICIEA 2018, 2018.  

19.  S.  Few,  “There’s  Nothing  Mere  About  Semantics,”  Perceptual  Edge,  2017.  [Online]. 
Available: https://www.perceptualedge.com/blog/?p=2793. [Accessed: 18-Nov-2020]. 

20.  H. Daniel, “The Impact of Securiy Alert Overload,” 2019. 
21.  T. Casey, “Survey: 27 Percent of IT professionals receive more than 1 million security alerts 
daily,” Imperva, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.imperva.com/blog/27-percent-of-
it-professionals-receive-more-than-1-million-security-alerts-daily/. 
[Accessed:  18-Nov-
2020]. 

22.  Oliveira, N.; Praça, I.; Maia, E.; Sousa, O. Intelligent Cyber-Attack Detection and Classifi-
cation for Network-based Intrusion Detection Systems. Preprints 2020, 2020120315 (doi: 
10.20944/preprints202012.0315.v1). 

