This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version
may no longer be accessible.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.DOI

Systematic Literature Review on Cyber
Situational Awareness Visualizations

LIUYUE JIANG 1,2, ASANGI JAYATILAKA 1, MEHWISH NASIM 3,4, MARTHIE GROBLER 4,
MANSOOREH ZAHEDI 5, M. ALI BABAR 1,2
1CREST – the Centre for Research on Engineering Software Technologies, School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
2Cyber Security Cooperative Research Centre (CSCRC), Australia
3College of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA 5000 Australia
4CSIRO’s Data61, Melbourne, Australia
5School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia

2
2
0
2

Corresponding author: Liuyue Jiang (e-mail: liuyue.jiang@adelaide.edu.au).

The work has been supported by the Cyber Security Research Centre Limited whose activities are partially funded by the Australian
Government’s Cooperative Research Centres Programme.

y
a
M
4
2

ABSTRACT The dynamics of cyber threats are increasingly complex, making it more challenging than
ever for organizations to obtain in-depth insights into their cyber security status. Therefore, organizations
rely on Cyber Situational Awareness (CSA) to support them in better understanding the threats and
associated impacts of cyber events. Due to the heterogeneity and complexity of cyber security data,
often with multidimensional attributes, sophisticated visualization techniques are needed to achieve CSA.
However, there have been no previous attempts to systematically review and analyze the scientiﬁc literature
on CSA visualizations. In this paper, we systematically select and review 54 publications that discuss
visualizations to support CSA. We extract data from these papers to identify key stakeholders, information
types, data sources, and visualization techniques. Furthermore, we analyze the level of CSA supported by
the visualizations, alongside examining the maturity of the visualizations, challenges, and practices related
to CSA visualizations to prepare a full analysis of the current state of CSA in an organizational context. Our
results reveal certain gaps in CSA visualizations. For instance, the largest focus is on operational-level staff,
and there is a clear lack of visualizations targeting other types of stakeholders such as managers, higher-level
decision makers, and non-expert users. Most papers focus on threat information visualization, and there is
a dearth of papers that visualize impact information, response plans, and information shared within teams.
Interestingly, we ﬁnd that only a few studies proposed visualizations to facilitate up to the projection level
(i.e., the highest level of CSA), whereas most studies facilitated only the perception level (i.e., the lowest
level of CSA). Most of the studies provide evidence of the proposed visualizations through toy examples and
demonstrations, while only a few visualizations are employed in industrial practice. Based on the results that
highlight the important concerns in CSA visualizations, we recommend a list of future research directions.

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

3
v
4
5
3
0
1
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

INDEX TERMS Situational Awareness, Visualizations, Cyber Security, Systematic Literature Review

I. INTRODUCTION
“The only truly secure system is one that is powered off,
cast in a block of concrete and sealed in a lead-lined room
with armed guards". These words by Gene Spafford illustrate
the persistent vulnerability that networks and systems have
in terms of cyber attacks, with cyber attacks increasing in
sophistication and regularity. The outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic has impacted every industry, particularly health-
care services, workers in remote areas, and the unemployed,
who have all emerged to become new cyber attack targets
[1]. A report published by IBM Security [2] shows that the

global average cost of a data breach in 2021 is estimated at
US$4.24 million, compared with US$3.86 million in 2020
[3], with the latest statistics revealing that the average time
for companies to identify a data breach in 2021 is 212
days, up from 207 days in 2020 [3]. Particularly during
the COVID-19 pandemic, many companies reported that
they experienced the identiﬁcation and containment of a
data breach as taking longer. These statistics show that the
number, depth, and breadth of incidents related to cyber
attacks worldwide are increasing. Such incidents reinforce
the need for better and faster mechanisms, tools, policies,

VOLUME 4, 2022

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

risk management approaches, training, and technologies that
can help safeguard the cyber environment of an organization.
This all comes down to effective and efﬁcient cyber security.
Cyber-related data is automatically generated at millisec-
ond levels of resolution from diverse data sources and is often
very voluminous. Furthermore, cyber attackers are increas-
ingly applying sophisticated techniques in their attacks. As a
result, implementing effective cyber security measures has
become especially challenging. In this context, Situational
Awareness (SA) has become paramount to facilitate correct
and timely decision making to prevent or reduce the impact
of cyber attacks. Situational (or situation) awareness is tra-
ditionally deﬁned following the seminal work of Endsley [4]
as “the perception of the element in the environment within
a volume of time and space, the comprehension of their
meaning, and the projection of their status in the near future”.
Cyber data visualization can provide efﬁcient and mean-
ingful insights to overwhelming amounts of data, allowing
decision makers to both explore and monitor the cyber status
at various abstractions levels [5]. Although various visual-
izations have been proposed to support CSA, there is no
clear understanding of the different stakeholders for those
visualizations, different types of information visualized, data
sources employed, visualization techniques used, levels of
CSA that can be achieved, and the maturity levels of the visu-
alizations, challenges, and practices for CSA visualizations.
Responding to this evident lack of investigation into an
important topic, we systematically analyzed the literature
on CSA visualizations. This Systematic Literature Review
(SLR) enables both researchers and CSA visualization de-
signers to gain in-depth and holistic insights into the state-of-
the-art CSA visualizations and offers support in transferring
the research outcomes into industrial practice [6]. Further-
more, the results can be used to identify limitations of the
existing literature related to CSA visualizations and gaps
that require further attention from the researchers. The key
contributions of this systematic literature review are listed
below:

• A synthesized body of research knowledge on CSA
visualizations, providing guidance for researchers and
CSA visualization designers who want to better under-
stand the topic.

• A comprehensive understanding of the different stake-
holders of CSA visualizations, different types of infor-
mation visualized, data sources employed, and visual-
ization techniques used.

• An analysis of the CSA levels that can be achieved
through the proposed visualizations and the maturity of
the proposed visualizations.

• An analysis of the challenges identiﬁed in designing
and developing CSA visualizations and practices that
have been reported to implement CSA visualizations
successfully.

• Identiﬁcation of the potential gaps for future research
highlights important and practical considerations for
CSA visualizations that require further attention.

FIGURE 1. Three Levels of SA. Adapted from [4].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
gives an overview of CSA and visualizations employed for
achieving CSA. Section III describes the methods that we
used to conduct this SLR, including the review protocol.
Section IV describes our results, including the demographic
information and the quality assessment of the included stud-
ies, and addresses the research questions (RQs) through the
analysis of selected studies. In Section V we discuss the
key ﬁndings of this research and possible future directions.
Section VI describes the threats to the research’s validity.
Finally Section VII concludes the review.

II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
This section discusses the background and related work with
respect to several important topics relevant to this SLR.

A. SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Situational Awareness refers to the human cognitive capacity
to analyze its environment and act accordingly. SA has been
recognized as critical for successful decision making across
a broad range of situations in various domains, including
military command and control operations, health care, and
air trafﬁc control. SA is crucial for understanding and com-
prehending the implications of a situation, concluding, and
making informed decisions about the future. It can be consid-
ered from two different aspects [5]. The technical aspect of
SA is concerned with collecting, compiling, processing, and
fusing data. Here, information and data fusion is the most
important concept considering aggregation and extraction
of knowledge from various information sources to estimate
current and predict future states. The cognitive aspect of SA
is concerned with a person’s mental awareness in a given
situation, speciﬁcally a person’s capacity to comprehend
the technical implications and draw conclusions to make
informed decisions.

Endley’s model [4] deﬁnes three SA levels (see Figure 1)
that can be used to measure the extent to which a human
decision maker is aware of a situation and whether they have
reached a certain level of SA:

• Perception (Level 1): The lowest level of SA is associ-
ated with the user’s perception of the status, attributes,
and dynamics of the relevant elements of the environ-
ment.

• Comprehension (Level 2): This involves comprehend-
ing or forming a synthesis of the situation based on the
different elements in the perception level. This allows

2

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

users to go beyond simply being aware of the elements
in the environment to comprehending the situation and
understanding the signiﬁcance of those elements.

• Projection (Level 3): The highest level of SA is asso-
ciated with the ability to predict future states or events
of the elements of the environment. The accuracy of the
prediction highly depends on the accuracy of SA Level
1 and Level 2.

It is important to note that the proposed levels of SA represent
ascending levels of awareness and not linear stages [7]. By
following this process, the user can rationalize the situation at
hand, enabling decision making and action. The person who
comprehends and understands the meaning of the current
situation will possess greater situational awareness than a
person who reads the data without understanding its meaning.
Similarly, someone who can predict probable future events
and states will better understand the situation than someone
who is unable to do so.

B. CYBER SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Given the progressiveness and usefulness of SA research, it
is increasingly applied to cyberspace [5]. Hence, CSA can
be considered an extension or a subset of traditional SA to
cyberspace.

A systematic literature review on CSA conducted by
Franke et al. [5] describes and discusses peer-reviewed lit-
erature on this topic from the perspective of both national
cyber strategies and science. SA requires adequate knowl-
edge about the organization’s current and past cyber activities
to effectively detect, identify, and respond to various threats
and attacks within the cyber security domain. CSA provides
holistic and speciﬁc information related to cyber threats and
vulnerabilities, allowing organizations to swiftly identify,
process, and comprehend information. Such suspicious and
interesting activities can be diverse and might range from
low-level network snifﬁng to activities obtained by external
data sources such as social media. In turn, CSA helps organi-
zations understand their current and future risk situation and
position in terms of their protection mechanisms.

In line with the three levels of SA, CSA is concerned
with developing the ability to recognize the current state of
assets and the cyber threat situations (perception), the ability
to comprehend the meaning of the cyber threat situation
and assess the impact of the threats (comprehension), and
the ability to project the future state of threats or actions
(projection).

Current CSA research mainly focuses on three aspects:
data collection [8]–[10], data processing and analysis [11]–
[13], and data visualization [14], [15]. Newer models and
frameworks have been proposed to achieve CSA, such as
cyber-speciﬁc Common Operating Pictures (COPs) [16].
COP has historically been a military term used to describe
a command and control solution that aggregates important
operational information into a single picture, “a single iden-
tical display of relevant information shared by more than
one command that facilitates collaborative planning and

assists all levels of decision makers to achieve situational
awareness”. Conti et al. [16] clearly articulated the roles
of humans and machines in a Cyber Common Operating
Picture (CCOP) for achieving CSA. They argued that CCOPs
should be designed to consider the tasks better suited to
human cognitive capabilities, and those can be automated and
processed at high speed by machines.

Advanced sophisticated data analytic techniques are often
used to process and analyze complex cyber information in
real-time and ofﬂine to provide CSA. However, due to the
volume and complexity of cyber data and attacks, powerful
machine learning techniques alone are insufﬁcient to achieve
CSA [16], [17]. It is important to effectively link technical
aspects with cognitive aspects in cyber security to achieve
complete CSA. To this end, effective data visualization is
imperative; visualizations allow users to explore and analyze
large amounts of data and quickly identify trends and unex-
pected events, enabling swift decision making and action [5],
[17], [18].

C. CYBER SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
VISUALIZATIONS
Although we observed an increasing numbers of papers in the
literature around the topic of CSA visualizations, we did not
ﬁnd any existing SLR or systematic mapping study focused
on the visualizations aimed at CSA. However, there have
been several existing reviews on visualizations for speciﬁc
security areas. This section compares these existing reviews
and discusses the gaps and novelty of this SLR.

A number of studies look at visualizations related to
network [19]–[21] and malware analysis [22]. For instance,
Shirave et al. [19] present an SLR on network security
visualizations. The authors identiﬁed ﬁve network security
visualization classes, including host server monitoring, in-
ternal/external monitoring, port activity, attack patterns, and
routing behavior. In another study, Guimaraes et al. [21]
present an SLR of information visualization for network and
service management. They identiﬁed several well-explored
topics on network and service management regarding the
use of information visualization,
including IP networks,
monitoring, and measurement. They also analyzed the vi-
sualization techniques and tasks/interactions in network and
service management information visualizations. Their results
revealed that standard 2D/3D displays are the most com-
monly used visualization technique in network and service
management visualizations. They also point out a number of
future research directions for information visualizations for
network and service management, speciﬁcally IoT, Big data,
Cloud computing, SDN, and Human-centered evaluation.

Wagner et al. [22] provide a survey of visualization sys-
tems for malware analysis. They categorized the literature
based on a general approach to data processing and visual-
ization using a malware visualization taxonomy. They also
categorized the literature by their input ﬁles and formats,
the visualization techniques utilized, the representation space
and the mapping to time, certain temporal aspects, their

VOLUME 4, 2022

3

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

interactive capabilities, and the different types of available
user actions.

Staheli et al. [23] provide a survey of visualization eval-
uations for cyber security. The authors identify the most
common evaluation types for security applications and dis-
cuss future directions. Franke et al. [5] conducted an SLR
that speciﬁcally focused on CSA. Their survey is broad
and includes publications that are not related to visualiza-
tion. They focus on various topics, including introductory
literature on CSA and SA in industrial control systems,
emergency management, SA architectures, algorithms, and
visualizations. In terms of visualizations, Franke et al. [5]
speciﬁcally highlight the need for going beyond technical
aspects of the visualizations to obtain a more comprehensive
understanding of the relationship between CSA levels (i.e.,
mental states) and the CSA visualizations.

In summary, there are several shortcomings in the existing
literature reviews. Most of the reviews mentioned above
have not been carried out considering CSA or only consider
speciﬁc areas related to cyber security visualizations (e.g.,
network analysis or malware analysis). Therefore, the ex-
isting literature reviews do not provide an overall view of
CSA visualizations. Furthermore, existing literature does not
consider or describe important aspects such as the level of
SA that could be reached (i.e., mental states) using the visu-
alization, diversity of stakeholders, types of information visu-
alized, and challenges and practices for CSA visualizations.
Therefore, in this research, we conduct an SLR to obtain a
complete view of the literature on visualizations targeting
CSA while considering the aspects mentioned above that
are important to the CSA domain, narrowing the existing
knowledge gap in this ﬁeld.

III. METHODOLOGY
The research methods in an SLR provide a well-deﬁned
process for identifying, analyzing, and interpreting literature
relevant to a particular set of research questions (RQs). We
followed the three-phased guidelines published by Kitchen-
ham and Charters [24]: deﬁning a review protocol, conduct-
ing the review, and reporting the review. We describe the
main steps of this SLR in the following subsections, detailing
the process illustrated in Figure 2.

A. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
This SLR focuses on providing an extensive overview and
analysis of the existing literature on CSA. Therefore, we
formulated ﬁve RQs to guide this SLR. Table 1 presents the
RQs, along with their motivation.

Answering these RQs will provide an in-depth understand-
ing of the stakeholder of the CSA visualization (RQ1), the
types of information visualized, the data sources used, and
how the cyber information is visualized (RQ2), the level of
CSA is facilitated by the visualization (RQ3), CSA visual-
ization maturity (RQ4), challenges for CSA visualizations
(RQ5), and practices for supporting effective CSA visualiza-
tion (RQ6). In addition, the ﬁndings will enable researchers

TABLE 1. Research Questions

Number

Question

Motivation

RQ1

RQ2

RQ3

RQ4

RQ5

RQ6

Who are the stakehold-
ers that use and bene-
ﬁt from CSA visualiza-
tions?
What
infor-
types of
mation are visualized,
which data sources are
used, and how is the cy-
ber information visual-
ized?
What level of CSA is
facilitated by the visu-
alizations?

is the maturity
What
of the proposed visu-
alizations that facilitate
CSA?
What are the reported
challenges in employ-
ing visualizations to fa-
cilitate CSA?
What practices have
to
been
implement
CSA
visualizations
successfully?

reported

To understand the types of people
who are intended to beneﬁt from
the proposed CSA visualizations.

To understand the different types
of information presented in CSA
visualizations, data sources used,
and visualization techniques and
task interactions employed to vi-
sualize CSA data.
To understand the level (i.e., per-
ception, comprehension and pro-
jection) supported by visualiza-
tions.
To help researchers assess the
maturity of the CSA visualiza-
tions.

To identify the challenges for de-
signing and developing CSA vi-
sualizations reported in the liter-
ature.
To understand the good practices,
guidelines, lessons learned, and
shared experiences needed to im-
plement CSA visualizations.

to obtain an in-depth overview of this topic, identify limita-
tions and gaps, and potential future directions.

B. SEARCH STRATEGY
This subsection discusses the search terms and data sources
used in this SLR. We used the guide presented by [25]
to develop the search string of this study iteratively. First,
the base keywords used as search terms were constructed
by considering the three aspects related to the SLR topic:
cyber, situational awareness, and visualizations. Then, we
systematically modiﬁed the search string by adding a set
of alternative search terms. These alternative search terms
were obtained by considering researchers’ knowledge and
experience, synonyms, and key terms used in the existing
related research papers.

• Cyber – cyber*
• Visualizations – visual* OR dashboard OR dash board
OR dash-board OR picture OR diagram OR graphic OR
video OR image OR audio OR multimedia OR multi
media OR multi-media

• Situational awareness – situational aware* OR
situational-aware* OR situation aware* OR common
operating picture OR common operational picture OR
CCOP

The identiﬁed search terms were combined into the ﬁnal
search string using Boolean AND and OR operators. We
conducted several pilot searches to identify the best search
string. We also veriﬁed the inclusion of well-known primary
studies when ﬁnalizing the search terms. The ﬁnal search

4

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

FIGURE 2. Methodology

string combined each base keyword category with an AND
operation:

cyber* AND (visual* OR dashboard OR dash board
OR dash-board OR picture OR diagram OR graphic OR
video OR image OR audio OR multimedia OR multi media
OR multi-media) AND (situational aware* OR situational-
aware* OR situation aware* OR common operating picture
OR common operational picture OR CCOP).

Previous researchers [25], [26] have shown that Scopus
indexes a large number of journals and conference papers
indexed by other search engines, including ACM Digital
Library, IEEE Xplore, Science Direct, Wiley Online Li-
brary, and SpringerLink. Furthermore, digital libraries such
as SpringerLink and Wiley Online Library place several
restrictions on the meta-data of the published studies in large-
scale searches. The search string also needs to be modiﬁed
for each digital library, otherwise it would result in errors
being introduced. As such, we used the Scopus search engine
to ﬁnd potentially relevant papers. Scopus enabled us to use
one search string while retrieving the most relevant studies.
The search terms were matched with the title, abstract, and
keywords of papers in Scopus. The search conducted in
February 2021 resulted in 343 papers that matched the search
string.

C. STUDY SELECTION
Three authors applied the inclusion and exclusion criteria
detailed in Table 2 to systematically select the ﬁnal set of
papers included in this SLR. All the authors discussed the
criteria and agreed upon them before the study selection
phase. We reﬁned the inclusion and exclusion criteria in
several iterations to accurately classify the papers. One of the
critical selection criteria is that the paper should introduce a
visualization for CSA with a design or implementation (I1).

TABLE 2.

Inclusion (I) and exclusion (E) criteria

Criteria

Inclusion
or
Exclusion

I1

I1
I2
E1

E2

E3
E4

The paper should introduce a CSA visualization with
design or implementation.
The paper should be peer-reviewed.
The paper should be published in the English language.
Any editorials, position papers, keynotes, reviews, tuto-
rial summaries, and panel discussions are excluded.
If a conference paper and a journal paper duplicate the
same work, the conference paper will be excluded, and
the journal paper will be retained.
Short papers of fewer than ﬁve pages are excluded.
Papers for which the full text is not available at the time
of the study are excluded.

In the meantime, we decided not to include any short papers
(E3) because they only presented concepts or ideas. They
lack well-deﬁned visualizations, and most importantly, they
did not provide sufﬁcient and relevant evidence to answer the
deﬁned RQs.

By applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria to the
papers’ titles and abstracts, the number of papers was reduced
to 96. The inclusion and exclusion criteria were then applied
to the introduction and conclusion of the remaining papers,
resulting in the further exclusion of 31 papers. The majority
of the papers excluded at this point resulted from the papers
not speciﬁcally addressing visualizations for CSA. For exam-
ple, we excluded papers that mainly address physical infras-
tructure in the smart-grid industry. We read the full text of the
remaining 65 papers in the last stage and included only 54 in
the ﬁnal set. For example, we excluded the papers claiming
CSA visualization in the abstract and introduction but which
do not have proper visualization design or implementation.

VOLUME 4, 2022

5

Identifying the need for the reviewPlanning the reviewDefining the research questionsDefining the review protocolRunning the search on Scopus (February 2021)Results: 343Application of the inclusion and exclusion criteria based on the title and abstractResults: 96Application of the inclusion and exclusion criteria based on the Introduction and ConclusionResults: 65Application of the inclusion and exclusion after reading the full paper and appraising the workResults: 54Pilot data extraction and data extractionData analysis using Excel spreadsheets and NVivo softwareConducting the reviewData synthesis and reportingReporting the reviewJiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

TABLE 3. Data extraction form

Item Question

Related RQ

Description

Thematic analysis was used where taxonomies were not
available to analyze the collected data. We describe in detail
how the data was analyzed below.

Demographics
Demographics
Demographics

Demographics

–
–
–

–

D1
D2
D3

D4

D5

D6

D7

D8

D9

Authors
Year
Publication
type
Publication
venue
Stakeholders

Information
visualized
Data
sources
Visualization
techniques
Tasks or in-
teractions

D10

Level
CSA
D11 Maturity of

of

visualiza-
tions
Challenges
reported

D12

RQ1

RQ2

RQ2

RQ2

RQ2

RQ3

RQ4

RQ5

D13

Practices

RQ6

Types of people intended to
beneﬁt
from the proposed
CSA visualization
Types of information that are
visualized
Data sources used for visual-
ization
Visualization techniques em-
ployed
The ways in which a user
can interact with the visual-
izations
Level of CSA facilitated
through the visualizations
Assessment of the reported
evidence

Challenges and barriers that
have been reported to design,
implement and adopt CSA vi-
sualizations
Lessons learned, good prac-
tices, and authors’ experi-
ences in successfully imple-
menting CSA visualizations

The three authors’ disagreements during the study selection
were discussed with the other authors in detail and resolved
before moving on to the data extraction.

D. DATA EXTRACTION
Data extraction was performed by three authors, following
the guidelines set out by Kitchenham et al. [24], where
multiple researchers review different primary studies due to
time or resource constraints. This process recommends a
method of checking to ensure that researchers extract data
consistently. A pre-deﬁned data extraction form (see Table 3)
was used to extract data from the selected primary studies.
When extracting data, we considered a single visualization as
a region in a user interface with a clear visual boundary where
information is displayed as a group. Before the data extrac-
tion, we conducted a pilot data extraction and compared the
results of a selected random sample of primary studies to
ensure the data extraction form could capture all the required
information in the best possible summarised version. Any
disagreements were discussed in detail and resolved before
moving on to the data extraction from all the papers.

E. DATA ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS
The demographic and contextual set of data items (D1 to D4
in Table 3) were analyzed by employing descriptive statistics.
Other extracted data (D5 - D13) to answer the RQs were
analyzed using thematic analysis or existing taxonomies.

1) Thematic analysis for qualitative data analysis
The data extracted for D5, D6, D7, D12, and D13 were an-
alyzed using the thematic analysis technique. Thematic data
analysis is a widely used qualitative data analysis method. We
used the steps proposed by Braun and Clarke to thematically
analyze the qualitative data collected [27]. First, we famil-
iarized ourselves with the extracted data by carefully reading
each element. After familiarizing ourselves with the data, the
data were saved to the NVivo data analysis tool for further
analysis. Based on the principles of thematic analysis, we
then performed open coding. This involved breaking the data
into smaller components to generate the initial codes. The
key points of the data were summarized using codes (i.e., a
phrase) of three-ﬁve words. Next, codes were grouped and
assigned to potential themes. This was an iterative process
as it was important to revise and merge codes based on their
similarities.

2) Use of existing taxonomies for analyzing the extracted
data
To analyze the data extracted for D8, D9, D10, and D11,
we utilized existing taxonomies. We observed a range of
taxonomies proposed in the information visualization ﬁeld
to analyze data collected for visualization techniques (D8).
However, some of these were too speciﬁc or unrelated to
our purpose. For example, the researchers in [28] propose a
taxonomy speciﬁcally for static (i.e., non-interactive) visual-
izations, whilst other speciﬁc taxonomies have been proposed
for dynamic graph visualizations [29], [30] and treemap
visualizations [31].

The taxonomy proposed by Guimarães et al. [21] is closely
related to our work. They merged two taxonomies to achieve
the framework needed for an adequate general classiﬁcation
of visualization techniques and tasks or interactions for end-
users. For the ﬁrst criterion (i.e., visualization techniques),
the researchers in [21] used the “Information Visualization
and Data Mining” taxonomy proposed in [32]. These tax-
onomies are widely accepted and referenced by the visualiza-
tion community. Based on the visualization technique taxon-
omy proposed by Guimarães et al. [21], it is possible to divide
the techniques used in the visualizations into ﬁve generalized
standard 2D/3D displays, ii) geometrically
categories: i)
iconic displays, iv) dense pixel
transformed displays, iii)
displays, v)
stacked pixel displays. In addition to these
categories, we added four more categories: geographical
displays, immersive environments, single value displays, and
tables/text summaries, to capture the visualization techniques
we observed in our papers. Detailed descriptions of these
categories are given in Section IV-D3a.

To analyze the tasks/interactions (D9), Guimarães et al.
[21] merged the taxonomies proposed by Keim [32] and
Shneiderman [33], and they added a new task and interaction

6

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

TABLE 4. Study quality assessment results

Study quality assessment
question

Yes

Partially

No

Is there a rationale for why
the study was undertaken?
Is there an adequate descrip-
tion of the context?
Is there a justiﬁcation and
description of the research
design?
Has the study an adequate
description of the technique
for visualization?
Is there a clear statement of
the ﬁndings?
Do the researchers critically
examine their potential bias
and inﬂuence on the study?
Are the limitations of the
study discussed explicitly?

54 (100.0%)

0 (0.0%)

0 (0.0%)

48 (88.9%)

6 (11.1%)

0 (0.0%)

37 (68.5%)

15 (27.8%)

2 (3.7%)

38 (70.4%)

15 (27.8%)

1 (1.9%)

33 (61.1%)

16 (29.6%)

5 (9.3%)

5 (9.3%)

17 (31.5%)

32 (59.3%)

6 (11.1%)

9 (16.7%)

39 (72.2%)

technique called move/rotate. The resulting taxonomy had
nine categories: i) overview; ii) zooming; iii) ﬁltering; iv) de-
tails on demand; v) history; vi) relate; vii) extract/share;
viii) move/rotate; and ix) linking and brushing. We added a
new task/interaction called customization to capture informa-
tion on user interactions related to customization of visualiza-
tions. It is important to note that the overview category is con-
cerned with the ability to gain an overview of the entire data
collection using other tasks/interactions, such as zooming
and ﬁltering. Hence to remove the duplication of information,
we did not use the tasks/interactions called overview in this
study. Detailed descriptions of the tasks/interactions used in
this study are given in Section IV-D3b.

Using data collected in D10, we explain how the visual-
izations support SA. Here we mapped each visualization to
the three levels of SA deﬁned by Endsley [4]. Data collected
for D11 are used to explain the maturity of the proposed
visualizations that facilitate CSA. We have used a six-level
hierarchy proposed in [34] to describe the visualization ma-
turity. The details of this hierarchy proposed in [34] are given
in Section IV-F.

F. QUALITY ASSESSMENT
The 54 primary studies were evaluated by the same three
authors who performed the data extraction. The quality as-
sessment was performed against the set of quality assessment
questions listed in Table 4 (adopted from [35], [36]). Each
question was answered during the data extraction process
according to a ratio scale ‘Yes’, ‘No’, or ‘Partially’. The
answers for each study show the quality of a selected study
and the credibility of the study’s results. Previous studies
highlight that the quality assessment result of the included
studies can reveal the potential limitations of the current
research and guide future research in the ﬁeld [24], [36].
Similar to [35], the quality assessment was not used for study
selection but was employed for validating the results of the
selected studies.

FIGURE 3. Distribution of papers in years and venue types

IV. RESULTS
This section reports the synthesis and analysis results of the
data extracted from the 54 primary studies to answer the
research questions.

A. DEMOGRAPHICS
Our dataset comprises papers published between 2003 and
2020. Only eight papers in our dataset were published before
2010, with the remaining 46 papers (85.2%) published in
or after 2010. Of those papers, about 44.4% (24 papers)
were published in or after 2017. It shows that CSA has only
started to gain popularity in the last decade. The distribution
is shown in Figure 3. Most selected studies were published
in conferences (44 studies, 81.5%). Only ﬁve studies (9.3%)
were published in workshops. The remaining ﬁve studies
(9.3%) were published in journals. We found that the In-
ternational Symposium on Visualization for Cyber Security
(VizSec) is a popular venue for publishing work on CSA
visualizations as they have published 13.0% (7 studies) of
the selected studies. The International Conference on Cyber
Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment (Cy-
berSA) has three publications (5.6%), and the International
Conference on Big Data has two publications (3.7%). Most
other venues only show one paper. The selected studies were
generally published in venues targeted at security, visual-
ization, big data, and general software engineering. This
ﬁnding demonstrates that this research topic has been broadly
considered by different research interests.

B. QUALITY ASSESSMENT RESULTS
Table 4 illustrates the quality assessment results of the 54
publications selected. As shown in Table 4, all studies state
the rationale for the conducted study (Q1). Q2 was answered
positively by most studies (88.9%), which means the re-
viewed studies have an adequate description of the context
in which the research was carried out. Concerning Q3, 37
out of 54 studies (68.5%) provided adequate descriptions
of the research design (Q3). The answers to Q4 and Q5
reﬂect the accuracy of the data extraction results. 38 out of
54 studies (70.4%) described their proposed visualization
techniques adequately, and 15 studies (27.8%) addressed
these techniques to some extent. 61.1% of studies have a
clear statement of their ﬁndings. Q6’s majority (59.3%) “No”

VOLUME 4, 2022

7

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

responses show that the researchers did not critically examine
their bias and inﬂuence on the study’s outcomes. The major-
ity of the studies (72.2%) did not discuss any limitations or
drawbacks.

C. RQ1: WHO ARE THE STAKEHOLDERS THAT USE
AND BENEFIT FROM CSA VISUALIZATIONS?

• CSA visualizations found in the primary stud-
ies mainly target three types of stakeholders: i)
operational-level staff; ii) managers and senior-
level decision makers; and iii) non-expert users.
• Most visualizations focus on operation-level staff.
However, only a few studies focus on man-
agers, senior-level decision-makers, and non-
expert users.

This section presents the ﬁndings for RQ1 and describes
the various stakeholders of CSA visualizations. The data
extracted for this section correspond to item D5 in Table 3. In
our selected primary studies, we found three main categories
of stakeholders, noting that several papers targeted multiple
stakeholders. These three categories of stakeholders are de-
scribed below.

Operational-level staff: We found that the majority of se-
lected primary studies targeted the operational-level staff and
focused on facilitating their day-to-day business (64.8%).
Among these papers, some visualizations targeted network
analysts. For example, researchers in [P38] propose a scal-
able platform for large-scale networks to process and vi-
sualize data in real time. Furthermore, researchers in [P47]
propose an ensemble visualization approach to improve net-
work security analysis. Another set of papers focuses on CSA
visualizations targeting risk analysts and security analysts.
For example, researchers in [P54] propose multiple views
that allow security analysts to analyze the event history, asset
relationships, and plausible future events to identify the best
course of action.

Managers and higher-level decision makers: With cyber
attacks becoming more frequent, sophisticated, targeted, and
widespread, cyber security decision makers need to make
quick critical decisions to contain and mitigate cyber attacks.
Several studies have focused on CSA visualizations to as-
sist managers and higher-level decision makers (35.2%) in
assessing risks, allocating resources, and altering the state
of operations of the organization in response to the real
and potential security risks. For example, researchers in [P5]
propose a Cyber COP that facilitates commanders’ decision
making process by recognizing the current state of assets
and the cyber threat situation, the impact of cyber attacks
on the mission related to assets, and future threat scenarios.
In [P49], the researchers demonstrate how composite visual
data structures and their synthesis can reduce or illuminate
the direction of cyber security policies.

Non-expert users: Two primary studies (3.7%) focus on
CSA visualizations tailored to non-expert users. In particular,

TABLE 5. Stakeholders

Stakeholder

Papers

Operational
level staff

Managers
and
higher
level decision
makers
Non-expert
users

[P3, P4, P6, P7, P9, P11, P12, P13, P14, P16,
P19, P20, P22, P24, P26, P27, P28, P30,
P32, P33, P34, P35, P37, P38, P39, P40,
P41, P42, P45, P47, P48, P50, P51, P52,
P54]

[P2, P5, P10, P12, P13, P16, P21, P22, P23,
P24, P29, P31, P32, P36, P37, P43, P46,
P49, P53]

[P1, P44]

Count

35

19

2

these two papers [P1, P44] propose CSA visualizations to
enable non-expert users to actively monitor and observe their
activity for greater online awareness. While [P44] focuses on
2D visual analytics interfaces, [P1] engages in 3-dimensional
visualizations for home networking monitoring.

D. RQ2: WHAT ARE THE TYPES OF INFORMATION
VISUALIZED, DATA SOURCES USED, AND HOW IS THE
CYBER INFORMATION VISUALIZED?

• Various types of

information are represented
through CSA visualizations. Threat information
is the most common type of such information.
However, only a few studies consider impact infor-
mation, response plans, and shared information.
• Often multiple data sources are utilized together
in CSA visualizations. The most frequent data
sources are asset identiﬁcation systems and logs.
The external data sources and human input and
organizational information are the comparatively
less common data sources for CSA visualizations.
• Iconic displays and geometrically transformed dis-
plays are the prominent types of visualization tech-
niques employed in CSA visualizations. On the
other hand, immersive environments are very rarely
used in CSA visualizations.

• Only a few interaction techniques are used in
CSA visualizations frequently. These are zoom-
ing, ﬁltering, and details on demand. Other in-
teraction techniques such as relate, extract/share,
move/rotate, linking and brushing, and customiza-
tion are very rarely employed in CSA visualiza-
tions.

This section presents the ﬁndings for RQ2. In particular,
we discuss different types of information visualized in the
CSA visualizations (see Section IV-D1), data sources used
(see Section IV-D2), and how the cyber information is visu-
alized (see Section IV-D3).

8

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

TABLE 6. Information types

Information
types

Assets

History
trends

and

Impact
information
Response plans

Shared
information
Network infor-
mation

Risk
information

Threat informa-
tion

Papers

Count

[P1, P5, P8, P13, P20, P22, P30, P31,
P33, P34, P37, P39, P40, P41, P43, P45,
P46, P51, P53, P54]
[P2, P4, P7, P16, P21, P24, P25, P27,
P30, P34, P37, P38, P44, P47, P48, P49,
P50, P53, P54]
[P2, P8, P9, P13, P21, P24, P33, P43,
P54]
[P2, P8, P16, P21, P28, P31, P33, P36,
P39, P51]
[P3, P10, P12, P31, P37, P51]

[P1, P5, P11, P12, P13, P14, P15, P24,
P29, P34, P35, P36, P38, P40, P42, P44,
P47, P49, P50, P51, P52]
[P2, P4, P6, P9, P10, P12, P13, P14, P16,
P17, P19, P21, P23, P25, P31, P32, P33,
P36, P37]
[P2, P3, P5, P7, P8, P10, P13, P16, P18,
P19, P20, P21, P22, P23, P25, P26, P28,
P30, P31, P32, P33, P34, P35, P37, P39,
P41, P45, P46, P47, P48]

20

19

9

10

6

21

19

30

1) What information is visualized
This section presents the types of information visualized
in our primary studies. The data extracted for this section
corresponds to item D6 in Table 3. Our thematic analysis
resulted in the identiﬁcation of eight types of information,
as shown in Table 6. A single paper may visualize multiple
types of information hence may have repeated entries in the
table.

Assets: An asset in the context of cyber security could
be any data, device, or other components of an organiza-
tion’s systems that are valuable, mainly because it contains
sensitive data or can be used to access such information.
Therefore, a clear understanding of the assets-related infor-
mation is vital to CSA. We found 20 papers (37.0%) in our
SLR that visualized asset information. Among our primary
papers, it was common to employ map views to visualize
organizational cyber assets, geographic locations to which
the target assets belong, and the relationship between those
assets [P5, P8, P31]. Apart from this, cyber capabilities
critical to the mission, network state in terms of assets, assets,
and their relationship with cyber incidents were visualized in
our primary studies.

History and trends: Analyzing the history and trend
information allows users to easily contextualize the current
cyber security status. Furthermore, understanding the trends
and patterns allows users to make predictions with some
certainty. In our selected papers, we found 19 papers (35.2%)
that visualized history and trend information. It involves
historical data related to attacking behavior, temporal infor-
mation related to cyber security incidents, and trends in over-
all organizational performance. For example, we observed
several papers provide the temporal context of cyber events
to the users by displaying relevant data that happened before

an event occurred [P4, P25]. Researchers in [P21] propose
novel circle-based cyber security metric display visualiza-
tions capable of displaying history information along with the
current metric values. However, only a few studies visualized
history or trends for overall organizational performance. For
example, researchers in [P13] provide views for high-level
management to analyze the history and trends related to
the impact of compromised network nodes and the cost of
corrective actions.

Impact information: Understanding the impact or con-
sequences of successful or potential cyber security events
is crucial in identifying how to respond to those incidents
or possible attacks. A limited number of papers provide
various visualizations to support this (16.7%). For example,
in [P13], the visualization uses the concept of area corruption
to convey visually the impact of a compromised device on its
supported process. Each compromised device will produce a
hole in the area proportional to its operational impact score
value. In [P2], researchers propose a proactive environment
that shows the maximum impact or risk for the business
devices.

Response plans: Some papers (18.5%) provide visualiza-
tions to assist users in determining the response plans for
cyber incidents are grouped under this category. For a given
situation, there can be multiple response methods. The visu-
alizations in the selected set of papers assist users in either
identifying these response methods or selecting the most
suitable response plan by analyzing their costs and beneﬁts.
For example, researchers in [P5] propose visualizations that
allow doing “what if" projections to explain to commanders
the cyber side of the different “courses of action” (CoAs) that
are proposed to the commanders by their staff. In another
example, response plans are presented to users in various
dimensions such as risk mitigation, return on responsible
investment, and impact [P2].

Shared information: Achieving complete

situation
awareness requires members of different teams and differ-
ent organizational positions, working across different work
shifts to collaborate and share information. In our primary
papers, we observed a limited number of studies (11.1%)
that include visualizations to support communication and
collaboration among different team members. These visual-
izations consist of information related to observations and
hypotheses performed or insights gained by the analysts.
They also include analyst movements for the coordinators,
email communication with the team, and communication
workﬂows. For example, researchers in [P3] focus on a mind
mapping system for supporting collaborative cyber security
analysis, and researchers in [P37] propose visualizations to
show shared incident reports and as well as to facilitate the
coordination of incident responses and defenses among the
multiple stakeholders.

Network information: Several papers in our data set vi-
sualize various network-related information (38.9%). The vi-
sualized information in this category includes network data,
network topology, network reports, and network communi-

VOLUME 4, 2022

9

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

TABLE 7. Data source types

Data source types

Papers

Count

Security tools

identiﬁcation
management

Asset
and
systems

External data source

Human input and
organizational infor-
mation
Logs

Network traces

[P2, P5, P6, P7, P8, P12, P13, P16,
P18, P19, P21, P26, P28, P31, P32,
P39, P41, P52, P53]
[P1, P5, P7, P20, P21, P22, P23, P24,
P28, P29, P30, P31, P33, P34, P36,
P37, P38, P39, P40, P42, P43, P45,
P46, P54]
[P1, P6, P8, P9, P11, P16, P19, P20,
P21, P23, P28, P30, P31, P41]
[P2, P3, P7, P8, P10, P12, P13, P17,
P18, P20, P21, P22, P28, P31, P33,
P36, P37, P51]
[P4, P10, P14, P16, P20, P21, P23,
P25, P31, P33, P34, P35, P36, P37,
P38, P40, P42, P44, P45, P47, P48,
P49, P53]
[P1, P4, P14, P15, P16, P18, P19, P20,
P21, P22, P23, P24, P27, P29, P30,
P31, P33, P50, P53]

19

24

14

18

23

19

cation. For example, in [P38], both streaming and archived
network ﬂow data is visualized in real-time to support net-
work activity monitoring, identify network attacks and com-
promised hosts, and anomaly detection. In another example,
visualizations were proposed to analyze ﬁrewall log events
[P50].

Risk evaluation: We observed several primary papers
(35.2%) in this SLR that visualize information that allows the
user to assess the risks related to possible attacks and threats.
Risk evaluation information can take on various forms. For
example, known vulnerabilities on critical assets can be
related to security alerts for risk evaluation [P33], changes in
risk levels [P6, P13], possible attack paths [P28], suspicious
or known malicious IP addresses [P4], classiﬁcation and
distribution of cyber security events [P19, P21, P23, P25],
and attacker capacities [P16].

Threat information: Threat

information is the most
highly sought piece of information in our primary studies
(55.6%). Analyzing and understanding information for inci-
dents with potential harm to the organization is crucial for
its ability to correctly focus its cyber security strategy and
budget. We observed various views in our primary studies
on how to analyze cyber threat situations. These views help
analysts and decision makers to identify diverse aspects of
the threats, including relationships between threats and assets
[P4, P5], the status and progression of a threat [P2], and the
evolution of threats [P7]. For example, researchers in [P5]
provide views to the users to analyze the attack scenario in
the form of an attack chain generated through attack scenario
analysis of high-level threat alerts. These views allow the user
to analyze how an attack occurs in the attack chain, identify
any anomalies, and predict the next attack phase.

2) What data sources are used
This section presents the different data sources used for CSA
visualizations in our selected set of primary papers. The data

extracted for this section corresponds to item D7 in Table
3. Our thematic analysis resulted in the identiﬁcation of six
types of data sources, as shown in Table 7. We observed that
multiple data sources are often used in the selected set of
primary papers to generate CSA Visualizations. As a result,
one paper can appear under two data sources in Table 7.

Security tools: We found 35.2% of the primary papers in
our SLR utilized information obtained from security tools.
It includes Security Information and Event Management
(SIEM) [P2, P5, P8], risk analysis tools [P8], and output
from various analysis tools [P16, P26]. For example, in [P5],
researchers use high-level alerts generated by the correlation
rule set deﬁned in SIEM to represent nodes in the visualized
attack scenarios. Researchers in [P8] use outputs of various
risk analysis tools and incident response trackers for the
proposed Cyber Common Operating Picture.

Asset identiﬁcation and management systems: One of
the key aspects of cyber security is to systematically discover
and select all relevant information assets that the organization
holds; then, potential security risks or gaps that affect them
can be identiﬁed. 44.4% of primary papers utilize data from
asset identiﬁcation and management systems. For example,
the Cyber COP system architecture proposed in [P5] includes
an asset database created using information gathered through
asset identiﬁcation and management systems. In their ar-
chitecture, various mechanisms such as a Simple Network
Management Protocol (SNMP) and local agents are used to
gather asset information.

External data sources: With the ever-increasing and com-
plex cyber security incidents, organizations now need to
move beyond data internal to the organization to make swift
and effective cyber security decisions. Therefore, integrating
external knowledge and data components is becoming an
essential component for CSA. However, only 25.9% of the
primary papers use external data sources in their visualiza-
tions. These data sources include common attack pattern
enumeration, external domain sinkholing, GIS (Geographic
Information System) maps, Malware sharing platforms, Na-
tional vulnerability databases, and passive DNS systems. For
example, in [P16], domain sinkholing strategies and a well-
deﬁned list of command and control server domains are
adopted as the external data sources to identify networks with
machines participating in botnet activities.

Human input and organizational information: Cyber
security depends on various human inputs and organizational
information. We observed that 33.3% of papers use differ-
ent human input and organizational information forms in
their proposed CSA visualizations. The human input consists
of user-reported security incidents, expert knowledge, and
security-related conﬁguration parameters such as patching
compliance ratings. Furthermore, organizational information
includes mission dependencies and business processes. Re-
searchers in [P17] use expert knowledge about risk proﬁles
stored in text ﬁle format as input to their expert system to
facilitate an institutional risk proﬁle deﬁnition for CSA.

10

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

FIGURE 4. The visualization for Improved Situational Awareness (VISA)
demonstrator employed in [P8] provides a common operational picture to
military staff. The visualization employs traditional military symbols.

FIGURE 6. Visualization proposed in [P19] uses heatmaps to determine the
general location of a Field Area Network (FAN) from where the anomalous
trafﬁc is emanating. Here dashed circles indicate possible problematic areas.

FIGURE 5. The visualization proposed in [P2] provides two views for the
proactive environment (i.e., two visualizations): i) view on the left shows the
network topology; and ii) view on the right shows a summary of information
related to the attack graph and parallel coordinates visualization to support its
analysis.

Logs: A log is a record of previous activities of a system,
and the organization can use them to take corrective and pre-
ventive measures. For example, in a cyber incident case, logs
can be used to identify what assets have been compromised
and their severity. It is observed that 42.6% of papers use logs
as a data source for CSA visualizations. It includes database
logs, ﬁrewall logs, IDS logs, network logs, and web proxy
logs.

Network traces: We found 19 (35.2%) papers using net-
work traces. This category consists of raw data and network
data collected from tools such as Wireshark and Splunk [P1].
Furthermore, Network trafﬁc [P19, P20, P21, P22, P23, P24,
P29, P30, P31] and TCP/IP packet traces [P27] fall under this
category. For example, in [P4, P16], the authors analyze data
from network ﬂow in addition to ﬁrewall logs and web proxy
logs. In this context, a network ﬂow represents an aggregation
of packets exchanged by a pair of systems.

3) How the cyber information is visualized
CSA visualizations employ various visualization techniques.
Furthermore, diverse tasks/interactions are linked with CSA
visualizations to improve user experience. In this section, we

FIGURE 7. Visualization proposed in [P21] is a treemap.

report how the CSA information described before is visu-
alized considering the visualization techniques and related
tasks/interaction techniques (i.e., the data extracted for this
section corresponds to items D8 and D9 in Table 3).

a: Visualization techniques
Table 8 presents how the visualization techniques are dis-
tributed over the selected studies. We describe these cate-
gories below.

Iconic displays: Iconic displays are the most common
class of visualization techniques reported in the studies con-
sidered in this SLR (85.2%). In iconic displays, the attributes
of multidimensional data items are mapped onto the features
of an icon for the representation. Some of the common iconic
displays reported in our primary studies include color icons
[P2, P4, P13, P14, P16, P18] and shape icons [P8, P12, P21].
In addition, color icons often highlight the importance and

VOLUME 4, 2022

11

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

TABLE 8. Visualization techniques

Visualization Techniques

References

Count

Iconic displays

Geometrically transformed displays

Standard 2D/3D displays

Tables/text summaries

Geographical displays
Stacked displays
Single value displays
Dense displays
Immersive environments

[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, P10, P11, P12, P13, P14, P16, P17, P18, P19, P20, P21, P22, P23, P24,
P25, P26, P27, P29, P30, P31, P32, P33, P34, P36, P37, P39, P40, P41, P44, P45, P46, P47, P49, P50,
P51, P52, P53, P54]
[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P7, P8, P9, P10, P11, P12, P13, P14, P15, P18, P19, P21, P22, P23, P24, P25, P28,
P30, P31, P32, P33, P38, P39, P40, P43, P45, P46, P47, P49, P50, P51, P53, P54]
[P2, P4, P9, P13, P14, P16, P17, P19, P21, P23, P25, P26, P29, P30, P34, P36, P37, P38, P40, P41,
P42, P44, P47, P48, P49, P50, P53]
[P2, P4, P5, P10, P12, P13, P16, P22, P26, P28, P30, P31, P32, P34, P35, P36, P37, P38, P39, P42,
P45, P48, P49, P51, P54]
[P1, P4, P5, P8, P12, P13, P16, P19, P23, P26, P30, P31, P34, P38, P39, P41, P42, P52, P54]
[P6, P18, P20, P21, P28, P32, P33, P36, P40, P43, P44, P49, P50]
[P8, P13, P34, P37, P38, P39, P40, P41, P42, P43, P48, P51, P54]
[P4, P8, P13, P19, P20, P27, P44, P47, P49, P50]
[P8, P11, P12, P39, P40]

46

38

27

25

19
13
13
10
5

FIGURE 10. Visualization proposed in [P30] uses standard 2D bar and line
charts.

FIGURE 8. Visualization proposed in [P39] is in an immersive environment.

FIGURE 9. Visualization proposed in [P13] proposes a tachometer view to
facilitate ﬁnancial security managers get an overall view of the system
performance. Furthermore, the view also provides trends and patterns of
various indicators.

FIGURE 11. Metaphoric visualization proposed in [P1] uses the buildings and
cars as metaphors to show the network activity to non-expert users. It uses the
relative positioning to show the IP addresses.

signiﬁcance of the reported values [P13, P20, P22, P25, P26].
Furthermore, some primary studies associate icon sizes with
numerical attributes. For example, in [P5], the node’s size is
used to represent its importance to the respective mission.
Several studies use special icons familiar to the user in their
visualizations. For example, the work reported in [P1] uses
shape icons that are familiar to the user, such as laptops,
cables, buildings, and roads, to visualize the cyber status (see
Figure 11).

Geometrically transformed displays: Often cyber secu-
rity data consists of more than three attributes and, therefore,
they do not allow a simple visualization as 2D or 3D plots

described previously. This category includes visualizations
that use interesting transformations of multidimensional data
sets. We found that 70.4% of the primary studies in our
SLR use geometrically transformed displays in their visu-
alizations. Common examples are the node-link diagrams
[P2, P3, P5, P12, P31] and parallel coordinate plots [P2].
Parallel coordinates plot each multidimensional data item
as a polygonal line that intersects the horizontal dimension
axes at a position corresponding to the data value for the
corresponding dimension (see Figure 5). We also observed
other visualizations with interesting transformations of mul-

12

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

tidimensional data. For example, in an area corruption chart
proposed in [P13], each compromised device produces a hole
in the area representing the supported sub-process. The hole
is proportional to the value of its operational impact score.
Furthermore, the Mission-Attacker-Controls triangle (MAC)
proposed in [P8] is a 3D triangular plot used to show the
relative forces of the mission, the attacker’s interest in the
asset, and the security controls.

Standard 2D/3D displays: A large number of the primary
studies selected for this SLR use standard 2D/3D displays
(50.0%). This includes visualization techniques like x-y plots
(e.g., scatter plots [P14, P21, P25], bar charts [P4, P26, P29,
P30], pie charts [P29]), and line charts [P9, P17, P30]). For
example, the works reported in [P26, P30] use bar charts to
illustrate the distribution of the standardized incidence rate
and the per-minute observed trafﬁc levels, respectively. In
[P25], scatter plots show similar alerts grouped where an alert
is represented as one dot in the visual space.

Tables/text summaries: We identiﬁed tables and text sum-
maries as a popular form of presenting cyber information
in the selected papers (46.3%). Geographical displays: In
our selected set of primary studies, 35.2% of the studies
use geographical displays to visualize geographical informa-
tion. Maps are often employed to present the geographical
distribution of information related to assets [P5, P8, P31],
risks [P16, P19, P23], and threats [P5, P8]. For example,
researchers in [P13] use maps to illustrate how the network
nodes are geographically distributed. The work reported in
[P16] employs maps to illustrate how the attacker capacity
is distributed worldwide and provides the user with a closer
look at the organizations infected by malware. In [P20],
maps are used to display cities with extremely high or low
malicious activities.

Stacked displays: Stacked displays are representations
of hierarchical data and hierarchical layouts for multidi-
mensional data. However, only a limited number of studies
(24.1%) use this display in their visualizations. Treemaps
are examples of a hierarchical data representation found in
two papers [P20, P21], displaying hierarchical data as a set
of nested rectangles. For example, in the treemap visualiza-
tion proposed in [P21] (see Figure7), the business value of
the host deﬁnes the rectangle size, and the calculated host
security level deﬁnes the color. Another example of stacked
displays can be found in work reported in [P6], where the risk
levels are visualized using a risk tree visualization. In [P28],
a tree view represents the entire attack graph in the form of a
directory hierarchy. In work reported in [P33], a hierarchy of
layers presents how types of operational missions, mission-
critical tasks, and types of assets are connected together.

Single value displays: Single value displays show an
interesting representation of a single or instantaneous value
that is meaningful on its own. We observed this visualization
in 24.1% of the selected set of papers. Gauge representations
are a common form of single value displays [P8, P13].
Researchers in [P13] (see Figure 9) use gauge representations
to provide a glance view of several performance indicators to

the ﬁnancial security manager.

Dense pixel displays: Each data point in dense pixel dis-
plays is mapped to a colored pixel so that they can be grouped
into adjacent areas that represent individual data dimensions.
However, only a few studies (18.5%) use this type of display.
A heatmap is an example of dense pixel displays employed in
studies reported in this SLR [P4, P8, P13, P19, P20, P27]. A
heatmap is a two-dimensional representation of data in which
values (i.e., the magnitude of phenomena) are represented by
different colors (see Figure 6).

Immersive environment: Immersive environments allow
users to immerse themselves in the artiﬁcially-created virtual
environments through a collection of computer hardware
and software so that users could perceive themselves to be
included in and interact in real-time with the environment and
its contents. However, only a limited set of studies (9.3%)
employ immersive environments in their visualizations [P8,
P11, P12, P39, P40]. In [P8, P11, P12], virtual reality head-
mounted displays are used to create an illusion for the user of
immersion in virtual cyberspace. In [P39], a Collaborative
Virtual Environment is deployed for the 3D Cyber COP
model to help cyber analysts mediate analysis activities. The
immersive environment is shown in Figure 8. Through the use
of these environments, users have the impression that they are
inside an environment rather than viewing it from the outside.
Multiple visualization techniques are often utilized to-
gether in a single visualization. We observed that apart from
standard 2D/3D displays and tables/text summaries, other
visualization techniques are combined with iconic displays
in more than 50% of the visualization instances of our
selected set of papers. Iconic displays place the information
en-richer role in most of these visualizations. For example,
color or shape icons are often used with geometrically trans-
formed displays, geographical displays, and stacked displays
to emphasize the status, severity, or impact of a particular
phenomenon [P1, P5, P16, P22, P23, P31, P33].

Besides iconic displays, geometrically transformed dis-
plays are often combined with other visualization techniques.
For example, the work reported in [P1, P11] combined a
node-link diagram (an example of a geometrically trans-
formed display) with immersive environments. In these ex-
amples, the users can immerse in the environment through
the virtual reality headsets to investigate the properties of
the node-link diagrams. It is also interesting to note that
single value displays instances are used in combination with
standard 2D/3D displays more than 50% of the time. When
is clear that standard
source literature is referred to,
2D/3D displays are used to provide additional information
to interpret the metrics visualized through the single value
displays. For example, in Figure 9, a standard 2D display
shows the trends and patterns of the associated metrics while
the tachometer shows the overall system performance.

it

We also compared the cyber security information types
discussed in Section IV-D1 with the utilized visualization
techniques. According to Figure 12, it is evident that all the
information types often employ iconic displays as a visu-

VOLUME 4, 2022

13

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

Table 9 illustrates the tasks/interactions type distribution over
the selected set of papers. We also point out that there are 16
papers (29.6%) that we did not classify into tasks/interactions
topics. A similar observation was made previously in [21].
Similar to [21], we are unsure whether the authors do not
highlight these features or the proposed visualization does
not provide such features. The tasks/interactions classiﬁca-
tion used in this paper is described below.

Zooming: Zooming helps to present data in a highly
compressed form to provide an overview of the data while
at the same time allowing a ﬂexible display of the data at
different resolutions based on the user’s needs. As evident
from Table 9, zooming functionality is indicated in 25.9%
of the publications. This functionality allows users to zoom
in on items of interest to them. For example, in [P8], an
operational picture of the situation is initially presented at
a higher level of abstraction, and when the users zoom in,
abstract nodes are replaced by their detailed representations.
Filtering: Filtering allows users to interactively partition
the data set into segments and focus on interesting subsets.
In our selected set of primary studies, 37.0% of the papers
use the ﬁltering functionality. For example, the parallel co-
ordinates visualization proposed in [P2] allows users to ﬁlter
a set of attack paths by brushing on one or more axes. The
ﬁltering allows a complex set of attack paths to be quickly
reduced only to paths that respect certain conditions deﬁned
by the user. In [P25], the proposed visualization allows the
user to ﬁlter cyber events based on several criteria.

Details on demand: Details on demand functionality al-
lows users to select an item or group and get details when
needed. This functionality is mentioned in 38.9% of the
primary papers. Details on demand are often provided by
clicking or double-clicking options [P13, P16, P21, P28, P30]
and tool-tips [P2, P25].

History: History allows support users to keep and view the
history step by step through different options such as undo
and replay. However, as evident from Table 9, this function-
ality is only mentioned in eight publications (14.8%).

Relate: This enables viewers to view relationships among
items. Through the relate interaction, users can click on one
item and see its relationships to other items. Only six (11.1%)
publications included this user interaction.

Extract/share: This allows users to share item(s) that they
desire with others or extract item(s) that they desire for later
use. After extracting, the users could save the data to a ﬁle
in a format that would facilitate other uses such as sharing,
printing, and graphing [P4, P16]. We found only four papers
(7.4%) in this category.

Move/rotate Moving and rotating the visualization [P8,
P11, P12]. Moving and rotating are related to 3D displays and
immersive environments. However, we only observed four
papers (7.4%) that discussed this user interaction.

Linking and brushing: Linking and brushing allows in-
teractive changes made in one visualization to be reﬂected
automatically in other visualizations. However, we only
found one paper (1.9%) that mentioned this ability. In [P50],

FIGURE 12. Visualization techniques vs information types

TABLE 9. Task/interaction techniques

Tasks/interactions

References

Count

Zooming

Filtering

Details on demand

History
Relate
Extract/share
Move/rotate
Linking/brushing
Customization

[P2, P7, P8, P13, P20, P22, P23, P28,
P32, P40, P46, P47, P48, P53]
[P2, P3, P4, P7, P13, P16, P25, P26,
P28, P35, P38, P40, P41, P44, P45,
P46, P47, P48, P49, P53]
[P2, P12, P13, P16, P19, P21, P25, P28,
P30, P40, P41, P42, P43, P44, P45,
P46, P47, P49, P50, P51, P53]
[P2, P7, P16, P44, P49, P50, P53, P54]
[P2, P4, P5, P7, P40, P53]
[P4, P16, P28, P31]
[P8, P11, P12, P51]
[P50]
[P6, P8, P28, P37, P38]

14

20

21

8
6
4
4
1
5

alization technique. Furthermore, geometrically transformed
displays are often employed in visualizations that present
information related to networks [P5, P11, P14, P15, P24],
assets [P1, P5, P8, P13, P22], risks [P14, P18, P21, P23,
P32], threats [P13, P19, P32], and impact [P8, P9, P13,
P21, P24]. When presenting asset information, geographical
displays are often employed as a visualization technique [P5,
P8, P13, P31]. Standard 2D/3D displays are often employed
to visualize information related to history and trends [P25,
P27] and risk evaluation [P16, P17]. Tables/text summaries
are mainly used to convey information related to threats
[P5, P22, P31, P32] and response plans [P2, P16, P28].
Furthermore, immersive environments commonly visualize
network information [P11, P12].

b: Tasks/interactions
Interaction techniques allow users to interact with the visu-
alizations and facilitate effective data exploration directly.

14

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

TABLE 10. Cyber Situational Awareness Level

Situational
Awareness
Level

Perception

Comprehension

Projection

References

Count

[P1, P2, P4, P5, P6, P8, P9, P10, P11, P12,
P13, P14, P15, P16, P17, P18, P19, P20,
P21, P22, P23, P24, P25, P26, P27, P28,
P29, P30, P31, P33, P34, P35, P36, P37,
P38, P39, P40, P41, P42, P43, P44, P45,
P46, P47, P48, P49, P50, P51, P52, P53]
[P2, P3, P4, P5, P7, P8, P13, P16, P19,
P20, P21, P22, P23, P24, P26, P28, P30,
P31, P32, P34, P36, P37, P38, P39, P40,
P43, P44, P46, P54]
[P2, P5, P8, P16, P21, P24, P28, P39, P43,
P54]

50

29

10

analysts are allowed to make good use of both heatmaps and
line charts to overcome their weaknesses by implementing
linking and brushing interactions.

Customization: Editing the visualization (edit mode). We
observed this user interaction in only 5 (9.3%) publications.
In both [P5] and [P28], users can customize the visualizations
by changing the layout. In [P6], users are given a series
of visualization techniques to choose from. Here the user
can pick the visualization technique that best suits them to
visualize the information at hand.

E. RQ3: WHAT LEVEL OF CSA IS FACILITATED BY THE
VISUALIZATIONS?

• Most studies (92.6%) facilitate the perception
level, and several studies (53.7%) facilitate up to
comprehension level.

• Only a limited number of studies (18.5%) provide
visualizations to achieve up to projection level.

As described in Section II-A, the Endsley [4] model pro-
vides three ascending levels of SA, namely perception, com-
prehension, and projection, which may or may not be linear.
In this section, we analyze what levels of CSA, described in
Section II-A, can be achieved through the proposed visualiza-
tions. It is also important to highlight that some publications
included in this SLR provide multiple visualizations that may
facilitate achieving multiple SA levels. In the case where a
single visualization can be used to achieve multiple levels of
CSA, we assigned the corresponding highest level of CSA for
that particular visualization. Table 10 illustrates the levels of
CSA supported by the publications selected in this SLR and
presents the distribution of papers across the three CSA lev-
els. As one publication could provide multiple visualizations,
in Table 10, a single publication can be reﬂected in multiple
levels of SA.

a: Perception
Visualizations that provide users with an overview of the
status, attributes, and dynamics of the cyber environment

FIGURE 13. Visualization proposed in [P31] provides the user an overview of
the geographical distribution of critical infrastructure.

FIGURE 14. Visualization proposed in [P38] shows information about the
location of source IP addresses.

have been linked to the perception level (see Figure 14).
These visualizations often allow the user to answer the ques-
tion “What is happening in the cyber environment?”. Most
studies in this category provide visualizations that present a
high-level overview of the cyber assets [P5, P20, P31, P33],
network topology [P2, P29], cyber threats [P4, P5, P25, P26],
and cyber risks [P2, P14, P16, P28]. For example, Cho et
al. [P5] propose a geographical perspective view that allows
the user to identify the status of cyber assets and threats.
Carvalho et al. [P16] provide an indication of the attacker’s
capacity by visualizing the distribution of bots over a world
map. Kopylec et al. [P31] provide the user with an overview
of the geographical distribution of critical infrastructure us-
ing maps. Angelini et al. [P2] provide a visualization to
allow users to obtain an overview of the system’s network
topology and risk status. For this, they have superimposed
an attack graph over the network topology. Using the attack
graph, the user can get an overview of the risk posture of
the organization (see Figure 5). Yu et al. [P26] use a world
map to show cities with the highest Standardized Incidence
Rate (SIR). The SIR metric can be used to identify cities
with higher infection levels and is deﬁned as the "number
of malicious IP addresses for every 100,000 actual machines
that could be infected in a city".

VOLUME 4, 2022

15

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

FIGURE 15. Visualization proposed in [P13] shows the impact of
compromised nodes through the concept of area corruption.

FIGURE 16. Visualization proposed in [P24] to allow decision makers to
interpret the cyber situation. History information is included in the visualization.
Small dials provide more information on the individual components of the
system. The dial is reinforced to facilitate rapid interpretation.

b: Comprehension
Comprehension allows users to move from simply being
aware of the elements in the cyber environments to compre-
hending the situation. Therefore, visualizations that facilitate
the users to understand the meaning of the elements in the
cyber environment are linked to this category (see Figure 15
and Figure 16). These visualizations allow the user to answer
questions like “Why it is happening?” and “What is the
meaning?” with respect to elements in the cyber environment.
Several studies in this category provided visualizations that
provide the context of the elements in the cyber environment
[P2, P4, P5, P24, P32]. For example, the work reported in
[P4] provides an ‘event detail page’ that provides the context
of a selected cyber event. It includes horizon graphs of
several ﬂow ﬁelds and heatmaps of IP addresses that provide
temporal context to the event. These visualizations prioritize
showing trends and patterns since this is most important
for context. Understanding the context of a speciﬁc event
allows users to comprehend its meaning, and this can be
considered a higher mental state than simply being aware
that a cyber incident has occurred. Authors in [P24] propose
a visualization by extending standard gauge visualizations

FIGURE 17. What-if analysis result proposed in [P43] provides a predictive
analytics capability.

(see Figure 16). Their visualization includes a large dial and
a set of smaller dials that show the system’s overall status,
network, or mission and how individual system components
are being impacted. The information provided in the smaller
dials provide context to understand the information shown
on the large dial. Furthermore, to provide more context into
what is shown on the larger dial, history information has been
added by providing rings within the dial where the outer ring
shows the current value. The work reported in [P5] allows us
to see how a speciﬁc attack has been taking place in terms of
ﬁve attack phases of a proposed attack chain model. It allows
users to closely investigate the attack progression and take
actions if needed.

Some visualizations in the comprehension category also
speciﬁcally looked at providing information on the sig-
niﬁcance/consequence of cyber incidents to the user [P8,
P13, P28]. Understanding the impact, signiﬁcance, or conse-
quence of the cyber incidents allows users to comprehend the
situation and is a higher mental state than being just aware
of the cyber incidents that have occurred. For example, the
work reported in [P28] visually displays the effects that occur
when a speciﬁc node or protection domain is affected. This
allows users to move from just being aware of the threat
situation to understanding and comprehending the threats
with respect to organizational goals. In [P13], the impact
of a compromised device on its supported process is shown
through the concept of area corruption. The idea is to have
a hole in the area representing the supported sub-process
for each compromised device. The hole is proportional to
the value of its operational impact score. It allows users to
understand the signiﬁcance of the cyber incidents and their
relationships to the supported process.

16

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

FIGURE 18. In [P2], response plans are shown in a table and classiﬁed by
their characteristics.

FIGURE 19. Visualization techniques for achieving different levels of SA

c: Projection
The visualizations that facilitate the projection level allow
users to predict the future cyber threat situation and possible
future actions. These visualizations allow the user to answer
questions like “What will happen next?” and “What can I
do?” with respect to the cyber environment. A number of
studies in this category have provided visualizations to illus-
trate the impact of possible future threats [P8, P21, P24] and
possible plans to respond to the cyber security situation of
the organization [P2, P21] (see Figure 17 and Figure 18). For
example, the work reported in [P8, P28, P43] facilitates what-
if analysis to assist the user in identifying possible future
actions. Through the what-if analysis proposed in [P28], the
user can specify a starting point for the attack (the presumed
threat source), as well as an attack goal (critical network asset
to protect). The results of what-if analysis allow the user
to model the effects of software patches or other mitigation
solutions on the system. In [P8], what-if analysis will allow
the decision maker to analyze different action plans based on
the importance given to the mission, the attacker’s interest in
the asset, and the security controls. Furthermore, the system
also provides recommendations for optimal network defense.
In [P2], response plans are shown to the user based on the
current cyber situation. The proposed visualizations also al-
low users to understand how each response plan could reduce
the risk on the network devices. Kotenko and Novikova [P21]
visualize the Return-on-Security-Investment index for each
countermeasure that characterizes possible damages due to
the security incident and the cost of security incidents.

We also analyzed the distribution of visualization tech-
niques (described in Section IV-D3a) with respect to the
three levels of CSA (see Figure 19). According to Figure 19,
iconic displays are the most commonly used visualization
technique at the perception and comprehension level. At
the projection level, the most popular visualization tech-
nique is geometrically transformed displays. Furthermore,
it is interesting to note that popularity for standard 2D/3D
displays and geographical displays gradually reduces over
the CSA levels where there are no standard 2D/3D displays
and geographical displays at the projection level.

TABLE 11. The evidence is available in the selected studies to adopt the
proposed visualization techniques.

Maturity level

References

No evidence
Demonstration or toy
examples

Expert opinions or ob-
servations
Academic study
Industrial case study
(casual case study)
Industrial practice

[P5, P13, P18, P28, P37]
[P6, P7, P8, P9, P11, P12, P14,
P17, P19, P20, P21, P22, P23,
P25, P26, P27, P29, P31, P33,
P35, P43, P44, P47, P48, P49,
P52, P53, P54]
[P1, P2, P30, P36, P40, P45, P46,
P50]
[P3, P39, P47]
[P10, P15, P24, P32, P34, P41]

[P4, P16, P38, P42]

Count

5
28

8

3
6

4

F. RQ4: WHAT IS THE MATURITY OF THE PROPOSED
VISUALIZATIONS THAT FACILITATE CYBER
SITUATIONAL AWARENESS?

• Most studies use demonstrations or toy examples

in their evaluations.

• Unfortunately, most proposed CSA visualizations
lack rigorous and industry-suitable evaluation.

To answer RQ4, we analyzed the data collected for D11 in
Table 3. The importance of rigorous evaluation to assess the
appropriateness of the proposed solutions has been empha-
sized by the software engineering research community [37].
As mentioned in Section III-E2, we used a six-level hierarchy
proposed in [34] for assessing the reported evidence. The
proposed six-level hierarchy is listed below: i) no evidence;
ii) evidence obtained from demonstration or working out with
toy examples; iii) evidence obtained from expert opinions
or observations; iv) evidence obtained from academic stud-
ies (e.g., controlled lab experiments); v) industrial studies
(e.g., casual case studies); and vi) evidence obtained from
industrial practice. This hierarchy has been used in previous
studies to evaluate the maturity of visualizations in other
domains [35]. In particular, ‘no evidence’ and ‘demonstration
or toy examples’ are at the weak end of the hierarchy, while
‘industrial practice’ indicates that the method has already

VOLUME 4, 2022

17

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

been approved and adopted by an organization which may
indicate convincing proof that something works.

Table 11 presents the distribution of the studies according
to the six levels of evidence. From Table 11, it is evident
that ﬁve studies (9.3%) do not have any evaluation evidence
of the proposed visualizations. Most of the primary studies
(51.9%) selected in this SLR show their maturity through
demonstrations or toy examples. Some of these studies used
ﬁctional scenarios and simulated data sets for their demon-
strations [P7, P8, P9, P21, P23, P54]. For example, authors in
[P23], using a set of test scenarios that simulate ﬁve attacks
of varying complexity, demonstrate their implementation of
smart grid trust visualization. Authors in [P7] show the
capabilities of the visualizations using simulated data sets
(thus avoiding sensitivity issues). Authors in [P8] explained
ﬁctional scenarios that derive and generate data conditions
applicable to their visualizations. In other studies [P14, P17,
P20, P26, P27, P49], publicly available data sets are used to
demonstrate the capabilities of the visualizations.

Eight selected studies (14.8%) use expert opinions to eval-
uate their visualizations [P1, P2, P30, P36, P40, P45, P46,
P50]. For example, the work reported in [P30] proposed a
set of visual interfaces to help analysts identify and explain
off-normal activities. Seven analysts provided feedback on
the proposed visualizations by participating in workshops.
In [P2], 104 experts, including 12 real users of the system,
provided their opinions on the system through a close-ended
questionnaire after being exposed to a 3-hour live demonstra-
tion of the visualization system.

Three of the selected papers (5.6%) use academic studies
to provide evidence of the proposed CSA visualizations [P3,
P39, P47]. For example, in [P3], a two-phase experiment was
conducted in a controlled lab environment. The ﬁrst phase
was an observational study to observe how four senior un-
dergraduate students completed a given task in the proposed
system based on a given network monitoring data set. The
second phase was conducted with seven further participants.
Four of them are undergraduate students, two are graduate
students, and one is a professional software engineer. In the
second phase, participants reviewed the outputs of the ﬁrst
phase and completed a questionnaire about the system.

The maturity of the visualization of six studies (11.1%)
is demonstrated through industrial case studies [P10, P15,
P24, P32, P34, P41]. For example, the work reported in
[P32] proposed a platform for correlating network alerts from
disparate logs. Their prototype was evaluated at the Air Force
Research Lab in New York for one week. It allowed them
to collect perspectives from analysts and other personnel
about the tool’s usability and other features that need to be
incorporated into the tool to improve its effectiveness.

Only four studies (7.4%) [P4, P16, P38, P42] provide ev-
idence of industrial practice for the proposed visualizations.
[P4] presents a real-world example of how analysts are using
the visualizations at a large (5000 users) Security Operations
Center (SOC) on a daily basis. In the study, the analysts
are deﬁned as experts with experience from 2 to 10 years

TABLE 12. Reported challenges

Challenge

Key point

Handling large amount
of data

Uncertain, missing, or
erroneous data

Different data formats
and standards

Comprehensibility of
information

Ease of use

• Information cluttering [P2,
P3, P4, P6, P7, P12, P13,
P15, P16, P18, P21, P25,
P28, P30, P31, P44, P50]
• Streaming data challenges

[P4, P53]

• Missing or inadequate in-
formation [P2, P10, P49]
• Dealing with errors in data

[P2, P6, P23, P26]

• Diverse data sources [P10,

P16, P19, P53]

• IP address space [P20, P26]

• Visualizations to suit

the
user and time [P8, P22, P29,
P37, P43, P47]

• Simple Vs. precise visual-
izations [P6, P11, P12, P18,
P21, P54]

• Facilitating the identiﬁca-
tion of patterns, trends and
relationships [P2, P9, P13,
P14, P16, P32, P44]

• Choosing appropriate aes-
thetics [P1, P11, P16, P32]

• Easy integration and con-
sistency with existing tools
[P11, P25, P28, P53]

• Easy to use visualizations

[P14]

Count

18

6

6

20

5

in network security. Observations on how analysts use the
proposed visualizations were conducted over six months in
multiple sessions. They also solicited analyst feedback by
email over 12 months. The authors in [P16] explain that
the proposed visualization system is used in the real world
and have obtained customer feedback. However, the detailed
feedback from the customers is not presented in the paper.

G. RQ5: WHAT ARE THE REPORTED CHALLENGES IN
EMPLOYING VISUALIZATIONS TO FACILITATE CYBER
SECURITY AWARENESS?

• We identiﬁed several challenges for CSA visual-
izations reported in the literature. The most com-
monly reported challenges are handling a large
amount of data and comprehensibility of informa-
tion.

• Less commonly reported challenges are uncertain,
missing or erroneous data, different data formats
and standards, and ease of use.

18

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

This section presents the thematic analysis ﬁndings for
RQ5 and describes various challenges for cyber security
visualizations (see Table 12) that are reported in the selected
papers. The data extracted for this section correspond to item
D12 in Table 3.

1) Handling large amounts of data

In the era of big data and the Internet of Things, cyber
security data collection volumes are ever-expanding. As a
result, in CSA visualizations, there is a huge degree of
complexity involved in storing and viewing a large volume
of raw and analyzed data (33.3%) [P3, P12, P13, P15, P16,
P25]. The streaming nature of data [P4, P53] can introduce
further challenges for analysis due to the continued growth
and dynamic nature of the data. Even when information is
visualized using several layers, handling large amounts of
data is still a huge concern. For example, when historical data
is added, the number of layers grows faster, making it difﬁcult
to analyze any unfolding trends or patterns. As the density of
information increases, users get overloaded with information,
and important data could be occluded [P16, P31]. Therefore,
it is crucial for CSA visualizations to be ﬂexible and scalable
to cater to the immense volumes of data that are generated by
modern data sources.

2) Uncertain, missing, or erroneous data

Several studies have discussed challenges with respect to
uncertain, missing, or erroneous data for CSA visualizations
(11.1%). Having uncertain, missing, and erroneous data in
CSA visualizations means that those visualizations could
present misleading information to the user leading to ﬂawed
decision making. Therefore, CSA visualizations should con-
sider techniques to compensate for data ﬂaws and statistical
variability [P26] to deal with false positives [P6] and missing,
fragmented or inaccurate data [P2, P49].

3) Different data formats and standards

The number of devices connected and the variety of appli-
cations or services employed in current CSA visualizations
are very high. It means that creating these visualizations
requires a high volume of heterogeneous data formats to be
stored and analyzed (11.1%) [P10, P16, P53]. For example,
researchers in [P16] use data from different data sources in
their platform for real-time detection and visualization of
cyber threats. These data sources are divided into external
data and internal data. External sinkholing, passive DNS,
and social media data are external sources examples used in
their work. Network ﬂow, logs, and analysis outputs captured
inside the network are examples of internal data sources
employed in their work. Having diverse sources and data
would require having systems and practices in place to store
and analyze apparently uncorrelated data to build effective
CSA visualization systems.

4) Facilitating comprehension of information
Ensuring that users can comprehend and synthesize the pro-
vided information is a huge challenge in CSA visualizations.
37.0% of primary studies mention this challenge. The CSA
visualizations have to be simple enough to enable users
to understand the visualization easily and precisely enough
to make correct decisions swiftly [P12, P54]. Not all the
available information has to be shown to users at once to
enable them to make decisions. On the other hand, not
providing adequate information could lead to ﬂawed decision
making. The information in CSA visualizations should be
visualized so that users can quickly and easily identify any
patterns, trends, and relationships [P44]. Choosing appro-
priate aesthetics also plays an important part in facilitating
comprehension of the information shown in CSA visualiza-
tions [P1]. Another key challenge is providing the correct
type of visualization at the right time [P22] and making sure
the provided visualizations relate to users’ knowledge and
experience [P8, P22, P37].

5) Ease of use
Several studies (9.3%) explain that CSA visualizations need
to be easy to use in order to be effective and useful. If
visualizations have adequate information for users to make
decisions, but the users cannot easily identify or ﬁnd that
information, then those visualizations will not be effective.
Since each user will be different, the user requirements have
to be considered carefully to understand how to design vi-
sualizations that are easy to use. Another common challenge
in CSA visualizations is that they are often standalone and
do not integrate well with existing tools and data. Users
often trust speciﬁc tools and data sources they understand
and rely heavily upon. So if the CSA visualizations are
not consistent with existing tools and systems or do not
integrate well, they will be less effective and useful [P53].
When CSA visualizations do not integrate well with existing
tools and practices, it limits users’ capacity to collaborate,
communicate effectively, and share information with others.

H. RQ6: WHAT PRACTICES HAVE BEEN REPORTED TO
IMPLEMENT CYBER SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
VISUALIZATIONS SUCCESSFULLY?

• We identiﬁed several practices to implement the
CSA visualizations reported in the literature. The
most commonly reported practices are condensed
presentations, providing context, and layouts and
aesthetics to reduce visual complexity.

• Less commonly reported practices are ﬂexibility
handle differences in data and facility to share
information.

This section presents the thematic analysis ﬁndings for
RQ6 and describes key practices (see Table 13) regarding
cyber security visualizations reported in the selected papers.

VOLUME 4, 2022

19

The data extracted for this section correspond to item D13 in
Table 3.

TABLE 13. Reported practices

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

1) Condensed presentation
CSA information that needs to be visualized is often com-
plex and multi-dimensional. Therefore, CSA visualization
researchers have looked into condensed forms of information
representation to provide more information using a single
visualization. As detailed in Section IV-D3, our primary
papers have used various forms of visualization techniques
such as geometrically transformed displays, iconic displays,
dense displays, geographic displays, and stacked displays,
to present diverse multi-dimensional data in compact ways.
Furthermore, multiple visualization techniques are superim-
posed to provide additional information to the user in a single
visualization. For example, color or shape icons are often
used with geometrically transformed displays, geographical
displays, and stacked displays to emphasize the status or
severity, or impact of particular phenomena (refer to Sec-
tion IV-D3). Furthermore, user interactions such as details on
demand, zooming, and ﬁltering allow users to obtain informa-
tion only on demand, which facilitates showing information
in a condensed way.

2) Providing context
As CSA visualizations often deal with a tremendous amount
of data, the user performance in comprehending the provided
information and projecting for the future could suffer tremen-
dously without support to reason out the context. In fact,
previous research has highlighted that providing context to
interpret information is the key to developing CSA [P30].
We observed several ways visualizations available in our
primary papers facilitate users to comprehend information by
providing context. For example, researchers in [P4] identify
the temporal context of an event as an important design
practice for CSA. They used horizon graphs of several ﬂow
ﬁelds and heatmaps of IP addresses to provide context to
a cyber event. Furthermore, researchers in [P13] adopt the
practice of showing trends and patterns of how the network
compromises could affect the organization’s performance.
Researchers in [P30] attach relevant contextual information
to the charts so that users can easily understand why certain
activity changes might be taking place. On the other hand,
limited studies have looked at context-adaptive CSA visual-
izations. For example, researchers in [P18] propose a real-
time adaptive system for recommending the appropriate level
of detail views tailored for hierarchical network information
structures. This system reasons the contextual information
associated with the network, user task, and user cognitive
load to adapt the network visualization presentation to facili-
tate context-aware reasoning.

3) Layouts and aesthetics to reduce visual complexity
The visual complexity inﬂuences how a user will interact
with those visualizations. Several papers have focused on
more effective layouts and aesthetics to reduce visual com-

Practice

Key point

Condensed presen-
tation

Providing context

Layouts and aes-
thetics to reduce
visual complexity

Facility to share
information

Flexibility to han-
dle differences in
data

User-driven
requirements

Real world evalua-
tions

• Condensed forms of visualiza-
tions [P2, P4, P8, P13, P21,
P24, P26, P38, P40, P43, P50,
P54]

• Superimposing different visu-
alizations techniques [P5, P8,
P34, P37, P38, P42]

interactions
obtaining

to support
• User
users
information
only on demand [P2, P13, P16,
P22, P30, P38, P39, P40, P41,
P43, P44, P46, P53, P54]

• Context-aware adaptive visual-

izations [P18, P41, P49]

• Providing trends and patterns
[P4, P13, P16, P21, P24, P30,
P34, P38, P41, P44, P47, P49,
P51, P53]

• Details to provide context for
threats or risks [P2, P4, P5, P8,
P9, P13, P34, P35, P37, P43,
P44, P54]

• Reducing complexity of data
using layout options [P28, P37,
P38, P41, P53].

• Providing multiple views for in-
formation visualization [P2, P4,
P5, P12, P13, P16, P20, P25,
P33, P37, P38, P39, P41, P50]
• Importance for visual attributes
to reduce visual complexity
[P1, P2, P3, P5, P8, P11, P13,
P16, P22, P37, P43, P46, P50,
P53]

• Providing the ability to share
visualized information [P3, P4,
P10, P12, P16, P37, P38].

• Extra views to handle accurate
and missing information [P2,
P34, P50].

• Flexibility to have different data

models [P7].

• Consultation industrial partners
or real users or observations
to gather requirements [P2, P4,
P11, P12, P24, P38, P41, P42,
P45].

• Evaluation with real users [P2,
P4, P16, P24, P32, P36, P39,
P45, P46, P50]

Count

24

23

23

7

4

9

16

• Real-world

deployment

and
short term use [P10, P15, P24,
P32, P34, P41]

• Real-world

deployment

and
long term use [P4, P16, P38,
P42]

20

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

plexity. In terms of having better layouts, the authors of [P28]
propose a top-level layout approach to perform incremental
layout algorithms. This approach allows them to import and
display large attack graphs in seconds which previously could
take several hours to load. In [P14], the authors use the client-
server layout in Gephi to reduce bipartite graphs’ complex-
ities. In [P25], aggregated alert events are presented using
multiple coordinated views with timeline, cluster, and swarm
model analysis displays. The framework aims to improve sit-
uational awareness and to enable an analyst to easily navigate
and analyze large number of detected events and also be able
to combine sophisticated data analysis techniques with inter-
active visualization for ease of maneuvering through complex
information. Researchers in [P4] propose several views to
present different types of information. These views include
overviews that allow users to scan information within sec-
onds and other views to conduct detailed analysis if needed.
Several primary papers discuss the importance of focusing
on aesthetics to reduce visual complexity. Researchers in
[P8] discuss selecting icons/symbols in the visualizations that
relate more to the users’ day-to-day business. They claim that
will allow users to understand and interpret information that
is visualized easily. Another paper [P11] discusses using dark
background so that users can visualize things unobtrusively
in a 3D environment.

4) Facility to share information
Complete CSA is implausible to achieve by considering
interactions between an individual analyst or decision maker
and their technology alone [16], [38]. Achieving complete
SA requires diverse stakeholders to collaborate and share
information with each other. Often each stakeholder will
have different and sometimes overlapping perspectives on
the situation. Two or more such perspectives will likely need
to be combined to obtain complete SA. Unfortunately, there
is a lack of technologies conducive to humans collaborat-
ing, effectively communicating, and sharing information and
knowledge in the context of CSA. A limited number of our
primary papers have reported practices that enable visualiza-
tion data to be shared with others. For example, researchers
in [P4] introduce watchlists in their visualizations to manage
suspicious IP addresses lists that can be shared with analysts.
In [P3], the researchers propose a mind mapping tool that
allows analysts to directly interact with each other and review
past analysis, share their ﬁndings and divide tasks in a timely
manner.

5) Flexibility to handle differences and issues in data
As explained in Section IV-G, key challenges for CSA visu-
alizations include handling differences in data formats and
standards, and dealing with uncertain and erroneous data.
A limited number of primary papers in this SLR report
practice handling these differences and data issues. For ex-
ample, researchers in [P7] explain previous graph-based tools
that focus on speciﬁc analytic use cases against ﬁxed data
models and propose a schema-free data model to decouple

from the storage implementation. The proposed approach
applies data transformations that map source data elements
to nodes, edges, and their properties rather than relying on
a ﬁxed schema for the data sources. Researchers in [P2]
propose a method to deal with possible missing or inaccurate
information in alert messages. Their algorithms consider
two different matches: i) approximate matches and ii) exact
matches. The exact match allows taking into account possible
inaccurate or wrong information, which includes but is not
limited to a missing source IP address in the alert and a
mismatch in the CVE due to different classiﬁcations used by
the underline IDS.

6) User driven requirements

A clear understanding of user needs is an essential part of
software design and could be considered one of the deciding
factors of the success of systems [39]. However, we only
observed that 16.7% of the primary papers had consulted
industrial partners or real users when designing CSA vi-
sualizations. For example, researchers in [P24] conduct a
series of brainstorming and interviews with analysts, network
managers, security researchers, and visualization researchers
before coming up with visualization mock-ups to facilitate
immediate high-level SA. Furthermore, researchers in [P12]
visit and observe four Security Operations Centers (SOC) of
their industrial partners to understand cyber security collab-
orative practices before designing a collaborative 3D Cyber
Common Operating Picture Platform.

7) Real world evaluations

The software engineering research community had empha-
sized the criticality of rigorous evaluation to assess the ap-
propriateness of the proposed solutions [37]. However, as
detailed in Section IV-F, among the selected studies, there
is a lack of rigorous evaluation that utilizes more mature
methods such as real-world deployments and case studies
with real users. Our ﬁndings clearly demonstrate that most
primary papers do not involve real users in their evaluations.
Only a few papers looked into conducting case studies or
deploying the proposed visualization systems in the real
world to understand how the users perceive those systems in
practice.

V. DISCUSSION
There is an increasing realization that cyber security visu-
alizations can enable signiﬁcant progress towards achieving
the goal of CSA. Throughout this review, we have identiﬁed,
categorized, and discussed the knowledge related to CSA
visualizations in various dimensions. This section will sum-
marize the key ﬁndings from this SLR (see Section V-A)
and discuss the potential future research and development
opportunities in the CSA visualization domain based on the
identiﬁed key limitations and gaps (see Section V-B).

VOLUME 4, 2022

21

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

A. KEY INSIGHTS
Focus on operational-level staff: We identiﬁed several
stakeholders who use and beneﬁt from CSA visualizations
(see Section IV-C). Our results clearly show that most
papers (64.8%) provide visualizations for operational-level
staff such as network analysts, risk analysts, and security
analysts. From an organizational perspective, there is an
evident lack of scientiﬁc research that presents information
for managers and higher-level decision makers. Usually,
managers and higher-level decision makers are tasked with
overseeing the operations and activities of an organization
and making strategic decisions that can inﬂuence the future
of the organization. Often they lack cyber expertise [40];
hence in the absence of CSA visualizations, they may have to
rely on domain experts to interpret the cyber security status
of the organizations, causing delays in the decision making
process. Outside the organizational context, we found only
two studies that provide CSA visualizations targeted at non-
expert users. With the ever-increasing security threats online
and lack of cyber security awareness of non-expert users
who act in cyberspace, it is alarming to have such a limited
number of studies with CSA visualizations targeted at non-
expert users.

Limited attention to external data sources: Our analyses
provide important insights into the types of data sources
used by CSA visualizations. We found that several studies
reported difﬁculties dealing with diverse data sources, and
in particular, our results indicate that external data sources
are the least common source of CSA visualizations. This is
concerning since being limited to internal cyber security data
and knowledge could limit situational understanding of cyber
security threats and risks, hindering the effectiveness of cyber
security decision making [41], [42].

Limited attention to speciﬁc information types: Our
results reveal diverse types of information visualized through
the CSA visualizations. The most common type of infor-
mation visualized is the threat information (55.6%). How-
ever, we observed a lack of attention to visualizing impact
information and response plans. Understanding the business
impact of a cyber incident and response plans allows effective
management of cyber risks and more targeted responses to
cyber incidents [43]. Furthermore, shared information is the
least common type of information visualized in CSA visu-
alizations. Given that previous research has highlighted that
team-level SA is of utmost importance for complete CSA and
communication and information coordination is at the heart
of team-level situation awareness [38], lack of visualizations
to support communication and collaboration among different
team members is concerning.

Lack of attention to several CSA visualization tech-
niques and user interactions: We categorized the visu-
alizations of the selected papers under nine visualization
techniques. From the results presented in Section IV-D3a, it
is clear that iconic displays and geometrically transformed
displays are the most popular visualizations techniques used
in the studies. Iconic display is an interesting way to en-

code information, while increasing the hedonic quality of
the visualizations. Geometrically transformed displays al-
low users to understand complex, multi-dimensional cyber
data through interesting transformations. Other visualization
techniques (e.g., immersive environments) are less employed
in the selected set of papers. It was also clear that many
visualizations combine multiple visualization techniques, of-
ten by superimposing them, to provide more information
in a condensed manner. However, more user evaluations
are needed to comment on their effectiveness. The power
of visualization can be enhanced through user interactions.
However, we noticed that a signiﬁcant number of papers
(16 papers, 29.6%) did not discuss user interactions. As
explained in Section IV-D3a, it is uncertain whether the
authors do not emphasize these features or visualizations
do not have user interactions. Furthermore, we noticed that
while user interactions like zooming, ﬁltering, and details on
demand have gained much attention, other user interactions
have gained less attention. For example, extract/share and
move/rotate were only found in four papers respectively, and
linking/brushing was only found in one study.

Facilitating only lower-level of CSA: Understanding
what is happening in the cyber environment is only the
ﬁrst level of CSA (i.e., perception level as described in
Section II-A). The ability to comprehend and interpret the
current cyber situation is crucial to move beyond perception
level and reach comprehension level. Several studies in the
SLR report challenges comprehension of the information
visualized (see Section IV-G). Our results show that most
studies (92.6%) facilitate the perception level, compared with
only 53.7% of the studies that facilitate up to the comprehen-
sion level. Unfortunately, not having the ability to understand
the data and its relationships could lead to poor interpretation
of the displayed information and hence could reduce the
power of visualizations. As discussed in Section II-A and
Section IV-E, to move beyond the comprehension level to
projection level, users should also be able to identify the
future state of threats and possible future actions. Unfortu-
nately, our results provide evidence that the projection level
is the least supported through the CSA visualizations in the
selected papers.

Lack of rigorous evaluations: As explained in Sec-
tion IV-F, most studies either do not provide evidence or
only provide demonstrations/toy examples as evidence of the
proposed visualizations. Lack of rigorous evaluation could be
the main reason for the limited number of studies (7.4%) that
provide evidence for industrial practice.

Mapping between challenges and practices: Figure 20
presents a mapping of the identiﬁed challenges in Sec-
tion IV-G onto the practices reported in Section IV-H. First,
this mapping provides readers (both researchers and practi-
tioners) with a quick way to identify the relationships be-
tween challenges (i.e., exacerbation). For example, having
a large amount of data could result in challenges for the
comprehensibility of the visualized information and could
hinder the ease of use of the CSA visualizations. Second,

22

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

intelligence, to provide all levels of staff a common view of
cyberspace to facilitate collective decision making. Among
our selected primary papers, we found only a few papers
[P5, P8, P12, P20] that explicitly claim to focus on Common
Operating Pictures. These studies are still in their infancy and
cannot provide the true power of Cyber Common Operat-
ing Pictures. These systems further lack fully customizable
dashboards that allow organizations to adapt the information
they want to visualize and tailor visualizations to a particular
audience.

Context-aware adaptive visualizations: The ultimate
goal of CSA visualizations should be to get the correct
information to the right person, at the right time, in the
right way to facilitate swift decision making. Unfortunately,
the sheer volume of cyber security data could lead to over-
crowding of displays, decreasing the power of visualizations
and decreasing the capacity for a human to identify key
information, trends, and data patterns. As explained in Sec-
tion IV-H, condensed or summarised forms of information
visualizations and powerful user interactions could allow
users to ﬁnd and navigate to the appropriate level of de-
tail. However, this approach places control on the user to
identify and navigate where they need to focus on making
decisions. Manual navigation of the required information
could be seen as a laborious, error-prone process that could
create a cognitive overload for users. Therefore, we argue that
future research should focus more on visualizations capable
of automatically adapting the information and visualization
techniques used based on the context, user needs, and task
at hand. Only a few papers [P18, P41, P49] in this SLR
discussed this concept; hence we believe there is a clear gap
in this area and argue that this research area (i.e., adaptive and
context-aware visualization) should be investigated further in
the future.

Novel data sources and data source agnostic visualiza-
tions: Future researchers can explore further into how exter-
nal data sources such as Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT)
can be integrated into CSA visualizations. OSINT can be
considered an early warning source for cyber security events
such as vulnerability exploits [44]. For example, publicly
available data sources such as Twitter could be used to
identify emerging threats and cyber attacks. We believe that
combining internal and external data sources could result in
a better CSA for the organizations.

As identiﬁed by several papers in Section IV-G, introduc-
ing new data sources and fusing diverse data sources can
create additional challenges for CSA visualizations. These
ﬁndings suggest that future CSA visualizations should give
careful consideration to heterogeneous data types which need
to be conveniently stored and prepared for analysis [10]. In
this context, we emphasize that it is important to follow the
principles and best practices of scalable big-data systems
to store and analyze such heterogeneous data for building
effective CSA visualizations. Organizations have different
environments and data sources that contribute to their own
CSA, so there are no one-size-ﬁts-all visualization solutions.

FIGURE 20. Mapping of challenges to practices.

this mapping provides readers with a way to identify how
practices could help overcome the challenges in CSA visual-
izations (i.e., support). For example, driving CSA visualiza-
tion designs based on user needs and preferences, focusing on
better layouts and aesthetics to reduce visual complexity, and
providing the ability for users to share visualized information
easily could allow CSA visualization to be easy to use. Fur-
thermore, conducting real-world evaluations will ultimately
provide evidence of whether the designed and developed
CSA visualizations are easy to use in practice. In summary,
the mapping in Figure 20 provides anyone interested in CSA
visualizations with the ability to understand the challenge
space better and in more detail, and how changed practices
could alleviate these challenges.

B. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
CSA visualizations for higher-level decision makers and
non-expert users: To be best placed to make cyber secu-
rity decisions effectively and efﬁciently higher-level decision
makers, including executives, should have access to infor-
mation on the entire organization’s potential cyber security
risks, opportunities, and challenges in a format that is easy
to digest and translate to the business dimensions. Hence
future research could be conducted to speciﬁcally target the
design of CSA visualizations for managers and higher-level
decision makers. A better understanding of their information
needs and visualization preferences will facilitate the devel-
opment of effective visualizations for this cohort. Outside
the organizational context, there are opportunities to design
visualizations for CSA focusing on non-expert users. It can
be expected that such visualization support will help non-
expert users be proactive about their online safety.

Cyber Common Operating picture focusing on all lev-
els of staff: Future studies can invest effort in developing
fully customizable Common Operating Pictures to facilitate
cyber security decision making [16]. We anticipate such
platforms will combine data from various data sources such
as Security Information and Event Management (SIEM)
systems, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), logs, data from
security training and awareness programs, patching coverage,
new critical vulnerabilities, and external sources of threat

VOLUME 4, 2022

23

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

Therefore, researchers could invest their efforts in automated
CSA visualization generation from machine-readable data
models [45]. Furthermore, AI-based techniques can then be
applied to recommend visualization models based on data
sources provided by an organization [46]. The automated
CSA dashboard generation will be beneﬁcial for organi-
zations to monitor key information from the data sources
dynamically, fast prototype their organizational CSA knowl-
edge, and validate their CSA design.

Facilitating collaboration and information sharing:
Achieving complete SA requires members of different teams
and different organizational positions, working across differ-
ent work shifts to collaborate and share information with
[38], [47], [48]. Lack of the ability to collab-
each other
orate and share information within the organization could
limit the ability of organizations to take full advantage of
their staff’s expertise and relationships for the management
of vulnerabilities, threats, and incidents, as well as other
cyber security activities. We only found a limited number
of visualizations in this SLR that provided some form of
support for collaboration and information sharing. Therefore,
we assert that collaboration and information sharing should
be considered an integral part of CSA visualizations in
the future. Collaboration and information sharing should be
considered within the organization and across organizations.
More prominence can be given to visualizations that facilitate
collective decision making, sharing of information within
different applications of the same organization, and sharing
of information within organizations.

User-centered design approaches: We assert that user-
centered design should be an intrinsic part of the design
philosophy of CSA visualizations. Traditional practices of
user-centered design incorporate a clear understanding of
users’ needs, wants, and limitations throughout the design
process, which help evaluate the effectiveness of the pro-
posed systems or tools [49]. Therefore, we emphasize that
ﬁrst understanding users’ CSA needs and then iteratively im-
proving the visualizations based on their feedback is crucial
to implementing usable and effective visualization. However,
only nine studies (16.7%) in this SLR have attempted to un-
derstand the requirements from users for CSA visualizations.
Furthermore, only one study [P30] discusses iterative user in-
volvement throughout the process, including brainstorming,
design, and evaluation. We believe the availability and cost of
experts could also create challenges for user-centered design
approaches in the CSA visualization domain. Therefore, we
assert that adopting user-centered design approaches within
the cyber security visualization domain requires effective and
efﬁcient research methods that facilitate user involvement.

Visualization support to project future events, conse-
quences, and possible actions: We emphasize the need for
a gradual but inevitable transition of future visualization
approaches towards facilitating the projection level to achieve
comprehensive CSA. We anticipate that complex data analy-
sis approaches, which may stem from AI and ML techniques,
may be used in this regard [50].

More rigorous real-world evaluations: Rigorous real-
world evaluations will improve the applicability and quality
of the research outcomes [37]. However, this SLR observed
that only a small percentage of the studies had been evaluated
in an industrial setting, which may be due to fewer indus-
try collaborations. Therefore, future researchers should pay
more attention to rigorously evaluating the CSA visualiza-
tions using approaches with industrial relevance. It will lead
to more practical and usable research outcomes.

VI. THREATS TO VALIDITY
We followed the guidelines provided by [24] strictly; how-
ever, we had similarities to other SLRs regarding validity
threats, which we will discuss below.

Missing primary studies: Most of the SLRs face the
limitation of missing primary studies. It is mainly due to
limitations in the search method and non-comprehensive
venues. To minimize the effects of this issue, we used several
strategies. We used Scopus as our search engine. Scopus is
the largest indexing system leading to the most comprehen-
sive search results among other digital libraries [51], allowing
us to expand the coverage of relevant studies. Furthermore,
our search string was carefully identiﬁed. When constructing
the search terms, we consulted the search strings used in the
existing SLRs [5]. We iteratively improved the search string
based on the pilot searches by ensuring all known papers
could be captured through the search string. All authors care-
fully checked the search string before executing the search.
Furthermore, although we did not impose any restrictions
on the publication date of the papers, we acknowledge that
the studies added to the database after the search date (i.e.,
February 2021) are not considered in the review, which is an
inevitable limitation in SLR studies [52].

Bias in study selection: Studies can be selected based on
the subjective judgments of researchers regarding whether or
not they meet the selection criteria. We strictly followed the
predeﬁned review protocol to address this issue, recording
the exclusion reasons for all excluded papers. In addition, a
pilot set of selected studies was shared with all the authors to
make sure all authors agreed with the inclusion and exclusion
criteria. The ﬁrst three authors largely conducted the study
selection and had ongoing internal discussions about any
papers that raised doubts about their inclusion or exclusion
decisions; the remaining authors were consulted whenever a
decision could not be made.

Bias in data extraction and analysis: To reduce the bias
in the data extraction, we ﬁrst created a data extraction form
(see Table 3) to extract and analyze the data consistently
in order to answer the RQs of this SLR. Then, the ﬁrst
three authors conducted a data extraction pilot with a subset
of papers. Any differences in the data extraction were dis-
cussed and resolved; where necessary, the remaining authors
were consulted. After that, the papers were divided, and
the ﬁrst three authors extracted data separately. To analyze
the extracted data, both quantitative and qualitative methods
were applied. It should be noted that we did not have any

24

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

interpretation unless the data items were explicitly provided
by the study. It should be noted that occasionally it was
difﬁcult to interpret the extracted data because of a lack of
sufﬁcient information about the data items. Consequently, in
some instances, interpretation and analysis of the data were
subjective, which might have inﬂuenced the data extraction
results.

VII. CONCLUSION

With cyber attacks becoming ever more sophisticated and
creating potentially disruptive impacts, underadjusting the
cyber security landscape is more necessary than ever. A
picture is worth a thousand words; hence cyber security
visualizations play a pivotal role in conveying complex cyber
security information efﬁciently and effectively. This paper
reports our research efforts to systematically review the liter-
ature on the CSA visualizations and shed light on important
aspects of this emerging research ﬁeld.

We have conducted rigorous analysis and systematic syn-
thesis of 54 papers reporting research on CSA visualizations.
Our research questions systematize and learn different stake-
holders of CSA visualizations, different information types
visualized, data sources employed, visualization techniques
used, CSA levels that can be achieved through the proposed
visualizations, the maturity of the proposed visualizations,
challenges identiﬁed in designing and developing CSA visu-
alizations, and practices that have been reported to implement
CSA visualization successfully.

The ﬁndings of this SLR will help to inform researchers
and practitioners of the main limitations and barriers to the
design, development, and adoption of CSA visualizations
and help direct future research in this area. For example, we
found a lack of research focused on higher-level decision
makers, and non-expert users. Our results also reveal that
most visualizations do not reach the required level of matu-
rity. Finally, we also provided a mapping between challenges
and practices, and we anticipate this will be beneﬁcial for
researchers and CSA designers so they can more easily
understand what practices exist for facilitating each challenge
reported for CSA visualizations.

We have provided guidance for the areas of future re-
search through 8 recommendations. Furthermore, while we
acknowledge that our study does not provide a complete
view of the CSA, the visualizations are one of the most
important components of any technological system designed
for CSA. Hence, we take the ﬁrst step to highlight this area of
research and lay the foundation for developing effective CSA
technologies and systems in the future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank Dr. Praveen Gauravaram from Tata Consultancy
Services Limited (TCS) for providing detailed feedback on
earlier versions of this SLR.

REFERENCES

[1] Varonis, “134 cybersecurity statistics and trends for 2021,” https://www.
varonis.com/blog/cybersecurity-statistics/, 2020, [Online; accessed 18-
May-2021].

[2] “Cost of a data breach report 2021,” https://www.ibm.com/au-en/security/

[3] “Cost

of

data-breach, 2021, [Online; accessed 18-Nov-2021].
data
www.capita.com/sites/g/ﬁles/nginej291/ﬁles/2020-08/
Ponemon-Global-Cost-of-Data-Breach-Study-2020.pdf, 2020, [Online;
accessed 18-May-2021].

https://

breach

2020,”

report

a

[4] M. R. Endsley, “Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic

systems,” Human factors, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 32–64, 1995.

[5] U. Franke and J. Brynielsson, “Cyber situational awareness - A systematic
review of the literature,” Computers and Security, vol. 46, pp. 18–31,
2014. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2014.06.008
[6] B. A. Kitchenham, T. Dyba, and M. Jorgensen, “Evidence-based software
engineering,” in Proceedings. 26th International Conference on Software
Engineering.

IEEE, 2004, pp. 273–281.

[7] M. R. Endsley, “Situation awareness misconceptions and misunderstand-
ings,” Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making, vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 4–32, 2015.

[8] W. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. He, and Z. Ding, “An IoT honeynet based
on multiport honeypots for capturing IoT attacks,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 3991–3999, 2020.

[9] C. Fachkha and M. Debbabi, “Darknet as a source of cyber intelligence:
Survey, taxonomy, and characterization,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1197–1227, 2016.

[10] J. Komárková, M. Husák, M. Laštoviˇcka, and D. Tovarˇnák, “Crusoe:
Data model for cyber situational awareness,” in Proceedings of the
13th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security,
ser. ARES 2018. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3230833.
3232798

[11] R. Vinayakumar, K. Soman, P. Poornachandran, S. Akarsh, and M. El-
hoseny, “Deep learning framework for cyber threat situational awareness
based on email and url data analysis,” in Cybersecurity and Secure Infor-
mation Systems. Springer, 2019, pp. 87–124.

[12] A. Hariharan, A. Gupta, and T. Pal, “CAMLPAD: Cybersecurity au-
tonomous machine learning platform for anomaly detection,” in Advances
in Information and Communication, K. Arai, S. Kapoor, and R. Bhatia,
Eds. Springer International Publishing, pp. 705–720.

[13] I. Alrashdi, A. Alqazzaz, E. Alouﬁ, R. Alharthi, M. Zohdy, and H. Ming,
“Ad-iot: Anomaly detection of iot cyberattacks in smart city using machine
learning,” in 2019 IEEE 9th Annual Computing and Communication
Workshop and Conference (CCWC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 0305–0310.

[14] F. Carroll, A. Chakof, and P. Legg, “What makes for effective visualisation
in cyber situational awareness for non-expert users?” in 2019 International
Conference on Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics And Assess-
ment (Cyber SA).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8.

[15] Y. Livnat, J. Agutter, S. Moon, R. F. Erbacher, and S. Foresti, “A visual-
ization paradigm for network intrusion detection,” in Proceedings from the
Sixth Annual IEEE SMC Information Assurance Workshop.
IEEE, 2005,
pp. 92–99.

[16] G. Conti, J. Nelson, and D. Raymond, “Towards a cyber common op-
erating picture,” in 2013 5th International Conference on Cyber Conﬂict
(CYCON 2013).

IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–17.

[17] G. A. Fink, C. L. North, A. Endert, and S. Rose, “Visualizing cyber
security: Usable workspaces,” in 2009 6th international workshop on
visualization for cyber security.

IEEE, 2009, pp. 45–56.

[18] I. Kotenko and E. Novikova, “Visualization of security metrics for cyber
situation awareness,” in 2014 Ninth International Conference on Availabil-
ity, Reliability and Security.

IEEE, 2014, pp. 506–513.

[19] H. Shiravi, A. Shiravi, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A survey of visualization
systems for network security,” IEEE Transactions on visualization and
computer graphics, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1313–1329, 2011.

[20] T. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. Li, F. Guo, Y. Ma, and W. Chen, “A survey
of network anomaly visualization,” Science China Information Sciences,
vol. 60, no. 12, p. 121101, 2017.

[21] V. T. Guimaraes, C. M. D. S. Freitas, R. Sadre, L. M. R. Tarouco, and L. Z.
Granville, “A survey on information visualization for network and service
management,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 285–323, 2015.

VOLUME 4, 2022

25

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

[45] J. Komárková, M. Husák, M. Laštoviˇcka, and D. Tovarˇnák, “CRUSOE:
Data model for cyber situational awareness,” ACM International Confer-
ence Proceeding Series, 2018.

[46] R. Coulter, Q. L. Han, L. Pan, J. Zhang, and Y. Xiang, “Data-Driven Cyber
Security in Perspective - Intelligent Trafﬁc Analysis,” IEEE Transactions
on Cybernetics, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 3081–3093, 2020.

[47] J. C. Creasey, “Protecting critical national infrastructure through collabo-
rative cyber situational awareness,” in 8th IET International System Safety
Conference incorporating the Cyber Security Conference, 2013, pp. 1–4.
[48] P. Rajivan and N. Cooke, “Impact of team collaboration on cybersecurity
situational awareness,” in Theory and Models for Cyber Situation Aware-
ness. Springer, 2017, pp. 203–226.

[49] J. Noyes and C. Baber, User-centred design of systems. Springer Science

& Business Media, 1999.

[50] M. Husák, J. Komárková, E. Bou-Harb, and P. ˇCeleda, “Survey of attack
projection, prediction, and forecasting in cyber security,” IEEE Communi-
cations Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 640–660, 2018.

[51] M. Zahedi, M. Shahin, and M. A. Babar, “A systematic review of knowl-
edge sharing challenges and practices in global software development,”
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 995–
1019, 2016.

[52] N. K. Tran, M. A. Babar, and J. Boan, “Integrating blockchain and internet
of things systems: A systematic review on objectives and designs,” Journal
of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 173, p. 102844, 2021.

[22] M. Wagner, F. Fischer, R. Luh, A. Haberson, A. Rind, D. A. Keim, and
W. Aigner, “A Survey of Visualization Systems for Malware Analysis,” in
Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) - STARs, R. Borgo,
F. Ganovelli, and I. Viola, Eds. The Eurographics Association, 2015.
[23] D. Staheli, T. Yu, R. J. Crouser, S. Damodaran, K. Nam, D. O’Gwynn,
S. McKenna, and L. Harrison, “Visualization evaluation for cyber security:
Trends and future directions,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh Workshop on
Visualization for Cyber Security, 2014, pp. 49–56.

[24] B. Kitchenham and S. Charters, “Guidelines for performing Systematic
Literature Reviews in Software Engineering,” Technical report, EBSE
Technical Report EBSE-2007-01, 2007.

[25] B. Kitchenham, R. Pretorius, D. Budgen, O. P. Brereton, M. Turner,
M. Niazi, and S. Linkman, “Systematic literature reviews in soft-
ware engineering–a tertiary study,” Information and software technology,
vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 792–805, 2010.

[26] M. Shahin, M. A. Babar, and M. A. Chauhan, “Architectural design space
for modelling and simulation as a service: A review,” Journal of Systems
and Software, vol. 170, 12 2020.

[27] V. Clarke and V. Braun, “Thematic analysis,” The Journal of Positive

Psychology, vol. 12, pp. 1–2, 12 2016.

[28] M. A. Borkin, A. A. Vo, Z. Bylinskii, P. Isola, S. Sunkavalli, A. Oliva, and
H. Pﬁster, “What makes a visualization memorable?” IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2306–2315,
2013.

[29] F. Beck, M. Burch, S. Diehl, and D. Weiskopf, “A taxonomy and survey of
dynamic graph visualization,” in Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 36, no. 1.
Wiley Online Library, 2017, pp. 133–159.

[30] B. Lee, C. Plaisant, C. S. Parr, J.-D. Fekete, and N. Henry, “Task taxon-
omy for graph visualization,” in Proceedings of the 2006 AVI workshop
on BEyond time and errors: Novel evaluation methods for information
visualization, 2006, pp. 1–5.

[31] W. Scheibel, M. Trapp, D. Limberger, and J. Döllner, “A taxonomy of
treemap visualization techniques,” in VISIGRAPP 2020 - Proceedings of
the 15th International Joint Conference on Computer Vision, Imaging and
Computer Graphics Theory and Applications, vol. 3, 2020.

[32] D. A. Keim, “Information visualization and visual data mining,” IEEE
transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp.
1–8, 2002.

[33] B. Shneiderman, “The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for
information visualizations,” in Proceedings 1996 IEEE symposium on
visual languages.

IEEE, 1996, pp. 336–343.

[34] V. Alves, N. Niu, C. Alves, and G. Valença, “Requirements engineering
for software product lines: A systematic literature review,” Information
and Software Technology, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 806–820, 2010.

[35] M. Shahin, P. Liang, and M. A. Babar, “A systematic review of software
architecture visualization techniques,” Journal of Systems and Software,
vol. 94, pp. 161–185, 2014.

[36] T. Dybå and T. Dingsøyr, “Empirical studies of agile software develop-
ment: A systematic review,” Information and software technology, vol. 50,
no. 9-10, pp. 833–859, 2008.

[37] C. Zannier, G. Melnik, and F. Maurer, “On the success of empirical studies
in the international conference on software engineering,” in Proceedings of
the 28th international conference on Software engineering, 2006, pp. 341–
350.

[38] N. J. Cooke, M. Champion, P. Rajivan, and S. Jariwala, “Cyber situation
awareness and teamwork,” EAI Endorsed Transactions on Security and
Safety, vol. 1, no. 2, p. e5, 2013.

[39] M. Maguire and N. Bevan, “User requirements analysis,” in IFIP World

Computer Congress, TC 13. Springer, 2002, pp. 133–148.

[40] L. James, “Making cyber-security a strategic business priority,” Network

Security, vol. 2018, no. 5, pp. 6–8, 2018.

[41] S. Petrenko, K. Makoveichuk, and A. Oliﬁrov, “New methods of the cy-
bersecurity knowledge management analytics,” Communications in Com-
puter and Information Science, vol. 1140 CCIS, pp. 296–310, 2020.
[42] B. D. Czejdo, M. D. Iannacone, R. A. Bridges, E. M. Ferragut, and J. R.
Goodall, “Integration of external data sources with cyber security data
warehouse,” ACM International Conference Proceeding Series, pp. 49–52,
2014.

[43] S. Musman, M. Tanner, A. Temin, E. Elsaesser, and L. Loren, “Computing
the impact of cyber attacks on complex missions,” in 2011 IEEE Interna-
tional Systems Conference.

IEEE, 2011, pp. 46–51.

[44] B. D. Le, G. Wang, M. Nasim, and M. A. Babar, “Gathering cyber threat
intelligence from twitter using novelty classiﬁcation,” Proceedings - 2019
International Conference on Cyberworlds, CW 2019, pp. 316–323, 2019.

26

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

.

APPENDIX A SELECTED PRIMARY STUDIES

ID

P1

P2

P3

P4

P5

P6

P7

P8

P9

P10

P11

P12

P13

P14

P15

P16

P17

P18

Title

Author(s)

Venue

What makes for effective visualization in cyber situational
awareness for non-expert users?

Carroll F., Chakof A., Legg P.

International Conference on
Cyber Situational Awareness

Year

2019

MAD: A visual analytics solution for Multi-step cyber Attacks
Detection

Angelini M., Bonomi S., Lenti
S., Santucci G., Taggi S.

Journal
Languages

of

Computer

2019

AOH-Map: A Mind Mapping System for Supporting Collabo-
rative Cyber Security Analysis

Zhong C., Alnusair A., Sayger
B., Troxell A., Yao J.

Situ: Identifying and explaining suspicious behavior in net-
works

C.A.,

J.R., Ragan E.D.,
Goodall
J.W.,
Reed
Steed
Richardson
Huffer
K.M.T., Bridges R.A., Laska
J.A.

G.D.,

IEEE Conference on Cognitive
and Computational Aspects of
Situation Management

2019

IEEE Transactions on Visual-
ization and Computer Graphics

2019

Cyber kill chain based threat taxonomy and its application on
cyber common operational picture

Clio S., Han I., Jeong H., Kim
J., Koo S., Oh H., Park M.

International Conference on
Cyber Situational Awareness

Combining real-time risk visualization and anomaly detection

Väisänen T., Noponen S., Lat-
vala O.-M., Kuusijärvi J.

ACM International Conference
Proceeding Series

Mission-focused cyber situational understanding via graph an-
alytics

Noel S., Rowe P.D., Purdy S.,
Limiero M., Lu T., Mathews W.

International Conference on
Cyber Conﬂict

A comparative analysis of visualization techniques to achieve
cyber situational awareness in the military

Llopis S., Hingant J., Perez I.,
Esteve M., Carvajal F., Mees
W., Debatty T.

International Conference on
Military Communications and
Information Systems

2018

2018

2018

2018

Comparative analysis and patch optimization using the cyber
security analytics framework

Abraham S., Nair S.

Journal of Defense Modeling
and Simulation

2018

Blue Team Communication and Reporting for Enhancing Sit-
uational Awareness from White Team Perspective in Cyber
Security Exercises

Kokkonen T., Puuska S.

Conference
Things and Smart Spaces

Internet

on

of

2018

Enhancing cyber defense situational awareness using 3D visu-
alizations

Kullman K., Cowley J., Ben-
Asher N.

International Conference on
Cyber Warfare and Security

From Cyber Security Activities to Collaborative Virtual Envi-
ronments Practices Through the 3D CyberCOP Platform

Cyber situational awareness: from geographical alerts to high-
level management

Kabil A., Duval T., Cuppens
N., Le Comte G., Halgand Y.,
Ponchel C.

International Conference on In-
formation Systems Security

Angelini M., Santucci G.

Journal of Visualization

Deriving cyber use cases from graph projections of cyber data
represented as bipartite graphs

Eslami M., Zheng G., Eramian
H., Levchuk G.

IEEE International Conference
on Big Data

A Study into Detecting Anomalous Behaviours within Health-
Care Infrastructures

Boddy A., Hurst W., Mackay
M., El Rhalibi A.

International Conference on
Developments
eSystems
Engineering

in

OwlSight: Platform for real-time detection and visualization of
cyber threats

Carvalho V.S., Polidoro M.J.,
Magalhaes J.P.

IEEE International Conference
on Big Data Security on Cloud

An expert system for facilitating an institutional risk proﬁle
deﬁnition for cyber situational awareness

Graf R., Gordea S., Ryan H.M.,
Houzanme T.

Adaptive visualization of complex networks with focalpoint: A
context aware level of details recommender system

Inibhunu C., Langevin S.

P19 Web-Based Smart Grid Network Analytics Framework

Pietrowicz S., Falchuk B., Ko-
larov A., Naidu A.

P20

Conﬁgurable IP-space maps for large-scale, multi-source net-
work data visual analysis and correlation

Miserendino S., Maynard C.,
Freeman W.

P21

Visualization of security metrics for cyber situation awareness

Kotenko I., Novikova E.

P22

CyberVis: Visualizing the potential impact of cyber attacks on
the wider enterprise

Creese S., Goldsmith M., Mof-
fat N., Happa J., Agraﬁotis I.

ICISSP 2016 -
Conference
on
Systems Security and Privacy

International
Information

Proceedings of the Human Fac-
tors and Ergonomics Society

IEEEInternational Conference
on Information Reuse and Inte-
gration

Proceedings of SPIE - The In-
ternational Society for Optical
Engineering

International Conference on
and
Availability, Reliability
Security

IEEE International Conference
on Technologies for Homeland
Security

2018

2018

2017

2017

2017

2016

2016

2016

2015

2014

2014

2013

VOLUME 4, 2022

27

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

Title

Author(s)

Venue

CyberSAVe - Situational awareness visualization for cyber se-
curity of smart grid systems

Matuszak W.J., DiPippo L.,
Sun Y.L.

ACM International Conference
Proceeding Series

Visualization design for immediate high-level situational as-
sessment

Erbacher R.F.

P25

Visualization techniques for computer network defense

Beaver J.M., Steed C.A., Patton
R.M., Cui X., Schultz M.

P26

EMBER: A global perspective on extreme malicious behavior

Yu T., Lippmann R., Riordan J.,
Boyer S.

ACM International Conference
Proceeding Series

P27

Intrusion monitoring in process control systems

Valdes A., Cheung S.

P28

A graph-theoretic visualization approach to network risk analy-
sis

O’Hare S., Noel S., Prole K.

P29

Cyberspace situation representation based on Niche Theory

Zhuo Y., Zhang Q., Gong Z.

P30

Putting security in context: Visual correlation of network activ-
ity with real-world information

Pike W.A.,
Zabriskie S.

Scherrer C.,

P31

Visualizing cascading failures in critical cyber infrastructures

P32

A visualization paradigm for network intrusion detection

Kopylec
Goodall J.

J., D’Amico A.,

Livnat Y., Agutter J., Moon S.,
Erbacher R.F., Foresti S.

Visualization as an aid for assessing the mission impact of
information security breaches

D’Amico A., Salas S.

ML-based data anomaly mitigation and cyber-power transmis-
sion resiliency analysis

Anshuman Z.N., Sajan K.S.,
Srivastava A.K.

A novel architecture for attack-resilient wide-area protection
and control system in smart grid

Singh V.K., Govindarasu M.

Resilience Week

Understanding and Enabling Tactical Situational Awareness in
a Security Operations Center

Mullins R., Nargi B., Fouse A.

Advances in Intelligent Sys-
tems and Computing

A Dynamic Visualization Platform for Operational Maritime
Cybersecurity

Zhao H., Silverajan B.

International
on
Visualization and Engineering

Conference
Design,

Cooperative

Insight2: A modular visual analysis platform for network situa-
tional awareness in large-scale networks

Kodituwakku H.A.D.E., Keller
A., Gregor J.

Electronics (Switzerland)

Alert characterization by non-expert users in a cybersecurity
virtual environment: A usability study

Kabil A., Duval T., Cuppens N.

International Conference on
Augmented Reality, Virtual
Reality and Computer Graphics

Operator impressions of 3d visualizations for cybersecurity
analysts

Kullman K., Asher N.B., Sam-
ple C.

European Conference on Infor-
mation Warfare and Security

A Tri-Modular Human-on-the-Loop Framework for Intelligent
Smart Grid Cyber-Attack Visualization

Sundararajan A., Khan T., Abu-
rub H., Sarwat A.I., Rahman S.

Conference Proceedings - IEEE
SOUTHEASTCON

P42

DiPot: A distributed industrial honeypot system

Cao J., Li W., Li J., Li B.

Dagger: Modeling and visualization for mission impact situa-
tion awareness

Peterson E.

Enhancing cyber situation awareness for Non-Expert Users
using visual analytics

Legg P.A.

Results and lessons learned from a user study of display effec-
tiveness with experienced cyber security network analysts

Garneau C.J., Erbacher R.F.,
Etoty R.E., Hutchinson S.E.

Learning from Authoritative
Security Experiment Results

2016

VOLUME 4, 2022

International
on Smart Computing
Communication

Conference
and

IEEE Military Communica-
tions Conference

International Conference on
Cyber Situational Awareness,
Data Analytics and Assessment

ACM International Conference
Proceeding Series

Proceedings of SPIE - The In-
ternational Society for Optical
Engineering

Annual Hawaii
International
Conference on System Sciences

International Workshop on Vi-
sualization for Computer Secu-
rity

IEEE International Conference
on Information and Automation

Proceedings of the Workshop
on Visualization for Computer
Security

IFIP Advances in Information
and Communication Technol-
ogy

Annual IEEE System, Man and
Cybernetics Information Assur-
ance Workshop

Information Survivability Con-
ference and Exposition

IEEE International Conference
on Communications, Control,
and Computing Technologies
for Smart Grids

Year

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2008

2008

2008

2005

2003

2020

2020

2020

2020

2020

2020

2019

2018

2018

2016

2016

ID

P23

P24

P33

P34

P35

P36

P37

P38

P39

P40

P41

P43

P44

P45

28

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

ID

P46

P47

P48

Title

Author(s)

Venue

Visual analytics for cyber red teaming

Yuen J., Turnbull B., Hernan-
dez J.

IEEE Symposium on Visualiza-
tion for Cyber Security

Ensemble visualization for cyber situation awareness of net-
work security data

Hao L., Healey C.G., Hutchin-
son S.E.

IEEE Symposium on Visualiza-
tion for Cyber Security

Towards an integrated defense system for cyber security situa-
tion awareness experiment

Zhang H., Wei S., Ge L., Shen
D., Yu W., Blasch E.P., Pham
K.D., Chen G.

The International Society for
Optical Engineering

P49

Visual structures for seeing cyber policy strategies

Stoll J., Bengez R.Z.

International Conference on
Cyber Conﬂict

P50

VAFLE: Visual analytics of ﬁrewall log events

Ghoniem M., Shurkhovetskyy
G., Bahey A., Otjacques B.

The International Society for
Optical Engineering

P51

Capturing human cognition in cyber-security simulations with
NETS

Giacobe N.A., McNeese M.D.,
Mancuso V.F., Minotra D.

IEEE International Conference
on Intelligence and Security In-
formatics: Big Data, Emergent
Threats, and Decision-Making
in Security Informatics

Year

2015

2015

2015

2015

2014

2013

P52

On detection and visualization techniques for cyber security
situation awareness

Yu W., Wei S., Shen D., Blow-
ers M., Blasch E.P., Pham K.D.,
Chen G., Zhang H., Lu C.

The International Society for
Optical Engineering

2013

P53

Visualization for cyber security command and control

Langton J.T., Newey B., Havig
P.R.

The International Society for
Optical Engineering

P54

ViSAw: Visualizing threat and impact assessment for enhanced
situation awareness

Nusinov M., Yang S.J., Holsop-
ple J.

IEEE Military Communica-
tions Conference

2010

2009

VOLUME 4, 2022

29

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

LIUYUE JIANG received the M.S. degree in com-
puter science from School of Computer Science,
The University of Adelaide, Australia, in 2019,
where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with Centre for Research on Engineering Soft-
ware Technologies (CREST) at the University of
Adelaide, and he is funded by the Cyber Security
Cooperative Research Centre (CSCRC).

MARTHIE GROBLER is passionate about mak-
ing cyber security more accessible. Her research
focus is on human centric cyber security, enhanc-
ing usability of security solutions by considering
human factors. She spearheaded the establishment
of a new human centric security research team,
which is focused on addressing the alignment and
integration of human factors in the cyber domain
to enhance security adoption and efﬁciency. Her
expertise falls within a very niche area of cyber
security, the intersection between cyber security, usable security and human
computer interaction. Marthie has a strong focus on improving cyber secu-
rity across user groups, considering traditional usability metrics, governance
and policies, as well as cyber security maturity and resilience. Her main
developments are in the domains of cyber risk and governance, and cyber
education and digital upskilling. Marthie currently holds a position as
Team Leader: Human Centric Security at CSIRO’s Data61 in Melbourne,
Australia.

ASANGI JAYATILAKA is a post-doctoral re-
searcher at the Centre for Research on Software
Technologies (CREST) at the University of Ade-
laide (UoA). Prior to joining CREST, she worked
as a lecturer in Software Engineering and Com-
puter Science at the UoA, School of Computer
Science. She received her PhD from the School of
Computer Science at UoA. She is passionate about
research on human aspects in computing. This
includes studying the effects of different human
aspects on technology development, whether and/or to what extent these
are accounted for and how we can best use these to build better tools and
technologies that are both usable and effective. She has extensive experience
in both qualitative and quantitative research methods. Her work has led to
designing, implementing, and evaluating technologies and tools in various
domains, including cyber security, digital health, and pervasive computing.

MEHWISH NASIM is a lecturer in Computing
and Mathematical Sciences at the College of Sci-
ence and Engineering at Flinders University. She
is also an adjunct lecturer at the University of
Adelaide, an associate investigator with ARC Cen-
tre of Excellence for Mathematical and Statistical
Frontiers, and a visiting scientist at CSIRO, Aus-
tralia. She is a member of the Australian Math-
ematics Society and Women in Maths Special
Interest Group. She did her Ph.D. in Computer
Science from University of Konstanz, Germany. Her research lies at the in-
tersection of applied mathematics and social psychology. She is particularly
interested in network science, understanding grey-zone tactics, combating
online misinformation, serious games, and decision making in the context
of cyber security. She is working on AI-enabled situational understanding
models for combating misinformation, using graph-theoretic knowledge-
based constructs, coupled with natural language processing techniques and
social psychology. Her work has led to the design of agent-based network
simulation models that can be deployed in modern wargames which can be
used by defence and the government for training decision-makers to combat
online misinformation during crisis.

MANSOOREH ZAHEDI is a lecturer in Software
Engineering (SE) at the School of Computing
and Information Systems, the University of Mel-
bourne. She has received her PhD from School of
Software and Systems at IT University of Copen-
hagen, Denmark. Her research is stimulated by
the challenges involved in continuously evolving
Software Engineering processes and practices to
enable organizations developing high-quality soft-
ware intensive systems. Her primary research goal
is to apply empirical research methods and tools to investigate the role
of people, processes, and technologies in different software development
paradigms. Her key research interests are human aspects in software en-
gineering, socio-technical aspects of cyber security and continuous soft-
ware engineering. She has conducted extensive ﬁeld studies with different
companies internationally and published empirically grounded ﬁndings.
Her work has been published in several high-ranking software engineering
venues e.g., EMSE, FSE, JSS, IST, ESEM, EASE. She has served the
research community extensively in different capacities, e.g., workshop chair
of Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE 2021), Short-
papers chair of (EASE 2020), workshop co-chair of international conference
on Agile Software Development (XP 2020), poster co-chair of international
conference on Model Driven Languages and Systems (MODELS 18, 19),
judge at SRC competition (ICSE 2020) and Social activities co-chair of
Requirements Engineering conference (RE 2022).

30

VOLUME 4, 2022

Jiang et al.: Systematic Literature Review on Cyber Situational Awareness Visualizations

M. ALI BABAR is currently a Professor with
School of Computer Science, The University of
Adelaide. He is an Honorary Visiting Professor
with the Software Institute, Nanjing University,
China. He is also the Director of Cyber Security
Adelaide (CSA), which incorporates a node of
recently approved the Cyber Security Cooperative
Research Centre (CSCRC), whose estimated bud-
get is around AU$140 Millions over seven years
with AU$50 Millions provided by the Australia
Government. In the area of software engineering education, he led the Uni-
versity’s effort to redevelop a Bachelor of Engineering (software) degree that
has been accredited by the Australian Computer Society and the Engineers
Australia (ACS/EA). Prior to joining The University of Adelaide, he spent
almost seven years in Europe (Ireland, Denmark, and U.K.) as a Senior
Researcher and an Academic. Before returning to Australia, he was a Reader
of software engineering with Lancaster University. He has established an
Interdisciplinary Research Centre, Centre for Research on Engineering
Software Technologies (CREST), where he leads the research and research
training of more than 30 (20 Ph.D. students) members. Apart from his work
having industrial relevance as evidenced by several research and develop-
ment projects and setting up a number of collaborations in Australia and
Europe with industry and government agencies, his publications have been
highly cited within the discipline of software engineering as evidenced by his
H-index is 52 with 11045 citations as per Google Scholar on December 16,
2021. He leads the theme on Platform and Architecture for Cyber Security
as a Service with the CSCRC. He has authored/coauthored more than 220
peer-reviewed publications through premier software technology journals
and conferences.

VOLUME 4, 2022

31

