Staring Down the Digital Fulda Gap – Path Dependency as a Cyber 

Defense Vulnerability 

Jan Kallberg¹  

¹Army Cyber Institute at West Point, United States Military Academy, West Point, New 

York, United States 

Jan Kallberg, Army Cyber Institute at West Point, United States Military Academy, 

Spellman Hall 4-33, 2101 New South Post Road, West Point, NY 10996, United States 

E-mail: jkallberg@gwu.edu 

Disclaimer: 
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy 
or position of the Army Cyber Institute at West Point, the United States Military 
Academy, the Department of the Army, or the Department of Defense. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Staring Down the Digital Fulda Gap – Path Dependency as a Cyber 

Defense Vulnerability 

Introduction 

Academia, homeland security, defense, and media have accepted the perception 

that critical infrastructure in a future cyber war (cyber conflict) is the main gateway for 

a massive cyber assault on the U.S. The question is not if the assumption is correct or 

not; the question is instead of how did we arrive at that assumption. The cyber paradigm 

considers critical infrastructure the primary attack vector for future cyber conflicts. The 

national vulnerability embedded in critical infrastructure is given a position in the cyber 

discourse as close to an unquestionable truth – as a natural law.  

The operational environment changes, but organizations adapt to these changes 

if the organizational ideology can accept the changes aligned with the dominant 

organizational perception of reality.1 Large organizations develop a narrative, a story, 

that defines the perception of the mission, why the organization exists, and how it 

justifies its existence and share of shared resources. In government, bureaucratic 

maximization is common, where public agencies seek to maximize their size and 

maintain growth by adding tasks and redefining the mission (charter).2 

    History provides numerous examples of how organizations preferred to see 

the operational environment based on the organizational ideology and narrative. The 

first battles between the Germans and French armies in the First World War were 

examples of how military bias and organizational ideology came to play as both sides 

had designed their strategies based on path-dependency, bias, and organizational 

ideology. Both the Germans and the French had chosen offensive strategies; one of the 

reasons was the inherited notion that only professional armies could attack3 and, 

therefore, defensive strategies were considered to undermine the army’s status and 

2 

 
professional standing. If there were a defensive doctrine, conscripted units would 

receive an equal standing, which the professional army did not prefer. So even if it was 

evident after the Boer War and the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905 that increased 

firepower, industrial mass fabricated weaponry, and the deployment of machine guns at 

grand scale had tipped the scale in favor of a defensive posture,4 both the French and 

German armies internal bias5 was stronger than properly assessing reality. The 

misalignment between perception, doctrine, and reality led to the massive loss of human 

lives in the First World War.   

Critical infrastructure fits well the internal bias among different stakeholders; 

homeland security needs a significant domestic cyber threat to justify its cyber 

engagement, the military struggle to visualize what a cyber conflict entails, and critical 

infrastructure serves as an understandable target for the general public. The military 

influence in the cyber security discussion directly influences the perception by utilizing 

terminology similar to military actions. If there is a threat to critical infrastructure, the 

doctrine would require cyber deterrence to deter potential attackers.6  

Any fighting force has an embedded urge to understand the battlefield, plan, 

strategize, and prepare for war. Historically, it has been necessary to avoid strategic 

surprise, horrific defeat and limit the actual casualties and devastation to its force and 

society. The study of the future fight has been instrumental in preventing strategic 

surprise. In a future cyberwar, it is at critical infrastructure where the cyber enemy will 

appear, or do we expect them to attack the critical infrastructure because we have 

decided so in over two decades of cyberwar planning and strategic discussions?     

3 

 
 FORGING HISTORICAL AND CYBER NARRATIVE 

Defense, homeland security or military, are large organizations formed by 

formal structures, hierarchies, institutional knowledge, shared history, and a common 

perception of reality through disseminated values that go through ranks and surface in 

doctrine. Beyond mission statements and quadrennial defense reviews, the defense 

establishment has a living narrative of who they are, what tasks are ahead, and why they 

are doing what we do. Traditionally, a shared view of the battlespace has been 

instrumental in our ability to understand war. Being aware of who you are and what you 

do is an asset and strength for any organization. It is the foundation for professionalism, 

respect, and dedication to supporting the mission. A flipside comes with a shared 

perspective – the risk for groupthink.7 The large bureaucracy has invested time, money, 

and effort in critical infrastructure as the predominant attack vector, which adds to the 

path dependency as sunk cost fallacy overrides logic.8 The unified internal view of the 

operational environment could become a gospel, preaching, and identifier for 

membership in the “professional” group as defined by the group itself.              

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AS AN INTELLECTUAL CATCH-

ALL 

The assumption that the enemy in cyber will appear at a specific location, 

conduct pre-assessed operations, and act to predetermine the larger constraints is likely 

spurious because it does not reflect the operational realities of a cyber conflict.  

Why are we so convinced that future massive cyber attacks will follow a specific 

pattern of a broad attack on critical infrastructure?  

One of the unique tenets of cyber is the large target area as any networked 

device can be reached, the sizeable vulnerable target area is naturally inviting, but the 

4 

 
adversary does not have endless assets to engage in their cyber mission force. The size 

of the U.S. economy is 21 trillion USD GDP (2021). Over 3 200 counties, 70 000+ local 

government departments, public works, and numerous major private utilities are already 

highly skilled in defensive cyber operations (DCO) visualize the size of the defending 

force. Even a larger adversary will have to prioritize the offensive cyber operations 

(OCO) targeting drastically; there are a limited number of OCO teams in the 

adversary’s mission force.     

THE EVER INCREASING SCOPE OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE 

Since the 1980s, the definition of critical infrastructure has expanded. The 

definition of critical infrastructure is now so broad that it becomes a catch-all. With 

today’s broad definition of critical infrastructure covering a spectrum starting with 

lightning for ballparks to e-mail alerts from career websites, it is apparent critical 

infrastructure’s assumption faces another challenge. It is almost impossible to prioritize 

defensive cyber assets to defend critical infrastructure because of the broad scope.  

In a 1983 report, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) defined 

“infrastructure” as facilities with “the common characteristics of capital intensiveness 

and high public investment at all levels of government. They are, moreover, directly 

critical to activity in the nation’s economy.” The CBO included highways, public transit 

systems, wastewater treatment works, water resources, air traffic control, airports, and 

municipal water supply in this category. The CBO also noted that the concept of 

infrastructure could be “applied broadly to include such social facilities as schools, 

hospitals, and prisons, and it often includes industrial capacity, as well.”9 On Jul. 15, 

1996, President Clinton signed Executive Order 13010 establishing the President’s 

Commission on Critical Infrastructure Protection (PCCIP).  This Executive Order 

5 

 
defined “infrastructure” as The framework of interdependent networks and systems 

comprising identifiable industries, institutions (including people and procedures), and 

distribution capabilities that provide a reliable flow of products and services essential to 

the defense and economic security of the United States, the smooth functioning of 

government at all levels, and society as a whole.10 

Since the 1990s have the cyber mantra has been the protection of critical 

infrastructure11 and still is. The 2013 Presidential Executive Order - Improving Critical 

Infrastructure Cybersecurity12 uses a broadened definition of critical infrastructure.  It is 

based on our previous experience, the human need to grasp and comprehend.  As 

humans, we are colored of the past because past experiences continued through 

doctrine, technique, and tactics.  

In May 2021, President Biden issued Executive Order 14208, “Executive Order 

on Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity,”13  which reemphasizes the importance of 

critical infrastructure and seeks to increase threat intelligence sharing within 

government and between the government and the private sector. 

President Biden introduced a few new innovative approaches. One of these is to 

create a Cyber Safety Review Board tailored after the National Transportation Safety 

Board that investigates airplane crashes and other significant transportation disasters. 

The aviation industry and the government investigates airplane crashes to find out the 

root cause of the incident, with the overarching goal that a vulnerability should only 

lead to one crash. According to the current administration, the concept of airplane crash 

investigations and adjustments of safety posture afterward could be transposed to cyber 

security. President Biden also wants to limit barriers for government and private sector 

cyber threat information sharing. The increasingly fast cyberattacks, from the 

penetration of a system to widespread effects, drive the need for information sharing. 

6 

 
The time window to act is becoming smaller and smaller. Information sharing of threat 

intelligence between the government and the private sector becomes necessary to ensure 

that detection and mitigation at a broad scale are not unnecessarily delayed.       

THE RATIONALE FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE 

The increased interest in the cyber-defense of critical infrastructure has several 

drivers. First, our society is far more dependent on technical infrastructure than ever 

before, with an increasing demand for better communications, more bandwidth, and 

high close to undisrupted availability.14  Forty years ago, disruptions happened, and the 

demand for constant infrastructural services was not present. Today’s younger 

generation has grown up with a functional web of accessible infrastructural services, a 

cultural shift that increases vulnerability.  

Second, in the last two decades, an increasing number of cyber-physical 

equipment has gone online. In the early 1990s, there was manual control of a midsized 

dam in a watershed. Today, in 2021, the dams in a whole watershed are connected to the 

Internet and controlled remotely from a control room potentially hundreds of miles 

away.15  In most cases, the remotely controlled cyber-physical systems no longer have a 

fallback ability to use the older control methodology. The manual mode is no longer in 

the present system design; the earlier staff that knew how to run the system manually is 

no longer there. Attacks on cyber-physical equipment can lead to releasing chemicals, 

waste products, and other contamination that have long-term environmental damage.16 

17  

Third, along with critical infrastructures, goes supply chain concerns, as one of 

the outfalls of failed infrastructure is disruptions in the supply chains. The logistic chain 

7 

 
that hauls our goods feeds our population and ensures that products safely arrive in time 

is increasingly exposed to cyber threats. The safe handling from farm to table that 

through years been manually monitored is now rapidly becoming controlled by 

computers.18  Satellite communication and GPS track Refrigeration trucks’ position, the 

cargo’s temperature, and other essential data for food safety, and this data is a part of a 

data network through logistics, warehouses, and the supermarket.    

With various operating programs and software, the number of systems coming 

from different technical generations, both modern and all the way to close to obsolete, 

create a kaleidoscope of vulnerabilities and opportunities for a potential attacker. There 

is no discussion that critical infrastructure is a vital component of a functional modern 

society; it is more a question of if critical infrastructure is unavoidably the main 

battlefield for a future cyber conflict.   

STRATEGIC INTENT 

Cyberattacks on critical infrastructure can have different intents. There is a similarity 

between cyber and national intelligence; both are trying to make sense of limited 

information looking at a denied information environment. In reality, our knowledge of 

the strategic intent and goals of our potential adversaries is limited.  

We can study doctrine19, published statements, non-classified events, and with 

some luck in the covert realm, the potential adversary’s classified events, but still, there 

are significant gaps. We are assessing the adversary’s strategic intent from the outside, 

which are often qualified guesses, with all the uncertainty that comes with it. Then to 

assess strategic intent, many times, logic and past behavior are the only guidance. 

Nation-state actors tend to seek a geopolitical end goal, change policy, destabilize the 

target nation, or acquire the information they can use for their benefit.  

8 

 
  
 
Criminal networks seek economic gain, visible in ransomware that encrypts and 

blocks the usage of a targeted computer network, allowing it only to be restored after 

the victim paid a ransom.20  

Attacks on critical infrastructure make the news headline, and for a less able 

potential adversary, it can serve as a way to show their internal audience that they can 

threaten the United States. In 2013, Iranian hackers broke into the control system of a 

dam in Rye Brook, N.Y.21 The actual damage was limited due to circumstances the 

hackers did not know. Maintenance procedures occurred at the facility, which limited 

the risk for broader damage. The limited intrusion in the control system made national 

news, engaged the State of New York, elected officials, Department of Justice, the 

Federal Bureau of Investigations, Department of Homeland Security, and several more 

agencies. Time Magazine called it in the headline;” Iranian Cyber Attack on New York 

Dam Shows Future of War.” For a geopolitically inferior country that seeks to be a 

threat and a challenger to the U.S., examples are Iran or North Korea; the massive 

American reaction to a limited attack on critical infrastructure serves its purpose. The 

attacker had shown its domestic audience that they could shake the Americans, 

primarily when U.S. authorities attributed the attack to Iranian hackers, making it easier 

to present it as news for the Iranian audience. When attacks occur on critical domestic 

infrastructure, it is not a given that it has a strategic intent to damage the U.S.; the 

attacks can also be a message to the attacker’s population that their country can strike 

the Americans in their homeland.     

Russian leaders under sanctions can not enjoy the “benefits” of corruption as 

extravagant travel, moving money freely in the West, can not let their anger out except 

for authorizing harassing cyber-attacks on the Americans. Cyber-attacks become a risk-

free way of picking a fight with the Americans without risking escalation. 

9 

 
 
 
Several potential adversaries do not subscribe to our playbook, especially when 

it comes to international law, the law of armed conflict, and ethics, so their actions are 

more restricted by what their senior leaders accept than anything else. Numerous cyber-

attacks on critical American infrastructure could be a way to harass the American 

society and have no other justification than hostile authoritarian senior leaders has it as 

an outlet for their frustration and anger against the U.S. 

Nothing stops an authoritarian regime from using American infrastructure as a 

training group for their cyber forces because they are not constrained by our rules, laws, 

and ethics. They could train their forces on our systems, with no other intent than 

education with the hope of gaining valuable information.     

POTENTIAL OUTCOME 

One open question is how will the American population react to a massive, 

crippling attack on critical infrastructure. Historically, Americans tend to react heavily 

to attacks on American soil with anger and support for punitive action, even if requiring 

a more prolonged operation. Attackers seeking to maximize civilian hardship as a tool 

to bring down a targeted society have historically faced a reversed reaction. The 

reactions to Pearl Harbor and 9-11 show that there is a risk for any adversary to attack 

the American homeland and that such an attack might unify American society instead of 

injecting fear and force submission to foreign will. The German bombings of the 

civilian targets during the 1940’s air campaign “Blitz” only hardened the British 

resistance against the Nazis. An attacker needs to take into consideration the potential 

outfall of a significant attack on critical infrastructure.   

A systematic large-scale cyberattack on the power grid, leading to a blackout 

similar to the Northeastern blackout of 2003,22 does not need to lead to the same 

10 

 
 
  
outcome as it did then. During the Northeastern blackout of 2003,23  instead of panic, 

there was a sense of solidarity; New Yorkers helped each other. Rationally, there is no 

guarantee that the population would act in the same manner 18 years later.  

The reliance on older experiences could be a blind spot as society changes over time, 

and new technology enables the sharing of fearful events, which could induce panic, 

several societal destabilizations, and second-tier effects. Will the Tik-tok, Instagram, 

social media population we have today be as composed and orderly as the New Yorkers 

in the 2003 blackout? In 2003, the population only saw their part of the event, a dark 

street or a stuck subway car, but it is still there. A gadget-reliant population that 

suddenly loses cell phone, data, light, and connectivity might react entirely differently 

because the impact affects their virtual and physical worlds. In the older examples, as 

the 2003 blackout, the virtual world was not fully developed, and the impact might have 

felt less. There are significant uncertainties about how the population will react to the 

significant cyber-enabled devastation of our infrastructure, if successful, believing that 

it will be as orderly as the blackout of 2003 could be wishful thinking.             

FULDA GAP  

Critical infrastructure is not the first time the U.S. had a prevailing narrative on 

where the main future battle would occur. The Fulda Gap analogy becomes relevant due 

to the decades’ long assumption that if there were a Soviet Warsaw Pact sudden attack 

on NATO, this would be where the thrust of the Soviet Warsaw Pact attack would be.  

During the Cold War, NATO leaders, American and European politicians and military, 

and security analysts were convinced that a potential war between the Soviet Warsaw 

Pact and NATO would start in a flat area in central West-Germany on the border 

between East-Germany (DDR) and West-Germany (BRD). As a gateway to the West 

11 

 
with heavily forested areas on both sides, the open landscape formed an invasion 

corridor that leads from the Soviet formations right through West Germany. In the way 

stood the U.S. V. Corps as the NATO defenders of the Fulda Gap sector. The Fulda Gap 

was by NATO the assumed attack route for the Soviet 8th Guards Army, and following 

Soviet and East German units, towards the Frankfurt-am-Main and Rhine, in the pursuit 

to have a decisive victory over NATO before U.S. troops from the continental U.S. 

could arrive. General James H. Polk, then commander of U.S. Army Europe and 

Seventh Army, stated in 1970 that:  

“...the communist armies are bigger and better trained than at any time since World 

War II. They have the most modern weapons and equipment....In the Soviet zone 

of Germany, 20 Russian tank and motorized rifle divisions.. . 300,000 men stand 

fully combat ready....In addition to the Soviet divisions stationed in Eastern 

Europe, the armies of East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Poland provide 30 

additional tank and motorized rifle divisions...”. 24 

The defenses against a potential Soviet rapid onslaught in central Germany 

dominated NATO and U.S. ground war strategic thinking for over forty years.25 On 

Mar. 1, 1987, L.A. Times wrote: “NATO planners have pinpointed the Fulda Gap--

several open passes running through the hills about 60 miles northeast of Frankfurt--as a 

likely invasion route into Western Europe for Soviet Bloc forces.” The first line of 

defense was the U.S. Armored Cavalry; for the first half of the 40 years, the U.S. 14th 

Armored Cavalry Regiment was then relieved by the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment.  

The LA Times article from 1987 continued, “This is the frontier where it would 

happen,” Col. Thomas E. White, 43, of Detroit, commander of the 4,500-man Fulda-

based U.S. 11th Armored Cavalry, said in an interview.” In Fulda Gap, fighting the 

enemy became a science.26 The U.S. and NATO conducted studies of the target surface 

and exposure time of potentially invading tanks, the number of neutralized Soviet tanks 

12 

 
per lost AH64, fuel consumption and maintenance hours for every sortie, and all 

summarized in impeccable statistics and scientific analysis.         

The perception of the Fulda Gap as the Cold War’s most crucial defense line 

survived the Cold War and still exists. In 2004, then-Secretary Colin L. Powell stated in 

a published article in the German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine, as a reflection on 

the Cold war; “Our mission was to defend the Fulda Gap, a break in the Vogelsberg 

mountains through which the Iron Curtain ran, and through which the Red Army any 

day might pour.”27  

In the current debate, the narrow space between Kaliningrad (Königsberg) and 

Belarus, a Russian ally, has taken over as the Fulda Gap of the 2000s.28 The current 

expectation is that the narrow Lithuanian corridor that separates Kaliningrad from 

Belarus is the potential future battleground. The concept of Fulda Gap-thinking has 

survived into a new era.     

SEVEN DAYS TO THE RHINE 

After the Cold War, the Warsaw Pact war planning became accessible, 

especially after Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Eastern Germany left the 

Soviet/Russian sphere. The Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact made several plans 

through the Cold War, but they did not emphasize the Fulda Gap as NATO, the U.S., 

and their war planners assumed.29 30 

The Fulda Gap area was in the Warsaw Pact, Soviet indirectly, war planning but 

as one of five thrusts into the NATO defenses. According to the 1979 battle plans, the 

planned main Warsaw Pact/Soviet attack was further north to cut off debarkation ports 

to disallow British and U.S. units to land in continental Europe and secure the Baltic 

Sea approaches. The Warsaw Pact/Soviets made several war plans, but the Fulda Gap as 

13 

 
the overshadowing pivot in the battle between NATO and the Soviets was a NATO, and 

U.S., assumption. The reason why Fulda Gap became identical to where a potential 

Warsaw Pact/Soviet massive armored attack could have many reasons. First, it was 

suitable terrain, but not the only one for a rapid assault from East to West. Second, after 

a breach in Fulda, the Warsaw Pact/Soviet forces were close to West Germany’s 

industrial centers of the Rhine valley and the Ruhr, the West German then-capital Bonn, 

main NATO headquarters and installations. The focus on the Fulda Gap assumption 

fitted the DOD institutional agenda and a narrative tailored for the general public and 

politicians to justify programs, weapons systems and paved the way for a modernization 

of the U.S. Army that enabled success in the Gulf War. The narrative spread to 

politicians in favor of higher defense spending as Fulda Gap becomes synonymous with 

where the Soviet onslaught would occur if there ever were a NATO/Warsaw-pact war.       

CONCLUSION: RISKING SPURIOUS ASSUMPTIONS  

Any military organization will seek to optimize the opportunity to support its 

strategic goals with limited resources and assets. We tend to see vulnerabilities and 

concerns about cyber threats to critical infrastructure that matter to us. But an adversary 

will assess where and how a cyberattack will benefit the adversary’s strategy. Logically, 

it is not convincing that attacks on general critical infrastructure have the high payoff 

that an adversary seeks, so it becomes questionable that the U.S. strong focus on critical 

infrastructure is warranted. Naturally, the U.S. will defend critical infrastructure, but if 

too much focus is   

The American reaction to Sept. 11, and any attack on U.S. soil, hint to an 

adversary that attacking critical infrastructure to create hardship for the population 

could work contrary to the intended softening of the will to resist foreign influence. It is 

14 

 
more likely that attacks that affect the general population instead strengthen the will to 

resist and fight, similar to the British reaction to the German bombing campaign 

“Blitzen” in 1940.  

We can’t rule out attacks that affect the general population, but there are not 

enough adversarial offensive capabilities to attack all 16 critical infrastructure sectors 

and gain strategic momentum. An adversary has limited cyberattack capabilities and 

needs to prioritize cyber targets that are aligned with the overall strategy. Logically, an 

adversary will focus their OCO on operations that has national security implications and 

support their military operations by denying, degrading, and confusing the U.S. 

information environment and U.S. cyber assets.    

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Snyder, Jack. The ideology of the offensive. Cornell University Press, 2013, 30.  
2 Kato, Junko. The problem of bureaucratic rationality. Princeton University Press, 1994. 
3 Snyder, Jack. The ideology of the offensive. Cornell University Press, 2013, 63. 
4 MacKenzie, S. P. "Willpower or Firepower? The Unlearned Military Lessons of the Russo-
Japanese War." In The Russo-Japanese War in Cultural Perspective, 1904–05,Palgrave 
Macmillan, London, 1999, 31. 

5 Janis, Irving L., and Leon Mann. Decision making: A psychological analysis of conflict, 

choice, and commitment. Free press, 1977. 

6 Wilner, Alex S. "US cyber deterrence: Practice guiding theory." Journal of Strategic Studies 

43, no. 2 (2020): 245-280. 

7 Janis, Irving L. "Groupthink." Psychology today 5, no. 6 (1971): 43-46. 
8 Frey, Bruno S., and Reiner Eichenberger. "Anomalies in political economy." Public Choice 68, 

no. 1-3 (1991): 71-89. 

9 U.S. Congressional Budget Office. Public Works Infrastructure: Policy Considerations 
for the 1980s. April 1983. p 1. 
10 Executive Order 13010—Critical Infrastructure Protection. Federal Register, July 17, 1996. 

Vol. 61, No. 138. pp 37347-37350. Reference is on page 37347. 

11 Clinton, William Jefferson. "Executive order 13010-critical infrastructure protection." Federal 

Register 61, no. 138 (1996): 37347-37350. 

12 Fischer, Eric A., Edward C. Liu, John Rollins, and Catherine A. Theohary. "The 2013 

Cybersecurity Executive Order: Overview and Considerations for Congress." Congressional 
Research Service, March 1 (2013). 

13 U.S. Government. Cybersecurity and Critical Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). 
”Executive order on improving the nation’s cybersecurity.”  September 30, 2021. 
https://www.cisa.gov/executive-order-improving-nations-cybersecurity. 

14 Trevisan, Martino, Danilo Giordano, Idilio Drago, Maurizio Matteo Munafò, and Marco 
Mellia. "Five years at the edge: Watching internet from the isp network." IEEE/ACM 
Transactions on Networking 28, no. 2 (2020): 561-574. 

15 Burk, Rosemary A., and Jan Kallberg. "Cyber defense as a part of hazard mitigation: 

Comparing high hazard potential dam safety programs in the United States and Sweden." 
Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management 13, no. 1 (2016): 77-94. 
16 Kallberg, Jan, and Rosemary A. Burk. "Cyberdefense as Environmental Protection—The 

Broader Potential Impact of Failed Defensive Counter Cyber Operations." In Conflict and 
Cooperation in Cyberspace, pp. 265-276. CRC Press, 2016. 

17 Kallberg, Jan, and Rosemary A. Burk. "Failed Cyberdefense: The Environmental 

Consequences of Hostile Acts." Military Review 94, no. 3 (2014): 22. 

18 Bogaardt, M. J., K. J. Poppe, V. Viool, and E. van Zuidam. Cybersecurity in the Agrifood 

sector. Capgemini Consulting, 2016. 

19 Fritz, Jason R. China's Cyber Warfare: The Evolution of Strategic Doctrine. Lexington 

Books, 2017. 

20 Wilkie, Christina. "Colonial Pipeline paid $5 million ransom one day after cyberattack, CEO 

tells Senate." CNBC, June 8 (2021). 

21 Hemsley, Kevin E., and E. Fisher. History of industrial control system cyber incidents. No. 
INL/CON-18-44411-Rev002. Idaho National Lab.(INL), Idaho Falls, ID (United States), 
2018. 

22 Muir, A., and J. Lopatto. "Final report on the August 14, 2003 blackout in the United States 

and Canada: causes and recommendations." Department of Energy. (2004). 

23 Yuill, Chris. "Emotions after dark-a sociological impression of the 2003 New York blackout." 

Sociological Research Online 9, no. 3 (2004): 34-41. 

24 Polk, James H. "New Weapons, Realistic Training Mark NATO Vigil." 
Army. October 1970. 
25 Mearsheimer, John J. "Why the Soviets can't win quickly in central Europe." International 

Security 7.1 (1982): 3-39. 

16 

 
 
26 Lin, Yau Tang. Terrain effects on line of sight (ground-to-air) in the Fulda Gap area. No. 

SAND-79-0489. Sandia Labs., Albuquerque, NM (USA), 1979. 

27 Powell, Colin. U.S. State Department. https://2001-

2009.state.gov/secretary/former/powell/remarks/30860.htm 

28 Kemper, Charles, Jacob Helgestad, Nathan Colvin, and Simon Cox. "Design to Execution 
Into the Suwalki Gap." Military Review. Available from: http://www. armyupress. army. 
mil/Journals/Military-Review/Online-Exclusive/2018-OLE/Design-to-Execution/[Accessed 
20 May 2019] (2018). 

29 Watts, Nicholas. “Poland risks Russia's wrath with Soviet nuclear attack map.” The Guardian. 

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/nov/26/russia.poland 

30 Hoare, Callum. “World War 3: Secret plan to crush NATO in seven DAYS with nuclear 

bombardment exposed.” The Express. 
https://www.express.co.uk/news/world/1271746/world-war-3-nato-nuclear-warning-soviet-
union-cold-war-warsaw-pact-rhine-river-spt 

17 

 
 
