LCOE-based Pricing for DLT-enabled Local Energy
Trading Platforms

1

Marthe Fogstad Dynge, Ugur Halden, Gro Klæboe, Umit Cali
Department of Electric Power Engineering, NTNU
Trondheim, Norway
{marthe.f.dynge, ugur.halden, gro.kleboe, umit.cali}@ntnu.no

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
1
2

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

2
v
7
0
7
9
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Support schemes like the Feed-in-Tariff (FiT) have
for many years been an important driver for the deployment
of distributed energy resources, and the transition from con-
sumerism to prosumerism. This democratization and decar-
bonization of the energy system has led to both challenges
and opportunities for the system operators, paving the way for
emerging concepts like local energy markets. The FiT approach
has often been assumed as the lower economic bound for a
prosumer’s willingness to participate in such markets but is
now being phased out in several countries. In this paper, a new
pricing mechanism based on the Levelized Cost of Electricity
is proposed, with the intention of securing proﬁtability for the
prosumers, as well as creating a transparent and fair price for all
market participants. The mechanism is designed to function on a
Distributed Ledger Technology-based platform and is further set
up from a holistic perspective, deﬁning the market framework as
interactions in a Cyber-Physical-Social-System. Schemes based
on both ﬁxed and variable contracts with the wholesale supplier
are analyzed and compared with both the conventional FiT
and to its proposed replacement options. The results show a
cost reduction for the consumers and a slight loss in revenue
for the prosumers compared to the FiT scheme. Comparing
it to the actual suggested replacements to the FiT, however,
it is clear that the pricing mechanism proposed in this study
provides a substantial increase of beneﬁts for both prosumers
and consumers.

Keywords—Cyber-Physical-Social-Systems, Distributed
Ledger Technology, Electricity Pricing, Levelized Cost of
Electricity, Local Energy Markets

I. INTRODUCTION

Along with the pressing need to mitigate climate change,
the world’s energy sector is undergoing a remarkable transi-
tion. To fulﬁll the goal of decarbonization, as well as reaching
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal (UN SDG)
#7 (access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern
energy for all), renewable energy sources are rapidly entering
the system. The affordability of small-scale, Decentralized
Energy Resourcess (DERs) is thus increasing correspond-
ingly. With the simultaneous maturing of Information and
Communication Technologies, such as Distributed Ledger
Technology (DLT), previously passive consumers are able to
take a more active role in the energy system, transitioning to
being prosumers. This can further accelerate the enrollment
of renewable energy and unlock ﬂexibility in the distribution
system for future grid planning and operation. However,
the introduction of prosumers into the distribution system
may lead to challenges in terms of operational stability and
security, as well as social and legislative issues. To both
enhance the beneﬁts of the democratization of the energy
system and to control the challenges, Local Energy Markets
(LEMs) have emerged as a promising concept [1], [2].

One of the key determinants of a prosumer’s willingness
to participate in a LEM is the community trading price [3].

Multiple studies have proposed different strategies for both
bidding processes and the actual price setting, all including
different aspects to be considered in a fair market price. In
general, one can categorize the different schemes proposed in
the literature into auction-based [4], [5], [6], [7], optimization-
based [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], game theory-based [13], [14]
and cost-sharing [15], [16], [17] methods.

Auction-based methods rely on the active participation of
each market participant by placing bids and offers to the
market platform. Dynamic price adjustments are analyzed in
[6] and show advantages in terms of higher social welfare
and reduced environmental impacts compared to other bid-
ding strategies. Two auction mechanisms, Discriminatory and
Uniform k-mean, are analyzed in [4], as well as the impact
of different bidding strategies. The analysis suggests that the
discriminatory approach outperforms the uniform mechanism
in terms of market participation, but is more sensitive to
market conditions and can lead to more ﬂuctuating trading
prices. Employing a game-theoretic bidding strategy where
the participants compete to bid for the best price obtains a
near-optimal economic efﬁciency according to this analysis.
Although game-theoretic approaches have gained popu-
larity in the literature, market participants are still required
to take an active role in price-setting games. A common
approach in modeling the LEM interactions are Stackelberg
games, where the prosumers act as leaders and the consumers
act as followers, as done in [13] and [14]. A similar game
is analyzed in [18], showing higher social welfare among
the market participants compared to direct Peer-to-Peer (P2P)
trading. A socially optimal solution, which is also Pareto
optimal, is obtained through a cake-cutting game in [19], with
discriminate pricing. However, both auction-based and game
theoretic market structures are high-demanding strategies in
terms of participation and may seem intimidating to some
agents. This can in turn discourage the establishment of
LEMs.

Other pricing mechanisms use different optimization tech-
niques to set the LEM prices implicitly, through dual prices
of an optimal power ﬂow model [8] or a general market
clearing problem [10]. Others propose more direct price-
setting optimization algorithms, like consensus-based Alter-
nating Method of Multipliers (ADMM) [9]. In [11], the LEM
price is calculated based on a multi-class energy clearing
problem, solved through the ADMM approach, considering
the different preferences of the market participants.

In most cost-sharing methods, the community costs are
distributed ex-post, and the ﬁnal price is set based on different
balancing criteria. The prosumers are thus considered as price-
takers and cannot actively inﬂuence the LEM price. In [15],
a Supply-Demand Ratio (SDR) is calculated based on the

 
 
 
 
 
 
energy balance within the community at each time step. The
local trading price is linearly set between an upper and lower
bound, based on this ratio. Two incentive extensions to this
method are also proposed. A similar method combined with
a compensation rate is analyzed by [17] and prosumers’
preferred level of participation is taken into account in the
approach proposed by [20]. The SDR approach is compared
with the Bill Sharing Scheme and the Mid-Market Rate
in [16], showing the disadvantages of the existing cost-
sharing schemes, while proposing an improved, two-stage
SDR mechanism. The same three methods are compared
in [21], illustrating an outperformance of the SDR method
compared to the other two in terms of the overall performance.
In this paper, the SDR pricing mechanism is further ex-
plored. With the Feed-in-Tariff (FiT) schemes being phased
out in, e.g., Germany, a new limit on the minimum trading
price based on the DERs’ Levelized Cost of Electricity
(LCOE) is proposed to ensure both prosumer and consumer
proﬁtability. The usage of LCOE as a pricing instrument
literature. In [7],
for LEMs is limited within the current
it is used together with the national grid price to form a
truncated normal distribution as a basis for two different
auction mechanisms. It is also used as a minimum trading
price for a price matching algorithm in [22]. However, further
research is required and thus the contributions of this paper
are as follows:

• Rethinking the existing convention of the FiT as the
lower bound of prosumers’ willingness to participate
in LEMs, an LCOE-based mechanism is proposed to
sustain the viability of the prosumers’ investments in
production capacity.

• A fair and transparent pricing mechanism for LEMs
is proposed, distributing the costs and beneﬁts of the
local energy trading based on each market participant’s
contribution to the supply-demand balance.

• The impacts of the proposed LEM pricing mechanism
are investigated using a techno-economic analysis from
both prosumers’ and consumers’ points of view.

• Conceptualization of a potential DLT-based local energy
trading platform that can use the proposed LEM pricing
mechanism as an integral part.

II. DISTRIBUTED LEDGER TECHNOLOGY IN LOCAL
ENERGY MARKETS
DLT can be deﬁned as a distributed digital consensus and
record-keeping system whose main purpose is to eliminate
unnecessary third parties and build trust in a generally un-
trustful environment such as the internet. The main working
principle of DLT is to allow the transactions (either of data
or actual payments) to be logged, distributed and saved
immutably in private, public, or hybrid networks depending
on the architecture of the system. Meanwhile, for validation
and authentication of these transactions, various consensus
systems are utilized, with the Proof-of-Work (PoW) and
Proof-of-Stake (PoS) being the most dominant ones [23].
There are various use cases within the applications of DLT
in the energy sector. However, to keep this section concise,
only peer-to-peer energy trading, electric vehicle charging,
and payment settlement parts will be explained further as the
core use cases of LEMs.

As the number of smart meters, DER, and various two-way
communication equipment entering the power system keep
increasing, a paradigm shift in the energy sector is inevitable.

2

To enable this transition towards energy democratization, DLT
can be utilized to remove the need for Trusted Third Parties
(TTP), provide privacy towards market participants, and speed
up the transaction validation times. This has further opened
the possibility to form peer-to-peer markets, where smaller
agents can trade energy directly between each other [23].
Several projects, albeit in the pilot phase, have developed
working trading platforms with DLT and various tokens
to enable this kind of direct trading [24]1. However, most
existing projects suffer from scalability issues both in terms
of DLT and physical infrastructure integration. Thus, more
research needs to be performed for utilization in real-world
applications.

Due to the ongoing electriﬁcation of transport and the
increasing popularity of electric vehicles, the electricity and
transport sectors are becoming more entangled. However, for
widespread adaptation and utilization, signiﬁcant barriers still
exist such as unavailability or scarcity of public charging in-
frastructures. Additionally, the management of high-resolution
data and complex transactions that need to happen and be
validated as quickly as possible poses another barrier. DLT-
enabled LEM networks can be utilized in this step as a
charging regulator, which can perform the required power and
token transactions in a fast, secure, and private way 23.

III. METHODOLOGY

The modern energy system can be classiﬁed as a com-
bination of cyber, physical, and social subsystems, creating
a cyber-physical-social-system (CPSS), as described in [25].
The overall market framework of this paper can be explained
through the interaction between these layers, illustrated in
Fig. 1.

Figure 1: Energy CPSS Interactions of the system.

The main underlying assumption of the LEM is that nec-
essary energy policies and regulations are in place. In that
case, private households are not only allowed but encouraged
through legal provisions to form transactive energy markets
with their neighbors. The policies and regulations will thus
inﬂuence the deployment of new physical components of
the power system, such as DLT-enabled electric meters, that

1IEEE Spectrum. (2018). Startup Proﬁle: ME SOLshare’s “Swarm Elec-
triﬁcation” Powers Villages in Bangladesh. https://spectrum.ieee.org/startup-
proﬁle-me-solshares-swarm-electriﬁcation-powers-villages-in-bangladesh
[Accessed February 13, 2022].

2WePower. (2022). WePower: Secure energy buyers faster and cheaper.

https://wepower.com/project-owners.html [Accessed February 13, 2022].

3Besnainou, J.

(2018). Autonomous datasets and v2x transactions:
Blockchain in mobility pilots getting traction. https://www.cleantech.com/
autonomous-datasets-and-v2x-transactions-blockchain-in-mobility-pilots-
getting-traction/ [Accessed February 13, 2022].

will be operated in the LEM and support
the proposed
approach (Process (1a)). They will also affect how the LEM
is structured and how the local energy price will be set and
communicated with the LEM participants (Process (1b)). The
interaction between the CPSS layers in the operational phase
is designed as follows.

Process (2). The LEM aggregator facilitates the routing of
energy to satisfy the needs and preferences of the market
participants, without violating the physical boundaries of the
system. Smart meters provide information about generation
and consumption for each market participant and communi-
cate this information to the LEM platform.

Process(3). The information from the neighborhood smart

meters is collected and processed by the LEM platform.

Process (4). DLT is used to ensure trust is built between
transacting parties, generate immutable track recording, and
secure sharing of information and transactions on the market
platform. The fourth process of the framework is marked red
to symbolize that it is not implemented in this paper’s analysis
but is assumed to be in place for the real-life implementation
of the LEM platform where DLT can be deployed.

Process (5). The processed data regarding the market par-
ticipants’ generation and consumption proﬁles are retrieved by
the market mechanism. The LEM price for each timestamp
is then obtained. Pricing information is then sent back to
the DLT network. Since this information is sensitive and not
expected to overload the DLT network, such data can be
stored in an on-chain database.

Process (6). Based on the pricing results, techno-economic
analyses are made to investigate the economic conditions of
the neighborhood, as well as the individual gains or losses as
a result of participating in the LEM.

Process (7). The experience from the techno-economic
evaluation may form new suggestions for policy and regu-
lation improvements.

A. Replacing the Feed-in-Tariffs

Government-funded FiT schemes have for decades ensured
renewable energy producers, from utility-scale to small house-
holds, a steady pay-back for their energy surplus fed back
to the grid. In Germany alone, the generous scheme has
contributed to the increasing share of renewable power pro-
duction, from 3.5% in 1990 to 40.9% in 2021 4. However, as
the 20-year guarantee for the pioneer installations is reaching
its end, the German policymakers are intending to phase out
the FiTs5. The business model replacing this scheme will
be formed by 2027, and a more market-driven structure is
expected. New larger scale installations have for recent years
switched to auctions, where the price is set by the bidders and
the maximum volume built is determined by the government.
Although installations below 750 kW are still excepted from
participating in the auction processes, it is expected that the
remuneration price offered to prosumers, if any, for their feed-
in power will stabilize around the same level as the auction
prices.

4AGEB - AG Energiebilanzen e.V. (2021). Electricity generation by energy
sources (electricity mix) from 1990 to 2021 (in TWh) Germany as a
whole (in German). https://ag-energiebilanzen.de/wp-content/uploads/2021/
02/Strommix-Dezember2021.pdf [Accessed March 8, 2022]

5Appunn, K. and Wehrmann, B. (2019). Germany 2021: when ﬁxed feed-
in tariffs end, how will renewables fare? - Energy Post. https://energypost.eu/
germany-2021-when-ﬁxed-feed-in-tariffs-end-how-will-renewables-fare/
[Accessed February 7, 2022]

3

B. Levelized Cost of Electricity

To provide incentives for both consumers and prosumers
to participate in a LEM, a general assumption is that the
consumer should pay a lower price for electricity than from
the wholesale market, and the prosumer should get a higher
price than from any other undertaker. Thus, a stable LEM
could only exist if the LEM price, pt, stays within the limits
of the highest price a prosumer can get, pL, and the lowest
price a consumer can get, pU , outside the LEM:

pL ≤ pt ≤ pU

(1)

Based on the current policies in most electricity markets,
pL can generally be deﬁned as the FiT. However, as Germany
and other countries are phasing out the FiT scheme, another
more long-term lower limit must be developed.

With no speciﬁc schemes for the retail market to procure
excess energy from the neighborhood, another priority for the
prosumers will be to recover their investment costs for energy
resources. Thus, the LCOE is considered to be a logical new
lower boundary for the LEM price as it reﬂects the average
cost of producing power from the Photovoltaic (PV) system
over its lifetime.

I0 + (cid:80)N

n=1

LCOE =

(cid:80)N

n=1

An
(1 + R)n
Mn,el
(1 + R)n

(2)

The main components of the LCOE are the ﬁxed and
variable costs related to investing in a PV system, divided
by the total amount of electricity produced over the system’s
lifetime, as represented in Eq. (2). I0 denotes the initial
investment expenditures, An is the ﬁxed and variable costs
for the year n and Mn,el is the total electricity generated by
the system in year n. R represents the weighted average cost
of capital. The Capital Expenditures (CAPEX) related to the
initial investment costs of the system is deﬁned by Eq. (3).

CAP EX = P Vcap · (CE + CDl + CIl + CP + CO)

(3)

Here, CE denotes the equipment costs per kWp, CDl
and CIl are the direct and indirect labor costs, whereas Cp
represents the project permission costs and CO the overhead
costs such as project administration. P Vcap is the installed
PV capacity.

The variable costs are represented by the Operational
Expenditures (OPEX). These are costs related to the annual
operation and maintenance throughout the lifetime of the
system. In general, the OPEX account for a much smaller
percentage than the CAPEX [26]. The LCOE value is natu-
rally individual for each of the LEM prosumers. The LCOE
value referred to further in this study is thus assumed to be
the average across the market participants, for simplicity.

C. Supply-Demand Ratio

The proposed pricing mechanism in the following sections
is a modiﬁcation and improvement of the method introduced
by [15]. The overall concept is to let the ratio between supply
and demand in the LEM determine the local trading price,
and thus distribute the costs in accordance with each market
participant’s contribution to the LEM.

The total surplus in the neighborhood, and thus the amount
available for local trade, is calculated based on each market

4

Figure 2: Flowchart of overall pricing mechanism.

participant’s net surplus after ensuring its self-consumption.
Hence, the surplus is deﬁned as the difference between the
amount generated by agent i in timestep t, git, and the load
of the same agent in said timestep lit, as described in (4).

sit =

(cid:40)

git − lit,
0,

if git > lit
if git ≤ lit.

(4)

The net demand of the neighborhood is similarly deﬁned in
(5) as the net demand of agent i in timestep t after consuming
its self-generated power.

(cid:40)

dit =

lit − git,
0,

if lit > git
if lit ≤ git.

(5)

The SDR further used as a base for the local energy trading
price is then deﬁned in (6) as the ratio between the total
surplus and demand in the neighborhood.

rt =

(cid:80)
i∈Pt
(cid:80)
i∈Ct

sit

dit

(6)

D. Pricing Scheme

The overall pricing mechanism proposed in this study is
described by the ﬂowchart in Fig. 2. The grey boxes represent
the steps involved in the core concept, meaning that they are
involved regardless of the different variations later described.
The green and blue boxes represent the scenario-dependent
components, related to the scenarios described in Section IV.
In addition to this, two variations within the ”Local Energy
Pricing” box are proposed in this study and will be further
explained in the following subsections.

1) Fixed Upper and Lower Price Thresholds: In markets
where prosumers are offered a ﬁxed price for their surplus
and most consumers are assigned to ﬁxed-price contracts, a
stable LEM situation can be obtained if

pL ≤ LCOE ≤ pt ≤ pU .

(7)

Under this criterion,

there will be incentives for both
consumers and prosumers to participate in the LEM as well
as investing in new generation capacity.

When there is no surplus in the market, hence rt = 0, all
remaining demand must be covered by purchasing from the
wholesale market. Thus, the LEM price equals its upper limit,
pt = pU , the wholesale energy price.

With 0 < rt < 1, the demand in the neighborhood can be
partially covered by local surplus. When there is a limited
surplus, the LEM price tends towards the upper limit pU .

lim
rt→0+

pt = pU

(8)

On the other end, when the local surplus almost covers
the entire demand, the LEM price orients towards the lower
selling limit. By the balancing criterion in (7), this should
equal the LCOE when rt < 1.

lim
rt→1−

pt = LCOE.

(9)

On sunny days with low demand, situations can occur
where the surplus exceeds the demand in the neighborhood,
hence rt >= 1. In these cases, the abundant power will be
sold to the utility and the net consumers in the neighborhood
can procure power locally for the same price. Thus, the LEM
price equals pt = pL.

The ﬁnal LEM price could thus be deﬁned by a convex
combination of the LCOE and pU as long as the market is
not fully saturated, as well as collapsing to pL when the LEM
is saturated.

pt =

(cid:40)

rt · LCOE + (1 − rt) · pU ,
pL,

if
if

rt < 1
rt ≥ 1.

(10)

E. Dynamic Upper and Fixed Lower Price Thresholds

In some areas, it is more common for end-users to choose
variable pricing contracts. This variable price can be based
on the wholesale electricity market price, where the consumer
pays a markup to buy power from the grid from a supplier.

Similarly, the wholesaler deducts a margin from the spot price
to make a margin on the marketing of local production. We
can then deﬁne a time-variable upper threshold for the LEM
as follows:

5

(14)

· ct

cit =

(cid:80)

dit

dit

i∈Ct
Applying the deﬁnition of rt and ct, this can be reformu-

pU t = αt + µcons

lated to

(11)

where µcons is the mark-up of the wholesaler and αt is
the time-dependent wholesale electricity price. The lower
threshold, pL is ﬁxed and is here deﬁned as the price a
prosumer would get if selling its surplus to the utility.

With dynamic pricing thresholds and as DERs struggles to
reach total grid parity in many countries, situations may occur
where pU t < LCOE. Provided that pU t > 0, the prosumer
would still prefer to sell for this price within the LEM,
as it would be more proﬁtable than curtailing without any
storage options. If pU t < 0, it is assumed that the prosumers
can curtail their excess production, rather than paying the
utility. While LCOE < pU t the LEM price follows the same
principles as deﬁned in Section III-D1, thus resulting in the
ﬁnal pricing scheme illustrated by Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Algorithm for LEM pricing scheme with dy-
namic thresholds.

for each t in T do
Calculate qt
if pU t < LCOE then

pt ← pU t

else

if rt = 0 then
pt ← pU t

else if rt < 1 then

pt ← rt· LCOE +(1 − rt) · pU t

else if rt >= 1 then

pt ← pL

end if

end if
end for

F. Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis

To evaluate the advantages of the proposed pricing mech-
anisms, a cost-beneﬁt analysis of both the total market costs
and the individual beneﬁts was conducted. As with the LEM
price itself, the costs are distributed differently depending
on the SDR, rt. When 0 < rt ≤ 1, all surplus energy
is traded within the LEM, and the consumers cover the
remaining demand by procuring from the utility. Hence, the
total neighborhood cost for each time step is deﬁned as

ct =

(cid:32)

(cid:88)

i∈Pt

(cid:33)

sit

· pt +

(cid:32)

(cid:88)

i∈Ct

dit −

(cid:88)

i∈Pt

(cid:33)

sit

· pU t.

(12)

Here, Pt is deﬁned as the set of prosumers in timestep t in
the LEM, whereas Ct is the set of consumers in timestep t.
If the LEM is saturated, i.e., rt > 1, all electricity demand in
the neighborhood would be covered by locally traded energy,
sold by the local trading price, pt.

ct =

(cid:88)

i∈Ct

dit · pt

(13)

This total cost is distributed among the market participants
based on their share of the total energy requirement in the
neighborhood.

cit = dit · (rt · pt + (1 − rt) · pU t) .

(15)

Both the total cost ct and the individual cost cit are
deﬁned as pure procurement costs and do not account for
the prosumers’ revenue for selling their surplus. This revenue
is distributed post-trade depending on each prosumer’s contri-
bution to the supply-demand balance in the LEM at each time
step and the LEM trading price at that hour. When rt > 0,
all surplus is sold through the LEM for the local price.

yt =

(cid:88)

i∈Pt

sit · pt

(16)

The individual prosumer’s revenue is distributed post-trade
depending on its contribution to the total surplus in the LEM,
in the same manner as the procurement costs.

yit =

(cid:80)

sit

sit

· yt

(17)

i∈Pt
By using the deﬁnition of both rt and yt, (17) can be

reformulated to

yit = sit ·

(cid:18) 1
rt

· pt +

(cid:16)

1 −

(cid:19)

· pL

.

(cid:17)

1
rt

(18)

The net cost of the prosumers is subsequently deﬁned as

cnet
it = cit − yit.

(19)

IV. LOCAL ELECTRICITY MARKET STRUCTURE AND
ANALYZED SCENARIOS

To analyze the effects of the pricing strategies proposed in
this paper, a virtual LEM platform was designed. The market
consists of 10 participants, randomly assigned the role of
prosumers and consumers. The structure and distribution of
PVs are illustrated in Fig. 3. As illustrated in Fig. 3, both

Figure 3: Illustration of the analyzed local market.

energy and data are exchanged both internally in the LEM
and with entities outside. When the LEM is saturated, pro-
sumers can sell their excess surplus to the utility through the
LEM platform. From a longer-term perspective, policymakers

evolve their policies regarding LEMs through data collected
from the LEM platform.

For this particular case study, artiﬁcial load proﬁles with
hourly granularity for each of the market participants were
generated with the open-source Artiﬁcial Load Proﬁle Gen-
erator developed by [27]. PV production time-series were
retrieved through the open-source tool Renewables Ninja [28],
which generates proﬁles for a given geographical area based
on the meteorological database NASA MERRA-2 [29]. The
coordinates of Freiburg im Breisgau were used to estimate the
yearly PV production series of a neighborhood in Southern
Germany.

Pricing strategies for end-users assigned to ﬁxed price and
dynamic price contracts are analyzed in this study. In this
case, the ﬁxed utility price is set to 30.46 C/MWh, according
to German levels of 2019 [30]. The LEM price thresholds
in the dynamic case are based on the wholesale electricity
market price, in this case, set to the spot price of Germany
in 2019 [31]. The supplier markup for consumers, µcons, is
set to equal 10% of the spot price.

The novel proposal of this study is the usage of LCOE in
the LEM price setting. However, for benchmarking purposes,
scenarios with the FiT in the place of the LCOE value for both
pricing mechanisms are analyzed. The FiT value is set to 6
C/MWh following German rates [32] in 2019. The LCOE is
set to equal 8 C/MWh, as calculated for German PV systems
subject to a 4% interest rate in [33]. This is in accordance with
the range between 6 and 11 C/MWh found by Fraunhofer ISE
[34] for small PV rooftops systems in Germany in 2021. In
the cases where LCOE is used, pL is deﬁned as the average
auction value that is offered outside the LEM and is set to
equal 5 C/MWh [32]. Following the ﬂowchart in Fig. 2,
Scenario 1 refers to the cases where the FiT is used, for both
ﬁxed and dynamic pricing thresholds. Scenario 2 refers to the
usage of LCOE.

V. RESULTS
To capture seasonal variations in the SDR proﬁle, hourly
simulations for an entire year were executed for all cases.
To illustrate how the SDR varies over time,
the hourly
values for March are shown in Figure 4. It is clear that the
rt > 1 condition occurs quite frequently, indicating a slight
overscaling of the number of prosumers in the neighborhood.

6

A. Fixed Pricing Thresholds

Firstly,

the scenarios with ﬁxed pricing thresholds are
analyzed. The resulting LEM prices for each hour of the
simulated year are sorted in descending order and plotted
for the two different scenarios to form a duration curve in
Figure 5. Based on the curve’s characteristics, it is clear that
the LEM is operative for almost half of the year. As the LCOE
is slightly higher than the FiT, the LEM price is marginally
higher while rt < 1. When the market is saturated, the LEM
price collapses to either equal the FiT or the auction price,
and thus the prices in the LCOE-based scenario are lower. The
declining curve between the upper and lower bound is quite
steep, indicating that the market is mostly saturated when it
is active, in accordance with the SDR levels in the sample
period in March in Figure 4.

Figure 5: Duration curves of the local energy market prices
for the scenarios with ﬁxed utility price.

Zooming in on the chosen day in March, one can fur-
ther observe the daily differences between the two pricing
schemes, respectively named “FiT Fixed” and “LCOE Fixed”
in Figure 6. The ﬂuctuations between the upper and lower
bound in the middle of the day when the LEM is operative
are showcased. Even though the price never reaches the lower
bound for any of the scenarios for this day, it is still evident
that the scheme using the LCOE as the lower bound pushes
the LEM prices down compared to the FiT scheme.

Figure 4: SDR, rt, in March.

Figure 6: Comparison of LEM price for a day in March
obtained for all the simulated scenarios.

As the scenarios with ﬁxed and dynamic LEM pricing
thresholds are not directly comparable, they will be presented
in separate sections.

The daily average LEM prices are shown for each month
for the case using the FiT and ﬁxed pricing thresholds in

Figure 7A. The center of gravity of the violins in the plots
indicates the frequency of the daily average value for each
month, and the white dot represents the monthly average
price. As the only DER within the LEM is rooftop solar, one
can observe that the average prices are lower during summer,
due to the amount of surplus in the neighborhood and thus
when the rt > 1 condition is occurring. However, the monthly
average is lower than the utility price even in the winter
months. This means that there is an activity in the LEM all
year, despite the season-dependent generation capacity. Exam-
ining the average prices of the LCOE scenario, illustrated in
Figure 7B, the LEM prices are shifted downward, reaching a
daily average of around 18 C/MWh in mid-summer, whereas,
the FiT scenario delivers higher minimum LEM prices of
around 19 C/MWh during summer. The violins are also more
stretched in the LCOE scenario, with the highest average at
the same value as for the FiT scenario for almost all months,
mainly due to the same SDR effects. It also indicates that the
LEM prices become more volatile using LCOE.

B. Dynamic Pricing Thresholds

The duration curve for the LEM price with dynamic pricing
thresholds is depicted in Figure 8. Similar to the scenarios
with ﬁxed pricing thresholds, the LCOE scenario generates
slightly lower local prices while the LEM is active. With the
volatile wholesale prices, the LEM now experiences negative
prices. As stated in Section III-E, these prices only indicate
the buying price from the wholesale market, as the prosumers
curtail their excess production in these hours.

Figure 6 shows a snapshot of the LEM variations of a day
in March with the two scenarios with dynamic pricing thresh-
olds, represented by “FiT Dynamic” and “LCOE Dynamic”,
compared to the supplier price pU t. Both scenarios generate
lower prices than the supplier can offer when the LEM is
active. Even though the prices in both scenarios converge
to approximately the same level, it is clear that the LCOE
scenario mostly obtains the lowest prices. As the auction
price, pL, is lower than the FiT value the prices are lower
in the LCOE scenario when the market is saturated. When
0 < rt < 1, between timestep 13 and 15 in Figure 6, the
prices of the LCOE scenario reaches a slightly higher value
than in the FiT scenario, as LCOE>FiT.

The combined effect of LCOE and pL can be further
conﬁrmed by studying Figure 9, where one can still observe
slightly lower values for the LCOE scenario compared to the
FiT scenario for all months of the year. Because of the volatile
utility price, four days of the year even experience negative
daily average prices in both scenarios.

C. Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis

To estimate the full impact of the proposed pricing schemes
on both prosumers and consumers participating in the LEM, a
cost-beneﬁt analysis was conducted. The individual net costs
of each of the market participants for each of the analyzed
scenarios are illustrated in Figure 10. Now, the scenarios of
the case study are also compared to their respective base
scenarios. These are cases where there are no LEM in place.
Hence, the prosumers are only able to sell their surplus to the
price offered by the retailer; the FiT, or the auction price, and
the consumers must cover their demand through the utility.
Thus, for both the ﬁxed and dynamic pricing cases, the net
cost of the consumers equals the cost of procuring all energy

7

for the utility price and is the same for both the FiT and
the auction alternative. As the auction price is lower than the
FiT, the net costs of the prosumers are higher for the “Base
Auction” scenario than for the “Base FiT” for both the ﬁxed
and dynamic cases.

it should be noted that

Looking at the LEM scenarios, one can observe that the net
costs are higher with the LCOE scenarios for all prosumers
(house nr. 1, 2, 4, and 6), but lower for all consumers. This
is true for both the ﬁxed and dynamic pricing threshold
alternatives. Here,
the correlation
between the pL and LCOE value, and the utility prices, will
depend on the energy mix of the larger electricity market.
Although solar power is yet to become a dominant source in
the German energy mix, with a share of 8.6% in 2019 [35],
one can expect that it will become increasingly inﬂuential
on the electricity price in the future. It can thus be reasoned
that if the PV generation is high within the LEM, it will
also be high in the wholesale electricity market. Then, a
correlation between the LEM prices and the utility price is
created, such that the utility price will be lower when rt
is high. In this study, historical data for Germany for both
pricing and production was used, and the correlation between
the two is implicitly considered.

The overall costs and revenues for the entire neighborhood
subject
to ﬁxed pricing thresholds are listed in Table I.
Extracting the costs of the consumers, a slight cost reduction
is observed, with 0.8% lower costs than with the FiT scheme.
It is also clear that the lower local prices obtained through
the LCOE scenario are less beneﬁcial for the prosumers,
with a revenue reduction of 13%. However, comparing the
LCOE scheme with the alternative base scenario, where
prosumers only get paid the auction value for their surplus, the
prosumers’ revenue is increased by 14%. With an additional
22% reduction in consumer costs, it is clear that using the
proposed LCOE pricing scheme through a LEM setup is much
more beneﬁcial for both prosumers and consumers than the
originally proposed replacement of the FiT scheme. Lastly,
looking at the neighborhood as a whole, the aggregated net
costs with ﬁxed pricing are summarized in the last row of
Table I. With the decrease in prosumer revenue in the LCOE
scenario, the total net cost is 1.8% higher than with the FiT
scenario, correlating with the individual values in Figure 10.
Compared to the base scenario with auctions, the total net
cost of the neighborhood is reduced by 20%.

For the scheme with a dynamic upper pricing threshold,
the same effect can be observed for both consumers and
prosumers, as demonstrated in Table II. The differences
between the LEM scenarios are almost the same as for the
ﬁxed pricing threshold cases. The beneﬁts are, however, even
more, substantial for the LCOE scheme compared to the base
auction scenario. It is important to emphasize that the FiT
scenarios in this study are not an alternative as this scheme
is being phased out, and is solely used to benchmark the
new, proposed pricing mechanism. As auctions are one of the
solutions being suggested as a replacement of the FiT scheme
by German policymakers, the comparison to this scenario is
much more relevant.

D. Sensitivity Analysis

To analyze the actual impact of the SDR on the LEM price,
a sensitivity analysis was conducted by varying the amount
of surplus in the neighborhood. Additional simulations were

8

Figure 7: Comparison of the daily average LEM prices for each month for the (A) FiT scenario and (B) LCOE scenario with
ﬁxed utility price.

Table I: Total procurement costs with ﬁxed pricing thresholds, in C.

Total consumer cost ((cid:80)

i∈Ct
Total prosumer revenue ((cid:80)
(cid:80)

Total net cost ((cid:80)

i∈Ct∪Pt

t cit)

(cid:80)
t yt)
t cnet
it

)

Base FiT Base Auction FiT LCOE ∆FiT ∆Auction

5703
938
6929

5703
782
7086

4458 4423 (-0.8%)
1025
(-13%)
5597 5699 (+1.8%)

888

(-22%)
(+14%)
(-20%)

Table II: Total procurement costs with dynamic pricing thresholds, in C.

Total consumer cost ((cid:80)

i∈Ct
Total prosumer revenue ((cid:80)
(cid:80)

Total net cost ((cid:80)

i∈Ct∪Pt

t cit)

(cid:80)
t yt)
t cnet
it

)

Base FiT Base Auction FiT LCOE ∆FiT ∆Auction

7771
938
9657

7771
782
9813

5843 5809 (-0.6%)
1044
(-13%)
7621 7722 (+1.3%)

909

(-25%)
(+16%)
(-21%)

increasing numbers of prosumers in the LEM. Its total revenue
is depicted in Figure 12. As the electricity consumption of
the neighborhood remains the same for all cases, one would
expect that each prosumer’s revenue would decrease when
more surplus becomes available in the market. Accordingly,
it is clear from Figure 12, that the prosumer revenue in all
the LEM cases converges towards the base scenarios where
all surplus is sold for the price offered by the utility. With six
or more prosumers in this particular neighborhood, the market
reaches its saturation point; in other words, rt > 1 frequently
with more than three prosumers. This means that the demand
of the neighborhood is covered, and the prosumers often sell
the remaining surplus to the utility. As both the FiT and
pL value used in this study is lower than the LCOE, the
viability of the prosumers’ DER investments is then hard to
maintain. Thus, the incentives of becoming a prosumer under
these LEM conditions are diminishing. With the additional
decreasing cost for the consumers, however, one can also
assume that it becomes more attractive to join the LEM as
a consumer, stabilizing the supply-demand balance in the
neighborhood.

In Germany, it is estimated that a regular household own-
ing a PV system, consumes 20-40% of their self-generated
electricity [36]. In all simulated scenarios, around 52% of
the PV power was sold to the utility, regardless of the LEM
pricing scheme. This indicates that with a LEM in place, more
locally generated electricity remains within the neighborhood.
Thus, in terms of increasing self-consumption and activating
the LEM, prosumers would beneﬁt from installing batteries.
This could also postpone the saturation point observed in
Figure 12, as the surplus available in the LEM can be more
evenly distributed across the day. Then, the attractiveness of
investing in DER equipment with several prosumers already

Figure 8: Duration curves of the LEM prices for the scenarios
with dynamic pricing thresholds.

thus performed, increasing the number of prosumers for each
time.

House 3 retains the role of a pure consumer for all simula-
tions. Its net costs, depending on the number of prosumers in
the neighborhood, are plotted in Figure 11. The alternatives of
procuring everything for both the ﬁxed and dynamic utility
prices are also plotted for comparison. In general, the con-
sumer costs decrease as more surplus becomes available in the
LEM. For both schemes based on ﬁxed and dynamic pricing
thresholds, the LCOE scenario generates the lowest net costs
for the consumers, independent of the market saturation. The
difference between the LCOE and FiT scenario increase along
with the increasing surplus.

House 1 acts as a prosumer in all simulated cases with

9

Figure 9: Comparison of the daily average LEM prices for each month for the (A) FiT scenario and (B) LCOE scenario with
dynamic utility price.

Figure 10: Net costs of all market participants for (A) scenarios with ﬁxed utility price and (B) scenario with dynamic utility
price.

in the market is restored. As the pricing scheme replacing the
FiT is yet to be determined it is also worth noting that the
price offered by the utility to buy surplus from the prosumers
can be affected by the availability of storage. With a high
amount of unpredictable PV power being delivered from the
LEM, the utility may end up having to settle a lot in the
balancing and intraday market, and may thus be less willing to
offer a good price for the surplus. Predictability and ﬂexibility
can then be of higher value.

VI. CONCLUSION

To promote LEMs as an attractive option to take an
active role in the energy system for end-users, a transparent
and fair pricing mechanism for locally traded energy must
be established. With the phase-out of the FiT and similar
support schemes, other methods to ensure the proﬁtability of
participating in local ﬂexibility activities must be redesigned.
The average LCOE value of the LEM is proposed in this

paper, showing promising results in terms of cost reductions
for the consumers in the market. Comparing the new LCOE
convention with the existing FiT scheme,
the prosumers’
revenue is decreased. However, comparing it to the auction
alternative, both consumers and prosumers experience sub-
stantially higher beneﬁts. This ﬁnding can also be utilized
by policymakers to incentivize the decarbonization, decen-
tralization, and democratization through LEMs in areas with
a high penetration level of DERs, and thus further contribute
to UN SDG #7. Hence, the proposed pricing mechanism
requires sophistication, with track recording of parameters
like the SDR, rt, dynamically, while also ensuring information
security for the participating agents. DLT is thus highlighted
as one of the most promising digitalization technologies to
provide a functional solution to realize such next-generation
energy policy and LEM mechanisms. Still,
the proposed
pricing scheme is easy to grasp for its users, and will likely
be perceived as fair by the market participants, as the costs

10

[6] Z. Wang, X. Yu, Y. Mu, and H. Jia, “A distributed Peer-to-Peer energy
transaction method for diversiﬁed prosumers in Urban Community
Microgrid System,” Applied Energy, vol. 260, no. 92, p. 114327, 2020.
[7] G. Vieira and J. Zhang, “Peer-to-peer energy trading in a microgrid
leveraged by smart contracts,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, vol. 143, p. 110900, 6 2021.

[8] T. Morstyn, A. Teytelboym, C. Hepburn, and M. D. McCulloch, “Inte-
grating P2P Energy Trading with Probabilistic Distribution Locational
Marginal Pricing,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 4,
pp. 3095–3106, 2020.

[9] A. Paudel and H. B. Gooi, “Pricing in Peer-to-Peer Energy Trading
Using Distributed Optimization Approach,” IEEE Power and Energy
Society General Meeting, vol. 2019-August, pp. 8–12, 2019.

[10] M. H. Ullah, A. Alseyat, and J. D. Park, “Distributed Dynamic Pricing
in Peer-to-Peer Transactive Energy Systems in Smart Grid,” IEEE
Power and Energy Society General Meeting, vol. 2020-Augus, pp. 1–5,
2020.

[11] T. Morstyn and M. D. McCulloch, “Multiclass Energy Management for
Peer-to-Peer Energy Trading Driven by Prosumer Preferences,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 4005–4014, 2019.
[12] F. Lezama, R. Faia, J. Soares, P. Faria, and Z. Vale, “Learning Bidding
Strategies in Local Electricity Markets using Ant Colony optimization,”
2020 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, CEC 2020 -
Conference Proceedings, 7 2020.

[13] Y. Jiang, K. Zhou, X. Lu, and S. Yang, “Electricity trading pricing
among prosumers with game theory-based model in energy blockchain
environment,” Applied Energy, vol. 271, p. 115239, 8 2020.

[14] E. Fernandez, M. J. Hossain, K. Mahmud, M. S. H. Nizami, and
M. Kashif, “A Bi-level optimization-based community energy man-
agement system for optimal energy sharing and trading among peers,”
Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 279, p. 123254, 1 2021.

[15] U. Cali and O. Cakir, “Energy Policy Instruments for Distributed Ledger
Technology Empowered Peer-to-Peer Local Energy Markets,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 82 888–82 900, 2019.

[16] M. Grzanic, J. M. Morales, S. Pineda, and T. Capuder, “Electricity
Cost-Sharing in Energy Communities under Dynamic Pricing and
Uncertainty,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 30 225–30 241, 2021.

[17] C. Long, J. Wu, Y. Zhou, and N. Jenkins, “Peer-to-peer energy
sharing through a two-stage aggregated battery control in a community
Microgrid,” Applied Energy, vol. 226, pp. 261–276, 9 2018.

[18] K. Anoh, S. Maharjan, A. Ikpehai, Y. Zhang, and B. Adebisi, “Energy
peer-to-peer trading in virtual microgrids in smart grids: A game-
theoretic approach,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 1264–1275, 2020.

[19] W. Tushar, C. Yuen, D. B. Smith, and H. V. Poor, “Price Discrimination
for Energy Trading in Smart Grid: A Game Theoretic Approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1790–1801, 2017.
[20] N. Liu, X. Yu, C. Wang, C. Li, L. Ma, and J. Lei, “Energy-Sharing
Model with Price-Based Demand Response for Microgrids of Peer-to-
Peer Prosumers,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 32, no. 5,
pp. 3569–3583, 9 2017.

[21] Y. Zhou, J. Wu, and C. Long, “Evaluation of peer-to-peer energy sharing
mechanisms based on a multiagent simulation framework,” Applied
Energy, vol. 222, pp. 993–1022, 7 2018.

[22] J. An, M. Lee, S. Yeom, and T. Hong, “Determining the Peer-to-
Peer electricity trading price and strategy for energy prosumers and
consumers within a microgrid,” Applied Energy, vol. 261, p. 114335,
3 2020.

[23] M. Andoni, V. Robu, D. Flynn, S. Abram, D. Geach, D. Jenkins, P. Mc-
Callum, and A. Peacock, “Blockchain technology in the energy sector:
A systematic review of challenges and opportunities,” Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 100, pp. 143–174, 2 2019.

[24] M. Khorasany, A. Dorri, R. Razzaghi, and R. Jurdak, “Lightweight
blockchain framework for location-aware peer-to-peer energy trading,”
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems,
vol. 127, no. October 2020, p. 106610, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijepes.2020.106610

[25] U. Cali and O. Cakir, “Novel donation sharing mechanisms under smart
energy cyber-physical-social system and DLT to contend the energy
poverty problem,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 127 037–127 053, 2021.

[26] E. Vartiainen, G. Masson, C. Breyer, D. Moser, and E. Rom´an Medina,
“Impact of weighted average cost of capital, capital expenditure, and
other parameters on future utility-scale PV levelised cost of electricity,”
Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 28, no. 6,
pp. 439–453, 2020.

[27] G. Hoogsteen, “A Cyber-Physical Systems Perspective on Decentralized
Energy Management,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Twente, 2017.
[28] S. Pfenninger and I. Staffell, “Long-term patterns of European PV
output using 30 years of validated hourly reanalysis and satellite data,”
Energy, vol. 114, pp. 1251–1265, 11 2016.

[29] M. M. Rienecker, M. J. Suarez, R. Gelaro, R. Todling, J. Bacmeister,
E. Liu, M. G. Bosilovich, S. D. Schubert, L. Takacs, G. K.
Kim, S. Bloom, J. Chen, D. Collins, A. Conaty, A. Da Silva,

Figure 11: Annual cost for Consumer 3, depending on number
of prosumers in the neighborhood.

Figure 12: Annual revenue for Prosumer 1, depending on the
number of prosumers in the neighborhood.

and beneﬁts are distributed according to actual contribution
to the market. Further improvements of the method should
involve the inclusion of energy storage technology and how
it inﬂuences both the LCOE value and the strategic behavior
of the market agents.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We are grateful for the ﬁnancial support granted by the
through the IDUN project,

Norwegian Research Council
under grant agreement No 295920.

REFERENCES

[1] W. Tushar, C. Yuen, T. K. Saha, T. Morstyn, A. C. Chapman, M. J. E.
Alam, S. Hanif, and H. V. Poor, “Peer-to-peer energy systems for
connected communities: A review of recent advances and emerging
challenges,” Applied Energy, vol. 282, p. 116131, 1 2021.

[2] S. Bjarghov, M. Loschenbrand, A. U. Ibn Saif, R. Alonso Pedrero,
C. Pfeiffer, S. K. Khadem, M. Rabelhofer, F. Revheim, and H. Farah-
mand, “Developments and Challenges in Local Electricity Markets: A
Comprehensive Review,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 58 910–58 943, 2021.
[3] U. J. Hahnel, M. Herberz, A. Pena-Bello, D. Parra, and T. Brosch,
“Becoming prosumer: Revealing trading preferences and decision-
making strategies in peer-to-peer energy communities,” Energy Policy,
vol. 137, 2 2020.

[4] J. Lin, M. Pipattanasomporn, and S. Rahman, “Comparative analysis
of auction mechanisms and bidding strategies for P2P solar transactive
energy markets,” Applied Energy, vol. 255, no. August, p. 113687,
2019.

[5] R. Ghorani, M. Fotuhi-Firuzabad, and M. Moeini-Aghtaie, “Optimal
Bidding Strategy of Transactive Agents in Local Energy Markets,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, 2018.

W. Gu, J. Joiner, R. D. Koster, R. Lucchesi, A. Molod, T. Owens,
S. Pawson, P. Pegion, C. R. Redder, R. Reichle, F. R. Robertson,
A. G. Ruddick, M. Sienkiewicz, and J. Woollen, “MERRA: NASA’s
Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis for Research and Applications,”
Journal of Climate, vol. 24, no. 14, pp. 3624–3648, 7 2011. [Online].
Available: https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/clim/24/14/jcli-d-
11-00015.1.xml

[30] BDEW,

“BDEW-Strompreisanalyse

Januar

2022,”

11

”https://www.bdew.de/service/daten-und-graﬁken/bdew-
strompreisanalyse/”, 1 2022, [Date Accessed: 2022-2-25].
“Spot Market

[31] Fraunhofer
2022,
https://energy-charts.info/charts/price spot market/chart.htm?l=
en&c=DE&year=2019&stacking=stacked absolute area&interval=
year&legendItems=000001

-
[Online].

2022-2-7].

Accessed:

Prices

[Date

ISE,

Energy-Charts,”
Available:

[32] C. Morris, “Community energy in germany - more than just climate

change mitigation,” Renewable Energy Agency, no. 89, 2019.

[33] U. Halden, U. Cali, M. F. Dynge, J. Stekli, and L. Bai, “DLT-based
equity crowdfunding on the techno-economic feasibility of solar energy
investments,” Solar Energy, vol. 227, pp. 137–150, 10 2021.

[34] C. Kost, S. Shammugam, V. Fluri, D. Peper, A. D. Memar, and
T. Schlegl, “Levelized Cost of Electricity - Renewable Energy Tech-
nologies, June 2021,” Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems
ISE, no. June, 2021.
ISE,

[35] Fraunhofer
2022,
able:
en&c=DE&share=solar share&interval=year

Energy-Charts,”
Shares
Avail-
2022-2-7].
https://energy-charts.info/charts/renewable share/chart.htm?l=

“Renewable

Accessed:

[Online].

[Date

-

“Recent

[36] H. Wirth,
many,”
able:
publications/studies/recent-facts-about-photovoltaics-in-germany.pdf

in Ger-
2021,
[Online]. Avail-
15,
https://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/ise/en/documents/

Photovoltaics
2021.

Facts
of May

version

about

