SOCIAL MEDIA NETWORK ATTACKS AND 
THEIR PREVENTIVE MECHANISMS: A REVIEW 

Emmanuel Etuh, Francis S. Bakpo and Eneh Agozie H 

Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Physical Sciences,  
University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria 

ABSTRACT 

We live in a virtual world where actual lifestyles are replicated.   The growing reliance on the 
use of social media networks worldwide has resulted in great concern for information security. 
One  of  the  factors  popularizing  the  social  media  platforms  is  how  they  connect  people 
worldwide to interact, share content, and engage in mutual interactions of common interest that 
cut  across  geographical  boundaries.  Behind  all  these  incredible  gains  are  digital  crime 
equivalence  that  threatens  the  physical  socialization.  Criminal  minded  elements  and  hackers 
are exploiting Social Media Platforms  (SMP) for many nefarious activities to harm others. As 
detection  tools  are  developed  to  control  these  crimes,  hackers’  tactics  and  techniques  are 
constantly  evolving.  Hackers  are  constantly  developing  new  attacking  tools  and  hacking 
strategies to gain malicious access to systems and attack social media network thereby making 
it  difficult  for  security  administrators  and  organizations  to  develop  and  implement  the proper 
policies and procedures necessary to prevent the hackers’ attacks. The increase in cyber-attacks 
on  the  social  media  platforms  calls  for  urgent  and  more  intelligent  security  measures  to 
enhance the effectiveness of social media platforms. This paper explores the mode and tactics of 
hackers’ mode of attacks on social media and ways of preventing their activities against users to 
ensure secure social cyberspace and enhance virtual socialization. Social media platforms are 
briefly categorized, the various types of attacks are also highlighted with current state-of-the-art  
preventive mechanisms to overcome  the  attacks as proposed in research works, finally,  social 
media  intrusion  detection  mechanism  is  suggested  as  a  second  line  of  defence  to  combat 
cybercrime on social media networks 

KEYWORDS 

Intrusion  Detection  System,  Data  Warehouse,  Machine  Learning,  Hackers,  Social  Media 
Platform, Online Social Network Intrusion. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

Social  media  network  platforms  provide  mechanisms  that  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  virtual 
socialization in the global village. It is a medium that enable families, friends, and associates to 
interact  and  communicate  seamlessly  irrespective  of  their  locations,  distances,  and  platforms. 
Online Social Networks (OSNs) are the connection and communication platform  that promotes 
the social interaction in the virtual space [1]. [2] identified 7 categories of social networks on the 
Internet to include: electronic mail services like Gmail, Yahoo mail, Microsoft outlook, Hotmail, 
etc;  Instant  messengers  like  WhatsApp,  Twitter,  Yahoo  messenger,  Instagram,  Telegram, 
Snapchat, etc; Blogs platforms like Blogger, Tomblr, Wix, Linda etc; Social networking sites like 
Facebook,  TikTok,  Quora,  LinkedIn,  etc;  Multimedia  sharing  systems  like  YouTube,  Skype, 
Flikr,  etc;  Auction  platforms  like  Jumia,  Alibaba,  Konga,  OLX,  etc;  and  Social  search  engines 
like  Google,  Yahoo,  Safari,  etc.  All  these  platforms  enable  users to socialize  and  stay  in  touch 

David C. Wyld et al. (Eds): CSE, AI & FL, NLPTT - 2021 
pp. 59-72, 2021. CS & IT - CSCP 2021  

                                   DOI: 10.5121/csit.2021.112405 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 

      Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

with social reality in the virtual environment with varying functionalities. The pervasive nature of 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) has greatly influenced every aspect of human 
activities; this has also influenced social media users to see the platform as a virtual home where 
they save their sensitive information on the database of these platforms. 

The  growing  reliance  on  the  use  of  social  media  networks  worldwide  has  resulted  in  great 
concern  for  information  security.  One  of  the  factors popularizing  the  social  media  platforms  is 
how  they  connect  people  worldwide  to  interact,  share  content  and  engage  in  discussions  of 
mutual  interest  that  know  no  geographical  boundaries.  Behind  all  these  incredible  gains,  most 
traditional crimes now have digital equivalence enabling criminal minded elements and hackers 
to  exploit  social  media  platforms  for  many  nefarious  activities  to  harm  others.  As  security 
administrators and policy makers develop detection tools to control these crimes, hackers’ tactics 
and techniques are also constantly evolving. Hackers are cybercriminals that specializes in virtual 
terrorism  that  endangers  the  legitimate  users  of  Social  Media  Network  Platform  (SMNP)  in 
particular and the entire virtual community in general [3] through various kinds of cyber-attacks.  

These cybercrimes have significant negative impact on the social media platforms and the users 
in particular. Because of ease of accessibility, some of the social media users prefer to store their 
sensitive data on the network and when the account is hacked, this information could be used to 
swindle and defraud the user; also, the user’s social contacts on the platform are at high risk of 
being defrauded by the hacker who could use their techniques by masquerading as the authorized 
user.  High  profile  users  like  public  and  political  leaders  with  private  information  that  could 
tarnish their image if extracted can be used to threaten the user for ransom. 

Different approaches have been used to prevent hackers’ intrusion on the social media network 
platforms. The prevalent one is authentication using credentials like username and password, or 
PIN;  biometric  authentication  like  using  face  recognition  technology,  fingerprint,  pattern 
matching,  or  voice  recognition  are  all  various  forms  of  authentication.  Other  methods  are  Role 
Based Access Controls (RBAC), Extended RBAC, Temporal (RBAC), Risk-based access control 
[4].  These  security  methods  have  a  lot  of  drawbacks  like  weak  password  which  can  easily  be 
guessed  by  hackers  using  dictionary  attack.  In  an  attempt  to  enforce  stronger  password  for 
authentication,  social  media  users  are  forced  to  write  their  authentication  credentials  on  papers 
which  can  also  be  stolen  by  hackers,  these  weaknesses  have  influenced  many  researchers  to 
propose  several  security  mechanisms  to  curtail  the  activities  of  these  hackers.  Some  of  these 
proposals  include:  biometric  authentication,  hybrid  system  for  anomaly  detection  in  social 
networks [5],Network Intrusion Detection System[6], [7], [8]etc.  

All  these  methods  are  not  suitable  for  data  warehouse  security.  The  commonly  used  network 
securities  software  like  firewall  and  anti-viruses  independently  provide  different  services  to 
network  security  but  they  can  be  bypassed  by  hackers.  Hackers  improvises  new  techniques  of 
breaking into the social media platforms without being detected, the two close proposals on Data 
Warehouse  Database  Intrusion  Detection  System  by  [9]  and  [4]  does  not  discourage  resilient 
hackers. The limitations of all these proposed security approaches have been pointed out in Table 
2.4  of  the  literature  review.  Hence,  there  is  therefore  a  need  for  Intelligent  Intrusion  Detection 
Model (IIDM) that is efficient to disarm the hackers from carrying out their cybercrime activities 
against SMNP. 

2.  THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 

Social  media  platforms  have  become  an  integral  part  of  average  network  users  in  the  virtual 
community. Billions of connected devices to the Internet operate on one social media platform or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                    61 

the other. According to report in [10], over 500million IoT devices were implemented globally in 
2003,  12.5  billion  in  2010,  and  50  billion  in  2020.There  are  about  3.5  billion  people  on  social 
media with an estimated attacks that generate over $3 billion annually for cyber criminals  [11]. 
Online social network platform like Facebook incorporate several functionalities like product and 
services  advertisement  and  sales  that  makes  it  relevant  to  almost  all  internet  users  either 
cooperate or private. This has also increased cybercriminals’ activity on the platform. According 
to a recent survey by Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT), the rate of cyber-attacks has 
been doubling every year [6]. Online social network is faced with threatening security challenges 
[2].  Facebook  is  the  most  popular  social  networking  site.  It  was  launched  in  February  2004 
[12]With roughly 2.89 billion monthly active users as at the second quarter of 2021, Facebook is 
the biggest social network worldwide. 

The Covid19 pandemic has been instrumental to the geometric shift to virtual socialization. The 
technological  shift  to  cloud  computing  paradigm  also  has  positively  influenced  the  ubiquity  of 
social media. This shift seems to have given hacker an edge to securely carryout their nefarious 
acts  since  humans  are  less  involved.  Cloud  intrusion  attacks  are  set  of  actions  that  attempt  to 
violate the integrity, confidentiality or availability of cloud resources on cloud SMNP. The rising 
drop in processing and Internet accessibility cost is also increasing users’ vulnerability to a wide 
variety of cyber threats and attacks.  

Intrusion detection is meant to detect misuse or an unauthorized use of the computer systems by 
internal  and  external  elements  [7].  IDS  are  an  effective  security  technology,  which  can  detect, 
prevent  and  possibly  react  to  the  attack  [13],  [14]  opined  that  artificial  Intelligence  plays  a 
driving role in security services like intrusion detection. 

2.1.  Social media network 

Social media network is a platform that creates virtual environment for social interactions among 
circle of friends and fans of like-minds. “Social media platforms are internet-based applications 
focused on broadcasting user-generated Content”[15] It deals with the sharing of information and 
multimedia  content  between  users  on  similar  platforms  over  electronic  network  especially  the 
internet  and  cyberspace  [16].  This  platform  has  geometrically  grown  to  become  not  only  an 
effective  communication  tool  for  personal  and  social  use,  but  also  an  essential  channel  for 
businesses and official communication channels. There are thousands of social media platforms 
being used today for different purposes, few of them that are most popular are highlighted below. 

  Facebook  is  an  online  social  media  platform  that  provides  several  services  like  social 
networking of friends and fans, online advertising, voice calls, instant messaging, video calls, 
video sharing and viewing, online market place, virtual gifts among both young and the old, 
private and corporate bodies. It was launched on February 4, 2004, by Mark Zuckerberg. It 
had  over  1.18  billion  monthly  active  users  as  of  August  2015  [16]  and  2.85  billion  active 
users in 20201 according to statistics by [17] with an engagement of over 4 billion views of 
videos everyday on the network. About 2.14 billion people can be reached via advertising on 
Facebook [17]. 

  WhatsApp is a cross-platform internet-based instant messaging application that allows smart 
phone users to exchange text, image, video and audio messages for free provided the device 
has  Internet  access.  It  was  developed  in  2009  by  Brian  Acton  and  Jan  Koum.  WhatsApp 
became the most popular messaging app with about 900 million active users as at September, 
2015 [16]. 

  MySpace is a social networking website offering an interactive, user-submitted network of 
friends, personal profiles, blogs, groups, photos, music and videos.  It was the biggest social 

 
 
 
 
 
62 

      Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

media platform up till 2008 when it was overtaken by Facebook. It was cofounded by Chris 
DeWolfe and Tom Anderson 

  Twitter  is  a  social  network  platform  that  enables  users  to  write  and  read  short  character 
messages called tweets. It revolves around the principle of followers who are equally users, 
who  choose  to  follow  another  Twitter  user  and  can  thus  view  tweets  sent  by  that  user. 
Whereas  unregistered  users  can  read  tweets,  one  must  be  registered  to  send  tweets.  It  was 
founded in March, 2006 by Jack Dorsey [16]. 

  Instagram  allows  users  to  upload  media  that  can  be  edited  with filters and  organized 
by hashtags and geographical  tagging.  Posts  can  be  shared  publicly  or  with  pre-approved 
followers.  Users  can  browse  other  users'  content  by  tags  and  locations  and  view  trending 
content. Users can like photos and follow other users to add their content to a personal feed. 
Instagram  has  1.38  billion  active  users  with  500  million  daily  active  users  of  Instagram 
stories, 1.16 billion people can be reached through adverts on Instagram [17]    

  YouTube is a video sharing service that allows users to watch videos posted by other users 
and upload videos of their own. With the ubiquitous use of smart phones this platform has 
become  the  first  choice  in  personal  broadcasting  and  video  sharing.  It  was  cofounded  by 
Chad  Hurley,  Steve  Chen,  and  Jawed  Karim  in  February  2005.  In  November  2006,  it  was 
bought by Google and now operated by Google 

  LinkedIn  is  a  social  media  platform  for  professional  networking.  It  is  a  social  networking 
tool available to job  seekers  and  professionals  where  users can  invite  other  users  and  even 
non-users  to  connect.  Inviters  who  get  several  rejections  from  invitees  risk  having  their 
accounts  restricted  or  closed.  On  this  platform,  users  can  get  introduced  to  networks  of 
contacts, new job and business opportunities, display products and services in their company 
profile pages, list job vacancies and search for potential candidates 

  Skype is an IP telephony service provider that can be used to make free voice and video calls 
over the Internet to any Skype subscriber or to any other non-user at low calling rates. It is 
relatively simple to download and install the software, which works on most computers and 
phones.  A  dedicated  Skype  phone  can  be  used  or  desktop  computers,  notebooks,  tablets, 
mobile phones and other mobile devices fitted with a headset, speakers, microphones or USB 
phone. Skype also enables file transfers, texting, video chat and videoconferencing. 

  Viber  is  a  mobile  application  that  allows  phone  calls  and  text  messages  to  all  other  users, 
whether mobile or landline, for free. It is available over WiFi or 3G with sound quality much 
better  than  a  regular  call  with  mobile  carrier  charges  applicable  when  used  over  a  3G 
network. Once the application is installed, calls can also be made to numbers that do not have 
Viber  at  low  rates  using  ViberOut.  Viber  works  on  most  android,  iphone,  blackberry, 
windows, mac, nokia and bada devices. 

  Tumblr  is  a  microblogging and social  networking platform  it’s  service  allows  users  to 
post multimedia and other content to a short-form blog. Users can follow other users' blogs. 
Bloggers can also make their blogs private. For bloggers many of the website's features are 
accessed from a "dashboard" interface. It was founded by David Karp in 2007. 

  WeChat is a Chinese multi-purpose instant messaging, social media and mobile payment app 
developed by Tencent. First released in 2011, it became the world's largest standalone mobile 
app in 2018, with over 1 billion monthly active users. It has been described as China's "app 
for  everything"  and  a  "super  app"  because  of  its  wide  range  of  functions.  It  provides  text 
messaging,  hold-to-talk  voice  messaging,  broadcast  (one-to-many)  messaging,  video 
conferencing, video games, sharing of photographs and videos and location sharing. 

  Reddit  This  social  media  platform  enables  you  to  submit  content  and  later  vote  for  the 
content. The voting determines whether the content moves up or down, which is ultimately 
organized based on the areas of interest (known as subreddits). Number of active users per 
month: 100 million approximately. 

Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                    63 

  Taringa is one of the largest social networking platforms in Latin America and allows users 
to  share  their  experiences,  content  and  more.  Number  of  active  users:  75  million 
approximately. 

  Renren  is the largest social networking site in China and is literally a platform for everyone. 
It has been highly popular with the youth due to its similarity to Facebook, as it allows users 
to easily connect with others, quickly share thoughts and posts, and even update their moods. 
Number of active users per month: More than 30 million approximately 

All the social media network platforms including the ones highlighted above can be categorized 
based on their support for the types of data they exchange or based on their aspect of support for 
social interactions. 

Based on their support for the types of data they exchange, social media network platforms can 
be categorized into four main types: 

i)  Textual-based  platform:  used  for  text-related  social  communication  for  sending/receiving 

messages. A good examples are the messenger platforms. 

ii)  Visual-based  platforms:  used  to  for  picture-related  social  interactions  like  sending  and 

receiving images. A good example is flikr platform 

iii)  Audio-visual  based  platforms:  used 

to 

for  video-related  social 

interactions 

like 

sending/receiving video data).A typical example is the YouTube,  

iv)  Hybrid platforms: this platform combines the functionalities of more than one of the textual, 

visual, and audio-visual platforms. A typical example is the Facebook 

Social  media  platforms  can  also  be  categorized  based  on  their  aspect  of  support  for  social 
interactions. These categories are summarized in Table 2.1 below. 

Table 2.1.  Summary of Categories of Social Media Platform 

Category 
Electronic  Mail 
Service Platforms 

Usage 
The  very  first  social  media  platform  that  gave  birth 
to  the  Internet.  Used  to  send  and  receive  electronic 
mails from friends and associates 
Mostly  used  to  connect  friends,  family,  brands,  and 
to reach out to target audience. 
Mostly designed for research, and focused discussion 
with people with common interest 

Social  networking 
websites 
Discussion 
Platforms 
Blogging platforms  Mostly  used  for  news,  writing  of  articles,  and 

Instant  Messenger 
Platforms 

personal messages to targeted audience  
Used  for  real-time  textual  conversation  with  instant 
sending and receiving functionalities 

Multimedia 
Platforms 
Auction Systems 

For  sharing  of  videos  with  both  subscribed  and 
visitor social media user of this platform 
For sales of goods and services  

Cooperate  Social 
Platforms 

Educational 
/Professional 
Platforms 

Most companies are now incorporating social flavor 
like  blog  to  their  virtual  platform  to  enable  them  to 
reach  their  target  customers  with  their  products  and 
services 
For  sharing  knowledge  through,  chart,  uploading  of 
live  meetings,  and  connecting  with 
resources, 
professionals  in  the  chosen  profession  of  the  social 

Quora, 

Medium, 

Examples 
Gmail,  Yahoo  mail, 
Microsoft 
outlook, 
hotmail, etc  
Facebook,Twitter, 
Whatsapp, Instagram, 
Reddit, 
Nairaland, etc 
Tumblr, 
Blogger, Wix, Linda 
Whatsapp, 
Yahoo 
Instagram, Snapchat, 
YouTube,  Skype  Flikr, 
TikTok, etc 
Jumia,  Alibaba,  Konga, 
OLX, 
Microsoft  news,  Yahoo 
news, BBC news, Safari 
etc 

Twitter, 
messenger, 

Elsevier, 
Academia, 
Slack.  DOAJ,  Google 
Meet,  Zoom,  LinkedIn 

 
 
 
 
 
 
64 

      Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

media user 

etc 

Gaming platforms  Hosts  gamming  applications  where  social  media 
users  play  games  either  for  entertainment,  fun,  or 
betting  
It 
that  enhances  virtual 
is 
socialization.  It  enable  social  media  user  to  easily 
locate the object of search 

Search Engines 

the  major 

tool 

Nairabet, 
Kingsbet, etc 

Naijabet, 

Google, 
Yahoo, 
Microsoft  edge,  Firefox, 
etc 

2.2.  Social media network platforms attacks 

There  are  several  attacks  launched  against  social  media  network  platforms.  It  is  important  to 
know them because a more thorough understanding of these types of attacks equips social media 
user  an  armament  of  defensive  measures  and  knowledge  to  lessen  the  likelihood  of  being 
exploited  [3].    In  August  6,  2009,  Twitter,  Facebook,  LiveJournal,  Google’s  Blogger,  and 
YouTube  were  attacked  by  a  distributed  denial-of-service  (DDoS)  attack,  in  October,  2021, 
similar service disruption was encountered. [3] identified seven deadliest attacks on social media 
network platforms. These attacks are highlighted as follows 

1. 
Social networking infrastructure attacks: here the attacker launches the attack on the 
platform that provides the social service with the view to disconnecting users from accessing the 
services provided by the platform. The major attack used against social networking infrastructure 
that directly affects the users is DDoS.  
2. 
Malware  attacks:  in  this type  of  attack,  the  hacker  develop  a  malicious  software  with 
the  intention  of  gaining  control  and  utilizing  the  user’s  device  to  perform  some  malicious 
activities like launching DoS attack, keystrokes logging, theft of credential, credit-card number or 
bank details, etc. The mode of infecting user’s device on social media is usually through links or 
images  sent  to  the  user’s  inbox  knowing  that  the  user  will  likely  open  since  it  comes  from  a 
connected social  contact  [18].  Once a  user is  infected,  the  hacker  uses the  compromised  social 
media account to spread the worm by delivering a message to other users who are friends with 
the infected user containing a luring link to a third-party Web site, where they are then prompted 
to perform an action like “register to view full image”, “update you Adobe Flash player to have a 
better view”, etc. Once the action is performed, the worm will automatically infect the devices of 
all  the  connected  friends  that  followed  the  link  to  the  third  party  site.  Common  Malware 
Categories  are  Crimeware,  Spyware,  Adware,  Browser  Hijackers,  Downloader,  Toolbars,  and 
Dialers [18]. Hackers leverage on the openness of social networking sites where users generate 
their  contents;  the  large  number  of  users;  and  the  trust  that  is  implied  where  users  assume  all 
friends  are  to  be  trusted  to  launch  attacks  to  connected  billions  of  users.  The  most  effective 
method  is  by  using  Cross-Site  Scripting  XSS  to  implement  their  malicious  codes  on  social 
networking site. 
3. 
Phishing attacks: as the name imply is a hacking technique where the hacker lure a user 
using  “bate”  that is  most  appealing  to  the  user  with  the  intention  of  trapping  the  user.  In  most 
cases, the user is coarse into divulging sensitive information that will in turn be used to attack the 
user. 
4. 
Evil  twin  attacks:  in  this  type  of  attack,  the  hacker  uses  the  target’s  profile  to  create 
account to mimic the authentic user. This attack can also be called cyber-impersonation. The new 
account is then used to send friend’s request to the contacts on the social media platform just to 
enable the attacker to enjoy the privileges of friends and gain access to the users on the platform.  
5. 
Identity theft: in this type of attack, the user’s credential is stolen and used to securely 
gain access to the user’s social media platform. Once the attacker successfully gains access, they 
launch their pre-conceived attacks while impersonating the authentic user. 

 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                    65 

6. 
Cyber-bullying: a way of threatening or intimidating a social media user either through 
messages or by posting objectionable content on the social media network to harass or intimidate 
the targeted user. 
7. 
Physical threats: in this attack, the hacker launches physical attack against selected user. 
It could be in form of bypassing physical security of the platform through threatening the user to 
remove the device security. 
All these threats can use any of the following attacking mode to carryout the threats.  

1.  Denial  of  Service  (DoS)  where  an  attacker  tries  to  prevent  legitimate  users  from  using  a 

service 

2.  Probe attack where an attacker tries to find information about the target host through ways 
such as scanning victims to get information about available services and the operating system 
3.  User  to  Root  (U2R)  where  unauthorized  access  to  local  super-user  privileges  are  being 

granted 

4.  Remote  to  Local  (R2L)  where  unauthorized  access  from  a  remote  machine  through 

approaches such as guessing password to obtain a local account on the victim host 

5.  Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) is a targeted attack against a high-value asset or physical 
system  where  attackers  often  leverage  stolen  user  credentials  or  zero-day  exploits  to  avoid 
triggering alerts  

2.3.  Security measures for social media network 

The “juicy prospect” of social media network platforms has  made hackers to constantly device 
techniques  to  intrude  and  usurp  users.  They  have  two  fold  targets  which  are  the  social  media 
users and the SMNP which they break into and control for their selfish gain  [19]. On the users 
end,  the  hackers’  activities  make  them  susceptible  to  threats  which  include  identity  theft,  evil 
twin,  password  resetting,  sim  cloning,  brute  force,  fake  links,  phishing,  information  leakage, 
celebrity spoofing, fake account, impersonation, etc [20] [21] [22]. They also use code injection 
through malicious SQL script to disrupt the network. The existing security mechanism for DW 
include  Role  Based  Access  Controls  (RBAC),  Extended  RBAC,  Temporal  RBAC  (TRBAC), 
Risk-based  access  control[4]  which  all  has  to  do  with  authentication  using  username  and 
password. [9] were the first to propose Database Intrusion Detection Systems (DIDS) for DW. [4] 
improved it by incorporating second level authentication, instant messenger like Whatsapp also 
uses two-steps verification where the user is asked to supply a PIN at intervals to prevent hackers 
from the network any time there is a detected anomaly, but hackers still use social engineering to 
trick  the  users  thereby  compromising  the  account  which  go  undetected  by  role-based  access 
controlled systems. 

To  hack  into  a  social  media  network,  there  are  basic  steps  taken  by  attackers  to  perform  their 
operations. These steps are: 

i. 
Target selection: the attacker determine the victim of the social media users to attack 
ii.  Attack selection: The attacker determine the type of attack to launch against the target, 
e.g  infrastructure,  malware,  phishing,  evil-twin,  identity  theft,  cyber-bullying,  physical 
threat, celebrity spoofing etc.  
Strategy formation: the strategy is dependent on the type of attack to use. If the selected 
attack  is  to  launch  DDoS  attack,  then  the  attacker  will  have  to  recruit  accomplices 
(botnet) to use in launching the attack either through Calls, E-mail, Post to user groups, 
or Creation of a Web page where users are redirected to for infection. 

iii. 

iv.  Army  training: Furnish  the  accomplices  with package  containing the attack, time,  date, 

and instructions on how to perform the attack. 

 
 
 
 
 
66 

v. 

      Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

Launching attack: here the attacker will launch the attack, wait and watch the execution 
of the attack. 

To  overcome  the  various  attacks  highlighted  on  the  social  media  network  platform,  the  user 
should: 

Ensure an up-to-date antivirus software on the device as a primary line of defence 

i. 
ii.  Not open e-mails from people you don’t know. 
iii.  Not click on unknown links  
iv.  Not visit unfamiliar sites  
v.  Disable JavaScript.  
vi.  Maintain and ensure regular update on software patches. 
vii. 

Implement browser security policies, such as blocking pop-ups and limiting the number 
of connections. 
Implement platform privacy security policies, such as “who can see my personal info”, 
“who can post on my wall”, status, etc 
Implement IDS/IPS as second line of defence against attackers. 

viii. 

ix. 

2.4.  Intrusion detection mechanisms 

Intrusion  detection  system  (IDS)  is a  device  or  software  application  that  monitors  a  system, 
network  or  application  for  malicious  activity  or  policy  violations  with  the  aim  of  detect  them. 
Two major IDS emphasized in literatures are Host-based and Network-based. These IDSs are not 
suitable  for  intrusion  detection  in  application  related  intrusion  attacks.  This  gave  rise  to  the 
development of application specific IDS which is application based. Fig 2.1 shows the three types 
of intrusion detection systems presently available for information security. 

Fig 2.1. Types of Intrusion Detection System 

Researchers  have  proposed  various  methods  to  detect  abnormal  operations  in  a  system. 
Generally,  IDS  comprises  of  four  main  components:  Traffic  Collector,  Analysis  Engine, 
Signature  Database,  Management  and  Reporting  Interface  [7].  Network-based,  Host-based,  or 
Application-based intrusion detection systems use either signature mechanism to detect intrusion 
or  anomaly  approach.  The  signature  approach  uses  rules  for  decision  making  on  classifying 
intrusion based known profile of intrusion. Anomaly on the other hand classifies an operation as 
intrusion based on a deviation from the known normal operation of a given system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                    67 

Fig 2.2. Mechanisms for intrusion detection 

The work done in can be consulted for further reading [23] as it compared the various approaches 
using features, advantages, and disadvantages of each approach. 

2.5.  Review of Related Literatures 

[5] proposed “an efficient hybrid system for anomaly detection in social networks”. The model 
cascaded  several  machine  learning  algorithms  that  included  decision  tree,  Support  Vector 
Machine (SVM) and Naïve Bayesian classifier (NBC) for classifying normal and abnormal users 
on social networks. the anomaly detection engine uses SVM algorithm to classify social media 
network user as happy or disappointed, NBC algorithm is used based on a defined dictionary to 
classify social media users with social tendency. Unique features derived from users’ profile and 
contents were extracted and used for training and testing of the model, performance evaluation 
conducted  by  experiment  on  the  model  using  synthetic  and  real  datasets  from  social  network 
shows 98% accuracy. 

(Mansoori et al. 2020) proposed “Suspicious Activity Detection of Twitter and Facebook using 
Sentimental Analysis”. The model was designed using Natural  

[24]  proposed  “Social  Media  Cyberbullying  Detection  using  Machine  Learning”  the  model 
leverage  on  the  machine  learning  capability  to  detect the language  patterns  of  bullies  on social 
media  network  which  will  be  used  to  generate  a  model  that  can  automatically  detect 
cyberbullying actions on the network. The model was evaluated using two classifier algorithms: 
SVM and Neural Network, TFIDF and sentiment analysis algorithms were used for features ex- 
traction.  Different  n-gram  language  models  were  used  to  evaluate  the  model  and  was  found  to 
achieved 92.8% accuracy using Neural Network with 3-grams and 90.3% accuracy using SVM 
with 4- grams while using both TFIDF and sentiment analysis together. NN performed better than 
the  SVM classifier  with  average f-score  of 91.9%  while  that  of  SVM  achieved average  f-score 
89.8%. 

(Shah, Sharma, and Bandgar 2021) proposed “Cybercrime Prevention on Social Media” in which 
a  Facebook-like  social  network  platform  was  designed  as  a  proof-of-concept  to  detect 
cyberbullying and anormaly detection. Each user’s post will be passed through “Post Classifier” 
to  divide  illegal  posts  from  adult  image  post,  the  illegal  post  detection  algorithm  was  used  to 
check for violence-based objects. Similarly, sentiment analysis was used to check the intention of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 

      Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

the message to detect any harrasment words in the content of the post. A threashold was set for 
any  of  the  negative  words  and  images  posted  by  a  user,  if  any  illegal  post  by  a  user  exceed  a 
threashold, the user will be warned, and if there is persistence in the post, the user will be banned 
from  making  a  post  on  the  platform.  Convolution  Neural  Network  (CNN)  machine  learning 
algorithm was used in the implementation 

[4]  “Intrusion  Detection  System  for  Data  Warehouse  with  Second  Level  Authentication”.  This 
proposal  was  premised  on  the  ground  that earlier  security  mechanisms  for  data  warehouse  like 
“Role  Based  Access  Controls  (RBAC),  Extended  RBAC,  Temporal  RBAC  (TRBAC),  Risk-
based  access  control,  Intrusion  Detection  System  (IDS)  and  some  other  customized  security 
solutions for DWs does not detect a hacker that gain rightful access to the DW through credential 
theft. Therefore, a second level authentication mechanism within the IDS was proposed where a 
minute  deviation  from  the  user’s  past  behavior  will  be  detected  based  on  providing  answer  to 
secrete question that was provided at the account setup phase. 

In their research work, [12] envisioned the most important criteria of employing social network in 
higher  education,  they  observed  broad  view  of possibilities  for  using  social  networks  in  higher 
education.  The  conceptual  framework  for  academic  social  network  should  have  the  following 
four  main  objectives:  (1)  To  provide  academic  service  support  and  academic  information 
dissemination;  (2)  To  enable  student  support  and  communication;  (3)  To  exalt  social  and 
cooperate learning; (4) To provide achievement representationability. 

[13] developed an “Intrusion Detection System for College (ERP) Enterprise Resource Planning 
System” The system used a layered approach combined with a decision tree based architecture to 
detect attacks, the design and simulation was carried out using Netbeans integrated development 
environment with MYSQL database. 

[8]proposed  a  model  for  building  the  network  intrusion  detection  system  using  a  machine 
learning  algorithm  called  decision  tree  to  detect  anomaly  based  intrusion.  The  system  used 
Recursive-Feature-Elimination  (RFE)  to  select the  best  features  from  Change  Control  Intrusion 
Detection (CCIDS) 2017dataset. The dataset was split into training and test dataset, the training 
dataset  was  fit  to  the  classification  model  developed  to  classify  the  test  data  as  malicious  or 
benign. The precision of the proposed system indicated True-Positive-Rate (TPR) of 99.9% and 
the False-Positive-Rate (FPR) of 0.1% 

[14]proposed a dynamic Intelligent Intrusion Detection Model based on specific AI approach for 
intrusion detection. It is a hybrid system that combines anomaly, misuse and host based detection. 
SNORT  packet  sniffer  was  used  for  new  data  collection  which  will  be  passed  through  the 
inference  engine  to  classify  the  operation  as  host-based  or  anomaly.  The  implementation 
algorithm used was neural networks and fuzzy logic with network profiling. Simple data mining 
techniques was used to process the network data to predict anomaly detection. 

[7]  proposed  “Network  Intrusion  Detection  System”.  The  system  like  any  other  intrusion 
detection system comprises of four major components which are: Traffic Collector for gathering 
activity  and  event  data  for  analysis;  Analysis  Engine  that  analyzes  the  data  that  the  traffic 
collector  gathered;  Signature  Database  which  is  an  amalgamation  of  signatures  known  to  be 
associated with suspicious and malicious activities; Management and Reporting Interface used by 
system administrators to manage the system and receive alerts when intrusions are detected. The 
system was implemented using Java programming language, used to detect specific attacks which 
are Man-in-the- Middle, DOS and ping of death.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                    69 

[6] proposed “Data warehousing and data mining techniques for intrusion detection systems” the 
aim  was  to  improve  the  performance  and  usability  of  Intrusion  Detection  Systems  (IDS).  The 
system model network traffic and alerts using a multi-dimensional data model and star schemas 
to perform network security analysis and to detect denial of service attacks. A prototype of the 
system was successfully tested at Army Research Labs. 

[9] proposed “DBMS Application Layer Intrusion Detection for Data Warehouses (DW)”. They 
argued that the current DIDS lack capacity to detect heterogeneous oriented DW. In the research 
work,  specific  requirements  for  data  warehouse  based  IDS  was  defined  which  lead  to  the 
proposal of a conceptual approach for a real-time DIDS for DWs at the SQL command level that 
works transparently as an extension of the Database Management System (DBMS) between the 
user applications and the database server itself. 

In  their  review,  [25]  looked  into  four  different  approaches  to  intrusion  detection  in  a  network 
environment. The approaches are: Artificial Neural Network (ANN) “is comprised of a collection 
of  processing  elements  that  are  highly  interconnected,  and  convert  a  set  of  inputs  to  a  set  of 
desired  outputs”;  Self  Organizing  Map  (SOM),  Fuzzy  Logic  and  Support  Vector  Machine 
(SVM). 

Table 1. shows the summary of related literatures 

Title [Ref] 

efficient 
for 

An 
system 
detection 
networks [5] 

in 

hybrid 
anomaly 
social 

Methodology/ 
Tools 
R  language  and 
Python  machine 
learning 
packages. 

Suspicious 
Activity 
Detection  of  Twitter  and 
using 
Facebook 
Analysis 
Sentimental 
[26] 

Sentiment 
analysis, 
based 
Speech 
tagging 

NLP 
Part-Of-
(POS) 

Social 
Media 
Cyberbullying  Detection 
using  Machine  Learning 
[24] 

SVM, 
Neural 
Network,  TFIDF 
and 
sentiment 
analysis 
algorithms 

Cybercrime  Prevention 
on Social Media [27] 

Django, 
NN, CNN 

NLP, 

Application 
Intrusion 
for  Data 

DBMS 
Layer 
Detection 
Warehouses [9] 
Intrusion 
System : Overview [25] 

Detection 

11g 
Oracle 
DBMS,  TPC-H 
benchmark 

Qualitative 

Intrusion 
system 

detection 
data 

for 

 MariaDB, 
MYSQL,  TPC-H 

Contribution 

Research Gap 

that 
as 
or 
the 

users 
one 
in 

DT-SVMNB 
classifies 
depressed 
suicidal  one 
social network 
Developed  a  model 
that  can  analyze  the 
opinions  posted  on  the 
classify 
to 
internet 
them  as  good,  bad,  or 
neutral. 
Achieved  average  f-
score  of  91.9%  and 
89.8% 
for  NN  and 
SVM  respectively  on 
the detection. 

a 
Developed 
platform 
customized 
and 
implemented 
anomaly post detection 
DBMS 
Proposed 
Application 
Layer 
Intrusion  Detection  for 
Data Warehouses 
four 
highlighted 
different approaches to 
intrusion detection in a 
network environment 
Developed 
for 
data  warehouse  with 

IDS 

was 

Focus 
on 
predicting  vulnerable 
users  on  the  social 
media not hackers 

Does  not  cover  the 
hackers’ 
intrusion 
detection on the social 
media platforms 

Handled  only  one 
aspect of social media 
attacks 
– 
cyberbullying.  Does 
not  cover  anomaly 
intrusion 
intrusion 
The 
detection  can  only 
detect  cyberbullying 
attack 
with 
Hackers 
persistent  attack  can 
evade 
security 
the 
mechanism 
There 
proposed design 

was 

no 

Resilient  hacker  can 
hacking 
use 

their 

 
 
 
 
 
70 

      Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

warehouse  with  second 
level authentication [4] 

Intrusion 
Detection 
System  for  College  ERP 
System [13] 

JDK 
MYSQL, 
NETBEANS 

1.7, 

level 
to 
access 

second 
authentication 
reinforce 
control security 
Developed 
college ERP system 

IDS 

for 

Network 
Intrusion 
Detection  System  Using 
Machine Learning [8] 

Python 
CCIDS, RFE 

libraries, 

Achieved 
TPR 
of99.9%  and  FPR  of 
0.1% on CCIDS 

Intelligence 
Artificial 
Techniques  Applied  To 
Intrusion Detection [14] 

mining 

Data 
MySQL, 
SNORT,  Fuzzy 
Logic 

Network 
Detection System [7] 

Intrusion 

Java, 
Sniffer 

Traffic 

data  mining 
Used 
techniques  to  process 
the  network  data  used 
to  predict 
anomaly 
detection. 

used  to  detect  specific 
attacks which are Man-
in-the-  Middle,  DOS 
and ping of death 

Data  warehousing  and 
data  mining  techniques 
for 
intrusion  detection 
systems [6] 

STAR 
OLAP 

schemas, 

A  Conceptual  Model  of 
Social  Networking 
in 
Higher Education [12] 

conceptual model 

A Data Mining Approach 
for Attribute Selection in 
Intrusion 
Detection 
System [28] 

WEKA 

2.6.  Research/Knowledge Gap 

4  main 

the 
improved 
performance 
and 
usability  of  Intrusion 
Systems 
Detection 
(IDS  with 
the  star 
schema 
Identified 
functions of social 
usage 
network 
in 
education: 
higher 
service 
academic 
student 
support; 
support; 
and 
cooperate 
learning; 
achievement 
representation 
Justified  that  attribute 
will 
in 
selection 
improve 
Intrusion 
Detection System 

social 

and 

techniques 
to 
overcome  the  second 
level authentication  

to 

The  IDS  only  detect 
data 
inconsistent 
entry 
the  ERP 
system 
Decision  trees  have  a 
tendency  to  over-fit 
and 
create 
can 
biasness  
Rule-based  models 
the 
limited  by 
are 
knowledge 
the 
of 
expert  that  developed 
sit 

Focused  on  NID  for 
Man-in-the-  Middle, 
DOS  and  ping  of 
detection 
death, 
algorithm 
not 
specified 
The improvement was 
for  network  intrusion, 
not  DW 
intrusion 
detection 

Social vulnerability of 
the  network  was  not 
explored.  This  will 
efficient 
affect 
learning 

IDS 
developed 

was 

not 

There is  presently  no  developed intrusion  detection  system  for  social  media  platform  to  curtail 
the  activities  of  hackers  that  have  turned  their  attention  to the  platform.  Most  of  the  literatures 
reviewed do not have the intelligence to detect anomaly usage of social media account. 

Role Based Access Control (RBAC), Extended RBAC, Temporal RBAC (TRBAC), Risk-based 
access control, etc does not have the ability to detect an attacker who obtains access to the system 
using  some  compromised  credentials.  Intrusion  Detection  System  (IDS)  and  some  other 

 
 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                    71 

customized  security  solutions  for  DWs  have  also  been  proposed  including  second  level 
authentication. But the same mechanism used to evade  the first level authentication can still be 
employed  to  overcome  the  second  level  authentication  security  approach.  Hence  fooling  the 
intrusion 
attacker  with  fake  response  will  provide  a  better  reinforcement 
detection/prevention mechanism. 

to  DW 

Most  of  the  previous  proposals  used  KDD-CUP-99and  DARPA  98/99  dataset  for  training  but 
these  datasets  have  become  outdated  with  limitations  over  updating  of  new  attacks  [8].  Those 
earlier  models  might  not  work  well  owing  to  the  fact  that  attackers  changes  their  signatures 
regularly to evade detection. 

3.  CONCLUSIONS 

Social  media  network  has  become  the  nerve  centre  of  the  virtual  community  that  connects 
billions of heterogeneous users for mutual interaction. Because of its dynamic nature where users 
can share contents freely between friends and followers, hackers are seriously exploiting this rich 
platform  for  malicious  intention.  Various  strategies  for  attacking  social  media  users  have  been 
highlighted in this paper with various preventive approaches proposed by researchers. Despite all 
these preventive approaches, hackers activities on the platform is on the rise hence social media 
intrusion  detection  system  will  be  highly  recommended  as  second  line  of  defence  against  the 
attacks of hackers on the social media network platforms. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors would like to thank my lecturers for their constructive criticism and impact! 

REFERENCES 

[1]  A.  E.  Omolara,  A.  Jantan,  O.  I.  Abiodun,  V.  Dada,  H.  Arshad,  and  E.  Emmanuel,  “A  Deception 
Model Robust to Eavesdropping over Communication for Social Network Systems,” no. Im, pp. 1–
21, 2019. 

[2]  K. Musial and P. Kazienko, “Social networks on the Internet,” World Wide Web, pp. 31–72, 2012. 
[3]  C. Timm, Seven Deadliest Social Networks Attacks. USA: Elsevier Inc., 2010. 
[4]  A.  Arora  and  A.  Gosain,  “Intrusion  Detection  System  for  Data  Warehouse  with  Second  Level 

Authentication,” Int. J. Inf. Technol., vol. 13, pp. 877–887, 2021. 

[5]  M. S. Rahman, S. Halder, M. A. Uddin, and U. K. Acharjee, “An efficient hybrid system for anomaly 

detection in social networks,” Cybersecurity, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 1–11, 2021. 

[6]  A.  Singhal  and  S.  Jajodia,  “Data  warehousing  and  data  mining  techniques  for  intrusion  detection 

systems,” Distrib Parallel Databases, vol. 20, pp. 149–166, 2006. 

[7]  G.  N.  Prabhu,  K.  Jain,  N.  Lawande,  Y.  Zutshi,  R.  Singh,  and  J.  Chinchole,  “Network  Intrusion 

Detection System,” Int. J. Eng. Res. Appl., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 69–72, 2014. 

[8]  R.  A.  Jamadar,  “Network  Intrusion  Detection  System  Using  Machine  Learning,”  Indian  J.  Sci. 

Technol., vol. 11, no. 48, pp. 1–6, 2018. 

[9]  R. J. Santos, J. Bernardino, and M. Vieira, “DBMS Application Layer Intrusion Detection for Data 

Warehouses,” in Building sus- tainable information systems., 2013. 

[10]  O. Logvinov, “Standard for an Architectural Framework for the Internet of Things ( IoT ),” 2021. . 
[11]  “Social Media Attacks,” 2020. 
[12]  P. Jucevi and G. Valinevičienė,  “A Conceptual  Model of  Social Networking in  Higher  Education,” 

Electron. Electr. Eng., vol. 6, no. (102, 2010. 

[13]  H.  Vora,  J.  Kataria,  D.  Shah,  and  V.  Pinjarkar,  “Intrusion  Detection  System  for  College  ERP 

System,” J. Res., vol. 03, no. 02, pp. 69–72, 2017. 

[14]  B. Shanmugam and N. B. Idris, “Artificial Intelligence Techniques Applied To Intrusion Detection,” 

in Proceedings of the Postgraduate Annual Research Seminar, 2005, pp. 285–287. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 

      Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

[15]  C. F. Noonan and A. . Piatt, Global Social Media Directory. USA: U.S Department of Energy, 2014. 
[16]  E. S. Dandaura, U. M. Mbanaso, G. N. Ezeh, and U. C. Iwuchukwu, “The Use of Social Networking 

Service among Nigerian Youths between Ages 16 and 25 Years,” 2015. 

[17]  J.  Bagadiya,  “367  Social  Media  Statistics  You  Must  Know  In  2021,”  Social  Pilot,  2021.  [Online]. 

Available: https://www.socialpilot.co/blog/social-media-statistics. [Accessed: 12-Oct-2001]. 

[18]  C. Timm, Seven Deadliest Social Network Attacks. USA: Syngress Publishing, Inc, 2010. 
[19]  C.  Noonan  and  A.  Piatt,  Global  Social  Media  Directory,  no.  October.  USA:  U.S.  Department  of 

Energy, 2014. 

[20]  H.  Wilcox  and  M.  Bhattacharya,  “A  Human  Dimension  of  Hacking :  Social  Engineering  through 

Social Media,” in IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 2020. 

[21]  C. Suggs, “Hacking Social Media.” 
[22]  J.  Patterson,  “Hacking:  Beginner  to  Expert  Guide  to  Computer  Hacking,  Basic  Security,  and 

Penetration Testing (Computer Science Series).” 

[23]  L. Wang,  “Big Data in Intrusion Detection Systems and Intrusion Prevention Systems,”  J.  Comput. 

Networks, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 48–55, 2017. 

[24]  J.  Hani,  M.  Nashaat,  M.  Ahmed,  Z.  Emad,  E.  Amer,  and  A.  Mohammed,  “Social  Media 
Cyberbullying Detection using Machine Learning,” Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 
703–707, 2019. 

[25]  H. O. Alanazi, R. Noor, B. B. Zaidan, and A. A. Zaidan, “Intrusion Detection System : Overview,” J. 

Comput., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 130–133, 2010. 

[26]  S. Al Mansoori, A. Almansoori, M. Alshamsi, S. A. Salloum, and K. Shaalan, “Suspicious Activity 
Detection  of  Twitter  and  Facebook  using  Sentimental  Analysis,”  TEM  J.,  vol.  9,  no.  4,  pp.  1313–
1319, 2020. 

[27]  B.  Shah,  N.  Sharma,  and  S.  Bandgar,  “Cybercrime  Prevention  on  Social  Media,”  Int.  J.  Eng.  Res. 

Technol., vol. 10, no. 03, pp. 509–513, 2021. 

[28]  R.  Pandey  and  J.  Pant,  “A  Data  Mining  Approach  for  Attribute  Selection  in  Intrusion  Detection 

System,” Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 172, no. 1, pp. 11–14, 2017. 

AUTHORS 

Emmanuel Etuh is currently pursuing a PhD in Computer Science at the University of 
Nigeria,  Nsukka,  He  obtained  his  first  degree  certificate  in  Computer  Science  from 
Kogi State University, Anyigba in 2009 and an MSc degree in Computer Science from 
Ahmadu  Bello  University,  Zaria  in  2014,  His  research  interest  include  Artificial 
Intelligence, CyberSecurity, and Software Engineering.  

Professor Bakpo, Francis Sunday received his M Eng. degree in Computer Science and Engineering from 
Kazakh  National  Technical  University,  Almaty  (formerly  USSR)  in  1994  and  PhD 
degree in Computer Engineering in 2008  from Enugu State University of Science and 
Technology  (ESUT),  Agbani.  He  joined  the  Department  of  Computer  Science  at 
University  of  Nigeria  Nsukka  as  lecturer  II  in June  1996  and  further  progressed  from 
the  rank  of  lecturer  II  to  Professor  in  2010.  His  current  research  interest  includes 
Computer architectures, computer communications networking, artificial neural network applications, and 
Petri  net  theory.  He  is  dully  registered  professionally  as  member  Nigeria  Computer  Society,  MNCS  and 
Computer  professional  of  Nigeria,  MCPN,  respectively  and  has  also  published  a  number  of  excellent 
journal papers, books and conference proceeding papers in his field.  

Eneh,  Agozie  H  is  a  Senior  Lecturer  in  the  Department  of  Computer  Science  at  the 
University  of  Nigeria,  Nsukka.  His  Area  of  Specialization  include:  authentication 
protocols  analysis,  network  security,  optimisation  theories,  medical  informatics,  and 
assistive technologies for educating children and adolescents with learning difficulties.  

© 2021 By AIRCC Publishing Corporation. This article is published under the Creative 
Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. 

 
 
 
 
  
 
