Accepted in 2021 3rd International Conference on Sustainable
Technologies for Industry 4.0 (STI), 18-19 December, Dhaka

STRIDE-based Cyber Security Threat Modeling for
IoT-enabled Precision Agriculture Systems

Md. Rashid Al Asif∗, Khondokar Fida Hasan†, Md Zahidul Islam‡, and Rahamatullah Khondoker§
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Barishal, Bangladesh∗
Centre for Cyber Security Research & Innovation, RMIT University, 124 La Trobe Street, Melbourne, 3000, VIC, Australia†
Department of Information and Communication Technology, Islamic University, Bangladesh‡
Department of Business Computing, THM University of Applied Sciences, Friedberg, Germany§
Email: rashid.al.asif∗@gmail.com, ﬁda.hasan†@rmit.edu.au, zahidimage‡@gmail.com, rahamatullah.khondoker§@mnd.thm.de

2
2
0
2

n
a
J

0
3

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
3
9
4
9
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

traditional

Abstract—The concept of

farming is changing
rapidly with the introduction of smart technologies like the
Internet of Things (IoT). Under the concept of smart agriculture,
precision agriculture is gaining popularity to enable Decision
Support System (DSS)-based farming management that utilizes
widespread IoT sensors and wireless connectivity to enable
automated detection and optimization of resources. Undoubtedly
the success of the system would be impacted on crop productivity,
where failure would impact severely. Like many other cyber-
physical systems, one of the growing challenges to avoid system
adversity is to ensure the system’s security, privacy, and trust. But
what are the vulnerabilities, threats, and security issues we should
consider while deploying precision agriculture? This paper has
conducted a holistic threat modeling on component levels of
precision agriculture’s standard infrastructure using popular
threat intelligence tools STRIDE to identify common security
issues. Our modeling identiﬁes a noticing of ﬁfty-eight potential
security threats to consider. This presentation systematically
presented them and advised general mitigation suggestions to
support cyber security in precision agriculture.

Index Terms—Cyber security, Internet of Things (IoT), Precision

Agriculture, STRIDE, Threat Modeling

I. INTRODUCTION

The adoption and acceleration of disruptive technologies
such as the Internet of Things (IoT) and cloud computing
are propelling the 4th industrial revolution, changing our
lives and environment remarkably. One of the smart moves
of these technologies is in the farming system that replaces
the traditional farming infrastructure with smart infrastruc-
ture. Precision agriculture is a smart farming management
system that evolves from IoT aggregated sensors, actuators,
and devices with the intention of interaction, control, and
automated decision-making. Its already been introduced in
many countries and rolling in some developing countries like
Bangladesh and India to facilitate with lessen human effort,
reduced cost, saving time while increasing harvest and proﬁt
[1].

Most IoT devices that are being used for ﬁeld sensings,
such as temperature, humidity, and moisture sensors, are gen-
erally resource-constrained — they usually don’t have high-
end computation capabilities or memory. The communication
technology that has been employed also does not offer large
bandwidth. Such resource-constrained infrastructures are mal-
reputed with system vulnerabilities and windows with attack

vectors. Additionally, with the recent trend of cloud-based
virtualization, Machine learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
stepped forward the automation further by assisting with any
intelligent and automated decision decision including remotely
turning on/off an irrigation actuator, productivity monitoring
and forecasting, and disease control [2]. There are many IoT
platforms (both commercial and open-source) available for
precision agriculture services in the marketplace [3]. However,
involving the Internet undoubtedly widening the attack surface
where attack vectors originate from global sites too [4].
Therefore, cyber threats in smart farming management such
as precision agriculture are a signiﬁcant concern for sustain-
able development that can directly impact crop growth and
farmers’ realization. This paper has identiﬁed the cyber threat
associated with standard precision agriculture infrastructure to
offer a mitigation strategy.

Threat modeling is a well-accepted measure to design cyber-
secure infrastructure that helps identify, enumerate, priori-
tize threats for a system. It is a part of threat intelligence
aimed to apply appropriate controls against
threats. There
are different
threat modeling tools available; however, we
adopted STRIDE, a Microsoft corporation product, in our
modeling. While developing our model, we consider the design
to list all possible attack vectors
at
within and between nodes. Our proposed model
identiﬁes
a noticeable ﬁfty-eight cyber security threats in a standard
precision agriculture system. Considering these threats can
assist in developing appropriate countermeasures towards a
cyber-secure robust system.

the component

level

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II
reviews the usage beneﬁt of IoT and research scope toward se-
curity issues present at the device/component level in precision
agriculture. Afterward, the research methodology is presented
in Section III. Section IV summarizes components, data ﬂows,
interactors, and threat models to analyze threats. Section V
lists identiﬁed cyber security threats plus a recommended list
of defense mechanisms against threat categories. The paper is
concluded in Section VI with the future scope.

II. LITERATURE REVIEW

Smart farming or precision agriculture enables farmers to
treat plants (or animals) precisely with their needs towards

 
 
 
 
 
 
highest
level of productivity. Smart farming refers to the
introduction of a range of advanced technologies including
image
robotics, sensor technology, satellite imaging, GPS,
processing, big data, artiﬁcial intelligence, cloud computing.
Besides, there are IoT platforms available to aid precision
agriculture, such as Arable Mark (Pulsepod), Agri M2M,
Libelium–Waspmote, A3-uRADMonitor, Observant. I. Marcu
et al. presents a good comparative study on the basis of the
features, disadvantages of those platforms [3].

A. R. de Araujo Zanella et al. reviewed security issues and
their current state on smart agriculture [5]. They identiﬁed
smart agriculture as still in the emerging stage with low-
level security features (still an open issue). But, building
efﬁcient and robust system security is crucial. Later on,
four-layered smart-agricultural elements are presented along
with possible security issues. Finally, they provide a list of
security resources (i.e., intrusion/anomaly detection system,
ﬁrewall, anti-malware, anti-virus, access control, authentica-
tion, cryptography) where further improvement may enhance
the security in smart agriculture as a future direction.

Another study carried on security issues covering preci-
sion agriculture and introduced a risk-based framework using
Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) as a basis to
assess and prioritize vulnerabilities [6]. The proposed frame-
work helps to understand the cyber security vulnerabilities
within the technology itself and the environment wherein it is
adapted. Therefore, it helps to determine the required elements
for constructing a precision agriculture system protected from
cyber-attacks.

R. Khan et al. presented a simpliﬁed threat modeling frame-
work for cyber-physical systems (using Microsoft STRIDE)
to ensure system security at the component level [7]. But it
is a prerequisite to address vulnerabilities for each component
whenever interdependencies between components. Otherwise,
the entire security system may fall out of control. Therefore,
the framework followed a systematic and comprehensive ap-
proach to maximize security at the component level. So, it
might be helpful for a system design and validation process
before deployment.

A. Omotosho et al. performed threat modeling on eleven
IoT health devices based on device assets and access points
[8]. They have employed the STRIDE model
to identify
device threats and rank them using a threat-risk model named
DREAD. Also, they suggested countermeasures to mitigate
identiﬁed threats. Moreover, as part of the model prototype,
they developed a web-based system where all stakeholders
see device vulnerabilities, privacy risks, and threat ratings.
Thus, create an opportunity for designers to improve product
security. M. Cagnazzo et al. represented a similar threat mod-
eling in the context of the Mobile Health (mHealth) System
[9]. But it was with a focus on encryption and authentication
for resource-constrained devices. From a mHealth prototype,
authors identify assets and classify threats using STDIRE
methodology. Like the previous work, it labeled risk-level
using DREAD and recommend possible mitigation strategies
to afford a reliable atmosphere.

Fig. 1: Consolidated Scheme of Threat Modeling

Refer to above works, threat modeling resultant details may
be helpful in mitigation strategies to increase system security.
Moreover, researchers from [10] presented threat modeling on
a generic telesurgery system considering its components and
data ﬂows. The resultant threat detail might be crucial to check
whether proper mitigations are present before deployment.

In this work, we consider a precision agriculture scenario
based on the proposed IoT architecture [11] to perform threat
modeling as an extension of previous work.

III. METHODOLOGY

This research aims to perform threat modeling of precision
agriculture by following the approach displayed in Fig. 1. In its
process, we have considered and added two use cases follow-
ing one of our previous work [11]. This leads us to derived
system components that reveal functionalities, relationships,
and interactions among them. Next, we included a data ﬂow
diagram to point all components and data ﬂows. Afterward,
the Microsoft STRIDE method is applied to perform threat
modeling on the data ﬂow diagram. As a result, the threat
model produced threats with further details. Finally, we pre-
sented possible cyber security defense mechanisms to aid the
mitigation strategies against identiﬁed threats.

Fig. 2: Use cases of sensor measurement and actuator control

A. Use Case Scenario

The use case intends to explain precision agriculture from
the perspective of the proposed IoT architecture [11]. Simply,
temperature,
sensors are sensing measurements data (i.e.,

Use Case ScenarioSystem ComponentsData Flow DiagramOutcomeThreat ModelingThreat DetailsPossible MitigationsSensor MeasurementsActuator ControlCloudIoT GatewaySensorsIoT NodeSensorsIoT NodeCropland AreaIoT Field GatewayIoT Actuatorlevels, pH, relative humidity,

humidity, soil nutrient
leaf-
wetness) and sending to the cloud for further processing.
Besides, remote users perform any actions (i.e., spraying,
irrigation) via the actuators to the cropland. From Fig. 2,
sensor measurements are sent from the cropland to the cloud.
Besides, actuator control instructions are coming from the
cloud to the actuator. Here, we have explained two use cases
whether other use cases are possible to incorporate within the
system.

a) Sensing measurements: Cropland sensors are located
on different locations of the imagined cropland. All of those
are connected to the gateway and capable of sensing mea-
surements frequently or on user demands. The role of the
gateway is to collect and transmit those measurements to the
cloud. As measurement data is stored in the cloud the remote
users/cropland owners utilize those for purposes.

b) Device control: If the sensed soil humidity is below
the standard range then it should start the irrigation process.
In that case, the IoT ecosystem sends start instruction to the
Salo actuator. Besides, the cropland sensors are sending live
humidity measurements frequently to the cloud. At the same
time, the IoT system continuously checks certain humidity
levels whether to stop the irrigation process. And this can
be done automatically by setting appropriate conditions for
speciﬁc measurements and actions for actuators.

Fig. 3: System components of precision agriculture

B. System Components

Fig. 3 illustrated the system components of precision
agriculture, derived to specify the function of components,
relationship, and interaction among them. Each component
performs some actions based on input and generates output.
The generated output may feed into the input of another com-
ponent. Moreover, one component may have multiple input
dependencies to make it work. As a whole, the components
including gateways, sensors, cloud services, IoT nodes, and
human interactors have their role and integrated part of the
precision agriculture system.

With technological advancement (i.e., IoT, robotics, artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, sensor technology, satellite imaging, GPS,
image processing, etc.), precision agriculture allows better
crops production by reducing human effort [12]. It enables
farmers to monitor crop health for large areas in real-time.
However, it is essential to capture croplands or sense several
parameters such as soil temperature, pressure, humidity, soil
nutrient levels, pH, relative humidity, leaf wetness, and others.
Generally, sensors sense various parameters to send the cloud
via edge devices. Consequently, those measurements are ana-
lyzed to take further actions like spraying, irrigation. Finally,
the actuator performs the action based on the analyzed deci-
sion. Moreover, several issues (i.e., soil fertilization, disease
forecasting, and detection) can be addressed to enhance crop
productivity and quality [13], [14].

The human interactors (Remote Users and Mobile Clients)
manage and control all of the Sensors and Actuators (Irri-
gation, Drone Imaging/Spraying) attached to the system. The
IoT Node incorporates GPS, sensory metadata (i.e., data/type
conﬁguration, protocols, data reading/sending frequency) and
enables network connectivity with IoT Field Gateway. The
usage of GPS in precision agriculture allows the analysis of
soil property for croplands. And the analyzed results help to
form ﬁeld mapping and decide what type of soil is suitable
for a given crop. The Mobile Clients linked to the IoT Field
Gateway locally with the help of a Smart App and short-
distance radio communication technologies such as Bluetooth,
Bluetooth Low Energy, ZigBee, etc.

Like remote users, Mobile Clients may check the status such
as temperature, humidity, pressure, pH, soil nutrient level of
the cropland. This status information would be helpful to take
any further actions such as irrigation or applying fertilizer.
Here, Fog Node performs a sort of computation from the edge
of the network and sends only required information to the
cloud for further processing.

Cloud provides different services such as data accumula-
tion, abstraction, integration, remote visualization, analytics,
prototype, Smart App development, and more. It also inte-
grates Satellite Imaging to capture cropland along with drone
imaging for mainly disease forecasting purposes. Therefore,
in Cloud, every piece of information is stored, processed, and
served to remote users.

C. Data Flow Diagram (DFD)

The Fig. 4 represents the visual DFD of the precision
agriculture system that shows the high-level description and
points all of the components along with data ﬂows. Here,
we consider the functionalities of all gateways, actuators, and
sensors as a process as they accept input data, perform some
actions and produce some output information. In the DFD, we
have used the circle to denote process, arrow to represent data
ﬂow, and rectangle to show external interactor.

D. Threat Modeling

Generally, sensor measurements and actuator controlling
commands are transmitted through the Internet. So, any com-

Remote UsersCloudSatellite ImagingIoT Gateway/Fog NodeIoT Field GatewayIoT Nodes(Sensor Configuration, GPS)Sensors(Temperature, Humidity, Pressure)Mobile ClientActuators(Irrigation, Spraying, Imaging)Bidirectional dataflowComponentsLegendFig. 4: Data ﬂow diagram (Out of scope elements: Cloud, Satellite Imaging, IoT Node, and Sensors)

promise may result in a wrong decision or take the control of
the overall system. Thus, we cannot deny the potential security
issues (especially cyber security) in precision agriculture.

Threat modeling is a proactive way to identify, enumerate,
and prioritize threats thus helping to take appropriate safe-
guards against threats. Simply, it is formed to answer the
questions like “Where are the potential threats to the system?”,
“What are the most relevant threats?”, and “Where the system
is most vulnerable?” [15]. According to NIST special publica-
tion “threat modeling is a form of risk assessment that models
aspects of the attack and defense sides of a logical entity,
such as a piece of data, an application, a host, a system, or an
environment” [16].

IV. EVALUATION OF THREATS

In this section, a brief discussion is stated for the evaluation

of threats and the tool used to perform the threat modeling.

A. Analyze Threats in DFD

In this work, we have performed threat modeling on selected
components, data ﬂows, and interactors of DFD. We assume
that the Local User Zone, IoT Cloud Zone, IoT Field Gateway
Zone, IoT Device Zone, and Local User Zone are physically
secure and trusted (which is marked with red dashes in DFD).
Besides, we didn’t perform any threat analysis (kept out of
scope that marked as blur in DFD) for some components

including Cloud, Satellite Imaging, IoT Node, and Sensors.
The IoT Node and Sensors are placed in the croplands and
trusted thus kept out of scope. Moreover, we believe that
the Cloud/Satellite Imaging service providers take appropri-
ate countermeasures for possible security issues as they are
accounted for.

Finally, we consider only threats that associated with major
components, data ﬂows (interaction), and external interactor.
Those are as follows: 1) External interactors: Remote Users
(RU), Mobile Clients (MC); 2) Components: IoT Gateway/Fog
Node (IGFN), IoT Field Gateway (IFG), Actuator; 3) Data
ﬂows: Cloud to RU, RU to Cloud, IGFN to Cloud, Cloud -
to IGFN, IGFN to IFG, IFG to IGFN, IGFN to Actuator,
Actuator to IGFN, IFG to MC, MC to IFG.

B. Threat Models

There are multiple models available that enable to perform
cyber security threats assessment [17]. For example, Microsoft
STRIDE, an acronym that covers six threat categories namely
Spooﬁng, Tampering, Repudiation, Information Disclosure,
Denial of Service, and Elevation of Privilege; Process for
Attack Simulation and Threat Analysis (PASTA); Common
Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS); Attack trees; Security
Cards; Hybrid Threat Modeling Method (hTMM); Trike; Per-
sona non Grata (PnG); LINDDUN (linkability, identiﬁabil-
ity, nonrepudiation, detectability, disclosure of information,

CloudRemote Users (RU)Satellite Imaging(SI)RU_to_CloudCloud_to_RUCloud_to_SISI_to_CloudCloud_to_IGFNIGFN_to_CloudIFG_to_IGFNMC_to_IFGIFG_to_MCActuator_to_IGFNIGFN_to_ActuatorIFG_to_ININ_to_IFGSensors_to_ININ_to_SensorsIGFN_to_IFGIoT FieldGateway (IFG)IoT Field Gateway ZoneIoT Gateway/FogNode (IGFN)IoT Cloud Gateway ZoneSensors(Temperature,Humidity,Pressure)Generic  Trust BoundaryLocal User ZoneMobile Clients(MC) Actuator(Irrigation,Spraying, Imaging)IoT Node (IN) (SensorConfiguration,GPS)IoT Device ZoneFig. 5: Summary of STRIDE threat category with desired security property inside parentheses

TABLE I: Identiﬁed Threats for selected components, data ﬂows, and interactors

Threat
Category

Spooﬁng

Tampering

Repudiation

Information
Disclosure

Denial of
Service

Elevation of
Privilege

Threat
Count

Component, Data Flow, Interactor

05

15

05

15

14

04

Remote Users, IoT Gateway/Fog Node, IoT Field Gateway, Actuator, Mobile Clients

Remote Users, RU to Cloud, Cloud to RU, IoT Gateway/Fog Node, Cloud to IGFN, IGFN to Cloud, IoT Field Gateway,
IFG to IGFN, IGFN to IFG, Actuator, Actuator to IGFN, IGFN to Actuator, Mobile Clients, MC to IFG, IFG to MC

Remote Users, IoT Gateway/Fog Node, IoT Field Gateway, Actuator, Mobile Clients

Remote Users, RU to Cloud, Cloud to RU, IoT Gateway/Fog Node, Cloud to IGFN, IGFN to Cloud, IoT Field Gateway,
IFG to IGFN, IGFN to IFG, Actuator, Actuator to IGFN, IGFN to Actuator, Mobile Clients, MC to IFG, IFG to MC

Remote Users, RU to Cloud, Cloud to RU, IoT Gateway/Fog Node, Cloud to IGFN, IGFN to Cloud, IoT Field Gateway,
IFG to IGFN, IGFN to IFG, Actuator, Actuator to IGFN, IGFN to Actuator, MC to IFG, IFG to MC

IoT Gateway/Fog Node, IoT Field Gateway, Actuator, Mobile Clients

Fig. 6: Cyber security defense mechanisms against STRIDE category

unawareness, noncompliance); Operationally Critical Threat,
Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation (OCTAVE); Quantitative
Threat Modeling Method (Quantitative TMM); Visual, Agile,
and Simple Threat (VAST) Modeling.

Among all, we have chosen the Microsoft STRIDE model
to discover threats and possible mitigations because it
is
widely accepted in industry and academia. Moreover, an open-
source (free of cost) tool called “Microsoft Threat Modeling
Tool” is available from Microsoft that is continuously updated
and handy to perform threat modeling. The summary of the
STRIDE model is represented in Fig. 5.

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

After considering components, data ﬂows, interactors, and
threat modeling methods, this section exhibited resultant threat

details with some defense mechanisms against threat cate-
gories.

A. Resultant Threats

We have applied the Microsoft STRIDE method (with-
out taking any mitigation actions) on DFD for the chosen
components, data ﬂows, and interactors to identify cyber
security threats. As a result, we got ﬁfty-eight threats under
six STRIDE categories listed in Table-I.

B. Defense Mechanisms

Cyber security defense mechanism aims to protect con-
nected devices (i.e., gateway, router, switch, hub, pc, smart-
phone) from any compromise or provide software services to
authenticated users only. So, the defense is at both hardware

STRIDEImpersonating someone or somethingSpoofing(Authentication)Modifying data or code on disk, network, memory, or elsewhereTampering(Integrity)Claiming to have not performed an actionRepudiation(Non-repudiation)Exposing information to someone not authorized to access itInformation Disclosure(Confidentiality)Deny or degrade service to usersDenial of Service(Availability)Elevation ofPrivilege(Authorization)Allowing someone to perform unauthorized actionsDefense MechanismSpoofingat deviceMultifactor Authentication [18-20]InformationDisclosureat data flowat deviceEncryption (Symmetric/Asymmetric) mechanisms such as AES-256, RSA-4096, ECC, Secure Element (HSM) [23-25]Authenticated Encryption of TLS [26], AES of MACsec, ESP of IPsec, WPA3Elevation ofPrivilegeat deviceAccess Control Authorization [28]Denial ofServiceat data flowat deviceRedundant components, Secure Element (HSM) [23-25]Data Rate Limiting, Redundant data/network pathsTamperingat data flowat deviceHMAC [21], CMAC [22], Secure Element (HSM) [23-25]CMAC/HMAC of TLS [26], ICV of MACsec, AH of IPsec [27]Repudiationat deviceEnsure that appropriate Auditing and Logging is enforcedand software level
that can be the antimalware, ﬁrewall,
encryption, intrusion detection, access control, authentication,
authorization, and more. For securing the data ﬂow and at
rest, several defense mechanisms are applied, for example,
Hash-based Message Authentication Code (HMAC), Cipher-
based MAC (CMAC), Rivest–Shamir–Adleman (RSA) cryp-
tosystem, Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), Elliptic curve
cryptography (ECC), Transport Layer Security (TLS), Internet
Protocol Security (IPsec), Wi-Fi Protected Access 3 (WPA3),
Authentication Header (AH), Encapsulating Security Payload
(ESP), Integrity Check Value (ICV), Media Access Control
Security (MACsec), and Hardware Security Module (HSM).
In this work, we have provided generalized defense mecha-
nisms against STRIDE threat categories presented in Fig. 6.
Moreover, we suggest following NIST guidelines for standard
cryptographic algorithms and key length used to secure data
or communication in each threat category [29], [30].

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Precision agriculture optimizes the farming process, thus
increasing productivity by utilizing real-time sensors/devices
that help make data-driven decisions. However, cyber security
issues evolved from and with these devices and data com-
munication potential stakeholders’ concerns. This work has
performed threat modeling on a standard precision agriculture
framework using the Microsoft STRIDE model to tackle cyber
security issues. This work uses the Microsoft STRIDE model
to identify, enumerate, and categorize threats for selected com-
ponents, data ﬂow, and external interactors. As an outcome,
there identiﬁed ﬁfty-eight cyber security threats which need
to be controlled for a thriving smart farming eco-system. As
the next stage, this work will lead to deepening each threat to
assess risk. So that we can apply the most appropriate miti-
gation strategy for security betterment in precision agriculture
systems is scoped as the future work.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Khanna and S. Kaur, “Evolution of Internet of Things (IoT) and its
signiﬁcant impact in the ﬁeld of Precision Agriculture,” Computers and
electronics in agriculture, vol. 157, pp. 218–231, 2019.

[2] M. H. Kabir, K. F. Hasan, M. K. Hasan, and K. Ansari, “Explainable
Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Smart City Application: A Secure and Trusted
Platform,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00601, 2021.

[3] I. Marcu et al., “Overview of IoT basic platforms for precision agri-
culture,” in International Conference on Future Access Enablers of
Ubiquitous and Intelligent Infrastructures, 2019, pp. 124–137.

[4] K. F. Hasan, A. Overall, K. Ansari, G. Ramachandran, and R. Jurdak,
“Security, Privacy and Trust: Cognitive Internet of Vehicles,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.12878, 2021.

[5] A. R. de Araujo Zanella, E. da Silva, and L. C. P. Albini, “Security
challenges to Smart Agriculture: Current State, Key Issues, and Future
Directions,” Array, p. 100048, 2020.

[6] J. West, “A prediction model framework for cyber-attacks to precision
agriculture technologies,” Journal of Agricultural & Food Information,
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 307–330, 2018.

[7] R. Khan, K. McLaughlin, D. Laverty, and S. Sezer, “STRIDE-based
threat modeling for cyber-physical systems,” in 2017 IEEE PES Innova-
tive Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT-Europe), 2017,
pp. 1–6.

[8] A. Omotosho, B. Ayemlo Haruna, and O. Mikail Olaniyi, “Threat
modeling of internet of things health devices,” Journal of Applied
Security Research, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 106–121, 2019.

[9] M. Cagnazzo, M. Hertlein, T. Holz, and N. Pohlmann, “Threat modeling
for mobile health systems,” in 2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference Workshops (WCNCW), 2018, pp. 314–319.

[10] M. R. Al Asif and R. Khondoker, “Cyber Security Threat Modeling
of A Telesurgery System,” in 2020 2nd International Conference on
Sustainable Technologies for Industry 4.0 (STI), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[11] M. R. Al Asif, N. Mahfuz, and M. A. Momin, “An SDN-Enabled
IoT Architecture with Fog Computing and Edge Encryption Support,”
in Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Computational
Intelligence, 2020, pp. 409–423.

[12] U. Shaﬁ, R. Mumtaz, J. Garc´ıa-Nieto, S. A. Hassan, S. A. R. Zaidi,
and N. Iqbal, “Precision agriculture techniques and practices: From
considerations to applications,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 17, p. 3796, 2019.
[13] J. Sun, A. M. Abdulghani, M. A. Imran, and Q. H. Abbasi, “IoT
enabled smart fertilization and irrigation aid for agricultural purposes,”
in Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Computing,
Networks and Internet of Things, 2020, pp. 71–75.

[14] H. Lee, A. Moon, K. Moon, and Y. Lee, “Disease and pest prediction
IoT system in orchard: A preliminary study,” in 2017 Ninth International
Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), 2017, pp.
525–527.

[15] A. Shostack, Threat modeling: Designing for security. John Wiley &

Sons, 2014.

[16] M. Souppaya and K. Scarfone, “Guide to data-centric system threat
modeling,” National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2016.
[17] N. Shevchenko, T. A. Chick, P. O’Riordan, T. P. Scanlon, and C. Woody,
“Threat modeling: a summary of available methods,” Carnegie Mellon
University Software Engineering Institute Pittsburgh United . . . , 2018.
[18] A. A. Ahmed and W. A. Ahmed, “An effective multifactor authentication
mechanism based on combiners of hash function over internet of things,”
Sensors, vol. 19, no. 17, p. 3663, 2019.

[19] H. N. Noura, R. Melki, and A. Chehab, “Secure and lightweight mutual
multi-factor authentication for IoT communication systems,” in 2019
IEEE 90th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2019-Fall), 2019, pp.
1–7.

[20] Z. A. Alizai, N. F. Tareen, and I. Jadoon, “Improved IoT device
authentication scheme using device capability and digital signatures,” in
2018 International Conference on Applied and Engineering Mathematics
(ICAEM), 2018, pp. 1–5.

[21] A. Erroutbi, A. El Hanjri, and A. Sekkaki, “Secure and Lightweight
HMAC Mutual Authentication Protocol for Communication between
IoT Devices and Fog Nodes,” in 2019 IEEE International Smart Cities
Conference (ISC2), 2019, pp. 251–257.

[22] M. J. Dworkin, “Recommendation for block cipher modes of operation:

The CMAC mode for authentication,” 2016.

[23] P. Urien, “Cloud of secure elements perspectives for mobile and cloud
applications security,” in 2013 IEEE Conference on Communications
and Network Security (CNS), 2013, pp. 371–372.

[24] J. Saidov, B.-K. Kim, J.-H. Lee, and G. Lee, “Hardware Interlocking
Security System with Secure Key Update Mechanisms In IoT Environ-
ments,” The Journal of the Korea institute of electronic communication
sciences, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 671–678, 2017.

[25] T. W. Pieber, T. Ulz, C. Steger, and R. Matischek, “Hardware secured,
password-based authentication for smart sensors for the industrial in-
ternet of things,” in International Conference on Network and System
Security, 2017, pp. 632–642.

[26] P. Urien, “Introducing TLS/DTLS secure access modules for IoT
frameworks: concepts and experiments,” in 2017 IEEE symposium on
computers and communications (ISCC), 2017, pp. 220–227.

[27] A. Bhattacharjya, X. Zhong, J. Wang, and X. Li, “CoAP—application
layer connection-less lightweight protocol for the Internet of Things
(IoT) and CoAP-IPSEC Security with DTLS Supporting CoAP,” in Dig-
ital Twin Technologies and Smart Cities, Springer, 2020, pp. 151–175.
[28] O. J. A. Pinno, A. R. A. Gregio, and L. C. De Bona, “Controlchain:
Blockchain as a central enabler for access control authorizations in
the iot,” in GLOBECOM 2017-2017 IEEE Global Communications
Conference, 2017, pp. 1–6.

[29] Q. Dang, “NIST Special Publication 800-107 Revision 1 Recommenda-
tion for Applications Using Approved Hash Algorithms,” 2012.
[30] E. B. Barker, “Guideline for Using Cryptographic Standards in the
Federal Government: Cryptographic Mechanisms,” National Institute
of Standards and Technology, NIST SP 800-175Br1, Mar. 2020. doi:
10.6028/NIST.SP.800-175Br1.

