> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

1

Roadmap for Cybersecurity in  
Autonomous Vehicles 

Vipin Kumar Kukkala, Sooryaa Vignesh Thiruloga, and Sudeep Pasricha 
Colorado State University 

 

Abstract— Autonomous vehicles are on the horizon and will be 
transforming  transportation  safety  and  comfort.  These  vehicles 
will be connected to various external systems and utilize advanced 
embedded  systems  to  perceive  their  environment  and  make 
intelligent decisions. However, this increased connectivity makes 
these  vehicles  vulnerable  to  various  cyber-attacks  that can  have 
catastrophic effects. Attacks on automotive systems are already on 
the  rise  in  today’s  vehicles  and  are  expected  to  become  more 
commonplace in future autonomous vehicles. Thus, there is a need 
to strengthen cybersecurity in future autonomous vehicles. In this 
article, we discuss major automotive cyber-attacks over the past 
decade  and  present  state-of-the-art  solutions  that  leverage 
artificial  intelligence  (AI).  We  propose  a  roadmap  towards 
building  secure  autonomous  vehicles  and  highlight  key  open 
challenges that need to be addressed. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

T

HE  aggressive  attempts  of  automakers  to  make  vehicles 
fully autonomous have resulted in increased software and 
hardware complexity across automotive subsystems. Many 
state-of-the-art automotive subsystems for collision avoidance, 
lane  keep  assist,  pedestrian  and  traffic  sign  detection,  etc., 
demand  powerful  embedded  systems,  typically  referred  to  as 
electronic  control  units  (ECUs),  to  be  integrated  into  the 
vehicles.  To  meet  the  needs  across  various  subsystems,  a 
diverse  set  of  ECUs  consisting  of  different  compute  and 
memory capacities are used in today’s vehicles. The ECUs are 
distributed  across  the  vehicle  and  communicate  using  an  in-
vehicle network. Several in-vehicle network protocols are used 
in modern vehicles to meet the data rate, timing, and reliability 
requirements  of  automotive  subsystems.  Some  of  the  most 
commonly used in-vehicle network protocols include controller 
area  network  (CAN),  local  interconnect  network  (LIN), 
FlexRay, and Ethernet. Both ECUs and in-vehicle networks are 
becoming more complex to satisfy emerging autonomy needs.  
Additionally, a variety of automotive subsystems rely heavily 
on  the  data  from  external  systems  as  shown  in  Fig.  1,  which 
makes  modern  vehicles  highly  vulnerable  to  various  security 
attacks. In the past decade (2010 onwards), nearly 79.6% of all 
automotive attacks have been remote attacks, which do not   
require the attacker to be within the vicinity of the vehicle [1]. 
A  variety  of  attack  vectors  have  been  used  including  WiFi, 
telematics,  Bluetooth,  keyless  entry  systems,  and  mobile 
applications. We discuss many of these attacks in this article, as 
well  as  techniques  that  have  been  proposed  to  protect  the 
vehicles  from  cyber-attacks.  However,  due  to  the  overall 
increase of the automotive system complexity (heterogeneous 

ECUs,  network  architectures/protocols,  and  applications), 
detecting  cyber-attacks  is  not  easy,  which  poses  a  major 
challenge  for  emerging  connected  and  autonomous  vehicles 
(CAVs). There is a critical need for a monitoring solution that 
can serve as an intrusion detection system (IDS) to detect cyber-
attacks  in  vehicles.  Traditionally,  such  IDSs  in  computing 
systems have relied on using firewalls, or rule-based systems to 
detect cyber-attacks. These simple systems cannot detect highly 
complex modern automotive attacks.  

Fig. 1. Illustration  of an in-vehicle  network connecting  different ECUs using 
isolated  networks  that  are  connected  to  a  gateway  (GW),  and  external 
connectivity of modern vehicles with various systems in the environment. 

Another 

interesting 

subsystems 

(ADAS),  where 

trend  in  modern  vehicles 

is  the 
widespread  adoption  of  AI  techniques  for  advanced  driver 
assistance 
environmental 
perception  is  required  [2].  Such  AI  techniques  can  also  be 
deployed in powerful automotive ECUs to monitor and detect 
cyber-attacks. AI-based solutions are well known to be highly 
efficient  in  learning  the  complex  patterns  that  exist  in  high 
dimensional  time-series  vehicular  network  data.  They  can 
observe  for  anomalous  patterns  on  in-vehicle  networks  that 
connect all in-vehicle and external subsystems, to detect cyber-
attacks.  With  fully  autonomous  vehicles  supporting increased 
connectivity to external subsystems on the horizon, having an 
efficient IDS that can detect a variety of cyber-attacks using AI 
techniques is crucial and an urgent requirement. 

In this  article,  we  discuss  the  timeline  of  major automotive 
cyber-attacks  and  then  present  the  state-of-the-art  efforts  that 
utilize  advanced  AI  and  deep-learning  models  to  detect  and 

 
 
 
 
 
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

2

Fig. 2. Timeline of major automotive cyber-attacks. 

address  cyber-attacks in  vehicles.  We  also  present  a roadmap 
for achieving cybersecurity goals in autonomous vehicles and 
present insights on the future challenges in this area. This article 
is  motivated  by  the  increasing  frequency  of  attacks  on 
automotive  platforms  in  recent  years.  The  emphasis  on 
contemporary issues with cybersecurity in autonomous vehicles 
provides valuable insights for a general technical audience, as 
well  as  cyber-physical  architects,  security 
researchers, 
automakers, and Tier-N OEMs to understand the challenges in 
this  area  and  positively  impact  the  design  of  future  security-
aware automotive products. 

II.  HISTORY OF AUTOMOTIVE CYBER-ATTACKS 

Modern automotive systems are facing an inflection point as 
they become highly vulnerable to various security, privacy, and 
safety risks. Several automotive attacks have been observed in 
the past that ranged from targeting a single stationary vehicle to 
a fleet of vehicles on the road. Here we present a timeline of the 
major automotive attacks (Fig. 2) and discuss their impacts. 

The researchers at the University of California at San Diego 
and the University of Washington demonstrated one of the first 
vehicle  hacks  in  2010  [3].  They  exploited  the  onboard 
telematics system and reverse-engineered the system, and were 
able to gain full control of the vehicle. The researchers however 
worked  with  the  manufacturer  and  did  not  disclose  the  full 
details of the vulnerability. Needless to  say, this hack opened 
up a Pandora's box. Several other works followed this approach 
and  tried  to reverse  engineer  the ECUs  in  the  vehicles  in  the 
following  years.  However,  all  of  these  attacks  required  the 
attacker to be physically present inside the target vehicle, which 
resulted in dismissing as an unlikely situation and these hacks 
not gaining much traction in the media.  

This changed in 2015 when the first major remote attack was 
demonstrated on an unaltered 2014 Jeep Cherokee [4] by two 
security researchers. The researchers identified a software bug 
in the vehicle’s infotainment system that would allow them to 
connect  to  the  vehicle  remotely  over  the  4G  LTE,  and  send 
CAN messages to the ECUs in the vehicle. They demonstrated 
a  wide  range  of  attacks  ranging  from  remotely  controlling 
simple  functionality  such  as  the  vehicle  radio,  A/C,  and 
windshield  wipers  to  more  critical  functionalities  such  as 
controlling  brakes,  transmission,  and  even  killing  the  engine 
while the vehicle was on a freeway. The attackers were able to 
launch these attacks on a remote vehicle from their home. This 
hack created a huge media outburst and the manufacturer had 

to  issue a patch  to  fix the  bug. The  same researchers  in 2016 
exposed  another  bug  that  let  them  remotely  control  the 
acceleration,  steering  wheel,  and  cruise  control  systems. 
Similar attacks came into light in 2016, where an attacker was 
able  to  remotely  control  a  Nissan  Leaf  in  England  from 
Australia.  These  attacks  changed  the  landscape  of  how 
automotive cyber-attacks were carried out and highlighted the 
urgency to address cybersecurity in vehicles. 

Starting  around  2016,  a  new  type  of  attack  emerged  that 
focused  on hacking the  keyless  entry  system  in  vehicles.  The 
goal  of  these  attacks  was  to  steal  the  vehicle  rather  than 
remotely  control  it.  The  researchers  at  the  University  of 
Birmingham  showed  how  they  were  able  to  recover  the 
cryptographic  algorithms  and  keys  from  the  ECUs  and  clone 
the  VW  group  remote  control  by  eavesdropping  on  a  single 
signal sent by the original remote [5]. Several other attacks have 
emerged  that  targeted  mobile  applications  that  were  used  for 
remote start and immobilizer systems in vehicles. Some of the 
recent attacks in this class include cloning the Tesla Model S 
key fob in 2018 [6] and the Tesla Model X key fob in 2019 [7]. 
Researchers  were  able  to  clone  key  fobs  by  capturing  the 
Bluetooth  communication  between  the  key  fob  and  the  body 
control module (BCM) and were able to use a bootleg BCM to 
replay it and steal the vehicle in under 90 seconds.  

A different class of attacks has gained popularity since 2018, 
mainly  targeting  the  ADAS  systems  and  the  onboard  sensors 
used for perception. In [8], researchers generated various robust 
visual adversarial perturbations to a stop sign that resulted in it 
being misidentified as a 45 mph speed limit sign. A few years 
before this, researchers were able to blind a Mobileye C2-270 
camera and demonstrate jamming, spoofing, and relay attacks 
on  an  Ibeo  LUX3  LiDAR  sensor  [9].  More  recent  attacks 
include  tricking  lane  change  system  of  a  Tesla  Model  S  with 
bright stickers on the road by Tencent Keen security lab in 2019 
[10] and object removal attacks on LiDAR sensors in 2021 [11]. 
Another recent attack that made the headlines was the T-BONE 
attack  [12]  where  researchers  were  able  to  gain  remote  code 
execution  (RCE)  over  WiFi  on  the  infotainment  system  in  a 
Tesla Model 3 using a drone. They were able to remotely open 
doors  and 
trunk,  change  seat  positions,  steering,  and 
acceleration  modes.  However,  this  exploit  does  not  provide 
driving control of the vehicle. The researchers also highlighted 
that  adding  a  privilege  escalation  exploit  such  as  CVE-2021-
3347 to T-BONE would weaponize this exploit and turn it into 
a worm. This would allow them to load new WiFi firmware and 
exploit  other  Tesla  cars  in  the  victim  car’s  proximity.  More 

 
 
 
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

3

recently, in the beginning of 2021, an online hacking group by 
the  name  DoppelPaymer  claimed  to  conduct  a  ransomware 
attack  on  KIA  motors  America  and  have  stolen  unencrypted 
confidential data [13].  

Thus,  cyber-attacks  are  becoming  increasingly  prevalent  in 
modern  vehicles.  A  comprehensive  taxonomy  of  vehicular 
security  attacks  with  details  related  to  attacker  types,  attack 
tools and actions, and attack objectives are discussed in [31]. 

III.  AI TO THE RESCUE FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN 
VEHICLES 

these 

techniques  mainly 

To  protect  vehicles  from  devastating  cyber-attacks,  it  is 
crucial  to  address  cybersecurity  in  the  automotive  domain. 
Several  lightweight  authentication  mechanisms  such  as  [25] 
and [33], and versatile automotive security frameworks such as 
[26] try to improve security in resource-constrained automotive 
ECUs.  However, 
focus  on 
authenticating  the  ECUs  during  the  initial  setup  phase  and 
cannot detect the presence of an attacker in the later stages or 
when an already authenticated ECU gets compromised. Thus, 
there  is  a  need  for  an  intrusion  detection  system  (IDS)  that 
continuously  monitors  the  vehicular  network  and  detects  any 
cyber-attacks. Moreover, an IDS is extremely crucial and often 
the last line of defense when the attacker breaks through defense 
mechanisms.  Traditional  IDS  solutions  relied  on  firewalls  or 
rule-based  (non  AI-based)  systems  to  detect  cyber-attacks. 
However, they are not effective against detecting sophisticated 
automotive  attacks  as  they  fail  to  capture  the  complex 
dependencies  in  the  time-series  vehicular  network  data.  With 
the  availability  of  large  troves  of  data  in  vehicles  from 
communication  between  ECUs  and  external  systems,  and  the 
increased computing capabilities of ECUs, AI-based solutions 
can be leveraged to parse high dimensional vehicular network 
data. Here we discuss some recent work on AI-based IDSs that 
encompass  monitoring  and  attack  detection  at  an  in-vehicle 
network level and vehicular ad hoc network (VANET) level. 

A.  IDSs for In-Vehicle Network Security 

A  generative  adversarial  neural  network  (GAN)  based  IDS 
was  introduced  in  [14]  that  tries  to  learn  the  patterns  of  the 
message  identifier  (ID) in  CAN  data,  by  transforming  the  ID 
data  into  “CAN  images”,  to  detect  attacks.  This  approach 
employs  two  discriminator  models  to  detect  known  and 
unknown  attacks,  respectively.  The  former  is  trained  using 
normal  and  abnormal  CAN  images  from  actual  vehicle  data, 
and  the  latter  is  trained  simultaneously  using  the  adversarial 
process  (a  mix  of  adversarial  data  from  the  generator  and 
normal CAN images). The second discriminator learns to detect 
fake CAN image that looks similar to real CAN images. This 
approach  showed  high  detection  accuracy  against  distributed 
denial of service (DDoS), and message injection attacks. 

A  gated  recurrent  unit  (GRU)  based  recurrent  autoencoder 
IDS is presented in [18]. During training, this technique learns 
the normal operating behavior of the system by reconstructing 
the  input  attack-free  CAN  data.  During  inference  at  runtime, 
this technique observes the deviation from the learned normal 
system  behavior  to  detect  cyber-attacks.  This  approach  was 
implemented  on  real-world  automotive  hardware  and  tested 
under several attack scenarios. In [16], an unsupervised LSTM-

the 

traversing 

based  encoder-decoder  was  proposed  that  integrates  a  novel 
self-attention mechanism to learn the characteristics of normal 
in-vehicle  network.  The  attention 
data 
mechanism  enhanced  the  ability  of  the  model  to  focus  on  the 
important hidden state information from the past. A one-class 
support vector machine (OCSVM) based classifier was trained 
and deployed together with the self-attention model at runtime 
to  detect  cyber-attacks.  This  approach  demonstrated  superior 
performance  in  accuracy,  F1  score,  false-positive  rate  (FPR), 
and receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve-area under 
the curve (AUC) compared to various state-of-the-art statistical, 
proximity-based,  and  machine  learning  (ML)  based  IDS 
approaches  under  different  attacks  scenarios.  In  [15],  a 
weighted  state  graph  (WSG)  was  constructed  in  the  offline 
phase with the CAN message IDs as the vertices of the graph 
and the edges of the graph representing the time-varying state 
transitions  of  CAN  data  frames.  At runtime,  a  sub-graph  was 
generated for a sliding window of CAN IDs, and an anomaly 
was  triggered  if  the  generated  sub-graph  was  not  within  the 
range  of  the  WSG  created  during  training.  This  technique 
focuses  on  detecting  a  wide  range  of  attacks  and  minimizing 
FPR.  A  temporal  convolutional  neural  attention  (TCNA) 
network-based lightweight IDS was presented in [17], to learn 
very  long-term  dependencies  between  messages  in  an  in-
vehicle network. This was used to effectively learn the normal 
system behavior of the vehicle at design time. A decision tree 
(DT)  based  classifier  was  used  to  learn  the  model  deviations 
that correspond to the normal vehicle operation at design time. 
At  runtime,  the  trained  TCNA  and  DT  models  were  used  to 
observe for deviations using the deviation score metric to detect 
cyber-attacks. This technique outperformed all the comparison 
works in the Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) metric. 

B.  IDSs for VANET Security 

Several  other  efforts  have  focused  on  AI-based  IDS  in 
VANET  environments,  particularly  during  vehicle-to-vehicle 
(V2V), and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication. 

An AI-based IDS framework was introduced in [21] to detect 
and  mitigate  anomalous  vehicle  responses  of  cooperative 
adaptive cruise control (CACC) modules in a V2V network. An 
ML-based  predictor  was trained to  predict the acceleration of 
the  preceding  vehicle,  and an anomaly  alert  was raised  when 
the observed acceleration exceeded the prediction by a certain 
threshold. The framework then assessed the threshold deviation 
level  and  would  override  the  CACC  when  anomalies  were 
detected.  On-road  driving  data  such  as  the  preceding  vehicle 
acceleration, 
inter-vehicle  space,  vehicle  velocity  was 
periodically collected to train the ML model. A data-driven IDS 
to  detect  attacks  occurring 
in  roadside  units  (RSUs) 
communicating with a vehicle was presented in [19]. It used a 
convolution neural network (CNN) based architecture to extract 
the  link  load  features  of  the  RSU  to  detect  attacks.  This 
technique  demonstrated  high  accuracy  compared  to  neural 
network,  support  vector  machine,  and  principal  component 
analysis models. However, this technique was evaluated only a 
limited set of attacks. A hybrid IDS framework was proposed 
in  [20]  that  performed  a  three-phase  data  traffic  analysis, 
reduction,  and  classification  on  the  received  cloud  service 
requests  to  detect  intrusions.  A  combination  of  a  deep  belief 

 
 
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

4

neural  network  (DBN)  and  a  DT  classifier  was  presented  to 
perform data dimensionality reduction and attack classification. 
This  technique  achieved  high  detection  accuracy  and  lower 
FPR when evaluated under DoS, probe, remote to user (R2L), 
and user to root (U2R) attacks. However, this approach incurs 
large detection accuracy. An LSTM based autoencoder model 
was proposed in [22] to detect intrusion in V2X networks. The 
LSTM  model  tries  to learn  the  temporal representation  of  the 
compressed  network  traffic  data,  and  any  deviation  from  the 
learned  representation  is  classified  as  an  attack.  The  authors 
claim  their  technique  can  detect  intrusions  in  both  in-vehicle 
and external networks with high accuracy. 

TABLE I 
SUMMARY OF AI-BASED IDS SOLUTIONS DISCUSSED IN THIS ARTICLE 

Level 

In-vehicle 
network 

VANET 

Work 
GIDS [14] 

INDRA [18] 

LATTE [16] 

TENET [17] 

RACCON 
[21] 

DD-IDS [19] 

CS-IDS [20] 

AED-ITS 
[22] 

Technique 
GAN based IDS using CAN images 
GRU based recurrent autoencoder; static 
threshold based attack detection 
LSTM based encoder-decoder with self-
attention; OCSVM based attack detection 
Temporal CNN with neural attention; DT 
based classifier for attack detection 
Explores five different machine learning 
techniques; static threshold to detect V2V 
attacks 
CNNs to detect attacks aimed at RSUs 
DBN for data reduction; DT classifier to 
detect attacks in received cloud service 
requests 
LSTM based autoencoder; static threshold 
to detect V2V and V2I attacks 

A  summary  of  both  in-vehicle  network  and  VANET  level 
IDSs  discussed  in  this  article  are  summarized  in  Table  I. 
Moreover, the techniques in [16], [17], and [18] have explored 
the  feasibility  of  AI-based  IDS  on  a  real-world  automotive 
ECU.  They  were  able  to  detect  various  cyber-attacks  with 
minimal computational, memory, and power overhead. 

IV.  CYBERSECURITY ROADMAP FOR AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES 

Despite  the  many  promising  state-of-the-art  AI-based  IDS 
techniques  that  show  compelling  results,  several  issues  still 
need to be addressed to make future autonomous vehicles truly 
secure.  Here  we  discuss  various  key  elements  in  roadmap 
(shown  in  Table  II)  to  achieve  autonomous  automotive 
cybersecurity  goals  in  the  near  future.  Note  that  the  order  in 
which the key elements in the roadmap are presented does not 
represent  a  recommendation  for  solving  them  sequentially  in 
that order. These key elements can be addressed concurrently. 

A.  Cybersecurity Aware Design Practices 

Traditional  automotive  systems  are  designed  by  having 
safety  and  reliability  requirements  as  the  main  focus,  and 
security is added as an additional layer on the top. This severely 
limits  the  scope  of  security  goals  that  can  be  realized,  which 
exposes the automotive systems to a variety of attacks. On the 
other  hand,  in  a  cybersecurity-aware  design  process,  the 
security requirements are considered from the beginning of the 
development  cycle.  This  integration  of  security  as  one  of  the 
fundamental  requirements  in  the  design  process  helps  in 
achieving  a  diverse  set  of  security  goals,  making  automotive 
systems  robust  and  better  protected  against  cyber-attacks. 

Additionally, advanced security strategies such as the defense-
in-depth  or  castle  strategy  [27],  where  a  series  of  layered 
security  mechanisms  are  built  to  provide  confidentiality  and 
integrity goals, need to be adapted to further enhance security. 
These  approaches  introduce  redundancy 
the  defense 
mechanisms  that  can  be  highly  effective  against  complex 
attacks.  

in 

The modern automotive system design process also needs to 
employ  proactive  security  strategies  such  as  a  zero-trust 
security model. This model relies on never trust, always verify 
principle,  where  no  participant  or  transaction  is  trusted  by 
default, even if they were verified earlier. Zero trust practices 
advocate for mutual authentication and verifying their identity 
and  integrity.  This  is  a  prominent  strategy  in  cloud-based 
systems,  data  centers,  and  corporate  IT,  that  needs  to  be 
customized  for  time-critical  resource-constrained  automotive 
systems.  Lastly,  designing lightweight  security  protocols  will 
be  crucial,  especially  with  the  adoption  of  5G  and  newer 
networks  in  VANETs  that  will  require  security-specific 
processing  to  finish  within  microsecond  latencies  to  avoid 
missing deadlines. 

TABLE II 

KEY ELEMENTS IN CYBERSECURITY ROADMAP FOR AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES 

Roadmap Elements 

Components 

Cybersecurity-aware 
design practices 

Secure hardware and 
software stack 

New security and AI 
standards and regulations 

Advanced threat 
intelligence 

Open challenges 

  Security requirements 
  Multi-layered security 
  Zero trust security 
  HSMs and TPMs 
  SDL for automotive software 
  SOTA and FOTA updates 
  ISO/SAE 21434 
  UNECE WP. 29 
  AI regulations 
  Vulnerability assessment 
  Penetration testing 
  Auto ISAC 
  Data protection and privacy 
  Tamper-proof AI 
  Securing automotive IC supply chain 
  Adopting emerging technologies 

B.  Secure Hardware and Software Stack 

With level-3 and level-4 autonomous vehicles involving high 
and full automation (as defined in SAE J3016 [34]) expected to 
hit  the  roads  soon,  automotive  hardware  and  software  is 
experiencing  a  paradigm  shift.  Modern  ECUs  handle  various 
safety-critical  applications  such  as  autonomous  lane  change, 
collision avoidance, airbag deployment, etc., which makes them 
an attractive target for malicious attackers. One of the popular 
approaches  to  protect  ECUs  from  being  attacked  is  by 
implementing  security  mechanisms to  authenticate and  verify 
the  identity  of  the  components.  However,  this  incurs  high 
overhead on the ECUs and can jeopardize real-time operations 
of the vehicle. To address this, future autonomous vehicles must 
utilize  cryptographic  accelerators  called  hardware  security 
modules  (HSMs)  to  offload  security  tasks.  Moreover,  future 
vehicles  need  to  employ  trusted  platform  modules  (TPMs), 
which  provide  a  hardware  root  of  trust  to  enable  secure 
computing and secure key storage. A comprehensive discussion 
of  hardware  security  primitives  for  vehicles  including  HSMs 
and TPMs is discussed in [32]. Moreover, recent works such as 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

5

[33]  that  explored  the  use  of  physically  unclonable  functions 
(PUFs),  and  [26]  that  used  meta-heuristics  based  key-
management  can  help  in  achieving  lightweight  secure  ECU 
authentication. 

Various other security features will also need to be supported 
within  ECUs,  such  as  core  isolation  (which  protects  safety-
critical  processes  by  isolating  them  in  memory),  memory 
integrity  (to  ensure  malicious  code  is  not  injected  in  the 
memory corresponding to critical processes), and address space 
layout  randomization  (to  randomize  memory  locations  where 
the applications are loaded and protect against buffer overflow 
attacks).  Moreover,  automotive  application  development 
should  adopt  security  development  lifecycle  (SDL)  [28] 
practices  that  involve  including  the  security  artifacts  in  the 
software development lifecycle. Automakers need to adopt the 
over  the  air  (OTA)  updates  as  a  standard  practice  to  provide 
patches  to  the  software  (SOTA)  and  firmware  (FOTA) 
vulnerabilities  and  need  to  include  the  required  hardware  to 
enable this. Currently, SOTA updates are employed by multiple 
automakers  but  FOTA  updates  remain  uncommon.  Lastly, 
adopting secure multi-party computation (MPC) eliminates the 
need  for  sharing  data  with  a  trusted  third-party  and  allows 
collaborators  to  work  securely  on  encrypted  data.  In  2021, 
Bosch  launched  an  open-source  project  called  Carbyne  stack 
[29] that enables secure data processing using MPC. 

C.  New Security and AI Standards and Regulations 

In August 2021, ISO and SAE jointly published the ISO/SAE 
21434 standard for Road Vehicles - Cybersecurity Engineering. 
It specifies various engineering requirements for cybersecurity 
risk  management  for  road  vehicles  including  many  of  their 
components  and  interfaces.  Another  standard,  SAE  J3061 
provides guidance and establishes high-level principles related 
to  security  of  cyber-physical  systems.  There is a need  for  the 
development of similar standards across all vehicle subsystems, 
and  to  encourage  OEMs  and  Tier-N  suppliers  to  adopt  them. 
The lack of current cybersecurity-centric regulatory mandates 
allows  automakers  today  to  have  less  stringent  security 
requirements resulting in subpar security in vehicles. In 2020, 
the world forum for harmonization of vehicle regulations (WP. 
29)  of  the  United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for  Europe 
(UNECE)  adopted  two  new  regulations  that  mandate  all 
automakers in the 54 contracting nations to adopt cybersecurity 
management 
software  update 
(CSMS) 
management systems (SUMS) by July 2022.  

systems 

and 

Moreover, with the increasing adoption of AI algorithms in 
modern vehicles, there is a growing need for regulations around 
AI  development.  In  April  2021,  the  European  Commission 
introduced the first ever legal regulation on AI to mitigate the 
hazards of “high risk” AI applications. Even though this does 
not specifically focus on autonomous vehicles, this is a move in 
the  right  direction.  There  is  also  a  need  for  more  legal 
regulations  around  crashes  and  other  accidents  caused  by 
driving  decisions  made  by  AI  algorithms  in  autonomous 
vehicles.  The  need  for  this  was  highlighted  in  2018  when  a 
ridesharing company’s autonomous vehicle testing resulted in 
a fatal crash leading to the death of a pedestrian. The company 
did  not  face  any  criminal  charges  but  halted  testing  of  the 
autonomous vehicles. 

D.  Advanced Threat Intelligence 

Threat intelligence refers to the act of collecting, processing, 
and analyzing data to understand existing and future threats. It 
is  crucial  to  continuously  monitor  vehicles  for  any  cyber-
threats, to design effective remedial actions. Vehicles today go 
through  multiple  years  of  rigorous  testing  to  ensure  safety 
functionalities but do not go through any comparable testing to 
ensure security. Threat intelligence data needs to be collected 
for  vehicles  and  used  for  enhanced  cybersecurity  testing. 
Conducting  regular  vulnerability  assessments  and  penetration 
testing on vehicles will be crucial and should be made just as 
important  (and  frequent)  as regular  vehicle  maintenance.  It is 
also  important  to  have  a  common  platform  to  share  this 
information  between  different  organizations  to  effectively 
tackle cyber-attacks. To solve this, the automotive information 
sharing and analysis center (Auto-ISAC) was formed in 2015. 
It  consists  of  52  members  ranging  from  OEMs  to  Tier-N 
suppliers  actively  sharing  information  about  cyber-threats  in 
vehicles.  Auto-ISAC also  works  with the  U.S.  Department of 
homeland  security  (DHS)  to  share  vulnerabilities  with  the 
federal government. Such advanced threat intelligence sharing 
across  organizations  will  be  crucial  to  ensure  the  security  of 
future autonomous vehicles. 

V.  OPEN CHALLENGES 

Beyond  the  recommendations  that  have  already  been 
discussed, we present some key open challenges that represent 
promising opportunities for researchers to assist with achieving 
security goals in future autonomous vehicles. 

A.  Data Protection and Privacy 

Data theft is a rapidly growing concern in today’s world and 
is a prevalent issue across various industries. In 2020 alone, the 
average cost of a single data breach was around $3.86 million 
[1]. This is also a concern in future autonomous vehicles as the 
vehicles  collect  and  operate  on  large  volumes  of  data  of 
different  types.  Data  thefts  have  varying  levels  of  safety, 
security,  and  economic  impacts  depending  on  the  type  and 
severity of the breach. Such thefts can compromise individual 
user data as well as intellectual property data of vehicle OEMs. 
With  the  recent  introduction  of  next-generation  driverless 
ridesharing  services  in  places  such  as  Phoenix  and  San 
Francisco, the stakes for user data privacy now is higher than 
ever. For instance, attackers can use stolen user information to 
launch more effective socially engineered attacks. The issues of 
security,  trust,  and  privacy  in  autonomous  vehicles  are 
presented in detail in [24]. Techniques such as confidentiality 
integrity  availability 
immutable 
ephemeral (DIE) models need to be adopted in the automotive 
domain  to  ensure  data  protection  and  privacy  of  future 
autonomous vehicles. 

(CIA)  and  distributed 

B.  Tamper-proof AI 

AI algorithms have shown superior performance in IDS and 
ADAS  subsystems  for  autonomous  vehicles.  However,  these 
algorithms  are  vulnerable  to  carefully  crafted  adversarial 
attacks  [8].  Moreover,  with  the  rollout  of  increasingly 
connected vehicles, we envision that Black-hole DDoS attacks 
(where communication between vehicles is blocked) and Sybil 

 
 
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

6

attacks (where a vehicle operates with multiple identities) will 
become  increasingly  common.  Such  attacks  will  result  in 
confusing  AI  algorithms,  potentially  causing  failure  across 
vehicle  subsystems.  Recent  model  inversion  attacks  [30]  that 
try to reconstruct training data from the model parameters are 
gaining  popularity.  Such  attacks  pose  a  great  threat  to  the 
proprietary data of the automakers that are used to train the AI 
models.  Moreover,  with  newer  and  scalable 
learning 
approaches  for  large  AI  algorithms  such  as  with  federated 
learning in datacenter environments, the need for creating new 
approaches for tamper-proof and adversarial attack-resilient AI 
algorithms  becomes  even  more  imperative.  A  comprehensive 
survey  of  adversarial  attacks  on  AI/ML  algorithms  in  CAVs, 
with  adversarial  defense  approaches  and  open  challenges  is 
discussed in detail in [35]. 

C.  Securing Automotive IC Supply Chains 

As  different 

semiconductor 

integrated  circuit 

(IC) 
components in a vehicle are manufactured in different parts of 
the world today, it is crucial to have a secure supply chain. Any 
vulnerability induced from the supply chain in any component 
of  the  vehicle  will  have  disastrous  effects  on  autonomous 
vehicles. This issue is further exacerbated with the increasing 
demand for the RSUs and 5G infrastructure to enable intelligent 
transportation systems. A comprehensive list of IC supply chain 
concerns and a logic obfuscation technique to overcome them 
is presented in [23]. Techniques such as digital watermarking, 
IC fingerprinting, IC metering, etc., need to be further explored 
to ensure a secure supply chain. 

D.  Adopting Emerging Technologies 

In recent  years, researchers have  started  looking  into  using 
WiGig  networks  that  use  IEEE  802.11ad  multiple  gigabit 
wireless system (MGWS) standard at 60 GHz frequency for in-
vehicle  network  communication.  The  ability  to  support  high 
data rates and enable low latency applications can transform the 
prospect  of  both  in-vehicle  networks  and  future  self-driving 
applications. The feasibility of using IEEE 802.11ad millimeter 
wave (mmWave) for in-vehicle communication between ECUs 
is  demonstrated  in  [36],  with  a  worst-case  (experimentally-
observed) throughput of around 300 Mbps. Another disruptive 
technology that could revolutionize future autonomous vehicles 
is  blockchain  technology.  The  blockchain’s  decentralized 
ledger provides  accurate and  simultaneous  access  to  different 
types  of  data,  such  as  traffic  information  and  better  vehicle 
tracking 
ride-sharing  applications.  A 
blockchain-based scheme to mitigate the security and privacy 
issues in autonomous vehicles is discussed in [37]. However, as 
these  technologies  are  still  in  their  infancy  in  the  automotive 
to  be  meticulously  scrutinized  by 
domain, 
security 
characterizing 
mechanisms to enhance security.  

vulnerabilities 

information 

they  need 

exploring 

and 

for 

VI.  CONCLUSION 

In this article, we presented a comprehensive timeline of the 
major automotive cyber-attacks and discussed their impact. We 
then discussed the need for efficient intrusion detection systems 
and  presented  various  state-of-the-art  AI-based  intrusion 
detection  techniques.  We  presented  a  roadmap  for  realizing 
secure autonomous vehicles in the future, while discussing both 

technical and regulatory issues that need to be addressed along 
with the  key  open  challenges  that  currently  remain  unsolved. 
The  key  elements  of  the  cybersecurity  roadmap  and  open 
challenges highlight some of the crucial concerns that need to 
be  addressed  to  solve  the  problem  of  cybersecurity  in  future 
autonomous vehicles. Moreover, secure hardware and software 
stacks in conjunction with advanced threat intelligence will be 
the  vital  fundamental  components  towards  realizing  various 
security  goals.  Ultimately,  incorporating  cybersecurity-aware 
vehicle design practices, as discussed in this article, will be of 
utmost importance  to  comprehensively  achieve  security  goals 
required 
from  emerging 
sophisticated attacks across the entire vehicle infrastructure.  

future  vehicles 

to  safeguard 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This  work  was  supported  by  National  Science  Foundation 

(NSF), through grant CNS-2132385. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  “Upstream  Security's  2021  Global  Automotive  Cybersecurity  Report,” 
[Online].  Available:  https://upstream.auto/2021report.  (Accessed:  18 
December, 2021). 

[2]  V. K. Kukkala, J. Tunnell, S. Pasricha and T. Bradley, “Advanced Driver-
Assistance  Systems:  A  Path  Toward  Autonomous  Vehicles,”  in  IEEE 
Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 18-25, Sept. 2018.  
[3]  K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, S. Patel, T. Kohno, S. Checkoway, 
D.  McCoy,  B.  Kantor,  D.  Anderson,  H.  Shacham,  and  S.  Savage, 
“Experimental  security  analysis  of  a  modern  automobile,”  in  IEEE 
symposium on security and privacy, 2010. 

[4]  C.  Valasek,  and  C.  Miller,  “Remote  Exploitation  of  an  Unaltered 

Passenger Vehicle,” in Black Hat USA, 2015. 

[5]  F. D. Garcia, D.  Oswald, T.  Kasper, and P.  Pavlidès, “Lock  it and  still 
lose it—on the (in) security of automotive remote keyless entry systems,” 
in 25th USENIX, 2016. 

[6]  L.  Wouters,  E.  Marin,  T.  Ashur,  B.  Gierlichs,  and  B.  Preneel,  “Fast, 
Furious and Insecure: Passive Keyless Entry and Start Systems in Modern 
Supercars,” in Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and  Embedded 
Systems, pp. 66-85, 2019. 

[7]  L.  Wouters,  B.  Gierlichs,  and  B.  Preneel,  “My  other  car  is  your  car: 
compromising the Tesla Model X keyless entry system,” in Transactions 
on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pp. 149-172, 2021. 
[8]  K.  Eykholt,  I.  Evtimov,  E.  Fernandes,  B.  Li,  A.  Rahmati,  C.  Xiao,  A. 
Prakash, T. Kohno, and D. Song, “Robust physical-world attacks on deep 
learning visual classification,” in Proc. of IEEE CVPR, 2018. 
J.  Petit,  B.  Stottelaar,  M.  Feiri,  and  F.  Kargl,  “Remote  Attacks  on 
Automated  Vehicles  Sensors: Experiments  on Camera and LiDAR,” in 
Black Hat Europe, 2015. 

[9] 

[10]  Tencent  Keen  Security  Lab,  “Experimental  Security  Research  of  Tesla 

Autopilot," 2019. 

[11]  Z. Hau, K. T. Co, S. Demetriou, and E. C. Lupu, "Object removal attacks 

on lidar-based 3d object detectors," in arXiv preprint, 2021. 

[12]  R.P  Weinmann  and  B.  Schmotzle,  “TBONE  –  A  zero-click  exploit  for 

Tesla MCUs [White paper],” ComSecuris, 2020. 

[13]  “Kia  Motors  America  suffers ransomware attack, $20  million ransom,” 
[Online]  Available:  https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/ 
kia-motors-america-suffers-ransomware-attack-20-million-ransom/. 
(Accessed: 18 December, 2021). 

[14]  E.  Seo,  H.  M.  Song,  and  H.  K.  Kim,  “GIDS:  GAN  based  Intrusion 
Detection System for In-Vehicle Network,” in Privacy, Security and Trust 
(PST), pp. 1-6, 2018. 

[15]  Y.  Linghu,  and  X.  Li,  “WSG-InV:  Weighted  State  Graph  Model  for 
in  IEEE  Wireless 

Intrusion  Detection  on  In-Vehicle  Network,” 
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 1-7, 2021. 

[16]  V. K. Kukkala, S. V. Thiruloga, and S. Pasricha, “LATTE: LSTM Self-
Attention  based  Anomaly  Detection 
in  Embedded  Automotive 
Platforms,”  in  ACM  Transactions  on  Embedded  Computing  Systems 
(TECS), Vol. 20, No. 5s, Article 67, August 2021. 

 
 
> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

7

[17]  S.  V.  Thiruloga,  V.  K.  Kukkala,  and  S.  Pasricha,  “TENET:  Temporal 
CNN  with  Attention  for  Anomaly  Detection  in  Automotive  Cyber-
Physical Systems,” in ASP-DAC, 2021. 

[18]  V.  K.  Kukkala,  S.  V.  Thiruloga,  and  S.  Pasricha,  “INDRA:  Intrusion 
Detection  using  Recurrent  Autoencoders  in  Automotive  Embedded 
Systems,” in IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated 
Circuits and Systems (TCAD), Vol. 39, Iss. 11, November 2020. 

[19]  L.  Nie,  Z.  Ning,  X.  Wang,  X.  Hu,  Y.  Li,  and  J.  Cheng,  “Datadriven 
intelligent  Internet  of  vehicles:  A  deep 
intrusion  detection  for 
convolutional  neural  network-based  method,”  in  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Network Science and Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 4, April 2020. 

[20]  M.  Aloqaily,  S. Otoum, I.  Al Ridhawi, and Y. Jararweh, “An  intrusion 
detection  system  for  connected  vehicles  in  smart  cities,”  in  Ad  Hoc 
Networks 90, 2019. 

[21]  S.  Boddupalli,  A.  S. Rao, and S. Ray, “Resilient  Cooperative  Adaptive 
Cruise Control  for  Autonomous  Vehicles  Using Machine Learning,” in 
arXiv preprint, 2021. 

[22]  J.  Ashraf,  A.  D.  Bakhshi,  N.  Moustafa,  H.  Khurshid,  A.  Javed,  and  A. 
Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled lstm autoencoder architecture for 
discovering anomalous events from intelligent transportation systems,” in 
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2020. 

[23]  K.  Shamsi,  M.  Li,  K.  Plaks,  S.  Fazzari,  D.  Z.  Pan,  and  Y.  Jin,  “IP 
protection  and  supply  chain  security  through  logic  obfuscation:  A 
systematic  overview,”  in  ACM  Transactions  on  Design  Automation  of 
Electronic Systems (TODAES), vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1-36, 2019. 

[24]  G. Muhammad, and M. Alhussein, “Security, Trust, and Privacy for the 
Internet  of  Vehicles:  A  Deep  Learning  Approach,”  in  IEEE  Consumer 
Electronics Magazine, 2021. 

[25]  Q. Wang and  S.  Sawhney, “VeCure:  A practical  security  framework to 
protect the CAN bus of  vehicles,” in IEEE International Conference on 
the Internet of Things, 2014.  

[26]  V. K. Kukkala, S. Pasricha, T. Bradley, “SEDAN: Security-Aware Design 
of  Time-Critical  Automotive  Networks,”  in  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Vehicular Technology, Vol. 69, Iss. 8, August 2020. 

[27]  M. R. Stytz, “Considering defense in depth for software applications,” in 

IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 72-75, 2004. 

[28]  M.  Howard,  and  S.  Lipner,  “The  security  development  lifecycle,” 

Redmond: Microsoft Press, 2006. 

[29]  Robert Bosch GmbH, Carbyne Stack, github:  https://github.com/carbynestack 

(Accessed: 18 December, 2021). 

[30]  S.  Chen,  M.  Kahla,  R.  Jia,  and  G.  J.  Qi,  “Knowledge-Enriched 
in  Proc.  of  IEEE/CVF 

Distributional  Model  Inversion  Attacks,” 
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021. 

[31]  H. Thapliyal, S. P. Mohanty, and S. J. Prowell, “Emerging Paradigms in 
Vehicular Cybersecurity,” in IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 
8, no. 6, pp. 81-83, Nov. 2019. 

[32]  C.  Labrado,  and  H.  Thapliyal,  “Hardware  security  primitives  for 
vehicles,” in IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 99-
103, Nov. 2019. 

[33]  C.  Labrado,  H.  Thapliyal,  and  S.  P.  Mohanty,  “Fortifying  Vehicular 
Security  Through  Low  Overhead  Physically  Unclonable  Functions,”  in 
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 18, 
Iss. 1, pp. 1-18, 2022. 

[34]  SAE  International,  “Taxonomy  and  Definitions  for  Terms  Related  to 
Driving  Automation  Systems  for  On-Road  Motor  Vehicles.”  [Online]. 
Available:  https://www.sae.org/standards/content/j3016_202104/,  2021 
(Accessed: 18 December 2021). 

[35]  A. Qayyum, M. Usama, J. Qadir and A. Al-Fuqaha, “Securing Connected 
&  Autonomous  Vehicles:  Challenges  Posed  by  Adversarial  Machine 
Learning  and  the  Way  Forward,”  in  IEEE  Communications  Surveys  & 
Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 998-1026, 2020. 

[36]  R.  Nino,  T.  Nishio  and  T.  Murase,  “IEEE  802.11ad  Communication 
Quality Measurement in In-vehicle Wireless Communication  with Real 
Machines,”  in  IEEE  Annual  Ubiquitous  Computing,  Electronics  & 
Mobile Communication Conference (UEMCON), 2020. 

[37]  R. Gupta, S. Tanwar, N. Kumar, and S. Tyagi, "Blockchain-based security 
attack  resilience  schemes  for  autonomous  vehicles  in  industry  4.0:  A 
systematic review," in Computers & Electrical Engineering, 2020. 

 
 
