Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.DOI

Deﬁning Security Requirements with the
Common Criteria: Applications,
Adoptions, and Challenges

NAN SUN12, CHANG-TSUN LI1, (SENIOR MEMBER, IEEE), HIN CHAN 3, BA DUNG LE 24, MD
ZAHIDUL ISLAM 4, LEO YU ZHANG 1, (MEMBER, IEEE), MD RAFIQUL ISLAM4, AND
WARREN ARMSTRONG.5
1School of Engineering & Information Technology, University of New South Wales, Canberra, ACT 2612, Australia
2Cyber Security Cooperative Research Centre, Joondalup, WA 6027, Australia
3Australian Cyber Security Centre, Kingston, ACT 2604, Australia
4School of Computing, Mathematics and Engineering, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, NSW 2678, Australia
5QuintessenceLabs Pty Ltd, Canberra, ACT 2609, Australia

Corresponding author: Nan Sun (e-mail: nan.sun@adfa.edu.au).

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
2

The work is supported by the Cyber Security Research Centre Limited whose activities are partially funded by the Australian
Government’s Cooperative Research Centres Programme.

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

4
v
7
1
4
7
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT Advances in emerging Information and Communications Technology (ICT) technologies
push the boundaries of what is possible and open up new markets for innovative ICT products and services.
The adoption of ICT products and systems with security properties depends on consumers’ conﬁdence
and markets’ trust in the security functionalities and whether the assurance measures applied to these
products meet the inherent security requirements. Such conﬁdence and trust are primarily gained through
the rigorous development of security requirements, validation criteria, evaluation, and certiﬁcation. The
Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation (often referred to as Common Criteria
or CC) is an international standard (ISO/IEC 15408) for cyber security. Motivated by encouraging the
adoption of the CC that is used for ICT security evaluation and certiﬁcation, in this paper, we conduct a
systematic review of the CC standard and its adoptions. Adoption barriers of the CC are investigated based
on the analysis of current trends in cyber security evaluation. In addition, we share the experiences and
lessons gained through the recent Development of Australian Cyber Criteria Assessment (DACCA) project
on the development of the Protection Proﬁle that deﬁnes security requirements with the CC. Best practices,
challenges, and future directions on deﬁning security requirements for trusted cyber security advancement
are presented.

INDEX TERMS Common Criteria, Cyber Security, Protection Proﬁle, Security Standard and Certiﬁcation,
Trusted System

I. INTRODUCTION

S TATISTICS from the Australian Cyber Security Centre’s

(ACSC) Annual Cyber Threat Report [1] show a sharp
upwards trend in the number of cyber security incidents.
Cyber security issues are becoming a day-to-day struggle
across both private and public sectors. The ever-increasing
number of cyber attacks and security incidents continues
to deepen concerns over data breaches, physical system
damage, economic loss, reputation harm, and even compro-
mise of national security [2]. With such acute concerns, the
development of security requirements for Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) products is of paramount

importance. With a robust security infrastructure in place,
hacking and other forms of cyber attacks can be prevented
and mitigated to some extent [3]. However, security vulnera-
bilities often slip into ICT products during the development
and implementation stages. With the more widespread use
of ICT products, it is imperative to have in place a rigorous
security process to ensure the products are secure during
the design and development process, validate their security
performance, and promote the enforcement of protection
policies.

In recent years, the interest in trusted systems that enforce
a given set of attributes to a stated degree of assurance has

VOLUME 4, 2016

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

reemerged [4]. Enhancing the trust and conﬁdence users
have in ICT products is of great signiﬁcance in the area of
cyber security, which can be gained through setting security
standards and using independent assessment against the stan-
dards [5]. The Common Criteria for Information Technology
Security Evaluation (often referred to as Common Criteria
or CC) is an international standard (ISO/IEC 15408) for
achieving cyber security certiﬁcation. It is inherited from ICT
security assurance through a rigorous veriﬁcation process,
which is conducted on a case-by-case basis [6]. With the
strict, standardized and repeatable methodology, the CC pro-
vides assurance for implementing, evaluating and operating
a security product at the level that is commensurate with the
operational environments.

Under the CC, vendors list the intended security func-
tional requirements (SFRs) within a Security Target (ST)
[6]. Since new products are constantly being developed and
every product is designed and developed differently, Protec-
tion Proﬁles (PPs) have been created for common products,
such as databases, operating systems, and smart cards [7].
Generally, a PP deﬁnes a set of security requirements and
objectives for a speciﬁc category of products or systems.
In addition, the PP can serve as a benchmark in terms of
product security. Once validated by competent and licensed
laboratories [8], a certiﬁcate is issued by the certiﬁcation
authority and recognized by CC signatory countries.

Since the CC standard emerged in the 1990s, there have
been 17 Certiﬁcate Authorizing Participants (including Aus-
tralia) and 14 Certiﬁcate Consuming Participants signed up to
the Common Criteria Recognition Arrangement (CCRA) [9].
Suppose an ICT security product is successfully evaluated.
In that case, the product will be certiﬁed by the certiﬁcation
authority of a CCRA signatory country and listed on the
Certiﬁed Products List at the CC Portal [10]. The certiﬁcation
helps consumers determine whether the products meet their
security requirements, which also boosts the competitiveness
of the products by comparing them with similar products on
the market.

Contributions of this paper: This paper aims to provide
an overview of current cyber security efforts to develop CCs
internationally and in Australia, in order to encourage the
adoption of the CC by the wider community. We ﬁrstly in-
troduce the CC methodology and contemporary applications
of the CC. Besides, we investigate the current adoption of the
CC. By comparing the CC with the state-of-the-art security
standards, we explain the signiﬁcance and demonstrate the
impact of the CC. Speciﬁcally, through the collaboration
with the Australian Certiﬁcation Authority of the Australian
Cyber Security Centre, QuintessenceLabs and cyber security
researchers in academia, the lessons and best practices rele-
vant to deﬁning security requirements with the PP develop-
ment are presented in this paper. The target audiences of the
paper are researchers in academia, security policy-makers,
industrial practitioners, and end-users in public and private
sectors who are interested in the speciﬁcation, development,
evaluation, certiﬁcation, procurement, and operation of ICT

products with security properties. In summary, the contribu-
tions of this work are as follows.

• A systematic review of the CC and its applications are
demonstrated based on literature review combined with
practical experience gained through the recent Develop-
ment of Australian Cyber Criteria Assessment (DACCA)
project 1.

• An in-depth and comprehensive analysis of current
trends in the CC adoption is carried out. Based on the
identiﬁed challenges of the CC adoption, the adoption
barriers of the CC internationally and nationally are
analyzed.

• Practices, recommendations and future directions de-
rived from the analysis and solutions to address iden-
tiﬁed challenges in deﬁning security requirements with
the CC are presented.

Comparison with related works: There are limited re-
view works that explore security requirements for ICT prod-
ucts and services. The latest work in [3] provided an overview
of cyber security certiﬁcation for the Internet of Things (IoT).
In [3], Matheu et al. analyzed the various cyber security
certiﬁcation schemes and the potential challenges in apply-
ing them to the IoT ecosystem. They also studied current
efforts in risk assessment and testing processes. The work
[3] made signiﬁcant contributions to the deployment of an
IoT cyber security certiﬁcation framework. However, this
work [3] focused speciﬁcally on IoT products and covered
a broad range of certiﬁcation standards without an in-depth
discussion of the CC methodology and adoption. From the
perspective of security testing and risk assessment in the
IoT, previous works [11] [12] [13] reviewed the key building
blocks for the cyber security certiﬁcation process. Besides
security certiﬁcation in IoT, Leszczyna et al. [14] conducted
a comprehensive survey on smart grid standards that deal
with cyber security issues and provided valuable insights into
security-related standards. The work in [14] covered 36 cyber
security-related and 12 privacy-related standards on smart
grids. However, similar to [3], insightful analysis on the CC
is lacking. In addition, Kara et al. [15] reviewed the CC in
a speciﬁc ﬁeld, which stressed CC’s applications in secure
software development. When it comes to the signiﬁcance of
the CC, Matheu et al. [3] acknowledged the CC as the most
widely deployed and adopted cyber security certiﬁcation
standard in the ﬁeld of IoT. Furthermore, Houmb et al. [16]
proposed a CC-driven security requirements elicitation and
tracing approach, which demonstrates the capability of the
CC on providing security expertise, knowledge, and guide-
lines for building secure systems. Albeit the fact that Russia
is neither a Certiﬁcate Authorizing Participant nor a Certiﬁ-
cate Consuming Participant of the CC, the history, structure,
and features of the CC used in the Russian scheme are pre-
sented in [17] and [18], which manifest the importance of the
CC. In addition, China is not a CCRA signatory country but

1https://cybersecuritycrc.org.au/development-australian-cyber-criteria-

assessment

2

VOLUME 4, 2016

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

has the adoption of the CC called GB/T 18336 [19]. To the
best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst comprehensive
survey on the CC for ICT Security Evaluation with regard to
its applications, adoptions and related challenges.

Roadmap: The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
We start with introducing the methodology and applications
of the CC towards security assurance for ICT product evalua-
tion in Section 2. Section 3 presents our comprehensive liter-
ature review with respect to the CC adoption trend, adoption
barriers, and its impact. Section 4 discusses the challenges
in PP development and our experience gained from the
development of a Protection Proﬁle that deﬁnes the security
requirements for encryption key management appliances. In
addition, the best practices and future directions that support
CC approaches are shared based on the identiﬁed challenges.
Section 5 concludes this review paper.

II. COMMON CRITERIA METHODOLOGY
This section aims to introduce the CC methodology and its
applications for evaluating ICT products. The analysis is
based on Protection Proﬁles and Certiﬁed Products listed on
the CC portal, research papers and technical reports from
various organizations including governments, vendors and
other CC participants. In addition, potential categories of CC
applications on emerging technologies are proposed.

A. DRIVING SECURITY ASSURANCE THROUGH
SECURITY TARGETS AND PROTECTION PROFILES
The CC is the driving force for the widest available mutual
recognition of secure ICT products. In this subsection, we
demonstrate how to drive security assurance through Secu-
rity Targets and Protection Proﬁles with the CC standards.
Firstly, deﬁnitions of key CC concepts are identiﬁed and
speciﬁed. Secondly, we introduce the methodology of the CC
by presenting the rationales and relationships among the core
building blocks in the CC. Thirdly, we emphasize that the CC
is risk-based by illustrating how the CC works to reduce and
minimize risks and threats, so as to raise users’ conﬁdence in
the security performance of ICT products.

1) Background and Deﬁnitions
The CC was developed to certify that products and systems
meet pre-deﬁned security requirements [20]. Through a set
of speciﬁcations and guidelines designed to evaluate ICT
products and systems, the products that have undergone
successful testing and evaluation are awarded the CC certi-
ﬁcation [4].

The history of the CC: In 1994, the CC was developed
by the governments of the US, Canada, Germany, France,
the UK, and the Netherlands [20]. The CC is the uniﬁed
standards of the Canadian Trusted Computer Product Evalua-
tion Criteria (CTCPEC), the United States Trusted Computer
System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), and the European In-
formation Technology Security Evaluation Criteria (ITSEC)
[21]. The consolidation of these security standards helps to

TABLE 1: The classes of Security Assurance Requirements

Class
APE
ASE
ADV
AGD
ALC
ATE
AVA
ACO

Class name
Protection Proﬁle Evaluation
Security Target Evaluation
Development
Guidance Documents
Life-Cycle Support
Tests
Vulnerability Assessment
Composition

TABLE 2: The classes of Security Functional Requirements

Class
FAU
FCO
FCS
FDP
FIA
FMT
FPR
FPT
FRU
FTA
FTP

Class name
Security Audit
Communication
Cryptographic Support
User Data Protection
Identiﬁcation and Authentication
Security Management
Privacy
Protection of the TOE Security Functionality
Resource Utilization
TOE Access
Trusted Path/Channels

avoid the repetitive work on the evaluation of similar prod-
ucts and systems of the same type and also addresses the ap-
plication in prevailing international markets. By March 2021,
the Common Criteria Recognition Arrangement (CCRA)
including 17
consists of 31 governmental organizations,
certiﬁcate authorizing nations and 14 certiﬁcate consuming
nations [22]. The CCRA aims to conduct evaluations to
high and consistent standards, improve the availability of
Certiﬁed Products, and eliminate the duplication and improve
the efﬁciency of evaluations and processes [22]. The CCRA
maintains the CC portal’s Certiﬁed Products List (CPL) [10]
that lists all CC Certiﬁed Products completed by all certiﬁcate
authorizing nations.

Key CC concepts: The part of the product or system that is
the subject of the evaluation is called the Target of Evaluation
(TOE). To deﬁne a standard set of security requirements for
a particular class of related products, the Protection Proﬁle
(PP) is usually developed by a user or a user group [20]. A
PP serves as a reusable template of security requirements to
support the deﬁnition of functional standards, and also as a
guide for formulating product development or procurement
speciﬁcations. A PP is an implementation-independent set of
security requirements for a particular technology that enables
repeatable evaluations. To enhance the consistency of testing,
some PPs are augmented with the speciﬁcation of testing
activities. Depending on the TOE, multiple proﬁles can be
used at once based on the particular technology that the TOE
is to be certiﬁed. If a vendor has an ICT product that they
would like to be evaluated and certiﬁed under CC standards,
they must complete a Security Target (ST) description. The
ST is the document provided by the vendor to identify the
security features of the TOE [6]. In addition, the ST includes
the evaluation of any potential security risks by deﬁning the
security functional and assurance measures that the TOE

VOLUME 4, 2016

3

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

should offer to meet CC requirements.

As shown in Table 1, eight categories of Security Assur-
ance Requirements (SARs) are identiﬁed by the CC to be
used as the basis for gaining conﬁdence that claimed security
measures are implemented correctly. The CC deﬁnes eleven
categories of Security Functional Requirements (SFRs) in
relation to desirable security functionalities to provide a
standard way of expressing the requirements for a TOE, as
summarized in Table 2. The Evaluation Assurance Levels
(EAL) deﬁne how the product is tested and how thoroughly
the product is evaluated. The EAL levels are scaled from
EAL1 (the lowest) to EAL7 (the highest) [6]. It should be
noted that the EAL number does not measure the security
of the product but states at what level the product or system
was tested. A higher EAL level reﬂects added assurance
requirements that must be met to achieve the CC certiﬁcation
[23]. Although the product or system that will be certiﬁed
must fulﬁll the exact assurance requirements to achieve a
speciﬁc EAL level, they do not have to fulﬁll the exact
functional requirements (i.e., security features). Therefore,
the product or system with a higher EAL level does not
necessarily mean more secure in the particular application
than the one with a lower EAL level. If two products contain
the same and necessary security features in the ST, then a
higher EAL level indicates the product is more secure.

How are products tested: For evaluation against a PP
that speciﬁes testing activities, the vendor should complete
a self-assessment on compliance with the PP. For EAL-based
evaluation, the vendor’s testing would serve as an input to
the evaluator’s testing [6]. The tests are carried out under
laboratory conditions to validate the security features of the
product and to evaluate how the product satisﬁes the require-
ments listed in the ST [8]. If the validation and evaluation
are successful, the product will be awarded a CC certiﬁcate
and listed on the CC portal [24]. From the consumer’s point
of view, the CC certiﬁcation ensures consumers that they
can trust the products they are investing in conformance to
the vendor’s claims and can offer reliable security protection
for their operational environment. For the vendors, the CC
certiﬁcation boosts the competitiveness of their products
when the consumers compare similar products on the market.
One of the advantages of using the CC is that products can
be evaluated once and sold in multiple nations. The CCRA
ensures that the same criteria and testing methodology are
applied to the products against the same standards in dif-
ferent accredited laboratories, regardless of their geographic
location or national afﬁliation. For governments, besides sup-
porting procurement, the CC certiﬁcation also increases the
transparency of ICT products’ security features, facilitating
the supervision and surveillance of the market.

The CC is risk-based: The CC process is helpful as
a guide for the development, evaluation and procurement
of ICT products with security functionality [23]. Typically,
from the perspective of risk control and management, the
CC is risk-based, as illustrated in Figure 1. On the one
hand, under the CC methodology, security is concerned with

FIGURE 1: The Common Criteria is risk-based

protecting assets that refer to entities that the owners of
a system places value upon, including hardware, software,
data, and transmission link. On the basis of the impact of
the threats on the assets and the likelihood of the threats
being exploited, threats increase the risks to the assets. The
owners impose ICT and non-ICT countermeasures that seek
to reduce and minimize the risk to assets. On the other hand,
the CC evaluation provides the conﬁdence to achieve the pro-
tection goals of ICT security with conﬁdentiality, integrity,
availability, authenticity, and non-repudiation [25], which
is also needed by vendors and purchasers. Sufﬁcient and
correct countermeasures, which are achieved by conforming
to CC requirements, will minimize the risks to the assets. By
evaluating ICT security assessments in line with CC, trust
under risk can be achieved.

2) Methodology of the Common Criteria
We explain the CC methodology by introducing core build-
ing blocks of the CC, including TOE description, security
problems, security objectives, and security requirements. The
relationships between these core building blocks are depicted
in Figure 2. Generally, a Protection Proﬁle (PP) deﬁnes the
security requirements of a technology type while a Secu-
rity Target (ST) describes how the TOE meets the deﬁned
requirements in the CC. The TOE physical environment,
security problems, security objectives, security requirements
and the purpose of the TOE, which is relevant to the product
type and the intended use, are included in the PP [3]. The
goal of the CC methodology is to achieve an internationally
recognized evaluation benchmark for ICT security. As shown
in Figure 2, a PP is a CC requirement speciﬁcation for a
speciﬁc technology. In the context of a dedicated use-case,
a set of security requirements stated for a given usage are
extracted to instantiate an ST and determine the TOE [26].

TOE description: To give end users a general understand-
ing of what the TOE can do, the way it can be used, and
whether it meets their security needs [6] is the ﬁrst step in the
CC methodology.

Security problems: In line with the description of the
TOE, the security problems will be deﬁned in three aspects:
threats, organizational security policies, and assumptions [6].
Firstly, a threat consists of adversarial actions performed by
a threat agent on an asset. The actions affect one or more

4

VOLUME 4, 2016

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

FIGURE 2: Methodology of the Common Criteria

properties of the asset from which that asset derives its value.
One example of a threat is “An attacker may attempt to
intercept communications from the TOE". Secondly, organi-
zational security policies are security rules, procedures, or
guidelines imposed by an actual or hypothetical organization
in the operational environment, which can be applied to
the TOE and/or its operational environment. An example
of organizational security policies on the auditing activities
is “Audit logs will be archived every seven days". Lastly,
assumptions can be made about the operational environment,
including the physical setting (e.g., “the TOE is located
in a secure area, which will prevent unauthorized physical
access"), personnel skills and behaviour (e.g., “operators of
the TOE are appropriately trained"), and connectivity (e.g.,
“the TOE will not be connected to an insecure network").

Security objectives: The security objectives are the in-
tended solution expressed as a concise and abstract response
to the security problems. The security objectives serve three
purposes: (1) provide a high level solution to the security
problems; (2) divide the solution into those objectives to be
satisﬁed by the TOE, and those objectives to be satisﬁed by
the environment; (3) demonstrate that these part-wise solu-
tions can form a complete solution to the security problem.
Security objectives for the TOE consist of the objectives
that the TOE should achieve to solve security problems.
For example, a high-level objective such as “the TOE shall
keep conﬁdential the content of all ﬁles transmitted between
it and a server" addresses the security problems caused by
unauthorized monitoring of network trafﬁc. The security
objectives for the operational environment include statements
that describe the goals that the environment should achieve.
For example, “the operational environment shall ensure that
all human TOE users receive appropriate training before
working with the TOE" provides the procedural measures to
assist the TOE in providing its security functionalities cor-
rectly from the perspective of the operational environment.

Security Functional Requirements (SFRs): The SFRs
are a translation of the security objectives for the TOE [7].
The SFRs provide a more detailed and complete translation
to make sure that the security objectives can be completely
addressed. Speciﬁcally, the SFRs are independent of any
speciﬁc technical implementation. Hence, the CC requires
the translation from security objectives to the SFRs to be con-
ducted with standardized language. The advantages and rea-
sons for the standardized language requirements are twofold.
One is to provide an exact description instead of natural
language of what is the functionality to be evaluated. Another
advantage is to allow comparison among products of the
same class that will be evaluated. The standardized language
enforces the use of the same terminology and concepts
that contributes to the easy comparison. The CC supports
the standardized translation by providing predeﬁned security
functional requirements, operations, and dependencies. It is
worth mentioning that the SFRs are only for the TOE. The
operational environment is not evaluated, and therefore a
description aimed at the evaluation of the operational envi-
ronment is not required [7]. The parts of the operational envi-
ronment may be evaluated in another independent evaluation.
For instance, an operating system as a TOE may require a
ﬁrewall to be present in its operational environment. The
current evaluation focuses on the operating system TOE only,
and another evaluation can subsequently be applied to the
ﬁrewall.

Security Assurance Requirements (SARs): Different
from the SFRs, SARs describe the measures taken during the
process of development and evaluation of ICT products to
assure compliance with the security functionalities [23]. The
pre-packaged set of SARs is deﬁned in the CC as summarized
in Table 1 and speciﬁed from EAL1 to EAL7. For certain
PPs, the EAL speciﬁcation is optional, which indicates the PP
can specify a customized set of assurance components (i.e.,
no EAL). The recent trend on the PP development includes
assurance activities for each SFR by specifying detailed

VOLUME 4, 2016

5

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

TABLE 3: The summary of Common Criteria applications, including current categories and future developments

Category

Access control devices and systems
Biometric systems and devices
Boundary protection devices and systems
Data protection
Databases
Detection devices and systems
ICs, smart cards and smart card-related devices
and systems
Key management systems
Mobility
Multi-function devices
Network and network-related devices and systems
Operating systems
Products for digital signatures
Trusted computing
Other devices and systems
Blockchain mechanisms and systems
Quantum computing
Privacy-preserving authentication
Artiﬁcial intelligence systems
Internet of Things applications

Existing
Categories

Potential
Categories

Example products
Single Sign On (SSO) and identiy managers
Palm vein biometric systems
Security gateways
Data transport systems
Distributed databases and graph databases
Intrusion detection systems scanners and analyzers

Research Efforts

[27]
[28]
[29]
[30] [31] [32]
[33]
[34]

JavaCard, electronic residence permits, and electronic passports

[35]

Public key infrastructures
Smartphones, tablets, and laptops
Hardcopy devices
Hubs, switches, and routers
Systems and servers
Signature creation devices
Trusted platform modules
Web browsers, voting machines, and smart TVs
Blockchian platforms
Quantum computers
Privacy-preserving biometric authentication
Facial Detection and Recognition systems
Smart city and smart homes

[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[43] [48] [3] [49]

actions in the supporting documents for the evaluator to per-
form [24]. It is noted that the TOE always makes assumptions
about the operational environment. Security objectives for
the TOE do not trace back to assumptions, and they are not
evaluated but need to be understood and upheld.

B. COMMON CRITERIA APPLICATIONS: CURRENT
CATEGORIES AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
In this subsection, we provide the analysis of CC applications
by reviewing current efforts. In addition, we propose future
developments for the CC applications based on emerging
technologies and compliance requirements with emerging
privacy legislation. Table 3 summarizes existing and potential
CC applications with the illustration of example products and
references of research efforts.

1) Existing Categories
We ﬁrstly review and summarize the existing Certiﬁed Prod-
ucts and applications under the CC by category. The Certiﬁed
Products and Protection Proﬁles endorsed on the CC Portal
[24] by December 2021, research papers, and technical re-
ports on the CC are included in the review.

Access control devices and systems: Functioning within
the framework of the security system, access control devices
and systems ensure only authorized persons can access the
system [50]. Usually, an access control system is a software-
based application that provides an interface for authorized
users to pass through an interface integrated into the system.
The access control devices are the physical hardware that an
access control system requires to enforce the functional rules.
Speciﬁcally, Singh et al. [27] proposed a formal security
policy model for implementing the insider threat protection
security solution for the network computing environment in
line with CC. Under the category of access control devices
and systems, the CC portal [24] contains PPs for the evalu-
ation of Single Sign On (SSO) and enterprise management

access control. The archived PP list on the CC portal [24]
lists the 11 PPs for ﬁrewalls, intrusion detection systems and
the US Government Authorization server for basic robustness
environments, which are for reference only and are not to be
used as a basis for new evaluations. In addition, 25 products
are certiﬁed under the access control devices and systems
category.

Biometric systems and devices: Biometrics is one of the
most robust and reliable approaches for human identiﬁcation
in the physical and cyber spaces [51]. Tremendous advances
in sensor technologies and data processing techniques lead to
the strengthening of traditional biometric technologies (e.g.,
ﬁngerprint, face, voice, iris, etc.) and the emergence of new
technologies (e.g., DNA analysis, biometric payment cards,
etc.). However, vulnerabilities and threats will inevitably
occur, highlighting the signiﬁcance of evaluating the secu-
rity of biometric systems and devices [52]. The PPs for
ﬁngerprint spoof detection based on organizational security
policies and biometric veriﬁcation mechanisms are listed on
the CC portal [24]. So far, there are no Certiﬁed Products
under this category. Tekampe et al. [28] offered guidance for
the evaluators of biometric system, vendors, and certiﬁers
of biometric systems and devices according to the CC for
security evaluation, which is a valuable input for further
standardization activities.

Boundary protection devices and systems: Boundary
protection monitors and controls communications at the ex-
ternal boundary of the system to prevent and detect malicious
and other unauthorized communication [53]. Boundary pro-
tection can be achieved through ﬁrewalls, routers, gateways,
proxies, and encrypted tunnels [54] [29]. Practical design,
installation, conﬁguration, and maintenance of the boundary
protection devices and systems are critical tasks in providing
effective cyber security. In summary, there are a total of
46 Certiﬁed Products and 42 PPs listed on the CC portal
in this domain, including several personal ﬁrewalls. One

6

VOLUME 4, 2016

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

example of PPs in this category is the collaborative Protection
Proﬁle (cPP) Module for Stateful Trafﬁc Filter Firewalls.
Typically, a cPP is a PP that has been created through a
collaborative process consisting of vendors, test laboratories,
CCRA nations, and academia to deﬁne requirements and
testing methodology through industry engagement.

Data protection: Data protection refers to the rules, safe-
guards, and practices put in place to protect data and ensure
that users remain in control of the data [55]. As the extent
and potential value of data increases, the data protection reg-
ulation is signiﬁcant for users to protect the privacy of users
[56]. There are 28 current data protection PPs available on
the CC portal, which cover cryptographic modules, encrypted
storage device and cryptographic protocols. There is also a
cPP for full drive encryption. There are 66 Certiﬁed Products
under the category of data protection. In addition, there are
a number of research efforts on the data protection for the
CC development [30] [31] [32]. With the aid of functional
requirements deﬁned in the CC for data protection, Khan
et al. [30] characterized user data protection of software
components to boost the conﬁdence and trust in component
technologies. Furthermore, privacy and data protection issues
of biometric applications are always a recurring question
when applying existing data protection legal frameworks to
respond to the new threats under the fundamental rights to
respect for privacy and data protection. Kindt [31] system-
atically analyzed the privacy and data protection issues of
biometric applications and summarized the key requirements
according to the CC for Information Technology Security
Evaluation. To develop and run the biometric systems in
compliance with European data protection legislation, Meints
et al. [32] investigated the most relevant data protection
principles in the ﬁeld of biometric systems.

Databases: A database is the organized collection of
structured data stored in the computer system [57]. Typi-
cally, a database is controlled by a database management
system [33]. A relational database is the most common type
of database systems, including Structured Query Language
(SQL) server, Oracle Database, MySQL, etc. In addition,
there are other types of databases available in the mar-
ket nowadays, including NoSQL databases [58], distributed
databases [59], graph databases [60], cloud databases [61],
centralized databases and commercial databases. Currently,
there are 11 database management systems related PPs and
one cPP available on the CC portal and 14 Certiﬁed Prod-
ucts, including the industry-leading advanced databases from
IBM, Microsoft, Oracle, and HUAWEI.

Detection devices and systems: Intrusion detection and
prevention system protects users’ ICT systems and applica-
tions by identifying suspicious activity and behavior [34].
Detection devices and systems usually operate by monitoring
and analyzing network trafﬁc and providing proactive and
preventive measures to ensure the security of the machines
on which they are deployed [62]. There are 17 expired and
archived PPs on intrusion detection systems scanners and
analyzers, while there is no current PP on the CC portal in

this stage. Moreover, nine products that do not conform to
any PPs under the category of detection devices and systems
are certiﬁed through EAL-based evaluation.

ICs, smart cards and smart card-related devices and
systems: The category which sees most comprehensive ap-
plication of the CC is Integrated Circuits (ICs), smart cards
and smart card related devices and systems. ICs and smart
cards are physical electronic authorization devices used to
access a resource [63]. Usually, it is a card with an embedded
integrated circuit, which may require physical contact or
can be contactless [35]. There are 84 current PPs covering
JavaCard, electronic residence permits, electronic passports,
Machine Readable Travel Documents (MRTDs), security
module cards, and health cards. There is a cPP for the ded-
icated security component. There are 571 Certiﬁed Products
under this category.

Key management systems: Key management systems
refers to the management of cryptographic keys in cryp-
tosystems [64] [65] [66] . Key management systems and
appliances are designed to centrally manage enterprise digital
keys and certiﬁcates for enterprise applications, users and
devices throughout their lifecycle. A key management sys-
tem handles key generation, distribution, usage, automated
rotation, renewal and revocation. Therefore, successful key
management is critical to the security of a cryptosystem.
Limited PPs and Certiﬁed Products are included in the CC
portal. However, a secure, usable, uniﬁed and centralized
suite of complementary requirements for key management
systems is expected by vendors, purchasers and research
community [67]. Based on our experience gained through
the DACCA project [36], we will review and summarize
the lessons learned from the practical PP development on
encryption key management components in Section 4.

Mobility: The mobility category covers the evaluations of
mobile device fundamentals and mobile device management.
The mobile device provides essential services, such as cryp-
tographic services, key storage services, and data-at-rest pro-
tection to support the operation of applications on the device
securely [68]. Furthermore, a mobile device management is
the administration of mobile devices, including smartphones
[37], tablets, and laptops [69]. A total of 27 Certiﬁed Products
are evaluated under the CC standard, including the mobile
devices from Samsung, Google, Apple, Blackberry and other
mobile devices representatives.

Multi-function devices: A Multi-Function Device (MFD)
refers to an equipment that can print, copy and scan [38].
Threatened by vulnerabilities in relation to network connec-
tions, MFD devices may be laden with security vulnerabil-
ities and may fall victim to security incidents like data ex-
posure and eavesdropping [38]. There are 229 MFD certiﬁed
devices listed on the CC portal and ﬁve PPs for hardcopy
devices available as part of certiﬁcation processes according
to the CC.

Network and network-related devices and systems:
Network devices are physical devices that are needed for
communication and interaction between hardware on the

VOLUME 4, 2016

7

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

computer network [70]. Common network devices include
hubs, switches, routers, gateways, bridges, modems, re-
peaters, and wireless access points [39]. There are 232 Cer-
tiﬁed Products and 13 current PPs under the network and
network-related devices category, there is one cPP for the
network devices [71] that was developed by the networking
international Technical Community (iTC) and was updated
over time.

Operating systems: An operating system is the system
software that manages computer hardware, software, and
contributes common services for computer programs [40].
This category includes a considerable number of PPs and
Certiﬁed Products (e.g., MacOS Catalina 10.15, Windows 10
and Windows Server 2019 Version 1809, HongMeng V1.2,
etc.) for operating systems in networked environments.

Products for digital signatures: The digital signature is
a mathematical algorithm for validating the authenticity and
integrity of digital messages or documents [72]. Products for
digital signatures are one of the application categories of the
CC evaluation [41]. There are 53 Certiﬁed Products available
on the CC portal, such as DocuSign. Within this category,
there are also 23 PPs for cryptographic modules and digital
signature creation devices.

Trusted computing: Trusted computing refers to tech-
nologies developed for resolving network security problems
by enhancing hardware and modifying associated software
components. The computer industry has accommodated the
idea of trusted computing that is designed and promoted by
Trusted Computing Group (TCG) in various ways. The TCG
published the Trusted Platform Module (TPM) speciﬁcation
and a corresponding PP, which represents efforts to develop
formal criteria for evaluating its security [73]. Although some
people argue that trusted computing is unlikely to become a
complete remedy for security problems [74], there has been a
sharp rise in the number of PPs and Certiﬁed Products under
the category of trusted computing in recent years. Löhr et
al. [42] demonstrated how to advance PP development for
trusted computing technology with exemplar projects.

Other devices and systems: This category contains Certi-
ﬁed Products and PPs for everything else which do not ﬁt in
the afore-mentioned categories, including web browsers, vot-
ing machines, smart TVs, etc. Research efforts, for example,
the discussion on how to obtain CC certiﬁcation for smart
TV, are found in the literature [43].

2) Potential Categories
The increasing adoption of emerging technologies motivates
the study of potential categories of the CC. We list below
the emerging technologies and compliance requirements with
privacy legislation that may be included as new CC categories
in the future.

Blockchain mechanisms and systems: Blockchain offers
innovative and integrated approaches to ensure information
storage and transactions executed in an open environment
are easily veriﬁable and auditable to all participants [75].
Blockchain is considered a ground-breaking technology for

cryptography and cyber security, with application in many
areas including cryptocurrency systems, smart contracts, and
smart grids over IoT devices. [76]. However, the security
and privacy concerns attributed to the blockchain technology
should not be ignored when deploying blockchain in different
applications. Furthermore, the maturity of the blockchain
technology and relevant protocols are not sufﬁcient
to
subside security concerns without subjecting blockchain-
enabled IT products to standardized security evaluation and
validation [77]. For example, Matsuo [44] pointed out that
the application logic layer of the blockchain technology, that
contains the scripting language for the ﬁnancial transaction
does not yet have a standard to provide security analysis.

Quantum computing: The emerging technology of quan-
tum computing encodes information in qubits as a non-
classical approach, enabling computing to be conducted 2n
times faster than classical computing [78]. There are con-
siderable speculations from industry and academia about
the impact of quantum computing on cyber security [45].
In light of the potential power of quantum computers at
non-trivial scale, it will be important to study and explore
the incorporation of quantum-resistant algorithms or alterna-
tive approaches (such as quantum key distribution) into CC
requirements around network security. These requirements
will require modiﬁcation to ensure Certiﬁed Products can
continue to meet security guarantees around conﬁdentiality
and integrity of their data, particularly if transmitted over
an untrusted network between trusted endpoints. In addition,
the investigation into zero knowledge proofs’ reliance on
post-quantum hardness assumptions for security should be
considered in the CC development.

Privacy-preserving authentication: In the last few years,
many privacy-preserving authentication methods have been
proposed to make authentication technologies reliable and
secure [79] [80]. With the use of privacy-preserving authen-
tication on the rise, its emergence as a new CC category
is expected [46]. For example, to ensure compliance with
legislation (e.g., the European Union’s General Data Protec-
tion Regulations), the feasibility of specifying the concept
of privacy-by-design in the CC needs to be investigated,
which can be achieved by incorporating privacy-preserving
authentication into standards.

Artiﬁcial

intelligence systems: Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) systems demonstrate the capability to produce tertiary
consciousness such as self-recognition, cognitive feedback,
components of self-concept, and so forth [81]. However, in
light of this capability as well as its misuse, the assurance of
cyber security for AI systems is imperative. In January 2017,
a group of artiﬁcial intelligence researchers developed 23
principles for AI called Asilomar AI principles [82], which
underlines that AI systems should be safe and secure through-
out the whole operational lifetime, and veriﬁable so where
applicable and feasible. Since then, many other questions
remain as to what is a safe and secure AI system and how
to achieve it, especially verifying the security features in
the context of the rapidly expanding and developing areas

8

VOLUME 4, 2016

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

in ﬁnancial trading, health care, translation, transportation
etc. The increasing dependence on AI for critical functions
and services create more incentives for attackers and lead to
more severe damages [83]. In the past years, there has been
an accelerated growth of policy proposals and government
interest in the security of AI system. For instance, the Euro-
pean Commission is proposing for a regulation laying down
harmonized rules on AI [47]. These security-focused policies
for AI systems mainfest the importance of transparency,
measurement and accountability for the AI system.

Internet of Things applications: The IoT refers of the
system of interrelated and internet-connected devices that
are able to collect and transfer information over the wireless
network without human to human or human to computer in-
teraction [84]. With the emergence of IoT, numerous gadgets,
services, and products containing innovative IoT technolo-
gies (such as smart TVs, voice controllers and mobile robots)
provide consumers with convenience and improve the quality
of their life [43]. IoT ecosystems are complex with signiﬁcant
security challenges, including insufﬁcient data protection,
weak password protection, insecure interfaces, and other
risks. However, these risks must be reduced and mitigated
for the entire lifecycle of IoT devices. Recently, there are a
few studies on the approaches to the CC certiﬁcation for IoT
devices [43] [48] [3] [49] with a number of PPs developed in
this space. Building trust in IoT devices with powerful IoT
security solutions that keep IoT systems safe and ensures the
availability, integrity, and conﬁdentiality of the IoT solution
is a potential future direction for the CC development.

III. COMMON CRITERIA ADOPTIONS
To pave the way for widespread adoption of the CC, we inves-
tigate possible adoption barriers to determine if organizations
have concerns related to cyber security regulatory issues
as well as deciding organizations’ attitudes towards cyber
security standards. In this section, we present the current
worldwide adoption of the CC and identify the adoption
barriers.

A. TRENDS IN COMMON CRITERIA EVALUATIONS:
SOME STATISTICS
To investigate the current adoption, development trend and
users’ trust of the CC internationally and nationally, we
studied the cases,
including Certiﬁed Products [10] and
Protection Proﬁles [85], listed on the CC portal [24]. This
subsection presents the statistics of the CC obtained after
processing accessible information on the CC portal and the
comparative analysis of Certiﬁed Products and Protection
Proﬁles by category, scheme and assurance level.

Figure 3(a) shows the number of Certiﬁed Products and
archived Certiﬁed Products approved through the CC evalua-
tion and certiﬁcation process. They are listed on the CC portal
according to the categories of the TOEs. There are a total of
1619 Certiﬁed Products and 3226 archived Certiﬁed Products
up to Dec 2021. The category of ICs, smart cards and smart
card related devices and systems is the undisputed leader.

Given the mutual recognition by all CCRA signatory coun-
tries and the comprehensive coverage of technologies and
security functionalities, the number of signatory countries is
progressively increasing [86]. Also, the number of Certiﬁed
Products is rising annually. In the year of 2019 and 2020, the
number of Certiﬁed Products was 275 and 367 respectively.
Usually, the certiﬁcates will remain on Certiﬁed Products
List with a ﬁve years validity [10]. The validity period may
be determined by a scheme or a technical community that
developed the PP. The validity period may impact a vendor’s
return on investment from a certiﬁcation. The trend of PPs
is similar to Certiﬁed Products when looking at the number
of PPs and archived PPs, whose number increases year by
year. Based on the number of PPs and archived PPs by TOE
category as shown in Figure 3(b), the category with the most
Certiﬁed Products and PPs listed is the ICs, smart cards and
smart card-related devices and systems.

As mentioned above, the Evaluation Assurance Level is
a number that ranges from EAL 1 to EAL 7, describing
the depth and rigor of an evaluation. EAL 1 is the least
rigorous level, and EAL 7 the most exacting. Each EAL
corresponds to a Security Assurance Requirements package
that covers the complete development process with the given
level of strictness. The Certiﬁcate Authorizing Participants
implement CCRA compliant CC certiﬁcation requirements
to produce certiﬁcates under certiﬁcate authorizing schemes.
Based on the 17 Certiﬁcate Authorizing Schemes [87], shares
of Certiﬁed Products under different schemes, are shown
in Figure 4(b). As shown in Figure 4(a), investigating by
assurance levels, most products are rated under EAL4+. The
French, German, and Netherlands schemes have produced
the most certiﬁcates listed on the CC portal. When observing
the number of Certiﬁed Products in 2021, the US leads the
number on 33, Germany on 31, France on 20 and Canada
on 8. In particular, the US keeps the Certiﬁed Products
listed for two years before being archived, while the other
countries keep them for ﬁve years. Different from the most
applied schemes in Certiﬁed Products, it is worth noting
that the United States scheme takes the maximum amount
of adoption in PPs. In addition, in the same way of CC
Certiﬁed Products, the EAL4+ takes up the largest proportion
(33.5%) by investigating the PPs by certiﬁcation assurance
level. From the perspective of adoption of PPs, it is worth
noting that the United States scheme certiﬁed against PPs
exclusively.

B. COMMON CRITERIA ADOPTION BARRIERS
Despite the importance and value of the CC, there are bar-
riers in it adoption. Below, we highlight the barriers to the
adoption of the CC certiﬁcation for ICT products.

Cost and complexity of evaluation: The CC evaluation
cost is commonly regarded as a barrier to the CC certiﬁ-
cation adoption [3] [88], particularly for companies with a
limited budget and for products with small market shares
and low margin. In the competitive market of ICT products,
products with a low-proﬁt margin may not be able to justify

VOLUME 4, 2016

9

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

(a) The number of Certiﬁed Products and archived Certiﬁed Products by TOE category (a Certiﬁed Product may
have multiple categories associated with it)

(b) The number of Protection Proﬁles and archived Protection Proﬁles by TOE category (a Protection Proﬁle may
have multiple categories associated with it)

FIGURE 3: The number of Certiﬁed Products and Protection Proﬁles under the Common Criteria certiﬁcation scheme

and defray the cost of the CC certiﬁcation. Based on the
investigation on Certiﬁed Products [10], vendors of ICT
products with high proﬁt margin and capability for protecting
sensitive government networks are relatively more inclined to
adopt CC certiﬁcations. Extensive resources are required to
complete the complex evaluation activities in the evaluation
process by the laboratory. Based on the Australian scheme,
the CC certiﬁcation process generally consists of four phases,
namely pre-evaluation, conduct, conclude, and assurance
continuity. Generally, the pre-evaluation phase is essential to
ensure success and avoid delays by conducting initial assess-
ments and planning all building blocks of the CC evaluation
process including development of the ST and the schedule of
evaluation. Other tasks include writing of the functional and
high/low level design speciﬁcations. Secondly, the conduct
phase is to verify any claimed security functionality under
the requirements of the CC and other claimed cryptographic
functionality under the speciﬁc security standard, such as
FIPS 140-2 [89]. In the conclude phase, the evaluation and
certiﬁcation activities are ﬁnalised. Lastly, the assurance
continuity phase establishes a way to minimize the number of

evaluations and allows the determination to be made that the
certiﬁcation may be extended to the updated version of the
TOE. The total cost of an evaluation varies depending on the
security assurance level or PP conformance claims and the
complexity of the TOE [39]. Four components, namely inter-
nal costs, external costs, lab fees, and certiﬁcation fees make
up the overall evaluation cost. The internal costs are incurred
preparing deliverables and supporting the evaluators. The
external costs consist of consulting fees. The lab fees are paid
to the evaluation labs, and the certiﬁcation fees are paid to
the corresponding certiﬁcation body if applicable. A recently
estimated average cost for a CC certiﬁcation lifecycle is
US$250,000 [3] depending on the evaluation assurance level
and re-use of past evaluation effort. The cost of an evaluation
against a PP is generally lower. This is due to the reduced
effort in developing the evaluation documentation. Because
of the cost and complexity of evaluation, it is challenging to
evaluate the products against the CC standard for companies
with narrow proﬁt margins and budgets.

Time of evaluation: With rapid changes in technology de-
velopment, the time-consuming process of the CC evaluation

10

VOLUME 4, 2016

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

consumers of CC Certiﬁed Products can be categorized based
on market sectors: the public and private sectors. In terms
of the public sector, government support can increase the
adoption of the CC certiﬁcation by requiring the procurement
of CC Certiﬁed Products. Furthermore, setting policy re-
quirements for the procurement process used by governmen-
tal departments and agencies stimulates CC adoptions. For
example, the US government issued a policy requiring the CC
certiﬁcation for products intended for certain applications,
which encourages vendors to participate in CC evaluations
[39]. With respect to the private sector, government incen-
tives can promote the adoption of CC Certiﬁed Products
as well. For instance, the IT Investment Promotion Tax
Incentive in Japan allows businesses to claim tax deductions
for the use of CC Certiﬁed Products, which consequently
increases the acquisition of the Certiﬁed Products [96]. The
government’s support and incentives would play an essential
role in boosting the adoption of CC certiﬁcation as the
vendors can address legal risks and gain economic beneﬁt
from performing the CC evaluation.

Availability of approved Protection Proﬁles: The CC
certiﬁcation process of ICT products may be hindered due
to the lack of approved PPs. For example, the Australasian
and Singaporean CC schemes encourage products to be
certiﬁed against an approved PP [92] [97]. Products to be
certiﬁed without PP conformance (such as using ST only)
may only be accepted on a case-by-case basis or when no
suitable PP exists. Hence, the unavailability of approved PPs
may discourage vendors from obtaining the CC certiﬁcation.
For mutual recognition under the CCRA, a CC certiﬁcate
claiming compliance to EAL 3 or higher but not claiming
compliance to a collaborative Protection Proﬁle is generally
treated as an equivalence to EAL 2 [92].

Implementation of security-by-design in products: Im-
plementing security-by-design in product engineering pro-
cesses means that the product must be designed from the
ground up to be secure. This may shorten the evaluation and
certiﬁcation process signiﬁcantly [92] because the incremen-
tal certiﬁcation of products for additional product features
can be more accessible with the integration of certiﬁca-
tion evaluation activities in the security system engineering
process [98] [99]. However, it is challenging to integrate
security-by-design in security product engineering processes
[100]. Therefore, the lack of security-by-design in products
may leave the products with many vulnerabilities [101],
which makes it difﬁcult for obtaining a security certiﬁcation.
Complexity of the CC standard: The structure and the
readability of the CC standard is somewhat complex and not
easily understandable. This has led to the need for many
product vendors to engage evaluation supporting consultants
at the pre-evaluation stage in order to prepare speciﬁc evalua-
tion material which increases the overall evaluation time and
cost. Major review work is underway by international experts
through the International Organization of Standardization
(ISO). This should see an improvement of the CC for wider
adoption. Further review work is likely needed to ensure

(a) The proportion of Certiﬁed Products by EAL

(b) The proportion of Certiﬁed Products by the CC Certiﬁcation
Scheme

FIGURE 4: The proportion of Certiﬁed Products under
Common Criteria evaluations

and certiﬁcation signiﬁcantly slows down the commercial-
ization of security products in markets. This is particularly
undesirable for products with a short lifecycle. For example,
the technology for producing a low-cost IoT device may
have become obsolete when the CC certiﬁcation process
completes. The CC testing process needs to go through a se-
quence of stages, including ST evaluation, design evaluation,
guidance evaluation, life-cycle evaluation, functional testing
and penetration testing. Besides, the requirement on formal
documentation and processes takes time [90] [91]. According
to recent ﬁgures from the Australian Certiﬁcation Authority,
the average evaluation completion time is around six months.
According to the Cyber Security Agency of Singapore, a
typical evaluation takes about 3 to 6 months [92]. According
to [93], a CC certiﬁcation of an EAL 4 evaluation would
take 6 to 9 months depending on the technology type. The
completion of the CC certiﬁcation can take about 9 to 12
months [94], according to the Lightship Sec Lab. The Cana-
dian Centre for CyberSecurity would allow the total of about
6 months from the Product in Evaluation (PiE) date [95].
Generally, the average time needed for the CC certiﬁcation
is 6 months to 1 year [3]. For products that require frequent
replacements or updates or have a short time-to-market, the
time for evaluation indeed hinders the adoption of the CC
evaluation.

Lack of government supports and incentives: Govern-
ment supports and incentives promote the adoption of the CC
evaluation and CC Certiﬁed Products to a certain degree. The

VOLUME 4, 2016

11

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

TABLE 4: Comparison of state-of-the-art cyber security standards regarding scope (I indicates international standard, N
indicates national standard, and D indicates industry-speciﬁc stand), mutual recognition agreement (Y indicates that more than
two countries agree on the standard), target candidates, publicly available (Y means that the security standard is publicly
available, N indicates standard is not publicly available), cost and time for evaluation (NA means the cost and time spent on
the standard are not available)

Standard

Scope

Mutual
Recognition
Agreement

Target
Candidate

Publicly
Available

Cost

CC

ISO 27K

IEC 62443

ISO/SAE
21434
ISO/IEC
20924
& ETSI EN
303645
Cyber
Essentials
Essential 8
UK NCSC
& CPA

CSPN

IT-Grundschutz

NIST

NERC CCS

FIPS 140

PCI DSS

UL 2900

I

I

I

I

I

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

D

D

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Product

Organization

Industrial
Automation
and Control
Systems
Automotive
Industry

IoT

UK

Organization

Australia

Organization

UK

Smart Meters

France

German

Product

Organization

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

US

Organization

Y

North
American

US

Y

Y

Electrical
Power
Industry

Cryptography

Payment
Card

Medical
Device

Y

Y

Y

N

US$250,000

£2,850
to £14,250

US$500 to
US$20,000

NA

NA

£300

NA
US$1,300
per day
C 25,000
to C 35,000
NA
US$5,000 to
US$15,000
on compliance
check, $35,000 to
$115,000 on
remediation once
issues found

NA

US$50,000 per
module
US$15,000
to US$40,000
US$225 to
US$750 on checking
standards,
US$40,000 to
US$150,000 on
certiﬁcation

Time

6 months
to 1 year
2 to
15 days

NA

NA

NA

1 to
14 days
NA
6 to
18 months
35 days
to 2 months
NA

A few weeks
to several years

NA

Up to
1 year

NA

NA

usability and readability and to make the standard simpler
to understand and use.

C. STATE-OF-THE-ART OF SECURITY STANDARDS

Besides the CC, there are also other cyber security standards
that are designed to protect the cyber operational environ-
ments of users and the organizations involved [102]. Starting
from the objective that mitigates and reduces security risks, a
series of cyber security standards are promulgated, including
policies, guidelines, best practices, and so forth, to con-
tribute to establishing a trusted cyber security environment.
This subsection surveys the currently existing and state-of-
the-art standards, including international standards, national

standards, and industry-speciﬁc standards, which are widely
considered to address the cyber security posed by threats. To
further demonstrate the impacts of adopting the CC, Table 4
summarizes the state-of-the-art cyber security standards and
compare the CC with these cyber security standards from
the perspective of the scope, mutual recognition agreement,
target candidates, publicly available, and cost and time for
evaluation.

1) International Standards

We ﬁrst outline the international standards, focusing on the
objective, context of use, and cost and time for obtaining
the certiﬁcate. ISO 27K: ISO/IEC 27000-series, also known

12

VOLUME 4, 2016

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

as Information Security Management System (ISMS) Family
Standards or ISO 27K, consists of information security stan-
dards published by International Organization for Standard-
ization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commis-
sion (IEC). The representative ISO/IEC 27001 establishes
requirements on how to manage information security [103].
The objective of ISO/IEC 27001 is to provide guidelines for
organizations on how to manage the information and data.
Therefore, the standard is not applicable to the IT industry
only, also to other candidates, including organizations and
government bodies that aim to protect their information.
Through the requirements for establishing, implementing,
maintaining and constantly improving the ISMS, the standard
helps organizations make data assets more secure [103]. The
recognized national accreditation body properly accredits the
certiﬁcation if the organizations meet the requirements and
pass the audits, which usually costs from £2,850 to £14,250
and takes 2 to 15 days [104] based on the size of the organiza-
tion. Furthermore, ISO/IEC 27002 provides best practices on
information security management for those who are respon-
sible for implementing and maintaining the ISMS. Besides,
ISO 27K includes the standards from ISO/IEC 27000 to
ISO/IEC 27050, ISO/IEC 27701 and ISO/IEC 27799 [105].
The ISO 27K standards are routinely reviewed and updated
on a roughly ﬁve-year cycle. The standards related to digital
forensics and cyber security are in preparation. Compared
with the CC, ISO 27K is related to the information security
certiﬁcation for companies, while the CC certiﬁes products.
IEC 62443: Some standards tend to specialize in a spe-
ciﬁc domain in cyber security. IEC 62443 targets Industrial
Automation and Control Systems (IACS) by deﬁning com-
mon standards in processes, techniques and security require-
ments [106]. There are four categories in IEC 62443 cyber
security standard series, respectively General, Policies and
Procedures, System and Component, covering foundational
information, asset owner, system design guidance and re-
quirements, and speciﬁc product development and technical
requirements for IACS [107]. IEC 62443 deﬁnes Common
Component Security Constraints (CCSCs) in addition to
technical requirements, which must be met by components
to be compliant with IEC 62443 Part 4.2.

ISO/SAE 21434: New vehicle usage trends, including car-
sharing platforms and mobility-as-a-service, are growing.
However, the number of attack vectors in the connected
cars and automotive industry is signiﬁcant [108]. Under
the circumstance, a new cyber security standard for the
development lifecycle of road vehicles is under development
by ISO and the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE).
ISO/SAE 21434 sets the guidelines for securing the high-
level processes and cyber security standards in the connected
cars and automotive industry [109]. Different phases, namely
requirements engineering, design, speciﬁcation, implemen-
tation, test and operations are taken into consideration on
security aspects.

ISO/IEC 20924 and ETSI EN 303645: During the past
decade, IoT that encompasses various protocols and tech-

nologies to interconnect physical devices to Internet infras-
tructure is one of the most relevant scenarios in cyber security
[110]. ISO/IEC 20924 [111] provides the deﬁnition along
with the terms and deﬁnitions forming the terminology foun-
dation for IoT, which ﬁlls the gap between traditional security
standards to the extension on the adoption of IoT systems
in the early stages [112] [113]. Furthermore, the ETSI EN
303645 standard provides the baseline requirements for se-
curity in IoT devices [114], which was released in 2020. The
standard compasses the technical controls and organizational
policies for the developers and vendors of IoT devices [114].
For IoT devices involving multiple Personally Identiﬁable
Information (PII), the standard facilitates their compliance to
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [115].

2) National Standards
Besides international security standards, national govern-
ments enact standards to set expectations and requirements
for ICT products and organizations regarding cyber security.
The national standards are described below with a focus
on the application context, harmonization with international
standards, and evaluation workﬂow.

Cyber Essentials: Cyber Essentials is a national security
standard developed by the UK government that speciﬁes
the assurance framework and a set of security controls to
protect information from threats, concerning technical rules
designed to protect devices, internet connection, data and ser-
vices [116]. This standard is a government-backed certiﬁca-
tion scheme that helps to tighten overall cyber security within
the organization, and it is also mandatory for businesses look-
ing for speciﬁc government contracts [117]. The certiﬁcation
usually takes a day to a fortnight to complete the assessment
and costs around £300. Cyber Essentials certiﬁcation is valid
for 12 months upon successful application.

ASD Essential 8: The Essential Eight

is a series of
baseline mitigation strategies to combat cyber security inci-
dents produced by the Australian Signals Directorate (ASD)
[118]. These strategies aim to aid organizations in protecting
against adversaries to compromise systems. The Essential
Eight Maturity Model provides advice on how to implement
the strategies as well as assists the organizations in self-
testing the maturity of implementation. As one of the most
effective mitigation strategies in ensuring the security of
systems, application control is designed to protect against
malware executing on the systems. The other strategies in-
clude assessing security vulnerabilities and applying patches,
Microsoft Ofﬁce Macro Security, restricting administrative
privileges, implementing multi-factor authentication, and the
other strategies to mitigate cyber security incidents.

UK NCSC and CPA: National Cyber Security Centre
[119] is the UK government organization that gives support
and advice to the public and private sector to help them
avoid security threats. The Commercial Product Assurance
(CPA) [120] was set up to help organizations demonstrate
the security functions of the products met deﬁned NCSC
standards. The Assured Service Providers is used to conduct

VOLUME 4, 2016

13

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

testing and assessment by NCSC. The products are tested
against the published CPA Security Characteristics [120].
The certiﬁcation usually needs 6 to 18 months, and the cost of
the certiﬁcate is US$1,300 per day of work [121]. However,
since March 2019, the NCSC no longer accepts new product
evaluation under the CPA scheme unless they are Smart
Meters or smart metering products.

CSPN: The Certiﬁcation de Sécurité de Premier Niveau
(CSPN) is a cyber security certiﬁcation methodology pro-
posed by the National Cybersecurity Agency of France
(ANSSI) in 2008 [122]. The main objective of CSPN is
to verify the product’s compliance with its security spec-
iﬁcations. Compared with the CC, CSPN is a lightweight
certiﬁcation standard [3] that assesses the product in a shorter
period, typically taking from 35 days to 2 months. Gen-
erally, the cost for evaluation and certiﬁcation is around
from C25,000 to C35,000 [121]. However, CSPN is only
recoginzed in France as a national standard.

BSI IT baseline protection: IT baseline protection (also
known as IT-Grundschutz) from the German Federal Ofﬁce
for Information Security (BSI) is a methodology to identify
and implement cyber security measures in an organization.
The goal of BSI IT baseline protection is to achieve the ade-
quate and appropriate level of security for IT systems [123].
To achieve the goal, BSI recommends “well-proven techni-
cal, organizational, personnel, and infrastructural safeguards"
[124]. The organizations show the systematic approach to
secure their IT systems by obtaining the ISO/IEC 27001
certiﬁcate based on IT-Grundschutz.

NIST: The National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) of the US proposed cyber security framework on
the basis of standards and guidelines to help organizations
manage security risks [125]. Based on Executive Order
13636, the framework was deﬁned to improve the cyber
security of critical infrastructure in 2014 [126] and updated
to address the emerging scenarios in cyber security in 2018
[125]. Furthermore, a series of special publications describe
the security principles and provide advice on cyber security
management, which is aligned to the framework.

NERC CCS: Some national standards target a speciﬁc
area in cyber security. North American Electric Reliability
Corporation (NERC) Cyber Security Standards (CCS) was
created in 2003 to be used to secure the electrical power
industry [127]. As the enhancement of the requirements, the
newest and most widely recognized NERC security standard
is NERC 1300, which provides bulk electric system standard
to network administration and supports the best-practice in-
dustry processes.

FIPS 140: In the area of cryptography and database
security, Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS)
are the US government security standards that specify the
requirements for the cryptography modules [128]. FIPS 140-
2 and FIPS 140-3 are current and active standards. In support
of the cryptography block in CC functional security require-
ments, FIPS provides the speciﬁcations for cryptographic
modules, and a set of standards that specify the cryptographic

algorithm in use [129]. Four security levels from Level 1 to
Level 4 are deﬁned in FIPS 140-2. FIPS 140 validations can
take up to one year and cost over $50,000 per module. The
individual ratings and overall rating are listed on the vendor’s
validation certiﬁcate in the general ﬂow of FIPS testing and
validation [130].

3) Industry-speciﬁc Standards
After recapping the international and national standards, we
further replenish the state-of-the-art security standards by
including the industry-speciﬁc standards.

PCI DSS: The usage of payment cards, such as debit
card, credit card, and prepaid card, is continuously increas-
ing [131]. Consequently, the number of security incidents,
like data breach, related to payment cards cause damages
on businesses, customers’ beneﬁts and retailers’ reputation
[132]. The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard
(PCI DSS) is an industry-speciﬁc security standards admin-
istered by the PCI Security Standard Council, which sets the
information security standards for organizations that handle
payment cards from the major card schemes. The objective
of the standard is to tighten payment card information and
reduce cyber incidents on payment card, such as credit card
fraud. An audit that accesses the organization’s compliance
with the PCI DSS costs around $15,000 to $40,000, depend-
ing on the business types, size, security environment, and the
speciﬁc processing methods of the usage of payment card
[133].

UL 2900: UL 2900 is a set of standards published by
Underwriters Laboratories (UL) that is a global security
certiﬁcation organization. And it includes the general cyber
security requirements (UL 2900-1), speciﬁc requirements
for medical products (UL 2900-2-1), industrial systems (UL
2900-2-2), and security and life safety signaling systems
(UL 2900-2-3) [134]. The standard requires effective security
countermeasures implemented to protect data as well as other
data assets, such as command and control data. Besides,
security vulnerabilities in the software should be eliminated,
and the security of software should be veriﬁed through pene-
tration testing [135]. The UL 2900 standards are not publicly
available, leading to the harmonization and standardization
aspects that should be addressed further [3]. Typically, check
on the criteria will spend between US$225 to US$750 based
on the number and delivery format of the standards. And a
fee ranging from US$40,000 to US$150,000 will be needed
to certify the products [136].

IV. DEFINING SECURITY REQUIREMENTS WITH THE
COMMON CRITERIA
In this section, combined with the lessons learned from the
recent project, Development of the Australia Cyber Criteria
Assessment (DACCA), we present the lessons learned from
and reﬂect on the challenges of deﬁning security require-
ments with the CC through the development of a Protection
Proﬁle. In addition, we propose potential future directions to
improve and promote the adoption of the CC.

14

VOLUME 4, 2016

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

A. BEST PRACTICES
In Figure 5, the structure of a generic PP is outlined, which
consists of the main blocks, including PP introduction, con-
formance claims, security problem deﬁnition, security objec-
tives, extended components deﬁnition, and security require-
ments. In terms of the development process of a PP, it is an
iterative and incremental procedure where the speciﬁcations
are broken down into multiple blocks. The development
process is gradually and iteratively built up with the core
blocks, and the supplementary features are added further. In
practice, we developed a PP to deﬁne security requirements
with the CC for the target TOE - encryption key managers.
The following are the best practices we summarized on how
to deﬁne security requirements with the CC in a Protec-
tion Proﬁle through the literature review and the experience
gained from the DACCA project.

Iterative and incremental approach: We have taken an
incremental approach in the project by iterating the following
steps to mature the PP. This approach proved to be of partic-
ular effectiveness for an inter-sectoral project like DACCA
with partners from the academia, industry, and certiﬁcation
authority. The ﬁrst step, Q&A, begins with brainstorming
with initial questions and answers. The initial questions iden-
tiﬁed to help explain the TOE and the objectives include what
the common characteristics and functions for the encryption
key managers are, what the required non-TOE hardware/soft-
ware/ﬁrmware for the TOE is, what the operational environ-
ment for the encryption key management products is, and so
forth. The second step, Draft, aims to draft contents for each
chapter and section following the PP speciﬁcations listed in
Figure 5. The third step, Reﬁnement, reﬁnes the contents
based on literature review, cross-reference to related PPs, and
feedback from industrial partners. The fourth step, Polishing,
is to reduce impractical and repetitive items surrounding the
risks, which makes sure the security countermeasures are cor-
rect and sufﬁcient to respond to the considered risks. The ﬁfth
step Evaluation reviews and evaluates the deliverability of
the PP to improve the consistency with the CC standard. The
incremental process of PP developments iterates to gradually
improve the quality of PP documents and the assurance of
security.

PP-Module development: The new evolution of the CC
supports the comparability among the results of independent
cyber security evaluations through collaborative Protection
Proﬁle (cPP) [3]. A PP-module builds on a cPP, and con-
forming TOEs are obligated to implement the functionality
required in the cPP along with the additional functionality de-
ﬁned in the PP-module. Hence, building upon the cPP rather
than developing a standalone PP will not reinvent the wheel
on certain functionality and ensure the speciﬁed functionality
is sufﬁcient to enhance cyber security for the technology and
product. For example, in the DACCA project, for the target
TOE - key encryption management components, we utilize
the collaborative Protection Proﬁle for Network Devices
(NDcPP) as the Base-PP and develop PP-Module intended
for use with the NDcPP. This Base-PP is valid because a

device that implements centralised enterprise Encryption Key
Management is a speciﬁc type of network device. There is
nothing about implementing Encryption Key Management
that would prevent any of the security capabilities deﬁned
by the Base-PP from being satisﬁed. In the developed PP-
Module, only the security functionalities of Encryption Key
Management components in terms of the CC and assurance
requirements for such products that are not included are
needed to be added in the PP-Module, which avoids repetitive
and redundant information, and also simpliﬁes the develop-
ment process.

Threats analysis: A CC certiﬁcation requires compre-
hensible product documentation, including a detailed threat
analysis [137]. The following analytical approaches have
been proved to be effective for such a purpose in our PP
development. The anecdotal way is generally adopted by
brainstorming a list of known threats and then culling, cate-
gorizing by assets, and assigning to operating environments.
An alternative and more analytical way is to order, delete
or retain the threats according to the priority, severity, and
mitigation cost of the threats. Alternatively, work in [138]
deﬁned the data as assets and then generalized data assets
(e.g., documents, conﬁguration data) and asset state (e.g., in
transit, at rest) to apply different threats to different states.
Different threats may materialize in various operational en-
vironments or arise from vulnerabilities. Hence, deﬁning the
security threats based on the operational environments and
supplementary threats derived from various vulnerabilities
are another two effective approaches. The hybrid method that
combines the above ﬁve approaches makes sure the identiﬁed
threats in the PP are comprehensive, which paves the way for
specifying the security requirements desired for the product
under the CC standard.

Security functional requirements speciﬁcation: Speci-
fying high-quality security requirements is an essential but
complex task [139]. The starting point can be tailoring
through existing SFRs listing in the CC Part 2 [7] through
iteration, assignment, selection and reﬁnement. Generally,
iteration enables a component to be used more than once with
varying operations. Assignment provides the speciﬁcation of
parameters. Selection allows the speciﬁcation of one or more
items from a list. Reﬁnement permits the addition of details.
However, there are some security objectives for the TOE
that cannot be transformed to SFRs listed in the CC Part
2, for example, organizational policies or other third party
requirements. The extended security functional requirements
are set and included with deﬁnition and detailed requirements
on the condition that the security objectives are hard to
translate. Furthermore, in the PP development process, the
SFRs are required to be speciﬁcally and precisely deﬁned
based on the corresponding functionalities of target TOE
instead of generically described. For example, when deﬁning
the SFRs of key encryption management components in the
DACCA project, cryptography’s concrete aspects, including
the cryptographic features of encryption and decryption,
hashing, keyed hash algorithm, and digital signatures, are

VOLUME 4, 2016

15

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

FIGURE 5: Main structural blocks of a Protection Proﬁle

included in the SFRs rather than the general description.

B. NEW CHALLENGES AHEAD

Informed by the best practices we have presented, and in
the light of the security implications attributed to emerging
technologies, we highlight the following challenges that will
be addressed for the development and broad adoption of the
CC.

1) Transferability of Protection Proﬁles

With the target TOE, there are many different conﬁgurations,
methods and parameters for key management products [64]
[140]. For example, a pure software key management product
is a standalone TOE that generates, stores and manages key
materials. Moreover, some key management products use
specialised hardware for key material generation through
True Random Number Generators (TRNGs), or for providing
extra security properties via an internal Hardware Security
Module (HSM). Besides, some key managers require the
operating system for the supporting hardware platform or
have the embedded operating system in the product. To fulﬁll
encryption-related operations, such as using key material to
sign by clients, the key management products require client-
side software to be securely linked. The description of the
TOE is the foundation of a PP and determines the number of
PPs that will be developed [141]. To achieve harmonization,
the TOE description facilitates the further comparison of
the same types of products when conducting evaluation by
comparing technical documents [142]. Can one Protection
Proﬁle satisfy a class of products that is composed of many
combinations of options is a challenge to be addressed in
future PP development.

2) Compactness and Sufﬁciency of Requirements
The CC has already deﬁned 11 categories of security func-
tional requirements concerning desirable security function-
alities to provide a standard way of expressing the require-
ments for a TOE. However, the up-front analytical work is
essential when specifying the complete, atomic, and testable
requirements through the lifecycle for gathering, analyzing,
and synthesizing security requirements [138]. In the lifecycle
of PP development, the SFRs will be reﬁned by ﬁltering
the irrelevant requirements and noisy features. Therefore,
another main challenge is the formulation of a compact but
sufﬁcient set of security functional requirements. Addition-
ally, the SFRs need to be polished through matching and
augmenting by packages for each function and option of key
management products, as mentioned in the ﬁrst challenge.

3) Future-prooﬁng of Requirements
Due to the complexity and diversity of operational environ-
ments, the CC approach might lack linguistic expressive-
ness for the full range of security requirements. The CC
is technology agnostic in terms of security functional and
assurance requirements and this leads to the formulation of
product-speciﬁc requirements. Working in collaboration with
industry partners to identify relevant product and system
speciﬁc requirements for inclusion in the PPs is important.
Simultaneously, PP developers need to ensure that the re-
quirements do not contradict the CC requirements. Addi-
tionally, adding threat awareness into the PPs by incorpo-
rating a better understanding of threats from vulnerability is
desirable in the PP development [143] [144]. Furthermore,
the security implication of emerging technologies, such as
quantum computing and zero-knowledge proofs, need to be
considered in the future PP development [145]. In summary,
extended requirements are expected to be incorporated based

16

VOLUME 4, 2016

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

on analysis of features of products, security threats, and
emerging technology. Extrapolation from existing guidance
and Protection Proﬁles for complicated operational environ-
ments is the direction for extensions of CC requirements.

C. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Below, we summarize the key ﬁndings from our study of CC
adoptions and the PP development with the CC. Moreover,
the recommendations and future directions for the CC to
establish the trusted security ecosystem are proposed.

Latest renovations of the Common Criteria: There is
the new generation of PP type where an EAL is not speciﬁed
within the PP itself. That means assurance is gained through
customized assurance activities developed as part of the PP
for the given technology and is based on SARs of different
assurance levels. Another renovation is the transformation
of evaluations with exact compliance to technology-speciﬁc
PP to provide achievable, repeatable, testable evaluation
results. For example, the National Information Assurance
Partnership (NIAP) [146] which oversees a national pro-
gram to evaluate Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) ICT
products’ conformance to the CC, no longer accepts EAL-
based evaluations. Products being evaluated against a NIAP-
approved PP must be in exact compliance with that PP. NIAP
has worked closely with government agencies, including the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), to
ensure all references to Evaluation Assurance Levels and
Robustness were removed from applicable documentation.
Occasionally, EAL or Robustness is mentioned, usually in
regards to product acquisition.

Accommodation of emerging technologies: The CC cov-
ers a wide range of ICT security-related technologies and the
evaluations in terms of security functionalities and security
assurance. In Section II-B1, the categories of existing CC
applications were reviewed. Traditional ICT technology and
products, such as ICs, database and network devices, are
sufﬁciently covered and evaluated under the CC standard in
the past decades [20]. In light of emerging technologies as
listed in Section II-B2, the evaluation of the newly emerging
technologies, including blockchain, quantum computing, AI,
and IoT, as well as the compliance requirements with privacy
legislations for high assurance products, such as privacy-
preserving authentication, need to be covered in the CC
standard.

Elimination of Common Criteria adoption barriers:
Increased adoption of the CC evaluation contributes to im-
proving ICT ecosystem security for end-users. To lay the
foundation for more extensive adoption of the CC evaluation,
we analyzed the CC adoption barriers in Section III-B. An
effective way to bolster the CC adoption is to eliminate
the identiﬁed barriers. The possible solutions include cost,
time and complexity reduction through the normalization of
evaluation process, support and incentives from government
agencies, increase of the availability and coverage of cPPs,
and the integration of evaluation activities with product de-
sign and engineering procedures.

Standardization of evaluation activities: Traditional PPs
are implementation-independent documents [147], which de-
ﬁne the security requirements for the ICT technology that the
consumers require. Competent and independently licensed
laboratories evaluate the products to decide whether the
claimed security properties have been achieved [148]. For
cPPs, uniﬁed processes and formalized steps for evaluation
activities reduce the complexity of the evaluation. The stan-
dardization of evaluation and testing procedures improves the
transparency of the certiﬁcation process. Through standard-
ization, the evaluation activities are better deﬁned in PPs and
corresponding supporting documents to provide guidance for
evaluators.

Comparability and harmonization of evaluation: Based
on the fact that various cyber security standards interna-
tionally, nationally, and at the industry-speciﬁc level are
adopted worldwide, it is hard to compare the level of security
properties across diverse security standards. Even for the CC
standard, it is difﬁcult to reach the objective of comparison
due to complex technical documents [3]. The standardiza-
tion process of evaluation activities mentioned above can
improve the comparability and harmonization of evaluation.
In addition, rigorous security metrics that indicate the level
of threats, risks and security provided by the products can be
developed to address the issue of comparability.

Improvement of user conﬁdence: The adoption of
security-sensitive ICT products and services heavily relies on
the users’ trust in the security functionality of the ICT prod-
ucts. Cyber security standards and certiﬁcation is considered
as a driving force for increasing the users’ trust. The col-
laboration among vendors, technical specialists, customers
and governments to raise the bar of security in ICT products
is a never-ending endeavor. The sharing of information on
the core blocks of the CC evaluation and certiﬁcation, such
as threats, vulnerabilities and evaluation activities through
education and information provided on the CC portal [24] or
other platforms will also contribute to this cause. Similarly,
improvement to the usability and readability of CC standards
would also help with the users of the standard.

Effective tools for security speciﬁcations: CC security
speciﬁcations are written in natural language, making rig-
orous evaluation challenging. As part of the new evolution
of the PP, all evaluation activities are thoroughly deﬁned in
the corresponding supporting document. Furthermore, some
tools have been developed to fulﬁll security requirements.
For example, Morimoto et al. [149] proposed a process that
makes the security speciﬁcations with the CC formalized in a
mathematics manner. In addition, Teri et al. [150] introduced
a model called B method that can formally model security
speciﬁcations of the Java Card. There is a high demand for
effective tools that assist in making the evaluation process
efﬁcient, reliable, and rigorous.

V. CONCLUSION
The last decade has witnessed a security paradigm shift from
subjective risk management to more objective and measur-

VOLUME 4, 2016

17

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

able trust validation. One of the main driving forces of this
shift is security evaluation and certiﬁcation. The promotion
of security standards, particularly the CC, facilitates mutual
recognition of secure ICT products and adds value to the
products and services to give the industrial partners the
competitive edge to operate in the global market. Certiﬁ-
cation provides consumers with a level of assurance in the
security of ICT products and enables them to make better-
informed decisions when it comes to procurement. This paper
provides the readers who are interested in trusted cyber
security development from academia, government agencies,
and industry with references and guidelines for the speciﬁ-
cation, development, evaluation, certiﬁcation, procurement,
and operation of ICT products with security functionality.
This paper provides a rigorous review of the CC by sum-
marizing the methodology of the CC, analyzing CC appli-
cations, investigating CC adoptions, and comparing the CC
with the state-of-the-art cyber security standards. Through
our experience from the PP development of an inter-sectoral
project, we presented lessons learned from deﬁning security
requirements through the Protection Proﬁle. We identiﬁed the
challenges of deﬁning security requirements through the CC
and offered suggestions on the direction of deﬁning security
requirements for trusted cyber security.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge Mr Bosheng Yan’s contribution to data col-
lection in relation to Protection Proﬁle development through
his internship associated with the Development of Australian
Cyber Criteria Assessment project.

REFERENCES

[1] A. C. S. Centre, “Acsc annual cyber threat report,” Australian Cyber Se-
curity Centre, September 2020, https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/
ﬁles/2020-09/ACSC-Annual-Cyber-Threat-Report-2019-20.pdf.

[2] N. Sun, J. Zhang, P. Rimba, S. Gao, L. Y. Zhang, and Y. Xiang, “Data-
driven cybersecurity incident prediction: A survey,” IEEE communica-
tions surveys & tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1744–1772, 2019.

[3] S. N. Matheu, J. L. Hernández-Ramos, A. F. Skarmeta, and G. Baldini,
“A survey of cybersecurity certiﬁcation for the internet of things,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1–36, 2020.

[4] W. Stallings, L. Brown, M. D. Bauer, and A. K. Bhattacharjee, Computer
security: principles and practice. Pearson Education Upper Saddle River,
NJ, USA, 2012.

[5] G. J. Popek and C. S. Kline, “Encryption and secure computer networks,”
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 331–356, 1979.
[6] C. Criteria, “Common criteria for information technology security
Introduction and general model,” https:

evaluation - part 1:
//www.commoncriteriaportal.org/ﬁles/ccﬁles/CCPART1V3.1R5.pdf,
April 2017.

[7] ——, “Common criteria for information technology security evalua-
tion - part 2: Security functional requirements,” April 2017, https://
www.commoncriteriaportal.org/ﬁles/ccﬁles/CCPART2V3.1R5.pdf.

[8] ——,

laboratories,”
//www.commoncriteriaportal.org/labs/.

“Licensed

February

2021,

https:

[9] ——,

“Arrangement
in

on
the ﬁeld

the
of

recognition
information

certiﬁcates
https://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/ﬁles/operatingprocedures/cc-
recarrange.pdf, July 2014.

common

of
technology

criteria
security,”

[10] ——,

“Certiﬁed products,” https://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/

products/, 2021.

[11] M. Bures, T. Cerny, and B. S. Ahmed, “Internet of things: Current
challenges in the quality assurance and testing methods,” in International

Conference on Information Science and Applications.
pp. 625–634.

Springer, 2018,

[12] J. P. Dias, F. Couto, A. C. Paiva, and H. S. Ferreira, “A brief overview
of existing tools for testing the internet-of-things,” in 2018 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Software Testing, Veriﬁcation and Validation
IEEE, 2018, pp. 104–109.
Workshops (ICSTW).

[13] I. Kuzminykh and A. Carlsson, “Analysis of assets for threat risk model
in avatar-oriented iot architecture,” in Internet of Things, Smart Spaces,
and Next Generation Networks and Systems. Springer, 2018, pp. 52–63.
[14] R. Leszczyna, “Cybersecurity and privacy in standards for smart grids–
a comprehensive survey,” Computer Standards & Interfaces, vol. 56, pp.
62–73, 2018.

[15] M. Kara, “Review on common criteria as a secure software development
model,” International Journal of Computer Science & Information Tech-
nology, vol. 4, no. 2, p. 83, 2012.

[16] S. H. Houmb, S. Islam, E. Knauss, J. Jürjens, and K. Schneider, “Eliciting
security requirements and tracing them to design: an integration of
common criteria, heuristics, and umlsec,” Requirements Engineering,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 63–93, 2010.

[17] A. Barabanov and A. Markov, “Modern trends in the regulatory frame-
work of the information security compliance assessment in russia based
on common criteria,” in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Security of Information and Networks, 2015, pp. 30–33.

[18] A. Barabanov, A. Markov, and V. Tsirlov, “Russian it security certiﬁca-
tion scheme: Steps toward common criteria approach,” in Proc. of 15th
International Common Criteria Conference (ICCC-2014), New Delhi,
India, 2014, pp. 1–11.

[19] L. Hu, H. Li, Z. Wei, S. Dong, and Z. Zhang, “Summary of research on
it network and industrial control network security assessment,” in 2019
IEEE 3rd information technology, networking, electronic and automation
control conference (ITNEC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1203–1210.

[20] D. S. Herrmann, Using the Common Criteria for IT security evaluation.

CRC Press, 2002.

[21] A. O. W. Paper, “Computer security criteria: Security evaluations and
assessment,” July 2001, https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/topics/
security/seceval-wp-133226.pdf.

[22] C. Criteria, “About

the common criteria,” May 2021, https://

www.commoncriteriaportal.org/ccra/.

[23] ——, “Common criteria for information technology security evalua-
tion - part 3: Security assurance components,” April 2017, https://
www.commoncriteriaportal.org/ﬁles/ccﬁles/CCPART3V3.1R5.pdf.

[24] ——,

“The

common

criteria

portal,”

2021,

https://

www.commoncriteriaportal.org/.

[25] R. Von Solms and J. Van Niekerk, “From information security to cyber

security,” computers & security, vol. 38, pp. 97–102, 2013.

[26] C. Hennebert, “A ﬁrst step towards a protection proﬁle for the secu-
rity evaluation of consensus mechanisms,” in 2020 7th International
Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security
(IOTSMS).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.

[27] M. Singh and M. S. Patterh, “Formal speciﬁcation of common criteria
based access control policy model.” Int. J. Netw. Secur., vol. 11, no. 3,
pp. 139–148, 2010.

[28] N. Tekampe, A. Merle, and J. Bringer, “D6. 5: Towards the common
criteria evaluations of biometric systems,” Evaluation, vol. 1, 2011.
[29] Y. Xu, W. Ge, X. Li, Z. Feng, X. Xie, and Y. Bai, “A co-occurrence
recommendation model of software security requirement,” in 2019 In-
ternational Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Software Engineering
(TASE).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 41–48.

[30] K. M. Khan, J. Han, and Y. Zheng, “Characterising user data protection
of software components,” in Proceedings 2000 Australian Software En-
IEEE, 2000, pp. 3–11.
gineering Conference.

[31] E. J. Kindt, Privacy and data protection issues of biometric applications.

Springer, 2016, vol. 1.

[32] M. Meints, H. Biermann, M. Bromba, C. Busch, G. Hornung, and
G. Quiring-Kock, “Biometric systems and data protection legislation in
germany,” in 2008 International Conference on Intelligent Information
IEEE, 2008, pp. 1088–1093.
Hiding and Multimedia Signal Processing.
[33] S. Mohammad and P. Martin, “Index structures for xml databases,”
in Advanced Applications and Structures in XML Processing: Label
Streams, Semantics Utilization and Data Query Technologies.
IGI
Global, 2010, pp. 98–124.

[34] H.-J. Lee, Y. Lee, and D. Won, “Security requirement of end point
security software,” in International Conference on Grid and Pervasive
Computing. Springer, 2013, pp. 788–795.

18

VOLUME 4, 2016

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

[35] I. Narasamdya and M. Périn, “Certiﬁcation of smart-card applications
in common criteria,” in International Conference on Fundamental Ap-
proaches to Software Engineering. Springer, 2009, pp. 309–324.
[36] N. Sun, B. D. Le, C.-T. Li, W. Armstrong, I. Md Zahidul, I. Md Raﬁqul,
L. Y. Zhang, and H. Chan, “Progress on and lessons from the pp
development for encryption key management (part 1), technical report
submitted to australian cyber security cooperative research centre,” June
2021.

[37] H. Lee and D. Won, “Security requirement for mobile virtualization,”

ASIA LIFE SCIENCES, pp. 217–228, 2015.

[38] D. Lee, “A study on protection proﬁle for multi-function devices,” Journal
of the Korea Institute of Information Security & Cryptology, vol. 25,
no. 5, pp. 1257–1268, 2015.

[39] R. E. Smith, “Trends in security product evaluations,” Information Sys-

tems Security, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 203–216, 2007.

[40] D. C. Toll, S. Weber, P. A. Karger, E. R. Palmer, and S. K. McIntosh,
“Tooling in support of common criteria evaluation of a high assurance
operating system,” IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center Report,
2008.

[41] B. Langenstein, R. Vogt, and M. Ullmann, “The use of formal methods
for trusted digital signature devices.” in FLAIRS Conference, 2000, pp.
336–340.

[42] H. Löhr, A.-R. Sadeghi, C. Stüble, M. Weber, and M. Winandy, “Model-
ing trusted computing support in a protection proﬁle for high assurance
security kernels,” in International Conference on Trusted Computing.
Springer, 2009, pp. 45–62.

[43] S. Kang and S. Kim, “How to obtain common criteria certiﬁcation of
smart tv for home iot security and reliability,” Symmetry, vol. 9, no. 10,
p. 233, 2017.

[44] S. Matsuo, “How formal analysis and veriﬁcation add security to
blockchain-based systems,” in 2017 Formal Methods in Computer Aided
Design (FMCAD).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–4.

[45] S. Cadzow, I. Sanchez, and G. Baldini, “An analysis on the development
and application of cybersecurity standards,” Joint Research Centre (JRC),
2018.

[46] K. Beckers and M. Heisel, “A foundation for requirements analysis of
privacy preserving software,” in International Conference on Availability,
Reliability, and Security. Springer, 2012, pp. 93–107.
regulation
“Proposal

harmonised rules on artiﬁcial
act),”
1623335154975&uri=CELEX%3A52021PC0206, May 2021.

down
intelligence
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=

[47] E. Commission,

intelligence (artiﬁcial

laying

for

a

[48] J.-H. Kim, H.-M. Jung, and H.-J. Cho, “Design plan of secure iot system
based common criteria,” Journal of the Korea Convergence Society,
vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 61–66, 2017.

[49] G. Suciu, C. Istrate, I. Petre, and A. Scheianu, “Lego methodology
approach for common criteria certiﬁcation of iot telemetry,” in World
Conference on Information Systems and Technologies. Springer, 2019,
pp. 165–174.

[50] D. M. Bowers, Access control and personal

identiﬁcation systems.

Butterworth-Heinemann, 2013.

[51] C. Hill, “Wearables–the future of biometric technology?” Biometric

Technology Today, vol. 2015, no. 8, pp. 5–9, 2015.

[52] A. O. Alaswad, A. H. Montaser, and F. E. Mohamad, “Vulnerabilities
of biometric authentication “threats and countermeasures”,” International
Journal of Information & Computation Technology, vol. 4, no. 10, pp.
947–58, 2014.

[53] R. Kissel, Glossary of key information security terms. Diane Publishing,

2011.

[54] A. Adler, P. Samouelian, M. Atighetchi, and Y. Fu, “Remote manage-
ment of boundary protection devices with information restrictions,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 33,
2019, pp. 9398–9403.

[55] L. A. Bygrave, Data protection law. Wolters Kluwer Law & Business,

2002.

[56] S. Wachter, “Data protection in the age of big data,” Nature Electronics,

vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 6–7, 2019.

[57] W. Kim, “Relational database systemsr,” ACM Computing Surveys

(CSUR), vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 187–211, 1979.

[60] R. Angles and C. Gutierrez, “Survey of graph database models,” ACM

Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1–39, 2008.

[61] G. C. Deka, “A survey of cloud database systems,” It Professional,

vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 50–57, 2013.

[62] H.-J. Liao, C.-H. R. Lin, Y.-C. Lin, and K.-Y. Tung, “Intrusion detection
system: A comprehensive review,” Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 16–24, 2013.

[63] K. M. Shelfer and J. D. Procaccino, “Smart card evolution,” Communi-

cations of the ACM, vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 83–88, 2002.

[64] A. Ghosal and M. Conti, “Key management systems for smart grid
advanced metering infrastructure: A survey,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2831–2848, 2019.

[65] A. M. Hegland, E. Winjum, S. F. Mjolsnes, C. Rong, O. Kure, and
P. Spilling, “A survey of key management in ad hoc networks,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 48–66, 2006.
[66] Y. Xiao, V. K. Rayi, B. Sun, X. Du, F. Hu, and M. Galloway, “A survey
of key management schemes in wireless sensor networks,” Computer
communications, vol. 30, no. 11-12, pp. 2314–2341, 2007.

[67] A. J. Stieber, “Enterprise cryptographic key management realities and

issues,” IEEE, 2010.

[68] C. Gao, A. Gutierrez, M. Rajan, R. G. Dreslinski, T. Mudge, and C.-J.
Wu, “A study of mobile device utilization,” in 2015 ieee international
symposium on performance analysis of systems and software (ispass).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 225–234.

[69] D. Hayes, F. Cappa, and N. A. Le-Khac, “An effective approach to mobile
device management: Security and privacy issues associated with mobile
applications,” Digital Business, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 100001, 2020.

[70] M. A. M. Vieira, C. N. Coelho, D. j. da Silva, and J. M. da Mata,
“Survey on wireless sensor network devices,” in EFTA 2003. 2003
IEEE Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation.
Proceedings (Cat. No. 03TH8696), vol. 1.

IEEE, 2003, pp. 537–544.

[71] N. I. T. Community, “Collaborative protection proﬁle for network de-
vices,” March 2020, https://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/ﬁles/ppﬁles/
CPP_ND_V2.2E.pdf.

[72] E. Paul, “What is digital signature-how it works, beneﬁts, objectives,

concept,” EMP Trust HR, 2017.

[73] T. C.
proﬁle,”
PP_TCPATPMPP_V1.9.7.pdf.

P. Alliance,
protection
2002, www.commoncriteriaportal.org/public/ﬁles/ppﬁles/

platform module

“Trusted

[74] R. Oppliger and R. Rytz, “Does trusted computing remedy computer
security problems?” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 16–19,
2005.

[75] J. Kolb, M. AbdelBaky, R. H. Katz, and D. E. Culler, “Core concepts,
challenges, and future directions in blockchain: a centralized tutorial,”
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1–39, 2020.
[76] P. Sharma, R. Jindal, and M. D. Borah, “Blockchain technology for
cloud storage: A systematic literature review,” ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1–32, 2020.

[77] R. Zhang, R. Xue, and L. Liu, “Security and privacy on blockchain,”
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 1–34, 2019.
[78] S. S. Gill, A. Kumar, H. Singh, M. Singh, K. Kaur, M. Usman, and
R. Buyya, “Quantum computing: A taxonomy, systematic review and
future directions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15559, 2020.

[79] P. Karger, S. McIntosh, E. Palmer, D. Toll, and S. Weber, “Lessons
learned: Building the caernarvon high-assurance operating system,” IEEE
Security & Privacy, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 22–30, 2010.

[80] D. Wang, H. Cheng, D. He, and P. Wang, “On the challenges in design-
ing identity-based privacy-preserving authentication schemes for mobile
devices,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 916–925, 2016.
[81] J. F. Pagel, Dream science: Exploring the forms of consciousness. Aca-

demic Press, 2014.

[82] A. researchers et al., “Asilomar ai principles,” Asilomar conference,

2017, https://futureoﬂife.org/ai-principles/.

[83] J.-h. Li, “Cyber security meets artiﬁcial intelligence: a survey,” Frontiers
of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering, vol. 19, no. 12, pp.
1462–1474, 2018.

[84] Y. Fathy, P. Barnaghi, and R. Tafazolli, “Large-scale indexing, discovery,
and ranking for the internet of things (iot),” ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 1–53, 2018.

[58] A. Davoudian, L. Chen, and M. Liu, “A survey on nosql stores,” ACM

[85] C.

Criteria,

“Protection

proﬁles,”

2021,

https://

Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 1–43, 2018.

www.commoncriteriaportal.org/pps/.

[59] M. T. Özsu and P. Valduriez, “Distributed and parallel database systems,”

[86] ——,

“About

the

common

criteria,” May

2021,

https:

ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 125–128, 1996.

//www.commoncriteriaportal.org/ccra/.

VOLUME 4, 2016

19

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

[87] ——,

“Certiﬁcate

authorizing

schemes,”

2021,

https:

//www.commoncriteriaportal.org/ccra/schemes/.

[88] G. Baldini, A. Skarmeta, E. Fourneret, R. Neisse, B. Legeard, and
F. Le Gall, “Security certiﬁcation and labelling in internet of things,” in
2016 IEEE 3rd World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT).
IEEE,
2016, pp. 627–632.

[89] D. L. Evans, P. Bond, and A. Bement, “Fips pub 140-2: Security re-
quirements for cryptographic modules,” Federal Information Processing
Standards Publication: Gaithersburg, MD, USA, vol. 12, 2002.

[90] S. P. Kaluvuri, M. Bezzi, and Y. Roudier, “A quantitative analysis of
common criteria certiﬁcation practice,” in International Conference on
Trust, Privacy and Security in Digital Business.
Springer, 2014, pp.
132–143.

[91] S. J. Murdoch, M. Bond, and R. Anderson, “How certiﬁcation systems
fail: Lessons from the ware report,” IEEE Security and Privacy, vol. 10,
no. 6, p. 40, 2012.

[92] C. S. A.

of Singapore,

guide,”
February 2021, https://www.csa.gov.sg/-/media/csa/documents/sccs/
cybersecurity_certiﬁcation_guide_v2.pdf.

“Cybersecurity

certiﬁcation

[93] J. Tierney and T. Boswell, “Common criteria: Origins and overview,” in
Springer, 2017, pp.

Smart Cards, Tokens, Security and Applications.
193–216.

[94] L. Security, “What

is common criteria?” February 2021, https://

lightshipsec.com/common-criteria/.

[95] C. C. for Cyber Security, “Canadian common criteria program in-
structions,” February 2021, https://cyber.gc.ca/en/guidance/canadian-
common-criteria-program-instructions.

[96] H. Yajima, M. Murata, N. Kai, and T. Yamasato, “Consideration of
present status and approach for the widespread of cc certiﬁcation to a
private ﬁeld˜ cases in japan˜.”

[97] A. C. S. Centre, “Australia information security evaluation program,”
July 2021, https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/programs/
australasian-information-security-evaluation-program.

[98] M. Andrea, M. Philippe, D. Sbastien, and G. Jeremy, “Towards incre-
mental safety and security requirements co-certiﬁcation,” in 2020 IEEE
European Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 79–84.

[99] K. Beznosov and P. Kruchten, “Towards agile security assurance,” in
Proceedings of the 2004 workshop on New security paradigms, 2004,
pp. 47–54.

[100] S. Peisert, J. Margulies, D. M. Nicol, H. Khurana, and C. Sawall,
“Designed-in security for cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Security &
Privacy, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 9–12, 2014.

[101] M. Patton, E. Gross, R. Chinn, S. Forbis, L. Walker, and H. Chen,
“Uninvited connections: a study of vulnerable devices on the internet
of things (iot),” in 2014 IEEE joint intelligence and security informatics
conference.

IEEE, 2014, pp. 232–235.

[102] V. Y. Pillitteri and T. L. Brewer, “Guidelines for smart grid cybersecurity,”

National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2014.

[103] E. Humphreys, Implementing the ISO/IEC 27001: 2013 ISMS Standard.

Artech House, 2016.

[104] I. Governance, “Typical iso 27001 certiﬁcation costs,” April 2021, https:

//www.itgovernance.co.uk/iso27001-certiﬁcation-costs.

[105] S. Higgins, “Information security management: The iso 27000 (iso 27k)
series,” Department of Information Studies: Digital Curation Centre,
2009.

[106] B. Leander, A. ˇCauševi´c, and H. Hansson, “Applicability of the iec 62443
standard in industry 4.0/iiot,” in Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, 2019, pp. 1–8.
[107] J.-P. Hauet, “Isa99/iec 62443: a solution to cyber-security issues?” 2012.
[108] T. Micro, “Iso/sae 21434: Setting the standard for connected cars’
https://documents.trendmicro.com/

cybersecurity,”
assets/white_papers/wp-setting-the-standard-for-connected-cars-
cybersecurity.pdf.

2021,

April

[109] C. Schmittner, G. Griessnig, and Z. Ma, “Status of the development of
iso/sae 21434,” in European Conference on Software Process Improve-
ment. Springer, 2018, pp. 504–513.

[110] A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, M. Mohammadi, M. Aledhari, and
M. Ayyash, “Internet of things: A survey on enabling technologies,
protocols, and applications,” IEEE communications surveys & tutorials,
vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2347–2376, 2015.

[111] ISO, “Information technology—internet of things (iot)—vocabulary
(iso/iec 20924:2018),” April 2021, http://www.iso.org/cms/render/live/
en/sites/isoorg/contents/data/standard/06/94/69470.html.

[112] J. Granjal, E. Monteiro, and J. S. Silva, “Security for the internet of
things: a survey of existing protocols and open research issues,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1294–1312,
2015.

[113] I. Makhdoom, M. Abolhasan, J. Lipman, R. P. Liu, and W. Ni, “Anatomy
of threats to the internet of things,” IEEE communications surveys &
tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1636–1675, 2018.

[114] ETSI, “Etsi en 303 645,” April 2021, https://www.etsi.org/deliver/
etsi_en/303600_303699/303645/02.01.01_60/en_303645v020101p.pdf.

[115] P. Regulation, “General data protection regulation,” Intouch, 2018.
[116] A. Calder, Cyber Essentials: A Pocket Guide.
IT Governance Ltd, 2014.
[117] C. Essentials, “Cyber essentials scheme: Assurance framework,” His

Majesty’s Government, 2015.

[118] ASD, “Essential eight,” April 2021, https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/

view-all-content/essential-eight.

[119] NCSC,

“The

national

cyber

security

centre,”

2021,

https:

//www.ncsc.gov.uk/.

[120] CESG, “The commercial product assurance (cpa) build standard,”
April 2021, https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/information/commercial-product-
assurance-cpa.

[121] E. Commission, “Tannex 8: Jrc analysis and recommendations for a
european certiﬁcation and labelling framework for cybersecurity in eu-
rope,” 2017, https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regdoc/rep/10102/2017/
EN/SWD-2017-500-F1-EN-MAIN-PART-6.PDF.

[122] ANSSI, “Certiﬁcation de sécurité de premier niveau (cspn),” 2008, https:

//www.ssi.gouv.fr/administration/produits-certiﬁes/cspn/.

[123] B. Tsoumas and D. Gritzalis, “Towards an ontology-based security man-
agement,” in 20th International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications-Volume 1 (AINA’06), vol. 1.
IEEE, 2006,
pp. 985–992.

[124] BSI, “Bsi - it-grundschutz,” 2021, https://www.bsi.bund.de/EN/Topics/

ITGrundschutz/itgrundschutz_node.html.

[125] N. I. of Standards and Technology, “Framework for improving critical
infrastructure cybersecurity, version 1.1. technical report,” 2018, https:
//doi.org/10.6028%2Fnist.cswp.04162018.

[126] ——, “Framework for

infrastructure cyberse-
improving critical
curity, version 1.0,” 2014, https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/CSWP/
NIST.CSWP.04162018.pdf.

[127] N.

. S. Technologies,

“Nerc

cyber

security

standards,

through

002-1
http://www.netsectech.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/
WP_NERC_CSS_Compliance_Ref_NST.pdf.

Compliance

cip-009-1:

reference,”

cip-
2006,

[128] S. H. Standard, “Fips pub 180-1,” National Institute of Standards and

Technology, vol. 17, p. 15, 1995.

[129] K. H. Brown, “Security requirements for cryptographic modules,” Fed.

Inf. Process. Stand. Publ, pp. 1–53, 1994.

[130] C. No, “Fips 140-2 validation certiﬁcate,” Signature, vol. 1, p. 5.
[131] J. Liu, Y. Xiao, H. Chen, S. Ozdemir, S. Dodle, and V. Singh, “A survey
of payment card industry data security standard,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 287–303, 2010.

[132] E. A. Morse and V. Raval, “Pci dss: Payment card industry data security
standards in context,” Computer Law & Security Review, vol. 24, no. 6,
pp. 540–554, 2008.

[133] G. Ataya, “Pci dss audit and compliance,” Information security technical

report, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 138–144, 2010.

[134] S. Yuan, A. Fernando, and D. C. Klonoff, “Standards for medical device

cybersecurity in 2018,” 2018.

[135] UL, “Ul standards,” 2021, https://standardscatalog.ul.com/Default.aspx.
[136] I. Code DX, “Cyber ul certiﬁcation: A time-saver for application se-
curity testers?” 2011, https://techbeacon.com/app-dev-testing/cyber-ul-
certiﬁcation-time-saver-application-security-testers.

[137] K. Beckers, D. Hatebur, and M. Heisel, “A problem-based threat analysis
in compliance with common criteria,” in 2013 International Conference
on Availability, Reliability and Security.

IEEE, 2013, pp. 111–120.

[138] B. Smithson, “Protection proﬁle development for hardcopy devices:

Lessons learned,” IEEE, 2010.

[139] D. Mellado, E. Fernández-Medina, and M. Piattini, “A common criteria
based security requirements engineering process for the development of
secure information systems,” Computer standards & interfaces, vol. 29,
no. 2, pp. 244–253, 2007.

[140] W. Daniel, D. Chen, Q. Liu, F. Wang, and Z. Wei, “Emerging issues in
cloud storage security: encryption, key management, data redundancy,
trust mechanism,” in International Conference, MISNC. Springer, 2014,
pp. 297–310.

20

VOLUME 4, 2016

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

[141] V. I. Vorobiev, L. N. Fedorchenko, V. P. Zabolotsky, and A. V. Lyubimov,
“Ontology-based analysis of information security standards and capa-
bilities for their harmonization,” in Proceedings of the 3rd international
conference on Security of information and networks, 2010, pp. 137–141.
[142] J. Cugini, “The common criteria: on the road to international harmoniza-
tion,” Computer standards & interfaces, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 315–320, 1995.
[143] S. Ardi and N. Shahmehri, “Introducing vulnerability awareness to com-
mon criteria’s security targets,” in 2009 Fourth International Conference
on Software Engineering Advances.

IEEE, 2009, pp. 419–424.

[144] H. Li, X. Li, J. Hao, G. Xu, Z. Feng, and X. Xie, “Fesr: A framework for
eliciting security requirements based on integration of common criteria
and weakness detection formal model,” in 2017 IEEE International
IEEE,
Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security (QRS).
2017, pp. 352–363.

[145] A. Farkas and C. Walsh, “A perspective of the common criteria in modern
it business’,” in 3rd International Common Criteria Conference, May.
Citeseer, 2002, pp. 1–8.

[146] N. I. A. Partnership, “The national information assurance partnership

portal,” 2021, https://www.niap-ccevs.org/.

[147] K. Lee, Y. Lee, D. Won, and S. Kim, “Protection proﬁle for secure e-
voting systems,” in International Conference on Information Security
Practice and Experience. Springer, 2010, pp. 386–397.
portal,”

2020,
https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/referral-organisations/
common-criteria-portal.

S. Directorate,

“Common

[148] A.

criteria

June

[149] S. Morimoto, S. Shigematsu, Y. Goto, and J. Cheng, “Formal veriﬁcation
of security speciﬁcations with common criteria,” in Proceedings of the
2007 ACM symposium on Applied computing, 2007, pp. 1506–1512.

[150] S. M.-C. Téri, “Using b method to formalize the java card runtime
security policy for a common criteria evaluation,” ProQuest Number:
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS, vol. 28787739, 2000.

NAN SUN received the B.S. degree (Hons.)
and the Ph.D. degree in Information Technology
from Deakin University. She is currently a Lec-
turer in the School of Engineering and Informa-
tion Technology at the University of New South
Wales (UNSW), Canberra, Australia. Before join-
ing UNSW,she was a postdoctoral research fel-
low at Deakin University. Her current research
interests include cybersecurity and social network
security.

CHANG-TSUN LI received the BSc degree in
electrical engineering from National Defence Uni-
versity (NDU), Taiwan, in 1987, the MSc degree
in computer science from U.S. Naval Postgraduate
School, USA, in 1992, and the PhD degree in
computer science from the University of Warwick,
UK, in 1998. He was an associate professor of
the Department of Electrical Engineering at NDU
during 1998-2002 and a visiting professor of the
Department of Computer Science at U.S. Naval
Postgraduate School in the second half of 2001. He was a professor of the
Department of Computer Science at the University of Warwick (UK) until
January 2017 and a professor of Charles Sturt University (Australia) from
January 2017 to February 2019. He is currently a professor of the School
of Information Technology at Deakin University, Australia. His research
interests include multimedia forensics and security, biometrics, data min-
ing, machine learning, data analytics, computer vision, image processing,
pattern recognition, bioinformatics, and content-based image retrieval. The
outcomes of his multimedia forensics research have been translated into
award-winning commercial products protected by a series of international
patents and have been used by a number of police forces and courts of
law around the world. He is currently the Chair of IAPR Computational
Forensics Technical Committee, the Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, EURASIP Journal of Image
and Video Processing (JIVP), and IET Biometrics.

HIN CHAN is the manager of the Australian
Information Security evaluation Program (AISEP)
that resides within the Australian Cyber Security
Centre (ACSC). The AISEP performs Common
Criteria (CC) evaluation and certiﬁcation of ICT
security products for Australian Organizations use
as well as to set standards to improve the se-
curity in ICT products. Within this role, he is
the Australian government adviser on all matters
related to product assurance and leads the strategic
direction of Australia’s international Common Criteria effort. Hin is also
an Australian representative at various international CC committees, at ISO
JTC1/SC27 working groups and is a member of the Accreditation Advisory
Committee (AAC) within Australia’s national accreditation body for testing
laboratories, the National Association of testing and Accreditation (NATA).

BA DUNG LE received his Ph.D. in Computer
Science from the University of Adelaide, Aus-
tralia. He worked as a Postdoctoral research fellow
in Cyber Security at the Charles Sturt University.
He has led and participated in a number of re-
search projects in Data Clustering, Cyber Threat
Detection, and Privacy-Preserving Statistical Ag-
gregation.

VOLUME 4, 2016

21

Sun et al.: Deﬁning Security Requirements with the Common Criteria: Applications, Adoptions, and Challenges

MD ZAHIDUL ISLAM is a Professor of com-
puter science in the School of Computing, Math-
ematics, and Engineering, Charles Sturt Univer-
sity, Australia. His main research interests include
data mining/machine learning, privacy preserving
data mining, applications of data mining/machine
learning in real life including cyber security.

LEO YU ZHANG (M’17) is currently a Lec-
turer with the School of Information Technology,
Deakin University, VIC, Australia. He received
the bachelor’s and master’s degrees in compu-
tational mathematics from Xiangtan University,
Xiangtan, China, in 2009 and 2012, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree from the City University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 2016. Prior to joining
Deakin, he held various research positions with
the City University of Hong Kong, the University
of Macau, Macau, China, the University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, and the
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. His current research interests include
applied cryptography and AI-related security, and he has published more
than 60 refereed journal and conference articles in these ﬁelds.

MD RAFIQUL ISLAM is working as an Associate
Professor at the School of Computing, Mathe-
matics and Engineering, Charles Sturt University,
Australia. Dr Islam’s main research background
in cybersecurity focuses on malware analysis and
classiﬁcation, security in the cloud, privacy in
social media, and the dark web.

WARREN ARMSTRONG received his PhD
from the Australian National University in 2011,
and is currently Director of Engineering at
QuintessenceLabs, building cyber security prod-
ucts.

22

VOLUME 4, 2016

