Date of publication Sep 13, 2022, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000. 

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.Doi Number 

Sustainable Satellite Communications in the 6G 
Era: A European View for Multi-Layer Systems 
and Space Safety  

Marko Höyhtyä1, Senior Member, IEEE, Sandrine Boumard1, Anastasia Yastrebova1, Pertti 
Järvensivu1, Markku Kiviranta1, Senior Member, IEEE and Antti Anttonen1, Senior Member, 
IEEE 
1VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd, Oulu, 90571 Finland  

Corresponding author: Marko Höyhtyä (e-mail: firstname.surname@ vtt.fi). 

This work was supported by the CF Space project and in part by Business Finland through the 6G_Sat project, grant 1537/31/2021.  

ABSTRACT  During  the  New  Space  era  small  countries  are  becoming  important  players  in  the  space 
business.  While  space  activities  are  rapidly  increasing  globally,  it  is  important  to  make  operations  in  a 
sustainable  and  safe  way  in  order  to  preserve  satellite  services  for  future  generations.  Unfortunately,  the 
sustainability aspect has been largely overlooked in the existing surveys on space technologies. As a result, 
in this survey paper, we discuss the multi-layer networking approaches in the 6G era specifically from the 
sustainability  perspective.  Moreover,  our  comprehensive  survey  includes  aspects  of  some  interesting 
industrial, proprietary, and standardization views. We review the most important regulations and international 
guidelines and revisit a three-dimensional architecture vision to support the sustainability target for a variety 
of application areas. We then classify and discuss space safety paradigms that are important sustainability 
enablers  of  future  satellite  communications.  These  include  space  traffic  management,  debris  detection, 
environmental  impacts,  spectrum  sharing,  and  cyber  security  aspects.  The  paper  also  discusses  advances 
towards a planned European connectivity constellation that could become a third flagship infrastructure along 
with the Galileo and Copernicus systems. Finally, we define potential research directions into the 2030s. 

INDEX TERMS Aerospace engineering, Low earth orbit satellites, Radio spectrum management, 
Spaceborne radar 

I. INTRODUCTION 
Technology trends  in  satellite  communications  include  on-
board  processing  and the  use  of  ever-higher  frequencies to 
enable  high-throughput  satellites  (HTS)  to  fulfill  growing 
data  demands.  The  two  main  disruptions  currently  driving 
satellite 
the  development 
communications 
satellite 
constellation  size  and  the  integration  of  satellite  and 
terrestrial networks. The former aims to provide broadband 
services  to  currently  underserved  areas  with  improved 
performance. The latter is related to the evolution of mobile 
networks  where  different  wireless  and  wired  technologies 
converge. This creates a vast amount of new opportunities in 
different  application  fields  such  as  public  safety,  digital 

rapid  growth  of 
increasing 

and 
(SatCom) 

are 

in  developing 
health,  logistics,  and  Internet  services 
countries.  The  annual  space  business  related  to  the  5th 
generation  (5G) and  6th  generation  (6G)  of  communication 
systems  is  expected  to  grow  to  more  than €500B  during 
the next two decades [1]–[3]. This is more than the current 
entire  space  business  including  scientific  missions,  earth 
observation (EO), and navigations. 

At  the  same  time,  the  whole  space  sector  is  in  a 
transformation  phase  due  to  the  so-called  New  Space 
Economy. A significant reduction in launch costs and easy 
and affordable access to space have attracted new innovative 
players to the space business [4] [5]. Low Earth Orbit (LEO) 
systems  and  small  satellites  in  particular  are  increasing 
rapidly. The most typical orbit heights are above 500 km but 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

1 

 
 
there are significant efforts to also use very low Earth orbits 
(vLEO)  to  provide  sensing  and  communications  services. 
The  so  called  Karman line,  defining  where  the atmosphere 
ends and space begins, is above 80 km and orbiting objects 
can survive multiple perigee passages at altitudes around 80–
90 km [6]. Small satellites in the range of 80-220 kg can be 
seen  as  a  sweet  spot  [5]  since  they  are  large  enough  for 
payloads  to  support  broadband  communications  [7]–[9]  or 
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imaging [10] [11].  

A. MULTI-LAYER NETWORKS 
6G  systems  will  be  used  to  provide  pervasive  services 
worldwide  to  support  both  dense  and  less-dense  areas.  To 
achieve  this  goal,  6G  systems  will  need  to  integrate 
terrestrial,  airborne 
(drones,  high-altitude  platforms 
(HAPs)),  and  satellite  communications  in  different  orbits 
[12] [13]. This means that in contrast to traditional research 
and  development (R&D)  work, network analysis,  planning 
and  optimization  will  be  updated  from  two  dimensions  to 
three  dimensions 
the  heights  of 
(3D),  where  also 
communications  nodes  are  taken  into  consideration  [12]–
[15].  In  this  way,  6G  networks  will  be  able  to  provide 
drastically higher performance to support passengers in ships 
and airplanes. 

The  initiatives  spawned  recently  range  from  very  high 
throughput  geostationary  orbit  (GEO)  and  medium  Earth 
orbit (MEO) systems  to unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) 
[16]–[18] and small satellite systems dedicated to machine-
to-machine  (M2M)  and  Internet-of-Things  (IoT)  services 
[19]–[21].  Especially  interesting  are  mega-constellations 
consisting  of  hundreds to  thousands  of  small  and medium- 
size  satellites  like  those  proprietary  ones  envisaged  by 
OneWeb,  Starlink,  Orbcomm  and  Telesat to  mention  but  a 
few. There is also ongoing active work in the 3rd Generation 
Partnership  Project  (3GPP)  standardization  to  define  non-
terrestrial  networks  (NTN)  with  interoperable  interfaces  in 
order  to  have  truly  seamless  connectivity  in  the  future, 
described in detail in Section V.B. 

B. SPACE SAFETY AND SUSTAINABILITY 
There are not  only  technical drivers in  the  development  of 
multi-layer 6G networks. It is essential to develop services 
and technologies in a sustainable way to ensure high quality 
services  also  to  coming  generations.  To  mention  a  few 
examples: 1) According to International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU) only half of the world’s population has access 
to  broadband  services  above  256  kbits/s  currently  [22].  2) 
The  COVID-19  pandemic  has 
that  video 
communications  provide  means  for  people  and  businesses, 
including medical professionals, and their patients to remain 
in  virtual  contact,  avoiding  the  need  for  travel  while 
remaining socially, professionally, and commercially active 
[23].  

shown 

A comprehensive analysis of the linkage between 6G and 

the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UN  

Figure 1. Sustainable 6G SatCom aspects. 

from 

technological,  business  and 

SDGs) 
regulation 
perspectives  has  been  provided  in  [24]  [25].  A  very  good 
overview of how European Space Agency (ESA) programs 
support  SDGs  is  given  in  [26].  For  instance,  satellite 
communication  technologies  provide  e-learning  in  the 
Congo,  tools  for  telemedicine  and  transmission  of  key 
medical  data  to  and  from  remote  locations,  and  means  to 
gather  and  share  data  on arctic  sea and  climate  conditions. 
Thus, it supports a multitude of SDGs including good health 
and wellbeing, climate action, quality education, sustainable 
cities and communities, reduced inequalities, and life on land 
by helping to protect terrestrial ecosystems. 

Therefore,  modern  communication  networks  will  be 
purposefully  designed  to  be  socially,  economically,  and 
environmentally  sustainable,  and  they  will  provide  the 
means to support equality globally. The main sustainability 
aspects, visualized in Figure 1, are:  

Social  drivers:  The  system  should  support  reaching 
societal  SDG  goals  and  do  that  with  a  human-centric 
approach.  This  means  supporting  good  life,  equality  of 
service,  and  access  around  different  regions  worldwide 
including developing countries in order to tackle the digital 
divide. 

Economic drivers: It is not economically feasible to build 
terrestrial  infrastructure  to  provide  connectivity  in  Arctic 
areas  or  many  other  remote  locations.  There  are  market 
expectations and user needs to be fulfilled. The system to be 
built has  to  be  economically  feasible  for  the  operators and 
affordable  for  the  users.  Satellites  provide  a  cost-efficient 
platform 
locations. 
Standardization  is  also  driving  the  development,  making 
systems interoperable and easier to adopt. 

to  connect 

in  remote 

in  order 

Environment  drivers:  Environmental  and  ecological 
factors  are  driving  development  of  future  technological 
solutions.  From  the  satellite  system  point  of  view  drivers 
include avoidance of space debris creation, energy and  

VOLUME XX, 2022 

2 

 
 
 
 
Topic of the article  Ref. 
[7], 
Review  of 
[8] 
satellites 

small 

Unmanned 
vehicle 
communications 
Satellite 
communications  in 
the New Space era 
5G and 6G  satellite 
communications 

[16] 

[28] 

aerial 
based 

TABLE I. COMPARISON TO EXISTING REVIEW ARTICLES. 
Contributions given in the article 
Survey  on  small  satellites  and  their 
capabilities and related transformation 
of the space business. 
Comprehensive  review  of  the  use  of 
airborne  platforms  to  support  wireless 
services. 
Comprehensive  overview  covering 
technical 
topics  and  development 
environments. 
Reviews  describing  5G  use  cases, 
standardization 
technologies, 
and 
activities 
to  non-terrestrial 
networking. 
Survey papers and white papers on 6G 
connectivity  regarding  main  drivers, 
sustainability,  requirements,  technical 
building  blocks 
architecture 
visions. Focus on terrestrial aspects but 
also remote connectivity. 
to  share  spectrum  between 
How 
different networks such as satellite and 
terrestrial.  Focus  on  database-assisted 
technology. 
Overview 
operations and emerging threats  

[29]- 
[31],  
[34], 
[35] 
[12], 
[24], 
[25], 
[36]-
[40] 

[32], 
[33] 

sustainable 

wireless 

related 

space 

and 

of 

Dynamic  spectrum 
sharing  

6G 
systems visions 

[27], 
[41], 
[43] 

Sustainability  and 
threats  caused  by 
constellations 
Sustainable satellite 
communications  in 
the 6G era 

Novelty:  Industry  views  based  on 
interviews.  Sustainability  and  space 
safety aspects in multi-layer networks  

entities operating on SatCom aspects. In addition, during the 
roadmap  work,  we  have  been  collaborating  with  ESA. 
Finland is an example of a relatively small country that has 
significantly increased space activities during the New Space 
era  and  has  chosen  to  focus  strongly  on  sustainability  in 
development.  Part  of  the  material  presented  in  this  paper 
originates  from  the  interviewed  organizations.  Insights and 
findings  can  be  generalized to  other  countries  as  well.  We 
aim to provide a comprehensive view that covers not only a 
single  growing  space  country  but  also  Europe  in  general. 
This  provides  a  complementary  view  of  the  vast  literature 
covering developments in North America and Asia. 

to 

related 

Many recent survey and vision papers discuss technology 
developments 
integrated  satellite-terrestrial 
networks  [13],  [28]–[35],  and  6G  topics  [36]–[40].  In 
addition, there are papers discussing space sustainability and 
threats  related  to  emerging  constellations  [27],  [41]–[44]. 
However, there are gaps in the literature that we aim to fill. 
First,  industrial  interviews  have  not  been  used  much  to 
describe  needs  and  use  cases  for  SatCom.  Second, 
regulations  and  space  safety  aspects  related  to  multi-layer 
networks have not been covered in detail in previous papers. 
Third, there are no up-to-date surveys of proprietary systems 
and standardization with linkage to space safety aspects and 
related  research  directions.  Thus,  the  novelty  of  our  paper 
(elaborated in TABLE I) includes the following: 

spectrum  efficiency,  and  pollution mitigation. It  is  good  to 
note  that  it  is  not  always  ecologically  feasible  to  build 
terrestrial systems in fragile areas such as the Arctic. The use 
of  satellites  to  provide  wanted  services  is  therefore  a  good 
choice. 

In the following, we list a couple of key points from the 

SatCom point of view. 

  The  number  of  satellites  is  increasing  especially  in 
LEO orbits. The sustainable use of space [27] ensures 
flight safety and mitigation of debris and creates the 
means  to  detect  the  debris  to  avoid  collisions  and 
enable space cleaning. 

  The spectrum must be allocated and used in a way that 
does  not  endanger  existing  services.  For  example, 
some  frequencies  are  actively  used 
to  gather 
information about the space environment and should 
not be interfered with communications signals. 
Integrated  systems  need  to  be  designed  from  the 
beginning  to  be  cyber  secure  in  order  to  ensure 
reliable services and prevent data and systems to be 
accessed by unauthorized users. 

 

C. BACKGROUND AND CONTRIBUTIONS OF THIS 
PAPER  
This paper has been prepared as an outcome of a project that 
aimed at creating a national roadmap for 6G systems. In the 
project, we have interviewed more than 20 mostly national 
organizations, including companies, ministries, and funding 

1.  We  define  sustainable  6G  SatCom  systems  and  the 
three  main  elements  related  to  them,  i.e.  social, 
economic and environmental drivers. 

2.  We  revisit  a  multi-layered  architecture  from  a 
sustainability  perspective  and  extend  our  previous 
work  presented  in  [13]  to  a  survey  with  up-to-date 
information from extensive interviews and the latest 
6G literature. 
European-level 
discuss 
developments 
flagship 
connectivity  initiative  [45]  that  could  complement 
Copernicus  and  Galileo  programs  and  support 
European sovereignty. 

to  a  planned 

national 

3.  We 

related 

and 

4.  We  examine  6G  SatCom  systems 

the 
sustainability  perspective  focusing  on  space  safety 
aspects.  We  classify 
the  space  safety  related 
development into seven subtopics and discuss related 
technical and regulatory issues.  

from 

The  organization  of  the  paper  is  described  in  Figure  2. 
First  we  will  provide  a  system  overview  in  Section  II, 
defining use cases and the most relevant regulations. Then, 
we discuss multi-layer architecture and sustainability targets 
in  Section  III.  We  analyze  and  describe  6G  related 
developments  including  large  constellations  in  Section  IV 
before  taking  a  deeper  look  at  the  recent  progress  in 
technology  enablers  in  Section  V.  Sustainability  enablers 
and space safety aspects  are reviewed in Section VI. Finally, 
research directions toward sustainable 6G SatCom are given 
in Section VII before concluding the paper.  

VOLUME XX, 2022 

3 

 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Structure of this paper. 

II. SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
A  high-level  architecture  of  a  future  multi-layer  system  is 
depicted  in  Figure  3.  It  is  a  3D  network  consisting  of 
terrestrial communications, aerial platforms, and satellites at 
different  orbits  interconnected  via  high  throughput  inter-
satellite links (ISLs), which can directly route data packets 
through  space 
to 
accommodate  the  requirements  of  the  targeted  vertical 
industries and utilize the assets and infrastructure owned by 
multiple  stakeholders.  The  user  segment  includes  user 
terminals  that  may  be  fixed,  or  mobile  ones  deployed  on 
platforms such as trains or airplanes i.e., located in multiple 
layers.  

[46].  The  architecture  has 

[13] 

The main motivation for such integrated 3D networks lies 
in the fact that terrestrial networks will be mainly developed 
to  cover  urban  areas  but their  coverage  is poor  in  a harsh, 
remote environment [35]. Thus, satellites are needed in 6G 
systems to extend coverage to mountains, oceans and other 
less-populated regions. There are also significant differences 
between  satellite  and  terrestrial  systems  regarding  the 
transmission  delay  and  number  of  users  served.  The 
development and use of integrated systems need to be done 
in  a  sustainable  way,  fulfilling  the  aspects  described  in 
Figure 1.  

A. 

IDENTIFIED USE CASES 

There are numerous papers discussing 6G related use cases, 
some  of  which  also  discuss  multi-layer  networking.  Our 
objective is to provide a consolidated Nordic view based on 
interviews with Finnish industry actors and administrations. 
In addition, we highlight the sustainability aspect throughout 
the descriptions. Obviously, similar use cases are also of high 
interest  in  other  regions  and  we  have  aimed  to  create  an 
internationally applicable view. Here we list the findings that 
are  also  depicted  in  Figure  4.  The  list  is  not  meant  to  be 
exhaustive  but  it  indicates  potential  application  areas  and 
shows  where  needs  from  the  interviewed  industrial  and 
governmental organizations are. 

The views are also in line with the Finnish recovery and 
resilience  plan,  part  of  Finland’s  sustainable  growth 
program, where Pillar 2 focuses on digitalization and the data 
economy  [47].  This  pillar  is  further  divided  into  three 
component areas: digital infrastructure, accelerating the data 
economy and digitalization, and digital security. The aim of 
the  digital  infrastructure  is  to  have  a  high-speed  reliable 
network  and  nation-wide  coverage.  Another  target  is  to 
promote  the  digitalization  of  traffic,  which  will  further 
support  the  attainment  of  transport  emission  reduction 
targets.  This 
railway  mobile 
a 
communication system to enable a better and more punctual 
provision of trains. We have classified the use cases into five 
main categories. 

includes 

future 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Multi-layer network architecture for 6G. 

Figure 4. Use cases for future satellite communications. 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1)  AUTONOMOUS AND REMOTE-CONTROLLED 
SYSTEMS / COMMUNICATIONS ON THE MOVE  

Satellites 

capabilities. 

Communications  on  the  move  is  a  natural  use  case  for 
future satellite-terrestrial systems. 6G technologies will need 
to  provide  robust  high-capacity  connections  to  airplanes, 
trains, cars, working machines, and maritime users across the 
globe. Satellites support operations by providing connection 
and enhancing situational awareness via remote sensing and 
provide 
navigation 
complementary redundant connection in a sustainable way, 
without the need to build extensive terrestrial infrastructure. 
Latency is still seen as a challenge for remote-controlled and 
autonomous  systems  such  as  cars,  but  upcoming  LEO 
solutions  are  expected  to  provide  significant  improvement 
for  latency  reduction.  Broadcasting  to  a  large  number  of 
receivers  will  be  provided  by  satellite  and  terrestrial 
infrastructure  in  the  future.  The  broadcasting  capability  of 
satellites  will  also  be  used  in  sending  software  updates  to 
devices and moving platforms over a large area. 

can 

The  satellite  connections  and  integrated  systems  are 
inherently needed in the maritime domain. Digitalization of 
maritime requires development, which is described in [48], 
[49].  The  3GPP  standardization  forum  identifies 
the 
following  main  services  for  maritime  communications 
(MarCom),  covering  the  needs  of  humans  as  well  as 
maritime systems: 1) Mobile broadband services for users at 
sea; 2) Machine type communication services inside a vessel, 
between  vessels  and  between  UEs  at  sea;  3)  Maritime 
communication services between authorities and users at sea; 
4)  Interworking  and  harmonization  (with  very  high 
frequency (VHF) and satellite systems). Additionally, other 
services such as collection and dissemination of sensor data 
(e.g.,  meteorological  and  hydrographic  data)  are  possible. 
Based on the conducted interviews of MarCom end users it 
is  essential  to  have  integrated  systems  that  can  provide 
services  globally  also  in  areas  where  mobile  cellular 
networks  do  not  provide  coverage.  There  is  quite  a  good 
connection using the Finnish public safety network (VIRVE) 
towards Tallinn but commercial networks are not so good far 
from the shore. 

2)  SECURE CONNECTIVITY FOR CRITICAL USERS 
A secure and resilient connectivity solution with sovereignty 
–also  during  crisis  times–  is  an  essential  part  of  future 
development  in  Europe.  There  are  plans  to  develop 
governmental  SatCom  (GovSatCom)  solutions  that  can 
to 
support  broadband  needs  and  provide  services 
governmental  users  in  any  location  over  the  continent. 
GovSatCom is defined in [50] as a new service class between 
fully commercial and military applications, providing highly 
available secure connections. The air interface of the system 
could  be  based  on  5G  and  later  6G  in  order  to  create  a 
standardized system on top of  which security functions are 
built. From the cybersecurity viewpoint, quantum solutions 
are foreseen.  

Public safety authorities are increasingly using broadband 
services,  new  multimedia  applications,  and  smart  devices. 
Many new critical user sectors are emerging, including live 
broadcasting, critical business, security, remote control, and 
value transportation. The resulting connectivity needs cannot 
be  supported  by  traditional  narrowband  systems.  Instead, 
broadband  mobile  networks  and  satellite  connections  are 
needed as enabling technologies. For example, border guards 
and military personnel need rapidly deployable networks, (or 
so  called  “tactical  bubbles”  [51])  in  remote  locations. 
Coverage and capacity for integrated networks and easy-to-
use  solutions  are  mentioned  in  interviews  as  goals  for 
adopting  satellite  systems  for  operational  use.  The  use  of 
NTN for public safety applications in Finland was studied in 
[52].  It  was  concluded  that  “Satellites  could  be  used  as 
backup connections especially in locations where terrestrial 
network  is  not  available.  This  will  create  resiliency  to  the 
operations.” 

Usually,  the military  has  the  satellite  system  under their 
control.  Also  in  Finland,  ground  stations,  terminals,  and 
personnel  are  internally  managed;  only  satellites  are  not 
controlled  by  them.  In  addition  to  the  mentioned  tactical 
bubbles,  military  users  need  satellites  as  redundant 
connections  that  can  provide  services  anywhere.  Satellites 
can,  e.g.,  connect  hierarchically  different  parts  during 
operations.  For  example,  the  facility  area  that  handles  the 
main  resources  can  be  connected  to  the  battle  zone  where 
satellites and drone swarms provide redundant performance 
to the troops. 

include  cheap, 

3)  SATCOM FOR IOT AND EARTH OBSERVATION 
SERVICES 
Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  and  machine-type  communication 
low-complexity  sensors,  and 
services 
actuators that are able to generate and exchange data. Due to 
the large number of devices, traffic generated by them will 
have a significant impact on the network load. Satellites can 
help  to  offload  the  terrestrial  IoT  network  traffic  through 
backhauling or provide service  continuity in cases where a 
terrestrial  network  cannot  be  reached.  Several  interviewed 
companies thought that this is an important future use case 
since  IoT  does  not  require  so  many  satellites  in  a 
constellation  in  order  to  have  reasonable  business  cases 
available. However, there are many old and new players and 
the IoT area is competitive. NTN-IoT interconnecting every 
point  on  Earth  to  service  centers  is  interesting  for  many 
industries.  There  is  ongoing  development  for  narrowband 
IoT 
in  3GPP 
(NB-IoT) 
standardization. 

services  over 

satellites 

Although EO can be considered a separate business area 
from communications, the amount of EO data transmitted to 
dedicated  ground  stations  is  significant.  Collected  sensor 
data  at  the  satellites  may  be  so  large,  that  some  pre-
processing is required before downlink transmission. In such 
a case, the data links form the limiting factor of the system. 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

6 

 
 
 
 
The situation arises especially with LEO satellites, which are 
visible  to  ground  stations  for  only  a  short  period  of  time 
during which the download of data must be performed. Inter-
satellite links (ISLs) to GEO, highly elliptical orbit (HEO) or 
other  LEO  satellites  solve  the  problem,  but  then  the  EO 
satellites  become  a  part  of  a  satellite  communication 
networks,  justifying  the  inclusion  in  the  communications 
business  area.  The  number  of  EO  satellites  is  constantly 
increasing due to an increased need to monitor the changing 
environment and resources of Earth. 

4)  DIRECT CONNECTIVITY INCLUDING HARD-TO-
REACH AREAS 
Direct  5G  and  6G  handheld  connections  could  make 
emerging  satellite  services  widely  used  by  consumers  and 
enable  seamless  integration  with mobile  cellular networks. 
The ability to connect without separate satellite equipment is 
definitely  of  high  interest  both  to  entertainment  and 
authoritative applications. 3GPP is working on a global new 
radio (NR)-based solution enabling hand-held devices to be 
used both in terrestrial and non-terrestrial networks as well 
as  mobility  in  between.  This  is  a  promising  business 
opportunity for mobile phone manufacturers. 

Roughly half of the world’s population cannot access the 
Internet via broadband connections [53]. In addition, Internet 
services  are  very  limited  e.g.,  in  Arctic  areas.  Building 
terrestrial infrastructure in remote locations and developing 
countries is not economically feasible. Thus, this is a good 
opportunity  and  driver  for  the  development  of  satellite 
services since they can provide truly global connectivity. In 
more  populated  places  satellites  will  most  probably  only 
complement terrestrial systems, not replace them. Satellites 
can  still  provide  backhaul  services  to  mobile  networks, 
playing an important role in their development. 

The  Arctic  area  is  very  relevant  for  many  European 
stakeholders. From the Finnish viewpoint the solutions that 
generally work in the Arctic also work in Finland. One of the 
main SDGs is to provide coverage to poorly connected areas. 
The  developed  solution  should  not  only  be  technically 
capable,  but it  should also  be  easy  to  use  and adaptable  to 
different cultures. One company pointed out that in general 
they  are  looking  for  use  cases  that  promise  sustainable 
development  from  the  climate  point  of  view.  It  is  vital  to 
develop situational awareness solutions that can be used to 
detect environmental impacts. 

5)  SPACE SAFETY AND SATELLITES AS A SERVICE 
One part of sustainable development is to take care of space 
safety  related  aspects.  Space  weather  services  provide 
information to the space infrastructure and helps in defining 
required  protection  for  the  coming  satellites  and  their 
electronics. The number of satellites is increasing rapidly in 
the New Space era and both avoidance and detection of space 
debris  are  very  important.  Both  ground-borne  radars  and 
space-borne radars can help in space debris management. It 

was  found  in  a  recent  paper  [54]  that  while  high-density 
constellations  intrinsically  increase  the  risk  of  satellite 
collisions,  they  can  also  be  used  to  mitigate  the  debris 
problem. Tight integration between space-based and ground-
based  radars  might  provide  the  best  solution  for  real-time 
debris detection. 

As future needs and technology developments cannot be 
predicted accurately there is a need to develop programmable 
satellites [55] and concepts such as satellite-as-a-service or 
payload-as-a-service. The former concept refers to providing 
the  satellite  capability  to  a  customer  whereas  in  the  latter 
concept,  a  single  satellite  may  carry  several  payloads  for 
different  customers.  Still  the  development  of  the  platform 
and operation of the satellite is done by the satellite operator, 
easing customer access to the satellite data.  

The envisioned development requires the use of software-
defined  radio  technology  and  software-defined  satellite 
platforms.  Then,  the  satellite  or  its  payload  could  be 
reconfigured over the air to needs that are not even known 
yet to improve its longevity and sustainability. In addition, 
this could also make updates of technology releases possible 
so  that  regular  updates  of  3GPP  releases  would  not  mean 
launching new satellites into orbit. Satellite-as-a-service and 
payload-as-a-service  reduce  the  need  for  large  technical 
teams in different organizations, they can pay for the service 
only when needed and the satellites can be used by multiple 
customers  for  multiple  missions.  A  recent  example  is 
Lockheed Martin’s SmartSat concept, which allows satellite 
operators to quickly change missions while in orbit with the 
simplicity  of  starting,  stopping,  or  uploading  new 
applications [56]. 

Lessons 

learned:  While  researchers  and  research 
organizations  typically  provide  futuristic  visions  about  use 
cases that might require a totally new kind of performance 
from 6G networks, there are still many industrial players that 
reliability, 
seek  mostly  moderate 
in 
scalability,  and  cost.  Interviews  showed 
that  many 
organizations would be very willing to increase their use of 
satellite  services  and  predicted 
that  developments  in 
performance, cost, and availability will spark innovations in 
many  industrial  fields.  Concepts  such  as  satellite-as-a-
service  may  provide  useful  tools  that  will  limit  the 
exponential growth in the number of satellites. 

improvements 

B.  REGULATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL 

GUIDELINES 

Regulation is one of the most important, or perhaps the most 
important  aspect  for  ensuring  sustainable  operations.  They 
provide an international framework to be followed by space 
nations  and  ways  to  control  and  monitor  the  actual 
operations. The following sections cover the identified key 
topics  related  to  multi-layer  networks.  The  relation  of 
identified  aspects  to  the  three  main  sustainability  pillars  is 
presented in TABLE II. 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

7 

 
 
 
  
 
TABLE II. REGULATIONS TO ENABLE SUSTAINABILITY 

Social 

Economic 

regulations 

Relevant 
and guidelines 
Cybersecurity 
UAV regulations 
Territorial aspects 
Ground stations and data 
Cybersecurity 
Frequency management 
Territorial aspects 

Environment  Space debris 

UAV regulations 
Frequency management 

Comments 

to 
People  need 
trust 
that  new 
technology  is  safe 
and reliable. 
Enables industry 
to operate 
internationally. 
Keeping 
the 
environment  safe 
and  other  services 
protected. 

1)  FREQUENCY MANAGEMENT AND LICENSES TO 
OPERATE  
Currently, different frequency bands are assigned to different 
users  and  service  providers,  and  licenses  are  required  to 
operate  within 
those  bands.  Cellular  communication 
systems,  broadcasting  services,  satellites,  etc.,  all  have 
dedicated bands on which they may operate. These licensed 
that  are  distinctively 
systems  possess  characteristics 
different  from  each  other and  thus require  dedicated  bands 
for  interference-free  operation.  In  addition,  there  are 
unlicensed  bands  where  several  systems  such  as  Wi-Fi, 
Bluetooth,  and  other  short-range  communication  systems 
may operate according to given rules without any regulatory 
protection against interference. 

Operators, both in terrestrial and satellite networks, need 
a  license  from  a  regulator  to  be  able  to  provide  wireless 
services. Regarding the space segment, the license specifies 
the  allowed  orbital  positions  in  order  to  avoid  physical 
collisions  or  interference  with  other  satellites  in  the  same 
frequency band. There are two key sustainability aspects in 
frequency management: (1) To ensure that coming services 
do  not  endanger  existing  services  and  (2)  A  frequency 
license enables good business and a basis for infrastructure 
investment. The interested reader may look at [32] for more 
details about the regulation process. 
2)  SPACE DEBRIS RELATED ASPECTS  
There is an increasing number of satellites in orbit that  are 
increasing the risk for collisions and the generation of debris 
that could put satellite services in danger. Space debris, also 
called  orbital  debris,  are  non-functional  man-made  objects 
orbiting the Earth or re-entering the atmosphere [57]. Space 
debris  is  an  important  aspect  of  space  sustainability  [27]. 
Most  international  guidelines  are not legally  binding.  Such 
guidelines 
Inter-Agency  Space  Debris 
Coordination  Committee  (IADC)  space  debris  mitigation 
guidelines, the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer 
Space  (COPUOS)  space  debris  mitigation  guidelines,  and 
the  UN  COPUOS  Guidelines 
the  Long-term 
Sustainability  of  Outer  Space  Activities  (LTS  Guidelines). 
The EU has also included space situational awareness (SSA) 
in  its  space  program  for  2021–2027.  SSA  includes  space 

include 

the 

for 

surveillance and tracking (SST), which tracks resident space 
objects (RSOs), including both active and inactive satellites 
and space debris. In addition to SSA, a more comprehensive 
target is prompt space traffic management capability similar 
to  air  traffic  management.  However,  as  things  are  more 
complicated in space, we are still quite far from an effective 
space traffic management system [58]. 

Companies  have  also  realized  the  important  economic 
aspects  of  space  sustainability  and  debris  mitigation.  The 
space  safety  coalition is an ad-hoc  coalition  of  companies, 
organizations,  and  other  government  and 
industry 
stakeholders that have endorsed a set of best practices for the 
sustainability of space operations to address gaps in current 
space  legislations  [59].  They  promote  the  exchange  of 
information  between  all  actors,  the  careful  selection  of 
launch  providers,  the  prioritization  of  space  safety  in  the 
design  and  operation,  best  practices 
in  design,  and 
sustainability enhancing operations. Additionally, the World 
Economic  Forum’s  Global  Future  Council  on  Space 
Technologies has developed, together with stakeholders, the 
concept of Space Sustainability Rating (SSR) [60]. The SSR 
will  score  space  missions  based  on  markers  such  as 
evidenced-based  debris  mitigation  and  alignment  with 
international guidelines. The sustainability certifications for 
mission operators will start in 2022.  

The importance of space debris mitigation has led many 
countries to incorporate some of the guidelines into legally 
binding national  instruments  [27].  In  Finland,  the  Ministry 
of  Economic  Affairs  and  Employment  takes  care  of  the 
national  space  legislation  and  authorizes  and  registers  any 
space activities [61]. The Finnish act on space activities of 
2018  includes  a  section  on  environmental  protection  and 
space debris. The operator of the space activity “shall assess 
the  environmental  impacts  of  the activities  on the  earth, in 
the  atmosphere  and  in  outer  space,  and  present  a  plan  for 
measures  to  counter  and  reduce  adverse  environmental 
impacts.”  Additionally,  “the  operator  shall  seek  to  ensure 
that  the  space  activities  do  not  generate  space  debris.  In 
particular, the operator shall restrict the generation of space 
debris  during  the  normal  operations  of  the  space  object, 
reduce the risks of in-orbit break-ups and in-orbit collisions 
and, after the space object has completed its mission, seek to 
move it into a less used orbit or into the atmosphere.” 
3)  TERRITORIAL ASPECTS RELATED TO 5G AND 6G 
NETWORKS  
A SatCom operation and communication service from high 
altitude platforms (HAPs) can easily cross borders i.e., cover 
areas  in more  than  one  country.  In  addition,  there  are also 
international water and land areas without territorial claims 
such  as  the  Antarctic  where  service  from  satellites  is 
provided.  Regulations  allowing  fluent  operation  across 
borders are good from a social point of view, allowing end 
users to access services easily while traveling. In addition, it 
supports 
latest 
international  business  and  makes 
technology widely available. 

the 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

8 

 
 
 
 
An  example  of  extraterritorial  access  is  where  a  mobile 
network identifier (ID) is used for a local network on a ship 
or  plane  traveling  in  or  over  international  waters  and  then 
satellites are used to connect to the outside world [62]. IDs 
are authorized by one administration in one country, but they 
could also be transmitted by a radio access network (RAN) 
in another country. 3GPP is currently developing guidelines 
for regulatory aspects related to regional operation including 
how to enable routing to a core network in a specific country. 
Regulations  may  require  that  the  satellite  ground  station 
and/or base station and the core network all have to be in the 
same country as the user equipment (UE), unless countries 
have  made  specific  agreements  [62].  Finally,  international 
regulations  ensure  safe  and  efficient  maritime  traffic 
management  and  air  traffic  management  and  other  safety-
critical  applications.  On 
the  other  hand,  passenger 
communications  must  comply  with  regulations  of  the 
territory with sovereignty over the location they are in. 
4)  UAV REGULATIONS  
Airborne  platforms  differ  from  satellites  in  the  sense  that 
they operate in the air space of different countries whereas 
space  is  international.  UAV  regulations  include  not  only 
connectivity  but  also  operational  limitations  on  different 
locations and ethical constraints related to privacy protection 
[63]. When the UAV is small enough, its use is regulated by 
national  aviation  authorities  but  when  they  are  larger  than 
150  kg,  they  are  usually  regulated  similarly  to  manned 
aircraft.  Typically,  there  are  also  no-fly  zones  defined  to 
minimize risks to manned air flights, and UAVs can only be 
operated  in  line-of-sight  conditions.  Regulations  make  the 
UAV more acceptable and safe for people as well as help to 
protect critical services in the environment. 
5)  GROUND STATIONS AND DATA  
An important item in the regulatory domain is work related 
to  ground  stations  and  data  aspects.  This  work  is  actively 
ongoing  in  Finland  to  support  practical  ground  station 
operators in their work. There are new operators willing to 
start  operations  to  support  both  Earth  observation  and 
communications  systems.  Nordic 
locations  are  more 
favorable  than  southern  Europe  locations  due  to  longer 
visibility 
times  for  satellites  using  polar  orbits  and 
consequently  better  data  downlinks.  However,  there  are 
regulatory  aspects  that  need  to  be  clear  for  commercial 
operators  willing  to  support  a  number  of  operators  from 
different countries. For example, the data that goes through 
the  ground  station  is  not  necessarily  visible  at  all  to  the 
the  operator  collaborate? 
operator.  With  whom  can 
Regulations  allow  for  efficient  collaboration,  transparency 
and consequently trust for people and businesses.  
6)  CYBER SECURITY REQUIREMENTS AND 
GUIDELINES  
Cyber security is not meant to be a legal concept. However, 
regulators,  such  as  Traficom’s  National  Cyber  Security 
Centre Finland, develop and monitor networks and services 

TABLE III. SUSTAINABILITY IN MULTI-LAYER NETWORKS 

Terrestrial 
layer 

Airborne 
layer 

Space layer 

and 

support 

Sustainability targets for design 
Multi-tenancy 
sharing  of 
infrastructure,  resource  efficiency,  ability  to 
tailor the network for different needs. 
Selecting  the right platform  for temporal  use, 
electricity,  support  for  critical  infrastructures, 
environmental monitoring 
Preventing space debris, coverage everywhere, 
efficient resource use, ability to update over the 
air, low latency 

and  also  provide  guidelines  nationally.  It  is  well  stated  in 
[64] as “Ensuring the security of society is a key task of the 
government authorities and the vital functions of our society 
must be secured in all situations.” The main cyber aspects for 
multi-layer  6G  networks  include  three  attributes:  (a) 
Availability i.e., communication services must be available 
for legitimate users to access at any time. Radio frequency 
interference can be seen as a denial-of-service attack when it 
is intentional; (b) Confidentiality, maintaining the secrecy of 
information by preventing access to systems and data from 
unauthorized  users.  The  platforms,  interfaces,  and  end-to-
end  connections  should  be  well  protected  so  that  “hostile 
quarters cannot obtain the control of constellations” as one 
interviewee  put  it.  (c)  Integrity,  i.e.,  protecting  data  from 
unauthorized  alteration  such  as  modification,  deletion,  or 
injection of wrong data. It is also good to protect the system 
against unintentional alteration such as data loss caused by a 
system malfunction. 

Lessons  learned:  To  develop  a  sustainable  multi-layer 
space-air-ground  system  one  needs  to  take  into  account 
multiple  regulations  and  guidelines,  which  also  partially 
limits  technologies  that  can  be  applied  in  practice.  When 
proposing new technologies and frequency bands to use, one 
also  needs  to  conduct  regulatory  studies  and  discuss  with 
administrations  before  those  can  be  used  in  operational 
systems.  Good  regulations  can  be  seen  as  a  driver  and 
enabler for sustainable operations. 

III. 6G MULTI-LAYER ARCHITECTURE 
Considering now the multi-layer architecture given in Figure 
3 we will describe each layer of a sustainable network. The 
main design targets are summarized in TABLE III.  

layer 

terrestrial 

includes  several 

A. TERRESTRIAL NETWORK LAYER: GROUND 
SEGMENT  
radio  access 
The 
technologies such as cellular radios, WiFi, and IoT solutions 
to  support  fixed  and  mobile  users.  Car-to-car  and  ship-to-
ship communications are also enabled by radios specifically 
developed for those purposes. The ground segment consists 
of  a  gateway  and  a  core  network  operated  by  the  network 
operator.  System  control, network access,  and  backhauling 
are  done  at  the  ground  segment.  A  satellite  operator  uses 
telemetry, tracking & control (TT&C) stations to monitor the 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
status  of  satellites  and  their  subsystems,  run  updates,  and 
update  the  configurations.  These  can  be  used  to  keep 
satellites at the desired orbits, update camera parameters, etc. 
Small  user  terminals  are  handheld  devices  with  small 
antennas  and  very  small  aperture  terminals  (VSATs)  with 
dish or flat antennas installed e.g., on a ship deck. The UE of 
a  future  system  will  be  a multi-radio  terminal  (any  type  of 
integrated communication device) including satellite access. 
The  RAN  is  assumed  to  be  software-defined  networking 
(SDN)  capable  of  multi-tenancy  support.  That  is  essential 
because, in practice, different RANs and transport networks 
are often managed by separate network operators. Network 
techniques  enable  different 
virtualization  and  slicing 
operators  to  share  network  resources  with  other  (virtual) 
operators  and  provide  end-to-end  connectivity  across 
operator boundaries. Efficiency in spectrum and energy use 
is  targeted  as  well.    The  whole  3D  network  could  be 
controlled by a centralized entity, an SDN controller, which 
has control over the network devices and global knowledge 
about the network state within an administrative region. The 
core  network  in  the  6G  architecture  supports  seamless 
cooperation  between  the  terrestrial  and  non-terrestrial 
segments and enables QoS management of data transmission 
e.g.,  by  dedicating  part  of  the  resources  to  higher-priority 
applications. 

Furthermore,  multi-access  edge  computing 

(MEC) 
provides  localized  computing  and  storage  resources  for 
applications  as  well  as  real-time  information  on  local 
network  conditions.  The  satellite  can  provide  a  reliable 
backhaul  link  for  edge  computing.  Together,  software 
networks permitting flexible control of network traffic with 
fine granularity and MEC enabling the provision of scalable 
distributed  services  and  network  functions  create  a  highly 
elastic  integrated  satellite-airborne-terrestrial  system.  This 
means  that  the  whole  system  can  be  tailored  during  the 
operation of the network to support different kind of services.  

B. AIRBORNE NETWORK LAYER 
The  airborne  layer  comprises  UAVs  that  can  be  classified 
according  to  their  altitude.  Low  altitude  platforms  (LAPs) 
are characterized by an altitude lying within the troposphere 
[65]    and  HAPs  are  between  10  km  and  50  km  (mostly 
concentrated  around  20  km)  in  altitude  [18].  UAV  types 
include (1) balloons, (2) fixed-wing aircraft, and (3) rotary-
wing  aircraft.  There  can  be  WiFi,  5G,  and  6G  types  of 
payloads  providing  connectivity  to  terrestrial  users,  and 
Earth observation sensors for remote-sensing purposes. Due 
to the short distance, there is no need to use different radio 
equipment, and standardized cellular equipment can be used 
to  provide  services  from  HAPs  to  cellular users.  HAPs  are 
used  for  various  use  cases  and  their  implementation 
scenarios  include dedicated,  shared, and neutral hosts.  It  is 
important to select a suitable platform for operations to save 
cost and resources. 

A major challenge for many operations is the ability of a 

HAP  to  maintain  a  stationary  position  due  to  windy 
conditions  at high altitudes.  An  operating altitude  between 
17 and 22 km is often chosen for platforms because in most 
regions of the world, this represents a layer of relatively mild 
wind and turbulence above the jet stream. This altitude (> 17 
km)  is  also  above  commercial  air-traffic  heights,  which 
would  otherwise  prove  to  be  a  potentially  prohibitive 
constraint. 

Tethered aerostations, drones, and unmanned balloons are 
density  neutral,  floating  at  the  desired  altitude  [66]. 
Propulsion is only used to maintain their position. Tethered 
balloons are generally LAPs, operated within a few hundred 
meters  in  altitude.  Although  tether  limits  the  achievable 
height of the aerial systems, it also offers the means to feed 
electric  power  and  communications  cable  to  the  platform. 
Thus, they can be used for long-duration missions.  

The majority of drones or UAVs operate at a low altitude. 
They  are  versatile  and  easily  deployable  aerial  platforms, 
which  are  increasingly  used  for  different  applications  and 
purposes.  According  to  [67]  the  following  attributes  make 
drones  a  desirable  candidate  to  substitute  or  complement 
terrestrial networks: (1) a higher probability for line-of-sight 
(LoS) links to connect users on the ground and the ability to 
adjust locations to maintain high-quality links; (2) dynamic 
deployment capability according to needs. No need for site 
rental costs; (3) UAV-based swarm networks for ubiquitous 
connectivity to recover and expand communications fast and 
effectively.  Sustainable  UAVs  aim to  use  electricity  in  the 
form  of  rechargeable  batteries  instead  of  fossil  fuels.  In 
addition,  they  can  play  a  crucial  role  in  monitoring  the 
environment and critical infrastructure. 

C. SPACE NETWORK LAYER 
The space layer comprises satellite constellations and large 
satellites  operating  in  different  orbits  –  and  links  between 
them.  The  satellite  payloads  can  be 
transparent  or 
regenerative.  In  the  latter  case,  part  of  the  base  station 
(e.g., 
functionalities  are  performed  by 
demodulating and re-modulating the signal) whereas in the 
traditional  transparent  case,  the  satellite  acts  as  a  simple 
repeater  that  amplifies  the  signal  and  makes  a  frequency 
conversion  between  the  uplink  (UL)  and  downlink  (DL) 
frequencies. 

the  satellite 

There are satellites in LEO, vLEO, MEO, GEO and even 
HEO.  Large  satellites  in  high  orbits  are  mostly  built, 
launched, and operated by established companies within the 
space  industry.  GEO  satellites  are  used  for  providing 
broadband  access  especially 
to  remote  areas,  which 
otherwise cannot be served – either for technical or economic 
reasons. Modern high-throughput satellites (HTS) are able to 
provide  sufficient  data  rates  to  most  consumers.  However, 
the availability of GEO broadband services becomes limited 
in  polar  areas  above  60° 
latitude.  Thus,  satellite 
constellations at lower orbits are developed to also support  

VOLUME XX, 2022 

10 

 
 
gravitational  constant,  Re ≈  6378  km  is  the Earth’s radius, 
and  h  is  the  orbit height  defining  the  distance  between  the 
ground  station  and  the  satellite.  Pass  time  or  possible 
connection time from a specific location on the ground to a 
passing satellite from horizon to horizon is then 

𝑇p =

𝑇

𝜋

arccos⁡( 𝑅e
𝑅e+ℎ

). 

(2) 

The pass time also defines the maximum handover time from 
one satellite to another. Usually, the time is somewhat less 
than  that  since  a  safety  margin  is  needed  to  guarantee 
connectivity. 

D. DEVELOPMENT PATHS 
When we look specifically from the SatCom point of view, the 
following  development  paths  can  be  seen  when  we  move 
towards 6G [1], [13], [34], [68]. 

1)  The networks will become multi-layered. The role of 

small satellites in LEO orbits is essential. 

2)  The  on-board  computer  (OBC),  the  brain  of  the 
satellite,  is  evolving  and  its  processing  power 
increasing. This allows  for  the  softwarization  of  the 
payload,  which  brings  flexibility  to  the  system  and 
renders  possible  the  dynamic  adaptation  of  beams, 
power  and  frequency  allocations,  as  well  as 
reconfigurability 
itself. 
longevity  and 
Reconfigurability 
sustainability  of  the  satellites.  On  the  software  side, 
isolation  using  partitioning,  virtualization,  or 
containers  can  prevent the  on-board  data  processing 
from  interfering  with  the  basic  operations  of  the 
satellite. 

of 
improves 

payload 

the 

the 

3)  From  the  spectrum  point  of  view,  millimeter  wave 
and  terahertz  technologies  and  optical  links  allow 
very  high-rate  data  links,  and  spectrum  sharing 
techniques will be used to reduce interference in the 
future. 

4)  Reconfigurable  phased  array  antennas  and  multi-
to  reduce  power 

beam  architectures  are  used 
consumption and improve spectrum efficiency. 
End-to-end cybersecurity is to be taken into account early 
in  the  design  phase  (security-by-design)  to  cover  all 
interfaces,  handovers,  and  the  whole  platform.  Quantum 
technologies  including  post-quantum  cryptography  will  be 
used for secure connectivity. 

Lessons learned: Network planning needs to be updated 
to  three  dimensions.  Consequently  efficient  resource  use 
paradigms  will  have  to  cover  vertical  dimensions.  The 
integrated  architecture  will  be  dynamic  with  multiple 
moving and potentially temporal components in it. Satellite-
terrestrial  infrastructure  will  form  the  backbone.  Airborne 
platforms are mainly temporal additions for specific needs.  

IV. 6G SATCOM SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT 

A. BRIEF HISTORY OF DEVELOPMENTS 
Satellites have been studied and developed in parallel to  

Figure 5. GEO, MEO and LEO orbits. 

TABLE IV. COMPARISON OF SATELLITE ORBITS. 

Orbit 

(v)LEO 

MEO 

GEO 

Typical orbit height (km) 

160 – 1400 

10000 – 20000 

35786 

Path loss at 17.7 GHz 
(dB) 

Number of satellites for 
global coverage 

Orbital period (h) 

Pass time (min) 

1-way latency, Zenith 
(ms) 

161 – 180 

197 – 203 

208 

40 – 200 

10 – 30 

1.5 – 2 

6 – 22 

0.5 – 5 

6 – 12 

130 – 300 

33 – 67 

119 

3 

24 

- 

Arctic environments. 

Small satellite R&D efforts are growing rapidly with new 
players that focus on non-geostationary (NGSO) orbits and 
integrate  products  and  services  of  different  technology 
providers. The majority  of  planned  small  satellite  missions 
around  the  world  consider  communications  and  the  use  of 
very  small  platforms  such  as  CubeSats.  In  addition  to 
providing  coverage  for  remote  areas,  the  space  segment  is 
required to be able to support low-latency services, and that 
is  only  possible  with  lower  orbits.  Satellites  in  a  future 
system can be tailored on-the-fly with on-board processing 
capabilities. For example, space-hardened software-defined 
radios  can  enable  on-board  waveform-specific  processing 
that can be upgraded during a satellite’s lifetime [28]. While 
improving technical capabilities, it is also essential to be able 
to  use  radio  resources  very  efficiently,  which  may  mean 
narrow antenna beams and dynamic spectrum sharing. 

The  main  orbits  are  depicted  in  Figure  5,  showing 
footprints  and  the  distance  from  the  orbit  to  Earth.  A 
comparison summary is given in TABLE IV. The number of 
satellites is related to coverage of the entire globe. However, 
more  satellites  might  be  needed 
to  fulfill  capacity 
requirements.  The  orbital  period  can  be  calculated  with 
Kepler’s third law in seconds as [9] 

𝑇 = 2𝜋√(𝑅e + ℎ)3/𝜇, 

(1) 

where  µ  =  398600.5  km3/s2  is  the  Earth’s  geocentric 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Timeline for 3GPP development and small satellites by 2030. 

the 

terrestrial 

mobile cellular networks during all generations. During 1G 
and 2G satellite networks were separate, proprietary systems 
providing services e.g., to remote areas [30]. During 3G the 
first step towards the convergence of satellite and terrestrial 
systems  was  made and the  satellite  air  interface  was  made 
compatible  with 
universal  mobile 
telecommunication  system  (UMTS)  infrastructure  [69].  In 
addition  to  satellites,  HAPs  were  also  considered  [70]. 
Satellites became more important in 4G and satellite systems 
were  considered  an  essential  part  of  achieving  global 
roaming in places where a terrestrial network is impossible 
to  be  installed  or  too  expensive  [71]–[73].  5G  is  making 
further progress and there are real promises of having wide-
scale use of integrated systems in the future. In 5G, service 
continuity ensures a smooth handover, e.g., from terrestrial 
to NTN interface.  

The  timeline  for  3GPP  development  since  3G  and  some 
milestones related to LEO constellations are shown in Figure 
6. CubeSats have been in orbit for almost two decades. The 
first Finnish satellite was launched in 2017 [74] and the first 
telecommunications satellite was launched in the summer of 
2021.  The  W-cube  mission  aims  at  modeling  75  GHz 
channels and their suitability for future satellite systems [75]. 
5G  NTN  service  will  be  available  in  a  few  years,  and 
multiple  LEO  constellations  with  global  service  will  exist 
before 2030 when 6G technology will become available. 

In  addition  to  3GPP,  other  standards  –  such  as  the 
enhanced version of the second generation of Digital Video 
Broadcasting standard for satellites (DVB-S2X) — are still 
very  relevant  for  HTS  satellites  [76]  [77].  They  form  the 
basis for digital satellite transmission around the world. 

B. STANDARDIZATION IN 5G AND BEYOND 
3GPP is the main standardization body for mobile networks. 
During the 5G standardization, an important action item has 
been  to  include non-terrestrial networks  to  support  5G  use 
cases such as public safety and mobile autonomous systems. 

The  consensus  and  general  agreement  on  what  satellite 
brings to achieving 5G requirements are [13], [78]: 

  Ubiquity:  Satellites  provide  high-speed  capacity 
across  the  globe  using  the  following  enablers: 
capacity in-fill inside geographic gaps; overspill to 
satellite  when  terrestrial  links  are  over  capacity; 
global coverage; and backup for network fallback. 
  Mobility:  Satellite  is the  only  technology  capable 
of providing connectivity anywhere at sea, on land 
or  in  the  air  for  moving  platforms,  aircraft,  ships 
and  trains,  while  requiring  minimal  terrestrial 
infrastructure for support. 

  Broadcast 

(Simultaneity):  A 

satellite  can 
efficiently  deliver  rich  multimedia  and  other 
content across multiple sites simultaneously, using 
broadcast/multicast  streams  with  an  information 
centric  network  and  content-caching  for  local 
distribution. 

in 

rapid,  and 

  Security/resilience: Satellite networks can provide 
resilient 
reliable, 
secure,  highly 
deployment 
communication 
challenging 
scenarios,  such  as  in  emergency  responses.  Rapid 
deployment essentially means that you can rapidly 
have a connection to the outside world even in cases 
where  the  terrestrial  infrastructure  is  destroyed. 
Emergency personnel may bring with them a base 
station  for  local  connections  –  and  a  satellite 
terminal to connect to the outside world to provide 
up-to-date situational awareness. 

The same topics are still very relevant when going towards 
6G.  Excellent  research  covering  NTN-related  activities 
papers  have  recently  been  published.  5G  use  cases  and 
scenarios defined in the Sat5G project are described in [29]. 
Non-terrestrial  networking  and  standardization  aspects  are 
discussed  in  [30].  In  addition,  the  importance  and  role  of 
LEO satellite systems in the 6G era are studied in [31]. An 
up-to-date standardization status is summarized in TABLE V  

VOLUME XX, 2022 

12 

 
 
 
 
TABLE V. 3GPP NTN STANDARDIZATION AS OF AUG. 2022 

Technical spec. group 
Radio Access Network 
(RAN) 

Release 
Rel. 15 

Rel. 16 

Rel. 17 

Rel. 17 

Rel. 16 

Rel. 17 

Rel. 17 

Rel. 17 

Rel. 17 

Rel. 18 

Rel. 17 

Service & System 
aspects (SA) 

Core Network and 
Terminals (CT) 

Feature and study item 
Study on NR to support non-
terrestrial networks 
Study on solutions for NR to 
support non-terrestrial networks 
Solutions for NR to support non-
terrestrial networks 
Study on NB-IoT/eMTC support 
for NTN 
Study on using satellite access in 
5G 
Integration of satellite access in 
5G 
Study on architecture aspects for 
using satellite access in 5G 
Integration of satellite systems in 
the 5G architecture 
Management and orchestration 
aspects with integrated satellite 
components in a 5G network 
Guidelines for extra-territorial 5G 
systems 

CT aspects of 5GC architecture 
for satellite networks 

Objectives 
Channel model, 
deployment scenarios 
Necessary features 

Enhancements for LEO, 
GEO 
Scenarios and changes to 
support IoT 
Use cases and requirements 

Stage 1 requirements 

Key issues for integrating 
satellites in 5G architecture 
Normative specifications 

Business roles, service 
management and 
orchestration 
Use cases, relevant 
features, operation over 
borders 
Issues related to PLMN 
selection 

Technical report / year 
TR 38.811 / 2018 

TR 38.821 / 2019 

n/a, completed 2021 

TR 36.763 / 2021 

TR 22.822 / 2018 

n/a, requirements defined 
in 2018 
TR 23.737 / 2020 

n/a, completed 2020 

TR 28.808 / 2020 

TR 22.926, v18.0.0 in Dec. 
2021 

TR 24.821 / 2021 

The  industry  is  working  towards  the  deployment  of 
satellites  as  part  of  the  5G  and  beyond  networks  in 
partnership  with  mobile  network  operators.  This  work  has 
been  done  partly  in  Rel.  17  where  both  direct  access  and 
satellite backhaul and their QoS aspects have been studied as 
well as mobility management and core network architecture. 
3GPP also approved a study item for enabling the operation 
of IoT in NTN networks, focusing on NB-IoT and enhanced 
MTC-over-satellite  communications.  Both  LEO  and  GEO 
orbits have been considered to assume a transparent payload 
and sub-6 GHz frequency bands.  

Rel. 17 specifications are expected to be completed during 
the  second  quarter  of  2022  and  the  first  NTN  chips  might 
become available within two years from that as shown also 
in  Figure  6.  Now  the  work is  shifting  towards  Rel.  18 and 
5G-Advanced finally leading to 6G systems. 

The  study  items  currently  in  Rel.  18 include  public  land 
topics  where  new 
mobile  network  (PLMN)  related 
deployment scenarios are studied: (1) Terrestrial access and 
satellite access in the same PLMN, (2) PLMNs with shared 
satellite access networks, and (3) Mobility between PLMNs 
with terrestrial-only and satellite-only access. In addition, the 
regulatory  guidelines 
for  extra-territorial  operations 
discussed in Section III. D are prepared. 

Considering 

for  network 
the  architecture  options 
integration, there are two main ways to do it as depicted in 
Figure 7. First, in direct access mode the end user is directly 
connected  to  the  satellite  as  well  as  to  the  terrestrial  base 
station.  This  enables  access  to  satellite  services  anywhere 
with  a  typical  mobile  phone.  Secondly,  indirect  access  is 
basically the backhaul case where the end-user terminal is  

Figure  7.  Direct  and  indirect  (backhaul)  access  with  some 
tentative technologies.  

and  documents  therein  including  [62],  [79]–[85].  We  can 
analyze and see the following information from the table. 

NTN networks have been actively advanced in the 3GPP 
forum  since  2017.  The  work  started  by  defining  channel 
models and deployment scenarios in Rel. 15 and continued 
by identifying three main categories of use cases including 
service  continuity,  service  ubiquity  and  service  scalability. 
Rel. 16 continued providing a baseline for NR functionalities 
needed  to  support  LEO  and  GEO  satellites.   The  work has 
been developing technical solutions to cope with challenges 
such as long propagation delays and Doppler effects due to 
the movement of LEO satellites. Solutions include improved 
timing  and  uplink  synchronization  as  well  as  Hybrid 
Automatic Repeat Request (HARQ). 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

13 

 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Evolution of launch traffic per mission type (left) and LEO launches categorized based on the launch mass (right) 
[86]. Reprinted with permission. 

15 bps/Hz 

6G 
1 Tbps 

4G 
1 Gbps 

5G 
10 Gbps 

TABLE VI. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS OF THE MOBILE SYSTEMS. 
Parameter 
Peak data 
rate 
Max spectral 
efficiency 
Mobility 
support 
End-to-end 
latency 
Network 
architecture 

up to 1000 
km/h 
1 ms 

up to 500 
km/h 
10 ms 

up to 350 
km/h 
100 ms 

100 bps/Hz 

Horizontal 

30 bps/Hz 

Horizontal + 
NTN 
component 
studied 
10 cm on 2D 

Three-
dimensional 
(3D) with 
vertical  
1 cm with 3D 

Positioning 
accuracy 

Tens of 
meters in 2D 

connected  to  the  radio  network  using  3GPP  or  non-3GPP 
technology. The RAN is connected to the 5G core network 
via satellite. Indirect use enables connecting a local private 
network on the ground, ships, or aircraft to the outside world. 
In the backhaul case, the gNB could be located in an airborne 
platform such as a HAP. 

C. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 

The  basic  requirements  for  6G  connectivity  given  as 
performance  indicators  are  shown  in  TABLE  VI,  with  a 
comparison to 4G and 5G. In general, 6G systems [36]–[40] 
aim to offer: 

  Extremely high data rates per device, 
  Extremely low latency, 
  Ultra-high reliable connectivity, 
  A very large number of connected devices, 
  Very low energy consumption with IoT devices, 
  Global connectivity, and 
  Connected  intelligence  with  machine  learning 

capability. 

However,  it  should  be  noted  that  not  all  these  happen 

simultaneously.  Performance  can  be  tailored  according  to 
application  requirements.  6G  networks  will  fuse  digital, 
physical,  and  virtual  worlds  together  and  consequently 
increase the range of applications and services. Compared to 
previous generations, 6G will increase capacity and mobility 
support and aim for extremely low latencies. However, it is 
clearly  evident  that  the  integration  of  networks  and  the 
vertical  dimension  are  taken  into  account  in  the  network 
design and operations from the beginning, leading to the 3D 
architecture.  Therefore,  6G  systems  can  support 
the 
connectivity  and  positioning  needs  of  future  users  and 
applications accurately and efficiently. 

In  discussions  with  ESA  and  the  industry,  it  became 
evident that in the 6G era, researchers should not focus solely 
on  the  connectivity  part  of  the  space  systems.  Instead, 
telecommunication  satellites,  earth-imaging  satellites,  and 
navigation  satellites  may  all  be  integrated  to  provide 
advanced services to end users, including localized services, 
situational awareness and Internet connectivity anywhere. 

D. PROPRIETARY LEO MEGACONSTELLATIONS AND 
MULTI-LAYER CONNECTIVITY 
A major part of the planned small satellite missions globally 
considers  communications,  encouraged  by  the  business 
visions presented earlier. There are many initiatives aiming 
to 
into  LEO  orbits 
including mega-constellation initiatives from the USA, Asia, 
and  Europe.  For  example,  Starlink  is  already  by  far  the 
largest  satellite  constellation  ever  built  with  over  2000 
satellites in orbit.  

launch  communications  satellites 

A good state-of-the art analysis of the current situation is 
given  in  [86].  Figure  8  shows  that  the number  of  satellites 
launched  into  LEO has  exploded and  most  of  the  launches 
include small communications satellites with 100+ kg mass. 
One  thousand  SatCom  satellites  were  launched  in  2020 
alone.  These  launches  are  related  to  building  mega-
constellations. There is also a rapidly increasing number of  

VOLUME XX, 2022 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VII. COMPARISON OF EXISTING AND PLANNED SATELLITE CONSTELLATIONS AS OF AUGUST 2022. 

Altitude 

550-570 km 

Number 
launched/ 
authorised 
2748/4408 

Mass 

227 kg 

User data 
rate/total 
capacity 

Terminal 
type 

Status 

1/20 Gbps 
roughly 100 Mbps 
DL for users 

VSAT, 
ESIM 

> 100 000 users 
commercial in the 
Arctic 2022 

1200 km 

428/648 

150 kg 

10 Gbps per 
satellite 

VSAT, 
ESIM 

Arctic area 
coverage in 2022 

Constellation 

SpaceX 
Starlink 

OneWeb 

Telesat 
Lightspeed 

Kuiper 
Systems 

Frequency 
band 

Ku-band 
DL: 12 GHz 
UL: 14 GHz 
+ Ka-band 
Ku-band 
DL: 12 GHz 
UL: 14 GHz 
+ Ka 
Ka-band 
DL: 20 GHz 
UL: 29 GHz 

Ka-band 
DL: 20 GHz 
UL: 29 GHz 

China SatNet  Ka/Ku bands 

Terrestrial 
frequencies 
< 2 GHz 
Terrestrial 
frequencies 
< 2 GHz 

Not defined 
yet 

AST Space 
Mobile 

Lynk 

European 
Constellation 
plan: Secure 
Connectivity 

Inmarsat 
Orchestra 

700 kg 

- 

- 

1500 kg 

1015 km / 78 
satellites 
1325 km / 
220 satellites 
590-630 km 

2/292 
both test 
satellites 
deorbited 
-/3236 

1/12992 
test satellite 
in 2018 
168 

25 kg 

6 launched/ 
Plan up to 
5000 

- 

- 

1145 km / 
508-600 km 

700 km 

500 km 

Multiorbital 
LEO+MEO 
+GEO 

L-band 
S-band 
Ka-band 

Multiorbital, 
GEO, LEO, 
and 
terrestrial 5G 

14 GEOs in 
orbit, 5 
GEOs 
scheduled  

2000-6500 
kg 

Iridium Next 

1.6 GHz 
(TDD) 

780 km 

75/66 

680 kg 

ViaSat-2 

Ka 

GEO 

1 

6400 kg 

Sateliot 

Terrestrial 
frequencies 
> 2 GHz 

LEO, ~550 
km 

1/100 

Swarm 
Technologies 

SES 03b 
mPOWER 

137-138 
MHz 
400-401 
MHz 

Ka band 

300-585 km 

155/150 

8000 km + 
vLEO 

20/70 

3U nanosat 
test, final 
satellites 
not 
confirmed 
0.4 kg 
(smallest 
commercial 
satellites in 
space) 
1700 kg 
(MEO) 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

Up to 7.5 Gbps 
for a single 
terminal, 20 Gbps 
for a hotspot 
400 Mbps user 
data rates in 
terminal tests 

- 

VSAT, 
ESIM 

VSAT, 
ESIM 

VSAT, 
ESIM 

Initially 120 
Mbit/s peak data 
rate for a cell 
Narrowband 
transmission such 
as text messages 

Commercial 
cellular 
handheld 
Commercial 
cellular 
handheld 

Broadband 
services and 
governmental 
users targeted 

L-band BGAN 
high data rate 
600-700 
kbps/user 
EAN up to 100 
Mbps/aircraft 

Call 2400 bits/s. 
Up to 1100 
simultaneous calls 
per satellite. 
260 Gbps total, up 
to 100 Mbps for 
the user 
IoT 

IoT 

- 

VSAT, 
ESIM 

Proprietary 
handheld 

Cellular 
handheld, 
sensors 

Proprietary 
system 

max user rate 10 
Gbps / total 
hundreds of Gbps 

VSAT, 
ESIM 

Plan to have 
commercial 
service in 2023   

First satellites in 
2022, one-half to 
be launched by 
2026 
Plan to have 60 
satellites in 2022 

Aiming first 
satellites to be 
launched in 2023 
FCC license files 
for up to 10 small 
satellites in May 
2021 
Feasibility study 
finished in 2021. 
Estimated cost 
€6B. Potential 
new EU flagship  
2 6th generation 
GEO to be 
launched in 2021-
2022 
Planning for 150-
175 LEO 
satellites 
Operational, 9 in-
orbit spare 
satellites 

Plan to launch the 
whole 
constellation in 
2022 

SpaceX acquired 
Swarm in 2021, 
full constellation 
in 2022 

MEO satellites 
operational, plan 
to include 36 
vLEO satellites 

15 

VSAT, 
ESIM 

Operational since 
2017 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. European secure connectivity initiative vision from DG DEFIS, redrawn by authors. 

nanosatellites with less than 10 kg mass in orbit. 

TABLE  VII  compares  existing and planned  LEO  satellite 
constellations, including Iridium and Viasat-2 information as 
reference  examples  of  traditional  LEO  and  GEO  systems. 
The information  is  gathered mostly  from  public  webpages. 
In  addition  to  Starlink,  OneWeb  is  also  already  providing 
initial  services  and  both  systems  plan  to  provide  Arctic 
coverage,  including  Finland,  in  2022.  Other  notable  LEO 
constellation  initiatives  include  Kuiper  Systems,  Telesat 
Lightspeed, AST Space Mobile, Lynk, and Chinese plans for 
their  13,000-satellite  constellation.  More  information  on 
initiatives on LEO orbits can be found in [87]–[90].  

In addition to LEO, there are system developments related 
to  other  orbits  and  multi-layer  systems  including  Inmarsat 
Orchestra [91] [92] and O3B [93]. Finally, there have been 
some failed attempts to build a constellation such as LeoSat 
even though  it  first raised a  good  amount  of  funding.  Also 
OneWeb was very close to going bankrupt before the British 
government  and  an  Indian  investor  supported  the  work. 
Already  more  than  400  satellites  have  been  launched  into 
orbit and the company seems commercially competitive. 

The costs of the proposed constellations are quite high and 
there  is  clearly  a  strong  belief  in  the  business  models. 
SpaceX Starlink, OneWeb, Telesat and Kuiper projects have 
estimated total costs ranging from $5B to $30B. AST Space 
mobile  has  a  slightly  lower  price  of  around  $2B  but 
economic  information  about  the  Chinese  state-sponsored 
ChinaSat plans is missing. Comparing the proposed systems, 
we can highlight the following findings: 

 

Iridium  works  with  handhelds  and  low  data  rates, 
providing voice services. 

  Lynk and SpaceMobile also aim for handhelds, even 
commercial  mobile  phones.  Lynk  has  successfully 
demonstrated the ability for two-way  

communications  between  a  satellite  and  a  handheld 
for  limited  data  rate  applications  such  as  text 
messaging. 

  Many  initiatives  consider  VSAT  and  the  “cellular 
Internet” type of performance. Both fixed and mobile 
user terminals will be supported. 

  Viasat-2  has  a  higher  total  capacity  for  a  GEO 
satellite, but the total system capacity and maximum 
user 
in 
throughput 
megaconstellations. 

clearly 

higher 

are 

TABLE  VII  provides  an  overview  of  the  situation. 
However, there are a number of initiatives not presented in 
the table, such as the IoT satellite constellation being built by 
Kepler  Communications  [94].  Finally,  there  are  also  LEO 
constellations for Earth observation including Spire Global, 
Planet Labs and Iceye.  

E. EUROPEAN FLAGSHIP CONSTELLATION PLAN 

The European Commission funded a feasibility study on a 
secure space-based connectivity system, fulfilling Europe’s 
need to rapidly develop a space-based connectivity initiative 
[95]  [96].  This  could  potentially  become  a  third  flagship 
space  infrastructure  besides  Galileo  and  Copernicus.  The 
initiative aims at implementing the most advanced satellite 
infrastructure for connectivity, providing the first broadband 
coverage  to  areas  where  terrestrial  infrastructure  cannot 
reach  and  later  supporting  services  such  as  autonomous 
transport. The consortium doing the study includes European 
satellite  manufacturers,  operators  and  service  providers, 
telco  operators  and  launch  service  providers.  Recently,  a 
plan to  invest  €6  billion  in the  system  was  made  public. It 
aims  to  provide  worldwide  uninterrupted  access  to  secure 
and cost-effective satellite communication services [97]. 

The Directorate-General for Defence Industry and Space 
(DG  DEFIS) has  created  a high-level  figure  of  the  system, 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

16 

 
 
 
  
 
 
depicted in Figure 9. The planned system includes traditional 
large  satellites  at  higher  orbits  as  well  as  an  LEO 
constellation  and  the  5G  terrestrial  infrastructure.  The 
system  would  support  European  sovereignty,  providing 
secure services to governmental users as well as broadband 
connection to consumers. The main objective is to create a 
broadband  service  for  the  whole  of  Europe  so  that  the 
continent  will  have  an  ultra-secure  connectivity  system  to 
guarantee  operations  during  crises.  EuroQCI,  a  secure 
quantum communication infrastructure, and standardized 5G 
technology are key components of the initiative. 

There  are  ambitious  goals  set  for  the  system  since  the 
initial  service  should  be  provided  already  in  2024  and  the 
multi-layer network should be fully operational in 2027. To 
enable this, the European Commission and ESA are expected 
to  fund  several  technology  development  projects  in  the 
coming years. The development is partly funded by ESA’s 
4S program (Space Systems for Safety and Security), which 
works  on  secure  space  systems  to  integrate  them  into 
seamless operations on Earth. Quoting the program webpage 
[98]: “There’s no safety on Earth without safety in space.” 

of 

Lessons 

importance 

learned:  The 

satellite 
communications is  increasing  throughout  society,  covering 
the  needs  of  individual  users,  businesses  and public  safety 
organizations. Due to the estimated high business potential, 
there  are  a  number  of  commercial  players  developing 
proprietary satellite constellations to support broadband and 
IoT  needs  from 
the  sky.  To  make  future  systems 
interoperable with each other as well as with the terrestrial 
systems, standardization work is actively ongoing to create 
globally 
solutions.  Constellation 
developments  are  on-going  in  different  continents  and 
countries to ensure sovereignty also during times of crisis. It 
is  not  likely  that  all  existing  and  new  players  will  stay 
economically competitive in the future. 

acceptable  NTN 

Figure 10. The SCNE simulator architecture. 

board  and  terrestrial  system  limitations  [105].  Finally,  the 
described  3D 
a  multi-layer 
constellation  design,  which  has  been  considered  in  [106], 
[107]. 

architecture 

requires 

Typically, constellation designs are made using advanced 
simulators and various constellation creation methods, such 
as the Walker constellation, which is a globally symmetrical 
configuration, or streets-of-coverage. The latter refers to the 
swath  on 
the  ground  with  continuous  coverage. 
Deterministic  and  location-based  models  that  have  been 
applied to analyze satellite systems are typically restricted to 
support simulations. Recently, stochastic geometry analysis 
that abstracts generic networks into uniform binomial point 
processes  has  also  been  developed  to  support  constellation 
design and analysis [108] [109]. Analytical methods can lead 
to very fast results. Since numerical models can lead to more 
accurate  outcomes  than  analytical  methods,  they  are  still 
favored  in  constellation  and  orbit  designs.  There  are  also 
semi-analytic  approaches  proposed 
the 
computational  burden related  to  satellite propagation  [104] 
or  probability  of  detection  calculations  [54]  in  the  case  of 
joint communication and sensing constellations. 

lowering 

for 

V. RECENT PROGRESS IN TECHNOLOGY ENABLERS 

A. CONSTELLATION DESIGN AND SIMULATIONS  
Satellite constellation design is a complex task that needs to 
take into account service requirements, coverage areas, and 
sustainability  aspects.  Traditionally,  the  constellation  has 
been  optimized  for  global  coverage  [99]–[102]  or  for 
regional  coverage  especially  for  EO  constellations  [103] 
using  a  single-layer  system.  There  is  no  specific  unified 
design  approach  for  a  local  continuous  coverage  or 
surveillance mission over a region [104], and the design can 
aim at maximizing  coverage  while  minimizing revisit  time 
or achieving a revisit time target. Also, EO satellites need to 
download  their  measurement  data  to  ground  stations. 
Depending  on  the  number  of  satellites  in  the  constellation 
and  the  locations  of  ground  stations  it  is  also  necessary  to 
design  proper  datalinks  and  scheduling  algorithms.  Data 
downlink  scheduling  is part  of  a  much  wider  problem  that 
also involves scheduling the sensing and managing of on- 

Regarding the SatCom applications, it is not enough to be 
able  to  create  a  constellation  that  provides  the  required 
coverage  globally  or  for  the  area  of  interest.  The  design 
needs to consider detailed physical layer protocols, network 
traffic characteristics such as end-to-end delays, throughput 
requirements, routing, and interference. In Finland, Magister 
Solutions Ltd has developed the Satellite Network Simulator 
3 (SNS3) [110] as part of an ESA ARTES project to support 
network  simulations.  Magister  has  also  created  a  system 
simulator  for  5G  NTN  evaluations  [111]  to  support  3GPP-
based  SatCom  development.  In  addition,  there  are  studies 
from  the  University  of  Oulu  on  the  use  of  5G  NR-over- 
SatCom links [112].   

There  is no  single  simulation  tool  currently  available  on 
the  market  that  can  holistically  cover  all  the  needs. 
Traditional simulation tools handle either orbital or network 
aspects,  with  limited  interfacing  and  coupling  between  the 
two. Thus, one approach is to combine different simulation 
tools intelligently e.g., by using Systems Tool Kit (STK)  

VOLUME XX, 2022 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Evolution of database-assisted spectrum sharing towards 6G systems.  

to create a constellation and then use MATLAB for detailed 
link  level  analysis  in  the  designed  constellation  [113]. 
Another  recent  example  of  this  approach  is  the  Satellite 
Constellation Network Emulator (SCNE) project [114] done 
in  collaboration  between  Airbus,  Magister  and  VTT.  The 
project  has  developed  a  novel  co-simulation  approach  that 
enables  the  modelling  of  complete  satellite  constellations 
including orbital and network aspects. The objective of the 
project  has  been  to  enable  the  study  and  assessment  of 
protocol performances used in large LEO constellations. The 
tool is particularly helpful in the study of routing protocols 
and consequently end-to-end quality of service aspects.  

The  high-level  architecture  of  the  tool  is  presented  in 
Figure  10.  It  includes  the  following  components.  First,  the 
human-computer  interface  (HCI)  provides  the  means  for  a 
user to define the desired constellation and load the orbital 
and network scenarios. The HCI includes the STK Graphical 
User Interface (GUI) to define the constellations using a GUI 
or a scripting approach. Second, there is an orchestrator that 
is  a  plugin  developed  specifically  for  interwork  between 
STK  and  ns-3.  The  orchestrator  calculates 
link 
characteristics  of  all  the  possible  links  based  on  STK 
accesses-defined  restrictions  between  satellites,  users,  and 
link 
gateways.  Finally, 
information  to  the  ns-3,  where  the  L2  and  upper  layer 
protocols are added and the end-to-end link performance is 
assessed. 

the  orchestrator  transfers  the 

the 

B. INTEGRATION OF SATELLITES INTO 5G/6G TEST 
NETWORKS 
5G Test Network Finland is a multisite test environment and 
co-operation  network  [115].  Test  networks  provide  the 
infrastructure 
technology 
development,  service  research,  and  large-scale  field  trials. 
The  majority  of  the  projects  have  focused  on  terrestrial 
technology  developments  to  support  various  verticals  such 

support  5G  and  6G 

to 

as  port  automation  and  ultra-reliable  low  latency  aspects 
[116] [117]. However, there are also drones and real satellite 
equipment (both LEO and GEO) included in the test network 
to  support  3D  network  studies.  The  GEO  connection  in 
VTT’s test network includes two different types of terminals 
that  support  high  throughput  broadband  connections.  The 
fixed terminal is located in Espoo and the nomadic one has 
been  used  in  various  locations.  In  addition,  the  LEO 
connection with lower latency supports 700 kbps DL and 300 
kbps  UL 
use 
megaconstellation-based connections in the near future when 
they become commercially available in Finland. 

connections.  We 

plan 

also 

to 

 Part  of  the  work  has  been  developing  concepts  and 
conducting analysis and simulation studies for IoT satellites 
[118] [119]. Some areas such as autonomous shipping [120] 
or  connected  driving  and  road  safety  [121]  [122],  can  be 
greatly  enhanced  with  the  integrated  satellite-terrestrial 
networks.  Satellites  can  provide  both  connectivity  and 
positioning services. A practical connectivity solution of an 
autonomous  ship  includes  both  satellite  and  terrestrial 
communication  systems.  It  may  also  include  HAPs,  e.g., 
along shipping routes in the Arctic.  

Implementation  activities  in  the  test  network  have  first 
focused  on  measuring  the  performance  of  the  available 
solutions  and  then  building  proofs-of-concept  for  selected 
application  areas.  Regarding  public  safety  networks,  we 
implemented  a  private  network,  or  “tactical  bubble,”  to 
provide a local connection to authorities and used the GEO 
connection as a backhaul towards the core network [123]. 

C. SPECTRUM SHARING AND THE WORLD’S FIRST 
TRIAL IN INTEGRATED SATELLITE-TERRESTRIAL 
NETWORKS  
Adaptive  communications  research,  which  started  in  the 
sixties [124], led over years to cognitive radio (CR) studies 
aiming to share and use spectrum efficiently [125]. Spectrum 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

18 

 
 
 
 
frequency  bands  and  application  scenarios. 
several 
Controlled  sharing  was  shown  to  be  an  attractive  option 
since, in some cases it can ensure the status of the satellite 
operator on the band instead of totally losing it to some other 
systems  via new  spectrum  allocations. The applicability  of 
LSA to public safety and to support local networks  via the 
use of distributed architecture was studied in [131]. Finally, 
the  recent  ESA  ASCENT  project  created  a  testbed  and 
conducted field trials using real base stations and up to 1000 
virtual  base  stations  [132].  Trials  considered  spectrum 
sharing  scenarios  between  satellite  and  cellular  systems  at 
the 5G pioneer bands at 3.4–3.8 GHz and 24.25–27.5 GHz, 
where  a  satellite  system  is  operating  in  the  downlink 
direction and a cellular system is accessing the same band.  
As  described  in  [133],  spectrum  discussions  for  6G 
networks  are  currently  in  their  infancy.  Database-assisted 
technologies  [134]  can  support  local  networks  that  will  be 
more and more important in the future, and those networks 
can use satellite connections from any location to connect to 
the  outside  world.    In  addition,  the  development  of  joint 
communication and sensing especially at higher frequencies 
opens up further possibilities for 6G networks to sense and 
adapt their operations in real time.    

D. MILLIMETER WAVE SATELLITE IN ORBIT: W-CUBE  
In  order  to  maximize  data  rates  for  multilayer  systems, 
millimeter wave technologies need to be applied in terrestrial 
and  satellite  links  [135]–[137].  Frequency  bands  clearly 
above  10  GHz  can  provide  larger  bandwidths  compared to 
conventionally used frequencies and enable the use of highly 
directional antennas. However, those frequencies are heavily 
attenuated due to effects such as atmospheric absorption and 
tropospheric  scintillation.  Thus,  successful  application  of 
those  frequencies  requires  the  development  of  RF  and 
antenna technology as well as channel modelling missions to 
really be able to evaluate performance over satellite links.  

The  ESA  ARTES activity  called  W-Cube  is  using a  3U 
(where  1U  is  10  cm  x  10  cm  x  11.35  cm)  nanosatellite 
equipped  with  a  beacon  transmitter  to  measure  and 
characterize the wireless channel in the 75 GHz band [138]. 
This opens up possibilities for the use of the high millimeter 
wave  frequency  range  in  communications  satellites  in  the 
future. The first-ever W band satellite that was launched into 
orbit  in  June  2021  is  depicted  in  Figure  12.  The  payload 
design  includes  an  innovative  concentric  ring  antenna  for 
signal  transmission.  In  addition  to  the  main  payload,  the 
satellite broadcasts a Q band signal at 37.5 GHz to compare 
the  information  on  measurements  with  previous  models at 
lower  frequencies.  The  satellite  platform  was  designed, 
developed, and tested by the Kuva Space company, and the 
payload was developed by VTT.  

One  aim  of  the  mission  is  to  understand  how  weather 
phenomena  affect  signal  propagation  and  polarization.  To 
save battery power, the beacon signals are switched on only 
when they can be detected by measuring stations located in 

Figure 12. W-Cube nanosatellite. 

coexistence studies in satellite communications were done at 
the  same  time  [126]  and  the  first  ESA  funded  activity 
considering  the  application  of  CR  techniques  to  SatCom 
provided results regarding suitable scenarios and frequency 
bands  in  [127].  In  parallel,  Business  Finland  funded  test 
network  projects  started  to  develop  practical  solutions  for 
licensed  spectrum  sharing  starting  from  licensed  shared 
access (LSA). In this approach the incumbent operators are 
required  to  provide  a  priori  information  for  this  database 
about  their  spectrum  use  over  the  area  of  interest,  telling 
where,  when,  and  which  parts  of  the  frequency  bands  are 
available. A limited number of users obtain the right to use 
the  band  while  the  LSA  controller,  using  the  information 
from  the  database  called  the  LSA  repository,  ensures 
predictable QoS for all spectrum rights of use holders with 
proper power and frequency allocations.  

to 

The timeline for spectrum sharing developments from the 
database-assisted system point of view is given in Figure 11. 
The world’s first LSA trial was done in 2013 in the CORE+ 
(cognitive  radio  trial  environment)  project  at  the  2.3  GHz 
band,  showing  the  applicability  of  the  system  in  practice 
[128].  Multiple  enhancements  were  done  during 
the 
following  years  adding  more  base  stations  and  advanced 
the  setup.  Another  spectrum  sharing 
technologies 
approach  proposed  in  the  3.5  GHz  band  called  spectrum 
access  system  (SAS)  for  citizens  broadband  radio  service 
(CBRS), emerged in the USA [129]. While LSA is a two-tier  
model  with  primary  and  secondary  users,  the  SAS  model 
includes a third tier, called general authorized access (GAA) 
to  facilitate  opportunistic  spectrum  use. In  order  to  protect 
FSS 
the  Federal  Communications 
Commission (FCC) has adopted a rule that requires satellite 
operators to register their stations annually. The SAS obtains 
this  information  from  the  FCC  database  and  uses  the  data 
when it grants or denies access to users willing to operate in 
the same band. The world’s first CBRS trials were conducted 
in the CORE++ project [130]. 

stations, 

earth 

The  use  of  database-assisted  technologies  in  SatCom 
continued in the ESA Freestone project [32]. Findings from 
the  project  provided  technical  and  economic  analysis  for 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

19 

 
 
 
 
Austria and Finland. At other times, the satellite charges its 
batteries using the craft’s solar panels. The satellite orbits the 
Earth  approximately  once  every  1.5 hours and is  visible to 
the ground station for about 10 minutes at a time. The signals 
from  space  have  been  successfully  received  at  the  ground 
station  and  the  actual  channel  modeling  work  led  by 
Joanneum Research from Austria is ongoing.  

E. TOWARDS TERAHERTZ AND OPTICAL 
COMMUNICATIONS 
The quest for ever-higher frequencies is actively continuing 
especially  in  terrestrial  short-range  communications.  For 
example,  D-band  (above  100  GHz)  active  electronically 
steerable  antennas  have  been  developed  recently  [139]. 
There are studies on terahertz technology, such as [140], in 
which the authors show that the capacity of the satellite-to-
airplane  THz  link  may  reach  speeds  ranging  from  50–150 
Gbps,  thus  enabling  cellular-equivalent  data  rates  to  the 
passengers and staff during the entire flight. 

In small satellites, cost and power consumption are clearly 
limiting  factors.  Ground  stations  will  use  electronically 
steerable multi-beam antennas that are able to communicate 
with multiple LEO satellites simultaneously. Miniaturization 
and the creation of efficient antennas for small satellites is an 
important topic, and planar patch antennas are being actively 
developed. It is essential to develop antenna systems that can 
sustain  wireless  links  or  remote  sensing  requirements  in  a 
small, stowable package [141]. 

Optical communication is a disruptive technology that will 
enable  ISLs  and  satellite  formations  and  can  lead  to 
significant power savings compared to RF communications. 
According  to  [142]  it  can  provide  a  safe  and  cyber-secure 
way to serve scalable 3D networks, enabling the shift from 
partitioned ground and space segments into a fully integrated 
system.  Optical  communications  are  limited in many  areas 
due to clouds. There is actually an “optical belt” across the 
Sahara  and  the  Middle  East  where  satellite-to-ground 
connections are possible due to cloud-free availability [186]. 
Lessons  learned:  Analysis  of  recent  research  related  to 
multi-layer networks shows that  the research community is 
actively  developing  technologies  for  complex  integrated 
multi-layer  networks.  Simulations  enable  the  cost-efficient 
modeling of large systems, showing what could be possible 
in  the  future.  Test  networks  enable  the  development  and 
testing of practical applications. High-capacity demands may 
be  fulfilled  with  very  high-frequency  bands  and  optical 
communications. Even though we have used many Finnish 
examples  in  the  analysis,  the  topics  can  be  generalized  to 
other  countries  and  areas  since  satellite  communications  is 
naturally an international business. The following potential 
research  topics  are  targeted  at  the  whole  SatCom  research 
community across the globe. 

Figure 13. Space safety aspects related to 6G SatCom. 

VI. SUSTAINABILITY ENABLERS AND SPACE SAFETY 
The  described  development  is  both  enabling  sustainable 
growth globally and inevitably creating challenges related to 
space  congestion.  Thus,  while  developing  6G  SatCom 
systems, one needs to take care of space safety as well. The 
risks associated with space systems originate from hazardous 
characteristics  of  the  system  design  and  its  operating 
environment  and  the  hazardous  effects  of  system  failures 
[143].  The  space  system  itself  is  comprised  of  hardware, 
software, and the human operator. ESA defines a “hazard” 
as a source of threat to safety. A hazard is therefore not an 
event  but  a  characteristic  of  a  system  or  its  potentially 
dangerous environment. We adopt the same view and look at 
the situation from the SatCom perspective. Thus, we do not 
consider manned flights and related risks to onboard humans. 
Those  topics  are  well  covered in  [144]. The topic  of  space 
safety  has  been  visibly  raised  in  many  countries’  agendas. 
For example, in [145] the UK Space Agency is welcoming 
all efforts – public and commercial – to preserve the space 
environment for future generations. 

A. CLASSIFICATION OF SATCOM RELATED ASPECTS  
The emergence of a large number of small satellite systems 
in  LEO  orbits (including  the  flagship  initiative)  is  creating 
challenges  in  keeping  the  systems  safe  and  reliable.  There 
should  be  no  physical  collisions  to  prevent  a  total  loss  of 
services and the creation of space debris. On the other hand, 
there  is  a  need  to  manage  radio  system  interference,  both 
between  satellite  and  terrestrial  services  and  between 
different satellite systems. Current space safety procedures, 
including  debris  mitigation  and  collision  avoidance  are 
designed with lower traffic densities and the New Space era 
is  causing  clear  challenges.  We  classify  the  space  safety 
aspects  related  to  SatCom  into  seven  different  themes, 
depicted  in  Figure  13.  Even  though  the  focus  is  on  the 
communication systems the classification and discussion can 
be easily generalized to any  

VOLUME XX, 2022 

20 

 
 
 
 
TABLE VIII. RESEARCH TOPICS FOR SPACE SAFETY AND SUSTAINABILITY IN THE 6G ERA. 

Space safety topic 
Space traffic management 

Space debris detection and 
avoidance 

Environmental impacts 

Space weather 

Near-Earth objects and 
deep space communications 

Cyber security 

Spectrum management 

Key considerations and selected research areas  
Automated  collision  avoidance  procedures  have  been  proposed  for  use  with  satellites  in  LEO 
constellations in order to make them react rapidly to threats. This ability requires the development of 
new ways to keep space object catalogs and their predictions up-to-date. For example, there might be a 
need to share data on collision avoidance actions in a global registry. 
It is essential to avoid creating new debris and shield critical infra as well as possible against hits by very 
small pieces of debris. However, in order to avoid and remove the debris, reliable detection is essential. 
This could be achieved by efficiently combining space-based and ground-based detection capabilities. 
Keeping  the  megaconstellations  up-to-date  with  the  continuous  launching  of  new  satellites  and  re-
entrance  of  satellites  at  their  end  of  life  to  the  atmosphere  should  not  cause  too  much  harm  to  the 
atmosphere or land/ocean areas. The development of in-orbit servicing methods and innovative materials 
including how cleanly satellites burn when returning to Earth are clearly fruitful research topics.  
New Space Economy players entering the business with cheap small satellites should still consider high 
reliability  and  safety  standards  to  avoid  their  equipment  becoming  debris  due  to  the  harsh  space 
environment. How to ensure this while enabling flexible entrance to the space business? 
Life on Earth can be threatened by Near-Earth Objects such as asteroids. On the other hand, the space 
may  provide  useful  resources  to  us  as  well  as  provide  places  to  go  for  future  generations.  The 
development  of  multi-hop  networks  for  deep  space  to  support  mining,  space  exploration,  and  the 
potential inhabitance of other planets is foreseen. 
The protection of  space infrastructure in space and on Earth covering multi-layer networks and their 
interfaces is very important. Sustainable and safe development requires effective coordination of actions 
among stakeholders and organizing training for space actors. 
Ensuring the  availability  of  services  and avoiding  harmful interference  will  be ensured  by  regulated 
allocations.  However, there  is a need to  develop  the  means  to  detect  interference sources to  prevent 
malicious actions. In addition, developing coordinated dynamic spectrum management approaches will 
enable more efficient use of limited resources. 

space-based activity. Each topic is covered in detail in Table 
VIII and the following sections. 

constellations due to their high number of satellites. 

B. SPACE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
Space traffic is increasing rapidly including both launchers 
and  the  number  of  satellites  in  orbit.  According  to  the 
European Space Agency, there are currently 8840 satellites 
in space of which 6200 are still functioning [146]. Due to the 
miniaturization of thrusters in the satellites, small satellites 
also  are  capable  of  maneuvering  themselves.  NewSpace 
operators are making extensive use of low-thrust systems for 
both transit and station-keeping. One approach is to launch 
into  low LEO orbit,  transition  to  the  higher  operational 
altitude  via  low-thrust, and  at  end-of-life,  deorbit  the  same 
way [147].  

Space surveillance networks are keeping their catalogs of 
space objects (including satellites and tracked debris) up-to-
date and also aim at predicting where they are going in order 
to prevent collisions. However, existing catalog and collision 
avoidance processes  have no  effective  way  of  dealing  with 
frequent  or  continuous  maneuvers,  since they  are  based  on 
predictions generated days in advance, with no assumption 
of  maneuvers.  Thus,  if  an  existing  satellite  constellation is 
operating in proximity to  one of the SatCom constellations 
that  are  frequently  automated  maneuvering,  its  current 
collision  avoidance  process  breaks  down.  Automated 
maneuvers may move one vehicle in the constellation out of 
a  conjunction,  or  it  could  create  a  new  problematic 
conjunction [147].  This  especially  concerns  SatCom 

C. SPACE DEBRIS DETECTION AND AVOIDANCE 
Thousands of satellites and rocket bodies (especially in LEO 
orbits) can break into debris upon collisions, explosions, or 
degradation  in  the  harsh  space  environment  [43].  These 
fragmentations  increase  the  collision  probability  per  time 
and in the worst case these collisions could dominate in-orbit 
evolution, leading to a situation called the Kessler Syndrome 
[148].  There  are  approximately  31 400  cataloged  space 
debris  objects,  and  it  is  estimated  that  there  are  1,000,000 
objects  larger  than  1 cm  in  diameter  [146].  Debris  is 
travelling in space at a very high velocity where the relative 
speed of debris objects compared to satellites can be on the 
level  of  15  km/s.  Thus,  even  small  pieces  can  destroy 
satellites and it is important to develop the means to manage 
a  situation  that  is  becoming  more  and  more  complex.  The 
evolving situation is putting space-based services in danger 
and challenging space traffic in total and could even prevent 
people to leave Earth in the distant future to look for other 
inhabitable planets. 

The  main  mitigation  approaches  to  space  debris  include 
debris creation avoidance, debris collision avoidance, debris 
removal, and debris shielding [149]. Provided that the debris 
is already existing in space, a key enabler in defending the 
satellites is the ability to detect the time-varying positions of 
the  debris.  Several approaches have  been  developed  in  the 
past  for  debris  detection  including  ground-based  radars 
(GBRs) and space-based radars (SBRs), using either radio 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

21 

 
 
Figure 14. Illustration of the SBRC concept where SatCom 
signal  is  used  as  radar.  (Illustration  created  with  STK 
software.) 

into 

frequencies or optical measurement techniques [150]. While 
the former remains the basis of technology for larger objects, 
say larger than 10 cm, the latter approach is often preferred 
for  smaller  objects.  A  separate  stand-alone  space-borne 
debris  detection  system  would  not,  however,  be  a  cost-  or 
spectral-efficient solution. To overcome this, complimentary 
space-borne  radar  systems  that  would  be  more  deeply 
integrated 
the  emerging  satellite  communication 
infrastructure  have  been  recently  proposed  [54].  Smaller 
satellites are being launched into the lower orbits by several 
satellite operators (e.g., SpaceX), and therefore, this solution 
is now more timely than ever before. Next, we look at this 
option more carefully. 
1)  SPACE-BORNE RADAR AND COMMUNICATIONS 
CONCEPT  
A  simplified  illustration  of  the  5G  space-borne  radar  and 
communication (5G-SBRC) concept is shown in Figure 14. 
Space debris is detected over signals that are designed solely 
for communication purposes between satellites. Specifically, 
while 
to  exchange 
information  between  two  collaborating  entities,  the  radar 
incentive  is to  extract information  by  sensing radio  signals 
reflected  from  a  non-collaborating  target.  In  general,  there 
are several alternative strategies to develop an SBRC system 
with different trade-offs regarding the achievable integration 
gain and compatibility with existing legacy systems. These 
strategies include (1) independent signals of communication 
and  radar  subsystems  operated  in  a  single  platform,  (2) 
communication over existing radar signals, (3) radar sensing 
over  existing  communication  signals,  and  (4)  jointly 
optimized waveforms by redesigning both domains. Clearly, 
the first option represents the smallest effort for integration 
with  the  smallest  integration  gains,  while  the  last  option 
provides 
solutions 
advanced 
maximizing the benefits jointly for both communications and 
radar tasks at the cost of greater integration efforts as both 
domains must be redesigned. The two options in the middle 
represent  design  approaches  where  some  compromises  are 
made between achievable gains and compatibility. 

the  communication 

the  most 

integration 

incentive 

is 

Figure 15. ISL distance versus constellation inter-plane 
density for different orbits. 

The  main  benefits  of  the  approach  are  that  a  separate 
space-borne  radar  infrastructure  would  not  be  needed,  the 
payload of a satellite can be reduced, and spectrum efficiency 
is improved. However, the transmission power and antenna 
size of satellites must also be reduced compared to that of the 
GBRs. In practice, the satellites cannot be brought arbitrarily 
close  to  each  other  due  to  cost,  safety,  and  interference 
regulations.  To  enable  reliable  detection  of  very  small 
objects  less  than  a  few  centimeters,  the  detection  distance 
should be reduced to less than a few kilometers when using 
smaller  satellites.  To  obtain  a  rough  understanding  of  the 
required constellation complexity, we plot the ISL distance 
versus  the  constellation  inter-plane  density  in  Figure  15, 
which is derived analytically in [151]. For instance, for LEO, 
we would need about 1000 satellite planes in a constellation 
to reduce  the  ISL to  less  than  10  km.  One  possible  way  to 
overcome  this  difficulty  is  to  allow  debris  detection  via 
constellation-dependent 
cooperation.  This  has  been 
evaluated in [54]. 

Terrestrial  5G  networks  are  now  being  integrated  into 
satellite communications, and it is therefore a good signaling 
candidate for the proposed SBRC concept. However, the 5G 
signal structure possesses severe limitations in estimating the 
velocity of debris objects up to 15 km/s, which is 100 times 
faster relative speed than that of typical terrestrial vehicular 
radar applications. We discuss this aspect next in more detail. 
2)  CASE EXAMPLE: 5G-SBRC 
We apply the SBRC approach with the radar sensing over 
existing  5G  communication  signal  strategy  and  provide  a 
numerical example of the estimation accuracy of the sensing 
part.  One  main  limiting  factor  is  to  ensure  unambiguity  in 
range  and  velocity  estimations  of  the  high-speed  debris 
objects.  

Extracting information from high-speed non-collaborating 
debris  objects  is  challenging  with  5G  communication 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

22 

RadarCommunications 
 
 
 
 
 
  
signals, which are optimized for communication purposes. 

Figure 16. Advantage of 400 MHz 5G on the velocity 
estimation accuracy of debris objects. 

Among other signal characteristics, the 5G bandwidth (BW) 
has  an  important  role  in  radar  estimation  accuracy  of  the 
millimeter-sized  debris  objects.  Using  our  velocity 
estimation techniques and parameters proposed in  [54], we 
show  the  processing  gain  advantage  of  increasing  the  BW 
from  100  MHz  to  400  MHz  in  Figure  16.  In  space,  high 
velocities  also  cause  an  integer  frequency  offset  (IFO)  in 
addition to a fractional frequency offset (FFO). With the IFO 
compensation  up 
the  signal-to-noise  ratio  (SNR) 
threshold,  root  mean  square  error  (RMSE)  performance  is 
comparable to the case where there is only FFO distortion. 
3)  FUTURE OUTLOOK 

to 

There are several directions for future work under space 
debris  mitigation.  Clearly,  signals that  optimize  jointly  the 
different objectives of communications and debris detection 
would  provide  some  interesting  opportunities  for  both 
satellite  communications  and  space  debris  detection. 
Furthermore,  tighter  integration  between  space-based  and 
ground-based radars could boost overall detection reliability. 
Obviously,  it  is  not  enough  to  aim  at  merely  improving 
debris detection approaches. To this end, different types of 
active  space  debris  removal  methods  are  being  proposed 
including lasers, tethers, sails, and satellites (see the survey 
from  [152]).  Commercial  debris  removal  technologies  are 
being developed, e.g., by Astroscale [153]. 

D. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 
A very positive development towards more sustainable space 
operations  has  included  smaller  launchers  and  reusable 
rockets that can carry satellites into orbit multiple times, such 
as the  ones  used  by  SpaceX.  However, in  their rockets  the 
second  stages  are  also  usually  controlled  through  re-entry 
and  deposited  in  remote  areas  of  an  ocean  [43].  The 
cumulative 
the  rocket  bodies  can  cause 
environmental damages to the fragile ocean environment. In 
addition, a large number of launches produces black carbon 
into the atmosphere. If the number of launches per year is  

impact  of 

Figure  17.  WISA  WoodSat,  a  wooden  satellite.  Credit: 
Arctic Astronautics. 

more  than  1000,  it  can  lead  to  a  persistent  layer  of  black 
carbon  particles  in  the  northern  stratosphere  [154].  That 
could  potentially  cause  changes  in  the  global  atmospheric 
circulation and distribution of ozone and temperature. Over 
years of active launching this may lead to radiative forcing 
comparable to the effects of current subsonic aviation. 

Another significant effect of the launches required to keep 
megaconstellations  functional  is  that  the  satellites  have  a 
limited  lifecycle,  and  over  the  update  cycle,  there  can  be 
several  tons  of  satellites  re-entering  Earth’s  atmosphere 
every  day.  As  explained  in  [43],  satellites  that  include 
aluminum and re-entry  will  create  fine  particles  that  could 
greatly  exceed  natural  forms  of  high-altitude  atmospheric 
aluminum deposition. 

The sustainable use of space has led to inventions related 
to  satellite  structures  as  well.  A  recent  Finnish  initiative 
called  WISA  WoodSat  is  developing  the  world’s  first 
wooden  satellite  that  uses  plywood  panels  in  its  structure 
[155] [156]. One of the aims of the mission is to understand 
how  well  the  wooden  structure  can  be  applied  to  the 
spacecraft  including  long-term  radiation  and  harsh  space 
conditions. An interesting feature of this design is that during 
re-entry  into  the  atmosphere,  the  satellite  will  burn  more 
rapidly, causing less risk to humans on the ground and fewer 
aluminum  particles  in  the  atmosphere.  The  satellite  has 
passed  vibrations  tests  on  the  premises  of  ESA  and  is 
scheduled to be launched in the second half of 2022. The first 
stratospheric test flight up to 30 km to test its communication 
capabilities, command response, and selfie stick camera was 
successful. The satellite is depicted in Figure 17 showing the 
wooden panels on the exterior. The satellite is also equipped 
with  a  selfie  stick  that  enables  inspection  of  the  satellite 
condition  in  orbit.  In  addition  to  materials  research,  the 
mission  initially  aimed  to  provide  IoT  connections  using 
LoRa technology from space, and to support amateur radio 
communications via space. However, this was not supported 
by the International Radio Amateur Union. Therefore, there 
is  a requirement to  build,  test and license  a  different radio 
system before the launch can be made. 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

23 

 
 
 
 
  
In-orbit servicing is another solution to extend the life of 
satellites.  There  have  been  few  human-assisted  in-orbit 
servicing  missions  and  few  others  for  testing  autonomous 
servicing,  like  the  DARPA  Phoenix  program.  Commercial 
satellite  service  models  are  still  not  fully  developed.  One 
company,  SpaceLogistics  [157],  successfully  docked  its 
mission extension vehicle-1 (MEV-1) to a client satellite in 
February  2020,  making  it  the  first  commercial  in-orbit 
servicing  operation.  Other  companies  working  towards  in-
orbit servicing include Altius Space Machines and Orbit Fab. 
The Consortium for Execution of Rendezvous and Servicing 
Operations (CONFERS), a satellite servicing industry group, 
is working on satellite service standards, ranging from sets 
of  principles  and  best  practices  to  fiducials  and  refueling 
interfaces on spacecraft.  

E. SPACE WEATHER 
that  can  cause 
Space  weather  describes  phenomena 
significant impacts on systems and technologies both in orbit 
and on Earth [158] [159]. It is caused by solar wind and solar 
flares in near-Earth  space  and the upper part  of  the  Earth's 
atmosphere. Currently, the baseline approach is to collect as 
much  of  the  required  measurement  data  as  possible  using 
ground-based  instruments,  because  they  are  usually  less 
expensive  and  easier  to  maintain  and  upgrade  than  space-
borne  instruments  onboard  satellites.  For  example,  the 
Finnish Meteorological Institute provides space weather data 
using automatic magnetometer stations located in Finland. 

Space  weather  affects  6G  services  via  their  impact  on 
systems such as global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) 
signals [160] [161] and electronics on satellites. Ionospheric 
scintillations are one of the earliest known effects of space 
weather, causing interruptions and degradations to the GNSS 
receivers. The effects of space weather on signal propagation 
can be mitigated through engineering design solutions.  

However,  space  weather  can  lead  to  a  total  loss  of 
communication due to attenuation and/or severe scintillation 
when  the  broadcast  signals  in  certain  frequencies  cross  the 
ionosphere.  Thus,  to  make  the  future  system  resilient,  one 
has  to  take  space  weather  effects  into  account.  A  recent 
example of the impact was a geomagnetic storm in February 
2022,  which  caused atmospheric drag during  the  launch  of 
the Starlink satellites – and 40 satellites had to be deorbited 
back to the atmosphere [162]. 

In order to make electronics and shielding of satellite stand 
against harsh space weather, standardized quality procedures 
and  tests  defined  by  the  European  Cooperation  for  Space 
Standardization  (ECSS)  must  be  met.  This  means  that  the 
New Space players should not rush too quickly to orbit but 
rather  ensure  that  even  the  smallest  and  cheapest  satellites 
are  engineered  in  a  sustainable  and  reliable  way.  This  is  a 
good action for avoiding the creation of debris. 

Figure 18. Joint HERA and DART mission for asteroid study 
and planetary defense mechanisms. Credit: ESA. 

F. NEAR EARTH OBJECTS AND DEEP SPACE 
COMMUNICATIONS 
A near-earth object (NEO) is an asteroid or comet that passes 
close to the Earth’s orbit (more accurately, within 45 million 
kilometers of it). They are classified based on their size and 
an  NEO,  which  is  more  than  140  meters  in  diameter,  is 
it  can  create 
considered  potentially  hazardous  since 
significant  damage  to  the  Earth’s  surface.  There  are  many 
powerful  radars  on Earth  to  detect  NEOs,  and  space-borne 
missions  are  also  used  to  complement  the  information  for 
cataloging NEOs, and they help in preparing counteractions 
to ease and even avoid hazardous effects. So how does this 
relate to SatCom and New Space developments? 

As an example, in the planned HERA mission depicted in 
Figure 18 the aim is to send a large satellite to the vicinity of 
the Didymos asteroid [163]. Then, that satellite will launch 
deep-space CubeSats to study the composition of the asteroid 
in detail. Also, deep-space intersatellite links will be tested 
between  the  large  and  small  satellites.  HERA  will  also 
demonstrate  autonomous  navigation  around  the  asteroid 
(similarly to modern autonomous cars or ships on Earth), and 
gather  crucial  scientific  data,  to  help  scientists  and  future 
mission  planners  better  understand  asteroid  compositions 
and  structures.  In addition,  jointly  with the  DART  mission 
[164], the aim is to study planetary defense mechanisms and 
the possibility to shift the asteroid orbit with a kinetic impact. 
In addition, there is ongoing active research towards deep 
space  communication  networks  to  provide  connectivity 
anywhere in the solar system and to support exploration  of 
the  universe.  As  described  in  [165],  “The  deep  space 
exploration missions require high quality of communication 
performance  between  the  Earth  stations  and  various  deep 
space explorers, such as Mars orbiters and rovers.” The paper 
describes  a  structured  solar  system  satellite  constellation 
network where several relays are used to create a topology 
that can support deep space operations and connect objects 
from deep space to each other and to Earth. 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

24 

 
 
 
An  example  of  a  security  challenge  is  the  handover 
situation  that  can  happen  quite  frequently  in  dynamic  3D 
networks [169]. The situation is depicted in Figure 19. Key 
management during handover situations is challenging. For 
example,  when a  police  officer  is  changing his  connection 
from terrestrial 5G to an LEO satellite, handover information 
includes  both  previously  accessed  networks  and  newly 
accessed satellites. Signaling is exchanged between different 
entities and might be eavesdropped, falsified, or fabricated.  
Finally,  it  should  be  ensured  that  the  system  to  use  for 
critical  communications  is  available.  For  Europe  and 
Finland, it is good to have systems that are under their own 
control.  This  was  described  by  a  Finnish  organization  as: 
“Can we trust systems outside Europe during a time of crisis? 
It is much better to have a European constellation.” 

H. SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT 
Enabling  services:  The  number  of  satellites  increases  but 
the spectrum resource is naturally limited [174]. We covered 
some  regulatory  aspects  related  to  spectrum  allocations 
already  in  Section  II.  The  potential  for  new  allocations  is 
shrinking because the expansion of wireless communications 
is continuing and new systems are emerging faster than the 
aging systems currently in use are becoming extinct. There 
are  two  main  ways  to  cope  with  the  spectrum  scarcity 
problem  [32].  (1)  Use  higher  frequencies  that  are  not  yet 
allocated  (or  optical  links  [175])  and  (2)  Use  currently 
allocated frequencies more efficiently. The latter leads to the 
concepts  of  dynamic  spectrum  sharing  and  spectrum 
coexistence.  

Spectrum  sharing  means  that  two  or  more  systems  are 
operating in the same frequency band. In the 6G SatCom this 
may  include  spectrum  coexistence  (1)  between  different 
satellite  systems,  (2)  between  satellite  and  terrestrial 
systems, and (3) between systems in different layers of the 
multi-layer  network.  This  is  a  very  challenging  field  and 
leads to the use of techniques such as spectrum sensing [176] 
[177], adaptive beam control and multi-beam satellites [178] 
[179],  predictive  frequency  allocations  [180],  and  licensed 
spectrum  management  [33].  The  latter  includes  database-
assisted  techniques  [32]  that  enable  controlled  spectrum 
sharing  with  guaranteed  QoS  for  the  sharing  parties.  The 
basic  principle  of  a  spectrum  database approach is that  the 
secondary user of the spectrum is not allowed to access the 
band until it has successfully received information from the 
database that the channel it intends to operate on is free at the 
location of the device for the time period needed. 

Astronomy: It is important to use spectrum efficiently to 
enable  an 
interference-free  environment  and  reliable 
delivery  of  wireless  services  to  end  users.  Another  crucial 
point is to allocate and use frequencies without endangering 
other space safety services including astronomy [181] [182]. 
The  astronomical  radio  signals  arriving  on  Earth  are 
extremely  weak  compared  to  signals  from  communication 
systems  and  require  large  radio  antennas  (called  radio 

Figure 19. Handover scenarios in a layered network. 

Many innovative missions are developed annually, and it 
is foreseen that the development of a visionary 3D network 
around the globe and a deep space communication network 
would  enable  unforeseen  growth  in  New  Space  missions. 
When  the  connectivity  is  robust  and  working  anywhere, 
innovative missions for science and remote sensing can also 
be served at an unprecedented level. 

increase  of  platforms  and 

G. CYBERSECURITY 
There  are  many  emerging  cybersecurity  challenges  due  to 
the development of complex multi-layer systems [166] and 
the  rapid 
interfaces.  The 
infrastructure  both  in  space  and  on  the  ground  must  be 
protected. In addition, application areas such as autonomous 
and remote-controlled shipping mean opening up previously 
closed  systems  due  to  external  control  interfaces  [48]. 
Therefore, before the design phase for the whole architecture 
can begin, it is important to first define relevant threats and 
assess the impact of those threats on the system. Secondly, 
map out risk scenarios and finally understand the trade-offs 
between  acceptable  and  unacceptable  risks.  After  this 
evaluation,  it  is  possible  to  proceed  in  defining  the 
architecture,  i.e.,  using  the  security-by-design  principle. 
Thus,  fine-tuning  the  multi-layer  architecture  for  future 
networks requires a new type of approach.  In order to make 
this  happen  across  different  countries  and  stakeholders, 
effective coordination of actions and organizing training for 
space  actors  is  required.  Space  agencies  such  as  ESA  and 
NASA  will  play  an  important  role  in  coordinating  the 
activities [167] [168]. 

Both payload and control communication need to be tested 
before launching satellites into orbit. It is important to cover 
the  whole  end-to-end  path  when  creating  reliable,  secure 
communications.  Cybersecurity  issues  have  recently  been 
studied from different viewpoints including general issues in 
space networks [169], integrated satellite-terrestrial systems, 
[170], 5G and beyond networks [171], looking at the effects 
of machine learning on security [172], and ensuring secure 
telemetry and command links [173].  

VOLUME XX, 2022 

25 

GEOLEOAirborneVertical handover5GGround segmentHorizontal handoverVertical handover 
 
 
  
telescopes)  to  detect  them.  Even  a  cellular  phone  on  the 
moon  would  produce  a  signal  on  Earth 
that  radio 
astronomers  consider  quite  strong.  Thus,  cosmic  radio 
sources are easily masked if this is not taken carefully into 
account.  Regulations are made  to  set power  and  frequency 
limits in order to keep services operational. Technical studies 
on aggregate interference effects from new wireless services 
have to be done in order to support regulatory activities. 

Radio  astronomy  is  used  to  increase  our  knowledge  of 
space, particularly deep space topics such as pulsars, black 
holes,  radio  galaxies,  and  cosmic  microwave  background 
radiation. Thus, it helps to answer questions such as how the 
universe  and  planets  are  born  or  trying  to  find  extra-
terrestrial  intelligence  [183].  In  addition,  radio  astronomy 
provides useful information on the sun and solar activities, 
and thus we can learn about stars in general.  Astronomy uses 
a wide range of frequency bands from a few kHz to tens of 
GHz,  and  there  have  been  many  interference  incidents 
caused  by  ground-based  broadcast  systems,  GNSS  signals, 
and cellular phones. New allocations in any layer of the 6G 
system  should  not  produce  harmful  interference  in  a  co-
channel or in adjacent bands. In addition, large constellations 
are challenging optical astronomy since satellites can reflect 
sunlight and appear as bright streaks in telescopes [184].  

In  Finland,  the  Sodankylä  Geophysical  Observatory  has 
already  been  operating  for  more  than  100  years.  For 
example, they will be using the European Incoherent Scatter 
Scientific Association (EISCAT) 3D research infrastructure, 
consisting  of  thousands  of  phased  array  antenna  elements 
operating in 233 MHz band [185]. It uses radar observations 
and the incoherent scatter technique to cover the near-Earth 
space  environment  for  space  weather  forecasts  and  space 
debris detection.  

Lessons 

learned:  The  development  of  new  space 
technologies  and  the  launch  of  an  increasing  number  of 
satellites  create  a  lot  of  potential  for  business  and  novel 
applications. However, there are many  safety and security- 
related  issues  that  need  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the 
development  to  keep  it  sustainable  and  also  have  those 
services functional in the future. Avoidance of debris, cyber-
native design, and minimization of environmental impact are 
examples of good practices to follow. 

VII. POTENTIAL RESEARCH TOPICS 
In  this  section,  we  identify  a  few  promising  research 
directions. In addition to the described technical topics, and 
space  safety  topics  presented  in  TABLE  VIII,  we  foresee  a 
plethora of new application areas that can be supported and 
enabled by multi-layer networks in the future. These include 
the  so-called  metaverse,  i.e.,  a  virtual  environment  that 
blends  the  physical  and  digital  worlds,  facilitated  by  the 
convergence between the Internet and extended reality (XR) 
technologies  [187].  Another  example  is telemedicine  [188] 
and  advanced  global  Internet-based  services  including  the 
least developed countries. 

A. MULTI-LAYER CONSTELLATION DESIGN 
Traditional  constellation  designs  have  considered  satellites 
at a single orbit, and updating the designs to multiple layers 
is not a simple task. There is a need to develop new design 
methodologies  and  simulation  tools  for  flexible  operations 
and capacity estimations across layers. Future designs might 
require the use of machine learning frameworks such as the  
reinforcement learning-based capacity estimation derived in 
[189].  Also,  stochastic  geometry  analysis  [108]  [109]  can 
provide  tools  for  capacity  optimization  with  a  minimum 
number of satellites in different orbits. In addition to space 
layers, new designs are needed for the ground segment. 

Thousands  of  SatCom  and  EO  satellites  will  provide  a 
tremendous amount of data in the future. To access the data, 
customers need to either build their own ground stations and 
antennas or lease them from ground station providers  [28].  
It would be useful and more sustainable to create a ground 
station network that can be shared among constellations. For 
example, in the Amazon AWS initiative [190], the data can 
be collected from the numerous satellites orbiting the Earth 
and  stored  in  a  central  cloud.  In  such  a  case,  interested 
customers will only need to access the cloud without the need 
to invest in their own infrastructure. Another recent example 
is the NorthBase in Finland providing secure ground station 
services 
to  satellite  operators  [191].  The  remaining 
challenges  for  the  operation  are  where  to  locate  ground 
stations  to  support  real-time  requirements,  how  to  connect 
them to  the national networks, and  setting  clear regulatory 
foundations for their use.   

B. EFFICIENT SPECTRUM USE IN 3D NETWORKS 
Dynamic spectrum management needs to be updated to the 
6G era. There are many topics to be addressed to make this 
successful. First, defining the most suitable frequency bands 
for systems and links. Second, developing spectrum sharing 
mechanisms  to  manage  the  complexity  of  a  dynamic  and 
mobile 3D network. Most probably, AI-based solutions are 
required  [192]. When  a  massive  number  of  devices  are 
involved in 6G networks and require spectrum assignment, 
AI-enabled spectrum management is capable of intelligently 
supporting  a  massive  number  of  connections  and  diverse 
services. It is good to note that the inclusion of non-terrestrial 
base  stations  (BSs)  brings  new  challenges  to  network 
controller  design  because  both  the  serving  and  interfering 
BSs can move at the same time in the 3D plane [15].  

A  concept  for  spectrum  sharing  in a  multi-layer  satellite 
system  is  seen  in  Figure  20.  There  are  GSO  and  NGSO 
satellites operating in the same frequency bands. In order to 
coordinate spectrum use and enable predictable QoS for all 
users,  information  must  be  shared  between  the  entities 
controlling the involved layers or towards a third-party entity 
controlling  spectrum  use.  The  system  could  use  AI-based 
optimized  spot  beam  allocation  and  resource  management 
for aggressive frequency reuse and beamforming/precoding 
techniques [193] to cover the needs of mobile and fixed  

VOLUME XX, 2022 

26 

 
 
   
scale use. 

D. AI-ENABLED FLEXIBLE NETWORKING 
6G  will  enable  innovative  services  with  different  capacity 
and latency requirements, and AI technologies can be used 
to  tailor  the  network  and  its  functionalities  on-the-fly  to 
support those services in the best way [199].  Deep learning 
can  be  used  to  optimize  3D  networks  for  configuration, 
routing, and computation [200]. Machine learning provides 
the  means  to  identify  and  exploit  repetitive  patterns  in  the 
constellation  geometry  and  minimize routing  computations 
[201].  This  could  finally 
to  dynamic  network 
architecture  and  management  with  different  optimization 
goals.  

lead 

Satellite  operators  aim  to  reduce  the  costs  of  future 
satellite  connectivity  by  using  software-defined  satellites 
that  enable  radio  updates  with  the  latest  standard  features, 
such  as  on-the-fly  and  3D-layered  architecture  control and 
management  based  on  extensions  of  software-defined 
network  concepts  that  are  already  used  for  the  terrestrial 
components  [202]–[204].  The  ability  to  change  coverage 
areas, power and frequency allocations, and architecture on-
demand would mean that a satellite can be manufactured first 
and  tailored  to  the  operator’s  needs  later.  AI-empowered 
SDN  technology  and  MEC  paradigms  enable  anytime 
anywhere communications.  

slicing  consumes 

resources,  dynamic 

Dynamic network slicing provides the means to support a 
variety  of  services  [131].  Already,  a  static  network  slice 
enables reserving resources ahead of time in a coarse-grained 
manner for end-to-end services instead of per session. Since 
static 
slicing 
techniques will be needed in future multi-layer networks to 
quickly  create,  adapt,  and  manage  slices  according  to  the 
needs  of  users  and  applications  while  taking  into  account 
dynamically 
architectures.  These 
technologies  will  not  only  facilitate  automated  network 
management and increase network flexibility without human 
interventions,  but  also  provide  improved  QoS  for  global 
multimedia  services.  This  will  also  improve  the  longevity 
and sustainability of the satellites. 

varying  network 

E. DEEP SPACE OPERATIONS AND AUTONOMOUS 
SATELLITES 
Autonomous satellites can use deep learning, expert systems, 
and intelligent agents to process spacecraft data (telemetry, 
payload)  and  make  decisions  autonomously  during  the 
mission.  Artificial  intelligence  enables  autonomous  re-
planning,  detection  of  internal  and  external  events,  and 
reaction  accordingly,  ensuring  fulfillment  of  mission 
objectives  without  the  delays  introduced  by  the  decision-
making loops on the ground [205]. However, an increase in 
autonomy creates challenges for space traffic management, 
as  described  in  Section  VI  and  thus,  new  approaches  for 
collision  avoidance  and  information  sharing  need  to  be 
developed.

Figure 20. Multi-layer spectrum sharing with dynamic spot 
beam technology. 

users. Thus, spot beam settings are dynamically adjusted to 
support  capacity  needs  and  avoid  interference.  Suitable 
database approaches and AI technologies are to be developed 
to realize the approach. 

New  types  of  antenna  solutions  are  being  developed 
including  holographic  radio,  where  electronically  active 
surfaces  are designed and  utilized  to receive,  transmit, and 
reflect arbitrary waveforms [194] [195]. This can potentially 
lead  to  energy  savings,  especially  in  aerial  and  terrestrial 
layers. 5G and 6G SatCom with multibeam technology will 
enable even more advanced services [196] and possibilities 
for  more  efficient  use  of  spectrum  in time,  frequency,  and 
spatial domains. 

C. CYBER SECURITY IN THE QUANTUM ERA 
In 6G communications, post-quantum cryptography will be 
essential  to  secure  information  [40]  [197].  We  can  assume 
that  in  the  near  future  an  adversary  may  have  access  to 
quantum  algorithms  that  will  break  the  commonly  used 
cryptosystems.  Therefore,  6G  systems  should  be  quantum 
proof or at least prepared for a fast transition to post-quantum 
encryption.  

Quantum key distribution (QKD) with an elegant practical 
solution  has  already  been  demonstrated  by  the  Chinese 
Academy of Sciences and their Micius satellite in the LEO 
orbit [198]. The experiment used the satellite to establish a 
secure key between itself and a location in Xinglong, China, 
and  another  key  between  itself  and  Graz,  Austria.  The 
secured connection was used for a video conference.  

European plans related to secure space-based connectivity 
include QKD transmission to securely connect ministries and 
other organizations across the continent. However, there are 
also  challenges  related  to  the  use  of  optical  connections, 
especially in northern Europe during the winter time due to 
cloudy  weather.  Thus,  it  is  not  yet  clear  how  suitable  the 
concept is for connecting Helsinki to Brussels, for example. 
Therefore, a careful analysis of the availability and reliability 
of the concept for local conditions is required before its wide-

VOLUME XX, 2022 

27 

 
 
 
 
Technology topics 
Multi-layer constellation 
design 

Spectrum use over 
horizontal and vertical 
dimensions 

Cyber security in the 
quantum era 

Flexible satellite 
architectures and 
networking 

Space operations and 
people as multi-planetary 
species 

Multi-purpose payloads for 
advanced space traffic 
management 

TABLE IX. SUMMARY TABLE OF FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS.

Challenges and research directions 
3D network architecture will include satellites at different orbits. There will be small and 
large satellites simultaneously used, each having different capabilities. How to optimize 
the  number  of  satellites  in  different  orbits  and  their  inter-connections?  New  types  of 
simulation tools to support design and operations are needed. 
Dynamic spectrum management needs to be updated to the 6G era, taking into account 
the use of very high frequencies such as terahertz communications. What frequencies can 
be  used  for  dynamic  links  and  how  to  utilize  AI  technologies  for  flexible  operations? 
Development  should  cover  joint  communication  and  sensing  approaches  and  multi-
purpose payloads. 
Quantum  computing  can  break  current  cryptosystems  and  therefore  fast  transition  for 
post-quantum encryption might be required in near future. In addition, secure links e.g. in 
governmental communications will use QKD technology. What is required to ensure the 
protection of space and ground infrastructure internationally and what will be the role of 
optical satellite communications?   
In contrast to traditional satellite systems, the future multi-layer systems are designed to 
be  operated  in  a  dynamic,  flexible  way.  Machine  learning  and  software-defined 
technology will enable automated operations and updates of operations on-the-fly. How 
to  create sustainable  business  models  for  the  “payload-as-a  service”  type  of  operations 
while simultaneously ensuring predictable service quality? 
Future  space  operations  have  to  create improved  means  for space  debris  detection  and 
removal  while  enabling  reliable  space  traffic  management  and  autonomous  collision 
avoidance procedures. In addition to providing services to Earth we have to develop deep 
space  communications  networks  using  optical  and  RF  technologies  to  support  space 
missions across the solar system.  
Software-defined radios and networking will enable tighter integration of terrestrial and 
satellite networks and the development of multi-purpose payloads. How to harness small 
satellites and satellite constellations for real-time space situational awareness? 

References 
[106],[114], 
[107], [189] 

[32], [133], 
[140], [192] 

[44], [142], 
[197], [198] 

[200], 
[201], [204] 

[205], [209] 

[203], [210] 

There  are  ambitious  plans  for  humanity  to  see  us  as  a 
multi-planetary species in the future. Countries such as the 
USA,  China,  and  the  UAE  have  their  own  plans  for  the 
settlement of Mars during the next century, see e.g. [206]. To 
make  this  a  reality,  one  needs  to  also  create  a  supporting 
infrastructure  that  includes  food  and  water  supply  and 
production,  mining,  construction,  and  connectivity.  Thus, 
studies aiming at adding even more layers to the network to 
also  support  inter-planetary  connections  are  ongoing.  A 
practical  example  is  NASA’s  Mars  Cube  One  (MarCo) 
mission  –  relaying  data  from  the  lander  to  Earth  with  6U 
CubeSats [207]. Another recent example is Nokia’s plan to 
create  a  cellular  network  on  the  moon  [208].  The  network 
will  provide  critical  communication  capabilities 
for 
applications  such  as  vital  command  and  control  functions, 
remote  control  of  lunar  rovers,  real-time  navigation,  and 
streaming  of  high  definition  video.  The  mentioned 
applications and connectivity capabilities are vital for a long-
term  human  presence  on  the  moon  and  on  Mars.  The  key 
challenge related to deep space operations is crystallized in 
[209] as “Determining the most cost-effective combination 
of  RF  and  optical  assets  for  communicating  with  the 
postulated  human  Mars  assets  while  still  providing  for  the 
needs of all the other missions across the solar system.”  

F. MULTI-PURPOSE PAYLOADS FOR ADVANCED 
SPACE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
Traditional  satellite  payloads  have  been  designed  to  fulfill 

the requirements  of  a  single  mission  and  different  services 
have  required  separate  satellites.  The  customer  base  for 
satellite services is increasing and very heterogeneous, and 
future needs for them are not well known. Thus, one needs 
to  be  able  to  adapt  and  update  the  satellites  and  satellite 
constellations over their lifetime to fulfill the requirements. 
It is possible to launch satellites with better functionalities as 
part  of  the  constellation  every  time  new  needs  arise. 
However,  this  is  not  the  most  sustainable  way.  The  better 
option  is  to  update  the  satellites  themselves  with  multi-
purpose payloads using software-defined technologies [203]. 
Then, the satellite can be updated over-the-air to fulfill new 
requirements.   

to  use 

However,  there  are  still  many  open  challenges  to  be 
tackled.  How 
software-defined  networking 
capabilities  to  integrate  satellites  tightly  as  part  of  5G/6G 
networks [210]? Can very small satellites be equipped with 
advanced  multi-purpose  payloads  to  support  both  SatCom 
and  EO  or  navigation  needs?  We  envision  that  joint 
communication  and  sensing  payloads  can  be  used  in  the 
future  to  gather  needed  information  about  the  space 
environment.  This  provides  the  means  for  advanced  space 
traffic  management  since  it  is  possible  to  harness  satellite 
constellations 
to  provide  accurate  up-to-date  space 
situational awareness. Researchers need to identify the most 
suitable  frequency  bands,  signal  formats,  and  data-sharing 
mechanisms to enable reliable information. 

We have summarized the research directions in Table IX, 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

28 

 
 
 
 
complementing  the  space  safety  specific  table  presented in 
Section VI. Thus, there are definitely interesting times ahead 
and  a  lot  of  challenges  for  researchers  and  industries  to 
tackle.  

VIII. CONCLUSIONS  
The world is currently experiencing strong developments in 
satellite  communications  and  the  integration  of  5G/6G 
technology into satellite systems. This is leading to a major 
turning  point  globally  in  the  satellite-enabled  service 
business. In this paper we have looked at the development of 
6G networks and satellite megaconstellations.  Unlike other 
related  review  papers,  we  address  the  importance  of 
sustainability,  highlighting  the  importance  of  space  safety 
related aspects in the development. We provide a systematic 
classification  of  space  safety  topics  related  to  SatCom 
development and define promising research directions. As a 
specific  example,  we  investigate  joint  communication  and 
sensing related  to  space  debris  development,  showing how 
satellite constellations can also help in debris detection and 
management.  

So, what is the role that Europe will play? The USA and 
China  are  rapidly  advancing  with 
their  plans  and 
constellations. After a slower start, Europe is now investing 
billions  of  euros  in  developing  our  own  constellation. 
Multiple companies and start-ups are growing significantly 
in the  SatCom  field.  Due to  a  very  strong  background and 
position in 3GPP standardization, it is assumed that Europe 
will  play  a  very  important  role  in  the  development  of 
interoperable  global  space  networks.  There  are  ambitious 
plans  for multi-layer networks, and multiple  R&D  projects 
are  developing 
secure 
connectivity.  Finally,  ESA  promotes  the  sustainable use  of 
space for all services in 6G in a sense that supports SDGs via 
telecom,  EO,  and  navigation.  Trustworthy  and  reliable 
SatCom  is  seen  as  an  essential  part  of  sharing  EO  and 
navigation data. 

future-proof 

solutions 

for 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  interviewed 
organizations  for  their  contributions:  European  Space 
Agency;  companies  such  as  Airbus,  Nokia,  Ericsson, 
Reaktor  Innovations,  KNL  Networks,  Magister  Solutions, 
Northbase,  Huld,  Telia,  Harp  Technologies,  Missing-Link 
and nationally  relevant  organizations  such as  Erillisverkot, 
Defence Forces, Finnish Meteorological Institute, Sodankylä 
Geophysical Observatory, Traficom, Business Finland; and 
ministries including the  Ministry of Interior and the Ministry 
of Finance. However, the views expressed in this paper are 
those of the authors. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  European Space  Agency, “From 5G to 6G: Space  connecting planet 

Earth for a sustainable future,” White Paper, 2021. 

[2]  P.  Haines,  “Overview  of  satcom  market  evolution,”  presentation 

[restricted access], ESA JCB meeting, 9 Sept. 2020. 

[3]  Morgan  Stanley,  “New  Space  Economy,”  [Online].  Available: 
https://www.morganstanley.com/Themes/global-space-economy. 
[4]  C.  Pomeroy,  A.  C.-Diaz,  and  D.  Bielicki,  “Fund  me  to  the  Moon: 
Crowdfunding and the New Space Economy,” Space Policy, vol. 47, 
pp. 44-50, Feb. 2019. 

[5]  G. Denis et al., “From new space to big space: How commercial space 
dream  is  becoming a reality,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 166, pp. 431–
443, Jan. 2020. 
J.  C.  McDowell,  “The  edge  of  space:  Revisiting  the  Karman  line,” 
Acta Astronautica, vol. 151, pp. 668–677, Oct. 2018. 

[6] 

[7]  M. N. Sweeting, “Modern small satellites - Changing the economics 

of space,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 106, pp. 343-361, Mar. 2018. 

[8]  N. Saeed,  A. Elzanaty, H.  Almorad, H. Dahrouj, T. Y.  Al-Naffouri, 
and  M.-S.  Alouni, “CubeSat Communications:  Recent advances and 
future challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts, vol. 22, pp. 1839–
1862, Third Quarter 2020. 

[9]  D. Roddy, Satellite Communications, 4th edition, McGraw-Hill, 2006. 
[10]  V. Ignatenko, P. Laurila, A. Radius, L. Lamentowski, O. Antropov and 
D.  Muff,  “ICEYE  Microsatellite  SAR  Constellation  Status  Update: 
Evaluation of First Commercial Imaging  Modes,” in  Proc.  IGARSS, 
Sept.-Oct. 2020. 

[11]  Iceye 

SAR 

satellite 

constellation, 

[Online].  Available: 

https://www.iceye.com/sar-data/satellite-capabilities. 

[12]  S. Dang, O. Amin, B. Shihada, and M.-S. Alouini, “What should 6G 

be,” Nature Electronics, vol. 3, pp. 20–29, Jan. 2020. 

[13]  M. Höyhtyä, M. Corici, M. Covaci, and M. Guta, “5G and beyond for 
New  Space:  Vision  and  research  challenges,”  in  Proc.  ICSSC,  Oct. 
2019. 

[14]  J.  Lia,  Y.  Shi,  Z.  M.  Fadlullah  and  N.  Kato,  “Space-air-ground 
integrated networks: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, 
pp. 2714-2741, Fourthquarter 2018. 

[15]  E. C. Strinati et al., “6G in the sky: On-demand intelligence at the edge 
of 3D networks,” ETRI Journal, vol. 42, pp. 643–657, Oct. 2020. 
[16]  M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, Y.-H. Nam, and M. Debbah, “A 
tutorial on UAVs for wireless networks: Applications, challenges, and 
open  problems,”    IEEE  Commun.  Surveys  Tuts,  vol.  21,  pp.  2334–
2360, Thirdquarter 2019. 

[17]  Y. Huo. et al., “Distributed and multi-layer UAV network for the next-
generation  wireless  communication  and  power  transfer,”  IEEE 
Internet Things J., vol. 6, pp. 7103–7115, Aug. 2019. 

June 

2021. 

[18]  GSMA White Paper, “High altitude platform systems: Towers in the 
Available: 

skies,” 
https://www.gsma.com/futurenetworks/wp-content/uploads/2021 
/06/GSMA-HAPS-Towers-in-the-skies-Whitepaper-2021.pdf. 
[19]  Alén  Space,  “Successful  launch  of  the  first  satellite  of  the  Sateliot 
constellation,” news announcement, March 2021. [Online]. Available: 
https://alen.space/successful-launch-of-the-first-satellite-of-the-
sateliot-constellation/. 

[Online]. 

[20]  B.  Soret,  I.  Leyva-Marga,  S.  Cioni,  and  P.  Popovski,  “5G  satellite 
networks for Internet of Things: Offloading and backhauling,” Int. J. 
Satell. Commun. Netw., vol. 39, pp. 431–444, July/Aug. 2021. 
[21]  D.  Palma  and  R.  Birkeland,  “Enabling  the  Internet  of  Arctic  things 
with freely-drifting small-satellite swarms,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 
71435–71443, Nov. 2018. 

[22]  ITU  Broadband  Commission,  “The  state  of  broadband:  Tackling 
digital inequalities,  A decade of action,” September 2020. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.broadbandcommission.org/publication/the-
state-of-broadband-2020/. 

[23]  International Labour Organization, “Teleworking during the Covid-19 
pandemic  and  beyond:  A  practical  guide,”  [Online].  Available: 
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/--
-travail/documents/instructionalmaterial/wcms_751232.pdf.  

[24]  H. Saarnisaari, S. Dixit,  M.-S.  Alouini,  A. Chaoub,  M. Giordani,  A. 
Kliks, M. Matinmikko-Blue, and N. Zhang (Eds.), “6G white paper on 
connectivity for remote areas,” white paper, 6G Research Visions, No. 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

29 

 
 
 
 
5,  University 
http://urn.fi/urn:isbn:9789526226750 

of  Oulu, 

2020. 

[Online].  Available: 

[25]  M. Matinmikko-Blue et al., “White paper on 6G drivers and the UN 

SDGs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14695, April 2020. 

[26]  European  Space  Agency,  “ESA  and  the  sustainable  development 
Available: 
[Online]. 
goals.” 
https://www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/Preparing_for_the_Future/Spa
ce_for_Earth/ESA_and_the_Sustainable_Development_Goals. 
[27]  M.  Palmroth  et  al.,  “Toward  sustainable  use  of  space:  Economic, 
technological, and legal  perspectives,”  Space Policy,  vol. 49, 12 pp, 
Aug. 2021. 

[28]  O. Kodheli et al., “Satellite communications in the New Space era: A 
survey and future challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts, vol. 23, 
pp. 70–109, Firstquarter 2021. 

[29]  K. Liolis et al., “Use  cases and  scenarios  of 5G  integrated  satellite-
terrestrial  networks  for  enhanced  mobile  broadband:  The  SaT5G 
approach,” Int. J. Satell.  Commun. Netw.,  vol. 37,  pp. 91–112, Mar. 
2019. 

[30]  F. Rinaldi et al., “Non-terrestrial networks in 5G & beyond: A survey,” 

IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 165178–165200, Sep. 2020. 

[31]  X. Lin  et al., “On  the path to 6G:  Embracing the next  wave of low 
Available: 

Earth 
[Online]. 
https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2104/2104.10533.pdf. 

access,” 

satellite 

orbit 

[32]  M.  Höyhtyä  et  al.,  “Database-assisted  spectrum  sharing  in  satellite 
communications: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 25322–25341, 
Dec. 2017. 

[33]  R.  H.  Tehrani,  S.  Vahid,  D.  Triantafyllopolou,  H.  Lee,  and  K. 
Moessner,  “Licensed  Spectrum  Sharing  Schemes  for  Mobile 
Operators: A Survey and Outlook,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts, vol. 
18, pp. 2591–2623, Fourth Quarter 2016. 

[34]  M. Giordani and M. Zorzi, “Non-terrestrial  networks in the 6G Era: 
Challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Network, vol. 35 pp. 244–251, 
March/april 2021. 

[35]  X. Fang et al., “5G embraces satellites for 6G ubiquitous IoT: Basic 
models  for  integrated  satellite  terrestrial  networks,”  IEEE  Internet 
Things J., vol. 8, pp. 14399–14417, Sep. 2021.  

[36]  F. Tariq et al., “A speculative study on 6G,” IEEE Wireless Commun., 

vol 27, pp. 118–125, Aug. 2020. 

[37]  A.  Yastrebova,  R.  Kirichek,  Y.  Koucheryavy,  A.  Borodin  and  A. 
2030:  Architecture  & 

Koucheryavy, 
requirements", Proc. ICUMT, pp. 1-8, Nov. 2018. 

networks 

"Future 

[38]  T. Huang  et al., “A  survey  on green 6G  networks:  Architecture and 

technologies,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 175758–175768, Dec. 2019. 

[39]  IMT-2030 2021. IMT-2030 (6G) Promotion Group, “White paper on 

6G vision and candidate technologies,” June 2021. 

[40]  P. Raatikainen et al., “Holistic approach to 6G networks,” VTT White 
Available: 
2021. 

Paper, 
[Online]. 
https://info.vttresearch.com/download-beyond-5g. 

Sept. 

[41]  J. Radtke, C. Kebschull, and E. Stoll, “Interactions of the space debris 
environment  with  mega  constellations—Using  the  example  of  the 
OneWeb constellation,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 131, pp. 55–68, Feb. 
2017. 

[42]  A.  H.  Sanchez,  T.  Soares,  and  A.  Wolahan,  “Reliability  aspects  of 
mega-constellation  satellites  and  their  impact  on  the  space  debris 
environment,” in Proc. RAMS, Jan. 2017. 

[43]  A. C. Boley and M. Byers, “Satellite mega‑constellations create risks 
in Low Earth Orbit, the atmosphere and on Earth,” Nature Sci. Rep., 
Vol. 11, May 2021. 
[44]  D.  Housen-Couriel, 

satellite 
“Cybersecurity 
communications: Towards a typology of state actor responses,” Acta 
Astronautica, vol. 128, pp. 409–415, Nov./Dec. 2016. 

threats 

to 

[45]  T. Breton, Speech at the workshop on space based secure connectivity 
  https://ec.europa.eu/commission/ 

project, 
commissioners/2019-2024/breton/announcements/workshop-space-
based-secure-connectivity-project_en  

[Online].  Available: 

[46]  R.  Radhakrishnan,  W. W. Edmonson,  F.  Afghah, R.  M. Rodriguez-
Osorio,  F.  Pinto,  and  S.  C.  Burleigh,  “Survey  of  inter-satellite 

communication for small satellite systems: Physical layer to network 
layer  view,”  IEEE  Commun.  Surveys  Tuts,  vol.  18,  pp.  2442–2473, 
May 2016. 

[47]  Ministry  of  Finance,  Finland,  “Sustainable  growth  programme  for 
Available: 

Finland,” 
https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/163363/V
N_2021_69.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y. 

[Online]. 

2021. 

[48]  M. Höyhtyä and J. Martio, “Integrated satellite-terrestrial connectivity 
for autonomous ships: Survey and future research directions,” Remote 
Sens., vol. 12, 24 pp., Aug. 2020. 

[49]  3GPP,  “Feasibility  study  on  maritime  communication  services  over 
3GPP system,” TR 22.819 V1.0.0, Technical report, Jan. 2018.  
[50]  H.  Lueschow  and  R.  Pelaez,  “Satellite  communications  for  security 
and defence,” in Handbook of Space Security, pp. 779–796, Springer, 
2020. 

[51]  M. Heikkilä et al., “Field trial with tactical bubbles for mission critical 

communications,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Tech., 2021.  

[52]  A. Anttonen and M. Höyhtyä, “Emerging 5G satellite-aided networks 
for mission-critical services: A survey and feasibility study,” research 
report,  VTT-R-01049-19,  Oct.  2019. 
[Online].  Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340173872_Emerging_5G
_satellite-aided_networks_for_mission-
critical_services_A_survey_and_feasibility_study. 

[53]  ITU/UNESCO  Broadband  Commission,  “The  state  of  broadband: 
People-centered  approaches  for  universal  broadband,”  Sept.  2021. 
[Online].  Available:  https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-s/opb/pol/S-
POL-BROADBAND.23-2021-PDF-E.pdf   

[54]  A. Anttonen, M. Kiviranta, and M. Höyhtyä, “Space debris detection 
over  intersatellite  communication  signals,”  Acta  Astronautica,  vol. 
187, pp. 156–166, Oct. 2021. 

[55]  ESA  -  Reprogrammable  satellite  shipped  to  launch  site.  [Online]. 

Available: 
https://www.esa.int/Applications/Telecommunications_Integrated_A
pplications/Reprogrammable_satellite_shipped_to_launch_site.  
[56]  SpaceNews,  “Lockheed  Martin  +  USC  To  Build  Smart  Smallsats,” 
[Online].  Available:  https://news.satnews.com/2020/08/06/lockheed-
martin-usc-to-build-smart-smallsats/.  

[57]  Space Safety Coalition, “Best practices for the sustainability of space 
Available: 

[Online]. 

operations,” 
https://spacesafety.org/best-practices/. 

2019. 

Sep. 

[58]  SpaceNews,  “From  space 

traffic 
management,”  [Online].  Available:  https://spacenews.com/from-
space-traffic-awareness-to-space-traffic-management/ 

traffic  awareness 

to  space 

[59]  Space Safety Coalition website. Available: https://spacesafety.org/. 
[60]  World  Economic  Forum,  “Space  Sustainability  Rating.”  [Online]. 
https://www.weforum.org/projects/space-sustainability-

Available: 
rating. 

. 

Activities,” 

[61]  Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs  and  Employment,  Finland,  “Act  on 
Available: 
2018 

Space 
https://tem.fi/documents/1410877/3227301/Act+on+Space+Activitie
s/a3f9c6c9-18fd-4504-8ea9-
bff1986fff28/Act+on+Space+Activities.pdf?t=1517303831000. 
[62]  3GPP, “Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; 
Guidelines  for  Extraterritorial  5G  Systems,”  TR  22.926  V18.0.0, 
Technical Report, Dec. 2021. 

[Online]. 

[63]  C.  Stöcker,  R.  Bennett,  F.  Nex,  M.  Gerke  and  J.  Zevenbergen, 
"Review of the current state of UAV regulations", Remote Sens., vol. 
9, no. 5, pp. 459, 2017.  

[64]  Ministry  of Defence, “Finland’s  Cyber  Security  Strategy”, [Online]. 
https://www.defmin.fi/files/2378/Finland_s_ 

Available: 
Cyber_Security_Strategy.pdf , 2013. 

[65]  A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan and S. Lardner, “Optimal LAP altitude 
for  maximum  coverage,”  IEEE  Lett.  Wireless  Commun.,  vol.  3,  pp. 
569–572, Dec. 2014. 

[66]  M.  Kishk,  A.  Bader,  and  M.-S.  Alouni,  “Aerial  base  station 
deployment  in  6G  cellular  networks  using  tethered  drones:  The 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

30 

 
mobility and endurance tradeoff,” IEEE Veh. Technol.Mag., vol. 15, 
pp. 103-111, Dec. 2020. 

[67]  Li  B.,  Fei  Z.,  and  Zhang  Y.,  “UAV  communications  for  5G  and 
beyond: Recent advances and future trends,” IEEE Internet Things J., 
vol. 6, pp. 2241-2263, Apr. 2019. 

[68]  A.  W.  Mast  and  J.  P.  Bruckmeyer,  “Radios,  payloads,  &  onboard 
processing made easy,” in Proc. IEEE Aerosp. Conf., Mar. 2017. 
[69]  N. Efthymiou, Y. F. Hu, R. E. Sheriff, and A. Properzi, “Inter-segment 
handover  algorithm  for  an  integrated  terrestrial/satellite-UMTS 
environment,” in Proc. PIMRC, pp. 993–998, Sep. 1998. 

[70]  E. Falletti, M. Mondin, F. Dovis, and D. Grace, “Integration of a HAP 
within  a  terrestrial  UMTS  network:  Interference  analysis  and  cell 
dimensioning,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 24, pp. 291–325, Feb. 
2003. 

[71]  B. Evans, M. Werner, E. Lutz, M. Bousquet, G. E. Corazza, G. Maral, 
and  R.  Rumeau,  “Integration  of  satellite  and  terrestrial  systems  in 
future  multimedia  communications,”  IEEE  Wireless  Commun.,  vol. 
12, pp. 72–80, Oct. 2005. 

[72]  E.  Corbel,  I.  Buret,  J.-D.  Gayrard,  G.  E.  Corazza,  and  A.  Bolea-
Alamanac,  “Hybrid  satellite  &  terrestrial  mobile  network  for  4G: 
Candidate  architecture  and  space  segment  dimensioning,”  in  Proc. 
ASMS, pp. 162–166, Aug. 2008. 

[73]  J.  Ylitalo  et  al.,  “Hybrid  satellite  systems:  Extending  terrestrial 
networks  using  satellites,”  in  Cooperative  and  Cognitive  Satellite 
Systems, edited by S. Chatzinotas, B. Ottersten, and R. De Gaudenzi, 
pp. 337–371, Academic Press, Elsevier, 2015. 

[74]  J. Praks  et al., “Aalto-1,  multi-payload CubeSat: Design, integration 
and launch,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 187, pp. 370–383, Oct. 2021. 

[75]  Satnews, 

W-Cube 

smallsat, 

Available: 

https://news.satnews.com/2021/09/01/the-first-75-ghz-signals-are-
sent-from-space-by-the-w-cube-smallsat/ . 

[76]  P.-D.  Arapoglou  et  al.,  “DVB-S2X-enabled  precoding  for  high 
throughput satellite systems,” Int. J. Satell. Commun. Netw., vol. 34, 
pp. 439–455, May/June 2016. 

[77]  N.  Mazzali  et  al.,  “Enhancing  mobile  services  with  DVB‐S2X 
superframing,” Int. J. Satell. Commun. Netw., vol. 36,  pp. 503–527, 
Nov./Dec. 2018. 

[78]  K.  Liolis,  A.  Franchi,  and  B.  Evans,  “Editorial  for  Wiley  IJSCN’s 
special issue “Satellite networks integration with 5G”,” Int. J. Satell. 
Commun. Netw., vol. 39, pp. 319–321, July/Aug. 2021. 

[79]  3GPP,  “3rd  Generation  Partnership  Project;  Technical  Specification 
Group Services and System Aspects; Study on architecture aspects for 
using  satellite access in 5G,” TR 23.737 V17.2.0, Technical Report, 
Mar. 2021. 

[80]  3GPP, “Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; Study 
on New Radio (NR) to support non terrestrial networks,” TR 38.811 
V15.0.0, Technical Report, June 2018. 

[81]  3GPP,  “Technical  Specification  Group  Radio  Access  Network; 
Solutions  for  NR  to  support  Non-Terrestrial  Networks  (NTN)”, 
TR38.821 V16.1.0, Technical Report, May 2021. 

[82]  3GPP, “Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; 
Study on using satellite access in 5G”, TR22.822 V16.0.0, Technical 
Report, June 2018. 

[83]  3GPP, “Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; 
Study on management and orchestration aspects of integrated satellite 
components in a 5G network”, TR28.808 V17.0.0, Technical Report, 
Mar. 2021. 

[84]  3GPP, “Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; Study 
on  Narrow-Band  Internet  of  Things  (NB-IoT)  /  enhanced  Machine 
Type Communication (eMTC) support for Non-Terrestrial Networks 
(NTN),” TR 36.763 V17.0.0, Technical Report, June 2021. 

[85]  3GPP, “Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; 
Study on PLMN  selection  for  satellite access,” TR 24.821 V17.0.0, 
Technical Report, Sept. 2021. 

[86]  European Space Agency. ESA’s Annual Space Environment Report. 
Ref 
[Online]. 
GEN-DB-LOG-00288-OPS-SD. 
Available: https://www.sdo.esoc.esa.int/environment_report/Space_E
nvironment_Report_latest.pdf. (2020). 

[87]  I. del Portillo, B. Cameron, and E. Crawley, “A technical comparison 
of three low earth orbit satellite constellation systems to provide global 
broadband,”Acta Astronautica, vol. 159, pp. 123–135, June 2019. 
[88]  C. Ravishankar, R. Gopal, N. BenAmmar, G. Zakaria and X. Huang, 
“Next-generation  global  satellite  system  with  mega-constellations,” 
Int. J. Satell. Commun. Netw., vol. 39, pp. 6–28, Jan./Feb. 2021. 
[89]  A. Yastrebova, M. Höyhtyä, and M. Majanen “Mega-constellations as 
enabler of autonomous shipping,” in Proc. ICSSC, Oct. 2019.  

[90]  A.  Jones,  “China 

is  developing  plans  for  a  13,000-satellite 
megaconstellation”  Spacenews,  April  2021.  [Online].  Available: 
https://spacenews.com/china-is-developing-plans-for-a-13000-
satellite-communications-megaconstellation/.  

[91]  J.  Rainbow,  “Inmarsat  unveils  multi-orbit  Orchestra  constellation,” 
Spacenews,  July  2021.  [Online].  Available:  https://spacenews.com/ 
inmarsat-unveils-multi-orbit-orchestra-constellation/. 
[Online]. 

[92]  Inmarsat 

Available: 

Orchestra 

system, 

https://www.inmarsat.com/en/about/technology/orchestra.html   
[93]  SES  O3B  system,  [Online].  Available:  https://www.ses.com/our-

coverage/o3b-mpower.  

[94]  Kepler Commmunications, [Online], Available: https://kepler.space/.  
[95]  European Commission, “Secure Space initiative,” [Online]. Available: 

https://ec.europa.eu/defence-industry-space/major-space-
breakthrough-secure-digital-connections-future-2021-01-12_en. 
[96]  Airbus,  “European  study  on  EUs  space  connectivity”,  press  release 

https://www.airbus.com/newsroom/press-
releases/en/2020/12/european-space-and-digital-players-to-study-
build-of-eus-satellitebased-connectivity-system.html.  

[97]  European  Commission,  “Space:  EU 

initiates  a  satellite-based 
connectivity system and boosts action on management of space traffic 
for  a  more  digital  and  resilient  Europe,”  press  release,  [Online], 
Available: 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_921.  

[98]  European 

space  agency,  4S  program. 

[Online].  Available: 

https://artes.esa.int/safety-and-security-4s.  

[99]  D. C. Beste, “Design of satellite constellations for optimal continuous 
coverage,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 14, pp. 466-473, 
May 1978. 

[100] R. D. Lüders, “Satellite networks for continuous zonal coverage,” Am. 

Rocket Soc. J., vol. 31, pp. 179-184, Feb. 1961. 

[101] J. G. Walker, “Satellite constellations,” J. Brit. Interpl. Soc., vol. 37, 

pp. 559–572, 1984. 

[102] C.  J.  Wang,  “Structural  properties  of  a  low  Earth  orbit  satellite 
constellation the Walker delta network,” in Proc. MILCOM, pp. 968-
972 Oct. 1993. 

[103] J. Jiang, S. Yan, and M. Peng, “Regional LEO satellite constellation 
design based on user requirements,” in Proc. ICCC, Aug. 2018. 
[104] T.  Savitri,  Y.  Kim,  S.  Jo  and  H.  Bang,  “Satellite  constellation  orbit 
design  optimization  with  combined  genetic  algorithm  and 
semianalytical  approach,”  Int.  J.  Aerosp.  Eng.,  vol. 2017, Article 
ID 1235692, 17 pages, 2017. 

[105] S.  Boumard  et  al.,  “Constellation  and  data  link  design  for  a 
nanosatellite Earth Observation system,” Proc. ICSSC, Oct. 2022. 
[106] H. Nishiyama, Y. Tada, N. Kato, N. Yoshimura, M. Toyoshima, and 
N.  Kadowaki,  “Toward  optimized  traffic  distribution  for  efficient 
network capacity utilization in two-layered satellite networks,” IEEE 
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 62, pp. 1303-1313, Mar. 2013. 

[107] J. Qi, Z. Li, and G. Liu, “Research on coverage and link of multi-layer 
satellite network based on STK,” in Proc. ChinaCom, Aug. 2015. 
[108] N.  Okati,  T.  Riihonen,  D.  Korpi,  I.  Angervuori,  and  R.  Wichman, 
“Downlink  coverage  and  rate  analysis  of  low  Earth  orbit  satellite 
constellations using stochastic geometry,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 
68, pp. 5120-5134, Aug. 2020. 

[109] A.  Yastrebova  et  al.,  “Theoretical  and  simulation-based  analysis  of 
in  Proc. 

to  LEO  satellite  uplinks,” 

terrestrial 
GLOBECOM, Dec. 2020. 

interference 

[110] Satellite  Network  Simulator  3 

(SNS3), 

[Online].  Available: 

https://www.sns3.org/content/home.php.  

VOLUME XX, 2022 

31 

 
[111] J.  Puttonen,  L.  Sormunen,  H.  Martikainen,  S.  Rantanen  and  J. 
Kurjenniemi,  “A  system  simulator  for  5G  non-terrestrial  network 
evaluations,” in Proc. WoWMoM, June 2021. 

[112] H.  Saarnisaari  and  C.  de  Lima,  “Application  of  5G  new  radio  for 
satellite links  with low peak-to-average  power ratios,” Int. J. Satell. 
Commun. Netw, vol. 39, pp. 445–454, July/Aug. 2021. 

[113] A.  Yastrebova,  A.  Anttonen,  M.  Lasanen,  M.  Vehkaperä  and  M. 
Höyhtyä,  “Interoperable  simulation  tools  for  satellite  networks,”  in 
Proc. WoWMoM, June 2021. 

[114] Satellite  Constellation  Network  Emulator,  [Online].  Available: 
https://artes.esa.int/projects/realtime-satellite-network-emulator.   

[115] 5G  Test  Network  Finland 

(5GTNF), 

[Online].  Available: 

https://5gtnf.fi/.  

[116] M. A. Uusitalo et al., “Ultra-reliable and low-latency systems for port 
automation,”  IEEE  Wireless  Commun.,  vol.  28,  pp.  114–120,  Aug. 
2021. 

[117] H.  Vuojala  et  al.,  “Spectrum  access  options  for  vertical  network 
service providers in 5G,” Telecomm. Policy, vol. 44, May 2020. 
[118] M. Asad Ullah, K. Mikhaylov and H. Alves, “Massive machine-type 
communication  and  satellite  integration  for  remote  areas,”  IEEE 
Wireless Commun., vol. 28, pp. 74–80, Aug. 2021. 

[119] M. Asad Ullah et al., “Situational awareness for autonomous ships in 
the  Arctic:  mMTC  direct-to-satellite  connectivity,”  IEEE  Commun. 
Mag.,vol. 60, pp.32-38, June 2022. 

[120] M.  Höyhtyä,  J.  Huusko,  M.  Kiviranta,  K.  Solberg  and  J.  Rokka, 
"Connectivity  for  Autonomous  Ships:  Architecture,  use  cases  and 
research challenges", in Proc. ICTC, pp. 345-350, Oct. 2017. 

[121] T. Ojanperä et al., “5G-enabled road safety and cybersecurity services 
for  connected  and  automated  vehicles,”  in  Proc.  VTC  Spring,  May 
2021.  

[122] A.  Yastrebova,  T.  Ojanperä,  J.  Mäkelä  and  M.  Höyhtyä,  “Hybrid 
connectivity  for  autonomous  vehicles:  Conceptual  view  &  Initial 
results,” in Proc. VTC Spring, May 2021. 

[123] M.  Vehkaperä,  M.  Hoppari,  J.  Suomalainen,  J.  Roivainen,  and  S. 
Rantala,  “Testbed  for  local  area  private  network  with  satellite-
terrestrial backhauling,” in Proc. ICECCE, June 2021. 

[124] J.  F.  Hayes,  “Adaptive  feedback  communications,”  IEEE  Trans. 

Commun. Technol., vol. CT-16, pp. 29–34, Feb. 1968. 

[125] S.  Haykin, 

“Cognitive 

radio:  Brain-empowered  wireless 
communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 25, pp. 201–220, 
February 2005. 

[126] A.  D.  Panagopoulos,  P.-D.  M.  Arapoglou,  G.  E.  Chatzarakis,  J.  D. 
Kanellopoulos,  and  P.  G.  Cottis,  “Coexistence  of  the  broadcasting 
satellite service with fixed service systems in frequency bands above 
10GHz,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 52, pp. 100-107, Mar. 2006. 

[127] M.  Höyhtyä,  J.  Kyröläinen,  A.  Hulkkonen,  J.  Ylitalo,  and  A. 
Roivainen,  “Application  of  cognitive  radio  techniques  to  satellite 
communication,” in Proc. DySPAN, pp. 540–551, Oct. 2012. 

[128] M. Matinmikko  et al., “Cognitive radio trial  environment:  First live 
authorized  shared  access-based  spectrum-sharing  demonstration,” 
IEEE Veh. Tech. Mag., vol. 8, pp. 30–37, Sept. 2013. 

[129] M. M.  Sohul, Y.  Miao, T. Yang, and J. H. Reed, “Spectrum access 
system for the citizen broadband radio service,” IEEE Commun. Mag., 
vol. 53, pp. 18–25, Jul. 2015. 

[130] M. Palola et al., “Field trial of the 3.5 GHz citizens broadband radio 
service  governed  by  a  spectrum  access  system  (SAS),”  in  Proc. 
DySPAN, Mar. 2017. 

[131] M. Höyhtyä  et al., “Critical  communications over  mobile  operators’ 
networks: 5G use cases enabled by licensed spectrum sharing, network 
slicing,  and  QoS  control,”  IEEE  Access,  vol.  6,  pp.  73572–73582, 
December 2018. 

[132] M. Höyhtyä et al., “Licensed shared access field trial and a testbed for 
integrated  satellite-terrestrial  communications  including  research 
directions for 5G and beyond” Int. J. Satell. Commun. Netw, vol. 39, 
pp. 455–472, July/Aug. 2021. 

[133] M.  Matinmikko-Blue,  S.  Yrjölä  and  P.  Ahokangas,  “Spectrum 
management  in  the  6G  era:  The  role  of  regulation  and  spectrum 
sharing,” in Proc. 6G SUMMIT, Mar. 2020.  

[134] M. Höyhtyä, A. Mämmelä, A. Chiumento, S. Pollin, M. Forsell, and 
D. Cabric, “Database-assisted spectrum prediction in 5G networks and 
beyond: A review and future challenges,” IEEE Circuits Syst. Mag., 
vol. 19, pp. 34–45, Third Quarter 2019. 

[135] T. S. Rappaport et al., “Millimeter wave mobile communications for 
5G cellular:  It  will  work!,” IEEE Access,  vol. 1, pp. 335–349, May 
2013. 

[136] J.  G.  Andrews  et  al.,  “Modeling  and  analyzing  millimeter  wave 
cellular  systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun.  vol. 65,  pp. 403–430, Jan. 
2017. 

[137] M.  Giordani  and  M.  Zorzi,  “Satellite  Communication  at  Millimeter 
Waves: a  Key Enabler of  the 6G  Era,” in  proc. ICNC, pp. 383-388, 
Feb. 2020. 
[138] First  W-band 

from  space,  [Online],  Available: 

transmission 

https://artes.esa.int/news/first-wband-transmission-space  

[139] A. Lamminen, J. Säily, J. Ala-Laurinaho, J. de Cos and V. Ermolov, 
“Patch antenna and antenna array on multilayer high-frequency PCB 
for D-Band,” IEEE Open J. Antennas  Propag., vol. 1, pp. 396–403, 
June 2020. 

[140] J. Kokkoniemi, J. M. Jornet, V. Petrov, Y. Koucheryavy and M. Juntti, 
“Channel  modeling  and  performance  analysis  of  airplane-satellite 
terahertz band communications,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Tech., vol. 70, pp. 
2047–2061, Feb. 2021. 

[141] Y. Rahmat-Samii, V. Manogar and J. M. Kovitz, “For satellites, think 
small,  dream  big  –  A  review  of  recent  antenna  developments  for 
CubeSats,”  IEEE  Antennas  Propag.  Mag.,  vol.  59,  pp.  22-30,  Feb. 
2017. 

[142] H.  Hauschildt,  C.  Elia,  H.  L.  Moeller  and  J.  M.  P.  Armengol, 
“HydRON:  High  throughput  optical  network,”  in  Proc.  SPIE  Free-
Space Laser Commun. XXXI, Mar. 2019.  

[143] C.  Preyssl,  “Safety  risk  assessment  and  management  -  The  ESA 

approach,” Reliab. Eng. Syst., vol. 49, pp. 303-309, 1995. 

[144] G. Musgrave, A. Larsen and T. Sgobba (Eds.), Safety Design for Space 

Systems, Elsevier, 2009. 
[145] UK  Space  Agency, 

press 

release 

[Online].  Available: 

https://www.gov.uk/government/news/g7-nations-commit-to-the-
safe-and-sustainable-use-of-space  

[146] ESA,  Space  Debris  by 

the  Numbers, 

[Online].  Available:  

https://www.esa.int/Safety_Security/Space_Debris/Space_debris_by
_the_numbers  

[147] T. J. Muelhaupt, M. E. Sorge, J. Morin and R. S. Wilson, “Space traffic 
management in the new space era,” J. Space Saf. Eng., vol. 6, pp. 80–
87, June 2019. 

[148] D.  Kessler  and  B.  Cour-Palais,  “Collision  frequency  of  artificial 
satellites: The creation of a debris belt,” J. Geophys. Res. vol. 83, pp. 
2637–2646, June 1978. 

[149] A. Murtaza, S. Pirzada, T. Xu, and L. Jianwei, “Orbital debris threat 
for  space  sustainability and  way  forward,”  IEEE  Access,  vol. 8,  pp. 
61000–61019, 2020. 

[150] H. Klinkrad, Space Debris: Models and Risk Analysis, Springer, 2006. 
[151] E. Ekici, I. Akyildiz, and M. Bender, “A distributed routing algorithm 
for  datagram  traffic  in  LEO  satellite  networks,”  IEEE/ACM  Trans. 
Netw., vol. 9, pp 137–147, Apr. 2001. 

[152] C.  Mark  and  S.  Kamath,  “Review  of  active  space  debris  removal 

methods,” Space Policy, vol. 47, pp. 194-206, Feb. 2019. 

[153] Astroscale, 

“Active  debris 

removal,” 

[Online].  Available: 

https://astroscale.com/services/active-debris-removal-adr/  

[154] M. Ross, M. Mills and D. Toohey, “Potential climate impact of black 

carbon emitted by rockets,” Geophys. Res. Lett., vol. 27, Dec. 2010. 

[155] T.  Pultarova,  “The  World’s  first  wooden  satellite  will  launch  this 
year,”    https://www.space.com/first-wooden-satellite-will-launch-in-
2021.  
[156] Wisa 

Available: 

WoodSat, 

[Online]. 
https://www.wisaplywood.com/wisawoodsat/.  
[Online]. 
Logistics, 

[157] Space 

Available: 

https://www.northropgrumman.com/space/space-logistics-services/. 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

32 

 
[158] H.  Koskinen  et  al.  “Space  weather  effects  catalogue,”  ESA  Space 

Weather Study (ESWS), 2001. 

[159] R.  Schwenn,  “Space  Weather:  The  Solar  Perspective.” Living  Rev. 

Sol. Phys. 3, 2 (2006).  

[160] G. W. Hein, “Status, perspectives and trends of satellite navigation,” 

Satellite Navigation, Article 22, 2020. 

[161] A. Yastrebova, M. Höyhtyä, S. Boumard, E. Lohan, and A. Ometov, 
“Positioning  in  the  Arctic  Region:  State-of-the  art  and  future 
perspectives,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 53964–53978, Mar. 2021.  
[162] Geomagnetic  storm  brings  down  Starlink  satellites,  [Online]. 

Available: 
https://spaceweather.com/archive.php?view=1&day=09&month=02
&year=2022  

[163] ‘HERA 

mission’, 
Space_Safety/Hera/Hera.  

https://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/ 

[164] ‘Double  Asteroid  Redirection  Test  (DART)  mission’,  [Online]. 

Available:  https://www.nasa.gov/planetarydefense/dart.  

[165] P.  Wan  and  Y.  Zhan,  “A  structured  Solar  System  satellite  relay 
constellation  network  topology  design  for  Earth-Mars  deep  space 
communications,” Int. J. Satell. Commun. Netw., vol. 37, pp. 292-313, 
May/June 2019. 

[166] M. Kivelä, A. Arenas, M. Barthelemy, J. P. Gleeson, Y. Moreno and 
M.  A.  Porter,  “Multilayer  networks,” J.  Complex  Netw.,  vol.  2,  pp. 
203-271, Sept. 2014. 

[167] NASA 

[Online]. 
https://www.nasa.gov/centers/ivv/cybersecurity.html . 

Cybersecurity 

services, 

Available: 

[168] European Space Security and Education Centre, [Online]. Available: 

https://www.esa.int/About_Us/Corporate_news/ESA_ESEC.  

[169] C.  Jiang,  X.  Wang,  J.  Wang,  H.-H.  Chen  and  Y.  Ren,  “Security  in 
space information networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, pp. 82-
88, Aug. 2015. 

[170] I. Ahmad, J. Suomalainen, P. Porambage, A. Gurtov, J. Huuskoand M. 
Satellite-Terrestrial  Communications: 
Solutions”.TechRxiv,11-Jul-

Höyhtyä,“Security 
Challenges 
2022,doi:10.36227/techrxiv.20254605.v1.   

Potential 

and 

of 

[171] I. Ahmad, S. Shahabuddin, T. Kumar, J. Okwuibe, A. Gurtov and M. 
Ylianttila,  “Security  for  5G  and  beyond”, IEEE  Commun.  Surveys 
Tuts., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3682-3722, 4th Quart. 2019. 

[172] J.  Suomalainen,  A.  Juhola,  S.  Shahabuddin,  A.  Mämmelä  and  I. 
Ahmad, “Machine learning threatens 5G security,” IEEE Access, vol. 
8, pp. 190822-190842, Oct. 2020. 

[173] S.  S.  Saha,  S.  Rahman,  M.  U.  Ahmed  and  S.  K.  Aditya,  “Ensuring 
cybersecure  telemetry  and  telecommand  in  small  satellites:  Recent 
trends and empirical propositions,” IEEE Aerosp.  Electr. Syst. Mag., 
vol. 34, pp. 34–49, Aug. 2019. 

[174] M. Höyhtyä et al., “Spectrum occupancy measurements: Survey and 
use of interference maps,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, pp. 
2386–2414, Fourth Quarter 2016. 

[175] P.  H.  Pathak,  X.  Feng,  P.  Hu  and  P.  Mohapatra,  "Visible  light 
communication  networking  and  sensing:  A  survey  potential  and 
challenges", IEEE  Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17,  no. 4,  pp. 2047-
2077, 4th Quart. 2015. 

[176] M.  Jia,  X.  Liu,  X.  Gu,  and  Q.  Guo,  “Joint  cooperative  spectrum 
sensing 
satellite 
selection 
communication  system  based  on  cognitive  radio,”  Int.  J.  Satell. 
Commun., vol. 35, pp. 139–150, Mar./Apr. 2017. 

optimization 

channel 

and 

for 

[177] F. Dimc, G. Baldini, and S.  Kandeepan, “Experimental detection  of 
mobile  satellite  transmissions  with  cyclostationary  features,”  Int.  J. 
Satell. Commun., vol. 33, pp. 163–183, Mar.-Apr. 2015. 

[178] S. Maleki, S.  Chatzinotas, B. Evans,  K. Liolis, J. Grotz,  A.  Vanelli-
Coralli, and N. Chuberre, “Cognitive spectrum utilization in Ka band 
multibeam satellite communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, 
pp. 24–29, Mar. 2015. 

[179] S. Tani et al., “An adaptive beam control technique for Q band satellite 
to  maximize  diversity  gain  and  mitigate  interference  to  terrestrial 
networks,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 7, pp. 115–122, 
Jan./Feb. 2019. 

[180] M. Höyhtyä, S. Pollin, and A. Mämmelä, “Improving the performance 
of  cognitive  radios  through  classification,  learning,  and  predictive 
channel  selection,”  Adv.  Electron.  Telecommun.,  vol.  2,  pp.  28–38, 
December 2011. 

[181] J.  Hall  et  al.,  “Light  pollution,  radio  interference  and  space  debris: 
Threats  and  opportunities  in  the  2020s,”  White  paper,  Bull.  Am. 
Astron. Soc., Vol. 51, Sept. 2019. 

[182] A. Venkatesan, J. Lowenthal, P. Prem, and M. Vidaurri, “The impact 
of satellite constellations on space as an ancestral global commons,” 
Nature Astron., vol. 4, pp. 1043–1048, Nov. 2020. 

[183] J. Tarter, “The search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI),”  Annu. 

Rev. Astron. Astr., vol. 39, pp. 511–548, Sept. 2001. 

[184] A.  Witze,  “How  satellite  ‘megaconstellations’  will  photobomb 
2020. 

astronomy 
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-02480-5.  

images,” 

Nature 

News, 

Aug. 

[185] D.  Kastinen,  T.  Tveito,  J.  Vierinen,  and  M.  Granvik,  “Radar 
observability  of  near-Earth  objects  using  EISCAT  3D”,  Ann. 
Geophys., vol. 38, pp. 861–879, Jul. 2020. 

[186] D. J. Israel and H. Shaw, “Next-generation NASA Earth-orbiting relay 
satellites:  Fusing  optical  and  microwave  communications,”  in  Proc. 
IEEE Aerosp. Conf., Mar. 2018. 

[187] L.-H. Lee et al., “All one needs to know about metaverse: A complete 
survey  on  technological  singularity,  virtual  ecosystem,  and  research 
agenda,” https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.05352.pdf.  

[188] R.  Bashshur,  C.  R.  Doarn,  J.  M.  Frenk,  J.  C.  Kvedar,  and  J.  O. 
Woolliscroft, “Telemedicine and the COVID-19 pandemic, lessons for 
the  future,”  Telemedicine  and  e-Health,  vol.  26,  pp.  571–573,  May 
2020. 

[189] C.  Jiang  and  X.  Zhu,  “Reinforcement  Learning  Based  Capacity 
Management  in  Multi-Layer  Satellite  Networks,”  IEEE  Trans. 
Wireless Commun., vol. 19, pp. 4685–4699, July 2020. 

[190] AWS Ground Station: Easily Control Satellites and Ingest Data With 
Fully  Managed  Ground  Station  as  a  Service,  [Online].  Available: 
https://aws.amazon.com/ground-station/.  
groundstations, 

[191] Finnish 

NorthBase 

Available: 

[Online]. 

http://www.northbase.fi/.  

[192] M.  Jia,  X.  Zhang,  J.  Sun,  X.  Gu,  and  Q.  Guo,  “Intelligent  resource 
management  for  satellite and  terrestrial  spectrum  shared  networking 
towards  B5G,”  IEEE  Wireless  Commun.,  vol.  27,  pp.  54–61,  Feb. 
2020. 

[193] M. A. Vazquez, A. Perez-Neira, D. Christopoulos, S. Chatzinotas, B. 
Ottersten, P.-D. Arapoglou, A. Ginesi, and G. Tarocco, “Precoding in 
multibeam satellite communications: Present and future challenges,” 
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 23, pp. 88–95, Dec. 2016. 

[194] E.  Björnson,  L.  Sanguinetti,  H.  Wymeersch,  J.  Hoydis,  and  T.  L. 
Marzetta, “Massive MIMO is a reality— What is next? Five promising 
research directions for antenna arrays,” Digit. Signal Process., vol. 94, 
pp. 3–20, Nov. 2019. 

[195] H.  Lu,  Y.  Zeng,  S.  Jin,  and  R.  Zhang,  “Aerial  intelligent  reflecting 
surface:  Joint  placement  and  passive  beamforming  design  with  3D 
beam flattening,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., pp. 1–1, 2021. 
[196] F. Rinaldi, H.-L. Määttänen, J. Torsner, S. Pizzi, S. Andreev, A. Iera, 
Y. Koucheryavy, and G. Araniti, “Broadcasting services over 5G NR 
enabled  multi-beam  non-terrestrial  networks,” 
IEEE  Trans. 
Broadcast., vol. 67, pp. 33–45, Mar. 2021. 

[197] D. J. Bernstein and T. Lange, “Post-quantum cryptography,” Nature, 

vol. 549, pp. 188–194, Sept. 2017. 
[198] S.-K.  Liao  et  al.,  “Satellite-relayed 

intercontinental  quantum 

network,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 120, Jan. 2018.  

[199] J. Hoydis, F. A. Aoudia, A. Valcarce and H. Viswanathan, “Toward a 
6G AI-native air interface,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 59, pp. 76–81, 
May 2021. 

[200] N. Kato, Z. M. Fadlullah, F. Tang, B. Mao, S. Tani, A. Okamura, and 
J. Liu, “Optimizing space-air-ground integrated networks by artificial 
intelligence,”  IEEE  Wireless  Commun.,  vol.  26,  pp.  140–147,  Aug. 
2019. 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

33 

 
[201] I.  Leyva-Mayorga  et  al.,  “LEO  small-satellite  constellations  for  5G 
and Beyond-5G communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 184955–
184964, Oct. 2020. 

[202] D.  Kreutz  et  al.,  “Software-defined  networking:  A  comprehensive 

survey,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 103, pp. 14-76, Jan. 2015. 

[203] S.  Xu,  X.-W.  Wang,  and  M.  Huang,  “Software-defined  next-
generation satellite networks: Architecture, challenges, and solutions,” 
IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 4027-4041, Jan. 2018. 

[204] Y. Bi  et al., “Software defined  space-terrestrial  integrated networks: 
architecture,  challenges,  and  solutions,”  IEEE  Network,  vol.  33,  pp. 
22–28, Jan./Feb. 2019.  

[205] European Space  Agency, “AIKO:  Autonomous  operations thanks to 
artificial 
Available: 
https://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Telecommunications_Integrated_
Applications/TTP2/AIKO_Autonomous_satellite_operations_thanks
_to_Artificial_Intelligence.  

intelligence,” 

[Online]. 

[206] SpaceWatch.  “UAE  aims  to  establish  settlement  on  mars  by  2117,” 
https://spacewatch.global/2017/02/uae-aims-

[Online]  Available: 
establish-human-settlement-mars-2117/.  

[207] NASA,  “Mars  Cube  One  (MarCo):  Mission  overview,”  [Online]. 
Available: https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/cubesat/missions/marco.php.  

[208] Nokia, 

Press 

release, 

[Online]. 

Available: 

https://www.nokia.com/about-us/news/releases/2020/10/19/nokia-
selected-by-nasa-to-build-first-ever-cellular-network-on-the-moon/.  
[209] D. S. Abraham et al., “Recommendations emerging from an analysis 
of  NASA’s  deep  space  communications  capacity,” 
in  Space 
Operations: Inspiring Humankind's Future, edited by H. Pasquier C. 
A. Cruzen, M. Schmidhuber, and Y. H. Lee, pp. 475–511, Springer, 
2019. 

[210] Kratos, “Software-defined satellites meet software-defined ground,”,  

https://www.kratosdefense.com/constellations-
podcast/articles/software-defined-satellites-meet-software-defined-
ground, 2021.  

Marko Höyhtyä (Senior Member, IEEE) received 
the  D.Sc.  (Tech.)  degree  in  telecommunication 
engineering from the University of Oulu, where he 
currently holds an associate professor position. He 
is  an  associate  professor  at  the  National  Defence 
University as  well.  Since 2005, he has  been  with 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd. in 
various researcher and team leader positions. He is 
currently working as a research professor, focusing 
on  satellite  communications  and  situational 
technologies.  He  was  a  Visiting 
awareness 
Researcher  at  the  Berkeley  Wireless  Research  Center,  CA,  from  2007  to 
2008, and a  Visiting Research Fellow  with the European Space Research 
and  Technology  Centre,  the  Netherlands,  in  2019.  His  research  interests 
include  critical  communications,  autonomous  systems,  and  resource 
management in terrestrial and satellite communication systems.  

Sandrine  Boumard  received  her  Master  of  Science  and  Master  of 
Advanced  Studies  degrees  in  Electronics,  Systems,  Radar  and  Radio-
communication  from  the  “Institut  National  des  Sciences  Appliquées,” 
INSA, in Rennes, France, in 1998. She has since been working at VTT. She 
is currently a senior scientist on the autonomous systems connectivity team 
in the  mobility and transport research area of the  carbon  neutral  solutions 
business area at  VTT. Her research  focus is  on  physical layer algorithms, 
e.g., synchronization and OFDM systems, but her experience ranges from 
channel modeling to system-level analysis and simulation as well as VHDL 
modeling.  She  has  been  involved  in  several  research  and  development 
projects,  national,  and  international  projects.  She  has  co-authored  several 
conference and journal papers as well as book chapters. 

Anastasia  Yastrebova  received  her  M.Sc.  in 
Information Technology from Tampere University 
(former  Tampere  University  of  Technology), 
Finland,  in  2019.  Currently,  she  is a  Research 
Scientist  at  the  Technical  Research  Centre  of 
Finland,  VTT  Ltd  in  the  Autonomous  Systems 
Connectivity team.  She  is also working towards a 
Ph.D.  degree  in  Communications  Engineering  at 
the University of Oulu, Finland. Her research focus 
is  on heterogeneous  wireless  communication 
networks, including satellite-terrestrial systems and 
next-generation  communication  systems  for  remote  monitoring,  and 
autonomous operation of on-land and maritime systems. 

from 

with 
and 

in  electrical  engineering 

Pertti  Järvensivu  received  the  degree  of  M.Sc. 
(Tech.) 
the 
University  of  Oulu  in  1992.  From  June  1988  to 
the 
he 
December 
was 
1999, 
Telecommunication 
the 
Laboratory 
Mathematics Division at the University of Oulu in 
various teaching and research positions. He joined 
VTT in January 2000 and is currently a Principal 
Scientist  in  the  Antennas  and  RF  technologies 
team.  He  was  the  leader  of  the  Wireless  Access 
team  from  2003  to  2011  and  the  leader  of  the 
Cognitive Radios and Networks team  from 2011 to 2013. Since 2000, he 
has been a project manager in several publicly funded and private customer 
projects,  for  example,  on  mm-wave  radio  technologies.  He  is  currently 
managing  ESA  Contract  No.  4000135759/21/NL/MGu,  “Automotive 
FMCW  radar  technology  for  space  applications,”  in  ESA’s  Technology 
Development  Element  (TDE)  program.  His  interests  include  millimeter 
wave  radio  communication,  satellite  communication  systems,  and  space 
applications of radio techniques. 

Markku  Kiviranta  (Senior  Member,  IEEE) 
received  the  degrees  of  the  MSc  (Tech.)  and 
Lic.Sc.  (Tech.)  from  the  University  of  Oulu, 
Finland, in 1994 and 2000, respectively. In 2017, 
he  received  the  D.Sc.  (Tech.)  degree  from  the 
School 
of  Electrical  Engineering,  Aalto 
University,  Finland.  He  started  his  professional 
career in 1993 at VTT, and since then, he has had 
a  strong  impact  on  ramping  up  and  performing 
PHY  layer  algorithm  and  performance  activities 
for  microwave and  satellite links and 3G/4G/5G- 
capable base stations and terminals as well as for high data rate and short 
link  modems. In 2005, he  spent a year at the Berkeley Wireless Research 
Centre  in  California.  He  has  led  the  Digital  Transceiver  and  Cognitive 
Radios and Networks teams at VTT for 10 years, after which he has worked 
as a principal scientist of radio systems. 

Antti  Anttonen (Senior  Member, IEEE)  received 
the  D.Sc.  (Tech.)  degree  from  the  Department  of 
Electrical and Information Engineering, University 
of  Oulu,  Finland,  in  2011.  He  works  as  a  Senior 
Scientist  at  VTT  Technical  Research  Centre  of 
Finland Ltd. He  has visited  Lucent Technologies, 
USA 
the  University  of  Hannover, 
Germany  in  2008,  and  the  University  of  Leuven, 
Belgium in 2014. He has participated in numerous 
national and European research projects related to 
wireless  communications.    His  main  interests  include  smart  resource 
management, data traffic control, and the application of statistical theories 
for heterogeneous wireless networks. 

in  2000, 

VOLUME XX, 2022 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
