This is a preprint version of the article that appeared as: Kott, Alexander, Maureen S. Golan, Benjamin D. 
Trump, and Igor Linkov. "Cyber Resilience: by Design or by Intervention?." Computer 54, no. 8 (2021): 
112-117. 
…………………….. 

Cyber Resilience: by Design or by 
Intervention?  

Alexander Kott1, Maureen S. Golan2,4, and Benjamin D. Trump2,5*, Igor Linkov2,3 

1US Army DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA 

2US Engineer Research and Development Center, Boston, MA, USA 

3Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 

4Credere Associates, Concord, MA, USA 

5University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 

Abstract 
The term “cyber resilience by design” is growing in popularity. But what is the other resilience, not by 
design? In this article we explore differences and mutual reliance of resilience by design and resilience by 
intervention. 

Key words: 
cyber resilience, dependability, security 

Introduction 

The term “cyber resilience by design” appears ever more frequently in the literature (Ahmadi-Assalemi et 
al. 2020; Bagchi et al. 2020; Gourisetti et al. 2019), and is a topic of this, third of a series of articles in 
this column on cyber resilience—an important attribute of system dependability. The previous two were 
(Linkov et. al. 2020) and (Kott and Linkov, 2021). 

Before we move any further, let’s orient ourselves with respect to our lexicon. Here, by cyber resilience 
we refer to the ability of the system to resist, minimize and mitigate a degradation caused by a successful 
cyber-attack on a system or network of computing and communicating devices (NRC 2012; Kott and 
Linkov, 2019). This is not the only definition of cyber resilience, but we see it as an important one, and 
will settle on it for the sake of this paper. But what does “by design” means?  

Opinions differ. Some use the term “by design” when arguing that systems must be designed and 
implemented in a provable mission assurance fashion, with the system’s intrinsic properties ensuring that 
a cyber-adversary is unable to cause a meaningful degradation (Jabbour 2019). Others envision autonomic 

 
 
 
 
 
This is a preprint version of the article that appeared as: Kott, Alexander, Maureen S. Golan, Benjamin D. 
Trump, and Igor Linkov. "Cyber Resilience: by Design or by Intervention?." Computer 54, no. 8 (2021): 
112-117. 
…………………….. 
resilience (Hariri et al. 2011) where cyber resilience is provided by reflexive, no-thinking-required actions 
of appropriate elements within the system. Yet others (Kott and Theron 2020) recommend that a system 
should include a built-in autonomous intelligent agent responsible for thinking and acting towards 
continuous observation, detection, minimization and remediation of a cyber degradation. In all cases, the 
qualifier “by design” indicates that the source of resilience is somehow inherent in the structure and 
operation of the system.  

But what, then, is the other resilience, not by design? Clearly, there has to be another type of resilience, 
otherwise what’s the purpose of the qualifier “by design”? Indeed, while mentioned less frequently, there 
exists an alternative form of resilience called “resilience by intervention” (Linkov et al. 2021). Unlike in 
the case of resilience by design (let’s abbreviate it RBD), in resilience by intervention (RBI) the effects of 
an external actor are the necessary source of resilience.   

To use a psychological analogy, most humans have some innate abilities to cope emotionally with an 
adverse effect, and to return to a pre-crisis state. Many cases, however, require an intervention by a 
professional, e.g., a therapist (Rynearson 2006). In case of a human, the distinction seems clear enough: 
resilience through self-coping mechanisms resident in the mind and body of a given individual reflects 
RBD, while engagement of an external actor – a therapist – is analogous to RBI.  But does this distinction 
make sense in the world of cyber where systems are typically distributed, networked, and have fluid, 
permeable and uncertain boundaries? How would we even define what is an “external” actor? 

Three examples 

To make our discussion more concrete, let’s introduce three examples.  

Example 1. Ms. Johnson owns a self-driving car. She purchased a service in which a third-party provider 
remotely, continuously monitors and assesses the cyber-health of her car, and issues alerts to Ms. Johnson 
if a compromise is detected. Then Ms. Johnson can take her car to any shop with cyber-repair capabilities, 
of her choice, and get the compromise eliminated. 

Example 2. Ms. Johnson owns a self-driving car. The car includes a resident software agent responsible 
for continuously monitoring all events on the car’s multiple computing devices and related internal and 
external networks; detecting and mitigating cyber compromises, and ensuring that the car can drive even 
when it is cyber-compromised. 

Example 3. Ms. Johnson often gets around by calling a self-driving cab of Robo-Cab Inc. This company 
owns a fleet of self-driving cars, controlled and serviced from a company’s depot. A depot-based system 
monitors each car, safely disables it when a compromise is suspected and sends a response team to the 
vehicle. In addition, every few hours, each car returns to depot for a thorough checkup and potential re-
imaging. 

Clearly, in each case, we find some provisions for cyber resilience. But is it RBI or RBD? Before we 
proceed with answering this question, let’s offer two perspectives on what differentiates RBI and RBD. 

Integration and Authority 

 
 
This is a preprint version of the article that appeared as: Kott, Alexander, Maureen S. Golan, Benjamin D. 
Trump, and Igor Linkov. "Cyber Resilience: by Design or by Intervention?." Computer 54, no. 8 (2021): 
112-117. 
…………………….. 
We find that differences between RBI and RBD of a given system are more clearly seen in light of two 
considerations. The first is the degree of integration of the resilience-producing elements with the rest of 
the system.  RBD is likely to be found where strong links exist between the resilience elements of the 
system and those components of the system that are responsible for producing the primary functions of 
the system. On the other hand, if the links are established occasionally and selectively based on 
circumstances, we are probably looking at RBI. 

(Parenthetically, we should mention that the term “system” in this paper refers to a socio-technical system 
consisting of technical artifacts as well as humans if and when humans are integral parts of the overall 
system; that is, the term encompasses the human, software, and hardware partitions of an information 
system. Therefore, when we refer to various capabilities of a system, those capabilities are allocated 
amongst the human, software, and hardware. Thus, when we refer to “intervention” and “external actor,” 
the intervention may be performed by a strictly technical system (e.g., the external actor being an 
automated cyber-mitigation tool), or by humans, or by a socio-technical system that combines humans 
and technical means.)   

The observation that tight integration is associated with RDB seems to be true regardless of the specific 
mechanisms by which resilience is established. In a case of a system designed with innate cyber-resilience 
properties, as advocated by (Jabbour 2019), the resilience mechanism is literally indistinguishable from 
the system’s primary functional elements; implying RBD. In the case of a built-in autonomous intelligent 
agent responsible for cyber-resilience (Kott and Theron 2020), the agent is tightly integrated within the 
system, in an RBD fashion.  

This is also true regardless of the nature of the system, be it, for example, technical or biological. For 
instance, human psychological coping mechanisms are inherent in a human, and as such illustrate RBD. A 
therapist on the other hand, is clearly not integral to the human patient, implying RBI.  

In addition, the notion of integration does not necessarily imply spatial co-location. In a distributed 
system, various functions, including those that provide resilience, may reside, say, on different computers 
networked but separated by thousands of miles. This separation in itself tells us little about RBD or RBI. 
Instead, we should explore how closely and persistently these functions rely on each other.  

The second perspective that helps differentiate between RBD and RBI is that of authority. When actions 
associated with resilience are taken, that is, actions of resisting, minimizing and mitigating a degradation 
caused by a successful cyber-attack, who has the authority to direct these actions? Who decides whether, 
when, where and how these actions are performed?  

When these decision rights are internal to the system, it does not require the permission (or direction) of 
an external actor to change system properties or reorganize itself. This authority is important in order to 
seize quickly opportunities to minimize or to recover from disruption. A system with an internal decision-
making authority is able to interpret new information within itself or its environment and adjust 
accordingly. The system benefits from avoiding potential inefficiencies or delays from waiting for an 
external actor to yield permission or direction for change.  

Conversely, a system that lacks internal decision authority has to rely on an external intervention in order 
to recover or adapt system properties or organizing characteristics. Such systems may also have 
advantages -- it is possible that external intervention comes with greater decision-making abilities and 

 
This is a preprint version of the article that appeared as: Kott, Alexander, Maureen S. Golan, Benjamin D. 
Trump, and Igor Linkov. "Cyber Resilience: by Design or by Intervention?." Computer 54, no. 8 (2021): 
112-117. 
…………………….. 
may yield greater control over the intended future of a disrupted or adapted system. External and internal 
authorities may co-exist or conflict – we will return to this point shortly.   

If the decision authority resides primarily outside of the system, we suspect RBI. If, on the other hand, the 
decisions are made primarily within the system (whether by humans or by a technical decision-making 
element), RBD is more likely. 

Referring again to the emotional crisis example, in self-coping the decisions inevitably reside with the 
human experiencing the crisis. However, when a therapist intervenes, the patient may express his or her 
wishes, but the therapist reserves the ultimate authority on how and whether to provide a treatment. This 
is characteristic of RBI.     

Back to Three Examples 

Now we are ready to return to Ms. Johnson and her means of transportation. Let us use the two 
perspectives we just discussed – integration and authority – to explore whether our three examples 
represent RBD or RBI. 

In the first example, the integration links between Ms. Johnson and her car (together they are “the 
system”) on the one hand, and the cyber-services providers are rather weak. If Ms. Johnson is unhappy 
with the service – or finds a better price – she will readily switch to another provider. She probably does 
not adapt her routine or her car to the needs of the provider; she would prefer to keep her options of 
choosing among multiple providers. Likewise, the providers are unlikely to customize their service to 
meet Ms. Johnson’s unique requirements. They might try to entice her into a long-term contract, but 
otherwise Ms. Johnson is just one of many customers. Their mutual reliance is minimal. 

And what about authority? Ms. Johnson may express her wishes, but ultimately the service providers will 
decide how they provide the service, when (e.g., “sorry, this week we are too busy”) and which specific 
processes and procedures they will use. Ms. Johnson and her car do not have much authority over these 
decisions. Let’s conclude: integration is minimal and authority is external to the system. This is RBI.  

In the second example, the resilience-producing component – a software agent responsible for monitoring 
and mitigation of compromises – is fully integrated into the overall system. It is customized or custom-
designed for the given car, and for the pattern of operations characteristic of consumers like Ms. Johnson. 
It is dedicated entirely to the car and to Ms. Johnson, and does not have much purpose outside of that 
system. The integration is tight. 

The authority for making decisions about how to monitor the cyber-state of the car, how to detect and 
analyze the compromise, and what mitigating actions to take – all resides with the agent. Granted, the 
agent will attempt to ask for Ms. Johnson’s approval in appropriate situations, but in most cases the agent 
will have to act autonomously because Ms. Johnson is unavailable or unable to make a relevant decision.  
Here we have tight integration of resilience-producing elements into the system, and decision-making 
authority residing internally in the system. This is RBD.  

However, although rare, some impacts to this cyber system may be too large, outside the scope of the 
software agent’s mitigation or repair capabilities, or cause myriad cascading impacts that require Ms. 
Johnson to seek specific service capabilities elsewhere. In these circumstances, Ms. Johnson does not 
have any prior commitments or contracts to any service providers, and the integration is loose. And 

 
This is a preprint version of the article that appeared as: Kott, Alexander, Maureen S. Golan, Benjamin D. 
Trump, and Igor Linkov. "Cyber Resilience: by Design or by Intervention?." Computer 54, no. 8 (2021): 
112-117. 
…………………….. 
although the monitoring service has authority over the vehicle under situations it is capable of mitigating, 
should Ms. Johnson require to seek services elsewhere during exceptional events, the single-job provider 
will have the onus of recovery and adaptation placed on them. They will likely collaborate or seek system 
history from Ms. Johnson’s cyber monitor, but a majority of the authority is external to the system. This 
scenario therefore is RBI. 

The third example differs significantly from the previous two. Importantly, the system under  
consideration is different. It consists of the fleet of cars and the depot. Ms. Johnson is not a part of the 
system, she is an external consumer of the services produced by the system.  

All activities related to cyber resilience are integrated within the depot-cars system. Note that the system 
is highly distributed and dynamic: the depot itself may consist of multiple physical facilities, and its 
cyber-related systems may reside on multiple computers, anywhere in the world. The cars are traveling 
over a wide geographic area, constantly changing their locations. Nevertheless, all cyber-resilience 
components and their activities are integrated within this distributed system. The depot’s resilience-
producing components (including human specialists) are designed to support the fleet of cars, and cars 
cannot operate (at least for this business model) without the depot support. 

Regarding the authority for making cyber resilience related decisions, they also reside substantially within 
the depot-cars system (including its human employees). The decisions on how to resist, minimize and 
mitigate a degradation caused by a successful cyber-attack are made by automated or human elements 
within the overall system, even if the decision may be produced in a distributed fashion between multiple 
elements of the system. Thus, we have tight integration and internal authority, implying RBD.   

Table 1. Comparison of illustrative examples and their implications for cyber resilience implementation. 

Overview 

System 

Goal 

Environment 

Integration 

Example 1 
Ms. Johnson owns self-driving car 
and has a contract with a third-party 
continuous monitoring provider 
Ms. Johnson and her car 

Ms. J & car: maintain safe mobility 
and quick recovery from 
cyberthreats  
Third-party monitoring, alerts, and 
choice of cyber-repair shop 
Loose: 
Weak link between Ms. J & repair 
process 

Authority 

Resilience 
Type 
Advantage 

External: 
Service providers decide path 
forward & responsible for repair 
outcome 

Resilience-by-intervention 

Response is more threat & impact 
dependent; resources used as needed 

Example 2 
Ms. Johnson owns self-driving car with 
a resident software agent for continuous 
monitoring. 
Ms. Johnson and her car with 
monitoring 
Ms. J & car: maintain safe mobility and 
seamless recovery from cyberthreat 

Any self-driving car shop/garage 

Tight: 
Autonomous response by software agent 
(represent Ms. J) & repair process 
Loose: 
Certain disruptions require one-time 
contracts with specialty shops 
Internal: 
Resident software agent holds 
responsibility for repair 
External: 
Specialty shop responsible for repair 
Resilience-by-design & Resilience-by-
intervention 
Response is more immediate & 
consequences may be less severe 

Example 3 
Ms. Johnson uses a self-driving car 
service with a depot-based 
continuous monitoring system 
Robo-Cab, Inc.  
(fleet of cars, depot, monitoring) 
Robo-Cab: maintain safe mobility 
for customers and seamless 
recovery from cyberthreat 
Ms. Johnson and her mobility needs 

Tight: 
Fleet, depot, and support uniquely 
designed for the distributed system 

Internal: 
Robo-Cab’s cyber-physical-human 
team hold responsibility for repair 

Resilience-by-design 

Response is more immediate & 
consequences may be less severe 

 
This is a preprint version of the article that appeared as: Kott, Alexander, Maureen S. Golan, Benjamin D. 
Trump, and Igor Linkov. "Cyber Resilience: by Design or by Intervention?." Computer 54, no. 8 (2021): 
112-117. 
…………………….. 

Disadvantage  May be too slow of a response 

Cyberthreat may adapt to & overcome 

Cyberthreat may adapt to & 
overcome 

Design and Intervention should be Complementary  

Needless to say, RBD and RBI, although different, are not incompatible. Both approaches may co-exists. 
A given system may have provisions for both RBD and RBI, although this co-existence should be 
carefully orchestrated. In particular, a clear protocol should be established for the handover of 
responsibilities between RBD mechanisms to RBI mechanisms, and back. If both RBI and RBD 
mechanisms need to operate simultaneously, a coordination protocol should ensure that their respective 
actions do not produce undesirable interference. Interactions of RBD and RBI should be specific to 
system and situation.  

Furthermore, both RBD and RBI have their disadvantages. For example, relying strictly on RBI, as in Ms. 
Johnson’s first example, may be risky. If RBI-based mitigation of a cyber compromise cannot be 
provided rapidly, she might find herself speeding on a highway in a dangerously uncontrollable car. For 
such emergency situations, it would be far safer to provide her car with an on-board RBD mechanism, 
like in example 2, even if it is less capable then comprehensive cyber-resilience service by intervention. 
As we discussed elsewhere (Kott and Theron 2020), Ms. Johnson does live in an environment where fast, 
brutal cyberattacks exist, and demand extremely fast response. Criminals or irresponsible pranksters 
might take control of Ms. Johnson’s car, and consequences can be tragic (Ring 2015). That’s why her car 
would benefit from having an onboard intelligent autonomous agent capable of taking the necessary 
resilience actions, that is, an RBD component.  

Similarly, reliance only on RBD comes with its own risks. For example, if a cyber attacker is able to 
overcome the capabilities – inevitably limited – of the RBD mechanisms, external intervention is a 
necessity. Such an intervention may come from multiple external actors, depending on the specific 
challenge of a cyber-compromise. Even if most of the external actors find themselves unable to handle the 
complex compromise, chances are relatively high that in a multiplicity of external actor, at least one is 
found who is able to deal with the challenge.  

Provisions for adding RBI to RBD, when a situation dictates, are necessary because sooner or later such a 
situation would arise. This conclusion is no by no means unique to cyber resilience. For example, in case 
of supply-chain, engineering and environmental resilience,  the use of resilience analytics facilitates the 
implementation of corrective actions from within the system and/or external to the system for a unified 
approach that maintains necessary critical function despite inevitable disruption (Golan et al. 2021; 
Linkov et al. 2021; Simchi-Levi and Simchi-Levi 2020; Trump et al. 2020).  

To conclude, the terms “cyber resilience” and “resilience by design” are gaining popularity. Occasionally 
they seem to be misused as synonyms or as a “cooler” substitute for tired terms like cyber security, with 
little concrete meaning behind them. This should not be the case.  Resilience by design is a particular type 
of cyber resilience (not to be confused with cyber security), distinct from resilience by intervention and 
perhaps other types, yet to be identified. Both types require clear definition and differentiation. To 
distinguish RBD and RBI, it is useful to examine how tightly the resilience-producing elements are 

 
 
 
This is a preprint version of the article that appeared as: Kott, Alexander, Maureen S. Golan, Benjamin D. 
Trump, and Igor Linkov. "Cyber Resilience: by Design or by Intervention?." Computer 54, no. 8 (2021): 
112-117. 
…………………….. 
integrated into the overall system, and whether the authority for making resilience-related decisions 
resides within or outside the system. Neither RBD nor RBI are a panacea, and careful integration of the 
two is likely to produce superior resilience.   

Table 2. Comparison of risk management approaches (i.e., cybersecurity), resilience-by-design, and 
resilience-by-intervention for cyber systems. 

Risk management 
Harden individual components 

Resilience-by-design 
Design components to be self-
reorganizable 

Predictable disruptions, acting 
primarily from outside the system 
components 
Vulnerable nodes and/or links fail as 
result of threat 

Either internal or external to the 
system 
Either loosely or tightly integrated 
with the system 
Prepare and absorb 
(risk is product of threat, 
vulnerability and consequences and 
is time independent) 

Either known/predictable or 
unknown disruptions, acting at a 
component or system level 
Degradation of critical functions in 
time and capacity to achieve 
system’s function 
Internal to the system 

Resilience-by-intervention 
Rectify disruption to components 
and stimulate recovery by external 
actors 
Failure in context of societal needs, 
may be constellation of networks 
across systems 
Degradation of critical societal 
function due to cascading failure in 
interconnected networks. 
External to the system 

Tightly integrated with the system 

Loosely integrated with the system 

Recover, and adapt (explicitly 
modeled as time to recover system 
function and the ability to change 
system configuration in response to 
threats) 

Prepare, absorb, recover, and adapt 
(explicitly modeled as ability to 
recover and secure critical societal 
function and needs through 
constellation of relevant systems) 

Objective 

Capability 

Consequence 

Actor 

Corrective Action 

Stages/Analytics 

References 
Ahmadi-Assalemi, G., Al-Khateeb, H., Epiphaniou, G., Maple, C. (2020). Cyber Resilience and 
Incident Response in Smart Cities: A Systematic Literature Review. Smart Cities, 3(3): 
894-927. https://doi.org/10.3390/smartcities3030046  

Bagchi, S., Aggarwal, V., Chaterji, S., Douglis, F., Gamal, A. E., et al. (2020). Vision Paper: 
Grand Challenges in Resilience: Autonomous System Resilience through Design and 
Runtime Measures. IEEE Open Journal of the Computer Society,  2020(1): 155-172. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/OJCS.2020.3006807  

Gourisetti, S. N. G., Scott, M., Michael, M., et al. (2019).  Secure Design and Development 

Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model (SD2-C2M2): Next-Generation Cyber 
Resilience by Design. Proceedings of the Northwest Cybersecurity Symposium, 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3332448.3332461  

Hariri, S., Eltoweissy, M., Al-Nashif, Y. (2011). BioRAC: biologically inspired resilient 

autonomic cloud. Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Workshop on Cyber Security and 
Information Intelligence Research, 80: 1-1. https://doi.org/10.1145/2179298.2179389  

 
 
 
This is a preprint version of the article that appeared as: Kott, Alexander, Maureen S. Golan, Benjamin D. 
Trump, and Igor Linkov. "Cyber Resilience: by Design or by Intervention?." Computer 54, no. 8 (2021): 
112-117. 
…………………….. 
Jabbour, K. (2019). The Post-GIG Era. The Cyber Defense Review, 4(2): 117-128. 
https://cyberdefensereview.army.mil/CDR-Content/Articles/Article-
View/Article/2017729/the-post-gig-era-from-network-security-to-mission-assurance/  

Golan, M. S., Trum, B. D., Cegan J. & Linkov, I. (2021). The Vaccine Supply Chain: A Call for 
Resilience Analytics to Support COVID-19 Vaccine Production and Distribution. 
COVID: Risk and Resilience. Springer International Publishing, New York, NY. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.14231  

Kott, A., Theron, P. (2020). Doers, not watchers: Intelligent autonomous agents are a path to 

cyber resilience. IEEE Security & Privacy, 18(3): 62-66. 
http://doi.org/10.1109/MSEC.2020.2983714   

Kott, A., Linkov. I., eds. (2019). Cyber Resilience of Systems and Networks. Switzerland: 

Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77492-3  

Kott, A., Linkov, I., (2021) To Improve Cyber Resilience, Measure It. Computer, 54(2), 80-85. 

https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/MC.2020.3038411 

National Research Council (NRC). (2012). Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative. 

Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/13457  

Linkov, I., Trump, B. D., Golan, M., Keisler, J. M. (2021). “Enhancing Resilience in Post-
COVID Societies: By Design or By Intervention?” Environmental Science & 
Technology, 55(8):4202-4204. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c00444  

Linkov, I., Galaitsi, S., Trump, B. D., Keisler, J. M., & Kott, A. (2020). Cybertrust: From Explainable to 

Actionable and Interpretable Artificial Intelligence. Computer, 53(9), 91-96. 

Ring, T. (2015). Connected cars – the next target for hackers. Network Security, 2015(11): 11-

16. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1353-4858(15)30100-8  

Rynearson, E. K., ed. Violent death: Resilience and intervention beyond the crisis. New York, 

NY: Routledge, 2006. ISBN: 0-415-95323-5. 

Simchi-Levi, D., and Simchi-Levi, E. (2020). We Need a Stress Test for Critical Supply Chains. 

Harvard Business Review. 28 April 2020. https://hbr-
org.cdn.ampproject.org/c/s/hbr.org/amp/2020/04/we-need-a-stress-test-for-critical-
supply-chains  

Trump, B. D., Linkov, T., Hynes, W. (2020). Combine Resilience and Efficiency in Post-COVID 

Societies. Nature, 588(220). https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-03482-z  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is a preprint version of the article that appeared as: Kott, Alexander, Maureen S. Golan, Benjamin D. 
Trump, and Igor Linkov. "Cyber Resilience: by Design or by Intervention?." Computer 54, no. 8 (2021): 
112-117. 
…………………….. 
Author Bios 
ALEXANDER KOTT is the Chief Scientist with the U.S. Army DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, 
Adelphi, Maryland. Contact him at alexander.kott1.civ@mail.mil. 

BENJAMIN D. TRUMP is a research social scientist with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Engineer 
Research and Development Center, Concord, Massachusetts. Contact him at  
benjamin.d.trump@usace.army.mil. 

MAUREEN S. GOLAN is a research engineer with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Engineer 
Research and Development Center, Concord, Massachusetts. Contact her at maureengolan@gmail.com. 

IGOR LINKOV is a Senior Science and Technology Manager with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ 
Engineer Research and Development Center, Concord, Massachusetts. Contact him at 
Igor.linkov@usace.army.mil. 

DISCLAIMER 

The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as 
representing the policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of their employers. The U.S. 
government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for government purposes, 
notwithstanding any copyright annotations thereon. Certain commercial entities, equipment, or 
materials may be identified in this document to describe an experimental procedure or concept 
adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the 
authors or their employers, nor is it intended to imply that the entities, materials, or equipment are 
necessarily the best available for the purpose. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
