Evaluation of Cyber Attacks Targeting Internet Facing IoT: An Experimental 
Evaluation 

Navod Neranjan Thilakrathne 1,* , Dr. Rohan Samarasinghe 2 , Madhuka Priyashan3 

1,2Department of ICT, Faculty of Technology, University of Colombo 

3 Department of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, 
University of Ruhuna, Galle, Sri Lanka 

navod.neranjan@ict.cmb.ac.lk* 

Abstract: The rapid growth of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in the 21st 
century has resulted in the emergence of a novel technological paradigm; known as the Internet 
of Things, or  IoT. The IoT, which is at the heart of today's smart infrastructure, aids in the 
creation of a ubiquitous network of things by simplifying interconnection between smart digital 
devices  and  enabling  Machine  to  Machine  (M2M)  communication.  As  of  now,  there  are 
numerous examples of IoT use cases available, assisting every person in this world towards 
making their lives easier and more convenient. With the latest advancement of IoT in variety 
of domains such as healthcare, smart city, smart agriculture it has led to an exponential growth 
of  cyber-attacks  that  targets  these  pervasive  IoT  environments,  which  can  even  lead  to 
jeopardizing  the  lives  of  peoples;  that  are  involving  with  it.  In  general,  this  IoT  can  be 
considered  as  every  digital  object  that  is  connected  to  the  Internet  for  intercommunication. 
Hence in this regard in order to analyse cyber threats that come through the Internet, here we 
are doing an experimental evaluation to analyse the requests, received to exploit the opened 
Secure Shell (SSH) connection service of an IoT device,  which in our case a Raspberry Pi 
devices, which connected to the Internet for more than six consecutive days. By opening the 
SSH service on Raspberry Pi, it acts as a Honeypot device where we can log and retrieve all 
login  attempt  requests  received  to  the  SSH  service  opened.  Inspired  by  evaluating  the  IoT 
security  attacks that target  objects  in  the pervasive  IoT environment,  after retrieving  all the 
login requests that made through the open SSH connection we then provide a comprehensive 
analysis along with our observations about the origin of the requests  and the focus areas of 
intruders ; in this study. 

Keywords: IoT, Cyber-attack, Honeypot, Cyber security, Internet security 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Background 

With the rapid advancement of IoT, it is being widely integrated and applied in with, many application 
domains for instance military, agriculture, smarty city, surveillance, healthcare, and so on, offering a 
wide variety of benefits for the goodness of mankind. This recent advancement of IoT, made it a fast-
growing technology conquering all other technologies present, creating a huge impact on the society as 
well as many of the business operations [1]-[5]. The IoT has gradually permeated most of the aspects 
of human life such as medical care, agriculture, military, and so on, making the technology affordable 
for everyone [6]-[10]. In recent years, owing to the rapid demand and various socio-economic factors 
the number of IoT devices, that are commissioned has shown an exponential growth making this IoT is 
a part of our daily life. On the other hand, this also poses another doubt about robust security approaches 
in  response  to  this  rapid  demand  over  the  years,  as  the  number  of  cyber-attacks  that  target  digital 
infrastructure becomes more robust, intuitive, and complex owing to the vast threat landscape. Not only 
that but it is also evident that the number of potential attackers is also increasing with novel sophisticated 
tools and techniques, which clearly necessitates the implementation of appropriate security measures 
[1],[10]-[15]. Inspired by analyzing these IoT security attacks that target digital objects in the pervasive 
IoT environment, in this study we do an experimental evaluation to set up a Honeypot IoT devices using 
Raspberry  Pi  devices  along  with  open  source  technologies  and  we  will  keep  open  the  Secure  Shell 
(SSH) connection service of Raspberry Pi for more than six consecutive days to log all the requests, 
that is received via the open SSH service, that are coming to the internal network, from the outside 
Internet.  

When it comes to a Honeypot it looks and functions exactly like a genuine computer system, including 
all  programs  and  data,  deceiving  hackers  into  believing  it  as  a  legitimate  target.  A  honeypot,  for 
example, may imitate a company's customer billing system, which is a common target for intruders 
looking  for  credit  card  data  [1]-[3].  Once  the  hackers  have  gained  access,  their  activities  may  be 
recorded and analysed for clues on how to make the real network more secure and resilient which is 
highly beneficial for further research and security product development. On the other hand, honeypots 
are made appealing to attackers by including intentional security flaws, which is the exact theory that 
our  research  is  built  upon.  For  example,  it  may  include  ports  that  respond  to  a  port  scan  or  weak 
passwords. Then to attract attackers into the honeypot environment, vulnerable ports may be left open 
so  attackers  will  lure  into  the  honeypot  instead  of  the  real  system  [18]-[20].  By  monitoring  traffic 
coming into the honeypot system, we can assess; where the cybercriminals are coming from (01), the 
level of threat (02), what data or applications they are interested in (03), and how well the security 
measures are working to against towards stopping cybercriminals (04). 

Based on the literature it is evident that; there are already studies available about this honeypot where 
several reviews /surveys have also been done [3]-[10]. On the other hand variety of research has also 
been carried out about implementing honeypot systems and then using artificial intelligence towards 
identifying threats. But in our study, we intend to use a cost-effective devices and open source freely 
available  technologies  towards  making  an  IoT  honeypot  device  to  assess  the  threats  and  derive 
conclusions for further research [15]-[20]. Nevertheless, in the literature;  there was less research has 
done about IoT honeypot architecture and assessments hence we believe our research experiment would 
be useful for carrying out further research in this area.  

In order to represent our research work the rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section two (02) 
describes the objectives of our study and section (03) depict our methodology. After that in section four 
(04), we highlight our results and finally, we conclude our paper with the conclusion section. 

 
 
2.  Objectives 

The main objective of our research is to analyse the cyber-attacks that target typical IoT objects in the 
pervasive IoT environment using a really simple cost-effective setup, and have an exact idea about what 
these external intruders are trying to do along with their origin source, when it comes to exploiting a 
remote  IoT  device,  in  a typical  IoT  network;  and  then  suggest  recommendations  for  stopping  these 
threats and future research. 

3.  Methodology 

For setting up the research environment; configuration and the environmental setup were done and it 
comprised of four (04) key steps as follows. 

1.  First, for setting up the IoT honeypot device, in an internet-facing network; a Raspberry Pi 

derive is used which has the pre-configured Raspberry Pi OS. 

2.  Secondly  in  order  to  make  our  Raspberry  Pi  module  a  honeypot;  an  open-source  SSH 
Pluggable  Authentication  Module  (PAM)  is  set  up  on  the  device  (For  setting  the 
authentication of OS), which is an open source software package freely available on GitHub. 
3.  Next after implementing the PAM module an open-source portable OpenSSH is configured 
on the Raspberry Pi device, which is also an open source software package freely available 
on GitHub. (This OpenSSH is a complete implementation of the SSH protocol (version 2) for 
secure remote login, command execution, and file transfer) 

4.  Then upon the completion of all these configurations, all the login requests that may receive 
from external parties are configured to log in to the PAM database by default which is in the 
Raspberry device, where we can use them for our analysis task using a Microsoft SQL server 
database collating them into a single CSV file, afterward. 

5.  For better understanding the Fig. 1 depicts the high-level architecture of our honeypot setup. 

After setting all these configurations, the SSH service which is set up on the Raspberry Pi kept open all 
the time. Then we connected the Raspberry Pi device with the internet via a broadband router and it 
was the  sole device  that  is  connected  to  the  Internet.   The  Internet  connection itself  was  a  standard 
residential broadband ADSL service.  Finally, the configured IoT SSH honeypot was kept online for 
over  six  (06)  days  of  time  and  afterward  logs  were  taken  out  and  imported  to  the  local  computers 
Microsoft SQL server database for further analysis. 

Fig. 1 The IoT Honeypot architecture 

 
 
 
4.  Results 

The SSH service which is set up on the Raspberry Pi was running all the time and was the sole device 
on the Internet connection. The Internet connection itself was a standard residential broadband ADSL 
service.    Finally,  the  configured  IoT  SSH  honeypot was  kept  online for  over six  (06)  days  of  time. 
During the time we witnessed a total of 105764 logging attempts. While further breaking down all these 
requests; the interesting thing what we noted was the vast majority of requests came from  four (04) 
major hosts (sources), which accounted for  90175 requests on the whole. (around 85% from all the 
requests). The Fig. 2 depicts the analysis based on the dispersion of the requests based on geographic 
area. 

Dispersion of the requests based on the geographic 
area (based on the IP) - Top 05 only

n
o
i
t
a
c
o
L

United States

Russia

France

United Arab Emirates

China

0

10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 70,000 80,000 90,000 100,000

No of requests

Fig. 2 Dispersion of the requests based on the geographic area (based on the IP) - Top 05 only 

Most of these hosts were attempting to exploit the credentials and they were carrying out a dictionary 
attack on the root user. The following is a list of the top 20 users that were attempted in order to exploit 
the login via the open SSH service. 

root -  101634 
admin - 967 

 
 
  0 - 98 
  pi - 87 
 
test - 76 
  user - 74 
 
support - 33 
  odroid - 28 
 
ftpuser - 26 
  postgres - 25 
  ubnt - 24 
  guest - 23 
  ubuntu - 18 

 
 
 
  Administrator - 16 
 
ftp - 14 
  oracle - 14 
  vagrant - 14 
  webmaster - 14 
 
  dietpi - 13 

administrator - 13 

Then in the following, we depict the passwords that were attempted. The following is the list of the top 
20 passwords we have noted. 

administrator  

admin  

 
  0  
  123456  
  password  
  1234  
 
raspberry  
 
root  
  ubnt  
 
  welc0me  
  guest  
  openelec  
 
test  
  pi  
 
alpine  
  default  
  12345  
  postgres  
 
alex  
 
ftpuser  

Based on the results of this simple experiment, following are the recommendations and conclusions that 
we have derived from our research. 

 

It is evident that most of the intruder sources are dispersed around China which accounts for 
more than 85% of the exploitation attacks, which we can clearly say most of the attackers are 
located in China which we needed to be aware of. 

  Followed by China we have the United Arab Emirates, France, Russia and Unites states in the 
top list, which these malicious hosts are based on; whereas the number of requests received to 
our honeypot were negligible from these sources as opposed to the amount of requests that were 
received from China. 

  Based on most of the dictionary attacks performed it is evident that most of the attackers are 
trying to exploit the default user names or passwords (factory fitted username and password). 
For  instance,  the  default  username  and  password  for  Kali  Linux  distribution  are  root  and 
toor. For some other distributions, it is admin and admin for both username and password. 

More examples (See the Table 1 below): 

 
Table 1. More examples for default credentials of IoT devices 

Username 
admin 
admin 
guest 
guest 

Password 
password 
12345 
password 
12345 

So we can clearly assume all these external attacks that target these IoT devices are trying to find a 
simple vulnerability from the end-users end. (e.g.: not changing the default user name and password 
and keep open the device connection for the internet), where it would be the easiest way for attackers 
to exploit your IoT devices for planting malware, used in a botnet for performing Distributed Denial of 
Service  (DDOS)  attacks,  or  performing  other  types  of  malicious  attacks.  Hence  based  on  these 
conclusions what we can recommend is, it is always advisable to use a reliable antivirus in your personal 
commuter or smart mobile device .where it would hinder the path of attackers towards infecting your 
device. On the other hand end users needed to be vigilant for their operating system, inbuilt firewall 
activities as some software’s may change the configurations on these firewall settings especially with 
Microsoft window 8, 8.1, and 10 operating systems,   as even your smart mobile device or personal 
computer can act as an IoT device. On the other hand, when it comes to other types of IoT devices such 
as smart TV, webcams, surveillance cameras, and routers it is more advisable to change the factory 
fitted default user names and passwords as it would make it super easy for attackers to intrude into the 
system. At last but not least whenever you are connecting with the internet it is advisable to think that 
you are one step close towards getting hacked. 

Recommendations  

a)  For policy makers and planners 

Protecting user privacy is a vital element nowadays owing to the increasing cyber threats that 
come through the Internet. Whenever a user connects an IoT device to the Internet if the device 
is not safe or if the user is unaware of the security and privacy of themselves it would make a 
perfect gap for cybercriminals to access. Hence the security software developers and relevant 
stakeholders can take appropriate actions towards protecting their user’s privacy even the user 
is not aware about any of the things. 

b)  For researchers  

In this study we have made a simple and a cost effective IoT honeypot architecture for analysing 
threats that target IoT devices in the pervasive IoT devices and implemented it by connecting 
to the Internet. Hence this would make a good avenue for future researchers to carry out further 
research  making  our  study  as  a  foundation  as  there  are  less  research  has  been  carried  out 
targeting IoT ecosystem. 

5.  Conclusion  

Inspired by evaluating the IoT security attacks that target objects in the pervasive IoT environment, we 
have configured a simple cost effective IoT honeypot architecture and we then provide a comprehensive 
analysis of requests received along with our observations and recommendations; in this study. Based 
on our analysis it is evident that leaving services such as SSH open can result in a large number of 
malicious requests.  Hence the users need to be sure to lock down any ports you do not require; from 
the firewall regardless of their operating system. All these external attacks that target these IoT devices 

 
 
 
 
are trying to finding a simple vulnerability and if the end-users are not aware of any of the things (not 
changing the default user name and password and keep open the connection for the internet), it would 
be the easiest way to attackers to exploit your IoT devices such as your smart watch, desktop computer, 
and laptop device and etc. Thus we believed this study would be useful for anyone, who seeks to protect 
their  digital  privacy.  On  the  other  hand  in  this  study,  we  have  showcased  a  simple  IoT  honeypot 
architecture and demonstrated its ability by connecting with the real Internet, where this would be highly 
useful for carrying out further research.  

References 

1.  Abomhara,  M.,  &  Køien,  G.  M.  (2015).  Cyber  security  and  the  internet  of  things: 
vulnerabilities, threats, intruders and attacks. Journal of Cyber Security and Mobility, 65-88. 
2.  Soe, Y. N., Feng, Y., Santosa, P. I., Hartanto, R., & Sakurai, K. (2020). Towards a lightweight 
detection  system  for  cyber  attacks  in  the  IoT  environment  using  corresponding  features. 
Electronics, 9(1), 144. 

3.  Stellios, I., Kotzanikolaou, P., Psarakis, M., Alcaraz, C., & Lopez, J. (2018). A survey of iot-
enabled  cyberattacks:  Assessing  attack  paths  to  critical  infrastructures  and  services.  IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 20(4), 3453-3495. 

4.  Radanliev, P., De Roure, D., Cannady, S., Montalvo, R. M., Nicolescu, R., & Huth, M. (2018). 
Economic  impact  of  IoT  cyber  risk-analysing  past  and  present  to  predict  the  future 
developments in IoT risk analysis and IoT cyber insurance. 

5.  Thilakarathne, N. N. (2021). Review on the Use of ICT Driven Solutions Towards Managing 

Global Pandemics. Journal of ICT Research & Applications, 14(3). 

6.  Soe, Y. N., Feng, Y., Santosa, P. I., Hartanto, R., & Sakurai, K. (2020). Towards a lightweight 
detection  system  for  cyber-attacks  in  the  IoT  environment  using  corresponding  features. 
Electronics, 9(1), 144. 

7.  Dvorkin,  Y.,  &  Garg,  S.  (2017,  September).  IoT-enabled  distributed  cyber-attacks  on 
transmission and distribution grids. In 2017 North American Power Symposium (NAPS) (pp. 
1-6). IEEE. 

8.  Genge, B., & Enăchescu, C. (2016). ShoVAT: Shodan‐based vulnerability assessment tool for 

Internet‐facing services. Security and communication networks, 9(15), 2696-2714. 

9.  Bodenheim,  R.  C.  (2014).  Impact  of  the  Shodan  computer  search  engine  on  internet-facing 
industrial control system devices. AIR FORCE INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY WRIGHT-
PATTERSON  AFB  OH  GRADUATE  SCHOOL  OF  ENGINEERING  AND 
MANAGEMENT. 

10.  Quinkert, F., Leonhardt, E., & Holz, T. (2019). Dorkpot: A honeypotbased analysis of google 
dorks. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Measurements, Attacks, and Defenses for the Web 
(MADWeb ‘19), San Diego, CA. 

11.  Pelizzi, R., Tran, T., & Saberi, A. (2011). Large-scale, automatic xss detection using google 
dorks.  Stony  Brook  University,  Department  of  Computer  Science.  URL:  http://www3.  cs. 
stonybrook. edu/~ rpelizzi/gdorktr. pdf (besucht am 23.06. 2016). 

12.  Thilakarathne,  N.  N.  (2020).  Security  and  privacy  issues  in  iot  environment.  International 

Journal of Engineering and Management Research, 10. 

13.  Kagita, M. K., Thilakarathne, N., Gadekallu, T. R., Maddikunta, P. K. R., & Singh, S. (2020). 

A review on cyber crimes on the Internet of Things. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.05708. 

14.  Kagita, M. K., Thilakarathne, N., Gadekallu, T. R., & Maddikunta, P. K. R. (2020). A review 

on security and privacy of internet of medical things. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.05394. 

15.  Thilakarathne,  N.  N.,  &  Wickramaaarachchi,  D.  (2020).  Improved  hierarchical  role  based 

access control model for cloud computing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.07764. 

 
16.  Kagita,  M.  K.,  Thilakarathne,  N.,  Rajput,  D.  S.,  &  Lanka,  D.  S.  (2020).  A  Detail  Study  of 

Security and Privacy issues of Internet of Things. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.06341. 

17.  Thilakarathne, N. N., Kagita, M. K., & Priyashan, W. M. (2022). Green Internet of Things: The 
Next  Generation  Energy  Efficient  Internet  of  Things.  In  Applied  Information  Processing 
Systems (pp. 391-402). Springer, Singapore. 

18.  Nawrocki, M., Wählisch, M., Schmidt, T. C., Keil, C., & Schönfelder, J. (2016). A survey on 

honeypot software and data analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.06249. 

19.  Nawrocki, M., Wählisch, M., Schmidt, T. C., Keil, C., & Schönfelder, J. (2016). A survey on 

honeypot software and data analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.06249. 

20.  Pouget, F., & Dacier, M. (2004, May). Honeypot-based forensics. In AusCERT Asia Pacific 

Information Technology Security Conference. 

 
 
