Intl. Journal on Cyber Situational Awareness, Vol. 6, No. 1, 2021 

Multidimensional Cybersecurity Framework for 

Strategic Foresight 

Cyril Onwubiko1,2 and Karim Ouazzane3 
1Enterprise Security Architecture, Chief Information Security Office (CISO), Pearson Plc 
2Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain & Cyber Security, Research Series, London, UK 
3Cyber Security Centre, London Metropolitan University, London, UK 

ABSTRACT 
Cybersecurity is now at the forefront of most organisations’ digital transformative agendas and National 
economic, social and political programmes. Hence its impact to society can no longer be seen to be 
one  dimensional.  The  rise  in  National  cybersecurity  laws  and  regulations  is  a  good  indicator  of  its 
perceived  importance  to  nations.  And  the  recent  awakening  for  social  and  ethical  transparency  in 
society  and  coupled  with  sustainability  issues  demonstrate  the  need  for  a  paradigm  shift  in  how 
cybersecurity discourses can now happen. In response to this shift, a multidimensional cybersecurity 
framework for strategic foresight underpinned on situational awareness is proposed. The conceptual 
cybersecurity framework comprising six domains – Physical, Cultural, Economic, Social, Political and 
Cyber – is discussed. The guiding principles underpinning the framework are outlined, followed by in-
depth  reflection  on  the  Business,  Operational,  Technological  and  Human  (BOTH)  factors  and  their 
implications for strategic foresight for cybersecurity. 

Keyword: Multidimensional Cybersecurity Framework, Geo-politics, Social, Culture, Economic, Cyber, 
Physical, Situational Awareness, Foresight, Business, Operational, Technological and Human Factors 

I. 

Introduction 

Cybersecurity  is  now  an  enterprise,  national,  global  and  societal  priority,  an  utmost  priority  for  that 
matter. Emerging cybersecurity discourse and debates permeate society, whether it is in guiding against 
false  news  and  misinformation  in  social  media  networks  and  platforms,  or  regulating  Blockchain  to 
sustainability  (Environmental,  Social  and  Governance  (ESG))  concerns,  or  ethical  use  of  Artificial 
Intelligence  (AI)  to  enacting  new  National  cybersecurity  laws,  and  data  privacy  directives  and 
regulations. These developments correlate with the increasing number of countries creating their own 
National  cybersecurity  strategies  (e.g.,  UK  Cybersecurity  2021,  US  National  Cyber  2018,  Finland 
Cybersecurity 2019, Australia Cybersecurity 2020), and regional national cybersecurity centres (e.g., 
the  European  National  Information  Security  Agency  (ENISA),  ASEAN1  Cyber  Capacity  Programme, 
and ASEAN-Japan Cybersecurity Capacity Building Centre etc.). And the growing national and regional 
data privacy regulatory derivatives (e.g., European GDPR), national cybersecurity laws (e.g., Chinese 
Cyber Security Law) in part, to protect themselves, their intellectual property from cyber espionage and 
foreign State interference in the rule of law and governance. In the other part, to foster a secure and 
safe  cyberspace  to  conduct  businesses  and  to  attract  human  capital,  talent  pipeline  and  bolstering 
innovation and economic potential and opportunities. 

Strategic vision for cybersecurity as a business decision attempts to balance protection needs with the 
desired business outcomes (Proctor and Sampath, 2020), and understanding that it can no longer be 
solved through technical approaches alone is equally as important. Cybersecurity approaches aimed 
only at the technical and operational levels have been shown to be inefficient in countering emerging 
cyber threats (Gandhi R. et al., 2011, Ikwu R. et al., 2017, Nakhla N. et al., 2017), and the best defenses 
are  found  to  be  both technical  and  organisational  (Marotta  A.,  and  Pearlson  K.,  2019).  According  to 
David  Koh,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Cyber  Security  Agency  (CSA),  “Cybersecurity  can  no  longer  be 
considered merely a technical issue, but has spilled over to the geopolitical realm. Critical technologies 
and  communications  infrastructure,  to  emergent  ones  such  as  5G,  cloud  computing,  artificial 

1 ASEAN – Association of Southeast Asian Nations 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 

intelligence, and quantum computing, and the associated cyber risks they portend, provide conduits to 
impact  a  country’s  National  security,  economic  progress,  and  societal  values.”  (Koh,  2020).  In 
recognition that cybersecurity is now a societal priority, the United Nations agreed 11 consensus norms 
of  responsible  State  behaviour  in  cyberspace,  articulated  in  the  2015  U.N.  Group  of  Governmental 
Experts (GGE) report (U.N. GGE, 2015).  

It is in response to these current debates and realities that we propose a multidimensional cybersecurity 
framework to extend the realms of coverage to include Physical, Cultural, Economic, Social, Political 
and Cyber dimensions. 

The contributions of this paper are: 

1.  We propose and explain a multidimensional cybersecurity framework comprising six domains, 

namely Physical, Cultural, Economic, Social, Political and Cyber. 

2.  We  outline  the  foundational  principles  underpinning  our  multidimensional  framework,  and 
through a derivative of Business, Operational, Technological and Human (BOTH) factors we 
reflect on strategic foresight in cybersecurity through these viewpoints. 

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: Section II discusses motivation for the research 
and  related  contributions  in  the  literature.  Key  terminologies  used  in  the  paper  are  defined,  and 
methodologies  applied  in  the  work  are  outlined.  Section  III  explains  our  proposed  multidimensional 
cybersecurity framework. It discusses the key principles applied in the research, and provides an in-
depth discussion of the Business, Operational, Technological and Human factors. Section IV compares 
intra-domain  and  inter-domain  cybersecurity  situational  awareness  and  their  relevance;  finally, 
conclusions and recommendations for future work are presented in Section V. 

II. 

Background 

A.  Motivation 

The purpose of a National or organisational cyber programme is to design, build and embed a robust 
cybersecurity practice for a nation or an organisation that allows its citizens or stakeholders to conduct 
business in a secure and safe manner that bodes trust for the nation or organisation and its stakeholders 
in the ecosystem (i.e., citizens, allies, clients, partners and supply chain). To achieve this purpose, the 
cyber programme must understand the business operatives of the nation or organisation, the risks it 
bears, the threats it faces, and most importantly, the business requirements and responsibilities of the 
nation or organisation. This is very much so that the cybersecurity capabilities being deployed by the 
programme  are  relevant,  efficient  and  achieves  the  set  goals.  With  the  many  objectives  that  an 
organisation  may  have,  its  overarching  cybersecurity  goal  is  to  ensure  that  Data,  Applications  and 
business and information Assets and Services (DAAS) of the organisation are appropriately protected. 
It should also have moral, ethical, and socio-economic (and socio-political for a government or National 
cybersecurity programme) responsibilities of the security of the products and services it offers, and the 
supply  chain  and  partners  in  which  it conducts  businesses  with. Finally,  it  should  have  sustainability 
(environmental, social and governance) responsibility of the impacts its products and services have to 
society at large. 

To some organisations, protection is focused on procuring expensive technical and operational cyber 
defence  tools.  We  argue  that  this  approach  does  not  offer  comprehensive  protection  needed  for 
emerging cyber threats and attacks. According to several contributions e.g. (Ikwu R., 2017, Gandhi R. 
et  al.,  2011),  cyber  defense  approaches  centered  only  around  technical  and  operational  dimensions 
are inefficient, incapable and limited. 

Our approach to cyber defense is holistic and multidimensional encompassing not only technical and 
operational, but also social, cultural, political and physical dimensions. This means ensuring that there 
are trained and capable people, robust processes, social and technical capabilities to identify, prevent, 
detect, monitor, respond and recover from cyber-attacks and cyber incidents. Economic and political 
dimensions  such  as  geo-political,  regulatory  and  sanctions-based  controls  to  deter  and  enforce 
adherence  and  compliance.  Furthermore,  we  emphasise  on  the  concerted  efforts  for  the  technical, 
socio-cultural and human capabilities to be integrated and responsive. Economic and political controls 
to  be  coordinated,  while  technical  and  operational  capabilities  to  be  automated.  Our  proposal  for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 

human-in-the-loop  for  cybersecurity  management  and  decision  making  is  to  provide  strategic  cyber-
foresight. 

B.  Related Work 

The seminal work of Mica Endsley on situational awareness (Endsley, 1995) is regarded as the pivotal 
point for this field of study, and since then, situational awareness has been applied to several areas 
e.g., safety, security and transportation. Situational awareness has also been applied in cybersecurity, 
vehicular  networks,  aviation  and  social  media  analytics  (Onwubiko  C.,  2016,  Eiza  M.  H.,  2017). 
Situational awareness is ideal for understanding organisational and human factors  aspects that offer 
insights on human operator decision making (e.g., cognition, teamwork, knowledge, skills and abilities). 
We  see  this  to  be  pertinent  in  this  paper,  especially  in  gaining  ‘understanding’  of  the  relationships 
through humans-in-the-loop, who understand and have experience of cybersecurity assessment, major 
incident management, geo-politics, cyber economics and cyber physical systems. These humans-in-
the-loop  leverage  technology,  automation  and  integration  combined  with  their  experience,  skills  and 
knowledge to gain cyber foresight. Furthermore, the interdependence and  inter-dimensionality of the 
multiple domains e.g., physical, cultural, economic, social, political and cyber that should be considered 
in order that enhanced situational awareness across the domains can be achieved. 

Cyber defence tools are not a ‘silver bullet’, and do not solve all the cybersecurity problems themselves. 
For example, cyber defence tools such as firewalls or intrusion detection systems are unable to solve 
cybersecurity procedural or human factors problems. They are as efficient as the people who use them 
to monitor business services, follow up on incidents and conduct incident triage. The tools may offer 
cues  and  prompts  which  the  human  operators,  such  as  Cyber  Security  Operations  Centre  (CSOC) 
administrators and analysts should investigate. Often these cues are symptomatic - an expression of a 
likelihood of something, rather than an explicit indication, therefore, human expertise and experience 
are very much required. The cues which are provided by the monitoring systems may be in the form of 
alerts, alarms, events etc. These intelligences will need to be analysed and decision on possible cause 
of action (CoA) will be down to humans to make. 

A cross-domain CyberSA framework was proposed by (Hall M. J., Hansen D. D., and Jones K., 2015), 
which focused on data, information and intelligence but within a single domain (Cyber Domain). Their 
concept  of  domain  relates  to  data,  information,  knowledge,  intelligence.  Similarly,  the  Australian 
Government’s  Cyber  Security  Centre  (Australian  ACSC,  2015)  provides  guidance  for  Cross-Domain 
solution on how to connect systems of different business impact levels, and security classifications e.g., 
OFFICIAL, SECRET & TOP SECRET. Equally, the focus of that guidance was specifically on impact 
levels rather than domains in the sense of different realms. 

We argue that data, information, knowledge and intelligence are ‘layers’ as opposed to domains. Our 
use of domain in this paper relates to Physical, Cultural, Economic, Social, Political and Cyber. These 
are distinct realms that are governed by specific laws, attributes, and intrinsically and extrinsically by 
unique features, like the traditional domains, for example, Land, Sea, Air and Space. We refer to data, 
information,  knowledge  and  intelligence  as  layers  that  exist  within  a  single  domain.  Data  can  be 
collected from the physical, cultural, economic, social, political or cyber domains. For example: 

●  Data relating to the physical domain, may be temperature, humidity and the HVAC (heating, 

ventilating, and air conditioning) of the data centre, environment or location. 

●  Data relating to cultural domain may be human actions, such as decisions made by operators 
of  the  systems,  their  reaction  to  a  cyber  incident  and  how  quickly  they  invoked  incident 
response playbook. 

●  Data relating to economic domain may be related to business models about business outcome 
or  stock  market  in  the  event  of  a  negative  publicity  resulting  from  cyber  incident  or  security 
breach. 

●  Data relating to social domain may be related to diversity, equity and inclusion of the workforce 
e.g., operators of the systems. The more diverse they are, the better their collective intelligence, 
and hence better response approach and playbook. 

●  Data relating to political domain may be how citizens and corporations react to a new piece of 
legislation or policy, or how a sovereign nation reacts to when it finds out that a recent cyber 
incident it suffered was conducted by a hostile nation. 

●  Data  relating  to  cyber  domain  may  be  related  to  cyber  incidents  to  digital  and  online 

infrastructures. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
49 

It is pertinent to note that the six (6) domains are interdependent and interwoven (See fig. 1). Take for 
example, the Physical Domain and the Cyber Domain are interdependent, and their intersection has 
borne a class of new systems referred to as the Cyber Physical Systems (CPS). Similarly, there are 
socioeconomic, geopolitical, sociopolitical and sociocultural systems, and many others, this is just to 
show the various interdependencies across the domains. 

C.  Definitions 

Cybersecurity is the protection of information, data, communications and the underlying infrastructures 
that are used to process, store and transit information and data. It is about ensuring confidentiality and 
integrity  of  the  information  and  data  it  processes  and/or  stores,  and  the  availability  thereof  to  the 
appropriate/legitimate owners and users of the system. It has been defined in several complementary 
ways,  such  as  an  enabler  for  the  advancement  and  growth  of  economic  and  social  prosperity,  see 
(Finnish Cyber Security Strategy, 2010, UK Cyber Security Strategy, 2021, NATO CCD COE, 2015). 

Cyber  defence  is  defined  with  respect  to  offensive  and  defensive  capabilities,  that  is,  the  ability  to 
defend, stop and counter cyber-attacks and threats through cyber means for resilience, recovery and 
business continuity. Cyber defense is more akin to military and agency cyber programme where the 
capability to prevent has more emphasis than detection and response. It is important to note that these 
terms are occasionally used interchangeably in the literature, (see, DoD MNE7, 2013). 

According to (Dictionary Online, 2019), foresight is defined as “knowledge or insight gained by or as by 
looking forward; a view of the future”. Similarly, the (Oxford Dictionary, 2019), defines foresight as “the 
ability to predict what will happen or be needed in the future”.  Based on these definitions of foresight, 
we  define  Cyber  foresight  (a.k.a.  Cybersecurity  foresight)  as  the  ability  to  understand  current  cyber 
situations  or  circumstances  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  predict  and  address  future  or  emerging 
cybersecurity situations. By this definition, cyber foresight encompasses knowledge, understanding, or 
insight into the current cyber situations or circumstances with a view to predicting future cyber situations. 
Cyber  situations  include  cyber  threats,  cybersecurity  attacks,  cyber  risks  and  cyber  issues,  such  as 
vulnerabilities, exploits, security incidents, data breaches and cybercrime. 

Cyber Situational Awareness (Cyber SA) has been defined in many ways in relation to cybersecurity, 
cyber defense, and cyber operations (see, Tadda G. P., and Salerno J. S., 2010, Cumiford D. L., 2006). 
We adopt the definition of Cyber SA provided by Onwubiko and Owens (Onwubiko C. & Owens J.T., 
2011), which states that “situational awareness is the ability of being aware of circumstances that exist 
around us, especially those that are particularly relevant to us and which we are  interested about. It 
encompasses  the  prediction  of  future  states  or  impending  states  because  of  the  knowledge  (which 
could include new information) and understanding of current states”.  

Based on these definitions, one would argue that there exists an overlap between Cyber Foresight and 
Cyber SA. Also, we believe that both are congruent and complementary. This is because both seeks 
understanding and insight with the ability to predict. It would not be surprising if ‘cyber foresight’ and 
‘cyber situational awareness’ are used interchangeably in certain contexts and application. 

D.  Research Methodology 

The  following  research  methods  are  applied  in  this  paper  to  investigate  multidimensional  situation-
aware security framework: 

●  Attribute Listing: We use attribute listing to enumerate the domains considered for the proposed 
multidimensional  framework  (see  Section  III  and  Fig.  3).  Attribute  listing  is  a  research  and 
innovative methodology formulated in the early 1930s that allows all possible attributes/features 
of an object or a thing to be listed; including smaller aspects of the object that would ordinarily 
not been considered in conventional listing. By doing so, it allows for innovative understanding 
and discovery of some aspects of the existing object to be revealed or uncovered which would 
ordinarily  would  have  been  unknown,  hence  the  newly  discovered  attributes  can  then  be 
combined  in  new  ways  that  were  not  known  prior  to  develop  new  products,  gain  a  greater 
understanding of existing objects or to innovate and extend the functionality of existing objects. 
●  PEST  Analysis:  We  use  PEST  (Political,  Economic,  Social  and  Technological)  Analysis  to 
conduct impact assessment of the Business Factors of the proposed framework as discussed 
in Section III C3 (see Table 1) of the paper.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 

●  Human Factors: We use Human Factors Analysis and Requirements Elicitation Method (see 
Section III B) to investigate Human Factors of the framework, which is discussed in Section III 
C4 of this paper. 

●  Theory of Work Adjustments (TWA): We apply and discuss in Section III C4 in relation to Human 
Factors and the SOC analysts’ operational needs and how to ensure Human Factor Blockers 
such  as  stress,  anxiety  and  workload  are  minimised.  TWA  argues  that  individuals  and 
environment are mutually satisfied if and only if the Knowledge, Skills and Abilities (KSA) of the 
individual meet the demands of the environment (Dawis and Lofquist, 1987). 

●  Training Needs Assessment (TNA):  TNA is another methodology used in the study to ensure 
that appropriate training is provided to cyber analysts to do their work, this is covered in Section 
III C4 under Human Factors. 

●  Fieldwork  and  Experiential  Analysis:  Our  experience  and  fieldwork  (case  studies)  offer 

contributory insights to this study. 

III.  Multidimensional Cybersecurity Framework 

A Multidimensional Situation-Aware Cybersecurity Framework is proposed (See Fig. 1).  It consists of 
four key components namely 1) Domains (Physical, Cultural, Economic, Social, Political and Cyber), 2) 
Factors (Business  Operational, Technological  and  Human),  3)  Cross-Domain  Situational  Awareness 
and 4) Cyber Foresight. Our framework allows Cyber Foresight to be gained through the understanding 
of the relationships that exist across the various Domains combined with consideration of the impacts, 
causes and effects of the concepts identified across the Factors – Business, Operational, Technological 
and Human (BOTH) factors. Cyber foresight is the culmination of the understanding and comprehension 
of  the  causes  and  effects,  impacts  and  influences  of  the  factors  and  their  relationships  across  the 
domains. 

Figure 1: Multidimensional Situation-Aware Security Framework 

The framework is composed of: 

●  Six (6) Domains: Physical, Cultural, Economic, Social, Political and Cyber. These domains are 
selected through several iterations of Attribute Listing methodology. As discussed in the related 
work section. This work is novel and unique in its consideration of six domains, and there is no 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 

research, to the best of our knowledge that has considered the fusion of these domains in the 
way and manner applied in this research. 

●  Four (4) Factors: Business factors, Operations factors, Technology factors and Human factors. 
Each factor contains a list of attributes and features as shown in Fig. 1. The justification for the 
Factors  and  their  features  is  selected  through  a  combination  of  Attribute  Listing  and  PEST 
methodologies, which are explained in the subsections. 

●  Cross-Domain Situational Awareness: This entails the awareness and comprehension of the 
issues arising from the six domains and using this information to find the best resolution to the 
problems,  and  in  addition,  potentially,  being  able  to  use  them  to make  certain  predictions  of 
future states. 

●  Cyber  Foresight:  This  is  effectively  the  ‘outcome’  of  combining  the  information  from  the 
domains,  and  consideration  of  the  four  factors  and  their  constituent  subfactors  into  gaining 
enhanced situational awareness and informed decision making. 

A.  Domain 

In  this  paper,  we  describe  a  Domain  as  a  realm  or  dimension,  which  is  governed  by  a  set  of  well-
defined rules and principles that control its operation and use. Domain is used in this paper also as a 
way  of  explaining  the  dimensions  or  realms  that  impact  strategic  cyber  programme  or  mission.  And 
when  these  domains  are  not  considered  they  could  be  exploited  to  affect the  mission’s  capability  to 
protect itself and/or its constituents. The domains of interest for this research and that are considered 
to  gain  strategic  cyber  foresight  and  superiority  for  the  nation  or  mission  are  Physical,  Cultural, 
Economic, Social, Political and Cyber (as shown in Fig. 2). 

Figure 2: Cross-Domain Situational Awareness 

To the best of our knowledge, our proposed framework is by far the most comprehensive framework for 
Strategic Cyber Foresight. We note that (Romanych M., 2010) considered three domains – Physical, 
Information  and  Cognitive  –  for  Information  Operation  in  a  military  context,  while  (Alberts  D.  et  al.., 
2001)  considered  the  same  three  domains  but  in  relation  to  Information  Age  Warfare.  These 
contributions are foundational and fundamental to Cyber Foresight. Since we framework builds on the 
works of (Romanych M., 2010) and (Alberts D. et al.., 2001) they provide the foundational basis. 

For example (as will be discussed below), the Physical Domain in this paper subsumes the well-known 
domains such as Land, Sea, Air, and Space. While the Cyber Domain encompasses the Information, 
Intelligence,  Data  and  Knowledge  domains,  which  have  been  studied  in  their  own  rights  as  distinct 
domains (see, Hall M. J., Hansen D. D. and Jones K., 2015). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 

The  Physical  Domain  deals  with  the  physical  ‘things’  such  as  the  location,  geography,  environment, 
buildings,  architecture,  communications  infrastructures,  systems,  networks,  media,  and  including 
hosting (building), data centre and environmental facilities, such as water, power (electricity & gas), and 
wind turbine. Additional examples can be seen in Table 1. In a broader sense, it encompasses Land, 
Air, Sea and Space. According to the Department of Defence (DoD) Command and Control Research 
Program  (CCRP),  the  Physical  Domain  is  the  real  tangible  world.  In  the  context  of  this  paper,  the 
Physical  Domain  comprises  the  physical  infrastructure  of  an  organisation  such  as  building,  network 
architecture, systems, networks and storage, SCADA, IoT and cyber-physical systems. These are the 
things  that  the  programme  must  consider  and  assess  when  developing  a  robust  solution.  Equally, 
because  threats  are  realised  on  the  physical  infrastructures,  it  is  therefore  imperative  to  ensure 
adequate protection of the Physical Domain. 

The Cultural Domain deals with people, cognition and metal models (a.k.a. perspective and perception), 
communities, groups, National and organisational shared values, behaviors and practices (see Table 
1). Every organisation has its own organisational culture, e.g., diversity and inclusion culture, learning 
and  development  culture,  cybersecurity  culture,  governance  culture  etc.  One  could  ask,  what  is  the 
cybersecurity  culture  of  that  organisation?  Or  what  is  their  governance  practices  and  culture?  For 
example, is it a hierarchical culture, are reporting lines based on hierarchy, or is it an open and diverse 
culture, one that allows people to learn, grow and develop, or is it bureaucratic, one that hinders and 
stifles  innovation  and  collaboration?  Cybersecurity  culture  is  one  aspect  of  organisational  culture 
(Marotta and Pearlson, 2019), but a very important aspect especially in the context of this study. For 
example, Uchendu et al. (2021) states that the Culture Domain has been heavily studied in the past 
decade in research and practice as organisations seek to combat increased cyberattacks that focus on 
exploiting human factors. It is important to recognise that organisations in certain verticals are known 
to be more regulated in certain respects than others, and hence may require more stringent compliance 
and  enforcement  cybersecurity  culture.  For  example,  cybersecurity  culture  in  say  government 
departments,  military  or  defence  organisations  are  much  more  stringent  compared  to  non-defense 
related organisations. The same can be said of regulatory culture for financial institutions and healthcare 
organisations.  The  Cultural  Domain  is  also  known  as  the  cognitive  domain  (see  Borgatti  S.  P.,  and 
Halgin  D.  S.,  1998),  informed  by  shared  perception,  beliefs  and  values  (Romanych  M.,  2018).  The 
people aspect should be considered and assessed when developing a robust security programme. We 
rely on people for protecting the enterprise, on compliance with directives, and good judgement and 
decision making, hence the Culture Domain is of the same importance as the other domains. 

The Economic Domain deals with the financials, goods, products, services, supply and demand, supply-
chain  economics  and  return  on  investment  of cybersecurity  (see Table  1).  Economics  of  information 
security is well studied. Anderson R. and Moore T. (2006) are pioneers of this discipline who argue that 
‘security failure’ is caused at least as often by bad incentives as by bad design. They went on to discuss 
several challenges in the economics of information security by considering misaligned incentives and 
externalities.  Felici  et  al.  (2016)  postulate  that  as  ICT  is  used  in  the  cyber  domain  e.g.,  information 
technology  and  in  the  other  domains,  e.g.,  physical  and  economic  domains,  hence,  cybersecurity 
economics is essential in enabling ICT to hold this dual role (i.e., applied to both the cyber and other 
domains). Hence the economic impact is not just on one domain rather on multiple domains. Evolution 
in  the  cyberworld  over  the  last  decade  has  introduced  further  conundrum  in  the  economics  of 
cybersecurity.  For  example,  1)  recent  cyber-economic  models  such  as  ransomware  as  a  service 
(RaaS),  where  malware  infrastructures  can  be  rented on  a  ‘pay  as  you  go’  service  by  bad  actors to 
conduct  cyber-attacks  (Midler  M.  (2020))  has  introduced  further  complications  into  cybersecurity 
economics. 2) while cyber insurance in turn offers insurance cover over cybersecurity breaches to an 
organisation, it has introduced a new dimension (i.e., a new economic model) to this field. 3) supply-
chain risk inherent in business models, e.g., Business to Business (B2B), Direct to Consumer (D2C) 
business models and Open Source Software (OSS) models, such as freemium, freeware, open source, 
community source etc., have introduced varied responsibility issues. For example, who owns the codes, 
how  can  it  be  used,  who  maintains  and  has  ultimate  responsibility  for  code  assurance.  Without 
understanding the supply-chain ecosystem or the goods, products or services of the organisation, how 
could a robust security programme be designed and implemented? And how can the cybersecurity risks 
be identified, or cybersecurity situations be recognised, let alone be understood and addressed. To gain 
enhanced situational awareness, that is, an understanding of current situations, and the ability to make 
predictions  of  future  states,  then the  Economic  Domain,  and  factors  influencing  it  should  be  known, 
assessed and understood. We are aware of several supply-chain exploitations, and allegations of nation 
state cyber covet monitoring and intellectual property theft through supply-chain ecosystem (Reed J., 

 
 
 
53 

2012,  BBC,  2018,  Chapman  B.,  2018).  Therefore,  we  argue  that  cybersecurity  foresight  should 
encompass  an  understanding  of  supply-chain  ecosystem,  and  the  risks  they  pose.  The  Economic 
Domain  should  also  consider  economic  incentives  e.g.,  measures  to  assess  cybersecurity 
effectiveness, and regulatory and liability mandates to better improve security processes (Lesk (2011)). 
Further,  it  should  consider  investments  into  cybersecurity,  the  business  case  for  cybersecurity,  the 
economic benefits and benefits realisations, and the return on cybersecurity investment (RoSI). Every 
organisation,  and  in  fact,  the  nation  or  government  needs  to  know  their  threshold  in  cybersecurity 
investment  (Brangetto  P.,  and  Aubyn  M.  KS.,  2015),  and  the  objectives  it  should  deliver  to  society, 
government and citizens; whether direct tangible benefits (e.g., having a secure and reliable National 
cybersecurity strategy could protect citizens and Critical National Infrastructures) and indirect tangible 
benefits  (e.g.,  having  secure  and  reliable  National  cybersecurity  strategy  could  attract  foreign 
investments and create new job opportunities for citizens alike). 

The Social Domain is related to the social, ethical, sustainability, environmental, governance and other 
relational considerations that influence cybersecurity practices of the organisation or the nation (if it is 
a  National  cyber  programme).  Additional  examples  can  be  seen  in  Table  1.  We  reflect  on  the 
relationships,  associations  and  communications  involved  in  managing  cybersecurity  within  an 
organisation (e.g., intra-cybersecurity practices and management) and with their supply chain, vendors 
and  partners  (inter-cybersecurity  practices  and  management).  In  discussing  the  social  aspects  of 
information  security,  Frangopoulos  et  al.  (2008)  identify  three  categories  of  stakeholders  in  an 
organisation,  security  professionals  (who  create  and  direct  information  security for the  organisation), 
management  (who  provide  oversight  for  the  programme)  and  end-users  (who  should  adhere  to 
information  security  policies  and  directives).  In  examining  the  relationships  and  cooperation  among 
these groups, and the difficulty in information security compliance in the organisation, they conclude 
that “the difficulty in common acceptance and internalisation of the security effort by all stakeholders of 
an organisation creates innumerable security holes and provides social engineers with the opportunity 
for  successful  attacks”.  Extrapolating  Frangopoulos  et  al.’s  argument,  one  could  not  but  imagine  the 
extremely challenging situation it could be when dealing with supply chain ecosystem. Trust in social, 
digital and online  enterprises is key. How can we trust that stakeholders in an organisation (security 
professionals,  management  and  end  users)  will  comply  to  cybersecurity  policies,  practices  and 
directives,  but  this  trust  should  be  earned  by  ensuring  stakeholders  are  trained  (cybersecurity 
awareness  trainings,  and  regular  certifications,  and  cybersecurity  seminars  and  drills)  and  equipped 
(cybersecurity  policies,  good  practice  guides  and  repo  are  made  available  to  all  stakeholders)?  The 
effort  is  harder  with  inter-cybersecurity  practices  as trust  between  partners,  vendors  and  consumers 
are much harder to attest.  Trust between organisations can be earned through demonstration of good 
cybersecurity  practices  through  certifications,  compliance  attestation  to  cybersecurity  and  regulatory 
directives and mandates (e.g., ISO27001, PCI DSS, GDPR etc.,), but trust between organisation and 
consumers  still  needs  to  be  investigated.  Recent study  has  shown  that  consumers  do  not  only  care 
about an organisation’s cybersecurity practices (how excellent they are in managing cybersecurity risk) 
but  also  the  organisation’s  position  and  support  for  sustainability,  and  their  position  around  ethics, 
equality, diversity and inclusion. Equality is cited as the number one consumer value (i.e., one of three 
top consumer trends for 2021) according to Gartner research (Omale G., 2020). In fact, these factors 
are becoming more important to Gen Z consumers than ever before (Duerst M. and Eichhorn E. 2020). 
We  argue that  understanding  social  domain  dynamics  to the  ecosystem  offer  insights  into  the  many 
factors  that  should  be  considered  when  developing  a holistic  cybersecurity  programme that  not  only 
addresses current problems but offers foresight into the future situations. The Social Domain abridges 
the Cultural Domain in the sense that it also intercepts the decision making and judgement of the people, 
their cognitive processes and thoughts. Since people aspects are dealt with in the Cultural Domain, one 
might  ask  the  relationship  between  the  Cultural  Domain  (a.k.a.  cognitive  domain)  and  the  Social 
Domain? Take for example, government digital and social structures such as e-government, e-voting 
etc., such important structures are reliant on digital, social and trust infrastructures, which if abused will 
have equal, if not overwhelming ramifications to the government as would physical or political domains. 
We argue that all the domains are important and do need consideration, understanding and appreciation 
of their risks and rewards. Their interdependence must not be overlooked, too. 

The  Political  Domain  deals  with  policy,  regulation,  directives,  legal,  legislative  and  corporate 
governance structures (see Table 1). These include local, provincial, National, lateral, multilateral and 
international  regulation  and  mandates.  They  shape  and  influence  how  organisations  and  nations 
operate,  and  how  we  should  defend  society  and  citizens.  Also,  the  Political  Domain  influences  the 
provisos  and  prerogatives  under  which  bilateral  and  multilateral  mandates  operate.  The  Political 

 
 
 
54 

Domain, unlike all the other domains, can have an overwhelming impact on the stability, security and 
safety of a country and its citizens, and consequently, to its  neighboring nations and continents. The 
Political  Domain  can  cause  ripples  that  propagates  to  the  other  domains,  and  an  instability  in  the 
Political  Domain  can  destabilize  the  other  domains.  Tension  in  the  political  sphere,  for  example, 
between two nations can cause economic instability and impact economic conditions, cultural and social 
strive, and certainly a reaction in the Cyber Domain. As recent studies suggest, the Cyber Domain has 
become the battleground for the realisation of political tensions and the exercising of power, control and 
dominion. For example, during the political tension between America and Russia in 2020, there were 
accounts of alleged cyber-attacks and infiltration between the two nations (CNN, 2020). Similarly, during 
the political tension between Russia and Estonia in 2007 (Ottis R. 2007). It is hard to divorce the impact 
of one domain to another since the domains are interdependent. It is not only the Cyber Domain that 
may be affected by tensions in the political sphere. The economy will be proportionately impacted, too. 
Stock  market  is  usually  the  worst  impacted.  The  United  Kingdom’s  BREXIT  referendum  and  the 
negotiations that followed with the European Union (EU) caused the pound sterling to drop, at a point, 
to its lowest in two years (BBC, 2016). It was also reported that the immediate aftermath of the BREXIT 
referendum caused the sterling to decline sharply in value (BBC, 2019). 

The  Cyber  Domain  deals  with  digital,  cloud,  information,  internet  and  the  intangible  attributes  that 
intercept  the  traditional  physical  matters  of  Land,  Sea,  Air  and  Space  but  that  provides  experiential 
outcomes which may be realised in both physical and non-physical domains (see Table 1). According 
to  the  Finnish  Government  Cyber  Security  Strategy  (Finland,  2013),  the  Cyber  Domain  is  an 
interdependent  and  multipurpose  electronic  data  processing  environment.  And  because  of  the 
dependence of all the other domains on Cyber this has made the Cyber Domain extremely important 
and equally, the most vulnerable. According to the DoD Multinational Experiment 7 (MNE7, 2013), “most 
of our activities and decisions in our physical world depend on information and access to cyber, which 
also continues to rapidly evolve faster in comparison to the other traditional and well-known domains 
such as Air, Sea, Land and Space. No wonder the growth of the Cyber Domain is seen as the biggest 
social and technological change of a lifetime (UK Cyber Strategy, 2021). The Cyber Domain is the most 
complex. According to (Bertoli G., 2018), “all systems within cyberspace are complex in their function 
and often have several external dependencies”, hence it is not enough to protect what we consider as 
mission critical systems, we must also consider all the data sources and their dependability on existing 
and/or  external  communications  channels,  interfaces, links  and  interactions.  These  may  be  used  as 
attack vectors. 

Table 1: Domains, Descriptions & Attributes 

Domains  Descriptions 
Physical  

The physical world that contains, houses 
and accommodates physical matter and 
materials. 

Cultural 

The cognitive or mental space, human 
and operator-oriented space. 

Economic 

Social 

Political 

Cyber 

The business aspects, financial 
orientated space and supply-chain 
ecosystem. 
The social relational space, especially 
around nations, geographies, 
communities, teams or groups. 
The political, regulatory and compliance 
space. 
The abstract space of information, 
communication and intelligence. 

Attributes 
Physical location, coordinates, physical substance 
that one can touch, feel and smell. E.g., Land, Sea, 
Space and Air, and for cyber physical systems, 
these are bridges, airports, water pipelines, IoT, 
national grid (electricity & gas), data centres. 
Knowledge, perception, values, beliefs, attributes. 
All these relate to human aspects. 
Equally, group and collective (e.g., Team SA – i.e., 
situational awareness relating to group or team 
behaviour e.g., a group of operators, administrators, 
commander and their teams). 
Finance, gain, loss, impact to a nation’s economic 
wellbeing, equity market, stock or share prices, 
business models and bargaining power. 
Trust, sustainability, environmental, social, 
relationships and structures, groups and teams’ 
dynamics. 
Policy, regulation and governance, leadership, legal, 
compliance and directive imperatives. 
Information, communication, intelligence, cyber 
incidents, cyber-attacks, exploits and data 
breaches. 

The interconnection of the Physical Domain to the Cyber Domain (e.g., through microwave and satellite 
communications or physically connecting them with wired and wireless communications, and/or via the 
sea with submarines) have created a ‘centrality phenomenon’ (where cyber is seen to be in the middle 

 
 
 
 
55 

connecting every domain, and hence making it significantly important). For example, the Cyber Domain 
is now used to realise cyber harm in all the other domains, such as the physical, cultural, economic, 
social and political domains. It is a continuum for both ‘good’ and ‘bad’ in relative terms. We argue that 
strategic Cyber Foresight can only be gained, especially for a robust framework that could be used to 
support  government,  organisation  and  nation,  when  all  the  domains  discussed  in  this  paper  are 
considered and impacted. The consideration of only a single domain will be a fruitless effort. 

B.  Overarching Principles of the Framework 

In this section, we discuss the overarching principles underpinning the framework, and the rationale for 
its consideration. While the proposed framework is conceptual, any realisation of the framework should 
consider principles that should guide its implementation (guiding principles). The following overarching 
principles support the proposed framework in achieving its purposes: 

●  Multidimensional: The framework should consider the different domains that exist and impact 
these  so  that  a  holistic  understanding  of  cybersecurity  can  be  achieved.  Failure  to  consider 
multiple  domains  could  lead  to  a  framework  being  constrained  and  consequently  unable  to 
address risks arising from domains that were not considered. Furthermore, a multidimensional 
approach  enables  strategic  foresight,  which  is  gained  by  understanding  and  impacting 
situations from the different domains. As studies have shown, cybercrime and cyber incidents 
can  be  technically,  socially,  economically,  legally  and  physically  oriented  (Gandhi  R.,  et.al. 
2011), therefore a one-dimensional approach is neither capable of addressing emerging and 
modern  cyberattacks  nor  able  to  reflect  geo-political,  economic  or  socially  oriented  tensions 
that  could  result  in  the  realisation  of  physical  harm,  abuse,  extortion  and  exploitation  in  the 
Cyber Domain. 
Integration: The domains and components of the framework should be integrated. Integration 
allows  the  framework  to  function  as  a  composite  unit  rather  than  individual  and  localised 
components that are silos.  

● 

●  Automation: The framework should be automated because manual analysis will lag in time of 

the responses needed to address current and emerging cybersecurity threats.  

●  Responsiveness:  The  framework  should  be  responsive  or  adaptable  because  cybersecurity 

programmes is not a one-size-fits-all proposition.  

●  Adaptive:  A  good  framework  is  one  that  is  adaptive  so  that  different  organisations  and 

institutions of varying sizes and risk appetite can still employ it. 

●  Coordination:  The framework should be coordinated, meaning the need for human inputs and 
decision making (e.g., human in the loop). Coordination of cybersecurity incident management, 
investigation of data breaches, decision making for incident response, geo-political escalation 
and sanctions and diplomatic relationships all require human coordination oversight. That said, 
coordination leverages automation in technology workflows and processes for speed, accuracy 
and efficiency. 

C.  Factors 

Our methodological approach using Attribute Listing is shown in Fig. 3. Through using Attribute Listing 
matrix and analysis methodology we derived the Factors. We then organised and categorised them into 
four distinct groups. The methodology allowed us to list all possible attributes and features stemming 
from  the  areas  we  considered.  Four  overarching  categories  are  identified  -  Business,  Operational, 
Technology and Human (BOTH) Factors, which is the resultant outcome of the approach (see Fig. 4). 

It is pertinent to note that Security, Privacy and Assurance (see light green horizontal of Fig. 4) neither 
appeared in any specific quadrant nor included in any of the Factors. We argue that security, privacy 
and information assurance are intrinsic features that must be considered in their own rights for all the 
four  principal  factors  (BOTH  Factors).  For  example,  Operations  Factors  must  consider  information 
security, privacy and assurance requirements with respect to the operations that the tools undertake, 
and  the  processes  should  be  such that  they  align  to  security  standards  and  privacy  regulations  and 
directives. Similarly, Business, Technology and Human Factors should all abide by the same guiding 
principles. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 

Figure 3: Methodological Approach - Attribute Listing 

Figure 4: BOTH Factors 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 

C1. 

Business Factors for Cyber Foresight 

To  explore  the  Business  Factors,  we  used  PEST  (Political,  Economic,  Social  and  Technology)  analysis  in  discussing  the  overarching  themes.  Business 
environmental factors comprise both internal and external factors that influence businesses. External factors range from economic, social, legal, technological 
to political factors (Kotler P. and Armstrong G., 2004; Paypervids, 2016). Some studies consider competitiveness as an external factor, for example PESTEC - 
Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Environmental and Competitiveness (BBC, 2019). Internal factors include financial resources, physical resources, 
human resources, access to natural resources and organisational processes and innovation (Pestle Analysis, 2015). Our ability to understand current cyber 
situations  or  circumstances  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  predict,  and  address  future  or  emerging  cybersecurity  situations  will  depend  on  identifying  the 
pertinent business and environmental factors that allow us to gain insight of our business environment. In this study we consider factors that influence cyber 
foresight from business operating environment lens. Our analysis is conducted using PEST as shown in Table 2. 

Table 2: PEST Analysis of Business Factors for Cyber Foresight 

(P) Political 
Compliance 
Cyber disclosure compliance directive (a.k.a. 
Breach Disclosure) would mean that 
organisations located in jurisdictions and/or 
countries where security breach disclosures 
are enacted, and mandatory must report any 
breaches to the authorities.  

While Breach Disclosure mandates are a 
good thing and bodes well with the principle 
of honesty and transparency, it could 
however spell doom to some companies. It is 
pertinent to note that the real impact of a 
security breach is not the total cost that may 
be required to protect impacted system, 
recover stolen data, or prevent the attack 
happening again or the cost of forensic 
investigation, but the real cost to the 
impacted business is often realised on the 
impact to their stock market, the impact to 
their bottom line, shares and stocks, and 
unfortunately, some companies have had to 
close down as a result. 

Policy 
Government policy on profiling resulting from 
current incidents of covertly manning and 
using personal data to influence 
circumstances (e.g., Cambridge Analytica, 
Facebook) could mean that cyber 

(E) Economic 
Finance 
Finance relating to monetary resources required 
to establish and operate organisational or 
national cyber programmes. The whole life cost 
(TCO – total cost of ownership) should include 
the CAPEX required to build and establish the 
programme, while the OPEX is the continual 
operating cost, which is a yearly cost, budgeted 
to at least five years. 

For national cyber programmes, the government 
or sponsoring bodies (e.g., in the UK, HM 
Treasury) would need to review and approve 
funding for the business case for the 
establishment of such programmes. While 
organisational cyber programme business cases 
would need to be reviewed and approved by 
their respective organisational finance board or 
senior management team, or whichever body 
that has this authority and responsibility within 
their organisations. 

(S) Social 
Sustainability 
The environmental, social and governance 
responsibilities is a new corporate imperative. 
ESG reporting is receiving scrutiny from both 
external and internal stakeholders alike. 
Employees are keen to understand the position 
of the company they work for on important 
socials issues like health and safety, diversity, 
equity and inclusion; environmental issues such 
as renewable energy, water use, climate etc., 
and on governance, they are interested in pay 
equality, board composition and racial minority 
diversity (Gartner, 2021). These are extremely 
important societal issues. 

(T) Technological 
Accessibility and Automation 
Accessibility requirements at the workplace - 
use of accessibility tools such as 
accessibility keyboards, dashboards 
(screens), brail, hearing loops, wheelchair 
access etc. could help improve affective 
computing, business processes and 
cybersecurity foresight. 

Automation allows business processes and 
operations to be conducted swiftly leveraging 
technological advances and capabilities such 
as RPA, Machine Learning (ML) and 
Blockchain. Integration aids efficiency in 
modern business and operational 
technology, allowing synergy in business 
processes to be cooperative. This means 
that business processes and workflows can 
be automated which encourages business 
efficiencies. 

Investments in Cyber  
Organisations may not have enough budget for 
cybersecurity centres or programmes, and this 
may mean essential components of the cyber 
programmes may not be developed or started.  

Immigration & Border Control (‘The Big Issues’) 
Immigration control stemming from political 
policies do often cause social issues, for 
example, the United Kingdom BREXIT 
referendum, could have a potential impact to 
migrants, and could worsen the existing 

Transformation 
Technological transformations could improve 
business processes and operations allowing 
cyber foresight to be readily gained. 
Business transformation in form of 
digitalisation allows many business 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programmes would be unable to utilise 
certain data analytics tool or use relevant 
data that could enrich intelligence or cyber 
foresight. In the case of the Mission, 
agencies may therefore need to resort to the 
invocation of national security mandates in 
order that they may be allowed to process 
high volumes of sensitive personal data that 
could have ordinarily been constrained by 
the data privacy mandates (e.g., DPA and 
GDPR requirements). 

Regulation & Cybersecurity Laws 
Regulations like GDPR means that user 
consent must be required before data 
collection, and this may impact data 
collection and analysis regimes, especially 
around cybersecurity monitoring. 

National cybersecurity laws provide 
sovereign and safety net to countries to 
protect their intellectual property (IP), critical 
national infrastructures (CNI), government 
and infringements and interference from 
nation states. National cybersecurity laws are 
powerful and while it is a force for good, it 
has also been used in authoritarian nationals 
to curb, and control private organisations 
(Chinese Cybersecurity Law). The recent 
crackdown of Tech and Ed-Tech publicly 
listed companies, e.g., DiDi, Tencent, 
Alibaba etc. by China on cybersecurity 
concerns impacted the market, and 
demonstrated how these laws can impact 
society in general (Cheng E. (2021)) 

Cost of developing national cyber programmes 
is likely to rise due to poor national economic 
outlook, and the cost of attracting skilled 
cybersecurity SMEs is likely to rise due to cyber 
skills shortage. Furthermore, the ability to 
sustain cyber programmes or national fusion 
centre is a challenge since these programmes 
are not for profit and therefore are operated on a 
different paradigm to how industry projects or 
programmes are run. Longevity of national 
cybersecurity programmes are dependent on 
government sponsorships and funding. Should 
funding not be secured some government 
programmes do not continue. And with cuts in 
national budget (reduction in funding) to central 
government departments this would impact 
cybersecurity programmes. 

Return on Security Investment (RoSI) 
Return on security investment can be measured 
through technological advances, allowing 
business operations, activities and risk to be 
appropriately assessed and measured. It is easy 
to measure certain things, especially tangible 
things, for example, profit and loss of 
consumables and goods; however, it is 
challenging to measure intangible things, for 
example services as they are subjective. It is 
even harder when it comes to measuring 
cybersecurity profitability. Because of this, we 
believe RoSI should be assessed based on 
cyber KPIs where certain key performance 
indicators are used to measure RoSI. Cyber 
foresight cannot be measured by a single 
parameter, it is a culmination of several useful 
KPIs. 

59 

shortage in cyber skills. This is because skilled 
workers may immigrate to other countries other 
than the UK leading to widening skills shortage 
gap in the UK. 

The US/Mexican border immigration control is 
another such example, and may result in many 
unintended consequences, and one of such, is 
that skilled workers may leave the US and 
equally, the US may find it challenging to attract 
fresh skilled immigrants. 

processes and operations to be digitalised, 
automated and integrated.  

Digitalisation allows business processes to 
be conducted from anywhere and 
everywhere, which means no geographic 
constraints or time zone issues, this 
effectively means increased effectiveness, 
and/or productivity. And innovation could 
drive efficient and optimised business 
processes through automation, integration 
and intelligence. 

Healthcare and Social Housing 
The cost of healthcare in certain countries 
makes it unaffordable for most, especially those 
living in cities where healthcare is either not free 
or subsidized, for fresh graduates whose wages 
are not enough and hence unable to afford it. 
This is likely to have negative impact to 
organisations operating in such cities and the 
ability to attract and retain skilled workers. 

Cyber Skills Shortage and Risk 
Cyber skills shortage may mean that cyber 
programmes may struggle to attract the right 
cyber analysts or cyber personnel to work at 
the centres. 

Through technology, risk assessment and 
risk management can be applied to ensure 
business operations are better understood. 

The lack of affordable housing is likely to impact 
the young working force, and may impact their 
choices of living or location, as most people will 
look for employment where they can afford, and 
this may invariably bias employment. For 
example, In the UK, while London may be 
attractive to young people, unfortunately due to 
the high cost of living exacerbated by 
unaffordable housing is leading people to move 
out of London, and this is having social impact to 
the city and equally to industries in the city as 
they must pay higher wages than is paid to 
colleagues in other parts of the country causing 
also social divide.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 

C2. 

Operational Factors for Cyber Foresight 

Operational Factors deal with operational aspects of the cybersecurity programme. Operational Factors 
somewhat realise the contributions of the Technology Factors when implemented correctly and ensure 
Business  Factors  are  met.  Operational  Factors  range  from  Operational  Technology  (OT),  tools  to 
techniques  employed  by  operations  and  change  management,  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  The  Operational 
Factors discussed in this paper are derived using Attribute Listing and Filtration. Attribute Listing allowed 
us to enumerate all operational factors, attributes and features, and by filtering against duplications, we 
removed factors that are either similar, duplicates or overlapped with existing features covered in other 
parts of the framework (see Fig. 3). The resultant Operational Factors are discussed as follows: 

●  Architecture  

Operational  architectures  are  ‘live’  architectures  that  are  in  the  production  environment  of  the 
organisation and are used to process and execute live services and systems. They include patterns, 
designs,  interfaces  and  building  blocks  (i.e.,  architecture  artefacts)  that  underpin  business  and  IT 
technologies.  Operational  architectures  for  systems  and  services  are  underpinned  on  the  business 
requirements  of  the  organisation,  and  to  support  and  ensure  that  business  needs  are  achieved. 
Operational  architectures  should  use  baselined  architecture  patterns,  architecture  designs  and 
architecture  blueprints  that  have  been  assessed,  approved,  tested  and  baselined;  and  are  in  use  in 
parts  of  the  organisation.  We  gain  operational  efficiencies  and  time  savings  by  reusing  existing 
architecture  artefacts,  and  by  ensuring  continuous  assurance  of  architecture  contents.  This  means 
architecture  repository  is  regularly  updated  with  new  and  emerging  secure  by  design  architecture 
collaterals  and  artefacts.  Operational  architectures  should  describe  tasks  that  they  accomplish, 
operational elements and information flows and patterns that should be used for (Dictionary of Military 
and  Associated  Terms,  2005),  and  they  should  be  continuously  reviewed  and  managed  through 
architecture  change  boards,  e.g.,  DevOps  (Development  and  Operations)  and  CI/CD  (Continuous 
Integration and Continuous Development) pipelines. This is so that changes in the architecture space 
have full audit trail, authorisation and accountability. 

●  Automation 

According to (Onwubiko C. and Owens J.T., 2011), the advent of powerful computing systems and the 
possibility  of  real-time  processing  have  made  automation  of  technologically  enabled  and  situation-
aware  tasks  much  more  attractive  and  accessible.  The  processing  of  data  and  information  using 
graphics  processing  units  (GPUs)  in  addition  to  its  affordability  have  made  processing  of  big  data  a 
reality. Nowadays there is a real desire to automate almost everything ranging from physical, logical, 
perceptual and even cognitive tasks. This is invariably driven by the needs of modern society, the quest 
to process things at ultra-fast speed as our lives move at a tremendous pace, and technology is used 
to  power  and  automate  processes,  e.g.,  robotic  process  automation  is  now  used  to  automate  the 
ordinary everyday tasks, such as check email, reply to emails, tweet, post Facebook updates, write blog 
posts and aggregate news feeds. Automation brings far greater advantages in cyber, especially around 
speed, accuracy and precision. We need these attributes if we are to gain  Cyber Foresight. Take for 
example, in information operation in warfare, being able to analyse huge volumes of data at a greater 
pace,  accuracy  and  precision  can  become  the  unique  selling  point  (USP)  that  differentiates  Cyber 
Foresight over one mission and their opponents. Automation allows for tasks, processes and routines 
to  be  mechanised,  operationalized  and  industrialised  to  gain  greater  depth  and  efficiency. In today’s 
world of information overload, big data, cloud computing, and the plethora of social media all competing 
for both our time and attention, and huge volumes of data to process, it would be challenging to gain 
enhanced  situational  awareness  of  the  threat  landscape  let  alone  gain  Cyber  Foresight  across  the 
interwoven domains without automation. 

●  Coordination 

Coordination relates to the human aspect that deals with the organisation of the different and disparate 
elements of a complex activity to enable them to work together coherently and effectively (Dictionary 
Online, 2019). Coordination is an intrinsic human cognitive function through which elements of complex 
tasks,  operations  and  maneuver  are  arranged,  organised,  fused  and/or  managed  collectively  and 
collaboratively to achieve a common and desired goal. Coordination is applied to both cyber and non-
cyber  related  activities.  But  since  this  paper  is  focused  on  Cyber  Foresight,  our  examples  and 
explanations  are  tailored  to  Cyber,  where  coordination  is  an  extremely  important  feature.  Take  for 
example,  cyber  operators  and  analysts  coordinate  cyber  incident  response  and  crisis  management. 
These  tasks  on  their  own  are  complex,  time  and  cognitively  demanding.  Each  aspect  of  Cyber  is 
interdependent, and it is this interdependence that necessitates coordination. For instance, responding 

 
 
 
 
61 

to  cyber  incidents  requires  a  coordination  of  various  tasks,  e.g.,  security  monitoring,  correlation  of 
security  signals,  and  cyber  incident  response.  Cyber  incident  responders  perform  activities  such  as 
gathering,  preparation  of  digital  evidence  and  the  preservation  of  digital  evidence,  with  the  incident 
management helpdesk, and the senior management team who make decisions on the approach and 
possible cause of action and including authorisation for reporting of the breach to national authorities, 
where applicable. While cyber operators may use technology and automation to perform many of the 
complex tasks, allowing and leveraging machine intelligence, speed and accuracy, coordination is, and 
will  remain  largely  a  human  factor  attribution.  We  argue  that  very  limited  foresight  is  possible  in  a 
chaotic, uncoordinated and siloed ecosystem. We believe foresight will be enhanced in a cooperative 
endeavor based on human to system (H→S) relationship. A reliance on a singular aspect, say machine 
alone  (without  humans),  will  not  provide  the  required  levels  of  foresight.  A  coordination  across  the 
domains  allows  insights  and  situational  awareness  to  be  gained  through  monitoring  and  intelligence 
sharing of the ecosystem. 

● 

Integration 

To  achieve  foresight  of  any  kind,  cyber  or  otherwise,  systems  integration  and  automation  are  key. 
Operational technologies and systems ought to be integrated so that they form a cooperative and co-
existing  system  of  systems  that  delivers  the  overarching  functionalities,  interaction  and  business 
processing. With systems integration, disparate and diverse systems, components and subsystems that 
would  have  ordinarily  existed  as  separate,  isolated  and  siloed  systems  creating  fragmentation  are 
brought  together  in  a  way  that  allowed  services  operated  across  them  to  be  cooperative  and 
coordinated. Cyber defences form a layer of protection (defense in depth) only when they are integrated. 
Integration  can  be  achieved  in  hardware,  software,  programming  and  hybrid,  for  example,  systems 
integration  of  CPU  to  motherboard,  keyboard  and  monitor  is  achieved through  hardware  integration, 
network  integration  can  be  hardware  or  software,  process  integration  can  be  achieved  through 
application  programming  interfaces  (API),  while  robotic  process  automation  can  be  achieved  in 
hardware,  software  and  hybrid  (e.g.,  cyber  physical  systems).  Integration  and  automation  of  cyber 
defence  systems  is  an  absolute  business  requirement  and  considering  the  plethora  of  systems  and 
applications that the CSOC monitors, it will be challenging, if not impossible, to monitor such myriad of 
systems  and  networks  without  systems  integration  and  process  automation  of  the  CSOC  central 
collection infrastructure. Besides, systems integration helps offer service efficient and customer value-
add through improved product quality and performance (Vonderembse M. A. et al, 1997).  

●  Tools 

These are the technical and technology capabilities deployed in the framework that allow operational 
aspects of the service to be swiftly executed and processed. Without capable tools in place, it will be 
challenging  to  realise  operational  efficiencies  or  meet  some  of  the  overarching  business  goals.  For 
example, using the case of a security operations centre programme, as a use case, without appropriate 
technical tools, SOC operations will lag in time and consequently fail to achieve  its business goal of 
real-time continuous monitoring. This is because it will be overwhelmed with high volumes of logs that 
it could not manually process without the use of technical correlation and analysis tools such as security 
event and information management (SIEM) tool. Tools aid technical effectiveness of the programme 
and help in processing data and events continuously allowing the programme to be efficient and to gain 
enhanced situational awareness of the ecosystem. Tools selection and choice must be depending on 
achieving the features articulated by the Technology Factors (see Section C3), some of those include, 
e.g.,  Tools  must  be  situation-aware,  have  the  prerequisite  interfaces,  be  automated  allowing  for 
orchestration and workflow processes. It should be integrated and support multiple interface types such 
as API, native etc., and should be smart and intelligent. It is important that operational tools have the 
capability to process huge amounts of data, easy to use, and portable. These are some of the features 
that guide tools selection and choice. 

●  Techniques  

This  relates  to  the  approaches  used  to  operationally  analyse,  process  and  conduct  activities.  Such 
techniques might be approaches to SOC operations, analyst work, cyber incident event processing or 
incident management coordination. We argue that techniques that allow cyber programmes to leverage 
efficiencies in automation, workflow and orchestration offer the SOC the much-needed pace in keeping 
up with cyber incident response which is very much dependent on speed and accuracy. Industry best 
security and technology practices in this space include the MITRE ATT&CK framework (Mitre, 2017), 
the  Lockheed  Martin  Cyber  Attack  Kill-chain  (Lockheed  Martin,  2016)  etc.  Operational  techniques 
should be driven by operational efficiency, performance, speed, accuracy and precision. 

 
 
 
 
62 

●  Policy, Process and Procedure 

Policy,  process  and  procedure  are  the  foundation  for  operational  technology  without  which  it  will  be 
infeasible to conduct operational tasks. Policy provides guidelines, procedure stipulates the low level, 
‘how’ of applying the policy, while the process helps industrialise the procedure and therefore allows a 
consistent approach to be followed. Like other operational tasks, Cyber operation is no different. Take 
the  CSOC  for  example,  they  need  policies,  processes  and  procedures  to  operate  the  SOC  service. 
These may include policies on a wide range of tasks, from simple to complex tasks, such as Joiners, 
Movers and Leavers (JML) policy, Access provision and Deprovision policy, User Rights Management 
policy  etc.  They  need  procedures  to  follow,  for  example,  cyber  incident  response  procedure,  major 
incident management procedure, etc., and likewise, they need to have processes in place that allow 
consistency  across  various  repetitive  tasks,  at  least,  for  example,  cyber  incident  playbook  process, 
access requisition process, account creation process etc. Cyber programmes, especially CSOC should 
have  operational  policies,  processes  and  procedures that  they follow  in  a  systematic  and  consistent 
manner that enable service efficiencies. To stay ahead of the game, we argue that cyber programmes 
should have very robust policies, procedures and processes and these need to be relevant, current and 
maintained, and most importantly, made readily available to staff. Often, processes may exist, but staff 
are not aware of them due to poor communication or limited document management access or both. It 
is pertinent to note that the relevance of these artefacts depends on several factors, namely: 

a) All staff should be made aware that policies exist 
b) All staff should have access to policy documents 
c) All staff should be trained on the use of policy artefacts 
d) All staff must be briefed of the consequences abuse of policy. 

●  People 

Operations people comprise staff who are responsible and accountable for maintaining the operational 
day to day activities of the organisation ensuring that operational systems are effective and perform in 
accordance to stipulated functional and business requirements and supports the organisations services. 
There are many categories of operational staff, ranging from cyber operators, operational staff, cyber 
incident  responders,  administrators,  analysts  to  management  teams.  These  people  are  incredibly 
important  because  they  deal  with  the  overall  operational,  administrative  and  change  management 
aspects of the service operations and maintenance. They perform the business-as-usual tasks, operate 
the technologies that drive the processes and ensure that the tools and technologies are maintained, 
operated and serviced. For cybersecurity tools, the situation is even much more critical and impacting. 
For  example,  if  cyber  defence  systems  are  not  continuously  updated  or  patched,  vulnerabilities  may 
exist  and  this  could  result  in  the  safeguards  being  exploited  and  further,  they  may  then  be  used  to 
compromise the wider ecosystem. Human operators conduct cyber incident and crisis management, 
monitor the infrastructures, networks and systems, carry out analysis and investigations when a security 
breach  occurs,  and  take  part  in  decision  making,  escalations  and  reporting.  People  will  always  be 
required in most manner of endeavors in some form or another. This is most pertinent with cyber; while 
there  exist  machine  learning  models  that  can  predict cyber-attacks,  artificial  intelligence  models  that 
can  recognise  speeches  and  deep  learning  models  that  can  investigate,  recommend  and  optimise 
choices for humans, there are still, at least for now, areas and use cases where human operators are 
needed  and  may  still  be  needed,  for  example,  in  decision  making,  escalations,  cybersecurity 
investigations, and prosecutions etc. There is no doubt that human operators will have to depend on 
cyber- physical systems, machine learning models etc. for swifter, more precise and optimised choices, 
however, it will be a case of interdependency than replacement or displacement. We see a cooperative 
situation where humans leverage technological power, prowess, speed and accuracy in human decision 
making, prioritisation and resolution. 

C3. 

Technology Factors for Cyber Foresight 

Technological  Factors  are  technical  requirements  and  capabilities  that  should  be  considered  to  gain 
Cyber Foresight for organisational or National cyber programmes. These factors are characteristic of 
the necessary functional and nonfunctional requirements. While we have not attempted to distinguish 
between functional and nonfunctional attributes, we have discussed both knowing that regardless, both 
are  required  in  achieving  and  maintaining  Cyber  Foresight  for  the  organisation.  Factors  we  have 
considered  for  the  technological  aspects  for  achieving  Cyber  Foresight  are  obtained  by  applying 
Attribute  Listing  –  a  methodology  that  allows  for  features  of  objects  to  be  listed,  including  low  level 

 
 
 
 
 
63 

attributes,  so  that  by  combining  these  attributes  new  concepts  may  emerge  or  be  identified.  These 
attributes include: 

●  Adaptive 

It  is  without  a  doubt  that  we  are  now  beyond  the  ‘valley  of  death’  in  AI  and  ML.  Valley  of  death  is  a 
business  idiomatic  description to  highlight  technological  maturity  and  investment  take-off, the  ‘death’ 
occurs  when  technological  advancements,  for  some  reason,  do  not  take-off  or  lead  to  a  successful 
business beyond proof of concepts and laboratory demonstrations. AI, which has been in existence for 
several years has been in the ‘valley of death’ until recently. It has since recently led to successful and 
sustainable businesses. AI and ML (and Deep Learning) have been applied to many problem spaces 
to revolutionise operations. In these cases, their implementation, including the feature engineering and 
the algorithms must be adaptive as each problem space is unique and the use cases are varied and 
different. While it is not new to deploy automation to achieve faster and better efficiency, with data and 
even,  big  data  being  readily  available  now  compared  to  several  years  ago,  the  problem  space  has 
shifted from one that needs data to automate tasks so that intelligence and efficiencies can be gained 
to one that now have data, and therefore must adapt automation in the right possible ways to leverage 
efficiencies and effectiveness. To gain enhanced situational awareness and Cyber Foresight, we argue 
that our technologies or the technologies we deploy in our cyber programmes should be adaptive. This 
includes  the  tools,  techniques,  and  workflows.  It  is  only  through  adaptation  can  we  exploit  the 
opportunities and take advantages that big data and the revolutionized AI offer us. We leverage these 
tools to gain insights and cyber superiority over our adversaries. 

●  Complexity 

We  live  at  a  time  of  unprecedented  complex  ecosystem.  The  technologies  are  complex,  data  is 
complex,  operational  processes  involve  far  more  stakeholders  than  ever  before,  with  far  reaching 
supply-chain ecosystem covering geographies and economies that were not physically and otherwise 
integrated prior. Entities now involve both humans and bots, and the activities and interactions of both 
are difficult to differentiate. Geographic reach is no longer a constraint, there are various technologies 
overlaid  on  the  Internet  that  have  addressed  these  issues.  For  example,  realtime  communications 
technologies,  geographic  visualization  tools,  and  geo-location  technologies  that  can  track  entities  to 
their nearest post codes, street-level location etc. at high precision and dimension now exist. All of these 
has  made  gaining  insights  and  understanding  of  our  environment  extremely  pertinent  and  equally 
challenging.  Complexity  is  not  a  singular  or  localised  issue.  It  is  seen  in  every  aspect  of  society,  in 
Economic, Social, Cultural, Political and Physical domains. Cognition like cyber  is very complex and 
convoluted. Mental processes are challenging to understand or program, likewise, all the other domains 
comprise of complex interlaying of knowledge and activities that are intriguing to comprehend. The fact 
that  these  domains  are  interdependent  and  interwoven,  as  no  domain  is  isolated  or  an  island  on  its 
own,  has  exacerbated  the  complexity  of  inter-domain  interaction  and  multi-domain  relationships. 
Gaining  Cyber  Foresight  or  maintaining  enhanced  situational  awareness  across  these  domains  is 
challenging. 

●  Dynamism 

Each of the domains namely Physical, Social, Cultural, Economic, Political and Cyber are different and 
so are their requirements, properties and attributes. For example, the Physical domains of Land, Sea, 
Air and Space may not be as dynamic as say the Cyber domain. The Cyber domain processes huge 
volumes of data, information and intelligence using computer networks and communications systems, 
and their operations are dynamic, complex and often abrupt as shown by the varying levels of events 
or  packets  they  process,  transmit  and  store.  Communications  are  swift,  realtime,  dynamic  and 
continuous, and computer networks process high volumes of data, information and events, and these 
can  often  be  unpredictable,  depending  on  the  activities  and  user  base  they  operate  or  transactions 
occurring  daily.  Modern  computer  systems  and  networks  are  built  with  extremely  fast  processing 
capabilities, such as GPU to boost the performance of video and graphics. They comprise multi-core 
CPUs, large memory banks and disk facilities that enable turbo fast processing of data and information. 
No  wonder  why  some  networking  devices,  such  as  routers,  switches  and  firewalls  can  process 
thousands  of  events  per  second  (EPS),  analyse  terabyte  and  even  petabytes  of  data  in  minutes. 
Analysis of any sort can now happen in seconds or tenths of minutes instead of hours. The mean time 
to detect incidents are continuously reduced and lowered; databases are now graph-based instead of 
the traditional relational-based architecture, allowing for faster input and output operations. The advent 
of  cloud  computing  has  taken  this  to  a  new  and  unprecedented  levels  as  the  power  of  parallel 

 
 
 
 
64 

processing  and  infinite  compute  augmentation  can  be  leveraged  to  render  data  and  information  at 
speeds never seen before.  

●  Fusion 

Fusion  is  a  technology  requirement  for  Cyber  Foresight.  Data  fusion  is  a  technique  to  aggregate 
disparate sets of evidence regarding a perceived situation to better understand its relationships. It is a 
capability that allows correlation and cross-correlation of multiple sensors or data sources across the 
different domains, so that information from one domain can be related with information across the other 
domains.  Multi-data  fusion  allows  for  enhanced  situational  awareness  to  be  gained  by  allowing 
information  from  one  domain  to  be  cross  correlated  among  the  other  domains,  allowing  for  greater 
visibility, understanding and comprehension of the relationships of a single incident across the domains. 
For example, by fusing information across the domains, and by correlation, incidents that would have 
gone undetected or incidents that would seem unrelated can now be identified and their relationship 
substantiated, and the wider impact can equally be uncovered and understood. Fusion allows for data 
from multiple heterogeneous sources to be combined to obtain better and higher degrees of accuracy 
and richer inferences than those obtained from a single source. According to (Hall D. L., and McMullen 
S. A. H., 2004) fusion is a collection of framework, theory, tools and techniques for exploiting the synergy 
in  the  data,  information  or  evidence  acquired  from  multiple  sources,  such  as  sensors,  databases, 
networks and humans that helps us better understand a phenomenon and enhance intelligence. We 
argue  that  data  fusion  is  better  in  detecting  wide-spreading  and  enterprise-wide  situations  (network 
faults, threats and attacks) targeting networks or enterprises as the understanding or intelligence gained 
from the analysis of multiple data sources outperform that which is gleaned from a single source. This 
is  a  fundamental  preposition  for  Cyber  Foresight,  as  enhanced  situational  awareness  is  far  more 
plausible with fusion across the domains than analysis of single items against a single domain. 

●  Heterogeneity 

Heterogeneity is a fact of all facets of life. Different tools, mechanisms and processes are used, and no 
single organisation can claim to use the same tools (homogenous) or same processes for everything. 
Certainly, in the Cyber domain, we leverage the power, quality and veracity of heterogeneity to obtain 
the best of breed in cybersecurity monitoring. Communications and computer networks, infrastructure, 
operating  systems  and  applications  are  monitored  using  heterogeneous  tools  and  techniques  to 
analyse traffic to detect vulnerabilities, cyber-attacks and data breaches. Heterogeneous data sources 
observe,  process  and  detect  dynamic  changes  in  the  network.  E.g.,  the  use  of  intrusion  detection 
systems  (IDS),  firewalls,  anti-virus  systems  and  boundary  security  controls  to  collate  security 
information events observed in the network, and the use of security information and event management 
(SIEM) tools to analyse, correlate and detect cyber incidents. Heterogeneity is applicable to the other 
domains, such as Economic, Cultural, Social and Physical domains. Through the use heterogeneous 
controls enhanced situational awareness and Cyber Foresight can be gained. Since no single control 
can identify all security threats, therefore, it is recommended to use heterogeneous controls to detect a 
wide range of threats perceived in the network, which is not possible from a single control perspective.  
We argue that observation and intelligence from myriad of multiple heterogeneous sources offer richer 
Cyber  Foresight  picture  than  that  from  a  single  source.  Similarly,  enhanced  situational  awareness  is 
gained  by  integrating,  correlating  and  cross-correlating  information  from  the  six  domains  than  that 
gained from a single domain. This is the premier of our multi-domain and multi-dimensional approach 
to cyber situational awareness for Cyber Foresight. 

● 

Interface Design (a.k.a. User Interface) 

With the huge volumes of information being generated, processed and outputted by computer network 
systems  to  the  users/operators  for  decision  making,  then  interface  designs  have  become  as  equally 
important as the complex processing capabilities inbuilt into such systems. Human operators should be 
able to use the system to make inferences, and the interface designs as much as the output should be 
intuitive  and  easy  to  understand  (usability  and  enhanced  user  experience).  These  systems  use  a 
plethora of technologies and software to implement complex business logic, some of which involve a 
finite  number  of  background  processes  that  are  transparent  to  the  operator,  and  therefore  make  it 
challenging  for  the  operator  to  swiftly  identify  sequence  of  erroneous  actions  or  detect  a fault  in  the 
system or spot when an abnormal situation is happening. To assist operators to detect, diagnose and 
remedy abnormal situations swiftly, complex computer systems should provide interfaces that enable 
human computer interaction. Operator situational awareness will be enhanced if systems can provide 
interactive UI that enable human interaction. These UIs enable Human Computer Interface (HCI) and 
feedback  loop.  Whatever  the  UI,  systems  and  their  components  need  to  interact  (intra  and  inter 

 
 
 
65 

communications), integrate and interoperate either as autonomous or interdependent systems. And this 
is  one  of  the  reasons  why  UI  design  has  become  a  significant  factor  when  assessing  situational 
awareness in systems. According to Endsley M., and Garland D. J., (2000), one of the primary reasons 
for  measuring  SA  has  been  for  the  purpose  of  evaluating  new  system  and  interface  designs.  HCI 
designs do affect operator performance and system safety. HCI design is shown to have a profound 
effect on safety assurance, particularly during emergency situations (Sandom C., 1999). For example, 
when  emergencies  arise  and  system  operators  must  react  swiftly  and  accurately,  the  situational 
awareness  of  the  operator  is  critical  to  their  ability  to  make  decisions,  revise  plans  and  to  act 
purposefully to correct the abnormal situation. This sentiment emphasises the importance of designing 
UIs  to  support  situational  awareness,  especially  in  complex  and  dynamically  changing  environment 
such  as  in  security  monitoring.  The  quality  of  a  system’s  UI  (e.g.,  aesthetics  and  accessibility) 
determines the degree of human interaction possible, such as touch, responsiveness, aural etc.  

●  Responsiveness 

Responsiveness is the ability to present data and information, especially graphics and graphical-based 
imagery,  meaningfully  across  multiple  platforms  without  the  need  to  manually  reformat  the  layout  or 
appearance. Responsiveness is a very powerful feature of Mobile and Tablets that allows these portable 
devices  to  present  information  in  readable  and  graphical  layouts  without  distortion,  especially  for 
graphical  user  interfaces  across  multiple  screen  sizes  and  dimensions.  This  is  phenomenal  when 
considering  that  most  of  the  information  and  graphics  that  are  now  displayed  nicely  on  Mobile  and 
Tablets would have been previously challenging to display without manual adjustments of the images 
to  predefined  sizes  and  shapes. This feature  on  its  own  is  important,  but  considering  the  number  of 
Mobile  users  to  date,  which  is,  4.58  billion  (Statista,  2019),  and  this  number  is  growing,  makes  this 
feature  extreme  pertinent.  Mobile  and  Tablets  are  now  mainstream  channels  of  information 
consumption, and in fact, more people access information and services on Mobile and Tablets than on 
desktops. Cyber Foresight and situational awareness of the environment and domain should therefore 
consider access from all forms of channels. Mobile and Tablets are used to disseminate and receive 
communications of all forms and classifications of information. Their ability to render services, especially 
satellite  imagery,  Geographic  Information  Systems  (GIS)  and  graphical  objects  undistorted  is  an 
important  feature to  consider. We  argue  that the  ubiquity  of  Mobile  and  Tablets  platforms,  and  their 
uses  in  modern  communications  make  them  extremely  pertinent  for  technological  considerations  to 
gain enhanced situational awareness and Cyber Foresight. This also implies to technological impact 
across all platforms – IoT, Radar, Sensors, Desktop, Mobile and Tablets.  

●  Visualisation 

Visualisation is a powerful tool to understanding relationships, not just of one domain but across multiple 
domains.  For  example,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  6  &  Fig.  7,  these  figures  help  visualise  intradomain  and 
interdomain  relationships,  providing  better  understanding  than  textual  because  relationships  can  be 
seen  and  visualised.  We  use  graphical  visualisation  to  understand  relationships  in  situations, 
connections, patterns and outliers. Security visualisation has been used to visualise patterns in cyber-
attack information, threat intelligence content (e.g., attack graph) to assist security analysts to swiftly 
spot  or  detect  a  cyber  incident.  Visualisation  is  the  display  of  organised  data  and  information  into 
meaningful patterns or sequence of actions and activities that are visualised on a dashboard, screen or 
other displays. It is shown to aid faster and better comprehension of situational awareness as visuals 
create  lasting  images  of  the  situation  and  show  both  temporal  and  spatial  relationships  among  the 
objects. Visualisation can be applied to any of the domains to understand patterns and relationships to 
quickly gain Cyber Foresight. In the Economic domain, visualisation can be applied to better understand 
the  stock  market,  macroeconomics  and  monetary  policy  impacts  on  commodities  or  shares,  for 
example. In the Political, Cultural or Social domains, it can be applied to understand social networks, 
human  and  cognitive  behaviour  and  actions,  settlement  patterns  and  demographics.  Visualisation 
allows network information, indicators of compromise (IoC) to be monitored and visualised providing 
cybersecurity analysts a rich display of ongoing or historic trend of attacks so that they can better identify 
relationships,  associations  and  traffic  patterns  and  behaviours,  and  to  process  large  amounts  of 
information concisely. According to (D’Amico A., and Kocka M., 2005) security visualisation has proven 
to be a valuable tool for working efficiently with complex data and maintaining situational awareness in 
dynamic and demanding operational environments. Visualising network activities can be useful to both 
decision makers and security analysts in identifying patterns of attacks, and in decision making, control 
selection  and  cause  of  action.  For  example,  visual  analytics  is  essential  to  obtaining  enhanced 
situational awareness in networks (Gregoire M., and Beaudoin L., 2005), understanding endpoint-level 
netflow traffic in networks (Lakkaraju K. et al., 2004), and continuous monitoring (Yin X. et al., 2008). 

 
 
66 

C4. 

Human Factors for Cyber Foresight 

Situational awareness has always been needed for people to perform tasks effectively (Endsley M. R., 
and Garland D. J., 2000) regardless of the domain of application. While technology, tools and robotic 
process automation in recent years have been used to automate tasks, and even accomplish the tasks 
faster  than  humans  and  with  a  higher  degree  of  accuracy,  however,  humans  (namely,  operators, 
analysts, and decision makers) are still needed in the ecosystem, at least for now, and hopefully, for 
the foreseeable future. Across the domains, anything and everything can be automated to a degree. AI 
and ML can now be used to ‘learn’ tasks that humans used to do, and even perform those tasks with 
improvements,  however,  contextual  intelligence  without  human  in  the  loop  is  still  uncommon.  The 
argument is not that it could not or would not happen, the argument is that you will still need humans to 
provide citizen feature engineering and domain knowledge expertise required to codify and ‘learn’ what 
good  looks  like  or  not,  which  is  offered  by  a  citizen  data  scientist.  Even  with  unsupervised  learning, 
where ‘learning’ is claimed to be unsupervised, it does require human input and guidance, at least of 
the data and the business domain of the problem to be solved. In cybersecurity, where automation and 
ML are now at the forefront of defence controls, especially around endpoint protection and boundary 
control analysis, malware detection and behavioral analytics, yet we still rely on humans for decision 
making, cyber incident response, incident coordination and operational security monitoring. Therefore, 
it  is  pertinent  to  discuss  human  factors  regardless.  We  argue  that  human  operators  gain  enhanced 
situational awareness of the domains, the environment and the context in order that Cyber Foresight 
can be gained through many enablers, and the impact therefore of the stressors, too. In this paper, we 
divide Human Factors into two categories, namely Human Factors Enablers, such as knowledge, skills 
and  abilities,  experience,  training,  cognition  and  group  or  team  experience  and  support.  The  other 
Human  Factors  are  what  we  term  Human  Factor  Blockers.  We  explain  Human  Factor  Blockers  as 
factors that inhibit (or worsen) situational awareness of an individual or group of persons (e.g., shared 
stressors).  These  factors  include  stress,  mental  health  and  wellbeing,  anxiety,  workload,  working 
conditions, health & safety and diversity, equality and inclusion (see detailed discussions on these in 
Section – C4.1 and C4.2).  

Figure 5: Human Factors Requirements for Cyber Foresight 

Fig. 5 is our illustration of Human Factor requirements for Cyber Foresight. This picture depicts a human 
operator being asked to ‘make sense’ of dynamic and spontaneous flowing network traffic information 
and  alert  scenarios,  that  is,  to  monitor  the  network.  First,  network traffic  is  processed  and  analysed 
using a plethora of very complex technologies and tools, such as firewalls, antivirus systems, intrusion 
detection systems (IDS), flow analyser, security information and event management (SIEM) systems, 
etc. Each processing huge volumes of data using complex automated processes and workflows and 
producing information in dynamic changing but abrupt frequencies. Cues and prompts are rendered as 
alerts  to  the  human  operator  (e.g.,  security  analyst,  SOC  operator).  Graphs  and  trends  of  varying 
colours are displayed on the dashboard (and in most cases on multiple dashboards and screens), which 
the analyst must check and investigate.  

 
 
 
 
67 

As  shown  in Fig.  5, there  are  several  important  questions  the  analyst  needs  answers.  For  example, 
given all these myriads of information and cues: 

1.  When do I know something has gone wrong?  
2.  What  cues  and  prompts  reliably  show/depict  a  compromise  or  security  breach?  (Due  to  the 

high false positives with most IDS, this is not such a trivial question)? 

3.  What happens if the information or evidence produced by two or multiple sources are in conflict 

and non-complementary? 

4.  What happens if the information is incomplete or inconclusive? 

In response to the above questions, there are likely to be several assumptions. 

●  Assumption #1: The analyst will be prompted automatically by the alerts or alarms that are 
triggered by the sources and controls, such as IDS, SIEM whenever an event/incident occurs. 
●  Assumption #2: The display (e.g., dashboard, or visualisation) will provide varying degrees of 
visual  clues  e.g.,  fluctuations  in  peaks  and  troughs  of  the  trendline,  changing  colours  of  the 
metrics being monitored etc. to indicate abnormal changes in the traffic being monitored. There 
is likely to be changes in the traffic volumes, too, especially from baseline profile. 

●  Assumption #3: The helpdesk (e.g., assuming the organisation has a helpdesk function) and 
impacted customers might contact the analyst on phone, SMS, email or use other channels, 
e.g., slack, to enquire of the failure in service, network outage or incident.  

The  analyst  will  have  to  contend  with  the  high  rate  of  change,  velocity,  volume  and  veracity  of  the 
monitoring  environment,  and  including  other  things  beyond  his  control.  For  example,  cyber-attacks 
happen  unannounced,  and  no  one  knows  when  a  cyber  incident  will  occur.  Also,  multiple  and  multi-
stage attacks may occur simultaneously. Furthermore, because cyber-attacks require immediate and 
instant  response  to  mitigate  the  attack  to  reduce  and  minimise  the  impact,  and  most  importantly  to 
preserve forensic evidence which may be analysed at a later stage to understand who conducted the 
attack,  where from,  what  they  did,  and  probably  if they  left  a  backdoor  to  carry  out  future  attacks  or 
security breaches. With all of these, the analyst is faced with further questions such as: 

a)  Do I understand what is going on? - It is probably not going to be a binary answer of ‘Yes’ or 
‘No’. This answer will depend on several other factors, for example, internal and external factors 
to  the  user.  One  of  the  internal  factors  will  be.  Does  the  user  possess  the  experience  to 
understand what is going? Has the user been trained? A couple of the external factors to the 
user, will be, are there sufficient information or intelligence provided in order that the user can 
make sense of the situation? The information outputted by the monitoring tools is it reliable? 
There  are  many  other  factors  that  will  need  to  be  addressed  to  appropriately  answer  these 
questions. 

b)  Do I have enough information and data to make sense of the situation? 
c) 

Is the information presented to me in a manner that is readily easy to help me quickly identify 
the problem? 

d)  Have I been appropriately trained about the monitoring system and what to expect in such an 

environment? 

e)  Have I worked in a similar environment before (e.g., prior knowledge)? 
f)  Who could assist me if I do not know, and to whom could I escalate to? 

The above questions could be amplified in certain environments and domains but providing appropriate 
responses would require the continuous extraction of information and meaning about a dynamic system 
and its environment. The ability to combine this information with previously acquired knowledge to form 
a coherent mental picture, and the use of that picture in directing further perception of, anticipation of, 
and attention to future events (Wickens C. D., 2008). It is this process that allows Cyber Foresight to 
be gained of the situation, its environment and the context. 

C4.1.  Human Factor Enablers 

Human Factor Enablers help answer the questions posed by Fig. 5. We discuss them as follows: 

●  Cognition 

We discuss cognition in relation to operators’ mental ability to recognise, understand and comprehend 
cyber  situations,  e.g.,  an  outbreak  of  malware,  attempted  intrusion,  information  manipulation, 
gamification  of  the  monitored  systems, cyber  espionage,  incident  investigation  etc.  Achieving  Cyber 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 

Foresight against these cyber situations requires a combination of tech and human cognitive abilities 
(Endsley  M.  R.,  and  Connors  E.,  2012).  Operator  cognition  is  as  important  as  technology  because 
operators’ cognition is helpful in identifying and recognising situations. Cyber security experts rely on 
their  experience,  abilities  and  knowledge  of  the  domain  (e.g.,  domain  experts)  to  understand  cyber 
situations. Operators’ cognition of situations is built upon their prior knowledge of existing situations or 
similar situations to the existing one. Their understanding is much better through their mental processing 
if they have seen, observed, handled or dealt with similar situations in the past. For example, related to 
observations they had seen in the past, patterns they recognised and relationships that they are familiar 
with. All these draws on the mental apriori of the operator. We argue that operators possess improved 
cognition when they are trained and experienced; obviously when they are aided through the power, 
pace  and  accuracy  offered  by technology  the  outcomes  are  far  much  better.  Experienced  operators 
leverage  historical  or  past  knowledge  (mental  apriori)  of  the  situation  to  make  better  and  informed 
decision. That is, if it is a situation the operator had previously handled, the operator is most likely to 
understand it better and hence be quicker and appropriate in responding to the situation. That said, the 
operator must first understand the situation, the nature of the attacks, what the attacks are targeting to 
exploit (e.g., vulnerability that may exist in the asset), and with all these able to assess the impact and 
possible remedies, and on how best to respond swiftly to reduce the impact. There are occasional cases 
where operator judgement without prior knowledge or experience of the situation may be appropriate, 
however, this does not negate the necessity of prior knowledge and experience. 

●  Experience 

Experience is a measure of understanding a person has or possesses of a specific area or field. It does 
not and should not correlate to the number of years that person has been working in that field. While it 
is expected that the longer one works in a certain area or on some certain tasks then the better, they 
become  at  it  and  hence  reflects  their  experience.  This  does  not  negate  the  possibility  that  certain 
individuals learn faster and perform better. In relation to Cyber Foresight, experience is key to gaining 
situational awareness of adversarial techniques, tactics and approach. To have cyber superiority of any 
kind, the mission must have experienced people who are not only able to understand the adversary but 
most importantly their approach, techniques and tactics, which would allow them to intercept, prevent 
and detect the adversaries’ attempts and intrusions, and ultimately foil their intent. The adversary may 
target a domain or multiple domains therefore, it is important to gain insights of the weaknesses and 
vulnerabilities that may exist across the domains (cross domain situational assessment). 

●  Training 

Training  is  essential  in  all  walks  of  life.  It  is  invaluable  in  today’s  technologically  fast-paced  modern 
world. The pace of technology and technological advances necessitates the need for lifelong learning 
and upskilling. To ensure analysts are good on their job, they need training (upskilled and reskilled). 
The  fast  pace  of  the  modern  cyber  world  means  that  new  techniques,  processes,  methods  and 
applications are frequently introduced. Hence operators are now required to be trained and re-trained 
much  more  frequently  to  cope  with  the  increasing  speed  of  technological  advancements.  Take  for 
example, technology refresh cycle is now between 12 - 18 months (used to be 24 months or more), 
meaning new technologies are introduced ever so frequently. Operators of the new technologies will 
need to be trained on the new technologies, and while this is going on, it is likely that their ability to 
understand  and  comprehend  information  produced  by  these  techs  will  improve  over  time. That  said, 
training  is  not  a  panacea  as  these  operators  work  in dynamically  changing  environments,  therefore, 
they are expected not only to know the systems and their outputs, but also, be experts in interpreting 
the meaning of the outcomes from these systems. Training Needs Analysis (TNA) is an assessment 
that allows an organisation to determine the skills gap (skills needs) in its employees, so that appropriate 
training  opportunities  can  be  tailored  to  meet  the  needs  of  its  employee  to  do  their  work  better. 
Unfortunately,  training  provided  without  prior  assessment  of  the  needs  of  employees  could  result  in 
training  being  provided  to  people  who  do  not  need  it,  or  the  wrong  training  being  provided.  TNA  is 
required for employment purposes across most verticals (Gould D. et.al, 2004). It has recently been 
applied  to  cybersecurity  related  roles  and  including  information  technology  to  evaluate  and  design  a 
systematic package of learning for IT staff. TNA should be an ongoing continuous process useful for 
determining training needs. This has become even more important in cybersecurity related roles, first, 
because of the skills gap in cybersecurity roles, and secondly, and more fundamental, because of the 
increasing  change  and  the  introduction  of  new  aspects  in  cybersecurity.  For  example,  there  are 
emerging aspects in cybersecurity that were never thought about some years ago, such as machine 
learning  in  cybersecurity,  digital  forensics,  security  analytics,  cybersecurity  operations  centre, 
Blockchain in cybersecurity etc. These advances in cyber have brought its own challenges, and these 

 
 
 
69 

may have exacerbated the already known cyber skills shortage. Due to these reasons, cybersecurity 
demands a coherent and structured learning and training programme. According to (Brown J., 2002), 
TNA is required to determine and create an effective training programme. We argue that to create an 
efficient cybersecurity programme to support Cyber Foresight, a continuous training needs assessment 
should be in place, and a structured training programme that stems from TNA must be deployed for the 
organisation. Through providing appropriate training to operator (e.g., security analysts, administrators 
and incident responders) will their understanding of situations improve, and arguably, combined with a 
healthy mental wellbeing should improve their overall situational awareness. 

●  KSA (Knowledge, Skills and Abilities) 

The human operators should gain the necessary and appropriate knowledge, skills and abilities required 
to perform their duties regardless of the domain.  

Knowledge is gained through training, reading, education and apprenticeship. A cybersecurity analyst, 
like a medical doctor, a nurse or an engineer needs to be taught the basics and the foundation of their 
profession, this may be through attending college, university or self-schooling, whichever, they need 
the knowledge required for the professional work they intend to undertake. 

Skills are gained once knowledge is achieved. Skill is gained by the constant application of knowledge. 
For  example,  a  Cyber  security  graduate  is  taught  the  foundation  of  computing,  programming, 
information security and networking at college, university or tertiary institutions of some sort; but that 
candidate  once  graduated  will  need  to  apply  the  knowledge  gained  from  education  at  work  and  by 
constantly doing so, he/she will perfect and gain the skills required to become a skilled worker in their 
various specialties. Skill is a specific aspect of knowledge. Knowledge is broad while skill is narrower 
and  more  focused. For  example,  one may  have  knowledge  about  computing  but  lack skills  to  repair 
computers. A typical example is a candidate who earns a bachelor’s degree in computing, may not have 
the skills to programming and code development but may have the skills to repair computers; therefore, 
although he/she is knowledgeable in computing but lacks programming skills. 

Ability  is  a  higher  level  of  skill.  We  define  ability  as the  level  of  applicability  of  a  specific  skill. Ability 
levels are used to distinguish and differentiate expertise and competency levels. Frameworks exist such 
as the SFIA Framework (SFIA, 2018) that defines different levels of ability and competency levels (a.k.a. 
Responsibility  levels)  per  specialist  areas,  such  as  Practitioner  level,  Senior  Level,  and  Lead  Level. 
Each level reflects the ability, competency, and responsibility required to appropriately execute that role 
and the responsibility accorded to that level, e.g., degree of autonomy, influence, complexity, knowledge 
and business skills. Hence, ability is not just about skills but also, includes required responsibility. 

To gain Cyber Foresight, human operators should possess the requisite KSA appropriate for their role, 
responsibility and domain. This is more important these days than ever because of the changing nature 
of our modern technologically driven world. For example, computers are far more automated than ever 
and the advent of big data, cloud computing and the use of machine learning and artificial intelligence 
means  that the  operator  is  overwhelmed  with  far more  information  than  were  previously  seen.  Plus, 
these sets of information are provided at pace never seen before. Operator awareness, knowledge and 
skills are challenged every day and the level of sophistication and advancement means that operators 
must continuously train, reskill and upskill. Also, the advancement means that techniques used, say in 
cybersecurity to attack systems and to compromise critical assets are far more advanced these days. 
Emerging threats and bad actors use obscure programming techniques to evade detection (Computer 
Weekly, 2022), while others use a combination of automation, bots etc. to evade detection, either by 
conducting activities at pace that existing defences find challenging to detect or are overwhelmed that 
they may fail to spot or detect the attack. Hence, the knowledge, skills and abilities required to detect 
modern  complex  cyber-attacks  do  require  a  multidisciplinary  approach.  That  is,  a  multidisciplinary 
knowledge, skills and abilities ranging from linguistics, psychology, human factors to cybersecurity. The 
threats facing modern society is varying, complex and sophisticated, as such, the workforce requires 
multidimensional and multidisciplinary approach. 

C4.2.  Human Factors Blockers 

Human  Factors  Blockers  are  factors,  circumstances  or  preconditions  that  inhibit  the  performance, 
cognition, and overall mental wellbeing of an operator or team / group of operators. We discuss Human 
Factor Blockers from a standpoint of the cyber operators rather than a generalist contribution, therefore, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 

we note that the list of Human Factor Blockers discussed in this paper is neither aimed to be exhaustive 
nor complete. 

●  Comprehension  

A  cyber  programme,  (e.g.,  a  SOC)  is  one  that  comprises  hundreds  of  thousands  of  assets  (e.g., 
endpoints,  servers,  switches,  routers,  etc.),  tens  of  different  and  diverse  security  controls  (e.g.,  IDS, 
firewalls, anti-malware gateways, anti-virus, DLP, encryptors, key materials etc.), and several network 
infrastructures and segments which SOC operators continuously and protectively monitor. Each of the 
endpoints  produce  logs,  events,  flows, metrics  and  other  business  logic  that  are  often  different,  use 
different  formats  and  standards.  While  tools  such  as  security  information  and  event  management 
(SIEM) may be used to normalise and correlate information, still there are myriad of intelligence, cues 
and  prompts  that  are  produced  that the SOC  analyst should  understand,  comprehend  and  therefore 
respond  to.  Maintaining  a  high-level  situational  awareness  over  such  an  environment  is  not  trivial 
(Onwubiko, C. and Owens J.T., 2011). Endpoints usually produce and generate high volumes of logs; 
unfortunately, high volumes of logs do not equate to high fidelity in the evidence generated by the logs. 
Secondly,  sensors  are  used to monitor,  and  correlate logs  generated  by  the  endpoints  to  determine 
whether  they  are  genuine  indicators  of  compromise.  Unfortunately,  when  using  multiple  sensors 
(multisensor fusion), we are often faced with the challenge that evidence from multiple sensors can be 
complementary, conflicting and incomplete. The challenge lies in an approach to manage conflicting 
and  incomplete  evidence  received  from  multiple  sensors,  and  the  reliability  of  such  information  or 
evidence. The evidence (in the form of logs, events or messages) from sensors are sometimes non-
existent, conflicting  or  incomplete.  That  notwithstanding,  the  analyst  is  expected  to  understand  such 
situations, and more so, are expected to investigate and respond to incidents that result from the myriad 
of disparate assets. The SOC analysts may be trained on one or many technologies, may understand 
the behaviour of one or many controls, but the symptomatic evidence that each produces under different 
situations  are  often  different,  and there  will  be  situations  that  the  analyst  may  have  not  experienced 
before, and even if they do, the incidents may be subtly different. We argue that analyst’s situational 
awareness  of  cyber  situation  (e.g.,  data  breach,  cyber  incident,  etc.)  is  considerably  good  when  it 
leverages tools and technologies that can detect many cyber situations; however, understanding, and 
knowing what the incidents are related to, and what may have caused the incidents are a totally different 
issue, and are by far beyond the basic cues and prompts offered by technology. The cyber analyst’s 
mental ability, experience, cognition and understanding are all tested in this situation. Comprehension 
is not merely being aware of a situation, but rather, a much deeper understanding, insight and knowing 
(knowledge) far beyond the superficiality provided by the cues and alerts. 

●  Mental Health & Wellbeing 

Our focus is on the cyber operator mental health and wellbeing, either as an individual, and as a team 
or group of operators; so, through this work, we assess factors that are likely to impact the mental health 
of cyber operators and consequently impact their cognition, productivity and efficiency. 

○  Stress 

Stress is a manifestation of poor health and sociological wellness. Symptoms of stress include lack of 
coordination, irritability, poor outlook, poor cognition and depression. Stress could be caused by many 
things, for example, workplace related stress, workload related stress and technostress. Other causes 
of stress include family-related stress, relationship-related stress, event-related stress etc. Our focus in 
this paper is stress related to operators at workplace, hence the three types of stress considered are: 
workplace  related  stress,  workload  related  stress  and  technostress.  Stress  can  lead  to  diminished 
responsibility,  lack  of  awareness  and  a  general  poor  outlook.  It  is  imperative  that  cyber  operators, 
especially  those  tasked  with  monitoring  critical  national,  and  business  critical  services  are  regularly 
assessed  to  ensure  they  are  in  good  health  conditions.  Technostress  is  defined  as  psychosomatic 
illness caused by working with computer technology daily, or the negative psychological link between 
people and the introduction of new technologies (Wikipedia 2019). The fast-paced workplace, and the 
continuous changing technological landscape at workplace is shown to cause technostress (Ayyagari 
R. et al., 2011, Tarafdar, M., Tu, Q., and Ragu-Nathan, T.S., 2010, Lundgren M., and Bergstrom, E., 
2019). Workplace-related stress and technostress should be minimised, and this can be achieved by 
ensuring that operators are not overwhelmed with endless activities and that there is a work life balance. 
Operators’ workload should be regularly assessed as workload is known to contribute to stress, anxiety 
and causes operators to feel overwhelmed. Operators should be encouraged to have periodic time off 
from  work,  this  is  particularly  essential  for  operators  who  work  shifts,  weekends,  antisocial  and  long 
hours. This category of operators should be encouraged to take regular time off. Studies have shown 

 
 
 
 
71 

that  fatigue  is  a  contributing  factor  to  technostress,  in addition  to  the  rapid  and  constant  changes  in 
technology,  pace  of  change  and  complexity  (Ayyagari  R.  et  al.,  2011).  It  is  therefore  imperative  that 
operators have appropriate rest and relaxation. We argue that technostress and work-related anxieties 
are not caused by workload alone but by the increasing complexity in technology, exacerbated by the 
pace of change and constant changes in organisational strategy. For example, in a certain government 
department, we observed that over a period of three months, more than 15 people resigned, majority 
of them cited reasons for their resignation to be work stress either resulting from workload and lack of 
clear directions by the senior management team or too many changes too frequently. While this is not 
a  purely  academic  and  scientific  assessment,  it  is  equally  not  a  pure  coincidence.  People  get 
disillusioned when there are far too frequent changes, especially when such changes do not seem to 
be  accompanied  by  a  clear  sense  of  direction  or  purpose.  Communication  at  workplace  is  lacking. 
People are not often informed on what is going on at workplace, or what may be coming their way, and 
so often, when communications are sent out, they are buried with other ephemeral emails that people 
do not bother reading. Email communications are often not clear and follow up conference calls or what 
is  expected  of  employees  are  often  missing  or  not  properly  articulated,  and  the  rationale  for  such 
changes are not stated in such emails. 

○  Anxiety 

Anxiety,  which  can  be  caused  by  many  things  including  fear,  apprehension  and  uncertainty  causes 
restlessness  to  operators  which  in  turn  may  lead  to  poor  cognition  and  wellbeing.  Security-related-
anxiety  can  be  caused  my  many  factors,  such  as  a  demanding  job,  pace  of  change  in  technology, 
especially  those  that  require  regular  or  uphill  training  and  examination  and,  in  some  cases,  require 
specialist prerequisite skills which many operators may not have. 

●  Workload 

According  to  Lee  C.  et  al.  2016,  the  two  major  causes  of  information  security  related  stress  are 
technology  and job,  and  it  has  been  shown that  work overload  and  invasion  of  privacy  are the main 
culprits (Ayyagari et al., 2011, Moore 2000).  Studies have shown that workload, especially extreme 
and  constant  workload,  has  a  correlation  to  poor  cognition.  It  is  no  wonder  why  most  safety  related 
professions  have  restrictions  and  regulations  to  the  number  of  hours  they  work.  There  is  a  federal 
regulation  to  the  maximum  number  of  hours  pilots  are  restricted  to  fly  per  month.  According  to  the 
Federation Aviation Administration (FAA, 2010), it is recognised that adequate rest of pilot is important 
to maintaining aviation safety. It is cited and shown that pilot’s fatigue is a contributing factor and threat 
to flight safety (NYT, 1988).  Similarly, clinicians, such as nurses and doctors are regulated, too. Unlike 
cyber operators, there is no such regulation that we know of, and because of this lack of regulation, 
cyber operators may work longer hours, especially during a major cyber incident or crisis. Further, cyber 
operators  often  work  shifts,  for  instance  in  SOCs  and NOCs,  working  weekends,  and  including  anti-
social  hours  and  festive  period.  The  backdrop  of  this  is  that  where  appropriate  measures  are 
nonexistent,  cyber  operators  are  overworked  and  this  could  lead  to  reduced  cognition,  poor  mental 
agility and declined productivity. 

●  Working Conditions & Practices 

Time is of the essence.  Cyber incidents require immediate attention to respond to the attack, and most 
importantly to restore services. Cyber dictates the shortest mean time to detect and respond to a cyber-
attack. This  means,  unlike  traditional  security  incidents,  such  as  physical  break-in,  data  centre  theft, 
etc.,  cyber  incident  dictates  speed  and  accuracy.  The  reason  is  because  if  a  cyber  incident  is  left 
unattended, the attacker may delete, steal, tamper and destroy evidence that could be used to establish 
who the attacker was, how the incident happened, and what may have been compromised in addition. 
The cyber environment is always dynamic, continuous, and fast paced. Cyber incidents are sudden, ad 
hoc  and  unannounced,  hence  cyber  operators  must  always  be  ready  and  available  (a.k.a.  cyber 
readiness).  Like  a  crisis,  cyber  incidents  require  immediate  response.  Cyber  operators  are  often 
overworked,  under  constant  pressure,  which  is  demanded  of  the  job,  especially  at  times  of  cyber 
incidents or crisis. With the increasing rise in cyber-attacks, cyber incidents and security breaches are 
also frequent. Emerging cyber-attacks are complex and sometimes coordinated, making them harder 
to detect. The complexity of emerging cyber-attacks mean that not only are the skills and experience of 
cyber operators challenged, but also, their aptitude and determination are equally tested. Those working 
in highly sensitive and high demanding environments and especially those protecting critical national 
security may be worse off. Further, the scarcity of good cyber experts a reflection of cyber skills shortage 
does not help the current situation. Working in an environment that is constantly demanding, while at 
the same time, you are required to react and swiftly respond in the event of an incident is challenging. 

 
 
 
 
72 

The  rapidly  changing  technology  and  process  mean  that  cognition  and  mental  wellbeing  of  cyber 
operators may be negatively impacted. There is a high likelihood that over time cyber operators may 
experience  poor  cognition,  reduced  mental  well-being  and  overall  poor  mental  health  resulting  from 
working conditions and practices. 

IV. 

Cross-Domain Cybersecurity Situational Awareness 

Situational awareness allows us to make sense or understand the cues that are produced by networks, 
systems  and  operational  activities from  which  to  gain  better  comprehension  of  the  nature, state  and 
impending situation. Business risks need understanding and so are business requirements and both go 
hand in hand. Understanding of the changing political, cultural and economic landscapes are important, 
too. Better decision making is achieved when all the disparate information is collated, correlated and 
analysed. While single events or events produced by one tool may be limited in view, we argue that 
having wide view of all the events produced across the estate allow for better situational awareness. 
Fig. 6 is an illustration of how Cyber Foresight can be gained on a single domain, e.g., Physical domain. 
A single domain spans multiple layers, such as physical layer, network layer, data layer, information 
layer,  application  layer  and  service  layer.  The  awareness,  comprehension,  resolution  and  prediction 
still happen in a single domain. While foresight can be gained, but it is still of a single domain. There is 
no doubt that insights gained on a single domain but from various layers offer richer and better insights 
than that gained from a single layer on a single domain. We argue that to gain strategic Cyber Foresight 
and Cyber Superiority, insights from all the six domains should be considered and harnessed.  

Figure 6: Intra-Domain Cybersecurity Situational Awareness (Intra-Domain CyberSA) 

Figure 7: Cross-Domain Cybersecurity Situational Awareness (Cross-Domain CyberSA) 

A multidimensional approach allows for information, knowledge, cues and intelligence gathered from 
the  various  domains  to  be  collected,  collated,  processed,  analysed  and  disseminated  allowing  the 
mission or organisation an uninterrupted access to a great deal of intelligence, which invariably offer 
enhanced  situational  awareness  over  intelligence  or  information  from  a  singular,  non-coordinated 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 

domain. In addition, important decision makings can be collaborative, and shared across the domains 
in a coordinated fashion allowing for cooperation and accountability. 

It is of note to distinguish between intra-domain (see Fig. 6) and inter-domain (see Fig. 7) cybersecurity 
situational awareness. 

Intra-domain cybersecurity situational awareness (Intra-domain CyberSA) is the collection, processing 
and analysis of cues, prompts, information and intelligence from multiple layers of a single domain (see 
Fig. 6). For example, the collection, processing and analysis of cues, information and intelligence in, 
and of a single domain e.g., Physical domain.  

Inter-domain cybersecurity situational awareness (Inter-domain CyberSA) is the collection, processing 
and analysis of cues, prompts, information and intelligence from multiple layers across multiple domains 
(see  Fig.  7).  For  example,  collection,  processing  and  analysis  of  cues,  prompts,  information  and 
intelligence across the six domains of the Physical, Cultural, Economic, Social, Political and Cyber. We 
argue  that  inter-domain  situational  awareness  offers  strategic  Cyber  Foresight  over  situational 
awareness gained of a single domain. The rationale is that awareness, comprehension and prediction 
stemming from processing of cues and prompts from a single domain is limited and does not offer the 
overarching understanding of impending issues in the other domains, neither is it aware of contextual 
information  and  intelligence  outside  its  own  domain.  Consequently,  which  may  impact the  accuracy, 
reliability  and  completeness  needed,  and  therefore  is  likely  not  to  provide  a  complete  picture  of  the 
entire situation. 

Table 4: Differences between intra-domain and inter-domain relationship 

Intra-domain 
Within a single domain 
Across multiple layers in a single domain 
Localised situational awareness of a single 
domain 
Cyber Foresight of a single domain 

Constrained and limited  

Inter-domain 
Across multiple domains 
Across multiple layers across multiple domains 
Domain-wide situational awareness across 
multiple domains and across multiple layers 
Cyber Foresight across multiple domains offering 
holistic and strategic foresight 
Scalable and robust 

V. 

Conclusions and Future work 

Cybersecurity  (i.e.,  secure  and  safe  cyberspace)  should  be  everyone’s  goal  and  priority  –  citizens, 
industry, academia, government and nations. It should also be a multidisciplinary and multidimensional 
endeavour  requiring  concerted  efforts  from  everyone  –  lawmakers,  law  enforcement,  government, 
policy  makers,  investors,  practitioners,  technologists,  stakeholders  and  supply  chain.  Cooperation 
through multilateral agreements, open and transparent voluntary commitments – rules of engagement 
and responsible behaviour in cyberspace should be the norm. 

Cyber Foresight – the ability to understand current cyber situations or circumstances, the preparation 
and capability to identify future cyber situations, and the capacity to address these situations – is gained 
through a multidisciplinary and multidimensional continuous approach. Cyber Foresight encompasses 
knowledge, understanding, and insight into the current cyber situations or circumstances, the readiness 
and  preparedness  to  understand  plausible  future  situations  and/or  scenarios,  and  the  capacity  to 
address (deter, deflect and resist) the emerging future cyber situations. As noted by the European Union 
Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA, 2021), gaining or acquiring Cybersecurity Foresight is complex. It 
requires  multi-stage  and  continuous  endeavour  that  involves  strategic  planning,  preparation  and 
development  aimed  for  informed  decision  marking  for  securing  current  and  future  possible 
developments. So, the goal for National Cyber Foresight should focus on: 

• 
• 

• 
• 

• 

responsible behaviour in cyberspace,  
capability enhancement to gain understanding and insights of ‘bad actors’ and noncooperating 
or hostile Nations,  
cooperation among multilateral stakeholders, and  
through  a  multidisciplinary  and  multidimensional  collaboration  to  understand  plausible 
emerging and future cyber situations, and  
capacity to deter, deflect and resist adversarial infringement. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 

Planning, designing, deploying and executing cybersecurity programmes (e.g., cybersecurity capacity 
centres,  National  cybersecurity  agency,  cyber  fusion  centres  etc.)  requires  a  multidisciplinary  and 
multidimensional  approach.  As  discussed  in  this  paper,  multidimensional  cybersecurity  fosters 
collaboration and cooperation across multiple domains, not just one domain/dimensional approach of 
focusing  on  technical  capabilities  alone.  An  adoption  of  an  inclusive  and  encompassing  approach 
considering impacts from and to the other domains, e.g., Physical, Cultural, Economic, Social, Political 
and Cyber domains. 

Business,  Operational,  Technological  and  Human  factors  contribute  to  achieving  multidimensional 
cybersecurity.  Business  Factors  allow  organisation-wide  business  requirements  to  be  successfully 
executed  toward  achieving  cost,  performance  and  business  efficiencies. Operational  Factors  ensure 
operational aspects of the cybersecurity programme are addressed, and they help fulfill the objectives 
of the Technology Factors when implemented correctly and also, ensure Business Factors are met. 

Human Factors in cybersecurity cannot be overemphasised. Strategic cybersecurity foresight is not a 
product, or an end game but a journey. It is underpinned on our determination to embed and practice 
consciously the rules of responsible behaviour to improve the quality of our service, diversity, equity 
and  inclusion,  consideration  for  ESG  and  sustainability,  a  drive  to  ensure  ethical  use  of  artificial 
intelligence and cognition for adequacy in our data privacy practices.  

Situational  awareness  is  a  human  attribute;  therefore,  it  is  so  challenging  to  demonstrate  when  it  is 
earned from a technology standpoint. Several factors constituting technology can enable foresight to 
be gained by the operators of the systems through training, experience, training and needs assessment 
(TNA),  knowledge,  skills  and  abilities.  Unfortunately,  there  are  other  factors  that  could  inhibit  or  limit 
operator situational awareness such as stress, anxiety, workload, environment and cognition.  

Future  work  should  explore  a  multidisciplinary  collaboration  of  domain  experts  across  Foresight, 
Linguistics,  Humanities,  Psychology,  Sociology,  Cybersecurity,  Artificial  intelligence  and  Policy  to 
develop sample application use cases for Cyber Foresight for selected scenarios or cyber situations. 
The selected cyber scenarios should focus on generally applicable scenarios initially. 

VI.  References 

Anderson R. and Moore T. (2006), “The Economics of Information Security”, University of Cambridge, Computer Laboratory, 

2006. Retrieved July 2021 from https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~rja14/Papers/sciecon2.pdf 

Alberts D. S., Garstka J. J., Hayes R. E. and Signori D. A. (2001), “Understanding Information Age Warfare”, CCRP, August 

2001. 

Australian ACSC (2015), "Introduction to Cross Domain Solutions", 2015. Accessed 25th Jan 2019 

https://acsc.gov.au/publications/protect/Cross_Domain_Solutions.pdf 

Australia Cybersecurity (2020), “Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020”. Retrieved August 2021 from 

https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/about-us/our-portfolios/cyber-security/strategy/australia%E2%80%99s-cyber-
security-strategy-2020 

Ayyagari R., Grover V., and Purvis R. (2011), “Technostress: Technological Antecedents and Implications. MIS Quarterly Vol. 

35 No. 4 pp. 831-858, December 2011 

BBC (2016), "Pound plunges after Leave vote", The British Broadcasting Corporation, 24 June 2016. Retrieved August 2021 

from https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-36611512  

BBC (2019), “How does BREXIT affect the Pound?”, 2019. Accessed 26 Feb 2019. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-

46862790 

BBC (2019) - External Factors - PESTEC - National, Accessed April 2019 
https://www.bbc.com/bitesize/guides/zgfrpbk/revision/1 

Bertoli G., (2018), “The Elusive Nature of Cyber Terrain” CSIAC Journal, Cyber Security & Information Systems Information 

Analysis Center, Volume 6, Number 2, July 2018, pp.40-47 

Borgatti S. P. and Halgin D. S. (1998) - Chapter 1 Elicitation Techniques for Cultural Domain Analysis, in Schensul, Jean & 

Margaret Weeks (Eds.) 1999. The Ethnographic Toolkit. Sage Publications. http://steveborgatti.com/papers/bhetk.pdf 

Brangetto P. and Aubyn M. KS. (2015), "Economic aspects of national cyber security strategies". Project Report, Brown J., 

(2002), “Training Needs Assessment: A Must for Developing an Effective Training Program”, Public Personnel 
Management, Volume 31 No. 4 Winter 2002 

Chapman B. (2018), "Huawei poses a security risk to UK telecoms network, British spies warn", Independent Newspaper. 

Accessed 22nd Jan 2019. https://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/huawei-uk-security-risk-telecoms-
network-gchq-warning-a8456006.html 

Cheng E. (2021), “Another group of U.S.-listed China stocks plunge as Beijing regulators crack down”, CNBC. Published Fr. Jul 
23, 2021. Retrieved August 2021 from https://www.cnbc.com/2021/07/23/us-listed-china-education-stocks-plunge-as-
beijing-regulators-crack-down.html 

Chinese Cybersecurity Law (2017), “Cybersecurity Law of the People’s Republic of China”, - Translated in English. Retrieved 

August 2021 from https://iapp.org/resources/article/cybersecurity-law-of-the-peoples-republic-of-china-english-
translation/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75 

Computer Weekly (2022), “Malicious Actors turn to Obscure Programming Languages”. 26 July 2021. Retrieved Jan 2022 from 

https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252504470/Malicious-actors-turn-to-obscure-programming-languages 

CNN (2020), “2016 Presidential Campaign Hacking Fast Facts”, CNN Editorial Research, Updated 1512 GMT, October 28, 

2020. Retrieved August 2021 from https://edition.cnn.com/2016/12/26/us/2016-presidential-campaign-hacking-fast-
facts/index.html 

Cumiford D. L. (2006), “Situation Awareness for Cyber Defense”, 2006 CCRTS – The State of the Art and the State of the 

Practice, Sandia National Laboratories, MS 0455, USA, 2006 

D'Amico  A.  and  Kocka  M.,  (2005),  “Information  Assurance  Visualisation  for  Specific  Stages  of  Situational  Awareness  and 

Intended Uses: Lessons Learned”, Workshop on Visualisation for Computer Security, USA, 2005. 

Dawis R. and Lifquist L. H. (1987), “Measurement of person-environment fit and prediction of satisfaction in the theory of work 

adjustment”, J Vocat Behav 1987; 31(3):297-318 

Dictionary Online (2019), “Foresight”. https://www.dictionary.com/browse/foresight 
Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (2005). Retrieved April 8, 2019, from 
https://www.thefreedictionary.com/operational+architecture 

DoD MNE7 (2013), "Multinational Experiment 7, Outcome 3 – Cyber Domain, Objective 3.2 - Information Sharing Framework, 

22 January 2013.  Accessed 22nd Jan 2019 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2017/04/26/dod_js_j7_part_2_022713.pdf 

Duerst M. and Eichhorn E. (2020) "The Future State of Value-Driven Consumer Goods", Gartner 
Endsley M. R. (1995), “Toward a Theory of Situation Awareness in Dynamic Systems. Human Factors Journal 37(1), 32-64, 

March 1995. 

Endsley M. R., and Connors E., (2012), “Situation Awareness in Cyber Operations”, in Perspectives on the Role of Cognition in  
Cyber Security” in the Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 56th Annual Meeting, 2012, page 
268-271. 

Endsley M. R. and Garland D. J., (Eds) (2000), Situation Awareness Analysis and Measurement; Mahwah, NJ; Lawrence Erlbaum 

Associates, ISBN: 0-8058-2133-3, 2000.  

Eiza M. H. (2017), “Application of Cyber Situational Awareness and Cyber Security in Connected Vehicles”, Cyber Science 2027, 

London, UK 

ENISA (2021), “Foresight Challenges – A study to enable foresight on emerging and future cybersecurity challenges”. 

European Union Agency for Cybersecurity, ENISA. November 2021. Retrieved Feb 2022 from 
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/foresight-challenges  
FAA, (2010) Fact Sheet – Pilot Flight Time, Rest, and Fatigue, January 27, 2010 - 

https://www.faa.gov/news/fact_sheets/news_story.cfm?newsId=6762 

Finland Cybersecurity Strategy, (2019), Finland ́s Cyber security Strategy, 2019. Retrieved August 2021 from 

https://turvallisuuskomitea.fi/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Kyberturvallisuusstrategia_A4_ENG_WEB_031019.pdf 
Frangopoulos E.D., Eloff M.M., Venter L.M. (2008) "Social Aspects of Information Security", Proceedings of the ISSA 2008 
Innovative Minds Conference, ISSA 2008, Gauteng Region (Johannesburg), South Africa, 7-9 July 2008 

Gandhi R., Sharma A., Mahoney W., Sousan W., Zhu Q. and Laplante P. (2011), "Dimensions of Cyber-Attacks, Social, 

Political, Economic, and Cultural", IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, Spring, 2011 

Gartner (2021), “ESG Risk by the Numbers: Benchmarking ESG Disclosures”. Published 4 August 2021 – ID G00756331 by 

Enterprise Risk Management Research Team. 

Gould D., Kelly D., White I. and Chidgey J., (2004), “Training Needs Analysis. A Literature Review and reappraisal”, Science 

Direct, International Journal of Nursing Studies 41 (2004) 471-486 

Gregoire M. and Beaudoin L., (2005), “Visualisation for Network Situational Awareness in Computer Network Defence”, 

Proceedings of the Visualisation and the Common Operational Picture, pp. 20-1-20-6, RTO-MP-IST-043, 2005. 

Hall D. L., and McMullen S. A. H., (2004), “Mathematical Techniques in Multisensor Data Fusion”, 2nd Edition, ISBN: 1-58053-

335-3, 2004 

Hall M. J., Hansen D. D., Jones K. (2015), "Cross-domain situational awareness and collaborative working for cyber security”, 

in the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment 
(CyberSA), 2015. 

Ikwu R. (2017), “Multi-Dimensional Structural Data Integration for Proactive Cyber-Defense”, published in the IEEE International 

Conference on Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment (Cyber SA, 2017), 2017 
Koh D. (2020), “The Geopolitics of Cybersecurity – Cooperation among states must underpin efforts to create a safer, more 
secure, and interoperable cyberspace” December 09, 2020. The Diplomat. Retrieved August 2021 from 
https://thediplomat.com/2020/12/the-geopolitics-of-cybersecurity/ 

Kotler, P & Armstrong, G., (2004). “Principles of Marketing”, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2004 
Lesk M. (2011), “Cybersecurity and Economics”, IEEE Security & Privacy Economics, pp. 76-79, November/December 2011 
Lipp M., Schwarz M., Gruss D., Prescher T., Haas W., Fogh A., Horn J., Mangard S., Kocher P., Genkin D., Yarom Y. and 

Hamburg M. (2018), “Meltdown: Reading Kernel Memory from User Space”, in the 27th USENIX Security 
Symposium, USENIX Security 2018 

Lockheed Martin Cyber Kill Chain (2016) - Cyber Kill Chain, Accessed 8th April 2019, https://www.lockheedmartin.com/en-

us/capabilities/cyber/cyber-kill-chain.html 

Lundgren, M., and Bergstrom, E., (2019), “Security-Related Stress: A Perspective on Information Security Risk Management”, 

in the proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security and the Protection of Digital Services 
(Cyber Security 2019), Oxford, June 3-4, 2019 

Marotta A., and Dr. Keri Pearlson K., (2019) A Culture of Cybersecurity at Banca Popolare di Sondrio, the Twenty-fifth 

Americas Conference on Information Systems, Cancun, 2019  

Midler M. (2020), “Ransomware as a Services (RaaS), Software Engineering Institute (SEI), Carnegie Mellon University, 2020. 

Retrieved Aug 2021 from https://insights.sei.cmu.edu/blog/ransomware-as-a-service-raas-threats/ 

Mitre ATT&CK, (2017) - Mitre Att&ck framework - https://attack.mitre.org/ 
Nakhla N., Perrett K. and McKenzie C. (2017), “Automated Computer Network Defence using ARMOUR: Mission-oriented 

decision support and vulnerability mitigation, published in the IEEE International Conference on Cyber Situational 
Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment (Cyber SA, 2017), 2017. 

NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence (CCD COE). 2015 
New York Times, (1988) - Pilots' Fatigue Termed Threat To Safe Flying. Accessed 7th April 2019  
https://www.nytimes.com/1988/06/05/us/pilots-fatigue-termed-threat-to-safe-flying.html 

 
76 

NIST (2018), “NIST Cybersecurity Framework”, Version 1.1, April 2018E 
Omale G. (2020), "3 Top Consumer Trends for Marketers to Watch in 2021", Gartner Research, 2 December 2020. Retrieved 

August 2021 from https://www.gartner.com/en/marketing/insights/articles/three-top-consumer-trends-marketers-
watch-2021 

Onwubiko C. and Owens T. J. (2011), "Situational Awareness in Computer Network Defense: Principles, Methods and 

Applications", IGI Global, 2012 

Onwubiko C.  (2016), “Understanding Cyber Situation Awareness”. International Journal on Cyber Situational Awareness, Vol. 

1, No. 1, pp11-30. 

Ottis R. (2007), “Analysis of the 2007 Cyber Attacks Against Estonia from the Information Warfare Perspective”, Cooperative 

Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence, Tallinn, Estonia, 2007. Retrieved Aug 2021 from 
https://ccdcoe.org/uploads/2018/10/Ottis2008_AnalysisOf2007FromTheInformationWarfarePerspective.pdf 

Oxford Dictionary (2019), “Foresight”. https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/foresight 
Paypervids, (2016). “5 Factors that influence Business Environment”, Sept 10, 2016. Accessed April 2019 

https://www.paypervids.com/factors-influence-business-environment/ 

Pestle Analysis, (2015), "Internal Factors that May affect the Business Organisation", Accessed April 2019 

https://pestleanalysis.com/internal-factors-affect-business-organization/ 

Reed J. (2012), "U.S. lawmakers to American companies: Don’t do business with Huawei or ZTE". FP News. Accessed 22nd 

Jan 2019 - https://foreignpolicy.com/2012/10/08/u-s-lawmakers-to-american-companies-dont-do-business-with-
huawei-or-zte/ 

Romanych M. (2018), "Applying the Domains of Conflict to Information Operations", Information Operations / Assurance, in 

10th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium, the Future of C2. 
http://www.dodccrp.org/events/10th_ICCRTS/CD/papers/036.pdf 

Sandom C., (1999), “Situational Awareness through the Interface: Evaluating Safety in Safety-Critical Control Systems”, IEE 
Proceedings of People in Control – An International Conference on Human Interfaces in Control Rooms, Cockpits 
and Command Centres, University of Bath, UK, 21-23 June 1999. 

SFIA (2018), The SAFIA Skills Framework, June 2018, UK. Accessed 16th March 2019. https://www.sfia-

online.org/en/framework  

Statista (2019), “Number of mobile phone users worldwide from 2015 to 2020 (in billions)”, Statista - the statistic portal. 

Accessed 28th Feb. 2019. https://www.statista.com/statistics/274774/forecast-of-mobile-phone-users-worldwide/ 
Tadda G. P. and Salerno J. S. (2010), "Overview of Cyber Situation Awareness" in the book S. Jajodia et al., (eds.), Cyber 

Situational Awareness, Advances in Information Security 46, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-0140-8 2 

Uchendu B., Nurse J.R.C., Bada M., Furnell S. (2021) “Developing a cyber security culture: Current practices and future needs” 

Elsevier, Computers & Security 109 (2021) 102387  

UK Cybersecurity Strategy (2021), “National Cyber Security Strategy 2016 to 2021”, Retrieved October 2021 from 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-cyber-security-strategy-2016-to-2021 

US National Cyber (2018), “National Cyber Strategy of the United States of America”. Retrieved August 2021 from 
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/National-Cyber-Strategy.pdf 

Tarafdar, M., Tu, Q., and Ragu-Nathan, T.S., (2010), “Impact of Technostress on End-User Satisfaction and Performance”, 

Journal of Management Information Systems, 2010, 27(3)303-334. 

UN GGE (2015), “Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the 

Context of International Security”, United Nations General Assembly, 22 July 2015. Retrieved August 2021 from 
https://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/70/174 

US-CERT (2014), “OpenSSL 'Heartbleed' vulnerability (CVE-2014-0160)”, Alert (TA14-098A), 5th October 2014 
Vonderembse, M.A., Raghunathan, T.S., and Rao, S.S. (1997). "A post-industrial paradigm: To integrate and automate 

manufacturing". International Journal of Production Research. 35 (9): 2579–2600. doi:10.1080/002075497194679 

Wickens C. D., (2008), “The Trade-off of Design for Routine and Unexpected Performance: Implications of Situation 

Awareness” Chapter 10 of the book Situation Awareness Analysis and Measurement (EDS) Mica R. Endsley and 
Daniel J. Garland. Reprinted 2008 by CRC Press. 

Wikipedia (2016), “2016 Democratic National Committee email leak”, 2016. 
Wikipedia (2019), “Technostress”, 2019 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technostress 
Yin X., Yurick W., and Slagell A., (2008), “VisFlowConnect-IP: An Animated Link Analysis Tool for Visualising Netflows”, SIFT 
Research Group, National Centre for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2008. 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

Dr Cyril Onwubiko is a Senior Member of the IEEE, Distinguished Speaker and Board 
of  Governor,  IEEE  Computer  Society.  He’s  a  Senior  Director,  Enterprise  Security 
Architecture at Pearson – the world’s learning organisation, and Director, AI, Blockchain 
& Cyber Security at Research Series Limited, where he is responsible for directing AI 
strategy, Blockchain governance and Cyber security. He is a leading scholar in Cyber 
Situational  Awareness  (Cyber  SA),  Cyber  Security,  Data  Fusion,  Intrusion  Detection 
Systems  and  Computer  Network  Security;  and  vastly  knowledgeable  in  Information 
Assurance,  HMG  Security  Policy  Framework  (SPF)  and  Risk  Assessment  & 
Management. Cyril holds a PhD in Computer Network Security from Kingston University, London, UK; 
MSc in Internet Engineering, from University of East London, London, UK, and BSc, first class honours, 
in Computer Science & Mathematics. He has authored several books including “Security Framework 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77 

for Attack Detection in Computer Networks” and “Concepts in Numerical Methods.” He co-edited the 
book  on  “Situational  Awareness  in  Computer  Network  Defense:  Principles,  Methods  &  Applications” 
published  by  IGI  Global,  USA.  Cyril  is  the  Editor-in-Chief  of  the International  Journal  on  Cyber 
Situational  Awareness  (IJCSA),  and  founder  of the  Centre  for  Multidisciplinary  Research, Innovation 
and Collaboration (C-MRiC), London, UK. 

Professor  Karim  Ouazzane  is  a  professor  of  Computing  and  Knowledge  Exchange, 
Director  of  Research  and  Enterprise,  Chair  of  the  European  Cyber  Security  Council 
(Brussels),  and  founder  of  the  Cyber  Security  Research  Centre  (CSRC),  London 
Metropolitan University, London, UK. His research interests include artificial intelligence 
(AI) applications, bimodal speech recognition for wireless devices, cyber security and big 
data,  computer  vision,  hard  and  soft  computing  methods,  flow  control  and  metering, 
optical instrumentation and lasers. He has carried out research in collaboration with industry through a 
number  of  research  schemes  such  as  The  Engineering  and  Physical  Sciences  Research  Council 
(EPSRC), KTP, EU Tempus, LDA (London Development Agency), KC (Knowledge Connect) and more. 
He has also published over 100 papers, three chapters in books, is the author of three patents and has 
successfully supervised 13 PhDs. He is a member of the Oracle Corporation Advisory Panel. 

REFERENCE 

Reference to this paper should be made as follows: Onwubiko C. and Ouazzane K. (2021). 
Multidisciplinary  Cybersecurity  Framework  for  Strategic  Foresight.  International  Journal  on 
Cyber Situational Awareness, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp46-77. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
