Intl. Journal on Cyber Situational Awareness, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2019 

Challenges towards Building 

an effective Cyber Security 

Operations Centre 

Cyril Onwubiko* and Karim Ouazzane+ 

*Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain and Cyber Security, E-Security 
Group, Research Series, London, UK 
+Cyber Security Research Centre (CSRC), London Metropolitan 
University, London, UK 

ABSTRACT 
The  increasing  dependency  of  modern  society  on  IT  systems  and 
infrastructures for essential services (e.g. internet banking, vehicular network, 
health-IT,  etc.)  coupled  with  the  growing  number  of  cyber  incidents  and 
security vulnerabilities have made Cyber Security Operations Centre (CSOC) 
undoubtedly vital. As such security operations monitoring is now an integral 
part of most business operations. SOCs (used interchangeably as CSOCs) are 
responsible for continuously and protectively monitoring business services, 
IT systems and infrastructures to identify vulnerabilities, detect cyber-attacks, 
security breaches, policy violations, and to respond to cyber incidents swiftly. 
They must also ensure that security events and alerts are triaged and analysed, 
while  coordinating  and  managing  cyber  incidents  to  resolution.  Because 
SOCs are vital, it is also necessary that SOCs are effective. But unfortunately, 
the effectiveness of SOCs are a widespread concern and a focus of boundless 
debate. In this paper, we identify and discuss some of the pertinent challenges 
to building an effective SOC. We investigate some of the factors contributing 
to the inefficiencies in SOCs and explain some of the challenges they face. 
Further,  we  provide  and  prioritise  recommendations  to  addressing  the 
identified issues.  

Keywords:  Cyber Security Operations Centre, CSOC, SOC, Cyber 
Operations, Cyber Onboarding, Effective SOC & Challenges 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 

INTRODUCTION 

1 
A Cyber Security Operations Centre (CSOC) is an essential business function 
and should arguably be an integral part of all modern business operations and 
national cyber security programmes regardless of scale and size. SOCs are 
responsible for cyber security incident management, cyber-attack detection, 
continuous  and  protective  security  monitoring, log  and  event  management, 
coordination and investigation (Onwubiko, C., & Ouazzane, K., 2019a).  

An effective SOC comprises three key aspects: 

•  Building  of  the  central  log  collection,  aggregation,  analysis  and  incident 

management platform (a.k.a. SOC Monitoring Platform). 

•  Onboarding of both new and existing services for continuous monitoring by 

the SOC monitoring platform (a.k.a. Cyber Onboarding). 

•  Performing the continuous monitoring by SOC Analysts through technology, 

tools and processes (a.k.a. ‘Eyes-on-Glass’). 

While  a  SOC  monitoring  platform  may  be built  but  the  problem  lays  with 
onboarding services into it so that they can be continuously and protectively 
monitored. We use the analogy of a building and its content. You could have 
an unfurnished property, where the property is built with the necessary doors 
and  windows,  but  the  property is  empty  and  has  no  content,  such  as  beds, 
chairs,  cooker  or  electricity.  The  same  can  be  said  of  a  SOC  monitoring 
platform without onboarding of the services and infrastructures it was built to 
monitor.  Therefore,  to  have  a  functioning  and  operational  SOC,  then 
onboarding  of  services,  systems  and  network  infrastructure  to  the  SOC 
monitoring platform must occur (Onwubiko, C. and Ouazzane, K., 2019a).  

Further,  and  equally  as  important,  is  meeting  business  requirements, 
especially for a multitenant SOC or a SOC monitoring business services of 
varied security and operational requirements. SOC is not a one-size fits all. It 
must be tailored, however slightly, to meet unique business and operational 
use cases.  

Unfortunately,  many  SOCs  are  believed  to  be  ineffective.  According  to 
Schinagl,  S.,  et  al.,  (2015),  only  a  few  SOCs  are  effective  in  countering 
cybercrime and IT abuse.  

Our contributions in this paper are: 

1.  This  is  an  extension  of  our  paper,  titled  “Cyber  Onboarding  is 
Broken” (Onwubiko, C. and Ouazzane, K., 2019a), which focusses 
primarily on ‘Cyber Onboarding’ – a core component of the SOC. In 

 
 
 
 
 
 
13 

that work, we utilised the reframing matrix methodology to identify 
and discuss four stakeholder views in understanding and reasoning 
how  best  a  SOC  can  be  established  to  achieve  its  overarching 
purpose. Conversely, in this paper, significant extensions have been 
made, including SOC monitoring and incident management, process, 
people and technology. 

2.  We discuss several SOC operating models and their features. 
3.  We investigate some of the factors contributing to the inefficiencies 

in SOCs, and finally, 

4.  We  explain  some  of  the  challenges  SOCs  face  and  how  best  to 

address these issues and concerns. 

The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  organised  as  follows:  Section  2  provides  a 
detailed review of SOCs, covering SOC vs. SIEM, Insource vs. Outsource, 
Cloud  SOC,  On-Premise  and  Hybrid  SOCs.  The  business  requirements  of 
SOCs are presented in Section 3. In Section 4,  Cyber Onboarding is briefly 
discussed, while Section 5 outlines factors contributing to SOC inefficiencies. 
Challenges facing organisational and national SOCs are explained in Section 
6.  Section  7  offers  recommendations  and  conclusions,  and  suggestions  for 
future work in Section 8. 

2 

SECURITY OPERATIONS CENTRE 

FIG. 1: SOC FUNCTIONAL CONCEPTUAL DIAGRAM 

Many people conflate SOC with SIEM. A SIEM (Security Information and 
Event Management) is a tool, which offers log management, event and log 

 
 
 
14 

correlation, analysis and dashboard. Conversely, SOC is a business operations 
function comprising People, Process and Technology as shown in Fig. 1. 

Fig. 1 is a conceptual representation of a SOC, showing the building blocks - 
people, process and technology. It is pertinent to note that the list of processes, 
or  types  of  technologies,  or  categories  of  people  shown  in  Fig.  1  is 
deliberately inexhaustive. 

People 

2.1 
People  comprises  analysts,  administrators,  incident  responders,  SOC 
manager etc. who perform continuous monitoring (a.k.a. ‘eyes-on-glass’) of 
the  organisation’s  business  services  and  IT  estate  by  leveraging  the 
capabilities  offered  by  Technology  e.g.  SIEM  tool,  and  guided  by  the 
organisation’s policies, processes and procedures. So, a SIEM is not a SOC. 
Rather, a SIEM is only a technology constituent part of a SOC. People can be 
subdivided into two broad categories: cyber onboarding people, and SOC 
monitoring and incident management personnel. 

2.1.1  Cyber Onboarding 
Cyber  onboarding  is  a  multidisciplinary  team  composed  of  solutions  and 
technical  architects,  SOC  designers,  SOC  content  engineers,  business 
analysts,  risks  and  information  assurance  consultant  and  project  managers 
(see Fig. 1). These are the people who carry out project related activities to 
ensuring that each business service (a business service usually comprises, at 
the least, systems, network infrastructures and applications) to be monitored 
is  properly  onboarded  to  a  SOC  monitoring  and  incident  management 
platform.  

SOC Monitoring and Incident Management  

2.1.2 
SOC monitoring and incident management are solely responsible for security 
monitoring, continuous and protective monitoring of onboarded services that 
are in the SOC platform, providing ‘eyes-on-glass’ monitoring1, vulnerability 
scanning,  alerting  and  event  analysis,  incident  triage,  cyber  incident 
management,  coordination  and  reporting.  They  are  also  the  custodians  for 
fascinating  and  coordinating  major  incidents,  incident  governance  and 
command,  investigations  and  post  incident  reports.  SOC  monitoring  is  a 
Business-as-Usual  (BAU)  and  operational  function  as  opposed  to  cyber 
onboarding  that  is  usually  a  project-based  time-bounded  roles.  In  some 

1 ‘Eyes-on-glass’ monitoring is a colloquial to mean people starring on dashboards, computer 
screens, plasma or projector screens as a means of observing, looking, and detecting an 
occurrence. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
15 

organisations,  the  SOC  analysts  can  perform  varied  roles  including  threat 
intelligence,  intelligence  handling,  vulnerability  management,  and  threat 
hunting. Note that these roles ought to be performed by specialist individuals 
with the appropriate skills regardless of the organisational structure. 

Processes 

2.2 
SOC  processes  in  this  paper  encompass  operational  guides,  local  working 
instructions (LWI), knowledge articles (KA), procedures and operations-level 
policies. A sample of some SOC essential processes (see Fig. 1) are cyber 
incident  management  playbook,  incident  response  process,  operational 
runbook or knowledge articles, joiners, movers and leavers (JML) process, 
SOC access control policy, security operating procedures (SyOPS) etc. 

Technology 

2.3 
The technology aspect, as shown in Fig. 1,  comprises  of the tools that are 
deployed in a typical SOC, such as  SIEM for event analysis, correlation and 
realtime  monitoring;  web  fraud  detection  (WFD)  to  detect  web-based 
transactional fraud, typically for financial orientated SOCs, IDS/IPS to detect 
and/or  prevent  intrusions,  threat  intelligence  e.g.  malware  information 
sharing platform (MISP - an open source threat intel feed) and cyber incident 
management  ticketing  system  for  tracking  security  incidents  tickets, 
assigning tasks and on-going incidents and issues. There are myriad of SOC 
tools, but the aforementioned ones in this paper are core and essential. 

The SIEM market is very mature with well-established products and a set of 
criteria to assess their offerings, e.g. Gartner SIEM Magic Quadrant (Gartner, 
2018). Mainstream tools range from leaders IBM QRadar and Micro Focus 
ArcSight  to  the  niche  players  such  as  AT&T  Cybersecurity,  FireEye 
(Onwubiko, C., and Ouazzane, K., 2019a). 

A  notable  misconception  is  that  many  people  procure  SIEM  tools  and 
therefore  believe  they  now  have  a  SOC.  This  is  absolutely  incorrect.  The 
tools,  when  setup  properly,  will  no  doubt  help  the  SOC  to  perform  its 
functions better, provided the ‘the challenging’ task of onboarding systems, 
logs, applications and networks to the SIEM is completed, including having 
the correct parsers, plugins or API (Application  Programming  Interface) to 
ingest events from disparate log sources e.g. firewall, routers, applications, 
intrusion detection systems (IDS) etc. and also, the ability to ingest network-
wide information such as flow events and threat intelligence information to 
detect emerging and inflight incidents (Onwubiko, C., 2015, 2017, 2018). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
16 

A  SOC  must  have  the  appropriate  policies  and  processes  to  allow them to 
react  swiftly  to  a  cyber  incident.  For  example,  a  SOC  must  have  a  cyber 
incident  management  playbook  to  respond  to  incidents  and  coordinate 
significant  cyber  incidents  (Onwubiko, C.,  and  Ouazzane,  K,  2019b),  they 
should  have  other  operating  procedures  such  as  SyOPs,  cyber  recovery 
process, incident response process and reporting and escalation procedures, 
at the minimum. 

Human-in-the-loop 

2.4 
The  people  and  process  aspects,  in  our  opinion,  are  the  fundamental 
difference  between  a  SOC  and  a  SIEM.  We  argue  that  SOCs  should  have 
human-in-the-loop;  even  with  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  and  machine 
learning (ML) embedded endpoints and point solutions deployed in the SOC 
to better and faster detect threats, yet the need for human-in-the-loop cannot 
be overemphasized. For example, we rely on SOC human operators to make 
decisions on the cause of action (CoA), not just of technology decision, but 
holistic decisions that encompasses social, human, financial, risk, reputation 
and otherwise. We depend on SOC human operators to conduct cyber incident 
management and to invoke governance and cyber incident and security breach 
commands, and of course, reliant on technology for pace and precision.   

SOC operators (a.k.a. Analysts, Administrators, Incident Responders, Threat 
Hunters,  Forensic  Investigators  etc.)  perform  several  roles  ranging  from 
continuous  monitoring,  detection,  alert  triage  to  threat  hunting,  incident 
response  and  cyber  forensic  investigation.  They  continuously  monitor 
business  assets  and services  by  leveraging the  capabilities  offered  by tools 
and  technologies  deployed  in  the  organisation’s  estate  e.g.  SIEM,  WFD, 
Identity and Access Management, IDS, IPS, Anti-malware, firewalls etc. 

Automation,  orchestration  and  robotic  process  automation  (RPA),  machine 
intelligence, machine learning and artificial intelligence do play a part, and 
will continue to play a role in providing power, pace and precision to SOC 
operations, process and operational efficiencies, but it is best when they are 
collaborative, cooperative and complementary with humans.  

Cybersecurity operations have become increasingly reliant on automation and 
machine intelligence, and this trend has gained pace in recent years, and will 
continue at greater pace in the nearest future. This is because automation and 
machine intelligence-based technologies are becoming readily available and 
affordable,  and  are  getting  better  at  detecting  cyber  incidents,  especially 
endpoint and network-based anomalies. For example, machine intelligence-

 
 
 
 
 
17 

based  detection  of  malware  and  botnet  at  enterprise  level  is  now  possible 
(Kidmose, E., 2018). 

Unfortunately,  process-based  automation  and  human  intelligence  are 
complex and hard to codify to machine intelligence, and these are the aspects 
of cybersecurity operations monitoring that will still be delivered via human 
analysts, at least for the time being. According to (Guerra P., and Tamburello, 
P.,  2018)  “continuous  monitoring  and  detection  will  remain  part  of  the 
cybersecurity operations process for the foreseeable future”. 

Outsource vs. Insource SOCs 

2.5 
The drive to ‘outsource’ everything was met with ‘bring everything back in 
house’ a couple of years ago, and recently, we observe that most companies 
now  operate  a  hybrid managed  SOC  model.  This  is the  case,  for  example, 
where a framework exists for organisations to outsource some aspects of the 
SOC service e.g. the continuous monitoring aspects (a.k.a. operations security 
monitoring)  responsibility  to  a  supplier  organisation  while 
incident 
management remains their accountability. 

There  are  many  reasons  for  outsourcing  SOC  function  to  supplier 
organisations, the two main reasons are: 

a)  The supplier organisation is tasked to do “the heavy lifting and shifting” – 
a perception that the expertise to run a functional SOC is readily available 
in  the  supplier  organisation,  hence  it  is  believed  that  the  supplier 
organisation is by far better to run and maintain a SOC service, while the 
client organisation becomes responsible for security incident management, 
escalation and decision making as the overarching risk owner.  

b)  Most client organisations work 9am to 5pm, therefore, client organisations 
prefer  to  leverage  the  24x72  SOC  service  operated  by  the  supplier 
organisations, a preference many client organisations believe to offer cost 
saving and efficiency in human resource. 

Cloud vs. On-Premise vs. Hybrid SOCs 

2.6 
Cloud-based SOCs have become a new phenomenon. It is the consolidation 
of  an  organisations’  monitoring  capabilities  centrally 
in  a  Cloud 
Environment.  This  encompasses  the  hosting  of  the  SOC’s  Central  Log 
Collection Infrastructure or Platform, and the tools and technologies they will 
use to aggregate, collect, collate, curate, process and analyse log, events and 
intelligence in the Cloud.  

2 24x7 means 24 hours in a day and 7 days in a week. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 

A SOC Log Collection Platform is the central repository where logs, events, 
network and application metrics are stored, for processing  (that is, parsing, 
normalization, correlation, and alerting) either in realtime or later (e.g. batch 
processing or non-realtime processing). This then allows analysis and cross 
correlation  of  the  network  information  (e.g.  flow,  packets)  and  logs  and 
events information in order to detect indicators of compromise (IoC) in packet 
payloads,  logs  and  events  such  that  alerts  can  be  triaged,  and  incident 
response followed in the event of a security breach. 

Cloud-based SOCs are becoming popular and increasingly attractive for the 
following reasons:  

a)  There  are  several  Cloud-based  monitoring  tools  and  technologies  that 
complement SIEM tools in the Cloud. The prevalence3 of such tools (e.g. 
CloudTrail, Cloud Watch, Guard Duty, Azure Monitor, Network Watcher, 
Log  Analytics,  Application  Insights  etc.)  across  the  different  regions  and 
among the three known and popular Cloud Providers means monitoring of 
services  can  be  accomplished  as  quickly  as  possible,  now  in  minutes  not 
days, which is the case with on-premise onboarding. 

b)  The  readiness  and  availability  of  APIs  and  their  interoperability  means 
automation  and  integration,  which  in  traditional  SIEM  posed  several 
problems are nonetheless irrelevant in Cloud. 

c)  Availability of Cloud versions of the SIEM, that is, SIEM providers have 
built Cloud-based versions of their offering, making their products readily 
available 
the  Cloud.  E.g.  Log  analytics,  Splunk,  ArcSight, 
ManageEngine, etc all have  their cloud offerings in Amazon Web Service 
Cloud (AWS, 2019). 

in 

d)  Pre-Integration and integration with other associated tools are already done 
by the Cloud provider, and where it has not been done by the provider, it is 
easy and straightforward. For example, most cloud-based SIEM have pre-
integration with tools such as identity and access management, vulnerability 
management, threat intelligence and anti-malware etc. This means that the 
SOC can leverage the existing pre-integration to deploy services quicker. 
e)  The  ability to flex  up/down  compute and  infrastructure  in a  ‘pure’ Cloud 
environment,  plus  the  low  cost  of entrance  (e.g.  pay-as-you-use  nature  of 
Cloud)  has  made  Cloud-based  SOC  (a.k.a.  Virtual  SOCs)  a  popular  and 
increasingly attractive preposition.  

f)  Deliverability and  timeliness  -  Cloud-based  SOCs  can be  built,  setup and 
fully  functioning  in  days  as  opposed  to  the  more  traditional  On-Premise 
SOCs, that take months, at least, to build and setup. 

3 Cloud-based monitoring tools are available depending on the Cloud Environment you host 
your services, e.g. CloudTrail, CloudWatch, Guard Duty are AWS solutions, while Azure 
Monitor, Network Watcher, Log Analytics and Application Insights are available in MS Azure 
cloud. 

 
 
 
 
19 

WHY ARE SOCS IMPORTANT? 

3 
The  drivers  for  establishing  SOCs  are  not  only  driven  by  business 
requirements, or necessitated by governance and compliance requirements, 
but also, on demonstrable active risk reduction.  

As an integral part of business function, SOCs enable the organisation fulfil 
its  business  responsibilities  and  support  its  cyber  security  strategy.  For 
example,  business  requirements  are  underpinned  on  the  appropriate 
functioning  of  business  services,  e.g.  being  secure,  being  available  to 
legitimate users of the systems, and being integral and trusted. By using the 
SOC to continuously and protectively  monitor controls (technical, process, 
policy  and  procedural)  and  critical  and  prioritised  business  assets  of  the 
organisation can the business meets its overarching requirements. Further, it 
also supports the organisation to meet its business obligations, e.g. business 
continuity,  communication  strategy  and  communications  readiness.  For 
example,  the  SOC’s incident management  playbook, and  majority  incident 
handling protocol should align and inform the organisation’s communications 
readiness in the event of a significant cyber incident or security breach. 

As a compliance requirement, SOCs are used to fulfill regulatory, governance 
and legal compliance and directives, for example, regulatory compliance to 
the payment card industry data security standard (PCI DSS), or compliance 
to  information  security  compliance,  e.g.  (ISO  27001),  Network  and 
Information Systems Directive (NIS), General  Data Protection Regulations 
(GDPR) etc. 

As a mechanism for active risk reduction, SOCs are utilized to measure and 
report key performance indicators (KPIs), such as the percentage of the estate 
or ecosystem being monitored, systems or critical systems being monitored, 
performance  of  continuous  vulnerability  scans,  health  hygiene  of  the  IT 
estate, and progress of any ongoing security incidents and breaches etc. This 
then  provides  the  organisation  with  a  dynamic  active  risk  picture  of  their 
estate. 

CYBER ONBOARDING 

4 
Cyber  Onboarding  follows  a  set  of  well-defined  processes  to  onboard  a 
service  for  cyber  security  monitoring  (see  Fig.  2),  covering  discovery 
workshop,  security  monitoring  requirements  gathering,  risk  assessment, 
topology  and  architecture  design,  implementation,  assurance  and  security 
testing, and handover. 

 
 
 
 
 
20 

FIG. 2: CYBER ONBOARDING PROCESS 

Note:  Cyber  onboarding  tasks  can  be  deployed  in  an  agile  methodology, 
which  means  the  entire  process  lifecycle  can  be  shortened  and  iterated  in 
small  and  short  sprints;  therefore,  we  are  not  recommending  a  lengthy 
waterfall method. When deployed in Cloud, these processes can be completed 
in days not months. 

These distinct processes are discussed briefly:  

a)  Discovery  workshops  are  conducted  per  organisation,  business  unit  or 
service  to  be  onboarded  to  the  SOC  monitoring  platform  in  order  to 
understand the specific monitoring needs of that organisation, business unit 
or  service  such  that  security  monitoring  is  implemented  appropriately  to 
address  the  unique  security  monitoring  requirements  for  that  department, 
business unit or service.  

b)  Solutions  design, architecture  and  integration patterns  are  produced  based 
on  the  organisation’s  business  needs,  hosting  arrangements,  integration 
requirements, and connectivity options.  

c)  Topology map of the existing hosted environments is required in order to 
allow  appropriate  monitoring  use  cases  to  be  developed  to  ensure  that 
critical assets of the organisation are protected.  

d)  The  implemented  security  monitoring  solution  will  need  to  be  tested  and 

assured, and  

e)  Finally, the solution is handed over to the SOC to monitor and operate. 

Cyber Onboarding is a team in a SOC function responsible for ensuring that 
business services to be monitored by the SOC are appropriately onboarded to 
the SOC monitoring platform. This means, ensuring that the business services 
and the underpinning infrastructure and applications within that business area, 
such  as  firewalls,  servers,  desktops  and  network  infrastructures  are 
configured to produce logs and events, and that these events are transported 
and  ingested  by  the  SOC  monitoring  platform  for  analysis,  correlation, 
alerting and incident triage. 

It is pertinent to note that these assets and applications include containers and 
microservices, and where logs and events are gathered and monitored, also 
metrics and state behaviours of the containers and microservices are equally 
monitored.  In  some  cases,  this  may  require  API  integration  and/or 

 
 
 
 
 
21 

exploitation of container specific mechanisms such as side-car security stacks 
(SCSS), cybersecurity services, microservices architecture and service mesh 
(ISTIO) and API management and zero trust monitoring (Chaillan N., 2019). 

In  some  organisations,  both  the  cyber  onboarding  team  and  the  SOC 
monitoring  and  incident  management  team  are  the  same;  however,  in  this 
paper, we have presented these teams as distinct but cooperative teams under 
one  management.  Hence,  the  cyber  onboarding  may not  exist  as  a  distinct 
business unit in most organisations as their duties are performed by the SOC 
under  one  accountability  business  unit.  Regardless,  the  cyber  onboarding 
activities as shown in Fig. 2, must be performed to have a  functioning and 
operational SOC.  

These activities include: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

creating  design  patterns  and  implementing  architecture  solutions  for  any 
service (existing or new) to be onboarded to the SOC platform for security 
monitoring;  
ensuring  the  assets  of  the  business  units  to  be  monitored  are  enabled  for 
logging and events generated by these disparate log sources are ingested and 
monitored by the SOC; 
enabling  the  right  parsers  and  plugins  so  that  logs  are  normalised4  and 
forwarded to the SOC platform; 
ensuring  that  a  transport  mechanism  exists  for  conveying  logs,  metrics, 
events,  messages  and  flows  from  disparate  environments  to  a  central  log 
collection, aggregation and analysis point for the SOC monitoring platform. 

These include:  

a)  Ingest mechanisms: This is a method to ensure that the different and 
disparate log types generated by the vast array of log sources in the 
monitored  estates  are  appropriately  ingested,  normalised  and 
analysed by the SIEM platform. This means ensuring that an ingest 
mechanism  exists  e.g.,  agentless,  parser,  API  and  plugin  (see  log 
source  types  in  Table  1)  for  the  appropriate  log  type  and  format; 
otherwise,  custom  parsers  must  be  developed.  Custom  parsers  are 
especially important for ingesting proprietary logs whose schemas do 
not comply or conform with appropriate and known standards, e.g. 
logging standards such as the IETF RFC 5424 format5.  

4 Normalisation is a process of using a consistent schema to process data, events or logs in 
exactly the same way so that meta-data types are stored on the same columns, for optimised 
querying and database performance 
5 RFC 5424 – The Syslog Protocol, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5424 

 
 
 
 
 
22 

TABLE 1:MONITORING METRIC AND FORMATS (ONWUBIKO, 
C. 2018) 

S-N  Log Source Type 
1 

Events and logs 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Network 
Information  
Structured Digital 
Feed 
Semi and 
Unstructured 
Digital 
Threat Intelligence  

Log Source Example  
Raw log, Alert, Event, Windows events, 
Syslog, Alarm 
Heartbeat, Flow, Session, Trap 

Scan, Vulnerability Information, PCAP6, 
TVM7, CMDB8, NVD9 
Trace, Manual Input, Wetware  

Indicators of Compromise (IoC) 

b)  Agent  vs  agentless:  Agent  and  agentless  are  both  mechanisms  to 
ingest events by the SIEM. Agent-based ingest requires a third-party 
application or a package of the SIEM to be installed at the end device 
or endpoint. This is needed, in most cases, when the SIEM tool does 
not have a matching plugin to ingest logs or events of a particular log 
source  type.  For  example,  windows  events  do  not  follow  the  IETF 
RFC  5424  standard  hence  one  way  to ingest  windows  events  is  to 
install  a  third-party  agent  or  software  at  the  endpoint  to  convert 
windows events to syslog compliant format – this processing of using 
a third-party software or an agent to ingest logs and event is regarded 
as agent-based ingestion. The other option is to use agentless method 
where  a  third-party  agent  is  not  required,  instead  the  SIEM  tool 
accepts  native  or  raw  logs  or  uses  API  to  receives  and  ingest  the 
events. 

c)  Design  development:  The  primary  function  of  the  technical  and 
solutions architects in the cyber onboarding team is to develop robust 
and  reusable  architecture  patterns,  solutions  design  and  integration 
patterns  artefacts  that  allow  various  systems  and  business  services 
hosted in different locations to be integrated to the SOC monitoring 
platform, allowing the SOC to securely monitor these services and 
systems. The created reusable architecture and solutions artefacts are 
signed-off  and  approved  by  the  organisation’s  technical  design 
authorities. 

6 PCAP – Packet Capture 
7 TVM – Threat and Vulnerability Management 
8 CMDB – Configuration and Management Database 
9 NVD – National Vulnerability Database 

 
 
 
23 

d)  Implementation  and  testing:  The  design  artefacts  need  to  be 
implemented and tested. Testing can be carried out by other specialist 
teams, however, this activity should be coordinated through the cyber 
onboarding team, since they are the project-based arm of the SOC. 
Testing should not only include assurance testing, but also, security 
testing such as IT health checks, penetration testing and vulnerability 
scanning and testing. This is done so that any vulnerability (intrinsic 
or extrinsic) are mitigated prior to go-live. Since IT health checks are 
carried  to  establish  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  cyber  hygiene  of  the 
solution, then it is best to be conducted by an external or independent 
provider (this is to avoid bias), however, the continuous vulnerability 
and threat management should still remain an in-house activity. 
e)  Tagging framework: This is a process of tagging events from specific 
business services as a way of distinguishing and separating services 
and this is particularly important in a multi-tenant and multi-customer 
SOC service, where incident response and escalation maybe different 
for each business services. Tagging is not only used to differentiate 
services,  but  also  useful  to  manage  business  services  with 
overlapping IP addresses, and where name resolution is not working 
properly. 

f)  Alerting and tuning: This is a process of improving the reliability of 
the service by ensuring that ‘noise’ and false positives are reduced 
and  minimised.  This  is  done  by  filtering  out  known  noise  on  the 
monitored environment to improve both performance and reliability. 
The  purpose  of  tuning  is  to  baseline  the  service  so  that  SOC 
alerts/alarms are reliable and trustworthy. Tuning do take time and 
could be considerably longer depending on size, scale and complexity 
of the SOC platform. On the average, it is common to allow three to 
six months for this. 

g)  Network groupings: This is a process of customising networks and 
subnets into their appropriate business areas, functions and groups to 
allow for quicker identification of incidents to affected business areas 
and networks. 

h)  Content development: This is a process of setting up some of the SOC 
monitoring  artefacts  such  as  rules,  filters,  use  cases,  queries  and 
dashboards etc. Monitoring content is important as different business 
services may face unique risks and concerns; therefore, it is essential 
that the use cases are adapted to address their respective concerns and 
risks.  

i)  Report development: This is a process of creating both generic and 
custom  monitoring  reports  for  each  business  area  and  business 
service being monitored. Reports are used for many purposes, e.g. to 

 
24 

assess  the  performance  of  the  SOC  service,  benchmark  the  SOC 
service, review service and operation level agreements (SLA/OLA), 
key performance indicators (KPI), and most importantly, to measure 
the  return  on  security  investment  (RoSI).  Cyber  metrics  such  as 
report  against  the  risks  mitigated,  report  on  threats  prevented  or 
incidents encountered can be useful barometers to assess RoSI of the 
SOC (Onwubiko, C. and Onwubiko, A. (2019)). 

Factors Contributing to SOCs Inefficiencies 

5 
We argue that some of the contributory factors to SOC inefficiencies include: 
a)  Percentage  of  the  monitored  estate  –  The  percentage  of  the  estate 
monitored  is  often  disproportionate  to  the  coverage  of  the 
organisation. We believe that in some organisations, less than 5% of 
their ecosystem are monitored by their SOCs. 

b)  Quality – Most SOCs provide only a general-purpose basic security 
monitoring, using  ‘out-of-the-box  SIEM  rules’  and  offering  a  one-
size-fits-all  use  case.  Only  very  few  create  custom  use  cases  or 
bespoke use cases. 

c)  Process  Maturity  –  Most  SOCs  lack  the  necessary  processes, 
procedures  and  local  working  instructions  required  to  operate  the 
service  efficiently.  For  example,  processes  for  handling  cyber 
incidents, incident management playbooks, etc are found to be non-
existent  in  some  SOCs,  and  where  processes  exist,  they  are  not 
regularly updated. 

d)  Skilled Resource – Most SOCs have resource capability and capacity 
issues (e.g. lack of trained and highly skilled analysts) to run the SOC, 
this may  be  related  to the  global  skills  shortage  in Cyber  security, 
and,  retainership  of  skilled  professionals,  which  is  equally  a 
challenge. 

e)  Lack  of  Standardisation  –  SOCs  have  varying  perceptions  across 
its  own 
industry  and  government.  Each  organisation  has 
understanding of what a SOC should do ((Schinagl, S., et al., 2015), 
(Onwubiko, C. and Ouazzane, K., 2019a)). 

CSOC Challenges  

6 
To build an effective SOC takes time, especially one for a large enterprise, 
such as a government department or financial institution. It is a project that is 
often  dependent  on  a  number  of  factors,  e.g.  technical,  programmatic, 
commercial,  logistic  and  organisational.  For  instance,  the  footprint  of  the 
estate to be monitored, the number of hosting environments to be monitored, 

 
 
 
25 

size, coverage and complexity of the organisation, the quality of monitoring 
required and the size of the project workforce, structure and organisation  – 
internal,  external,  suppliers  and  partners,  procurement  frameworks  and 
budget etc. That said, it can be accomplished relatively quickly these days by 
leveraging cloud computing. 

To  understand  the  challenges,  we  employed  a  proven  methodology  –  the 
reframing matrix. 

The  reframing  matrix  (Mindtools,  2018),  created  by  Michael  Morgan 
(Morgan, M. 1993), is a tool for critical reflection, insight and innovation. An 
ideal tool for analysing organisational issues from various perspectives that 
then  allows  the  problem  to be  viewed  from  multi-stakeholder  perspectives 
and viewpoints encouraging issues to be seen from different lens, opinions 
and insights. 

FIG. 3: CYBER ONBOARDING REFRAMING MATRIX 

As a problem-solving tool, the reframing matrix uses the four perspectives 
(4Ps) for insights, viewpoints, interests and concerns. Each quadrant of the 
matrix is a perspective. The problem to be solved is placed at the centre of the 
matrix, and opinions, views and concerns are then sought from the respective 
stakeholders.  Based  on  the  different  views,  solutions  to  the  problems  are 
obtained. It is pertinent that the stakeholders (4Ps) are selected based on their 
relevance  and  importance  to  the  problem  domain  since  the  strength  of  the 

 
 
 
 
26 

reframing  matrix  lies  on  the  fact  the  different  stakeholders  with  different 
experiences approach problems in different ways. 

Our application of the reframing matrix to cyber onboarding is as shown in 
Fig. 3. First, we put the question been assessed in the middle of a grid. We 
use  boxes  around  the  grid  for  the  different  perspectives.  Each  perspective 
represents a stakeholder group consulted in the assessment. The 4Ps are the 
Onboarding  Team  themselves,  the  CSOC  team,  the  Client  and  the  Senior 
Management Team (SMT). 

Using  the  reframing  matrix  to  identify  the  challenges  faced  by  cyber 
onboarding (as shown in Fig. 3), we identified 16 different issues from four 
perspective, namely (clockwise):  

•  Onboarding  perspective  –  as  the  function  responsible  for  onboarding 
services for different clients and business units, they deal with the day-to-
day fallouts and know the issue best, however, from a unique perspective.  
•  CSOC perspective – as the custodian for security monitoring, and people 
at the frontline’ of the SOC service, so it is important that they are consulted 
for any reliable solution to the cyber onboarding problem to be identified, 
besides, they are the direct ‘customers’ of the Cyber Onboarding Team.  
•  Client Perspective – it is important that we consulted the client for a say, 
after all, they pay and consume the SOC service. If they are not happy then 
the business case for standing a SOC capability could easily disintegrate.  

•  SMT perspective – these are the senior management team, comprising the 
SRO, CTO, Directors and Heads of service. SMT are sponsor, fund and are 
accountable for the SOC service, therefore has an interest and a viewpoint 
of the problem.  

The 16 issues identified are briefly explained. 
From Onboarding perspective, they feel that lacked SMT support on a couple 
of  organisational  and  process  issues.  They  feel  SOC  is  not  mature  in  their 
operations and skillsets. There is a sense of acceptance that cyber onboarding 
is indeed complex and complicated, and there are a number of dependencies 
hindering progress. 

From  CSOC  perspective,  they  feel  they  are  not  provided  with  enough 
information  feeds  to  monitor.  So  the  onboarding  team  are  not  onboarding 
systems and services quick enough. There is quality issues and  incomplete 
documentations provided to them, which then impacts how quickly they can 
react, and also, they feel there are many screens to monitor.  

From Client perspective, there is appreciation of lack of funds. So they do not 
have funds to pay for the SOC service, and they feel they should not have to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
27 

pay for a SOC service operated in-house, therefore the funding model is not 
appropriate. They said there is nothing to show for security monitoring even 
when it is enabled because they do not receive regular reports or KPIs for the 
SOC  service,  and  they  feel  cyber  onboarding  is  very  time  consuming  to 
rollout. 

From  SMT perspective,  they  feel  cyber  onboarding is  costing  them  far  too 
much, hence it is an upscale project. They feel that the metrics and progress 
they receive from the onboarding team is not clear most times, and that the 
governance and structure between CSOC and Onboarding teams should be 
improved. 

Following the reframing matrix analysis (see Fig. 3), we conducted a further 
assessment  to  see  if  some  of  the  viewpoints  could  converge.  The  16 
viewpoints are now consolidated to 8 key factors that make cyber onboarding 
challenging and often perceived to be ‘broken’, as follows: 

A)  Complexity 

If cyber onboarding is simple then establishing a functioning SOC would not 
have  been  so  difficult,  unfortunately,  this  is  not  the  case.  The  process  to 
onboard  a  service  is  straightforward  in  principle  (see  Fig  2)  but  often 
challenging in practice. For example, a service to be onboarded may be hosted 
in multiple locations and comprising a myriad of different log sources, across 
the  stack,  ranging  from  physical,  network,  operating systems,  middleware, 
databases to applications. In addition, for a cloud service, this may include 
hypervisors and/or containers, which also need to be monitored. Each of these 
stacks will need to be monitored to have a truly complete service onboarding. 
The  problem  is  that  many  of  these  stacks  produce  logs  and  messages  in 
varying formats (see Table 1) most of which are non-compliant with the IETF 
RFC 5424 standard, and a couple may include proprietary formats, especially 
applications  coded  in  non-compliant  formats,  therefore  the  mechanism  to 
ingest and normalise these events is not so trivial. All of these contribute to 
the complexity, complication and convolutedness. 
Additional factors contributing to complexity include A1-A3: 

A1) Architecture designs and patterns 

SOC design and architecture is not a one size fits all. Each service onboarding 
requires a unique design, and at best  may leverage existing patterns which 
will  still  need  to  be  adapted  and  implemented,  and  at  worst,  a  new  set  of 
designs are to be produced. The design requirements may be different to the 
overall design of the SOC monitoring platform itself, therefore, each service 
to be onboarded will need its own design and solutions architecture, which 

 
 
 
 
 
28 

may  utilise  existing  network  connectivity  or  the  provisioning  of  a  new 
network connectivity to transports logs, events or messages of the onboarded 
business  services  to  the  SOC  platform  for  analysis,  correlation  and  cyber 
incident triage. The network connectivity (local area networks included) may 
require a form of wide area network, routing, and security controls enabled to 
ensure  that  appropriate  policies  such  as  access  controls,  security  groups, 
blacklisting and firewall policies are correctly implemented. 

A2) Risk assessment 

Each business services to be monitored has its own risks or concerns for why 
it  needs  security  monitoring.  For  example,  a  bank  implementing  security 
monitoring for their online banking system may do so in order that the SOC 
will monitor its online bank transactions, hence the risks or concerns are about 
monitoring  of  their  online  banking  transactions  and  ensuring  the  right 
customers  and  correct  payments  are  made;  however  for  a  government 
department  responsible  for  immigration  or  issuance  of  national  passports, 
their risks and concerns for security monitoring is obviously different. Here, 
their concern is to ensure that national passports are only issued to legitimate 
citizens, that  passports  are  not  flaunted  on  ‘black  market’,  and illegitimate 
documents  are  not  used  to  obtain  national  passports.  Security  risks  and 
concerns are bound to be different based on business functions for different 
corporations,  institutions  and  government  departments.  These  unique  risks 
and concerns will need to be turned into security monitoring use cases and 
policies. This process requires niche skillsets, not trivial, and adds a layer of 
complexity, too. 

A3) Security monitoring requirements 

As  organisations’  business  offerings  and  services  are  different  so  are  their 
security  monitoring  needs.  Security  monitoring  requirements  will  differ 
among departments, business units and services, therefore onboarding of each 
department,  business  unit  or  service  is  bound  to  be  subtly different.  While 
onboarding  may  follow  a  fairly  straightforward  process,  however,  each 
business services onboarding requires unique set of solutions ranging from 
architecture pattern to monitoring use cases.  

Take two UK Government Departments for comparison. The Department for 
Work and Pensions (DWP) for example, their primary responsibility to the 
UK citizens and government is social welfare to UK citizens in the form of 
housing allowances, job seekers’ allowances etc. to appropriate UK citizens, 
and on a timely manner. Conversely, HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) is 
responsible for collecting taxes e.g. VAT, annual returns, PAYE, customs etc. 
from citizens and corporations, hence the former’s cyber security monitoring 

 
 
 
 
29 

need is focusing on ensuring appropriate social welfare arrangements are paid 
to suitably qualified citizens while the latter ensures and enforces taxes are 
received from citizens and corporations. Of course, their security monitoring 
requirements are different and predicated on their business obligations. This 
goes to demonstrate again that security monitoring and cyber onboarding is 
not a one size fits all proposition. This uniqueness and tailoring of the cyber 
onboarding  deliverables  per  business  service  onboarding  adds  a  layer  of 
complexity and intricacy. 

B)  Strategic Support 

SOC, like every organisational cyber security programme, has a slim chance 
of  success  without  strategic  support  from  the  senior  management  teams 
(SMT). Strategic support is particularly fundamental with SOCs because of 
its  remit,  since  it  serves  both  as  a  horizontal  business  function,  and  as  a 
compliance  mandate.  Without  strategic  support,  SOC  will  be  unable  to 
perform its role of compliance, audit and regulations. 

One of the main challenges facing SOCs is having appropriate authority to 
conduct  protective  and  security  monitoring  across  an entire  organisation if 
SMT have not lend their support and approval. SOC is a horizontal business 
function, meaning it should be instituted to serve all business units of an entire 
organisation  and  should  have  the  prerequisite  authority  to  perform  audit, 
security  compliance  checks  and  as  an  enabler  to  drive  continuous  security 
improvements across the organisation. This is important since cyber-attacks 
can be exploited from any aspect of the organisation and may use a weakness 
in one aspect as a channel or conduit to exploit other parts of the business. 
Hence, SOCs must be empowered, as monitoring custodians, to perform its 
duties accordingly. 

C)  Funding Model 

SOC is an upscale project, requiring the procurement and implementation of 
a  myriad  of  cyber  tools,  such  as  SIEM,  intrusion  detection  systems,  flow 
analyser, transaction monitoring (web fraud detection), threat intelligence and 
possibly user and entity behaviour analytics (UEBA) etc. These tools can be 
expensive,  including  software  licenses  and  professional  services  costs.  In 
addition, the SOC needs facility  – the physical operating environment, and 
human resources to operate and monitor the service and including handling 
incident response and management. Considering that the project, depending 
on the organisation’s size and scale, may last for a couple of years from start 
to  go-live,  and  subsequently,  the  operational  people  aspect  to  manage  and 
operate the SOC as normal business as usual (BAU) staff, who must still be 
costed, then, it is essential that the right funding model for the SOC exists. 

 
 
 
 
30 

The absence of appropriate funding model is likely to impact the success, or 
the  effectiveness  of  a  SOC.  SOCs  are  a  medium  to  address  cyber  risk  and 
encourage good cyber hygiene, it is therefore pertinent that SOC’s funding 
model is based around active risk reduction as other funding models is likely 
to  encourage  ‘wrong  cyber  behaviour’.  For  example,  the  ‘right  cyber 
behaviour’ is to encourage active risk reduction as opposed to risk mitigation 
approach based on ‘low hanging fruit’. The reasons for this are that ‘easy and 
quick wins’ do not necessarily mean effective prioritisation and efficient risk 
reduction, because the ‘quick wins’ may not yield the same risk reduction. 
We  posit  that,  based  on  risk  proportionality,  monitoring  an  organisation’s 
asset  that  is  either  marked  for  decommissioning  or  that  is  not  particularly 
important  to  the  organisation  does  not  yield  the  same  risk  reduction  as 
opposed  to  monitoring  the  origination’s  customer  database,  or  their 
intellectual property.  

Similarly, protectively monitoring a standalone guest WiFi just because the 
guest  WiFi  project  is  funded  as  opposed  to  offering  the  same  security 
monitoring on citizens data based on risk reduction encourages wrong cyber 
behaviour. 

Our proposal to addressing the ‘cyber behaviour problem’, one we strongly 
recommend, is to ensure that SOC  – here we mean SOC and its composite 
teams  such  as  Cyber  Onboarding  –  is  directly  funded.  We  distinguish 
between  direct  vs  central  funding.  Direct  funding,  we  define  as  funding 
allocated  directly  by  the  organisation,  usually  granted  or  assigned  to  a 
business  unit  and  ringfenced  for  its  purpose  alone  and  secured  through  a 
business case. On the other hand,  Central funding, we define as a type of 
funding arrangement which is obtained by collectively levying other business 
units  as  a  contribution  for  payment  of  service  they  have  received,  or  will 
receive, and are often referred to as ‘cross-charge’.  

SOCs should be  directly funded to afford it the autonomy to onboard and 
monitor services that actively attribute to actual risk reduction. Prioritisation 
of services to be monitored by the SOC must not be decided or dictated solely 
on the basis that an individual business unit has funds or budget, but because 
the services to be onboarded are those that will reduce risk exposure in the 
ecosystem and to the organisation as a whole.  

The premise for onboarding a service just because the project has funds is 
totally  unacceptable.  As 
this  may  drive  wrong  cyber  behaviour. 
Fundamentally, if a SOC is centrally funded, it means it has no choice as to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
31 

which services it monitors, because it will be underpinned on ‘first come, first 
served’. That is, the SOC will serve those who have contributed or paid for 
their  services  and 
lesser 
priority/criticality over those that are significantly critical. 

this  may  mean  monitoring  services  of 

D)  Strategy 

Every efficient SOC has a clear strategy underpinned by the organisation’s 
Cyber  Strategy.  Every  organisation  should  have  a  Cyber  Strategy.  An 
organisation cyber strategy is a blueprint for cyber, business transformation, 
business enablers, governance, risk and compliance. 

Organisation  Cyber Strategy  should  adopt  cyber  principles  that  encourage, 
support and enable business and digital transformation agenda, e.g. digital by 
default, secure by default, active risk management, active defence, proactive 
and continuous monitoring, cyber resilience and recovery etc. These are the 
enablers  of  strong  economic  wellbeing,  creating  an  environment  where 
businesses  thrive  by  ensuring  that  digital  technology  and  its  frontier  are 
secure. The UK Cyber Strategy (HMG, 2016), a blueprint for national cyber 
security  strategy,  aims  to  create  an  environment  where  businesses  are 
confident, capable and resilient in transformational digital world.  

For both national and organisational cyber security strategy to be achieved, 
investments in SOC, Cyber Programme, Governance, Risk and Compliance 
(GRC), Personnel and Physical security, Cyber Security Training, Awareness 
and Education need to occur.  

E)  Goals and Objectives 

With  Cyber  and  SOC  strategies  come  functional  goals  and  objectives. 
Functional objectives help to achieve business goals, and both in turn enable 
the strategy to be achieved. To achieve the SOC strategy, high-level business 
goals  which  are  fulfilled  by low-level  functional  objectives  must  exist.  A 
successful  SOC  function  (comprising  people,  process  and  technology)  is 
realised on overarching strategy, business goals and functional objectives. 

Using the Cyber strategy discussed in Section 4 as an example, a primary goal 
of  the  SOC  will  be  to  provide  realtime  security  monitoring  across  the 
monitored  estates.  The  rationale  for  this  goal  is  that  a  goal  must  directly 
support its strategy; therefore, to support the SOC strategy of active defence 
and  digital  transformation  a  key  enabler  is  proactive  and  realtime  security 
monitoring. Further, a key functional objective to achieve the business goal, 
will be to ensure that the SOC has trained and capable personnel to operate 
the SOC (i.e. towards SOC maturity).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
32 

For SOC to be successful, it must have clear set of goals and objectives that 
support its strategy, and the wider Cyber Strategy. 

F)  Governance and Onboarding Prioritisation 

Every organisation should have governance boards, well-defined governance 
structure,  and  clear  delineation  of  roles  and  responsibilities.  At  a  strategic 
level,  there  should  be  a  Cyber  Governance  Board  accountable  for  Cyber. 
Membership  to  this  board  should  include  the  following,  at  the  very  least, 
Cyber SRO, Director of Cybersecurity, Head of GRC, SOC Director/Head, 
Programme-Level  Directors  from  Business Services. This  board  should  be 
responsible for deciding on the critical services and systems, through a risk 
based prioritisation, to be onboarded for security monitoring. 

Further, organisational governance structure and hierarchy must be clear so 
that SOC knows who is in charge with clear point of escalation and reporting. 
It is important that such structures are communicated not only to the SOC, 
but  also,  to  the  entire  organisation.  After  all,  security  is  everyone’s 
responsibility. 

There must be a clear set of rationale based on active risk management for the 
candidate systems and services to be prioritised. The risk-based prioritisation 
scheme  should  take  into  consideration  such  metrics  as:  sensitivity  of  the 
assets,  criticality  of  the  asset  e.g.  critical  national  infrastructure,  value  of 
business  data  it  holds  e.g.  citizens  data,  business  data,  national  data,  cyber 
value at loss (CVaL), degree of susceptibility of attack, vulnerability of the 
asset, or that may exist with the controls currently protecting the asset, mean 
time  to  restore,  disaster  recovery  targets,  cyber  response  and  recovery 
objectives etc. 

G)  SOC Structure and Approach 

All  the  capabilities  shown  in  Fig  1.  should  sit  under  one  SOC  structure. 
Getting  a  SOC  structure  right  cannot  be  overstated.  It  is  often  the  prime 
causes of an inefficient and immature SOC. The rationale for recommending 
that all the composite aspects of a SOC sits under one authority is because, it 
works better and more coherent under one leadership. 

If  some  of  the  functions,  such  as  Cyber  Onboarding  were  to  be  under  a 
different structure or authority it will cause friction and fester the perception 
of ‘them’ and ‘us’ mentality, which is needless. Secondly, coherence is key 
for  an  effective  SOC.  That  is,  the  ability  to  have  consistency  in processes, 
administration,  methodologies  and  communication.  Communication  is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 

important.  Information  from  the  SOC  to  the  entire  organisation  should  be 
concise and consistent. 

A SOC structure should support and enable its approach. There are various 
approaches to operating a SOC, and in this, we are referring to the operating 
model rather than whether it is outsourced or insourced. The operating model, 
that is, the SOC operating service hours, for example, 24x7 or 9x5 or 7x7 plus 
on-call hours. Operating model is governed by business cases determined by 
the ways of working of all the other stakeholders performing reliant activities 
either for the SOC or to the business. 

Most SOCs operate 24x7 service, which means they work round the clock, 24 
hours  in  a  day,  7  days  in  a  week,  including  Saturdays,  Sundays  and  bank 
holidays. While some SOCs operate 24x7, this could be arranged as 9x5 plus 
on-call for after hours and weekend; or 7x7 services complemented with on-
call for after hours. Either way, the objective is to have a service coverage 
that  supports  the  organisation’s  risk  appetite  and  that  are  relevant  and 
efficient. 

It is pertinent to note that, for example, if a SOC operates 24x7, but some 
business teams or stakeholder groups are not, then it may make the need for 
24x7  SOC  ineffective,  because  if  an  incident  happens  during  non-working 
hours and the business teams that are needed to assist with the incident, e.g. 
networks and infrastructure teams are not 24x7, it then means that the incident 
will be queued to this team and will be in their queue until when they start 
work in the following morning. This is not an ideal case and one the puts the 
effectiveness of the SOC in jeopardy. 

SOC operating model must be approved by the SMT based on business case, 
benefit realisation and business efficiencies. It is important to note that, SOC 
can operate 24x7 in many formats efficiently as discussed prior. 

H)  SOC Maturity 

SOC  maturity  is  assessed  against  many  factors,  unfortunately,  there  is  no 
consensus on the factors or criteria that should be used. In this paper, we have 
carefully selected five generic criteria, we believe should help with operating 
an effective SOC underpinned on risk reduction, in our assessment. Further, 
we have also provided a list of some quantitative and qualitative factors that 
organisations may consider when conducting SOC assessment of their own. 

The generic factors include: 

1.  adequate and capably trained staff,  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 

2.  robust SOC and Onboarding processes, policies and procedures, 
3.  appropriately tuned SIEM tool, 
4.  cyber incident management, reporting and investigation, 
5. 

threat intelligence and threat hunting. 

The maturity of a SOC can be assessed on other factors such as qualitative 
factors e.g.  

•  quality of logging  
•  how quickly the SOC can recover from a cyber-attack 
•  how quickly they can respond to a significant cyber incident 
• 
• 

cyber response and recovery readiness 
forensic readiness 

On  the  other  hand,  SOC  maturity  can  be  assessed  by  quantitative  factors 
such as: 
• 
• 
• 
• 

the number of true positives or incidents the SOC detects 
the volume of data analysed in seconds or minutes,  
the number of events processed,  
the number of metrics used in the analysis, e.g. logs, events, flows, 
PCAP and traps (see Table 1) and  
finally,  if  monitoring  is  across  the  full  stack  of  infrastructure, 
operating 
systems,  middleware,  containers,  databases  and 
applications. 

• 

Whichever criteria (generic, quantitative, qualitative or a combination of all) 
are used to assess the maturity of a SOC, there must be rationale for their uses. 

I)  Supplier Incentive  

As discussed in Section Error! Reference source not found., to build a SOC 
service often involves multiple stakeholders ranging from internal teams e.g. 
SOC team, networks and infrastructure teams, to external organisations e.g., 
suppliers and professional services partners. 

For  instances,  a  supplier  may  be  responsible  for  hosting,  another  for 
management of existing legacy services and another for deployment of new 
services.  Whatever  their  responsibilities  are,  to  deploy  a  SOC  multiple 
stakeholders are often required. Since the main objective of a SOC is to ensure 
that all services to be monitored, whether in the supplier environment, hosted 
applications or cloud-based applications are onboarded, therefore, the SOC 
will  deal  with  a  range  of  multiple  stakeholders  and  should  have  a  plan  to 
incentivise suppliers and delivery partners in order that the desired outcomes 
are achieved. 

 
 
 
 
 
35 

Supplier  incentives  could  be  by  way  of  communication  to  the  supplier 
community of the SOC strategy, and the need for cooperation in order for all 
assets to be onboarded.  This may include change notices and contract change 
notices (that is, payment related change notices), impacting and assessment 
processes  that  are  lean  and  workable.  In  addition,  supplier  incentives  may 
take  other  forms  of  collaborative  frameworks  or  memorandum  of 
understanding, such as co-location agreements or deployment of third-party 
applications  into  an  existing  hosting  arrangements  or  procurement  of  new 
contractual arrangements. 

7 

RECOMMENDATIONS & CONCLUSIONS 

Recommendations 

7.1 
Our recommendations stem from arguments in the preceding sections of this 
paper.  The  recommendations  are  MoSCoW’ed  (Must,  Should,  Could  or 
Would) to highlight importance, as follows: 

a)  An organisation must have a cyber strategy upon which SOC strategy 
and  other  programme-level  strategies  hinge,  such  as  network 
operations  centre  (NOC)  strategy,  network  and  infrastructure 
strategy,  programme  management  strategy  etc.  The  absence  of  a 
cyber strategy will mean that there is no coherent organisation-wide 
blueprint  to  work  toward,  and  this  is  likely  to  lead  to  standalone, 
tower-based models that are fragmented, isolated and divergent.  
b)  A SOC strategy should support and enable the organisation’s cyber 

strategy and offer a mechanism to deliver the cyber strategy. 

c)  Governance, structure and approach must exist, and are fundamental 
to achieving a fit for purpose and functional SOC. It is imperative to 
have clear delineation of roles and responsibilities and a distinct line 
of  escalation  and  reporting,  as  these  will  build  the  enabling 
environment for an efficient SOC. 

d)  All SOC composite teams as shown in Fig. 1 should be under one 
authority  and  governance  structure  as  this  will  enable  the  SOC  to 
operate  much  more  efficiently.  SOC  is  complex  and  adding  extra 
layer  of  complexity  by  way  of  segmenting  SOC  composite  teams 
under  different  governance  may  stifle  SOC  progress  and  its 
autonomy. 

e)  Whether  SOC  is  funded  centrally  or directly,  having its  own  ring-
fenced funds devolved from individually funded projects allows it to 
make  security  decision  based  on  risks  rather  than  funding. 
Onboarding  prioritisation  or  selection  of  candidate  services  to  be 

 
 
 
 
36 

continuously  and  protectively  monitored  based  on  funding  drives 
wrong  behaviour  as  we  have  seen  in Section  4.  Hence  onboarding 
prioritisation of candidate system to be monitored must be based on 
active risk reduction. 

f)  Finally,  as  SOC  is  both  a  horizontal  business  function  and 
compliance mandate, therefore, it should be assessed so that business 
return  on  investment  and  return  on  cyber  security  investment  are 
measurable.  SOC  maturity  is  one  way  of  achieving  this  and  it  is 
pertinent that the organisation is clear on what metrics or criteria they 
want to use to measure this growth. As discussed in this paper, we 
have offered three sets of assessment factors including quantitative, 
qualitative and generic (see Section 4). 

Conclusions 

7.2   
The contributions of this paper are fundamental in many ways. It can be 
seen  as  a  blueprint  for  how  SOC  can be  built,  delivered  and  operated; 
offering  a  guide  to  rarely  discussed  aspect  of  SOC,  which  is  Cyber 
Onboarding.  The  ‘aspect’  of  the  SOC  that  brings  new  and  existing 
services  into  the  SOC  so  that  it  can  be  appropriately  monitored.  It  is 
equally the aspect of the SOC that produces the necessary collaterals such 
as the designs, design patterns, infrastructure and systems configurations 
and  parsers  that  enable  services  to  be  protectively  and  continuously 
monitored. 

In  this  paper,  we  conducted  a  comprehensive  review  of  SOCs,  which 
enable us to provide a detailed account of the factors contributing their 
some of their inefficiencies, but most importantly we offered a prioritise 
set of actions or recommendations other SOCs or organisation can do in 
order to run an effective and efficient SOC. 

The various approaches to building a SOC are discussed, and the choices 
of  an  out-sourced  SOC  vs  an  In-house  (insource)  operated  SOC  are 
explained, and including the differentiation between SIEM and SOC. 

Other key contributions are summarized as follows: 

1.  SOC is a major organisational investment driven by: 

a.  cyber  security  needs  of  detection,  monitoring,  response  and 
recovery from cyber-attacks, especially since modern cyber-attacks 
are emerging, complex and challenging. 

b.  compliance  mandate 

to  satisfy  regulatory  and  compliance 

obligations e.g. PCI DSS, ISO 27001 etc. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
37 

2.  Building an efficient SOC takes time and effort. Organisations must 
have  a  roadmap  of  SOC  delivery  aligned  with  capability  and 
maturity. This is so that it can assess its achievements but more so, to 
be better planned. 

3.  SOC is not a one-size-fits-all. Even when a SOC is built for a single 
organisation, business unit requirements will be different, and risks 
and  concerns  are  likely  to  be  subtly  different  and  hence  SOC  and 
security monitoring use cases must be adapted, tailored and relevant. 
4.  While SOC processes maybe straightforward, however its success is 
dependent  on  cooperation  from  multiple  stakeholders,  and  in  most 
cases  suppliers;  therefore,  organisations  that  find  themselves  in  a 
similar model should have an approach to incentivise suppliers and 
stakeholders in order that their overarching goals and objectives are 
accomplished. 

5.  Finally,  SOC  must  have  an  operating  model,  and  this  must  be 
predicated on business case, relevance and wider stakeholders’ ways 
of working. For example, a SOC can operate 24x7 in multiple ways; 
and of course, should not operate 24x7 if the organisation’s business 
case and risk appetite dictate differently. 

FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 

8 
We  aim  to  investigate  a  quantitative  research  with  possibly  London 
Metropolitan  University  as  a  stakeholder  to  prototype  some  aspects  of  the 
findings in this paper. This is so that a demonstrable Minimum Viable Product 
(MVP) may be realised. 

9 
AWS (2019), “SIEM Cloud Versions”, 2019. 

REFERENCES 

https://aws.amazon.com/search/?searchQuery=SIEM+solution  Retrieved 
September 2019. 

Chaillan N., (2019), “DoD Enterprise DevSecOps Initiative (Software Factory)”, U.S. 

Air Force, v4.0- Unclassified, 2019. 

Gartner (2018), “Gartner SIEM Quadrant”, 2018 Reviews 
Guerra, P., and Tamburello, P., (2018), “Modernizing Cybersecurity Operations with 

Machine Intelligence. O’Reilly, ISBN: 978-1-492-03598-5 

HMG (2016), “National Cyber Security Strategy 2016-2021”, 1 November 2016. 
Kidmose E., (2018), “Network-Based Detection of Malicious Activities – A Corporate 

Network Perspective”, PhD Dissertation, Aalborg University, Denmark, 
2018 

Mindtools (2018), “The Reframing Matrix”, accessed 30th December 2018, 
https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newCT_05.htm 

Morgan, M., (1993), “Creating Workforce Innovation”, Business and Professional 

Publishing, Sydney, 1993 

 
 
 
38 

Onwubiko, C., (2015), “Cyber Security Operations Centre: Security Monitoring for 

Protecting Business and Supporting Cyber Defense Strategy, published in 
2015 International Conference on Cyber Situational Awareness, Data 
Analytics and Assessment (CyberSA)  

Onwubiko, C., (2017), “Security Operations Centre: Situation Awareness, Threat 

Intelligence and Cybercrime” published in 2017 International Conference on 
Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment (CyberSA), 
10.1109/CyberSA.2017.8073384 

Onwubiko, C., (2018), “CoCoa: An Ontology for Cybersecurity Operations Centre 
Analysis Process” published in 2018 International Conference on Cyber 
Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment (CyberSA), 
10.1109/CyberSA.2018.8551486 

Onwubiko, C., and Ouazzane, K., (2019a), “Cyber Onboarding is Broken” in the 

2019 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security and Protection of 
Digital Services (Cyber Security) 

Onwubiko, C., and Ouazzane, K., (2019b), “SOTER: A Playbook for Cyber Security 
Incident Management” accepted for publication at the IEEE Transaction on 
Engineering Management (TEM-18-0710), Special Section: Cyber-attacks, 
Strategic Cyber-foresight and Security 

Onwubiko, C., and Onwubiko, A., (2019), “Cyber KPI for Return on Security 

Investment” in the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Situational 
Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment (CyberSA) 

Schinagl, S., Schoon, K., and Paans, R., (2015), “A Framework for Designing a 

Security Operations Centre (SOC)” in the IEEE 48th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. DoI 10.1109/HICSS.2015.270 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

Dr Cyril Onwubiko is a Senior Member of the IEEE, and currently 
the  Secretary  –  IEEE  United  Kingdom  and  Ireland,  Chair  of  the 
IEEE  UK  &  Ireland  Blockchain  Group;  and  Director,  Artificial 
Intelligence,  Blockchain  and  Cyber  Security  at  Research  Series 
Limited,  London,  UK,  where  he  directs  Artificial  Intelligence, 
Blockchain and Cyber Security. Prior to Research Series, Cyril had 
worked in the Financial Services, Telecommunication, Health sector 
&  Government  and  Public  services  Sectors.  He  is  a  leading  scholar  in  Cyber 
Situational Awareness (Cyber SA), Cyber Security, Security Information and Event 
Management  (SIEM)  &  Data  Fusion,  he  has  authored  a  couple  of  books 
including “Security  Framework  for  Attack  Detection  in  Computer  Networks”, and 
edited  several  books  including  “Situational  Awareness  in  Computer  Network 
Defense:  Principles,  Methods  &  Applications".  Cyril  is  the  Editor-in-Chief  of 
the International Journal  on  Cyber  Situational  Awareness  (IJCSA),  and  founder  of 
the Centre for Multidisciplinary Research, Innovation and Collaboration (C-MRiC). 
He holds a PhD in Computer Network Security from Kingston University, London, 
UK; MSc in Internet Engineering, from University of East London, London, UK, and 
BSc, first class honours, in Computer Science & Mathematics. He’s a guest lecturer 

 
 
 
 
39 

to several UK and European Universities and have successfully examined / assessed 
several PhD students in the UK and Europe. 

Professor  Karim  Ouazzane  is  a  professor  of  Computing  and 
Knowledge Exchange, Director of Research and Enterprise, Chair of 
the European Cyber Security Council (Brussels), and founder of the 
Cyber  Security  Research  Centre  (CSRC),  London  Metropolitan 
University,  London,  UK.  His  research  interests  include  artificial 
intelligence  (AI)  applications,  bimodal  speech  recognition  for 
wireless  devices,  cyber  security  and  big  data,  computer  vision,  hard  and  soft 
computing methods, flow control and metering, optical instrumentation and lasers. 
He  has  carried  out  research  in  collaboration  with  industry  through  a  number  of 
research schemes such as The Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EPSRC), KTP, EU Tempus, LDA (London Development Agency), KC (Knowledge 
Connect) and more. He has also published over 100 papers, three chapters in books, 
is  the  author  of  three  patents  and  has  successfully  supervised  13  PhDs.  He  is  a 
member of the Oracle Corporation Advisory Panel. 

REFERENCE 

Reference  to  this  paper  should  be  made  as  follows:  Onwubiko,  C.  and 
Ouazzane,  K.  (2019).  Challenges  towards  Building  an  effective  Cyber 
Security  Operations  Centre.  International  Journal  on  Cyber  Situational 
Awareness, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp11-39. 

 
 
 
 
 
