“Cyber security is a dark art”: The CISO as soothsayer

Joseph Da Silva
Royal Holloway, University of London
joseph.dasilva.2018@live.rhul.ac.uk

Rikke Bjerg Jensen
Royal Holloway, University of London
rikke.jensen@rhul.ac.uk

February 28, 2022

2
2
0
2

b
e
F
5
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
5
7
2
1
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Commercial organisations continue to face a growing
and evolving threat of data breaches and system com-
promises, making their cyber-security function critically
important. Many organisations employ a Chief Informa-
tion Security Oﬃcer (CISO) to lead such a function. We
conducted in-depth, semi-structured interviews with 15
CISOs and six senior organisational leaders, between Oc-
tober 2019 and July 2020, as part of a wider exploration
into the purpose of CISOs and cyber-security functions.
In this paper, we employ broader security scholarship
related to ontological security and sociological notions
of identity work to provide an interpretative analysis of
the CISO role in organisations. Research ﬁndings reveal
that cyber security is an expert system that positions
the CISO as an interpreter of something that is mysti-
cal, unknown and fearful to the uninitiated. They show
how the fearful nature of cyber security contributes to
it being considered an ontological threat by the organ-
isation, while responding to that threat contributes to
the organisation’s overall identity. We further show how
cyber security is analogous to a belief system and how
one of the roles of the CISO is akin to that of a modern-
day soothsayer for senior management; that this role is
precarious and, at the same time, superior, leading to
alienation within the organisation. Our study also high-
lights that the CISO identity of protector-from-threat,
linked to the precarious position, motivates self-serving
actions that we term ‘cyber sophistry’. We conclude by
outlining a series of implications for both organisations
and CISOs.

skills. We situate our analysis within broader security
scholarship related to ontological security and sociologi-
cal notions of identity work and, through such analytical
lenses, deepen the understanding of the CISO role within
organisations. Our ﬁndings show that CISOs sit at a
nexus, assimilating information from multiple sources,
making judgements and relaying those judgements to
senior management in terms those stakeholders can un-
derstand. The analogy of soothsaying, a term we nei-
ther consider nor intend to be denigratory, acts as both
a rhetorical device that brings to light the diﬃcult and
conﬂicting position that CISOs occupy and as a model
with which to explore their role.

The motivation behind our study is to explore and un-
derstand the purpose of CISOs within commercial busi-
nesses. CISOs perform an important, challenging, and
yet poorly understood and ill-deﬁned role [58, 13]. By fo-
cusing on perceived purpose, both from the perspective
of CISOs and from the perspective of their most senior
stakeholders, across a relatively large and varied sample,
we aim to gain a greater understanding of CISO practice
that oﬀers value to practitioners and their employers –
and to CSCW and cyber-security scholarship. To that
end, we do not explore how purpose may be perceived
at other organisational levels or by other stakeholders.
While we focus on the soothsayer identity in this pa-
per, as it emerged through our analysis, it is important
to note that it is one of a number of diﬀerent roles we
identiﬁed CISOs performing. Future work will explore
other roles, including the CISO as police and the CISO
as salesperson.

1

Introduction

An eﬀective cyber-security function is of critical impor-
tance to commercial organisations, particularly due to
the continuing and very public threat of data breaches
and system compromises. As threats evolve in terms of
sophistication from both external and internal sources,
having an in-house capability that holds the responsi-
bility for eﬀective management of the organisation’s in-
formation security posture is a common means of risk
In order to lead such a capability, many
mitigation.
organisations employ a Chief Information Security Of-
ﬁcer (CISO). We argue that one of the roles the CISO
performs is akin to that of a modern-day soothsayer,
grounded in an understanding of cyber security being re-
liant on specialised and sometimes mystical insights and

Contributions. Our work contributes to and extends
existing, albeit limited, scholarship which has explored
cyber security within organisations, e.g. [42, 50, 62, 88,
69, 99, 108], and an even smaller number focusing on
CISOs, e.g., [13, 91]. We do so by studying the role
and identity of the CISO as critical to the organisational
cyber-security function and by bringing it into conversa-
tion with wider security scholarship related to ontolog-
ical security and sociological notions of identity work,
through a theoretically grounded interpretative analy-
sis.

Data was gathered through 21 semi-structured inter-
views with CISOs (15) and senior organisational leaders
(six) representing a range of commercial organisations,
predominantly multinationals based in the United King-
dom (UK). The interviews were carried out between Oc-
tober 2019 and July 2020. The data was analysed the-

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
matically, following Braun and Clarke [21, 22], with an-
alytical techniques inﬂuenced by Salda˜na [96]. One key
theme that emerged from the data is that the CISO acts
as a soothsayer to the organisation, both in their own
approach and in the expectations of their stakeholders.
We identify diﬀerent forms of identity work performed
by the CISO that support the CISO-as-soothsayer con-
struction and link this to wider security themes.1

To this end, our work contributes four key ﬁndings,
which are outlined in Section 5 and discussed in Sec-
tion 6. First, our study shows how cyber security is
an expert system that both demands interpretation by
someone with specialised knowledge and is opaque to
non-specialists. This positions the CISO as an inter-
preter to key stakeholders. Second, cyber security ap-
pears mystical, unknown and fearful to the uninitiated;
the non-specialists. We observe how this makes cyber se-
curity analogous to a belief system, which positions the
CISO-as-interpreter as a soothsayer. Third, as a sooth-
sayer, the CISO occupies a precarious role, at a number
of levels. While they are often scapegoated when things
go wrong, their ‘superior’ position of special knowledge
also means that they often assume a position of an out-
sider – or ‘other’ – in the organisation. Fourth, cyber
security is implicated in identity, for both CISOs and the
organisations that they work for. Our study shows how
CISOs as well as organisations experience ontological in-
security, which leads to the development of identities as
protector-against-threat and protected-from-threat, re-
spectively. For CISOs, we show how this identity moti-
vates self-serving actions that we term ‘cyber sophistry’.
We conclude by setting out a number of implications
that the construction of CISO-as-soothsayer has for or-
ganisations. Moreover, we consider how a broader un-
derstanding of and approach to cyber-security research
can beneﬁt future research in CSCW and adjacent ﬁelds
as well as the role of the CISO.

2 Related work

In this section, we position our work within existing
scholarship on cyber security in organisational contexts
and in relation to wider CSCW work on cyber security,
focusing on work that is both psychologically and soci-
ologically driven, while bridging to notions of identity
work, ontological security and permanent emergency.

2.1 Cyber security in organisations

Prior research into cyber-security practice in organisa-
tions, much of which has also utilised semi-structured
interviews [13, 99, 108], has identiﬁed a lack of un-
derstanding and confusion regarding the subject [54].
Security improvements may be seen as of little value
within organisations [89], with security itself being seen
confusing . . . dull” [54, p. 411] or fo-
as “scary . . .
cused on attributing blame for failings [69]. A number

1While the concept of soothsaying has been applied to other
professions such as law, e.g. [83, 63], no previous work, to our
knowledge, has substantively made the connection to cyber secu-
rity.

of studies have investigated cyber-security behaviours
within organisations, e.g. [80, 16, 36], and the eﬀective-
ness of programmes aimed at improving such behaviours,
e.g.
[92, 98], with some concluding that top-down,
policy-based approaches to improving cyber-security be-
haviour were ineﬀective [67] and others ﬁnding more ef-
fective results from game-based interventions [61]. Poller
et al. [88] call for security initiatives implemented in or-
ganisations to be “reconciling people’s ideas of security
with the requirements of the organizational setting” [88,
p.2502]; thus, highlighting the centrality of both com-
munication and management perspectives.

2.1.1 CISOs

Cyber security may be perceived as an individualistic
practice and thus not ‘cooperative’ as noted by Goodall
et al. [50]. Their study showed that cyber security is in-
herently collaborative both within and across organisa-
tional settings – while also being grounded in a commu-
nity of experts. Eﬀective cyber security depends on mul-
tiple actors, not just those who are cyber-security practi-
tioners [91]. However, a number of studies highlight that
CISOs appear be somewhat disconnected from the rest
of their organisations, being seen as blockers [13], gov-
ernors [91, 66], translators [58], or even adversaries [12].
They also highlight a lack of clarity regarding what a
CISO is expected to do [58, 66], and how CISOs ex-
perience conﬂicted identities [13]. CISOs may be re-
cruited in response to a cyber-security exposure [66],
and thus occupy an identity that ‘ﬁxes’ rather than ‘pre-
vents’, yet may implement controls that are negatively
perceived [91] or ignored [67]. They may be distrusted
by their business stakeholders [12] and ﬁnd that there is
a broader lack of understanding as to what they actually
do [110].

While these other works have problematised cyber se-
curity in organisational contexts, and highlighted confu-
sion in relation to the role of the CISO, our work provides
a diﬀerent perspective. Beyond highlighting murkiness
regarding the role, e.g,
[13, 58, 66], and the existence
of disconnects between security managers and the rest
of the organisation [91], we present a discussion that
explores one of the multiple roles of a CISO and the
implications this has on cyber-security practice in busi-
ness, employing theoretical concepts as analytical lenses
to deepen interpretations of empirical data. The lat-
ter is not a new phenomenon in CSCW work, albeit
one that is signiﬁcantly limited and under-explored, de-
spite the fact that the beneﬁts of (organisational) theory
for the ﬁeld was discussed at a 2004 CSCW panel [14].
Here, some of the panellists argued for more theoreti-
cally informed approaches to CSCW research, including
theories from sociology and social psychology. Echoing
Kocksch et al. [69], who used the notion of care as an
analytical lens to bring to light the often invisible as-
pects and practices that underpin IT security, we con-
tend that an approach that employs analytical lenses
grounded in organisational and sociological concepts is
of signiﬁcant value to CSCW and HCI research more
broadly, both with regards to academic scholarship and
practitioner practice. We also base our study on a more

2

extensive sample of participants than many other stud-
ies of CISOs, e.g., [13, 91] as well as providing a broader
perspective derived from a sample of senior stakeholders.

concept arguably originated), and a number of other dis-
ciplines including cyber security, e.g. [33] and Organisa-
tional Studies, e.g. [103].

3 Theoretical grounding

In this section, we provide a brief overview of theories of
identity work, ontological security and permanent emer-
gency. We employ these theoretical positions to inter-
pret and produce meaning from the research ﬁndings,
outlined in Section 5.

3.1

Identity work

Identity work is an established concept in the social sci-
ences, with the term originating from a seminal work
by sociologists Snow and Anderson [101], but drawing
In
signiﬁcantly on earlier work by Goﬀman, e.g. [49].
essence, identity work refers to the multiple discursive
strategies employed by individuals in constructing and
maintaining their identity. Ybema et al summarise this
succinctly by “suggest[ing] that ‘identity’ is a matter
of claims, not character; persona, not personality; and
presentation, not self” [109, p. 306]. Others have ap-
plied and expanded this concept, including its applica-
tion to organisational research, e.g. [24, 31, 68]. Identity
work can include the construction of identities that are
deemed to be ‘moral’, with those who are “known for
exemplary moral commitments” referred to as “moral
exemplars” [55, p. 497].2 Morality has also been linked
with cyber security, e.g. [82, 69].

Identity may be threatened, a concept explored by
several scholars, e.g. [46, 72, 17]. Although well es-
tablished [25], deﬁnitions of ‘identity threat’ are con-
tested [86]. For Petriglieri, threats to identity have the
“unique feature of arising from present cues of future
harm” [86, p. 644]. This can include unrealistic or un-
wanted role expectations [60]. Identity threats are con-
sidered to motivate identity work [60, 25], in order to
maintain the (present) identity and by extension, onto-
logical security (we expand on this in Section 3.2). Cun-
liﬀe suggests that, through dialogic identity construc-
tion, individuals build a sense of ontological security [39].
Identity work has been considered in relation
to an organisation’s overall
[71] and
“[o]rganizational legitimacy is also a key [identity] con-
cern, because legitimate status is a sine qua non for easy
access to resources, unrestricted access to markets, and
long-term survival” [23, p. 38] (italics in original). The
notion of identity threat has also been applied to collec-
tives, e.g. [46, 25].

identity, e.g.

3.2 Ontological security

Ontological security, as a concept, has been explored in
some detail within the ﬁelds of International Relations
and Critical Security Studies, e.g. [59, 95, 77], as well
as by those in Sociology [48], Psychiatry [73] (where the

2While the existence of ‘moral experts’ is debatable [45], the
concept is well established and continues to be applied, e.g. [93].

Steele deﬁnes ontological security as “security as
being” rather than “security as survival” [102, p.
426]. This aligns with Giddens [48] but contrasts with
Buzan [29] and Huysmans [59]. For Buzan, survival is
“the bottom line” [29, p. 19]. Coles-Kemp et al. sum-
marise McSweeney’s [77] position on the term as both
“the freedom to live free from fear as well as protection
from harms” [33, p. 3], echoing the thoughts of Roe [95].
McSweeney discusses the need for insecurity and how
it has underpinned international relations “for cen-
turies” [77, p. 2]. Burke [27] describes security’s depen-
dence on insecurity; how it is deﬁned by it. This insecu-
rity is often achieved through the maintenance of a state
of ‘permanent emergency’, which may be used to achieve
control and set boundaries within a society [79, 26]. This
concept has been debated for many years [52], with Neo-
cleous [79] providing historical examples, to demonstrate
how ‘temporary’ emergency powers have been used to
limit workers’ rights and regulate behaviour [78], and
how such powers have subsequently become permanent,
including those that erode civil liberties [105].

Neocleous further notes how the continued existence of
threats and an associated atmosphere of fear is needed
to justify security-related actions, including the neces-
sary existence of “demons . . . villains” [79, pp. 119,
223]. Juntunen and Virta describe the potential for se-
curity crises to be viewed as “almost . . . desirable” [64,
p. 72] in the sense of building resilience among those
aﬀected and describing the “normalis[ation of] crises . . .
as potentially positive learning experiences” [64, p. 80].

4 Methodology

In this section, we set out our methodology, including the
methods used, the recruitment and interview process,
ethical considerations, data analysis and limitations.

4.1 Semi-structured interviews

Data was collected through semi-structured interviews
and these were all conducted by one of the researchers,
who happens to be a practising CISO. Interviews took
place between October 2019 and July 2020.
In total,
21 interviews were conducted, within 18 diﬀerent com-
panies. Of the 21 interviews, 15 were with CISOs and
the remaining six were with senior organisational leaders
(see Table 1). We refer to participants by their abbre-
viated job role and an incremental number, i.e., CISO1,
CISO2, CEO1. Interview guides were prepared for each
set of participants, i.e. CISOs and non-CISOs, compris-
ing a broad set of question topics to use as prompts when
required. We include these in Appendices ?? and ??.
The interview design was based on the primary research
question: what is the purpose of a CISO within a com-
mercial organisation?

3

Table 1: Participants & Interviews

Participants

Interview

ID
CISO1
CISO2
CISO3
CISO4
CISO5
CISO6
CISO7
CISO8
CISO9
CISO10
CISO11
CISO12
CISO13
CISO14
CISO15
CEO1
CEO2
CFO1
CFO2
CIO1
NED1

Duration
00:48:29
00:49:28
00:47:33
00:44:41
00:43:44
00:41:38
00:45:19
00:49:41
00:51:30
00:38:43
00:55:45
00:40:56
00:40:07
00:46:07
00:50:02
00:24:59
00:42:45
00:45:41
00:40:52
00:47:28
00:27:52

Medium Timing
Oct19
F2F
Oct19
F2F
Dec19
F2F
Dec19
F2F
Dec19
F2F
Jan20
F2F
Jan20
F2F
Mar20
F2F
Mar20
F2F
Apr20
Remote
Remote May20
Remote May20
Jun20
Remote
Jul20
Remote
Jul20
Remote
Dec19
F2F
Jan20
F2F
Jan20
F2F
Apr20
Remote
Jul20
Remote
Dec19
F2F

Note: in addition to 15 CISOs, we conducted semi-structured
interviews with two Chief Executive Oﬃcers (CEOs), two Chief
Financial Oﬃcers (CIOs), one Non-Executive Director (NED)
and one Chief Information Oﬃcer (CIO), between October 2019
and July 2020.

4.1.1 Interview process

Interviews were carried out either face-to-face or on-
line. For face-to-face interviews, participants were in-
terviewed at their own oﬃce locations. Being in their
‘own space’ provided participants with a sense of secu-
rity, both physical and psychological.
Interviews con-
ducted online were done so in response to the COVID-
19 pandemic which occurred during the data collection
phase. Interviews were recorded and transcribed as soon
as possible following each interview. Signiﬁcant aspects
of the interview, not captured in audio recordings, such
as body language and spatial information, were captured
in a handwritten journal immediately following each in-
terview.

As mentioned above, interview guides were prepared
in advance. These were not intended to be an exhaus-
tive list of questions, rather they were example prompts
that the researcher used to guide the conversation as
and when appropriate. Interviews were approached as
a conversation focused on cyber-security practice, which
was a joint construction between the researcher and the
participant, rather than as an extraction of data [11].
Interviews were scheduled for one hour in total, how-
ever, some conversations ended naturally before the end
of the time allocated, and some participants had to cut
the interview short due to unplanned demands on their
time that emerged on the day.

4.1.2 Participants and recruitment

Participants were predominantly CISOs, with a smaller
pool of executives and non-executives, from a variety of
UK-based, but predominantly multinational, commer-
cial entities. Organisations were selected primarily on
the basis of access through professional networks. How-

ever, one criterion applied was that research was limited
to organisations that were quoted on a major stock mar-
ket, which was intended to provide a level of consistency
across organisations on the basis of them being subject
to consistent corporate governance requirements.

We used our own networks of professional contacts
to recruit participants. This meant that the eventual
sample was eﬀectively a “snowball sample” [53, p. 135]
with a number of contacts introducing additional partic-
ipants. This occurred both through those who were di-
rectly involved in the research and were able to introduce
others as well as through those who were not involved in
the research. The latter group included acquaintances
at other companies who did not work in cyber security
or at a board level, but were willing to make introduc-
tions to relevant contacts. In general terms, each contact
led to the recruitment of one participant. This helped
to ensure that our sample was as diverse as possible.
There is little opportunity to gain access to board mem-
bers outside of a professional environment and access to
these participants was approached through CISOs who
were participating in the research, as well as through
board members with whom we already had a relation-
ship. Although the intention was to gain both CISO
and senior leader perspectives from each organisation,
due to the diﬃculty in gaining access, only six non-CISO
participants were recruited (see also Section 4.2.1). Par-
ticipants were engaged through a variety of means, in-
cluding direct email contact, face-to-face interaction at
industry events, the use of mutual acquaintances to ef-
fect introductions and direct contact on LinkedIn. The
latter method was the least successful but did result in
a small number of interviews.

Table 2: Industry sectors represented in this study
ICB Super-sector
Banks
Food, Beverage and Tobacco
Industrial Goods and Services
Personal Care, Drug and Grocery Stores
Real Estate
Technology
Telecommunications
Travel and Leisure
Utilities
Total

Number of organisations
1
1
6
2
1
1
2
1
3
18

Coverage of industries represented in this research based on
classiﬁcations taken from [7, 1].

4.1.3 Ethical considerations

Every care was taken to protect participants at every
stage of the research. All of our activities were approved
for self-certiﬁcation through our institution’s Research
Ethics Committee, before the start of the research. The
study was designed to minimise both the collection of
personally identiﬁable information and the risk of indi-
rect identiﬁcation. Participants were fully informed of
the research and were provided with consent forms and
information sheets two working days before each inter-
view; the information sheet explained how data would
be anonymised and protected. We include the infor-
mation sheet in Appendix ??. All interview data was

4

anonymised. We only refer to participant IDs, their
role, the company that they represented and the indus-
try sector applicable to that company. Participants were
referred to only by their ID from the point of transcrip-
tion onwards. Any sensitive or potentially identiﬁable
information was redacted during transcription. Once in-
terviews were transcribed and anonymised all recordings
were destroyed.

4.2 Data analysis

The data was collected as part of a wider study exploring
the purpose of cyber-security functions within commer-
cial organisations. The ﬁndings presented in this paper
represent one theme emerging from this work, namely
the conception of the CISO as a soothsayer. This no-
tion manifested itself across the data. Transcripts were
analysed inductively and coded in multiple cycles using
NVivo 12 [6]. We used a mixture of coding types, with
in-vivo, process, versus and dramaturgical coding [96]
being used extensively. Following the inductive phases,
we applied a deductive approach in order to categorise
and rationalise the codes. Analytic memos were pro-
duced throughout, following others, e.g. [96, 70, 32]. Di-
agramming was used extensively in the analysis (see Ap-
pendix ?? for an example) to explore relationships be-
tween codes and categories, combining several methods
from Salda˜na [96] including category relationship and
operational model diagrams. These were used to iden-
tify and explore themes emerging from the data, fol-
lowing [21]. At this stage, multiple sociological lenses
were used to facilitate a deeper interpretation and sense-
making of our research ﬁndings.

4.2.1 Limitations

A number of limitations should be taken into account
when interpreting our ﬁndings. First, while a broad
range of industries are represented in the study, there
is a weighting towards one industry (Industrial Goods
and Services) and there are industries that are not rep-
resented. Second, the semi-structured nature of the in-
terviews was chosen to provide depth rather than scale,
and the ﬁndings will not be representative of all CISOs
or senior leaders, nor of all companies. Third, there is
an inherent bias in interview-based research, given that
participants self-select to take part. It may be the case
that the participants who agreed to be interviewed were
those that were particularly motivated to express iden-
tity concerns. This limitation is not unique to this study,
but mirrors other interview-based studies. Fourth, there
is a lack of diversity in the study, at a number of lev-
els. The majority of the participants, and all of those
in CISO roles, have self-identiﬁed as male. All partici-
pants can also be considered to be ‘elites’, while there
is a lack of ethnic diversity in the study. This lack of
diversity, however, reﬂects the lack of diversity in the
industry more broadly. Fifth, the positionality of the
main researcher, as a practising CISO, may be a crucial
factor in the eﬀectiveness of the analysis stage [30, p. 8].
It may have aided interpretation, although with the risk
of bias. Sixth, there is an imbalance between CISO and

non-CISO participants, due to the diﬃculty in securing
both engagement with, and commitment from, senior
leaders. Seventh, other organisational levels beyond se-
nior leaders are not reﬂected in this study and, there-
fore, roles that the CISO plays at these other levels has
not been explored. Eighth, the interviewer was a CISO,
which will have introduced aspects of personal bias. Fi-
nally, the COVID-19 outbreak meant that eight of the
interviews were conducted remotely (see Table 1). Con-
ducting interviews online limited the researcher’s abil-
ity to observe the participants’ physical setting, which
might have aﬀected their ability to speak freely.

5 Research ﬁndings

Our research ﬁndings are structured into ﬁve sections.
Section 5.1 focuses on the role of the CISO as cyber-
security interpreter and communicator, Section 5.2 cov-
ers cyber-security expertise and associated trust, Sec-
tion 5.3 highlights perceived mystical aspects of cyber
security, Section 5.4 focuses on the relationship between
fear and cyber security, and Section 5.5 shows the CISO
role as precarious and alienated.

5.1 Cyber security as an interpretive

practice

Multiple participants described there being a need for
cyber-security decisions to be made based on interpreta-
tion. These did not solely originate from CISO partici-
pants. For example, CFO2 described how cyber-security
information needs to be “expressed in a way that is un-
derstandable to a more lay person”. This indicates both
a sense at the senior leadership level that such informa-
tion needs to be interpreted, or at least translated, but
also that such information is specialist, perhaps even
mystical. Although the term “lay person” may be used
to indicate a non-specialist, it carries implications of sec-
ular versus clerical and may, therefore, also suggest a
mystical nature to cyber security. CISO14 suggested
that they met the needs of CFO2 when they stated that:

“I don’t just say that there’s this ﬂavour of ran-
somware and it’s really bad and it could hit us,
that means nothing, you know, I try to articu-
late that in a balanced risk-based way so that
they can understand how vulnerable we are . . .
what the consequence would be perhaps in ﬁ-
nancial terms, yeah, and what we need to do
and how much it might cost to mitigate that
risk.”

Not only have they interpreted the information from the
perspective of its relevance to the organisation and its
exposure, they have done so, according to them, in a
balanced way, using language that they consider to be
more understandable by their audience. This suggests
that the CISO is an interpreter and translator, and holds
a position of power as a gatekeeper of information.

5

5.1.1 Cyber security as a foreign language

As well as information needing to be interpreted, it needs
to be relayed in words that the audience can understand.
CISO4 described how they “speak in a language that
actually is very business-speciﬁc rather than technology-
speciﬁc”, they “keep it as simple as we can . . . as mono-
syllabic as we can”. CISO8 noted how they wanted to
“ﬁnd a common language for talking to the board about
security”; this common language was ﬁnancial in nature,
similar to the explanation given by CISO14 above.

CISO5 made an explicit reference to cyber security
being a foreign language, describing how “when you try
to talk to anybody in another language you should at
least know how to say please, thank you, order a beer”
and stating that it is “incumbent upon a CISO or any
head of security in whatever guise to teach the recipient
how to speak pidgin cyber or pidgin IT or something
that gives them a ﬁghting chance to understand”. The
same participant described how “we almost speak in you
know, hieroglyphics or we speak in . . .
language that
nobody else speaks in”. The reference to hieroglyphics
implies some mysticism regarding the language of cyber
security, which is discussed further in Section 5.3.

Several references were made to cyber security being
diﬃcult to understand. Multiple CISOs described the
necessity of analogy and metaphor in their communica-
tions, particularly with senior leaders. The CISOs also
indicated that their stakeholders had a limited under-
standing of the subject, across all levels of the organ-
isation. Senior leaders expressed the need for cyber-
security messaging to be kept “as simple as possible”
(CEO2) and to be “expressed in a way that is under-
standable to a more lay person” (CFO2). Moreover,
CFO2 described how cyber-security specialists “have a
depth of knowledge and a smell and a sense for their
particular area”. This also suggests something beyond
knowledge, an intangible, arguably mystical, “sense” for
the subject.

5.1.2 Cyber security as a continuum

Participants indicated that cyber security represents a
continuum, with the implication being that, due to
the lack of a binary nature, interpretation is necessary.
CFO2 highlighted the interpretive aspect of cyber secu-
rity by stating that “we don’t gold-plate it I wouldn’t
have said, but we don’t short-change it”, implying that
there is a ‘range’, a continuum from short-changing to
gold-plating, with regard to security. This also implies
that it is necessary to determine where on this scale an
organisation should be placed. CISO7 used similar lan-
guage when describing how they agreed risk tolerance
with their board as “we’re not going to be gold-plated”.
They further implied a continuum by distinguishing be-
tween “good practice” and “best practice” and added
that not achieving best practice amounted to “just com-
mon sense stuﬀ”.3 They further noted a “subtlety be-
tween ‘do you want good practice or best practice’ ”

3This perhaps undermines the idea of there being a need for
a specialist interpreter. However, it is likely the case that this is
only ‘common’ to specialists.

when talking to the board about risk tolerance. By
asking the board whether they want good practice or
best practice, they are both constructing the continuum
and their role as an interpreter of the continuum, and
of being capable of helping their stakeholders determine
where on that continuum they ‘should’ be. They admit-
ted to “the subjectiveness of it” and described part of
their role as “wordsmithing things”, further indicating
the ‘art’ of what they do but also the opportunity for
sophistry.

Other references to a continuum were made by partic-
ipants, including the role that the CISO plays in deter-
mining where on that continuum the organisation should
be. For example, CISO12 described “a certain baseline
they need to achieve and in security that’s where I come
in” and how, within their organisation, they set each in-
dividual business unit a “bar” to achieve with regard to
cyber security. Moreover, several CISOs invoked a ‘one
size doesn’t ﬁt all’ argument with reference to cyber se-
curity, implying the need for a ‘tailored’ approach. This
further implied the need for a specialist, a ‘tailor’, who
will interpret the needs of the situation and design an
appropriate solution, with the CISO positioning them-
selves as this tailor, this interpreter. CISO4 described
how “it’s quite complex . . . there’s no one size . . . that
we prescribe”, invoking not just the language of a tai-
lor but that of a medical practitioner as well. There is
also an implication here of power; the CISO is in a posi-
tion to be able to prescribe to the organisation what its
approach to cyber security should be.

5.1.3 Cyber security as not-science

Several CISOs either explicitly labelled themselves as
pragmatic or as not-dogmatic, or implicitly invoked that
label using similar words, e.g. “I think they appreciate
I’m pretty candid and also realistic” (CISO2). The in-
vocation of ‘pragmatic’ (identiﬁed in 13 out of 15 CISO
interviews) implies a sense of interpretation; in order to
be pragmatic or realistic, both an analysis and a judge-
ment are required.

In addition, several CISOs described cyber security as
not-science; CISO2 passionately stated that “although
much of . . . cyber security . . .
is kind of positioned as
almost a science, you know my own approach is that it’s
not at all” (emphasis captured in original transcript).
They added that they rely on “judgement and gut feeling
and stuﬀ like that”, suggesting a self-conception as a
soothsayer, and also as a judge. They further highlighted
how they determine “the right course of action” based
on both “data” and “gut feeling”, but that often there is
no empirical data and therefore they must rely on their
own “experience”.

In line with this, several CISOs invoked the ‘art not
science’ motif by describing the immeasurability of the
cyber-security risk and pressures from their stakeholders
for measurability and quantiﬁcation. This resulted in
the CISOs feeling frustrated, as they considered that
their stakeholders did not appreciate that “there isn’t a
clear answer” (CISO13).

6

5.2 Cyber security as an expert system

CFO2 described how “the cyber team recommend to us
as a management team what they think they need to
do because it’s quite specialised”, which may suggest
that this “cyber team” position themselves as special-
ists. Indeed, making recommendations is one method by
which an identity as an expert may be constructed. This
participant also referred to how they need to “unpick”
the information they are provided, in which “there are
quite a lot of acronyms”. CISO3 described how their
board “still struggle a little” and explicitly positioned
themselves as an expert, describing how “you’ll come
in [to a board meeting] as a subject matter expert”.
Through this narrative construction, they are not only
the expert but also the solution to a problem. Another
CISO suggested a similar narrative: “when I turned up,
it was management by anecdote . . .
the board didn’t
know which question to ask . . . I think I’ve turned that
around”. CISO4 described “dealing with . . . a partic-
ularly sophisticated set of attack activity”, adding that
“cyber-security is a dark art . . . most people won’t un-
derstand it”; their narrative describes a problem that is
both fearful and incomprehensible.

CIO1 described the need for any individual who is re-
sponsible for cyber security to have “the credentials in
place to do that ﬁrst” and describes how their staﬀ have
“incentives to gain qualiﬁcations quickly”; these refer-
ences suggest a perceived need not just for experts but
for proof of that expertise. Other indications of con-
structing cyber security as an expert system include ref-
erences to the subject itself being demanding; CISO11
for example stated how “it’s not simple and it’s not easy,
it’s not straightforward”. CISO1 alluded to this when
describing how they “want to give them [their senior
stakeholders] an idea of the scope of what we’re trying
to do”. By giving stakeholders the idea that the CISO
is dealing with something that is diﬃcult, they also con-
struct (or maintain) an identity as an expert.

5.2.1 Trust in expert systems

The non-CISO participants considered cyber security to
be an expert system. CFO2, for example, referred to
how their CISO is “bringing real time expertise to the
organisation”. NED1 described how “we’re [i.e. board
members] not going to have the deep expertise” and
CFO1 stated that they are “never going to be a cyber-
security expert”, how cyber security itself is “a topic . . .
where you’re always going to be looking to genuine ex-
perts”. Not only is cyber security accepted as an expert
system, it is trusted. NED1 described how “we’re going
to trust that we’re not going to have the deep exper-
tise . . . but we do ultimately have to understand the
right questions to ask to make sure someone like you
[i.e. the interviewer, a CISO] is doing your job appropri-
ately.” CFO1 noted that they would “rather someone
. . . would look at it [cyber security] properly and, you
know, knew what it should look like”. CISO6 described
the importance of trust, but suggested the possibility of
abusing that trust:

“I like to make sure that we are very honest

about the risks because it’s very easy to mis-
lead because . . . they [the board] don’t know
so they have to have some faith
enough . . .
and trust in me and obviously my boss for rep-
resenting that.”

Several participants, both CISOs and non-CISOs,
referred to external standards such as NIST-CSF,
ISO27001 and ISO31000. For example, CFO2 described
how they would “like us to have a more mature ISO
27001 environment”. As well as the incantation of stan-
dards, participants also referred to accreditation against
them. This provides a further means of cementing cy-
ber security as an expert system; not only is there an
external standard, agreed upon by external experts and
branded with/by a recognised external authority, com-
pliance with that standard can be assessed by further
experts, i.e. auditors. CISO9, however, partly chal-
lenged the use of standards, saying that “ISO27001 is
often seen as a bit of a panacea” and that they are “not
necessarily convinced that ISO[27001] is the sort of . . .
big sticking plaster that everybody thinks it is”. They
suggested that there is a ranking of accredited standards,
that some are considered “lesser certiﬁcations or qual-
iﬁcations”, but they think that “actually . . .
they all
have a place”. Moreover, CISO7 described how their
board “quite like the fact that I’ve based us around the
NIST cyber-security framework” and described referenc-
ing this standard in their reporting, using it to frame
their activity. The use and presence of standards may
serve to legitimise their activity but also their position
as an interpreter and, by extension, an expert. One
CISO suggested that if a provider of a service is regu-
lated, that fact “slightly obviates” the consumers of that
service “from having to make a judgment”. Similarly,
the reference to a standard by a CISO may “obviate”,
at least in part, the need of their audience to make a
judgement on the CISO’s legitimacy or expertise.

5.2.2 Expert superiority

A further suggestion of an expert identity was made by
CISO3 who stated “it’s like children isn’t it”, when de-
scribing how they need to communicate cyber risk to
their stakeholders; they described how “people don’t like
to be told what to do . . . unless they understand”. This
suggests not just the construction of an expert iden-
tity but also one of superiority, a more knowledgeable
and well-meaning parent explaining something to a less
knowledgeable, na¨ıve child. A diﬀerent aspect of superi-
ority was expressed by CISO14 when referring to one of
their team members; they described how “you might not
put him in front of the board of directors”. As well as
being superior, this may suggest that a particular ‘type’
of person is required in order to interact with senior lead-
ers.4 CISO4 stated that “most people won’t understand
it [cyber security]”; this implies not just the specialist
nature of the subject, but also the specialist nature (in
the sense of being ‘special’) of the person who does un-
derstand it. By delineating between those who do and
4A related ﬁnding from this study was a clear diﬀerentiation be-
tween technical and non-technical identities; this will be explored
in future research.

7

those who do not understand there is also a suggestion
of superiority, that having that understanding sets them
apart from “most people”.

also positions and reinforces cyber security as being an
expert system.

5.3 Cyber security as mystical or arcane

it is “a dark art”
Not only is the subject complex,
(CISO4), it is “another language” (CISO5), “almost . . .
hieroglyphics” (CISO5). Those who do not practice it
are “lay-person[s]” (CISO2) and those outside of it, such
as CFO2, recognise themselves as such. The use of this
language helps to position cyber security as a specialist
subject, but also as something mystical, possibly even
clerical in nature. As a subject that is specialist and
mysterious, it requires a specialist to make sense of it. If
positioning cyber security as mystical beneﬁts the con-
ception of it as an interpretive practice, which therefore
requires an interpreter, then this may motivate CISOs
(and others with a vested interest in cyber security) to
position the subject in this way, e.g.
to explain it as
a dark art. Another CISO described cyber security as
“opaque and . . . pervasive”; not only is it complex, it is
impenetrable, and it is everywhere, implying an almost
ghostly or spectral nature to the subject.

5.3.1 Cyber security as virtuous or moral

Participants made reference to cyber security having di-
mensions of right and wrong.
In particular, multiple
CISOs made reference to ‘doing the right thing’, in terms
of the organisation, its employees and its third parties.
Referring to the latter, CISO7 described how they are
“holding them to account to make sure they’re doing the
right thing”.

Non-CISO participants also made reference to rights
and wrongs. CFO2 described how breaches in cyber se-
curity can “cause nasty accidents” and can be “cruel”.
These value-laden references suggest the existence of
the right-versus-wrong dualism. CIO1 used similar lan-
guage, describing how “nasty things happen” in rela-
tion to cyber security. Further, CFO2 described how
the CISO has “a duty to communicate risk”, “duty” im-
plying a dimension of trust and a moral aspect. They
trusted the CISO to ‘do the right thing’.

Participants also implied aspects of cyber-security ac-
tivities within their organisation as akin to social work
which contributes to the conception of cyber security as
virtuous; this included the CISO working with people
in their organisation to “introduce the right kind of . . .
behaviours and judgements” (CISO2). The notion of cy-
ber security being interpretive is also supported by this
idea of ‘rights and wrongs’, both in terms of there be-
ing a right way to ‘do’ cyber security – e.g. “you still
need to get the basics right” (CISO6) – and a ‘right
and wrong’ dualism inherent in the topic – e.g. “do the
right thing” (CISO11), “we had an army . . . trying to
ﬁnd you [employees] doing wrong” (CISO8). In order to
determine right and wrong a ‘moral expert’ is required
to interpret the situation. Positioning cyber security as
moral helps to maintain the identity of the CISO role as
an interpretive one. Further, requiring moral expertise

5.3.2 Disciplinary aspects of cyber security

A number of references were made to cyber security
within organisations involving aspects of policing and
enforcement. An example of this was provided by CISO5
who described how “security’s job is to hold their [the
IT department’s] feet to the ﬁre”. CISOs described their
activities as “policing” (three CISOs), discussed enforc-
ing both penalties (three CISOs) and remedial action
(two CISOs), and escalating incidents of non-compliance
(two CISOs). There was an expectation of the latter
from CFO2 who described how “if there was any poor
behaviour . . .
[including from] myself, there would be
an outlet for that person [the CISO] to raise the whis-
tle”. There was also an implication of governance by
consent from a number of CISOs; CISO12 described be-
ing proud of having “change[d] the conversation and the
outlook around security . . .
from being something that
is done to them to being something that is done with
them”. CISO13 referred to the COVID-19 pandemic as
having “created a dynamic that is probably even less I
guess accepting of governance and controls”, suggesting
that governance requires consent.

These references to discipline and, in particular, pun-
ishment are predicated on a concept of right and wrong;
it is diﬃcult to punish someone if they have not done
something that is considered to be wrong, if they have
not transgressed against something. This further rein-
forces the narrative of cyber security being an expert sys-
tem; because discipline is possible/permitted/accepted,
then this suggests an authority of some description that
sits behind that disciplinary ability.

5.3.3 Edifying aspects of cyber security

Several CISOs positioned their role and its activities as
improving for the organisation. For example, CISO13
explicitly noted the edifying role that they see them-
selves playing, stating: “I see it on myself to ultimately
get them [the organisation] to a better place and im-
prove it”. This included positioning cyber security as
enlightening. For example, CISO11 described “dragging
it [the company] out of the dark ages of security into
the modern contemporary security daylight” and the
CISO6 described how, without them, the organisation
“would wander round blindly”. Multiple CISO partici-
pants made reference to changing “mindsets”; for exam-
ple, CISO4 described how they had “changed . . . per-
ception . . . and actually created a much more open, en-
abling mindset” in relation to their stakeholders within
the organisation.

CISO8 referred to “an altruistic element” to cyber se-
curity, both within the organisation and in wider society,
such as “making it safe for children to use the inter-
net . . . making it safe for consumers to buy bus tick-
ets”. CISO12 stated “I try to improve for the beneﬁt for
the many”, suggesting a self-conception as an altruist.
There was also an implication that cyber security was a
‘cause’, that CISOs believed in what they did because it

8

was ‘right’. CISO8 described how they wanted a family
member to “be able to use the internet without fear”.

of the sectors we play in, of meeting our responsibility
to do our best to defend against such an attack”.5

Several CISOs positioned themselves as providing an
“oversight” to the business. CISO12 described how,
without them, “the businesses [within the organisation]
would suﬀer . . .
because some of the things I see”.
CISO2 described how, without them, their business
would “live with a kind of . . . ﬁg leaf” but eventually
there would be “a pretty serious failing”.

5.4 Cyber security as fearful

The association of fear with cyber security was ob-
served throughout the data. For example, words such
as “scary” and “worried” were commonly used by both
CISOs and non-CISOs. The perception of senior lead-
ers in particular was that a cyber security incident was
something to be afraid of, summarised by the following
exchange:

Interviewer: “When you hear about things like
the Travelex incident [104], how does that tend
to make you feel, how do you tend to react?”
CEO2: “Shit!” [laughter]

NED1 described how increased knowledge regarding cy-
ber security, as provided by their CISO and also from
what they had observed in the media, had “got me a
little scared”. CISO8 explained how “it’s very diﬃcult
for a conversation [about cyber security] not to gravi-
tate back to being scary and inevitable”. CISOs also
described deliberately utilising fear with their stakehold-
ers, including one visceral description of the use of “war
games . . . with the executive committee . . .
[whereby]
you watch them shit themselves over the next half an
hour” (CISO11). CISO14 described how fear is “cou-
pled with ‘so what are you doing about it’ ”, indicating
that they generate a fear response in order to position a
sense of assuagement of that fear. CISO14 was also more
explicit regarding assuagement, describing how they saw
their role as “giving my senior stakeholders . . .
[a] level
of comfort”. The CISO6 used similar language when
referring to reporting on cyber security to their senior
stakeholders, stating that “a lot of it’s about a comfort
factor”. We also found that CISOs deliberately refer-
enced cyber-security incidents aﬀecting other organisa-
tions. As well as articulating those incidents, their com-
munications included “why it might not happen to us”
(CISO4).

Participants also invoked narratives of permanent
emergency. For example, CISO14 described how they
it’s when
had “tried to drive the message that . . .
not if [a cyber-security incident occurs]”, adding that
their stakeholders “accept that the likelihood is that
we will suﬀer some form of cyber event over the . . .
short to medium term”. Multiple references were made
to “sophisticated” threats that were “increasing” and
“ever-changing”; CISO4 summed this up by stating that
“there are troubled times ahead”. Reference was also
made to threats from “rogue states” and “cyber war”,
with participants referring to being “acutely conscious

5.4.1 Cybersecurity as bad news

We found that cyber security was characterised as bad
news, and the CISO as a ‘bad news merchant’. CISO3
described how “our job is to point out there’s a prob-
lem here”, while CISO13 referred to activities aimed at
“ﬂush[ing] out some of the issues”. CISO2 described
how the role of the CISO is “turning over rocks and
doing discovery and showing how bad everything is so
things appear to get worse”. CISO12 provided an exam-
ple of the CISO being a ‘bad news merchant’, describing
how they would only be present at a board meeting “if
it’s something going wrong”. CEO1 described how “if
something serious happened I would be told quickly”,
again suggesting that the CISO’s primary engagement
with senior leaders is to articulate bad news. However,
CFO2 implied that they did not want to be told bad
news, and CISO9 described how their CEO was, at one
stage, “very angry” when presented with cyber-security
risk.6 CISO5 described how “there’s only so much [that]
people can put up with”, which may indicate that bad
news relating to cyber security results in fatigue. This
statement also suggests a level of frustration and resig-
nation on behalf of the CISO in relation to being the
bad news merchant. CEO1 stated that “what we try
to avoid is shroud-waving at ourselves the whole time
because people then don’t take it seriously”, indicating
again that cyber security has a negative association and
suggesting the risk of ‘cyber fatigue’.

The data also included a number of references to the
high cost of cyber security, which may also contribute
to a conception of the subject as bad news. For ex-
ample, CISO8 described how “the board is saying ‘we
seem to be spending a lot of money on security’ ” and
another CISO described how, to their stakeholders, “we
just seem to be costing money”. Senior leaders also indi-
cated concerns with cost; for example, CEO1 described
how “[security teams] are by nature quite expensive to
run”. Beyond cost, CISOs also expressed concern with
other labels being applied to them, including “as some-
one who’s being kind of too unreasonable and who’s . . .
creating too much bureaucracy, not being commercially
minded” (CISO13), which may also contribute to nega-
tive associations.

5.4.2 Cyber security as an ontological threat

We found that senior participants in particular con-
sidered a cyber-security incident to be an ontological
threat to the organisation, aﬀecting its ongoing viabil-
ity. For example, CEO1 described cyber risk as “poten-
tially catastrophic”, stating that “it could destroy the
business”. Not all senior participants agreed however,
with the CEO2 stating that although a cyber-security

5Deliberately not attributed to inhibit potential identiﬁcation.
6This also demonstrates another aspect of cyber security that
emerged from the data: it is often experienced emotionally. As well
as fear and anger, panic, shame, and even love were articulated by
participants in relation to cyber security.

9

incident would be “incredibly disruptive” and would re-
quire “alternative ways of operating”, they did not con-
sider it as something that could put them out of busi-
ness. CISOs also referred to the ontological threat of
cyber security,
including using terms such as “catas-
trophe” (CISO11), “debilitating” (CISO4) and “disas-
trous” (CISO9) to refer to cyber-security incidents. Sev-
eral CISOs explicitly described how such an event would
pose a risk to the ongoing viability of their organisation;
for example, CISO5 described how “[in] the worst case
. . . your business is over”.

Several references were made to an increasing cyber-
security threat. CISO6 described the need to be “cog-
nisant of the new threats or new attack types” and
CISO1 described the need to “keep up to pace” with
such threats. The cyber-security threat landscape was
positioned as “sophisticated, [it] changes almost on a
daily basis” (CISO14). Non-CISOs also believed that
cyber-security threats were increasing, including CFO1
describing cyber security as “a continuing moving goal
post”.

5.5 Precarity of the CISO role

The data indicated that CISOs considered themselves
to occupy a precarious position. CISO12 summed this
up by stating “we know that it’s implicit with our role,
if something goes wrong . . . you’re the guy [that gets
ﬁred]”. The importance of cyber security itself was, how-
ever, not questioned, suggesting that what was under
threat was not the existence of the function or the role
itself, but the incumbent’s occupation of that role. For
example, CISO3 described how the cyber-security func-
tion is “going to be there for the long term that’s for
sure” but they themselves were “not under any illusions
[as] to where accountability sits”. CISO2 stated that
“if we had a terrible security failing here . . . I wouldn’t
escape the spotlight”, also describing how their relation-
ship with their board could change if they “drop the ball
really hard”. Non-CISOs also implied a threat to the
CISO’s position; for example, NED1 described the role
that their board had with regard to cyber security as
including the power to “hire [and] ﬁre people” and their
need to determine whether “whoever is accountable for
it [cyber security] has the right level of expertise”. CEO1
stated: “you have to make judgments on the ﬂy about
whether you think somebody is bullshitting or not”.

they are “treated like a body that needs to be negoti-
ated with . . . rather [than] as something intrinsic” and
another CISO described how they were viewed as being
“of a diﬀerent tribe”.

6 Discussion

In this section, we discuss how the CISO’s identity as a
soothsayer is constructed, as evidenced in our ﬁndings,
and employing theories of identity work and ontologi-
cal security to unpack this identity. The CISOs in our
study, in response to feeling ontologically insecure, per-
formed identity work aimed at creating or maintaining a
protective identity that was essential or necessary. Sim-
ilarly, the existence of a CISO within an organisation
may represent that organisation’s response to its own
feelings of ontological insecurity. We develop this fur-
ther below by ﬁrst discussing how the soothsayer iden-
tity is constructed in Section 6.1, before exploring the
identity work of organisations in relation to cyber se-
curity in Section 6.2 and the self-serving aspects of the
CISO role in Section 6.3. Finally, we set out implications
for future CSCW work and call for greater attention to
be paid to theoretically informed analytical approaches,
thus, picking up a discussion that has surfaced at diﬀer-
ent moments in the history of CSCW, e.g. [14, 69].

Soothsaying should not necessarily be viewed in a neg-
ative light. Historically, soothsayers have been “prophet-
consultant” [106, 41] and totem [87], as well as “scape-
goat” [106]. They are associated with ‘reading’ signs and
interpreting information that would be unintelligible to
a non-soothsayer, e.g. animal entrails [34] or patterns in
the stars [94]. As well as ‘reading’ information and as-
similating data, they make judgements and advise their
stakeholders on the path to take, even including which
path is permitted. Some of this judgement is based
on ‘gut feeling’ and soothsayers, as prophets, may have
self interest in the realisation of their prophecies [106].
Soothsayers occupy a position of some jeopardy; if their
stakeholders are displeased with their interpretation, or
if they are seen to have failed, the soothsayer may lose
their job, e.g. [100, 97, 3] or worse, their life e.g. [9].
In more modern times, nation states have employed ‘fu-
turists’ to predict military threats, which include those
related to cyber security; those nation states may take a
futurist’s predictions seriously, even when based on their
own works of ﬁction [81].

5.5.1 Detachment and ‘othering’ of the CISO

6.1 Constructing the soothsayer identity

Inhabiting what they see as a precarious role con-
tributes towards feelings of detachment and vulnerabil-
ity that were also observed in the data. Multiple CISOs
felt somewhat detached from their organisation, seeing
themselves as a gatekeeper or an overseer. In addition,
CISOs expressed feelings of isolation (“it can be very
lonely in security”), of being exposed (“you can never
win really”) and of frustration (“I found it a really, re-
ally hard slog to get . . .
stakeholders to just engage
with security and understand the value”). Related to
this, CISOs also experienced aspects of ‘othering’ within
their organisations. For example, CISO2 described how

The following section discusses the identity work per-
formed by the CISO that contributed to the development
of the soothsayer theme.

6.1.1 The CISO as protector

Participants in this study articulated narratives wherein
the CISO performs a speciﬁc role of responding to, or
providing protection from, threats. This is what Czar-
niawska describes as a “modern story’, in which “society
and nature cause disequilibria, and science restores equi-
librium” [40, p. 86] (italics in original). These stories, as

10

expressed by both CISOs and non-CISOs, position the
CISO and their discipline as the “science [that] restores
equilibrium” [40, p. 86].

Soothsayers or oracles were historically consulted for
motives of politics [76] and warfare [35]. Tropes of war-
fare were used by participants in this study, including
references to militaristic attack-defence concepts in re-
lation to cyber security which are common in the cyber-
security industry, e.g. [10, 43]. Such narratives are also
seen in mass media, e.g. [37, 8], some with governmental
origins, e.g. [18], and in academia, e.g. [75, 65]. In par-
ticular, the existence of a permanent emergency that ne-
cessitates speciﬁc attention being paid to cyber security
appears consistent in security discourse. Through the
existence of a CISO, and statements that make its pres-
ence public, a wider narrative of cyber security as perma-
nent emergency is supported, speciﬁcally as something
that is a threat which needs to be addressed by busi-
nesses. Indeed, we found that organisations considered
cyber security to be an ontological threat. In order to
be seen as defending the organisation from that threat,
it is helpful to make that organisation feel like it is un-
der attack. Using militaristic language enables the CISO
to maintain this feeling but, crucially, as we discuss be-
low, the nature of the attack is positioned as mystical or
specialist, requiring a certain capability in order to be
successfully defended against. This enables the CISO to
position themselves as a soothsayer; if there is war, then
an advantage would be gained by going ‘into battle’ with
a soothsayer on one’s side, particularly to advise on as-
pects of that war that are not well understood.7 This
narrative therefore beneﬁts from the existence of opaque
threats that require interpretation.

Masculine dimensions of cyber security. Mili-
taristic language has a traditionally masculine dimen-
sion and should be viewed in this light. Wider secu-
rity discourse suﬀers from a masculine bias which per-
petuates gendered language and concepts [107]. The
cyber-security industry suﬀers from a lack of representa-
tion of women [84, 90, 69] and cyber-security discourse,
both in mass media and in academia, commonly utilises
masculine tropes; for example, the positioning of cyber-
security workers as “shadow warriors” [110]. This bias
contributes to the traditionally masculine and arguably
paternalistic notion of being a ‘protector’. Notably,
soothsaying historically was a profession that was dom-
inated by male practitioners [28].

6.1.2 The CISO as interpreter of an expert sys-

tem

We found that the CISO functions as an interpreter,
utilising expertise in order to enable the organisation
to make decisions, similar to ﬁndings from other cyber-
security researchers, e.g. [54]. CISOs indicated that cy-
ber security is an expert system, comprising technical
aspects, e.g. software vulnerabilities that cannot just be
taken at face-value; they require interpretation in order

7But also to act as a totem, indicating to anyone observing
the warring party that it is defended against such threats. These
totemic aspects are discussed further below.

for risks to be related to the organisation. The CISO
constructs an identity as an interpreter, but also as be-
ing necessary, with an implication that, without their
role (or perhaps without them speciﬁcally), the organi-
sation may under- or over-react to a threat.

References that CISOs made to interpreting data and
statistics relating to cyber security can also be viewed
through a semiotic lens. Without the CISO, senior lead-
ers may look at data – i.e. signs – and make their own,
inaccurate, interpretations. Such judgement based on
signs is analogous to soothsaying practices of divination,
an interpretive practice performed by “specialists” [34,
p. 320]. References that senior leaders made to the
capabilities of the CISO suggested something beyond
knowledge, an intangible, arguably mystical, sense for
the subject, possibly akin to divination.

The existence of qualiﬁcations and professional asso-
ciations regarding cyber security, e.g. [4, 2], not only
support its consideration as an expert system but are
also analogous to soothsaying, in which “membership of
a prophetic association” [20, p. 130] provided endorse-
ment and validation.

6.1.3 The CISO as moral expert

CISOs in our study positioned cyber security as hav-
ing a moral dimension, something established by other
cyber-security researchers, e.g., [69], as well as position-
ing their work as edifying. Viewed alongside cyber secu-
rity as an expert system, this constitutes identity work
that positions the CISO as a moral expert [45]. Having
a moral identity helps the CISO maintain their position;
this may be a stronger or more stable identity than one
that is solely based on a job title. A moral identity can
be seen as more important, or more elevated, within a
society. If so, it serves the CISO’s interest to maintain
a moral aspect to the subject but, as will be discussed
further below, it also serves wider interests at a soci-
etal level; positioning cyber security as moral reinforces
existing narratives regarding those who are ‘wrong’, i.e.
enemies. Both mass media reporting and government
rhetoric in relation to cyber security is consistent in por-
traying both a “growing and evolving threat” [5, p. 9]
and known ‘villains’, e.g. [37, 85]. The typical geopolit-
ical nature of those ‘villains’ also supports Neocleous’s
arguments relating security to a wider narrative with
respect to the superiority of Western cultures and ide-
ologies [79, 9, p. 172]. As an illustration of this, during
their interview, one senior leader made reference to mul-
tiple nation states posing a cyber security threat, pro-
viding an almost ‘clean sweep’ of the current Western
view of ‘villains’, i.e. Russia, China and North Korea,
with only Iran missing.

Indexing a wider concept of morality also serves to le-
gitimise the domain; as morality is an established norma-
tive concept, associating cyber security with it makes the
latter more acceptable, perhaps even more ‘real’. Oper-
ating a cyber-security function may even represent an
attempt at “salvation by works” [15, p. 62] (italics in
original) and the conception of cyber security as virtu-
ous, and references to its practice as edifying, support
such an intention.

11

Cyber security as a belief system. As well as moral
dimensions, this study suggests that cyber security has
dimensions of mysticism and interpretation, with indi-
cations of there being a doctrine, even if that doctrine
is resisted. CISO participants also suggested that cyber
security was, to them, a cause; that they felt a sense
of duty, even a calling. They felt the need to make a
diﬀerence, to improve. Further, there was an implica-
tion of being ‘gifted’, perhaps even ‘chosen’, exempliﬁed
in one CISO’s description of a team member who they
considered unsuitable to be brought into contact with se-
nior leaders. In combination, these factors suggest that
CISOs view their discipline as akin to a belief system; it
has aspects of right and wrong, its practice beneﬁts those
who receive it, and it requires special skills to interpret.
Edifying aspects of cyber security included applica-
tions of ‘light’ versus ‘darkness’, a motif that, tradition-
ally, has a spiritual dimension [41, p. 165]. The ide-
ological associations of cyber security also support the
belief system analogy. Doctrinal implications made by
participants included multiple references to ‘lay-people’,
as well as references to people who “get it” and sugges-
tions of orthodoxy in relation to cyber security. Further,
several CISOs articulated a need to ‘sell’ the concept of
cyber security to the rest of the organisation, including
the promotion of positive security behaviours, a need
also found by other researchers [54]. This may motivate
not just ediﬁcation, but also evangelism. We consider
these implicit associations of cyber security with sys-
tems of belief as mutually reinforcing of the role that
CISOs play as soothsayers.

6.1.4 The CISO as heretic

Being associated with a domain that has aspects of an
established belief system does not preclude resistance
against this system. Resistance against orthodoxy can
be a response to bureaucracy in such a system [74, p.
104] and, notably, being heretical does not necessarily
result in less mysticism; heresies can claim greater mys-
ticism than the dogma they are positioned against [74,
p. 104]. Being heretical supports both the conception
of cyber security as an interpretive practice, and as ‘art
not science’. Moreover, many CISOs in this study either
explicitly labelled themselves as pragmatic or as not-
dogmatic. The use of the word ‘pragmatic’ (seen in 13
out of 15 CISO interviews) implies a sense of interpreta-
tion; to be “pragmatic” or “realistic”, both an analysis
and a judgement are required. By suggesting the exis-
tence of dogma, a practical application of knowledge can
be positioned as an alternative.

There was a strong aversion from CISOs to not be-
ing categorised as dogmatic, suggesting that there was a
fear of this label being seen as the default with regard to
cyber security. This is a form of identity work, an expres-
sion of being not-X. Even though they may be heretical,
they may still be ‘tainted’ by the association with some-
thing that is seen as a dogmatic belief system and the
‘I’m pragmatic’ protestation can be seen as an attempt
to counteract that. This relates to a separate ﬁnding
from the data regarding the conﬂicted identity of cyber-
security functions. One identiﬁed conﬂict was whether

a cyber-security function was part of an IT function. In
some cases, this conﬂicted identity was observed regard-
less of reporting line. If the IT discipline is associated
with dogma then performing identity work to position
oneself as pragmatic can be a reaction against being seen
to be part of an IT function, serving to create an iden-
tity that is not just discrete, but speciﬁcally is not-IT.
Being not-X can be an important factor in the creation
and maintenance of identity [56] and not-IT and not-
dogmatic may be manifestations of such identity work.
The invocation of dogma lends support to the notion
that cyber security is akin to a system of belief. Not only
does it have a sense of ‘right and wrong’, as described
earlier, there is also a sense of ‘authority’ and accepted
practice. CISOs in this study resisted the call of dogma,
actively positioning themselves as heretical. We specu-
late that heretics are more acceptable, particularly in a
society (considering an organisation as a society) that
is more secular, and claiming to be heretical may be a
response by the CISO to being seen as an outsider.

6.1.5 Threats to the CISO’s identity

The positioning of the CISO as a soothsayer may be
performed by the incumbent as a response to perceived
threats to their own identity, similar to identity issues
identiﬁed by other researchers, e.g. [13]. Underberg de-
scribes how “a prophet, a ﬁgure at times not at the
center of social life and who sometimes delivers prophe-
cies that will not be well received, can be in danger of
becoming a scapegoat” [106, p. 148], and security it-
self often carries associations of blame [69]. The CISO,
as modern soothsayer, may lose their job as a result of
proclamations which displease their masters [100, 97] as
well as for perceived failures [3]. The risk of displeas-
ing their audience may be high as “credibility of oracles
depends on their apparent wisdom, and apparent wis-
dom is deﬁned by the beliefs and opinions of those to
whom it must appear as wisdom” [20, p. 126]. Their
proclamations may also be impenetrable and ambigu-
ous, something observed historically, e.g. [76]. Perhaps
being aware of the precarity of their role, CISOs are like
other prophets who “are said to know the time and place
of their own deaths” [106, p. 152].

Positioning the cyber security discipline. The
positioning of cyber security as ‘art not science’, along-
side its positioning as ‘a dark art’ may be attempts by
CISOs to modify or enhance their identity in order to
maintain their position. If they consider themselves to
be in a precarious position, then cyber security being
considered a science, i.e. as repeatable, methodical, es-
tablished, is threatening, as that would imply the rela-
tive ease of their replacement. If cyber security is a ‘dark
art’, on the other hand, i.e. mystical, arcane and requir-
ing interpretation, then their replacement is more prob-
lematic. In other words, it is easier to replace a chemist
than a soothsayer. This conception as not-science and
the need for a soothsayer may be facilitated or under-
pinned by the lack of an established scientiﬁc basis to
cyber security [57, 47] – or even vice versa.

12

6.2 Organisational identity work

The notion of the CISO as a soothsayer also supports an
organisation’s own identity work, particularly if the or-
ganisation experiences ontological insecurity as a result
of perceived cyber-security threats, as we found in this
study. The existence of a CISO is a fact often mentioned
in an organisation’s public statements, including annual
reports and press releases; such statements can also be
seen as identity work, and serve as a means to build
prestige [15] or to demonstrate “resemblances that pro-
vide favourable social analogies” [44, p. 52]. Statements
made by organisations relating to cyber-security invest-
ment, including the existence of a CISO, contribute to
a fetishisation [79, p. 5]8 of cyber security and have a
wider intent of achieving status, and legitimacy.

6.2.1 The CISO as totem

The CISO as soothsayer also performs a semiotic func-
tion, particularly if viewed as a form of totem; modern
totems can include “oracles, experts” [87]. Pettman de-
scribes how “totemic semiotics [are used to] . . .
frame,
and make sense of, a largely hostile and uncertain
world” [87, p. 8]. Organisations in this study articulated
considerable uncertainty in relation to cyber security, as-
sociating this with threats to the continued viability of
the organisation.

Totems provide assuagement [87], a function we found
to be provided by CISOs. As totem, they function
as an instrument of ontological security [87], and, as
“medicine-man or wizard9 . . .
ensur[e] the prosperity
of the tribe” [28, p. 5]. As with soothsayers, totems are
also used to predict the future [87]. The CISO as totem
also serves to indicate group membership [87, p. 22] and
indicate to observers the moral position of the organisa-
tion [38, p. 7]. Referring to the existence of a CISO in an
annual report can be viewed as an organisation publicly
stating their membership of an implied group, i.e. or-
ganisations that are addressing cyber-security risks. No-
tably, these mentions are of the role and not the named
individual who occupies the role, despite other, albeit
more senior, individuals being named in such reports.
if the CISO is totemic, then the role of the
Indeed,
its image, can be
CISO and its visible existence, i.e.
understood to be more important than the person who
inhabits the role [87, p. 19]. Being a totem contributes
to the othering of CISOs; a totem may be “a ‘frenemy,’
who could turn on the subject at any moment” [87, p.
9] and may have a disquieting eﬀect [87, p. 10]. Other-
ing may also result from an impression that totems are
“tricksters” [87, p. 27].

number of participants, both CISO and non-CISO, were
aware of these opportunities.
It is not just in the in-
terpretation and the associated judgement but also in
the communication of that judgement where the CISO
can exert inﬂuence. This inﬂuence may be self-serving
or may serve to support others within the organisation.
Regardless, there is a suggestion from the data that their
interpretations may not be entirely objective. This may
result in undesirable outcomes of reduced security due
to ineﬀective allocation of resources [47].

As with soothsayers, CISOs can have a self-interest
in the realisation of their own prophecies, a position
that may motivate unscrupulous behaviour. The CISO’s
role in regulating information provides them with sig-
niﬁcant inﬂuence and potentially allows them to help
secure their own future. Predicting an ever-increasing
number of ‘sophisticated’ threats may deter their stake-
holders from considering their replacement or removal,
and multiple CISO participants made reference to devel-
opment of long-term cyber-security plans, perhaps indi-
cating an attempt to secure their positions for longer.
A dynamic may exist whereby the greater the perceived
threat to their position, the greater the eﬀort in securing
their future. Cyber-security threats play multiple parts
in this dynamic. The greater the threat, the more likely
a breach is to occur that could ultimately cost the CISO
their job, if they are scapegoated for it. However, the
greater the threat, the more weight the CISO can put
behind their own agenda. Therefore, although it may be
in the CISO’s interest to articulate the existence of such
threat, it may be more in their interest for those threats
not to exist.

6.3.1 Self-serving aspects of the cyber-security

industry

The wider cyber-security industry may also be moti-
vated to perpetuate discourse that positions the disci-
pline as requiring interpretation by experts, but also the
consumption of goods. As well as beneﬁting the indus-
try [79], this beneﬁts a consumption-driven society more
generally [15]. Cyber-security predictions made by other
modern-day soothsayers such as so-called “futurists” can
be seen to be inﬂuenced by purely commercial desires,
e.g. [81], which may motivate predictions of a worsening
security climate [47]. Further, narratives of permanent
emergency and associated threats, as repeated by CISOs
and the wider cyber-security industry, serve to maintain
a position of power for that industry and also support
broader societal agendas which beneﬁt from an ongoing
sense of insecurity [79].

6.3 Cyber sophistry

6.4

Implications for CSCW

The CISO plays a role in not just interpreting, but also
relaying information. They hold a position of power,
and that power provides opportunities for sophistry. A

8Neocleous describes how security is “fetish[ised]” [79, p. 5]
to drive consumption, further arguing security’s embeddedness in
capitalist society.

9These gendered terms unfortunately borne out by the gender

imbalance in this study, and the wider CISO community.

Seen through the lenses of sociological theories of secu-
rity and identity work, our research aﬀords an account
of the cyber-security function within organisations that,
we argue, calls for greater attention to be paid to the-
oretically informed approaches in future CSCW work
in this context. This would, we believe, enrich and ex-
tend research in CSCW as well as security research more
widely, as we have demonstrated throughout the discus-

13

sion in this section. Here, we set out some initial implica-
tions for CSCW, grounded in the ﬁndings from our work.
More speciﬁcally, such implications relate to managerial
and design aspects of cyber security, as well as practical
implications for security practice within organisations.

6.4.1 Managerial implications

If we accept that cyber security is interpretive, as we
have argued in this paper, and which builds on existing
debates in the security research community, e.g., [57],
then it should not be approached as a binary, ‘are we se-
cure?’, determination – it needs specialist interpreters to
advise on the level of risk. This also includes accepting
that the CISO is not employed to ‘make things secure’.
Indeed, as Herly and Van Oorschot make clear, it is in-
disputable that ‘being secure’ cannot be proven [57], if
indeed it can be considered as a binary state. Rather,
the role of the CISO becomes one of advising on the level
of risk, at least at the most senior levels of the organisa-
tion. Accordingly, rather than being a role of ‘securing’
– or indeed ‘policing’ – an organisation, the CISO role
is more akin to weather forecasting. Orienting their role
away from ‘securing’ towards ‘weather forecasting’ also
serves the CISO: they may be less likely to be ﬁred as
a result of an inaccurate weather forecast (although a
series of inaccurate forecasts would likely still lead to
that result). Indeed, our data shows that the perceived
precarity of the CISO role leads to self-serving actions.
Furthermore, managers and practitioners should be con-
scious of the potential for cyber-sophistry and the un-
helpful outcomes that can result [47]. This may require
additional cyber-security expertise to exist at senior lev-
els within an organisation, possibly in a non-executive
capacity, in order to identify and challenge this, par-
ticularly given the inability to disprove many security-
related aﬃrmations, as highlighted in [57].

In this paper, we have unearthed and discussed cy-
ber security as being mystical, with CISOs occupying
the role of soothsayers in their organisation. This also
has an impact on how we approach cyber-security edu-
cation. Approaches to education relating to cyber secu-
rity could either aim to demystify it, or, alternatively,
to acknowledge the mysticism and thus reinforce the
If adopting the lat-
need for specialist interpretation.
ter approach, education of staﬀ may be best approached
as instruction in the use of systems in a secure way,
with the security aspects of this education being implicit
rather than explicit, and certain decisions on acceptabil-
ity of risk being deferred to cyber-security specialists.
For example, rather than training staﬀ how to identify
phishing emails, an organisation may place more focus
on the cyber-security team ﬁltering emails before they
reach staﬀ. Equally, rather than training developers on
common cyber-security threats, organisations may fo-
cus more eﬀort on specialist testing and associated risk
assessment of systems before implementation. These op-
tions are, however, potentially problematic if they result
in end users feeling less responsible for security and de-
pending entirely on technological protections, becoming
themselves powerless in the process. Additionally, end
users will always need an element of preparedness for

security-related incidents. However, as with much in se-
curity, educative approaches should be viewed as a con-
tinuum rather than in a binary manner, and a change
in focus that results in secure behaviour without neces-
sarily involving explicit articulation of security speciﬁcs
may ultimately lead to a more user-centric security ap-
proach, as called for by others, e.g., [91], where employee
experience is foregrounded.

6.4.2 Practical implications

The question of whether cyber security is a dark art or
not is perhaps obsolete. However, if it is considered a
dark art then systems should be designed on the basis
that their security will need to be interpreted by a spe-
cialist, in order for that specialist to advise the users
of that system as to the level of risk that it poses, and
how it may be mitigated.10 To make that easier, there
may need to be a minimum level of information provided
with a system in order to make that task simpler or more
standardised. As an analogy, often specialist parts for
domestic goods have a separate ‘advice/information for
installer’ section. That is, where there is a section for the
purchaser to read and familiarise themself with, there is
also a separate section for the installer. Employing this
analogy, we may begin to consider a similar approach
for security systems: an ‘information for CISO’ section
to be provided at point of purchase. Similarly, as we
noted above, developers should not approach security in
a binary, ’is it secure?’, manner. They may need to ap-
preciate, particularly in organisations, that security-risk
decisions require interpretation by a specialist that the
organisation has appointed.

While others have highlighted the lack of “science”
in cyber security, e.g. [57, 47], and problematised its
practice in organisational contexts, e.g., [13, 58, 66],
we introduce a diﬀerent perspective. Rather than at-
tempting to make security “more scientiﬁc” [57, p. 114],
perhaps there is greater value in acknowledging the in-
terpretive nature of cyber-security practice, particularly
within commercial organisations, and reclaiming sooth-
saying as a beneﬁcial advisory profession, rather than
seeing the term in a negative light. Even sophistry can
be viewed positively, with “[e]ﬀective communication,
including pedagogy and sound argument, [being] criti-
cal to prosperity” [51, p. 23], and perhaps it is espe-
cially important to distinguish between sophistry and
“rhetrickery” [19, p. 7]. Therefore, rather than only
exploring the ‘what’ of cyber-security behavioural inter-
ventions in organisations, e.g., [67, 80, 16, 36, 92, 98],
there is value in future research also exploring the ‘how’
and identifying the most eﬀective means of educating
and communicating desirable behaviours and practices,
particularly among the non-expert actors on whom ef-
fective security depends [91]. Eﬀective cyber security
may depend less on policy and control, themselves inef-
fective, e.g., [67, 12, 69, 89], and more on communica-

10This may even go as far as advising users whether that risk
is acceptable or not. Examples of this were observed in our data,
where CISOs were expected to make that decision on behalf of
the organisation’s leaders, conﬂicting with normative assumptions
that executive and supervisory boards alone determine risk toler-
ance.

14

tion and collaboration. This has an implication on re-
cruitment. Others have already highlighted the need for
CISOs to have eﬀective communication skills, e.g., [58],
and alongside this, the need for advisory and forecast-
ing skills should also be considered. As well as being
able to evaluate risk, CISOs need to be comfortable with
providing advice, and making recommendations on, its
acceptability, and being clear with their stakeholders as
to implications of their advice. Such an approach needs
to be followed with all stakeholders within the organisa-
tion, not just leaders, as collaborative engagement at all
levels is crucial to eﬀective security outcomes [13, 91].

Organisational leaders themselves should rely less on
the CISO-soothsayer as protector, totem and scapegoat
and more on them as advisor, forecaster and educator.
Shifts in thinking such as this will help organisations to
develop and improve their security measures collectively,
rather than as the responsibility of one person or func-
tion. Unclear responsibilities, and confused, misunder-
stood and multifarious roles, lead to conﬂicts within or-
ganisations that ultimately increase their cyber-security
risk. The aspiration should be to build a truly collabora-
tive approach to cyber security [50], with multiple actors
playing their part [91], and resolve the otherwise discon-
nected and othered state of the CISO [13, 91, 66, 58, 12],
as well as improving overall organisational cyber secu-
rity.

7 Conclusion

Our intention here is not to position cyber security in the
same category as either astrology or haruspication, how-
ever, this study has shown that the role of the CISO com-
prises several functions akin to a modern-day soothsayer
for an organisation. The CISO sits at a nexus within
that organisation, consuming opaque information from
multiple sources and making decisions based on their in-
terpretations and what they judge to be appropriate or
‘the right thing’ for their stakeholders. Having a sooth-
sayer beneﬁts the organisation, not just through the role
it performs, but also how it contributes to the organisa-
tion’s own identity; as a legitimate, and defended, entity.
Being a soothsayer, however, has downsides. The CISO
can be scapegoated or othered, and can feel detached
from the rest of the organisation.

This study has implications for both those perform-
ing the CISO role and their stakeholders. For CISOs,
it would be beneﬁcial to reﬂect on how such an identity
aﬀects, both positively and negatively, their interactions
and practice within their organisations. Such reﬂection
can also help them to come to terms with the detach-
ment and alienation many of them experience within
those organisations. For organisational leaders, it is use-
ful to consider whether employing a soothsayer is indeed
what they have intended, and also whether this repre-
sents an abdication of responsibility in decision making.
By relying on a soothsayer to ‘read the signs’ (i.e. to
provide the weather forecast) they may deliberately be
facing away from confronting a problem more directly –
or perhaps they are deliberately looking for someone to
blame in the event of disaster. It may indeed be bene-

ﬁcial for all parties if the CISO is treated as a weather
forecaster instead of a security totem.

References

[1] Companies and Securities - London Stock Ex-

change.

[2] Cybersecurity Certiﬁcation and Training —

(ISC)2.

[3] Equifax Releases Details on Cybersecurity Inci-

dent, Announces Personnel Changes.

[4] IT Governance - IT Certiﬁcation - Serving IT Pro-

fessionals — ISACA.

[5] Progress of the 2016-2021 National Cyber Secu-
rity Programme - National Audit Oﬃce (NAO)
Report.

[6] Qualitative Data Analysis Software — NVivo.

[7] Industry Classiﬁcation Benchmark (ICB), June

2018.

[8] Trump administration escalates cyber-attacks on

Russia as warning to Putin, June 2019.

[9] Julius O. Adekunle. On Oral Tradition and
History. Studies on Nigerian Borgu. Anthropos,
89(4/6):543–551, 1994.

[10] Gary Adkins. Red Teaming the Red Team: Utiliz-
ing Cyber Espionage to Combat Terrorism. Jour-
nal of Strategic Security, 6(Extra):1–9, August
2013.

[11] Mats Alvesson. Beyond Neopositivists, Roman-
tics, and Localists: A Reﬂexive Approach to Inter-
views in Organizational Research. The Academy of
Management Review, 28(1):13–33, 2003.

[12] Debi Ashenden and Darren Lawrence. Security
Dialogues: Building Better Relationships between
Security and Business. IEEE Security & Privacy,
14(3):82–87, May 2016.

[13] Debi Ashenden and Angela Sasse. CISOs and
organisational culture: Their own worst enemy?
Computers & Security, 39:396–405, November
2013.

[14] Stephen R Barley, William H Dutton, Sara
Kiesler, Paul Resnick, Robert E Kraut, and
JoAnne Yates. Does cscw need organization the-
ory? In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM onference on
Computer supported cooperative work, pages 122–
124, 2004.

[15] Jean Baudrillard. The Consumer Society : Myths
and Structures. London : Sage, London, 1998.

[16] Adam Beautement, Ingolf Becker, Simon Parkin,
Kat Krol, and M. Angela Sasse. Productive Se-
curity: A scalable methodology for analysing em-
ployee security behaviours. In Proceedings of the

15

Twelfth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Secu-
rity (SOUPS 2016), page 19, 2016.

[17] Nic Beech, Charlotte Gilmore, Paul Hibbert, and
Sierk Ybema. Identity-in-the-work and musicians’
struggles: The production of self-questioning
identity work. Work, Employment & Society,
30(3):506–522, 2016.

[18] David Bond. Britain preparing to launch new cy-

ber warfare unit, September 2018.

[19] W. C. Booth. The Rhetoric of RHETORIC: The
Quest for Eﬀective Communication. Wiley, 2009.

[20] M. F. C. Bourdillon. Oracles and Politics in An-

cient Israel. Man, 12(1):124–140, 1977.

[21] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. Using the-
matic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research
in Psychology, 3(2):77–101, January 2006.

[22] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. Reﬂecting on
reﬂexive thematic analysis. Qualitative Research
in Sport, Exercise and Health, 11(4):589–597, Au-
gust 2019.

[23] Andrew D. Brown. Narrative, Politics and Legiti-
macy in an IT Implementation. Journal of Man-
agement Studies, 35(1):35–58, 1998.

[32] Kathy Charmaz. Grounded Theory: Methodology
and Theory Construction.
In James D. Wright,
editor, International Encyclopedia of the Social &
Behavioral Sciences (Second Edition), pages 402–
407. Elsevier, Oxford, January 2015.

[33] Lizzie Coles-Kemp, Rikke Bjerg Jensen, and Reem
Talhouk. In a New Land: Mobile Phones, Ampli-
ﬁed Pressures and Reduced Capabilities. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’18, pages
1–13, Montreal QC, Canada, 2018. ACM Press.

[34] Derek Collins. Mapping the Entrails: The Practice
of Greek Hepatoscopy. The American Journal of
Philology, 129(3):319–345, 2008.

[35] W. R. Connor. Early Greek Land Warfare as
Symbolic Expression. Past & Present, (119):3–29,
1988.

[36] Dan Conway, Ronnie Taib, Mitch Harris, Kun Yu,
Shlomo Berkovsky, and Fang Chen. A Qualita-
tive Investigation of Bank Employee Experiences
In Thir-
of Information Security and Phishing.
teenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security
({SOUPS} 2017), pages 115–129, 2017.

[37] Gordon Corera. NHS cyber-attack ’came from N

Korea’, June 2017.

[24] Andrew D. Brown. Identities and Identity Work
in Organizations. International Journal of Man-
agement Reviews, 17(1):20–40, January 2015.

[38] P. Cormack.

Sociology and Mass Culture:
Durkheim, Mills, and Baudrillard. University of
Toronto Press, 2004.

[25] Andrew D. Brown and Christine Coupland. Iden-
tity Threats, Identity Work and Elite Profession-
als. Organization Studies, 36(10):1315–1336, Oc-
tober 2015.

[26] Nils Bubandt. Vernacular Security: The Politics of
Feeling Safe in Global, National and Local Worlds.
Security Dialogue, 36(3):275–296, September 2005.

[27] Anthony Burke. Aporias of Security. Alternatives:

Global, Local, Political, 27(1):1–27, 2002.

[28] E. M. Butler. The Myth of the Magus. Cambridge

University Press, canto edition, 1993.

[29] Barry Buzan. People, States and Fear : An
Agenda for International Security Studies in the
Post-Cold War Era. London : Harvester Wheat-
sheaf, London, 2nd ed. edition, 1991.

[30] Kate Caelli, Lynne Ray, and Judy Mill. ‘Clear as
Mud’: Toward Greater Clarity in Generic Qualita-
tive Research. International Journal of Qualitative
Methods, 2(2):1–13, June 2003.

[31] Brianna Barker Caza, Heather Vough, and Har-
shad Puranik.
Identity work in organizations
and occupations: Deﬁnitions, theories, and path-
ways forward. Journal of Organizational Behavior,
39(7):889–910, 2018.

[39] Ann L. Cunliﬀe. Managers as Practical Au-
thors: Reconstructing our Understanding of Man-
agement Practice. Journal of Management Stud-
ies, 38(3):351–371, 2001.

[40] Barbara Czarniawska. Narratives in Social Science

Research. Sage, 2004.

[41] H. S. Daemmrich and I. Daemmrich. Themes
& Motifs in Western Literature: A Handbook.
Francke, 1987.

[42] Sauvik Das, Adam DI Kramer, Laura A Dabbish,
and Jason I Hong. The role of social inﬂuence in se-
curity feature adoption. In Proceedings of the 18th
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooper-
ative Work & Social Computing, pages 1416–1426,
2015.

[43] Yuri Diogenes. Cybersecurity, Attack and Defense
Strategies : Infrastructure Security with Red Team
and Blue Team Tactics.
Infrastructure Security
with Red Team and Blue Team Tactics. Birming-
ham, UK : Packt Publishing, 2018.

[44] Mary Douglas. How Institutions Think. London :

Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1987.

[45] Julia Driver. Moral Expertise: Judgement, Prac-
tice, and Analysis. Social Philosophy and Policy,
30(1-2):280–296, January 2013.

16

[46] Naomi Ellemers, Russell Spears, and Bertjan
Doosje. Self and Social Identity. Annual Review
of Psychology, 53(1):161–186, February 2002.

[60] Herminia Ibarra and Jennifer L. Petriglieri. Iden-
tity work and play.
Journal of Organizational
Change Management, 23(1):10–25, January 2010.

[47] Dinei Florˆencio, Cormac Herley, and Adam
Shostack. FUD: A plea for intolerance. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 57(6):31–33, June 2014.

[48] Anthony Giddens. The Consequences of Moder-

nity. Stanford University Press, 1990.

[49] Erving Goﬀman. Asylums : Essays on the Social
Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates.
London : Routledge, 2017 (1961).

[50] John R Goodall, Wayne G Lutters, and Anita
Komlodi. I know my network: collaboration and
expertise in intrusion detection. In Proceedings of
the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer supported
cooperative work, pages 342–345, 2004.

[51] David Charles Gore. Sophists and Sophistry in
the Wealth of Nations. Philosophy & Rhetoric,
44(1):1–26, 2011.

[52] Oren Gross. The Normless and Exceptionless
Exception: Carl Schmitt’s Theory of Emergency
Powers and the Norm-Exception Dichotomy. Car-
dozo Law Review, 21:1825–1868, 2000.

[53] Martyn Hammersley and Paul Atkinson. Ethnog-
raphy Principles in Practice (Second Edition).
Routledge, 1995.

[54] Julie M. Haney and Wayne G. Lutters.

”It’s
Scary. . . It’s Confusing. . . It’s Dull”: How Cyber-
security Advocates Overcome Negative Percep-
tions of Security. In Fourteenth Symposium on Us-
able Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2018), pages
411–425, 2018.

[55] Sam A. Hardy and Gustavo Carlo. Moral iden-
tity. In Seth J. Schwartz, Koen Luyckx, and Vi-
vian L. Vignoles, editors, Handbook of Identity
Theory and Research. Springer New York, New
York, NY, United States, 2011.

[56] Alexis Heraclides. ‘What will become of us without
barbarians?’ The enduring Greek–Turkish rivalry
as an identity-based conﬂict. Southeast European
and Black Sea Studies, 12(1):115–134, March 2012.

[57] Cormac Herley and P.C. Van Oorschot. SoK: Sci-
ence, Security and the Elusive Goal of Security
as a Scientiﬁc Pursuit. In 2017 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 99–120, May
2017.

[58] Val Hooper and Jeremy McKissack. The emerging
role of the CISO. Business Horizons, 59(6):585–
591, November 2016.

[59] Jef Huysmans. Security! What Do You Mean?:
From Concept to Thick Signiﬁer. European Jour-
nal of International Relations, 4(2):226–255, June
1998.

[61] Gokul Chettoor Jayakrishnan, Gangadhara Reddy
Sukanya Vaddepalli, Vijayanand
Sirigireddy,
and
Sachin Premsukh Lodha,
Banahatti,
Sankalp Suneel Pandit.
Passworld: A Seri-
ous Game to Promote Password Awareness and
Diversity in an Enterprise.
In Sixteenth Sympo-
sium on Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS}
2020), pages 1–18, 2020.

[62] Haiyan Jia, Pamela J Wisniewski, Heng Xu,
Mary Beth Rosson, and John M Carroll. Risk-
taking as a learning process for shaping teen’s on-
line information privacy behaviors.
In Proceed-
ings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing,
pages 583–599, 2015.

[63] Tom Johnson. Soothsayers, Legal Culture, and the
Politics of Truth in Late-Medieval England. Cul-
tural and Social History, 0(0):1–20, August 2020.

[64] Tapio Juntunen and Sirpa Virta. Security dynam-
ics: Multilayered security governance in an age of
complexity, uncertainty, and resilience. Leading
Change in a Complex World: Transdisciplinary
Perspectives, 2019.

[65] Vesa Kanniainen. Cyber Technology and the Arms
Race. German Economic Review, 0(0), 2018.

[66] Erastus Karanja. The role of the chief information
security oﬃcer in the management of IT security.
Information and Computer Security, 25(3):300–
329, July 2017.

[67] I. Kirlappos, A. Beautement, and M. A. Sasse.
”Comply or die” is dead: Long live security-aware
principal agents.
In Financial Cryptography and
Data Security, 2013.

[68] Joshua R. Knapp, Brett R. Smith, Glen E.
Kreiner, Chamu Sundaramurthy, and Sidney L.
Barton. Managing Boundaries Through Iden-
tity Work: The Role of Individual and Organiza-
tional Identity Tactics. Family Business Review,
26(4):333–355, December 2013.

[69] Laura Kocksch, Matthias Korn, Andreas Poller,
and Susann Wagenknecht. Caring for IT Secu-
rity: Accountabilities, Moralities, and Oscillations
in IT Security Practices. Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction, 2(CSCW):92:1–
92:20, November 2018.

[70] Glen E. Kreiner. Tabula Geminus: A ”Both/And”
Approach to Coding and Theorizing. In Handbook
of Qualitative Organisational Research. Innovative
Pathways and Methods, pages 350–361. Routledge,
2016.

17

[71] Glen E. Kreiner, Elaine Hollensbe, Mathew L.
Sheep, Brett R. Smith, and Niyati Kataria. Elas-
ticity and the Dialectic Tensions of Organizational
Identity: How Can We Hold Together While We
Are Pulling Apart?
Academy of Management
Journal, 58(4):981–1011, August 2015.

[72] Glen E. Kreiner, Elaine C. Hollensbe, and
Mathew L. Sheep. Where Is the ”Me” Among the
”We”? Identity Work and the Search for Opti-
mal Balance. Academy of Management Journal,
49(5):1031–1057, October 2006.

[73] Robert Laing. The Divided Self: An Existential
Study in Sanity and Madness. Penguin UK, 2010
(1960).

[74] Malcolm (Malcolm D.) Lambert. Medieval Heresy
: Popular Movements from the Gregorian Reform
to the Reformation. Oxford : Blackwell, Oxford,
2nd ed. edition, 1992.

[75] Jarno Limn´ell. The cyber arms race is accelerating
– what are the consequences? Journal of Cyber
Policy, 1(1):50–60, January 2016.

[76] Anne Marchais-Roubelat and Fabrice Roubelat.
The Delphi method as a ritual: Inquiring the Del-
phic Oracle. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 78(9):1491–1499, November 2011.

[77] Bill McSweeney. Security, Identity and Interests :
A Sociology of International Relations, volume 69.
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1999.

[78] Mark Neocleous. The Problem with Normality:
Taking Exception to “Permanent Emergency”. Al-
ternatives, 31(2):191–213, April 2006.

[79] Mark Neocleous. Critique of Security. Edinburgh

: Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, 2008.

[80] James Nicholson, Lynne Coventry, and Pam
Briggs. Introducing the Cybersurvival Task: As-
sessing and Addressing Staﬀ Beliefs about Eﬀec-
tive Cyber Protection. In Fourteenth Symposium
on Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2018),
pages 443–457, 2018.

[81] Dion Nissenbaum. Author Warns U.S. Military to
Focus on China. Wall Street Journal, June 2015.

[82] Helen Nissenbaum. Where Computer Security
Meets National Security. Ethics and Information
Technology, 7(2):61–73, June 2005.

[83] Mark K. Osbeck. Lawyer as a Soothsayer: Ex-
ploring the Important Role of Outcome Prediction
in the Practice of Law. Penn State Law Review,
123(1):41–102, 2018.

[84] Donna Peacock and Alastair Irons. Gender In-
equality in Cybersecurity: Exploring the Gender
Gap in Opportunities and Progression. Interna-
tional Journal of Gender, Science and Technology,
9(1):25–44, May 2017.

18

[85] Michael

Peel, Madhumita Murgia,

interference

EU scrambles

Henry Foy.
sian
http://www.ft.com/content/d8205ea0-3a6a-
11e9-b72b-2c7f526ca5d0, February 2019.

of May

ahead

and
to stop Rus-
elections.

[86] Jennifer Louise Petriglieri. Under threat: Re-
sponses to and the consequences of threats to indi-
viduals’ identities. The Academy of Management
Review, 36(4):641–662, 2011.

[87] D. Pettman. Look at the Bunny: Totem, Taboo,

Technology. John Hunt Publishing, 2013.

[88] Andreas Poller, Laura Kocksch, Sven T¨urpe, Fe-
lix Anand Epp, and Katharina Kinder-Kurlanda.
Can security become a routine? a study of organi-
zational change in an agile software development
group. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM conference
on computer supported cooperative work and social
computing, pages 2489–2503, 2017.

[89] Andreas Poller, Laura Kocksch, Sven T¨urpe, Fe-
lix Anand Epp, and Katharina Kinder-Kurlanda.
Can Security Become a Routine? a Study of Or-
ganizational Change in an Agile Software Devel-
opment Group. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work and Social Computing, CSCW ’17, pages
2489–2503, New York, NY, USA, February 2017.
Association for Computing Machinery.

[90] J Reed, Y Zhong, L Terwoerds, and J Brocaglia.
The 2017 Global Information Security Workforce
Study- Women in Cybersecurity.pdf, 2017.

[91] Lena Reinfelder, Robert Landwirth, and Zinaida
Benenson. Security Managers Are Not The Enemy
Either. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
’19, pages 1–7, New York, NY, USA, May 2019.
Association for Computing Machinery.

[92] Benjamin Reinheimer, Lukas Aldag, Peter Mayer,
Mattia Mossano, Reyhan Duezguen, Bettina Loft-
house, Tatiana von Landesberger, and Melanie
Volkamer. An investigation of phishing awareness
and education over time: When and how to best
remind users. In Sixteenth Symposium on Usable
Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2020), pages 259–
284, 2020.

[93] Amber Riaz. How to Identify Moral Experts. The

Journal of Ethics, June 2020.

[94] F. Rochberg. The Heavenly Writing: Divination,
Horoscopy, and Astronomy in Mesopotamian Cul-
ture. Cambridge University Press, 2004.

[95] Paul Roe. The ’Value’ of Positive Security. Review
of International Studies, 34(4):777–794, 2008.

[96] Johnny Salda˜na. The Coding Manual for Quali-
tative Researchers. SAGE Publications Ltd, 3rd
edition, 2016.

[110] Alberto Zanutto, Ben Shreeve, Karolina Follis,
and Awais Rashid. The Shadow Warriors: In the
no man’s land between industrial control systems
and enterprise {IT} systems. In Thirteenth Sym-
posium on Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS}
2017), 2017.

[97] Simon Sharwood. Trump ﬁres cybersecurity boss
Chris Krebs for doing his job: Securing the election
and telling the truth about it.

[98] Hossein Siadati, Sean Palka, Avi Siegel, and Da-
mon McCoy. Measuring the Eﬀectiveness of Em-
In 10th {USENIX}
bedded Phishing Exercises.
Workshop on Cyber Security Experimentation and
Test ({CSET} 17), 2017.

[99] Abhishek Narain Singh, Arnold Picot, Johann
Kranz, M. P. Gupta, and Amitabh Ojha.
In-
formation Security Management (ISM) Practices:
Lessons from Select Cases from India and Ger-
many. Global Journal of Flexible Systems Man-
agement, 14(4):225–239, December 2013.

[100] Maanvi Singh. Trump ﬁres director of US cyberse-
curity agency that refuted voter fraud claims. The
Guardian, November 2020.

[101] David A. Snow and Leon Anderson. Identity Work
Among the Homeless: The Verbal Construction
and Avowal of Personal Identities. American Jour-
nal of Sociology, 92(6):1336–1371, 1987.

[102] Brent J. Steele. Ontological Security and the
Power of Self-Identity: British Neutrality and the
American Civil War. Review of International Stud-
ies, 31(3):519–540, 2005.

[103] Mark Thompson. People, practice, and technol-
ogy: Restoring Giddens’ broader philosophy to the
study of information systems.
Information and
Organization, 22(3):188–207, July 2012.

[104] Joe Tidy. Travelex being held to ransom by hack-

ers. BBC News, January 2020.

[105] Ken D Tunnell. Pissing on Demand: Workplace
Drug Testing and the Rise of the Detox Industry.
NYU Press, 2004.

[106] Natalie M. Underberg. Soothsayer (Diviner, Or-
acle, Etc.): Motif D1712. In Archetypes and Mo-
tifs in Folklore and Literature: A Handbook, pages
147–153. Routledge, 2017.

[107] Sandra Walklate. Risk and criminal victimization:
A modernist dilemma? The British Journal of
Criminology, 37(1):35–45, 1997.

[108] Rodrigo Werlinger, Kirstie Hawkey, David Botta,
and Konstantin Beznosov. Security practition-
ers in context: Their activities and interactions
with other stakeholders within organizations. In-
ternational Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
67(7):584–606, July 2009.

[109] Sierk Ybema, Tom Keenoy, Cliﬀ Oswick, Armin
Beverungen, Nick Ellis, and Ida Sabelis. Articu-
lating identities. Human Relations, 62(3):299–322,
March 2009.

19

