Intl. Journal on Cyber Situational Awareness, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2020 

CyberOps: Situational Awareness in Cybersecurity 

Operations 

Cyril Onwubiko 

Enterprise Security Architecture, Pearson Plc 
Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain & Cyber Security, Research Series, 
London, UK 

ABSTRACT 
Cybersecurity  operations  (CyberOps)  is  the  use  and  application  of 
cybersecurity capabilities to a domain, department, organisation or nation. It 
is  fundamentally  to  protect  digital  investments,  contribute  to  national 
economic wellbeing by providing a safe, secure and conducive environment 
to conduct business and to protect a nation’s critical national infrastructures 
and  citizens  welfare.  In  this  paper,  we  investigate  operational  factors  that 
influence  situational  awareness  of  CyberOps, specifically,  the  features  that 
deals  with  understanding  and  comprehension  of  operational  and  human 
factors  aspects  and  that  helps  with  insights  on  human  operator  decision 
making  (e.g.,  cognition,  teamwork,  knowledge,  skills  and  abilities).  The 
operational  factors  discussed  in  this  paper  range  from  tools,  techniques, 
integration, architecture to automation, cognition, people, policy, process and 
procedures. 

Keyword:  SOC, SSOC, CSOC, CERT, CSIRT, CyberSA, Operational 
Factors, CyberOps, DAAS, Zero Trust, Situational Awareness  

INTRODUCTION 

1 
Like  engineering,  computer  science  or  chemistry,  cybersecurity  is  now 
considered a mainstream discipline. Its importance has never been felt more 
than the past 12 months when the world has been forced to adapt to a ‘new 
normal’ as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. This ‘new normal’ has forced 
people to remote-everything, from remote working, remote tutoring, remote 
schooling, to remote socials, e.g., ‘Zoom lunch’, ‘Zoom Christmas’. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83 

Despite the many benefits derived from remote and online activities, but the 
‘new  normal’  is  not  without  its  challenges  and  continues  to  be  tested  on  a 
daily  basis.  Whether  through  the  increased  attacks  on  university  learning 
platforms and theft of students' data (BBC, 2021a), attacks on online banking 
services, to nation-state malware embedded in school pupils’ laptop provided 
by government (BBC, 2021b). 

Cyber-attacks  have  become  sophisticated  and  increasing  in  number.    The 
sophistication  is  as  a  result  of  advances  in  technology,  automation  and 
emerging  techniques,  for  example,  advances  in  machine  learning  and 
artificial intelligence have been leveraged to conduct deepfake (exact copy 
look-alike) of genuine emails, transactions, audio and video transcripts. We 
do not suggest that the several folds increase in cyber-attacks in the last 12 
months  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  is  as  a  result  of  sophistication  in 
technology,  and  neither  are  we  suggesting  that  all  the  recent  cyber-attacks 
have  used  sophisticated  techniques.  Indeed, some  recent  attacks  have  used 
sophisticated  techniques  to  evade  detection,  but  the  fact  remains,  majority 
used the same ‘old’ techniques that have been in the wild for several years. 
Further,  these  attacks  do  not  target  one  type  of  organisation,  a  particular 
vertical,  country  or  region.  We  have  seen  accounts  of  cyber-attacks  to 
government and military, health, banking, education sectors and individual 
and home users. 

One thing is evident, we need appropriate cybersecurity capabilities to secure 
individual,  organisation  and  national  digital  investments,  and  one  way  of 
doing  this  is  through  cybersecurity  operations  (CyberOps).  Hence,  the 
motivation  for  this  paper  is  to  investigate  CyberOps.  Specifically,  best 
practices and the factors, which influence their situational awareness. 

The key contributions of this manuscript can be summarised as: 

1)  Introduce CyberOps in the wider context and discuss its relationship 

to constituent components/capabilities. 

2)  Explain Zero Trust with respect to entity interaction diagram (see Fig. 

2) and coarse-level principles. 

3)  Provide insights to Cyber Situational Awareness (CyberSA). 
4)  Introduce  and  explain  our  proposed  BOTH  (Business,  Operation, 

Technology and Human) factors. 

5)  Investigate  operational  factors  influencing  situational awareness  of 

the analysts in CyberOps.  

 
 
 
 
 
84 

This  paper  is  organised  as  follows.  Section  2  provides  insights  into 
cybersecurity  operations.  It  discusses  CyberOps,  the  difference  between 
CyberOps and CSOC (a.k.a. SOC); introduces Zero Trust Architecture and 
outlines related works. We then explain situational awareness in CyberOps in 
Section  3.  This  is  followed by  an  in-depth  explanation  of  factors  affecting 
cyber situational awareness in CyberOps. Each of the factors are explained, 
followed  with  an  example  or  a  discussion.  In  Section  5  we  discuss  future 
work, while Section 6 concludes the paper. 

2 

UNDERSTANDING CYBEROPS 

CyberOps 

2.1 
CyberOps  (a.k.a.  Cyber  Security  Operations,  Cyber  Operations,  Security 
Operations, SecOps) is simply, the use or application of Cyber capabilities in 
a particular domain.  

For example, the application of Cyber capabilities in the Military domain, is 
called, Military Cyber Operations (see Schulze M., 2020); the application of 
Cyber capabilities in Operational Technology is referred to as (Cyber OT), 
e.g., Industrial Control Systems, Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA)  and  Distributed  Control  Systems  (see  (NCSC,  2021);  (ENISA, 
2016));  the  application  of  Cyber  capabilities  for  intelligence  purpose,  is 
regarded as Cyber intelligence operation (Intel Op), while the use of Cyber 
capabilities for threat intelligence purposes is regarded as Cyber threat intel 
(CTI). The application of Cyber capabilities in information technology (IT) 
and  information  communications  technology  (ICT),  i.e.,  cyber  in  ICT  is 
generally regarded as Cyber Operations. 

CyberOps, the use of Cyber capabilities in ICT, is discussed in relation to the 
functions, operations (e.g., activities, tasks) and responsibilities performed to 
administer,  operate,  monitor  and  support  cybersecurity  services,  systems, 
applications, platforms and infrastructures to fulfil business goals. 

It is important to note that CyberOps is very broad, encompassing four key 
responsibilities:  1)  Administration,  2)  Execution,  3)  Monitoring  and  4) 
Support.  These  responsibilities  can  be  accomplished  by  a  single  team  or 
multiple teams. The teams can either be centralized or distributed and diverse. 
The choice as to whether the organisation operates a centralized or distributed 
team structure is dependent on many factors, such as, size, structure, business 
model,  investment,  and  business  operating  model  of  the  organisation, 
institution (e.g., Government or Agency) or/and establishment.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
85 

FIGURE 1: CYBEROPS FUNCTIONAL REPRESENTATION 

 
 
86 

Since CyberOps is broad and diverse, it is challenging to comprehensively 
describe or define it. We describe it to cover not just the administration and 
execution,  but  also  the  monitoring  and  support  of  cybersecurity  systems, 
applications and services. That is, the administration, execution, monitoring 
and  supporting  of  an  organisation’s  protect  surface  –  the  data,  assets, 
applications  and  services  (DAAS)  –  to  ensure  errors,  incidents,  faults  and 
failures are identified, detected and remedied. We use the word ‘Monitoring’ 
in  this  text  to  comprise  detection  through  to  response,  remediation,  and 
recovery. 

These  tasks  can  be  performed  by  one  team  or  several  teams  within  the 
organisation, and in some cases, the responsibility could be outsourced to a 
security and/or service provider organisation to perform. The decision as to 
whether  one  team  or  several  teams  perform  the  cybersecurity  operations 
functions, and whether it is outsourced to a service provider organisation is 
dependent on several factors. For example, the size of the organisation, their 
operating model, vision and cybersecurity strategy.  

In  Fig  .1  we  represent  key  constituent  capabilities  of  a  typical  CyberOps 
within  an  organisation.  These  capabilities  are  broken  down  at  a  very  high 
level  into  subcomponents,  at  most,  two  subcomponents  for  the  sake  of 
brevity. These capabilities are mapped to the National Institute of Standards 
and  Technology  (NIST)  Cybersecurity  Framework  (NIST  CSF,  2021).  We 
recognise that a capability may address multiple issues and may be aligned to 
a couple of domains (that is in respect to the NIST CSF, of identify, protect, 
detect, respond and recover), hence where we believe this to be the case, we 
colour-coded the subcomponents of the capability in overlapping colours. For 
example, capabilities #10 (Security Testing), #13 (Cloud Security) and #17 
(Cyber  Analytics)  are  divided  primarily  into two.  Note:  These  capabilities 
can  be  split  into  multiple  granular  levels,  but  to  aid  understanding,  we 
partitioned each capability to no more than two.  

The  alignment  and  structuring  of  these  capabilities  may  differ  from 
organisation to organisation. For example: 

a)  One  organisation  may  combine  Security  Testing  (Cap.  #10),  with 
Vulnerability and Patch Management (Cap. #16) under one function 
or  accountability,  and  many  of  the  capabilities  may  be  structured 
differently across organisation for many reasons, such as cost, size of 
the  organisation,  cyber  maturity  of  the  organisation,  scale  of 
transactions or business. 

b)  We do not expect every organisation to rollout (or implement) all the 
capabilities at once, or even at all for obvious reasons, for example, 

 
 
 
 
87 

an  organisation  may  be  constrained  by  resources  (e.g.,  skilled 
manpower), cost, and business necessities. 

c)  Some of the capabilities should be combined in some organisations 

due to the reasons provided in (a) above. 

Each capability represented in Fig. 1 encompasses four aspects to realise it, 
namely: 1) Architecture/Engineering, 2) Systems Administration, 3) Systems 
Operation and 4) Systems Support. Architecture and engineering deals with 
the  design,  the  building  blocks  and  the  blueprint  that  stems  from  business 
requirements and needs for the capability. From the design the capability is 
built. Administration deals with configuration, setting up and fine tuning the 
capability such that it aligns to the architecture or engineering design and to 
realise both the functional and nonfunctional requirements, and does include 
adding  new  instances  and  users  of  such  capability.  Operation  deals  with 
operating  the  capability,  monitoring  the  capability  to  ensure  it  works 
according to how it is built, and that faults, errors, failures and incidents are 
detected,  remediated  and  services  restored  to  normal,  and  finally,  Support 
deals  breaks  and  fixes,  ensuring  the  faults  and  failures  detected  on  the 
capability  are  remedied  and  that  services  are  restored  back  to  normal 
operating state. 

The effectiveness and efficiency of CyberOps should be measured in relation 
to  a  number  of  factors  such  as  tools,  techniques,  process  maturity,  service 
automation  and  orchestration,  knowledge,  skills  and  abilities  (KSA)  of  the 
analysts, operators and administrators of the service.  

Cyber Security Operations Centre (CSOC or SOC) 

2.1 
According to Carson Zimmerman (Zimmerman, C. 2014), a SOC is a team of 
people  comprising  security  analysts  who  perform  detection,  analysis, 
response, reporting and prevention of cybersecurity incidents. The functions 
that the SOC performs can also be performed by teams who may be known 
by other names, such as the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT), 
Computer  Security  Incident  Response  Team  (CSIRT),  Computer  Incident 
Response Team (CIRT) etc. these terms may be used interchangeably in some 
publications. 

We  describe  SOC  as  a  horizontal  business  function  of  an  organisation, 
institution,  industry  comprising  people,  technology  and  process.  They  are 
responsible  for  continuous  security  monitoring,  cyber  incident  response, 
cyber  security  incident  management,  detection,  monitoring,  log  and  event 
management.  We  describe  it  as  a  horizontal  business function  because  the 
effectiveness  of  a  SOC  to  the  organisation  is  best  realised  when  the 

 
 
 
 
 
88 

responsibilities  of  the  SOC  is  for  the  entire  organisation,  as  opposed  to 
multiple,  tactical,  isolated,  standalone  and  fragmented  SOCs  that  lack 
situational awareness of the risks the organisation bears as a whole. 

CSOC, SOC, fusion centres and CIRTS or CERTs are a subset of CyberOps. 
It is imperative to understand that CyberOps encompass all the disparate, and 
sometimes  related  cyber  capabilities  performed  by  the  different  teams, 
ranging  from  identification,  protection,  detection,  monitoring  through  to 
respond and recovery from cyber-attacks.  

Another distinction worth noting is that cybersecurity operations is not the 
same  as  cyber  security  operations  center  (CSOC).  CSOC  or  Security 
Operations  Centre  (SOC)  is  a  subset  of  CyberOps.  CyberOps  is  a  much 
broader capability (as seen in Fig. 1) than SOC, and they perform much more 
responsibilities than a SOC or a CSOC normally does. 

As shown in Fig. 1, the capabilities denoted with 
can  be  said to  belong 
to  a  typical  SOC,  while  the  other  capabilities  are  performed  by  the  wider 
security organisation and not by the SOC. In fact, in some organisations, one 
 could be performed 
could argue that some of the capabilities denoted with 
by other security organisation. For example, some organisations have Cyber 
Threat Intelligence and Cyber & Data Analytics dedicated Team / Group or 
Departments  and  as  such  these  functions  are  performed  by  these  Teams  / 
Groups or Departments, but not necessarily by the SOC. 

Zero Trust 

2.2 
We  recognise  that  an  effective  SOC  should  have  an  enriched  monitoring 
platform,  capable  of  providing  the  requisite  situational  awareness  of  the 
monitored  protect  surface,  comprising  Data,  Assets,  Applications  and 
Services  (DAAS).  It  is  pertinent  to  note  that  protect  surface,  a  Zero  Trust 
concept, formulated by John Kindervag (Kindervag J., 2020) comprises an 
organisation critical data (e.g., personally identified information (PII)), assets, 
applications and services they wish to prioritise for protection and security 
monitoring. Since not all DAAS of an organisation warrants the same  level 
of  protection,  and  neither  could  protection  be  provided  to  every  service  at 
once,  it  is  important  to  prioritise  which  ‘surfaces  are  protected’.  In  other 
words,  which  critical  services  of  the  organisation  must  be  protected, 
especially  through  an  informed  risk  proportionality  assessment  approach? 
Understanding  the  protect  surface  is  the  key  starting  point  to  providing 
efficient protection. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
89 

Zero  Trust  is  a  descriptive  concept,  a  set  of  security  and  architecture 
principles on how best to protect critical resources of an organisation (e.g., 
DAAS)  and  how  access  to  these  can  be  safeguarded.  It  is  underpinned  on 
seven (7) high-level principles, which are discussed in Table 1.  

TABLE 1: ZERO TRUST PRINCIPLES 

Principles 

1  Non-

Presumptive 
Access 

2 

Zero Trust 
Architecture 
(ZTA) 

3  Conditional 

Access (a.k.a. 
adaptive risk 
and trust-based) 
assessment 

Description 
Access and rights are  neither  static nor assumed. 
Instead  access,  privileges  and 
rights  are 
determined  based  on  the  level  of  risk  and  trust 
assessed  of  the  entity  and  identity  requesting  the 
access. 

Design  the  network  architecture  to  align  to 
business  requirements,  ensuring  that  access  to 
business-critical 
less 
dependent  on,  and  transparent  to,  the  network 
infrastructure  and  security  is  a  function  of  the 
identity  rather  than  ‘hard  border’  or  supposedly 
network boundary.   

(DAAS) 

services 

is 

 All  interactions  from  workforce  (e.g.,  user, 
persona or identity and endpoint) to workload and 
workplace  (e.g.,  Data,  Assets,  Applications,  and 
Services) are risk and trust assessed throughout the 
duration  of  the  interaction.  See  Section  2.3, 
conditions  2a-2f.  Adaptive 
trust 
to 
is 
assessment 
achieving  a  Zero  Trust  assessment  of  Gartner’s 
CARTA  –  continuous  adaptive  risk  and  trust 
assessment (Gartner, 2021). 

the  underlining  construct 

risk  and 

4  Context-aware 
security 

Access to targeted resources e.g., DAAS  – Data, 
Asset, Application and Service from all identities 
are controlled based on context. For example, the 
'what', from 'where' and 'why' and for 'how' long. 

5 

Secure Access 

The focus for secure access is underpinned on the 
principle of least-privilege access combined with 
multi-factor authentication (MFA) and certificate-
based endpoint protection. Ensure overprivileged 
accounts are rationalized, MFA is rolled out, and 
managed endpoints are cert-based. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

Identity is the 
‘new’ Perimeter 
(Perimeterless) 

7 

Secure the 
Protect Surface 

90 

Assume  no  "North-South"  perimeters  anymore.  
Perimeters  will  gradually  extend  to  the  very 
identities  (e.g.,  users,  devices,  applications  and 
workload) they protect, e.g., edge computing, and 
edge  protection.  This  is  the  same  principle  as 
'Application  and  identity-centric  protection  over 
infrastructure and network-based protection'. 

Since not all services of an organisation requires 
the  same  level  of  protection,  and  in  reality,  not 
every  single  DAAS  of  an  organisation  may  be 
adequately  protected,  therefore,  identifying  and 
prioritising 
is  essential. 
the  protect  surface 
Knowing  your  critical  data,  assets,  applications 
and services, how they can be accessed, by whom 
are extremely valuable. Since access to DAAS can 
be initiated from outside and within, and there is 
no differentiation. 

2.2.1 Understanding Zero Trust Architecture 
An Internet Protocol (IP)-based communication starts from a source, usually 
an identity using an entity or endpoint through a network (IP-based network) 
to a target, usually a business services, such as a web server, database or an 
application. The network encapsulates many resources such as switch, router, 
firewall, intrusion detection system etc. These resources perform a series of 
functions, ranging  from routing, filtering, inspection to  forwarding. This is 
how the source gets to the target. The source and the service it wants to access 
(a.k.a. target) can be in the same organisation, in which case, it is internal to 
internal communication. On the other hand, the source can be external while 
the  target  is  internal  or  vice  versa,  in  which  case  is  external  to  internal 
communication. 

Fig 2 is our representation of a conceptual Zero Trust Architecture. It shows 
how a source (A) uses an entity or endpoint (B) through an abstracted network 
(C)  accesses  a  business service  (D).  We  use  the  notation  of  an  ‘abstracted 
network’ to imply that the network is simply abridged, meaning a paradigm 
shift  from  securing  the  perimeter  to  securing  the  identity  (e.g.,  user  or 
persona).    We  argue  that  ‘identity’-based  protection  offers  robust  security 
over perimeter-defence since better understanding of the risks presented by 
the identity and the endpoint is far more prudent than ‘perimeter’ focused-
defence. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
91 

FIGURE 2: ZERO TRUST REPRESENTATION 

As shown in Fig. 2, imagine identities (e.g., user persona, robots, scripts) as 
shown in  (A)  through  entities  (e.g.,  Tablets,  Laptops etc.)  as  shown  in  (B) 
requesting  access  to  Business  Services  as  shown  in  (D)  through  Network 
Services as shown in (C). 

Conditional access is predicated on the continuous assessment of risks and 
trust of identity and entity (see Fig. 2) requesting access to critical services 
may poss. These conditions are essential for achieving conditional access: 

a)  Could the identity and endpoint be used to compromise the service? 
b)  Could  the  entity  (e.g.,  health  hygiene)  be  in  such  a  condition  e.g., 
malware infested, such that through it the service it may be requested 
may be infested with malware?  

c)  Could  the  entity  pose  material  risks,  geographical  risks  (e.g., 
geolocation) or regulatory risks (e.g., access from certain geographies 
that are under a sanction or prohibited from accessing the service)? 

d)  Could there be underlying risk (e.g., backdoor access) that this entity 

may introduce? 

e)  Could the entity or identity be used for financial extortion? 
f)  Could  the  access  originate  from  identity  and/or  entity  from  a 
geography (geo-location) that is prohibited or untrusted (e.g., risky) 
g)  Is the behaviour of the identity and entity symptomatic of an attacker 
(e.g.,  odd,  unusual,  or  suspicious  behaviour),  e.g.,  access  at  odd 
times,  random  access  to  several  services  that  the  identity  does  not 
have  access  to,  and/or  should  not  be  accessing  e.g.,  hidden  files, 
protected documents etc. 

Zero  Trust  is  principally  focused  on  non-presumptive  access,  that  is,  not 
granting  any  identity  or  entity  presumptive  access,  rights  or  privileges  to 
critical  services,  instead  access  to  critical  services  should  be  continuously 
assessed based on trust and risk (a.k.a. conditional access) of the requesting 
identity. It could also be likened to preserving the least privilege principle of 
security protection, where access given to identities requesting services must 

 
 
 
 
92 

be  the  least  minimum  required  to  complete  the  work  rather  than  granting 
overly permissive access to an identity. 

2.3 
In the literature, attempts to describe and discuss Cyber Operations exist. 

Related Works 

The  Cyber  Security  Body  of  Knowledge  (CyBOK),  an  initiative to  inform 
and align cyber security to thematic domains for education and professional 
training  (CyBOK,  2019)  offers  insights.  Through  the  CyBOK  initiative, 
Herve  Debar  (Debar  H.,  2019)  describes  Security  Operations  and  Incident 
Management  (SOIM)  as  the  application  and  automation  of  the  Monitor, 
Analyse, Plan, Execute-Knowledge (MAPE-K) autonomic computing loop to 
cybersecurity.  This  description  while  combining  incident  management 
focused  primarily  on  the  constituent  aspects  of  the  monitoring,  detection, 
response and remediation aspects of cyber security operations. 

Schulze  M.  (2020)  discusses  Cyber  Operations  in  relation  to  the  military 
domain,  where  cyber  capabilities  are  discussed  in  respect  to  offensive  and 
defensive operations, although the motivation for his contribution focuses on 
the use of Cyber Operations in War, that is, the active use of cyber capabilities 
in war time. It follows a set of coordinated actions with very precisely defined 
military purpose in cyberspace. The use of cyber capabilities in an active war 
is not only to prove superiority over your adversary, but also, to deny your 
adversary the ability to respond, influence or succeed in that war. 

The use of Cyber capabilities in Maritime (i.e., the maritime section) is an 
emerging area of recent contributions. For example, Kimberly Tam and Kevin 
D  Jones  (Tam  K.  &  Jones  K.  D.,  2019)  investigate  the  pertinent  need  for 
realtime  and  adaptive  cyber  risk  assessment  and  situational  awareness  in 
maritime. Their work investigates the need for cyber operations in maritime 
for timely, realtime and adaptive risk assessment and situational awareness in 
managing cyber-physical risks to the maritime sector. Modern ships are built 
these days with extensive reliance on advance operational technology (OT), 
e.g.,  onboard  circuitry,  chips  and  embedded  systems,  and  these  have  huge 
reliance  on  information  technology  for  receiving  information  and  signals, 
radar  communications,  e.g.,  from  the  global  navigation  satellite  systems 
(GNSS), and various other situational awareness cues and prompts that are 
provided to operators onboard. Understanding the conjecture and relationship 
between OT and IT in maritime and the bridge between OT and IT is essential 
to effective cyber operations in maritime (Man, Lundh & MacKinnon, 2018). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
93 

Aviation Cyber Security focuses on the use of cybersecurity capabilities to 
ensure safe, secure and resilient operation in aeronautics (UK Aviation Cyber 
Security  Strategy,  2018).  With  the  increasing  number  of  cyber  threats  to 
modern  aircrafts  and  the  proliferation  of  vulnerabilities  in  IT  systems, 
CyberOps  and  situational  awareness  in  this  space  is  extremely  important. 
According  to  the  Military  Aviation  Authority  (MAA),  modern  military 
aircrafts  and  their  supporting  ground  systems  (e.g.,  Air  Traffic  Controls, 
Operators  etc.)  are  now  hugely  reliant  on  computer  systems  for  safe  and 
efficient operations making them susceptible to cyber-attacks (MAA, 2020). 
It is recognised that CyberOps in aviation is extremely essential to counter 
cyber-attacks that poses significant threats the safe and operation of modern 
aircrafts and its supporting ground systems. 

Our  work  provides  a  holistic  understanding  of  CyberOps  drawn  from  the 
contributions of previous body of knowledge cited in this article.  

CYBER SITUATIONAL AWARENESS 

3 
Since the seminal work of Endsley (Endsley, 1995) situational awareness has 
been applied to a number of areas such as safety, security and transportation. 
Situational awareness has been applied in cyber security, vehicular networks, 
aviation,  social  media  analytics  and  conversational  agents  (Onwubiko  C., 
2009, Eiza M. H., 2017, & McDermott, C. D., Jeannelle, B., and Isaacs, J. P., 
2019).  

Cyber Situational Awareness (Cyber SA) has been defined in many ways in 
relation to cyber security, cyber defense, and cyber operations in general (see, 
McGuiness B., Foy J. L., 2000, Cumiford D. L., 2006 and Tadda G. P., and 
Salerno  J.  S.,  2010).  We  adopt  the  definition  of  Cyber  SA  provided  by 
Onwubiko and Owens (Onwubiko C. & Owens T., 2012), which states that 
“situational awareness is the ability of being aware of circumstances that exist 
around us, especially those that are particularly relevant to us and which we 
are  interested  about.  It  encompasses  the  prediction  of  future  states  or 
impending  states  as  a  result  of  the  knowledge  (which  could  include  new 
information) and understanding of current states”.  

Situational  awareness  is  ideal  for  understanding  operational  and  human 
factors aspects and helps with insights on human operator decision making 
(e.g., cognition, teamwork, knowledge, skills and abilities). We see this to be 
pertinent  in  this  paper,  especially  in  gaining  ‘understanding’  of  the 
relationships  through  humans-in-the-loop.  Humans-in-the-loop  are  Cyber 
Security Operators (e.g., Analysts, Administrators, Scientists, Engineers etc.) 
who take inputs from technologies (e.g., security enforcing functions devices, 

 
 
 
 
 
94 

SIEM etc.) to aid decision making.  They understand and have experience of 
cyber  security  incident  management  and  assessment,  major  incident 
management,  detection,  cyber  incident  response  and  recovery.  These 
integration 
humans-in-the-loop 
combined  with  their  experience,  skills  and  knowledge  provide  cyber 
foresight.  Further  and  most  importantly,  the  interdependence  and  inter-
dimensionality  of  the  multiple  domains  e.g.,  physical,  cultural,  economic, 
social,  political  and  cyber  that  must  be  considered  in  order  that  enhanced 
situational awareness across the domains can be achieved. 

technology,  automation  and 

leverage 

Cyber defence tools are not a ‘silver bullet’, and do not solve  all the cyber 
security  problems  themselves.  For  example,  cyber  defence  tools  such  as 
firewalls  or  intrusion  detection  systems  are  unable  to  solve  cyber  security 
procedural or human factors problems. They are as efficient as the people who 
use them to monitor business services, follow up on incidents and conduct 
incident  triage.  The  tools  may  offer  cues  and  prompts  which  the  human 
operators,  such  as  cyber  security  operations  centre  (CSOC)  administrators 
and  analysts  should  investigate.  Often  these  cues  are  symptomatic  -  an 
expression  of  a  likelihood  of  something,  rather  than  an  explicit indication, 
therefore, human expertise and experience are very much required. The cues 
which are provided by the monitoring systems may be in the form of alerts, 
alarms, events etc. These intelligences will need to be analysed and decision 
on possible cause of action (CoA) will be down to humans to make. 

Cyber situations include cyber threats, cyber security attacks, cyber risks and 
cyber  issues,  such  as  cyber  vulnerabilities,  exploits,  security  breaches  and 
cybercrime. 

OPERATIONAL FACTORS INFLUENCING CYBER 

4 
SITUATIONAL AWARENESS IN CYBER OPERATIONS 
In  this  section,  we  investigate  factors  that  influence  operators’  situational 
awareness in CyberOps, specifically operational factors. The term ‘operator’ 
is  used  here  as  a  generalistic  term  to  describe  administrators,  analysts, 
scientists,  engineers  and  architects  whose  roles  in  cybersecurity  involves 
administering,  operating,  monitoring  and  supporting  cybersecurity  of  an 
organisation,  as  discussed  in  Section  2  of  this  paper,  and  functionally 
represented in Fig 1. 

Operational  factors  have  been  described  and  discussed  in  many  ways.  In 
logistics, operational factors are defined as factors that are used to evaluate 
alternatives  capabilities  for  meeting  the  external  requirements  of  outbound 

 
 
 
 
 
95 

logistics  services  (Çebi,  F.,  Otay,  İ., &  Çelebi,  D.  2014);  and  according  to 
Reverso Dictionary (Reverso, 2021), operational factors relate to the working 
of a system, device or a plan. In this paper, we adopt the Reverso dictionary 
definition  when  investigating  operational  factors,  namely  those  factors 
relating to, and that influence the working of cybersecurity systems, devices 
and/or their plans, policies, processes and procedures. 

Further,  we  investigate  how  the  operational  factors  influence  operators’ 
situational awareness in CyberOps. How do these operational factors help the 
operators:  

Identify and detect threats and cyber-attacks?  

• 
•  Respond and manage the affected systems and services when they are 

breached or compromised? 

•  Recover and remedy the systems and services when they fail? 

In general, we propose four overarching group of factors that we considered 
to  influence  cyber  situational  awareness.  These  are  business,  operational, 
technology  and  human  factors  (a.k.a.  BOTH  factors).  They  are  derived 
using attribute listing, matrix and morphological analysis methodology. 

Attribute listing and morphological analysis is one of the methods applied in 
this research to enumerate all possible attributes and features stemming from 
each domain we considered. For example, to understand operational factors 
that  influence  cyber  situational  awareness  in  cybersecurity  operations  we 
listed all possible operational attributes and feature sets of operational tasks 
involved  in  cybersecurity  domain.  By  further  deduplicating  and  pruning 
identical and redundant attributes and features we then obtained a subset of 
the  initial  list.  This  iteration  happened  several  times  until  a  baseline  is 
obtained. The baseline is as shown in Fig. 3. 

Security, privacy and information assurance requirements neither appeared 
in  any  specific  quadrant  nor  included  in  any  of the  factors.  We  argue  that 
information security, privacy and information assurance are intrinsic features 
that must be considered in their own rights for all the four principal factors. 
Therefore, these requirements are embedded across the four principal factors 
(as  shown  in  Fig.  3),  e.g.,  Business  Factors,  Operational  Factors, 
Technological Factors and Human Factors. 

For example, operations factors must consider information security, privacy 
and  information  assurance  requirements  with  respect  to  the  operations  that 
the tools undertake and the processes must be such that they align to security 

 
 
 
 
 
 
standards  and  privacy  regulations  and  directives.  Similarly,  business, 
technology and human factors must all abide by the same principles. 

96 

FIGURE 3: BOTH – BUSINESS, OPERATIONAL, TECHNOLOGY & HUMAN 
FACTORS 

We identified ten (10) pertinent operational factors that influence situational 
awareness (CyberSA) for CyberOps (see Fig. 3, the second column marked 
in  red border).  These  operational  factors  are  derived using  attribute listing 
and  morphological  analysis  (MindTools,  2021).  Attribute  listing  and 
morphological analysis allowed us to enumerate all operational attributes and 
features  of  each  task,  and  by  filtering  against  duplications,  we  removed 
factors that are either similar, duplicates or overlapped with existing features 
covered in other parts of the framework.  

We  observed  that  operational  factors  are  influenced  by  technology  factors 
when  they  are  implemented  correctly  and  ensure  business  factors  are  met 
appropriately. Operational factors range from tools and techniques employed 
to  automate  and  orchestrated  cybersecurity  services  to  the  policies  and 
procedures that are leveraged to render these services efficiently and to the 
people that are tasked to operate and monitor the services, as shown in Fig. 3.  

 
 
 
 
 
97 

Note: This paper is focused only on the operational factors, we hope to cover 
the other factors and in addition to providing in-depth discussion on how the 
BOTH  Factors  are  realised  in  future  contributions  (see  Section  5  –  future 
research directions). 

The resultant operational factors are briefly discussed as follows: 

4.1 Tools 

These are the technical tools or technologies deployed in an organisation that 
allow operational aspects of the service to be swiftly executed and processed. 
Without capable tools in place, it will be challenging to realise operational 
efficiencies or meet some of the overarching business goals. For example, a 
security  operations  centre  would  be  overwhelmed  if  they  try  to  process  or 
analyse high volumes of event logs without automation (e.g., parser, plugin, 
application  programming 
(e.g.,  Security 
interface)  and 
information  and  event  management  (SIEM)),  because  manual  analysis  of 
large  corpse  of  logs  will  lag  in  time  and  consequently  fail  to  achieve  the 
business  goal  of  real-time  continuous  monitoring.  In  addition,  manual 
analysis is error-prone and less accurate, hence could impact the reliability 
and fidelity of the SOC analysis or outcomes.  

technology 

Tools aid the SOC to become effectiveness in processing data and events (in 
realtime or near realtime), which helps CyberOps gain enhanced situational 
awareness  of  the  current  incident  (situation),  or  impending  and  potential 
future  manifestation  of  the  same  incident.  It  will  also  allow  CyberOps  to 
monitor and understand when there has been an escalation of the incident or 
when a similar incident occurs in future (a.k.a., predictive analytics).  

Tools selection must be depending on achieving the features articulated by 
the Technology Factors (Onwubiko C., 2009) (as shown in Fig. 3), some of 
those include:  

•  Tools must be situation-aware,  
•  have the prerequisite interfaces,  
•  be automated allowing for orchestration and workflow processes.  
• 
It should be integrated and support multiple interface types such 
as API, native etc., and should be smart and intelligent.  
It is important that operational tools have the capability to process 
huge amounts of data, easy to use, and portable. These are some 
of the features that guide tools selection and choice. 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98 

4.2 Techniques  

This relates to the approaches CyberOps use to operationally identify, protect, 
detect, analyse, process and respond to cyber threats and cyber-attacks and 
remediate and recover from security breaches and exploits.  CyberOps tasks 
and responsibilities are reliant on efficient techniques leveraging automation 
and machine intelligence for pace, speed, accuracy and precision.  

For  example,  such  techniques  might  be  approaches  to  a  Zero  Trust 
architecture, endpoint protection, SOC operation, data science analysis, cyber 
event  processing  or  incident  management  coordination.  Irrespective  of  the 
chosen technique, we argue that techniques that allow CyberOps to leverage 
efficiencies  in  automation,  workflow  and  orchestration  offer  the  much-
needed situational awareness of the organisation’s DAAS, allowing operators 
to gain awareness, understanding and comprehension of immediate dangers, 
errors, events and incidents, and their future state change, which must also be 
understood.  While  speed,  pace  and  accuracy  are  afforded  by  technology, 
automation  and  orchestration,  but  without  situational  awareness,  better 
understanding and comprehension of the situation, then it is challenging for 
the  operators  to  make  informed  and  evidence-based  risk  decision  over  the 
various competing situations. 

CyberOps  techniques  utilise  industry  best  practices  such  as  the  MITRE 
ATT&CK  framework  (Mitre,  2017),  CoCoa  –  an  ontology-based  and 
knowledge graph (Onwubiko C., 2018), the Lockheed Martin Cyber Attack 
Kill-chain  (Lockheed  Martin,  2016),  CREST  Cyber  Threat  Intelligence 
Maturity  Assessment  Tool  (CREST,  2021),  CHECK  Tailored  Security 
Testing  (CHECK,  2021),  Cyber  Operational  Recovery  Framework  (CRF, 
2020) as guardrails for benchmarking and assessment. 

Operational 
performance, speed, accuracy and precision. 

techniques  must  be  driven  by  operational  efficiency, 

4.3 Architecture  

Operational architectures are ‘live’ architectures in production and are used 
to  operate,  process  and  execute  live  services  and  systems.  They  include 
patterns, designs, interfaces and building blocks (i.e., architecture artifacts) 
that  underpin  business  and  operational 
technologies.  Operational 
architectures for systems and services execute business requirements of the 
organisation  to  ensure  the  business  needs  are  achieved.  Operational 
architectures  must  use  baselined  architecture  patterns,  architecture  designs 
and architecture blueprints that have been tested, approved and that are in use 
by the organisation. 

 
 
 
 
 
99 

We  gain  operational  efficiencies  and  time  savings  by  reusing  existing 
architecture  artifacts,  and  by  ensuring  continuous  assurance  of  architecture 
contents.  This means  architecture  repository  is  regularly  updated  with  new 
and emerging secure by design architecture collaterals and artifacts. Adopting 
continuous integration, continuous development and continuous maintenance 
(CI,  CD  &  CM)  DevSecOps  lifecycle,  that  is  (Development,  Security  & 
Operation)  methodology  allows  CyberOps  to  gain  enhanced  situational 
awareness of the architectures. It is important to note that infrastructures and 
architecture can now be instantiated in code, for example, infrastructure as 
code,  or  architecture  as  code,  this  is  the  case  where  infrastructure  and 
architectures  can  be  instantiated  in  code.  In  a  pure  cloud  environment, 
infrastructures, such as EC2 (Elastic Cloud Compute) or virtual machines and 
virtual  networking  infrastructures  can  be  instantiated  in  code,  using  cloud 
templates, e.g., AWS CloudFormation to do this. 

to 

(for 

example, 

architectures 

Risks 
errors, 
misconfiguration and vulnerabilities in code or infrastructure) are minimised 
through continuous  maintenance, using the DevSecOps pipeline. This is to 
ensure code and architecture are continually assured, and obsolete codes are 
removed,  while  new  stacks  are  certified,  reviewed  and  approved  through 
automation and appropriate code review channels. 

accidental  human 

As discussed in Section 2 of this paper, by leveraging ZTA principles, through 
secure  micro-segmentation,  continuous  trust  and  risk  assessment  of  the 
identity  (a.k.a.,  conditional  access),  and  continuous  entity  and  user 
behavioural analytics enhanced situational awareness of the monitored DAAS 
to be gained and maintained. Further, by collecting and understanding metrics 
around availability of service, continuity of service, reliability, performance 
of products and application, all of these can help enrich the overall CyberSA 
picture for operators. 

Operational  architectures  must  describe  tasks  that  they  accomplish, 
operational elements and information flows and patterns that should be used 
for (Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, 2005), and they must be 
continuously  reviewed  and  managed  through  architecture  change  boards. 
This  is  so  that  changes  in  the  architecture  space  have  full  audit  trail, 
authorisation and accountability. 

4.4 Integration 

To achieve foresight (for example, situational awareness) of any kind, cyber 
or  otherwise,  systems  integration  and  automation  are  key.  Operational 

 
 
 
 
 
 
100 

technologies  and  systems  ought  to  be  integrated  so  that  they  form  a 
cooperative and co-existing system of systems that deliver the overarching 
functionalities, interaction and business processing. With systems integration, 
disparate and diverse systems, components and subsystems that would have 
ordinarily  existed  as separate,  isolated  and  siloed  systems  are interlaced  as 
cooperative and coordinated services.  

integrated.  Integration  can  be  achieved 

Cyber defences form a layer of protection (defense in depth) only when they 
are 
in  hardware,  software, 
programming and using hybrid methods, for example, systems integration of 
CPU to  motherboard,  keyboard  and  monitor is  achieved  through  hardware 
integration,  network  integration  can  be  hardware  or  software,  process 
integration  can  be  achieved  through  application  programming  interfaces 
(API),  while  robotic  process  automation  can  be  achieved  in  hardware, 
software and hybrid (e.g., cyber physical systems). 

Integration and automation of CyberOps is an absolute business requirement 
and  considering  the  plethora  of  systems  and  applications  that  are  used  in 
CyberOps (see Fig. 1), it will be challenging, if not impossible, to monitor 
such  myriad  of  systems,  applications  and  networks  without  systems 
integration,  process  and  technology  automation. Systems  integrations  offer 
service efficiency and customer value-add through improved product quality 
and  performance  (Vonderembse  M.  A.  et  al,  1997).  To  gain  enhanced 
situational awareness of CyberOps, integration and automation are extremely 
essential. Through these, information, interactions and awareness of current 
situations  are  learned,  identified  and  comprehended,  while  impending  and 
future situations can be predicted. 

4.5 Automation 

CyberOps relies on automation for speed, accuracy and precision. Without 
automation it will be challenging for CyberOps to be effective, relevant and 
responsive.  For  example,  Cyber  Ops  depends  on  automation  of  tools, 
processes and procedures to analyse humongous volumes of logs and security 
event data at pace to gain situational awareness of current risks, impending 
situations  and  changes  and  evolution  in  future  states  of  the  incident 
(predictive analytics). 

Automation allows cybersecurity operations to leverage machine intelligence, 
workflow  automation,  advance  analytics  and  machine 
learning  for 
information risk management, decision making, pattern matching, rule-based 
expert  systems,  conversational  agent inference  and  extended  detection  and 
response (XDR) capability. Orchestration, tools automation, business process 

 
 
 
 
 
101 

automation,  workflow,  and  analysis  offer  fundamental  enhancements  to 
CyberOps for attack detection, analytics, incident management, investigation 
and forensics. 

Advances  in  automation  means  CyberOps  can  become  sophisticated  in  its 
responses, it can now stop active cyber-attacks (e.g., by sending) automated 
realtime response, for instance, TCP teardown, block malicious traffic, stop 
the execution of active malicious codes, automatic traffic re-routes and active 
cyber defence (ACD). These capabilities are challenging without automation, 
and it is inconceivable to operate CyberOps without automation, and where 
this  is  the  case,  then  CyberOps  will  lag  in  time  and  would  not  be  fit  for 
purpose. 

4.6 Coordination 

Coordination is a human factor aspect that deals with the organisation of the 
different and disparate elements of a complex activity to enable them to work 
together  coherently  and  effectively  (Dictionary,  2019).  Coordination  is  an 
intrinsic human cognitive function through which elements of complex tasks, 
operations  and  maneuver  are  arranged,  organised,  fused  and/or  managed 
collectively and collaboratively to achieve a common and desired goal.  

Coordination is applied to both cyber and non-cyber related activities. Since 
this  paper  is  focused  on  cyber  situational  awareness,  our  examples  and 
explanations  are  drawn  from  the  cyber  domain,  where  coordination  is  an 
extremely valuable feature.  

Take a SOC as an example, in the event of a cyber incident, security analysts 
are relied upon to analyse, investigate and coordinate cyber incident response, 
digital forensics, cyber-attack analysis and cyber incident management etc. 
These  tasks  on  their  own  are  complex,  timely  and  cognitively  demanding; 
allowing for actionable intelligence to be driven and appropriate mitigation 
to  be  executed  to  either  stop  the  incident  or  minimise  the  impact  in  a 
coordinated  fashion.  Each  aspect  of  cyber  is  interdependent,  and  it  is  this 
interdependence  that  necessitates  coordination.  For  instance,  responding  to 
cyber  incidents  requires  that  activities  of  the  SOC,  such  as  monitoring, 
evidence  gathering  are  coordinated  with  those  of  the  cyber  incident 
responders  who  perform  activities  such  as gathering, preparation  of  digital 
evidence  and  the  preservation  of  digital  evidence,  with  the  incident 
management helpdesk, and the senior management team who make decisions 
on  the  approach  and  possible  cause  of  action  (CoA),  and  including 
authorisation  for  reporting  of  the  breach  to  national  authorities,  where 
applicable. 

 
 
 
 
 
102 

While operators may employ technology and automation to perform many of 
the complex tasks, allowing and leveraging machine intelligence, speed and 
accuracy, coordination is, and will remain largely a human factor attribute. 

4.7-9 Policy, Process & Procedure 

Policy,  process  and  procedure  are  the  foundation  for  CyberOps,  without 
which  it  will  be  infeasible  to  conduct  operational  tasks.  Policy  provides 
guidelines, procedure stipulates the low level, ‘how’ of applying the policy, 
while  the  process  helps  industrialise  the  procedure  and  therefore  allows  a 
consistent  approach  to  be  followed.  Cyber  operation  is  no  different.  For 
example, they need policies, processes and procedures to operate the service, 
these may include policies on a wide range of tasks, from simple to complex 
tasks,  such  as  joiners,  movers  and  leavers  (JML),  access  provision  and 
deprovision, user rights management etc. The need procedures to follow, for 
example,  cyber  incident  response  procedure,  major  incident  management 
procedure, etc., and likewise, they must have processes in place that allow 
consistency  across  various  repetitive  tasks,  at  least,  for  example,  cyber 
incident playbook, access requisition process, account creation process etc. 

The operational policies, processes and procedures provide a systematic and 
consistent  guidance  that  allow  for  service  efficient,  improvement  and 
performance. To stay ahead of the game, we argue that CyberOps must have 
very robust policies, procedures and processes and these need to be relevant, 
current and maintained, and most importantly, made readily available to staff. 
Often, process collaterals exist but staff are not aware of them due to poor 
communication  or  limited  document  management  access  or  both.  It  is 
pertinent to note that the relevance of these collaterals depends on a number 
of factors, namely: 

a) All staff must be made aware that policies exist 
b) All staff should have access to policy collaterals 
c) All staff should be trained on the use of policy artefacts 
d) All staff must be briefed of the consequences abuse of policy. 

4.10 People 

People  comprise  staff  (see  Section  2,  e.g.,  architects,  engineers,  analysts, 
administrators,  scientists  and  management)  who  are  responsible  and 
accountable  for  engineering,  administering,  maintaining  &  supporting  the 
operational day to day activities of the organisation ensuring that  IT & OT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
103 

systems  and  applications  are  effective,  and  perform  in  accordance  to 
stipulated functional and business requirements.  

There are many categories of operational staff, ranging from cyber operators, 
data scientists, cyber incident responders, administrators, analysts through to 
management teams. These people are incredibly important with the overall 
operational,  administrative  and  change  management  aspects  of  the  service 
operations  and  maintenance.  They  perform  the  business-as-usual  tasks, 
operate the technologies that drive the processes and ensure that the tools and 
technologies are maintained, operated and serviced. 

People  are  a  critical  aspect  of  CyberOps.  While  recent  advances  in 
technology, e.g., automation, machine intelligence and machine learning are 
useful  and  have  helped  improve  CyberOps  efficiencies  and  effectiveness, 
however,  people  are  key.  For  example,  if  cyber  defence  systems  are  not 
continuously  updated  or  patched,  vulnerabilities  may  exist  and  this  could 
result in the safeguards being exploited and further, they may then be used to 
compromise the wider ecosystem. 

People aspect comes with its own challenge. Hiring highly skilled people is 
always a challenge and this has been exacerbated by the skills shortage in the 
cyber domain. In addition, the Tech expansion (increasing number of Startups 
and  Enterprises)  has  increased  competition  for  the  sought-after  employees 
resulting in staff retention also being a considerable challenge.  

People  (human  operators)  conduct  cyber  incident  and  crisis  management, 
monitor  the  infrastructures,  networks  and  systems,  carryout  analysis  and 
investigations  when  a  security  breach  occurs,  and  take  part  in  decision 
making,  escalations  and  reporting. People  will  always  be  required  in  most 
manner  of  endeavors  in  some  form  or  another.  This is  most  pertinent  with 
cyber; while we now develop machine learning models that can predict cyber-
attacks,  artificial  intelligence models  that  can  recognise  speeches  and  deep 
learning  models  that  can  investigate,  recommend  and  optimise  choices  for 
humans,  there  are  still,  at  least  for  now,  areas  and  use  cases  where  human 
operators  are  needed  and  will  still  be  required  in  future.  For  example,  in 
decision making, escalations, cyber security investigations, and prosecutions 
etc. There is no doubt that human operators will depend on cyber physical 
systems,  machine  learning  models  etc.  for  swifter,  more  precise  and 
optimised  choices,  however,  it  will  be  a  case  of  interdependency  than 
replacement or displacement. We see a cooperative situation where humans 
leverage  technological  power,  prowess,  speed  and  accuracy  in  human 
decision making, prioritisation and resolution. 

 
 
 
 
 
104 

FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 

5 
The contributions in this paper focused specifically on operational factors that 
influence CyberSA in cybersecurity operations. This is just one aspect of a 
main theme of work, we coined BOTH (Business, Operations, Technology 
and  Human)  factors.  In  future  directions  of  this  research,  we  hope  to 
investigate  the  other  factors.  We  plan  to  discuss  Business,  Technology  & 
Human factors that influence CyberSA in CyberOps in future contributions. 

CONCLUSIONS 

6 
CyberOps  is  an  essential  function  of  any  organisation,  be  it  a  government 
department,  industry,  or  academia.  Regardless  of  the  domain  in  which  the 
cyber capabilities are applied to, for instance, aviation, maritime, intelligence 
community,  industrial  control  systems  (operation  technology)  or  ICT, 
CyberOps must be governed, managed, operated and maintained.  

CyberOps operators, namely engineers, administrators, analysts and scientists 
leverage  operational  factors  to  become  efficient  and  effective  on  their 
functions.  Operational  factors  help  the  operators  not only  to  gain  meaning 
situational awareness of the services they protect, but also, useful intelligence 
of  the  adversary  which  they  must  protect  against.  Operational  factors  for 
cyber  situational  awareness  investigated  encompass  tools,  techniques, 
integration,  architecture,  automation,  coordination,  policy,  process  and 
procedure and people. 

To  gain  an  enhanced  cyber  situational  awareness  it  must  be  through  a 
cooperative  endeavor  based  on  human  to  system  (H→S)  relationships,  as 
reliance on a singular aspect, say machine alone (without humans), will not 
provide the required levels of foresight; most pertinently, a relationship across 
multiple domains, which allows situational awareness of the ecosystem to be 
gained through monitoring, coordinating and responding to cyber incidents, 
leveraging system, process and task integration, automation, coordination and 
processing in a coherent and consistent manner that offer insight is required. 

7 
BBC, (2021a), “Blackbaud Hack: University loss data to ransomware attack”, British 

REFERENCES 

Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). Retrieved Jan 2021 from 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-53516413 

BBC, (2021b), “Malware found on laptops given out by government”, British 
Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). Retrieved Jan 2021 from 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-55749959 

Çebi, F., Otay, İ., & Çelebi, D. (2014). Fuzzy MCDM Approach for Make or Buy 

Decision Problem. In Wang, J. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Business Analytics 

 
 
 
 
 
105 

and Optimization (pp. 978-995). IGI Global. http://doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
5202-6.ch090 Retrieved Jan 2021 from https://www.igi-
global.com/dictionary/operational-factors/39757  

CHECK, (2021), “CHECK Tailored Penetration Testing”, National Cyber Security 

Centre (NCSC). Retrieved Jan 2021 from https://www.crest-
approved.org/schemes/ncsc-penetration-testing/index.html 

Cumiford D. L. (2006), “Situation Awareness for Cyber Defense”, 2006 CCRTS – 

The State of the Art and the State of the Practice, Sandia National 
Laboratories, MS 0455, USA, 2006 

CREST, (2021), “Cyber Threat Intelligence Maturity Assessment Tool”, Crest. 

Retrieved Jan. 2021 from https://www.crest-
approved.org/2020/01/10/cyber-threat-intelligence-maturity-assessment-
tool/index.html 

CRF, (2021), “Cyber Recovery Operational Framework”, Centre for Multidisciplinary 

Research, Innovation and Collaboration (C-MRiC.COM). Retrieved Jan 
2021 from https://cyberframework.c-mric.com  

CyBOK (2019), “The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge”. Retrieved Jan. 10, 2021 

from https://www.cybok.org/ 

Debar H. (2019), “Security Operations & Incident Management Knowledge Area”, 

Issue 1.0. Retrieved January 10, 2021 from 
https://www.cybok.org/media/downloads/Security_Operations__Incident_M
anagement_issue_1.0.pdf 

Dictionary  of  Military  and  Associated  Terms  (2005).  Retrieved  April  8  2019  from 

https://www.thefreedictionary.com/operational+architecture 
Endsley M. R. (1995), “Toward a Theory of Situation Awareness in Dynamic 

Systems. Human Factors Journal 37(1), 32-64, March 1995. 

ENISA (2016), “Communication Network Dependencies for ICS/SCADA Systems”, 

European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA), 
December 2016. Retrieved Jan. 13, 2021 from 
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/ics-scada-dependencies 
Eiza M. H. (2017), “Application of Cyber Situational Awareness and Cyber Security in 

Connected Vehicles”, Cyber Science 2027, London, UK 

Gartner, (2021), “Zero Trust is an Initial Step on the Roadmap to CARTA”, Gartner. 

Published 10 December 2018. ID G00377791.  

Lockheed Martin Cyber Kill Chain (2016) - Cyber Kill Chain, Accessed 8th April 

2019, https://www.lockheedmartin.com/en-us/capabilities/cyber/cyber-kill-
chain.html 

MAA, (2020), “”, Retrieved Jan 2021 from 

https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cybersecurity-in-aviation-a-
regulators-perspective 

Man, Y., Lundh, M., & MacKinnon, S. (2018). Managing unruly technologies in the 

engine control room: from problem patching to an architectural thinking and 
standardization. WMU Journal of Maritime Affairs.  
McDermott, C. D., Jeannelle, B., and Isaacs, J. P., (2019), "Towards a 

Conversational Agent for Threat Detection in the Internet of Things," 2019 
International Conference on Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics 
and Assessment (Cyber SA), Oxford, United Kingdom, 2019, pp. 1-8, doi: 
10.1109/CyberSA.2019.8899580. 

McGuiness, B., Foy, J. L., (2000), “A subjective measure of SA: The crew 

awareness rating scale (cars); 2000. p. 286-291. 

Mitre ATT&CK, (2017) - Mitre Att&ck framework - https://attack.mitre.org/ 

 
106 

MindTools, (2021), “Attribute Listing and Morphological Analysis”, MindTools, 2021. 

Retrieved Feb. 2021 from 
https://www.mindtools.com/search?search_term=Attribute+Listing+and+Mo
rphological+Analysis 

NCSC, (2021), “Operational Technology”, UK National Cyber Security Centre 

(NCSC). Retrieved Jan. 13, 2021 from 
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/operational-technologies  

NIST CSF, (2021), “NIST Cybersecurity Framework”, National Institute of Standards 

and Technology, CSF. Retrieved Jan 201 from 
https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework 

Onwubiko C., (2009), “Functional Requirements of Situational Awareness in 
Computer Network Security “; Proceeding of the IEEE International 
Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics IEEE ISI 2009, 8-11, 
June 2009, Dallas, Texas, USA. 

Onwubiko C. and Owens T. J. (2012), "Review of Situational Awareness for 

Computer Network Defense" in the book titled "Situational Awareness in 
Computer Network Defense: Principles, Methods and Applications", IGI 
Global, 2012. 

Onwubiko C.  (2016), “Understanding Cyber Situation Awareness”. International 

Journal on Cyber Situational Awareness, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp11-30. 
Onwubiko C.  (2018), “CoCoa: An Ontology for Cybersecurity Operations Centre 
Analysis Process” published in 2018 International Conference on Cyber 
Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment (CyberSA), 
10.1109/CyberSA.2018.8551486. 

Reverso Dictionary (2021), “Operational Factors”. Retrieved Jan. 2021 from 

https://dictionary.reverso.net/english-cobuild/operational+factors 

Schulze M. (2020), “Cyber in War: Assessing the Strategic, Tactical, and Operational 
Utility of Military Cyber Operations”. In the 2020 12th International 
Conference on Cyber Conflict 20/20 Vision: The Next Decade, NATO 
CCDCOE, Tallinn, Estonia 

Tadda G. P. and Salerno J. S. (2010), "Overview of Cyber Situation Awareness" in 

the book S. Jajodia et al., (eds.), Cyber Situational Awareness, Advances in 
Information Security 46, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-0140-8 2 

Tam, K., & Jones, K. (2019). Situational Awareness: Examining Factors that Affect 
Cyber-Risks in the Maritime Sector. International Journal on Cyber 
Situational Awareness, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp40-68  

UK Aviation Cyber Security Strategy (2018), “Aviation Cyber Security Strategy”, 

Moving Britain Ahead, UK Department of Transport. Retrieved Jan 2021 
from 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/upload
s/attachment_data/file/917529/aviation-cyber-security-strategy-
document.pdf 

Vonderembse, M.A., Raghunathan, T.S., and Rao, S.S. (1997). "A post-industrial 

paradigm: To integrate and automate manufacturing". International Journal 
of Production Research. 35 (9): 2579–2600. 
Doi:10.1080/002075497194679 

Zimmerman, C. (2014). Ten Strategies of a World-Class Cybersecurity Operations 

Center, MITRE, 2014 

 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

107 

and 

Dr  Cyril  Onwubiko  is  a  Senior  Member  of  the  IEEE,  and 
currently  a  Distinguished  Speaker  (DVP)  of  the  IEEE 
Computer  Society.  Cyril  is  Director,  Enterprise  Security 
Architecture  at  Pearson,  and  also  Director,  Artificial 
Intelligence,  Blockchain  and  Cyber  Security  at  Research 
Series  Limited,  London,  UK,  where  he  directs  Artificial 
Security 
Intelligence, 
Blockchain 
programmes. Prior  to  Research  Series,  Cyril  had  worked  in  the  Financial, 
Telecommunication, Health & Government and Public services Sectors. He 
is  a  leading  scholar  in  Cyber  Situational  Awareness  (Cyber  SA), Cyber 
Security, Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) & Data Fusion, 
he has authored a couple of books including “Security Framework for Attack 
Detection  in  Computer  Networks”,  and  edited  several  books  including 
“Situational Awareness in Computer Network Defense: Principles, Methods & 
Applications". Cyril is the Editor-in-Chief of the International Journal on Cyber 
Situational Awareness (IJCSA), and founder of the Centre for Multidisciplinary 
Research,  Innovation  and  Collaboration  (C-MRiC).  He  holds  a  PhD  in 
Computer  Network  Security  from  Kingston  University,  London,  UK;  MSc  in 
Internet Engineering, from University of East London, London, UK, and BSc, 
first class honours, in Computer Science & Mathematics. 

Cyber 

REFERENCE 

Reference to this paper should be made as follows: Onwubiko C. (2020). 
CyberOps: Situational Awareness in Cybersecurity Operations. International 
Journal on Cyber Situational Awareness, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp82-107 

 
 
 
 
