Artificial Intelligence-Based Smart Grid Vulnerabilities
and Potential Solutions for Fake-Normal Attacks:
A Short Review

Jema David Ndibwile
Carnegie Mellon University | Africa
jeman@cmu.edu

Abstract
Smart grid systems are critical to the power industry,
however their sophisticated architectural design and
operations expose them to a number of cybersecurity
threats, such as data tampering, data eavesdropping, and
Denial of Service, among others. Artificial Intelligence
(AI)-based technologies are becoming increasingly popular
for detecting cyber assaults in a variety of computer
settings, and several efforts have been made to secure
various systems. The present AI systems are being exposed
and vanquished because of
the recent emergence of
sophisticated adversarial systems such as Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAN). The purpose of this short
review is to outline some of the initiatives to protect smart
grid systems, their obstacles, and what might be a potential
future AI research direction.

I.  INTRODUCTION

A smart grid is an electrical system that incorporates a
number of operations and energy measures, such as
smart meters, smart appliances, renewable energy
sources, and energy efficient resources [28]. Smart
devices and the advancement of ICT technologies in
general have influenced the transition from traditional
grid to smart grid and, eventually, to state-of-the-art
operations. However, security concerns like physical
infrastructure destruction, data poisoning, denial of
service, malware, and infiltration are introduced by
complex architecture, which includes communication
networks and multiple end devices [1]. As a result,
there are a number of research efforts underway in
academia
these security
concerns
the widespread
deployment and survival of  complex systems..

and industry
in order

to secure

to solve

A review of broad assaults on smart grid
systems, as well as machine learning algorithms to

identify and mitigate these attacks, particularly false
data injection (FDI) attempts, is described in this brief
survey study. The challenges that these systems would
have in identifying assaults like Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN), which can generate fake-normal
traffic and so avoid detection [29], are also explored.
The paper's key recommendation is that GAN attacks
be explored further in order to figure out how to
modify machine
artificial
learning
intelligence technologies to detect them properly.

other

and

Fig. 1. Generative Adversarial Network [30]

II. CLASSIFICATION OF SMART GRID ATTACKS

A number of studies have attempted to categorize
smart grid assaults. To classify attacks, Rawat et al. [2]
used types of networks that the attacks target, such as
Home Area Network (HAN), Wide Area Network
(WAN), and Neighborhood Area Network (NAN).
Security objectives such as Confidentiality, Integrity,
and Availability (CIA) are emphasized in these three
categories.

Various authors, notably [3, 4], have examined
trust, privacy, usability, and connectivity issues in great
detail. According to the authors, security concerns
have risen dramatically as a result of the widespread
use and popularity of public networks. As a result,

provided

investigation,

cybersecurity has become a critical component of the
long-term viability of numerous systems. They go on
the smart grid on public networks'
to discuss
commercial operations and system design. Based on
their
numerous
they
techniques for communications and field devices to
address security needs, such as access control, secrecy,
and
cryptographic
algorithms. Wang et al. [5] classified various smart grid
cyber assaults based on security objectives (CIA) and
cryptographic
provided similar mechanisms
algorithms,
secure
and
architecture.

via
protocols,

integrity

network

through

various

and

testbeds,

Sun et al.

cybersecurity

[6] on the other hand, have
thoroughly examined current smart grid systems such
as SCADA and the security concerns they provide.
They looked into prospective cybersecurity solutions,
CPS
unsolved
cybersecurity difficulties. They also pointed out that
present security methods are not always applicable to
the smart grid context. They claim that the stringent
availability standards of electricity systems often cause
problems. In addition, the research looked into several
Intrusion Detection System (IDS) methodologies that
can be used in a variety of smart grid contexts and
applications. Nonetheless, due to a lack of validation
and verification on live operations and in the real
world, most of these proposed methodologies and
approaches have yet to be adopted by industry.

Adepu et al. [7] used the Electric Power and
Intelligent Control (EPIC) testbed to examine the
exploitation of vulnerabilities, designing and launching
attacks utilizing several methodologies. According to
the study, current attacks on transmission systems,
loss of line and generators, and automatic generation
controllers (AGC) are generally focused on limited
locations [8, 9]. There has been minimal work put into
addressing these vulnerabilities in dispersed systems
or specific components that may be more vulnerable
than highly secure transmission systems in general.
For example, the likelihood of attack scenarios on
regularly used renewable energy inverters using a
standard home PC is one of the areas that has been
overlooked.

[10] went on to categorize
Sagiroglu et al.
in hardware,
and threats
general vulnerabilities
software, and networks related to Smart grid. The
majority of the security vulnerabilities addressed in

this research are those that are most frequent and
applicable in everyday computing environments.

More specifically, Gunduz et al. [12] argue that
the Advanced Smart Metering System in smart grids is
more vulnerable to various cyber attacks than Smart
Distribution Substations because Smart Meters are
designed to exist on the utility network's edge, directly
facing unprotected and uncontrollable HAN devices
at the users' premises. The Distribution Substations,
on the other hand, do not pose significant security
risks despite their high level of automation and
proximity to densely populated regions of the city
since they are designed to be secure.

III. FALSE DATA AND FAKE-NORMAL ATTACKS
There are a variety of security measures available to
protect smart grid systems, having the following goals
in mind:

● Smart grid components and protocols have
inherent security flaws and vulnerabilities that
must be addressed

● Reducing the negative impact of cyber-attacks
and incursions on essential infrastructure
● Developing state-of-the-art deterrence tactics
and periodically validating and improving
them in order to identify new attacks

However, other assaults, such as false data
traffic generation, are
injection and fake-normal
understudied and could pose a significant threat to a
wide range of devices connected to the smart grid and
its environment.

Cui et al. [11] offered a detailed assessment on
the evolution of machine-learning in identifying bogus
data injection attacks, with a focus on the attacks. Due
to the obvious complex structure of smart grids, such
as the deep integration of electrical components, false
data injection attacks could be carried out effectively.

The transmission and distribution networks,
power
and communication
generation systems,
connections are all possible targets for a fake data
injection attack. Furthermore, these attacks can be
classified as replay/man-in-the-middle, zero dynamics,
and FDI assaults.

The multiple end devices at various smart grid
interfaces, according to Wei et al. [13], enable the
smooth operations and functionality of the energy
remotely. The
systems within the premises or

for

difficulties occur during data transfer between these
devices;
the
example, FDI might
falsification of data transmitted between smart grids.
It would hijack the session or communication channel
with malicious packets and disable sensor nodes to
damage networks and other hardware systems [14].

target

To minimize malicious data tampering and
destruction, smart grids necessitate that data be of
high integrity. A common integrity attack scenario,
according to Cui et al [11], would involve changing
settings in a power plant and broadcasting a data
packet to the state estimator. In this case, the security
and
a
posture
authentication mechanism in place to ensure that no
party denies participating in an operation and that
everyone using the system must authenticate her
identity.

non-repudiation

have

to

is

Conversely, if the data transmission network is
about to push the system over the brink, fraudulent
data injection might certainly occur. Due to system
failure or unavailability, data may be forced to be
offline, making any offline malicious packet injection
by a physical intruder or disgruntled employee on the
premises difficult to identify. More crucially, in smart
grids or any other system, data confidentiality governs
disclosure. If all data and communication channels are
adequately secured with the appropriate cryptographic
techniques, fake data injection would be difficult to
if the smart
achieve. According to Lee et al. [15],
grids' confidentiality is revealed, sensitive data such as
sensor control parameters and billing credentials
would be
and
reputational damage to users and service providers.

compromised,

financial

causing

techniques

Several machine-learning

to
non-technical losses, such as energy theft detection,
have been presented, with the supervised approach
with SVM being preferred over other algorithms [16].
In those studies, the SVM was integrated with other
algorithms for voltage sensitivity analysis and power
optimization. Other methods,
such as K-nearest
neighbors (KNN), regression, and artificial neural
networks (ANN), have also been explored and shown
to produce similar results [17, 18, 19]. However,
supervised approaches appear to produce a high
number of false positives, which has a significant
Furthermore,
detection
impact
categorizing the datasets for this purpose was a
difficult undertaking. As a result, other researchers

rate.

the

on

concentrated on the unsupervised learning strategy as
an alternative. Clustering-based algorithms were the
most prevalent method.
However,

the unsupervised approach of
clustering has a low detection rate with tampered data,
suggested a detection
thus Zheng et
framework that integrates state-based methods with
clustering. Other
studies used gradient boosting
(extreme gradient boosting, category boosting, and
light
the
aforementioned approach [22, 23, 24].

investigate

boosting)

gradient

[20]

al.

to

The majority

the machine-learning
of
algorithms used in smart grids are still hampered by a
number of issues. High false positive rates due to
underfitting and class imbalance in training datasets
are just a few of the issues. As a result, several
attempts have been made to detect fake-normal traffic
using deep-learning algorithms, and one possible
to efficiently detect
research topic would be
fraudulent data
injection. Convolutional neural
networks (CNN) have been explored extensively,
among other things. For example, [25, 26, 27] used
the
deep-learning methodologies
detection algorithm with varied datasets.

construct

to

smart

for example,

grid systems

IV. POTENTIAL FUTURE RESEARCH
Although a variety of techniques have been used to
secure smart grid systems, only a few have focused on
from assaults
safeguarding
designed to deceive AI-based models. Most existing
research,
focuses on improving the
performance of machine/deep learning models to
achieve higher detection accuracy while maintaining
reasonable computational performance, but it pays
little
traffic
generated by Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN). They also don't spend much time examining
the subtle variations between fake-normal and actual
traffic.

attention to the

fake-normal data

By combining a generator and a discriminator,
GANs are particularly effective in fooling artificial
intelligence systems. The attacker tries to mimic the
prediction function that the smart grid's pre-trained
ML model uses to detect attacks by employing the
discriminator. Also, utilize the generator to create
is
from malicious
benign traffic
accomplished by a series of iterations in which the
generator or (GAN) adds noise and fine-tunes its

traffic. This

malicious packets/traffic to the point where they
elude the smart grid model's detection radar. As a
result, the attacker's traffic is able to pass through the
algorithm without being detected. Instead of being
classified as malicious, they would be classified as
normal traffic.

Finally, I'd like to suggest that GAN attacks
on smart grid systems be investigated further in order
to make detectors more resilient against intelligent
attacks.

REFERENCES
[1] Komninos, N., Philippou, E. and Pitsillides, A., 2014. Survey
in smart grid and smart home security: Issues, challenges
and countermeasures.
IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, 16(4), pp.1933-1954.

[2] Rawat, D.B. and Bajracharya, C., 2015, April. Cyber security
for smart grid systems: Status, challenges and perspectives.
In SoutheastCon 2015 (pp. 1-6). IEEE.

[3] Shapsough, S., Qatan, F., Aburukba, R., Aloul, F. and Al Ali,
A.R., 2015, October. Smart grid cyber security: Challenges
and solutions. In 2015 International conference on smart grid and
clean energy technologies (ICSGCE) (pp. 170-175). IEEE.

[4] Liang, X., Gao, K., Zheng, X. and Zhao, T., 2013, April. A
study on cyber security of smart grid on public networks. In
2013 IEEE green technologies
(pp.
301-308). IEEE.

(GreenTech)

conference

[5] El Mrabet, Z., Kaabouch, N., El Ghazi, H. and El Ghazi, H.,
2018. Cyber-security in smart grid: Survey and challenges.
Computers & Electrical Engineering, 67, pp.469-482.

[6] Sun, C.C., Hahn, A. and Liu, C.C., 2018. Cyber security of a
power grid: State-of-the-art. International Journal of Electrical
Power & Energy Systems, 99, pp.45-56.

[7] Adepu, S., Kandasamy, N.K., Zhou, J. and Mathur, A., 2019.
Attacks on smart grid: Power supply interruption and
malicious power generation. International Journal of Information
Security, pp.1-23.

[8] Lin, H., Slagell, A., Kalbarczyk, Z.T., Sauer, P.W. and Iyer,
R.K., 2016. Runtime semantic security analysis to detect and
IEEE
mitigate control-related attacks
Transactions on Smart Grid, 9(1), pp.163-178.

in power grids.

[9] Meliopoulos, A.S., Cokkinides, G., Fan, R. and Sun, L., 2017.
Data attack detection and command authentication via
IEEE Design & Test, 34(4),
cyber-physical comodeling.
pp.34-43.

[10] Sagiroglu, S.

and Canbay, Y., 2019. Solutions and
Suggestions for Smart Grid Threats and Vulnerabilities.
International Journal of Renewable Energy Research (IJRER), 9(4),
pp.2053-2063.

[11] Cui, L., Qu, Y., Gao, L., Xie, G. and Yu, S., 2020. Detecting
false data attacks using machine learning techniques in smart
grid: A survey. Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
p.102808.

[12] Gunduz, M.Z. and Das, R., 2020. Cyber-security on smart
grid: Threats and potential solutions. Computer Networks, 169,
p.107094.

[13] Wei, D., Lu, Y., Jafari, M., Skare, P. and Rohde, K., 2010,
January. An integrated security system of protecting smart
grid against cyber attacks. In 2010 Innovative Smart Grid
Technologies (ISGT) (pp. 1-7). IEEE.

[14] Xu, R., Wang, R., Guan, Z., Wu, L., Wu, J. and Du, X.,
false data
5,

2017. Achieving efficient detection against
injection
pp.13787-13798.

IEEE Access,

attacks

smart

grid.

in

[15] Lee, A., 2010. Guidelines for smart grid cyber security (No. NIST

Interagency/Internal Report (NISTIR)-7628).

[16] Messinis, G.M., Rigas, A.E. and Hatziargyriou, N.D., 2019.
A hybrid method for non-technical loss detection in smart
distribution grids. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 10(6),
pp.6080-6091.

[17] Jokar, P., Arianpoo, N. and Leung, V.C., 2015. Electricity
theft detection in AMI using customers’ consumption
patterns. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 7(1), pp.216-226.

[18] Liu, X. and Nielsen, P.S., 2016. Regression-based online
smart grid data. arXiv preprint

anomaly detection for
arXiv:1606.05781.

[19] De Nadai, M. and van Someren, M., 2015, July. Short-term
anomaly detection in gas consumption through ARIMA and
artificial neural network forecast. In 2015 IEEE Workshop on
Environmental, Energy,
and Structural Monitoring Systems
(EESMS) Proceedings (pp. 250-255). IEEE.

[20] Zheng, K., Chen, Q., Wang, Y., Kang, C. and Xia, Q., 2018.
A novel combined data-driven approach for electricity theft
detection. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 15(3),
pp.1809-1819.

[21] Buzau, M.M., Tejedor-Aguilera, J., Cruz-Romero, P. and
Gómez-Expósito, A., 2018. Detection of non-technical
losses using smart meter data and supervised learning.
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 10(3), pp.2661-2670.

[22] Punmiya, R. and Choe, S., 2019. Energy theft detection
using
theft detector with feature
engineering-based preprocessing. IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, 10(2), pp.2326-2329.

gradient boosting

[23] Chen, T. and Guestrin, C., 2016, August. Xgboost: A
scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm
sigkdd international
conference on knowledge discovery and data
mining (pp. 785-794).

[24] Prokhorenkova, L., Gusev, G., Vorobev, A., Dorogush, A.V.
and Gulin, A., 2018. CatBoost: unbiased boosting with
categorical features. In Advances in neural information processing
systems (pp. 6638-6648).

[25] Yao, D., Wen, M., Liang, X., Fu, Z., Zhang, K. and Yang,
B., 2019. Energy theft detection with energy privacy
preservation in the smart grid. IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
6(5), pp.7659-7669.

[26] Li, W., Logenthiran, T., Phan, V.T. and Woo, W.L., 2019. A
novel smart energy theft system (SETS) for IoT-based smart
home. IEEE Internet of  Things Journal, 6(3), pp.5531-5539.

[27] Bhat, R.R., Trevizan, R.D., Sengupta, R., Li, X. and Bretas,
A., 2016, December. Identifying nontechnical power loss via
spatial and temporal deep learning. In 2016 15th IEEE
International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications
(ICMLA) (pp. 272-279). IEEE.

[28] Smart Grid

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_grid [accessed on 4th
September 2020].

[29] Fournaris, A.P., Lalos, A.S. and Serpanos, D., 2019.
Generative
AI-Enabled
Safety-Critical Systems: Friend or Foe?. Computer, 52(9),
pp.78-81.

Adversarial Networks

in

[30] Hayes, J., Melis, L., Danezis, G. and De Cristofaro, E.,
LOGAN: Evaluating Information Leakage of Generative
Models Using Generative Adversarial Networks.

