arXiv:2203.04072

Guidelines for cyber risk management in shipboard 
operational technology systems 

Priyanga Rajaram, Mark Goh, Jianying Zhou 

iTrust, Centre for Research in Cyber Security 
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD) 

Email: priyanga@sutd.edu.sg, mark_goh@sutd.edu.sg, jianying_zhou@sutd.edu.sg 

Abstract. Over the past few years, we have seen several cyber incidents being reported, where 
some of the primary causes were the lack of proper security controls onboard the ship and crew 
awareness on cybersecurity. In response to the growing cyber threat landscape in the maritime 
sector, we have developed a set of guidelines for maritime cyber risk management, focusing on 
four major shipboard Operational Technology (OT) systems that are crucial for the day-to-day 
operation of ships. These four OT systems are: Communication Systems, Propulsion, Machinery 
and  Power  Control  Systems,  Navigation  Systems  and  Cargo  Management  Systems.  The 
guidelines  identify  the  cyber  risks  in  each  of  the  OT  systems  and  recommend  the  necessary 
actions  that  can  be  taken  to  manage  risks  in  each  shipboard  OT  system.  In  this  paper,  we 
introduce  the  new  guidelines,  which  include  cyber  risks,  mitigation  measures,  cyber  risk 
assessment,  and  a  checklist  to  help  shipowners  and  maritime  authorities  assess  and  enhance 
cyber hygiene of their vessels. Our guidelines have been disseminated by the Maritime and Port 
Authority of Singapore (MPA) to owners and operators of the Singapore Registry of Ships for 
their reference and use. 

1. Introduction
Cybersecurity has become a vital subject for the maritime industry to consider, due to the increasing
adoption of digital advancements that help enhance maritime operations. Despite their many benefits,
digitalisation of shipboard operations can pose a significant threat to the safety of vessels and its crew,
if there is a lack of awareness on cybersecurity among the crew and cyber hygiene habits are not put
into practice. All the components in a vessel, such as OT systems, IT systems including routers, switches
and network cables, etc., need to be safeguarded from cyber threats, since a weak cybersecurity posture
can have a major impact on the safety of the crew, vessel and cargo. As shipboard OT systems are crucial
for day-to-day operation of vessels, managing the cyber risks associated with those systems must take
top priority.
     We have developed a new set of guidelines [1] to address the impacts of cyber risks in shipboard OT 
systems and the necessary security controls to be enforced in those systems in order to maintain cyber 
hygiene in vessels. The guidelines are framed in such a way that they are feasible and cost-effective for 
enforcement by ship owners and maritime authorities. The guidelines are centered on four shipboard 
OT systems: Communication Systems, Propulsion, Machinery and Power Control Systems, Navigation 
Systems, and Cargo Management Systems. The International Maritime Organisation (IMO) has also 
highlighted these OT systems as the most vulnerable to cyberattacks [2]. 
     In our new guidelines, the attack surfaces and cyber risks associated with the shipboard OT systems 
are listed, with a description of potential attack scenarios. We also described mitigation measures for 

those  cyber  risks  identified.  To  assess  the  severity  and  likelihood  of  those  cyber  risks,  a  cyber  risk 
assessment methodology is proposed. Finally, a checklist with a tiered security approach is included to 
guide maritime authorities in determining the cyber hygiene of vessels. It can also be referenced by 
those in charge of ensuring and enhancing cybersecurity of vessels, such as engineers and IT/OT system 
specialists. During each stage of developing the guidelines, webinars were hosted to exhibit the work 
done and to receive feedback from the stakeholders, which helped in fine-tuning the guidelines further. 
     The rest of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 reviews the related guidelines that have been 
published by various maritime organisations. Section 3 investigates the cyber risks and attack surfaces 
associated with the shipboard OT systems. Section 4 highlights the features of our guidelines, especially 
the cyber risk assessment approach and the checklist with tiered security. Finally, Section 5 concludes 
the paper. 

2. Related Guidelines 
The  International  Maritime  Organization  (IMO)  resolution  MSC.428(98)  Maritime  Cyber  Risk 
Management in Safety Management Systems states that a ship’s Safety Management System (SMS) must 
include cyber risk management based on the objectives and functional requirements of the International 
Safety  Management (ISM)  code [3].  Before the first annual  verification of  company’s  Document  of 
Compliance  on  1  January  2021,  IMO  encourages  administrators  to  address  the  cyber  risks  in  SMS. 
Correspondingly,  this  resolution  highlights  IMO’s  Guidelines  on  Maritime  Cyber  Risk  Management 
(MSC-FAL.1/Circ.3), which contains high-level recommendations on maritime cyber risk management, 
to  safeguard  the  maritime  industry  from  the  existing  and  emerging  cyber  threats  [2].  This  guideline 
recommends five functional elements of cyber risk management defined by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) cybersecurity framework, that is, identify, protect, detect, respond, 
and  recover  [4].  The  guidelines  also  emphasize  on  the  fact  that  cyber  risk  management  should  be 
initiated  by  the  senior management  level,  and  awareness  on  cybersecurity must be  established  at  all 
levels of an organisation. 
     Besides references to ISO/IEC 27001 and NIST cybersecurity frameworks, the IMO guideline also 
refers  the  Guidelines  on  Cyber  Security  Onboard  Ships  Version  4  issued  in  2020,  published  and 
supported  by  various  maritime  organisations  such  as  the  Baltic  and  International  Maritime  Council 
(BIMCO), Intercargo, Intermanager, INTERTANKO, Chamber of Shipping of America (CSA), Digital 
Containership Association (DCA), ICS, IUMI, OCIMF, Sybass and World Shipping Council [5]. This 
guideline focuses on creating awareness on cybersecurity onboard ships and guides in enhancing the 
safety and security of the ships and the crew. It also outlines the cyber risks and the right measures to 
be implemented to ensure cybersecurity onboard vessels. 
     Det Norske Veritas (DNV) recommended a set of cybersecurity measures with the publication of 
Cyber Security Resilience Management for Ships and Mobile Offshore Units in Operation in 2016, to 
guide the personnel in charge of cybersecurity in their respective organisations [6]. This guideline is 
designed based on well recognised guidelines issued by organisations such as IMO and BIMCO. The 
guidelines spotlight various cyber threat factors targeting the maritime sector and focuses on crucial 
improvements and validation mechanisms necessary for cybersecurity resilience in ships. The ‘cyber 
secure’  guideline  for  class  notation  (October  2020  edition)  provided  by  DNV  is  centred  on  the 
cybersecurity of a ship’s primary functions and the operational needs of ship owners [7]. The notations, 
Cyber Secure, Cyber Secure (Essential) and Cyber Secure (Advanced) entail ten primary functions such 
as  navigation,  propulsion,  steering,  power  generation,  etc.,  and  are  suitable  where  cyber  risk 
management system is set up and enforced into prevailing procedures and systems. Apart from this, the 
“+” notation can be used to add additional functions for a notation. 
     The European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) published two reports regarding 
maritime cybersecurity. In 2011, ENISA published a report on the Analysis of Cyber Security Aspects 
in the Maritime Sector, to highlight the cybersecurity challenges in the maritime industry and provide 
suggestions  for  the  same  [8].  Another  related  report  published  in  2019  is  on  Good  Practices  for 
Cybersecurity  in  the  Maritime  sector,  focusing  on  port  cybersecurity,  primarily  aiming  at  those 
responsible for OT and IT security in the port ecosystem [9]. That report includes good practices for 
ensuring port cybersecurity, related to both IT systems and OT systems. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Similarly, the Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET) published a Code of Practice Cyber 
Security for Ships in 2017, to recommend good practices on developing cybersecurity assessment plans, 
devising  mitigation  measures,  and  managing  security  breaches  and  incidents  [10].  The  guideline 
considers the importance of implementing cyber security measures, with respect to the technological 
aspects in maritime systems. On the other hand, the American Bureau of Shipping (ABS) published the 
Guide  for  Cybersecurity  Implementation  for  the  Marine  and  Offshore  Industries,  ABS  Cybersafety 
Volume 2, in February 2021, providing cyber security recommendations and requirements for cyber-
enabled systems [11]. ABS awards vessels with four notations CS-System, CS-Ready, CS-1 and CS-2, 
based on compliance with the requirements given in this guide.  
     Based on the review of the guidelines discussed above, while they do discuss maritime cyber risk 
management,  their  intended  audiences  are  those  at  the  management  levels.  On  the  contrary,  our 
guidelines  focus  on  managing  risks  in  shipboard  OT  systems,  with  the  target  audience  being  those 
responsible for implementing cybersecurity controls in their respective organisations, and they include 
IT/OT system specialists and engineers. Our guidelines include a list of actionable mitigation measures 
organised as a checklist that can serve as a guide for maritime authorities and ship owners to check and 
ensure the cyber hygiene of the vessels. 

3. Cyber Risks in Shipboard OT Systems 
The shipboard OT systems that are fundamental for everyday vessel operations include communication 
systems, propulsion, machinery and power control systems, navigation systems and cargo management 
systems. These systems are vulnerable to cyber attacks due to various weaknesses in the systems or in 
the network in which they are connected. While enhancing operational efficiency with new technologies 
is important, cyber risks loom large in the background. For example, shipboard OT systems need to be 
connected  to  the  Internet  for  operations,  updates,  communication,  etc.,  and  such  interconnectivity 
between OT and IT network could be an entry point for attackers to compromise the ship’s systems. The 
attack  surfaces  and  corresponding  cyber  risks  associated  with  each  OT  sub-system  are  provided  in 
Tables 1, 2, 3, 4. For more details, please refer to our published journal article on cyber risks in shipboard 
operational technology (OT) systems in [12]. 

3.1. Communication Systems 
Reliable communication is crucial during events such as alerting, sending and receiving maritime safety 
information. Cyberattacks targeting essential communication systems such as satellite communication 
system (SATCOM) and VoIP (Voice Over Internet Protocol) phones can disrupt communication among 
ships and between ship and shore. 

3.2. Propulsion, Machinery and Power Control Systems 
The ship’s propulsion, power generation and management are vital for its safe passage. The performance 
parameters of machineries related to propulsion and power control are mostly monitored and controlled 
through  a  computer  console.  At  times,  these  systems  may  use  the  Internet  for  various  operational 
purposes, and remote updates, thus they can fall victim to cyberattacks. Compromising these systems 
could result in issues such as engine failure, fuel tank overflow, alarm failure and disrupted power supply 
in the vessel. 

3.3. Navigation Systems 
Navigation systems play a major role in determining a ship’s speed, position and heading, which enable 
safe navigation. If cyberattacks are targeted on such systems, it may result in lack of navigation data, 
which in turn may result in severe consequences such as ship sinking, collision, etc. 

3.4. Cargo Management Systems 
Cargo management systems are a crucial part of vessel operations including assisting in the tracking and 
management of cargo, and in maintaining vessel’s stability in varying environmental conditions with 
the use of ballast water system. With vast reliability on the Internet for managing cargo operations and 
due to human threat factors, these onboard systems can fall victim to cyberattacks. Attackers might take 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advantage of the weaknesses in these systems to compromise them, which could disrupt cargo operations 
and trigger vessel instability. 

Table 1. Cyber risks in Communication Systems. 

OT sub-system 
Satellite Communication 
System (SATCOM) 
Integrated 
Communication System 
(ICS) 

Attack surface 
Phishing emails, VSAT 
system/modem 

Cyber risk 
Malware attack via Phishing emails, 
exploiting vulnerabilities in outdated 
VSAT software, unauthorised 
administrative access of vessel 
network, cross-site scripting, 
eavesdropping 

Voice Over Internet 
Protocol (VoIP) 

VOIP protocol (Session 
Initiation Protocol) 

Denial of Service (DoS) attack, 
eavesdropping, vishing 

Wireless Local Area 
Network (WLAN) 

Access point (router) 

Denial of Service (DoS) attack, 
access point tampering, 
eavesdropping/session hijacking 

Table 2. Cyber risks in Propulsion, Machinery and Power Control Systems. 

OT sub-system 
Engine Governor System 
Fuel Oil System 
Alarm Monitoring & 
Control System 

Attack surface 
USB ports in the 
machinery monitoring 
systems, serial 
communication network 

Power Management 
System 
Emergency Generators 
and Batteries 

USB ports in the power 
management system 
console, serial 
communication network 

Cyber risk 
Malware attack via USB ports, Man-
in-the-middle (MITM) attack 

Malware attack via USB ports, Man-
in-the-middle (MITM) attack 

Table 3. Cyber risks in Navigation Systems. 

OT sub-system 
Electronic Chart Display 
and Information System 
(ECDIS) 

Attack surface 
USB ports, serial 
communication 
network, outdated 
software 

Cyber risk 
Malware attack via USB ports, 
spoofing, Denial-of-Service (DoS) 
attack 

Radio Detection and 
Ranging (RADAR) 

Automatic Identification 
System (AIS) 

Ethernet switch, SMB 
(Server Message Block) 
service 

AIS software, AIS 
messages (VHF radio 
communication) 

Malware intrusion, Man-in-the-
middle (MITM) attack 

Spoofing, Replay attack, Frequency 
hopping attack 

Global Positioning 
System (GPS) 

GPS/GNSS receiver 

GPS spoofing, GPS jamming 

Dynamic Positioning 
System (DPS) 

DP system software, 
GNSS Receiver 

Denial-of-Service (DoS) attack, 
Backdoor attack, Spoofing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OT sub-system 

Attack surface 

Cyber risk 

Global Maritime Distress 
and Safety System 
(GMDSS) 

Very High Frequency 
(VHF) radio 
communication, 
poor/outdated software 

Eavesdropping, spoofing, Denial-of-
Service (DoS) attack 

Voyage Data Recorder 
(VDR) 

Integrated Navigation 
System (INS) 

USB ports, VDR system  Man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack, 

Remote code execution 

SMB (Server Message 
Block) service, Remote 
desktop protocol 

Man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack, 
Remote code execution 

Table 4. Cyber risks in Cargo Management systems. 

OT sub-system 
Cargo Control Room 
(CCR) 

Attack surface 
Phishing emails, USB 
ports 

Cyber risk 
Ransomware, Malware attack 

Ballast Water System 
(BWS) 

Phishing emails, USB 
ports 

Phishing emails, Malware attack 

4. Features of New Guidelines 
While the existing guidelines mainly focus on maritime cyber risk management at the management level, 
our guidelines are framed in such a way that they can be readily adopted by those responsible for the 
cybersecurity  of  shipboard  OT  systems  such  as  engineers,  IT/OT  system  specialists  and  vessel 
inspectors. Here we highlight the features of our new guidelines. 

4.1. Mitigation Measures 
With heightening demands for cargo transportation by sea, if vital shipboard systems are subject to cyber 
attacks, the company might need to face severe repercussions such as economic and reputational loss. 
Ship operators, ship owners, engineers, IT/OT specialists, etc., must be aware of the potential cyber risks 
and the necessary mitigating actions to be taken. Our guidelines include a list of specific actionable 
mitigation measures to each of the cyber risks in shipboard OT systems (discussed in Section 3) that can 
be promptly implemented on those systems.  
     For  example,  security  controls  can  be  helpful  when  shipboard  OT  systems  operate  in  the  serial 
network. However, they often connect to the Internet for remote updates and operational purposes. Thus, 
technical and procedural security measures such as firewall, Virtual Private Network (VPN), antivirus 
software,  email  security  mechanisms,  regular  SATCOM  software  updates,  password  security 
mechanisms, logging, access control lists, multi-factor authentication, network monitoring, and crew 
awareness programs are necessary for safe operation of the Internet-facing systems, as they are one of 
the common entry points for various cyberattacks. On the other hand, physical security measures are 
needed in cases where machineries need to be handled with care, for example, engine system, power 
generators,  etc.,  as  mishandling  can  cause  harm  to  the  crew  and  the  ship.  Likewise,  it  is  also  very 
important to secure USB ports in shipboard systems by blocking unused ports, to avoid insider attacks. 
The  mitigation  measures  in  our  guidelines  include  a  mixture  of  technical,  procedural  and  physical 
security measures that can help safeguard shipboard OT systems from potential cyber attacks. 

4.2. Cyber Risk Assessment Approach 
In order to assess the cyber risks, a risk assessment approach is also detailed in our guidelines. Risk 
assessment helps in determining the impact and likelihood of risks, and this in turn can help to identify 
the  places  where  security  controls  need  to  be  improvised  or  freshly  implemented.  As  the  shipboard 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system conditions evolve due to upgrades, installation of new software, etc., it is good to perform risk 
assessment frequently.  
     In our guidelines, a four-step scale definition is defined to assess the severity and likelihood of a 
cyber risk. A 4x4 risk score matrix, as shown below in Figure 1, can be used to calculate the risk score 
for each cyber risk in an OT system, where the risk score is the product of severity score and likelihood 
score. The likelihood score of a risk can be decided based on the attack complexity and attacker’s ease 
of access to necessary resources and attack surface. On the other hand, impact or severity score of a risk 
can  be  determined  by  the  extent  of  environmental  harm,  financial  loss  and  loss  of  confidentiality, 
integrity and availability that can result from a cyber attack. Tables 5 and 6 depict the definitions for 
evaluating the likelihood and severity scores respectively.  

Critical

(4)

(4)

(8)

(12)

(16)

Severe

(3)

(3)

(6)

(9)

(12)

 Severity

Moderate

(2)

(2)

(4)

(6)

(8)

Light

(1)

(1)

Low
(1)

(2)

(3)

Medium Low
(2)

Medium High
(3)

(4)

High 
(4)

                      Likelihood 

Figure 1. Cyber risk assessment matrix. 

Table 5. Likelihood Definition. 

Score 
4 

Label 
High 

Likelihood Definition 
-  Attack  can  be  performed  remotely  or  with  physical 

access to open ports and systems in the vessel. 

-  Can  be  performed  with  very  minimal  or  no  technical 
knowledge  and  with  publicly  available  resources  (e.g., 
Shodan, ExploitDB). 

-  Can be attacked from external network. 

3 

Medium High 

-  Attack can be performed with basic technical knowledge. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
        
Score 

Label 

Likelihood Definition 
-  Can be performed with no change in exploits published 

online. 

-  Possible if the attacker is in either an internal or external 

network. 

2 

Medium Low 

-  Attack  can  be  performed  with  moderate  technical 

knowledge.  

-  Can  be  performed  with  minor  changes  in  exploits 

published online. 

-  Possible if the attacker is in either an internal or external 

network. 

1 

Low 

-  Attack  can  be  performed  with  advanced  technical 

Score 
4 

Label 
Critical 

knowledge. 

-  Requires chaining of multiple exploits. 
-  Requires physical/remote access to the OT system where 

there is restricted access. 

Table 6. Severity Definition. 

Severity Definition 

Consequences of a cyberattack on the vessel operations, 
crew, and the enterprise, such as: 

-  All  operation 

systems,  data, 

and 

resources 

unavailable, impacting safe operations. 

-  Impact on the lives of crew members e.g., collision, 
explosion, sinking of ship, imbalance of ship, loss of 
life. 

-  Economic loss to the enterprise. 

3 

Severe 

Cyberattacks that lead to: 

2 

Moderate 

-  Unauthorised  access  of  the  vessel  network,  system, 
data, and other resources that affect day-to-day vessel 
operations  such  as  navigation,  communication, 
propulsion, generators, cargo. 
-  Disruption of vessel network. 
-  Disruption of ship-to-shore communication link. 

Cyberattack prevents or impairs the normal authorised 
functionality of networks, systems, or applications by 
exhausting resources. 

-  Lack of availability of systems, data. 
-  Misleading communication between OT systems, 

causing damage to the ship, cargo and disrupting its 
operations. 

1 

Light 

Suspected or potential unauthorised access to the vessel 
systems which leads to data breach (sensitive/non-sensitive 
information). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Based on the risk scores determined with the 4x4 risk score matrix, as shown in Figure 1, the OT 
sub-systems and their associated cyber risks are classified into three categories based on their risk scores. 
The  three  categories  are  defined  as  follows:  High  risk  category  (Risk  Score:  12–16),  Medium  risk 
category (Risk score: 3–9) and Low risk category (Risk score: 1–2). Such categorization facilitated us 
to define mitigation measures under each category in the form of a checklist. 

4.3. Checklist with Tiered Security 
Often,  unsafe  practices  such  as  usage  of  default  or  weak  passwords,  outdated  software  or  operating 
systems, etc., are some common causes that lead to cyber attacks. Hence, the most basic and crucial 
security controls must be implemented onboard the ships. Although there is no guarantee that a ship can 
be fully safeguarded from cyber threats, requisite actions can be taken as first line of defence against 
potential cyber threats.  
     In  our  guidelines  we  have  provided  a  checklist,  which  is  a  list  of  mitigation  actions  that  can  be 
enforced in shipboard OT systems to manage the associated risks. To help maritime authorities and ship 
owners determine the cyber hygiene of their vessels, we introduce the concept of security tiers for listing 
the checklist. It consists of three tiers (Tier 1, Tier 2, Tier 3), where a tier of security refers to the urgency 
of cyber risks of a ship that ship owner needs to mitigate or manage. 
     The three security tiers are defined as follows: 

•  Tier 1: Includes cybersecurity measures for managing high risk cyber threats, which means 
that the measures stated under this tier are highly recommended to implement on-board vessels. 
•  Tier 2: Includes cybersecurity measures for managing medium risk cyber threats, which means 

that the security controls mentioned under this tier are recommended to have on-board. 

•  Tier 3: Includes cybersecurity measures for managing low risk cyber threats, which means that 
the measures listed under this tier are good to implement on-board, even though the risk level 
is low. 

     The checklist is designed to help ship owners and maritime authorities assess and improve the cyber 
hygiene  of  their  vessels.  The  checklist  can  be  easily  enforced  since  the  security  measures  are  cost-
effective and actionable.  

5. Conclusions 
Although adoption of emerging technologies in the maritime industry has become increasingly common, 
it opens up many attack surfaces for hackers to exploit. As OT systems play an important role in ship 
operations, it is crucial to protect them from the emerging cyber threats. In view of this, we developed 
guidelines  that  highlight  the  cyber  risks  and  the  impacts  associated  with  OT  systems,  along  with 
mitigation measures to manage those risks. The cyber risk assessment approach defined in the guidelines 
will aid in assessing the risks, whereas the checklist will guide in implementing appropriate security 
controls in shipboard OT systems. Thus, the guidelines will serve as a practicable guide for managing 
the cyber risks in shipboard OT systems and also ensure cyber hygiene in vessels. 
     Our guidelines have been disseminated by the Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore (MPA) to 
owners and operators of the Singapore Registry of Ships for their reference and use. An information 
paper  “Voluntary  cyber  risk  management  guidelines  for  shipboard  operational  technology  (OT) 
systems”  has  also  been  submitted  by  MPA  to  the  105th  session  of  the  IMO’s  Maritime  Safety 
Committee, to make our guidelines freely available to all entities that may find them useful.  

6. References 
[1]       iTrust Centre for Research in Cyber Security 2022 Guidelines for cyber risk management in 

shipboard operational technology systems 
https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/research/projects/maritime-cyber/ 

[2]       International Maritime Organization 2017 Guidelines on Maritime Cyber Risk Management  
[3]       International  Maritime  Organization  2017  Maritime  Cyber  Risk  Management  in  Safety 

Management Systems  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[4]       National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  2018  Framework  for  Improving  Critical 

Infrastructure Cybersecurity  

[5]       BIMCO et al., 2020 Guidelines on Cyber Security Onboard Ships  
[6]       Det Norske Veritas 2016 Cyber Security Resilience Management for Ships and Mobile Offshore 

Units in Operation  

[7]       Det Norske Veritas 2020 Class Guideline Cyber Secure  
[8]       European Network and Information Security Agency 2011 Analysis of Cyber Security Aspects in 

the Maritime Sector  

[9]       European Network and Information Security Agency 2019 Port Cybersecurity - Good practices 

for cybersecurity in the maritime sector  

[10]       Boyes H and Isbell R 2017 Code of Practice Cyber Security for Ships  
[11]       American Bureau of Shipping 2021 Guide for Cybersecurity Implementation for the Marine and 

Offshore Industries ABS Cybersafety Vol 2  

[12]       Rajaram P, Dumbala R, Goh M and Zhou J 2021 A Cyber Risk Study in Shipboard OT Systems 
Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers Singapore 40th Annual Journal 2020/2021 

Acknowledgements 
This work is carried out by iTrust, the Centre for Research in Cyber Security in Singapore University of 
Technology and Design (SUTD) and funded by the Singapore Maritime Institute (SMI) under the grant 
number SMI-2020-MA-04. The team would like to thank the Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore 
(MPA) for the support throughout this project. We would also like to extend our thanks to American 
Bureau  of  Shipping  (ABS),  Klynveld  Peat  Marwick  Goerdeler  (KPMG),  Centre  of  Excellence  in 
Maritime Safety (CEMS) in Singapore Polytechnic (SP), and the Singapore Shipping Association (SSA) 
for their valuable feedback on the draft version guidelines. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
