Cyber security and the Leviathan

Joseph Da Silva
Royal Holloway, University of London
joseph.dasilva.2018@live.rhul.ac.uk

March 11, 2022

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
0
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
5
2
5
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Dedicated cyber-security functions are common in com-
mercial businesses, who are confronted by evolving and
pervasive threats of data breaches and other perilous
security events. Such businesses are enmeshed with the
wider societies in which they operate. Using data gath-
ered from in-depth, semi-structured interviews with 15
Chief Information Security Oﬃcers, as well as six senior
organisational leaders, we show that the work of politi-
cal philosopher Thomas Hobbes, particularly Leviathan,
oﬀers a useful lens through which to understand the con-
text of these functions and of cyber security in Western
society. Our ﬁndings indicate that cyber security within
these businesses demonstrates a number of Hobbesian
features that are further implicated in, and provide signif-
icant beneﬁts to, the wider Leviathan-esque state. These
include the normalisation of intrusive controls, such as
surveillance, and the stimulation of consumption. We
conclude by suggesting implications for cyber-security
practitioners, in particular, the reﬂexivity that these
perspectives oﬀer, as well as for businesses and other
researchers..

1 Introduction

Cyber-security practice is increasingly recognised as more
than a technological exercise. The application of sociolog-
ical and political viewpoints to such practice, particularly
in organisations, is becoming more and more common,
e.g., [29, 117]. In this paper, we build on these founda-
tions by applying a number of lenses based on the work
of Thomas Hobbes to a study of 15 Chief Information
Security Oﬃcers (CISOs) and six senior organisational
stakeholders representing 18 UK-based, but predomi-
nantly multinational, businesses. This work contributes
to and extends cyber security scholarship by considering
cyber security within business as a component of wider
societal power structures. First, this research indicates
that cyber security functions within businesses serve the
interests of the state Leviathan. This positions those
functions as indirect and possibly unwitting agents of
the state, and cyber security itself as beneﬁcial to the
state and associated hegemonies. Second, it shows that
cyber security functions within businesses operate as a
Hobbesian form of control within the micro-societies of
businesses, who are themselves mini-Leviathans. Third,
it provides a novel sociological lens with which to explore

cyber security within businesses and wider societies. We
consider the key contribution of this research as being to
provide a novel viewpoint on cyber-security practice that
enables greater reﬂexivity and reﬂection for practitioners,
as well as oﬀering a pathway for future research.

Our research question, part of a wider study, was ‘what
is the purpose of a CISO in a commercial organisation?’,
and, through our analysis, we applied a range of dif-
ferent sociological concepts in order to derive meaning
from our data. One of those lenses, motivated by mul-
tiple resonances within the data, was that of Hobbes.
Hobbes’ Leviathan, in particular, has had a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on Western political philosophy [9, 117] and it
is from this text that we develop our analytical lenses,
in a similar vein to that followed by Burdon and Coles-
Kemp [29] who applied Smith [116] as a lens to their
study of cyber-security practitioners. Hobbes’ thesis,
expounded in Leviathan and other works that follow a
consistent thread, e.g., [73, 74], is one of structured power
and the establishment of an eﬀective (bourgeois) soci-
ety [91]. His philosophy is both political and moral, and
inﬂuenced a number of other major philosophical works,
e.g., [107, 90]. As others have pointed out, e.g., [37],
there is a need for caution when applying historical con-
cepts to modern situations without acknowledging the
circumstances in which they were authored. However,
given the inﬂuence Hobbesian thinking has had on mod-
ern society [9], it would be “a missed opportunity” [37,
p. 103] to ignore the value that can be oﬀered by this
analytical lens.1

We are not the ﬁrst to look at modern businesses
through a Hobbesian lens, e.g.,
[37, 34] and others
have invoked Hobbes in reference to cyber security,
e.g., [79, 117, 82]. However, we believe we are the ﬁrst to
apply a business-as-Leviathan lens to concepts of cyber
security in business and how these relate to the wider
state Leviathan. By applying sociological lenses to cyber
security within business, we aim to achieve, and encour-
age, greater reﬂexivity [42, p. 119] within both academia
and practice as to both the intended and unintended
consequences of such functions.

Cyber security is inherently multi-disciplinary [65, p.
107] and its sociological aspects have been explored by

1It should also be noted that extensive conversation regarding
Hobbes continues in International Relations and Sociology and it is
not within the scope of this paper to explore these debates. Hobbes
oﬀers a starting point into wider viewpoints from these disciplines
and provides one perspective, rather than an authoritative view
on modern societies.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
many scholars e.g., [117, 38, 45, 109], with direct calls be-
ing made for sociologists to research cyber security within
organisations [44]. Examples of sociological viewpoints
being applied to cyber security within organisations in-
clude the exploration of social practices relating to cyber
security within an organisation [10] and of trust build-
ing [52]. Others have explored the role of the CISO,
e.g., [11, 86, 105], including the importance of the so-
cial aspects of this role [78], and, from a methodologi-
cal perspective, argued for computer security research
to be grounded in an interpretive socio-organisational
paradigm [46] .

We begin by providing a brief conceptual grounding on
Hobbes in Section 2. Next, we describe our methodology
in Section 3 before presenting our research ﬁndings in
Section 4. We unpack these in Section 5, employing a
number of concepts from Hobbes for the purpose of anal-
ysis and interpretation, before concluding in Section 6,
suggesting implications for practitioners and businesses,
as well as future research directions.

2 Conceptual grounding

In this section, we brieﬂy summarise a number of key
concepts from Hobbes which are used as analytical lenses
in Section 5 in order to interpret, and gain a deeper un-
derstanding of the ﬁndings in Section 4. We began with a
ground-up analysis of our data, from which we identiﬁed
a number of references to state power, fear and market
dynamics in relation to cyber security. Subsequently, we
brought these references into conversation with Hobbe-
sian notions, due to the manifest linkages to his work,
using these as a framework on which we built a deeper
interpretation and derivation of meaning from the ﬁnd-
ings. Such an approach is well established in qualitative
research that follows an interpretive paradigm, where
new knowledge is developed through the application of
existing theory to data, e.g.,

[29].

Hobbes has been inﬂuential in the very deﬁnition of
security [83, p. 69]. Other scholars have previously em-
ployed his work in exploring the links between cyber
security and state security, e.g., [38, 82], including as-
pects of surveillance, e.g., [39, 15] and cyber warfare,
e.g., [27]. Others have highlighted the importance of cor-
porations in achieving national security, e.g., [32], with
some problematising this relationship, e.g. [49]. The
threat that cyber security may pose to national and in-
ternational security has also been extensively explored
by others, e.g., [124], including the societal risks posed,
e.g., [114], the impacts that responses to this may have
on freedoms, e.g., [98] and the threats to state power
associated with cyber security risk [32]. The application
of sociological perspectives to businesses is also well es-
tablished, e.g.,
[127, 111, 30]. More recently, Geppert
and D¨orrenb¨acher [59] summarised how power relations
in multinational businesses have been studied from a so-
ciological perspective and highlighted the links to wider
societal power structures. In a broader context, the ap-
plication of social perspectives to risk is well established,
e.g., [17] with the impact, and use of, fear within soci-
ety, e.g., [61, 18, 57] and how this supports wider power

structures, e.g., [97], being a common thread.

We now brieﬂy summarise a number of key concepts
from Hobbes which form the basis of the analysis in
Section 5.

2.1 The state of nature

Leviathan was written during the English Civil War,2 and
this turmoil was a key concern of Hobbes, who believed
that his political science could avoid any recurrence and
achieve a lasting peace. It is premised on an argument
that, without eﬀective governance, humankind would
exist in a state of war, “of every man, against every
man” [72, p. 185].3 In this state, regardless of the exis-
tence of “actuall ﬁghting” [72, p. 186], there is “continuall
feare, and danger of violent death; And the life of man,
solitary, poore, nasty, brutish, and short” [72, p. 186].
The avoidance of this ‘state of nature’, as it is referred to,
e.g., [93], is a primary motivation in the establishment
of the Leviathan, which provides security against it in
exchange for obedience. This is one of the key tenets of
Leviathan; citizens enter into a contract with the state in
which this exchange takes place [16]. The observance of
this contract, according to Hobbes, was fundamental to
achieving peace within a society, and was based on both
“the absolute right of sovereigns to command. . . and the
absolute duty of the people to obey” [21, p. 613]. This
obedience is consensual [35, p. 80] although citizens may
suﬀer diminution as a result [126]. This contract, and
the extension of Hobbes’ ideas, may equate to tyranny,
even totalitarianism [13, 9]. The Leviathan’s “ultimate
end is accumulation of power” [9, p. 180]. The tyran-
nical aspect is something that Hobbes himself does not
deny and is, in fact, “proud to admit” [9, p. 188]; he is
dismissive towards accusations of tyranny, labelling these
as simply the protestatory responses of malcontents [72,
p. 240].

While the Leviathan exists to avoid the state of nature,
it beneﬁts from the continued presence of this threat
in the minds of its citizens. Without this threat, the
Leviathan’s power and dominion over its citizens is di-
minished; in order to exchange obedience for protection,
there needs to be some peril, otherwise the equation is
imbalanced. Security of citizens from threat is “[t]he
raison d’ˆetre of the state” [9, p. 181] (italics in original).
Sovereignty is both achieved and maintained through
fear [89]. Hobbes describes how “that which enclineth
men least to break the Laws, is Fear” [72, p. 343] and,
further, that fear may in fact be “the onely thing. . . that
makes men keep them [i.e., laws]” [72, p. 343]. He be-
lieved that “feare of some coercive Power” [72, p. 196],
owned by the sovereign, was necessary in order to make
citizens keep their promises [103]. Barkan, discussing
Esposito [50], describes “the sovereign’s power to expose
life to death as opposing but also interlinked sides of
a persistent immunitary [sic] dynamic” [13, p. 89]. In

2Although it was a development of earlier ideas [2].
3Leviathan is “covertly gendered” [33, p. 118], with “the im-
portant actors in life [being] men. . . or very rarely. . . masculinized
women” [33, p. 118]. The primacy Hobbes provides to men is
clear throughout the text, and he was “writing for a male audi-
ence. . . from a male point of view” [47, p. 635n10].

2

other words, it is beneﬁcial for the sovereign for threat to
life to exist, so that the sovereign can oﬀer protection to
the citizenry from such a threat; if this threat ceases to
exist, or ceases to be perceived to exist, then the power
of the sovereign in commanding obedience is diminished.

emergency, warfare and power.
Permanent
Within the domain of International Relations (IR), the
concept of permanent emergency has been established
and discussed by a number of scholars, e.g., [97]. This
refers to the perpetuation of a state of threat, whereby a
population’s security, and often its way of life, are sub-
ject to, or positioned as being subject to, various forms
of continuing menace. This environment facilitates the
establishment of various responses to those threats that
restrict the freedoms of citizens, in the name of ‘secu-
rity’ [97, 28], a concept which has many parallels with
Hobbes’ state of nature.

In a Hobbesian society, there is a never-ending need
for the state to expand its power; “only by constantly
extending its authority and only through the process of
power accumulation can it remain stable” [9, p. 184]. If
such a society were to achieve “complete security”, then
the state’s power would crumble [9, p. 184]. Therefore,
there is a need for the continual provision of “new props
from the outside” [9, p. 184], such as novel threats. The
“ever-present possibility of war guarantees the Common-
wealth a prospect of permanence because it makes it
possible for the state to increase its power at the expense
of other states” [9, p. 184-5]. According to Hobbes, “[i]t
is rationally required to seek peace, but when peace is
unattainable it is rationally allowed to wage war” [60, p.
245]. Arendt further elaborates the need for a “never-
ending accumulation of power [as being] necessary for the
protection of a never-ending accumulation of capital” [9,
p. 186] and how this has underpinned imperialism and
indeed modern society.4

Although a Hobbesian state may hold supreme power,
its citizens still hold the right to rebel against it if such
rebellion is for self-defence [125]. As a precaution against
such an eventuality, the Hobbesian state must “have
recourse to arms to enforce civil order” [125, p. 221]. In
De Cive, Hobbes describes how “[a]ll judgement therefore
in a City belongs to him who hath the swords” [74, p. 48].
But the state must also remain trusted by its citizens,
particularly in its determination of what is and is not
a threat [125], and the most important control that the
sovereign should have is over “language (which deﬁnes
what is)” [125, p. 219-220].

Morality and threat.
In a Hobbesian society, deﬁn-
ing ‘what is’ includes deﬁning what is right and what
is wrong. Hobbes viewed morality as subjective, and
considered it as the responsibility of the Leviathan to
determine what qualiﬁed as “good and bad, true and
false, right and wrong” [125, p. 230].5 For Hobbes “truth
is a function of logic and language” [125, p. 217] and

4Modern globalisation practices being equivalent with imperi-
alistic ones [36]. Hobbes himself was actively involved in colonial
enterprise [80].

5Hobbes’ morality continues to be a topic of some interest, and

debate, for many scholars, e.g. [88].

“what is granted to that authority [i.e., the Leviathan] is
the right to decide among irresolvably contested truths:
to provide the authoritative criteria for what is” [125, p.
219]. This “control of normative doctrine” [89] assigned
to the Leviathan means that as well as deﬁning what
is right and wrong, the state can deﬁne who is right
and wrong, and of the latter, what threats they pose. If
sovereignty is predicated on, or maintained using, fear,
and if the sovereign has authority to determine what is to
be feared, then it is in the sovereign’s interest for there to
exist “demons . . . villains” [97, pp. 119, 223], otherwise
not only is the state’s authority in question, as its citi-
zens are providing obedience without receiving anything
in exchange, as there is nothing to be protected from,
but even its identity as a state may be threatened [70].
Hobbes does not refer to the beneﬁts accruing to the
state of maintaining the existence of speciﬁc threats, nor
encourage their invention, however, in a criticism of reli-
gious authority, he does point out “who, that is in fear
of Ghosts, will not bear great respect to those that can
make the Holy Water, that drives them from him?” [72,
p. 692].

The role of advisers. Hobbes discusses the value of
“Counsell” [72, p. 303], distinguishing this from “Com-
mand” in that the latter “is directed to a mans [sic] own
beneﬁt” whereas the former is “to the beneﬁt of another
man” [72, p. 303]. He deﬁnes “the ﬁrst condition of a
good Counsellour. . . [as being that] his Ends, and Inter-
est, be not inconsistent with the Ends and Interest of him
he Counselleth” [72, p. 307] (italics in original) and de-
scribes how “the Ability of Counselling proceedeth from
Experience, and long study. . . No man is presumed to be
a good Counsellour, but in such Businesse, as he hath
not onely been much versed in, but hath also much medi-
tated on, and considered ” [72, p. 307] (italics in original).
He further adds that “The wit required for Counsel. . . is
Judgement” [72, p. 308] and believed that “[t]he most
able Counsellours, are they that have least hope of bene-
ﬁt by giving evill Counsell, and most knowledge of those
things that conduce to the Peace, and Defence of the
Common-wealth” [72, p. 391].

2.2 Education and discipline

Hobbes “sought to cool men oﬀ, to pacify them, to drive
them into the waiting arms of whoever might be ruling
with the frightening imagery of a state of nature” [35,
p. 88]. One of the mechanisms through which he in-
tended to achieve this was through education. Hobbes
had a clear view on education as being authoritarian
and as being a role, indeed, a duty, of the state [21].
What Hobbes wished to be taught, according to Bejan,
was Leviathan’s “‘doctrine’. . . This doctrine was no more
than the existence of a ‘mutual relation between pro-
tection and obedience’, which required an ‘inviolable
observation’” [21, p. 613]. Hobbes believed that the
sovereign’s power should be “utterly authoritarian in
principle. . . and vigilantly oversee the intellectual life of
his subjects from the cradle to the universities, and from
there to the grave” [21, p. 621].

3

Hobbes saw the family unit as playing a crucial role
in initiating this obedience; the family is “Leviathan
writ small” [35, p. 77] (italics in original). Hobbes saw
parents as “representatives of the sovereign power” [21,
p. 620], and that “[b]y direction of the sovereign, the
connection between protection and obedience is to be
made quite clear” [35, p. 82]. “In teaching a child the
nature of obedience in the family, a parent is teaching
the nature of obedience in the state” [35, p. 86] and “[t]o
teach one’s children that their obedience is due when
protection is given is to learn the same lesson for one’s
self” [35, p. 88]. The control over language that the
Leviathan holds, as discussed above, underpins Hobbes’
emphasis on education rather than force as the method
by which the Leviathan maintained power [125], such
control also helping sustain its identity [22]. However,
Bejan [21, p. 619, p623n17] argues that Hobbes intended
to stress discipline rather than education or training
which are alternative translations of the disciplina used
by Hobbes in De Cive.6 Hobbes did appear to consider
discipline and chastisement to be productive motivators
for learning, with “negative reinforcement. . . [being] an
eﬀective teacher” [35, p. 85]. Beyond educational disci-
pline, Hobbes believed in the value of punishment, for
the purpose of “correction, either of the oﬀender, or of
others by his example” [72, p. 389]. He considered that
“the severest Punishments are to be inﬂicted for those
Crimes, that are of most Danger to the Publique” [72, p.
389].

2.3 Leviathan and mini-Leviathan

As the family was a mini-Leviathan, so too are corpora-
tions. Hobbes saw corporations as intrinsic parts of the
Leviathan, even as “vital” [80, p. 66] to it. However, he
also identiﬁed them as potential threats, as “wormes in
the entrayles of a naturall man” [72, p. 375], and in order
to address these threats, they needed to be adequately
governed [80]. This view of corporations as potential
threats is similar to his view of children as potential
threats to the mini-Leviathan of the family [74, 35] if
they are not adequately controlled (through education
and punishment) and indeed, Hobbes uses a parent-child
metaphor when referring to a form of corporation [80, 72].
The mini-Leviathan of the corporation may pose a
particular threat to the state-as-Leviathan where it is
a multinational and therefore not subject to a single
sovereign power [37, 34]. This can result in those cor-
porations being able to direct and inﬂuence legislation
and regulation diﬀerently in the diﬀerent states they op-
erate in [106], frustrating attempts to achieve consistent
control. Hobbes was concerned that companies would
become so strong that they aﬀected the Leviathan’s own
power [80]. Arendt points out that Hobbes could see
multinational corporations as the logical endpoint of the
“acquisition of wealth conceived of as a never-ending pro-
cess. . . for the accumulating process must sooner or later
force open all existing territorial limits” [9, p. 189].

Barkan argues that “corporate power and sovereign
power are ontologically linked ” [12, p. 4] (italics in origi-

nal). The “entanglement” [66, p. 741] between corporate
businesses and states provides a link between the concept
of state Leviathans and the corporation as both agent-
of-Leviathan7 and as mini-Leviathan in its own right.
Echoing Chapman [35], Heath et al. refer to a corpora-
tion as “a society writ small”, but also as “an actor within
the larger society in which it operates” [69, p. 437]. Part
of the role that a corporation plays as agent-of-Leviathan
is in the generation of “social wealth” [37, p. 123] and
partly through enacting regulatory control over the citi-
zenry [12], even acting as a form of police [13, 55, 101].

Viability and survival. Hobbesian logic is based
upon the avoidance of “death, pain, and disability” [60,
p. 243] and that such “natural reason . . . makes use
of instrumental reason and verbal reason to achieve its
goals” [60, p. 248], that is, “the avoidance of an avoidable
death” [60, p. 249]. Hobbes believed that “the terrour of
present death” was even a valid excuse for an individual
to commit a crime “because no Law can oblige a man
to abandon his own preservation” [72, p. 345], and de-
scribed how “since every man hath a Right to preserve
himself, he must also be allowed a Right to use all the
means, and do all the actions, without which He cannot
Preserve himself ” [74, p. 5] (italics in original). However,
such is the drive for self-preservation, that, without the
governance of the Leviathan, this would lead to the ‘war
of all against all’ [72], due to the “independence of the in-
dividuals in determining the best means to preserve their
own life” [80, p. 74]. As well as self-preservation of indi-
viduals, Hobbes is “unequivocal that self-preservation is
the primary goal of those forming a commonwealth” [92,
p. 115]. Hobbes’ concerns regarding survival, both of
individuals and of the Leviathan itself,8 are echoed in
discussions in classical organisational literature regarding
a business’s concern with ensuring its own continued
viability, e.g., [20, 94].

3 Methodology

We collected data between October 2019 and July 2020
through 21 semi-structured interviews and by download-
ing each company’s most recent annual report. 15 CISOs
and six organisational leaders were interviewed, as shown
in Appendix A. The organisational leaders comprised
two Chief Executive Oﬃcers (CEOs), two Chief Finan-
cial Oﬃcers (CFOs), one Non-Executive Director (NED)
and one Chief Information Oﬃcer (CIO). The organisa-
tions represented a range of diﬀerent industries, although
with a particular weighting in one sector. As we began
to notice repetition of comments from participants, we
considered that data saturation may be approaching,
however, data saturation is a problematic concept [100].
Ultimately we made a decision to stop gathering data
on “[t]he adequacy of the sample . . . [not] solely on the
basis of the number of participants but the appropriate-
ness of the data” [100, p. 195]. We regularly revisited
and revalidated this decision during the analysis phase,

7A possibly unintended consequence, which we argue in more

6In which Hobbes states “Man is made ﬁt for Society not by

detail in Section 5.3.

Nature, but by Education” [74, p. 8].

8Through the avoidance of war.

4

to continually conﬁrm our judgement that the sample
size was adequate. The use of annual reports as well as
interview data provided triangulation, as well as the gath-
ering of multiple perspectives through the interviewing
of non-CISO participants.9

One of the researchers is a practising CISO and used
their own network of professional contacts to recruit par-
ticipants, eﬀectively producing a “snowball sample” [67,
p. 135]. Access to Board members is diﬃcult outside of
a professional environment and, therefore, these partici-
pants were approached through CISOs who were partici-
pating in the research, as well as our personal networks.
Participants were not compensated for their participation
in this research. Interviews took place either face-to-face
at their own oﬃce locations or online, the latter in re-
sponse to the COVID-19 pandemic which commenced
during data collection. We recorded the interviews and
transcribed them as soon as possible following each inter-
view, capturing non-recorded aspects such as body lan-
guage and spatial information, in a handwritten journal
immediately following each interview. Interview guides
were prepared with prompts to be used as necessary,
however, interviews were approached as conversations
rather than extractions of data and, therefore, these were
not used in a strict manner, following Hermanowicz [71].
The majority of Participants, and all of those in CISO
roles, self-identiﬁed as male. In addition, there was lim-
ited ethnic diversity in the study and all participants
can also be considered to be ‘elites’. This lack of di-
versity, however, reﬂects a broader lack of diversity in
the cyber-security industry. We received approval from
our our institution’s Research Ethics Committee for self-
certiﬁcation before beginning the research and designed
the study to minimise both the collection of personally
identiﬁable information and the risk of indirect identiﬁ-
cation. Participants were provided with consent forms
and information sheets two working days before each in-
terview which explained how data would be anonymised
and protected. Participants were anonymised, with ran-
domly assigned pseudonyms being utilised which, in this
paper, have been substituted for participant numbers.
We redacted any sensitive or potentially identiﬁable infor-
mation during transcription and destroyed all recordings
following transcription.

Interview transcripts were analysed inductively and
coded in multiple cycles using NVivo 12 [3] and applying
a variety of coding types, following [108]. Subsequently,
we applied a deductive approach in order to categorise
and rationalise the codes. A similar method was used to
analyse annual reports, however, as this was performed
subsequent to the interview coding cycles, coding be-
came more deductive, as codes and concepts determined
at the previous inductive stage were, consciously and
unconsciously, reused. We developed themes from our
data following [25, 26]. Following others, e.g. [108], we
produced analytic memos throughout as well as using dia-
grams to explore relationships and to identify and explore
themes developed from the data, again following [25] and
combining several methods from Salda˜na [108].

9Due to diﬃculties in obtaining access to these senior leaders,
it was not possible to obtain multiple perspectives from every
organisation, as had been our original intention.

As has been established within cyber-security schol-
arship, e.g. [29], qualitative research that follows an in-
terpretive paradigm is an eﬀective means of studying
cyber-security practice. The use of semi-structured inter-
views to gather data is also well established, e.g. [113, 11,
96, 29], as is analysis of annual reports to derive insight
about businesses [81, 129], including the use of document
coding [129] as discussed further below.

4 Findings

Our thematic analysis produced multiple themes, a num-
ber of which had Hobbesian connotations and we present
these below.10 Section 4.1 shows these organisations
as mini-Leviathans, Section 4.2 covers aspects of sur-
vival articulated by these businesses and Section 4.3 sets
out these organisations’ role in wider society.11 Certain
quotations are not attributed to limit the risk of identi-
ﬁcation. No direct quotations from annual reports are
included for the same reason and where single quotation
marks are used, these indicate paraphrasing.

4.1 The organisation as Leviathan-writ-

small

The organisations in this study demonstrated a number
of features that indicated their operation as miniature
societies. These included references to the organisation
having both a culture and ‘values’, which were observed
in the majority of annual reports and approximately half
of the interview transcripts. The culture of the organi-
sation aﬀected how the participants viewed their ability
to inﬂuence cyber-security outcomes. This included a
continuum regarding risk posture being described by
many participants, from “ludicrously conservative” to
less conservative (CISO8). These organisations regulated
employee behaviour, indicated by speciﬁc mentions of
mandatory standards of behaviour and conduct, on which
staﬀ were trained, measured and, in some cases, penalised
for non-compliance. Organisations in this study expected
their staﬀ to comply with their policies, adhere to their
‘core values’ and even to adjust their ‘mindset’ as part
of working for the company. CISOs described having
responsibilities to “introduce the right sort of behaviours
and judgements in our workforce” (CISO2).

Cyber security was an area of both discipline and
punishment. Part of the role of the cyber-security func-
tion in these organisations was “to hold feet to the ﬁre”
(CISO5). Compliance with security policies and stan-
dards was mandated and failure to comply could result
in “[being] on a disciplinary” (CISO3), with staﬀ fac-
ing “disciplinary action . . . even if they’ve done nothing
wrong” (CISO12). Despite a number of CISOs being
keen to avoid the characterisation, cyber-security teams
were seen as performing a policing function. This in-
cluded speciﬁc references to being “the police” as well

10Other themes will be explored in future research.
11Throughout the remainder of the paper, we use ‘business’ and
‘organisation’ interchangeably for ease of reading. For the avoid-
ance of doubt, all of the organisations referred to are commercial
businesses.

5

as more subtle references to “stop[ping] people having
fun” (CISO1) and “trying to ﬁnd [staﬀ] doing wrong”
(CISO8).

As well as disciplinary action, the organisations in this
study linked staﬀ remuneration, particularly at a senior
level, to cyber security through their performance ob-
jectives, both explicitly and implicitly. These included
multiple references to punishment of staﬀ through “claw-
backs” of bonus payments in particular. Triggers for the
latter included reputational impact, direct losses, regula-
tory investigations, contractual breaches and, commonly,
general failures in risk management. More broadly, remu-
neration was dependent on a number of factors including
both risk management and ethical performance, areas
that were commonly linked with cyber security. In some
cases, cyber-security objectives were described as speciﬁc
measures relating to bonus payments, as were measures
relating to the completion of mandatory compliance train-
ing.

Cyber security was also associated with state punish-
ments, whether through ﬁnes, “other sanctions . . . from
government” (CFO2) and even incarceration. Some of
those punishments were viewed as useful by participants.
CISO9 described how “it was only when the likes of
Marriott Hotels or BA [British Airways] started to get
massive ﬁnes relating to personal data that suddenly
Boards sat up and took notice”. The annual reports also
indicated that these organisations were concerned that
cyber-security failings would lead to punishments, either
from regulators or through legal action, with explicit ref-
erences to enforcement and censure that were considered
to be threats to organisational viability, as discussed in
Section 4.2.

4.1.1 Cyber security as pedagogy

As well as applying discipline, a key role of the CISOs
in our study was educating staﬀ. References to cyber-
security education were made by multiple participants
as well as across the majority of annual reports. This
involved not just “making sure they’re [i.e., staﬀ] edu-
cated well” (CISO3) but also “[making] cyber-security
meaningful for them. . . on a personal level” (CISO11).
There was a need to “educate” because cyber security
was “another language” (CISO5). Senior stakeholders
were also included, and their education was speciﬁcally
called out in a number of annual reports, particularly
the recency of such education.

Various methods used by these organisations to educate
staﬀ and stakeholders on cyber security were mentioned,
including “visual breakdowns” (CISO2) and “games”
(CISO11), as well as testing of staﬀ, particularly through
simulated phishing attacks. Many of the references in the
annual reports to this education included the modiﬁer
‘mandatory’. There were indications of the deliberate use
of fear in relation to cyber security, such as the use of
“war games [with senior leaders] . . . and you watch them
shit themselves” (CISO11). CEO1 described the value
in using fear, stating that “[when staﬀ] see the art of
the possible and it’s scary . . . they say okay, I’m gonna
whine less”. CISOs acknowledged that “it’s very diﬃcult
for a conversation [about cyber security] not to gravitate

back to being scary and inevitable” (CISO8) but were
conscious of the risk of “scaremongering” (CISO5).

Cyber security was consistently characterised by par-
ticipants as having an ethical or moral dimension, with
‘rights and wrongs’ relating to cyber security being a com-
mon refrain observed throughout the data. One CISO
described their department as “the moral police force of
the company” (CISO8). Cyber security personnel had
a “duty to communicate risk” (CFO2) and to “hold [the
organisation] to account to make sure they’re doing the
right thing” (CISO7). Cyber-security failures at a single
organisation could have wider societal impacts; one par-
ticipant described their company as “the soft underbelly”
for their customers, who themselves supported wider
societal goals such as distribution of food. The articula-
tion of cyber threats in moral terms was also consistent.
This included references to cyber threat actors as “bad
guys” (CISO9) and a statement that “the mission [of
the cyber-security function] really is to protect against
crime” (CISO8).

4.1.2 The CISO as advisor

As well as being an educator, the CISO for these or-
ganisations also performed a role as a form of advisor
to the organisation. This was summed up by one se-
nior leader who described the need to be told “no you
don’t need to be worried about that, yes you do need
to be worried about this” (CEO1). Many CISOs articu-
lated this role explictly, such as being “a trusted advisor
to the business . . . to provide guidance, provide advice”
(CISO12). Annual reports also indicated the advisory
role that specialist risk management functions, including
cyber security, provided to these businesses, describing
the use of such advisers in providing both predictability
and interpretation of uncertainty. Such advisers were
trusted to provide “judgements” (CISO2).

CISOs were aware that their functions were “going to
be there for the long term that’s for sure” (CISO3), with
senior leaders agreeing that it was “certainly not gonna
get less important” (CFO1). However, CISOs in this
study indicated concerns that they could be subject to
punishment through job losses. They were “not under any
illusions [as] to where accountability sits” (CISO3). They
knew that they “wouldn’t escape the spotlight” (CISO2)
and “that it’s implicit with our role, if something goes
wrong, you’re the guy [that gets ﬁred]” (CISO12).

4.2 Viability and survival

The large majority of businesses in our study expressed
cyber-security threat as a survival-level concern, with
cyber-security incidents being able to “destroy the busi-
ness” (CEO1) or “bring the company to its knees [and]
drive us to bankruptcy” (NED1). In many cases cyber
security was explicitly referenced in the viability state-
ments made in their annual reports.12 Cyber-security
incidents were positioned as threats to this viability by

12All organisations in this study made reference to various threats
to their ongoing viability in their annual reports, however, this is
unsurprising given that such statements are a requirement of the
UK Corporate Governance Code [43].

6

many of these organisations, with fear of regulatory ac-
tion and associated ﬁnes and reputational damage being
a prime concern. Such incidents were considered as exis-
tential threats and phrases such as “absolute catastrophe”
(CISO11) and “disastrous” (CISO9) were common. Cy-
ber security functions were, in a number of cases, seen as
assuagement against this threat to viability, with CISOs
providing “a level of comfort” (CISO14) to their senior
leaders.

Cyber security threats were considered to be both per-
manent and fearful. They were “really scary” (NED1)
and resulted in “sleepless nights” (CISO1). For these par-
ticipants, it was “when not if [a cyber-security incident
occurs]” (CISO14), and they needed to “accept the fact
that we are going to be compromised” (CISO11). This
normalisation of cyber-security incidents was also indi-
cated by senior leaders, with them being characterised
as “the kind of things that happen all the time” (CEO2).
NED1 described how cyber security was “gonna get worse
not better”, with CFO1 describing cyber security as “a
continuing moving goal post”. Cyber-security threats
were “so sophisticated [and] change almost on a daily
basis” (CISO14), and there were “troubled times ahead”
(CISO4). Similar statements were observed in the annual
reports, with references to the ‘sophisticated’ and ‘con-
tinual’ nature of cyber threat being common throughout.
As well as explicit references to the potentially catas-
trophic nature of a cyber-security incident, we also ob-
served more implicit references to fear in connection
with cyber security, such as mentions of cyber crime
and cyber terrorism. Threats were also seen to originate
from other sources, including hacktivists and, in particu-
lar, nation states. One CISO described how “the whole
concept of state sponsored threat actors is frightening”
(CISO14). Some of these states were named, e.g., “the
Chinese . . . somebody sitting in Siberia . . . North Koreans”
(CEO1), “Iran . . . China . . . Russia” (CISO8), whereas
other references were generic, unnamed nation states.
Explicit references to cyber warfare were also observed,
with cyber security being a “method of attack against
the nation” (CISO3). Cyber security was positioned as a
component of national security by multiple participants
and annual reports, highlighting their organisation’s role
within this, which we describe further below. Metaphors
of war in connection with cyber security were common
throughout the data, including “attack”, “defend”, “war
stories” and “war games”.13

panies made through investment, through community
support and the delivery of ‘critical services’ to that
society. Annual reports included language relating to
societal obligations and responsibilities, societal impacts,
and even direct references to the social contract. Partic-
ipants also mentioned the role that their organisations
played in wider society. Some referred to their organ-
isations as being critical to the functioning of the UK
economy, while many referred to the role that they played
in national security. One organisation’s cyber-security
department was assessed by a UK military agency be-
fore they were “allowed to bid” on a contract, with “the
quality of the cyber-security team [being] very much the
litmus test”. Another organisation’s CISO described
being “conscious of . . . our responsibility . . . to defend
against [a cyber attack on the country]” while one of
the CEOs described being obligated by government to
take actions in relation to national security. Other refer-
ences to the role these organisations played in national
cyber security included participating in national security
working groups and being regularly assessed by secu-
rity services and other government departments.14 It
appeared there were double standards regarding eval-
uation by government, with government departments
charged with assessing these businesses responding with
“oh Lord no, we would never achieve it” when asked if
they complied with the same requirements. There were
also references to to invitation-only and industry-speciﬁc
information exchanges with representatives from state
security services where speciﬁc threats were shared with
attendees as well as indications of more indirect gov-
ernmental inﬂuence. The latter included senior leaders
being invited by government departments to participate
in “roundtable discussions” and being encouraged to
utilise certain frameworks. One CEO described how “the
UK government has been quite vocal [on cyber security]”,
with another CEO stating that “[governments, plural]
keep an eye out, which works in ways that neither you or
I need to know how it works but they keep an eye out”.
A number of annual reports alluded to potential nega-
tive impacts on revenue if the focus of their government
customers moved away from security-related products
and services. It was also noted that a number of these
organisations had senior leaders who either currently or
previously held positions within the military, government
or quasi-government organisations.

4.3.1 Security versus freedom

4.3 The organisation in wider society

Virtually all of the organisations in this study articulated,
through their annual reports, the broader societal role
that they played, and the beneﬁts that society derived
as a result. These included the contributions those com-

13Other stereotypically masculine language and concepts were
observed throughout much of the data. These included participants
referring to their businesses being like a “bearpit” (CISO6), need-
ing to avoid being “too soft” (CISO13) and being “browbeaten”
(CISO1). Similar language was seen in the annual reports, with
the use of conventionally masculine concepts such as aggression,
conﬂict, strength and even penetration being common. Both the
interview data and the annual reports also featured multiple refer-
ences to competition, another masculine archetype.

A perceived dualism between security and freedom in
relation to cyber security was indicated within the data.
CISO4 described there being “an amount of disruption
that is necessary in order to do the right thing”. Security
controls were “very tight” (CFO2) with an expectation
that they would “get tighter and tighter” (NED1). CEO1
linked this to fear, describing how “the more that we go
and scare ourselves . . . the more the organization becomes
willing to tolerate some inconvenience in what it does”.

14One participant described having recently been visited by
representatives from the UK intelligence services directly preceding
our interview for this research, which may have aﬀected their
responses.

7

Organisations in this study surveilled their staﬀ in
a number of ways. These included monitoring of com-
pany vehicle use, for both health and safety and ethical
reasons, i.e., vehicle emissions, as well as monitoring of
technology systems for cyber security and IT reasons. As
well as surveilling their staﬀ, there were also examples
of organisations surveilling their customers in terms of
how their products and services were used by them, al-
though with an acknowledgement from CISO8 that “it is
a tough balance, not everybody wants it [i.e., monitoring
of product usage] . . . some people are really paranoid”.
They described diﬃculties in achieving “a balance be-
tween inspection and surveillance”, and potential impacts
upon “free speech”, with their customers holding diﬀer-
ent views ranging from “absolutely no problem [with
monitoring]” to monitoring of activity being “abhorrent”.
There were also indications of deference, even servility,
to wider surveillance occurring at state level, as per the
ﬁnal CEO comment in Section 4.3.

5 Discussion

In this section, we unpack our ﬁndings by applying a
number of Hobbesian concepts in an attempt to provide
deeper meaning. We ﬁrst describe in Section 5.1 how
Hobbes can be used to read the threat to survival that
cyber security posed to these organisations. Next, in
Section 5.2 we apply Hobbes to cyber-security related
discipline and punishment enacted by these organisations.
Finally, in Section 5.3 we explore the wider role of cyber
security in the context of the state Leviathan.

5.1 “Perpetuall feare”

Cyber security is often characterised as fearful, with cyber
threats being both permanent and evolving [48], and cy-
ber attacks being seen as inevitable [104]. The businesses
in our study seemed to agree, with cyber threat appear-
ing to be normalised. Participants, both CISO and non-
CISO, considered these threats to be enduring and busi-
nesses needed to accept that they would be compromised.
This implies a “perpetuall cyber warre” [117, p. 120].
These businesses existed in “continuall feare” [72, p. 186],
threatened by “death, poverty, or other calamity” [72,
p. 169] arising from something, i.e, cyber security, that
was not well understood, even mystical,15 as “perpetuall
feare, [is] always accompanying mankind in the ignorance
of causes” [72, p. 169-70].16 The role of the CISO may
be valued as one “that can make the Holy Water” [72,
p. 692] that provides protection from fearful things, and,
therefore, is motivated to maintain the fear and dread
that underpins their value.17

15The impacts of cyber-security threats may be considered by
these organisations as ‘real’ but the threats themselves, including
their sources, may be considered more ephemeral. The mystical
nature of cyber security was a separate theme developed from the
data which will be explored in future research.

16The state of nature may even be considered as a “secular
hell” [21, p. 618]. Similar metaphors have been used with reference
to cyber security, such as “cyber hell” [110, p. 480] and “cyber
apocalypse” [117, p. 105].

17The potential that this oﬀers for ‘cyber sophistry’ will be

explored in future research.

Survival was clearly a concern for these businesses.
Cyber security was positioned as a threat to viability
by many of these organisations, with fear of regulatory
action and associated ﬁnes and reputational damage in
particular being a prime concern. Such concerns with
viability and survival, arguably the primary motivation
for businesses [20], are analogous with seeking to avoid
punishment that could lead to “pain, and disability” and,
ultimately, “death” [60, p. 243]. The punishments they
sought to avoid were enacted by the larger Leviathan
of the state and, as mini-Leviathans, these businesses
cascaded this concept, instituting their own mechanisms
of punishment for their employees, as we discuss below.
Internal experts were positioned by many of these or-
ganisations as ‘guards’ that protected them against the
various harms that they faced. Cyber security functions
were seen as assuagement against threats to business
viability and helped these businesses to manage the un-
certainty they experienced as a result of these threats
and ensure their continued survival. This allowed them
to shape their future to a certain extent, aligning with
Hobbes’ encouragements towards continued attentiveness
to threats [117], but also provided a resource that artic-
ulated and predicted those threats, based on both past,
and imagined future, events.

5.1.1 Permanent cyber emergency

Many of these organisations played a role in national
cyber security, including participating in invitation-only
national security working groups. Such fora, in which
government intelligence services share details of cyber
threats with speciﬁc industries, demonstrate the role that
governments play in maintaining a state of permanent
cyber emergency. They provide a mechanism through
which governments can both maintain fear and amplify
it. This could be achieved through exaggeration or even
fabrication, particularly when considering the reliance of
the state Leviathan on the persistence of this fear.18

A permanent emergency oﬀers beneﬁts as a “master
narrative” [115, p. 18] that can be invoked to support
actions taken by businesses and individuals within that
business, whether to justify investment or to justify re-
strictive controls such as surveillance, as we discuss in
Section 5.3. The positioning of cyber security as war-
fare, which is a narrative repeated by both media and
governments [117], establishes that concept in the minds
of all parties to that war, whether attacker or attacked.
Adversaries, or even just those who disagree, will respond
to the narrative of cyber security-as-war and then treat
it as such, focusing on attack and defence, rather than
seeing it as anything else, for example, as a collective
problem of identifying and addressing weaknesses that
threaten all. This could lead to actions that have un-
intended consequences, such as state purchasing, and
[76]. Cyber security-
hoarding, of vulnerabilities, e.g.

18The use of falsehoods in the service of continued peace was
something that Hobbes appeared to support [72, p. 703] [8, p. 224,
pp. 290-1], although, as Bejan summarises, this reading is debated
and other scholars have found his intentions “far less sinister” [21,
p. 623n13]. However, Hobbes was clear that the authority of
the sovereign was absolute, even in matters of “Prophecy” [72, p.
466-469].

8

as-collective-problem could be considered a “ﬂattened
narrative” [51], with preference instead provided to the
cyber security-as-war concept which supports the main-
tenance of existing power structures. This can also be
considered as indexing a “meta-narrative” [118, p. 3]
of existing or ‘traditional’ enemies [117], and the “su-
periority of . . . the West” [97, p. 172], as suggested by
the references to (ex-)communist states19 observed in
the data. There is an almost paradoxical relevance of
both Foucault’s and von Clausewitz’s perspectives on
war, with cyber war being a “mere continuation of policy
by other means” [121, p. 12] and cyber politics being
“the continuation of war by other means” [54, p. 15].20
Each of these also provides economic beneﬁts [97], as we
discuss below.

Positioning cyber security as an existential threat, as
a war with “apocalyptic” [117, p 121] consequences, may
also allow for exceptionalism and deviance from existing
laws, both national and supranational. Hobbes explicitly
permitted deﬁance of law if motivated “by the terrour of
present death” [72, p. 345]. Such exceptionalism based
on existential threat can be observed in modern societies,
e.g. [5, 62, 63], including in relation to cyber security
threats [122]. References to national security also connect
with this warfare motif. As the nation is ‘under threat’
then there is a collective sense of conﬂict and, therefore,
a suggestion that everyone has to play their part.

The fear generated by these threats propels citizens
into “the waiting arms of whoever might be ruling” [35,
p. 88]. Such fear may be a “necessity-justiﬁcation” [35,
p.
89] for enduring power, and, as Chapman sug-
gests, it is straightforward to conceive of such “justi-
ﬁcation . . . [occurring] at the state level, as a function
of real or manufactured inter-state crises” [35, p. 89],
particularly with regard to threats that are hard to un-
derstand or somewhat ephemeral in nature, such as those
related to cyber security. If cyber-security threats result
in fearful and bewildered citizens, those citizens are easier
to moderate. Educating citizens on, or even communicat-
ing the existence of, cyber threats may couple “paranoia
with paciﬁcation” [35, p. 90].

Businesses that publicly articulate their cyber-security
capability, through references to the existence of dedi-
cated personnel and the actions they are taking to mit-
igate cyber risk, are demonstrating their strength and
their readiness for war in a “calculated presentation” [54,
p. 92]. Such pronouncements, particularly in annual
reports, also serve to maintain the organisation’s power
by “memorializ[ing]” what the organisation has achieved,
arguably also creating “an obligation” [54, p. 67] for
future leaders of that organisation.

5.1.2 Cyber discourse

The collocation of certain words observed in the data,
e.g. ‘sophisticated’ and ‘threat’, which are also seen in
broader cyber-security discourse, e.g., [99], may carry “en-
coded ideologies” [22, p. 113] that also serve to maintain

19Who are also competing state Leviathans.
20It is outside the scope of this paper to explore these arguments
in more detail, however, future research will apply a number of
Foucauldian lenses to our Findings.

power structures. References to ‘nation state’ alongside
‘cyber threat’ carry an association of war being waged,
particularly by previously established ‘enemies of the
West’. As “packaged, homogenized violence” [14, p. 160],
such references not only maintain hegemonical power
(‘we’ are threatened by ‘them’ therefore we must take
action) but also provides a means by which citizens are
molliﬁed, arguably even tranqullised, as well as driving
consumption [14], as we discuss in Section 5.3.

Hobbes saw the importance of the Leviathan having
control over language. By maintaining discourse that
deﬁnes, or repeats, who and what are threats, and the
relative urgency of those threats, the state can main-
tain broader narratives of fear, war, friend and enemy,
good and bad, and right and wrong. Such narratives
in connection with cyber security featured in our data
but, in particular, the articulation of cyber threats in
moral terms was consistent. A moral association may
strengthen the power and importance of these threats
for citizens but also result in unquestioning acceptance
of those positions. Although morality may (arguably) be
subjective [128],21 it may be experienced objectively in
everyday life [77] and, therefore, by assigning a moral
dimension to cyber security, citizens may be discour-
aged from challenging the ‘need’ for intrusive controls
associated with it.

The use of specialist cyber-security language, which is
inaccessible to non-specialists, provides power to those
that can understand it, and this power is increased when
there is an interpretation being provided. An interpreta-
tion provides an opportunity, conscious or unconscious,
to imbue its translation with other meanings, whether
moral, political or emotional. Language is a means by
which reality is both experienced and constructed [22],
with those who have the power to interpret specialist or
‘foreign’ language also having the power to construct real-
ity for their audience. Cyber security may oﬀer a channel
through which sentiments and beliefs that are beneﬁcial
to the Leviathan can be established and maintained, such
as those relating to ‘enemy threats’ or those relating to
‘security versus privacy’, a questionable dualism [97] that
we discuss below..

Cyber security in both academic and mass media com-
munication abounds with military tropes, e.g. [84, 87, 41,
24] and many metaphors of war were observed throughout
our data. Such militaristic references may be motivated
by a desire for those who work in cyber security, most
of whom are male [102],22 to cast themselves as heroic,
a masculine trait that is strongly Hobbesian [47]. The
perception of always being ‘at war’ from a cyber-security
perspective, besides the ontological ‘comfort’ this may
provide [95], may also be motivated by a masculine desire
for such valorous narratives, demonstrating masculinity
through “metaphor, and bravado” [33, p. 115]. Such
language may also be deeply performative [33, 31]. Cy-
ber security professionals may possess a distinctive and

21It is outside the scope of this paper to explore the ongoing and
unresolved philosophical debate concerning this highly contentious
position.

22Modern corporations are also male-dominated [40], often with
hierarchical structures that feature inherent masculinity through
militaristic associations [33].

9

exceptional “power” that helps form their heroic identity,
namely “knowledge” and “right method” [47, p. 642]
which represents “the requisite special weapon of the epic
hero” [47, p. 642], and, similar to Hobbes’ self-conception
as heroic, cyber-security professionals may be “proposing
a solution to a predicament that [is] more masculine than
human in tenor” [47, p. 643].

5.2 Protection in exchange for

(cy-

ber) obedience

Cyber security was an area of discipline and of punish-
ment. Organisations in this study required obedience
from their staﬀ, in terms of policy compliance, as well
as alignment with standards of behaviour. Obedience,
whether through completion of mandatory training, com-
pliance with cyber security policies and standards, or
through eﬀective management of cyber-security risk, was
mandatory and non-compliance would be punished. As
well as disciplinary action, non-compliance resulted in
impacts upon staﬀ remuneration, particularly at a senior
level. The potential for the organisation to remove a level
of security from its staﬀ, in terms of the security of con-
tinued employment and income, suggests what Barkan23
describes as an “immunitary dynamic” [13, p. 89]. As
with the Leviathan, these businesses were providing pro-
tection in exchange for obedience and if this obedience
was not received, their protection could be removed.

As discussed above, the Leviathan is tyrannical. While
our study has not focused on all aspects of corporate
life, some indications of tyranny that align with Friedrich
and Brzezinski’s [56] description of typical totalitarian
features were observed. The cyber security departments
in these organisations appeared to function as an oﬃcial
police force, despite CISOs wishing to avoid this char-
acterisation, and performed surveillance of staﬀ. They
acted as agents of the mini-Leviathan, applying discipline
and punishment. Beyond cyber security, these organisa-
tions applied punishments if staﬀ did not comply with
their dictates, including if they behaved contrary to their
values. This may also have been motivated by a lack
of parity between the interests of the organisation and
the interests of individual employees. Punishment was
imbued with morality by extending a concept of ‘doing
the right thing’. These organisations educated and in-
doctrinated their staﬀ, with fear being a component of
these processes.

Cyber security was also associated with state-directed
punishment. The threat of punishments relating to cyber
security had a regulatory eﬀect on these organisations,
with considerable attention paid in the annual reports to
addressing how compliance was monitored and enforced,
including references to the organisational capabilities
charged with these responsibilities. Organisations in
this study wanted to ‘do the right thing’ in order to
avoid punishment by the Leviathan and internally, as
mini-Leviathans, instituted mechanisms of punishment
for their employees, extending that same concept. The
references that participants made to the ‘usefulness’ of
cyber security incidents aﬀecting other organisations,

including explicit references to those that resulted in reg-
ulatory action, suggest a Hobbesian view of punishment
as providing examples for others but also a spectacular
nature to cyber-security punishment. This is similar to
that described by both Foucault [53] and Farley [51],24
and punishment itself is a representation of power [53].
The Leviathan is terrorised by cyber-security threats,
whether real or imagined, which, in the most fearful type,
arise from the Leviathan’s known enemies. It expects
its “lesser Common-wealths” [72, p. 375] to take action
against these threats for the beneﬁt of the larger com-
monwealth. Failure to obey results in punishment by
the Leviathan, such punishments being public spectacles
that provide examples to others.

5.2.1 CISO as teacher and “counsellour”

The CISOs in these organisations were educators, which
included “teaching . . . obedience” [35, p. 86] and apply-
ing discipline. They taught staﬀ about the existence
of cyber-security threats, communicated a deﬁned set
of rules, indoctrinated them into acceptable behaviours,
monitored their compliance against these, and punished
them when they transgressed. Staﬀ were educated that
both they, and the organisation itself, were subject to
cyber-security threats. In order for the organisation to
mitigate those threats, protecting both itself and its staﬀ,
those staﬀ must forgo certain liberties and agree to be reg-
ulated. CISOs utilised fear in their instruction, aligning
with Hobbes’ template [35].

As well as being teachers, CISOs were advisors, “Coun-
sellours” [72, p. 391], for these businesses. They had
“knowledge of those things that conduce to the Peace, and
Defence of the Common-wealth” [72, p. 391]. Although
such counsellours may be expected to have consistent
“Ends and Interest” with the organisation, they may still
derive “beneﬁt by giving evill Counsell” [72, p. 391], par-
ticularly if that beneﬁt is continued employment. One
area where the CISO may not share equivalence with
Hobbes’ counsellours is in their risk of scapegoating.
Hobbes’ view was that “he that demandeth Counsell, is
Author of it; and therefore cannot punish it” [72, p. 304],
however, the CISOs in this study indicated concerns that
they were subject to punishment through job losses.

5.3 Cyber security and the Leviathan(s)

It is not in the interests of a Hobbesian society to achieve
“complete security” [9, p. 184]. Both the relative novelty
of cyber-security threats and the continued emergence of
new types of such threats, including the ‘sophisticated’
aspects thereof, can be viewed as “new props from the
outside” [9, p. 184] that stoke the ﬂames of the possibility
of war, particularly when attributed to nation states.
These threats also oﬀer “new and ever-growing ﬁelds
for the honorable and proﬁtable employment” [75, p.
28] of citizens,25 particularly the bourgeoisie who are
appeased by new job opportunities, and further stimulate
consumption and growth [9].

24Farley also invokes Hobbes in his exploration of state punish-

ment.

23Discussing Esposito [50].

25Speciﬁcally, the employment of “sons” [75, p. 28].

10

In a (post)modern world where threats to the state
are less obvious or apparent, i.e., there is no obvious
invader on the doorstep, particularly since the end of
the Cold War, the inclination of the citizen towards
obedience may be weaker. The state may, therefore, feel
the need to motivate obedience by making it clear that
it is still oﬀering protection, but not against obvious
invaders. Rather, it is against opaque, mysterious, and
highly sophisticated threats, from which the state is
providing protection. Not only do these threats need to
be explained by specialists, due to their complexity, they
also need to be ‘sold’ to citizens through education. It is
even conceivable that such teachings could be contrary to
“true Philosophy” [72, p. 703] but serve the beneﬁt of the
state, as well as securing the continued employment of
the teacher [8]. This could motivate the embellishment of
any threats communicated. It may be more advantageous
for the state Leviathan to have such education delivered
not through a state organ but rather through another
component of society such as businesses. Rather than a
conscious decision taken by the Leviathan this may be
a fortuitous beneﬁt, but one that it seeks to encourage
through, e.g., communicating the ‘responsibility’ that
businesses have in protecting wider society against cyber
threats [64].

Dedicated cyber-security functions support, and re-
peat, messages relating to a broader security agenda [97],
both among a company’s employees and their customers.
There is a wider security industry that “must. . . ensure
that security is never really achieved” [97, p. 156]. This
provides commercial beneﬁts, as well as supporting an
insecurity that is relied on by the state to achieve its
aims [97], as previously noted by Arendt [9]. If states
ultimately seek the perpetuation of (at least partial) inse-
curity, then it may be in their interests to deﬁne ‘security’
in an insecure manner, at the same time encouraging
organisations and wider society to achieve a level of ‘in-
secure security’. Recent attempts by governments to
weaken or circumvent strong encryption, e.g. [120, 7],
some successful, e.g. [119], can be argued as demonstrat-
ing this desire.26 In addition, motivating organisations to
operate a cyber-security function that inures employees,
who are also citizens, to increased and intrusive surveil-
lance and monitoring may also contribute to this same
‘insecure security’, albeit potentially providing associated
beneﬁts to those employees, such as greater privacy.

These organisations taught their staﬀ about the ex-
istence of cyber-security threats, communicated a de-
ﬁned set of rules, indoctrinated them into acceptable
behaviours, monitored their compliance against these,
and punished them when they transgressed. In order
for both the organisation and their staﬀ to be protected
from these threats, staﬀ must forgo certain liberties and
agree to certain controls, such as being surveilled. In this
manner, the employee-as-citizen is indoctrinated into a
mindset of being subject to cyber threats and becomes
inured to the custom of exchanging privacy for security.
Considering power relations as interactive, processual and
two-way [22, p. 89], cyber security within business can

be seen as a mechanism through which citizen-employees
participate in the maintenance of hegemonic power.27
Cyber security personnel ensure that messages of inse-
curity and threat are repeated, as well as performing
a policing role that normalises surveillance, while other
citizen-employees support hegemonic power in the role
they play as the surveilled.

Cyber security can be used to terrorise citizens into
compliance and to justify their surveillance. Cyber-
security controls have an eﬀect not just on the employee-
as-employee but also the employee-as-citizen. Educating
employees on what they need to be protected from, and
what they need to obey in order to be protected, may, di-
rectly or indirectly, inure or condition employees towards
broader obedience, including acceptance of controls that
could be used beyond purposes of cyber security, provid-
ing beneﬁts to the state beyond citizen protection.28 The
use, and acceptance, of surveillance in these organisations
may function as a normative control [19], conditioning or
preparing staﬀ (citizens) to be surveilled in wider society
and supporting a wider meta-narrative in relation to
security versus privacy. The Leviathan-writ-small of the
business plays a role on behalf of the state Leviathan in
conditioning the employee-as-citizen towards obedience,
and surrendering of liberties, in exchange for protection
from threat. The opaque and relatively unseen nature of
the threat, which requires specialists to deliver education
about its existence, is beneﬁcial to the state for ensuring
continued obedience, and even in maintaining its own
identity [70], and its own history [112].

5.3.1 Consumption

Companies within a broader security industry accrue
beneﬁt from perpetuating a state of insecurity [85]. This
may be exploited through a narrative of unforeseeable
risks that builds uncertainty [85], fear stimulating con-
sumption [14] in the same way as war [123]. The security
and defence industries need there to be something to
be defended against [97]. As well as cyber security be-
ing one of these industries, with cyber-security crises
leading to increases in budgets [4], even in other, un-
aﬀected, businesses [68], cyber capability is a factor in
being ‘allowed to play’ in others, and can be a barrier
to entry. Cyber security is thus enmeshed with a much
broader aspect of modernity in the sense of continued
consumption, both as an industry in its own right and
as a facet of other industries. Some organisations in this
study indicated the beneﬁt they accrued from governmen-
tal spending on security-related products and services,
further demonstrating the link between societal threat
and certain business sectors. The Leviathan, which seeks
continued and never-ending growth, can stimulate expan-
sion by creating a need for spending that counteracts
fear and anxiety [14]. Such spending can arguably “in
some way ‘improve’ life in civil society” [123, p. 111].

27Other hegemonical linkages included the roles that these busi-
nesses played in national security and the presence of senior leaders
representing military or governmental actors, as well as references
to both direct and indirect governmental inﬂuences on these organ-
isations.

26Although increased surveillance may be possible without weak-

28“The most potent weapon in the hands of the oppressor is the

ening encryption [58].

mind of the oppressed” [23, p. 137].

11

Where that fear and anxiety is generated by unseen and
ever-more-sophisticated sources, there is, in theory, no
upper limit to the growth that could be achieved.

6 Conclusion

This paper has shown that Hobbes’ work provides a
useful lens through which to view the role that cyber
security plays in society within and without businesses,
particularly given the importance of Hobbesian thinking
to Western political thought and the enmeshed nature
of states and corporations. Cyber security oﬀers a use-
ful mechanism from which the Leviathan derives bene-
ﬁt. It supports the establishment of fear and discipline,
therefore, cementing power through obedience and con-
formance. Additionally, although less obviously, it also
drives accumulation of capital through consumption of
products and services, and job creation.

Businesses play a crucial role for the Leviathan. They
employ and educate citizens, inuring them to surveillance
and punishing them when they transgress. They main-
tain narratives of morality. They generate and expand
capital. In some cases, they operate critical infrastruc-
ture and perform other state functions on the Leviathan’s
behalf. Businesses are themselves mini-Leviathans, and
are in fear of threats to their existence. Cyber security
functions within those businesses provide a means by
which they seek to avoid a state of nature. They also,
indirectly, provide that function to the state, supporting
its attempts to dominate competing state Leviathans.
Actions taken by businesses in relation to cyber security
involve spending that provides fuel for the continued
growth of the Leviathan’s power, and that of the hege-
mony that the Leviathan supports.

Our research opens up a number of interesting future
directions. The Hobbesian perspective that we introduce
may encourage the application of broader contexts from
International Relations (IR), using other IR theorists and
perspectives to explore cyber security within businesses
and wider society. In particular, we consider there to be
beneﬁt to research avenues relating to the context of busi-
nesses within globalisation and geopolitics, including the
establishment of cyber norms and other developing ar-
eas of study. Most signiﬁcantly, our research encourages
greater reﬂexivity within the discipline of cyber security,
both for researchers and for practitioners. The latter
may beneﬁt from considering the role they unwittingly
perform in the maintenance of both political and commer-
cial power structures. Businesses themselves may beneﬁt
from reﬂecting on the role that they play in supporting
the state Leviathan, and indeed in wider globalisation
of Hobbesian models of control. Such reﬂexivity and
improved awareness of broader contexts oﬀers empower-
ment for individuals within those businesses, particularly
CISOs in this case. Part of the role of a CISO is being
the agent of two Leviathans, the mini-Leviathan of the
business that employs them, and the larger Leviathan of
the state. The latter role may not be as immediately obvi-
ous or recognisable and may be uncomfortable for many
CISOs. However, recognising this allows for reﬂexive
consideration and engagement with the implications, or

at the very least an acknowledgement of what the CISO
does or does not agree with. The CISO may acknowl-
edge that there is value in implementing surveillance in
order to protect the business-as-Leviathan but if that
helps to normalise surveillance by the state Leviathan on
the employee-citizen, there may be a potential internal
conﬂict that they need to either resolve or come to terms
with. We have considered whether this perspective could
potentially lead to (perceived) negative outcomes for the
cyber-security industry. For example, will there be less
surveillance within organisations as a result of CISOs
resisting the support that they indirectly provide to state
surveillance? We consider this to be unlikely, however, it
opens up further avenues of potential research, particu-
larly to explore whether or not a CISO’s primary focus
is on their employer. After all, their employer is oﬀering
them the most immediate protection, in terms of salary
and continued employment, and, similar to the Hobbe-
sian family structure, is where their primary interest and
indeed obedience may lie. Therefore, the CISO may do
what is in the interest of their employer and ensure that
they protect them as best they can, including implement-
ing controls that they would feel less comfortable with
if they were in place in wider society. Their employer’s
interests may also be more closely aligned with their own,
particularly in terms of ensuring continued viability, than
with the state Leviathan’s, and this symbiotic relation-
ship may be an important factor in any decision-making
regarding controls. Future research could also consider
the possibility of ‘deviant’ corporations and the concept
of insider threats through a Hobbesian lens.29 The latter,
in particular, could also be expanded to consider the
perspective of resistance.30 Further, there may be an
interesting parallel to explore with regard to biological
threats, such as Covid-19, and cyber threats. Each of
these can be considered as unseen, ephemeral threats
that require specialist advisors and motivate restrictive
controls that could be considered as oﬀering additional
beneﬁts to a Hobbesian state.31

Our Findings oﬀer a broad perspective on cyber-
security practice within organisations. As such, they
will also be interpreted through other analytical lenses
and connected to other, existing, models of managing
cyber security.

References

[1] Companies

and

London

-
https://www.londonstockexchange.com/statistics/companies-
and-issuers/companies-and-issuers.htm.

Stock

Securities
Exchange.

[2] Hobbes’s Leviathan. https://www.bl.uk/collection-

items/hobbess-leviathan.

[3] Qualitative Data Analysis Software — NVivo.

https://www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo-
qualitative-data-analysis-software/home.

29We thank an anonymous reviewer for these suggestions.
30This has potential parallels with prior work performed by

Coles-Kemp et al. [38].

31Again, we thank an anonymous reviewer for inspiring this

angle.

12

CISO

[4] TalkTalk
blanche
https://www.totaltele.com/492027/TalkTalk-
CISO-given-carte-blanche-over-security-
investments.

security

carte
investments.

given

over

[5] USA PATRIOT Act 2001, October 2001.

[23] Steve Biko. Black Consciousness & the Quest for
a True Humanity. Ufahamu: A Journal of African
Studies, 11(1), 1981.

[24] David Bond. Britain preparing to launch new cyber
warfare unit. http://www.ft.com/content/eef717f2-
bb6e-11e8-8274-55b72926558f, September 2018.

[6] Industry Classiﬁcation Benchmark

(ICB).

https://www.ftserussell.com/data/industry-
classiﬁcation-benchmark-icb, June 2018.

[25] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. Using the-
matic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research
in Psychology, 3(2):77–101, January 2006.

[7] Google, Apple criticise GCHQ snooping tech. BBC

News, May 2019.

[8] H. Arendt. Between Past and Future. Penguin

Publishing Group, 2006.

[9] Hannah Arendt. The Origins of Totalitarianism.

Penguin Books Limited, 2017 (1951).

[10] Debi Ashenden and Darren Lawrence. Security
Dialogues: Building Better Relationships between
Security and Business. IEEE Security & Privacy,
14(3):82–87, May 2016.

[11] Debi Ashenden and Angela Sasse. CISOs and organ-
isational culture: Their own worst enemy? Com-
puters & Security, 39:396–405, November 2013.

[12] J. Barkan. Corporate Sovereignty: Law and Gov-
ernment under Capitalism. University of Minnesota
Press, 2013.

[13] Joshua Barkan. Roberto Esposito’s Political Biol-
ogy and Corporate Forms of Life. Law, Culture
and the Humanities, 8(1):84–101, February 2012.

[14] Jean Baudrillard. The Consumer Society : Myths
and Structures. London : Sage, London, 1998.

[15] Zygmunt Bauman, Didier Bigo, Paulo Esteves,
Elspeth Guild, Vivienne Jabri, David Lyon, and
R. B. J. Walker. After Snowden: Rethinking the
Impact of Surveillance. International Political So-
ciology, 8(2):121–144, June 2014.

[16] Deborah Baumgold. “Trust” in Hobbes’s Political
Thought. Political Theory, 41(6):838–855, Decem-
ber 2013.

[17] Ulrich Beck. Risk Society : Towards a New Moder-

nity. Sage, Los Angeles, [Calif.], 1992.

[18] Ulrich Beck. World at Risk. Polity Press, 2009.

[19] Nic Beech. On the Nature of Dialogic Identity

Work. Organization, 15(1):51–74, January 2008.

[20] Staﬀord Beer. The Heart of the Enterprise. Wiley,

1979.

[21] Teresa M. Bejan. Teaching the Leviathan: Thomas
Hobbes on education. Oxford Review of Education,
36(5):607–626, October 2010.

[22] Bethan Benwell and Elizabeth Stokoe. Discourse
and Identity. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, Edinburgh, 2006.

[26] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. Reﬂecting on
reﬂexive thematic analysis. Qualitative Research in
Sport, Exercise and Health, 11(4):589–597, August
2019.

[27] Susan W. Brenner and Leo L. Clarke. Civilians in
Cyberwarfare: Conscripts. Vanderbilt Journal of
Transnational Law, 43:1011–1076, 2010.

[28] Nils Bubandt. Vernacular Security: The Politics of
Feeling Safe in Global, National and Local Worlds.
Security Dialogue, 36(3):275–296, September 2005.

[29] Mark Burdon and Lizzie Coles-Kemp. The signiﬁ-
cance of securing as a critical component of informa-
tion security: An Australian narrative. Computers
& Security, 87:101601, November 2019.

[30] Gibson Burrell and Gareth Morgan. Sociological
Paradigms and Organizational Analysis: Elements
of the Sociology of Corporate Life. Gower, 1987
(1979).

[31] Judith Butler. Gender Trouble : Tenth Anniversary
Edition. London : Routledge, 2nd ed. edition, 2002
(1990).

[32] Madeline Carr. Public-private partnerships in na-
tional cyber-security strategies. International Af-
fairs, 92(1):43–62, January 2016.

[33] Terrell Carver. Men and Masculinities in Interna-
tional Relations Research. The Brown Journal of
World Aﬀairs, 21(1):113–126, 2014.

[34] A. D. Chandler and B. Mazlish, editors. Leviathans:
Multinational Corporations and the New Global
History. Cambridge University Press, 2005.

[35] Richard Allen Chapman. Leviathan Writ Small:
Thomas Hobbes on the Family. The American
Political Science Review, 69(1):76–90, 1975.

[36] Ronald H. Chilcote. Globalization or Imperialism?

Latin American Perspectives, 29(6):80–84, 2002.

[37] R.j.g. Claassen. Hobbes Meets the Modern Busi-
ness Corporation. Polity, 53(1):101–131, December
2020.

[38] Lizzie Coles-Kemp, Debi Ashenden, and Kieron
O’Hara. Why Should I? Cybersecurity, the Secu-
rity of the State and the Insecurity of the Citizen.
Politics and Governance, 6(2):41–48, June 2018.

13

[39] Lizzie Coles-Kemp, Alf Zugenmaier, and Makayla
Lewis. Watching You Watching Me: The Art of
Playing the Panopticon. Stand Alone, pages 147–
162, 2014.

[40] R. W. Connell and Julian Wood. Globalization
and Business Masculinities. Men and Masculinities,
7(4):347–364, April 2005.

[53] Michel Foucault. Discipline and Punish. Penguin

Books, 1991 (1977).

[54] Michel Foucault. Society Must Be Defended. Pen-

guin Books, 2004.

[55] Michel Foucault. Security, Territory, Population.

Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.

[41] Gordon Corera. NHS cyber-attack ’came from N
Korea’. https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-
40297493, June 2017.

[56] Carl J. Friedrich and Zbigniew K. Brzezinski. To-
talitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy. Praeger Uni-
versity Series. Praeger, New York, 1961 (1956).

[42] P. Cormack.

Sociology and Mass Culture:
Durkheim, Mills, and Baudrillard. University of
Toronto Press, 2004.

Council.

Reporting

[43] Financial
UK
Corporate
Code.
https://www.frc.org.uk/getattachment/88bd8c45-
50ea-4841-95b0-d2f4f48069a2/2018-UK-
Corporate-Governance-Code-FINAL.pdf, 2018.

Governance

[44] Jessica Dawson and Robert Thomson. The Future
Cybersecurity Workforce: Going Beyond Technical
Skills for Successful Cyber Performance. Frontiers
in Psychology, 9, 2018.

[45] Ronald J. Deibert and Rafal Rohozinski. Risking
Security: Policies and Paradoxes of Cyberspace
Security. International Political Sociology, 4(1):15–
32, March 2010.

[46] Gurpreet Dhillon and James Backhouse. Current
directions in IS security research: Towards socio-
organizational perspectives. Information Systems
Journal, 11(2):127–153, April 2001.

[47] Christine Di Stefano. Masculinity as ideology in po-
litical theory: Hobbesian man considered. Women’s
Studies International Forum, 6(6):633–644, Jan-
uary 1983.

[57] Frank Furedi. Culture of Fear Revisited : Risk-
Taking and the Morality of Low Expectation. Lon-
don : Continuum, London, 4th ed. edition, 2006.

[58] Urs Gasser, Nancy Gertner, Jack L. Gold-
smith, Susan Landau, Joseph S. Nye, David
O’Brien, Matthew G. Olsen, Daphna Renan, Ju-
lian Sanchez, Bruce Schneider, Larry Schwartzol,
and Jonathan L. Zittrain. Don’t Panic: Making
Progress on the ”Going Dark” Debate. Berkman
Center Research Publication, 2016.

[59] Mike Geppert and Christoph D¨orrenb¨acher. Poli-
tics and Power within Multinational Corporations:
Mainstream Studies, Emerging Critical Approaches
and Suggestions for Future Research. International
Journal of Management Reviews, 16(2):226–244,
2014.

[60] Bernard Gert. Hobbes on Reason. Paciﬁc Philo-

sophical Quarterly, 82(3-4):243–257, 2001.

[61] Anthony Giddens. The Consequences of Modernity.

Stanford University Press, 1990.

[62] UK Government. Regulation of Investigatory Pow-

ers Act 2000, 2000.

[63] UK Government. Terrorism Act 2006, 2006.

[48] Damian Ehrlicher.

Of

Evolution
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2021/03/05/the-
evolution-of-cybersecurity-in-2021/, March 2021.

Cybersecurity

Council Post:
In

The
2021.

Government.
Security

[64] UK
ber
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-
cyber-security-strategy-2016-to-2021, 2016.

National
to

Cy-
2021.

Strategy

2016

[49] Kristen E. Eichensehr. Public-Private Cybersecu-
rity. Texas Law Review, 95(3):467–538, February
2017.

[50] R. Esposito. B´ıos: Biopolitics and Philosophy.

University of Minnesota Press, 2008.

[51] Anthony Paul Farley. Amusing monsters. Cardozo

L. Rev., 23:1493, 2001.

[52] Ivan Flechais, Jens Riegelsberger, and M. Angela
Sasse. Divide and conquer: The role of trust and
assurance in the design of secure socio-technical
systems. In Proceedings of the 2005 Workshop on
New Security Paradigms, NSPW ’05, pages 33–41,
New York, NY, USA, September 2005. Association
for Computing Machinery.

[65] Peter Hall, Claude Heath, and Lizzie Coles-Kemp.
Critical visualization: A case for rethinking how we
visualize risk and security. Journal of Cybersecurity,
1(1):93–108, September 2015.

[66] Sarah Hall. Entanglements Between Finance, Cor-
porate Power and State Sovereignty. Geopolitics,
19(3):740–745, July 2014.

[67] Martyn Hammersley and Paul Atkinson. Ethnogra-
phy Principles in Practice (Second Edition). Rout-
ledge, 1995.

[68] Taha Havakhor, Tianjian Zhang, and Bryan Ham-
mer. Cybersecurity Talents and the Value of
IT Security Investments. SSRN Scholarly Pa-
per ID 3324696, Social Science Research Network,
Rochester, NY, January 2019.

14

[69] Joseph Heath, Jeﬀrey Moriarty, and Wayne Nor-
man. Business Ethics and (or as) Political Philos-
ophy. Business Ethics Quarterly, 20(3):427–452,
2010.

[70] Alexis Heraclides. ‘What will become of us without
barbarians?’ The enduring Greek–Turkish rivalry
as an identity-based conﬂict. Southeast European
and Black Sea Studies, 12(1):115–134, March 2012.

[71] Joseph C. Hermanowicz. The Great Interview: 25
Strategies for Studying People in Bed. Qualitative
Sociology, 25(4):479–499, December 2002.

[72] Thomas Hobbes. Leviathan. Penguin Books, Lon-

don, [1651] 1985.

[73] Thomas Hobbes. The English Works of Thomas
Hobbes of Malmesbury; Now First Collected and
Edited by Sir Willaim Molesworth, Bart., volume 6.
John Bohn, London, 1839.

[74] Thomas Hobbes. De Cive. Dodo Press, 2009 (1642).

[75] J. A. Hobson. Capitalism and Imperialism in South
Africa. The Tucker Publishing Co., New York,
1900.

[76] Jon Hoeksma. NHS cyberattack may prove to be
a valuable wake up call. BMJ: British Medical
Journal, 357, 2017.

[77] Wilhelm Hofmann, Daniel C. Wisneski, Mark J.
Brandt, and Linda J. Skitka. Morality in everyday
life. Science, 345(6202):1340–1343, 2014.

[78] Val Hooper and Jeremy McKissack. The emerging
role of the CISO. Business Horizons, 59(6):585–591,
November 2016.

[84] Vesa Kanniainen. Cyber Technology and the Arms
Race. German Economic Review, 20(4):e523–e544,
2019.

[85] Elke Krahmann. The market for ontological secu-
rity. European Security, 27(3):356–373, July 2018.

[86] Joel Lanz. The Chief Information Security Oﬃ-
cer: The New CFO of Information Security. CPA
Journal, 87(6):52–57, June 2017.

[87] Jarno Limn´ell. The cyber arms race is accelerating
– what are the consequences? Journal of Cyber
Policy, 1(1):50–60, January 2016.

[88] S. A. Lloyd. Morality in the Philosophy of Thomas
Hobbes: Cases in the Law of Nature. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2009.

[89] Sharon A. Lloyd and Susanne Sreedhar. Hobbes’s
Moral and Political Philosophy. In Edward N. Zalta,
editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
fall 2020 edition, 2020.

[90] John Locke. An Essay Concerning Human Under-
standing. Penguin Classics. Penguin Books, London
[Eng.], [1690] 1997.

[91] C. B. Macpherson.

Introduction.

In Leviathan.

Penguin Books, London, 1985.

[92] Christopher Scott McClure. War, Madness,
and Death: The Paradox of Honor in Hobbes’s
Leviathan. The Journal of Politics, 76(1):114–125,
2013.

[79] Rex Hughes. A treaty for cyberspace. International
Aﬀairs (Royal Institute of International Aﬀairs
1944-), 86(2):523–541, 2010.

[93] Charles Edward Merriam. Hobbes’s Doctrine of
the State of Nature. Proceedings of the American
Political Science Association, 3:151–157, 1906.

[80] Mathias Hein Jessen. The State of the Com-
pany: Corporations, Colonies and Companies in
Leviathan. Journal of Intellectual History and Po-
litical Thought, 1(1):56–85, 2012.

[81] Anant Joshi, Laury Bollen, Harold Hassink, Steven
De Haes, and Wim Van Grembergen. Explaining
IT governance disclosure through the constructs
of IT governance maturity and IT strategic role.
Information & Management, 55(3):368–380, April
2018.

[82] Ryan T. Kaminski. Escaping the cyber state of
nature: Cyber deterrence and international insti-
tutions. In Christian Czosseck and Karlis Podins,
editors, Conference on Cyber Conﬂict Proceedings
2010, pages 79–94, Tallinn, 2010. CCD COE Pub-
lications.

[83] Anni Kangas, Johanna Kujala, Anna Heikkinen,
Antti L¨onnqvist, Harri Laihonen, and Julia Beth-
waite. Leading Change in a Complex World :
Transdisciplinary Perspectives. Tampere University
Press, 2019.

[94] Henry Mintzberg. The Structuring of Organiza-

tions. Prentice-Hall, 1979.

[95] Jennifer Mitzen. Ontological Security in World Pol-
itics: State Identity and the Security Dilemma.
European Journal of
International Relations,
12(3):341–370, September 2006.

[96] Tyler Moore, Scott Dynes, and Frederick R. Chang.
Identifying How Firms Manage Cybersecurity In-
vestment. Working Paper, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas, 2015.

[97] Mark Neocleous. Critique of Security. Edinburgh :
Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, 2008.

[98] Helen Nissenbaum. Where Computer Security
Meets National Security. Ethics and Information
Technology, 7(2):61–73, June 2005.

[99] Laura Noonan. Bank of England-backed cyber secu-
rity war game opens to more companies. Financial
Times, October 2021.

15

[100] Michelle O’Reilly and Nicola Parker. ‘Unsatisfac-
tory Saturation’: A critical exploration of the no-
tion of saturated sample sizes in qualitative re-
search. Qualitative Research, 13(2):190–197, April
2013.

[101] Pasquale Pasquino. Theatrum Politicum: The Ge-
nealogy of Capital - Police and the State of Prosper-
ity. Chicago : University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
1991.

[102] Donna Peacock and Alastair Irons. Gender Inequal-
ity in Cybersecurity: Exploring the Gender Gap in
Opportunities and Progression. International Jour-
nal of Gender, Science and Technology, 9(1):25–44,
May 2017.

[103] Mark Peacock. Obligation and Advantage in
Hobbes’ ”Leviathan”. Canadian Journal of Philos-
ophy, 40(3):433–458, 2010.

[104] Keri Pearlson, Brett Thorson, Stuart Madnick, and
Michael Coden. Cyberattacks Are Inevitable. Is
Your Company Prepared? Harvard Business Re-
view, March 2021.

[105] Sajay Rai and Philip Chukwuma. Ciso – Career Is

Surely Over? EDPACS, 59(6):1–4, June 2019.

[106] Brian Roach. A Primer on Multinational Corpora-
tions. In A. D. Chandler and B. Mazlish, editors,
Leviathans: Multinational Corporations and the
New Global History, pages 19–44. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2005.

[107] Jean-Jacques Rousseau. The Social Contract. Pen-

guin Books, 1968 (1762).

[114] Gian Piero Siroli. Considerations on the Cyber
Domain as the New Worldwide Battleﬁeld. The
International Spectator, 53(2):111–123, April 2018.

[115] Brett Smith and Andrew C. Sparkes. Contrasting
perspectives on narrating selves and identities: An
invitation to dialogue. Qualitative Research, 8(1):5–
35, February 2008.

[116] Graham M. Smith. Into Cerberus’ Lair: Bringing
the Idea of Security to Light. The British Journal
of Politics and International Relations, 7(4):485–
507, November 2005.

[117] T. Stevens. Cyber Security and the Politics of Time.

Cambridge University Press, 2016.

[118] Gillian Symon, Petros Chamakiotis, Rebecca Whit-
ing, and Helen Roby. Identity work across bound-
aries in a digital world. In BAM2014 Conference
Proceedings, Belfast, 2014. British Academy of Man-
agement.

[119] Josh Taylor. Australia’s anti-encryption laws being
used to bypass journalist protections, expert says.
The Guardian, July 2019.

[120] Iain Thomson. Low Barr: Don’t give me that
crap about security,
just put the backdoors
in the encryption, roars US Attorney General.
https://www.theregister.co.uk/2019/07/23/us en-
cryption backdoor/, 2019.

[121] Carl von Clausewitz. On War. N. Tr¨ubner &

Company, London, 1873.

[122] Clive Walker. Cyber-Terrorism: Legal Principle
and the Law in the United Kingdom. Penn State
Law Review, 110:625–665, 2006.

[108] Johnny Salda˜na. The Coding Manual for Quali-
tative Researchers. SAGE Publications Ltd, 3rd
edition, 2016.

[123] R. B. J. Walker. Inside/Outside: International Re-
lations as Political Theory. Cambridge University
Press, 1993.

[109] James Shires. Enacting Expertise: Ritual and Risk
in Cybersecurity. Politics and Governance, 6(2):31–
40, June 2018.

[110] Howard Shrobe, David L. Shrier, and Alex Pent-
land. Conclusion. In New Solutions for Cybersecu-
rity, pages 477–482. MIT Press, 2018.

[111] David Silverman. The Theory of Organisations :
A Sociological Framework. London : Heinemann
Educational, London, 1970.

[112] David Sims. You Bastard: A Narrative Exploration
of the Experience of Indignation within Organi-
zations. Organization Studies, 26(11):1625–1640,
November 2005.

[113] Abhishek Narain Singh, Arnold Picot, Johann
Kranz, M. P. Gupta, and Amitabh Ojha.
In-
formation Security Management (ISM) Practices:
Lessons from Select Cases from India and Germany.
Global Journal of Flexible Systems Management,
14(4):225–239, December 2013.

[124] Barney Warf and Emily Fekete. Relational geogra-
phies of cyberterrorism and cyberwar. Space and
Polity, 20(2):143–157, May 2016.

[125] Michael C. Williams. Hobbes and International
Relations: A Reconsideration. International Orga-
nization, 50(2):213–236, 1996.

[126] Sheldon S Wolin. Hobbes and the Epic Tradition of
Political Theory. Los Angeles : William Andrews
Clark Memorial Library, University of California,
Los Angeles, 1970.

[127] Joan Woodward. Industrial Organization: Theory
and Practice. Oxford University Press, 1965.

[128] Michael J. Zimmerman. Is moral obligation objec-

tive or subjective? Utilitas, 18(4):329–361, 2006.

[129] Robert W. Zmud, Teresa Shaft, Weijun Zheng,
and Henry Croes. Systematic Diﬀerences in Firm’s
Information Technology Signaling: Implications for
Research Design. Journal of the Association for
Information Systems, 11(3):150–181, March 2010.

16

A Interview details

Below in Table 1 we provide a brief summary of the in-
dustry sectors represented in this study, whereas Table 2
provides details of the participant interviews.

Table 1: Industry sectors represented in this study
ICB Super-sector

Number of organisations

Banks
Food, Beverage and Tobacco
Industrial Goods and Services
Personal Care, Drug and Grocery Stores
Real Estate
Technology
Telecommunications
Travel and Leisure
Utilities

Total

1
1
6
2
1
1
2
1
3

18

Coverage of industries represented in this research based on classi-
ﬁcations taken from [6, 1].

Table 2: Participants & Interviews
Interview

Participants

ID

Duration

Medium Timing

CISO1
CISO2
CISO3
CISO4
CISO5
CISO6
CISO7
CISO8
CISO9
CISO10
CISO11
CISO12
CISO13
CISO14
CISO15
CEO1
CEO2
CFO1
CFO2
CIO1
NED1

00:48:29
00:49:28
00:47:33
00:44:41
00:43:44
00:41:38
00:45:19
00:49:41
00:51:30
00:38:43
00:55:45
00:40:56
00:40:07
00:46:07
00:50:02
00:24:59
00:42:45
00:45:41
00:40:52
00:47:28
00:27:52

Oct19
F2F
Oct19
F2F
Dec19
F2F
Dec19
F2F
Dec19
F2F
Jan20
F2F
Jan20
F2F
Mar20
F2F
Mar20
F2F
Remote
Apr20
Remote May20
Remote May20
Jun20
Remote
Jul20
Remote
Jul20
Remote
Dec19
F2F
Jan20
F2F
Jan20
F2F
Apr20
Remote
Jul20
Remote
Dec19
F2F

In addition to 15 CISOs, we conducted semi-structured interviews
with two Chief Executive Oﬃcers (CEOs), two Chief Financial
Oﬃcers (CIOs), one Non-Executive Director (NED) and one Chief
Information Oﬃcer (CIO), between October 2019 and July 2020.

17

