2
2
0
2

r
a

M
5

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
6
2
5
1
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

How Do Organizations Seek Cyber Assurance?
Investigations on the Adoption of the Common Criteria and Beyond

Nan Sun
Deakin University

Chang-Tsun Li
Deakin University

Hin Chan
Australian Cyber Security Centre

Md Zahidul Islam
Charles Sturt University

Md Raﬁqul Islam
Charles Sturt University

Warren Armstrong
QuintessenceLabs Pty Ltd.

Abstract

Cyber assurance, which is the ability to operate un-
der the onslaught of cyber attacks and other unexpected
events, is essential for organizations facing inundating
security threats on a daily basis. Organizations usually
employ multiple strategies to conduct risk management
to achieve cyber assurance. Utilizing cybersecurity stan-
dards and certiﬁcations can provide guidance for ven-
dors to design and manufacture secure Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) products as well as
provide a level of assurance of the security functional-
ity of the products for consumers. Hence, employing
security standards and certiﬁcations is an effective strat-
egy for risk management and cyber assurance.
In this
work, we begin with investigating the adoption of cy-
bersecurity standards and certiﬁcations by surveying 258
participants from organizations across various countries
and sectors. Speciﬁcally, we identify adoption barriers
of the Common Criteria through the designed question-
naire. Taking into account the seven identiﬁed adoption
barriers, we show the recommendations for promoting
cybersecurity standards and certiﬁcations. Moreover, be-
yond cybersecurity standards and certiﬁcations, we shed
light on other risk management strategies devised by our
participants, which provides directions on cybersecurity
approaches for enhancing cyber assurance in organiza-
tions.

1

Introduction

According to the statistics from Dell Technology in
2019/2020, 44% of organizations have experienced at
least one cybersecurity attack or data breach during the
prior twelve months [64]. Security issues are becoming
a daily struggle for public and private sectors alike. Data
from the Australian Cyber Security Centre’s (ACSC) An-
nual Cyber Threat Report [7] shows that the number of
cybersecurity attacks is still on the rise. As the conse-

quences of a cybersecurity attack, an organization’s ﬁ-
nancial and reputational health may be affected, business
operations are disrupted, sensitive information including
intellectual property may be stolen, and malicious activ-
ity may continue [62].

Although it is difﬁcult to quantify the costs of im-
pacts, cybersecurity remediation can be more expensive
than early and ongoing investment in prevention [8]. To
reduce the potential impact of cyber attacks, risk man-
agement that involves the process of identifying, assess-
ing, and taking steps to minimize security risks is essen-
tial as a cybersecurity approach for organizations. Hav-
ing cybersecurity awareness and robust security strate-
gies in place can help organizations prepare for, pro-
tect against, and respond to cyber attacks to some ex-
tent [49]. Since Information and Communication Tech-
nology (ICT) products are widely used by organizations
and individual users, choosing trusted ICT products is of
paramount importance for the organization’s risk man-
agement. The existing cybersecurity standards and certi-
ﬁcations for evaluating ICT products provide guidelines
for vendors to design, develop, evaluate, certify their
products, as well as provide trusted references for users
to choose the products.

The Common Criteria for Information Technology Se-
curity Evaluation (often referred to as Common Crite-
ria or CC) is an international standard (ISO/IEC 15408),
which certiﬁes that systems and products to ensure they
meet predeﬁned security requirements [38]. The Com-
mon Criteria covers comprehensive ICT security-related
technologies and a wider range of evaluation aspects re-
garding security functionalities and security assurance.
Security requirements for a class of related products are
typically predeﬁned in a Protection Proﬁle by a user
group or user [38]. The purpose of a Protection Proﬁle
is to provide reusable templates of security requirements
to support the deﬁnition of functional security standards
and guide the formulation of product development and
procurement speciﬁcations.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Generally, the subject of the evaluation that can be part
of the product or system is called the Target of Evalua-
tion. A Security Target is a document that identiﬁes the
security features of the Target of Evaluation [21]. If a
vendor has an ICT product that they would like to be
evaluated and certiﬁed under the Common Criteria, they
must complete a Security Target description. The ven-
dor should conduct a self-assessment on compliance with
the Protection Proﬁle prior to evaluation against the pro-
ﬁle. Evaluation are conducted in laboratories to validate
the product’s security features and conﬁrm that it meets
the security requirements outlined in the Security Target
[29]. Following the evaluation of ICT products and sys-
tems via a set of speciﬁcations and guidelines, the prod-
ucts that passed the evaluation are awarded the Common
Criteria certiﬁcation [60] and be listed on the Common
Criteria portal [28].

The Common Criteria certiﬁcation assures consumers
that the products they invest in provide reliable security
protection for their operational environment and conform
to the vendor’s claims. Furthermore, the Common Cri-
teria certiﬁcation increases the competitiveness of ven-
dors’ products when consumers compare them to similar
products on the market. For government agencies, the
Common Criteria certiﬁcation not only facilitates pro-
curement but increases the transparency of ICT prod-
ucts’ security features, facilitating market supervision
and surveillance. However, there is a lack of widespread
adoption of evaluated ICT products with security func-
tionality by organizations, including governments and
commercial sectors [37]. For instance, although Aus-
tralia is a signatory to the Common Criteria Recogni-
tion Arrangement (CCRA), the number of certiﬁcations
through the Australian Information Security Evaluation
Program is trivial when compared to the number of cer-
tiﬁcated products on Common Criteria’s Certiﬁed Prod-
ucts List [27].

In this paper, we aim to identify the adoption barri-
ers for security standards and certiﬁcations, especially
the one which covers the most extensive category of ICT
products, the Common Criteria. Through 258 responses
to an online questionnaire from participants from Aus-
tralian and international organizations, we analyze the
organizations’ attitudes towards being measured against
cybersecurity standards and their adoption of the cyber-
security standards. Our participants also describe risk
management strategies, such as reactive and proactive
cybersecurity countermeasures and multi-layered risk
management approaches, adopted by their organizations
to pursue cyber assurance. To achieve our aim, in this
paper, we address the following research questions:

RQ1: What are the adoption barriers of the Common

Criteria?

RQ2: How to promote the adoption of the Common

Criteria?

RQ3: How do organizations seek cyber assurance be-

yond adopting security standards and certiﬁcations?

To answer RQ1, based on the identiﬁed adoption bar-
riers from the literature review, we design the question-
naire to investigate the adoption barriers for the Common
Criteria in Section 4.1. Recommendations for promot-
ing Common Criteria adoption as well as the other secu-
rity standards and certiﬁcations are presented in Section
4.2towards answering RQ2. Beyond the security stan-
dards and certiﬁcations, the adopted approaches to cyber
assurance are discussed in Section 5 to address RQ3.

2 Related Work

Cybersecurity standards and certiﬁcations. The ap-
plications and adoption of cybersecurity standards and
certiﬁcations for ICT products and systems have been ex-
plored and discussed in previous studies. As ICT prod-
ucts are designed, developed, and implemented, cyberse-
curity standards and certiﬁcations play a signiﬁcant role,
especially in areas such as the Internet of Things (IoT)
[49], smart grids [47], and software [42]. The recent
study [49] reviewed cybersecurity standards and certi-
ﬁcations for the IoT ecosystem by analyzing the vari-
ous standards and certiﬁcations schemes and the chal-
lenges associated with implementing them. Addition-
ally, previous works [18, 32, 44] reviewed the key build-
ing blocks for the certiﬁcation process in the context of
security testing and risk assessment in IoT. Along with
security certiﬁcations for IoT, Leszczyna et al. [47] con-
ducted a study that examined smart grid cybersecurity
standards and provided insights into the adoption of cy-
bersecurity standards. Speciﬁcally, the work [47] ex-
amined 36 cybersecurity-related and 12 privacy-related
standards and their adoptions in the area of smart grid.
Additionally, Kara et al. [42] reviewed the Common Cri-
teria in a speciﬁc ﬁeld, which shed light on the Common
Criteria’s application in secure software development.

Since Common Criteria covers a comprehensive range
of categories and technologies for ICT products and ser-
vices, it promotes the mutual recognition of secure ICT
products among a broad range of security standards and
certiﬁcations [35]. For example, Matheu et al.
[49]
stated that Common Criteria is the most widely used cy-
bersecurity certiﬁcation in the IoT ﬁeld. Furthermore,
albeit the fact that Russia is neither a Certiﬁcate Au-
thorizing Participant nor a Certiﬁcate Consuming Par-
ticipant of the Common Criteria, the history, structure,
and features of the Common Criteria used in the Russian
scheme are reviewed in [13] and [14]. The Common
Criteria standard has also been adopted worldwide by
other non-Common Criteria Recognition Arrangement
nations, such as China, which has its own certiﬁcation

2

scheme with their adaption of the Common Criteria stan-
dard called GB/T 18336 [40]. In spite of the signiﬁcant
role of the Common Criteria in ensuring cybersecurity
through security standards and certiﬁcations, widespread
adoption of the Common Criteria and certiﬁed products
is still a long way off [37].
In this work, we investi-
gate adoption barriers of security standards in the case of
the Common Criteria by adopting the survey approach.
Aside from the adoption barriers identiﬁed from the lit-
erature review being validated by our designed question-
naire, we explore other previously overlooked adoption
barriers.

Cyber assurance and risk management. Security
risk management refers to the process of “identifying,
assessing, and taking steps to reduce security risks to
an acceptable level” according to the deﬁnition from the
Australian Cyber Security Centre [6]. Additionally to
cybersecurity standards and certiﬁcations, organizations
employ a variety of risk management strategies, which
include physical controls (e.g., alarm systems, biomet-
rics, etc.), technological controls (e.g., ﬁrewalls, encryp-
tion, etc.), and behavioral controls (e.g., security train-
ing, policies and procedures, etc.). The topic of risk
management for cybersecurity assurance in different in-
dustry sectors has been extensively researched from the
perspective of technology [20, 36, 39, 51], theoretical
perspective [66], as well as the practice perspective [3].
For example, the study by Ghadge et al. [36] focused
on cyber risk management in supply chain contexts by
conducting a systematic literature review. A clear un-
derstanding of the cyber risk challenges and mitigation
strategies helps supply chain managers make informed
decisions. The paper by Ahmad et al. [3] provided an in-
depth case study of a ﬁnancial organization and outlined
a process model that can be used to increase situation
awareness in organizations.

Furthermore, numerous studies offer valuable insights
into better risk management in organizations [17, 43, 45,
65]. For instance, Hoppe et al.
[39] gathered market
insights from 37 recent industry surveys and structured
them based on the steps of the risk management process.
Through the study, the researchers [39] found that a lack
of security experts and a strained market were the main
obstacles to implementing cyber risk management for
small and medium-sized businesses. From the strategic
aspects of risk management, Laube et al. [45] system-
atically reviewed works on cyber risk information shar-
ing, which is proved to be beneﬁcial in providing more
edges to the defenders in their races against cyber at-
tackers. Tounsi and Rais [65] argued that the defenders
are required to collect and understand cyber-threat intel-
ligence to cope with the ever-increasing sophistication of
cyber threat intelligence. To investigate the role of cyber
[17] con-
insurance in risk management, Biener et al.

ducted an empirical analysis on the insurability of cyber
risks. After assessing the market potential in light of the
increasing number of high-proﬁle cyber incidents, they
concluded [17] with a positive note on cyber insurance.
Nevertheless, organizations in various industry verti-
cals are still vulnerable to cyber risks and continue to
suffer from damages, such as ﬁnancial loss, data breach,
and even reputation loss, caused by cyber attacks [62].
As part of our research, we investigate, through ques-
tionnaires, how organizations in different countries and
industries currently seek cyber assurance and risk man-
agement in addition to cybersecurity standards and cer-
tiﬁcations. Combined with the practice, strategies and
insights from the previous research work, we further pro-
vide the risk management best practices for cyber assur-
ance at a high level.

3 Our Investigations

To investigate how organizations seek cyber assurance
and their adoption of security standards, especially
the Common Criteria, we tried to ﬁnd participants
across different sectors, countries and organizations of
various sizes. We collected responses to our question-
naire through Qualtrics from 22 Sep 2021 to 23 Dec
2021 to seek answers to the three research questions
we raised in the Introduction. Our study received
ethics approval from Deakin University and Charles
Sturt University Human Research Ethics Ofﬁce with
the Reference Number SEBE-2021-38 and Protocol
Number H21353, respectively. See survey at: https:
//github.com/nansunsun/DACCA Questionnaire/
blob/main/DACCA Questionnaire.pdf. This section
discusses the questionnaire design, data collection, and
analysis of the responses.

3.1 Questionnaire Design and Data Collec-

tion

There are 28 questions in the questionnaire, including
open-ended and closed-ended questions in the forms of
short answers or multiple-choice questions. We ﬁrst
investigated participants’ demographics using Q1 - Q4
(Question 1 to Question 4), including the organization’s
name, countries where the participant’s organization op-
erates,
the size of the organization, and the sectors
wherein the participant’s organization conducts its busi-
nesses.

For participants from organizations that produce
ICT products that may be implemented in hardware,
ﬁrmware, or software conﬁrmed in Q5, we further inves-
tigated their adoption of and attitudes towards adopting
the Common Criteria through Q8 and Q10 - Q21. Be-
sides the Common Criteria, we explored whether these

3

Table 1: The number of each sector of participants’ or-
ganizations belong to. One participant can choose more
than one sector. The statistics are based on 158 partici-
pants who disclosed the sectors where their organizations
operate in.

Sector name
Defence industry
Health and social care
Food and agriculture
Energy and utilities
Resources and Mining
Information Communication Technology
Manufacturing
Transportation
Environment, water and soil
Education
Financial and insurance services
Real estate and insurance services
Wholesale and retail trade
Legal services
Others

Count
39
19
3
21
5
109
16
13
9
19
15
3
6
2
56

ICT product manufacturers adopt any other security stan-
dards in Q7 and Q9. In addition, the categories that are
relevant to the products produced by the participants’ or-
ganizations were surveyed in Q6.

For the participants whose organizations use ICT
products conﬁrmed in Q22, we surveyed if there are any
security certiﬁcation standards the participants’ organi-
zations are looking for when they select the ICT prod-
ucts used or to be used within their organizations in Q24
and those certiﬁcation standards they have obtained in
Q25. Speciﬁcally, if the organizations use ICT products
with Common Criteria certiﬁcation, the Evaluation As-
surance Levels for the products were investigated in Q26.
The categories that are relevant to the products used by
the participants’ organizations were surveyed in Q22. In
the absence of ICT products with a security certiﬁcation
standard, by adopting the open-ended questions, we sur-
veyed the ways the participants’ manage risks associated
with potentially poor implementation of security func-
tionality within the products through Q27 and the ways
the participants go about seeking assurances in the secu-
rity functionality of the products in Q28.

Through various avenues, we distributed the ques-
tionnaires and collected the responses from the partici-
pants across different countries, organizations, and sec-
tors. To ensure our survey reached a wide range of re-
spondents, we used several strategies to identify poten-
tial participants. Firstly, the contact information of par-
ticipants with a track record of participating in IT secu-
rity standards was collected from the International Com-

Figure 1: Word cloud of the names of participants’ or-
ganizations that also infer the operating sectors of orga-
nizations. The statistics are based on 152 participants of
responses who disclosed the name of their organizations.
Words that occur frequently appear larger and darker in
colour.

mon Criteria Conference website [2]. Secondly, we tried
to expand the participants’ list by searching users from
Common Criteria Users Forum [30], which is a com-
munity based around those using the Common Criteria
and ISO/IEC 15408 standards. Thirdly, we retrieved the
authors from the representative Common Criteria liter-
ature (i.e., research paper) as the potential participants
and collected their contact details. Furthermore, multi-
ple ICT vendors and companies found in the Common
Criteria portal [28] were included to gain a higher re-
sponse rate of questionnaires. Last but not least, with the
support of the Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSA),
the questionnaires were distributed to the ACSA partners
[5], which aims to gain the broader viewpoint from par-
ticipants in the wider cyber security community.

Email, Linkedin Message, and blog post 1 were used
to reach out to participants interested in cybersecurity
standards, which included certiﬁcation bodies, evalua-
tion laboratories, researchers, policymakers, product de-
velopers, sellers, and buyers. Participation in the project
is voluntary, and participants are free to stop and skip
any question at any time if they do not wish to reveal any
speciﬁc information. The total number of valid responses
was 285, of which 177 answered the entire 28 questions.

3.2 Responses Analysis

Our participants are from different organizations and sec-
tors, as shown in Table 1. 32.54% of organizations oper-
ate in the ICT sector, which is the most signiﬁcant pro-
portion of participants. Besides the sectors listed in Table
1, including the defence industry, energy and utilities, ed-
ucation, etc., 35.44% of participants chose the “Others”

1https://www.quintessencelabs.com/blog/quintessencelabs-joins-
research-study-with-deakin-university-and-charles-stuart-university/

4

option. Based on the analysis of these participants, it ap-
pears that most of them are from city councils, police de-
partments, government departments, and national com-
missions. A few are from consulting and cybersecurity
companies, and the others are anonymous participants.
To illustrate the range of sectors of the participants, we
present the word cloud of the names of participants’ or-
ganizations based on the responses for Q1 in Figure 1.

Both Australian and international participants are in-
volved in our survey. There are 175 participants’ organi-
zations operating in Australia, which takes up 61.40% of
the participants. Second place goes to the United States
of America, with 11.93%. Besides, organizations operat-
ing in Asian, North America, Oceania, South American,
and African countries are involved in the survey. Note
that these statistics do not reﬂect the popularity of certi-
fying ICT security products in various countries, but to
demonstrate that we made a serious attempt to explore
beyond Australia and provide a global picture of the cer-
tiﬁcation adoption landscape.

Lastly, from the perspective of the size of organiza-
tions, the responses are from organizations with various
sizes, including large, mid-market, and small businesses.
Among the responses, 37.50% are organizations with
more than 1000 employees. Around half (i.e., 46.15%)
of the organizations have 11-1000 employees. Besides,
there are 16.35% organizations with 0-10 employees par-
ticipating in our survey from the small business.

4 Our Findings

Based on the responses from survey participants 2, this
section describes our ﬁndings from the survey on the
Common Criteria adoption barriers and the potential in-
centive strategies to encourage the adoption of the Com-
mon Criteria.

4.1 The Common Criteria Adoption Barri-

ers

We ﬁrstly discuss the barriers that discourage organiza-
tions from adopting the Common Criteria certiﬁcation.
These adoption barriers are identiﬁed from the closed-
ended Q11 - Q19 and open-ended Q20. We show the
responses to the closed-ended questions on the Common
Criteria adoption barriers in Figure 2. Speciﬁcally, we
identify the following seven adoption barriers that are
common to organizations: (1) absence of technology cat-
egory in the Common Criteria portal; (2) time consum-
ing and not up-to-date; (3) lack of mutual recognition;
(4) lack of security evaluation experience; (5) expensive

2The IDs of participants are used to refer to the survey participant

(P).

costs; (6) not a key driver for purchase decisions; (7) lack
of governmental drive. These adoption barriers will be
discussed in detail below.

4.1.1 Absence of Technology Category

The Common Criteria uses a framework in which the
vendors and purchasers can specify their security func-
tional and assurance requirements for the ICT products.
The Common Criteria portal [28] archives the published
Protection Proﬁles and Certiﬁed Products under a broad
range of categories and diverse technology types. Al-
though the Common Criteria currently cover ﬁfteen cat-
egories, there are still 14.75% participants who strongly
agree and 31.15% participants who somewhat agree the
absence of approved Protection Proﬁles for the category
of the products makes it challenging to obtain the Com-
mon Criteria Certiﬁcation, based on the responses for
Q16. In particular, participant with the ID number 2 (P2)
speciﬁed:

“Protection Proﬁles do not exist for some new
technology used by the government such as
SD-WAN (i.e., Software-Deﬁned Wide Area
Network)”.

In addition, the increasing adoption of emerging tech-
nologies motivates the users on bringing in the poten-
tial categories of the Common Criteria [61]. The lack of
emerging technology category in Common Criteria is an
adoption barrier under the reason of absence of technol-
ogy category. P273 explained:

“There is no Common Criteria method for
evaluating products which have some security
functionality delivered partially or fully from
the cloud.”

Components required to operate and manage enter-
prise ICT environments account for a large proportion
of the Common Criteria certiﬁed products. For example,
according to the statistics on Common Criteria certiﬁed
products [27], by December 2021, there are 580 certi-
ﬁed products under the category of the Integrated Cir-
cuits (ICs), smart cards, and smart card-related devices
and systems, which takes up the most signiﬁcant percent-
age of certiﬁed products. However, some organizations
found that it is hard to certify their products, compared
with the ICT infrastructure products. P22 shared their
experiences:

“Organization produces building control sys-
tems, including HVAC (i.e., Heating, Ventila-
tion, Air Conditioning), Fire & Security, air-
port management systems, and many IoT prod-
ucts. Historically, the government agencies

5

Figure 2: The distribution of agreement level for the identiﬁed adoption barriers (i.e., Q11 - Q19). The semantic level
of agreement is measured using a ﬁve-point scale, where each segment represents the probability of respondents who
select that level of agreement (N=60).

running the Common Crieria are not interested
in these market sectors, remaining focused on
infrastructure products to the exclusion of oth-
ers.”

4.1.2 Time Consuming and Not Up-to-Date

The Common Criteria evaluation process requires a se-
ries of stages, including Security Target evaluation, de-
sign evaluation, guidance evaluation, life-cycle evalua-
tion, functional testing, and penetration testing. Besides,
the evaluation and testing process needs formal docu-
mentation following the Common Criteria convention,
which takes time to study and compile [41] [52]. On
average, the time required for the Common Criteria cer-
tiﬁcation is six months to one-year [49].

More than half of the participants (60.66%) agree that
the Common Criteria evaluation time is too long com-
pared to the product life cycle (Q13). For products that
have a short time-to-market, the lengthy evaluation pe-
riod hinders the adoption of the Common Criteria. To
illustrate, P16 shared their experience on Common Cri-
teria certiﬁcation:

“Another factor hindering Common Criteria
adoption is that the approval is only for a spe-
ciﬁc release, which is years old by the time cer-
tiﬁcation is obtained...There should be a path
to quickly have a new version accepted for cer-
tiﬁcations.”

As technology changes rapidly, the time-consuming
process of Common Criteria evaluation and certiﬁcation
impedes the commercialization of security products in
the market. As an example, when the Common Criteria
certiﬁcation process concludes, the technology for man-
ufacturing low-cost IoT devices may have become obso-
lete. Customers may expect the latest features instead of

absolute security assurance. As a proof, P125, as one of
the largest multi-disciplinary insurance agencies in Aus-
tralia, said: “Clients want latest features, these haven’t
time for Common Criteria evaluation prior to release...”.
P273 from the telecommunications equipment company
had similar concerns: “The software release cadence of
cloud products (e.g., monthly) would not align with Com-
mon Criteria certiﬁcation time-frames.”

4.1.3 Lack of Mutual Recognition

The Common Criteria is the driving force for the widest
available mutual recognition of secure ICT products. As
of 2021, there are 17 certiﬁcate authorizing schemes un-
der the Common Criteria [25]. Country-speciﬁc imple-
mentation of Common Criteria schemes are different in
the ﬂow of evaluation and certiﬁcation of ICT products
[35]. The fragmented landscape of Common Criteria
schemes generates the disharmonized perspective for se-
curity evaluation. In particular, the US keeps the certi-
ﬁed products listed for two years before being archived,
while the other counties keep them for ﬁve years. Nearly
half (45.90%) of our participants agree that there is a
lack of mutual recognition on Common Criteria certiﬁ-
cation among the countries where your products are sold
(Q17). P273 emphasized the different lifetimes for dif-
ferent schemes, “Different schemes enforce different cer-
tiﬁcate lifetimes, e.g., NIAP - 2 years, Canada - 5 years
etc.”

The lack of mutual recognition across diverse secu-
rity standards is one adoption barrier for security cer-
tiﬁcations, including the Common Criteria [49]. The
comment from one of the ICT product consumers P103
remarked “Certiﬁcation overload makes anyone choice
hard.” Harmonization of the certiﬁcation results across
different standards is expected from both consumers and
vendors to improve the transparency of the security cer-

6

31.15%1.64%31.67%5.00%8.20%11.48%5.00%8.33%29.51%9.84%11.48%21.67%13.33%11.48%11.48%10.00%16.67%16.39%36.07%26.23%20.00%38.33%34.43%31.15%28.33%15.00%16.39%29.51%32.79%21.67%30.00%31.15%29.51%41.67%23.33%6.56%24.59%27.87%5.00%13.33%14.75%16.39%15.00%36.67%Q11-NO BENEFIT TO PRODUCTS (𝜎=1.26, 𝜇=2.38)Q12 -EXPENSIVE COSTS (𝜎=0.95, 𝜇=3.69)Q13 -TIME CONSUMING (𝜎=1.04, 𝜇=3.74)Q14 -NOT BELONG TO IT SECURITY PRODUCTS (𝜎=1.27, 𝜇=2.47)Q15 -PROHIBITIVE DOCUMENTATION (𝜎=1.03, 𝜇=3.33)Q16 -PROTECTION PROFILE ABSENCE (𝜎=1.11, 𝜇=3.33)Q17 -LACK OF MUTUAL RECOGNITION (𝜎=1.20, 𝜇=3.28)Q18 -LACK GOVERNMENTAL DRIVE (𝜎=1.02, 𝜇=3.52)Q19 -NOT A PURACHASE DRIVE (𝜎=1.34, 𝜇=3.63)Strongly DisagreeSomewhat DisagreeNeither Agree Nor DisagreeSomewhat AgreeStrongly Agreetiﬁcations. As the vendor, P16 stated:

“No commonality among related certiﬁca-
tions. Why can’t testing for FIPS 140-3 be ac-
cepted as testing for NDcPP? Why can’t ND-
cPP testing be accepted for EAL2? Why can’t
NDcPP and EAL2 be combined? I would like
to see a requirement table which showed rela-
tionships between EAL2, NDcPP, FIPS 140-3,
EU Cybersecurity law, California Cybersecu-
rity law...”

4.1.4 Lack of Security Evaluation Experience

The Common Criteria standard is somewhat complex
and not easy to follow to conduct evaluation in terms
of its usability and readability. For example, participant
P147 commented “unclear on the process to undertake
evaluation”, P4 stated “internal resources unavailabil-
ity”, and P14 recommended that “streamline Common
Criteria adoption process will be helpful.” 43.33% of our
participants agreed that the documentation requirements
for Common Criteria evaluation are prohibitive, so that
it is difﬁcult to obtain the Common Criteria certiﬁca-
tion (Q15). In response, many product vendors engage
consultants to prepare speciﬁc evaluation material at the
pre-evaluation stage. The current efforts on major review
work are underway by international experts through the
International Organization of Standardization (ISO) [35].
This should see an improvement of the Common Criteria
for wider adoption from the perspective of usability and
readability of the documentation.

However, updating and revising the Common Criteria
make the certiﬁcation process inconsistent when users
intend to obtain a Common Criteria certiﬁcation. A
few national evaluation schemes are phased out of us-
ing Evaluation Assurance Levels (EALs) and only ac-
cept products that claim strict conformance with Protec-
tion Proﬁles approved by them. In fact, only Protection
Proﬁle evaluations are currently allowed in the United
States. P18 mentioned this difﬁculty when they tried to
certify their product under a particular Common Criteria
scheme: “Lack of consistency and changing rules in the
middle of an evaluation makes it very difﬁcult to properly
plan and evaluate our products.”

Furthermore, it is not within the scope of the Com-
mon Criteria to detail how cryptography is implemented
within the TOE. Instead, national standards, such as
FIPS 140-2 [53], specify the speciﬁcations for crypto-
graphic modules, and various standards specify the cryp-
tographic algorithms used. In recent years, the Protec-
tion Proﬁle authors have included cryptographic require-
ments for Common Criteria evaluations that would gen-
erally be covered by FIPS 140-2 evaluations, expand-

ing the scope of the Common Criteria by using scheme-
speciﬁc interpretations.

In addition, a common phenomenon of the security
evaluation is the lack of talent and expertise, especially
Common Criteria. The outﬂow of talent with the secu-
rity evaluation expertise is happening. According to the
response from an Australian technology company P152:

“... New entrants don’t see a career path and
prefer to work out how to leave as soon as pos-
sible... A small core remains in security evalu-
ations.”

4.1.5 Expensive Costs

In our survey, 24.5% of participants strongly agree,
29.5% somewhat agree, and no participant strongly dis-
agrees that the Common Criteria evaluation costs are too
expensive compared to the beneﬁts brought into the eval-
uated products (Q12). The evaluation costs to obtain
the Common Criteria certiﬁcation is commonly regarded
as a barrier to the Common Criteria certiﬁcation adop-
tion [12][49], particularly for companies with a limited
budget and low-margin products. ICT products with a
low-proﬁt margin may not be able to justify and defray
the costs associated with Common Criteria certiﬁcation,
given the market’s competitive nature. Based on the in-
vestigation on certiﬁed products listed on the Common
Criteria portal [26], the Common Criteria certiﬁcation is
relatively more likely to be adopted by companies with
a high-proﬁt margin and capable of sustaining sensitive
government networks. P96 shared their thoughts on the
cost of Common Criteria evaluation:

“Common Criteria (and its predecessor) was a
nice idea but has always been too expensive...”

Generally, in line with the Australia scheme, obtaining
the Common Criteria certiﬁcation involves four steps:
pre-evaluation, conduct, conclusion, and assurance con-
tinuity.
In the ﬁrst step, pre-evaluation is essential to
ensure the success of the Common Criteria evaluation
process, prevent delays, conduct initial assessments, de-
velop the Security Target and the evaluation schedule.
This includes the writing of functional, high-level, and
low-level design speciﬁcations. As a second step, the
conduct phase veriﬁes any claimed security functionality
under the Common Criteria, and any other claimed cryp-
tographic functionality under the speciﬁc security stan-
dard, such as FIPS 140-2 [33]. The evaluation and cer-
tiﬁcation processes are ﬁnalized in the conclusion phase.
Additionally, the assurance continuity phase allows for
a minimization in the number of evaluations and the op-
tions of extending certiﬁcation to the updated Target of
Evaluation version.

7

In general,

the costs of an evaluation depends on
the security assurance level or Protection Proﬁle confor-
mance claims, as well as on the complexity of the Target
of Evaluation [58]. A start-up database company P45
commented on the cost of Common Criteria evaluation:

“We’ve learnt that the certiﬁcation cost may
be above 100k USD, which is too expensive
for startups or companies in early developing
stages, like ours.”

The overall evaluation costs are composed of four
lab fees,
internal costs, external costs,
components:
and certiﬁcation fees. The internal costs are incurred
on preparing deliverables and supporting the evaluators.
The external costs consist of consultancy fees. The lab
fees are paid to the evaluation labs, and the certiﬁcation
fees are paid to the corresponding certiﬁcation body if
applicable. The cost of conducting complex evaluation
activities in laboratories is substantial. A recently esti-
mated average cost for a Common Criteria certiﬁcation
lifecycle is US$250,000 [49] depending on the evalua-
tion assurance level and re-use of past evaluation effort.
The cost of an evaluation against a Protection Proﬁle is
relatively inexpensive due to the reduced efforts in de-
veloping the evaluation documentation. Because of the
heavy cost on the Common Criteria lifecycle, it is chal-
lenging to evaluate the products against the Common
Criteria standard for organizations.

4.1.6 Not a Key Driver for Purchase Decisions

A majority of the participants (60.66%) strongly or
somewhat disagree with the statement in Q11: Common
Criteria certiﬁcation does not add any beneﬁts to your
products. However, when considering issues related to
the economic viability of the organizations, 36.67% of
our participants strongly agree that Common Criteria cer-
tiﬁcation seems not to be a key driver for purchasing de-
cisions of commercial customers (Q19). For example,
P147 said: “Unclear on the value it would provide to the
business.”

For start-up companies or low-margin businesses, the
budget for gaining security certiﬁcations is limited. As a
participant from a start-up company, P27 realized that the
organization should take countermeasures to cope with
cyber attacks. However, the highest priority for spending
time and money is on delivering new functionality:

“...As a startup, our focus is on adding ad-
ditional functionality and must-have features
than on optional ones...Our customers are not
that security-focused.”

difﬁcult to forecast revenue associated to a certiﬁcation
to justify certiﬁcation expenses.” P112 pointed out that
the decision to pursue Common Criteria certiﬁcation for
their products is partly determined by market demand:

“Certiﬁcation of a product must contribute to
the commercial viability of the product. This
should be done by a combination of measures
to change the cost/effort barrier to achieving
product certiﬁcation and to improve the unit
price/accessible market/demand for the certi-
ﬁed product.”

4.1.7 Lack of Governmental Drive

Within the Q18 respondents, 28% strongly or somewhat
agree that there is a lack of governmental drive (e.g.,
security certiﬁcation requirements) in their procurement
policy for the Common Criteria certiﬁcation. P111 com-
mented: “People once cared about Common Criteria
certiﬁcation, but the current PSPF (i.e., Protective Se-
curity Policy Framework)/ISM (i.e., Information Security
Manual) really don’t encourage us.” Some organizations
found it hard to seek help and support from government
agencies, such as the input from P112:

“Government and commercial do not see prod-
uct certiﬁcation as a key part of the risk man-
agement around the selection and implementa-
tion of effective security controls. Government
agencies are very unhelpful in establishing any
form of commercial justiﬁcation to get a prod-
uct certiﬁed and in getting products through
any form of the certiﬁcation process.”

4.2 Adoption of

the Common Criteria:

Recommendations

According to the response received from our survey par-
ticipants, the above identiﬁed barriers hinder the adop-
tion of the Common Criteria. Security standards have al-
ways been considered an effective way to provide cyber
assurance, although there are some obstacles to widely
embracing these security standards. To drive the broad
adoption of the Common Criteria and the wider range of
security standards, we next discuss the identiﬁed Com-
mon Criteria incentive strategies and summarize six cat-
egories as follows: (1) guidance, resources, and exper-
tise; (2) governmental incentive; (3) mutual recognition;
(4) procedure optimization; (5) extension into emerging
technologies; (6) consumers’ trust.

Additionally, some organizations expect to gain eco-
nomic beneﬁts from Common Criteria certiﬁcation in ad-
dition to security assurance. P27 further put it: “It is

4.2.1 Guidance, Resources, and Expertise

The guidance and resources on how to begin the Com-
mon Criteria assessment process, including developing

8

Protection Proﬁle, preparing Security Target, and test-
ing for evaluation, are highly desirable. Although there
are documents that introduce the Common Criteria gen-
eral model [23], security functional requirements [22],
and security assurance requirements [24] available on the
Common Criteria portal [28], many participants found it
is hard to initiate the procedures due to the lack of us-
ability and readability of these documents as identiﬁed
in Section 3. For example, P147 emphasized the need
for “better guidance on when a product should be eval-
uated, and how to begin the process.”

Besides the Common Criteria portal, another impor-
tant source of information is the International Common
Criteria Conference (ICCC) [2]. It is a technical confer-
ence where professionals involved in the Common Cri-
teria exchange their experiences in speciﬁcation, devel-
opment, evaluation, certiﬁcation and approval with re-
gard to the ICT security of products and systems. Al-
though the ICCC is held annually for the community
of professionals involved in Common Criteria, the ex-
periences shared on the process of Common Criteria as-
sessment are hard to access through public resources.
Based on the situation, some companies choose to utilize
“outsourced service” (P4) that transfers the tasks to pro-
fessionals with Common Criteria expertise. Moreover,
some companies choose to establish their own informa-
tion bank. P147 shared their approaches on how to accu-
mulate guidance, resources, and expertise on the Com-
mon Criteria:

“[Company name] has its own training mate-
rial and induction process for trainee evalua-
tors. This material includes speciﬁc examples
of EAL2+ assurance classes and evaluations.
A training package that included completed ex-
amples of EAL2+ (including ALC FLR.2) as-
surance classes “which was intended to be
shared with TOE developers” would be ideal
as it will allow new entrants to view and under-
stand the source material required as inputs to
the assurance classes. It would also allow new
[Company name] workers to view and create
templates to speed up the creation of assurance
classes.”

4.2.2 Governmental Incentive

According to the responses from our participants, gov-
ernment supports and incentives motivate the adoption of
Common Criteria evaluations and Common Criteria cer-
tiﬁed products to a certain extent. As the manufacturers
of ICT products, some participants adopt the Common
Criteria to meet the government’s procurement require-
ments in order to access the markets. For example, P273

9

shared one of the reasons for adopting Common Criteria
evaluations:

“As an IT equipment manufacturer, [Company
name] adopts the Common Criteria as a mar-
ket access requirement for various government
markets globally.”

Consumers of Common Criteria certiﬁed products can
be categorized based on market sectors: public and pri-
vate. When it comes to the public sector, government
supports can boost the adoption of Common Criteria cer-
tiﬁcations through the requirement of Common Criteria
certiﬁed products. For example, establishing policy re-
quirements for the procurement process used by govern-
ment departments and agencies encourages the Common
Criteria adoption. The US government requires Com-
mon Criteria certiﬁed products for speciﬁc applications.
This policy encourages vendors to participate in Com-
mon Criteria evaluations [58]. P103 shared the ideas on
the Common Criteria incentive strategies: “Government
mandate or engagement, critical mass in the market.”
Similar comments came from P274 and P27: “Govern-
ments mandate for customer and assistance to vendors
to get started” (P274), “Government regulation” (P27).
In addition, government incentives can encourage the
adoption of Common Criteria certiﬁed products in the
private sector. The government’s support and incentives
would be essential in boosting the uptake of Common
Criteria certiﬁcations since the vendors could minimize
legal risks and gain economic beneﬁts from perform-
ing the Common Criteria evaluations. For instance, in
Japan, tax deductions are available for businesses that
use Common Criteria certiﬁed products, which increases
the purchase of the certiﬁed products [68]. “Government
funding” (P106), “Government grants” (P100), “Spon-
sorship from government”(P61) and “Tax incentive”(P3)
were proposed to encourage the adoption of the Common
Criteria from our participants for responding Q21 - What
kind of incentive would be helpful for your organization
for adopting Common Criteria certiﬁcation.

4.2.3 Mutual Recognition

Globally, there are a variety of cybersecurity standards,
including international, national, and industry-speciﬁc
regulations. Comparing the level of security between dif-
ferent standards is difﬁcult. As P44 stated: “There are
many security certiﬁcation standards.”. Even for the sin-
gle Common Criteria standard, it is difﬁcult to achieve
the objective of comparability due to the technical nature
of the document [49]. To achieve the objective, it was
proposed to establish a single comprehensive standard
to facilitate mutual recognition among various security
standards. For example, P189 remarked:

“I think a mass move toward a single com-
prehensive standard within [Country name]
would strongly inﬂuence my organization to re-
evaluate the need to maintain a standard that
essentially duplicates effort and paraphrases
similar criteria to other standards.”

Evaluation in the future can be made more compara-
ble and harmonized by standardizing evaluation activi-
ties. For product comparability, rigorous security metrics
can be developed that indicate the level of threats, risks,
and security provided by each.

4.2.4 Procedure Optimization

Through uniﬁed processes and formalized steps, evalua-
tion activities are made more manageable. For example,
P159 expected “Lower barriers to entry and a quicker,
more transparent process” to adopt the Common Cri-
teria. Usually, implementation-independent Protection
Proﬁles in the Common Criteria [46] deﬁne the secu-
rity requirements for ICT technology that consumers ex-
Independent laboratories then evaluate products
pect.
to decide if the claimed security properties have been
achieved [9]. Standardization of evaluation and testing
procedures in the future will make the certiﬁcation pro-
cess more transparent.

In addition, “the agile and swift” (P14) process can
be considered as the future direction of the optimization
procedure for the Common Criteria. Many participants
are expecting the “faster timeframes” (P130), “faster
pace with faster path for features updates” (P156) for
the Common Criteria certiﬁcation. In order to respond
quickly with rapid iterations and updates on technology,
the Common Criteria need to be continuously updated
with requirement discovery and solution improvement
through the collaboration of vendors, technical special-
ists, customers, and governments.

Lastly, our participants are concerned about the costs
associated with Common Criteria evaluation and certiﬁ-
cation, as mentioned in Section 4.1.5. There are several
proposed ways of reducing the cost proposed, including
“Reducing gap analysis cost, consulting cost, evaluation
voucher, etc.” (P10), “Free evaluations for two products
per company.” (P125), and governmental supports dis-
cussed in Section 4.2.2.

4.2.5 Extension into Emerging Technologies

ICT security-related technologies and evaluations are
covered by the Common Criteria, from functionalities
to security assurance. Traditional ICT technology and
products, such as ICs, database and network devices,
are sufﬁciently covered and evaluated under the Com-
mon Criteria standard in the past decades [38]. In light

of emerging technologies, the Common Criteria stan-
dard needs to address the evaluation of new technologies,
such as blockchain, quantum computing, artiﬁcial intel-
ligence, and IoT. This is conﬁrmed by P22 who indicated
the importance of: “extension into IoT and commercial
sectors.” Additionally, privacy laws should be observed
for high assurance products, such as privacy-preserving
authentication.

4.2.6 Consumer Trust

The adoption of security-sensitive ICT products relies
heavily on the trust the users’ place in the security fea-
tures of these products. The trust of users are considered
the driving force behind certiﬁcations and cybersecurity
standards. P41 stated:

“Adopting Common Criteria certiﬁcation or
not is up to the commercial customers in the
target market of the products.”

Assuring the security of ICT products is a joint en-
deavour between vendors,
technical specialists, cus-
tomers, and governments that never ends. Through ed-
ucation and information available on the Common Crite-
ria portal [28] and other platforms, sharing information
on the core blocks of Common Criteria evaluation and
certiﬁcation will contribute to this cause. The trustwor-
thiness of ICT products and the Common Criteria can
be established if consumers are provided with long-term
security assurances regarding the products’ security fea-
tures. C150 identiﬁed other factors that inﬂuence the
purchase of security-enhanced ICT products, aside from
certiﬁcation:

“From the perspective of a consumer of secu-
rity products, Common Criteria (or similar) is
not a factor. It is the real world efﬁcacy of a
security product combined with the ability to
readily implement, maintain and manage that
inﬂuence the purchasing decision, not a certi-
ﬁcation.”

The implementation of security-by-design in product
engineering processes can not only signiﬁcantly shorten
the evaluation and certiﬁcation process, but also ensure
that products are designed from the very beginning to be
secure [31]. The incremental certiﬁcation of products for
additional functionality and features will be more acces-
sible with the integration of certiﬁcation and evaluation
into the product development process [4][16]. Further-
more, the certiﬁcation itself, accompanied by continu-
ous assurances of products’ security to consumers, helps
consumers build and strengthen trust in the Common Cri-
teria.

10

5 Risk Management Directions for Cyber

Assurance

By investigating the Common Criteria adoption barriers,
we understand the process of organizations making de-
cisions when they purchase, produce, and use ICT prod-
ucts with security functionalities. In addition to adopt-
ing security standards such as the Common Criteria as
discussed in Section 4, there are other risk management
approaches to achieve cybersecurity assurance that orga-
nizations can take to protect their assets and the data of
their employees, business partners, and customers. We
further discuss our investigation of risk management ap-
proaches for cyber assurance adopted by the participat-
ing organizations in our survey with the proposed future
directions for risk management of organizations.

5.1 Reactive vs Proactive cybersecurity

An organization can choose to take a proactive approach
to cybersecurity, preventing threats before they arise, or
a reactive approach, addressing cybersecurity breaches
after they have occurred. Reactive cybersecurity investi-
gates the signs that indicate a data breach has occurred
and a cybersecurity incident has been committed [67].
The reactive approach involves responding to cybersecu-
rity incidents in case of further damage [15]. Proactive
cybersecurity investigates the indicators of compromise,
which is a broad and overall approach that involves not
only speciﬁc methods and practices but also a mindset
of protecting cybersecurity before the incidents happen
in advance [62]. Below, we categorize the cybersecu-
rity risk management approaches shared by our partici-
pants and analyze these approaches from the reactive and
proactive points of view respectively.

5.1.1 Patch Management

Patching falls under the Essential Eight in the Strate-
gies to Mitigate Cyber Security Incidents of the Aus-
tralian Cyber Security Centre [11]. Patch management
is applied to computer systems, applications, cloud in-
frastructure, and other critical infrastructure (e.g., indus-
trial control systems) to mitigate cybersecurity incidents.
Once a vendor releases a patch, the patch should be ap-
plied in a timeframe commensurate with an organiza-
tion’s exposure to the security vulnerability and the level
of cyber threat the organization is aiming to protect itself
against. Once a newly discovered security vulnerability
in an internet-facing service is made public, adversaries
will likely develop malicious code within 48 hours [10].
Some of our participants handled patching manage-
ment in their own way. For example, P229 mentioned
that they conducted “regular review of available up-

dates and patching” as part of the risk management pro-
cess, and P134 reviewed “patch management forums” to
check the feedback on the products prior procurement.
A reactive patch is applied in response to an issue that
currently affects a system and that needs immediate re-
lief [55]. When such a situation occurs, users typically
install the most recent patch or patches, which may ap-
pear to be capable of resolving the issue. However, in
many cases, problems that can occur have already been
identiﬁed, and patches have already been released. Com-
pared to a reactive patch management strategy, a proac-
tive patch management strategy implies more changes
and regularly scheduled maintenance windows to reduce
unplanned issues [54].

5.1.2 Cyber Risk Proﬁle

The cyber risk proﬁle is a quantitative approach for as-
sessing cybersecurity risks for an organization, asset,
project or individual [59]. In the absence of cybersecu-
rity certiﬁcations, some participants establish a risk pro-
ﬁle for the product to manage risks. For example, P193
shared their experience on how to manage risks when
there are no cybersecurity certiﬁcations for the products:

“...We establish an overall risk proﬁle for the
product to consider what information will be
stored, processed or communicated using the
product, as well as establishing mitigating or
alternative controls to manage the absence of
the certiﬁcation.”

As a reactive way, the audit data can be retrieved to
avoid further damage if cybersecurity incidents have hap-
pened [48]. Furthermore, the risks are monitored based
on the established risk proﬁle. For example, P140 men-
tioned that the risks are monitored in “the lifecycle of
the supportability of the product”. The procedures and
countermeasures are formulated based on the risk pro-
ﬁle to understand the risks, assess them, and mitigate
them. Therefore, the organization proactively manages
the risks on products, systems, assets, and projects to
reduce the likelihood of cyber attacks, as illustrated by
P156’s example:

“Evaluate the risk proﬁle versus beneﬁt for the
product in question and put in place commen-
surate controls and standard operating proce-
dures to minimize the security risk.”

It is worth mentioning that through the secure shar-
ing of risk proﬁles across organizations, the information
on risk management can be shared to improve cyber re-
silience. For example, the Open Science Cyber Risk Pro-
ﬁle (OSCRP) aims to help improve IT security for open

11

science projects [56] for scientists and IT professionals,
which serves to bridge the communication gap between
scientists and IT security professionals and allows for the
effective management of risks to open science caused by
IT security threats.

5.1.3 Self and In-house Evaluations

Independent testing, such as “penetration testing” (P11),
“own vulnerability scanning” (P125), “in-house exami-
nation” (P104), was adopted by our survey participants
for cyber assurance based on the survey. Through inde-
pendent testing, ICT products are tested with white-hat
hackers to ﬁnd exploitable vulnerabilities. In addition,
potential exploits can be closed with the help of pene-
tration testing in the proactive approach. The mitigation
recommendations and strategies will be decided to con-
duct risk management within organizations based on the
testing results. P273 shared their experience on their self
and in-house evaluations:

“For cloud products, we conduct a detailed
cloud security assessment based on the busi-
ness criticality of information classiﬁcation
of its use within [Company name]. For on-
prem products, we conduct in-house evalua-
tions prior to deployment.”

5.1.4 Cybersecurity Insurance

Cyber risk management is imperative due to the signif-
icant economic impacts and increased media attention
[17]. In the light of the need for improving risk man-
agement within organizations, cybersecurity insurance
companies have been developing steadily in recent years
[63]. For instance, BizCover [1] is an insurance com-
pany that will cover expenses on cybersecurity incidents.
In the context of cybersecurity insurance, the cyber risk
is tagged with a price, which creates incentive for risk-
appropriate behavior.
In addition, by simply applying
for cybersecurity insurance, the organizations become
more aware of self-protective awareness against the cy-
ber threats. Cybersecurity insurance assists users in tak-
ing a proactive approach to cybersecurity in addition to
potentially covering the ﬁnancial cost of dealing with cy-
bersecurity attacks in the reactive way [34].

Some of our participants, especially small businesses,
chose to use insurance companies to seek assurances in
the cybersecurity aspect. For example, P7 is a global
IT company with the size between 51-250 employees
mentioned that they employed “insurance companies”
to manage risks associated with potentially poor imple-
mentation of security functionality within the products
in the absence of IT products with a security certiﬁcation

standard and used “insurance companies” to seek cyber
assurance.

However, there are a number of difﬁculties that restrict
the development of cybersecurity insurance, including
loss occurrence, information asymmetries, and the limits
of insurance coverage [17]. With the increasing market
development, the risk information pool for cybersecurity
insurance will become more extensive with more avail-
able data. Therefore, sharing data through national reg-
ulators or international associations will improve insur-
ance risk assessments and insurance market efﬁciency.

5.1.5 Cybersecurity Awareness Education

According to MediaPRO’s annual privacy and security
awareness report, 85% of ﬁnance workers lacked knowl-
edge around data privacy and cybersecurity [50]. Besides
the professional education on evaluation as introduced in
Section 4.1.4, cybersecurity uncertainty will be mitigated
by keeping employees up to date on the latest threat in-
telligence and attack methods. In addition to reducing
stress, security training helps eliminate risky behaviours
and establishes a culture of cybersecurity in the work-
place regarding security standards.

Based on the responses from our questionnaires, many
organizations provided cybersecurity training to their
staff to establish their awareness. For example, P67 said
that they offered “policies/procedures and staff cyberse-
curity training”, and P229 shared that they trained their
staff with “industry best practices guides” and “previous
implementation experience.”

Besides the training on cybersecurity standards, the
best practices, and standards, making sure users know
how to spot the tell-tale signs and tricks of fraudsters
will enable them to avoid social engineering and other
phishing attacks.

5.2 Multi-layered Risk Management

Although a few participants indicated that “never at-
tempted to” (P3) seek cybersecurity assurances with the
product and “not used” (P246) risk management.
In
most cases, our participants took steps to ensure cyberse-
curity and prevent potential threats. Rather than relying
on a single approach to managing risks, most of our par-
ticipants adopted multiple risk management strategies.
For example, P262 introduced how to obtain cyber as-
surance within the organization when accessing the ICT
products:

“For products and services that we have ac-
cess to, we will use a mix of audit and tech-
nical testing capabilities to obtain an appro-
priate level of assurance. The degree of this
activity is dependant on the risk.”

12

In order to effectively manage risk, organizations need
a systemic multi-layered approach that crosses multiple
business units, departments and processes, touching ev-
ery individual, machine and element within the organi-
zation. Below, we discuss how to obtain cyber assurance
through the multi-layered risk management based on the
responses from our participants.

Firstly,

in the process of product design and im-
plementation, practical risk management tools and ap-
proaches are employed through assurance activities. For
example, P78 mentioned that they utilized “vulnerabil-
ity management and mitigation controls where possible”
to manage risks within the products during the prod-
uct implementation process. Organizations also follow
“best practices recommended by governments” (P267)
and “industry best practices guide” (P229) in this pro-
cess, such as the implementation of security-by-design
as demonstrated in Section 4.2.6. P119 shared their ac-
tivities in this process:

“Through detailed threat modeling and analy-
sis and designing required mitigations. Stan-
dard cybersecurity risk management practices
are then used as a mechanism to provide re-
quired assurance.”

Secondly, organizations need to protect their cyberse-
curity and improve their cyber resilience when selecting
and utilizing these ICT technologies. Usually, organiza-
tions combine a number of available data to choose ICT
products. Many participants preferred to choose prod-
ucts with “trusted brands” (P143) and “reputable com-
panies” (P75). Besides reference checks on the products,
security certiﬁcation is an essential element to check for
the purchasers. For example, P83 declared: “We need
to see the certiﬁcation from the vendors”. In addition,
some participants conducted “own independent testing”
(P159) or “3rd party efﬁcacy test” (P150) before pro-
curement and monitor the products during use. P57
shared their activities before procurement to achieve cy-
bersecurity assurance:

“Generally achieved through supply chain due
diligence, selecting preferred and trusted sup-
pliers and by conducting internal assessment
and suitability validation of the products as ﬁt
for purpose and being with the risk thresholds
of the organization.”

Thirdly, cybersecurity attacks and incidents are in-
evitable nowadays. Organizations prepare for the worst
before incidents occur and try their best to reduce losses
if incidents have already occurred. Another layer of risk
management relates to incident management. Audit data
should be traceable to help organizations reﬂect on the

attacks to avoid similar attacks in the future. Some of
our participants chose to utilize an insurance company as
shown in 5.1.4. In addition, setting up a response team
to prepare for mitigation recommendations and actions is
necessary to bounce back after cybersecurity incidents.

Furthermore, cybersecurity issues are not limited to
the IT department. They pose a signiﬁcant threat to
business continuity and reputation and threaten every as-
pect of an organization. Security awareness within the
company helps employees understand cyber hygiene that
refers to the practices for ensuring the safe handling of
data and for securing networks [19]. Educating employ-
ees about the security risks associated with their actions
via email and the web reduces the chances of being at-
tacked [69]. As demonstrated in 5.1.5, some of the staff
from the organizations of our participants were provided
with cybersecurity training. Furthermore, since cyber-
security is a cross-functional concern, the organizations
sometimes need to work with external entities to share in-
formation on cybersecurity to improve cyber resilience.
Hence, besides cybersecurity awareness education, the
C-suite level plays an imperative role in establishing a
cybersecured organization [57].

6 Conclusion

In this work, we presented the results of our survey on
the Common Criteria adoption and approaches to ensur-
ing cyber assurance for organizations. To determine if
organizations have concerns related to cybersecurity reg-
ulatory issues as well as to determine organizations’ atti-
tudes towards being measured against cybersecurity stan-
dards, seven adoption barriers of security standards and
certiﬁcations are identiﬁed. The results of our study in-
form our recommendations for promoting Common Cri-
teria adoption and broader cybersecurity standards and
certiﬁcations. Aside from the use of cybersecurity stan-
dards and certiﬁcations to select secure ICT products,
we investigate how organizations pursue cyber assurance
and their adopted strategies. We hope the ﬁndings and
recommendations we have made help researchers, orga-
nizations, and regulators raise concerns among academia
and industry about the importance of cybersecurity stan-
dards and certiﬁcations. Beyond cybersecurity standards
and certiﬁcations, the survey presents insights and direc-
tions on risk management, in the hope of inspiring orga-
nizations to achieve cyber assurance.

Acknowledgements

The work has been supported by the Cyber Security
Research Centre Limited whose activities are partially

13

Infor-
In-
https:

Infor-
In-
https:

Infor-
Se-
https:

Infor-
Se-
https:

funded by the Australian Government’s Cooperative Re-
search Centres Programme.

References

[1] BizCover: Compare Small Business Insurance Quotes Australia.

https://www.bizcover.com.au.

[2] International Common Criteria Conference, 2021. https://

iccconference.org/.

[3] AHMAD, A., MAYNARD, S. B., DESOUZA, K. C., KOTSIAS,
J., WHITTY, M. T., AND BASKERVILLE, R. L. How can or-
ganizations develop situation awareness for incident response: A
case study of management practice. Computers & Security 101
(2021), 102122.

[4] ANDREA, M., PHILIPPE, M., SBASTIEN, D., AND JEREMY,
G. Towards incremental safety and security requirements co-
In 2020 IEEE European Symposium on Security
certiﬁcation.
and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW) (2020), IEEE, pp. 79–84.

[17] BIENER, C., ELING, M., AND WIRFS, J. H.

Insurability of
cyber risk: An empirical analysis. The Geneva Papers on Risk
and Insurance-Issues and Practice 40, 1 (2015), 131–158.

[18] BURES, M., CERNY, T., AND AHMED, B. S. Internet of things:
Current challenges in the quality assurance and testing methods.
In International Conference on Information Science and Appli-
cations (2018), Springer, pp. 625–634.

[19] CAIN, A. A., EDWARDS, M. E., AND STILL, J. D. An ex-
ploratory study of cyber hygiene behaviors and knowledge. Jour-
nal of information security and applications 42 (2018), 36–45.

[20] CHOO, K.-K. R., GAI, K., CHIARAVIGLIO, L., AND YANG, Q.
A multidisciplinary approach to internet of things (iot) cyberse-
curity and risk management. Computers & Security 102 (2021),
102136.

[21] COMMON CRITERIA.

Common Criteria

for

mation Technology Security Evaluation - Part 1:
troduction and General Model, April 2017.
//www.commoncriteriaportal.org/files/ccfiles/
CCPART1V3.1R5 marked changes.pdf.

[5] AUSTRALIA CYBER SECURITY CENTRE. Partner hub.

[22] COMMON CRITERIA.

Common Criteria

for

[6] AUSTRALIA CYBER SECURITY CENTRE.

Security risk
https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-

management.
content/glossary/security-risk-management.

[7] AUSTRALIAN CYBER SECURITY CENTRE.

nual Cyber Threat Report, September 2020.
//www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-09/
ACSC-Annual-Cyber-Threat-Report-2019-20.pdf.

ACSC An-
https:

[8] AUSTRALIAN CYBER SECURITY CENTRE. ACSC Annual Cyber
Threat Report, September 2021. https://www.cyber.gov.au/
acsc/view-all-content/reports-and-statistics/
acsc-annual-cyber-threat-report-2020-21.

[9] AUSTRALIAN SIGNALS DIRECTORATE.

June 2020.

Portal,
view-all-content/referral-organisations/common-
criteria-portal.

Common Criteria
https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/

[10] AUSTRALIAN SIGNALS DIRECTORATE.

Assessing Secu-
rity Vulnerabilities and Applying Patches, December 2021.
https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/
publications/assessing-security-vulnerabilities-
and-applying-patches.

[11] AUSTRALIAN SIGNALS DIRECTORATE.

Essential Eight,
April 2021. https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-
content/essential-eight.

[12] BALDINI, G., SKARMETA, A., FOURNERET, E., NEISSE, R.,
LEGEARD, B., AND LE GALL, F. Security certiﬁcation and la-
belling in internet of things. In 2016 IEEE 3rd World Forum on
Internet of Things (WF-IoT) (2016), IEEE, pp. 627–632.

[13] BARABANOV, A., AND MARKOV, A. Modern trends in the regu-
latory framework of the information security compliance assess-
ment in russia based on common criteria. In Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Security of Information and Net-
works (2015), pp. 30–33.

[14] BARABANOV, A., MARKOV, A., AND TSIRLOV, V. Russian it
security certiﬁcation scheme: Steps toward common criteria ap-
proach. In Proc. of 15th International Common Criteria Confer-
ence (ICCC-2014), New Delhi, India (2014), pp. 1–11.

[15] BENZEL, T. Cybersecurity research for the future. Communica-

tions of the ACM 64, 1 (2020), 26–28.

[16] BEZNOSOV, K., AND KRUCHTEN, P. Towards agile security
assurance. In Proceedings of the 2004 workshop on New security
paradigms (2004), pp. 47–54.

mation Technology Security Evaluation - Part 1:
troduction and general model, April 2017.
//www.commoncriteriaportal.org/files/ccfiles/
CCPART1V3.1R5.pdf.

[23] COMMON CRITERIA.

Common Criteria

for

functional

mation Technology Security Evaluation - Part 2:
curity
//www.commoncriteriaportal.org/files/ccfiles/
CCPART2V3.1R5.pdf.

requirements, April 2017.

[24] COMMON CRITERIA.

Common Criteria

for

assurance

mation Technology Security Evaluation - Part 3:
curity
//www.commoncriteriaportal.org/files/ccfiles/
CCPART3V3.1R5.pdf.

components, April

2017.

[25] COMMON CRITERIA.

Certiﬁcate Authorizing Schemes,
https://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/ccra/

2021.
schemes/.

[26] COMMON CRITERIA. Certiﬁed Products, 2021. https://

www.commoncriteriaportal.org/products/.

[27] COMMON CRITERIA.

- Statis-
Certiﬁed Products List
https://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/

tics, 2021.
products/stats/.

[28] COMMON CRITERIA.

The Common Criteria Portal, 2021.

https://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/.

[29] COMMON CRITERIA. Licensed Laboratories, February 2021.

https://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/labs/.

[30] COMMON CRITERIA USERS FORUM. Common Criteria Users

Forum: CCUF Portal.

[31] CYBER SECURITY AGENCY OF SINGAPORE.

security Certiﬁcation Guide, February 2021.
//www.csa.gov.sg/-/media/csa/documents/sccs/
cybersecurity certification guide v2.pdf.

Cyber-
https:

[32] DIAS, J. P., COUTO, F., PAIVA, A. C., AND FERREIRA, H. S.
A brief overview of existing tools for testing the internet-of-
In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Software
things.
Testing, Veriﬁcation and Validation Workshops (ICSTW) (2018),
IEEE, pp. 104–109.

[33] EVANS, D. L., BOND, P., AND BEMENT, A. Fips pub 140-2:
Security requirements for cryptographic modules. Federal In-
formation Processing Standards Publication: Gaithersburg, MD,
USA 12 (2002).

14

[34] EVANS, M., MAGLARAS, L. A., HE, Y., AND JANICKE, H. Hu-
man behaviour as an aspect of cybersecurity assurance. Security
and Communication Networks 9, 17 (2016), 4667–4679.

[51] MESZAROS, J., AND BUCHALCEVOVA, A.

Introducing ossf:
A framework for online service cybersecurity risk management.
computers & security 65 (2017), 300–313.

[35] FATIMA, M., ABBAS, H., YAQOOB, T., SHAFQAT, N., AH-
MAD, Z., ZEESHAN, R., MUHAMMAD, Z., RANA, T., AND
MUSSIRALIYEVA, S. A survey on common criteria (cc) evaluat-
ing schemes for security assessment of it products. PeerJ Com-
puter Science 7 (2021), e701.

[36] GHADGE, A., WEISS, M., CALDWELL, N. D., AND WILDING,
R. Managing cyber risk in supply chains: A review and research
agenda. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
(2019).

[37] HEARN, J. Does the common criteria paradigm have a future?

IEEE Security & Privacy 2, 1 (2004), 64–65.

[38] HERRMANN, D. S. Using the Common Criteria for IT security

evaluation. CRC Press, 2002.

[39] HOPPE, F., GATZERT, N., AND GRUNER, P. Cyber risk man-
agement in smes: insights from industry surveys. The Journal of
Risk Finance (2021).

[40] HU, L., LI, H., WEI, Z., DONG, S., AND ZHANG, Z. Summary
of research on it network and industrial control network secu-
rity assessment. In 2019 IEEE 3rd information technology, net-
working, electronic and automation control conference (ITNEC)
(2019), IEEE, pp. 1203–1210.

[41] KALUVURI, S. P., BEZZI, M., AND ROUDIER, Y. A quanti-
In In-
tative analysis of common criteria certiﬁcation practice.
ternational Conference on Trust, Privacy and Security in Digital
Business (2014), Springer, pp. 132–143.

[42] KARA, M. Review on common criteria as a secure software de-
velopment model. International Journal of Computer Science &
Information Technology 4, 2 (2012), 83.

[43] KURE, H. I., ISLAM, S., GHAZANFAR, M., RAZA, A., AND
PASHA, M. Asset criticality and risk prediction for an effective
cybersecurity risk management of cyber-physical system. Neural
Computing and Applications (2021), 1–22.

[44] KUZMINYKH, I., AND CARLSSON, A. Analysis of assets for
threat risk model in avatar-oriented iot architecture. In Internet
of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next Generation Networks and Sys-
tems. Springer, 2018, pp. 52–63.

[45] LAUBE, S., AND B ¨OHME, R. Strategic aspects of cyber risk
information sharing. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 50, 5
(2017), 1–36.

[46] LEE, K., LEE, Y., WON, D., AND KIM, S. Protection pro-
ﬁle for secure e-voting systems. In International Conference on
Information Security Practice and Experience (2010), Springer,
pp. 386–397.

[47] LESZCZYNA, R. Cybersecurity and privacy in standards for
smart grids–a comprehensive survey. Computer Standards & In-
terfaces 56 (2018), 62–73.

[48] LIU, L., CHEN, C., ZHANG, J., DE VEL, O., AND XIANG, Y.
Insider threat identiﬁcation using the simultaneous neural learn-
ing of multi-source logs. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 183162–183176.

[49] MATHEU, S. N., HERN ´ANDEZ-RAMOS, J. L., SKARMETA,
A. F., AND BALDINI, G. A survey of cybersecurity certiﬁca-
tion for the internet of things. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)
53, 6 (2020), 1–36.

[50] MEDIAPRO.

2020

State

of Privacy

Security
https://www.bsigroup.com/

and

Report.

Awareness
globalassets/localfiles/en-ie/our-
services/mediapro/2020 state of privacy-
security awareness report mediapro.pdf.

[52] MURDOCH, S. J., BOND, M., AND ANDERSON, R. How certiﬁ-
cation systems fail: Lessons from the ware report. IEEE Security
and Privacy 10, 6 (2012), 40.

[53] NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY.

FIPS 140-2 Validation Certiﬁcate.

[54] NICASTRO, F. Security patch management. CRC Press, 2019.

[55] O’CONNOR, E.

Patch Management Best Practices, April
https://www.oracle.com/technical-resources/

2008.
articles/it-infrastructure/patch-management-
jsp.html#Reac.

[56] PEISERT, S., WELCH, V., ADAMS, A., BEVIER, R.,
DOPHEIDE, M., LEDUC, R., MEUNIER, P., SCHWAB, S., AND
STOCKS, K. Open science cyber risk proﬁle (oscrp).

[57] SANDERS, R. Embedding cybersecurity into your company’s

dna. People & Strategy 39, 1 (2016), 8–10.

[58] SMITH, R. E. Trends in security product evaluations. Informa-

tion Systems Security 16, 4 (2007), 203–216.

[59] SOKRI, A. Cyber security risk modelling and assessment: A
quantitative approach. In ECCWS 2019 18th European Confer-
ence on Cyber Warfare and Security (2019), Academic Confer-
ences and publishing limited, p. 466.

[60] STALLINGS, W., BROWN, L., BAUER, M. D., AND BHAT-
TACHARJEE, A. K. Computer security: principles and practice.
Pearson Education Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2012.

[61] SUN, N., LE, B. D., LI, C.-T., ARMSTRONG, W., MD ZA-
HIDUL, I., MD RAFIQUL, I., ZHANG, L. Y., AND CHAN, H.
Review on common criteria adoptions and challenges in protec-
tion proﬁle development for encryption technologies.

[62] SUN, N., ZHANG, J., RIMBA, P., GAO, S., ZHANG, L. Y.,
AND XIANG, Y. Data-driven cybersecurity incident prediction:
A survey. IEEE communications surveys & tutorials 21, 2 (2019),
1744–1772.

[63] TALESH, S. A. Data breach, privacy, and cyber insurance: How
insurance companies act as “compliance managers” for busi-
nesses. Law & Social Inquiry 43, 2 (2018), 417–440.

[64] TECHNOLOGIES, D.

FOUR KEYS TO NAVIGAT-
2020.

ING THE HARDWARE SECURITY
https://www.delltechnologies.com/asset/en-us/
solutions/business-solutions/industry-market/
futurum-four-keys-to-navigating-the-hardware-
security-journey.pdf.

JOURNEY,

[65] TOUNSI, W., AND RAIS, H. A survey on technical threat intel-
ligence in the age of sophisticated cyber attacks. Computers &
security 72 (2018), 212–233.

[66] WEBB, J., AHMAD, A., MAYNARD, S. B., AND SHANKS, G.
A situation awareness model for information security risk man-
agement. Computers & security 44 (2014), 1–15.

[67] XU, S. The cybersecurity dynamics way of thinking and land-
scape. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Workshop on Moving Tar-
get Defense (2020), pp. 69–80.

[68] YAJIMA, H., MURATA, M., KAI, N., AND YAMASATO, T. Con-
sideration of present status and approach for the widespread of cc
certiﬁcation to a private ﬁeld˜ cases in japan˜.

[69] ZHANG-KENNEDY, L., AND CHIASSON, S. A systematic re-
view of multimedia tools for cybersecurity awareness and educa-
tion. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54, 1 (2021), 1–39.

15

