Chapter 9 

Human-centred home network security  

Derek McAuley1, Jiahong Chen1, Tom Lodge1, Richard 
Mortier2, Stanislaw Piasecki1, Diana Andreea Popescu2, 
and Lachlan Urquhart3  

This chapter draws from across the foregoing  chapters discussing many core HDI 
approaches and disciplinary perspectives to consider the specific application of HDI 
in  home  network  security.  While  much  work  has  considered  the  challenges  of 
securing in home IoT devices and their communications, especially for those with 
limited  power  or  computational  capacity,  scant  attention  has  been  paid  by  the 
research community to home network security, and its acceptability and usability, 
from the viewpoint of ordinary citizens. 

It will be clear that we need a radical transformation in our approach to designing 
domestic networking infrastructure to guard against widespread cyber-attacks that 
threaten  to  counter  the  benefits  of  the  IoT.  Our  aim  has  to  be  to  defend  against 
enemies inside the walls, to protect critical functionality in the home against rogue 
devices and prevent the proliferation of disruptive wide-scale IoT DDOS attacks that 
are already occurring [1]. 

9.1 Introduction 

The  IoT  represents  a  convergence  of  ubiquitous  computing  and  communication 
technologies,  with  emerging  uses  that  actuate  in  the  real  world.  No  longer  do 
ubiquitous  computing  systems  simply  sense  and  respond  digitally,  now  they 
physically interact with the world, ultimately becoming embodied and autonomous. 
Hence on top of the legal issues concerned with privacy (see chapter 2), where it is 
often (contestably) cited that “users don’t care”, to one of user safety, where users 
(along  with  regulators,  governments,  and  other  stakeholders)  certainly  do  care. 
Likewise, industry needs to become aware that this shift also changes the legal basis 
under  which  companies  need  to  operate,  from  one  of  disparate  and  often  weakly 
enforced privacy laws, to one of product liability.  
The current widely adopted approach in which cloud services underpin IoT devices 
has  already  raised  major  privacy  issues.  Importantly  in  an  actuated  future, 
untrammelled communications implicating a plethora of heterogeneous online services 
in their normal operation also brings with it resilience challenges. We must ensure the 

1 School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK 
2 Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK 
3 Law School, University of Edinburgh, UK 

 
4 

Running head book title 

integrity of actuating systems, which will require greater local autonomy, and hence 
localised security, alongside increased situated accountability to users.  

This problem applies in many areas: industrial control, autonomous vehicles, 
smart  cities  and  buildings,  but  also  includes  the  intimate  and  commonly  shared 
context  of  the  home.  Importantly,  within  the  foregoing  contexts  there  exist 
professional IT Network support staff employed to ensure the systems is securely 
designed,  configured  and  operated,  and  hence  the  underlying  technology  and  its 
management is targeted at professional users with technical background and training. 
Likewise, such systems often limit device procurement, enforce device registration 
for network access and mandate updates and patches be applied before allowing a 
device to communicate on the relevant network.  

It is a very different situation in the home, where the majority of the deployments 
will not benefit from any specific technical knowledge or training of the users, while 
currently most home installations place any devices plugged in or having gained the 
WiFi  password  access  immediately  onto  the  same  single  network,  providing  no 
isolation between attached devices and the traffic they generate.  

With  this  in  mind  we  created  the  DADA  project  (Defence  Against  the  Dark 
Artefacts) to investigate how we could effectively provide usable network security 
for  the  now  nearly  ubiquitous  local  area  network  in  peoples’  homes.  We  have 
adopted an approach deeply rooted in pragmatism  that recognises the ‘real world, 
real time’ conditions that attach to the IoT in the home: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

that the cyber security solutions currently being defined for IoT systems will 
not deal with legacy issues and will never achieve 100% adoption;  
that extant businesses limit the period of time for which they will provide 
software and security updates (even if they don’t go out of business);  
that  cyber security  is an arms  race and  threats will  continue to  emerge  in 
future;  
and that the public will never become network security experts. 

Assisted Living 
The scenario of assisted living helps to illustrate the goals of this research. Imagine 
a domestic future in which people are mixing devices with substantially different 
reliability requirements. Firstly, there are critical devices that support the delivery 
of healthcare services where interference in their normal operation could be life 
threatening.  Then  there  are  devices  that  support  building  management  and 
domestic security where interference could be extremely disruptive and costly. The 
integrity of these devices and their communications must be ensured. Add to this 
connected domestic appliances  that support a wide  range  of  mundane  activities 
where interference amounts to little more than an annoyance - people will not die, 
or even be seriously affected by such interference, merely inconvenienced - even 
so, users still want to know what is happening in their network when things go 
wrong. 

Isolating  and  protecting  IoT  devices  requires  that  we  develop  and  apply  edge 
learning technologies (as covered on chapter 8) to generate and evolve models that 
profile device and inter-device behaviour. These models will, in turn, implicate the 
capabilities  of  the  switching  and  routing  fabric  that  tightly  constrains  network 

 
 
Running head chapter title 5 

communications in the home.  

Key  to  the  network  design  transformation  is  a  human-centric  view  of 
infrastructure to ensure that secure systems providing the greatest degree of isolation 
between devices do not become burdensome to users, but rather are accountable and 
socially  relevant  [2]  and  thus  provide  the  legibility,  agency,  and  negotiability 
required  [3]  to  enable  people  to  exercise control  over  IoT  device  behaviours and 
communications in their everyday lives. 

Our focus then is on the evolution of the sociotechnical home network context 
into which domestic IoT is being deployed. This approach builds upon work from 
both  the  Databox  home  server  infrastructure  [4]  and  Homework  user  experience 
design methodologies [5], while looking at the new challenges of intelligent home 
cyber-defence.  

9.2 Networking background  

The fundamental network security concepts we adopt in DADA are already widely 
deployed  in  enterprise  class  networks:  separation  of  functionality  and  isolation  o 
devices by use of VLANs, separate IP subnet addresses spaces and enforcement of 
“Guest” status in networks so that devices are only able to send packets to the default 
router, and not even talk to other devices on the same layer 2 network. Likewise, 
traffic  enforcement  of  both  destination  addresses  is  standard  issue  firewalling 
technology,  while  traffic  shaping  to  limit  bandwidth  use  is  widely  deployed  in 
integrated communications infrastructure that mixes both data and voice traffic. 

Within the DADA project the challenges are then the specific requirements of 
domestic IoT, e.g., understanding the varied communication patterns of clusters of 
devices - like peer-to-peer or device-to-hub, in addition to use of broadcast discovery 
mechanisms.  These  requirements  then  need  to  be  mapped  to  specific  switching, 
routing  and  firewalling  mechanisms  that  can  provide  segregated  sub-networks. 
Importantly, where shared resources are used (e.g., upstream Internet links, in-home 
links carrying multiple subnetworks), traffic shaping and rate control will enforce 
traffic profiles, with specific attention to rate limiting actuation events, which may 
involve  compound  network  interactions,  that  could  lead  physical  devices  to  be 
particularly susceptible to denial of service by excessive use [6] or operation outside 
of design envelope [7]. Traffic shaping will also be available on a per device basis, 
applying shared profiles created by the ubiquitous monitoring and made available 
through the profiling service, providing both traffic management and attack detection 
These  enforcement  mechanisms  also  need  to  be  complemented  by  device 
profiling, where we seek to learn and share behavioural and communications patterns 
of IoT devices – such systems need to be lightweight and accurate, and being based 
on edge-based sampling techniques and modelling, engage in pseudonymous profile.  
General characterisation of Internet-connected devices is known to be complex 
[8,9]. However, domestic IoT devices have much simpler networking properties than 
general Internet-connected general-purpose computers, and the scale and degree of 
multiplexing is thus much smaller and amenable to enumeration and computation. 
While manufacturers could, in principle, supply device behaviour profiles (e.g., via 
a Hypercat endpoint) to provide a priori information to management systems, devices 
deployed in these environments are likely to have long lifetimes, and will undergo 
many  firmware/software  upgrades  resulting  in  evolving  behaviours,  as  will  the 

 
 
6 

Running head book title 

natural  evolution  of  the  cloud  services  used  to  support  such  devices.  Continual 
monitoring and re-profiling will thus be necessary. Furthermore, specific attention 
will  be  given  to  identifying  physical  actuation  interactions,  potentially  involving 
compound network interactions with multiple devices. In addition, homes will often 
contain only a small number of instances of many devices (e.g., smart TVs, fridges, 
electricity meters) rendering it necessary to share information across a statistically 
representative number of monitored networks to build an evolving dynamic model 
of  behaviour  while  being  sure  to  preserve  the  privacy  of  individuals  and  avoid 
revealing personal information through sharing device behaviours [9].  

Building new technical capabilities into home network infrastructure inevitably 
leads to questions of how do users interact with such systems and how are they made 
accountable to end-users, in socially relevant ways that enable end-users to exercise 
control over their network. 

9.2.1  Network mechanisms 

In order to provide the basis for traffic interventions we must first monitor traffic on 
the local network and provide a means to identify anomalies. Here we present eBPF-
IoT, a customized system for securing Internet-of-Things smart homes – in a future 
smart home this would be running continuously within the home router, or in more 
complex  domestic  networks  within  all  active  networking  elements.  Our  specific 
implementation here is based on Linux. 

The eBPF-IoT is comprised of two components: i) eBPF-Mon, which computes 
traffic  statistics  and  extracts  machine  learning  features  needed  to  train  machine 
learning  algorithms  for  IoT  device  identification  and  anomaly  detection;  and  ii) 
eBPF-IoT-MUD - a traffic management module based on eBPF which implements 
traffic policies derived from Manufacturer Usage Description (MUD) files provided 
by the IoT manufacturer. 

The  extended  Berkeley  Packet  Filter  (eBPF)  provides  a  very  general  way  to 
hook code into network data paths within the Linux kernel without modifying the 
kernel source code. To ensure system stability the eBPF framework ensures that the 
code loaded is both safe to execute and loop free (and so will terminate). Our eBPF-
Mon component then uses these hooks to gather statistics about flows in real-time. 
The eBPF program can hook into the eXpress Data Path (XDP) to efficiently 
implement packet dropping, for example, to block a Denial-of-Service (DoS) attack 
- in our scenario we are specifically interested in blocking  such traffic originating 
from devices within the home, whether a DoS on another device in the home or as 
part of a Distributed DoS targeting a service on the Internet. More complex controls 
are also possible, such as rate limiting flows, or blocking / forwarding packets at a 
fine  grain,  for  example,  specific  ports  on  specific  servers.  In  contrast  to  general 
purpose  computers  the  Internet  services  that  an  IoT  device  would  connect  to  in 
normal  operation  are  fixed  and  known  by  the  manufacturer,  and  the  MUD 
specification  (RFC8520)  defines  how  these  services  can  be  listed,  and  in  an 
extension, the expected traffic rates to each service when in operation. So, our eBPF-

Running head chapter title 7 

IoT-MUD  component,  uses  the 
to 
MUD  profiles  of  devices 
configure  the  XDP  to  only  permit 
certain  communications  from  the 
IoT  device  (and  block  all  others) 
and in combination with the eBPF-
Mon  enforce  rate  limits  on  the 
network flows. 

Performance  measurements 
show  that  we  can  sustain  over  1 
Gbps in most scenarios, with only 
modest  added  delay  to  processing 
the packets in the router. 

Figure 9.1 Additional Delay in packet 
processing time 

9.3 Shaping User Interaction 

To what degree do users need to interact with home security systems? As we have 
seen in previous discussion, monitoring and mitigation of network security threats 
can  be  handled  transparently  by  the  underlying  system;  developments  in  device 
profiling, pattern recognition and the network control plane can increase the ability 
of  a  system  to  effectively  respond  to,  for  example,  misconfigured,  malicious  and 
poorly designed IoT devices. There is a strong argument for involving the user as 
little as possible, if at all, in the resolution of these problems, to allow security experts 
and systems designers to make the security choices for end-users; indeed [10] have 
argued  that  the  network  should  be  an  unremarkable  and  mundane  part  of  a 
household;  that  foregrounding  it  to  users  may  run  the  risk  of  making  networks 
“constantly remarkable and thus problematic”. Two factors, however, argue against 
fully cocooning a user from the concerns of their network security: 

1.  Home network security pervades and is deeply entangled within the social fabric 
of a household. Privacy, for example may be equally violated within the home 
as  without.  Similarly,  the  management  of  access  to  resources  (devices, 
filesystems, printers and so forth) are subject to routine matters in the home, 
such as working or socialising. 

2.  Security  management  may  often  be  subordinate  to  the  here  and  now  of  a 
household occupant’s activities. Where remedial actions taken by a network are 
disruptive (for example consuming bandwidth, rebooting devices or restricting 
or  even  disabling  connectivity),  automated  fixes  may  be  at  odds  with  the 
immediate concerns of members of the household.  

Our  challenge,  therefore,  is  to  design  interactions  that  support  users  in  the 
management of the security practices mentioned in (i) whilst ensuring that the home 
network remains ‘unremarkable’. Security-based interactions must defer those out-
of-band priorities that arise from day-to-day living. Put another way, we must design 
with  an  awareness  of  the  typical  philosophy  that  “some  kind  of  working  is  good 
enough for now” [10] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

Running head book title 

Rules and policies are  a key feature of network systems, and one approach to 
folding in social concerns to the management of home network security is to have 
the system capture and  recognise those events (temporal, system, and household) 
that  form  the  basis  of  a  householder’s  reasoning  about  how  their  system  should 
behave.  Temporal  events  might  be  ‘between  10  and  11  in  the  morning’,  system 
events  might  be  ‘using  social  media,  or  device  uploading  10%  more  data  than 
normal’ whereas household events might be ‘when Mum gets home’ or even ‘Jamie 
is watching TV’. Ideally, events might be composed to reflect the nuanced needs of 
household, the used to trigger appropriate system behaviours.  Though a beguiling 
notion, in practice there are a set of (perhaps intractable) issues that limit its use; not 
least  the  thorny  technical  challenges  of  capturing  and  codifying  higher  level 
constructs (such as ownership, activities such as ‘shopping’ or ‘doing homework’) 
into sane system primitives. Moreover, given that “different people are allowed to 
do different things with different devices at different times of the day and in different 
places” [11], it is simply too difficult for users to anticipate and express rules to cover 
even a subset of scenarios; studies have shown that in reality, rules are established 
retrospectively in response to experience (ibid). 

The authors of [12] argue more expansively against relying on fully automated 
systems  security,  suggesting  that  there  are  inherent  limitations  to  how  well 
automation can succeed in practice even if the technology behind it is faultless. They 
suggest that these limitations can lead to “failures” of automation that are not only 
technical (i.e., when the automation system simply stops working, for example), but 
are also failures of meeting the actual needs of the users. Moreover, as the authors of 
[13] suggest, we “Only need to make the wrong decision once to discourage future 
use”.  

Given that fully automated approaches to system security are unlikely to provide 
a complete solution, we continue to require mechanisms to help users interact with 
their network security; these will include manually responding to issues, restricting 
or elevating resource access, updating firmware or software, monitoring behaviours 
and  usage.  The  prevalent  support  provided  today  is  by  graphical  user  interfaces; 
these  vary  in  complexity  and  functionality  but  will  typically  provide  a  degree  of 
monitoring and control. As the range of security vulnerabilities increases alongside 
the number of devices in our homes, there may need to be a corresponding increase 
in  the  complexity  of  the  interfaces  we  use  to  monitor  and  control  them.  These 
interfaces  may even  come  to  resemble enterprise systems,  though  these  are  often 
simply “too complex for home users” [14]. In response, alternative approaches have 
been developed and studied. The authors of [14], for example, provide spatial and 
logical  views  of  a  user’s  home  that  can  be  directly  manipulated.    Others  mimic 
already understood home devices such as alarm or heating panels [15] and we’ve 
even seen standalone physical, single purpose devices built to simplify traditionally 
problematic tasks [16][17].  

Outside technical tools for controlling the network, there is some evidence that 
householders  use  non-technical approaches  to  assume  control;  access  control,  for 
example, may be managed by negotiation, though where enforcement is required, 
more imaginative approaches have been observed, such as locking devices away, or 
the deliberate creation of ‘dead zones’ in the house where broadband is unavailable 
due to an access point being out of range [10] 

Running head chapter title 9 

9.3.1  Designing for control 

To address the observations and challenges we have discussed, and to walk the line 
between on one hand keeping the network ‘unremarkable’ and on the other providing 
adequate  interaction support  when  required,  we  have  built  a mobile  and  physical 
interface to facilitate a further examination of a householder interactions with their 
devices and networks. In the first instance, we have designed mechanisms for users 
to  control,  rather  than  monitor  network  security.  We  have  limited  the  scope  of 
‘control’  to  a  range  of  simple  actions:  rebooting  devices,  restricting  access  to 
resources,  device  monitoring  and  switching  between  privileged  and  unprivileged 
networks.  We  are explicitly  assuming  that  all  householders may  wish  to  perform 
network control actions on one or more sets of devices, but that  social constructs, 
such  as  ownership  and  household  hierarchy  (rather  than,  for  example,  technical 
competence) can be respected when determining the set of control mechanisms that 
are  available.  We  have  built  a  physical  component  for several  reasons;  first,  it  is 
situated,  meaning  that  we  can  explicitly  require  that  a  householder  is  present  to 
perform some tasks, and that the act of performing a task can be made visible to other 
occupants. Second, it enables us to simplify the interactions and corresponding effort 
of  performing  control  tasks  (so  use  is  predicated  upon  little  to  no  technical 
competence). Third, it extends the opportunity for householders to elevate or remove 
control mechanisms, using non-technical and familiar means (for example, moving 
out  of  reach,  hiding,  locking  away,  loaning);  something  that  we  are  especially 
interested in studying. 

We use physical tokens as proxies for home devices (Figure 1.1); an approach 
reminiscent of the interactive ‘tokens and constraints’ work first proposed by [18].  
The tokens use MiFare4 1K RFID tags to communicate with an Android smartphone 
and a reader. The reader consists of a microprocessor (Adafruit Feather M0 Wifi)5 
that is connected (over I2C) to an (MFRC5226) RFID reader,  which is capable of 
reading  multiple  tags  simultaneously.  The  microprocessor  has  a  wifi  chip  and 
communicates with a MQTT broker running on our home access point. 

4 https://www.mifare.net/en/ 
5 https://www.adafruit.com/product/3010 
6 https://www.nxp.com/docs/en/data-sheet/MFRC522.pdf 

 
 
 
 
 
10 

Running head book title 

Figure 9.2  Tokens, pot and reader. 

Those that are in receipt of tokens will have control of the corresponding device(s) 
that the token represents. Crucially, tokens can be associated with a single device, or 
arbitrary device groups that make sense to a particular household (e.g. all of Ellie’s 
devices,  all  televisions,  the  thermostats  in  the  top  bedroom).  Tokens  can  be 
replicated, so that users can share control, and they can be modified to add or remove 
devices as required.  

To  perform  a  security-related  task,  tokens  are  placed  into  a  ‘pot’;  a  pot  is 
associated with an action, such as ‘remove from the network’ or ‘provide access to 
printer’ or ‘log all traffic’. The pot also has an RFID tag but is encoded to distinguish 
it from tokens. When a pot is placed into a reader, all of the tokens that are in the pot 
will be subject to the associated action. The reader will light up an LED to show that 
the action has been triggered. Actions may be continuous or discrete. That is, in some 
cases,  removing  tokens  from  the  pot  or  reader  will  undo  the action  (for  example 
revoke permissions, stop traffic logging), in other cases, the action will remain until 
superseded, by placing the token in another pot; this allows a user to compose sets 
of actions whilst keeping hold of the token. Note that, once in receipt of user study 
data,  we  may  eventually  choose  to  exclusively  support  only  one  of  these  two 
modalities. 

Figure 9.3  App device introduction. 

 
 
 
Running head chapter title 11 

Our  mobile  app  is  used  to  bootstrap and  configure  our  tokens  and  pots.  The  app 
presents a list of devices on the home network, and, using Google’s quick draw API7, 
provides  a  simple  interface  for  sketching  the  device  (to  help  users  distinguish 
between all of their devices) (Fig 1.2).   

Figure 9.4  Association of tokens with devices. 

To associate tokens with devices, a user holds a token against the mobile phone.  If 
the token is not already associated with any devices, the user is invited to select a set 
of devices to associate it with (Fig 1.3).  The mac addresses of the devices are then 
written to the token’s tag.  If the token already has devices associated with it, the 
user will be shown the devices, and can remove them and re-associate if required. 

The process of configuring pots is similar. To configure a pot, a user holds it 
against the phone, and they will then be presented with a set of system activities that 
they  can  have  the  pot  perform  (Fig  1.4).  Again,  if  the  pot  already  has  action 
associated with it, the user can remove them and add alternatives.  

7 https://quickdraw.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 

Running head book title 

Figure 9.5 Association of tokens with devices. 

To  begin  with,  we  will  only  support  a  small  set  of  actions,  though  this  can  be 
expanded in the future. Where it makes sense, the system will allow actions to be 
composed and associated with a single pot. By designing our system in this way, 
with programmable pots and configurable tokens, our intention is to enable users 
foreground  and  simplify  problematic  or  frequently  needed  functionality  (for 
example, rebooting a router, dealing with visitors, revoking access to social media) 
whilst ignoring (or leaving the system to deal with) any features or devices that are 
or little or no interest. Though the system is principally designed to be reactive, the 
actions  associated  with  pots  can  themselves  be  made  contingent  upon  events  if 
required.  

9.4 Compliance by Design  

One of the challenges facing smart home technologies is the uncertainties within the 
regulatory environment where multiple forms of normative enablers and constraints 
may come into play, such as design codes, technical standards and law. At the same 
time,  being  a  concept  for  a  future  domestic  IoT  security  solution,  DADA  is  by 
definition a smart home technology itself, and will thus be subject to a similar set of 
challenges as well. To ensure smart technologies – including security solutions, such 
as DADA – are designed to be truly usable by non-expert users in their everyday life, 
it is crucial to understand how compliance requirements have affected design, and 
how design can support compliance. 

We  take  the  view  that  ‘secure  by  design’  [19]  is  not  just  about  bringing  the 
development of smart technologies in line with the security requirements, but also 
about creating the right conditions for law and technologies to co-evolve in such a 
way that all involved parties are incentivised to be on board – what one might call 
the ‘legal design’ [20]. In this regard, reaching out to different sectors throughout the 
entire project lifecycle, so as to understand the regulatory landscape as well as the 
stakeholder expectations, forms an important part of our work at DADA. Through 
working  with  the  academic,  industrial  and  policymaking  communities,  we  have 
envisaged, discovered, verified and pre-empted some of the design and compliance 
challenges facing the industry as well as DADA. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Running head chapter title 13 

9.4.1  Outlining the regulatory framework with academic research 

In the scholarly literature, while there have been a growing body of discussions in 
improving privacy and security in the IoT environments, such efforts have largely 
focused on the technical aspects of the IoT artefacts or the interactions between such 
artefacts and human users. The regulatory environment, though touched upon as a 
relevant  topic,  has  been  mostly  framed  as  either  the  motivation  for  research 
initiatives or the external constraints for research and development. In developing 
our work at DADA, we take a bidirectional approach by unpicking not only how the 
technological paradigms for IoT technologies can shift to improve compliance with 
the  existing  regulatory  framework,  but  also  how  the  regulatory  environment  can 
evolve  to  support  the  human-centred  approach  we  advance.  By  ‘regulatory 
environment’, our work mainly addresses two normative realms: law and standards. 
The  legal  thread  of  our  investigation  deals  with  the  data  protection  legal 
framework,  mainly  the  GDPR.  Considering  the  sheer  volume  and  potential 
sensitivity of the data collected and analysed by IoT devices, including DADA as a 
future IoT cybersecurity solution, the starting point of our inquiry is whether and to 
what extent data protection law applies to edge computing in smart homes. In our 
paper ‘Who is responsible for data processing in smart homes?’ [21], two key legal 
concepts have been foregrounded to highlight the impact of data protection law on 
the development and adoption of security- and privacy-enhancing technologies: joint 
controllership and the household exemption. We note that these two notions are not 
simply static, immutable rules, but rather an ever-adapting pair that have been shaped 
up through regulatory guidelines and case-law over the years. The expanding scope 
of joint controllership – meaning developers and end-users of smart technologies are 
more  likely  to  be  held  responsible  as  joint  data  controllers  –  and  the  shrinking 
household exemption – meaning end-users are less likely to be exempted from data 
protection obligations – will collectively create a regulatory environment where the 
research and uptake of IoT privacy and security technologies may be deterred by the 
potential compliance burdens. These trends are well-intended with the objective to 
provide seamless protection to data subjects, but have failed to recognise the nuances 
of  control  and  power  in  digital  domestic  life.  We  therefore  concluded  that, 
‘[p]aradoxically this may then result in a lower degree of privacy, as well as security, 
for smart home inhabitants.’ [21] 

This message is further elaborated in Chapter 2 of this book, where we further 
unpack the legal principle of ‘accountability’ in a smart home environment and also 
in a more user-centric approach. This is achieved through the construction of the 
notion  of  ‘domestic  data  controllers’  and  the  advancement  of  the  differentiated 
responsibilities in smart homes. These discussions are relevant to our approach with 
DADA because it underlines how the current data protection legal framework does 
not fully capture the contemporary reality of digital life that is characterised by the 
mundanity of ordinary people exercising control over personal data as well as the 
complex techno-socio-legal dynamics behind the decision-making on IoT privacy 
and  security  issues  by  stakeholders.  To  support  domestic  data  controllers  to 
demonstrate accountability, we argued, it would be essential to make sense of the 
interpersonal relations in the digitalised domestic politics, the role of technologies in 
this domain, and the differentiated nature of power exercised by domestic controllers 
and vendors. All these have profound implications for policymaking, including how 
the regulatory environment may be improved with clear and fair guidance. 

 
 
14 

Running head book title 

A  second  thread  of  our  work  focuses  on  cybersecurity  standards.  We  have 
written  on  how  these  standards  are  currently  showing  a  similar  lack  of 
acknowledgement of the latest socio-technical developments in smart homes [22]. 
For  one  thing,  major  technical  standards  for  IoT  security  are  predominantly 
developed  with  the  stereotypical  cloud-based  architecture  in  mind.  The  recurring 
recommendations of those standards on how smart devices should be designed (for 
example,  the  resilience  to  outages  requirement)  would  be  often  also  relevant  for 
edge-computing  architectures  and  actually  more  efficiently  implemented  by  the 
latter.  While  cloud-based  standards  are  needed  considering  the  number  of  IoT 
devices relying on this architectural model, standards can also set out directions for 
best  practice  and,  therefore,  should  be  more  aspirational  in  attempting  to  change 
current  industry  practices,  especially  in  the  context  of  the  rapid  developments  in 
edge-computing. For another thing, current standards focus mainly on technical and 
external threats, leaving a significant gap in addressing the internal human threats in 
smart homes. For example, domestic abusers may exploit IoT devices to monitor, 
harass, intimidate, control or manipulate other members of the household, but most, 
if not all, of the current cybersecurity standards have failed to provide guidance on 
how  to  anticipate  and  minimise  such  risks.  Standards  could  potentially  help  in 
removing affordances related to in-home human threats and further research in this 
field is required. In this regard, the routine activity theory (RAT) can be a helpful 
conceptual framework for uncovering the values of edge-computing and translating 
such strengths into actionable strategies to defend against security threats, whether 
technical or human in nature, and whether from within or outside the home [23]. 
Again,  the  shortcomings  of  the  current  standards  will  have  policymaking 
implications,  especially  the  urgent  need  to  deepen  our  understanding  of  different 
types of security risks, and the roles and limitations of technical standards.   

Through our research into the status quo of data protection law and cybersecurity 
standards, we aim to communicate a message to the academic community, one that 
echoes the underlying idea of DADA: Human-centred IoT security is not just about 
technological  design,  but  also  about  normative  development.  A  supportive 
regulatory  environment,  created  with  the  right  set  of  legal  rules  and  technical 
standards, will promote security in smart homes. For academics and policymakers 
alike, this means further interdisciplinary work is needed to comprehend the human 
factors  in  compliance,  design  and  regulation  in  the  area  of  domestic  IoT.  The 
policymaking  implications  of  DADA  will  be  further  discussed  in  Section  8.7.3 
below. 

9.5 Extracting practical insights from industrial involvement 

In conjunction, we want to ensure that our work engages with practical challenges 
of designing for cybersecurity in IoT development. As such, we focus on two strands 
of our work here, where industrial insights have been key in charting the problem 
space. 

Firstly, we conducted a series of exploratory  semi structured  interviews with 
different stakeholder groups from the IoT sector. Whilst industry practice around IoT 
security was a key focus, we also wanted to understand the wider IoT ecosystem and 
thus spoke to NGOs and government bodies. This provided us a wider appreciation 
of the emerging threat landscape, priorities for industry, strategies for anticipating 

Running head chapter title 15 

and managing these risks and what direction the industry is headed in securing IoT. 
For  example,  in  relation  to  motivations  and  solutions.  The  motivations  for 
building secure IoT systems ranging from fear of harder regulation and reputational 
harm  to  emerging  threats,  such  as  how  to  manage  vulnerabilities  at  scale  (e.g.  a 
washing  machine  bug  in  thousands  of  homes  leading  to  a  critical  national 
infrastructure  threat,  not  just  an  individual  one).  In  terms  of  solutions,  edge 
computing, greater need for life cycle security management, value of MUD profiles 
and use of labelling of IoT risks all emerged as valuable. Such insights can guide 
academic research, providing interesting problems to be addressed. 

Secondly, we are aware that developers have a growing role in addressing socio-
technical  harms  of  IoT  systems, as seen  in  the  Secure  by  Design  work  discussed 
below.  Thus,  we  wanted  to  create  a  tool  to  help  translate  and  make  discussions 
around IoT cybersecurity more accessible. Acknowledging the value of reflective 
tools for thinking about law and ethics (e.g. ideation card decks) [24], we wanted to 
explore  the  value  of  play,  and  developed  a  ‘serious  board  game’  for  helping  IoT 
developers  consider  human  dimensions  of  securing  smart  homes.  Conscious  of 
moving past the framing of purely technical solutions, the goal was to create a game 
that engages with the complexities of managing home networks, guarding against a 
hacker who is compromising IoT devices. The game uses play to raise awareness 
about  appropriate  strategies  to  secure  the  home,  nature  of  risks  and  challenges 
domestic users face in using different skillsets to address these dangers. The game 
has  been  developed  through  a  process  of  iterative  development  with  different 
stakeholder groups from experts in cybersecurity and games, to those working on 
IoT, HCI and usable privacy and security.8  As such, our process has been shaped by 
their insights, where industry, as well as academic expertise, has played a key role 
in guiding gameplay, aesthetic, and themes covered. Furthermore, with Covid-19, 
we needed to adapt our planned game development approach. Originally it was to be 
a  physical  game  but  we  still  managed  to  use  Tabletopia  (an  online  boardgame 
platform), to iterate and test our prototype, to great success. 

9.6 Shaping the prospect by informing policymaking 

DADA started as a research project at a time when large-scale cybersecurity attacks 
have raised cross-departmental concerns in the UK government [19], followed by 
the publication of a code of practice for consumer IoT security [25], and later a set 
of  regulatory  proposals  [26].  At  the  time  of  writing,  the  Department  for  Digital, 
Culture, Media & Sport (DCMS) has conducted a formal consultation on its initial 
positions (May-June 2019) [26], feeding into its revised proposal open for a second 
round of comments (July-September 2020) [27]. In a separate but related review, the 
DCMS also carried out a review on cybersecurity incentives and regulation, with a 
call for evidence (November-December 2019) [28]. This highlights the importance 
of regulating IoT cybersecurity as a governmental priority, and also represents an 
opportunity  for  DADA  to  translate  research  findings  into  something  that  can 
potentially impact the regulatory environment surrounding smart technologies. 

8 Many thanks to our project intern Adam Jenkins, PhD researcher in usable 
security at School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh. He has been key in the 
game design and iterative testing process. 

 
 
 
16 

Running head book title 

We have submitted our responses to all three inquiries [29, 30, 31] with a view 
to raising some of the legal issues we have identified in the journal articles and the 
practical considerations flagged up in our engagements with industrial stakeholders. 
Responding  to  public  consultations,  however,  has  the  limitation  that  these 
consultations always  take  the  form  of  a set  of  pre-determined,  sometimes  strictly 
structured questions, and occasionally, there is a preferred position, be it explicitly 
specified in the consultation document or inferred by the way the questions have 
been framed. 

Exposing  the  ‘blind  spots’  of  these  inquiries  can  therefore  be  somewhat 
challenging,  because  going  beyond  the  scope  of  the  questions  may  result  in  the 
answers  being  disregarded.  From  the  three  IoT-related  inquiries  initiated  by  the 
government, there is a clear lack of the emphasis on the human aspects of security in 
smart  homes.  The  regulatory  proposal  for  the  May-June  2019  consultation,  for 
example, views the regulatory challenge being ‘vulnerable devices becom[ing] the 
weakest  point  in  an  individual’s  network’  and  ‘[c]ompromised  devices  at  scale 
[posing] a risk for the wider economy through distributed denial of service (DDOS) 
attacks such as Mirai Botnet in October 2016.’ [32] Accordingly, the first proposed 
regulatory option – which became the selected model in the July-September 2020 
version  [33]  –  focused  entirely  on  the  three  technical  safeguards:  ‘no  default 
passwords’,  ‘implement  a  vulnerability  disclosure  policy’,  and  ‘keep  software 
updated’.9  Our  response  highlighted  the  need  to  take  into  account  the  user-
friendliness  consideration  of  managing  IoT  security  mapping  these  design 
requirements to the existing cybersecurity guidelines, such as the ‘make installation 
and  maintenance  of  devices  easy’  principle  in  the  government’s  own  code  of 
practice. We submitted that ‘most of the ten guidelines additional to the “top three” 
are already legally required under data protection law and cybersecurity law’ and 
therefore  mandating  all  13  principles  ‘would  not  per  se  create  a  significant  or 
disproportionate amount of compliance costs to retailers or manufacturers’ [29]. 

As regards the organisational dimension of addressing cybersecurity threats, the 
July-September 2020 review has touched upon the lack of ability and motivation for 
businesses to put in place security measures. Many of the consultation questions, 
however, are based on the assumption that the level of incentives and barriers varies 
along the spectrum of size of business (e.g. small, medium and large organisations). 
Yet, through our expert interviews, we found that organisation size is not the only 
decisive factor, other parameters such as the organisation’s  position in the supply 
chain, the market structure of a particular sector and the business model can also 
significantly  affect  how  motivated  a  business  can  be  to  manage  cybersecurity 
properly. As such, we submitted that, ‘[a]n effective cybersecurity strategy will need 
to acknowledge the heterogeneity within and across sectors on those dimensions.’ 
[28] 

There is clearly a delicate balance between foregrounding the under-discussed 
issues  and  remaining  in  scope  when  it  comes  to  responding  to  governmental 
consultations.  DADA  as  a  research  project  has  endeavoured  to  communicate  the 

9 These are known as the ‘top three’ principles in the Code of Practice for 
Consumer IoT Security. See Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. Code 
of Practice for Consumer IoT Security [online]. 2020. Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/consultation-on-regulatory-
proposals-on-consumer-iot-security [Accessed 26 Sep 2020]. 

 
Running head chapter title 17 

message of a human-centred approach in cybersecurity to policymakers by carefully 
aligning this with how the challenges and solutions have been framed. For future 
projects, other forms of engagement, such as a more proactive initiative to contribute 
to the scoping of the consultation in an earlier stage, may prove more effective if the 
timing of the project lifecycle allows. 

9.7 Lessons of DADA on compliance by design 

Our work on compliance by design in domestic IoT has not only enabled us to ensure 
DADA  as  a  research  project  is  privacy-aware,  value-driven,  ethically-sustainable 
and legally-compliant, but more importantly to explore approaches to understanding 
and  interacting  with  the  surrounding  regulatory  spaces  that  matter  to  future 
developments  of  security-  and  privacy-enhancing  technologies  for  smart  homes. 
Through  different  threads  of  research  and  outreach  activities  with  the  academic, 
industrial and policymaking communities, some of our experiences may be of value 
to future research projects: 

Firstly,  for  interdisciplinary  projects,  there  can  be  a  strong  role  for  social 
scientists to play in co-shaping the technical approach, provided that messages are 
clearly translated across discipline-specific languages. The initiative to proactively 
engage with audiences coming from a more technical background is key. 

Secondly, with a multi-stakeholder approach, it is essential that the priorities of 
different  groups  are  clearly  identified  so  as  to  inform  the  adjustment  of  the 
engagement  approaches.  Industrial  partners,  for  example,  would  have  starkly 
different  motivations  behind 
improving  IoT  security  from  policymakers. 
Consequently, in order to generate greater impact, it would be helpful to explain how 
the human-centred approach is in line with their own overall agenda. 

Thirdly, managing interdependencies and continuity across different strands of 
work has proved significantly crucial. For example, the RAT theory employed in our 
academic work has ended up being the conceptual framework for the design of the 
serious game. Also, the findings in our interviews with experts from the industry 
have  also  laid  the  empirical  groundwork  for  our  policy  engagement  activities. 
Effective communications between, and timely reflections on, all fronts of the work 
have made this much more manageable. 

Fourthly,  with  a  large  part  of  our  work  taking  place  during  the  COVID-19 
pandemic,  adaptability  and  resilience  have  turned  out  especially  important  to  our 
empirical research. While the plans to engage with industrial stakeholders through 
interviews and the game were affected by the restrictions, eventually it was possible 
to move these activities online. It also offered us the opportunity to reflect on how 
different groups of stakeholders have responded to our new approaches, and what 
the more effective ways to engage with them would be going forward.  

Acknowledgement 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Engineering  and  Physical  Sciences  Research 
Council 
[grant  numbers  EP/M001636/1,  EP/N028260/1,  EP/M02315X/1, 
EP/R03351X/1]. This chapter is based on the following original works: 

•  Piasecki, S., Urquhart, L., and McAuley.  D.  (2021)  Defence  Against the 

 
 
18 

Running head book title 

Dark  Artefacts:  Smart  Home  Cybercrimes 
and  Cybersecurity 
Standards. Computer Law & Security Review: The International Journal of 
Technology Law and Practice. (In Press). 

•  Chen, J., Edwards, L., Urquhart, L., McAuley, D. (2020) Who Is 

Responsible for Data Processing in Smart Homes? Reconsidering Joint 
Controllership and the Household Exemption. International Data Privacy 
Law. 2020; 10(4) pp. 279-293. 

References 

1.  Symantec, https://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/iot-devices-being-

increasingly-used-ddos-attacks  

2.  Privacy-aware infrastructure for managing personal data, 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2934872.2959054   

3.  HDI? 

4.  Amar, Y., Haddadi, H. and Mortier, R. (2016) “Privacy-aware infrastructure 
for managing personal data”, Proceedings of SIGCOMM, pp. 571-572, 
Florianópolis, Brazil, ACM Press. https://doi.org/10.1145/2934872.2959054  

5.  Crabtree, A., Rodden, T., Tolmie, P., Mortier, R., Lodge, T., Brundell, P. and 
Pantidi, N., 2015. House rules: the collaborative nature of policy in domestic 
networks. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 19(1), pp.203-215. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-014-0771-6  

6.  A Survey: DDOS Attack on IoT http://www.ijerd.com/paper/vol10-

issue11/Version_3/I10115863.pdf  

7.  The real story of Stuxnet https://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/the-real-

story-of-stuxnet  

8.  Guide to intrusion detection & prevention systems, 

http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-94   

9.  Spying on the Smart Home: Privacy Attacks and Defenses on Encrypted IoT 

Traffic, https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.05044   

10.  Crabtree, A., Mortier, R., Rodden, T. and Tolmie, P., 2012, June. 

Unremarkable networking: the home network as a part of everyday life. 
In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference (pp. 554-
563). 

11.  Crabtree, A., Rodden, T., Tolmie, P., Mortier, R., Lodge, T., Brundell, P. and 
Pantidi, N., 2015. House rules: the collaborative nature of policy in domestic 
networks. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 19(1), pp.203-215. 

12.  Edwards, W.K., Poole, E.S. and Stoll, J., 2008, July. Security automation 

considered harmful?. In Proceedings of the 2007 Workshop on New Security 
Paradigms (pp. 33-42). 

13.  Bauer, L., Cranor, L.F., Reiter, M.K. and Vaniea, K., 2007, July. Lessons 

learned from the deployment of a smartphone-based access-control system. 
In Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (pp. 64-
75). 

Running head chapter title 19 

14.  Yang J., Edwards K., and Haslem D. (2010) “Eden”, Proc. of UIST, pp, 109-

118, New York, ACM 

15.  Mortier, R., Rodden, T., Lodge, T., McAuley, D., Rotsos, C., Moore, A.W., 
Koliousis, A. and Sventek, J., 2012, January. Control and understanding: 
Owning your home network. In 2012 Fourth International conference on 
communication systems and networks (COMSNETS 2012) (pp. 1-10). IEEE. 

16.  Yang, J. and Edwards, W.K., 2007, September. Icebox: Toward easy-to-use 
home networking. In IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (pp. 
197-210). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

17.  Balfanz, D., Durfee, G., Grinter, R.E., Smetters, D.K. and Stewart, P., 2004, 
August. Network-in-a-Box: How to Set Up a Secure Wireless Network in 
Under a Minute. In USENIX Security Symposium (Vol. 207, p. 222). 

18.  Ullmer, B., Ishii, H., and Jacob, R.J. (2005). Token+constraint systems for 
tangible interaction with digital information. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 
Interact., 12, 81-118.   

19.  Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. Secure by Design report 

[online]. 2018. Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/secure-by-design-report 
[Accessed 26 Sep 2020]. 

20.  Rossi A., Haapio H. ‘Proactive Legal Design: Embedding Values in the 

Design of Legal Artefacts’ in In Schweighofer E., Kummer F., Saarenpää A. 
(eds.): Internet of Things. Proceedings of the 22nd International Legal 
Informatics Symposium IRIS 2019. Bern: Editions Weblaw; 2019. pp. 537–
544. 

21.  Chen J., Edwards L., Urquhart L., McAuley D. ‘Who is responsible for data 
processing in smart homes? Reconsidering joint controllership and the 
household exemption’. International Data Privacy Law. 2020. 

22.  Piasecki S., Urquhart L., McAuley D. Defence Against Dark Artefacts: An 
Analysis of the Assumptions Underpinning Smart Home Cybersecurity 
Standards 2019. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3463799. 

23.  Lawrence E. Cohen and Marcus Felson, ‘Social Change and Crime Rate 
Trends: A Routine Activity Approach’ (1979) 44 American Sociological 
Review 588 

24.  Moral-IT Cards; Privacy by Design Cards. 

25.  Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. Code of Practice for 

Consumer IoT Security [online]. 2018. Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/code-of-practice-for-consumer-
iot-security [Accessed 26 Sep 2020]. 

26.  Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. Code of Practice for 

Consumer IoT Security [online]. 2020. Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/consultation-on-regulatory-
proposals-on-consumer-iot-security [Accessed 26 Sep 2020]. 

27.  Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. Proposals for regulating 
consumer smart product cyber security - call for views [online]. 2020. 
Available from https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/proposals-for-

 
 
20 

Running head book title 

regulating-consumer-smart-product-cyber-security-call-for-views [Accessed 
26 Sep 2020]. 

28.  Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. Cyber Security Incentives & 

Regulation Review: Call for Evidence [online]. 2019. Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/cyber-security-incentives-
regulation-review-call-for-evidence [Accessed 26 Sep 2020]. 

29.  McAuley D., Koene, A., Chen J.  Response to Consultation on the 

Government's Regulatory Proposals Regarding Consumer Internet of Things 
(IoT) Security [online]. 2019. Available from https://doi.org/10.17639/4esm-
9705  

30.  McAuley D., Haddadi, H., Urquhart L., Chen J.  Response to the 

Government’s Call for Views: Proposals for Regulating Consumer Smart 
Product Cyber Security https://nottingham-
repository.worktribe.com/output/4880636 

31.  McAuley D., Chen J.  Response to DCMS Call for Evidence: Cyber Security 

Incentives and Regulation https://doi.org/10.17639/SWKM-5T76. 

32.  Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. Consultation on the 

Government's regulatory proposals regarding consumer Internet of Things 
(IoT) security [online]. 2020. Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/consultation-on-regulatory-
proposals-on-consumer-iot-security/consultation-on-the-governments-
regulatory-proposals-regarding-consumer-internet-of-things-iot-security 
[Accessed 26 Sep 2020]. 

33.  Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. Proposals for regulating 
consumer smart product cyber security - call for views [online]. 2020. 
Available from https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/proposals-for-
regulating- 

34.  McAuley D., Koene, A., Chen J.  Response to Consultation on the 

Government's Regulatory Proposals Regarding Consumer Internet of Things 
(IoT) Security [online]. 2019. https://doi.org/10.17639/4esm-9705  

 
 
