A preprint article submit to IROS 2022 

Millimeter-wave Foresight Sensing for Safety and Resilience in 
Autonomous Operations  

Daniel Mitchell, Jamie Blanche, Sam T. Harper, Theodore Lim, Valentin Robu, Ikuo Yamamoto and 
David Flynn 

Abstract—  Robotic  platforms  are  highly  programmable, 
scalable  and  versatile  to  complete  several  tasks  including 
Inspection,  Maintenance  and  Repair  (IMR).  Mobile  robotics 
offer reduced restrictions in operating environments, resulting 
in greater flexibility; operation at height, dangerous areas and 
repetitive  tasks.  Cyber  physical  infrastructures  have  been 
identified  by  the  UK  Robotics  Growth  Partnership  as  a  key 
enabler in how we utilize and interact with sensors and machines 
via  the  virtual  and  physical  worlds.  Cyber  Physical  Systems 
(CPS) allow for robotics and artificial intelligence to adapt and 
repurpose  at  pace,  allowing  for  the  addressment  of  new 
challenges in CPS. A challenge exists within robotics to secure 
an effective partnership in a wide range of areas which include 
shared workspaces and Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS).  
Robotic  manipulation  abilities  have 
improved  a  robots 
accessibility  via  the  ability  to  open  doorways,  however, 
challenges exist in how a robot decides if it is safe to move into a 
new workspace. Current sensing methods are limited to line of 
sight and are unable to capture data beyond doorways or walls, 
therefore, a robot is unable to sense if it is safe to open a door. 
Another  limitation  exists  as  robots  are  unable  to  detect  if  a 
human is within a shared workspace. Therefore, if a human is 
detected, extended safety precautions can be taken to ensure the 
safe  autonomous  operation  of  a  robot.  These  challenges  are 
represented  as  safety,  trust  and  resilience,  inhibiting  the 
successful advancement of CPS. This paper evaluates the use of 
frequency modulated continuous wave radar sensing for human 
detection  and  through-wall  detection  to  increase  situational 
awareness. The results validate the use of the sensor to detect the 
difference between a person and infrastructure, and increased 
situational  awareness  for  navigation  via  foresight  monitoring 
through walls. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

In 2021, there were more than 26 bn Internet of Things (IoT) 
devices. This number is expected to increase to 75bn by 2025 
[1].  Deloitte  Global’s  third  annual  survey  asked  2029 
companies  which  industry  4.0  technologies  are  expected  to 
have  the  most profound impact on their organizations. This 
found  IoT  (72%),  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  (68%),  cloud 
infrastructure (64%), big data analytics (54%) and advanced 
robotics  (40%)  as  the  most  profound  technologies  for  their 
organization  [2],  [3].  Radical  transformation  of  the  way 
products and services are offered is shaping the twenty-first 

century  towards  the  necessary  steps  required  for  future 
automation.  The  amalgamation  of  robots,  AI,  advanced 
sensing  and  Digital  Twins  (DTs)  will  represent  a  new 
revolution  in  industry  [4].  The  foundations  of  AI,  cloud 
infrastructure and big data analytics will be further developed 
by allowing the architectures and workflows of any sectors to 
benefit  from  the  state  of  the  art  in  technology  and 
bidirectional  comms,  providing  efficient  decision  making 
based  on  the  dynamic  run-time  data  and  environment.  A 
Cyber  Physical  System  (CPS)  is  an  integration  of  systems 
whose  main  mission  is  to  control  a  physical  process  and, 
through feedback, adapt itself to new conditions in run-time. 
With  the  creation  at  the  intersection  of  physical  processes, 
networking, and computation between the physical world and 
the  digital  environment  [5].  CPSs  form  a  network  for 
machines  and  assets  to  exchange  the  run-time  digitalized 
information  regarding  their  workload,  workspace  data  and 
their  health  status,  thus  the  production  processes  can  be 
optimized based on the collected information. 

in 

A significant bottleneck exists in the future integration of 
robotics, due to industry taking a product-based approach by 
further developing the physical qualities such as agility, speed 
the 
and  balance  of  systems.  A  new  perspective 
improvement  of  systems  which  enables  trust  and  safety  is 
paramount  in  the  deployment  of  multi-robot  fleets.  Multi-
robot fleets include several different robotic platforms, which 
leverage the capability of a robotic agent  in an autonomous 
mission. With a rise in fully and semi-autonomous platforms 
sector wide, robotic assistants can be used to perform Beyond 
Visual  Line  of  Sight  (BVLOS)  operations  which  include 
confined  space,  hazardous  zones  or  offshore.  The  key 
motivation includes the execution of unmanned missions with 
lower risks and costs. In 2019, the global professional service 
robots market was valued at $12.3 bn and was predicted to 
rise by 41% in 2027 based on compound annual growth rate 
[6]. Considering this, in the future, automated robotic systems 
will require autonomy as a service to ensure reliability, safety, 
resilience and trust for a user.  

Trust, safety and resilience represent the key motivations 
to  achieve  fully  operational  BVLOS  missions.  However, 

*Research  supported  by  the  Offshore  Robotics  for  the  Certification  of 
Assets (ORCA) Hub under EPSRC Project EP/R026173/1 and MicroSense 
Technologies  Ltd  in  the  provision  of  their  patented  microwave  FMCW 
sensing mechanism (PCT/GB2017/053275). 

D. Mitchell, J. Blanche, S. Harper and T. Lim are with the Smart Systems 
Group  at  Heriot-Watt  University,  Edinburgh,  EH14  4AS 
(email: 
dm68@hw.ac.uk;J.Blanche@hw.ac.uk;Sam.Harper@hw.ac.uk;T.Lim@hw.
ac.uk. 

V.  Robu  was  with  the  Centre  for  Mathematics  and  Computer  Science, 
Intelligent  and  Autonomous  Systems  Group,  CWI,  1098  XG  Amsterdam, 

The Netherlands and Algorithmics Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, 
Mathematics  and  Computer  Science  (EEMCS),  Delft  University  of 
Technology  (TU  Delft),  2628  XE  Delft,  The  Netherlands  (email: 
valentin.robu@cwi.nl). 

I.Yamamoto  was  with  Nagasaki  University,  Nagasaki,  852-8521,  Japan 

(email: iyamamoto@nagasaki-u.ac.jp) 

D.Flynn  is  with  James  Watt  School  of  Engineering,  University  of 

Glasgow, UK, G12 8QQ (email: David.Flynn@Glasgow.ac.uk). 

 
  
 
A preprint article submit to IROS 2022 

issues lie in the quantification of trust, safety and resilience; 
how  can  we  increase  transparency  in  a  system?  For  fully 
autonomous missions, a robotic platform must be required to 
evaluate its own state of health, risk and likelihood of mission 
success.  The  integration  of  these  systems  must  be  paired 
alongside digital versions of themselves and the environment 
they  are  deployed  in  to  maximize  reliability  and  mission 
success.  Providing  this  hyper-enabled  overview  builds  trust 
and allows remote operators to clearly identify, "is my robot 
safe”, “are there any faults within my robotic platform?” and 
“are there any personnel in a shared workspace with a robot?”. 

This paper presents the development of foresight sensing 
for a cyber physical symbiotic system, which integrates novel 
Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) sensing to 
detect  the  presence  of  humans  though  walls  or  doors. 
Extending  the  sensing  capabilities  of  a  RAS  out  with  the 
immediate  mission  space  demonstrates  the  importance  of 
trust and resilience via an increase in situational awareness. 
Allowing  for  real-time  decisions  to  be  made  for  examples 
such as “Is there a human on the other side of a doorway?” 
and “Is there enough space for a robot to access beyond  the 
initial doorway?” To evaluate a low-power and non-contact 
sensing solution, an FMCW radar sensor was  installed as a 
payload onboard a Husky A200 with dual UR5 manipulators.  

This publication is structured as follows. In Section II, the 
current state of technology is discussed for through-the-wall 
sensing  methods  and  robotic  safety  features.  Section  III 
discusses  the  importance  or  trust,  safety  and  resilience  for 
autonomous systems. A new methodology, foresight sensing, 
for  sensing  requirements  of  autonomous  systems 
is 
highlighted in Section IV. The results are presented in Section 
V,  where  human  proximity  alerting  and  through-wall 
detection  is  validated.  Section  VI  presents  the  discussion, 
followed by the conclusion in Section VII.  

II.  CURRENT STATE OF TECHNOLOGY 

This section identifies  how state of the art sensing methods 
are  used  for  through-wall  detection  and  how  other  safety 
features are being implemented onboard robotic platforms. 

A.  Through-wall Detection 

Sun et al. investigated the use of a through-the-wall sensing 
method based on forward scattering for detection of humans. 
It  is  demonstrated  that  the  transceiver  radar  is  capable  of 
detecting  various  types  of  human  motions  behind  the  wall 
with positive sensitivity and at very low transmission powers 
[7]. However, this method required the use of two  antennas 
(Tx  and  Rx)  to  be  positioned  behind  each  wall,  detracting 
from field deployability. 

Ma et al. report a corner multipath for through-wall radar 
imaging  based  on  compressive  sensing.  The  sensing 
mechanism  utilizes  a  linear  array  aperture  of  several 
wideband  transceivers  placed  parallel  to  a  wall,  which  can 
detect the positions of objects around the corner of the wall 
[8].  Limitations  of 
the 
requirement  for  several  antennas  and  the  inability  of  detect 
signal  contrasts  for  differing  material  types,  aiding  target 
identification.  

this  sensing  method 

include 

Alkus  et  al.  utilize  a  W-Band  millimeter-wave  FMCW 
radar which utilized compressive sensing to illuminate a wall 
and  target  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  wall.  The  sensor 
accurately  localized  a  12  mm,  metallic  object  behind  3mm 
thick  drywall,  however, 
the  graphical  results  require 
improvements due to low output image resolution, resulting 
in difficulties in target identification [9]. The sensor must also 
be tested against thicker and more dense wall types. 

Yanik et al. discusses the use of FMCW radar sensing in 
the  W-band  for  the  detection  of  concealed  item  detection. 
This  system  has  very  accurate  detection  of  the  shape  of 
concealed items, however requires a large setup including X 
and  Y  Axis  motors  to  construct  the  resulting  image.  The 
sensor has also not yet been tested for the detection of items 
behind more dense materials [10].  

A  summary  of  the  key  properties  of  the  previously 
discussed sensing methods is discussed in Table I. The table 
identifies  that  many  of  the  methods  only  require  a  single 
sensor  and  can  detect  the  presence  of  different  objects 
through-the-wall.  However,  a  limitation  exists  as  these 
sensing  methods  are  unable  to  detect  and  distinguish  the 
difference in the presence of a human versus an object. If a 
sensor was able to do this, then they would be able to update 
safety  protocols  for  the  robot  ahead  of  entering  a  new 
workspace.  

B.  Robotic Safety Features 

A methodology to increase safety of mobile robotic platforms 
is  proposed  within  [11],  which  proposes  a  method  to 
overcome the issues in human-robot collaboration which exist 
in  caged  robots  and  robots  which  operate  behind  light 
curtains.  To  implement  the  methodology,  a  sensing  suite  is 
required to enable safe operation of the robot where a tiered 
hierarchy  which  represents  layered  zones  around  the  robots 
exist.  An  additional  feature  includes  privileged  access  to 
certain well-trained individuals. 

A  real-time  human-robot  collision  safety  evaluation 
method for  collaborative robots (cobots) is proposed within 
[12]. The paper discusses the use of a run-time algorithm and 
mathematical model with the ability to estimate the pressure 
associated with different tools and materials upon a collision. 
Pig  skin  was  used  within  the  investigation  due  to  similar 
compression  properties  with  the  soft  skin  of  a  human 
forehead. The algorithm is effective at reducing the estimated 
contact force if a collision does occur however, it does seem 
that the algorithm simply slows down the speed of movement 
of  the  manipulator  arm  to  allow  the  force  to  be  below  the 
predetermined ‘allowable force’. Limitations exist within this 
approach  which  limit  the  productivity  of  the  cobot.  This 
TABLE I   KEY PROPERTIES OF THE DISCUSSED SENSORS IN SECTION 
IIII.A. 

Reference 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

Single 
sensor 
✔ 

✕ 

✔ 

✔ 

Object 
Detection 
✔ 

Distinguishing of 
Human 
✕ 

✔ 

✔ 

✔ 

✕ 

✕ 

✕ 

 
 
papers reviewed discussed this scenario, however, should be 
considered  in  the  future  where  there  may  be  unforeseen 
circumstances.  

III.  TRUST, SAFETY AND RESILIENCE FOR ROBOTIC 

PLATFORMS 

systems 

in  more 

Advances  in  RAS  mobility  have  led  to  the  deployment  of 
autonomous 
advanced/difficult 
environments including the offshore, nuclear, manufacturing, 
space  and  public  sectors.  This  has  created  several 
opportunities  for  CPSs  in  parallel  to  several  barriers  which 
inhibit the successful deployment of robotics. These relate to 
trust, resilience and safety issues (as viewed in Fig. 1) where 
robots  are  expected  to  consistently  operate  effectively. 
Resilience includes the ability for an autonomous system to 
recover  from,  or  adjust  to,  misfortune  or  change.  From  the 
perspective of robustness, safety compliance and reliability: 
resilience means an autonomous system can adapt its planned 
mission  strategy  by  operating  key  systems  irrespective  of 
adversity. This reduces the risk of an unsuccessful mission. 
Resilience  relates  to  robotics  as  a  resilience  framework 
prevents  the  loss  of  assets,  minimizes  costs  and  ensures 
recovery from high impact/low frequency events. An example 
of  this  includes  where  primary  navigation  sensors  are 
compromised  due  to  low  visibility  conditions,  such  as  fog, 
mist,  smoke,  and  where  supporting  navigation  sensing 
(FMCW radar sensing) is used to return to a safe position. 

Trust is an important relationship which must be  gained 
by the human operators to ensure safe deployment of robotics 
and  artificial  intelligence.  This  is  especially  important  in 
shared, collaborative workspaces, where humans must work 
in shared environments with robots. Some companies which 
utilize robotics do not have shared workspaces, resulting in 
robots that are often caged off (to mitigate risks) from humans 
in nearby proximity. This is due to risks  that exist as minor 
robotic mistakes can lead to significant safety risks. However, 
more applications of service robots are implemented in areas, 
such as warehouses, as environmental conditions are well lit

A preprint article submit to IROS 2022 

approach could be improved by inclusion of a sensor which 
can  detect  if  a  robot  is  in  close  proximity  to  allow  the 
algorithm to be switched on to reduce the risk of a collision 
by slowing down the cobot to the predetermined ‘allowable 
force’.  

An  interactive  human-robot  collision  avoidance  system 
approach  was  implemented  for  mobile  robots  which  are 
deployed in shared environments indoor. The system utilized 
a Kinetic 2.0 sensor as a payload onboard a H20 robot. When 
a human is in the path of the robot, the robot firstly tries to 
interact with the human to execute several actions based on 
arm  positions  from  a  human;  collision  avoidance,  move 
forward, move backwards, left or right. The human must use 
specific gestures to interact with the robot  [13]. If the robot 
receives  no  gestures,  then  collision  avoidance  occurs. 
Limitations  exist  in  the  scenario  where  a  human  is  holding 
objects, therefore unable to complete the required gestures, or 
on the occasion where someone is disabled, in addition to the 
scenario includes someone who is untrained and is in the path 
of the robot. Another limitation occurs due to the robot relying 
on  visual  line  of  sight  with  a  human.  The  robot  may  find 
difficulties at corners of hallways or at doorways. 

the  case  studies  utilized,  many  of 

In  summary,  several  of  the  previously  discussed  safety 
methodologies  have  several  advantages  and  disadvantages. 
Safety in design has been critical in establishing these safety 
features for robotic and autonomous systems. However, key 
limitations  exist  due  to  the  following  results  displayed  in 
the 
Table  II.  In 
methodologies  utilized  tiered  levels  of  safety.  This  is 
identified  as  an  advantage  for  robotics  as  it  maintains  the 
productivity of robots. In many cases, when a human is in a 
shared  workspace,  robotic  speeds  are  limited  to  ensure  a 
human can predict  a robotic motion or evade a robot in the 
event  of  a  potential  collision.  The  detection  of  objects  in  a 
workspace  includes  a  robots  ability  to  detect  an  object  and 
avoid the object. Therefore, [12] is excluded as the algorithm 
can only detect a collision during the incident. This results in 
a limitation as the algorithm relies on a breach of safety. This 
should be implemented as a last resort hence a barrier in the 
system. Autonomous systems must have the ability to detect 
and  distinguish  humans  that  enter  a  workspace.  The 
methodology  proposed  in  [11]  has  the  ability  to  detect  a 
human if they have the required access card, however, it is not 
clear  if  the  sensing  suite  has  the  ability  to  detect  a  human 
beyond  collision  avoidance  if  a  human  enters  a  workspace 
without an access card. Due to the dynamic environment and 
purpose  of  several  robots,  they  will  often  be  deployed  in 
hazardous  environments,  therefore,  robots  must  have  the 
ability to operate safely in opaque environments. None of the 
TABLE II   SUMMARY OF THE KEY PROPERTIES OF THE SAFETY 
FEATURES DISCUSSED IN SECTION IIII.B. 

Detection of 
objects in a 
workspace 

Detection 
of 
humans 

Operational 
in opaque 
conditions 

Reference 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

Tiered 
levels of 
safety 
features 
✔ 
✕ 

✔  ✔/✕ 
✕ 

✕ 

✔ 

✔ 

✔ 

✕ 

✔ 
✕ 

Figure 1. Key barriers in the deployment of fully autonomous systems 
and descriptions of challenge examples. 

 
 
 
 
A preprint article submit to IROS 2022 

and clear of obstacles, reducing the risks of collisions. This 
allows for robots to avoid collisions and operate within shared 
workspaces.  

Robotic safety standards are a collection of guidelines for 
robot specifications and autonomous operations in which all 
involved  in  the  manufacture,  sales  and  use  of  robots  must 
adhere  to.  Often  a  three-stage  approach  is  utilized  when 
manufacturing and designing safety standards. This includes 
safe  design,  protective  measures  and  warnings  and 
instructions.  Safety  standards  do  exist  for  robotics  and 
autonomous  systems  including  EN  ISO  12100  (Safety  of 
machinery),  EN  ISO  10218  (Safety  requirements  for 
industrial 
(Safety 
requirements for personal care robots) [14]. However, due to 
the rapid advancement of robotics, it can be difficult to ensure 
safety  standards  are  maintained  and  updated  alongside  the 
advancement of robotics and artificial intelligence [15]. 

robots)  and  EN 

ISO  13482:2014 

IV.  FORESIGHT SENSING 

An  area  where  minor  advancements  can  create  significant 
improvements in trust and safety includes advanced sensing 
mechanisms. As identified within this literature review there 
exists  a  gap  for  a  compact,  lightweight,  low  power  sensing 
mechanism with the ability to sense through walls to allow for 
an increased operational overview.  

Foresight  sensing  allows  for  a  robotic  platform  to  have 
increased  situational  awareness  via  the  ability  to  sense  the 
difference  between  an  object,  a  person  and  infrastructure. 
This also has an added capability of through-wall detection of 
objects in close proximity to doors and walls. This leads to 
the following benefits for autonomous systems: 

1.  Increased safety precautions due to a robot having the 

ability to detect a person. 

2.  Increasing navigational and situational awareness for 

autonomous operation between workspaces. 

The  Clearpath  Husky  A200  robot  (Fig.  2)  is  an 
autonomous  ground  vehicle  with  a  pair  of  dual  UR5 
manipulators.  The  platform  ha  payloads  of  a  3D  Velodyne 
LiDAR alongside a 2D SICK Lidar positioned on the front of 
the base. A pan-tilt unit was utilized for effective positioning 
of the FMCW radar sensor onboard the robotic platform. In 
previous autonomous missions, the FMCW radar was utilized 
for the following as an asset integrity role:  

1.  Detection  of  surface  corrosion  precursors  on  metals 

[16], [17]. 
2.  Monitoring  of 

surface  and 

subsurface  defect 

precursors in wind turbine blades [18]. 

3.  Analysis  of  civil  infrastructure  for  subsurface  fault 

precursors [19].  

However, for this investigation, the radar was utilized to 
support a new use case under the term foresight sensing. The 
millimeter  wave  sensing  unit  can  be  used  to  support 
navigational sensors in scenarios which reduce the reliability 

Figure  2.  Dual  UR  Husky  A200  AGV  fully  annotated  highlighting 
sensing payloads and key components. 

of conventional sensing techniques such as smoke, steam and 
mist.  This  allows  for  resilient  sensing  in  dynamic  offshore 
environments and scenarios.  

Foresight sensing feeds into cyber physical systems due to 
the  benefits  of  an  increased  operational  overview  for 
autonomous systems and increased symbiosis between field 
deployed  humans  and  robots.  This  allows  for  increased 
capability  as  a  robot  can  update  its  safety  features  in  the 
presence of a human.  

V.  RESULTS 

Robotic  resilience  is  a  primary  aspect  which  must  be 
the  deployment  of  an  asset.  Mobile 
considered  for 
autonomous  platforms  are  designed  to  be  deployed  in 
hazardous  environments  such  as  opaque  conditions.  These 
include areas of steam, mist and smoke. These conditions are 
commonly found in the offshore renewable energy sector, oil 
and  gas  sector,  mining  and  search  and  rescue  operations. 
Autonomous  robotic  platforms  must  have  supporting 
navigational tools which can ensure the resilience of a mission 
or  support  an  ‘Adapt  and Survive’  methodology  which  will 
ensure the integrity of the asset.  

The FMCW radar sensor is an emergent and critical asset 
which will ensure that a robotic platform can remain resilient 
in testing environmental conditions. The following discusses 
how  the  FMCW  radar  can  be  applied  for  the  detection  and 
distinguishing of humans within a shared workspace and for 
through-wall detection to ensure safety compliance of robotic 
platforms. 

A.  Human Proximity Alerting 

The  following  application  of  the  FMCW  radar  sensor 
investigates  human  proximity  alerting.  Millimeter-wave 
sensing  enables  distinguishing  of  a  human  and  an  asset  or 
structure  by  the  autonomous  platform.  This  improves  the 
situational awareness of a platform, ensuring it meets safety 
compliance  requirements  in  terms  of  robot  proximity  to 
humans and infrastructure, representing a major function of 
SLAM. This application summarizes the use of the FMCW 
sensor to distinguish a human target and a metallic target at a 
range of distances from the robotic platform.  

The  FMCW  sensor  and  robotic  platform  remained  in  a 
static  position  where  the  human  represented  the  variable  as 

 
 
 
 
A preprint article submit to IROS 2022 

they  repositioned  themselves  further  from  the  sensor.  The 
human  was  positioned  directly  within  the  Field  Of  View 
(FOV) of the FMCW sensor and moved in 1-meter increments 
to 4 meters away from the sensor. This methodology was then 
repeated  where  the  positioning  of  the  human  was  replaced 
with an aluminum metal sheet measuring 700mm by 500mm. 
The Return Signal Amplitude (RSA) responses as a function 
of distance from the radar sensor can be viewed within Fig. 3. 
The figure has been annotated to aid with the visualization of 
the results presented. The diagram firstly presents an empty 
reference signal for when there is no target in the FOV of the 
radar  sensor.  The  RSA  identifies  the  back  wall  of  the 
laboratory  as  annotated  with  the  blue  block  at  6.5m.  The 
diagram utilizes solid lines with a yellow block for when the 
Aluminum metal sheet was positioned in the FOV of the radar 
sensor  and  dashed  lines  alongside  a  human  silhouette  for 
when  the  human  was  positioned  in  the  FOV.  The  data 
collected  within  this  investigation  presents  a  difference  in 
RSA where an algorithm can utilize the peaks collected and 
produce a reflection magnitude relative to a set baseline, in 
this case  the laboratory wall at 6 meters from the sensor as 
shown in Fig. 3 [20]. It must be noted that the FMCW radar 
was not properly calibrated for the investigation, therefore the 
distances to the target are slightly increased within Fig. 3. 

Equation (1) was used to calculate the relative reflection 
magnitudes  by  utilizing  the  RSA  for  the  empty  reference 
against the RSA for the target as displayed in Table III. 

𝑅𝑅𝑀 =

𝑅𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑅𝑆𝐴
𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑅𝑆𝐴

(1) 

  Where Relative Reflection Magnitude = RRM. 

B.  Through-wall Detection 

The following use case demonstrates the capability of FMCW 
for detection of objects through walls. This initial work was 
conducted to assess whether the FMCW radar could be used 
to increase the situational awareness of a robotic platform to 
variables,  such  as  a  human  or  robotic  platform  entering  a 
room  or  mission  space.  This  level  of  situational  mapping 
promotes the safety compliance of autonomous systems when 
operating in constricted, high foot-traffic areas. For example, 
if a human is working in close proximity to a regularly used 
door, if the FMCW equipped robot can detect the human as 
an  obstacle  obscured  by  the  door,  then  the  autonomous 
platform can replan to find entry via another route. This would 
increase  safety  and  trust  of  robotic  platform  by  mitigating 
potential  human  collision  risks  during  transit  through  the 
doorway  or  by  avoiding  becoming  stuck  between  the  door, 
rendering  it  unusable.  This  risk  is  increasing  as  several 
platforms such as SPOT, Robotnik and Dual UR5 Husky have 
manipulator  arms  with  the  ability  to  access  and  open 
doorways.  

Fig.  4  illustrates  where  the  radar  was  positioned  10  cm 
from  the  FOV  of  a  partition  wall  within  the  laboratory.  A 
copper sheet measuring 30 x 30cm was held by a human in 
the hallway on the other side of the wall from the radar. The 
sheet was moved from wall 2 towards wall 1 whilst the radar 
was continuously scanning. Fig. 5 shows the results, where an 
empty  reference  baseline  was  established  for  the  partition 
wall (wall 1) and hallway to wall 2. The human holding the 
copper sheet was then positioned with their back against wall 
2. The copper sheet was therefore at position A and moved 
continuously  towards  the  radar  until  the  copper  sheet  was 
pressed against wall 1. Fig. 5 displays observed peaks within 

Figure 3. RSA versus distance for human and metal sheet targets. 

TABLE III 

 RELATIVE REFLECTION MAGNITUDES CALCULATED FROM 

THE FMCW RADAR SENSOR DATA 

Figure  4.  Diagram  highlighting  the  procedure  of  the  through  wall 
detection investigation. 

Target Type and Distance from Sensor 

“No Target” Reference (or Lab Wall at 600 cm) 

Human at 100cm  
Human at 200cm 
Human at 300cm 
Human at 400cm 
Aluminium Sheet at 100cm 
Aluminium Sheet at 200cm 

Aluminium Sheet at 300cm 
Aluminium Sheet at 400cm 

Relative 
Reflection 
Magnitude 
1 

1.55 
1.88 
1.51 
1.32 
14.93 
10.79 

7.51 
13.52 

Figure 5. RSA responses for through wall detection investigation at 
positions A-D. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A preprint article submit to IROS 2022 

the RSA from the empty reference baseline indicating where 
the copper sheet is detected by the radar. The red, green, black 
and  cyan  peaks  indicate  positions  A-D  respectively  and 
demonstrate  detection  of  the  copper  sheet  when  moving 
towards the radar whilst obscured through the wall.  

VI.  DISCUSSION 

This paper discussed the utilization of millimeter-wave radar 
sensing  for  human  detection  and  through  wall  detection  of 
obstacles (in this case a human holding a copper sheet) on the 
opposite  side  of  a  partition  wall.  The  FMCW  radar  sensor 
represents  a  novel  payload  which  could  be  used  by 
autonomous systems for the detection of humans in line-of-
sight scenarios. For example, if a human entered a workspace. 
This would allow for  a robot to automatically update safety 
standards if a human entered a collaborative workspace.  

Due to the resilient sensing properties of FMCW radar, the 
sensor could also be utilized to support primary navigational 
sensors  in  the  case  of  opaque  conditions  (smoke,  steam  or 
mist).  These  conditions  often  reduce  the  accuracy  of  visual 
spectrum  and  laser  based  navigational  systems  such  as 
cameras and LiDARs. Therefore, FMCW radar sensing can 
be  utilized  to  support  navigation  in  these  unforeseen 
circumstances  to  ensure  mission  resilience  and  safety 
compliance.  

Through-wall  sensing  is  an  emerging  sensing  technique 
which  will  be  important  in  ensuring  trust  and  safety 
compliance of autonomous systems in the future. This is due 
to the sensor having the ability to update path planning and/or 
update  safety  rules  ahead  of  entering  a  workspace.  This 
increases situational awareness for an autonomous system to 
it  operates  within  predetermined  safety 
that 
ensure 
regulations.  

In 

incapacitation. 

Search  and  Rescue  environments  are  often  considered 
highly  variable  and  harsh  conditions,  with  low  visibility, 
thermal extremes, confined spaces, infrastructural failure and 
noxious  fumes  all  acting  as  contributing  factors  for  human 
disorientation  or 
this  paper,  we 
demonstrated the ability of the FMCW system to detect static 
and  dynamic  features  through  partition  walls  and  in  other 
publications utilized the sensor to assess more dense materials 
such as sandstone and concrete  [19], [21]. This leads to the 
potential  unique  use  of  FMCW  for  person  and  object 
detection  in  the  built  environment.  The  FMCW  system 
demonstrated  within  this  paper  is  capable  of  functioning  in 
conditions  which  inhibit  more  standard  methods  of  robotic 
platform localization, such as LiDAR and visual cameras.  

Some applications where FMCW radar may be developed 

for use in search and rescue are as follows:  

1.  Discrimination  between  humans  and  infrastructure, 
allowing  for  localization  of  vital  rescue  priorities  in 
areas where normal communications have failed, such 
as GPS-denied environments. 

2.  Detection and identification of humans within a search 
and  rescue  area,  even  when  obscured  by  failed 
infrastructure or in low visibility conditions. 

3.  Detection  of  key  vital  sign  data  for  assessment  of 

casualties [22]–[25]. 

4.  Support navigation and mapping in opaque conditions 
to  provide  emergency  service  commanders  and 
personnel with run-time situation reporting/mapping. 

A key barrier which inhibits the advancement of robotics 
and  AI  includes  trust.  This  requires  a  balance  between 
consistency  and  capability  to  ensure  trust  between  human 
operator and robot. This is important in terms of the resilience 
and  safety  of  a  mission  if  a  robot  is  deployed  BVLOS 
however,  is  increasingly  important  for  robots  in  shared, 
collaborative workspaces due to increased risks for humans in 
shared  spaces.  A  loss  of  trust  due  to  an  accident  can  be 
extremely detrimental to the deployment of robots regardless 
of the benefits in productivity as safety is the most imperative 
feature  of  any  autonomous  system.  Therefore,  the  FMCW 
radar and other sensing mechanisms will ensure that a human 
is effectively detected and AI can enable for tiered levels of 
safety to be enabled. 

infrastructure  which 

In the roadmap to advancing autonomous systems, robots 
will require increased sensing mechanisms and algorithms as 
discussed in literature this literature  review and novel work 
presented in this paper to increase situational awareness, trust, 
safety and resilience. However, the authors of this paper view 
a Symbiotic System of Systems Approach (SSOSA) as a key 
enabler to unlocking the future potential as robots move from 
single  use  cases  to  multi-robot  fleets  [26].  This  can  be 
enhanced  via  bidirectional  communications  across  a  cyber 
physical  systems 
integrates  and 
synchronizes  models,  data  and  information  streams  from 
deployed  robots.  This  includes  sensing,  actuators  and  run-
time data via bidirectional communication. To support trusted 
deployments,  information  is  fed  to  a  synthetic  environment 
(DT)  to  ensure  the  orchestration  and  control  of  robots, 
missions  and  objectives  alongside  the  analyzation  of  data, 
results from IMR and self-certification data from robots. This 
demonstrates  the  importance  of  this  approach  of  future 
integrated autonomous systems as the real and digital world 
together  for  efficient  utilization  of 
blend  seamlessly 
information.  To  ensure  the  resilient,  safe  and  trusted 
deployment,  ‘Autonomy  as  a  Service’  will  also  include  a 
predominant 
including  operation, 
functions 
maintenance and optimization within infrastructures.  

role 

for 

VII.  CONCLUSION 

Safety, resilience and trust are key components in a successful 
autonomous  mission.  It  is  clear  that  a  variety  of  sensing 
mechanisms and algorithms will be required to advance these 
factors for robotic and autonomous systems. The application 
of  this  research  offers  a  solution  to  effective  detection  and 
distinction  of  humans.  In  addition  to  increased  situational 
awareness  to  update  navigational  and  safety  parameters  via 
through  wall  detection  using  the  FMCW  radar  sensor. 
Foresight  sensing  allows  for  robotic  platforms  to  have 
increased situational awareness for BVLOS sensing to ensure 
safety  standards  are  met  whilst  overcoming  barriers  to 
mission success. To increase trust in robotic agents, systems 
must operate first time, every time. This will lead engineers 
to better understand and trust the  productivity created via a 
robot. This will enhance cyber physical systems where robots 
can  become  more  symbiotic  via  encouraging  effective 

 
A preprint article submit to IROS 2022 

infrastructure 
partnerships 
personnel, leading to cyber physical symbiotic systems. 

environments, 

across 

and 

human-robot interaction,” in 2016 9th International Conference on 
Human  System  Interactions  (HSI),  2016,  pp.  209–215,  doi: 
10.1109/HSI.2016.7529633. 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The  research  within  this  paper  has  been  supported  by  the 
Offshore  Robotics  for  Certification  of  Assets  (ORCA)  Hub 
[EP/R026173/1]  and  the  authors  wish  to  thank  MicroSense 
Technologies  Ltd  for  use  of  their  patented  FMCW  radar 
sensor (PCT/GB2017/053275). 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

REFERENCES 

Seed  Scientific,  “How  Much  Data  Is  Created  Every  Day?  [27 
Powerful  Stats].”  https://seedscientific.com/how-much-data-is-
created-every-day/ (accessed Oct. 28, 2021). 

“Importance  of  IoT  -  Market  opportunity  -  Deloitte  Report  | 
Internet 
Things.” 
of 
https://www2.deloitte.com/in/en/pages/technology-media-and-
telecommunications/articles/iot-2020.html 
2021). 

(accessed  Oct.  28, 

Deloitte,  “Internet  of  Things  (IoT)-  The  Rise  of  the  Connected 
World,”  Accessed:  Oct.  28,  2021. 
[Online].  Available: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/in/Documents/te
chnology-media-telecommunications/in-tmt-
IoT_Theriseoftheconnectedworld-28aug-noexp.pdf. 

V. Robu, D. Flynn, and D. Lane, “Train robots to self-certify their 
safe  operation,”  Nature,  vol.  553,  no.  7688.  Nature  Publishing 
Group, p. 281, Jan. 18, 2018, doi: 10.1038/d41586-018-00646-w. 

Y.  Lu,  “Cyber  Physical  System  (CPS)-Based  Industry  4.0:  A 
Survey,”  https://doi.org/10.1142/S2424862217500142,  vol.  02, 
no. 03, p. 1750014, Nov. 2017, doi: 10.1142/S2424862217500142. 

[19] 

“Professional Service Robots Market Size | Industry Report, 2027.” 
https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-
analysis/professional-service-robots-market  (accessed  Jan.  20, 
2022). 

H.  Sun,  “Through-the-Wall  Human  Motion  Sensing  Based  on 
Forward  Scattering,” 
IEEE  Radar  Conference 
(RadarConf), 2019, pp. 1–5, doi: 10.1109/RADAR.2019.8835770. 

in  2019 

Y. Ma, H. Hong, and X. Zhu, “Corner Multipath in Through-the-
Wall  Radar  Imaging  based  on  Compressive  Sensing,”  in  2020 
IEEE MTT-S International Wireless Symposium (IWS), 2020, pp. 
1–3, doi: 10.1109/IWS49314.2020.9359966. 

U. Alkus, A. B. Sahin, and H. Altan, “Stand-Off Through-the-Wall 
W-Band Millimeter-Wave Imaging Using Compressive Sensing,” 
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 1025–1029, 
2018, doi: 10.1109/LGRS.2018.2817591. 

M.  E.  Yanik  and  M.  Torlak,  “Near-Field  2-D  SAR  Imaging  by 
Millimeter-Wave  Radar  for  Concealed  Item  Detection,”  in  2019 
IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium (RWS), 2019, pp. 1–4, doi: 
10.1109/RWS.2019.8714552. 

G.  O.  Hoskins,  J.  Padayachee,  and  G.  Bright,  “Human-Robot 
Interaction:  The  Safety  Challenge  (An  inegrated  frame  work  for 
human  safety),”  in  2019  Southern  African  Universities  Power 
Engineering  Conference/Robotics  and  Mechatronics/Pattern 
Africa 
Recognition 
Association 
(SAUPEC/RobMech/PRASA), 
doi: 
10.1109/RoboMech.2019.8704744. 

of 
2019, 

74–79, 

South 

pp. 

H. Shin, S. Kim, K. Seo, and S. Rhim, “A Real-Time Human-Robot 
Collision Safety Evaluation Method for Collaborative Robot,” in 
2019 Third IEEE International Conference on Robotic Computing 
(IRC), 2019, pp. 509–513, doi: 10.1109/IRC.2019.00106. 

[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 

[24] 

[25] 

[26] 

[13] 

M.  Ghandour,  H.  Liu,  N.  Stoll,  and  K.  Thurow,  “Interactive 
collision  avoidance  system  for  indoor  mobile  robots  based  on 

systems,” 

F.  Stoica,  “EU product  safety  framework  for  advanced  robots  & 
autonomous 
2017. 
https://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/image/docum
ent/2017-30/felicia_stoica_-
_the_existing_eu_safety_framework_with_regard_to_autonomou
s_systems_and_advanced_robots__iot-systems_6210B836-9707-
D592-D33613EE1C6F086A_46145.pdf. 

O.  Zaki,  M.  Dunnigan,  V.  Robu,  and  D.  Flynn,  “Reliability  and 
Safety of Autonomous Systems Based on Semantic Modelling for 
Self-Certification ,” Robotics , vol. 10, no. 1. Jan. 03, 2021, doi: 
10.3390/robotics10010010. 

D. Mitchell et al., “Symbiotic System of Systems Design for Safe 
and  Resilient  Autonomous  Robotics  in  Offshore  Wind  Farms,” 
Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3117727. 

D.  Mitchell  et  al.,  “Symbiotic  System  of  System  Approach  - 
Autonomous  Confined  Space  Asset  Integrity  Inspection  - 
2021. 
Summary 
(accessed 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QG04Q-W0bvY 
Mar. 22, 2021). 

Video,” 

J. Blanche, D. Mitchell, R. Gupta, A. Tang, and D. Flynn, “Asset 
Integrity  Monitoring  of  Wind  Turbine  Blades  with  Non-
Destructive  Radar  Sensing,” 
in  2020  11th  IEEE  Annual 
Information Technology, Electronics and Mobile Communication 
Conference 
doi: 
10.1109/IEMCON51383.2020.9284941. 

(IEMCON), 

498–504, 

2020, 

pp. 

D.  Mitchell,  J.  Blanche,  and  D.  Flynn,  “An  Evaluation  of 
Millimeter-wave Radar Sensing for Civil Infrastructure,” in 2020 
11th  IEEE  Annual  Information  Technology,  Electronics  and 
Mobile  Communication  Conference  (IEMCON),  2020,  pp.  216–
222, doi: 10.1109/IEMCON51383.2020.9284883. 

O.  F.  Zaki  et  al.,  “Self-Certification  and  Safety  Compliance  for 
doi: 
Robotics 
10.4043/30840-ms. 

p.  OTC-30840-MS, 

Platforms,” 

2020, 

J.  Blanche,  D.  Flynn,  H.  Lewis,  G.  Couples,  and  R.  Cheung, 
“Analysis of geomaterials using frequency-modulated continuous 
wave 
[Online].  Available: 
http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?scp=85029439576&pa
rtnerID=8YFLogxK. 

the  K-band,”  2017, 

radar 

in 

A.  Ahmad,  J.  C.  Roh,  D.  Wang,  and  A.  Dubey,  “Vital  signs 
monitoring  of  multiple  people  using  a  FMCW  millimeter-wave 
sensor,”  in  2018  IEEE  Radar  Conference  (RadarConf18),  2018, 
pp. 1450–1455, doi: 10.1109/RADAR.2018.8378778. 

S.  Wang  et  al.,  “A  novel  ultra-wideband  80  GHz  FMCW  radar 
system  for  contactless  monitoring  of  vital  signs,”  in  2015  37th 
Annual  International  Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in 
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2015, pp. 4978–4981, doi: 
10.1109/EMBC.2015.7319509. 

T.  Kiuru  et  al.,  “Movement  and  respiration  detection  using 
statistical properties of the FMCW radar signal,” in 2016 Global 
Symposium  on  Millimeter  Waves  (GSMM)  &  ESA  Workshop  on 
Millimetre-Wave Technology and Applications, 2016, pp. 1–4, doi: 
10.1109/GSMM.2016.7500331. 

M. Alizadeh, G. Shaker, and S. Safavi-Naeini, “Experimental study 
on the phase analysis of FMCW radar for vital signs detection,” in 
2019  13th  European  Conference  on  Antennas  and  Propagation 
(EuCAP), 2019, pp. 1–4. 

T. Semwal and F. Iqbal, CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS : solutions 
to pandemic challenges., 1st ed. ROUTLEDGE- Taylor & Francis 
Group, 2022. 

 
 
