Communication Layer Security in Smart Farming: A 
Survey on Wireless Technologies 

H. Mohammadi Rouzbahani, H. Karimipour, E. Fraser, A. Dehghantanha, E. Duncan, A. Green, C. Russell 

yield  and  profit  while  minimizing  waste  and  environmental 
impact [3]. A fully interconnected multilayer architecture, also 
known as the IoT, is required to collect, transfer, and analyze 
data via different layers, including perception, communication, 
processing,  and  application  layers  [4].  Properly  done,  such  a 
smart  farming  framework  will  give  producers  the  ability  to 
increase productivity while reducing environmental impact and 
waste  through  the  precision  application  of  inputs  such  as 
fertilizers and pesticides.  

A  smart  farming  framework  is  a  multilayer  system  that 
consists  of  IoT  infrastructures  along  with  data  processing 
capability.  Several  physical  components,  including  different 
sensors,  meters,  surveillance  cameras,  Radio-frequency 
identification  (RFID)  tags,  readers,  and  Global  Positioning 
System  (GPS)  devices,  collect  required  information  as  the 
perception layer [5]. The communication layer refers to a data 
transferring  network  between  the  perception  and  application 
layer employing short, medium, and long-range protocols [6]. 
Short-range  networks  like  ZigBee  and  WiFi  enable  short-
distance data transferring, while Lora is a protocol supporting 
[7].  Long-distance  data 
middle-range 
transmission 
long-range  protocols, 
including WiMAX, and cellular networks (e.g., GPRS, 3G, 4G, 
and  5G)  [8].  In  the  processing  layer,  the  collected  data  are 
stored  before  the  cleaning,  visualizing,  and  processing  steps 
that  are  required  to  create  a  model.  Finally,  farmers  access 
various management frameworks through the application layers 
in order to monitor the entire farm procedure. Fig. 1 shows a 
schematic of a smart farming framework. 

communication 

is  provided 

through 

Abstract—Human population growth has driven rising demand for 
food that has, in turn, imposed huge impacts on the environment. In an 
effort  to  reconcile  our  need  to  produce  more  sustenance  while  also 
protecting the world’s ecosystems, farming is becoming more reliant 
on smart tools and communication technologies. Developing a smart 
farming  framework  allows  farmers  to  make  more  efficient  use  of 
inputs thus protecting water quality and biodiversity habitat. Internet 
of  Things  (IoT),  which  has  revolutionized  every  sphere  of  the 
economy,  is  being  applied  to  agriculture  by  connecting  on-farm 
devices  and  providing  real-time  monitoring  of  everything  from 
environmental conditions to market signals, through to animal health 
data.  However,  utilizing  IoT  means  farming  networks  are  now 
vulnerable 
activities,  mostly  when  wireless 
communications are highly employed. With that in mind, this research 
aims  to  investigate  different utilized  communication  technologies  in 
smart  farming.  Moreover,  possible  cyber-attacks  are  investigated  to 
discover 
technologies 
considering the most frequent cyber-attacks that have been happened. 

the  vulnerabilities  of  communication 

to  malicious 

Keywords—  Smart  Farming, 
Communication Layer, Cyber-attack.  

Internet  of  Things 

(IoT), 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

B 

Y the end of 2050, the world population will likely be 10 
billion people, and at the same time, the food supply per 
capita increases ceaselessly [1]. A rising food demand, growing 
urbanization,  climate  change,  and  other  global  crises  (e.g., 
COVID-19  pandemic)  represent  challenges  that  may  lead  to 
food insecurity [2]. 

Since conventional farming procedures cannot address these 
challenges,  a  modern  framework  is  needed  to  maximize  crop 

Fig. 1 Schematic of a smart farming framework 

Hossein Mohammadi Rouzbahani is with University of Guelph, Canada (e-

mail: hmoham15@uoguelph.ca). 

 
 
  
 
 
Utilizing various sensors, smart meters, cameras, gateways, 
actuators,  antenna,  and  transceivers  makes  an  IoT-based 
farming  framework  more  vulnerable  to  potential  malicious 
activities and cyber-attacks [9]. Also, the communication layer 
is known as the most critical section from the security point of 
view since the common theme for smart frameworks, as well as 
smart farming, is communication and connectivity (from local 
to  global  scale).  Moreover,  considering  the  harsh,  extensive, 
and  highly  distributed  nature  of  farms,  wireless  data 
transmissions 
type  of 
communication that, as an open network environment, pave the 
way for attackers [10]. 

extremely 

employed 

the 

are 

There have been several studies conducted on the security of 
the communication layer in smart farming. An attack prediction 
approach  for  smart  farming  networks  has  been  presented  by 
Jason  West  [11],  focusing  on  false  alarm  reduction,  while 
blockchain-based  solutions  have  been  suggested  in  [12]  and 
[13].  In  [14],  a  brief  survey  on  security  challenges  in  smart 
farming  has  been  conducted,  along  with  presenting  a  general 
attack taxonomy and studying different threat models. 

Unauthorized access has been investigated by Rumyantsev 
et  al.  [15],  offering  a  two-pass  compensation  based  on  fiber-
optic  communication,  enhancing  the  efficiency  by  reducing 
misleading solutions. In [16], Support Vector Machine (SVM), 
K-Nearest  Neighbors  (KNN),  and  decision  tree-based  models 
have  been  employed  in  unauthorized  access  point  datasets  in 
order  to  find  the  best  true  positive  rate,  where  the  KNN  and 
decision  show  satisfying  performance.  Effect  of  Denial  of 
Service (DoS) attack on a smart farming structure's functionality 
has  been 
in  [17],  besides  studying  WiFi 
authentication attack caused by IEEE 802.11 vulnerabilities.  

investigated 

Intrusion  attack  is  another  security  issue  that  has  been 
studied in the literature. A two-level intrusion detection method 
has  been  developed  in  [18]  against  Modbus/Transmission 
Control  Protocol  (TCP)  attack  focusing  on  communication 
latency. In [19], a stereo depth intrusion detection algorithm has 
been  established,  reducing  false  positive  and  false  negative 
rates simultaneously.  

There  are  also many  surveys on  cybersecurity  threats  and 
challenges  in  IoT-based  smart  farming.  In  [20],  the  security 
challenges,  basic  characteristics,  and  performance  of  the 
application layer of smart farming frameworks were examined. 
Gupta et al. [21] investigated security and privacy issues in a 
multi-layered  precision  architecture  as  a  highly  distributed 
cyber-physical  system.  A  comprehensive  survey  on  security 
challenges  in  an  IoT-based  smart  farming  network  has  been 
presented  by  Demestichas  et  al.  [22],  focusing  on  associated 
emerging vulnerabilities. 

None  of  the  previous  studies  focused  on  the  utilized 
the 
protocols  and  associated 
communication layer of the smart farming network. This review 
investigates  various  communication  technologies  utilized  in 
smart  farming  networks  to  determine  their  advantages  and 
disadvantages  by  breaking  it  down  into  operation  frequency 

security  challenges 

in 

band,  protocols  and  standards,  data  rate,  indoor  and  outdoor 
ranges.  Moreover, potential  cybersecurity  issues  and  possible 
cyber-attacks are studied in order to discover the vulnerabilities 
and security deficiencies in the communication layer. 

As Fig. 2 demonstrates, the communication types in an IoT-
based smart farming platform are categorized into three main 
classes based on the coverage area radius difference, where the 
communication ranges are varied from less than one meter for 
Near-field  communication  (NFC)  to  more  than 40  kilometers 
[23]. 

Fig.  2 Smart Farming Communication Technologies 

The  rest  of  this  review  paper  is  organized  as  follows: 
Section 2 provides an overview of communication technologies 
in  smart  farming.  Section  3  introduces  security  challenges. 
Finally, section 4 presents conclusions. 

II. COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES 

In  this  review  paper,  we  categorize  communication 
standards into four main classes: 1) ultra-short-range protocols, 
2) short and medium range protocols, 3) long-range protocols, 
and  4)  cellular  networks.  This  categorization  recognizes 
different  parameters,  including  range,  frequency  band,  data 
rates,  power  consumption,  and  ease  of  installation.  These 
classifications are detailed below. 

A. Ultra-Short-Range Protocols 
Optimizing  cost,  energy  consumption,  and  throughput  are 
fundamental  concerns  at  the  first  level  of  communication 
networks where numerous nodes are linked, and localization is 
prone  to  be  a  significant  challenge.  In  order  to  address 
mentioned  concerns, 
two  primary  standards  have  been 
developed, including NFC and RFID which are highly utilized 

 
 
 
 
 
in protocols in healthcare applications, mobile data exchange, 
social media, entertainment, and educational applications [24].  

Transporter,  reader,  and  antenna  are  the  three  main 
components of these two protocols. Readers have carried Radio 
Frequency (RF)  signals toward tags in order to be modulated 
based on the antenna's impedance. The modulated signal which 
has been returned to the reader is analyzed to discover the exact 
tag [25]. RFID tags have been classified into active and passive 
categories based on their source of power. NFC operates at a 
lower frequency than RFID since it utilizes passive tags. Table 
1 summarizes the specifications of NFC and RFID. 

Table 1. RFID and NFC specifications 

Range 

NFC 

5 cm 

RFID 

100 m 

Frequency band 

13.56 MHz 

3.11 GHz 

Data rate 

424 Kbps 

4 Mbps 

Encoding/decoding 

Manchester coding 

On-off keying 

Memory size 

4 Kbytes 

32 Kbytes 

B. Short and Medium Range Protocols 
Communication in the short-range distance (usually less than 
300  meters)  is  covered  by  different  network  protocols, 
including  Bluetooth,  Zigbee,  Z-Wave,  EnOcean,  Wireless 
Highway  Addressable  Remote  Transducer  (Wireless  HART) 
Protocol, and Wireless Fidelity (WiFi). 

Bluetooth has been classified into four classes based on the 
range (5 cm to 100 meters) and the transmit power (0.5 to 100 
mW) based on IEEE 802.15.1 standard. It uses multiple equal 
channels to prevent coexisting while the frequency band varies 
from m 2.4 GHz to 2.485 GHz [26]. 

As  a  low-power  and  low-rate  protocol,  Zigbee  has  been 
designed  based  on  digital  radios  and  according  to  IEEE 
802.15.4 standard. This protocol typically uses in Home  Area 
Networks (HAN) and operates in the 2.4 GHz frequency band, 
consuming 185 microwatts per second. The nominal range and 
data rate of Zigbee are 100 meters and 250 Kbps, respectively 
[27]. 

Z-Wave  and  EnOcean  are  two  similar  low  power  wireless 
communication systems since both operate  in the same  range 
(300 meters) and frequency band (868 MHz). EnOcean is more 
efficient than Z-Wave because it provides a 125 Kbps data rate 
(85 Kbps higher than Z-Wave) while its power consumption is 
significantly low. 

WirelessHART  is  the  first  open  wireless  protocol  that  has 
been  developed  for  process  measurement  and  control 
applications,  based  on 
[28]. 
WirelessHART  operating  range  is  250  meters,  while  its  data 

IEEE  802.15.4  standard 

range and frequency bands equal Zigbee. 

WiFi  is  an  extremely  employed  protocol  based  on  the 
specifications in IEEE 802.11 standard, functioning in between 
2.4 GHz and 5.6 GHz industrial, scientific, and medical (ISM) 
bands  [29].  WiFi  has  the  highest  data  rate  in  the  short-range 
protocols by far (600 Mbps for ratification IEEE 802.11n). The 
maximum outdoor range for WiFi estimates 250 meters which 
is  higher  than  Zigbee,  equals  WirelessHART,  and  less  and 
EnOcean.  

C. Long-Range Protocols 
Sigfox, LoRaWAN, and Neul are three long-range and Low-
Power Wide Area Networks (LPWAN) standards. IoT devices 
that employ these protocols are cheap and consume a very low 
amount of energy [30].  

The main aim of utilizing Sigfox is to the increasing range 
while  minimizing  power  consumption.  It  operates  in  a  radio 
band of 900 MHz with a maximum range  of 10  km in urban 
environments.  The  maximum  data  rate  if  Sigfox  is  600  bps 
which is very low compared to other protocols. 

LoRaWAN,  similar 

to  Sigfox,  provides  bidirectional 
communication  in  smart  farming  applications  and  Machine  2 
Machine (M2M) interactions. LoRaWAN uses 928 MHz radio 
bands, delivering  service  in  a  maximum  range of 15  km  in  a 
suburban  environment.  Although  the  range  is  less  than 
LoRaWAN,  a  data  rate  of  50  Kbps  is  the  superiority  of  this 
protocol. Moreover, LoRaWAN is capable of removing noise 
and  interference  due  to  utilizing  the  chirp  spread  spectrum 
method [31]. 

Comparable with Sigfox and LoRaWAN, Neul operates at a 
radio frequency band of 900 MHz, providing an average range 
of  10  km  and  a  data  rate  of  100  Kbps.  The  outstanding 
advantage of Neul as a weightless protocol is the incredibly tiny 
power consumption as little as 20 mA [32]. 

D. Cellular Networks 
Communication between all tools and devices across a smart 
farming  platform  can  also  be  performed  through  cellular 
networks, including 2G, 3G, 4G, and 5G in the near future. Data 
range has been enhanced dramatically from 171 kbps for 2G to 
2  Mbps  and  100  Mbps  in  3G  and  4G,  respectively  [33]. 
Ultimately, 5G technology has been introduced that is capable 
of transmitting data up to 10 Gbps. Although the range of other 
protocols is almost 16 km, 5G has a limited range of fewer than 
500 meters. Also, 5G operates at a radio frequency of 39 GHz, 
which  is  considerably  higher  than  employed  frequencies  by 
other cellular technologies [34]. This technology still needs to 
be  enhanced  since  the  signal  can  be  interrupted  by  physical 
obstructions  like  buildings,  towers,  and  trees,  just  to  name  a 
few. Also, developing 5G infrastructure or upgrading existing 
networks required a considerable capital cost. 

III.   POTENTIAL CYBER ATTACKS IN THE 
COMMUNICATION LAYER 

Smart farming security vulnerabilities in the communication 
layer are similar to other IoT domains considering the structural 
design and protocols of the utilized technology. For illustration, 

 
 
 
  
a WiFi encrypted is more vulnerable to password cracking than 
other  protocols  [35].  Fig.  3  shows,  security  challenges  in  the 
communication  layer  are  classified  into  two  main  categories, 
including data attacks and network and equipment attacks [21]. 

Fig. 3 Cybersecurity challenges in the communication layer 

This study briefly introduces smart farming communication 

layer attacks as follows [36]–[41]: 

•  Denial-of-Service  (DoS)  attack:  DoS  happens  by  flooding 
the network with an overwhelming amount of information. 
DoS  is  the  most  probable  attack  in  a  smart  farming 
framework. 

•  Malware  injection  attack:  Installing  harmful  software  that 
performs  unauthorized  actions  with  the  aim  of  causing 
damage to the network. 

•  Sinkhole attack: An intruder, who is an insider attacker, tries 
to discover neighbor nodes routines in order to attract their 
traffic. This attack affects every single node in the network 
regardless of the distance from the base station. 

•  Phishing attack: An attacker fakes itself as a trusted source 
while  trying  to  steal  sensitive  information.  The  victim  is 
tricked  through  various  methods,  including  clicking  on  a 
malicious link or replying to a text message, just to mention 
a few. 

•  Hello flood attack: An attacker broadcasts or replays a Hello 
packet with extremely high transmitting power so that most 
of the nodes take it as a parent node. 

•  Hacking  attacks:  By  deciphering  passwords,  an  intruder 

gains  access  to  the  network.  There  are  several  hacking 
techniques involving brute force, dictionary, rainbow table, 
credential stuffing, and password spraying attacks or even 
social engineering. 

•  Internet  Protocol  (IP)  spoofing  attack:  An  attacker  creates 
IP packets used to trick other devices by modifying or hiding 
the source address. 

•  SQL injection attack: A web security vulnerability leads to 
a  malicious  activity  via  executing  SQL  query  statements. 
The attacker may steal, modify, or delete the database server 
contents. 

•  Reply  attack:  This  attack  happens  by  eavesdropping  into 
transmitted information in a communication network, then 
fraudulently sending those data to misdirect the victim. 

•  Man-in-the-Middle  (MITM)  attack:  An  intruder  intercepts 
the  data  transmission  between  the  communicating  nodes 
since the nodes cannot verify each other's status. 

•  Relay attack: This attack is reminiscent of reply and MITM 
attacks where an attacker intercepts and relays information 
to a third party without observing or altering it.  

•  Radio jamming attack: In fact, this attack is a type of DoS 
attack in wireless networks. Radio signals are disrupted by 
shrinking the Signal-to-Inference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR) 
using  a  constant  jammer,  deceptive  jammer,  random 
jammer, or reactive jammer. 

•  Traffic analysis attack: This attack does not compromise the 
network's data, and attackers are just capable of observing 
transmitted 
network 
information. 

traffic  statistics  or  monitoring 

A. Ultra-Short-Range Protocols security analysis 
RFID and NFC vulnerabilities in communication levels are 
classified  into  two  main  classes:  channel  and  system  security 
risks. RFID and NFC technologies are extremely vulnerable to 
relay  attacks  since  this  technology  uses  air  gap  as  the 
communication medium, which provides a spying opportunity. 
Also, MITM and reply attacks are other possible attacks taking 
advantage of channel vulnerability. System threats may lead to 
password  hacking,  DoS,  and  malware  injections.  Since 
encoding is a method to guarantee confidentiality and integrity 
in  RFID  and  NFC,  password  hacking  is  the  most  common 
attack  arising  from  system  vulnerabilities.  DoS  attacks  are 
mostly  physical 
involving  kill  command,  de-
synchronization, and tad data modification attacks, but it affects 
the  system  performance  as  well  [42].  Although  current  ultra-
short-range technologies are not capable of installing software 
due  to  lack  of  memory  capacity,  in  the  near  future,  malware 
injection could be a potential attack [43]. 

threats 

B. Short and Medium Range Protocols Security Analysis 
Bluetooth  vulnerabilities  are  varied  based  on  the  utilized 
version, but the communication security level degrades to the 
weakest link. This study presents the joint vulnerabilities in all 
versions.  Encryption  length  and  function  have  a  direct 
relationship  with  the  risk  of  a  hacking  attack.  Since  the 
minimum  required  encryption  length  in  Bluetooth  is  just  one 
byte, hacking is one of the most prevalent attacks in all versions 

 
 
 
of  this  technology.  In  the  absence  of  user  authentication  and 
limitation for device authentication, MITM and relay are two 
other potential attacks in Bluetooth technologies. The two last-
mentioned  attacks  may  also  lead  to  MAC  address  spoofing 
attacks  since  the  header  of  transmitted  information  contains 
MAC addresses of the devices [44]. 

ZigBee  claims  to  deliver  state-of-the-art  security  applying 
seven  protection  levels,  including  physical,  Medium  Access 
Control layer (MAC), network, application support, application 
framework, device object, and security service provider layers. 
low  computing  power  makes  ZigBee  more 
However, 
vulnerable  to  network  attacks.  The  most  notorious  attacks  in 
this technology are DoS, reply, flooding, insider and jamming 
attacks [45]. Flooding attacks, in fact, are pre-attacks that assess 
the  network  security  to  perform  DoS  attacks.  Insider  attack 
occurs  by  blocking  communication  among  devices  that  can 
manipulate the routing protocols. Reply attack simply happens 
in a ZigBee network where encryption is not enabled or in the 
lack of trust center. 

Z-wave  technology  is  vulnerable  to  spoofing,  MITM,  and 
sinkhole attacks. Spoofing attacks rising from the controller or 
another  device  since  the  source  and  destination  of  the  MAC 
Protocol  Data  Unit  (MPDU)  frame  have  been  known  as  a 
trusted field. A MITM attack is another threat due to the mesh 
network  design  of  the  Z-wave.  Ultimately,  exploiting  the 
impersonation 
cache  modification 
vulnerabilities may lead to a sinkhole attack [46]. 

source 

route 

and 

employing 
number 

a  unique,  unalterable  32-bit 
Although 
identification 
secure 
in  EnOcean 
communication, this technology is still vulnerable to MITM and 
IP spoofing attacks. Anti MITM attack that has been proposed 
for  EnOcean  is  activated  just  for  line-powered  devices.  IP 
spoofing attack exploits mesh design and the IP weaknesses of 
EnOcean [47]. 

provides 

Improper  input  validation  besides  open  physical  medium 
makes  WirelessHART  a  potential  target  of  jamming  attacks. 
Since the security of WirelessHART relies on the safety of the 
join key, an insider attack consequently can be another potential 
threat [48]. 

WiFi is most susceptible to password hacking attacks due to 
cryptographic weaknesses in Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), 
leading  to  a  MITM  attack  as well.  Also,  taking  advantage  of 
interference  that  originated  from  a  wireless  environment,  an 
attacker can combine jamming techniques in order to launch a 
DoS  attack.  Moreover,  a  MAC  spoofing  attack  can  be  easily 
performed since an attacker is able to bypass filtering control. 
Finally, malware injection is another potential threat exploiting 
buffer overflow conditions [49], [50]. 

The 5G TCP/IP protocol has several vulnerabilities leading 
to  DoS  and  MITM  attacks  [51].  A  DoS  attack  in  cellular 
networks originated from an SYN flood where the server faces 
numerous  SYN  requests,  while  MITM  launches  when  an 
attacker captures the initial handshake among network devices 
compromising  private  communications.  Lastly,  a  jamming 
attack runs an intentional interference in cellular networks via 
a jammer which is a malicious node. There are several types of 
jammers,  including  regular,  delusive,  random,  responsive, 

control channel, and go-next jammers [52]. Table 2 presents the 
most important weakness of different communication protocols 
in a smart farming platform beside the most frequent associated 
cyber-attack. 

Table 2. Major weakness and potential attack based on the 
protocols. 

Protocol 

Weaknesses 

Frequent attack 

NFC 

RFID 

Data exposure 

Relay/MITM 

Data exposure 

Relay/MITM 

Bluetooth 

Key exchange protocol 

Hacking/Relay 

ZigBee 

Z-wave 

Access Control 

DoS/Flooding 

Certificate Validation 

MITM/Sinkhole 

EnOcean 

Identification 

IP spoofing 

WirelessHART 

Input validation 

Insider 

WiFi 

Cryptography 

Password Hacking 

LoRaWAN 

Input validation 

DoS/Jamming 

Sigfox 

Neul 

NAK key 

Reply 

Input validation 

Traffic analysis 

Cellular 

Input validation 

Jamming/DoS 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

Food security is a major concern and global challenge due to 
fast  population  growth  along  with  global  warming. 
Accordingly, utilizing new technologies and smart  equipment 
is  inevitable.  Taking  advantage  of  IoT,  intelligent  farming 
frameworks  provide  local  and  global  connectivity  among  all 
devices  in  order  to  increase  yield  and  quality  of  products 
through real-time monitoring, controlling irrigation, recording 
moisture and temperature, and adapting treatments to these and 
other  monitored  inputs.  However,  high  penetration  of  smart 
devices along with bidirectional communication leads to novel 
security concerns. 

In  this  review  paper,  various  utilized  communication 
technology in smart farming has been classified into four main 
classes: ultra-short-range, short and medium-range, long-range, 
and  cellular  networks.  All  the  technologies  have  been 
investigated  considering  standard  protocol,  radio  frequency 
band,  range,  and  data  rate  to  discover  advantages  and 
disadvantages.  Potential  attacks  in  the  communication  layer 
were presented. Finally, the most frequent attacks for specific 
vulnerabilities  in  four  different  communication  technology 
groups were identified. 

 
 
 
 
REFERENCES  

[1] 

 O. F. Godber and R. Wall, “Livestock and food security: 
vulnerability to population growth and climate change,” Global 
Change Biology, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 3092–3102, Oct. 2014 
[2]  P. Udmale, I. Pal, S. Szabo, M. Pramanik, and A. Large, “Global 
food security in the context of COVID-19: A scenario-based 
exploratory analysis,” Progress in Disaster Science, vol. 7, p. 
100120, Oct. 2020 

[3]  A. Walter, R. Finger, R. Huber, and N. Buchmann, “Smart 
farming is key to developing sustainable agriculture,” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, vol. 114, no. 24. National Academy of 
Sciences, pp. 6148–6150, Jun. 13, 2017 

[4]  H. Haddadpajouh, A. Mohtadi, A. Dehghantanaha, H. 

Karimipour, X. Lin, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A Multi-Kernel and 
Meta-heuristic Feature Selection Approach for IoT Malware 
Threat Hunting in the Edge Layer,” IEEE Internet of Things 
Journal, pp. 1–1, Sep. 2020 

[5]  M. M. Nasralla, I. Garcia-Magarino, and J. Lloret, “Defenses 
against Perception-Layer Attacks on IoT Smart Furniture for 
Impaired People,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 119795–119805, 
2020 

[6]  D. Glaroudis, A. Iossifides, and P. Chatzimisios, “Survey, 

comparison and research challenges of IoT application protocols 
for smart farming,” Computer Networks, vol. 168, p. 107037, 
Feb. 2020 

[7]  N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D. I. Kim, and 
Z. Han, “Data Collection and Wireless Communication in 
Internet of Things (IoT) Using Economic Analysis and Pricing 
Models: A Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys and 
Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 4. Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers Inc., pp. 2546–2590, Oct. 01, 2016 

[8]  L. K. Ketshabetswe, A. M. Zungeru, M. Mangwala, J. M. 

Chuma, and B. Sigweni, “Communication protocols for wireless 
sensor networks: A survey and comparison,” Heliyon, vol. 5, no. 
5. Elsevier Ltd, p. e01591, May 01, 2019 

[9]  S. S. L. Chukkapalli et al., “Ontologies and Artificial 

Intelligence Systems for the Cooperative Smart Farming 
Ecosystem,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 164045–164064, Sep. 
2020 

[10] X. Yang et al., “A Survey on Smart Agriculture: Development 
Modes, Technologies, and Security and Privacy Challenges,” 
IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 273–
302, Feb. 2021 

[11] J. West, “A Prediction Model Framework for Cyber-Attacks to 

Precision Agriculture Technologies,” Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Information, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 307–330, Oct. 2018 
[12] M. A. Ferrag, L. Shu, X. Yang, A. Derhab, and L. Maglaras, 
“Security and Privacy for Green IoT-Based Agriculture: 
Review, Blockchain Solutions, and Challenges,” IEEE Access, 
vol. 8. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 
32031–32053, 2020 

[13] M. Gupta, M. Abdelsalam, S. Khorsandroo, and S. Mittal, 
“Security and Privacy in Smart Farming: Challenges and 
Opportunities,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 34564–34584, 2020 

[14] M. S. Farooq, S. Riaz, A. Abid, K. Abid, and M. A. Naeem, “A 
Survey on the Role of IoT in Agriculture for the Implementation 
of Smart Farming,” IEEE Access, vol. 7. Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 156237–156271, 2019 
[15] K. E. Rumyantsev and A. P. Pljonkin, “Preliminary stage 

synchronization algorithm of auto-compensation quantum key 
distribution system with an unauthorized access security,” Sep. 
2016 

[16] D. Kim, D. Shin, and D. Shin, “Unauthorized Access Point 

Detection Using Machine Learning Algorithms for Information 
Protection,” in Proceedings - 17th IEEE International 

Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and 
Communications and 12th IEEE International Conference on 
Big Data Science and Engineering, Trustcom/BigDataSE 2018, 
Sep. 2018, pp. 1876–1878. 

[17] S. Sontowski et al., “Cyber Attacks on Smart Farming 

Infrastructure,” 2020 IEEE 6th International Conference on 
Collaboration and Internet Computing (CIC), pp. 135–143, 
2020. 

[18] G. K. Ndonda and R. Sadre, “A Two-level Intrusion Detection 

System for Industrial Control System Networks using P4,” Aug. 
2018 

[19] W. Shang, P. Zeng, M. Wan, L. Li, and P. An, “Intrusion 

detection algorithm based on OCSVM in industrial control 
system,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 9, no. 10, 
pp. 1040–1049, Jul. 2016, doi: 10.1002/sec.1398. 

[20] D. Glaroudis, A. Iossifides, and P. Chatzimisios, “Survey, 

comparison and research challenges of IoT application protocols 
for smart farming,” Computer Networks, vol. 168, p. 107037, 
Feb. 2020 

[21] M. Gupta, M. Abdelsalam, S. Khorsandroo, and S. Mittal, 
“Security and Privacy in Smart Farming: Challenges and 
Opportunities,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 34564–34584, 2020 

[22] K. Demestichas, N. Peppes, and T. Alexakis, “Survey on 
Security Threats in Agricultural IoT and Smart Farming,” 
Sensors, vol. 20, no. 22, p. 6458, Nov. 2020 
[23] S. Tayeb, S. Latifi, and Y. Kim, “A survey on IoT 

communication and computation frameworks: An industrial 
perspective,” Mar. 2017 

[24] P. Bhoyar, P. Sahare, S. B. Dhok, and R. B. Deshmukh, 

“Communication technologies and security challenges for 
internet of things: A comprehensive review,” AEU - 
International Journal of Electronics and Communications, vol. 
99. Elsevier GmbH, pp. 81–99, Feb. 01, 2019 

[25] P. Mezzanotte, V. Palazzi, F. Alimenti, and L. Roselli, 

“Innovative RFID Sensors for Internet of Things Applications,” 
IEEE Journal of Microwaves, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 55–65, Jan. 2021 

[26] A. Hernandez-Solana, D. Perez-Diaz-De-Cerio, M. Garcia-

Lozano, A. V. Bardaji, and J. L. Valenzuela, “Bluetooth Mesh 
Analysis, Issues, and Challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 
53784–53800, 2020 

[27] L. Kong, Y. Cao, L. He, G. Chen, M. Y. Wu, and T. He, “Multi-

Rate Selection in ZigBee,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on 
Networking, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 1055–1068, Jun. 2019 

[28] J. Song et al., “WirelessHART: Applying wireless technology in 
real-time industrial process control,” in Proceedings of the IEEE 
Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications 
Symposium, RTAS, 2008, pp. 377–386. 

[29] H. A. Omar, K. Abboud, N. Cheng, K. R. Malekshan, A. T. 
Gamage, and W. Zhuang, “A Survey on High Efficiency 
Wireless Local Area Networks: Next Generation WiFi,” IEEE 
Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 4. Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 2315–2344, 
Oct. 01, 2016 

[30] W. Kassab and K. A. Darabkh, “A–Z survey of Internet of 

Things: Architectures, protocols, applications, recent advances, 
future directions and recommendations,” Journal of Network 
and Computer Applications, vol. 163, p. 102663, Aug. 2020 
[31] L. Chettri and R. Bera, “A Comprehensive Survey on Internet of 

Things (IoT) Toward 5G Wireless Systems,” IEEE Internet of 
Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 1. Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 16–32, Jan. 01, 2020 
[32] J. S. Kalsi and J. Singh Ubhi, “A study of Conventional 

Protocols applicable to the emerging IoT Systems and Devices,” 
in 2019 International Conference on Automation, Computational 
and Technology Management, ICACTM 2019, Apr. 2019, pp. 
395–399 

 
 
information: A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 52, no. 
3. Association for Computing Machinery, Jun. 01, 2019 
[51] R. Odarchenko, V. Gnatyuk, S. Gnatyuk, and A. Abakumova, 
“Security key indicators assessment for modern cellular 
networks,” Oct. 2018 

[52] Y. Arjoune and S. Faruque, “Smart Jamming Attacks in 5G New 
Radio:  A  Review,”  in  2020  10th  Annual  Computing  and 
Communication  Workshop  and  Conference,  CCWC  2020,  Jan. 
2020, pp. 1010–1015. 

[33] A. Mahmood, N. Javaid, and S. Razzaq, “A review of wireless 

communications for smart grid,” Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, vol. 41. Elsevier Ltd, pp. 248–260, Jan. 01, 
2015 

[34] A. Gupta and R. K. Jha, “A Survey of 5G Network: Architecture 

and Emerging Technologies,” IEEE Access, vol. 3. Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 1206–1232, 2015 

[35] T. Xie et al., “The Untold Secrets of WiFi-Calling Services: 
Vulnerabilities, Attacks, and Countermeasures,” IEEE 
Transactions on Mobile Computing, pp. 1–1, May 2020 
[36] H. Darabian et al., “Detecting Cryptomining Malware: a Deep 

Learning Approach for Static and Dynamic Analysis,” Springer 
[37] H. Karimipour and V. Dinavahi, “On false data injection attack 
against dynamic state estimation on smart power grids,” in 2017 
5th IEEE International Conference on Smart Energy Grid 
Engineering, SEGE 2017, Sep. 2017, pp. 388–393 

[38] H. M. Rouzbahani, H. Karimipour, and L. Lei, “An Ensemble 

Deep Convolutional Neural Network Model for Electricity Theft 
Detection in Smart Grids,” in IEEE Transactions on Systems, 
Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, Oct. 2020, vol. 2020-October, 
pp. 3637–3642 

[39] H. M. Rouzbahani, Z. Faraji, M. Amiri-Zarandi, and H. 

Karimipour, “AI-Enabled Security Monitoring in Smart Cyber 
Physical Grids,” in Security of Cyber-Physical Systems, 
Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 145–167. 

[40] H. Karimipour, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, K. K. R. Choo, 

and H. Leung, “A Deep and Scalable Unsupervised Machine 
Learning System for Cyber-Attack Detection in Large-Scale 
Smart Grids,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 80778–80788, 2019 

[41] S. Mohammadi, H. Mirvaziri, M. Ghazizadeh-Ahsaee, and H. 
Karimipour, “Cyber intrusion detection by combined feature 
selection algorithm,” Journal of Information Security and 
Applications, vol. 44, pp. 80–88, Feb. 2019 

[42] D. Tagra, M. Rahman, and S. Sampalli, “Technique for 

preventing DoS attacks on RFID systems,” in SoftCOM 2010, 
18th International Conference on Software, Telecommunications 
and Computer Networks, 2010, pp. 6–10. 

[43] S. Figueroa Lorenzo, J. Añorga Benito, P. García Cardarelli, J. 

Alberdi Garaia, and S. Arrizabalaga Juaristi, “A Comprehensive 
Review of RFID and Bluetooth Security: Practical Analysis,” 
Technologies, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 15, Jan. 2019 

[44] P. Cope, J. Campbell, and T. Hayajneh, “An investigation of 

Bluetooth security vulnerabilities,” Mar. 2017, doi: 
10.1109/CCWC.2017.7868416. 

[45] B. al Baalbaki, J. Pacheco, C. Tunc, S. Hariri, and Y. Al-Nashif, 
“Anomaly Behavior Analysis System for ZigBee in smart 
buildings,” in Proceedings of IEEE/ACS International 
Conference on Computer Systems and Applications, AICCSA, 
Jul. 2016, vol. 2016-July 

[46] C. W. Badenhop, S. R. Graham, B. W. Ramsey, B. E. Mullins, 
and L. O. Mailloux, “The Z-Wave routing protocol and its 
security implications,” Computers and Security, vol. 68, pp. 
112–129, Jul. 2017 

[47] P. Sinha, V. K. Jha, A. K. Rai, and B. Bhushan, “Security 

vulnerabilities, attacks and countermeasures in wireless sensor 
networks at various layers of OSI reference model: A survey,” 
in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Signal 
Processing and Communication, ICSPC 2017, Mar. 2018, vol. 
2018-January, pp. 288–293 

[48] D. Raposo, A. Rodrigues, S. Sinche, J. S. Silva, and F. Boavida, 
“Securing WirelessHART: Monitoring, exploring and detecting 
new vulnerabilities,” Nov. 2018. 

[49] I. Yaqoob et al., “The rise of ransomware and emerging security 
challenges in the Internet of Things,” Computer Networks, vol. 
129, pp. 444–458, Dec. 2017 

[50] Y. Ma, G. Zhou, and S. Wang, “WiFi sensing with channel state 

 
 
 
