A review of knowledge graph application 

scenarios in cyber security 

Kai Liu1, Fei Wang1, Zhaoyun Ding1, Sheng Liang2, Zhengfei Yu1, Yun Zhou1 

1 Science and Technology on Information Systems Engineering Laboratory, National University of 
Defense Technology, China 
2 Center for Information and Language Processing (CIS), University of Munich (LMU), Germany 

Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): liukai18@nudt.edu.cn, zyding@nudt.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Facing the dynamic complex cyber environments, internal and external cyber threat intelligence, 
and the increasing risk of cyber-attack, knowledge graphs show great application potential in the 
cyber  security  area  because  of  their  capabilities  in  knowledge  aggregation,  representation, 
management,  and  reasoning.  However,  while  most  research  has  focused  on  how  to  develop  a 
complete knowledge graph, it remains unclear how to apply the knowledge graph to solve industrial 
real challenges in cyber-attack and defense scenarios. In this review, we provide a brief overview of 
the basic concepts, schema, and construction approaches for the cyber security knowledge graph. 
To  facilitate  future  research  on  cyber  security  knowledge  graphs,  we  also  present  a  curated 
collection  of  datasets  and  open-source  libraries  on  the  knowledge  construction  and  information 
extraction task. In the major part of this article, we conduct a comparative review of the different 
works that elaborate on the recent progress in the application scenarios of cyber security knowledge 
graph.  Furthermore,  a  novel  comprehensive  classification  framework  is  created  to  describe  the 
connected  works  from  nine  primary  categories  and  eighteen  subcategories.  Finally,  we  have  a 
thorough  outlook  on  several  promising  research  directions  based  on  the  discussion  of  existing 
research flaws. 

Keywords：  Cyber security, Knowledge graph, Construction technology, Application scenarios 

1. Introduction 

With the development of new information technologies and applications, the scale of the cyber 
space is gradually expanding from the traditional internet to a variety of areas such as manufacturing, 
healthcare, agriculture, aviation, business, etc. As a result, cyber space can comprise interactions 
between industrial physical systems, human social systems, and network information systems and 
has become an increasingly complex infrastructure for social development. The opportunities left 

 
 
 
 
for attackers are increasing. Due to their combination of cyber as well as many physical assets, the 
consequence  of  cyber-attacks  become  more  and  more  serious.  The  cyberattack  experienced  by 
Colonial Pipeline is an example of how a cyberattack can impact the physical world. The cyberattack 
shut down a pipeline that supplies 45% of the East Coast's fuel, leading to a $5 million economic 
loss，  fuel delivery disruption, and panic buying across the United States [1]. Given the increasing 

number and intensity of attacks and malware, the lack of qualified cyber security personnel is a 
cause for concern [2]. Since neither the number of available people nor the required skills can be 
increased overnight, companies must increase the development of technologies for modeling experts’ 
knowledge and experience. The integration of automation, intelligent technology, and attack defense 
technology has become one of the inevitable trends in the development of cyber security technology. 
Cyberattacks and defenses against them are conducted in dynamic complex environments, with 
numerous factors contributing to attack success and mission impacts. The network environments 
are continually changing, with the applications installed, machines added and removed, etc., which 
is  one  of  the  main  obstacles  [3].  On  the  other  hand,  the  information  asymmetry  between  the 
offensive and defensive sides in cyberspace is becoming more and more obvious [4]. For example, 
when confronted with a constantly updated new vulnerability or attack pattern, defenders often feel 
helpless to grasp the most up-to-date attacking techniques and vulnerability information, as well as 
the  corresponding  effective  defense  strategy,  to  maintain  a  balance  with  the  attacker.  The  long 
persistence  and  highly  concealed  characteristics  of  modern  attacks,  such  as  advanced  persistent 
threat (APT) attacks [5], make the limitations of traditional defense technologies based on expert 
rules, machine learning, and deep learning have become increasingly apparent. The relatively simple 
tasks, such as feature extraction [6], anomaly detection [7], and data classification [8], can no longer 
restore the full picture of attack behavior. Expert knowledge hidden in cybersecurity data is still a 
very important breakthrough to solve the above problems.   

However, the cyber security-related data generated in cyberspace has experienced explosive 
growth. These data are diverse, heterogeneous, and fragmented, making it difficult for cyber security 
managers to quickly find the information they need [9]. Therefore, the current problem of cyber 
security  analysis  is  not  the  lack  of  available  information,  but  how  to  assemble  heterogeneous 
information from multiple sources into one model, to further understand the cybersecurity situation 
and provide auxiliary decision support. The current focus of cybersecurity analysis research is to 
obtain  correlations  and  potential  attacks  from  threat  intelligence  data.  Technologies  such  as 
correlation analysis [10], causal inference [11], and semantic reasoning [12] technologies based on 
knowledge modeling have become new solutions under big data conditions. 

The  cybersecurity  knowledge  graph  (CSKG),  as  a  specific  knowledge  graph  (KG)  in  the 
security area, is made up of nodes and edges that constitute a large-scale security semantic network, 
providing an intuitive modeling method for various attacks and defense scenarios in the real security 
world. Nodes can be entities or abstract concepts (e.g., vulnerability name, attack pattern, product 
name, vendor), edges represent the attributes or relationships between entities, and nodes and edges 
together form a KG. The advantages of the KG can be discussed under three aspects: first, utilizing 
KG  construction  and  refining  techniques  including  ontology  [13],  information  extraction  (IE) 
[14,15], and entity disambiguation [16], KGs effectively extract and integrate existing knowledge 
from  multi-source  heterogeneous  data.  Second,  it  can  express  knowledge  in  the  cyber  security 
domain structurally and relationally, and visualize the knowledge in a graphical manner, which is 
very intuitive and efficient. Third, using semantic modeling, query, and reasoning technologies, a 

cyber  security  KG  can  imitate  the  thinking  process  of  security  specialists  aims  to  derive  new 
knowledge (as known as new relations) or check data consistency based on the existing facts (i.e., 
triples) and logic rules [17]. 

Although  construction  of  CSKG  recently  caught  the  attention  of  both  researchers  and 
companies. Many kinds of CSKGs were constructed from different perspectives of cyber security. 
However, while most research has focused on how to develop a complete KG, it remains unclear 
how to apply the KG to solve industrial real challenges in cyber-attack and defense scenarios. Some 
research teams have proposed some schemas and made some attempts, but there is still a long way 
to  go  before they can be put  into  practice.  How,  for  example, should  KGs be  used  in  a  specific 
network  environment  with  specific  network  assets?  Security  managers  in  many  organizations 
wonder whether the existing CSKG can be reused in their work and whether it fits into their existing 
IT infrastructure. Furthermore, few earlier papers addressed what kind of new knowledge the CSKG 
may infer in addition to new relationships.   

Previous systematic reviews or meta-analyses of the CSKG have been mainly undertaken in 
its data processing, construction, and visualization. Kai Zhang [18] etc. reviewed the literature about 
the application of KG only from the aspects of situation awareness, security assessment and analysis, 
and association analysis, which was limited to the security assessment region. Noel [19] summarized 
the graph-based methods for assessing and improving network security in two major aspects: the 
“when”  aspect  and  the  “where”  aspect. The  first-dimension  cover  three  particular  phases  of  the 
security process (prevention, detection, or reaction). In the second dimension, it gave an expectation 
that  incorporating  various  operational  components  (i.e.,  network  infrastructure,  security  posture, 
cyber-space threats, mission dependencies) into a unified knowledge base for many cyber security 
tasks. The other articles reviewed the research of CSKG mainly from the dimensions of data sources, 
ontology design [20], construction technologies [21], and reasoning methods [22]. As a part of the 
review, Ding et al. [23] briefly attempted to illustrate several application directions of CSKG based 
on  the  introduction  of  CSKG  construction  technologies.  However,  none  of  the  survey  papers 
mentioned  above  focused  on  the  challenging  problem  that  how  to  utilize  the  CSKGs  to  solve 
practical issues? 

The goal of this paper is to motivate and give an introduction to the application scenario of 
KGs in cyber security. To have a comprehensive survey of current literature, this paper first gives a 
summary of the background and construction methods of the CSKG. The primary content of this 
paper  focuses  on  providing an overview of  existing  application  scenarios  of CSKGs  and related 
datasets found in practice. Finally, we discuss the future directions of this research field. Our main 
works are as follows: 

  A  comprehensive  review  of  existing  application  scenarios  of  CSKG. We  propose  a 
novel classification framework for conducting a comprehensive review of the application 
scenarios  of  CSKG  based  on  an  investigation  of  the  background  and  construction 
technology of CSKG. 

  We Summarize the relevant datasets. To facilitate future research on CSKGs, we also 
provide  and  analysis  a curated  collection  of  datasets and  open-source  libraries  for  two 
tasks: the construction task of CSKG and the task of information extraction.   

  The future directions. This survey provides a summary of each category and highlights 

promising future research directions. 

The  rest  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  In  Section  2,  an  overview  of  construction 

methods  for  CSKG  including  definitions,  the  building  flow,  ontology,  named  entity  recognition 
methods,  and  relation  extraction  approaches  are  given.  The  usual  datasets,  as  well  as  their 
inadequacies, are presented in section 3 to aid in  the application of CSKG and the extraction of 
information.  In  Section 4,  an  overview  of  the  application  progress of KGs in  the cyber  security 
domain is given. In section 5, we discuss the shortcomings of existing research before prospecting 
future research opportunities. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 6.   

2. A brief overview of construction methods for cyber security 

knowledge graph   

Knowledge representation has experienced a long-period history of development in the fields 
of  logic  and AI. With  resource  description  framework  (RDF)  [24]  and Web  Ontology  Language 
(OWL) [25] were released in turn, the idea of modern KG gained great popularity since its first 
launch by Google’s search  engine  [26]  to  enhance  the  search  engines  capabilities  and  the user’s 
search quality. In this section, we will briefly introduce the construction process of CSKG from the 
following aspects: First, we present a framework for building a CSKG. Then, the security ontology 
design is described as representing knowledge in the security domain. Next, our review goes to tasks 
of  named  entity  recognition.  Finally,  we  talk  about  relation  extraction  and  similar  works  in  this 
domain. 

2.1 Some definition 

KGs  are  structured  semantic  knowledge  bases  used  to  describe  concepts  and  their 
interrelationships in the physical world in the symbolic form [27]. Formally, a KG can be typically 
defined as  𝐺 = (𝐸, 𝑅, 𝑇), where  𝐺  is a labeled and directed multi-graph, and  𝐸 = {𝑒1, 𝑒2, ⋯ 𝑒|𝐸|}, 
𝑅 = {𝑟1, 𝑟2, ⋯ 𝑟|𝑅|}  are the set of entities and relationships respectively.  |𝐸|  and  |𝑅|  represent the 
number  of  elements  in  sets  E  and  R,  respectively.  Each  triple  is  formalized  as  𝑇 =
{(𝑒, 𝑟, 𝑒′) | 𝑒, 𝑒′ ∈ 𝐸, 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅}  which represents a fact of the relation  𝑟  from head entity  𝑒  to tail 
entity  𝑒′ .  The  triplet  < 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦, 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝, 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦 >   and  < 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡, 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒, 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 > 
are the basic forms of  𝑇, in the knowledge base. The entities as the basic elements in the KG mainly 
include collections, categories, object types, categories of things (e.g., product, vendor, vulnerability, 
attacker).  Relationships  connect  entities  to  form  a  graph  structure,  and  the  attribute  contains 
characteristics and parameters, such as google.com, windows, etc.   

2.2 The building flow of KG 

Similar to the general KG construction process, the CSKG follows the process and framework 
of the general KG construction. Due to the relatively mature and complete knowledge data of this 
field,  a top-down  construction  method  [28]  can be  adopted  for  building CSKG. The fragmented 
domain data could be integrated under the guidance of a certain framework or a pre-designed cyber 
security  ontology  from  domain  experts.  Then  information  extraction  and  entity  alignment 

technologies  can  separate  entities  and  relationships  from  the  original  cyber  security  data. 
Knowledge reasoning technology can generate new knowledge based on the existing KG to provide 
support for prediction and inference tasks. The construction framework of the CSKG is shown in 
Figure 1. 

Figure 1 The construction framework of the cyber security knowledge graph 

2.3 Cyber security ontology 

Cyber security ontology is used to describe cyber security concepts and relationships between 
concepts in a cyber security field or even a wider range. These concepts and relationships have a 
common, unambiguous, and unique definition that everyone agrees on in the shared range, which 
makes humans and machines can communicate with each other [29]. Unified ontologies, such as 
STUCCO  [30],  Unified  Cybersecurity  Ontology  (UCO)  [31],  were  created  in  the  field  of  cyber 
security  to  incorporate  and  integrate  heterogeneous  data  and  knowledge  schemas  from  various 
cybersecurity systems, as well as the most commonly used cybersecurity standards for information 
sharing  and  exchange.  For  different  specific  application  scenarios,  researchers  have  developed 
different  ontologies,  such  as  intrusion  detection  [32],  malware  categorization  [33]and  behavior 
modeling [34], cyber threat intelligence (CTI) analysis [35], cyber-attack analysis [36, 37], threat 
and security evaluation [38, 39], vulnerability analysis [40], threat actor analysis [41], etc. as shown 
in Figure 2. Building a generic network security ontology in today's complex cyber environment is 
a difficult and time-consuming process that heavily relies on the domain knowledge and information 
technology knowledge of network security professionals. As a result, application scenarios should 
guide  the  design  of  appropriate  security  ontology.  At  the  same  time,  dynamic  and  automatic 
enrichment of the information security ontology is required [42].   

Cyber security original dataInformation extractionEntitiesRelationsAttributesEntity alignmentKnowledge graphApplicationKnowledge reasoningOntology modelGuideGuideGuideInputOutcomeInputStandardizeInputDownstreamRefinedData layerTechnologies layer 
 
Figure 2 The cyber security ontologies 

2.4 Cyber security entities extraction 

The  technology  of  information  extraction  (IE)  has  drawn  incremental  attention. At  present, 

there are two main tasks of IE are Named Entity Recognition (NER) and Relation Extraction (RE). 

Traditional  approaches  to  NER  are  broadly  classified  into  three  main  streams:  rule-based, 

unsupervised  learning  and  feature-based  supervised  learning  approaches  [43].  The  rule-based 

methods, such as regular expression [44], bootstrapping methods [45], etc. work very well when the 

lexicon  is  exhaustive,  but  cannot  be  transferred  to  other  domains.  Comparatively,  traditional 

statistical-based extraction  methods  [46]  including  the Hidden Markov  model  (HMM),  Decision 

Trees,  Maximum  Entropy  Model  (MEM),  Support  Vector  Machines  (SVM),  and  Conditional 

Random Fields (CRF), achieve good results. However, they rely heavily on feature engineering, 

which has some limitations [47]. Compared to traditional approaches, deep learning is beneficial in 

the capability of representation learning and the semantic composition empowered by both vector 

representation and neural processing. Illustrated in Figure 3 are the three basic components (i.e., 

distributed representation, feature extractor, and decoder) and some corresponding instances of the 

deep learning NER approach.   

Figure 3 The deep learning approach for the NER flowchart 

This  allows  a  machine  to  be  fed  with  raw  data  and  to  automatically  discover  latent 

representations and processing needed for classification or detection. At present, many methods [48-

Cyber Security OntologiesSTUCCO [30]UCO [31]UnifiedSecurity OntologiesSpecific Scenarios OntologiesIntrusion detection ontology [32]Malware categorization and behavior modeling ontology [33, 34]Cyber threat intelligence analysis ontology [35]Cyber attack analysis ontology [36, 37]Threat and security evaluation ontology [38, 39]Vulnerability analysis ontology [40]Threat actor analysis ontology [41]Distributed representation: Word Embedding, Character Embedding, BERT, other pre-train language model,  Feature extractor: CNN, RNN, Transformer,   Decoder:Softmax, CRF, RNN,   Outcome Input 
 
52] have been tried, mainly including multi-task deep learning, deep transfer learning, deep active 

learning, deep reinforcement learning, deep adversarial learning, attention mechanism, etc.   

2.5 Relations extraction of cyber security entities 

The relationship between entities is an indispensable part of the KG. Abundant relationships 
weave independent entities together into a KG. Relationship extraction from unstructured text is 
one of the core tasks of the KG construction. To overcome the limitation of traditional methods that 
traditional ways strongly rely on the quality of hand-engineered features, Zeng et al. [53] proposed 
an end-to-end CNN-based method that could automatically capture relevant lexical and sentence-
level features. The methods based on RNN or LSTM have been proposed one after another [54, 55]. 
However, most supervised relation extraction methods require large labeled training data which is 
expensive to construct. Distant Supervision (DS) [56] helps with the construction of this dataset 
automatically. Furthermore, multi-instance learning, sentence-level attention mechanism [57, 58] 
were leveraged in the task of relation extraction to reduce the noise introduced by DS. The above-
mentioned work typically solves IE tasks in the extract-then-classify or unified labeling manner. 
However,  these  methods  either  suffer  from  redundant  entity  pairs  or  ignore  the  important  inner 
structure in the process of extracting entities and relations. To address these limitations, Fu et al. 
[59]  presented  a  method  of  joint  extraction  of  entities  and  relations,  which  outperformed  the 
previous  pipelined  approach.  Some  researchers  attempt  to  extract  cyber  security  entity-relation 
triples using a joint extraction model based on their unpublished datasets, which does not address 
the issue of labeled data scarcity [60, 61]. 

However,  there  are  three  main  challenges  during  extracting  information  from  unstructured 
cybersecurity text. Firstly, most previous IE research has focused on common events in a person’s 
life, such as those defined by ACE [62] or the TAC Knowledge Base Population  [63]. One core 
difference between extracting life knowledge and cybersecurity knowledge is the required domain-
relevant expertise. As a result, the IE task suffers from a lack of large labeled training data. A second 
difference  between  extracting  life  knowledge  and  cybersecurity  knowledge  is  the  inherent 
complexity of cybersecurity knowledge. A cyberattack event can consist of an attack pattern with 
multiple actions, attempted or completed. Each mention of one of these actions can be considered 
as  a  separate  cybersecurity  event  description,  which  multiplies  the  possible  choices  for  a 
cybersecurity event reference. Thirdly, there is much implicit information in the unstructured data 
that cannot be expressed explicitly. 

To assure the quality of the KG, it is required to analyze and verify the knowledge, remove 
redundant knowledge, and resolve conflicting information to prevent errors from propagating in the 
reasoning process. The technologies, such as named entity linking and entity disambiguation [64], 
were proposed to refine the KG. Additionally, the KG, which is generated based on IE technologies, 
primarily contains relationships that are represented in sentences explicitly. It is also required to 
mine possible implicit knowledge and enrich the CSKG through reasoning [65]. The knowledge 
reasoning may be combined with specific task requirements, and it can employ association query, 
rule-based  reasoning,  distributed  representation  learning-based  reasoning  methods,  and  neural 
network-based reasoning methods extensively [66]. 

3. The datasets 

In their mission to secure systems, security analysts rely on a wealth of knowledge such as 
known  and  newly  identified  vulnerabilities,  weaknesses,  threats,  and  attack  patterns.  Such 
knowledge  is collected,  published,  and  structured  by  research  institutions, government  agencies, 
and industry experts, e.g., Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs) and MITRE [67]. The 
widely  used  standards  include  the  vulnerabilities  and  associated  data  from  the  National 
Vulnerability  Database  (CVE,  CWE,  CPE,  CVSS,  etc.)  [68],  and  potential  attacker  exploits 
expressed  with  Common Attack  Pattern  Enumeration  and  Classification  (CAPEC)  [69].  In  this 
section, we review the significant datasets for building CSKG by the categories as follows: (1) the 
datasets of open-source CSKG; (2) the datasets for IE in the cyber security domain; (3) the other 
datasets, which may enlighten new researchers to find new solutions.   

3.1 The datasets of open-source CSKG 

Table 1 presents a comparative study of the datasets for CSKG presented. For each dataset, the 
purpose, data sources, and relevant papers (if available) are considered. These open-source CSKG 
are developed for different purposes, which means they need various data sources. For instance, the 
CWE-KG  [72]  was  constructed  to  discover  potential  threats  from  Twitter  data,  so  it  needs  the 
information from CWE, CAPEC, and Twitter data. There are, however, obvious drawbacks to these 
datasets. One of these is that four of them do not give the statement document, e.g., paper, report. 
More than this, the Vulnerability KG [75] even only displays the visualization results on a webpage, 
without the statement of its construction method and experiment performance. The Open-CyKG [76] 
presents a CTI-KG framework that is constructed using an attention-based neural Open IE model to 
extract valuable cyber threat information from unstructured APT reports. Moreover, the MalKG [79] 
aims to integrate information on malware threat intelligence. The SEPSES CKB [70] provides the 
details of the CSKG dataset and the corresponding published paper [71]. While the knowledge from 
MITRE provided strong support for building this KG, this study neglect to include the open-source 
cyber  threat  intelligence  (OSCTI).  Furthermore,  these  works  are  also  limited  by  their  only 
consideration  of  one  language.  Thereby,  the  researchers  in  the  industry  are  beginning  to  look 
forward to the development of CSKG based on abundant threat intelligence and more languages. 

Table 1: Comparative table of the datasets of open-source CSKG 

Name and Year 

Purpose 

Data sources 

Ref. 

SEPSES CKB [70], 2019 

SEPSES CSKG with detailed instance data 

CVE, CWE, CAPEC, CPE, CVSS. 

[71] 

CWE-KG [72], 2019 

A CWE KG supporting Twitter data analysis 

CWE, CAPEC, Twitter data 

CSKG [73], 2020 

Cybersecurity KG 

CVE, CWE, CAPEC 

ICSKG [74], 2020 

KG for vulnerabilities of industrial control systems 

CVE, CWE, CPE, CERT 

Vulnerability KG [75], 2021 

Visualization web page of vulnerability KG 

CVE, CWE 

Open-CyKG [76], 2021 

An open cyber threat intelligence KG 

APT reports, CTI reports 

MalKG [78], 2021 

Open-source KG for malware threat intelligence 

CVE, Malware reports 

- 

- 

- 

- 

[77] 

[79] 

 
3.2 The datasets for information extraction task 

Information  extraction  technologies  are  essential  for  generating  CSKG.  For  the  purpose  of 
training  robust  IE  models,  providing  quality-assurance  annotated  datasets  is  a  crucial  task  that 
cannot  be  bypassed.  This  chapter  summarizes  several  datasets  for  enhancing  the  works  for 
knowledge extraction. From the discussion above it is apparent that the datasets should be divided 
into two categories: the datasets for the NER task and the datasets for the RE task. Frankly speaking, 
the research around this topic is more than these, but the others did not publish their datasets. The 
datasets listed in Table 2 are only the part of new researchers could download and use. Despite the 
fact that most of the datasets are defined for the NER task, following the trend that Rastogi et al .'s 
new malware dataset [79] is the only one for both the NER and RE tasks. The entity and relation 
types  are  in  general  defined  in  a  specific  security  ontology,  which  restricts  the  potential  for  use 
outside of the designated domain. Although they are collected and annotated based on various data 
sources,  most  of  them  are  generated  with  English  corpus.  On  the  other  hand,  a  lot  of  security 
knowledge is released in a variety of languages, often intermingled with English, necessitating the 
creation of multi-language datasets.   

Table 2: The open datasets of information extraction task for cyber security 

Dataset and Year 

Lal [80], 2013 

Bridges et al. [81], 2013 

Lim et al. [82], 2017 

Kim et al. [83], 2020 

Task 

NER 

RE 

√ 

√ 

√ 

√ 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Rastogi et al. [79], 2021 

√ 

√ 

Entity types 

Data sources 

Software, Network_terms, Attack, File_name, Hardware, 

Blogs, Official Security 

Other_technical_terms, NER_modifier 

Bulletins, CVE 

Vendor, Product, Version, Language, 

vulnerability, and vulnerability relevant term 

NVD, OSVBD, Exploit DB 

Action, Subject, Object, Modifier 

APT reports,   

Malware, IP, Domain/URL, Hash, their categories 

CTI reports 

Malware, MalwareFamily, Attacker, 

AttackerGroup, ExploitTarget, Indicator, etc. 

CVE, Malware reports 

3.3 Other datasets for the application of CSKG 

Transferring theoretical framework to practice by mastery of the environment, understanding 
of  the  actions  of  threat  actors,  integration  of  external  intelligence,  and  stockpiling  of  basic 
knowledge.  In  2021,  Zhang  et  al.  [84]  categorized  the  data  demand  from  four  dimensions: 
environment data (e.g., assets and their weakness), behavior data (such as network alerts, terminal 
alerts, and logs), threat intelligence (e.g., internal and external CTI), and knowledge data (such as 
ATT&CK  and  CAPEC).  However,  the  current  studies  highlight  the  threat  intelligence  and  the 
knowledge data in building CSKG and ignore the environment and behavior data of the target IT 
system. Further, there is still no mature and unified specification to describe these data. 

 
4. The application scenarios 

After being introduced by Google, knowledge graph technology has attracted a lot of research 
interest in recent years. In the cyber security domain, research on KG can be classified into two 
categories, research on construction techniques and applications. Studies on construction techniques 
focus on the extraction, representation, fusion, and reasoning of the knowledge in the graphs [85], 
such as linking entities and relations to KG correctly after extracting them from unstructured text 
and reasoning new facts from such KG. While studies on application stress applying CSKG to solve 
practical problems in different network environments. This paper gives a systematic survey on the 
applications of CSKGs.   

According to our current survey, the majority of papers devoting to applying KGs into specific 
areas have put their interests in different particular phrases of overall security process (assessing the 
overall  situation  of  the  network,  discovering  potential  threats,  and  investigating  the  ongoing  or 
ending attack), which will be introduced in from section 4.1 to section 4.3 in this paper. This article 
presents several specific applications from section 4.4 to section 4.8 that will help operators and 
managers  with  decision  making,  operation,  vulnerability  management,  malware  attribution,  and 
analysis  in  conjunction  with  the  physical  environment.  Section  4.9  introduces  some  other 
possibilities  of  application  for  CSKG  like  social  engineering  attack  analysis,  fake  cyber  threat 
intelligence identification. A taxonomy of the application of CSKG in this paper is given in Figure 
4. 

Figure 4. Application scenarios of cyber security knowledge graph 

4.1. Situation awareness and security assessment   

Assessing the overall security of an enterprise network as well as understanding its situation 

Application scenarios6. Vulnerability management and prediction7. Malware attribution and analysis8. Coupling to the physical layer4. Intelligent security operationSecurity alert or event correlation analysisIntelligent operation5. Intelligent decision-makingGeneration of attack strategySecurity policy validation3. Attack investigationAttack paths analysisAttack attributionConsequence predictionAttack analysis2. Threats discoveryAttack predictionCyber threat huntingIntrusion detection1. Security assessment & Situation awarenessSecurity assessment Situation awarenessCombating fake intelligence9. othersSocial engineering 
 
 
has become a demanding undertaking for human administrators as the combination of equipment 
and  services  deployed  on  enterprise  networks  has  become  increasingly  complicated.  A  security 
administrator  for  an  enterprise  network  has  to  combat  these  multi-stage  and  multi-host  attack 
scenarios.  CSKG  can  play  a  vital  role  in  situation  awareness  and  security  assessment.  MITRE 
proposed  a  situation  awareness  system  CyGraph  [86],  which  is  mainly  oriented  toward  network 
warfare  task  analysis,  visual  analysis,  and  knowledge  management. As  a  KG  with  four  layers: 
network infrastructure, security posture, cyber threats, mission readiness, CyGraph aims to analyze 
attack  paths,  predicts  critical  vulnerabilities,  analyze  intrusion  alarm  correlation,  and  interactive 
visual  queries  by  bringing  together  isolated  data  and  events  into  an  ongoing  overall  picture. 
CyGraph  provides  some  query-driven  demonstration  cases  for  stating  its  effectiveness  but  no 
corresponding datasets. Chen [87] combined an existing indicator system and situation detection 
model and proposes an attack situation detection scheme based on KG. It provides a novel feature 
for  improving  the accuracy of  cyber  security  situation detection  by  abstracting  the  attack  events 
(e.g.,  historical  events,  Internet  news)  as  graph  description.  Wang  [88]  proposed  a  KG-based 
network  security  situation  awareness  model  (KG-NSSA)  to  address  the  two  classic  problems: 
network attack scenario discovery and situation understanding. Different from the traditional alert-
based attack scenario discovery approach, which is susceptible to a large number of redundancy and 
false  positives,  the  scheme  can  effectively  reflect  the  network  attack  scenario  in  the  asset  node 
situation with similarity estimating and attribute graph mining method. Yi et al. [89] utilized the 
domain  knowledge-based  reasoning  method  to  realize  automatic  correlation  analysis  of  multi-
source intelligence and understand the satellite cyber situation. 

4.1.1 security assessment 

Wu  et  al.  [90]  proposed  an  innovative  ontology  and  a  graph-based  approach  for  security 
assessment. The ontology, which may be instantiated for specific networks, is intended to represent 
security knowledge such as assets, vulnerabilities, and attacks in a standardized manner. Using the 
inference abilities of the ontological model, an efficient framework is proposed to generate attack 
graphs,  identification  of  possible  attacks  caused  by  existing  vulnerabilities,  and  assess  network 
security. The final output of their method includes the attack graph in a visualized representation as 
well as descriptions of the properties set. To clearly show the progression of the attack, this paper 
provided a flow diagram of the attack process, which illustrates how an adversary can attack and 
compromise several objectives in the test network through multiple hosts and stages. This enables 
enterprise  administrators  to  accomplish  security  risk  assessment  tasks  and  react  to  new  threats. 
Inspired  by  the  existing  cybersecurity  ontologies,  such  as  STUCCO  [30],  UCO  [31],  Cyber 
Intelligence Ontology [91], Kiesling et al. [71] proposed a publicly available CSKG with concrete 
instance information and illustrated its applicability for security assessment by two SPARQL [92] 
query example scenarios. In order to assess the potential impact that a newly identified vulnerability 
may have, it will query which data assets might be exposed in the local system model based on 
linking  organization-specific  asset  information  to  a  continuously  updated  stream  of  known 
vulnerabilities. According to the application scenarios and security threat characteristics of power 
IOT terminals, Pang et al. [93] proposed a security assessment of power IOT terminals based on KG 
with three dimensions including terminal assets, vulnerability intelligence, and threat alarm. The 
method realizes the correlation analysis of the security monitoring data of the independent power 

IoT  terminal  and  generates  the  terminal  threat  index  reflecting  the  terminal  security  status. This 
should have been a good attempt, unfortunately, the article did not give the details of the KG and 
method. 

4.2. Threats Discovery 

Even with advanced monitoring, sophisticated attackers can spend more than 100 days in a 
system before being detected [94]. Many factors ranging from alerts flooding to slow response-time, 
render existing techniques ineffective and unable to reduce the damage caused by these attacks. The 
CSKG could fill this gap with the power of knowledge representation and reasoning. This section 
presents  the  findings  of  the  research  about  the  application  of  CSKG,  focusing  on  the  three  key 
themes including attack prediction, threat hunting, and intrusion detection. Before the cyberattack, 
security analyst hopes to spot signs of attacks ahead of time by attack prediction and threat hunting 
methods.  During  the  attack,  security  administrators  want  to  detect  suspicious  activities  with 
intrusion detection technologies.   

4.2.1 Attack prediction 

Narayanan  et  al.  [95]  developed  a  cognitive  system  to  detect  cybersecurity  events  early  by 
amalgamating information from traditional sensors, dynamic online textual sources, and KGs. The 
author  extended UCO  such that  it  can  reason  over  the  inputs from  various network  sensors like 
Snort, IDS, etc., and information from the cyber-kill chain. SWRL (Semantic Web Rule Language) 
was used to specify rules between entities. The aggregator module was designed to combine alerts 
into a reasoning model. They demonstrated its capabilities of detecting newer attacks by testing it 
against  custom-built  ransomware  similar  to  WannaCry  and  showing  the  timeline  of  the  attack 
performed and the actions from the system. Unfortunately, this study solely described the system's 
architecture and did not include any additional information or data. To solve the difficulty of attack 
prediction caused by the 0day vulnerability, a prediction method of 0day attack path based on cyber 
defense KG was proposed by Sun et al. [96]. The KG was generated from 3 aspects (i.e., threat, 
assets,  and  vulnerability),  which  supported  transforming  the  attack  prediction  task  to  the  link 
prediction  problem  of KG.  According  to  this,  a  path  ranking  algorithm  was applied  to  mine  the 
potential 0day attack in the target system and construct the 0day attack graph. The experimental 
result showed that with the help of KG, the proposed method can improve the accuracy of 0day 
attack  prediction.  Moreover,  utilizing  the  path  ranking  algorithm  can  also  help  to  backtrack  the 
reasons for predicting results so as to improve the explaining ability to predict. 

4.2.2 Threat hunting 

For  the  task  of  cyber  threat  hunting,  a  system  was  developed  by  Gao  et  al.  [97]  aiming  at 
facilitating log-based cyber threat hunting by leveraging vast external threat knowledge provided 
by OSCTI [98]. The system is composed of two subsystems, i.e., a knowledge extraction pipeline 

 
for building threat behavior KG, and a query subsystem built upon system auditing, which could 
collect audit logging data across hosts. This research also provides a threat behavior query language 
(TBQL), and a query synthesis mechanism that automatically synthesizes a TBQL query, with event 
sequential information, from the threat behavior KG, which could be used for finding the matched 
system  auditing  records.  Nevertheless,  one  of  the  limitations  of  this  system  is  that  it  does  not 
consider the attacks that are not captured by system auditing. Furthermore, existing methods often 
exhibit important limitations in terms of the interpretability, quantity, and relevance of the generated 
alerts. 

4.2.3 Intrusion detection 

Besides  the  intrusion  detection  methods  mentioned  by  [99],  the  CSKG  could  also  be 
constructive in detecting intrusion. Kiesling et al. [71] gave a query-based case to illustrate how 
alerts  from  the  network  intrusion  detection  system  (NIDS)  can  be  connected  to  the  SEPSES 
cybersecurity KG in order to obtain a deeper understanding of potential threats and ongoing attacks. 
Chen et al. [100] proposed a DDoS attack detection method based on KG, which is mainly aimed 
at the DDoS attack on TCP traffic. The KG is used to express the communication process of TCP 
traffic between two hosts. Together with calculating the value for one-way transmission propensity, 
a  threshold  was  set  to  determine  whether  the  source  host  is  the  initiator  of  a  DDoS  attack.  To 
comprehensively describe the DDoS attack, Liu et al. [101] constructed distributed DDoS attacks 
malicious behavior knowledge base, which contains two parts: a malicious traffic detection database 
and a network security knowledge base. The front one detects and classifies malicious traffic caused 
by DDoS attacks. The network security knowledge base is the core part of the malicious behavior 
knowledge  base  of  DDoS  attacks,  including  the  network  topology  graph,  malicious  behavior 
traceability graph, malicious behavior feature graph, and traffic behavior KG. The network security 
knowledge base is responsible for data structure processing, malicious behavior KG construction, 
behavior reasoning, and feedback. In 2021, Garrido et al. [102] applied machine learning on KGs 
to  detect  unexpected  activity  in  industrial  automation  systems  integrating  IT  and  OT  elements. 
Using a readily available ontology [103], this study builds a KG via integrating three main sources 
of knowledge: information about the automation system, observations at the network level (e.g., 
connections  between  hosts),  and  observations  at  the  application  level  (e.g.,  data  access  events). 
Inspired by KG completion methods, this study adopts a graph embedding algorithm to rank the 
likelihood  of  triple  statements  resulting  from  events  observed.  Experimentally,  the  suggested 
method  produces  intuitively  well-calibrated  and  interpretable  alarms  in  a  variety  of  contexts, 
pointing  to  the  potential  benefits  of  relational  machine  learning  on  KG  for  intrusion  detection. 
Although these results are produced on a reduced-scale prototype and without the help of CTI, the 
present research explores, for the first time, the synergistic combination of KG and industrial control 
systems.   

4.3. Attack investigation 

CSKG is fast becoming a key instrument in attack analysis. In the chapter that follows, we will 
discuss recent progress on how to apply KG into attack analysis from the following four aspects: 

attack path analysis, attack attribution, consequence prediction, and attack analysis.   

4.3.1 Attack path analysis 

As mentioned above (in section 4.1), the CyGraph could query out potential attack paths based 
on the network environment. Similar to CyGraph, Neol et al. [104] illustrated a graph-based strategy 
with a novel attack graph model that merges a complex blend of network data, including topology, 
firewall  policies,  vulnerabilities,  attack  patterns,  and  intrusion  alerts,  through  standardized 
languages for cyber security data. The author, furthermore, created a model that predicts possible 
attack paths based on network events (intrusion alerts, sensor logs, etc.). Correlating detected attack 
events  with  potential  attack  paths  gives  the  best  options  for  response,  especially  for  protecting 
critical  assets,  and  improves  situational  awareness,  e.g.,  inferring  missed  attack  steps  and 
eliminating false positives. The resulting attack graph is stored in the Neo4j database [105] for query 
and visualization. Despite its efficiency of query and visualization for potential attack paths, the 
proposed KG still faces several disadvantages. Firstly, this research did not show us how to use KG 
to infer new knowledge. Secondly, the corresponding datasets, such as the input format of alerts 
data  and  firewall  policies,  were  not  demonstrated  clearly.  Finally,  the  OSCTI  (the  knowledge 
provided by METRE) is not reflected in the architecture. To extend the information on the attack 
path, Ye et al. [106] designed building a cyber attack KG with 4 types of entities including software, 
hardware, vulnerabilities, and attack entity. With the help of four kinds of attributions of attack entity 
(i.e.,  attack  conditions,  attack  methods,  success  rate,  and  earnings),  this  research  used  KG  to 
generate an attack path and improve the assessment of vulnerability rather than rely on CVSS score 
[107].  Thanks  to  the  knowledge  representation  and  information  management  ability  of  KG,  the 
attack path could update local information based on multiple sources. To further increase efficiency, 
a graph-based strategy for determining the ideal penetration path is proposed, taking into account 
insider and unknown attacks. Wang et al. [37] defined a two-layer threat penetration graph (TLTPG), 
where the upper layer is a penetration graph of the network environment, and the lower layer is a 
penetration graph between any two hosts. The KG was used to describe the attack-related resources 
(e.g., software, vulnerability, ports in use, and privilege of a successful attack) of each host, which 
would be of great benefit not only to generate the penetration path between hosts but also to integrate 
collected  information  of  0-day  vulnerability  attack  for  unknown  attack  prediction.  In  the  power 
networks,  Chen  et  al.  [108]  generated  the  expansion  attack  graph  for  obtaining  the  maximum 
probability vulnerability path and providing the success rate of attacking the power grid and the loss. 
As was discussed in the “attack prediction” section, the KG could also be used to represent and 
generate 0day attack paths with the approach of link prediction and path ranking algorithm [96]. It 
comprehensively considered the existence, availability, and impact of vulnerability as well as the 
knowledge of attack intent, asset types. 

4.3.2 Attack attribution 

As a defender, we must be able to answer questions like who attacked me, where the attack 
point is, and what the attack path is in order to gain a competitive advantage in cyberwarfare. This 

 
step  is  known  as  attack  attribution. The  attack  source,  intermediate  medium,  and  corresponding 
attack path can all be determined using attack attribution technologies, allowing for more tailored 
protection and countermeasure techniques to achieve active defense. As can be seen, attribution of 
attacks is a crucial step in the transition from passive to active defense. Based on an ontology with 
six dimensions, namely host asset, vulnerability, attack threat, evidence, location, strategy, and the 
relations  between  them,  Zhu  et  al.  [109]  constructed  a  CSKG  for  space-ground  integration 
information network. In addition, each dimension has several unique attributes and data sources. 
The  research  proposed  an  automated  attributing  framework  for  cyber-attack. Attack  attribution 
could be performed from different perspectives by querying the established CSKG. As an example, 
given in the article, based on the host asset dimension, security personnel can query the KG to find 
out  the  vulnerable  host  asset  that  is  suspected  of  being  attacked,  associated  vulnerability,  and 
attribution strategy in sequence. Then, the evidence and positions left by the attack could be found 
and the attacked host asset can be located by executing the corresponding attribution strategy. Xue 
et al. [110] analyzed the existing provenance graph construction technology based on causation in 
NSFOCUS’s blog. The study introduced the provenance graph construction from three dimensions 
including  terminal  dimension,  the  perspective  of  Syslog  and  application  log  correlation,  the 
association of network and terminal. The terminal perspective method focused on the relations of 
processes,  files,  and  filenames  in  one  isolated  host  and  ignored  the  application  log  which  was 
replenished by the second dimension. Moreover, the third level method extended the provenance 
graph from single host to multi-host network which could be improved by causal analysis for getting 
a complete attack process. However, this study did not consider the semantic context and OSCTI 
provided by CSKG.   

4.3.3 Consequence prediction 

Common software weaknesses, such as improper input validation, integer overflow, can harm 
system security directly or indirectly, causing adverse effects such as denial-of-service, execution 
of unauthorized code. Understanding the consequence of weakness becomes significant to assess 
the risk of a system and to take prompt response. In 2018, Han et al. [111] built a KG based on 
common weakness enumeration (CWE) [112], which contains rich information about weaknesses, 
including textual descriptions, common consequences, and relations between software weaknesses. 
The current CWE data does not support advanced reasoning tasks on software weaknesses, such as 
the prediction of missing relations and common consequences of CWEs. This research developed a 
translation-based, description-embodied knowledge representation learning method to embed both 
weaknesses  and  their  relations  in  the  KG  into  a  semantic  vector  space.  Following  the  vector 
embedding generation, extensive experiments were conducted to estimate the performance of KG 
in  knowledge  acquisition  and  inference  tasks.  In  this  study,  CSKG  could  be  exploited  for  three 
reasoning  tasks,  including  CWE  link  prediction,  CWE  triple  classification,  and  common 
consequence prediction. Datta et al. [113] transferred the consequence prediction problem to the 
classification  task  by  introducing  a  dataset  and  building  machine  learning  and  natural  language 
processing  (NLP)  models.  The  dataset  of  cyber-attacks  consists  of  93  diverse  attacks  and  their 
descriptions, which are annotated with their technical and non-technical consequences. The idea is 
to enable security researchers to have tools at their disposal that makes it easier to communicate the 
attack consequences with various stakeholders who may have little to no cybersecurity expertise. 

Additionally,  with  the  proposed  approach  researchers’  cognitive  load  can  be  reduced  by 
automatically predicting the consequences of attacks in case new attacks are discovered. 

4.3.4 Attack analysis. 

Besides the above application, Qi et al. [114] built a CSKG, which includes two subgraphs: 
CSKG and scene KG, for attack analysis. The CSKG is the core graph representing the knowledge 
about vulnerabilities, attacks, assets and the relationships among them, which can be obtained from 
various vulnerability and attack analysis websites and can be updated gradually. Scene KG is an 
extended graph constructed based on node and connectivity information of the network involved in 
a specific attack. The input data of the whole analysis framework come from the data collection 
system  and  detection  system.  Using  the  CSKG,  attack  rule  base,  and  spatiotemporal  property 
constraints, composite attack chains are mined from multiple single attacks. With many alerts to 
investigate, cyber analysts often end up with alert fatigue, causing them to ignore a large number of 
alerts and miss true attack events. There is an observation that different attacks may share similar 
abstract strategies, regardless of the vulnerabilities exploited and payloads executed. Alsaheel et al. 
[115] presented ATLAS, a framework that constructs an end-to-end attack story from off-the-shelf 
audit logs based on a causal graph. ATLAS leverages a novel combination of causality analysis, 
NLP,  and  machine  learning  techniques  to  build  a  sequence-based  model,  which  establishes  key 
patterns of attack and non-attack behaviors from a causal graph. At inference time, given a threat 
alert event, an attack symptom node in a causal graph is identified. ATLAS then constructs a set of 
candidate sequences associated with the symptom node, uses the sequence-based model to identify 
nodes in a sequence that contribute to the attack, and unifies the identified attack nodes to construct 
an attack story.   

6G-oriented network intelligence needs the support of knowledge from inside and outside the 
network. Therefore, Wang et al. [116] proposed a method to construct cyber-attack KG based on 
CAPEC  [69]  and  CWE,  which  is  implemented  in  the  graph  database  Neo4j.  This  study  only 
introduced  two  query-based  application  scenarios  in  detecting  and  responding  to  DDoS  flood 
attacks and multi-stage attacks based on the query and display function provided by Neo4j, rather 
than based on the reasoning function of KG. This study just focused on the analysis and application 
of CAPEC and CVE, which did not cover the complete knowledge of cyber security.   

4.4. Intelligent security operation 

4.4.1 Intelligent operation 

An AI-driven security operations framework was presented by Zhang et al. [84]. In this study, 
CSKG  could  support  dynamic  query  and  aggregation  analysis  of  security  data,  improving  the 
integrity of security data operation analysis. The KG is a unified data view, which can support the 
realization of multi-level technical capabilities such as subsequent risk perception, causal cognition, 
robust decision-making. And some challenges were discussed from the aspects of data, models, and 
semantic context. However, this research did not demonstrate the specific method.   

The  white  paper  [117]  introduced  the  application  scenarios  of  KG  in  the  field  of  security 
operation  from  three  aspects:  attack  profiling,  attack  path  investigation  and  response  mitigation 
strategy recommendation, as well as the challenges of intelligent operation. As a white paper, it aims 
to  sort  out  directional  content  such  as  demand  scenarios,  application  solutions,  and  technology 
prospects in this research field, but it will not involve technical details. 

4.4.2 Security alert or event correlation analysis 

Given the ever-evolving threat landscape, security researchers managing the security operation 
center (SOC) are often overloaded with numerous security incidents and, at the same time, trying to 
keep abreast with the latest threats in the wild. Effectively correlation analyzing large volumes of 
diverse alert or event data brings opportunities to identify issues before they become problems and 
to prevent future cyberattacks. Traditional methods usually store the different dimensions of security 
information in separate knowledge bases, which leads to the lack of synergies between the various 
dimensions. As illustrated by Xue [118], the main challenge faced by the application of cyber CSKG 
is that there is no direct connection between the KG based on abstract attack knowledge such as 
STIX 2.0 and the system and network logs that contain the behavior information. It is a semantic 
gap between them. For complex attacks, it is difficult to integrate all context information quickly to 
launch real-time and accurate analysis. The traditional rule-based association analysis needs to rely 
on expert knowledge to construct the attack scene which lacks the ability of reasoning automatically. 
Wang  et  al.  [119]  proposed  an  integrated  security  event  correlation  analysis  system  to  solve  the 
above problem. The system integrated the network infrastructure KG, vulnerability KG, cyber threat 
KG,  and  intrusion  alert  KG  into  the  CSKG,  and  detailed  the  data  source  of  each  dimension. 
Following  alert  normalization  and  alert  fusion,  the  alert  verification  was  conducted  by  judging 
whether the vulnerabilities of one alert are in the host vulnerability set. Furthermore, the process of 
attack thread correlation analysis is based on the existing alerts to query the associated alerts, CVE 
items, and CAPEC items, which could be conducive to predicting the real purpose of attackers. In 
the author’s thesis [120], rebuilding the scene of a series of alerts based on KG was introduced in 
detail. The author conducts an experiment on the DARPA 2000 dataset to evaluate the performance 
of the proposed framework by comparing the number of remaining alerts after correlation analysis. 
This research showed an example of the use of KG for correlation analysis. Qi et al. [121] considered 
that  cyber-attacks  have  multiple  attack  steps,  which  are  associated  with  alerts  from  intrusion 
detection systems (IDS). Based on this idea, an association analysis algorithm based on KG of cyber 
security attack events is proposed to display the attack scenario of an air-ground integrated network 
graphically. The CSKG contains 5 tuples: attack, event, alarm, relation, and rule. The association 
analysis was used by calculating the coincidence degree between the sequence of events collected 
and  the  sequence  of  events  attacked  in  the  KG.  Nevertheless,  due  to  a  lack  of  comprehensive 
understanding of the space-ground integration network and the limitations of current experimental 
conditions,  this  paper  merely  used  simulation  experiments  to  verify  the  feasibility  of  the  above 
algorithm.  Logs  manual  investigation  typically  does  not  scale  well  and  often  leads  to  a  lack  of 
awareness and incomplete transparency about issues. To tackle this challenge, Ekelhart et al. [122] 
introduce  a  flexible  framework  for  the  automated  construction  of  KGs  from  arbitrary  raw  log 
messages. By making log data amenable to semantic analysis, the workflow fills an important gap 
and opens up a wealth of data sources for KG building. As mentioned earlier in section 4.2, Garrido 

et  al.  [102]  proposed  the  application  of  machine  learning  on  KGs  to  improve  the  quality  and 
relevance  of  IDS-generated  alerts  in  modern  industrial  systems,  increasing  their  usefulness  for 
human operators. 

4.5. Intelligent decision-making 

The  current  cyber  security  assessment  also  relies  on  personal  experience,  and  the  level  of 
intelligence is low. Improving the intelligence level of cyber security assessment is a problem that 
needs to be solved urgently. Based on the KG technology, it is worthwhile to study the decision 
model applicable to cyber security and improve the intelligence level of cyber security assessment. 
The aim of the section is to introduce several research cases of intelligent decision-making based 
on KG, such as the generation of attack strategy and security policy validation.   

4.5.1. Generation of attack strategy 

Analyzing the attack strategy from the perspective of an attacker can help determine existing 
security  problems  and  provide  targeted  protection  suggestions.  Compared  with  the  query-based 
method of CyGraph, a cyber-attack method recommendation algorithm based on KG was proposed 
by Ou et al. [123]. It contains a six-tuple KG construction schema based on 4 open databases (i.e., 
CVE, CWE, MSF, CAPEC), the collaborative filtering recommendation that describes difference 
relations  between  nodes  by  meta-path,  a  generator  of  recommendation  list  with  calculating  the 
correlation score of each path with node vector. In the second part, a recommendation algorithm for 
cyber attack entities is proposed by combining the method of machine learning feature extraction 
and the method of constructing heterogeneous information network meta-path. Based on this KG, 
intelligent  search  and  recommendation  of  knowledge  related  to  new  threat  intelligence  can  be 
achieved. Compared with the traditional content-based search recommendation method, this method 
is more accurate in predicting the weakness of vulnerabilities and can realize the prediction and 
recommendation  of  attack  patterns  based  on  the  natural  language  description  of  vulnerabilities. 
Likewise, from the perspective of an attacker, Chen et al. [124] proposed a knowledge-driven attack 
strategy generation method to realize the combined exploitation of multiple vulnerabilities in the 
industrial control network. The method consists of a KG of vulnerability exploitation, a graphical 
representation of industrial control network, and knowledge reasoning rules. Searching for attack 
paths at the device level based on the attack process is a common idea among security experts. The 
process of formulating an attack strategy can be divided into two steps: The first step is analyzing 
multiple vulnerabilities on the current device-level nodes and correlating them based on the pre-
conditions  and  consequences  of  exploitation.  After  formulating  the  exploit  sequence  of  all  the 
vulnerabilities  in  the device,  connect  the  device-level  nodes  according  to  the  access rules  of  the 
firewall  and  other protection  devices  to  form  a global attack strategy  graphically. Currently,  this 
proposed  KG  was  applied  to  analyze  multiple  vulnerabilities  on  a  small-scale  industrial  control 
network to generate attack paths. With the expansion of KG, such as supplementing with other threat 
intelligence, more and more attack strategies need to be generated, especially the most cost-effective 
attack strategy.   

4.5.2. Security Policy Validation 

Vassilev  et  al.  [125]  proposed  a four-layer  (i.e.,  ontological  level,  heuristic  level,  workflow 
level, and process-level) framework for logical analysis, threat intelligence analysis, and validation 
of security policies in cyber systems. The framework is validated using a set of scenarios describing 
the most common security threats in digital banking and a prototype of an event-driven engine for 
navigation  through  the  intelligence  graphs  has  been  implemented.  But  this  framework  was 
developed specifically for application in digital banking and did not introduce used datasets.   

4.6. Vulnerability management and prediction 

This section presents several case studies that illustrate various CSKG analytic capabilities in 
vulnerability management and prediction. In security operation, managing, identifying, quantifying, 
and prioritizing vulnerabilities in one system is a key activity and a necessary precondition for threat 
mitigation and elimination and hence for the successful protection of valuable resources. 

KG  technologies  provide  an  exciting  opportunity  to  advance  our  knowledge  of  managing 
considerable vulnerability data by presenting them in a structured ontological format. Except for the 
using case in section 4.2.3, another using scenario of the SEPSES KG [71] is a query-based example 
to state how the KG can support security analysts by linking organization-specific asset information 
to  a continuously updated stream  of  known vulnerabilities.  Cybersecurity  vulnerability  ontology 
(CVO), a conceptual model for formal knowledge representation of the vulnerability management 
domain, was created by Syed et al. [126]. Additionally, in this research, they utilized the CVO to 
design  a  cyber  intelligence  alert  (CIA)  system  that  issues  cyber  alerts  about  impending 
vulnerabilities and countermeasures. At the practical level, its components include the vulnerability 
repository,  social  media  intelligence  extractor-tagger  (SMIET),  vulnerability  mapper,  RDF 
converter, CVO, the cyber intelligence ontology (CIO), and cyber alerts rules engine. Finally, this 
study gave the evaluation approaches, corresponding results, and examples in practice. Based on 
the industrial internet security vulnerabilities, an industrial CSKG was built and stored into Neo4j 
by Tao et al. [127], in order to analyze, query, and visualize from the dimension of temporal, spatial, 
and correlation.   

In the face of actual attacks, CyGraph correlated intrusion alerts to known vulnerability paths 
and suggests the best courses of action for responding to attacks. CyGraph builds a query-based 
predictive model of possible attack paths and critical vulnerabilities. As previously stated, a CSKG 
based on CWE [111] could be used to predict missing relations and common consequences of CWEs 
by developing a translation-based, description-embodied knowledge representation learning method. 
To find hidden relationships among weaknesses, Qin et al.[40] proposed a query-based model for 
automatic analysis and reasoning. The reasoning flow of the sample CWE Chain was demonstrated 
based on vulnerability KG (VulKG) which contains the vulnerability data including NVD, CVE, 
CPE, and CWE. But the example could merely partially replace the analysis and labeling work of 
security experts under some specific scenarios, where the operator needs to know the query target 
previously. For effectively managing the sparse or inaccurate malware threat information, a malware 
KG called MalKG was established by Rastogi et al. [79], which is the first open-source automated 
KG  for  malware  threat  intelligence.  Additionally,  the  provided  MalKG  dataset  (i.e.,  MT40K) 

contains approximately 40,000 triples generated from 27,354 unique entities and 34 relations. The 
study also manually curated a benchmark KG dataset called MT3K, with 3,027 triples generated 
from 5,741 unique entities and 22 relations. It demonstrated the prediction capabilities of MalKG 
using two use cases in predicting new information. One of the application scenarios is predicting 
and sorting all the potential vulnerabilities or CVEs of the malware-impacted software system, by 
comprehensive utilization of information from the network environment, malware, and KG. As has 
already been noted in [124], a KG about vulnerability exploitation was established by integrating 
and extracting multi-dimensional domain knowledge. By occupying each device-level node, attack 
strategies based on KG improve the performance in comprehensive vulnerability exploitation and 
flexible response. The feasibility of the method was demonstrated through an industrial network 
example. Similarly, in Wang’s study [128] chain reasoning and confidence calculation were also 
used for supporting vulnerability detection and finding latent relations between CWEs. At the end 
of  this  research,  similarity  matching  based  on  a  source  code  level  graph  is  used  for  judging  the 
similarity between target node and node in the vulnerability database, which provides new insights 
into vulnerability mining. Wang et al.[129] extended the relations in vulnerability KG by identifying 
the alternative vulnerability with similar consequences. 

4.7. Malware attribution and analysis 

This section aims to discuss how to utilize the KG to analyze and attribute the malware. Najafi 
et al. [130] proposed a graph-based malware rank inference algorithm, named MalRank, which was 
designed to infer a node maliciousness score based on its associations to other entities presented in 
the  KG,  e.g.,  shared  IP  ranges  or  name  servers.  This  essay  presented  a  KG  that  models  global 
associations  among  entities  observed  in  proxy  and  IDS  logs,  enriched  with  related  open-source 
intelligence (OSINT) and CTI. The authors formulate threat detection in the security information 
and event management (SIEM) environment as a large-scale graph inference problem. After a series 
of  experiments  on  real-world  data  captured  from  a  global  enterprise’s  SIEM,  it  showed  that 
MalRank maintains a high detection rate outperforming its predecessor, belief propagation, both in 
terms  of  accuracy  and  efficiency.  Furthermore,  it  showed  that  this  approach  is  effective  in 
identifying  previously  unknown  malicious  entities  such  as  malicious  domain  names  and  IP 
addresses.  Besides  the  application  scenarios  reported  earlier,  MalKG  [131]  could  also  be 
implemented  in  the  malware  attribution  scenario  [79].  For  example,  given  a  newly  discovered 
malware attack on one system, the analyst needs to build a fingerprint of the malware’s origination 
by assembling sufficient features, such as author, campaign, and others. The goal of MalKG is to 
automate the prediction of these features associated with a given malware, for instance, the newly 
discovered malware may share similarities with a disclosed malware linked to a certain APT group. 
As reported in the white paper [117], the profiling and automatic attribution of APT attacker gangs 
can be realized through the extraction of key elements of threat intelligence and dynamic behavioral 
reasoning. The key solution lies in how establishing a unified language to describe the behavior and 
characteristics  of  different  APT  organizations,  as  well  as  build  a  knowledge  base  about  APT 
organizations. But the white paper did not disclose the details of related research. 

4.8. Connection to the physical system 

The CSKG uses big data analysis and graph mining technology to deeply analyze the coupling 
relationship between the information layer and the physical layer in the modern industrial control 
system, and realize the intelligence of “decision making, risk prediction, accident analysis, attack 
identification” and other capabilities assisted and automated processing. This section attempts to 
provide a summary of the literature relating to how to combine the CSKG with a physical network 
environment. 

To illustrate various cybersecurity analytic capabilities in MITRE’s situation awareness system 
CyGraph  [86]  and  [104],  they  presented  a  simple  network  architecture  for  the  case  study.  The 
architecture shows the underlying connectivity among hosts, switches, routers, and firewalls. The 
internal network is segmented into three protection domains (DMZ, mission client workstations, 
and  data  center).  The  external  firewall  protects  the  internal  network  from  the  outside,  and  the 
internal firewall protects the critical data-center servers. Based on the information on the network 
topology, firewall rules, and vulnerability scan results, the KG was built. To verify the effectiveness 
of the proposed method, a typical internal network architecture model with six types of elements is 
introduced in this paper[106]. In this architecture, the firewall isolates the Internet from the intranet 
router. FTP server, host1, and host2 are directly connected to the router. Host1 and host2 can access 
the FTP server. The database server is connected to the FTP server to receive and respond to requests 
from the FTP server. For the purpose of generating penetration paths, the essay [37] designed an 
illustrative  network  example.  The  network  contains  a  host  on  Internet,  a  DMZ  area,  and  three 
subnets. There is a web server in the DMZ area. Subnet1 has two devices (i.e., one Pad and a host), 
which can be connected to the Internet. Subnet2 has two hosts and cannot connect to the Internet. 
Subnet3 includes three servers including a print server, file server, and data server. The attacker is a 
host on the Internet. It also considered the potential connection between subnet1 and subnet2 with 
USB. Similar to the architecture above, an experiment network environment was designed in the 
paper [96]. In this study, the experiment network contains two subnets protected by two firewalls 
separately,  and  one DMZ also with  a  firewall. The  two subnets  connect  the  Internet  through  the 
DMZ. Each part of the network has different assets, such as an email server and a web server are in 
the DMZ, two hosts and a file server are part of subnet1, and an application server is connected with 
subnet2. Building a suitable experiment network environment could be beneficial to demonstrate 
the effect of approaches and reproduce the attack and defensive process. 

Despite  the  various  traditional  network  architectures,  it  is  also  important  to  research  the 
security of industrial control systems with a suitable experiment network. In the research of [102], 
a  hardware  prototype  was  described  for  evaluation,  following  the  design  of  modern  industrial 
systems integrating IT and OT elements. The automation side is equipped with a Siemens S7-1500 
PLC connected to peripherals via an industrial network. These peripherals include a drive subsystem 
controlling the motion of a conveyor belt, an industrial camera, a human-machine interface (HMI), 
and a distributed I/O subsystem with modules interfacing with various sensors for object positioning 
and other measurements. The PLC exposes values reported by these sensors as well as information 
about the state of the system through an OPC-UA server. So, the PLC connects to 2 edge computing 
servers. Thereafter, the network with main traffic flows was also displayed in this paper. In order to 
sense  and  measure  the  security  risks  and  threats  of  massive  power  IoT  terminals  in  real-time,  a 
security threat assessment for power IOT terminals based on KG was proposed [93]. But this article 

did not describe a suitable network for evaluation. As analyzed previously, Chen et al. [124] applied 
the  domain  KG  to  analyze  multiple  vulnerabilities  in  the  industrial  control  network  to  generate 
attack strategies. The topology of the target network is composed of the Internet, two firewalls, one 
router, an enterprise network, and an industrial ethernet. One firewall is used to protect all assets of 
the local network. The other one is situated between the enterprise network and industrial ethernet. 
The route is between the first firewall and the enterprise network, followed by the second firewall 
and industrial ethernet. The assets of the enterprise network include a web server, admin host, and 
printer.  Some  peripherals,  such  as  an  HMI,  a  data  server,  a  workstation,  and  three  PLCs  with 
different end-effector devices (e.g., valve, flowmeter), are connected to the industrial ethernet. The 
attacker is a certain host from the Internet and the target of the attack is the PLCs.   

Based on the above analysis and related research, this paper sorts out a general experiment 
network  architecture  (as  shown  in  Figure  5)  to  demonstrate  the  effect  of  potential  security 
investigation approaches. This general network mainly contains four parts including DMZ, a subnet 
connected to the Internet via a router, a subnet connected to DMZ, and an industrial control network 
connected  to  DMZ.  Each  subnet  is  isolated  by  a  firewall. And  the  attackers  usually  start  their 
offensive action from the Internet. A researcher could utilize it to adapt to a complex network by 
modifying or adding some devices, extending the subnets, or changing the connection mechanism. 
The network topology expresses the network environment. In addition, it should also include the 
software  and  hardware  installed  on  each  node,  security  protection  measures,  and  existing 
vulnerabilities.   

Figure 5 A general experiment network architecture 

4.9. Other reasoning tasks 

So  far,  this  paper  has  focused  on  several  dominating  application  scenarios.  The  following 

InternetFirewall 1Firewall 2Firewall 4Firewall 3Web ServerEmail ServerRouterFileServerApplicationServerAttackerHost 3PadHMIHost 1PLCData ServerHost 2 
section will discuss some fresh applications, such as social engineering attack analysis, fake cyber 
threat intelligence identification, and so on.   

Succinctly,  social  engineering  is  a  type  of  attack  wherein  the  attacker  exploits  human 
vulnerability through social interaction to breach cyberspace security [132]. Social engineering has 
posed a serious threat to cyberspace security. To protect against social engineering attacks, Wang et 
al.  [133]  develops  an  ontology  of  social  engineering  in  cybersecurity  and  conducts  an  ontology 
evaluation  method  by  its  applications.  The  ontology  defines  11  concepts  of  core  entities  that 
significantly constitute or affect the social engineering domain, together with 22 kinds of relations. 
It provides a formal and explicit knowledge schema to understand, analyze, reuse and share domain 
knowledge of social engineering. Furthermore, the KG was built based on 15 social engineering 
attack  incidents  and  scenarios,  and  it  was  thoroughly  evaluated  using  7  query-based  application 
examples (in 6 analysis patterns) comprehensively.   

Today there is a significant amount of fake cybersecurity intelligence on the internet. To filter 
out such information, Mitra et al. [134] build a system to capture the provenance information and 
represent  it  along  with  the  captured  CTI.  Together  with  enhancing  the  exiting  CSKG  model  to 
incorporate intelligence provenance, this study fused provenance graphs with CSKG. The reasoning 
capabilities of CSKG enforce rules that help in preserving credible information and discarding the 
rest. Additionally, classes capturing the provenance can be added to the schema of the CSKG which 
can give us more information about the source of the data. However, the details and datasets of this 
novel KG were not given. 

Apart from that, Xiao et al. [135] developed a KG embedding method to predict within-type 
and across-type relations of software security entities. Finding such missing relationships among 
existing  entities  helps analysts enrich software  security  knowledge. But  this CSKG is not  open-
source so we could not read the details of it. In addition, the mentioned white paper [117] reported 
several  other  application  scenarios  of  CSKG  technology  as  well  as  its  two  classical  reasoning 
methods.  Despite  the  fact  that  there  was  some  limitation  in  stating  the  adequate  details,  the 
application scenarios, such as ATT&CK threat modeling, APT threat hunting, intelligent security 
operation,  cyberspace  surveying  and  mapping,  supply  chain  security,  cyber-physical  system 
protection,  were  outlined  and  forecasted  by  the  white  paper.  There  are  two  broad  categories  of 
reasoning technologies based on CSKG: relational reasoning based on graph representation learning 
and multi-relational reasoning methods based on neural networks. 

5 Discussion and research opportunities 

At  present,  some  achievements  have  been  made  in  the  application  of  KGs  in  multiple 
knowledge-driven cyber security tasks, but in general, it is still in its infancy. In this section, we first 
give a brief summary of these methods to identify the gap and then propose research opportunities 
for relevant aspects of CSKG. 

(1)  Open-source dataset construction 

In reviewing the literature, no open-source data was found on the perfect solution to all the 
problems. For the task of CSKG construction, further research should be carried out on building a 
dataset  that  could  cover  all  the  dimensions  such  as  the  knowledge  data  from  MITRE,  the  CTI 
obtained from open sources, the environment data (e.g., assets, attributions, and their topology), and 

 
behavior data (such as network alerts, terminal alerts, and logs), as shown in Figure 6.   

Figure 6 The data for the cyber security knowledge graph construction 

The adequate annotated cyber security datasets are indispensable for training or validating the 
IE models, even for the pre-training language model or the prompt-based language models. However, 
existing datasets could not support this task well because of several drawbacks: firstly, most of them 
are designed for only one information extraction task (i.e., entity extraction) rarely for two IE tasks; 
secondly, because of different self-designed ontologies and different research targets, the entity and 
relation types are various; thirdly, the existing datasets are in a single language (i.e., English), which 
could not satisfy the requirement of multi-language; finally, annotating the corpus manually remains 
the primary way to offer initial data for the model in the vertical domain. 

Further research should be undertaken to investigate the new multi-language cyber security IE 
dataset building based on comprehension and reliable data sources. This potential dataset should be 
annotated in a standard format and with a statement document. In the aspect of the annotated method, 
to  lessen  the  reliance  on  annotated  vertical  corpus,  semi-supervised  or  unsupervised  extraction 
approaches, as well as prompt-based generating methods, can be investigated. 

(2)  The construction of a dynamic cyber security knowledge graph 

There are mature frameworks for reference to construct the knowledge graph. Both top-down 
construction methods [136] and bottom-up construction methods [137] can be used to build large-
scale knowledge bases. In the area of cyber security, the former one is more popular (i.e., design a 
cyber security ontology schema firstly, then extract the knowledge required by the schema from the 
corpus), which relies heavily on expert knowledge. The automatic ontology construction technology 
(also known as ontology learning) should still be considered necessary for the timely collection of 
emerging knowledge during the process of ontology update.   

Conventional knowledge graph mainly focuses on the entities, their relations, attributions, etc., 
which are relatively deterministic and static knowledge. With the development of KG research and 
the  demand  for  field  applications,  event  knowledge  and  dynamic  knowledge,  such  as  temporal 
information,  conditional  relationships, causal  information,  and  event  subordination  relationships, 
will inevitably be included. Considerably more work will need to be done to represent the cyber 
security events knowledge and support relevant logical reasoning by building a cyber security event 
temporal knowledge graph. 

(3)  The application scenarios of the cyber security knowledge graph 

Although  the  construction  technologies  of  CSKG  are  stable,  there  is  still  no  unified  open-
source KG that is accepted by everyone. Despite their value and practicality, KGs usually suffer 

Data of CSKG01020403CTI The CTI from open sources (e.g., malware, attack events, APT groups, analyze reports,  ) Knowledge DataThe data from MITRE (e.g., CVE, CWE, CAPEC, Kill-Chain,  )Behavior Data E.g., network alerts, terminal alerts, network traffic data, and logs.Environment Data E.g., assets, weakness attributions, and the topology. 
 
 
from incompleteness, redundancy, and ambiguity that might translate to uninformative query results. 
As the result of different application demands of various scenarios, researchers have to rebuild a 
new knowledge graph every time. This survey has made a comprehensive review of the application 
scenarios of CSKG, but at present, the CSKG function proposed above mainly remains on the query 
and display functions provided by Neo4j. This does not fully exploit the KG's potential to automate 
reasoning. Therefore, it is still not clear how to use it to solve some practical problems in the cyber 
security  domain.  KG  completion  is  just  one  of  the  many  applications  of  knowledge  reasoning 
technology.  To  get  a  new  understanding,  additional  exploration  and  study  based  on  reasoning 
technology should be conducted. 

The semantic gap between CSKG and logs is the key to restricting the application of CSKG to 
attack path investigation. By supplementing relevant knowledge, this semantic gap can be filled, 
and the semantic association between CSKG and log can be realized. The most important work in 
the future is to improve the interaction between the CSKG and the network internal knowledge, 
particularly the cyber-physical system, as well as to apply the KG’s automated reasoning ability and 
association analysis ability to uncover risks and network situational awareness. 

(4)  The evaluation criterion of the cyber security knowledge graph 

Although it is still in its infancy, potential applications of CSKG are found both in defensive 
and  offensive  scenarios  across  most  cybersecurity  functions.  Currently,  there  are  no  established 
evaluation  standards  for  the  KG.  The  accuracy,  precision,  and  F1  value  are  frequently  used  by 
researchers  to  assess  the  information  extraction  model.  Hits@n,  Mean  Rank  (MR),  and  Mean 
Reciprocal Rank (MRR) is used for assessing the triple prediction model's reasoning ability and use 
the  query-based cases  to  demonstrate the  KG's query and  visualization  capabilities. These  aren't 
ideal for a comprehensive analysis of a knowledge graph. For example, we cannot claim that the 
KG may be used in certain situations to demonstrate that it is superior to other KG. Accordingly, 
future studies on proposing the evaluation standards for CSKG are therefore recommended.   

6 Conclusion 

In this review, we have provided a critical overview of the various works on the application 
scenarios of the cyber security knowledge graph. To begin, this paper introduces a brief overview 
of the background, concepts, and construction technologies of the cyber security knowledge graph. 
Then, several open-source datasets that are available for building cyber security knowledge graph 
and the information extraction task, and their drawbacks are illustrated. In the fourth part of this 
paper, we carried out a comparative study of the different works that elaborate on the recent progress 
in  the  application  scenarios  of  CSKG.  A  novel  comprehensive  classification  framework  was 
developed for describing the related works from nine main aspects and eighteen subclasses. Finally, 
based on the discussion of shortcomings of existing research, future research directions have been 
prospected. 

Security managers can use KG to intuitively understand security intelligence, network situation, 
entity  relationships,  and  then  discover  the  attributes  of  security  entities,  which  could  serve  as  a 
foundation  for  understanding  cyber  security  knowledge,  analyzing  cyber  security  data,  and 
discovering attack patterns and abnormal characteristics related to cyber-attacks. It is hoped that this 
research will contribute to a deeper understanding of how to apply cyber security knowledge graphs 

 
in industrial practice. 

Reference 

[1]  Osborne, Charlie. Colonial Pipeline paid close to $5 million in ransomware blackmail 

payment, Zero Day, 13 May 2021, https://www.calvin.edu/library/knightcite/index.php. 

[2]  Auer, Markus. Lack of experts in cyber security, ThreatQuotient, Inc., 14 July 2020, 

https://www.threatq.com/lack-of-experts-in-cyber-security/. 

[3]  Kumar K, Pande B P. Applications of Machine Learning Techniques in the Realm of 

Cybersecurity[J]. Cyber Security and Digital Forensics, 2022: 295-315. 

[4]  Liebetrau T. Cyber conflict short of war: a European strategic vacuum[J]. European Security, 

2022: 1-20. 

[5]  Cole E. Advanced persistent threat: understanding the danger and how to protect your 

organization[M]. Newnes, 2012. 

[6]  Sriavstava R, Singh P, Chhabra H. Review on Cyber Security Intrusion Detection: Using 
Methods of Machine Learning and Data Mining[M]//Internet of Things and Big Data 
Applications. Springer, Cham, 2020: 121-132. 

[7]  Pang G, Shen C, Cao L, et al. Deep learning for anomaly detection: A review[J]. ACM 

Computing Surveys (CSUR), 2021, 54(2): 1-38. 

[8]  Perdisci R, D Ariu, Fogla P, et al. McPAD: A multiple classifier system for accurate payload-

based anomaly detection[J]. Computer Networks the International Journal of Computer & 
Telecommunications Networking, 2009, 53(6):864-881. 

[9]  Llorens, Audrey. 5 Best Practices to Get More from Threat Intelligence, ThreatQuotient, Inc., 

26 Oct. 2021, https://www.threatq.com/5-best-practices-more-threat-intelligence/. 
[10] Xue R, Tang P, Fang S. Prediction of Computer Network Security Situation Based on 

Association Rules Mining[J]. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, 2022.   
[11] Zeng Z R, Peng W, Zeng D, et al. Intrusion detection framework based on causal reasoning 

for DDoS[J]. Journal of Information Security and Applications, 2022, 65: 103124. 
[12] Sikos L F, Philp D, Howard C, et al. Knowledge representation of network semantics for 

reasoning-powered cyber-situational awareness[M]//AI in Cybersecurity. Springer, Cham, 
2019: 19-45. 

[13] Rastogi N, Dutta S, Zaki M J, et al. Malont: An ontology for malware threat 

intelligence[C]//International Workshop on Deployable Machine Learning for Security 
Defense. Springer, Cham, 2020: 28-44. 

[14] Zhao J, Yan Q, Li J, et al. TIMiner: Automatically extracting and analyzing categorized cyber 

threat intelligence from social data[J]. Computers & Security, 2020, 95: 101867. 

[15] Husari G, Al-Shaer E, Ahmed M, et al. Ttpdrill: Automatic and accurate extraction of threat 
actions from unstructured text of cti sources[C]//Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Computer 
Security Applications Conference. 2017: 103-115. 

[16] Bouarroudj W, Boufaida Z, Bellatreche L. Named entity disambiguation in short texts over 

knowledge graphs[J]. Knowledge and Information Systems, 2022: 1-27. 

[17] Ji S, Pan S, Cambria E, et al. A survey on knowledge graphs: Representation, acquisition, and 

applications[J]. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2021. 

[18] Zhang K, Liu J. Review on the application of knowledge graph in cyber security 

assessment[C]//IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering. IOP Publishing, 
2020, 768(5): 052103. 

[19] Noel S. A review of graph approaches to network security analytics[J]. From Database to 

Cyber Security, 2018: 300-323. 

[20] Sani, M. Knowledge Graph on Cybersecurity: A Survey. 2020.   
[21] Yan Z, Liu J. A Review on Application of Knowledge Graph in Cybersecurity[C]//2020 

International Signal Processing, Communications and Engineering Management Conference 
(ISPCEM). IEEE, 2020: 240-243. 

[22] Dong C, Jiang B, Lu Z G, et al. Knowledge graph for cyberspace security intelligence: A 

survey[J]. J. Cyber Secur, 2020, 5: 56-76.   

[23] Ding Z, Liu K, Liu B, et al. Survey of cyber security knowledge graph [J]. J. Huazhong Univ. 

of Sci. & Tech. (Natural Science Edition),2021,49(07):79-91. 

[24] Lassila, Ora, and Ralph R. Swick. Resource Description Framework (RDF) Model and 

Syntax Specification, W3C, 22 Feb. 1999, http://w3.org/TR/1999/REC-rdf-syntax-19990222. 

[25] Smith, Michael K., et al. OWL Web Ontology Language Guide, W3C, 10 Feb. 2004, 

http://w3.org/TR/owl-guide. 

[26] Singhal, Amit. Introducing the Knowledge Graph: things, not strings, Google, 16 May 2012, 

https://blog.google/products/search/introducing-knowledge-graph-things-not/. 

[27] Hogan A, Blomqvist E, Cochez M, et al. Knowledge graphs[J]. Synthesis Lectures on Data, 

Semantics, and Knowledge, 2021, 12(2): 1-257. 

[28] Yang YJ, Xu B, Hu JW, Tong MH, Zhang P, Zheng L. Accurate and efficient method for 

constructing domain knowledge graph. Ruan Jian Xue Bao/Journal of Software, 
2018,29(10):2931-2947. 

[29] X. Y. Du, M. Li, S. Wang. A Survey on Ontology Learning Research. Journal of Software. 

17(2006), 1837-1847. 

[30] Iannacone M, Bohn S, Nakamura G, et al. Developing an ontology for cyber security 

knowledge graphs[C]//Proceedings of the 10th Annual Cyber and Information Security 
Research Conference. 2015: 1-4. 

[31] Syed Z, Padia A, Finin T, et al. UCO: A unified cybersecurity ontology[C]//Workshops at the 

thirtieth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. 2016. 

[32] Undercofer J, Joshi A, Finin T, et al. A target-centric ontology for intrusion 

detection[C]//Workshop on Ontologies in Distributed Systems, held at The 18th International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 2003. 

[33] Ding Y, Wu R, Zhang X. Ontology-based knowledge representation for malware individuals 

and families[J]. Computers & Security, 2019, 87: 101574. 

[34] Grégio A, Bonacin R, Nabuco O, et al. Ontology for malware behavior: A core model 

proposal[C]//2014 IEEE 23rd International WETICE Conference. IEEE, 2014: 453-458. 

[35] Gao Jian, Wang An. Research on ontology-based network threat intelligence analysis 

technology. Computer Engineering and Applications, ,2020,56(11):112-117. 

[36] Simmonds, A.; Sandilands, P.; and van Ekert, L. 2004. An ontology for network security 

attacks. In Applied Computing. Springer. 317-323. 

[37] S. Wang, J. H. Wang, G. M. Tang, et al. Intelligent and Efficient Method for Optimal 

Penetration Path Generation. Journal of Computer Research and Development. 56(2019), 
929-941. 

[38] Wang J A, Wang H, Guo M, et al. Ranking Attacks Based on Vulnerability Analysis[C]. In 
Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2010: 1-10. 

[39] Gao J B. Research on Ontology Model and Its Application in Information Security 

Evaluation[J]. Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2015. 

[40] Qin S, Chow K P. Automatic analysis and reasoning based on vulnerability knowledge 

graph[M]//Cyberspace Data and Intelligence, and Cyber-Living, Syndrome, and Health. 
Springer, Singapore, 2019: 3-19. 

[41] Hooi E K J, Zainal A, Maarof M A, et al. TAGraph: knowledge graph of threat 

actor[C]//2019 International Conference on Cybersecurity (ICoCSec). IEEE, 2019: 76-80. 
[42] Sanagavarapu L M, Iyer V, Reddy R. A Deep Learning Approach for Ontology Enrichment 

from Unstructured Text[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08554, 2021. 

[43] Li, J., et al., A Survey on Deep Learning for Named Entity Recognition. IEEE Transactions 

on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2020. 99: p. 1-1. 

[44] X. Liao, K. Yuan, Z. Li, et al. Acing the IOC Game: Toward Automatic Discovery and 

Analysis of Open-Source Cyber Threat Intelligence[C]. ACM Sigsac Conference on 
Computer and Communications Security(ACM SIGSAC), 2016: 755-766. 

[45] C. L. Jones, R. A. Bridges, K. M. T. Huffer, et al. Towards a Relation Extraction Framework 

for Cyber-Security Concepts[C]. Cyber and Information Security Research 
Conference(CISR), 2015: 11. 

[46] Meng Li, Yanling Li, Min Lin. Review of Transfer Learning for Named Entity 

Recognition[J]. Journal of Frontiers of Computer Science & Technology, 2021, 15(2): 206. 
[47] Georgescu T M. Natural language processing model for automatic analysis of cybersecurity-

related documents[J]. Symmetry, 2020, 12(3): 354. 

[48] Wang X, Zhang Y, Ren X, et al. Cross-type biomedical named entity recognition with deep 

multi-task learning[J]. Bioinformatics, 2019, 35(10): 1745-1752. 

[49] Huang L, Ji H, May J. Cross-lingual multi-level adversarial transfer to enhance low-resource 
name tagging[C]//Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long 
and Short Papers). 2019: 3823-3833. 

[50] Yang Y, Chen W, Li Z, et al. Distantly supervised NER with partial annotation learning and 

reinforcement learning[C]//Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics. 2018: 2159-2169. 

[51] Li J, Ye D, Shang S. Adversarial Transfer for Named Entity Boundary Detection with Pointer 

Networks[C]//IJCAI. 2019: 5053-5059. 

[52] Zhang Q, Fu J, Liu X, et al. Adaptive co-attention network for named entity recognition in 

tweets[C]//Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 2018. 
[53] Zeng, D., et al., Relation Classification via Convolutional Deep Neural Network, in 
Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics: Technical Papers. 2014. p. 2335-2344. 

[54] Zhang, D. and D. Wang, Relation Classification via Recurrent Neural Network. arXiv 

preprint, 2015. arXiv:1508.01006. 

[55] Zhou, P., et al., Attention-Based Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory Networks for 

Relation Classification, in Proceedings of the 54th annual meeting of the association for 
computational linguistics (volume 2: Short papers). 2016. p. 207-212. 

[56] Vashishth S , Joshi R , Prayaga S S , et al. RESIDE: Improving Distantly-Supervised Neural 

Relation Extraction using Side Information[J]. 2018. 

[57] Zeng, D., et al., Distant Supervision for Relation Extraction via Piecewise Convolutional 
Neural Networks, in Proceedings of the 2015 conference on empirical methods in natural 
language processing. 2015. p. 1753-1762. 

[58] Lin Y, Shen S, Liu Z, et al. Neural relation extraction with selective attention over 

instances[C]//Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2016: 2124-2133. 

[59] Fu, T.-J., P.-H. Li, and W.-Y. Ma, GraphRel: Modeling Text as Relational Graphs for Joint 

Entity and Relation Extraction, in Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics. 2019. p. 1409-1418. 

[60] Guo Y, Liu Z, Huang C, et al. CyberRel: Joint Entity and Relation Extraction for 

Cybersecurity Concepts[C]//International Conference on Information and Communications 
Security. Springer, Cham, 2021: 447-463. 

[61] Tao LI, Yuanbo GUO, Ankang JU. Knowledge triple extraction in cybersecurity with 
adversarial active learning[J]. Journal on Communications, 2020, 41(10): 80-91. 

[62] Walker, C.; Strassel, S.; Medero, J.; and Maeda, K. 2006. ACE 2005 multilingual training 

corpus. Technical report, Linguistic Data Consortium. 

[63] Mitamura, T.; Liu, Z.; and Hovy, E. H. 2015. Overview of TAC KBP 2015 event nugget 
track. In Text Analysis Conference. National Institute of Standards and Technology. 

[64] Sevgili O, Shelmanov A, Arkhipov M, et al. Neural entity linking: A survey of models based 

on deep learning[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.00575, 2020. 

[65] Chen X, Jia S, Xiang Y. A review: Knowledge reasoning over knowledge graph[J]. Expert 

Systems with Applications, 2020, 141: 112948. 

[66] LI Xu, LIAN Yifeng, ZHANG Haixia, HUANG kezhen. Key Technologies of Cyber Security 

Knowledge Graph[J]. Frontiers of Data and Domputing, 2021, 3(3): 9-18. 

[67] MITRE. Mitre. https://www.mitre.org/, 20 Mar. 2022.   
[68] US-CERT Security Operations Center. National Vulnerability Database, https://nvd.nist.gov/, 

20 Mar. 2022. 

[69] MITRE. Common attack pattern enumeration and classification. https://capec.mitre.org/, 02 

Mar. 2022. 

[70] SEPSES. The SEPSES Cyber-KB. https://sepses.ifs.tuwien.ac.at/dumps/version/102019/, 21 

Oct. 2019. 

[71] Kiesling E, Ekelhart A, Kurniawan K, et al. The SEPSES knowledge graph: an integrated 
resource for cybersecurity[C]//International Semantic Web Conference. Springer, Cham, 
2019: 198-214. 

[72] Sun Nan. CWE-Knowledge-Graph-Based-Twitter-Data-Analysis-for-Cybersecurity. 

https://github.com/nansunsun/CWE-Knowledge-Graph-Based-Twitter-Data-Analysis-for-
Cybersecurity, 21 Jan. 2019. 

[73] Wang Di. CyberSecurity Knowledge graph. 

https://github.com/HoloLen/CyberSecurity_Knowledge_graph, 12 May. 2020. 
[74] QYue. Knowledge Graph for vulnerabilities of Industrial Control Systems (ICSKG). 

https://github.com/QYue/Athena-ICSKG-master. 30 Jun. 2020. 

[75] Cheng Xingqi. Visualization web page of vulnerability knowledge graph. 

https://cinnqi.github.io/Neo4j-D3-VKG/. 10 May 2021. 

[76] Sarhan I, Spruit M. Open-CyKG. https://github.com/IS5882/Open-CyKG, 16 Feb. 2021. 
[77] Sarhan I, Spruit M. Open-cykg: An open cyber threat intelligence knowledge graph[J]. 

Knowledge-Based Systems, 2021, 233: 107524.   

[78] Rastogi N, Dutta S, Christian R, et al. MalKG. https://github.com/liujie40/MalKG-1, 12 Feb. 

2021. 

[79] Rastogi N, Dutta S, Christian R, et al. Predicting malware threat intelligence using KGs[J]. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05571, 2021. 

[80] Lal R. Information Extraction of Security related entities and concepts from unstructured 

text[J]. 2013. 

[81] Bridges R A, Jones C L, Iannacone M D, et al. Automatic labeling for entity extraction in 

cyber security[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.4941, 2013. 

[82] Lim S K, Muis A O, Lu W, et al. Malwaretextdb: A database for annotated malware 

articles[C]//Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2017: 1557-1567. 

[83] Kim G, Lee C, Jo J, et al. Automatic extraction of named entities of cyber threats using a 

deep Bi-LSTM-CRF network[J]. International journal of machine learning and cybernetics, 
2020, 11(10): 2341-2355. 

[84] Zhang R, Li W. An Intelligent Security Operation Technology System Framework 

AISecOps[J]. Frontiers of Data and Domputing, 2021, 3(3): 32-47. 

[85] Xu Zenglin, Sheng Yongpan, He lirong, et al. Review on Knowledge Graph Techniques[J], 

Journal of University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 2016, (4):589-606. 

[86] Noel S, Harley E, Tam K H, et al. CyGraph: graph-based analytics and visualization for 

cybersecurity[M]//Handbook of Statistics. Elsevier, 2016, 35: 117-167. 

[87] Chen J. Design and implementation of network attack situation detection system based on 

knowledge graph[D]. Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,2020. 

[88] Wang Y. Research and Implementation of NSSA Technology Based on Knowledge Graph 

[D]. University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 2020. 

[89] Yi J, Liu B, Yao L. Satellite Cyber Situational Understanding Based on Knowledge 

Reasoning [J/OL].Systems Engineering and Electronics:1-13[2022-03-10]. 

[90] Wu S, Zhang Y, Cao W. Network security assessment using a semantic reasoning and graph 

based approach[J]. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 2017, 64: 96-109. 

[91] Philpot M. Cyber Intelligence Ontology, https://github.com/daedafusion/cyber-ontology, 18 

Oct. 2015. 

[92] Virtuoso SPARQL Query Editor, https://w3id.org/sepses/sparql, 20 Mar. 2022. 
[93] Pang T, Song Y, Shen Q. Research on Security Threat Assessment for Power IOT Terminal 
Based on Knowledge Graph[C]//2021 IEEE 5th Information Technology, Networking, 
Electronic and Automation Control Conference (ITNEC). IEEE, 2021, 5: 1717-1721. 

[94] FireEye. Common vulnerability scoring system. 

https://www.fireeye.com/content/dam/collateral/en/mtrends-2018.pdf, 2018. 

[95] Narayanan S N, Ganesan A, Joshi K, et al. Early detection of cybersecurity threats using 
collaborative cognition[C]//2018 IEEE 4th international conference on collaboration and 
internet computing (CIC). IEEE, 2018: 354-363. 

[96] Sun C, Hu H, Yang Y, et al. Prediction method of 0day attack path based on cyber defense 

knowledge graph[J]. Chinese Journal of Network and Information Security, 2022,8(01):151-
166. 

[97] Gao P, Shao F, Liu X, et al. Enabling efficient cyber threat hunting with cyber threat 

intelligence[C]//2021 IEEE 37th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). 
IEEE, 2021: 193-204. 

[98] SENKI, Open Source Threat Intelligence Feeds, https://www.senki.org/operators-security-

toolkit/open-source-threat-intelligence-feeds/, 28 Aug. 2020. 

[99] Jian S, Lu Z, Du D et al. Overview of network intrusion detection technology [J]. Journal of 

Cyber Security,2020,5(4):96-122. 

[100] 

Chen J. DDoS Attack Detection Based on Knowledge Graph[J]. Journal of Information 

Security Research, 2020, 6(01): 91-96. 

[101] 

Liu F, Li K, Song F. Distributed DDoS attacks malicious behavior knowledge base 

construction[J]. Telecommunications Science, 2021, 37(11): 17-32. 

[102] 

Garrido J S, Dold D, Frank J. Machine learning on knowledge graphs for context-aware 

security monitoring[C]//2021 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security and 
Resilience (CSR). IEEE, 2021: 55-60. 

[103] 

Kovalenko O, Wimmer M, Sabou M, et al. Modeling automationml: Semantic web 
technologies vs. model-driven engineering[C]//2015 IEEE 20th Conference on Emerging 
Technologies & Factory Automation (ETFA). IEEE, 2015: 1-4. 

[104] 

Noel S, Harley E, Tam K H, et al. Big-data architecture for cyber attack graphs 

representing security relationships in nosql graph databases[J]. 2015. 

[105] 

Vukotic A, Watt N, Abedrabbo T, et al. Neo4j in action[M]. Shelter Island: Manning, 

2015. 

[106] 

Ye Z, Guo Y, Li T, et al. Extended Attack Graph Generation Method Based on 

Knowledge Graph[J]. Computer Science, 2019, 46(12):165-173. 

[107] 

Ruohonen J. A look at the time delays in CVSS vulnerability scoring[J]. Applied 

Computing and Informatics, 2019, 15(2): 129-135. 

[108] 

Chen Z, Dong N, Zhong S, et al. Research on the power network security vulnerability 

expansion attack graph based on knowledge map[J]. Information Technology,2022, 
46(02):30-35. 

[109] 

Zhu Z, Jiang R, Jia Y, et al. Cyber security knowledge graph based cyber attack 

attribution framework for space-ground integration information network[C]//2018 IEEE 18th 
International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT). IEEE, 2018: 870-874. 

[110] 

Xue J. Attack attribution: provenance graph construction technology based on causation, 

NSFOCUS, 7 Sept. 2020, http://blog.nsfocus.net/attack-investigation-0907/. 

[111] 

Han Z, Li X, Liu H, et al. Deepweak: Reasoning common software weaknesses via 
knowledge graph embedding[C]//2018 IEEE 25th International Conference on Software 
Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 2018: 456-466. 

[112]  Mitre. Common weakness enumeration, 28 Feb. 2022, https://cwe.mitre.org/. 
[113] 

Datta P, Lodinger N, Namin A S, et al. Cyber-Attack Consequence Prediction[J]. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2012.00648, 2020. 

[114] 

Qi Y, Jiang R, Jia Y, et al. Attack analysis framework for cyber-attack and defense test 

platform[J]. Electronics, 2020, 9(9): 1413. 

[115] 

Alsaheel A, Nan Y, Ma S, et al. ATLAS: A Sequence-based Learning Approach for 

Attack Investigation[C]//30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21). 2021: 
3005-3022. 

[116]  Wang W, Zhou H, Li K, et al. Cyber-Attack Behavior Knowledge Graph Based on 

CAPEC and CWE Towards 6G[C]//International Symposium on Mobile Internet Security. 
Springer, Singapore, 2021: 352-364. 

[117] 

NEFOCUS, Security Knowledge Graph Technology White Paper, NSFOCUS, 5 Jan. 

2022, https://www.nsfocus.com.cn/html/2022/92_0105/166.html.   

[118] 

Xue J. Attack reasoning: Dilemma of application of security knowledge graph, 

NSFOCUS, 17 Sept. 2020, http://blog.nsfocus.net/stucco-cyber/. 

[119]  Wang W, Jiang R, Jia Y, et al. KGBIAC: Knowledge graph based intelligent alert 

correlation framework[C]//International Symposium on Cyberspace Safety and Security. 
Springer, Cham, 2017: 523-530. 

[120]  Wang W. Research for algorithm of distributed security event correlation based on 
knowledge graph [D]. Hunan: National University of Defense Technology, 2018. 

[121] 

Qi Y, Jiang R, Jia Y, et al. Association analysis algorithm based on knowledge graph for 

space-ground integrated network[C]//2018 IEEE 18th International Conference on 
Communication Technology (ICCT). IEEE, 2018: 222-226. 

[122] 

Ekelhart A, Ekaputra F J, Kiesling E. Automated knowledge graph construction from 

raw log data[J]. 2020. 

[123] 

Ou Y, Zhou T, Zhu J. Recommendation of cyber attack method based on knowledge 

graph[C]//2020 International Conference on Computer Engineering and Intelligent Control 
(ICCEIC). IEEE, 2020: 60-65. 

[124] 

Chen X, Shen W, Yang G. Automatic Generation of Attack Strategy for Multiple 

Vulnerabilities Based on Domain Knowledge Graph[C]//IECON 2021–47th Annual 
Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society. IEEE, 2021: 1-6.   

[125] 

[126] 

Vassilev V, Sowinski-Mydlarz V, Gasiorowski P, et al. Intelligence graphs for threat 
intelligence and security policy validation of cyber systems[C]//Proceedings of International 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Applications. Springer, Singapore, 2021: 125-139.   
Syed R. Cybersecurity vulnerability management: A conceptual ontology and cyber 

intelligence alert system[J]. Information & Management, 2020, 57(6): 103334.   

[127] 

Tao Y, Jia X, Wu Y. A research method of industrial Internet security vulnerabilities 
based on knowledge graph [J]. Network security protection technology, 2020, 39(1): 6-13.   

[128]  Wang L. Research on Software Security Vulnerability Mining Technology Based on 

Knowledge Graph[D]. Xi'an Technological University, 2021.   

[129]  Wang L. Research on Construction of Vulnerability knowledge Graph and Vulnerability 

Situation Awareness[D]. University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2020. 

[130] 

Najafi P, Mühle A, Pünter W, et al. MalRank: a measure of maliciousness in SIEM-
based knowledge graphs[C]//Proceedings of the 35th Annual Computer Security Applications 
Conference. 2019: 417-429. 

[131] 

Dutta S, Rastogi N, Yee D, et al. Malware Knowledge Graph Generation[J]. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2102.05583, 2021. 

[132]  Wang Z, Sun L, Zhu H. Defining social engineering in cybersecurity[J]. IEEE Access, 

2020, 8: 85094-85115. 

[133]  Wang Z, Zhu H, Liu P, et al. Social engineering in cybersecurity: a domain ontology and 

knowledge graph application examples[J]. Cybersecurity, 2021, 4(1): 1-21. 

[134]  Mitra S, Piplai A, Mittal S, et al. Combating Fake Cyber Threat Intelligence using 

Provenance in Cybersecurity Knowledge Graphs[C]//2021 IEEE International Conference on 
Big Data (Big Data). IEEE, 2021: 3316-3323. 

[135] 

Xiao H, Xing Z, Li X, et al. Embedding and predicting software security entity 
relationships: A knowledge graph based approach[C]//International Conference on Neural 
Information Processing. Springer, Cham, 2019: 50-63. 

[136] 

Shang H, Jiang R, Li A, et al. A framework to construct knowledge base for cyber 

security[C]//2017 IEEE Second International Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace 
(DSC). IEEE, 2017: 242-248. 

[137] 

Liu Q., Li Y., Duan H., et al. Knowledge graph construction techniques[J]. Journal of 

computer research and development, 2016, 53(3): 582-600. 

 
