1

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
3
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
7
1
1
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Distributed Energy Resources Cybersecurity Outlook:
Vulnerabilities, Attacks, Impacts, and Mitigations

Ioannis Zografopoulos, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Charalambos Konstantinou, Senior Member, IEEE,
Nikos D. Hatziargyriou, Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The digitalization and decentralization of the electric
power grid are key thrusts towards an economically and environ-
mentally sustainable future. Towards this goal, distributed energy
resources (DER), including rooftop solar panels, battery storage,
electric vehicles, etc., are becoming ubiquitous in power systems,
effectively replacing fossil-fuel based generation. Power utilities
beneﬁt from DERs as they minimize transmission costs, provide
voltage support through ancillary services, and reduce opera-
tional risks via their autonomous operation. Similarly, DERs
grant users and aggregators control over the power they produce
and consume. Apart from their sustainability and operational
objectives, the cybersecurity of DER-supported power systems
interop-
is of cardinal
erable, and support remotely controllable features, thus, their
cybersecurity should be thoroughly considered. DER communi-
cation dependencies and the diversity of DER architectures (e.g.,
hardware/software components of embedded devices, inverters,
controllable loads, etc.) widen the threat surface and aggravate
the cybersecurity posture of power systems. In this work, we
focus on security oversights that reside in the cyber and physical
layers of DERs and can jeopardize grid operations. We analyze
adversarial capabilities and objectives when manipulating DER
assets, and then present how protocol and device -level vulnerabil-
ities can materialize into cyberattacks impacting power system
operations. Finally, we provide mitigation strategies to thwart
adversaries and directions for future DER cybersecurity.

importance. DERs are interconnected,

Index Terms—Cybersecurity, distributed energy resources, at-

tacks, mitigations.

I. INTRODUCTION
In the last decades, electric power systems (EPS) have
undergone signiﬁcant transformations (e.g., decentralized gen-
eration, digitization of customer services, smart grid initia-
tives, etc.) to meet increasing power demand and provide
economically and environmentally friendly energy. Renewable
energy resources (RES) harnessing wind, solar, and thermal
energy have been used to improve energy efﬁciency while
meeting stringent carbon emission regulations [1]. The shift
towards more sustainable grid architectures has also boosted
the adoption of distributed energy resources (DER). According
to the deﬁnition of the North American Electric Reliability
Corporation (NERC), DERs are distribution-level resources
that produce electricity and are not part of the bulk EPS [2].
DERs can leverage renewable or non-renewable resources
for power generation. Typical DER examples include i)
ii) wind (mi-
distributed rooftop solar photovoltaic (PV),
cro)turbines, iii) diesel generators, iv) microgrids, v) control-
lable loads and demand-response, vi) electric vehicles (EV)
and electric transportation, and vii) behind- or in front-of-the-
meter energy storage (e.g., battery energy storage systems –
BESS, ﬂywheels, etc.) connected on the distribution trans-
former secondary [2]. DER-integrated systems and devices
are classiﬁed into different categories based on their operation
principles, e.g., generation, energy storage, combination of the

two, and controllable loads. For instance, solar panels and
wind turbines DERs belong to the generation category [3],
batteries and electric vehicles fall into energy storage, com-
bined cooling, heating, and electric water heaters are examples
of controllable loads [4], and inverter-based resources (IBR)
can be used in both generation and storage setups.

The rapid integration of DERs highlights their importance
for future EPS. Furthermore, the high demand for DERs has
resulted in a decrease in the cost of solar cells and lithium bat-
teries production, which has expedited their adoption. Studies
forecast that the global DER generation capacity is expected
to grow from 132.4 GW in 2017 to 528.4 GW in 2026 [5].
Similar observations can be made for BESS. For example, in
the United States (U.S.), BESS are expected to grow from 1.2
GW in 2020 to nearly 7.5 GW in 2025, while developing into
a market of $7.3 billion annually [6].

Strategic placement of DERs adjacent to consumers can
take advantage of on-site generation and minimize utility
costs by deferring investments for the expansion of the power
system network. DER generated power does not need to be
transferred from remote bulk generation facilities, thus mini-
mizing energy losses and providing economically dispatchable
power to consumers. For example, DERs could be harnessed
to reduce the transmission system operator (TSO) ancillary
market costs, which increased by almost 70% during the
2020 COVID-19 lockdown period [7]. This was due to the
the stochasticity of the real-time power demand, and the
requirement of maintaining frequency stability and energy
reserves, while primarily relying on intermittent generation of
renewable resources, which created a very competitive power
market [7]. DERs can also enhance EPS reliability through
DER-supported autonomous functions. With higher DER pen-
etration, the consequences of disastrous events, e.g., blackouts,
extreme weather, cyberattacks, etc., could be averted or effec-
tively mitigated [8]. For instance, DERs could have helped
curtail the impacts of extreme weather events similar to the
Texas snowstorm in February 2021 [9].

The efﬁcient, ﬂexible, and autonomous attributes that DERs
possess render them invaluable pillars for the EPS critical in-
frastructure (CI). DERs are a crucial part of the EPS, thus, they
can become prominent targets. Attackers could compromise
the remote communication and control of DER capabilities,
and propagate the impact of their attacks to the rest of
the system. The effects of nonfunctional and/or maliciously
controlled EPS can be dire. The cybersecurity incident in Utah,
U.S. on 5 March 2019 is a prime example of how attackers
can corrupt communications and compromise grid services. In
the 2019 Utah incident, attackers exploited vulnerabilities in
security ﬁrewall devices (residing on the operator side) to halt

 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol

IEEE 1815
DNP3

Sunspec
Modbus

Fig. 1: Utility-to-DER interconnection.

OpenADR

communications between system operators and distribution
wind and solar utilities [10]. The impact of this denial-of-
service (DoS) attack caused loss of visibility of power grid
assets and could have caused interruptions of electrical system
operations [11], [12]. To overcome disruptive cyberattacks
comprehensive security investigations should be performed
factoring in the cyberphysical DER architecture, which could
be targeted on either the cyber or physical threat plane.

On the cyber level, protocols facilitate the essential commu-
nication transpiring between DERs and utility aggregators for
DER monitoring and control purposes (Fig. 1). Information
and communication technologies (ICT) enable communica-
tion between DER assets and DER management systems
(DERMS). Typically, wired or wireless communication pro-
tocols are used, such as the IEEE 1815-Distributed Network
Protocol (DNP3), Sunspec Modbus, open automated demand
response (OpenADR), and IEEE 2030.5 (Table I). Embedded
devices on the DER side handle monitoring and remote
DER asset control requests. Insecure remote communication
expands the EPS threat surface since adversaries can exploit
communication protocol weaknesses to mount attacks, e.g.,
DoS, man-in-the-middle (MitM), etc. The situation is aggra-
vated by the fact that many of the communication proto-
cols being used have known vulnerabilities. Exploiting those
vulnerabilities can compromise system operation if malicious
commands are issued to DER devices (Section III-A).

layer,

On the physical

the device-level consists of the
embedded architectures (e.g., controllers, actuators, gateways,
converters, etc.) and their fundamental components (e.g., hard-
ware, ﬁrmware, software, etc.) that support the control of
DERs and could constitute another weak link for the system
security. Most of these embedded devices are built using
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components. As a result,
embedded device-related vulnerabilities in the hardware and
software level can be ported to DER systems. Apart from
the vulnerabilities of COTS and the computational resource
constraints of embedded systems (which can limit the sophisti-
cation of the employed security schemes), their trustworthiness
cannot be attested either. The heterogeneity of embedded
systems aggravates their security posture and makes verifying
the supply-chain trustworthiness often infeasible. Multiple
third-party vendors provide intellectual property (IP) blocks
which are then integrated by fabrication facilities during their
manufacturing stages [13]. The severe impact of supply-chain
attacks was demonstrated during the Solarwinds incident in
December 2020, which targeted network management sys-
tems around the globe. Namely, 18k of the 300k Solarwinds
customers were running vulnerable versions of the Orion

TABLE I: Common DER communication protocols.

2

Description
Interoperable communication framework
for secure information exchange in
industrial systems (e.g., SCADA)
Modbus protocol extension for DER
parameters (e.g., power, voltage) and
ancillary services monitoring and control
Energy market management standard
regulating demand-response via signals to
DERs and other controllable devices
Smart energy proﬁle application standard
and default protocol for DER management

Std.

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

IEEE 2030.5

platform, including the U.S. Department of Treasury, U.S.
Department of Energy, U.S. Department of Defense, 425 of the
U.S. Fortune 500, as well as the cybersecurity ﬁrm FireEYE
[14], [15]. The severe blow of the Solarwinds supply-chain
attack on CI networks forced the White House to issue an
executive order instructing the improvement of cybersecurity
in all federal government networks [16]. Overall, supply chain
related dependencies arise as potential threat vectors, espe-
cially given the lack of security controls when designing or
integrating COTS software or hardware during system design.
Sophisticated cyberattacks targeting the pillars of CI are
gaining popularity. Such attacks can have severe impacts
on business operations like the Solarwinds incident and the
colonial pipeline ransomware attack which halted the delivery
of transport fuel to the Atlantic coast [17]. Moreover, attacks
on public health are rising, such as the attack on the Florida
water treatment plant [18], attacks on hospitals during COVID-
19 [19], [20], etc. The aforementioned incidents underline that
CI protection needs to become the epicentre of cybersecurity
research. As shown in Fig. 2, multiple cyberattacks targeting
the energy and other critical infrastructure sectors have been
reported in the literature. Renewable and distributed resources
are evidently becoming prominent targets. This was the case in
[12], where a ﬁrmware vulnerability in operational technology
equipment (OT), speciﬁcally CISCO ﬁrewalls, was exploited
to cause a DoS that disrupted power system communica-
tions and impeded the control of small renewable generation
facilities. In order to combat DER-related threats, existing
efforts such as the DER cybersecurity framework (DERCF)
by the National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL) [21], and the
renewable energy and distributed systems integration (RDSI)
program by Sandia National Lab (SNL) [22], place grid
security as one of their core initiatives.

In this paper, we focus on cyberattacks targeting DER
assets. DERs play a signiﬁcant role in reliable and resilient
EPS operation, given their autonomous capabilities (e.g., de-
fensive islanding) and ancillary service provision (e.g., volt-
age/frequency regulation, active/reactive power compensation,
etc.) [27]. However, DER security is contingent upon the
utilized communication protocols and control schemes (e.g.,
user, aggregator, or utility -deﬁned) as well as the inherent
DER device architectures (e.g., vendor-speciﬁc). Thus, we ﬁrst
discuss the motives and resources of adversaries, and then
focus on DER attacks at the i) communication protocol and
ii) device level of such assets. Last, DER protocol and device
-level vulnerabilities, attacks, impacts, and mitigation strate-

3

Fig. 2: Timeline of cyberattacks targeting the energy sector and other critical infrastructure facilities.

gies are presented. The roadmap of this work is as follows.
Section II presents the adversary and attack models. Section
III outlines the protocol and device vulnerabilities, which, if
exploited, can lead to cyberattacks, and discusses potential
impacts and mitigations. Finally, Section IV concludes the
paper and provides challenges that need to be addressed for a
secure future power system.

II. THREAT MODELING

This section identiﬁes high-value targets in DER-integrated
systems and attack vectors with their corresponding cyber-
threats. Assumptions about adversary capabilities and knowl-
edge, and attack speciﬁcs following the threat model method-
ology are introduced in [28]. Furthermore, we compile the
threat vectors along with the methodology followed to mate-
rialize attacks, and outline some common cyberattack deﬁni-
tions, which are further used in Section III.

A. Adversary Model

The following discussion delineates our assumptions regard-
ing adversarial system knowledge and capabilities, as well
as how they correlate with attacks targeting DER grid com-
munications and devices. Adversaries could rely on publicly
available information to perform their attacks [29]. Additional
knowledge can be acquired after a system asset or device
is compromised and/or while a cyberattack is propagated
in the system. Knowledge can also be obtained by access-
ing unsupervised hosts on enterprise networks [30], [31],
by gaining unauthorized access to data shared among DER
devices. Other methods include eavesdropping trafﬁc, target
device IP address identiﬁcation, port scanning, application-
level protocol exploitation [30], [32], ciphertext decryption,
intercepting exchanged data [33], or malicious insiders.

Equally important to the attacker knowledge assumptions
are the adversarial capabilities. Adversarial capabilities con-
sider the access to DER assets within a given system. For
example, an attacker might be able to connect to remote DER
devices through legitimate Bluetooth or speedwire connections
(i.e., insider case) [34]. Additionally, attackers could possess
or have physical access to EV charging stations or to the local
area network (LAN) over which DERs communicate [35]. In

the latter case, such access could be achieved if attackers
can inﬁltrate the LAN using proxy attacks on PCs, routers,
surveillance systems, etc. [36]. Additionally, other attacks as-
sume that the adversary is capable of compromising peripheral
controllers and deploy custom ﬁrmware [37] (e.g., change volt-
age measurement values in human-machine interfaces (HMIs)
[32]). As a result, attackers can remotely manipulate and jeop-
ardize various physical assets (e.g., distribution level devices,
DERs, substation equipment, etc.) [29]. Attackers are assumed
to have sufﬁcient computational resources – especially when
supported by criminal organizations or nation-state actors – to
crack passwords and decrypt power grid data. For example,
it is reported that by brute-forcing PIN codes of wind farm
control panels, attackers could send malicious commands to
wind turbines impacting grid operation [35].

B. Attack Model

Of equal importance to the adversary model, the attack
model speciﬁcs are essential for the threat model descrip-
tion (e.g.,
in retrospection of past cyberattack incidents).
Although we do not provide one-to-one mappings between
attacks (presented in this study) and each corresponding attack
model component, their key aspects – inﬂuencing impacts and
mitigation strategies – are described in Sections III-B and
III-A. Attack model information is crucial when establishing
the requirements for a vulnerability to develop into a system
compromise, its potential impact, and mitigations or other
methods to overcome such adversity. Following the attack
methodology in [28], the attack model can be considered as
being composed of the following six elements, i) the attack
frequency, ii) the attack reproducibility, iii) the functional level
being attacked in the system, iv) the attacked asset, v) the
techniques being used, and vi) the attack premise. For instance,
some attacks might have to be performed iteratively and
reproduced multiple times to compromise the system behavior.
This could be the case with packet replay, DoS, and MitM at-
tacks, where attacks might aim to spoof DER communications
or exhaust DER protocols and/or device resources causing
intermittent, slow or loss of communication thereof [38]. The
attack functional level and the targeted DER assets notably
differ when considering communication protocol and device

4

TABLE II: DER attack vector description and potential threats.

Attack vector

Description

Lack of
interoperability

DER architectural diversity and implementation speciﬁcations (e.g., security requirements)
can result in inter-system insecure communications.

Data integrity
violations
Implementation
errors
Supply-chain
compromises

Insecure ﬁrmware

Stored, transmitted or received data is modiﬁed without validation, causing DER
malfunction or allowing unauthorized access to control/log information.
Security ﬂaws within systems and/or communication modules enabling the remote control
of DER assets and exﬁltration of historical generation data.
Installment of malicious hardware-based eavesdropping programs, worms, oversights
during manufacturing of components, devices, or systems.
Digital signatures of ﬁrmware updates are not veriﬁed, granting malware (viruses, worms,
trojans, etc.) access to otherwise secure systems.

Compromise
DER denial of legitimate
messages and control
commands
Malicious modiﬁcation of
control parameters
Command and control of
load/demand-side devices
Sensitive information
disclosure
DER systems privilege
escalation

attacks. Typically, cyberattacks targeting DER devices could
be assigned to the levels 0 and 1 including process sensors,
actuators, and controllers, while attacks on the communication,
coordination and control fabric of DER systems target the
higher levels (i.e., 3, 4, and 5) of the Purdue model [39].

Furthermore, distinctions are necessary when investigating
the attack techniques and the premise of cyberattacks. A
detailed presentation of the most common attack techniques
used by adversaries (constantly updated with new incidents)
can be found in [40]. The attack premise delineates whether
the attack is performed in the cyber or physical system domain.
For our study, identifying the attack premise is fairly intuitive
since DER protocol attacks are limited to the cyber domain,
while DER device compromises could span both the cyber
and the physical domains. Further information is provided in
literature on how more complex cyberattacks could target the
cyber and physical domains while exploiting diverse attack
techniques [28]. Speciﬁcally, in the case studies presented [28],
physical devices, e.g., inverter controllers, are compromised
logic modiﬁcation techniques impacting
exploiting control
power conversion, power factor, active/reactive injections, etc.
Additionally, cyberattacks targeting communications – via
time-delay attacks on the cyber domain – and the impact of
intercepted, delayed, and/or modiﬁed control commands on
the simulated power system models are also demonstrated.

C. DER Targets and Cyber-Threats

We refer to mission-critical system assets which can jeop-
ardize grid operation if maliciously compromised by threat
actors as crown jewels [41]. Crown jewels span the ICT
infrastructures, such as the stakeholder-to-DER device com-
munication channels [38], physical-interfaces [36], and the
DER devices themselves. Notably, DER devices include PV
inverters or smart inverters [32], battery energy storage sys-
tems, EVs, wind turbines [35], demand-side loads [42], and
DER controllers. Gaining access to any of the aforemen-
it enables adversaries to manipulate
tioned crown jewels,
DER power output (e.g., generated, stored, etc.), which can
result in possible brownouts, false trips, feeder overloadings,
voltage/frequency violations, damaged protection equipment
or system instabilities [43]. In Table II, we present a summary
of attack vectors targeting DERs and inherent cyber-threats
based on related security research studies [4], [43], [44].

In this work, we distinguish between attacks targeting
the DER communication protocols used for the control and
coordination of DER assets, and the actual DER embedded

devices and their underlying components, i.e., hardware, and
software. Although the threat surface for these two categories
might share similarities, it has also differences (e.g., attack
access, exploitation tactics and techniques, etc.). Along with
these differences, the interoperable nature of DER systems
mandates comprehensive security mechanisms that treat the
DER crown jewels jointly. Table III compiles common cyber-
attack deﬁnitions relevant to DER asset vulnerabilities.

III. VULNERABILITIES, ATTACKS, IMPACTS, AND
MITIGATIONS
The proliferation of DERs could increase grid resilience
to unexpected events (e.g., faults, attacks, etc.) through the
autonomous operation of DER-enabled microgrids [47], [48].
However, in order to control and monitor the operation of
DERs, perpetual communication between utilities and ag-
gregators is essential [49]. The utility- or aggregator- to-
DER interconnection leverages application-speciﬁc communi-
cation protocols operating on embedded systems located at
the DER-side. Although such communication protocol and
embedded system synergies optimize DER performance, they
also broaden the threat landscape. Below, we ﬁrst discuss
vulnerabilities, attacks, impacts, as well as mitigations related
to DER communication protocols (III-A). Then, the equivalent
investigation is conducted with emphasis on the DER device-
level security proﬁle (III-B).
A. DER Protocol Level

The following sections elucidates DER protocol-level se-
curity oversights and furnishes approaches to mitigate and
overcome the impact of intrusions exploiting the communica-
tion plane. We examine prominent industrial control protocols
systematically and demonstrate the DER cyber kill chain
(5) indicating the steps that adversaries need to follow to
compromise EPS operations.

1) DER Protocol Level Vulnerabilities: The most com-
monly used protocols for DER communication include the
IEEE 1815-DNP3, Modbus, OpenADR, and IEEE 2030.5 [50].
However, most of these protocols did not originally support
any overarching cybersecurity requirements [51]. More specif-
ically, Modbus and DNP3, two widely used serial protocols
in process automation systems, have several identiﬁed vul-
nerabilities [52]. For instance, the authors in [53], provide
an comprehensive attack taxonomy for DNP3 and discuss 28
different attack types. The presented attacks can be classiﬁed
into four broad threat categories, including DNP3 data i) inter-
ruption, ii) interception, iii) modiﬁcation, and iv) fabrication

5

Attack Type

Network
Reconnaissance

Eavesdropping

Man-in-the-Middle
(MitM)

Denial of Service
(DoS)

Packet Replay

Supply-chain

Brute forcing and
fuzzying

TABLE III: Cyberattack deﬁnitions targeting DER assets.

Deﬁnition
Adversary performs vulnerability scanning on a network. Information such as IP and MAC
addresses of the DER devices, open ports, services running, and type/version of the system can
be disclosed.
Attacker “listens” to conﬁdential in-transit data potentially stealing sensitive information.
Adversary redirects communication packets through a compromised “middle” node (e.g., network
switch, gateway, etc.) enabling monitoring and modiﬁcation of such packets before they reach
their destinations.
Target resources are overloaded (open ports are ﬂooded with trafﬁc), inhibiting its nominal
operation. Targeted devices become “laggy”, unable to timely issue responses to legitimate device
requests.
Data transmissions between DER client applications and the DER devices are recorded, modiﬁed,
and retransmitted by attackers at different time instances.
Adversary adds malware during either the component manufacturing, system integration,
shipping, or installation stages. The malware can be weaponized remotely to perform
unauthorised/unintended actions.
Adversary attempts to guess credentials, encryption keys, etc. or bring the system to an
unexpected state. Once the above conditions are met, the adversary could attain unauthorized
access to the system resources.

Reference

[38]

[45], [46]

[4], [31],
[46]

[38]

[38], [44]

[31]

[44]

attacks (Fig. 3). Interruption and interception attacks could
delay control commands to industrial assets or acquire data
in-transit. However, modiﬁcation and fabrication attacks arise
as the most threatening since they can send erroneous data
affecting industrial processes, alter device conﬁgurations, and
spoof master controllers, as shown in Fig. 4. As a result,
the attack impact ranges from the acquisition of network
and device conﬁguration data to the corruption of remote
devices and acquiring control of DNP3 master units. Similarly,
more than 700 vulnerabilities have been identiﬁed in the open
source CERT Java-based implementation of OpenADR [54].
Some of those vulnerabilities could be remotely exploited,
compromising sensitive exchanged data such as usernames,
system properties, installation directories, etc. [55].

To enhance the security of DER communication, IEEE
1547-2020 interconnection and interoperability standard iden-
tiﬁes the security requirements which need to be satisﬁed by
both communicating parties [56]. Although compliance with
IEEE 1547 can safeguard the exchanged data and control
commands issued between DERs and aggregators, cyberat-
tacks aiming to disrupt grid operations remain (e.g., DoS).
Out of the aforementioned DER protocols, only IEEE 2030.5
was developed with stringent cryptography requirements [57].
The latest versions of DNP3 [58], Sunspec Modbus 700
series [59], and OpenADR 2.0 conform with IEEE 1547-2020
and National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
requirements. As such,
they can be seen as semantically
identical from a security standpoint with IEEE 2030.5 [59].
Furthermore,
layer security (TLS 1.2 or 1.3) is
advised for all protocols to enhance wireless communications
security between aggregators and DER edge devices [44], [60].

transport

Although there are secure communication protocols, the
network communication infrastructure remains a prominent
threat vector for adversaries. This can be attributed to the
hesitation of industrial facilities to switch to newer and more
secure communication protocols considering the potential
economic or operational overheads. The plethora of legacy
devices is also a limiting factor that restricts the modernization
efforts of the communication fabric. The situation is further

exacerbated, since according to the Electric Power Research
Institute (EPRI), more than 75% of North American electric
utilities use the DNP3 protocol for industrial control applica-
tions and supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
systems [61]. For instance, attacks targeting DNP3 commu-
nications could either aim to exploit vendor implementations
of the protocol, protocol speciﬁcations, or vulnerabilities in
the supporting communication infrastructure [53]. In addition
to DNP3 protocol vulnerabilities, the user datagram protocol
(UDP) vulnerabilities arise since in some systems, portions of
DER modiﬁcation requests are passed in plaintext [43], which
presents a critical control vulnerability to the DER system.

Applying the latest protocol versions using TLS and cryp-
tographically secure communication channels can potentially
deter adversaries. However, the security of the power grid sys-
tem is contingent upon each weakest link. Knowing that many
already deployed DER devices support: insecure and outdated
versions of the aforementioned communication protocols, lim-
ited computational capabilities prohibiting the implementation
of sophisticated encryption algorithms or even updating their
ﬁrmware (e.g., could be infeasible due to ﬁeld operational
constraints), urges for potent attack detection and mitigation
mechanisms. Following, we discuss some of the eminent
cyberattacks exploiting the pitfalls of protocol vulnerabilities.

2) DER Protocol Level Attacks: To identify which layer of
the protocol stack is targeted by each attack, the Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) basic reference model is used [62]. The
OSI model has seven major layers: application, presentation,
session, transport, network, data link, and physical layer. In
this paper, we focus on the security of commonly used indus-
trial control protocols and speciﬁcally consider the data link,
network, and transport layers of the OSI stack. The physical
layers as well as the session, presentation, and application
layers are not discussed since no security requirements are
deﬁned for the physical layer (bit transmission layer) while the
aforementioned higher OSI layers can be application-speciﬁc
or supported by other application protocols (e.g., secure ﬁle
transfer protocol – FTP/SFTP, simple network management
protocol – SNMP, telnet, etc.).

6

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 3: DER protocol level attack categories including data and/or command (a) interruption (e.g., sinkhole), (b) interception
(e.g., port stealing), (c) modiﬁcation (e.g., ARP poisoning), and (d) fabrication (e.g., MAC- and SYN-ﬂooding) attacks.

On the transport layer, the predominant attack is synchro-
nization (SYN) ﬂooding. During this attack, the adversary
sends continuous SYN requests to different ports of the target
device using fake IP addresses [34]. The target device sends
acknowledgement packets (SYN-ACK) to each requesting fake
IP [34]. Since no consequent actions are provided by the fake
IP client, this results in the target device’s port to remain open
until the connection times out and another fake SYN request
is received. SYN ﬂooding is a type of DoS attack limiting the
availability of the target device.

3) DER Protocol Level Impacts: The MAC spooﬁng attack
on the data link layer can result in adversaries gaining unau-
thorized access to the network by maliciously modifying the
source IP address [34]. Another attack on this layer, MAC
ﬂooding, can target DER devices such as inverters, which
may result in overuse of memory and potential bottlenecks in
communications [34]. Adversarial impact could lead in loss of
availability in communication with the DER device, including
the inability to control DER power management parameters.
MitM and packet replay attacks on the network layer of
DER device communication leverage the commands received
from client applications using UDP/IP transport protocols.
Such interception is possible since security examinations have
reported incidents where sensitive information involving DER
generation data and control commands are exchanged in
plaintext format [38]. Trafﬁc analysis and in-transit packet
inspection can be used to exﬁltrate setpoint values and issue
control commands. The underlying impact of a successful
packet replay attack is demonstrated in [63], where the replay
attack doubles the magnitude oscillations of the DER’s real
output power. In microgrids, especially during autonomous
operation or in weak grid setups, such disturbances could
result in relay trippings, damaged equipment, and potentially
load shedding events [64]–[66].

The impact of a protocol-based DoS attack, e.g., during
SYN ﬂooding, could diminish the availability of the target
DER device. Reference values for real power, reactive power,
and phase measurements are critical for the proper operation
of inverters. If such information is not timely delivered, real-
time reference values cannot be updated, and thus, the DER
operation is indicated by ﬁrmware deﬁned defaults [63]. Such
distortions can result
in under or over generation by the
inverter, leading to uneconomic operation and even real and
reactive power instabilities in the DER connected grid [67].

4) DER Protocol Level Mitigations: Different mitigation
strategies for protocol-level attacks have been reported in the

Fig. 4: DNP3 attack on DER controller: attacker intercepts
the control command (from master) and issues a maliciously
fabricated command to the outstation device.

Data link layer uses the Ethernet protocol which is vulner-
able to media access control (MAC) spooﬁng attacks. The
MAC address can be spoofed allowing Ethernet frames to
be forwarded to adversaries [34]. In addition, MAC ﬂooding
attacks target the MAC address tables used by switches to
store the information of legitimate devices, as well as the
speciﬁc ports (of the switch) that each device is connected
the cybersecurity of DER
to [34]. On the network layer,
device communication is speciﬁed by IEEE Std. 2030.5,
which operates over UDP and transmission control protocol
(TCP) with support for IPv4 and IPv6 protocols [44]. Many
owners of DER devices (e.g., rooftop solar panels, EVs, BESS,
etc.) have means for communication with their DER devices,
which provide them with data such as measurement statistics,
network communication analysis, ﬁrmware updates and more.
The client-to-DER device communication utilizes the UDP
protocol. Attacks targeting UDP’s vulnerability such as packet
replay attacks on the client-to-DER device communication
have also been reported [43]. In more detail, during a suc-
cessful packet replay attack, the plaintext requests are cap-
tured while being transmitted. The attacker can then send the
captured packets and issue malicious commands to the DER,
resulting in device malfunctioning. For IPv4/IPv6 protocols,
potential attacks include but are not limited to network re-
connaissance, packet replay, MitM, and DoS [38]. Typically,
sophisticated MitM attacks on client applications and DER
device communications have multiple steps. First, the adver-
sary eavesdrops the DER-to-client communications and then
performs address resolution protocol (ARP) poisoning and port
stealing attacks [38]. ARP poisoning forces the MAC address
of the adversary to be linked to the IP address of the target.
This technique enables the interception of data in transit. Port
stealing enables the interception and modiﬁcation of data by
the adversary before it is delivered to the destination [38].

7

Fig. 5: DER cyber kill chain including vulnerabilities, attacks, impacts, and mitigations.

literature [34], [68]. To mitigate spooﬁng attacks on the data
link layer, authentication-based access control is necessary.
In the presence of authentication-based access control, the
communication between the client and the device has to be
ﬁrst authenticated before the client
is allowed to connect
and exchange data and control commands. An alternative
proposed mitigation approach considers the network switch
conﬁguration, i.e., white-listing a limited number of trusted
MAC addresses, while discarding any requests received from
unknown sources. Network switch best practises suggest the
deployment of an authentication, authorization, and accounting
(AAA) server, that manages network connections and certiﬁes
that the MAC addresses are added to the table only after the
authentication process.

On the network layer, the use of ﬁrewalls, one-way com-
munication diodes, packet ﬁlters, circuit-level gateways, proxy
servers, and two-way authentication can be utilized to pre-
vent network reconnaissance, packet replay, MitM, and DoS
attacks. The use of physical and logical network segmenta-
tion and perimeter security defenses can be used to prohibit
access to critical parts of the system and prevent the lateral
movement of threat actors between IT and ICS networks (if
the prior is compromised) [69]. Demilitarization zones (DMZ)
should also be enforced to aid in network segregation and
serve as proxies, avoiding the security hazards that network-
connected devices could port to DER control functionalities.
Furthermore, the implementation of cryptographic techniques,
secure key distribution, and exchange schemes can help pre-
vent MitM and replay attacks [70], [71]. Additionally, DER
applications which use TCP/IP are more resistant to packet
replay attacks because such attacks use the unique session
IDs that the DER device generates during the initial three-way
TCP handshake (communication initialization) [38]. However,
TCP/IP transport includes additional IP header information
that DER applications can use to prevent packet replay attacks.
Based on this unique IP header, the server is able to detect and
drop duplicate packets, hence preventing packet replay attacks.
On the transport layer, mitigation of SYN ﬂooding attacks
is achieved by cryptographic hashing and stack tweaking,
which reduces the connection request timeout period and drops
incomplete connections. Cryptographic hashing will determine
the legitimacy of the connection by sending the SYN-ACK
packet with a code derived from the client’s IP address, port
number, and a unique ID number. This dropping of incomplete

connections in stack tweaking opens up the port for a legiti-
mate connection. Additionally, the use of ﬁrewalls, intrusion
detection and protection systems (IDS/IPS), and traceback and
push-back services aims to limit the rate of trafﬁc, therefore
countering DoS attackers. In Fig. 5, we present the DER cyber
kill chain. In essence, we recapitulate protocol vulerabilities
and attack entry points, as well as enumerate the potential
impacts of attacks along with mitigations to overcome such
adverse events.

B. DER Device Level

Different DER categories can be identiﬁed based on their
principle of operation, e.g., generation, energy storage, hybrid,
controllable loads, etc. As a result, DER device compromises
can impact grid operations to varying degrees based on
their category and system utilization. This section enumerates
vulnerabilities, attacks, impacts, and mitigations on the DER
device level, including the physical components encountered
in such DERs (e.g., sensors, actuators, controllers, etc.) along
with their inherent hardware, ﬁrmware, and software.

1) DER Device Level Vulnerabilities:

Inverter-based re-
sources are rapidly deployed in EPS on a commercial and resi-
dential scale. However, they remain vulnerable to cyberattacks
that can modify or erase their default DER settings [72], [73].
Rooftop PV inverter control, for instance, is regulated both
on the local level (primary) as well as at a higher level, i.e.,
secondary control. The primary control system is responsible
for matching the inverter-generated energy to the consumer
power demand. Contrary to the local control system which
operates on the consumer side, the secondary control system
resides on the concentrator/aggregator and utility sides. The
secondary control system orchestrates inverter operation on
a larger scale, optimally dispatching power and meeting dy-
namic power demands economically. Typically, these control
systems are operated remotely, using Internet-of-Things (IoT)-
based and third-party applications, which could expose such
DER devices to cyberattacks. For example, in [38], the au-
thors demonstrate that by eavesdropping DER communications
(performed over the Internet), passwords, user data, serial
IDs and device names can be extracted using network trafﬁc
analysis software (e.g., Wireshark). Furtheremore, in some
cases, sensitive information is exchanged in plaintext format,
highlighting the importance of end-to-end data encryption and
endpoint security hardening on the physical device itself.

Similar security concerns exist for wind turbines too, which
represent another DER type being rapidly integrated in the
electric grid. In more detail, wind turbine control panels
(WTCP) are used to control turbines and monitor their real-
time operating conditions, e.g.,
their generation setpoints
are dynamically controlled to meet the electricity demand.
According to [74], in some deployments, the only security
practices employed against adversaries attempting to access
the WTCPs are software-based credential authentication (e.g.,
passwords, identiﬁcation number, PINs, etc.). Standalone cre-
dential authentication is not regarded secure, granted that it
can be bypassed using brute forcing and fuzzing techniques.
Additionally, phishing, spear-phising, vishing, etc., and other
social engineering campaigns have also managed to exﬁltrate
sensitive authentication data from operators potentially jeop-
ardizing the secure operation of wind-based DERs.

The electriﬁcation of the transportation sector is a major
thrust towards grid decarbonization. As a result, a precipitous
growth has been observed in the numbers of EVs across
the world. Among their advantages (e.g., greener form of
transportation), EV batteries can be used as backup power
supplies during unexpected and instant power demand. To
support such ancillary backup services, as well as to charge
their battery resources, EVs connect to the electric grid via
charging stations. According to [75], EV charging stations
(EVCS) perform the following tasks. First, they authenticate
the vehicles, and then they either charge them or connect
them to the main grid where they can be utilized as ad-
hoc energy storage. Authorization can be done through radio
frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) cards, Bluetooth, or Wi-Fi
technologies. However, RFID systems have been proven to be
insecure. According to [76], RFIDs are vulnerable to malicious
attacks such as eavesdropping and active interference. RFID
readers and tags operate in noisy and inherently unstable
environments, which decreases the security of the device and
can consequently compromise the EVCS. Furthermore, au-
thorization done using wireless networks (Wi-Fi or Bluetooth
technologies) can be exploited by adversaries as well. Multiple
design ﬂaws, security weaknesses, and practical attack sce-
narios have been reported regarding Bluetooth technologies,
enabling adversaries to pair to devices and impersonate their
legitimate users [77], [78]. Apart from the authorization and
wireless network conﬁguration security oversights, a plethora
of threats targeting EVs is reported in [79]. The authors present
in their security analysis the vulnerable components of EVs
that could be exploited by adversaries (e.g., via remote and
network-based attacks) compromising grid operation.

Apart

from the discussed vulnerabilities

concerning
generation-type DERs, critical vulnerabilities in DER control-
lable loads also exist. The IoT is a network of connected
devices including smart appliances (e.g., smart thermostats,
air-conditioning, heat pumps, EVCS points, etc.), enabling the
exchange of information between devices and users leveraging
wired and wireless connections [80]–[82]. These IoT-enabled
devices are connected to the load-end of DERs and their
operation is typically orchestrated remotely by their end users.
According to [80], [83], a large number of IoT devices (using
remote internet access mechanisms) still lack concrete security

8

mechanisms and, as a result, can be vulnerable to cyberattacks.
Researchers have demonstrated that attackers can manipulate
IoT-connected devices in low-inertia EPS (e.g., relying on
renewable generation) and other exogenous conditions to cause
unsafe grid operation. That is, in [82], [84], the authors inves-
tigate the impact on grid stability of load altering attacks – if
multiple IoT-connected high-wattage devices are compromised
simultaneously – during the COVID-19 lockdown period. This
adversarial behavior is enabled by the absence of overarching
defense mechanisms, such as anti-viruses, and the sporadic
provision of software/ﬁrmware updates and security patches
which further weaken the device security posture. As a result,
the vulnerabilities of such IoT-connected devices can be ported
to the utility grid, given their interconnection to DERs.

The authors in [85] report that another compelling reason
undermining IoT – and DER-controllable load – security is
that during the design cycles of such devices, function and
lowering manufacturing costs were prioritized above ﬁrmware
security. As a result, end-users are presented with impres-
sive and feature-full devices furnishing multiple backdoors
that adversaries can exploit; paving the way for malware
developers [85]. Smart thermostats, for instance, represent a
prime example of how the consequences of a compromised
IoT device could propagate posing threats to the power grid.
Smart thermostats can regulate the temperature of residential
or commercial facilities by “cleverly” managing heat sources
and air conditioners. Furthermore, thermostats can learn their
users preferred patterns and adapt their operation accordingly
[86]. The cybersecurity of such devices has been shown
to be lacking since many are shipped from manufacturers
using default conﬁgurations and predeﬁned credentials [80].
Furthermore, the end-users of such devices might be unaware
of the essential steps to conﬁgure their devices and secure
them against cyberattacks. Consequently, such devices are
left vulnerable to attacks which could simultaneously trigger
on/off particular loads (e.g., heaters) deliberately affecting
the instantaneous power demand of power grids leading to
blackouts or brownouts [4].

Similarly to IoT-based systems which leverage ICTs to
exchange information, recently the design of solar farms has
also incorporated “smart” features. Essentially, in large solar
deployments, ICTs have been used for remote and real-time
management of the generated power for economic dispatch and
demand-response schemes. Apart from remote and centralized
control, storage solutions have also been used for the aggre-
gation of historical and generation data, exposing solar farms
to threats (e.g., single point-of-failure paragon). The remote
control, communication, and data aggregation features of grid
resources can be exploited as attack entry points. This was
the case with the cyberattack targeting VESTAS offshore wind
turbine manufacturer, which led to the ex-ﬁltration of sensitive
data and “forced VESTAS to shut down IT systems across
multiple business units and locations to contain the issue”
[87]. Although, according to the Danish wind manufacturer,
customers were not affected by the event, the socio-economic
and reputation blow to the company was acute.

In residential solar PV deployments, communication tech-
nologies such as Bluetooth are mainly used regardless of the

limited cybersecurity mechanisms, which can result in security
breaches, compromising user privacy and escalating to grid
abnormalities [42]. Aside from the attacks on IoT controllable
loads and generation assets that stem from inherent implemen-
tation or architectural vulnerabilities, the possibility of supply
chain based attacks should be accounted. Security oversight in
manufacturing facilities can be exploited to construct supply
chain attacks, in which adversaries are granted apriori control
over thousands of DER-connected assets [88]. The possibility
of such supply-chain compromises along with the catastrophic
consequences of such events was demonstrated during the
colonial pipeline incident in 2021 [17].

2) DER Device Level Attacks: Attacks targeting the DER
device level exploit implementation, architectural, and other
security design oversights (e.g., communication, internal stor-
age, remote update or control functionality, etc.) in order
to maximize their impact and compromise power system
operations. In the case of inverters, for example, after suc-
cessfully gaining access to the DER assets, adversaries can
launch cyberattacks including, i) DoS attacks compromising
the inverter’s availability, ii) data alteration attacks where the
exchanged data between DERs and utilities are maliciously
modiﬁed, and iii) command injection attacks where termina-
tion commands or malicious controls are forwarded to the
inverters [30], [89]. During DoS attacks, the communication
bandwidth of the inverter can be ﬂooded leading to device
disruptions, i.e., the process control ﬂow of the device is
halted [38]. Inverter operation is dynamically regulated to
enhance power generation efﬁciency and support ancillary ser-
vices when requested by grid operators. However, adversaries
could delay or prevent the transmission of critical data (e.g.,
sensor measurements, control commands, etc.) to certain DERs
inhibiting their operation [38].

MitM attacks can also be leveraged to compromise grid
inverters. In such scenarios, attackers can gain device-level
information by eavesdropping on the data trafﬁc between
inverters and the utility grid. Attackers can access system
information by decoding manufacturing message speciﬁcation
(MMS) packets [32]. MMS is used to transmit real-time
data between connected devices in a network. Given that
most inverter models use MMS to send and receive data,
such attacks could potentially have a considerable impact on
the grid stability. For instance, attackers could compromise
the device operation by modifying the inverter conﬁguration
using undesirable parameters, e.g., tampering with the reactive
power reference of inverter-based DERs [90]. Furthermore,
brute force attacks can be leveraged to compromise DER
assets. In [74], researchers demonstrate that adversaries can
brute force weak PIN sequences granting access to WTCPs.
Similar to the aforementioned inverter command injection
attack, adversaries can then send malicious commands to wind
turbines, modifying setpoints or control objectives, causing
unexpected operation with various grid impacts [91].

In many cases, DER assets are owned by end-users. In such
scenarios, DERs can be connected to user networks exhibiting
similar operation to common IoT devices. As such, they could
be remotely operated and controlled by consumers or other
third-party applications. IoT devices have been exploited on a

9

massive scale in the past, as was the case with the Mirai botnet
attack [80]. The Mirai malware, after its propagation to mul-
tiple vulnerable IoT devices, it grants adversaries full control
over the compromised devices. The groups of compromised
devices, i.e., botnets, can be exploited collectively causing
distributed DoS (DDoS) attacks [92], [93]. However, in the
case of DERs, which have power generation and ancillary
service capabilities (e.g., reactive power compensation), such
attacks could severely affect grid stability. Apart from botnet
attacks, other common IoT-sourced vulnerabilities could be
abused, compromising DER operation. Attackers can perform
replay attacks, where legitimate commands transmitted from
DER asset owners can be reproduced. RFID authentication
and Bluetooth or Zigbee communication packets can be eaves-
dropped and replayed, achieving unauthorized access to DER
devices [94], [95]. Additionally, the security of these IoT-
connected DER devices is relied upon the user competence
in safeguarding their assets. If the IoT network security is
overlooked, adversaries could capture exchanged data, obtain
session or encryption keys enabling them to access the devices,
and issue commands that can render them unreachable (DoS)
or instruct DERs to operate anomalously [95].

3) DER Device Level Impacts: Adversaries, after having
gained initial access to DER devices, can follow different
approaches to deploy and/or implement their attacks [40].
If maximizing the immediate system-wide impact
is their
objective, overvoltage or undervoltage conditions, frequency
ﬂuctuations, false trippings, disconnections, and defensive
islanding mechanisms could be targeted. Power systems have
built-in mechanisms to automatically detect and isolate such
high impact events to avert their potentially disastrous conse-
quences. Different methodologies can also be utilized, physics-
based, data-driven, or a combination of the two, could be used
to detect and overcome such conditions [32], [96], [97].

On the other hand,

in the advanced persistence threat
(APT) case, threat actors might prioritize system persistence,
breach of privacy, and long-term system degradation instead
of immediate impact, and opt for more sophisticated and
stealthy attacks [98]. For instance, attackers could remain in
control of the DER device while stealthily performing minute
modiﬁcations to system parameters or coordinate attacks in
ways that will not affect the net system behavior deceiving
detection mechanisms [99], [100]. Such stealthy attacks might
cause unsafe, unstable, or uneconomic operation of IBRs.
Adversaries could also exﬁltrate sensitive user information
(e.g., credentials, passwords, etc.), since DER devices might
be connected in user-owned home networks. Attackers may
also be learning the operational patterns of DERs, that is, ag-
gregating enough system information to identify the temporal
and spatial conditions which, if satisﬁed, can maximize the
impact of attacks on the grid [99], [101].

The rapid adoption of EVs (from 3 million in 2017 to
125 million by 2030 [102]) makes them prominent targets for
attackers aiming to gain access to EVs or EVCS. Malware
can be deployed and propagated throughout the whole EV
infrastructure, compromising the charge controllers, demand-
response schemes, charging limits, grid power quality, and
crippling the power and transportation sectors [103]. Ac-

cording to [29], compromised EV supply equipment (EVSE)
servers can prevent EVCS sessions by denying authentication,
or reproducing incorrect information about charging station
data (e.g., price, online station status, etc.). Furthermore,
EVCS being high-wattage assets, if maliciously manipulated
in addition to power-related consequences (e.g.
increased
load demand, power quality issues, etc.), can also inﬂict
considerable ﬁnancial losses on electric power utilities [104].
Similarly, sensitive user information (e.g., identity, location,
payment information, etc.) could be leaked during potential
attacks on the EV and charging infrastructures [105]. The
absence of attack impact assessment methodologies for EV
networks is highlighted by the authors in [106]. Their work
attempts to identify potential attack and failure scenarios,
while demonstrating the consequences of such events to the
corresponding EV system security.

Researchers have demonstrated that multiple paths exist
to compromise the security of wind-integrated DER assets.
In [74], access to WTCP is granted by launching a brute
force dictionary attack on the WTCP device. Similarly, in
[91], by compromising the network devices and wind process
automation controllers, malicious requests can be issued to
the turbines, preventing the nominal operation and potentially
causing damage to critical electrical and mechanical compo-
nents [107]. The impacts of wind turbine abnormal operation
can lead to ﬁres, explosions, jeopardize personnel assigned
to resolve such issues, and the safety of the surrounding
communities. Such impacts are highlighted by a plethora of
high proﬁle wind incidents reported in literature [108]–[111].
Although the aforementioned impacts have not been caused
due to cyberattacks, the probability of exploiting wind turbine
vulnerabilities remotely exists and research works have been
focusing on the impacts that such attacks could have on grid
reliability [112], [113].

Malware, such as the Mirai and many of its derivatives,
could be exploited to control the operation of IoT connected
DERs leading to intermittent operation and DDoS attacks
[114]. As a result, the botnet of the compromised DER devices,
can be maliciously operated as a distributed load or generation.
Grid instability can thus occur when DERs and other remotely
controlled high-wattage devices (i.e., smart thermostats, EVs,
EVSE, Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning – HVACs,
etc.) are simultaneously switched on or off severely affecting
the electricity power demand [115]. In large scale demand-
side attack scenarios, grid operators will be forced to perform
load-shedding to maintain the operation of critical loads [84].
A summary of potential vulnerabilities and the attacks im-
pacts of demand-side compomises targeting DER devices and
aggregators is depicted in Fig. 6. Consumers might experience
brownouts and service interruptions, while the impacts of load-
altering attacks on the local power supply will also affect
demand-response schemes [116]. Apart from the grid impacts,
the infected devices could also propagate malware (in a worm-
like fashion) to the rest of the devices residing within the same
network (e.g., switches, personal computers, mobile phones),
thus, jeopardizing sensitive user information [117].

4) DER Device Level Mitigations: To combat threats tar-
geting DER devices, a multitude of mitigation strategies have

10

been proposed. With respect to inverters, the authors in [43]
suggest that an additional power electronic interface (energy
buffer) should be developed and placed at different locations
within the distribution grid (mainly at points where the device
is connected to the grid). This energy buffer interface can help
avoid unintentional islandings, which could be triggered due
to the conﬂicting anti-islanding detection and low/high volt-
age ride-through functions that inverters support. The micro-
architectural hardware components of inverter controllers have
also been utilized for the detection of malicious events within
the DER asset’s process control loop [37]. In [48], the inherent
physical properties of DER-integrated grid systems are used to
identify potential actuator or sensor modiﬁcations which could
lead to abnormal system operation. Furthermore, a multitude
of model- and data-driven anomaly detection methods have
also been proposed to identify compromised DER assets
[118]–[120]. Once intrusions have been efﬁciently detected,
the compromised assets are isolated and the available grid
resources are utilized to achieve resilience and maintain the
power supply-demand balance equilibrium [121]–[124].

The prevention of adversaries from launching DoS attacks
on EVSE can be achieved via the use of hardened operating
systems [125]. Such systems can be leveraged to deploy and
keep the EVSE with the up-to-date ﬁrmware. Furthermore,
roll-back ﬁrmware update functionality is essential, enabling
the use of previously working ﬁrmware, in cases where the
updated ﬁrmware versions are proven unreliable or have been
maliciously modiﬁed. Different methodologies have also been
proposed for the mitigation of the harmonic interference of
EV-related cyberattacks. For instance, the authors in [126] and
[127], propose pulse-width-modulation and a high-frequency
resonance scheme, respectively, that can mitigate the power
quality degradation introduced by EVs and bidirectional grid-
tied converters (e.g., battery storage). On the other hand, a
power management framework leveraging renewable resources
and the EV infrastructure itself is used in [128], in order to
alleviate power quality challenges encountered in unbalanced
distribution networks. The importance of cyber insurance
against cyberattacks on EVCS has also been highlighted by
researchers. In [104], the authors demonstrate that defense
mechanisms and cyber insurance policies can effectively re-
duce the ﬁnancial impacts of cyberattacks and curtail insurance
premiums for the entities that manage EVCS.

Towards mitigating brute force attacks targeting weak cre-
dentials used by WTCP, [125] recommends the usage of
password management systems. Furthermore, monitoring user
behavior (e.g., failed login attempts), the implementation of
network segregation, and role-based access control rules are
encouraged to restrict the adversarial access to DER wind
turbine assets. In order to mitigate stealthy attackers aiming to
gain access to wind turbines controllers exploiting their remote
ﬁrmware update capabilities (e.g., over-the-air updates), the
authors in [129] and [130] have proposed different method-
ologies to ensure that benign ﬁrmware versions are deployed
on the devices. In [129], a secure ﬁrmware update scheme is
introduced, where devices leverage the blockchain to check
for new ﬁrmware versions and validate their integrity before
downloading and installing the ﬁrmware images to the target

11

Fig. 6: Overview of DER-integrated power grid illustrating how the layered architecture expands the threat surface and affects
attack and impact propagation.

embedded device. On the other hand, the authors in [130],
leverage a hardware architecture to validate ﬁrmware authen-
ticity. Cryptographic modules, in addition to the embedded
device’s physical characteristics, are utilized to guarantee the
integrity and authenticity of ﬁrmware packages impinging
malicious ﬁrmware deployment attacks.

When viewing DERs from the IoT perspective, most of the
security implications and attack mitigation strategies applica-
ble for IoT end-devices could be exercised. In [131], the au-
thors suggest the use of a personal security application (PSA)
as a countermeasure for IoT-related attacks. PSA resembles
a combination of security features, such as access control
mechanisms, malware detection, network trafﬁc, and resource
utilization monitoring, etc., to strengthen the security posture
of IoT devices and networks. Blockchain technology has also
been mobilized to safeguard the security of IoT networks,
singling out malicious nodes from benign ones [132]. For
example, a blockchain detection methodology is presented in
[114] to protect IoT nodes from the Mirai botnet. In [80],
a thorough review of IoT attacks and their corresponding
mitigations are presented. A plethora of design best practices,
mitigation techniques, and security policies are enumerated,
viewed from the device, infrastructure, communications, and
services standpoint. The authors also discuss open challenges
regarding the security of future IoT systems, which closely
relate to the obstacles that DER infrastructure will have
to overcome (e.g., vendor locking, computationally limited
resources, cost, data security, etc.).

IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS AND DISCUSSION
Improving EPS cybersecurity and resilience to adverse
events is of critical importance. DERs are expected to con-
tribute toward this effort. However,
the alarming number
and sophistication of cyberattacks targeting energy systems
emphatically indicates that multifaceted security approaches
should be considered. In more detail, detection, protection and
mitigation schemes should factor in the inherent vulnerabilities
encountered on the DER cyber and physical stacks. Security
analyses should also contemplate on how DERs contribute to
the power grid operation, given the potential risks and system-
wide impacts of cyberattacks.

This work explores the cybersecurity posture of DERs as
an essential building block for future resilient EPS architec-
tures. We investigate the cybersecurity threats that arise and

present an overview of attacks targeting DER assets. The study
examines DER vulnerabilities from the protocol and device -
level and presents a consolidated review of attacks and their
corresponding impact on the operation of DER. Mitigation
methodologies and design best practices are also discussed to
thwart adversaries and safeguard DER systems (Table IV).

Even though the proposed strategies could effectively reduce
the DER threat surface, they still cannot be considered as
“silver bullet solutions” which can address every application.
This fact is partly attributed to the DER distributed mode of
operation, which can be utility-, aggregator-, or prosumer-
owned. Especially for the later case, user negligence in the
security conﬁguration of their DER assets, could give rise
to compromises. However, the risk and magnitude of such
disturbances relies on how many DERs could simultaneously
be attacked. Security conformance standards and policies –
such as IEEE 1547-2020 [56] and DNP3 [58] – should be
created and enforced to ensure the innocuous DER operations
even in untrusted environments (e.g., user-owned assets).

Security challenges will still exist, regardless of the preven-
tive and preemptive methodologies that we propose and the
security of future DER devices that is expected to improve
(both in the device and protocol levels). Developing universal
risk management schemes can be a perplexing or infeasible
task due to the distributed, ad-hoc (e.g., EVs, battery storage)
and stochastic (e.g., solar inverters) nature of DERs. However,
comprehensive system modeling using digital twin systems
and data-driven approaches can be leveraged to forecast grid
behavior and predict cyberattack impacts. Additionally, risk
assessment and cyber-physical risk metrics can be developed
to evaluate and prioritize mitigation decisions. High-ﬁdelity
information, derived from system models (i.e., digital twins),
can assist risk-metric estimations using system-speciﬁc DER
information, which in turn can be utilized when designing
cyberattack response strategies and self-healing schemes.

The inﬂux of DER devices and their projected numbers
underscore the need for comprehensive security practices.
To harness DER advantages and withstand their underlying
security impediments, the combined knowledge of security en-
gineers, the industry, and the academic community is essential.
User vigilance is also crucial to impede malicious behavior
attempting to achieve foothold on user-owned DERs and
even post-compromise to restrict attack propagation. Security

12

TABLE IV: Cyberattack mitigations and design best practises.

Mitigations
Network connection auditing using authentication,
authorization, and accounting servers, role-based access control,
authentication-based MAC address white-listing, unused port
hardening
IP header (Sequence number) inclusion in TCP,
cryptographically enhanced address resolution protocols (ARP),
secure key distribution and exchange schemes
Firewalls, intrusion detection/prevention systems (ID/IPS),
traceback and push-back services, cryptographic hashing and
stack tweaking
Password management systems, access restriction after multiple
failed log-in attempts, hardened operating system kernels,
roll-back ﬁrmware updates
Personal security and privacy practises (e.g., security updates,
password managers, encryption, ephemeral keys, etc.)

Attacks

MAC Spooﬁng, MAC Flooding, DoS, MitM,
SYN ﬂooding

Reference

[34], [38]

Packet Replay, DoS, MitM, SYN ﬂooding

[43], [38]

Mac Flooding, DoS, MitM, SYN ﬂooding

[43], [44], [34]

Brute force attacks, DoS, Packet Replay,
Eavesdropping

Packet Replay, Eavesdropping

[125]

[131]

standardization and policy-making procedures can strengthen
the cybersecurity posture of DERs and prevent vulnerabilities
from materializing into treats and attacks. However, if the
to prevent or detect DER attacks,
discussed practices fail
risk metrics, detailed system modeling, and mitigation plans
can orchestrate available resources to inhibit or overcome
undesirable grid conditions, thus enhancing EPS resilience.

REFERENCES

[1] National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), “Grid Moderniza-

tion,” [Online]: https://www.nrel.gov/grid/, 2021.

[2] North American Electric Reliability Corporation, “Distributed energy
resources: Connection modeling and reliability considerations,” 2017.
[3] S. Gholami, S. Saha, and M. Aldeen, “A cyber attack resilient control
for distributed energy resources,” in 2017 IEEE PES Innovative Smart
Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT-Europe), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[4] S. Soltan, P. Mittal, and H. V. Poor, “Blackiot: Iot botnet of high
the power grid,” in 27th {USENIX}

wattage devices can disrupt
Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 18), 2018, pp. 15–32.
[5] G. Insights, “Global Capacity of Distributed Energy Resources Is

Expected to Reach Nearly 530 GW in 2026,” 2017.

[6] H. K. Trabish, “2021 Outlook: The DER boom continues, driving a
’reimagining’ of the distribution system,” [Online]: https://tinyurl.com/
2p96cz4b, 2021.

[7] E. Ghiani et al., “Impact on electricity consumption and market pricing
of energy and ancillary services during pandemic of covid-19 in italy,”
Energies, vol. 13, no. 13, p. 3357, 2020.

[8] A. D. Syrmakesis, C. Alcaraz, and N. D. Hatziargyriou, “Classifying
resilience approaches for protecting smart grids against cyber threats,”
International Journal of Information Security, pp. 1–22, 2022.

[9] U. of Texas at Austin, “The Timeline and Events of the Febru-
ary 2021 Texas Electric Grid Blackouts,” https://energy.utexas.edu/
ercot-blackout-2021, 2021, accessed: 2021-9-07.

[10] NIST - National Vulnerability Database, “CVE-2018-0296 Detail,”

https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2018-0296, 2018.

[11] NERC, “Electric Emergency and Disturbance Report

- Calendar
Year 2019,” https://www.eenews.net/assets/2019/04/30/document ew
03.pdf, 2021.

[12] L. Learned, “Risks posed by ﬁrewall ﬁrmware vulnerabilities,” Tech.
rep. North American Electric Reliability Corporation, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[13] M. Areno, “Supply Chain Threats against Integrated Circuits,” https:

//tinyurl.com/445vx9x6, 2020.

[14] K. Mandia, “FireEye Shares Details of Recent Cyber Attack, Actions
to Protect Community,” https://tinyurl.com/mr2kbb3k, 2020, accessed:
2020-10-12.

[15] J. Williams,

“What You Need
Attack,”

to Know About
the
https://www.sans.org/blog/

Supply-Chain

SolarWinds
what-you-need-to-know-about-the-solarwinds-supply-chain-attack/,
2020, accessed: 2020-10-12.

[16] NIST, “SolarWinds and Beyond: Improving the Cybersecurity of Soft-
ware Supply Chains,” https://tinyurl.com/57w3xe5x, 2021, accessed:
2021-5-30.

[17] N. P. Michael D. Shear and C. Krauss, “Colonial Pipeline Paid Roughly
$5 Million in Ransom to Hackers,” https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/
13/us/politics/biden-colonial-pipeline-ransomware.html, 2021.

[18] L. Mathews, “Florida Water Plant Hackers Exploited Old Software And
Poor Password Habits,” https://tinyurl.com/yxakfed4, 2021, accessed:
2021-2-20.

[19] M. Evans and R. McMillan, “Cyberattacks Cost Hospitals Millions
During Covid-19,” https://tinyurl.com/2p9wjp5n, 2021, accessed: 2021-
3-26.

[20] L. Muthuppalaniappan, Menaka and K. Stevenson, “Healthcare
threat
and the COVID-19 pandemic:
an urgent
for Quality in Health
[Online]. Available:

cyber-attacks
to global health,” International Journal
Care, vol. 33, no. 1, 09 2020, mzaa117.
https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzaa117

[21] National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), “Distributed Energy
Resource Cybersecurity Framework (DERCF),” [Online]: https://dercf.
nrel.gov/, 2021.

[22] Sandia National Laboratories, “Renewable Energy & Distributed Sys-
tems Integration (RDSI),” [Online]: https://energy.sandia.gov/programs/
electric-grid/renewable-energy-integratio/, 2021.

[23] IEEE, “Ieee standard for interconnection and interoperability of dis-
tributed energy resources with associated electric power systems in-
terfaces,” IEEE Std 1547-2018 (Revision of IEEE Std 1547-2003), pp.
1–138, April 2018.

[24] Sunspec, “SUNSPEC MODBUS FOR IEEE 1547 ,” [Online]. Avail-

able: https://sunspec.org/sunspec-speciﬁcations-for-ieee-1547/, 2021.

[25] J. Gamblin, “IEC 62746-10-1:2018 Systems interface between cus-
tomer energy management system and the power management system
- Part 10-1: Open automated demand response,” [Online]. Available:
https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/26267, 2018.

[26] IEEE, “IEEE standard for smart energy proﬁle application protocol,”

IEEE Std 2030.5-2018, pp. 1–361, Dec 2018.

[27] OAK RIDGE NATIONAL LABORATORY, “ANCILLARY SER-
VICES PROVIDED FROM DER,” [Online]: https://info.ornl.gov/sites/
publications/Files/Pub57484.pdf, 2005.

[28] I. Zografopoulos et al., “Cyber-physical energy systems security:
Threat modeling, risk assessment, resources, metrics, and case studies,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 29 775–29 818, 2021.

[29] S. Acharya, Y. Dvorkin, and R. Karri, “Public plug-in electric vehicles+
grid data: Is a new cyberattack vector viable?” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, 2020.

[30] B. Kang et al., “Investigating cyber-physical attacks against iec 61850
photovoltaic inverter installations,” in 2015 IEEE 20th Conference on
Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation (ETFA).
IEEE, 2015.
[31] R. Siqueira de Carvalho and D. Saleem, “Recommended functionalities
for improving cybersecurity of distributed energy resources,” National
Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), Tech. Rep., 2020.

[32] A. Teymouri, A. Mehrizi-Sani, and C.-C. Liu, “Cyber security risk
assessment of solar pv units with reactive power capability,” in IECON
2018-44th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics So-
ciety.

IEEE, 2018, pp. 2872–2877.

[33] Z. Zhou et al., “Secure and efﬁcient vehicle-to-grid energy trading in
cyber physical systems: Integration of blockchain and edge computing,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 50,
no. 1, pp. 43–57, 2019.

[34] A. Sundararajan et al., “A survey of protocol-level challenges and solu-
tions for distributed energy resource cyber-physical security,” Energies,
vol. 11, no. 9, p. 2360, 2018.

[35] A. Zabetian-Hosseini, A. Mehrizi-Sani, and C.-C. Liu, “Cyberattack
to cyber-physical model of wind farm scada,” in IECON 2018-44th
Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society.
IEEE,
2018.

[36] D. J. Sebastian and A. Hahn, “Exploring emerging cybersecurity risks
from network-connected der devices,” in 2017 North American Power
Symposium (NAPS).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[37] A. P. Kuruvila et al., “Hardware-assisted detection of ﬁrmware attacks
in inverter-based cyberphysical microgrids,” International Journal of
Electrical Power & Energy Systems, vol. 132, p. 107150, 2021.
[38] C. Carter et al., “Cyber security assessment of distributed energy
resources,” in 2017 IEEE 44th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference
(PVSC).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 2135–2140.

[39] P. Ackerman, Industrial Cybersecurity: Efﬁciently secure critical in-

frastructure systems. Packt Publishing Ltd, 2017.

[40] MITRE, “ATT&CK for Industrial Control Systems Techniques,” [On-
line]: https://collaborate.mitre.org/attackics/index.php/All Techniques,
2021.
[41] ——,

Jewels Analysis,”

https://tinyurl.com/

[Online]:

“Crown
zcuvvdun, 2019.

[42] D. J. S. Cardenas, A. Hahn, and C.-C. Liu, “Assessing cyber-physical
risks of iot-based energy devices in grid operations,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 61 161–61 173, 2020.

[43] J. Qi et al., “Cybersecurity for distributed energy resources and smart
inverters,” IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory & Applications, vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 28–39, 2016.

[44] C. Lai, et al., “Cyber security primer for der vendors, aggregators, and

grid operators,” Tech. Rep., 2017.

[45] J. Henry et al., “Cyber security requirements and recommendations
for CSI RD&D solicitation for distributed energy resource communi-
cations,” 2015.

[46] I. Onunkwo et al., “Cybersecurity assessments on emulated der com-
munication networks,” Sandia Technical Report, Tech. Rep., 2018.
[47] S. Tierney, “The Value of “DER” to “D”: The Role of Distributed
Energy Resources in Supporting Local Electric Distribution System
Reliability,” Analysis Group,
[Online].
Available: https://tinyurl.com/mudr3s2x

Inc., Tech. Rep., 2016.

[48] I. Zografopoulos and C. Konstantinou, “Detection of malicious attacks
in autonomous cyber-physical inverter-based microgrids,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Informatics, 2021.

[49] F. Katiraei, “DER communication,” CANMET Energy Technology

Centre - Varennes (Canada), Tech. Rep., 2019.

[50] J. T. Johnson, “Roadmap for photovoltaic cyber security,” 12 2017.

[Online]. Available: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1782667

[51] J. Obert et al., “Recommendations for Trust and Encryption in DER

Interoperability Standards,” Sandia National Lab, Tech. Rep., 2019.

[52] Z. Drias, A. Serhrouchni, and O. Vogel, “Taxonomy of attacks on
industrial control protocols,” in 2015 International Conference on
Protocol Engineering (ICPE) and International Conference on New
Technologies of Distributed Systems (NTDS).

IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.

[53] S. East et al., “A taxonomy of attacks on the dnp3 protocol,” in Critical
Infrastructure Protection III, C. Palmer and S. Shenoi, Eds. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 67–81.

[54] M. Park, M. Kang, and J.-Y. Choi, “The research on vulnerability
analysis in openadr for smart grid,” in International Workshop on Data
Analytics for Renewable Energy Integration. Springer, 2014.
[55] MITRE, “CVE-2010-3860,” [Online]. Available: https://cve.mitre.org/

cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2010-3860, 2021.

[56] I. 1547, “IEEE 1547a-2020 - IEEE Standard for Interconnection
and Interoperability of Distributed Energy Resources with Associated
Electric Power Systems Interfaces – Amendment 1: To Provide More
Flexibility for Adoption of Abnormal Operating Performance Cat-
egory III,” https://standards.ieee.org/standard/1547a-2020.html, 2020,
accessed: 2020-05-27.

[57] “Ieee approved draft standard for smart energy proﬁle application

protocol,” IEEE P2030.5/D2, March 2018, pp. 1–358, 2018.

[58] 1815.1-2015, “IEEE Standard for Exchanging Information Be-
tween Networks Implementing IEC 61850 and IEEE Std 1815(TM)
[Distributed Network Protocol (DNP3)],” https://standards.ieee.org/
standard/1815 1-2015.html, 2020, accessed: 2020-05-27.

[59] “SunSpec Modbus Protocol,” [Online]. Available: https://sunspec.org/

sunspec-modbus-home/, 2020.

13

[60] “DNP3 - Transport Layer Security (TLS),”

[Online]. Avail-
able: https://docs.stepfunc.io/dnp3/0.10.0/guide/docs/api/tls/?mc cid=
8d045fd4ed, 2022.

[61] Dong Jin, D. M. Nicol, and Guanhua Yan, “An event buffer ﬂooding
attack in dnp3 controlled scada systems,” in Proceedings of the 2011
Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), 2011, pp. 2614–2626.

[62] H. Zimmermann, “Osi reference model-the iso model of architecture
for open systems interconnection,” IEEE Transactions on communica-
tions, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 425–432, 1980.

[63] S. Gholami, S. Saha, and M. Aldeen, “A cyber attack resilient control
for distributed energy resources,” in 2017 IEEE PES Innovative Smart
Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT-Europe).
IEEE, 2017,
pp. 1–6.

[64] A. Adib et al., “On stability of voltage source inverters in weak grids,”

IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 4427–4439, 2018.

[65] Q. Peng, et al., “On the stability of power electronics-dominated
systems: Challenges and potential solutions,” IEEE Transactions on
Industry Applications, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 7657–7670, 2019.

[66] A. Barua and M. A. A. Faruque, “Hall spooﬁng: A Non-Invasive
DoS attack on Grid-Tied solar inverter,” in 29th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 20). USENIX Association, Aug.
2020, pp. 1273–1290. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/
conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/barua

[67] J. Ospina et al., “Trustworthy cyberphysical energy systems: Time-
delay attacks in a real-time co-simulation environment,” in Proceedings
of the 2020 Joint Workshop on CPS&IoT Security and Privacy, 2020.
[68] I. Zografopoulos, J. Ospina, and C. Konstantinou, “Special session:
Harness the power of ders for secure communications in electric energy
systems,” in 2020 IEEE 38th International Conference on Computer
Design (ICCD).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 49–52.

[69] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Guide to Indus-
trial Control Systems (ICS) Security,” [Online]: https://csrc.nist.gov/
publications/detail/sp/800-82/rev-2/ﬁnal, 2015.

[70] A. Castiglione et al., “Secure group communication schemes for
dynamic heterogeneous distributed computing,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 74, pp. 313–324, 2017.

[71] I. Zografopoulos and C. Konstantinou, “Derauth: a battery-based au-
thentication scheme for distributed energy resources,” in 2020 IEEE
Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI).
IEEE, 2020,
pp. 560–567.

[72] I. E. Agency,

from 2019 to
2024,” May 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.iea.org/reports/
renewables-2019/distributed-solar-pv#abstract

and forecast

“Market

analysis

[73] O. T. Soyoye and K. C. Stefferud, “Cybersecurity risk assessment
for california’s smart inverter functions,” in 2019 IEEE CyberPELS
(CyberPELS), 2019, pp. 1–5.

[74] A. Zabetian-Hosseini, A. Mehrizi-Sani, and C. Liu, “Cyberattack to
cyber-physical model of wind farm scada,” in IECON 2018 - 44th
Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 2018,
pp. 4929–4934.

[75] R. Gottumukkala et al., “Cyber-physical system security of vehi-
cle charging stations,” in 2019 IEEE Green Technologies Confer-
ence(GreenTech), 2019, pp. 1–5.

[76] A. Mitrokotsa, M. Rieback, and A. Tanenbaum, “Classiﬁcation of rﬁd

attacks,” 01 2008, pp. 73–86.

[77] K. Haataja and P. Toivanen, “Two practical man-in-the-middle attacks
on bluetooth secure simple pairing and countermeasures,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Wireless Communications, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 384–392, 2010.
[78] M. Jakobsson and S. Wetzel, “Security weaknesses in bluetooth,” in
Berlin,

Topics in Cryptology — CT-RSA 2001, D. Naccache, Ed.
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2001, pp. 176–191.

[79] M. A. Mustafa et al., “Smart electric vehicle charging: Security
analysis,” in 2013 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies
Conference (ISGT).

IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[80] C. Xenofontos et al., “Consumer, commercial and industrial iot (in)
security: attack taxonomy and case studies,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 2021.

[81] H. Garg and M. Dave, “Securing iot devices and securelyconnecting
the dots using rest api and middleware,” in 2019 4th International
Conference on Internet of Things: Smart Innovation and Usages (IoT-
SIU), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[82] S. Lakshminarayana, J. Ospina, and C. Konstantinou, “Load-altering
attacks against power grids under covid-19 low-inertia conditions,”
2022.

[83] I. Makhdoom et al., “Anatomy of threats to the internet of things,”
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1636–
1675, 2019.

[84] J. Ospina et al., “On the feasibility of load-changing attacks in power
systems during the covid-19 pandemic,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 2545–
2563, 2020.

[85] B. Vignau, R. Khoury, and S. Hall´e, “10 years of iot malware: A
feature-based taxonomy,” in 2019 IEEE 19th International Conference
on Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C),
2019, pp. 458–465.

[86] M. Moody and A. Hunter, “Exploiting known vulnerabilities of a smart
thermostat,” in 2016 14th Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and
Trust (PST), 2016, pp. 50–53.

[87] J. Stine, “Vestas data ’compromised’ by cyber attack,” https://reut.rs/

3fYYJqB, 2021.

[88] R. J. Campbell, “Electric Grid Cybersecurity,” https://fas.org/sgp/crs/

homesec/R45312.pdf, 2018, accessed: 2020-08-30.

[89] J. Ye et al., “A review of cyber-physical security for photovoltaic
systems,” IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power
Electronics, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[90] Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) Order No. 827, “Reac-
tive Power Requirements for Non-Synchronous Generation,” [Online].
Available: https://tinyurl.com/3vrspjj8, 2021.

[91] J. Staggs, “Breaking wind: Adventures in hacking wind farm control

networks,” Black Hat, 2017.

[92] T. S. Gopal et al., “Mitigating mirai malware spreading in iot environ-
ment,” in 2018 International Conference on Advances in Computing,
Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), 2018, pp. 2226–2230.
[93] J. Gamblin, “Mirai source code,” [Online]. Available: https://github.

com/jgamblin/mirai-source-code, 2016.

[94] T. Kasper, D. Oswald, and C. Paar, “Wireless security threats: Eaves-
dropping and detecting of active rﬁds and remote controls in the wild,”
2011 International Conference on Software, Telecommunications and
Computer Networks, SoftCOM 2011, 01 2011.

[95] K. Lounis and M. Zulkernine, “Attacks and defenses in short-range

wireless technologies for iot,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, 2020.

[96] I. Zografopoulos et al., “Security assessment and impact analysis of

cyberattacks in integrated t&d power systems,” 2021.

[97] C. Konstantinou and O. M. Anubi, “Resilient cyber-physical energy
systems using prior information based on gaussian process,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, pp. 2160–2168, 2021.
[98] Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency – CISA, “Advanced
Persistent Threat Compromise of Government Agencies, Critical In-
frastructure, and Private Sector Organizations,” [Online]. Available:
https://www.cisa.gov/uscert/ncas/alerts/aa20-352a, 2021.

[99] S. Rath, I. Zografopoulos, and C. Konstantinou, “Stealthy rootkit
attacks on cyber-physical microgrids: Poster,” in Proceedings of
the Twelfth ACM International Conference on Future Energy
Systems, ser. e-Energy ’21. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2021, p. 294–295. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3447555.3466576

[100] S. Sahoo et al., “On detection of

false data in cooperative dc
microgrids—a discordant element approach,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 67, no. 8, pp. 6562–6571, 2020.

[101] S. Rath et al., “Behind closed doors: Process-level rootkit attacks in
cyber-physical microgrid systems,” in IEEE PES General Meeting.
IEEE, 2022.

[102] T. Bunsen et al., “Global ev outlook 2018: Towards cross-modal

electriﬁcation,” 2018.

[103] Y. Park, O. C. Onar, and B. Ozpineci, “Potential cybersecurity issues
of fast charging stations with quantitative severity analysis,” in 2019
IEEE CyberPELS (CyberPELS).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–7.

[104] S. Acharya et al., “Cyber insurance against cyberattacks on electric

vehicle charging stations,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2021.

[105] J. Antoun et al., “A detailed security assessment of the ev charging
ecosystem,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 200–207, 2020.
[106] D. Reeh, et al., “Vulnerability analysis and risk assessment of ev charg-
ing system under cyber-physical threats,” in 2019 IEEE Transportation
Electriﬁcation Conference and Expo (ITEC), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[107] J. Staggs, D. Ferlemann, and S. Shenoi, “Wind farm security: attack
targets, scenarios and mitigation,” International Journal
surface,
Infrastructure Protection, vol. 17, pp. 3–14, 2017.
of Critical
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1874548217300434

[108] National Wind Watch, “Wind Power News: Accidents,” [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.wind-watch.org/news/tag/accidents/?titles=on, 2021.
[109] Fire Trace International, “5 High Proﬁle Wind Turbine Fires,”
https://www.ﬁretrace.com/ﬁre-protection-blog/

[Online]. Available:
wind-turbine-death, 2021.

14

[110] RECHARGE News, “New failure for ﬂagship GE wind turbine as
Cypress blade breaks in Germany,” [Online]. Available: https://tinyurl.
com/3pazjr7d, 2021.

[111] L. Paulsson, “Huge Vestas Wind Turbine Collapses in Northern Sweden
in Rare Accident,” [Online]. Available: https://www.insurancejournal.
com/news/international/2020/11/23/591674.htm, 2021.

[112] J. Yan, C.-C. Liu, and M. Govindarasu, “Cyber intrusion of wind
farm scada system and its impact analysis,” in 2011 IEEE/PES Power
Systems Conference and Exposition.

IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–6.

[113] Y. Zhang, Y. Xiang, and L. Wang, “Power system reliability assessment
incorporating cyber attacks against wind farm energy management
systems,” IEEE transactions on smart grid, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 2343–
2357, 2016.

[114] Z. Ahmed et al., “Protecting iots from mirai botnet attacks using
blockchains,” in 2019 IEEE 24th International Workshop on Computer
Aided Modeling and Design of Communication Links and Networks
(CAMAD), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[115] B. Huang, A. A. Cardenas, and R. Baldick, “Not everything is dark
and gloomy: Power grid protections against {IoT} demand attacks,”
in 28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19), 2019, pp.
1115–1132.

[116] C. Dang et al., “Demand side load management for big industrial
energy users under blockchain-based peer-to-peer electricity market,”
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 6426–6435, 2019.
[117] E. Ronen et al., “Iot goes nuclear: Creating a zigbee chain reaction,”
IEEE, 2017.
[118] Y. Li et al., “Active synchronous detection of deception attacks in
microgrid control systems,” IEEE transactions on smart grid, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 373–375, 2016.

in 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP).

[119] A. Y. Fard et al., “Cybersecurity analytics using smart inverters in
power distribution system: Proactive intrusion detection and corrective
control framework,” in 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Tech-
nologies for Homeland Security (HST).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[120] F. Li et al., “Detection and identiﬁcation of cyber and physical attacks
on distribution power grids with pvs: An online high-dimensional data-
driven approach,” IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in
Power Electronics, 2019.

[121] M. J. E. Alam, K. M. Muttaqi, and D. Sutanto, “Effective utilization
of available pev battery capacity for mitigation of solar pv impact and
grid support with integrated v2g functionality,” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1562–1571, 2016.

[122] S. Abhinav et al., “Synchrony in networked microgrids under attacks,”
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 6731–6741, 2017.
[123] A. Bidram et al., “Resilient and cybersecure distributed control of
inverter-based islanded microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3881–3894, 2019.

[124] S. Sahoo, Y. Yang, and F. Blaabjerg, “Resilient synchronization strategy
for ac microgrids under cyber attacks,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Electronics, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 73–77, 2021.

[125] R. S. de Carvalho and D. Saleem, “Recommended functionalities
for improving cybersecurity of distributed energy resources,” in 2019
Resilience Week (RWS), vol. 1, 2019, pp. 226–231.

[126] Z. Zhang and K.-T. Chau, “Pulse-width-modulation-based electromag-
netic interference mitigation of bidirectional grid-connected converters
for electric vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 6,
pp. 2803–2812, 2017.

[127] X. Zhou, J. Fan, and A. Q. Huang, “High-frequency resonance mitiga-
tion for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles’ integration with a wide range
of grid conditions,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 27,
no. 11, pp. 4459–4471, 2012.

[128] S. Martinenas, K. Knezovi´c, and M. Marinelli, “Management of power
quality issues in low voltage networks using electric vehicles: Exper-
imental validation,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 32,
no. 2, pp. 971–979, 2017.

[129] B. Lee and J.-H. Lee, “Blockchain-based secure ﬁrmware update for
embedded devices in an internet of things environment,” The Journal
of Supercomputing, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 1152–1167, 2017.

[130] S. Falas, C. Konstantinou, and M. K. Michael, “A hardware-based
framework for secure ﬁrmware updates on embedded systems,” in
2019 IFIP/IEEE 27th International Conference on Very Large Scale
Integration (VLSI-SoC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 198–203.

[131] J. Kuusij¨arvi et al., “Mitigating iot security threats with a trusted
network element,” in 2016 11th International Conference for Internet
Technology and Secured Transactions (ICITST), 2016, pp. 260–265.

[132] S. Jain et al., “Blockchain and autonomous vehicles: Recent advances
and future directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 130 264–130 328, 2021.

