A Tale of Two Markets: Investigating the
Ransomware Payments Economy

Kris Oosthoek
Delft University of Technology

Jack Cable
Independent Researcher

Georgios Smaragdakis
Delft University of Technology

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
0
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
2
0
5
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Ransomware attacks are among the most severe cy-
ber threats. They have made headlines in recent years
by threatening the operation of governments, critical
infrastructure, and corporations. Collecting and ana-
lyzing ransomware data is an important step towards
understanding the spread of ransomware and design-
ing effective defense and mitigation mechanisms. We
report on our experience operating Ransomwhere, an
open crowdsourced ransomware payment tracker to col-
lect information from victims of ransomware attacks.
With Ransomwhere, we have gathered 13.5k ransom pay-
ments to more than 87 ransomware criminal actors with
total payments of more than $101 million. Leveraging
the transparent nature of Bitcoin, the cryptocurrency
used for most ransomware payments, we characterize
the evolving ransomware criminal structure and ransom
laundering strategies. Our analysis shows that there are
two parallel ransomware criminal markets: commodity
ransomware and Ransomware as a Service (RaaS). We
notice that there are striking differences between the two
markets in the way that cryptocurrency resources are
utilized, revenue per transaction, and ransom laundering
efficiency. Although it is relatively easy to identify choke
points in commodity ransomware payment activity, it is
more difficult to do the same for RaaS.

1 INTRODUCTION
Ransomware, a form of malware designed to encrypt
a victim’s files and make them unusable without pay-
ment, has quickly become a threat to the functioning of
many institutions and corporations around the globe. In
2021 alone, ransomware caused major hospital disrup-
tions in Ireland [3], empty supermarket shelves in the
Netherlands [8], the closing of 800 supermarket stores
in Sweden [4], and gasoline shortages in the United
States [20]. In a recent report, the European Union
Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) ranked ransomware
as the “prime threat for 2020-2021” [13]. The U.S. govern-
ment reacted to high profile attacks against U.S. indus-
tries by declaring ransomware a national security threat
and announcing a “coordinated campaign to counter ran-
somware” [21]. Other governments, including the United

Kingdom [37], Australia [22], Canada [12], and law en-
forcement agencies, such as the FBI [38] and Europol [11],
have also launched similar programs to defend against
ransomware and offer help to victims.

To the criminal actors behind these attacks, the result-
ing disruption is just ‘collateral damage’. A handful of
groups and individuals, with names such as NetWalker,
Conti, REvil and DarkSide, have received tens of millions
in USD as ransom. But this is just the top of the food
chain in an ecosystem with many grey areas, especially
when it comes to laundering illicit proceedings. In this
article, we will provide a closer look at the ecosystem
behind many of the attacks plaguing businesses and
societies, known as Ransomware as a Service (RaaS).

Cryptocurrencies remain the payment method of choice
for criminal ransomware actors. While many cryptocur-
rencies exist, Bitcoin is preferred due to its network
effects, resulting in wide exchange options. Bitcoin’s
sound monetary features as a medium of exchange, unit
of account and store of value make it as attractive to
criminals as it is to regular citizens. According to the
U.S. Department of Treasury, based on data from the
first half of 2021, the “vast majority” of reported ran-
somware payments were made in Bitcoin [28]. Law en-
forcement agencies have started to disrupt ransomware
actors by obtaining personal information of users from
Bitcoin exchange platforms. This is realized through
anti-money laundering regulations such as Know Your
Customer (KYC), which require legal identity verifica-
tion during registration with the service. While cryp-
tocurrencies such as Bitcoin are enablers of ransomware,
blockchain technology also offers unprecedented oppor-
tunities for forensic analysis and intelligence gathering.
Using our crowdsourced ransomware payment tracker,
Ransomwhere, we compile a dataset of 7,321 Bitcoin
addresses which received ransom payments, based on
which we shed light on the structure and state of the
ransomware ecosystem.
Our contributions are as follows:
∙ We collect and analyze the largest public dataset of
ransomware activity to date, which includes 13,497
ransom payments to 87 criminal actors over the last
five years, worth more than 101 million USD.

 
 
 
 
 
 
∙ We characterize the evolving ransomware ecosystem.
Our analysis shows that there are two parallel ran-
somware markets: commodity and RaaS. After 2019,
we observe the rapid rise of RaaS, which achieves
higher revenue per address and transaction, and higher
overall revenue.

∙ We also characterize ransom laundering strategies by
commodity ransomware and RaaS actors. Our analysis
of more than 13k transfers shows striking differences
in laundering time, utilization of exchanges and other
means to cash out ransom payments.

∙ We discuss the difficulties defending against profession-
ally operated RaaS and we propose possible ways to
trace back RaaS activity in cryptocurrency systems.
∙ To enable future research in this area, we make our
tracker, Ransomwhere, and the tracked ransomware
payments of our analysis publicly available at [6].

2 THE RANSOMWARE ECOSYSTEM
The ransomware ecosystem and its payment traffic can
be largely recognized in two categories: commodity ran-
somware and ransomware as a service (RaaS).

2.1 Commodity Ransomware
In the early years of ransomware, the majority of ran-
somware that spread can be characterized as ‘commodity’
ransomware. Commodity ransomware is characterized
by widespread targeting, fixed ransom demands, and
technically-adept operators. It usually targets a single
device [17]. Actors behind commodity ransomware are
usually technically savvy, as most of the time it is devel-
oped and spread by the same person. Commodity ran-
somware operators take advantage of preexisting work,
often copying and modifying leaked or shared source
code, causing the formation of ransomware families. His-
torically, most commodity ransomware campaigns uti-
lized phishing emails as the primary delivery vector and
exploited vulnerabilities in common word processing and
spreadsheet software, if not directly via malicious exe-
cutables. The modus operandi was mass exploitation,
rather than targeting specific victims.

Exemplary are WannaCry and NotPetya ransomware
families, which over a course of only two months im-
pacted tens of thousands of organizations in over 150
countries by exploiting a vulnerability allegedly stolen
from the NSA [15]. In today’s standards, both families
were poorly coded and their payment systems weren’t
ready for business, although allegedly on purpose for
NotPetya [14].

With regards to its mitigation, the conventional advice
is to have a proper backup and contingency plan. The

2

initial philosophy was that a quick ability to restore
would make it unnecessary to pay, impairing the financial
incentive of ransomware operators. But it turned out
that what we now regard a commodity was just a proving
ground for a higher-impact utilization of ransomware.

2.2 Ransomware as a Service (RaaS)
While the first reports of Ransomware as a Service (RaaS)
emerged in 2016, it wasn’t until 2019 that RaaS became
widespread, rapidly capturing a large share of the ran-
somware market. We define RaaS as ransomware created
by a core team of developers who license their malware
on an affiliate basis. They often provide a payment portal
(typically over Tor, an anonymous web protocol), allow-
ing negotiation with victims and dynamic generation of
payment addresses (typically Bitcoin). RaaS frequently
employs a double extortion scheme, not only encrypting
victims’ data, but also threatening to leak their data
publicly.

The rise of RaaS has enabled existing criminal groups
to shift to a new lucrative business model where lower-
skilled affiliates can access exploits and techniques pre-
viously reserved for highly-skilled criminals. This was
exemplified by a leaked playbook from the RaaS group
Conti, which enables novice actors to compromise enter-
prise networks [34]. RaaS affiliates can differ markedly in
their approaches. Some scan the entire internet and com-
promise any victims they can. Once they have identified
the victim, they engage in price discrimination based on
the victim company’s size. Affiliates may even use finan-
cial documents obtained in the attack to justify higher
prices [19]. Another strategy, known as big game hunting,
targets big corporations that can afford paying a high
ransom. Darkside is one of most notable RaaS families
whose affiliates practice big game hunting, including the
notable Colonial Pipeline attack in 2021 [18].

RaaS families often rely on spear-phishing over the
mass phishing mails utilized by commodity ransomware
groups. They also exploit recently disclosed vulnerabil-
ities, leaving remote and virtual desktop services vul-
nerable [9]. RaaS has lowered the barrier to entry into
cyber-criminality, as it has removed the initial expendi-
ture to develop effective ransomware. As a result, attacks
can be performed with near zero cost. Combined with
high ransom demands, this has led to a low-risk, high
reward criminal scheme.

RaaS has effectively weaponized the unpatched internet-
facing technology of many unwitting organizations. Such
organizations have significant financial interest to have
systems restored and get back to business after a ran-
somware attack. Cryptocurrencies enable ransomware

To seed the dataset, we collected data from several
public sources. We imported addresses from Paquet-
Clouston et al. [30], who collected 7,222 addresses and
labeled families representing approximately $12.7 million
in payments. This dataset provides us with, among other
ransomware families, 7,014 addresses belonging to Locky.
We further collected 37 addresses and associated families
from the AT&T Alien Labs Open Threat Exchange, an
open threat intelligence sharing platform [1].

Members of the public may submit reports at our
crowdsourced payment tracker Ransomwhere [6]. We re-
ceived 99 reports containing 198 addresses over a 6-
month period from June 2021 to December 2021. While
this is a lower number of addresses, they represent the
majority of ransomware payment value in our dataset. In
order to verify reports, the reporter must include the rel-
evant Bitcoin addresses and the associated ransomware
family. In addition, they have to provide evidence of
the ransom demand, such as a screenshot of the ransom
payment portal or a ransom message on an infected com-
puter. Some addresses were involved in more than one
report. All reports were manually reviewed before being
added to the dataset. We did not accept reports that
were inaccurate or were not related to ransomware (e.g.,
addresses involved in extortion scam emails).

All reported ransom addresses were Bitcoin addresses.
Due to the transparent nature of Bitcoin it is possible
to verify that the collected addresses indeed received
payments. Using our own Bitcoin full node, we scraped
all transactions for the addresses in our dataset. Overall,
7,323 out of 7,454 Bitcoin addresses were involved in at
least one ransom payment. We discarded 134 addresses
that did not receive any payment. We have queried Tor
using a solution from a peer researcher [33] for all Bitcoin
addresses in our dataset to rule out the chance of an
address being used for cybercrime purposes other than
ransomware. Based on this, we excluded 2 addresses
belonging to a cache of Bitcoin seized by the U.S. De-
partment of Justice after the closing of the SilkRoad
darkweb market [23]. After these steps, the final number
of addresses considered for our analysis is 7,321. For a
summary of our dataset we refer to Table 1.

Figure 1: General course of a ransom payment and its
laundering.

actors to directly monetize these vulnerabilities at a
scale never seen before. In this paper, we regard the
functioning of ransomware actors through what usually
is the last mile of the attack.

Figure 1 shows the general course of events after a
ransomware infection, when the victim decides to pay
the attacker (step 1 ). In the case of commodity ran-
somware families, the ransom demand price is fixed and
negotiation with the attacker isn’t necessary. With RaaS,
attackers usually run chat-based services to interact with
victims and negotiate the final ransom amount (step 2 ).
After this, a victim will usually exchange fiat legal ten-
der for cryptocurrency such as Bitcoin at an exchange
platform (step 3 ) and then send it to the attacker’s
wallet (step 4 ). The attacker will then usually route
the obtained Bitcoin through various services (step 5 )
in order to obfuscate ownership and reduce the risk of
deanonymization before cashing out (step 6 ).

3 METHODOLOGY
In this section, we describe how we collected data of
ransom payments and ransomware actors in our study.

3.1 Addresses involved in Ransom Payments
We obtain ransomware Bitcoin addresses from our crowd-
sourced payment tracker Ransomwhere. The Ransomwhere
dataset contains Bitcoin addresses and associated fami-
lies collected from open-source datasets and publicly-
submitted crowd-sourced reports. In total, the Ran-
somwhere dataset contains 7,457 Bitcoin addresses and
their corresponding ransomware families.

3

3.2 Ransom Payments and Laundering
The transparency of Bitcoin also allows us to collect
information about (ransom) payments, i.e., the amount
of Bitcoin received. For each address we collected the
number of incoming (payments) and outgoing (transfers)
transactions, their value in Bitcoin, and their timestamp.
We calculated the USD value of each transaction using

How ransom payments are executed and laundered1Victim assets are infected, ransom notice is displayed2RaaS: negotiation through Tor payment portal / chat support 3Victim exchanges legal tender for Bitcoin4Victim sends Bitcoin to attacker wallet5Attacker launders funds through illicit services and exchanges6Attacker cashing out legaltender and/or giftcards Table 1: Ransomware Dataset Statistics

Table 2: Ransomware criminal actors in our Dataset

Data
Unique Actors
Bitcoin Addresses
Received Transactions
(Payments)
Transferred Transactions
(Laundering)

Commodity RaaS Total
71
161
4,799

16
7,160
8,698

87
7,321
13,497

4,557

8,540

13,097

the BTC-USD daily closing rate on the day of the trans-
action. This serves as an approximate ransom payment
and not the exact amount in USD the criminal actors
requested or later profited. The total ransom paid to
addresses in our dataset is $101,297,569. The lowest pay-
ment received is $1, and the highest is $11,042,163. The
median payment value is $1,176.

In collaboration with Crystal Blockchain [5], we tracked
the destination of outgoing transactions, i.e., transfers.
In order to estimate addresses’ potential for illicit use,
Crystal Blockchain utilizes clustering heuristics such as
one-time change address and common-input-ownership
[40], as well as human collection of off-chain data from
various cryptocurrency services. In addition to this, Crys-
tal Blockchain scrapes online forums and other Inter-
net services for Bitcoin addresses and their associated
real-world entity. Based on this, it is possible to track
payments several hops from the original deposit address.
To have the most reliable view, in our analysis we have
only regarded the direct destination of ransom payments
(first hop). Based on the characterization of the involved
addresses across the path, we are able to study the laun-
dering strategies of ransomware groups as well as the
time needed to wash out the money (see Section 5).

3.3 Ransomware Actors
We obtained addresses and labeled families as described
in Section 3.1. We categorized each ransomware fam-
ily as used by either commodity ransomware or RaaS
actors. Ransomware is generally categorized as RaaS
due to the use of an affiliate structure, with the ran-
somware developer (operator) selling the ransomware to
criminal actors either based on a commission for each
ransom paid, or a flat monthly fee (as a service, like
many subscription-based services). As there does not
exist any comprehensive public list of RaaS groups, we
have labeled a family as RaaS if a reliable industry or law
enforcement source claims that a given ransomware is
sold as a service. A list of commodity and RaaS families
in our dataset is presented in Table 2.

#Addrs. Name (contd.)
Name
7037
Locky
66
NetWalker
48
SamSam
40
Ryuk
27
Conti
22
Qlocker
11
JigSaw
10
CryptConsole
9
Egregor
9
DMALocker v3
7
Globe v3
REvil
7
CryptoTorLocker2015 7
6
HC6/HC7
5
Globe
5
WannaCry
5
TeslaCrypt
5
CTB-Locker
4
Xorist

DarkSide
MedusaLocker
NotPetya
GlobeImposter
ThunderCrypt
Nemucod
LockBit 2.0
Globe v2
EDA2
Flyper
Black Kingdom
CryptoLocker
AvosLocker
NoobCrypt
VenusLocker
XLocker v5
Chimera
Badblock
Other Groups/Families*

#Addrs.
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
50

* 50 families with 1 address each. RaaS actors are highlighted.

3.4 Limitations
Our dataset of Bitcoin addresses is the largest public
collection of ransomware payment addresses collected to
date, based on total USD value. While this allows for a
unique view on the ransomware financial ecosystem, it
is not exhaustive. An inherent limitation of any research
using adversary artifacts is its dependence on the avail-
ability of artifacts that bad actors have an interest to
hide. Furthermore victims might have an interest not to
report addresses, as they prefer keeping attacks undis-
closed. We note that certain families, such as NetWalker,
may be overrepresented in our dataset due to us having
more complete data on these families. Despite this limi-
tation, we believe that our dataset provides a valuable,
if incomplete, representation of ransomware payments
over many years. This broad view provides a better re-
flection of the state of affairs than simply focusing on
a few families. We hope that this can lay the ground-
work for further public data collection in the future, and
encourage anyone to submit data at Ransomwhere [6].

4 RANSOM PAYMENT ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyze 13,497 payments to the Bitcoin
addresses owned by ransomware actors in our dataset
(see Table 1). A payment is a transaction received by
an address in our dataset. Table 2 lists the ransomware
families used by the actors in our dataset. Our dataset
contains Bitcoin addresses associated with 87 commod-
ity ransomware or RaaS actors. For reasons of brevity,
families for which our dataset contains just 1 address are
excluded from Table 2. The 16 actors that are classified
as RaaS, highlighted in Table 2, account for 7,160 out of
7,321 addresses in our dataset. As mentioned previously,
for full review our dataset is publicly available [6].

4

Figure 2: Revenue per ransomware actor.

Ransomware victims typically create an account with
a reputable exchange platform to buy Bitcoin with fiat
currency. Then, victims perform a transaction (payment)
to the address provided by the ransomware actor. In our
dataset, payment transactions to ransomware addresses
tend to originate one to two hops away from reputable
exchange platforms, such as Coinbase and Kraken.

4.1 Ransomware Revenue
In Figure 2 we list 15 ransomware families with the high-
est revenue. The top-grossing families are dominated
by RaaS: NetWalker has the highest revenue, $26.7 mil-
lion, followed by Conti ($16.4 million), REvil/Sodinokibi
($12.1 million), DarkSide ($9.1 million) and Locky ($8.1
million). All commodity actors combined account for a
total revenue of $5.5 million. Although the number of
RaaS actors is lower, they together earned $95.7 million.
Figure 3 shows the accumulated revenue of both com-
modity ransomware and RaaS actors. It shows that, from
2015 until 2019, early RaaS actors, primarily Locky, were
gaining significant but still relatively low revenues. Com-
modity actors were also active, but with even lower rev-
enues. As seen in Figure 3, RaaS revenue reached $8.2
million in April 2020. This can be primarily attributed to
NetWalker, which actively targeted hospitals and health
care institutions during the first COVID-19 lockdown in
that period [24]. Other revenue peaks caused by RaaS
groups are in May and June of 2021, with peaks of $13.5
million and $12.8 million respectively. These spikes are
caused by large ransom payments by individual victims.
One example of this is a payment to REvil/Sodinokibi
on June 1st, 2021, accounting for $11 million. This is
a payment by the Brazilian meat processing company
JBS, which dominated headlines at the time [16].

Locky has a notorious reputation as one of the biggest
ransomware strains in 2016-2017. It’s also one of the
earliest, if not the first, RaaS family. What stands out
apart from its high revenue is its address usage. The
actors behind Locky issued addresses to each new victim,

5

Figure 3: USD revenue for commodity and RaaS.

a novelty at the time. This is evident in our analysis, with
many addresses with only 2 or 3 incoming transactions.
According to French court documents, Locky’s developer
is the same individual who owned BTC-e, a fraudulent
exchange [7]. Hence, the actor was able to set up a new
address for each payment without raising compliance
alarms. Locky is an early, less sophisticated example of
a RaaS operation which would serve as an example to
many cybercriminal actors to follow.

4.2 Ransomware Payment Characteristics
RaaS actors are not only more effective in terms of
profits, but also in handling payments. They typically
have higher revenue per address, while also generating
unique addresses for victims. In Figure 4 we show the
cumulative distribution of received payments between
commodity and RaaS actors. Commodity ransomware
actors typically use single wallet addresses to receive
hundreds of ransom payments. The highest amount of
payments to a single address is 697 to AES-NI, followed
by 496 to SynAck and 441 to File-Locker. While these
are outliers, Figure 4 shows that using a single address
to receive upwards of 100 payments is not unusual.

In contrast, RaaS actors almost exclusively use a new
wallet address to receive each payment, as observed in
Figure 4 (right). An outlier is an address associated
with NetWalker which has received 138 payments. This
address is likely an intermediate payment address, com-
bining payments from many victims, discovered during
McAfee Labs’ investigation into NetWalker [35].

The distribution of unique addresses per commodity
ransomware and RaaS actor is presented in Figure 5.
In stark contrast to the revenue from ransom activities,
presented in Figure 3, the number of addresses used in
recent years are low, on the order of tens per month. We
suspect that RaaS actors prefer to create new addresses
for each new ransom payment in order to ensure their

Netwalker(Mailto)ContiREvil/SodinokibiDarkSideLockyRyukRagnar-LockerMount-LockerBlack-MatterEgregorHelloKittyBitPaymer/DoppelPaymerAES-NIDMA-Lockerv3Medusa-LockerRansomware Actor0.0M5.0M10.0M15.0M20.0M25.0MRevenue in million USD0.0M2.0M4.0M6.0M8.0M10.0M12.0M14.0MRevenue in million USDCommodity RansomwareRansomware­as­a­ServiceTotal Revenue (Commodity+RaaS)20152016201720182019202020212022Year230004600069000BTC­USD Exchange Ratethese groups have a specific interest in operational secu-
rity, as transactions usually aren’t supported by exchange
platforms. Another address format is Pay-to-Witness-
Public-Key-Hash (P2WPKH), or Segregated Witness
(SegWit) protocols, with prefix bc1q. 72 addresses in our
dataset, belonging to Conti, Netwalker, SunCrypt, Dark-
Side and HelloKitty. These are RaaS actors and could
imply that they deliberately use SegWit for additional
security instead of a traditional address format.

5 MONEY LAUNDERING ANALYSIS
In the previous section, we investigated ransom payments
by victims to ransomware actors. In the next section, we
investigate 13,097 laundering transactions in our dataset
(see Table 1) to shed light on how these actors liquidate
their illicit earnings.

5.1 Laundering Strategies
To avoid exposing their identity, ransomware actors
will usually launder their revenue. After routing funds
through one or more services to obfuscate the money trail,
it is cashed out as legal tender or monetized through the
purchase of voucher codes or physical goods. In Figure 6
we show the number of transfer transactions per address.
The number of transfer (outgoing) transactions provides
insights on how actors prefer to initialize their launder-
ing. In short, we see that RaaS actors mostly prefer to
empty the deposit address in one transaction, whereas
commodity actors prefer multiple smaller transactions,
up to hundreds, in some cases more. Hence commodity
ransomware actors are less sophisticated. For example,
three commodity ransomware actors with the most pay-
ments per address (File-Locker, SynAck, AES-NI) also
have the most outgoing transactions. While the motiva-
tion for this behavior remains unclear, given that law
enforcement scrutiny was relatively low, it is likely that
the commodity actors took advantage of the ability to
cash out more frequently with little risk. This is further
supported by their choice of laundering entities.

Almost all ransomware actors in our dataset launder
their proceedings entirely. The speed with which this
happens can be inferred from the time between the first
incoming payment to and the last outgoing transaction
from the deposit address. We define this time duration in
which ransomware actors start laundering after having
received the payment as collect-to-laundry time. Note
that this is not the total duration for caching the ransom,
but rather the time spent between start receiving the
ransom payment and transferring the payment received.
Figure 7 shows the ECDF of the collect-to-laundry time
(in days) for the commodity ransomware and the RaaS

Figure 4: ECDF of payments per address for commodity
ransomware and RaaS actors.

Figure 5: Number of unique payment addresses for com-
modity ransomware and RaaS.

pseudo-anonymity, and thus make legal investigations
and takedowns more difficult.

Moreover, our analysis shows that RaaS groups apply
better operational security practices when using native
Bitcoin functionality for wallets (payment addresses).
Bitcoin uses Bitcoin Script to handle transactions be-
tween addresses. The script type used defines the wallet
type. Pay-to-Public-Key-Hash (P2PKH) addresses have
the prefix 1. This is Bitcoin’s legacy address format and
the most common address format in our dataset with
7,339 addresses. 46 addresses in our dataset are Pay-to-
Script-Hash (P2SH) formatted, recognized by the prefix
3. To spend received payments in Bitcoin, the recipient
must specify a redeem script matching the hash. The
script can contain functionalities to increase security,
such as time-locks or requiring co-signatures. We only
observe this for select actors in our dataset: Qlocker, Net-
walker, REvil, Ryuk and Phobos. This could mean that

6

0200400600Received Payments0.00.20.40.60.81.0ProportionFile-LockerSynAckAES-NIType = commodity0200400600Received Payments NetWalker (Mailto)MedusaLockerType = RaaS24002600Commodity Ransomware AddressesRansomware-as-a-Service Addresses60080020152016201720182019202020212022Year051015202530Number of AddressesTable 3: Laundering Entities Overview

Entity
ATM / Payment Provider
Dark Market / Illegal Services
Fraudulent Exchange
Gambling
Low/Moderate ML-Risk Exchange Exchanges with strict AML/KYC policies might still be used for laundering criminal funds
Mixers
(Very) High ML-Risk Exchange
Wallet Service

Description
Payment gateways for physical/online merchants or ATMs, usually used to launder small amounts
Illegal services available on Tor or other Internet services, used to buy illegal server hosting etc.
Exchange platforms officially sanctioned by the US Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC)
Online casinos and gambling platforms, used to launder small amounts anonymously

These services take and ‘mix’ Bitcoin from various parties to obfuscate ownership
Exchanges with lax or no AML/KYC implementations are popular for money laundering
Custodial/online wallets, some might have also have privacy features such as mixers.

Evidence
[27]
[10]
[7]
[36]
[32]
[26]
[31]
[36]

dataset (Ryuk, Conti). As the illicit funds received by
RaaS are washed out quickly and, typically, in full, this
suggests that it is more difficult to track payments to
RaaS and lowering the odds of recovery.

Only a small set of families still have significant por-
tions of their proceedings on the original address. This
is the case for NetWalker, which has 20.36% still on an
address, MedusaLocker (7.98%) and WannaCry (7.92%).
In this case, it is likely that the actor has lost the private
key or is incapable to safely launder the ransom, for
example due to law enforcement scrutiny. It is known
that NetWalker’s proceedings have been seized by law en-
forcement [24], with WannaCry under heavy monitoring
and most of the laundering failed [2].

5.2 Challenges in Fighting Laundering
Contrary to popular belief, Bitcoin isn’t anonymous
but pseudo-anonymous. Forensic analysis might link a
Bitcoin address to a real-world identity, especially when
an exchange platform is used to convert between fiat
currency and Bitcoin. In most jurisdictions, legal entities
behind such platforms are held to Know Your Customer
(KYC) legislation, which requires them to verify the
identity of every user signing up on their service. During
an investigation, when known illicit Bitcoin is routed
through an exchange that requires KYC, authorities have
a chance to identify the culprit. Several industry players
support law enforcement in such AML investigations,
with technology based on clustering algorithms which
can link addresses to a service such as an exchange
platform. As seen in Figure 8, we have grouped the data
we obtained through Crystal Blockchain in a select set
of entities, which are explained in Table 3.

Laundering can involve routing illicit funds through
several hops before cashing out. As it is difficult to know
where actual ownership has terminated after several hops,
in this analysis we only regard the first hop, i.e., the first
transfer transaction. This is the service to which actors
transfer funds directly after having obtained them at the
deposit address shared with the victim. As this has the
closest link to the payment address, this is the first point
of investigation for law enforcement. An actor choosing

Figure 6: Transfer transactions per Address for com-
modity and RaaS actors.

Figure 7: Collect-to-Laundry time for commodity ran-
somware and RaaS actors.

actors in our dataset. RaaS actors have a significantly
lower collect-to-laundry time compared to commodity
actors. Typically, payments to RaaS actors are trans-
ferred away from the deposit address in the first minutes
to hours after payment. The few outliers in RaaS are
caused by NetWalker and individual addresses associated
with actors for which we have multiple addresses in our

7

0200400600Outgoing Transactions0.00.20.40.60.81.0ProportionFile-LockerSynAckAES-NIType = commodity0200400600Outgoing Transactions NetWalker (Mailto)MedusaLockerType = RaaS050010001500Days0.00.20.40.60.81.0Proportion Cryptohitman WannaCry NotPetyaType = commodity050010001500Days Ryuk NetWalker (Mailto)MedusaLockerType = RaaSthat cybercriminals have wound down the use of fraud-
ulent exchanges [29]. In a sense, commodity actors do
not partake in any systematic laundering at all, whereas
RaaS actors use fraudulent (non-KYC) exchanges and
mixers, a clear laundering strategy. Based on this, we
hypothesize that the chances of recovering payments
through law enforcement intervention are higher with
commodity ransomware than with RaaS. The services
of their choice logically leave more user traces (IP ad-
dress, login session) than mixer services and fraudulent
exchanges designed to obfuscate ownership.

When an actor’s collect-to-laundry time is high, a law
enforcement investigation may be able to successfully
recover the funds. However, in many such cases there
is less incentive to intercept transactions due to the
comparatively low ransom amounts. The speed with
which RaaS groups transfer funds out suggests criminal
sophistication, which is also reflected in their preferred
means of laundering. Given this, it is difficult to intercept
funds unless law enforcement is already involved at the
very moment the payment is made [25].

6 CONCLUSION
Ransomware is a severe, growing threat plaguing our
world. In this paper, we take a data-driven and “follow
the money” approach to characterize the structure and
evolution of the ransomware ecosystem. To this end, we
report on our experience in operating Ransomwhere, our
open crowdsourced ransomware payment tracker to col-
lect information from victims of ransomware attacks. By
analyzing a corpus of more than 13.5k ransom payments
with a total revenue of more than $101 million, we shed
light on the practices of these criminal actors over the
last years. Our analysis unveils that there are two sym-
biotic, parallel markets. Commodity ransomware actors,
and (dominant since 2019) Ransomware as a Service
(RaaS) actors. The first is operated by individuals or a
small group of programmers, the second by professional
criminals who offer it on an affiliate basis to typically
less technical criminal actors. Due to differences in vic-
timization, the first has low ransom amounts, the latter
higher ransom amounts depending on the victim profile.
Our analysis of ransom payments (all in Bitcoin) shows
that RaaS actors have adopted more sophisticated cryp-
tographic techniques, compared to commodity actors,
in their operation and typically generate one address
per victim to hide their identity. This allows RaaS to
generate more revenue and with higher level of protec-
tion, attracting more criminal groups to use RaaS to
perform high profile attacks in recent years. RaaS ac-
tors are also more efficient to launder ransom payments,

Figure 8: Pie chart of one-hop laundering entities.

to use a service implies that they trust the service, at
least enough not to disclose their identity.

Figure 8 shows the proportion of estimated USD value
of Bitcoin directly transferred (first hop) to the entities
explained in Table 3 for commodity and RaaS actors.
Due to limitations in reliably establishing (legal) entities
behind an address, the direct transactions in our dataset
account for a subset of the total revenue generated by the
actors in our dataset. Hence we report using percentages,
a best practice used with comparable datasets [39].

Our core observation is that commodity actors don’t
exhibit a specific laundering strategy, while RaaS actors
primarily use fraudulent exchanges and mixers. Mixers
are services which take in Bitcoin from cybercriminals or
simply privacy-aware users and combine these in many
transactions. Through this the accurate tracking of Bit-
coin is hindered, as every client gets their initial deposit
(minus service fee) back as a mix from other users’ Bit-
coin. Thus, it is more difficult to trace the laundering
activity of RaaS criminal actors.

When considering fraudulent exchanges together with
low- and high-risk exchanges, commodity authors seem
to prefer exchanges, and thus perhaps cash-out to fiat cur-
rency or other cryptocurrencies. It is however also known

8

(Very) High ML­RiskExchange (5.54%)ATM / PaymentProvider (1.35%)Dark Market / IllegalServices (25.13%)FraudulentExchange (11.97%)Gambling (2.24%)Low/Moderate ML­RiskExchange (40.66%)Mixer (1.99%)Wallet Service (11.12%)Commodity(Very) High ML­RiskExchange (3.36%)ATM / PaymentProvider (0.43%)FraudulentExchange (69.78%)Low/Moderate ML­RiskExchange (1.11%)Mixer (25.02%)Wallet Service (0.27%)RaaSas they move to launder funds within hours or days.
RaaS actors also transfer revenue from ransom payments
to mixers and other sophisticated laundry entities that
make difficult for law enforcement agencies to recover
ransom payments.

REFERENCES
[1] 2021. AT&T Alien Labs Open Threat Exchange. https:

//cybersecurity.att.com/open-threat-exchange.

[2] BBC. 2017. Wannacry money laundering attempt thwarted.

https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-40826056

[3] BBC. 2021. HSE cyber-attack: Irish health service still recov-
ering months after hack. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-
europe-58413448.

[4] BBC. 2021.

Swedish Coop supermarkets shut due to
US ransomware cyber-attack. https://www.bbc.com/news/
technology-57707530.

[5] Crystal Blockchain. 2021.

Crystal Expert.

https://

crystalblockchain.com/crystal-expert/.

[6] Jack Cable. 2022. Ransomwhere: A Crowdsourced Ran-
somware Payment Dataset. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
6512123

[7] Catalin Cimpanu. 2021.

BTC-e founder sentenced to
five years in prison for laundering ransomware funds.
https://www.zdnet.com/article/btc-e-founder-sentenced-to-
five-years-in-prison-for-laundering-ransomware-funds/

of

after

2021.

Dutch

cheese

run out

Computer.

supermar-
[8] Bleeping
kets
attack.
https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/dutch-
supermarkets-run-out-of-cheese-after-ransomware-attack/.
[9] U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA). 2021. Alert (AA21-209A): Top Routinely Exploited
Vulnerabilities.
https://www.cisa.gov/uscert/ncas/alerts/
aa21-209a

ransomware

[10] Europol. 2021. darkmarket: world’s largest illegal dark web
marketplace taken down. https://www.europol.europa.eu/
media-press/newsroom/news/darkmarket-worlds-largest-
illegal-dark-web-marketplace-taken-down

[11] Europol. 2021.

Ransomware: What you need to
know. https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications-events/
publications/ransomware-what-you-need-to-know.

[12] Canadian Centre for Cyber Security. 2021. Ransomware.

https://cyber.gc.ca/en/ransomware.

[13] European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). 2021.
Threat Landscape report - 2021. https://www.enisa.europa.
eu/topics/threat-risk-management/threats-and-trends.

[14] Andy Greenberg. 2018.

The Untold Story of Not-
the Most Devastating Cyberattack in History.

Petya,
https://www.wired.com/story/notpetya-cyberattack-
ukraine-russia-code-crashed-the-world/

[15] The Guardian.

2017.

Petya: how ransomware hit
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/dec/
30/wannacry-petya-notpetya-ransomware

the big time

WannaCry, Petya, Not-
in 2017.

[16] The Wall Street Journal. 2021. JBS Paid $11 Million to Re-
solve Ransomware Attack. https://www.wsj.com/articles/jbs-
paid-11-million-to-resolve-ransomware-attack-11623280781.
[17] Amin Kharraz, William Robertson, Davide Balzarotti, Leyla
Bilge, and Engin Kirda. 2015. Cutting the gordian knot: A
look under the hood of ransomware attacks. In International
Conference on Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and

9

CARBON
2.

Vulnerability Assessment. Springer, 3–24.

[18] Eric Loui

and Josh Reynolds.

2021.

SPIDER Embraces Big Game Hunting, Part
https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/carbon-spider-
embraces-big-game-hunting-part-2/.

Shortages Af-
https:

[19] Microsoft. 2021.

How cyberattacks are changing ac-
cording
to new Microsoft Digital Defense Report.
https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2021/10/11/how-
cyberattacks-are-changing-according-to-new-microsoft-
digital-defense-report/
2021.

Panic Drives Gas

[20] NPR.

ter Colonial Pipeline Ransomware Attack.
//www.npr.org/2021/05/11/996044288/panic-drives-
gas-shortages-after-colonial-pipeline-ransomware-attack.
[21] National Security Agency (NSA). 2022. 2021 Cybersecurity
Year in Review. https://www.nsa.gov/Press-Room/Press-
Releases-Statements/Press-Release-View/Article/2921744/
nsa-releases-2021-cybersecurity-year-in-review/.

[22] Australian Government Department

of Home Af-
Australia’s Ransomware Action Plan.

fairs. 2021.
https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/cyber-security-
subsite/files/ransomware-action-plan.pdf.

[23] U.S. Department of Justice. 2020. United States Files A Civil
Action To Forfeit Cryptocurrency Valued At Over One Billion
U.S. Dollars. https://www.justice.gov/usao-ndca/pr/united-
states-files-civil-action-forfeit-cryptocurrency-valued-over-
one-billion-us.

[24] U.S. Department of Justice. 2021. Department of Justice
Launches Global Action Against NetWalker Ransomware.
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/department-justice-
launches-global-action-against-netwalker-ransomware.

of

Seizes

Justice.
$2.3 Million

[25] U.S. Department
Justice
to

Department
in Cryptocurrency
of
Paid
the Ransomware Extortionists Darkside.
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/department-justice-seizes-
23-million-cryptocurrency-paid-ransomware-extortionists-
darkside.

2021.

[26] U.S. Department of Justice. 2021.

individual arrested and
charged with operating notorious darknet cryptocurrency
mixer. https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/individual-arrested-
and-charged-operating-notorious-darknet-cryptocurrency-
mixer

[27] U.S. Department of Justice. 2021.

six charged with
related to virtual currency exchange business.

crimes
https://www.justice.gov/usao-nh/pr/six-charged-crimes-
related-virtual-currency-exchange-business

[28] U.S. Department of Treasury Financial Crimes Enforce-
ment Network. 2021. Ransomware Trends in Bank Secrecy
Act Data Between January 2021 and June 2021. https:
//www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/2021-10/Financial%
20Trend%20Analysis_Ransomware%20508%20FINAL.pdf.

[29] Kris Oosthoek and Christian Doerr. 2020. Cyber Security
Threats to Bitcoin Exchanges: Adversary Exploitation and
Laundering Techniques. IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management 18, 2 (2020), 1616–1628.

[30] Masarah Paquet-Clouston, Bernhard Haslhofer, and Benoit
Dupont. 2018. Ransomware Payments in the Bitcoin Ecosys-
tem. arXiv:1804.04080 [cs.CR]

[31] Robert Poulsen. 2021.

Laundering

Money
https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-accuses-russian-of-
money-laundering-for-ryuk-ransomware-gang-11636741333

U.S. Accuses Russian of
for Ryuk Ransomware Gang.

[32] Reuters. 2022. Crypto Giant Binance Kept Weak Money-
Laundering Checks Even As It Promised Tougher Compliance,
Documents Show. https://www.reuters.com/investigates/
special-report/finance-crypto-currency-binance/

[33] Dark Web Solutions. [n.d.]. Dark Web Monitor. https://dws.

pm/.

[34] Cisco Talos. 2021. Translated: Talos’ insights from the re-
https://blog.

cently leaked Conti ransomware playbook.
talosintelligence.com/2021/09/Conti-leak-translation.html

[35] McAfee ATR Operational Intelligence Team. 2020. Take a
“NetWalk” on the Wild Side. https://www.mcafee.com/blogs/
other-blogs/mcafee-labs/take-a-netwalk-on-the-wild-side/

[36] Financial Times. 2022.

the rise of crypto laundries: how
criminals cash out of bitcoin. https://www.ft.com/content/

4169ea4b-d6d7-4a2e-bc91-480550c2f539.

[37] UK National Cyber Secuirty Centre. 2021. Mitigating malware
and ransomware attacks. https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/
mitigating-malware-and-ransomware-attacks.

[38] U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). 2021. Common
Scams and Crimes: Ransomware. https://www.fbi.gov/scams-
and-safety/common-scams-and-crimes/ransomware.

[39] Kai Wang, Jun Pang, Dingjie Chen, Yu Zhao, Dapeng Huang,
Chen Chen, and Weili Han. 2021. A Large-scale Empirical
Analysis of Ransomware Activities in Bitcoin. ACM Transac-
tions on the Web (TWEB) 16, 2 (2021), 1–29.

[40] Official Bitcoin Wiki. 2021. Blockchain attacks on privacy.

https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Privacy.

10

