2
2
0
2

n
u
J

5
2

]
T
I
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
6
6
2
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Crypto Makes AI Evolve

Behrouz Zolfaghari†, Elnaz Rabieinejad†, Abbas Yazdinejad†, Reza M. Parizi‡, Ali Dehghantanha†
†Cyber Science Lab, School of Computer Science, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada
behrouz@cybersciencelab.org, erabiein@uoguelph.ca ,ayazdine@uoguelph.ca, adehghan@uoguelph.ca
‡College of Computing and Software Engineering, Kennesaw State University, GA, USA
rparizi1@kennesaw.edu

1

Abstract—Adopting cryptography has given rise to a signiﬁcant evolution in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). This paper studies the path and
stages of this evolution. We start with reviewing existing relevant surveys, noting their shortcomings, especially the lack of a close look
at the evolution process and solid future roadmap. These shortcomings justify the work of this paper. Next, we identify, deﬁne and
discuss ﬁve consequent stages in the evolution path, including Crypto-Sensitive AI, Crypto-Adapted AI, Crypto-Friendly AI ,
Crypto-Enabled AI, Crypto-Protected AI. Then, we establish a future roadmap for further research in this area, focusing on the role of
quantum-inspired and bio-inspired AI.

Index Terms—Crypto-Inﬂuenced AI, Encrypted Neural Network, Encrypted Machine Learning, Encrypted Deep Learning,
Homomorphic Neural Network.

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

In recent decades, Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has been of
great interest to the research community [1] [2], [3]. AI
refers to the use of advanced mathematics and layers of
complex algorithms in tasks that would typically require
human intelligence, such as classiﬁcation. AI is used in a
wide variety of environments ranging from edge and cloud
computing [4] to aerospace engineering [5], remote sensing
[6], meteorology [7], and medical systems [8].

Different design objectives such as energy-efﬁciency [9],
[10], stability [11], computational performance [12], [13] and
resource constraint awareness [14] are considered in the
design of AI-based systems. However, security is probably
the most critical design objective in such systems [15] [16],
[17]. Among all security measures, which frequently appear
in the ecosystem of AI, this paper focuses on cryptography.
Cryptography is the art and science of leveraging algo-
rithms, mathematical problems and structures, secret keys,
and complex transforms to keep data conﬁdential while
being stored or transmitted. Cryptography is used in a
broad variety of applications via serving to different security
controls such as information hiding [18], authentication
[19], privacy [20]. Modern cryptography is connected with
several branches of science and technology including, but
not limited to quantum computing [21], information theory
[22] [23], chaos theory [24] and hardware technology [25],
[26] in its ecosystem. The adoption of Cryptography has
played a critical role in the evolution of AI [27] in a way that
it cannot be separated from AI anymore. Figure 1 illustrates
this role.

In Figure 1,

the overlapping parallelograms repre-
sent evolved AI after adopting crypto, to which Crypto-
Inﬂuenced AI (CIAI) in the rest of this paper. We use the
general term CIAI to refer to those AI methods, models,
algorithms and concepts that have been affected by cryp-
tography.

Fig. 1. Crypto Makes AI Evolve

There are numerous research works focusing on the
application of cryptography in secure Machine Learning
(ML) and Deep Learning (DL). However, the role of cryp-
tography in the evolution of AI has not been studied in-
depth. In fact, the current literature does not provide a
thorough understanding and a comprehensive perspective
on the impact of cryptography on the present and the
future of AI. This review is an attempt to address this gap,
which makes it pertinent to conduct a survey CIAI. Such a
survey can highlight existing trends and shed light on less-
studied aspects. Furthermore, it simpliﬁes future research
and investigation.

1.1 Objectives

In this review, we attempt to answer the following questions
via exploring the evolution path and stages of CIAI as well
as its future roadmap.

 
 
 
 
 
 
• What stages should AI go through so that it adopts

the Crypto in itself?

• What additional capabilities AI will obtain in these

stages?

• What enabling technologies will play roles in the

future of CIAI?

• What is the future expected to hold for CIAI given

existing trends in AI and cryptography?

1.2 Achievements

The achievements of this survey can be listed as follows.

1) We recognize and deﬁne the following ﬁve different

evolution stages of CIAI.

• Crypto-Sensitive AI(CSAI): Capable of de-
tecting (benign/malign) encryption in cipher-
text without decryption.

• Crypto-Adapted AI (CAAI): Capable of pro-
cessing and analyzing encrypted input data
and returning the result in encrypted form.
• Crypto-Friendly AI (CFAI): Considering that
issues such as security and privacy threaten
the use of data to train AI-based systems,
CFAI is capable of being trained on encrypted
datasets.

• Crypto-Enabled AI (CEAI): Capable of using
AI inheritance features, such as making com-
plex ciphertext, to improve encryption and
decryption in cryptographic functions.

• Crypto-Protected AI (CPAI): AI and crypto
get Interwoven. AI models get secured by
cryptographic mechanisms, and cryptogra-
phy gets more robust using AI features.

2) We review current AI trends and then predict the
inﬂuence of these trends on the future of CIAI.
Moreover, we develop a future roadmap for further
research in this area. Hereon, we anticipate the
impact of bio-inspired and quantum-inspired AI on
the future of research in this area.

1.3 Organization

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews existing relevant surveys in order to highlight their
shortcomings and clarify our motivations for the work of
this paper. Section 3 discusses the evolution path and stages.
Section 4 develops a future roadmap for further research in
this area, and lastly, Section 5 concludes the paper.

2 EXISTING SURVEYS
This section studies existing relevant surveys to shed light
on their shortcomings, which motivate the survey reported
in this paper.

2.1 Surveys on Secure AI

Secure AI refers to methods that can be used to reduce prob-
lems in the application of AI methods, such as methods for
privacy-preserving machine learning and inference. Secure
AI has been of interest to many researchers in recent years.

2

As a result, there have been several surveys published on
this topic. Most such surveys have focused on a speciﬁc
security aspect such as privacy or resilience in a speciﬁc
AI tool such as neural networks, Machine Learning (ML),
or Deep Learning (DL) [28], [29]. For example, the authors
of [30] have studied collaborative (distributed) DL from a
privacy point of view. They have discussed general cryp-
tographic algorithms and other techniques for preserving
privacy in collaborative DL. Resilient ML has been studied
in another survey with a focus on applications in networked
cyber-physical systems [31]. The latter survey argues that
resilience is a necessary property for ML algorithms used
in secure cyber-physical systems. Finally, robust ML for
secure healthcare systems has been reviewed in [32]. Var-
ious privacy-preserving scenarios in healthcare have been
investigated in [32] along with potential robust ML methods
for each scenario.

Moreover, a survey of privacy-preserving DL methods
based on multiparty computation and data encryption has
been presented in [33] with a focus on privacy in the training
and inference phases. In [33], robust DL methods have
been categorized depending on whether they use linear or
nonlinear analyses as building blocks.

Security and privacy issues in DL have been summa-
rized in [34] along with associated attack and defense
methods, focusing on adversarial attacks. In addition, the
mentioned survey discusses some related challenges and
poses some open problems regarding privacy in DL.

Another review focusing on secure AI has been reported
in [35], which studies attacks on DL models. This survey
particularly focuses on four types of attacks, namely model
inversion attack, model extraction attack, adversarial attack ,and
poisoning attack along with related essential workﬂow as
well as attack goals and adversary capabilities. Security
threats against ML, along with the related defensive tech-
niques, have been reviewed in [36]. The authors of [36]
classify existing countermeasures against ML attacks into
security assessment mechanisms, training phase countermeasures,
testing phase countermeasures, inferring phase countermeasures,
data security mechanisms, and privacy preservation. Moreover,
they highlight some related topics on which there is room
for future research. A brief overview of emerging research
problems related to secure ML, along with a survey on
current progress in this area, has been presented in another
research work [37].

A broad range of attacks are commonly conducted
against ML has been discussed by He, et al. along with
the related corresponding countermeasures [35]. In another
overview on secure ML, Liao, et al. highlighted adversarial
attacks among the most critical threats against ML models
[37].

Zhang, et al. argued that privacy is a major concern when
it comes to DL [33] due to signiﬁcant dependency on large
datasets. They discussed how progress is made in the design
of privacy-preserving DL and how further research can be
conducted in this area. In another survey, Antwi-Boasiako,
et al. observed that the idea of Collaborative DL (CDL) is
more about the training stage than the inference stage [30].
They showed in their review that privacy preservation as a
main component of CDL is improved as collusion resistant
and quantum robustness are investigated by researchers.

Moreover, they concluded that homomorphic encryption
holds an excellent promise for privacy-preserving DL, pro-
vided that the computation and communication costs are
efﬁciently managed. Olowononi, et al. highlighted resilience
as a signiﬁcant need in secure cyber-physical systems con-
sidering the increasing vulnerabilities caused by the gap
between sensors and actuators [31]. They remarked that
although AI and ML can serve the security of cyber-physical
systems, they need resilience themselves.

Qayyum, et al. investigated the vulnerabilities of ML
and DL models to adversarial attacks and recommended
some defensive approaches, including but not limited to
examining the raw data and understanding the model and
dataset’s limitations, as well as continuous monitoring and
testing [32]. In addition, there is another review on the
vulnerability of ML models to adversarial attacks [36]. The
authors of the latter report highlighted adversarial attacks as
the most emerging threats against ML and the assessment
of the vulnerability of ML to these attacks as a prominent
trend in research on this area.

2.2 Surveys on the Role of Cryptography

AI techniques can be applied to improve cryptography in
various ways. In this way, ML and DL have been adopted
for encryption and cryptoanalysis. Cryptography is the
practice of converting plaintext to a ciphertext to keep it
conﬁdential. The ciphertext should ideally avoid creating
patterns to protect data and prevent hacking. Furthermore,
AI’s ability to generate complex patterns is a good option for
cryptography and particularly for cipher generation. For ex-
ample, Arnaut, et al. showed that the multi-objective genetic
training algorithm performed was best able to classify SSH
and non-SSH trafﬁc when compared to C4.5 and k-means
algorithms on the same network as the training data [38].
However, they observed that the C4.5 training algorithm
performed better than the other algorithms when tested on
a different network from the training data.

In another work, Wang, et al. acknowledge DL becoming
desirable for classifying encrypted network trafﬁc and dis-
cuss current work in the area [39]. Indeed, they review most
of the existing work according to dataset selection, model
input design, and model architecture until they propose
some noteworthy DL-based mobile services trafﬁc classi-
ﬁcation challenges. Also, in [40], 30 state-of-the-art image
encryption classiﬁcation models have been reviewed. The
researchers found that models focus either on the security
of the techniques or on the optimization of the model. Their
optical security (PNO) system aims to resolve this issue.
They conclude that using neural network-based encryption
techniques can increase security.

A review of the literature on symbiotic relationships
between machine learning and cryptography applications
is presented in [41]. The authors demonstrate that crypto-
graphic algorithms can successfully be applied to ML is-
sues, while DL algorithms are appropriate for cryptography.
Lastly, they pay particular attention to the area of adversar-
ial robustness. Kiya also discusses progress and challenges
in privacy-preserving encryption and machine learning [42].
This paper discusses compression-then-compression (EtC)
systems and learnable encryption systems, which have been
proposed for encrypted image encryption.

3

TABLE 1
A Summary of Existing Surveys

Survey
[38]
[37]
[35]
[36]
[30]
[39]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[40]
[41]
[42]

Year
2011
2011
2019
2018
2021
2019
2021
2021
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020

Crypto General AI

Yes
No
No
No
No
yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

Roadmap
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Table 1 summarizes the surveys discussed in this section
in order to facilitate identifying their shortcomings and
comparing them to our work in this paper.

The ﬁrst column in each row of Table 1 cites one of the
surveys discussed earlier. The second column contains the
publication year of the cited survey. This column helps iden-
tify outdated surveys. The third column indicates whether
the survey focuses speciﬁcally on cryptography or other
security aspects and mechanisms. The fourth column con-
tains a ”Yes” if the survey studies the general concept of
AI (instead of focusing on ML, DL, neural networks, etc.).
The ﬁfth column shows the existence or the lack of a future
roadmap in the survey.

2.3 Motivations

The literature comes with some surveys on secure AI or the
role of AI in security, a few of which were studied earlier in
this section. However, as seen in Table 1, some of them are
too outdated for such a fast-moving research area [38] [37].
Others do not focus on the role of cryptography [35] [36].
Further, some existing surveys focus on speciﬁc aspects of
AI instead of covering the whole branch of science. Some
existing surveys fail to give directions for future research
[30] [39]. Most importantly, to the best of our knowledge,
there is no survey focusing on the evolution of AI under the
impact of cryptography. This makes it pertinent to conduct
a comprehensive surveys with the objectives discussed in
Subsection 1.1 and the achievements mentioned in subsec-
tion 1.2.

3 THE EVOLUTION PATH AND STAGES
In today’s modern world, where innovative technologies are
part of people’s daily lives and are connected to their per-
sonal information, security and privacy are one of the most
critical concerns. Hackers try to discover system vulnerabili-
ties and exploit them in various ways every day. Numerous
reports of malicious system activity, even with cryptogra-
phy, indicate that traditional cryptographic methods are not
immune to new attacks. So over time, researchers have been
looking for ways to upgrade cryptographic algorithms and
reduce systems security vulnerabilities.

AI is an extensive scientiﬁc discipline that can im-
prove cryptography and cryptoanalysis by adopting com-
plex learning, reasoning, and self-correction processes. AI

can enhance cryptography in several ways. For example,
because of its ability to generate complex patterns, AI can
produce more complex ciphertexts by maximizing diffusion
and confusion. In another example, AI tries to improve
the cryptographic algorithm by examining the power of
algorithms and the points that hackers use to break the
encryption. Therefore, according to the different roles AI can
play in cryptography, the ﬁve stages of the evolution of CIAI
can be deﬁned as CSAI, CAAI, CFAI, CEAI, and CPAI. AI
should go through these stages to adopt the Crypto in itself.
Figure 2 is a visual representation of the stages of the
evolution of CIAI. Bringing Crypto and AI together to meet
these steps is important. We can use Crypto-AI applications
to detect malign encryption, process encrypted data, train
AI models using encrypted data, advance encryption, and
protect AI systems. The evaluation should be based on
each path and its features and characteristics due to the
application-speciﬁc. In the following, we will discuss each
of these stages.

4

post-decryption detection and non-decryption detection. Since
the post-decryption detection approach is time and energy-
consuming, its application is not suggested. As a result,
researchers have been looking for an effective way to detect
attacks without the need for decryption [43], [44], [45].As
a non-decryption detecting method, AI shows remarkable
performance in detecting benign encrypted data [46].

As shown in Figure 3, CSAI refers to the type of AI that
is not only used to detect maliciously encrypted data but
also, in some cases, is used for detecting benign encrypted
data. For example, Pastor, et al. showed that ML could be
used to detect encrypted cryptomining malware in a real-
time environment [43]. They also identiﬁed network ﬂow
features that can be used in a real-time environment for
detection. In response to adversarial attacks via encrypted
network packets, Bazuhair, et al. developed a method to
generalize further a convolutional neural network [44]. They
then extracted known relevant features and encoded them
to train the DL model. Miller, et al. described a framework
that can identify whether a packet is from a VPN or an
original IP in real-time via a multilayer perceptron neural
network [47]. Yu, et al. developed a method for detection
of malicious encrypted trafﬁc via a neural network for
detection and used multilayer autoencoder networks to
extract features [48]. They also investigated the inﬂuence
of dataset imbalance on outcomes in encrypted trafﬁc detec-
tion. Moreover, Wright, et al. created a system that classiﬁes
components of a program as either related to or not related
to cryptography [45]. Using an artiﬁcial neural network,
the authors classiﬁed functional blocks from a disassembled
program based on cryptography-relation

Fig. 2. The Evolution Stages of CIAI

3.1 CSAI

As security and privacy concerns grow, the usage of encryp-
tion in data has increased signiﬁcantly. While encryption
improves data security and privacy, it also covers hackers’
malicious and illegal behaviors on the data. Detecting mali-
cious behaviour and attacks on encrypted data is difﬁcult
due to the complexity of ciphertext. Detection of attacks
on encrypted data is divided into two general categories:

Fig. 3. CSAI Capable of Detecting Benign and Malign Encryption in Input
Data

In another research, the authors used graph embeddings
and ML to detect cryptography misuse in source code
[49]. The authors compare node2vec, graph embedding
techniques, and Bag of Graphs as embedding generators
of source code graph representations. The main goal is to
detect cryptography misuses in source code by combining
these techniques with ML models. Finally, they showed that
Bag of Graphs outperformed node2vec in this task; also,
both techniques outperformed previously evaluated tools.

To summarize, different AI methods, including ML and
DL, are capable of seeing attacks through encryption. In
other words, the knowledge that AI methods gain from
extracting and analyzing relevant features causes malign
encrypted data to be identiﬁed. Furthermore, CSAI makes
it possible to efﬁciently detect the malicious behaviour of
hackers hiding behind complex encryption.

3.2 CAAI

Analyzing and processing privacy-sensitive data has always
been a concern for customers. Traditional data analysis
methods only can process the plain text form of data and
information. Converting the encrypted data to plain text not
only threatens data privacy but also is cost-consuming. As
we can see in Figure 4, different AI methods, including ML
and DL, are effective and accurate methods capable of an-
alyzing and computing encrypted input data and returning
the result in encrypted form. In this regard, Zhou, et al. pro-
posed a deep binarized convolutional neural network over
encrypted data [50]. They binarized input data and weights
of the model. Additionally, all operations in the model were
changed to bit-wise operations. Using this, they achieved a
speedup of 6.3 times that of current schemes. Further, in [51]
the authors of been performed cryptanalysis using neural
networks and achieved hit rates of 99.5% with a two-level
neural network when classifying ﬁle type of stream ciphers
in depth using neural networks. In another work, Badawi,
et al. created a homomorphic convolutional neural network
that employed GPUs to perform calculations on encrypted
data quickly [52]. They evaluated two CNNs to classify
the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets homomorphically, and
their solution achieved a sufﬁcient security level. Similarly,
Pradeepthi, et al. use ML to identify the encryption algo-
rithm of encrypted text with over 90% accuracy [53]. Okada,
et al. compared three ML algorithms, Naive Bayes, Support
Vector Machine, and C4.5 decision tree, for classifying en-
crypted trafﬁc [54]. They observed that the support vector
machine achieved the highest accuracy at 97.2%. In research
by Muliukha, et al., they use ML to classify encrypted-
SSL session applications [55]. Moreover in another work,
Khan, et al. found that supervised ML performed better than
unsupervised ML when processing encrypted data [56].

Fig. 4. CAAI Capable of Processing Encrypted Input Data

Another application of AI on encrypted data is image
recovery. In response to growing security concerns sur-
rounding cloud computing, Kitayama, et al. show that it is
possible to extract histograms-of-oriented-gradients features
encrypted then compressed images [57]. Additionally, in
VPN connections they were able to classify user actions. T.

5

Hazra developed an image retrieval for encrypted images.
Their solution involves creating a database of features and
then having the images be reconstructed by a ML algorithm
[58].

However, it is important to remember that many ap-
plications of encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation are malicious.
Msadek, et al. show that it is possible to perform IoT
ﬁngerprinting attacks via ML [59]. They train machine-
learning algorithms based on selected features extracted
from the encrypted IoT trafﬁc to perform the ﬁngerprint
attack. Also, Liu, et al. show that it is possible to identify
a user’s behavior from features extracted from encrypted
surveillance video trafﬁc with 94% accuracy [60].

One particular area of interest is video quality prediction
from encrypted trafﬁc. Orsolic, et al. show that it is possible
to predict the quality of experience for video streaming from
only monitoring encrypted network data with 84% accuracy
[61]. Seddigh, et al. continue the development of MLTAT,
a network classiﬁcation platform, that is now capable of
achieving 90% accuracy when identifying network trafﬁc at
10Gbps [62].

In [63], the authors proposed ML-based delay-aware
UAV detection and operation mode identiﬁcation over En-
crypted Wi-Fi trafﬁc. The suggested framework extracts
feature derived only from packet size and inter-arrival time
of encrypted Wi-Fi trafﬁc and can efﬁciently detect UAVs
and identify their operation modes. Also, Al-Hababi, et al.
were able to perform a man-in-the-middle attack in a lab
setting on various social media platforms using encrypted
trafﬁc such as YouTube, WhatsApp and Skype [64]. They
were able to classify trafﬁc vs noise with high accuracy
for all three platforms. Jackson, et al. were able to identify
different classes of requests to an Amazon Echo via random
forest ML from encrypted trafﬁc with a 97% accuracy [65].
However, the ML model requires more computation to be
trained. Alshammari, et al. used several different algorithms
to identify SSH trafﬁc in encrypted trafﬁc [66]. They found
that C4.5 was the best suited of their tested algorithms,
achieving a tested detection rate of 83.7% but potentially
as high as 97%.

Leroux, et al. demonstrate that it is possible to identify
what encrypted trafﬁc is in an IPsec or TOR tunnel using
ML [67]. Seufert, et al. use a random forest model to predict
video stalling with high accuracy from encrypted network
trafﬁc to allow for quality of experience analysis in real-time
[68]. Their model is capable of predicting within 1s.

By and large, one of the most heavily researched ar-
eas of CAAI is encrypted trafﬁc. In this regard, He, et
al. show that Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent
neural networks can outperform traditional autoregressive
integrated moving average models in identifying encrypted
video trafﬁc [69]. Similarly, in [70], the authors considered
UAV detection over Encrypted Wi-Fi trafﬁc. This UAV de-
tection method extracts statistical features derived only from
packet size and inter-arrival time of encrypted Wi-Fi trafﬁc
and can quickly identify UAV types. The evaluation results
show that their proposed method can identify the tested
UAVs within 0.15-0.35s with high accuracy of 85.7-95.2%.
Wassermann, et al. developed ViCrypt, which uses ML
to analyze encrypted video trafﬁc to predict performance
indicators, including but not limited to stalling and video

bitrate [71]. Suh, et al. use fully homomorphic encryption
alongside control synthesis. They demonstrate that their
methods cause minimal reductions in precision [72].

Mobile encrypted trafﬁc has also been studied. Aceto,
et al. propose DL as a viable method for network classiﬁ-
cation in the rapidly changing mobile network space [73].
To address the challenges of identifying BitTorrent trafﬁc
in TCP tunnels Cruz, et al. developed a recurrent neural
network that uses the statistical behavior of the tunnel to
identify BitTorrent trafﬁc [74]. Lu Vu, et al. created a time
series analysis technique to identify important features of
the packets [75]. They then used this technique alongside
a ML model to identify various encrypted network trafﬁc
with an average F1 score of 98%.

Alternatively, Shen, et al. developed DeepQoE, which is
capable of measuring the quality of experience of encrypted
network trafﬁc using a convolutional neural network [76].
This provided a 22% increase over other state-of-the-art
video quality of experience predictors on encrypted trafﬁc
at the time.

In [77], offered a multi-view DL model for encrypted
trafﬁc classiﬁcation, which uses different neural network
structures to process different types of features. Likewise,
the authors of [78] detect anomalies in Encrypted trafﬁc
via deep dictionary learning as D2LAD. The experimen-
tal results show that their method achieves high accuracy
and low resource usage and outperforms the representative
state-of-the-art techniques in real-world settings.

Wang, et al. use three interpolation schemes derived
from nearest value, bilinear and bicubic to reduce encrypted
network packets down to constant size [79].

Soleymanpour, et al. provided a DL method for en-
crypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation on the Web [80]. The authors
adopted a cost-sensitive CNN and considered a cost for each
classiﬁcation according to the distribution of classes. The
neural network uses these costs for the training process to
improve the overall accuracy. Compared to the Deep Packet
method, the proposed model obtained higher classiﬁcation
performance (about 2% on average) based on the empirical
results. Chen, et al. developed PlaidML-HE, which allows
for the automatic creation of homomorphic encryption ker-
nels on many different devices by using domain-speciﬁc
languages [81]. Furthermore, they show that PlaidML-HE
signiﬁcantly reduces the runtime of MLaaS using it com-
pared to existing implementations of the time. Aceto, et
al. then showed that the application of big data does not
improve the time needed for the training phase of trafﬁc
classiﬁcation DL, despite its ability to accelerate other tasks
[82].

In another research,

the authors have discussed a
service-centric segment routing mechanism using reinforce-
ment learning for Encrypted trafﬁc [83]. They proposed
a novel service-centric segment routing mechanism using
reinforcement learning in the context of encrypted trafﬁc.
Their proposal aims to help ISPs decrease the network
problems’ inﬂuence and meet the strict user requirement
related toQuality of Experience.

To tackle the rapid evolution of network trafﬁc diversity,
the authors of [84] proposed a DL-based network encrypted
trafﬁc classiﬁcation and intrusion detection framework. This
is a lightweight framework with DL for encrypted traf-

6

ﬁc classiﬁcation and intrusion detection, termed deep-full-
range. Wang, et al. use three DL schemes to create encrypted
data classiﬁers [85]. They use these data classiﬁers in their
software-deﬁned network home gateway framework, in-
tended to manage smart home networks better.

Moreover, Hou, et al. show that it is possible to predict
a user’s activity from their encrypted wireless trafﬁc with
up to a 99.17% accuracy [86]. Additionally, Shen, et al. show
that packet length statistics, when combined with clustering
methods based on the similarities of the initial incoming and
outgoing packets with certain ﬂags from the same website,
can be Incorporated into ML models [87]. They refer to this
process as Bali. Their experimental results show that ML
models using Bali can achieve an accuracy of 79.4%, an
improvement over CUMUL and APPS methods.

To sum up, to protect data against security risks, re-
searchers have explored novel ML and DL methods to
process privacy-sensitive data over ciphertext. Due to the
use of ML and DL on encrypted data, CAAI has various
applications, including identifying encryption algorithms,
image recovery, examining the normal and abnormal be-
haviour of Wi-Fi trafﬁc, and predicting the quality of video
streams by monitoring encrypted network data.

3.3 CFAI

In the modern era and with the advancement of informa-
tion and communication technology, AI applications have
penetrated many ﬁelds. One of the most critical factors
required for the accurate performance of models based on
AI is the availability of sufﬁcient data for model training.
However, making data available has legal, security, and
privacy issues. In this regard, CFAI has been of interest to
several researchers in recent years. As we can see in Figure
5, to solve mentioned problems related to data availability,
CFAI has made it possible for people to upload their training
data in encrypted form and create an encrypted model. For
instance, Mokel, et al. showed that it is possible for a convo-
lutional neural network acting on encrypted data to produce
an identical accuracy order to that of a convolutional neu-
ral network working on plain data [88]. They considered
training neural networks over encrypted data designing
convolutional neural network classiﬁers when data in their
basic form are not accessible because of the privacy policy.
Also, the authors of [89] show that it is possible to achieve
a 50x speedup of DL on encrypted data by optimizing the
open-source library HElib. Their networks still maintain an
acceptable accuracy of 96% via implementing a Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) based neural network training.

Fig. 5. CFAI Capable of Being Trained on Encrypted Datasets

In another work, Xu, et al. propose a Crypto Neu-
ral Network that uses the emerging functional encryption

scheme to allow for training over encrypted data [90]. Their
CryptoNN framework employed the emerging functional
encryption scheme instead of secure multi-party compu-
tation (SMC) or homomorphic encryption (HE) to train
a neural network model. Their models’ accuracy on the
MNIST dataset is similar to other networks. In another
work, the same researchers developed another framework
that uses encrypted multi-sourced datasets to train neural
networks [91]. Their method signiﬁcantly reduces the time it
takes to train a neural network. When tested on the MNIST
datasets, their model’s accuracy was similar to other neural
networks. Also, they found that the depth and complexity
of neural networks do not impact the training time despite
introducing a privacy-preserving.

F. Gonzalez-Serrano, et al. train ML models on encrypted
data by exploiting the partial homomorphic property of
certain cryptosystems [92]. They use multiple-key cryp-
tosystems and the impact of quantizing real-valued input
data required before encryption. Finally, Bost, et al. devel-
oped three classiﬁcation protocols for Naive Bayes, deci-
sions trees, and hyperplane decisions provide the privacy
that relies on a library of building blocks for constructing
classiﬁers securely [93]. They also show the potential for this
library to implement other classiﬁers such as a multiplexer
or a face detection classiﬁer.

CFAI, as the third stage of CIAI evolution, in addition
to detecting malign encryption and processing encrypted
data,
is capable of training DL and ML models using
encrypted datasets. As can be seen from the results, the
accuracy obtained from the models taught on the encrypted
dataset is equal to that used in the plain dataset. Moreover,
training DL and ML models using encrypted datasets leads
to improved data privacy protection.

3.4 CEAI

Fig. 6. CEAI Capable of Encrypting and Decrypting Input Data

7

the Evolution Stages of CIAI, can reduce the possibility
of breaking ciphertexts by producing complex patterns. In
this method, cryptography can be employed for securing
ﬁrmware, proprietary IP, and sensitive data, especially in
embedded systems. According to Figure 6, CEAI embeds
cryptography into neural networks and other AI models
for advanced encryption and decryption on input data.
For instance, in [94] has proposed cryptography embedded
on the convolutional neural network (CNN) accelerator as
CREMON model. CREMON is a reconﬁgurable system with
a cryptography reconﬁgurable processing element (CRPE).
Moreover, protecting nonvolatile memories from having
their trained neural network parameters extracted via a
conﬁdentiality attack is becoming increasingly important
[95]. Cai, et al. propose using a runtime encryption scheme
and a sparse fast gradient encryption scheme together to
ensure conﬁdentiality [96] [95]. They provide variants of
the encryption method to better ﬁt quantized models and
various mapping strategies. The experiments demonstrate
that the NN models can be strictly protected by encrypting
a tiny proportion of the weights.

Key exchanging is a major step of cryptography. Exten-
sive studies have been conducted to ﬁnd a suitable protocol
for secure key exchange, such as the Difﬁe–Hellman key
exchange protocol. These traditional key exchange proto-
cols are based on algebraic number theory. Many of these
protocols are not suitable for practical use due to security,
privacy and efﬁciency problems. In this way, in [97] au-
thors proposed a novel method based on the Tree Parity
Machine(TPM) to share a key between sender and receiver
securely. They adopted Vector-Valued Tree Parity Machine
(VVTPM), which is more secure and efﬁcient than basic
TPM in real-life systems. Secure key sharing is a signiﬁcant
concern in e-health. To eliminate this concern, the authors
in [98] proposed a novel method based on TPM to prevent
man-in-the-middle attacks in sharing patients’ information.
This proposed method gained higher performance in terms
of protection, reliability, and efﬁciency than existing key
sharing schemes.

As observed in all previous evolution stages, AI and
cryptography were two separate methods, and AI was used
to perform a process on encrypted data. In contrast, this
stage is the starting point for AI and cryptography to begin
to integrate. In this stage, AI inheritance features, includ-
ing learning, generating complex patterns, etc., are used
to improve cryptography. CEAI allows for more advanced
applications of AI models, such as public-key encryption,
key distribution, hash generation, etc.

Despite the widespread use of AI in cryptography and
reducing its vulnerabilities, it still poses dangers. Hack-
ers try to break data encryption by designing complex
attacks. They often try to extract plaintext according to
the patterns in ciphertext to break the encryption. There-
fore, there is a need for a tool that can use complex
and unpredictable computations to enhance cryptographic
security. In this area, researchers have studied the appli-
cation of AI in strong cryptography and have achieved
excellent results. Various features in AI algorithms such
as self-learning, mutual learning, and stochastic learning
are helpful encryption. CEAI, which is the next step of

3.5 CPAI

After exploring different approaches to cryptography and
AI, the researchers found that the two technologies could
not be considered separately to achieve the highest security
and performance. This has led to the belief that the inter-
twining of AI and cryptography can effectively maintain
security and privacy. As a result, a new concept called CPAI,
which is demonstrated in Figure 7 has been formed.

To show how CPAI is formed, we show how crypto
undergoes changes to be adoptable by AI, and how AI is
upgraded to adopt crypto.

8

proach is passwordless and eliminates the third party in
enforcing ML transactions. To estimate their a proposed
approach, they perform exploratory ML transactions on the
IoT board and estimate the computation time for each trans-
action. The experimental results indicate that their proposed
approach can address security issues in ML computation
with low time consumption.

In another work, Behera, et al. use homomorphically
encrypted input data with a ML model to get encrypted
output data from the same model [108].

Chen, et al. suggest a decentralized privacy-preserving
DL model for vehicular ad-hoc networks to address privacy
and data security concerns in data analysis [109]. This is
done using blockchain, fully homomorphic encryption, and
DL. Also, Paul, et al. use homomorphic encryption with a
long short-term memory DL model to provide better data
privacy when using ML in healthcare setting [110]. Privacy
concerns in robotic systems led Chen, et al. to suggest
and demonstrate that a privacy-preserving DL model with
homomorphic encryption for use in robotic systems can
address these concerns efﬁciently [111].

[112],

The authors of

focus on DL with chaotic
encryption-based secured ethnicity recognition. They pro-
pose an ethnicity recognition (ER) model based on con-
volution neural networks (CNNs). Additionally, a chaotic
encryption-based blind digital image watermarking tech-
nique is applied to recognized security images. Cover im-
ages are used to conceal the recognized image to protect the
images from attackers or third parties. Likewise, in [113], it
has been considered privacy-preserving distributed learning
clustering of healthcare data using cryptography protocols.
With the aim of enabling a privacy-preserving version of
the clustering algorithm, along with sub-protocols for secur-
ing computations, they were able to handle the clustering
of vertically partitioned data among the healthcare data
providers.

Sirchotedumrong, et al. propose a privacy-preserving
scheme for deep neural networks for images encryption that
also allows for data augmentation [114]. Cantoro, et al. show
that various encryption mechanisms increase resilience and
fault detection on artiﬁcial neural networks [115].

Another common approach to privacy preservation in
the research is using pixel-based encryption. Sirichotedum-
rong, et al. developed a privacy-preserving scheme for deep
neural networks that can be used on images that lack visual
information and also have independent encryption keys
[116]. Their experiments show that this scheme defends
against ciphertext-only attacks and has high classiﬁcation
performance. Sirichotedumrong, et al. developed a similar
privacy-preserving scheme for neural networks that did not
require common encryption keys [117].

There are some other potentially promising CPAI in the
research. Emmanuel, et al. propose using selected gradients
only for encryption in order to reduce overhead costs of
privacy-preservation in distributed deep neural networks
[118]. Sun, et al. present a fully homomorphic encryption
scheme that improves on HElib. Their scheme reduces the
ciphertext size via relinearization and reduces decryption
and modulus noise via modulus switching [119]. Addition-
ally, we can mention to Li, et al. that they developed a
lightweight protection scheme via processing in memory

Fig. 7. CPAI

3.5.1 Crypto moving towards AI

AI can improve attack detection techniques and create more
robust cryptography such as homomorphic encryption. Ho-
momorphic encryption algorithms are a type of encryp-
tion algorithm designed to allow mathematical operations
to be performed on encrypted data. In this regard, the
authors in [99] developed an expansion on the original
TFHE scheme for fully homomorphic encryption. Their
new library, WTFHE, is implemented in Ruby to be quick
to implement and verify functionality. Their method can
be speedily veriﬁed before being implemented as a high-
performance library. Moreover, Arita, et al. created the
FHE4GHT scheme for homomorphic encryption, which is
capable of computing the greater-than bit of an encryption
key [100]. In other words, it can homomorphically classify a
given encrypted data without decrypting it, using machine-
learned parameters.

In another work, the authors analyzed the robustness
of pixel-based image encryption against ciphertext-only at-
tacks [101]. They found that the original image could be
constructed when the attack has used the images generated
using models trained by the same encryption key. However,
this was not true for images generated using models trained
by multiple encryption keys. Similarly, in [102], the authors
proposed a fully homomorphic encryption scheme to calcu-
late the encrypting of the great than bit without needing the
secret key.

3.5.2 AI moving towards Crypto

CPAI uses cryptography to protect AI models by preserving
the privacy of the training set and the model’s parameters.
Homomorphic encryption has proven to be very effec-
tive in CPAI. Dalvi, et al. demonstrate that it is possible to
protect a vulnerable neural network from a backdoor attack
using homomorphic encryption [103]. Moreover, Phong, et
al. combined DL and additively homomorphic encryption to
create a privacy-preserving DL system with tolerable over-
head that does not leak information to a server [104]. Also,
in [105], the authors improve the preserve privacy in DL via
fully homomorphic encryption alongside a convolutional
neural network. They argue that this is important in DL
models regarding image recognition to protect user privacy.
In addition, Pedzisz, et al. created a homomorphic feed-
forward network [106]. With two layers, one exponential
and hidden the other for logarithmic prepossessing. This
network is intended for adaptive nonlinear ﬁltering. They
prove that their proposed network is a competitive alter-
native to sigmoidal feed-forward networks. Also, in [107],
the authors use securing ML engines in IoT applications
with attribute-based encryption. Indeed, their proposed ap-

and physically unclonable functions to prevent unautho-
rized access of data and limit edge devices to protect DL
models in the cloud [120]. Also, Chi, et al. developed audio
encryption techniques to allow audio data to be protected
in unprotected environments [121]. Additionally, they en-
sure that the encryption technique is compatible with ML
algorithms used in unprotected environments. In another
work, Lisin, et al. suggest potential uses of order-preserving
encryption for privacy-preserving ML models, such as gra-
dient boosting [122]. Indeed, they considered some existing
order-preserving encryption schemes and suggested some
cases of ML, where they can be applied to obtain cor-
rectly working privacy-preserving ML algorithms. Privacy
protection is a major concern in AI. One of the research’s
solutions to this problem is homomorphic encryption. Li,
et al. present HomoPAI, which can securely manage and
parallel process data from multiple owners [123]. Next, Kuri,
et al. present a model for privacy-preserving extreme ML
[124]. This model can learn from additively homomorphic
encrypted data. Additionally, Madi, et al. propose the novel
Federated Learning Model that is secure from integrity and
conﬁdentiality threats from an aggregation server [125].
This is done by performing a federated averaging operation
using veriﬁable computing and homomorphic encryption in
the encrypted domain. The model’s effectiveness is veriﬁed
on the FEMNIST dataset.

4 CIAI FUTURE ROADMAP

research on CIAI will move to-
We anticipate that
wards crypto-inﬂuenced quantum-inspired AI and crypto-
inﬂuenced bio-inspired AI in the near future. Our reason
for such anticipation is the existence of trends towards en-
crypted AI-based post-quantum cryptography, bio-inspired
AI, and quantum-inspired AI, which are discussed in Sub-
sections 4.1 and 4.2, respectively. Figure 8 illustrates the
future roadmap of secure quantum AI. As we can see
in the Figure 8, bio-science and quantum computing are
new sciences that have gained researchers’ attention due
to improving existing challenges in various applications. In
this way, researchers seek to combine the feature of these
sciences with AI to create a more efﬁcient and more intel-
ligent version of AI. Because of the novelty of bio-inspired
AI and quantum-inspired AI, they haven’t been used for
cryptography by now. In the following, we will explore the
potential of bio-inspired AI and quantum-inspired AI for
cryptography.

4.1 Bio-Inspired AI

Bio-inspired AI is a new approach to AI which is inspired
by evolution. The traditional AI approach has a top-down
view and follows the creation approach. In comparison,
Bio-inspired AI has a bottom-up view and is inspired
by a wide range of biological systems. In this way, Bio-
inspired AI is capable of Independent self-organization. Bio-
inspired AI has versatile applications, including biorobotics,
immune systems, evolutionary computation, genetic algo-
rithm, swarm intelligence, etc [126]. In the direction of Bio-
Inspired AI, we review some related research. Yuan, et al.
demonstrate the effectiveness of bio-inspired representation

9

Fig. 8. The Future Roadmap

learning for visual attention prediction [127]. Their imple-
mentation uses bio-inspired ML after feature attraction to
combine the high-level semantic features with the low-level
contrast features. This allows them to use low-level contrast
features to generate a visual attention prediction better than
other models. Moreover, Xu, et al. developed a framework
for predicting facial aesthetics [128]. They ﬁrst performed
experiments to determine regions of interest. Then a convo-
lutional neural network is used to train a set of bio-inspired
features.

In another research, Tu, et al. developed a reinforcement
learning model to allow for animal movement in robots
[129]. This model partially or fully takes control of a con-
troller when attempting an animal-like movement such as
turning upside down. They then built a hummingbird robot
capable of performing a 360 body ﬂip within one wingspan,
outperforming other models. Similarly, the authors of [130]
use bio-inspired metaheuristic algorithms, such as particle
swarm optimization, to optimize many different ML for
classifying mail as spam or not. Again, they demonstrate
that their results are competitive with other ML models for
spam detection.

Lehnert, et al. use retina physiology to create input

data for a reinforcement learning network for autonomous
navigation [131]. They then use auxiliary tasks to generate
sparse rewards to allow continuous learning. They found
that the auxiliary tasks added robustness to the system in a
simulated environment.

The technology for creating bio-inspired AI is improv-
ing. Yang, et al. demonstrate that a bio-inspired self-learning
method can be used to solve dynamic multiobjective op-
timization problems in an IoT environment [132]. They
demonstrate the feasibility of their method on agricultural
IoT systems. Their results show that their method outper-
forms traditional methods, especially for high-dimension
problems. Also, Duan, et al. developed BOLE to facili-
tate the learning of bio-inspired optimization algorithms
[133]. BOLE is an interactive learning environment based
in MatLab that facilitates learning bio-inspired optimization
algorithms and is dedicated exclusively to unmanned aerial
vehicle path planning with enhancing learning efﬁciency.

Cipher attacks will get more complex and unpredictable
in the future. Therefore, there is a vital need to advance
defence methods to improve security. As we discussed, bio-
inspired AI creates versatile facilities in different applica-
tions. So, bio-inspired AI can be used to enhance cryptog-
raphy against upcoming cyber threats. For instance, the ge-
netic algorithm can be adopted to design cryptographic pro-
tocols, cryptoanalysis and cryptographic primitives [134],
[135]. In another example, some evolutionary algorithms,
such as ant colony and swarm, can be used to advance
encryption [136]. Outstanding features of bio-inspired AI
offer a variety of opportunities to cope with emerging
cryptography attacks in the future.

4.2 Quantum-Inspired AI

Although AI has made much progress in recent years, there
are still some challenges, such as reasoning under uncer-
tainty, adaptive ML and neuromorphic cognitive models.
Quantum-inspired AI, which means using quantum com-
puting for ML and DL algorithms, is one of the solutions
that can help AI level up and overcome these challenges.
Quantum-inspired AI can improve AI in terms of improving
the decision-making process in complex problems, optimiz-
ing ML algorithms, and rapid training of ML models [137],
[138]. Quantum-inspired AI has begun to show promising
results in many applications. As an example in this space,
Y. Li et al. use quantum-inspired reinforcement learning to
plan the trajectory of unmanned aerial vehicles [139]. The
trajectory planning problem is optimized via the quantum-
inspired reinforcement learning (QiRL) approach. Speciﬁ-
cally, the QiRL method adopts a novel probabilistic action
selection policy and new reinforcement strategy, which are
inspired by the collapse phenomenon and amplitude am-
pliﬁcation in quantum computation theory, respectively. In
another work, Wei, et al. applied a quantum-inspired expe-
rience relay to traditional deep reinforcement learning [140].
Using this, they showed on Atari 2600 games that deep
reinforcement learning with a quantum-inspired experience
relay had better training efﬁciency than its competitors.

Masuyama, et al. develop two quantum-inspired multi-
directional associative memories [141]. The ﬁrst uses a one-
shot learning model, and the second uses a self-convergent

10

iterative learning model. They use these models to show
the advantages of quantum-inspired multidirectional as-
sociative memory, such as stability and reliability. More-
over, Dong, et al. present a quantum-inspired reinforcement
learning algorithm for autonomous robot navigation [142].
Their simulated experiments show that this approach is
more robust than traditional reinforcement learning algo-
rithms.

Finally, Patel, et al. developed a quantum-inspired fuzzy-
based neural network for classiﬁcation between two classes
[143]. Neurons are added to the hidden layer via fuzzy c-
means clustering, with the fuzziness parameter being devel-
oped from quantum computing. Additionally, this network
uses a modiﬁed step activation function. Their experiments
showed that this network was competitive and superior to
current state-of-the-art methods.

According to the quantum-inspired AI developments,
we will see its applications in cryptography soon. Each
quantum computing and AI have a signiﬁcant role in
improving cryptography. Quantum computing can process
large volumes of data at a speed that was not possible with
traditional methods. Because AI becomes smarter with more
data analyzed, AI algorithms become more accurate, more
quickly, with quantum. The popularity of the quantum-
inspired AI method for cryptography is not limited to the
high speed of learning ML models and data processing. This
method can use AI features to more quickly and accurately
predict, detect, and neutralize attacks.

5 CONCLUSION

AI has evolved extensively under the impact of cryptog-
raphy. It started from CSAI, which was primarily used to
detect malicious data, to CPAI, which now uses cryptogra-
phy to protect the privacy of AI models and their datasets.
Crypto-AI is now moving into two new research areas,
including quantum-inspired and bio-inspired. This paper
attempted to determine CIAI evolution stages, including
Crypto AI and covered CSAI, CAAI, CFAI, CEAI, and CPAI.
Also, a future roadmap was discussed to shed more light on
quantum-inspired AI and bio-inspired AI technologies for
making a new trend in cryptography. Finally, we discussed
how these technologies could turn cryptography into a
secure and efﬁcient version.

REFERENCES

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

G. Chen, G. Chen, and Y. Lou, “Diagonal recurrent neural
network-based hysteresis modeling,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.
J. Ji, Z. Chen, and C. Yang, “Convolutional neural network with
sparse strategies to classify dynamic functional connectivity,”
IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics (Early Access
Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.
Y. Hailemariam, A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, G. Srivastava, and
A. Dehghantanha, “An empirical evaluation of ai deep explain-
able tools,” in 2020 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps, 2020,
pp. 1–6.
Y. Huang, X. Qiao, P. Ren, L. Liu, C. Pu, S. Dustdar, and J. Chen,
“A lightweight collaborative deep neural network for the mobile
web in edge cloud,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing (Early
Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2020.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

Y. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Wu, H. Cai, and H. Yokoi, “Adaptive neural
network control of a ﬂexible spacecraft subject to input nonlin-
earity and asymmetric output constraint,” IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks and Learning Systems (Early Access Article), pp.
1–1, 2021.
T. Li, H. Shen, Q. Yuan, and L. Zhang, “A locally weighted
neural network constrained by global training for remote sensing
estimation of pm2.5,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.
Z. Zhang, S. Yang, S. Liu, B. Xiao, and X. Cao, “Ground-based
cloud detection using multiscale attention convolutional neural
network,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters (Early Access
Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.
Z. Zhang, G. Chen, and S. Yang, “Ensemble support vector recur-
rent neural network for brain signal detection,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (Early Access Article), pp.
1–1, 2021.
S. Zhao, J. Yang, and M. Sawan, “Energy-efﬁcient neural network
for epileptic seizure prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[10] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, Q. Zhang, and K.-
K. R. Choo, “An energy-efﬁcient sdn controller architecture for
iot networks with blockchain-based security,” IEEE Transactions
on Services Computing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 625–638, 2020.

[11] H. Ran, S. Wen, Q. Li, Y. Cao, K. Shi, and T. Huang, “Compact
and stable memristive visual geometry group neural network,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (Early
Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.
S. Allahabadi, H. Iman-Eini, and S. Farhangi, “Fast artiﬁcial
neural network based method for estimation of the global maxi-
mum power point in photovoltaic systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[12]

[13] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Bohlooli, A. Dehghantanha, and
K.-K. R. Choo, “A high-performance framework for a network
programmable packet processor using p4 and fpga,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 156, p. 102564, 2020.
[14] Y. Huang, X. Qiao, P. Ren, L. Liu, C. Pu, S. Dustdar, and J. Chen,
“A lightweight collaborative deep neural network for the mobile
web in edge cloud,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing (Early
Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2020.

[15] M. Li, S. S. M. Chow, S. Hu, Y. Yan, S. Chao, and Q. Wang,
“Optimizing privacy-preserving outsourced convolutional neu-
ral network predictions,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and
Secure Computing (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2020.

[16] H. Zheng, H. Hu, and Z. Han, “Preserving user privacy for
machine learning: Local differential privacy or federated machine
learning?” IEEE Intelligent Systems (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1,
2021.

[17] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, M. Hammoudeh,
H. Karimipour, and G. Srivastava, “Block hunter: Federated
learning for cyber threat hunting in blockchain-based iiot net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pp. 1–1, 2022.
[18] L. Xiong, X. Han, C.-N. Yang, and Y.-Q. Shi, “Robust reversible
watermarking in encrypted image with secure multi-party based
on lightweight cryptography,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems for Video Technology (Early Access Article), 2021.

[19] P. Parida, C. Pradhan, X.-Z. Gao, D. S. Roy, and R. K. Barik, “Im-
age encryption and authentication with elliptic curve cryptogra-
phy and multidimensional chaotic maps,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp.
76 191–76 204, 2021.

[20] M. A. Al-Shareeda, M. Anbar, S. Manickam, A. Khalil, and I. H.
Hasbullah, “Security and privacy schemes in vehicular ad-hoc
network with identity-based cryptography approach: A survey,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 121 522 – 121 531, 2021.

[21] K. Bibak, R. Ritchie, and B. Zolfaghari, “Everlasting security of
quantum key distribution with 1k-dwcdm and quadratic hash,”
Quantum Information and Computing, vol. 21, no. 3&4, pp. 181–202,
2021.

[22] B. Zolfaghari, K. Bibak, and T. Koshiba, “The odyssey of entropy:

Cryptography,” Entropy, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1–27, 2022.

[23] B. Zolfaghari, V. Singh, B. K. Rai, K. Bibak, and T. Koshiba,
“Cryptography in hierarchical coded caching: System model and
cost analysis,” Entropy, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1–22, 2021.

[24] B. Zolfaghari and T. Koshiba, “Chaotic image encryption: State-
of-the-art, ecosystem, and future roadmap,” Applied System Inno-
vation, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1–38, 2022.

11

[25] B. Zolfaghari, K. Bibak, H. R. Nemati, T. Koshiba, and P. Mitra,
Statistical Trend Analysis on Physically Unclonable Functions: An
Approach via Text Mining. CRC Press, April 2021.

[26] A. Yazdinejad, A. Bohlooli, and K. Jamshidi, “Efﬁcient design
and hardware implementation of the openﬂow v1. 3 switch on
the virtex-6 fpga ml605,” The Journal of Supercomputing, vol. 74,
no. 3, pp. 1299–1320, 2018.

[27] B. Zolfaghari and T. Koshiba, “The dichotomy of neural networks
and cryptography: War and peace,” Applied System Innovation,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1–28, 2022.

[28] A. Yazdinejad, E. Rabieinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi,
and G. Srivastava, “A machine learning-based sdn controller
framework for drone management,” in 2021 IEEE Globecom Work-
shops (GC Wkshps), 2021, pp. 1–6.

[29] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, and R. M. Parizi, “A deep learn-
ing model for threat hunting in ethereum blockchain,” in 2021
IEEE 20th International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in
Computing and Communications (TrustCom), 2021, pp. 1185–1190.

[30] E. Antwi-Boasiako, S. Zhou, Y. Liao, Q. Liu, Y. Wang, and
K. Owusu-Agyemang, “Privacy preservation in distributed deep
learning: A survey on distributed deep learning, privacy preser-
vation techniques used and interesting research directions,” Jour-
nal of Information Security and Applications, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 1–20,
2021.

[31] F. O. Olowononi, D. B. Rawat, and C. Liu, “Resilient machine
learning for networked cyber physical systems: A survey for
machine learning security to securing machine learning for cps,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 524–
552, 2021.

[32] A. Qayyum, J. Qadir, M. Bilal, and A. Al-Fuqaha, “Secure and
robust machine learning for healthcare: A survey,” IEEE Reviews
in Biomedical Engineering, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 156–180, 2021.
[33] Q. Zhang, C. Xin, and H. Wu, “Privacy-preserving deep learning
based on multiparty secure computation: A survey,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 13, pp. 10 412–10 429, 2021.

[34] X. Liu, L. Xie, Y. Wang, J. Zou, J. Xiong, Z. Ying, and A. V. Vasi-
lakos, “Privacy and security issues in deep learning: A survey,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 4566–4593, 2021.

[35] Y. He, G. Meng, K. Chen, X. Hu, and J. He, “Towards security
threats of deep learning systems: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2020.

[36] Q. Liu, P. Li, W. Zhao, W. Cai, S. Yu, and V. C. M. Leung, “A
survey on security threats and defensive techniques of machine
learning: A data driven view,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 12 103–
12 117, 2018.

[37] X. Liao, L. Ding, and Y. Wang, “Secure machine learning, a brief
overview,” in Proceedings of Fifth International Conference on Secure
Software Integration and Reliability Improvement - Companion, Jeju,
Korea (South), June 2011.

[38] D. J. Arndt and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “A comparison of three
machine learning techniques for encrypted network trafﬁc analy-
sis,” in Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence
for Security and Defense Applications (CISDA), Paris, France, April
2011.

[40]

[39] P. Wang, X. Chen, F. Ye, and Z. Sun, “A survey of techniques
for mobile service encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation using deep
learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 54 024–54 033, 2019.
5th International Conference on Innovative Technologies in In-
telligent Systems and I. A. (CITISIA), “Review of image en-
cryption techniques using neural network for optical security in
the healthcare sector – pno system,” in Proceedings of Jinfeng Su
and Anup Kankani and eorge Zajko and Amr Elchouemi and Hendra
Kurniawan, November 2020.

[41] K. Sooksatra and P. Rivas, “A review of machine learning and
cryptography applications,” in Proceedings of International Confer-
ence on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI),
Las Vegas, NV, USA, December 2020.

[42] H. Kiya, “Progress and challenges in compressible and learnable
image encryption for privacy-preserving image encryption and
machine learning [keynote],” in Proceedings of 12th International
Conference on Knowledge and Smart Technology (KST), Pattaya,
Thailand, February 2020.

[43] A. Pastor, A. Mozo, S. Vakaruk, D. Canavese, D. R. L ´opez,
L. Regano, S. G ´omez-Canaval, and A. Lioy, “Detection of en-
crypted cryptomining malware connections with machine and
deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 158 036–158 055, 2020.

[44] W. Bazuhair and W. Lee, “Detecting malign encrypted network
trafﬁc using perlin noise and convolutional neural network,” in
Proceedings of 10th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop
and Conference (CCWC), Las Vegas, NV, USA, January 2020.
J. L. Wright and M. Manic, “Neural network approach to locating
cryptography in object code,” in Proceedings of IEEE Conference on
Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation, Palma de Mallorca,
Spain, September 2009.

[45]

[47]

[46] H. Yang, Q. He, Z. Liu, and Q. Zhang, “Malicious encryption traf-
ﬁc detection based on nlp,” Security and Communication Networks,
vol. 2021, 2021.
S. Miller, K. Curran, and T. Lunney, “Multilayer perceptron
neural network for detection of encrypted vpn network traf-
ﬁc,” in Proceedings of International Conference On Cyber Situational
Awareness, Data Analytics And Assessment (Cyber SA), Glasgow,
UK, June 2018.

[48] T. Yu, F. Zou, L. Li, and P. Yi, “An encrypted malicious trafﬁc
detection system based on neural network,” in Proceedings of
International Conference on Cyber-Enabled Distributed Computing
and Knowledge Discovery (CyberC), Guilin, China, October 2019.

[50]

[49] G. E. de P. Rodrigues, A. M. Braga, and R. Dahab, “Using
graph embeddings and machine learning to detect cryptography
misuse in source code,” in Proceedings of 19th IEEE International
Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), Miami,
FL, USA, December 2020.
J. Zhou, J. Li, E. Panaousis, and K. Liang, “Deep binarized
convolutional neural network inferences over encrypted data,”
in Proceedings of 7th IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security
and Cloud Computing (CSCloud)/2020 6th IEEE International Confer-
ence on Edge Computing and Scalable Cloud (EdgeCom), New York,
NY, USA, August 2020.
J. Dunham, M.-T. Sun, and J. Tseng, “Classifying ﬁle type of
stream ciphers in depth using neural networks,” in Proceedings
of The 3rd ACS/IEEE International Conference onComputer Systems
and Applications, Cairo, Egypt, January 2005.

[51]

[52] A. QaisarAhmadAlBadawi, J. Chao, J. Lin, C. F. Mun, S. J. Jie,
B. H. M. Tan, X. Nan, A. M. M. Khin, and V. Chandrasekhar,
“Towards the alexnet moment for homomorphic encryption:
Hcnn, the ﬁrst homomorphic cnn on encrypted data with gpus,”
IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing (Early Access
Article), pp. 1–1, 2020.

[53] K. V. Pradeepthi, V. Tiwari, and A. Saxena, “Machine learning
approach for analysing encrypted data,” in Proceedings of Tenth
International Conference on Advanced Computing (ICoAC), Chennai,
India, December 2018.

[54] Y. Okada, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakahira, and I. Oka, “Com-
parisons of machine learning algorithms for application identi-
ﬁcation of encrypted trafﬁc,” in Proceedings of 10th International
Conference on Machine Learning and Applications and Workshops,
Honolulu, HI, USA, December 2011.

[55] V. A. Muliukha, L. U. Laboshin, A. A. Lukashin, and N. V.
Nashivochnikov, “Analysis and classiﬁcation of encrypted net-
work trafﬁc using machine learning,” in Proceedings of XXIII In-
ternational Conference on Soft Computing and Measurements (SCM),
St. Petersburg, Russia, May 2020.

[56] A. N. Khan, M. Y. Fan, A. Malik, and R. A. Memon, “Learning
from privacy preserved encrypted data on cloud through super-
vised and unsupervised machine learning,” in Proceedings of 2nd
International Conference on Computing, Mathematics and Engineering
Technologies (iCoMET), Sukkur, Pakistan, January 2019.

[57] M. Kitayama and H. Kiya, “Hog feature extraction from en-
crypted images for privacy-preserving machine learning,” in
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics
- Asia (ICCE-Asia), Bangkok, Thailand, June 2019.

[58] T. K. Hazra, S. R. Chowdhury, and A. K. Chakraborty, “Encrypted
image retrieval system: A machine learning approach,” in Pro-
ceedings of IEEE 7th Annual Information Technology, Electronics
and Mobile Communication Conference (IEMCON), Vancouver, BC,
Canada, October 2016.

[59] N. Msadek, R. Soua, and T. Engel, “Iot device ﬁngerprinting: Ma-
chine learning based encrypted trafﬁc analysis,” in Proceedings of
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC),
Marrakesh, Morocco, April 2019.

[60] X. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, and W. Xia, “Inferring
behaviors via encrypted video surveillance trafﬁc by machine
learning,” in Proceedings of IEEE 21st International Conference on
High Performance Computing and Communications and IEEE 17th

12

[61]

International Conference on Smart City and IEEE 5th International
Conference on Data Science and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS),
Marrakesh, Morocco, August 2019.
I. Orsolic, D. Pevec, M. Suznjevic, and L. Skorin-Kapov, “Youtube
qoe estimation based on the analysis of encrypted network
trafﬁc using machine learning,” in Proceedings of IEEE Globecom
Workshops (GC Wkshps), Washington, DC, USA, December 2016.

[62] N. Seddigh, B. Nandy, D. Bennett, Y. Ren, S. Dolgikh, C. Zeidler,
J. Knoetze, and N. S. Muthyala, “A framework & system for
classiﬁcation of encrypted network trafﬁc using machine learn-
ing,” in Proceedings of 15th International Conference on Network and
Service Management (CNSM), Halifax, NS, Canada, October 2019.
[63] A. Alipour-Fanid, M. Dabaghchian, N. Wang, P. Wang, L. Zhao,
and K. Zeng, “Machine learning-based delay-aware uav detec-
tion over encrypted wi-ﬁ trafﬁc,” in Proceedings of IEEE Conference
on Communications and Network Security (CNS), Washington DC,
DC, USA, June 2019.

[64] A. Al-Hababi and S. C. Tokgoz, “Man-in-the-middle attacks to
detect and identify services in encrypted network ﬂows using
machine learning,” in Proceedings of 3rd International Conference on
Advanced Communication Technologies and Networking (CommNet),
Marrakech, Morocco, September 2020.

[65] R. B. Jackson and T. Camp, “Amazon echo security: Machine
learning to classify encrypted trafﬁc,” in Proceedings of 27th In-
ternational Conference on Computer Communication and Networks
(ICCCN), Hangzhou, China, July-August 2018.

[66] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Machine learning
based encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation: Identifying ssh and skype,”
in Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence for
Security and Defense Applications, Ottawa, ON, Canada, July 2009.
S. Leroux, S. Bohez, P.-J. Maenhaut, N. Meheus, P. Simoens, and
B. Dhoedt, “Fingerprinting encrypted network trafﬁc types using
machine learning,” in Proceedings of IEEE/IFIP Network Operations
and Management Symposium, Taipei, Taiwan, April 2018.

[67]

[68] M. Seufert, P. Casas, N. Wehner, L. Gang, and K. Li, “Stream-
based machine learning for real-time qoe analysis of encrypted
video streaming trafﬁc,” in Proceedings of 22nd Conference on
Innovation in Clouds, Internet and Networks and Workshops (ICIN),
Paris, France, February 2019.

[69] Q. He, G. P. Koudouridis, and G. D´an, “A comparison of ma-
chine and statistical time series learning for encrypted trafﬁc
prediction,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Comput-
ing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), Big Island, HI, USA,
February 2020.

[71]

[70] A. Alipour-Fanid, M. Dabaghchian, N. Wang, P. Wang, L. Zhao,
and K. Zeng, “Machine learning-based delay-aware uav de-
tection and operation mode identiﬁcation over encrypted wi-ﬁ
trafﬁc,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
vol. 15, pp. 2346–2360, 2020.
S. Wassermann, M. Seufert, P. Casas, L. Gang, and K. Li,
“Vicrypt to the rescue: Real-time, machine-learning-driven video-
qoe monitoring for encrypted streaming trafﬁc,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Network and Service Management (Early Access Article), pp.
1–1, 2020.
J. Suh and T. Tanaka, “Sarsa(0) reinforcement learning over fully
homomorphic encryption,” in Proceedings of SICE International
Symposium on Control Systems (SICE ISCS), Tokyo, Japan, March
2021.

[72]

[73] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescap´e, “Mobile
encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation using deep learning,” in Proceed-
ings of Network Trafﬁc Measurement and Analysis Conference (TMA),
Vienna, Austria, June 2018.

[74] M. Cruz, R. Ocampo, I. Montes, and R. Atienza, “Fingerprinting
bittorrent trafﬁc in encrypted tunnels using recurrent deep learn-
ing,” in Proceedings of Fifth International Symposium on Computing
and Networking (CANDAR), Aomori, Japan, November 2017.
[75] L. Vu, H. V. Thuy, Q. U. Nguyen, T. N. Ngoc, D. N. Nguyen, D. T.
Hoang, and E. Dutkiewicz, “Time series analysis for encrypted
trafﬁc classiﬁcation: A deep learning approach,” in Proceedings of
18th International Symposium on Communications and Information
Technologies (ISCIT), Bangkok, Thailand, September 2018.
[76] M. Shen, J. Zhang, K. Xu, L. Zhu, J. Liu, and X. Du, “Deepqoe:
Real-time measurement of video qoe from encrypted trafﬁc with
deep learning,” in Proceedings of IEEE/ACM 28th International
Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS), Hang Zhou, China, June
2020.

[77] K. Liang, G. Gou, C. Kang, C. Liu, M. Yang, and Y. Guo, “A multi-
view deep learning model for encrypted website service classi-
ﬁcation,” in Proceedings of IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), Waikoloa, HI, USA, December 2019.
J. Xing and C. Wu, “Detecting anomalies in encrypted trafﬁc
via deep dictionary learning,” in Proceedings of IEEE Conference
on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS),
Toronto, ON, Canada, July 2020.

[78]

[79] P. Wang, Y. Zhou, F. Ye, and H. Yue, “Data interpolation for
deep learning based encrypted data packet classiﬁcation,” in
Proceedings of International Conference on Computing, Networking
and Communications (ICNC), Honolulu, HI, USA, February 2019.
S. Soleymanpour, H. Sadr, and H. Beheshti, “An efﬁcient deep
learning method for encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation on the web,”
in Proceedings of 6th International Conference on Web Research
(ICWR), Tehran, Iran, April 2020.

[80]

[81] H. Chen, R. Cammarota, F. Valencia, and F. Regazzoni, “Plaidml-
he: Acceleration of deep learning kernels to compute on en-
crypted data,” in Proceedings of IEEE 37th International Conference
on Computer Design (ICCD), Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
November 2019.

[82] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescap´e,
“Know your big data trade-offs when classifying encrypted mo-
bile trafﬁc with deep learning,” in Proceedings of Network Trafﬁc
Measurement and Analysis Conference (TMA), Paris, France, June
2019.

[83] V. Tong, S. Soihi, H. A. Tran, and A. Mellouk, “Service-centric
segment routing mechanism using reinforcement learning for
encrypted trafﬁc,” in Proceedings of 16th International Conference on
Network and Service Management (CNSM), Izmir, Turkey, Novem-
ber 2020.

[84] Y. Zeng, H. Gu, W. Wei, and Y. Guo, “Deep-full-range : A
deep learning based network encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation and
intrusion detection framework,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 45 182–
45 190, 2019.

[85] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “Datanet: Deep learning
based encrypted network trafﬁc classiﬁcation in sdn home gate-
way,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 55 380–55 391, 2018.

[86] T. Hou, T. Wang, Z. Lu, and Y. Liu, “Smart spying via deep learn-
ing: Inferring your activities from encrypted wireless trafﬁc,” in
Proceedings of IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information
Processing (GlobalSIP), Ottawa, ON, Canada, November 2019.

[87] M. Shen, J. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Liu, and L. Zhu, “Machine learning
classiﬁcation on trafﬁc of secondary encryption,” in Proceedings of
Meng Shen and Jinpeng Zhang and Siqi Chen and Yiting Liu and
Liehuang Zhu, Waikoloa, HI, USA, December 2019.

[88] V. Molek and P. Hurtik, “Training neural network over encrypted
data,” in Proceedings of IEEE Third International Conference on Data
Stream Mining & Processing (DSMP), Lviv, Ukraine, August 2020.
[89] K. Nandakumar, N. Ratha, S. Pankanti, and S. Halevi, “Towards
deep neural network training on encrypted data,” in Proceedings
of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops (CVPRW), Long Beach, CA, USA, June 2019.

[90] R. Xu, J. B. Joshi, and C. Li, “Cryptonn: Training neural networks
over encrypted data,” arXiv (ePrint arXiv:1904.07303), 2019.
[91] R. Xu, J. Joshi, and C. Li, “Nn-emd: Efﬁciently training neural
networks using encrypted multi-sourced datasets,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Dependable and Secure Computing ( Early Access Article),
pp. 1–1, 2021.
I. J. of Information Security, “Supervised machine learning us-
ing encrypted training data,” 17, vol. 2, no. Francisco-Javier
Gonzalez-Serrano and Adrian Amor-MartinAdrian Amor-Martin
and Jorge Casamay ´on-Ant ´on, pp. 365–377, 2018.

[92]

[93] R. Bost, R. A. Popa, S. Tu, and S. Goldwasser, “Machine learn-
ing classiﬁcation over encrypted data,” in Proceedings of NDSS
Symposium, San Diego, CA, USA, February 2015.

[94] Y. Choi, J. Sim, and L.-S. Kim, “Cremon: Cryptography em-
bedded on the convolutional neural network accelerator,” IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 67, no. 12,
pp. 3337–3341, 2020.

[95] Y. Cai, X. Chen, L. Tian, Y. Wang, and H. Yang, “Enabling secure
nvm-based in-memory neural network computing by sparse fast
gradient encryption,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 69,
no. 11, pp. 1596–1610, 2020.

[96] ——, “Enabling secure in-memory neural network computing
by sparse fast gradient encryption,” in Proceedings of IEEE/ACM

13

[97]

International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), West-
minster, CO, USA, November 2019.
S. Jeong, C. Park, D. Hong, C. Seo, and N. Jho, “Neural cryp-
tography based on generalized tree parity machine for real-life
systems,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2021, 2021.

[98] A. Sarkar and M. Sarkar, “Tree parity machine guided patients’
privileged based secure sharing of electronic medical record:
cybersecurity for telehealth during covid-19,” Multimedia Tools
and Applications, vol. 80, no. 14, pp. 21 899–21 923, 2021.
J. Klemsa and M. Novotn ´y, “Wtfhe: neural-network-ready torus
fully homomorphic encryption,” in Proceedings of 9th Mediter-
ranean Conference on Embedded Computing (MECO), Budva, Mon-
tenegro, June 2020.

[99]

[100] S. Arita and S. Nakasato, “Fully homomorphic encryption for
classiﬁcation in machine learning,” in Proceedings of IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Smart Computing (SMARTCOMP), Hong
Kong, China, May 2017.

[101] W. Sirichotedumrong, Y. Kinoshita, and H. Kiya, “On the security
of pixel-based image encryption for privacy-preserving deep
neural networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE 8th Global Conference on
Consumer Electronics (GCCE), Osaka, Japan, October 2019.
[102] S. Arita and S. Nakasato, “Fully homomorphic encryption for
classiﬁcation in machine learning,” in Proceedings of IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Smart Computing (SMARTCOMP), Hong
Kong, China, May 2017.

[103] A. Dalvi, A. Jain, S. Moradiya, R. Nirmal, J. Sanghavi, and
I. Siddavatam, “Securing neural networks using homomorphic
encryption,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Intelligent
Technologies (CONIT), Hubli, India, June 2021.

[104] S. Moriai, “Privacy-preserving deep learning via additively ho-
momorphic encryption,” in Proceedings of IEEE 26th Symposium
on Computer Arithmetic (ARITH), Kyoto, Japan, June 2019.
[105] N. J. H. Marcano, M. Moller, S. Hansen, and R. H. Jacobsen,
“On fully homomorphic encryption for privacy-preserving deep
learning,” in Proceedings of IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
Waikoloa, HI, USA, December 2019.

[106] M. Pedzisz and D. P. Mandic, “A homomorphic neural network
for modeling and prediction,” Neural Computation, vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 1042–1064, 2008.

[107] A. Kurniawan and M. Kyas, “Securing machine learning engines
in iot applications with attribute-based encryption,” in Proceed-
ings of IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security
Informatics (ISI), Shenzhen, China, July 2019.

[108] S. Behera and J. R. Prathuri, “Application of homomorphic en-
cryption in machine learning,” in Proceedings of 2nd PhD Col-
loquium on Ethically Driven Innovation and Technology for Society
(PhD EDITS), Bangalore, India, November 2020.

[109] J. Chen, K. Li, and P. S. Yu, “Privacy-preserving deep learning
model for decentralized vanets using fully homomorphic encryp-
tion and blockchain,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems (Early Access Article), pp. 1–10, 2021.

[110] J. Paul, M. S. M. S. Annamalai, W. Ming, A. A. Badawi, B. Veer-
avalli, and K. M. M. Aung, “Privacy-preserving collective learn-
ing with homomorphic encryption,” IEEE Access (Early Access
Article), pp. 1–10, 2021.

[111] Y. Chen, B. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “Pdlhr: Privacy-preserving
deep learning model with homomorphic re-encryption in robot
system,” IEEE Systems Journal (Early Access Article), pp. 1–12,
2021.

[112] C. Christy, S. Arivalagan, and P. Sudhakar, “Deep learning
with chaotic encryption based secured ethnicity recognition,”
in Proceedings of 2019 3rd International conference on Electronics,
Communication and Aerospace Technology (ICECA), Coimbatore,
India, June 2019.

[113] A. M. Elmisery and H. Fu, “Privacy preserving distributed learn-
ing clustering of healthcare data using cryptography protocols,”
in Proceedings of IEEE 34th Annual Computer Software and Applica-
tions Conference Workshops, Seoul, Korea (South), July 2010.
[114] W. Sirichotedumrong, T. Maekawa, Y. Kinoshita, and H. Kiya,
“Privacy-preserving deep neural networks with pixel-based im-
age encryption considering data augmentation in the encrypted
domain,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing (ICIP), Taipei, Taiwan, September 2019.

[115] R. Cantoro, N. I. Deligiannis, M. S. Reorda, M. Traiola, and
E. Valea, “Evaluating data encryption effects on the resilience of
an artiﬁcial neural network,” in Proceedings of IEEE International

14

[133] H. Duan, P. Li, Y. Shi, X. Zhang, and C. Sun, “Interactive learning
environment for bio-inspired optimization algorithms for uav
path planning,” IEEE Transactions on Education, vol. 58, no. 4, pp.
276–281, 2015.

[134] J. A. Clark, “Nature-inspired cryptography: past, present and
future,” in The 2003 Congress on Evolutionary Computation, 2003.
CEC’03., vol. 3.

IEEE, 2003, pp. 1647–1654.

[135] S. B. Sadkhan, “A proposed genetic algorithm attack for public
key cryptosystem,” in 2021 7th International Engineering Confer-
ence “Research & Innovation amid Global Pandemic”(IEC).
IEEE,
2021, pp. 194–199.

[136] L. N. de Castro, “Immune, swarm, and evolutionary algorithms.
part ii: philosophical comparisons,” in Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference on Neural Information Processing, 2002.
ICONIP’02., vol. 3.

IEEE, 2002, pp. 1469–1473.

[137] S. J. Nawaz, S. K. Sharma, S. Wyne, M. N. Patwary, and
M. Asaduzzaman, “Quantum machine learning for 6g communi-
cation networks: State-of-the-art and vision for the future,” IEEE
access, vol. 7, pp. 46 317–46 350, 2019.

[138] V. Dunjko and H. J. Briegel, “Machine learning & artiﬁcial in-
telligence in the quantum domain: a review of recent progress,”
Reports on Progress in Physics, vol. 81, no. 7, p. 074001, 2018.
[139] Y. Li, A. H. Aghvami, and D. Dong, “Intelligent trajectory plan-
ning in uav-mounted wireless networks: A quantum-inspired re-
inforcement learning perspective,” IEEE Wireless Communications
Letters (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[140] Q. Wei, H. Ma, C. Chen, and D. Dong, “Deep reinforcement learn-
ing with quantum-inspired experience replay,” IEEE Transactions
on Cybernetics (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[141] N. Masuyama, C. K. Loo, M. Seera, and N. Kubota, “Quantum-
inspired multidirectional associative memory with a self-
convergent iterative learning,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-
works and Learning Systems, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1058–1068, 2018.
J. Chu,

“Robust
quantum-inspired reinforcement learning for robot navigation,”
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 86–97,
2012.

[142] D. Dong, C. Chen,

and T.-J. Tarn,

[143] O. P. Patel, N. Bharill, A. Tiwari, and M. Prasad, “A novel
quantum-inspired fuzzy based neural network for data classiﬁ-
cation,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. 9,
no. 2, pp. 1031–1044, 2021.

Symposium on Defect and Fault Tolerance in VLSI and Nanotechnol-
ogy Systems (DFT), Frascati, Italy, October 2020.

[116] W. Sirichotedumrong, Y. Kinoshita, and H. Kiya, “Pixel-based im-
age encryption without key management for privacy-preserving
deep neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. Hubli, India, 2019.
[117] ——, “Privacy-preserving deep neural networks using pixel-
based image encryption without common security keys,” in Pro-
ceedings of Asia-Paciﬁc Signal and Information Processing Association
Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA ASC), Lanzhou, China,
November 2019.

[118] A.-B. Emmanuel, S. Zhou, Y. Liao, and Q. Liu, “Privacy-
preservation in distributed deep neural networks via encryption
of selected gradients,” in Proceedings of IEEE 22nd International
Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications and
IEEE 18th International Conference on Smart City and IEEE 6th,
Yanuca Island, Cuvu, Fiji, December 2020.

[119] X. Sun, P. Zhang, J. K. Liu, J. Yu, and W. Xie, “Private machine
learning classiﬁcation based on fully homomorphic encryption,”
IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 352–364, 2020.

[120] W. Li, Y. Wang, H. Li, and X. Li, “Leveraging memory pufs and
pim-based encryption to secure edge deep learning systems,” in
Proceedings of IEEE 37th VLSI Test Symposium (VTS), Monterey,
CA, USA, April 2019.

[121] P.-W. Chi and P.-H. Hsiao, “Learnable audio encryption for un-
trusted outsourcing machine learning services,” in Proceedings of
14th Asia Joint Conference on Information Security (AsiaJCIS), Kobe,
Japan, August 2019.

[122] N. Lisin and S. Zapechnikov, “Order-preserving encryption as
a tool for privacy-preserving machine learning,” in Proceedings
of IEEE Conference of Russian Young Researchers in Electrical and
Electronic Engineering (EIConRus), St. Petersburg and Moscow,
Russia, January 2020.

[123] Q. Li, Z. Huang, W. jie Lu, C. Hong, H. Qu, H. He, and W. Zhang,
“Homopai: A secure collaborative machine learning platform
based on homomorphic encryption,” in Proceedings of IEEE 36th
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), Dallas, TX,
USA, April 2020.

[124] S. Kuri, T. Hayashi, T. Omori, S. Ozawa, Y. Aono, L. T. Phong,
L. Wang, and S. Moriai, “Privacy preserving extreme learning
machine using additively homomorphic encryption,” in Proceed-
ings of IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI),
Honolulu, HI, USA, December 2017.

[125] A. Madi, O. Stan, A. Mayoue, A. Grivet-S´ebert, C. Gouy-Pailler,
and R. Sirdey, “A secure federated learning framework using ho-
momorphic encryption and veriﬁable computing,” in Proceedings
of Reconciling Data Analytics, Automation, Privacy, and Security: A
Big Data Challenge (RDAAPS), Hamilton, ON, Canada, May 2021.
[126] N. K. Long, K. Sammut, D. Sgarioto, M. Garratt, and H. A.
Abbass, “A comprehensive review of shepherding as a bio-
inspired swarm-robotics guidance approach,” IEEE Transactions
on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, vol. 4, no. 4, pp.
523–537, 2020.

[127] Y. Yuan, H. Ning, and X. Lu, “Bio-inspired representation learn-
ing for visual attention prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Cyber-
netics, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 3562–3575, 2021.

[128] M. Xu, F. Chen, L. Li, C. Shen, P. Lv, B. Zhou, and R. Ji, “Bio-
inspired deep attribute learning towards facial aesthetic predic-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 12, no. 1, pp.
227–238, 2021.

[129] Z. Tu, F. Fei, and X. Deng, “Bio-inspired rapid escape and tight
body ﬂip on an at-scale ﬂapping wing hummingbird robot via
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 37,
no. 5, pp. 1742–1751, 2021.

[130] S. Gibson, B. Issac, L. Zhang, and S. M. Jacob, “Detecting spam
email with machine learning optimized with bio-inspired meta-
heuristic algorithms,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 187 914–187 932,
2020.

[131] H. Lehnert, M. Araya, R. Carrasco-Davis, and M.-J. Escobar, “Bio-
inspired deep reinforcement learning for autonomous navigation
of artiﬁcial agents,” IEEE Latin America Transactions, vol. 17,
no. 12, pp. 2037–2044, 2019.

[132] Z. Yang, Y. Jin, and K. Hao, “A bio-inspired self-learning co-
evolutionary dynamic multiobjective optimization algorithm for
internet of things services,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 675–688, 2019.

