1

Mitigating Load-Altering Attacks Against Power
Grids Using Cyber-Resilient Economic Dispatch

Zhongda Chu, Student Member, IEEE, Subhash Lakshminarayana, Senior Member, IEEE
Balarko Chaudhuri, Senior Member, IEEE and Fei Teng, Senior Member, IEEE

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

7
2

]

Y
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
2
1
3
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Large-scale Load-Altering Attacks (LAAs) against
Internet-of-Things (IoT) enabled high-wattage electrical appli-
ances (e.g., wiﬁ-enabled air-conditioners, electric vehicles, etc.)
pose a serious threat to power systems’ security and stability. In
this work, a Cyber-Resilient Economic Dispatch (CRED) frame-
work is presented to mitigate the destabilizing effect of LAAs
while minimizing the overall operational cost by dynamically
optimizing the frequency droop control gains of Inverter-Based
Resources (IBRs). The system frequency dynamics incorporating
both LAAs and the IBR droop control are modeled. The system
stability constraints are explicitly derived based on parametric
sensitivities. To incorporate them into the CRED model and mini-
mize the error of the sensitivity analysis, a recursive linearization
method is further proposed. A distributionally robust approach
is applied to account for the uncertainty associated with the LAA
detection/parameter estimation. The overall performance of the
proposed CRED model is demonstrated through simulations in
a modiﬁed IEEE reliability test system.

Index Terms—Economic dispatch, cyber-resilience, load alter-

ing attacks, system stability, sensitivity analysis

I. INTRODUCTION
Internet-of-things (IoT)-enabled electrical appliances, such
as WiFi-enabled air conditioners, electric vehicles, etc. are
being increasingly installed, as they provide convenience to
consumers. However,
these devices typically do not have
sophisticated security measures (such as encryption-enabled
communication) incorporated in their design. Thus, they may
become convenient entry points for malicious actors to gain
access to the power grid. Botnet-type attacks that target a
large number of these devices can severely affect power grid
operations.

The topic of power grid security has gained widespread
prominence in the last decade. The majority of the works focus
on the security of bulk power and the associated supervisory
control and data acquisition (SCADA) system [1]–[3]. In con-
trast, cyber attacks targeting end-user IoT-electrical appliances
have only gained attention recently. Existing work on this topic
can be broadly divided into two categories – (i) attack impact
analysis, and (ii) detecting/localizing cyber attacks.

An unplanned and large-scale ﬂuctuation in the system
load can potentially disrupt the balance between supply and
demand, subsequently leading to unsafe operating conditions.
LAAs can be divided into categories depending on the type
of load altered – static LAAs and dynamic LAAs. Static
LAAs refer to a sudden one-time manipulation of the demand.

Zhongda Chu, Balarko Chaudhuri and Fei Teng are with Department of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, London SW7
2AZ, U.K. Corresponding author: Dr Fei Teng (f.teng@imperial.ac.uk).

Subhash Lakshminarayana is with the School of Engineering, University

of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, U.K.

It has been shown that such attacks lead to economic cost
increment, load shedding, and/or unsafe frequency excursions
[4]–[6]. Temporal ﬂuctuations of system load and renewable
energy can be exploited by the attacker to execute LAAs
[7], [8]. Furthermore, low-inertia conditions caused by the
growing penetration of renewable energy resources can further
exacerbate the vulnerability of power grids to LAAs [8]. On
the other hand, Dynamic LAA (DLAA) involves the manip-
ulation of the demand over several time slots. In particular,
it was shown that if attackers can manipulate the load in
accordance with the ﬂuctuations of system frequency, they
can potentially destabilize the frequency control
loop [9].
Moreover, the knowledge required to execute such attacks
can be gathered from publicly-available information [10]. An
analytical framework to identify buses corresponding to the
least-effort destabilizing attacks was characterized in [11]
using the theory of second-order dynamical systems.

Detecting and localizing LAAs is an important ﬁrst step
towards mitigating their destabilizing effects. Initial work in
this area aimed at detecting LAAs by analyzing the power grid
signals (phase angle/frequency data) in the frequency domain
[12], and this method was subsequently extended to localizing
the nodes that are under attack [13]. However, the framework
was restricted to a linear model of power system dynamics,
and cannot be extended trivially to non-linear models. An
unscented Kalman ﬁlter-based approach to detect and localize
LAAs was proposed in [14], which, however, does not scale
well for large power grids. To overcome these limitations,
reference [15] proposed the application of physics-informed
machine learning techniques to detect and localize LAAs by
monitoring data from phasor measurement units following the
attack. The proposed framework can also estimate the attack
parameters (static attack magnitude and attack controller gain
for dynamic attack).

In contrast to the two streams of work, the problem of
mitigating the destabilizing effects of LAAs and the corre-
sponding impact on system operation has received limited
attention, which is the main focus of this paper. Existing works
on this topic mostly focus on ofﬂine security enhancements.
For instance, the problem of ﬁnding the optimal locations for
deploying load protection features (e.g., encryption-enabled
smart devices) has been addressed in [9], [11]. Reference
[16] formulates an optimization framework to obtain generator
operating points to ensure that none of the transmission lines
in the grid become overloaded in the event of an LAA. A data-
centric edge-computing infrastructure for IoT devices in power
grids is designed in [17]. Based on power grid knowledge,
edge servers are equipped to enhance the security policies
against IoT-based attacks. A model-free defense framework
against LAAs, using machine-learning based algorithms is

 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed in [18] where only static LAAs are considered.
Reference [19] presents a defense policy against LAAs, which
models the problem through a two-player zero-sum multistage
game solved by minimax-q learning.

However, such ofﬂine mitigation measures incur signiﬁcant
economic costs due to two reasons. (i) The system must be op-
erated at an uneconomic point over the entire operating period,
irrespective of whether the attack occurs or not (cyber attacks
are very rare events). (ii) Since the operator has no way of
having prior knowledge of the actual parameters the attackers
may use, they require making worst-case assumptions about
the attacker’s capabilities (e.g., secure the power grid against
all possible attack parameters).

To address these shortcomings, in this work we propose
an online DLAA mitigation technique to enhance the power
system’s resilience to potential LAAs, named, cyber-resilient
economic dispatch (CRED). The proposed method utilizes the
fast and ﬂexible control of IBR units, whose capability to
enhance the system security and stability has been extensively
studied and demonstrated such as in [20]–[23]. Speciﬁcally,
since the DLAAs destabilize the system by decreasing the
system damping, additional damping achieved through IBR
droop control is supplied to the grid when an attack event
is detected. It is to be noted that the scope of this study is
limited to traditional electromechanical stability. The assump-
tion is that IBRs are controlled to provide synthetic inertia
and mimic the operation of SGs. Hence, the basic nature
of the stability problem remains electromechanical even with
large penetration of IBRs. Stability problems caused by IBRs
operating in grid-following mode in conjunction with a weak
network [24] in particular, are outside the scope of this study.
The droop gains of the IBRs are known to inﬂuence such
stability problems which would be accounted for in a future
study. Additionally, the control and response of IBRs are much
faster and more accurate than SGs, hence enabling the IBR
units to provide the desired damping to the grid [25], [26].
Although it is possible to design or utilize more sophisticated
IBR control schemes, it would signiﬁcantly complicate the
system dynamics and prevent it from being incorporated into
optimization model, thus not being considered in this work.
Moreover, the proposed approach explicitly takes the attack
detection/localization results into account, including the uncer-
tainty associated with them. It can also be easily incorporated
into the conventional UC problem. Our main contributions
include the following:

• We propose a CRED model to ensure the power system
stability under potential LAAs. The proposed scheduling
framework is implemented dynamically following LAA
detection/identiﬁcation to achieve stable system operation
until the attack is eventually isolated in the most cost-
effective manner.

• We derive the system stability constraints analytically
based on parametric sensitivities. To improve the accu-
racy of eigenvalue sensitivities, a recursive linearization
approach is proposed. The resulting constraints are further
reformulated while considering the uncertainty associated
with the attack parameter estimation, to ﬁt the overall
optimization model.

• The performance and effectiveness of the proposed model

2

are demonstrated through case studies based on an IEEE
Reliability Test System. The cyber-resilience improve-
ment under different operating conditions and the corre-
sponding cost increment as well as the impact of various
factors are assessed.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the power system model considering the LAAs and
the mitigation strategies. Section III derives system stability
constraints, which are reformed to decrease the sensitivity
error and ﬁt the optimization model. The uncertainty of attack
detection and the overall operation framework are discussed
in Section IV, followed by case studies in Section V. Section
VI concludes the paper.

II. SYSTEM MODEL
In this section, the frequency dynamic model in a multi-area
power system, the LAA model and the proposed mitigating
strategies against the attacks are discussed.

A. Power System Modeling

We consider a power system containing a set of N =
{1, ..., N } areas with the frequency and phase angle in each
area assumed to be the same. Each area may include Syn-
chronous Generators (SGs), IBRs, storage units and loads. The
power system’s phase angle and frequency dynamics can be
described by the following set of differential equations:
(cid:20) I
O −(Mg + Ms)
(cid:125)

(cid:21) (cid:20) ˙δ
˙ω

(cid:20)
0
P L − P C
(cid:20) O
K I + B K P + D

(cid:21) (cid:20)δ
ω

, (1)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
M

=

+

O

(cid:21)

(cid:21)

(cid:21)

(cid:124)

I

where δ, ω ∈ RN are vectors of phase angles and frequency
deviations in each area respectively; Mg, Ms, D ∈ RN ×N
are diagonal matrices with their diagonal entries being the
aggregated inertia of SGs, aggregated synthetic inertia from
IBRs and the aggregated damping from SGs and loads;
K I , K P ∈ RN ×N are diagonal matrices with their diagonal
entries being the aggregated integral and proportional gains of
the governor control loop of the SGs in each area respectively;
B ∈ RN ×N denotes the susceptance matrix connecting differ-
ent areas, and P L ∈ RN and P C ∈ RN represent the vector
of aggregated demands and IBR outputs in each area.

B. Load Altering Attacks

Under LAAs, the attacker manipulates the system load by
synchronously turning on or off a large amount of electrical
IoT-enabled appliances. It is assumed that the demand in each
area consists of two components P L = P LS + P LV , where
P LS denotes the secure part of the load and P LV denotes the
vulnerable part of the load, which the attacker can manipulate.
The system vulnerable load under LAAs is given by:

P LV = −K Lω + (cid:15)L,

(2)

where K Lω is the DLAA component that represents a time-
varying load manipulation that follows the local frequency
ﬂuctuations [9] and (cid:15)L is the SLAA component (one-time step-
change manipulation); K L ∈ RN ×N represents the matrix

of attack controller gains. It is assumed that the attacker can
only monitor the frequency within the attack area, i.e., K L
being diagonal. Combining (1) and (2) gives the power system
dynamics under load altering attack:

(cid:20) I
O
O −M

(cid:21) (cid:20) ˙δ
˙ω

(cid:21)

=

+

(cid:21)

(cid:20)
0
P LS + (cid:15)L − P C
(cid:20) O
K I + B K P + D − K L

I

Using the dynamic LAA component, the attacker can alter the
eigenvalues of the system indirectly by changing the elements
of the matrix K L, which is equivalent to modify the overall
damping in the system. Thus, they can potentially destabilize
the power system control loop [9]. Although an attack with
larger K L would lead to a less stable system, the choice of
K L is limited by the following constraint:

K L

n,nωmax ≤ (P LV

n − (cid:15)L

n )/2, ∀n ∈ N ,

(4)

(2) and (5) gives the power system dynamics with LAAs and
the droop response from IBRs.
(cid:21)
(cid:20) I
O
O −M
(cid:123)(cid:122)
−A

(cid:20)
0
P LS + (cid:15)L − P C∗

(cid:20) ˙δ
˙ω

=

(cid:21)

(cid:21)

(cid:124)

(cid:125)

(cid:21)

(cid:21) (cid:20)δ
ω

.

(3)

+

(cid:20) O
K I + B K P + D − K L + K C
(cid:123)(cid:122)
B

(cid:124)

I

(cid:21)

(cid:125)

(cid:20)δ
ω

It is evident that with appropriate selection of the droop control
gains from IBRs given the estimation or prediction of the
potential attacks [15], the system stability can be maintained.
the droop response of IBRS are considered
Remarkably,
as decision variables due to their fast control whereas the
proportional control gains (K P ) of synchronous generators are
considered to be ﬁxed.

3

(cid:21)

.

(6)

where K L
n,n, the n-th diagonal element is the attack gain in
the n-th area and ωmax > 0 is the maximum permissible
frequency deviation in the system. This constraint requires that
the maximum value of the load to be altered by the attacker in
each area should be less or equal to amount of vulnerable load
after removing the static load altering attack (P LV
n ). The
factor 2 on the RHS is due to the fact that to destabilize the
system, the amount of load that needs to be compromised must
allow for both over and under frequency ﬂuctuations before
the system frequency exceeds ωmax.

n − (cid:15)L

III. SYSTEM STABILITY CONSTRAINT DERIVATION AND
REFORMULATION

In this section, the system stability constraints under LAAs
are derived based on system eigenvalues and sensitivity analy-
sis. To ensure an accurate approximation, a recursive lineariza-
tion approach is further proposed. The resulting conditional
constraints are effectively reformulated to ﬁt the overall opti-
mization structure while considering the uncertainty associated
with the attack gain estimation.

C. Mitigating Actions Against LAAs

The attackers have the capability to destabilize the system if
the amount of the vulnerable load is large enough. Therefore,
it is necessary for the system operators to maintain the system
stability with proper measures given the potential LAAs.
The mitigation strategies considered here is the frequency
droop control implemented in the IBRs, due to their fast and
accurate active power control. Furthermore, the droop structure
is relatively simple and can be incorporated into the system
scheduling process, enabling dynamic optimization and im-
plementation immediately after the LAA detection. Moreover,
the droop control is equivalent to providing system damping
which is exactly what the attacker manipulates through the
DLAA, thus being effective in counteracting the attack and
stabilizing the system. Note that the droop control has been
proposed and studied mainly for the purpose of frequency
support after system disturbances. However, in this work the
frequency droop control from IBRs is controlled to supply
additional system damping during the attack period such that
the overall system stability can be ensured.

The output power from IBRs, P C can then be expressed as

P C = P C∗ − K Cω,

(5)

where P C∗ is the total power reference of IBRs in each area
and K Cω represent the power deviation according to the local
frequency. K C ∈ RN ×N is a diagonal matrix with the entries
being the aggregated droop gains in each area. Combining (1),

A. System Stability Constraints

Denote the eigenvalues of system (6) by λi ∈ C and the
associated right and left eigenvector by zj, yj ∈ C2N . The
system becomes unstable if there exists at least one eigenvalue
λi, such that (cid:60)(λi) > 0. Here, only stability constraint is
considered but if the requirement is for the oscillations to settle
within a stipulated time, the constraint boundary can be shifted
to the left of the imaginary axis to ensure a minimum settling
time. Therefore, to ensure the system stability, the following
constraint must hold:

(cid:60)(ˆλi) = (cid:60)(λ0

i ) +

(cid:88)

(cid:60)

(cid:19)

(cid:18) ∂λ0
i
∂K L

n,n

K L

n,n

n∈N
∂λ0
i
∂K C

n,n

+

(cid:88)

n∈N

(cid:60)(

)K C

n,n < 0, ∀i = 1, ..., 2N,

(7)

where ˆλi is the estimated i-th eigenvalue using sensitivities
and λ0
is the eigenvalue of the system without the LAAs
i
and the additional droop control from IBRs. The relationship
(cid:60)(λ0
i ) < 0, ∀i = 1, ..., 2N must hold since the system is
/ ∂λ0
are the eigenvalue sensi-
stable without attacks.
i
∂KC
tivities with respect to the n-th diagonal element in K L/K C
matrix. The analytical expressions for the sensitivity factors
can be derived using the theory of second-order dynamical
system [11]:

∂λ0
i
∂KL

n,n

n,n

∂λ0
i
∂K L

n,n

= −

∂λ0
i
∂K C

n,n

= −y

(cid:104)
λ0
i

(cid:124)
i

∂A
∂KL

n,n

+ ∂B
∂KL

n,n

(cid:105)

zi,

(8)

where,

4

n,n

∂A
∂K L
∂B
∂K L

n,n

= O

(cid:21)

(cid:20)O
O −In,n

O

.

=

(9a)

(9b)

We deﬁne In,n as a matrix whose (n, n)th element is one if
there is a DLAA in the n-th area, and all the others are zero.
n,n in an actual system
have to be considered. The former is discussed in (4), whereas
for K C

Moreover, the limits of K L

n,n and K C

n,n, the following constraint applies:
P C∗
n + K C
P C∗
n − K C

n,nωmax ≤ P C,max
n
n,nωmax ≥ 0,

(10a)

(10b)

n

where P C,max
is the aggregated maximum available active
power from IBRs according to the MPPT control in the n-th
area. Constraint (10) ensures adequate deloaded active power
and sufﬁciently large power output during normal operation
(without LAAs) to provide desired droop response following
the frequency oscillation on both sides triggered by the attack.
It is clear that a larger K C
n,n leads to a more stable system but
inevitably more operation cost. This trade-off will be balanced
in the proposed cyber-resilient economic dispatch model.

B. Recursive Linearization Approach

Since the system stability constraint in (7) is derived based
on the sensitivity analysis, it provides a satisfying approxima-
tion only if the K L
n,n are relatively small. However,
this may not always be the cases in reality. To illustrate this
issue, ﬁrst rewritten (7) giving the relationship in (8):
(cid:19)

n,n and K C

(cid:60)(λ0

i ) +

(cid:60)

(cid:18) ∂λ0
i
∂K L

n,n

(cid:88)

n∈N

(K L
(cid:124)

n,n − K C
) < 0,
n,n
(cid:125)
(cid:123)(cid:122)
KL−C
n,n

∀i = 1, ..., 2N. (11)

n,n

An example demonstrating the linearization performance
based on (11) is shown in Fig. 1 with only one eigenvalue
plotted for simplicity. It is observed that as K L−C
decreases
from zero, the real part of the eigenvalue increases, which
results in an unstable system if it becomes positive. However,
the error between the true values and the approximations
based on (11) gradually increases in this process due to
the larger distance to the linearization point (K L−C
n,n = 0).
In addition, since the system stability depends on the sign
of the eigenvalues, good approximations should always be
ensured for all K L−C
that renders eigenvalues with negative
and slightly positive real parts, e.g., [−3.5, 0] in this case.
Therefore,
the approximations in Fig. 1 give unsatisfying
results because of the errors around zero. Although this may
not occur for certain system parameters, there is no systematic
guarantee based on the formulation in (11).

n,n

In order to address this problem, a piecewise decision-
dependent recursive linearization approach is proposed with
the detailed steps shown in Algorithm 1. After the initial-
ization, the sensitivity range φi,n, within which an accurate
approximation is desired, is determined ﬁrst. For instance,
φi,n = [−3.5, 0] in the case of Fig. 1. Gradually vary the

Fig. 1: Real part of system eigenvalue under single-point
LAAs. Circles: true values, Crosses: estimated values.

Algorithm 1 Recursive Linearization Algorithm
1: Set m = 0, l = 0, εm = 0, ∆φ(l)
2: Determine the sensitivity range, φi,n = [φ
3: while ∆φ(l)

do

i,n

i,n ≥ φ

i,n

, 0]

i,n = 0 and Mi,n = {m}

i,n = ∆φ(l)

i,n

Obtain the new linearization point, ∆φm
Calculate the eigenvalue at this point,
λm
i,n = λi|KL−C
Calculate the sensitivity at this point, ∂λm
∂KL
while εm ≤ εlim do

n,n =∆φm
i,n

i,n

n,n

l = l + 1
Move along the sensitivity range,

∆φ(l)

i,n = ∆φ(l−1)

i,n − εφ

Calculate the true eigenvalue, λ(l)
i,n
Calculate the estimated eigenvalue, ˆλm,(l)
Compute the approximation error,

i,n

εm =

(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:60)(λ(l)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
i,n) − (cid:60)(ˆλm,(l)
(cid:12)
i,n )
(cid:12)

end while

13:
14: Mi,n = Mi,n ∪ {m}
m = m + 1
15:
Reset the approximation error, εm = 0
16:
17: end while
18: Return Mi,n, ϕi,n and ∂ϕi,n

4:
5:

6:

7:
8:
9:

10:

11:
12:

i,n

i,n from 0 to φ

with a pre-deﬁned ﬁxed step,

auxiliary ∆φ(l)
εφ. At each step, calculate the true eigenvalue, λ(l)
i,n, by setting
K L−C
i,n , based
on the sensitivity evaluated at the latest linearization point
K L−C
i,n, which are deﬁned as follows:

i,n and the estimated eigenvalue, ˆλm,(l)

n,n = ∆φ(l)

n,n = ∆φm

λ(l)
i,n = λi|

KL−C

n,n =∆φ(l)
i,n
∂λm
i,n
∂K L

n,n

ˆλm,(l)
i,n = λm

i,n +

(∆φ(l)

i,n − ∆φm

i,n),

(12a)

(12b)

where λm
i,n is the i-th eigenvalue of the system with potential
attack or IBR droop control in area n, evaluated at the m-
th linearization point (Step 5), and ∂λm
is the associated
∂KL
sensitivity based on (8).

n,n

i,n

As long as the approximation error is smaller than a pre-
speciﬁed limit εlim, the current linearization point and the
associated sensitivity are acceptable. However, once the error

-3.5-3-2.5-2-1.5-1-0.50-0.3-0.2-0.100.1where Fn(·) is the eigenvalue variation due to the attack or
IBR droop control in the n-th area. It is deﬁned as follows:

5

K L−C
n,n ,

if K L−C

n,n ∈ (φ1

i,n, φ0

i,n]

n,n

∂λ0
i
∂KL
...
∂λm
i
∂KL

...






(K L−C
i − λ0

n,n − φm
i ),

i,n)

n,n

+(λm

Fn =

∂λ

|Mi,n|−1
i
∂KL
+(λ

n,n

(K L−C

n,n − φ
− λ0
i ),

|Mi,n|−1
i

if K L−C

n,n ∈ (φm+1

i,n , φm
i,n]

.

|Mi,n|−1
i,n

)
if K L−C

n,n ∈ [φ

i,n

, φ

|Mi,n|−1
i,n

]
(15)

Depending on the range of K L−C
the sensitivity of the
n,n ,
nearest linearization point on its right is used. However, since
K L−C
is essentially a decision variable, (14) is a decision-
n,n
dependent constraint, which cannot be incorporated into the
optimization problem directly. To address this problem, |Mi,n|
(cid:12)
(cid:9), are introduced for each
binary variables, (cid:8) zm
(cid:12) m ∈ Mi,n
i,n
i and n to indicate to which interval K L−C
belongs:

n,n

zm
i,n =

(cid:40)

1
0

i,n < K L−C

n,n ≤ φm
i,n

if φm+1
otherwise.

(16)

Equation (16) can be rewrite in the following form by deﬁning
i,n , zm2
ancillary binary variables zm1

i,n , ∀m ∈ Mi,n:

zm1
i,n =

(cid:40)
1
0
(cid:40)
1
0
i,n + zm2
i,n = zm1
zm

zm2
i,n =

i,n < K L−C
n,n

if φm+1
otherwise

n,n ≤ φm
i,n

if K L−C
otherwise

i,n − 1.

(17a)

(17b)

(17c)

As a result, the conditional constraints (17) can be transformed
into linear constraints, ∀n ∈ N :

0 ≤ φm+1
0 < K L−C
zm
i,n = zm1
i,n, zm1
zm

i,n − K L−C
n,n − φm
i,n + zm2

n,n + Mzm1
i,n + Mzm2
i,n − 1
i,n ∈ {0, 1}

i,n , zm2

i,n < M

i,n ≤ M

(18a)

(18b)

(18c)

(18d)

where M > 0 is a sufﬁciently large constant. With the binary
variables zm
i,n, the conditional constraints (15) can be converted
to:

(cid:88)

Fn =

Fm

n zm
i,n,

(19)

m∈Mi,n

where

Fm

n =

∂λm
i
∂K L

n,n

(K L−C

n,n −φm

i,n)+(λm

i −λ0

i ), ∀m ∈ Mi,n. (20)

The only nonlinearity in (19), (20) is the term K L−C
n,n zm
i,n,
which is the product of a continuous and a binary variable.
This can be easily linearized through the standard Big-M
method, which is not covered here. Finally, the system stability
constraint under LAAs and the IBR droop control can be

Fig. 2: Real part of system eigenvalue using proposed algo-
rithm. Circles: true values, Crosses: estimated values.

becomes larger than the limit, reset the approximation error.
Then, choose a new linearization point by setting ∆φm
i,n =
∆φ(l)
i,n and calculate the eigenvalue and the sensitivity at this
point. This process is repeated until all the values in the
sensitivity range are evaluated (in a discrete manner). To
formulate the system stability constraints, all the linearization
points and the associated sensitivities are collected:

ϕi,n = (cid:8) φm

(cid:9)

(cid:12)
(cid:12) ∀ m ∈ Mi,n
i,n
(cid:26) ∂λm
i,n
∂K L

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

n,n

∀ m ∈ Mi,n

∂ϕi,n =

(cid:27)

.

(13a)

(13b)

in practice, not all

theoretically this algorithm applies for all i =
Note that
1, ..., 2N and n ∈ N . However,
the
eigenvalues and their sensitivities with respect to all the areas
are needed. Given the system information and the prediction
of the potential attacks, it is very likely that the numbers
of vulnerable eigenvalues and sensitives are limited. Those
eigenvalues that are barely inﬂuenced by the attack and the
IBR droop control, thus never entering the right-half plane,
can be neglected.

An example of the linearization performance applying Al-
gorithm 1 is depicted in Fig. 2 where the red circles represent
the linearization point, i.e., φm
i,n ∈ {0, −2.2} in this case. It
is observed that the gradually increasing approximation error
due to the deviation from the linearization point is reset at
K L−C
n,n = −2.2, where a new linearization point is deﬁned.
Therefore, with the proposed recursive linearization approach,
any desired accuracy, speciﬁed by εlim, can be achieved within
the entire sensitivity range.

C. System Stability Constraint Reformulation

The system stability constraint (7) which is derived based on
sensitivities evaluated at one single linearization point needs
to be adapted considering Algorithm 1:

(cid:32)

(cid:60)

λ0
i +

(cid:88)

n∈N

(cid:33)

Fn

(cid:0)K L−C

n,n

(cid:1)

< 0, ∀i = 1, ..., 2N,

(14)

-3.5-3-2.5-2-1.5-1-0.50-0.3-0.2-0.100.1obtained by combining (14) with Fn being replaced by Fn
together with (18), (19) and (20):

6

(cid:18)

(cid:60)

λ0
i +

(cid:88)

(cid:18) (cid:88)

n

m

(cid:16) ∂λm
i
∂K L

+ (λm

i − λ0
i )

(cid:17)

zm
i,n

n,n
(cid:19)(cid:19)

(K L−C

n,n − φm

i,n)

< 0, ∀i = 1, ..., 2N.

(21)

IV. INCORPORATING UNCERTAINTY OF ATTACK
DETECTION INTO CRED AND OVERALL SYSTEM
OPERATION

The framework presented thus far assumes perfect knowl-
edge of the attack parameters K L. In real-world operation,
attack mitigation operation such as CRED follows the attack
detection/attack parameter estimation phase. Existing works
[13], [15] adopt a data-driven approach for this purpose using
frequency/phase angle data monitored by phasor measurement
units. However, due to the stochastic nature of the detection
algorithms (e.g., machine learning based detectors proposed
in [15]), and factors such as sensor measurement noise, the
predicted attack parameters incur estimation errors. In this
section, we present a framework to incorporate such errors
into the CRED algorithm and provide details on how CRED
can be incorporated into the overall system operation.

Fig. 3: General framework of the proposed model in system
operation.

where η ∈ (0, 1) is the conﬁdence level speciﬁed by system
operators. According to Theory 3.1 in [27], the above distri-
butionally robust chance constraint is equivalent to:

(cid:18)

(cid:60)

λ0
i +

(cid:88)

(cid:18) (cid:88)

n

m

(cid:16) ∂λm
i
∂K L

n,n

( ¯K L

n,n + kησn

− K C

n,n − φm

i,n) + (λm

i − λ0
i )

(cid:17)

kη =

(cid:114) η

1 − η

,

(cid:19)(cid:19)

zm
i,n

< 0

(25a)

(25b)

A. Distributionally Robust Chance Constraint

which ensures system stability given certain conﬁdence level.

In order to account for the uncertainty associated with
the estimation of LAAs parameters, the system stability con-
straints are further reformulated into distributionally robust
form. Assume that the ﬁrst and second moment of LAAs gains
are known whereas the detailed distribution is unknown. For
instance, the aforementioned ﬁrst and second moments can be
computed numerically by analyzing data traces obtained from
the attack detection/parameter estimation process (more details
are provided in the Section V).

Therefore,

the random variable K L
modeled by the following ambiguity set:

n,n, ∀n ∈ N can be

(cid:110)

P =

D ∈ Φ(K L

n,n) : ED(K L

n,n) = ¯K L

VarD(K L

n,n) = σ2
n

(22)

n,n,
(cid:111)
,

n,n) denotes the set of all probability distributions
n,n and σ2
n denote the mean and variation of
n,n. In addition, assume that the attacks in different areas

where Φ(K L
n,n; ¯K L
on K L
K L
are independent with each other, i.e.,

cov (cid:0)K L

n,n, K L

m,m

(cid:1) = 0, ∀n, m ∈ N , n (cid:54)= m.

(23)

By modifying (21), the distributionally robust chance con-
straint of system stability, ∀i = 1, ..., 2N , can be thus written
as:

(cid:40)

inf
D∈P

Pr

(cid:60)

(cid:18)

λ0
i +

(cid:88)

(cid:18) (cid:88)

n

m

(cid:16) ∂λm
i
∂K L

+ (λm

i − λ0
i )

(cid:17)

zm
i,n

n,n
(cid:19)(cid:19)

(K L

n,n − K C

n,n − φm

i,n)

(cid:41)

< 0

≥ η,

(24)

B. Overall System Operation Framework

The overall framework of the proposed CRED is integrated
in the system scheduling model as illustrated in Fig. 3.
Since the LAAs are low frequency high impact events, it is
economically inefﬁcient to run the CRED algorithm during
normal system operation. Instead, at this stage, conventional
Unit Commitment (UC) with N-1 frequency security con-
straints (maximum RoCoF, frequency nadir and steady-state
frequency) as proposed in [28], is conducted and the LAA
detection is constantly performed. The objective of the con-
ventional UC problem is to minimize the expected cost over
all nodes in the given scenario tree:

min

(cid:88)

n∈N



π(n)



(cid:88)

g∈G



Cg(n) + ∆t(n)csP s(n)



(26)

where π(n) is the probability of scenario n ∈ N and Cg(n)
is the operation cost of unit g ∈ G in scenario n including
startup, no-load and marginal cost; ∆t(n)csP s(n) represents
the cost of the load shedding in scenario n with the three terms
being the time step of scenario n, load shedding cost and shed
load. The objective function (26) is subjected to a number of
constraints. Due to the space limitation, all the conventional
UC constraints such as those related to thermal generation
units, power balance and frequency security are not listed in
the paper. The readers can refer [28], [29] for more details
regarding the constraints and scenario tree building. Note that
at this stage, the system stability constraints are not included
in the scheduling model.

LAADetectionFrequencyStabilityCheckConventionalUCr>r0stable?Cyber-ResilientEDImplementConventionalUCResultsImplementResults1○:systemoperatingcondition2○:generatorstatus1Yes221NoYesNoHowever, if a potential LAA is detected, indicated by a
pre-deﬁned criterion, r > r0, (e.g., using existing approaches
[15]), then the system resilience needs to be guaranteed under
this circumstance. The operating conditions obtained from
conventional UC are checked ﬁrst, against system stability
given the estimation of LAA. Since the system parameters,
operating conditions and the attack information are known,
this process can be conducted fast and easily by assessing the
eigenvalues of the system (25), thus not being covered here.
A stable system renders no further action and the results from
conventional UC are implemented, whereas an unstable system
requires CRED algorithm to be implemented in order to ensure
stable system operation (until the attack can be potentially
isolated) and avoid potential blackouts.

The CRED takes the input of generator status from conven-
tional UC and outputs the resilient system operating condi-
tions. The optimization model of the CRED remains the same
as the conventional UC, except that the generator states are
ﬁxed according to the conventional UC and the constraint
(25) is added to guarantee the system stability under the
detected LAAs. Constraint (25) requires IBR droop control and
deloading of RES, which inﬂuences generation cost and the
optimization objective as deﬁned in (26). Larger droop gains
lead to a more stable system with higher operational cost.
This trade-off can be balanced within the proposed CRED
framework, ensuring the system stability under LAAs in a
most cost-effective manner. Note that
if the actual attack
parameters (such as attack controller gain K L) cannot be iden-
tiﬁed accurately, then the system operator can always use the
worst-case attack parameters in the implementation of CRED
framework, by replacing (25) with (21). Additionally, during
the CRED process, we assume that the loss of generation and
the LAAs would not occur simultaneously.

V. CASE STUDIES

In this section, the effectiveness of the proposed CRED
algorithm and its impact on system operation are assessed
through simulations in the modiﬁed IEEE Reliability Test
System (72 buses, 33 machines). The system is divided into
three areas and the parameters are available in [30], [31].
In addition, wind generation is added in Area 2 to realize
different IBR penetrations and it is assumed that the attack
only occurs in Area 2 since an attack in other areas has little
impact on system operation as demonstrated in Section V-C.
Other system parameters are set as follows:
load demand
P D ∈ [4.79, 8.55] GW, load damping D = 0.5%P D/1 Hz,
base power PB = 1GW, conﬁdence level η = 95%. The
frequency limits of nadir, steady-state value and RoCoF are
set as: 0.8 Hz, 0.5 Hz and 0.5 Hz/s respectively. The weather
conditions are obtained from online numerical weather predic-
tion [32]. We consider an optimization problem with a time
horizon of 24 hours and time step of 1 hour, which is solved
by Gurobi (8.1.0) on a PC with Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-7820X
CPU @ 3.60GHz and RAM of 64 GB. Note that the SI from
IBRs are not considered, i.e., Ms = 0 in (1), for all the case
studies except in Section V-D where its impact is explicitly
investigated.

7

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4: System frequency evolution after a small step distur-
bance at t = 1 s: (a) without CRED; (b) with CRED.

A. Time domain simulation

The effectiveness of the proposed CRED in terms of
maintaining system stability is validated through time domain
simulation. Fig. 4 depicts the frequency dynamics of the
studied system under LAA at Area 2 with and without the
CRED, where fi∈{1,2,3} represents the averaged frequency
of the i-th area. The same amount of accessible vulnerable
load (30%) to the attacker is assumed for both situations. In
order to assess the system stability, the frequency variations
are triggered by applying a small step disturbance at t = 1 s.
In Fig. 4a, the system becomes unstable under LAAs without
CRED, where the frequencies in all the areas oscillate with
increasing magnitude. f2 is spotted with the largest oscillation
magnitude as the LAA is applied in this area. This growing
frequency deviation would eventually lead to generator trips
and even cascade failures, endangering the system operation.
On the contrary, with the proposed CRED (Fig. 4b), the LAA
with the same magnitude cannot destabilize the system, since
there is enough damping in the system and the oscillations
due to the LAA gradually attenuate. Note the difference in
the frequency range of the two sub-ﬁgures.

Other parameters related to the two systems in Fig. 4 are
listed in Table I, where K L and K C are the DLAA and
IBR droop gains; Pres, P W , P G and Cost represent
the
reserved wind power for IBR droop response, total power from

TABLE I: System Parameters w/o and with CRED

CRED

w/o
with

KL
[p.u.]
26.70
26.70

KC
[p.u.]
0
18.85

Pres
[GW]
0
0.30

P W
[GW]
3.82
3.51

P G
[GW]
4.74
5.04

Cost
[k£]
68.73
80.21

010203049.85050.250.4Time[s]Frequency[Hz]f1f2f3010203049.9849.995050.0150.02Time[s]Frequency[Hz]f1f2f38

Fig. 5: Cost increment of CRED under different attack knowl-
edge.

Fig. 6: Impact of wind penetration and vulnerable load on
system operation cost considering potential LAAs.

wind and synchronous generation and system operation cost
respectively. It is observed that to maintain system stability
0.6 GW of wind power is deloaded, hence more power from
SGs and larger operation cost.

B. Assessment of CRED with various knowledge of attack
parameters

The additional system operation cost to ensure the cyber-
resilience is shown in Fig. 5. Three different situations are
considered: (1) worst case assumption of the attack parameter
where the system operator has no estimation of the actual at-
tacks and assumes the attacker has access to all the vulnerable
load in the system (Base Case); (2) accurate estimation of the
actual attacks where the real attack gains can be predicted
perfectly (blue bars in Case I-III); (3) Distributional Robust
(DR) case where only the ﬁrst and second moments of the
attack parameters are assumed to be known based on some
attack estimation methods (red bars in Case I-III). In particular,
for (3), we implement the sparse identiﬁcation of non-linear
dynamics (SINDy) algorithm proposed in [15] for LAAs attack
parameter estimation (we choose the SINDy algorithm as the
algorithm is robust and performs well over a wide range of
system parameters) over 1000 runs, and compute the required
ﬁrst and second moments numerically as shown in Table II.
Note that the installed wind capacity in Area 2 for all the cases
is 5 GW and the total vulnerable load is 30% of the load in
this area. Since attacks with the same magnitude at different
hours of a day may have different effect on system operation,
the cost increment in this work is the averaged value among
the cost increment due to the attack at each hour of the day.
It can be observed from the ﬁgure that Base Case leads
to largest cost increment since it assumes all the vulnerable
load can be accessed by the attacker to generate the attack,
thus being most conservative. In this case, the accurate and
DR approaches make no difference. Furthermore, Case I to
Case III represent the circumstances where the attacker has
80%, 60% and 40% accessibility to the entire vulnerable load
respectively. As expected, when the attacker has lower accessi-

TABLE II: Attack Parameters Associated with Fig. 5

Base Case Case I Case II Case III

KL [p.u.]
¯KL [p.u.]
σ [p.u.]

22.31
22.31
0

16.96
17.59
0.48

13.50
13.19
0.36

9.11
8.80
0.24

these cases,

bility to the vulnerable load, less additional cost is generated
for both accurate estimation and DR approach, to maintain
the system stability. In all
the DR approach
causes slightly larger cost increment compared with accurate
estimation due to the uncertainty management associated with
is also clear
the attack parameter estimation. However,
that the proposed DR approach can reduce the attack-induced
operation cost giving actual estimation of the attack parameters
compared with the worst case assumption.

it

Note that the dynamic simulation shown in Fig. 4b cor-
responds to the accurate attack estimation case. Since the
DR case presents a very similar trend except a slightly faster
attenuation rate due to the larger damping, it is not included.

C. Impact of wind penetration on LAAs and CRED

In conventional power system where the main power sources
are SGs, the LAAs may not be able to destabilize the system
as there is sufﬁcient damping in the system. However, the
consequence of LAAs could become more obvious with higher
wind penetration where less damping from SGs is available. To
demonstrate this effect, Fig. 6 depicts system cost increment
due to the attack with increasing percentage of vulnerable load,
where each line represents a different installed wind capacity.
If no wind generation is installed in the system (green line),
the LAAs do not inﬂuence the system operation cost because
the SGs are capable of maintaining the system stability even
if 50% of the load in Area 2 is vulnerable. Furthermore, as the
installed wind capacity increases to 3 GW and 5 GW, less SGs
are dispatched in the system, making the system less stable.
Therefore, additional damping (K C) is required from IBRs
to maintain system stability under the LAAs, which results in
the deloading of wind power and more dispatched power from
SGs, hence more operation cost. A larger wind penetration and
higher vulnerable load make the above effect more evident,
corresponding to higher cost increment. Notably, after the
vulnerable load increases to about 35% and 40% in the cases
of 3 GW and 5 GW respectively, the system operation cost
grows dramatically. This is because there is not enough wind
power to be deloaded for more damping provision and some
of the load has to be curtailed to maintain system stability,
thus generating signiﬁcant load shedding cost.

However, as the wind penetration continues increasing (blue
and black curves), we notice that
increment due
to the attack starts to decrease, since to ensure the N-1
frequency security constraints, certain amount of SGs has

the cost

BaseCaseCaseICaseIICaseIII024686.54.42.40.76.55.22.91.1CostIncrement[k£/h]AccurateDR010203040500510VulnerableLoad[%]CostIncrement[k£/h]0GW3GW5GW10GW15GWFig. 7: Relationship between net demand and K C.

to remain connected in the system and more wind power
is available to supply additional damping, making it easier
to maintain system stability. Moreover, the substantial cost
increase induced by the load shedding disappears with the
sufﬁcient wind power.

An example of the additional damping from IBRs (K C)
under the attack at different hours in the day, and its rela-
tionship with the net demand (P D − P W ) in the system are
depicted in Fig. 7, where the vulnerable load is 30% of the
total load and the wind capacity is 5 GW. A clear negative
correlated relationship can be spotted, i.e., higher net demand
leads to less K C from wind generation. This is due to the
reason that more SGs are dispatched online to supply the
higher net demand, hence less damping from IBRs are needed
to maintain system stability. Note that the equivalent damping
from SGs is around 20 p.u. based on their own capacities [30].

D. Impact of synthetic inertia provision on CRED

During the conventional UC process in Fig. 3, the N-1
frequency security constraints are considered such that the
constraints of frequency metrics will not be violated. The
previous section (Sec. V-C) only utilizes the inertia and
primary frequency responses from SGs to ensure the frequency
security. Alternatively, fast frequency responses from IBRs can
also help to maintain the frequency constraints. Speciﬁcally,
we consider the Synthetic Inertia (SI) provision from wind
turbines [28] and its inﬂuences on the LAAs and the CRED are
analyzed here. Notably, since SI is provided using the stored
kinetic energy of wind turbines, there is no additional cost due
to SI provision.

The results are illustrated in Fig. 8, where cost increments
with various wind penetration are considered. The solid and

9

Fig. 9: Impact of energy storage on CRED. Solid lines: without
storage, Dashed lines: with storage.

dashed lines represent
the situation without and with SI
provision respectively. Compared with the previous situation
(without SI), once SI is incorporated into the convention UC
process, the additional operation cost to ensure the system
resilience under LAAs reduces signiﬁcantly at different wind
penetrations. This is due to the fact that the synthetic inertia
from the wind turbines in Area 2 decreases the eigenvalue
sensitivities with respect to the attacks, making the system
more stable. Therefore, attacks with the same magnitude as in
the no SI cases have less effects on destabilizing the system,
thus less cost increment. For the same reason, the percentage
of vulnerable load after which load shedding is needed to
ensure system stability in the cases with 3 GW and 5 GW
wind power also increases by about 10% and 8% respectively.

E. CRED under different battery energy storage conditions

In power systems with high wind penetration, it is often
the situation that certain amount of battery energy storage is
preferred to better utilize the renewable energy and mitigate
the uncertainty in the system. This subsection investigates how
the battery energy storage would inﬂuence the resilience of
the system under LAAs. Fig. 9 presents the system opera-
tion cost increment to maintain system stability under LAAs
without (solid curves) and with (dashed curves) battery energy
storage. The parameters of battery energy storage are shown
in Table III, with SoCmin, SoCmax, ηb, | ¯Pb| and Eb denote
the minimum, maximum state of charge, efﬁciency, maximum
(dis)charging power and energy capacity. It is observed that
the overall impact of battery energy storage on the system
operation against the LAAs is not very remarkable for most
of the cases in Fig. 9, where there is no load shedding. This is
because the energy usages with battery storage in the system
has already been optimized in the conventional UC problem
and once the attack is detected, the additional cost due to the
power re-dispatch would not change considerably compared
with the case where no storage is installed in the system.
Hence, the dashed lines are slightly below the solid lines with
the same color. However, the load shedding in the cases of
3 GW and 5 GW wind capacity disappears after including

TABLE III: Parameters of Battery Storage Devices

Fig. 8: Impact of synthetic inertia provision on CRED. Solid
lines: without SI, Dashed lines: with SI.

SoCmin
20%

SoCmax
80%

ηb
0.9

| ¯Pb| [GW] Eb [GWh]

5

15

61218240246Time[h]NetDemand[GW]0183654KC[p.u.]010203040500510VulnerableLoad[%]CostIncrement[k£/h]3GW5GW10GW010203040500510VulnerableLoad[%]CostIncrement[k£/h]3GW5GW10GW10

[13] S. Amini, F. Pasqualetti, M. Abbaszadeh, and H. Mohsenian-Rad,
“Hierarchical location identiﬁcation of destabilizing faults and attacks
in power systems: A frequency-domain approach,” IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 2036–2045, 2019.

[14] M. Izbicki, S. Amini, C. R. Shelton, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “Identi-
ﬁcation of destabilizing attacks in power systems,” in Proc. American
Control Conference (ACC), 2017, pp. 3424–3429.

[15] S. Lakshminarayana, S. Sthapit, H. Jahangir, C. Maple, and H. V. Poor,
“Data-driven detection and identiﬁcation of iot-enabled load-altering
attacks in power grids,” IET Smart Grid, pp. 1–16, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1049/stg2.12066

[16] S. Soltan, P. Mittal, and H. V. Poor, “Protecting the grid against mad
attacks,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, vol. 7,
no. 3, pp. 1310–1326, 2020.

[17] B. Shrestha and H. Lin, “Data-centric edge computing to defend power
grids against iot-based attacks,” Computer, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 35–43,
2020.

[18] C. Chen, M. Cui, X. Fang, B. Ren, and Y. Chen, “Load altering
attack-tolerant defense strategy for load frequency control system,”
Applied Energy, vol. 280, p. 116015, 2020.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261920314586

[19] Y. Guo, L. Wang, Z. Liu, and Y. Shen, “Reinforcement-learning-
based dynamic defense strategy of multistage game against dynamic
load altering attack,” International Journal of Electrical Power &
Energy Systems, vol. 131, p. 107113, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0142061521003525

[20] Z. Chu and F. Teng, “Short circuit current constrained uc in high
ibg-penetrated power systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 3776–3785, 2021.

[21] L. Huang, H. Xin, Z. Li, P. Ju, H. Yuan, Z. Lan, and Z. Wang, “Grid-
synchronization stability analysis and loop shaping for pll-based power
converters with different reactive power control,” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 501–516, 2020.

[22] Z. Chu, N. Zhang, and F. Teng, “Frequency-constrained resilient
scheduling of microgrid: A distributionally robust approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[23] Y. Fang, K. Jia, Z. Yang, Y. Li, and T. Bi, “Impact of inverter-interfaced
renewable energy generators on distance protection and an improved
scheme,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 66, no. 9,
pp. 7078–7088, 2019.

[24] Hatziargyriou, Nikos et al., “Deﬁnition and classiﬁcation of power
system stability – revisited & extended,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 3271–3281, 2021.

[25] S. D’Arco and J. A. Suul, “Equivalence of virtual synchronous machines
and frequency-droops for converter-based microgrids,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Smart Grid, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 394–395, 2014.

[26] U. Markovic, Z. Chu, P. Aristidou, and G. Hug, “Lqr-based adaptive
virtual synchronous machine for power systems with high inverter
penetration,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy, vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 1501–1512, 2019.

[27] G. C. Calaﬁore and L. E. Ghaoui, “On distributionally robust chance-
constrained linear programs,” Journal of Optimization Theory and Ap-
plications, pp. 1–22, 2006.

[28] Z. Chu, U. Markovic, G. Hug, and F. Teng, “Towards optimal system
scheduling with synthetic inertia provision from wind turbines,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4056–4066, 2020.

[29] F. Teng, V. Trovato, and G. Strbac, “Stochastic scheduling with inertia-
dependent fast frequency response requirements,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1557–1566, 2016.

[30] A. Moeini, I. Kamwa, P. Brunelle, and G. Sybille, “Open data ieee test
systems implemented in simpowersystems for education and research in
power grid dynamics and control,” in 2015 50th International Univer-
sities Power Engineering Conference (UPEC), 2015, pp. 1–6.

[31] Grigg, C et al., “The ieee reliability test system-1996. a report prepared
by the reliability test system task force of the application of probability
methods subcommittee,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 1010–1020, 1999.

[32] “Met Ofﬁce. Weather Forecasts,” 2022, accessed: 2022-5-18. [Online].

Available: https://www.metofﬁce.gov.uk/public/weather

battery energy storage since more damping can be supplied
by the storage system when the wind power is insufﬁcient,
therefore no need of load shedding.

It should be noted that although battery energy storage
system could reduce the total operation cost for balancing
generation and demand, it is not reﬂected in this ﬁgure since
the cost increment is always obtained by comparing with the
case where no attack would occur.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

A cyber-resilient economic dispatch model

is proposed
in this paper. The effectiveness of the proposed CRED is
demonstrated through dynamic simulations. Case studies also
illustrate the beneﬁt and essential to consider the LAA pa-
rameter estimation. The LAAs have larger impact on system
stability in systems with high wind penetration. The operation
cost increment to maintain system stability is also inﬂuenced
by the SI provision from wind turbines and the energy storage
in the system. As a follow-up of this work we are looking at
1) the impact of time delay in attack detection and using more
advanced and ﬂexible defense strategies and 2) the inﬂuence
of varying the droop gain of IBRs on the converter-driven
instability in weak grids.

REFERENCES

[1] Y. Liu, P. Ning, and M. K. Reiter, “False data injection attacks against
state estimation in electric power grids,” in Proc. ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (CCS), 2009, pp. 21–32.
[2] F. Bellizio, W. Xu, D. Qiu, Y. Ye, D. Papadaskalopoulos, J. L. Cremer,
F. Teng, and G. Strbac, “Transition to digitalized paradigms for security
control and decentralized electricity market,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
pp. 1–18, 2022.

[3] S. Lakshminarayana, A. Kammoun, M. Debbah, and H. V. Poor, “Data-
driven false data injection attacks against power grids: A random matrix
approach,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 635–
646, 2021.

[4] A. Dabrowski, J. Ullrich, and E. R. Weippl, “Grid shock: Coordinated
load-changing attacks on power grids: The non-smart power grid is
vulnerable to cyber attacks as well,” in Proc. Annual Computer Security
Applications Conference (ACSAC), 2017, pp. 303–314.

[5] S. Soltan, P. Mittal, and H. V. Poor, “BlackIoT: IoT botnet of high
wattage devices can disrupt the power grid,” in Proc. USENIX Security,
2018, pp. 15–32.

[6] B. Huang, A. A. Cardenas, and R. Baldick, “Not everything is dark and
gloomy: Power grid protections against iot demand attacks,” in Proc.
USENIX Security Symposium, Aug. 2019, pp. 1115–1132.

[7] J. Ospina et al., “On the feasibility of load-changing attacks in power
systems during the covid-19 pandemic,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 2545–
2563, 2021.

[8] S. Lakshminarayana, J. Ospina, and C. Konstantinou, “Load-altering
attacks against power grids under COVID-19 low-inertia conditions,”
IEEE Open Access Journal of Power and Energy, pp. 1–1, 2022.
[Online]. Available: 10.1109/OAJPE.2022.3155973

[9] S. Amini, F. Pasqualetti, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “Dynamic load altering
attacks against power system stability: Attack models and protection
schemes,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2862–
2872, July 2018.

[10] S. Acharya, Y. Dvorkin, and R. Karri, “Public plug-in electric vehicles
+ grid data: Is a new cyberattack vector viable?” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 5099–5113, 2020.

[11] S. Lakshminarayana, S. Adhikari, and C. Maple, “Analysis of iot-based
load altering attacks against power grids using the theory of second-
order dynamical systems,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 12,
no. 5, pp. 4415–4425, 2021.

[12] S. Amini, F. Pasqualetti, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “Detecting dynamic
load altering attacks: A data-driven time-frequency analysis,” in Proc.
SmartGridComm, 2015, pp. 503–508.

