Efficacy of Asynchronous GPS Spoofing Against High
Volume Consumer GNSS Receivers
Gaurav S Kasbekar
Department of Electrical Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology,
Bombay
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
gskasbekar@ee.iitb.ac.in

M Surendra Kumar
msurendrakumar2008@gmail.com
Department of Aerospace
Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Bombay
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India

Arnab Maity
Department of Aerospace
Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Bombay
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
arnab@aero.iitb.ac.in

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

8
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
3
1
9
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract
The vulnerability of the Global Positioning System (GPS)
against spoofing is known for quite some time. Also, the
positioning and navigation of most semi-autonomous and
autonomous drones are dependent on Global Navigation
Satellite System (GNSS) signals. In prior work, simplistic
or asynchronous GPS spoofing was found to be a simple,
efficient, and effective cyber attack against L1 GPS or GNSS
dependent commercial drones. In this paper, first we make
some important observations on asynchronous GPS spoofing
attacks on drones presented in prior research literature. Then,
we design an asynchronous GPS spoofing attack plan. Next,
we test the effectiveness of this attack against GNSS receivers
(high volume consumer devices based on Android mobile
phones) of different capabilities and a commercial drone (DJI
Mavic 2 Pro) under various conditions. Finally, we present
several novel insights based on the results of the tests.

CCS Concepts: • General and reference → Evaluation; •
Security and privacy → Denial-of-service attacks; Embed-
ded systems security; Usability in security and privacy.

Keywords: vulnerability, asynchronous, GPS Spoofing, at-
tack plan, GNSS receiver

ACM Reference Format:
M Surendra Kumar, Gaurav S Kasbekar, and Arnab Maity. 2022.
Efficacy of Asynchronous GPS Spoofing Against High Volume
Consumer GNSS Receivers. In Proceedings of October 24–28, 2022
(MSWiM ’22). ACM, Montreal, Canada, 10 pages. https://doi.org/
XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
MSWiM ’22, Montreal, Canada,
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

1 Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) or drones are no more a
technology of the future; they are a current story unfold-
ing [19]. Nearly all the businesses, activities, and services
carried out by humankind on this planet are on the verge
of being disrupted by this technology [5]. Indian national
planners too have taken cognizance of this possibility and
have liberalized the civilian drone rules along with introduc-
ing the Production Linked Incentives (PLI) in our country
[23]. The impact of these changes made is seen as a catalyst
in expanding the Indian drone industry, which is presently
having a turnover of approximately Indian National Rupees
(INR) 80.00 crores, to an estimated INR 900.00 crores by 2023
and INR 15,000.00 crores by 2026 [20]. It is also estimated
that every year, 10 million plus GNSS enabled drones will
be manufactured and shipped this decade [10]. This expo-
nential growth in the number of drones around us makes
it imperative for us to assess the vulnerabilities of commer-
cially available UAVs against various threats and be prepared
to exploit or counter them.

Figure 1. Ingress and egress routes, i.e., inputs into and
outputs from a drone along with their vulnerabilities.

Researchers worldwide have studied cyber-security vul-
nerabilities of UAVs [12, 13, 22, 36, 38]. Cyber threats are
often considered equivalent to theft or disruption, and these

 
 
 
 
 
 
MSWiM ’22, Montreal, Canada,

are carried out using the ingress or egress routes [14]. Fig.
1 shows the vulnerabilities in ingress and egress routes, i.e.,
the inputs to and outputs from a UAV. In semi-autonomous
and autonomous drones, the GPS or GNSS input is vital since
in addition to basic positioning and reporting locations on
maps, other functions such as return to home and no-fly
zone are based on them. From previous work done in this
field, it was found that GPS spoofing is an effective attack
and it is applicable against a large number of commercial
drones.

Based on the success of GPS spoofing against commercial
drones in previous research works, our main aim was to
check if GPS spoofing can be used as an effective counter-
measure against rogue commercial drones. As more than
90% of high volume consumer devices support only the L1
frequency [9], in this work we set up an asynchronous GPS
spoofing attack and test its efficacy against GNSS receivers
(single frequency multi-constellation based receivers with
different capabilities in high volume consumer devices such
as Android mobiles) and a commercial drone. The major
contributions of this paper are as follows:

• We first observe the commonality in the conditions
under which GPS spoofing attacks reported in prior
research literature were conducted.

• Next, we design a detailed GPS spoofing attack plan.
• We generate GPS spoofing signals and transmit them.
• We test our attacks against GNSS receivers and a com-

mercial drone under different conditions.
• We present our observations from the results.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
provides a review of prior research literature. We explain our
GPS spoofing attack plan in Section 3. Section 4 describes the
experimental setup and scenarios. In Section 5, the results
obtained from our experiments are presented and discussed.
Section 6 concludes our work.

2 Related Work
Commercial drones can be categorized into three types,
based on the role of an operator and its autonomy [1]: 1) Re-
motely Piloted Vehicle: Driven by drone pilots, always keep-
ing the drone within their visual range, 2) Semi-Autonomous:
Has capabilities such as hovering and returning to home
without inputs by the operator, 3) Fully-Autonomous: Does
not necessarily require a Command-and-Control (C2) link.
The GPS is an all-weather, satellite-based navigation sys-
tem developed by the Department of Defence (DOD) of the
United States. It was developed for military use, but today
it continuously provides position, velocity, and time (PVT)
services to military as well as civilian users worldwide at or
near the surface of the earth [26, 37]. Satellite navigation sys-
tems with global coverage are termed GNSS [4]. E.g., United
States’ GPS, Russia’s GLONASS, China’s BeiDou navigation
satellite system, and the European Union’s Galileo are the

M Surendra Kumar, et al.

four operational GNSS. Japan and India have their regional
satellite-based navigation systems [4]. GPS being the earliest
in becoming fully functional with global coverage and free
of cost, has been widely used commercially. 100% of GNSS
receivers manufactured till date have L1 frequency compat-
ibility [25]. Moreover, over 70% of the GNSS receivers can
operate only on the L1 frequency [25].

The vulnerability of L1 GPS signals is known for almost
two decades now. Civilian GPS signals are vulnerable due to
three reasons:

• Transparency of the technology[4, 26, 27, 37]: Owing
to this, developers have developed software to generate
signals similar to GPS. An open source GPS simulator
is [8] (commercially too GPS or GNSS simulators [24,
29] are available).

• The fact that there is no authentication mechanism in
civilian L1 GPS signals keeps it vulnerable to spoofing
[4, 26, 27, 37].

• The low power of the GPS received signals [4, 26, 27,

37] keeps it vulnerable to being over-powered.

The GPS spoofing threat was assessed and various ver-
sions of GPS spoofing were explained by the authors in [18].
Different versions of GPS spoofing include asynchronous
spoofing (when an attacker does not synchronize the spoofed
signals with the original GPS signals), intermediate spoofing
(in this, an attacker synchronizes the spoofed signal based on
the knowledge of the receiver’s location and time), sophisti-
cated spoofing (in this, an attacker transmits synchronized
spoofed signals using multiple antennae to overcome the
direction of arrival counter-measure), and meaconing (in this
spoofing methodology, an attacker re-transmits the received
authentic signals) [18]. The authors of [18] also developed a
sophisticated GPS spoofer, but it was too bulky and costly.
The authors of [35] explained the nuances of carrying out
successful GPS spoofing attacks; however, most of the exper-
iments in this paper were set up in a controlled environment.
In [34], the authors demonstrated hacking a commercial
civilian UAV using GPS spoofing. The hacking was carried
out under the live sky, but used specifically designed GPS
spoofing equipment. GPS spoofing using a Software Defined
Radio (SDR) was demonstrated in [17]. A software devel-
oper developed code for a GPS simulator and made it public
by uploading the same on GitHub [8]. This simulator gen-
erated L1 civilian GPS baseband signal data streams and
required an SDR for generation and transmission (Tx) of
Radio Frequency (RF) signals. In [17] and [8], the equipment
and process for carrying out an asynchronous GPS spoofing
attack were simplified. Numerous research works have been
done since then, in the area of GPS spoofing simulations and
attacks, showing the vulnerabilities of various commercial
drones using open source code or commercial GPS simula-
tors [2, 7, 15, 16, 28, 32, 33, 39]. Nearly all of the GPS spoofing
work done till date have been reviewed in [21]. The authors

Efficacy of Asynchronous GPS Spoofing Against High Volume Consumer GNSS Receivers

MSWiM ’22, Montreal, Canada,

Table 1. System and conditions of GPS spoofing

Reference

System

Conditions

[16]

[15]

[7]

[2]

[39]
[33]

[32]

SDR (BladeRF X40)+Open • Static and dynamic spoofing done against static drone
Source Simulator (OSS)
SDR (USRP B210)+
Replayed received signal
LABSAT3
GPS simulator
SDR (BladeRF X40)
+OSS
SDR (HackRF One)+OSS
Aeroflex GPSG
-1000 GPS simulator
SDR (BladeRF X40)+OSS

• Experiment carried out indoor
• Target’s position required
• Target drone in loiter or hovering mode
• Experiment carried out indoor
• Drone in static position
• Experiment carried out indoor
• Drone landed or hovering
• Attacks carried out against hovering or landed drone
• Experiment carried out under lab conditions
• In absence of live-sky signals
• Attacks carried out against hovering drone

did not limit their review to GPS spoofing attacks against
aerial platforms, but also included non aerial platforms.

Table 1 tabulates some of the recent successful GPS spoof-
ing attacks against commercial civilian drones along with
the spoofing system utilised and the specific conditions un-
der which attacks were carried out. It can be observed from
Table 1 that most of the spoofing attacks have been carried
out against static or hovering drones and indoors (in absence
of live sky signals). Moreover, all the attacks were against
GPS receivers and not against GNSS receivers. In [40], the
authors summarized various countermeasures against GNSS
spoofing, along with the sophistication and cost required
in implementing them. Table 1 shows that under the condi-
tions listed in the table, GPS spoofing attacks are successful
against commercial drones. However, in [31], it has been
shown that mass consumer devices like Android mobiles
with dual-frequency band GNSS chipset are resilient against
synchronous GPS spoofing attacks. In this paper, we seek to
evaluate the efficacy of asynchronous GPS spoofing, find out
the conditions under which it works and hence can be used
as an effective countermeasure against rogue commercial
drones, and to suggest countermeasures to protect drones
against it.

3 GPS Spoofing Attack Plan
The GPS spoofing attack plan was designed and executed
to check the efficacy of asynchronous GPS spoofing against
GNSS receivers. The attack plan consists of the following
phases: generation, Tx, target, and testing. Fig. 2 shows our
attack plan.

3.1 Generation of GPS Spoofed Signal

The generation of a GPS baseband signal has been carried
out on a laptop with Windows 10 as its operating system.
GPS-SDR-SIM [8] is used as the GPS simulator in our ex-
periments. GPS-SDR-SIM is an open source GPS simulator

Figure 2. GPS spoofing attack plan designed considering
generation, transmission (Tx), targets of attack, and method
to test the results.

written in C, which can generate GPS baseband data streams
in binary format. A Receiver INdependent EXchange format
(RINEX) navigation file for GPS ephemerides is required by
GPS-SDR-SIM, which can be downloaded from the cddis.nasa
website [6]. The broadcast ephemeris files are named as brd-
cDDD0.YYn, where DDD is the number of days of the year,
i.e., 001 to 365/ 366 and YY are the last two digits of the year.
E.g., for 10 Jun 2022, the broadcast ephemeris file is uploaded
with the name brdc1610.22n. The broadcast ephemeris file
data is uploaded post 4 hours; thus, spoofing was not carried
out for real-time scenarios. For static spoofing (i.e., when
the generated spoofed signals make a GPS receiver compute
its position to be a static location), GPS-SDR-SIM requires
the coordinates of the destination in either x,y,z in the Earth
Centered Earth Fixed (ECEF) coordinate system or latitude
(lat), longitude (long), and altitude (alt) in the World Geo-
detic System (WGS 84 coordinate system). We used the lat,
long, and alt data and sourced these information of the de-
sired spoofed destination locations from Google Maps. For
dynamic spoofing (i.e., when the generated spoofed signals
make a target GPS receiver compute its position to follow a
dynamic path with a certain velocity), GPS-SDR-SIM requires
either a user defined Comma Separated Values (CSV) file or

MSWiM ’22, Montreal, Canada,

a National Marine Engineering Association (NMEA) GGA
stream of data. We utilised Google Earth to define a route at
the desired location, exported the Keyhole Markup Language
(KML) file onto the SatGen software [24] (Labsat provides a
trial version of its SatGen software which can generate a L1
Coarse Acquisition (C/ A) signal) and generated the NMEA
GGA data stream. Fig. 3 is a pictorial representation of how
the spoofed GPS signal is generated.

M Surendra Kumar, et al.

• Time To First Fix (TTFF), i.e., the time taken by the
GNSS receiver to compute its position in seconds

• Speed in m/ s
• Number of satellites (#Sats) in the format xx/ yy/ zz:
where xx shows the number of satellites used in the
fix, yy represents the number of satellites in view with
valid signal strength, and zz shows the number of satel-
lites known to the device

• C/N0: Carrier to noise density ratio in dBHz.

Figure 3. The image shows how generation of various
spoofed GPS signals (static or dynamic) has been carried
out.

3.2 Tx of Generated Spoofed Signal

The generated GPS baseband data streams are converted to
RF using a Software Defined Radio (SDR). We have utilized
the HackRF One SDR (the lowest price of HackRF One SDR
in comparison to other available SDRs was the reason for
choosing it). For Tx of the generated RF signal, a compatible
700-5800 MHz directional patch array antenna was utilised.
The intention behind using a directional antenna was to keep
the generated spoofed signals in the desired directions only,
while carrying out the experiments. The internal crystal
clock accuracy of our SDR is 20 parts per million (PPM). To
improve the accuracy, we used a Temperature Compensated
Crystal Oscillator (TCXO) with accuracy 0.5 PPM. Fig. 6 (top
left) shows a TCXO connected to a HackRF One SDR.

3.3 Target and Testing

The efficacy of an asynchronous GPS spoofing attack was
tested against GNSS receivers in high volume consumer de-
vices with different chipsets and support for different con-
stellations as shown in Table 2, and against a commercial
drone (DJI Mavic 2 Pro). To record the received signals in the
Android devices, we utilised the GPSTest Application (App)
[3]. Fig. 4 shows various views of the GPSTest App. The left-
most screenshot is of the status view. The status view gives
a lot of information; the important ones for understanding
our results are:

Figure 4. GPSTest App’s various views: status view (left),
sky view (centre), and map view (right).

The centre screenshot is of the sky view and the rightmost
screenshot is of the map view. In addition to the GPSTest
App’s map, we also utilised Google Maps and Ola App’s map
for visualising our original and spoofed locations on the
Android devices. DJI Go 4 App is the requisite App required
by a DJI mobile based controller to fly a DJI drone. We utilised
this App to visualize the drone’s location, registered the
drone’s home location, and controller location. Our testing
was conducted in three phases.

• Phase I: Testing different scenarios onto a single An-

droid mobile device.

• Phase II: Testing different scenarios onto all four An-

droid mobile devices simultaneously.

• Phase III: Testing GPS spoofing attack on drone.

4 Experimental Scenarios and Setup
4.1 Experimental Scenarios

The efficacy of an asynchronous GPS spoofing attack against
a GNSS receiver in an Android mobile phone was tested
under the following conditions:

1. Receiver placed indoor/ outdoor in the absence/ pres-

• Lat and Long, both in decimal degrees WGS 84, Alt

ence of live sky signals, respectively.

(meters above the WGS 84 ellipsoid)

2. Static/ dynamic spoofed signal is transmitted.

Efficacy of Asynchronous GPS Spoofing Against High Volume Consumer GNSS Receivers

MSWiM ’22, Montreal, Canada,

Table 2. Models of Android Mobiles, Chipsets and GNSS Capabilities

Sr. No.@

Build

Model

Chipset

GNSS Capability

S1
S2
S3
S4

Realme 3
Oppo
ASUS
POCO

RMX1825
F7

Mediatek Helio P70
Mediatek MT6771(Helio P60)

Max Pro M1 Qualcomm SDM 636 Snapdragon
M2
Mediatek MT6769V/CU Helio G80
G= GPS, L= GLONASS, B= BeiDou, A= Assisted GPS
@While assessing the results, we will be referring to different Android devices with their sr. nos., i.e., S1, S2, S3
and S4.

G+L+A
G+L+A
G+L+B+A
G+L+B+A

3. Receiver is static/ mobile.

The simulated GPS signals were designed to simulate static
and dynamic locations in and around Indian Institute of
Technology, Bombay (Mumbai), Maharashtra, India. The ex-
periments were conducted in the outskirts of Madurai, Tamil
Nadu, India. The physical crow fly distance between the two
locations is nearly 1200 kms. Fig. 5 shows the geographical
location of the original own location (left), spoofed own lo-
cation (center), and the air travel duration between the two
locations, which is more than 2 hrs and 30 mins (right).

Figure 6. Top left: external TCXO connected on HackRF
One SDR; Top right: indoor experimental setup; Bottom left:
capabilities of different GNSS receivers; Bottom right: setup
for spoofing test against drone.

used as a controller of the drone. We used both Android and
iOS mobile phones as the controller and our results in the
two cases were the same (see Section 5).

5 Experimental Results and Discussion
Initially, the spoofed signals transmitted by the SDR as plan-
ned in Fig. 2 were not received by the Android phone GNSS
receiver. However, once an external TCXO with 0.5 PPM
accuracy was fixed onto the HackRF One SDR as shown
in Fig. 6 (top left), the spoofed signals were received by
the GNSS receiver. Figs. 7-18 (explained in the following
sections) are screenshots of the GPSTest App, Google Maps,
OLA App, camera capture, DJI Go 4 map, and Apple map
showing the results of spoofing taken during testing. Table
3 shows the results of various asynchronous GPS spoofing
tests conducted over the embedded GNSS receiver of an
Android mobile phone S1 (see Table 2).

Figure 5. Screenshots of original own location (left), spoofed
own location (center), air travel duration between the two
(right).

4.2 Experimental Setup

The top (right) and bottom (right) images in Fig. 6 show the
experimental setup for conducting the efficacy test against
Android mobile phone based GNSS receivers and a commer-
cial drone (DJI Mavic 2 Pro), respectively. As per the user
manual, a DJI Mavic 2 Pro’s GNSS receiver supports GPS
and GLONASS. However, the frequencies and bands utilised
by the drone are not shared. DJI drones use a DJI GO App,
which can be run on an Android or iOS mobile phone and

MSWiM ’22, Montreal, Canada,

5.1 Indoor and Outdoor (Static/ Dynamic) Spoofing
Against an Android Mobile Phone based GNSS
Receiver

M Surendra Kumar, et al.

Figure 7. Indoor static spoofing: the leftmost screenshot is
of GPSTest App with no original GNSS signal being received,
center screenshot shows the reception of the spoofed signal
and the GNSS receiver locking onto it, and the rightmost
screenshot of Google Maps shows own location as in the
middle of Powai lake, Mumbai.

Fig. 7 shows the screenshots (left to right) taken during
the static GPS spoofing attack carried out against a GNSS
receiver under indoor conditions. The GNSS receiver was
not able to receive any signals from GPS or GLONASS con-
stellation satellites, as highlighted in the leftmost screenshot.
Once the spoofed signals were transmitted, the GNSS re-
ceiver started receiving them instantaneously and was able
to compute its position within 30-40 s. The center screen-
shot highlights that it took the receiver 38 s as TTFF. The
received C/N0 is found to be ranging from 40 to 55 dBHz.
Fig. 8 shows the effect of indoor dynamic spoofing on the
GNSS receiver. As was seen in Fig. 7 itself, the receiver was
not able to receive any genuine signals indoors. Fig. 8 shows
screenshots from the beginning of the dynamic spoofing
till the receiver computed its position (left to right). Even
though the TTFF is shown as 33 s, the own location blip in
Google Maps took some time (3-10 s) to follow the dynamic
movement. The rightmost screenshot of Fig. 8 highlights the
receiver showing its speed as 25.8 m/ s.

Fig. 9 shows sequential screenshots (left to right) of the
Google Maps App running and showing its location to be
shifting around the Gymkhana track of IIT Bombay (as de-
signed in the spoofed signal generation process). The initial
results of dynamic spoofing were not consistent, i.e., the
movement of own location blip in Google Maps was not
corresponding accurately with the designed route. To im-
prove the same, the way-points, while designing the route in

Figure 8. Indoor dynamic spoofing: screenshots of GPSTest
App. The leftmost screenshot shows the beginning of spoof-
ing. The middle screenshot shows the TTFF and the right-
most screenshot shows speed.

Figure 9. Indoor dynamic spoofing: screenshots of Google
Maps App. Left to right are the screenshots showing the
spoofed location as if moving around the Gymkhana ground
track in IIT Bombay.

Google Earth, were selected at equal distances with several
repetitions (see Fig. 10); this improved the spoofing results.
Under outdoor conditions, the receiver was receiving gen-
uine live sky signals. The Tx of spoofed GPS signals led to
the non-reception of genuine GNSS signals by the receiver,
as the generated signal strength was much higher than the
genuine GNSS signal strength. It was found that the time
taken by the GNSS receiver to lock onto the received spoofed
signals increased under outdoor conditions. Also, the time
to lock onto the received spoofed signals further increased
when dynamic spoofing was carried out, especially when
the GNSS receiver had achieved lock onto genuine signals

Efficacy of Asynchronous GPS Spoofing Against High Volume Consumer GNSS Receivers

MSWiM ’22, Montreal, Canada,

Table 3. Results of Phase I Tests

Location of Receiver
Receiver

Indoor

Static

Mobile*

Static

Outdoor

Mobile*

S(30-40 s)
S(30-40 s)

Static spoofed signal
Dynamic spoofed signal

S(30-50 s)
S(>90 s)
S= spoofing was successful; (xx s) = time taken by the receiver to show spoofed location.
∗ Movement to the receiver was imparted by manual walking movement with a speed not more than 1 meter (m) per
second (s). Also, the maximum distance of the receiver from the spoofer during the experiments was less than 50 m. All
the tests were carried out with the cellular 4G network on.

S(30-40 s)
S(>60 s)

S(>60 s)
S (>90 s)

Figure 10. Designing route in Google Earth with numerous
waypoints.

before the receipt of spoofed signals. Fig. 11 shows screen-
shots of Google Maps and OLA App before and after Tx of
the spoofed signals under outdoor conditions. Figs. 12 and
13 show the results during dynamic spoofing attacks being
tested with the movement of the GNSS receiver, i.e., the An-
droid mobile device. The movement of the Android mobile
phone was in a straight line without any change in height,
starting from a distance and ending at the spoofing signal
generation system. This movement was imparted by walking
with the Android mobile phone in hand.

5.2 Results of Static and Dynamic Spoofing under

Indoor and Outdoor Conditions on Different
GNSS Receivers

Table 4 summarizes all the testing results. Fig. 14 and Fig.
15 show the results. The results show that in presence of
live sky signals from three constellations, the receiver did
not get spoofed by dynamic signals. Thus, receivers with
more constellation support are less prone to get spoofed
by dynamic signals (provided the genuine signals are not
jammed). In addition, even a three-constellation-supported
GNSS receiver can get spoofed if receiver is overwhelmed

Figure 11. Outdoor static spoofing: the two screenshots on
the left are of the Google Maps App before and after spoofing.
The two screenshots on the right are of the OLA App map
before and after spoofing.

by the spoofing signal, as in the case of static spoofing (S4
getting spoofed during static spoofing). The reason for ex-
emplary resilience shown by S3 of not accepting the spoofed
GPS signals, filtering it out and receiving only genuine sig-
nals is anti-spoofing measures being employed in it. This
was researched and it was found that its chipset supports
Observed Time Difference Of Arrival (OTDOA) [30], a Long
Term Evolution (LTE) 4G based positioning technique [11].
From our results, it can be seen that S3 utilised its OTDOA
positioning and timing to filter out spoofed signals.

5.3 Results of Indoor and Outdoor Spoofing Against

a Commercial Drone (DJI Mavic 2 Pro)

When tested indoor (in absence of genuine signals), the
drone controller accepted the spoofed signals and showed
the spoofed location as its own location. Our results of in-
door spoofing against the drone can be seen in Fig. 16. When
tested outdoor (once the drone and its controller had locked
onto genuine GNSS signals), the drone controller accepted
the spoofed signals and showed the spoofed location as its

MSWiM ’22, Montreal, Canada,

M Surendra Kumar, et al.

Table 4. Results of various tests on different GNSS receivers.

Location
Spoofed Signal

Indoor
S3∗
S2∗

S1∗

S4∗

S1∗

S2∗

Outdoor
S3∗

S4∗

Static Spoofing
Dynamic Spoofing
∗ Sr. No. as given in Table 2, S= Successfully Spoofed, @= did not get spoofed

S @ S
S @ S

S @
S @

S
@

S
S

S
S

Figure 12. Left to right: screenshots of GPSTest App, Google
Maps, and mobile phone camera during outdoor dynamic
spoofing.

Figure 14. Results of dynamic GPS spoofing on different
GNSS receivers.

Figure 13. Left to right: screenshots of GPSTest App, Google
Maps, and mobile phone camera after receipt of dynamic
spoofing signals (outdoor).

own location. However, the drone registered its original lo-
cation as its home location (seen in the bottom half of Fig.
17 as H circled by green color). The drone with its align-
ment is seen in the screenshots as a red arrow head. Fig. 18

Figure 15. Results of static GPS spoofing on different GNSS
receivers.

shows similar results received in an iOS based drone con-
troller. From the results received during indoor and outdoor
testing against the drone, it was found that the drone did
not accept the spoofed signals. It can be assumed that the
manufacturers have incorporated countermeasures against
GPS spoofing in their latest firmware update. Since we did

Efficacy of Asynchronous GPS Spoofing Against High Volume Consumer GNSS Receivers

MSWiM ’22, Montreal, Canada,

Figure 16. Screenshots taken on drone controller Android
device during indoor spoofing: top left #1: GPSTest App
showing receipt of spoofed signals, top center #2: GPSTest
App map showing controller’s location, top right #3: Google
Maps App showing controller’s location, bottom #4: DJI GO
4 App showing controller’s location.

Figure 18. Screenshots taken on ios based drone controller
with DJI Go 4 App running. Top left: Google Maps showing
spoofed location; Top right: Apple map showing spoofed
location: Bottom: DJI Go 4 map showing drone’s location
and registered home location.

support. A DJI made commercial drone is found to be se-
cure from asynchronous GPS spoofing. The obvious coun-
termeasure against such a GPS spoofing attack is a multi-
frequency GPS receiver or GNSS receiver. Since commer-
cial paid GNSS simulators are capable of generating multi-
frequency multi-constellation signals, a multi-frequency and
a multi-constellation GNSS receiver can also be spoofed.
Utilising simple anti-spoofing measures like filtering out
high power signals or signals with time errors more than
a few milliseconds can be sufficient to protect these high
volume consumer device GNSS receivers from asynchronous
GPS spoofing. A direction for future research is to explore
the efficacy of GNSS simulator based spoofing attacks and
countermeasures. It will also be interesting to see how coun-
termeasures such as OTDOA (which utilizes the network for
positioning) and those implemented in commercial drones
will fare against GNSS simulator based synchronous spoof-
ing attacks.

Acknowledgments
The work was partially supported by SEED grant [RD/0516-
IRCCSH0-026 (16IRCCSG009)].

References
[1] Abdul Aabid, Bisma Parveez, Nagma Parveen, Sher Afghan Khan, and
Md Abdul. 2022. Reviews on Design and Development of Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle (Drone) for Different Applications. J. Mech. Eng. Res.
Dev 45, 2 (2022), 53–69.

[2] Sandra Pérez Arteaga, Luis Alberto Martínez Hernández,
Gabriel Sánchez Pérez, Ana Lucila Sandoval Orozco, and Luis

Figure 17. Screenshots taken on drone controller with DJI
Go 4 App running. Top: drone own location; Bottom: con-
troller’s and drone’s locations.

not have proprietary permission, we could not find which
particular countermeasure has been implemented in this
drone. Our results show that a vulnerability which these
drones (DJI made) once had (shown in many research papers
till late 2020) has been patched up.

6 Conclusions and Future Work
Our results show that an asynchronous GPS spoofing at-
tack is effective even under live sky signals against GNSS
receivers in Android mobile phones with single frequency

MSWiM ’22, Montreal, Canada,

M Surendra Kumar, et al.

Javier García Villalba. 2019. Analysis of the GPS spoofing vulnerability
in the drone 3DR solo. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 51782–51789.

[3] Sean Barbeau and Mike Lockwood. 2021. GPSTest android application.

https://github.com/barbeau/gpstest

[4] Juan Blanch, Todd Walter, and Per Enge. 2012. Satellite Navigation
for aviation in 2025. Proc. IEEE 100, Special Centennial Issue (2012),
1821–1830.

[5] M.J. Boyle. 2020. The Drone Age: How Drone Technology Will Change
War and Peace. Oxford University Press, Incorporated, UK. https:
//books.google.co.in/books?id=6wbcDwAAQBAJ

e507.

[22] CG Leela Krishna and Robin R Murphy. 2017. A review on cyber-
security vulnerabilities for unmanned aerial vehicles. In 2017 IEEE
International Symposium on Safety, Security and Rescue Robotics (SSRR).
IEEE, IEEE, Shanghai, China, 194–199.

[23] Mamidala Jagadesh Kumar. 2021. The sky is not the limit: The new
rules give wings to the Drone Technology in India. , 463–464 pages.
[24] Labsat. 2021. SatGen GNSS Signal Simulation Software. https://www.
labsat.co.uk/index.php/en/products/satgen-simulator-software
[25] Marco Lisi. 2020. GNSS User Technology Report 2020. GEOmedia 24,

[6] cddis.nasa.gov. 2022.

Broadcast Ephemeris DataFile.

https:

5 (2020).

//cddis.nasa.gov/Data$_$and$_$Derived$_$Products/GNSS/
broadcast$_$ephemeris$_$data.html

[7] Vishal Dey, Vikramkumar Pudi, Anupam Chattopadhyay, and Yuval
Elovici. 2018. Security Vulnerabilities of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and
Countermeasures: An Experimental Study. In 2018 31st International
Conference on VLSI Design and 2018 17th International Conference on
Embedded Systems (VLSID). IEEE, Pune, India, 398–403. https://doi.
org/10.1109/VLSID.2018.97

[8] Takuji Ebinuma. 2018. GPS-SDR-SIM. https://github.com/osqzss/gps-

sdr-sim

[9] EUSPA. 2020. GNSS User Technology Report 2020.

https:

//www.euspa.europa.eu/european-space/euspace-market/gnss-
market/gnss-user-technology-report

[10] EUSPA. 2022. EUSPA EO and GNSS Market report 2022.

https:

//www.euspa.europa.eu/2022-market-report

[11] Sven Fischer. 2014. Observed time difference of arrival (OTDOA)
positioning in 3GPP LTE. Qualcomm White Pap 1, 1 (2014), 1–62.
[12] Joshua Gordon, Victoria Kraj, Ji Hun Hwang, and Ashok Raja. 2019. A
security assessment for consumer wifi drones. In 2019 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Industrial Internet (ICII). IEEE, IEEE, Orlando, FL,
USA, 1–5.

[13] Kim Hartmann and Christoph Steup. 2013. The vulnerability of UAVs
to cyber attacks-An approach to the risk assessment. In 2013 5th inter-
national conference on cyber conflict (CYCON 2013). IEEE, IEEE, Tallinn,
Estonia, 1–23.

[14] ME Hathaway. 2014. MELISSA E. HATHAWAYa and JOHNN. STEW-
ARTb aCouncil of Experts, Global Cyber Security Center (GCSEC).
Best Practices in Computer Network Defense: Incident Detection and
Response 35 (2014), 130.

[15] Daojing He, Yinrong Qiao, Shiqing Chen, Xiao Du, Wenjie Chen, Sen-
cun Zhu, and Mohsen Guizani. 2018. A friendly and low-cost technique
for capturing non-cooperative civilian unmanned aerial vehicles. IEEE
Network 33, 2 (2018), 146–151.

[16] Eric Horton and Prakash Ranganathan. 2018. Development of a GPS
spoofing apparatus to attack a DJI Matrice 100 Quadcopter. The Journal
of Global Positioning Systems 16, 1 (2018), 1–11.

[17] Ling Huang and Qing Yang. 2015. Low-cost GPS simulator GPS spoof-
ing by SDR. In Proc. DEFCON. DEFCON23, Las Vegas, Nevada.
[18] Todd E Humphreys, Brent M Ledvina, Mark L Psiaki, Brady W
O’Hanlon, Paul M Kintner, et al. 2008. Assessing the spoofing threat:
Development of a portable GPS civilian spoofer. In Proceedings of the
21st International Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The
Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS 2008). Proceedings of the 21st Inter-
national Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of
Navigation (ION GNSS 2008), Savannah, GA, 2314–2325.

[19] Divya Joshi. 2019. Drone technology uses and applications for com-
mercial, industrial and military drones in 2020 and the future. Business
Insider Dec (2019).

[20] A Karunakaran. 2022. Swarm Drones and Indian Academia. Journal

of Defence Studies 16, 1 (2022), 73–81.

[21] Shah Zahid Khan, Mujahid Mohsin, and Waseem Iqbal. 2021. On GPS
spoofing of aerial platforms: a review of threats, challenges, method-
ologies, and future research directions. PeerJ Computer Science 7 (2021),

[26] Jules G McNeff. 2002. The global positioning system. IEEE Transactions

on Microwave theory and techniques 50, 3 (2002), 645–652.

[27] P. Misra and P. Enge. 2011. Global Positioning System: Signals, Mea-
surements, and Performance. Ganga-Jamuna Press, Lincoln, MA.
https://books.google.co.in/books?id=5WJOywAACAAJ

[28] Juhwan Noh, Yujin Kwon, Yunmok Son, Hocheol Shin, Dohyun Kim,
Jaeyeong Choi, and Yongdae Kim. 2019. Tractor beam: Safe-hijacking
of consumer drones with adaptive GPS spoofing. ACM Transactions
on Privacy and Security (TOPS) 22, 2 (2019), 1–26.

[29] Orolia. 2021. Skydel BroadSim GNSS Simulation Platform. https:

//www.orolia.com/document/broadsim-datasheet/
636

Snapdragon

[30] Qualcomm.com.

2022.

specifications.

https://www.qualcomm.com/products/application/smartphones/
snapdragon-6-series-mobile-platforms/snapdragon-636-mobile-
platform-Overview

[31] Akmal Rustamov, Neil Gogoi, Alex Minetto, and Fabio Dovis. 2020.
Assessment of the vulnerability to spoofing attacks of gnss receivers
integrated in consumer devices. In 2020 international conference on
localization and gnss (icl-gnss). IEEE, IEEE, Tampere, Finland, 1–6.
[32] Jabang Aru Saputro, Esa Egistian Hartadi, and Mohamad Syahral. 2020.
Implementation of GPS Attacks on DJI Phantom 3 Standard Drone as
a Security Vulnerability Test. In 2020 1st International Conference on In-
formation Technology, Advanced Mechanical and Electrical Engineering
(ICITAMEE). IEEE, IEEE, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 95–100.

[33] Dinesh Sathyamoorthy, Z Fitry, Esa Selamat, S Hassan, Ahmad Firdaus,
and Z Zaimy. 2020. Evaluation of the vulnerabilities of unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) to global positioning system (GPS) jamming and
spoofing. Defence S and T Technical Bulletin 13 (2020), 333–343.
[34] Daniel P Shepard, Jahshan A Bhatti, and Todd E Humphreys. 2012.
Drone hack: Spoofing attack demonstration on a civilian unmanned
aerial vehicle.(2012). Google Scholar (2012).

[35] Nils Ole Tippenhauer, Christina Pöpper, Kasper Bonne Rasmussen, and
Srdjan Capkun. 2011. On the requirements for successful GPS spoofing
attacks. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Computer and
communications security. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, United States, 75–86.

[36] Burak Tufekci and Cihan Tunc. 2021. Vulnerability and Threat Analysis
of UAVs. In 2021 IEEE/ACS 18th International Conference on Computer
Systems and Applications (AICCSA). IEEE, IEEE, Tangier, Morocco, 1–2.
[37] Wikipedia contributors. 2022. GPS signals — Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=GPS_signals&
oldid=1091064831 [Online; accessed 3-June-2022].

[38] Jean-Paul Yaacoub, Hassan Noura, Ola Salman, and Ali Chehab. 2020.
Security analysis of drones systems: Attacks, limitations, and recom-
mendations. Internet of Things 11 (2020), 100218.

[39] Xian-Chun Zheng and Hung-Min Sun. 2020. Hijacking unmanned
aerial vehicle by exploiting civil GPS vulnerabilities using software-
defined radio. Sensors and Materials 32, 8 (2020), 2729–2743.

[40] Jasmine Zidan, Elijah I Adegoke, Erik Kampert, Stewart A Birrell,
Col R Ford, and Matthew D Higgins. 2020. GNSS vulnerabilities and
existing solutions: A review of the literature. IEEE Access 9 (2020),
153960–153976.

