Cyber Threats Jurisdiction and Authority – A Legal Discussion 

Feras A. Batarseh 

Antonin Scalia Law School, George Mason University 

Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech  

batarseh@vt.edu 

Abstract:  Cybersecurity  threats  affect  all  aspects  of  society;  critical  infrastructures  (such  as 

networks, corporate systems, water supply systems, and intelligent transportation systems) are 

especially prone to attacks and can have tangible negative consequences on society. However, 

these  critical  cyber  systems  are  generally  governed  by  multiple  jurisdictions,  for  instance  the 

Metro in the Washington, D.C. area is managed by the states of Virginia and Maryland, as well as 

the  District  of  Columbia  (DC)  through  Washington  Metropolitan  Area  Transit  Authority 

(WMATA).  Additionally,  the  water  treatment  infrastructure  managed  by  DC  Water  consists  of 

waste  water  input  from  Fairfax  and  Arlington  counties,  and  the  district  (i.e.  DC).  Additionally, 

cyber attacks usually launch from unknown sources, through unknown switches and servers, and 

end  up  at  the  destination  without  much  knowledge  on  their  source  or  path.  Certain 

infrastructures are shared amongst multiple countries, another idiosyncrasy that exacerbates the 

issue of governance. This law paper however, is not concerned with the general governance of 

these  infrastructures,  rather  with  the  ambiguity  in  the  relevant  laws  or  doctrines  about  which 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 1 of 22 

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
authority would prevail in the context of a cyber threat or a cyber-attack, with a focus on federal 

vs. state issues, international law involvement, federal preemption, technical aspects that could 

affect  lawmaking,  and  conflicting  responsibilities  in  cases  of  cyber  crime.  A  legal  analysis  of 

previous cases is presented, as well as an extended discussion addressing different sides of the 

argument. 

1.  Introduction 

One  of  the  most  important  constitutional  doctrines  is  the  Supremacy  Clause,  which  is 

Article  VI;  Paragraph  2  of  the  U.S.  Constitution1.  It  establishes  that  the  U.S.  Constitution  and 

federal  law  take  precedence  over  state  law.  However,  in  many  cases  that  span  state  or  even 

national borders (such as issues of international law), the Supremacy Clause can be a target of 

multiple interpretations and different opinions, which lead to different court cases’ outcomes. 

Cybersecurity is a field of law that requires considering the Supremacy Clause however, 

legal  scholars  should  reflect  on  how  it  is  to  be  applied  and  in  what  form  given  the  field’s 

technical, virtual, and non-geographic nature. This report aims to present different factors and 

aspects that influence that discussion. 

The  focus  of  the  report  is  on  U.S.  law;  however  an  example  from  Australia  (that 

referenced  U.S.  statutes  in  their  court  proceedings)  illustrates  the  need  for  such  a  discussion 

across multiple jurisdictions. In the year 2000, the Maroochy Water Services was compromised 

via a cyber attack that paralyzed the water plant, dumped one million liters of sewage into the 

river,  and  -more  dangerously-  polluted  500  meters  of  open  drain  in  a  residential  area.  In  an 

opinion published by the Supreme Court of Queensland2, the court concluded that if the plant 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 2 of 22 

 
 
 
had  applied  the  U.S.  National  Institute  for  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)’s  SP  800-53 

standard3  (for  Security  and  Privacy  Controls  for  Information  Systems  and  Organizations),  the 

threat  would  have  been  mitigated  or  its  effects  hugely  minimized.  In  the  U.S.,  similar  threats 

have occurred (and continue to), such as a recent attack on Florida’s water system in 2021, and 

other wide-scale attacks across the nation on critical infrastructure such as the infamous multi-

state Colonial gas pipeline attack. In some cyber attack cases, the jurisdiction is clear because all 

the components of an infrastructure (such as a water plant) are under one district. However, in 

most other U.S. cases presented in this report (that span cross states or international borders), 

the  cyber  attack  effects  extend  to  multiple  areas,  which  creates  the  need  for  further  legal 

analysis – this law paper aims to discuss that. 

The remaining of this report is presented as follows: the next section (2) introduces the 

legal  questions  addressed.  Section  3  presents  four  arguments  related  to  the  questions  under 

discussion: (1) federal law argument, (2) state law argument, (3) the technical argument, and (4) 

the international law argument. Lastly, section 4 presents final remarks and conclusions. 

2.  The Legal Question(s) 

The  question  that  this  report  addresses  is  three-fold:  (1)  in  cases  of  cyber  attacks  on 

shared infrastructures or networks, which jurisdiction should prevail? (2) What precedential and 

constitutional considerations are to be debated to deliver legal answers related to cyber crimes? 

(3) How does federal vs. state vs. international doctrines apply in cases of Cybersecurity law? 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 3 of 22 

 
 
 
 
3.  Evaluation (The Four Main Arguments) 

This section provides a discussion on both sides of the argument, i.e. what points support 

the need for the federal government’s oversight versus the need for state’s involvement and in 

some cases, international law considerations. Section 3.1 makes the case for federal leadership 

in this arena, which 3.2 looks at state-driven use cases of Cybersecurity, section 3.3 reviews the 

technical  aspects  related  to  the  law  and  lawmaking,  and  lastly,  section  3.4  addresses  the 

international law angle and its relevance to the jurisdiction discussion.  

3.1 The Federal Argument: Authority Granted through FISA and the Executive Branch 

In many cyber-related instances, the federal government’s intervention is agreed on and 

needed, besides protecting consumers on a national scale; but also when protecting American 

networks  and  infrastructure  against  external  attacks  by  state  and  non-state  players.  In  many 

cases, cyber attacks require a response on a national scale, such as in the cases of Solar Winds 

and  other  similar  adversaries.  Article  I,  Section  8,  Clause  11  of  the  U.S.  Constitution  grants 

Congress  the  power  to  declare  war  (including  a  cyber  war).  The  President  however,  being  the 

Commander  in  Chief,  derives  the  power  to  order  the  attack  after  a  congressional  declaration. 

These  provisions  dictate  coordination  between  the  president  (Executive  Branch)  and  Congress 

(Legislative Branch) on all cyber war affairs. 

Additionally, the government has been getting involved in Cybersecurity entanglements 

internally  for  a  while  now.  For  instance,  in  a  recent  case,  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC) 

“alleged that LabMD's data-security program was inadequate and thus constituted an unfair act 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 4 of 22 

 
 
 
or practice” under Section 5 (a) of the FTC act, 15 USC § 45 (a) (as in FTC v. LabMD). The FTC act 

prohibits  “unfair  or  deceptive  acts  or  practices  in  or  affecting  commerce”.  In  2005,  the  FTC 

started with actions under the mentioned provision against companies with potentially deficient 

security of their networks or ones that failed to protect consumer data against hackers. The vast 

majority of these cases have ended in some form of a settlement – which constitutes an example 

of a successful federal intervention in cyber matters. 

Moreover,  in  2008  and  2009,  hackers  (unknown)  successfully  accessed  Wyndham 

Worldwide Corporation's computer systems. They stole personal information “for thousands of 

consumers leading to over $10.6 million dollars in fraudulent charges, the FTC filed suit in federal 

District Court, alleging that Wyndham's conduct was an unfair practice and that its privacy policy 

was deceptive” (refer to FTC vs. Wyndham Worldwide). 

Similar  domestic  cyber  threat  cases  seem  to  need  and  require  the  intervention  of  the 

federal  government  to  apply  generic  rules  to  govern  the  process,  especially  that  they  are 

considered  clear  and  responsibility  could  be  deemed  fairly  manageable,  nonetheless,  in  cases 

where  an  attack  is  from  an  external  player  (international)  via  software  and  data  tools,  it  is 

difficult  to  understand  responsibility  and  even  qualify  the  action  as  an  act  of  war  (such  as  a 

possible  routine  surveillance  operation  for  instance).  Justice  Scalia  argued  (in  one  of  the  cases 

related to Guantanamo and acts of war) that the judiciary branch has no business (whatsoever) 

in war making, whether it is in cases of cyber or not.  

Nonetheless,  in  cases  related  to  Foreign  Intelligence  Surveillance  Act  (FISA),  cyber 

defense  and  offense,  and  other  means  of  technological  acts  of  war  (such  as  drones),  it  seems 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 5 of 22 

 
 
that the statute is under scrutiny due to its lack of “catching up” with technology advancements, 

which is an area that needs progress and further collaboration with other countries.  

Similar  to  Environmental  law  (where  smoke  might  cross  borders  and  water  bodies  are 

shared),  cyber  attacks  cross  borders,  and  enacting  centralized/federal  laws  in  isolation  seems 

disconnected, accordingly, a combination between international collaboration while prioritizing 

U.S. national security is needed in enacting or updating laws such as FISA and other Department 

of Defense regulations regarding recommended actions in cyber and other advanced domains of 

war,  in  addition  to  the  Computer  Fraud  and  Abuse  Act  (CFAA)  which  is  the  one  of  the  main 

methods to prosecuting “federal level” cyber crime. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  the  President  is  allowed  (through  emergency  powers),  in 

cases of rebellion, such as in the famous Prizes  cases 67 U.S. 635 to act swiftly (a case argued 

before  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  in  1862  during  the  American  Civil  War.  The 

Supreme  Court's  decision  declared  the  blockade  of  the  Southern  ports  ordered  by  President 

Abraham  Lincoln  constitutional).  Similarly,  in  cases  of  a  cyber  attack  on  critical  infrastructures 

such  as  on  power  grids,  gas  pipelines,  or  internet  networks,  the  president  can  act  swiftly  and 

launch a cyber war as a measure to avoid extensive harm to the country.  

As  Koh4  discussed  in  the  Emerging  Law  of  21st  Century  War,  a  temporary  dictatorship 

(quick, major, and centralized Presidential decisions) could be warranted due to cyber cases and 

their complexity in emergency situations.  

Additionally,  in the foundational case, Youngstown v. Sawyer (1952), it  provided a solid 

precedent  and  path  forward  for  many  similar  cases  where  the  line  might  blur  between 

congressional  distinct  right  to  declare  cyber  attacks  as  acts  of  war  and  a  president's  executive 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 6 of 22 

 
 
order that enables such acts either based on proactive (speculative) or reactive measures (in the 

Youngstown  case,  an  action  as  seizing  a  steal  manufacturing  plant  due  to  the  nation's 

involvement in war was invalid), and only vested (by the constitution) to lawmakers. 

As  granted  by  the  U.S.  Constitution,  only  congress  can  authorize  war,  however,  the 

President,  being  the  Commander-in-Chief  can  order  the  military  to  take  action  in  some 

emergency scenarios without Congress's approval. In Youngstown v. Sawyer, the court took note 

that the President has notified congress of the actions, and didn't act in secrecy – albeit not a 

notion  that  would  apply  to  Cybersecurity  law  directly.  In  states  of  cyber  emergency,  the 

Executive  branch  can  act  without  Congress  (such  as  in  the  Prize  cases,  67  U.S.  635).  It  is 

important to note that executive orders by the US president, such as orders 13636 (Improving 

Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity in 2013) and 14028 (Improving the Nations Cybersecurity in 

2021)  have  major  implications  on  domestic  reaction  to  cyber  attacks.  The  orders  mentioned 

aspects  that  won’t  be  possible  if  the  federal  government  is  not  involved,  for  instance:  (1) 

“removing  Barriers  to  Sharing  Threat  Information”  between  states,  as  well  as  business  and 

companies (such as in the case of FireEye after the Solar winds attack), (2) enforcing the role of 

The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) as a governing agency, (3) protecting 

naturally cross state systems such as software supply chains and other critical infrastructure, and 

(4)  other  “policy  coordination”  amongst  states,  the  government  and  the  private  sector,  and 

possibly other nations. But how does Stare Decisis present the international dimension? 

In  famous  cases  such  as  U.S.  citizens  in  Nicaragua  vs.  Reagan,  it  was  held  that  statutes 

supersede  customary  international  law  (discussed  in  section  3.4)  and  are  not  subject  to 

challenge  on  the  basis  of  a  violation  of  international  law,  which  leads  to  having  exits  when  it 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 7 of 22 

 
 
comes to acting solely in case of a cyber attack. However, can the US really act alone in cases of 

attacks? What about international collaboration and cyber threats that cross borders?  

An  action  that  the  president  could  take  in  cases  of  a  cyber  attack  that  spans  multiple 

countries  is  notifying  the  UN's  Security  Council  and  getting  approval  to  have  the  response 

qualified as self-defense. Conversely, if for instance, state A is a victim of a cyber attack through 

an  entry  point  in  state  B,  which  jurisdiction  prevails,  A,  B,  or  both?  The  mentioned  executive 

orders and federal laws continue to play a bipartisan major role in driving the issue at the federal 

level, in hopes that it would trickle down to the state level, which is discussed in the next section. 

The next section presents discussions related to that and the state’s law argument for governing 

cyber threats. 

3.2 The State’s Argument: Authority Granted through the Constitution 

As  it  is  established  prior  in  this  report,  cyber  issues  are  not  governed  by  geographical 

state borders or other definitions such as by districts and district courts. Nonetheless, there have 

been  cases  where  state  or  district  courts  dealt  with  a  cyber  attack  albeit  from  a  consumer 

protection angle.  

For  instance,  in  2013,  in  a  non-federal  case,  hackers  attacked  Neiman  Marcus  (the 

department store), and stole the credit card numbers of its customers. In December of the same 

year, the store was informed by some of its customers about fraudulent charges on their credit 

cards. In January, it announced to the public that the cyber attack had occurred and that 350k 

cards  had  been  exposed  to  the  hackers'  malware.  In  the  wake  of  those  disclosures,  several 

customers  brought  this  action  under  the  Class  Action  Fairness  Act5,  28  U.S.C.  §  1332,  seeking 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 8 of 22 

 
 
 
various forms of making up for data breaches and losses. The district court stopped the suit in its 

tracks;  however,  the  court  ruled  that  both  the  individual  plaintiffs  and  the  consumer  group 

lacked  standing  under  Article  3  of  the  US  Constitution.  This  resulted  in  a  dismissal  of  the 

complaint without prejudice (see Hilary Remijas vs. Neiman Marcus).  

Conversely,  in  another  non-federal  case,  Plaintiffs  Luciano  Pisciotta  and  Daniel  Mills 

brought  an  action  on  behalf  of  an  alleged  group  of  consumers  and  potential  customers  of  the 

Old  National  Bancorp  (ONB)  –  one  of  the 

largest  financial  services  holding  company 

headquartered  in  the  state  of  Indiana.  The  case  was  brought  to  court  after  ONB’s  website 

solicited personal information for banking services and failed to secure it properly. Accordingly, a 

third  party  hacker  was  able  to  collect  confidential  information  of  multiple  thousands  of  ONB 

customers. The plaintiffs sought “damages relief”.  

These two example cases (ONB and Neiman Marcus) show how states and district courts 

deal  with  cases  related  to  Cybersecurity.  However,  the  main  issue  with  state  laws  relevant  to 

cyber-issues  is  that  they  have  different  “technical”  assumptions  that  lead  to  different 

outcomes/decisions  while  crafting  the  laws.  States  have  different  laws  for  Cybersecurity,  and 

where one lives certainly effects what laws are in place especially in cases when an attack occurs. 

For  instance,  the  National  Conference  of  State  Legislatures  (NCSL)  compiled/announced  the 

different laws governing states across the country, Figure 1 illustrates how protected a citizen is 

by  state  laws  “strictness”  as  analyzed  by  the  NCSL6  (states  such  as  TX  and  AL  have  stricter 

Cybersecurity laws while others such as Mississippi and Kentucky have less strict laws). 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 9 of 22 

 
 
 
Figure 1: Cybersecurity State Law Strictness (Small Biz Trends6) 

Besides the physical/geographical challenge, there is a technical challenge. In many court 

cases,  responsibility  has  been  proven  or  disproven  based  on  technical  expert  opinions,  or 

existing  patents  related  to  Cybersecurity,  however,  even  those  two  foundational  sources  have 

been  in  debate,  for  instance,  when it  comes  to Cybersecurity  inventions  or  patents,  a  bedrock 

principle of patent law is that the claims of a patent define the invention to which the patentee is 

entitled the right to exclude; Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1312 (quoting Innova/Pure Water, Inc. v. Safari 

Water  Filtration  Sys.,  Inc.,  381  F.3d  1111,  1115,  Fed.  Cir,  year  2004).  For  such  detailed 

technological  specifics,  courts  first  “look  to  the  words  of  the  claims  themselves  to  define  the 

scope of the patented invention”7 (Vitronics Corp. v. Conceptronic, Inc., 90 F.3d 1576, 1582). The 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 10 of 22 

 
 
 
claim  terms  are  “generally  given  their  ordinary  and  customary  meaning”  but  “a  patentee  may 

choose  to  be  his  own  lexicographer  and  use  terms  in  a  manner  other  than  their  ordinary 

meaning”. To that point, court cases related to cyber have been affected by the definition of the 

technology, or type of attack (such as in: Cupp Cybersecurity vs. Trend Micro Inc., United States 

District Court, N.D. Texas, Dallas Division, 2021). Accordingly, the technical angle and argument is 

certainly of relevance and is presented in the next section. 

3.3 The Technical Argument (Why Lawmaking Should Catch-up with Technology) 

This section presents an important angle to the discussion; because not all cyber attacks 

are  created  equal,  and  while  some  attacks  are  easily  and  obviously  classified  as  intentional 

“attacks”,  others  could  be  less  of  an  attack  and  more  of  a  data  privacy  issue,  which  is  not 

adversarial  per  se,  albeit  still  unconstitutional.  For  instance,  in  the  last  ten  years,  the Supreme 

Court decided several cases on cyber and technological “search and seizures”. In USA v. Jones for 

example, the court decided (year 2012) that GPS trackers usage to monitor the location of a car 

is a search that is under the umbrella of the 4th amendment of the constitution. In this case, the 

police installed GPS monitoring tool(s) in a car to monitor the driver for a month. All nine justices 

of the Supreme Court agreed that these actions constituted a breach to the constitutional rights 

of the driver. 

Debating  jurisdiction  without  the  technical  components  is  certainly  missing  a  major 

component  that  would  influence  the  effectiveness  of  crafted  Cybersecurity  laws8.  As  Figure  2 

illustrates, not all cyber  threats are created equal, which  poses the question: does that have a 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 11 of 22 

 
 
 
connection  to  which  jurisdiction  prevails  in  cyber  scenarios?  For  instance,  if  an  attack  of some 

kind is generated through proxy servers in another three or four state, which jurisdiction would 

prevail? Also, if the attacker was identified, and it’s a competitor that is based in another state, 

which state’s law prevails? In common law, the plaintiff “generally” has a choice to “where” to 

sue,  however,  in  cases  where  the  location  is  not  known  such  as  in  “black-box  attacks”9,  how 

should jurisdiction be decided? 

Figure 2: Not All Cyber Threats are Created Equal9 (Rosenberg, 2020) 

More dangerously, when cyber attacks are performed across international borders, such 

as cases by waged attacks by China, Russia, and  Iran on the US (Alexander and  Jaffer, 2020)10, 

usually they occur through a hidden pattern to hide the country of origin, which leads to cases 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 12 of 22 

 
 
 
where  the  country  of  origin  is  either  known  or  unknown.  As  Alexander  and  Jaffer  (2020)10 

declare: “we predicted Iran would continue to press its advantage and test American resolve. It 

has done just that . . . over the last decade, Iran has repeatedly hit the U.S. and our allies with 

both disruptive and destructive cyber attacks”10; an ongoing issue that needs clear legal grounds; 

such  as  it  was challenged by  the Huawei  vs.  United States  case,  where  Huawei  challenged the 

constitutionality of the ban by the US on Huawei to trade or deal with American companies.  

The Huawei case was driven by technical observations, and detecting their intervention 

was  only  possible  due  to  the  technical  ability  of  American  investigators  and  Cybersecurity 

engineers.  From  a  Constitutional  side  though,  Article  I,  Section  9,  Clause  3  of  the  Constitution 

(the  Bill  of  Attainder  Clause)  clearly  states:  “No  Bill  of  Attainder  or  ex  post  facto  Law  shall  be 

passed”.  According  to  the  Supreme  Court,  that  is  “a  legislative  act  which  inflicts  punishment 

without a judicial trial”.  

More importantly, the Bill of Attainder Clause doesn’t mean that the congress is not able 

to pass a ban on specific firms (such as Huawei) in the event that it their practices are deemed a 

threat to national security (as discussed in the federal argument section). In such cases (as well 

as  cases  similar  to  the  Solar  winds  and  Holiday  bear  attacks),  the US  has  to  react  in  ways  that 

doesn’t  break  domestic  or  international  law  but  protects  our  homeland,  the  international 

dilemma (of Cybersecurity responsibility and governance) is discussed in the next section.   

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 13 of 22 

 
 
 
 
 
3.4 The International Law Point of View (and Argument) 

Besides  works  by  the  United  Nations  Commission  on  Science  and  Technology  for 

Development  (CSTD),  one  of  the  most  prominent  documents  calling  for 

international 

cooperation  on  Cybersecurity  is  the  Tallinn  manual11.  Many  instances  of  the  need  for  cyber 

coalitions  are  reported12,  13,  14,  15,  and  there  have  been  many  attempts  at  regulating  an 

international framework for cyber through the management of data and AI goals (some of which 

are Listed in Table 1).  

Table 1: Federal and International Regulation Attempts for Governing Data, Cyber, and AI 

Title and agency 

Publication 

Details 

description 

Publishing 

date 

(DoD/DIU) 

Data 

The  Defense  Innovation  Unit  (DIU)  launched 

11/15/2021 

Responsible AI 

protection 

an 

important 

initiative 

in  3/2020 

to 

Guidelines in 

implement  the  Department  of  Defense’s 

Practice 

(DoD)  main  principles  for  Cyber  and  AI  into 

commercial  prototyping  and  acquisition 

programs. The result is a set of guidelines that 

could  be  consulted  when  creating  wide-scale 

government 

best 

practices 

and 

recommendations  related  to  the  security  of 

data  systems  and  AI  algorithms  across  the 

government, private sector and academia.  

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 14 of 22 

 
 
(HHS/FDA) Good 

Medical  data 

The  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  the 

10/27/2021 

Machine 

access 

and 

United  Kingdom’s  Medicines  and  Healthcare 

Learning Practice 

cyber threats 

Products  Regulatory  Agency,  and  Health 

for Medical 

Device 

Canada  have 

jointly 

identified  ten  main 

guiding  principles 

that  can 

inform 

the 

Development: 

development  of  Good  Machine  Learning 

Guiding 

Principles 

Practice (GMLP).  

The principles in this document aims to create 

a comprehensive legal proposal that can help 

in  protecting  medical  devices,  bio-systems, 

healthcare  data,  and  hospital  operations 

related to Cybersecurity. 

(VA) Department 

Strategy 

In 2021, the VA implemented a set of internal 

10/14/2021 

of Veterans 

documents 

regulations 

for  governing  data  and  AI 

Affairs Artificial 

deployments  with  the  goal  of 

increased 

Intelligence (AI) 

security. 

Strategy 

(White House) 

High level 

This  Executive  Order  aims  to  accelerate 

12/08/2020 

Executive Order 

guidelines  

Federal  adoption  of  secure  AI,  modernize 

Promoting the 

government,  and  cultivate  public  trust 

in 

Use of 

data-driven  algorithms  and  by  defining 

Trustworthy AI in 

principles for the use of AI in government in a 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 15 of 22 

 
 
the Federal 

Government 

secure  manner.  It  also  aims  at  establishing  a 

generic  and  common  set  of  policies  for 

implementing  and  enforcing  the  principles, 

which 

includes  developing  catalogues  for 

Cybersecurity  use  cases  that  would  lead  to 

trustworthy  AI  and  other  decision  support 

systems. Other orders16, 17 as presented prior, 

numbers 26645 and 13636. 

(FOC) FOC Joint 

Cyber and AI 

The  US  is  a  founding  member  of  the  32 

11/05/2020 

Statement on 

principles; 

country-member  Freedom  Online  Coalition 

Artificial 

International 

(FOC). 

The  US  work  with  multiple 

Intelligence and 

declaration 

stakeholders 

from  around  the  world  to 

Human Rights 

develop this statement on human rights, with 

the  goal  of  refraining  from  the  use  of  digital 

systems 

for  repressive  and  authoritarian 

purposes  around  the  globe.  Additionally,  the 

goal  was  to  ensure  the  design,  development, 

and  use  of  systems  at  governments 

is 

deployed  in  accordance  with  international 

human rights laws and obligations. 

(ODNI) Artificial 

AI/data 

This AI and security  ethics framework for the 

07/01/2020 

Intelligence 

science in the  

Intelligence  Community  (IC)  provides  a  guide 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 16 of 22 

 
 
Ethics 

intelligence 

for IC personnel on how to design, build, use, 

Framework for 

community 

protect,  consume,  and  manage  secure  and 

the Intelligence 

safe  AI  and  related  data  systems.  This 

Community 

framework  is  aimed  as  serving  as  a  living 

document to provide stakeholders around the 

country  with  a 

law-backed  approach  to 

judgment 

and 

to 

assist  with 

the 

documentation of issues and cases associated 

with Cybersecurity. 

(DoD) Ethical 

Data/cyber 

These  AI  ethical  principles  were  adopted  to 

02/24/2020 

Principles for 

ethical 

enhance  the  department’s  commitment  to 

Artificial 

principles 

upholding 

the  highest  ethical  standards 

Intelligence 

during  the  accelerating  adoption  of  AI  and 

data  systems.  The  principles  are  based  on 

Military  law  (US  Army  guidelines)  and  the 

Constitution, Title 10 of the U.S. Code, Law of 

War, as well as current international laws and 

treaties,  and  other  commonplace  technical 

concepts. 

(OECD) 

International 

The  Organization  for  Economic  Co-operation 

05/01/2019 

Recommendation 

document by 

and  Development  (OECD)  Recommendations 

on AI 

the OECD 

on  AI  were  adopted  in  mid-2019  by  member 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 17 of 22 

 
 
countries.  The  document  promotes  AI  and 

related  security  practices  that  are  inventive 

and  trustworthy  while  respecting  human 

rights 

and 

international 

law. 

The 

recommendation  defines  principles  for  the 

responsible stewardship of secure and safe AI, 

along  with  adopting  national  policies  and 

international 

cooperation 

aspects 

for 

implementing 

these  principles 

at 

the 

intersection of AI and Cybersecurity. 

Accordingly,  as  Table  1  presents,  different  domestic  and  international  regulations  are 

under construction and consideration – the table is not conclusive nonetheless, but the question 

remains  on  which  treaties  would  be  ratified  in  the  US  and  could  eventually  govern  the 

Cybersecurity space nationally. Lastly, it is important to note that if the argument #3 (technical 

issues and crossing geographical boundaries) and argument #4 (international considerations) are 

unified;  it  becomes  evident  that  an  international  take  on  the  law  driven  by  multi-nation 

collaborations  is  needed  to  better  mitigate  adversarial  issues,  stop  unfriendly  states  from 

launching or turning a blind eye to attacks from their lands, and minimize the overall effects of 

cyber threats around the world.  

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 18 of 22 

 
 
 
 
4.  Final Remarks and Conclusions 

As this report illustrated, in the case of cyber threats, although jurisdiction is debatable, 

coordination  (amongst  states  and  countries)  seems  to  be  a  must.  Not  all  attacks  are  created 

equal  (and  not  all  U.S.  states  have  comparable  laws),  and  so  the  legal  treatment  should  be 

applied  and  analyzed  differently.  As  it  is  stated  through  FISA  principles,  jus  bello  ought  to  be 

considered as a doctrine in cyber situations just like they are in conventional war. Jus ad bellum, 

as  it  refers  to  the  conditions  under  which  countries  such  as  the  U.S.  may  utilize  to  launch  an 

attack or counter attack i.e. has to be consistent with international law, United Nations Charter 

of 1945,  and  other  treaties  such  as  through  NATO.  While  jus  in  bello  regulates  the  conduct  of 

parties engaged in conflicts, jus ad bellum manages the conditions and whether involvement is 

permissible  to  start  with.  The  issue  with  these  two  concepts  is  that  in  cyber  situations,  quick 

action  might  be  required  (as  illustrated  the Presidential  intervention  discussion  in  section 3.1). 

For  instance,  technologies  such  as  automated  data-driven  cyber  attacks  (often  referred  to  as 

Counter  Artificial  Intelligence;  C-AI)  could  launch  attacks  reactively  without  consulting  an 

operator,  or  a  human.  Therefore,  an  ongoing  unresolved  legal  dilemma  still  persists,  such  as: 

who is responsible for loss and damages? And which jurisdiction (again) shall prevail.  

Moreover,  the  issue  exacerbates  as  a  Cyber  Supply  Chain  Risk  Management  Processes 

(CSCRM) are not in place, as NIST defines it: “the process of identifying, assessing, and mitigating 

the  risks  associated  with  the  distributed  and  interconnected  nature  of  IT  product  and  service 

supply  chains”,  another  notion  that  needs  technical  answers  to  drive  the  crafting  of  effective 

Cybersecurity laws and understanding jurisdiction assignment correctly. 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 19 of 22 

 
 
As the number of attacks is on rise (nationally), the rising trend is predicted to sustain18 

(as  illustrated  in  Figure  3).  Therefore,  this  question  (jurisdiction  assignment)  which  is  at  the 

intersection of technology and law is certainly worthy of further legal analysis and study. 

Figure 3: Cybersecurity attacks-induced loss of American records 18 

This law report reviewed presented some pointers to addressing the jurisdiction question 

from multiple perspectives; however, although more cases are becoming a part of the legal body 

of knowledge, it is clear that Cybersecurity law is still a fairly growing area that shall be inspected 

in  light  of  future  shifts  in  technology  and  international  collaborations  while  preserving  US  law 

and Constitution. 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 20 of 22 

 
 
 
 
 
References: 

1.  The U.S. Constitution; Article VI; Paragraph 2 

2.  District  Court  at  Maroochydore,  Appeal  against  Conviction  and  Sentence  Proceedings 

regarding Appellant Vitek Boden, Supreme Court of Queensland, Queensland, Australia, 

2002 

3.  NIST  SP  800-53,  Available  at:  https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-53/rev-

5/final 

4.  Harold Hongju Koh, The Emerging Law of 21st Century War, The Justice Stephen Breyer 

Lecture Series on International Law 2014-2016 

5.  Class Action Fairness Act, 28 U.S.C. § 1332 

6.  Small Biz Trends, Accessed 2022, Available at: https://smallbiztrends.com/2018/08/state-

cybersecurity-laws.html 

7.  Vitronics Corp. v. Conceptronic, Inc., 90 F.3d 1576, 1582 

8.  Batarseh,  F.,  and  Yang.,  R.,  Federal  data  science:  Transforming  government  and 

agricultural policy using artificial intelligence, Elsevier’s Academic Press, 2017 

9.  Rosenberg,  I.,  Shabtai,  A.,  Elovici,  Y.,  &  Rokach,  L.  (2020).  Adversarial Machine  Learning 

Attacks  and  Defense  Methods 

in 

the  Cyber  Security  Domain. arXiv  preprint 

arXiv:2007.02407 (Published as a survey paper in ACM - CSUR 2020) 

10. Alexander,  K.,  and  Jaffer,  J.,  Iranian  Cyberattacks  Are  Coming,  Security  Experts  Warn, 

Article in the Barron’s, 2020 

11. Jensen, E., The Tallinn Manual 2.0, 2017 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 21 of 22 

 
 
12. Ryan  O’Hare,  China  Proudly  Debuts  its  New  Stealth  Jet  it  Built  ’by  Hacking  into  US 

Computers  and  Stealing  Plans,  DAILY  MAIL 

(Nov.  1,  2016,  06:57  EDT), 

http://www.dailymail.co.uk/ sciencetech/article-3893126/Chinese-J-20-stealth-jet-based-

military-plans-stolen-hackers-makespublic-debut.html 

13. Sam  Thielman,  Yahoo  Hack:  1bn  Accounts  Compromised  by  Biggest  Data  Breach  in 

History, 

The 

Guardian, 

2016, 

Available 

at:  

https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/1 

4/yahoo-hack-security-of-one-

billion-accounts-breached 

14. Statement of James R. Clapper Before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Worldwide 

Threat  Assessment  of  the  US 

Intelligence  Community  1–4,  2016,  Available  at: 

https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Clapper_02-26-15.pdf  

15. U.K.  Cabinet  office,  The  UK  Cyber  Strategy,  2011-2016:  Report,  2016,  Available  at: 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/516331

/UK_Cyber_Security_ Strategy_Annual_Report_2016.pdf 

16. Executive Order 13636, Federal Register, Vol. 78, No. 33, 2013 

17. Executive Order 26645, Federal Register, Vol. 86, No. 93, 2021 

18. Statista 

report,  Available  at:  https://www.appknox.com/blog/united-states-cyber-

security-laws, 2017 

https://ai.ece.vt.edu/  

Page 22 of 22 

 
 
 
 
