2
2
0
2

n
u
J

8

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
3
9
3
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: Understanding UK
Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber
Security

SARAH TURNER, NANDITA PATTNAIK, JASON R.C. NURSE, and SHUJUN LI, Institute of
Cyber Security for Society (iCSS) & School of Computing, University of Kent, UK

The Internet of Things (IoT) is increasingly present in many family homes, yet it is unclear precisely how well
families understand the cyber security threats and risks of using such devices, and how possible it is for them
to educate themselves on these topics. Using a survey of 553 parents and interviews with 25 families in the
UK, we find that families do not consider home IoT devices to be significantly different in terms of threats
than more traditional home computers, and believe the major risks to be largely mitigated through consumer
protection regulation. As a result, parents focus on teaching being careful with devices to prolong device life
use, exposing their families to additional security risks and modeling incorrect security behaviors to their
children. This is a risk for the present and also one for the future, as children are not taught about the IoT, and
appropriate cyber security management of such devices, at school. We go on to suggest that steps must be
taken by manufacturers and governments or appropriate trusted institutions to improve the cyber security
knowledge and behaviors of both adults and children in relation to the use of home IoT devices.

CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Usability in security and privacy; Social aspects of security
and privacy; • Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in collaborative and social com-
puting.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Internet of Things, smart home, cyber security, families, parents, children,
consumer protection

1 INTRODUCTION
A 2021 report into smart home product ownership in the UK found that 76% of respondents owned
at least one such device [62]. Although the picture of ownership is a complex one, with only smart
TVs, smart speakers and fitness devices being reported in this survey as having ownership levels
higher than 20% of the respondent population, the increase of such devices in communal areas
of the home cannot be denied. This means that all members of a household, whether adults or
children, comfortable with technology or not, may be expected to live around Internet-connected
devices.

Recently, research has focused upon the various usability and privacy issues of the multi-use
of home IoT devices [4, 11, 24, 35, 72].1 The privacy of all people living within a home is of
key importance when considering home IoT devices, and keeping data that is intended to be
private out of the public domain is fundamental. The security issues arising from the adoption
of home IoT devices extend beyond this, however, and the relative novelty and heterogeneity of
such devices, coupled with their global production, also mean that they have, to date, evaded
meaningful regulation or legislation to mandate minimum security requirements. Blythe and
Johnson [7] suggest that a lack of policy and technical intervention may facilitate a “crime harvest”,
where crimes targeted at the individual (burglary, sex crimes) or a societal level (such as political

1“Home IoT devices” will be considered to be those explicitly defined in the Code of Practice for Consumer IoT Security
published by the UK’s Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) [14].

This is the author version of the article: Turner S., Pattnaik N., Nurse J.R.C, Li S. (2022) “You Just Assume It Is In There, I
Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security. Accepted for publication as part of ACM
CSCW 2022; publication details forthcoming.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Turner et al.

subjugation) will become more common; Hodges [29] has shown that homes with smart technology
at present are somewhat more likely to suffer crimes such as burglary.

Home IoT device threats are much more pervasive than those of home computers, in that they
can allow for enormous data collection about the users, run essential elements of a home, be linked
to credit card and other sensitive information, and be leveraged for cybercrime. In a multi-user
setting, device owners should be considering a range of threat actors, from malicious adversaries
[49], to misuse by the manufacturer [59], to those inside the house, who could use devices for
control of others [39], or simply inadvertently making purchases or breaking a device. However,
users’ mental models of home IoT devices have been shown to be inaccurate [40], and this lack
of understanding, coupled with a lack of interfaces, can make it harder to understand how the
devices should be secured. Devices may not obviously provide users with means to implement
appropriate security on the device, possibly requiring home network security to be increased for
adequate protection. Home IoT devices that fail, or manufacturers that cease to exist, may cause
fundamental parts of the home to stop working.

This paper extends out the work done on the privacy of multi-use devices by considering what
it means for families to manage the cyber security aspects of such device use, and not solely the
privacy concerns. It looks to understand how families in the UK consider and implement home IoT
device cyber security, how they learn about and discuss it as a group with specific responsibilities
around keeping each other safe and passing on knowledge. Using a survey of 553 individuals and
interviews with 25 families,2 we investigated the concerns that families in the UK have about
managing the cyber security of home IoT devices, and how and when they educate themselves
about cyber security issues. Prior research in this area has tended to use either smaller interview
or focus groups [4, 60, 72], or a survey of individuals [10], or be based in the USA [2, 24]. By
combining both a survey and interview of UK families, we are able to understand a wide range
of parents’ experiences of home IoT device use, along with their cyber security understanding
for these devices. When combined with the qualitative detail of the interviews, we find that that
families are well versed in controlling and discussing cyber security aspects that apply to being
online, but do not have similar strategies in place to manage the different threats of home IoT use,
assuming a certain level of protection simply from existing consumer protection regulation. Despite
relying heavily on discussion as a means of facilitating a communal understanding of rules, neither
parents nor children have sufficient prior knowledge or access to sufficient education or support to
have meaningful conversations about home IoT device cyber security as a family unit, focusing
instead on factors relating to cost saving and efficient use. We argue that this is a concern not only
for the present day, but for the future as well, as children are not having appropriate behavior
modeled to them by their parents, and make suggestions for the role of different stakeholders in
managing this knowledge gap.

The rest of the paper reads as follows: an overview of related work is found in Section 2, methods
of both survey and interviews are explained in Section 3. Survey findings, followed by interview
findings, are in Section 4; these findings are discussed in Section 5. Limitations and further work
are considered in Section 6, which are followed by concluding thoughts in Section 7.

2 RELATED WORK

2.1 Multi-use of IoT devices
Sun et al. [60] found, from interviewing 23 parents in the US and Canada, that parents’ perception of
the risk assessments to keep their children physically and digitally safe in the smart home typically

2Where a family group comprises of all the parents and/or legal guardians and school-aged children in a household (along
with any other household members, although it is the parent/child interaction with devices that is of primary focus).

2

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

moved through three phases, encompassing purchasing decisions, re-evaluation as the children
start to use the device, and further adjustments as the children grow. More specifically, Garg and
Sengupta [23] explored how parents of different socio-economic groups and ethnicities had different
concerns over their children’s use of smart speakers, ranging from managing the children’s use of
the device, to behavioral and privacy considerations. Geeng and Roesner [24] found that home IoT
devices often created tensions, requiring ongoing cooperation and negotiation between members
of the home, particularly between parents and children. When interviewed, parents whose children
used fitness trackers designed for children found that such trackers required significantly more
parental interaction than expected because of the limited agency these devices provided to the
children, despite device claims and parental hopes of increased child independence [47]. Apthorpe
et al. [2] found, via a study involving 13 interviews and a survey of 508 individuals, that the lack
of nuanced sharing solutions for home IoT devices meant that households were required to fall
back to “social resolution techniques”, such as agreeing not use particular features, in order that
ongoing use remains acceptable for all involved. Agreement and discussion from all participants
about the goals and requirements of a device is a fundamental part of what Kraemer et al. [35]
refer to as “group efficacy”, a key element of acceptable multi-user device management. However,
power dynamics need to be recognized as a limiting factor in group efficacy: Bernd et al. [4] report
that nannies working within a family context did not consider themselves to have enough power
in the relationship with parents — their employers — to ask for smart surveillance systems to be
switched off. Ehrenberg and Keinonen [17] similarly found that the use of smart technologies in the
home can work to create hierarchies by affecting access to, use of and interactions within physical
household spaces.

2.2 Parent-child communication around cyber security and privacy
There is suggestion that communal decision making about how and when families should use
Internet-connected devices (in particular, smartphones) can create higher levels of willing compli-
ance [28, 34]. This is in keeping with the argument of Blum-Ross and Livingstone [6] that family
life is, increasingly, a democratic one, that requires more complex rule-making around technology
use than time or content restriction, and the recognition that children are beings with their own
agency.

Shin [56] and Kumar et al. [37] found that parents will often put off discussing security with their
children, erroneously considering it to be a future risk. Wisniewski et al. [70] showed that this lack
of interaction between parents and teenage children in regards to how to manage Internet-related
risks sets children up poorly to manage them, should they occur. Additionally, children tend not
to raise instances where they have encountered risks to their parents, and feel that their parents
disproportionately tell them what they cannot — rather than can — do online [5].

Nikken and de Haan [44] showed that parents do not understand enough to feel comfortable in
what their children are doing, or how to manage it appropriately, or by themselves, often relying on
external support, or older siblings. Cranor et al. [13] discussed how, for teenagers, parents struggle
with the need to exhibit trust to foster maturation and independence — but consider that their
children need far less privacy in the digital realm than real life. This finding is echoed by Ur et al.
[65], where parents agreed that children should have privacy when interviewed, only to deny them
this privacy when subsequently setting up a security camera, as they should have nothing to hide.

2.3 Cyber Security and Privacy Knowledge and Action
In a study of 13 families, Muir and Joinson [42] found that families worried about a wide range of
cyber security issues, but considered threats such as cyber bullying and stranger danger of more
concern than financial or technical threats, in terms of the immediate danger to the family. When

3

Turner et al.

interviewed by Tanczer et al. [61], academic and industry participants with expertise in the security
of IoT devices considered there to be a high potential for crime, exploitation, risk to physical safety
and a loss of personal control to emanate from IoT devices.

It has long been understood that people form inaccurate security stances based upon inaccurate
mental models of the digital technologies that they use [22, 67]. Huang et al. [31] showed that,
in the case of smart speakers at least, incorrect mental models about how the devices use and
present data to all users can cause individuals to make poorer decisions about privacy than they
may believe they are. Seymour et al. [55] found that visualisations of home IoT data flows did not
provoke change of device use or restriction of those flows, despite the information about data flows
being interesting to review.

In conjunction with inaccurate understandings of the risks the devices may pose, the perceived
convenience of IoT devices leads individuals to exhibit the privacy paradox: despite considering
themselves privacy conscious, in practice, they will behave in a more risky manner, in particular
sharing a significant amount of personal information with home IoT devices and further with
online services, where the perceived benefit of using such devices is worthwhile [69]. Zheng et al.
[74] found that individuals trust manufacturers to protect their privacy, but do not take steps to
verify this. Furthermore, users may turn to the Internet for advice on cyber security issues relating
to home IoT devices, but often struggle to find formal guidance when online [63]. In situations
where accounts are shared, participants in [68] suggested that they avoided discussing issues of
security and privacy, despite the potential risks to everyone using the account. This accords with
the performative aspect of trust that people exhibit when sharing devices with people that they are
close to [41]. This lack of consistent behavior may cause problems for the next generation: Kumar
et al. [37] explored the mental models that children aged 5-11 had around privacy and security in
relation to Internet use. While they found that the children were able to develop some strategies
for control (such as providing false information), they relied heavily on their parents for support.

3 METHODS
We started our research with two main research questions: 1) how do families manage the cyber
security related to their home IoT device use, and 2) how and when do families educate themselves
about home IoT device security. In order to answer these questions, we undertook a survey and
semi-structured interviews. For both, families had to be living in the UK, with at least one IoT
device at home. Survey participants had to be a parent or legal guardian of at least one school-aged
child (between 4-18); for the interview, the participants had to be a family (of at least one adult
and one school-aged child). The survey was framed in order to gather a wider picture of what
devices families in the UK have and what steps they take to keep those devices secure, based upon
the view of a single adult family member. It additionally asked questions about the participants’
experience of cyber security in the news, what their children learned at school, and what they
discussed at home. The interviews followed the survey, to dig deeper into questions around the
family experience of home IoT device cyber security, giving the opportunity for both parents and
children to discuss. Interview participants were recruited independently, with the agreeing adult
asked to take the survey prior to the family interview, or through an expression of interest after
completing the survey. For a visual guide to the recruitment process, see Figure 1; this is further
explained in the sections that follow below. Both pieces of research received approval from the
University’s relevant ethics committee in July 2020.

3.1 Survey

Survey Design. The survey was designed to capture a broad range of information about
3.1.1
the type of home IoT devices found in the homes of respondents, how and who bought, used and

4

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

Fig. 1. Recruitment Process

managed them, as well as understanding the attention paid to cyber security in the home. Unlike
the interviews, it was understood that only a single adult member of the family would be providing
their interpretation of the family’s use of such devices, giving the opportunity to ask specific
questions (such as “Does one person take ownership of managing the device?”) to understand the
adult’s role in family technology use. Each question gave multiple options for response, including a
free text field for adding in options not covered.

The survey asked participants to list all their home devices, based upon the list found in [14],3
and then required the participants to answer a range of questions on the one or two devices
they used most within the home. Participants were asked to focus on the most commonly used
device(s) as a means of ensuring most, if not all, of the questions subsequently asked, would have
been considered at some point during ownership of the particular device(s). Questions were asked
about the devices that covered entire family use, from point of purchase onwards (e.g. “Was there
discussion about buying the device amongst the household members (including children) before it
was bought?”, “Does everyone in the household use the device in the same way?”, “Do you have
to help the child(ren) in the house to use the device?”). These questions were asked to provide an
understanding of how the participant perceived the role of home IoT device use in the home, and
where children in particular fitted in the decision making and use of such devices.

The remainder of questions about the specific devices covered the understanding of cyber security
and devices, broadly based on guidance provided by the UK’s National Cyber Security Centre
(NCSC) [43]. These questions asked about the setup of the device (“When the device was set up,
were there detailed instructions?”, and “Did setup involve changing the device’s password?”), the
current use of the device (“Do you know how you would completely delete the information the
device has collected?”, and “Do you know how long for, or until when, the software on the device
is supported until?”) as well as more general questions around device misuse and breaking (“Has
your current device ever broken?”, and “If the device broke tomorrow, what would be your major
concerns?”) to assess cyber security risks against other risks that the users perceived.

The final part of the survey asked for details on the participants’ experience with cyber security
issues more directly: “Who or where do you turn to for support with digital technology issues?”,
followed by “Have you ever been a victim of a cybercrime of data breach?”. If they had, they were
then asked if they incurred a loss as a result of this (with loss intentionally not being defined as
purely financial). Finally, they were asked if they were aware of the manufacturers of devices in
their home having reported a breach. In relation to cyber security and the family, they were then

3This list was used as it forms the basis of devices captured by a comprehensive code of practice for “consumer IoT devices”,
set out by the UK government, and so provided a useful yardstick as to the devices available to consumers in the UK at the
time. Participants were able to add in any devices they did not feel were covered in the list.

5

Turner et al.

asked what aspects of cyber security they understood their children were taught at school, and
what they discussed at home, based on the list of topics covered in the English curriculum [16].4
These questions aimed to give a reflection of the awareness of the participant of their role as a
potential victim of cybercrime, and educator about cyber security in the home.

Survey participation. The online survey was hosted on Jisc’s Online Surveys tool,5 using the
3.1.2
participant recruitment platform Prolific.6 In total, 558 adults responded to the survey during July
and September 2020; 551 of these through Prolific, and 7 from the interview recruitment process.
Two participants were excluded for responding solely about a laptop computer and smart phone, not
a home IoT device, leaving 556 responses for further screening. There were two attention checks in
the survey: four participants failed both attention checks (0.72%); one of these participants was also
interviewed. The three participants who failed the attention checks and were not interviewed were
excluded from further review. The decision was taken to retain the individual who was interviewed
as it was possible to see the consistency in answers between the interview and survey. This left
553 valid responses for the final analysis. Survey participants recruited through Prolific were paid
pro-rata for their time, using the UK’s Living Wage Foundation calculated 2019/2020 rate of £9.30
per hour7 (with the majority of participants taking around 15 minutes to complete it). Those survey
participants recruited outside of Prolific (as part of the interview process) were paid £5 in Amazon
gift vouchers for completing the survey.

3.1.3 Demographic Information. The participants of the survey had a mean age of 42.32 years (SD
7.51), with an age range of 24-66. 138 (24.82%) were male, 417 (75.00%) female, with one participant
preferring not to answer this question. All participants lived in the UK at the time of taking the
survey, with 473 living in England (85.07%), 41 in Scotland (7.37%), 21 in Wales (3.78%) and 18 in
Northern Ireland (3.24%); although not intentionally sought, this proportion is broadly in line with
the population breakdown across the countries in the UK as reported by the UK’s Office of National
Statistics for 2020 [46]. 81.69% of participants were employed either full- or part-time, or due to start
a job within the next month, with 2.51% considering themselves to be unemployed, but job-seeking.
The respondents were asked to detail out the age of their children. 17.36% of respondents (96) had
a 0-5 year old child, 54.07% (299) had a child aged 6-10, 53.52% (296) had an 11-15 year old, and
19.89% (110) had a 16-17 year old.

3.2 Interview

Interview Design. The interview process was designed to build upon and flesh out the survey
3.2.1
questions, by allowing the initial survey participants to expand upon their survey responses, and
also to enable the entire family to add their views. The interview format was semi-structured,
meaning that each individual could spend time focusing more on areas of concern (or awareness)
for them; the full set of questions used in the interviews can be found in Appendix A.

The interview process was designed in such a way that the children would be asked questions
by the interviewer first, where possible, without interruption from their parents; the parents were
then asked to answer the questions after the children had spoken. This allowed for the parents

4Within the United Kingdom, each of the devolved nations have their own powers to build school curricula. The curricula
within Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland cover similar ground, focusing upon online safety and learning about the role
of the Internet within society in particular; however, to avoid complexity, the English Department for Education curriculum
has been used in this research as the basis upon which questions are asked as it is the oldest, and is referenced as a basis for
at least some of the more recent devolved nations’ curricula.
5https://www.onlinesurveys.ac.uk/
6https://www.prolific.co/
7https://www.livingwage.org.uk/what-real-living-wage

6

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

to reflect on the children’s answers, as in most cases, the parents had remained within earshot as
their children were interviewed. The questions for children were modified based on whether the
child was either in primary school (4-11 years) or secondary or tertiary education (12-18 years) in
two ways: the expected level of knowledge was taken into consideration, based upon the national
curriculum for England laid out in [16], but also, the language used was modified by the interviewer
based upon the age of the child. Questions focused on how each participant used the devices they
chose to talk about: which device features did they like and dislike using, where they struggled
to use the devices (and how they managed that). Participants were then asked, more specifically,
about their understanding of what cyber security was. Children were asked to reflect on their
understanding of what cyber security was, whether from school or elsewhere and what they
considered the biggest risks of using the Internet, and home IoT devices were. Parents, additionally,
were asked to share any situations of being a victim of a cyber crime or incident, any times where
they felt that they needed to seek further information, and how they went about it.

Interview Participation. There were 25 interviews, taking place between July and September
3.2.2
2020; the longest interview was 1 hour 15 minutes, with the shortest being 20 minutes long. There
were 33 adults interviewed in total, with 22 being female (66.67%), 11 male (33.34%). There were 38
children interviewed, aged from 4-16 (average age: 9.63 years, SD 3.59). Given ongoing COVID-19
social distancing restrictions at the time of interview, three video-conferencing systems were used:
Microsoft Teams, Zoom and Google Meet, based on the participants’ preference. Where possible,
all family members were asked to attend, in particular, to enable the interviewer (the first author of
the paper) to ask questions of all family members and avoid the “driver” of device use answering all
the questions on behalf of less knowledgeable family members, and to understand the interaction
the family had when discussing the technology. This was not always possible, but for all interviews
at least one adult and one child from the family participated. Participants were sourced through
posts on social media and message board sites (Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, Gumtree), through
expressing interest having completed the survey, and through the first author’s networks. Interview
participants were remunerated with a £10 Amazon gift voucher if aged 18 or over, and a £5 Amazon
gift voucher if under 18.

The participant details are in Table 1; throughout this paper, adults will be referred to through
the following coding system: A (for adult), M or F (male or female), and their family’s Interview
Reference number, e.g., the mother in interview 2 is referred to as “AF2”, the father in interview 3 as
“AM3”. Children are referred to by C, their family’s Interview Reference number, then distinguished
by their age, e.g., the two children in interview 14 are referred to as “C14, aged 13” and “C14, aged
16”.

3.2.3 How the children participated. The children interviewed had a wide range of ages, and so
their participation and interaction in the interview process differed. All children reacted reasonably
well to the use of video-conferencing and talking to the interviewer; in two circumstances, the
children asked not to be interviewed on camera, which posed no problems, as they were comfortable
to talk whilst off camera. In many cases, the opening questions, asking the children to describe
the home IoT devices (more details on how this was handled by children of differing ages in the
paragraphs below), followed by questions asking how they used them, were enough to allay any
initial reticence to participate.

The youngest children (aged 4-5) did not sit by themselves to be interviewed: being interviewed
in their own homes allowed them to wander around, and in certain circumstances, answer ques-
tions by doing — giving demonstrations of how they interacted with devices, rather than giving
verbal explanations. Parents of children in this age group often re-framed questions posed by the
interviewer, not only to focus the child upon answering the question but also to use more familiar

7

Table 1. Information of interview participants

Interview Reference Number of adults Number and ages of children

Turner et al.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1

1 (15)
2 (12,15)
1 (5)
1 (4)
1 (10)
1 (6)
3 (7, 9, 11)
2 (5, 6)
2 (4, 8)
3 (7, 12, 13)
2 (7, 14)
1 (13)
1 (12)
2 (13, 16)
1 (7)
2 (7, 9)
1 (8)
1 (10)
1 (12)
2 (6, 9)
1 (9)
1 (8)
2 (14, 15)
1 (8)
1 (16)

terms (for example, “how do you use the device?” was typically modified by parents in ways such
as “how do you use Alexa?”). Parents of children in this age group supplemented answers with
additional descriptions of device use and their experience of their children’s level of understanding
of how to use the devices. Children in this age group were able to think about, and talk through,
how the devices they were familiar with might work — or make clear to the interviewer that they
did not know.

Children roughly between 6-10 would participate with a parent on- or off-screen. This provided
reassurance to the child that it was safe and appropriate to answer the questions posed by the
interviewer (who was, of course, a stranger to them). In particular, children in this age group would
not always give full answers to questions, so parents would prompt fuller explanations from their
children when they recognized this was needed. Children of this age did not seem particularly
inhibited by their parents’ presence, with at least one child quite happily discussing talking to
strangers online, much to the shock of their parents, despite sitting right next to them. Children
were able to think through how devices might work, apply concepts they had started to learn at
school, and had some idea of risks that might come from the Internet, if not home IoT devices.

Children older than 10 or 11 were able to hold a conversation by themselves with the interviewer,
with little to no interaction with the parents as they were interviewed. In the case of children in
this age group, many commented that they had become used to talking this way as a result of
COVID-19 lockdowns and home schooling in particular. Older children often also listened in to
their parent(s)’ responses, which sometimes promoted broader discussions between the parent(s)
and the child(ren) about the question being asked.

Interviews were carried out by the first author of the paper, audio recorded and transcribed.
The transcripts from the interviews were subjected to inductive thematic analysis [8] by the first

8

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

two co-authors of the paper. Such thematic analysis allows relative freedom for researchers to
distinguish, and then refine, themes as the data is reviewed, rather than starting from a point of
pre-determined coding framework. This provides a flexibility that is important when trying to
ascertain significant themes that may otherwise be overlooked. The authors undertaking the coding
performed the process entirely independently, met to review similarities in the generated codes, and
discussed differences. After the discussion, both coders refined their code books individually, and a
subsequent analysis of similarity generated a Cohen’s kappa value of 0.63, indicating a substantial
level of agreement. The agreed-upon codes, with description of primary sub-codes, can be found in
Appendix B.

4 FINDINGS

4.1 Survey
Participants reported owning 2,326 devices in total: the top ten devices owned overall are reported
in Table 2. There are three types of devices that appear to be much more prevalent than others:
smart TVs, smart speakers/home assistants and streaming devices (such as Google Chromecast
devices and Amazon Fire sticks), with 1,181 of these three devices being recorded.

Participants subsequently gave detailed information on 886 of these devices: the top eleven types

of devices where participants gave detailed information reported in Table 3.

Summary of findings. This paragraph gives a high-level overview of the survey findings
4.1.1
presented below. Devices that are usually more expensive or integral to the household (e.g., Smart
TVs, refrigerators) were reported as being less new than other devices. Participants mostly bought
devices after reading online customer reviews; despite over half responding that they received
detailed instructions, the majority of participants could not provide significant details about cyber
security requirements, either at set up or throughout device life. Participants’ primary concern
about the device breaking was around the cost of replacement, not the implications for data security.
Participants reported, on the whole, neither helping the children in the household with the
device, or having concerns about children using the devices. This was especially the case for older
participants, or where there were older children in the family.

Participants overwhelmingly reported getting information for cyber security information online;
the majority of participants were not aware of having been the victim of a data breach or cyber
crime, or if the manufacturers of any of the devices in their home had ever reported a breach.
Reported learning at school and that discussed at home focused more upon online safety than cyber
security steps: despite men being more likely to say they managed devices in the home, they were
less likely to show knowledge of the children’s school curriculum. Older participants seemed to be
more likely to discuss cyber security strategies (rather than online safety) with their children.

4.1.2 Quantitative Analysis. As a result of the largely categorical nature of the variables in the
survey, alongside descriptive statistics, the results were analyzed using chi-squared tests of inde-
pendence to determine any associations between three of the main demographic variables and
different survey variables. The demographic variables considered were: the age of the participants
(based on the age ranges of 30 and below, 31-40, 41-50, 51 and above) and the age of the oldest child
(based on the age ranges of 0-5, 6-10, 11-15, 16-18) and the gender of the participant responding to
the survey (male, female).

For the purposes of the chi-squared tests of independence, one record, of the one participant
that answered “prefer not to say” in relation to their gender, was excluded as an outlier so as not to
unduly influence the results. The sample size (𝑁 ) used for calculation is different depending upon
whether the question responded to was about a specific device, or about the participant and their

9

Turner et al.

family in general. For questions relating to the device, the sample size is the responses provided
(𝑁 = 884); for questions relating to the participant and their family, the sample size is the number
of participants (𝑁 = 552). The alpha value used throughout is < 0.05.

We had the following hypotheses:
The null hypothesis: There is no correlation between the particular demographic groups and
how parents behave, in relation to their children and their use of IoT devices, portrayed through
the survey question’s variables.

The alternative hypothesis: There is a correlation between the specific demographic variables

and the compared survey variables.

Those results that were statistically significant, and where, therefore, we could reject the null

hypothesis, are detailed below.

4.1.3 Responses about devices.

Age of devices. Although there was a relatively even spread in the age of devices (0-6m: 18.40%,
6-12m: 24.94%, 1-2 years: 27.43%, 2+ years: 29.23%), it was notable that 139 of the Smart TVs (40.17%
of the 346 smart TVs considered in the detailed questions) were recorded as being over 2 years
old. Although with much smaller reported numbers, 100% of connected refrigerators/freezers (3
reported) and 55.56% of connected washing machines and tumble dryers were bought two years
ago or earlier (5 of 9 reported). These larger devices, which cost more and are considered to be
a standard fixture of a family home, are not only less new than many of the other devices in the
survey, but were reported to be bought in spite of the smart/connected features frequently. 2 of
the 3 refrigerator/freezers were not bought for the smart features, along with 4 of the connected
washing machine/tumble dryers, and 66 (19.08%) of the smart TVs.

Table 2. Top ten reported device types

Device type

Number owned Percentage of all devices

Smart TV
Smart speaker + home assistant
Device connecting smartphone to TV (e.g., Chromecast)
Smart meter
Smart printer
Connected children’s toy
Smart lighting
Connected smoke detector
Connected thermostat
Connected doorbell

437
414
330
134
130
107
96
89
84
82

18.57%
17.55%
14.02%
5.69%
5.52%
4.55%
4.08%
3.78%
3.57%
3.48%

How devices were researched prior to purchase. Respondents gave some insights into how
they found reviews for the devices they were answering for. Participants either did not, or did
not remember, researching 226 (25.51%) of the devices. Across the remaining devices, 572 (64.56%)
devices were bought after reading “customer reviews on the Internet”; this option far outweighed
more typically trustworthy means of ascertaining reviews, with only 116 devices (54 of which were
smart TVs) being bought after the participant read a review from a consumer protection body such
as Which?, the UK consumer protection body.8 Much more important seems to have been the cost
of devices relative to alternative products (this being a consideration for 316 of the devices), as well

8https://www.which.co.uk/

10

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

Table 3. Top eleven devices: detailed participant response

Device type

Number in depth
questions answered about

Percentage

Smart TV
Smart speaker + home assistant
Device to connect smartphone to TV (e.g., Chromecast, Fire Stick)
Connected doorbell
Connected children’s toy
Smart meter
Connected thermostat
Smart printer
Smart camera
Connected smoke detector
Smart lighting

346
207
106
39
33
29
18
18
16
13
13

39.05%
23.36%
11.96%
4.40%
3.72%
3.27%
2.03%
2.03%
1.81%
1.47%
1.47%

as what the device looked like (a consideration for 226 of the devices), and whether the device was
compatible with other devices in the home already (200 devices).

Who managed the devices? Devices reported on in the survey were typically managed by one
individual, whether adult or child (633 devices; 71.44%). The decision for one person to manage
these devices was reported as being intentional in 59.87% of the cases (for 379 of those 633 devices).
There was a relatively equal split between whether people intentionally decided how their device
would be managed, with participants either confirming that there was no active decision making
process for management (or that they could not remember this decision being made) for 428 of
the devices (49.42%). Despite this, there were only 6 reported devices where the status quo had
caused issues, ranging from disagreement over device use, to forgetting passwords (0.68%). There
was a statistically significant relationship between gender and reported management of the device9
(𝜒 2(4, 𝑁 = 884) = 57.21, 𝑝 < .001), with the data showing that men were more likely to say they
had sole ownership of managing the device (62.8% for men against 39.3% for women).

Security at the point of device setup. The survey asked participants if they had received
“detailed instructions” about how to set up their device. They responded that 536 of the 886 devices
(60.50%) did have, with physically printed instructions included with 365 of the devices; 151 devices
had prompts to visit a website, the remainder had a combination of both options. In one case, the
instructions were also given by the retailer. The phrase “detailed instructions” was left deliberately
vague for participants to interpret as they found appropriate. The survey showed that across all
participants an overwhelming majority of users did not know when their devices were supported
until — this was not known for 843 (95.15%). Having “detailed instructions” made little difference
to this figure: of the 536 with such instructions, participants reported not knowing the supported
life of 505 (94.22%) of them.

The majority of users did not remember set up involving a password change: 495 devices (55.87%)
did not require a password change, and respondents did not remember for 196 of them (22.12%).
Other activities that are linked to the security and privacy of the device are also poorly understood
by users: respondents did not know how to delete personal data from 685 devices (77.31%). There
was a statistically significant relationship between gender and whether the participant knew how to
delete personal data from the device or not (𝜒 2(1, 𝑁 = 884) = 7.97, 𝑝 < .005); men were more likely

9With the options for management of the device being managed by: “me” (the participant), “another adult”, “a child”, “no
one person in the household” or “a landlord”.

11

Turner et al.

to report understanding how to delete data from the device (29.6% for men; 20.4% of women). When
asked to give their concerns, should the device break tomorrow, participants were overwhelmingly
concerned about replacing the device (67.16% of all devices), not over whether the data they had
provided would become inaccessible to them (12.87% of all devices), or subsequently deleteable
(0.23%, just 2, devices).

Family Use. Respondents were asked about the type of help that they provided their children
4.1.4
to use for each device they answered questions about. For 687 of the devices (77.54%), respondents
suggested that they felt no need to give help to their children. When they did give help, parents
reported explaining how to interact with the device the most (93 devices, 10.50%); in the case
of 83 devices (9.37%), respondents suggested that they managed their children’s usage to avoid
physical damage, or damage to the service the device provided. Respondents felt that they had no
concerns about their children using the devices for 572 (64.56%) of those devices surveyed, and
indeed, children were reported as using 682 of the devices (76.98%) by themselves, with very few
reported issues.

Older participants provide less help and have fewer concerns. The age of participants was
shown to be statistically significant in terms of both helping children with devices10 (𝜒 2(12, 𝑁 =
884) = 67.18, 𝑝 < .001), and being concerned that children in the home may damage the device11
(𝜒 2(6, 𝑁 = 884) = 31.21, 𝑝 < .001). In particular, the amount of help given to children seems to
decrease as the age of the parent increases, and the same is true of the concern around breaking
the device. For further detail, see Table 4.

Table 4. Age ranges of adult participants and interactions with their child(ren) (percentage based on all
responses to the question by age range)

Age range
of participant

Children do not
get help with devices

Percentage

I am not concerned about
children breaking the device

Percentage

Children learn about cyber
security topics that could be
applied to devices at school

Percentage

I talk to children about cyber
security topics that could be
applied to devices at home

Percentage

30 and under
31-40
41-50
51 and over

28
264
302
92

52.8%
75.0%
79.3%
92.0%

26
199
256
82

49.1%
58.5%
67.2%
82.0%

5
68
113
42

20.8%
30.2%
47.1%
65.6%

14
125
165
49

58.3%
55.6%
68.8%
76.6%

The presence of older children makes for less help or concern for all children. Similarly, the
age of the oldest child in the family seems to make a difference to how the participant reported the
help they provided or concerns they had for all of their children. When chi-square tests of association
were applied to the eldest child a participant reported as having, there were statistically significant
outcomes as to the generally reported levels of help given to children (𝜒 2(12, 𝑁 = 884) = 65.37,
𝑝 < .001), and concerns about breaking or damaging devices (𝜒 2(6, 𝑁 = 884) = 36.36, 𝑝 < .010),
as well as whether the participant believed their children were competent with the device or not
(𝜒 2(3, 𝑁 = 884) = 16.77, 𝑝 < .001). Survey participants with children in the oldest age range (16-17)
were less likely, based upon the responses in the survey, to report giving help to any children in the
family, or having any concerns about the children damaging the device. Interestingly, only when
the oldest child was 5 or under was there a clear difference in the likelihood that the participants
considered the children competent with the device. See Table 5 for more detail.

4.1.5 Cyber Security in the Home.

10With the options for“who helps the children in the home” being “all/most of the adults in the home”, “another adult in the
home”, “no one in the home”, “just me in the home”, or “I don’t know” (where ‘me’ and ‘I’ refer to the participant).
11With the options being “I have concerns”, “I do not have concerns”, or “the children do not use this device”.

12

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

Table 5. Age of oldest child and perceived ability (percentage based on all responses to the question by age
range of oldest child)

Age of oldest child

Not concerned
about breaking device

Percentage

No help given
with device

Percentage

Is competent with
the device

Percentage

Between 0-5
5-10
11-15
16-17

19
157
251
136

36.5%
56.7%
66.8%
75.1%

22
183
313
161

55.8%
66.1%
83.2%
89.0%

28
217
297
140

53.8%
78.3%
79.0%
77.3%

Where do users get support? There was a wide spread of answers to the multiple response
question “Who or where do you turn to for support with digital technology use”. 406 respondents
(73.29% of the total number of respondents) said that they would turn to the Internet for support,
with 217 respondents (39.17%) saying that they would also turn to other adults within the household.
64 respondents (11.55%) suggested that they needed no support, with similar numbers turning to
friends (73, 13.18%), family outside the household (65, 11.73%) or children within the home (72,
13.00%). Very few respondents said that they made use of paid support (6, 1.08%).

Cyber crime and its effects. The vast majority of participants had not, or did not believe that
they had been, the victim of a cyber crime at any point (457, 82.50%). Of those that responded that
they had, 26 reported having suffered a financial loss as a result. 65 said they had not, with 6 saying
that they were not sure. 503 respondents (90.79%) said that they were unaware of manufacturers of
devices that they owned ever having reported a security breach.

How is cyber security discussed at school and home? The survey also looked at the parents’
understanding of what children learned at school about cyber security and Internet safety. The most
common themes were “cyber bullying” (411, 74.19%), “stranger danger” (396 respondents, 71.48%)
and “harmful online content” (390, 70.40%). More traditional cyber security themes were much less
frequently recorded, e.g., “use of strong unique passwords” by 194 (35.02%) and “malware” by 107
respondents (19.31%). 87 respondents (15.70%) said that they were unaware of what their children
had learned at school. There was a statistical significance between the age of the participant and the
knowledge of those types of themes associated with home IoT device use12 (𝜒 2(6, 𝑁 = 552) = 35.99,
𝑝 < .001) (see Table 4), and also the gender of participant and the knowledge of these themes
(𝜒 2(2, 𝑁 = 552) = 12.27, 𝑝 < .002). The data shows that the older a parent is, the more likely they
would be to report such themes; women (44.6%) were more likely than men (31.7%) to do so, too.
Finally, the survey reviewed discussions held at home by families about cyber security, and
the Internet. 481 respondents (86.82%) reported having discussed the importance of not talking
to strangers online. Other topics were far less uniformly discussed. 245 (44.22%) had discussed
“what data might identify or reveal about you”, and 212 (38.27%) had discussed the use of strong
and unique passwords. 27.98% of respondents (155) had had discussions about how to minimize
the risks of becoming a victim of malware. There was a statistical significance between the age of
participant and the likelihood to discuss topics such as passwords and malware, instead of topics
more closely linked to safeguarding, such as stranger danger13 (𝜒 2(6, 𝑁 = 552) = 17.73, 𝑝 < .007).

12With the participant responses being gathered into topics that were home IoT device related (strong password use, data
management practices, malware, cyber crime, personally identifiable data), those that are not home IoT device related
(stranger danger, harmful online content, cyber bullying) and “I don’t know”.
13As with the school test described in the previous paragraph, the participant responses being gathered into topics that
were home IoT device related, those that are not home IoT device related and “I don’t know”.

13

Turner et al.

The older the age range of a participant is, the more likely they would be to report discussing those
topics more closely aligned to cyber security aligned to home IoT device use — see Table 4.

4.2 Interviews

Summary of findings. This paragraph gives a high-level overview of the interview findings
4.2.1
presented below. Both parents and children talked about threats and risks in the language of
online safety — stranger danger, cyber bullying and so on — and scams, without association to
the home IoT devices that they were discussing. The ability for children to spend money through
home IoT devices was recognized by both parents and children, but often not acted upon until
the children had spent money without permission. Other types of financial fraud were not taken
particularly seriously by parents (and was not considered at all by children) as the mechanisms for
reimbursement through UK financial institutions were considered to be robust. Data loss from IoT
devices was not raised as a concern.

Much as with their description of risks and threats, families described discussing online safety
issues, when asked about how cyber security was discussed at home. Evidence of robust cyber
security knowledge was relatively limited among both adults and children, with application of
that knowledge poorer still. Much stronger concerns arose, from both parents and children, about
other aspects of home IoT device use — not security or privacy, but the costs of the devices, the
interoperability capabilities of the devices, and the necessity of careful use to extend out their
useful life.

4.2.2 What do families consider the threats and risks of home IoT device use to be?

Stranger danger, scams: the same threats as posed by using the Internet directly. All in-
terviewed families did not differentiate between the threats and risks that home IoT devices pose,
compared to other digital technologies that allow you to browse the Internet, and connect to social
media in particular. Participants, too, presented no understanding of specific threats based upon
their personal situation, but rather focused on generic threats with no clearly defined adversary.
The most talked about threat was that of “stranger danger” and that of inappropriate online
contact with strangers. This is less applicable to home IoT devices, which participants recognized
(“Well, you can’t chat to anyone on the [Amazon Fire] stick.” (C5, aged 10)). The second most
commonly considered threat was that of financial loss, through falling victim to scams, e.g., “...
giving your password, your bank password, to someone and they then transfer all your money out.
That kind of thing, I suppose. I can’t think what else they could do that would bother me that much,
or as much as that” (AF2). This was a risk that parents felt strongly, and children were much less
cognisant of, with suggestion that this was because they were not individually capable of managing
their own finances. Interestingly, children who had seen attempted scams were likely to recognize
them as such precisely because they targeted accounts they were not old enough to have (“...I’ve
got like, 10 [text messages] this week [telling me that] my PayPal account has been hacked...but I don’t
even have an account.” (C13, aged 12)).

Some parents felt that they could rely upon being reimbursed, should financial fraud occur,
which minimized the harm (“ ... my PlayStation 4 account was hacked. And they spent a lot of money.
I got it all back. It was fine.” (AM9)); this was from an expectation that any form of fraud would be
reversed, or at least properly investigated, by traditional financial services firms, such as banks
and credit card companies (“ ... [if] someone’s in your bank account, you’d call your bank, and they’d
resolve it” (AM7)). A couple of adult participants had experience of fraud through less traditional

14

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

financial services firms, such as PayPal:14 “I just noticed all this abnormal spending activity. PayPal
weren’t particularly interested, I have to say.” (AF8). The participant here was not reimbursed.

Unauthorized spending on devices is not as concerning as fraud. Unauthorized spending
on devices did not appear to be considered “financial fraud” for our adult participants, despite
being a much more possible threat of home IoT devices. Perhaps as a result of being interviewed
during periods of COVID-19 lockdowns, limiting the number of people that could enter the home,
any unauthorized spending was considered almost exclusively in terms of children in the home,
and as such was considered to be a restriction that parents should manage, even if they were
unaware of the ability to do so: “Oh yes, ... you ended up spending £5 on some terrible game, because
we hadn’t yet realized we’d not blocked it ...” (AF6). The prevailing feeling, even among the children
who discussed it, was that children might be expected to spend money accidentally when using
devices, without realising what they were doing (“I’ve got a password for my profile...so I don’t spend
money by accident.” C22, aged 8). Those with family accounts on shared devices described instances
of receiving an email about online purchases made by the child’s account, and having to have a
discussion with the child after the event. Only in one instance did a parent give an example of
making the child repay the cost of the downloaded goods — a significant sum was spent on video
games, by chance in the run-up to the child’s birthday, making paying the parent back with money
received as gifts a straightforward event. Had it been any other time of the year, the child would
not have had the money to repay the parent.

Data loss is not an active concern. Participants did not exhibit particular concerns about the
loss or theft or data of themselves or on behalf of their family from any devices (home IoT or
otherwise), or even the ongoing use of personal data by devices and their manufacturers. Some
adult participants were sanguine about data loss, e.g., by saying “we all just live now assuming that
our data has been stolen and [we are] waiting for something bad to happen” (AM23). Children, too,
exhibited signs that they were aware of the risks of making their personal data available to others,
whether through accident or design. In answer to the question “what is the biggest risk of using
home IoT devices?”, some children responded as follows: “Your information being shared and people
knowing what you do on the Internet...because you could get hacked or something” (C10, aged 13); “I
think, just accidentally giving my information” (C12, aged 13), “Accidentally sharing information
that is going to come back to you and put you at risk” (C23, aged 15). Children interviewed under the
age of 13 did not talk about data loss as a risk.

Two families with more hands-off devices, such as robot vacuum cleaners, smoke alarms or
thermostats, seemed genuinely puzzled by the notion that they would discuss these devices with
their children, or that there would be security implications. In both cases, the children were typically
reported as being interested and disruptive with the devices for a period, then ignoring them. Upon
pressing, one parent explained their thought process about the smart thermostat: “I would teach
them to use it in the same way I would teach them to use anything else ... as [child] gets older, I would
like him to load the dishwasher ...” (AF9). When the time came, they would be showing their children
only how to use the manual overrides for the smart devices in the home, not expecting them to
use apps, or have any more significant control over the management of the data. When asked
about data collection from smart home devices, this family felt comfortable with their expected
data use by the manufacturers: “I know they collect all the information. I know they try and use it to
make money.” (AM9). Another participant, heavily bought into the Amazon ecosystem of home IoT
devices, expressed frustration that the most effective way to limit data collection, or to opt out of

14PayPal explicitly explains that, because of its choice of location and registration for UK business, “The nature and extent
of consumer protections may differ from those for firms based in the UK.” [51]

15

Turner et al.

data use for improvement, was to activate a setting that might see them not receive future features:
“I changed some settings in the app that stopped them because they can listen to your recordings ... And
you can turn off the ability for them to listen to it. It’s like a weird setting because it comes up with an
option that says why you might not get any of the new features if you turn this off, and I’m like, ‘I like
new features!’” (AM16).

Linking “hackers” to Internet, not home IoT device use. Some children considered “hacking”
to be the biggest risk, but could not necessarily explain what hacking meant, who might hack or
what “being hacked” might look like in anything more than vague terms, e.g., “they can change your
password, so you cannot log into anything” (C24, aged 8) or “to me hacking means all data is stolen
then it is sold” (C18, aged 10). Children also framed this data capture in terms of smartphone or social
media use (“... phones have, like, tracking information, so they know where you are” (C13, aged 12)),
rather than home IoT device use. Several parents were unsure whether younger children recognized
that home IoT devices connected to the Internet in similar ways to computers or smartphones
(“They don’t understand that Alexa is connected to the Internet.” (AF20)). When asked, most children
were confused by the question of how a home IoT device might work: “[Alexa] is a program. So
people put in questions and answers. So yeah, it’s like Google.” (C10, aged 12); “It’s a good question.
I don’t know. It’s magic!” (C23, aged 15). Children seem to have a level of knowledge about data
collected when using the Internet directly, but are at risk of not making the link between personal
data collection, potential misuse and home IoT devices.

Threats to the home. No adult participants raised potential threats to the home from home IoT
devices, whether in terms of facilitating burglary or other physical damage. Conversely, two sets
of parents explained how their connected home surveillance systems had enabled assistance in
arresting a burglar in their neighbourhood (“We were able to send pictures to the police.” (AF2)),
and in feeling more secure after past events around the house (“I think just having it there prevents
things.” (AF19)). Children seemed to be more aware of physical damage that might arise from
devices, and considered these risks more urgently than risks to personal data in two cases: “There
are a lot of things plugged in down there — they could set fire!” (C19, aged 12); “I think the most
dangerous thing is getting water inside it...that’s the only thing that’s dangerous about it.” (C5, aged
10). These concerns were not shared by their parents.

4.2.3 Cyber security knowledge gathering, sharing and adherence within the family.

Discussion as a family... The most common way that interviewed families reported themselves
managing any type of cyber security was through discussing it as a family. Should a child want to
use a new app or device, many families expressed a process of discussing guidelines — length of
use at a time, who and how they could communicate with people, what they could download, for
example. Despite bringing the topic up when asked about cyber security, families recalled talking
more spontaneously about online safety issues that they saw arising from the Internet (posting
inappropriate content, not talking to strangers) than more strictly cyber security issues. Whether
explicitly understood by the parents or not, the importance of a trusting relationship for this type
of discussion was clear: “... we talk to them a lot, and tell them to tell us in any situation” (AF7).
Children often referred to asking or learning from parents when they were unsure (“I just call Mum
and Dad” (C7, aged 7), “I [watch] my parents do it” (C11, aged 14)).

...but not about home IoT device security. There were no reported instances of interviewed
families discussing home IoT device security together. Some parents suggested that they might
use items in the news as a means of having conversations about specific security topics with their
children, although, when asked about what news stories they had seen recently that made them

16

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

consider their own home IoT setup, no one interviewed pointed to a specific story about a home IoT
device being compromised. Neither parents nor children could explain, when asked, in much detail,
as to how the devices they used worked: “I don’t actually know — no one has ever asked me that
question before.” (C17, aged 8). Yet parents seemed to assume that at some point there would need
to be a discussion, without taking steps to understand the technology further. As AF5 explained:
“What I’m guilty of is I don’t really think about it in any depth. You know, and probably because my
children are still fairly young that you don’t sort of think any further than what you need to.”

Some parents with a larger age gap between children reflected how they seemed to have missed
having conversations with their older, teenage children, because advances in digital technologies
had happened relatively recently. Conversely, their younger children seemed to have grown up with,
and just “understood” core functionalities of devices in the home instinctively, expecting devices to
have touch screens and to stream programs on demand, for example, without understanding the
technologies behind the device: “He knows what he’s doing when he’s looking at it, but ask him what
he’s done. He wouldn’t be able to tell you.” (AM24).

Children’s awareness of cyber security. All children recalled that they had had classes at
school about certain aspects of computer use. Most talked of having annual reminders of “stranger
danger” and “cyber bullying”, and using programs such as Scratch15 to learn programmatic thinking
and the fundamentals of coding. Only one child actively discussed being taught about malware (C23,
aged 14). No children reported being taught about IoT products at all, with one child commenting
that “It would be nice to know just how different technologies worked, not just spending all the time
on computers” (C2, aged 12). Many children found school’s approach “all common sense stuff ” (C7,
aged 11), and “just talk[ing] about the same thing every time” (C5, aged 10).

Most children interviewed indicated that they knew something about strong passwords, but
typically had one core password that they used (“I have my passwords all the same, so I remember it!
But if you hack one account, you hack all of them!” (C13, aged 12)), varying them should they need
to share details with others (“... if my friend and I may want to make an account where we all have
access, I will use a password that is not my original password.” (C5, aged 10)). Beyond this, children
exhibited little cyber security knowledge that could be considered specific to home IoT devices: one
child had read an article about how to delete their search history from their smart home assistant:
“I think I probably just saw something about it like on social media: ‘This is how you stop your Alexa
from knowing all your secrets’.” (C23, aged 14).

Seven families had instances where a child expressed knowing more than a parent about the
Internet generally, or specific security features. In these instances, children pointed out gaps in
their parents’ knowledge, but gave no indication that they would be expected to teach or help their
parents further. For example, C13 (aged 12) showed frustration that his mother “didn’t understand
the safe tick” that the anti-malware software they used provided to show the safety of websites.
AF13 followed this by saying “you’ll have to show me!”, suggesting that the willingness to learn
may be present, but not necessarily obvious to the child. Despite the suggestion that children may
be on a par with their parents, there was no instance where a family expected the child to have
a part in the security or management of communal devices, even if the child had an interest or
exhibited accurate knowledge about security.

Parents’ awareness of cyber security. Ten of the adults considered themselves to be quite
confident in the security of their homes. Either they thought themselves “fairly savvy on things”
(AF1) or felt confident that devices come ready prepared to avoid any kind of security breach “Well,
I suppose a lot of the devices such as the Echos ... those kinds of things that kind of come pre-set up to

15https://scratch.mit.edu/

17

Turner et al.

be defensive” (AM2). AM16 was aware of the potential for insecure home IoT devices to be used as a
means of getting access to an entire network, but put faith in well-known devices: “I read something
about someone who put a Wi-Fi kettle on their network, and then someone had hacked into it ... and
gained access to the whole [network] ... It can be a bit dodgy, but I trust the Amazon system, the Alexas
...” Participants that were confident of their abilities to secure computers did not provide evidence
of having more security measures set up for smart home devices (for example, discussing guest
networks, non-standard router settings or additional home networking) than users who were not
confident when asked. Almost all adult users, and some of the older children, suggested that, should
they need to find information about any aspect of security, they would search online, and assess
the responses based on their judgement or prior experiences: “Slight cliché, but Google, Google, and
then I look at what looks like a legitimate organization. I don’t have like, a specific way in mind, but I
think I’m able to tell based on you know, how the website looks.” (AF9).

When adults were asked how they would like to receive information about cyber security, answers
ranged from getting it from trusted technology TV shows, popular UK consumer champions, private
companies, or even school. There were some parents who thought that this might be the remit of
the government, but were unclear where it might sit (Interviewer:“Which areas of the government?”
AF25: “I would say, probably [the Department for] Education ...”), or if there was even sufficient
budget for the government to do it usefully (“...maybe the government but I don’t know how the
government actually have the resources.” (AF8)). AM3 reflected that it would be helpful if there
was an “NHS (National Health Service) for cyber security”. The UK’S NCSC, who run the national
security awareness campaign CyberAware,16 was not mentioned by any participants.

Parents’ cyber security application. Several adult participants expressed their inability to
understand what is needed to secure the home and act accordingly, relying on other adults in the
home (“My husband brings stuff in the house and I have no clue. I can’t tell you exactly what we’ve
got ... I’ve got no clue how it works or anything about it.” (AF2)), or not thinking about it (“I’m one of
those people who probably doesn’t think about security. I just go along until the disaster strikes and
then yeah, I mean, obviously, I’ve got you know, passwords for our various things, but I mean, I don’t
sort of you know, think about it in that much depth.” (AF5). Three adult participants equated being
secure with having anti-malware software (“Once I download it I am happy for the year.” (AF13)) —
even when not being sure that it would carry over to the home IoT devices they had: “... [using
anti-malware software] was just kind of what got drummed into us when we were younger and when
we first had computers, but with all the other kind of connected items, you just assume it’s ... in there, I
guess.” (AF6). Other participants understood that anti-malware was not the sole means of keeping
their home secure, and was not on their home IoT devices: “I have Norton on everything apart
from the TV.” (AF 17). This gap was noted as if the home IoT device did not require any additional
protection. Some participants considered free anti-malware to be superior to paid-for versions (“... I
found a lot of them if you’d shop around the free ones are just as safe as the subscription ones. I mean,
I swear on AVG Free for most of it. I still swear with that over £60 Norton every time.” (AM24)). Given
the practice of selling the data of users of free antivirus software, this may, in fact, open the user
up to different security issues [58].

Where cyber security knowledge was lacking. Only one interviewed adult participant used a
password manager for themselves, with another participant writing passwords down in a notebook.
Two other participants expressed awareness of password management software, but dismissed
them as too complex and tricky, or incompatible with not having access to technology all the time
(one participant, unable to use their smartphone at work, was unable to access their bank account

16https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/cyberaware/

18

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

because the details were stored in the password manager). Other adult participants did not consider
password management outside of their own memory a necessary practice. Some were confident
that they could store a range of passwords adequately without further assistance (“I’m fairly on the
ball myself with it, to be honest, so I don’t ever see the need [for a password manager]” (AM24)), many
expressed some small discomfort, or guilt, at knowing that they did not follow guidance that they
knew to be important (“I have the same passwords pretty much. Just like a couple of letters changed.
I’m terrible, yeah I know ...” (AF21)). Those adults participants asked had not changed the password
on their router (“It’s too bloody long!” (AM7); “... I just put that in the too boring/too hard basket.”
(AF1)), and retained the router given to them by their Internet Service Provider. Children did not
reference using password management software themselves, or having any discussion with their
families about how to manage passwords of home IoT devices, and the potential for misuse when a
single account is tied to a communal device.

Few interview participants, and no children, reported using multi-factor authentication (MFA).
In the majority of cases where individuals did report using MFA, it was only done after being
the victim of a cyber crime, resulting in fraudulent activity (“[the experience] made me go and
turn on 2FA” (AM9)). MFA is, of course, less obviously used in home IoT devices directly, however
equivalent steps, such as requiring a PIN for purchases through an account linked to a home IoT
device, were typically not activated by participants. As with password management, there was no
report of discussions within the family about the use and benefits of MFA.

Most adult participants were not completely sure as to whether their devices received automatic
software updates, or whether they needed to be involved in the process. There were no participants
who were aware of how long they expected their devices to be supported for, with some participants
misunderstanding the question (“[supported life] is probably similar to a normal energy bulb” (AF16)).
Software updating was not discussed between families as a necessary process. Three children
mentioned the importance of automatic software updates — but only one in relation to a device
other than their smartphone (an Amazon Fire Stick). Six adult participants talked of their assumption
that updates were automatically done, and took little time to consider it: “when they get notifications
they’ll do it, but it’s not a conscious thing.” (AF14, about the children in the house). Both adults and
children expressed a desire to manage their device updates, either because they did not want to
have their use interfered with in the moment (“I feel like it’s an informed choice when I do things”
(AF2)) or because “I feel like it slows the phone down” (C25, aged 16).

Other home IoT concerns: costs, interoperability. A much larger concern than security, par-
ticularly for those with a larger number of home IoT devices, was how to expand their smart home
within their budget, and keep devices functional for as long as possible. Some participants were
proud that they had been careful with old smart home assistants that were still functioning: “ ...
none of [my Echos] have ever broken. Some of them I’ve had since right at the beginning.” (AF19). One
participant with a significant smart home set up recalled that, with individual devices being so
expensive, building up a smart home system was a slow process involving second-hand devices and
constant interoperability issues. Older devices that this family had did not have full functionality,
compared to newer devices, suggesting being out of supported life. Another family, unaware of
the security implications, talked at length about how these interoperability issues made life a little
more frustrating and a little less smart than they would have liked (“Having to have a bridge like
that is really annoying...why does Phillips [manufacturer of smart bulbs] need a bridge [to work with
other home IoT devices] when none of the others do?” (AF19)).

There were agreed-upon strategies to ensure that children took care of their devices — some
children recognized that a device broken by them would not be immediately replaced (“I don’t want
my [device] to break, because I won’t be getting another one!” (C6, aged 6)), where other families

19

Turner et al.

employed strategies such as this: “We make them spend their own money on stuff like that. Hopefully
promote a sense of like, you know, ‘I bought this, it’s mine and it’s my responsibility.’ ” (AF7). Younger
children in particular exhibited signs of friendship and care towards smart home assistants (“[C4.
aged 4] considers the Google Home part of the family...they have conversations in a very friendly way.”
(AM4)), or seeing them as integral (“just part of our house” (AM16)).

5 DISCUSSION

5.1 A misalignment of perceived and actual threats and risks
5.1.1 Perceived threats and risks. The interviews and the survey showed that families were happy
to use and integrate home IoT devices in their homes, and did not take particular steps to inform
themselves as to how to make these devices more secure. The underlying concerns of parents in
particular, around stranger danger and financial fraud, suggest that they did not recognize the
difference in threats and risks posed by home IoT devices, compared to using the Internet in a
home computer. Children echoed this, speaking almost exclusively of threats posed to them on
social media, and risks typically stemming from “hackers”, external to the family.

The adults and children interviewed had some level of understanding of how having home
IoT devices increased the collection of personal data, and that misuse of such data by someone
with malicious intent could be bad. The survey showed a complex relationship between the age
of the participant and their actions in relation to their children — regardless of the child’s age:
although, the older the parent, the more likely they were to report talking to their children about
cyber security measures that could be applied to home IoT devices, they were much less likely to
offer their children support with such devices. This shift perhaps reflects the adoption of digital
technologies over time — younger parents, more likely to have experience of digital technologies
as ubiquitous and for interacting with others, seem to focus more on the risks arising from this.
The interviews and survey indicated several reasons for the lack of knowledge and subsequent
action by participants. As indicated by the survey results, people did not notice news stories about
their devices, and may miss stories of data leaks and other breaches, thus not taking actions when
needed. The interviews highlighted how adults and older children were resigned to data being
taken and occasionally leaked, and the survey results suggest that people are often unaware of, or
immediately unaffected by any breach. Regardless of their feelings about this, if individuals want
to use such devices, they have to accept the terms of use, which often requires full data collection
to be turned on for complete device functionality. Furthermore, cutting corners with, or not using,
cyber security measures rarely causes directly applicable, irreversible harms, which reduces the
incentive to try to change.

5.1.2 Actual threats and risks. There is the overwhelming feeling that threats posed by home IoT
devices are too impersonal and too remote for many people to feel compelled to take interest. It
has long been considered that individuals do not find themselves interesting enough — or not
wealthy or valuable enough — to be hacked [30]; in this light, it is understandable that the families
interviewed spent more time discussing the much more manageable and realistic risks of talking to
strangers and over-sharing personal data online.

It also does not help that stories, such as the home network being hacked through an insecure
smart kettle, as mentioned by one of the interviewees, have a faintly ridiculous edge that undercuts
the severity of having a home network compromised. Conversely, other potential threats that can
arise from a malicious party accessing the types of data that can emanate from a smart home can be
extremely distressing to consider, given the potential of harm to property and person, and how little
the user might be able to do to protect the household. The 2019 incident of an individual hacking
into a Ring camera in a child’s bedroom and pretending to be Santa, talking directly to the children

20

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

[45], is one such upsetting example. Not only is this reported to be an attack widely possible due to
software especially designed and distributed for the purpose [12], but Amazon, the owner of the
Ring device family, has refused to acknowledge their responsibility for the harm and distressed
caused, blaming users’ insecure practices for facilitating the hacking [50]. The psychological harms
of an event like this need to be appropriately considered when considering threats, particularly
when taking decisions for, and discussing alongside, children or other dependents. Agrafiotis et al.
[1], considered the range of potential psychological harms that may occur to victims of a cyber
breach — ranging from embarrassment and discomfort, to shame, depression and guilt, over an
extended time period. Within a family setting, these types of feelings can be difficult to discuss, or
may affect different family members in different ways. The importance of effective cyber security
measures — strong and unique passwords, and regularly updated software in particular — is even
more important when manufacturers may cite a user’s lack of management of the security features
to avoid liability.

Children interviewed did not report witnessing active risk management from their parents. The
survey results showed the extent to which users did not know the details of their devices’ security
features. The interviews showed that families did not routinely talk about cyber security strategies
that home IoT devices may need to use, such as the deploying of password management strategies,
using MFA or the importance of regular software updates. Additionally, women were less likely
to manage the devices in the home, or understand how to use them, but take more ownership
of understanding what their children learn at school, meaning that the parent that may be less
capable or confident is the one overseeing the children’s education in relation to applicable cyber
security. Instead, children are taught the importance of managing the cost of device use from their
parents. Parents may look to second-hand devices to reduce the cost of expanding their smart
homes, agree with their children that they must take care of those devices that they use, and use
free security software. It is a common practice that software is free at point of use, but is monetized
through strategies such as selling data collected about the users. This can be extremely invasive
when software is designed to control an entire system, as is the case with anti-malware applications
[18, 58]. Additionally, normalizing the downloading of free software may increase the chance of
downloading a malicious app [66]; although directly a concern on smartphones, similar threats
from careless downloading of skills (the smart home assistant equivalent of apps on mobile devices)
have been shown to exist [38].

Parents promoted ideas of relying upon recognized consumer protection regulation, particularly
in the case of fraud, but also in ignoring children who believed electrical safety could be an issue.
Adults in the UK are accustomed to a rigorous consumer standards framework, with the ability to
approach financial services firms for reimbursement where there is fraud without “gross negilgence”
[21], and levels of assurance around electrical safety.17 Families also modeled behavior about
extending device life through careful use. In a family context, this poses the problem that devices
are not necessarily as secure as people might expect, leaving them open to attack in ways that may
not be covered by consumer protection regulation, yet remain damaging to those affected.

5.2 Neither adults nor children have opportunities to learn appropriate cyber security

information

Both the survey and the interviews show the lack of appropriate education opportunities for both
adults and children around cyber security. Children are more easily approached in school settings,
but the status quo in the curricula applicable in the United Kingdom is not teaching appropriate

17Such standards include the Kitemark (https://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/kitemark/) and the CE mark (https://www.gov.
uk/guidance/ce-marking).

21

Turner et al.

security for home IoT devices or capturing the interest of children. Those children interviewed
found cyber education at school repetitive, learning little that they did not already know about
some topics (notably the safeguarding aspects of Internet use), and little to nothing about security
topics. This confirms the findings of Pencheva et al. [52], focusing on cyber security at school, who
found that students generally are very tech-savvy, but treat online safety and cyber security as
the same subject. The survey, furthermore, showed how important it is to ensure all children in a
family receive the same education in a school setting, as it appears to be the case that the presence
of older children in a home setting reduces the amount of attention given by parents to ensuring
careful home IoT device use and secure cyber security practices of all the children.

Education for adults in this space, outside of formalized education, is extremely difficult to land
effectively [3], and the efficacy of such education depends upon personal and social norms, in many
respects. Our interviews did not get as far as asking what types of message would be personally
effective for participants, given the basic lack of knowledge as to how the devices worked on the
part of the participants. However, participants did give a suggestion of the types of organisations
and groups that they would like to hear from. These ranged from the government and related
bodies, to trusted people with influence (such as particular TV shows and consumer champions)
or manufacturers. The reliance on turning to the Internet for advice shows a lack of knowledge
that could possibly be bolstered by these channels. Of course, this depends on how well trusted
organizations are, which is a factor that will change from country to country, as will the societal
approach to parenting, and managing personal risks. As an example, Kritzinger et al. [36] found
that, in comparing cyber security message approaches between the UK and South Africa, the UK’s
messaging focused upon the responsibility of the individual to protect themselves, rather than
being a communal effort. This ties in with the argument in Renaud et al. [53] that cyber security in
the UK is becoming “responsibilized”, with individuals expected to manage their own risks. This is
not a particularly unusual expectation, also seen in the USA [25], but, as the interviews showed, if
individuals have inaccurate understandings of where and how they are protected, and what the
actual threats and risks are, it is extremely unlikely that they will manage these risks effectively.

5.3 Recommendations to help families become more secure in their home IoT device

use

5.3.1 Help families understand where to do better. Without even a general knowledge, it is hard to
take the next step of efficient threat management based upon personal situations. Extending the
suggestions from Parkin et al. [48] and Emami-Naeini et al. [19], manufacturers must do more to
make the key threats of home IoT device use clearer at point of setup, and periodically throughout
device use. Documentation about major threats relating to personal data and device misuse, and
the recommended baseline steps to mitigate these issues based upon the specific device may help
to increase awareness in adult users, which can, in turn, trickle down to children. Manufacturers
may also focus on providing this information clearly online, so that when users are faced with
trying to improve their knowledge, official sources are plentiful.

Home IoT devices — particularly those that must have a reasonable expectation of use by multiple
people, multiple generations, within a single location — should be provided with better guidance as
to how to set them up for the situation it is located in. Every person, and every household has its own
particular set of threats and risks that might make certain security options more or less appropriate
for them; however, there will be certain baseline security features that should be promoted to users
at the point of setup and periodically thereafter. Hiniker et al. [28] and Ko et al. [34] have shown
that families are more likely to come to agreements over rules for Internet use if they agree upon
these rules as a unit. Our findings agree with this: families instinctively use discussion as a means
of managing potentially tricky areas for their children. However, previous research has shown

22

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

children and adults may use different words to discuss cyber security [33]. In addition, children
may not perceive devices in the same way that adults do, not only, as our interviews showed, failing
to understand they are connected to the Internet, but also in understanding how they work [71, 73].
As such, the expectation that using discussion either to agree about home rules about home IoT
devices or as a means of providing children with additional knowledge will fail, without further
guidance for both parents and children.

5.3.2 Appropriate levels of base security measures for home IoT devices. The evidence from the
interviews in particular suggest that home IoT devices that are expected to be used by groups of
people — especially children — should come with more stringent security measures set by default.
For example, although some steps seem to have been taken by manufacturers to allow notifications
when things are purchased, further work could make spending money and downloading items
harder (requiring purchases to be confirmed with a PIN or other agreement from the primary
account holder). Alternatively, a clear signpost to the potential risks of not protecting purchases
at the point of setup, should be provided. The interviews show that, for example, adults in the
UK are used to being protected by strong consumer protection measures that should cover most
cases of fraud — but crucially, not “gross negligence” when, despite being the victims of fraud, they
were deemed not to have taken the proper precautions [9]. Although adult interview participants
were extremely concerned about financial fraud, few had enabled settings to limit purchases on
applicable home IoT devices, and no family considered the ease with which significant sums of
money could be spent fraudulently, potentially without recourse.

It must be recognized that there are proposed measures to mitigate some of the security aspects
explored here, such as the UK’s Product Security and Telecommunications Infrastructure Bill,
mandating some aspects of security by design in consumer smart products [64] and ETSI’s EN
303 645 baseline standard for consumer IoT [20]. Much like the devices they seek to legislate and
standardize, these measures are nascent, and may well need to be extended and revised as the
market matures. Policy makers should continue to analyze the ongoing harms arising from the
increased ubiquity of such devices to understand whether more regulation or legislation may be
necessary to protect consumers and specific groups of vulnerable people in the future. An example
of regulatory focus on a particularly vulnerable group would be the UK’s Age Appropriate Design
Code [32], which requires organizations to consider the safety of children explicitly, when providing
those services within the UK. Acting unilaterally, as the UK government is in the case of [15] and
[32], works on the assumption that the measures can be applied to — and enforced against — those
devices that are for sale in the UK in a meaningful manner, despite home IoT devices being made,
and sold, globally. Some small shifts have been seen in large online platforms’ age confirmation
processes as a result of the Age Appropriate Design Code [27], but what the effect on the device
market will be remains to be seen.

5.3.3 Up to date education — for children and adults. Parents and children interviewed and surveyed
in this research portrayed the learning provided by school as focusing only on the Internet as a
place for socialising and commerce. Curricula must be updated to capture not only the pervasive
nature of the IoT, including exploring how the data collection from such devices is even more
pervasive than that collected using the Internet, and also why the threats are different to the
Internet accessed via a computer. Helping children be able to better comprehend what and who
may actually constitute a threat, and how to apply knowledge about cyber security skills to manage
such threats would be an excellent start.

However, enhancing school curricula is not enough to improve the cyber security knowledge
within the home in the short term — not only do children not typically have the power in the
familial relationship to engender change of their parents’ activities, but the accounts for the home

23

Turner et al.

IoT devices are unlikely to be theirs to manage. As Blum-Ross and Livingstone [6] considered, the
information exchange between school and parents is poor: there can be no expectation that parents
would become significantly more knowledgeable simply because their children are learning more.
Parents need to find means of educating themselves, and knowing how to extend this knowledge
to their children, where the knowledge is not gained at school.

In the UK there is some expectation of support from the government for personal risk man-
agement. However, the interviewees showed a complete lack of awareness of the existence of the
body tasked with supporting them with cyber security, the NCSC. There is an interesting case to
be made for learning the public health messaging lessons deployed to spread messages around
social distancing, and then the promotion of vaccination, in relation to COVID-19. The use of
poster campaigns, short slogans and promotion of positive behavior by trusted members of society,
whether in a personal capacity or through platforms such as TV shows or recognized websites may
serve to normalize good cyber security practices. This should sit on top of school-based education,
and would serve to provide knowledge that is currently unavailable to both adults and children
alike.

5.3.4 Better recognition that families try to look after their devices. The importance of strong
security practices becomes more important as countries, including the UK and the European Union,
introduce rights to repair in law for certain home electronic goods, including televisions and
refrigerators [26]. As these devices are expected to be repairable for up to ten years, so smart
instances of these devices need to maintain appropriate software updates and usable security
processes for this period. This must happen to ensure that users are not put at risk for being careful
with their devices, and that children do not need to learn that the ability to have devices on a budget
does not come at the expense of its, and their, security.

6 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
As often happens in research relating to the home and family life, there was an over-representation
of women participating in both the survey and the interviews. Although this may serve to skew
some responses, as women may have a tendency to underplay their technology knowledge [54],
this is to some degree balanced by the input of other family members in the interview process.
Additionally, although there is clearly going to be participant bias in terms of the type of person who
would consider answering surveys on Prolific, this does not seem to have produced a respondent
group who is extremely technologically aware, for example. It must be considered also that the
research is focusing on technology that is, at present, largely discretionary in nature; as such the
higher proportion of employed participants may not be entirely surprising.

As is the case with most research based around qualitative work, our findings can be said to be
applicable to the situation that families found themselves in the UK, at the time of undertaking the
research. Parenting methods, trust in government, governmental entities and consumer protections
vary throughout the world: future work could be undertaken to understand where the findings of
this piece of research may differ in other jurisdictions and regions globally. Taking the EU Kids
Online survey as an example, which in its 2020 review looked at online behaviors of children in
19 EU countries [57], it may even be beneficial to scale such research up to look at the security
differences in home IoT devices between countries: as devices are sold globally, so their use, and
misuse, need to be understood globally too.

Future work should build on these findings as a means of engaging families more with the
elements of cyber security they can discuss and manage appropriately as a specific multi-user case.
In particular, work should look not only at what families can be expected to do, but what areas they
do not consider significantly threatening enough to spend time managing, and which bodies should

24

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

be managing such risks. It is also necessary for further work to be done to integrate knowledge of
home IoT devices and the cyber security risks that they pose, into school curricula, to make cyber
security education more than an online extension of child safeguarding principles.

7 CONCLUSIONS
This research looked to answer two initial research questions: how families in the UK manage
the cyber security of their home IoT device use, and how and when they learn and discuss cyber
security for home IoT device use. We found that families have limited knowledge around the threats
and risks of home IoT device use, falling back on more general knowledge about the risks of using
home computers. Furthermore, parents showed much greater concern for modeling and teaching
their children efficient and careful device use to extend the device’s life, in part because of the
expectation of harm reduction and management through consumer protection regulation in the
UK. We also found that children do not receive any education about the concept of the IoT, or
cyber security as it should be applied to ubiquitous devices, as part of the school curriculum. These
findings pose immediate concerns, in that home IoT devices do require different cyber security
management than home computer use; in particular, the expectation of long device use may see
families using unsupported, therefore insecure, devices, and the lack of friction around downloads
and purchases especially may not be covered by consumer protection legislation as the interview
participants may assume. This also has the potential to store up problems for the future: with no
education from either home or school, children may grow up without a proper appreciation of how
to keep home IoT devices safe.

We discuss how the UK has a relatively individualized approach to personal risk management, al-
beit with an understanding that governmental agencies and legislation will protect consumers from
most active threats. Specifics will change, based upon where citizens of any particular jurisdiction
place their trust, but increased messaging from trusted local sources must be leveraged to improve
adult knowledge, on top of incorporation of learning about the IoT, and effective cyber security
measures, during a child’s school life. In addition, manufacturers must present more details as to
the threats, and the specific mitigation factors for their devices, so that, even in the face of a lack of
education from the state, individuals can make decisions that are truly representative of the threats
and risks to their own families.

REFERENCES
[1] Ioannis Agrafiotis, Jason R C Nurse, Michael Goldsmith, Sadie Creese, and David Upton. 2018. A taxonomy of
cyber-harms: Defining the impacts of cyber-attacks and understanding how they propagate. Journal of Cyberse-
curity 4, 1 (10 2018). https://doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/tyy006 arXiv:https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article-
pdf/4/1/tyy006/27126934/tyy006.pdf tyy006.

[2] Noah Apthorpe, Pardis Emami-Naeini, Arunesh Mathur, Marshini Chetty, and Nick Feamster. 2020. You, Me, and IoT:

How Internet-Connected Consumer Devices Affect Interpersonal Relationships. arXiv:2001.10608v2 [cs.HC]

[3] Maria Bada, Angela Sasse, and Jason R.C. Nurse. 2015. Cyber Security Awareness Campaigns: Why do they fail
to change behaviour?. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Cyber Security for Sustainable Society.
Sustainable Society Network+, 118–131.

[4] Julia Bernd, Ruba Abu-Salma, and Alisa Frik. 2020. Bystanders’ Privacy: The Perspectives of Nannies on Smart Home
Surveillance. In Proceedings of the 10th USENIX Workshop on Free and Open Communications on the Internet. USENIX
Association, 14 pages. https://www.usenix.org/conference/foci20/presentation/bernd

[5] Lindsay Blackwell, Emma Gardiner, and Sarita Schoenebeck. 2016. Managing Expectations: Technology Tensions
among Parents and Teens. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing. ACM, 1388–1399. https://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819928

[6] Alicia Blum-Ross and Sonia Livingstone. 2020. Parenting for a Digital Future: How Hopes and Fears about Technology

Shape Children’s Lives. Oxford University Press.

[7] John Blythe and Shane Johnson. 2019. A systematic review of crime facilitated by the consumer Internet of Things.

Security Journal 2019 (2019), 97–125. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41284-019-00211-8

25

Turner et al.

[8] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3,

2 (2006), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa

[9] Miles Brignall. 2020. Bank fraud: couple lose £43,000 but can’t get a refund. News report, The Guardian. https:

//www.theguardian.com/money/2020/feb/08/bank-couple-lose-43000-but-cant-get-a-refund

[10] Sara Cannizzaro, Rob Procter, Sinong Ma, and Carsten Maple. 2020. Trust in the smart home: Findings from a nationally
representative survey in the UK. PLOS ONE 15, 5, Article e0231615 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0231615
[11] George Chalhoub, Martin J Kraemer, Norbert Nthala, and Ivan Flechais. 2021. “It Did Not Give Me an Option to
Decline”: A Longitudinal Analysis of the User Experience of Security and Privacy in Smart Home Products. Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445691

[12] Joseph Cox and Samantha Cole. 2019. How Hackers Are Breaking Into Ring Cameras. News report, Vice. https:

//www.vice.com/en/article/3a88k5/how-hackers-are-breaking-into-ring-cameras

[13] Lorrie Faith Cranor, Adam L. Durity, Abigail Marsh, and Blase Ur. 2014. Parents’ and Teens’ Perspectives on Privacy in
a Technology-Filled World. In Proceedings of the Tenth USENIX Conference on Usable Privacy and Security. USENIX
Association, 19–35.

[14] Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, UK Government. 2018. Code of Practice for Consumer IoT Security.

Governmental report. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/code-of-practice-for-consumer-iot-security

[15] Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, UK Government. 2020. Consultation on regulatory proposals on
consumer IoT security. Public consultation document. https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/consultation-
on-regulatory-proposals-on-consumer-iot-security

[16] Department for Education. 2013. National curriculum in England: computing programmes of study. Web page.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-computing-programmes-of-study

[17] Nils Ehrenberg and Turkka Keinonen. 2021. The Technology Is Enemy for Me at the Moment: How Smart Home
Technologies Assert Control Beyond Intent. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445058

[18] Anirudh Ekambaranathan, Jun Zhao, and Max Van Kleek. 2021. “Money Makes the World Go Around”: Identifying
Barriers to Better Privacy in Children’s Apps From Developers’ Perspectives. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, Article 46, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445599

[19] Pardis Emami-Naeini, Henry Dixon, Yuvraj Agarwal, and Lorrie Faith Cranor. 2019. Exploring How Privacy and
Security Factor into IoT Device Purchase Behavior. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, Article 534, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300764

[20] ETSI. 2020. CYBER; Cyber Security for Consumer Internet of Things: Baseline Requirements. European Standard
REN/CYBER-0048. https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/303600_303699/303645/02.01.01_60/en_303645v020101p.pdf
[21] Financial Ombudsman. 2021. Fraud and scams. Web page. https://www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk/consumers/

complaints-can-help/fraud-scams

[22] Alain Forget, Sarah Pearman, Jeremy Thomas, Alessandro Acquisti, Nicolas Christin, Lorrie Faith Cranor, Serge
Egelman, Marian Harbach, and Rahul Telang. 2016. Do or Do Not, There is No Try: User Engagement May Not
Improve Security Outcomes. In Proceedings of the Twelfth USENIX Conference on Usable Privacy and Security. USENIX
Association, 97–111.

[23] Radhika Garg and Subhasree Sengupta. 2019. “When You Can Do It, Why Can’t I?”: Racial and Socioeconomic
Differences in Family Technology Use and Non-Use. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, Article
63 (Nov. 2019), 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359165

[24] Christine Geeng and Franziska Roesner. 2019. Who’s In Control? Interactions In Multi-User Smart Homes. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Article 268, 13 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300498

[25] Julie Haney, Yasemin Acar, and Susanne Furman. 2021. “It’s the Company, the Government, You and I”: User Perceptions
of Responsibility for Smart Home Privacy and Security. In Proceedings of the 30th USENIX Security Symposium. USENIX
Association, 22 pages. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/presentation/haney

[26] Roger Harrabin. 2021. ‘Right to repair’ law to come in this summer. News report, BBC News. https://www.bbc.co.uk/

news/business-56340077

[27] Alex Hern. 2021. TechScape: How the UK forced global shift in child safety policies. News report, The
Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2021/aug/18/uk-governments-child-safety-regulation-leads-to-
global-policy-shifts

[28] Alexis Hiniker, Sarita Y. Schoenebeck, and Julie A. Kientz. 2016. Not at the Dinner Table: Parents’ and Children’s
Perspectives on Family Technology Rules. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative
Work & Social Computing. ACM, 1376–1389. https://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819940

26

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

[29] Duncan Hodges. 2021. Cyber-enabled burglary of smart homes. Computers & Security 110 (2021), 102418. https:

//doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102418

[30] Adele E. Howe, Indrajit Ray, Mark Roberts, Malgorzata Urbanska, and Zinta Byrne. 2012. The Psychology of Security
for the Home Computer User. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. IEEE, 209–223.
https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2012.23

[31] Yue Huang, Borke Obada-Obieh, and Konstantin (Kosta) Beznosov. 2020. Amazon vs. My Brother: How Users of Shared
Smart Speakers Perceive and Cope with Privacy Risks. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, Article 402, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376529

[32] Information Commissioner’s Office. 2020.

Introduction to the Age appropriate design code. Web page. https:

//ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/ico-codes-of-practice/age-appropriate-design-code/

[33] Simon L. Jones, Emily I.M. Collins, Ana Levordashka, Kate Muir, and Adam Joinson. 2019. What is ‘Cyber Security’?
Differential Language of Cyber Security Across the Lifespan. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Article LBW0269, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312786
[34] Minsam Ko, Seungwoo Choi, Subin Yang, Joonwon Lee, and Uichin Lee. 2015. FamiLync: Facilitating Participatory
Parental Mediation of Adolescents’ Smartphone Use. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing. ACM, 867–878. https://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804283

[35] Martin J. Kraemer, Ivan Flechais, and Helena Webb. 2019. Exploring Communal Technology Use in the Home. In
Proceedings of the Halfway to the Future Symposium 2019. ACM, Article 5, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3363384.
3363389

[36] Elmarie Kritzinger, Maria Bada, and Jason R.C. Nurse. 2017. A Study into the Cybersecurity Awareness Initiatives for
School Learners in South Africa and the UK. In Information Security Education for a Global Digital Society. Springer,
110–120.

[37] Priya Kumar, Shalmali Milind Naik, Utkarsha Ramesh Devkar, Marshini Chetty, Tamara L. Clegg, and Jessica Vitak.
2017.
‘No Telling Passcodes Out Because They’re Private’: Understanding Children’s Mental Models of Privacy
and Security Online. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 1, Article 64 (2017), 21 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3134699

[38] Christopher Lentzsch, Sheel Jayesh Shah, Benjamin Andow, Martin Degeling, Anupam Das, and William Enck. 2021.
Hey Alexa, is this Skill Safe?: Taking a Closer Look at the Alexa Skill Ecosystem. In Proceedings of the 28th ISOC Annual
Network and Distributed Systems Symposium. Internet Society, 18 pages. https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-
paper/hey-alexa-is-this-skill-safe-taking-a-closer-look-at-the-alexa-skill-ecosystem/

[39] Isabel Lopez-Neira, Trupti Patel, Simon Parkin, George Danezis, and Leonie Tanczer. 2019. ‘Internet of Things’: How

abuse is getting smarter. Safe - The Domestic Abuse Quarterly 63 (2019), 22–26.

[40] Ewa Luger and Abigail Sellen. 2016. “Like Having a Really Bad PA": The Gulf between User Expectation and Experience
of Conversational Agents. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 5286–5297. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858288

[41] Tara Matthews, Kerwell Liao, Anna Turner, Marianne Berkovich, Robert Reeder, and Sunny Consolvo. 2016. “"She’ll
Just Grab Any Device That’s Closer": A Study of Everyday Device & Account Sharing in Households. In Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 5921–5932. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2858036.2858051

[42] Kate Muir and Adam Joinson. 2020. An Exploratory Study Into the Negotiation of Cyber-Security Within the Family

Home. Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020), 424. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00424

[43] National Cyber Security Centre, UK. 2019. Smart devices: using them safely in your home. https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/

guidance/smart-devices-in-the-home

[44] Peter Nikken and Jos de Haan. 2015. Guiding young children’s internet use at home: Problems that parents experience
in their parental mediation and the need for parenting support. Cyberpsychology: Journal of Psychosocial Research on
Cyberspace 9, 1 (2015), 1. https://doi.org/10.5817/CP2015-1-3

[45] Poppy Noor. 2019. Ring hackers are reportedly watching and talking to strangers via in-home cameras. News report,
The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/dec/13/ring-hackers-reportedly-watching-talking-
strangers-in-home-cameras

[46] Office for National Statistics. 221. Population estimates for the UK, England and Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland: mid-2020. Web page. https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/
populationestimates/bulletins/annualmidyearpopulationestimates/latest

[47] Işil Oygür, Daniel A. Epstein, and Yunan Chen. 2020. Raising the Responsible Child: Collaborative Work in the Use
of Activity Trackers for Children. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 4, CSCW2, Article 157 (Oct. 2020), 23 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3415228

[48] S. Parkin, E.M. Redmiles, L. Coventry, and M.A. Sasse. 2019. Security When it is Welcome: Exploring Device Purchase
as an Opportune Moment for Security Behavior Change. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Usable Security and Privacy.

27

Turner et al.

https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/auto-draft-19/

[49] Kari Paul. 2019. Ring sued by man who claims camera was hacked and used to harass his kids. News report, The

Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/dec/27/ring-camera-lawsuit-hackers-alabama

[50] Kari Paul. 2020. Dozens sue Amazon’s Ring after camera hack leads to threats and racial slurs. News report, The
Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/dec/23/amazon-ring-camera-hack-lawsuit-threats
[51] PayPal (Europe) S.à r.l. et Cie, S.C.A. 2021. Send Money, Pay Online or Set Up a Merchant Account - PayPal. Web page.

https://www.paypal.com/uk/home

[52] D. Pencheva, J. Hallett, and A. Rashid. 2020. Bringing Cyber to School: Integrating Cybersecurity Into Secondary

School Education. IEEE Security & Privacy 18, 2 (2020), 68–74. https://doi.org/10.1109/MSEC.2020.2969409

[53] Karen Renaud, Stephen Flowerday, Merrill Warkentin, Paul Cockshott, and Craig Orgeron. 2018. Is the responsibilization
of the cyber security risk reasonable and judicious? Computers & Security 78 (2018), 198–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cose.2018.06.006

[54] Jennifer A. Rode. 2010. The roles that make the domestic work. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer

Supported Cooperative Work. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 381–390. https://doi.org/10.1145/1718918.1718984

[55] William Seymour, Martin J. Kraemer, Reuben Binns, and Max Van Kleek. 2020. Informing the design of privacy-
empowering tools for the connected home. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, Article 137, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376264

[56] Wonsun Shin. 2015. Parental socialization of children’s Internet use: A qualitative approach. New Media & Society 17,

5 (2015), 649–665. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444813516833

[57] David Smahel, Hana Machackova, Giovanna Mascheroni, Lenka Dedkova, Elisabeth Staksrud, Kjartan Ólaf-
EU Kids Online 2020: Survey results from 19 coun-
http://www.lse.ac.uk/media-and-communications/assets/documents/research/eu-kids-online/reports/EU-

sson, Sonia Livingstone, and Uwe Hasebrink. 2020.
tries.
Kids-Online-2020-10Feb2020.pdf

[58] Jitendra Soni. 2020. Avast reportedly sold user web browsing data. News report, TechRadar. https://www.techradar.

com/news/avast-reportedly-sold-user-web-browsing-data

[59] Nick Statt. 2018. Amazon sent 1,700 Alexa voice recordings to the wrong user following data request. News report, The
Verge. https://www.theverge.com/2018/12/20/18150531/amazon-alexa-voice-recordings-wrong-user-gdpr-privacy-ai
[60] Kaiwen Sun, Yixin Zou, Jenny Radesky, Christopher Brooks, and Florian Schuab. 2021. Child Safety in the Smart Home:
Parents’ Perceptions, Needs, and Mitigation Strategies. In Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
(CSCW2, Vol. 5). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 471, 41 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3479858

[61] Leonie Maria Tanczer, Ine Steenmans, Miles Elsden, Jason Blackstock, and Madeline Carr. 2018. Emerging risks in the
IoT ecosystem: Who’s afraid of the big bad smart fridge?. In Living in the Internet of Things: Cybersecurity of the IoT -
2018. IEEE, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1049/cp.2018.0033

[62] techUK and GfK. 2021. The State of the Connected Home 2021. Industry Report. techUK. https://www.techuk.org/

resource/the-state-of-the-connected-home-2021-new-report-launch.html

[63] Sarah Turner, Jason R.C. Nurse, and Shujun Li. 2021. When Googling It Doesn’t Work: The Challenge of Finding
Security Advice for Smart Home Devices. In Human Aspects of Information Security and Assurance, Steven Furnell and
Nathan Clarke (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 115–126.

[64] UK Government. 2022. Product Security and Telecommunications Infrastructure Bill. https://bills.parliament.uk/

publications/43895/documents/1050

[65] Blase Ur, Jaeyeon Jung, and Stuart Schechter. 2014. Intruders versus Intrusiveness: Teens’ and Parents’ Perspectives on
Home-Entryway Surveillance. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing. ACM, 129–139. https://doi.org/10.1145/2632048.2632107

[66] Lisa Vass. 2020. Android pulls 24 ‘dangerous’ malware-filled apps from Play Store. News report, Naked Security.
https://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2020/02/06/android-pulls-24-dangerous-malware-filled-apps-from-play-store/
[67] Rick Wash. 2010. Folk models of home computer security. In Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Usable Privacy and

Security. ACM, Article 11, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1837110.1837125

[68] Hue Watson, Eyitemi Moju-Igbene, Akanksha Kumari, and Sauvik Das. 2020. “We Hold Each Other Accountable":
Unpacking How Social Groups Approach Cybersecurity and Privacy Together. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Article 478, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.
3376605

[69] M. Williams, J.R.C. Nurse, and S. Creese. 2017. “Privacy is the Boring Bit”: User Perceptions and Behaviour in the
Internet-of-Things. In Proceedings of the 2017 15th Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust. IEEE, 181–190.
https://doi.org/10.1109/PST.2017.00029

[70] Pamela Wisniewski, Heng Xu, Mary Beth Rosson, and John M. Carroll. 2017. Parents Just Don’t Understand: Why
Teens Don’t Talk to Parents about Their Online Risk Experiences. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on

28

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. ACM, 523–540. https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998236
[71] Ying Xu and Mark Warschauer. 2020. What Are You Talking to?: Understanding Children’s Perceptions of Conversa-
tional Agents. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Article
289, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376416

[72] Yaxing Yao, Justin Reed Basdeo, Oriana Rosata Mcdonough, and Yang Wang. 2019. Privacy Perceptions and Designs of
Bystanders in Smart Homes. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, Article 59 (2019), 24 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3359161

[73] Jason C. Yip, Kiley Sobel, Xin Gao, Allison Marie Hishikawa, Alexis Lim, Laura Meng, Romaine Flor Ofiana, Justin
Park, and Alexis Hiniker. 2019. Laughing is Scary, but Farting is Cute: A Conceptual Model of Children’s Perspectives
of Creepy Technologies. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
Article 73, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300303

[74] Serena Zheng, Noah Apthorpe, Marshini Chetty, and Nick Feamster. 2018. User Perceptions of Smart Home IoT Privacy.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, Article 200 (2018), 20 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3274469

29

Turner et al.

A INTERVIEW QUESTIONS

A.1 Device questions

A.1.1 To each primary school aged child (4-11):

• How do you use the device?
• Do your parents have to help you?
• Do you have your own account? If so, does that limit what you can do with it? Do your

parents control what you can do (e.g. with an app)?

• Do you do different things with the device to the adults in the house or your siblings?
• Can you tell me how you think the device works?
• What do you like about the device?
• What would you change about the device?
• Do you know how to turn the device on or off, or make changes to how it works? Have you

tried to do this?

A.1.2 To each 12-16 year old child:
• How do you use the device?
• Do you have a separate account to other house members? Do your parents have to monitor

what you do with the account?

• How do you think the device works?
• What information do you think the device has about you?

– How do you feel about that?
– Who do you think can access that information?

• Do you think you use it differently to your parents and siblings?
• Have you ever tried to change the settings of the device? If so, can you tell me more about

that?

• Do you think the device is useful?
• What would you change about the device?
• Does the device stop you from doing things, physically or virtually?

A.1.3 To each adult (+16) household member individually:

• How do you use the device?
• Do you have a separate account to other house members?
• Have you ever tried to change the settings of the device? If so, can you tell me more about

that?

• What information do you think the device has about you?

– How do you feel about that?
– Who do you think can access that information?

• Do you think the device is useful?
• Do you use the device for the purpose that you bought it?
• What would you change about the device?
• Do you have to use workarounds to use the device in the way you want to?
• Does the device work as well for every member of the household?
• Do you intend on buying or having any more devices installed in your home in the next

year?

• If so, which and why?

A.2 Cyber security knowledge

A.2.1 Questions to all children:

30

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

• What have you learned at school about computers and the Internet?

– Can you describe to me what you know about staying safe when using the Internet?
– Do you talk about what you’ve learned with your family?

A.2.2 Questions to 12+ children:

• How much knowledge do you think you have about using the Internet compared to your

parents?
– Have you ever given them help?

• Could you describe to me what you think the biggest risks of using Internet-connected

devices in the house are?
– What changes would you like to make to stop those risks happening?

A.2.3 Questions to adults:

• How well do you think you have secured the devices you have in your home?

– Can you give details?
– Is there one person in the house that is more likely to manage issues with technology?

∗ Is this because of necessity or choice?
∗ Do the other members of the household wish they could do more?

• What do you consider to be the biggest risk that you have with the IoT devices in your home?

– Is there anything you feel you could do immediately to minimize that risk?
– What else would you like to see done to minimize that risk? By whom?

• Are you aware of ever having been the victim of a cyber crime or data breach?
• Who manages the cyber security aspects of the devices that you use in the home?

– Is that an intentional choice?

• Which sources to do you use to get cyber security information?

– Are you aware of educational schemes run by the government or other non-govermental

organisations? If so, have you used them, and did they help?

• What would be your ideal method of becoming informed about cyber security issues that

might affect you?

• Are you aware of any issues (on the news or otherwise) that have been raised about the

security of IoT devices?
– How does that make you feel?

31

Turner et al.

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
T
o
I

e
m
o
h
r
i
e
h
t

t
u
o
b
a

e
g
d
e
l
w
o
n
k
f
o
k
c
a
l

a
d
e
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
w
e
i
v
r
e
t
n
i
y
n
a

e
r
e
h
w

f
o
s
e
l
p
m
a
x
E

g
n
i
d
a
e
h
e
d
o
c
b
u
s

f
o
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

p
i
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r

s
’
y
l
i

m
a
f

e
h
t

f
o
s
t
n
e
m
e
l
E

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
T
o
I

e
m
o
h
h
t
i

w

n
e
r
d
l
i
h
c
d
n
a

s
t
l
u
d
a
h
t
o
b
y
b
d
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
d
s
a

,
s
e
c
i
v
e
d
T
o
I

e
m
o
h
e
s
u
s
t
l
u
d
a
w
o
h
f
o
s
e
c
n
a
t
s
n
i

c
fi
i
c
e
p
S

n
e
r
d
l
i
h
c
d
n
a

s
t
l
u
d
a
h
t
o
b
y
b
d
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
d
s
a

,
s
e
c
i
v
e
d
T
o
I

e
m
o
h
e
s
u
n
e
r
d
l
i
h
c
w
o
h
f
o
s
e
c
n
a
t
s
n
i

c
fi
i
c
e
p
S

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n
n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
h
t
i

w
p
i
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
d
l
i
h
C

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
h
t
i

w
e
l
b
a
t
r
o
f
m
o
c
y
l
r
e
v
O

e
c
i
v
e
d
g
n
i
r
e
t
l
a

r
o
g
n
i
g
a
n
a
m
d
l
i
h
C

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
h
t
i

w

l

u
f
e
r
a
c

t
o
n
s
i
d
l
i
h
C

s
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
t
s
e
r

s
t
n
e
v
m
u
c
r
i
c
d
l
i
h
C

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
h
t
i

w

l

u
f
e
r
a
c

s
i
d
l
i
h
C

e
s
u
e
c
i
v
e
d
d
l
i
h
C

e
s
u
f
o
e
s
a
e
d
l
i
h
C

e
g
d
e
l
w
o
n
k
e
c
i
v
e
d
r
e
v
o
n
o
i
s
u
f
n
o
C

s
k
r
o
w
e
c
i
v
e
d
w
o
h
d
n
a
t
s
r
e
d
n
u
t
’
n
o
D

e
c
n
e
d
fi
n
o
c

l
a
n
o
s
r
e
p
f
o
k
c
a
L

y
t
i
l
i
b
i
t
a
p
m
o
c
n
I

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
h
t
i

w
p
i
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
y
l
i

m
a
F

s
e
d
o
c
b
u
s
/
s
e
d
o
C

e

m
o
h
e
h
t
n
i
h
t
i
w
s
e
c
i
v
e
d
f
o

e
s
U

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

g
n
i
g
a
n
a
m

l
a
r
t
u
e
n
/
e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

g
n
i
g
a
n
a
m
e
v
i
t
a
g
e
N

e
s
u
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

m
i
L

t
s
u
r
t

f
o
k
c
a
L

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

e
c
i
v
e
d
e
v
i
t
a
g
e
N

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

e
c
i
v
e
d
e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P

e
v
a
h
e
l
p
o
e
p
t
a
h
t

s
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

e
s
u
e
c
i
v
e
d
t
n
i
o
J

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
h
t
i

w
p
i
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r

t
l
u
d
A

K
O
O
B
E
D
O
C

B

e
s
u
e
c
i
v
e
d
t
l
u
d
A

32

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

d
e
k
r
o
w
s
e
c
i
v
e
d
T
o
I

e
m
o
h
w
o
h
f
o
g
n
i
d
n
a
t
s
r
e
d
n
u
r
i
e
h
t
d
e
n
i
a
l
p
x
e

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
w
e
i
v
r
e
t
n
i
y
n
a
n
e
h
w
p
u
e
m
a
c

t
a
h
t

s
c
i
p
o
T

m
e
h
t

t
h
g
u
o
b
y
e
h
t
y
h
w
d
n
a

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
e
h
t
d
e
w
e
i
v

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
w
e
i
v
r
e
t
n
i

w
o
h
f
o
s
n
o
i
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E

?
a
t
a
d
e
h
t
h
t
i

w
o
d
y
e
h
t
n
a
c
h
c
u
m
w
o
H

e
m
o
h
n
i

e
s
u
t
u
o
b
a

e
l
b
a
t
r
o
f
m
o
c

t
o
N

a
t
a
d
l
a
n
o
s
r
e
p
f
o
d
a
o
l
n
w
o
D

e
m
o
h
n
i

e
s
u
t
u
o
b
a

e
l
b
a
t
r
o
f
m
o
C

s
i

t
i

e
r
u
c
e
s
w
o
h
e
r
u
s

t
o
N

d
o
o
g

e
t
i
h
w

r
e
h
t
o
y
n
a

e
k
i
l

t
s
u
J

?
t
h
g
u
o
b
y
h
W

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
e
h
t

t
u
o
b
A

k
r
o
w
s
e
c
i
v
e
d
o
d
w
o
H

e
v
a
h
s
e
c
i
v
e
d
a
t
a
D

?
g
n
i
n
e
t
s
i
l

s
y
a
w
A

l

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

r
e
v
e
N

g
n
i
d
a
e
h
e
d
o
c
b
u
s

f
o
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

s
e
d
o
c
b
u
s
/
s
e
d
o
C

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
T
o
I

e
m
o
h
w
e
i
v

s
t
n
e
r
a
p
w
o
H

e
s
u
s
’
n
e
r
d
l
i
h
c

r
i
e
h
t
o
t

t
c
e
p
s
e
r
h
t
i

w

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
h
t
i

w
p
i
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r

l
a
t
n
e
r
a
P

33

t
i
d
e
e
n
y
e
h
t
d
l
u
o
h
s

,

y
t
i
r
u
c
e
s

t
u
o
b
a
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
i

t
e
g

d
l
u
o
w
y
e
h
t
d
e
n
i
a
l
p
x
e

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
e
r
e
h
W

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n
n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

n
e
r
d
l
i
h
c

r
e
t
f
a
k
o
o
l
o
t

f
l
e
s
r
u
o
y
g
n
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

m
o
r
f

t
r
o
p
p
u
s

t
e
g
o
t

e
r
e
h
W

e
c
r
u
o
s

c
fi
i
c
e
p
s

-

e
n
i
l
n
O

s

m
a
r
g
o
r
p
V
T

t
n
e
r
e
ff
i
d
t
’
n
e
r
a

s
e
c
i
v
e
D

s
e
i
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
t

r
e
h
t
o
o
t

e
c
i
v
e
d
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
e
D

s
n
r
e
c
n
o
c

t
n
e
t
n
o
C

e
v
i
t
c
i
r
t
s
e
r
o
o
t

s
i

r
e
t
l
fi
s
’
d
i
K

n
e
r
d
l
i
h
c

r
o
f

s
n
r
e
c
n
o
C

t
n
e
m
n
r
e
v
o
G

a
e
d
i
o
N

e
b
u
T
u
o
Y

k
n
a
B

g
n
i
d
a
e
h
e
d
o
c
b
u
s

f
o
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

s
e
d
o
c
b
u
s
/
s
e
d
o
C

Turner et al.

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
y
b
d
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
d
s
n
o
i
s
s
u
c
s
i
d
y
l
i

m
a
f

f
o
s
e
p
y
T

,
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
y
n
a
y
b

,

d
e
t
s
i
l

s
n
r
e
c
n
o
c

l
l

A

e
s
u
y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
t

l
a
t
i
g
i
d
t
u
o
b
a

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
T
o
I

e
m
o
h
g
n
i
s
u
o
t
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r

n
i

w
a
s

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
t
a
h
t

s
k
s
i
r

e
h
T

e
n
i
l
n
o
g
n
i
h
t
y
r
e
v
e

g
n
i
v
e
i
l
e
b
n
e
r
d
l
i
h
C

s
t
n
u
o
c
c
a
d
e
t
c
i
r
t
s
e
r
/
d
l
i
h
C

s
e
c
n
e
u
q
e
s
n
o
c
d
e
d
n
e
t
n
i
n
U

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

l
a
t
n
e
r
a
p
f
o
k
c
a
L

g
n
i
k
c
a
r
t

l
a
t
n
e
r
a
P

s
n
o
i
t
c
i
r
t
s
e
R

e
g
a
m
a
d
l
a
c
i
s
y
h
P

n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f
l
a
M

h
c
a
e
r
b

a
t
a
D

e
t
s
a
w
e
m
T

i

s
k
s
i
R

t
n
e
t
n
o
c

e
t
a
i
r
p
o
r
p
p
a
n
I

s
e
s
u
r
i
V

o
f
n
i

e
n
i
l
n
o
r
o
f
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
n
u
o
c
c
a

f
o
k
c
a
L

s
r
e
g
n
a
r
t
s

m
o
r
f

t
c
a
t
n
o
c
d
e
t
i
c
i
l
o
s
n
U

)
l
a
t
n
e
d
i
c
c
a

r
o
l
a
e
r
(

t
f
e
h
T
y
t
i
t
n
e
d
I

f
l
e
s
r
u
o
y
g
n
i
y
f
i
t
n
e
d
i
/
g
n
i
x
x
o
D

n
o
i
s
s
u
c
s
i
d
d
l
i
h
c
/
t
n
e
r
a
P

t
f
e
h
t
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
I

d
u
a
r
f

l
a
i
c
n
a
n
fi
/
s

m
a
c
S

"
g
n
i
k
c
a
H

"

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n
n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

l
o
o
h
c
s

t
a
d
e
n
r
a
e
l

s
g
n
i
h
t

g
n
i
s
s
u
c
s
i
D

c
i
r
e
n
e
g

-

e
n
i
l
n
O

y
l
i

m
a
F

s
d
n
e
i
r
F

e
c
i
l
o
P

s
n
r
e
c
n
o
C

y
c
a
v
i
r
P

y
t
i
r
u
c
e
S

34

“You Just Assume It Is In There, I Guess”: UK Families’ Application And Knowledge Of Smart Home Cyber Security

g
n
i
d
a
e
h
e
d
o
c
b
u
s

f
o
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

s
e
d
o
c
b
u
s
/
s
e
d
o
C

d
e
n
i
a
l
p
x
e

e
r
e
w
e
g
d
e
l
w
o
n
k

,

g
n
i
r
i
u
q
c
a

f
o
s
n
a
e
m

r
o

,
f
o
l
e
v
e
l

s
’
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
e
h
t
h
c
i
h
w
n
i

s
e
c
n
a
t
s
n
I

s
e
i
g
e
t
a
r
t
s
y
t
i
r
u
c
e
s

r
e
b
y
c

c
fi
i
c
e
p
s

f
o
s
e
l
p
m
a
x
E

m
e
l
b
o
r
p
g
n
i
v
l
o
s

f
o
s
n
a
e
m
a

s
a
n
o
i
s
s
u
c
s
i
D

o
d
o
t

t
a
h
w

t
n
e
r
a
p
g
n
i
l
l
e
t
d
l
i
h
C

s
t
n
e
r
a
p
m
o
r
f
n
r
a
e
l

n
e
r
d
l
i
h
C

g
n
i
d
r
a
u
g
e
f
a
S

e

m
o
h
e
h
t
n
i

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m
y
t
i
r
u
c
e
s

r
e
b
y
C

e
s
u
o
h
e
h
t
n
i
y
t
i
r
u
c
e
s

f
o
l
e
v
e
l

f
o
e
r
u
s
n
U

e
s
u
o
h
e
h
t
n
i
y
t
i
r
u
c
e
s

f
o
l
e
v
e
l
d
o
o
G

t
u
o
b
a
k
n
i
h
t
o
t

t
l
u
c
ffi
i
d
o
o
T

e
n
i
l
n
o
s
g
n
i
h
t

s
u
o
i
c
i
l
a
m

f
o
s
s
e
n
e
r
a
w
A

l
o
o
h
c
s

t
a

t
h
g
u
a
t

s
i

t
a
h
W

r
e
v
o
c
d
l
u
o
c

l
o
o
h
c
s

t
a
h
W

r
e
g
a
n
a
m
d
r
o
w
s
s
a
P

i
F
i
W
ff
o
g
n
i
n
r
u
T

s
e
i
g
e
t
a
r
t
S

s
w
e
n
e
h
t
n
i
y
l
e
v
i
t
a
g
e
n
h
c
e
T

e
g
d
e
l
w
o
n
K

d
e
n
r
e
c
n
o
c

t
a
h
t

t
o
N

e
c
n
e
d
fi
n
o
c
-
f
l
e
S

s
w
e
n
e
h
t
n
i
h
c
e
T

t
i
o
d
o
t

w
o
H

s
e
c
i
v
e
d
d
l
O

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
o
i
B

g
n
i
h
s
i

m
S

A
F
2

n
o
i
t
e
l
e
d
a
t
a
D

e
r
a
w
l
a
m

-
i
t
n
A

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n
n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

s
d
r
o
w
s
s
a
p
k
a
e
w
/
e
s
u
e
r
d
r
o
w
s
s
a
P

e
s
u
a
t
a
d
l
a
n
o
s
r
e
P

s
d
r
o
w
s
s
a
P

35

Turner et al.

g
n
i
d
a
e
h
e
d
o
c
b
u
s

f
o
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

s
e
d
o
c
b
u
s
/
s
e
d
o
C

s
e
t
a
d
p
u
e
r
a
w

t
f
o
S

36

