 A Comprehensive Survey on the Cyber-Security of Smart 
Grids: Cyber-Attacks, Detection, Countermeasure 
Techniques, and Future Directions 

1School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks 58202, ND,USA 

Tala Talaei Khoei1, Hadjar Ould Slimane 1 , and Naima Kaabouch1 

Abstract- One of the significant challenges that smart grid networks face is cyber-security. Several studies have 
been conducted to highlight those security challenges. However, the majority of these surveys classify attacks based 
on  the  security  requirements,  confidentiality,  integrity,  and  availability,  without  taking  into  consideration  the 
accountability  requirement.  In  addition,  some  of  these  surveys  focused  on  the  Transmission  Control 
Protocol/Internet  Protocol  (TCP/IP)  model,  which  does  not  differentiate  between  the  application,  session,  and 
presentation and the data link and physical layers of the Open System Interconnection (OSI) model. In this survey 
paper, we provide a classification of attacks based on the OSI model and discuss in more detail the cyber-attacks 
that can target the different layers of smart grid networks communication. We also propose new classifications for 
the  detection  and  countermeasure  techniques  and  describe existing  techniques  under  each  category.  Finally,  we 
discuss challenges and future research directions.   

Key  words: Smart  grid,  architecture,  cyber-attacks,  network  security,  confidentiality,  integrity,  availability, 
accountability, countermeasures, detection techniques.  

I. 

Introduction 

The traditional power grid is no longer a practical solution for power  delivery and distribution due to several 
shortcomings including: chronic blackouts, energy storage issues, high cost of assets, and high carbon emissions. 
Briefly, several cases prove that there is a serious need to improve the functionality of the traditional power system. 
For example, in February 2020, the storm Ciara caused a power cut for around 130,000 homes in France. During 
the same month, in Bavaria, the storm Sabine caused a blackout for approximately 60,000  homes [1]. In March 
2016, at least 70 million people in Turkey were impacted by a power blackout. These examples are the obvious 
reasons why using a traditional power grid is no longer considered an effective power system [2]. 

To address the limitations of the traditional grid, a new approach, microgrid, was introduced. A microgrid can 
be defined as a local and small distribution system that consists of sets of micro sources, namely micro turbines, 
fuel cells, photovoltaic arrays wind turbines, and some storage systems like energy capacitors. It can be connected 
to a main grid or work independently. Microgrids provide some benefits, such as a higher efficiency, reduction of 
emissions,  and  cheaper  and  cleaner  energy.  Also,  this  technology  deals  with  some  challenges,  including  the 
resynchronization with the main grid, which can be problematic to the network, due to the network inconsistency. 
To address these challenges and limitations, a holistic solution, smart grid, was proposed [3]. This new electrical 
grid includes a  variety of operations and energy measures, including smart meters, smart appliances, renewable 
energy resources, and energy-efficient resources. It utilizes information technology to deliver energy to end-users 
through  a  two-way  flow  of  communications,  which  changes  the  power  infrastructure  in  terms  of  efficiency, 
scalability, reliability, and interoperability.  
   The National Institute of Standard and Technology (NIST) stated that smart grids consist of seven logical domains, 
namely  bulk  generation,  transmission,  distribution,  customer,  markets,  service  provider,  and  operations.  These 
logical domains have actors and applications that are presented as smart grid’s conceptual model. Actors are defined 
as  programs  and  systems,  while  applications  are  considered  as  tasks.  These  tasks  are  conducted  by  a  single  or 
multiple actors in every domain. In the customer domain, the major actor is the end-user, which is divided into three 
types:  home,  commercial,  and  industrial.  This  domain  mainly  has  a  close  communication  with  the  distribution, 
operation, service provider, and market domains. Within the market domain, the users have to be the operators that 
participate  in electricity markets.  The service  provider consists of the organizations that can provide services to 
customers and utility companies. More importantly, the bulk generation domain has some electric generators in bulk 
quantities, and the transmission domain can carry out the generated electric power over long distances from  the 
generation domain to the distribution domain via a variety of substations [3]. The transmission network can monitor 
and control via Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system. The distribution domain can distribute 
the electricity to and from end-users in different structures, like radial, looped, or meshed. This domain is capable 

 
 
 
of  supporting  energy  generation  and  storage,  which  is  mainly  connected  to  the  transmission  domain,  customer 
domain, and metering points for electricity consumption [4].  

The smart grid is expected to create a reliable, efficient, and clean energy distribution by combining various 
technologies.  It  promises  reliability,  improved  efficiency,  and  economical  means  of  power  transmission  and 
distribution. It also reduces greenhouse  emissions to deliver clean, affordable, and efficient energy to users [4].  
However,  this  infrastructure  can  be  subjected  to  cyber-attacks  that  can  violate  the  availability,  integrity, 
confidentiality,  and  accountability  of  smart  grid’s  security  requirements.  For  example, a  cyber-attack  on  a  U.S. 
power  grid  occurred  in  March  2018  that  targeted  numerous  nuclear  power  plants  and  water  facilities.  Another 
instance of cyber-attacks happened in Ukraine in December 2015. During this incident, the attackers turned off 30 
substations that led to a complete blackout for about 6 hours, leaving around 230,000 people without electricity. To 
improve  the  security  level  of  the  power  systems,  the  US  National  Electric  Sector  Cybersecurity  Organization 
(NESCOR) and the Department of Energy (DOE) joined their efforts. For this purpose, they collaborated with some 
federal  U.S.  agencies,  such  as  the  Cybersecurity  for  Energy  Delivery  Systems  (CEDS)  and  the  Federal  Energy 
Regulatory Commission (FERC). They  involved  experts, developers, and users to test the security of the power 
systems. They collaboratively worked together to enhance security risks of smart and mitigation strategies. Their 
investigations  proved  that  using  this  modern  technology  requires  some  holistic  solutions  to  defend  and  prevent 
cyber-security issues. Despite the critical advancements of smart grids, the detection and prevention of sophisticated 
cyber-attacks are still at an early stage and need more attention [5, 6]. 

Over the last decade, several surveys provided an overview of smart grid’s cyber-security, as shown in Table I  
[7,  8,  9-16].  The  authors  of  [7,  8,  9,  11,  14]  reviewed  the  main  cyber-attacks  that  can  damage  the  smart  grid 
infrastructure, the detection techniques, and the countermeasures. In [10, 16], the authors mainly focused on the 
cyber-physical attacks in smart grid networks, their impacts, along with their defense strategies. In [16], the authors 
also highlighted a classification for detection techniques for cyber-physical attacks in smart grids and compared the 
efficiencies of various detection techniques. In [12], the authors reviewed cyber-security related to smart homes and 
smart grid networks. They classified cyber-attacks in smart home/smart grid networks according to confidentiality, 
integrity, availability, authorization, and authenticity. The authors of [15] also provided a survey on cyber-security 
and privacy of smart metering networks. They briefly reviewed cyber-attacks in traditional power systems and smart 
grid networks and introduced future research trends in depth.  
      Several  other  surveys  discussed  the  security  of  smart  grid  infrastructure  and  provided  various  cyber-attack 
classifications on smart grid networks. These surveys only classified attacks in terms of the security requirements, 
such as confidentiality, integrity, and availability. They also did not consider the accountability requirement, which 
can present any action conducted to guarantee the system traceability. The majority of surveys did not provide a 
comprehensive overview of detection techniques and countermeasures for smart grid infrastructure. Furthermore, a 
last 2020 survey related to cyber-security mainly discussed the different cyber-attacks in smart grid in terms of 
security  requirements  and  four  layers  of  OSI  communication  model.  This  survey  did  not  discuss  any  solutions 
regarding  prevention  or  defending  attacks  in  the  network. Therefore,  our  study  mainly  fills  the  current gap  and 
provides  a  comprehensive  classification  for  cyber-attacks  in  the  smart  grid.  This  study  also  provides  a  new 
classification  for  both  detection  and  countermeasure  methods,  while  the  previous  works  did  not  provide  such 
complete security strategies. To be precise, in this paper, we present an in-depth survey of technological advances 
in smart grid infrastructure cyber-security. First, we  provide a classification of cyber-attacks that target the OSI 
communication  layers.  We  also  propose  two  classifications,  one  for  detection  techniques  and  another  one  for 
countermeasure methods. After each classification, cyber-attacks are described as well as the methods of detecting 
and mitigating these attacks. We also discuss four critical security parameters for cyber-attacks that can compromise 
smart grid networks. Moreover, an overview of future trends and the current challenges related to this network's 
cyber-security are discussed. The contributions of this survey can be summarized in the following key points: 

•  Review and classification of cyber-attacks in the smart grid network. 
•  Description and comparison of these attacks, along with their purposes and impacts. 
•  Review, analysis, and classification of detection techniques. 
•  Analysis and classification of corresponding countermeasure methods. 
•  Discussion  of  the  challenges  and  open  issues  related  to  the  security  of  smart  grid  and  future  research 

directions to address them. 

 
 
 
 
 
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows: Section II provides an overview of the smart grid system 
and its features and architectures. Section III describes the smart grid architecture, its technologies, and protocols. 
Section IV reviews the smart grid's security, discusses the security requirements that are expected to be met, and 
provides a classification of cyber-attacks that target the OSI communication layers. The purposes and impacts of 
these  cyber-attacks  are  also  evaluated  in  this  section.  Section  IV  also  provides  a  classification  of  detection 
techniques, the state-of-the art in detection techniques, and summarizes existing countermeasures against various 
cyber-attacks. Section V describes several research challenges and future research directions. Finally, Section VI 
closes the survey with a conclusion. 

Related 
Work 

Gunduz et 
al. [8] 

Table I. Existing Surveys Related to the Cyber-security of Smart Grids. 

Topic 

Cyber-Attacks Mentioned 

Concepts Covered 

Survey on cyber-
security solutions 
of IOT-based 
smart grids. 

Different kinds of cyber-
attacks against CIA tirade 
and five OSI 
communication layers. 

•  Cyber-attack types and the general importance of 

countermeasures. 

•  Analysis of various cyber-attacks and their security 

requirements along with future directions. 

Peng et 
al. [9] 

Survey on security 
communications in 
smart grids. 

He et al.  
[10] 

Survey on cyber-
physical attacks 
and solutions in 
smart grids. 

Gupta et 
al.[11] 

Survey of cyber-
security in smart 
grids. 

Traffic analysis, social 
engineering, scanning I.P., 
scanning port, scanning 
vulnerability, worms, DoS, 
FDI, replay, privacy 
violation, backdoor 
Generation system attacks, 
transmission system attacks, 
distribution system/ 
customer side attacks, 
electricity market attacks 

•  Cyber-physical security of smart grids, and potential IT-

based attacks scenarios. 

•  Detection/protection methods and challenges regarding to 

threats of smart grids. 

•  Critical cyber-physical attacks and their defense methods. 
•  Analyzing the impact of cyber-physical attacks in smart 

grids. 

DoS/ DDoS attacks 

•  Smart grid and its components. 
•  Existing methods for communication protocols and their 

architectures. 

•  DoS/DDoS attacks and their impacts on smart grids. 

Elmrabet 
et al. [12] 

Comprehensive 
review of cyber-
attacks and their 
solutions in smart 
grids. 

Survey on cyber-
security in smart 
homes and smart 
grids. 

Komninos 
et al. [13] 

Traffic analysis, social 
engineering, scanning IP, 
scanning port, scanning 
vulnerability, worms, Trojan 
horse, DoS, FDI, replay, 
privacy violation, integrity 
violation, backdoor, MITM, 
jamming, popping the HMI, 
masquerade. 

Different kinds of cyber-
attacks against 
confidentiality, integrity, 
availability, authorization, 
authenticity.  

•  Important cyber-attacks in smart grid and their impacts. 
•  Various security methods to address cyber-security issues 

in smart grids. 

•  Most common threats against smart homes and smart 

grids. 

•  Different cyber-attack scenarios with their specific 

countermeasures. 

•  Methods to defend against or prevent cyber-attacks. 

Sakhnini 
et al. [14] 

Survey on cyber-
security aspects of 
IOT aided smart 
grids. 

MITM, jamming, FDI, 
spoofing, DoS, malware, 
replay attacks.  

•  Bibliometric analysis of published journals. 
•  Different cyber-attacks targeting smart grids and their 

security mechanisms. 

•  Future trend of smart grid cyber-security. 

Concepts Not 
Covered 

Countermeasure 
methods and 
detection 
techniques. 

Accountability as 
a security 
requirement in 
smart grids. 

Detection 
techniques for 
cyber-physical 
attacks in smart 
grids. 

Existing cyber-
attacks that 
targets smart 
grids, their 
countermeasures, 
and detection 
techniques. 

Detection 
techniques and 
countermeasure 
approaches. 

Smart grid cyber-
attacks, 
countermeasures, 
and detection 
techniques. 

Countermeasure 
techniques. 

Kumar et 
al. [15] 

Survey of cyber-
security and 
privacy of smart 
grid metering 
networks. 

Different kinds of attacks on 
energy companies, 
renewable energy resources, 
and metering networks.  

•  Cyber-attacks vulnerabilities in the traditional energy 

network. 

•  Security and privacy requirements for smart grid metering 

networks. 

•  Future research trends and challenges. 

Countermeasures 
and detection 
methods. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Musleh et 
al. [16] 

Survey on 
detection 
techniques for 
cyber-physical 
attacks in smart 
grids. 

Different kinds of cyber-
physical attacks that take 
place in smart grids. 

•  Cyber-physical attacks and the classification of detection 

techniques in smart grids. 

•  Analysis of false data injection attacks and their impacts. 
•  Study of future trends and their challenges. 

Countermeasure 
techniques. 

II.  Overview of Smart Grid  

In this section, we mainly discuss the smart grid’s features and applications. In the following, we provide a 

short description of the most critical features in smart grids and the important applications in this network. 

2.1.  Smart Grids' Features 
The  significant  features  expected  from  the  smart  grid  are  improving  grid  resilience,  self-healing,  increasing 
environmental and system performance [7, 17]. Grid resilience means that the power grid can recover quickly and 
fulfill the mission during power interruptions and outages [18]. This can be provided by adding extra disperse power 
supply and integrating modern resources into the power grid when an interruption happens [19]. The self-healing 
feature allows the system to identify faults quickly, decrease the duration of the outage, and help the system to 
recover faster.  Therefore, by providing a higher level of flexibility and reliability, the grid’s resilience and self-
healing features have a critical impact on the economy [20]. 

Another expected feature in the smart grid is improving system’s performance. In the traditional power grid, 
energy loss may happen due to several reasons, including faults in power stations or damages in transmission lines. 
The smart grid promises to increase the system performance by optimizing asset utilization and operations, reducing 
energy costs, and transmitting electricity in an effective manner. These benefits may directly increase the quality of 
power and efficient asset management, which indicates the increased level of system performance [20]. Moreover, 
the  smart  grid  is  expected  to  expedite  the  replacement  of  electric  vehicles  with  conventional  vehicles.  These 
replacements  may  lead  to  enhance  environmental  performance  by  reducing  the  energy  used  for  end-users  and 
decreasing energy loss through the grid [19]. 

2.2. Smart Grid Applications 
As  illustrated  in  Fig.  1,  the  smart  grid  includes  a  variety  of  heterogeneous,  distributed  applications  and 
capabilities,  such  as  Advanced  Metering  Infrastructure  (AMI),  Supervisory  Control  and  Data  Acquisition 
(SCADA), Substation Automation, Electrical Vehicles (E.V.s) charging, Demand Response Management (DRM), 
Outrage Management (O.M.), Distribution Management (D.M.), and Home Energy Management (HEM) [21, 22]. 
This section will discuss three vulnerable applications in the smart grid infrastructure, namely AMI, SCADA, and 
DRM. The other applications were discussed in detail in [21-28].  

Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) is one of the essential components of smart grid infrastructure. AMI 
is mainly responsible for reading the power usage of home appliances and some other integrated devices, such as 
water  heaters,  gas  meters,  smart  thermostats,  rooftop  photovoltaic  systems,  etc.  AMI  consists  of  three  main 
components:  a  smart  meter,  a  data  concentrator,  and  a  central  system  (AMI  headend),  with  a  two-way  flow  of 
communications between these components [29]. The meter data that are collected from the power usage of home 
appliances are received by the AMI host system and transmitted to the meter data management system (MDMS). 
MDMS is responsible for data storage management and data analysis for the utilities. The AMI system provides 
financial benefits and increased service quality (multi-utility service and multi-vendor service) [30].  

Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) is a type of Process Control System (PCS) that is responsible 
for monitoring, measuring, and analyzing real-time data of the electrical power grid [7]. SCADA mostly effective 
for large-scale environments; however, it can ensure both short-range and long-range communications [31]. This 
system  consists  of  three  main  elements:  The  Remote  Terminal  Unit  (RTU),  Master  Terminal  Unit  (MTU),  and 
Human-Machine Interface (HMI).  RTU, as a device, consists of three components. The first component is the one 
that can perform data acquisition, the second component runs logic programs that are coming from the MTU, and 
the third component is mostly responsible for developing the communication infrastructure [32]. Another element 
in SCADA is the MTU, which is a device for monitoring and controlling the RTU. As the last element in SCADA, 
HMI considers as a graphic interface for the SCADA operator [22].  

Demand Response Management (DRM) is one of the essential systems in the smart grid infrastructure. This 
system refers to the routines conducted to control the energy consumption of consumers. DRM can achieve a balance 
between  electrical  energy  supply  and demand.   DRM's  benefits  are  to  decrease  the  peak-to-average  ratio  of  the 

 
 
 
 
 
demand and power supply, reduce user bills and power generation costs, improve energy efficiency, and address 
short-term reliability [22]. 

Fig. 1. Important Applications in the Smart Grid. 

III. 

Smart Grids Architecture 

As the smart grid infrastructure connects a huge variety of systems, the hierarchical architecture of the smart 
grid  with  few  sub-networks  is  considered  critical  in  the  infrastructure;  however,  each  sub-network  is  only 
responsible for specific geographical regions. Smart grid network includes three main sub-networks, Wide Area 
Network (WAN), Neighborhood Area Network (NAN), and Home Area Network (HAN), as shown in Fig. 2 [33]. 
To these three sub-networks, the authors of [34] added several sub-networks, namely Field Area Network (FAN), 
Local Area Network (LAN), and Building Area Network (BAN). BAN is divided into two sub-networks, Home 
Area Network (HAN) and Personal Area Network (PAN), as shown in Fig. 3. 

WAN is one of the major networks in the smart grid architecture. In [35], the authors highlighted WAN as the 
main  network  that  can  create  a  connection  backbone  to  connect  highly  distributed  smaller  networks  for  power 
systems  at  various  locations.  This  network  is  a  high-bandwidth  connection network,  which  can  deal  with  long-
distance  data  transmission  over  advanced  monitoring  and  sensing  applications.  WAN  provides  a  bidirectional 
communication  for  automation,  monitoring,  and  communication  of  smart  grid  systems.  The  authors  of  [36] 
described the NAN as a network that is expected to connect smart meters and distribution automation devices to the 
WAN  gateways.  It  is  a  bridge  between  user  premises  and  substations  with  access  points,  collectors,  and  data 
concentrators.  This  sub-network  may  be  considered  as  low  bandwidth  that  is  highly  robust  for  secure  data 
communication. 

HAN is necessary for customers to monitor and control smart devices and execute some functionalities, such as 
DRM and AMI. It allows users to know about their electricity consumption cost and handle their usage behaviors. 
According  to  [37],  this  network  supports  low-bandwidth  communication  between  home  appliances  and  smart 
meters. In [35], the authors defined BAN as a network that can perform any communications among homes and 
offices within a building. PAN is responsible for any communication between personal appliances, such as laptops, 
tablets, phones, etc. In LAN and FAN, any distant communication in backhaul networks, smart homes, factories, or 
even power generation plants can be performed. 

 
  
 
 
Fig. 2. Main Sub-Networks in the Smart Grid Architecture. 

In  a  sophisticated  smart  grid  architecture,  different  networks  demand  various  communication 
technologies  and  protocols  to  deliver  reliable  and  secure  data  or  power  to  utilities  and  users.  In  the 
following sections, we will describe smart grid communication technologies and few numbers of well-
known protocols. 

Fig. 3. Different Communication Networks in Smart Grids. 

3.1. Smart Grids Communication Technologies  
In smart grid, secure, reliable, and real-time information is considered a key factor for an efficient delivery of 
power between generators and users. Equipment failures, natural accidents, catastrophes, and capacity constraints 
can be the main reasons for power disturbances in grid systems. To deal with these issues, new communication and 
information technologies with modern intelligent monitoring systems play an indispensable role  in securing data 
transmission between smart meters and utilities, while they apply two different communication media, namely wired 
and wireless. The authors of [38] discussed the benefits of wired and wireless communication technologies. In this 
study, the authors highlighted some of the benefits of wireless communications over wired communications, such 
as reasonable infrastructure prices and stronger connections in unreachable regions; however, this technology is 
only  able  to  provide  a  connection  in  short  distances  with  low  data  rates,  compared  to  wired  communications. 
Wireless  technologies  include  Zonal  Intercommunication  Global-standard  (Zigbee),  Z-wave,  worldwide 
interoperability for microwave access (WiMAX), Wi-Fi, DASH7 (D7A), and cellular and satellite.  

Wired communications also have some advances. For example, it can provide higher connection capacity and 
shorter communication delay with less interference in comparison with wireless communication. Examples of wired 
communication technologies include Powerline Communication (PLC) and Digital Subscriber Lines (DSL) [39]. In 

 
 
 
 
 
this section, we mainly focus on  satellite, PLC, and DSL. For further reading, Zigbee, Z-wave, WiMAX, WiFi, 
DASH7, and Cellular are discussed in detail in [39-44]. Main features, including bandwidth, coverage rate, data 
rate, application, and application area of the most common communication technologies along with their standards, 
are summarized in Table 1. More details about smart grid communication technologies can be found in [38-48]. 

PLC is a wired communication technology that can support high-speed data from one device to another one. It 
simply connects smart meters to a data concentrator via a power line, and its data can be transmitted to the data 
center with cellular network technologies [39]. It is suitable for some applications, including smart metering, home 
automation,  Heating,  Ventilation  and  Air  Conditioning  (HVAC)  control,  and  lighting.  This  technology  reduces 
installation costs; however, it has some technical issues, including low bandwidth, high dependency on Quality of 
Service  (QoS),  and  high  sensitivity  to  disturbances.  Because  of  these  limitations,  PLC  does  not  provide  full 
connectivity, and it has to be combined with other technical communications, such as General Packet Radio Services 
(GPRS), and Global System for Mobiles (GSM) [39-41]. 

Digital  Subscriber  Lines  (DSL)  is  another  wired  communication  technology  that  has fast  speed  digital  data 
transmission and can conduct effectively on the voice telephone network [40]. Although this technology provides 
cheap,  high  data  bandwidth,  and  expected  availability,  it  has  some  disadvantages,  such  as  lack  of  reliability, 
downtime, and proper standardization.  In [35], the authors also mentioned that as this technology requires cables, 
it is difficult to use in rural areas due to high installation expenses in low-density regions. Satellite communication 
is one instance of wireless communication technology that is usually used in radio broadcasting, plane TVs, and 
vehicles. Although this technology provides some benefits, including reliability and flexibility, its performance is 
heavily impacted by weather conditions [35], and it is not considered cost-effective. Satellite communication also 
reduces  the  need  for  backhaul  networks,  which  demonstrates  a  good  fit  for  smart  grid  infrastructure  [43].  This 
technology can provide SCADA and distant communication remote substations, making it a viable option for future 
use.    

3.2. Smart Grids Protocols 
Initially, the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) was used in the smart grid to ensured 
end-to-end data communications. However, this protocol is not considered a good option for smart networks due to 
its  sophisticated  memory  management  problems  and  the  fact  that  it  is  only  suitable  for  wide  area  networks. 
Alternatively,  several  different  smart  grid  protocols  were  developed  to  meet  the  different  smart  network 
requirements [49]. 

SCADA and AMI are important key components in smart grid infrastructure. A few protocols were developed 
over the years to provide secure and reliable communications for these systems. The communication within SCADA 
depends  on  several  industrial  protocols,  such  as  Modicon  communication  bus  (Modbus),  Distributed  Network 
Protocol  version  3  (DNP3),  Process  field  bus  (Profibus),  and  International  Standard  Defining  Communication 
Protocol 61850 (IEC61850). However, the communications among the AMI, home appliances, and smart meters 
are done through various communication protocols. They vary widely in their inherent security requirements and 
vulnerabilities.  In  this  section,  we  mainly  focus  on  four  vulnerable  protocols  that  are  used  in  smart  grid 
infrastructure, including Modbus, DNP3, Profibus, and IEC61850. 

According to [50], DNP3 is an optimized open communication protocol used for power grid equipment. Initially, 
this protocol's major aim was to be used in the traditional power grid; however, this protocol has recently been used 
as  a  solution  for  delivering  data  measurements  in  the  smart  grid  because  of  its  reliability,  efficiency,  and 
compatibility in comparison with previous protocol versions. The DNP3 inherently was not a secure protocol; hence 
the authentication features were added to DNP3 protocol to addresses the security issue. Modicon communication 
bus or Modbus is another protocol designed in 1979 as a serial communication protocol to permit communication 
between various machines over twisted wires. This protocol consists of three types, Modbus  American Standard 
Code  for  Information  Interchange  (ASCII),  Modbus  Remote  Terminal  Unit  (RTU),  and  Modbus  Transmission 
Control Protocol (TCP). In general, Modbus ASCII enables the messages to be coded in hexadecimal, while this is 
the slowest type of Modbus in comparison with other types, and it is ideal for telephone modems. In Modbus RTU, 
the messages are expected to be coded in a binary manner. Modbus RTU is suitable to be applied over RS232 and 
can  generate  communications  between  master  and  slaves  by  using  their  IP  addresses  instead  of  their  device 
addresses. Modbus TCP is defined as a specific data frame protocol, which has a function code for an action that  

 
Technology 

Frequency 

Coverage Rate 

Data Rate 

Application 

Table II. Communication Technologies of Smart Grids. 

ZigBee 

915 MH and 2.4 
GHz 

30-100m 

Up to 250 Kbps 

HAN 

PLC 

24-500 KHz 

1-3Km 

2-3 Mbps 

2.402-2.48 GHz 

Bluetooth 

1-30m 

1 Mbps 

100-1000 THz 

Fiber Optic 

AON: up to 10 Km 
BPON: up to 20–60km 
EPON: up to 20 km 

AON:100 Mbps up/down 
BPON:155–622 Mbps 
EPON: 1 Gbps 

WiFi 

2.4 and 5 GHz 

Up to 1 Km 

Up to 600 Mbps 

WiMAX 

2.3-2.7 and 3.4-3.6 
GHz 

Almost 10Km-100Km 

Up to 75 Mbps 

GSM 

850-1900 MHz 

1-10 Km 

14.4 Kbps 

Satellite 

1- 40 GHz 

100–6000 km 

Iridium: 2.4–28 kbps 
Inmarsat-B: 9.6 up to 128 kbps 
BGAN: up to 1 Mbps 

GPRS 

800-1900 MHz 

1-10 Km 

Z-Wave 

868 and 915 MHz 

30-100 m 

179 Kbps 

40 Kbps 

DSL 

4 KHz-MHz 

ADSL: up to 5 Km 
ADSL2: up to 7 km 
ADSL2þ: up to 7 km 
VDSL: up to 1.2 km 
VDSL2: 300 m–1.5 km 

LTE Mobile 
Network 

0.41-2.1 GHz 

5-30 Km 

ADSL: 8 Mbps down/1.3 Mbps 
up 
ADSL2: 12 Mbps down/ 3.5 
Mbps up 
ADSL2þ: 24 Mbps down/ 3.3 
Mbps up 
VDSL: 52–85 Mbps down/16– 85 
Mbps up 
VDSL2: up to 200 Mbps down/up 
75 Mbps-300 Mbps 

HAN 
NAN 

HAN 

WAN 

HAN 
FAN 
NAN 
BAN 
WAN 

HAN 
NAN 
FAN 
WAN 
HAN 

WAN 

HAN 

HAN 

HAN 
NAN 
WAN 

HAN 

Application 
Areas 

Energy 
Monitoring, 
Automatic Meter 
Reading, Home 
Automation 
Automatic Meter 
Reading, Low 
Voltage 
Distribution 

Home 
Automation 
AMI, Metering 
reading, 
Distribution 
automation, 
Service switch 
operation 
Demand 
response, Wide-
area monitoring 

AMI 

Wireless 
Automatic 
Meter, Reading, 
Outage 
Detection, AMI 
AMI, Demand 
Response 
AMI, Remote 
generation 
plants, Electric 
Vehicles 
Remote 
automation, 
Distribution 
Automation 
AMI, Demand 
Response 
Home 
automation, 
energy 
automation 

Smart Grid City 
Smart Metering 

AMI 
Demand 
Response 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has  to  be  completed.  This  protocol  is  particularly  one  of  the  most  popular  industrial  control  protocols,  which 
generates a simple request or reply method between the control center and field devices.  
Process  Field  Bus  (PROFIBUS)  is  yet  another  communication  protocol  in  smart  grid  infrastructure  used  for 
automation technology [52]. This protocol is considered as one of the well-known Fieldbus protocols standardized 
as  EN50170.  PROFIBUS  can  address  the  real-time  requirements  on  MAC  layer.  It  is  used  as  a  token-passing 
protocol,  same  as  IEEE  802.4  in  a  Token  Bus.  This  protocol  is  mainly  divided  into  two  categories,  PROFIBU 
Decentralized Peripherals (DP) and PROFIBUS Process Automation (PA). PROFIBUS DP is used for conducting 
sensors and actuators via centralized controllers, and the PROFIBUS PA can be used in hazardous areas, and it is 
mainly  designed  as  an  improvement  version  of  some  convenient  systems,  like  Highway  Addressable  Remote 
Transducer (HART) in process automation.   
       Another protocol is IEC 61850 [53], which is  another well-known communication protocol in the smart grid 
mainly  designed  for  communication  networks  and  systems  in  order  to  provide  better  interoperability  between 
Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs). It provides several opportunities to increase the efficiency of the grid and 
reduce  its  cost.  This  protocol  can  introduce  five  variant  types  of  communication  services,  including  Abstract 
Communication  Service  Interface  (ACSI),  Generic  Object-Oriented  Substation  Event  (GOOSE),  Generic 
Substation Status Event (GSSE), Sampled Measured Value multicast (SMV), and Time Synchronization (T.S.). 

IV. 

Security of Smart Grids 

With  the  transformation  of  traditional  power  grids  to  smart  grids,  the  security  became  one  of  the  critical 
challenges in the last few decades. To address this challenge, the system and its infrastructure must be designed 
following secure architectural conditions. Therefore, cyber-security as an integral and complimentary process needs 
to follow a set of comprehensive security requirements. Initially, the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST)  defined  three  security  requirements  that  need  to  be  met  in  the  smart  grid:  confidentiality,  integrity,  and 
availability.  However,  the  authors  of  [54]  demonstrated  that  accountability  also  plays  an  important  role  in  the 
security of smart grids. 

  In general, when unauthorized access to some information happens, confidentiality is lost. While integrity seeks 
to deliver accurate data by protecting it from any improper modification or data destruction done by an unauthorized 
user.  Availability, on the other hand, is defined as an important aspect of smart grids that can guarantee access to 
the system's data. Loss of availability indicates that the data is not available or accessible to use by users. In addition 
to the requirements previously mentioned, accountability plays an important role in smart grid security; it guarantees 
the system's traceability that must be recorded by a person, device, or public authority. Moreover, the recorded data 
can be used as an evidence in case of an attack to prove the action made by every user, or even administrator, and 
the  integrity  of  the  data  collected  from  each  device  [5].  Hence,  following  these  four  requirements,  including 
confidentiality,  integrity,  availability,  and  accountability  can  provide  adequate  protections  to  smart  grid 
infrastructures.  

Due to the inherent vulnerabilities of communication, smart grid networks are subject to several cyber-attacks, 
which can be classified in different ways.  In the following section, we discuss existing cyber-attack classifications 
along with our proposed classification, and describe the possible attacks, with their purposes and impacts  on the 
networks.   

4.1. A Classification of Cyber-Attacks in Smart Grid 
Fig. 4 provides a visual representation of existing cyber-attack classifications in smart grids in the current Fig. 
4 provides a schematic of existing cyber-attack classifications in smart grid. In [55, 56], the authors classified these 
cyber-attacks based on the security requirements, confidentiality, integrity, and availability; however, they excluded 
accountability from this classification [7, 54]. As shown in Fig. 4, the authors of [56] also provided another cyber-
attack classification, which was according to the subnetworks and architecture of smart grids, namely home area 
network, wide area network, and neighborhood area network. This classification does not include cyber-attacks on 
the  other sub-networks, such as Building Area Network (BAN), Field Area Network (FAN), and Personal Area 
Networks  (PAN).  In  this  paper,  the  authors  also  described  the  impact  of  each  cyber-attack  on  three  security 
requirements (confidentiality, integrity, and availability), while they excluded the attacks targeting accountability.  
In [7], the authors proposed a classification based upon the attacking cycle, including reconnaissance, scanning, 
exploitation, and maintenance access, as shown in Fig. 4. This classification also did not include all cyber-attacks. 
Several cyber-attacks, such as intrusion, brute-force, and spoofing attacks, are primary concerns in a smart grid, and 

 
 
they  require  multiple  security  mechanisms.  However,  this  paper  excluded  these  cyber-attacks  from  the 
classification. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the authors in [58] also provided a general classification divided into three 
categories: component-wise, protocol-wise, and topology-wise. The authors indicated that some cyber-attacks such 
as replay attacks and eavesdropping attacks might be excluded from this classification.  The authors of [59] proposed 
a  taxonomy  of  basic  cyber-attacks,  including  devices,  data,  privacy,  and  network  availability  attacks.  This 
classification also does not include cyber-attacks like social engineering attacks. In [8], the authors classified cyber-
attacks according to five communication layers, including the application layer, transport layer, network layer, MAC 
layer, and physical layer. Several attacks target the session layer and presentation layer, which both were excluded 
from  the  classification.  This  paper  also  did  not  provide  clear  descriptions  of  cyber-attacks,  with  their  impacts, 
purposes, and security requirements they target, and did not cover the detection and mitigation techniques. 

A number of survey papers related to cyber-attacks on smart grid networks have been published over the last 
decade. Some of these papers focus on cyber-attacks that target one or some of the communication layers, such as 
the physical layer or the network layer. For example, a survey published in 2020 focused on the attacks based on 
the layers of the TCP/IP model; however, the TCP/IP model does not distinguish between the cyber-attacks that 
target the application, presentation or session layer and the data link or physical layer. Therefore, motivated by the 
limitations of the current studies, we classify cyber-attacks on smart grids based on the seven communication layers 
of the OSI model, which provides a comprehensive conceptual detail of the networking process. The seven layers 
of this model are introduced to perform a set of unique functions in a data communication. As a result, the OSI 
model is more detailed and informative compared to the TCP/IP model. Since several cyber-attacks may target these 
layers,  it  is  important  to  select  a  model  that  considers  a  set  of  distinct  functions  for  every  layer.  Therefore,  we 
classify the cyber-attacks in smart grids into the physical, data-link, network, transport, session, presentation, and 
application layers.  

Fig. 4. A Review of the Current Classifications of Cyber-Attacks in Smart Grids. 

4.2. Cyber-Attacks in Smart Grids 
As we mentioned, multiple cyber-attacks may target smart grid infrastructures. Fig. 5 illustrates possible cyber-
attacks in a smart grid, with their target layers in OSI model. According to this figure, multiple cyber-attacks can 
target the same communication layers or target more than one layer simultaneously. In the following, we describe 
these  cyber-attacks,  along  with  their  purposes,  targeted  layers’  impacts,  and  their  security  requirements,  as 
summarized in Table III. 

One of the cyber-attacks that are more likely to occur in a smart grid is jamming. In these attacks, an attacker 
broadcasts continuous or random signals to keep the channel busy and prevent authorized devices from transmitting 
and receiving [7, 59, 67]. Different types of jammers include constant, random, deceptive, and reactive jammers 

 
  
 
 
[64] can target the physical layer [55, 8, 61], data-link layer [8], and network layer [87] of the smart grid, which can 
compromise the availability of the smart grid network [7, 8,57]. 

Spoofing attacks are yet another category of cyber-attacks that target smart grid networks. This category includes 
identity/data spoofing, Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) spoofing, Global Position System (GPS) spoofing, IP 
spoofing, and Media Access Control (MAC) spoofing. In any of these attacks, the spoofer pretends to be a legitimate 
node  [7,  8,  57]  to  mislead  other  nodes  in  the  network  in  order  to  disrupt  the  security,  reliability,  stability,  and 
operation of the network [8], which can violate the integrity, the confidentiality and the accountability of the smart 
grid [8, 57]. These attacks can target the physical layer [71, 72], the data link layer [2, 8, 73], and the network layer 
[70]. 

According to the authors of [89], injection attacks can be conducted when an adversary attempts to delete, alter 
and add new manipulated data to the network, which may disrupt the smart grid operations and lead to a blackout. 
Violation of the data integrity, corruption, and appearance of illegitimate nodes in the network are also considered 
as other impacts of this type of cyber-attacks. Like the above-described attacks, injection attacks can target one or 
several communication layers, such as the data-link layer [8, 72], network layer [8, 72], and transport layer [8, 72]. 
Another potential cyber-attack that targets smart grid networks, as illustrated in Fig. 5, is the flooding attack which 
aims to flood the network with several random packets and requests. This attack can occur in the application layer 
[8,  74]  and  the  network  layer  [57]  to  disrupt  the  system's  availability.  It  may  exhaust  the  target's  resources  by 
processing the received fake messages [74].  Another impact of this attack is the lack of node functionality in the 
network [73]. 

Other cyber-attacks on smart grid infrastructures are the Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attacks. Such cyber-attacks 
target the network layer [8, 13] and the session layer [76]. MITM in a smart grid is performed when an adversary 
intercepts the traffic by inserting himself between two authorized devices, connecting to the devices, and relaying 
the  traffic  between  them  [7,  10].  The  devices  seem  to  communicate  directly;  however,  the  adversary  is 
communicating with these devices as a third device. [7, 8] The main purpose of this kind of cyber-attacks is to 
prevent network data from being transmitted, modify it during the transmission, and gain unauthorized access to 
valuable data [7, 26]. MITM also can compromise the confidentiality and integrity of the network [57, 75].   

Other possible cyber-attacks on smart grid infrastructure are social engineering attacks. These attacks target the 
application  layer  and  violate  the  confidentiality  of  the  system  [77,  78].  In  [78],  the  authors  state  that  social 
engineering  attacks  are  considered  the  biggest  cyber-security  threat.  They  described  several  types  of  social 
engineering attacks, including phishing, pretexting, baiting, tailgating, ransomware, fake software, reverse social 
engineering, phone/windows fraud, and robocalls attacks. All these attacks aim at manipulating users in order to 
discover  and  steal  valuable  and  sensitive  information.  Violating  consumers'  privacy,  identity  theft,  and  stealing 
sensitive information are the consequences of these attacks.  

Eavesdropping attack is another well-known passive attack on smart grid communication channels that targets 
the network layer [8, 81] and compromises the confidentiality security requirement of the smart grid [8].  In [57], 
the authors explained that eavesdropping attacks occur when a malicious user listens to the communication between 
two nodes on a LAN network and gains access to some information. The malicious user may also use this private 
data to disrupt or compromise the network [8]. These attacks violate the privacy requirement of networks [57, 81].  
Time Synchronization Attacks (TSA) are well-known potential cyber-attacks on a smart grid that target timing 
information [7, 86] at the physical layer [8] and data link layer [8]. TSA can target phasor measurement units and 
wide area protection, monitoring, and control [57, 8]. The authors of [88] provided a detailed overview of TSA 
impacts on smart grids. In a smart grid, several applications use synchronous measurements, and the majority of the 
measurement devices are equipped with GPS for accurate timing information. These devices can also be subject to 
GPS spoofing attacks. Since the communication and control messages are time-sensitive, GPS spoofing and TSA 
can be both amongst cyber-attacks that can more likely be carried out in smart grids [7].  

Brute-force attacks consist of hybrid brute-force (dictionary attacks), reverse brute-force, and credential stuffing 
attacks  that  target  the  presentation  layer,  session  layer,  and  network  layer  [74].  These  attacks  can  occur  when 
malicious attackers crack passwords or passphrases to access the user’s accounts or systems. The authors of [67] 
highlighted  the  consequences  of  these  attacks,  including  gaining  unauthorized  access  to  the  system  and  user 
accounts  and  exploiting  the  security  of  the  system  by  compromising  the  confidentiality  and  the  integrity  of  the 
system.  In  smart  grids,  an  attacker  usually  benefits  from  brute-force  attacks  by  gaining  access  to  the  private 
information of consumers in the network [65]. 

Another cyber-attack against smart grid is the intrusion attack, in which an adversary exploits the vulnerabilities 
of the network to gain illegal access to the nodes. In other words, any unauthorized or even forcible action may 

subject to an intrusion attack [75]. It also aims at misusing the available resources in the network by disrupting the 
integrity, and the confidentiality of the network [82] in both the application layer [83] and the network layer [82]. 
Due to the smart grid's vulnerable critical nature, the intrusion attack plays an essential role in security disruptions 
in  the  network.  For  example,  modern  SCADA  systems  in  smart  grids  experience  a  lack  of  authentication  and 
integrity, which causes them to be more exposed to cyber-attacks, such as intrusion attacks. Therefore, the detection 
and prevention of this attack can improve the network's general performance and avoid system disruptions.  

Traffic analysis attack is applied when an adversary listens and analyzes the traffic. The goal of this attack is to 
control the hosts and devices that are connected to the smart grid network. This attack can violate the confidentiality 
of the network and target the data link layer.  In this attack, the intruder can sniff and analyze the messages, therefore 
getting information about the patterns of communication between nodes. Masquerading attack is also another known 
cyber-attack that targets the data link layer in the smart grid. This attack mainly compromises the confidentiality, 
integrity,  availability,  and  accountability  of  the  network. In  such  attack,  a  malicious  user  may  pretend  to  be  an 
authorized user in order to gain access to the network or be able to conduct unauthorized actions. In the smart grid, 
the  attacker  mostly  changes  a  Programmable  Communicating  Thermostat  (PCT)  in  order  to  decrease  electronic 
power at a residential location [2, 3]. 

In the smart grid, one of the most common attacks is the smart meter tampering attack. It can violate the integrity 
of  the  network  while  it  targets  the  physical  layer.  In  smart  meter  tampering  attack,  the  intruder  can  modify  the 
transmitted data for any customers. As a result, the user may need to pay higher or lower electricity bills. One cyber-
attack that is more likely to happen in the smart grid is known as buffer overflow, in which the malicious attacker 
sends  data  to  specific  components  or  systems.  It  also  targets  the  application  and  transport  layers,  while  it 
compromises the availability requirement of the network. This attack may lead to system crash and exhausting the 
network resources [2].   

Fig. 5.  Cyber-Attack Classification Based on Communication Layers. 

 
 
 
 
 
 Table III. Cyber-Attacks in Smart Grids. 

Cyber-Attacks 

Objectives/Purpose 

Jamming 
Attacks 

Spoofing 
Attacks 

Injection 
Attacks 

Disrupting the 
transmission and the 
reception of data. 
Pretending to be a 
legitimate node to 
compromise the system. 

Injecting false/untrusted 
data packets into a 
network. 

Flooding 
Attack 

Depleting, and exhausting 
system resources. 

Man-in-the-
Middle Attacks 

Preventing, or modifying 
data during transmission 
through the network. 

Social 
Engineering 
Attacks 
Eavesdropping 
Attack 

Manipulating users to 
reveal sensitive 
information. 
Monitoring and capturing 
all network traffic. 

Intrusion Attack  Gain illegal access to the 

node or network. 

Brute Force 
Attacks 

Cracking usernames and 
passwords. 

Time 
synchronization 
Attack 

Traffic Analysis 
Attack 

Targeting timing data and 
disrupting the time 
synchronization between 
nodes. 
Control the hosts and the 
devices that are connected 
to the network. 

Masquerade 
Attack 

Pretend to be an authorized 
user. 

Targeting 
Layers 
Physical  
Data Link  
Network 
Physical  
Data Link 
Network 
Transport 

Data Link  
Network 
Transport 
Application 

Data Link 
Network 
Transport  
Application 
Data Link 
Network 
Session 

Application 

Physical  
Network 

Network 
Application 

Network 
Session 
Presentatio
n 

Physical 
Data Link 

Data Link 

Data Link 

Impacts 

Blocking one or several nodes to transmit and 
receive information collisions. 

Misleading other nodes. 

Injecting false data 
Corrupting the legitimate processes and 
operations 
Appearance of illegitimate nodes in the 
network. 

Security 
Requirements 

Availability 

Integrity 
Availability 
Confidentiality 
Accountability 

Integrity 

Malfunction of nodes and loss of availability in 
a network. 

Availability 

Unauthorized access to sensitive information. 

Violation of users' privacy. 
Temporary or permanent damage to the system. 
Steal sensitive and private information. 
Identity theft. 

Loss of privacy. 

Misusing available resources in the network. 

Integrity 
Confidentiality 

Confidentiality 

Confidentiality 

Integrity 
Confidentiality 

Gaining unauthorized access to users' system or 
accounts. 

Integrity 
Confidentiality 

Compromising events, such as location 
estimation and fault detection 
Performance degradation. 

Sniff and analyze the message in order to 
achieve information about the patterns of 
communications between nodes. 

Gaining unauthorized access to users' system.  

Integrity 
Availability 

Confidentiality 

Integrity 
Availability 
Confidentiality 
Accountability 

Smart Meter 
Tampering 
Attack 
Buffer Overflow 
Attack 

Puppet Attack 

Teardrop 
Attack 

Smurf 
Attack 

Popping the HMI 
Attack 

Modification the 
transmitted data for any 
customers. 
Sending improper or 
incorrect data to the 
specific system. 
Sending fake data in the 
AMI network. 

the 
in  sequential 

Modification  of  the  length 
fragmentation 
and 
IP 
offset 
packets. 
Modifying the traffic of an 
entire system. 

Physical  

Pay higher or lower electricity bills. 

Integrity 

Transport 
Application 

Network 

System crash or exhaust resources. 

Availability 

Reduce packet delivery to 10% or 20% 
Exhaust the communication network bandwidth. 

Availability 

Network 

System crash. 

Availability 

Network 

Replay and saturate the target network. 

Availability 

Get unauthorized access  

Application 

Controling the compromised system 

Integrity 
Availability 
Confidentiality 
Accountability 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Another  known  attack  that  targets  the  smart  grid  is  the  puppet  attack,  which  violates  the  availability  of  the 
network and targets the network layer. This attack targets the AMI network in the smart grid, using a vulnerability 
in the Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) protocol. Then, it can exhaust the communication network bandwidth. One 
of the main impacts of this attack is the reduction of the packet delivery by 10% or 20% [3].  In addition, the smurf 
attack is one of the potential cyber-attacks in the smart grid that violates the availability of the network. This attack 
can not only target a specific unit of the smart grid, but also saturates and congests the traffic of an entire system. 
This  attack  consists  of  three  factors,  namely  the  source  site,  bounce  site,  and  target  site.  In  the  source  site,  an 
adversary  sends  some  spoofed  packets  to  the  broadcast  address  of  the  bounce  site.  As  soon  as  the  bounce  site 
receives the forged packets, it can broadcast these packets to all hosts. This process may lead to saturate the target 
network. This attack type mostly targets the network layer [3]. 

Popping the HMI attack is one of the disruptive cyber-attacks targeting the smart grid. In this case, an adversary 
uses a common devices’s attack (device’s software or operating system vulnerabilities) and installs a remote shell, 
which permits the attacker to connect remotely to the server from the attacker’s computer. The aim of this attack is 
to get unauthorized access and be able to control the compromised system. SCADA and substations of smart grid 
are considered good targets for this attack. Because the devices’ documentaries are publicly available, this attack 
does not need any advanced networking skills. Therefore, launching such attack is easy and provides full control of 
the target system to the attacker. It violates the availability, integrity, confidentiality, and accountability and targets 
the application layer [3]. 

4.3. Detection Techniques of Cyber-Attacks on Smart Grids 
Techniques  to  detect  cyber-attacks  that  target  smart  grids  can  be  mainly  classified  into  six  categories: 
localization-based  techniques,  AI-based  techniques,  prediction  models,  Channel  characteristic-based  techniques, 
filtering-based techniques, and intrusion detection systems.  

Fig. 6. Classification of Detection Techniques in Smart Grids. 

4.3.1.  Localization-Based Techniques 
 Several  localizations  or  ranging  techniques  have  been  proposed  in  the  literature  and  received  considerable 
attention from researchers. In [90], the authors divided the localization techniques into Received Signal Strength 
(RSS-based),  Received  Signal  Strength  Indicator  (RSSI-based),  Time  Difference  of  Arrival  (TDoA-based),  and 
Angle of Arrival-based localization (AoA-based).  

RSS signals are widely used in communication technologies for various purposes. One information that can be 
derived from RSS is the transmitter's location, which has been the focus of numerous studies.  For instance, the 
authors  of  [91]  proposed  an  RSS-based  technique  for  detecting  spoofing  attacks  based  on  a  spatial  correlation 
feature. In this study, the authors extracted RSS stream features in order to decrease the redundancy of data and 
applied two distinguishable features of RSS streams, including the Summation of Detailed Coefficient (SDCs) in 
Discrete  Haar  Wavelet  Transform  (DHWT)  and  the  ration  of  out-of-bound  frames.  Their  proposed  approach 
provides an effective, low-cost method for detecting spoofing attacks in a network. However, the authors of [92] 
highlighted that the RSS-based technique suffers from poor localization accuracy, which is a critical disadvantage 
of this technique. It is one of the simplest localization techniques that consider a cost-effective method in networks. 
     In [93], the authors proposed RSSI-based detection mechanism for MITM attacks. In this study, RSSI values are 
commonly arbitrary integers, which are received by antennas. These values can be evaluated using a sliding window, 
that leads to static information about signals' characteristics, including mean and standard deviation. Their proposed 
technique can detect MITM attacks by analyzing these profiles. In [94], the authors also took advantage of RSSI-
based techniques for detecting spoofing attacks in smart grids. They developed a cosine-similarity method of RSSI 
in home area networks in a smart grid. Their proposed technique provided a higher detection rate compared to other 

 
 
 
 
related studies and proved an efficient approach in terms of accuracy [95- 101]. The authors of [102] combined 
RSS-based technique with the maximum likelihood estimation to handle uncertainty in measurements. According 
to their simulation results, this technique outperforms the existing RSS-based techniques in detecting attackers.  
     Localization-based techniques also consist of another common type, TDoA-based. Methods under this type are 
well-known techniques that measure the distance between nodes. For instance, the authors of  [103] introduced a 
lightweight TDoA-based technique between source and beacon nodes.  The authors of [104] also proposed a TDoA-
based technique to detect time synchronization attacks in a network. In this work, the authors focused on using 
TDoA-based  techniques  on  fixed  sensors  whose  time  reference  could  be  maliciously  affected.  Their  proposed 
solution mainly exploits the weighted least squares estimator with newly generated weights and the measurements 
of TDoA conducted from an unknown source. In [105], the authors developed a TDoA-based technique combined 
with the Maximum Likelihood Estimator (MLE), which provided superior performance compared to some other 
existing approaches. 

In  [106],  the  authors  introduced  a  new  localization  technique,  AoA-based  technique.  This  technique  mainly 
focuses  on  the  angle  of  arrival  signals  to  calculate  transmitters'  locations.  In  [107],  the  authors  discussed  this 
localization technique, which can achieve the angle of data by using radio array approaches. They highlighted two 
ways to evaluate the angles of arrival, multiple and directional antennas. Multiple antennas work based on time 
analysis or even phase difference between the signals at various array elements in which the locations are known. 
While, directional antennas can compute the RSS ratio between several directional antennas in order to have an 
overlap between their major beams. In [108], the authors demonstrated that AoA-based localization techniques are 
not a good fit for cyber-attack detection of an indoor system in networks. In this study, the system’s accuracy was 
reduced because of intensive multi-path components and Non-Line of Sight (NLOS) communications.   

4.3.2.  Artificial Intelligence-Based Techniques 
AI-based techniques category consists of various machine-learning and deep learning algorithms, data mining 
techniques,  evolutionary  algorithms,  and  fuzzy  logic  methods.  For  detecting  cyber-attacks,  machine  learning 
category received more attention from researchers. For example, the authors of [55] used machine-learning to detect 
jamming attacks, namely random forest, support vector machine, and neural network. Their numerical results show 
that the proposed technique based on random forest achieves high accuracy. In [109], the authors also used machine 
learning algorithms to detect social engineering attacks. The technique performs based on unsupervised learning, 
which means that there is no previous knowledge about the observed cyber-attacks. They compared the performance 
of different machine learning algorithms (support vector machine, biased support vector machine, artificial neutral, 
scaled conjugate gradient, and self-organizing map) in terms of reliability, accuracy, and speed.  Their simulations 
proved that support vector machine give better results compared to other algorithms.  

 In [81], the authors used machine-learning techniques to detect brute force attacks on the Secure Shell protocol 
(SSH) at the network layer. The authors used different classifiers, including K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), decision 
tree, and Naïve Bayes (N.B.), to develop scalable detection models that can provide good prediction results. Another 
study in the literature that exploited machine-learning is detailed in [110]. In this study, the authors highlighted a 
concept from statics and economics, named "first difference," which led them to develop a classifier to detect time 
synchronization attacks in the network. Their results show that Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) are the best choice 
for detecting these attacks in the network.  In [111], the authors used an ANN model to detect MITM attacks and 
their results did provide a good detection rate. In [112], the authors used machine learning techniques to detect and 
locate intruders in smart grids. The simulation results of this study showed that the proposed method could achieve 
a good detection rate.  

Deep  learning  techniques  has  also  been  used  to  detect  cyber-attacks  targeting  smart  grid  infrastructure.  For 
instance, in [113], the authors proposed ensemble deep learning techniques, using deep neural network (DNN) and 
decision  tree.  The  proposed  model  was  evaluated  based  on  the  10-fold  cross  validation.  The  evaluation  results 
showed that the proposed model outperforms other traditional techniques, including random forest, AdaBoost, and 
DNN. In [114], the authors applied a deep reinforcement learning based technique to identify the physical tripped 
line and the fake outrage line. Another study [115] also employed a deep learning technique, called encoders to 
reduce  dimensions  and  feature  extraction,  followed  by  an  advanced  Generative  Adversarial  Network  (GAN)  to 
detect false data injection attacks. In this study, due to expensive costs of labelling in power systems, the collected 
data is partially  labelled, therefore, numerical results show the effectiveness and high rate of accuracy of this model. 

Another type of AI-based category is data mining algorithms that can be useful for detecting cyber-attacks in 
the smart grid. The authors of [16] surveyed existing studies that used data mining techniques for detecting false 
data injection attacks (FDIA) in the smart grid. These techniques can determine patterns in huge datasets in order 
to analyze invisible patterns of data. The authors of [111, 112] used a data mining method, Common Path Mining 
(CPM), to detect FDIA in networks.  They introduced a path as a sequence of samples in a temporal order. For any 
unique event, there is a path, which consists of various types of faults. Hence, when a sequence is compatible with 
the paths, it will be listed as an attack. In [112], the authors also introduced a Casual Event Graph (CEG) to detect 
FDIA  in  smart  grids.  The  main  objective  of  data  mining  techniques  in  this  study  is  to  train  historical  datasets. 
Although  data-mining  techniques  provide  some  benefits,  they  may  sometimes  require  low  computational 
complexity (based on the data size) when a training process is over, which is considered a benefit in detecting FDIA 
in a smart grid. 

Fuzzy  logic-based  methods  have  also  been  proposed  to  effectively  detect  various  attacks  in  a  network.  For 
example, the authors of [116] proposed artificial immune systems and fuzzy logic in order to detect flooding attacks 
in a network. In this study, the aim of using fuzzy  logic is to reduce uncertainty whenever there is no clear line 
between  malicious  and  legitimate  traffic.  Another  study  that  applied  fuzzy  logic  in  cyber-attack  detection  is 
described in [117], in which the authors developed a detection technique based on fuzzy logic for jamming attacks. 
This technique uses the clear channel assessment, bad packet ratio, and received strength signal parameters to detect 
link  loss  due  to  jamming  or other  causes.  The  efficiency of  their  proposed  techniques  for  constant  and  random 
jamming was high. Other authors [118] combined fuzzy logic with other approaches, such as genetic algorithms 
and Hidden Markov Model (HMM), to detect various cyber-attacks.   

Another important type in AI-based techniques is that of evolutionary algorithms, which are widely used for 
global optimizations. One popular instance of evolutionary algorithms is genetic algorithms. These algorithms can 
mimic the evolution and natural selection process. In [119], the authors proposed a technique based on a genetic 
algorithm that consists of two stages, training and detection. In their work, they applied a genetic algorithm for 
reducing the set of features in the detection stage. According to the authors' results, this technique provides a high 
level of accuracy for various cyber-attacks in networks. In [120], the authors also analyzed the impact of genetic 
algorithms on various machine-learning techniques, such as SVM, KNN, and ANN. The simulation results show 
that  genetic  algorithms  and  these  three  machine  learning  techniques  effectively  detect  FDIA  in  smart  grids. 
However, KNN and SVM were found more efficient in detecting these attacks than some existing techniques. 

In another work, the authors proposed a hybrid technique based on Genetic algorithms and fuzzy logic [121]. 
They developed a multi-objective genetic-fuzzy model for detecting anomalies in networks. The numerical results 
show that the proposed method is not suitable for detecting attacks in networks. In [122], the authors also analyzed 
a hybrid framework for detecting different cyber-attacks that apply both genetic and fuzzy logic techniques. This 
method provided good accuracy and better results compared to some other existing techniques. 

4.3.3.  Prediction Models 
With the increasing variety and number of cyber-attacks in smart grids, it has become  challenging to detect 
cyber-attacks in any network. The process of detecting attacks usually occurs late for a victims' network. Therefore, 
detection and identification of attacks in an early stage are considered a challenge for modern systems. Prediction 
models are well-adapted methods to predict attacks at an early stage in the systems. They mainly apply statistics for 
the prediction of the results of any unknown events. Several studies focused on using prediction models for attack 
detections in smart grid infrastructures. For example, the authors of [123] proposed a detection method that uses 
cosine similarity and chi-square detector to identify FDIA in networks. They also employed Kalman filter to find 
expected  measurements  and  calculate  any  deviation  between  actual  measurements  and  estimated  values.  Their 
results show that both chi-square detector and cosine similarity machining are effective methods for the detection 
of random attacks. In addition, the authors concluded that chi-square detector cannot detect FDIA based on their 
methodology; however, using cosine similarity provided better results in detecting FDIA in networks.  

In another paper, Kalman filter was used to improve cyber-attack detection performance [124]. They modeled 
the  smart  grid  network  as  a  discrete  linear  dynamic  system  and  exploited  Kalman  filter as  the  state  estimation. 
Several studies also used Kalman filter as a technique to enhance cyber-attack detection in a smart grid, along with 
other  techniques,  such  as  the Euclidean detector  [125],  cosine  similarity  detector  [126], and  chi-square  detector 
[120] which have the capacity of testing the actual measurements and the predicted measurements. Auto Regressive 
Moving  Average  (ARMA)  and  Auto  Regressive  Integrated  Moving  Average  (ARIMA)  are  other  instances  of 

prediction models that have been proposed for detecting cyber-attacks in networks. In fact, auto regression-based 
models  can  predict  future  trends  from  past  behavior,  while  moving  averages  can  predict  long-term  behaviors. 
ARIMA is also another statistical model that uses time-series data to forecast future behaviors.  

In [128], the authors developed an early-stage method to detect SYN flooding attacks. In this method, the SYN 
traffic is predicted by using ARIMA model, and a  cumulative sum algorithm is used to discover SYN flooding 
attacks. In [158], the author discussed using principal component analysis, ARMA, and Hopefield model to detect 
intrusions in networks using data mining techniques. In this work, analysis time series data analysis was conducted 
using these models and neural networks for detecting intrusions in real-time. Their proposed model provided a good 
detection rate  and a low false alarm ratio. Other studies also used these time series models for detecting cyber-
attacks smart grid networks [129-134].   

4.3.4.  Filtering-Based Techniques 

Filtering-based  techniques  represent  another  common  category  for  cyber-attack  detections  in  a  smart  grid.  This 
survey will discuss two main techniques in this category, namely threshold-based and bloom filtering techniques. 
Several studies evaluated the efficiency of threshold-based techniques in detecting cyber-attacks in any system. For 
example,  the  authors  of  [103]  used  threshold-based  techniques  to  detect  social  engineering  attacks  in  networks. 
They are easy to develop but not efficient due to their values' limitations. On the other hand, the authors of [135] 
used bloom filters to detect flooding attacks against signaling protocols. They also introduced a metric called session 
distance to detect flooding attacks. In addition, they also used the bloom filters in the SCADA system. Because 
these filters need low memory and computing power, they can effectively help detect any existing anomalies in the 
SCADA system.  
In [136], the authors used a hybrid model for detecting intrusion attacks in SCADA systems. They proposed an 
approach  using  multi-level  methods  to  detect  anomalies  using  bloom  filters  in  SCADA  networks.  They  also 
suggested an algorithm for secure feature extraction and multi-level anomaly detection. Their experimental results 
showed  that  the  proposed  approach  can  achieve  an  accuracy  of  97%.  In  [81],  the  authors  compared  filtering 
techniques with some other detecting techniques to detect some social engineering attacks. In this work, the authors 
highlighted filtering techniques as easy techniques to use, but ineffective and costly. Despite their limitations, these 
techniques,  particularly  bloom  filters,  are  known  as  space  efficiency  techniques,  which  are  useful  in  specific 
scenarios in a smart grid.   

Intrusion Detection Systems 

4.3.5. 
Intrusion detection systems (IDS) are considered as one of the main techniques to detect cyber-attacks in smart 
grid  infrastructure  [183,  184].  These  systems  can  audit  and  analyze  security  information  to  detect  any  possible 
malicious vulnerabilities. One of the important benefits of these systems is to detect unknown or zero-day attacks 
effectively [137, 185].  

Several  studies  have  been  proposed  to  detect  cyber-attacks  using  IDS.  For  example,  the  authors  of  [138] 
proposed  a  hierarchical  distributed  IDS  based  on  a  distributed  fog  architecture.  This  system  consists  of  three 
different layers of architecture, namely home  area networks, residential area networks, and fog operation center 
networks. Their proposed system demonstrated good performance results over different conditions of the smart grid 
infrastructure.  

In [137], the authors proposed an IDS system to detect operational data. For this purpose, they used real power 
plant data and described a new architecture for the proposed system. Their simulation results proved that this system 
has some benefits compared to other existing systems. In [139], the authors proposed a network-based IDS system 
based on a moving target defense technique in the smart grid. In this study, the authors mainly focused on IPV6 
advanced metering infrastructure. The authors of [140] also developed an IDS system, called ARIES, which is able 
to  detect  any  cyber-attacks,  such  as  DoS,  brute-force,  port  scanning,  and  bots  attacks,  against  network  flows, 
Modbus/Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), and operational data. They highlighted that the proposed system 
provides  a  high  efficiency  in  detecting  cyber-attacks.  In  addition,,  some  works  primarily  attempted  to  improve 
signature-based IDS systems. In [141], the authors compared different types of IDS systems, including anomaly-
based and signature-based. In particular, the authors focused on the improvement of signature-based IDS. To address 
this challenge, they employed Snort using a layered dataset.. 

In [142], the authors designed a signature-based IDS system that can detect DoS attacks in a network. For this 
purpose, they simulated different types of DoS attacks, such as Hello flooding attacks using Cooja simulator and 

 
IPV6  routing  (RPL)  protocol.  Their  proposed  system  provided  effective  results.  In  addition  to  these  traditional 
methods, some studies used hybrid methods that combine IDS with other techniques. For instance, in  [143], the 
authors  applied  a  hybrid  model  to  detect  cyber-attacks.  This  model  combines  AI-based  algorithms,  including 
decision  tree,  K  Nearest  Neighbor  (KNN),  and  Support  Vector  Machine  (SVM),  along  with  an  IDS  system  to 
improve the performance of this system. Their results showed that their proposed system achieves high performance 
results. The authors of [144] proposed an IDS system that is capable of detecting lethal. The proposed system uses 
the Cumulative Sum (CUSUM) algorithm with the characteristics of IDS systems. Their achieved detection rate is 
high, while the false positive rate is relatively low.  

4.4. Countermeasures in Smart Grids 
Several countermeasures have been proposed in the  literature that can be used against various cyber-attacks 
introduced  in  the  next  section.  For  example,  in  [63],  the  authors  surveyed  several  countermeasures,  including 
frequency hopping spread spectrum for jamming attacks in wireless sensor networks (WSNs). In [145], the authors 
compared  several  encryption  techniques  and  showed  that  one-time  pad  (OTP)  is  the  only  secure  cryptosystem 
countermeasure solution for brute-force attacks. According to the shift-invariant feature of the transmission policy, 
the  authors  of  [146]  proposed  a  countermeasure  technique  for  time  synchronization  attacks.  This  technique  can 
construct  a  shift-invariant  transmission  policies  by  characterizing  the  lower  and  upper  bounds  for  the  system 
estimation, while the attacker does not have any knowledge of the system. 

Several  studies  provided  countermeasure  classifications.  For  instance,  in  [97],  the  authors  proposed  a 
countermeasure  classification  comprised  of  four  categories,  cryptographic  functions,  personal  identification, 
classification algorithms, and channel characteristics. In [55], the authors divided cyber-attack countermeasures into 
two  categories,  cryptographic  and  network  countermeasures.  In  this  section,  as  Fig.  7  illustrates,  we  classify 
countermeasure techniques in smart grid networks into two main categories, computer-based and non-computer-
based.  Computer-based  countermeasures  are  classified  into  five  types,  namely  secure  protocols  and  standards, 
cryptographic  functions,  intrusion  preventions,  spread  spectrum  techniques,  and  game  theory-based  techniques. 
Non-computer-based countermeasures include two types, education, and access control and cyber-security policies. 
Relevant countermeasures techniques and cyber-security strategies for each category are described below. 

             Fig. 7. A Classification of Countermeasure Techniques in Smart Grids. 

4.4.1.  Preventive-Based Countermeasures 
To  be  prepared  for  potential  cyber-attacks  in  smart  grid  network,  it  is  important  to  understand  the  different 
categories of countermeasures. This section only considers computer-based countermeasures that mainly focus on 
Information technology and software aspects of countermeasures. We will briefly discuss each of these categories 
with several suggested solutions for smart grid. 
4.4.1.1.  Secure Protocols and Standards 
Secure protocols, such as IPsec, transport layer security (TLS), secure sockets layer (SSL), and secure DNP3, 
play critical roles in data transmission's security and integrity in smart grid network. However, DNP3 and secure 

 
 
 
DNP3 are the most widely used protocols as industrial protocols without any other security mechanism [7]. The 
authors of [55] suggested these protocols for dealing with several attacks, such as man-in-the-middle, jamming, and 
eavesdropping attacks in networks. 

In  [148],  the  IEEE  802.1  1i  protocol  was  proposed  for  more  confidentiality,  integrity,  authentication,  and 
availability in a smart grid network. This protocol was designed to replace the Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) in 
the original IEEE 802.11 with AES- CCM, which had multiple confidentiality and integrity issues [149]. However, 
even after all the enhancements, the IEEE 802.1 1i protocol remained vulnerable to different attacks. In [148], the 
authors proposed a Smart Grid Secure Protocol (SGSP) solution that creates a more secure node-server connection 
to  achieve  DoS  resistance.  In  [150],  the  authors  described a  new  security  protocol  that adds  authentication  and 
preserves integrity and confidentiality. This protocol controls smart grid transmission lines in a sensor network, and 
it preserves the network connectivity during node failures.  

In addition, the authors of [151] proposed a protocol called scalable, secure transport protocol (SSTP) for smart 
grid data collection. They stated that integration of transmission control protocol (TCP) with transport layer security 
(TLS) protocol could provide some scalability issues.  Their simulation results based on SSTP showed a high level 
of  security  and  scalability  for  smart  grid.  They  also  showed  that  this  protocol  can  reduce  memory  overhead 
exponentially.  In  [152],  the  authors  proposed  a  lightweight  protocol  for  reliable  communication  in  smart  grid 
network. This protocol solved the security issues of some other protocols, such as IEC 62351 and IEC 61850. Their 
results show a reduction of the communication cost, solving overhead issues, and improving the privacy and security 
of data exchange.  

In [153], the authors also discussed a countermeasure that uses IPSec and secure neighbor discovery (SEND) 
protocols.  This  study  focused  on  using  these  protocols  to  prevent  any  vulnerabilities  that  may  occur  in 
communication with other protocols, such as IPV4 and IPV6. In [154], the authors described compressed transport 
protocols,  such  as  the  datagram  transport  layer  (DTL)  in  the  network  layer,  which  can  be  considered  a  good 
protection mechanism against cyber-attacks in networks. This protocol can mainly protect networks against cyber-
attacks that influence data integrity and confidentiality. 

Several other studies also introduced and discussed the standards in smart grid as efficient techniques to mitigate 
the detected cyber-attacks in a network. For example, the author of [155] highlighted some standards, including The 
US Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) Regulatory Guide (RG) 5.71 (NRC RG 5.71), IEEE Std 1686-2013 
IEEE  Standard  for  Intelligent  Electronic  Devices  Cyber  Security  Capabilities  (IEEE  1686),  Security  Profile  for 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure (security profile for AMI), and the ISO/IEC 27000 series (or ISO27k for short, 
such as ISO 27001, and ISO 27002) as critical countermeasures in smart grid infrastructure. In general, NRC RG 
5.71 is mainly able to establish a comprehensive analysis for computer systems and smart grid networks, identifying 
the necessary digital assets, and deploying the required security controls. This security measure can mitigate the 
detected attacks in scope of nuclear infrastructure of smart grid networks.   

Another important standard in smart grid is the IEEE 1686, which can provide a complete security control in a 
network. This standard can mitigate any detected vulnerability in the network. In addition, some other standards, 
like security profile for AMI, can provide baseline controls for AMI systems in smart grid infrastructures. Also, , 
ISO27k  series  standards  are  critical  security  controls  for  managing  information  through conducting  information 
security management system (ISMS). These standards are  capable of identifying the detected threats during the 
testing and assessment process in the network. 

In addition, the authors of [156] described a few other standards, such as IEC 62443 -3-3 and IEEE C37.240. 
For instance, they discussed in-depth the importance of security controls, such as IEC 62443 -3-3 and IEEE C37.240, 
which can perform security controls and reliable countermeasures mostly through SCADA systems in the network. 
Other standards include NISTIR 7628, IEEE 1686, IEEEE C37.240, IEEE 1402, IEC 62056, and ISO/IEC 19790. 
An overview of essential standards as security controls are provided in Table V.  

Table V. List of Important Security Controls in Smart Grid [155-158]. 

Security Control 

NRC RG 5.71 
ISO 27001, and ISO 27002 
Security profile for AMI 
IEC 62443 -3-3 
IEEE C37.240. 
NISTIR 7628 
IEEE 1686 
IEEE 1402 

Scope 

Security of Nuclear Infrastructure 
Security Information System Management 
Security of AMI 
SCADA 
Security of Communication Substations 
Security of all Components of Smart Grid Infrastructure 
Security of Vehicular-based Communication Systems in Smart Grid 
Security of Electric Power Substation in Smart Grid 

 
IEC 62056 
ISO/IEC 19790 
IEC 62351 
IEEE 2030 
IEC 61400-25 
IEEE 1402 
IEC 62056-5-3 
ISO/IEC 14543 

Security of meter data exchange in Smart Grid 
security characteristics of cryptographic modules 
Security of communication protocols 
Smart Grid interoperability for all components 
Wind power plant component in smart grid 
Security of physical and electrical substations 
Security of AMI component for data exchange  
Security of home electronic system component  

4.4.1.2.  Cryptographic and Authentication  
As previously mentioned, one other basic type of countermeasure techniques in smart grid is cryptography and 
authentication. Most of these techniques aim to protect data integrity, privacy, and confidentiality. In this section, 
we discuss most common cryptographic functions and authentication methods.  

In general, there are two types of cryptographic functions: symmetric and asymmetric functions. In symmetric 
functions, the encryption and decryption keys are the same or a transformation of one another. The well-known 
algorithms  used  as  symmetric  methods  are  advanced  encryption  standard  (AES),  one-time  pad  (OTP),  and data 
encryption standard (DES). In asymmetric methods, different keys are used for encryption or decryption: a public 
key and a private key. The most known asymmetric algorithm is RSA (Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman) [121-122]. In 
fact, these techniques' efficiency depends on various factors, such as computational resources, processing time, and 
time complexity. Another technique is elliptic curve cryptosystems. The authors of [92] introduced elliptic curve 
cryptosystems as a public-key cryptography with the same power as RSA, despite its key size smaller than RSA 
[123].  

 Key management techniques play an important role in encryption and authentication approaches. Public key 
infrastructure (PKI) is a type of key management that guarantees authentication through a network. In [125], the 
authors  discussed  some  smart  grid  requirements  regarding  key  management  approaches,  such  as  secure 
management, scalability, evaluability, and efficiency. These requirements must be followed in order to establish a 
secure  key  management  scheme.  Several  examples  of  key  management  frameworks  are  provided  in  [7]  as  key 
establishment scheme for SCADA systems (SKE), key management architecture for SCADA systems (SKMA), 
advanced key management architecture for SCADA (ASKMA), advanced ASKM (ASKMA+), and scalable method 
of cryptographic key management (SMOCK).  

Authentication methods are widely applied in smart grids as countermeasures. In [124], the authors introduced 
a  privacy-preserving  data  aggregation  scheme  using  authentication  methods  in  the  smart  grid.  Another 
countermeasure in smart grid is blockchain which is a new emerging technology [126] that can bring considerable 
advantages to the smart grid's cyber-security. In blockchain technology, distributed structures or ledgers can store 
digital  data  without  any  central  authority  in  peer-to-peer  networks.  It  provides  potential  solutions  as  a 
countermeasure approach, particularly for preventing or eliminating different cyber-attacks, such as man-in-the-
middle attacks [127-130] and eavesdropping attacks [128, 130].  

4.4.1.3.  Intrusion Prevention 
Any malicious activity in the network, called intrusion, has to be prevented or eliminated to enhance smart grid 
performance. One of the traditional methods of preventing attacks on any system is to use firewalls and antivirus.  
The authors of [131] defined firewalls as a software or hardware systems that can monitor network activities by 
using several protocols or policies; however, using firewalls and antivirus cannot effectively deal with unknown or 
sophisticated cyber-attacks. For this purpose, other security techniques, such as network data loss prevention (DLP), 
intrusion  prevention  systems  (IPS),  security  information  and  event  management  systems  (SIEM),  File  integrity 
monitoring (FIM), and automated security compliance have been proposed to diminish or prevent the impacts of 
cyber-attacks on the network.  

In  general,  DLP  is  a  system  that  can  prevent  the  theft  or  loss  of  data  through  the  network,  while  IPS  is  an 
intrusion  system  that  can  prevent  the  identified  attacks  in  the  network.  IPS  and  DLP  observe  the  network 
continuously, identifying malicious activities and abnormalities, and reporting them to the network administrator to 
prevent them.  In [160], the authors evaluated thirty-seven different IPS for smart grid in terms of their architecture, 
intrusion  methodology,  and programming  characteristics.  They  also  specified  that  none of  these  IPS  has  a  self-
healing mechanism that they can help during emergencies. In [161], the authors proposed an IPS that mainly protects 
ZigBee-based  home  area  networks  in  the  smart  grid  against  multiple  attack  types.  Their  simulation  results 
demonstrate  that  this  proposed  system  secures  the  network  against  multiple  attacks,  such  as  spoofing, 
eavesdropping, and DoS attacks.  

 
In addition, a few studies used DLP systems as techniques to prevent cyber-attacks in the network. For example, 
the  authors  of  [162]  mentioned  DLP  as  a  monitoring  system  that  can  diminish  the  impact  of  any  breach  or 
vulnerabilities in the network; however, this technique usually cannot ensure security for heterogeneous networks 
such as a smart grid. To address this issue, several other security mechanisms, such as  security information and 
event management systems (SIEM) and automated security compliance, have been proposed to prevent possible 
intrusions in a network and reduce the risk of cyber-attacks in smart grid. For instance, SIEM can connect security 
information management (SIM) and security event management (SEM) system. This system constantly analyzes 
events and provides security alerts if anything unusual occurs [163]. In smart grid, the authors of [164] stated that 
this system can be used as a good technology to prevent cyber-attacks.  

Another practical solution to prevent intrusion in a network is file integrity monitoring (FIM) that prevents any 
changes in sensitive data and files and determines the possible breaches in the network. In [165], the authors applied 
the FIM system to protect the integrity of consumers' sensitive data and privacy in smart grid networks. In [166], 
the authors introduced another technique, called automated security compliance, which is considered an automated 
tool in the network. The proposed automated security compliance can check through smart grid components in order 
to guarantee the system configurations are updated. This tool can show a fault in any smart grid component, leading 
to a security breach in other components. Another practical solution to mitigate the detected intrusion in smart grid 
network  is  to  sanitize  the  dataset.  For  instance,  SQL  injection  attacks  mainly  happen  when  a  malicious  SQL 
statement is submitted to a web form. To prevent such attacks, sanitizing the dataset can be effective approach in 
the network [167].  

Address space layout randomization (ASLR) is yet another countermeasure in smart grid networks. ALSR is 
defined as a memory-protection technique for any network against buffer-overflow attacks. These techniques can 
insert  an  address  space  target  in  any  unpredictable  locations  of  the  network.  Hence,  ASLR  can  reduce  or  even 
prevent the risk of memory corruptions in smart grid network. Other simple mitigation techniques for detecting 
cyber-attacks  are  web  browser  extensions  (for  users),  Spam  Ware,  and  moving-target  defense.  Moving-target 
defense techniques (MTD) consist of several technologies which are required to increase their security resilience 
through improving their software diversity. MTD techniques in smart grid are considered as crucial techniques to 
defer  any  blended  cyber-attacks.  For  instance,  the  authors  of  [168]  proposed  a  MTD-based  technique  that  is 
considered as a defense technique in order to mitigate detected false data injection attacks in the network. Their 
simulation  results  demonstrated  that  the  proposed  approach  can  reduce  the  attacker’s  ability  to  estimate  the 
underlying space model, and that can prevent such cyber-attacks in network. 

4.4.1.4.  Education 
In smart grid, utility services play a significant role in preventing cyber-attacks. For this purpose, the authors of 
[133] recommended that suitable security training and education for both employees and customers can efficiently 
prevent  the  impact  of  some  attacks  on  networks.  For  example,  tailgating  attacks,  a  common  type  of  social 
engineering  attacks,  can  be  prevented  by  training  professionals.  More  precisely,  employees  are  supposed  to  be 
trained never to give access to any users who do not have badges to access the inside of the utility company, and 
employees  need  to  have  IDs  to  access  to  the  network  [159].  Moreover,  employees  may  be  required  to  discard 
sensitive data and materials and important files to avoid such attacks.  

Some  companies  implemented  security  defense  frameworks  to  analyze  and  mitigate  cyber-attacks  in  their 
networks. Using these frameworks, they can analyze consumers’ profiles to show the existing threats and attacks in 
smart grid. However, this is not sufficient to minimize the impacts of cyber-attacks. They also need to increase the 
awareness of employees about cyber-attacks, such as social engineering, and how to prevent them. Another security 
education is to report security incidents to the IT support team. Reporting incident procedures may help the utility 
services identify possible vulnerabilities and malicious actions for further reference and avoid that they happen in 
the  future.  In  addition  to  employee  education,  users  are  responsible  for  preventing  cyber-attacks  on  smart  grid 
networks. Users must avoid letting someone use their personal ID or password. They also need to be check if they 
are using legitimate websites before entering any personnel information. Another important venue for cyber-attacks 
are emails;  users as well as employees have to verify that the email is coming from the utility company before 
clicking on  any link embedded in the email [81]. 

4.4.1.5.  Access Control and Cyber-Security Policies 

 
There are a variety of strategies that are effective in managing smart grid networks and determining privileges’ 
access to users and employees. These strategies mainly manage permissions along with providing assurance for an 
enterprise in a scalable solution. For example, policy-based access control techniques, also known as attribute-based 
access  control,  are  practical  solutions  to  tackle  data  security  and  management.  In  smart  grid  infrastructure, 
authorized  employees  are  required  to  define  some  authorization  policies  in  order  to  give  permissions  to  other 
employees  and  users.  These  policies  mostly  show  the  regulations  for  individuals  to  provide  protection  against 
physical vulnerabilities or cyber-attacks.  

Furthermore, integrity checking policy is another method to check if the data has been altered. Therefore, any 
changes to the network can be observed, and a set of core controls can be applied. Integrity checking in smart grid 
networks can be performed as a security countermeasure and an indicator of malicious activity. Integrity checking 
methods can be monitored by authorized employees. Another countermeasure in this category is associated with 
physical protections. A physical protection is a set of hardware, software, data, and network that protect a network 
from external or internal vulnerabilities [181] and actions that may cause serious loss or damage to the infrastructure. 
In addition, a physical protection is an efficient approach in dealing with meter measurement modification attacks 
that can happen accidentally or intentionally when AMI reports incorrect measurements [167].  

Security policies can also improve the security of a smart grid network and reduce the impact of cyber-attacks. 
These policies are primarily defined by authorized mangers or higher authorities, and they change over time. Such 
security policies include acceptable user policies, risk assessment standards, personnel security policies, end user 
key protection controls, and monitoring and logging policies. Although these policies usually focus on providing 
confidentiality and integrity, they cannot individually guarantee efficient protection in smart grid. Therefore, using 
several other security controls are considered as necessary steps to secure the network [182].   

4.4.2.  Protective- Based Countermeasures 
In this section, we discuss two main categories of protective-based countermeasures, namely spread spectrum 

and game theory-based techniques. 

4.4.2.1.  Spread Spectrum Techniques 
In smart grid, spread spectrum techniques are defined as a major approach in which a generated signal with 
specific bandwidth is deliberately spread in a frequency domain leading to a wider bandwidth. Spread spectrum 
techniques are known as effective techniques to prevent jamming attacks in networks. These techniques can be 
divided into frequency hopping (FHSS) and direct sequence (DSSS). In the following, we briefly describe these two 
types in the scope of smart grid infrastructure.  

In FHSS techniques, signals are transmitted by changing a carrier frequency among several distinct occupied 
frequencies. In [169, 170], the authors introduced an FHSS technique to provide protection against jamming and 
collision attacks in the network. Their results showed that the total required bandwidth of this technique is wider 
than similar data with a single carrier frequency. In [60], the authors mentioned the advantages of FHSS techniques 
as countermeasures, including dealing effectively with the multipath effect.  

DSSS techniques are used to decrease the overall signal interference. The direct sequence creates the transmitted 
signals much higher than the information signals. For example, in [171], the authors used a DHSS-based approach 
to  mitigate  the  detected  jamming  attacks  in  the  network.  In  this  study,  the  authors  conducted  their  approach 
according to the dynamic tree-based scheme; however, it generates a huge maintenance overhead. Although the 
proposed method provided good protection against jamming attacks at the physical layer, this technique required 
very expensive computational resources. In [172], the authors also investigated the use of a DSSS technique by 
applying code division multiple access (CDMA) to prevent jamming attacks in the network. In [173], the authors 
recommended a hybrid approach that combines FHSS and DSSS to protect the network against jamming attacks. 
The authors compared their results with FHSS and DSSS, and concluded that a hybrid of FHSS/DSSS can provide 
a low probability of detection, low probability of interception, and improvement of the ability to deal with near far 
problems. 

4.4.2.2.   Game Theory-Based Techniques 
Game theory-based techniques are considered as mathematical models that have strategic interactions among 
rational decision makers [174]. In [175], the authors proposed a two-layer game theory prevention technique for 
false data injection attacks in smart grid. In this study, their proposed approach used data from multiple sources in 

order to increase the prevention rates of attacks. So, they developed a zero-sum static game theory that optimize the 
deployment of various defense resources. The authors of [176] also proposed a game theory model based on the 
minimax regret method. This multi-level game theoretic framework provides a cost-effective and computationally 
efficient approach for large-scale power systems and smart grid infrastructure. 

In [177], the authors introduced an approach based on game theory for defending against cyber-attacks in smart 
grid.  In  this  work,  they  applied  a  game  theory-based  method  which  can  identify  cyber-attacks  for  smart  energy 
scheduling of smart grid. The authors of [178] also designed a game theory approach to prevent against dynamic 
cyber-attacks in smart grid networks. Their model strategically identifies the chronological order of cyber-attacks 
that can occur, then protects the network against these attacks. Their simulation results proved that the proposed 
model is good and effective in detecting cyber-attacks. 

The authors of [179] developed a game theory-based technique for smart grid, which according to their results, 
is 4.5 times faster than other existing studies. This technique also achieves a low communication and storage cost.  
In [180], the authors also proposed a system, using dynamic game theory technique, as countermeasure that analyzes 
the attacks in cyber-physical system of the network. They mostly used a hybrid model that combines particle swarm 
optimization technique, game theory, and sequential quadratic programming technique to validate their model.  

4.5. Comparison and Discussion 

Each detection and countermeasure category  has some advantages and disadvantages. In this section, we briefly 
describe these benefits and shortcomings of these techniques as shown in Table V and VI.  As we discussed earlier, 
our proposed classification has different categories, namely localization-based, AI-based, prediction models, and 
intrusion detection systems. A comprehensive summary of advantages and disadvantages of these techniques are 
provided  in  Table  V.  As  shown  in  Table  V,  localization-based  techniques,  the  first  category  of  the  detection 
classification,  have  some  limitations,  such  as  high  processing  time  and  synchronization.  In  addition,  these 
techniques present lower complexity, and having the locations of the malicious users is not always necessary for 
detecting attacks. 

The second category, AI-based techniques, can provide  a high level of detecting cyber-attacks in smart grid 
networks;  however,  these  techniques,  such  as  machine  learning,  deep  learning,  data  mining,  and  fuzzy  logic 
methods, have a very high implementation cost for smart grid networks. Nevertheless, their detection rates are high. 
Furthermore, these techniques mostly provide a low false alarm rate in risky situations and are also considered as 
the  fastest  techniques  in  detecting  cyber-attacks.  It  is  worth  to  mention  that  AI-based methods  require  a proper 
dataset to test and implement their algorithms; however, due to security reasons, working with real data may not be 
possible in smart grid networks.  

The third category of our detection classification, prediction models, can generally provide a better knowledge 
about the trend of an attack occurrence, while these techniques have to be used along with proper and high-quality 
data. In fact, incorrect and  low-quality data may lead to a poor performance of  these models. In addition, using 
prediction models is one of the main keys of identifying future security risks and attack incidents. Therefore, they 
can be an effective model in detecting cyber-attacks in smart grids.  

One of the most robust and flexible detection methods in smart grid is filtering-based techniques, which usually 
have high computational complexity. These techniques are also simple to develop and their detection rates are high. 
It is also worth to mention that these techniques are very cost effective. Despite all of their benefits, they require a 
fixed threshold, which can be challenging to select.   

The last category of our detection classification presents intrusion detection systems, which are widely used to 
detect multi-step cyber-attacks in the network. These systems are usually used along with other techniques, such as 
AI-based methods. In general, in smart grid networks, there is no need for an authorized user to control the intrusion 
detection systems, and they  mostly perform without any centralized authorizations. Also,  these techniques have 
high rates of false alarm and require high memory storage. Therefore, these systems still need more development 
and improvement to detect complicated attacks in the smart grid. 

Table V. A Discussion of Advantages and Disadvantages Of Different Detection Techniques in Smart Grids.  

Detection Technique 

Localization-based 

AI-based  

Prediction models 

Advantage 

Disadvantage 

Less complexity. 
Always malicious users’ location is not needed. 
Usually high detection rate and low false alarm. 

Analysis of the current and historical data. 
Understanding a better trend. 
Identify potential future risks and opportunities. 

Needs synchronization. 
High processing time. 
For learning process, a proper dataset for training 
and testing is required. 
Incomplete and poor data quality lead to inaccurate 
results. 

 
 
Filtering-based 

Easy implementation. 
Robust. 

Intrusion Detection System  No need to be centralized.  

Usually fixed threshold. 
Usually high computational complexity. 
High false rate. 
High memory storage. 

As presented in Table VI, we compare the proposed countermeasure categories to discuss their advantages and 
disadvantages. According to this table, secure protocols and standards provide flexible solutions to prevent cyber-
attacks in the smart grid. In addition, these methods are simple to manage and maintain; however, there are still no 
protocols in the smart grid infrastructure that guarantee a high level of security. Moreover, secure protocols and 
standards  deal  with  a  limited  frequency  of  communication,  which  may  lead  to  the  lack  of  performance  in  the 
network.  

Cryptographic  and  authentication  techniques  are  also  used  in  confidential  scenarios,  although  their 
implementation  complexity  is  high  and  they  are  an  inefficient  solution.  Another  preventive  countermeasure,  as 
shown in Table VI, is intrusion prevention, which can protect the privacy of the network and users while preventing 
abnormal  activities.  Furthermore,  to  provide  a  higher  security  and  to  mitigate  the  detected  attacks,  intrusion 
prevention methods are not highly recommended to be used without any other techniques.  Education techniques is 
also another category in our countermeasure classification, which is considered as a simple and easy to understand 
method for users. Only educating users, however, is not enough to guarantee any attack prevention. Access control 
and cyber-security policies also are considered as another prevention approach that have a high scalability, which 
is easy to understand. Furthermore, this approach cannot guarantee the protection against cyber-attacks and is only 
compatible with small-scale networks.   

Game theory-based techniques also protect the smart grid against multiple cyber-attacks with optimal solutions 
and high data rates; however, in these methods, it is necessary to have mobile users to develop such techniques. It 
is clear that, in some scenarios, it is impossible to have mobile users. Therefore, game-based countermeasures cannot 
be used in all conditions. Another protective countermeasure is spread spectrum techniques, which provide high 
levels of protection. However, they may have some limitations, such as a complicated implementation for smart 
grids and an inefficient bandwidth. Despite these challenges, spread spectrum techniques can be a good solution to 
mitigate the detected cyber-attacks in smart grids.  

Table VI. A Summary of Advantages and Disadvantages of Countermeasure Techniques in Smart Grids. 

Countermeasure 
methods 
Secure  protocols 
and standards 
Cryptographic  and 
authentication 
Intrusion 
prevention 
Spread 
techniques 
Game 
based 
Education 

spectrum 

theory-

Access control and 
cyber-security 
policies 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Flexibility. 
Simple to manage and maintenance. 
Cryptographic algorithms benefits. 
Confidentiality is recommended. 
Privacy protection. 
Prevent abnormal network activities. 
High level of protection. 

Optimal solution. 
High rates of data. 
Simple. 
Provide  enough  knowledge 
employees. 
High scalability. 
Simple to understand. 

to  users  and 

No high secure protocols in smart grid. 
Limited frequency of communication. 
Implementation complexity. 
Not always efficient. 
Needs  to  implement  with  other  countermeasure  techniques  to  be 
able to prevent attacks. 
Complicated implementations. 
Inefficient bandwidth. 
Mobile users are necessary. 

Not enough to protect and prevent the network against attacks. 

Not ensure protection against attacks. 
Suitable for small-scale networks. 

V. 

Challenges and Future Directions 

With smart grid deployment, this technology is exposed to several cyber-attacks like any other heterogeneous 
system. It is found that there is a plethora of challenges in the security of the smart grid in order to provide a reliable, 
secure, and protective framework. Moreover, there are still several challenges and open questions about the security 
of the smart grid that need to be addressed and answered. Also, most smart grid advancements are in the early stage 
and they are considered more conceptual rather than practical. Therefore, studying challenges and future directions 
play an important role in the advancement of the smart grid. 

For example, the increased number of connected devices with unsecure protocols makes smart grid networks 
vulnerable to new attacks. Each device connected to the network can be considered as a possible point of entry. 
There are numerous studies that aimed to enhance the security of  the smart grid; however,  some of the existing 
techniques have fundamental limitations, and there are still a number of challenges to address. For instance, existing 

 
 
 
 
IDSs still deal with some limitations, such as a low detection accuracy and a high false positive rate. Several studies 
used machine-learning techniques with these systems to improve their performance. However, machine learning 
models require large datasets which are not widely shared by researchers. A few groups share their datasets, and 
these datasets do not include data gathered from real attacks. Therefore, there is a need for developing and sharing 
datasets for machine learning training and validation.  

Cryptographic and authentication techniques barely support AMI  and WAN entities. Several techniques have 
been  proposed  on  this  topic;  however,  these  techniques  are  only  compatible  with  SCADA  systems.  Thus,  one 
research direction is to develop key management techniques specific to AMI and WAN components. For detection 
techniques that use artificial intelligence, the models have to be extensively trained before any cyber-attack happens. 
Therefore, there is a need for techniques that classify not only incoming signals, but also prevent new attacks and 
help the system recover from them. Another issue is the fact that existing techniques deal only with one attack. 
These  techniques  are  inefficient  in  detecting  complex  and  distributed  attacks.  Thus,  there  is  a  need  for  layered 
frameworks  that  can  prevent,  detect,  and  mitigate  cyber-attacks  in  smart  grid  infrastructure.  Regarding  current 
protocols for smart grids, their main purpose is connectivity, not security. None of these protocols provide a high 
level of security. The confidentiality, privacy, integrity, and accountability can easily be violated with such existing 
protocols. Therefore, there is a need for new secure protocols for smart grid networks.  

VI. Conclusion 

The security of smart grid networks is of paramount importance and plays a pivotal role in the implementation 
of smart grid systems. However, prior studies have shown a constrained role in evaluating cyber-security solutions 
for smart grid networks. Therefore, this paper considers the shortcomings of the existing surveys and provides an 
in-depth description of potential attacks that target smart grids and an evaluation of different security solutions. In 
this paper, we propose a benchmarking of cyber-attacks in terms of the integrity, availability, confidentiality, and 
accountability and a classification based on OSI communication layers. Moreover, we present a new classification 
for the existing detection techniques, which is mainly divided into localization-based, AI-based, prediction models, 
filtering  techniques,  and  intrusion  detection  systems.  We  also  classify  the  countermeasure  techniques  into 
preventive  and  protective  techniques.  In  the  preventive  countermeasures,  we  describe  secure  protocols  and 
standards, cryptographic and authentication, intrusion prevention, education, access control,  and required cyber-
security policies approaches. For the protective countermeasure category, we discuss spread spectrum techniques 
and  game  theory  in  the  smart  grid.  Finally,  we  describe  the  existing  challenges  that  can  guide  future  research 
directions.  This  survey  has  highlighted  the  requirements  of  new  solutions,  which  can  collectively  resolve  the 
problems related to security challenges in the smart grid infrastructures without compromising the performance and 
functionalities of this type of network. 

Reference 
[1] Z. Zhang, S. Gong, A. D. Dimitrovski, and H. Li, “Time Synchronization Attack in Smart Grid: Impact and Analysis,” Transactions on Smart 
Grid, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 87-98, 2013.  
[2]  M.  S.  Al-kahtani,  and  L.  Karim,  “A  Survey  on  Attacks  and  Defense  Mechanisms  in  Smart  Grids,” International  Journal  of  Computer 
Engineering and Information Technology, vol. 11, no. 5, pp.94-100, 2019. 
[3]  Y.  Yoldaş,A.  Önen,  S.  M.  Muyeen,  A.  V.  Vasilakos,  A.V.  and  İ.  Alan,  “Enhancing  Smart  Grid  with  Microgrids:  Challenges  and 
Opportunities,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, no. 72, pp.205-214, 2017. 
[4]  A.  Gopstein,  C.    Nguyen, C.  O'Fallon,  N.  Hastings,  and  D.  Wollman,  “NIST  Framework and Roadmap  for  Smart  Grid  Interoperability 
Standards,” National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication (NIST SP), release 4.0, 2021. 
[5] J. Liu, Y. Xiao and J. Gao, “Achieving Accountability in Smart Grid,” Systems Journal, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 493-508, 2014. 
[6] G. Bedi, G. K. Venayagamoorthy, R. Singh, R. R. Brooks and K. Wang, “Review of Internet of Things (IoT) in Electric Power and Energy 
Systems,” Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 847-870, 2018. 
[7] Z. El Mrabet, N. Kaabouch, H.  El Ghazi, and H. El Ghazi. “Cyber-security in Smart Grid: Survey and Challenges,” Computers and Electrical 
Engineering, vol. 67, pp.469-482, 2018. 
[8] M. Z. Gunduz, and R. Das, “Cyber-security on Smart Grid: Threats and Potential Solutions,” Computer networks, vol. 169, pp.107094, 2020. 
[9] C. Peng, H. Sun, M. Yang and Y. Wang, “A Survey on Security Communication and Control for Smart Grids under Malicious Cyber Attacks," 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 1554-1569, 2019. 
[10]  H.  He,  and  J.  Yan,  “Cyber-physical  Attacks  and  Defenses  in  the  Smart  Grid:  a  survey,” IET  Cyber-Physical  Systems:  Theory  & 
Applications, vol.1, no.1, pp.13-27, 2016. 
[11]  B.  B.  Gupta,  and  T.  Akhtar,  “A  Survey  on  Smart  Power  Grid:  Frameworks,  Tools,  Security  Issues,  and  Solutions,”  Annals  of 
Telecommunications, vol. 72, no. 9, pp.517-549, 2017. 
[120] N. Komninos, E. Philippou and A. Pitsillides, “Survey in Smart Grid and Smart Home Security: Issues, Challenges and Countermeasures,” 
Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1933-1954, 2014. 
[13]  X.  Li,  X.  Liang,  R.  Lu,  X.  Shen,  X.  Lin  and  H.  Zhu,  “Securing  Smart  Grid:  Cyber-attacks,  Countermeasures,  and  Challenges,” 
Communications Magazine, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 38-45, 2012. 
[14] J. Sakhnini, H.  Karimipour, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, and G. Srivastava, “Security Aspects of Internet of Things Aided Smart Grids: 
A Bibliometric Survey,” Internet of things, p.100111, 2019. 

 
 
[15] P. Kumar, Y. Lin, G. Bai, A. Paverd, J. S. Dong and A. Martin, “Smart Grid Metering Networks: A Survey on Security, Privacy and Open 
Research Issues,” Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2886-2927, 2019. 
[16] A. S. Musleh, G. Chen and Z. Y. Dong, “A Survey on the Detection Algorithms for False Data Injection Attacks in Smart Grids,” in IEEE 
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2218-2234, 2020. 
[17] R. E. Brown, “Impact of Smart Grid on Distribution System Design,” Power and Energy Society General Meeting - Conversion and Delivery 
of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century, pp. 1-4, 2008. 
[18]  E.  D.  Knapp  and  R.  Samani,  “Applied  Cyber  Security  and  the  Smart  Grid:  Implementing  Security  Controls  into  the  Modern  Power 
Infrastructure,” Elsevier, 2013. 
[19]  S.  G.  I.  Panel,  “Guidelines  for  Smart  Grid  Cyber  Security:  Vol.  1,  Smart  Grid  Cyber  Security  Strategy,  Architecture,  and  High-level 
Requirements, and Vol. 2, Privacy and the Smart Grid,” National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), vol. 7628, 2010.  
[20] M. A. Elgenedy, A. M. Massoud and S. Ahmed, “Smart Grid Self-healing: Functions, Applications, and Developments,” First Workshop 
on Smart Grid and Renewable Energy (SGRE), pp. 1-6, 2015. 
[21] A. Usman and S. H. Shami, “Evolution of Communication Technologies for Smart Grid Applications,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 19, pp. 191–199, 2013.  
[22]  V.  C.  Gungor  et  al.,  “A  Survey  on  Smart  Grid  Potential  Applications  and  Communication  Requirements,”  Transactions  on  Industrial 
Informatics, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 28–42, 2013. 
[23] A. Mahmood, N. Javaid, and S. Razzaq, “A Review of Wireless Communications for Smart Grid,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 41, pp. 248–260, Jan. 2015.  
[24]  P.  Yi,  T.  Zhu,  Q.  Zhang,  Y.  Wu,  and  J.  Li, “A  Denial of  Service  Attack  in  Advanced Metering  Infrastructure  Network,"  International 
Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 1029–1034, 2014.  
[25] K. Gai, M. Qiu, Z. Ming, H. Zhao, and L. Qiu, “Spoofing-Jamming Attack Strategy Using Optimal Power Distributions in Wireless Smart 
Grid Networks,” Transactions on Smart Grid, pp. 1–1, 2017.  
[26]  P.  Maynard,  K.  McLaughlin,  and  B.  Haberler,  “Towards  Understanding  Man-In-The-Middle  Attacks  on  IEC  60870-5-104  SCADA 
Networks,” Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on ICS \& SCADA Cyber Security Research, pp. 30–42, 2014.  
[27] M. A. Faisal, Z. Aung, J. R. Williams, and A. Sanchez, “Data-streambased intrusion detection system for advanced metering infrastructure 
in smart grid: A feasibility study,” Systems Journal, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 31–44, 2015.  
[28] D. Choi, S. Lee, D. Won, and S. Kim, “Efficient secure group communications for SCADA,” Transactions on power delivery, vol. 25, no. 
2, pp. 714–722, 2010. 
[29] C. Bennett and D. Highfill, “Networking AMI Smart Meters,” Energy 2030 Conference, pp. 1-8, 2008. 
[30]  S.  Zhou,  “The  Effect  of  Smart  Meter  Penetration  on  Dynamic  Electricity  Pricing:  Evidence  from  the  United  States,”  The  Electricity 
Journal, vol. 34, no. 3, pp.106919, 2021. 
[31] D. Pliatsios, P. Sarigiannidis, T. Lagkas, and A. G. Sarigiannidis, “A survey on SCADA systems: secure protocols, incidents, threats and 
tactics,” Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 3, pp.1942-1976, 2020. 
[32] Graham, James H., and Sandip C. Patel. “Security Considerations in SCADA Communication Protocols,” 2004. 
[33] B. Chai, J. Chen, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, "Demand Response Management with Multiple Utility Companies: A Two-Level Game Approach," 
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 722-731, 2014. 
[34]  C.  Gomez  and  J.  Paradells,  “Wireless  Home  Automation  Networks:  A  Survey  of  Architectures  and  Technologies,”  Communications 
Magazine, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 92–101, 2010. 
[35] S. Ahmed, T. M. Gondal, M. Adil, S. A. Malik and R. Qureshi, “A Survey on Communication Technologies in Smart Grid,” PES GTD 
Grand International Conference and Exposition Asia (GTD Asia), pp. 7-12, 2019. 
[36]  V.  Terzija,  G.  Valverde,  D.  Cai,  P.  Regulski,  V.  Madani,  J.  Fitch,  S.  Skok,  M.  M.  Begovic,  and  A.  Phadke,  “Wide-area  Monitoring, 
Protection, and Control of Future Electric Power Networks,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, no. 1, pp. 80–93, 2011. 
[37] C.-H. Lo and N. Ansari, “The Progressive Smart Grid System from Both Power and Communications Aspects,” Communications Surveys 
and Tutorials, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 799–821, 2012. 
[38]  S.  Elyengui,  R.  Bouhouchi,  and  T.  Ezzedine,  “The  Enhancement  of  Communication  Technologies  and  Networks  for  Smart  Grid 
Applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1403.0530, 2014. 
[39] Kabalci, Yasin, “A survey on smart metering and smart grid communication,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 57, pp.  302-
318, 2011. 
[40] V. C. Gungor et al., “Smart Grid Technologies: Communication Technologies and Standards,” Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 
7, no. 4, pp. 529-539, 2011. 
[41] Y. Peizhong, A. Iwayemi, and C. Zhou, “Developing ZigBee Deployment Guideline under WIFI Interference for Smart Grid Applications,” 
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 110–120, 2011. 
[42] C. Gezer and C. Buratti, “A ZigBee Smart Energy Implementation for Energy Efficient Buildings,”  Vehicular Technology Conference 
(VTC Spring), pp. 1–5, 2011. 
[43]  R.  P.  Lewis,  P.  Igic,  and  Z.  Zhongfu,  “Assessment  of  communication  methods  for  smart  electricity  metering  in  the  UK,”  PES/IAS 
Conference Sustainable Alternative Energy (SAE), pp. 1–4, 2009. 
[44] N. Bressan, L. Bazzaco, N. Bui, P. Casari, L. Vangelista and M. Zorzi, “The Deployment of a Smart Monitoring System Using Wireless 
Sensor and Actuator Networks,” International Conference on Smart Grid Communications, pp. 49-54, 2010. 
[45] A. A. Khan, M. H. Rehmani and M. Reisslein, “Cognitive Radio for Smart Grids: Survey of Architectures, Spectrum Sensing Mechanisms, 
and Networking Protocols,” Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 860-898, 2016. 
[46] M. Zhai, “Transmission Characteristics of Low-Voltage Distribution Networks in China Under the Smart Grids Environment,” Transactions 
on Power Delivery, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 173-180, 2011. 
[47]  V.  Paruchuri,  A.  Durresi  and  M.  Ramesh,  “Securing  Powerline  Communications,” International  Symposium  on  Power  Line 
Communications and Its Applications, pp. 64-69, 2008.  
[48] D. M. Laverty, D. J. Morrow, R. Best and P. A. Crossley, “Telecommunications for Smart Grid: Backhaul Solutions for the Distribution 
Network,” PES General Meeting, pp. 1-6, 2010. 

[49] S.M. Bellovin, “Security problems in the TCP/IP protocol suite,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 19,no 2, pp. 
32-48, 1989 
[50] M. Talaat, A. S. Alsayyari, A. Alblawi, and A. Y. Hatata, “Hybrid-cloud-based Data Processing for Power System Monitoring in Smart 
Grids,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 55, pp.102049, 2020. 
[51] A. Ortega, A. A. Shinoda, C. M. Schweitzer, F. Granelli, A. V. Ortega, and F. Bonvecchio, “Performance Evaluation of the DNP3 Protocol 
for Smart Grid Applications over IEEE 802.3/802.11 Networks and Heterogeneous Traffic,” Recent Advances in Communications, 2014. 
[52]  P.  Huitsing,  R.  Chandia,  M.  Papa,  and  S.  Shenoi,  “Attack  Taxonomies  for  the  Modbus  Protocols,” International  Journal  of  Critical 
Infrastructure Protection, vol. 1, pp. 37-44, 2008. 
[53] M. Kuzlu, M. Pipattanasompom and S. Rahman, “A Comprehensive Review of Smart Grid Related Standards and Protocols,” International 
Istanbul Smart Grid and Cities Congress and Fair (ICSG), pp. 12-16, 2017. 
[54] R. E. Mackiewicz, "Overview of IEC 61850 and Benefits,” Power Engineering Society General Meeting, pp. 8, 2006. 
[55] W. Wang, and Z. Lu, “Cyber Security in the Smart Grid: Survey and Challenges,” Computer networks, vol. 57, no. 5, pp.1344-1371, 2013. 
[56] D. B. Rawat and C. Bajracharya, “Cyber Security for Smart Grid Systems: Status, Challenges and Perspectives,” Southeast Conference, pp. 
1-6, 2015. 
[57] Z. A. Baig, and A. Amoudi, “An Analysis of Smart Grid Attacks and Countermeasures,” Journal of Communications, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 473-
479, 2013. 
[58]  F.  Aloul,  A.  R.  Al-Ali,  R.  Al-Dalky,  M.  Al-Mardini,  and  W.  El-Hajj,  “Smart  Grid  Security:  Threats,  Vulnerabilities  and 
Solutions,” International Journal of Smart Grid and Clean Energy, vol.1, no. 1, pp. 1-6, 2012. 
[59] B.B. Gupta, and A. Dahiya, “Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) Attacks: Classification, Attacks, Challenges and  Countermeasures,” 
CRC Press, 2020.  
[60] V. Y. Pillitteri, V.Y. and T. L. Brewer, “The Smart Grid Interoperability Panel – Cyber Security Working Group, Smart Grid Cyber Security 
Guidelines,” pp. 1–597, 2014. 
[61]  S.  N.  Islam,  Z.  Baig  and  S.  Zeadally,  “Physical  Layer  Security  for  the  Smart  Grid:  Vulnerabilities,  Threats,  and  Countermeasures,” 
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 6522-6530, 2019. 
[62] A. Sinha, R. Vyas, V. Subramanian, and O.P.  Vyas, “ Critical Infrastructure Security: Cyber-Physical Attack Prevention, Detection, and 
Countermeasures,”   Quantum Cryptography and the Future of Cyber Security, pp. 134-162, 2020. 
[63]  D.  Kemi,  X.  Ren,  D.  E.  Quevedo,  S.  Dey,  and  Ling  Shi,  “Defensive  Deception  against  Reactive  Jamming  Attacks  in  Remote  State 
Estimation,” Automatica, vol. 113, pp. 108680, 2020.    
[64] A. Mpitziopoulos, D. Gavalas, C. Konstantopoulos and G. Pantziou, “A Survey on Jamming Attacks and Countermeasures in WSNs,” 
Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 42-56, 2009.   
[65]  Y.  Arjoune,  F.  Salahdine, M.  S.  Islam,  E.  Ghribi  and  N. Kaabouch, “A  Novel  Jamming  Attacks  Detection Zubair  Approach Based on 
Machine Learning for Wireless Communication,” International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), pp. 459-464, 2020. 
[66] M. Z. Gunduz and R. Das, "Analysis of Cyber-attacks on Smart Grid Applications,” International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and 
Data Processing (IDAP), pp. 1-5, 2018. 
[67]  D.  Karagiannis,  and  A.  Argyriou,  “Jamming  Attack  Detection  in  a  Pair  of  RF  Communicating  Vehicles  using  Unsupervised  Machine 
Learning,” Vehicular Communications, vol. 13, pp.56-63, 2018. 
[68] M. R. Manesh, J. Kenney, W. C. Hu, V. K. Devabhaktuni and N. Kaabouch, “Detection of GPS Spoofing Attacks on Unmanned Aerial 
Systems,” Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), pp. 1-6, 2019.  
[69] J. Sengupta, S. Ruj, and S. D. Bit, “ A comprehensive survey on attacks, security issues and blockchain solutions for IoT and IIoT.” Journal 
of Network and Computer Applications, VOL. 149, pp.102481, 2020. 
 [70] V. Delgado-Gomes, J. F. Martins, C. Lima, and P. N. Borza, “Smart Grid Security Issues,” International Conference on Compatibility and 
Power Electronics (CPE), pp. 534–538, 2015. 
[71]  T. Talaei Khoei, S. Ismail, and N. Kaabouch, “Dynamic Selection Techniques for Detecting GPS Spoofing Attacks on UAVs,” Sensors, 
vol. 22, no. 2, p. 662,  2022. 
 [72] L. Xiao, Y. Li, G. Han, G. Liu and W. Zhuang, “PHY-Layer Spoofing Detection With Reinforcement Learning in Wireless Networks," 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 10037-10047, 2016.    
[73] M.  Mavani, and K. Asawa, “Modeling and Analyses of IP Spoofing Attack in 6LoWPAN Network,” Computers and Security, vol. 70, pp. 
95-110, 2017.     
[74] W. Yin, P. Hu, J. Wen, and H. Zhou, "Ack Spoofing on Mac-layer Rate Control: Attacks and Defenses," Computer Networks, vol.171, 
pp.107133, 2020. 
[75]  Y.  Wang,  T.  T.  Gamage  and  C.  H.  Hauser,  “Security  Implications  of  Transport  Layer  Protocols  in  Power  Grid  Synchrophasor  Data 
Communication,” Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 807-816, 2016.    
[76]  T.  Lieskovan,  J.  Hajny  and  P.  Cika,  “Smart  Grid  Security:  Survey  and  Challenges,” International  Congress  on  UltraModern 
Telecommunications and Control Systems and Workshops (ICUMT), pp. 1-5, 2019. 
[77] G. Dileep, “A survey on smart grid technologies and applications,” Renewable Energy, vol. 146, pp.2589-2625, 2020. 
[78] K. Tazi, F. Abdi and M. F. Abbou, “Review on Cyber-physical Security of the Smart Grid: Attacks and Defense Mechanisms,” International 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Conference (IRSEC), pp. 1-6, 2015.  
[79] J. Kim and L. Tong, “On Topology Attack of a Smart Grid: Undetectable Attacks and Countermeasures,”  Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications, vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 1294-1305, 2013.  
[80]  R.  Oppliger,  R.  Hauser,  and  D.  Basin,  “SSL/TLS  Session-aware  User  Authentication–Or  How  to  Effectively  Thwart  the  Man-in-the-
middle,” Computer Communications, vol. 29, no. 12, pp.2238-2246, 2006. 
[81] S. Fatima, and N. Kaabouch. “Social Engineering Attacks: A Survey.” Future Internet, vol. 11, no. 4, pp.  89, 2019.   
[82] K. N.  Ambili, and J. Jose, “Trust Based Intrusion Detection System to Detect Insider Attacks in IoT Systems,” Information Science and 
Applications, pp. 631-638, 2020.   
[83] S. Wang, S. Zhu and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain-based Mutual Authentication Security Protocol for Distributed Radio Frequency Identification 
(RFID) Systems,” Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC), pp. 00074-00077, 2018. 
[84] H. K. Patil, D. Wing, and T. M. Chen, “VoIP Security,” Computer and Information Security Handbook, pp. 871-886, 2013. 
[85] W. Han, and Y. Xiao, “Privacy Preservation for V2G Networks in Smart Grid: A Survey,” Computer Communications, vol. 91, pp. 17-28, 
2016.  

[86] M. M. Najafabadi, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, C. Kemp, N. Seliya and R. Zuech, “Machine Learning for Detecting Brute Force Attacks at the 
Network Level,” International Conference on Bioinformatics and Bioengineering, pp. 379-385, 2014.  
[87] T. Gautam and A. Jain, “Analysis of brute force attack using TG — Dataset,” SAI Intelligent Systems Conference (IntelliSys), pp. 984-988, 
2015. 
[88] P. C. van Oorschot, “Intrusion Detection and Network-Based Attacks,” Computer Security and the Internet, pp. 309-338, 2020. 
[89] F. S. Rietta, “Application Layer Intrusion Detection for SQL Injection,” Annual Southeast regional conference, pp. 531-536. 2006. 
[90] F. Salahdine, and N. Kaabouch, “Security Threats, Detection, and Countermeasures for Physical Layer in Cognitive Radio Networks: A 
Survey,” Physical Communication, vol. 39, p.101001 2020. 
[91] P. Jokar, N. Arianpoo, and V. C. Leung, “Spoofing Detection in IEEE 802.15. 4 Networks Based on Received Signal Strength,” Ad hoc 
networks, vol. 11, no. 8, pp.2648-2660, 2013. 
[92]  F.  Zafari,  A.  Gkelias  and  K.  K.  Leung,  “A  Survey  of  Indoor  Localization  Systems  and  Technologies,”  Communications  Surveys  and 
Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2568-2599, 2019. 
[93] L. Wang, and A. M. Wyglinski, “Detection of Man‐in‐the‐middle Attacks using Physical Layer Wireless Security Techniques,” Wireless 
Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 16, no. 4, pp.408-426, 2016. 
[94] B. Chatfield and R. J. Haddad, “RSSI-based Spoofing Detection in Smart Grid IEEE 802.11 Home Area Networks,” Power and Energy 
Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference (ISGT), pp. 1-5, 2017. 
[95]  S.  Misra,  A.  Ghosh,  A.  P.  S.  P.  and  M.  S.  Obaidat,  “Detection  of  Identity-Based  Attacks  in  Wireless  Sensor  Networks  Using  Signal 
prints,” Conference on Green Computing and Communications and Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing, pp. 35-41, 2010. 
[96] P. Jokar, H. Nicanfar, and V. C. M. Leung, “Specification-based Intrusion Detection for Home Area Networks in Smart Grids,” Conference 
on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), pp. 208–213, 2011. 
[97]  M.  A.  Ferrag,  L.  Maglaras,  A.  Derhab,  and  H.  Janicke,  “Authentication  Schemes  for  Smart  Mobile  Devices:  Threat  Models, 
Countermeasures, and Open Research Issues,” Telecommunication Systems, vol. 73, no. 2, pp.317-348, 2020. 
[98] P. Jokar and V. Leung, “Intrusion Detection and Prevention for Zigbee-based Home Area Networks in Smart Grids,” Transactions on Smart 
Grid, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2016. 
[99]  A.  Atassi,  N.  Sayegh,  I.  Elhajj, A.  Chehab,  and  A. Kayssi,  “Malicious  Node  Detection  in  Wireless  Sensor  Networks,”  Conference on 
Advanced Information Networking and Applications Workshops, pp. 456–461, 2013. 
[100] Y. Chen, J. Yang, W. Trappe, and R. P. Martin, “Detecting and Localizing Identity-based Attacks in Wireless and Sensor Networks,” 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 2418–2434, 2010. 
[101]  R.  Maivizhi  and  S.  Matilda,  “Distance  Based  Detection  and  Localization  of  Multiple  Spoofing  Attackers  for  Wireless  Networks,” 
Conference on Computation of Power, Energy, Information and Communication (ICCPEIC), pp. 63–67, 2014. 
[102] M. Bouabdellah, E. Ghribi and N. Kaabouch, “RSS-Based Localization with Maximum Likelihood Estimation for PUE Attacker Detection 
in Cognitive Radio Networks,” Conference on Electro Information Technology (EIT), 2019. 
[103] M. Cheng, Y. Ling and W. B. Wu, “Time Series Analysis for Jamming Attack Detection in Wireless Networks,” Global Communications 
Conference, pp. 1-7, 2017.  
[104] M. Delcourt and J. L. Boudec, “Time Difference of Arrival (TDOA) Source-Localization Technique Robust to Time-Synchronization 
Attacks,” Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 2020. 
[105]  Y. Zou  and  H.  Liu,  "Time  Difference  of  Arrival  (TDOA) Localization  with  Unknown  Signal  Propagation  Speed and  Sensor  Position 
Errors," Communications Letters, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1024-1027, 2020. 
[106] R. Peng and M. L. Sichitiu, "Angle of Arrival Localization for Wireless Sensor Networks,” Communications Society on Sensor and Ad 
Hoc Communications and Networks, pp. 374-382, 2006. 
[107]  A.  R.  Kulaib,  R.  M.  Shubair,  M.  A.  Al-Qutayri  and  J.  W.  P.  Ng,  "An  Overview  of  Localization  Techniques  for  Wireless  Sensor 
Networks,” Conference on Innovations in Information Technology, pp. 167-172, 2011. 
[108] F. Zahid, R. Nordin, and M. Ismail, “Recent Advances in Wireless Indoor Localization Techniques and System,” Journal of Computer 
Networks and Communications, vol. 2013, 2013. 
[109] C. Smutz, and A. Stavrou, “Malicious PDF Detection using Metadata and Structural Features,” Annual  computer security applications 
conference, pp. 239-248. 2012. 
[110] J. Wang, W. Tu, L. C. K. Hui, S. M. Yiu and E. K. Wang, “Detecting Time Synchronization Attacks in Cyber-Physical Systems with 
Machine Learning Techniques,” Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), pp. 2246-225, 2017. 
[111] R. A. Sowah, K. B. Ofori-Amanfo, G. A. Mills, and K. M. Koumadi, “Detection and Prevention of Man-in-the-middle Spoofing Attacks 
in MANETs using Predictive Techniques in Artificial Neural Networks (ANN),” Journal of Computer Networks and Communications, 2015. 
[112] G. Prasad, Y. Huo, L. Lampe and V. C. M. Leung, “Machine Learning Based Physical-Layer Intrusion Detection and Location for the 
Smart Grid,” Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing Technologies for Smart Grids (SmartGridComm), pp. 1-6, 2019. 
[113]  A.  Al-Abassi,  H.  Karimipour,  A.  Dehghantanha,  and  R.  M.  Parizi,  “An  Ensemble  Deep  Learning-Based  Cyber-Attack  Detection  in 
Industrial Control System,” in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 83965-83973, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2992249. 
[114]  Z. Wang, H. He, Z. Wan, and Y. Sun, “Coordinated Topology Attacks in Smart Grid Using Deep Reinforcement Learning,” in IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1407-1415, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TII.2020.2994977.  
[115] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, and B. Chen, “Detecting False Data Injection Attacks in Smart Grids: A Semi-Supervised Deep Learning Approach,” 
in IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 623-634, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2020.3010510. 
[116] G. F. Scaranti, L. F. Carvalho, S. Barbon and M. L. Proença, "Artificial Immune Systems and Fuzzy Logic to Detect Flooding Attacks in 
Software-Defined Networks," Access, vol. 8, pp. 100172-100184, 2020. 
[117] H. Reyes, N. Kaabouch, “Jamming and Lost Link Detection in Wireless Networks with Fuzzy Logic,” International Journal of Scientific 
and Engineering Research, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1-7, 2013.  
[118] J. Gomez, and D. Dasgupta, "Evolving Fuzzy Classifiers for Intrusion Detection," Workshop on information assurance, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 
321-323. 2002. 
[119]  S.  Lysenko,  K.  Bobrovnikova,  R.  Shchuka  and  O.  Savenko,  “A  Cyberattacks  Detection  Technique  Based  on  Evolutionary 
Algorithms,” Conference on Dependable Systems, Services and Technologies (DESSERT), pp. 127-132, 2020. 

[120] J. Sakhnini, H. Karimipour and A. Dehghantanha, “Smart Grid Cyber Attacks Detection Using Supervised Learning and Heuristic Feature 
Selection,” Conference on Smart Energy Grid Engineering (SEGE), pp. 108-112, 2019. 
[121] C. H. Tsang, S. Kwong, and H. Wang, “Genetic-fuzzy Rule Mining Approach and Evaluation of Feature Selection Techniques for Anomaly 
Intrusion Detection,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 2373- 2391, 2007. 
[122] R. Elhefnawy, H. Abounaser and A. Badr, “A Hybrid Nested Genetic-Fuzzy Algorithm Framework for Intrusion Detection and Attacks," 
Access, vol. 8, pp. 98218-98233, 2020. 
[123] D. B. Rawat and C. Bajracharya, “Detection of False Data Injection Attacks in Smart Grid Communication Systems,” Signal Processing 
Letters, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1652-1656, 2015. 
[124] M. N. Kurt, Y. Yilmaz and X. Wang, “Distributed Quickest Detection of Cyber-Attacks in Smart Grid,” Transactions on Information 
Forensics and Security, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 2015-2030, 2018. 
[125] K. Manandhar, X. Cao, F. Hu, and Y. Liu, “Detection of Faults and Attacks Including False Data Injection Attack in Smart Grid using 
Kalman Filter,” Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 370–379, 2014. 
[126] B. Li, R. Lu, and G. Xiao, “Detection of False Data Injection Attacks in Smart Grid Cyber-Physical Systems,” Springer, 2020.  
[127]  S.  Qibo,  W.  Shangguang,  Y. Danfeng,  and  Y.  Fangchun,  “An  Early  Stage  Detecting  Method against  SYN  Flooding  Attacks,”  China 
Communication, vol. 4, pp.108-116, 2009.  
[128]  T.  Yang,  “A  Time  Series  Data  Mining  Based  on  Autoregressive Moving  Average  (ARMA)  and  Hopfield  Model  for  Intrusion 
Detection,” Conference on Neural Networks and Brain, pp. 1045-1049, 2005. 
[129] A. H. Yaacob, I. K. T. Tan, S. F. Chien and H. K. Tan, “Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) Based Network Anomaly 
Detection,” Conference on Communication Software and Networks, pp. 205-209, 2010. 
[130] P. Tavolato, H. Schölnast, and C. Tavolato-Wötzl, “Analytical Modelling of Cyber-physical Systems: Applying Kinetic Gas Theory to 
Anomaly Detection in Networks,” Journal of Computer Virology and Hacking Techniques, vol. 16, no. 1, pp.93-101, 2020. 
[131] S. M. Tabatabaie Nezhad, M. Nazari and E. A. Gharavol, “A Novel DoS and DDoS Attacks Detection Algorithm Using ARIMA Time 
Series Model and Chaotic System in Computer Networks,” Communications Letters, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 700-703, 2016. 
[132] S. Bashar, Z. Ding, C. Xiao, “On the Secrecy Rate of Multi-antenna Wiretap Channel under Finite-alphabet Input,” Communication Letter, 
vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 527–529, 2011. 
[133]  M.  Elkashlan,  L.  Wang,  Q.  Duong,  K.  Karagiannidis,  A.  Nallanathan,  “On  the  Security  of  Cognitive  Radio  Networks,”  Vehicular 
Technology, vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 3790–3795, 2014. 
[134]  A. Chaman,  J.  Wang,  J.  Sun, H.  Hassanieh, R. Choudhury,  “Ghostbuster:  Detecting  the  Presence of  Hidden  Eavesdroppers,”  Annual 
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, pp. 337–351, 2018. 
[135]  D.  Geneiatakis,  N.Vrakas,  and  C.  Lambrinoudakis,  “Utilizing  bloom  filters  for  detecting  flooding  attacks  against  Session  Initiation 
Protocol (SIP) based services,” computers and security, vol. 28, no. 7, pp.578-591, 2009. 
[136] I. A. Khan, D. Pi, Z. U. Khan, Y. Hussain and A. Nawaz, “HML-IDS: A Hybrid-Multilevel Anomaly Prediction Approach for Intrusion 
Detection in SCADA Systems,” Access, vol. 7, pp. 89507-89521, 2019. 
[137] G. Efstathopoulos, P. R. Grammatikis, P. Sarigiannidis, V. Argyriou, A. Sarigiannidis, K. Stamatakis,  M. K. Angelopoulos, and S. K. 
Athanasopoulos, “Operational data based intrusion detection system for smart grid,” In 2019 IEEE 24th International Workshop on Computer 
Aided Modeling and Design of Communication Links and Networks (CAMAD), pp. 1-6, 2019. 
[138] D. A. Chekired, L. Khoukhi, and H. T. Mouftah, “Fog-based distributed intrusion detection system against false metering attacks in smart 
grid,” In ICC 2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), p. 1, 2019. 
[139]  B.  Chatfield,  and  R.  J.  Haddad,  “Moving  target  defense  intrusion  detection  system  for  ipv6  based  smart  grid  advanced  metering 
infrastructure,” In SoutheastCon 2017, pp. 1-7, 2017. 
[140] P. Radoglou Grammatikis, P. Sarigiannidis, G. Efstathopoulos, and E. Panaousis, “ARIES: a novel multivariate intrusion detection system 
for smart grid,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 18, p. 5305, 2020. 
[141] N. F. Firoz, M. T. Arefin, and M. R. Uddin, “Performance Optimization of Layered Signature Based Intrusion Detection System Using 
Snort,” In International Conference on Cyber Security and Computer Science, pp. 14-27, 2020. 
[142]  P.  Ioulianou,  V.  Vasilakis,  I.  Moscholios,  and  M.  Logothetis,  “A  signature-based  intrusion  detection  system  for  the  Internet  of 
Things,” Information and Communication Technology Form, 2018. 
[143] S. M. Taghavinejad, M. Taghavinejad, L. Shahmiri, M. Zavvar, and M. H. Zavvar, “Intrusion Detection in IoT-Based Smart Grid Using 
Hybrid Decision Tree,” In 6th International Conference on Web Research (ICWR), pp. 152-156, 2020. 
[144] M. Attia, S. M. Senouci, H. Sedjelmaci, E. H. Aglzim, and D. Chrenko, “An efficient Intrusion Detection System against cyber-physical 
attacks in the smart grid,” Computers & Electrical Engineering, vol. 68, pp.499-512, 2018. 
[145]  H,  J.  Jo, and  J.  W.  Yoon,  “A New  Countermeasure against Brute-force  Attacks  that  Use  High  Performance Computers  for Big  Data 
Analysis,” Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 11, no. 6, p.406915, 2015. 
[146]  Z.  Guo,  Y.  Ni,  W.  S.  Wong  and  L.  Shi,  “Time  Synchronization  Attack  and  Countermeasure  for  Multisystem  Scheduling  in  Remote 
Estimation,” Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 916-923, 2021 
[147]  T.  Mander,  R.  Cheung,  F.  Nabhani,  “Power  system  Distributed  Network  Protocol  3  (DNP3)  data  object  security  using  data  sets,” 
Computers and Security, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 487-500, 2010. 
[148] H. S. Sridhar, M. Siddappa and G. C. B. Prakash, “Design of Secure Communication Protocol for Smart Grid,” Conference on Emerging 
Devices and Smart Systems (ICEDSS), pp. 88-93, 2016. 
[149]  I.  Martinovic,  P.  Pichota,  M.  Wilhelm,  F.A.  Zdarsky,  J.B.  Schmitt,  “Bringing  law  and  order  to  IEEE  802.11  networks—A  case  for 
DiscoSec,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 5, no. 5, pp.510-525, 2009. 
[150] X. Zhang, F. Ye, S. Fan, J. Guo, G. Xu, and Y. Qian, “An adaptive security protocol for a wireless sensor-based monitoring network in 
smart grid transmission lines,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 60-71, 2016.  
[151]  Y.  Kim,  V.  Kolesnikov,  H.  Kim  and  M.  Thottan,  "SSTP:  A  Scalable  and  Secure  Transport  Protocol  for  Smart  Grid  Data 
Collection," International Conference on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), pp. 161-166, 2011. 
[152]  M.  F.  Moghadam,  M.  Nikooghadam,  A.  H.  Mohajerzadeh,  and  B.  Movali,  “A  Lightweight  Key  Management  Protocol  for  Secure 
Communication in Smart Grids,” Electric Power Systems, vol. 178, p.106024, 2020. 
[153]  A.  S.  A.  Mohamed  Sid  Ahmed,  R.  Hassan  and  N.  E.  Othman,  “IPv6  Neighbor  Discovery  Protocol  Specifications,  Threats  and 
Countermeasures: A Survey,” in IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18187-18210, 2017, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2737524. 

[154] C. Hennebert and J. D. Santos, “Security Protocols and Privacy Issues into 6LoWPAN Stack: A Synthesis,” in IEEE Internet of Things 
Journal, vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 384-398, Oct. 2014, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2014.2359538.  
[155] R. Leszczyna, “Standards with cybersecurity controls for smart grid—A systematic analysis,” International Journal of Communication 
Systems 32, no. 6, 2019.  
[156] R. Leszczyna, “A review of standards with cybersecurity requirements for smart grid,” Computers & security 77, pp.262-276, 2018. 
[157] R. Leszczyna, “Cybersecurity and Privacy in Standards for Smart Grids – a Comprehensive Survey,” Computer Standards & Interfaces, 
2017. 
[158] R. Leszczyna, “Standards on cyber security assessment of smart grid,” International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection, 22, pp.70-
89,  2018.[159]  K.  Ivaturi,  and  L.  Janczewski,  “A  Taxonomy  for  Social  Engineering  Attacks,”  Conference  on  Information  Resources 
Management, pp. 1-12, 2011. 
[160] P. I. Radoglou-Grammatikis and P. G. Sarigiannidis, "Securing the Smart Grid: A Comprehensive Compilation of Intrusion Detection and 
Prevention Systems," Access, vol. 7, pp. 46595-46620, 2019. 
[161]  F.  Sadikin,  T.  van  Deursen,  and  S.  Kumar,  “A  ZigBee  Intrusion  Detection  System  for  IoT  using  Secure  and  Efficient  Data 
Collection,” Internet of Things, vol.12, pp.100306, 2020.  
[162]  A.Tolba,  A.  and  Z.  Al-Makhadmeh,  “Predictive  Data  Analysis  Approach  for  Securing  Medical  Data  in  Smart  Grid  Healthcare 
Systems,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 117, pp.87-96, 2021. 
[163] F. Mengese et. al, “Towards GDPR-compliant Data Processing in Modern Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) Systems,” 
Computers and Security, p.102165, 2020. 
[164] M. Shrestha, C. Johansen, J. Noll, and D. Roverso, “A Methodology for Security Classification Applied to Smart Grid Infrastructures,” 
Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection, vol. 28, pp.100342, 2020.  
[165] M. Mohammadpourfard, Y. Weng, M. Pechenizkiy, M. Tajdinian, and B. Mohammadi-Ivatloo, “Ensuring Cybersecurity of Smart Grid 
against Data Integrity Attacks under Concept Drift,” International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems, 119, p.105947, 2020. 
[166] K. W. Ullah, A.S. Ahmed, and J. Ylitalo, “Towards Building an Automated  Security Compliance Tool for the Cloud,” Conference on 
Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications, pp. 1587-1593, 2013. 
[167] E. McCary and Y. Xiao, “Smart Grid Attacks and Countermeasures,” EAI Endorsed Transactions on Industrial Networks and Intelligent 
Systems, vol. 2, no. 2, p. e4, 2015. 
[168] A. Abdelwahab, W. Lucia, and A. Youssef, “Decoy-based Moving Target defense Against Cyber-physical Attacks On Smart Grid,” 2020 
IEEE Electric Power and Energy Conference (EPEC), pp. 1-5, 2020. doi: 10.1109/EPEC48502.2020.9320029. 
[169] O. E. Mouaatamid, M. Lahmer, and M. Belkasmi, “Internet of Things Security: Layered classification of attacks and possible 
Countermeasures,” electronic journal of information technology 9, 2016. 
 [170] M.  Usman,  S.  Raponi,  M.  Qaraqe,  and  G.  Oligeri, “KaFHCa: Key-establishment via  Frequency  Hopping Collisions,”  arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2010.09642, 2020. 
 [171]  J.  T.  Chiang  and  Y.  C.  Hu,  "Dynamic  Jamming  Mitigation  for  Wireless  Broadcast  Networks,"  IEEE  INFOCOM  2008  -  The  27th 
Conference on Computer Communications, 2008, pp. 1211-1219, doi: 10.1109/INFOCOM.2008.177. 
 [172]  Y.  Desmedt,  R.  Safavi-Naini,  Huaxiong  Wang,  C.  Charnes,  and  J.  Pieprzyk,  “Broadcast  anti-jamming  systems,”  IEEE  International 
Conference on Networks. ICON '99 Proceedings (Cat. No.PR00243), pp. 349-355, 1999. doi: 10.1109/ICON.1999.796197. 
[173] R. L. Pickholtz, D. L. Schilling, and L. B. Milstein, “Theory of spread spectrum communications-a tutorial”, IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 
20, no. 5, pp. 855-884, 1982. 
[174] F. Mohammadi, “Emerging Challenges in Smart Grid Cybersecurity Enhancement: A Review,” Energies, vol. 14, no. 5, p.1380, 2021. 
[175] Q. Wang, W. Tai, Y. Tang, M. Ni, and S. You, “A Two-Layer Game Theoretical Attack-Defense Model for a False Data Injection Attack 
against Power Systems,” International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems, vol 104, pp. 169–177, 2019. 
[176] A. Abusorrah, A. Alabdulwahab, Z. Li, and M. Shahidehpour, “Minimax-Regret Robust Defensive Strategy against False Data Injection 
Attacks,” In IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 2068-2079, 2019. 
[177] M. Pilz, F. B. Naeini, K. Grammont, C. Smagghe, M. Davis, J. –C. Nebel, L. Al-Fagih, E. Pfluegel, “Security Attacks on Smart Grid 
Scheduling and Their Defences: A Game-Theoretic Approach,” International Journal of Information Security, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 1–17, 2019. 
[178] S. Hasan, A. Dubey, G. Karsai, and X. Koutsoukos, “A Game-Theoretic Approach for Power Systems Defense against Dynamic Cyber-
Attacks,” International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems, vol. 115, 2020. 
[179] C. Cheng, Y. Qin, R. Lu, T. Jiang, and T. Takagi, “Batten Down the Hatches: Securing Neighborhood Area Networks of Smart Grid in 
the Quantum Era,” in IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 6386-6395, 2019, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2019.2903836.  
[180] B. Gao and L. Shi, “Modeling an Attack-Mitigation Dynamic Game-Theoretic Scheme for Security Vulnerability Analysis in a Cyber-
Physical Power System,” in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 30322-30331, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2973030.  
[181] M. Chahar, A. Dudi, and M. Kumar, “A Review on Physical Protection of Smart Grid,” International Journal of Computer Science and 
Mobile Computing, vol. 5(11), pp. 73-76, 2016. 
[182] S. Roth, T. Barron, S. Calzavara, N. Nikiforakis, and B. Stock, “Complex security policy? A longitudinal analysis of deployed content 
security policies,” In Proceedings of the 27th Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2020. 
[183] T. T. Khoei, G. Aissou, W. C. Hu and N. Kaabouch, "Ensemble Learning Methods for Anomaly Intrusion Detection System in Smart 
Grid," 2021 IEEE International Conference on Electro Information Technology (EIT), 2021, pp. 129-135. 
[184] T. T. Khoei, S. Ismail and N. Kaabouch, "Boosting-based Models with Tree-structured Parzen Estimator Optimization to Detect Intrusion 
Attacks on Smart Grid," 2021 IEEE 12th Annual Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics & Mobile Communication Conference (UEMCON), 2021, 
pp. 0165-0170. 
[185] T. T. Khoei, E. Ghribi, P. Ranganathan and N. Kaabouch, “ A performance comparison of encryption/decryption algorithms for UAV 
swarm communications,” 2021. 

 
