2
2
0
2

t
c
O
5
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
0
9
5
1
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Dichotomy of Cloud and IoT:
Cloud-Assisted IoT From a Security Perspective

Behrouz Zolfaghari, Abbas Yazdinejad, Ali Dehghantanha, Jacob Krzciok, and Khodakhast Bibak

1

Abstract—In recent years, the existence of a signiﬁcant cross-impact between Cloud computing and Internet of Things (IoT) has lead
to a dichotomy that gives raise to Cloud-Assisted IoT (CAIoT) and IoT-Based Cloud (IoTBC). Although it is pertinent to study both
technologies, this paper focuses on CAIoT, and especially its security issues, which are inherited from both Cloud computing and IoT.
This study starts with reviewing existing relevant surveys, noting their shortcomings, which motivate a comprehensive survey in this
area. We proceed to highlight existing approaches towards the design of Secure CAIoT (SCAIoT) along with related security
challenges and controls. We develop a layered architecture for SCAIoT. Furthermore, we take a look at what the future may hold for
SCAIoT with a focus on the role of Artiﬁcial Intelligence(AI).

Index Terms—Cloud-Assisted IoT, Secure Cloud-Assisted IoT, IoT, Cloud Computing.

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

In recent years, cloud computing has been of great interest to
researchers [1] [2]. Its role in providing on-demand services
and resources has opened its way into a variety of techno-
logical environments, ranging from data centers [3], power
systems [3] and video delivery systems [3] to earthquake
command systems [4] and intelligent transportation [3] [5].
A variety of design objectives including fairness [6], fault
tolerance [7], energy consumption [8], [9] and reliability [10]
are considered in the design of cloud computing systems.
However, security is probably the most critical design ob-
jective in this ﬁeld [11] [12] [13] [14], [15] [16].

IoT frequently appears in the ecosystem of Cloud
computing. This technology integrates geographically-
distributed cyber-physical devices or cyber-enabled systems
with the goal of providing strategic services [17], [18]. The
application areas of IoT vary from transport and healthcare
to agriculture and FinTech. Similar to the case of Cloud
computing, security is the most critical objective in the
design of IoT systems [19] [20] [21] [22].

Recent literature reveals a cross-impact between IoT and
Cloud computing, which leads to an inseparable dichotomy.
This dichotomy is illustrated in Figure 1.

Figure 1 introduces the icons we will use in the rest
of this paper for Cloud, IoT, CAIoT and IoTBC. In this
ﬁgure, overlapping parallelograms represent technologies
on top of each other. As seen in the ﬁgure, the dichotomy of
Cloud and IoT leads to two emerging technologies, namely
CAIoT and IoTBC. CAIoT deploys IoT on top of Cloud,
while in IoTBC, Cloud services are provided leveraging IoT
capabilities.

B. Zolfaghari, A. Yazdinejad, and A. Dehghantanha are with the Cy-
ber Science Lab, School of Computer Science, University of Guelph,
Guelph, Ontario, Canada. Email: behrouz@cybersciencelab.org,
ayazdine@uoguelph.ca, adehghan@uoguelph.ca. J. Krzciok and
K. Bibak are with the Department of Computer Science and Soft-
ware Engineering, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio, 45056, USA. Email:
{krzciojj,bibakk}@miamioh.edu

Fig. 1: The Dichotomy of Cloud Computing and IoT

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

provided by the IoT system with consideration
of Cloud requirements.

– Secure IoT-Cloud Communications (Subsec-
tion 3.3): The system designer attempts to
protect the communication between the two
layers from security threats.
Integrated SCAIoT Solutions (Subsection
3.4): Security provisions are applied to the
CAIoT as a whole via secure codesign, inter-
facing and integration.

–

• We identify the challenges faced by each of the afore-
mentioned approaches (Summarized in Subsection
4.1).

• We identify the security controls used by each of
these approaches (Summarized in Subsection 4.2).
• We establish a layered architecture for SCAIoT (sub-

section 4.3.)

• We attempt to anticipate the impact of AI and related
advancements on the future of research in this ﬁeld.
We contribute a future roadmap for further research
in this area (Section 5).

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews existing surveys and sheds light on their short-
comings to highlight our motivations for the work of this
paper. Section 3 discusses approaches towards CAIoT secu-
rity, along with the related challenges and controls. Section
4 summarizes the identiﬁed challenges and controls, and
establishes the layered architecture. Section 5 presents the
future roadmap. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2 EXISTING SURVEYS

Relevant existing surveys are brieﬂy reviewed in this section
by publication year and are categorized based on the role of
AI, future roadmap, security coverage, and strategies they
focused on.

subsectionSurveys on Cloud-Assisted IoT Several re-
search surveys has been conducted on cloud-assisted IoT.
The beneﬁt of these surveys is that they enable the re-
searchers to understand the challenges to overcome to im-
plement secure CAIoT networks and applications.

The authors of [23] presented a vision to merge cloud
computing and IoT. An infrastructure based on IoT Cloud
was designed to mitigate the challenges associated with the
integration of IoT and Cloud Computing. A similar system
to overcome the integration obstacles and to improve the
Quality of Service (QoS) has been proposed in [24]. To deal
with the issue of efﬁcient data storage and retrieval, a similar
framework was developed in [25] where fog computing
and cloud computing were implemented. Moreover, [25]
surveys the beneﬁts and shortcomings of various IoT-based
cloud models. Resource management was further studied
in [26] where the challenges involved in the modeling and
deployment of IoT applications and their mitigation were
discussed.

The authors of [27] discuss the rising complexity of
IoT frameworks used in applications, enterprises, and busi-
ness. They argue that traditional architectures have to be
modiﬁed to handle upcoming challenges. Thus, a compre-
hensive study on IoT framework architectures and their

Fig. 2: SCAIoT: CAIoT with Adopted Security Controls

The dichotomy of Figure 1 needs to be studied form
both sides; CAIoT and IoTBC, each of which brings about a
variety of challenges, issues and considerations. A compre-
hensive survey on each of the technologies can pave the way
for further research. In this survey, we study CAIoT from
a security point of view. The adoption of security controls
by CAIoT gives raise to SCAIoT. The notion of SCAIoT is
demonstrated in Figure 2. (introduced icons will be used in
the rest of this study to represent SCAIoT)

We present a survey on the literature of SCAIoT. We
identify existing approaches towards the design of SCAIoT.
We highlight security challenges faced by each approach.
Moreover, we study the security controls used to address the
challenges. We establish a layered architecture for SCAIoT,
which reﬂects all the identiﬁed approaches. Furthermore,
we develop a future roadmap for SCAIoT with a focus on
the role of AI in the present and the future of this technology.
Although there are some relevant surveys, there are
some shortcoming within them (Discussed in Subsection
2.3), which motivate our work in this paper.

In this review, we seek to answer the following ques-

tions:

• What are the security challenges of SCAIoT? A secu-
rity challenge is a requirement needed to be met for
a system to be secure.

• What are the the security controls need to be accom-
plished in SCAIoT? A security control is a procedure
or a program run in order to deploy, improve or
sustain security in a system.

• What should the architecture of SCAIoT look like?
• What roles does AI play in the future of SCAIoT?

In answering the above questions, we offer the following

contributions:

• We identify the following four approaches towards

the design of SCAIoT (Discussed in Section 3).

–

IoT on Top of Secure Cloud (Subsection
3.1): In this approach, system designers handle
security issues in the cloud layer, while taking
IoT requirements into consideration.

– Secure IoT on Top of Cloud (Subsection 3.2):
In this approach, security requirements are

performance is presented. In [28], multiple architectures
integrating FOG computing, EDGE computing, and mobile
cloud computing have been reviewed and a taxonomy has
been proposed. For instance, [29] studies cloud-based IoT-
enabled smart grids.

Girs, at el. [30] performed a systematic literature review
on Service Level Agreement (SLAs) related to cloud com-
puting and the IoT ecosystem. This work studies the man-
agement of SLAs for cloud computing and IoT. It identiﬁes
relevant literature and ﬂaws and discusses opportunities for
cloud services in IoT. In [28], the authors present a taxonomy
to survey the existing IoT-cloud architectures and classiﬁes
based on various criteria.

In relevant work, Sikarwar, et al. [25] review IoT-enabled
cloud platforms used in the integration with IoT. In addi-
tion, they examine the various applications of fog comput-
ing. The seamless data exchange between IoT devices and
sensors requires outlets for controlling, storing, and analyz-
ing data [31]. Thus, cloud computing and fog computing
were used interchangeably to provide high storage capacity
and processing capability.

Cloud-based IoT has a disadvantage of major power
consumption. Hasan, el at. [32] review research on energy-
efﬁcient schemes for IoT in various cloud environments.
They investigate the results according to previous methods,
and they discuss their shortcomings and possible opportu-
nities which can be investigated in the future to improve
these models.

In [33], the authors primarily discuss the procedure
behind handling sensor observation streams in cloud-based
IoT platforms. They present a method that delivers a com-
plete solution that considers IoT platforms’ challenges and
non-functional requirements, such as platform adaptation,
scalability, and availability. In a related survey, Tata, at
el. [26] investigated opportunities and challenges of IoT ap-
plication architecture. Research and development challenges
in the lifecycle of IoT applications, including modeling,
deployment, and support of non-functional requirements
such as security, privacy, performance and provenance,
were investigated. In this work, the authors summarize the
challenges related to the modeling and deployment of IoT
applications and probable research directions in overcoming
these challenges. The authors of [34] research Platform as
a service (PaaS) aspects of IoT end-user applications. They
have critically reviewed and discussed PaaS on the whole
spectrum of IoT verticals.

TABLE 1: Summary of Existing Surveys

Survey
[23]
[24]
[27]
[30]
[28]
[25]
[29]
[33]
[26]
[34]
[37]
[39]
[40]
[38]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]

Year
2021
2021
2021
2020
2020
2020
2020
2017
2017
2016
2021
2021
2018
2017
2016
2020
2020
2019
2019
2018
2017
2016

CAIoT
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Security
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Lay. Arch.
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

Roadmap
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

3

AI
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No

IoT that provide privacy-preserving data aggregation with-
out public-key encryption is presented in [38]. This paper
presents several open problems with promising ideas to
stimulate more research on Cloud-Based IoT Security and
Privacy.

The author of [39] study IoT data security. This work
Combines the concept of Cloud-based IoT architecture with
different layers toward proposes different security issues
and challenges in IoT. Alsaidi, et al. [40] proposed an
architecture of Cloud-assisted IoT applications for smart
cities, telemedicine, and intelligent transportation systems.
By and large, authors investigate the security threats and
attacks introduced by unauthorized access and misuse of
information collected by IoT devices.

Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) are regarded as intelli-
gent industrial system, is widely used in intelligent trans-
portation [41], smart grids, eHealthcare [42], etc. These
systems primarily use Supervisory Control and Data Ac-
quisition (SCADA) to monitor and control their critical
infrastructure. However, like IoT, these systems pose sig-
niﬁcant security and privacy challenges. The authors of [43]
propose a study related to security challenges that an indus-
trial system faces in an IoT cloud supported environment
and highlight the security challenges prevailing in classical
SCADA systems.

2.1 Surveys on Secure Cloud-Assisted IoT

2.2 Summary

Achieving security in cloud-assisted IoT environments has
been a challenging task [35], [36]. Due to this, various
surveys related to security challenges such as intrusion
detection, threat modeling, etc. were published. Public-key
encryption with search functionality is one of the widely
used cryptographic techniques that help in data retrieval
without decryption. It consists of public-key encryption
with keyword search (PKE-ES), public-key encryption with
equality test (PKE-ET), and plaintext checkable encryption
(PCE). The authors of [37] examine PKE-SF design in terms
of security and performance. Moreover, an architecture
for next-generation mobile technologies on Cloud-based

Table 1 summarizes the surveys reviewed in this section in
order to make it easier to compare them with our work in
this paper.

In Table 1, the ﬁrst entry in each row cites one of the
reviewed surveys. The second column contains the publi-
cation year. This column helps the reader identify outdated
surveys.The third column contains ”Yes” if the related sur-
vey covers CAIoT. It contains ”No” otherwise. The ﬁfth col-
umn indicates whether the survey discusses security or not.
The sixth column contains a ”Yes” for surveys that present
a future roadmap. The seventh column shows whether the
survey studies the role of AI in the future roadmap or not.

4

3.1.1.1 Privacy:

Privacy as a security challenge in CAIoT has been
studied in [51], [52], [53]. The authors propose a three-
party model integrated with two-stage decryption, namely
Paillier based cryptosystem, that allows cloud servers to
interact securely along with Machine Learning Service
Providers (MLSP) by encrypting the data. The tensor-based
multiple clustering methods can be widely used in the
Industrial Internet of Things (IoT) to improve productivity
and quality. Privacy-preserving tensor-based multiple clus-
tering methods on the secure hybrid cloud were proposed
in [54]. This method employs homomorphic cryptosystems
to encrypt object tensors and then uses servers to apply
multiple cluster calculations upon encrypted object tensors.
In addition, security subprotocols are provided to support
multiple clustering methods while considering privacy is-
sues. In similar research work [55] the challenges of privacy-
preserving analytics in healthcare information systems were
discussed. This study is based on kHealth—a healthcare
information system developed and employed for disease
monitoring.

The research work in [55] was extended in [56] to in-
troduce a Symmetric Key InterCloud Authentication and
redeemable Micropayment protocol (SKICAP) for IoT appli-
cations. This protocol ensures that authentication for mobile
IoT devices is handled by edge nodes outside of their home
cloud coverage. It also uses a cryptographic hash function
to protect the device from privacy breaches and is resilient
to security compromise.

3.1.1.2 Trust:

In [57], a 3-tier cloud-cloudlet-device hierarchical trust
management protocol, called IoT-HiTrust, for IoT systems
was presented. This protocols allows an IoT device to report
its experiences and determines the trueness of another IoT
device for service composition by following a simple local-
ized report-and-query paradigm.
3.1.1.3 Attack Resilience:

Regarding attack resilience, blockchain proves to be
a sustainable solution in terms of ﬂexibility, robustness,
and conﬁdentiality. Thus the authors of [58] proposed a
blockchain-enabled distributed security framework using
edge cloud and software-deﬁned networking (SDN) [59].
The SDN-enabled gateway offers early detection of security
attacks by identifying and blocking suspicious network
trafﬁc or activity. Experimental evaluation results prove that
this approach is efﬁcient against various security attacks.
A similar framework was presented in [60] to alleviate
security attacks using the Block-SDoTCloud architecture to
strengthen security in the cloud storage network. To equip
the cloud storage environment with the required facilities,
two leading technologies, i.e., SDN and Blockchain, were
applied.

As an extension of

[58], the authors of [61] proposed a
blockchain-based system that tags a unique device identiﬁer
and uses smart contracts to store data transaction records in
the blockchain. This is done for each IoT device as well as
cloud and user access. It provides distributed records that
can mitigate data tampering and data snitching attacks. The
presented scheme makes use of two different methods to
secure the privacy of IoT data. The ﬁrst method used was
a Merkle Tree data structure, which is used to efﬁciently

Fig. 3: IoT on Top of Secure Cloud

2.3 Motivations

As seen Table 1, although there are a number of surveys
somehow related to CAIoT and related areas, There is no
survey with all of the following features.

• Published recently
Focusing on CAIoT
•
Focusing on security

•
• Developing a layered architecture
• Presenting a future roadmap
Studying the role of AI
•

The main motivation of this review is to address the

above gap.

3 APPROACHES AND CHALLENGES

This section is dedicated to the approaches and challenges
prevailing in IoT over cloud and CAIoT. Most security and
privacy attacks target data during transmission between IoT
devices and the cloud. To address this, various approaches
and their associated challenges are discussed in Subsections
3.1 - 3.4.

3.1 IoT on Top of Secure Cloud

Figure 3 shows the notion of IoT on top of secure Cloud.
Security of IoT-aware Cloud has been studied by researchers
in terms of the following challenges and controls.

3.1.1 Security Challenges

In this subsection, we review existing research works fo-
cusing on different security challenges in CAIoT including
privacy, trust and attack resilience.

and securely encode data. The second method used was
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (pBFT) that allows the
system to continue working if some nodes become corrupt
or fail. These methods are implemented into a blockchain
system for secure IoT data transmission.

3.1.2 Security Controls

3.1.2.1 Authentication:

Due to the continuously raising security challenges [62],
the authors of [63] designed a security model for Cloud-
Based IoT. This model is based on blockchain technology.
It uses identity veriﬁcation algorithms to ensure that the
data is securely stored in the cloud and transmitted from
the cloud to the users. The authors of [63] designed this
scheme to help ensure the trustworthiness of data, low cost
of interactions while providing a high level of security, and
prevent tampering of data. Each of these help to create a
high level of authenticity for data.
3.1.2.2 Encryption:

Cryptography is the art and science of leveraging algo-
rithms, mathematical problems and structures, secret keys,
and complex transforms to keep data conﬁdential while
being stored or transmitted. Modern cryptography is con-
nected with several branches of science and technology
including, but not limited to quantum computing [64], in-
formation theory [65] [66], chaos theory [67] and hardware
technology [68] in its ecosystem. The adoption of Cryptog-
raphy has played a critical role in the evolution of AI [69] in
a way that it cannot be separated from AI anymore.

Using Mystiko Blockchain (which uses a novel smart
contract platform to allow for more throughput of data) [70],
the authors of [71] proposed a lightweight, decentralized,
encrypted cloud storage architecture called Yugala. The Yu-
gala architecture ensures ﬁle conﬁdentiality, eliminates data
deduplication, and increases ﬁle integrity. File conﬁdential-
ity with data deduplication is based on two approaches,
one is based on convergence encryption and double hashing
while the other approach is based on symmetric encryption.
This problem was also studied in [72] where an optimization
process was proposed. This process considers two critical
aspects, the new cloud edge on-demand service model for
allocation of resources and the impact of the application
implemented in terms of cost, performance, and security.

The author of [73] proposed a ﬂexible, economic model
by combining fog computing and cloud computing for
addressing challenges in data processing, effective data
retrieval, secure data storage and dynamic collection of
data. Cloud-based IoT requires large space to store data
in the cloud. In response to this, the authors of [74] pro-
posed a framework to store data using various compression
techniques and used the security standard AES encryption
to secure the data. The scheme is broken up into three
different layers. The ﬁrst layer is a sensor network which is
responsible for collecting the data and then encrypted and
compressed for transmission to the cloud. The next layer
is cloud storage where the encrypted data is transmitted
to. Lastly the client framework is used to decrypt and
decompress the data the client is pulling from the cloud
storage.

In another research work, the author of [75] proposed
a health monitoring system that is connected to an IoT

5

system to transmit data to a local server. In case of any
abnormalities in a patient’s health, the doctors are alerted
via a message or email. In this case, the data transmission
must be highly secured. Shamir’s sharing key algorithm is
used to serve this purpose, where the key and the data
are split and retrieved using threshold cryptography. For
heart diagnosis, a Support Vector Machine (SVM) is used
for prediction. The author of [76] proposed a similar secure
parallel outsourcing scheme to increase the feasibility of the
resource-bound modular exponentiation operation (widely
used in cryptographic computations) for application in
resource-constraint IoT devices. Additionally, an extension
scheme for RSA is designed in this research in order to
provide extra security for IoT devices.

In [77], the authors presented a new variant of RSA
called the Memory Efﬁcient Multi Key generation scheme.
The exchange of sensitive information takes place from
Cloud to IoT and from IoT to IoT devices. This approach
reuses RSA with a diophantine form of the non-linear equa-
tion for memory efﬁciency. The approach exhibited a high
performance in evaluations and it did not record extensive
use of Euclid’s algorithm. Similar research work was con-
ducted by [78] to enforce higher security on sensitive data.
Cryptography plays a vital role in securing the data. Thus,
to enhance the security of data, two-hybrid cryptography
algorithms were proposed. The RSA algorithm and DES
algorithm are used to encrypt the data before storing it in
the cloud.

3.1.2.3 Access Control:

Working toward secure cloud for IoT, the authors of [79]
focused their efforts on making the majority of the out-
sourced data rely on cloud services, which increases the
number of attack points as a side effect. The authors ad-
dress the issue by leveraging Ciphertext-Policy Attribute-
Based Encryption (CP-ABE). This allowed for credentials
to be assigned to users to access encrypted data. CP-ABE
has the issue of incorrect protection of keys and allowing
unauthorized users to access the data. These issues motivate
the authors to create a more veriﬁable access control scheme.
To do this they take advantage of blockchain as a tamper-
proof log that allows for transparency and traceability of
data and modiﬁcations. Access is given to data through the
use of smart contracts and then the details of use is turned
into blocks on the blockchain. Extensive testing completed
by the authors has shown the scheme to be efﬁcient in terms
of resource use, speed, and security.

3.2 Secure IoT on Top of Cloud

The idea behind secure Cloud-aware IoT is illustrated in Fig-
ure 4. In the following subsections, challenges and controls
are studied with respect to this approach.

3.2.1 Security Challenges

3.2.1.1 Privacy:

When focusing on privacy as a security challenge for IoT,
it is of critical importance to consider an identity protection
scheme. This is shown in [80] and is used for symmetric
data encryption. The main objective of the authors is to
create a novel privacy preserving symmetric encryption
method that can take advantage of symmetric encryption’s

6

IoT service platform, NETPIE, which is used to facilitate the
interconnected biometrics on IoT devices. To improve this
further the authors suggest the use of DAEDALUS which
messages NETPIE when malware is present. The system acts
as a secure alerting mechanism.

The amount of land required to produce enough food
for large populations is becoming overwhelming. The use
of IoT can help to maximize production of food on the land
already designated for crops by using different hydroponic
systems. The authors of [88] discuss the design and devel-
opment of an automatic monitoring of an indoor vertical
hydroponic system. There are three main components in this
system, these are: an indoor hydroponic module, a mecha-
nism for monitoring and handling the operation of the sys-
tem, and a two-factor authentication (2FA) to strengthen the
security elements of the system. The authentication system
is designed to ﬁrst have the user login using a user login,
a project login, and ﬁnally an access code to a third party
system. The third party system then sends a notiﬁcation to
the registered users phone to further be authenticated. This
allows for an additional layer of security in these sensitive
IoT networks.

In [89], a lightweight authentication protocol for IoT
devices, called light edge, is proposed. It consists of a three-
layer scheme, the IoT device layer, trust center at the edge
layer, and cloud service providers. Evaluation results show
that the proposed protocol is highly effective against a
number of security and privacy attacks. In [90], the authors
proposed to reuse the existing WIFI infrastructure to connect
the devices to the Internet. They present a tunneled-based
protocol EAP (TEAP) protocol for authorizing IoT devices
from the cloud using the EAP-AKA protocol as an inner
method EAP.

3.2.2.2 Encryption:

The authors of [91] devised a secure, low-cost device
that is employed to detect forced entry via IR. In their
proposal, there is a software unlocking method before the
physical unlocking system that exchanges information in an
encrypted form through a smartphone application over a
secure line.

Encryption can be very costly for systems with limited
computational resources such as in IoT. The authors of [92]
proposed a lightweight model that provides sensitive data
access from IoT owners only to authorized user. To do
this the IoT device will send the data to a semi-trusted
encryption server to encrypt the data. Once encrypted the
data is stored in the cloud to be accessed by data owners.
Here, the IoT owner can manage the authorization with a
single username/password to access their sensitive data.
Preliminary evaluation results show that this model offers
efﬁcient key management for IoT owners.

Another approach to encrypt personal information was
proposed in [93]. Zero-Knowledge proof blockchain solu-
tion is implemented using block inquiry to protect personal
information against security threats. In [94] AES is proposed
is proposed for signal encryption and decryption in elec-
trocardiogram instruments. However, this method does not
perform well with low-power IoT devices.

The research reported in [95] has led to the design of a
model that takes a computational approach towards secure
key generation in order to safeguard the data in CAIoT

Fig. 4: Secure IoT on Top of Cloud

fast processing while preserving the data privacy. The au-
thors take advantage of two layers the outer layer uses
k-anonymity based symmetric encryption. The inner layer
uses random encryption to further improve privacy and
security.Along with the proposed scheme, the authors give
security deﬁnitions for the problem. This provides security
levels for the newly constructed models. Security analysis
done by the authors shows that the proposed scheme is
reasonably secure while remaining energy efﬁcient.

This problem is further discussed in [81], where the au-
thors propose a sensor cloud architecture that adopts secu-
rity considerations as essential design objectives. It is based
on a multi-layer client-server model that separates physical
and virtual instances of the sensors to achieve enhanced
security, privacy, and reliability. The main concept behind
these virtual instances can be secured quickly. It can also
be implemented in real-time. This motivates a lightweight
data privacy scheme proposed in [82] that outsources data
from low-power IoT devices to the mobile cloud computing
system.

3.2.1.2 Trust:

Trust, as a security challenge in CAIoT, has been studied
in a research reported in [83]. The architecture proposed
[83] relies on an edge network and an edge plat-
in
form to reduce resource consumption and guarantee the
trust evaluation mechanism, respectively. Moreover, a data-
centric approach for IoT is introduced [83], where edge
and fog clouds leverage data-centric networks and help
in the optimal handling of upstream data ﬂow. Each IoT
device calculates trust and transmits it to the edge server
for mapping. The scheme uses a trust evaluation mechanism
and service template to take advantage of both of the edge
and fog computing capabilities. Testing done by the authors
show it is very secure and efﬁciently uses resources.

3.2.2 Security Controls

3.2.2.1 Authentication:

Recently, blockchain has
been advocated as a suitable authentication mechanism [84],
[85]. The framework proposed in [86] uses blockchain for
authentication at both the edge and cloud layers. Proof
of Authority (POA) is deployed as to enhance the overall
performance of this system.

Biometric authentication is widely used in various ap-
plications today. But biometric authentication using IoT
devices is challenging. To handle this, an IoT system using
biometric authentication over a cloud-based IoT service is
described in [87]. In this architecture, the system employs an

using encryption. The proposed key generation scheme
consists of the following components.

•

In the ﬁrst component, an encryption service model
based on Support Vector Machine (SVM) is run using
a key generation from the conventional encryption
operation mode with some improvements.

• Optimization techniques are added to the key gen-
eration process to make it computationally more
secure, speciﬁcally for /cloud environment.

3.2.2.3 Access Control:

Nowadays, access to cloud services is rendering a bottle-
neck in single-Cloud infrastructures due to the increasing
demand. To alleviate this bottleneck, the authors of [96]
have proposed a scheme that provides access to the best
IoT services among other services in a multi-cloud IoT. This
scheme consists of the following three stages of operation.

• Choosing the best service among available IoT ser-

vices.

• An authentication stage aimed at authenticating

users during execution.
Service-Level Agreement (SLA) management.

•

3.2.2.4 Reputation Management:

Data leakage and privacy exposure are considered as
serious threats these days. To respond to this challenge, the
author of [97] proposed a reputation evaluation system. The
scheme uses S-AlexNet convolutional neural network and
dynamic game theory to determine a secuirty reputation
for a health care data system. This encourages system ad-
ministrators to provide a high level of privacy for health
data. Furthermore the scores can then be used to protect IoT
systems against privacy attacks.

3.2.2.5

Intrusion Detection:

Intrusion detection is important in any system including
CBIoT. The authors of [98] ﬁrst break down the gaps of IoT
embedded software and physical devices of IoT as well as
the security ﬂaws that are attached to them. To bridge the
gaps the authors make a disconnect between IoT functions
and IoT devices by making a clone of IoT devices on the
cloud. These clones are stored on an IoT Agent Platform
and can be used to simulate function calls to physical IoT
devices. To allow for transparency of the devices the authors
implement Dripcast, a programming framework to allow
physical devices to access the clones stored on the cloud
IoT Agent Platform. This allows easy development of IoT
devices as designers can transparently see how they interact
with the clones. This scheme can allow for more efﬁcient
and secure designs of IoT devices and functions preventing
further intrusions on a system.

3.2.2.6 Risk Assessment:

To analyze the security risks, another research advance-
ment, presented in [99], uses attack tree analysis, soft sys-
tems thinking, and red team techniques to minimise cyber-
security risks. Using the information security research lens,
it was possible to anticipate real-world attacks using trained
data and assess the risks from a cloud perspective.

3.3 Secure IoT-Cloud Communications

This approach is shown in Figure 5. Research on this ap-
proach has led to the study of the security challenges in the
following subsections. 5.

7

Fig. 5: Secure IoT-Cloud Communications

3.3.1 Security Controls

3.3.1.1 Authentication:

IoT devices are susceptible to various security attacks
[100], [101]. To prevent their success, the authors of [102]
proposed a design by integrating the IoT module with the
Amazon IoT platform and securing access using authenti-
cation. The authentication for new IoT devices is done via
certiﬁcate signing requests (CSR). The CSR requires certain
information including a key to be sent to the AWS platform
so that it may be authenticated. The Amazon server returns
a certiﬁcate to the IoT device that can be used for mutual
authentication of the IoT device and the Amazon IoT plat-
form. These methods are able to then prevent attackers from
accessing data or communicating with the IoT devices or the
Amazon IoT platform.

3.3.1.2 Security Evaluation:

Security evaluation is one of the most important security
challenges [103]. This problem was discussed in [104] where
the authors proposed Inspection-Friendly Transport Layer
Security (IF-TLS). This scheme is used as an interception-
friendly communication library. Unlike other implemen-
tations of TLS in IoT IF-TLS can be fully controlled by
residential gateways. Along with using TLS for encryption
the scheme uses middleboxes to allow the user to analyze
trafﬁc. This scheme is an introduction of what can be done
using IF-TLS as the authors believe a lot can be done to
improve the proposed scheme.

3.4 Integrated SCAIoT Solutions

Figure 6 visualizes an integrated solution for the design of
secure CAIoT. The following challenges, mechanisms and
controls have been studied in research works focusing on
this approach.

3.4.1 Security Challenges

3.4.1.1 Privacy: To handle the privacy challenge
[105], a new network attestation scheme that provides scala-
bility [106], forward security, and preservation of privacy si-
multaneously was presented in [107]. This approach ensures
the conﬁdentiality of previous messages even when the
current secret key is revealed. Existing cloud security mod-
els employ Symmetric Search Encryption (SSE) to search
for encrypted data. However, this search activity requires

8

Based on the research work in [111], the data encrypted
should maintain privacy when stored in IoT cloud storage.
The author developed a cipher-text-policy attribute-based
encryption scheme, which assigns access control to the
cloud. With the help of this model, the data is secured
against the plaintext attack.

Data sharing happens frequently in the internet of med-
ical things (IoMT). The issue is that many devices are
resource constrained so encrypting that data is not always
possible using traditional methods. In [112], the proposed
framework suggests using CVaR to identify risk based
on channeling delay. The authors optimally developed a
branch-and-check (BNC) approach with minimum cost and
latency. Based on the results obtained, the authors advocate
that the unnecessary operation cost can be minimized and
optimized to provide secure transmission of data.

Next, Sharma, et al. [113] proposed an LABSE scheme
and a model that is IoT-based on cloud medical applications.
The system is beneﬁcial in real-time scenarios where the
security and privacy of patient data are secured. In [114],
the authors proposed a secure system for data privacy
that helps in accessing the data which is in an encrypted
format. The authors match the attributes and collect the
partial attributes with several advantages. To meet privacy-
preserving requirements, the authors of [115] suggested an
encryption approach with the keyword, which supports a
multi-user environment with the inverted index for Cloud-
IoT Platforms.

In [116], the ﬁrst-ever accountable and revocable large
universe Multi-Authority with decryption based on additive
groups in Edge-Cloud IoT is presented. This scheme is
ﬁxed securely in the oracle model under the q-DPBDHE2
assumption, providing service quality Loss-aware privacy
protection. Similarly, in [117] the authors present a concept
of a data bank to secure user sensitive data by controlling
the devices and contains several layers from IoT objects to
web and mobile devices in the top layer. The authors of [118]
focused on the privacy and security of cloud-based IoT envi-
ronments. They addressed analyzing and comparing current
approaches in ensuring fundamental security requisites and
securing intercommunication of IoT.

Processing large amounts of data is extremely important
in the realm of IoT. Due to its ability to efﬁciently and with
low latency transmit data, cloud edge computing has been
studied vastly in recent years. The authors of [119] present
a scheme of edge cloud computing that takes advantage
of PUFs while solving some of the issues related to the
synchronization of challenge response pairs (CPR). The
scheme uses blockchain to provide a more synchronized
scheme to allow for a secure and efﬁcient form of cloud edge
computing for IoT data transmission. The random oracle
model is used in testing the scheme and proves its security.

3.4.1.2 Trust:

Trust is studied using the framework discussed in [120].
This scheme evaluates the trustworthiness of cloud ser-
vices to conform to the security standards of the cloud-
based IoT by integrating security and reputation-based trust
assessment methods. The security-based trust evaluation
method utilizes cloud-speciﬁc security metrics to evaluate
the security of a cloud service. Furthermore, the feedback
on the quality of cloud service is reviewed to evaluate the

Fig. 6: Secure Codesign, Interfacing and Integration

the data owner to share the real key with query users by
ignoring malicious cloud servers. These limitations pose
a major challenge when implementing SSE. To overcome
these limitations, a framework was introduced in [108] for
cloud-based IoT. It initially provides a protocol with limited
key disclosure without exposing plaintext query points. This
technique processes the search using Merkle hash tree struc-
ture and k-means clustering. This approach is secure against
level-2 attacks. For level-3 attacks, the random splitting
technique is used.

Due to the openness of the cloud, retrieval of data from
the cloud will lead to security and privacy issues. To alle-
viate this, Privacy Enhanced Retrieval Technology (PERT)
was proposed in [109] for Cloud-based IoT. PERT ensures
privacy by hiding the information between the edge and
cloud servers during data transmission. In this approach,
privacy is guaranteed because edge servers maintain partial
data, and the attacker has to maintain the data between both
edge and cloud servers.

Cloud-based IoT consists of numerous innovative sys-
tems monitored and controlled via the Internet. In this
model, wireless communication is considered to be the
primary source of energy usage. It can be avoided by lim-
iting radio communications. However, privacy issues pose
a signiﬁcant challenge for these types of devices. Hence,
to address high energy usage, an Improved Ant Colony
Optimization (IACO) is presented in [110]. A privacy-
preserving method is also proposed for privacy concerns.
The published experimental results prove that the proposed
way is efﬁcient in terms of network lifespan and energy
consumption.

reputation of a cloud service.

Also, the authentication system was evaluated, and its
ﬂaws were demonstrated by Alzahrani, et al. [121]. Then,
in comparison to the related systems, the authors suggested
a safe and lightweight authentication and key agreement
scheme that meets fundamental security criteria while in-
curring the little computational cost.

In the research carried out in [122], the author has
suggested the scheme helps user-attribute revocation. The
proposed scheme uses a MAPE-K feedback control loop to
determine a trust ranking for an IoT cloud system. This
allows system administrators to make appropriate changes
to provide support and security against attacks. According
to the analysis methods results, it is ideal for large-scale
cross-domain collaboration in the dynamic cloud-aided IoT.
The authors of [123] propose a game-theoretic approach
for recruiting trustable Sensing service Providers (SSPs) in
mobile crowd sensing systems.

3.4.1.3

Integrity:

The authors of [124] research and create a formal access
control model for Google Cloud Platform, known as the
GCPAC model. They next develop the GCPAC model into
a formal Google Cloud Platform IoT Access Control (GCP-
IoTAC) model with IoT-speciﬁc components. Using the GC-
PIoT, they illustrate two popular IoT scenarios, E-health
and smart home. They also highlight some of the limits of
GCP-present IoT’s access control capabilities and propose
attribute-based additions for ﬁne-grained access control in
GCP and its IoT platform.

Finally, [125] proposed a data auditing scheme where
third party auditors audit data integrity. The authors then
provided a secondary layer for auditing the third party
auditors. The scheme uses a cloud-stored auditing method
for IoT devices based on consortium blockchain. This allows
IoT device data owners to analyse auditor’s activities. Test-
ing of the system proves an increase in data integrity and
security in using third party auditors.
3.4.1.4 Attack Resilience:

To address attack resilience problem, the author of [126]
proposed a user-centric model, ARCA-IoT. It is deﬁned as a
system that determines the attributes essential for trust and
provides a user-centric model capable of tackling attacks
wisely. For scalability and interoperability, a cloud-based
environment is introduced in the ARCA-IoT. An instinctive
Naive Bayes approach is employed to train this system so
that it manipulates the possibilities of the trustworthiness of
the entities and then determines different types of attacks
with the help of algorithms. Cloud-assisted IoT is more
susceptible to malware attacks. Thus, in order to maintain
conﬁdentiality and integrity, efﬁcient encryption mecha-
nisms must be implemented to protect the data against
different kinds of security attacks. Despite this, it is not
easy to perform calculations on data once it is encrypted.
Fully homomorphic encryption can be implemented in this
regard, but it is inefﬁcient in terms of data manipulation.
However, with the help of a semi-trusted server, this type of
encryption can be used, but the issue behind this is it cannot
be used for multiple distributed systems with shared IoT
data.

9

3.4.2 Security Controls

3.4.2.1 Authentication:

Authentication is a crucial issue since biometric data is
difﬁcult to counter and replace if it is compromised. To over-
come this issue, an approach based on fuzzy commitment
protocol, a ﬁngerprint recognition scheme using minutiae-
based sector coding strategy is presented in [127]. In this
approach, the minutiae of the ﬁngerprint are classiﬁed into
various designed sectors and then encoded based on their
features. Furthermore, numerical results were presented to
prove that this method is practical.

Many identity management schemes are costly to imple-
ment in IoT platforms. To solve this, Ahmad, et al. [128]
created a decentralized blockchain network that takes ad-
vantage of facial recognition for identiﬁcation. The cloud is
used to perform complex tasks in the scheme that couldn’t
be done on most IoT devices. Once the cloud gathers facial
ID date from the user, the blockchain conﬁrms the identity
of a user and creates a smart contract. The smart contract
is used to facilitate the terms of use for the service. This
is then stored on the blockchain. The use of blockchain and
the cloud reduces the stress on the IoT devices and increases
transparency, which improves security of the overall system.
The research done in [129] describes a technique and
gives a tutorial on IoT authentication, laying the ground-
work for future research into protocol validation. For IoT-
enabled smart devices, an extremely lightweight mutual
authentication mechanism based on Difﬁe Hellman has
been designed. The author of
[130] gave a classiﬁcation of
likely occurrences, proposed a knowledge-based approach,
and conducted a rigorous analytic investigation.

In another study, Alsahlani, et al. [131] has the main
focus of improving Wazid et al.’s [132] cloud-based au-
thentication system. The authors suggest the removal of
multiple smart cards to be replaced by a single one. It is
also suggested to remove the clustering strategy proposed
in Wazid et al. to allow for greater scalability. Lastly the
authors of [131] suggest the use of a suitable authentication
method to prevent data leakage.

In [133], a lightweight two-factor mutual authentication
scheme for Cloud-based IoT is proposed. Also, the authors
have commented on the weakness of state-of-the-art meth-
ods. Moreover, in [134], the authors suggested an architec-
ture known as data bank. In [135], a safe and efﬁcient KNN
query has been proposed to be applied on encrypted un-
trustworthy data. The authors utilized modiﬁed homomor-
phic encryption to encrypt the object set, which allows for
addition and multiplication over encrypted data. Because
the anticipated rank meets the key top-k characteristics, it
may be a conﬁdence ranking criterion.

A lightweight authentication solution for cloud-centric
IoT applications was proposed in [136]. The scheme’s ofﬁcial
security veriﬁcation was carried out utilising the widely
used AVISPA tool. Furthermore, the security analysis, com-
putational and communication costs show that the proposed
lightweight system is secure and efﬁcient. Another impor-
tant area is secure multi-factor remote user authentication
schemes. The authors of [137] examined the security of a
state-of-the-art method in their research. They demonstrated
that the method is vulnerable to identity and password
guessing, replay, and session key disclosure attacks. To

10

address the security issues in the evaluated method, they
also presented a safe multifactor authentication system for
cloud-IoT environments.

grained access policy to generate a credential and share it.
This, in turn, converts that credential into new ciphertexts
that can be readable by the shared user.

3.4.2.2 Encryption:

Attribute-Based Encryption (ABE) requires predeﬁned
public parameters during system initialization includ-
ing performing encryption and decryption efﬁciently, and
achieving security by assuming basic security standards. To
address the challenges present in the existing models, an
unbounded and efﬁcient attribute-based encryption scheme
with compatible security for cloud-based IoT is presented
in [138]. Compared to the previous approaches in this ﬁeld,
this scheme not only provides access control over encrypted
data in a ﬁne-grained way, but it has also been proven
to be secure under standard decision linear assumption.
Moreover, it eliminates the need for the initialization of
predeﬁned public parameters.

To ensure the normal operation of the system in IoT
devices, remote attestation for every smart device should
be ensured. Due to the engagement of large numbers of
smart devices, traditional attestation schemes are unable to
meet the requirements in terms of efﬁciency. Security risks
due to secret key exposures are more frequent in traditional
schemes [139]. To address this issue, a new method with
the help of a semi-trusted server is introduced in [140].
This method is capable of performing manipulations on
the encrypted data without gaining any useful informa-
tion. A ﬁne-grained self-controlled outsourced data deletion
scheme in cloud-based IoT is presented in [141]. The main
contribution of this scheme is that it enables data owners
to precisely and permanently delete their outsourced IoT
data in a policy-based way without depending on the Cloud
Server.

The authors of [142] proposed an effective data sharing
technique that engages intelligent devices to share data
securely at the edge of cloud-based IoT. A secure searching
scheme to search for the particular data is also proposed.
Retrieval of Ciphertexts under heterogeneous datasets is of
utmost importance in Cloud-based IoT devices used today.
Existing ciphertext retrieval schemes cannot retrieve cipher-
texts from encrypted heterogeneous datasets. To alleviate
this problem, the authors of [143] proposed a transparent ci-
phertext retrieval system without considering the program-
ming language, accessible platforms, and heterogeneity of
the datasets. This system acts as a middleware with an en-
crypted cloud database system. The middleware facilitates
cross-language and cross-platform queries over different
database systems, and it also realizes cross-database queries
over the encrypted cloud datasets. Cloud-assisted IoT is
regarded as an emerging technological trend in the IoT
domain, where the cloud acts as a great storage provider
for storing a vast amount of data.

To ensure the conﬁdentiality of the data, the encryption
mechanism is designed so that the user assigned by the
data owner can only decrypt the data. However, there
is a requirement in a multi-cloud IoT environment, and
the data has to be shared with multiple users rather than
the designated user. To satisfy this, the authors of [144]
proposed a scheme Flexible privacy-preserving data sharing
(FDPS), where the user can encrypt the data to a shared user
using identity-based encryption. The user can employ a ﬁne-

CAIoT provides a great solution to growing data size
problems for the constraints of separate objects. However,
with the implementation of the cloud, IoT faces new security
challenges for data exchange, which are introduced in this
paper and not addressed in traditional approaches. The
authors of [145] envisage a secure cloud-assisted IoT to
protect data conﬁdentiality when collecting, storing, and
accessing IoT data. Due to the rapid development in IoT,
security and privacy challenges pose a signiﬁcant threat.
Biometric authentication integrated with IoT can be con-
sidered an adequate replacement compared to traditional
biometric authentication.

The authors of [146] proposed searching over encrypted
data for multiple data senders in the cloud. This is done
through public-key encryption with keyword search (PEKS)
and has been regarded as one of the best forms of searchable
encryption (SE). Unfortunately, prevailing PEKS schemes
are currently susceptible to ﬁle-injection attacks due to the
lack of forwarding privacy. Thus, a forward secure PEKS
scheme was proposed based on identity-based encryption
for cloud-based IoT environments. Searchable public-key
encryption is an introductory module to realize fast key-
word search upon ciphertexts present in the cloud.

To mitigate this problem, the authors of [147] proposed
a new instance of SPCHS to attain fast and simultaneous
keyword searches over public-key ciphertexts. It is consid-
ered to be a new type of relationship among searchable
ciphertexts , which is built by the latest instance, where
each searchable ciphertext is associated with a standard and
public parameter.

All associated relationships are disclosed on receiving
a keyword search, and then all matching ciphertexts are
found. Similarly, phrase search enables the retrieval of au-
thentic documents, which is essential for machine learning
applications incorporated in cloud-based IoT. To prevent
sensitive data leakage from service providers, data is en-
crypted before being outsourced to the cloud. This leads to a
big challenge in searching for encrypted data. Existing meth-
ods also do not perform exact phrase searches as they cannot
determine the location relationship of multiple keywords
over encrypted data. Thus, a privacy-preserving search
scheme “P3” is discussed in [148]. It uses homomorphic
encryption and bilinear /mapping to obtain the location
relationship of queried keywords over encrypted data. In
addition to this, it also employs a probabilistic trapdoor
generation algorithm to protect users’ search patterns.

According to authors [149], a phrase search scheme
based on IoT data can be used as the model. It not only
returns the ﬁle with the query, but the pending ﬁles also
do not contain query phrases as well. The model stores
create a tag for storing the data with the help of identiﬁers,
then identifying with the help of identiﬁers, and then lastly
generating a veriﬁcation tag. As a result, the system is secure
and efﬁcient.

As the data and cloud server interactions are increasing
day by day, data privacy is a vital factor to keep privacy.
The authors of [150] developed a scheme for querying data
to cloud storage. For the ciphertext, the authors used the

Paillier cryptosystem for encrypting the data. The authors’
ﬁndings are secure and efﬁcient.

In [151], the authors propose a productive and ﬁne-
grained data sharing scheme with the help of keywords that
helps in removing hostile data users. A system is designed
in such a way that the user identity is unknown to provide
data accuracy.

The authors of [152] suggested improving IDM in IoT-
cloud by combining face recognition with blockchain-based
transaction register. The validation of face recognition will
allow the user to access printing services. In [153] attribute-
based encryption is used for ensuring the externalization
data from multiple users. With the help of PU-ABE, the
input text is shorter in size, and the size of ciphertext
supports the access policy. Moreover, ElGamal encryption
and an identity-based signature method are used to create a
safe, lightweight data aggregation scheme for cloud-assisted
IoT devices.

The authors of [154] considered the literature survey
reviewed and suggest that ABE is the ideal technique for
cloud-based IoT. Bilinear maps were utilized in the ABE
algorithm, which adds complexity and renders it unsuitable
for IoT devices. Elliptic curve cryptography-based tech-
niques have reduced processing costs more than bilinear
mappings. Guechi, et al. [155] proposed a simple two-
factor mutual authentication scheme. The proposed scheme
meets the requirements of mutual authentication, the se-
curity of a secret key, session key agreement, resistance
to forgery, insider attack, replay attack, and impersonation
attack. In [156], the authors addressed various obstacles
that multiple users in shared data face. Indeed, secure
and parallel expressive Search over encrypted data with
access control in multi-Cloud IoT has been implemented to
improve availability, integrity, and privacy.

Researchers in [157] focused on 5G-IoT networks with
SDN/NFV, blockchain-based vulnerability detection, and
mitigation paradigm is provided. The ﬁve planes that make
up this concept are the 5G infrastructure plane, data plane,
blockchain plane, control plane, and application plane. This
architecture aims to protect users from their sensitive data
via Blockchain-based lightweight Security in the 5G/B5G
enabled SDN/NFV cloud of IoT.

The authors’ of study [158] promise to speed encryption
and to search. A lightweight built edge-aided searchable
public-key encryption as ESPE used outsourced public-key
encryption with keyword search as PEKS and hidden struc-
tures in its models. This is a Lightweight Secure Searching
scheme for Industrial IoT (IIoT) Devices.

Researchers [159] focused on the decentralized multi-
authority attribute-based encryption for Cloud-Aided IoT.
CloudIoTSecurity is a quality model and technique to eval-
uate security in Cloud IoT applications aligned to ISO 25040,
which is a help to assess security step by step towards the
discovery of security concerns and, therefore, the improve-
ment of these applications. These work to minimize the risk
of attacks via protecting the, privacy and the reliability of
the data.

Cloud IoT networks are dynamic and need a dynamic
form of access control over the data that is encrypted in
communication. In [160], the authors proposed to com-
municate compensation related to the authenticity of the

11

location by workers. This is to minimize the effectiveness
of collusion attacks. Indeed, it is a secure, efﬁcient revocable
large Universe multi-authority Attribute-Based Encryption
for Cloud-Aided IoT. Using the random oracle model the
authors were able to show the proposed scheme is a secure
for of access control for encrypted data.

Another work, [161],

introduces an autonomic trust
management system for Cloud-based highly dynamic IoT
applications and services. We are becoming increasingly
conscious of the importance of removing the inﬂuence of a
third party’s malevolent recommendation and defamatory
practices on evaluation ﬁndings.

With IoT having such a large amount of data it is more
and more important to have a secure place to store it, such
as a cloud. To keep data secure on the cloud the research in
[162] propose LH-ABSC, a lightweight ABSC method that
uses ciphertext-policy encryption (CPABE) and key-policy
attribute-based signature (KPABS). Fog nodes are used to
reduce computing overhead in the scheme. The authors
provide an in-depth analysis to show the security of the
system.

3.4.2.3 Access Control:

To address access control issues, Kaaniche, et al. [163]
studied in detail and researched what problems there are
in light-weighted computation. The authors proposed an
ofﬂine computation that will help to retrieve the encrypted
data without giving away the delicate information.

The author of this research [164] suggested a blockchain-
based cloud-based IoT device authentication system. A
functional proof of concept was created and successfully
built using a hyperledger composer to test the suggested
approach. This was accomplished by extensive investiga-
tion and careful evaluation of technological choices. The
suggested method meets the CIA’s secrecy, integrity, and
availability requirements. The conﬁdentiality requirement
is met by prohibiting unauthorized access to IoT network
devices.

Mheni, et al. [165] presented an effective outsourced data
access control mechanism for cloud-based IoT with user re-
vocation. Not only may most revocation-related activities be
outsourced to the cloud via their method, but the efﬁciency
of encryption and decryption has also been improved.

Article [166] provided a method for considering cyber-
security as an IR dimension for cloud-based services. They
compare the related works through a compact survey and
conclude with a multi-perspective debate to incorporate
cybersecurity in the IoT/IoTSE architectures, based on edge
powered searching over IoT from a theoretical perspective.

3.4.2.4 Security Evaluation:

The cloud is a rather new invention that is being im-
plemented into many different areas of IoT. Many people
fear that it is not secure and this is why security evaluation
is such a useful tool for CBIoT. The authors of [167] have
proposed a security evaluation scheme that is based on a
software deﬁned network. The network works in collabora-
tion with twenty-three different indicators to check different
elements of a clouds security. The authors break down
each feature being tested in the scheme in order to display
importance. Testing of the scheme shows the usefulness and
the necessity of the scheme in the evaluation of CBIoT.

Moreover, the authors in [168], developed a protocol
called IoT-HiTrust. This can be used for large mobile-cloud
IoT systems. Even during disconnecting, it provides accu-
racy convergence and catches data securely without moving
out of place, i.e., stationary.

3.4.2.5 Anomaly Detection:

The authors of [169] discussed why some companies and
organizations are against cloudIoT. The authors argue that
cloudIoT have privacy and fewer security risks for handling
huge data generated from IoT devices that are stored in a
cloud storage with the help of SDN that enables in evalu-
ating security level via anomaly detection.The authors use
the ISO/IEC 25010 standard quality model to help in design
their scheme.

3.4.2.6 Malware Detection:

Malware detection strategies used to maintain the pri-
vacy of smart objects in IoT networks are well sought after.
So, a malware detection infrastructure is discussed in [170]
that consists of an Intrusion Detection System (IDS) along
with cloud and fog computing. Next, a signaling game
is introduced to reveal the interactions between the smart
object and the corresponding fog node. To attenuate privacy
leakage of smart objects, optimal strategies are also enforced
that improve malware detection probability by computing
the perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the game theoretically.
Almost all the data present in the cloud is under the control
of the Data Owner (DO), but they are out of the physical
control of the DO, and the data in the cloud can also lead
to data leakage. In this scenario, the deletion of data poses a
big challenge.
3.4.2.7

Intrusion Detection:

As more smart devices are inserted into the realm of IoT
there are more opportunities for attackers to take advantage
of new entry points into a network. Intrusion detection can
act as a tool to help us determine when an unauthorized
user gains access to a device. In [171] the authors proposed
a blockchain-aided searchable attribute-based encryption
(BC-SABE) scheme with efﬁcient revocation and decryption,
for which the traditional centralized server is replaced by
a decentralized blockchain system in charge of threshold
parameter generation, key management, and user revoca-
tion. Also, [172] proposed Edge-powered IoT Search, a new
security architecture representing a collaborative and intel-
ligent system in SDN-based cloud IoT networks, in which
three layers of IDS nodes are introduced with effective node
communication.

3.4.2.8 Risk Assessment:

In [173], a model, called SAIoT, is used for solving
problems of integrated cloud and IoT with focus on risk
assessment issues. The model consists of QoS modeling and
composition. The proposed scheme uses conditional value-
at-risk to evaluate the risk assessment. A branch and check
system is put in place to send inspection tasks to the system.
These are both able to be done with low latency as many
of the systems this is implemented in are time sensitive.
The results shown by the authors suggest that 30.64% is an
average improvement in QoS value.

3.4.2.9

Incident Response:

As more IoT devices come out there is a need to monitor
for incidents. The characterization of each incident can
decrease the response time and make for more efﬁcient

12

Fig. 7: Security Challenges of CAIoT

adjustments in IoT networks. The suggested method by
authors in [174] has all of the needed security properties,
especially incident response issue which are validated using
the widely used BAN logic. The scheme uses a graph based
model in order to capture knowledge about incidents for
better reporting in the future.

4 DISCUSSIONS

4.1 Summary of Security Challenges

As suggested by the literature, privacy, trust, integrity, and
attack resilience are the most critical challenges in the de-
sign of secure CAIoTs. These challenges are illustrated in
Figure 7.

4.2 Summary of Security Controls

Our review identiﬁes numerous security controls consid-
ered by designers and researchers in the ﬁeld of SCAIoT.
Among these controls, one may refer to authentication,
encryption, access control, reputation management, secure
data analytics, security evaluation, intrusion detection [?],
incident response, anomaly detection [?], malware detection
and risk assessment. These security controls are depicted in
Figure 8.

4.3 Layered Architecture

The architecture shown in Figure 9 reﬂects all the ap-
proaches studied in Section 3.

In Figure 9, the ﬁrst layer is suggested by research works
proposing IoT on top of secure cloud. The second layer
reﬂects methods proposed for secure IoT-Cloud communi-
cations. Approaches based on deploying secure IoT on top
of Cloud are seen in the third layer. There is also a super-
layer connected to all of the mentioned layers. This super-
layer represents approaches based on integrated SCAIoT
solutions.

13

connects the IoT with cloud computing and web services.
Wireless sensor nodes for monitoring the indoor environ-
ment and HVAC inlet air, as well as a wireless base station
for controlling HVAC actuators, have been created.

In [178], the authors presented a collaborative Big.Little
branch architecture to enable efﬁcient FL for artiﬁcial intel-
ligence IoT (AIoT) applications. Inspired by the architecture
of BranchyNet, which has multiple prediction branches,
their approach deploys deep neural network (DNN) models
across both cloud and AIoT devices. Zhang, et al. is studying
related to the ML models on cloud and trying to combine
IaSS or FaSS with low cost [179]. They propose MArk
(Model Ark), a general-purpose inference serving system, to
tackle the dual challenge of Service-Level Objectives (SLO)
compliance and cost-effectiveness. MArk employs three
design choices tailored to inference workload. Eventually,
according to authors [180], for real-time monitoring and
preventive maintenance of structural systems, a cloud-based
DT framework for SHM (cDTSHM) was developed. The de-
veloped approach allows for two-way mapping between a
physical structure and its digital counterpart and interaction
between structure, machine, and human, paving the way for
a real-time intelligent monitoring system.

5.2 AI in Secure Cloud

The authors of [181] analyzed an Edge-Cloud Collabora-
tion (ECC) scenario that includes numerous user devices
with energy harvesting components, one edge server, and
one cloud server. These components are concerned about
time latency, energy consumption, and the privacy level of
user devices during job ofﬂoading. The authors speciﬁcally
describe the tradeoff between ofﬂoading cost and privacy
level as a joint optimization issue, which they then model as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP). To further reduce time
delay and increase security the scheme takes advantage of
a deep Q-network. When tested against the widely used
reinforcement learning, the proposed scheme has a reduced
energy and time cost, while remaining secure.

In [182] the authors created SFAP, a secure federated
learning technique with multiple keys that prevents DI-level
poisoning assaults for medical diagnosis. Speciﬁcally, SFAP
delivers privacy-preserving random forest-based federated
learning through the use of secure cross computing, which
protects the conﬁdentiality of DI-related information. In
another research, we can mention TopoMAD, a stochastic
seq2seq model that can robustly model spatial and temporal
dependence in contaminated data, and is presented by the
researchers [183]. We use system topological information
to classify data from different components and use sliding
windows over measures acquired constantly to capture the
temporal dependence.

5.3 AI in IoT

AI has made many advancements in recent years with re-
spect to cloud computing. One such example is [184] where
the authors propose a unique spatial-temporal Chebyshev
graph neural network model (ST-ChebNet) for trafﬁc ﬂow
prediction to incorporate spatial-temporal data and assure
reliable trafﬁc ﬂow prediction. This work proposes a novel

Fig. 8: Security Controls in CAIoT

Fig. 9: The Layered Architecture of SCAIoT

5 FUTURE ROADMAP: THE PROMISE OF AI
We anticipate that research on secure cloud-assisted IoT
will move towards quantum-inspired AI-supported secure
cloud-assisted IoT. The reason behind this anticipation is
the existence of trends towards the application of AI in
IoT, secure IoT, cloud, secure cloud, cloud-assisted IoT,
and secure cloud-assisted IoT as well as the trend towards
quantum-inspired AI, which are discussed in subsections
5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6 and 5.7, respectively.

5.1 AI in Cloud

Several studies have been conducted in the area of AI in
the cloud [175]. Tuli, et al. [176] proposed an Asynchronous-
Advantage-Actor-Critic (A3C)-based real-time scheduler for
stochastic Edge-Cloud systems that allows concurrent de-
centralized learning across several agents. The Residual
Recurrent Neural Network (R2N2) architecture is used to
capture a large number of host and task parameters and
temporal trends to give efﬁcient scheduling decisions. Next,
a research work carried out by authors [177] describes that
a concept for the intelligent controller is suggested that

ST-ChebNet for trafﬁc ﬂow prediction to capture the spatial-
temporal features, which can ensure accurate trafﬁc ﬂow
prediction. They ﬁrst add a fully connected layer to fuse
the features of trafﬁc data into a new feature to generate a
matrix, and then the long short-term memory (LSTM) model
is adopted to learn trafﬁc state changes for capturing the
temporal dependencies.

Researchers [185] proposed a blockchain-based data
placement protocol and theoretically model a decision op-
timization problem that takes into account cloud, multi-
cloud, and decentralized storage technologies. This is done
in order to select the appropriate medium to store large-
scale IoT data while ensuring data integrity, traceability,
auditability, and decision veriﬁability. In [186], the authors
discussed CausalBG as a causal recurrent neural network
(CausalRNN) deployed on an IoT platform with smart-
phones and CGM for precise and efﬁcient individual blood
glucose concentration prediction, according to the scientists.
Another work, in [187], studies the security and computes
ofﬂoading challenges in a multi-user MECCO system with
blockchain at the same time. In fact, it simultaneously inves-
tigates the security and computation ofﬂoading problems
in a multi-user MECCO system with blockchain. Liang, et
al. apply the transfer learning approach for compressed
sensing in 6G-IoT [188]. In fact, a convolution-based transfer
learning CS (CTCS) model is proposed in this research work
to rebuild the compressed signal using transfer learning.

5.4 AI in Secure IoT

In some research, AI has been adapted for the purpose
of providing secure IoT [189], [190]. The authors of [191]
showed their efﬁcient and well-developed approach for
classifying risky network connections when they are no
longer blacklisted or whitelisted. The solution was created
for a variety of IoT cyber-physical and networking devices
that were linked to the Internet. In this work, they used
a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model for IoT and
networking malware threat detection. Similarly, in [192], the
authors introduce an improved deep-neural-network-based
relay selection (DNS) strategy for monitoring and improv-
ing end-to-end throughput in wireless-powered cognitive
Internet-of-Things (IoT) networks. In another work, [193],
the authors have proposed a dynamic analysis for IoT mal-
ware detection (DAIMD) to prevent IoT device damage by
detecting well-known and unseen and variants IoT malware
that has grown intelligently. Moreover, the authors in [194]
summarised the study and proposed a cross-architecture IoT
malware threat hunting methodology based on advanced
ensemble learning as an MTHAEL model.

As another work focusing on privacy preservation,
we can mention [195], where the authors have proposed
an asynchronous grouped federated learning framework
(PAG-FL) for IoT, which allows numerous devices and the
server to train models jointly and efﬁciently while main-
taining privacy. The PAG-FL framework is made up of an
adaptive R´enyi Differential Privacy (ARB) protocol and an
asynchronous weight-based grouped update (AWGU) algo-
rithm. Also, the authors [196] suggest DRLTrack, a frame-
work for target tracking in Edge-IoT using collaborative
deep reinforcement learning (C-DRL) to achieve high qual-
ity of tracking (QoT) and resource-efﬁcient performance.

14

5.5 AI in Cloud-Assisted IoT

Article [197] examined the integration of cloud and edge
computing for IoT data analytic and offers a deep learning-
based strategy for data reduction on the edge with cloud
machine learning. To decrease data dimensions, the auto-
encoder is positioned on the edge. In [198], NFV, MEC, and
cloud computing are combined in an NFV-enabled CECIIoT
architecture. We offer an online multi-objective SFC deploy-
ment model in this architecture to balance the resource
consumption and quality of various IIoT applications by
describing the different service requirements and particular
network environment. The authors of [199], employ adap-
tive cloud IoT devices called Intelligent Tetris Switch (ITS)
in conjunction with Big data analytic and deep learning
techniques to provide smart home personalization services.
Edge computing, as described by the authors [200], is
regarded as the ideal ally for a wide range of applications
for which conventional Cloud Computing is insufﬁcient.
Combining the edge method with IoT sensors and the cloud
would provide consumers more freedom and options. The
paper’s themes provide a general open-source platform
for intelligent IoT applications that is built on a shared
backbone architecture that is made up of three layers: IoT
objects, edge devices, and cloud infrastructure.

In [201], the authors researched evaluating the applica-
tion of machine learning regression approaches to forecast
the connection quality of communications performed by IoT
nodes. Based on the node location, the suggested approach
can estimate the connection quality of the most common
cloud communication protocols [202], [203], such as cellular,
Wi-Fi, SigFox, and LoRaWAN. Furthrmore, we can consider
JointRec in [204]. JointRec is a deep learning-based collabo-
rative cloud video recommendation platform, according to
the author’s proposal[188]. JointRec incorporates the Joint-
Cloud architecture with mobile IoT, allowing for federated
training across remote cloud servers. In [205], the authors
proposed an adaptive dropout deep computation model
(ADDCM) with crowd sourcing to the cloud for industrial
IoT big data feature learning. The article in [197] examines
the integration of cloud and edge computing for IoT data
analytics and offers a deep learning-based strategy for data
reduction on edge with cloud machine learning. The auto-
encoder is positioned on edge to decrease data dimensions.
In [198], NFV, MEC, and cloud computing are combined
in an NFV-enabled CECIIoT architecture. The scheme offers
an online multi-objective SFC deployment model in this
architecture to balance the resource consumption and qual-
ity of various IIoT applications by describing the different
service requirements and particular network environments.
The authors, in [199], employ adaptive cloud IoT devices
called Intelligent Tetris Switch (ITS) in conjunction with Big
data analytic and deep learning techniques to provide smart
home personalization services.

According to the authors of [200], edge computing, as
described in [184], can be considered as the ideal ally for
a wide range of applications for which conventional Cloud
Computing is insufﬁcient. Combining the edge method with
IoT sensors and the cloud would provide consumers with
more freedom and options. The paper’s themes provide
a general open-source platform for intelligent IoT appli-

cations built on a shared backbone architecture consisting
of three layers: IoT objects, edge devices, and cloud infras-
tructure. Next, in [201], the scheme provides research done
to evaluate the application of machine learning regression
approaches to forecast the connection quality of communi-
cations performed by IoT nodes. Based on the node location,
the suggested approach can estimate the connection quality
of the most common cloud communication protocols, such
as cellular, Wi-Fi, SigFox, and LoRaWAN.

Furthermore, in JointRec [204] a deep learning-based
collaborative cloud video recommendation platform is pro-
posed. JointRec incorporates the JointCloud architecture
with mobile IoT, allowing for federated training across
remote cloud servers. The authors of [205], propose an
adaptive dropout deep computation model (ADDCM) with
crowdsourcing to the cloud for industrial IoT big data
feature learning.

Based on research work in [206], Cloud Video Surveil-
lance (CVS) is a hot topic that is widely discussed every-
where showing the need for real-time analysis in smart
applications. There is a lack of object detection performance
due to the complex surveilling environment. Thus in this
paper, the authors have proposed multi-target object detec-
tion for real-time surveillance in IoT systems. This system
is based on a deep neural network called A-YONet that is
created by combining YOLO and MTCNN to build an end-
edge-cloud surveillance system to realize lightweight train-
ing and feature learning with limited computing resources
with higher performance. Likewise, a research reported in
[207], has examined a dynamic allocation strategy in the
edge-cloud network over the long term with unpredictable
workloads. In such a system, they present JORP, a JOint
Routing and Placement problem for IoT services that dy-
namically distributes resources based on workload demand
in order to decrease operating expenses in the long run.

In [208], the authors present a JOint Routing and Place-
ment problem for IoT service chain (JORP) that can dynam-
ically scale in/out the amount of VNF instances in this arti-
cle. Then, based on branch-and-bound(BnB), the authors use
a learning approach for solving JORP efﬁciently. In another
work, the authors [209] proposed a Micro-Service-based
Deployment Problem (MSDP) that is based on the heteroge-
neous and dynamic characteristics of the edge-cloud hybrid
environment, such as heterogeneity of edge server capaci-
ties, dynamic geographical information of IoT devices, and
changing device preference for applications and complex
application structures. Then, we offer a multiple buffer
deep deterministic policy gradient (MB DDPG) to provide
more ideal service deployment options. Based on [210], the
authors customized a federated learning framework in a
cloud-edge architecture for intelligent IoT applications. To
deal with heterogeneity concerns in IoT settings, we exam-
ine developing customized federated learning approaches
capable of mitigating the negative impacts produced by
heterogeneities in many aspects.

With considering Energy-Efﬁcient works in this area,
the authors in [211] propose a novel system energy con-
sumption model that accounts for the runtime, switching,
and computation energy consumption of all participating
servers (from both the cloud and the edge) and IoT devices.
In [211], to overcome the concerns above, a blockchain-

15

based collective Q-learning (CQL) strategy is utilized [212],
in which lightweight IoT nodes are used to train elements
of training tiers, and then blockchain is used to exchange
learning outcomes in a valid and essential way for monitor-
ing. We view the cognitive development in the IoT node as a
body of artwork rather than a pointless riddle. Additionally,
in this article [213], the author emphasizes the need to
expand beyond the domains of typical edge computing
(e.g., conﬁned to user-smartphones) and investigate ways
to embed intelligence into ultra-edge IoT sensors.

In [214], the author employs a variety of characteristics
to efﬁciently detect and forecast ﬂoods by utilizing cutting-
edge technical equipment and concurrently transmitting
through the internet, allowing us to save lives and make
the world a better environment. This system makes use
of several IoT devices such as a rain sensor, a water ﬂow
sensor, and a water level sensor, all of which are controlled
by an Arduino microcontroller that is designed to calculate
the likelihood of a ﬂood occurring. In [215], the authors
propose a real-time Air Quality Monitoring System (AQMS)
architecture that integrates the Internet of Things (IoT)
and cloud computing. AQMS operates independently and
autonomously thanks to a solar panel and battery pack,
making it self-powered and sustainable. Next, according to
the authors in [216], their study presented centered on creat-
ing a comprehensive monitoring and autonomous alerting
system for the elderly. By combining distinct warnings for
different scenarios, the priority-based alerting system pro-
vided caregivers with a time-efﬁcient attention method.

5.6 AI in Secure Cloud-Assisted IoT

AI can address the security features of cloud-assisted IoT.
As described by the author of [217], edge computing is
regarded as ideal for a wide range of applications for which
conventional Cloud Computing is insufﬁcient. Combining
the edge method with IoT sensors and the Cloud would
provide consumers with more freedom and options. The
paper’s themes provide a general open-source platform
for intelligent IoT applications built on a shared backbone
architecture consisting of three layers: IoT objects, edge
devices, and cloud infrastructure. In the article [218], the
author talks about how introducing Cloud, IoT, ML, and
AI into the system in the medical industry can increase
customer satisfaction. The author has proposed a novel
model that focuses on a smart hospital information man-
agement system that runs using hybrid Cloud, IoT, ML,
and AI. Integration of these into their system helps the
industry to customize based on customer requirements.
This introduction will prove beneﬁcial to both the medical
industry and its customers. The use of unique IDs for
patients and physicians would make the entire procedure
much more efﬁcient and simpler. Multi-specialty and super-
specialty hospitals may create a smart hospital information
management system by combining these components. The
authors introduce a novel approach to ML services that can
decrease privacy concerns while still making the services
more secure. The fundamental concept is that the client
delivers the partially processed feature data received from
the early stage of the NN to the server while the server
continues to run the rest of the NN. The privacy issue can be

mitigated since it is difﬁcult to reverse-engineer the original
data from the feature data. On the other hand, the author
discusses attempting to develop a privacy metric to evaluate
the partially processed feature data.

Also, the major goal of this work [219] is to offer a
test technique for detecting patterns in a given dataset that
do not reﬂect normal behavior in order to ﬁnd defects,
malfunctions, or the impacts of poor maintenance. This
technique compares two designs for an anomaly detection
system. The authors offer a real-world use case to illustrate
viability. The ﬁndings of this test indicate that when Cloud
computing power is increased, the full-cloud design outper-
forms the edge-cloud architecture and that applications may
be readily assessed.

Another research work, proposed solution by the au-
thors of [220] and consists of an intellectual polynomial-
time heuristic scheme that exploits the level of trust in
ML models by selecting and switching between a subset
of ML models from a superset of models to maximize
trustworthiness while respecting the given reconﬁguration
budget and reducing cloud communication overhead. They
also used two case studies to assess the performance of their
suggested heuristic- Industrial IoT (IIoT) services and smart
cities services. Similarly, the authors of [221] investigate the
case of data ﬂow between the Cloud and end-user dew
devices embedded into a connected car. This article aims
to offer an IoT threat analysis and apply a deep learning
technique to ﬁght cyber anomalies, followed by a validation
study of the metrics. An improvised version of Stacked
Autoencoder was employed to enhance the accuracy of
identifying attacks, with the loss over the training data
serving as a threshold. Compared to prior models, their
technique yields a better result, with 90 percent accuracy.

When considering phishing detection, the authors [222]
devised a two-step process that enabled partition-based
feature selection using a hybrid classiﬁer technique and
achieved optimal accuracy with a unique secure key gen-
eration mechanism, using adaptive entropy approaches.
The hybrid classiﬁer technique excelled with 97.86 percent
accuracy and reduced computing complexity by 87 per-
cent. Moreover, the authors [223] presented a new security
method called LEDEM for MDA launched by wireless IoT
on an IoT server. LEDEM has a semi-supervised ML model
for attack detection as well as two distinct mitigation tech-
niques for fIoT and mIoT. When compared to the solutions,
they achieved a 21% gain. They claim that their security
method can prevent customers from experiencing a denial
of service even when the IoT server is attacked via wireless
IoT. To solve cyber-attack issues, this study [224] provides
an edge-cloud deep IDS model in Lambda architecture for
IoT security. When compared to standard ML methods,
the introduced method minimizes training time, improves
performance, and boosts the accuracy of true positive de-
tected attacks. It may also identify suspicious behaviors in
real-time and classify them by evaluating past data in a
batch procedure. Likewise, this paper [225] offers a deep
blockchain framework (DBF) for IoT networks that protect
from intrusion, detection, and conﬁdentiality in blockchain
with smart contracts. The suggested framework has the
potential to be utilized as a decision support system to help
users, and cloud providers securely migrate their data in a

timely and reliable way.

16

Fig. 10: The Future of SCAIoT

5.7 Quantum-Inspired AI

Researchers these days are interested in the topic of quan-
tum AI, which is a hot topic. According to the authors
[226], a quantum-inspired reinforcement learning (QiRL)
approach to the trajectory planning problem aims to opti-
mize the ESUTR performance for the UAV ﬂying from the
start point to the destination. Q. Wei et al. [227] proposed
a novel training paradigm inspired by quantum compu-
tation is proposed for deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
with experience replay. In contrast to the traditional expe-
rience replay mechanism in DRL, the proposed DRL with
quantum-inspired experience replay (DRL-QER) adaptively
chooses experiences from the replay buffer according to the
complexity and the replayed times of each experience (also
called transition), to achieve a balance between exploration
and exploitation. Based on the author’s study in [228],
quantum-inspired multi-directional association models with
one-shot learning and self-convergent iterative learning,
namely QMAM and IQMAM, are given in this paper.

In another work, [229], a novel quantum-inspired re-
inforcement learning (QiRL) method is suggested for au-
tonomous robotic navigation control. The QiRL algorithm
employs a probabilistic action selection policy and a novel
reinforcement strategy inspired by the collapse phenom-
ena in quantum measurement and amplitude ampliﬁcation

in quantum computation, respectively. To address two-
class classiﬁcation issues, a novel learning model dubbed
Quantum-inspired Fuzzy Based Neural Network (Q-FNN)
was developed by the author [230]. The suggested model
constructs the NN architecture by inserting neurons into
the hidden layer, and learning is conducted using the idea
of Fuzzy c-Means (FCM) clustering, with the fuzziness
parameter (m) evolving utilizing the quantum computing
concept. The quantum computing idea gives a wide search
space for a selection of m, which aids in the discovery of
appropriate weights as well as the optimization of network
design.

Figure 10 summarizes the involvement of AI and Cloud
Computing concepts with IoT. According to this ﬁgure, to
make secure cloud computing and secure IoT, we need se-
curity which consists of various encryption and decryption.
Further, with the development of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
combining it with the secure Cloud and secure IoT, we
develop AI supported Secure CAIoT. When Neural Net-
works is interlinked with Artiﬁcial Intelligence, we create
Quantum Inspired AI Supported Secure CAIoT.

6 CONCLUSION

This review covered some sides and aspects of the di-
chotomy of cloud and IoT. The dichotomy gives raise to
IoT-Based Cloud (IoTBC) and Cloud-Assisted IoT (CAIoT).
This paper focused on the security of CAIoT. This research
identiﬁed different approaches towards the design of secure
CAIoT (SCAIoT) along with the related security challenges
and controls. Our reviews led to the development of a
layered architecture for SCAIoT as well as a future roadmap
with a focus on the role of AI. Our work in this paper can
be continued via studying IoTBC or studying the unstudied
aspects of CAIoT.

REFERENCES

[1]

Z. Liu, P. Dai, H. Xing, Z. Yu, and W. Zhang, “A distributed
algorithm for task ofﬂoading in vehicular networks with hybrid
fog/cloud computing,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics: Systems (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[4]

[3]

[2] W. Wang, M. Tornatore, Y. Zhao, H. Chen, Y. Li, A. Gupta,
J. Zhang, and B. Mukherjee, “Infrastructure-efﬁcient virtual-
machine placement and workload assignment in cooperative
edge-cloud computing over backhaul networks,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Cloud Computing (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.
S. Liu, T. Zhao, X. Liu, Y. Li, and P. Wang, “Proactive resilient day-
ahead unit commitment with cloud computing data centers,”
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications (Early Access Article),
2022.
C. Cheng, W. Chen, Y. Li, X. Chai, Q. Guo, Y. Ji, S. Niu, and
Y. Hou, “Analysis of earthquake emergency command system
according to cloud computing methods,” (Early Access Article),
pp. 1–1, 2022.
E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, T. Hasani, R. M. Parizi, and
M. Hammoudeh, “An efﬁcient deﬁ-based data warehousing
approach in supply chain ﬁnance.” New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3508072.3508100
S. Tang, C. Yu, and Y. Li, “Fairness-efﬁciency scheduling for cloud
computing with soft fairness guarantees,” IEEE Transactions on
Cloud Computing (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2022.
Y.-L. Lee, D. Liang, and W.-J. Wang, “Optimal online liveness
fault detection for multilayer cloud computing systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing (Early Access
Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[6]

[5]

[7]

17

[9]

[8] M. Xu, A. N. Toosi, and R. Buyya, “A self-adaptive approach
for managing applications and harnessing renewable energy for
sustainable cloud computing,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable
Computing (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2020.
A. Yazdinejad, A. Bohlooli, and K. Jamshidi, “Performance im-
provement and hardware implementation of open ﬂow switch
using fpga,” in 2019 5th Conference on Knowledge Based Engineering
and Innovation (KBEI), 2019, pp. 515–520.
J. Tang, J. Nie, Z. Xiong, J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, and D. Niyato,
“Slicing-based reliable resource orchestration for secure software
deﬁned edge-cloud computing systems,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[10]

[11] W. Xiangyu, J. Ma, M. Yinbin, X. Liu, and Y. Ruikang, “Privacy-
preserving diverse keyword search and online pre-diagnosis in
cloud computing,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing (Early
Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2019.
J. Lai, F. Guo, W. Susilo, X. Huang, P. Jiang, and F. Zhang,
“Data access control in cloud computing: Flexible and receiver
extendable,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing (Early Access
Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[12]

[13] X. Meng, L. Zhang, and B. Kang, “Fast secure and anonymous
key agreement against bad randomness for cloud computing,”
IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing (Early Access Article), pp.
1–1, 2021.
J. Huang, W. Susilo, F. Guo, G. Wu, Z. Zhao, and Q. Huang, “An
anonymous authentication system for pay-as-you-go cloud com-
puting,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing
(Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2020.

[14]

[15] Y. Liu, T. Zhou, Z. Yue, W. Liu, L. Y. Han, Q. Li, and X. Yang,
“Secure and efﬁcient online ﬁngerprint authentication scheme
based on cloud computing,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Comput-
ing (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[16] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, G. Srivastava,
S. Mohan, and A. M. Rababah, “Cost optimization of secure
routing with untrusted devices in software deﬁned networking,”
Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol. 143, pp.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
36–46, 2020.
com/science/article/pii/S0743731519306288

[17] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, G. Srivastava, A. Dehghantanha, and
K.-K. R. Choo, “Energy efﬁcient decentralized authentication in
internet of underwater things using blockchain,” in 2019 IEEE
Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[18] A. Yazdinejad, G. Srivastava, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha,
H. Karimipour, and S. R. Karizno, “Slpow: Secure and low
latency proof of work protocol for blockchain in green iot
networks,” in 2020 IEEE 91st Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC2020-Spring), 2020, pp. 1–5.

[19] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T. H.
den Hartog, “Ton iot: The role of heterogeneity and the need
for standardization of features and attack types in iot network
intrusion datasets,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal (Early Access
Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[20] M. N. Aman, U. Javaid, and B. Sikdar, “Iot-proctor: A secure and
lightweight device patching framework for mitigating malware
spread in iot networks,” IEEE Systems Journal (Early Access Arti-
cle), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[21] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, M. Hammoudeh,
H. Karimipour, and G. Srivastava, “Block hunter: Federated
learning for cyber threat hunting in blockchain-based iiot net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pp. 1–1, 2022.
[22] A. Bedari, S. Wang, and J. Yang, “A two-stage feature
transformation-based ﬁngerprint authentication system for pri-
vacy protection in iot,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
(Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[23] A. R. Biswas and R. Giaffreda, “Iot and cloud convergence: Op-
portunities and challenges,” in Proceedings of IEEE World Forum
on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), Seoul, Korea (South), March 2021.
[24] U. Kumar, P. Verma, and S. Q. Abbas, “Critical analysis of
challenges facing with cloud computing based iot and techniques
used to improve quality of service,” in Proceedings of 6th In-
ternational Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems
(ICCES), Coimbatre, India, July 2021.

[25] R. Sikarwar, P. Yadav, and A. Dubey, “A survey on iot enabled
cloud platforms,” in Proceedings of IEEE 9th International Confer-
ence on Communication Systems and Network Technologies (CSNT),
Gwalior, India, April 2020.

[26]

S. Tata, R. Jain, H. Ludwig, and S. Gopisetty, “Living in the cloud
or on the edge: Opportunities and challenges of iot application
architecture,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on
Services Computing (SCC), Honolulu, HI, USA, June 2017.
[27] E. Akanksha, A. Debnath, and B. Dey, “Extensive review of
cloud based internet of things architecture and current trends,” in
Proceedings of 6th International Conference on Inventive Computation
Technologies (ICICT), Coimbatore, India, January 2021.

[28] M. redha BOUAKOUK, A. ABDELLI, and L. MOKDAD, “Survey
on the cloud-iot paradigms: Taxonomy and architectures,” in
Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications
(ISCC), Rennes, France, July 2020.

[29] L. Bagherzadeh, H. Shahinzadeh, H. Shayeghi, A. Dejamkhooy,
R. Bayindir, and M. Iranpour, “Integration of cloud computing
and iot (cloudiot) in smart grids: Beneﬁts, challenges, and so-
lutions,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Computa-
tional Intelligence for Smart Power System and Sustainable Energy
(CISPSSE), Keonjhar, India, July 2020.
S. Girs, S. Sentilles, S. A. Asadollah, M. Ashjaei, and S. Mubeen,
“A systematic literature study on deﬁnition and modeling of
service-level agreements for cloud services in iot,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 134 498–134 513, 2020.

[30]

[31] A. Yazdinejad, E. Rabieinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi,
and G. Srivastava, “A machine learning-based sdn controller
framework for drone management,” in 2021 IEEE Globecom Work-
shops (GC Wkshps), 2021, pp. 1–6.

[32] W. K. A. Hasan, Y. Ran, J. Agbinya, and G. Tian, “A survey of
energy efﬁcient iot network in cloud environment,” in Proceedings
of Cybersecurity and Cyberforensics Conference (CCC), Melbourne,
VIC, Australia, May 2019.

[34]

[33] A. Auger, E. Exposito, and E. Lochin, “Sensor observation
streams within cloud-based iot platforms: Challenges and direc-
tions,” in Proceedings of 20th Conference on Innovations in Clouds,
Internet and Networks (ICIN), Paris, France, March 2017.
S. Yangui, R. H. Glitho, F. Belqasmi, M. J. Morrow, and P. A.
Polakos, “Iot end-user applications provisioning in the cloud:
State of the art,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference
on Cloud Engineering (IC2E), Berlin, Germany, April 2016.
[35] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Choo,
“Blockchain-enabled authentication handover with efﬁcient pri-
vacy protection in sdn-based 5g networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Network Science and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1120–1132, 2021.
[36] A. Yazdinejadna, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and M. S.
Khan, “A kangaroo-based intrusion detection system on
software-deﬁned networks,” Computer Networks, vol. 184, p.
107688, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1389128620312949

[37] H. Xiong, T. Yao, H. Wang, J. Feng, and S. Yu, “A survey of public
key encryption with search functionality for cloud-assisted iot,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2021.
J. Zhou, Z. Cao, X. Dong, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Security and
privacy for cloud-based iot: Challenges,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 26–33, 2017.

[38]

[39] N. Kashyap, A. Rana, V. Kansal, and H. Walia, “Improve cloud
based iot architecture layer security - a literature review,” in Pro-
ceedings of International Conference on Computing, Communication,
and Intelligent Systems (ICCCIS), Greater Noida, India, February
2021.

[40] A. Alsaidi and F. Kausar, “Security attacks and countermeasures
on cloud assisted iot applications,” in Proceedings of IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Smart Cloud (SmartCloud), New York, NY,
USA, September 2018.

[41] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi,
and G. Srivastava, “Secure ai and blockchain-enabled framework
in smart vehicular networks,” in 2021 IEEE Globecom Workshops
(GC Wkshps), 2021, pp. 1–6.

[42] A. Yazdinejad, G. Srivastava, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, K.-
K. R. Choo, and M. Aledhari, “Decentralized authentication of
distributed patients in hospital networks using blockchain,” IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 2146–
2156, 2020.

[43] A. Sajid, H. Abbas, and K. Saleem, “Cloud-assisted iot-based
scada systems security: A review of the state of the art and future
challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 1375–1384, 2016.
I. Mohiuddin and A. Almogren, “Security challenges and strate-
gies for the iot in cloud computing,” in Proceedings of 11th

[44]

18

International Conference on Information and Communication Systems
(ICICS), Irbid, Jordan, April 2020.

[45] K. N. Pallavi, V. R. Kumar, and S. Srikrishna, “Comparative
study of various lightweight cryptographic algorithms for data
security between iot and cloud,” in Proceedings of 5th International
Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES),
Coimbatore, India, June 2020.

[46] D. Bastos, “Cloud for iot — a survey of technologies and security
features of public cloud iot solutions,” in Proceedings of Living in
the Internet of Things (IoT), London, UK, May 2019.

[47] M. S. Mehmood, M. R. Shahid, A. Jamil, R. Ashraf, T. Mahmood,
and A. Mehmood, “A comprehensive literature review of data
encryption techniques in cloud computing and iot environment,”
in Proceedings of 8th International Conference on Information and
Communication Technologies (ICICT), Karachi, Pakistan, November
2019.

[48] P. Ghosal, D. Das, and I. Das, “Extensive survey on cloud-based
iot-healthcare and security using machine learning,” in Proceed-
ings of Fourth International Conference on Research in Computational
Intelligence and Communication Networks (ICRCICN), Kolkata, In-
dia, November 2018.

[49] T. Choudhury, A. Gupta, S. Pradhan, P. Kumar, and Y. S. Rathore,
“Privacy and security of cloud-based internet of things (iot),”
in Proceedings of 3rd International Conference on Computational
Intelligence and Networks (CINE), Odisha, India, October 2017.
I. B. Ida, A. Jemai, and A. Loukil, “A survey on security of
iot in the context of ehealth and clouds,” in Proceedings of 11th
International Design & Test Symposium (IDT), Hammamet, Tunisia,
December 2016.

[50]

[51] L. Yang and F. Li, “Cloud-assisted privacy-preserving classiﬁ-
cation for iot applications,” in Proceedings of IEEE Conference on
Communications and Network Security (CNS), Beijing, China, May-
June 2018.

[52] R. M. Parizi, S. Homayoun, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and
K.-K. R. Choo, “Integrating privacy enhancing techniques into
blockchains using sidechains,” in 2019 IEEE Canadian Conference
of Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE), 2019, pp. 1–4.

[53] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha,

and
H. Karimipour, “Federated learning for drone authentication,”
Ad Hoc Networks, vol.
[Online].
120, p.
Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1570870521001165

102574,

2021.

[54] Y. Zhao, L. T. Yang, and J. Sun, “Privacy-preserving tensor-based
multiple clusterings on cloud for industrial iot,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2372–2381, 2019.
S. Sharma, K. Chen, and A. Sheth, “Toward practical privacy-
preserving analytics for iot and cloud-based healthcare systems,”
IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 42–51, 2018.

[55]

[56] M. Seifelnasr, R. A. Tawy, and A. Youssef, “Efﬁcient inter-cloud
authentication and micropayment protocol for iot edge comput-
ing,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management (Early
Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.
J. Guo, I.-R. Chen, and J. J. P. Tsai, “A mobile cloud hierarchical
trust management protocol for iot systems,” in Proceedings of 5th
IEEE International Conference on Mobile Cloud Computing, Services,
and Engineering (MobileCloud), San Francisco, CA, USA, April
2017.

[57]

[58] D. V. Medhane, A. K. Sangaiah, M. S. Hossain, G. Muhammad,
and J. Wang, “Blockchain-enabled distributed security frame-
work for next-generation iot: An edge cloud and software-
deﬁned network-integrated approach,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6143–6149, 2020.

[59] A. Yazdinejad, A. Bohlooli, and K. Jamshidi, “Efﬁcient design
and hardware implementation of the openﬂow v1. 3 switch on
the virtex-6 fpga ml605,” The Journal of Supercomputing, vol. 74,
no. 3, pp. 1299–1320, 2018.

[60] A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, M. S. I. Khan, S. Kabir, A. I. Pritom,
and M. R. Karim, “Block-sdotcloud: Enhancing security of cloud
storage through blockchain-based sdn in iot network,” in Pro-
ceedings of 2nd International Conference on Sustainable Technologies
for Industry 4.0 (STI), Dhaka, Bangladesh, December 2020.
[61] R. Kabir, A. S. M. T. Hasan, M. R. Islam, and Y. Watanobe, “A
blockchain-based approach to secure cloud connected iot de-
vices,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Information and
Communication Technology for Sustainable Development (ICICT4SD),
Dhaka, Bangladesh, February 2021.

“A review on security of

[62] A. Yazdinejad, B. Zolfaghari, A. Azmoodeh, A. Dehghantanha,
H. Karimipour, E. Fraser, A. G. Green, C. Russell, and
E. Duncan,
farming
and precision agriculture: Security aspects, attacks, threats and
countermeasures,” Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 16, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/16/7518
[63] Y. Fan, G. Zhao, W. Shang, J. Shang, W. Lin, and Z. Wang,
“A preliminary design for authenticity of iot big data in cloud
computing,” in Proceedings of 29th International Conference on
Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN), Honolulu, HI,
USA, August 2020.

smart

[64] K. Bibak, R. Ritchie, and B. Zolfaghari, “Everlasting security of
quantum key distribution with 1k-dwcdm and quadratic hash,”
Quantum Information and Computing, vol. 21, no. 3&4, pp. 181–202,
2021.

[65] B. Zolfaghari, K. Bibak, and T. Koshiba, “The odyssey of entropy:

Cryptography,” Entropy, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1–27, 2022.

[66] B. Zolfaghari, V. Singh, B. K. Rai, K. Bibak, and T. Koshiba,
“Cryptography in hierarchical coded caching: System model and
cost analysis,” Entropy, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1–22, 2021.

[67] B. Zolfaghari and T. Koshiba, “Chaotic image encryption: State-
of-the-art, ecosystem, and future roadmap,” Applied System Inno-
vation, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1–38, 2022.

[68] B. Zolfaghari, K. Bibak, H. R. Nemati, T. Koshiba, and P. Mitra,
Statistical Trend Analysis on Physically Unclonable Functions: An
Approach via Text Mining. CRC Press, April 2021.

[69] B. Zolfaghari and T. Koshiba, “The dichotomy of neural networks
and cryptography: War and peace,” Applied System Innovation,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1–28, 2022.

[70] E. Bandara, W. K. Ng, K. De Zoysa, N. Fernando, S. Tharaka,
P. Maurakirinathan, and N. Jayasuriya, “Mystiko—blockchain
meets big data,” in 2018 IEEE international conference on big data
(big data).
S. P. Gochhayat, E. Bandara, S. Shetty, and P. Foytik, “Yugala:
Blockchain based encrypted cloud storage for iot data,” in Pro-
ceedings of, Atlanta, GA, USA, July 2019.

IEEE, 2018, pp. 3024–3032.

[71]

[73]

[72] V. Casola, A. D. Benedictis, S. D. Martino, N. Mazzocca, and
L. L. L. Starace, “Security-aware deployment optimization of
cloud–edge systems in industrial iot,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8, no. 16, pp. 12 724–12 733, 2021.
J.-S. Fu, Y. Liu, H.-C. Chao, B. K. Bhargava, and Z.-J. Zhang,
“Secure data storage and searching for industrial iot by integrat-
ing fog computing and cloud computing,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 4519–4528, 2018.
[74] P. Srivastava and N. Garg, “Secure and optimized data storage
for iot through cloud framework,” in Proceedings of International
Conference on Computing, Communication & Automation, Greater
Noida, India, May 2015.

[75] A. Kamble and S. Bhutad, “Iot based patient health monitoring
system with nested cloud security,” in Proceedings of 4th Inter-
national Conference on Computing Communication and Automation
(ICCCA, Greater Noida, India, December 2018.

[76] Q. Hu, M. Duan, Z. Yang, S. Yu, and B. Xiao, “Efﬁcient parallel
secure outsourcing of modular exponentiation to cloud for iot
applications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 16, pp.
12 782–12 791, 2021.

[77] C. Thirumalai and H. Kar, “Memory efﬁcient multi key (memk)
generation scheme for secure transportation of sensitive data
over cloud and iot devices,” in Proceedings of Innovations in Power
and Advanced Computing Technologies (i-PACT), Vellore, India,
April 2017.

[78] A. Kumar, V. Jain, and A. Yadav, “A new approach for security in
cloud data storage for iot applications using hybrid cryptography
technique,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Power
Electronics & IoT Applications in Renewable Energy and its Control
(PARC), Mathura, India, February 2020.

[79] Q. Xia, E. B. Sifah, K. O.-B. O. Agyekum, H. Xia, K. N. Acheam-
pong, A. Smahi, J. Gao, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Secured ﬁne-
grained selective access to outsourced cloud data in iot environ-
ments,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 10 749–
10 762, 2019.

[80] C. Gehrmann and M. Gunnarsson, “An identity privacy pre-
serving iot data protection scheme for cloud based analytics,” in
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data),
Los Angeles, CA, USA, December 2019.

[81] N. Kakanakov and M. Shopov, “Adaptive models for security
and data protection in iot with cloud technologies,” in Proceedings

19

of 40th International Convention on Information and Communica-
tion Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO), Opatija,
Croatia, May 2017.

[82] M. Bahrami, A. Khan, and M. Singhal, “An energy efﬁcient data
privacy scheme for iot devices in mobile cloud computing,” in
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Mobile Services (MS),
San Francisco, CA, USA, June-July 2016.

[83] T. Wang, G. Zhang, A. Liu, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, and Q. Jin, “A
secure iot service architecture with an efﬁcient balance dynamics
based on cloud and edge computing,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4831–4843, 2019.

[84] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, Q. Zhang, and K.-
K. R. Choo, “An energy-efﬁcient sdn controller architecture for
iot networks with blockchain-based security,” IEEE Transactions
on Services Computing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 625–638, 2020.

[85] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Choo,
“P4-to-blockchain: A secure blockchain-enabled packet parser for
software deﬁned networking,” Computers & Security, vol. 88, p.
101629, 2020.

[86] M. Rehman, N. Javaid, M. Awais, M. Imran, and N. Naseer,
“Cloud based secure service providing for iots using blockchain,”
in Proceedings of IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBE-
COM), Waikoloa, HI, USA, December 2019.
E.

Rattanalerdnusorn,
Takahashi,
P. Thaenkaew, and D. Inoue, “Usable and secure cloud-based
biometric authentication solution for iot devices,” in Proceedings
of IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC),
Natal, Brazil, June 2018.

[87] C. Vorakulpipat,

T.

[88] M. K. H. Rahimi, M. H. M. Saad, A. H. M. Juhari, M. K. A. M.
Sulaiman, and A. Hussain, “A secure cloud enabled indoor
hydroponic system via thingssentral iot platform,” in Proceedings
of IEEE 8th Conference on Systems, Process and Control (ICSPC),
Melaka, Malaysia, December 2020.

[89] A. Shahidinejad, M. Ghobaei-Arani, A. Souri, M. Shojafar, and
S. Kumari, “Light-edge: A lightweight authentication protocol
for iot devices in an edge-cloud environment,” IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[90] W. Zegeye and F. Moazzami, “Authentication of iot devices for
wiﬁ connectivity from the cloud,” in Proceedings of 53rd Annual
Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), Baltimore,
MD, USA, March 2019.

[91] N. S. Tallapaneni, M. Venkatesan, Y. B. Sundaresan, and R. Bhati,
“Cloud integrated smart security implementation in iot,” in
Proceedings of 5th International Conference on Trends in Electronics
and Informatics (ICOEI), Tirunelveli, India, June 2021.

[92] Z. Cui, H. Lv, C. Yin, G. Gao, and C. Zhou, “Efﬁcient key
management for iot owner in the cloud,” in Proceedings of IEEE
Fifth International Conference on Big Data and Cloud Computing,
Dalian, China, October 2015.
J. K. S. Doss and S. Kamalakkannan, “Iot system accomplishment
using blockchain in validating and data security with cloud,”
in Proceedings of Fourth International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT
in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC), Palladam, India,
October 2020.

[93]

[94] W.-Z. Zhang, I. A. Elgendy, M. Hammad, A. M. Iliyasu, X. Du,
M. Guizani, and A. A. A. El-Latif, “Secure and optimized load
balancing for multitier iot and edge-cloud computing systems,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 8119–8132, 2021.
[95] D. Samanta, A. H. Alahmadi, M. P. Karthikeyan, M. Z. Khan,
A. Banerjee, G. K. Dalapati, and S. Ramakrishna, “Cipher block
chaining support vector machine for secured decentralized cloud
enabled intelligent iot architecture,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp.
98 013–98 025, 2021.

[96] M. Kazim, L. Liu, and S. Y. Zhu, “A framework for orchestrating
secure and dynamic access of iot services in multi-cloud environ-
ments,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 58 619–58 633, 2018.

[98]

[97] F. Kong, Y. Zhou, B. Xia, L. Pan, and L. Zhu, “A security reputa-
tion model for iot health data using s-alexnet and dynamic game
theory in cloud computing environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.
161 822–161 830, 2019.
I. Nakagawa and S. Shimojo, “Iot agent platform mechanism
with transparent cloud computing framework for improving iot
security,” in Proceedings of IEEE 41st Annual Computer Software and
Applications Conference (COMPSAC), Turin, Italy, July 2017.
[99] D. A. Bird, “Information security risk considerations for the
processing of iot sourced data in the public cloud,” in Proceedings

of Living in the Internet of Things: Cybersecurity of the IoT, London,
March 2018.

[100] S. Nakhodchi, B. Zolfaghari, A. Yazdinejad, and A. Dehghan-
tanha, “Steeleye: An application-layer attack detection and at-
tribution model in industrial control systems using semi-deep
learning,” in 2021 18th International Conference on Privacy, Security
and Trust (PST), 2021, pp. 1–8.

[101] M. Kazemi and A. Yazdinejad, “Towards automated benchmark
support for multi-blockchain interoperability-facilitating plat-
forms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03866, 2021.

[102] G. Divesh, S. Armoogum, G. Suddul, and R. Foogooa, “Estab-
lishing a secure connection between an iot module for smart
agriculture via the amazon cloud,” in Proceedings of Zooming
Innovation in Consumer Technologies Conference (ZINC), Novi Sad,
Serbia, May 2021.

[103] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, and R. M. Parizi, “A deep learn-
ing model for threat hunting in ethereum blockchain,” in 2021
IEEE 20th International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in
Computing and Communications (TrustCom), 2021, pp. 1185–1190.

[104] E. Zhou, J. Turcotte, and L. D. Carli, “Enabling security analysis
of iot device-to-cloud trafﬁc,” in Proceedings of IEEE 19th Inter-
national Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing
and Communications (TrustCom), Guangzhou, China, December-
Jnauary 2020.

[105] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Bohlooli, A. Dehghantanha, and
K.-K. R. Choo, “A high-performance framework for a network
programmable packet processor using p4 and fpga,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 156, p. 102564, 2020.
[106] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, H. Karimipour, G. Srivastava,
and R. M. Parizi, “An efﬁcient packet parser architecture for
software-deﬁned 5g networks,” Physical Communication, vol. 53,
p. 101677, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1874490722000453

[107] H. Xiong, Q. Mei, Y. Zhao, L. Peng, and H. Zhang, “Scalable and
forward secure network attestation with privacy-preserving in
cloud-assisted internet of things,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 19,
no. 18, pp. 8317–8331, 2019.

[108] Q. Tong, Y. Miao, X. Liu, K.-K. R. Choo, R. Deng, and H. Li, “Vpsl:
Veriﬁable privacy-preserving data search for cloud-assisted inter-
net of things,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing (Early Access
Article), pp. 1–1, 2020.

[109] T. Wang, Y. Quan, X. S. Shen, T. R. Gadekallu, W. Wang, and
K. Dev, “A privacy-enhanced retrieval technology for the cloud-
assisted internet of things,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Infor-
matics (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2020.

[110] Y. Chen, S. Hao, and H. Nazif, “A privacy-aware approach
for managing the energy of cloud-based iot resources using an
improved optimization algorithm,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal
(Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[111] H. Nasiraee and M. Ashouri-Talouki, “Privacy-preserving dis-
tributed data access control for cloudiot,” IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1,
2021.

[112] Y. Bao, W. Qiu, P. Tang, and X. Cheng, “Efﬁcient, revocable
and privacy-preserving ﬁne-grained data sharing with keyword
search for the cloud-assisted medical iot system,” IEEE Journal
of Biomedical and Health Informatics (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1,
2021.

[113] D. K. Sharma, K. K. Bhardwaj, S. Banyal, R. Gupta, N. Gupta,
and L. Nkenyereye, “An opportunistic approach for cloud service
based iot routing framework administering data, transaction, and
identity security,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal (Early Access
Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[114] V. A. Cunha, E. da Silva, M. B. de Carvalho, D. Corujo, J. P.
Barraca, D. Gomes, A. E. Schaeffer-Filho, C. R. P. dos Santos, L. Z.
Granville, and R. L. Aguiar, “A network service for preventing
data leakage from iot cloud-assisted equipment,” in Proceedings
of IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC),
Barcelona, Spain, June-July 2019.

[115] M. Fernandez, J. Jaimunk, and B. Thuraisingham, “Privacy-
preserving architecture for cloud-iot platforms,” in Proceedings of
IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS), Milan, Italy,
July 2019.

[116] Z. Sun, Y. Wang, X. Tong, Q. Pan, W. Liu, and J. Zhang, “Service
quality loss-aware privacy protection mechanism in edge-cloud
iots,” in Proceedings of 13th International Conference on Advanced
Computational Intelligence (ICACI), Wanzhou, China, May 2021.

20

[117] J. Jaimunk, “Privacy-preserving cloud-iot architecture (abstract),”

in Proceedings of, Montreal, QC, Canada, May 2019.

[118] T. Choudhury, A. Gupta, S. Pradhan, P. Kumar, and Y. S. Rathore,
“Privacy and security of cloud-based internet of things (iot),”
in Proceedings of 3rd International Conference on Computational
Intelligence and Networks (CINE), Odisha, India, October 2017.

[119] Y. Zhang, B. Li, B. Liu, Y. Hu, and H. Zheng, “A privacy-aware
pufs-based multiserver authentication protocol in cloud-edge iot
systems using blockchain,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8,
no. 18, pp. 13 958–13 974, 2021.

[120] X. Li, Q. Wang, X. Lan, X. Chen, N. Zhang, and D. Chen,
“Enhancing cloud-based iot security through trustworthy cloud
service: An integration of security and reputation approach,” 7,
pp. 9368–9383, 2019.

[121] I.-R. Chen, J. Guo, D.-C. Wang, J. J. P. Tsai, H. Al-Hamadi, and
I. You, “Trust-based service management for mobile cloud iot
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management,
vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 246–263, 2019.

[122] S. Namal, H. Gamaarachchi, G. MyoungLee, and T.-W. Um, “Au-
tonomic trust management in cloud-based and highly dynamic
iot applications,” in Proceedings of ITU Kaleidoscope: Trust in the
Information Society, Barcelona, Spain, December 2015.

[123] M. Pouryazdan, C. Fiandrino, B. Kantarci, D. Kliazovich, T. Soy-
ata, and P. Bouvry, “Game-theoretic recruitment of sensing ser-
vice providers for trustworthy cloud-centric internet-of-things
(iot) applications,” in Proceedings of IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC
Wkshps), Washington, DC, USA, December 2016.

[124] H. Zhu, Y. Yuan, Y. Chen, Y. Zha, W. Xi, B. Jia, and Y. Xin, “A
secure and efﬁcient data integrity veriﬁcation scheme for cloud-
iot based on short signature,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 90 036–
90 044, 2019.

[125] Y. Lin, J. Li, S. Kimura, Y. Yang, Y. Ji, and Y. Cao, “Consortium
blockchain based public integrity veriﬁcation in cloud storage for
iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1,
2021.

[126] S. Javaid, H. Afzal, M. Babar, F. Arif, Z. Tan, and M. A. Jan, “Arca-
iot: An attack-resilient cloud-assisted iot system,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 19 616–19 630, 2019.

[127] S. Shi, J. Cui, X.-L. Zhang, Y. Liu, J.-L. Gao, and Y.-J. Wang,
“Fingerprint recognition strategies based on a fuzzy commitment
for cloud-assisted iot: A minutiae-based sector coding approach,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 44 803–44 812, 2019.

[128] N. M. Ahmad, S. F. A. Razak, S. Kannan, I. Yusof, and A. H. M.
Amin, “Improving identity management of cloud-based iot ap-
plications using blockchain,” in Proceedings of International Con-
ference on Intelligent and Advanced System (ICIAS), Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, August 2018.

[129] S. S. Panda, D. Jena, and B. K. Mohanta, “A remote device
authentication scheme for secure communication in cloud based
iot,” in Proceedings of 2nd International Conference on Innovations in
Electronics, Signal Processing and Communication (IESC), Shillong,
India, March 2019.

[130] K. Albalawi and M. M. A. Azim, “Cloud-based iot device au-
thentication scheme using blockchain,” in Proceedings of IEEE
Global Conference on Internet of Things (GCIoT), Dubai, United
Arab Emirates, December 2019.

[131] A. Y. F. Alsahlani and A. Popa, “Analyzing of

lam-ciot:
Lightweight authentication mechanism in cloud-based iot en-
vironment,” in Proceedings of IEEE Symposium Series on Compu-
tational Intelligence (SSCI), Canberra, ACT, Australia, December
2020.

[132] M. Wazid, A. K. Das, V. Bhat, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Lam-ciot:
Lightweight authentication mechanism in cloud-based iot envi-
ronment,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 150,
p. 102496, 2020.

[133] M. A. Kiran, S. K. Pasupuleti, and R. Eswari, “A lightweight
two-factor mutual authentication scheme for cloud-based iot,”
in Proceedings of 4th International Conference and Workshops on
Recent Advances and Innovations in Engineering (ICRAIE), Kedah,
Malaysia, November 2019.

[134] I. H. Abdulqadder, S. Zhou, D. Zou, I. T. Aziz, and S. M. A. Akber,
“Bloc-sec: Blockchain-based lightweight security architecture for
5g/b5g enabled sdn/nfv cloud of iot,” in Proceedings of IEEE
20th International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT),
Nanning, China, October 2020.

[135] M. Nikooghadam, H. Amintoosi, and N. Bagheri, “Lightweight
authentication for remote healthcare systems in cloud-iot,” in

Proceedings of 10th International Conference on Computer and Knowl-
edge Engineering (ICCKE), Mashhad, Iran, October 2020.

[136] S. Sahoo, S. S. Sahoo, P. Maiti, B. Sahoo, and A. K. Turuk, “A
lightweight authentication scheme for cloud-centric iot appli-
cations,” in Proceedings of 6th International Conference on Signal
Processing and Integrated Networks (SPIN), Noida, India, March
2019.

[137] J. Lee, M. Kim, S. Yu, K. Park, and Y. Park, “A secure multi-factor
remote user authentication scheme for cloud-iot applications,” in
Proceedings of 28th International Conference on Computer Communi-
cation and Networks (ICCCN), Valencia, Spain, August 2019.
[138] H. Xiong, X. Huang, M. Yang, L. Wang, and S. Yu, “Unbounded
and efﬁcient revocable attribute-based encryption with adaptive
security for cloud-assisted internet of things,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[139] A. Yazdinejad, H. HaddadPajouh, A. Dehghantanha, R. M.
Parizi, G. Srivastava, and M.-Y. Chen, “Cryptocurrency malware
hunting: A deep recurrent neural network approach,” Applied Soft
Computing, vol. 96, p. 106630, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1568494620305688
[140] F. Rezaeibagha, Y. Mu, K. Huang, L. Chen, and L. Zhang,
“Toward secure data computation and outsource for multi-user
cloud-based iot,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing (Early
Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[141] J. Hao, J. Liu, W. Wu, F. Tang, and M. Xian, “Secure and ﬁne-
grained self-controlled outsourced data deletion in cloud-based
iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1140–1153,
2020.

[142] M. B. Mollah, M. A. K. Azad, and A. Vasilakos, “Secure data
sharing and searching at the edge of cloud-assisted internet of
things,” IEEE Cloud Computing, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 34–42, 2017.
[143] X. Feng, J. Ma, S. Liu, Y. Miao, X. Liu, and K.-K. R. Choo,
“Transparent ciphertext retrieval system supporting integration
of encrypted heterogeneous database in cloud-assisted iot,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.
[144] H. Deng, Z. Qin, L. Sha, and H. Yin, “A ﬂexible privacy-
preserving data sharing scheme in cloud-assisted iot,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 11 601–11 611, 2020.

[145] W. Wang, P. Xu, and L. T. Yang, “Secure data collection, storage
and access in cloud-assisted iot,” IEEE Cloud Computing, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 77–88, 2018.

[146] H. Kim, C. Hahn, and J. Hur, “Forward secure public key encryp-
tion with keyword search for cloud-assisted iot,” in Proceedings of
IEEE 13th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD),
Beijing, China, October 2020.

[147] P. Xu, X. Tang, W. Wang, H. Jin, and L. T. Yang, “Fast and parallel
keyword search over public-key ciphertexts for cloud-assisted
iot,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 24 775–24 784, 2017.

[148] M. Shen, B. Ma, L. Zhu, X. Du, and K. Xu, “Secure phrase search
for intelligent processing of encrypted data in cloud-based iot,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1998–2008, 2019.
[149] C. Guo, S. Su, K.-K. R. Choo, P. Tian, and X. Tang, “A provably se-
cure and efﬁcient range query scheme for outsourced encrypted
uncertain data from cloud-based internet of things systems,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.
[150] J. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Ning, X. Huang, G. S. Poh, and D. Wang,
“Attribute based encryption with privacy protection and ac-
countability for cloudiot,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing
(Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2020.

[151] Y. Bao, W. Qiu, and X. Cheng, “Secure and lightweight ﬁne-
grained searchable data sharing for iot-oriented and cloud-
assisted smart healthcare system,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal
(Early Access Article), 2021.

[152] S. Belguith, N. Kaaniche, and G. Russello, “Pu-abe: Lightweight
attribute-based encryption supporting access policy update for
cloud assisted iot,” in Proceedings of IEEE 11th International Con-
ference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), San Francisco, CA, USA,
July 2018.

[153] A. Tripathi and S. K. Pasupuleti, “A secure lightweight data
aggregation scheme for cloud assisted iot,” in Proceedings of Fifth
International Conference on Parallel, Distributed and Grid Computing
(PDGC), Solan, India, December 2018.

[154] N. Zeeshan, M. Reed, and Z. Siddiqui, “Three-way security
framework for cloud based iot network,” in Proceedings of In-
ternational Conference on Computing, Electronics & Communications
Engineering (iCCECE), London, UK, August 2019.

21

[155] F. A. Guechi and R. Maamri, “Secure self-destruction of shared
data in multi-cloudiot,” in Proceedings of IEEE 5th International
Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud), Prague,
Czech Republic, August 2017.

[156] ——, “Secure and parallel expressive search over encrypted
data with access control in multi-cloudiot,” in Proceedings of 3rd
Cloudiﬁcation of the Internet of Things (CIoT), Paris, France, July
2018.

[157] W. Wang, P. Xu, D. Liu, L. T. Yang, and Z. Yan, “Lightweighted
secure searching over public-key ciphertexts for edge-cloud-
assisted industrial iot devices,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4221–4230, 2020.

[158] C. Guo, R. Zhuang, C. Su, C. Z. Liu, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Secure
and efﬁcient k nearest neighbor query over encrypted uncertain
data in cloud-iot ecosystem,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 9868–9879, 2019.

[159] K. Huang, “Accountable and revocable large universe decentral-
ized multi-authority attribute-based encryption for cloud-aided
iot,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 123 786–123 804, 2021.

[160] ——, “Secure efﬁcient revocable large universe multi-authority
attribute-based encryption for cloud-aided iot,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 53 576–53 588, 2021.

[161] S. Liu, J. Yu, Y. Xiao, Z. Wan, S. Wang, and B. Yan, “Bc-
sabe: Blockchain-aided searchable attribute-based encryption for
cloud-iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 7851–
7867, 2020.

[162] J. Yu, S. Liu, S. Wang, Y. Xiao, and B. Yan, “Lh-absc: A
lightweight hybrid attribute-based signcryption scheme for
cloud-fog-assisted iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7,
no. 9, pp. 7949–7966, 2020.

[163] N. Kaaniche and M. Laurent, “Privacy-preserving multi-user
encrypted access control scheme for cloud-assisted iot applica-
tions,” in Proceedings of IEEE 11th International Conference on Cloud
Computing (CLOUD), San Francisco, CA, USA, July 2018.
[164] J. Hao, C. Huang, J. Liu, M. Xian, and X. Shen, “Efﬁcient
outsourced data access control with user revocation for cloud-
based iot,” in Proceedings of IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December
2018.

[165] M. Merzouki, C. Mahmoudi, R. Bohn, and C. Tunc, “Security
automation for cloud-based iot platforms,” in Proceedings of
International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE
Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber,
Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data
(SmartData), Atlanta, GA, USA, July 2019.

[166] D. Gupta, S. Bhatt, M. Gupta, O. Kayode, and A. S. Tosun, “Ac-
cess control model for google cloud iot,” in Proceedings of IEEE
6th Intl Conference on Big Data Security on Cloud (BigDataSecurity),
IEEE Intl Conference on High Performance and Smart Computing,
(HPSC) and IEEE Intl Conference on Intelligent Data and Security
(IDS), Baltimore, MD, USA, May 2020.

[167] Z. Han, X. Li, K. Huang, and Z. Feng, “A software deﬁned
network-based security assessment framework for cloudiot,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1424–1434, 2018.
[168] P. Cedillo, A. Bermeo, D. Piedra-Garc´ıa, and P. Tenezaca-Sari,
“Cloudiotsecurity: Evaluating the security in cloud iot appli-
cations,” in Proceedings of IEEE ANDESCON, Quito, Ecuador,
October 2020.

[169] M. Razian, M. Fathian, H. Wu, A. Akbari, and R. Buyya, “Saiot:
Scalable anomaly-aware services composition in cloudiot envi-
ronments,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3665–
3677, 2021.

[170] S. Shen, L. Huang, H. Zhou, S. Yu, E. Fan, and Q. Cao, “Mul-
tistage signaling game-based optimal detection strategies for
suppressing malware diffusion in fog-cloud-based iot networks,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1043–1054, 2018.
[171] T. G. Nguyen, T. V. Phan, B. T. Nguyen, C. So-In, Z. A. Baig,
and S. Sanguanpong, “Search: A collaborative and intelligent
nids architecture for sdn-based cloud iot networks,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 107 678–107 694, 2019.

[172] C. Manta-Caro, J. M. Fern´andez-Luna, and W. J. Fern´andez, “Cy-
bersecurity as information retrieval dimension for cloud-based
edge-powered iot search,” in Proceedings of IEEE Latin-American
Conference on Communications (LATINCOM), Santo Domingo, Do-
minican Republic, November 2020.

[173] Y. Zhang and H.-Y. Wei, “Risk-aware cloud-edge computing
framework for delay-sensitive industrial iots,” IEEE Transactions

22

on Network and Service Management, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 2659–2671,
2021.

malware detection with convolution neural network model,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 96 899–96 911, 2020.

[174] H.-L. Truong and M. Halper, “Characterizing incidents in cloud-
based iot data analytics,” in Proceedings of IEEE 42nd Annual Com-
puter Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), Tokyo,
Japan, July 2018.

[175] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, G. Srivastava, and A. Dehghantanha,
“Making sense of blockchain for ai deepfakes technology,” in
2020 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[176] S. Tuli, S. Ilager, K. Ramamohanarao, and R. Buyya, “Dynamic
scheduling for stochastic edge-cloud computing environments
using a3c learning and residual recurrent neural networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing (Early Access Article), 2020.
[177] A. Javed, H. Larijani, A. Ahmadinia, and D. Gibson, “Smart
random neural network controller for hvac using cloud comput-
ing technology,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics (Early
Access Article), vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 351–360, 2017.

[178] X. Zhang, M. Hu, J. Xia, T. Wei, M. Chen, and S. Hu, “Efﬁcient
federated learning for cloud-based aiot applications,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems
(Early Access Article), 2020.

[179] C. Zhang, M. Yu, wei wang, and F. Yan, “Enabling cost-effective,
slo-aware machine learning inference serving on public cloud,”
IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing (Early Access Article), 2020.
[180] H. V. Dang, M. Tatipamula, and H. X. Nguyen, “Cloud-based
digital twinning for structural health monitoring using deep
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics (Early Access
Article), 2021.

[181] G. Zhang, S. Ni, and P. Zhao, “Learning-based joint optimization
of energy-delay and privacy in multiple-user edge-cloud collab-
oration mec systems,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal (Early Access
Article), 2021.

[182] Z. Ma, J. Ma, Y. Miao, X. Liu, K.-K. R. Choo, and R. Deng, “Pocket
diagnosis: Secure federated learning against poisoning attack in
the cloud,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing (Early Access
Article), 2021.

[183] Z. He, P. Chen, X. Li, Y. Wang, G. Yu, C. Chen, X. Li, and Z. Zheng,
“A spatiotemporal deep learning approach for unsupervised
anomaly detection in cloud systems,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems (Early Access Article), 2020.
[184] B. Yan, G. Wang, J. Yu, X. Jin, and H. Zhang, “Spatial-temporal
chebyshev graph neural network for trafﬁc ﬂow prediction in
iot-based its,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal (Early Access Article),
2021.

[185] S. M. Danish, K. Zhang, and H.-A. Jacobsen, “Blockaim: A
neural network-based intelligent middleware for large-scale iot
data placement decisions,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
(Early Access Article), 2021.

[186] M. He, W. Gu, Y. Kong, L. Zhang, C. J. Spanos, and K. M.
Mosalam, “Causalbg: Causal recurrent neural network for the
blood glucose inference with iot platform,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 598–610, 2020.

[187] D. Nguyen, P. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne, “Secure
computation ofﬂoading in blockchain based iot networks with
deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Network Sci-
ence and Engineering (Early Access Article), 2021.

[188] J. Liang, L. Li, and C. Zhao, “A transfer learning approach for
compressed sensing in 6g-iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal
(Early Access Article), 2021.

[189] Y. Hailemariam, A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, G. Srivastava, and
A. Dehghantanha, “An empirical evaluation of ai deep explain-
able tools,” in 2020 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps, 2020,
pp. 1–6.

[190] A. Yazdinejad, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, H. Karimipour,
G. Srivastava, and M. Aledhari, “Enabling drones in the internet
of things with decentralized blockchain-based security,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6406–6415, 2021.
[191] M. Wo´zniak, J. Siłka, M. Wieczorek, and M. Alrashoud, “Re-
current neural network model for iot and networking mal-
ware threat detection,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5583–5594, 2021.

[192] T.-V. Nguyen, T.-N. Tran, K. Shim, T. Huynh-The, and B. An, “A
deep-neural-network-based relay selection scheme in wireless-
powered cognitive iot networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 7423–7436, 2021.

[193] J. Jeon, J. H. Park, and Y.-S. Jeong, “Dynamic analysis for iot

[194] D. Vasan, M. Alazab, S. Venkatraman, J. Akram, and Z. Qin,
“Mthael: Cross-architecture iot malware detection based on neu-
ral network advanced ensemble learning,” IEEE Transactions on
Computers, vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 1654–1667, 2020.

[195] T. Zhang, A. Song, X. Dong, Y. Shen, and J. Ma, “Privacy-
preserving asynchronous grouped federated learning for iot,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal (Early Access Article), 2021.
[196] J. Zhang, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, Y. Xu, A. K. Singh, D. F. Hsu, and
E. Luo, “Trustworthy target tracking with collaborative deep
reinforcement learning in edgeai-aided iot,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics (Early Access Article), 2021.

[197] A. M. Ghosh and K. Grolinger, “Deep learning: Edge-cloud
data analytics for iot,” in Proceedings of IEEE Canadian Conference
of Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE), Edmonton, AB,
Canada, May 2019.

[198] S. Xu, Y. Li, S. Guo, C. Lei, D. Liu, and X. Qiu, “Cloud-edge
collaborative sfc mapping for industrial iot using deep reinforce-
ment learning,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics (Early
Access Article), 2021.

[199] J.-S. Wu and M.-S. Jian, “Smart home personalizing services
based on adaptive cloud iot devices with bigdata and deep
learning technique,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference
on Consumer Electronics - Taiwan (ICCE-TW), Yilan, Taiwan, May
2019.

[200] G. Zhang, S. Ni, and P. Zhao, “Keynote 3: Towards a hybrid
edge-cloud platform for self-adaptive machine learning based iot
applications,” in Proceedings of Seventh International Conference on
Software Deﬁned Systems (SDS), Paris, France, April 2020.
[201] B. Dias, A. Gl ´oria, and P. Sebasti˜ao, “Prediction of link quality
for iot cloud communications supported by machine learning,”
in Proceedings of IEEE World AI IoT Congress (AIIoT), Seattle, WA,
USA, May 2021.

[202] A. Yazdinejad, A. Bohlooli, and K. Jamshidi, “P4 to sdnet: Au-
tomatic generation of an efﬁcient protocol-independent packet
parser on reconﬁgurable hardware,” in 2018 8th International
Conference on Computer and Knowledge Engineering (ICCKE).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 159–164.

[203] A. Yazdinejad, S. Kavei, and S. Razaghi Karizno, “Increasing the
performance of reactive routing protocol using the load balancing
and congestion control mechanism in manet,” Computer and
Knowledge Engineering, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 33–42, 2019.

[204] S. Duan, D. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Jointrec: A
deep-learning-based joint cloud video recommendation frame-
work for mobile iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 1655–1666, 2020.

[205] Q. Zhang, L. T. Yang, Z. Chen, P. Li, and F. Bu, “An adaptive
dropout deep computation model for industrial iot big data
learning with crowdsourcing to cloud computing,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2330–2337, 2019.
[206] X. Zhou, X. Xu, W. Liang, Z. Zeng, and Z. Yan, “Deep-learning-
enhanced multitarget detection for end–edge–cloud surveillance
in smart iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 16, pp.
12 588–12 596, 2021.

[207] C. Pham, D. T. Nguyen, N. H. Tran, K. K. Nguyen, and
M. Cheriet, “Learning framework for iot services chain imple-
mentation in edge cloud platform,” in Proceedings of IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Communications (ICC), Dublin, Ireland, June
2020.

[208] ——, “Optimized iot service chain implementation in edge cloud
platform: A deep learning framework,” IEEE Transactions on
Network and Service Management, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 538–551, 2021.
[209] L. Chen, Y. Xu, Z. Lu, J. Wu, K. Gai, P. C. K. Hung, and M. Qiu,
“Iot microservice deployment in edge-cloud hybrid environment
using reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 8, no. 16, pp. 12 610–12 622, 2021.

[210] Q. Wu, K. He, and X. Chen, “Personalized federated learning
for intelligent iot applications: A cloud-edge based framework,”
IEEE Open Journal of the Computer Society, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 35–44,
2020.

[211] X. Chen, J. Zhang, B. Lin, Z. Chen, K. Wolter, and G. Min,
“Energy-efﬁcient ofﬂoading for dnn-based smart iot systems
in cloud-edge environments,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and
Distributed Systems, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 683–697, 2022.

[212] C. Qiu, X. Wang, H. Yao, J. Du, F. R. Yu, and S. Guo, “Networking
integrated cloud–edge–end in iot: A blockchain-assisted collec-

[230] O. P. Patel, N. Bharill, A. Tiwari, and M. Prasad, “A novel
quantum-inspired fuzzy based neural network for data classiﬁ-
cation,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. 9,
no. 2, pp. 1031–1044, 2021.

23

tive q-learning approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8,
no. 16, pp. 12 694–12 704, 2021.

[213] S. Sakib, M. M. Fouda, Z. M. Fadlullah, and N. Nasser, “Mi-
grating intelligence from cloud to ultra-edge smart iot sensor
based on deep learning: An arrhythmia monitoring use-case,”
in Proceedings of International Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing (IWCMC), Limassol, Cyprus, June 2020.

[214] M. N and A. A. U, “Cloud-based ﬂood prediction using iot de-
vices and machine learning algorithms,” in Proceedings of Second
International Conference on Electronics and Sustainable Communica-
tion Systems (ICESC), Coimbatore, India, August 2021.

[215] M. Hussain, S. Aleem, A. Karim, F. Ghazanfar, M. Hai, and
K. Hussain, “Design of low cost, energy efﬁcient, iot enabled,
air quality monitoring system with cloud based data logging,
analytics and ai,” in Proceedings of International Conference on
Emerging Trends in Smart Technologies (ICETST), Karachi, Pakistan,
March 2020.

[216] A. Srinivasan, N. Natarajan, R. V. Karunakaran, R. Elangovan,
A. Shankar, P. M. Sabharish, B. S. Sreeja, and S. Radha, “Elder
care system using iot and machine learning in aws cloud,” in
Proceedings of IEEE 17th International Conference on Smart Commu-
nities: Improving Quality of Life Using ICT, IoT and AI (HONET),
Charlotte, NC, USA, December 2020.

[217] N. Abdennadher, “Keynote 3: Towards a hybrid edge-cloud plat-
form for self-adaptive machine learning based iot applications,”
in Proceedings of Fifth International Conference on Fog and Mobile
Edge Computing (FMEC), Paris, France, April 2020.

[218] J. N. A. Kumar and S. Suresh, “A proposal of smart hospital
management using hybrid cloud, iot, ml, and ai,” in Proceedings of
International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems
(ICCES), Coimbatore, India, July 2019.

[219] P. Ferrari, S. Rinaldi, E. Sisinni, F. Colombo, F. Ghelﬁ, D. Maffei,
and M. Malara, “Performance evaluation of full-cloud and edge-
cloud architectures for industrial iot anomaly detection based
on deep learning,” in Proceedings of II Workshop on Metrology for
Industry 4.0 and IoT (MetroInd4.0&IoT), Naples, Italy, June 2019.

[220] B. Qolomany, I. Mohammed, A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, and
J. Qadir, “Trust-based cloud machine learning model selection
for industrial iot and smart city services,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2943–2958, 2021.

[221] M. M. Moussa and L. Alazzawi, “Cyber attacks detection based
on deep learning for cloud-dew computing in automotive iot ap-
plications,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Smart
Cloud (SmartCloud), Washington, DC, USA, November 2020.
[222] C. Thirumallai, M. S. Mekala, V. Perumal, P. Rizwan, and A. H.
Gandomi, “Machine learning inspired phishing detection (pd)
for efﬁcient classiﬁcation and secure storage distribution (ssd)
for cloud-iot application,” in Proceedings of IEEE Symposium Series
on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), Canberra, ACT, Australia,
December 2020.

[223] N. Ravi and S. M. Shalinie, “Learning-driven detection and
mitigation of ddos attack in iot via sdn-cloud architecture,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 3559–3570, 2020.
[224] R. Alghamdi and M. Bellaiche, “A deep intrusion detection
system in lambda architecture based on edge cloud computing
for iot,” in Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Big Data (ICAIBD), Chengdu, China, May 2021.

[225] O. Alkadi, N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A deep
blockchain framework-enabled collaborative intrusion detection
for protecting iot and cloud networks,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 9463–9472, 2021.

[226] Y. Li, A. H. Aghvami, and D. Dong, “Intelligent trajectory plan-
ning in uav-mounted wireless networks: A quantum-inspired re-
inforcement learning perspective,” IEEE Wireless Communications
Letters (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[227] Q. Wei, H. Ma, C. Chen, and D. Dong, “Deep reinforcement learn-
ing with quantum-inspired experience replay,” IEEE Transactions
on Cybernetics (Early Access Article), pp. 1–1, 2021.

[228] N. Masuyama, C. K. Loo, M. Seera, and N. Kubota, “Quantum-
inspired multidirectional associative memory with a self-
convergent iterative learning,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-
works and Learning Systems, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1058–1068, 2018.
J. Chu,

“Robust
quantum-inspired reinforcement learning for robot navigation,”
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 86–97,
2012.

[229] D. Dong, C. Chen,

and T.-J. Tarn,

