Railway cyber-security in the era of interconnected systems: a survey

Simone Soderi

, Senior Member, IEEE, Daniele Masti

, Yuriy Zacchia Lun , Member, IEEE,

1

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

7
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
1
4
3
1
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— Technological advances in the telecom-
munications industry have brought signiﬁcant advan-
tages in the management and performance of commu-
nication networks. The railway industry, where sig-
naling systems are now fully computerized, is among
the ones that have beneﬁted the most. These intercon-
nected systems, however, have a wide area exposed to
cyberattacks. This survey examines the cybersecurity
aspects of railway signaling systems by considering the
standards, guidelines, and frameworks most widely
used in the industry. We dedicate speciﬁc attention
to communication networks since data communication
systems are essential to signaling architectures. To
this end, we explore using dedicated cyber ranges as
an enabling technology to model attacks to computer
networks, emulate attack-defense scenarios, study
vulnerabilities impact in general, and ﬁnally devise
countermeasures to them.

I. Introduction

Railways have been one of the main commodities to
move passengers and freight since at least the late 19th
century. Nevertheless, operators have faced mounting
pressure in recent years to meet ever-increasing perfor-
mance and safety demands from the public [1]. On top
of such targets, the awareness of cybersecurity themes
has also changed. Securing railway systems from cyber
attacks has become a central issue for practitioners and
the public, especially after recent news stories such as [2].
The cause for this abrupt need for answers is simple:
while, in the past, railway systems often depended on
speciﬁcally purposed electromechanical devices that op-
erated in an air-gapped environment, newer infrastruc-
tures are often based on commercial-oﬀ-the-shelf (COTS)
systems that operate in a fully networked setting. This
means that such new installations oﬀer both a much
larger attack surface and that attacks can be carried out
with shallower knowledge than before. This problem is
ampliﬁed by the reliance on shared infrastructures for
the operations of multiple subsystems (e.g., both VOIP
and signaling might use the same network infrastruc-
ture to carry information), making the possibility of
lateral movements extremely relevant. This possibility
is problematic because railway companies may operate
(through the same shared infrastructure) information
and communication technology (ICT) services, which
have also been hit by various attacks [3].

Simone Soderi and Daniele Masti are with Scuola IMT Alti
Studi Lucca, Piazza San Francesco 19, 55100 Lucca, Italy. email:
{simone.soderi,daniele.masti}@imtlucca.it. Yuriy Zacchia Lun
is with Universit`a degli Studi dell’Aquila, Via Vetoio, Coppito,
67100, L’Aquila, Italy. email:yuriy.zacchialun@univaq.it

This scenario is not unique to the railway sector:
many public infrastructures have become victims of cy-
ber attacks in recent years. Nevertheless, it is a highly
problematic situation, as a successful attack on railway
systems can result in the loss of safety guarantee of the
network [4]. For these reasons, the rail transportation
sector can no longer consider cybersecurity, physical pro-
tection, and safety as separate issues, developing eﬀective
methods for verifying and hardening rail systems is of
great practical and theoretical importance.

To address this issue, in 2008, the “European Pro-
gramme for Critical Infrastructure Protection” (EP-
CIP) [5] was established to improve security of critical
infrastructures, which are deﬁned as all those systems
considered essential to maintaining the vital functions
of society. Recently [6], debates restarted to update this
Directive to deal with the present threat landscape,
championing an approach focused on the resilience of
integrated infrastructures rather than on
the overall
protecting the individual assets and for the inclusion
of a much broader landscape of systems, including the
transportation industry and the railway sector.

In this survey, we investigate how the industry has

responded to such a challenge by:

• collecting the standards governing the many safety-
critical subsystems that make up a complete railway
network;

• performing a comprehensive analysis of the cyberat-
tacks carried out in recent years on railways systems;
• investigating the cybersecurity projects involving

railway signaling systems

• proposing an approach based on the use of cyber
ranges to emulate and verify the security of net-
working systems similar those used in the railway
industry.

The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we recall
the main components of a railway system; in Section III,
we introduce the facet of security in the railway sector; in
Section IV we discuss in depth the security of signaling
systems. How cyber ranges can be valuable for security
assessments is reported in Section V. In Section VI
we ﬁnally draw some ﬁnal remarks and discuss further
developments.

II. Railways as an integrated system

In a broad sense, railways can be deﬁned as a collec-
tion of diﬀerent systems whose purpose is to transfer
passengers and goods on wheeled vehicles running on

 
 
 
 
 
 
rails located on tracks. Such sub-systems can be broadly
collected into three families:

• Railway infrastructure, comprises all the tracks
(sometimes referred to as the permanent way), all
the civil works, and the systems and premises that
ensure the regular traﬃc ﬂow. In literature, this lat-
ter component is often further divided to distinguish
between the wayside systems (namely: level crossing,
electriﬁcation facilities, and signaling machines) that
operate along the lines and the so-called “facilities
and premises,” which encompass stations, depots,
and other similar facilities.

• Rolling stocks comprise powered vehicles (loco-
motives, single rail cars, shunters, etc.), engineering
vehicles, and trailer vehicles.

• Railway operations encompass the technical du-
ties performed to ensure trains circulate and the
commercial operations that railway companies per-
form to ensure revenue [1].

Please note that most tasks carried out in a railway
company involve all those three subsystems simultane-
ously. This suggests that “holistic” approaches that favor
securing the system as a whole (see, for instance, [7])
should be preferred to approaches that focus on securing
a single component of the system without caring for its
overall capability to accomplish its many tasks.

A. The dualism between safety and security

Railways and other transportation systems are classi-
ﬁed as safety-critical since their failure may result in loss
of human life or disaster of another sort. The design of
this kind of system has traditionally followed a “safety
above all” paradigm, meaning that, to be considered
safe to be used, each component of such system (and
the system as a whole) must achieve a minimum Safety
Integrity Level (SIL) [8], [9]. To achieve a given SIL,
speciﬁc design rules and test procedures must be im-
plemented, guaranteeing that the system continues to
fulﬁll its safety requirements in case of random failure.
It is worth underlining that any system responsible for
critical functions needs to be safety certiﬁed, and if it
controls vital applications, a fail-safe behavior must be
implemented. However, the safety standards used as ref-
erences for railway infrastructure design do not consider
cybersecurity but only mention that the implementer
should design a cybersecurity mechanism for use with
the standard [10], [11], [12].

For example, the IEC 61508 [9], which can be con-
sidered the general standard for achieving the safety
of electronic and electrical devices, does not cover se-
curity issues [12]. Another railway-related example is
the standard used to design communication between
safety-related equipment, namely the CENELEC EN
50159 [13]. While such a standard addresses the topics
such as message authenticity, integrity, etc., it does not
cover general cybersecurity issues such as preventing

2

overloading transmission systems or ensuring the con-
ﬁdentiality of safety-related information. Both standards
only mention that intentional malicious human actions
must be considered, proposing the ISA/IEC 62443 [14]
standard, which considers four degrees of a safety hazard
and four levels of security.

A similar landscape can be found concerning the
technical norms governing control platforms doors and
wayside control systems. For the former, the primary
reference is the GB 50157-2003 [15], which again does
not tackle security issues [12]. For the latter, relying on
IEC 62264 [16] is common. Although such a standard has
several enterprise-control system facets, security issues
are again not in scope.

B. Security landscape in the railway industry

This lack of cybersecurity awareness in such often
legally-binding standards is a severe issue for the railway
sector. Many solutions have been envisioned to address it
but, before listing them, it is meaningful to analyze the
unique requirements of railway systems compared to ICT
systems and classical industrial control systems (ICS).

As already mentioned, technological evolution has led
to increasingly important computerization of control
systems,
including those used in railways. Nowadays,
railway projects heavily rely on ICS to control electrome-
chanical systems and automate industrial processes and
operations in various applications. The main components
of such ICSs include programmable logic controllers
(PLCs), data communication systems (DCSs), and su-
pervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA).

The communication between such components is
achieved through a transportation network managed via
a central operation control center (OCC), where many
operational tasks are merged. At the present time, there
is no consensus about how to design such control cen-
ters [12], and many diﬀerent OCC conﬁgurations have
been designed following possibly incompatible standards.
Among them, the APTA RT-OP-S-005-03 [17] is among
the most used ones, yet it considers only physical security
and provides no guidelines for cybersecurity.

Securing ICS systems poses diﬀerent challenges than
securing pure ICT systems. Consider, for instance, the
Conﬁdentiality, Integrity, and Availability (CIA) triad,
a well-known model that deﬁnes the security require-
ments to support organizations in specifying the core
security objectives of their systems [18]. As shown in
Figure 1, while ICT security focuses on conﬁdentiality
to prevent stealing private information, ICSs are more
concerned with data integrity and avoiding unplanned
system outages that can disrupt production availability
and proﬁtability. Moreover, compared to classical ICSs,
the transportation sector poses even more importance to
the concept of resilience [19] since the availability of each
subsystem has a paramount priority.

In light of recent news events (we report a few con-
ﬁrmed events in Appendix II), such a situation in recent

3

such as the “European train control system” (ETCS) and
”Communications-based train control” (CBTC), include
ATP functions [24].

Speaking about ETCS, such a system is used as the
signaling and control component of the European rail
traﬃc management system (ERTMS), which is the de
facto global standard [25] in the high speed and main-
line railway market segment (plese refer to Appendix I
for an overview of railway market). ERTMS has been
designed with the hope of being an almost universal
solution to traﬃc management. In order to achieve so, the
European Union Agency for Railways (ERA) speciﬁed
several ERTMS/ETCS levels for the wayside equipment
to address diﬀerent operating needs [20].

Speaking about the CBTC, this system [26] was de-
signed mainly for the metro market [27], and it is
employed for signaling and controlling platforms. Nev-
ertheless, it has found applications also in non-urban
railway systems. CBTC provides a continuous ATP and
oﬀers ﬂexible grades of automation (GoA) that goes
from merely helping human engineers (at the GoA1
level) up to a fully unattended train operation (at
GoA4), in which automatic pilot and automatic on-board
monitoring systems are employed [1]. Two international
standards provide the general requirements for CBTC
systems, IEEE 1474.1-2004 [24] and IEC 62290 [28].
Unfortunately, they fundamentally diﬀer in terminology
and structure, meaning that it is not automatic for a
product to meet both standards [27].

D. Communication systems for wayside system

The functioning of modern signaling systems is primar-
ily based on (possibly discontinuous) wireless communi-
cation between wayside equipment and railway vehicles.
Many solutions exist to achieve such a communication
channel. Among them, the leading standards [29] are the
“Global System for Mobile communications – Railway”
(GSM-R) [30],
[31] and ”Terrestrial Trunked Radio”
(TETRA) [32], [33]. We also cite the novel “Future Rrail-
way Mobile Communication System” (FRMCS) [34].
TETRA, for instance, is used for data and voice com-
munication, allowing group calls and the walkie-talkie
mode [32], possibly involving multiple users at each time
thanks to dedicated IP-based dispatchers [35]. At Level
1, ERTMS/ETCS relies on intermittent ATP architec-
ture that relies on controlled transponders (balises1 or
loops) in the track, which gets their information from
a traditional signaling system via a line-side electronic
unit (LEU). At ERTMS/ETCS Level 2 and 3, the
ETCS works as a continuous ATP system with bidi-
rectional vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication
(either through the GSM-R or FRMCS radio). Inter-
estingly, thanks to the strong push on commonality,
all ETCS levels use the same onboard equipment. In

1Eurobalise Transmission System is a safe spot transmission
based system conveying safety related information between the
wayside infrastructure and the train and vice-versa [36]

Fig. 1. The diﬀerent meanings of the CIA triad in ICT and ICSs.

years, there has been a substantial call for technical
norms that deal with the issue of cybersecurity in the
railway industry.

C. A deeper look on signaling systems

Signaling comprises all the machinery necessary to
ensure safe movements of rolling stocks on railway infras-
tructure [20] and is part of the so-called wayside systems.
In such a family, we can also include many other critical
components of railway systems, such as the electriﬁcation
systems (which hardening is deeply interlaced with the
security of the electrical grid as a whole [21], [22]) and
level crossings.

As a whole, signaling systems are comprised of a few

main components tasked to:

• check the clearance of track sections using either

track circuits or axle counters;

• lock movable track elements such as switches and

crossings in a proper position;

• prevent conﬂicting train movements through the
action of an interlocking (IXL) system. Railway IXL
systems are those systems that are responsible for
granting a train exclusive access to a route which is
a sequence of track elements exclusively assigned for
train movement through a station or a junction [23];
• controlling railway vehicles to keep them safely
apart and within speed limits through Automatic
Train Control (ATC) systems.

ATC systems can be further divided into three sub-
systems: Automatic Train Protection (ATP), Automatic
Train Supervision (ATS), and Automatic Train Opera-
tion (ATO) [24]. ATP is a vital subsystem continuously
ensuring compliance with the maximum safe speed and
minimum safe distance limits. ATS often acts upon the
signals generated by the IXL system to monitor and
adjust the performance of individual trains to ensure
smooth railway service. The ATO subsystem performs
those functions otherwise assigned to the train operator
and meets all operating conditions and limits set by the
ATC, following the requirements of the railway system to
ensure passenger comfort by establishing policies for safe
[23]. All modern railway signaling systems,
operations

ICTICSConﬁdentialityIntegrityAvailability4

Fig. 2. Main railway signaling and communication systems in railway market segments of interest (in gray)

.

III. Toward security requirements for railway
systems

The ﬁrst step in mitigating risks is to identify risk
scenarios. The result of this analysis, in turn, is used to
compute the unmitigated risk and mitigate it. In other
words, the ﬁrst step of this pipeline is to perform a
security assessment of the existing systems to identify
weaknesses in the system [38].

There are diﬀerent types of security assessment. A
way to classify them is to distinguish by whom they are
performed [39]. When an organization’s internal teams
perform the evaluation, we speak about Cybersecurity
Assessment (CSA). Its main goal is to understand the
sources of threats, threat events, and possible vulnerabili-
ties on diﬀerent levels. It ranges from the security policies
to infrastructure security spanning, e.g., network, hard-
ware, cyber-physical systems (CPSs), and physical layer
security. To do so, the cybersecurity assessors rely on
standards and their experience to gauge the strength and
eﬀectiveness of the company’s security posture. When ex-
ternal experts conduct the analysis, the focus is to assess
and measure the compliance of an organization’s systems
and processes against speciﬁc policies, standards, and
criteria in the cybersecurity ﬁeld. In such a case, we call
this analysis a security audit (SA).

In both cases, cybersecurity risk assessments (CRA)
are integral to any security assessment. CRAs catego-
rize cyber risks by their likelihood and impact, and
detail ﬁndings and potential controls to communicate
to management. The security assessment process, as a
whole, will produce a report directed to the company’s
management that will include the evaluation results and
ﬁnal recommendations to improve the security of the test
environment [39].

It is important to note that such kinds of audits are
often very intrusive. Consider, for instance, performing
a vulnerability assessment: this task aims to identify,
categorize, and evaluate asset vulnerabilities. Since vul-
nerability scans may involve intrusive automated scans
or penetration tests, they may heavily impact their
target by creating considerable traﬃc load, abnormal
interactions, and alerts in system and security manage-
ment tools. For this reason, the security assessors must
carefully plan and communicate scanning activities to
all parties aﬀected by a possible service outage. This
reasoning is even more actual for penetration tests: this
technical methodology extends vulnerability assessment
with sanctioned attempts to exploit the discovered vul-
nerabilities to show their potential real-world impact.

It is then easy to see that security assessments of any

Fig. 3. Security threats in a railway signaling system. They aﬀect
the DCS directly through the wired wayside network (in gray)
and indirectly via vehicles’ on-board network and wireless V2I
and V2V communications. Dashed boxes next to each means of
communication list possible technological solutions. Cybercriminals
can attack these systems through the same interfaces the IXL uses
to monitor and manipulate objects.

ERTMS, a railway cab can receive the train control infor-
mation from transponders (so-called balizes), short loop
antennas (a.k.a. loops), or digital radio (mainly GSM-
R). We also cite the “Next generation of train control”
(NGTC) [37] study2: in this project, ETCS and CBTC
have been analyzed to establish possible commonalities
between the two systems.

Interconnected computers control all these systems,
expanding the attack surface towards the railway sys-
tems. Later in this paper, we introduce the most signiﬁ-
cant projects that investigated the security of the railway
systems. Figure 3 shows the schematic representation of
a railway system. In there each component and each V2I,
V2V and spot communication channel can be subject to
security threats. Indeed, wireless communication oﬀers
new possibilities for support and new services, it also
increases complexity during development as it exposes
a broader attack surface. This picture is useful to see
how securing a single subsystem without regard for its
placement in an general scheme may not achieve desir-
able overall security characteristics.

Figure 4 shows a common railway wayside scenario
where the IXL drives other systems through a computer
communication network. Figure 2 summarizes the most
common application scenarios of CBTC systems and
ETCS.

2Sometimes referred also as “EU Project 605402”

Railway signaling & communicationCBTC + TETRAHigh speed & mainlineETCS + GSM-R / FRMCSMetroBALISEONBOARD NETWORKONBOARD NETWORKWAYSIDE NETWORKInterlockingData Communication SystemPeripheral EquipmentV2IV2VGSM-R, 3G, 4G, 5G IEEE 802.11,TETRAIEEE 802.11,TETRAETHERNET OPTICAL FIBER FIELD-BUSESWIRELESSTRANSPONDERV2IxSecurity Threats 5

Fig. 4. Wayside network scenario. The central control room connects the safe HMI with support system diagnostic and interlocking in
LAN and controller areas via WAN. Each LAN comprises networking devices such as gateways, routers, and switches. The control areas
link trackside devices to their safety input/output manager and diagnostic system.

kind must be seen as a project themselves: clear goals
and scope must be established in the planning of the
assessment itself, and constraints must be taken into
account.

To facilitate this process, Section V will show that it
is often convenient to perform the tests required within
a virtual perimeter (named cyber range in the rest of the
article) that provides isolation from production devices.
The cyber ranges allow the execution of the tests fore-
seen by the security analysis by quickly replicating the
scenarios of interest.

A. Standards for Cybersecurity assessments

Currently, procedures for security assessment of rail-
way systems are mostly framed within the ISA/IEC
62443 standard [14], which is the global standard for
network security of industrial control systems (ICSs).
Such a document guides ICS operators through a pipeline
that establishes all the requirements, controls, and best
practices necessary for securing industrial networks.

Other generally applicable norms and frameworks re-

garding cybersecurity are:

• the “Common Criteria for Information Technology
Security Evaluation” (CC), also known as ISO/IEC
15408 [40]. This standard introduces security speciﬁ-
cations, implementation, and evaluation procedures
tailored for the designated use environment;

• the ISO/IEC 27001 [41] standard, which speciﬁes
requirements for establishing,
implementing, and
maintaining information security management sys-
tems;

• the Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) [42]. CSF con-
sists of standards, guidelines, and best practices
related to cybersecurity risk management. It also
provides a common language for communicating cy-
bersecurity expectations and awareness within and
across organizations.

All those standards and frameworks, however, are
rather generic and not tailored to the needs of railway
systems. To address this issue, the European Networks

and Information Systems Agency (ENISA) has estab-
lished a series of speciﬁc security requirements and mea-
sures for the operators of essential services (OES) that
can be recast in the frameworks mentioned above [43].

Besides, the issue of safety certiﬁcation still stands:
since no standard guidelines to certify the safety of se-
curity modules exist, certifying products, including such
modules, is far from trivial. Unfortunately, as we have
already mentioned, safety certiﬁcations are a must for the
railway industry. To address this issue, some Authors [12]
suggested that manufacturers should physically separate
the security modules from the safety modules. This
approach, however, would hardly be optimal as it would
leave security as a side objective for the overall system.
The novel CENELEC TS 50701 “Railway Applications
– Cybersecurity” [38] is possibly the ﬁrst attempt to solve
such an integration issue. This technical speciﬁcation
is based on ISA/IEC 62443 and provides a tailored
solution for the railway industry, including rolling stock,
signaling, and infrastructure. CENELEC will assess this
document in three years and possibly transform it into a
standard [44].

B. Guidelines and other comprehensive studies

Players like the UK Department for Transport, the In-
ternational Union of Railways (UIC), etc., have produced
various guidelines to enhance the security of railway
systems [45], [46], [47]. Bloomﬁeld et al. [48] also provided
a high-level cyber security risk assessment procedure for
generic ERTMS-based railway infrastructures and ETCS
onboard systems. Several projects have also tried to
address the rail sector cybersecurity challenges under the
Shift2Rail [49] initiative, a European public-private joint
undertaking for rail research. In particular, the two most
signiﬁcant ones have been:

• 4SECURail [50], a project that addresses the call for
formal methods in the railway environment and sup-
ports implementing a “Computer Security Incident
Response Team” (CSIRT) for railways;

• CYRail, which has produced various guidelines to

enhance the security of railway systems [51].

CENTRAL CONTROL ROOM IXLSAFE HUMANMACHINEINTERFACESUPPORTSYSTEM  DIAGNOSTICDATA COMMUNICATION SYSTEM CONTROLLER AREA 1SWITCH LAYER 2GATEWAYSAFETY I/OMANAGERDIAGNOSTICSYSTEMETHERNET BUS 1ETHERNET BUS 2TRACKSIDEDEVICES(1...n1)Local Area Network (LAN)DATA SOURCEROUTERLAYER 3SWITCHLAYER 2GATEWAYINTERFACE (I.0)DATA SOURCEINTERFACE (I.1)CONTROLLER AREA NSWITCH LAYER 2GATEWAYTRACKSIDEDEVICES(1...nN)DATA SOURCEINTERFACE (I.N)SAFETY I/OMANAGERDIAGNOSTICSYSTEMWide Area Network (WAN)6

Using the risk scenario analysis output, one can further
proceed with the threat examination phase. At this stage,
the auditor tries to identify the threats that might aﬀect
the network under test, namely all those circumstances
that might disclose, manipulate, or destroy information
together with all those events that might result in a
in turn,
loss of the network availability. This stage,
comprises performing three steps ( highlighted in gray
at the bottom of Figure 5), namely:

• identifying threats in software, protocols, and archi-
tecture is preliminary for determining the associated
risks in the last step;

• ﬁnding vulnerabilities in software, protocols, and

architecture;

• identifying the associated risk that derives from the
threat event’s likelihood and the impact it might
have on the network.

Such states are highlighted in gray at the bottom of
Figure 5. It is helpful to note that referring to the
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) [59] list,
such as the one overseen by MITRE Corporation.

The cybersecurity assessment ends with a report with
the primary objective of providing the proper network
security awareness.

It is important to remark that, despite being based
on the current literature, the procedure we presented in
this section is novel as no speciﬁc standard nor scientiﬁc
consensus has been established to perform this task.

It is also worth mentioning that the threat examina-
tion stage resembles the hazard analysis involving hazard
identiﬁcation and related risk analysis and evaluation in
the safety assessment process (see [60] and the references
therein). However, as described in Section II-A, the safety
and security analyses diﬀer in their focus.

V. Cyber ranges as assessment tools

Studying many security threats related to the network
domain is challenging to reproduce in the laboratory and
highly disruptive to analyze on live systems. Virtualiza-
tion technologies and digital twins provide a valuable
alternative in this case as they enable the creation of
virtual scenarios that can be scaled and maintained
remotely. With the term Cyber ranges, we indicate all
those interactive platforms that allow one to create
possibly fully virtual representations (called scenarios)
of the existing network infrastructure and emulate its
operations. Scenarios can represent a particular sys-
tem setup, specifying active elements, applicable rules,
and selected interconnections so that the operators can
carry out the testing in an isolated environment [61].
In addition, the cyber ranges are invaluable tools for
training purposes [62], [63]: events such as the Cyber-
Challenge.IT [64] become possible thanks to such tools.
Cyber ranges can also be used as tools to replicate the
communication network used for railway signaling. To do
so, one of the critical challenges to overcome is obtaining
highly detailed knowledge from the system owners about

Fig. 5. General cybersecurity assessment process. The core stage
and its main steps have a gray background.

Within the Shift2Rail umbrella, projects that con-
sider cybersecurity topics within a broader context
have also been proposed. Examples are X2Rail-1 [52],
Roll2Rail [53], and Safe4RAIL [54]. Roll2Rail, for in-
stance, studied the impact, likelihood, and risk evalua-
tion for speciﬁc train control and monitoring component,
i.e., the external door control system [55]

For a comprehensive review of other projects regarding

these issues, we refer the interested reader to [49].

In addition to that, we must mention:
• the NIST Special Publications Series 800, and in
particular the NIST SP 800-53 [56], includes the
NIST CSF security controls, while the NIST SP 800-
82 [57] deals with ICSs security controls often used
for security in railway;

• the Open Source Security Testing Methodology
Manual (OSSTMM) [58], which is the de facto
standard for vulnerability assessment thanks to an
auditing methodology aimed to satisfy regulatory
and industry requirements.

IV. Railway signaling networks cybersecurity
assessment

In this subsection we shows how a security analysis
can possibly be carried out. In particular, we take as
a test case the network security analysis of a wayside
system, 3 like the one shown in Figure 4. This procedure
can be seen as a summarization of the rules in the stan-
dards/guidelines mentioned in Section III-A. An overall
scheme of the procedure is shown in Figure 5.

The ﬁrst step in the procedure is the so-called in-
formation gathering phase. At this stage, one collects
information regarding the system under concern, such
as requirements, assumptions on technologies, network
characteristics, etc. These data will be used to extract
a list of all network components and all interfaces that
allow communication between them. Such analysis is the
main object of the architecture modeling phase.

With such a scheme at hand, one proceeds with risk
scenarios analysis. Depending on the use case, this will
involve auditing network device conﬁgurations; inspect-
ing the policies already in place and real traﬃc, and
identifying protocol weaknesses, etc. The analysis of
security requirements also takes place at this stage.

3The scheme we present can also extend to onboard networks.

DESCRIPTIONINFORNATION GATHERING:DOCUMENTSNETWORK DESCRIPTIONUSE CASESINPUTVALIDATIONANALYSISOUTPUTREPEATARCHITECTURE MODELING: UMLENUMERATIONRISK SCENARIOS ANALYSIS:SET UP  SCENARIOS CYBER RANGESTHREATS EXAMINATION: THREATS EVALUATION DOCUMENTATION: FINAL REPORTMITIGATIONS PROPOSAL IDENTIFYINGTHREATSFINDING  VULNERABILITIES CLASSIFYINGRISKS their systems. Almost ironically, the ﬁrst beneﬁt one
gets when building such virtual scenarios is thus not
technological since it forces both owner/operator and
security assessors to detail the internal functioning of the
original system [65].

A. The landscape of cyber ranges

Many solutions have been proposed to create cyber
ranges, depending on the complexity, typology, and pur-
pose of use. To better assess the technological landscape,
an idea is to distinguish between cyber ranges based
on simulation-based architectures from those based on
emulation-based architectures. The diﬀerence is that a
simulation environment mimes the essential characteris-
tics of the physical system but neglects low-level imple-
mentation details4. Instead, an emulation environment
reproduces most physical system peculiarities on a vir-
tual platform. Cyber ranges based on actual physical
systems also exist.

When all the scenario components in a theater adopt
virtualization solutions to emulate physical devices, some
authors classify them as virtual. Physical theaters pro-
vide a replica of the target infrastructure in an isolated
and secure environment. Hybrid cyber ranges adopt solu-
tions relying on a combination of hardware, virtualized,
and simulated elements. An example of a hybrid cyber
range is PAIDEUSIS [63], a theater oﬀering integration
between a virtual environment and physical machinery
such as ICS, IoT, and network hardware devices.

B. The machinery behind cyber ranges

The development and execution of experiments in
cyber ranges are labor-intensive and error-prone oper-
ations, thus making automation a highly desirable fea-
ture [66], [67]. General-purpose conﬁguration manage-
ment automation tools [68], such as Ansible [69], and
Chef [70], Puppet [71], provide the means for system-
atically conﬁguring certain types of components indi-
vidually or in bulk, so it is no surprise that they have
found also use in theater automation frameworks [72].
Speciﬁcally:

• Alpaca [73] and EZSetup [74] rely on Ansible;
• KYPO [75] uses Ansible and Puppet;
• Security Scenario Generator (SecGen) [76] employs
only Puppet, and EDURange [77] adopts Ter-
raform [67];

• Alfons

[78], ADLES [79], CRATE [66], and
CyRIS [80] propose customized special-purpose au-
tomation engines.

frameworks based on domain-speciﬁc

Finally,
lan-
guages such as virtual scenario description language
(VSDL) [81], [67] have also been developed and allow
for the complete deﬁnition, veriﬁcation, and deployment
of cyber range scenarios in an automated fashion under

4such details, however, are often crucial for a thorough network

security analysis.

7

Fig. 6. Data ﬂow in cyber range conﬁguration.

the cloud computing paradigm. The theater automa-
tion frameworks above mentioned, however, are often
limited to unique existing cyber range facilities (like
StarBED [82]
in the case of Alfons) or do not pro-
vide a complete set of network-related functionalities
(traditionally oﬀered by dedicated network emulation
tools [83]). This fact makes them unsuitable for running
virtualized networking scenarios.

Luckily, network-centered cyber ranges also exist. Ta-
ble I presents a comparison between well-known network
emulators, including Cisco Modeling Labs (CML) [84],
Common Open Research Emulator (CORE) [85], Em-
ulated Virtual Environment - Next Generation (EVE-
NG) [86], Graphical Network Simulator 3 (GNS3) [87],
and Mininet [88]. All these emulators provide means for
connecting external nodes, but only CML, EVE-NG, and
GNS3 support device operating system virtualization.
They, however, diﬀer in performance and implementation
methods. In particular, GNS3 can be considerably slower
than EVE-NG, CORE and Mininet, although relatively
easy to use, do not support the emulation of the operat-
ing system of the nodes in the network. This functionality
is, however, essential for a thorough network security
assessment. CML is geared toward Cisco products, and
although it has been given the possibility to emulate
it is quite an expensive
devices from manufacturers,
product.

1) Integration with the cloud: In the case cloud net-
working assessment is also required,
it is possible to
integrate a network emulator with a cloud platform such
as OpenStack and software-deﬁned networking (SDN)
controller like OpenDaylight, as illustrated with the case
of the OpenStackEmu testbed [89]. We remark that SDN
has become the main concept for deﬁning network in-
frastructure in recent years. The paradigm behind SDNs
separates that network control logic (i.e., control plane)
from the actual data ﬂow (i.e., data plane) [90]. With
the SDN, one can abstract much of the hardware details.
However, in an industrial scenario, or when the network
must interface with ICS and SCADA systems, using
virtualization in such an extreme way is unsuitable for
interfacing with CPSs [63].

C. The role of cyber ranges for network security

As already introduced, one of the cyber range key
applications is to enable security testing of complex
systems of which computer networks are part. Cyber
ranges allow one to investigate, for instance, the behavior
of malware on various networked computers or an attack
at L2 of a computer network. This section considers
the role of cyber ranges in network security assessment.

ORCHESTRATION TOOLSPECSTRANSALTORSCRIPTNETWORK SECURITYVULNERABILITIESMODELANSIBLECYBER RANGETABLE I
Network emulators.

CORE [85]
Python, Labs

Mininet [88]
Python, CLI

EVE-NG [86]
API, Labs

GNS3 [87]
API, Labs

CML [84]
API, Labs

8

Network conﬁguration

Network emulation level

L3,
(L1/L2 EMANE)

Connection to external nodes

Nodes operating system emulation

Licensing

Yes

No

BSD

L2

Yes

No

L2

Yes

Yes

L2

Yes

Yes

L2

Yes

Yes

BSD

GPL, Commercial

GPL

Commercial

Fig. 7. Example of using cyber-range to emulate an MPLS IP network.

Indeed, with these tools, we can automatically deﬁne test
scenarios to evaluate network security issues.

Cyber ranges naturally ﬁt in the workﬂow presented
in Figure 5. Following the procedure we proposed, one
can proceed by enumerating the system components and
modeling them in a “cyber range-friendly way,” i.e.,
in a way conﬁguration management and orchestration
tool language, e.g., YAML in the case of Ansible, can
immediately process. If done right, this allows one to
automatically create a cyber range scenario and analyze
the system vulnerabilities in such a controlled scenario in
a non-disruptive way. For example, security threats may
reside in the network architecture, device conﬁgurations,
operating systems, and communication protocols. So,
we can study and test diﬀerent combinations of cyber
threats aﬀecting the system with various cyber range
scenarios.

Conforming to a reconnaissance strategy (please refer
to Appendix III for details), the workﬂow for using a
cyber range to evaluate network security is shown in
Figure 6 and considers the following steps:

1) emulate the network (or a part of it) using the
actual conﬁgurations and operating systems of the

involved devices;

2) research the vulnerabilities

through automatic

tools and scripts created for the speciﬁc case;
3) enumerate the vulnerabilities and measure their

impact on the system under test.

Once one has found a vulnerability with the cyber range,
the security analyst can proceed in developing a counter-
measure and give evidence of it. This process will result
in new scenarios that do not contain the vulnerability
anymore. We document this threat analysis step in the
mitigation proposal. The procedure can be repeated until
the analysis has covered all the network segments.

Cyber ranges can also be used to model attacks
on computer networks [91] to emulate attack-defense
scenarios [92]. This capability allows organizations to
understand potential network weaknesses and train cyber
security response teams to respond to attacks [93] by
diﬀerent kind of attackers. Indeed, using cyber ranges,
one can make several assumptions about the attacker
(internal or external to the network?), its capabilities (is
it a one-person job or state-sponsored action?), etc.

D. Building cyber ranges: an applicative example

As a practical example of the proposed procedure,
in this Section, we show how EVE-NG can be used
to investigate an imaginary IP/MPLS backbone like
the one shown in Figure 7. This kind of network is a
realistic representation of what a railway operator may
use to interconnect equipment in diﬀerent stations.This
scenario has been inspired by [94], [95].

There, we can recognize a core network5 (the central
part composed of provider devices) whose task is to
interconnect various Local Area Networks (LAN) into
private networks. In each LAN, we can recognize a
customer edge router connected both to the core and
to a ﬁrewall. This latter device guards the traﬃc ﬂowing
into each local area.

The conﬁguration of each device is managed via Ansi-
ble, meaning that diﬀerent conﬁgurations for each device
can be very easily modiﬁed and applied to stress diﬀerent
aspects of the network and to discover vulnerabilities bet-
ter and assess their impact. We can quickly run security
tests in a cyber range by creating and executing diﬀerent
scenarios. For example, we can verify using Ansible that
the conﬁgurations applied to each device is deﬁned in the
initial design of the communication network or we can
test whether an attacker can implement attacks such as
BGP/OSPF poisoning or OSPF link ﬂapping. It is clear
that through a cyber range we can automate a good part
of the security analysis process.

We remark that in this shown scenario, the devices are
not emulated but virtualized. Although this may cause
more diﬃculties for the ﬁrst setup, it also means that
each component indeed behaves like the real one and is
not a mere reproduction whose functioning may diﬀer
from the one of the original equipment.

VI. Future challenges and conclusion

In this survey, we reviewed the current landscape for
security issues of railway signaling. To do so, we ﬁrst
analyzed how trackside and onboard systems commu-
nicate in various application scenarios, discussing the
overall architecture of such systems, and noting how
they strongly rely on complex communication networks.
The continuous evolution of attacks on such systems
has spawned interest in new tools and methodologies
for cybersecurity rapid risk assessment for safety-critical
infrastructure. To this end, we reviewed the existing
rail and cybersecurity standards and guidelines that can
be applied to rail signaling scenarios and proposed a
cybersecurity assessment procedure for communication
networks used for railway systems. We also analyzed how
cyber ranges can be used as an enabling technology to
create virtual scenarios in which each vulnerability can
be tested and its impact/risk assessed. As a result, our
assessment procedure can help improve the cybersecurity

5A proper tractation of MPLS networks is outside the scope of
this document. We refer the interested reader to [96] for further
readings on the topic.

9

posture of railway systems by understanding and mit-
igating cyber threats and vulnerabilities. Our solution
is, however, not ﬁnal. At the present time, the most
pressing open challenge is how to integrate such tools
with digital twins (i.e., a digital replica that implements
the same behavior as the physical system). This would
allow for an unprecedented level of ﬁdelity and allow
studying safety and security aspects of the systems under
concern simultaneously. An open question here is how to
address the computational requirements of high-ﬁdelity
simulation environments. Indeed, as the ﬁnal goal would
be to emulate a railway signaling system in its entirety, it
is easy to see how the required computational resources
might be beyond the current state-of-the-art capability.
Another challenge is deﬁnitely on the cultural level:
how can we train tomorrow’s technicians? Gamiﬁcation
has been used in cybersecurity for many years as an anal-
ysis tool in virtual environments such as cyber ranges. It
will undoubtedly be interesting to see and study what
solutions can be adopted to train railroad companies’
personnel in a cyber range with capture-the-ﬂag type
exercises.

Appendix I
An overview of railway market

In order to better understand the scenarios that a com-
pany may have to face when assessing the security proﬁle
of a railway system, it is helpful to introduce the way
railway systems are often classiﬁed based on the intended
task they are meant to achieve. The ﬁrst distinction to
be made is between passenger and freight rail services.
Among the former, we can further distinguish based on
the distance traveled and the kind of territory served
(e.g., urban, inter-regional, etc.) Railway networks are of-
ten organized around mainline rails that serve as a route
between major urban centers and to which branches,
yards, sidings, and spurs are connected. Mainline is used
to provide both High-Speed Rail6 (HSR) services and
conventional speed rail services. Regional traﬃc may or
may not share the infrastructure with mainline traﬃc [99]
and provides conventional medium/short-based services.
Finally, there is an urban/sub-urban segment that may
share the tracks with ordinary road traﬃc and is often
separated from the mainline rail traﬃc. Examples of such
traﬃc are metros, tramways, and light rails.

Appendix II
Incidents and their modeling

In this appendix, we provide in Table II a non-
exhaustive list of signiﬁcant conﬁrmed cybersecurity in-
cidents that have aﬀected transportation operations or
have endangered or had the potential to compromise
transportation safety. Please note that we do not list the
cyber events that resulted exclusively in data theft and
leakage. We can note that while the earliest incidents

6An HSR service is deﬁned as a service that achieves a speed [97]

of at least 200 km/h, regardless of the distance covered [98].

10

TABLE II
Timeline of cybersecurity incidents in the railway sector with their description.

Date Description

August 2003 A computer virus disabled the CSX Transportation headquarters in Florida, aﬀecting signaling in thousands of km

of railway line. [100].

January 2008 A teenager derailed four tram vehicles causing injuries to twelve people after hacking a train network of Lodz,

Poland [2].

December 2012 A cyberattack on a Northwestern US rail company’s computers disrupted railway signals for two days [101].

March 2015

Febraury 2016

The HoneyTrain Project recorded 2.745.267 logins attempts with four successful illegal accesses to the human-
machine interface (HMI) of a virtual train control system in the space of six weeks [102], [103].
BlackEnergy and KillDisk malware infected the systems of a prominent Ukrainian rail company. In December 2015
the Ukraine power grid cyberattack was also attaked using the same malwares [104].

July 2016 A study reported that the UK Network Rail had been hit by at least four signiﬁcant cyberattacks over 12
months, including intrusion in rail infrastructure itself. According to such a study, these attacks seemed to be
exploratory [105].

November 2016 A ransomware attack took ticket machines of the San Francisco light rail transit system (SF Muni) oﬄine for a day,

There was no impact on transit service, the safety systems, or customers’ personal information [106], [107].

May 2017 Deutsche Bahn, suﬀered a ransomware attack on its data systems [108]. The same computer virus also hit the

October 2017

May 2018

national railway systems in Russia [109] and China [110].
Sweden’s transportation Administration was targeted by a DDoS attack on the IT systems that monitor railway
traﬃc. Two DDoS attacks hit the public transportation operator V¨asttraﬁk the next day [111].
The Danish operator DSB came under a DDoS attack, making it impossible to purchase tickets. Internal mail and
telephone systems used by the DSB staﬀ were also aﬀected [112].

March 2019 An Israeli cyber threat intelligence company identiﬁed an actor operating on a top-tier dark web forum selling

access to an administrative panel of a Chinese rail control system [113].

October 2020 A ransomware attack hit the Soci´et´e de transport de Montr´eal (STM) compromising 624 operationally sensitive

servers. The outage also aﬀected STM for over a week [114], [115].

December 2020 A ransomware attack hit OmniTRAX. It was the ﬁrst publicly disclosed case of a so-called double-exhortation

December 2020

ransomware attack against a US freight rail operator [116].
The Egregor ransomware attack hit TransLink, forcing the company to shut down several IT services including
part of payment systems [117]. No transit safety systems were aﬀected, but the IT problems impacted GPS
functions on buses [118] and information regarding personal banking social insurance information may have been
compromised [119]

July 2021 A cyberattack on Iran’s railroad system caused chaos across the whole country [120].

October 2021

The Toronto Transit Commission (TTC) became a victim of a ransomware attack, losing access to systems used to
communicate with vehicle operators, online booking, etc. [121]. Subsequently, the TTC announced that personal
information of (former) employees, may have been stolen [122].

could have directly aﬄicted transportation operations
and safety, the most recent attacks involving ransomware
have not impacted railway safety systems but signiﬁ-
cantly disturbed the transportation services.

Many authors have proposed approaches to ana-
lyze such cyber attacks formally. We cite here at-
[125], vectors [126],
tack graphs [123], trees [124],
surfaces [127], over and above diamond model
[128],
OWASP threat model
[130], and the so-called
[129],
“kill chain” approach. See, e.g., [131] for an overview of
some of these models and [132], [133] for applications of
attack-fault trees to analyze some cybersecurity-related
incidents in the rail industry.

Appendix III
The kill chain approach

According to the kill chain approach to modeling
threats [134], cyber reconnaissance is the ﬁrst step an
attacker performs when trying to breach a system. There
are two types of reconnaissance: passive and active. Pas-
sive reconnaissance is when the attacker gathers informa-
tion about a target without direct interaction. Active re-
connaissance is when an attacker directly interfaces with
a target system to gather speciﬁc details later helpful
in delivering a malicious payload. We refer the reader

to
[133], [134], [135] for a more detailed presentation
of this topic and how kill chains can be used to analyze
cybersecurity-related incidents in the rail industry.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Maurice H. ter Beek

and Rocco De Nicola for their insightful comments.

References

[1] C. N. Pyrgidis, Railway transportation systems: design, con-

struction and operation. CRC press, 2016.

[2] J. Leyden, “Polish teen derails tram after hacking train
https://www.

network,” The Register, Jan. 11 2008.
theregister.com/2008/01/11/tram_hack/.

[3] H. Jo, G. Kim, J. Baek, K. Lee, D. Shin, Y. Shin, and J. Lee,
“A study on the on-board centered train control system
through ICT convergence,” in International Conference on
Control, Automation and Systems (ICCAS), pp. 1206–1210,
Oct. 2012.

[4] D. Milligan, “Securing a railway control system,” in Inter-
national Conference on System Safety and Cyber Security,
pp. 1–6, IET, Oct. 2014.

[5] Council of the EU, “Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8
December 2008 on the identiﬁcation and designation of Eu-
ropean critical infrastructures and the assessment of the need
to improve their protection,” Oﬃcial Journal of the European
Union (OJ) - Legislation series (L), vol. 51, no. 345, pp. 75–
82, 2008.

[6] E. Commission, “Proposal for a directive of the european
parliament and of the council on the resilience of critical
entities,” (COM (2020) 829 ﬁnal), 2020.

[7] A. Thaduri, M. Aljumaili, R. Kour, and R. Karim, “Cyberse-
curity for eMaintenance in railway infrastructure: risks and
consequences,” International Journal of System Assurance
Engineering and Management, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 149–159,
2019.

[8] CENELEC EN 50126, “Railway applications - The speciﬁca-
tion and demonstration of Reliability, Availability, Maintain-
ability and Safety (RAMS,” standard, European Committee
for Electrotechnical Standardization, 2018.
safety
electronic

“Functional

[9] IEC

61508,

of
electri-
safety-related
Electrotechnical

cal/electronic/programmable
standard,
systems,”
Commission, Apr. 2010.

International

[10] K. Hansen, “Security attack analysis of safety systems,”
in Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation (ETFA),
pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2009.

[11] J. Grønbæk, T. K. Madsen, and H. P. Schwefel, “Safe wireless
communication solution for driver machine interface for train
control systems,” in International Conference on Systems
(ICONS), pp. 208–213, IEEE, Apr. 2008.

[12] L. J. Valdivia, I. Adin, S. Arrizabalaga, J. A˜norga, and
J. Mendizabal, “Cybersecurity – the forgotten issue in rail-
ways: security can be woven into safety designs,” IEEE
Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 48–55,
2018.

[13] CENELEC EN 50129, “EN 50129 -Railway applications -
Communication, signalling and processing systems - Safety
related electronic systems for signalling,” standard, European
Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization, Nov. 2018.
[14] ISA/IEC 62443, “Security for Industrial Automation and
Control Systems,” series of standards, International Society
of Automation & International Electrotechnical Commission,
Jul. 2009.

[15] GB 50157-2003, “Code for Design of Subway,” national stan-
dard, Ministry of Construction, People’s Republic of China,
May 2003.

[16] IEC 62264, “Enterprise-control system integration,” stan-
dard, International Electrotechnical Commission, May 2013.
[17] APTA RT-OP-S-005-03, “Operations Control Centers,” stan-
dard, American Public Transportation Association, Jul.
2018. 3rd revision.

[18] R. J. Anderson, Security engineering: a guide to building
dependable distributed systems. John Wiley & Sons, 2nd ed.,
2008.

[19] C. L´evy-Bencheton and E. Darra, “Cyber security and re-
silience of intelligent public transport: good practices and
recommendations,” tech. rep., European Union Agency for
Cybersecurity (ENISA), Attiki, Greece, Dec. 2015.

[20] J. Pachl, Railway Signalling Principles.

2.0 ed., October 2021.

Braunschweig,

[21] Y. Zacchia Lun, A. D’Innocenzo, F. Smarra, I. Malavolta,
and M. D. Di Benedetto, “State of the art of cyber-physical
systems security: An automatic control perspective,” Journal
of Systems and Software, vol. 149, pp. 174–216, 2019.
[22] S. M. M. Gazafrudi, A. T. Langerudy, E. F. Fuchs, and K. Al-
Haddad, “Power quality issues in railway electriﬁcation: A
comprehensive perspective,” IEEE Transactions on Indus-
trial Electronics, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 3081–3090, 2014.

[23] A. Fantechi, “Connected or autonomous trains?,” in 3rd
International Conference on Reliability, Safety, and Security
of Railway Systems: Modelling, Analysis, Veriﬁcation, and
Certiﬁcation (RSSRail), (Cham), pp. 3–19, Springer, 2019.
[24] IEEE 1474.1, “IEEE Standard for Communications-Based
Train Control (CBTC) Performance and Functional Require-
ments,” standard, The Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Feb. 2005.

[25] M. Ghazel, “A control scheme for automatic level crossings
under the ERTMS/ETCS level 2/3 operation,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 18, no. 10,
pp. 2667–2680, 2017.

[26] R. D. Pascoe and T. N. Eichorn, “What is communication-
based train control?,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine,
vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 16–21, 2009.

11

[27] A. Ferrari, G. O. Spagnolo, G. Martelli, and S. Menabeni,
“Product line engineering applied to CBTC systems devel-
opment,” in Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods,
Veriﬁcation and Validation (ISoLA), pp. 216–230, Springer,
2012.

[28] IEC 62290, “Railway applications - Urban guided transport
management and command/control systems,” standard in 3
parts, International Electrotechnical Commission, Jul. 2014.
[29] P. Fraga-Lamas, T. M. Fern´andez-Caram´es, and L. Castedo,
“Towards the Internet of smart trains: A review on industrial
IoT-connected railways,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 6, p. 1457,
2017.

[30] R. He, B. Ai, G. Wang, K. Guan, Z. Zhong, A. F. Molisch,
C. Briso-Rodriguez, and C. P. Oestges, “High-speed railway
communications: From GSM-R to LTE-R,” IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 49–58, 2016.
[31] S. Banerjee, M. Hempel, and H. Sharif, “A survey of wireless
communication technologies & their performance for high
speed railways,” Journal of Transportation Technologies,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 15–29, 2016.

[32] ETSI, “TErrestrial Trunked RAdio (TETRA),” 2011.
[33] J. Moreno, J. M. Riera, L. De Haro, and C. Rodriguez, “A
survey on future railway radio communications services: chal-
lenges and opportunities,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 62–68, 2015.

[34] UIC - Rail System Department, FRMCS and 5G for rail:
International

challenges, achievements and opportunities.
Union of Railways (UIC), Paris, France, Dec. 2020.

[35] W. Qi, Y. Xin, and X. Dechun, “Design of tetra-based dedi-
cated radio dispatching system of urban rail transit,” in 2013
Third International Conference on Intelligent System Design
and Engineering Applications (ISDEA), pp. 574–578, Jan.
2013.

[36] UNISIG, “FFFIS for Eurobalise - SUBSET-036,” Standard,

2012.

[37] P. Gurn´ık, “Next generation train control (NGTC): More
eﬀective railways through the convergence of main-line and
urban train control systems,” Transportation Research Pro-
cedia, vol. 14, pp. 1855–1864, 2016.

[38] CENELEC CLC/TS 50701:2021, “Railway applications –
Cybersecurity,” technical speciﬁcation, European Committee
for Electrotechnical Standardization, Jul. 2021.

[39] J. Warsinske, M. Graﬀ, K. Henry, C. Hoover, B. Malisow,
S. Murphy, C. P. Oakes, G. Pajari, J. T. Parker, D. Seidl,
and M. Vasquez, The Oﬃcial (ISC)2 Guide to the CISSP
CBK Reference. John Wiley & Sons, ﬁfth ed., May 2019.
[40] ISO/IEC 15408-1:2009, “Information technology – Security
techniques – Evaluation criteria for IT security – Part 1:
Introduction and general model,” standard, International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) & International Elec-
trotechnical Commission, Dec. 2009.

[41] ISO/IEC 27001, “Information technology – Security tech-
niques – Information security management systems – Re-
quirements,” standard, International Organization for Stan-
dardization, Oct. 2013.

[42] M. Barrett, “Framework for improving critical infrastructure
cybersecurity,” NIST Cybersecurity Framework, National In-
stitute of Standards and Technology, Apr. 2018. ver. 1.1.
[43] ENISA, “Mapping of OES security requirements to speciﬁc
sectors.” European Union Agency for Cybersecurity, Dec.
2017.

[44] C. Schlehuber and S. Benoliel, “CENELEC prTS 50701
(Railway applications – CyberSecurity),” in Cybersecurity in
Railways, pp. 1–18, ENISA-ERA, 2021. presentation only.

[45] UK DfT, Rail cyber security: guidance to industry. UK
Department for Transport (DfT), London, UK, 2016.
[46] UIC - Rail System Department, Guidelines for cyber-security
International Union of Railways (UIC), Paris,

in railway.
France, 2018.

[47] M. Antoni and N. Ammad, “Argus project-harnessing asset
management to do cyber security to an uic guideline for
railways,” in Congr`es Lambda Mu 21 (cid:28)Maˆıtrise des risques et
transformation num´erique: opportunit´es et menaces(cid:29), 2018.
[48] R. Bloomﬁeld, M. Bendele, P. Bishop, R. Stroud, and
S. Tonks, “The risk assessment of ERTMS-based railway
systems from a cyber security perspective: Methodology and
lessons learned,” in International Conference on Reliability,

Safety, and Security of Railway Systems (RSSRail), pp. 3–19,
Springer, 2016.

[49] ´E. Masson and C. Gransart, “Cyber security for railways
– a huge challenge – Shift2Rail perspective,” in Interna-
tional workshop on communication technologies for vehicles
(Nets4Cars / Nets4Trains / Nets4Aircraft), pp. 97–104,
Springer, 2017.

[50] “4SECURail.” https://www.4securail.eu/.
[51] L. Alexe, H. Pereira, P. Ribeiro, M.-H. Bonneau, and
F. Marqu´es, “Safety and security requirements of rail trans-
port system in multi-stakeholder environments,” deliverable
d2.1, CYbersecurity in the RAILway sector (CYRai) EU
Project 730843, 2017.

[52] “X2Rail.” https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/730640.
[53] “Roll2Rail.” http://www.roll2rail.eu/.
[54] “Safe4RAIL.” https://safe4rail-1.safe4rail.eu/.
[55] M. Rekik, C. Gransart, and M. Berbineau, “Cyber-physical
security risk assessment for train control and monitoring
systems,” in Conference on Communications and Network
Security (CNS), pp. 1–9, IEEE, 2018.

[56] NIST Joint Task Force, “Security and privacy controls for in-
formation systems and organizations,” NIST Special Publica-
tion 800-53, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Sep. 2020. Rev. 5.

[57] K. Stouﬀer, V. Pillitteri, S. Lightman, M. Abrams, and
A. Hahn, “Guide to industrial control systems (ICS) secu-
rity,” NIST Special Publication 800-82, National Institute of
Standards and Technology, May 2015. Rev. 2.

[58] P. Herzog, “The open-source security testing methodology
manual,” tech. rep., Institute for Security and Open Method-
ologies (ISECOM), Dec. 2010.

[59] “Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE).” https://

cve.mitre.org/.

[60] D. Basile, M. H. ter Beek, and V. Ciancia, “Statistical model
checking of a moving block railway signalling scenario with
Uppaal SMC,” in Leveraging Applications of Formal Meth-
ods, Veriﬁcation and Validation (ISoLA) (T. Margaria and
B. Steﬀen, eds.), vol. 11245 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, (Cham), pp. 372–391, Springer, 2018.

[61] E. Russo, G. Costa, and A. Armando, “Scenario design and
validation for next generation cyber ranges,” in International
Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA),
pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2018.

[62] M. M. Yamin, B. Katt, and V. Gkioulos, “Cyber ranges and
security testbeds: Scenarios, functions, tools and architec-
ture,” Computers & Security, vol. 88, p. 101636, 2020.
[63] G. Berra, G. Ferraro, M. Fornero, N. Maunero, P. Prinetto,
and G. Roascio, “PAIDEUSIS: A remote hybrid cyber range
for hardware, network, and IoT security training,” in Italian
Conference on Cybersecurity (ITASEC), pp. 284–297, 2021.

[64] “CyberChallenge.IT.” https://cyberchallenge.it/.
[65] H. Winter, “System security assessment using a cyber range,”
in International Conference on System Safety, incorporating
the Cyber Security Conference, pp. 1–5, IET, 2012.

[66] T. Gustafsson and J. Almroth, “Cyber range automation
overview with a case study of CRATE,” in Nordic Conference
on Secure IT Systems, pp. 192–209, Springer, 2020.

[67] E. Russo, G. Costa, and A. Armando, “Building next gener-
ation Cyber Ranges with CRACK,” Computers & Security,
vol. 95, p. 101837, 2020.

[68] S. R. Goniwada, Cloud Native Architecture and Design. A
Handbook for Modern Day Architecture and Design with
Enterprise-Grade Examples. Apress, 1st ed., 2022.

[69] “Ansible.” https://www.ansible.com/.
[70] “Chef.” https://www.chef.io/products/chef-infra.
[71] “Puppet.” https://puppet.com/.
[72] N. Chouliaras, G. Kittes, I. Kantzavelou, L. Maglaras,
G. Pantziou, and M. A. Ferrag, “Cyber ranges and testbeds
for education, training, and research,” Applied Sciences,
vol. 11, no. 4, p. 1809, 2021.

[73] J. Eckroth, K. Chen, H. Gatewood, and B. Belna, “Alpaca:
Building dynamic cyber ranges with procedurally-generated
vulnerability lattices,” in Southeast Conference (ACMSE),
pp. 78–85, ACM, 2019.

[74] Y. Li, D. Nguyen, and M. Xie, “Ezsetup: A novel tool for
cybersecurity practices utilizing cloud resources,” in Annual

12

Conference on Information Technology Education (SIGITE),
pp. 53–58, ACM, 2017.

[75] J. Vykopal, R. Oˇslejˇsek, P. ˇCeleda, M. Vizvary, and D. To-
varˇn´ak, “KYPO cyber range: Design and use cases,” in In-
ternational Conference on Software Technologies (ICSOFT),
pp. 310–321, SciTePress, 2017.

[76] Z. C. Schreuders, T. Shaw, M. Shan-A-Khuda, G. Ravichan-
dran, J. Keighley, and M. Ordean, “Security scenario genera-
tor (SecGen): A framework for generating randomly vulner-
able rich-scenario VMs for learning computer security and
hosting CTF events,” in Workshop on Advances in Security
Education (ASE), pp. 1–10, USENIX, 2017.

[77] R. S. Weiss, S. Boesen, J. F. Sullivan, M. E. Locasto,
J. Mache, and E. Nilsen, “Teaching cybersecurity analysis
skills in the cloud,” in Technical Symposium on Computer
Science Education (SIGCSE), pp. 332–337, ACM, 2015.
[78] S. Yasuda, R. Miura, S. Ohta, Y. Takano, and T. Miyachi,
“Alfons: A mimetic network environment construction sys-
tem,” in International Conference on Testbeds and Research
Infrastructures, pp. 59–69, Springer, 2016.

[79] D. Conte de Leon, C. E. Goes, M. A. Haney, and A. W.
Krings, “Adles: Specifying, deploying, and sharing hands-on
cyber-exercises,” Computers & Security, vol. 74, pp. 12–40,
2018.

[80] R. Beuran, C. Pham, D. Tang, K.-i. Chinen, Y. Tan, and
Y. Shinoda, “Cybersecurity education and training support
system: CyRIS,” IEICE Ttransactions on Information and
Systems, vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 740–749, 2018.

[81] G. Costa, E. Russo, and A. Armando, “Automating the
generation of cyber range virtual scenarios with VSDL,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.06681, 2020.

[82] T. Miyachi, K.-i. Chinen, and Y. Shinoda, “StarBED and
SpringOS: Large-scale general purpose network testbed and
supporting software,” in International Conference on Perfor-
mance Evaluation Methodolgies and Tools (VALUETOOLS),
pp. 30–es, ACM, 2006.

[83] P. Segeˇc, M. Moravˇc´ık, M. Kontˇsek, J. Pap´an, J. Uramov´a,
and O. Yeremenko, “Network virtualization tools – analysis
and application in higher education,” in International Con-
ference on Emerging eLearning Technologies and Applica-
tions (ICETA), pp. 699–708, IEEE, 2019.

[84] “Cisco Modeling Labs (CML).” https://developer.cisco.

com/modeling-labs/.

[85] “Common

Open

Research

Emulator

(CORE).”

https://www.nrl.navy.mil/Our-Work/Areas-of-
Research/Information-Technology/NCS/CORE/.

[86] “Emulated Virtual Environment - Next Generation (EVE-

NG).” https://www.eve-ng.net/.

[87] “Graphical Network Simulator 3 (GNS3).”

gns3.com/.

https://www.

[88] “Mininet.” http://mininet.org/.
[89] C. H. Benet, R. Nasim, K. A. Noghani, and A. Kassler,
“OpenStackEmu – a cloud testbed combining network em-
ulation with OpenStack and SDN,” in Consumer Commu-
nications & Networking Conference (CCNC), pp. 566–568,
IEEE, 2017.

[90] D. Kreutz, F. M. V. Ramos, P. E. Ver´ıssimo, C. E. Rothen-
berg, S. Azodolmolky, and S. Uhlig, “Software-deﬁned net-
working: A comprehensive survey,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 14–76, 2015.

[91] M. E. Kuhl, M. Sudit, J. Kistner, and K. Costantini, “Cyber
attack modeling and simulation for network security analy-
sis,” in Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 1180–1188, 2007.
[92] M. H. ter Beek, A. Legay, A. Lluch Lafuente, and A. Vandin,
“Quantitative security risk modeling and analysis with
RisQFLan,” Computers & Security, vol. 109, p. 102381, 2021.
[93] K. B. Vekaria, P. Calyam, S. Wang, R. Payyavula, M. Rockey,
and N. Ahmed, “Cyber range for research-inspired learn-
ing of “attack defense by pretense” principle and practice,”
IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 322–337, 2021.

[94] C. Systems,

“Mpls

in the dcn,”

2007.

https:

//www.cisco.com/c/en/us/td/docs/ios/solutions_docs/
telco_dcn/Book/telco5.html.

[95] C. Systems, “Conﬁguring a basic mpls vpn,” 2020. https:

13

[117] C. Cimpanu, “Ransomware attack cripples Vancouver
transportation agency,” ZDNet, Dec. 4 2020.

public
https://www.zdnet.com/article/ransomware-attack-
cripples-vancouver-public-transportation-agency/.
[118] M. Macmahon, P. James, and K. Tindale, “TransLink
payment
ransomware
2020.
3

CEO conﬁrms
info not
https://www.citynews1130.com/2020/12/03/translink-
suspicious-activity-response/.

says
1130, Dec.

compromised,” News

[119] S. Boynton and J. Armstrong, “TransLink warns staﬀ hack-
ers accessed personal banking information in cyberattack,”
Global News, Dec. 30 2020. https://globalnews.ca/news/
7548761/translink-cyberattack-personal-info/.

hack,

[120] Reuters,

“Hackers breach Iran rail network, disrupt
service,” Reuters, Jul. 9 2021. https://www.reuters.com/
world/middle-east/hackers-breach-iran-rail-network-
disrupt-service-2021-07-09/.

[121] R. Rocca, “TTC says investigation underway amid ran-
https://

somware attack,” Global News, Oct. 29 2021.
globalnews.ca/news/8337090/ttc-ransomware-attack/.

[122] J. Patton, “TTC cyberattack may have stolen information
from up to 25K employees, former employees,” Global News,
Nov. 8 2021. https://globalnews.ca/news/8358094/ttc-
cyber-attack-investigation-employee-information/.
[123] C. Phillips and L. P. Swiler, “A graph-based system for
network-vulnerability analysis,” in New Security Paradigms
Workshop (NSPW), pp. 71–79, 1998.

[124] B. Schneier, “Attack trees,” Dr. Dobb’s journal, vol. 24,

no. 12, pp. 21–29, 1999.

[125] S. Mauw and M. Oostdijk, “Foundations of attack trees,”
in International Conference on Information Security and
Cryptology (ICISC), pp. 186–198, Springer, 2005.

[126] M. Mulazzani, S. Schrittwieser, M. Leithner, M. Huber, and
E. Weippl, “Dark clouds on the horizon: using cloud storage
as attack vector and online slack space,” in USENIX Security
Symposium, pp. 1–11, 2011.

[127] P. K. Manadhata and J. M. Wing, “An attack surface met-
ric,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 37,
no. 3, pp. 371–386, 2010.

[128] S. Caltagirone, A. Pendergast, and C. Betz, “The diamond
model of intrusion analysis,” Tech. Rep. ADA586960, DTIC,
2013.

[129] “OWASP Threat Modeling Project.” https://owasp.org/

www-project-threat-model/.

[130] V. Drake, “Threat Modeling.”

community/Threat_Modeling.

https://owasp.org/www-

[131] H. Al-Mohannadi, Q. Mirza, A. Namanya,

I. Awan,
A. Cullen, and J. Disso, “Cyber-attack modeling analysis
techniques: An overview,” in International Conference on
Future Internet of Things and Cloud Workshops (FiCloudW),
pp. 69–76, IEEE, 2016.

[132] G. Pizzi, “Cybersecurity and its integration with safety for
transport systems: not a formal fulﬁllment but an actual com-
mitment,” Transportation research procedia, vol. 45, pp. 250–
257, 2020.

[133] R. Kour, A. Thaduri, and R. Karim, “Railway defender kill
chain to predict and detect cyber-attacks,” Journal of Cyber
Security and Mobility, pp. 47–90, 2020.

[134] M. J. Assante and R. M. Lee, “The industrial control system
cyber kill chain,” white paper, SANS Institute, October 2015.
[135] E. M. Hutchins, M. J. Cloppert, and R. M. Amin,
“Intelligence-driven computer network defense informed by
analysis of adversary campaigns and intrusion kill chains,” in
Leading Issues in Information Warfare and Security Research
(J. Ryan, ed.), vol. 1, pp. 80–106, Academic Publishing
International Limited, 2011.

//www.cisco.com/c/en/us/support/docs/multiprotocol-
label-switching-mpls/mpls/13733-mpls-vpn-basic.html.

[96] L. D. Ghein, MPLS Fundamentals. Cisco Press, 2016.
[97] UIC - Passenger Department, High Speed Rail – Fast Track to
Sustainable Mobility. International Union of Railways (UIC),
Paris, France, May 2018.

[98] M. Garmendia, C. Ribalaygua, and J. M. Ure˜na, “High speed
rail: implication for cities,” Cities, vol. 29, pp. S26–S31, 2012.
[99] UIC - Communication Department, A global vision for rail-
International Union of Railways (UIC),

way development.
Paris, France, Nov. 2015.

[100] M. Niland, “Virus disrupts train signals,” CBS News, Aug. 21
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/virus-disrupts-

2003.
train-signals/.

[101] K. Zetter, “Hackers breached railway network, disrupted
service,” WIRED, Jan. 24 2012. https://www.wired.com/
2012/01/railyway-hack/.

[102] Koramis

GmbH,

Aufbau,
Durchf¨uhrung und Ergebnisse [in German],” whitepaper,
Koramis GmbH, 2015.

HoneyTrain:

“Projekt

11

2015.

[103] F. A. Scherschel, “Simuliertes Zug-Steuersystem HoneyTrain:
2,7 Millionen Angriﬀe in sechs Wochen,” heise online,
Sep.
https://www.heise.de/security/
meldung/Simuliertes-Zug-Steuersystem-HoneyTrain-
2-7-Millionen-Angriffe-in-sechs-Wochen-2810967.html.
[104] K. Wilhoit, “KillDisk and BlackEnergy go beyond energy
https://www.

sector,” Trend Micro, Feb. 11 2016.
trendmicro.com/en_us/research/16/b/killdisk-and-
blackenergy-are-not-just-energy-sector-threats.html.
[105] T. Cheshir, “Four cyber attacks on UK railways in a year,”
Sky News, Jul. 12 2016. https://news.sky.com/story/four-
cyber-attacks-on-uk-railways-in-a-year-10498558.
[106] A. Thomas, “Germany’s Deutsche Bahn rail operator
targeted in global cyberattack,” The Wall Street Journal,
May 13 2007.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/germanys-
deutsche-bahn-rail-operator-targeted-in-global-
cyberattack-1494658493.

[107] S. Gibbs, “Ransomware attack on San Francisco public
transit gives everyone a free ride,” The Guardian, Nov. 28
2016.
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/
nov/28/passengers-free-ride-san-francisco-muni-
ransomeware.

[108] AFP and The Local, “International cyber attacks put
ransoms on German rail station screens,” The Local, May 13
2017. https://www.thelocal.de/20170513/international-
cyber-attacks-put-ransoms-on-german-train-
departure-boards.

[109] TASS, “Virus attack targeting Russian Railways localized,”
TASS, May 13 2017. https://tass.com/world/945717.
[110] AP, “The Latest: 29,000 Chinese institutions hit by cyberat-
tack,” The Associated Press, May 15 2017. https://apnews.
com/article/f3bc9c0749624febb3770aa362555317.

[111] The Local,

“Swedish transport agencies

cyber attack,” The Local, Oct.
//www.thelocal.se/20171012/swedish-transport-
agencies-targeted-in-cyber-attack.

,12 2017.

[112] Ritzau and The Local, “Cyber attack hits Danish rail net-
work,” The Local, May 14 2018. https://www.thelocal.dk/
20180514/cyber-attack-hits-danish-rail-network/amp.

[113] Sixgill Report, “Hacked Chinese rail control

system,”
Sixgill, Mar. 3 2019.
https://www.hackread.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/03/Hacked-Chinese-Rail-Control-
System.pdf.

[114] CBC, “STM says it refused hackers’ $2.8M demand in
ransomware attack,” Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
News, Oct. 29 2020.
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/
montreal/stm-refused-to-pay-2-8-million-ransomware-
attack-1.5782838.

[115] L. Abrams, “Montreal’s STM public transport system hit
by ransomware attack,” Bleeping Computer, Oct. 21 2020.
https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/
montreals-stm-public-transport-system-hit-by-
ransomware-attack/.

[116] N. Tabak,

rail
“Ransomware attack hits
operator OmniTRAX,” FreightWaves,
2021.
https://www.freightwaves.com/news/ransomware-attack-
hits-short-line-rail-operator-omnitrax.

short
Jan.

line
9

targeted in
https:

