Mobile Security for the modern CEO: Attacks, Mitigations, 

and Future Trends 

Marc Schmitt a, 1 

a Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK 

Abstract 

Today’s world is digital, global, and interconnected and mobile devices are at the heart of modern 

communications in business, politics, and civil society. However, cyber threats are an omnipresent 

reality in our hyper-connected world. The world economic forum ranks cyber threats consistently 

among  the  global  top  security  risks.  Attacks  on  mobile  devices  grow  yearly  in  volume  and 

magnitude  causing  severe  damage.  This  paper  offers  a  comprehensive  overview  of  modern 

mobile attacks categorized into malware, phishing, communication, supply chain, physical, and 

authentication attacks, including a section on mitigations and limitations. It also provides security 

design tips to secure the mobile setup and general recommendations to  prevent the successful 

execution  of  an  incoming  attack.  The  last  section  highlights  future  technology  trends  and  how 

those will impact and change the mobile security landscape in the future. 

Keywords: Mobile system security; cyber security; cyber threats; malware; social engineering; 

CEO 

1 Corresponding author. E-mail address: marcschmitt@hotmail.de 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

2 

1 

Introduction 

In  the  last  decade,  there  has  been  an  astonishing  increase  in  connectivity,  stored  data,  and 

advanced  analytics.  This  digital  storm  has  brought  us  another  change,  which  is  increasingly 

shaping the world – the smartphone. Several factors helped mobile devices to spread further. The 

most important ones are information democratization; the need or expectation for individuals and 

corporations to access that information in real-time; a significant shift from local markets towards 

a global economy; and a mindset shift from as soon as possible to right now (Weichbroth & Łysik, 

2020).  

Mobile  devices  have  become  an  omnipresent  reality  and  the  importance  of  those  devices  will 

continue  to  increase  (Weichbroth  &  Łysik,  2020).  In  addition,  the  external  economic  shock 

experienced  in  2020  –  the  coronavirus  pandemic  –  further  accelerated  the  trend  toward 

digitalization and the amount of mobile device utilization to access corporate systems. According 

to several studies, this trend will with a high likelihood gain momentum over the years  (Zakaria, 

2020). At the same time, cyber-attacks have been growing significantly and accelerated further 

(Delcher, 2021). The attack surface grew accordingly and made mobile devices more susceptible 

than  ever  to  cyber  threats  (Check  Point,  2021).  Mobile  devices  have  introduced  a  new  and 

powerful  gateway  to  the  enterprise  backend,  and  executives  and  other  business  stakeholders 

must  recognize  this  new  threat,  which  increases  in  importance  due  to  the  above-mentioned 

developments yearly. There is no “silver bullet” to stop cybercrime (Richardson, 2020), but giving 

up and losing the fight against cyber attackers is no option either. Organizations and individuals 

can shield themselves better from  cyber-attacks by acquiring an understanding of the potential 

attack  surface  and  possible  mitigation  techniques.  This  requires  carrying  out  an  objective 

assessment  of  security  weaknesses  and  vulnerabilities  including  an  identification  of  proper 

defenses.  

In this paper, we analyze the mobile attack surface including mitigations based on the hypothetical 

scenario  of  a  Chief  Executive  Officer  (CEO)  who  is  an  active  smartphone  user.  The  goal  is  a 

comprehensive  analysis,  description,  and  discussion  of  the  threats,  attacks,  and  mitigation 

techniques  including  possible  limitations.  Most  employees  in  today’s  world  do  not  differentiate 

between  smartphones  for  private  and  business  purposes.  Therefore  –  given  our  world  of 

disappearing boundaries – we will consider attacks on the company as well as private information 

on the same device. 

This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 “Mobile Threat Landscape” will define the mobile 

threat landscape and the scope of the analysis. Section 3 “Attacks and Mitigation” builds the major 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

3 

body  of  this  paper.  Here  we  will  explain  and  discuss  the  different  attacks/techniques  that  are 

utilized  to  achieve  an  adversary’s  goal,  including  specific  mitigations  and  where  relevant  a 

discussion  on  the  limitations.  Section  4  “Security  Design  and  Future  Research”  builds  on  the 

earlier analysis and gives recommendations for a modern mobile security design and also offers 

a best-practice summary for the CEO. In addition, hot topics in mobile security are introduced, 

including suggestions for future research. Section 5 ends with a summary and conclusion. 

2  Mobile Threat Landscape 

Our  CEO  is  a  high-profile  target,  which  results  in  many  potential  adversaries  that  might  be 

interested in gaining access to her smartphone. Also, mobile devices can serve as an entrance 

point  for  the  enterprise  backend  and  more  serious  security  breaches/compromises  thereafter. 

Once  an  adversary  has  access  to  the  mobile  device,  he  could  initiate  a  lateral  move  into  the 

enterprise  and  carry  out  additional  attacks.  A  mobile  device  as  our  smartphone  interacts  via 

different protocols/communication networks with the internet and subsequently accesses public 

app  stores,  vendor  infrastructures,  social  networks,  websites,  etc.  The  need  to  connect  to 

(potentially unsecured) internet access points make mobile devices subject to interception attacks. 

Another option is the direct physical connection via a USB cable to another device, which could 

lead to physical security breaches. To give the analysis a more structured nature we will continue 

the discussion based on the following six core threat categories: 

1.  Malware: Malicious applications are one of the standard methods used by adversaries to 

gain control over mobile devices and can have a variety of different purposes. Malware is 

delivered via other methods/attack vectors as phishing, network attacks, or supply-chain 

compromises. 

2.  Phishing: This section covers social engineering attacks with a particular focus on spam 

phishing, spear-fishing, and smishing. Humans tend to be the weakest link in the security 

chain and are often an easy target. 

3.  Communication:  This  section  covers  all  network-based  attacks 

that 

impact 

communication channels (Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and Cellular). 

4.  Supply Chain: This section covers physical supply chains as well as the mobile ecosystem 

– mainly the utilization of app stores to deliver malware. 

5.  Physical and Authentication: The last section covers physical device breaches caused 

by  loss,  theft,  malicious  charging  stations,  and  other  external  devices  including  all 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

4 

authentication methods as passwords, pins, patterns, and biometrics to gain access to the 

mobile device. 

The table below is based on the MITRE ATT&CK2 list of attacks and matches all possibilities to 

associated sections in this paper.  

Figure 1 - Mapping of MITRE attack techniques to section 

There are  two  big differences  when  it  comes  to  the attack  surface  of  mobile  devices.  The  first 

obvious one is getting device access, which is probably one of the most important steps for most 

cyber-attacks. (MITRE, 2021) lists the usual attack options for gaining initial device access. The 

second  one  is  to  compromise  the  network  or  communication  channels  our  smartphone  is 

connected  to.  We  can  differentiate  between  threats  or  attacks  that  need  and  strive  for  device 

access  and  attacks  that  target  exclusively  the  network  and  communication  channels  to  cause 

harm without access to our device.  

2 MITRE ATT&CK® is a globally accessible knowledge base of adversary tactics and techniques based on real-world 
observations. ATT&CK is open and available to any person or organization for use at no charge. 

CategoryTechniquesCovered in sectionDeliver Malicious App via Authorized App StoreMalware, Supply ChainDeliver Malicious App via Other MeansMalware, PhishingDrive-by CompromiseMalwareExploit via Charging Station or PCPhysical and AuthenticationExploit via Radio Interfaces CommunicationInstall Insecure or Malicious ConfigurationMalwareLockscreen Bypass Physical and AuthenticationMasquerade as Legitimate Application MalwareSupply Chain Compromise Supply ChainNetwork AttacksDowngrade to Insecure ProtocolsCommunicationEavesdrop on Insecure Network CommunicationCommunicationExploit SS7 to Redirect Phone Calls/SMS CommunicationExploit SS7 to Track Device LocationCommunicationJamming or Denial of ServiceCommunicationManipulate Device Communication CommunicationRogue Cellular Base StationCommunicationRogue Wi-Fi Access PointsCommunicationDevice Access 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

5 

The  following  section  will  focus  on  each  of  these  categories  and  describe  the  associated 

attacks/techniques  in  more  detail.  Also,  mitigation  techniques  will  be  discussed  including  their 

limitations. 

3  Attacks and Mitigations 

This part will focus on the defined threat categories and describe  the different attacks for each. 

This  includes  examples,  mitigation  techniques,  as  well  as  potential  limitations.  Due  to  the 

interconnected nature of cybersecurity topics can overlap in some areas. 

3.1  Malware 

Due to the overlapping nature of security topics, we will start with an overview of malware types 

as malware is usually utilized during several concrete attack scenarios described later below. We 

can  think  of  this  chapter  as  the  X  we  would  move  out  of  the  brackets  in  an  equation.  Cyber- 

adversaries use malware to perform malicious activities on their behalf.  Malware is designed to 

infiltrate, disrupt and/or damage computers without the user's consent. It can be present in any 

layer of the system stack – either as an independent program or embedded in another application 

or document (Lee, 2019).  

3.1.1  Malware Types 

The  term  malware  includes  viruses,  worms,  Trojans,  rootkits,  spyware,  adware,  keyloggers, 

botnets,  and  more.  Below  is  a  taxonomy  for  the  different  malware  types  including  a  short 

description (Abijah Roseline & Geetha, 2021; Kaspersky, 2021b; Lee, 2019). 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

6 

Figure 2 – Malware Types 

Malware types that are especially relevant for mobile devices as Adware, Ransomware, Rootkits, 

and  Trojans.  Advertisement-related  malware  embedded  in  applications  is  one  of  the  most 

widespread and also profitable enterprises today. It is not necessary very harmful to the end-user, 

but tends to be annoying and might drain the energy of the mobile device faster. Another modern 

malware type is crypto-jacking, which refers to unauthorized cryptocurrency mining on a victim’s 

mobile device. This is done by embedding crypto-minder code in the app. The crypto-miners then 

utilize  a  device's  processing  power  to  mine  cryptocurrencies  (Bitcoin,  Ethereum,  or  another 

altcoin). While not very harmful to the device owner it will constantly drain the device's energy as 

the  crypto-miner  will  be  active  and  independent  from  the  host  application  (Abijah  Roseline  & 

Geetha, 2021). 

3.1.2  Malware Distribution Channels 

Malware needs to be delivered from the adversary to the target. Adversaries use different methods 

to install Malware or malicious configuration settings on our devices. There are several different 

ways to accomplish this objective. The simplest way is where the adversary gains access to a 

system  through  a  user  visiting  a  website  over  the  normal  course  of  browsing,  which  is  rather 

TypeDescriptionVirusHidden, self-replicating software that propagates by infecting another program (parasitic infectors). A virus cannot replicate itself without the activation of a host/user.WormStand-alone malicious programs. Able to self-replicate and propagate independently. No user activation required to execute or spread their code. Able to make multiple copies of itself and spread across the network/internet.TrojanA non-replicating program that is disguised as a useful application, but performs a different function in the background without the knowledge of the user. E.g. Cryptojacking - mobile miners that utilize a device's processing power to mine cryptocurrencies or adware that displays additional advertisement.RootkitStealth software, which is actively flying under the radar. This is achieved by gaining privileges as root access. It then gains control over the devices functions (e.g. security software)BackdoorAllows unauthorized access. A back door is an alternative method of access to programs or hardware systems that bypasses the usual security mechanisms. SpywareSecretly installed software that invades the user’s privacy by gathering information on individuals or organizations without their knowledge (e.g. Keylogger)AdwareSoftware that shows the user advertising in addition to the actual function or installs additional software that displays advertising.RansomwareAlso known as cryptoviral extortion. Ransomware gains access to the victims data and encrypts their files (private person or organization). The attacker then demands a ransom payment to deliver the encryption key.BotnetInfects a system and becomes a node. Many of thoes nodes build a group of automated malicious programs called bots. The botnet can be used to carry out differnet attacks (e.g. DDoS, distribution of viruses, and worms) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

7 

random. Another way is to deliver malicious apps via official app stores. This is one of the best 

ways to do it as most mobile devices tend to be configured in a way that only allows installations 

from  authorized  app  stores  like  the  Google  Play  Store  or  the  Apple  App  Store.  If  the  attacker 

manages  to  place  malware-infected  applications  onto  those  official  stores  it  will  be  possible  to 

distribute them easily. To do that, adversaries can use fake identities to create developer accounts 

to publish malicious applications to app stores. Also, once live on the app store the adversary can 

gain access to the target’s Google account and use the possibility of remote installation to install 

this malicious app on an android device (MITRE, 2021). The obvious alternative to authorized app 

stores is are 3rd party app stores. The advantage would be unlikely detection and easy setup due 

to less scrutiny compared to official app stores. The major downside of this approach is the fact 

that many mobile devices do not allow the installation of applications outside of the authorized app 

store  ecosystem.  A  third  option  is  to  utilize  social  engineering  as  phishing  emails  or  text 

messages  to  convince  the  target  to visit  the  website.  Phishing emails or  text  messages,  either 

directly contain an attachment or use a weblink to finalize the attack (MITRE, 2021). More details 

on phishing can be found in section 3.2. 

Before malware is delivered it needs to be packaged in a way to conceive its victims. Independent 

of the specific malware or distribution type, but especially for app-store delivery it makes sense to 

masquerade as a legitimate application. The closer the malicious application looks to the real one 

the easier it will be to convince the target to download and keep the malicious application on their 

devices. This is done by embedding the malware in a legitimate application or by closely aligning 

the  design  of  the  malicious  app  with  a  popular  real  app.  Embedding  the  malware  requires 

downloading and reengineering the application. Once this is done, the attacker can upload the 

malware-infected app to 3rd party or authorized app stores, or use other methods as phishing to 

deliver the infected app (MITRE, 2021). 

The  following  two  examples  will  show  the  danger  of  today's  sophisticated  malware  packages. 

Anubis started as a tool for cyber espionage but was revised and entered the market again as a 

banking trojan. It is a fairly comprehensive malware package and can completely take over an 

Android mobile device. Anubis incorporates many different malware types as trojan, spyware, and 

even ransomware. One way Anubis was distributed was via phishing emails, that contained a link 

to  a  downloadable  Android  Package  Kit  (APK).  This  is  the  normal  way  to  install  Android 

applications. During the installation, the user was asked to Google Play Protect, which in reality 

did  the  opposite.  This  action  disabled  the  real  Google  Play  Protect  and  gave  Anubis  various 

permissions Anubis (Feller, 2020). See the table below. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

8 

Figure 3 – Anubis Permission Rights 

Anubis  targets  mainly  apps  related  to  financial  services,  but  also  other  shopping  apps  where 

monetization might be possible. The identified applications receive a slight update in the form of 

a fake overlay – again social engineering – to capture the user credentials (Feller, 2020). However, 

Anubis was not only distributed via phishing emails. It used/uses all available distribution channels 

as far this was possible and was indeed also available at the official Google App Store (Sun, 2019). 

3.1.3  Mitigations and Limitations 

Protection against malware could come in the form of shielding the mobile devices themselves 

against  malicious  code.  This  can  be  done  by  installing  and  keeping  up-to-day  anti-malware 

solutions  on  the  device,  having  policies  in  place  that  prevent  the  download  and  installation  of 

unsecured  content,  and  being  aware  of  the  distribution  channels  is  helpful  to  identify  potential 

issues by the user. Unfortunately, in case apps from authorized app stores are indeed infected 

with malicious code, there is not much the end-user can do, except the standard mechanism that 

hopefully  prevents  the  malware  from  causing  harm  as  an  antimalware  solution  on  the  mobile 

device. However, as the malware was already able to circumvent the protection mechanism from 

the  authorized  store  there  is  a  high  likelihood  that  most  malware  solutions  will  not  be  able  to 

identify it either. Overall, the best and easiest way to stop malware – as Anubis – is to prevent the 

installation in the first place as many malware types are often designed to specifically circumvent 

security mechanisms. 

Anubis - Permission RightsCapturing screenshotsEnabling or changing administration settingsOpening and visiting any URLDisabling Play ProtectRecording audioMaking phone callsStealing the contact listControlling the device via VNCSending, receiving and deleting SMSLocking the deviceEncrypting files on the device and external drivesSearching for filesRetrieving the GPS locationCapturing remote control commands from Twitter and TelegramPushing overlaysReading the device ID 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

9 

In  the  following  sections,  we  will  discuss  phishing,  communication,  supply  chain,  and  physical 

device breaches, which are often used as distribution channels for malware. One of the best ways 

to distribute malicious software as Anubis is to trick unaware end-users into taking certain actions. 

Therefore, we will first discuss social engineering, or more specifically phishing.  

3.2  Phishing 

Social Engineering is one of the most frequent attacks and everyone using the internet regularly 

has a high likelihood to have experienced it already. The most prevalent social engineering attack 

is phishing which affects anyone at any age and includes private and work scenarios. As a general 

rule in cybersecurity, humans tend to be the weakest link between the attacker and confidential 

information. 

3.2.1  Phishing Types 

Adversaries  using  phishing  attacks  disguise  themselves  as  trustworthy  parties  and  send  fake 

emails  or  text  messages,  which  might  contain  direct  attachments  (malware)  or  links  to  fake 

websites to deceive their targets (Fahl, 2019). The purpose of most phishing scams is to infect 

your device with malware, steal sensitive information like login credentials, or credit card numbers, 

obtain control of online accounts like email and social media or directly convince you  – usually 

with a sense of urgency – to carry out a monetary transaction (Kaspersky, 2021a). The idea behind 

phishing is to exploit user interface weaknesses taking advantage of the fact that humans have 

difficulties with verifying URLs and dynamic content of rendered HTML documents (Fahl, 2019). 

Phishing usually serves as initial access to the victim’s device or account, but often does not stop 

there. Since social engineering and phishing attacks depend largely on the generated trust, they 

can convey to the target it is even more successful to utilize the compromised accounts to launch 

a new more targeted attack on the contact list of the compromised account. Phishing attacks can 

result in identity theft or loss of money and can take different forms.  

Phishing for the mass market – spam phishing – takes on a spam-like nature and bombards a 

large number of targets with emails or SMS, which usually contain links to forged websites, where 

the  phishing  attack  continues.  However,  the  email  could  also  contain  a  direct  download  link. 

Attackers  use  forged  websites  to  convince  their  victims  they  are  interacting  with  the  legitimate 

version. Usually, only a small percentage will fall for this trick, but given the huge volume, this will 

be enough to consider the attack a success. Spam phishing is easy and popular but tends to be 

easily identifiable as spam or malicious attempt (Kaspersky, 2021a). 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

10 

More dangerous – especially for our CEO – are targeted spear-phishing attacks. Whaling usually 

takes on high-level targets from companies and government organizations, but can be applied to 

anyone the adversary deems a worthy target. Whaling attacks are planned rather long-term and 

start with an investigation/intelligence phase before preparing the attack itself. The amount of effort 

put into preparatory investigation and research can be significant before carrying out the actual 

attack. Attackers might gather details about their targets and organizations from publicly available 

information  such  as  social  media  or  earlier  carried  out  data  breaches.    Due  to  the  nature  of 

whaling, which tailors the attack parameters specifically to the unique situation, every executive 

could fall  for a well-prepared targeted phishing attack. To deceive our CEO into carrying out a 

specific  pre-planned  action  the  phishing  adversary  could  compromise  accounts  of  friends  and 

family  members  of  the  CEO  or  colleagues  working  at  the  same  company.  We  all  tend  to  trust 

people we know and the unlikely nature of this attack would make it usually successful. What is 

dangerous about well-planned targeted phishing attacks is that they often do not stop. CEO fraud 

is a method of fraud in which the attacker pretends to be a senior executive and, for example, asks 

employees  to  transfer  money  to  a  specific  account  or  to  send  confidential  information.  If  the 

attacker  uses  e-mail  as  a  means  of  communication,  CEO  fraud  is  a  form  of  Business  E-Mail 

Compromise (BEC) (Saud Al-Musib, Mohammad Al-Serhani, Humayun, & Jhanjhi, 2021). Usually 

faking the identity of an executive is called CEO fraud (Keyworth & Wall, 2016). This attack would 

be even more dangerous when the adversary had in fact access to the phone or email account of 

our CEO to convince the target to perform specific actions such as transferring funds or sending 

confidential information. 

Smishing is the smartphone version of phishing and uses text messages such as SMS, whats-

app, and others instead of emails. However, the general logic remains the same. Two methods 

are used to steal the victim's data:  

Malware:  The  Smishing  URL  link  could directly  convince  you  to  download  one  of  the  malware 

types described in section 4.1. This would include all the techniques such as masquerading as a 

legitimate app, asking actively for permission, or confidential information. 

Malicious website: Link to a forged website that mimics a legitimate one where you have to enter 

sensitive personal information (login credentials, credit card data, etc.) 

A third way, which is especially relevant for our CEO scenario is direct action. In case it is possible 

to directly invoke the victim's trust, for example through an already compromised account due to 

an earlier attack, there is a possibility to convince the target into immediate action (e.g. transferring 

money, handing out login credentials, or any other information the attacker is after). For our CEO 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

11 

scenario, this is especially relevant as this “spear-Smishing” attack could easily result in immediate 

access to useful information. 

3.2.2  Mitigations and Limitations 

What is the best way for our CEO to prevent phishing attacks? What always should be in place 

for enterprises are potent anti-malware solutions, which can automatically quarantine suspicious 

files;  network  intrusion  prevention  mechanisms  to  block  traffic  at  network  boundaries;  having 

restrictions  in  place  for  certain  websites,  which  automatically  block  downloads/attachments  or 

restrict  browser  extensions;  utilization  of  anti-spoofing  and  email  authentication  instruments  to 

filter messages based on validity checks of the sender domain and integrity of messages (MITRE, 

2021). So much for the technical protection within enterprises, but this is nothing the end-user or 

employee can necessarily influence. Another way to prevent social engineering attacks is to apply 

“good judgment”. If our CEO received an unusual request via the device or email of a close friend, 

family member, or colleague it might be best to give them a call to assure it was them who send 

the message. Social engineering is tricky and using common sense is one of the best mitigation 

tactics. Raising awareness of social engineering, education, and lifelong learning is key to staying 

afloat  in  this  area.  For  example,  not  engaging  with  unknown  emails,  especially  not  clicking  on 

URLs  provided  in  emails  or  SMS.  However,  phishing  attacks  continuously  expand  and  new 

variants evolve. Carefully planned spear-phishing attacks on high-profile targets can be almost 

impossible  to  avoid  if  the  attacker  chooses  the  right  approach.  There  is  always  a  chance  that 

humans fall for a carefully planned social engineering attack. People are busy, which means we 

often simply do not have the “time or inclination” to think about security as we are preoccupied 

with other thoughts. After all, cyber-attacks are not a certainty, but more a likelihood that “could” 

happen if we are unlucky. From a business or academic standpoint, this attitude is referred to as 

cost-benefit analysis. 

3.3  Communication 

One of the major attack vectors on mobile devices is their wireless communication mechanisms. 

In this section, we will consider the usual  suspects as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and Cellular networks.  

Communication channels requiring physical device access will be discussed in section 3.5. 

3.3.1  Wi-Fi 

Wi-Fi (802.11 networks) is one of the things in today’s world we cannot live without. We can find 

Wi-Fi  hotspots  in  all  public  places  such  as  coffee  shops,  shopping  malls,  hotels,  airports,  and 

many  others.  Usually,  these  hotspots  are  free  and  do  not  require  any  passwords.  This  is  very 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

12 

convenient for everyone, and this includes cybercriminals. Attackers gladly use these venues to 

intercept  data  from  unaware  victims  to  steal  valuable  information.  Especially  in  today’s  world 

where everyone is carrying a smartphone, we might jump from one Wi-Fi hotspot to the next during 

a trip to a foreign city. Let’s discuss some of the attacks our CEO could encounter. 

Information exchange between two mobile devices over a network is done by sending packets 

back and forth. Capturing this traffic is easy as it is over the air and everyone connected to the 

same Wi-Fi has access to it. Packet sniffing can be done with open-source tools like Wireshark. 

If the traffic is in addition not encrypted it is readable. A more sophisticated option is setting up a 

rogue Wi-Fi access point. This is the case when an adversary either sets up a completely new 

Wi-Fi  access  point  or  compromises  an  already  existing  one.  In  case  a  victim  connects  to  this 

malicious  access  point  the  attacker  could  eavesdrop  or  modify  the  network  communication 

(MITRE,  2021).  Setting  up  a  rogue  Wi-Fi  access  point  is  a  very  simple  attack.  Mobile  devices 

automatically scan for and rank the strongest available Wi-Fi signal. Giving the rogue access point 

a trustworthy name will do the rest to convince many victims to connect without a second thought. 

Let’s  assume  two  parties  want  to  initiate  bilateral  communication  via  a  network  in  the  hope  to 

exchange information. When this communication is secretly intercepted by a cyber adversary, we 

refer  to  this  as  a  man-in-the-middle  attack  (MITM).  The  attacker  redirects  the  traffic  and  can 

either  eavesdrop  on  the  conversation  or  impersonate  one  of  the  parties.  (Weichbroth  &  Łysik, 

2020). The major difference compared to packet sniffing is that the attack has also the option to 

alter the content of the packages. The adversary could change the email content or even insert 

malware. 

Corporate  executives  as  our  CEO  are  especially  vulnerable  to  all  kinds  of  attacks  on 

communication channels. Due to the potential high value of the information, they are carrying (e.g. 

potential  M&A  deals,  financials,  strategic  initiatives,  etc.)  cybercriminals  tend  to  put  a  lot  more 

effort into successfully carrying out an attack. Therefore, adversaries tend to focus specifically on 

venues that a regularly frequented by business executives. A very good example is the “Darkhotel” 

spy campaign in luxury Asian hotels (Drozhzhin, 2014). The attackers compromised several high-

class hotels. Once an executive checked into the hotel and connects to the room-Wi-Fi the attack 

starts. Hotels tend to be very similar when it comes to login requirements, which are the room 

number and the surname of the guest. Upon login, the attacker initiated a software update. Instead 

of  updating  Google,  Facebook,  or  another  well-known  application  the  attackers  installed  a 

backdoor on the mobile device of the executive. Once the malware was installed the attacker can 

collect data, passwords, and other login credentials. Darkhotel was not a one-time attack, but an 

ongoing cyberespionage campaign. It is important to mention that this was an organized campaign 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

13 

that utilized many zero-day vulnerabilities. The attackers also used different malware types and 

further phishing attacks once the initial backdoor was installed. Also, the time horizon of the attack 

is  quite  astonishing.  “The  #Darkhotel  campaign  appears  to  have  been  active  for  seven  years” 

(Drozhzhin, 2014). 

Our CEO will be pleased to hear that the threat through public Wi-Fi attacks can be mitigated. The 

easiest way is not to use public Wi-Fi hotspots at all and simply use the cellular network instead. 

The prerequisite would be sufficient mobile data to be independent of random Wi-Fi access points. 

Another  option  is  to  use  a  virtual  private  network  (VPN).  This  is  something  that  should  be  a 

permanent solution and not only because employees or executives want to use public Wi-Fi. Home 

networks  are  usually  not  subject  to  strong  security  mechanisms  either.  A  company  could  with 

mobile devices management (MDM) solutions control the Wi-Fi access points that employees are 

allowed  to  connect  to.  Security  considerations  are  important,  however,  it  is  not  a  good  idea  to 

sabotage  useability  and  end-user  satisfaction  with  unnecessary  and  especially  “annoying” 

restrictions.  Remote  work  will  significantly  increase  during  the  coming  years  and  the  “Digital 

Nomad” lifestyle will with a high likelihood establish itself as the new normal. In this world where 

everyone is changing locations frequently – maybe even several times per day – there should be 

a  reliable  solution  for  mobile  devices  in  place  at  all  times.  And  this  solution  needs  to  be  user-

friendly. Next to the VPN tunnel should be an up-to-date firewall and antivirus solution in place. In 

addition to the technical solutions such as VPN, firewall, and anti-malware solutions, employees 

which carry mobile devices should receive security training that raises the general awareness level 

regarding potential cyber-attacks. Treating all kinds of unsecured public Wi-Fi access points with 

a little suspicion might already help. Limitations are of course that a rogue access point could even 

include access to the corporate VPN. This could be achieved with the help of an insider (e.g. an 

employee of the company). 

3.3.2  Bluetooth and Cellular 

Bluetooth is a network technology for short-range radio frequency that enables mobile devices to 

communicate with one another. Bluetooth-enabled devices are mostly used as personal devices 

where sensitive data are stored. Exposing these sensitive data can be an issue for a person’s 

safety.  Similar  to  Wi-Fi,  devices  communicating  via  Bluetooth  are  susceptible  to  wireless 

networking threats. The usual suspects are denial of service (DoS) attacks, eavesdropping, man-

in-the-middle (MITM) attacks, message modification, and resource misappropriation. In addition, 

there are more specific attacks specifically related to the Bluetooth technology itself (Padgette & 

Padgette,  2017).  Examples  of  Bluetooth  vulnerabilities/attacks  are  Bluejacking,  Bluesnarfing, 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

14 

Bluebug,  Cracking  PIN,  Blueprinting,  BlueBorne,  Bleeding  Bit,  KNOB,  and  SweynTooth 

(Hargreaves, 2021). 

To secure Bluetooth-enabled devices organizations are advised to choose the strongest security 

mode available – there are different kinds based on the specific Bluetooth version  (Padgette & 

Padgette, 2017). Cope et al. (2017) analyzed Bluetooth security vulnerabilities and came up with 

17 recommendations to improve the security of those devices. Examples are disabling Bluetooth 

when  the  device  is  not  in  use;  using  adequate  encryption  key  strength  to  prevent  brute  force 

attacks;  setting  the  device  to  undiscoverable  by  default;  utilization  of  encryption  to  prevent 

eavesdropping. Overall, “As with any wireless technology, there is no way to prevent all attacks 

and guarantee security (Cope et al., 2017).” Nevertheless, user awareness training as mentioned 

already several times can help to mitigate attacks that are mainly based on fooling humans. 

Another way next to Wi-Fi or Bluetooth is to use the cellular network for attacks. The major threat 

here is the exploitation of vulnerabilities in the global mobile phone system to snoop on calls, and 

texts, or snatch the device location. In case the attacker sends in SMS via radio interfaces this 

would  count  as  a  cellular  attack  but  is  essentially  Smishing,  which  might  contain  links  to 

compromised websites or direct downloads of malware. Also interesting is an SS7 Attack, which 

might either be used to track the location of the device or to redirect calls or SMS to a number 

controlled by the adversary. Once this happened, the adversary can act as a man-in-the-middle 

to  intercept  and  alter  the  communication.  This  technique  could  be used  to  steal authentication 

codes for multi-factor authentication. Similar to the Wi-Fi version an adversary could set up a rogue 

cellular base station for eavesdropping or manipulating cellular device communication (MITRE, 

2021).  

Mitigations are here similar, which largely consist of making sure to encrypt communication. In 

addition, network carriers could use firewalls, and intrusion detection/prevention systems to fight 

SS7 exploitation (MITRE, 2021). 

3.3.3  Denial of Service 

Alternatively, especially when the purpose is not to access the device, attackers could simply jam 

radio signals like Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and Cellular. (Distributed) Denial of Services (DOS) attacks are 

a general way to flood the system of the target with an overload of bogus traffic with the purpose 

to  slow  down  or  crash  the  system.  DDoS  attacks  use  so-called  zombies,  which  are  infected 

devices that form a botnet. Using a large number of zombies will significantly increase the strength 

of the denial-of-service attack. Also, attackers could try to downgrade the communication to less 

secure protocols. Jamming frequencies used by newer protocols such as LTE might force mobile 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

15 

devices to utilize older protocols for communication (MITRE, 2021). This will help the attacker to 

carry out the above-mentioned attacks such as packet sniffing, rogue access point, and man-in-

the-middle. Jamming or Denial of Service attacks cannot be easily mitigated. 

3.4  Supply Chain 

A supply chain attack aims to harm a business by targeting weak elements in the supply chain. A 

supply chain attack can occur in any industry. Cybercriminals often manipulate the manufacturing 

process of a product by installing a rootkit or hardware-based spying components. In this section, 

we will differentiate between physical and app store ecosystem-related supply chain attacks. 

3.4.1  Physical Supply Chain 

Cybercriminals can manipulate hardware components in mobile devices along the supply chain 

before the final shipment to the customer to achieve a data or system compromise. This is often 

achieved by inserting a backdoor in the system that later grants the attacker unauthorized access. 

A backdoor is an alternative method of access to programs or hardware systems that bypasses 

the usual security mechanisms (MITRE, 2021). 

Physical  supply  chain  compromises  cannot  be  addressed  by  end-user  whether  for  private  or 

business purposes. The best option for suppliers is tight control of their supply network to prevent 

possible harm from cybercriminals. One option our CEO has that might reduce the likelihood of 

receiving  a  compromised  device  is  to  focus  on  high-end  phones  from  well-known  and  trusted 

suppliers  due  to  more  sophisticated  security  controls.  Another  one  is  to  perform  a  physical 

inspection of hardware to look for potential tampering upon delivery of the new device. 

3.4.2  App Store Ecosystem 

As already touched upon in section 3.1, one of the core distribution channels for malicious software 

or code to the device of an end-user is through compromising the app store supply chain. Software 

companies  tend  to  ship  new  applications  and  updates  thereof  daily  via  the  internet  and  cloud. 

Therefore, adversaries try to place the malicious application in an authorized app store, enabling 

the application to be installed on the victims’ devices (MITRE, 2021). 

A very good example of a supply chain-delivered malware is SimBad. This adware campaign was 

discovered  by  Check  Point  Software  Technologies  in  2019.  It  was  distributed  over  the  official 

authorized Google Play Store, was spread across 206 applications and affected 150 million users.  

The  name  SimBad  stems  from  the  fact  that  most  infected  apps  were  simulator  games  and 

transformed the use of the mobile device into an unbearable experience by displaying countless 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

16 

ads outside of the application, with no visible way to uninstall them (Root & Polkovnichenko, 2019). 

SimBad had the following malicious behavior (Clayton, 2019): 

Figure 4 – SimBad – Malicious Behaviour 

Modern mobile apps often utilize several third-party libraries and open-source components, which 

is important for DevOps teams to speed up the creation and deployment of applications. SimBad 

found its way into the supply chain via a Software Development Kit (SDK) for an ad-related SDK. 

Developers globally were somehow convinced to use this SDK, were not aware of its content, and 

uploaded the final and malware-infected application onto the Google Play Store. 

What  are  recommended  mitigations?  First  and  foremost,  users  should  be  encouraged  to  only 

install apps from authorized app stores and keep the natural protection mechanisms active that 

are provided by the vendors. For example, there is a setting on Android called “unknown source”, 

which needs to be active for users to install 3rd party apps. Hence, users should be discouraged 

to  enable  that  setting.  In  addition,  to  shield  against  malware  that  is  delivered  via  3rd  party  app 

stores  the  installation  of  unsigned  applications  should  not  be  allowed.  This  could  be  enforced 

through corporate policies and a mobile device management (MDM) system that ensures that only 

pre-approved applications can be installed on work devices (MITRE, 2021). In case the company 

operates under a Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) policy, the MDM will only be able to control the 

work-space part of the device (Boeckl et al., 2021). See section 4.1 for more details. 

Even though there is no guarantee to avoid malicious apps it is less likely that the official store 

contains malicious repackaged apps. Google, for example, is using Google Play Protect to screen 

for  potential dangers.  Google  Play  Protect  is  a protection  service  for  all  android devices  which 

continuously scans Google Play Store and user devices for malware (Google, 2021b). According 

to Google (Google, 2021b): “All Android apps undergo rigorous security testing before appearing 

in Google Play. Google Play Protect scans more than 100 billion apps daily to make sure that 

everything remains spot on. That way, no matter where you download an app from, you know it's 

been  checked  by  Google  Play  Protect.”  It  is  a  useful  protection  mechanism  and  helps  with 

1Showing ads outside of the application, for example when the user unlocks their phone or uses other apps.2Constantly opening Google Play or 9Apps Store and redirecting to another particular application, so the developer can profit from additional installations.3Hiding its icon from the launcher in order to prevent uninstallation.4Opening a web browser with links provided by the app developer.5Downloading APK files and asking the user to install it.6Searching a word provided by the app in Google Play. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

17 

increasing  the  security  levels  of  the  smartphone,  but  as  shown  in  the  examples  in  section  3.1 

(Anubis) and 3.4 (SimBad) it is often not enough. The first step during the Anubis installation is 

disabling Google Play Protect, which renders it immediately worthless. Here again, since the end-

user  specifically  had  to  give  access  to  Anubis  to  disable  Google  Play  Protect,  being  slightly 

suspicious helps to prevent many social engineering attacks.  

3.5  Physical and Authentication 

3.5.1  Physical Device breaches 

It was already mentioned that the human end-user tends to be the most serious security risk when 

it  comes  to  installing  malware  on  their  devices  due  to  a  lack  of  awareness  of  how  social 

engineering works and also the general inability of humans to spot errors on HTML-rendered user 

interfaces.  This  is  equally  true  for  this  part.  The  greatest  threat  to  mobile  devices  and  the 

associated loss of data is usually the owner of the mobile device. It is significantly more like for 

users to simply lose their phone compared to it being stolen (Weichbroth & Łysik, 2020). Another 

threat is physical storage devices like USBs and external hard drives, which can be connected to 

a smartphone. The same thing is true for compromised charging stations in public areas. Attackers 

can  use  these  physical  connections  to  install  malware  on  the  victim’s  device.  As  described  in 

section 3.1 Malware, most types for this purpose are quite persistent and evade detection. They 

tend  to  be  self-replicating  and  spread  to  other  devices  in  the  network  secretly  (worm)  (Abijah 

Roseline & Geetha, 2021). 

Mobile device owners should avoid using public charging stations or computers and only use their 

own charger or computer acquired from a trustworthy source. Also, it is vital not to click on any 

permission requests. For example, confirming that the attached computer or another device can 

be trusted. Mitigation techniques for the “stolen or lost” threats are easy to describe, but difficult 

to enforce: simply do not lose your device or get it stolen. Especially in public areas such as coffee 

shops, devices should not be left unattended, which is part of the mitigation technique “common 

sense”.  The  second  major  mitigation  technique  against  stolen  or  lost  phones  are  strong 

authentication mechanisms, which are discussed next. 

3.5.2  Passwords and Biometrics 

The most common mechanism for smartphone authentication are passwords, PINs, patterns, and 

biometrics (Fahl, 2019). The most secure option is a long and complex password but forcing the 

end-user to enter a long and complex password every time the screen is turned off is pure torture. 

Most mobile device users choose easier methods as short PINs (4-digits minimum) or a pattern 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

18 

(3x3 grid) to unlock the screen, which is significantly less secure. In addition to being vulnerable 

to shoulder surfing, unluck patterns have quite low entropy as users tend to choose rather similar 

versions  (Fahl,  2019).  Another  option  is  to  use  our  fingerprint  or  facial  recognition.  Biometric 

features do not replace the traditional password but offer us a more convenient way of accessing 

our mobile devices. The main advantage of biometrics is that it allows us to choose an extra-strong 

password.  Facial  recognition  allows  attackers  often  to  the  use  a  simple  picture  to  unlock  the 

device.  And  if  the  3D  effect  is  required  a  3D  printed  version  might  do  the  trick.  The  strongest 

combination  is  a  complex  password  in  combination  with  the  fingerprint  biometric  feature  for 

convenience  (Samsung  for  Business,  2021).  Physical  attacks  include  smudge  attacks  and 

shoulder surfing. Smudge attacks are based on the oily smudges that the victim's fingers have left 

behind. Here it is already obvious, that a complex password with overlapping characters will be 

significantly more difficult to read from this oily surface than a pattern or short PIN. Shoulder surfing 

usually uses dedicated equipment like cameras or telescopes and occurs often in public places 

similar  to  Wi-Fi  interception  attacks.  Shoulder  surfing  might  also  capture  login  information  to 

websites and other sensitive information from the screen.  

An adversary with physical access to a mobile device is in the position to attempt to bypass the 

device's lock screen. The attacker could try to unlock the device through pure guessing or brute 

force password attacks. Another option would be biometric spoofing. The attacker could create a 

3D  wax  face  (Jia,  Hu,  Li,  &  Xu,  2021)  or  simply  use  a  picture  for  facial  recognition.  For  the 

fingerprint, a fake silicon finger could do the trick. 

Companies  have  different  options  to  decrease  the  likelihood  of  a  physical  device  breach.  One 

option  is  to  increase  the  password  complexity  by  requiring  a  certain  password  length,  special 

characters, etc. is one option to make a simple brute force attack more difficult. Delays between 

the different password attempts are also standard. In addition, it is recommended to automatically 

wipe all the data if a wrong password is entered incorrectly too many times. Both of these policies 

would reduce the threat of brute force attacks, simple password guessing, and shoulder surfing 

(MITRE, 2021). To avoid biometric spoofing mobile phone vendors require the user after a certain 

amount of idle time to enter the password instead of only using biometrics. This is also true after 

every device restart. This helps to prevent biometric spoofing in case of a loss or a stolen phone. 

“Securing facial recognition: the new spoofs and solutions” is an article from Hassani and Malik 

(2021) that goes here in more detail. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

19 

4  Security Design and Future Research 

4.1  Modern BYOD MS Design 

In this part, we will have a look at the mechanisms required to achieve appropriate security and 

privacy  levels  for  workplace  devices,  which  is  also  recommended  for  our  CEO.  Due  to  the 

popularity  of  BYOD  policies,  mobile  devices  in  corporate  environments  have  become  an 

omnipresent reality. Carrying two or more devices (one for private use and one for work) is not 

convenient and the movement towards a BYOD mindset should be looked upon in favor. Accepting 

this  new  reality  will  help  to  speed  up  the  implementation  of  new  security  measures  in  most 

corporations across the globe. To support the security and privacy goals of BYOD devices the 

following mechanisms are recommended (Boeckl et al., 2021): Trusted Execution Environment, 

Enterprise Mobility Management (EMM), which is a system that can be used to provision policies 

to  mobile  devices  to  control  aspects  of  their  allowed  behavior,  Virtual  Private  Network  (VPN), 

Mobile Application Vetting Service, and Mobile Threat Defense, which may be able to spot and 

prevent the installations from sources outside of the official app stores. Those mechanisms will 

achieve the following benefits (Boeckl et al., 2021):  

1.  Separation  of  organizational  and  personal  information  by  creating  a  logical  separation 

between personal and workspace is achieved;  

2.  Encrypting  data  in  transit  with  the  help  of  a  VPN  or  similar  solutions  (having  the  right 

certificates is a prerequisite for accessing the companies’ resources) to reduce the risk of 

nonsecure networks, which put data at risk of interception;  

3.  Devices can  identify  vulnerable  applications and  also  react  by  removing  the  employer's 

work profile, while simultaneously keeping the personal information untouched;  

4.  Malware detection is in place to spot malicious software, especially from 3rd party stores 

(see section 3.1);  

5.  Trusted  access  due  to  security  certificates  and  maybe  other  user  credentials  to  ensure 

two-factor authentication; and finally, assuring end-user privacy by restricting information 

collection to avoid revealing sensitive personal data, device location, etc.  

The core feature, which is the logical separation of personal space and workspace on the same 

device has several advantages. Modern devices are Android and iOS are already capable of the 

following (Boeckl et al., 2021; Google, 2021a): (1) data flow restriction between enterprise and 

personal applications, (2) restriction of application installation from unknown sources, (3) selective 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

20 

wiping to remove enterprise data and preserve personal data, (4) device passcode requirement 

enforcement, (5) application configuration control, (5) identity and certificate authority certificate 

support. 

It  is  vital  to  understand  that  risk  assessments  are  always  a  likelihood  estimate  of  a  negative 

outcome.  This  futuristic  scenario  might  never  materialize,  which  means  that  most  actions  in 

cybersecurity are a trade-off and subject to cost-benefit considerations. This reality might result in 

systems with weak security mechanisms never experiencing any attack and cyber fortresses being 

breached by an over-motivated and capable hacker, who utilized the latest zero-day exploit.   

However, given that today’s mobile devices already possess the capabilities described above  I 

would be recommended that our CEO or the company for that matter assures us to implement 

those security measures. We have seen in section 3 ‘Attacks and Mitigations’ that cybercriminals 

are creative and keep expanding the pool of attacks consistently. Especially in today’s world, which 

is becoming more digital by the minute will the importance of cybersecurity only increase. It has 

already become one of the most important – and unfortunately lacking – skillsets in the industry, 

but  recurring  global  attacks  (e.g.  the  Kaseya  supply  chain  ransomware  attack),  which  cause 

significant  damage  to  enterprises  increasingly  help  to  convince  decision-makers  to  take  action 

(Allgeier, 2021). 

4.2  Securing the CEO‘s mobile device 

Let us summarize the main ideas regarding device protection. Overall, it depends on the concrete 

situation. Larger companies will take care of their own devices and will often utilize mobile device 

management solutions that take care of all the end-user security concerns. Also, it might be that 

only company approve applications are free to download. For start-ups and smaller companies, 

the  situation  is  different.  Here,  the  employee  could  be  completely  responsible  –  similar  to  the 

private device – to take care of the smartphone entirely, including all matters of security. Here are 

some  practical  recommendations  for  securing  our  CEO’s  mobile  devices:  Use  strong 

passwords/biometrics for authentication; Avoid public Wi-Fi / unencrypted connections; Utilize a 

Virtual Private Network (VPN); Encrypt your device or move important data to the cloud; Install an 

antivirus/antimalware application; Keep your device up-to-date. 

Keeping the above-mentioned tips in mind the likelihood to fall for a random spam-like attack will 

be significantly reduced. More targeted attacks from powerful adversaries, however, will always 

be dangerous, but the likelihood to be the victim is probably rather low. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

21 

4.3  Future Topics in Mobile Security 

The  most  significant  threats  for  mobile  devices  keep  changing  every  year  (GSMA,  2021),  and 

marching  into  the  next  decade  new  technological  innovation  and  product  introductions  will 

accelerate, which will further expand the attack surface  (Richardson, 2020). The major focus of 

this  paper  was  on  smartphone  security  with  a  specific  focus  on  a  hypothetical  CEO  scenario. 

However,  mobile  security  goes  beyond  smartphones.  It  includes  –  subject  to  the  concrete 

definition – a while basked of devices, which will gradually be present in almost any device we can 

imagine. Maybe in the not-too-distant future, we will become mobile devices ourselves - micro-

chips could be implemented below our skin. We see, it becomes vital to have absolute security 

when  adversaries  could  potentially  even  access  humans  themselves  and  gain  access  to  their 

brain-computer interfaces, which are potentially steering other remote devices carrying out vital 

tasks. The following fields might be interesting to explore further: 

Zero Trust is one interesting research direction in mobile security (Haddon, 2021). The workforce 

will increasingly be flexible and remote and wants to be secure everywhere (Sheridan, 2021). Also, 

customer  expectations  are  rising  consistently  in  our  digital  age.  This  means,  that  the  more 

seamlessly security  can be  integrated  into  our devices  without  creating additional  effort  for  the 

end-user the better. Mobile Cloud and Blockchain, or in general securing distributed computing 

environments. Mobile phones as the frontend are only the interface to our data, and due to “X as 

a  Service”  solutions  soon  to  almost  everything  (Li  et  al.,  2021).  Smartphones  and  the  gaming 

industry might for example significantly benefit from “Computing Power as a Service” offerings. 

Artificial  Intelligence  has  found  its  way  already  in  every  industry.  Nevertheless,  AI  has  the 

potential to be used in both an exploitative and positive sense. AI as general-purpose technology 

can be utilized by adversaries and security professionals alike to achieve their purpose. AI can 

help to generate new attacks, but also enhance existing security mechanisms to shield individuals, 

companies, and governments from cybercriminals (Sarker, Furhad, & Nowrozy, 2021). Interesting 

examples are Dark Trace and Siemens AI-Driven Cyber Security. Quantum Computing is still in 

its infancy, but Quantum-Safe Cryptography will become increasingly important as the capabilities 

and the availability of those systems increase (Mitchell, 2020). 

5  Summary and Conclusion 

Mobile devices have become omnipresent and Covid 19 catapulted us into a new age, which is 

characterized by a fully remote and therefore flexible workforce. Our digital age and the increasing 

importance  of  mobile  devices  have  also  attracted  cyber  criminals  that  are  after  valuable 

information. Malware – which is malicious software installed on our devices – is one of the core 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

22 

concepts present in cybersecurity and plays a huge part in many attacks. There are several types 

of malware including trojans, viruses, and worms, which are often self-replicating and actively try 

to hide from security mechanisms to stay permanently on the device once installed. Malware can 

be  distributed  via  different  channels,  which  often  goes  hand-in-hand  with  the  other  attacks 

discussed. Malware can be distributed via phishing attacks. Those can have a spam-like nature 

catering to the mass market, or be more targeted to specific individuals. Especially relevant for 

high-profile individuals as C-level executives are the more focused variants of spear-phishing or 

whaling. Another way to gain access to victims' devices and information is via network attacks that 

utilize our communication channels such as Wifi, Bluetooth, or cellular networks. Packages within 

those networks can eavesdrop, or the communication can be completely intercepted via a man-

in-the-middle attack, which allows the attacker not only to listen but also to alter the content of 

messages. Due to our end-to-end physical as well as digital supply chains, it is possible to place 

malware into devices and applications before they reach the end-user. Authorized app stores such 

as google play have several security measures in place, but this does not prevent adversaries 

from successfully placing malware-infected applications onto the store. Last but not least, it turns 

out that people are one of the weakest links when it comes to security as the likelihood that a 

device is stolen or compromised is significantly less than that of losing a smartphone. Therefore, 

it is highly recommended to take authentication mechanisms such as passwords and biometrics 

seriously and  avoid utilizing  patterns and  four-digit  pins  to  unlock  our  devices.  Moreover,  once 

breached, mobile devices can serve as an entrance point for the enterprise backend and more 

serious security compromises thereafter. Not everything is bleak though.  

The BYOD movement has increased the usage of mobile devices for work globally and triggered 

new security features for smartphones. The logical separation of personal space and work assures 

the  security  of  corporate  information,  while  at  the  same  time  hiding  private  information  like 

personal data and device location. In case of the identification of malicious activity, the workspace 

can be remote wiped while keeping the personal space untouched.  Overall, a zero-trust security 

approach is a way to go in our ever more complex, global, and digital world economy. People are 

already used to perfect flexibility, which means  not thinking about security during already busy 

schedules  will  be  favored.  Therefore,  fully  managed  end-points  using  a  zero-trust  policy, 

separated private and mobile spaces, VPN connections, etc. as a standard. Other topics such as 

IoT, AI, Cloud, and Blockchain will keep integrating and further seamlessly combining every part 

of the digital economy.  

The  only  constant  in  our  digital  world  is  “change”.  Innovations,  breakthroughs,  and  human 

creativity will continuously create new attack vectors, which increases the overall attack surface. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

23 

Cyber  Security  will  remain  a  constant  struggle against  highly  intelligent  adversaries,  which  are 

consistently striving to improve upon the status quo. And we – and our CEO – should strive to be 

prepared. 

6  References 

Abijah Roseline, S., & Geetha, S. (2021). A comprehensive survey of tools and techniques 

mitigating computer and mobile malware attacks. Computers and Electrical Engineering, 
92(March), 107143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2021.107143 

Allgeier, H. (2021). The big takeaway from the Kaseya supply chain/ransomware cyberattack. 
Retrieved from https://www.securitymagazine.com/articles/95741-the-big-takeaway-from-
the-kaseya-supply-chainransomware-cyberattack 

Boeckl, K., Grayson, N., Gema, H., Naomi, L., G. Ajmo, J., McGinnis, M., … Ward, P. (2021). 

Mobile Device Security: Bring Your Own Device. https://doi.org/10.1201/b18165 

Check Point. (2021). Mobile Security Report 2021. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-804629-

6.00002-x 

Clayton, R. (2019). Mobile Supply Chain Attacks Are More Than Just an Annoyance. Retrieved 

from https://blog.checkpoint.com/2019/03/13/mobile-supply-chain-attacks-are-more-than-
just-an-annoyance/amp/ 

Cope, P., Campbell, J., & Hayajneh, T. (2017). An investigation of Bluetooth security 

vulnerabilities. 2017 IEEE 7th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and 
Conference, CCWC 2017. https://doi.org/10.1109/CCWC.2017.7868416 

Delcher, P. (2021). Are we losing the fight against cybercrime? Computer Fraud and Security, 

2021(5), 18–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1361-3723(21)00055-5 

Drozhzhin, A. (2014). Darkhotel: a spy campaign in luxury Asian hotels. Retrieved from 

https://www.kaspersky.com/blog/darkhotel-apt/6613/ 

Fahl, S. (2019). Web & Mobile Security Knowledge Area. The Cyber Security Body of 

Knowledge. 

Feller, M. (2020). Infostealer, Keylogger, and Ransomware in One: Anubis Targets More than 
250 Android Applications. Retrieved from https://cofense.com/infostealer-keylogger-
ransomware-one-anubis-targets-250-android-applications/ 

Google. (2021a). Android Enterprise Security Paper. Retrieved from 

https://storage.googleapis.com/android-com/resources/enterprise/pdfs/AE Security 
Paper_V6 CM.pdf 

Google. (2021b). Google Play Protect. Retrieved from 

https://developers.google.com/android/play-protect 

GSMA. (2021). Mobile Telecommunications Security Landscape. 

Haddon, D. A. E. (2021). Zero Trust networks, the concepts, the strategies, and the reality. 

Strategy, Leadership, and AI in the Cyber Ecosystem. Elsevier Inc. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-821442-8.00001-x 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

24 

Hargreaves, C. (2021). Mobile Communications Security (Lecture Slides). Mobile System 

Security (MSS). University of Oxford. 

Hassani, A., & Malik, H. (2021). Securing facial recognition: the new spoofs and solutions. 

Biometric Technology Today, 2021(5), 5–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0969-4765(21)00059-
X 

Jia, S., Hu, C., Li, X., & Xu, Z. (2021). Face spoofing detection under super-realistic 3D wax face 

attacks. Pattern Recognition Letters, 145, 103–109. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2021.01.021 

Kaspersky. (2021a). All About Phishing Scams & Prevention: What You Need to Know. 

Retrieved from https://www.kaspersky.com/resource-center/preemptive-safety/phishing-
prevention-tips 

Kaspersky. (2021b). Types of Malware. Retrieved from https://www.kaspersky.com/resource-

center/threats/malware-classifications 

Keyworth, M., & Wall, M. (2016). The “bogus boss” email scam costing firms millions. Retrieved 

from https://www.bbc.com/news/business-35250678 

Lee, W. (2019). Malware and Attack Technologies. The Cyber Security Body of Knowledge. 

Li, G., Ren, X., Wu, J., Ji, W., Yu, H., Cao, J., & Wang, R. (2021). Blockchain-based mobile 

edge computing system. Information Sciences, 561, 70–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2021.01.050 

Mitchell, C. J. (2020). The impact of quantum computing on real-world security: A 5G case 
study. Computers and Security, 93, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.101825 

MITRE. (2021). MITRE ATT&CK®. Retrieved from https://attack.mitre.org/ 

Padgette, J., & Padgette, J. (2017). Guide to Bluetooth Security. NIST Special Publication 800-

121 Revision 2, 1–67. 

Richardson, J. (2020). Is there a silver bullet to stop cybercrime? Computer Fraud and Security, 

2020(5), 6–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1361-3723(20)30050-6 

Root, E., & Polkovnichenko, A. (2019). SimBad: A Rogue Adware Campaign On Google Play. 
Retrieved from https://research.checkpoint.com/2019/simbad-a-rogue-adware-campaign-
on-google-play/ 

Samsung for Business. (2021). Which biometric authentication method is most secure? 

Retrieved from https://insights.samsung.com/2021/05/25/which-biometric-authentication-
method-is-most-secure-3/ 

Sarker, I. H., Furhad, M. H., & Nowrozy, R. (2021). AI-Driven Cybersecurity: An Overview, 

Security Intelligence Modeling and Research Directions. SN Computer Science, 2(3), 1–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-021-00557-0 

Saud Al-Musib, N., Mohammad Al-Serhani, F., Humayun, M., & Jhanjhi, N. Z. (2021). Business 

email compromise (BEC) attacks. Materials Today: Proceedings, (xxxx). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.03.647 

Sheridan, O. (2021). The state of zero trust in the age of fluid working. Network Security, 

2021(2), 15–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1353-4858(21)00019-2 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Security: Attacks and Mitigations 

25 

Sun, K. (2019). Google Play Apps Drop Anubis, Use Motion-based Evasion. Retrieved from 

https://www.trendmicro.com/en_us/research/19/a/google-play-apps-drop-anubis-banking-
malware-use-motion-based-evasion-tactics.html 

Weichbroth, P., & Łysik, Ł. (2020). Mobile Security: Threats and Best Practices. Mobile 

Information Systems, (December). https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8828078 

Zakaria, F. (2020). Ten Lessons for a Post-Pandemic World. W. W. Norton & Company Ltd. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
