PowerDuck: A GOOSE Data Set of Cyberattacks in Substations

Sven Zemanek
sven.zemanek@fkie.fraunhofer.de
Fraunhofer FKIE

Immanuel Hacker
i.hacker@iaew.rwth-aachen.de
RWTH Aachen University
Fraunhofer FIT

Konrad Wolsing
konrad.wolsing@fkie.fraunhofer.de
Fraunhofer FKIE
RWTH Aachen University

Eric Wagner
eric.wagner@fkie.fraunhofer.de
Fraunhofer FKIE
RWTH Aachen University

Martin Henze
henze@cs.rwth-aachen.de
RWTH Aachen University
Fraunhofer FKIE

Martin Serror
martin.serror@fkie.fraunhofer.de
Fraunhofer FKIE

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

1
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
1
7
4
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Power grids worldwide are increasingly victims of cyberattacks,
where attackers can cause immense damage to critical infrastruc-
ture. The growing digitalization and networking in power grids
combined with insufficient protection against cyberattacks further
exacerbate this trend. Hence, security engineers and researchers
must counter these new risks by continuously improving security
measures. Data sets of real network traffic during cyberattacks play
a decisive role in analyzing and understanding such attacks. There-
fore, this paper presents PowerDuck, a publicly available security
data set containing network traces of GOOSE communication in
a physical substation testbed. The data set includes recordings of
various scenarios with and without the presence of attacks. Fur-
thermore, all network packets originating from the attacker are
clearly labeled to facilitate their identification. We thus envision
PowerDuck improving and complementing existing data sets of sub-
stations, which are often generated synthetically, thus enhancing
the security of power grids.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy → Intrusion detection systems; Denial-of-
service attacks; • Networks → Cyber-physical networks; • Gen-
eral and reference → Measurement.

KEYWORDS
data sets, network traffic, smart grid security, IDS

ACM Reference Format:
Sven Zemanek, Immanuel Hacker, Konrad Wolsing, Eric Wagner, Martin
Henze, and Martin Serror. 2022. PowerDuck: A GOOSE Data Set of Cyber-
attacks in Substations. In Cyber Security Experimentation and Test Workshop
(CSET 2022), August 8, 2022, Virtual, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3546096.3546102

1 INTRODUCTION
The increasing digitalization of power grids holds many opportuni-
ties, particularly for shifting from a centralized energy production

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CSET 2022, August 8, 2022, Virtual, CA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9684-4/22/08.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3546096.3546102

based on conventional energy sources to a more decentralized pro-
duction using renewable energies [4]. However, this evolution also
amplifies the risks of cyberattacks since initially air-gapped systems
become connected to one another and, in some cases, even to the
Internet without implementing sufficient security measures [10].
Unfortunately, severe consequences have already manifested in
the past in various incidents, such as Stuxnet [5] or the attacks
on the Ukrainian power grid [13]. Hence, academia and industry
need to intensify their research in cybersecurity for power grids
to effectively improve existing and enable the development of new
sophisticated security measures for power grids.

An essential prerequisite for the respective security research
is accurate data about the underlying processes, e.g., communica-
tion traffic and state information. Nevertheless, such data is often
unavailable to researchers due to security concerns of power grid
operators and the high availability requirement of such systems.
Instead, research often relies on artificially generated or simulated
data (e.g., [2, 7, 9]), subject to abstractions and simplifications. Mean-
while, a better approach for getting realistic data is performing
measurements in a physical testbed with real hardware.

Related Work. There are already several publicly available data
sets recorded in different testbeds and scenarios in the industrial
automation domain with an enormous impact on security research.
Examples of such data sets include recordings in the Secure Water
Treatment (SWaT) testbed [3] and the HIL-based augmented ICS
security (HAI) data sets [12]. Possible use cases for these data sets
include, for example, the evaluation and enhancement of anomaly
detection approaches, such as [6]. Unfortunately, there is a lack of
corresponding real-world security data sets for power grids, and,
therefore, researchers often use synthetically generated data to
evaluate their approaches (e.g., [8]). However, such data is often
subject to abstractions and simplifications due to the complex phys-
ical processes of power grids and thus has limited use for security
research. Recently, the authors of [1] published a data set recorded
in the Electric Power and Intelligent Control (EPIC) testbed contain-
ing network and process data. Nevertheless, the considered attack
scenarios are limited to malicious reconfigurations of the devices
present in the testbed and their impact. The scenarios in the data
set also do not include actual executions of the considered attacks.
Instead, a recommendation is to mutate the collected data, e.g., for
anomaly detection, which is again of limited use.

 
 
 
 
 
 
CSET 2022, August 8, 2022, Virtual, CA, USA

Sven Zemanek, Immanuel Hacker, Konrad Wolsing, Eric Wagner, Martin Henze, and Martin Serror

Contributions. Therefore, this paper presents PowerDuck1, a
publicly available data set for cybersecurity research of power
grids. We recorded the data in a real-world testbed representing
the secondary technology of a substation in the high and extra-
high voltage grid. The setup consists of three Intelligent Electronic
Devices (IEDs), a station control system, and the surrounding net-
working infrastructure. Moreover, the IEDs also implement a cura-
tive measure similar to a busbar protection to represent cascading
effects. In this setting, we recorded the IEC 61850 GOOSE data
traffic in different normal operation and attack scenarios with
varying parametrizations. Additionally, we convert our data set
to and label malicious packets in the Industrial Protocol Abstrac-
tion Layer (IPAL) format [14] to facilitate their identification and
analysis. The resulting data set thus offers a broad range of pos-
sibilities for cybersecurity research and is particularly suited for
testing Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) in power grids.

The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 thoroughly
describes the real-world testbed we used for the data recordings
and the considered operation scenarios. Then, we provide details
on the recorded data in Section 3. We discuss possible use cases of
PowerDuck in Section 4 and conclude this paper in Section 5.

2 CONSIDERED SETUP
In this section, we detail the considered setup for recording Power-
Duck. We begin with a comprehensive description of the substation
testbed in Section 2.1. Then, we present the different scenarios of
our measurement campaign in Section 2.2.

2.1 Testbed
The testbed represents the secondary technology of a substation in
the high and extra-high voltage grid, where the setup is sufficiently
complex to simulate advanced cyberattacks while still remaining
readily understandable. In the following, we describe the physical
structure of the testbed as well as the implemented IED application.

Structure. Figure 1 depicts our substation testbed. It consists of a
station control system connected to three IEDs. The communication
between the IEDs and the station control system occurs in the same
network, which thus replicates the station network of a substation.
To keep the setup manageable, we designed it as a single switch
without redundancy systems. Furthermore, a separate network
connects the substation control system with the control room. The
system’s scalability is mainly defined by the number of hardware
devices and the time to set up the configuration. In contrast to
a fully simulated environment, automatic reconfiguration of the
testbed is impossible. However, it would be possible to extend the
testbed by a simulation.

The communication between IEDs and the substation control
system uses the IEC 61850 GOOSE protocol and flows through a
central switch. Since an integral part of the PowerDuck data set
consists of traffic recordings, we use the switch’s SPAN port to
capture all GOOSE packets passing through the switch. Moreover,
as a realistic attack vector in power grids [4], we assume that an
attacker controls a device (i.e., a PC) connected to that switch.

1https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6724225

(a) Schematic view.

(b) Photo of the testbed.

Figure 1: Overview of our substation testbed. The setup con-
sists of a station control system and three IEDs connected
through a station bus. Moreover, an attack PC is attached to
the station bus, thus with direct access to the local network.

For the considered measurement scenarios, we connected a volt-
age measurement of the public power grid to the three IEDs and
implemented a circuit breaker emulation. This circuit breaker emu-
lation is thus implemented with the help of the I/Os on the IEDs and
enables a realistic emulation of the switching process, including
correct time delays. Through this setup, we can verify the effects
on the corresponding real-world assets and thus the impact of our
attacks. Mainly, we can observe the opening of circuit breakers
when they should not open or vice-versa, and that protection mech-
anisms, which should open the circuit breakers in case of a fault,
do not work. A result of such attacks could be a partial blackout
and even have a more severe impact when executed as a coordi-
nated attack. Moreover, malfunctioning protection mechanisms
may damage equipment and thus lead to prolonged outages.

IED Application. The IEDs use the IEC 61850 GOOSE protocol
to transmit their measurements to the substation control system.
Additionally, the IEDs host an application similar to a busbar pro-
tection and implement a curative measure. This application ensures
that when the circuit breaker of the first IED is opened, the cir-
cuit breakers of the other IEDs are also opened to prevent further
damage. We implemented this behavior using two GOOSE signals,
one indicating the activation of the curative measure and the other
indicating the current state of the circuit breaker. Hence, triggering
the curative measure would require both signals, an activation and
an open circuit breaker.

We defined different measurement scenarios based on this setup
to cover distinct testbed behavior under normal and attack condi-
tions. In the following, we briefly describe these scenarios.

ln89Sw100_306BUS 306BUS 125BUS 100  Control RoomAttack PCSubstation Control SystemGOOSE- activated- triggeredMMSln91Sw100_310BUS 310Sw100_125PowerDuck: A GOOSE Data Set of Cyberattacks in Substations

CSET 2022, August 8, 2022, Virtual, CA, USA

(a) Replay Attack

(b) Insertion Attack

(c) Suppression Attack

(d) Flooding Attack

Figure 2: Examples for the distinct attacks, including a sta-
tion control system (left), an attack PC (middle), and an IED.

2.2 Scenarios
The PowerDuck data set includes traffic captures from normal oper-
ation scenarios as well as different attack scenarios with varying
configurations. The selected attacks represent typical communi-
cation attacks targeting the IEC 61850 GOOSE protocol [2] and
are thus independent of the used hardware. As such, they are par-
ticularly suited for the Exploitation and Act on Objective phases
of the cyber kill chain model [15]. In the following, we provide
a general overview of the considered scenarios for our measure-
ment campaign. For a detailed description, including the specific
parametrizations of the different scenarios, we refer to Table 1.

Normal Operation. The testbed operates normally without any
attacks, i.e., the substation control system successfully performs
different switching operations. The recorded traffic from the corre-
sponding four measurement scenarios thus serves as a reference
for the normal operation of the involved systems.

Replay Attack. The attacker eavesdrops on one or more regu-
larly exchanged GOOSE packets to replay them later. Such packets
could include, e.g., a switching command or an outdated measure-
ment and thus lead to wrong switching operations. For this attack,
we recorded data from three distinct measurement scenarios. Fig. 2a
depicts an example of this attack.

Insertion Attack. As shown in Fig. 2b, the attacker sends a
specially crafted packet to disturb switching operations. Such a
packet could include, e.g., a wrongly announced switch opening
or forged measurements, leading to six different scenarios. For all
insertion scenarios, repetition packets were sent in the temporal
pattern according to the GOOSE specification.

Suppression Attack. The attacker exploits GOOSE sequence
numbers to manipulate the protocol states of the involved systems,
e.g., by sending crafted packets with increasing sequence numbers.
Then, legitimate packets are discarded, which leads to a denial of
service, as illustrated in Fig. 2c. We recorded data from five different
scenarios. For all suppression scenarios, repetition packets were
sent in the temporal pattern according to the GOOSE specification.

Flooding Attack. The attacker quickly sends many (large) pack-
ets to overburden the communication network, which might lead
to packet drops of legitimate requests and hence to a denial of ser-
vice. We depict the general flooding scenario in Fig. 2d and further
recorded two distinct variations of the attack.

With the present description of the testbed setup and the mea-
surement scenarios, we continue with the details of the recording
process and the resulting data structure in the following section.

3 PROPERTIES OF THE DATA SET
This section details how we executed our measurement campaign
for PowerDuck in our real-world testbed using the defined scenar-
ios in Section 3.1. Furthermore, we describe the structure of the
PowerDuck data set in Section 3.2.

3.1 Data Collection
To capture the relevant network traffic for the different scenarios,
we used the SPAN port of the central switch that connects the
different entities of our testbed, i.e., the attack PC, the substation
control system, and the IEDs. Moreover, we recorded the outgoing
network traffic on the attack PC to unequivocally label data packets
originating from the attack PC in the PowerDuck data set.

We conducted the individual measurements according to their
description in Table 1. For each of the 20 scenarios, we performed
the following general steps, where the exact actions depend on the
respective parameters and whether it includes an attack or not:

(1) reset the circuit breakers and the substation control system;
(2) start the recording of data traffic;
(3) possibly start an attack;
(4) possibly perform one or more actions, e.g., open a circuit

breaker; and

(5) stop the recording of data traffic.
The measurement duration varied between 5 and 18 minutes, de-
pending on the scenario. We provide the exact durations in Table 1.
Moreover, we slightly varied the timing of the different steps to
obtain individual traffic patterns, not depending on a fixed timing.
Upon completing the recording of the data traffic, we performed
the following postprocessing steps on the captured network traffic:
We removed all packets from the recordings that do not belong to
the IEC 61850 GOOSE protocol. Furthermore, we identified all pack-
ets originating from the attack PC with the help of the attack PC’s
recordings and described their purpose. Notably, we distinguished
between proper actions and packets that simply repeat previous
values according to the IEC 61850 GOOSE specification.

Besides providing the raw packet captures in the PCAP format,
we also transcribed them into the IPAL format [14], facilitating
further analysis and labeling of attack packets. IPAL provides an
abstract representation of the recorded network packets using the
JSON format. This representation enables a protocol-independent
classification of the different packet types and the annotation those
packets that originated from the attacker.

As an example, we visualized in Fig. 3 an insertion attack (no. 6)
and a suppression attack (no. 10), as observed in the PowerDuck
data set. The plots show when and how the attacker overwrites
the actual process states in the distinct scenarios. In the following
section, we provide further details on the structure of our data set.

cmdcmdmeas.seq.=13seq.=12xseq.=13............CSET 2022, August 8, 2022, Virtual, CA, USA

Sven Zemanek, Immanuel Hacker, Konrad Wolsing, Eric Wagner, Martin Henze, and Martin Serror

No. ID
1
2
3
4

normal-1
normal-2
normal-3
normal-4

Attack
–
–
–
–

Replay

Duration
00:14:14
00:18:26
00:12:38
00:16:53

00:05:35

1

2

3
4

5
6

7

8
9
10

11
12
13

replay-opening-switch-isolated

replay-opening-switch-w-context

Replay

00:05:36

replay-old-measurements
insert-fake-open-w-intermediate

insert-fake-open-only-end
insert-distort-meas-up-grad

Replay
Insertion

Insertion
Insertion

00:05:20
00:05:07

00:05:24
00:10:09

insert-distort-meas-down-grad

Insertion

00:10:25

insert-distort-meas-up-sharp
insert-distort-meas-down-sharp
sup-1-1-tbv0

sup-1-1-tbv1
sup-1-1-tbv2
sup-2

14

sup-1

Insertion
Insertion
Suppression

00:11:20
00:11:32
00:10:18

Suppression
Suppression
Suppression

00:10:24
00:12:11
00:11:29

Suppression

00:11:44

15 flood-repeat

Flooding

00:10:34

16 flood-bloat-repeat

Flooding

00:11:33

Description
Open IED 1’s circuit breaker, then close everything again.
Open IED 𝑥’s circuit breaker, then close everything again; for 𝑥 in {1,2}.
Open IED 𝑥’s circuit breaker, then close everything again; for 𝑥 in {3,2,3}
Open IED 𝑥’s circuit breaker, then close everything again; for 𝑥 in {2,1,3,1}
Replay two packets that indicate an opening of IED 1’s circuit breaker which
have been recorded previously.
Replay two packets that indicate an opening IED 1’s circuit breaker and their
value repetitions which have been recorded previously.
Replay previously recorded measurements of IED 1.
Insert crafted packets (values: opening – open) that indicate an opening of
IED 1’s circuit breaker.
Insert a crafted packet that indicates an open state of IED 1’s circuit breaker.
Insert crafted packets that indicate measurements of IED 1 raising from 399.45
to 419.91 over 186 seconds.
Insert crafted packets that indicate measurements of IED 1 falling from 399.45
to 380.09 over 176 seconds.
Insert a crafted packet that indicates a measurement of IED 1 of 420.0.
Insert a crafted packet that indicates a measurement of IED 1 of 380.0.
Insert two crafted packets (no delay) with a stNum value incremented by 1 and
2, respectively, while they still indicate a closed circuit breaker of IED 1.
Same as sup-1-1-tbv0, but with 1s delay between the two packets.
Same as sup-1-1-tbv0, but with 2s delay between the two packets.
Insert a crafted packet that has a stNum value incremented by 2, while its value
still indicates a closed circuit breaker of IED 1.
Insert a crafted packet that has a stNum value incremented by 1, while its value
still indicates a closed circuit breaker of IED 1.
Pick an observed packet announcing the state of IED 1 and send it repeatedly
in quick succession.
Same as flood-repeat, but the size of the packet that is being flooded has been
increased artificially to about the size of the MTU.

Table 1: Description of the measured scenarios in PowerDuck. For each scenario, the table includes a unique ID to simplify the
retrieval of the corresponding data in PowerDuck and the respective duration (hh:mm:ss) of the measurement.

3.2 Data Set Structure
The PowerDuck data set contains the recordings of the 20 previously
defined measurement scenarios (Section 2.2). The data is divided
into the plain packet capture files in the raw folder and the IPAL
transcriptions of those packet captures in the ipal folder. The files
in those folders are again subdivided into four files in the normal
subfolder, containing regular traffic, and 16 files in the attack
subfolder, containing the traffic of the attack scenarios.

In the IPAL transcriptions, packets from regular traffic have their
malicious value set to false. In contrast, packets originating from
the attacker have it set to a string indicating the attack ID given
in Table 1. This categorization is based on the JSON files in the
malicious folder, which indicate and describe the attack packets.
Consequently, such a description does not exist for the normal
traffic scenarios, which do not include any attacks. The files in
the malicious folder can be used to identify the attack packets in
the packet capture files manually: The ipalid value describes the
(0-based2) index of the corresponding packet in the packet capture
file. All files in the data set are named according to the scheme
No-ID-file extension, where No and ID correspond to those in

2Wireshark displays packet numbers with a 1-based index, e.g., locate the packet with
ipalid 200, one has to look for the packet Wireshark displays as No. 201.

Table 1, e.g., 01-normal-1.pcapng for the raw packets captures for
the first normal operation scenario.

4 APPLICATIONS AND USE CASES
After presenting the properties of the PowerDuck data set in the pre-
vious section, this section briefly highlights potential applications
and use cases of PowerDuck for security researchers and engineers.
We thus identify and discuss the following application areas.

Security Analyses. An essential use of PowerDuck is to better
understand existing attacks on the IEC 61850 GOOSE protocol in the
context of power grids and helps to assess potential vulnerabilities.
Such analyses include the concrete manifestation of the attacks on
real systems and their possible impact on the network traffic.

(Synthetic) Traffic Generation. Since some use cases require larger
amounts of network traffic than provided by PowerDuck, a viable
approach is to use these real-world recorded traffic patterns to sig-
nificantly improve synthetic traffic generation, such as proposed
in [11]. Moreover, this approach enables modifications and varia-
tions of normal and attack traffic as needed to better fit the require-
ments of the target use case.

PowerDuck: A GOOSE Data Set of Cyberattacks in Substations

CSET 2022, August 8, 2022, Virtual, CA, USA

(a) Effects of an insertion attack (no. 6) as observed in the PowerDuck data set.

(b) Effects of a suppression attack (no. 10) as observed in the PowerDuck data set.

Figure 3: Visualization of two example attacks from the PowerDuck data set (insertion attack no. 6 and suppression attack
no. 10). The plots show the manipulated information along with the actual overwritten states.

Intrusion Detection Systems. PowerDuck offers a solid foundation
for the training and testing of IDSs for power grids since the data
set also includes labeled packets originating from an attacker. In
particular, the recorded network traffic can be adapted and scaled to
match the needed requirements in combination with an improved
synthetic traffic generation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been supported by the German Federal Min-
istry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action within the project
“InnoSys 2030 – Innovations in System Operation up to 2030” (FKZ:
0350036I). Only the authors of this publication are responsible for
its content.

To summarize, PowerDuck offers a solid foundation to address
security analyses and implementations in the context of power
grids, particularly considering the control in substations via the
IEC 61850 GOOSE protocol. This real-world data set thus nicely
complements and improves existing power grid data sets based on
synthetically generated traffic. Moreover, the considered scenarios
include not only the simple transmission of commands but also the
(physical) reactions to such controls in an IED application, which
might trigger further actions and thus influence the network traffic.

5 CONCLUSION
This paper presents PowerDuck, a publicly available security data
set of IEC 61850 GOOSE network traffic in a substation testbed,
consisting of a station control system, three IEDs, and an attack PC.
We defined different scenarios, with and without the presence of
attacks, to cover a broad behavior of our physical testbed. Further-
more, the IEDs implement a curative measure, similar to a busbar
protection, which enables the triggering of cascading effects. The
resulting data set thus contains the GOOSE network traffic of dif-
ferent scenarios. Additionally, it includes a transcription to the
IPAL format, which facilitates a protocol-independent analysis and
allows us to label the packets originating from the attacker.

Concerning its use cases, PowerDuck contributes to a deeper un-
derstanding of current attacks on substations through the IEC 61850
GOOSE protocol. More importantly, it offers a solid foundation to
complement and improve the synthetic generation of IEC 61850
GOOSE network traffic, as the measurements in PowerDuck contain
actual attacks in a real-world setup. Hence, it opens up new possibil-
ities for modifying and scaling data sets to individual requirements,
such as the training and testing of IDSs in power grids.

REFERENCES
[1] Chuadhry Mujeeb Ahmed and Nandha Kumar Kandasamy. 2021. A Compre-
hensive Dataset from a Smart Grid Testbed for Machine Learning Based CPS
Security Research. In CPS4CIP. Springer Int’l Pub., Cham.

[2] Partha P. Biswas, Heng Chuan Tan, Qingbo Zhu, et al. 2019. A Synthesized Dataset
for Cybersecurity Study of IEC 61850 based Substation. In IEEE SmartGridComm.
[3] Jonathan Goh, Sridhar Adepu, Khurum Nazir Junejo, and Aditya Mathur. 2017. A
Dataset to Support Research in the Design of Secure Water Treatment Systems.
In Critical Information Infrastructures Security. Springer Int’l Pub., Cham.
[4] Tim Krause, Raphael Ernst, Benedikt Klaer, et al. 2021. Cybersecurity in Power

Grids: Challenges and Opportunities. Sensors 21, 18 (2021).

[5] Ralph Langner. 2011. Stuxnet: Dissecting a Cyberwarfare Weapon. IEEE Security

& Privacy 9, 3 (2011).

[6] Dan Li, Dacheng Chen, Baihong Jin, et al. 2019. MAD-GAN: Multivariate Anom-
aly Detection for Time Series Data with Generative Adversarial Networks. In
International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks. Springer, Cham.

[7] Chih-Yuan Lin, August Fundin, Erik Westring, et al. 2021. RICSel21 Data Collec-

tion: Attacks in a Virtual Power Network. In IEEE SmartGridComm.

[8] Ramin Moghaddass and Jianhui Wang. 2018. A Hierarchical Framework for Smart
Grid Anomaly Detection Using Large-Scale Smart Meter Data. IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid 9, 6 (2018).

[9] Ángel Luis Perales Gómez, Lorenzo Fernández Maimó, Alberto Huertas Celdrán,
et al. 2019. On the Generation of Anomaly Detection Datasets in Industrial
Control Systems. IEEE Access 7 (2019).

[10] Martin Serror, Sacha Hack, Martin Henze, Marko Schuba, and Klaus Wehrle. 2021.
Challenges and Opportunities in Securing the Industrial Internet of Things. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics 17, 5 (2021).

[11] Mustafizur R. Shahid, Gregory Blanc, Houda Jmila, et al. 2020. Generative Deep
Learning for Internet of Things Network Traffic Generation. In IEEE Pacific Rim
International Symposium on Dependable Computing.

[12] Hyeok-Ki Shin, Woomyo Lee, Jeong-Han Yun, and HyoungChun Kim. 2020. HAI
1.0: HIL-based Augmented ICS Security Dataset. In USENIX Workshop on Cyber
Security Experimentation and Test (CSET ’20).

[13] David E. Whitehead, Kevin Owens, Dennis Gammel, and Jess Smith. 2017. Ukraine
Cyber-Induced Power Outage: Analysis and Practical Mitigation Strategies. In
IEEE Conference for Protective Relay Engineers.

[14] Konrad Wolsing, Eric Wagner, Antoine Saillard, and Martin Henze. 2022. IPAL:
Breaking up Silos of Protocol-dependent and Domain-specific Industrial Intrusion
Detection Systems. In International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions
and Defenses (RAID ’22).

[15] Tarun Yadav and Arvind Mallari Rao. 2015. Technical Aspects of Cyber Kill
Chain. In Security in Computing and Communications. Springer Int’l Pub., Cham.

050100150200250300350400450500550time[s]400405410415420voltage[kV]normaloperationunderattackoverwrittenstate050100150200250300350400450500550time[s]openingopenclosednormaloperationunderattackoverwrittenstate