Abnormality Detection and Localization Schemes
using Molecular Communication Systems: A Survey

Ali Etemadi1∗, Maryam Farahnak-Ghazani1∗, Hamidreza Arjmandi2, Mahtab Mirmohseni3,
and Masoumeh Nasiri-Kenari1
1Sharif University of Technology, 2University of Warwick, 3University of Surrey

1

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

3
1

]
T
I
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
3
0
6
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— Abnormality, deﬁned as any abnormal fea-
ture in the system, may occur in different areas such as
healthcare, medicine, cyber security, industry, etc. The de-
tection and localization of the abnormality have been stud-
ied widely in wireless sensor networks literature where the
sensors use electromagnetic waves for communication. Due
to their invasiveness, bio-incompatibility, and high energy
consumption for some applications including healthcare,
molecular communication (MC) has been introduced as
an alternative approach, which enables promising systems
for abnormality detection and localization. In this paper,
we overview the MC-based abnormality detection and
localization schemes. To do this, we propose a general
MC system for abnormality detection and localization
to encompass the most related works. The general MC-
based abnormality detection and localization system con-
sists of multiple tiers for sensing the abnormality and
communication between different agents in the system.
We describe different abnormality recognition methods,
which can be used by the sensors to obtain information
about the abnormality. Further, we describe the functional
units of the sensors and different sensor features. We
explain different interfaces for connecting the internal and
external communication networks and generally model the
sensing and communication channels. Then, we formulate
the abnormality detection problem using MC systems. We
categorize the MC-based abnormality detection schemes
based on the mobility of the used sensors, cooperative
detection, and cooperative sensing/activation, and review
the schemes in each group. The detection schemes may
use stationary or mobile sensors to cooperatively or non-
cooperatively sense/activate or detect the abnormality. In
the schemes using mobile sensors, the sensors may move by
different propulsion mechanisms that we elaborate on in
this survey. After the abnormality is detected, it is critical
to localize it. We generally formulate the localization
problem using MC systems. The general framework for
externally-controllable localization is also presented. We
classify the localization approaches based on the sensor
mobility and propulsion mechanisms. The stationary and
non-propelled mobile sensors may communicate their ob-
tained information with a fusion center (FC) or gateway

∗Co-ﬁrst authors

(GW) to localize the abnormality and take further actions.
Self-propelled mobile sensors may autonomously localize
the abnormality using a variety of taxis (e.g., chemotaxis
and optotaxis) or sensor to sensor (S2S) cooperation
methods. The externally-propelled sensors cooperate with
the GW and local cloud to actuate external interventions.
Finally, we provide the ongoing challenges and future re-
search directions to realize and develop MC-based systems
for detection and localization of the abnormality.

I. INTRODUCTION
Abnormality detection and localization has been stud-
ied widely and has an established literature in different
application areas such as fraud detection in credit cards,
healthcare, and insurance [1], intrusion detection in cyber
security [2], fault detection in safety-critical systems
injection attacks and denial-of-service attacks in
[3],
networks [4]–[6], detection of physical entity malfunc-
tions in smart grids [7], underwater target detection and
localization [8], [9], cancer detection and localization
in medicine [10], [11], and odor source detection and
localization [12], [13]. Abnormality, which is deﬁned
as any abnormal feature in the system, is also referred
target, outlier, exception, surprise, con-
as anomaly,
taminant and peculiarity in different ﬁelds [14]. Due
to the entry of the internet of things (IoT) and artiﬁ-
cial intelligence (AI) into the industry, education, and
medicine, which has resulted in a large amount of data
gathered from the devices, the systems have been more
susceptible to the entry of anomalies, and the detection
and localization of anomalies has become even a more
important problem [15]. Further, the new advances in
technology have paved the way for new techniques to
address the problem.

Conventionally, wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are
used to detect and localize the abnormality in a variety
of healthcare, environmental, and industrial applications
[16]–[20]. In particular, wireless body area networks
(WBANs), which are one of the important classes of
WSNs, are used for health monitoring with an extensive

 
 
 
 
 
 
literature [21]–[29]. In [21]–[25], WBANs are introduced
to detect various abnormal conditions of physical health.
In [26]–[29], physical activity detection is investigated
using WBANs.

WSNs deploy electromagnetic (EM) waves to convey
information, which limits their application in some areas,
such as inside living bodies, due to the invasiveness,
high energy consumption, and incompatibility with the
environment. Moreover, EM waves may fail in some
environments such as inside structural metal pipes and
MC may be a more reliable approach in these applica-
tions [30]. Further, the conventional approaches are not
reliable in applications that demand for fast detection and
accurate localization of the abnormality. For instance,
the light symptoms at the early stage of cancer may
not be measured by these methods [31], [32]. In these
applications, the combination of molecular communica-
tion (MC) nano-networks inside the body and wireless
communication networks outside the body are promising
systems. Considering these applications, we focus on
the MC-based systems for abnormality detection and
localization in this paper.

MC is a new paradigm, inspired by the communication
between living cells in nature, which is biocompatible
and energy-efﬁcient, and hence more suitable for in-body
applications. MC systems use molecules as information
carriers with a vast of healthcare, industrial, and environ-
mental applications. In bio-medicine, MC can be used for
targeted drug delivery, health monitoring, and immune
system support [33], [34]. The industrial applications of
MC include pattern and structure formation, water and
food quality control, and functionalized materials. The
environmental applications include environment mon-
itoring, air pollution control, and biodiversity control
[33], [34]. In most of these applications, we need to
monitor the environment to detect the abnormal changes
that occur, e.g., the presence of tumor cells inside the
body, pollution in the environment, leakage or pressure
drop in oil pipelines. The abnormality detection must be
mostly followed by its localization to take appropriate
actions. MC systems are envisioned to detect abnormal-
ities in both micro-scale (range of nano-meter to micro-
meter) applications, such as early detection of cancer
cells inside the body [35], and macro-scale (range of
micro-meter to meter) applications, such as detection of
virus in the air [36], and detection of leakage or pressure
drop in oil-pipelines [37].

An MC-based abnormality detection and localization
system may consist of different tiers as shown in Fig. 1.
Here, we introduce a general multi-tier framework to
comprehensively encounter the existing works. However,
some tiers may not be present in some applications and

2

use-cases. In the ﬁrst tier, there is an abnormal entity that
makes change in the medium and sensors sense some
variables in the environment to detect the abnormality.
The abnormality may affect the environment in different
ways,
including molecule release (such as releasing
biomarker molecules), medium effect (such as changing
temperature or pressure), and molecule absorption (such
as absorbing certain molecules) that we describe in this
paper. The abnormality recognition at the sensors may
be done by capturing one (or more than one) of these ef-
fects. The abnormality sensing may be molecular or non-
molecular. For example, pressure measurement is non-
molecular and biomarker concentration measurement is
molecular. We explain the functional units of a sensor
including the recognition layer, transducer, processor,
memory, and power unit in this paper. Moreover, we
describe different sensor features for abnormality de-
tection and localization, including sensing, transduction,
processing, memory, communication, molecule release,
mobility, propulsion, manufacturing technology, and en-
ergy.

In the second tier, the sensors, which can be stationary
or mobile, may send their decisions to the fusion center
(FC) for cooperative abnormality detection/localization
due to the uncertainty in sensor decision [38]. The
sensors may also communicate with other sensors and
cooperatively activate each other upon detecting the
abnormality [37]. The FC processes the information
and makes the ﬁnal decision itself, or transfers it to
an external agent through a gateway (GW) for com-
plex processes (third tier) [39]. The FC may send the
processed or unprocessed information to an external
controlling agent, which controls the sensors based on
the received information [40]. The information gathered
from the sensors can also be used for localizing the
abnormality by the FC or external agents after detecting
the abnormality [37].

As another approach for localizing the abnormal-
ity,
the sensors may move towards the abnormality
using different mobility mechanisms, e.g., chemotaxis,
i.e., moving towards the higher concentration of cer-
tain molecules, or using magnetic ﬁelds externally. The
sensors may perform an action on the abnormality
themselves such as releasing drugs. Also, the sensor
nodes may act as leaders and release some attractant
molecules to attract follower sensors to the location of
the abnormality for performing action [41], [42]. The
leader sensors may also communicate with the external
environment through a GW after ﬁnding the location
of the abnormality [43]. The communication in each
tier may be based on wireless links (radio-frequency,
optical, and acoustic) or molecular links. The MC-based

3

Fig. 1: Schematic view of abnormality detection and localization system.

systems consist of at least one molecular sensing or
communication link.

For transferring the information to an external node
in MC-based systems, there should be an interface to
convert the internal signals to the external signals. We
explain different possibilities for constructing wireless
to wireless and molecular to wireless interfaces in
this paper. For example, carbon nano-tubes (CNT) and
Graphene nano-ribbons (GNR), embedded with molecu-
lar nano-sensors, can be used as promising molecular to
wireless interfaces in the FC or GW, in which an electric
signal is generated due to the change in the moving
electrons upon receiving molecules [44]. Other examples
of interfaces to convert molecular signals to EM waves or
vice versa are constructed using genetically engineered
cells and artiﬁcially synthesized materials [40].

Moreover, we summarize the modeling of sensing
and communication channels and signal reception for
molecular and non-molecular channels (including mag-
netic, ultrasonic, or RF-based channels). Molecular chan-
nels can be generally modeled by advection-reaction-
diffusion partial differential equations (PDEs) with some
boundary conditions according to the medium structure
and receiver type [45]. Magnetic, ultrasonic, or RF-
based channels can also be modeled by wave equations
following the second-order linear PDEs [46], [47].

Abnormality detection and localization have been
studied widely in the literature of MC. We ﬁrst for-
mulate the abnormality detection problem, in which the
detection of the abnormality is investigated and the
location of the abnormality is not of interest. Different

abnormality detection schemes will be discussed in this
paper in detail. These schemes are categorized based on
using stationary or mobile sensors. For schemes using
stationary sensors, where the location of the sensors is
ﬁxed in the medium, the abnormality may be detected
using either a single sensor (non-cooperative detection)
or multiple sensors that send their decisions to an FC
for ﬁnal decision (cooperative detection). As mentioned
above, the sensors may cooperatively activate each other
(cooperative sensing/activation). However, the schemes
in the literature do not consider this possibility for
stationary sensors. Hence, the schemes using stationary
sensors are categorized based on cooperative or non-
cooperative detection. For example, in [48], a single
stationary sensor placed in a room is used for detecting
virus-laden aerosols in the room, and in [49], multiple
stationary sensors and an FC are placed near the sus-
picious tissue and the target detection is investigated
at
the sensors and the FC. On the other hand, all
detection schemes using mobile sensors in the MC
literature use cooperative detection (multiple sensors and
an FC). Hence, the schemes using mobile sensors are
categorized based on the cooperative activation of the
sensors to schemes with non-cooperative or coopera-
tive sensing/activation. For example, in [31], multiple
mobile sensors with non-cooperative sensing/activation
are inserted in the circulatory system for early can-
cer detection. In [37], the abnormality detection inside
pipelines is accomplished using multiple mobile sensors
with cooperative sensing/activation, where the pipeline
is divided into multiple regions with an FC placed at the

end of each region.

The next step after the abnormality detection is to
localize the abnormality site. In this paper, we review
the localization schemes based on MC systems. For
abnormality localization, the navigation of a swarm of
sensors towards the intended region is potentially of high
interest, e.g., in the targeted drug delivery systems [50]
and macro-scale robot-assisted surveillance systems [51].
Similar to the abnormality detection, the abnormality
may be localized using mobile or stationary sensors. The
stationary sensors may employ classiﬁcation, discrete-
model, or continuous-model-based approaches to infer
the location of the abnormality [12]. The MC literature
has recently proposed schemes to estimate the location
of the transmitter as a source of molecule release that
leads to a diffusion ﬁeld [52]–[56]. The mobile sensors
are divided into non-propelled or propelled sensors. The
propelled sensors are inﬂuenced by speciﬁc internal or
external forces which are referred to as self-propulsion
or external propulsion. The self-propelled sensors can
be potentially employed in a variety of applications,
e.g., water decontamination, water remediation and cargo
transport, biomedical applications, etc [57]. The self-
propulsion can be in response to the natural mecha-
nisms (i.e., using taxis-based approaches) or relying on
synthetic motors (i.e., using control-driven approaches).
Taxis-based approaches, e.g., chemotaxis [58], optotaxis
[59], anemotaxis [60], and infotaxis [61] are well studied
self-propulsion mechanisms in the literature of physical
chemistry. In biological environments, biocompatibility
is vital for self-propelled sensors which means that the
sensors should emulate biological locomotion mecha-
nisms to efﬁciently localize an abnormality. On the other
hand, control-driven approaches [62] may perform more
efﬁciently than simple taxis-based approaches at the cost
of more computational complexity. The important chal-
lenge in self-propulsion mechanisms is that the sensors
have to autonomously locate the abnormality taking into
account the limited resources (e.g., energy, memory, etc)
of the sensors. As another approach, external triggers
may be employed to control the locomotion of the swarm
of sensors. To this end,
the communication between
sensors, FC, GW, and possibly the cloud computing
system is required to localize the abnormality externally.
Thereby, data gathered by the sensors from the abnor-
mality micro-environment may be employed locally by
the sensors or globally by either FC, GW, or cloud
computing system to make a local or global decision.
The links between sensor to sensor (S2S), sensor to FC
(S2FC), and FC to GW (FC2GW) can be either based on
wireless or MC technologies. Wireless communication
may consist of RF, acoustic, magnetic, or THz technolo-

4

gies. The priority of the information stream identiﬁes the
level of communication tier in which the decision should
be made. For low-priority events, the decision is made
at the FC or possibly GW. However, for high-priority
events which may need extensive global processing,
the information is transmitted to the cloud computing
system. Molecular communications (as the core of S2S
and S2FC links) is the main enabler of the abnormality
localization which is comprehensively discussed in this
paper. Besides, wireless communications (as the core
of the S2GW and FC2GW links) make the basis for
externally-controllable localization systems. To motivate
the role of the externally-controllable systems, a variety
of application-centric frameworks are developed, e.g., a
novel touch communication (TouchCom) framework for
drug-delivery systems [63] and a novel tumor detection
and localization framework using external devices [64],
which are clariﬁed throughout the paper. Recent ad-
vancements in the ﬁeld of medical imaging and actuating
systems in line with network cloudiﬁcation promises
future externally-controllable health monitoring systems.
In this paper, we describe the most important chal-
lenges to model, design, and implement the MC-based
abnormality detection and localization systems and pro-
vide future research and development directions. The
MC-based systems are envisioned to be mostly used
in nano-scale in-body applications. Therefore, the most
important challenges to implement these systems are
to design bio-nano-sensors with multiple functionalities
(such as mobility mechanisms, sensing methods, com-
munication strategies, storage capabilities, energy har-
vesting mechanisms, etc), and interfaces with different
types of signal conversion, for connecting the internal
network to the external network. The modeling of these
systems is another important challenge that requires a
well understanding and modeling of biological systems
and environments. The existing models introduced for
MC-based systems are simpliﬁed models, which are far
from reality in some cases. Therefore, more realistic
yet tractable models, are needed to be introduced for
these systems. Further, the detection and localization
approaches, which can be categorized in general into
classic, bio-inspired, and machine learning methods,
can be improved by appropriately combining different
approaches.

This paper is organized as follows:

in Section II,
the abnormality detection and localization problem and
the important elements of the systems including ab-
normality, sensors, FC and GW (interfaces), and sens-
ing/communication links are described. In Section III,
the abnormality detection schemes and in Section IV,
abnormality localization schemes are reviewed. Finally,

in Section V,
the important challenges of the MC-
based abnormality detection and localization systems are
explained and some directions are introduced for future
works.

II. PROBLEM AND SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

In this section, we describe the abnormality detection
and localization using MC systems, represented schemat-
ically in Fig. 1. In the following, we describe the impor-
tant elements of this system including abnormality, sen-
sors, FC/GW (interfaces), and sensing/communication
channels. We ﬁrst describe different abnormality recog-
nition approaches and explain the abnormality detection
and localization problems in Subsection II-A. In Subsec-
tion II-B, we illustrate different features for the sensors
in these systems and in Subsection II-C, we describe the
possible constructions for FC/GW (interfaces). Finally,
in Subsection II-D, we provide the modeling of sensing
and communication channels and signal reception for
molecular and some non-molecular channels.

A. Abnormality

Abnormality is deﬁned as any abnormal feature, char-
acteristic, or occurrence that interferes with the normal
status of a system [37]. The abnormal entities can be
recognized in different ways. We consider the follow-
ing abnormality recognition methods, which are mostly
considered in MC-based systems (see Fig. 2):
• Molecule release: an abnormal entity may release
certain molecules in the medium. For example, cancer
cells as abnormal entities in the body may release
biomarkers, which can be used to detect and local-
ize the cancerous site [65], [66]. Further, pathogens
(viruses, bacteria, etc) in the air or inside the body
may be detected by the sensors [67], [68]. Moreover,
pollutants may be present in the air, water, or oil
pipelines, which can be detected by certain sensors
[37]. The authors in [66] introduce the biomarkers
released by different cancers and the corresponding
sensors to detect them. The biomarker release rate
over time, noted by xB(t), can be modeled by Weibull
function as [69]

xB(t) = xB,0(1 − exp (−ktb)),

(1)

where b and k are biomarker power-law and biomarker
respectively; and xB,0 is the
release coefﬁcients,
steady-state release rate when t → ∞. [70] provides a
more realistic model for biomarker release rate from
healthy and cancerous cells. According to this model,
biomarker release rates from healthy and cancerous

5

cells that reach the blood vessels, noted by xH(t) and
xC(t), respectively, are obtained as [31]

xH(t) = fHrH(t)nH(t),

xC(t) = fCrC(t)nC(t), (2)

where nH(t) and nC(t) are the number of healthy
and cancerous cells over time, respectively; rH(t) and
rC(t) are the biomarker release rates from each healthy
and cancerous cell (which are assumed to be the
same for all cells), respectively; and fH and fC are
the fractions of released biomarkers from healthy and
cancerous cells that reach the blood vessels (while
the rest of them remain in tissues), respectively. It is
assumed that biomarker release rates from each can-
cerous and healthy cell are constant, i.e., rC(t) = rC
and rH(t) = rH Further, the number of healthy cells is
assumed to be constant over time, i.e., nH(t) = nH,0,
and the number of cancerous cells is modeled by
Gompertzian function as follows [71]:

nC(t) = nC,0 exp (

kGr
kDec

(1 − exp (−kDect))),

(3)

where kDec and kGr are the fractional decay and growth
rates of the cancerous cells, respectively, and nC,0 is
the number of cancerous cells at time t = 0. For small
values of kDec, i.e., kDec → 0 (which is the case in the
early stage of cancer), the number of cancerous cells
can be simpliﬁed to the following mono-exponential
growth function:

nC(t) = nC,0 exp (kGrt).

Hence, we have

xC(t) = fHrHnC,0 exp (kGrt).

(4)

(5)

• Medium effects: abnormality may appear as the change
in medium parameters such as ﬂow velocity [72],
pressure [73],
temperature [74], or geometry [75].
For example, a leakage leads to pressure drop in oil
pipelines [73]; a tumor may change the temperature
of the nearby environment [74]; and Atherosclerotic
Lesion decreases the cross-section of the blood vessel
[75]. The sensors may directly measure the envi-
ronment parameters and detect
the changes. Also,
a communication system may be inﬂuenced by the
medium change and indirectly detect the abnormality
[38].

• Molecule absorption: the abnormal entity may absorb
certain molecule types in the environment. For exam-
ple, an eavesdropper (considered as an abnormality)
may absorb information or signaling molecules to
interfere with a natural or synthetic molecular commu-
nication link [76]. Moreover, cancerous cells may act

as competitor cells for other cells inside the body and
absorb their released molecules (such as Oxygen) [38].
The concentration change of the absorbed molecules
can be used to detect this abnormal entity.
The sensors may use one (or more than one) of these
abnormality recognition methods to obtain information
about the abnormality in the environment. This informa-
tion can be processed by the sensors and/or other agents
of the system to detect and/or localize the abnormality. In
the following, we consider the problems of abnormality
detection and localization and explain the general system
for each problem, separately.

Abnormality detection: Abnormality detection aims
to detect the presence of an abnormality in the medium.
As mentioned above,
the abnormality can be recog-
nized by detecting the change in concentration of the
biomarker molecules or the change in channel parame-
ters, and the sensors sense the medium to look for these
changes. Multiple sensors may cooperate to detect abnor-
mality (see Fig. 1). In cooperative detection, individual
sensors sense the medium (through the abnormality
sensing link) and may send their raw measurements or
local decisions to an FC (through the S2FC communica-
tion link). As another approach, the sensors may move
towards the FC, where they are collected for reading their
activation levels [31]. The sensors may also cooperate
with each other for their sensing/activation (through the
S2S communication link) [37]. The FC may do some
further actions based on the received data and decisions,
depending on the application. Once the FC detects the
abnormality, it may transport the measurements, e.g.,
raw samples or soft/hard decisions, made locally by
the agents,
to an external GW through a molecular
or non-molecular link (FC2GW communication link).
The sensors may also send their information directly to
the external GW through a non-molecular link (S2GW
communication link) [68]. The GW processes the infor-
mation or sends it to a remote cloud via a wireless link.
The sensing and communication links can be molecular
or non-molecular. In this paper, we limit our focus on
the detection and localization systems with MC-based
sensing and/or communication links.

Abnormality localization: Localizing the abnormal-
ity source can be urgent in some applications to take
appropriate actions, such as targeted drug delivery [37],
[77]. This is a challenging task in the MC systems
in environments with unknown properties, e.g., bound-
aries, geometrical conﬁguration, and parameters of the
abnormality source [77]. To localize the abnormality,
the sensors of the system can potentially form a leader-
follower framework. In these systems, if a sensor detects
the abnormality, it gets activated and becomes a leader

6

Fig. 2: Different abnormality recognition methods.

Fig. 3: Functional units of the sensors.

sensor, informing the other sensors to follow it. Sensors
may move or be propelled towards the abnormality
source using the self or external propulsion equipment.
Alternatively, the sensors may send their data to the FC
to process them and take further actions to localize the
abnormality source [37]. In Section IV, the functional
options of the agents are extensively discussed.

B. Sensors

Sensors are used to sense and/or measure environ-
mental variables affected by the abnormality, such as
pressure, temperature, ﬂow velocity, particles, etc [78].
The functional units of sensors are shown in Fig. 3. A
sensor generally consists of a recognition layer, where
the abnormal events are recognized, a transducer unit,
where the perceived abnormal events are converted into
another type of signal to be processed further, a process-
ing unit, where the signal is processed, a power unit, who
provides the energy for the processor, a memory unit
to store information, and a transceiver to communicate
with other nodes or to perform some other actions at
the sensor (e.g., releasing drug molecules) [79]. The
communication signal
inputs may contain controlling
signals for the sensor, e.g., controlling the motion of
the sensor. The sensing input signals may also cause
the moving of sensors towards the abnormality. In the
following, we categorize the features of the sensors used
for abnormality detection and localization (see Fig. 4):
• Sensing: As the ﬁrst mission, sensors may sense
environmental parameters like temperature, pressure,
etc (non-molecular sensing) or sense and measure
the concentration of certain molecules (biomarkers) in

7

Fig. 4: Sensor features.

the environment (molecular sensing). For molecular
sensing, the receiving process of the sensors can be
modeled by transparent, absorbing (fully or partially),
or reactive receivers [45] (see Table. II for different
abnormality detection schemes assuming these mod-
els).

• Transduction: The converted signal in the transducer
may be electrical, optical, or mechanical [80]. The
optical and mechanical sensors need macro-scale el-
ements to detect the transducer’s output to be ready
for processing, while the electrical sensors can do the
detection in a self-operated manner at the nano-scale.
• Processing: The sensors may have the capability of
processing their measurements and making decisions
on the existence of the abnormality. The decisions
made in sensors can be hard representing the absence
or presence of the abnormality, or soft interpreting a
probability of abnormality existence [81].

• Memory: The sensors may use memory for infor-
mation processing. For instance, aggregate sensors
in [37] keep their measurements in different
time
instances and aggregate them for their ﬁnal decision.
A higher memory increases their potential to keep
more measurements and samples, which results in
more complicated information processing aiming at
abnormality detection and localization.

• Communication: Besides sensing,

the sensors may
communicate with other agents in the system (e.g.,
sensors or FC) to report their measurements and/or
decisions for further actions regarding the abnormality
[37]. Depending on the application, the sensors may be
designed to communicate, which can be accomplished
using wireless (e.g., radio-frequency (RF) [82], [83],
optical [84], ultrasonic [85],) or molecular signals
[35]. In [83], nano-sensors with RF-based commu-
nication, operate in Terahertz (THz) band. MC is a
promising approach for communication in nano-scale
in-body applications since it is bio-compatible and
energy-efﬁcient.

• Molecule release: The sensors may be able to release
molecules (single type or multiple types) for various

purposes, for instance,
to communicate with other
sensors or FC [37] or to deliver drug molecules at
the target site [38]. The molecules may be stored in
the sensor storage or produced through chemical pro-
cesses by the sensor itself. The release of molecules
should be controlled by the sensor, which can be done
using ion channels [86] and ion pumps [87].

• Mobility: Sensors may be mobile or stationary. The
locations of the stationary sensors are ﬁxed, e.g., skin-
integrated and implantable sensors [88], [89], tissue-
integrated sensors [90], and virus or air pollutant
sensors in a room [36]. On the other hand, the sensor
may be able to move autonomously [43], [91] or un-
autonomously [92] in the environment. This ability
may be used for efﬁcient abnormality detection and
localization.

• Propulsion: Mobile sensors move due to different
propulsion methods. The sensors may move au-
tonomously in the ﬂuid medium due to the diffusion
and/or ﬂow [91], which is called non-propulsion. Sen-
sors may move using their own means for autonomous
displacement, which we refer to as self-propulsion.
For example, ﬂagella bacteria autonomously move
towards the higher gradient of attractant molecules
to ﬁnd food [43]. The sensors may be externally-
propelled. For instance, external electric or magnetic
ﬁelds can control the sensors’ motion [92], [93].
• Manufacturing technology: The manufacturing tech-
nology of the sensors at nano- and micro-scales in-
cludes synthetic (based on micro-electromechanical
systems (MEMS)), bio-inspired (engineered biological
elements), or hybrid [39].

• Energy: Based on the manufacturing technology, the
sensors need a source of energy for their processing
that can be harvested or stored in advance in their en-
ergy storage (battery). The sensors may harvest energy
using different techniques including vibration energy
harvesting,
thermal energy harvesting, biochemical
energy harvesting, wireless energy harvesting, etc
[94]. Biological sensors may use the foods in their
environment to harvest energy (biochemical energy

harvesting) [94]. The sensors may use thermal energy
(temperature difference) to harvest energy [94], [95].
They may also harvest energy from the kinetic energy
(such as ﬂow) in their environment (vibration energy
harvesting) [94], [96], [97]. Further, they may harvest
energy from wireless energy sources (wireless energy
harvesting) [94], [98].

C. FC and GW (Interface)

FC collects the information from the sensors to pro-
cess and detect abnormality itself or forwards them to
an external processing agent through a GW. Further,
an external controlling agent may send its controlling
commands to the FC and sensors through a GW. GW
connects the internal communication network (e.g., the
nano-network inside the body, called the in-body net-
work) to the external communication network (e.g., the
macro-network outside the body, called the off-body
network). For in-body applications,
the GW can be
placed inside or outside the body [44]. Hence, either the
FC or GW needs a nano-macro interface to convert the
data from the in-body network to the appropriate form
for the off-body network.

The nano-network inside the body can use THz or
molecular signals and the agents outside the body mostly
use EM signals for communication. For example, [99],
[100] use THz signals and [40] use molecular signals for
communication in the nano-network. In THz-based nano-
networks, the nano-devices inside the body are non-
biological devices and may be invasive to the human
body, while MC-based nano-networks are more bio-
compatible and less invasive, and hence they are of most
interest. Based on the internal signal type, the interfaces
for in-body applications can be categorized into two
types:
• Wireless to wireless interface: for in-body networks
that use THz signals for communication, an interface
is needed to convert the THz signal inside the body to
the EM signal outside the body and vice versa. Since
both signals are wireless, the interface is an electrical
device with a dual transceiver to communicate with
the in-body and off-body networks. For example, in
the nano-devices are located inside coronary
[99],
arteries and communicate with the interface, located
in the intercostal space of the rib cage of the patient,
using THz signal and the interface, acting as a GW,
communicates with the outside of the body using RF
signal. In [100], multiple nano-devices are inserted
into the circulatory system and communicate with a
nano-router (interface), implanted in the hand skin
between the dermis and epidermis, in THz band, and

8

the interface also communicates in THz band with an
external portable device, which is placed on the back
of the hand, acting as a GW.

• Molecular to wireless interface: For molecular com-
munication networks inside the body, an interface is
needed to convert the molecular signal inside the body
to the EM signal outside the body and vice versa.
Different interfaces for in-messaging (messaging from
nano-machines inside body to external devices) and
out-messaging (messaging from external devices to
nano-machines inside body) can be implemented using
genetically engineered cells [40], [101], [102], artiﬁ-
cially synthesized materials (ARTs) (such as photo-
sensitive, temperature-sensitive, magnetic, and lumi-
nescent materials) [40], CNTs [44], [103], and GNRs
[44], [104]. Implementing different types of signal
conversion is complex using genetically engineered
cells. While ARTs provide a wide range of options
for signal conversion in interfaces, e.g., ARTs can be
designed for converting electrical, optical, or mag-
netic signals to molecular signals and vice versa.
ARTs can be constructed using Polystyrene bead and
pHrodo molecules [40]. pHrodo molecules are pH-
sensitive ﬂuorogenic dyes that are only ﬂuorescent
under acidic environments (low pH) and almost non-
ﬂuorescent under neutral environments. Hence,
the
intensity of the ﬂuorescence can be measured using
ﬂuorescence microscopy to get information about the
acidity and neutrality of the cells (out-messaging).
Further, polystyrene bead can be used to implement
in-messaging, e.g., it can be designed to release or
absorb molecules upon receiving signals from external
devices. However, the need for the implementation
of a ﬂuorescence microscope makes it complicated
for ordinary use. CNTs and GNRs are newer ap-
proaches to construct the interfaces [44], [103]. In
this mechanism, chemical nano-sensors are embedded
in CNT or GNT. These nano-sensors absorb certain
molecules that generate an electrical signal in the CNT
or GNT by changing the number of electrons that
move through the carbon lattice.

D. Uniﬁed Channel Model and Signal Reception

In this section, we provide the general channel model
for the system considered in Fig. 1. The link from
the abnormality to the sensors is referred to as the
sensing channel. Other links, e.g., S2FC, FC2GW, and
off-body links are all referred to as communication
channels. We model
the sensing and communication
channels using a generalized advection-diffusion-wave

equation in viscoelastic1 environments, which charac-
terizes the Brownian motion of particles as well as the
wave propagation. The generalized space-time fractional
advection-diffusion-wave equation of order (α, β) for
spatio-temporal ﬁeld C(r, t) is described as follows
[105], [106]:

Dβ
t

(cid:0)C(r, t)(cid:1) = ∇α(cid:0)ar,tC(r, t)(cid:1) − uβ∇.(cid:0)br,tC(r, t)(cid:1)

− uβF(kd, C(r, t)) + P(cid:0)S(r, t)(cid:1),

(6)

Dt

where uβ = 1β(cid:54)=2 and 0 otherwise. Also, ∇α(·) and
Dβ
t (·) denote the Riesz space-fractional derivative of or-
der α and the Caputo time-fractional derivative of order
β [105], [106], respectively. For β (cid:54)= 2, Eq. (6) describes
the space-time fractional diffusion equation with ar,t
and br,t denoting the spatio-temporal diffusion and drift
parts, respectively. Moreover, F(·) and P(·) describe
the degradation reaction rate function with degradation
rate kd and the source equation, respectively. In the case
of diffusion processes, Eq. (6) models a wide range of
diffusion processes from normal to anomalous diffusion.
For normal diffusion, i.e., (α, β) = (2, 1), the Fokker-
Planck equation in (6) is given by P(cid:0)S(r, t)(cid:1) = S(r, t).
Also, β = 2 characterizes the time-fractional wave
equation with ar,t = c2 where c denotes the speed of
the wave. In the sequel, the provided model in (6) is
clariﬁed for special cases of reaction-coupled diffusion
and wave-propagation channels.

1) Reaction-Coupled Diffusion Channels: In a typi-
cal biological microenvironment, there may be multiple
transceivers, obstacles, and boundaries in the presence
of ﬂow-induced diffusion coupled with arbitrary homo-
geneous boundary conditions. The molecules diffused
in the environment may react with the receptors on
the boundaries or obstacles in the environment. The
reactions at the boundaries may be complicated and non-
linear which can be simpliﬁed to a linear reaction chain.
A general homogeneous boundary condition that simply
models the wide range of reactions at the boundaries is
given as follows [107],

D∇C(r, t) · ˆn = LC(r, t),

r ∈ ∂D,

(7)

where ∇ denotes the spatial gradient operator, ˆn de-
scribes the surface normal vector pointing towards the
exterior of the diffusion environment at r ∈ ∂D, where
∂D denotes the set of all points over the boundary of
the environment, and D and L are some time-domain

1Viscoelasticity of a body identiﬁes its capability to simultaneously
dissipate and store mechanical energy in a generic continuous media
exhibiting a combination of viscosity (i.e., ﬂuid-like materials sup-
porting types of anomalous diffusion processes) and elasticity (i.e.,
solid-like materials exhibiting wave propagation) [105], [106].

9

differential operators which are characterized based on
the reactions involving information molecules across the
boundary.

In the case of a normal diffusive MC system in
a viscous medium with constant diffusion coefﬁcient
ar,t = D and uniform bulk ﬂow br,t = v , Eq. (6)
is simpliﬁed to:

(cid:0)C(r, t)(cid:1) = D∇2(cid:0)C(r, t)(cid:1)

(8)
− kdC(r, t) − v∇.(cid:0)C(r, t)(cid:1) + S(r, t),

with respect to boundary condition (7) which models a
wide range of boundary conditions including partially
absorbing boundaries and active transport mechanisms.
More interestingly, Eq. (7) can potentially describe an
oversimpliﬁed model for Transcytosis across membrane
announcing physiochemical reactive properties using a
second-order reaction-diffusion system [107].

unbounded

an
in
(6)
impulsive

1. Simpliﬁed
in
to

unbounded
an
instantaneous

adevction-reaction-diffusion
Example
The
environment:
channel
environment
solution
given the
source
S(r, t) = δ(r − r0)δ(t − τ0), where δ(·) denotes
the Dirac’s delta function, and boundary condition
C(|r| → ∞, t) = 0, diffusion coefﬁcient ar,t = D,
uniform bulk ﬂow br,t = v, and the ﬁrst-order
degradation of rate kd, i.e., F(kd, C(r, t)) = kdC(r, t)
is obtained as [45], [108]:

release

C(r, t) =

1
(4πD(t − τ0))3/2
× exp (cid:0) − kd(t − τ0) −

(9)

|r − (t − τ0)v − r0|2
4D(t − τ0)

(cid:1),

for t ≥ τ0.

2) Wave-propagation Channels:

In typical wireless
communications, various technologies, e.g., electromag-
netic, ultrasonic, and RF, are employed for information
transmission. The S2FC, FC2GW, and off-body links
may be modeled using (6) with β = 2, ar,t = c2, and
P(cid:0)S(r, t)(cid:1) = Γ ∂
∂t S(r, t) in which Γ is the Gr¨uneisen
coefﬁcient which depends on the medium characteristic
for the propagating wave [85].

Example 2. Opto-ultrasonic channel model: One of
the interesting channels in WBAN is the opto-ultrasonic
channel described by (6) [47], [85]. Actually, this chan-
nel is based on ultrasonic waves (i.e., high-frequency2
acoustic waves) generated in response to irradiation
of optical signals to the medium. Joint deployment of

2For instance, wideband ultrasonic signals (in the range of hun-
dreds of MHz for both bandwidth and central frequency) are gener-
ated in response to nano-seconds-long optical pulses.

the nano-scale which is critical

light beams and ultrasonic waves allows for external
for
interventions at
connecting in-body nano-networks to off-body WBANs.
Assuming Gaussian spatio-temporal pulse proﬁle, i.e.,
S(r, t) = G(r − r0)δ(t − τ0), the received pressure at
position r and time t under the far-ﬁeld assumption is
described as follows:

C(r, t) = −

Γ
2(2π)3/2c2r

t − τ
τ 3
e

(cid:18)

exp

−

(cid:19)

,

)2

1
2

(

t − τ
τe

(10)
the optical
where τe depends on both the width of
beam and optical pulse duration. Also, τ = r
c and the
source S(r, t) is the normalized absorbed heat by tissue
representing the spatio-temporal source of pressure [47].

We note that the signal received by the receiver (e.g.,
individual sensors, FC, or GW) is a random variable
whose mean is related to the obtained average ﬁeld
given by (6). In most scenarios,
the received signal
is well approximated by a Gaussian distribution, i.e.,
y(t) ∼ N (µ(r, t), σ2(r, t)) where µ(r, t) and σ2(r, t)
denote the mean and the variance of the received sig-
nal, respectively. The variance σ2(r, t) can be either
signal-dependent (diffusion-based links) or non-signal-
dependent (wave-propagation-based links).

III. ABNORMALITY DETECTION SCHEMES

Abnormality detection schemes using MC systems
can be categorized based on using stationary or mo-
bile sensors. In schemes with stationary sensors, the
location of the sensors is ﬁxed, while in schemes with
mobile sensors, the sensors are mobile mainly due to
the diffusion or medium ﬂow (non-propulsion). In both
cases, the abnormality detection can be cooperative or
non-cooperative. In the cooperative detection schemes,
the sensors send their observations to an FC (and pos-
sibly then to a GW), who makes the ﬁnal decision
about the existence or absence of the abnormality based
on the gathered information from the sensors. In the
schemes with non-cooperative detection, only one sen-
sor is used, which makes the ﬁnal decision about the
abnormality itself. In addition to the detection scheme,
the sensors’ sensing/activation can be done in either a
cooperative or a non-cooperative way. In the cooperative
sensing/activation case, the activated sensors, inform the
other sensors about the existence of the abnormality
and the sensors cooperatively activate each other. In
non-cooperative sensing/activation case, the sensors rely
on their own measurements to be activated and do not
cooperate or interact with each other in being acti-
vated. See Table I for the list of abnormality detection
schemes, which will be discussed in this section. Further,

10

we discuss the sensing and communication features in
abnormality detection schemes, including abnormality
recognition methods, sensor mobility, receiver type of
the sensors and the FC, and sensing and S2FC/GW
communication links, summarized in Table. II.

We ﬁrst formulate the abnormality detection prob-
lem using the hypothesis testing approach in Subsec-
tion III-A. Then, in Subsection III-B, we describe the
abnormality detection schemes using stationary sensors,
and in Subsection III-C, we describe the schemes using
mobile sensors.

A. Abnormality detection problem formulation

The abnormality detection problem is modeled as a
binary hypothesis testing problem; H0, the absence of
abnormality, and H1, the existence of abnormality, based
on a number of observations y = [y1, y2, ...yn]. The
decision is made using a test statistic T (y) and a set
A as follows:

(cid:40)

H1, T (y) ∈ A,
H0, T (y) ∈ Ac.

(11)

Assume fH0(.) and fH1(.) are the probability density
functions of T (y) conditioned on hypotheses H0 and
H1, respectively. The probability of detection in binary
hypothesis testing problem, i.e., the probability of cor-
rectly deciding H1, is

Pd = P(T (y) ∈ A|H1) =

(cid:90)

l∈A

fH1(l)dl,

(12)

and the probability of false alarm, i.e., the probability of
falsely deciding H1, is

Pfa = P(T (y) ∈ A|H0) =

(cid:90)

l∈A

fH0(l)dl.

(13)

Pm = P(T (y) ∈ Ac|H1) = 1 − Pd.

(14)

There is a trade-off between the false alarm and miss-
detection probabilities, i.e., reducing one of them in-
creases the other one. The goal in this problem is to
ﬁnd a good test statistic T and the set A, leading to a
low miss-detection probability Pm as well as a low false
alarm probability Pfa.

We ﬁrst describe a binary hypothesis test with a ﬁxed
sample size n and then provide its extension to a sequen-
tial test with a variable sample size. For the case of the
binary hypothesis test, the Neyman-Pearson lemma gives
the optimal test. The Neyman-Pearson criterion deals
with the trade-off between Pfa and Pm by solving the
following optimization problem [132]:

min
T,A

Pm subject to Pfa ≤ γ.

(15)

TABLE I: Summary of the abnormality detection and localization methods.

11

Abnormality Detection

Mobile sensors
(non-propelled)
Non-
cooperative
sensing/
activation

Coopera-
tive
sensing/
activation

Abnormality Localization

Stationary sensors (Passive)

Mobile sensors

Classiﬁca-
tion

Discrete-
model

Continuous-
model

Non-
propelled
(passive)

Self-
propelled
(active)

Externally-
propelled
(active)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

Stationary sensors

Non-
cooperative
detection
(single
sensor)
(cid:88)

Cooperative
detection
(multiple
sensors and an
FC)

(cid:88)

Ref.

[36], [48], [67]
[38], [49], [65],
[69], [81],
[109]–[113]
[31], [39], [68],
[75], [91], [114]
[35]
[37]
[12], [52], [53],
[56], [115], [116]
[61], [117]–[120]
[92], [121]
[122]
[123]
[42], [43]
[124]–[127]
[41], [64], [128]
[129]
[130], [131]
[44], [63]

According to the Neyman-Pearson lemma, given fH0 and
fH1, the optimal decision rule that minimizes Pm (or
equivalently maximizes Pd) for a ﬁxed sample size n
and any Pfa is the likelihood ratio test (LRT) as follows
[132]:

for n ∈ Z+. The decoder continues sampling as long
as T1 < λn < T2 and stops collecting the samples after
the ˜nth observation and decides about the hypothesis if
λ˜n ≤ T1 (decides H0) or λ˜n ≥ T2 (decides H1). Hence,
Wald’s SPRT can be characterized as

λLR(y)

H1≷
H0

T ,

(16)

where T is the threshold that satisﬁes Pfa = (cid:82) ∞
and λLR(y) is the likelihood ratio as follows:

T fH0(l)dl

λLR(y) =

P(y|H0)
P(y|H1)

.

(17)

The optimal decision rule can also be written using log-
likelihood ratio (LLR), i.e., λLLR(y) = log(λLR(y)), as
follows:

(18)

log(T ).

λLLR(y)

H1≷
H0
An alternative approach to deal with the trade-off
between Pfa and Pm, which is introduced by Wald [133],
is to assume a sequential test with variable sample size
n and to minimize n (i.e., to minimize the decision
delay) for predetermined values of Pfa and Pm. This
criterion yields to the Wald’s sequential probability ratio
test (SPRT), [134], which uses the observation sequence
(y1, y2, ...) and obtains the likelihood ratio sequence
(λ1, λ2, ...), where

˜n = inf{n > 0 : λn /∈ (T1, T2)},

(cid:40)

H0 : λ˜n ≤ T1,
H1 : λ˜n ≥ T2,

(20)

(21)

l≤T1

where T1 and T2 are obtained according to the prede-
ﬁned values of Pfa and Pm as Pfa = (cid:82)
fH0(l)dl and
Pm = (cid:82)

fH1(l)dl.

l≥T2

Alternatively, the decision-maker may choose from
a subset of actions to control the information which
can be extracted from the observation data and en-
hance the decision-making ﬁdelity [135], [136]. This
approach, which is called active hypothesis testing, was
ﬁrst introduced by Chernoff [137] for the sequential
case. However,
it can be used in both ﬁxed sample
size and sequential cases [138]. Active hypothesis testing
has been used for abnormality detection in [139], [140].
However, there are no works in the literature of MC that
use this approach.

B. Abnormality Detection Schemes using Stationary
Sensors

λn = λLR(y1, y2, ..., yn) =

P(y1, ...yn|H0)
P(y1, ...yn|H1)

,

(19)

In this subsection, we review the abnormality detec-
tion schemes that use stationary sensors. The schemes

TABLE II: Sensing and reporting features in abnormality detection schemes.

Abnormality
recognition

Sensor and FC
mobility

Receiver type at
the sensors and FC

Sensing
link

Ref.

[36], [67]
[109]
[110]
[69]
[49]
[81], [112]
[111], [113]
[31]

[91]

[114]

[68]

[37]

Molecule release
General
General
Molecule release
Molecule release
General
General

Molecule release

General

Molecule release

Molecule release

General

Absorbing FC
Absorbing FC

Reactive sensor
Reactive sensors
Absorbing FC
Absorbing

Stationary sensor
Stationary sensors and FC
Stationary sensors and FC
Stationary sensors and FC
Stationary sensors and FC Reactive sensors and FC
Stationary sensors and FC
Stationary sensors and FC
Mobile (non-propelled)
sensors and stationary FC
Mobile (non-propelled)
sensors and FC
Mobile (non-propelled)
sensors and stationary FC
Mobile (non-propelled)
sensors and stationary GW
Mobile (non-propelled)
sensors ans stationary FCs

Transparent FC

Transparent FC

Absorbing FC

Transparent

General

S2FC/GW
communication
link
—
General
Molecular
Molecular
Molecular
Molecular
Molecular

Molecular

Molecular

Molecular

Molecular
Molecular
General
Molecular
Molecular
General
General

Molecular

General

General

Molecular

Wireless

General

Molecular

12

Sensor
decision

Hard
Hard
Soft
Hard
Hard
Soft
Hard

Soft

Hard

Hard

Hard

Hard

are divided into cooperative detection schemes (multi-
ple sensors and an FC) and non-cooperative detection
schemes (single sensor). In principle, as mentioned be-
fore, the sensors can be cooperative or non-cooperative in
their sensing/activation. However, there are no schemes
in the literature of MC that use stationary sensors with
cooperative activation.

1) Non-cooperative detection (single sensor): Due
to the COVID-19 pandemic, [36], [67] use a single
electronic-based bio-sensor (Silicon NanoWire (Si-NW)
ﬁeld-effect transistor (FET)) in the environment to de-
tect virus-laden aerosols from the exhaled breath of an
infected human to viruses (such as inﬂuenza or COVID-
19). To detect viruses using Si-NW FET, the antibody
receptors of the virus are placed on Si-NW between the
transistor’s source and drain. The antigens on the surface
of the viruses bind to these receptors, and as a result, a
current change occurs across the source-drain channel.
In [67], the virus transmission using aerosols is modeled
as an MC system. The aerosol channel with continuous
sources (corresponding to breathing) and impulsive (jet)
sources (corresponding to coughing and sneezing) is
analyzed for a large room in the presence of airﬂow.
The steady-state and transient channel responses are
obtained for certain initial and boundary conditions. The
frequency response of the system is also derived for
choosing the appropriate sampling frequency. Further,
a bio-sensor detector along with an air-sampler is pro-
posed to detect the viruses using a predeﬁned threshold.
The air-sampler consists of an ionizer, which induces
the aerosols with the negative charge, and a charged
electrode, which is induced with the positive charge
and hence attracts the negatively charged aerosols. the
performance of the system is evaluated by obtaining
the miss-detection probability using simulation and the

effects of different parameters such as distance, virus
ﬂow rate, air ﬂow velocity, etc, are analyzed on the miss-
detection probability. It is shown that these parameters
have a signiﬁcant effect on the system performance.
In [36], the viral aerosol detection problem is consid-
ered in a bounded environment with quiescent air, and
partial/full absorption and reﬂection from the walls. The
breathing, coughing, and sneezing sources are modeled
as clouds with a relatively symmetrical conical shape
and an initial velocity that vanishes eventually through
space and time. Hence, there is a zero-velocity zone
where the aerosols move only due to diffusion. The paper
focuses only on the zero-velocity zone and obtains the
concentration of the virus-laden aerosols in this zone
using an impulsive point source and continuous circu-
lar source. The maximum-likelihood threshold for the
virus detector and the probability of miss-detection are
obtained and the effect of the channel parameters (such
as detector location, sampling time, etc) is investigated
using simulation. The authors show that the reﬂecting
and absorbing boundaries have a signiﬁcant effect on
the concentration proﬁle of the aerosols and the virus
detector performance.

2) Cooperative detection (Multiple sensors and an
FC): In [38], [49], [69], [81], [109]–[113], cooperative
abnormality detection is considered with a two-tier net-
work consisting of multiple stationary sensors with non-
cooperative sensing/activation and a stationary FC.
In [109],
two scenarios are studied which consider
different abnormality recognition methods (categorized
as molecule release, medium effects, and molecule ab-
sorption). In the ﬁrst scenario, speciﬁc molecules are
released from abnormal entities (molecule release). In
the second scenario, it is assumed that the abnormal
entity changes the medium parameters or absorbs the

molecules released from normal entities. For example,
it may change the absorbing rate of the molecules
at the sensors, devitalize the receptors or change the
temperature of the receptors (medium effects), or it may
be a competitor cell for the sensors that absorbs the
molecules (molecule absorption). The molecule sources
in each scenario are modeled by a transmitter. In the
ﬁrst scenario, the molecule source is the abnormal entity
that releases some molecules, and in the second sce-
nario, the molecule sources are other normal entities
that release some molecules both in the presence and
absence of the abnormality and the abnormality changes
the concentration of these molecules by absorbing the
molecules or changing the channel parameters. Multiple
sensors that can react with these molecules, acting as
molecular receivers, are injected into the medium and
the presence of the abnormality is detected by noticing
the change in the received molecular concentration. The
sensors communicate their hard decisions (activation
ﬂag) to the FC through a micro-communication channel
(which can be molecular or non-molecular), which is
modeled by an additive white Gaussian noise channel.
The ﬁnal decision is made by applying a threshold on the
received signal at the FC (where the optimum threshold
is obtained using the maximum a-posteriori (MAP) rule).
This is equivalent to the sub-optimal OR rule, i.e., the
FC decides on the existence of the abnormality if at least
one of the sensors reports its existence. The decision
thresholds and the detection probabilities of the ﬁrst tier
are obtained for limited false alarm probabilities at the
sensors. The detection and false alarm probabilities of
the second tier are also obtained at the FC. Further, the
overall detection and false alarm probabilities of the two-
tier network are analyzed, and the number of sensors is
optimized for the desired performance of the network.
Moreover, [109] considers the effect of temporal and
spatial correlation of the Gaussian observations which
showed that
the results are noticeably inaccurate by
ignoring their effects.
In [110], the sensors measure some variables, called
inputs, which are affected by the abnormality (such as
the concentration of biomarker molecules, temperature,
pH value, etc). The sensors make soft decisions by
normalizing and quantizing the measured values. These
decisions are reported to an absorbing FC by releasing
the same types of molecules (STM) or different types
of molecule types (DTM), respectively. For the STM
scenario,
the FC
the optimal detector is obtained at
using LLR, leading to a simple decision rule. For the
DTM scenario, since the optimal rule has a complex
form, sub-optimal decisions are made based on the
max-log, maximum ratio combining, and Chair-Varshney

13

approximations of LLR. Further, a two-stage sub-optimal
detector is proposed for the DTM scenario: in the ﬁrst
stage, the FC makes local decisions for each sensor
using their soft observations; in the second stage, the
FC makes the ﬁnal decision using the local decisions
and applying a threshold on the sum of the decisions.
The overall detection and false alarm probabilities are
investigated for both scenarios. A numerical method
is proposed for the performance evaluation of LLR-
based detectors. Closed-form expressions are derived
for the performance of optimal detector for STM and
sub-optimal maximum ratio combining and two-stage
detectors for DTM. Further, the asymptotic performance
is evaluated for the STM and DTM with respect to
the number of sensors, providing upper bounds for the
schemes. It has been shown that for small background
noise, the optimal detector for the DTM scenario has
a better performance compared to the STM, while for
large noise, STM outperforms DTM.
In [69], the sensors are absorbing artiﬁcial cells and
the FC is a ﬁxed smart probe, located along the blood
vessel, who sends its information to a bio-cyber interface
(GW). The abnormal entities are diseased cells that
release biomarkers in the medium and the range of the
biomarker concentration value distinguishes the healthy
and diseased cells. The biomarker release waveform
is modeled by the Weibull function, and the sensors
detect the abnormality by capturing the variations in
the biomarker concentration based on the steady state
biomarker concentration value and the generalized LRT
for independent Poisson observations. The sensors send
a molecular message to inform their hard decision to
the FC. If a sensor detects the abnormality, it releases a
concentration waveform over time, which is considered
the Weibull function; otherwise,
it stays silent. The
generalized LRT yields to a complex decision rule at
the sensors. Hence, a simpliﬁed decision rule and a
lower bound on its detection probability for a limited
false alarm probability are obtained by bounding the
likelihood ratio using the ML estimate of the average
number of received molecules at the sensors. Further,
assuming a symmetric topology for the network, the
decision rule at the FC, a lower bound on the total detec-
tion probability, and an upper bound on the total false
alarm probability are derived. Moreover, the optimum
thresholds at the sensors and the FC, which minimize
the total detection probability for a limited total false
alarm probability, are obtained numerically. Further, the
effect of different parameters on the system performance
is analyzed numerically.
The authors in [49] investigate the early detection of
the abnormality (such as a tumor) inside the body. The

sensors and FC, equipped with reactive receivers, are
located near a suspicious area to detect the abnormal en-
tity releasing biomarkers in the medium. The biomarker
release rate, which is assumed to be constant, and the
target location are unknown at the sensors and the FC,
while the locations of the sensors are known at the FC.
The average received signal, i.e., the average number
of activated receptors at each sensor, and its steady
state probability mass function are derived, which is
used to obtain the optimal decision rule at the sensors.
The presence of the target is detected at the sensors
using the optimal detector with unknown parameters
which turns out to be uniformly most powerful (UMP)
test, having a performance equal to the Neyman-Pearson
detector with known parameters. The UMP test compares
the received signal with a threshold instead of using
the LLR in the Neyman-Pearson detector. Each sensor
makes its hard decision using the optimal decision rule
and sends it to the FC using different molecule types
(and obviously different from the biomarker molecules).
The ﬁnal decision is made at the FC using sub-optimal
detectors including generalized LRT and generalized lo-
cally optimum detector (the detector proposed in [141]).
Further, a genie-aided detector, aware of the location of
the target and its biomarker release rate, is developed at
the FC leading to an upper bound on the performance
of the proposed detectors.
In [81], [112], the authors consider the MC-based abnor-
mality detection for a variety of medical and environ-
mental applications. The sensors sense some variables
in the medium affected by the abnormality (molecule
release/absorption or medium effects), and make general
soft decisions based on their measurements,
the
output of the sensors are quantized values between 0
and 1 (this is equivalent to the hard decision scenario
by setting two quantization levels). The soft decision of
the sensors is then sent to an absorbing FC using the
same molecule type for all sensors and the ﬁnal decision
at the FC is made using neural network detectors in
[81] and sequential tests in [112]. In [81], feed-forward
neural network (FF-NN) and recurrent neural network
(RNN) structures are used for abnormality detection
based on the training data obtained from the existing
statistical models (Poisson channel model). The training
data is a set received signal sequence labeled with the
corresponding hypothesis. The neural network detector,
trained by this set, decides on the hypothesis of a given
sequence of the received signal (test). It is shown that the
neural network-based detectors perform better than the
LLR detector in [110] for unknown channel parameters
since they provide a better approximation to the unknown
parameters. Note that since the channel parameters are

i.e.,

14

the beginning of the nest

unknown in practical applications, the LLR detector in
[110] requires the estimation of the unknown parameters
and gives an approximation to the optimal detector. In
[112], a decision fusion approach is proposed based on
Wald’s SPRT in (21), which uses a variable observation
window size and minimizes the average sample size
required for the decision. The authors in [112] propose
to use the average LLR (taking the average from the
likelihood function over the sum of sensor outputs) for
both ﬁxed sample size and sequential detectors. It is
shown that the sequential detector needs a lower sample
size on average and hence a shorter decision delay
compared to the ﬁxed sample size approaches for a given
detection performance.
In [113], the event detection problem is considered in
mediums with anomalous diffusion such as turbulent
ﬂow, which is usually modeled by L´evy walk, instead of
the normal diffusion where molecules diffuse according
to Brownian motion. Multiple sensor nano-machines
monitor the environment for certain events which occur
in the medium with probability pE. The sensors detect the
event with probability pD in each time slot and release
one molecule of the same type upon detecting the event
at
time slot. The released
molecule is assumed to diffuse according to L´evy walk
to reach an absorbing FC. The inter-symbol interference
caused by the released molecules from the previous
time slots is also considered. Thereby, the number of
received molecules from the sensors for each hypothesis,
corresponding to the presence and absence of the event,
is modeled as a Poisson-Binomial random variable which
is approximated to have a Poisson distribution for a large
number of time slots. Based on the Poisson observa-
tions, the LLR detector is obtained at the FC to detect
the abnormality. Further, an online algorithm based on
reinforcement learning is proposed to optimize the time
slot duration, and thereby the network throughput. The
performance of the proposed algorithm, in terms of the
network throughput, and the complexity of the algorithm,
in terms of the training phase duration, are investigated
using numerical simulations. It is shown that there is a
tradeoff between performance and complexity. But, the
proposed algorithm has a good performance for a short
training phase duration.
In [111], unlike the other works, there is a moving ab-
normality in the medium which initiates from a random
location and at a random time. A sensor network is
considered to monitor the environment. The sensors are
placed at known locations and partition the environment
into different sections. Each sensor senses the environ-
ment for the abnormality with certain probabilities of
detection and false alarm and if it detects the abnormal-

ity, it releases some molecules (which are of different
types for each sensor) to inform the FC with an absorbing
receiver. Two scenarios are considered at the FC, referred
to as stopping time and monitoring scenarios, in which
the initiation time of the abnormality and how it spreads
in the environment are investigated, respectively. For the
stopping time scenario, binary (two hypotheses) and non-
binary (more than two hypotheses) cases are considered
regarding the abnormality. In each case, to detect the
abnormality initiation time, the quickest change detection
and quickest detection and identiﬁcation of change prob-
lems are investigated. For these problems, the stopping
time and its corresponding hypothesis that minimize
the decision delay are obtained, with constraints on
the false alarm and/or miss-detection probabilities. The
optimal solutions for these problems are obtained using a
partially observable Markov decision process framework,
which is complex, and hence a sub-optimal solution is
obtained using myopic policy, which is shown to have
an acceptable performance.

C. Abnormality Detection Schemes using Mobile Sen-
sors

Here, we describe the abnormality detection schemes
using mobile sensors. In most of these schemes, the
sensors move due to the Brownian motion and/or the
medium ﬂow, i.e., they are non-propelled mobile sen-
sors. Similar to the schemes using stationary sensors,
the schemes using mobile sensors can have coopera-
tive detection (multiple sensors and an FC) or non-
cooperative detection (a single sensor). In addition, the
sensors can be cooperative or non-cooperative in their
sensing/activation. However, there are no schemes with
a single mobile sensor in the literature and all existing
schemes use cooperative detection. Hence, the schemes
are divided into schemes using cooperative and non-
cooperative sensors.

1) Non-cooperative sensing/activation: In [31], [35],
[39], [75], [91], [114], multiple mobile sensors with non-
cooperative sensing/activation and a stationary or mobile
FC is used for cooperative detection of the abnormality
in the medium. In these schemes, the sensors may contact
or be absorbed by the FC to report their measurements
and data. More accurately the sensors may move towards
the FC and the FC absorbs them for reading their
activation levels [31], [37].
In [31], early cancer detection using multiple mobile
nano-sensors in blood vessels is studied. The cancer
cells emit biomarkers in the blood vessels, which may
be detected by the sensors with transparent receivers. A
simpliﬁed model for the production of the biomarkers

15

Fig. 5: Abnormality detection with mobile cells in the cardiovascular
system [31].

from the cancerous and healthy cells is assumed as in
(3), and the biomarker release rates are approximated
by a constant rate in a quasi-steady state. The released
biomarkers propagate in the blood vessels due to the
diffusion and ﬂow. A simpliﬁed model is also assumed
for the cardiovascular system by assuming a 2-D model.
The biomarker concentration is obtained in a certain
network of blood vessels. Further, the probability mass
function of the number of biomarkers in a small area
corresponding to the receiving area of the sensors is
computed, which is used to derive the activation level
statistics of the sensors. The probability mass function
is shown to have Poisson-Binomial distribution, which
is approximated by a Poisson distribution for simplicity.
The sensors move in different paths according to the
topology of the blood vessel network and blood ﬂow
direction, and are eventually collected by a stationary
FC (see Fig. 5), where the ﬁnal decision is made by
reading the activation level of the sensors. The optimal
LRT is obtained at
the FC, which is based on the
knowledge of the cancerous cell location and network
is not applicable in practical
topology, and hence it
applications. Therefore, a sub-optimal sum detector is
proposed which does not need the network topology. The
system model assumptions are validated using particle-
based simulations, and for evaluating the performance
of the proposed scheme, miss-detection probability is
obtained using Monte-Carlo simulations. It
is shown
that the proposed scheme substantially outperforms the
benchmark scheme, which uses stationary sensors ﬁxed
at the location of the FC (equivalent to the conventional
blood test), and applies equal gain combining on the
sensor observations (see Fig. 5).
In [91], multiple mobile nano-sensors and a mobile FC
with absorbing receivers are used inside a single blood
vessel to detect an abnormality. The sensors and the
FC move along the vessels due to the blood ﬂow. The

16

to detect

of the cancer cells to the outside of the body. The smart
probe can be used to detect the tumor cells originating
from the tumor site and circulating in the cardiovascular
system. Due to the number of circulating cells in the
early stage of cancer, another approach is to use small
mobile sensors circulating in the blood vessels to detect
circulating cells and release a burst of molecules to
inform their decisions to the smart probe. In another
scenario, small mobile sensors with slow speed (bacteri-
obots with self-propulsion mechanism) move towards the
tumor cells to detect the tumor site. They inform their
decisions to several large mobile sensors that move with
faster speed in the blood vessels and eventually reach
the smart probe, where the ﬁnal decision is made and
sent to the outside of the body.
The authors in [39], propose an MC network to detect
and treat early-stage infections in the human body.
Several nano-machines inside the body sense their en-
vironment
infections and are able to send,
receive, and forward messages forming an in-body net-
work, which may use molecular or wireless signals for
communication. The nano-machines communicate with
a control station out of the body (off-body network)
using gateways which are implants or on-body micro-
organisms. Since the bio-nano-machines operate inside
the body, they are mobile and move in the vessels due
to the blood ﬂow.
In [68], early detection of the infection is considered
using mobile nano-sensors inside blood vessels, which
is faster than conventional blood tests that
take 48-
72 hours. The infections are caused by bacteria, which
release quorum-sensing molecules for communication
among each other. These molecules also reach the blood
vessels and may be detected by the nano-sensors. The
sensors circulate inside blood vessels and may reach the
sensing region (where the concentration of the quorum-
sensing molecules is above a detection threshold), which
is obtained using COMSOL simulations. If a sensor
enters the sensing region and detects the infection, it
reports its sensing data to a GW, which is placed out
of the body, using ultrasonic or THz signals (though the
channel is considered to be ideal). The GW applies the
counting rule on the sensor observations to make the ﬁnal
decision. To evaluate the performance of this system,
the probability of a sensor entering the sensing region is
obtained using machine learning (ML). To this end, the
traveling behavior of the sensors inside the human circu-
latory system is modeled using BloodVoyagerS [142] (a
simulation framework for nano-networks). Further, the
traveling path of the sensors in the circulatory system
(e.g., the vessels) is modeled as a Markov chain and the
transition probabilities are obtained using ML methods.

Fig. 6: Probability of miss-detection versus biomarker release rate
(µ) [31]. During the 7 month time interval, that µ changes from
0.5 s−1 to 2000 s−1, the miss-detection probability of the benchmark
scheme (conventional blood test) is more than 10−1. Further, using
the proposed sum detector, for the example considered, the cancer is
detected at least 6 months earlier than the conventional blood test.

sensors sense the abnormality with certain detection and
false alarm probabilities and send their local decisions
to the FC using different molecule types and ON-
OFF keying modulation. The FC receives the sensors’
transmission signals and uses a sub-optimal detecter that
is based on the approximation of LLR. The FC makes
the ﬁnal decision about the presence of the abnormality
using AND/OR rules. For the AND rule, the FC decides
on the existence of the abnormality if all of the sensors
report its existence.
In [114], the in-vivo detection of the abnormality is
considered using an MC system consisting of multiple
mobile nano-sensors and a stationary FC in a ﬂuid
medium with drift (such as blood vessels). The abnormal
entity releases biomarkers at a speciﬁc rate to the blood
vessels detectable by the sensors. The nano-sensors are
assumed transparent receivers randomly distributed in
the environment with limited movability, i.e., they are
able to hold their position to sense and sample the
biomarkers to detect the presence of abnormality. Each
nano-sensor decides individually on the presence of the
abnormal entity based on its observation (with some
probabilities of detection and false alarm) and informs
its decision to the FC using two different molecule types
(type 1 for the presence and type 2 for the absence of
abnormality). The ﬁnal decision is made at the FC using
the optimal Chair-Varshney fusion rule and sub-optimal
counting rule, also called K out of N fusion rule (i.e.,
the FC decides on the presence of abnormality if K out
of N sensors report its existence). The false alarm and
detection probabilities are obtained for the optimal and
sub-optimal fusion rules and it is shown that the sub-
optimal counting rule gives an acceptable performance.
In [35], an MC system is proposed for tumor detection
using mobile sensors inside the blood vessels and a
stationary smart probe that communicates the detection

17

Fig. 7: Abnormality detection with cooperative sensors in pipelines [37].

types of sensors are considered in [37] based on their
activation strategies: memoryless and aggregate. The
memoryless sensor is activated based on its observation
in a single time instance. The aggregate sensor is ac-
tivated based on the summation of its observations in
multiple time instances. The probabilities of false alarm,
miss-detection, and detection error are obtained for each
sensor type. As expected, the aggregate sensors outper-
form the memoryless sensors to detect the abnormality.
Further,
the authors show that cooperative activation
of sensors improves the performance signiﬁcantly (see
Fig. 8).
In [143], an MC system using multiple mobile nano-
machines with reactive receivers is proposed for in-
formation dissemination in the system. In this system,
the nano-machines have two infected and uninfected
states that correspond with awareness and unawareness
of the information being disseminated, respectively. The
infected nano-machines release information molecules
and the uninfected nano-machines may sense and detect
them, to change their state to infected. By repeating this
process, the information originating from a source node
can be disseminated in the system to reach a destination
node. This information dissemination method can be
used for target detection by propagating the information
about the target in the system, in which the source node
is the abnormal entity and the destination node is an FC
or a controlling node, and the sensors have cooperation
in their sensing/activation.

IV. ABNORMALITY LOCALIZATION SCHEMES

In this section, we review the papers in the area of
abnormality source localization mainly for medical ap-
plications. To localize the abnormality, mobile [37], [61],
[62], [144] and stationary [12], [52]–[56], [61], [76],
[115], [116], [118]–[120], [145]–[149] sensors may be
used. The localization schemes are also categorized into
passive or active schemes. In the passive localization, the
sensors solely determine the location of the abnormal-

Fig. 8: Probability of detection error versus the number of sensors
(Ns) using cooperative sensors in pipelines [37]. α is the detection
probability of the sensors at the abnormality and M is the number
of stored molecules at the sensors (M = 0 corresponds to the non-
cooperative activation for the sensors).

Then, using the transition probabilities, the stationary
probability of a sensor located in a vessel corresponding
to the sensing region is obtained for each organ inside
the body.

2) Cooperative sensors: In [37], [143], the sensors
share their decisions with other sensors to cooperate
effectively in sensing/activation.
In [37], an MC setup is proposed in the cylindrical
that uses cooperative mobile sensors to
environment
detect and localize the abnormality. While most of the
abnormality detection and localization methods in MC
literature focus on the micro-scale in-body applications,
[37] consider the macro-scale applications and investi-
gate detection and localization of the abnormality (such
as leakage) in pipelines. For cooperative activation, each
sensor that detects the abnormality and gets activated
releases molecules to activate other sensors. There are
multiple sensory regions with local FCs at the end of
each region (see Fig. 7) that collect the sensors and
read their activation levels to decide about the presence
of the abnormality using binary hypothesis testing. Two

ity while in the latter, the sensors collectively migrate
towards the abnormality using a propulsion mechanism,
e.g., in response to an abnormal gradient or actuating
external ﬁeld; see Table I.

A. Abnormality Localization Problem Formulation

Generally, the abnormality is characterized by a ﬁeld
given by (6) in Section II-D. For the special case of
a diffusion ﬁeld, it is assumed the abnormality source
releases type-A molecules at an unknown rate QAb
at an unknown position rAb. The diffusion coefﬁcient
for type-A molecules is D. Assume the jth sensor is
located at rs(j). Assuming an analytical concentration
proﬁle C(rs(j), rAb, QAb), the standard estimation prob-
lem centralized in the FC can be formulated using the
following least-square-based method:

minimize
rAb,QAb

M
(cid:88)

j=1

(cid:12)C(rs(j), rAb, QAb) − y[j](cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2,

(22)

where M denotes the number of the sensors in the en-
vironment and y[j] is the noisy concentration measured
by the jth sensor. Also, QAb and rAb are optimization
variables of the above least-squares problem.

Generally, the system includes mobile sensors that
should localize and potentially follow the abnormality,
as presented in Fig. 1. The sensors may be classiﬁed
into leaders or followers. A leader is responsible for
both abnormality detection and localization. Once the
abnormality is detected, two options are available to steer
the follower agents towards the abnormality for further
tasks. The steering procedure depends on the sensor
propulsion type. In the case of self-propelled sensors
in the MC framework, the leader may release type-B
molecules to coordinate the follower sensors towards
the abnormality. For the externally-propelled sensors, a
feedback system consisting of sensors, FC, and GW is
required to localize the abnormality and modulate the
external intervention, accordingly.

Fig. 9 depicts the hybrid feedback signaling ﬂow
among leader sensors (via cooperative MC/THz links),
follower sensors, FC, and GW. The solid lines refer
to links having both MC and wireless (RF, magnetic,
and acoustic) technologies. The dashed lines refer to
only the wireless technology. Of note, the links among
the same sensor types or between leader sensors and
follower sensors are considered to be MC or THz (as a
nano-scale RF technology). The FC plays the role of
a hub that can communicate with either sensors (via
S2FC links) or GW (via FC2GW link) to carry the
inbound or outbound messaging. The GW can directly
communicate and control the leaders and followers via

18

Fig. 9: Schematic representation of the hybrid localization system.
The solid lines refer to links having both MC and wireless (RF,
magnetic, and acoustic) technologies. The dashed lines refer to only
the wireless technology.

GW2S inbound links to enforce a dedicated task in
addition to the localization. In the sequel, we explain
localization schemes using different sensor types and
related communication links in more detail.

B. Abnormality Localization schemes using Stationary
Sensors

Conventionally, multiple (a network of) sensors are
used to localize the abnormality [12], [52], [53]. The
localization methods using stationary sensors are mainly
based on i) classiﬁcation, ii) discrete models, or iii)
continuous models [12]. Classiﬁcation methods [150]
simulate the received signals and measurements based on
a set of pre-known abnormality positions and compare
them with the real measurements. The data generation
process decelerates the localization process. Methods
based on the discrete models employ a lattice-based
structure to discretize the spatial dispersion [119], [150].
The number of sensors should exceed the number of
lattice nodes for better performance which makes these
methods costly. Methods based on continuous models
use analytical dispersion models to formulate the inverse
problems and estimate the parameters. These methods
require an analytical dispersion model of the molecule
concentration proﬁle in the medium and convergent so-
lutions for corresponding inverse problems. The methods
using continuous models are the most prevalent ones
that we review in Subsection IV-B1. We also review
the methods using classiﬁcation or discrete models in
Subsection IV-B2. See table I for the list of abnormality
localization schemes.

1) Continuous Models: These methods use the analyt-
ical dispersal model obtained based on (6) constrained on
various boundary conditions. The standard localization
problem formulated in (22) solves inverse problem to
ﬁnd QAb and rAb. However, ﬁnding closed-form ana-
lytical solution to (6) is cumbersome and only semi-
analytical or numerical solutions [151] are attainable
in case of realistic scenarios. Assuming the analytical
dispersion model in (22) and given the location of the
sensors in a d-dimensional space, at least d + 1 sensors
are theoretically needed to localize the transmitter [12].
In [52], a multi-sensor framework was proposed to
localize a diffusion source of concentration having po-
tential applications in biomedical engineering, industrial
applications, and environmental monitoring. Assuming
the analytical dispersal model in (9) with zero drift, the
location of the transmitter as a source of abnormality
is estimated and the Hammersley-Chapman-Robinson
lower bound (as a generalization of Cram´er-Rao lower
bound) is investigated considering time-dependent noisy
measurement and inter-symbol interference (ISI). Also,
the condition for a unique localizability of the abnor-
mality given both known and unknown locations of the
sensors are obtained. The authors show that the proposed
algorithm has a low root-mean-squared (RMS) error.
In [53] a localization method based on the peak of the
channel impulse response is proposed employing multi-
ple sensing nodes and an FC with transparent stationary
receivers. The sensors report the measurements to the
FC for further processing. It is assumed that each sensor
picks the largest value for making further decisions.
A method based on triangulation (equivalently known
as the least-square problem deﬁned in (22) or multi-
point positioning method), as well as a gradient-descent
method, were adopted to minimize a non-convex cost
the gradient-
function. The results demonstrated that
descent approach outperforms the triangulation approach
for a wide range of signal-to-noise ratios.
In [54],
the authors consider the source localization
problem using a cluster of a limited number of sensing
points in a turbulent diffusion channel. A novel back
propagation-based neural network based on Bayesian
regularization is proposed in a bounded environment. A
concentration total variation comparison algorithm was
employed to select the most important sensing points. It
is revealed that the proposed scheme characterizes the
radius and location of the abnormality with low error.
In [146], the localization of a silent abnormal entity,
which absorbs molecules from the medium, is investi-
gated. The diffusive MC channel in the presence of an
absorbing target (abnormality entity) is modeled using
the probability equivalent modeling method. To localize

19

the abnormality source, the maximum-likelihood prob-
lem is formulated and solved based on the Newton-
Raphson algorithm. The proposed method is extended to
the channel with multiple absorbing abnormalities. The
results reveal that the localization accuracy depends on
the perceived differentiated concentration of molecules
at the receiver.
In [76], the localization of an absorbing source (e.g., an
eavesdropper) is solved using the ﬁnite return probability
of the random walk process. Also, a 1-d probability
density function of the molecules with absorbing and
reﬂecting boundaries employing mirroring principles was
derived. It was shown that closer abnormalities to the
transmitter may need more costly manipulations for re-
verse estimation. For abnormalities closer to the receiver
than the transmitter, a simple ﬁrst-term approximation
of probability density function with high accuracy is
appropriate for low diffusion coefﬁcient scenarios. An
eavesdropper very close to the transmitter is highly
probable to be detected due to the higher rate of molecule
absorption. The proposed method is complicated to lo-
calize the eavesdropper in a 3-D environment.
In a similar framework to [76], authors in [145] char-
acterize the 1-D closed-form analytical channel impulse
response in the presence of a point transmitter located
between two fully-absorbing receivers. The 1-D envi-
ronment is a good approximation for close inter-cellular
regions, e.g., a synaptic cleft. They analytically derive
the fraction of absorbed molecules, the corresponding
hitting rate, and the asymptotic fraction of the ab-
sorbed molecules as a function of time. The number
the receiver is introduced
of molecules absorbed at
as a metric to localize the eavesdropper abnormality.
It is shown that increasing degradation rate results in
a reduction in the mutual inﬂuence of two absorbing
receivers.
In [55], the transmitter positioning is adopted using a
single-input multiple-output MC system. The cumulative
number of molecules hitting the fully-absorbing receiver
until a predeﬁned time is considered as the dispersal
model. The distance from the transmitter and the atten-
uation factor are estimated using a curve-ﬁtting method
in the form of a non-linear least-square problem. This
optimization problem is solved using the Levenberg-
Marquardt algorithm. After estimating distances,
the
multi-point positioning method was employed to localize
the transmitter.
In [115], the problem of abnormality localization in the
macro-scale was adopted using a clustered sensor net-
work in an experimental platform. The network consists
of a point transmitter and 24 MQ-3 alcohol sensing
nodes placed on a rectangular surface. Also, a Gaussian

plume model is assumed to model the release of the
molecules by evaporation at room temperature to identify
the location of the unknown transmitter. Assuming the
turbulent dispersal model given by (9), joint estimation
of location and detection time is adopted using numerical
algorithms. Moreover, an averaged clustering method
for estimating wind velocity is proposed based on the
estimated detection times. Then, the estimated velocity is
employed for estimating the evaporation rate of ethanol
in the air.
In [116], the problem of locating a chemical abnormality
(e.g., submarine disaster or airplane crash discovery)
using a mobile robot equipped with a transparent receiver
was investigated. The background chemical noise is
considered to be Gaussian distributed with its variance
depending on the receiver’s sensitivity deﬁned as the
limit of detection (LOD). The authors assume that due
to the motion of the molecules by oceanic waves, the
LOD is dominant compared to the counting noise which
is typically assumed in the MC literature. To solve
the localization problem, a multi-stage gradient method
based on the Rosenbrock gradient ascent algorithm is
proposed. The Rosenbrock algorithm (as a numerical
optimization algorithm or a particular form of derivative-
free search) is well adapted to searching environments
with blind methods in the presence of zones with
zero gradients. The proposed methods outperform the
conventional acoustic methods for underwater source
localization with many applications.
In [56], a novel source localization approach for lo-
calizing multiple transmitters (i.e., diffusing multi-focal
abnormality sources) considering a fully absorbing re-
ceiver is proposed. The scenario considers multiple point
transmitters located at different positions which release
the same amount of molecules in the environment. A 3-
D unbounded environment with zero drift is considered.
i.e., K-
The method employs clustering algorithms,
means, Gaussian mixture models, Dirichlet model, and
Bayesian mixture models. The Gaussian mixture and
Dirichlet models are based on the iterative expectation-
maximization algorithm. After the clustering stage, the
results are employed to provide the direction of arrival
by averaging coordinates of the hitting molecules at
the surface of the absorbing receiver. Using estimated
distance and direction of arrival information, the source
can be efﬁciently localized.

2) Classiﬁcation and Discrete Models: The classiﬁca-
tion models consider multiple a-priori known positions
for the source of abnormality [117], [120]. Then, in the
case of every diffusion source, simulation (or potentially
experimental) data are generated for all sensors. The
classiﬁcation is adopted by comparing the simulated

20

is revealed that

data to the reference signals which is computationally
inefﬁcient. On the other hand, discrete models use dis-
cretization of the dispersal model. To this end, a lattice-
based model for source localization assuming sensors
and sources located at lattice points are proposed in the
literature [119], [150]. To attain an acceptable localiza-
tion accuracy, the number of sensors should be in the
same order compared to the state-space system.
Motivated by classiﬁcation methods, authors in [117]
proposed a recurrent neural network for odor source
localization (OSL) problem with stationary sensors. The
proposed deep learning approach is based on a com-
bination of classiﬁcation and discrete-model methods.
learning-based approaches in line
It
with probabilistic methods may provide more reliable
approaches. Also, feature extraction methods using the
support vector machine classiﬁcation method to learn the
environment with stationary sensors should be manipu-
lated to process the measured time series data gathered
from the sensors. It is shown that the model learns the
inverse problem and can accurately estimate the leakage
point as the source of abnormality.
The papers [12], [118], [119] have investigated the
macro-scale abnormality OSL problem using multiple
sensors. In [12], the location of a continuously releas-
ing point source is estimated using multiple stationary
sensors assuming a turbulent advection-diffusion model.
The localization problem in (22) is formulated as a
quadratically constrained least-squares problem. Moti-
vated by the discrete-model methods, authors in [118]
investigate the localization of a diffusive point source
provided by a distributed chemical sensor network using
the sequential maximum likelihood (MLE) algorithm. In
[119], a sensor network is deployed to localize multiple
sources of diffusion at
the macro-scale. The sources
are classiﬁed into instantaneous and non-instantaneous
sources. The paper provides simple and exact closed-
form inversion formulas based on the dispersal model
for both cases of concentration proﬁles. Using Green’s
second theorem [151], a sequence based on Prony’s
method was developed to estimate the intended source
parameter. The use of Green’s second theorem links the
boundary and obstacle surface concentration measure-
ments to the abnormality sources. The discrete spatio-
temporal samples may robustly construct diffusion ﬁelds
which is critical in multi-focal localization problems. De-
spite the need for continuous full-ﬁeld measurements of
the environment, the proposed method can be leveraged
to recover the source by approximating the generalized
measurement model. The authors also address the prob-
lem in the case of noisy measurements which needs the
inversion formula to be adjusted to improve robustness.

It is revealed that the proposed method robustly combats
noises and model mismatches. The authors also adopted
an experimental setup and successfully recovered the
multi-focal temperature ﬁelds.
In [120], a machine learning (ML) framework is de-
veloped to infer the diffusion channel parameters in a
complex turbulent diffusion environment. A rectangular
environment with non-reﬂecting transparent boundaries
is considered with an injector at the origin. The source of
abnormality is considered to be the velocity of individual
puffs by the injector (as a transmitter) in the environ-
ment. It is assumed that the abnormality injects multiple
molecular puffs into the environment having different
is to discriminate the velocities
velocities. The goal
using a time difference concentration method based on
the support vector machine. Also, a stepwise maximum
variance algorithm is proposed which selects dominant
sensing points in a multi-sensor environment (in a lat-
tice as a discrete model approach), leading to the less
dimension-related complexities inherent in localization
problems with stationary sensors. Employing different
regularization schemes, the methods based on ML are
approved to accurately estimate the velocities.
In [149], the relative angle of an absorbing interferer,
which causes a perturbation in the diffusion environment,
is estimated by the receiver. A point
transmitter is
considered in the environment and both the receiver and
interferer are assumed to be fully absorbing. The results
revealed non-trivial behavior of the considered MC sys-
tem where the variance of the localization error increases
with the distance between the transmitter and receiver
and their relative look angle. When the transmitter and
receiver are closely located, the estimation is unreliable.
Moreover, a look angle of 30◦ is demonstrated to be the
optimal value for accurate interferer localization. The
potential application of the proposed framework arises
in the self-propulsive motion planning for mobile MC
systems.
THz-band communications can also be used to establish
S2FC links or cooperation among sensors [83], [152] to
detect abnormal events at the nano-scale. However, the
wireless nano-sensors have low communication coverage
[124], [125]. To address this problem, multi-hopping
localization strategies may be proposed at the cost of
error propagation by increasing number of the hops.

C. Localization using Mobile sensors

This section introduces the localization using mobile
sensors [121], referred to as mobile microrobots. As
Table I demonstrates, mobile sensors can be classiﬁed
into three categories including non-propelled sensors

21

[37], self-propelled sensors [61], [144], or externally-
propelled sensors [92], [121]. For non-propelled sensors,
the sensors do not have a propulsion source, e.g., motor
or other types of responses to the concentration changes
in the environment. They may be freely distributed in
the environment and move due to the inherent forces of
the environment, e.g., the blood ﬂow in the body (or
potentially other forms of ﬂows like in the lymphatic
system or the laminar or bulk ﬂow in the industrial liquid
ducts) to monitor and localize the abnormality. For self-
propelled sensors, the source of propulsion can be either
a speciﬁc response of the agent to the changes in the
environment [57], e.g., taxis-based approaches [153]–
[157], or other cooperative control-driven approaches
[62], [122]. Understanding the motion control mech-
anisms inspires designing multi-functional systems in-
corporating micro-agents [121]. In two latter kinds of
motion, the agents are steered towards the target site
using self-propulsion mechanisms or an external ﬁeld of
forces. In the sequel, we review the localization methods
in these three categories in detail.

1) Non-propelled sensors: While these sensors do not
move intentionally, the inherent forces of the environ-
ment may move them.
In [37], abnormality localization is conducted us-
ing non-propelled sensors non-cooperatively. An FC
is required to integrate the local sensing information
through a multi-hypothesis testing problem. Two types
of FCs (namely class-A and class-B FCs) are considered
with/without requiring sampling of the sensors’ marker
signal. These markers can be used by the FC to ﬁnd
the location of the abnormality. The class-A FCs use
markers for localization (activated sensors are known but
the corresponding sub-regions where the sensors were
activated are unknown) while the class-B FCs know
both the ﬂag value (representing the activation statue of
individual sensors) and level of each sensor. It is revealed
that employing multiple sensors, markers, and increasing
resolution of the FC sensors storage levels (an indicator
of the received molecules at the sensor) improves the
performance of the localization. Also, the performance
of the localization error in perfect and imperfect sensing
regimes for both type-A and type-B FCs is obtained. For
class-A FCs in the perfect sensing regime, increasing the
number of sensors to inﬁnity leads to zero probability
of localization error. Also, class-B FCs in the perfect
sensing regime can accurately (with no error) localize
the abnormality.
In [123], the security challenges inherent in MC systems
employing two types of Blackhole and Sentry attacks
were introduced. The whole sensors are classiﬁed into
two types: malicious and legitimate. In the Blackhole

attack, the malicious agent emits attractant molecules
to disrupt the legitimate sensor from normal searching
for the target site. In the Sentry attacks, the malicious
sensors emit repellent chemicals to disperse the legit-
imate sensors from the target site. A combination of
the Bayes’ rule and a threshold-based decision-making
approach was conducted to induce robustness against
such attacks. To this end, a cooperative form of the
engineered bacterial swarms is investigated. Once any
probable abnormality is detected by any individual le-
gitimate sensors, it switches from emitting repellents to
emitting attractants to drag the other legitimate sensors
towards itself.

2) Self-propelled sensors: Cooperative molecular
communication among sensors is challenging in dif-
fusion environments due to the inherent interference,
time variability, and the need for synchronization. How-
ever, swarm behaviors of biological organisms may
be used to address this challenge. Self-assembly, self-
replication, self-feeding, locomotion, and communica-
tion are operated mainly in swarm-like collections [158].
A swarm of sensors with less intelligence (i.e., hav-
ing limited storage and computational capabilities) is
expected to realize the localization [153]–[157]. The
self-propelled agents are considered for their potential
applications in water decontamination, DNA sensing
and detection, water remediation and cargo transport,
wastewater treatment, biocompatible engine, biomedi-
cal applications, propagation of pollutants, etc. [57].
The self-propulsion mechanisms include bubble-based,
self-electrophoresis, and taxis-based propulsion mecha-
nisms. The taxis-based propulsion mechanisms include
chemotaxis [153], magnetotaxis [154], phototaxis [155],
rheotaxis [156], and viscotaxis [157]. For instance, in
chemotaxis, self-propelled micro-agents are navigated by
means of chemoattractants and chemo-repellents induc-
ing direct migration of the agent towards and away from
a diffusion source, respectively [121]. Generally, the self-
propulsion mechanism is generated using various types
of micro-motors, e.g., droplet swimmer as a chemotactic-
based method [159]. Also, some of the taxis-based ap-
proaches (e.g., magnetotaxis) are classiﬁed as externally-
propelled approaches which are discussed in the next
subsection.
In [43], the authors design and model a mobile MC
system based on the Bacterium-inspired quorum-sensing
method, in which repellent and attractant molecules are
used to search for and localize the abnormality. The
sensors are multi-functional in the sense that they can
detect the abnormality (e.g., pathogens, and infectious
micro-organisms), release molecules in the environment
to inform other sensors about the abnormality, and reg-

22

ulate its motion towards the abnormality. In order to
widely spread in the environment, the sensors release
repellent molecules. Once an abnormality is detected,
the activated sensors start to release attractant molecules
to gather other sensors to the target site. To evaluate
the efﬁcacy of the localization system, the density of
the sensors gathered around the target site is considered
as a performance metric using a simulation-based envi-
ronment. An oversimpliﬁed discrete-time mobility model
of the bacteria (i.e., bacterial chemotaxis) is used to
emulate the sensors’ movements. Employing an FC (i.e.,
a millimeter-sized implantable device communicating
with GW via FC2GW link) in the monitoring environ-
ment may help the sensors efﬁciently coordinate their
movements towards the abnormality. A mean-square
displacement measure is used to account for the efﬁcacy
of the network expansion in response to the repel-
lent molecules released by sensors. Notably, in realistic
chemotaxis where repulsive sensors may not be avail-
able, bacteria employ the rotational diffusion mechanism
to search the environment more efﬁciently. Similarly,
without attractive sensors, the abnormality localization
becomes opportunistic and time-consuming. Also, this
work assumes a simpliﬁed exponentially-decaying model
for the dispersal of attractant and repellent molecules
which tackles the design challenges intrinsic to the more
complicated dispersal models. For feasibility analysis,
a wet-lab experiment
is also conducted to show the
efﬁcacy of the localization framework.
In the more recent work [42], a non-diffusion-based
framework for targeted drug delivery system is proposed
which uses the adhesive molecules instead of the dif-
fusive molecules for navigation. The sensors (or nano-
machines) are divided into two main groups of leader or
follower sensors. The leaders are spatially distributed and
responsible for the exploration of the environment while
the followers carry the drug particles. The paper proposes
a new model for mobile MC networks considering more
simpliﬁed functionalities for the sensors. The role of
non-diffusion-based MC systems is the role of abundant
adhesive molecules (e.g., ﬁbronectin, laminin, elastin,
and collagen) in the extra-cellular matrix (ECM) [160]
which enable a probable binding mechanism for the
cells. A wet-laboratory experiment relying on mathemat-
ical techniques is adopted to realize more realistic MC
systems. In this setup, endothelial cells and ﬁbronectin
are used as the sensor and attractant molecules, respec-
tively. This is a form of chemotaxis where endothelial
cells move up the ﬁbronectin gradient. For experimental
setup, calf pulmonary artery endothelial (CPAE) cells
were cultured at 37◦C. Maximum-likelihood estimation
was adopted to estimate the parameters of the Langevin

23

Fig. 10: Distribution of the leader and follower sensors around detected abnormality [42]. (Top) The leader sensors freely distributed in the
environment, (Middle) the concentration generated due to the activated leader sensors, (Bottom) the distribution of the followers attracted
towards the abnormality.

equation for both leaders and followers. To this end, the
cell’s location was measured every 10 min over 12 h. A
performance metric based on the detection likelihood of
the tumor site as a function of time was developed which
can be used to calculate the optimal number of leaders
and followers in the monitoring environment. Also, the
impact of attractant release rate, attractant degradation
rate, and target relocation was investigated. Fig. 10
depicts a sample realization of the leader-follower-based
model in [42]. Fig. 10 (top) shows the time evolution of
the leader sensors freely distributed in the environment
to sense the abnormality. Fig. 10 (middle) demonstrates
the concentration proﬁle generated by the activated lead-
ers. Fig. 10 (bottom) depicts the time evolution of the
followers towards the activated leaders which leads to a
reliable localization.
In [131], an MC system is developed which comprises
leaders, followers, and amplifying bio-nano-machines (as
the sensors). The idea behind the amplifying sensors
is to strengthen the attractant ﬁeld of the leaders in a
leader-follower-based framework. The followers migrate
towards the abnormality using a discretized space model.
In contrast to [42] which lies on a non-diffusion-based
model,
the authors in [131] consider diffusion-based
MC with the aid of amplifying sensors. The ampli-
fying sensors follow a simple random-walk model in
the environment to distribute the attractant molecules
switching between reactive and non-reactive phases. The
concentration of the attractant molecules released by

the leader sensors in the environment is compared to
a threshold and if it is higher than a threshold, the
amplifying agents react by releasing the same molecules
to enhance the gradient ﬁeld.
In a more recent work [130], as a complementary to
[131], the collective migration of the bio-nano-machines
(as self-propelled sensors) towards the abnormality in a
2-D unbounded environment is described. Unlike [42],
[43] where the sensors do not relay the perceived concen-
tration signal, the sensors in [130] perform depending on
the region where they are located. The sensors outside
of the abnormality area use a stop-and-relay strategy,
i.e., they relay the perceived signaling molecules and
stop for a period of time to coordinate their motion
towards the abnormality. Every sensor performs its strat-
egy according to its internal state (e.g.,
the number
of activated cell-surface receptors or internal signaling
pathways). The internal state changes according to a
function that depends on the perceived concentration and
the current state of the sensor. The rate at which the
sensor releases the molecules in the environment depends
on the internal state and how it is located inside or
outside the target region. The release function is designed
to support repetitive pulse dispersions if the sensors are
located inside the target region. For sensors outside the
target region, the release of molecules occurs whenever
the perceived concentration by the sensors increases.
The migration of the sensors towards the abnormality
is described by a state-space model comprising a noisy

description of the sensor’s velocity. The deterministic
part of the velocity corresponds to the perceived concen-
tration gradient, internal state, and the related threshold
values of the sensor. In the ﬁrst part of the simulations
provided in [130], the authors give proof-of-concept re-
sults (i.e., without considering the abnormality) to show
the impact of the functions and corresponding parameters
on the efﬁcacy of the relaying and signal propagation
strategies. Then, the locomotion of the relaying self-
propelled sensors (as followers) towards the activated
sensors (as leaders) is investigated. The simulation is
conducted with 99 relay sensors and shows that only
10 nearest sensors react to the concentration ﬂuctuations
due to the leader sensor. The results show that only the 4
nearest sensors can reliably localize and reach the leader.
Also, the disruptive effect of the signal relaying by other
sensors is conﬁrmed in the simulations which is the
main idea behind extending the relay-and-stop strategy
to compensate for the unintended motion ﬂuctuations
of the sensors. Finally, the relay-and-stop strategy is
examined in a practical setup (including abnormality),
and its efﬁcacy to localize the abnormality was approved.
In [61], a non-gradient-based method based on the Fisher
information matrix referred to as infotaxis, is proposed
to localize the concentration source. This strategy locally
maximizes the expected rate of the information gain to
ﬁnd the best route towards the abnormality source. The
idea behind this approach is that entropy decreases faster
in the proximity of the source.
From a more practical perspective, authors in [161]
introduce self-propelled (autonomous) shape-morphing
micro-machines consisting of stimuli-responsive hydro-
gels for drug-delivery applications. Inspired by the loco-
motion of the Leukocytes, synthetic thermo-responsive
hydrogels (as self-folding nano-sensors) are proposed to
localize the abnormality for drug delivery applications.
The abnormality, e.g., tumor site, is primarily localized
using conventional medical imaging approaches in an
in-vitro environment. Then, the abnormality is targeted
with an external near-infrared light gradient which can be
sensed by the injected nano-sensors. Finally, a rotating
magnetic ﬁeld is applied to steer the micro-machines
to explore the monitoring environment to ﬁnd the ab-
normality. The results reveal that the sensors move up
along the gradient by increasing velocity and remain at
the target site by unfolding their shape to release the
drug whenever they arrive. This is a special kind of
optotaxis where autonomous localization is conducted
using sensory information without external intervention
(e.g., imaging feedback).

Cooperative multi-sensor abnormality detection and
localization is of high interest, particularly when the

24

monitoring environment is wide or the source is a slowly-
varying diffusion ﬁeld. In [122], a stand-alone3 control-
driven approach is proposed to steer an equispaced
circular formation of the sensors towards the abnormality
(e.g., a macro-scale heat source located in a room) using
distributed gradient-ascent algorithm. The sensors can
solely measure the relative angles with respect to their
neighbors. The method of Poisson integral is used to ﬁnd
the concentration gradient which can be approximated
by a ﬁnite summation of measurements perceived by the
sensors. Notably, the center of the formed circle by the
sensors moves along the estimated gradient ﬁeld. The
main drawback of the proposed scheme is to use the
gradient-ascent algorithm which necessitates convexity
assumption over the spatial simulation domain. The
provided steering control algorithms are according to
a ring-shaped communication topology where required
information can be handed over S2S links using the lin-
ear average-consensus algorithm. The minimum number
of sensors required for the proposed scheme is three
without restraining the maximum limit. The efﬁcacy of
the localization scheme using an illustrative example was
approved and theoretically investigated.
Recently, machine learning (ML) approaches have
been investigated for OSL problems considering self-
propelled sensors in complex environments with time-
varying conditions. In [162], due to the spatio-temporal
changes of the environment, a continuous state-space
and action space model based on a partially observable
Markov decision process (POMDP) is proposed. A deep
reinforcement learning method was used to enable sen-
sors to optimize their interactions with their surrounding
environment to localize abnormality. The POMDP is
designed as a long short-term memory (LSTM) structure.
Also, a belief-state model is used instead of the con-
ventional state-space model and selects its future action
(i.e., path planning) based on its history and current
measurement. To maximize the long-term cumulative
reward function, an LSTM-based deterministic policy
gradient (DPG) algorithm is proposed. The training stage
of the proposed ML approach is accelerated by employ-
ing supervised policies (i.e., features inherent in dynamic
programming methods). A simulation-based abnormality
localization setup is considered for a turbulent time-
varying environment. To learn a searching strategy, the
agent requires to record and use the local concentra-
tion measurements, local ﬂow velocity, and the related
motion information. Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes

3Our aim by using the term stand-alone is to highlight that the
sensor does not need its own coordinate to localize the source. This is
an inherent assumption considered in many bio-inspired localization
algorithms, e.g., chemotaxis.

25

localization system. The experimental setup is based on
the blood vessels and capillaries in which the sensors
are conveyed and can be seen using an angiogram. The
probability distributions corresponding to the propaga-
tion time from the injection site to the tumor, the angle
of arrival, and the path loss are investigated. Moreover,
the delay spectrum and azimuth spectrum, as crucial
parameters for drug-delivery applications, are studied.
Recent studies demonstrated the value of the soft un-
tethered grippers [164] to pick-and-place biological ma-
terials in dynamic environments for minimally-invasive
surgery and lab-on-a-chip systems. Unlike previous stud-
ies which use imaging as a mechanism to control the in-
body systems, ultrasound is more bio-compatible with
medical applications. Ultrasound provides a high frame
rate, which is crucial to realize the real-time interventions
which can also be the best choice to externally control
self-propelled sensors [165]. An external device, e.g., a
GW, can be used to emit wireless signals (e.g., ultra-
sound signals) to directly accomplish the localization or
steering process. In [166], magnetic closed-loop motion
control of a soft miniaturized hydrogel-based gripper
towards a target site using feedback from ultrasound
images was reported. The results demonstrated that the
proposed system employing ultrasound images can track
the gripper with an error in the order of 0.4 mm without
payload and 0.36 mm conveying a payload. The provided
system enables the control of miniaturized grippers in the
absence of visual feedback cameras.
In [129], a more developed MC-based externally-
controllable framework based on [40] is proposed that
combines RF communication and MC to realize ex-
ternally controllable MC systems to apply therapeutic
interventions inside the body. Furthermore, a proof-of-
concept model for targeting cell and exosome-mediated
theranostic systems accompanying phenotypic switching
and network formation is proposed [129]. The authors
introduced a novel brain-machine interface to detect,
localize, and control molecular activities bidirectionally.
The proposed framework consists of an external device
(e.g., GW or the local cloud as described in Fig. 1) in-
corporating a processing unit, storage, and corresponding
feedback mechanisms. However, the migration mecha-
nisms of the cells to reach the intended sites need further
investigation and research.
In [64], a novel sequential multifocal tumor localization
approach using the history of the biological gradient

equations were used to make the simulation environ-
ment. The results revealed that the LSTM-based DPG
algorithm outperforms the deep DPG algorithm in both
efﬁciency and effectiveness. Also, it is revealed that the
LSTM-based DPG supplemented by supervised policy
accelerates the localization efﬁcacy.

3) Externally-propelled sensors: Externally-propelled
and controllable sensors promise non-invasive health
monitoring and interventions [40]. As the feedback sys-
tem in Fig. 9 shows, wireless links (e.g., RF, magnetic, or
acoustic) are only mechanisms for external messaging to
control the nano-network or stimulating the externally-
propelled sensors [40], [83]. Linking the nano-networks
(based on MC/THz links) to external communication
systems (based on wireless links) is an important on-
going research direction [163]. The bottleneck is to
design appropriate communication links (e.g., FC2GW
or S2GW links) to interact with nano-scale externally-
propelled sensors. Particularly, the hybrid interconnec-
tivity of THz-based nano-networks and MC-based nano-
networks was recently reviewed in [44]. In the following,
we review the proof-of-concept models which still de-
mand more theoretical research and investigations.
The authors in [63] proposed a touch communication
(referred to as TouchCom) framework which employs
externally-controllable sensors for transportation of phar-
maceutical compounds to the target (e.g., tumor) site in-
side the body. To this aim, a cross-scale (micro-to-macro)
design of communication and control is proposed. The
sensors are transient in the sense that they remain in
the environment for a medically-useful time duration
before any dissolving and resorption by the body and
comprise three compartments namely diffusion, branch-
ing, and degeneration until they reach the tumor. Both
silicon-based (transient electronics) and bacteria-based
(magnetotactic bacteria) structures are appropriate as
sensors for the TouchCom framework. The TouchCom
can be generalized to other applications including quality
control of water and food, environmental pollution, etc.
The important part of the TouchCom is the external
control system (e.g., a GW cooperating with a local
cloud computing system) which can partially coordinate
the movements of the externally-propelled sensors using
a feedback system; see Fig. 9. The GW intelligently
optimizes the localization using previous trajectories
of the sensors combined with learning methods. The
feedback loop can be adopted using GW2S links. The
S2GW link is a visual communication link that enables
the GW to control
the localization by touching the
tangible maneuvering space using an external ﬁeld. The
propagation delay and attenuation loss minimizations
are important measures to evaluate the efﬁcacy of the

ﬁeld (BGF4) is proposed. The localization is estab-
lished by externally-propelled sensors, e.g., Janus nano-
particles, which are maneuvered by a GW (i.e., external
actuating device) using magnetic-based S2GW links.
The efﬁcacy of the non-intervening delivery methods
depends on the body’s natural circulatory system leading
to extremely poor delivery performance (about 0.7%
of injected particles). The sequential localization strat-
egy modiﬁes the BGF and helps the sensors to be
divided into multiple clusters to ﬁnd the tumors one
after another. The important point is that state-of-the-
art medical imaging techniques cannot ﬁnd the location
of the microscopic tumors due to the resolution limits.
The provided framework proposes a nano-robot-assisted
natural computation method for blind tumor localization.
The sensors are maneuvered by an external actuating
device (e.g., a rotating magnetic ﬁeld generated by a
coil) and steered in the ﬂuid using a swarm intelligence
algorithm. The typical imaging systems can be deployed
to follow the trajectory of the sensors and the BGF is es-
timated using the sensors’ characteristics. A multi-modal
optimization problem with the aim of minimizing the
BGF is formulated whose solution is the global optimal
location of the tumors which is sequentially explored by
a share of swarm sensors. The typical imaging systems
can be deployed to follow the trajectory of the nano-
sensors. It was shown that the proposed imaging-and-
control-assisted method localizes the tumor sites and
outperforms the conventional multi-modal optimization
algorithms.

In addition to MRI and ultrasound, other technologies
like optical tracking, magnetic particle imaging (MPI),
X-ray ﬂuoroscopy, and ﬂuorescence for the S2GW and
FC2GW links may be hired. In optical tracking, the
3-D localization of the sensor is hard and it is eas-
ily disrupted by noise or other environmental optical
sources. Currently, this approach is only applicable in
transparent micro-environments like vitreous humor in
eyes. The MRI is based on the magnetic ﬁeld which is
bio-compatible non-ionizing radiation causing excellent
tissue contrast. This approach is not only employed ex-
tensively for imaging but also used to manipulate nano-
machines which enables 3-D localization. However, real-
time data acquisition is challenging and costly. The MPI
has the same advantages as the MRI with high spectral

4Notably, the BGF concept is related to the biological character-
istics of high-risk tissues in the body. For instance, the capillaries
around the healthy tissues exhibit a uniformly-distributed pattern
while for the tumor environment, the capillaries are tortuous and
highly dense. This leads to varied BGFs which are captured by the
GW due to the changed trajectories and magnetic variations of sensors
in the multi-focal tumor environment.

26

resolution and fast scanning speed. The drawback of
the MPI is its limited application to super-paramagnetic
nano-particles. The X-ray family has the advantage of
deep penetration into the human body. As previously
described, an interesting approach is ultrasound which is
real-time imaging with low cost. Among the technolo-
gies mentioned, ultrasound has minimum adverse health
effects making it a proper solution for both imaging and
nano-machine control.

V. CHALLENGES AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE
WORKS

In this section, we address the open challenges and
directions linked to the abnormality detection and lo-
calization problem. We classify them into four main
branches:
implementations, system design, modeling,
and methods in Fig. 11. Further, we extensively discuss
the mentioned challenges for IoT systems as an impor-
tant part of beyond 5G networks which comprises the
internet of nano-things (IoNTs) and internet of bio-nano-
things (IoBNTs).

A. Implementation

Implementation of MC systems requires multidisci-
plinary collaborative research at the intersection of bi-
ology, physics, communications, and computer sciences.
Developing multifunctional sensory systems in complex
environments is a challenging task that needs more
investigation. Here, we provide the challenges and recent
trends in sensor design, developing interfaces, creation
of testbeds and platforms, design strategies, and security
and privacy devoted to the intersection of IoNTs and the
future beyond 5G networks.

Sensors: Developing multi-functional sensors with
different physical and technical capabilities such as mo-
bility mechanisms, detection schemes, storage capabil-
ities, release techniques, sampling methods, reception
processes, and synchronization are very critical, particu-
larly for nano-scale applications which need great atten-
tion from multidisciplinary perspectives. While various
constructions have been provided for sensors in macro-
scale applications,
the sensors cannot be necessarily
scaled down to nano- and micro-scale dimensions to
be operated in a micro-environment. Designing nano-
sensors is an ongoing research trend in the physical
chemistry ﬁeld [80]. A promising method to manufac-
ture nano-sensor is based on using biological elements.
Sensors can be electrical, optical, or mechanical based
on the converted signal in the transducer unit. However,
transducers gain more attention since they
electrical
do not need macro-scale elements for detecting optical

Interfaces

Sensors

Classic
Methods

Bioinspired
Methods

Implementation

Methods

Testbeds
and
platforms

Tractable
Realistic
Models

Consistent
and Re-
producibe
Models

Challenges
and
Directions

Machine
Learning
Methods

Comm.
Links and
Protocols

Modeling

System
Design

Learning
based
Models

Security
and
Privacy

Design
Strategies

Fig. 11: Schematic of the research challenges and directions for
abnormality detection and localization.

and mechanical signals. To realize electrical transducers,
designing miniaturized signal processing units at
the
nano-scale is urgent [80]. The design of biocompatible
nano-sensors having potential applications in nano-scale
sensory systems and synthetic biology is another chal-
lenge that embraces attention from the engineering ﬁeld.
FET-based bio-sensors [167] provide another promising
method to manufacture bio-nano-sensors. The electrical
transducers in these sensors consist of a source and a
drain and a semiconductor channel between them cov-
ered by multiple bio-receptors for receiving molecules,
which is an important element of the transducer. Semi-
conductor fabrication at
the nano-scale faces repro-
ducibility problem due to the randomness in the bio-
reception process. Also, imperfect fabrications in the
system parameters result in extra noise in the analytical
model.

Interfaces: Efﬁcient control of the nano-networks
requires more reliable and sensitive implantable inter-
faces operating as FCs and GWs. Realizing highly-
accurate real-time interfaces, e.g., FCs and µ-GWs for
nano- and micro-scales is imperative, particularly for
healthcare applications. At the nano-scale, fabrication of
signal conversion entities, e.g., opto-genomic [168] or
electro-chemical [169] interfaces are of high importance.
Typical interfaces need an indirect use of electronically-
controlled devices, e.g., the drug injecting systems [50]
which may trigger the in-body nano-machines. The low
probability of triggering a chemically-activated nano-
machine from external systems due to the diffusion is

27

the main drawback of such interfaces. A more inter-
esting form of direct external intervention is the use
of electroencephalogram (EEG) signals as a carrier of
information in brain-machine interfaces. Light-assisted
control of the genomic processes, referred to as opto-
genetics, has been introduced to control biological pro-
cesses. Plasmonic nano-lasers enable the integration of
nano-antennas and single-photon detectors functioning
as a nano-actuator of light-controlled processes. Energy
harvesting and performance of signal conversion are
two desired parameters for the adoption of biological
micro-electromechanical systems (bio-MEMS). Despite
progress in external control of biological environments,
there is still a long way to design efﬁcient bio-MEMS.
Testbeds and Platforms: Despite the efforts to em-
ulate biological environments [170]–[173], most of the
focus was to develop microﬂuidic and macro-scale plat-
forms [174], [175]. Similar to the innovative technolo-
gies which need to incentivize the industry for in-
vestment, developing application-centric prototypes and
platforms for MC systems are also necessary for IoBNT
applications [176].

B. System Design

Communication Links and Protocols: The sensors
can send the sensing information, i.e., the local decisions,
the test statistics, or the unprocessed data centrally to
the FC. While the FC is responsible for making global
decisions, it may also take the role of central coordinator
among sensors for efﬁcient localization. As depicted in
Fig. 1, the leader-follower framework (which considers
mobile sensors as self-propelled agents) is highly reliant
on the efﬁcacy of MC-based intra-sensor and S2FC
communication links. Despite extensive research in the
area of mobile MC systems, still much effort is needed
to realize efﬁcient communication and control among
sensors. One challenge is to probabilistically model
the mobile MC channels for abnormality detection and
localization in complex environments (having obstacles,
turbulences, or reactive boundaries).
Optimal path planning using resource-constrained leader
sensors is of high importance to localize the abnormal-
ity. As previously described in Section V-A, the rate-
constrained MC channels limit the efﬁcacy of the real-
time ML-based detection and localization algorithms for
IoNT systems. In addition, mobility of the sensors or
turbulences inherent in the environment may lead to out-
dated channel state information (CSI) which deteriorates
the connectivity for MC systems. THz communication
is an alternative for both S2S and S2FC links. THz
communication suffers from shadowing which implicates

the proper modulation schemes for reliable data trans-
mission.
If the FC itself cannot handle the decision-making or
coordination processes,
it may collaborate with GW
via FC2GW communication link [163]. The GW can
be implanted near the intended monitoring environment
(referred to as micro-GWs), or external to it (e.g., on-
body GWs in healthcare applications). The wireless
technology (e.g., acoustic, magnetic, or RF) can be
employed for both communication and coordination of
sensors or FC; see Fig. 9. More accurate statistical
channel models are required to adopt such a reliable
communication channel. In the speciﬁc case of RF
communications for WBAN, the channel model follows
a log-normal distribution [177]. However, developing
THz-based FC2GW and GW2S links using nano-scale
sensors is more challenging and needs further research.
This technology uses sensors equipped with THz nano-
antennas for IoNT applications where the GW is located
outside of the sensors’ micro-environment [178].
Bio-compatible FC2GW links are urgent for health-
care applications. To date, many experimentally-tested
options
externally-propelled sensors was pro-
posed including magnetic-assisted mechanisms [179],
[180], ﬂoresent-assisted mechanisms [181], Optoﬂu-
idics5 [182], and ultrasound. Besides, imaging methods
based on contrast-aided MRI and ultrasonic revealed to
be appropriate candidate for in-vivo monitoring [183].
Adopting more reliable external control of the nano-scale
is an ongoing research trend.
There are extensive applications ranging from monitor-
ing to control of inaccessible environments (e.g., in-
body networks) which require external interventions. The
emergence of 5G networks also provides ultra-reliable
low-latency communications to a remote health mon-
itoring center. When external interventions are needed
(e.g., an urgent decision made by a physician), the local
decisions may be sent to a remote health center for a
precise external intervention. The communication can
be adopted using ﬁxed wireless access and ﬁber-to-
the-home as the last-mile technologies or even mobile
connections. It is envisioned that IoNT applications to
be standardized in future 6G networks by 2026 [176].
the
Thereby, more research should be conducted at
intersection of IoNT and 6G networks.

for

Design Strategies: The abnormality sensing links
and S2FC communication links in Fig. 9 are highly
susceptible to the spatio-temporal dynamics of the ﬂuids
incurred due to the turbulence. The turbulence is a

5Optoﬂuidics is a promising technology to monitor biological in-
vitro systems which combines optical microscopy with microﬂuidics
[182] invasively.

28

prevalent phenomenon in ﬂuids which makes the en-
vironment unpredictable, making the dispersal map a
non-convex function. Designing efﬁcient path planning
rules in the presence of turbulence is an urgent research
direction. Prolonging static measurements at speciﬁc
positions may help to average out this effect at the cost of
reduced efﬁciency. Importantly, the problem of avoiding
being trapped in local optima when trying to locate
the abnormality is a fundamental challenge in source
localization. Therefore, developing adaptive optimization
algorithms from a localization perspective to avoid this
problem is of high interest. Moreover, adopting appro-
priate strategies to locate multiple abnormality sources,
e.g., multiple leakages or sources of diffusion, in real
micro-environments needs further research.
Despite many potential applications, diffusive processes
decelerate information dissemination in ﬂuidic environ-
ments and make the communication rate-constrained.
This limits the efﬁcacy of the more complex localization
algorithms (e.g., ML-based algorithms) since they may
need a huge amount of information transmission to
reliably characterize the diffusive channels. In order
to simplify the processing resources of sensors,
the
computation burden may be shifted outward to FC
or GW making them signiﬁcant for future externally-
controllable systems. Moreover, cross-layer design and
adopting appropriate navigation strategies constrained by
limited resources of the sensors is another interesting
research direction in this area.

Security and Privacy: The requirements for security
and privacy are application-dependent. Particularly, in-
trusion into the body through IoNT systems (e.g., MC-
based IoBNT systems and WBAN) may lead to bio-
cyber attacks [184]–[186]. The challenge is to design
stringent security-related measures which minimize the
probability of intrusion (also as a potential source of
abnormality) into the networks. Authors in [184] also
discuss challenges in designing interfaces for secure
communications at the intersection of IoNTs and conven-
tional communication systems. As previously mentioned
in Subsection IV-C1,
the attacks in intra-sensor and
S2FC links may comprise spooﬁng, sentry, blackhole,
and eavesdropping [123]. In addition, the sensors and
FC should be identiﬁable as legitimate nodes by the
human immune system to prevent deliberate apoptosis by
immune cells. Importantly, the FC2GW link faces critical
challenges substantiated to WBAN systems which in-
clude eavesdropping, man-in-the-middle attack, resource
depletion,
injection attack, device tampering, denial-
of-service attack, and malware and ﬁrmware attacks
[184]. Hackers can launch a number of life-threatening
attacks by intruding into external entities, e.g., GW

or a local processing unit. To this end, developing
stringent privacy-preserving algorithms (i.e., appropriate
encryption and authentication methods) constrained on
the resource-limited environment of IoNT and IoBNT
is crucial which opens new research direction in the
intersection of IoNT with commercial beyond 5G net-
works. Noteworthily, the IoNT and IoBNT systems are
supported by IoT backhauling infrastructure. So,
the
cross-layer security solutions of IoT systems can be
equally employed for IoNT and IoBNT systems.

C. Modeling

The development of comprehensive models is indis-
pensable for realistic MC systems. Most of the papers
in the MC literature solely focus on macroscopic and
mesoscopic models which are based on the effective and
averaged ﬂuctuations of the particles, respectively. How-
ever, molecular-level
interactions assuming particular
trajectories for the particles are also of high importance
for accurate modeling of realistic environments which
need further research from an MC perspective. In the
sequel, we clarify other challenges inherited to the ﬁeld
of modeling MC systems in complex environments.

Development of Realistic Models: Both natural and
synthetic systems are much more complicated than the
existing models introduced in the MC literature. More
realistic models, though tractable, are required for in-
vivo micro-environments. The complex physiological
conditions due to the presence of interfering objects and
disruptive ﬂows followed by temperature variations need
to be considered in the models.
like
For most proposed schemes so far, all entities,
the molecule generation and reception, channel, sensors,
etc have been considered ideal, and act perfect and
independently. For instance,
the size of sensors and
molecule generation and reception entities may affect
the propagation environment.
A well understanding of the biological systems en-
ables the researchers from communication engineering
to robustly model the biological entities and the corre-
sponding environments, in order to use the biological
components as a building block and integrate them
into a uniﬁed MC network. The challenge is to model
biological environments considering signal transduction,
signaling pathways, reciprocal interactions of molecules
to each other, etc.

Resolving Irreproducibility and Inconsistency Is-
sues: Of important challenges inherited to the exper-
imental studies is the lack of models for design pro-
cedure, which leads to irreproducibility and inconsis-
tency of experimental results. Particularly, in the area

29

of sensory systems, conducting experimentally veriﬁed
sensor design can pave the way for realistic nano-scale
implementations.

Learning-based Models

for Complex Environ-
ments: For complex environments, analytical channel
modeling may be cumbersome or intractable. Machine
learning approaches are widely employed in wireless
communication and are applicable for MC systems,
too [187], [188]. Developing learning-based models can
obviate the need for analytical methods and realize more
practical systems. However, collecting and processing a
huge amount of spatio-temporal data which is inevitable
for training the MC systems makes it more challeng-
ing. Also, numerical methods for complex environments
[151] may need prior information about the environment
which cannot be obtained solely by the MC systems and
may need external interventions.

D. Methods

Classic Methods: Most of the MC-based detection
and localization approaches are probabilistic. Proba-
bilistic methods comprise a wide range of theoretical
methods including Bayesian approaches, hidden Markov
models, information-driven approaches like Fisher in-
formation matrix, and ﬁltering approaches. The basic
idea behind probabilistic methods is to estimate the
posterior distribution of the parameters based on the
measurements.
Developing mathematical models for multi-agent dis-
tributed and sequential detection and localization
schemes in realistic molecular environments needs fur-
ther research. Improving probabilistic methods to en-
hance the efﬁciency of the detection and localization
algorithms is an ongoing research direction [189] for
both OSL and IoNT systems.

Bio-inspired Methods: These localization schemes
rely on a ﬁnite-state model inspired by the locomotion of
biological entities to decide on the optimal path towards
the abnormality. Taxis-based approaches are well-studied
approaches in this area which is still of high interest in
localization problems, particularly in biology.
Engineered micro-organisms based on efﬁcient bio-
inspired locomotion algorithms are imperative for fast
and accurate abnormality localization. Moreover, ex-
ternal
interventions augment another degree of free-
dom to compensate for intrinsic shortcomings of self-
propulsion mechanisms using external actuating systems.
For externally-propelled sensors, e.g., magnetic sensors
[190], the external actuation ﬁeld can be simply adjusted
to attain the desired velocity of the motion. Design-
ing synthetic sensors equipped with more efﬁcient bio-

inspired propulsion capabilities is a research trend for
IoBNT systems.

Machine Learning Methods: The ML methods rely
on the generalized experience of the agent (as a learner)
and are divided into three categories namely super-
vised learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforce-
ment
learning. The ML approaches are popular for
parametric or non-parametric estimation in model-free
environments. Non-parametric methods using matrix fac-
torization are another way of model-free multi-source
localization schemes in the literature [191]. Recent
progress in the area of ML-assisted motion control of
micro-robots using self-propelled or externally-propelled
micro-agents promises its substantial role in environ-
ments with spatio-temporal variations [192]. Important
ML approaches comprise several schemes from deep
reinforcement learning to imitation learning. Combining
ML-based approaches with probabilistic methods may
lead to more efﬁcient localization.
It should be noted that the ML-based approaches in
the literature mostly contribute to stationary sensors,
while the mobility of sensors can make the problem
more challenging due to the outdated channel state infor-
mation which complicates the training mechanism. The
development of an appropriate framework for localizing
abnormalities based on learning methods is an important
and attractive research direction.
Inspired by the collective behavior of natural systems,
heuristic methods were proposed to solve model-free
engineering problems. Some of these approaches for
macro-scale localization problems include genetic al-
gorithm, particle swarm optimization, and ant colony
optimization [193]. From a macro-scale perspective,
abnormality localization in dynamic environments with
moving obstacles and abnormality sources is still chal-
lenging.
The swarm-like behavior of the heuristic approaches
makes it more appealing for IoBNT applications. In
a dynamic environment, adopting hybrid methods, i.e.,
a combination of classiﬁcation methods with particle
swarm optimization revealed successful outcomes [194].
A combination of heuristic methods with conventional
or ML-based approaches customized for nano-scale lo-
calization is a future research direction for IoNBTs.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have conducted a comprehensive
survey on the abnormality detection and localization
schemes using MC systems. We presented an end-to-
end system model for MC-based abnormality detection
and localization which consists of multiple tiers: the
abnormality sensing link in the ﬁrst tier; and the S2FC

30

communication link in the second tier. There may be
other tiers in the system for sending the information to an
external processing/controlling unit through a GW. We
considered different abnormality recognition methods,
including molecule release, medium effect, and molecule
absorption. Moreover, we described the functional units
of the sensors and different sensor features. We also
explained possible constructions for interfaces (FC and
GW) to convert the internal signals to the external signals
including wireless to wireless and molecular to wireless
interfaces. We developed a uniﬁed propagation model
to describe the molecular and non-molecular channels
in the abnormality detection and localization systems.
We categorized the abnormality detection schemes based
on the sensor mobility, and cooperative detection and
sensing/activation, and classiﬁed the abnormality local-
ization approaches based on the sensor mobility and
propulsion mechanisms. In addition, we also presented
a general framework for the externally-controllable lo-
calization systems. We ﬁnally presented the important
challenges on the MC-based abnormality detection and
localization systems and introduced some directions for
future works. We also presented a general framework for
the externally-controllable localization systems. Finally,
we presented the important challenges of the MC-based
abnormality detection and localization systems and in-
troduced some directions for future research.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Abdallah, M. A. Maarof, and A. Zainal, “Fraud detection
system: A survey,” J. of Netw. and Comput. Appl., vol. 68, pp.
90–113, 2016.

[2] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman,
“Survey of intrusion detection systems: techniques, datasets
and challenges,” Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, 2019, Art. no.
20, doi: 10.1186/s42400-019-0038-7.

[3] D. Miljkovi´c, “Fault detection methods: A literature survey,” in
Proc. of the 34th Int. Convention MIPRO, 2011, pp. 750–755.
[4] G. Thatte, U. Mitra, and J. Heidemann, “Detection of low-
rate attacks in computer networks,” in IEEE INFOCOM Work-
shops, 2008, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/INFOCOM.2008.4544638.
[5] ——, “Parametric methods for anomaly detection in aggregate
trafﬁc,” IEEE/ACM Trans. On Networking, vol. 19, no. 2, pp.
512–525, 2010.

[6] A. Chattopadhyay and U. Mitra, “Attack detection and secure
estimation under false data injection attack in cyber-physical
systems,” in 52nd Annu. Conf. on Inf. Sci. and Sys. (CISS),
2018, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/CISS.2018.8362307.

[7] M. Levorato and U. Mitra, “Fast anomaly detection in smart-
grids via sparse approximation theory,” in IEEE 7th Sensor
Array and Multichannel Sig. Process. Workshop (SAM), 2012,
pp. 5–8, doi: 10.1109/SAM.2012.6250561.

[8] L. Hu, X. Wang, and S. Wang, “Decentralized underwater
target detection and localization,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21,
no. 2, pp. 2385–2399, 2020.

[9] J. Chen and U. Mitra, “Underwater acoustic source localiza-
tion using unimodal-constrained matrix factorization,” in 51st
Asilomar Conf. on Signals, Sys., and Comput., 2017, pp. 2002–
2006, doi: 10.1109/ACSSC.2017.8335718.

[10] D. R. Sanderson and R. S. Fontana, “Early lung cancer
detection and localization,” Annals of Otology, Rhinology &
Laryngology, vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 583–588, 1975.

[11] M. S. Islam, N. Kaabouch, and W. C. Hu, “A survey of medical
imaging techniques used for breast cancer detection,” in IEEE
Int. Conf. on Electro-Inf. Tech. (EIT), 2013, pp. 1–5, doi:
10.1109/EIT.2013.6632694.

[12] J. Matthes, L. Groll, and H. B. Keller, “Source localization
by spatially distributed electronic noses for advection and
diffusion,” IEEE Trans. on Sig. Process., vol. 53, no. 5, pp.
1711–1719, 2005.

[13] A. Kuzu, S. Bogosyan, and M. Gokasan, “Survey: detection,
recognition and source localization of odor,” WSEAS Trans.
on Sys., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 611–621, 2008.

[14] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection:
A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 41, no. 3,
2009, Art. no. 15, doi: 10.1145/1541880.1541882.

[15] F. Zhu, R. Shankaran, B. Zhao, Y. Zhao, Y. Gang, and X. Chen,
“Anomaly detection-based intelligent computing in internet of
things and network applications,” Internet Tech. Letters, vol. 4,
no. 3, 2021, Art. no. e293, doi: 10.1002/itl2.293.

[16] M. Xie, S. Han, B. Tian, and S. Parvin, “Anomaly detection in
wireless sensor networks: A survey,” J. of netw. and comput.
Appl., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1302–1325, 2011.

[17] E. Karapistoli and A. A. Economides, “Anomaly detection
and localization in uwb wireless sensor networks,” in IEEE
24th Annu. Int. Symp. on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio
Comm. (PIMRC), 2013, pp. 2326–2330.

[18] X. Fu, W. Chen, S. Ye, Y. Tu, Y. Tang, D. Li, H. Chen, and
K. Jiang, “A wireless implantable sensor network system for
in vivo monitoring of physiological signals,” IEEE Trans. on
Inf. Tech. in Biomedicine, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 577–584, 2011.
[19] C. Meesookho, U. Mitra, and S. Narayanan, “On energy-based
acoustic source localization for sensor networks,” IEEE Trans.
on Sig. Process., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 365–377, 2007.

[20] I. F. Akyildiz and M. C. Vuran, Wireless sensor networks.

John Wiley & Sons, 2010.

[21] M. Yuce and J. Khan, “Introduction to wireless body area
network,” in Wireless Body Area Networks-Technology, Imple-
mentation and Applications. Pan Stanford Publishing, 2012,
pp. 1–17.

[22] S. Movassaghi, M. Abolhasan, J. Lipman, D. Smith, and
A. Jamalipour, “Wireless body area networks: A survey,” IEEE
Comm. Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1658–1686,
2014.

[23] K. Hasan, K. Biswas, K. Ahmed, N. S. Naﬁ, and M. S. Islam,
“A comprehensive review of wireless body area network,” J.
of Netw. and Comput. Appl., vol. 143, pp. 178–198, 2019.

[24] R. Negra, I. Jemili, and A. Belghith, “Wireless body area
networks: Applications and technologies,” Procedia Comput.
Sci., vol. 83, pp. 1274–1281, 2016.

[25] M. Anwar, A. H. Abdullah, K. N. Qureshi, and A. H. Majid,
“Wireless body area networks for healthcare applications: An
overview,” Telkomnika, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1088–1095, 2017.
[26] G. Thatte, M. Li, A. Emken, U. Mitra, S. Narayanan, M. An-
navaram, and D. Spruijt-Metz, “Energy-efﬁcient multihypoth-
esis activity-detection for health-monitoring applications,” in
Annu. Int. Conf. of the IEEE Eng. in Medicine and Biology
Society, vol. 1, 2009, pp. 4678–4681.

[27] G. Thatte, V. Rozgic, M. Li, S. Ghosh, U. Mitra, S. Narayanan,
M. Annavaram, and D. Spruijt-Metz, “Optimal allocation of
time-resources for multihypothesis activity-level detection,” in

31

Int. Conf. on Distributed Computing in Sensor Sys., 2009, pp.
273–286.

[28] G. Thatte, M. Li, S. Lee, B. A. Emken, M. Annavaram,
S. Narayanan, D. Spruijt-Metz, and U. Mitra, “Optimal time-
resource allocation for energy-efﬁcient physical activity detec-
tion,” IEEE Trans. on Sig. Process., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 1843–
1857, 2011.

[29] D.-S. Zois, M. Levorato, and U. Mitra, “Energy-efﬁcient,
heterogeneous sensor selection for physical activity detection
in wireless body area networks,” IEEE Trans. on Sig. Process.,
vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 1581–1594, 2013.

[30] S. Qiu, W. Guo, S. Wang, N. Farsad, and A. Eckford, “A
molecular communication link for monitoring in conﬁned
environments,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Comm. (ICC), 2014, pp.
718–723, doi: 10.1109/ICCW.2014.6881284.
[31] R. Mosayebi, A. Ahmadzadeh, W. Wicke, V.

Jamali,
R. Schober, and M. Nasiri-Kenari, “Early cancer detection
in blood vessels using mobile nanosensors,” IEEE Trans. on
NanoBiosci., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 103–116, 2018.

[32] G. Tarro, A. Perna, and C. Esposito, “Early diagnosis of
lung cancer by detection of tumor liberated protein,” J. of
Cellular Physiology, vol. 203, no. 1, pp. 1–5, 2005, doi:
10.1002/jcp.20195.

[33] B. Atakan, Molecular communication Among Nanomachines.

Springer, 2014.

[34] I. F. Akyildiz, F. Brunetti, and C. Bl´azquez, “Nanonetworks:
A new communication paradigm,” Comput. Netw.: The Int. J.
of Comput. and TeleComm. Networking, vol. 52, no. 12, pp.
2260–2279, 2008.

[35] L. Felicetti, M. Femminella, G. Reali, and P. Li`o, “A molecular
communication system in blood vessels for tumor detection,”
in Proc. of ACM The First Annu. Int. Conf. on Nanoscale
Computing and Comm., 2014, pp. 1–9, Art. no. 21, doi:
10.1145/2619955.2619978.

[36] O. Amin, H. Dahrouj, N. Almayouf, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, B. Shi-
hada, and M.-S. Alouini, “Viral aerosol concentration char-
acterization and detection in bounded environments,” IEEE
Trans. on Mol., Bio. and Multi-Scale Comm., vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 185–199, 2021.

[37] L. Khaloopour, M. Mirmohseni, and M. Nasiri-Kenari, “The-
oretical concept study of cooperative abnormality detection
and localization in ﬂuidic-medium molecular communication,”
IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 15, pp. 17 118–17 130, 2021.

[38] S. Ghavami, F. Lahouti, and A. Masoudi-Nejad, “Modeling
and analysis of abnormality detection in biomolecular nano-
networks,” Nano Comm. Netw., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 229–241,
2012.

[39] M. Stelzner, F.-L. Lau, K. Freundt, F. B¨uther, M. L. Nguyen,
C. Stamme, and S. Ebers, “Precise detection and treatment of
human diseases based on nano networking,” in Proc. of the
11th EAI Int. Conf. on Body Area Netw., 2016, pp. 58–64.

[40] T. Nakano, S. Kobayashi, T. Suda, Y. Okaie, Y. Hiraoka, and
T. Haraguchi, “Externally controllable molecular communica-
tion,” IEEE J. on Selected Areas in Comm., vol. 32, no. 12,
pp. 2417–2431, 2014.

[41] N. R. Raz, M.-R. Akbarzadeh-T, and M. Tafaghodi, “Bioin-
spired nanonetworks for targeted cancer drug delivery,” IEEE
Trans. on NanoBiosci., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 894–906, 2015.
[42] T. Nakano, Y. Okaie, S. Kobayashi, T. Koujin, C.-H. Chan,
Y.-H. Hsu, T. Obuchi, T. Hara, Y. Hiraoka, and T. Haraguchi,
“Performance evaluation of
leader–follower-based mobile
molecular communication networks for target detection appli-
cations,” IEEE Trans. on Comm., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 663–676,
2016.

[43] Y. Okaie, T. Nakano, T. Hara, T. Obuchi, K. Hosoda, Y. Hi-
raoka, and S. Nishio, “Cooperative target tracking by a mobile

bionanosensor network,” IEEE Trans. on NanoBiosci., vol. 13,
no. 3, pp. 267–277, 2014.

[44] K. Yang, D. Bi, Y. Deng, R. Zhang, M. M. U. Rahman, N. A.
Ali, M. A. Imran, J. M. Jornet, Q. H. Abbasi, and A. Alomainy,
“A comprehensive survey on hybrid communication in context
of molecular communication and terahertz communication for
body-centric nanonetworks,” IEEE Trans. on Mol., Bio. and
Multi-Scale Comm., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 107–133, 2020.

[45] V.

Jamali, A. Ahmadzadeh, W. Wicke, A. Noel, and
R. Schober, “Channel modeling for diffusive molecular
communication-a tutorial review,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 107,
no. 7, pp. 1256–1301, 2019.

[46] C. Hoelen and F. De Mul, “A new theoretical approach to
the Acoustical

photoacoustic signal generation,” The J. of
Society of America, vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 695–706, 1999.
[47] H. Kim, M. Park, C. W. Kim, and D. Shin, “Opto-ultrasonic
communications in wireless body area nanonetworks,” in
Asilomar Conf. on Sig., Sys. and Comput., 2013, pp. 1066–
1070, doi: 10.1109/ACSSC.2013.6810455.

[48] M. Khalid, O. Amin, S. Ahmed, and M.-S. Alouini, “System
modeling of virus transmission and detection in molecular
communication channels,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Comm. (ICC),
2018, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2018.8422665.

[49] R. Mosayebi, W. Wicke, V.

Jamali, A. Ahmadzadeh,
R. Schober, and M. Nasiri-Kenari, “Advanced target detec-
tion via molecular communication,” in IEEE Glob. Comm.
Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2018, pp. 1–7, doi: 10.1109/GLO-
COM.2018.8647734.

[50] Y. Chahibi, M. Pierobon, S. O. Song, and I. F. Akyildiz, “A
molecular communication system model for particulate drug
delivery systems,” IEEE Trans. on Biomedical Eng., vol. 60,
no. 12, pp. 3468–3483, 2013.

[51] M. Dunbabin and L. Marques, “Robots for environmental
monitoring: Signiﬁcant advancements and applications,” IEEE
Robotics & Automation Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 24–39, 2012.
[52] S. Kumar, “Nanomachine localization in a diffusive molecular
communication system,” IEEE Sys. J., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 3011–
3014, 2020.

[53] H. E. Baidoo-Williams, M. M. U. Rahman, and Q. H. Ab-
basi, “Channel impulse response-based source localization in
a diffusion-based molecular communication system,” Inter-
net Tech. Letters, vol. 3, no. 2, 2020, Art. no. e143, doi:
10.1002/itl2.143.

[54] D. Zhu, X. Bao, and W. Zhang, “Target recognition in turbulent
diffusion channels,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 25, no. 11, pp.
3694–3698, 2021.

[55] Y. Miao, W. Zhang, and X. Bao, “Cooperative source position-
ing for simo molecular communication via diffusion,” in IEEE
19th Int. Conf. on Comm. Tech. (ICCT), 2019, pp. 495–499,
doi: 10.1109/ICCT46805.2019.8947256.

[56] O. Yetimoglu, M. K. Avci, B. C. Akdeniz, H. B. Yilmaz, A. E.
Pusane, and T. Tugcu, “Multiple transmitter localization via
single receiver in 3-d molecular communication via diffusion,”
Digital Sig. Process., vol. 124, 2021, Art. no. 103185, doi:
10.1016/j.dsp.2021.103185.

[57] A. C. Tsang, E. Demir, Y. Ding, and O. S. Pak, “Roads to smart
artiﬁcial microswimmers,” Advanced Intelligent Sys., vol. 2,
no. 8, 2020, Art. no. 1900137, doi: 10.1002/aisy.201900137.
[58] E. T. Roussos, J. S. Condeelis, and A. Patsialou, “Chemotaxis
in cancer,” Nature Reviews Cancer, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 573–
587, 2011.

[59] S. de Beco, K. Vaidˇziulyt˙e, J. Manzi, F. Dalier, F. Di Federico,
G. Cornilleau, M. Dahan, and M. Coppey, “Optogenetic dis-
section of rac1 and cdc42 gradient shaping,” Nature Comm.,
vol. 9, no. 1, 2018, Art. no. 4816, doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-
07286-8.

32

[60] W. Jatmiko, K. Sekiyama, and T. Fukuda, “A pso-based mobile
robot for odor source localization in dynamic advection-
diffusion with obstacles environment: theory, simulation and
measurement,” IEEE Computational Intelligence Mag., vol. 2,
no. 2, pp. 37–51, 2007.

[61] M. Vergassola, E. Villermaux, and B. I. Shraiman, “‘Infotaxis’
as a strategy for searching without gradients,” Nature, vol. 445,
no. 7126, pp. 406–409, 2007.

[62] A. Sinha, R. Kumar, R. Kaur, and A. P. Bhondekar,
“Consensus-based odor source localization by multiagent sys-
tems,” IEEE Trans. on Cybernetics, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 4450–
4459, 2018.

[63] Y. Chen, P. Kosmas, P. S. Anwar, and L. Huang, “A touch-
communication framework for drug delivery based on a tran-
sient microbot system,” IEEE Trans. on NanoBiosci., vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 397–408, 2015.

[64] S. Shi, Y. Yan, J. Xiong, U. K. Cheang, X. Yao, and Y. Chen,
“Nanorobots-assisted natural computation for multifocal tumor
sensitization and targeting,” IEEE Trans. on NanoBiosci.,
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 154–165, 2020.

[65] S. N. Solak and M. Oner, “Rnn based abnormality detection
with nanoscale sensor networks using molecular communi-
cations,” in Proc. of the 7th ACM Int. Conf. on Nanoscale
Computing and Comm., 2020, pp. 1–6, Art. no. 17, doi:
10.1145/3411295.3411313.

[66] R. G. Kerry, K. E. Ukhurebor, S. Kumari, G. K. Maurya,
S. Patra, B. Panigrahi, S. Majhi, J. R. Rout, M. del Pilar
Rodr´ıguez-Torres, G. Das et al., “A comprehensive review on
the applications of nano-biosensor based approaches for non-
communicable and communicable disease detection,” Bioma-
terials Sci., vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 3576–3602, 2021.

[67] M. Khalid, O. Amin, S. Ahmed, B. Shihada, and M.-S.
Alouini, “Modeling of viral aerosol transmission and detec-
tion,” IEEE Trans. on Comm., vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 4859–4873,
2020.

[68] J. T. G´omez, A. Kuestner, K. Pitke, J. Simonjan, B. D. Unlu-
turk, and F. Dressler, “A machine learning approach for abnor-
mality detection in blood vessels via mobile nanosensors,” in
Proc. of the 19th ACM Conf. on Embedded Networked Sensor
Sys., 2021, pp. 596–602, doi: 10.1145/3485730.3494037.
[69] S. Ghavami, “Anomaly detection in molecular communications
with applications to health monitoring networks,” IEEE Trans.
on Mol., Bio. and Multi-Scale Comm., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 50–59,
2020.

[70] S. S. Hori and S. S. Gambhir, “Mathematical model identiﬁes
blood biomarker–based early cancer detection strategies and
limitations,” Sci. Translational Medicine, vol. 3, no. 109, pp.
109–116, 2011.

[71] L. Norton, R. Simon, H. D. Brereton, and A. E. Bogden,
“Predicting the course of gompertzian growth,” Nature, vol.
264, no. 5586, pp. 542–545, 1976.

[72] J.-C. Fouron, F. Absi, A. Skoll, F. Proulx, and J. Gosselin,
“Changes in ﬂow velocity patterns of the superior and inferior
venae cavae during placental circulatory insufﬁciency,” Ultra-
sound in Obstetrics and Gynecology: The Ofﬁcial J. of the Int.
Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology, vol. 21,
no. 1, pp. 53–56, 2003.

[73] J. Zhu, L. Ren, S.-C. Ho, Z. Jia, and G. Song, “Gas pipeline
leakage detection based on pzt sensors,” Smart Materials
and Structures, vol. 26, no. 2, 2017, Art. no. 025022, doi:
10.1088/1361-665X/26/2/025022.

[74] M. Jafari and M. Hasanzadeh, “Cell-speciﬁc frequency as a
new hallmark to early detection of cancer and efﬁcient therapy:
Recording of cancer voice as a new horizon,” Biomedicine
& Pharmacotherapy, vol. 122, 2020, Art. no. 109770, doi:
10.1016/j.biopha.2019.109770.

[75] M. Liu, Y. Sun, and Y. Chen, “Detection of atherosclerotic
lesions based on molecular communication,” in Int. Conf. on
Bio-inspired Inf. and Comm. Tech., 2020, pp. 221–225, doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-57115-3 19

[76] W. Guo, Y. Deng, B. Li, C. Zhao, and A. Nallanathan,
“Eavesdropper localization in random walk channels,” IEEE
Comm. Letters, vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1776–1779, 2016.

[77] P. Ogren, E. Fiorelli, and N. E. Leonard, “Cooperative control
of mobile sensor networks: Adaptive gradient climbing in a
distributed environment,” IEEE Trans. on Automatic Cont.,
vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 1292–1302, 2004.

[78] J. S. Wilson, Sensor technology handbook. Elsevier, 2004.
[79] D. P. Agrawal, “Designing wireless sensor networks: From
theory to applications,” Central European J. of Comput. Sci.,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 2–18, 2011.

[80] M. Kuscu and O. B. Akan, “On the physical design of molec-
ular communication receiver based on nanoscale biosensors,”
IEEE Sensors J., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 2228–2243, 2016.
[81] S. N. Solak and M. Oner, “Neural network based decision fu-
sion for abnormality detection via molecular communications,”
in IEEE Workshop on Sig. Process. Sys. (SiPS), 2020, pp. 1–5,
doi: 10.1109/SiPS50750.2020.9195212.

[82] P. Ganesh and H. Venkataraman, “Rf-based wireless commu-
nication for shallow water networks: Survey and analysis,”
Wireless Personal Comm., vol. 120, no. 4, pp. 3415–3441,
2021.

[83] F. Lemic, S. Abadal, W. Tavernier, P. Stroobant, D. Colle,
E. Alarc´on, J. Marquez-Barja, and J. Famaey, “Survey on
terahertz nanocommunication and networking: A top-down
perspective,” IEEE J. on Selected Areas in Comm., vol. 39,
no. 6, pp. 1506–1543, 2021.

[84] H. Guo, P. Johari, J. M. Jornet, and Z. Sun, “Intra-body optical
channel modeling for in vivo wireless nanosensor networks,”
IEEE Trans. on NanoBiosci., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 41–52, 2015.
[85] G. E. Santagati, T. Melodia, L. Galluccio, and S. Palazzo,
“Medium access control and rate adaptation for ultrasonic
intrabody sensor networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. on Networking,
vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1121–1134, 2014.

[86] H. Arjmandi, A. Ahmadzadeh, R. Schober, and M. N. Ke-
nari, “Ion channel based bio-synthetic modulator for diffu-
sive molecular communication,” IEEE Trans. on NanoBiosci.,
vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 418–432, 2016.

[87] H. Arjmandi, V. Jamali, A. Ahmadzadeh, A. Burkovski,
R. Schober, and M. N. Kenari, “Ion pump based bio-
synthetic modulator model for diffusive molecular commu-
nications,” in IEEE 17th Int. Workshop on Sig. Process.
Advances in Wireless Comm. (SPAWC), 2016, pp. 1–6, doi:
10.1109/SPAWC.2016.7536836.

[88] D. Rodrigues, A. I. Barbosa, R. Rebelo, I. K. Kwon, R. L. Reis,
and V. M. Correlo, “Skin-integrated wearable systems and
implantable biosensors: A comprehensive review,” Biosensors,
vol. 10, no. 7, 2020, Art. no. 79, doi: 10.3390/bios10070079.
[89] B.-H. Koo, H. J. Kim, J.-Y. Kwon, and C.-B. Chae, “Deep
learning-based human implantable nano molecular communi-
cations,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Comm. (ICC), 2020, pp. 1–7,
doi: 10.1109/ICC40277.2020.9148818.

[90] N. A. Wisniewski, S. P. Nichols, S. J. Gamsey, S. Pullins, K. Y.
Au-Yeung, B. Klitzman, and K. L. Helton, “Tissue-integrating
oxygen sensors: continuous tracking of tissue hypoxia,” in
Oxygen transport to tissue XXXIX. Springer, 2017, pp. 377–
383.

[91] N. Varshney, A. Patel, Y. Deng, W. Haselmayr, P. K. Varshney,
and A. Nallanathan, “Abnormality detection inside blood ves-
sels with mobile nanomachines,” IEEE Trans. on Mol., Bio.
and Multi-Scale Comm., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 189–194, 2018.

33

[92] F. Soto, J. Wang, R. Ahmed, and U. Demirci, “Medical mi-
cro/nanorobots in precision medicine,” Advanced Sci., vol. 7,
no. 21, p. 2002203, 2020.

[93] Y. Sun, Y. Hsiang, Y. Chen, and Y. Zhou, “A cooperative
molecular communication for targeted drug delivery,” in Int.
Conf. on Bio-inspired Inf. and Comm. Tech., 2020, pp. 16–26,
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-57115-3 2.

[94] J. Katic, “Efﬁcient energy harvesting interface for implantable

biosensors,” Ph.D. dissertation, KTH, 2015.

[95] X. Lu and S.-H. Yang, “Thermal energy harvesting for wsns,”
in IEEE Int. Conf. on Sys., Man and Cybernetics, 2010, pp.
3045–3052.

[96] C. Wei and X. Jing, “A comprehensive review on vibration
energy harvesting: Modelling and realization,” Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 74, pp. 1–18, 2017.
[97] C. H. Park, H. Bae, C.-s. Kim, D.-H. Peck, and J. Lee,
“Nanoﬂuidic energy harvesting through a biological 1d
protein-embedded nanoﬁlm membrane by interfacial polymer-
ization,” Nano Energy, vol. 74, 2020, Art. no. 104906, doi:
10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.104906.

[98] J. D. Phillips, “Energy harvesting in nanosystems: Power-
ing the next generation of the internet of things,” Fron-
tiers in Nanotech., vol. 3, 2021, Art. no. 633931, doi:
10.3389/fnano.2021.633931.

[99] N. Islam and S. Misra, ““Catch the pendulum”: The problem
of asymmetric data delivery in electromagnetic nanonetworks,”
IEEE Trans. on NanoBiosci., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 576–584, 2016.
[100] S. Canovas-Carrasco, A.-J. Garcia-Sanchez, and J. Garcia-
Haro, “A nanoscale communication network scheme and en-
ergy model for a human hand scenario,” Nano Comm. Netw.,
vol. 15, pp. 17–27, 2018.

[101] Y. Wu, A. D. Kaiser, Y. Jiang, and M. S. Alber, “Periodic
reversal of direction allows myxobacteria to swarm,” Proc. of
the National Academy of Sci., vol. 106, no. 4, pp. 1222–1227,
2009.

[102] T. Ozawa, H. Yoshimura, and S. B. Kim, “Advances in ﬂuo-
rescence and bioluminescence imaging,” Analytical Chemistry,
vol. 85, no. 2, pp. 590–609, 2013.

[103] C. Roman, F. Ciontu, and B. Courtois, “Single molecule
detection and macromolecular weighting using an all-
4th
nanoelectromechanical
carbon-nanotube
IEEE Conf. on Nanotech., 2004, pp. 263–266, doi:
10.1109/NANO.2004.1392318.

sensor,”

in

[104] P. Lazar, F. Karlicky, P. Jurecka, M. Kocman, E. Otyepkov´a,
K. ˇSaf´aˇrov´a, and M. Otyepka, “Adsorption of small organic
molecules on graphene,” J. of the American Chem. Society,
vol. 135, no. 16, pp. 6372–6377, 2013.

[105] Y. Luchko, “Fractional wave equation and damped waves,” J.
of Mathematical Physics, vol. 54, no. 3, 2013, Art. no. 031505,
doi: 10.1063/1.4794076.

[106] F. Mainardi, Fractional calculus and waves in linear vis-
coelasticity: an introduction to mathematical models. World
Scientiﬁc, 2010.

[107] H. Arjmandi, M. Zoofaghari, S. V. Rouzegar, M. Veleti´c,
and I. Balasingham, “On mathematical analysis of active
drug transport coupled with ﬂow-induced diffusion in blood
vessels,” IEEE Trans. on NanoBiosci, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 105–
115, 2020.

[108] N. Farsad, H. B. Yilmaz, A. Eckford, C.-B. Chae, and W. Guo,
“A comprehensive survey of recent advancements in molecular
communication,” IEEE Comm. Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18,
no. 3, pp. 1887–1919, 2016.

[109] S. Ghavami and F. Lahouti, “Abnormality detection in corre-
lated gaussian molecular nano-networks: Design and analysis,”
IEEE Trans. on NanoBiosci., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 189–202, 2017.

[110] R. Mosayebi, V. Jamali, N. Ghoroghchian, R. Schober,
M. Nasiri-Kenari, and M. Mehrabi, “Cooperative abnormal-
ity detection via diffusive molecular communications,” IEEE
Trans. on NanoBiosci., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 828–842, 2017.

[111] N. Ghoroghchian, M. Mirmohseni, and M. Nasiri-Kenari, “Ab-
normality detection and monitoring in multi-sensor molecular
communication,” IEEE Trans. on Mol., Bio. and Multi-Scale
Comm., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 68–83, 2019.

[112] S. Solak and M.

¨Oner, “Sequential decision fusion for ab-
normality detection via diffusive molecular communications,”
IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 825–829, 2020.
[113] T. C. Mai, M. Egan, T. Q. Duong, and M. Di Renzo, “Event de-
tection in molecular communication networks with anomalous
diffusion,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1249–1252,
2017.

[114] U. Rogers and M.-S. Koh, “Parallel molecular distributed
detection with brownian motion,” IEEE Trans. on NanoBiosci.,
vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 871–880, 2016.

[115] F. Gulec and B. Atakan, “Localization of a passive molecular
transmitter with a sensor network,” in Int. Conf. on Bio-
inspired Inf. and Comm. Tech., 2020, pp. 317–335, doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-57115-3 28.

[116] S. Qiu, W. Guo, B. Li, Y. Wu, X. Chu, S. Wang, and Y. Y.
Dong, “Long range and long duration underwater localization
using molecular messaging,” IEEE Trans. on Mol., Bio. and
Multi-Scale Comm., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 363–370, 2015.
[117] H. Kim, M. Park, C. W. Kim, and D. Shin, “Source localization
for hazardous material release in an outdoor chemical plant
via a combination of lstm-rnn and cfd simulation,” Comput.
& Chem. Eng., vol. 125, pp. 476–489, 2019.

[118] S. Vijayakumaran, Y. Levinbook, and T. F. Wong, “Maximum
likelihood localization of a diffusive point source using binary
observations,” IEEE Trans. on Sig. Process., vol. 55, no. 2, pp.
665–676, 2007.

[119] J. Murray-Bruce and P. L. Dragotti, “Estimating localized
sources of diffusion ﬁelds using spatiotemporal sensor mea-
surements,” IEEE Trans. on Sig. Process., vol. 63, no. 12, pp.
3018–3031, 2015.

[120] J. Li, W. Zhang, X. Bao, M. Abbaszadeh, and W. Guo,
“Inference in turbulent molecular information channels using
support vector machine,” IEEE Trans. on Mol., Bio. and Multi-
Scale Comm., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 25–35, 2020.

[121] Q. Yang, L. Xu, W. Zhong, Q. Yan, Y. Gao, W. Hong,
Y. She, and G. Yang, “Recent advances in motion control of
micro/nanomotors,” Advanced Intelligent Sys., vol. 2, no. 8,
2020, Art. no. 2000049, doi: 10.1002/aisy.202000049.
[122] R. Fabbiano, F. Garin, and C. Canudas-de Wit, “Distributed
source seeking without global position information,” IEEE
Trans. on Cont. of Netw. Sys., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 228–238,
2016.

[123] A. Giaretta, S. Balasubramaniam, and M. Conti, “Security
vulnerabilities and countermeasures for target localization in
bio-nanothings communication networks,” IEEE Trans. on Inf.
Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 665–676, 2015.

[124] H. Tran-Dang, N. Krommenacker, and P. Charpentier, “Lo-
calization algorithms based on hop counting for wireless
nano-sensor networks,” in Int. Conf. on Indoor Position-
ing and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), 2014, pp. 300–306, doi:
10.1109/IPIN.2014.7275496.

[125] L. Zhou, G. Han, and L. Liu, “Pulse-based distance accumula-
tion localization algorithm for wireless nanosensor networks,”
IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 14 380–14 390, 2017.

[126] M. El-Absi, A. A. Abbas, A. Abuelhaija, F. Zheng, K. Solbach,
and T. Kaiser, “High-accuracy trans.localization based on
chipless rﬁd systems at thz band,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
54 355–54 368, 2018.

34

[127] F. Lemic, S. Abadal, E. Alarc´on, and J. Famaey, “Toward
location-aware in-body terahertz nanonetworks with energy
harvesting,” arXiv:2101.01952, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.01952

[128] N. Rady Raz, M. R. Akbarzadeh Totonchi et al., “Biosensors
localization for swarm medical delivery,” in 4th Conf. on
Swarm Intelligence and Evolutionary Computation, 2020, pp.
010–014, doi: 10.1109/CSIEC49655.2020.9237305.

[129] A. D. Odysseos and T. Nakano, “Bionanomachine diagnostics
and nanonetwork therapeutic in brain malignancies with bio-
nanodevice interfaces,” IEEE Trans. on Mol., Bio. and Multi-
Scale Comm., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 28–35, 2022.

[130] S. Ishiyama, T. Nakano, Y. Okaie, T. Hara, and K. Haru-
moto, “Cooperative signaling and directed migration of
bio-nanomachines in mobile molecular communication,” in
Proc. of
the 7th ACM Int. Conf. on Nanoscale Com-
puting and Comm., 2020, pp. 1–7, Art. no. 3, doi:
10.1145/3411295.3411299.

[131] Y. Okaie, S.

Ishiyama, and T. Hara, “Leader-follower-
ampliﬁer based mobile molecular communication systems
for cooperative drug delivery,” in IEEE Glob. Comm.
Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2018, pp. 206–212, doi: 10.1109/GLO-
COM.2018.8647185.

[132] H. V. Poor, “Elements of hypothesis testing,” in An introduc-
tion to signal detection and estimation. Springer, 1994, pp.
5–44, doi: 10.1007/978-1-4757-2341-0 2.

[133] A. Wald, Sequential analysis. Courier Corporation, 2004.
[134] L. J. Young and J. H. Young, “Sequential hypothesis testing,”
in Statistical Ecology. Springer, 1998, pp. 153–190.
[135] M. Naghshvar and T. Javidi, “Active sequential hypothesis
testing,” The Annals of Statistics, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 2703–
2738, 2013.

[136] D. Kartik, A. Nayyar, and U. Mitra, “Active hypothesis testing:
beyond chernoff-stein,” in IEEE Int. Symp. on Inf. Theory
(ISIT), 2019, pp. 897–901, doi: 10.1109/ISIT.2019.8849436.
[137] H. Chernoff, “Sequential design of experiments,” The Annals
of Mathematical Statistics, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 755–770, 1959.
[138] S. Nitinawarat, G. K. Atia, and V. V. Veeravalli, “Controlled
sensing for hypothesis testing,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Acous-
tics, Speech and Sig. Process. (ICASSP), 2012, pp. 5277–5280,
doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2012.6289111.

[139] D. Kartik, A. Nayyar, and U. Mitra, “Testing for anoma-
lies: Active strategies and non-asymptotic analysis,” in IEEE
Int. Symp. on Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2020, pp. 1277–1282, doi:
10.1109/ISIT44484.2020.9174399.

[140] K. Cohen and Q. Zhao, “Active hypothesis testing for anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 3, pp.
1432–1450, 2015.

[141] R. B. Davies, “Hypothesis testing when a nuisance parameter
is present only under the alternative,” Biometrika, vol. 74,
no. 1, pp. 33–43, 1987.

[142] R. Geyer, M. Stelzner, F. B¨uther, and S. Ebers, “Blood-
voyagers: Simulation of the work environment of medical
nanobots,” in Proc. of the 5th ACM Int. Conf. on Nanoscale
Computing and Comm., 2018, pp. 1–6, Art. no. 5, doi:
10.1145/3233188.3233196.

[143] S. Ishiyama, T. Nakano, Y. Okaie, and T. Hara, “Epidemic
information dissemination in mobile molecular communication
systems,” in IEEE Glob. Comm. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2018,
pp. 1–7, doi: 10.1109/GLOCOM.2018.8648028.

[144] A. R. Mesquita and J. P. Hespanha, “Jump control of probabil-
ity densities with applications to autonomous vehicle motion,”
IEEE Trans. on Automatic Cont., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2588–
2598, 2012.

[145] X. Huang, Y. Fang, A. Noel, and N. Yang, “Channel character-
ization for 1-d molecular communication with two absorbing

35

receivers,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1150–1154,
2020.

[146] X. Bao, Q. Shen, Y. Zhu, and W. Zhang, “Relative localization
for silent absorbing target in diffusive molecular communica-
tion system,” IEEE Internet of Things J., vol. 9, no. 7, pp.
5009–5018, 2022.

[147] S. Qiu, N. Farsad, Y. Dong, A. Eckford, and W. Guo, “Under-
water molecular signalling: A hidden transmitter and absent
receivers problem,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Comm. (ICC), 2015,
pp. 1085–1090, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2015.7248467.

[148] N. Farsad, D. Pan, and A. Goldsmith, “A novel experimental
platform for in-vessel multi-chemical molecular communica-
tions,” in IEEE Glob. Comm. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2017, pp.
1–6, doi: 10.1109/GLOCOM.2017.8255058.

[149] E. Regonesi, M. Rapisarda, M. Magarini, and M. Ferrari,
“Relative angle estimation of an interferer in a diffusion-based
molecular communication system,” in Proc. of the 7th ACM
Int. Conf. on Nanoscale Computing and Comm., 2020, pp. 1–
7, Art. no. 14, doi: 10.1145/3411295.3411310.

[150] M. E. Alpay and M. H. Shor, “Model-based solution tech-
niques for the source localization problem,” IEEE Trans. on
Cont. Sys. Tech., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 895–904, 2000.

[151] M. Zoofaghari, H. Arjmandi, A. Etemadi, and I. Balasingham,
“A semi-analytical method for channel modeling in diffusion-
based molecular communication networks,” IEEE Trans. on
Comm., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 3957–3970, 2021.

[152] J. M. Jornet and I. F. Akyildiz, “Joint energy harvesting
and communication analysis for perpetual wireless nanosensor
networks in the terahertz band,” IEEE Trans. on Nanotech.,
vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 570–580, 2012.

[153] H. Berg, “Motile behavior of bacteria,” Physics today, vol. 53,

no. 1, pp. 24–29, 2000.

[154] D. A. Bazylinski and R. B. Frankel, “Magnetosome formation
in prokaryotes,” Nature Reviews Microbiology, vol. 2, no. 3,
pp. 217–230, 2004.

[155] B. Dai, J. Wang, Z. Xiong, X. Zhan, W. Dai, C.-C. Li, S.-
P. Feng, and J. Tang, “Programmable artiﬁcial phototactic
microswimmer,” Nature Nanotech., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 1087–
1092, 2016.

[156] Z. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Meriano, C. Ru, S. Xie, J. Luo, and
Y. Sun, “Human sperm rheotaxis: a passive physical process,”
Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 6, no. 1, 2016, Art. no. 23553, doi:
10.1038/srep23553.

[157] B. Liebchen, P. Monderkamp, B. Ten Hagen, and H. L¨owen,
“Viscotaxis: Microswimmer navigation in viscosity gradients,”
Physical Review Letters, vol. 120, no. 20, 2018, Art. no.
208002, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.208002.

[158] S. Pan´e, J. Puigmart´ı-Luis, C. Bergeles, X.-Z. Chen, E. Pel-
licer, J. Sort, V. Poˇcepcov´a, A. Ferreira, and B. J. Nelson,
“Imaging technologies for biomedical micro-and nanoswim-
mers,” Advanced Materials Tech., vol. 4, no. 4, 2019, Art. no.
1800575, doi: 10.1002/admt.201800575.

[159] W. Francis, C. Fay, L. Florea, and D. Diamond, “Self-propelled
chemotactic ionic liquid droplets,” Chem. Comm., vol. 51,
no. 12, pp. 2342–2344, 2015.

[160] S.-H. Kim, J. Turnbull, and S. Guimond, “Extracellular matrix
and cell signalling: the dynamic cooperation of integrin, pro-
teoglycan and growth factor receptor.” The J. of Endocrinol-
ogy, vol. 209, no. 2, pp. 139–151, 2011.

[161] H.-W. Huang, S. Lyttle, and B. J. Nelson, “Bioinspired nav-
igation in shape morphing micromachines for autonomous
in IEEE Int. Conf. on Soft
targeted drug delivery,”
Robotics (RoboSoft), 2018, pp. 13–18, doi: 10.1109/RO-
BOSOFT.2018.8404890.

[162] H. Hu, S. Song, and C. P. Chen, “Plume tracing via model-

free reinforcement learning method,” IEEE Trans. on Neural
Netw. and Learning Sys., vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 2515–2527, 2019.
[163] F. Dressler and S. Fischer, “Connecting in-body nano commu-
nication with body area networks: Challenges and opportuni-
ties of the internet of nano things,” Nano Comm. Netw., vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 29–38, 2015.

[164] F. Ongaro, S. Scheggi, C. Yoon, F. Van den Brink, S. H. Oh,
D. H. Gracias, and S. Misra, “Autonomous planning and con-
trol of soft untethered grippers in unstructured environments,”
J. of micro-bio robotics, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 45–52, 2017.
[165] A. S´anchez, V. Magdanz, O. G. Schmidt, and S. Misra,
“Magnetic control of self-propelled microjets under ultrasound
image guidance,” in 5th IEEE RAS/EMBS Int. Conf. on
Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics, 2014, pp. 169–174,
doi: 10.1109/BIOROB.2014.6913771.

[166] S. Scheggi, K. K. T. Chandrasekar, C. Yoon, B. Sawaryn,
G. van de Steeg, D. H. Gracias, and S. Misra, “Magnetic
motion control and planning of untethered soft grippers
using ultrasound image feedback,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2017, pp. 6156–6161, doi:
10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989730.

[167] M. Curreli, R. Zhang, F. N. Ishikawa, H.-K. Chang, R. J.
Cote, C. Zhou, and M. E. Thompson, “Real-time, label-free
detection of biological entities using nanowire-based fets,”
IEEE Trans. on Nanotech., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 651–667, 2008.
[168] J. M. Jornet, Y. Bae, C. R. Handelmann, B. Decker, A. Bal-
cerak, A. Sangwan, P. Miao, A. Desai, L. Feng, E. K. Sta-
chowiak et al., “Optogenomic interfaces: Bridging biological
networks with the electronic digital world,” Proc. of the IEEE,
vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 1387–1401, 2019.

[169] G. Maduraiveeran, M. Sasidharan, and V. Ganesan, “Electro-
chemical sensor and biosensor platforms based on advanced
nanomaterials for biological and biomedical applications,”
Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 103, pp. 113–129, 2018.
[170] L. Grebenstein, J. Kirchner, W. Wicke, A. Ahmadzadeh, V. Ja-
mali, G. Fischer, R. Weigel, A. Burkovski, and R. Schober, “A
molecular communication testbed based on proton pumping
bacteria: Methods and data,” IEEE Trans. on Mol., Bio. and
Multi-Scale Comm., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 56–62, 2019.

[171] B. Krishnaswamy, C. M. Austin, J. P. Bardill, D. Russakow,
G. L. Holst, B. K. Hammer, C. R. Forest, and R. Sivakumar,
“Time-elapse communication: Bacterial communication on a
microﬂuidic chip,” IEEE Trans. on Comm., vol. 61, no. 12,
pp. 5139–5151, 2013.

[172] E. De Leo, L. Donvito, L. Galluccio, A. Lombardo, G. Mora-
bito, and L. M. Zanoli, “Communications and switching in mi-
croﬂuidic systems: Pure hydrodynamic control for networking
labs-on-a-chip,” IEEE Trans. on Comm., vol. 61, no. 11, pp.
4663–4677, 2013.

[173] N. A. Abbasi, D. Lafci, and O. B. Akan, “Controlled informa-
tion transfer through an in vivo nervous system,” Scientiﬁc re-
ports, vol. 8, no. 1, 2018, Art. no. 2298, doi: 10.1038/s41598-
018-20725-2.

[174] N. Farsad, W. Guo, and A. W. Eckford, “Tabletop molec-
ular communication: Text messages through chemical sig-
nals,” PloS One, vol. 8, no. 12, 2013, Art. no. e82935, doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0082935.

[175] B.-H. Koo, C. Lee, H. B. Yilmaz, N. Farsad, A. Eckford,
and C.-B. Chae, “Molecular mimo: From theory to prototype,”
IEEE J. on Selected Areas in Comm., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 600–
614, 2016.

[176] H. Tataria, M. Shaﬁ, A. F. Molisch, M. Dohler, H. Sj¨oland,
and F. Tufvesson, “6g wireless systems: Vision, requirements,
challenges, insights, and opportunities,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol.
109, no. 7, pp. 1166–1199, 2021.

36

control of swimming micro/nanorobots,” View, vol. 2, no. 5,
2021, Art. no. 20200113, doi: 10.1002/VIW.20200113.
[193] T. T. Mac, C. Copot, D. T. Tran, and R. De Keyser, “Heuristic
approaches in robot path planning: A survey,” Robotics and
Autonomous Sys., vol. 86, pp. 13–28, 2016.

[194] X. Chen and Y. Li, “Smooth formation navigation of multiple
mobile robots for avoiding moving obstacles,” Int. J. of Cont.,
Automation, and Sys., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 466–479, 2006.

[177] A. N. Abdulfattah, C. C. Tsimenidis, B. Z. Al-Jewad, and
A. Yakovlev, “Performance analysis of mics-based rf wireless
power transfer system for implantable medical devices,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 11 775–11 784, 2019.

[178] D.-K. Lee, J.-H. Kang, J.-S. Lee, H.-S. Kim, C. Kim, J. H.
Kim, T. Lee, J.-H. Son, Q.-H. Park, and M. Seo, “Highly
sensitive and selective sugar detection by terahertz nano-
antennas,” Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 5, no. 1, 2015, Art. no.
15459, doi: 10.1038/srep15459.

[179] S. Kisseleff, R. Schober, and W. H. Gerstacker, “Magnetic
nanoparticle based interface for molecular communication
systems,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 258–261,
2016.

[180] K. Ulbrich, K. Hola, V. Subr, A. Bakandritsos, J. Tucek, and
R. Zboril, “Targeted drug delivery with polymers and magnetic
nanoparticles: covalent and noncovalent approaches, release
control, and clinical studies,” Chem. Reviews, vol. 116, no. 9,
pp. 5338–5431, 2016.

[181] E. Osmekhina, C. Jonkergouw, G. Schmidt, F. Jahangiri,
V. Jokinen, S. Franssila, and M. B. Linder, “Controlled com-
munication between physically separated bacterial populations
in a microﬂuidic device,” Comm. Biology, vol. 1, no. 1, 2018,
Art. no. 97, doi: 10.1038/s42003-018-0102-y.

[182] D. Bi, A. Almpanis, A. Noel, Y. Deng, and R. Schober, “A
survey of molecular communication in cell biology: Establish-
ing a new hierarchy for interdisciplinary applications,” IEEE
Comm. Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1494–1545,
2021.

[183] D. Maresca, A. Lakshmanan, M. Abedi, A. Bar-Zion,
A. Farhadi, G. J. Lu, J. O. Szablowski, D. Wu, S. Yoo, and
M. G. Shapiro, “Biomolecular ultrasound and sonogenetics,”
Annu. Review of Chem. and Biomolecular Eng., vol. 9, pp.
229–252, 2018.

[184] S. Zafar, M. Nazir, T. Bakhshi, H. A. Khattak, S. Khan,
M. Bilal, K.-K. R. Choo, K.-S. Kwak, and A. Sabah, “A
systematic review of bio-cyber interface technologies and
security issues for internet of bio-nano things,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 93 529–93 566, 2021.

[185] M. Usman, M. R. Asghar, I. S. Ansari, and M. Qaraqe,
“Security in wireless body area networks: From in-body to
off-body communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 58 064–
58 074, 2018.

[186] F. Al-Turjman, “Intelligence and security in big 5g-oriented
iont: An overview,” Future Generation Comput. Sys., vol. 102,
pp. 357–368, 2020.

[187] C. Lee, H. B. Yilmaz, C.-B. Chae, N. Farsad, and A. Gold-
smith, “Machine learning based channel modeling for molec-
ular mimo communications,” in IEEE 18th Int. Workshop on
Sig. Process. Advances in Wireless Comm. (SPAWC), 2017, pp.
1–5, doi: 10.1109/SPAWC.2017.8227765.

[188] S. Mohamed, J. Dong, A. Junejo et al., “Model-based: End-
to-end molecular communication system through deep rein-
forcement learning auto encoder,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.
70 279–70 286, 2019.

[189] T. Jing, Q.-H. Meng, and H. Ishida, “Recent progress and trend
of robot odor source localization,” IEEJ Trans. on Electrical
and Electronic Eng., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 938–953, 2021.
[190] L. Zhang, J. J. Abbott, L. Dong, K. E. Peyer, B. E. Kratochvil,
H. Zhang, C. Bergeles, and B. J. Nelson, “Characterizing
the swimming properties of artiﬁcial bacterial ﬂagella,” Nano
Letters, vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 3663–3667, 2009.

[191] J. Chen and U. Mitra, “Unimodality-constrained matrix factor-
ization for non-parametric source localization,” IEEE Trans. on
Sig. Process., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 2371–2386, 2019.

[192] S. Yu, Y. Cai, Z. Wu, and Q. He, “Recent progress on motion

