Cyber Security Threat Awareness Framework for 
High School Students in Qatar 

Mohammed Al-Tajer 
Network and Cybersecurity Dept. Community College of Qatar. altajer0043@ccq.edu.qa 
Richard Adeyemi Ikuesan 
Network and Cybersecurity Dept. Community College of Qatar. richard.ikuesan@ccq.edu.qa 

Abstract—Cyber  security  is  considered  a  necessity  for 
anyone in today’s modern world. Awareness  of cyber security 
standards  and  best  practices  have  become  mandatory  to 
safeguard one’s child in this day and age. High schoolers today 
do  not  understand  cyber  security  threats  due  to  the  lack  of 
parental  involvement  or  the  lack  of  educational  material  and 
courses in high school. This study developed a framework that 
addresses  the  lack  of  cybersecurity  awareness  for  high  school 
students.  The  proposed  framework  gives  a  flow  of  steps  to 
provide  effective  awareness  approaches  for  k-12.  This  was 
achieved  using  an  approach  of  creating  a 
functional 
operational  framework  that  consists  of  four  phases  which  are 
Threats  and  Attacks  Identification,  Existing  Awareness 
Discovery,  Creating  Awareness  Approach,  and  Awareness 
Approach  Evaluation.  The  output  resulted  in  a  cybersecurity 
awareness approach specifically for  the k-12 age range, which 
leverages  cybersecurity  emojis.  Thus,  by  exploring  this 
lure 
approach,  the  security  community  can  enroll  and 
teenagers  into  cybersecurity  and  raise  the  degree  of  security 
awareness. 

Keywords—k-12  Cyber-awareness  strategy,  Cybersecurity 
Education,  Awareness  framework,  Cybersecurity  Awareness 
approaches, Threat Awareness Framework. 

I. 

INTRODUCTION  

Cybersecurity  is  an  area  that  is  not  well  known  to  the 
majority,  however  lately  it  became  important  to  individuals 
as  a  personal  and  a  national  security  issue.  In  general, 
cybersecurity  includes  everything  that  relates  to  protecting 
our  personal  information,  data,  and  systems  from  theft  and 
damage  attempted  by  criminals  and  attackers.  Today,  it 
become  harder  to  follow  and  control  security  because  of 
technological  evolution  however,  ensuring  security  become 
essential  since  the  way  of  our  living  requires  relying  on 
technology use. Where cyber technology has been expanded 
and  critically  involved  in  many  different  sectors  such  as 
educational, medical, governmental, and more. As the usage 
of  internet  technology  today  becomes  inevitable,  teenagers 
find  themselves  exploring  the  world  as  an  adventure  that 
takes them ether to what they want to know about or facing a 
risk  situation  that  could  harm.  Moreover,  education  on 
information  technology  is  a  must  since  our  next-generation 
life  will depend on  it  without  a doubt.  Moreover, education 
institution  is  involved  in  this  subject  where  high  schools 
offer  the  students  fundamental  courses  in  information 
technology  which  is  good  but,  unfortunately,  they  usually 
ignore the security courses. This is a critical fault that results 
in  a  lack  of  cybersecurity  awareness  for  people.  When 
students  learn  how  to  be  secure  and  why  they  can  make  a 
positive critical impact on society. Thus, high schools should 
have a cybersecurity awareness program. 

II.  PROBLEM SETTING 

The lack of cybersecurity awareness programs become a 
critical factor that reflects problems in our future. According 

technology  requirement  has 

to  S.  Al-Janabi  and  I.  Al-Shourbaji  research,  Educational 
institutions  rely  on  computer  networks  and  technologies  to 
offer  their  learners  college  news,  events,  E  mails,  classes, 
academic  calendars,  marks,  and  other  personal  information 
saved on their computer systems. Hence, these systems must 
be  secure  against  many  threats  that  might  be  involved  such 
as malware, adware, worms, Trojan horse, and phishing [5]. 
Today  our 
increased  and 
cybersecurity became critically needed in most sectors in the 
country. 
  The  problem  is  that  our  education  toward 
information  technology  in  high  school  is  missing  a  critical 
to 
factor  which  is  cybersecurity  awareness.  Referring 
research  by  G.  Javidi,  One  of  the  weaknesses  in  the  K-12 
learning process  is  that  students  are educated  to use  several 
technologies,  however,  they  are  not  instituted  to  the  threats 
they  face while using  them  [2]. Internationally,  there  seems 
to  be  a  lack  of  cyber  security  and  safety  awareness 
knowledge in most high schools’ curricula. This observation 
is largely applicable in the context of Qatar, as well. Whilst 
there  seems  to  be  a  constant  and  speedy  adoption  of 
living.  Both  next 
technology-assisted  education  and 
generation and current high school students are the following 
human  resources  that  the  country  is  going  to  rely  on 
tomorrow  within  the  information  technology  infrastructure. 
According  to  research  by  Ebert,  the  students  must  realize 
how  to  pass  through  an  age-diverse  society.  Understanding 
that  education  should  be  extended  further 
the 
educational institution and the immediate context [6]. 

than 

III.  LITERATURES REVIEWED  

To cover this study and ensure the accuracy of the search, 
using other literature is a valuable key to gaining knowledge 
about  the  problem.  Moreover,  this  literature  helped  to  trace 
the  cybersecurity  awareness  trends  and  existing  solutions 
such as cybersecurity awareness frameworks, which are both 
related  to  the  k-12  technological  environment.  An  example 
of selected works of literature that have been reviewed is the 
existing approaches to delivering cybersecurity awareness to 
students  and  the  result  of  effectiveness  they  make.  These 
different  types  of  methodologies  found  have  strengths  and 
weaknesses.  Works  of  literature  highlighted  those  cyber 
threats  to  k-12  as  a  result  of  the  ignorance  of  cybersecurity 
education in schools and the lack of providing awareness to 
students.  thus,  understanding  their  points  of  view  and  their 
proposed  solutions  is  essential  to  highlight  the  matters  and 
create  a  way  to  enhance  cybersecurity  awareness  delivery 
methods.  

IV.  METHODOLOGY  

Along with the increased use of technology for tutoring, 
studying  and  ongoing  school  operations  in  today’s  long 
distant  studying  which 
the  “Remote 
Environment”,  schools  become  vulnerable  to  threats  and 
attacks. Furthermore, schools or educational institutions face 

is  known  as 

a  variety  of  challenging  hazards  and  threats.  In  addition  to 
natural  risks,  technological  hazards,  and  biological  risks, 
they  need  to  prepare  for  human-initiated  cyber  threats  and 
attacks.  These  incidents  can  be  unintentional  or  intentional, 
also  it  interrupts  education  and  essential  processes  of 
education. The exposed confidential information of students, 
instructors, and employees can be obtained and lead to a high 
level of negative impact. 

The  research  must  show  an  effective  approach  when  it 
comes to awareness programs. As a way to achieve this aim, 
there  should  be  an  operational  framework  that  guides 
accurate results. The operational framework will result in an 
effective  awareness  program  framework.  This  research  will 
study  the  case  by  gathering  accurate  existing  information 
from other pieces of literature. 

The operational framework consists of four phases as you 
can  see  in  the  next  figure,  these  phases  are  created  to 
measure available methods that are used for awareness in k-
12. As a result, it should give a proper formulate awareness 
framework at the end.  

Figure 1. The operational framework. 

A. Threats and Attacks Identification Phase 

Starting  with  collecting  information  to  come  up  with  a 
database of threats and attacks that are common against k-12. 
This database will be categorized and organized in a form of 
tables that show each finding in an understandable style. The 
table category starts with differentiating the type of the risk, 
is it an attack or threat. As we know the attack means that the 
risk  is  already  compromised  and  made  an  impact,  on  the 
other hand,  the  threat  means  that  the  risk  didn’t happen yet 
but  there  is  a  chance  to  get  harmed  if  it  is  ignored.  Then, 
there  will be  an indicators  section, which gives  information 
about  the  type  of  the  risk  for  example  is  it  phishing,  social 
engineering  activity,  and  so  on.  Also,  there  will  be  a  clear 
description of these attacks and threats. Lastly, there will be 
an  implication  or  effect  section  that  gives  the  measurement 
of the impact of these attacks and threats.  

B. Existing Awareness Discovery Phase 

effective 

identifying 

approaches 

After creating the database of attacks and threats that are 
commonly involved with k-12, there will be a minimization 
in  the  scop,  which  leads  to  creating  another  database  for 
awareness  approaches.  Phase  two  will  focus  on  finding  the 
best  existing  awareness  approaches  in  the  other  research, 
especially the awareness for k-12 ages. Phase two starts with 
identifying  the  effective  approaches  to  creating  awareness, 
which  means  a  determination  of  what  technique  is  used. 
Then, 
creating 
cybersecurity  awareness  also  from  other  studies.  Lastly, 
building  a  database  based  on  the  information  that  has  been 
extracted  can  also  allow  forensic  investigation  of  databases 
[25-43].  At  the  end  of  this  phase,  we  will  have  a  database 
that  is  categorized  and  organized  in  a  form  of  tables  that 
show  each  finding  in  an  understandable  style.  The  table 
category  starts  with  the  awareness  approach,  which  is  the 
type of method used to deliver the message of awareness, for 
example, academic posters, videos,  or maybe a  game-based 
awareness.  The  table  will  also  address  the  source  of  the 
information such as the author and the year. Moreover, there 
will  be  a  description  that  gives  an  explanation  and  identify 
the approaches used.     

to 

C. Creating Awareness Approach Phase 

Based on both databases that we will have at the end of 
phases one and two, phase three will start with developing an 
awareness mechanism. At this stage, there will be a clearance 
of  effectivity  awareness  approaches  and  pretty  good 
knowledge of  the  scope  of attacks  and  threats  against  k-12. 
That  allows for  the  allocation  of  the  best  fit mechanism  for 
developing  awareness.  The  second  step  in  this  phase  is 
developing  a  method  of  evaluating  the  mechanism  that  we 
will make and see the best awareness effectiveness. 

D. Awareness Approach Evaluation Phase 

This  phase  will  continue  the  process  of  phase  three,  it 
starts with questioning after evaluating if the method that we 
developed is effective or not. If not, then we  get to step one 
at  phase  three  to  redevelop  another  awareness  mechanism 
and do the same process again. If the answer to the question 
is yes, then the mechanism will be entered the framework of 
awareness as formulated awareness result. 

This  operational  framework  will  be  used  to  ensure 
developing the cybersecurity threat awareness framework for 
high school students is on reliable research information from 
other  studies.  Moreover,  the  four  phases  in  the  operational 
framework have been designed to give accurate results and a 
well-guided  process.  Thus,  the  estimated  result  for  this 
project  should  give  reliable  and  robust  results  for  the 
cybersecurity  threat  awareness  framework  for  high  school 
students. 

V.  RESULT AND ANALYSIS  
Teenagers  are  using  technology  and  the  internet  for  a 
long time. Moreover, it is difficult to tell what the deviating 
line  is  between  being  secure  or  at  risk.  This  aalso  includes 
the  way  to  control  the  use  and  overuse  of  technology. 
Frequently,  it  looks  like  teenagers’  lives  are  about  their 
devices  and  technology,  starting  with  social  media  phones, 
games,  and  other  types  of  technology.  Technology  is 
gradually developing, being  an  important component of our 
lives. As the k-12 needed to have great boundaries and rules 
in  offline  actions,  and  the  guidance  and  principles  to  make 
good  choices,  they  also  require  having  awareness  about 
cybersecurity, to protect them being online. 

 
 
threats  happen 

A  cybersecurity  awareness  program  is  vital  because 
cyber 
in  our  constantly  connected 
environments.  Technology  never  stops  evolving  and  where 
every day there will be a new challenge whether it is a new 
technology  that  can  benefit  the  community  or  a  threat  that 
could  harm  the  community.  Education  is  responsible  for 
having technology, and also it provides an improvement that 
leads  to  evolution  in  technology.  This  relation  between 
technology  and  education  has  an  essential  common  factor 
which is the student. The main source of development is the 
qualified  individual  because  in  the  future  the  decision-
making  should  be  taken  by  an  individual  with  appropriate 
knowledge.  In  another  word,  today's  students  are  the  future 
decision-makers,  they  are  going  to  lead  the  evolution  of 
technology  next.  Moreover,  they  are  going  to  combat 
technology threats  as  the  first  line  of  defense. Thus,  we  are 
to  provide  a  proper  cybersecurity  awareness 
required 
approach  to  light  students’  future  and  enforce  a  sense  of 
security in them.  

The  finding  was  that  cybersecurity  awareness  has  been 
experienced  with  k-12  students  in  different  kinds  of 
approaches. As result, each approach that has been used was 
almost  successful  to  deliver  the  message  of  awareness.  The 
approaches  are  used  to  give  awareness,  especially  to 
students, and try to fix the ignorance issue of cybersecurity in 
schools'  curricula.  The  first  approach  is  the  Conventional 
Delivery  Method,  which  is  about  using  both  electronic  and 
paper  resources  to  deliver  a  message  of  cybersecurity 
alerting to the students, for example, posters which they use 
in  cafeterias  to  grab  students'  attention  since  it’s  the  place 
where all student gather[19]. These posters contain a style of 
using  slogans  on  related  topics  which  attract  audiences  an 
example of these topics was a reminder of the importance of 
not  sharing  personal  passwords  [19].  This  approach  is 
effective  to  audiences  only  if  the  content  is  knitted  and 
elaborate  well.  Teenagers  did  not  have  an  interest  in 
everything  that  is hung on  the  wall unless  the  content lures 
them  and  attracts  their  attention.  The  second  approach  is 
using educational videos as a method of awareness delivery. 
As  a  result  that  has  been  found  from  a  literature  review, 
videos  are  very  excellent 
tools  used  for  persuasion. 
Cybersecurity  isn’t  just  about  theoretical  knowledge  that 
involves between a book lines to read, but it has a technical 
and  graphical  role  that  should  be  introduced  to  the  learner. 
The literature review addressed that London Digital Security 
Centre (LDSC)  used  to give educational videos  as  a  tool  to 
produce cybersecurity awareness understanding, their videos 
handle  essential  areas  in  cybersecurity  such  as  personal 
information  &  its  appropriate  treatment,  Phishing  attacks, 
social engineering attempts, and self-protection using bring-
your-own-device  “BYOD”  and  social  media  [20].  Videos 
simulate reality and give good experience time; it encourages 
and boosts student engagement with the proposed topics. The 
third approach that has been used to deliver awareness to k-
12  is  a  game  development  learning  model  to  simulate 
cybersecurity  activities.  According  to  a  literature  review 
[11],  GenCyber  Summer  Camp  provided  a  game-based 
learning  approach  that  focuses  on  three  goals  for  the 
teenager’s education and cybersecurity: 

1-  They aimed to rise the student interest in cybersecurity. 

2-  They  aimed  to  increase  the  general  awareness  of 
cybersecurity  and  support  all  teenagers  to  realize  and 
understand appropriate and safe online behavior. 

3-  They aimed to increase the diversity of the cybersecurity 
workforce in the country. 

is  game-based 

These  three  goals  can  be  reached  with  their  approach 
which 
In  general,  students 
learning. 
experience  greater  understanding  if  they  are  provided  with 
opportunities  to  actively  participate  in  classroom  activities 
that  boost  the  growth  of  critical  thinking  and  problem-
solving  skills.  The  fourth  approach  which  can  deliver 
cybersecurity  awareness  to  k-12  is  the  school  curriculum. 
According to the literature review, many kinds of curriculum 
proposals  have  been  offered  to  address  cybersecurity. 
However,  the  issue  is  that  these  curriculums  focus  only  on 
one  aspect  which  cannot  provide  a  full  picture  of 
cybersecurity  to  the  students.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
approach 
is  giving 
is  providing  a  solution  which 
cybersecurity discipline as a subject to teach at school, and it 
requires  that  students  must  learn  the  principles  of  STEM 
(Sciences,  Technology,  Engineering,  and  Mathematics)  and 
it 
thinking, 
technical,  and  problem-solving  skills  [21].  Along  with  that 
approach,  k-12  students  are  going  to  cover  cybersecurity 
areas earlier and before the College level which means their 
awareness of cyber risk will not be a concern. 

improve  students  critical 

is  necessary 

to 

Table 1: Summary of existent cybersecurity awareness approaches. 

Awareness 
Approach 

Existing Cybersecurity Awareness Approaches 

Cyber-Oriented 
Approach 

Description (identify, if possible, 
supportive theories) 

Using posters on school walls is 
common, and it is an effective 
method to announce a topic. They 
are usually used and displayed in 
places where people gather around 
for example meeting rooms and 
canteens. Posters can be used to 
emphasize time-sensitive matters 
and give a reminder to individuals 
about the incredibly specific 
actions that they can take to 
enhance the education institution's 
security posture [19]. 
The London Digital Security has 
made 
educational videos accessible on 
its member website and delivered 
cybersecurity awareness topics 
such as: 
- Personal information and its 
appropriate treatment. 
- Phishing attacks. 
- Social engineering attempts. 
- How to be protected using bring-
your-own-device “BYOD” and 
social media [20]. 

GenCyber Summer Camp is used 
to develop cybersecurity games as 
a learning model to simulate 
cybersecurity activities and makes 
students attracted more. The main 
goal of their project is to raise an 
awareness of cybersecurity that 
lead to secure online behavior of 
high school students. 

The authors recommended content 
and skill sets that must be added to 
a cybersecurity curriculum. 

Posters 

Conventional 
delivery methods 
(J. Abawajy) [1] 

Videos 

The London 
Digital Security 
Centre (LDSC) 
2015-2017. 

GenCyber 
Summer Camps 
1-3D Social 
Engineering 
Game. 
2-Development of 
Cyber Defense 
Tower Game in 
Unity3D 
3-Single-player 
GenCyber Card 
Game[11]. 
Cybersecurity 
Curriculum 

Games 

Cyber-
security- 
curriculum 

The cybersecurity awareness approach for k-12 should be 
developed  based  on  categorizing  possible  threats.  Since 

 
 
 
Known threats in the K-12 age range. 

Indicators 

Description/Definition/Ill
ustration 

Implication/Effect 

cybersecurity  awareness  approaches  are  demanded  in  k-12, 
there  should  be  an  understanding  of  risks  involved  in 
cyberspace and what type of threats are they. For that reason, 
the  search  concentrated  on  cyber  threats  that  are  associated 
with K-12 students only. As result, many pieces of literature 
give a variety of threats that involve in k-12, however, there 
are common threats mentioned which are the most critical in 
priority. Thus, developing a database is essential and it is an 
accurate  method  to  gather  and  categorize  k-12  threats' 
priorities and implications.  

Table 2: Summary of Known threats in the K-12 age range. 

Known threats in the K-12 age range. 

Indicators 

Description/Definition/Ill
ustration 

Implication/Effect 

Email Usage 

Cyberbullyin
g 

Sexting 

DATA 
Breach 

Phishing is a technique 
used by the attacker to 
scam the victim to reveal 
personal information, or 
makes the victim click a 
link to install malicious 
software such as trojan, 
spyware, and more. 

Harmful bullying 
activity or behavior that 
targets victims on the 
internet platforms. 
Mostly found on social 
media platforms. It 
comes in different forms 
which can include 
sending rumors, 
broadcasting sexual 
statements, using to gain 
a victim's personal 
information or pejorative 
labels 

This method is used to 
send sexual content such 
as messages, videos, or 
pictures by using a 
digital device. It can be a 
cellphone, computer, or 
any kind of 
technological device. 
Sexting is about shearing 
nudity and sex acts. 

It is an incident that 
might be caused when 
the data is obtained from 
the institution systems 
without the authorization 
order from the 
administrator. It’s also a 
process of security 
violation that reaches the 
loss of confidential data.  

-Phishing attacks might be the 
cause of several data 
breaches. 

Physical 
Security 

-Reputation and trust can be 
negatively impacted, and the 
surrounding school's 
reputation about the breach 
can damage the education 
institution. 
-Threats to Individual 
security: cyberbullying 
happen when the attacker 
usefully made a social 
engineering attack. 
Cyberbullying might lead to 
unfortunate actions, for 
example, suicide, and self-
harm. 

-Students, instructors, and 
management employees 
might be threatened and 
abused to the attacker's 
orders, where the attacker 
might hold a piece of 
information that is sensitive.    
-This could result in a high 
level of concern for the 
teenager or the students, 
which can reach the level of 
habituation to unhealthy 
behavior such as self-
harming, isolating 
themselves, and makes them 
restricted their food 
consumption. 

-Moral and ethical impact, 
sexting might create a bad 
cultural habit where teenagers 
become bold in 
communication and use bad 
online behavior such as 
insulting, sharing nudity 
content, or harming someone 
for entertainment.   
-A data breach happens when 
the attacker gains control or 
access to the system to reach 
the data which could be 
sensitive, protected, or 
confidential data. The purpose 
form this attack might be to 
copy, broadcast, view, steal, 
change or use this data by an 
unauthorized person.  

-Students can monopolize 
their grading and evaluation. 

social 
engineering 

IOT 
(Internet of 
Things) 
vulnerability 

Physical security is 
designed based on 
measurements that serve 
the purpose of 
accessibility. avoid and 
prevent unauthorized 
physical access from 
happening. Unauthorized 
access is would be 
denied to the institution's 
facilities, and resources, 
and there will be 
protection for individuals 
and property from 
damage or harm.   

physical security is about 
multiple layers of 
different systems. for 
example, there will be 
CCTV surveillance, 
isolated and locked 
rooms, security guards, 
incident protection, and 
other systems used to 
protect people and 
property.   
It is a manipulation 
method that depends on 
exploiting human error 
or human vulnerability 
seeking crime 
advantages such as gain 
information, access, or 
valuables. social 
engineering also called 
"human hacking" usually 
starts fraud the victims 
by luring them into 
revealing important data, 
installing malware that 
infects the system, or 
having access to 
protected system 
privilege.   

IoT devices are 
hardware-based items 
that contain a sensor that 
is responsible to transmit 
data from one place to 
another using the 
internet. IoT devices, for 
example, can be security 
cameras for the 
institution and it can be 
other devices that may 
be student or teacher 
owned such as tablets, 
laptops, or maybe cloud-
based voice service 
devices. These devices 
might be having lack 
security or are not 
updated. 

-Important documents might 
be leaked for example exams 
and quizzes can be obtained. 

Without physical security in 
the organization there will be 
a critical negative impact: 
-Attackers will have direct 
access to the resources and 
equipment which allow them 
to steal equipment and data, 
change information, or 
destroy the organization.  

-Natural disasters can impact 
the organizational system if 
there isn’t physical security, 
this threat is caused by the 
environment such as earth 
quick, water flooding, fire, 
and heat. The placement of 
physical security must be 
designed based on future 
threat possibilities.      

Many forms can represent 
social engineering threats and 
unfortunately, these threats 
cannot be denied if the 
individual did not have 
awareness. Social engineering 
is a way for the attacker to 
gain access to control for the 
system which results in 
information change and 
manipulation, extracting and 
sharing privet sensitive 
information, or it might lead 
to cyberbullying activities.  

When information is posted 
on the internet it will be 
shared and stay available to 
anyone to see it or use it.  

-Hackers will take advantage 
to break into the system and 
steal the data. With IoT 
devices that lack security, 
hackers can easily find 
information from users' daily 
live and use it. 

-Also, the institution or the 
organization might misuse the 
user information for example 
tracing the user location, 
access to the user contact list, 
or maybe gathering sensitive 
personal media files such as 
pictures, videos, and others.  

The information that is 
collected and stored by IoT, 
can be immensely beneficial 
to companies. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Known Targeted at K-12 Age Range 

Indicators 

Description/Definition/Illustra
tion 
pay.  Schools  have  several 
cases 
in  that  parents  and 
students  face  this  kind  of 
experience [2].   

in 

With 

the 
the  cybersecurity  awareness  shortage 
education  institutions, k-12 became  victims  of  cyberattacks. 
According to  many  literature reviews  that highlighted  types 
and cases that show students suffering because of the lack of 
security.  Sadly,  the  lack  of  awareness  of  cybersecurity  in 
schools  allows  threats  to  become  an  attack.  Specifically,  in 
schools, the level of risk is very high, and it is also common 
knowledge  that  the  education  sector  has a major  role in  the 
country's 
foundation. 
Cyberattacks  make  a  critical  impact  on  the  individual  and 
society,  it  harms  and  destroys  like  any  other  crime. 
Moreover, cyberattacks have many forms and methods used 
and  spicily  in  schools,  there  are  levels  and  priorities  to 
classify cyberattacks. Thus, developing a database is critical 
to categorize cyberattacks against k-12. 

infrastructure 

citizens' 

and 

Schools and students are vulnerable to different kinds of 
attacks, also works of literature highlighted the most relevant 
cyberattacks the search requires to prioritize cyberattacks on 
k-12.  Five  critical  attacks  impact  and  affect  schools  and 
students, and that is because there is a lack of cybersecurity 
awareness in that area.   

Trojan Attack 

Table 3: Summary of Known targeted at K-12 age range. 
Known Targeted at K-12 Age Range 

Indicators 

Phishing 
email 

Ransomware 

such 

credit 

answers. 

Description/Definition/Illustra
tion 
This  attack  is  used  to  make 
the  victim  reveal  his  privet 
as 
information 
password, 
card 
number,  or  even  security 
question 
The 
method used emails as a tool 
and 
communication 
of 
always  shows  that  the  email 
is  legitimate  but  the  truth  is 
fraud.  The  process  to  initiate 
phishing is usually by emails 
where  the  attacker  sends  a 
link  that  execute  malicious 
programs 
the 
victim clicks on it.  

the  moment 

Forms of phishing attacks: 

asking 

-  Deceptive  –  fake  emails 
legitimate-looking 
from 
enterprises 
the 
receiver  to  verify  his  ac- 
count and give them personal 
details 
-  Spear  -  like  the  deceptive 
except  with 
the  personal 
information  the  spear  email 
shows  the  victim's  position, 
name, etc. to make the email 
seem more authentic. 

program 
the  data  on 
hardware 

This  attack  uses  a  specific 
that 
malicious 
the 
encrypts 
victim's 
for 
example  the  storage  in  the 
computer  such  as  the  hard 
drive, 
attacker 
demands  an  exchange  for 
decrypting  the  data  back.  In 
some  cases, 
the  attacker 
starts  threatening  the  victim 
to  share  the  data  with  the 
public if the victim refuses to 

then 

the 

Distributed 
Denial-Of-
Service 
(DDoS) 

Password 
attacks 

Implication/Effect 

-The  attack  will  cause  a 
losing system or account 
control  if  the  attacker 
succeeded  in  collecting 
sensitive 
information 
from  the  victim or  made 
the  victim 
install  and 
execute 
the  malicious 
software which gives the 
privilege  to  the  attacker 
to control the system as a 
legitimate user.   

or 
-Blackmailing 
cyberbullying  can  be 
happening if the attacker 
has privet information or 
data  about  the  user  that 
can use to threaten.  

-Installing  spyware 
to 
the  victim's  machine  to 
spy on his activity. 

and 
-Blackmailing 
staging 
victim 
the 
“students  &  parents” 
where 
attacker 
the 
demands things could be 
financial, 
unethical 
behavior,  or  committing 
the crime. 
-Data loose, in case of 
disagreement between 
the attacker and the 
victim, that will be 
encrypted, and the user 

Implication/Effect 

will be prevented to use 
his data. 

After  installing  a  trojan, 
serval 
will 
effects 
happen to the victim.  
-The  performance  of  the 
impacted devices such as 
cellphones,  tablets,  and 
the  computer  will  be 
reduced  and  reach 
to 
limit,  for  example,  the 
recourses  of  a  computer 
such  as  RAM  (random 
access  memory)   will  be 
consumed 
the 
computer  will  function 
slowly.  

so 

-The  system  &  the  data 
can  easily  compromise 
since  the  trojan  allow 
to 
unauthorized  users 
access 
the 
through 
system backdoor. 

-Data can be modified, 
deleted, copied, and 
blocked so there will be 
no integrity 

The system or the 
network will be down. 
All data and recourses 
will not reachable. 
Process and work time 
will be delayed. 

Without physical 
security in the 
organization there will 
be a critical negative 
impact: 
-Attackers will have 
direct access to the 
resources and equipment 
which allow The attacker 
will gain access to the 
system as a legitimate 
privilege allowing him to 
control everything. 

as 

A  trojan  attack  is  a  malware 
program  disguised 
a 
legitimate program.  It  allows 
attackers  to  have  access  to 
the  victim  system  when  the 
Trojan  has  already  been 
installed.  Usually, 
users 
install  the  Trojan  after  social 
engineering  event  that  lures 
them to execute it.  Once the 
successfully 
Trojan 
installed, the attacker has full 
control to practice authorized 
actions. 

is 

These actions can be: 

1-  Deleting 

or 

Modifying data 

2-  Blocking data 
3-  Copying data 

Disrupting the performance 
of computers or computer 
networks. 

Distributed  denial-of-service 
is an improved type of denial 
of services, the idea behind it 
is  the  same.  The  attack  is 
starting  by  sending  a  huge 
number  of  requests  to  flood 
the network bandwidth or the 
targeted  server  resources  to 
reach the limit resulting in to 
freeze  or  shutdown  system. 
The  DDoS  is  using  multiple 
systems to initiate the attack; 
however, 
denial-of-
the 
service uses one system only.  

A  third  party  attempting  to 
get  access  to  systems  by 
breaking a user's password.  

This  attack  can  perform  in 
multiple ways: 

-Dictionary  attack:  cracking 
into  a  password-protected 
device 
systematically 
inserting  each  word  from  a 
dictionary as a password. 

by 

force:  depend  on 
-Brute 
predicting 
possible 
combinations  of  a  targeted 
the  correct 
password 
password is found. 

till 

-Key  logger  attack  is  a  way 
of  monitoring  a  program 
intended to record keystrokes 
that the user hit. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
A.  Proposed Cyber Awareness Framework 

After  understanding  the  existing  issues  with  k-12,  the 
threats,  and  attacks  that  involve  in  their  environment,  and 
what  are  the  approaches  that  have  been  used  to  deliver 
awareness.  Both  databases  have  been  gathered  and 
categorized  and  lead  to  propose  cybersecurity  awareness 
framework as shown in the next figure 

 Figure 2 The Proposed Cyber Awareness Framework 

B.  Evaluation of the Proposed Framework 

The  framework  goal  is  to  provide  effective  approaches 
that  can  successfully  deliver  cybersecurity  awareness  and 
especially to k-12.  Moreover, the framework has processes 
that  are  connected,  giving  the  step-by-step  order  to  achieve 
the proper awareness approach.   

is 

technology 

Starting, the  first process is  to  identify trending areas of 
technology utilization among k-12 students. In this phase, we 
must highlight the kind of technology that k-12 have and use. 
Each  technology  has  benefits  and  shortcomings,  depending 
on the individual who uses it and for what reason he/she uses 
it.  Moreover,  the  technology  type  makes  an  important  role, 
which can give the scope range for providing the awareness 
approach.  Understanding 
trends  and  what 
individuals’  categories  are  involved  will  lead  to  knowing 
which  approach 
important  and  can  be  effective. 
Specifically, with cybersecurity awareness, since technology 
is  booming  the  awareness  approach  every  time  needs  to  be 
improved  or  changed.  An  example  of  a  trending  area  of 
technology  utilization  among  teenagers  is  the  cellphone,  in 
the  past,  they  just  use  it  to  play  offline  games,  however, 
nowadays they use  them to interact with strangers on social 
media,  play online,  and use  credit  cards  to purchase online. 
Then,  moving  to  the  second  process  which  is  exploring 
related  cyber  threats  and  susceptibility  in  a  k-12-centric 
digital  platform.  In  particular,  this  step  leads  to  making  a 
clear  understanding  of  what  is  the  message  that  the 
awareness  approach  should  deliver  because  knowing  the 
possible threats and the extent of susceptibility of impact will 

highlight  errors  and  critical  areas  in  which  the  approach 
should concentrate on solving them. As an example, students 
are using their emails to receive school announcements, and 
for  that  reason,  they  are  vulnerable  to  an  email  phishing 
attack, where they could be tricked by the sender who claims 
to be legitimate. The next process is developing k-12-centric 
memes  because  teenagers  are  different  than  adults  or  old 
people in how their mindset works. Their interest in things is 
different  which  the  approach  requires  to  lure  them  and  use 
their  interest  as  part  of  the  motivation  to  enroll  with  the 
awareness  approach.  As  far  as  we  know  that  teenagers  are 
the most interactive with memes, which it is about an idea or 
behavior  that  is  shared  from  one  individual  to  another. 
Examples  of  memes  involve  opinions,  fashions,  tales,  and 
catchphrases. This process can open a door toward different 
kinds of cybersecurity approaches that can deliver awareness 
to k-12  in  a way  they  are  attracted with passion. Therefore, 
developing  k-12  memes  as  cybersecurity  awareness 
mechanises could  be decided ether  to be  integrated  into  the 
approach or  it could  be used standalone.  Before proceeding 
to  develop  the  awareness  delivery  mechanism  phase,  there 
should be a decision to select the type of approach, integrated 
or standalone. The integrated approach is where merging the 
created  memes  with  another  method  used 
to  deliver 
knowledge, for example, emojis are used to express emotion 
through text messaging, teenagers are more interactive to use 
them  intext  rather  than  being  formal,  and  integrating 
cybersecurity  as  symbols  can  give  senses  and  awareness  to 
them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  standalone  approach  gives  a 
direct  awareness  delivery  message  to  an  audience,  for 
example,  animation  videos  could  be  used  to  show  a  direct 
procedure  of  how  to  be  secure  in  online  browsing.  After 
making  a  selection  between  integration  or  standalone,  there 
should be a mechanism to use. Mainly, the mechanism must 
be matching the tendencies of k-12, their attraction depends 
on how this method is used. Teenagers’ interests are the key 
factor to accepting awareness knowledge, the more fun they 
see,  the  more  accepting  they  have.  Examples  of  suggested 
approaches  mechanisms 
safety 
are 
videogames  which  can  simulate  real-world  incidents  event 
and put the player in a good experience, creating cyber safety 
emojis  that  lure  k-12  messaging  usage  into  awareness 
understanding,  creating  awareness by developing  awareness 
animation videos in series that provide a good experience to 
audiences,  and  developing  cybersecurity  awareness  posters 
which can be posted digitally or in public places in schools, 
it should influence security sense in k-12.  The next process 
in  the  framework  flow  is  evaluating  the  degree  of  potential 
effectiveness,  the  logic  of  this  process  is  to  be  testing  the 
implantation  of  the  selected  mechanism  used.  The  result 
should  show  if  this  method  of  awareness  made  a  positive 
change  to  k-12  awareness.  The  next  process  is  document 
observation,  which  keeps  a 
the  previous 
experimental processes used and produces a revision for each 
tested  mechanism.  Then,  start  the  development  approach 
process,  where  implementation  of  accurate  approaches 
becomes  tangible  not  only  an  evaluated  idea.  Following, 
deploying  awareness  solutions  to  the  chosen  approach, 
complies with the goal of the awareness campaign.  The last 
process, evaluate the awareness approach, at this stage, there 
should  be  effort  and  impact  extracted  from  the  proposed 
approach,  the  result  should  be  a  positive  effect  on  the  k-12 
sense in cybersecurity, and work together with awareness, so 

record  of 

creating 

cyber 

Identify Trending area of technology utilization among K-12 StudentsExplore related cyber threats and Susceptibility in K-12-centric digital platformDevelop K-12-centric memescreate cyber-safety gamescreate Cyber-safe animationscreate Cyber-safe emojiscreate cyber-safe posterscreate cyber-safe postersIntegrated ApproachStandalone ApproachEvaluate the Degree of Potential Effectiveness Document ObservationDeploy Awareness SolutionDevelop Deployment ApproachEvaluate Awareness Approachcarry-out revision where required 
we  can  evaluate  the  effectiveness  that  this  approach  is 
delivering,  otherwise  start  the  process  of  developing  the 
approach mechanism again.     

C.  Cyber Safety Emojis 

By  using  the  proposed  framework,  here  is  a  sample  of 
one approach that delivers cybersecurity awareness for the k-
12  age  range,  which  is  developing  cybercity  emojis.  After 
processing the proposed framework, we came up with emojis 
as  one  kind  of  cybersecurity  awareness  that  interest  k-12. 
Since  they  are  active  on  social  media  platforms  and 
communicate  with  others  using  texting  applications,  emojis 
can  be  an  effective  tool  that  reminds  and  aware  them  in  a 
manner  they  got  influenced.    An  example  of  the  proposed 
approach is emojis are shown in the next figures.  

Figure 3 Hacker Emoji 

      Figure 4 Social Engineering Emoji 

Figure 5 Password Cracking Emoji 

Cybersecurity  awareness  is  important  to  solve  the 
curriculum ignorance error in the education sector. To avoid 
cyber  risk  to  the  next  generation  of  k-12,  implanting 
frameworks  that  provide  accurate  cybersecurity  awareness 
approaches  to  give  a  clear  and  effective  impact.  As  we 
provide  the  proposed  framework  which  can  be  used  to 
produce  highly  effective  approaches  for  cyber  security 
awareness,  especially  in  the  k-12  age  range.  The  most 
important  factor  in  providing  a  cybersecurity  awareness 
approach  to  teenagers  is  to  deliver  it  to  them  in  a  way  that 
inspires and attracts their attention. Even if the idea is simple, 
it  will  make  a  major  change,  for  example  providing 

cybersecurity emojis between k-12 hands will influence them 
to  understand  security  and  wake  up  the  sense  to  be  secure. 
Also,  the  proposed  framework  aligns  with  the  existing 
comprehensive  framework  to  distribute  awareness  to  global 
society.  Thus,  an  effective  cyber  security  awareness 
approach can be obtained by using the marge of the proposed 
framework with the existing comprehensive framework.  

VI.  DISCUSSION  

A guide to cybersecurity awareness has been presented in 
the previous section, as a mechanism towards an appropriate 
approach  to  educate  k-12  ages  range  of  students  on  cyber 
safety  and  awareness.  The  result  is  positive  and  can  be 
adjusted and improved further. Unfortunately, the lack of k-
12  cybersecurity  awareness  is  not  a  new  problem,  and  in 
many  educational  institutions,  there  is  ignorance  of  this 
critical issue. Some articles mention this dilemma and try to 
provide  suggestions  and  solutions,  but  very  few  of  them 
understand  that  this  problem  requires  to  have  a  framework 
that  provides  accurate  awareness.  Cybersecurity  approaches 
are  the  key  factor  to  make  changes  to  k-12  mindset 
acceptance.  Besides,  they  can  introduce  k-12  students  to 
future  career  or  makes  them  desire  more  exploration  in  the 
cybersecurity  field.  The  proposed  framework  helps  to  find 
out  the  right  approach  to  develop  awareness,  every  day  the 
technology will expand and improve, so for the same reason 
awareness should be improved too [24-42].  

the  proof 

As  technology  is  booming  daily,  threats  and  attacks  are 
going to increase as result teenagers will be at risk. They are 
priorate  victims  of  cybercriminals  since  most  of  them  lack 
awareness.  As  other  studies  result,  education  methods  are 
deciding  future  results, 
that  education  and 
awareness,  reduce  cyber-threats  [24].  Cybersecurity  as  a 
subject  to  learn  requires  ethics  and  moral  quality.  Since 
cyberspace  is like  our real  world but  it is virtual.  However, 
we still can control it behind the screen, our commands and 
input to this virtual word result in either good or bad. If user 
ethics was corrupted, then our existence in this virtual world 
will  be  threatened.  According  to  the  study,  students  must 
have  an  appreciation of ethical issues, because in  the  future 
they  will  have  to  face  situations  that  let  them  decide  to 
choose  ethics  and  morality  over  desire  [25].  Given  the 
foregoing, the author of this paper notes that while there is a 
need  for  a  cybersecurity  framework  for  high  schools  in 
Qatar,  it  is  also  important  from  the  perspective  of  these 
frameworks to identify lasting solutions [43-56] that can also 
identify post response strategies for security incidents. 

VII.  CONCLUSION  

In  conclusion,  this  study  concentrates  on  the  lack  of  a 
cyber security awareness framework matters and explains the 
value of providing cybersecurity awareness approaches to k-
12.  Also,  the  study  provided  a  proposal  framework  that 
participates 
in  creating  solutions  about  cybersecurity 
awareness approaches that can be used for teenagers and k-
12  students  to  interest  them  for  a  secure  future.  The  study 
uses  to  have  a  methodology  of  how  the  framework  was 
developed,  by  gathering  information  from  other  works  of 
literature  such  as  cyber  awareness approaches used,  threats, 

 
 
 
 
and attacks on k-12 which are used to build databases. As A 
Result,  the  proposed  framework  provides  a  cybersecurity 
awareness approach that developed emojis that are related to 
cybersecurity. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  A. Tabassum, M. S. Mustafa, and S. A. Al Maadeed, “The need for a 
global  response  against  cybercrime:  Qatar  as  a  case  study,”  6th  Int. 
Symp.  Digit.  Forensic  Secur.  ISDFS  2018  -  Proceeding,  vol.  2018-
Janua, pp. 1–6, 2018, doi: 10.1109/ISDFS.2018.8355331. 

[2]  G.  Javidi,  “K-12  Cybersecurity  Education,  Research,  and  Outreach,” 

2018 IEEE Front. Educ. Conf., pp. 1–5, 2018. 

[3]  Monica  and  J.  Jiang,  “Teens,  social  media  &  technology,”  Pew  Res. 
Cent.  [Internet  Am.  Life  Proj.,  pp.  1–9,  2018,  [Online].  Available: 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2018/05/31/teens-social-media-
technology-
2018/?utm_source=pocket&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=poc
kethits. 

[4]  E. A. Makarova and E. L. Makarova, “Aggressive behavior in online 
games  and  cybervictimization  of  teenagers  and  adolescents,”  Int. 
Electron.  J.  Elem.  Educ.,  vol.  12,  no.  2,  pp.  157–165,  2019,  doi: 
10.26822/iejee.2019257663. 

[5]  S.  Al-Janabi  and  I.  Al-Shourbaji,  “A  Study  of  Cyber  Security 
Awareness  in  Educational  Environment  in  the  Middle  East,”  J.  Inf. 
Knowl. 
doi: 
15, 
Manag., 
10.1142/S0219649216500076. 

2016, 

vol. 

no. 

1, 

[6]  A.  R.  Ebert,  A.  Nehrkorn-Bailey,  A.  K.  Carney,  and  J.  H.  Patrick, 
“Best Practices for Educating the Next Generation to Work With Older 
Adults,” 
doi: 
Int. 
10.1177/0091415020937587. 

Aging 

2020, 

Hum. 

Dev., 

J. 

[7]  B.  Gardner,  What  Is  a  Security  Awareness  Program?  Elsevier  Inc., 

2014. 

[8]  T.  Hunt,  “Cyber  Security  Awareness  in  Higher  Education,”  Cent. 

Washingt. Univ., pp. 1–14, 2016. 

[9]  M.  Zwilling,  D.  Lesjak,  S.  Natek,  K.  Phusavat,  and  P. 
Anussornnitisarn,  “How  To  Deal  With  the  Awareness  of  Cyber 
Hazards and Security in ( Higher ) Education ?,” Thriving Futur. Educ. 
Ind.  Bus.  Soc.  Proc.  MakeLearn  TIIM  Int.  Conf.  2019,  pp.  433–439, 
2019. 

[10]  K.  Handeli  and  S.  A.  Robila,  “A  Cybersecurity  High  School 

Curriculum Course,” pp. 864–869, 2018. 

[11]  G.  Jin,  M.  Tu,  T.  H.  Kim,  J.  Heffron,  and  J.  White,  “Game  based 
cybersecurity  training  for  High  School  Students,”  SIGCSE  2018  - 
Proc. 49th ACM Tech. Symp. Comput. Sci. Educ., vol. 2018-Janua, pp. 
68–73, 2018, doi: 10.1145/3159450.3159591. 

[12]  N. A. Khan, S. N. Brohi, and N. Zaman, “Ten Deadly Cyber Security 
Threats Amid COVID-19 Pandemic,” TechRxiv Powered by IEEE, pp. 
1–6, 2020, doi: https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.12264722.v1. 

[13]  F.  Alotaibi,  S.  Furnell,  I.  Stengel,  and  M.  Papadaki,  “A  survey  of 
cyber-security  awareness  in  Saudi  Arabia,”  2016  11th  Int.  Conf. 
Internet Technol. Secur. Trans. ICITST 2016, pp. 154–158, 2017, doi: 
10.1109/ICITST.2016.7856687. 
for 

infrastructure 
cybersecurity,” Proc. Annu. ISA Anal. Div. Symp., vol. 535, pp. 9–25, 
2018. 

[14]  M.  Barrett,  “Framework 

improving  critical 

[15]  E. Kritzinger and B.  Von  Solms, “A framework  for cyber security  in 
Africa,” Innov. Vis. 2020 Sustain. growth, Entrep. Econ. Dev. - Proc. 
19th Int. Bus. Inf. Manag. Assoc. Conf., vol. 1, pp. 438–447, 2012, doi: 
10.5171/2012.322399. 

[16]  N.  Kortjan  and  R.  Von  Solms,  “A  conceptual  framework  for  cyber 
security  awareness  and  education  in  SA,”  South  African  Comput.  J., 
vol. 52, no. 52, pp. 29–41, 2014, doi: 10.18489/sacj.v52i0.201. 

[17]  G. Falloon, M. Hatzigianni, M. Bower, A. Forbes, and M. Stevenson, 
“Understanding K-12 STEM Education: a Framework for Developing 
STEM Literacy,” J. Sci. Educ. Technol., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 369–385, 
2020, doi: 10.1007/s10956-020-09823-x. 

[18]  G.  Javidi  and  E.  Sheybani,  “Design  and  development  of  a  modular 
K12 cybersecurity curriculum,” ASEE Annu. Conf. Expo. Conf. Proc., 
2019, doi: 10.18260/1-2--32591. 

[19]  J.  Abawajy,  “User  preference  of  cyber  security  awareness  delivery 
methods,” Behav. Inf. Technol., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 237–248, 2014, doi: 
10.1080/0144929X.2012.708787. 

[20]  M. Bada and J. R. C. Nurse, “Developing cybersecurity education and 
awareness  programmes  for  small-  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(SMEs),” Inf. Comput. Secur., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 393–410, 2019, doi: 
10.1108/ICS-07-2018-0080. 

[21]  D.  Mouheb,  S.  Abbas,  and  M.  Merabti,  Cybersecurity  Curriculum 
Design:  A  Survey,  vol.  11345  LNCS.  Springer  Berlin  Heidelberg, 
2019. 

[22]  S.  Fraud,  P.  Enterprise,  P.  Susceptibility,  and  R.  Report,  “Top  5 
[Online].  Available: 
Cybersecurity 

Schools,” 
Cybersecurity  Threats 
https://www.cosn.org/sites/default/files/Top 
Threats.pdf. 

for 

5 

[23]  A.  M.  Bossler,  The  Palgrave  Handbook  of  International  Cybercrime 

and Cyberdeviance. 2020. 

[24]  L.  Muniandy,  B.  Muniandy,  and  Z.  Samsudin,  “Cyber  Security 
Behaviour  among  Higher  Education  Students  in  Malaysia,”  J.  Inf. 
Assur.  Cybersecurity, 
doi: 
10.5171/2017.800299. 

1–13, 

2017, 

2017, 

vol. 

pp. 

[25]  J.  D.  Bustard,  “Improving  Student  Engagement  in  the  Study  of 
Professional Ethics: Concepts and an Example in Cyber Security,” Sci. 
Eng.  Ethics,  vol.  24,  no.  2,  pp.  683–698,  2018,  doi:  10.1007/s11948-
017-9904-4. [1] 

[26]  M.  Ali,  “Security  Analysis  of  Mobile  Health  Application  in  Qatar 
Course  Name :  Senior  Project  Course  Number :  ITCS  4380 
Instructure  Name :  Richard  Adeyemi  Ikuesan  Students  Name : 
Academic Year : Fall 2020-2021,” pp. 1–11, 2021. 

[27]  A.  R.  Ikuesan,  M.  Salleh,  H.  S.  Venter,  S.  A.  Razak,  and  S.  M. 
Furnell,  “A  heuristics  for  HTTP  traffic  identification  in  measuring 
user  dissimilarity,”  Human-Intelligent  Syst.  Integr.,  vol.  2,  no.  1–4, 
pp. 17–28, 2020, doi: 10.1007/s42454-020-00010-2. 

[28]  B.  Zawali,  R.  A.  Ikuesan,  V.  R.  Kebande,  S.  Furnell,  and  A.  A-
Dhaqm,  “Realising  a  Push  Button  Modality  for  Video-Based 
Forensics,”  Infrastructures,  vol.  6,  no.  4,  p.  54,  2021,  doi: 
10.3390/infrastructures6040054. 

[29]  A.  Al-Dhaqm,  S.  A.  Razak,  R.  A.  Ikuesan,  V.  R.  Kebande,  and  K. 
Siddique,  “A  review  of  mobile  forensic  investigation  process 
models,”  IEEE  Access,  vol.  8,  pp.  173359–173375,  2020,  doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3014615. 

[30]  D. Ellison, R. A. Ikuesan, and H. S. Venter, “Ontology for Reactive 
Techniques  in  Digital  Forensics,”  2019  IEEE  Conf.  Appl.  Inf.  Netw. 
doi: 
pp. 
Secur. 
10.1109/AINS47559.2019.8968696. 

83–88, 

2019, 

2019, 

AINS 

[31]  D.  Ellison,  A.  R.  Ikuesan,  and  H.  Venter,  “Description  Logics  and 
Axiom  Formation  for  a  Digital  Forensics  Ontology,”  in  European 
Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security, 2019, pp. 742--XIII. 
[32]  A.  Al-Dhaqm,  S.  A.  Razak,  K.  Siddique,  R.  A.  Ikuesan,  and  V.  R. 
Kebande,  “Towards  the  Development  of  an  Integrated  Incident 
Response  Model  for  Database  Forensic  Investigation  Field,”  IEEE 
Access, 
doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3008696. 

145018–145032, 

2020, 

vol. 

pp. 

8, 

[33]  I.  R.  Adeyemi,  S.  A.  Razak,  and  N.  A.  N.  Azhan,  “A  review  of 
current  research  in  network  forensic  analysis,”  Int.  J.  Digit.  Crime 
Forensics, 
doi: 
1, 
10.4018/jdcf.2013010101. 

1–26, 

2013, 

vol. 

no. 

pp. 

5, 

“Mapping  digital 

[34]  V. R. Kebande, S. O. Baror, R. M. Parizi, K. K. R. Choo, and H. S. 
requirement 
Venter, 
specification to an international standard,” Forensic Sci. Int. Reports, 
vol. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.fsir.2020.100137. 

September, 

application 

100137, 

forensic 

2020, 

no. 

2, 

p. 

[35]  S.  Khorashadizadeh,  A.  R.  Ikuesan, and  V. R.  Kebande,  Generic  5g 

infrastructure for iot ecosystem, vol. 1073. 2020 

[36]  V.  R.  Kebande,  N.  M.  Karie,  R.  A.  Ikuesan,  and  H.  S.  Venter, 
“Ontology‐driven perspective of CFRaaS,” WIREs Forensic Sci., vol. 
2, no. 5, pp. 1–18, 2020, doi: 10.1002/wfs2.1372. 

[37]  H.  Munkhondya,  A.  Ikuesan,  and  H.  Venter,  “Digital  forensic 
readiness  approach  for  potential  evidence  preservation  in  software-
defined  networks,”  in  14th  International  Conference  on  Cyber 
Warfare and Security, ICCWS 2019, 2019, pp. 268–276. 

[38]  V.  R.  Kebande,  I.  Kigwana,  H.  S.  Venter,  N.  M.  Karie,  and  R.  D. 
Wario, “CVSS Metric-Based Analysis, Classification and Assessment 
of  Computer  Network  Threats  and  Vulnerabilities,”  2018,  doi: 
10.1109/ICABCD.2018.8465420. 

[39]  N. M. Karie,  V.  R. Kebande,  R.  A.  Ikuesan, M.  Sookhak,  and  H.  S. 
Venter,  “Hardening  SAML  by  Integrating  SSO  and  Multi-Factor 
in  ACM  International 
Authentication  (MFA) 

the  Cloud,” 

in 

 
 
Conference  Proceeding  Series,  2020,  p. 
10.1145/3386723.3387875. 

In  Press,  doi: 

Cyber  Warf.  Secur.  ICCWS  2020,  no.  ii,  pp.  617–626,  2020,  doi: 
10.34190/ICCWS.20.056. 

[40]  J.  Abawajy,  “User  preference  of  cyber  security  awareness  delivery 
methods,”  Behav.  Inf.  Technol.,  vol.  33,  no.  3,  pp.  237–248,  2014, 
doi: 10.1080/0144929X.2012.708787. 

[41]  S.  Fraud,  P.  Enterprise,  P.  Susceptibility,  and  R.  Report,  “Top  5 

Cybersecurity Threats for Schools.”  

“Mapping  digital 

[42]  V. R. Kebande, S. O. Baror, R. M. Parizi, K. K. R. Choo, and H. S. 
Venter, 
requirement 
specification to an international standard,” Forensic Sci. Int. Reports, 
vol. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.fsir.2020.100137. 

September, 

application 

100137, 

forensic 

2020, 

no. 

2, 

p. 

[43]  H.  Munkhondya,  A.  R.  Ikuesan,  and  H.  S.  Venter,  “A  case  for  a 
dynamic approach to digital forensic readiness in an SDN platform,” 
in  Proceedings  of  the  15th  International  Conference  on  Cyber 
Warfare  and  Security,  ICCWS  2020,  2020,  pp.  584–593,  doi: 
10.34190/ICCWS.20.049. 

[44]  I.  R.  Adeyemi,  S.  A.  Razak,  and  N.  A.  N.  Azhan,  “A  Review  of 
Current Research in Network Forensic Analysis,” Int. J. Digit. Crime 
Forensics, 
doi: 
1, 
10.4018/jdcf.2013010101. 

1–26, 

2013, 

vol. 

no. 

pp. 

5, 

[45]  S.  O.  Baror,  H.  S.  Venter,  and  V.  R.  Kebande,  A  Framework  for 
Concurrent  Contact-Tracing  and  Digital  Evidence  Analysis  in 
Heterogeneous  Environments,  vol.  183.  Springer  International 
Publishing, 2021. 

[46]  V.  R.  Kebande,  “A  Novel  Cloud  Forensic  Readiness  Service  Model 
Available: 

by,” 
298, 
https://repository.up.ac.za/handle/2263/66140. 

[Online]. 

2017, 

p. 

[47]  S.  O.  Baror,  R.  A.  Ikuesan,  and  H.  S.  Venter,  “A  defined  digital 
forensic  criteria  for  cybercrime  reporting,”  Proc.  15th  Int.  Conf. 

[48]  I.  R.  Adeyemi  and  N.  B.  Ithnin,  “Users  Authentication  and  Privacy 

control of RFID Card,” 2012. 

[49]  V. R. Kebande and R. A. Ikuesan, “Virtual sensor forensics,” in ACM 
doi: 

Proceeding 

Series, 

2020. 

International  Conference 
10.1145/3415088.3415117. 

[50]  V.  R.  V.  R.  Kebande  et  al.,  “Active  Machine  Learning  Adversarial 
Attack  Detection  in  the  User  Feedback  Process,”  Forensic  Sci.  Int. 
Reports, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 36908–36923, 2020. 

[51]  V. R. Kebande, P. Mudau, R. A. Ikuesan, H. S. Venter, and K.-K. R. 
Choo,  “Holistic  Digital  Forensic  Readiness  Framework  for  IoT-
Enabled Organizations,” Forensic Sci. Int. Reports, p. 100117, 2020. 

[52]  R.  A. 

Ikuesan,  “Online  Psychographic  Model 

for 

Insider 

Identification,” Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 2016. 

[53]  A.  Al-Dhaqm,  S.  Razak,  R.  A.  Ikuesan,  V.  R.  Kebande,  and  S.  H. 
investigation 

Othman,  “Face  validation  of  database 
metamodel,” Infrastructures, vol. 6, no. 2, 2021. 

forensic 

[54]  A.  Al-Dhaqm,  S.  Razak,  K.  Siddique,  R.  A.  Ikuesan,  and  V.  R. 
Kebande,  “Towards  the  Development  of  an  Integrated  Incident 
Response  Model  for  Database  Forensic  Investigation  Field,”  IEEE 
Access, 2020. 

[55]  A. Al-Dhaqm, S. Razak, and S. H. Othman, “Model derivation system 
to  manage  database  forensic  investigation  domain  knowledge,”  in 
2018  IEEE  Conference  on  Application,  Information  and  Network 
Security (AINS), 2018, pp. 75–80. 

[56]  A.  Al-Dhaqm,  R.  A.  Ikuesan,  V.  R.  Kebande,  S.  Razak,  and  F.  M. 
in  Drone 

Ghabban,  “Research  Challenges  and  Opportunities 
Forensics Models,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 13, p. 1519, 2021. 

 
 
 
