An Overview of Cyber Threats, Attacks, and Countermeasures 
on the Primary Domains of Smart Cities 

Vasiliki Demertzi1, Stavros Demertzis2 and Konstantinos Demertzis3* 

1 Computer Science Department, School of Science International Hellenic University Kavala Campus, 65404 Kavala, Greece; vademer@teiemt.gr 
2  School  of  Spatial  Planning  and  Development  Faculty  of  Engineering,  Aristotle  University  of  Thessaloniki  54124  Thessaloniki,  Greece; 
demertzs@plandevel.auth.gr   
3 School of Science & Technology, Informatics Studies, Hellenic Open University, 26335 Patra, Greece; demertzis.konstantinos@ac.eap.gr 
*Correspondence: demertzis.konstantinos@ac.eap.gr   

Abstract:  A  smart  city  is  a  place  where  existing  facilities  and  services  are  enhanced  by  digital  technology  to  benefit  people  and 
companies. The most critical infrastructures in this city are interconnected. Increased data exchange across municipal domains aims 
to manage the essential assets, leading to more automation in city governance and optimization of the dynamic offered services. 
However, no clear guideline or standard exists for modeling these data flows. As a result, operators, municipalities, policymakers, 
manufacturers, solution providers, and vendors are forced to accept systems with limited scalability and varying needs. Nonetheless, 
it is critical to raise awareness about smart city cybersecurity and implement suitable measures to safeguard citizens' privacy and 
security because the cyber threats seem to be well-organized, diverse, and sophisticated. This study aims to present an overview of 
cyber threats, attacks, and countermeasures on the primary domains of smart cities (smart government, smart mobility, smart envi-
ronment, smart living, smart healthcare, smart economy, and smart people) to present information extracted from state-of-the-art to 
policymakers to perceive the critical situation and, at the same time, to be a valuable resource for the scientific community. 

Keywords: Smart City; Cyber Threats; Cyber Attacks; Smart Government; Smart Mobility; Smart Environment; Smart Living; Smart 
Healthcare; Smart Economy; Smart People; 

1. Introduction 

The smart city [1] is an ecosystem that offers various e-government services, ensuring the seamless access of par-
ticipating citizens to these services. At the same time, through an integrated analysis program of the information col-
lected, you promote the optimal use of available resources, the improvement of urban space, and its other administra-
tive services. A city can be considered smart when traditional infrastructure and investment in human resources sup-
port sustainable economic development and high quality of life based on ICT. In this spirit, a smart city can connect its 
built environment, which is also its natural capital, with society, businesses, and human resources to develop better 
services and infrastructure for its perpetual sustainability [2].   

As said, the role of ICT is to provide intelligent management tools that will unite and strengthen the networks of 
people, infrastructure, companies, and generally available resources with the aim of sustainable economic development, 
high quality of life, and general well-being for the vast majority of citizens. Therefore, a smart city is a city that tries to 
face and solve public issues with the help of technology but based on a participatory process between multiple stake-
holders, with prudent management of natural reseizures above all, through participatory action and active participation 
of citizens, preventing and many times eliminating social exclusion. Thus, smart cities ensure a networked urban soci-
ety, which enjoys the benefits of intelligent management of its affairs with minimal financial, administrative, and social 
costs [3].   

Here it is also important to mention that a city cannot be considered smart if useful, up-to-date, and essential data 
is not collected, allowing all city entities, from competent bodies to each citizen, to make smart decisions. Critical data 
offers convenience, economy, optimal services, and better and more thoughtful design in a sustainable scheme, where 
problems are not simply solved. Still, based on the stored historical data, their hidden knowledge can reveal trends, 
allowing relevant agencies to implement preventive policies to avoid complex situations. So, in addition to the direct 
benefit that any entity of the city may have, these essential data can also provide indirect benefits, as they can be used 
by academic institutions and research bodies in environmental, social, economic, or transport studies by companies for 
the appropriate adaptation of their products or services, as well as by non-profit and non-governmental organizations 
to carry out more effective work    [4]. 

 
 
 
 
2 

In the face of rising urbanization, city planners are turning to technology to alleviate many challenges in contem-
porary cities. Smart cities result from deeper technological integration into new or existing urban environments. Build-
ing a smart city aims to improve people's quality of life by leveraging technology to improve service efficiency and meet 
residents' needs. A smart city is a vision for urban development that aims to secure and integrate multiple information 
and  communication  technology  solutions  to  manage  a  city's  assets.  The  smart  city  is  concerned  with  how  the  city's 
"organism" functions as an integrated whole and survives in harsh environments. A city's energy, water [5], transpor-
tation, public health and safety, and other aspects as critical infrastructure run smoothly while providing a clean, eco-
nomical, and safe environment to live and work in [6]. 

In practice, these transformational impacts will result from the combination of three components of technology: 
low-cost logic controllers, millions of sensors attached to devices scattered around a city, and a network that links all of 
these nodes and allows real-time communication. Smart cities rely on networks to ensure the supply and delivery of 
the  functions. Such network connections will allow for  more effective  and efficient delivery of urban services. Also, 
these networks aim to present conservation opportunities, improve efficiencies, and, most importantly, enable coordi-
nation among city officials, infrastructure operators, public safety officials, and the general public [7]. 

Many urban areas, including energy supply, transportation systems, and telecommunications infrastructure, have 
started to include parts of a "smart grid" - or a network of linked sensors inside the city with many advantages. On the 
other hand, increased connection brings potentially severe cyber security concerns that have yet to be fully identified 
and managed [8]. 

Based on the above, information security is critical in intelligent cities for ensuring higher levels of confidentiality, 
availability, and integrity, as well as the stability required by national services and organizations to support sustainable 
and livable intelligent environments. Although smart cities are intended to boost productivity and efficiency, they may 
pose severe hazards to inhabitants and authorities if cyber security is not prioritized.   

For example, the growth of the Internet of Things (IoT) reveals new vulnerabilities for intruders and other hostile 
actors  to  exploit.  There  are  many  possible  vulnerabilities  and  techniques  with  billions  of  linked  'things'  installed  in 
smart cities throughout the globe [9].   

In summarizing, the following are the most significant security challenges for smart city environments [10]: 
A large and complex attack surface: As cities become more intelligent,  they  will incorporate  more systems and 
"systems of systems," increasing the risk and impact of an attack and necessitating better control and visibility. Further-
more, the integration of vendor solutions increases the complexity of intelligent city systems, particularly during rapid 
technological transformations. 

Inadequate oversight and organization: Complex systems will necessitate more robust management and govern-
ance capabilities; keeping leadership fully informed of complex occurrences will require additional resources and ca-
pabilities. 

In  the  face  of  a  constantly  developing  cyber  threat  scenario,  the  research  community  must  supply  threat  infor-
mation, prevention, and reaction as smart cities will give enter-prizes unparalleled economic potential. However, be-
cause of the significant increase in interconnected devices, cyber threat actors will be presented with an unprecedented 
attack surface. Securing smart cities must be a collaborative project involving local administrations and private sector 
organizations with an immediate stake in the city's stable function. Also, ensuring that smart cities are cyber-safe will 
need identifying and prioritizing critical assets and behavior-based security - creating a baseline for the routine func-
tioning of vital support. It should be emphasized that a Smart City's smartness is measured by seven aspects in which 
the city should excel smart government, smart mobility, smart environment, smart living, smart healthcare, smart econ-
omy and smart people [1]. These critical assets must guarantee that all sections of the city conform to minimal bench-
mark, a policy of quick component replacement in case of breach or failure, and a safe segment of critical private assets 
from the public network. In this sense, this research aims to identify the cyber threats, attacks, and countermeasures 
based on the seven primary domains of smart cities listed above.   

The following is the  structure of the  study: The next section, Section 2, provides an in-depth description  of the 
primary threat’s attacks, and countermeasures that are present in the seven domains of the smart city networks, how 
they function, and the associated effective solutions that have been proposed in the most recent literature. The primary 
findings from our investigation are discussed in Section 3, which summarizes our results, makes our conclusions, and 
discusses potential avenues for further study. 

2. Cyber Threats, Attacks and Countermeasures 

Improving residents' living standards is the primary goal of constructing smart cities. From this point of view, a 
smart city utilizes its resources more effectively and produces an intelligent ecosystem using the capabilities of digital 

 
 
 
3 

technology. It requires more inventive urban transport networks, better water supply and waste disposal facilities, and 
more efficient methods to light and heat buildings in living places. It also involves more creative ways to deliver de-
mocracy and decision participation to citizens. It also means having a clean and safe environment with accessible public 
areas and user-friendly financial services that cater to the population's requirements without restrictions or exclusions. 
It should be emphasized that this connection is achieved with the optimal use of ICT, which also makes smart citizens 
of a smart city [2], [8].   

This study presents an overview of the most dangerous cyber threats, attacks, and countermeasures to smart city 
networks based on the seven primary domains of smart cities [11]. In this context, we will examine indicative but very 
characteristic cases of cyber threats related to these categories and the countermeasures proposed in the recent literature. 

2.1 Smart Government 

Smart  governance  [12]  encompasses  services  that  reflect  aspects  of  political  participation  and  opportunities  for 
citizens' social inclusion in the administration's operation. It also encourages the most efficient administration at the 
lowest possible cost, in which human resources and available resources are fully utilized, additional training opportu-
nities are provided, and the processing of bureaucratic tasks is promoted digitally, removing the citizen from an unfair 
waste of time [13]. Furthermore, smart governance empowers citizens to participate in public decision-making and city 
planning, increasing efficiency and information transparency. 

It is necessary to have policy guidelines in place in smart cities to guarantee the smoothness, security, integrity, 
and secrecy of smart governance [14]. The use of technology in smart governance must comply with a nation's laws to 
be considered legitimate. 

The city's governance services are becoming smarter and more complex, but these users must be prepared to con-
front cyberspace security using  more sophisticated technology and infrastructure. Governance service providers are 
facing growing problems in adopting a culture of security and information confidentiality as a critical component of 
their services [15], [16]. 

These difficulties will endure as long as regulatory oversight, and information security risks exist. Improving the 
information security culture inside these firms will most certainly aid in the safety of governance information, transac-
tions, and personal information and the continuing performance of essential governance processes. For example, risk 
identification and mitigation must occur at intersections and in separate domains in the governance system. The desig-
nation from the inter-sector dimension considers the linkages of the national or municipal sector and the interdepend-
ence of the other domestic and foreign sectors. Furthermore, the intersectoral extent indicates how risk is distributed 
throughout interrelated systems (contagion risk) because of parallels in concentration risk and connectivity. Meanwhile, 
the inter-time dimension specifies how hazards in the planned system rise over time, primarily risk caused by proce-
dural behavior shifting from one sector to another [17]. 

In a Smart Governance scenario, municipal authorities and local administrations strive to structure and arrange 
city-wide interventions across various IoT systems/applications to build an all-in-one and coordinated IoT ecosystem 
for the full Smart City. However, the administration of a whole Smart City requires a significant degree of responsibility 
for the many tasks to be completed, such as managing IoT systems (e.g., credential access, control of sensitive data). In 
addition, technology is necessary to handle these IoT systems in a coordinated and well-managed manner. The technical 
background required to carry out know-how is not recognized by City Authorities but by professionals in the field [15]. 
To successfully manage heterogeneous IoT systems deployed by public and commercial organizations, upper-tier 
authorities need a multilevel governance solution to distribute and transfer authority and duties across various levels 
of government (top-down governance). 

As a result, municipal governments need ICT-based solutions that offer the elements necessary for the Smart Gov-

ernance of the Smart City. We have emphasized the following desirable features [13], [14], [17]:   

Permission hierarchy model. From upper-tier authorities to local authorities, a multilevel governance system must 

issue and maintain permits in a hierarchical framework (top-down approach).   

Keeping track of duties. Because of the variety of IoT systems and functions supplied in a Smart City, the various 

authorities must administer a role-based access control system to allocate and monitor duties.   

Inclusion. An integrated strategy to accommodating heterogeneity within the same ICT-based solution is required 
to facilitate data interchange. Third-party API (Application Programming Interface) deployment, sharing of credentials 
and permissions, and so forth.   

 
 
 
4 

Support for new systems. A suitable solution that allows the integration of new IoT systems over time, independent 
of the technology on which they are based, is necessary for a dynamic Smart Municipal, integrating the new IoT system 
into the ICT-based solution offered by the city authorities.   

Safety  and  privacy.  It  is  critical  to  include  security  methods  in  the  elements  outlined  above.  For  example, only 

authorized and authenticated users may manage permissions using well-tested and robust processes. 

Several  ICT-based  solutions  are  needed  to  address  these  aspects.  However,  for  different  entities  to  cover  these 
features, a specific  and common  infrastructure that  provides the  ICT-based tools and mechanisms  natively to cover 
these features is required, ensuring that the same rules and regulations guide IoT systems that belong to a Smart City 
in terms of Smart Governance [18].   

From this point  of view, governance  systems must be  built on acceptable  standards such as ISO 27001: 2013, a 
global standard that defines the requirements for designing and evaluating an information security management sys-
tem. This is critical for any governance transaction service provider for the transactions as part of a governance process 
must be assured not only for security and secrecy but also for the ease of continuing to conclude. Other references that 
are often used for security requirements in technology-based services include [19], [20]:   

2. 

1.  COBIT - The Board of Standards Audit and Information Systems Control (ISACA) publishes the Control 
of Information and Related Technologies (COBIT), which offers a control framework for corporate govern-
ance and IT governance.   
ISO / IEC 15408 - This assessment criteria was established and is aligned with the national security stand-
ards.   
ITIL (or ISO / IEC 20000 series) - This publication presents a collection of best practices in IT services man-
agement (ITSM), focusing on the IT service process and emphasizing the user's important role. 
ISO/IEC 27001 – This certificate is often the most basic Information Technology Standard and determines 
which other security standards must also comply by a government organization. For example, if a govern-
ance domain offers payment services, it must meet, if not exceed, the Payment Card Industry Data Security 
Standard (PCI DSS). 

4. 

3. 

This  paper  [4]  shows  how  proper  smart  governance  and  security  framework  on  which  built  adequate  security 
infrastructure could simplify and speed up the certification process and, simultaneously, reduce the cost of certification. 
However, the link between smart governance and data security is quite complex. The combination of information 
security risks and data challenges, such as data transfer, processing, information management, network security, and 
equipment access, is significantly challenging. The goal is to improve the smart governance operation environment and 
the security of big data information by studying and improving relevant laws and regulations, strengthening access 
control processing, improving system protection levels, strengthening the integration of new technologies, and improv-
ing network intrusion detection systems, and the sophisticated mechanisms of identity security verification [21] 

A typical example is an authentication on smart governance must be more secure to guarantee its security and 
privacy, and only authorized users should be able to access the services. A robust authentication mechanism is provided 
in this research to address the shortcomings of previous approaches. Specifically, a three-factor authentication scheme 
designed especially for the authentication of e-governance applications. For permission, it exclusively uses lightweight 
XOR and one-way and perceptual hash operations. Numerous factors such as user identity, password, and biometrics 
are employed for improved scalability and security. The suggested approach has been verified using the popular Au-
tomated Validation of Internet Security Protocols and Applications tool. According to the security study, the system is 
resistant to numerous threats [20]. 

In this direction, the authors of this article provide a Smart Data Sharing Architecture for a Smart City Environment 
based on smart contracts and Blockchains. The suggested approach attempts to protect data exchange among various 
stakeholders by integrating data access control and audit methods. It employs the Proof-of-Trustworthiness (PoT) con-
sensus technique as a complicated security solution. The proposed consensus technique employs a multidimensional 
Trust Model to determine the total Trustworthiness of a Smart Service Provider. The suggested solution conforms to 
fundamental privacy laws and regulations, including the European Union General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 
duties [22]. 

Also, to protect the privacy of this sensitive information, unique software tools and cryptographic security proto-
cols must be employed using the user's settings. Hardware devices must be put inside the linked system to improve 
these security settings. Because the government is the critical player in delivering electronic services under its authority, 
this  study  has  previously  presented  a  citizen-centric  multidimensional  smart  card-based  E-Governance  system.  The 
authors  created  a  cloud  architecture  as  an  interconnected  governance  model  to  handle  a  large  volume  of  sensitive 

 
 
 
5 

information. The new model's viability is shown via Cloud Banking transactions via a linked governance environment 
[15]. 

On the  other hand, there  are several practical proposals for  this avenue, like the  authors of this study  [16] that 
propose an architecture for the Smart Governance of heterogeneous IoT solutions inside Smart Cities, which includes 
aspects such as power distribution, security limitations, and scalability, among others. It is a modified version of the 
fundamental architectural paradigm of smart government systems. It relies on Digital Objects to represent, store, and 
interact with physical and digital materials. It also uses open-source technologies to create the architectural concept and 
manage Digital Objects.   

Following the proposed transparent and open adjudication procedure, local officials may assign, for example, the 
administration of the city's smart lighting system. This is accomplished by defining and creating new Digital Objects as 
part of the Smart City infrastructure for these new actors: (55555/city/company for the company and 55555/users/man-
ager for the Manager or the company representative) and granting permissions to the Manager to handle all infrastruc-
ture related to the smart lighting system. Similarly, the Manager may authorize other members of the institution, such 
as the IoT system manager (55555/users/iotmanager), to assign tasks to trusted employers. 

Adopting this multi-level Smart Governance architecture also addresses one of the most challenging difficulties in 
any IoT-based solution: naming (devices or IoT settings). Because of the Handle System and its global infrastructure, 
each infrastructure installed following our concept functions as an independent node in a well-structured network that 
functions as a Domain Name System (DNS). In this approach, any IoT material and Smart Governance-related element 
may be accessible from anywhere, including external ecosystems such as other companies, municipal authorities, and 
Smart Cities. 

Remote e-voting is unquestionably the apex of e-governance in a prosperous smart city. Remote e-voting is con-
venient and gives voters simple access. On the other hand, it makes it simpler for election officials to tally ballots and 
compile reports. Nonetheless, there has been increased criticism of the security and integrity of remote e-voting systems. 
Concerns have also been expressed concerning the systems' ability to guard against cyber threats. A functional remote 
e-voting system must fulfill a set of regulatory requirements. This study [23] examines the design criteria for remote e-
voting systems as mentioned in the existing literature. The authors investigate whether the current public infrastructure 
can support an efficient remote e-voting system that fulfills the design criteria. They discovered that the present tech-
nological infrastructure is insufficient to enable efficient remote e-voting systems since the technologies that must be 
installed to meet design criteria are vulnerable to various cyber assaults. 

It is widely accepted, because of the decentralized nature of e-voting systems, ensuring transparency and depend-
ability is difficult. Also, maintaining the privacy, secrecy, and integrity of the votes and voters is equally suspicious. 
One potential answer is blockchain technology, which has ushered in a new age in the digital world. The immutability 
of blockchain technology and its decentralized design make it ideal for developing a strong and secure e-voting system. 
It aids in elections by ensuring the system's authenticity, integrity, transparency, secrecy, and non-repudiation. This 
article  assessed the  potential and practicality of blockchain technology for  electronic voting. In the  present E-voting 
system, the authors have solved all possible constraints. They created a small-scale example e-voting system as a smart 
contract  using  Solidity  language,  which  encompasses  everything  from  hosting  the  election  to  certifying  voters  and 
counting votes. The study also demonstrates how Zero-Knowledge Proof might aid in developing safe, privacy-pre-
serving E-voting systems [24]. 

However, implementing blockchain technology in voting systems causes severe delays in transaction execution. 
The software solution is only available to a small group of professionals, which does not inspire trust among voters. 
This study [25] suggests a novel strategy based on freely accessible verification of all means and procedures that may 
generate doubt about the accuracy of the vote count or the secrecy of their results. Specifically, the authors presented 
an e-voting system in which an audit of all the hardware and software of a server that conducts operations linked to 
potential misuse is performed to assure confidence. The mechanism guards against illegal influence on votes via bribery 
or other forms of pressure. It also monitors all employee operations to control the server's functioning from its inception 
until the election's conclusion. Simultaneously, the number of auditors is not restricted, and the verification method is 
streamlined by using extra software and hardware. Auditors' responsibilities include copying and comparing files. All 
e-voting system technological solutions, including audits, are easy to grasp and inexpensive. 

2.2 Smart Mobility   

Smart mobility aims to make transportation systems "smarter." Smart transportation networks, in particular, can 
better serve the public by improving safety, speed, and reliability to local and international accessibility. The availability 

 
 
 
6 

of information and communication technologies from modern and sustainable transportation systems is critical for con-
sumers to easily plan their schedules while  finding the  most economical and fastest routes by using transportation-
oriented mobile applications. Driver's passports, license recognition systems, car-parking searching, and prediction are 
other typical applications in smart mobility facilities. 

Traffic safety is a significant concern in crowded cities that harms residents [26]. In this regard, IoT can be more 
proactive in detecting human errors and reducing traffic accidents. In the literature, for example, particular research 
gives valuable insights into allowing smart mobility systems. In [27], an IoT-based system was created by combining 
internet platforms and low-cost antenna technologies. The suggested research in [28] demonstrates the viability of mon-
itoring road  safety using developments in IoT.  It  offers a low-cost IoT framework for  assessing  the  safety  of a road 
network. In addition, [29] presents an overview of the key IoT technologies suggested for smart mobility in smart city 
scenarios. 

Furthermore, IoT-based solutions must be employed for various applications and modes of transportation, such as 
smart traffic, parking, and mobility, in order to create safer and cleaner streets. For instance, in [30] an intelligent trans-
portation system has been designed to recognize, locate, track, and monitor buses through exchanging information and 
communication. This system is based on the  Internet  of Things (IoT), radio frequency identification (RFID), General 
Packet  Radio  Services  (GPRS),  Geographic  Information  System  (GIS),  and  Global  Positioning  System  (GPS),  among 
other technologies. Another project that is mentioned in [31] aims to construct a prototype for intelligent transportation 
that makes use of a global positioning system (GPS), near field communication (NFC), and temperature and humidity 
sensors to monitor automobiles and commuter information and the atmosphere inside buses. [32] Suggests a real-time 
traffic monitoring system as a solution to the issues associated with traffic management and monitoring. To determine 
roadway problems, the study used the information gathered from real-time traffic monitoring. [33] Create an intelligent 
transportation system application that uses Internet of Things platforms, Intel Edison, and Raspberry Pi. It has been 
proposed  that  information  on  traffic  conditions  may  be  distributed  via  standard  instant  messaging  services  like 
WhatsApp. 

As the above research works indicate, selecting IoT technology is critical for creating smart mobility systems [34], 
[35]. However, the  security provided by IoT  devices is not guaranteed. The  devices have a propensity to  have little 
computing power, and their hardware restrictions prevent them from having built-in security mechanisms. This makes 
the devices susceptible to vulnerabilities [36]–[38]. The IoT devices in a smart city's ecosystem control critical transpor-
tation infrastructures, so they need strict secure guarantees. In this point of view, a `Cybersecurity via Determinism' 
paradigm for the next-generation `Industrial and Tactile Deterministic IoT' is presented in this study [39]. Specifically, 
in layer 3, there is a new addition of a forwarding sub-layer called deterministic packet switches (D-switches), which 
are straightforward and safe. This sub-layer supports many deterministic Software-Defined Wide Area Networks (SD-
WANs),  in  addition  to  three  new  tools  that  may  be  used  to  improve  online  safety:  access  control,  rate  control,  and 
isolation control. To support D-flows, a Software-Defined Networking (SDN) control plane will set up each D-switch 
(also known as an FPGA) with several deterministic schedules. The control plane of a software-defined network (SDN) 
can insert millions of deterministic virtual private networks (DVPNs) into layer 3. This paradigm has a number of ad-
vantages, including the following:   

1.  All congestion, interference, and Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDOS) assaults are eliminated.   
2.  The size of the buffers in D-switches is cut in half.   
3.  Delays in end-to-end IoT communications were brought down significantly.   
4.  The D-switches do not require gigabytes of memory to store large IP routing tables.   
5.  Hardware support is provided in layer 3 for the US NIST Zero Trust Architecture.   
6.  Packets within a DVPN can be entirely encrypted using Quantum-Safe encryption, which is resistant to 

attacks by quantum computers using existing quantum algorithms.     

7.  By using lengthy Quantum-Safe encryption keys, the likelihood of an undiscovered cyberattack against a 

DVPN may be arbitrarily tiny.   

8.  Savings can approach thousands of dollars annually via decreased capital, energy, and operating expenses. 
Because of this, the attack surface is substantially smaller, meaning there are fewer packets to assault; thus, the 
danger posed by this attack is significantly decreased. In addition, using encrypted packets for signals eliminates any 
possibility that a rogue control-plane packet may get past the Authorization Check [39]. 

To provide safety and information-related applications on the road, the Vehicular Ad Hoc Network (Vanet) has 
recently  received  considerable  attention  in  the  smart  transportation  domain.  Vanet  delivers  an  infrastructure  where 
vehicles moving on the road can use communications to report traffic congestion, accidents, and road surface conditions 
to  other  vehicles.  Although  Vanet  is  an  excellent  cyber­physical  system  [40],  it  has  several  security  and  privacy 

 
 
 
7 

problems, particularly location privacy. In order to be broaded applied, they must be enhanced the Vanets applications 
to preserve the identity and location privacy of cars. However, since a hostile vehicle cannot be followed using a com-
plete privacy preservation strategy in a cyber security scenario, most users would expect a conditional privacy preser-
vation approach to safeguarding systems. Group signatures may be used to provide conditional privacy preservation. 
However, the calculation costs are relatively high. Unlikable pseudo­ID approaches may also produce dependent pri­
vacy preservation. However, revoking a malicious vehicle would result in a lengthy revocation list. Unfortunately, any 
proposed method for verified cater evocation does not enable forward unlikability. Forward unlikability is a challeng-
ing criterion for Vanet systems. If a car is hacked and turns malevolent, the vehicle's license should be canceled imme-
diately.  However, the  vehicle's previous communications and positions (from before it was hacked) should be safe-
guarded and unlikable. To address these issues, the authors of this research study [41] provide a lightweight conditional 
privacy  preservation  system  that  leverages  basic  hash­chain  algorithms  to  allow  accurate  identity  monitoring  by  a 
trusted authority and quick local revocation verification on the road. In Vanet systems, the suggested protocol addresses 
the needs for location privacy, conditional privacy preservation, and forward unlinkability. 

In addition, novel security techniques are presented in this study [42] to enable safe certificate revocation, which is 
regarded as one of the most demanding design challenges in Vanet networks. In this system, each vehicle that receives 
a communication from another vehicle validates the sender certificate authenticity. The recipient will evaluate the mes-
sage to see if the sender has a valid certificate. In contrast, if the sender has an invalid certificate, the recipient will ignore 
the communication. Furthermore, if the sender does not have credentials, the receiver will report the sender to the Road 
Side Unit and review the message to see whether it is valid. If the information supplied was accurate, the Road Side 
Unit will provide the sender with a Valid Certificate. Otherwise, the Road Side Unit will issue an Invalid Certificate and 
add  the  vehicle's  identity  to  the  Certificate  Revocation  List.  When  a  misbehaving  vehicle  with  a  Valid  Certificate  is 
discovered, the RSU replaces the old Valid Certificate with a new Invalid Certificate to indicate that this vehicle should 
be avoided. This occurs when multiple vehicles report to the Road Side Unit that a particular vehicle has a Valid Cer-
tificate and is broadcasting incorrect data. 

This research paper [43] presents a catalog of potential solutions, each of which, if put into practice, has the poten-
tial to dramatically cut the risk of cyberattacks on the communication systems of connected cars in a vanet infrastruc-
ture. Five various degrees of security architectures may be chosen from among the defense options that users can apply. 
But  cyber  attackers  have  a  large  terrain  of  assaults  and  objectives,  and  the  variations  between  innocuous  and  those 
damaging  are  recorded  in  terms  of  the  number  of  people  killed  and  the  amount  of  damage  done  to  transportation 
infrastructure. 

Cryptography, zero-knowledge between communication vehicles, and authentication methods with or without a 
trusted third party are all necessary breakthroughs; in reality, they have shown to be inadequate [44]–[46]. Especially 
today, when more and more automated vehicles are being put onto the roads, which need to cohabit with other types 
of motorized and non-motorized traffic participants efficiently and safely. Autonomous cars do, however, run the risk 
of traditional cyberattacks on the information and operation of the vehicle, as well as a new breed of attacks surrounding 
things like ransomware, IoT attacks, and DDoS attacks (connected vehicles drafted into Botnet Armies). Because of their 
interconnected nature, security risks are associated with the networks to which they are connected. This is true regard-
less of whether we are talking about the financial networks that process payments, roadside sensor networks, electricity 
infrastructure,  or  traffic control features. The authors of this paper  propose a method for designing safe  and secure 
mixed traffic systems, including automated vehicles and non-automated road users such as pedestrians, bicyclists, and 
conventional vehicles. This will allow the authors to model safe and secure cooperating Automated Vehicles and road 
infrastructure. In addition, this method will enable the authors to design safer and more secure Automated Vehicles 
and road infrastructure. The applicability of the suggested approach is shown with the help of a typical scenario involv-
ing the interaction of an automated vehicle with pedestrians at an intersection that does not have traffic signals [47]. 

The development of connected vehicles, which produce dynamic data through wireless communications, has made 
it possible to automate vehicles to operate more effectively. This is especially true in traffic signal control, which serves 
as the structural foundation for the scheduling of traffic flow. On the other hand, wireless communication channels are 
susceptible to cyberattacks and may constitute a significant risk to dynamic traffic signal control systems. Attackers 
might manipulate the usual traffic flow to bring up extreme traffic congestion. The authors of this work use Deep Rein-
forcement Learning to create an intelligent Sybil attack on a traffic intersection. In this attack, connected vehicles with 
fake identities are optimally placed to change traffic signal timings by corrupting traffic data. This work aims to high-
light and exploit existing vulnerabilities in Traffic Signal Control systems. The findings indicate that this attack causes 
a sizeable increase in the time it takes for vehicles to complete their journeys and results in catastrophic traffic conges-
tion,  mainly  if  carried  out  for  an  extended  period.  This  will  lead  to  several  serious  issues,  including  increased  fuel 

 
 
 
8 

consumption and air pollution in cities with a high population density. In the face of such sophisticated assaults, the 
design assumptions behind present Traffic Signal Control systems have become increasingly suspect [48]. 

The authors of this research paper [49] establish an assessment methodology for cyber-attacks on autonomous cars 
using preexisting traffic flow models as the basis for their work. They explore the influence of factors such as the per-
centage of cyber-attacked cars, the intensity of cyber-attacks, the range of cyber-attacks, and the demand for transpor-
tation. In addition, the transportation system's performance is evaluated using a set of four metrics, which include effi-
ciency, safety, emissions, and fuel consumption. The numerical simulations show that as the number of cyber-attacked 
vehicles  and  the  severity  of  the  cyber-attacks  increase,  the  negative  impact  on  traffic  flow  gradually  becomes  more 
noticeable. This  manifests as a reduction in capacity,  an increase in the  risk  of rear-end  collisions, an increase in air 
pollutants and fuel consumption, and so on. In addition, if cyberattacks are carried out on location rather than speed, 
this might result in accidents and decrease traffic operations' efficiency. Therefore, the position-attacked traffic system 
has a higher overall energy consumption and a higher overall pollution output. The results of this research give helpful 
information that may be used for projecting future traffic targeted by cyberattacks, conducting complete evaluations of 
transportation systems, and managing automated highway systems from the point of view of network security. 

But as is easily understood, the big problem in smart mobility is the cyber issues of mass transportation in which 
many people are carried within a single-vehicle. Specifically, the most serious difficulty is the cyber security of public 
transit [50], [51]. Trains, for example, are the most often used mode of transportation in a modern city, with millions of 
daily passengers, as opposed to car transportation. Because of system and infrastructure digitalization, automation of 
railway processes, mass transit concerns, and expanding linkages with external and multimodal systems, the railway 
industry  is  experiencing  a  significant  change  in  its  operations,  procedures,  and  infrastructure.  Cybercriminals  may 
choose  to  target  ticket  vending  machines,  passenger  information  screens,  and  passenger  Wi-Fi  infrastructure.  These 
systems are becoming more vulnerable to cyber-attacks as they transition from bespoke stand-alone systems to open-
platform,  standardized  equipment  built  with  commercial  off-the-shelf  components  and  increased  use  of  networked 
control and automation systems accessible remotely via public and private networks.  Many signals transmitted and 
received over insecure communication links are critical to railway operations. Constant monitoring, immediate notice 
of any departure from ordinary circumstances, and decisive measures to resolve the issue allow for effective risk reduc-
tion and business continuity. Furthermore, uninterrupted and safe traffic operation depends on recognizing and ad-
dressing threats to telecom, train management, and signaling systems as soon as possible. Complete visibility and the 
capacity to identify and mitigate hazards as they emerge give a route to reducing uncertainty and operational interrup-
tions [52], [53]. 

Though various studies on critical infrastructures have been conducted from the aspect of cyber security, there has 
been little research conducted from the standpoint of cyber-physical security in application areas such as railway infra-
structure. This is the first complete empirical evaluation of the cyber-physical vulnerability of communication-based 
train control systems [54]. The writers carefully analyze communication-based train control and the cyber-physical vul-
nerabilities  that  may  seize  control  of  the  train.  They  discover  that  a  man-in-the-middle  assault  combined  with 
knowledge of railroad signaling may result in substantial train crashes. They propose a countermeasure for communi-
cation-based train control resilience  to overcome  the  issue  and meet these difficulties. The primary idea behind this 
countermeasure design is to create a subsystem with a host that the attacker cannot reach. The cable links the subsystem 
to the software-defined networking (SDN) switch. The SDN controller, on the other hand, logically disconnects the link 
between the SDN switch and the subsystem. The subsystem stays undiscovered due to the logical separation while the 
attacker seeks victims. 

Consequently, during a man-in-the-middle attack, the subsystem may go undiscovered. For the subsystem to warn 
the automated railway protection system of the attack scenario, the SDN switch should detect ARP spoofing. The SDN 
switch continuously monitors ARP messages and creates an IP-MAC list for ARP messages across the structure's SDN 
switches. They validate their findings by developing a realistic communication-based train control testbed environment 
that yields promising outcomes. 

In addition, this research [55] looks at the security of railway control equipment against cyber or physical attacks. 
The  authors  offer  a  cyber-physical  authentication  approach  that  integrates  an  add-on  security  module  with  a  cyber 
security protocol for cyber-physical device authentication and data transmission. An add-on security module that acts 
as a 'hot swappable' bump-in-the-wire solution for current control devices and adds extra cryptographic capabilities 
was offered. Meanwhile, the suggested system offered tamper-resistance security by encapsulating the hardware in a 
tampered-detection box and employing tamper-resistant hardware to secure the cryptographic key. The device authen-
tication protocol is intended to provide secure communication between the Server and the Control Device. The protocol 
is divided into four stages: setup, first handshake, acknowledgment/critical exchange, and data transmission. Due to 

 
 
 
9 

the  necessity  of storage, RSA signatures were used for  the  first handshake, and AES with a 256-bit session key was 
utilized for the data transmission phase. The results of the tests reveal that the overall overhead has a minor influence 
on the functioning of the Control Device in the railway system. 

The  criteria  for  the  railway  management  system  are  outlined  in  detail  in  the  work  [56],  which  also  provides  a 
summary of the requirements that must be met for the Smart City concept. The authors offer a set of actions for enhanc-
ing cyber security and the information power of railway management systems, with the instruments of risk engineering 
and the knowledge gained from the area of information technologies serving as the foundation for their recommenda-
tions. Also, in this paper [57], the authors provide the bases for a combined Safety and Security risk assessment and 
analysis approach. This approach reconciles the  risk  analysis processes that are used in both Safety  and Security by 
making relevant connections at different stages of the two processes and by adding cross-cutting steps that are common 
to both Safety and Cybersecurity. 

2.3 Smart Environment 

A smart environment can make a significant contribution to the development of a sustainable society. The smart 
environment combines appealing natural conditions such as climate, green spaces, and so on with techniques for limited 
contamination, optimal resource management, and environmental actions. It is also related to access to services that 
improve the city's quality of life and the facilities of public spaces on a broader scale. In addition, it is associated with 
the city's cleanliness, the initiatives that give life and movement, and strengthening security in areas such as local forests, 
lakes, etc [58]. A smart city can monitor energy consumption, air quality, building structural reliability, traffic conges-
tion, and address pollution or waste using technical management tools. Thus, the sustainable and smart city considers 
using and producing green and renewable energies, more sustainable food production techniques, or the application of 
innovative technology to improve resource management (energy, air, water, waste, etc.). Novel environmental Wireless 
Sensor Networks (WSN) have the potential to monitor the natural environment and potentially anticipate and detect 
natural disasters [59], [60]. 

WSN are networks of autonomous sensing devices that monitor physical or environmental factors such as temper-
ature, pressure, sound, vibration, motion, or pollution at several places. WSNs are multi-hop ad hoc self-organizing 
networks in which all nodes interact wirelessly and use multiple routing protocols [61]. It works in circumstances with 
limited bandwidth and performance. It  is  scalable  and may accept  more  nodes  or  devices at any  moment.  It is also 
adaptable, allowing for physical divisions, and all nodes may be accessible through a centralized monitoring system 
[62]. Because it is wireless, it may be used on a big scale and in a wide range of environmental applications or sectors. 
Furthermore, it employs multiple security methods based on the underlying wireless technology, resulting in a depend-
able network for specific users [63]. 

Smart cities can save energy and reduce carbon issues using WSN. Specifically, through a large number of wireless 
sensors, can collect environmental factors and then return the information to the backend monitoring server. This study 
[64] presents a WSN using environmental sensors and controllers to adjust the energy consumption of electrical appli-
ances. Because the plethora of wireless nodes is exposed to physical or logical access in remote urban areas, the authors 
performed a massive simulation of DoS attacks or external damage by human manipulations. The authors use a sophis-
ticated analysis of various packet loss patterns to identify the potential damage and examine the abnormality. After 
identifying damage by the logical or physical attack, each node is used by the different queue management models to 
collect environmental data. 

It is difficult to approach or work at the WSN since it operates in a complicated setting. Because nodes are open, 
they are susceptible to numerous assaults. Traditional security systems will also mistake nodes deployed in a complex 
environment  with  poor-quality  connections  or  a  poorer  condition  (less  energy  or  a  higher  workload)  for  malicious 
nodes. In WSN, the  trust and reputation  model  may  be employed to  mitigate  the  harm caused by malicious nodes. 
However, trust and reputation models have a sizeable false-positive rate since a node with less reputation is evaluated 
undesirable owing to the communication context. This study  [65] provides trust and reputation-based harmful node 
detection techniques with environmental factors to prevent malicious nodes from interfering with or selectively for-
warding attack nodes. Environmental parameters may be solved using machine learning's linear regression and com-
bining node energy, data volume, number of nearby nodes, node sparsity, and other deterministic characteristics. The 
environmental  parameters  are  then  used  to  estimate  benchmark  trust  based  on  the  ecological  factors.  The  Gaussian 
radial basis function is simplified to compute the similarity between the benchmark trust sequence and the cycle repu-
tation  sequence.  Furthermore,  environmental  settings  provide  three  reputation  intervals  and  an  adoption  threshold 
span to detect malicious nodes based on the work environment and node statuses. The simulated findings demonstrate 

 
 
 
10 

that environmental factors increase the detection of malicious nodes by more than 1% compared to comparative meth-
ods and minimize false positives by more than 1%. 

To communicate outside of the wireless communication zone, WSN employs mobile nodes. Wireless ad hoc net-
work routing protocol attacks degrade network performance and dependability. Malicious nodes advertise the shortest 
route between source and destination in active black hole attacks on wireless networks, resulting in routing table alter-
ations and packet loss. Self-security management is a hot topic in WSN-related environmental applications. For exam-
ple, this paper [66] provides the Grouped Black Hole Attack Security Model (GBHASM), which prevents grouped hos-
tile nodes from advertising the shortest route between source and destination, preventing routing table alterations and 
packet loss. The GBHASM proposed is separated into two components. The first module describes how a new node 
will join the network, while the second handles communication. The joining request is received from the new joining 
node in the replay. It sends membership acknowledgment and waits for replication approval. If the request is not ac-
cepted within a specific time frame, it will be rejected; if approved, the demand for its details will be delivered. The 
same procedures will be repeated till the process is completed. Information received from a new  joining node is rec-
orded in the database, given a new node code, and the updated node code table is propagated on the network. The 
second model deals with network communication activities. After joining the network, the node sends out queries for 
the quickest network route. Every node will compare the node code, and if the key matches within a specific time frame, 
information about the packet will be revealed. Otherwise, the time-to-live packet will be sent on to the next node. 

Although prevention and  monitoring techniques may lower  the  risk of cyber  assaults, the  residual risk in vital 
infrastructures  or  services  might  still  be  unacceptable.  Resilience,  or  a  system's  capacity  to  survive  evil  occurrences 
while retaining adequate operation, is a crucial attribute of such systems. While numerous resilience indicators have 
previously been proposed, there  is limited experimental data on the  cyber  security of CPSs. This study  [67] aims to 
provide a model-free, quantitative, and general-purpose assessment approach for extracting resilience indices from data 
sources such as system logs and process logs. The authors evaluate four resilience indices from a broad range using an 
actual wastewater treatment plant model and modeling assaults that interfere with a vital feedback control loop. The 
findings reveal that although the selected indexes varied in their behavior and susceptibility to certain assaults, they 
can all summarize and extract valuable information from large system logs. The proposed method includes deriving 
performance indicators from observable data that does not need system dynamics understanding. 

Waste management and recycling are critical to remaining sustainable and clean in contemporary metropolitan 
settings.  Solid  waste  management,  disposal,  and  recycling  are  all  difficulties  in  many  major  cities  across  the  globe. 
Combining IoTs with deep learning provides a modular approach for data classification and real-time analysis. This 
article [68] depicts an effective smart waste management and classification system based on IoT and deep learning. The 
study proposes an architectural concept for a microchip-based rubbish bin that connects with the approach to collecting 
waste as rapidly as feasible. The Internet of Things (IoT) is employed in the recommended data monitoring system to 
provide real-time data control. This smart trash management and categorization strategy also included a waste classi-
fication algorithm based on convolutional  neural  networks. This trash classification approach  will be utilized at the 
waste-collection facility to separate garbage into several categories to enhance recycling. This suggested system pro-
vides comprehensive garbage management and recycling solutions for smart cities, including waste collection, man-
agement, and categorization. 

Modern technologies enable Water Distribution Systems (WDS) to provide improved water supply, storage, dis-
tribution, and recycling services. They help with real-time  monitoring, automation, and management. However, the 
limitations of these technologies expose the WDS to cyber-physical threats. The primary aim of cyber-physical assaults 
is to interrupt regular operations and tamper with crucial data, which negatively influences the WDS. As a result, it is 
critical to design and deploys solutions to improve WDS security by detecting and mitigating cyber-physical assaults. 
The authors of this research [69] thoroughly investigate typical cyber-physical assaults and common detection strategies 
for the WDS. They contrast assaults and detection approaches, focusing on concepts, methodologies, evaluation find-
ings, benefits, limits, etc. 

The increasing number  of successful and attempted attacks on critical infrastructures, such as power  grids and 
water treatment plants, has resulted in an urgent need to develop and implement methods for detecting such attacks, 
which are frequently carried out by state actors or insiders in the targeted organization. This research [70] aims to pro-
vide a case study of an infected wastewater treatment plant (WTP) that used a live memory dump acquisition Imager. 
The forensic carving procedure is removed in bulk, and features are extracted from the memory dump. In addition, this 
study [71] emphasizes one method that tries to identify assaults that compromise one or more actuators and sensors in 
a plant by successfully infiltrating the plant's communication network or accessing the plant computers directly. This 
technique, known as Distributed Attack Detection (DAD), may detect assaults in real-time by spotting irregularities in 

 
 
 
11 

the behavior of the physical process in the plant. The use of monitors that are actual implementations of the invariants 
obtained from the  plant architecture  is how anomalies are discovered. Each invariant must remain valid during the 
whole plant operation or while the plant is in a specific condition. A functioning water treatment facility was used in 
an experiment to evaluate the efficiency of DAD, and it was proven to be successful at detecting sneaky and coordinated 
assaults. Also, this study [72] aims to provide a technique for enhancing operational security in a wastewater treatment 
plant and to demonstrate how this approach can be used in a particular setting. 

In parallel, this study [73] suggests a cyber-security monitoring system that connects time-series event data, visu-
ally [74] depicting security occurrences. It provides a predictive prediction of probable circumstances based on estab-
lished situations. The motivation for this stems from the requirement to comprehensively understand security events 
or  attacks on a network and information about  the  intensity and propagation pattern. Furthermore, it may  assist in 
business  choices  by  identifying  or  comprehending  the  link  between  computer  equipment  and  their  business/infor-
mation technology services. 

In  recent  years,  the  smart  energy  grid  has  steadily  become  the  usual  development  trend  in  the  world's  power 
business. It is an improvement to the old system that incorporates technology and communication into the present grid. 
This results in a more efficient grid  that decreases energy demand peaks and can efficiently integrate  renewable  re-
sources (at naturally varying levels) into its network. To increase their security, smart  grids  have included physical 
control, data encryption, and authentication technologies. However, there is still a shortage of timely and efficient de-
tection tools to keep the grid safe from unwanted breaches. In response to this issue, a machine learning-based meth-
odology for detecting smart grid DoS assaults has been developed in this study [75]. The model initially gathers network 
data, picks feature, uses PCA to reduce data dimensionality, and then employs the SVM algorithm to identify abnor-
malities. The study exploits the attack vulnerabilities of smart meters and data servers to add data collection and intru-
sion detection modules between smart meters and data servers, aiming at the design structure of the smart grid. In the 
smart grid, real-time data capture and detection are possible. When DoS attack activity is recognized, the alarm system 
is initiated to handle the alert. 

Cyber  security  must  be  a  primary  priority  for  electric  power  providers  installing  smart  meters  and  smart  grid 
technologies. Despite the well-known benefits of smart meters, how and to what degree cyber assaults might disrupt 
smart meter functioning and remote data collecting about power use from client locations is unclear. To answer these 
issues, this study [76] tested a commercial-grade smart meter in a controlled lab and assessed its operational integrity 
under cyber-attack situations. In addition, the False Data Injection Attack (FDIA) is a way of disrupting the security of 
the power system based on meter measurement. FDIA detection researchers are now focused on detecting its existence. 
FDIA location information is also critical for power system security. Finally, in this study [77], identifying the meter's 
FDIA is seen as a multi-label classification task. Each label denotes the current condition of the respective meter. The 
multi-label decision tree approach is used as the classifier in the ensemble model to discover the precise position of the 
FDIA. This approach does not need power topology information or statistical knowledge assumptions. The suggested 
method's performance is validated by numerical tests using the IEEE-14 bus system. 

2.4 Smart Lining 

Smart living is intended to optimize and manage facilities. It emphasizes one of the primary goals of the sustainable 
and smart territory, which is to enhance the quality of life of its residents. The Smart Living axis is built on three key 
pillars: civic safety, social cohesion, and tourist attraction. It is a solution that maximizes the city's infrastructure while 
improving people's quality of life. Allows for real-time control, forecasting, and optimal asset optimization and man-
agement. The following are some smart living applications [78]: 

1.  Detectors of fire: It is feasible to monitor, detect, and prevent fires in the urban environment with this 24-
hour program. Furthermore, the detection methods may approach the various sources of fire efficiently to 
manage the fire more effectively. 
Intelligent video surveillance: to improve public safety and to use predictive analytics to optimize traffic 
flow and citizen safety. 

2. 

3.  Sports facility management: Smart living solutions include controlling capacity and performing central-
ized administration of sports facilities. It is also beneficial for making judgments based on historical data, 
identifying deficiencies or requirements, and implementing management and infrastructure upgrades. 
4.  Smart home automation: It monitors and regulates home smart applications such as temperature, humid-

ity, electric equipment, security, and so on in real-time. 

 
 
 
12 

Smart living ICT utilities allow operations to decrease resource overconsumption, such as water and gas, while 
increasing economic development and environmental protection. But the linked smart house poses a variety of security 
risks. To begin with, individual smart living gadgets may not be secure. Some IoT home devices are hurried to market, 
and their security may be compromised. In certain circumstances, user manuals fail to address privacy issues or provide 
sufficient  information  to  ensure  the  device's  security.  Baby  monitors  and  security  cameras,  for  example,  have  been 
hacked, enabling hackers to view inside a home [79].   

Second, the home network may not be secure, and any data stored on it may be available to intruders. An intruder, 
for example, may follow the device use habits to determine when users are out from home. If the main internet account 
controls the home network, data from IoT devices may also be in danger. Any flaw might expose personal or private 
information, including emails, social media accounts, and bank credentials. It is essential to ensure that a single insecure 
IoT  device  does  not  jeopardize  the  home  network's  security.  Many  customers  operate  their  linked  house  through 
smartphones, making it a valuable database for anybody looking to hack into their life [80].   

As follows from the above, it is critical to describe and comprehend the direction and development required to 
guarantee that,  as Smart Home  Systems become  more prevalent, the  security and functionality  of these systems are 
maintained. Form this spirit, the goal of this study [81] is to identify the hazards associated with smart home systems 
and research ways to reduce such risks. Also, it provides a comprehensive analysis of the techniques currently used by 
intruders, the reasons for adopting these methods, and what might be done differently to enhance smart home security. 
Also, this paper [82] presents and discusses the threats that can affect smart living systems and define the requirement 
to improve secure communication between the smart home devices and applications that remotely control the home 
devices. 

Vulnerabilities in IoT-based systems provide security risks and obstacles for smart applications. One of the most 
significant impediments to IoT-based systems has been identified by the low-level security provided. The smart home 
environment presents novel security, authentication, access control, and privacy concerns due to its internet-connected, 
dynamic, and diverse nature. The IoT-based smart environment requires an attack model and a risk management frame-
work to improve information security and integrity. This research  [83] provides a finite state automata-based attack 
model for investigating smart home-based security assaults and assessing their effect using our suggested risk manage-
ment framework for mitigating IoT smart home-related attacks. An examination of typical attack behavior and the risk 
management framework demonstrates that the proposed approach is feasible and effective and can be used in many 
smart home applications. 

IoT implementation in the Smart home sector is complicated since the devices utilized in such platforms vary in 
size and computing capacity. The capacity to impose security on such machines depends on how well the authentication 
procedures are carried out. Against this backdrop, this paper [84] is designed to thoroughly examine possible authen-
tication risks and attacks on IoT, specifically in the Smart Home sector. The significant concepts offered in this study on 
potential  authentication  risks  and  assaults  on  IoT  in  Smart  home  applications  are  primarily  influenced  by  a  careful 
literature assessment of relevant work in IoT. 

This research looked at the system architecture of a smart home ecosystem, vulnerabilities, potential assaults, re-
quirements, and post-attack settings [85]. Proposes an Architecture Analysis and Design Language tool to model the 
smart home architecture, which was then visualized using a complex graph tool against a security policy. The attack 
graph highlighted the need to address security considerations while creating smart home systems and identifying po-
tential threat landscapes. 

Based on the notion that the primary goal of home automation is to control home devices from a single place. This 
article [86] presents the design and implementation of a safe framework that provides flexibility and security for smart 
home systems based on CPS and IoT. As a result, the authors suggest a safe design that protects the system from external 
internet infections. They address home automation security concerns by installing a secure firewall software solution. 
A secure firewall identifies and warns the user of specific security vulnerabilities before launching its mitigation tech-
nique. Internal security additionally offers encryption for communication and protects the home automation system 
from unethical acts. This technology (cipher firewall) determines the user privacy problem since it does not allow ex-
ternal threats. Users may monitor smart home activity by attaching static IP addresses to the system. Users may connect 
to a home coordinator already tied to home automation through cellular internet. Users may turn on/off their TV, door, 
lights, heat radiator, air conditioning, and water appliances using their connection. 

The comparatively inadequate information security of smart home system (SHS) devices may jeopardize consum-
ers' privacy. The authors of this paper  [87] propose a novel block data structure based on homomorphic encryption 
(HEBDS) to record the SHS device information transaction. This study presents a homomorphic consortium blockchain 
based  on  the  standard  smart  home  system  for  SHS-sensitive  data  privacy  preservation  (HCB-SDPP).  To  validate 

 
 
 
13 

operational nodes and transactions in SHS, the authors introduce verification services constituted of verification nodes 
to our model. They create an encrypted algorithm based on Parlier encrypted for privacy protection using the HCB-
SDPP paradigm. To validate the HCB-SDPP architecture, they encrypt sensitive data from all gateway peers and submit 
it to the consortium blockchain. Following homomorphic encryption processing, they assess the security of sensitive 
data.  The  authors  also  develop  attack  trials  in  the  experiment  to  target  various  peers  on  the  consortium  blockchain 
under the HCB-SDPP architecture. The impact on the whole model is examined if these nodes are vulnerable. The sim-
ulation results suggest that the HCB-SDPP model is more successful than SHS at protecting client privacy. 

Wireless home alarm systems are becoming more popular, but their security has received little attention. Existing 
attacks on wireless home alarm systems use networking protocol flaws while ignoring issues caused by the physical 
components  of  IoT  devices.  The  authors  of  this  study  [88]  demonstrate  novel  event-elimination  and  event-spoofing 
attacks against commercial wireless home alarm systems by interfering with the  reed switch in practically all COTS 
alarm sensors in this research. In both assaults, the  external adversary controls the  state  of the  reed switch with his 
magnet to either delete valid alerts or spoof false warnings. Also, demonstrate a novel battery-depletion assault using 
programmed electromagnets to fast and quietly drain the alarm sensor's battery, intended to last a few years. Extensive 
tests on a sample Ring alarm system indicate the effectiveness of these assaults. 

On the other hand, several inspired smart living applications fulfill the privacy and security standards as [79] The 
primary purpose of this proposed project is to use new IoT technologies to enable the senior population to self-manage 
their health and remain active, healthy, and independent for as long as feasible in a smart and safe living environment. 
An open-source, comprehensive IoT ecosystem is proposed. It includes the following processes: data gathering, data 
transportation, data integration, processing, manipulation, and computing, visualization, data intelligence and exploi-
tation, data sharing, and data storage. This unique cloud-based IoT ecosystem serves as a one-stop-shop for integrated 
smart IoT-enabled services to assist elderly persons (65 and older) who live alone at home (or in care homes). Another 
breakthrough is this system's design and implementation of an integrated IoT gateway for wellness wearable and home 
automation  system  sensors  with  diverse  connection  protocols.  The  smart  living  system  and  services  address  smart 
health and care, smart quality of life, and the social community. The system is developed using the user-centered design 
process to enable active user interaction throughout the project lifecycle and relevant standards and compliances (e.g., 
security, trust, and privacy) that are followed to increase user-friendly adoption. 

Access-control rules in smart buildings are becoming more dependent on context, such as who is taking action, if 
there  is  an  emergency,  or  whether  an  adult  is  around.  The  extensive  literature on  context  sensing  might  be  used  to 
provide contextual access control, but it mostly overlooks threats, adversaries, and privacy. The authors of this work 
[89] reassess the literature on home context sensing from the standpoints of security and confidentiality. They describe 
a unique threat model in smart homes focusing on non-technical adversaries' capabilities. In this model, replay, mim-
icry,  and  shoulder-surfing  assaults  are  significantly  more  common.  They  also  synthesize  circumstances  pertinent  to 
home access control, matching them to existing sensors. They then organize the sensing literature to provide a decision 
framework for home context sensing that considers security, privacy, and usability. Using their approach, they discover 
that present  sensors do not adequately reduce potential hazards in houses. Some  sensors are vulnerable  to primary 
threats such as physical denial-of-service attacks,  making it simple  to circumvent restrictions  based on  the  lack of a 
characteristic. Many sensors capture more data than necessary and are useless for all user groups or scenarios. 

Simultaneous advances in the Internet of Things and Machine Learning have resulted in exciting multidisciplinary 
applications,  such  as  classification  tasks  based  on  data  provided  by  smart  devices  for  different  applications  such  as 
resource allocation, security, and activity categorization. However, such applications may be vulnerable to adversarial 
scenarios. The authors of this research [90] create a white-box adversarial attack technique to produce adversarial in-
stances  for  data  acquired  from  smart  meters  placed  in  residential  homes  and  show  that  their  statistical  features  are 
indistinguishable from actual data points. Adversarial machine learning, a method that uses false data to trick algo-
rithms,  is  a  developing  danger  in  AI  and  machine  learning  research.  The  most  typical  reason  is  to  cause  a  machine 
learning model to malfunction [91]. An adversarial attack might include training a model with erroneous or misleading 
data or injecting deliberately crafted data to confuse an already trained model. The attack technique focuses primarily 
on  Deep  Learning-based  models  used  in  smart  home  device  categorization.  Because  the  adversarial  data points  are 
statistically indistinguishable from the actual data points, non-machine Learning-based solutions may be unable to ad-
dress  the  issue  given  by  hostile  instances.  The  suggested  strategies'  efficacy  is  proved  using  the  publicly  accessible 
United Kingdom-Domestic Appliance-Level Electricity smart-meter dataset. 

2.5 Smart Healthcare 

 
 
 
14 

Quality, results, and value are the outcomes of technological advancement in the health industry. Patients need 
excellent and personalized services. Thus, it is critical to invest in this area. Digital healthcare is a movement that entails 
precisely leveraging new technology to increase the  degree of  support while keeping costs as low as feasible. Smart 
healthcare  entails  not  only  the  adoption  of  new  goods  and  technology  for  diagnosis  and  treatment  but  also  a  more 
considerable interchange of information across parties, a more active role for patients during treatment, and improved 
clinical data management [92], [93]. Human and non-human players in smart healthcare include physicians, patients, 
hospitals, and research organizations. Smart Healthcare strives to make patient care safer, better, and more manageable. 
IoT connection is transforming healthcare by linking patients and healthcare professionals in novel ways [94]. Weara-
bles, skin sensors, home monitoring tools, and other IoT-connected gadgets allow deeper medical insights into symp-
toms and health patterns, new degrees of remote care, and more control over patients' care and treatment. Sensors, like 
those used in other IoT-connected applications, are critical in allowing the gathering and analysis of real-time patient 
data. Artificial Intelligence (AI), the Internet of Things (IoT), the Medical Internet of Things (MIoT), edge computing, 
cloud computing, big data, and next-generation wireless communication technology are at its heart [95]. This allows 
healthcare practitioners to spend more time with patients and treating diseases and less on logistics. 

Smart health is an important field that continually analyzes patients' health, alternative treatments, and cutting-
edge disease-fighting technology. The purpose of smart health is to provide individuals with medical services at any 
time and from any place. Smart health monitoring devices are often connected through wireless networks, which are 
vulnerable to cyber threats. However, various risks may endanger these health monitoring applications and systems 
[96], [97]. These include Denial of Service (DoS) attacks, Fingerprint and timing-based eavesdropping, router attacks, 
select and forwarding attacks, sensor attacks, and replay attacks [98], [99]. In this paper [100], the authors investigate 
the  consequences  of  these  attacks  on  health  monitoring  systems  and  recommend  some  interventions  based  on  their 
research findings. 

The most challenging aspect of smart health apps is protecting data from numerous assaults while using simple 
approaches and algorithms. Given the security problems associated with implementing smart health apps as the pri-
mary data collecting and transmission source, cyber  threats are categorized to create  a viable  defense  strategy. This 
research [8] contributes to the analysis of security and privacy in the context of smart cities for healthcare applications 
in two ways. On the one hand, an overview of several IoT applications and their cyber vulnerabilities is provided. On 
the other hand, a complete assessment of potential solutions to the issue of cyber assaults is given. 

In recent years, smart healthcare has gained popularity. Because of the data, it collects, a more secure mechanism 
is required to maintain security and privacy. As a result, these techniques may also guarantee security and privacy in 
Smart health. The goal of this review paper is to assess individuals' concerns with security issues in their smart homes 
and to start a debate about how healthcare equipment that comes packaged with future houses is susceptible to cyber-
attacks that result in data breaches. Blockchain is proposed in this study [101] to increase security and privacy in smart 
healthcare. Using this platform,  the  writers discussed the  emerging blockchain  technology and how  its components 
may help healthcare flourish while maintaining total security. The proposed platform uses blockchain technology and 
considers the client control over the healthcare data, implying the ability to share data with a specific association or 
person on a case-to-case and field basis.   

Humans benefit from the fast progress of the MIoT connected with biosensors in various ways, including smart 
healthcare systems (SHS). The combination of MIoT devices and the increasingly networked nature of the healthcare 
environment enables healthcare providers to provide more efficient and effective emergency and preventative medical 
services to their patients. SHS offers several chances for healthcare professionals and institutions to monitor patient's 
health remotely. The health statistics acquired by SHS is kind. However, SHS exposes patients' health data to various 
assaults. The most complicated difficulties in smart healthcare systems are ensuring patient health data confidentiality 
and privacy. This paper [102] explores health data confidentiality, MIoT healthcare security concerns, and the rules and 
regulations  involved  in  establishing  a  smart  healthcare  system.  It  also  describes  the  many  prevalent  principles  and 
assaults exposed to corporate digital assets and patients' health information, as well as the necessary solutions for over-
coming the present obstacles, such as a cryptographic function and a communication protocol.   

For  example,  this  work  [84]  provides  a  complete  overview  of  possible  authentication  risks  and  attacks  on  IoT 
healthcare devices in the Smart healthcare area. Furthermore, utilizing a Hybrid cryptographic technique, the authors 
of [103] established a secure cloud storage solution for healthcare data. A symmetric algorithm encrypts data, while an 
asymmetric algorithm encrypts keys. The performance and security of the proposed approach were measured and com-
pared to a well-known current technology. Because it is based on a modular exponentiation process, the RSA method 
often performs poorly. As a result, the authors used the Montgomery modular multiplication technique to enhance the 
RSA implementation. Blowfish encryption is used when storing health-related data in the cloud, and keys are handled 

 
 
 
15 

using the improved RSA technique. This hybrid technique provided advantages such as quick encryption, large prime 
numbers for essential creation, and efficient key management. The simulation results reveal that the suggested hybrid 
technique's encryption and decryption time is faster than other approaches examined for comparison. 

Important points to discuss when exchanging information in a smart health system dealing with critical patient 
data are the technique to communicate across institutions and safeguard patients' private data. This work [104] proposes 
a method for saving image-type data using visual cryptography and distributing the data utilizing secretive sharing 
using practitioners' passwords. However, if penetrated, the underlying infrastructure might result in private data leaks 
and the destruction of healthcare records dependent on the control commands supplied by the attacker. The authors of 
this paper [105] concentrate on several degrees of security associated with the storage and transmission of healthcare 
information. Furthermore, they test some of the suggested approach's relevant characteristics using the Access Control 
Policy Testing tool to establish its practicality and examine the state-of-the-art in the subject. But, because the present 
record  management  system  cannot  full  handle  privacy  and  integrity,  the  health  sectors  nowadays  using  blockchain 
technology to store health data more safe, confident, and decentralized manner. This study  [106] offers a blockchain 
architecture for Electronic Health Records to safeguard private data based on the Elliptic Curve Cryptography Algo-
rithm. In parallel, this study [107] proposes a realistic solution based on the unique characteristics of blockchain, where 
the distributed ledger technology is thought to be  unbackable. The authors created a blockchain model to safeguard 
data security and privacy, assure data provenance, and give patients total control over their health information using 
the smart contract feature, a programmable self-executing protocol operating on a blockchain. This concept delivers a 
patient-centric procedure by customizing data segmentation and creating permitted lists for physicians to access their 
data. It assesses the model's feasibility, stability, security, and robustness. In addition, this article [108] offers a permis-
sioned Ethereum blockchain that connects hospitals and patients all over the globe. The proposed system employs a 
mix of symmetric and asymmetric  key encryption to enable  safe  storage and selective access to records. It provides 
patients total control over their health information and allows them to grant or deny access to their records to a hospital. 
The authors stored records using IPFS (interplanetary file system), which has the benefit of being dispersed and assuring 
record immutability. The suggested methodology also keeps illness data without invading any patient's privacy. 

The rising availability of healthcare data necessitates precise analysis of illness diagnosis, progression, and real-
time monitoring to enhance patients' therapies. Machine Learning (ML) models are used in this context to extract sig-
nificant characteristics and insights from high-dimensional and heterogeneous healthcare data to identify various ill-
nesses and patient behaviors in a Smart Healthcare System (SHS). However, recent studies reveal that ML models em-
ployed in different application areas are susceptible to adversarial assaults. This work [109] describes a novel adversar-
ial method for exploiting the ML classifiers used in a SHS. An attacker with a rudimentary understanding of data dis-
tribution, the SHS model, and an ML algorithm may launch both targeted and untargeted assaults. Their attack employs 
five different adversarial ML algorithms to carry out various malicious behaviors on a SHS (e.g., data poisoning, mis-
classifying outputs, and so on). Using these adversarial capabilities, the authors modify medical device readings result-
ing from the SHS to change patient status (disease-affected, normal condition, activities, etc.). Furthermore, we under-
take white and black box attacks on a SHS according to an adversary's training and testing phase capabilities. They also 
assess the effectiveness of their work in various SHS settings and medical equipment. Their rigorous study demonstrates 
that the suggested adversarial approach may severely reduce the effectiveness of an ML-based SHS in properly recog-
nizing illnesses and normal patient behaviors, resulting in incorrect treatment. 

2.6 Smart Economy 

A  sustainable  and  smart  city  is  a  fertile  platform  for  innovation  and  new  business  models  [110].  This  vision  is 
supported by ideas such as sustainable entrepreneurship and the circular economy. These innovative approaches pro-
mote local and global financial ecosystem linkages while fostering long-term economic competitiveness. The concept of 
smart economy is a prosperous economic prototype built on technology innovation, resource efficiency, sustainability, 
and high social welfare. It encourages innovation and new entrepreneurial activities while increasing productivity and 
competitiveness with the overarching objective of enhancing inhabitants' quality of life [111]. This technology-driven, 
interconnected system employs ICT applications for economic progress, urban planning, and public health improve-
ment. It combines enhanced creativity with improved production, efficiency, and competitiveness. It is distinguished 
by several new flexible kinds of labor and start-ups. A smart economy is projected to produce more goods and services 
while using less energy and emitting less pollution, as well as offer social benefits [112]. For example, in Jakarta, as a 
smart city, the  smart economy idea being applied aims to encourage an entrepreneurial and innovative spirit in the 

 
 
 
16 

society to attain high productivity. Jakarta also has several Smart Economy projects [113], [114] that benefit its inhabit-
ants. Among these programs are [115]–[117]: 

1. 

2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

JakPreneur: Jakarta's MSME development initiative encourages the creation and collaboration of an entre-
preneurial ecosystem. MSME actors will get training, coaching, marketing, and even instruction on obtain-
ing funding via JakPreneur. 
JakPangan: a feature that provides information on the cost of Jakarta's primary commodities. 
JakNaker Platform: a job-search portal designed to make it simpler for Jakarta citizens to find jobs. 
JakOne Pay: a non-cash payment option developed in partnership with Indonesia Bank [12]. 
JakLingko Card: The JakLingko card may be used to pay for many kinds of transportation (buses, micro-
buses, railways, etc.). 

To attain the degree of smartness that cities manage, smart cities are often tied to development initiatives. Several 
studies look at intelligent smart city performance utilizing various approaches and assessment criteria. Although there 
is no way to do such an assessment, we have found that the Smart Economy is essential in assessing smart cities. The 
smart economy was a significant feature in determining smart cities in 25 of the 30 studies we examined between 2015 
and 2020. The authors of this research [110] underline the relevance of the Smart Economy component in smart city 
development and demonstrate how it is assessed and evaluated in various evaluation methods. Furthermore, it delves 
into smart economy-related metrics utilized in multiple evaluation methods. The authors use a theoretical approach 
combined with quantitative and qualitative data to investigate similarities and relationships among the best-performing 
cities in the smart economy. 

In order to accomplish urban management services, business survival growth, and inhabitants' productive lifestyle, 
a smart city is the application of a new generation of information technology. The smart economy boosts core competi-
tiveness and may give citizens various economic options. Using China as an example, this paper [118] proposes a smart 
city development path based on the current state of smart city construction: use Internet technology to build big public 
data, strengthen the structure of digital infrastructure projects, ultimately mine data, lay a good technical foundation 
for smart city construction, integrate urban development with the Internet, and gradually promote harmonious town 
development. Moreover, this study [119] proposes a new service-oriented manufacturing business model called a smart 
linked product-service system (PSS) against the rapid rise of  customized service demand, the digitalization of goods 
and services, and the socializing of service resources. The issue of CPS-oriented smart connected products and associ-
ated service resources is explored from the service flow and product serviceability, as well as the smart corresponding 
product service system design and socialized service crowdsourcing setup. It is divided into three sections: analysis of 
personalized service demands using service flow design and product minimum service capacity modeling method to 
meet service requirements; CPS embedded Web  services modular  design  method for  smart connected product; and 
community construction of service resources using federated learning and service order-driven social crowdsourcing 
configuration.  The  objective  is  to  create  a  new  generation  of  service-oriented  manufacturing  models  that  are  smart, 
connected, efficient, and adaptable. 

Growing a local economy based on sharing data from IoT devices and other open data that can be utilized in apps 
to better the  lives of its residents is one  way a city might become  smarter. The authors  of the  [120] investigate  how 
blockchain and other distributed ledger technologies may be used to build a decentralized data marketplace. They ex-
plore the potential advantages of such a decentralized architecture, define several features that such a decentralized 
marketplace should include, and demonstrate how they may be incorporated into a holistic system. They also describe 
a basic, smart contract implementation of a decentralized registry where data owners may publish items for prospective 
purchasers to retrieve. 

There are several hurdles to overcome to advance this decentralized marketplace. These are some examples: 
Managing system complexity: With so many moving parts and components, the decentralized marketplace system 
may become fragmented or difficult to scale; how can this be avoided? On the other side, maintaining a tight foundation 
may hinder scalability. 

Economic incentives and centralization: Without sufficient financial incentives for all parties involved, the decen-
tralized marketplace may fail to operate successfully. On the other side, it may be required to carefully construct the 
incentives so that additional decision-making power and data do not get concentrated in the hands of specific parties, 
thereby distorting search, rankings, and recommendations in unjust ways. 

User-friendly interfaces and decentralized applications (apps) that make it simple to publish, browse, search, re-
view,  suggest,  curate, verify, and data items, vendors, and customers  will be required for  a successful  marketplace. 
People  and  organizations  should  be  sufficiently  incentivized  to  build  and  supply  functional  and  user-friendly  apps 
while keeping them decentralized. 

 
 
 
17 

Nonetheless, the smart economy's most pressing difficulty is privacy and security concerns. The smart economy 
idea, in particular, presents difficulties in analyzing vulnerabilities and revising strategies. Security concerns are real 
and must be addressed to guarantee the sustained achievement of smart city goals. Since security is a costly operation 
requiring a large budget, processing in the public sector takes longer. As a result, security and privacy are essential 
subjects, particularly in smart economy transactions, which are becoming more vital for believing the smart city notion 
of enhancing living standards. As a result, secure economic services are required to provide quick assistance for trans-
porting data, mainly via smart city networks. Therefore, it is necessary to have secured financial services to extend fast 
support for moving data, especially over smart city networks. The current research [3] aims to briefly present the core 
concepts of security and privacy issues concerning smart cities and reveal contemporary cyber-attacks targeting smart 
cities based on modern literature. Further, this research has elaborated and identified numerous security weaknesses 
and privacy challenges about various cyber security issues, challenges, and recommendations to provide future direc-
tions. 

To address the most persistent difficulty in the smart economy area, this article [121] provides a resilient architec-
ture  that  defends  smart  city  communications  using  autonomic  computing  and  Moving  Target  Defense  (MTD)  ap-
proaches. The basic concept behind attaining robustness is to make it exceedingly difficult for attackers to find out the 
current active execution environments utilized to operate smart city services by randomizing the utilization of these 
resources at runtime. The authors analyzed and verified their technique by running a variety of assaults on a smart 
infrastructure testbed and demonstrating that the delivered services could withstand these attacks with minimum over-
head. 

Under the same assumption, this research [7] focuses on the relevance of mobility and the strength of elliptic curve 
cryptography in heterogeneous wireless sensor networks to secure smart city applications. The results of the various 
simulations revealed that the proposed Dynamic Approach to Secure Smart City Applications algorithm improves ap-
plication  security  by  lowering  the  energy  consumption,  the  number  of  calculations  required,  and  the  storage  space 
necessary for the elliptic curve cryptography keys. In particular, in the proposed approach, a powerful mobile cluster 
head performs operations that demand more computation and use more battery sensors regularly, such as the devel-
opment, maintenance, and distribution of elliptic curve cryptography keys and periodic rekeying. Because the powerful 
mobile cluster head has no energy limits and is considered impenetrable, it serves as a periodic distributor of crypto-
graphic keys to all the data sensors in the different applications. 

However, the internet-based economy creates several threats, such as unlawful data copying and digital copyright 
infringement, posing the problem of preserving the security and copyright of important data housed in databases. In 
this study [122], we present a unique approach, Lossless Database Watermarking in Homomorphic Encryption domain 
(HOPE-L), to solve this difficulty. Our  method combines database encryption (homomorphic encryption,  order-pre-
serving encryption) and information concealing (lossless databased watermarking) technologies. To be more explicit, 
the information concealing technique uses the homomorphic encryption algorithm's homomorphic features to incorpo-
rate hidden data. Throughout the data embedding process, no distortion is introduced. As a result, we may combine 
the watermark within the encrypted data without losing any information. The watermark may validate the copyright, 
and the receivers can retrieve the original database without losing any data. Theorem and analysis show that HOPE-L 
can attain additional embedding space without distortion. Extensive testing demonstrates that the operating method is 
time-efficient, the embedded watermark is resilient, and HOPE-L outperforms previous techniques and can withstand 
typical database assaults. 

In contrast, the creative contribution of Blockchain to smart economy activities may enhance corporate operations 
and provide a real-time view of all financial data. On-demand products, for example, of a signed contract in the shortest 
period feasible  may considerably assist financial operations. This process's approval time is too lengthy, creating an 
opportunity to use Blockchain as a solution. This project [123] focuses on the Document of Understanding (DOU) con-
tract, which serves as the foundation for the relationship between a consumer service and the supplier of that service. 
The authors leveraged local resources and used design thinking and agile  principles to construct a local Blockchain 
Ledger for this assignment. As a consequence of merging the smart economy with cutting-edge technology, company 
operations in Smart Cities may be strengthened by safely using smart contracts in day-to-day activities. As a result, they 
produced a  proof-of-concept Blockchain demo that has the  whole precise  history of the  agreement, with immutable 
transactions and transparency, while providing protection and privacy to the participant's information. They registered 
the time required to get the DOU contract signed off by everyone engaged in the process with this demo, significantly 
improving it. It may also be reproduced in other areas that handle sensitive data and financial reporting. 

It must be noted, that Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) attacks [124] are one of the significant security challenges 
confronting smart economy sectors in smart cities. APT is a stealthy threat actor that acquires unauthorized network 

 
 
 
18 

access and stays undiscovered for a lengthy period. The targets of these meticulously selected and studied attacks are 
often financial institutions or governmental networks. According to this viewpoint, high-level security requirements 
must be enforced as smart economy frameworks, and infrastructures grow more technology-dependent. Furthermore, 
the candidates must work hard in the front, keeping an eye out for suspicious activity and aberrant conduct. To guar-
antee compliance with security rules and regulations, measures are essential to secure the weakest link in the smart 
economy IT infrastructure - endpoints and end-user devices. 

2.7 Smart People 

Smart People's domain aspires to change how people engage with the public and commercial sectors as individuals 
or enterprises via information or service supply. Increasing social and digital inclusion/equality via educational offer-
ings  is  necessary  for  delivering  more  efficient  communication  and  services  based  on  new  technologies.  Also,  smart 
people are about smart types of education that promote job options, labor market possibilities, vocational training, and 
lifelong learning for people of all ages and ethnicities. Talent development is also crucial from an economic development 
standpoint since it is becoming an increasingly relevant location element. Smart solutions for smart people promote the 
creation of a welcoming and inclusive atmosphere to boost prosperity and creativity within a city or community. Im-
plementing intelligent solutions facilitates or fosters participation, open-mindedness, and innovation. In general, a city 
is smart because it leverages technology to improve the lives of its residents [1]. 

Only humans can use technology, improve economic and political efficiency, and contribute to social, cultural, and 
urban advancement. However, poor morale and intellect, a lack of qualified human resources, and multi-ethnic conflicts 
are vital difficulties that often contribute to societal issues. This study [125] aimed to discover and investigate the aspects 
of clever people for a smart city. The research used a mixed-method approach. Questionnaires, document reviews, and 
observations  were used to  gather data. The findings revealed that the  variables of agreeableness, conscientiousness, 
emotional stability, extraversion, and experience with openness all had high mean scores. Aside from that, the compo-
nent of friendliness had the highest average mean score of 3.78 out of the four factors: conscientiousness, extraversion, 
emotional stability, and experience with openness. This research's findings indicate that local governments must adopt 
strategies and policies to construct and promote smart cities. 

Currently, schools disperse the teaching of various components of data skills throughout the curriculum. However, 
as smart city technologies emerge and demonstrate real promise in contributing to a more sustainable future, it is clear 
that new skills for working with the large urban data sets that drive these innovations must be taught to future gener-
ations for them to be active smart city citizens. The authors of this study [126] question how data skills might be taught 
more cohesively and practically, allowing for the application of skills in actual, smart city scenarios. They suggest using 
Urban Data Games to provide a setting for learning and showing practical application of skills for dealing with sub-
stantial, complicated data sets, such as big data on smart home energy use. In this regard, are current study programs 
capable of meeting the need for smart city education? What are the opportunities for people to become smart in a smart 
city? This study [127] offers excellent integration of smart people educational programs in future smart cities based on 
practice and professional field-oriented, diversity-inclusive approach. As, it is commonly acknowledged that learning-
by-doing may considerably improve students' understanding of information security in smart cities. Hands-on labora-
tories may help individuals learn about security fundamentals. This study [128] includes various hands-on laboratories 
that might assist individuals in doing practical exercises in risk-free settings.   

But low  motivation is the first barrier when educating end-users about smart cities. Game-based learning  with 
interactive exercises and engaging multimedia is an effective way to motivate end-users. Providing a wide range of 
game material to meet educational demands is critical. For example, in this paper [129], the authors propose a phishing 
attack game to describe stereotypical features of phishing attack techniques to teach people. As anti-phishing games 
develop as a scalable, motivating, and practical way to anti-phishing education for non-professional end-users, issues 
occur owing to a game's content and context becoming irrelevant. When a game delivers unfamiliar or unrelated in-
stances to the user, the learning potential is restricted since the user lacks a reference point. This study [130] presents a 
customization pipeline for data collecting, creation, and distribution for anti-phishing learning games to give players 
more meaningful, relevant game material. With the rise of remote work and education, it is vital to adopt new technol-
ogies to teach cybersecurity ideas. This work [131] describes the concept, design, and prototype of mixed reality-based 
cybersecurity teaching application on phishing to expose schoolchildren to the topic remotely and allow them to prac-
tice distinguishing harmful from authentic mail. On the other hand, there are methods systems to learn without much 
input from humans, e.g., phishing websites can be detected using machine learning by classifying the websites as legit-
imate  or  illegitimate  [132].  Furthermore,  this  paper  [133]  describes  a  contemporary  research  group's  attempt  to 

 
 
 
19 

counteract targeted assaults using spear-phishing by using social engineering via user education (to increase the success 
probability of phishing attacks, attackers often adopt social engineering techniques). The authors specifically establish 
a link between human psychological features and sensitivity to social engineering. The outcome may be used to deter-
mine if a user has been exposed to a social engineering approach, and the outcome can be used for countermeasure or 
user training. 

On the other side, ICT can potentially increase people's intelligence. This paper [134] describes a system that em-
ploys smart plugs, smart cameras, smart power strips, and a digital assistant such as Amazon Alexa, Google Home, 
Google Assistant, Apple Siri, or Microsoft Cortana to capture voice commands spoken in a much more natural manner 
by a person with physical disabilities to control ordinary home electrical appliances to turn them on or off with minimal 
effort. Moreover, this research [135] intends to assist blind persons using smartphone devices. The program allows users 
to start any app and call contacts using voice commands. Speech commands may be used to instruct a mobile device. 
These orders are quickly interpreted by the voice recognition engine, which transforms speech into  text for direct ac-
tions. This strategy is beneficial when a person feels alone in a low setting since it allows him to make a voice call to a 
known individual. Aside from that, the system offers an app interface that allows the user to get the most recent infor-
mation from numerous web servers. 

To allow smart connections among various devices, smart city technologies have merged artificial intelligence into 
smart gadgets. AI-powered smart home gadgets may interact with one another and collect new data to aid in learning 
human routines. The information gathered is utilized to forecast user behavior and establish situational awareness, i.e., 
to  comprehend  user  preferences  and  modify  settings  appropriately.  While  we  recognize  some  ideals  critical  for  the 
ethical discussion in AI, such as fairness, transparency, and accountability, these values often clash. More openness, for 
example, may result in less privacy. Introducing higher principles to balance values raises two issues:   

Principles might also be in contradiction with one another, deflecting the issue into a purely speculative sphere.   
If a higher-level principle is presented and contradicts another, a higher-higher-level principle is required, and we 

shall enter an endless regress.   

Although AI ethics is part of the so-called field of applied ethics, it appears to be about applying principles and 
values and finding the right balance concerning specific ethical theories, such as Kantian ethics or utilitarianism, tradi-
tional approaches in the field of applied ethics do not provide sufficient conceptual means to deal with practical prob-
lems. As a result, the difficulties that occur from installing intelligent systems cannot be fully addressed since the same 
issue  arises:  How  may  values  be  balanced  concerning  ethical  theories?  If  higher-level  principles  are  not  feasible  for 
resolving value conflicts, the conditions under which they may be applied should be considered. Consequently, it is 
advocated that precise  criteria for  implementing the  principles be made  clear, resulting in at least a clarification for 
public discussion regarding some technical developments in AI. Furthermore, it is argued that to address these conflicts, 
the implementation must be reviewed to see whether it allows for future human involvement  rather than rendering 
future actions and interventions impossible [136]. 

Our degree of connectedness and the rate of technology changes may be perplexing. It is widely accepted we've 
arrived at a crossroads at which we must reconsider how we engage with one another, what we value, how we work, 
and how we see ourselves. Recognizing the need for us all to look up from our devices, disconnect, breathe fresh air, 
enjoy some green space, and engage in face-to-face conversations is part of thoughtful, smart city development. Privacy, 
consumerism, ownership,  and human connections are just a few significant concerns that are touched on. Cities are 
fundamental to how the world operates. Keeping outstanding talent in our cities will provide possibilities we cannot 
afford to miss. 

3. Discussion and Conclusion 

The Smart Cities paradigm emerges as a reaction to the objective of constructing the city of the future, where in-
habitants' and industry well-being and rights are secured, and urban planning is evaluated from an environmental and 
sustainable standpoint. The development of smart networks must invariably involve the provision of integrated cyber 
and privacy ICT solutions [59], [137]. These solutions must ensure the interoperability of the various elements that make 
up  the  city's  structure  and  lessen  the  likelihood  that  multiple  technologies  will  become  obsolete.  The  variety  of  the 
infrastructures and the dynamism of their operational environment necessitates a continual reduction in complexity, 
quicker processing of expansion works, and the inclusion of equivalent new ones [3], [12]. These requirements must be 
met. In addition, unified management proposes clear and definite ways of providing end-to-end smart services based 
on robust security standards and ensuring the privacy of the information being exchanged to offer quality services [139], 
[140]. These ways are based on the fact that smart cities are becoming increasingly interconnected. 

 
 
 
20 

In this particular piece of work, to assess the developing dangers, some specific events of threats, attacks, and their 
respective countermeasures have been selected given. These are the kind of occurrences that have been suggested from 
time to time in the scientific literature. The work seeks to be an indicative model that may be considered during the 
architectural design and execution of infrastructure improvements connected to intelligent city networks. This goal was 
set for the work. 

Future enhancements will include incorporating operational standards used in industrial network applications, 
subject  to  ongoing  modification and reordering,  and  newly recognized standards for  smart city  networks.  Also, the 
recording of the general recommendations by the standardizing bodies per field of operation of the smart networks, as 
well as the  corresponding  gaps that have possibly been identified and further concern development and evaluation 
procedures, is a significant development that bears mentioning. This is another important advancement. 

References 

[1] 

R. Sánchez-Corcuera et al., “Smart cities survey: Technologies, application domains and challenges for the cities of the future,” 

Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw., vol. 15, no. 6, p. 1550147719853984, Jun. 2019, doi: 10.1177/1550147719853984. 

[2] 

L. L. Win and S. Tonyalı, “Security and Privacy Challenges, Solutions, and Open Issues in Smart Metering: A Review,” in 2021 

6th 

International  Conference  on  Computer  Science  and  Engineering 

(UBMK),  Sep.  2021,  pp.  800–805.  doi: 

10.1109/UBMK52708.2021.9558912. 

[3]  B. Hamid, N. Jhanjhi, M. Humayun, A. Khan, and A. Alsayat, “Cyber Security Issues and Challenges for Smart Cities: A survey,” 

in 2019 13th International Conference on Mathematics, Actuarial Science, Computer Science and Statistics (MACS), Sep. 2019, pp. 1–

7. doi: 10.1109/MACS48846.2019.9024768. 

[4] 

I.  Sedinić  and  Z.  Lovrić,  “Influence  of  established  information  security  governance  and  infrastructure  on  future  security 

certifications,” in 2013 36th International Convention on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics 

(MIPRO), Feb. 2013, pp. 1111–1115. 

[5]  K. Demertzis, L. Iliadis, and I. Bougoudis, “Gryphon: a semi-supervised anomaly detection system based on one-class evolving 

spiking neural network,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 32, no. 9, pp. 4303–4314, May 2020, doi: 10.1007/s00521-019-04363-x. 

[6]  V. Lakhno, Y. Matus, V. Malyukov, A. Desyatko, and T. Hnatchenko, “Smart City Cybersecurity Projects Financing Model in 

Case  of  Description  of  Investors’  Resources  With  Fuzzy  Sets,”  in  2019  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Advanced  Trends  in 

Information Theory (ATIT), Sep. 2019, pp. 249–252. doi: 10.1109/ATIT49449.2019.9030499. 

[7] 

S. M. Saïd, M. Abderrahim, O. Mohamed, and T. Mohamed, “Dynamic Approach to Secure Smart City Applications (DCESA),” 

in  2018  Renewable  Energies,  Power  Systems  &  Green  Inclusive  Economy  (REPS-GIE),  Apr.  2018,  pp.  1–6.  doi: 

10.1109/REPSGIE.2018.8488814. 

[8] 

S. Alromaihi, W. Elmedany, and C. Balakrishna, “Cyber Security Challenges of Deploying IoT in Smart Cities for Healthcare 

Applications,” in 2018 6th International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud Workshops (FiCloudW), Dec. 2018, pp. 

140–145. doi: 10.1109/W-FiCloud.2018.00028. 

[9]  A. Bekkanti, A. R, Y. Suganya, P. Valarmathi, S. Ganesan, and C. Z. Basha, “Novel approach of Internet of Things (IoT) Based 

Smart  Ambulance  System  for  Patient’s  Health  Monitoring,”  in  2021  2nd  International  Conference  on  Smart  Electronics  and 

Communication (ICOSEC), Jul. 2021, pp. 29–34. doi: 10.1109/ICOSEC51865.2021.9591791. 

[10]  P. Ganguly, M. Nasipuri, and S. Dutta, “Challenges of the Existing Security Measures Deployed in the Smart Grid Framework,” 

in  2019  IEEE  7th  International  Conference  on  Smart  Energy  Grid  Engineering  (SEGE),  Dec.  2019,  pp.  1–5.  doi: 

10.1109/SEGE.2019.8859917. 

[11]  R. Giffinger and H. Gudrun, “Smart cities ranking: an effective instrument for the positioning of the cities?,” ACE Archit. City 

Environ., vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 7–26, Feb. 2010, doi: 10.5821/ace.v4i12.2483. 

[12]  H. Kartika, Y. A. Fatimah, and S. H. Supangkat, “Secure Cashless Payment Governance in Indonesia: A Systematic Literature 

Review,” in 2018 International Conference on ICT for Smart Society (ICISS), Jul. 2018, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/ICTSS.2018.8549980. 

 
 
 
 
21 

[13]  N.  V.  Lopes,  “Tutorial:  Smart  Governance  for  Smart  Cities,”  in  2018  International  Conference  on  eDemocracy  &  eGovernment 

(ICEDEG), Apr. 2018, pp. 1–2. doi: 10.1109/ICEDEG.2018.8372349. 

[14]  N. V. Lopes, “Smart governance: A key factor for smart cities implementation,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Smart 

Grid and Smart Cities (ICSGSC), Jul. 2017, pp. 277–282. doi: 10.1109/ICSGSC.2017.8038591. 

[15]  A.  Roy,  “Smart  delivery  of  multifaceted  services  through  connected  governance,”  in  2019  3rd  International  Conference  on 

Computing Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC), Mar. 2019, pp. 476–482. doi: 10.1109/ICCMC.2019.8819851. 

[16]  A. Ruiz-Zafra, J. Pigueiras, A. Millán-Alcaide, V. M. Larios, and R. Maciel, “A Digital Object-based Infrastructure for Smart 

Governance of Heterogeneous Internet of Things Systems,” in 2020 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), Sep. 2020, 

pp. 1–8. doi: 10.1109/ISC251055.2020.9239077. 

[17]  Y.  Guo,  Z.  Tang,  P.  Li,  and  H.  Peng,  “The  research  on  the  connotation  characteristics  and  policy  analysis  of  smart  urban 

agglomeration under holistic governance,” in 2021 International Conference on Big Data and Intelligent Decision Making (BDIDM), 

Jul. 2021, pp. 96–99. doi: 10.1109/BDIDM53834.2021.00026. 

[18]  S. Bartolucci and S. Fiorentino, “Blockchain and Smart Contracts as New Governance Tools for the Sharing Economy,” in 2021 

IEEE  18th  International  Conference  on  Software  Architecture  Companion  (ICSA-C),  Mar.  2021,  pp.  118–119.  doi:  10.1109/ICSA-

C52384.2021.00030. 

[19]  M.  Razaghi  and  M.  Finger,  “Smart  Governance  for  Smart  Cities,”  Proc.  IEEE,  vol.  106,  no.  4,  pp.  680–689,  Apr.  2018,  doi: 

10.1109/JPROC.2018.2807784. 

[20] 

J.  Gowthami,  N.  Shanthi,  and  N.  Krishnamoorthy,  “Secure  Three-Factor  Remote  user  Authentication  for  E-Governance  of 

Smart Cities,” in 2018 International Conference on Current Trends towards Converging Technologies (ICCTCT), Mar. 2018, pp. 1–8. 

doi: 10.1109/ICCTCT.2018.8551172. 

[21]  Z. Tang, “Analysis of information security problems and countermeasures in big data management of colleges and universities 

under smart campus environment,” in 2021 2nd International Conference on Information Science and Education (ICISE-IE), Aug. 

2021, pp. 912–915. doi: 10.1109/ICISE-IE53922.2021.00209. 

[22]  D. E. MAJDOUBI, H. EL BAKKALI, and S. SADKI, “Towards Smart Blockchain-Based System for Privacy and Security in a 

Smart  City  environment,”  in  2020  5th  International  Conference  on  Cloud  Computing  and  Artificial  Intelligence:  Technologies  and 

Applications (CloudTech), Aug. 2020, pp. 1–7. doi: 10.1109/CloudTech49835.2020.9365905. 

[23]  H. Alamleh and A. A. S. AlQahtani, “Analysis of the Design Requirements for Remote Internet-Based E-Voting Systems,” in 

2021 IEEE World AI IoT Congress (AIIoT), Feb. 2021, pp. 0386–0390. doi: 10.1109/AIIoT52608.2021.9454194. 

[24] 

J. Thakkar, N. Patel, C. Patel, and K. Shah, “Privacy-Preserving E-voting System through Blockchain Technology,” in  2021 

IEEE International Conference on Technology, Research, and Innovation for Betterment of Society (TRIBES), Sep. 2021, pp. 1–6. doi: 

10.1109/TRIBES52498.2021.9751618. 

[25]  Y. Khlaponin, V. Vyshniakov, M. Prygara, and V. Poltorak, “The New Concept of Guaranteeing Confidence in the E-Voting 

System,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Problems of Infocommunications. Science and Technology (PIC S&T), Jul. 2020, pp. 

747–752. doi: 10.1109/PICST51311.2020.9468012. 

[26]  M. Derawi, Y. Dalveren, and F. A. Cheikh, “Internet-of-Things-Based Smart Transportation Systems for Safer Roads,” in 2020 

IEEE 6th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/WF-IoT48130.2020.9221208. 

[27]  D. Vishal, H. S. Afaque, H. Bhardawaj, and T. K. Ramesh, “IoT-driven road safety system,” in 2017 International Conference on 

Electrical,  Electronics,  Communication,  Computer,  and  Optimization  Techniques  (ICEECCOT),  Sep.  2017,  pp.  1–5.  doi: 

10.1109/ICEECCOT.2017.8284624. 

[28]  A.-E. M. Taha, “An IoT Architecture for Assessing Road Safety in Smart Cities,” Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput., vol. 2018, p. 

e8214989, Nov. 2018, doi: 10.1155/2018/8214989. 

 
 
 
22 

[29]  A. A. Brincat, F. Pacifici, S. Martinaglia, and F. Mazzola, “The Internet of Things for Intelligent Transportation Systems in Real 

Smart Cities Scenarios,” in 2019 IEEE 5th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), Apr. 2019, pp. 128–132. doi: 10.1109/WF-

IoT.2019.8767247. 

[30]  Z. Yongjun, Z. Xueli, Z. Shuxian, and G. shenghui, “Intelligent transportation system based on Internet of Things,” in  World 

Automation Congress 2012, Jun. 2012, pp. 1–3. 

[31]  T.  M.  Bojan,  U.  R.  Kumar,  and  V.  M.  Bojan,  “An  internet  of  things  based  intelligent  transportation  system,”  in  2014  IEEE 

International Conference on Vehicular Electronics and Safety, Sep. 2014, pp. 174–179. doi: 10.1109/ICVES.2014.7063743. 

[32] 

J. Sherly and D. Somasundareswari, “INTERNET OF THINGS BASED SMART TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS,” vol. 02, no. 

07, p. 4, 2015. 

[33]  L. F. Herrera-quintero, K. Banse, J. C. Vega-alfonso, W. D. Jalil-nasser, and O. E. Herrera Bedoya, “IoT approach applied in the 

context of ITS: monitoring highways through instant messaging,” in 2015 14th International Conference on ITS Telecommunications 

(ITST), Sep. 2015, pp. 27–31. doi: 10.1109/ITST.2015.7377395. 

[34]  R. M. Savithramma, B. P. Ashwini, and R. Sumathi, “Smart Mobility Implementation in Smart Cities: A Comprehensive Review 

on State-of-art Technologies,” in 2022 4th International Conference on Smart Systems and Inventive Technology (ICSSIT), Jan. 2022, 

pp. 10–17. doi: 10.1109/ICSSIT53264.2022.9716288. 

[35] 

I. Šemanjski, S. Mandžuka, and S. Gautama, “Smart Mobility,” in 2018 International Symposium ELMAR, Sep. 2018, pp. 63–66. 

doi: 10.23919/ELMAR.2018.8534693. 

[36]  B.  Kumar,  M.  AbuAlhaija,  L.  Alqasmi,  and  M.  Dhakhri,  “Smart  Cities:  A  New  Age  of  Digital  Insecurity,”  in  2020  9th 

International  Conference  System  Modeling  and  Advancement  in  Research  Trends  (SMART),  Sep.  2020,  pp.  267–272.  doi: 

10.1109/SMART50582.2020.9337127. 

[37]  S. Righini, L. Calderoni, and D. Maio, “A Privacy-Aware Zero Interaction Smart Mobility System,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 

11924–11937, 2022, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3146340. 

[38] 

J. Axelsson and S. Nylander, “An Analysis of Systems-of-Systems Opportunities and Challenges Related to Mobility in Smart 

Cities,”  in  2018  13th  Annual  Conference  on  System  of  Systems  Engineering  (SoSE),  Jun.  2018,  pp.  132–137.  doi: 

10.1109/SYSOSE.2018.8428713. 

[39]  T. H. Szymanski, “The ‘Cyber Security via Determinism’ Paradigm for a Quantum Safe Zero Trust Deterministic Internet of 

Things (IoT),” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 45893–45930, 2022, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3169137. 

[40]  A. Pundir, S. Singh, M. Kumar, A. Bafila, and G. J. Saxena, “Cyber-Physical Systems Enabled Transport Networks in Smart 

Cities:  Challenges  and  Enabling  Technologies  of  the  New  Mobility  Era,”  IEEE  Access,  vol.  10,  pp.  16350–16364,  2022,  doi: 

10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3147323. 

[41]  R.  Lu,  X.  Lin,  Z.  Shi,  and  X.  S.  Shen,  “A  Lightweight  Conditional  Privacy-Preservation  Protocol  for  Vehicular  Traffic-

Monitoring Systems,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 62–65, Feb. 2013, doi: 10.1109/MIS.2013.56. 

[42]  G. Samara and W. A. H. A. Alsalihy, “A new security mechanism for vehicular communication networks,” in Proceedings Title: 

2012  International  Conference  on  Cyber  Security,  Cyber  Warfare  and  Digital  Forensic  (CyberSec),  Jun.  2012,  pp.  18–22.  doi: 

10.1109/CyberSec.2012.6246119. 

[43]  P.  Škorput,  H.  Vojvodić,  and  S.  Mandžuka,  “Cyber  security  in  cooperative  intelligent  transportation  systems,”  in  2017 

International Symposium ELMAR, Sep. 2017, pp. 35–38. doi: 10.23919/ELMAR.2017.8124429. 

[44]  M. Badra and E. Ben Hamida, “A novel cryptography based privacy preserving solution for urban mobility and traffic control,” 

in  2015  7th  International  Conference  on  New  Technologies,  Mobility  and  Security  (NTMS),  Jul.  2015,  pp.  1–5.  doi: 

10.1109/NTMS.2015.7266468. 

[45]  B. Vaidya and H. T. Mouftah, “Security for Shared Electric and Automated Mobility Services in Smart Cities,” IEEE Secur. Priv., 

vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 24–33, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1109/MSEC.2020.3013759. 

 
 
 
23 

[46]  K. Kaur, S. Garg, G. Kaddoum, F. Gagnon, S. H. Ahmed, and M. Guizani, “A Secure, Lightweight, and Privacy-Preserving 

Authentication  Scheme  for  V2G  Connections  in  Smart  Grid,”  in  IEEE  INFOCOM  2019  -  IEEE  Conference  on  Computer 

Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Apr. 2019, pp. 541–546. doi: 10.1109/INFCOMW.2019.8845140. 

[47]  G.  Sabaliauskaite,  L.  S.  Liew,  F.  Zhou,  and  J.  Cui,  “Designing  Safe  and  Secure  Mixed  Traffic  Systems,”  in  2019  IEEE  19th 

International Symposium on High Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE), Jan. 2019, pp. 222–227. doi: 10.1109/HASE.2019.00041. 

[48]  N. S. Arabi, T. Halabi, and M. Zulkernine, “Reinforcement Learning-driven Attack on Road Traffic Signal Controllers,” in 2021 

IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security and Resilience (CSR), Jul. 2021, pp. 218–225. doi: 10.1109/CSR51186.2021.9527951. 

[49]  C.  Dong,  H.  Wang,  D.  Ni,  Y.  Liu,  and  Q.  Chen,  “Impact  Evaluation  of  Cyber-Attacks  on  Traffic  Flow  of  Connected  and 

Automated Vehicles,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 86824–86835, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2993254. 

[50]  A.  Ongel,  H.  Cornet,  P.  Kong,  R.  Khoo,  T.  Liu,  and  M.  Kloeppel,  “Public  Transport  Service  Quality  Improvement  Using 

Universal Design Standards and Advanced Vehicle Technologies,” in  2018 International Conference on Intelligent Autonomous 

Systems (ICoIAS), Mar. 2018, pp. 211–216. doi: 10.1109/ICoIAS.2018.8494057. 

[51]  H.  Li  and  Y.  Fu,  “Research  on  the  triggering  factors  of  PPP  in  urban  mass  transit,”  in  2017  4th  International  Conference  on 

Industrial Economics System and Industrial Security Engineering (IEIS), Jul. 2017, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/IEIS.2017.8078665. 

[52]  M. Wazid, B. Bera, A. K. Das, S. P. Mohanty, and M. Jo, “Fortifying Smart Transportation Security through Public Blockchain,” 

IEEE Internet Things J., pp. 1–1, 2022, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2022.3150842. 

[53]  Z.  Yorio,  R.  Oram,  S.  El-Tawab,  A.  Salman,  M.  H.  Heydari,  and  B.  B.  Park,  “Data  analysis  and  information  security  of  an 

Internet of Things (IoT) intelligent transit system,” in 2018 Systems and Information Engineering Design Symposium (SIEDS), Apr. 

2018, pp. 24–29. doi: 10.1109/SIEDS.2018.8374744. 

[54]  S.  Kim,  Y.  Won,  I.-H.  Park,  Y.  Eun,  and  K.-J.  Park, “Cyber-Physical  Vulnerability  Analysis  of  Communication-Based  Train 

Control,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 6353–6362, Dec. 2019, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2919066. 

[55]  H.  Guo  and  J.  W.  Wong,  “Cyber-physical  authentication  for  metro  systems,”  in  2017  23rd  Asia-Pacific  Conference  on 

Communications (APCC), Sep. 2017, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.23919/APCC.2017.8304066. 

[56]  T. Kertis and D. Prochazkova, “Cyber security of underground railway system operation,” in 2017 Smart City Symposium Prague 

(SCSP), Feb. 2017, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/SCSP.2017.7973839. 

[57]  S. R. Aktouche, M. Sallak, A. Bouabdallah, and W. Schön, “Towards Reconciling Safety and Security Risk Analysis Processes 

in Railway Remote Driving,” in 2021 5th International Conference on System Reliability and Safety (ICSRS), Aug. 2021, pp. 148–

154. doi: 10.1109/ICSRS53853.2021.9660764. 

[58]  K. Demertzis and L. Iliadis, “Detecting invasive species with a bio-inspired semi-supervised neurocomputing approach: the 

case of Lagocephalus sceleratus,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1225–1234, Jun. 2017, doi: 10.1007/s00521-016-2591-2. 

[59]  V.-D. Anezakis, L. Iliadis, K. Demertzis, and G. Mallinis, “Hybrid Soft Computing Analytics of Cardiorespiratory Morbidity 

and Mortality Risk Due to Air Pollution,” in Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management in Mediterranean Countries, 

Cham, 2017, pp. 87–105. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-67633-3_8. 

[60]  V.-D. Anezakis, K. Demertzis, L. Iliadis, and S. Spartalis, “A Hybrid Soft Computing Approach Producing Robust Forest Fire 

Risk Indices,” in Artificial Intelligence Applications and Innovations, Cham, 2016, pp. 191–203. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-44944-9_17. 

[61]  R. Elhabyan, W. Shi, and M. St-Hilaire, “Coverage protocols for wireless sensor networks: Review and future directions,” J. 

Commun. Netw., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 45–60, Oct. 2019, doi: 10.1109/JCN.2019.000005. 

[62]  S.  T.  Patel and  N.  H.  Mistry, “A  review:  Sybil attack  detection  techniques  in  WSN,”  in 2017  4th  International  Conference  on 

Electronics and Communication Systems (ICECS), Oct. 2017, pp. 184–188. doi: 10.1109/ECS.2017.8067865. 

[63]  S. Sudheendran, O. Bouachir, S. Moussa, and A. O. Dahmane, “Review  — Challenges of mobility aware MAC protocols in 

WSN,”  in  2018  Advances  in  Science  and  Engineering  Technology  International  Conferences  (ASET),  Oct.  2018,  pp.  1–6.  doi: 

10.1109/ICASET.2018.8376831. 

 
 
 
24 

[64]  C.-H. Liu and P.-C. Teng, “The study for campus monitoring system of attacks analysis,” in 2010 International Symposium on 

Computer, Communication, Control and Automation (3CA), Feb. 2010, vol. 1, pp. 407–410. doi: 10.1109/3CA.2010.5533785. 

[65]  Z. Teng, B. Pang, C. Du, and Z. Li, “Malicious Node Identification Strategy With Environmental Parameters,” IEEE Access, vol. 

8, pp. 149522–149530, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3013840. 

[66]  S. S. Bajwa and M. K. Khan, “Grouped Black hole Attacks Security Model (GBHASM) for wireless Ad-hoc networks,” in 2010 

The  2nd  International  Conference  on  Computer  and  Automation  Engineering  (ICCAE),  Oct.  2010,  vol.  1,  pp.  756–760.  doi: 

10.1109/ICCAE.2010.5451250. 

[67]  G. Murino, A. Armando, and A. Tacchella, “Resilience of Cyber-Physical Systems: an Experimental Appraisal of Quantitative 

Measures,”  in  2019  11th  International  Conference  on  Cyber  Conflict  (CyCon),  Feb.  2019,  vol.  900,  pp.  1–19.  doi: 

10.23919/CYCON.2019.8757010. 

[68]  M.  K.  Hasan,  M.  A.  Khan,  G. F.  Issa,  A.  Atta,  A.  S.  Akram, and  M.  Hassan, “Smart  Waste  Management  and  Classification 

System for Smart Cities using Deep Learning,” in 2022 International Conference on Business Analytics for Technology and Security 

(ICBATS), Oct. 2022, pp. 1–7. doi: 10.1109/ICBATS54253.2022.9759087. 

[69]  H. H. Addeen, Y. Xiao, J. Li, and M. Guizani, “A Survey of Cyber-Physical Attacks and Detection Methods in Smart Water 

Distribution Systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 99905–99921, 2021, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3095713. 

[70]  P. Binnar, A. Dalvi, S. Bhirud, and F. Kazi, “Cyber Forensic Case Study of Waste Water Treatment Plant,” in 2021 IEEE Bombay 

Section Signature Conference (IBSSC), Aug. 2021, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/IBSSC53889.2021.9673346. 

[71]  S. Adepu and A. Mathur, “Distributed Attack Detection in a Water Treatment Plant: Method and Case Study,”  IEEE Trans. 

Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 86–99, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2018.2875008. 

[72]  O. Chenaru, D. Popescu, D. Enache, L. Ichim, and F. Stoican, “Improving operational security for web-based distributed control 

systems in wastewater management,” in  2017 25th Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED), Jul. 2017, pp. 

1089–1093. doi: 10.1109/MED.2017.7984263. 

[73]  D. Ferebee, D. Dasgupta, and Q. Wu, “A Cyber-Security Storm MAP,” in 2012 International Conference on Cyber Security, Sep. 

2012, pp. 93–102. doi: 10.1109/CyberSecurity.2012.19. 

[74]  N. A. Giacobe and S. Xu, “Geovisual analytics for cyber security: Adopting the GeoViz Toolkit,” in 2011 IEEE Conference on 

Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), Jul. 2011, pp. 315–316. doi: 10.1109/VAST.2011.6102491. 

[75]  W. Zhe, C. Wei, and L. Chunlin, “DoS attack detection model of smart grid based on machine learning method,” in 2020 IEEE 

International  Conference  on  Power, 

Intelligent  Computing  and  Systems 

(ICPICS), 

Jul.  2020,  pp.  735–738.  doi: 

10.1109/ICPICS50287.2020.9202401. 

[76]  S.  Kumar,  H.  Kumar,  and  G.  R.  Gunnam,  “Security  Integrity  of  Data  Collection  from  Smart  Electric  Meter  under  a  Cyber 

Attack,”  in  2019  2nd  International  Conference  on  Data  Intelligence  and  Security  (ICDIS),  Jun.  2019,  pp.  9–13.  doi: 

10.1109/ICDIS.2019.00009. 

[77]  X. Lu, J. Jing, and Y. Wu, “False Data Injection Attack Location Detection Based on Classification Method in Smart Grid,” in 

2020  2nd  International  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Advanced  Manufacture  (AIAM),  Jul.  2020,  pp.  133–136.  doi: 

10.1109/AIAM50918.2020.00033. 

[78]  F. A. Cardoso e Silva, J. P. Villibor, T. A. Da Silva Almeida, B. D. Bonatto, and P. F. Ribeiro, “Smart Cities Criteria: A Discussion 

About  Relevant  and  Contextualized  Indicators  for  Sustainable  Smart  Living,”  in  2021  IEEE  PES  Innovative  Smart  Grid 

Technologies 

Conference 

- 

Latin 

America 

(ISGT 

Latin 

America), 

Sep. 

2021, 

pp. 

1–5. 

doi: 

10.1109/ISGTLatinAmerica52371.2021.9543019. 

[79]  A.-L.  Kor,  M.  Yanovsky,  C.  Pattinson,  and  V.  Kharchenko,  “SMART-ITEM:  IoT-enabled  smart  living,”  in  2016  Future 

Technologies Conference (FTC), Sep. 2016, pp. 739–749. doi: 10.1109/FTC.2016.7821687. 

 
 
 
25 

[80]  S.  K.  Das,  “Cyber-physical-social  convergence  in  smart  living:  Challenges  and  opportunities,”  in  2016  IEEE  International 

Conference  on  Pervasive  Computing  and  Communication  Workshops  (PerCom  Workshops),  Mar.  2016,  pp.  1–1.  doi: 

10.1109/PERCOMW.2016.7457093. 

[81]  A. J. Hussain, D. M. Marcinonyte, F. I. Iqbal, H. Tawfik, T. Baker, and D. Al-Jumeily, “Smart Home Systems Security,” in 2018 

IEEE 20th International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications; IEEE 16th International Conference on Smart 

City;  IEEE  4th  International  Conference  on  Data  Science  and  Systems  (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS),  Jun.  2018,  pp.  1422–1428.  doi: 

10.1109/HPCC/SmartCity/DSS.2018.00235. 

[82]  K. Karimi and S. Krit, “Smart home-Smartphone Systems: Threats, Security Requirements and Open research Challenges,” in 

2019 

International  Conference  of  Computer  Science  and  Renewable  Energies 

(ICCSRE), 

Jul.  2019,  pp.  1–5.  doi: 

10.1109/ICCSRE.2019.8807756. 

[83]  F. James, “A Risk Management Framework and A Generalized Attack Automata for IoT based Smart Home Environment,” in 

2019 3rd Cyber Security in Networking Conference (CSNet), Jul. 2019, pp. 86–90. doi: 10.1109/CSNet47905.2019.9108941. 

[84]  A. M. Gamundani, A. Phillips, and H. N. Muyingi, “An Overview of Potential Authentication Threats and Attacks on Internet 

of Things(IoT): A Focus on Smart Home Applications,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and 

IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart 

Data (SmartData), Jul. 2018, pp. 50–57. doi: 10.1109/Cybermatics_2018.2018.00043. 

[85]  M. Ibrahim and I. Nabulsi, “Security Analysis of Smart Home Systems Applying Attack Graph,” in 2021 Fifth World Conference 

on Smart Trends in Systems Security and Sustainability (WorldS4), Jul. 2021, pp. 230–234. doi: 10.1109/WorldS451998.2021.9514050. 

[86]  S. ur Rehman and V. Gruhn, “An approach to secure smart homes in cyber-physical systems/Internet-of-Things,” in 2018 Fifth 

International Conference on Software Defined Systems (SDS), Apr. 2018, pp. 126–129. doi: 10.1109/SDS.2018.8370433. 

[87]  W. She, Z.-H. Gu, X.-K. Lyu, Q. Liu, Z. Tian, and W. Liu, “Homomorphic Consortium Blockchain for Smart Home System 

Sensitive Data Privacy Preserving,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 62058–62070, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2916345. 

[88]  T.  Li  et  al., “Your  Home is  Insecure:  Practical  Attacks  on Wireless  Home  Alarm  Systems,” in  IEEE  INFOCOM 2021 - IEEE 

Conference on Computer Communications, Feb. 2021, pp. 1–10. doi: 10.1109/INFOCOM42981.2021.9488873. 

[89]  W. He et al., “SoK: Context Sensing for Access Control in the Adversarial Home IoT,” in  2021 IEEE European Symposium on 

Security and Privacy (EuroS&P), Sep. 2021, pp. 37–53. doi: 10.1109/EuroSP51992.2021.00014. 

[90]  A. Singh and B. Sikdar, “Adversarial Attack for Deep Learning Based IoT Appliance Classification Techniques,” in 2021 IEEE 

7th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), Jun. 2021, pp. 657–662. doi: 10.1109/WF-IoT51360.2021.9594946. 

[91]  K. Demertzis, N. Tziritas, P. Kikiras, S. L. Sanchez, and L. Iliadis, “The Next Generation Cognitive Security Operations Center: 

Adaptive Analytic Lambda Architecture for Efficient Defense against Adversarial Attacks,” Big Data Cogn. Comput., vol. 3, no. 

1, Art. no. 1, Mar. 2019, doi: 10.3390/bdcc3010006. 

[92]  U.  T.  Khan  and  M.  F.  Zia,  “Smart  city  technologies,  key  components,  and  its  aspects,”  in  2021  International  Conference  on 

Innovative Computing (ICIC), Aug. 2021, pp. 1–10. doi: 10.1109/ICIC53490.2021.9692989. 

[93]  H. K. Sharma, A. Kumar, S. Pant, and M. Ram, “1 Introduction to Smart Healthcare and Telemedicine Systems,” in  Artificial 

Intelligence, Blockchain and IoT for Smart Healthcare, River Publishers, 2022, pp. 1–12. Accessed: Jul. 10, 2022. [Online]. Available: 

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9782809 

[94]  F. Hussain and M. Hammad, “Smart healthcare facilities via IOT in the healthcare industry,” in  3rd Smart Cities Symposium 

(SCS 2020), Sep. 2020, vol. 2020, pp. 386–391. doi: 10.1049/icp.2021.0945. 

[95]  H. K. Sharma, A. Kumar, S. Pant, and M. Ram, “3 Role of Artificial Intelligence, IoT and Blockchain in Smart Healthcare,” in 

Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain and IoT for Smart Healthcare, River Publishers, 2022, pp. 25–36. Accessed: Jul. 10, 2022. [Online]. 

Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9782803 

 
 
 
26 

[96]  S. M. Karunarathne, N. Saxena, and M. K. Khan, “Security and Privacy in IoT Smart Healthcare,”  IEEE Internet Comput., vol. 

25, no. 4, pp. 37–48, Jul. 2021, doi: 10.1109/MIC.2021.3051675. 

[97]  H.  K.  Sharma,  A.  Kumar,  S.  Pant,  and  M.  Ram,  “7  Security  and  Privacy  challenge  in  Smart  Healthcare  and  Telemedicine 

systems,” in Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain and IoT for Smart Healthcare, River Publishers, 2022, pp. 67–76. Accessed: Jul. 10, 

2022. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9782812 

[98] 

J. Qiu, X. Liang, S. Shetty, and D. Bowden, “Towards Secure and Smart Healthcare in Smart Cities Using Blockchain,” in 2018 

IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), Sep. 2018, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/ISC2.2018.8656914. 

[99]  D. J. Cook, G. Duncan, G. Sprint, and R. L. Fritz, “Using Smart City Technology to Make Healthcare Smarter,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 

106, no. 4, pp. 708–722, Apr. 2018, doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2017.2787688. 

[100]  S. A. Butt, J. L. Diaz-Martinez, T. Jamal, A. Ali, E. De-La-Hoz-Franco, and M. Shoaib, “IoT Smart Health Security Threats,” in 

2019  19th  International  Conference  on  Computational  Science  and  Its  Applications  (ICCSA),  Jul.  2019,  pp.  26–31.  doi: 

10.1109/ICCSA.2019.000-8. 

[101]  S.  Safavi,  A.  M.  Meer,  E.  Keneth  Joel  Melanie,  and  Z.  Shukur,  “Cyber  Vulnerabilities  on  Smart  Healthcare,  Review  and 

Solutions,” in 2018 Cyber Resilience Conference (CRC), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/CR.2018.8626826. 

[102]  R. Nidhya, M. Kumar, R. Maheswar, and D. Pavithra, “Security and Privacy Issues in Smart Healthcare System Using Internet 

of  Things,” 

in 

IoT-enabled  Smart  Healthcare  Systems,  Services  and  Applications,  Wiley,  2022,  pp.  63–85.  doi: 

10.1002/9781119816829.ch4. 

[103]  P. Chinnasamy and P. Deepalakshmi, “Design of Secure Storage for Health-care Cloud using Hybrid Cryptography,” in 2018 

Second International Conference on Inventive Communication and Computational Technologies (ICICCT), Apr. 2018, pp. 1717–1720. 

doi: 10.1109/ICICCT.2018.8473107. 

[104]  D. Yang, I. Doh, and K. Chae, “Secure medical image-sharing mechanism based on visual cryptography in EHR system,” in 

2018  20th  International  Conference  on  Advanced  Communication  Technology  (ICACT),  Oct.  2018,  pp.  463–467.  doi: 

10.23919/ICACT.2018.8323796. 

[105]  M. Quamara, B. B. Gupta, and S. Yamaguchi, “An End-to-End Security Framework for Smart Healthcare Information Sharing 

against Botnet-based Cyber-Attacks,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), Jan. 2021, pp. 1–4. 

doi: 10.1109/ICCE50685.2021.9427753. 

[106]  N. Poonguzhali, S. Gayathri, A. Deebika, and R. Suriapriya, “A Framework For Electronic Health Record Using Blockchain 

Technology,” in 2020 International Conference on System, Computation, Automation and Networking (ICSCAN), Jul. 2020, pp. 1–5. 

doi: 10.1109/ICSCAN49426.2020.9262369. 

[107]  Y. Zhuang, L. R. Sheets, Y.-W. Chen, Z.-Y. Shae, J. J. P. Tsai, and C.-R. Shyu, “A Patient-Centric Health Information Exchange 

Framework  Using  Blockchain  Technology,”  IEEE  J.  Biomed.  Health  Inform.,  vol.  24,  no.  8,  pp.  2169–2176,  Dec.  2020,  doi: 

10.1109/JBHI.2020.2993072. 

[108]  G.  S.  Reen,  M.  Mohandas,  and  S.  Venkatesan, “Decentralized  Patient  Centric  e-  Health Record  Management  System using 

Blockchain  and  IPFS,”  in  2019  IEEE  Conference  on  Information  and  Communication  Technology,  Sep.  2019,  pp.  1–7.  doi: 

10.1109/CICT48419.2019.9066212. 

[109]  A. I. Newaz, N. I. Haque, A. K. Sikder, M. A. Rahman, and A. S. Uluagac, “Adversarial Attacks to Machine Learning-Based 

Smart  Healthcare  Systems,”  in  GLOBECOM  2020  -  2020  IEEE  Global  Communications  Conference,  Sep.  2020,  pp.  1–6.  doi: 

10.1109/GLOBECOM42002.2020.9322472. 

[110]  A. Youssef and P. Hajek, “The Role of Smart Economy in Developing Smart Cities,” in 2021 International Symposium on Computer 

Science and Intelligent Controls (ISCSIC), Aug. 2021, pp. 276–279. doi: 10.1109/ISCSIC54682.2021.00057. 

 
 
 
27 

[111]  A. Purnomo, A. V. Dian Sano, H. Nindito, E. D. Madyatmadja, and C. P. M. Sianipar, “Mapping of Smart Economy Research 

Themes:  A  Nine-Year  Review,”  in  2021  International  Conference  on  ICT  for  Smart  Society  (ICISS),  Dec.  2021,  pp.  1–7.  doi: 

10.1109/ICISS53185.2021.9533229. 

[112]  S.  Riasat  and  M.  A.  Shah,  “SECURING  SMART  CITIES:  AN  ANALYSIS  ON  USING  BLOCKCHAIN  FOR  DIGITAL 

ECONOMIES,”  in  Competitive  Advantage  in  the  Digital  Economy  (CADE  2021),  Jun.  2021,  vol.  2021,  pp.  143–148.  doi: 

10.1049/icp.2021.2417. 

[113]  D. R. Bongestu, Yappiter, and H. L. H. S. Warnars, “Jakarta Smart City Mobile Application for Problem Reporting,” in  2021 

International  Conference  on  Artificial 

Intelligence  and  Smart  Systems 

(ICAIS),  Mar.  2021,  pp.  735–740.  doi: 

10.1109/ICAIS50930.2021.9395879. 

[114]  E. Didik Madyatmadja, E. Abdurachman, F. L. Gaol, B. W. Pudjianto, and M. Hapsara, “Potential Impact of Social Media to 

Support Government Services in Jakarta Smart City,” in 2018 International Conference on Information Management and Technology 

(ICIMTech), Sep. 2018, pp. 534–538. doi: 10.1109/ICIMTech.2018.8528160. 

[115]  A. Parlina, H. Murfi, and K. Ramli, “Smart City Research in Indonesia: A Bibliometric Analysis,” in  2019 16th International 

Conference on Quality in Research (QIR): International Symposium on Electrical and Computer Engineering, Jul. 2019, pp. 1–5. doi: 

10.1109/QIR.2019.8898264. 

[116]  F. Anindra, S. H. Supangkat, and R. R. Kosala, “Smart Governance as Smart City Critical Success Factor (Case in 15 Cities in 

Indonesia),” in 2018 International Conference on ICT for Smart Society (ICISS), Jul. 2018, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ICTSS.2018.8549923. 

[117]  E. E. Surbakti, F. A. T. Tobing, R. Prisalia, and R. Septa, “AHP Hierarchy Structure for Indicators of Smart City Implementation 

in Indonesia,” in 2021 2nd International Conference On Smart Cities, Automation & Intelligent Computing Systems (ICON-SONICS), 

Jul. 2021, pp. 25–30. doi: 10.1109/ICON-SONICS53103.2021.9617209. 

[118]  C. Wei and Z. Dong, “Promote Internet Economic Development and Smart City Construction with Data Sharing,” in 2021 2nd 

International  Conference  on  Big  Data  Economy  and  Information  Management  (BDEIM),  Sep.  2021,  pp.  483–486.  doi: 

10.1109/BDEIM55082.2021.00105. 

[119]  W. Guo and P. Jiang, “Framework for designing a smart connected product service system,” in  2021 IEEE 1st International 

Conference on Digital Twins and Parallel Intelligence (DTPI), Jul. 2021, pp. 448–451. doi: 10.1109/DTPI52967.2021.9540186. 

[120]  G. S. Ramachandran, R. Radhakrishnan, and B. Krishnamachari, “Towards a Decentralized Data Marketplace for Smart Cities,” 

in 2018 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), Sep. 2018, pp. 1–8. doi: 10.1109/ISC2.2018.8656952. 

[121]  J. Pacheco, C. Tunc, and S. Hariri, “Design and evaluation of resilient infrastructures systems for smart cities,” in  2016 IEEE 

International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), Sep. 2016, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ISC2.2016.7580756. 

[122]  X. Zhang, H. Xie, and H. Lin, “HOPE-L: A Lossless Database Watermarking Method in Homomorphic Encryption Domain,” 

in  2021  IEEE  9th  International  Conference  on  Smart  City  and  Informatization  (iSCI),  Jul.  2021,  pp.  31–38.  doi: 

10.1109/iSCI53438.2021.00014. 

[123]  J. M. Montes, C. E. Ramirez, M. C. Gutierrez, and V. M. Larios, “Smart Contracts for supply chain applicable to Smart Cities 

daily  operations,” 

in  2019 

IEEE 

International  Smart  Cities  Conference 

(ISC2), 

Jul.  2019,  pp.  565–570.  doi: 

10.1109/ISC246665.2019.9071650. 

[124]  Z.  S.  Zainudin  and  N.  Nuha  Abdul  Molok,  “Advanced  Persistent  Threats  Awareness  and  Readiness:  A  Case  Study  in 

Malaysian Financial Institutions,” in 2018 Cyber Resilience Conference (CRC), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–3. doi: 10.1109/CR.2018.8626835. 

[125]  C.  Mun  Chye,  M.  Fahmy-Abdullah,  S.  F.  Sufahani,  and  M.  K.  Bin  Ali,  “A  Study  of  Smart  People  Toward  Smart  Cities 

Development,” in Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Trends in Computational and Cognitive Engineering, Singapore, 

2022, pp. 257–271. doi: 10.1007/978-981-16-7597-3_21. 

[126]  A. Wolff, G. Kortuem, and J. Cavero, “Towards smart city education,” in  2015 Sustainable Internet and ICT for Sustainability 

(SustainIT), Apr. 2015, pp. 1–3. doi: 10.1109/SustainIT.2015.7101381. 

 
 
 
28 

[127]  D. Bululukova, M. Tabakovic, and H. Wahl, “Smart cities education as mobility, energy & ICT hub,” in 2016 5th International 

Conference on Smart Cities and Green ICT Systems (SMARTGREENS), Apr. 2016, pp. 1–8. 

[128]  M. J. Kwon, G. Kwak, S. Jun, H.-J. Kim, and H. Y. Lee, “Enriching Security Education Hands-on Labs with Practical Exercises,” 

in  2017  International  Conference  on  Software  Security  and  Assurance  (ICSSA),  Altoona,  PA,  Jul.  2017,  pp.  100–103.  doi: 

10.1109/ICSSA.2017.8. 

[129]  S.-S. Tseng, K.-Y. Chen, T.-J. Lee, and J.-F. Weng, “Automatic content generation for anti-phishing education game,” in 2011 

International Conference on Electrical and Control Engineering, Sep. 2011, pp. 6390–6394. doi: 10.1109/ICECENG.2011.6056921. 

[130]  R. Röpke, U. Schroeder, V. Drury, and U. Meyer, “Towards Personalized Game-Based Learning in Anti-Phishing Education,” 

in  2020  IEEE  20th  International  Conference  on  Advanced  Learning  Technologies  (ICALT),  Jul.  2020,  pp.  65–66.  doi: 

10.1109/ICALT49669.2020.00026. 

[131]  Y.-M. Chiou, C.-C. Shen, C. Mouza, and T. Rutherford, “Augmented Reality-Based Cybersecurity Education on Phishing,” in 

2021  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Virtual  Reality  (AIVR),  Aug.  2021,  pp.  228–231.  doi: 

10.1109/AIVR52153.2021.00052. 

[132]  F. Yahya et al., “Detection of Phising Websites using Machine Learning Approaches,” in 2021 International Conference on Data 

Science and Its Applications (ICoDSA), Jul. 2021, pp. 40–47. doi: 10.1109/ICoDSA53588.2021.9617482. 

[133]  T.  Takata  and  K.  Ogura,  “Confront  Phishing  Attacks  —  from  a  Perspective  of  Security  Education,”  in  2019  IEEE  10th 

International Conference on Awareness Science and Technology (iCAST), Jul. 2019, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/ICAwST.2019.8923444. 

[134]  P. Mtshali and F. Khubisa, “A Smart Home Appliance Control System for Physically Disabled People,” in 2019 Conference on 

Information Communications Technology and Society (ICTAS), Mar. 2019, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/ICTAS.2019.8703637. 

[135]  R. Kasthuri, B. Nivetha, S. Shabana, M. Veluchamy, and S. Sivakumar, “Smart device for visually impaired people,” in 2017 

Third  International  Conference  on  Science  Technology  Engineering  &  Management  (ICONSTEM),  Mar.  2017,  pp.  54–59.  doi: 

10.1109/ICONSTEM.2017.8261257. 

[136]  F. Richter, “Ethics of AI as practical ethics,” in 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Technology and Society (ISTAS), Jul. 2021, 

pp. 1–1. doi: 10.1109/ISTAS52410.2021.9629163. 

[137]  K.  Demertzis,  L.  Iliadis,  E.  Pimenidis,  N.  Tziritas,  M.  Koziri,  and  P.  Kikiras,  “Blockchained  Adaptive  Federated  Auto 

MetaLearning  BigData  and  DevOps  CyberSecurity  Architecture  in  Industry  4.0,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  22nd  Engineering 

Applications of Neural Networks Conference, Cham, 2021, pp. 345–363. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-80568-5_29. 

[138] M. R, G. K, and V. V. Rao, “Proactive Measures to Mitigate Cyber Security Challenges in IoT based Smart Healthcare Networks,” 

in  2021  IEEE  International  IOT,  Electronics  and  Mechatronics  Conference  (IEMTRONICS),  Apr.  2021,  pp.  1–4.  doi: 

10.1109/IEMTRONICS52119.2021.9422615. 

[139]  T. Alshalali, K. M’Bale, and D. Josyula, “Security and Privacy of Electronic Health Records Sharing Using Hyperledger Fabric,” 

in  2018  International  Conference  on  Computational  Science  and  Computational  Intelligence  (CSCI),  Sep.  2018,  pp.  760–763.  doi: 

10.1109/CSCI46756.2018.00152. 

[140]  J. Bringer, H. Chabanne, and A. Patey, “Privacy-Preserving Biometric Identification Using Secure Multiparty Computation: 

An Overview and Recent Trends,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 42–52, Mar. 2013, doi: 10.1109/MSP.2012.2230218. 

 
 
 
 
