Cyber Pirates Ahoy! 
An Analysis of Cybersecurity Challenges in the Shipping Industry 

George Grispos and William R. Mahoney 

School of Interdisciplinary Informatics 
University of Nebraska-Omaha 
Omaha, NE, United States 

E-mail: ggrispos@unomaha.edu; 
wmahoney@unomaha.edu 

Abstract:  Maritime  shipping  has  become  a  trillion-dollar  industry  that  now  impacts  the 
economy  of  virtually  every  country  around  the  world.  It  is  therefore  no  surprise  that 
countries and companies have spent billions of dollars to modernize shipping vessels and 
ports  with  various  technologies.  However,  the  implementation  of  these  technologies  has 
also caught the attention of cybercriminals. For example, a cyberattack on one shipping 
company resulted in nearly $300 millions in financial losses. Hence, this paper describes 
cybersecurity  vulnerabilities  present  in  the  international  shipping  business.  The 
contribution  of  this  paper  is  the  identification  and  dissection  of  cyber  vulnerabilities 
specific to the shipping industry, along with how and why these potential vulnerabilities 
exist. 

Keywords: Cybersecurity, Transportation Systems, Shipping, Maritime Security, Critical 
Infrastructure, Maritime Incidents 

1.  Introduction 

Maritime shipping has become a trillion dollar a year industry that now impacts the economy of 
virtually every country worldwide (Hellenic Shipping News 2018). A problem or system failure 
impacting a single shipping company (for example, the 2021 Suez Canal obstruction incident) 
can affect businesses and organizations in a variety of industries, many of which are not aware 
of  the  criticality  of  the  maritime  shipping  businesses.  Further  complicating  matters,  many 
countries have spent billions of dollars building and developing a large number of ports but tend 
to concentrate a majority of shipping trade through only a handful of ports (Tomer & Kane 2015). 

Hence,  it  is  no  surprise  that  the  shipping  industry  and  its  associated  infrastructure,  including 
shipping  ports,  have  become  high-value  targets  for  cybercriminals  and  state-sponsored 
cyberattacks  (Lagouvardou  2018;  Maritime  Industry  National  Maritime  Interagency  Advisory 
Group  2016).  For  example,  a  cyberattack  on  Maersk,  the  world’s  largest  shipping  company, 
resulted in nearly $300 million in financial losses (Greenburg 2018). Similarly, a malware attack 

This is a preprint version of a manuscript accepted in the Journal of Information Warfare. Please cite this paper 
as: G. Grispos and W.R. Mahoney (2022). “Cyber Pirates Ahoy! An Analysis of Cybersecurity Challenges in the 
Shipping Industry”. Journal of Information Warfare, Vol. 21 (3), pp. 59-73.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on  the  Mediterranean  Shipping  Company in  April  2020  resulted  in  its  data  centre  becoming 
unavailable  for  several  days  (Cimpanu  2020).  In  fact,  the  frequency  and  potential  impact  of 
cyberattacks on the shipping industry has resulted in both the European Union  and the United 
States  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (Committee  on  Homeland  Security  2017;  European 
Union  Agency  for  Cybersecurity  2020)  developing  and  publishing  guidelines  concerning 
cybersecurity countermeasures, in an effort to prevent these attacks.  

The  growing  importance  of  the  shipping  industry,  coupled  with  an  increased  number  of 
cyberattacks results in the following research question: what are the cyber security vulnerabilities 
currently present within the shipping industry? While previous research has focused on specific 
security  issues  in  shipping  vessels,  minimal  research  has  attempted  to  consolidate  how  issues 
could impact the wider shipping industry, when adversaries exploit one or more vulnerability. 
The purpose of this paper is to answer this question through a review of relevant literature and 
industry reports detailing cyberattacks on the maritime shipping business. Along with academic 
conference  and  journal  publications,  industry  reports  and  technical  bulletins  from  various 
governmental agencies (such as the National Maritime Intelligence-Integration Office [NMIO] 
and the International Maritime Organization [IMO]) were examined and included in the paper. 
The findings from the literature review have resulted in the identification of a number of cyber 
security vulnerabilities in ships, ports, and associated maritime infrastructure, which are reported 
upon here; the primary contribution of this paper is the identification and dissection of several 
cyber vulnerabilities known to exist within the shipping industry, along with how and why these 
potential vulnerabilities exist.  

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: The next section describes and discusses potential 
vulnerabilities identified in the literature that impact actual shipping vessels, including a ship’s 
identification  system,  the  Radio  Detection  and  Ranging  (RADAR)  system,  and  bridge-based 
systems. The third section presents potential vulnerabilities that impact shipping ports and their 
associated  infrastructure,  including  automated  cranes  and  power  systems.  The  fourth  section 
presents open cybersecurity challenges for the maritime industry based on the research findings, 
and the final section concludes the paper.  

2.  Technologies and Cyber Threats on Vessels 

As technology is increasingly being integrated into shipping vessels, many of the internal systems 
and computer networks on these vessels are interacting with external communication networks. 
As a result, there is an increased risk of unauthorized access and cyberattacks of vessels. This 
section describes various vulnerabilities that can be exploited involving onboard ship systems 
and networks, including electronic charts, RADAR, and other on-board equipment.  

2.1 Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS) 

The Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS) is the primary tool used for ship 
navigation and its use is mandated by the International Maritime Organization (IMO). The ECDIS 
relies  on  Electronic  Navigational  Charts  (ENCs)  from  external  sources,  such  as  the  National 
Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration  (NOAA).  Chart  information  can  be  loaded  into  the 
ECDIS  using  several  different  mechanisms,  including  external  media  (USB  drives,  DVDs,  or 
CD-ROMs) or can be downloaded directly from the Internet.  

The  International  Hydrographic  Bureau  (IHO)  defines  the  format  and  structure  of  ENC  files, 
defining them as standard number S-57 (International Hydrographic Organisation 2000). ENC 

2 

 
files  uploaded  to  a  ship’s  ECDIS  are  expected  to  be  obtained  from  an  official  IHO  database 
(Weintrit 2018). However, ENC files are also available from third-party commercial providers, 
who  create  alternative  ENCs  from  IHO-approved  data  points.  These  resellers  are  expected  to 
independently  verify  the  format  of  ENC  files,  so  that  they  conform  to  the  S-57  Standard. 
However, this verification process does not include validating the actual data content of the ENC 
file (Palikaris & Mavraeidopoulos 2020). ECDIS systems appear to accept ENC data files if they 
are in the correct format, regardless of the data content. As a result, a malicious insider or an 
individual who can obtain access to the ECDIS could, in theory, upload unauthorized ENC files 
to the system and could thus load malicious code that can compromise the ECDIS. 

While the IHO has released a new encrypted format for ENC files (S-63 Standard), backward 
compatibility challenges with older vessels means that ENC files are still being released in the 
older S-57 format (International Hydrographic Organisation 2012). Thus, it is still possible for 
an  attacker  to  create  an  unauthorised  ENC  file  and  to  upload  the  file  to  the  ECDIS.  Further 
complicating matters, many ECDIS systems are supported by the Windows XP operating system 
(Xiaoxia & Chaohua 2002; Weintrit 2009). However, this operating system is known to have 
significant security vulnerabilities. Hence, there is the potential to replace entire data files with 
false information that could result in navigational errors (Bothur, Zheng & Valli 2017; Dyryavyy 
2014).  

2.2 Radio Detection and Ranging and Automatic Radar Plotting Aid 

The purpose of Radio Detection and Ranging (RADAR) is to ‘sweep’ an area around a shipping 
vessel by using a steerable antenna, in order to detect objects by their reflected signature using 
emitted radio. While many would expect a RADAR system to involve a crew member hunched 
over a green circular scope, many RADAR systems also consist of a personal computer (PC) that 
is used to display the resulting scans from the RADAR system itself. For example, the Merlin 
RADAR system includes a PC that runs a version of Windows 7 Embedded edition (Kostenko 
2013).  As  a  result,  RADAR  systems  that  consist  of  PCs  such  as  the  Merlin  option  could  be 
exploited through any of the (un)known vulnerabilities or flaws that exist within the particular 
operating system. Further complicating matters, unless the PC is properly locked down (Grispos, 
Glisson & Storer 2013), unsecured USB ports could provide an adversary with an avenue for 
launching an attack.  

PCs running within the RADAR system could also be integrated with other sensory system units 
on the vessel, such as the Automatic Radar Plotting Aid (ARPA). Together with the RADAR 
system, the ARPA allows the ship’s crew to detect and to monitor objects (for example, other 
ships) in real time on a map-like display (Raytheon n.d.). In addition, an ARPA system can be 
used by the crew to ‘predict’ future positions of other vessels, and therefore acts as a collision 
detection  and  avoidance  mechanism.  However,  Marshall  (1995)  argues  that  crew  members 
operating an ARPA system could potentially be a weakness in the overall security of the systems. 
Marshall states that “while almost all vessels are properly equipped as a result of vessel inspection 
laws, there is no similar requirement that each mariner prove his or her competence before joining 
a vessel” (Marshall 1995). Hence, crew members with limited or no training and, potentially, 
limited knowledge about the ARPA system could result in incidents that could be avoided with 
proper crew education. 

In terms of cybersecurity vulnerabilities, Lagouvardou (2018) describes various attacks that are 
possible involving the ARPA system, including Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks, 

3 

 
intentional jamming of the signal, and the spoofing or modification of signals reflected back to 
the system from objects that are not really in the position detected by ARPA. Furthermore, if a 
ship  does  not  integrate  Global  Positioning  System  (GPS)  into  the  ARPA  system,  it  may  be 
vulnerable  to  “display[ing]  target  information  oriented  along  the  ship’s  heading,  the  so-called 
heads-up  mode,  with  relative  motion”  (Bhatti  &  Humphreys  2017).  This  problem  is  further 
amplified by the number of vulnerabilities that exist within GPS systems (Adams 2001; Achanta 
et al. 2015). 

2.3 Automatic identification systems of vessels 

The Automatic Identification System (AIS) allows maritime authorities and other ships to track 
and monitor vessel movements in the same way that an airport’s control tower monitors aircraft 
(Bhattacharjee 2019). Within AIS, each vessel is assigned a unique identifier that other ships can 
use to track their location. This information can also be used to locate ships when search and 
rescue missions are needed in the event of an incident or accident onboard the ship. As a result, 
the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) mandates that AIS is fitted to all passenger ships 
that  travel  internationally  as  well  as  to  any  ships  that  travel  through  international  waters  and 
weigh over 300 gross tonnes (Meng, Weng & Li 2014). 

However, AIS is not without its potential security issues. Many ships frequently implement AIS 
on the same computer as an Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS). As a 
result, the same hardware and software challenges that exist within ECDIS also apply to AIS. 
Balduzzi, Pasta & Wilhoit (2014) identified several potential vulnerabilities in AIS, including a 
lack of authentication, the ability to spoof Aids to Navigations (AtN) messages, the triggering of 
collision alarms, luring vessels via fake search-and-rescue signals, man-in-the-middle attacks, as 
well as denial-of-service attacks. Another potential vulnerability exists with the approach used 
by  AIS  providers  to  forward  and  transmit  AIS  data.  This  forwarding  process  uses  little  or  no 
authentication  or  encryption  and  transmits  information  over  Internet  Protocol  (IP)  UDP  Port 
5321.  These  AIS  providers  do  not  validate  incoming  sources  of  the  AIS  data;  as  a  result,  an 
adversary could inject or spoof malicious AIS data if the hosting network can be accessed. 

2.4 Maneuvering systems 

The overwhelming majority of shipping accidents can be attributed to human error (Celik & Cebi 
2009;  Weng  et  al.  2019).  As  a  result,  many  ships  are  choosing  to  deploy  safety-enhancing 
technology in order to reduce errors and improve overall efficiency. One piece of technology that 
has greatly assisted ship crews is a maneuvering system. Undertaking a manoeuvre in high-traffic 
areas, such as in ports or in coastal waters, is inherently more dangerous, which increases the 
likelihood of an accident occurring. For example, there have been several high-profile cases of 
ships striking the Oakland Bay Bridge near San Francisco in the United States (Rogers 2013; 
Taylor, Nolte & Curiel 2007). 

Hence,  the  introduction  of  new  technology  has  assisted  with  these  types  of  manoeuvres.  For 
example, the Deep-Sea Navigation System (DSNS) is an autopilot system that assists a ship crew 
to ensure they follow their planned route, but still allows for changes based on severe weather or 
complex traffic situations. This system also allows for remote onshore pilots to control the ship, 
if the need arises (Viljanen 2020). While there are minimal details on vulnerabilities affecting 
DSNS, this system utilises GPS signals in order to provide accurate ship position information. 
Therefore,  any  vulnerabilities  that  impact  GPS  systems  will  also  impact  DSNS,  and  the 
maneuvering system could, potentially, be fooled into an erroneous path. 

4 

 
2.5 Global positioning systems 

Many  systems  within  a  shipping  vessel  rely  directly  or  indirectly  on  the  Global  Positioning 
System (GPS) for accurate location and timing information (Nguyen 2020; Park & Kim 2011). 
GPS consists of three main components: a constellation of 24 satellites, a control segment that 
maintains the satellite orbits and general upkeep, and the GPS receivers that are used to determine 
location and time (Larcom & Liu 2013). In order for a GPS unit to determine its location, it must 
have a line-of-sight signal to at least three satellites. However, GPS receivers do not directly ‘look 
up’ for a satellite, but instead focus in an omnidirectional manner. As a result, GPS receivers are 
susceptible to spoofing attacks.  

For example, Tippenhauer et al. (2011) demonstrated how a group of GPS receivers can be fooled 
by transmitting a strong enough signal that appears to come from three satellites. Larcom and Liu 
(2013) describe a more complex attack called a ‘satellite lock takeover’ that is similar to man-in-
the-middle attack. In this scenario, legitimate GPS signals are received and then rebroadcast with 
modified coordinates. As a result, the GPS receiver gradually ‘drifts’ off and ends up in a position 
that is offset from its actual location. 

Unfortunately, due to the availability of detailed online documentation and equipment that can 
be purchased (albeit illegally) on eBay, GPS spoofing is well within the technology capabilities 
of  amateur  malicious  actors  (Hill  2017;  Huang  &  Yang  2015).  While  several  mitigation 
techniques have been described in the literature (Ioannides, Pany & Gibbons 2016; Larcom & 
Liu  2013),  it  appears  that  the  adoption  of  these  techniques  is  not  widespread  in  the  shipping 
industry. 

2.6 Notice to mariners corrections 

On a shipping vessel, an extremely important necessity is for the crew to have access to up-to-
date  correction  charts  showing  the  physical  location  of  obstructions,  sea  depths  at  certain 
locations, dangerous areas to travel, and course-plotting assistance markers. These data points 
change from time to time and need to be updated periodically so as to safeguard the vessel while 
in passage. In the United States, information related to coastlines and harbours that are within the 
U.S. or its territories are published by the National Ocean Service. Other nations provide changes 
to the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency for waters outside the U.S. (Lee 2007).  

In terms of cyber threats to this technology, correction chart updates are published on a typical 
website, accessible by the general public (The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
2019). As a result, these chart updates are susceptible to a variety of web attacks, which include 
redirecting ship crews to fraudulent websites that contain malicious binary code embedded within 
fake correction chart updates. Without a means to determine if an update is authentic, a ship’s 
crew could update its charts with incorrect information, potentially resulting in the vessel striking 
other objects either in the ocean or on land.  

2.7 Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (NAVTEX) 

In 1979, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) initiated the Global Maritime Distress 
and Safety System (GMDSS) as a way of establishing a set of policies and procedures intended 
to  increase  the  safety  of  shipping  vessels  (Kent  1989).  The  procedures  encompass  specific 

5 

 
 
 
equipment and communication protocols, which together enable the timely search and rescue of 
vessels. The policies apply to vessels that weigh over 300 tonnes and require ships to contain a 
communication system that consists of either a radio or satellite, which can be used to send or to 
receive distress calls.  

Another feature of the GMDSS is the integration of the Navigational Telex (NAVTEX) system, 
which  receives  automated  maritime  safety  information.  NAVTEX  consists  of  a  set  of  safety 
procedures  and  protocols,  as  well  as  equipment  that  is  used  to  provide  maritime  safety 
information  to  other  ships.  This  information  includes  detailed  weather  information  and  any 
relevant  warnings  (Bauk  2019).  This  allows  groups  and  agencies  responsible  for  search  and 
rescue missions to have information at their disposal in order to coordinate the rescue operation. 

NAVTEX  messages  are  transmitted  using  the  open  standard  Simplex  Teletype  over  Radio 
(SITOR-B) (Federal Register 1995). While radio teletype has been around since the 1950s and 
has been extended to include error correction in the 1970s, there is no inherent security with these 
message  types.  This  means  that  it  is  possible  to  construct  a  properly  formatted  message  and 
broadcast  it  to  all  ships  in  a  specific  area.  These  messages  could  contain  false  weather 
information, or a notice to avoid particular areas, causing a ship to change course. One potential 
mitigation strategy could be the corroboration of this information through other means, such as 
web portals.  

2.8 Dynamic Vessel Positioning 

In  certain  scenarios,  shipping  vessels  ‘hover’  over  a  particular  location  in  the  ocean.  This  is 
usually accomplished using a system called Dynamic Positioning (DP) that maintains the vessel 
location relative to some stationary object (Sørensen 2011). While the DP system is frequently 
used for offshore drilling vessels, passenger ships use the same system to prevent ‘corkscrewing’ 
in  the  water.  The  IMO  defines  various  safety  levels  according  to  the  needs  of  the  dynamic 
positioning system. These levels range from level one (no redundancy) to level three (extensive 
redundancy) (Kaushik 2016). To maintain position, a ship can use a combination of approaches 
including  ‘Light  Taught  Wire’  –  a  simple  weight  suspended  below  the  ship,  different  GPS 
systems, a gyrocompass, as well as seabed acoustics. These various systems provide information 
to a computer, which then produces a measured model of the ship, taking into consideration the 
current, wind, drag of the vessel, the ship’s location, and power of the thrusters being used.  

One vulnerability associated with the DP system is the spoofing or modification of the GPS signal 
used for the calculations (Grant et al. 2009). Bhatti and Humphreys (2017) add that, because the 
DP system relies heavily on GPS, an attack that focuses on gradually drifting the GPS signal, the 
vessel’s position will shift in a way which may not be detected, but instead be blamed on the wind 
or a change on the ocean current. It would also appear that certain DP systems have been found 
to contain malware; one incident reported in the literature describes an oil drilling rig where the 
dynamic positioning system contained a virus which was  undetected for nearly nineteen days 
(Bhatti  &  Humphreys  2017).  Lastly,  a  regulator  in  the  United  Kingdom  reported  that  it  was 
possible for malicious actors to perform a denial of service attack on DP systems that will impact 
a ship’s dynamic positioning (United Kingdom Health and Safety Executive 2013). 

2.9 Other Vessel Communication Systems 

In addition to the communications methods discussed above, shipping vessels also use a variety 
of other communication technologies. For example, the radio systems on many ships make use 

6 

 
of UHF/VHF, S-Band, and even cell technologies—such as GSM, 3G and 4G (Tian et al. 2017). 
Another  example  is  the  implementation  of  Private  Automated  Branch  Exchange  (PABX) 
technologies in order to allow on-board data communications, including voice over IP, within 
ships.  Many  of  these  onboard  networks  consist  of  off-the-shelf  components  that  increase  the 
potential for malicious insiders (for example, crew members) to introduce malware via removable 
media. 

Satellites  also  appear  to  be  a  popular  transmission  medium  within  shipping  vessels  (Rosa, 
Meidenbauer & Halla 2016). The most commonly used satellite systems used include Irridium, 
Inmarsat,  VSat,  Broadband  Global  Area  Network,  and  FleetBroadband  (Santamarta  2014). 
However,  satellite-based  networks  are  susceptible  to  uplink  and  downlink  jamming,  where  a 
malicious actor floods a signal, transmitter, or receiver with ‘noise’ with the purpose of interfering 
with the legitimate transmission (Hudaib 2016). 

3.  Technologies and Cyber Threats at the Shipping Port 

In addition to vulnerabilities existing in many modern shipping vessels, cyber threats are also 
becoming increasingly visible in shipping ports around the world. This section introduces cyber 
threats that involve port systems, including crane systems, power systems, as well as physical 
security systems. The first vulnerability examined is crane systems, and these as well as other 
port-side equipment have vulnerabilities similar to those onboard vessels.  

3.1 Crane systems for offloading and onloading 

Standard containers in the cargo industry consist of a steel or aluminium metal box with explicit 
dimensions  and  loading/unloading  anchor  points  (InterPort  2020).  The  majority  of  cargo  is 
transported in these standard units, but specialized containers might also include liquid containers 
or  refrigerated  units.  Because  of  their  standardized  dimensions,  the  loading  and  unloading  of 
containers from a ship is undertaken by robotic cranes, together with the assistance of Global 
Positioning Systems (GPS) (Gotting 2001). Also, with increased automation, one crane operator 
may  be  operating  several  cranes,  relying  on  automation  to  finish  moving  the  individual 
containers. These heavily automated cranes are responsible for the quick loading and unloading 
as vessels come in or leave a port. The primary benefit of using GPS for this operation is to reduce 
the number of misplaced containers. 

However, crane GPS systems are increasingly susceptible to GPS spoofing. The consequences of 
these attacks range from a robotic crane loading the incorrect container, placing a container on 
the  wrong  ship,  or  even  worse,  dropping  the  container  into  the  sea  or  ocean.  Moreover,  the 
increased automation of robotic cranes means modern crane systems also communicate with a 
variety of off-the-shelf port-side systems. This introduces a host of vulnerabilities and potential 
points of access for malicious actors to exploit entire crane ecosystems (Limer 2019).  

3.2 Port power systems and vulnerabilities 

A port’s electrical power and energy infrastructure are critical to ensuring continuous operations 
as  well  as  the  safety  of  port  workers,  customers,  and  the  goods  traveling  through  the  port. 
However, given that every post is different in terms of size, scope, and the nature of the traffic 
that flows through it, it is difficult to generalize the cybersecurity risks that a specific port might 
face. This is especially true when discussing today’s electrical and power infrastructure that could 
contain  both  physical  and  remote  components,  known  as  cyber-physical  systems  (Holmgren 

7 

 
Jenelius  &  Westin  2007;  ICF  International  2016).  As  a  result,  it  is  critical  to  make  sure  the 
physical infrastructure and the underlying electrical systems are protected and secure. Systems 
that  need  to  be  secure  include  instrument  transformers,  insulators,  isolators,  smart  feeder 
switches,  smart  meters,  and  micro-grid  controllers  (Davis  2009).  Other  systems  that  are  also 
susceptible to cyberattacks include Energy Storage Systems, which include large battery banks 
to help power port equipment as well as Alternate Maritime Power that provides shore-to-ship 
power delivery.  

Power and electrical systems once again rely on GPS systems. For example, a device known as 
a synchrophaser uses GPS timing to synchronize alternating current in an electrical power grid 
(Shepard, Humphreys & Fansler 2012). For instance, some electrical power might be supplied by 
hydroelectric  plants,  while  other  electricity  is  supplied  by  wind  or  solar  options.  Since  the 
alternating  current  must  be  coordinated  from  all  of  the  power  sources  on  the  grid,  the 
synchrophaser uses GPS timing to adjust the alternating current to the correct phase. Thus, GPS 
spoofing can potentially impact the supply of power to the port. This vulnerability has already 
been reported (Staff 2012), but, at the time of writing, no such attack has been identified in the 
real world.  

Moreover, vulnerabilities also exist within the power system’s information communication and 
industrial control systems (Martin & Reynolds 2016). These are systems used to enable disparate 
systems to exchange information and to control the underlying physical hardware. According to 
the National Renewable Energy Lab in the United States, these devices are a concern with regard 
to cyberattacks (Martin & Reynolds 2016). The main cause of concern for these devices stems 
from the embedded operating system they run on as well as the way in which they communicate 
with other parts of the system.    

3.3 Physical and access security 

While  not  always  directly  applicable  to  cybersecurity  incidents  or  digital  crimes,  the  physical 
security  of  the  port  nonetheless  intersects  with  the  world  of  cyberattacks.  The  United  States 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Security Grant Program was created in part to address 
physical port security, including the acquisition of control measures: gates, guns for guards, and 
ID cards with access codes (Federal Emergency Management Agency n.d.). In recent years, the 
grant  has  been  extended  to  include  cyber  threats,  with  DHS  making  the  enhancement  of 
cybersecurity capabilities a priority within the program (United States Department of Homeland 
Security 2020). The hope is to encourage port facilities to take the steps necessary to increase the 
security of their critical information communication systems. Potential vulnerable points of attack 
from  a  physical  aspect  include  connections  to  computer  networks,  the  Internet,  remote 
communications,  control  and  monitoring,  and  Supervisory  Control  and  Data  Acquisition 
(SCADA)  devices.  All  of  these  devices  have  been  discussed  in  the  literature  as  containing 
multiple vulnerabilities (Igure, Laughter & Williams 2006).  

4.  Open Challenges 

As discussed in previous sections, current issues in the area shipping vessel and port security 
support the development of research agendas to address these issues. This section specifically 
examines three areas of research that help improve and enhance the cybersecurity of the shipping 
industry, including the promotion of security-by-design shipping vessels, the development and 
advocation of specific cybersecurity standards for the shipping industry, and an understanding of 
incident response/cyber investigations of shipping vessels.  

8 

 
4.1 Security-by-design shipping vessels 

The idea behind security-by-design is that developers and designers take security into account 
from the early stages of the design or development process (Casola et al. 2016). One potential 
solution to the growing number of cyber threats to the maritime industry could thus involve the 
design  and  development  of  ships  and  bridge  equipment  which  prioritize  cybersecurity 
requirements. This would involve integrating requirements for security into relevant phases of 
the ship’s design and development, with the objective of producing a ship that can be considered 
secure-by-design.  

As evident by the above discussion, a typical ship’s architecture could consist of different layers 
and could contain multiple types of devices. For example, consider the implementation of Radio 
Detection  and  Ranging  (RADAR)  systems  that  consists  of  hardware  that  includes  USB  ports, 
which can be exploited to launch malware attacks. In a security-by-design approach, designers 
and  ship  developers  would  examine  a  RADAR  system’s  attack  surface,  identifying  how  the 
system can be exploited, and then identify security controls to mitigate or remove the risks posed 
by  the  identified  threats  (Geismann,  Gerking  &  Bodden  2018).  In  this  simple  example,  one 
potential solution could involve ‘locking’ down the USB ports, effectively removing the option 
for an attacker to use the ports to launch executable malware. Another potential vulnerability that 
could be mitigated with a security-by-design approach is the approach used by AIS providers to 
forward and transmit AIS data, which uses little or no authentication and encryption and transmits 
information.  Again,  system  designers  could  identify  that  this  data  transmission  mechanism  is 
open to abuse by an adversary who can inject or spoof AIS data. By identifying that this security 
flaw  exists  (as  part  of  the  attack  surface),  designers  and  developers  can  mitigate  the  risk  by 
implementing a message validation mechanism.  

4.2 Specific cybersecurity standards for the shipping industry 

While  the  above  discussion  has  identified  several  cybersecurity  challenges  in  the  shipping 
industry, it appears that the industry has been slow to adopt and implement standards and best 
practices with regard to cybersecurity. While the situation is improving, there is still room for 
improvement. For example, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) has taken the lead on 
publishing  cybersecurity  regulation  concerning  the  shipping  industry  called  “Guidelines  on   
Maritime   Cyber   Risk   Management” (International Maritime Organization n.d.). In addition, 
the IMO has also published a resolution entitled “Maritime Cyber Risk Management in Safety   
Management Systems” as well as penalties for (or lack of) compliance (International Maritime 
Organization n.d.). However, the guidelines only provide “high-level recommendations”, while 
the resolution, simply “encourages administrations to ensure that cyber risks are appropriately 
addressed”  and  only  took  effect  in  January  2021.  One  potential  obstacle  towards  the 
implementation and enforcement of shipping cybersecurity standards is that the industry spans 
countries,  companies,  requirements,  and  ports.  As  a  result,  the  IMO  would  need  to  have  the 
leverage to enforce the actual rules. Hence, short of an actual authority with the ability to penalize 
for compliance, the situation in terms of security standards may not be changing any time soon. 

4.3 Incident response and cyber investigations for shipping vessels   

Traditionally,  when  organisations  detect  or  identify  a  security  incident  or  digital  crime,  one 
response is to conduct an incident response/cyber investigation (Grispos, Glisson & Storer 2019, 

9 

 
 
Grispos et al. 2017). The purpose of this investigation is to collect and analyse data from systems 
affected by the incident/crime, in order to order establish the cause and how it can be prevented 
in the future. In terms of the shipping industry, the IMO’s “Guidelines   on   Maritime   Cyber   
Risk   Management” provide high-level recommendations that maritime stakeholders can take in 
the event a security incident or digital crime occurs. These guidelines include implementation of 
activities to detect the cyber event, the development of activities and plans to restore systems for 
normal shipping operations, as well as measures to recover and resume shipping operations as 
quickly  as  possible  after  a  cyber  event  (International  Maritime  Organization  n.d.).  The  IMO 
guidelines go on to suggest that maritime stakeholder consult “relevant international and industry 
standards  and  best  practices  such  as  ISO/IEC  27001  and  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology's (NIST) Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity” for further 
information (International Maritime Organization n.d.). 

The  problem  is  that  both  the  ISO/IEC  27001  and  NIST  standards  have  been  designed  and 
developed  with  traditional  computer  systems  in  mind,  and  do  not  take  into  consideration  the 
complexity  of  maritime  vessels.  For  example,  NIST’s  800-61  Computer  Security  Incident 
Handling  Guide  (National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  2012)  suggests  that  when 
incidents or crimes occur, impacted systems should be isolated, potentially powered down, and 
data collected in order to conduct an investigation; in a shipping vessel situation, this might be 
difficult or even impossible to achieve. Further complicating matters, there is the potential that 
tools and techniques that are recommended for use by the incident response/cyber investigation 
community are invalidated in shipping vessel contexts. For example, incident handlers are guided 
to use tools such as ‘dd’ and ‘FTK Imager’ to create complete bit-for-bit copies of storage devices 
under  investigation  (Grispos,  Storer  &  Glisson  2012).  These  tools  are  unlikely  to  work  with 
‘storage  devices’  in  shipping  vessels  and  obtaining  a  complete  bit-for-bit  copy  could  be  both 
dangerous  from  a  safety  perspective  and  cumbersome.  Hence,  the  maritime  industry  requires 
guidelines, tools, and techniques specific for situations that involve shipping vessels and their 
respective system architectures.  

5.  Conclusions 

This paper attempted to answer the research question: what are the cyber security vulnerabilities 
currently  present  within  the  shipping  industry?  The  integration  of  technology  into  shipping 
vessels and ports is creating a scenario that is encouraging security incidents and digital crimes. 
The number of systems involved, their complexity but accessibility, the open standards involved, 
and many additional factors all contribute to the acceleration of potential cyber incidents. These 
vulnerabilities exist due to the use of antiquated standards and equipment, the lack of a security 
mentality when shipping systems are designed, and the availability of capable exploits which take 
advantage of these shortcomings. This paper has highlighted several critical areas of concern for 
the shipping industry that need to be addressed. However, the response to these cybersecurity 
concerns  must  start  from  the  top,  effectively  beginning  with  organisations  such  as  the 
International  Maritime  Organisation  (IMO)  which  should  look  to  develop  more  detailed  and 
enhanced  cybersecurity  guidelines  specifically  for  the  shipping  industry.  But  guidelines  by 
themselves are insufficient. The importance of the shipping industry on global economies should 
force  legal  requirements  that  should  be  compulsory  on  shipping  manufacturers,  shipping 
companies, crew members, and port providers. Hopefully, this paper will start the conversation 
and will provide the basis for future discussions regarding the need for enhanced cybersecurity 
measures in the shipping industry.   

10 

 
6.  References  

Achanta, S, Watt, ST & Sagen, E 2015, 'Mitigating GPS vulnerabilities', Proceedings of the 17th 
Annual Power and Energy Automation Conference. 

Adams, TK 2001, 'GPS vulnerabilities', Military Review, vol. 81, p. 10.  

Balduzzi, M, Pasta, A & Wilhoit, K 2014, 'A security evaluation of AIS automated identification 
system', Proceedings of the 30th annual computer security applications conference, pp. 436-45. 

Bauk,  S  2019,  'A  review  of  NAVDAT  and  VDES  as  upgrades  of  maritime  communication 
systems', Advances in Marine Navigation and Safety of Sea Transportation, vol. 81, pp. 1-7. 

Bhattacharjee,  S  2019,  'Automatic  Identification  System  (AIS):  Integrating  and  identifying 
marine  communication  channels',  Marine 
Insight,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www. 
marineinsight.com/marine-navigation/automaticidentification-system-ais-integrating-and-
identifying-marine-communicationchannels. 

Bhatti, J & Humphreys, TE 2017, 'Hostile control of ships via false GPS signals: Demonstration 
and detection', NAVIGATION, Journal of the Institute of Navigation, vol. 64, pp. 51-66. 

Bothur,  D,  Zheng,  G  &  Valli,  C  2017,  'A  critical  analysis  of  security  vulnerabilities  and 
countermeasures in a smart ship system', The Proceedings of 15th Australian Information Security 
Management Conference, pp. 81-87. 

Casola, V, De Benedictis, A, Rak, M & Rios, E 2016, 'Security-by-design in clouds: A security-
SLA driven methodology to build secure cloud applications', Procedia Computer Science, vol. 
97, pp. 53-62. 

Celik,  M  &  Cebi,  S  2009,  'Analytical  HFACS  for  investigating  human  errors  in  shipping 
accidents', Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 41, pp. 66-75. 

Cimpanu,  C  2020,  All  four  of  the  world's  largest  shipping  companies  have  now  been  hit  by 
cyberattacks,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.zdnet.com/article/all-four-of-the-worlds-largest-
shipping-companies-have-now-been-hit-by-cyberattacks/. 

Davis, M 2009, Smart Grid Device Security Adventures in a New Medium, viewed 18/02/2022, 
https://www.blackhat.com/presentations/bh-usa-09/MDAVIS/BHUSA09-Davis-AMI-
SLIDES.pdf. 

Dyryavyy,  Y  2014,  'Preparing  for  cyber  battleships–Electronic  chart  display  and  information 
system  security,  viewed  18/02/2022,  www.  nccgroup.trust/globalassets/ourresearch/uk/ 
whitepapers/2014-03-03_-_ncc_group_-_whitepaper_-_cyber_battle_ship_v1-0. 
pdf,  NCC 
Group.  

European Union Agency for Cybersecurity 2020, Cyber Risk Management for Ports: Guidelines 
for  Cybersecurity  in  the  Martime  Sector,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.enisa.europa.eu/ 
publications/guidelines-cyber-risk-management-for-ports.  

11 

 
 
Federal  Emergency  Management  Agency  n.d.,  Nonprofit  security  grant  program,  viewed 
18/02/2022, https://www.fema.gov/grants/preparedness/nonprofit-security. 

Federal Register 1995, Discontinuance of Coast Guard High Frequency Morse Radiotelegraphy 
Services,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1995-01-27/html/95-
2092.htm. 

Geismann,  J,  Gerking,  C  &  Bodden,  E  2018,  'Towards  ensuring  security  by  design  in  cyber-
physical systems engineering processes',  Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on 
Software and System Process, pp. 123-27. 

Gotting 2001, 'DGPS Positioning of Gantry Cranes (RTGs)', viewed 18/02/2022, https://www. 
goetting-agv.com/dateien/downloads/S_G57650-A_E_system-description_R05_TD.pdf.  

Grant, A, Williams, P, Ward, N & Basker, S 2009, 'GPS jamming and the impact on maritime 
navigation', Journal of Navigation, vol. 62, p. 173-187. 

Greenburg, A 2018, The untold story of NotPetya, the most devastating cyberattac Glisson, W. 
B.k  in  history,  Wired,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.wired.com/story/notpetya-cyberattack-
ukraine-russia-code-crashed-the-world/. 

Grispos, G, Glisson, W & Storer, T 2019, 'How good is your data? Investigating the quality of 
data generated during security incident response investigations',  Proceedings of the 52nd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. 

Grispos, G, Glisson, Bourrie, D, Storer, T & Miller, S 2017, 'Security Incident Recognition and 
Reporting (SIRR): An industrial perspective',  2017 Americas Conference on Information Systems 
(AMCIS 2017), Boston, MA, US. 

Grispos,  G,  Glisson,  &  Storer,  T  2013,  'Cloud  security  challenges:  Investigating  policies, 
standards,  and  guidelines  in  a  Fortune  500  organization',  21st  European  Conference  on 
Information Systems, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 

Grispos,  G,  Storer,  T  &  Glisson,  WB  2012,  'Calm  before  the  storm:  The  challenges  of  cloud 
computing in digital forensics', International Journal of Digital Crime and Forensics (IJDCF), 
vol. 4, pp. 28-48. 

Hellenic  Shipping  News  2018,  Trillion-dollar  shipping  industry  betting  big  on  Blockchain, 
viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.hellenicshippingnews.com/trillion-dollar-shipping-industry-
betting-big-on-blockchain/. 

Hill, K 2017, Jamming GPS signals is illegal, dangerous, cheap, and easy, viewed 18/02/2022, 
https://gizmodo.com/jamming-gps-signals-is-illegal-dangerous-cheap-and-e-1796778955.  

Holmgren, AJ, Jenelius, E & Westin, J 2007, 'Evaluating strategies for defending electric power 
networks against antagonistic attacks', IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 22, pp. 76-84. 

12 

 
Huang, L & Yang, Q 2015, 'Low-cost GPS simulator GPS spoofing by SDR', viewed 18/02/2022, 
https://infocondb.org/con/def-con/def-con-23/low-cost-gps-simulator-gps-spoofing-by-sdr . 

Hudaib,  AAZ  2016,  'Satellite  network  hacking  &  security  analysis',  International  Journal  of 
Computer Science and Security (IJCSS), vol. 10, pp. 8-55.  

ICF  International  2016,  Electric  Grid  Security  and  Resilience:  Establishing  a  Baseline  for 
Adversarial Threats, CF International Inc., Fairfax, VA, US. 

Igure, VM, Laughter, SA & Williams, RD 2006, 'Security issues in SCADA networks', computers 
& security, vol. 25, pp. 498-506. 

International Hydrographic Organisation 2000, International Hydrographic Organisation Transfer 
Standard 
https://iho.int/ 
uploads/user/pubs/standards/s-57/31Main.pdf  

for  Digital  Hydrographic  Data, 

18/02/2022 

viewed 

—2012, International Hydrographic Organisation Data Protection Scheme, viewed 18/02/2022, 
https://iho.int/uploads/user/Services%20and%20Standards/ENC_ECDIS/data_protection/S-
63_e1.2.0_EN_Jan2015.pdf. 

—n.d.,  Maritime  cyber  risk,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Security/ 
Pages/Cyber-security.aspx.  

Ioannides, RT, Pany, T & Gibbons, G 2016, 'Known vulnerabilities of global navigation satellite 
systems, status, and potential mitigation techniques', Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 104, pp. 1174-
94. 

Kaushik,  M  2016,  What 
https://www.marineinsight. com/types-of-ships/what-is-a-dynamic-positioning-ship/.  

is  a  dynamic  positioning 

ship?,  viewed  18/02/2022, 

Kent,  PE  1989,  'The  global  maritime  distress  and  safety  system',    IEE  Colloquium  on  Marine 
Control, Communications and Safety, IET. 

Kostenko, FC 2013, 'Mobile communications within the deepwater lifelines', Army Command 
and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, USA.  

Lagouvardou,  S  2018',  Maritime  Cyber  Security:  Concepts,  problems  and  models.  Masters 
Thesis, Technical University of Denmark. 

Larcom,  JA  &  Liu,  H  2013,  'Modeling  and  characterization  of  GPS  spoofing',    2013  IEEE 
International Conference on Technologies for Homeland Security (HST), IEEE, pp. 729-34. 

Lee, KD 2007, 'Access to aeronautical charts and data by the US National Geospatial-Intelligence 
Agency: An ominous trend', Journal of Map and Geography Libraries, vol. 3, pp. 5-37. 

Limer,  E  2019,  Industrial  Cranes  Are  Disturbingly  Hackable,  Popular  Mechanics,  viewed 
18/02/2022, 
https://www.popularmechanics.com/technology/security/a25916987/industrial-
cranes-are-disturbingly-hackable/. 

13 

 
 
Maritime Industry National Maritime Interagency Advisory Group 2016, Cyber Security Threats 
to  the  Maritime  Transportation  System,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://cybrexllc.com/maritime-
cyber-assurance-research-sitrep/  

Marshall,  TK1995,  Incompetent  Use  of  ARPA  May  Constitute  Unseaworthiness,  viewed 
18/02/2022, http://www.maritimeconsultant.com/macnewsletters/spring95/arpa.htm. 

Martin, M & Reynolds, T 2016, Insecure Field Devices on the Smart Grid: Cyber Risks, Damage 
Potential, and Practical Solutions, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO, USA.  

Meng, Q, Weng, J & Li, S 2014, 'Analysis with automatic identification system data of vessel 
traffic characteristics in the Singapore strait', Transportation Research Record, vol. 2426, pp. 33-
43. 

National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  2012,  800-61:  Computer  Security  Incident 
Handling  Guide,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-61/rev-
2/final. 

Nguyen,  T  2020,  'Evaluation  of  the  accuracy  of  the  ship  location  determined  by  GPS  global 
positioning system on a given sea area',  Journal of Physics: Conference Series, IOP Publishing, 
042010. 

Palikaris,  A  &  Mavraeidopoulos,  AK  2020,  'Electronic  navigational  charts:  International 
standards and map projections, Journal of Marine Science and Engineering, vol. 8, p. 248. 

Park, JW & Kim, HS 2011, 'A study of the location and shape of the ship using GPS', Journal of 
the Institute of Electronics Engineers of Korea SC, vol. 48, pp. 86-93. 

Raytheon  n.d.,  Synapsis  NX,  Raytheon  Anschutz,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.raytheon-
anschuetz.com/fileadmin/content/Downloads/Brochures/synapsis-nx-workstation.pdf.  

Rogers,  P  2013,  'Bay  Bridge-crash  oil  tanker  pilot  gets  five-month  suspension  without  pay', 
viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.mercurynews.com/2013/07/01/bay-bridge-crash-oil-tanker-
pilot-gets-five-month-suspension-without-pay/, Mercury News. 

Rosa,  F,  Meidenbauer,  D  &  Halla,  D  2016,  Assessing  the  Maritime  Cybersecurity  Challenge, 
Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD, US. 

Santamarta,  R  2014,  A  Wake-up  Call  for  SATCOM  Security,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https:// 
ioactive.com/pdfs/IOActive_SATCOM_Security_WhitePaper.pdf, IOActive. 

Shepard, DP, Humphreys, TE, & Fansler, AA 2012, 'Evaluation of the vulnerability of phasor 
measurement  units  to  GPS  spoofing  attacks,  International  Journal  of  Critical  Infrastructure 
Protection, vol. 5, pp. 146-153. 

Sørensen, AJ 2011, 'A survey of dynamic positioning control systems', Annual reviews in control, 
vol. 35, pp. 123-36. 

14 

 
 
Staff,  GW  2012,  Going  Up  Against  Time:  The  Power  Grid’s  Vulnerability  to  GPS  Spoofing 
Attacks,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.gpsworld.com/wirelessinfrastructuregoing-against-
time-13278/. 

Taylor,  M,  Nolte,  C  2007,  'Container  ship  hits  Bay  Bridge  tower  -  Fuel  spills,  but  span 
undamaged',    viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Container-ship-hits-
Bay-Bridge-tower-fuel-3236913.php, SFGate.  

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 2019, 'Notice to mariners chart updates, 
viewed 18/02/2022, https://ocsdata.ncd.noaa.gov/ntm/Default.aspx. 

Tian,  Z,  Liu,  F,  Li,  Z,  Malekian,  R  &  Xie,  Y  2017,  'The  development  of  key  technologies  in 
applications of vessels connected to the Internet', Symmetry, vol. 9, p. 211. 

Tippenhauer,  NO,  Pöpper,  C,  Rasmussen,  KB,  &  Capkun,  S  2011,  'On  the  requirements  for 
successful GPS spoofing attacks',  Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Computer and 
communications security, pp. 75-86. 

Tomer,  A  &  Kane,  J  2015,  'The  Great  Port  Mismatch,  U.S.  Goods,  Trade  and  International 
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
18/02/2022, 
transportation', 
content/uploads/2015/06/BrgksSrvyGCIFreightNetworks.pdf, Brookings Institute.  

viewed 

United Kingdom Health and Safety Executive 2013, 'Warning to offshore industry on blocking 
of data communications in dynamic positioning systems', viewed 18/02/2022, https://www.hse. 
gov.uk/safetybulletins/dynamic-positioning-systems.htm  

United  States  Committee  on  Homeland  Security  2017,  Examining  Physical  Security  and 
Cybersecurity at Our Nation’s Ports, U.S. Government Publishing Office, Los Angeles, CA, US. 

United States Department of Homeland Security 2020, DHS Announces Grant Allocations for 
Fiscal  Year  2020  Preparedness  Grants,  viewed  18/02/2022,  https://www.dhs.gov/news/2020 
/06/30/dhs-announces-grant-allocations-fiscal-year-2020-preparedness-grants. 

Viljanen,  M  2020,  Shore-based  Voyage  Planning.  Masters  Thesis,  Satakunta  University  of 
Applied Sciences.  

Weintrit, A 2009, The electronic chart display and information system (ECDIS): An operational 
handbook, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA.  

Weintrit,  A  2018.  'Clarification,  systematization  and  general  classification  of  electronic  chart 
systems  and  electronic  navigational  charts  used  in  marine  navigation,  Part  1-electronic  chart 
systems',  TransNav:  International  Journal  on  Marine  Navigation  and  Safety  of  Sea 
Transportation, vol. 2, pp. 769-780. 

Weng, J, Yang, D, Chai, T & Fu, S 2019, 'Investigation of occurrence likelihood of human errors 
in shipping operations', Ocean Engineering,vol. 182, pp. 28-37. 

15 

 
Xiaoxia, W & Chaohua, G 2002, 'Electronic chart display and information system', Geo-spatial 
Information Science, vol. 5, pp. 7-11. 

16 

 
 
