Modeling Self-Propagating Malware with
Epidemiological Models

Alesia Chernikova∗ Nicol´o Gozzi† Simona Boboila∗ Nicola Perra‡ Tina Eliassi-Rad∗ Alina Oprea∗

∗Northeastern University

†University of Greenwich

‡ School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
5

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
7
2
3
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Self-propagating malware (SPM) has recently re-
sulted in large ﬁnancial losses and high social impact, with well-
known campaigns such as WannaCry and Colonial Pipeline being
able to propagate rapidly on the Internet and cause service
disruptions. To date, the propagation behavior of SPM is still
not well understood, resulting in the difﬁculty of defending
against these cyber threats. To address this gap, in this paper
we perform a comprehensive analysis of a newly proposed
epidemiological model for SPM propagation, Susceptible-Infected-
Infected Dormant-Recovered (SIIDR) [5]. We perform a theoretical
analysis of the stability of the SIIDR model and derive its basic
reproduction number by representing it as a system of Ordinary
Differential Equations with continuous time. We obtain access to
15 WananCry attack traces generated under various conditions,
derive the model’s transition rates, and show that SIIDR ﬁts best
the real data. We ﬁnd that the SIIDR model outperforms more
established compartmental models from epidemiology, such as SI,
SIS, and SIR, at modeling SPM propagation.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Self-propagating malware (SPM) is one of today’s most
important security threats that has resulted in huge ﬁnancial
losses and data breaches with high economic and social
impacts. For instance, the notorious WannaCry [22] attack
ﬁrst discovered in 2017 and still actively used by attackers
today was estimated to have affected more than 200,000
computers across 150 countries, with total damages ranging
from hundreds of millions to billions of dollars. In May 2021,
the Colonial Pipeline [36] cyber-attack caused the shut down
of the entirety of the Colonial gasoline pipeline system for
several days. It affected consumers and airlines along the East
Coast of the United States and was deemed a national security
threat. Another infamous worldwide SPM attack is Petya [37],
ﬁrst discovered in 2016 when it started spreading through
phishing emails. Petya represents a family of various types
of ransomware responsible for estimated damages of over 10
million dollars. Given the present cyber-crime landscape with
new threats emerging daily, it becomes signiﬁcantly important
to be able to model SPM behavior. A deep understanding
of self-propagating malware characteristics gives us an op-
portunity to identify similar threats, deﬁne control strategies,
and design proactive defenses against these attacks. A large
body of research has looked into designing methods to detect
and remove malware [28], but less so in ﬁnding best models
that capture its behavior. The majority of existing works
on SPM modeling focus on theoretical analyses of infection
spreading [12], [14], [20], [26], lacking a thorough real-world
evaluation of these models.

In this paper, we model the behavior of a well-known

SPM attack, WannaCry, based on real-world attack traces. The
similarities between the behavior of biological and computer
viruses enable us to leverage compartmental models from
epidemiology. We adopt a novel compartmental model called
SIIDR [5], and conduct a thorough analysis to show that
SIIDR is capable of accurately modeling WannaCry dynam-
ics. Additionally, we derive the infection-spreading rates that
characterize actual WannaCry attacks.

Epidemiological models divide a population into com-
partments describing the various stages of an illness. Their
number and characteristics depend on the disease under study.
Following the natural history of the disease, individuals tran-
sition from one compartment to another either spontaneously
(e.g., recovery process) or after interactions (e.g., infection
process) at given rates that depend on the characteristics of
the disease. Prototypical models, that act as building blocks
for many others, are the SI, SIS and SIR models [4], [16].
SI models are used to describe diseases where infection is
permanent. They feature two compartments and one transition.
The susceptible compartment S represents healthy individuals
that interacting with infectious individuals in the compartment
I might get infected. SIS models feature two compartments
as well, but two transitions. Beside the infection process as
in the previous model, we have a recovery process: infected
individuals spontaneously recover and become susceptible to
disease again. Hence, they are used to model diseases that can
infect us multiple times. SIR models instead, capture diseases
from which we develop a permanent immunity. They feature
three compartments and two transitions. Infected individuals
that are no longer infectious join the recovered compartment
R.

In their simplest incarnation epidemic models are repre-
sented by a system of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs)
under a homogeneous mixing approximation that assumes
a well mixed population where everyone is potentially in
contact [35]. We demonstrate that classic models are not
sufﬁcient to accurately describe self-propagating malware. In
particular, the investigation of real WannaCry attacks showed
that consecutive infection attempts originating from the same
host are delayed by a variable time interval. These ﬁndings
prompted us to study SIIDR: a model that features a new state,
Infected Dormant (ID), along with the S, I, R compartments.
During the dormant state, an infected host temporarily ceases
to pass infection to its neighbors, until it transitions back to
the Infectious state.

In this work, we present a comprehensive analysis of
SIIDR. We study the model assuming a well mixed pop-

 
 
 
 
 
 
Notation
S
I
ID
R
SPM
ODE
AIC
ABC
ABC-SMC (SMC)
ABC-SMC-MNN (SMC)
SI
SIS
SIR
SIIDR
β
˜β
µ
γ1
γ2
R0
G
E∗

Meaning
Number of Susceptible Individuals
Number of Infected Individuals
Number of Infected Dormant Individuals
Number of Recovered Individuals
Self-Propagating Malware
Ordinary Differential Equation
Akaike Information Criterion
Approximate Bayesian Computation
Sequential Monte-Carlo Approach
Sequential Monte Approach when Covariance Matrix is Calculated using M Nearest Neighbors of the Particle
Susceptible-Infected Compartmental Model
Susceptible-Infected-Susceptible Compartmental Model
Susceptible-Infected-Recovered Compartmental Model
Susceptible-Infected-Infected Dormant-Recovered Compartmental Model
Infection Rate
Infection Probability
Recovery Rate
Transition Rate from Infected to Infected Dormant Compartment
Transition Rate from Infected Dormant to Infected Compartment
The Basic Reproduction Number
Next-generation Matrix
Equilibrium Point for SIIDR Represented as the System of ODEs

Table I: Terminology and abbreviations used in the paper.

ulation of hosts and derive the basic reproduction number
R0 – a fundamental epidemic concept that characterizes the
transmission potential of a disease [8], [17], [34]. R0 is the
number of secondary cases generated by an infectious seed
in a fully susceptible population. It describes the epidemic
threshold, thus the conditions necessary for a macroscopic
outbreak (R0 > 1) [10], [34]. We also investigate equilibrium
or ﬁxed points of SIIDR as they provide insights on how to
contain or suppress the spreading of malware.

We reconstruct the dynamics of WannaCry from real trafﬁc
logs and use the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) [2]
to demonstrate that SIIDR captures the malware behavior
better than classical epidemic models such as SI, SIS, SIR.
Further, we determine the transition rates that characterize the
WannaCry propagation, using Sequential Monte-Carlo tech-
nique. We believe that the research community can greatly
beneﬁt from reconstruction-based modeling of actual attacks,
a challenging task that we undertake in this paper. The SIIDR
model and corresponding transition rates can be used as the
basis for future studies that enable validation of defensive
techniques through realistic SPM simulations.

To summarize, our contributions are the following:

• We reconstruct the SPM dynamics using real-world
WannaCry traces that were obtained by running a vul-
nerable version of Windows in a virtual environment.

• We analyze an epidemic model called SIIDR [5] and
demonstrate that it captures the behavior of WannaCry
traces.

• We derive the basic reproduction number of SIIDR
and discuss the stability conditions of its associated
system of ODEs for networks operating under the
homogeneous mixing assumption.

• We show that SIIDR outperforms several classical
models in terms of capturing WannaCry behavior, and
derive the model’s transition rates from actual attacks.

We organize the rest of the paper as follows: in Section II
the WannaCry

we provide background information about

malware and the most common compartmental models of
epidemiology. We also deﬁne the threat model and problem
statement. In Section III we introduce SIIDR, discuss the
derivation of R0 and the stability of the model. Section IV
presents the methodology for model selection and estimation of
transition rates. In addition, Section V presents the experimen-
tal results that support the ﬁndings of the paper. We conclude
in Section VII. Table I includes common terminology used in
the paper.

II. BACKGROUND AND PROBLEM STATEMENT

A. WannaCry Malware

WannaCry is a self-propagating malware attack, which
targets computers running the Microsoft Windows operating
system by encrypting data and demanding ransom in Bitcoin
cryptocurrency. It automatically spreads through the network
and scans for vulnerable systems, using the EternalBlue exploit
to gain access, and the DoublePulsar backdoor tool to install
and execute a copy of itself. WannaCry malware has a ’kill-
switch’ that appears to work like this: part of WannaCry’s
infection routine involves sending a request that checks for a
web domain. If its request returns showing that the domain
is alive or online, it will activate the ’kill-switch’, prompting
WannaCry to exit the system and no longer proceed with its
propagation and encryption routines. Otherwise, if the mali-
cious program can not connect to the domain, it encrypts the
computer’s data, then attempts to exploit the SMB vulnerability
to spread out to random computers on the Internet, and laterally
to computers on the same network [38].

B. Epidemiological Models

Compartmental models are mathematical

techniques to
describe infectious diseases. The most common examples are
SI, SIS, and SIR models. One way to represent the dynamics of
these models is to use a system of ODEs with continuous time.
In their simplest form, they assume a homogeneous mixing,
that is, every node is potentially in contact with all the others.

2

1) SI model: The SI model has the following dynamics:

dS
dt
dI
dt

= −βS

= βS

I
N

I
N

,

(1)

(2)

(3)

Due to the homogeneous mixing assumption, the per capita
rate at which susceptible individuals get infected is given by
the probability of interacting with an infected individual (I/N )
times the transmission rate of the disease β. The state diagram
for SI is represented in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Transition diagram for one node ni at some time
step t corresponding to SI model.

2) SIS model: The SIS model can be represented as fol-

lows:

dS
dt
dI
dt

= −βS

+ µI

= βS

− µI,

I
N

I
N

(4)

(5)

(6)

where µ is recovery rate of the disease. Note how the recovery
process is spontaneous and does not require any interac-
tion.Hence, each infected individual, has an average duration
of infection of µ−1. The state diagram for SIS is shown in
Figure 2.

Figure 2: Transition diagram for one node ni at some time
step t corresponding to SIS model.

3) SIR model: The system of differential equations corre-

sponding to SIR model is the following:

I
N

= −βS

I
N

= βS

= µI,

− µI

dS
dt
dI
dt
dR
dt

(7)

(8)

(9)

where as above β is the infection rate, and µ is recovery rate.
The state diagram for SIR is represented in Figure 3.

3

Figure 3: Transition diagram for one node ni at some time
step t corresponding to SIR model.

C. Problem Statement and Threat Model

We aim to understand and capture the behavior of one
of the most devastating cyber-threats today, self-propagating
malware. The objective of our work is to provide a rigorous
mathematical analysis of realistic SPM attacks, and thus lay
down the foundation of efﬁcient defense strategies against
these prevalent
threats. Several works propose models to
capture the behavior of SPM [12], [14], [20], [26], however,
the vast majority of them have only theoretical analysis and do
not incorporate the information about real-world SPM traces.
Thus, they lack the proof that the introduced models apply
to real-world scenarios. Additionally, it is hard to perform
comparative analyses to other models in these settings. Ex-
isting work that uses real-world data for modeling SPM [19]
leverages basic models of epidemiology with the small number
of possible compartments, thus, is not enough to capture more
comprehensive characteristics of malware. To this end, we are
using a more advanced model of epidemiology (SIIDR) to
derive the characteristics of a well-known malware, WannaCry,
using real-world attack traces.

In addition to determining which epidemiological model
ﬁts best real WannaCry attack traces, our second goal is to
infer the parameters of the SIIDR epidemic model for different
malware variants. Parameter inference is crucial for enabling
attack simulations on real networks to measure the impact of
the attack, as well as the effectiveness of defensive measures.
Once the parameters of the attack are known, an analyst can
compute the basic reproduction number of the attack, and
understand whether the attack will result in an epidemic. In the
case of computer networks represented as graphs, a defender
might conﬁgure its network topology by performing edge or
node hardening [18], [30], [32], minimizing the leading eigen-
value of the graph to prevent the damage from self-propagating
malware attacks, or using anomaly detection methods to detect
the malware propagation [28].

Our goal is to model SPM propagation inside a local net-
work (such as an enterprise network or campus network) since
we do not have global visibility on SPM malware propagation
across networks. We assume that the attacker gets a foothold
inside the local network through a single initially infected
host. From the ‘patient zero’ victim, the attack can propagate
and infect any other vulnerable machine in the subnet. We
assume a homogeneous mixing model, meaning that every
machine can contact all others. This is a valid assumption
because in a subnet every machine is able to scan every other
internal IP within the same subnet. We are assuming that none
of the machines is immune to the exploited vulnerability at
the beginning of the attack, thus, all of them may become
infected during SPM propagation. Infectious machines become

recovered when the malware is successfully detected and an
efﬁcient recovery process removes it. We assume that these
machines cannot be reinfected again.

with N = S(t) + I(t) + ID(t) + R(t), where the total size N
is constant. It is important to stress how the system of ODEs
assumes an homogeneous mixing in the host population.

III. SIIDR MODELLING AND ANALYSIS AS A SYSTEM OF
ODES

In this section, we start by describing the important charac-
teristics of the WannaCry propagation dynamic. We introduce
the SIIDR model, and discuss the basic reproduction number
and the stability of SIIDR disease-free equilibrium points.

A. SPM Modelling with SIIDR

The detailed analysis of the WannaCry traces [5] revealed

the following characteristics:

•

•

The time window ∆t between two consecutive ma-
licious attempts from the same infected IP has a
heterogeneous distribution.

The time interval ∆t between the last attack from an
infected IP and the end of the collected trace is large.

Based on the ﬁrst observation, an infected dormant state ID
is included to capture the heterogeneous distribution of time
windows between two malicious attack attempts. Therefore,
an infected node can become dormant for some period of time
and resume its malicious activity later. The second observation
supports the presence of a Recovered state: once nodes recover,
they will not become infectious or susceptible again. The tran-
sition diagram corresponding to the SIIDR model is illustrated
in Figure 4. A susceptible node can become infected with rate
β, and afterwards, it may either recover with rate µ, or move to
the dormant state with rate γ1 (where µ + γ1 ≤ 1). From the
dormant state, it may become actively infectious again with
rate γ2.

Figure 4: Transition diagram for one node ni at some time
step t corresponding to the SIIDR model.

The evolution of the system can be modeled through the
system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) as follows:

dS
dt
dI
dt
dID
dt
dR
dt

= −βS

I
N

I
N

= βS

− µI − γ1I + γ2ID

= γ1I − γ2ID

= µI

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

4

B. SIIDR Equilibrium Points

While modeling SPM we are interested in equilibrium
states when the number of infected individuals equals to 0
and does not change over time. Thus, we need to derive
the constant solutions or equilibrium points [29] of the ODE
system corresponding to SIIDR model.

Deﬁnition 1: An equilibrium point or ﬁxed point of the
system of ODEs ˙x = f (X) is a solution E∗ that does not
change with time, i.e. f (E∗) = 0.

For the SIIDR model we can ﬁnd the equilibrium points by
solving the following system:

βI

S
N

−βI

S
N

= 0

− µI − γ1I + γ2ID = 0

γ1I − γ2ID = 0
µI = 0

(14)

(15)

(16)
(17)

given that S + I + ID + R = N .

The system has the disease-free equilibrium points E∗
when I = ID = 0 and S + R = N . In case when µ = 0
there exists endemic equilibrium point when I (cid:54)= 0 which
is equal to (0, I ∗, γ1I ∗
, 0). However, in this case the system
γ2
becomes SIID without the opportunity to have R state.

C. The Basic Reproduction Number

The basic reproduction number R0 is the number of
secondary cases generated by a single infectious seed in a fully
susceptible population [16]. It deﬁnes the epidemic threshold.
The conditions that lead to a macroscopic outbreak. If R0 has
a value greater than 1, on average, infected individuals are able
to sustain the spreading. If R0 has a value smaller than one,
on average, the disease will die out before any macroscopic
outbreak.

A classic approach to compute R0 is to linearize the ODEs
using the fact that often at early times S(0) ≈ N . We can sum
equations 11 and 12 obtaining:

d(I + ID)
dt

= (β

S
N

− µ)I

(18)

at early stages S(0) ≈ N , hence we will have a growth in the
number of the infected and infected dormant individuals only
if β − µ > 0. This leads to the condition R0 = β
µ .

Another method to derive the reproduction number is
to use the next-generation matrix approach [3], [6], [7]. It
takes into consideration the dynamic of infected individuals
in compartment i, i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, where k is the number of
compartments with infected individuals:

dfi(X)
dt

= Fi(X) − Vi(X),

(19)

where Fi(X) is the rate of appearance of new infections
in compartment i by all other means, Vi(X) = [V −
i (X) −
i (X)], V +
V +
i (X) is the rate of transfer of individuals into
compartment i and V −
i (X) represents the rate of transfer of
individuals out of compartment.
If E∗ is a disease-free equilibrium, then we can deﬁne a next-
generation matrix:

G = F V −1,

(20)

where

(21)

F =

V =

(E∗)

(E∗).

∂Fi
∂xj
∂Vi
∂xj
The reproduction number is the largest eigenvalue of the next-
generation matrix G. In the case of SIIDR model, the G can
be represented at one of the disease-free equilibrium points
DF E = (N, 0, 0, 0) as follows:
(cid:20)β 0
0
0

(cid:21) (cid:20)µ + γ1 −γ2
γ2

−γ1

G =

(22)

(23)

(cid:21)−1

β
µ
0

(cid:21)

thus det[λI − G] = λ(λ − β
µ . We note how
in general, the disease free equilibrium (DFE) might contain
individuals already immune to the disease, i.e., DF E = (N −
R, 0, 0, R). This might be due to a second wave of infection
caused by the reintroduction of the virus. In this more general
(cid:1), where in parenthesis we have
case we have: R0 = β
µ
the fraction of the susceptible population.

(cid:0)1 − R

N

=

(cid:20) β
µ
0
µ ), and R0 = β

D. Stability Analyses of SIIDR Equillibrium Points

The important characteristic of the equilibrium points is
their stability [15]. It shows whether the system will be able
to return to the equilibrium points after small perturbations. For
example, in the case of SIIDR modeling, it can be the slightly
increased number of initially infected nodes. Let us consider
˙x = f (X) - system of ODEs, and suppose that X = E∗ is a
ﬁxed point of f (X), that is, f (E∗) = 0.

Deﬁnition 2: E∗ is stable if ∀(cid:15) > 0, ∃δ > 0 such that if
an initial condition X = X 0 lies in the ball of radius δ around
E∗ then it exists ∀t > 0 and stays in the ball of radius (cid:15).

Deﬁnition 3: We say that E∗ is locally asymptotically
stable if it is stable and the solutions X = X t with initial
condition X = X 0 in the ball of radius δ converge to E∗ as
t → ∞.

Deﬁnition 4: We say that E∗ is stable in the sense of
Lyapunov when there exists the continuously differentiable
function L(X) such that:

˙L(X) =

d
dt

L(X) =

(cid:88)

i

dL
dxi

L(X) ≥ 0, L(E∗) = 0

fi(X) ≤ 0, ˙L(E∗) = 0

(24)

(25)

If ˙L(X) < 0 and ˙L(X) = 0 only when X = E∗, then E∗ is
locally asymptotically stable.

Theorem 1: If R0 ≤ 1 the disease-free equilibrium point
E∗ of SIIDR system of ODEs is stable in the sense of
Lyapunov.

Proof: Let L(X) = I + ID, L is the valid Lyapunov
function as long as it is non-negative continuously differen-
tiable scalar function which equals to 0 when I = ID = 0.
Time-derivative of L is the following:

I
N

˙L =

= βS

dL
dt

− µI = I(

− 1) = I(R0 − 1)

βS
µN
˙L ≤ 0 when R0 ≤ 1 and
Hence, we can conclude that
˙L(E∗) = 0. Therefore, E∗ can be considered to be a disease-
˙L is
free equilibrium point stable in the sense of Lyapunov.
equal to 0 when I = 0, however, the X with I = 0 may not
be equal to E∗, thus, we cannot consider E∗ to be locally
asymptotically stable.

(26)

IV. SIIDR MODELING

In this section, we explain the Akaike Information Criterion
(AIC) technique used to select the model that ﬁts the Wan-
naCry malware best. We also demonstrate how we leverage
the Sequential Monte-Carlo (SMC) approach to estimate the
posterior distribution of SIIDR transition rates.

A. Model Selection

We use AIC to compare SIIDR to the most common
epidemiological models and prove that it ﬁts the real-world
WannaCry traces best. AIC is calculated based on the number
of free parameters used to ﬁt the model and the maximum
likelihood estimate of the model:

AIC = 2k − 2 ln L

(27)

where k is the number of free parameters and L is the
maximum likelihood. The ﬁrst term introduces a penalty that
increases with the number of parameters and thus discourages
overﬁtting. The second term rewards the goodness of ﬁt that is
assessed by the likelihood function. For the likelihood function,
we use the least squares estimation. This approach is valid
when the residuals follow the normal distribution. Thus, the
best model is the one with the lowest AIC. In the case of the
least squares estimation, the AIC can be expressed as:

AIC = 2k + n ln ˆσ2, where
t=1 ˆ(cid:15)i
T

ˆσ2 =

(cid:80)T

In Eq. 29, ˆ(cid:15)i are the estimated residuals:
t − I real

ˆ(cid:15)t = I sim

t

(28)

(29)

(30)

t

with I sim
being the cumulative number of infected nodes
from model simulations, and I real
the cumulative number of
t
infected nodes from real-world observations, at time interval
t.

To perform model selection, we use the method described
in Algorithm 1. We start by creating a uniform grid of possible
parameter values (lines 2-5). For each model and each set
of parameter values p = (β, µ, γ1, γ2) we perform several
stochastic experiments simulating the model dynamics (the
run stochastic avg procedure). We use stochastic simulation
over the direct integration of system of ODEs because they
appear to be a good approximation of the propagation process
only when the system is large. In the case of smaller systems
stochastic ﬂuctuations become more important. Therefore, we

5

are using them while performing model selection and param-
eter estimation. In our stochastic simulations, the transitions
among compartments are implemented through chain binomial
processes. At step t the number of entities in compartment
X transiting to compartment Y is sampled from a binomial
distribution P rBin(X(t), pX→Y (t)), where pX→Y (t) is the
transition probability. If multiple transitions can happen from
X (e.g., X → Y , X → Z)), a multinomial distribution is used
(e.g., P rM ult(X(t), pX→Y (t), pX→Z(t))). To account for the
time component in equations 10-13, we divide the whole dura-
tion of the actual dynamics by d. Hence, each stochastic real-
ization consists of a time series, where S(t), I(t), ID(t), R(t)
represent the number of nodes in each state at time interval t
during the simulation. The cumulative infection Isim consists
of the total number of nodes in states I, ID, and R, and is also
a time series across all time intervals dt. Next, we compute
the AIC using equation 28 by comparing m simulated points
to m (sampled) points from the actual dynamics. We select
the minimum AIC score for each model, the best model is the
one with the minimum AIC score overall.

Algorithm 1 SPM model selection

β ← 20 equidistant values in (0,1)
µ ← 20 equidistant values in (0,1)
γ1 ← 10 equidistant values in (0,1)
γ2 ← 10 equidistant values in (0,1)
for each model m = {SI, SIS, SIR, SIIDR} do

1: procedure MODEL SELECTION
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:

Si, Ii, IDi, Ri = run stochastic avg(p, h)
Isim = Ii + IDi + Ri
aic = AIC(Isim, Ireal)
min ← mini aic

for each set p = (β, µ, γ1, γ2) do

aicm

aicmin ← minm aic
pick M = model that correspond to aicmin
return M

11:

12:
13:
14:

B. Posterior Distribution of Transition Rates

To ﬁnd the best set of parameters for the SIIDR model
we can approximate the posterior distribution of the pa-
rameters using Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC)
techniques [23]. These techniques are based on the Bayes rule
for determining the posterior distribution of parameters given
the data:

P (θ|D) =

P (D|θ)P (θ)
p(D)

∝ p(D|θ)p(θ),

(31)

where P (θ) is the prior distribution of parameters that rep-
resents our belief about them and P (D|θ) is the likelihood
function, the probability density function of the data given the
parameters. Marginal likelihood of the data P (D) does not
depend on θ, and therefore the posterior distribution P (θ|D)
is proportional to the numerator in 31.

ABC methods perform well when the likelihood function is
unknown or is not feasible to estimate. The simplest version of
ABC techniques ABC-rejection is illustrated in Algorithm 2
However, the algorithm is slow for the following reason: at
each iteration, it proposes parameter values from the prior

distribution, which might not be part of the parameters’
space. This results in a large distance between the actual and
simulated models. Thus, if the threshold value (cid:15) is small, it
becomes possible to result in an inﬁnite number of iterations.

Algorithm 2 ABC-rejection algorithm

1: Sample θ∗ from the prior distribution P (θ).
2: Simulate SPM model D∗ using θ∗.
3: If (cid:80)T
4: Repeat until N particles θ∗ = {θ∗

t=1(Dt − D∗

t )2 ≤ (cid:15) accept θ∗, reject otherwise.

j , j = 1, . . . , N } are

accepted.

Alternatively, we can use the ABC-SMC [31] [21] ap-
proach where several generations of distributions are con-
structed by decreasing the threshold over time. At the ﬁrst
step (i.e., generation), a ﬁnite number of parameter sets (i.e.,
particles) is sampled from the prior distribution, and each
intermediate distribution of particles is obtained as a weighted
sample from the previous generation perturbed through the
kernel K(θ|θ∗). Common choices for the kernel are the
uniform and multivariate normal distributions. A kernel with a
large variance will prevent the algorithm from being stuck in
the local modes, but will result in a huge number of particles
being rejected, which is inefﬁcient. Therefore, we use the
multivariate normal distribution, where the covariance matrix is
calculated considering M nearest neighbors of the particles [9].
The ABC-SMC-MNN algorithm is illustrated in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3 SIIDR parameters estimation

Require: G - number of generations, N - number of particles,
M - number of nearest neighbors, (cid:15)1 > (cid:15)2 > (cid:15)3 > · · · >
(cid:15)G - sequence of decreasing tolerance values for each
generation of the particles

1: Set g = 0
2: Set j = 0
3: If g = 0, sample particle θ∗∗ from prior distribution
P (θ). Otherwise, sample θ∗ from the previous generation
of particles {θg−1} with weights {wg−1} and perturb to
obtain θ∗∗ ∼ K(θ|θ∗)

ˆP (D|D∗∗) = 1/n (cid:80)n

4: Generate n model simulations D∗∗
l=1(d(D, D∗∗
5: If ˆP (D|D∗∗) = 0 return to step 4
6: Set θj

g and calculate weights for the particle:

l using θ∗ and calculate
l ) < (cid:15)g)




ˆP (D|D∗∗)P (θ∗∗), g = 1

wj

g =



(cid:80)N

ˆP (D|D∗∗)P (θ∗∗)
g−1K(θj
g|θl

wl

g−1)
7: If j < N increment j and go to step 4
8: Normalize weights: (cid:80)N
9: If g < G increment g and go to step 3

j=1 wj

g = 1

l=1

, g > 1

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

In this section we describe the WannaCry malware traces
and show the results of the reconstruction of WannaCry
dynamics from Zeek [1] communication logs. Additionally, we
present the results from model selection to conﬁrm that SIIDR
ﬁts WannaCry traces best. Moreover, we illustrate the mean
values from the posterior distribution of SIIDR parameters.

6

Finally, we show the behavior of SPM with respect to the
basic reproduction number R0.

A. WannaCry Malware Traces

We obtained realistic WannaCry attack traces by running
the malware in a controlled virtual environment consisting of
51 virtual machines, conﬁgured with a version of Windows
vulnerable to the EternalBlue SMB exploit. The external trafﬁc
generated by the VMs was blocked to isolate the environment
and prevent external malware spread. The infection started
from an initial victim IP, and then the attack propagated
through the network as the infected IPs began to scan other IPs.
In these experiments, WannaCry varied the number of threads
used for scanning, which were set to 1, 4 or 8, and the time
interval between scans, which was set to 500ms, 1s, 5s, 10s or
20s. Using the combination of these two parameters resulted
in 15 WannaCry traces. While running WannaCry with this
setup, the log traces were collected with the help of the open
source Zeek network monitoring tool.

B. WannaCry Reconstruction

To reconstruct the WannaCry dynamics we are using Zeek
communication logs where we consider only communication
between internal IPs. Since WannaCry attempts to exploit the
SMB vulnerability, we label as malicious all the attempts of
connections on destination port 445. The ﬁrst attempt to estab-
lish the malicious connection is considered to be the start of the
epidemics, and the end corresponds to the last communication
event in the network. Each IP trying to establish a malicious
connection for the ﬁrst time at time t is considered infected at
time t. The cumulative number of infected IPs through time
represents the curve of the WannaCry epidemics.

C. WannaCry dynamics

We show the dynamics of WannaCry variants characterized
by different numbers of scanning threads and time between
scans in Figure 5. These dynamics represent the cumulative
number of infected nodes during the epidemic time. The trace
which corresponds to 1 thread and 20s sleeping time wc 1 20s
has unusual behavior in the dynamics. It has a very small
number of infected nodes until the end of the attack, when the
infections rapidly increase to the 7 infected nodes at once. For
all other WannaCry variants we observe that the attack reaches
the maximum number of infected nodes quickly and is not able
to infect any other nodes for a large time window before the
end of the epidemic. These graphs conﬁrm the fact that after
an IP enters a recovered state it no longer has an opportunity
to get back to susceptible or infected nodes. For modeling
and parameter estimation experiments we exclude the time
windows after which the number of infections does not change.
Additionally, we present the number of contacted and infected
IPs in Table II. Interestingly. the overall percentage of infected
nodes is small (around 25% on average) for all variants, which
indicates the fact that the attack propagates slowly through the
network.

D. Model Selection

We select the model that ﬁts WannaCry traces best among
several representative compartmental epidemiological models:

SI, SIS, SIR and SIIDR. We perform model selection for
all WannaCry traces. For these purposes, we use AIC which
is calculated based on the maximum likelihood estimate and
the number of free model parameters. The lower AIC score
corresponds to the best model. We run the experiments on an
uniform grid of model parameter values between 0 and 1. We
select the lowest AIC score for each WannaCry trace and each
compartmental model. The results are illustrated in Table III.
The SIIDR model has the lowest AIC score for all traces except
for wc 1 20s. For instance, the AIC score associated with the
SI model for wc 8 5s WannaCry trace is equal to 149, the SIS
model score is 104, the SIR model score is -35, whereas for
the SIIDR model the AIC is the lowest and has the value of
-121, which is much lower than others. This trend is valid for
all other WannaCry traces except for wc 1 20s which has very
high AIC scores for all models. This variant is an outlier and
none of the models is able to ﬁt the wc 1 20s trace. Therefore,
we can conclude that, among the four epidemiological models,
the SIIDR model ﬁts the WannaCry attack traces best.

For each compartmental model and each WannaCry trace,
we plot the reconstruction curve of the number of infected
nodes using the parameters corresponding to the lowest AIC
score along with the true dynamics of infected nodes. The
results are shown in Figure 6. In the case of the SI and SIS
model, the orange line representing the simulated dynamics
of the number of infected nodes is far from the blue one,
which illustrates the true dynamic for all malware traces. In
the case of the SIR model the numbers of simulated infections
are closer to the real ones, however, the orange and blue curves
are the closest when simulating WannaCry with the SIIDR
model. These results also conﬁrm the fact that SIIDR is the
best model to ﬁt the WannaCry traces.

E. Parameter estimation

We approximated the posterior distribution of SIIDR tran-
sition rates using the ABC-SMC-MNN technique. The mean
values of the posterior distribution of SIIDR transition rates
(β, µ, γ1, γ2) are represented in Table IV. The parameter
dt is the simulation timestamp, which is calculated as: dt =
(tN − t0)/T , where tN is the last timestamp, t0 is the ﬁrst
timestamp, and T is the number of timestamps in WannaCry
traces. dt differs by variant due to the different propagation
speeds. The attack transmission probability ˜β is related to
attack transmission rate β as follows: β = ˜β(cid:104)k(cid:105)t where (cid:104)k(cid:105)t
is the average contact rate per unit time. In the WannaCry
traces we have one communication or contact per dt, hence,
the transmission probability ˜β over a contact-link also equals
β.

Based on estimated values of transition rates we calculated
the basic reproduction number R0 for all WannaCry traces. We
also calculate the SPM propagation speed for all WannaCry
traces as the average number of new infections per 100
seconds. The results are illustrated in Figure 7, where higher
values of SPM propagation speed correspond to higher basic
reproduction number R0.

The mean values of the parameters’ posterior distribution
can be further used to simulate SPM with the SIIDR model.
This provides an opportunity to create synthetic, but realistic,
WannaCry scenarios and evaluate whether existing defenses

7

Figure 5: The cumulative number of the infected nodes I(t) (counting all nodes in states I, ID and R) at each time point t of
WannaCry propagation for different variants of WannaCry. Each WannaCry variant is identiﬁed by two parameters: the number
of threads used for scanning and the time interval between scans (i.e., wc 1 500ms uses 1 thread to scan every 500 ms).

WannaCry Variant
wc 1 500s
wc 1 1s
wc 1 5s
wc 1 10s
wc 1 20s
wc 4 500ms
wc 4 1s
wc 4 5s
wc 4 10s
wc 4 20s
wc 8 500ms
wc 8 1s
wc 8 5s
wc 8 10s
wc 8 20s

# Contacted IPs
37
37
37
34
35
34
35
36
35
35
35
35
35
36
35

# Infected IPs
8
8
8
10
7
5
8
9
7
5
7
7
5
6
9

Percentage of Infected IPs
0.22
0.22
0.22
0.29
0.20
0.15
0.23
0.25
0.20
0.14
0.20
0.20
0.14
0.17
0.26

Table II: Number of contacted and Infected IP adresses from communication data for WannaCry modeling.

are successful in preventing and stopping the malware from
propagation in the networks. However, we notice that some
of the WannaCry traces operate affect only a small numbers
of nodes. For example, the wc 8 5s trace has only 4 infected
nodes at the end of the trace which constitutes 14% of all
nodes. Consequently, ABC-SMC-MNN is expected to perform
worse in the estimation of transition rates for such traces. Thus,
parameters estimated from the traces with higher numbers are
more reliable.

VI. RELATED WORK

A number of works propose to capture the possible be-
havior of SPM with epidemic models. Mishra et al. [24]
introduce the SEIQRS model for viruses and study the effect

of the quarantined compartment on the number of recovered
nodes. In their paper, the authors focus on the analyses of
the threshold that determines the outcome of the disease.
Mishra et al. [25] introduce the SEIS-V model for viruses
with a vaccinated state. Mishra et al. [26] propose the SEIRS
model and investigate the malicious objects’ free equilibrium
stating the stability of the results in terms of the threshold
parameter. Toutonji et al. [33] propose a VEISV (Vulnera-
ble–Exposed–Infectious–Secured–Vulnerable) model and use
the reproduction rate to derive global and local stability. With
the help of simulation,
they show the positive impact of
increasing security countermeasures in the vulnerable state on
worm-exposed and infectious propagation waves. Guillen et
al. [13] introduce a SCIRAS (Susceptible-Carrier-Infectious-

8

WannaCry
variant
wc 1 500ms
wc 1 1s
wc 1 5s
wc 1 10s
wc 1 20s
wc 4 500ms
wc 4 1s
wc 4 5s

SI

SIS SIR SIIDR

583 143 114
431 188 145
683 163 143
462 197
53
704 559 696
277
-45
76
222 160 107
412 186 158

-126
-127
72
-92
700
-166
-55
-46

WannaCry
variant
wc 4 10s
wc 4 20s
wc 8 500ms
wc 8 1s
wc 8 5s
wc 8 10s
wc 8 20s

SI

SIS SIR SIIDR

-36
94
513
11
76
606
18
375 101
51
178
91
-35
149 104
253
-90
74
387 164 173

-145
-117
-147
-116
-121
-118
-89

Table III: AIC scores for each of the SPM models for different WannaCry variants. The lower is the better.

Figure 6: Model ﬁtting for different WannaCry variants.

WannaCry
variant
wc 1 500ms
wc 1 1s
wc 1 5s
wc 1 10s
wc 1 20s
wc 4 500ms
wc 4 1s
wc 4 5s
wc 4 10s
wc 4 20s
wc 8 500ms
wc 8 1s
wc 8 5s
wc 8 10s
wc 8 20s

β

µ

γ1

γ2

0.10
0.11
0.37
0.12
0.22
0.39
0.14
0.12
0.39
0.37
0.10
0.17
0.42
0.38
0.13

0.06
0.07
0.52
0.06
0.54
0.54
0.07
0.07
0.53
0.53
0.09
0.15
0.54
0.54
0.09

0.76
0.71
0.27
0.75
0.24
0.27
0.75
0.76
0.27
0.28
0.72
0.66
0.27
0.26
0.74

0.04
0.07
0.44
0.05
0.46
0.45
0.08
0.07
0.47
0.47
0.11
0.12
0.50
0.47
0.08

dt

0.09
0.06
0.16
0.09
0.99
0.05
0.05
0.07
0.10
0.14
0.03
0.03
0.07
0.06
0.07

Table IV: Mean values from posterior distribution of SIIDR parameters estimated with the ABC-SMC-MNN method.

Recovered-Attacked-Susceptible) model. Authors study the
local and global stability of its equilibrium points and compute
the basic reproductive number. Ojha et al.
[27] develop
a new SEIQRV (Susceptible-Exposed-Infected -Quarantined-
Recovered-Vaccinated) model to capture the behavior of SPM.

In their work, authors obtain the equilibrium points of the
proposed model, analyze the system stability under different
conditions, and verify theoretically through simulation results.
Zheng et al. [40] introduce the SLBQR (Susceptible-Latent-
Breaking out-Quarantined-Recovered) model considering vac-

9

real-world malware scenarios, but only consider theoretical
analyses of the proposed models. The closest to our work is
Levy et al. [19], where the authors ﬁt SPM with a SIR model
and study how the introduction of signatures affects the spread
of malware. They shows how early vaccination can prevent the
spread of SPM.

VII. CONCLUSIONS

In our work, we performed a comprehensive analysis of a
new compartmental model SIIDR that captures the behavior of
self-propagating malware. Indeed, we showed that it ﬁts real-
world WannaCry traces much better than existing compart-
mental models such as SI, SIS, and SIR previously studied
in the literature. Additionally, we estimated the posterior
distribution of the model’s parameters for real attack traces and
showed how they characterize the WannaCry behavior. We also
analytically derived the conditions when SPM is expected to
become an epidemic in well-mixed populations and discussed
the stability of model’s equilibrium points. Our work can have
an impact to model the propagation of SPM, simulate real
attacks on networks, and evaluate defensive techniques.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We acknowledge Jason Hiser and Jack W. Davidson from
University of Virginia for providing us access to the WannaCry
attack traces.

This research was sponsored by the U.S. Army Combat
Capabilities Development Command Army Research Labo-
ratory under Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-13-2-
0045 (ARL Cyber Security CRA). The views and conclusions
contained in this document are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as representing the ofﬁcial policies, either
expressed or implied, of the Combat Capabilities Development
Command Army Research Laboratory or the U.S. Government.
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copy-
right notation here on.

REFERENCES

[1]

“Zeek,” https://docs.zeek.org/en/master/script-reference/log-ﬁles.html,
accessed: 2022-07-11.

[2] H. Akaike, “A new look at the statistical model identiﬁcation,” IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 716–723, 1974.
J. C. Blackwood and L. M. Childs, “An introduction to compartmen-
tal modeling for the budding infectious disease modeler,” Letters in
Biomathematics, 2018.

[3]

[4] F. Brauer, “Compartmental models in epidemiology,” in Mathematical

epidemiology. Springer, 2008, pp. 19–79.

[5] A. Chernikova, N. Gozzi, S. Boboila, P. Angadi, J. Loughner,
M. Wilden, N. Perra, T. Eliassi-Rad, and A. Oprea, “Cyber network re-
silience against self-propagating malware attacks,” in Proceedings 27th
European Symposium on Research in Computer Security (ESORICS)
2022.

[6] O. Diekmann, J. Heesterbeek, and M. G. Roberts, “The construction of
next-generation matrices for compartmental epidemic models,” Journal
of the royal society interface, vol. 7, no. 47, pp. 873–885, 2010.
[7] O. Diekmann, J. A. P. Heesterbeek, and J. A. Metz, “On the deﬁnition
and the computation of the basic reproduction ratio r 0 in models for
infectious diseases in heterogeneous populations,” Journal of mathe-
matical biology, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 365–382, 1990.

Figure 7: The basic reproduction number R0 calculated by us-
ing estimated values of transition rates compared to the speed
of SPM propagation. Higher propagation speed corresponds to
higher R0. We exclude the results for the wc 1* traces.

cination strategies with temporary immunity as well as quaran-
tined strategies. The authors study the stability of the model,
investigate a strategy, based on quarantines, to suppress the
spread of the virus and discuss the effect of the vaccination
on permanent immunity. In order to verify their ﬁndings, the
authors simulate the model exploring a range of temporary
immune times and quarantine rates.

Another direction of research focuses on dynamical sys-
tems for SPM modeling. In their work, Guillen et al. [14]
study the SEIRS model and use a modiﬁed incidence rate
in it. Additionally, the equilibrium points are computed and
their local and global stability analyses are studied. Finally,
the authors derive the explicit expression of the basic repro-
ductive number and obtain the corresponding efﬁcient control
measures. Martinez et al. [20] introduce a dynamic version of
the SEIRS version. The authors look at the performance of the
model with different sets of parameters, propose optimal val-
ues, and discuss its applicability to model real-world malware.
Gan et al. [11] propose a dynamical SIP (Susceptible - Infected
- Protected) model, ﬁnd an equilibrium point, and discuss its
local and global stability. Additionally, the authors perform
the numerical simulations of the model to demonstrate the
dependency on parameter values. Yao et al. [39] present a time-
delayed worm propagation model with variable infection rate.
They analyze the stability of equilibrium and the threshold of
Hopf bifurcation. The authors carry out the numerical analysis
and simulation of the model.

Some of the authors explore the idea of the presence of
different types of devices in the network and consider it while
modeling the SPM behavior with ODE. For instance, Guillen
et al. [12] introduce the model for SPM that considers the
special class of carrier devices whose operative systems are
not targeted by the malware (for example, iOS devices for
Android malware) by introducing a new compartment. The
authors analyze the efﬁcient control measures by studying the
basic reproductive number. Zhu et al. [41] discuss the model
that takes into consideration the fact that viruses can infect
not only computers but also many kinds of external removable
devices. Thus, internal devices can be in Susceptible, Infected,
and Recovered states, while removable devices can be in
Susceptible and Infected states.

None of these works mentioned perform model ﬁtting to

10

[8] K. Dietz, “The estimation of the basic reproduction number for infec-
tious diseases,” Statistical methods in medical research, vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 23–41, 1993.

[30] H. Tong, B. A. Prakash, T. Eliassi-Rad, M. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos,
“Gelling, and melting, large graphs by edge manipulation,” in CIKM,
2012, pp. 245–254.

[9] S. Filippi, C. P. Barnes, J. Cornebise, and M. P. Stumpf, “On optimality
of kernels for approximate bayesian computation using sequential
monte carlo,” Statistical applications in genetics and molecular biology,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 87–107, 2013.

[31] T. Toni, D. Welch, N. Strelkowa, A. Ipsen, and M. P. Stumpf, “Approx-
imate bayesian computation scheme for parameter inference and model
selection in dynamical systems,” Journal of the Royal Society Interface,
vol. 6, no. 31, pp. 187–202, 2009.

[32] L. Torres, K. Chan, H. Tong, and T. Eliassi-Rad, “Nonbacktracking
eigenvalues under node removal: X-centrality and targeted immuniza-
tion,” SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, vol. 3, pp. 656–
675, 01 2021.

[33] O. A. Toutonji, S.-M. Yoo, and M. Park, “Stability analysis of veisv
propagation modeling for network worm attack,” Applied Mathematical
Modelling, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 2751–2761, 2012.

[34] P. Van den Driessche and J. Watmough, “Further notes on the basic
reproduction number,” Mathematical epidemiology, pp. 159–178, 2008.
[35] A. Vespignani, “Modelling dynamical processes in complex socio-

technical systems,” Nature Physics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 32–39, 2012.

[36] Wikipedia,

“Colonial

pipeline
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack”,
Accessed April 2022.

ransomware

attack,”

”https:

[37] Wikipedia

contributors,

notpetya — Wikipedia,
the free encyclopedia,” 2022,
[Online; accessed 22-June-2022].
[Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Petya
and NotPetya&oldid=1090033619

“Petya

and

[38] ——,

“Wannacry ransomware
2022,

free
encyclopedia,”
[On-
line]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=WannaCry
ransomware attack&oldid=1086034703

attack — Wikipedia,

7-May-2022].

accessed

[Online;

the

[39] Y. Yao, Q. Fu, W. Yang, Y. Wang, and C. Sheng, “An epidemic model of
computer worms with time delay and variable infection rate,” Security
and Communication Networks, vol. 2018, 2018.

[40] Y. Zheng, J. Zhu, and C. Lai, “A seiqr model considering the effects
of different quarantined rates on worm propagation in mobile internet,”
Mathematical Problems in Engineering, vol. 2020, 2020.

[41] Q. Zhu, X. Yang, and J. Ren, “Modeling and analysis of the spread of
computer virus,” Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical
Simulation, vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 5117–5124, 2012.

[10] C. Fraser, C. A. Donnelly, S. Cauchemez, W. P. Hanage, M. D.
Van Kerkhove, T. D. Hollingsworth, J. Grifﬁn, R. F. Baggaley, H. E.
Jenkins, E. J. Lyons et al., “Pandemic potential of a strain of inﬂuenza
a (h1n1): early ﬁndings,” science, vol. 324, no. 5934, pp. 1557–1561,
2009.

[12]

[11] C. Gan, Q. Feng, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, and Q. Zhu, “Dynamical
propagation model of malware for cloud computing security,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 20 325–20 333, 2020.
J. H. Guill´en and A. M. del Rey, “Modeling malware propagation
using a carrier compartment,” Communications in Nonlinear Science
and Numerical Simulation, vol. 56, pp. 217–226, 2018.
J. H. Guillen, A. M. Del Rey, and R. Casado-Vara, “Security counter-
measures of a sciras model for advanced malware propagation,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 135 472–135 478, 2019.
J. H. Guill´en, A. M. Del Rey, and L. H. Encinas, “Study of the stability
of a seirs model for computer worm propagation,” Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 479, pp. 411–421, 2017.
[15] M. Hirsch and S. Smale, Differential equations, dynamical systems, and

[13]

[14]

linear algebra. Academic Press, 1974.

[16] M. J. Keeling and P. Rohani, Modeling infectious diseases in humans

[17]

and animals. Princeton university press, 2011.
J. O. Kephart and S. R. White, “Measuring and modeling computer virus
prevalence,” in Proceedings 1993 IEEE Computer Society Symposium
on Research in Security and Privacy.

IEEE, 1993, pp. 2–15.

[18] L. T. Le, T. Eliassi-Rad, and H. Tong, “MET: A fast algorithm for
minimizing propagation in large graphs with small eigen-gaps,” in SDM,
2015, pp. 694–702.

[20]

[19] N. Levy, A. Rubin, and E. Yom-Tov, “Modeling infection methods of
computer malware in the presence of vaccinations using epidemiological
models: an analysis of real-world data,” International Journal of Data
Science and Analytics, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 349–358, 2020.
I. Mart´ınez Mart´ınez, A. Flori´an Quiti´an, D. D´ıaz-L´opez, P. Nespoli,
and F. G´omez M´armol, “Malseirs: Forecasting malware spread based on
compartmental models in epidemiology,” Complexity, vol. 2021, 2021.
[21] T. J. McKinley, I. Vernon, I. Andrianakis, N. McCreesh, J. E. Oakley,
R. N. Nsubuga, M. Goldstein, and R. G. White, “Approximate bayesian
computation and simulation-based inference for complex stochastic
epidemic models,” Statistical science, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 4–18, 2018.

[22] Mike
how
all-you-need-to-know-about-wannacry-ransomware/”, 2021.

wannacry
and
”https://www.mimecast.com/blog/

is
work?”

Azzara,
does

ransomware

“What

it

[23] A. Minter and R. Retkute, “Approximate bayesian computation for

infectious disease modelling,” Epidemics, vol. 29, p. 100368, 2019.

[24] B. K. Mishra and N. Jha, “Seiqrs model for the transmission of mali-
cious objects in computer network,” Applied Mathematical Modelling,
vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 710–715, 2010.

[25] B. K. Mishra and S. K. Pandey, “Dynamic model of worm propagation
in computer network,” Applied mathematical modelling, vol. 38, no.
7-8, pp. 2173–2179, 2014.

[26] B. K. Mishra and D. K. Saini, “Seirs epidemic model with delay
for transmission of malicious objects in computer network,” Applied
mathematics and computation, vol. 188, no. 2, pp. 1476–1482, 2007.
[27] R. P. Ojha, P. K. Srivastava, G. Sanyal, and N. Gupta, “Improved model
for the stability analysis of wireless sensor network against malware
attacks,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 116, no. 3, pp. 2525–
2548, 2021.

[28] T. Ongun, O. Spohngellert, B. A. Miller, S. Boboila, A. Oprea,
T. Eliassi-Rad, J. Hiser, A. Nottingham, J. W. Davidson, and M. Veer-
araghavan, “PORTFILER: Port-Level Network Proﬁling for Self-
Propagating Malware Detection,” in CNS.
IEEE, 2021, pp. 182–190.
Springer

[29] L. Perko, Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems.

Science & Business Media, 2013, vol. 7.

11

