Machine Learning-Enabled Cyber Attack Prediction
and Mitigation for EV Charging Stations

Mansi Girdhar and Junho Hong
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Michigan-Dearborn
Dearborn, USA
gmansi@umich.edu and jhwr@umich.edu

Yongsik Yoo and Tai-jin Song
Department of Urban Engineering
Chungbuk National University
Cheongju, South Korea
yys@chungbuk.ac.kr and tj@chungbuk.ac.kr

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
2
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
4
6
0
1
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Safe and reliable electric vehicle charging stations
(EVCSs) have become imperative in an intelligent transporta-
tion infrastructure. Over the years, there has been a rapid
increase in the deployment of EVCSs to address the upsurg-
ing charging demands. However, advances in information and
communication technologies (ICT) have rendered this cyber-
physical system (CPS) vulnerable to suffering cyber threats,
thereby destabilizing the charging ecosystem and even the entire
electric grid infrastructure. This paper develops an advanced
cybersecurity framework, where STRIDE threat modeling is used
to identify potential vulnerabilities in an EVCS. Further, the
weighted attack defense tree approach is employed to create
multiple attack scenarios, followed by developing Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) and Partially Observable Monte-Carlo Planning
(POMCP) algorithms for modeling the security attacks. Also,
potential mitigation strategies are suggested for the identiﬁed
threats.

Index Terms—EVCS, cybersecurity, STRIDE, HMM

I. INTRODUCTION

The global auto industry is undergoing a seismic transi-
tion from internal combustion engine dominance to electric
vehicles (EVs) as a source of salvation for climate change.
The penetration of EVCSs in the electric grids is increased
due to the continuously growing ﬂeet of EVs. Since internet-
connected EVCS is a principal infrastructure in an intelli-
gent power system, the cybersecurity perspective of EVCS
is critical to the operation of power systems. Cyber attack
patterns on critical infrastructures, especially energy delivery
systems, are evolving and diversifying, indebted to the inter-
net of things (IoT) paradigm, which has infused numerous
vulnerabilities. Due to the complex cyber-physical interactions
and interdependencies at the nexus of the EVs, EVCSs, and
power grid, the exchanged data might be subject to disparate
vulnerabilities. The perpetrators might use these existing vul-
nerabilities of the EVCS equipment to compromise the system,
thus jeopardizing its security. The severe implications incurred
by the adversarial attacks triggered a wide interest of white-hat
hackers and researchers to address the cybersecurity aspects
of the EVCSs.

Although extensive research has been done on developing
efﬁcient and resilient cybersecurity frameworks for power grid
applications, for e.g., development of Critical Infrastructure
Protection (CIP) 002-009 standard by the North American

Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) [1], and IEC 62351
standard by the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC) Technical Committee (TC) 57 Working Group (WG)
15 [2], designing of anomaly detection systems (ADSs)
in [3], [4] and [5], and several others, but they do not reinforce
the cybersecurity of EVCSs.

Also, EVCSs have not yet encountered distinguished and
high-proﬁle cyber incidents, and investigators have been in-
terposing with the charging operations to determine the ex-
istence of unknown vulnerabilities. For e.g., Kaspersky Lab
researchers exposed the software vulnerabilities of EVCSs,
which make them accessible to unauthorized hackers [6].
Therefore, these known vulnerabilities, and more eminently
a possibility of zero-day vulnerabilities, underline the cyber
risks of EVCSs.

Inspite of the fact that there have been some diligent efforts
done to address the critical cybersecurity gaps in an EVCS,
for e.g., the proposal of security standards for EV charging
architectures by the European Network of Cybersecurity [7]
and cybersecurity recommendations by the US DOE, NHTSA
and, DOHS, these proposed recommendations are yet to be
standardized and operational. Due to the unacceptable con-
sensus for the EV charging protocols, the non-standard cyber-
physical interfaces make EVs and EVCS susceptible to attacks
that can damage the EVs and EVCS equipment.

This paper emphasizes the cybersecurity concerns of an
EVCS along with the detection and mitigation measures to
counter the coordinated cyber attacks. The principal contribu-
tions of the paper are: (1) a cybersecurity framework which
encompasses STRIDE-based threat modeling for an EVCS
to identify potential cyber vulnerabilities, weighted attack
defense tree to outline multiple cyber attack scenarios, HMM
to predict the most likely path in a multi-stage attack and
POMCP algorithm to decoy the attacker towards the predicted
path of attack.

The remainder of the paper is divided as follows: Section
II discusses the cyber-physical model of an EVCS. Sections
III outlines the holistic cybersecurity framework, including
the applications of STRIDE threat modeling, weighted at-
tack defense tree, HMM, and POMCP algorithms to analyze
innumerable cybersecurity threats faced by an EVCS and
generate various attack scenarios in the EVs and EVCS.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Proposed cybersecurity framework.

EVCS are identiﬁed. Step 2, i.e., weighted attack defense
tree, studies diverse attack models which could be used by an
attacker to target the system. Thus, the cyber attack scenarios
are used as an input for HMM in step 3. HMM predicts the
attack steps in a multi-step attack scenario by using viterbi
algorithm and proposes various mitigation strategies. Finally,
at step 4, a POMCP algorithm is employed, where decoy nodes
are added along with the predicted path to deceive the attacker
if (s)he attacks the system through an un-predicted path.

A. STRIDE Threat Modeling

A literature review has identiﬁed numerous threat modeling
methodologies, e.g., system theoretic process analysis for se-
curity (STPA-sec), hazard and operability (HAZOP), security-
aware hazard and risk assessment (SAHARA), process for at-
tack simulation and threat analysis (PASTA), and STRIDE [8].
STRIDE is centered around the identiﬁcation and mitigation
of potential cyber threats against each system entity [9].

It

is a categorical

threat analysis model and has been
adopted in many previous works [9], [10]. This paper incor-
porated STRIDE to discover the potential susceptibilities or
security risks associated with each component of an EVCS at
the earlier stages of development. It consists of a data ﬂow
diagram (DFD), highlighting different assets, access points,
information ﬂow, and potential vulnerabilities in the charging
environment. It speciﬁes a mnemonic for six different types
of security threats as described below:
It

1) Spooﬁng:

indicates impersonating an authorized
source or system entity by fabricating data. For e.g.,
gaining access to the EVC and installing unauthorized
remote command sequences or malware. The malware
injected in the EVC may propagate to the EVs or
distribution system resulting in a temporary shutdown
of EVCS [11].

2) Tampering: It causes the forging of legitimate infor-
mation [12]. For example, EVC might inject erroneous
charging or discharging information into EVCSMS or
various data exchanges (e.g., energy request, demand
response (DR), DR request, EV ID, and utility ID)
between EVs, EVSE, and EVCSMS could be distorted.
Hence, successful tampering on an EVCS could damage
EVs, EVSE, XMS, and even the distribution transformer
by misleading the charging and grid operations.

3) Repudiation: It refers to invalidating or suppressing
the information exchange between the charging system
components [12]. For instance, an infected EVC might
deny the charge processing fee from an EV owner, even

Fig. 1. High-level overview of an EVCS.

Section IV evaluates the performance of the proposed model
by a case study of denial of service (DoS) attack along
with some potential mitigation strategies in section V. Finally,
Section VI concludes the paper along with the limitations and
recommendations for future work.

II. HIGH-LEVEL OVERVIEW OF AN EVCS

In general, an EVCS acts as an interface or a high-wattage
access point that capacitates the power exchange between a
power grid and the EVs, thus enabling EV charging facilities.
Fig. 1 presents the high-level overview of the CPS of an
EVCS. The EVCS conﬁgured with AC bus, is provided electric
power through the distribution grid topology system via step-
down transformer. It possesses the capability to charge mutli-
ple EVs simultaneously through multiple serving points on the
bus. These connection points are the distributed EVCs which
are conventional power outlets with speciﬁc current ratings.
Also the EVCs are connected through the outgoing radial
distribution feeders to the EVs. A centralized battery energy
storage system (BESS) is integrated into the LV DC link
using an AC/DC converter which performs secondary services,
such as energy arbitrage, and other grid ancillary services.
Further, EVCS is equipped with the central EVCS manage-
ment system (EVCSMS), which receives charging requests
from EVCs and acts as a standard access point to discrete
EVCs over Open Charge Point Protocol (OCPP). Moreover,
OCPP authorizes open communication between a smart EVCS
and the cloud-based backend where the system engineers can
remotely upgrade ﬁrmware, bill customers, optimize charging,
and other functions. Some EV communications with an EVCS
are governed by message types deﬁned by the IEC 61850
standard.

III. PROPOSED CYBERSECURITY FRAMEWORK

Fig. 2 gives an overview of the cybersecurity framework of
an EVCS. Step 1 evaluates the threat analysis using STRIDE,
where existing vulnerabilities and cyber threats within an

“OR” nodes. To exemplify, an attacker might accomplish the
goal of group L2-3 to shut down EVCs by various cyber
attack scenarios. One of the scenarios (i.e., L3-2) is DoS
attack on the charger.The agent might achieve its goal by
attacking through two different attack scenarios or paths, e.g.,
network bandwidth attack (NB) (L4-1) and system resource
depletion attack (SR) (L4-2). NB has three “AND” conditions,
i.e., (1) network ﬂooding (NF) and malformed packet (M),
(2) M and protocol vulnerability exploitation (P), (3) P and
ampliﬁcation (A) attack. Also, SR has three “AND” condi-
tions, i.e., (1) multiple login attempts (ML) and ﬁle system
modiﬁcation (FM), (2) FM and malware installation (MI),
(3) MI and application ﬂooding (AF). The attack tree also
proposes several mitigation actions at each attack scenario (L4-
1 and L4-2) for defense strategies. Wij, a weighting factor, is
used for defense cost (by an operator) or attack cost (by an
attacker). It also considers other primary factors, e.g., defense
cost Cij for developing defensive strategies in a CPS [13]. A
defender intends to establish minimum defense cost to secure
the optimal attack nodes during the design process. Another
parameter of paramount importance is the vulnerability index
(Vk) [14], which identiﬁes the vulnerable assets in an EVCS. It
varies from 0 (most vulnerable) to 1 (least vulnerable). Hence,
the optimal defensive strategy (ODS) can be computed by
minimizing Cij and maximizing Vk,

ODS = min

N
(cid:88)

M
(cid:88)

i=1

j=1

Cij + max

(cid:88)

Vk.

(1)

C. Hidden Markov Model

HMM, a stochastic predictive model, is proposed as an
intrusion detection and prevention system (ID&PS). It models
the interactions between the attacker and an EVCS for each
multi-step attack scenario and predicts the subsequent attack
steps to possibly prevent attacks and minimize the damage.

For the implementation of the proposed ID&PS, multi-step
attack ﬁles (attack steps of an attacker from the weighted
defense attack tree) and historical cybersecurity data, as well
as system logs, are used to train the proposed HMM by
supervised machine learning. The learning module produces
HMM conﬁguration ﬁles which represent the state transition
matrix, emission matrix, and the number of transition states,
which are important aspects for the prediction module. Further,
a real-time monitoring system produces a sequence of alerts
and notiﬁcations indicating an intrusion. The module uses the
HMM algorithm on the alert stream and assesses the attack
steps, followed by taking appropriate mitigation actions.

Mathematically, HMM is expressed as two probabilistic
processes [15]: (1) a hidden stochastic process (h(n)), which
corresponds to the state transition, and (2) an observation
process (o(n)), which corresponds to the emitted observations
from each hidden state.

Hence, a discrete ﬁrst-order HMM is given by

λ = (Σ, S, T, E, π).

(2)

Fig. 3. An example of weighted attack tree for DoS.

it has been paid for the corresponding charging. Hence,
it will cause a ﬁnancial loss to the EV owner.

4) Information disclosure: It refers to the data infringement
or data leakage causing privacy violations [12]. For
instance, the wireless or wired communication between
the EVC and EV is highly prone to be intercepted by
the threat agent. Hence, the attacker might eavesdrop and
gain an unauthorized access to the security-sensitive in-
formation. This might result in endangering the privacy
of both EVSE and EV.

5) Denial of Service: It refers to the inaccessibility of
network services to legitimate users due to ﬂooding
of the bus network with malicious trafﬁc injected by
an attacker [12]. It might shut down the entire EVCS
through the termination of the charging process of
connected EVs.

6) Elevation of privilege: It occurs when a malevolent
threat agent acquires more authority or privileges to
access data in a CPS as compared to the intended
user [12]. To exemplify, if a malicious agent gets critical
attributes of transmitted EVC data (e.g., ﬁrmware, EV
ID, or user data), (s)he might corrupt this data and
hamper the EVCSMS functions and modify system ﬁles
or software conﬁgurations. As a result, an entire EVCS
could be crippled due to data poisoning.

B. Weighted Attack Defense Tree

The proposed weighted attack defense tree, as shown in
Fig. 3, analyses an adversary’s attack objectives by exhibiting
a graphical tree notation in the form of a multi-level hierar-
chy process.The root node (L1: EVCS attack) of an attack
tree deﬁnes the primary goal of an attacker, which can be
accomplished through different combinations of attack steps
(or sub-goals, i.e., L2-2, L2-3, L2-4). Each attack leaf may
constitute one or more defense nodes and logical “AND” and

Where Σ represents a set of observations such that

Σ = {h1, h2, h3, ..., hM }.

S represents a set of HMM states such that

S = {S1, S2, S3, ..., SN }.

(3)

(4)

T is an N ×N state transition matrix for N probable states,
which describes probability of state transition (tij) from state
i to state j, such that

T = {{tij}N ×N | tij = P (qn+1 = Sj | qn = Si)},

where 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N (5)

E is an N × M emission matrix, which indicates the
probability of different alerts (ej) for a speciﬁc attack scenario
such that

E = {{ej(k)}N ×M | ej = P (hk | qn = Sj)},

where 1 ≤ j ≤ N, 1 ≤ k ≤ M.

(6)

Π is an N × 1 initial probability distribution vector, which
indicates the probability of the initial state of the attack such
that

Π = {{πi}N ×1 | πi = P (q1 = Si)}, where 1 ≤ i ≤ N.

(7)

In this paper, supervised training is used to obtain the
above mentioned probability matrices (T and E) and initial
distribution vector (Π). It is deﬁned mathematically by the
following equations,

tij =

t(i, j)
α=0 α · t(i, α)

(cid:80)N

,

ej(k) =

f (j, bk)
α=0 f (j, bk)

(cid:80)M

.

(8)

(9)

Post the computation of T, E and Π, viterbi algorithm
is applied to the T to estimate the most
likely the state
sequence, Q∗ = {q1, q2, ..., qk}, for the given alert sequence,
H = {h1, h2, ..., hk} based on the state probability for each
attack step. The likelihood of the best state sequence can be
evaluated by the following formula:

arg max{P (H | B, λ)} = arg max{P (H, B | λ)}.

(10)

Let δt(i) be the maximal probability of state sequences
time n that ends in state Si and produces the ﬁrst n
at
observations for the given model, denoted by the following
formula:

δt(j) = max{P (S1, S2, ..., Sn, h1, h2, ..., hn, qn = Sj | λ)}.
(11)

Hence, viterbi algorithm calculates the best state sequence and
speciﬁes the best state Si at time n.

D. Partially Observable Monte-Carlo Planning (POMCP) Al-
gorithm

A high-skilled attacker might not follow the predicted path
and cause abnormal behaviors by attacking through alternative
attack paths. Hence, to block these un-predicted paths, the
POMCP algorithm is used to drift the attacker towards the
predicted route [16]. Furthermore, decoy nodes can be de-
ployed, so once the attacker breaks into the decoy system, the
monitoring system will generate alerts, and the attacker will be
directed towards the predicted path. Finally, the defender can
undertake appropriate mitigation actions to block the attacker
beforehand. In this case, the defenders can safeguard all attack
paths based on the predicted probability index (PPr
L ), where P
is the probability estimate of an attack state, Pr is the priority
given to the attack stage, and L is the ith layer (i = 1,2,3, ..).

IV. CASE STUDY

An attack scenario is constructed where a DoS attack is
used to compromise the EVCs. There is a sequence of eight
attack states involved in the hidden layer, which constitutes:
(1) M, (2) P, (3) NF, (4) (A, (5) ML, (6) MI, (7) FM, and (8)
AF. In addition, there are two alert sequences in the second
layer, (1) NB and (2) SR.

In accordance with the viterbi algorithm, the system deter-
mines that the most likely attack path is “A”, “AF” and “P”
when alert observations for “SR”, “SR” and “NB” are received
from the monitoring system at three consecutive times. As
shown by Fig. 4, the most likely attack state (at n = 1) is “A”
with a maximum probability of 12.13% for the SR alert, the
most likely attack state (at n = 2) is “AF” with a maximum
probability of 3.06% for the SR alert, and the most likely
attack state (at n = 3) is “P” with a maximum probability of
0.29% for the NB alert. In other words, the threat agent tries
to attack the EVCs by attempting SR attacks and NB attacks.
Further, as described earlier, an attacker may traverse
through any attack path to reach its ﬁnal goal. Assuming that
there is an attack at the “A” attack stage, P1
1=0.12127. Then
the presence of decoy nodes (D) along with the predicted path
nodes in the network deﬂects the attacker to the predicted
path (i.e., A-AF-P). Now, even though the attacker is able to
compromise the decoy node, the subsequent predicted nodes
will deviate the attacker to another decoy in the system. Hence,
the defenders could protect the network across each node.

Hence, the proposed cybersecurity model predicts cyber
intrusions into an EVCS effectively as it renders explicit
information on the current state of the attack. Further, the
gained knowledge of attacks can be exploited to develop
signiﬁcant mitigation measures.

V. POTENTIAL MITIGATION MEASURES

This paper discusses various mitigation strategies to enhance
the security and resiliency of an EVCS. For instance, different
risk assessment and threat analysis models (e.g., STRIDE,
OCTAVE) might be used in the early development stage to an-
alyze multiple security threats and risks during the pre-attack
stage. Moreover, any unauthorized access to the malicious

detects the abnormal behaviors, unauthorized intrusions, and
anomalies of the threat actors. It focuses on predicting the
attacker’s potential targets and behaviors so that the defender
can undertake active defense actions prior to the occurrence
of cyber attacks. Since the proposed framework is evaluated
as an online decoding process, in the future, its real-time
implementation can be evaluated and tested by designing a
cyber-physical hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) testbed. Moreover,
the effectiveness of the proposed mitigations can be studied
under realistic and sophisticated cyber attack scenarios.

REFERENCES

[1] A. N. Bessani, P. Sousa, M. Correia, N. F. Neves, and P. Ver´ıssimo, “The
crutial way of critical infrastructure protection,” IEEE Security Privacy,
vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 44–51, 2008.

[2] J. Hong, R. Karnati, C. W. Ten, S. Lee, and S. Choi, “Implementation of
secure sampled value (sesv) messages in substation automation system,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[3] J. Hong, C. Liu, and M. Govindarasu, “Integrated anomaly detection for
cyber security of the substations,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1643–1653, 2014.

[4] R. Zhu, C. C. Liu, J. Hong, and J. Wang, “Intrusion detection against
mms-based measurement attacks at digital substations,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 1240–1249, 2021.

[5] Y. Yang, H. Xu, L. Gao, Y. Yuan, K. McLaughlin, and S. Sezer,
“Multidimensional intrusion detection system for iec 61850-based scada
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 32, no. 2, pp.
1068–1078, 2017.

[6] S. Acharya, Y. Dvorkin, H. Pandˇzi´c, and R. Karri, “Cybersecurity of
smart electric vehicle charging: A power grid perspective,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 214 434–214 453, 2020.

[7] D. T. Hoang, P. Wang, D. Niyato, and E. Hossain, “Charging and
discharging of plug-in electric vehicles (pevs) in vehicle-to-grid (v2g)
systems: A cyber insurance-based model,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 732–
754, 2017.

[8] W. Young and N. G. Leveson, “An integrated approach to safety and
security based on systems theory,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 57,
no. 2, Feb. 2014.

[9] R. Khan, K. McLaughlin, D. Laverty, and S. Sezer, “Stride-based threat
modeling for cyber-physical systems,” in 2017 IEEE PES Innovative
Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT-Europe), 2017, pp.
1–6.

[10] P. Danielis, M. Beckmann, and J. Skodzik, “An iso-compliant

test
procedure for technical risk analyses of iot systems based on stride,”
in 2020 IEEE 44th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications
Conference (COMPSAC), 2020, pp. 499–504.

[11] S. Lightman and T. Brewer, “Symposium on federally funded research
on cybersecurity of electric vehicle supply equipment (evse),” Nat. Inst.
Standards Technol. NISTIR 8294, April 2020.

[12] D. C. K. Harnett, B. Harris and G. Watson, “DOE/DHS/DOT volpe
technical meeting on electric vehicle and charging station cybersecurity,”
U.S. Department of Transportation, Tech. Report. DOT-VNTSC-DOE-18-
01, Mar. 2018.

[13] B. Xu, Z. Zhong, and G.He, “A minimum defense cost calculation
method for attack defense trees,” Security and Communication Networks,
vol. 2020, pp. 1–12, 2020.

[14] C.-W. Ten, C.-C. Liu, and M. Govindarasu, “Vulnerability assessment
of cybersecurity for scada systems using attack trees,” in 2007 IEEE
Power Engineering Society General Meeting, 2007, pp. 1–8.

[15] P. Holgado, V. A. Villagr´a, and L. V´azquez, “Real-time multistep attack
prediction based on hidden markov models,” IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 134–147, 2020.
[16] M. A. R. A. Amin, S. Shetty, L. Njilla, D. K. Tosh, and C. Kamhoua,
“Hidden markov model and cyber deception for the prevention of
adversarial lateral movement,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 49 662–49 682,
2021.

Fig. 4. A case study of Viterbi algorithm and POMCP algorithm.

users can be impeded by implementing vulnerability scan,
multi-authentication, signature-based cryptography of EVCS
operation and communications. Similarly, during the attack,
the proposed HMM and POMCP can be engaged to study the
current and future behavior of the cyber attacker. However, for
the post-attack mitigations, digital forensic analysis can be a
useful tool to resume EVCS to its healthy state by identifying
the compromised asset or vulnerabilities. Furthermore, system
hardening can be implemented to reduce its attack surface by
disconnecting the compromised components and using safer
backup options. In addition, a system engineer can update the
ﬁrmware or remove unauthorized software, set up an IDS&IPS
to reserve the issues.

VI. CONCLUSION

This paper proposes a ﬁrst-of-the-kind cybersecurity frame-
work using STRIDE for designing vulnerability and risk
assessment, a weighted attack defense tree to create attack
scenarios, HMM, and POMCP algorithms to analyze the cyber
threats and risks associated with an EVCS. Moreover,
it
also introduces potential mitigation strategies to enhance the
security and resiliency of an EVCS. The proposed ID&PS

