2
2
0
2

p
e
S
7

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
1
3
3
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measurement of the Usage of Web Clips in Underground
Economy

Qinyu Hu∗
Shanghai University of Engineering
Science
Shanghai, China
hqy@sues.edu.cn

Songyang Wu∗
The Third Research Institute of The
Ministry of Public Security
Shanghai, China
wusongyang@stars.org.cn

Wenqi Sun†
The Third Research Institute of The
Ministry of Public Security
Shanghai, China
sunwenqi@stars.org.cn

Zhushou Tang
QI-ANXIN Technology Group Inc.
Shanghai, China
ellison.tang@gmail.com

Chaofan Chen
QI-ANXIN Technology Group Inc.
Shanghai, China
darenfy@gmail.com

Zhiguo Ding
The Third Research Institute of The
Ministry of Public Security
Shanghai, China
dingzhiguo@stars.org.cn

Xiaomei Zhang†
Shanghai University of Engineering
Science
Shanghai, China
xmzhang@sues.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we study the ecosystem of the abused Web Clips in
underground economy. Through this study, we find the Web Clips
is wildly used by perpetrators to penetrate iOS devices to gain profit.
This work starts with 1,800 user complaint documents about cyber
crimes over Web Clips. We firstly look into the ecosystem of abused
Web Clips and point out the main participants and workflow. In
addition, what is the Web Clips used for is demystified. Then the
main participants, including creators, distributors, and operators are
deeply studied based on our dataset. We try to reveal the prominent
features of the illicit Web Clips and give some mitigation measures.
Analysis reveals that 1) SSL certificate is overwhelmingly
preferred for signing Web Clips instances compared with
certificate issued by Apple. The wildly used SSL certificates can be
aggregated into a limited group. 2) The content of the abused Web
Clips falls into a few categories,
‘Fraud’, and
‘Pornography’ are among the top categories. 3) Instant messenger
(IM) and live streaming platform are the most popular medium to
trick victims into deploying the Web Clips. 4) The Web Clips are
operated by a small amount of perpetrators, and the perpetrators
tend to evade detection by taking technical approach, such as
registering domain names through oversea domain name service

‘Gambling’,

∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Corresponding authors

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

provider, preferring easy-to-acquire new gTLD (global Top Level
Domain), and deploying anti-crawler tricks.

Our study gives hints on investigation of cyber crime over Web
Clips, we hope that this work can help stakeholders to stay ahead
of the threat.

KEYWORDS
iOS Web Clips, Underground Economy

ACM Reference Format:
Qinyu Hu, Songyang Wu, Wenqi Sun, Zhushou Tang, Chaofan Chen, Zhiguo
Ding, and Xiaomei Zhang. 2018. Measurement of the Usage of Web Clips
in Underground Economy. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct
conference title from your rights confirmation emai (Conference acronym ’XX).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

1 INTRODUCTION
Cyber crime is a pervasive and costly global issue. According to
the investigation of Internet Crime Complaint Center [15], the
loss caused by cyber crime is increasing every year. In 2021, the
reported losses of the cyber crime exceed $6.9 billion, with an over
50% increase than last year. Other report from China indicates that
the law enforcement has identified and frozen over 300 billion RMB
of the domestic transactions of cyber crime in 2021 [22].

There is a wide range of vectors used by perpetrators in the
criminal activity, including emails, websites, or advertisements. In
lots of
order to protect end-user against the cyber crime,
studies [4, 18, 20] have paid attention to such vectors that facilitate
cyber crimes. Recently, researchers dedicate to vetting the mobile
applications with the ever-evolving threats to mobile users [12, 14].
Among these research, a plethora of works target the APK file on
Android, whereas few has paid attention to APPs on iOS [17].

Apple has a good track record of protecting end-user from
malicious APPs. To guarantee the safety of the APP, Apple vets all

 
 
 
 
 
 
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Qinyu Hu, Songyang Wu et al.

APPs [5] before they’re published on the App Store. Moreover,
Apple does not allow for sideloading APPs, requiring that any APP
installed on the device is distributed through the iTunes App Store.
In order to breach such rule to reach iOS users, the corner content
distribution channels (e.g., iMessage [23], TestFlight [6] or Web
Clips [11]) are utilized by miscreants. Among these corner
channels, Web Clips, which are used to streamline the process of
setting up a large number of iOS devices, are abused for illicit
content distribution.

This paper aims to answer the four research questions to
demystify the Web Clips in underground economy, which are
beneficial for cyber investigation and new ways to prevent cyber
crimes.

RQ1. Who create Web Clips and by what?
RQ2. What is the purpose that the Web Clips are used for?
RQ3. How are the illicit Web Clips distributed?
RQ4. What are the characteristics of operators in the Web Clips

based criminal activities?

In order to demystify the ecosystem of the abused Web Clips and
pinpoint the participants of the underground economy, we study
the Web Clips dataset in a pipeline and give insight on a variety of
aspects, including the creator, distributor, and operator of the Web
Clips. Our findings include: 1) SSL certificate is overwhelmingly
preferred for signing Web Clips instances compared with certificate
issued by Apple. The wildly used SSL certificates can be aggregated
into a limited group, which can be correlated with online Web Clips
generating service. Since the online generators are so widely used in
underground economy, we highly recommend that more regulatory
measures should be taken. 2) The content of the abused Web Clips
falls into a few categories, ‘Gambling’, ‘Fraud’, and ‘Pornography’
are among the top categories. These are also the most pervasive
cyber crimes. 3) Instant messenger and live streaming platform are
the most popular medium to trick victims into deploying the Web
clips. About 66% illicit Web Clips are distributed through instant
messenger and live streaming. 4) The Web Clips are operated by a
small amount of perpetrators since the Web Clips can be aggregated
by using a variety of features. And the perpetrators tend to escape
detection by taking technical approach, such as registering domain
names through oversea organization, preferring easy-to-acquire
new gTLD, and deploying anti-crawler tricks.

In this paper, we make the first systematic study on the Web
Clips ecosystem especially being abused in illicit activities. Firstly,
we introduce research background, the used dataset of this work
and the Web Clips ecosystem overview (see section 2). Creators
perform the generation of Web Clips using local tools or online
Web Clips generators (see section 3). Then the purpose of the illicit
Web Clips are analyzed (see section 4). Distributors spread Web
Clips over various medium (see section 5). Operators deploy and
operate the Web Clips and related websites (see section 6). At last,
based on the research findings of Web Clips ecosystem, mitigation
measures are recommended (see section 7).

2 BACKGROUND
information and
As a daily-use device for storing personal
sensitive data, smartphones are a perfect target for cyber crimes
nowadays. Stakeholders, including app stores or mobile operating

(a) Widget added by using Web Clips

(b) View of the widget (no navigation
bar)

Figure 1: The widget looks like an app intuitively.

systems, have made tremendous effort to protect the end-users
from falling prey to cyber crimes. The safety net erected by
stakeholders drives malware/scamware/ransomware to find new
ways to reach smartphone systems. Among these ways, Web Clips,
which are used for configuring iOS devices, are abused to break
the confinement.

Similar to the android APP generated by a generator [19], Web
Clips of iOS can be generated for developers with little or no
software engineering background (a.k.a., citizen developer) by
using generators as well. Security concern of android APP
generated
ample
researches [12, 14, 19], however, the Web Clips are still lack of
specific study and understandings so far.

generator

attracted

has

by

a

In this section, we start with the introduction of Web Clips, then
the initial dataset being used is described, furthermore we give a
glimpse at the ecosystem of abused Web Clips.

to

via

the

setting

customized

2.1 Apple Web Clips
Apple allows to configure a large scale of enrolled iOS-based
devices
configuration
profiles [7, 8, 10] in mobile device management [9] scheme. The
configuration profiles contain a rich set of settings for configuring
email, network, etc, of iOS devices. Among these settings, the Web
Clips (The configuration profiles containing Web Clips setting are
referred to as Web Clips throughout this paper for brevity) allow to
add a widget to the Home Screen of the user’s device. The widget
provides fast access to website links. After the Web Clip (the file
end with .mobileconfig) has been delivered and deployed, it looks
like an APP is installed, users can tap the widget on Home Screen
of the iOS device to access website links [11]. An example is
shown in Figure 1. The red box in Figure 1(a) presents a concrete
example of the added widget, and after tapping the icon of this
widget, we will access to the webpage shown in Figure 1(b).

Measurement of the Usage of Web Clips in Underground Economy

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

A generalized and simplified Web Clip configuration profile is
depicted as Listing 1. As Listing 1 depicted, the configuration profile
is essentially an XML file consists of key-value pairs. To configure
Web Clips, developers can specify value of ‘Label’ (line 10-11) to set
the name of the widget, set content of ‘Icon’ (line 8) to designate
the icon of the widget displayed on Home Screen. An import key
to note is the value of ‘URL’ (line 13-14), which is used to specify
the URL for accessing when users tap the widget [11]. In essence,
the Web Clips are just wrappers of remote resource.

To ensure the integrity and remove the warning message of
‘Unverified Profile’ when deploying the Web Clips, developers can
opt to sign the Web Clips either by using the certificate issued
by Apple or by using a valid SSL certificate issued by a certificate
authority. If a Web Clip is signed, the original Web Clip (Listing 1)
and the certificate are enveloped together to form a new one. The
developer within a certificate issued by or the domain within an
SSL certificate is an import identity of Web Clips.

Listing 1: Snippet setting of Web Clips

<? xml version =" 1.0 " encoding =" UTF -8 "? >
< plist version =" 1.0 " >
< dict >

< key > PayloadContent </ key >
< array >

< dict >

< key > FullScreen </ key >< true / >
< key > Icon </ key > < data > ... </ data >
< key > IsRemovable </ key >< true / >
< key > Label </ key >
< string > Ding Sheng </ string >
...
< key > URL </ key >
< string > http: // login . tdo - sihgf9 - ajfca666 . ntum27 . cn /#/ Login ? roomCode =10001 </ string >

</ dict >

</ array >

</ dict >
</ plist >

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

2.2 Dataset and Ethical Considerations
It’s hard to collect Web Clips for there is no centralized
distribution channel like iTunes App Store. Thanks to the cyber
security complaint center of Anonymized Authority2, an outlet for
receiving complaints of cyber crimes, we get the documents of
cyber crimes filed by the authority agent based on the narration of
the victim. The non-structured document
logging incident
description according to per case, including the social media tool
the perpetrator used to interact with the victim, the URL provided
by the perpetrator to download the Web Clips. We have obtained
1,800 user complaint documents from April 1st to May 11th, 2021
as the corpus for studying the distribution of the Web Clips, and
1,173 unique Web Clips instances for the rest of the study
(different cases may refer to the same Web Clips such result in
duplicate instances). For the sake of ethical considerations, these
documents are processed by the complaint center to anonymize
personal private information as to avoid user privacy violation.

2.3 Web Clips Ecosystem Overview
In this section, we present the composition of the ecosystem of the
abused Web Clips. The ecosystem includes three main participants
i.e. creator, distributor and operator. Different participants may
either come from the same group or belong to different forces

2Anonymized for double-blind review.

Figure 2: Ecosystem of Abused Web Clips

that cooperate with each other. The participants and workflow are
shown in Figure 2.

Creators: firstly, creators utilize local tools or online generators
to create Web Clips. Target website need to be built beforehand.
The corresponding URL of that website is used as input during the
Web Clips generation process.

Operators: after the creation of Web Clips, operators may build
Web Clips downloading webpages through subscribing cloud
services or outsourcing the APP delivery services. Sometimes,
CDN (content distribution network) service is also selected in
order to improve user experience. Operator is the key role of the
ecosystem.

Distributors: distributors begin to spread the Web Clips
download webpages as widely as possible through various medium
such as instant messenger, live streaming, social networks, and etc.
Verbal trick is usually designed for attracting users to download
and install illicit APPs. A common scenario is that distributors
promote online gambling under the guise of high-rewarding
part-time jobs.

Distributors are usually hired by the operators. That is because
operators need more workforce to distribute Web Clips in order to
attract more people. The division and cooperation among different
roles of underground economy are more mature these days. The
participants cooperate with but being loosely connected with others,
which brings more difficulties for investigation and monitoring.

3 CREATOR OF THE ILLICIT WEB CLIPS
Given that the Web Clips can be signed either by using certificate
issued by Apple or SSL certificate, and such certificate can be used
to correlate with an identity of an Apple developer or a domain
name, we inspect certificate within the Web Clips in this section.
By taking the certificate, Apple can identify the illicit Web Clips
and evict them from the iOS host. Moreover, for these Web Clips
signed by SSL certificate, we conduct further investigation on the
counterpart (namely online generator) of the certificate for law
enforcement awareness.

3.1 Creator of the Web Clips
A signed Web Clips follows the format of Cryptographic Message
Syntax [7, 16], the certificate within the Web Clips contains

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Qinyu Hu, Songyang Wu et al.

information of I) ‘subject’ which indicates the owner (an Apple
developer or a domain) of the certificate, II) ‘issuer’ of the
certificate in a chain, and the root of the chain can be used to
distinguish who (Apple or other certification authority) issued this
certificate. The root of the ‘issuer’ can be used to tell the Apple
developer apart from domain.

In order to study the creator of the Web Clips, we use the tool of
openssl to parse the certificate enclosing in the Web Clips. Of the
1,173 unique Web Clips instances, we find 401 Web Clips instances
are not signed, and the rest 772, which takes 65.8% of the overall
instances, are signed. Among the signed Web Clips, we are
surprisingly to find 724 instances, which take 93.8% of the signed
instances, are signed by using SSL certificate, and the remainder 48
(6.2% of the signed Web Clips dataset) instances are signed by
using certificate issued by Apple however. Note that the 724
instances are signed by 88 unique SSL certificates. The developer
and domain identities (IDs) of the top 10 commonly used
certificates are listed in Table 1.

Table 1: The identities of the top 10 commonly used
certificate

Top 10 Apple developer’s IDs

CountTop 10 domain IDs

Count

engine to find the web pages that match these keywords. Eventually,
we successfully expand the domain collection to 955 for our study,
which is about ten folds of the former 88 domains.

Even though under most cases online Web Clips generators
are not actively misused, understanding the high level network
infrastructure information of them provides valuable clues for law
enforcement. A knowledge base of online Web Clips generators
could be built and maintained in order to understand the location
distribution, underlying infrastructure, domain name changing
records and etc. Under some cyber-investigation cases, if illicit Web
Clips are found to be related with a certain online generator, the
knowledge base could be utilized to get more clue.

Therefore, in the rest of this section, we study the IP location
the infrastructure provider, and domain name

distribution,
resolution of the online Web Clips generators.

IP location: The following figure 3 shows the IP location
distribution of online Web Clips generator domain names. Since
we use key words of generators in Chinese as study objects, the IP
addresses of about half generators are located in China mainland,
while others are located in HK China, US, Korea, Spain and
Philippines.

iPhone Distribution: peng sun (C379A9YGPS)
iPhone Distribution: Chengdu * (95JZQH2Q8R)
iPCU CA 34128794-d96d-4227-84b8-9d7c8918e683
iPCU CA e79d51e4-0007-432e-9db7-db13e8864e6f
iPhone Distribution: Weifu He (CLUXRHCPV2)
iPCU CA c29cc060-5fd9-48ab-a0ad-6dadd2f054d3
Apple Development: Chapelle * (HQ3BQ95B6A)
iPhone Distribution: XiaoWei * (3CMSCZUW46)
Apple Development: lu xu (9K7U3U5ZK5)
iPCU CA 4ab0edcc-ce74-4ca5-94e3-51531060793d
1 The overlong identities are trimmed by ‘*’ for the space limitation.

xz.xianke315.com
app.htmlpacker.com
xv8.0mwe.space
iosappnet.com
yh27.cn
360.ahlpb006.xyz
apk.pingzdoua.xyz
xb2.zxwerb08.xyz
huizhutz.com
dsew.ml

6
3
3
2
2
2
2
1
1
1

134
117
116
70
41
35
30
16
13
10

By comparing the 2nd and 4th columns of this table, we find the
creators of the illicit Web Clips are preferred to use SSL certificate
rather than certificate issued by Apple to sign their Web Clips
instances. The underlying reason is that the illicit Web Clips can’t
be identified by merely using certificate if the certificate is used by
benign one in the mean time. In addition, a SSL certificate is easier
to be obtained compared with a certificate issued by Apple. Data of
the 4th column diverse greatly, which indicate a limited group of
SSL certificates is utilized by the Web Clips creators.

Some of the SSL certificates are related to online Web Clips
generators. Thus, we extend our study to the Web Clips online
generator for a broader understanding of the threat.

3.2 Online Web Clips Generator
It is a convention of the online Web Clips generator to sign a Web
Clips instance by using the SSL certificate of itself. Such that we
can access the online Web Clips generator by using the domain
name within a SSL certificate. In order to expand the collection of
the online generator, we firstly design a crawler to get the first page
of the web service reside on the recognized domain name (the 3rd
column of table 1), title and body of the HTML file are preserved for
later on process. Then we use word segmentation and TF/IDF (Term
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency) algorithm to withdraw
keyword of these pages. 21 keywords, ‘BetaAPPHost’ for example,
are obtained in this stage. At last, we use the cyberspace search

Figure 3: IP location distribution

Infrastructure: Online Web Clips generators are websites
deployed on some kind of infrastructure. About 49.8% online Web
Clips generators provide services through public cloud platform
such as Alibaba cloud, Tecent cloud, Amazon cloud and etc. About
18% generators provide services through traditional network
show deployment
operators. The left generators do not
information. What should be mentioned is that about 42% domain
names of the generators have been filed in official authorities.
Some filed information of domain names is irrelevant with the
online generator, for example a domain name is filed by a food
supply corporation. The main reason is that the transaction of filed
domain names is quite popular and easily being abused in
underground economy nowadays.

Domain name aggregation: We find that some domain names
of online Web Clips generators are resolved to the same IP. Figure 4
shows that all the 955 domain names correspond to 512 IP addresses.
Generally, an IP address is used by less than 5 domain names. In
special cases, one IP address is used by more than 70 domain names,
and all the domain names correspond to the same online Web Clips
generator website. This kind of website might use many domain
names for some special reason like anti-blocking, which needs to
be payed more attention on.

Measurement of the Usage of Web Clips in Underground Economy

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Triage result in figure 5 shows the Web Clips are build for
purpose of ‘Pornography’, ‘Fraud’, and ‘Gambling’, which takes
45.35%, 27.96% and 6.91% of the dataset separately, with a total
80.22% of the entire dataset. If a website link contained in Web
Clips is out-of-date and the type cannot be clearly identified, then
the Web Clips will be marked as ‘Unknown’ type. The ‘Unknown’
type is not shown in the figure.

Figure 4: Domain name aggregation of online Web Clips
generators

4 PURPOSE OF THE ILLICIT WEB CLIPS
This section seeks to find out the purpose the illicit Web Clips built
for. To accomplish this task, we develop the taxonomy of the Web
Clips, then triage the 1,173 illicit Web Clips instances.

4.1 Taxonomy of Web Clips
Taxonomy of Web Clips is developed in terms of the content it
delivers because the Web Clips is a carrier of web resource. The
development starts with the initial categories of IC3 [15], then the
categories are refined iteratively according to the ongoing triage
process. To ensure the accuracy, domain experts are involved to
supplement/remove the categories and set the summary of the
category. Laws on online gambling are different from country to
country. In some EU countries online gambling is legal, but there
are still many countries like China that prohibit online gambling.
Therefore,
illegal online websites in this paper are those
containing content that is not allowed to be distributed by certain
countries. The final taxonomy consists of 6 categories: ‘Fraud’,
‘Pornography’, ‘Gambling’, ‘Copyright’, ‘Others’, and ‘Unknown’.
The category is further divided into sub-category, the category
‘Fraud’ is separated into ‘Fake Loan’, ‘Investment’, ‘Crowdsourcing
scams’,
‘Fake Transactions’, for example.
Summary of each sub-category is depicted in the third column of
Table 4 in the appendix.

‘Digital Currency’,

4.2 Triage the Web Clips
The 1,173 illicit Web Clips are manually triaged by co-authors of
this paper with a thorough understanding of the taxonomy. Note
that 1) One Web Clips may fall into multiple categories, we take
in the distinct visual element as the criteria for categorizing. e.g.,
pornography in a Web Clips is actually designed for attracting
victim to visit a gambling page, we categorize the the Web Clips
as ‘Pornography’, for the tiny window on the right-bottom corner
takes a small portion of the view. 2) There is intersection between
the categories. e.g., the dishonest gambling can be categorized as
both ‘Fraud’ and ‘Gambling’ categories, for lacking context of the
Web Clips, we categorize it as ‘Gambling’ nonetheless. 3) All minor
categories are categorized as ‘Others’.

Figure 5: Web Clips triage result.

Triage result of sub-categories in figure 6 reveals: 1) ‘Fake loan’
takes the prominent portion of the ‘Fraud’ category, indicating
such scheme is widely used by fraudsters to seize money from
victim; 2) ‘Pornographic video’ is the major sub-category of the
‘Pornography’ category, indicting perpetrators prefer to distribute
video rather than others; 3) The small variance of the sub-categories
of ‘Gambling’ indicts there is no obvious preferable schemes for
perpetrators. Note that there is bias results from the ‘Unknown’
category, however such category takes small portion of the dataset
so that can be ignored.

Figure 6: Web Clips sub-category triage result.

The triage result of the illicit Web Clips also reveals the types
of prevalent cyber crimes in current days. Breakdown of the triage
result is depicted in Table 4 in the appendix.

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Qinyu Hu, Songyang Wu et al.

5 DISTRIBUTOR OF THE ILLICIT WEB CLIPS
As mentioned before, Web Clips are abused for launching illicit
URLs as APPs in iOS. Then, we study how the Web Clips are
distributed. Usually illicit APPs are provided by download
webpages. A typical download webpage is shown in figure 7,
which offers QR code for Android APK or iOS light APP (Web
Clips). There are various ways to popularize the download

Figure 7: Web Clip download information

webpages. As mentioned before, we collect user compliant
messages during the year of 2021. About 1800 illicit APPs (Web
Clips for iOS) and their distribution processes are described . Event
extraction (EE) method to recognize events of illicit APPs
distribution from user complaint messages automatically. EE is an
advanced form of Information Extraction (IE), which focuses on
gathering knowledge about
incidents found in texts and
automatically identifying information about what happened. An
EE task is composed of event trigger, event type, event schema,
event augment and augment role.

recognition and augment

An EE task can be divided into three sub-tasks including event
detection, event augment
role
recognition. The following figure 8 depicts EE task for distribution
of illicit APPs and gives an example. The basic event schema is
designed as “A suspect utilizes verbal trick to distribute an
object APP to victims via a medium”. A complaint message (“A
stranger recommended online part-time job through WeChat
group chat, in fact users are lured to download gambling APP”) is
used as an example. Firstly, during the event detection stage, an
event is triggered by ‘recommending’ and the event type is
‘Distribution’. Next, event augment (EA) recognition is performed
to find entities such as part-time job, WeChat, gambling APP, and
etc. These entities are learned from sample data and provided as
prior knowledge for EA recognition. At last, augment roles such as
‘subject’, ‘verbal trick’, ‘victims’ and ‘medium’ are recognized.

Through the above EE analysis, we recognize about 711
distribution events from the 1800 complaint messages. About 42%
distribution events are related to gambling APPs which account
for the highest proportion. And 31% distribution events spread
pornography APPs. This may be because gambling advertising
activities are more complex and well-designed. Therefore, more
distribution events can be detected.

From our analysis, the distribution process of gambling APPs
are shown in figure 9. Firstly, advertisements are posted on various
platforms, such as Internet forum, social network, recruiting

website, live streaming platform and etc. We call the activity as
‘spreading stage’ which aims for attracting more people. The
second stage is ‘targeted scamming’ during which verbal trick is
organized in order to scam a particular victim. Some prevalent
instant messengers (IM) such as WeChat, Telegram are often
adopted to interact with victims. And the last stage of distribution
is ‘APP download’. Victims are guided to download and use the
gambling APPs. Usually, a customized IM is used to interact with
victims because they are more difficult to be detected and
investigated. Our analysis on the complaint data shows that more
than 20 customized IMs are mentioned. In addition, various
platforms and prevalent IMs that are used for distributing illicit
APPs are depicted by the following figure 10. we can draw some
conclusions based on the results. IM, live streaming and group
chatting are the most commonly used medium for illicit APPs
distribution. What should be explained is that IM and group
chatting may have some overlap. Here, IM means one-on-one
conversation while group chatting refers to the interaction in any
kind of chatting groups. There are various platformed used for
distributing gambling APPs, IMs are mostly relied on. Live
streaming is mainly used for distributing pornography APPs. We
also find a relatively new distribution way of illicit APPs on iOS ,
which is shown in figure 11. In recent years, many personal emails
are collected and sold unlawfully. Then, criminals send advertising
texts and illicit URLs through iOS Home share, album or calendar
functions using the large amount of emails (relying on the
iMessage mechanism). If an email address is registered an Apple
ID, iOS devices logged in by that Apple ID will receive the illicit
advertising texts. An example is given in Figure 12.

6 OPERATOR OF THE ILLICIT WEB CLIPS
Since most content of the Web Clips originate from the back-end
server, in this section, we profile the Web Clips operators by means
of 1) inspecting the network property they owns for facilitating
the illicit activity; 2) investigating technical tricks they use for
bypassing supervision. The study conduct on the counterpart server
of the 1,173 illicit Web Clips.

6.1 Network Property of the Operator
By equipping with adequate network resource, operator remains at
the forefront of the competition with the law enforcement. Inspired
by works of [13, 24], we inspect domain name property, IP property,
and web resource property of the illicit Web Clips operator.

6.1.1 Domain Name Property. WHOIS record of a domain name is
an important fingerprint of the operator, these information,
including registrar and registrant email address, give hints for law
enforcement to take action against the illicit activities. By applying
the python-whois library against the domain names specified by
the 1,173 illicit Web Clips, we get 65 registrars and 84 registrant
email addresses of these domains. The top 10 most frequently used
registrar are depicted in Table 2. Note the the register’s email
addresses are omitted herein for they are fully anonymized for
public access according to the GDPR (General Data Protection
Regulation), e.g., ‘abuse@godaddy.com’ for GoDaddy.com, LLC.,
and ‘abuse@support.gandi.net’ for GANDI SAS.

Measurement of the Usage of Web Clips in Underground Economy

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Figure 8: Event extraction task

Figure 9: Typical distribution process of gambling APPs

Although the register’s email addresses are anonymized, law
enforcement can resort to registrar to look up such information
without violating GDPR. The cooperation between different sectors
drives operator to get domain name from the oversea registrar
(relative to China), such that the top six oversea registrars are used
by 72.68% of the entire samples, which raise the difficulty of crime
investigation. Luckily, there are four remainder domestic registrars,
which takes 9.25% of the entire Web Clips instances.

In addition, we make a statistics on the TLDs (Top Level
Domains) of the domain name designated by the illicit Web Clips.
The statistical result is depicted in Table 3.

It is counterintuitive that the scarce TLD ‘com’, which takes
28.94% in total, are wildly used by operator, later investigation
reveals that such domain name are mainly used by Web Clips of
‘Gambling’ category, which is legal in some regions or countries
to be used directly. Note that the easy-to-acquire New gTLD (3rd
column of Table 3) contributes a large portion of the misused TLDs,

suggesting firm surveillance should be deployed on them, such that
the illicit domain name can be identified in time.

IP Property. The flexible mapping between domain name
6.1.2
and IP address allows a domain name be re-resolved to another IP
address and vice versa. In order to make clear the intricate
relationship among these domains (1,173), we firstly correlate the
domains by using the IP address if they are resolved to a same IP
address, then we study the cloud service provider the operator
favorite to use.

The 1,173 domain names are eventually resolved to 606 IP
addresses, the relationship among these domain names is depicted
in Figure 13. Different node color in this figure represents different
categories (cf. § 4) this domain name belongs to, except the blue
node with variant size represents the IP address for clustering. We
highlight that the domain names of ‘Pornography’ and ‘Fraud’
categories are clustered by limited IP address, suggesting the
back-end servers are managed by limited operators. For example,

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Qinyu Hu, Songyang Wu et al.

Table 2: Top 10 Registrar used in criminal Web Clips

Registrar

Count

Percent (%)

GoDaddy.com, LLC
GANDI SAS
Gname.com Pte. Ltd.
NameSilo, LLC
DYNADOT LLC
GMO INTERNET, INC.
Alibaba Cloud Computing Ltd.
Chengdu west dimension * Co., LTD
Alibaba Cloud Computing * Co., Ltd.
Xin Net Technology Corporation

277
257
123
76
66
40
39
29
25
14

24.01
22.27
10.65
6.58
5.71
3.46
3.37
2.51
2.16
1.21

Total

896

81.93

1 The overlong registrars are trimmed by ‘*’ for the space

Figure 10: Platforms used for distributing illicit APPs

limitation.

Table 3: Top 10 TLDs used in criminal Web Clips

Figure 11: A popular distribution way of illicit APPs on iOS

Figure 12: An example of a new distribution method on iOS.
The text in the figure means that an online gambling website
contains multiple gambling games, and claims that after
copying the domain name to visit the website, users will
receive a large amount of fees after registering or making
deposits.

the largest cluster in Figure 13 consists 63 domain names (e.g.,
‘mhb01.*.xyz’, ‘thb05.*.xyz’) for conducting ‘Fake loan’ scheme, all
of them are correlated by IP address of ‘52.77.67.*’.

We further mark the 606 IP locations on a world map, which is
depicted in figure 14. As note, 132 IP addresses with a 22% of the
entire dataset, locate on oversea zone or country of China. This
is the underlying reason why the operator provides continuous
web service on the above mentioned IP address (e.g., ‘52.77.67.*’)
regardless of the regulation on the domain names (e.g., ‘mhb01.*.xyz’,
‘thb05.*.xyz’).

6.1.3 Web Resource Property. Operators are free to copy, deploy,
and publish the web resource for delivering the illicit or forged
content to victims. The ownership of the web resource discloses
the operators under the hood. In order to narrow the large amount
of IPs down to limited operators, we cluster the web resource of
these IPs by analyzing the similarity of them. Since the retrievable
resource is the html file, we analyze the similarity of these files.

Number (#) New gTLD Percent (%)
✓

TLD

xyz
com
today
cn
ltd
world
top
vip
IpAddr
cc

Total

365
339
68
62
52
45
42
39
26
22

31.15
28.94
5.78
5.29
4.43
3.81
3.57
3.32
2.21
1.84

✓

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

1060

90.34

Rather than analyzing the literal similarity, we measure the
structural similarity of two html files. Study of Tang et al. [21]
reveals that the performance of bucketing the tags of an html
file [2] beforehand surpasses those compare the tags directly [3],
we opt to use the former strategy for clustering the html files. Our
clustering is built on the python library of HTMLSimilarity [2],
which bucketing the tags in an html file to fix-length (512) vector.
In addition, to avoid the pair-wise comparison for all html files of
two different IPs with the complexity of 𝑂 (𝑛2), we only compare
the first page of these IPs; To deal with the page rendered by
Javascript (e.g., Angular, React, or Vue.js) that contains less tags as
features for similarity analysis, we use the python library
Esprima [1] to get AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) of the Javascript
code, then traverse the obfuscation-resilient tags in the AST and
bucketing them into fix-length (512) vector. The similarity of two
pages is measured by Euclidean distance of the vectors, and two IPs
are connected if the distance less than the threshold of 0.01. The
source code is available at Web Site1, and the clustering result is
depicted as Figure 15.

1Anonymized for double-blind review.

Measurement of the Usage of Web Clips in Underground Economy

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Figure 13: Correlate domain name by using IP address.

Figure 15: Clustering result by using similarity analysis.

the anti-crawler techniques used in the 1,173 websites to have
deeper insight of the operator.

Considering that the adversary usually utilizes crawler to get
resource of the illicit websites [13, 24], the operator defeats the
crawler by checking the run-time environment of the client or by
exploiting drawback of the crawler. For example, by checking User-
Agent field in the request header, the operator refuses the request
originate from a Non-iOS devices, we found 92 websites, which
takes 7.8% of the 1,173 websites, are deployed with such scheme.
Another prevalent used technique is to redirect the request multiple
times by using the acquisition of the domain name/IP property,
this setting will drain the resource of a crawler if it follows such
redirection. Such scheme is deployed to 504 websites, about 43% of
the dataset.

7 MITIGATION
In this section, we give some concluded mitigation measures based
on the whole paper’s results.

• Web Clips can be deployed by using Apple Configurator 2,
email, webpage or over the air [8]. This work studies the
Web Clips deployed via website. Of note, such Web Clips is
misused in cyber crime. We strongly suggest Apple disable
the support for Web Clips deployed through website.

• Most websites used for generating online Web Clips also
provides other similar services such as APK packaging,
TestFlight signing and etc. In order to gain more profit, the
websites usually adopt weak user identity authentication
and perform few check work on the URL being packaged.
Therefore, they are more easily to be abused in illicit
activities. More supervision should be placed on the App
generation websites.

Figure 14: Location of the IP address.

By using the similarity analysis, we successfully cluster the 606
IPs to 392 groups. From Figure 15, we conclude that: 1) multiple
hosts deployed with the same ‘Fraud’ category web resource
indicates these hosts are managed by the same operator or the web
resource is acquired from the same developer; 2) the diversity of
web resource of ‘Pornography’ and ‘Gambling’ categories indicates
there are a large number of operators involve in such scheme or
the same operator owns versatile web resource to conduct the
illicit activities. To sum up, compared with ‘Pornography’ and
‘Gambling’ operators, ‘Fraud’ operators are more willing to use
templates (e.g., website template) of web resources.

6.2 Tricks of Anti-Crawler
We have witnessed the sophisticated technique the operator used to
evade detection. Such techniques include: 1) By using shortlink to
designate the target domain at will; 2) Deny access without a specific
parameter in the URL; 3) Use web page developing technique iframe
to conceal the illicit domain name [22]. In this section, we highlight

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Qinyu Hu, Songyang Wu et al.

[23] Trend Micro Inc. 2014. The Mobile Cybercriminal Underground Market in China.

In CYBERCRIMINAL UNDERGROUND ECONOMY SERIES.

[24] Hao Yang, Kun Du, Yubao Zhang, Shuang Hao, Zhou Li, Mingxuan Liu, Haining
Wang, Haixin Duan, Yazhou Shi, Xiaodong Su, et al. 2019. Casino royale: a deep
exploration of illegal online gambling. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference. 500–513.

• Considering the new distribution method of illicit messages
on iOS devices, for one thing, we need to do more to protect
personal information. For another thing, we suggest that
rules for sending messages through iOS Home share or
Album should be regulated. Messages can’t be sent
arbitrarily.

• The streamline communication and collaboration are
desired between the stakeholders in the process of criminal
investigation, especially for these cross sectors, regions or
countries. Therefore,
cooperation on
investigation and enforcement is essential.

international

REFERENCES
[1] 2022. Esprima. https://github.com/Kronuz/esprima-python. Accessed January 1,

2021.

[2] 2022. HTMLSimilarity. https://github.com/WebAppSecProj/HTMLSimilarity.

Accessed January 1, 2021.

[3] 2022. Page Compare. https://github.com/TeamHG-Memex/page-compare.

Accessed January 1, 2021.

[4] Ammar Almomani, Brij B Gupta, Samer Atawneh, Andrew Meulenberg, and
Eman Almomani. 2013. A survey of phishing email filtering techniques. IEEE
communications surveys & tutorials 15, 4 (2013), 2070–2090.

[5] Apple Inc. 2022. App Store Review Guidelines. https://developer.apple.com/app-
store/review/guidelines/#gaming-gambling-and-lotteries. Accessed April 8,
2022.

[6] Apple Inc. 2022. Beta Testing Made Simple with TestFlight. https://developer.

apple.com/testflight/. Accessed April 8, 2022.

[7] Apple Inc. 2022. Configuration Profile Reference. https://developer.apple.com/
business/documentation/Configuration-Profile-Reference.pdf. Accessed April 8,
2022.
[8] Apple

Configuring Multiple Devices Using Profiles.
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/devicemanagement/configuring_
multiple_devices_using_profiles/. Accessed April 8, 2022.

2022.

Inc.

[9] Apple Inc. 2022. MDM overview for Apple devices. https://support.apple.com/
guide/mdm/mdm-overview-mdmbf9e668/1/web/1.0. Accessed April 8, 2022.

[10] Apple Inc. 2022. Over-the-Air Profile Delivery and Configuration. https:

//developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/NetworkingInternet/
Conceptual/iPhoneOTAConfiguration/Introduction/Introduction.html. Accessed
April 8, 2022.

[11] Apple Inc. 2022. Web Clips MDM payload settings for Apple devices. https:
//support.apple.com/en-mn/guide/deployment/depbc7c7808/1/web/1.0. Accessed
April 8, 2022.

[12] Zhuo Chen, Lei Wu, Jing Cheng, Yubo Hu, Yajin Zhou, Zhushou Tang, Yexuan
Chen, Jinku Li, and Kui Ren. 2021. Lifting The Grey Curtain: A First Look at the
Ecosystem of CULPRITWARE. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05756 (2021).

[13] Yuhao Gao, Haoyu Wang, Li Li, Xiapu Luo, Guoai Xu, and Xuanzhe Liu. 2021.
Demystifying illegal mobile gambling apps. In Proceedings of the Web Conference
2021. 1447–1458.

[14] Geng Hong, Zhemin Yang, Sen Yang, Xiaojing Liao, Xiaolin Du, Min Yang, and
Haixin Duan. 2022. Analyzing Ground-Truth Data of Mobile Gambling Scams.
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (2022).

[15] Internet Crime Complaint Center IC3. 2021. INTERNET CRIME REPORT 2021.
https://www.ic3.gov/Media/PDF/AnnualReport/2021_IC3Report.pdf. Accessed
April 8, 2022.

[16] Burt Kaliski. 1998. PKCS# 7: Cryptographic message syntax version 1.5.
[17] Yeonjoon Lee, Xueqiang Wang, Kwangwuk Lee, Xiaojing Liao, XiaoFeng Wang,
Tongxin Li, and Xianghang Mi. 2019. Understanding {iOS-based} Crowdturfing
Through Hidden {UI} Analysis. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 19). 765–781.

[18] Steve Mansfield-Devine. 2014. The dark side of advertising. Computer Fraud &

Security 2014, 11 (2014), 5–8.

[19] Marten Oltrogge, Erik Derr, Christian Stransky, Yasemin Acar, Sascha Fahl,
Christian Rossow, Giancarlo Pellegrino, Sven Bugiel, and Michael Backes. 2018.
The rise of the citizen developer: Assessing the security impact of online app
generators. In 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 634–647.
[20] Abhinav Srivastava, Amlan Kundu, Shamik Sural, and Arun Majumdar. 2008.
Credit card fraud detection using hidden Markov model. IEEE Transactions on
dependable and secure computing 5, 1 (2008), 37–48.

[21] Zhushou Tang, Lingyi Tang, Keying Tang, and Ruoying Tang. 2021. When
Similarity Digest Meets Vector Management System: A Survey on Similarity
Hash Function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.08789 (2021).

[22] Tencent. 2022. Report of Telecommunication Network Fraud in China. https:

//www.baogaoshe.com/report/1602707530272816994. Accessed April 8, 2022.

Measurement of the Usage of Web Clips in Underground Economy

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Table 4: Taxonomy and categorize result.

Category

Sub-category

Description

Number (#)

Percentage (%)

Fake loan

Investment

Ask commission for the Loan, e.g., Credit Loans.

Induce victims to make purchases based on false information, e.g., Stock.

Fraud

Crowdsourcing scams

Induce victims to finish task without return. e.g., buy to promote the product.

Digital currency

Fake transactions

Total

High profits is claimed for the investments on digital currencies.

Goods or services are never received.

-

Pornographic video

Offer paid service for accessing pornographic videos.

Pornography

Pornographic pictures and literature

Offer paid service for accessing pictures and literature.

Pornographic broadcasting

Offer paid service for accessing pornographic broadcasting.

Sex trade

Total

Chess and card

Lottery

Sports betting

Electronic games

Offer service for sex trade.

-

Gambling built on chess and card, e.g., card, mahjong.

Provide unauthorized lottery service.

Bet on the result of sports.

Entertainment games for the purpose of gambling.

Aggregator Gambling

Aggregate multiple types of gambling platforms in one site.

Total

Hacker tool

Piracy

Total

-

-

Total

-

Provide code injection tools to modify other app.

Provide pirated video or software.

-

Minor categories does not fall into the above categories.

Access denied e.g., Requiring access code/sign-up, or banned/shutdown.

-

Gambling

Copyright

Others

Unknown

278

29

3

7

11

328

456

66

6

4

532

21

31

12

3

14

81

11

18

29

60

143

1173

23.69

2.47

0.26

0.60

0.94

27.96

38.87

5.63

0.51

0.34

45.35

1.79

2.65

1.02

0.26

1.19

6.91

0.94

1.53

2.47

5.11

12.19

100

A APPENDIX

