State of Security Awareness in the AM Industry: 2020 Survey  

Mark Yampolskiy1, Paul Bates2, Mohsen Seifi3, and Nima Shamsaei4  

ABSTRACT 

Security  of  Additive  Manufacturing  (AM)  gets  increased  attention  due  to  the  growing 

proliferation  and  adoption  of  AM  in  a  variety  of  applications  and  business  models.  However, 

there  is  a  significant  disconnect  between  AM  community  focused  on  manufacturing  and  AM 

Security community focused on securing this highly computerized manufacturing technology. To 

bridge  this  gap,  we  surveyed  the  America  Makes  AM  community,  asking  in  total  eleven  AM 

security-related questions aiming to discover the existing concerns, posture, and expectations.  

The first set of questions aimed to discover how many of these organizations use AM, outsource 

AM, or provide AM as a service. Then we asked about biggest security concerns as well as about 

assessment of  who  the  potential  adversaries might  be  and  their  motivation  for  attack.  We  then 

proceeded with questions on any experienced security incidents, if any security risk assessment 

was  conducted,  and  if  the  participants’  organizations  were  partnering  with  external  experts  to 

secure  AM.  Lastly,  we  asked  whether  security  measures  are  implemented  at  all  and,  if  yes, 

whether they fall under the general cyber-security category. 

1 Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Auburn Cyber Research Center (ACRC), and 
National Center for Additive Manufacturing Excellence (NCAME), Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, U.S.; 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4626-2754  
2 ASTM International, Washington, DC, 20036, U.S., https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5591-6820 
3 ASTM International, Washington, DC, 20036, U.S.; https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8385-2337  
4 Department of Mechanical Engineering and National Center for Additive Manufacturing Excellence (NCAME), 
Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, U.S.; https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0325-7314 
Corresponding Author: Mark Yampolskiy, mark.yampolskiy@auburn.edu  
Page 1 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Out  of  69  participants  affiliated  with  commercial  industry,  agencies,  and  academia,  53  have 

completed  the  entire  survey.  This  paper  presents the  results  of this survey,  as well as  provides 

our assessment of the AM Security posture. The answers are a mixture of what we could label as 

expected, “shocking but not surprising,” and completely unexpected. Assuming that the provided 

answers are somewhat representative to the current state of the AM industry, we conclude that 

the industry is not ready to prevent or detect AM-specific attacks that have been demonstrated in 

the research literature.  

Keywords 

AM Security, Industry Survey, State of Awareness, State of Preparedness.  

Introduction  

The broad adoption of Additive Manufacturing (AM) became a matter of fact and does 

not  require  convincing  anymore.  While  not  even  ten  years  ago,  at  AM  conferences  one  could 

frequently hear questions like “what could be the good use-case for AM besides the famous GE’s 

fuel  injection  nozzle?”  or  arguing  in  favor  like  “AM  gives  us  complexity  for  free,”  today  the 

conversation  shifted  to  two  distinct  but  technical  subjects.  One,  how  to  resolve  the  remaining 

technological challenges and allow AM to live to its fullest potential. Another, however, reflects 

growing  concern  that  AM  will  become  target  of  (what  is  often  referred  as)  “cyber-security 

attacks.” This paper is dedicated solely to the latter. 

Despite increased awareness of security, AM is not unique in the way how security risks 

are ignored by the technology developers and adopters. Just to name a few examples, we have 

seen security being neglected in industrial infrastructure (or SCADA systems) until the famous 

Page 2 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stuxnet  attack1  demonstrated  its  vulnerability,  and  in  modern  cars  until  they  were  famously 

hacked  and  remotely  taken  control  of.2,3  In  these  examples,  the  security  might  have  been 

explained away by the fact that previously secure systems became increasingly computerized and 

networked.  However,  when  the  natively  computerized  and  networked  Internet  of  Things  (IoT) 

devices were introduced, they went through the same phases of technology development, broad 

adoption,  discovery  and  demonstration  of  security  vulnerabilities,  and  only  then  development 

and implementation of the security measures.  

As  of  mid-2020,  AM  industry  is  clearly  in  the  phase  of  a  broad  technology  adoption. 

While  there  have  not  been  any  broadly  publicized  reports  about  real  AM-specific  attacks, 

security  incidents  like  ransomware  that  does  not  spare  even  hospitals  became  almost  a  weekly 

news. Thus, no wonder that AM industry becomes increasingly concerned about security.  

While the concern about potential of upcoming attacks is growing in the AM industry, it 

is not clear to what extent it is ready to face real attacks. To assess this, we conducted a survey; 

its results are presented in this paper. In the remainder of the paper, we first present the survey 

questions  and  characterize  the  participants.  We  then  present  answers  to  individual  questions 

alongside  the  related  preliminary  analysis  rooted  in  AM  Security  literature.  We  conclude  this 

paper with our overall assessment of the state of awareness and preparedness. 

Survey Questions and Participants 

The  AM  Security  field  was  pioneered  around  2014,4  with  both  attacks  and  defense 

measures discussed in the research literature since then. We prepared a set of questions based on 

the understanding of the problem space developed in the field. At the same time, we formulated 

the questions trying to avoid implicit bias and to provide respondents with the ability to provide 

answers  that  not  necessarily  would  fit  in  our  understanding  of  the  problem  space.  Some 

Page 3 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions  consisted  of  multiple  parts;  only  if  part  “a”  was  answered  in  a  certain  way  (mostly 

positively), the follow-up question(s) were asked. The prepared questions are listed in Table 1. 

TABLE 1 - QUESTIONS USED IN THE SURVEY 

Q# 

Question 

Q1 

Q2 

Does your organization manufacture with AM? 

What  related  security  risks/concerns  have  you  identified  related  to  your  manufacturing 

using AM? 

Q3.a  Does your organization outsource AM? 

Q3.b  What related security risks/concerns have you identified related to outsourcing your AM? 

Q4.a  Does  your  organization  provide  AM  manufacturing 

services 

to 

external 

companies/agencies/individuals? 

Q4.b  What related security risks/concerns have you identified as it relates to providing your AM 

manufacturing services? 

Q5 

Q6 

What are your biggest security concerns associated with additive manufacturing (AM)?  

Who  are  potential  attackers/adversaries  you  expect  would  attack  AM 

in  your 

company/agency?  

Q7 

What do you assess would be their goals/objectives?  

Q8.a  Has your organization experienced a cyber incident related to AM activities? 

Q8.b 

Please outline your cyber incident experience (if possible). 

Q9.a  Has your organization partnered with external AM security providers? 

Q9.b  Which security concerns do you have with using these external AM security providers? 

Q10.a  Has your organization conducted a formal or informal risk assessment related to AM? 

Q10.b  Which risks, related to AM, have been identified during this assessment? 

Page 4 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q11.a  Does your organization have a security program in place for AM? 

Q11.b  Does it fall under the general cyber-security? 

Q11.c  How does it go beyond general cyber security? 

We distributed a call for participation in the survey through several mailing lists. Overall, 

69 participants answered the call. They are affiliated with 64 unique organizations ,  representing 

industry,  governmental  agencies,  research  laboratories,  and  universities  (see  Appendix  A  for  a 

curated  list  of  participants’  affiliations).  As  it  is  common  with  the  surveys,  only  53  out  of  69 

participants answered all questions, what correspond to 77%.  

Survey Results and Per-Question Analysis 

In  this  section  we  provide  answers  to  individual  questions.  For  each  of  the  results,  we 

provide a preliminary analysis rooted in the AM Security literature. Our conclusions only apply 

to  organizations  whose  members  participated  in  the  survey.  We  advise  against  deriving  more 

wider-reaching conclusions, because (i) the number of participants is relatively small compared 

to  the  number  of  organizations  overall,  (ii)  the  knowledge  and  understanding  shown  by  the 

survey  participants  does  not  necessarily  represents  the  institutional  knowledge  of  their 

organizations, and (iii) as the majority of participants are affiliated with the U.S. organizations, 

breakdowns for other countries can look completely different. 

Q1: DOES YOUR ORGANIZATION MANUFACTURE WITH AM? 

All 69 (100%) respondents answered the question. 52 (75%) of them answered “yes” and 

17: (25%) “no” (see fig. 1). 

Page 5 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1 - ANSWERS TO Q1 

This indicates that among organizations  with interest to AM, a high  percentage already 

uses this technology. 

Q2:  WHAT  RELATED  SECURITY  RISKS/CONCERNS  HAVE  YOU  IDENTIFIED 

RELATED TO YOUR MANUFACTURING USING AM? 

Participants were given a free-form field to answer. Only 37 participants (corresponds to 

53%) answered this question. By analyzing the answers, we have seen that while some of them 

could  be  expected,  there  were  also  some  unexpected  and  even  disturbing.  Below  we  provide 

some examples. 

Provided Answers – Expected (excerpt): 

•  “Uncontrolled access to intellectual property (designs)” 

•  “Leakage of manufacturing data” 

•  “Cloud based data capture for access from remote R&D facility overseas” 

•  “Part build files: Intentional and unintentional (Tampering, translational errors 

Page 6 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between tools)” 

•  “Corruption of AM design files by unexpected network activity” 

•  “Data  corruption  and  lack  of  security  on  data  transfer  from  storage  systems  to 

printers” 

Provided Answers – Unexpected, sometimes Shocking (excerpt): 

•  “None”  

•  “None that I am aware of”  

•  “We buy IT services that are supposedly at NIST 800 -171 and will meet CMMC 

level 3 or more.” 

For both these groups conclusions could be drawn. While the expected answers identify 

security threats discussed in the AM Security literature, the way how these are described reveals 

that the respondents are not familiar with the terminology used in the field; this might indicate 

lack of familiarity with the literature. While several peer-reviewed publications surveyed the AM 

Security research literature4-10 as well as several partly overlapping taxonomies to structure the 

field  have  been  proposed,4,10,11  one  could  argue  that  we  should  not  expect  people  without 

security backgrounds to read the AM security research literature. To bridge this gap, in authors’ 

opinion, we need standards that are aligned with research results and provide AM industry clear 

recommendations and best practices how to secure AM. 

The unexpected answers show presence of ignorance to the potential security issues and 

in  overconfidence  on  a  certification  that  was  developed  without  specifics  of  AM  Security  in 

mind. In a particular instance, we want to note that the CMMC rulemaking process is currently 

ongoing; therefore, it is meaningless at this point to say that anything will “meet CMMC level 3 

or  more.”  The  research  literature  has  shown  that  even  security  solutions  developed  for 

Page 7 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subtractive manufacturing with CNC machines in mind would not necessarily work for AM,12-13 

and  that  established  cyber-security  considerations  such  as  CIA  Triad  (here,  CIA  stands  for 

confidentiality,  integrity,  availability)  are  applicable  to  AM  only  in  certain  cases  while  not 

applicable at all in many others.14 

Q3.A: DOES YOUR ORGANIZATION OUTSOURCE AM? 

Only 61 (88%) respondents answered the question. 32 (52%) of them answered “yes” and 

29 (48%) “no” (see fig. 2). 

FIGURE 2 - ANSWERS TO Q3.A 

This  shows  that  a  slim  majority  of  organizations  consider  that  benefits  of  outsourcing 

outweigh whatever concerns they might have in conjunction with this business model. 

Q3.B:  WHAT  RELATED  SECURITY  RISKS/CONCERNS  HAVE  YOU  IDENTIFIED 

RELATED TO OUTSOURCING YOUR AM? 

Only 23 (33%) of participants answered this question. Also here participants were given 

an opportunity to provide a free-form answer. As with the prior question, we could distinguish 

Page 8 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between rather expected and unexpected answers. Below we list examples for both. 

Provided Answers – Expected (excerpt): 

•  “Data  and  IP  loss  /  IP  and  loss  of  critical  information”  (here,  IP  stands  for 

Intellectual Property) 

•  “Protection for CAD files, and confidential design and manufacturing data with 

email communication“ 

•  “Used on the correct machine the correct number of times, especially if there is a 

failure or restart needed” 

•  “Sending  files  -  used  on  the  correct  machine  the  correct  number  of  times, 

especially if there is a failure or restart needed. ensuring no changes have been 

made once files are out of our hands” 

•  “How outsource vendors handle the information received” 

•  “In-situ monitoring can allow access to process parameters and scan strategies” 

Provided Answers – Unexpected, sometimes Shocking (excerpt): 

•  “None.  Any work outsourced has proper security safeguards” 

•  “Lack of standards in managing and transfer of proprietary CAD and build files”  

•  “Government requirements for data storage and transmission”  

•  “Sharing technical data files via email and not using a secure file share server” 

The  expected  answers  show  at  least  some  degree  of  the  problem  space  understanding. 

Most of the answers in this category indicate concerns about technical data theft. However, the 

way  how  answers  are  formulated  indicate  a  mix-up  between  security  threats  (i.e.,  adversarial 

goal that can be achieved) and attack means (i.e., methods that an adversary could use to achieve 

these goals). Furthermore, like our analysis of the answers to Q2, most of the expected answers 

Page 9 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were  given  without  using  the  terminology  established  in  the  research  literature;  this  also 

indicates the lack of familiarity with the latter.  

The unexpected answers reveal several deeper problems. The first answer in this category 

indicates  possible  overconfidence  on  undisclosed  “security  safeguards”.  The  next  two  answers 

are of technical and not security nature; this indicates a fundamental misunderstanding of what 

security  is  responsible  for.  The  last  answer  (sharing  data  files  via  e-mails)  indicates  that  even 

established  and  easily  available  cyber-security  mechanisms  are  not  necessarily  deployed  and 

used. This is of particular concern, because it shows that an attacker can be successful even by 

using broadly available exploits (i.e., compromise methods in cyber domain). 

Q4.A: DOES YOUR ORGANIZATION PROVIDE AM MANUFACTURING SERVICES 

TO EXTERNAL COMPANIES/AGENCIES/INDIVIDUALS? 

This question was a natural counterpart to the question Q3.a. Like with Q3.a, 61 (88%) of 

respondents  answered  the  question.  Here,  however,  36  (59%)  of  them  answered  “yes”  and  25 

(41%) “no” (see fig. 3). 

FIGURE 3 - ANSWERS TO Q4.A 

Page 10 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Slightly more organizations find it beneficial to provide AM as a service than using it as a 

service. Furthermore, 16 (26%) respondents answered positively to both Q3.a and Q4.a. This is 

an  interesting  and  rather  unexpected  result,  because  it  shows  that  a  substantial  portion  of 

organizations might be involved in AM outsourcing model on both sides.  

Q4.B: WHAT RELATED SECURITY RISKS/CONCERNS HAVE YOU IDENTIFIED AS 

IT RELATES TO PROVIDING YOUR AM MANUFACTURING SERVICES? 

Only 27 (39%) respondents whose organization provides AM as a service answered this 

question. We again distinguish between expected and unexpected answers. 

Provided Answers – Expected (excerpt): 

•  “Process theft as well as specific design theft / Design data copying” 

•  “For certification purposes some customer might require lot of details concerning 

the production process” 

•  “Counterfeit” 

•  “Export control concerns. In the healthcare space, protected health information 

(PHI)” 

•  “We transfer files over emails sometimes which isn't the safest/most efficient” 

•  “Potential malware handling electronic files” 

Provided Answers – Unexpected, sometimes Shocking (excerpt): 

•  “None / n/a” 

•  “Our IT is outsourced and supposedly meets NIST 800-171” 

•  “Issues w/ unprepared supply chains related to traceability” 

•  “Lack  of  compatibility  and  difficulty  in  integration  of  data  systems  between 

Page 11 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clients and internal systems” 

Like with the answers to Q3.b, the expected answers indicate unfamiliarity with the AM 

Security  research  literature  and  the  terminology  established  in  the  field.  The  first  two  answers 

(talking about process parameters) indicate understanding that technical data in the AM context 

is  not  limited  to  the  design  files  alone.  The  second  answer  shows  a  confusion  between  this 

security threat (i.e., the undesirable outcome of an attack) and the attack means (in this case, non-

technical: customer “requiring lot of details”). The third (counterfeit) and fourth (export control) 

indicate  valid  concerns, which,  however,  are  of legal  and  not  of  technical  nature.  The  last two 

selected  answers  in  this  category  indicate  the  negligence  of  using  established  cyber-security 

practices and tools; as in assessment to Q3.b, this enables use of broadly available exploits and 

hacker tools.  

Among the unexpected answers, the first two indicate either complete overconfidence of 

security or overreliance of the certification, oblivious of fact that the mentioned certification was 

developed  to  address  different  aspects  that  are  security  concern  in  the  AM  space.  In  the 

mentioned example it is even worse than that: NIST SP 800-171 is a guidance document, not a 

regulation.  Currently,  anyone  can  claim  that  they  comply  with  it.  No  formal  certification 

authority  exists  (yet).  The  recently  released  CMMC  2,0  allows  most  DoD  contractors  to  self-

certify. The third unexpected answer shows a mix-up between AM and Supply Chain Securities; 

both  are  necessary  but  very  distinct disciplines. It  is  indeed a  controversial  and  not a  clear-cut 

distinction when AM is being outsourced: does that makes the supply chain relationship an AM 

security concern? In any case, securing a business process is no less important than securing a 

manufacturing  process.  The 

last  example  answer 

listed  as  unexpected  demonstrates 

misunderstanding  of  security  concerns  at  a  more  fundamental  level,  because  it  talks  about  an 

Page 12 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issue that is not of security nature. 

Q5:  WHAT  ARE  YOUR  BIGGEST  SECURITY  CONCERNS  ASSOCIATED  WITH 

ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING (AM)? 

After  asking  in  Q3  and  Q4  questions  regarding  security  concerns  in  specific  business 

models, with this question we took a broader perspective. The respondents could both select one 

of the pre-defined answers as well as add an additional answer in a free form field. Overall, 56 

(81%) survey participants answered this question.  

Selected Predefined Answer(s): 

•  “Technical  data  theft  (e.g.,  Design  data,  Process  parameters,  IP  loss,  Sensor 

information)”: 50 (89% of all who answered the question) 

•  “Sabotage (of manufactured part, AM equipment, environment)”: 23 (41% of all 

who answered the question) 

Other (freeform): 

•  “Data integrity” 

•  “Maintaining  data  integrity  through  the  entire  process  will  be  a  challenge.  

Unintentional data corruption is likely a higher risk than hacking or theft.” 

•  “Liability for tech data theft” 

•  “Legal risk such as if data is ITAR” 

•  “Violation  of  export  control  restrictions,  violation  of  rules  regarding  critical 

infrastructures.” 

•  “Traceability of material sources” 

It was no surprise that the vast majority of respondents who answered the question (89%) 

Page 13 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
selected  Technical  Data Theft  as  one  of their security  concerns.  In  the  case  of  companies,  this 

could  lead  to  monetary  impact  on  the  business;  in  the  case  of  governmental  agencies  and 

sometimes labs, such an attack could compromise national security. What was interesting is that 

also a substantial portion of respondents (41% of all who answered the question, to be exact) also 

consider intentional Sabotage as a real concern. While sabotage has been intensively studied in 

the research literature,15-24 we were surprised to see that it is also considered a real concern by a 

substantial portion of surveyed organizations. 

The freeform answers were both revealing and again concerning. The first two answers 

mixes up potential attack means (violation of data integrity) with a security threat (in this case, 

sabotage)  to  which  it  potentially  could  lead.  The  next  three  answers  indicate  rather  legal  than 

technical  security  concerns.  The  last  answer  indicates  once  again  misunderstanding  of  what 

boundaries of security are: security disciplines are generally concerned about intentional actions 

taken  by  malicious  actors,  but  not  about  solving  technical  issues  under  benign  operational 

conditions.  

Q6:  WHO  ARE  POTENTIAL  ATTACKERS/ADVERSARIES  YOU  EXPECT  WOULD 

ATTACK AM IN YOUR COMPANY/AGENCY? 

56  (81%)  of  all  respondents  answered  this  question.  As  with  the  previous  question,  we 

have  provided  both  predefined  answers  (multiple  could  be  selected)  as  well  as  a  field  for  the 

freeform answer. 

Selected Predefined Answer(s): 

•  “State actors”: 29 (52%) 

•  “Competitors”: 39 (70%) 

Page 14 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  “Insider threat”: 22 (39%) 

Other (freeform): 

•  “Hackers” 

•  “Script kiddies, environmental activists” 

•  “Individual  threat  actors  looking  to  steal  IP  or  hold  our  company  hostage  for 

ransom” 

•  “Ransomware”  

•  “Vendors and suppliers - IP loss” 

•  “Subcontractors  can  (and  do)  share  our  designs  with  competitors  who  use  the 

same subcontractors” 

•  “Customers.  Some without ethics will also steal IP” 

•  “Could be issues with our customers’ competitors”  

•  “Actors wanting to compromise the integrity of transportation infrastructure” 

From the predefined answers, we were surprised to see that most respondents answered 

this question (70%) selected the “competitors” option. As AM Security literature is dominated by 

publications  from  academia,  we  think  that  the  breakdown  between  the  predefined  options  can 

provide a more realistic input for the future field development.  

From the freeform answers, we found especially interesting mentioning about “vendors”, 

“subcontractors”, and “customers”. This indicates a concern (regardless of whether it is realistic 

or  just  perceived)  that  entities  involved  in  the  contractual  relationships  can  be  malicious.  This 

could  be  another  valuable  input  to  the  AM  Security  field:  While  malicious  actors  have  been 

considered,25-26  most  of  the  research  literature  is  dominated  by  the  considerations  of  attacks 

conducted by an external adversary. 

Page 15 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q7: WHAT DO YOU ASSESS WOULD BE THEIR GOALS/OBJECTIVES? 

56 (81% of all respondents) answered this follow-up question.  

Selected Predefined Answer(s): 

•  “Exploratory/reconnaissance (e.g., intelligence gathering)”: 47 (84%) 

•  “Monetary gains (e.g., through ransomware)”: 23 (41%) 

•  “Patent infringement”: 33 (59%) 

•  “Denial of service (e.g., delay product launch)”: 16 (29%) 

Other (freeform): 

•  “Negligence (no particular objective)” 

•  “Threat from student using equipment” 

•  “Stealing customer's IP and drawings” 

•  “Steal trade secrets” 

•  “Embed defects in parts / Introduce critical flaws into parts to cause catastrophic 

failures” 

•  “Destruction of equipment, i.e., printing faulty parts that aren't detectable” 

•  “Damage  to  transportation  infrastructure  […]  inserting  undetectable  flaws  in 

parts ordered so they might” 

Interestingly,  the  majority  of  respondents  answered  this  question  (84%)  selected  the 

predefined option “exploratory/reconnaissance”. Several non-invasive side-channel attacks have 

been  shown  in  the  research  literature26-29  that  would  definitely  suffice  this  purpose  but  not 

necessarily would provide quality sufficient for part infringement.  

While most of the freeform answers are of technical and security-related nature, the first 

Page 16 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two  are  definitely  not.  Once  again,  it  indicates  that  the  responsibility  of  security  is  not 

necessarily clear to the survey participants, and possible to their organizations. At the same time, 

we  need  to  point  out  that  some  security  controls,  such  as  separation  of  duties  and  least 

functionality,  have  ancillary  non-security  benefits.  Thus,  robust  security should  not be  seen  by 

AM  industry  just  as  an  expensive  necessity  or  as  a  mandate,  but  also  as  means  of  protecting 

against costly mistakes, human error, etc. 

Q8.A: HAS YOUR ORGANIZATION EXPERIENCED A CYBER INCIDENT RELATED 

TO AM ACTIVITIES? 

As  no  real  AM-specific  attacks  have  been  publicized,  this  question  was  intended  to 

explore how realistic are concerns discussed in AM Security community. 55 (80%) respondents 

answered this question. 5 of them (9%) answered “yes” and 50 (91%) answered “no” (see fig. 4).  

FIGURE 4 - ANSWERS TO Q8.A 

This  demonstrate 

that  real  AM-specific  attacks  have  already  been  conducted. 

Furthermore, the actual number could have been higher than 9%, because of several reasons. For 

Page 17 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
example, participants might not be aware of all attacks their organization has been exposed; even 

if they are, they might have decided not to disclose this potentially sensitive information.  

Q8.B: PLEASE OUTLINE YOUR CYBER INCIDENT EXPERIENCE (IF POSSIBLE). 

Only  respondents  who  answered  positively  Q8.a  have  been  asked  this  question.  The 

answer was a  freeform field. Only two (2) of the participants answered this  question,  but after 

looking at their replies we had to correct participation to 0%.  

Answers given (freeform): 

•  “no comment.”  

•  “n/a” 

This indicates lack of willingness to share information. This is even more concerning in 

combination  with  the  answer  to  Q8.a,  because  it  indicates  the  posture  in  AM  industry  to  face 

security  challenges  alone  (without  collaboration  and  information  sharing  with  other  similar 

entities).  Other  non-native  security  sectors  (e.g.,  critical  infrastructure)  had  went  through  a 

similar development till broader realization that such posture does not serve security of anybody. 

Meanwhile,  there  are  serious  attempts  to  mandate  incident  reporting,30  thus  enabling  means  of 

collective protection.  

Q9.A:  HAS  YOUR  ORGANIZATION  PARTNERED  WITH  EXTERNAL  AM 

SECURITY PROVIDERS? 

This  was  the  first  in  a  series  of  questions  aiming  to  identify  how  security  concerns  are 

addressed.  54  (78%)  of  participants  answered  this  question,  12  (22%  of  those  who  answered) 

selected “yes” and 42 (78%) “no” (see fig. 5). 

Page 18 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5 - ANSWERS TO Q9.A 

The answers indicate that most surveyed organizations do not partner with AM Security 

professionals.  The  reasons  for  this  reluctance  present  an  interesting  question;  unfortunately,  it 

was not explored in this survey. Nevertheless, this also indicates a business opportunity for AM-

specialized security products. 

Q9.B:  WHICH  SECURITY  CONCERNS  DO  YOU  HAVE  WITH  USING  THESE 

EXTERNAL AM SECURITY PROVIDERS? 

This  question  was  presented  only  to  respondents  who  answered  Q8.a  positively.  We 

received 6 (or 50%) answers.  

Answers (freeform): 

•  “Don't rely on external security expertise but build up your own expertise”  

•  “All external activity is a risk. It means sharing more information with outsiders 

which makes it easier for an attacker to enter through another channel”  

•  “While  they  are  there  to  help,  they  also  create  another  potential  door  into  our 

data systems, for a team that we don't know and we don't have the ability to vet, 

Page 19 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
beyond doing what due diligence we can in deciding to work with the company.  

[…] we are AM & materials experts, not IT experts, so this raises question - how 

do we monitor the external IT security team?  When looking at recent events, like 

the Treasury Dept breach, it's quite a daunting question for any small companies 

when this got past large security providers and entire federal agencies!” 

•  “Security approach is not wholistic; tends to be focused on protecting design IP” 

•  “We trust them but I'm not sure how we'd audit them since IT is not our area of 

expertise.  The right things seem to be in place like dual VPN”  

•  “We are engaging a CMMC consultant so not sure if that applies” 

The answers show that even in the cases when an external security company is involved, 

the  AM  company  might  have  concerns  about  its  security  or  trustworthiness.  This  might  also 

indicate at least some of the reasons why AM organizations are reluctant to partner with external 

security  providers  (as  per  answers  to  Q9.a).  The  cause  of  this  can  be  a  lack  of  standards  that 

could provide means of assurance that a security products and services provided by third parties 

are trustworthy. 

Q10.A:  HAS  YOUR  ORGANIZATION  CONDUCTED  A  FORMAL  OR  INFORMAL 

RISK ASSESSMENT RELATED TO AM? 

53  (77%)  or  all  participants  answered  this  question,  20  (38%)  of  them  answered  “yes” 

and 33 (62%) “no” (see fig. 6). 

Page 20 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6 - ANSWERS TO Q10.A 

This  result  is  very  disconcerting,  because  it  shows  that  the  majority  of  surveyed 

organizations (62%) don’t appear to take security issues seriously. This indicates a wide-spread 

reactive mindset of “if it is not mandated, I don’t worry about it.” 

Q10.B: WHICH RISKS, RELATED TO AM, HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED DURING THIS 

ASSESSMENT? 

This  was  the  follow-up  that  was  only  asked  when  Q10.a  was  answered  positively.  We 

received 13 answers, but after discarding answers like “Prefer not to say” and “no comment” we 

only left with 9 (45% of those who were asked this question).  

Answers (freeform): 

•  “Data  and  IP  loss  through  insider  access  to  programming.  Outside  access 

restricted by company IT policies.”  

•  “IP loss in engaging AM service bureaus and suppliers Data security in transfer 

of files within and to vendors” 

•  “Potential  'reverse  engineering'  of  processing  data  to  gain  intelligence  of 

Page 21 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
products manufactured”  

•  “Inadvertent sharing of sensitive data (we are a global company)” 

•  “Loss  of  IP  due  to  data  theft,  2.  Damage  to  printers  that  are  connected  to  the 

internet” 

•  “Intentional  corruption  of  CAD  Software,  build  files,  tool  files.  Loss  of 

intellectual property” 

•  “Misconfigurations, account hacking, insider threat, weak control plane, insecure 

interfaces” 

•  “Data encryption” 

•  “Data loss, impact on company reputation, production of defective parts, revenue 

loss” 

•  “Data management, facility access, internal (employee) and external (IT service, 

IT security) access.  We have gone through a full NIST Cybersecurity framework 

assessment and about to start a DoD NIST 800.171 Cybersecurity assessment.” 

As  with  the  prior  questions,  first  six  answers  indicate  general  understanding  of  the 

security threats but use of “home-grown” explanations instead of the terminology established in 

the AM Security field; this indicates lack of knowledge of the literature. The seventh’s answer 

(“data encryption”) indicates a misunderstanding of what are security risks, security threats, and 

security  techniques  that  can  be  used  to  counter  those.  The  last  answer,  once  again,  indicates 

overconfidence rooted in a certification. 

Q11.A:  DOES  YOUR  ORGANIZATION  HAVE  A  SECURITY  PROGRAM  IN  PLACE 

FOR AM? 

Page 22 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With this question, we tried to understand whether organizations try to address or ignore 

security threats associated with AM. 51 (74%) answered this question, 21 (41%) of them “yes” 

and 30 (59%) “no” (see fig. 7) 

FIGURE 7 - ANSWERS TO Q11.A 

The answer indicates that the majority (59%) of the surveyed organizations simple ignore 

security of AM. 

Q11.B: DOES IT FALL UNDER THE GENERAL CYBER-SECURITY? 

Only respondents who answered Q11.a positively were asked this question. All 21 (100% 

of them) answered this question, 19 (90%) with “yes” and 2 (10%) with “no” (see fig. 8). 

Page 23 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 8 - ANSWERS TO Q11.B 

While  not  surprising,  it  is  also  concerning.  In  the  AM  Security  literature,  numerous 

publications  demonstrated  cyber-physical  attack  methods  capable  of  bypassing  cyber-security 

measures,26-29 as well as cyber-physical and physical defense measures were proposed.31-46 Also 

here, a need for a specific standard becomes obvious: derived from a constantly growing list of 

scientific publications, a curated view of possible attack methods and proposed countermeasures 

alongside  with  their  respective  limitations  should  provide  companies  with  means  for  a  more 

realistic assessment of their AM security.  

Q11.C: HOW DOES IT GO BEYOND GENERAL CYBER SECURITY? 

Only the respondents who answered Q11.b with “no” were asked also this question. None 

of them (0%) provided an answer.  

This  shows  unwillingness  to  share  information  that  might  have  contributed  to  the 

improved security posture in AM industry. 

Assessment of the Current Security Awareness State in the AM Industry 

Page 24 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summarizing  our  preliminary  analysis  of  answers  to  individual  questions,  we  conclude 

that  the  results  are  “shocking  but  not  surprising.”  Often,  we  have  observed  the  lack  of  the 

problem space understanding. It took several forms, such as frequent mix-ups of security threats, 

technical  means  that  attacks  can  use,  and  impact  on  the  business.  Furthermore,  some 

organizations  substitute  AM  Security  through  compliance  with  frameworks  developed  with 

different use cases, technologies, and threat models in mind. As mentioned throughout the text, 

we think that a dedicated AM Security standard or guidelines (none of which exists now) could 

significantly improve this situation. 

We  have  also  seen  the  unwillingness  to  share  information  about  AM-specific  attacks, 

ignoring potential benefits of collective protection and causing instead the situation when every 

organization  has  to  face  the  security  threats  alone.  But  even  then,  only  41%  of  the  surveyed 

organizations  have  a  dedicated  AM  Security  program  in  place,  but  90%  of  those  treats  cyber-

security as a  sole  solution to all problems – a posture  dangerous in the view of  various cyber-

physical attacks already demonstrated in the AM Security literature. 

Thus, we are coming to a very concerning conclusion that most organizations are NOT 

ready to adequately address AM Security. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This  work  was  funded  in  part  by  the  America  Makes  under  the  award  5001.005,  and  partially 

supported by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology 

under Grants NIST-70NANB19H170 and NIST-70NANB20H193. 

Page 25 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

1. Falliere, N., Murchu, L.O. and Chien, E., 2011. “W32.Stuxnet dossier.” White paper, Symantec Corp., 

Security Response, 5(6), p.29. 

2. Koscher, K., Czeskis, A., Roesner, F., Patel, S., Kohno, T., Checkoway, S., McCoy, D., 

Kantor, B., Anderson, D., Shacham, H. and Savage, S., 2010, May. “Experimental security 

analysis of a modern automobile.” In 2010 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (pp. 447-

462). IEEE. 

3. Checkoway, S., McCoy, D., Kantor, B., Anderson, D., Shacham, H., Savage, S., Koscher, K., 

Czeskis, A., Roesner, F. and Kohno, T., 2011, August. “Comprehensive experimental analyses of 

automotive attack surfaces.” In USENIX Security Symposium (Vol. 4, No. 447-462, p. 2021). 

4. Yampolskiy, M., King, W.E., Gatlin, J., Belikovetsky, S., Brown, A., Skjellum, A. and 

Elovici, Y., 2018. “Security of additive manufacturing: Attack taxonomy and survey.” Additive 

Manufacturing, 21, pp.431-457. 

5. Chaduvula, S.C., Dachowicz, A., Atallah, M.J. and Panchal, J.H., 2018. “Security in cyber-

enabled design and manufacturing: A survey.” Journal of Computing and Information Science in 

Engineering, 18(4). 

6. Caviggioli, F. and Ughetto, E., 2019. “A bibliometric analysis of the research dealing with the 

impact of additive manufacturing on industry, business and society.” International journal of 

production economics, 208, pp.254-268. 

7. Fernandez-Carames, T.M. and Fraga-Lamas, P., 2019. “A review on the application of 

blockchain to the next generation of cybersecure industry 4.0 smart factories.” Ieee Access, 7, 

pp.45201-45218. 

8. Wu, M. and Moon, Y.B., 2019, November. “Intrusion Detection of Cyber-Physical Attacks in 

Page 26 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Manufacturing Systems: A Review.” In ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress 

and Exposition (Vol. 59384, p. V02BT02A001). American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 

9. Zarreh, A., Wan, H., Lee, Y., Saygin, C. and Al Janahi, R., 2019. “Cybersecurity concerns for 

total productive maintenance in smart manufacturing systems.” Procedia Manufacturing, 38, 

pp.532-539. 

10. Mahesh, P., Tiwari, A., Jin, C., Kumar, P.R., Reddy, A.N., Bukkapatanam, S.T., Gupta, N. 

and Karri, R., 2020. “A Survey of Cybersecurity of Digital Manufacturing.” Proceedings of the 

IEEE, 109(4), pp.495-516. 

11. Gupta, N., Chen, F., Tsoutsos, N.G. and Maniatakos, M., 2017, June. “ObfusCADe: 

Obfuscating additive manufacturing CAD models against counterfeiting.” In Proceedings of the 

54th Annual Design Automation Conference 2017 (pp. 1-6). 

12. Yampolskiy, M., King, W., Pope, G., Belikovetsky, S. and Elovici, Y., 2017, March. 

“Evaluation of additive and subtractive manufacturing from the security perspective.” In 

International Conference on Critical Infrastructure Protection (pp. 23-44). Springer, Cham. 

13. Graves, L.M., Lubell, J., King, W. and Yampolskiy, M., 2019. “Characteristic aspects of 

additive manufacturing security from security awareness perspectives.” IEEE Access, 7, 

pp.103833-103853. 

14. Yampolskiy, M., Gatlin, J. and Yung, M., 2021, November. “Myths and Misconceptions in 

Additive Manufacturing Security: Deficiencies of the CIA Triad.” In Proceedings of the 2021 

Workshop on Additive Manufacturing (3D Printing) Security (pp. 3-9). 

15. Xiao Zi Hang (Claud Xiao), 2013, “Security Attack to 3D Printing.” Keynote at XCon2013, 

http://www.claudxiao.net/Attack3DPrinting-Claud-en.pdf 

16. Sturm, L.D., Williams, C.B., Camelio, J.A., White, J. and Parker, R., 2017. “Cyber-physical 

Page 27 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vulnerabilities in additive manufacturing systems: A case study attack on the. STL file with 

human subjects.” Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 44, pp.154-164. 

17. Yampolskiy, M., Schutzle, L., Vaidya, U. and Yasinsac, A., 2015, March. “Security 

challenges of additive manufacturing with metals and alloys.” In International Conference on 

Critical Infrastructure Protection (pp. 169-183). Springer, Cham. 

18. Yampolskiy, M., Skjellum, A., Kretzschmar, M., Overfelt, R.A., Sloan, K.R. and Yasinsac, 

A., 2016. “Using 3D printers as weapons.” International Journal of Critical Infrastructure 

Protection, 14, pp.58-71. 

19. Zeltmann, S.E., Gupta, N., Tsoutsos, N.G., Maniatakos, M., Rajendran, J. and Karri, R., 

2016. “Manufacturing and security challenges in 3D printing.” JOM, 68(7), pp.1872-1881. 

20. Belikovetsky, S., Yampolskiy, M., Toh, J., Gatlin, J. and Elovici, Y., 2017. “dr0wned–cyber-

physical attack with additive manufacturing.” In 11th USENIX Workshop on Offensive 

Technologies (WOOT 17). 

21. Moore, S.B., Glisson, W.B. and Yampolskiy, M., 2017. “Implications of malicious 3D 

printer firmware.” Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 

22. Slaughter, A., Yampolskiy, M., Matthews, M., King, W.E., Guss, G. and Elovici, Y., 2017, 

August. “How to ensure bad quality in metal additive manufacturing: In-situ infrared 

thermography from the security perspective.” In Proceedings of the 12th International 

Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (pp. 1-10). 

23. Chhetri, S.R., Faezi, S., Rashid, N. and Al Faruque, M.A., 2018. “Manufacturing supply 

chain and product lifecycle security in the era of industry 4.0.” Journal of Hardware and Systems 

Security, 2(1), pp.51-68. 

24. Ranabhat, B., Clements, J., Gatlin, J., Hsiao, K.T. and Yampolskiy, M., 2019. “Optimal 

Page 28 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sabotage attack on composite material parts.” International Journal of Critical Infrastructure 

Protection, 26, p.100301. 

25. Yampolskiy, M., Andel, T.R., McDonald, J.T., Glisson, W.B. and Yasinsac, A., 2014. 

“Towards Security of Additive Layer Manufacturing.” WiP presented at The 30st Annual 

Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC) 2014. 

26. Gatlin, J., Belikovetsky, S., Elovici, Y., Skjellum, A., Lubell, J., Witherell, P. and 

Yampolskiy, M., 2021, October. “Encryption is Futile: Reconstructing 3D-Printed Models Using 

the Power Side-Channel.” In 24th International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions 

and Defenses (pp. 135-147). 

27. Al Faruque, M.A., Chhetri, S.R., Canedo, A. and Wan, J., 2016, April. “Acoustic side-

channel attacks on additive manufacturing systems.” In 2016 ACM/IEEE 7th international 

conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS) (pp. 1-10). IEEE. 

28. Hojjati, A., Adhikari, A., Struckmann, K., Chou, E., Tho Nguyen, T.N., Madan, K., Winslett, 

M.S., Gunter, C.A. and King, W.P., 2016, October. “Leave your phone at the door: Side 

channels that reveal factory floor secrets.” In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference 

on Computer and Communications Security (pp. 883-894). 

29. Song, C., Lin, F., Ba, Z., Ren, K., Zhou, C. and Xu, W., 2016, October. “My smartphone 

knows what you print: Exploring smartphone-based side-channel attacks against 3d printers.” In 

Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security 

(pp. 895-907). 

30. David Kitchen and Kate Nelson,  “US Senate considers mandating 24-hour reporting 

requirement for ransom payments”, Data Protection Report, October 5, 2021,  

https://www.dataprotectionreport.com/2021/10/u-s-senate-considers-mandating-24-hour-

Page 29 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reporting-requirement-for-ransom-payments/ 

31. Chhetri, S.R., Canedo, A. and Al Faruque, M.A., 2016, November. “KCAD: kinetic cyber-

attack detection method for cyber-physical additive manufacturing systems.” In 2016 IEEE/ACM 

International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD) (pp. 1-8). IEEE. 

32. Albakri, M., Sturm, L., Williams, C.B. and Tarazaga, P., 2015, August. “Non-destructive 

evaluation of additively manufactured parts via impedance-based monitoring.” In Solid Freeform 

Fabrication Symposium (Vol. 26, pp. 1475-1490). 

33. Dachowicz, A., Chaduvula, S.C., Atallah, M. and Panchal, J.H., 2017. “Microstructure-based 

counterfeit detection in metal part manufacturing.” JOM, 69(11), pp.2390-2396. 

34. Kennedy, Z.C., Stephenson, D.E., Christ, J.F., Pope, T.R., Arey, B.W., Barrett, C.A. and 

Warner, M.G., 2017. “Enhanced anti-counterfeiting measures for additive manufacturing: 

coupling lanthanide nanomaterial chemical signatures with blockchain technology.” Journal of 

Materials Chemistry C, 5(37), pp.9570-9578. 

35. Bayens, C., Le, T., Garcia, L., Beyah, R., Javanmard, M. and Zonouz, S., 2017. “See no evil, 

hear no evil, feel no evil, print no evil? malicious fill patterns detection in additive 

manufacturing.” In 26th {USENIX} Security Symposium (USENIX Security 17) (pp. 1181-1198). 

36. Chen, F., Mac, G. and Gupta, N., 2017. “Security features embedded in computer aided 

design (CAD) solid models for additive manufacturing.” Materials & Design, 128, pp.182-194. 

37. Chhetri, S.R., Faezi, S. and Al Faruque, M.A., 2017, March. “Fix the leak! an information 

leakage aware secured cyber-physical manufacturing system.” In Design, Automation & Test in 

Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), 2017 (pp. 1408-1413). IEEE. 

38. Belikovetsky, S., Solewicz, Y.A., Yampolskiy, M., Toh, J. and Elovici, Y., 2018. “Digital 

audio signature for 3D printing integrity.” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and 

Page 30 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Security, 14(5), pp.1127-1141. 

39. Chhetri, S.R., Faezi, S. and Al Faruque, M.A., 2018. “Information leakage-aware computer-

aided cyber-physical manufacturing.” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 

13(9), pp.2333-2344. 

40. Gao, Y., Li, B., Wang, W., Xu, W., Zhou, C. and Jin, Z., 2018. “Watching and safeguarding 

your 3D printer: Online process monitoring against cyber-physical attacks.” Proceedings of the 

ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 2(3), pp.1-27. 

41. Gatlin, J., Belikovetsky, S., Moore, S.B., Solewicz, Y., Elovici, Y. and Yampolskiy, M., 

2019. “Detecting sabotage attacks in additive manufacturing using actuator power signatures.” 

IEEE Access, 7, pp.133421-133432. 

42. Kubo, Y., Eguchi, K., Aoki, R., Kondo, S., Azuma, S. and Indo, T., 2019, May. “FabAuth: 

Printed objects identification using resonant properties of their inner structures.” In Extended 

Abstracts of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1-6). 

43. Liang, S. and Beyah, R., Poster: "A Realizable Framework for Intrusion Detection in 

Additive Manufacturing Systems Using Analog Side-Channels. 

44. Okarma, K. and Fastowicz, J., 2019, May. “Computer vision methods for non-destructive 

quality assessment in additive manufacturing.” In International Conference on Computer 

Recognition Systems (pp. 11-20). Springer, Cham. 

45. Wu, M. and Moon, Y., 2019. “Alert correlation for cyber-manufacturing intrusion detection.” 

Procedia Manufacturing, 34, pp.820-831. 

46. Yu, S.Y., Malawade, A.V., Chhetri, S.R. and Al Faruque, M.A., 2020. “Sabotage attack 

detection for additive manufacturing systems.” IEEE Access, 8, pp.27218-27231. 

Page 31 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix A – Survey Participant’s Affiliation 

PARTICIPANT’S AFFILIATION 

ORGANIZATION TYPE 

3D Metalforge  

3D Systems 

Additive Industries North America 

Ansys Inc. 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Applied Research Laboratory at Penn State 

Research Laboratory 

Advanced Remanufacturing and Technology Centre (ARTC) 

Industry 

American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 

Standardization 

Battelle Memorial Institute 

ICON 

Buckeye Furniture 

Cincinnati 

ConocoPhillips 

Coventry University,  

TWI Ltd 

Organization 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Academia,  

Research Laboratory 

Defense & Energy Systems, LLC 

Industry 

The DoD Manufacturing Technology (ManTech) 

Research Laboratory 

diondo 

EOS North America 

Page 32 of 35 

Industry 

Industry 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EWI 

Fabrisonic, LLC 

Farcco Tecnologia Industrial 

FormAlloy Technologies, Inc. 

Research Laboratory 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

The Fraunhofer Research Institution for Additive Manufacturing 

Research Laboratory 

Technologies IAPT (Fraunhofer IAPT) 

General Electric (GE) 

GL 

Guaranteed B.V. 

Honda R&D Americas 

Intermecanic  

Ivaldi Group 

Johnson & Johnson 

Konica Minolta, Inc. 

KPMG 

Leonardo Helicopters 

Lithoz America, LLC 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Research Laboratory 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) 

Research Laboratory 

Massachusetts Department of Transportation 

Governmental Agency 

MatterHackers 

Mighty Buildings 

Industry 

Industry 

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 

Governmental Agency 

National Center for Defense Manufacturing and Machining 

Research Laboratory 

Page 33 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(NCDMM) 

America Makes - National Additive Manufacturing Innovation 

Governmental Agency 

Institute 

nCode Federal, LLC 

North Carolina State University (NCSU) 

Northrop Grumman Corporation (NGC) 

NGK Spark Plug Co., Ltd 

Northwestern University 

NuVasive 

Industry 

Academia 

Industry 

Industry 

Academia 

Industry 

Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) 

Research Laboratory 

The Ohio State University’s Center for Design and Manufacturing 

Research Laboratory 

Excellence (CDME) 

Perrygo consulting 

Raytheon Technologies Corporation 

Industry 

Industry 

Raytheon Technologies Research Center 

Research Laboratory 

Red Fox Tavern 

Renault Sport Racing  

SAE International 

Siemens Energy 

TCI Finance Industry Association 

The Boeing Company 

Industry 

Research Laboratory 

Standardization 

Organization 

Industry 

Industry 

Industry 

The University of Dayton Research Institute (UDRI),  

Academia,  

Page 34 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) 

UK Atomic Energy Authority 

University of Toledo  

Research Laboratory 

Research Laboratory 

Academia 

USACE Information Technology Lab 

Research Laboratory 

The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) 

Virgin Media 

Wichita State University (WSU),  

Academia 

Industry 

Academia,  

National Institute for Aviation Research (NIAR) 

Research Laboratory 

Page 35 of 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
