Hyperloop: A Cybersecurity
Perspective

Alessandro Brighente, University of Padua
Mauro Conti, University of Padua and TU Delft
Denis Donadel, University of Padua
Federico Turrin, University of Padua

among

the most

involves novel

prominent
future
Hyperloop
is
introduced by Elon Musk,
transportation systems. First
Hyperloop concept
technologies to allow
traveling at a maximum speed of 1220km/h, while
guaranteeing sustainability. Due to the system's performance
requirements and the critical infrastructure it represents, its
safety and security need to be carefully considered. In
cyber-physical systems, cyberattacks could lead to safety
issues with
consequences, both on the
population and the surrounding environment. Therefore, the
cybersecurity of all the components and links in Hyperloop
represents a fundamental challenge. To this day, no research
investigated the cyber security of the technology used for
Hyperloop.

catastrophic

the
In this paper, we propose the first analysis of
cybersecurity challenges raised by Hyperloop technology.
We base our analysis on the related works on Hyperloop,
distilling the common features which will be likely to be
present in the system. Furthermore, we provide an analysis
of possible directions on the Hyperloop infrastructure
management, together with their security concerns. Finally,
we discuss possible countermeasures and future directions
for the security of the future Hyperloop design.

Introduction
Hyperloop is a radically new concept of transportation
system introduced by Elon Musk in 2013 [1], where he
described a preliminary version (Figure 1) of the Hyperloop
project connecting Los Angeles and San Francisco. The
vision of Musk is to provide fast transportation means by
mitigating air resistance and friction. Besides the speed
objective, Hyperloop also allows for reduced operating costs
and, hence,
the first official
document, the project continued through university contests
organized by SpaceX and later with the foundation of two
startups: Virgin Hyperloop and Hyperloop Transportation
Technologies. Today, different companies are working on
Hyperloop systems and Hyperloop testbeds are deployed in
different
and
Middle-East [2, 3, 4].

like Europe, America, East,

for energy savings. After

countries

Hyperloop is characterized by two main elements: a
tube with vacuum capabilities and a capsule that travels
along the tube with passengers or cargo, exploiting air
pressure and electromagnetic forces. Hyperloop promises a
set of advantages compared to available transportation
systems. First of all, as already mentioned,
it provides
high-speed transportation. Airlines generally fly at 980km/h,
and special trains reach the speed of 570km/h, expected for

1

Figure 1. First Hyperloop conceptual design rendering [1].

In

Hyperloop is 1220km/h. Secondly,
it allows for reduced
operational costs. By placing solar panels properly over the
tube carrying the capsule, generated energy can be used to
run the system and stored for later use [1].
cybercriminals
years,

increasingly
targeting cyber-physical systems. Examples are countless
and interest a wide range of categories, from attacks against
nuclear plants [5] to vehicles and transportation systems [6,
7]. Therefore,
is necessary to assess the system's
weaknesses to prevent dangerous consequences.

recent

are

it

This paper analyzes the different components of the
current state-of-the-art
in Hyperloop technology and the
challenges they pose in the area of cybersecurity. Despite the
lack of official documentation, we collected information
from publicly available sources and identified common
elements with other transportation systems, such as aviation,
railways, and automobiles, to create a high-level description
of the Hyperloop system. Then, we focus on the different
components and their interconnection, identifying the key
security and privacy vulnerabilities they imply. Finally, we
propose different security practices to prevent possible
attacks. We analyze the overall system from both a network
and physical point of view. To the best of our knowledge,
this
the first work focusing on the cybersecurity
challenges related to Hyperloop technology.

is

Overview of the Hyperloop Infrastructure

In this section, we overview the components of
Hyperloop
infrastructure and then on the network infrastructure.

system focusing

first

the

on

the
physical

Physical Infrastructure
We represent in Figure 2 the overall physical infrastructure
of Hyperloop. We divide the physical system into three
macro components: the tube, the station, and the capsule.

Tube. The tube is a pipe with a near-vacuum environment
inside, reaching an air pressure equivalent to 60,960m above
sea level, where the Hyperloop capsule transits [4, 8].
Thanks to this environment, the tube significantly reduces
the aerodynamic drag to guarantee high speeds while
keeping energy consumption at a minimum level. The tube
exploits a series of venting valves deployed along its length
to
internal
the
environment. The details are depicted in Figure 2a.

depressurize

pressurize

rapidly

and

In case of emergencies,

the capsule will stop at a
predefined emergency station deployed along the route
length. The tube is equipped with emergency egresses every
75m to allow passengers to exit the vehicle in case of need
[8]. The tube implements valves specifically built to isolate
and re-pressurize part of the tube to ease the repairing
process.

The Hyperloop system aims at producing more energy
than it consumes thanks to solar panels placed over the tube
[1, 8]. The energy consumption of the Hyperloop mainly
depends on the journey's distance and the number of seats,
but it is generally lower than aircrafts [9].

Capsule. Hyperloop trains are called pods or capsules.
Figure 2b schematizes the pod’s structure and components.
According to [3, 10], the capsule has the size of a small
commercial aircraft with a capacity of 28-50 passengers
each, allowing for the transportation of more than 160,000
passengers daily from Los Angeles to San Francisco
(561km) [3]. The capsule's size depends on the purpose (i.e.,
passenger or cargo), and the tube to pod size ratio varies
from 1.4 to 4 [10]. Different
levitation mechanisms are
under investigation, ranging from air beaming employed in
the first concept [1], to more efficient electromagnetic or
electrodynamic suspension systems [11]. Four propulsion
engines flank pods to support any possible levitation
implementation high-speed movements. Thanks to the sound
bulkhead, the capsule can accelerate without impacting the
quality of experience of the passenger.

Capsules are designed for ultra-high-speed using various
technologies.
In particular, pods can be wrapped with
materials to monitor and transmit critical information such as
temperature, stability, and integrity [3]. Two or more
lithium-ion battery packs will power the capsule life support
system, making it unaffected by power outages. Battery
packs will be charged at the base station before the start of
the journey. Otherwise, Musk mentions the possibility of
storing compressed air to reverse as energy with fans in
second moments [1].

Station. According to [8], the Hyperloop portal will be a
central hub that integrates all nearby transportation systems
to enable a seamless end-to-end journey. The station will
ticketing, biometric check-in,
offer services like digital

2

wayfinding, and on-demand boarding. The Hyperloop
station will
include portals from which passengers may
depart and arrive. To foster the availability of on-demand
transportation and remove the need for
the
Hyperloop system will allow multiple pods to convoy or to
autonomously break away from a convoy to reach their
destination. This will be possible thanks to the high-speed
switching technology, which combines the benefits of
on-demand transportation with higher efficiency and train
throughput [8]. Furthermore, this system will allow pods to
avoid stopping at every station. Figure 2c shows a simplified
representation of the station.

timetables,

network

Network Infrastructure
conceptualized to manage
The
Hyperloop is proposed in different works [12, 13]. As
depicted in Figure 3, we divide the network infrastructure
into four layers.

architecture

layer
Hyperloop Network. This Hyperloop-specific
contains the first communication link with the field network.
This includes communications between capsules (originating
from the pod itself or from user services), between capsules
and the station, or between capsules and the Internet. To
support the fast communication between internal antennas,
Remote Access Units (RAUs), and stations, we can assume
the existence of a wired bus (e.g., optical fiber) inside the
tube which interconnects these entities. RAUs are placed
outside the tube to provide an Internet connection to the
communication inside the tube. The connection between the
Hyperloop Network and the Access Network can be wireless
(e.g., WiFi, 5G) or wired (e.g., optical fibers) to meet the
requirement of fast communication. The tube is internally
equipped with several antennas used to communicate with
the pods. More antennas are installed on capsules to alleviate
the
[12]. The
communications originated by the users inside the pods and
from the instrumentation on the capsule are captured by the
internal antennas and then forwarded to the station (via a
wired connection) or the Internet (via RAUs).

expensive

handover

process

timely

Access Network. Connects the Hyperloop Network and the
Aggregation Network. The Access Layer is also responsible
for gathering the information between the various RAUs
placed along the tube and connecting them with one or more
Internet Service Providers (ISPs). In fact, since the tube can
be hundreds of kilometers long through different countries,
the ISPs can differ based on the geographical area. An ISP is
an organization that provides the Internet connection to the
requestor by assigning it a public IP address.

Besides communication coming from the pods,
this
network allows the ground station of Hyperloop to connect
to the Internet, enabling services such as remote connection.

Aggregation Network. It connects the Access Network to
the Core Network by gathering and routing the information
between the different ISPs. ADSL, WiFi, Ethernet, and
optical fiber are among the technologies used in this layer.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. An overview of the Hyperloop physical infrastructure and its details. In particular, a) illustrates the tube details, b) the capsule
details, while c) the station details.

3

Figure 3. Different network layers composing the Hyperloop
Network Infrastructure.

Figure 4. Communications types inside the Hyperloop
Network Layer.

Core Network. The purpose of this layer is to interconnect
the different components of the network, enabling access to
the various facilities and services, such as databases and
clouds, for computations. It must provide low congestion,
short delays, high availability, and strong adaptability to
support future applications.

Hyperloop Communication Network

channels

employed for

In the following, we divide the network into the different
communication
system’s
operation. Figure 4 represents a schema of the various
communications in the Hyperloop network. We divide
communications into Pod-to-Pod (P2P), Pod-to-Tube (P2T),
User-to-Pod (U2P), Tube-to-Station (T2S), In-Pod (InP), and
User to all the devices available in the stations (U2S), e.g.,
ticketing service).

the

Pod-to-Pod Communication
P2P communication exchanges information in a model
to vehicle platooning. Pods are expected to
similar
automatically merge and detach based on their routes [3]. To
avoid collisions, a pod must detect the presence of another
pod and its relative location. To this aim, pods exchange
messages containing information on their location and speed
with other pods. Data transmission between high-speed pods
could be supported by ad-hoc protocols similar to Dedicated
Short Range Communications used for vehicle-to-vehicle
communication.

Pod-to-Tube Communication
The P2T link is used to control the pods. Thanks to this link,
the tube can control and manage the magnetic or air forces
needed to handle the pod's movements and maneuvers.
Viceversa, the pod can apply the magnetic or air forces for
the movement generated by the onboard engine. It demands
great attention to guarantee safety to infrastructure and
passengers. The P2T link can also be used to exchange
messages about the status of the capsule and its location.
This information will then be delivered via a T2S link to the
central station for managing purposes, such as pressure
regulation and motor management. Thanks
to RAUs
deployed along the tube, the pod can also use the P2T link to

4

to guarantee users' connectivity or

access the Internet
exchange information with external entities [13].
As discussed in [12], there are only two wireless standards to
the Hyperloop speed:
support
802.11ax networks and 5G NR. They are therefore likely to
be employed in the existing Hyperloop infrastructure
between internal antennas and pods.

communication at

the

an infotainment

User-To-Pod Communication
To provide
system to users during
transportation, the pod is equipped with an internal wireless
network. Hence, users can retrieve information regarding the
trip status, their current location, and expected arrival time.
Furthermore, users have access to entertainment material and
more generally to the Internet. This connection is guaranteed
by the P2T communication link that provides access to the
Internet thanks to the RAUs located along the tube. The
various access points are connected to the local ISP which
enables the connection to the core network providing
Internet access.

Tube-to-Station Communication
The operations that the tube needs to handle to guarantee
that pods can safely travel from one station to another need
to be managed by a central entity. These operations include,
for instance, operating valves that create the near-vacuum
environment and the opening of emergency exits in case of
need. Furthermore,
the tube needs to actuate the pods’
motion according to the scheduling and report to the station
information about the pods status for managing purposes.
These connections can be either wired (e.g., optical fiber) or
wireless (e.g., LTE, 5G), depending on the requirements in
terms of latency and reliability. Furthermore, a dedicated
power line will deliver the energy collected via solar panels
to the accumulator deployed at the central station. A second
power line will provide energy for operations related to the
tube. These operations include the application of power for
maglev and pods directioning.

In-Pod Communication
Each pod is equipped with an internal network where
controllers and actuators regulate the basic pod functioning.
This concept is similar to that exploited in modern vehicles,
where a Controller Area Network bus connects many

air

fire

and

such
alarms,

Electronic Controllable Units (ECUs). The pod might use a
similar technology to connect different internal areas and
conditioning, doors
manage operations
as
operations,
battery management
system [14]. All these units are connected to the pod safety
that continuously monitors data to guarantee
controller
safety. This network is also used to deliver power to the
different components of
the pod. For instance, suitable
controllers handle the flank propulsors that allow for
high-speed movements.
In-vehicle networks are usually
implemented via cable, and different ECUs manage different
pod parts.

User-to-(Devices in the) Station Communications
For a complete analysis of the Hyperloop system we have to
consider the communications occurring inside the station
between the users and the infrastructure. Many smart devices
are available to the users. Tickets can be bought from ad-hoc
terminals, which have to verify the availability of the seats
on the pods in real-time. Turnstiles manage the user access
to the boat area and could use the user's biometrics
information to facilitate the access. Displays show delays
and departure times for pods and help users find the proper
gate. Furthermore, even if not physically located in the
stations, we can consider the smartphone apps and web
services that enable users to remotely buy tickets in advance
to avoid long queues.

Cybersecurity Analysis

For each communication category, we present an analysis of
the possible security and privacy issues. Table 1 reports the
different attacks affecting each communication link,
the
corresponding threats, and their effect on the system.

cyberattacks

Pod-to-Pod Security
Several
can affect P2P communication.
Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) attacks can modify or craft
packets to include false information about
the pod and
generate a wrong reaction in the neighboring pods. For
instance, one pod under attack can claim to be close to the
preceding pod and make it speed up. Alternatively, an
attacker may launch a sybil attack by sending data from an
inexistent capsule to create inconsistencies between different
sensors. Furthermore, an attacker might capture P2P
communication packets in a blackhole attack preventing
packet forwarding. These attacks, especially if coordinated
on a certain number of capsules, can potentially be very
destructive and create disorder in the network. MitM can
also be used to send malicious messages to disconnect a pod
from a convoy. Another way to force the disconnection of a
pod could be a flooding attack leading to a Denial of Service
(DoS). This could make a capsule unable to receive
messages from other pods, inhibiting early reaction to the
Hyperloop
complete
disconnection of the target pod is not possible due to the
high capacity of the communication channel, a slight delay
in the packet transmission could be dangerous due to the
hard real-time constraints on location sharing to avoid
incidents.

system's problems. Even

if

a

5

Supposing that pods periodically broadcast their position
to alert all nearby pods, spoofing a false location could make
all
the other pods take wrong actions such as break or
speed-up/down even if not needed, leading to inefficiency
(e.g., delays) or crashes.

Pod-to-Tube Security
P2T communication has several purposes ranging from
critical aims (e.g., managing the levitation of the pod) to
forwarding the traffic from the
secondary scopes (e.g.,
infotainment system of the pod). A MitM attack can tamper
with the levitation mechanism to increase or decrease its
power leading to the derailing of the pod (i.e., slamming to
the edges or the floor of the tube). Hijacking a pod may also
be possible. In fact, due to the high-speed switching, an
attacker may trigger a switch to detach a pod from a convoy
and redirect it in the wrong direction.

can

spoof

attacker

Location data is transmitted not only on the P2P channel
but also with the ground station, through the tube, for central
safety management. An
this
communication to send messages with false locations of the
pods to generate inconsistencies in the system. Furthermore,
hiding the presence of a pod near the station via spoofing
could make another capsule leave the station before the
hidden pod’s departure, causing sudden breaks or incidents.
Although the pod’s location might be helpful for scheduling
purposes and estimation of arrival
the real-time
sharing of the location might represent a privacy threat.
Indeed, a user may target a specific pod and hijack it to a
particular location. Although the pod travels at a very high
speed, an attacker may predict when a targeting pod will
reach a specific point
in the tube based on the shared
location information. Therefore, it is fundamental to protect
the privacy of the pod’s location. Furthermore, an attacker
might infer information on the users traveling in the pod due
to the exchange of data from U2P and P2T. Without traffic
encryption or aggregation, an attacker may track and profile
users.

times,

To reach the ground station and the ISP, the pod must
forward the data through the tube. An attacker could disable
or delay this exchange of messages by performing a flooding
attack from a pod. DoS could lead to the disruption of the
infotainment system, and the delay of safety-critical data
flows.

It is possible to imagine an exchange of energy between
the tube and the pod (via, e.g., wireless power transfer) to
charge the pod’s batteries. This kind of energy flow must be
managed by the tube following the requests coming from the
pod. An attacker could tamper with this communication to
stop the energy request and avoid charging the pod, or it may
require more power than needed to damage the batteries.
Furthermore, a DoS could prevent the packet exchange, lead
to an unpredictable energy transfer behavior, or limit the
number of pods to benefit from it.

User-to-Pod Security
A central purpose of the U2P network is the infotainment
system. A malicious user can generate a DoS attack to

prevent other users from using the system. Since the pod is
shielded inside the tube, the stop of this communication
channel may imply the stop of every communication outside
the tube. To access the infotainment system the user is
requested to authenticate using credentials linked to the
to assign bandwidth and keep track of users'
ticket
misconduct fairly. A malicious actor can hijack another user
to circumvent restrictions or can DoS the authentication
system to avoid other users connecting to the access point. It
is reasonable to think that users will purchase a ticket that
grants them access to the pod. The pod is in charge of
checking the ticket validity. A malicious user may use a
relay attack to steal another user's ticket or jam the pod
receiver to prevent all users from accessing the pod.

Given the number of users connected to the same access
point, a malicious entity could try to attack other users, for
instance,
to eavesdrop on the communications and steal
sensitive information. MitM could also be possible for
non-encrypted communications, while traffic analysis could
be applied to infer users' activities by monitoring encrypted
data. With a view in the future, a router can also cache
content
to serve popular user requests faster [15]. These
systems can be vulnerable to cache poisoning attacks,
leading to phishing attacks and credentials leakages. A
malicious user can also eavesdrop on U2P communication to
track and profile a specific user's pod access.

Tube-to-Station Security
T2S communication must be reliable since it has to manage
the high traffic of pods and possible issues regarding trips. A
DoS attack can mine the system's availability and prevent
the exchange of messages in the T2S communication.
Again, even a small delay in data communication can be
devastating in systems with hard-real time constraints if
proper mitigation techniques are not in place.

Similarly, manipulation of the data transmitted can damage
the system. Sending malicious messages can affect the tube’s
functioning, such as forcing the depressurization. An evil
entity who obtained control of the channel could also insert
false anomalies or spoof pods’ information, for instance, to
make the system stop for useless maintenance. On the
contrary, if the system suffers in case of minor malfunctions,
an attacker may spoof sensor values to hide anomalies and to
prevent
the proper monitoring of the Hyperloop system.
Another possible effect of an injection attack could be the
complete shutdown of tube parts’ by, e.g., opening a closing
depressurization valve, creating an interruption of the service
and potential accidents.

the wired

Since the tube covers long distances, possibly in different
states, it is also important to consider physical attacks which
can damage the communications. A malicious actor can
tamper with
the
communication if cables are exposed to external entities. All
the devices such as RAUs, which are placed along the tube,
need constant monitoring because the manumission of the
T2S communication could potentially have catastrophic
consequences.

connections

stop

to

6

In-Pod Security
Even if most of the management and computations occur
outside the pod,
to provide sensor
the capsule has
measurements and manage the actuators to execute the
station's orders. A DoS in the in-pod network could lead to a
consumption of resources and prevent or delay the reception
of critical messages. These urgent messages control critical
systems such as emergency stops or fire detectors. Hence
even a small delay in the packets could lead to accidents.
The capsule also controls many non-critical devices such as
ventilation and infotainment systems. Tampering with these
technologies can create discomfort to the users (e.g., losses
of connection, too high/low air temperature, turn off lights)
eavesdropping the
privacy
or
communication between the users and the access point. An
attacker gaining MitM capability in the in-pod network
could propagate false messages, creating inconsistencies in
the pod’s
alarm messages.
Alternatively, the malicious user could lead to dangerous
behaviors of the pod’s components (e.g., opening the door
while the pod is in movement), or tampering with the battery
management system to remove the power source.

compromise user

and hence

status,

false

by

User-to-(Devices in the) Station Security
A malicious user can exploit different attacks to impact U2S
security and privacy. Thanks to MitM and eavesdropping, an
evil user can steal sensitive data. Information on a specific
tracking,
user's habits may lead to profiling or user
representing a privacy violation. An attacker may also spoof
the U2S communication to create false messages. For
instance, an attacker may be able to bill another user for a
ticket or modify the information shared with a user on the
availability of free seats in a pod, thus preventing purchases.
Furthermore, the attacker may modify the information on the
pod for the purchased ticket, causing passengers to miss their
pods. Also, an attacker may modify the information that the
station shares with the user on scheduling and pod tracking,
thus causing traveling issues.

Attacks Countermeasures

The first line of protection of the system should follow the
best security practice and the security standards from the
system's design phase. These standards are applied by
industries but also by governments and researchers. Since
there are no security
technology,
Hyperloop is a novel
standards to support its design phase. However, Hyperloop
inherits different properties from other sectors, such as
automotive,
therefore the
railway systems, and aviation,
designer can rely on the existing standards. For instance,
automotive security policies are collected in different
standards such as AUTOSAR and ISO/SAE 21434. Instead,
industrial security standards are defined, for instance, in IEC
62443 and NCSC secure design principles.

Besides security standards, security mechanisms can be
applied to increase the overall security level of the system
and prevent attacks. Table 1 shows the list of the possible
countermeasures related to each attack previously described.

Communication
Link

Pod-to-Pod

Attack

Threat

Effect

Countermeasure

Impact

MitM, Spoofing,
Relaying,
Replaying

Impersonation, Information
Gathering, Vulnerability
Exploitation, Manipulation,
System Corruption, Loss of
Service

- Send messages with malicious information
to make the preceding or following pod
break or speed-up/down to cause collisions

- Disconnect a connected pod, or connect a

disconnected pod

Authentication,
Encryption

High

Denial of Service,
Flooding

System Corruption, Loss of
Service

- Pod unable to receive messages from other

pods

- Generated delays make received

information useless

Resource
management
recovery, Intrusion
Detection System

Medium

Location
Spoofing

Manipulation, System
Corruption

-

Inject false information on the location of
nearby pods to create collisions

Distance bounding,
Digital Signature

Pod-to-Tube

MitM, Relaying,
Replaying

Impersonation, Information
Gathering, Vulnerability
Exploitation, Manipulation,
System Corruption, Loss of
Service

- Sending fake commands to a pod or to the

tube

- Derail a pod
- Hijack a pod

Authentication,
Encryption,
Intrusion Detection
System

High

High

Denial of Service,
Flooding

System Corruption, Loss of
Service

- Disable or delay exchange of messages
between tube and pod (both ways)

- Prevent exchange of energy between the

tube and the pod

Resource
management
recovery, Intrusion
Detection System

Medium

Location
Spoofing

Manipulation, System
Corruption

- Create inconsistencies between pod’s real

and claimed locations

Distance bounding,
Digital Signature

Medium

Privacy violation

Private Data Leakage

- Track the location of a pod, together with

identifiers of on board users

Data
Anonymization,
Encryption

Tube-to-Station

MitM, Spoofing,
Relaying,
Replaying

Information Gathering,
Vulnerability Exploitation,
Manipulation, System
Corruption, Loss of Service

- Send malicious control messages that affect

the tube’s functioning (e.g.,
depressurization, current/air control for pods
levitation and maneuvers)

- Generate anomalies or spoofing the pod

Authentication,
Encryption,
Intrusion Detection
System

Low

High

information

- Shutdown parts of the tube
- Hide running anomalies

Denial of Service

System Corruption

- Prevent exchange of messages from T2S

and vice-versa

Physical
Tampering

System Corruption, Loss of
Service

- Cut the wired communication
- Tamper with the RAUs to interrupt the

service

Firewall, Intrusion
Detection System

Medium

Medium

Enforcement with
anti-tamper
materials, Anomaly
detector

MitM,
Eavesdropping,
Attacks to
authentication
system

Denial of Service,
Attacks to
authentication
system

Privacy violation,
Phishing

Private Data Leakage, Loss
of Service

-

Intercept and modify users communications
to the external network (e.g., Internet)

- Steal sensitive informations
- Prevent users to access the pod using the

purchased ticket

Intrusion Detection
System, Encryption,
Authentication,
Data
Anonymization

System Corruption, Loss of
Service

- Prevent user to exchange information with

the pod (mostly related to infotainment) and
so with the Internet

Resource
management
recovery,
Authentication,
Firewall

Low

Low

Private Data Leakage

- Steal private information of users in the pod

Encryption,
Authentication

Low

User-to-Pod

7

In-Pod-
Communications

MitM, Spoofing,
Relaying,
Replaying

Information Gathering,
Vulnerability Exploitation,
Manipulation, System
Corruption, Loss of Service

- Compromise in-pod critical and non-critical
systems (e.g., infotainment, ventilation,
light, emergency exits, fire detectors and
extinguishers)

Intrusion Detection
System, Integrity
check

Medium

Denial of Service,
Flooding

System Corruption, Loss of
Service

- Consume resources and prevent or delay the

reception of critical messages (e.g.,
malfunctions, emergency stops)

Firewall, Intrusion
Detection System

High

User-to-(Devices
in the) Station

MitM,
Eavesdropping

Private Data Leakage

- Steal sensitive information from the user

Low

Encryption,
Authentication,
Virtual Private
Networking

Spoofing, Attacks
to authentication
system

Manipulation, System
Corruption, Loss of Service

- Bill another user for a ticket
- Prevent users from booking a ticket (e.g.,

Encryption, Digital
Signature

Low

make the pod look full)

- Prevent user from reaching the legitimate

pod

Privacy violation

Private Data Leakage

- Tracking users by monitoring pod’s accesses
- Profiling users

Data
Anonymization

Low

Table 1 Possible attacks and threats affecting Hyperloop and the consequent effect on the system.

to

avoid

data manipulation

Instead, DoS attacks

To prevent MitM attacks, the most common solution is to
introduce encryption and authentication techniques in the
from
communication
unauthorized parties.
are very
challenging to prevent. Common strategies include resource
managers correctly allocating the memory to the critical
processes and redistributing the resources if a DoS attack is
detected. To prevent network attack, a common solution is
the implementation of
Intrusion Detection Systems to
identify malicious behaviors early and take accurate
is also possible to
the system.
decisions to protect
implement a good firewall in strategic points of the network
(e.g., the station or in the different access points) to increase
the perimetral protection of the network.

It

An important factor for preserving the system's function is
to ensure the correct localization of every pod. For this
reason, an attacker may try to spoof the pod's location to
alternate and compromise Hyperloop. Other
than the
previous measures to avoid spoofing, like encryption and
authentication, a common solution to prevent spoofing of
communication is the introduction of a distance bounding
protocol. This protocol measures the physical distance of an
entity by analyzing the expected response time. In this way,
the delay added by manipulating data or by a spoofed
position will be detected by the receiver. This protocol has
been widely used to prevent relay attacks and GPS spoofing.
Due to the distributed nature of the system, also the
physical
of Hyperloop opens potential
vulnerability surfaces. The most common solution to prevent
tampering is integrating anti-tampering material
physical
equipped with sensors that
identify attempts. Another
solution is to employ anomaly detector software to identify
the alteration of a process related to a compromised device.

infrastructure

To prevent user privacy leakages, a standard solution is to
anonymization in all communications
provide
involving
include
data. Possible
encryption and data aggregation. In the case of devices with

solutions

sensible

correct

8

limited capacity or time-constrained operations, differential
privacy represents a viable solution.

Conclusions and Future Directions

an

and

represents

innovative

promising
Hyperloop
technology that is still under development. Indeed, currently,
there are no official documents related to the system's
technical
implementation, which does not allow precise
analysis of the infrastructure. However, cybersecurity is a
continuous analysis process, which must be seriously
considered from the design phase. This requirement
is
emphasized since Hyperloop exhibits a large attack surface
comprising
physical
processes. Compromising the security of a transportation
system can dramatically impact the safety of the passengers
and the surrounding environment.

communications,

network,

and

This document represents the first work in the direction of
the analysis of the cybersecurity of the Hyperloop system. In
particular, we identified the main type of communication
characterizing the Hyperloop system and investigated
possible attacks and threats on the different parts of the
infrastructure. Then we discussed the best practices,
countermeasures,
to prevent potential
standards
catastrophic attacks. We reported how traditional attacks
could compromise the system's safety. Furthermore, we
discussed the privacy issues related to both users and the
infrastructure. For each of the identified vulnerabilities, we
also proposed possible countermeasures.

and

This analysis should be deepened in future works using
more precise technical details of Hyperloop. In addition, we
expect
that academia and industries will develop more
reliable communication and efficient protocols to support the
shortly. Future
Hyperloop
security researchers must also consider and include such
novel technologies.

high-speed communication

Transactions on Information Forensics and Security. He is
IEEE Fellow, ACM Senior Member, and Fellow of the Young
Academy of Europe.

(donadel@math.unipd.it)

Denis Donadel
received the
Master's Degree in Telecommunication Engineering from the
University of Padua, Italy, in 2020, where he is currently
pursuing the interdisciplinary Ph.D. in Brain, Mind, and
Computer science, from October 2021. He is also an NGI
Explorers Alumnus. His research interests lie primarily in
focusing on Vehicles
security,
Cyber-Physical Systems
security and Critical Infrastructures security.

received

the
Federico Turrin (turrin@math.unipd.it)
in Computer Engineering from the
Master’s Degree
University of Padova, Italy, in 2019, where he is currently
pursuing the interdisciplinary Ph.D. in Brain, Mind, and
Computer science, since October 2019. He has been visiting
researcher at SUTD Singapore in 2022. His research
interests lie primarily in Cyber-Physical System Security
with a particular focus on Industrial Control Systems
Security, Vehicles Security, and application of Machine
Learning techniques for Anomaly detection.

Acknowledgments
Denis Donadel
is supported by Omitech S.r.l., while
Federico Turrin is supported by a grant from the Cariparo
Foundation and Yarix S.r.l.. We would like to thank all of
them. We also thank Elisa Turrin (aka Upata) for the
graphical illustration.

References
[1] E. Musk, Hyperloop alpha, SpaceX. Hawthorne, CA, USA,

2013.

[2] HyperloopItalia.

[Online,

retrieved Dec. 2021]. Available:

https://hyperloopitalia.com/

[3] Hyperloop Transportation Technology. [Online, retrieved Dec.

2021]. Available: https://www.hyperlooptt.com/

[4] Delft Hyperloop. [Online, retrieved Dec. 2021]. Available:

https://www.delfthyperloop.nl/

[5] N. Falliere, L. O. Murchu, & E. Chien, W32. Stuxnet dossier.
White paper, Symantec Corp., Security Response, 5(6), 29,
2011.

[6] C. Miller and C. Valasek, Remote exploitation of an unaltered

passenger vehicle. Black Hat USA, vol. 2015, no. S 91, 2015.

[7] Reuters, Hackers breach Iran rail network, disrupt service.
[Online,
Available:
Jan.
https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/hackers-breach-ira
n-rail-network-disrupt-service-2021-07-09/

retrieved

2022].

[8] Virgin Hyperloop. [Online, retrieved Dec. 2021]. Available:

https://virginhyperloop.com/

[9] M. Janić, Estimation of direct energy consumption and CO2
emission by high speed rail, transrapid maglev and hyperloop
passenger
Journal of
Sustainable Transportation, 15(9), 1–22, 2020.

International

transport

systems.

[10] J. C. Chin, & J. S. Gray, Open-source conceptual sizing models
for
56th
AIAA/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and
Materials Conference (p. 1587), 2015.

passenger

hyperloop

pod.

the

[11] J. K. Noland, Prospects and Challenges of the Hyperloop
Transportation System: A Systematic Technology Review.
IEEE Access, 9, 28439–28458, 2021.

[12] A. Tavsanoglu, C. Briso, D. Carmena-Cabanillas, & R. B.
Arancibia, Concepts of Hyperloop Wireless Communication at
1200 km/h: 5G, Wi-Fi, Propagation, Doppler and Handover.
Energies, 14(4), 983. 2021.

[13] W. Hedhly, O. Amin, B. Shihada, & M. S. Alouini, Hyperloop
Communications: Challenges, Advances, and Approaches.
IEEE Open Journal of
the Communications Society, 2,
pp.2413-2435, 2021.

[14] N. Singh, J. Karhade, I. Bhattacharya, P. Saraf, P. Kattamuri, &
A. M. Parimi, On-board Electrical, Electronics and Pose
Estimation
7th
International Conference on Control, Automation and Robotics
(ICCAR) (pp. 223-230), 2021.

System for Hyperloop Pod Design.

[15] J. Zhang, L. Liu, B. Han, Z. Li, T. Zhou, K. Wang, D. Wang, &
B. Ai, Concepts on train-to-ground wireless communication
system for hyperloop: Channel, network architecture, and
resource management. Energies, 13(17), 2020.

Alessandro Brighente
(alessandro.brighente@unipd.it)
received the Ph.D. degree in Information Engineering from
the University of Padova in 2020. He has been visiting
researcher at Nokia Bell Labs, Stuttgart, Germany in 2019.
He has served as TPC for conferences including Globecom
and VTC. He is also guest editor for IEEE TII. His current
for
research interests
cyber-physical
vehicles,
communication networks, and blockchain.

and
autonomous

include
systems,

security

privacy

Mauro Conti (mauro.conti@unipd.it) is Full Professor at
the University of Padua, Italy. He is affiliated with TU Delft
and University of Washington, Seattle. He has been awarded
with a Marie Curie Fellowship (2012), and with a DAAD
for the IEEE
Fellowship (2013). He is Editor-in-Chief

9

