Nanoripple formation on GaAs (001) surface by reverse epitaxy during ion beam 
sputtering at elevated temperature 

Debasree Chowdhury, Debabrata Ghose* 

Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Sector – I, Block – AF, Bidhan Nagar, Kolkata 700064, India 

Abstract 

Self-organized  pattern  formation  by  the  process  of  reverse  epitaxial  growth  has  been 

investigated  on  GaAs  (001)  surfaces  during  1  keV  Ar+  bombardment  at  target  temperature  of 

4500C for a wide range of incident angles. Highly ordered ripple formation driven by diffusion 

instability is evidenced at near normal incidence angles. Concurrent sample rotation shows that 

the ripple morphology and its orientation do not depend on the incident beam direction; rather 

they are determined by the symmetry of the crystal face. 

Keywords: GaAs (001); Ar+ sputtering; Reverse epitaxy; Nanoripples; Ehrlich-Schwoebel barrier 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  

*Correspondence:  debabrata1.ghose@gmail.com  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Introduction 

Molecular  beam  epitaxy  (MBE)  has  recently  been  applied  to  the  growth  and  self 

assembly of three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures on various semiconductor substrates for 

a number of applications in the field of electronics and photonics [1, 2]. The origin of this 

phenomenon  is  attributed  to  an  intrinsic  instability  of  the  surface  in  the  presence  of  an 

extra  energy  barrier,  the  so-called  Ehrlich-Schwoebel  (ES)  barrier  [3,  4]  felt  by  diffusing 

adatoms  at  monoatomic  steps  where  they  bounce  back  instead  of  reaching  of  lower 

terraces.  As  the  interlayer  mass  transport  is  inhibited,  there  is  a  net  uphill  current 

perpendicular  to  the  step  direction  resulting  to  an  unstable  surface.  Such  atomistic 

mechanism,  termed  as  Villain  instability  [5],  leads  to  the  growth  of  fascinating  patterned 

morphologies following the symmetry of the crystalline surface.   

Another  method  for  nanostructure  formation  on  semiconductor  surfaces  is  the  low 

energy  ion  beam  sputtering  (IBS)  which  is  well-known  for  its  cost  effectiveness  and  short 

production time [6, 7]. Contrary to MBE, surface diffusion barrier and in particular ES barrier 

does  not  found  to  be  responsible  for  the  growth  of  surface  instability  in  IBS  of 

semiconductors.  Instead,  the  surface  curvature  dependent  sputtering  [8]  plays  the 

dominant  role  for  the  development  of  3D  nanostructures.  The  main  reason  behind  this  is 

the  amorphization  of  the  surface  during  ion  bombardment,  which  destroys  the  surface 

structure and the effects of ES barrier. It is, however, possible to re-activate the ES biasing if 

one dynamically  anneals  the disordered  surface by keeping  the  target temperature  above 

its  recrystallization  temperature.  Recent  experiments  [9  -  12]  showed  that  at  elevated 

target temperatures, i.e. under conditions of rapid damage annealing, ion beam erosion of 

2 

 
crystalline  semiconductors  can  show  an  inverse  homoepitaxial  growth  analogous  to  MBE. 

The  creation  of  excess  vacancies  by  sputtering  and  the  maintenance  of  terrace  step 

structure at high temperature can trigger the action of diffusion bias on surface vacancies 

so as to destabilize the vicinal surface with respect to the structure formation. In MBE, the 

active diffusion species is the adatoms which are incorporated at a higher rate at ascending 

steps  leading  to  the  growth  of  mound-like  structures.  On  the  contrary,  the  IBS  produces 

surface vacancies which are the main diffusing species and have a higher attachment rate at 

descending steps thereby leading to development of “troughs”, i.e. a reverse growth of the 

surface  structure.  Such  asymmetric  kinetics  for  the  attachment  of  vacancies  is  found  to 

have  stronger  destabilization  effects  compared  to  the  curvature-dependent  sputtering 

under certain bombardment conditions, e.g. at normal ion beam sputtering [9]. 

In this paper, we report highly ordered ripple formation on GaAs (001) surface under  1 

keV  Ar+  ion  bombardment  at  sample  temperature  of  4500  C  by  reverse  epitaxy.  We  have 

shown  experimentally  that  the  pattern  morphology  at  near  normal  incidence  angles  is 

exclusively  controlled  by  surface  diffusion  dynamics  especially  the  step-edge  barriers 

analogous to MBE. On the other hand, at grazing incidence angles the curvature-dependent 

sputtering mechanism is found to play the dominant role for the pattern formation.  

2.  Experimental 

The experiments were carried out in a high vacuum sputtering chamber with a residual 

pressure of 10-8 mbar. The ion beam system provides a broad ion beam of 4 cm diameter 

from an inductively coupled RF discharge ion source equipped with three graphite grid ion 

3 

 
 
optical system (M/s Roth & Rau Microsystems GmbH, Germany). The substrate holder has 

the  facility  of  tilting  the  sample  from            with  respect  to  the  normal  to  the  surface 

and also has the provision for azimuthal rotation around the surface normal up to the speed 

of 30 rpm. The GaAs (   ) wafers with a miscut of  0.50 were exposed to high purity Ar+ 

beam of 1 keV energy and were placed about  33 cm away from the  ion source. Care has 

been  taken  to  prevent  surface  contamination  with  metallic  impurities  from  the  chamber 

wall  and/or  the  ion  source  [13].  The  beam  current  density  was  about  1000  A  cm-2.  The 

sample could be heated up to 5000 C by a radiation heater mounted at the chamber top. 

The temperature was measured by a thermocouple. After irradiation, the sputtered surface 

was examined ex-situ in a Veeco NanoScope IV atomic force microscope (AFM) operating in 

the tapping mode with Si cantilevers of 10 nm nominal tip radius. 

3.  Results and discussion 

Figure  1  shows  the  AFM  images  of  1  keV  Ar+  irradiated  GaAs  (001)  surfaces  at  target 

temperature      of  4500C  and  at  incidence  angles    between  00  and  850.  The  bombarding 

fluence was fixed at 1  1019 ions cm-2. Development of surface patterns at different angular 

regime  is  clearly  visible.  For  comparison,  the  surface  morphology  at  normal  incidence 

bombardment and at room temperature (         ) is also presented, which shows a flat 

stable  surface.  The  rms  roughness  of  bare  GaAs  was  measured  to  be  0.162  nm  and  after 

irradiation  at  room  temperature,  it  reduces  to  0.109  nm,  i.e.  there  is  smoothing  of  the 

surface. Interesting changes of the surface morphology, however, occurs when the target is 

irradiated at elevated temperature. Highly ordered periodic ripples are found to develop at 

4 

 
        
normal  incidence  (  =  00)  of  ion  bombardment  [cf.,  Fig.  1(b)].  The  morphology  consists  of 

alternate  piled-up  elongated  terraces  with  nanogrooves  in-between  running  parallel  to 

〈   〉 direction. The width of the terraces is quite narrow (a few nm) being along the 〈   〉 

direction. With the increase of incidence angle the terrace width increases, but the shape 

becomes  increasingly  irregular.  Although  a  large  number  of  topological  defects  are 

produced, a clear anisotropy is still observed in the pattern.   

For  examining  the  symmetry  and  the  order  of  the  pattern,  the  fast  Fourier  transform 

(FFT) of AFM images are calculated and displayed in Fig. 2. The origin of the reciprocal space 

locates at the center of each spectrum. The FFT at room temperature irradiation exhibits a 

broad  range  of  spatial  frequencies  showing  a  random  structure.  For  the  FFTs  at  high 

temperature irradiation and incident angles up to 650, one can see two bright spots located 

along  the  horizontal  axis  with  the  origin  in-between.  These  spots  come  from  the  rippled 

surface  and  it displays  a  two-fold  symmetric  structure.  The  spot  radius,  which  is  inversely 

proportional to the correlation length, decreases as the incident angle progresses towards 

the  normal.  Also  the  two  spot  centers  are  separating  further,  indicating  the  reduction  of 

ripple  wavelength.  The  second  order  diffraction  spots  can  be  seen  for  bombardment  at 

smaller  incident  angles,  revealing  a  high  degree  of  order  for  the  ripple  pattern  at  near 

normal incidence angles.  

As the incident angles are increases, the symmetry becomes less and less prominent as 

the  two  spots  tend  to  merge  and  finally,  at  700  an  isotropic  structure  is  obtained.  In  the 

grazing incidence angles, i.e. in the angular region 750 - 850 the topographical pattern is not 

clearly discernible in real space, but the Fourier space showing an elliptic structure indicates 

5 

 
the  formation  of  an  anisotropic  morphology  with  the  wave  vector  perpendicular  to  the 

incident  beam  direction  independently  from  the  azimuthal  orientation  of  the  sample 

surface. 

In order to ascertain that the ripple structure at low incident angles originates from the 

crystallinity of the surface, we rotate the sample around the surface normal azimuthally at a 

constant speed of 5 rpm after tilting the surface at various  angles. This is equivalent to the 

system  of  a  fixed  sample  irradiated  uniformly  by  the  ion  beam  from  all  azimuthal  angles. 

The  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  3.  For  each tilted angle,  including    00  angle  of  incidence,  we 

found that the pattern orientation does not change under continuous rotation of the target, 

i.e.  ripple  forms  with  its  crest  remained  align  with  the  <  ̅ >  crystallographic  direction 

similar to that obtained for the non-rotating target. This clearly indicates that the formation 

of ripples is determined by the bombarded surface crystallography and not by the ion beam 

direction  with  respect  to  the  surface  normal.  On  the  other  the  hand  above  the  angle  of 

incidence  650,  the  anisotropy  is  smeared  out  by  rotation  and  the  pattern  exhibits  an 

isotropic symmetry as revealed from the corresponding FFT images. This shows that, for the 

latter case, the pattern formation is mainly dictated by the incident beam direction [13]. 

To analyze the statistical properties of the developed morphology, we extract the height 

data  from  the  AFM  images  (Fig.  1)  and  evaluate  the  height-height  correlation  function 

defined as   ( )   〈(       ) 〉, where    and    are heights of the surface at two locations, 

   and   ,  separated  by  a  distance   ,  and  the  bracket  〈

〉 denotes  averaging  over  pairs  of 

points  [14,  15].  For  the  patterned  structures  calculations  of    ( )  along  the  horizontal 

direction, shows a number of oscillations after the linear part of the curve. The value of   

6 

 
corresponding to the first minimum is designated as  , the dominant in-plane length scale, 

which  quantifies  the  separation  or  repeat  distance  between  dominant  features  of  the 

surface morphology. The surface roughness amplitude   is defined as the value of √  ( ) 

at the first local maximum. Plots of   ( ) as a function of   for different ion incidence angles 

  are  displayed  in  Fig.  4.  Periodic  oscillations  of    ( )  are  clearly  discernible  for 

bombardment up to the angle of 550 and the wavelength of the ripples evaluated from the 

position  of  the  first  local  minimum  is  found  to  vary  from  40  –  60  nm  [Fig.  5(a)].  The 

roughness amplitude   versus  [Fig. 5(b)] shows a bell-shaped type variation with a broad 

maximum in the angular region  = 45 – 550. 

Analysis  of  local  slope  distributions  provides  information  about  the  formation  of 

predominant  facets  of  the  ripple  structure.  The  two-dimensional  slope  distributions 

extracted  from  AFM  images  (Fig.  1)  are  shown  in  Fig.  6,  evidencing  the  selection  of  facet 

slopes. The projection of    along 〈   〉 direction peaks at well-defined values that depend 

on the incident angle . The evolution of the selected slopes as a function of  is plotted in 

Fig. 7. Globally the slope angle is found to be constant up to the incidence angle of   450, 

which  is  attributed  to  the  formation  of  well-defined  facets  of  the  ripple  structure.  A 

saturation  of  the  slope  around  200  identifies  the  development  of  the  facet  planes 

corresponding  to  {   }  (19.470)  planes  tilted  with  respect  to  the  (001)  surface.  In  the 

continuum description of kinetic instabilities, such a slope selection is linked to ES barriers 

and is determined by the nonlinear current  ⃗   that vanishes for a given value of the local 

slope  [16].  For    >  450,  the  slope  angle  decreases  showing  diminishing  strength  of  the 

diffusion instability. 

7 

 
The rippling of the surface observed in the angular range 00 - 650, can be understood by 

a  diffusion-biased  roughening  mechanism  in  the  presence  of  ES  barrier  [4,  5].  The 

supersaturated  vacancies  generated  by  sputtering  on  a  high  symmetry  surface  prefer  to 

stick to the lower terraces rather than ascending because of the ES barrier. These result in a 

net  downhill  current  leading  to  a  surface  instability  in  the  form  of  depressions  which 

subsequently coarsen and lead to the development of 3D morphology. This mechanism has 

been proposed  by Ou et al. [9, 12] to explain the evolution of  various types of  symmetric 

pattern  on  sputtered  Si  (001),  Ge  (001),  Ge  (111),  InAs  (001)  and  GaAs  (001)  surfaces. 

Irrespective  of  the  bombarded  beam  direction  with  respect  to  the  azimuth,  the  pattern 

prefers to remain aligned with the direction of the crystallographic axes characterizing the 

bombarded face  

The  strength  of  biased  diffusion,  however,  depends  on  the  vacancy  density  and  the 

degree of biasing in attachment at descending steps. The transition between diffusive and 

erosive regime can be induced by changing the ion beam conditions, e.g. the incident angle 

to  suppress  or  enhance  different  mechanisms  [17].  The  ES  instability  is,  found  to  be 

weakened  above  a  certain  critical  angle    650.  At  this  stage,  the  instability  due  to  the 

curvature  dependent  sputtering  is  greater  and  the  pattern  formation  is dominated  by the 

erosion  kinetics.  For  the  latter,  the  ion  beam  direction  dictates  the  growth  of  surface 

structure independently from the crystal orientation. The present results substantiate that 

obtained from single crystal metal sputtering experiments  performed earlier  by the group 

of Valbusa [17, 18]. 

8 

 
 
4.  Conclusions 

We  observe  instabilities  and  pattern  formation  on  ion  eroded  GaAs  (001)  surface  at 

elevated temperature arising from surface diffusion dynamics analogous to those observed 

in MBE. Highly ordered defect-free ripples develop at near-normal incidence angles (  00 – 

350) by 1 keV Ar+ bombardment at sample temperature of 4500 C. As the incident angle is 

increased up to 650, the ordering of the ripple structure, however, degrades but maintaining 

its orientation along the <  ̅ > direction. Above 650, the pattern vanishes and smoothening 

of the surface is observed, although in the reciprocal space a clear change of orientation of 

the  surface  structure  by  900  can  be  recognized.  Moreover,  the  sample  rotation  does  not 

alter the overall sputtered-morphology and the pattern orientation so long as the incident 

angle  remains  less  than  700.  Above  700,  the  rotation  induces  an  isotropic  structure.  The 

present  results,  thus,  show  that  at  low  angles  of  bombardment  the  kinetic  instability 

involves  with  a  diffusion  bias  vacancy  transport,  whereas  at  grazing  incidence  angles  the 

mechanism of curvature dependent sputtering governs the structure formation. 

Acknowledgements 

One  of  the  authors  (D.  G.),  the  Emeritus  Scientist,  CSIR,  thanks  CSIR  (Grant  No. 

21(0988)/13/EMR-II dated 30-04-2015), New Delhi for providing financial support. 

References 

[1] C. Tiechert, Phys. Rep. 365 (2002) 335. 

[2] S. Franchi,  G. Trevisi, L. Seravalli, P. Frigeri, Prog. in Crystal Growth and Characterization 

of Materials, 47 (2003) 166.  

9 

 
[3] G. Ehrlich, F. G. Hudda, J. Chem. Phys. 44 (1966) 1039. 

[4] R. L. Schwoebel, E. J. Shipsey, J. Appl. Phys. 37 (1966) 3682. 

[5] J. Villain, J. Phys. (France) I 1, 19 (1991).  

[6] J. M. García, L. Vázquez, R. Cuerno,  J. A. Sánchez-García, M. Castro, R. Gago, in Lecture 

Notes in Nanoscale Science and Technology, Vol. 5 (Ed. Z. M. Wang), Dordrecht, Springer, 

(2009). 

[7] W. L. Chan, E. Chason, J. Appl. Phys. 101 (2007) 121301. 

[8] R. M. Bradley and J. M. E. Harper, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 6 (1988) 2390. 

[9] X. Ou, A. Keller, M. Helm, J. Fassbender, and S. Facsko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 

016101. 

[10] D. Chowdhuri, D. Ghose, and S. A. Mollick, Vacuum 107 (2014) 23.  

[11] D. Chowdhuri, D. Ghose, S. A. Mollick, B. Satpati, and S. R. Bhattacharyya, Phys. Stat. 

Sol. (b), 252 (2015) 811.  

[12] X. Ou, K. –H. Heinig, R. Hübner,  J. Grenzer, X. Wang, M. Helm, J. Fassbender, and S. 

Facsko, Nanoscale, 7 (2015) 18928.  

[13] D. Chowdhuri, D. Ghose, B. Satpati, Mater. Sci. Engn. B 179 (2014) 1. 

[14] S. J. Chey, J. E. Van Nostrand, D. G. Cahill, Phys. Rev. B 52 (1995) 16696.  

[15] J. Kim, D. G. Cahill, R. S. Averback, Phys. Rev. B 67 (2003) 045404.  

10 

 
[16] A. Levandovsky, L. Golubovi ́, Phys. Rev. E 76 (2007) 041605. 

[17] G. Costantini, S. Rusponi, F. Buatier de Mongeot, C. Boragno, U. Valbusa, J. Phys.: 

Condens. Matter 13 (2001) 5875.  

[18] U. Valbusa, C. Boragno, F. Buatier de Mongeot, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 14 (20012) 

8153.  

Figure Captions: 

Fig. 1: The AFM topography of 1000 eV Ar+ irradiated GaAs (001) surfaces for a fixed fluence 

of 1  1019 ions/cm2 at different ion incidence angles. The sample image (a) is for    = 200 C; 

11 

 
 
 
 
(b) – (k) for    = 4500 C. The 〈   〉 and 〈  ̅ 〉 crystal directions are marked. The white arrow 

indicates the projection of the ion beam direction. The vertical length scale is in nm. 

Fig.  2:  The  First  Fourier  Transform  (FFT)  of  the  AFM  images  displayed  in  Fig.  1.  For 

comparison at the top left corner the FFT image at room temperature irradiation is shown. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3: Result of substrate rotation on the evolution of nanopatterns on GaAs (001) surface 

at different ion incidence angles for    = 4500 C. Energy of Ar+ = 1 keV; substrate rotation = 5 

rpm; fluence = 1  1019 ions/cm2. The vertical length scale is in nm. 

13 

 
Fig. 4: Calculated height-height correlation functions √  ( ) as a function of   for increasing 

incidence angles: (a) 00, (b) 100, (c) 250, (d) 350, (e) 450, (f) 550, (g) 650; energy of Ar+ = 1 keV; 

    of  GaAs  (001)  =  4500  C;  fluence  =  1    1019  ions/cm2.  The  roughness  amplitude  and  in-

plane length scale are indicated by arrows 1 and 2, respectively, for the curve (a). 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5: Evolution of (a) the rms roughness and (b) the wavelength from Fig. 4 as a function of 

ion fluence.  

Fig. 6: Slope angle distributions of the AFM images displayed in Fig. 1. For comparison, the 

slope  distribution  of  the  topography  at  room  temperature  irradiation  is  shown  at  the  top 

left corner. 

15 

 
 
Fig. 7: Evolution of the facet angle extracted from slope angle distributions [cf. Fig. 6], as a 

function of ion fluence.  

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 

 
 
 
