NOTE: THIS DOCUMENT IS A PRE-PRINT VERSION. YOU MAY USE IT AT YOUR OWN CONVENIENCE BUT ITS CONTENT MAY DEVIATE IN 
PLACES FROM THE FINAL PUBLISHED ARTICLE. FOR CITATION, REFER TO THE INFORMATION REPORTED IN THE INTRODUCTIVE TABLE 

Title 

Authors 

Affiliations 

Ref. 

DOI 

Abstract 

Optical diagnostics and mass spectrometry on the afterglow of an 
atmospheric pressure Ar/O2 radiofrequency plasma used for polymer 
surface treatment 
C. Y. Duluard, T. Dufour, J. Hubert, F. Reniers 
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Faculté des Sciences, Chimie Analytique et Chimie des Interfaces, Boulevard du 
Triomphe,2 – 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium  
30th-ICPIG, Belfast, Northern Ireland, 28th August – 2nd September 2011, C10 
http://mpserver.pst.qub.ac.uk/sites/icpig2011/301_C10_Duluard.pdf 
- 
In the context of polymer surface treatment, the afterglow of an atmospheric pressure Ar/O2 radiofrequency plasma 
is characterized by optical emission spectroscopy, laser induced fluorescence and mass spectrometry. The influence 
of the O2 gas flow rate and the source power on the plasma properties (gas temperature, Ar excitation temperature, 
relative  concentrations  of  O  atoms  and  OH  radicals)  are  evaluated.  We  show  that  for  plasma  torch-to-substrate 
distances  lower  than  6  mm,  the  afterglow  creates  a  protective  atmosphere,  thus  the  plasma  gas  composition 
interacting with the substrate is well controlled. For higher distances, the influence of ambient air can no longer be 
neglected and gradients in Ar, O2 and N2 concentrations are measured as a function of axial and vertical position. 

1. Introduction 

Non-equilibrium  atmospheric  pressure  plasmas  are  gaining  an  interest  for  thin  film  deposition,  surface  treatment  and  biomedical 

applications for their ease of handling and their low operating gas temperatures. The atmospheric pressure RF plasma torch studied for 

this paper is an Atomflo™-250D plasma source from Surfx Technologies LLC, running at a frequency of 27.12 MHz, and commercialized 

for plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition or for treating polymer surfaces to increase, for instance, their adhesion properties. 

Helium is normally the main plasma gas, but this has been replaced with argon in our laboratory. With the ever increasing rarity and 

expected rises in the price of helium, the choice to use argon has been consciously made to prepare for the  future scenario where 

helium becomes less commercially viable. The discharge is produced between two multi-perforated, parallel plate electrodes, 2.5 cm in 

diameter. The Ar and O2 gas flows range between 20-40 L/min and 0-30 mL/min respectively. The power injected in the discharge is set 

between 60 W and 100 W. The polymer samples to be treated are placed downstream of the two electrodes, at a distance varying from 

2 mm to 10 mm. This work aims to characterize by optical emission spectroscopy, laser induced fluorescence and mass spectrometry 

the Ar/O2 plasma afterglow interacting with polymer surfaces, in order to bring to light the mechanisms responsible for their surface 

modification. 

30th-ICPIG, Belfast, N. Ireland, 28th Aug.-2nd Sept. 2011, C10, http://mpserver.pst.qub.ac.uk/sites/icpig2011/301_C10_Duluard.pdf 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE: THIS DOCUMENT IS A PRE-PRINT VERSION. YOU MAY USE IT AT YOUR OWN CONVENIENCE BUT ITS CONTENT MAY DEVIATE IN 
PLACES FROM THE FINAL PUBLISHED ARTICLE. FOR CITATION, REFER TO THE INFORMATION REPORTED IN THE INTRODUCTIVE TABLE 

2. Characterisation of Ar/O2 plasma afterglow: influence of source power and 
O2 gas flow 

2.1. OH radicals, O atoms 

One species of interest, though probably in minor concentration, is the OH radical, which presents a high oxidative reactivity and may 

participate in the surface activation of polymers such as LDPE (low density polyethylene). It is easily detected in our conditions by optical 

emission  spectroscopy through the A2+,v’=0X2,v’’=0 emission band around 309 nm. Ar and  O2 gases purities are 99.999%, and 

several tests (including experiments presented in section 2) lead us to conclude that the OH production mostly comes from water that 

adsorbs on the inner walls of the plasma torch when the plasma is turned off. However, it seems that the radical concentration decays 

as the plasma on time increases, see figure 1. For all the experiments presented, water vapour was then injected under the electrodes 

to allow a better stabilization of the OH concentration. 

Figure  1  OH  (A2+,v’=0  X2,  v’’=0)  band 

emission intensity versus plasma on time, with 

and  without  injected  water  vapour  (Ar  30 

L/min,  80  W,  plasma  torch-to-substrate 

distance 5 mm) 

Laser induced fluorescence experiments were carried out to measure the relative OH concentration as a function of plasma parameters. 

The laser pumping was set on the P2(6) transition at 284.9 nm which excites the F2(5) level of the upper OH(A2+, v’=1) vibrational state 

from the F2(6) level of the ground OH(X2, v’’=0) vibrational state [1]. The laser pumped level can deexcite through several mechanisms: 

fluorescence, collisional quenching down to the fundamental, and rotational (RET) and vibrational energy transfer (VET). VET down to 

the OH (A2+, v’=0) level can be problematic since the resulting emission in the (0,0) band overlaps the (1,1) band emission measured. 

Simulation of energy transfers with the LASKIN program [2] indicated that the (0,0) band emission following VET was at most one order 

of magnitude lower than the (1,1) band emission for N2 and CO2 concentrations of 0.01%, which is the case for small plasma torch-to-

substrate distances (cf. section 2). Taking into account the variations in decay time due to collisional quenching, we could then obtain 

trends of the OH concentration in the fundamental state. Figure 2 shows the ratio of the integrated LIF signal to the fluorescence decay 

time, considered to be proportional to the OH concentration, versus plasma source power. Globally, the OH concentration decreases 

with an increase in plasma source power and is higher when O2 is injected with Ar. 

The major oxidative species expected is atomic oxygen [3]. OES spectra show a linear increase in excited state O3p density with the 

increase in O2 gas flow (cf. figure 3). Ideally, two-photon LIF measurements on the O radical could be undertaken to verify that the 

ground state density follows indeed this trend, because emission is greatly dependent on the electron energy distribution function. 

30th-ICPIG, Belfast, N. Ireland, 28th Aug.-2nd Sept. 2011, C10, http://mpserver.pst.qub.ac.uk/sites/icpig2011/301_C10_Duluard.pdf 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE: THIS DOCUMENT IS A PRE-PRINT VERSION. YOU MAY USE IT AT YOUR OWN CONVENIENCE BUT ITS CONTENT MAY DEVIATE IN 
PLACES FROM THE FINAL PUBLISHED ARTICLE. FOR CITATION, REFER TO THE INFORMATION REPORTED IN THE INTRODUCTIVE TABLE 

Figure 2 Relative OH concentration versus plasma source power (Ar 30 L/min, 

Figure 3 O3p density from measurement of the O844.6 nm 

plasma torch-to-substrate distance 5 mm) 

line intensity versus O2 gas flow 

2.2. Temperature measurements 

An Ar excitation temperature T13 was derived from the calculation of the Ar ground state density (level 1) and from the determination 

of the Ar 4p levels density (level 3) via absolute optical emission spectroscopy. Because of the energy difference between the ground 

state and the 4p levels (12.5-13.5 eV), this method is more accurate to obtain an excitation temperature in non-equilibrium plasmas 

[4]. A collisional radiative model is then needed to convert the estimated temperature T13 to an electron temperature. In this study, 

only variations in T13 with the plasma parameters are presented. 

The Ar ground state density was derived from the ideal gas law, P=n1kTgas, where P is 1 bar and Tgas was estimated by the OH rotational 

temperature. This equation was used assuming that the population of the Ar ground state was much greater than that of any other 

species in the plasma afterglow. To obtain the OH rotational temperature, the OH (0,0) band emission was fitted to simulated spectra 

using the software LIFBASE [5]. In all the conditions tested, Trot was found in the 400-440 K range. 

Figure 4 shows that T13 increases with O2 gas flow when greater than 5 mL/min, and increases with source power. It is thus possible that 

the O ground state density does not show a linear increase with the O2 gas flow as suggested by OES measurements. 

Figure  4  Ar  excitation  temperature  T13 

versus  O2  gas  flow  for  various  powers 

(Ar 30 L/min, plasma torch-to-substrate 

distance 5 mm) 

30th-ICPIG, Belfast, N. Ireland, 28th Aug.-2nd Sept. 2011, C10, http://mpserver.pst.qub.ac.uk/sites/icpig2011/301_C10_Duluard.pdf 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE: THIS DOCUMENT IS A PRE-PRINT VERSION. YOU MAY USE IT AT YOUR OWN CONVENIENCE BUT ITS CONTENT MAY DEVIATE IN 
PLACES FROM THE FINAL PUBLISHED ARTICLE. FOR CITATION, REFER TO THE INFORMATION REPORTED IN THE INTRODUCTIVE TABLE 

3. Influence of plasma torch-to-substrate distance 

The  plasma  torch-to-substrate  distance  greatly  affects  the  plasma  afterglow  properties.  Figure  5  shows  that  the  Ar  excitation 

temperature T13 decreases as the substrate is moved away from the plasma torch. 

Figure 5 Ar excitation temperature T13 versus plasma torch-to-substrate 

Figure 6 Ar, N2 and O2 relative concentrations  determined from mass 

distance (Ar 30 L/min, 80 W) 

spectrometry measurements at 2 mm from the plasma torch in central 

position (Ar 30 L/min, O2 0 mL/min, 80 W) 

Mass spectrometry measurements (cf. figure 6) reveal that, in a central position under the plasma torch, the plasma afterglow creates 

a protective atmosphere for distances smaller than 6 mm. For greater distances, N2 and O2 molecular concentrations rapidly increase. 

Accordingly, emission from the 2nd positive system of N2 is detected in the same range of distances (cf. figure 7). The decrease in emission 

intensity from 9 mm onwards must be related to the decaying Ar excitation temperature. 

Figure 7. N2 C3uB3g (0-2) band emission intensity versus plasma torch-to-substrate 

distance (Ar 30 L/min, O2 0 mL/min 80 W) 

Figure  8  Ar,  N2  and  O2  relative  concentrations  determined  from  mass  spectrometry 

measurements versus height and axial position in the plasma afterglow (Ar 30 L/min, O2 

0 mL/min 80 W) for a plasma torch-to-substrate distance of 9 mm 

30th-ICPIG, Belfast, N. Ireland, 28th Aug.-2nd Sept. 2011, C10, http://mpserver.pst.qub.ac.uk/sites/icpig2011/301_C10_Duluard.pdf 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE: THIS DOCUMENT IS A PRE-PRINT VERSION. YOU MAY USE IT AT YOUR OWN CONVENIENCE BUT ITS CONTENT MAY DEVIATE IN 
PLACES FROM THE FINAL PUBLISHED ARTICLE. FOR CITATION, REFER TO THE INFORMATION REPORTED IN THE INTRODUCTIVE TABLE 

Figure 8 presents Ar, O2 and N2 relative concentrations obtained from mass spectrometry measurements (H2O and CO2 molecules were 

included in the total composition) versus height and axial position from the center of the plasma torch for a fixed distance of 9 mm. 

Gradients in species concentrations are observed, the N2 concentration reaching 26 % close to the edge of the plasma torch at a height 

of 2 mm. 

4. Conclusions 

The influence of the O2 gas flow rate and the source power on the properties (gas temperature, Ar excitation temperature, relative 

concentrations  of  O  atoms  and  OH  radicals)  of  an  Ar/O2  plasma  afterglow  have  been  evaluated.  The  OH  concentration  is  seen  to 

decrease with an increase in plasma source power and is higher when O2 is injected. The Ar excitation temperature is seen to increase 

with O2 gas flow when greater than 5 mL/min, and increase with source power. Optical emission spectroscopy and mass spectrometry 

measurements show that for plasma torch-to-substrate distances lower than 6 mm, the afterglow creates a protective atmosphere. 

When  the  distance  increases,  the  Ar  excitation  temperature  decreases,  and  N2  and  O2  molecular  concentrations  rapidly  increase. 

Gradients in Ar, O2 and N2 concentrations are then observed. 

5. Acknowledgments 

This work was carried out in the framework of the Interuniversitary Attraction Pole program “Plasma Surface Interactions” financially 

supported by the Belgian Federal Office for Science Policy (BELSPO). 

6. References 

[1] L. Magne, S. Pasquiers, N. Blin-Simiand and C. Postel, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 40 (2007) 3112–3127 

[2] M. Letzgus, A. Brockhinke and K. Kohse-Höinghaus, LASKINv2 - A Simulation Program for Time-Resolved LIF-Spectra, University of 

Bielefeld, Faculty of Chemistry, Physical Chemistry I, http://pc1.uni-bielefeld.de/~laskin  

[3] M. Moravej, X. Yang, R. F. Hicks, J. Penelon, S. E. Babayan, J. Appl. Phys. 99 (2006) 093305 

[4] N. d. Vries, E. Iordanova, A. Hartgers, E. M. v. Veldhuizen, M. J. v d Donker and J. J. A. M. v. d. Mullen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 39 (2006) 

4194- 4203 

[5] J. Luque and D. R. Crosley, LIFBASE, Database and spectral simulation for diatomic molecules (v 1.6), SRI International Report MP-

99-009 (1999) 

30th-ICPIG, Belfast, N. Ireland, 28th Aug.-2nd Sept. 2011, C10, http://mpserver.pst.qub.ac.uk/sites/icpig2011/301_C10_Duluard.pdf 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
