Anomalous refraction based on acoustic metasurfaces with 

membranes 

Shilong Zhai, Changlin Ding, Huaijun Chen, Song Liu, Chunrong Luo and Xiaopeng Zhao 

Smart  Materials  Laboratory,  Department  of  Applied  Physics,  Northwestern  Polytechnical 

University, Xi’an 710129 P. R. China 

E-mail: xpzhao@nwpu.edu.cn 

Abstract 

The investigation of metasurface, which is of great current interest, has opened up new degrees of 

freedom  to  research  metamaterials.  In  this  paper,  we  propose  an  ultrathin  acoustic  metasurface 

consisting of a series of structurally simple drum-like subunit cells. Eight units with different sizes are 

selected  to  realise  discrete  transmission  phase  shifts  ranging  from  0  to  2π  at  3.5  KHz.  The  designed 

metasurface  is  capable  of  manipulating  sound  waves  at  will,  including  anomalous  refraction  and 

conversion  of  propagating  waves  into  surface  waves,  which  can  be  predicted  precisely  by  the 

generalized  Snell’s  law.  It  is  worth  noting  that  the  total  thickness  of  such  planar  metasurface  is 

approximately  λ/5,  which  may  be  beneficial  to  the  miniaturization  and  integration  of  acoustic 

equipment.   

PACS: 43.20. +g, 43.40. +s, 43.28. +h 

Keywords: metasurfaces, membranes, anomalous refraction, drum-like, ultrathin 

 
1. Introduction 

Metamaterials  as  artificial  structures  possess  many  unique  properties  compared  to  conventional 

materials  as  they  can  control  the  propagation  of  waves  arbitrarily  [1-12].  Among  numerous  types  of 

metamaterials,  there  is  one  species  of  structure,  referred  to  as  metasurface,  is  able  to  modulate  the 

orientation of wavefront with a very simple mechanism. Besides, the  thickness of this model is generally 

deep-subwavelength.  Recently,  metasurfaces  in  electromagnetics  have  given  rise  to  various  novel 

phenomena, for an example, planar lens for manipulating wavefront [13, 14]. Since electromagnetic waves 

and  sound  waves  share  many  important  wave  characteristics,  it  is  expected  that  acoustic  metasurfaces, 

being capable of controlling the direction of sound waves, can also be constructed.   

To  date,  many  different  approaches  have  been  proposed  to  achieving  acoustic  metasurfaces.  For 

instance, Zhao et al [15] accomplished the redirection of reflected waves via manipulating the impedance 

distribution of a flat metasurface reflector. To overwhelm the challenge of impedance-mismatch, Li et al 

[16] designed a hybrid labyrinthine structure by modifying refractive indexes at the interface, and realised 

the convergence of sound waves in three-dimensional space utilizing a planar acoustic lens. Another kind 

of  method  to  tailor  acoustic  wavefronts is  to  modulate  the  phase  of  waves in  the  transverse  direction  of 

metasurfaces.  Li  and  Tang  et  al  [17,  18]  obtained  anomalous  acoustic  reflection  and  extraordinary 

refraction phenomena through coiling-up-space structures. As for the effects of negative refraction, there 

are also many other examples taking advantage of metamaterials [19-21].   

Despite  the  described  advantages,  aforementioned  acoustic  metasurfaces  inevitably  suffer  from  the 

restriction of fabrication due to the complication of inner microstructures of coiling units. Moreover, the 

impedance  of  acoustic  rigid  wall  used  for  increasing  propagation  path  of  sound  waves  mismatches  with 

that of surrounding air, which unavoidably enlarges dissipation in metasurfaces. 

The  elastic  membrane  with  fixed  boundaries,  as  a  type  of  acoustic  metamaterial,  exhibits  various 

unique properties owing to the membrane’s weak elastic moduli [22-24]. Whereas, most people care about 

the huge transmission loss of membranes within the frequency range between two eigenmodes. In a recent 

report, it has been demonstrated that a thin membrane metamaterial can achieve almost total transmission 

of sound waves in air [25]. On the basis of this feature, in this paper, membranes are introduced into the 

construction of acoustic metasurfaces in an audible regime. A drum-like subunit, containing a cavity filled 

with  air  column  and  two  membranes  whose  boundaries  are  fixed  at  the  ends  of  cavity,  is  proposed. 

Acoustic  metasurfaces  constructed  with  such  simple  subunits  exhibit  high-efficiency  performances  in 

steering  acoustic  wavefronts.  Numerical  simulations  demonstrate  that  the  transmission  phase  of  this 

subunit can be modulated from 0 to 2π at will by appropriately optimizing its structure size. Consequently, 

the orientation of refracted waves can be manipulated via spatially varying the dimensions of subunits. As 

the  incident  angle  of  sound  wave  changes  from  -90°to  90°,  extraordinary  phenomena  including  the 

abnormal refraction and conversion of propagating waves into surface waves  are obtained in comparison 

with conventional materials. In addition, the thickness of considered metasurface is only about λ/5, which 

is promising for the miniaturization and integration of acoustic devices.   

2. Description of model 

Figure  1(a)  displays  the  schematic  diagram  of  the  acoustic  metasurface,  which  is  composed  of  a 

cavity filled with air and two membranes with boundaries fixed on the ends of side walls to seal the cavity. 

It can be seen that the present structure is identical with a drum. Acoustic beams impinge upon the front 

face of metasurface (dark green arrows), and emit from the rear side after passing through the air medium 

sealed in the cavity. The partial amplification drawing of membrane is given in the inset of figure 1(a). The 

mass  density,  Yang’s  modulus,  and  Poisson’s  ratio  for  membrane  are  920  kg/m3,  6.9×109  Pa,  and  0.36, 

respectively. The width w of membrane is an adjustable parameter, and the edge of membrane is fixed to 

the side wall. Membranes will not deform when there is no sound wave impinging onto it, but will vibrate 

when driven by the sound pressure of incident waves. A sketch of forced deformation is illustrated by the 

iridescent  curve  in  figure  1(a).  The  dark  green  and  fluorescent  green  arrows  refer  to  the  propagation 

orientation  of  incident  and  transmitted  waves,  respectively.  Intuitively,  the  proposed  structure  will 

introduce  extra  propagating  phase  delay  of  acoustic  waves  than  air,  which  will  be  demonstrated  by  the 

following simulated results. 

Figure 1. (a) Schematic of the subunit of proposed metasurface. The purple rectangles depict rigid walls with 

length l =20mm. The red lines represent tensioned membranes with thickness d = 0.07 mm (clearly displayed in the 

inset). (b) The transmission (triangular dots), and the real part (square dots) and imaginary part (circular dots) of 

effective acoustic impedance Z of subunit (with membrane width w = 8.271 mm) as a function of frequency. 

For the purpose of designing an acoustic metasurface with high transmission efficiency, it is crucial to 

keep the acoustic impedance of subunit matching with that of air. It will be demonstrated in the following 

portion that the impedance of reported drum-like subunit is approximate to that of background in a certain 

frequency range by appropriately adjusting the size of microstructure (i.e., the width w of membrane). This 

microstructure,  at  low  frequencies,  can  be  regarded  as  a  homogenized  medium.  The  effective  acoustic 

impedance  of  metasurface  can  be  derived  from  transmission  and  reflection  results  by  retrieving  the 

effective  parameter  from  a  homogeneous  medium  [26].  Figure  1(b)  indicates  the  numerically  calculated 

 
acoustic impedance Z of subunit with w = 8.271 mm as a function of frequency. The red lines with square 

dots  and  circular  dots  are  real  parts  and  imaginary  parts  of  Z,  respectively.  It  is  observed  that  good 

impedance matching is achieved near 3.46 KHz (Z = 1). The power transmission coefficient also supports 

this phenomenon, which shows almost total transmission near 3.46 KHz, as illustrated in figure 1(b). It is 

also found that for the frequencies above 3.55 KHz, the real parts of Z are close to 0, while the imaginary 

parts  increase  gradually,  which  implies  the  augment  of  attenuation  and  decline  of  transmission.  In  this 

study, we choose 3.5 KHz as the working frequency. 

Figure2. (a) The phase of transmitted wave as a function of the width w of membrane with the chosen 

wavelength of incident wave λ = 98 mm. The red circles refer to discrete phases of eight subunits having specific 

membrane widths. The phase shift between two adjacent subunits is kept to be 45°. (b) The left portion denotes the 

sketch of eight subunits, and the right portion illustrates the corresponding field pattern of transmitted phase. The 

phase changes can be observed directly. 

In  the  following  demonstrations,  we  will  show  that  the  generalized  Snell’s  law  can  be  realised 

through the present metasurface. By appropriately selecting the geometrical sizes, eight subunits are able to 

provide discrete phase changes ranging from 0 to 2π with an interval of π/4 between adjacent subunits. The 

widths  of  membranes  for  eight  subunits  are  optimized  to  be  10  mm,  8.577  mm,  8.271  mm,  7.969  mm, 

7.645  mm,  7.469  mm,  7.29  mm,  and  6.492  mm,  respectively.  The  phase  for  transmitted  waves  as  a 

 
function  of  membrane  width  is  plotted  in  figure  2(a).  To  interpret  the  gradient  variation  of  phase  more 

directly, figure 2(b) shows the phase field distributions of transmission for eight subunits. It can be clearly 

observed that these eight subunits are sufficient for realising phase shifts covering 2π. It is worth pointing 

that the proposed metasurface is ultrathin with thickness approximately equal to  λ/5. In what follows, we 

will verify that the constructed metasurface can manipulate the direction of transmitted acoustic beams.   

3. Design of different phase gradients for abnormal refraction 

Figure 3. The simulated snapshots of pressure map for refracted beams (incident waves propagate along the 

direction perpendicular to the interfaces). Phase gradients dφ/dx for (a), (b), (c), and (d) are 5.582 rad/m, 11.122 

rad/m, 24.511 rad/m, and 45.295 rad/m, respectively. The orange arrows refer to the direction of incident waves with 

a Gaussian beam. It can be seen that the refracted angle changes with phase gradient. 

The refracted angles are certainly determined by the classical Snell’s law, due to the conservation of 

momentum along the tangential orientation of interface. However, if an abrupt phase change is artificially 

introduced on the surface, an extra term depicting the phase gradient (dφ/dx) should be added to generalize 

the Snell’s law: 

, 

(1) 

22sinsinoutinddx 
 
where  θin and θout represent the incident and refracted angle, respectively.  Equation (1) indicates that the 

refracted angle can be modulated at will by selecting appropriate phase profiles along surface. The θout can 

be deduced from equation (1) as follows: 

. 

(2) 

To  verify  this  feature,  four  phase  gradient  profiles  (5.582  rad/m,  11.122  rad/m,  24.511  rad/m,  and 

45.295  rad/m)  are  chosen  under  the  condition  of  normal  incidence  θin  =  0°.  The  theoretical  refracted 

angles  derived  from  equation  (2)  are  5°,  10°,  22.5°,  and  45°,  respectively.  Simulations  of  the 

metasurfaces  mentioned  above  are  performed  with  the  COMSOL  Multiphysics.  Figures  3(a)-(d)  display 

the snapshots of pressure map of transmitted beams for these four phase configurations. A sound source is 

set  to  generate  the  plane  wave  with  a  Gaussian  distribution.  Refracted  angles  can  be  obtained  from  the 

wavefront  direction of transmitted  beams. In figure  4, it is of significance that the simulated results (red 

square dots) are in good qualitative agreement with theoretical values (black line) calculated via equation 

(2). 

Figure 4. The refracted angle as a function of phase gradient profile (the incident angle is kept to be 0°). The 

black line indicates calculated results from the generalized Snell’s law, and the red square dots denote the results 

obtained from figure 3. 

sin(sin)2outindacrdx 
 
The black line in figure  5 refers to the energy conversion efficiency for  refracted beam with phase 

profile dφ/dx = 5.582 rad/m, defined as a ratio of transverse integration of |p|2 of transmitted beam (along 

the  line  1000  mm  away  from  the  back  side  of  metamaterial)  to  that  of  incident  beam.  Although  this 

configuration is only designed for the frequency of 3.5 KHz, the efficiency is over 80% between 3.45 KHz 

and 3.7 KHz. The high conversion can be roughly explained as follows: in this frequency range, the phase 

gradients  of  adjacent  subunits  are  no  longer  equal  (π/4),  nevertheless,  there  are  still  phase  shifts  among 

them, which consequently leads to positive transversal momentums. This phenomenon can be attributed to 

the  average  effect  of  all  subunits  for  the  broadening  of  operating  frequency.  It  can  be  verified  from  the 

insets in figure 5 that abnormal refractions still exist at different frequencies, whereas the refracted angles 

deviate slightly from that at 3.5 KHz.   

Figure 5. The energy conversion efficiency as a function of frequency when dφ/dx is fixed to be 5.582 rad/m 

with a Gaussian beam impinging normally upon the surface. Insets: the temporal pressure fields of transmitted waves 

at three different frequencies. 

4. Relation between refracted angles and incident angles 

When  the  phase  configuration  is  fixed  to  be  dφ/dx  =  45.295  rad/m,  the  refracted  angle  can  be 

calculated  accurately  from  incident  angle  according  to  the  generalized  Snell’s  law.  For  example,  the 

refracted  angle  θout  =  45°corresponds  to  the  incident  angle  θin  =  0°,  as  manifested  in  figure  6(a).  In 

 
addition, the θout 

increases with the increment of θin. However, as θin 

reaches a certain critical angle θcrit, 

will increase to 90°, implying that the propagating wave is converted into surface wave whose surface 

θout 

wave  number  kx  is  exactly  the same  as  k0.  At this  moment,  the  propagating  wave  vector  along  Y-axis  is 

.  In  this  situation,  the  critical  incident  angle  θcrit  =  arc  sin(1-45.295/k0)/6.28×360°= 

17.06°. In other words, the refracted angle increases monotonically when incident angle increases from 

-90°to  17.06°,  as  illustrated  in  figure  6(b)  (the  left  side  of  gray  region).  The  red  square  dots  indicate 

simulated results extracted from the polar plots of refracted beams, as shown in figure 6(a), and the black 

solid line represents theoretical curves calculated  by equation (2). It is seen that simulated results follow 

almost exactly the theoretical predictions. Note that, along with the variation of θin from -45°to 0°, the 

sign of refracted angle is contrary to that of incident angle, which means both of them are  located on the 

same  side  of  normal.  Figure  8(a)  describes  the  simulated  transient  image  of  sound  pressure  for  incident 

angle  of  -10°and  exhibits  the  negative  refraction  phenomenon  clearly.  For  the  incident  angles  ranging 

from 0°to 17.06°, θout is on the opposite side of normal with θin, as manifested in figure 8(b).   

Figure 6. (a) A polar plot of simulated acoustic pressure fields of transmitted beams (1000 mm away from 

metasurface) at different incident angles. The phase gradient is chosen to be 45.295 rad/m. A Gaussian beam is 

incident onto the surface. The amplitudes of acoustic pressures are normalized. It is regulated in this paper that, if the 

incident beams are on the right side of normal, the sign of θin is ‘+’; otherwise the sign is ‘-’. Rules for θout are as 

00yxkkk 
opposed to that for θin, as shown in the inset. (b) The variation of θout with θin. The black line and red square dots refer 

to theoretical and simulated results, respectively. The gray region indicates that the refracted angles do not exist (i.e., 

the metasurface is opaque for incident angles ranging from 17.06°to 24.45°). 

Further increasing θin 

will result in surface wave, of which the wave number kx will be larger than k0. 

In such a case, the wave vector component ky is imaginary, i. e. the sound waves propagating along Y-axis 

are evanescent waves. For instance, when the incident angle is 20°, the surface wave number kx = k0 sinθin 

+ dφ/dx = 67.2 rad/m, which is larger than that in air (k0 = 64.08 rad/m). As a result, the transmitted waves 

can  only  travel  along  the  surface.  Figure  7  displays  a  pressure  field  pattern  of  transmitted  waves  as  the 

angle of incident beam is  20°. It is found that the propagating waves are converted into surface waves 

along X-axis (red arrow) after incident waves impinging upon the sample (blue arrows). 

Figure 7. Conversion of propagating waves into surface waves near the metasurface with phase gradient dφ/dx 

= 45.295 rad/m. The blue and red arrows indicate the direction of incident and refracted beams respectively with 

incident angle θin = 20°. 

It is worth to note that, as the phase profile dφ/dx = 45.295 rad/m, the period of metasurface (138.648 

mm) is larger than the working wavelength (98 mm). In this situation, the non-local effects generated by 

periodicity  cannot  be  neglected.  Thus  the  proposed  metasurface  can  also  be  regarded  as  a  1D  phononic 

crystal  that  is  able  to  change  the  phase  of  sound  waves.  The  lattice  element  is  constructed  of  proposed 

subunits  with  period  T  =  138.648  mm,  and  the  created  phase  gradient  is  dφ′/dx  =  2π/T.  Under  this 

assumption, the generalized Snell’s law can be modified as follows: 

 
, 

(3) 

where m is determined from the momentum  matching on surface. For incident angles below θcrit, m = 0. 

When θin 

is above θcrit, the equation (3) can be satisfactorily fitted with m = -3. In this case, there is another 

critical  angle  θ′crit  =  24.45°.  As  θin  increases  from  θcrit 

to  θ′crit,  the  refracted  angles  do  not  exist  (as 

depicted by the gray region in figure 6(b)), which implies that the transmitted acoustic beams are surface 

waves.  For  the  case  of  θin  >  θ′crit,  negative  refraction  effects  appear  again,  as  shown  in  figures  6(b)  and 

8(c). 

Figure 8. Snapshots of pressure field for three different incident angles (-10°, 10°, and 40°) with phase 

profile dφ/dx = 45.295 rad/m. The black arrows represent the plane waves incident with Gaussian beams, and the red 

arrows denote transmitted beams. It can be seen that, apart from the transmitted waves propagating along red arrows, 

there are also a few parts of energy traveling along other directions, which has been interpreted in detail in reference 

5. Conclusion 

[27]. 

In summary, we numerically demonstrate a novel acoustic metasurface composed of simple subunits 

to manipulate refracted beams at will.  In order to realize the transmission phase shifts from  0 to 2π, the 

subunits are made up of two-layer elastic membranes and a cavity with different dimensions. The matching 

22sinsinoutinddmdxdx 
 
of  acoustic  impedance  of  metasurfaces  with  that  of  air  allows  high  transmission  efficiency.  With  the 

appropriate modulation of phase gradients and change of incident angles, extraordinary properties such as 

abnormal refractions and conversion of propagating waves into surface waves can be accomplished. With 

the simplicity of constructing these metasurfaces, a similar design can be expanded to three-dimensional 

case. The strategy presented in this work  provides a new clue for the preparation of ultrathin slab lenses 

and acoustic switches. 

Method of simulations 

All simulated results in this paper are obtained via the finite Element Method based on commercial 

software COMSOL MultiphysicsTM 4.3 b. Materials used in the simulation are air as a propagation medium, 

side  walls  as  acoustic  rigid  boundaries,  and  elastic  membranes.  Plane  wave  radiation  and  the  periodic 

boundary condition are imposed for the calculation of transmission phases of subunits. For the simulation 

of  transient pressure fields,  background  pressure field  with  a  Gaussian  shape  is employed,  and  perfectly 

matched layers are utilized to eliminate the interference from reflected waves. 

Acknowledgments 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  National  Natural  Science  Foundation  of  China  under  Grant  Nos. 

50936002, 11174234 and 51272215 and the National Key Scientific Program of China (under project No. 

2012CB921503) 

References 

[1] Liu H, Zhao X P, Yang Y, Li Q W and Lv J 2008 Adv. Mater. 20 2050 

[2] Shen H J, Pa¨ıdoussis M P, Wen J H, Yu D L, Cai L and Wen X S 2012 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 45 

285401 

[3] Li C H, Jia H, Ke M Z, Li Y X and Liu Z Y 2014 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 47 135102 

[4] Jin Y B, Bonello B and Pan Y D 2014 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 47 245301 

[5] Liu B Q, Zhao X P, Zhu W R, Luo W and Cheng X C 2008 Adv. Funct. Mater.18 3523 

[6] Novitsky A and Qiu C W 2014 Phys. Rev. A 90 053815 

[7] Ding C L and Zhao X P 2011 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 44 215402 

[8] Song K, Lee S H, Kim K, Hur S and Kim J 2014 Sci. Rep. 4 4165 

[9] Fleury R, Sounas D L, Sieck C F, Haberman M R and Alù A 2014 Science 343 516 

[10] Zhu J, Chen Y Y, Zhu X F, Garcia-Vidal F J, Yin X B, Zhang W L and Zhang X 2013 Sci. Rep. 3 

1728 

[11] Song K, Zhao X P, Liu Y H, Fu Q H and Luo C R 2013 Appl. Phys. Lett. 103 101908 

[12] Degiron1 A and Smith D R 2014 Phys. Rev. E 89, 053203 

[13] Chen X, Huang L, M€uhlenbernd H, Li G, Bai B, Tan Q, Jin G, Qiu C W, Zhang S and Zentgraf T 

2012 Nat. Commun. 3 1198 

[14] Kang M, Feng T, Wang H and Li J 2012 Opt. Express 20 15882 

[15] Zhao J J, Li B, Chen Z N and Qiu C W 2013 Appl. Phys. Lett. 103 151604 

[16] Li Y, Yu G K, Liang B, Zou X Y, Li G Y, Cheng S and Cheng J C 2014 Sci. Rep. 4 6830 

[17] Li Y, Liang B, Gu Z M, Zou X Y, Cheng J C 2013 Sci. Rep. 3 2546 

[18] Tang K, Qiu C Y, Ke M Z, Lu J Y, Ye Y T and Liu Z Y 2014 Sci. Rep. 4 6517 

[19] Feng L, Liu X P, Lu M H, Chen Y B, Chen Y F, Mao Y W, Zi J, Zhu Y Y, Zhu S N and Ming N B 

2006 Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 014301 

[20] Zhai S L, Chen H J, Ding C L and Zhao X P 2013 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 46 475105 

[21] Chen H J, Zeng H C, Ding C L, Luo C R and Zhao X P 2013 J. Appl. Phys. 113 104902 

[22] Yang Z, Dai H M, Chan N H, Ma G C and Sheng P 2010 Appl. Phys. Lett. 96 041906 

[23] Naify C J, Chang C M, McKnight G and Nutt S R 2012 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 132 2784 

[24] Ma G C, Yang M, Xiao S W, Yang Z Y and Sheng P 2014 Nature Mater. 13 873 

[25] Park J J, Lee K J B, Wright O B, Jung M K and Lee S H 2013 Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 244302 

[26] Fokin V, Ambati M, Sun C and Zhang X 2007 Phys. Rev.B 76 144302 

[27] Tang K, Qiu C Y, Ke M Z, Lu J Y, Ye Y T and Liu Z Y 2014 Sci. Rep. 4 6517 

Figure captions 

Figure 1. (a) Schematic of the proposed subunit of metasurface. The purple rectangles depict rigid walls with length l 

=20mm. The red lines represent tensioned membranes with thickness d = 0.07 mm (clearly displayed in the 

inset).  (b)  The  transmission  (triangular  dots),  and  the  real  part  (square  dots)  and  imaginary  part  (circular 

dots) of effective acoustic impedance Z of subunit (with membrane width w = 8.271 mm) as a function of 

frequency. 

Figure2. (a) The phase of transmitted waves as a function of the width of membrane w with the chosen wavelength of 

incident  wave  λ  =  98  mm.  The  red  circles  refer  to  discrete  phases  of  eight  subunits  having  specific 

membrane  width.  The  phase  shift  between  two  adjacent  subunits  is  kept  to  be  45°.  (b)  The  left  portion 

denotes sketches of eight subunits, and the right portion illustrates the corresponding phase field pattern of 

transmitted waves. The phase changes can be observed directly. 

Figure 3. The simulated snapshots of pressure map for refracted beams (incident waves propagate along the direction 

perpendicular  to  interfaces).  Phase  gradients  dφ/dx  for  (a),  (b),  (c),  and  (d)  are  5.582  (rad/m),  11.122 

(rad/m),  24.511  (rad/m),  and  45.295  (rad/m),  respectively.  The  orange  arrows  refer  to  the  direction  of 

incident waves with a Gaussian beam. It can be seen that the refracted angles change with phase gradients. 

Figure 4. The refracted angle as a function of phase gradient profile (the incident angle is kept to be 0°). The black 

line indicates calculated results from the generalized Snell’s law, and the red square dots denote the results 

from figure 3. 

Figure 5. The energy conversion efficiency as a function of frequency when dφ/dx is fixed to be 5.582 (rad/m) with a 

Gaussian  beam  impinging  normally  upon  the  surface.  Insets:  the  temporal  pressure  fields  of  transmitted 

waves at three different frequencies. 

Figure  6.  (a)  A  polar  plot  of  simulated  acoustic  pressure  fields  of  transmitted  beams  (1000  mm  away  from 

metasurface)  at  different  incident  angles.  The  phase  gradient  is  chosen  to  be  45.295  (rad/m).  A  Gaussian 

beam is incident onto the surface. The amplitudes of acoustic pressure are normalized. It is regulated in this 

paper that, if the incident beams are on the right side of normal line, the sign of θin is ‘+’; otherwise the sign 

is ‘-’. Rules for θout is as opposed to that for θin, as shown in the inset. (b) The variation of θout with θin. The 

black  line  and  red  square  dots  refer  to  theoretical  and  simulated  results  respectively.  The  gray  region 

indicates that the refracted angles do not exist (i.e., the metasurface is opaque for incident angles ranging 

from 17.06°to 24.45°). 

Figure  7.  Conversion  of  propagating  waves  into  surface  waves  near  the  metasurface  with  phase  gradient  dφ/dx  = 

45.295 (rad/m). The blue and red arrows indicate the direction of incident and refracted beams respectively 

with incident angle θin = 20°. 

Figure 8. Snapshots of pressure  field for three different incident angles (-10°, 10°, and 40°)  with phase profile 

dφ/dx = 45.295 (rad/m). The black arrows represent the plane wave incident with a Gaussian beam, and the 

red arrows denote transmitted beams. It can be seen that, apart from the acoustic waves propagating along 

red arrows, there are also a few parts of energy traveling along other directions, which has been interpreted 

in detail in reference [27]. 

 
