Observation of electron excitation into silicon conduction band  

by slow-ion surface neutralization 

S Shchemelinin and A Breskin 

Department of Astrophysics and Particle Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, 7610001 Rehovot, 

Israel 

E-mails: sergei.shchemelinin@weizmann.ac.il,  amos.breskin@weizmann.ac.il. 

Abstract 

Bare reverse biased silicon photodiodes were exposed to 3eV He+, Ne+, Ar+, N2+, N+ and H2O+ ions. In all cases an 
increase  of  the  reverse  current  through  the  diode  was  observed.  This  effect  and  its  dependence  on  the  ionization 
energy of the incident ions and on other factors are qualitatively explained in the framework of Auger-type surface 
neutralization  theory.  Amplification  of  the  ion-induced  charge  was  observed  with  an  avalanche  photodiode  under 
high applied bias. The observed effect can be considered as ion-induced internal potential electron emission into the 
conduction band of silicon. To the best of our knowledge, no experimental evidence of such effect was previously 
reported. Possible applications are discussed. 

Keywords:  auger  ion  neutralization,  ion  interaction  with  surfaces,  ion-induced  electron  emission, 
detection of slow ions, solid state detectors, ion deceleration. 

1.  Introduction 

When  an  ion  of  very  low  kinetic  energy  is  neutralized  at  a  solid  surface,  its  potential  energy 

(corresponding to the ionization energy of the parent atom or molecule) is released; most of this energy is 

transferred  to  electrons  of the  solid  via  Auger  neutralization  [1].  A  well-known  consequence  of  such  a 

process  is  the  ejection  of  electrons  from  the  solid  into  vacuum,  referred  to  as  potential  ion-electron 

emission; this term is derived from the fact that the process is due to the ion’s potential energy, while its 

kinetic energy  does not play here any significant role. This phenomenon was studied both theoretically 

and  experimentally  since  the  1930s  [2-4].  A  detailed  theoretical  study  of  ion  Auger  neutralization  at 

silicon and germanium surfaces followed by electron emission into vacuum was made by Hagstrum [1]. 

He  suggested  that,  in  some  cases,  electrons  may  only  be  excited  into  the  conduction  band  via  Auger 

neutralization without their ejection to vacuum. This prediction was out of the mainstream of his research 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that  was  rather  focused  on  electron  emission  ‒  as  a  tool  for  surface  studies  (e.g.  in  ion-neutralization 

spectroscopy  [5]).  Nevertheless,  charge  carriers  remaining  in  the  conduction  band  should  affect  the 

solid’s conductivity properties. Such effect could for example pave the way to novel detector concepts of 

slow  ions  and  neutral  metastable  atoms  and  molecules.  In  this  letter  we  report  on  experimental 

observations of an increase in silicon conductivity due to neutralization of low-energy ions at its surface. 

No experimental evidence to that has been reported, to the best our knowledge, in literature. 

2.  Experiments 

2.1.  Samples selection 

The  experiments  performed  required  Si  samples  with  low  concentration  of  charge  carriers  in  its 

conduction band ‒ to enhance sensitivity to the desired effect. Such low concentration can be obtained in 

reverse-biased  diodes.  Therefore,  in  this  first  study,  we  opted  for  commercially-available  bare 

photodiodes, with the thinnest possible dead-layers. The latter condition is a prerequisite for the efficient 

detection  of  electrons  excited  to  the  conduction  band  by  surface  neutralization.  In  the  diode  selection 

process we relied on the UV cutoff wavelength, bearing in mind that the thinner the dead-layer the shorter 

is the UV cutoff wavelength [6]. The chosen photodiodes were Hamamatsu S9904 (referred below as PD) 

and Advanced Photonix APD 197-70-73-520 (referred below as APD); they were slightly modified for us 

by  the  manufacturers:  Hamamatsu  PD  was  manufactured  without  its  usual  central  hole  and  Advanced 
Photonix APD ‒ without anti-reflection coating1. 

2.2.  Experimental procedure 

The selected photodiodes were irradiated with 3eV positive ions: He+, Ne+, Ar+, N2

+, N+ and H2O+. A 

conceptual scheme of the performed experiment and an example of a typical result are shown in figure 1. 
The ions were generated by a Collutron2 Ion Gun G1 coupled to a home-made ion decelerator ‒ drscribed 

in  more  detail  in  secttion  2.3.  For  proper  dark  current  subtraction,  a  beam-chopper  was  implemented, 

periodically  switching  the  ion  beam  on  and  off  the  target.  The  beam  was  directed  onto  the  sensitive 

surface  of  the  reversed-biased  photodiode;  the  currents  I1  and  I2  from  its  two  sides  were  measured,  as 

depicted in figure 1(a). An example of the measured currents is shown in figure 1(b). I2 depends on the 

concentration  of  the  charge  carriers  in  the  depleted  region  and  can  be  considered  as  a  sum  of  the  dark 

1 See the prototype parameters correspondingly  at  www.datasheetarchive.com/S9904/Datasheets-
IS69/DSAH00186682.html and www.chipfind.net/datasheet/photonix/1977073520.htm 

2 www.colutron.com 

2 

 
                                                 
  
 
current Idark,  and  the  expected  ion-induced  conductivity  current  Icond.  From  the  balance  of  the  incoming 

ions current Iion, I1 and I2 one can conclude that: 

(1) 

The  observed  drift  of  I2  in  figure  1  (b)  indicates  a  small  variation  of  Idark  during  the  measurements 

(~0.05% per minute), that did not affect the results. Iion measured at the sample was typically in the range 

of 0.3 – 3 nA. 

Figure  1. Scheme of the measurements with a chopped ion beam (a) and an example of the results 
(b),  averaged  over 163  records.  Iion  is the  current of  incoming  ions,  Idark  is  the  background current 
through the diode, and Icond is the current of the ion-induced conductivity. 

2.3.  Slow-ions generation 

A scheme of the experimental setup providing a beam of mass-selected slow ions, of kinetic energies 

down to a few eV, is shown in figure 2.  The ion beam was generated by a modified by us Colutron ion-

gun system G1. The beam from the ion source,  composed of various ion species, was accelerated up to 

about 1 keV and entered a Wien velocity filter ‒ tuned on a given ion mass. The mass-selected ions were 

directed onto the surface of the  investigated sample via a stack of focusing and decelerating electrodes; 

the sample was kept at ground potential. In this setup, a potential U0 of a few volts (above ground) was 

applied to the ion source, whereas the potentials at the accelerator’s cathode, the velocity filter and all the 

parts preceding the end station were kept at the accelerating potential Uacc with respect to the ion source (-

1kV  in  this  work).  In  that  way  the  kinetic  energy  of  q-charged  ions  in  the  velocity  filter  was  1  keV, 

3 

condiondarkIIII1 
                                                        
  
 
 
 
 
regardless of U0; after deceleration, their energy  E0=q*U0 at the grounded sample did not depend on Uacc. 

This allowed for varying E0 without re-tuning the velocity filter. 

Figure 2. A general scheme of the ion acceleration-deceleration setup. The sample at the end station 
is  irradiated  by  slow  mass-selected  ions  of  energy  E0=qU0.  The  potentials  at  different  parts  are 
given in parenthesis (See text). 

In  this  setup  the  velocity  filter  operated  in  an  “angle-shift”  mode,  in  which  the  selected  ions  at  its 

output were deflected  off the acceleration-stage axis by 4 degrees (figure 2). This significantly reduced 

the amount of residual light from the ion source as well as the neutral fraction of the beam reaching the 

sample;  both  would  cause  a  significant  background  current  though  the  sample  in  a  usual  zero-degree 

aligned  system.  For  improving  the  mass  resolution,  the  setup  included  a  drift  tube,  having  a  mass-

selecting aperture at its end. The distance between the sample and the deceleration system was dictated by 
the short focus of the latter. The vacuum level in the end station was maintained below 3·10-7 mbar during 

experiments. 

Figure  3.  The  decelerating  electrode  system. 
Mass-selected  ions  enter  the  electrode  system 
with  their  kinetic  energy  of  1000  eV;  after 
further  acceleration  and  deceleration  they  are 
focused  onto  the  sample  –  kept  at  ground 
potential.  Their  final  energy  is  defined  by  the 
ion-source potential U0 (see text).  

The deceleration system with the beam chopper and the sample location  are  shown in  figure 3. The 

electrode  assembly  was  manufactured  by  us  according  to  the  Colutron  Research  Corporation 

recommendations [7]. The chopper was designed as a cylindrical electrode cut into two halves along its 

4 

 
 
axis (see insert in figure 3). In a “beam on” situation, the two halves were kept under the same potential, 

with the chopper operating as an electrode focusing the beam onto the sample; in the “beam off” position, 

a potential difference was applied between the two parts, with the ions getting deflected off the sample. 

The chopper was placed close to the sample, to minimize the effects of undesirable “background” currents 

(see above).  

3.  Results and discussion 

Two types of experiments were performed: (1) with both diodes in “charge-collection” mode (without 

gain in the APD) and (2) with the APD in a “multiplication” mode. In the charge-collection mode (1) the 

measurements were performed according to the scheme in figure 1(a). The applied reverse bias was about 

10 mV for the  PD and about 1 V for  the APD; at this applied voltage the APD operated as a standard 

photodiode without avalanche gain. In all cases, a pronounced increase of the reverse diode current was 

observed under ion-beam impact on the diode surface, (see figure 1(b)). The ratio  = Icond/Iion is defined 

Figure  4  .  Response  of  the  Hamamatsu  PD  and  Advanced  Photonix  APD  (reversed-bias  1V)  to 
irradiation with 3eV ions of different ion species, vs their ionization energy Ei (shown on top for the 
various species). The values of  =Icond/Iion are shown for reverse conductivity current Icond trough 
the  diode,  induced  by  incident  ion  current  Iion.  The  dashed  curves  are  linear  fits.  The  vertical 
dashed  lines  show  the  energy  thresholds  for  the  Auger  neutralization  and  electron  emission  into 
vacuum, calculated according to Hagstrum theory[1]. 

5 

 
as the value characterizing the response of the diode to incident ions. It represents the number of collected 

secondary  electrons  (in  the  conduction  band)  per  single  ion  neutralized  at  the  surface.  The  measured 

values of  are presented in figure 4 versus the ionization energy Ei, carried by the different incident-ion 

species. 

The error bars in figure 4  are of ±10% for He+ and significantly larger for other incident-ion species, 

of lower Ei. values. The origin of the very large observed fluctuations for the heavier ions is yet unknown 

‒  requiring    further  investigations;  their    dependence  on  Ei  might  be,  for  example,  due  to  surface 

impurities. Nevertheless, in spite of the observed fluctuations, one can clearly observe in these first results 

two notable features: (1) significantly (about tenfold) larger values of  for the PD than for the APD and 

(2)  an  increase,  in  both  samples,  of   with  Ei.  Both  features  can  be  explained  in  the  framework  of  an 

Auger-type neutralization theory. The measured value  can be considered as the product of two factors: 

the  efficiency  of  creating  a  charge  carrier  in  the  ion-neutralization  process  and  the  probability  of  the 

charge-carrier survival  before its  collection  at  the  diode’s  electrodes  (the  dead-layer  effect). To  explain 

(1) it is suggested that the PD has a thinner dead-layer compared to the APD, as the former was specially 

designed  for  slow-electron  detection  (secondary  electrons  in  electron  microscopy),  which,  likely  to  our 

experiments, requires a thing dead-layer. To explain (2), one can assume that the survival probability of a 

charge-carrier  during  its  drift  across  the  dead-layer  increases  with  its  initial  energy,  which  in  turn 

increases with the ion’s Ei. An analogous increase with Ei was clearly observed for ion-electron emission 

into vacuum in many experiments [4]. 

In multiplication mode the potential of 1880 V applied to the APD yielded gain of 66. In this case, the 

high applied voltage prevented us from measuring I2 according to the scheme in figure 1(a). Instead, only 

I1  was  measured,  but  twice,  at  two  values  of  the  potential  applied  to  the  n-side  of  the  APD.  For  the 

multiplication mode, equation (1) should be replaced by: 

(2)  

where  G  is  the  APD  gain.  The  net  ion-related  current  IG  through  the  APD,  having  this  gain,  can  be 

obtained from the beam-chopped step in I1 seen in figure 1(b). It can be written as 

(3) 

with 

. Although Icond is the ion-induced conductivity current before APD amplification,  (not 

depending  on  G  explicitly)  may  still  depend  on the APD  voltage  (see below). For  a low  APD  voltage, 

with G=1, equation (3) can be rewritten as 

(4) 

6 

GIIIIcondiondark1)1(1GIIIIiondarkGioncondII)1(00ionII 
                                              
   
 
 
 
                                          
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
with I0 and 0 representing the corresponding values of IG and  at a low APD voltage, when G=1. Using 

(3) and (4),  can be derived from measured IG and I0: 

(5) 

Figure 5. . Comparison of the Advanced Photonix APD response  =Icond/Iion to 3eV incident ions at 
applied  potentials  of  1  V  (G=1)  and  1880  V  (G=66).  Note  that  in  both  cases  Icond  is  the  initial 
conductivity  current  trough  the  diode,  induced  by  the  surface  neutralization  before  the  APD 
amplification.  The  Ei  values  of  the  different  ion  species  are  shown  on  top.  The  dashed  curves  are 
linear fits. 

The measurements of IG and I0 were done at the corresponding applied voltages of 1880 V (gain 66) and  

1 V (gain 1); the values of 0, derived from figure 4, were introduced into relation (5).  

The obtained values of  vs Ei in multiplication mode are depicted in figure 5, together with that of 0. 

One can see a strong correlation between the two graphs, with a ~2.5 fold increased response under the 

high  applied  voltage.  Hence  the  reverse  conductivity current  Icond  induced  by  the  surface  neutralization, 

before  the  APD  amplification,  increases  under  high  applied  potential.  In  this  situation,  the  latter  is 

sufficiently high to establish in the diode an electric field - of the same order as the diode’s internal one 

(without external voltage). This additional field reduces the probability of electron-hole recombination in 

the near-surface dead-layer. The effect of increasing the collection efficiency of the carriers from the layer 

7 

GGIIIG0000)1( 
  
 
 
 
 
 
with  increasing  the  electric  field  is  known  and  has  been  analyzed  theoretically  [8]  for  UV-sensitive 

photodiodes. 

 In our experiments, the number of collected ion-induced charge carriers, per incident ion, reached at 
best  5%  ‒  for  He+  ions  (Fig.  4).  A  possible  cause  could  be  a  low  collection  efficiency  of  the  charge 

carriers  induced  at  the  surface  (a  dead-layer  effect).  To  support  this  hypothesis,  we  estimated  the 

collection efficiency of the carriers independently, based on experimental data of the diode response to 

electrons.  In  this  estimation  we  obtained  the  distribution  of  the  collection  efficiency  of  the  carriers 

induced in the photodiode at various distances from the surface. 

Figure 6. Collection efficiency of the carriers induced in a photodiode at different depths. The solid line 
presents the fitted efficiency distribution for the Hamamatsu PD, which brings the calculations according 
to  equation  (6) into agreement with  our measurements.  The  dashed  curve is  the efficiency  distribution 
obtained in the same way for a delta-doped device [12]. The horizontal strokes on the vertical axis mark 
the responses of the Hamamatsu PD to various ion species.  

Both  an  additional  experiment  and  CASINO1  simulations  were  performed.  The  reverse-biased 

Hamamatsu PD was irradiated with electrons with energies in the range of 60 – 8700 eV and the “gain”, 

defined here as the ratio of the current through the diode to the incident electron current, was measured; it 

varied from 0.54 at 60 eV to 1780 at 8700 eV. In the simulation, the “gain” was calculated as follows. 

The  depth  distribution  of  the  energy  deposited  in  silicon  by  an  incident  electron  of  given  energy  was 

simulated with CASINO. Assuming the density of the induced charge carriers being proportional to the 

1 CASINO - monte CArlo SImulation of electroNs insOlids; can be used on-line, for example, 
http://www.gel.usherbrooke.ca/casino/ 

8 

 
                                                 
deposited energy density (taking 3.71 eV per electron-hole pair), the obtained energy density distribution 

was converted to a depth distribution of the induced charge carriers n(x, E), where x is the distance from 

the surface and E is the energy of the incident electron. The ratio of the current through the photodiode 

I(E) to the current of the incident electrons Iel(E) was calculated by integration across the semiconductor: 

𝐼(𝐸)
𝐼𝑒𝑙(𝐸)

= ∫ 𝑛(𝑥, 𝐸)𝑓(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 

 (6) 

with collection efficiency f(x) of the carriers induced at depth x. The latter was varied and fitted to bring 

the  calculations  into  agreement  with  the  measurements.  The  obtained  f(x)  is  shown  by  the  solid line  in 

figure 6. 

In our ion experiments, the carriers are induced at the surface only. Therefore the diode response  to 

ions  (see  figure  4)  can  be  interpreted  as  the  product  of  the  probability  of  carriers’  induction  and  their 

collection  efficiency  at  zero  depth. The  values   for the  Hamamatsu  PD  are  marked  in  figure  6  on the 

vertical axis with horizontal strokes. Note that the described above efficiency estimation is not applicable 

to small depths; however, the efficiency at the surface can be estimated by extrapolating the solid curve in 

figure 4 to zero. From this one can conclude that the main factor limiting the response to ions is not the 

production probability of a charge carrier pair but rather its collection efficiency from the surface. In other 

words, even if the probability to induce an electron in the conduction band is close to 1, only a very small 

fraction of these electrons will succeed crossing the dead layer.  

 It should be noted that the diodes used in this work were not designed for our experiments; they were 

rather selected among commercially-available ones, designed for different applications. More promising 

for  further  experiments  would  be to  have  devises  with  optimized  surfaces, like  those obtained  by  delta 

doping [9, 10] with significantly reduced dead-layers in silicon [11]. For comparison, we estimated (in the 

same way as for the Hamamatsu PD) the collection efficiency distribution for a delta-doped device [12]; 

the measured response to incident electrons was taken from [12]. The estimated efficiency distribution is 

shown in figure 6 with the dashed line (the minimal depth of 1 nm is due to the lowest electron energy in 

[12],  of  200  eV).  From  comparison  of  this  efficiency  with  that  of  the  Hamamatsu  PD  one  can  expect 

significantly higher response of delta-doped devices to incident slow ions of eV energies.  

4.  Conclusions 

In this work we observed, for the first time, an increase in the reverse current of reverse-biased silicon 

photodiodes caused by neutralization of slow (3 eV) ions at their sensitive surfaces. The current increase 

depends on the incident-ion species and on the specific photodiode structure. It was observed that with the 

APD,  the  initial  generation  of  ion-induced  carriers  (before  charge  multiplication)  is  significantly  larger 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.5 fold) under high applied potential. Note that this increase (seen in figure 3) is not due to avalanche 

multiplication factor of the APD, but rather to the reduced recombination under the high electric field.  

The reported effect and its observed feature form a self-consistent picture, which can be qualitatively 

explained  in  the  frame  of  the  Auger-type  neutralization  theory,  taking  into  account  the  collection 

efficiency of the induced charge carriers.  

This observed effect can be considered as internal potential ion-electron emission (into the conduction 

band).  To  the  best  our  knowledge,  no  experimental  evidences  of  such  effect  were  reported  in  the 

literature.  

Further  studies  are  required,  with  dedicated  surfaces,  for  deeper  understanding  of  the  observed 

phenomenon and for optimizing the yield of charge carrier production and collection; they are expected to 

assess the potential applicability of the effect to novel semiconductor structures capable of effective slow 

(down to sub-eV) ion detection. As the surface Auger neutralization is very similar to surface Auger de-

excitation,  such  detectors  would  be  possibly  sensitive  also  to  metastable  neutral  atoms  or  molecules. 

Naturally, the detection of ion-induced (or de-excitation-induced) charges would require, besides proper 

surfaces,  the  development  of  new  concepts  of  internal  charge  amplification.  While  current  slow-ion 

detectors  usually  require  their  pre-acceleration,  requiring  high  vacuum,  as  described  in  [13],  internal-

emission detectors would operate even in a gas.  

Among  potential  applications  of  slow-ion  detectors  are:  ion-counting  nanodosimetry  [13]  for  track-

structure  studies  in  radiobiology,  track-structure  recording  in  astrophysics  like  in  x-ray  polarization 

studies  [14]  and  rare-event  experiments  e.g.  in  directional  dark-matter  searches  [15]  and  neutrinoless 

double-beta decay [16]. Detection of very slow ions is required also in ion-mobility spectroscopy [17] and 

ion detection in mass spectrometry.  

Acknowledgments 

We are indebted to the late Dr. Y. Krichevets of Micro Components Ltd. (Migdal Haemek, Israel) for 

his assistance as well as to Dr. V. Dangendorf of PTB (Braunschweig, Germany) and Dr. M. Rappaport of 

the  Weizmann  Institute  of  Science,  for  fruitful  discussions  and  useful  comments.  We  acknowledge  Dr. 

Erik Wåhlin of Colutron Research Corporation (Boulder, Colo. USA) for assistance in the ion decelerator 

design. A. Breskin is the W.P. Reuther Professor of Research in The Peaceful Use of Atomic Energy.  

References 

[1]  Hagstrum H D1961 Phys. Rev. 122, 83 

[2] 

Shekhter S S 1937 J. Exper. Theor. Phys. 7 750 

[3]  Hagstrum H. D. 1953 Phys. Rev. 89 244 

10 

 
[4]  Baragiola R A, Alonso E V, Ferron J and Oliva A 1979 Surface Science 90 240 

[5]  Hagstrum H D 1966 Phys. Rev. 155, 495  

[6] 

Sze S M and Kwok K Ng 2007 Physics of Semiconductor Devices (Hoboken, New Jersy:John 
Wiley and Sons), chapter 13 

[7] 

Jacobs J M and McCorkle R A 1991 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 62 2044 

[8]  Blank T V, Gol’dberg Yu A, Konstantinov  O V, Obolenskii O I, Posse E A 1997 

Semiconductors 31 1053 

[9]  Hoenk M E, Grunthaner P J, Grunthaner F J and Terhune R W 1992 Appl. Phys. Lett. 61, 1084 

[10]  Hoenk M E, Jones T J, Dickie M R, Greer F, Cunningham T J, Blazejewski  E R and Nikzad S 

2009 Proc. of the SPIE, 74190T-74190T-74115 

[11]  Jewell D, Jones T J, Sinha M P, and Nikzad S 2006 Appl. Phys. Lett. 88 043501 

[12]  Nikzad S, Yu Q, Smith A L, Jones T J, Tombrello T A, and Elliott S T 1998 Appl. Phys. Lett. 

73 3417 

[13]  Garty G, Schulte R, Shchemelinin S, Leloup C, Assaf G, Breskin A, Chechik R., Bashkirov V 

and Grosswendt B 2010 Phys. Med. Biol. 55 761 

[14]  Bellazzini R et all 2006 Nucl.Instrum.Meth. A 560 425 

[15]  Billard J, Mayet F and Santos D 2012. JCAP04 006. 

[16]  P. Novella P 2010 (for the NEXT collaboration) J. Phys.: Conf. Ser.203 012068 

[17]  Eiceman G A and Karpas Z 1994 Ion Mobility Spectrometry (Boca Ranton, Ann Arbor, 

London, Tokyo:  CRC Press) 

11 

 
 
 
