3D Character Customization for Non-Professional Users in Handheld
Augmented Reality

Iris Seidinger
Salzburg University of Applied Sciences

Jens Grubert∗
University of Passau

6
1
0
2

l
u
J

2
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
8
5
6
0
.
7
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

In gaming, customizing individual characters, can create personal
bonds between players and their characters. Hence, character cus-
tomization is a standard component in many games. While mobile
Augmented Reality (AR) games become popular, to date, no 3D
character editor for AR games exists. We investigate the feasibil-
ity of 3D character customization for smartphone-based AR in an
iterative design process.

Speciﬁcally, we present ﬁndings from creating AR prototypes in
a handheld AR setting. In a ﬁrst user study, we found that a tangible
AR prototype resulted in higher hedonistic measures than a camera-
based approach. In a follow up study, we compared the tangible AR
prototype with a non-AR touchscreen version for selection, scaling,
translation and rotation tasks in a 3D character customization set-
ting. The tangible AR version resulted in signiﬁcantly better results
for stimulation and novelty measures than the non-AR version. At
the same time, it maintained a proﬁcient level in pragmatic mea-
sures such as accuracy and efﬁciency.

Index Terms: K.6.1 [Management of Computing and Information
Systems]: Project and People Management—Life Cycle; K.7.m
[The Computing Profession]: Miscellaneous—Ethics

1 INTRODUCTION

Despite of the growing popularity of Augmented Reality (AR)
games [34], there has been no character editor in the ﬁeld of AR,
yet. Furthermore, mobile games generally often lack customiza-
tion and offer only one or a small set of predeﬁned characters to
choose from. One reason for that is that such an editor is often
unnecessary for games that don’t afford much time and commit-
ment of the player. However, with mobile AR games becoming
more common, the variety will increase and next to casual games
(e.g., [9, 11]), which are only played occasionally, bigger and more
immersive games, focusing on stories and characters, are likely to
evolve [34]. This can increase the demand for a character editor,
as, by customizing an individual character, people tend to identify
themselves more with it and strong personal bonds can be devel-
oped [36].

The objective of this work is to investigate the potentials of hand-
held AR environments for character customization. To this end, we
iteratively designed, implemented and validated a series of mobile
AR prototypes. In contrast to professional character modelling, we
focus on non-professional users who want to quickly customize a
game character before playing a game. Hence, we focus on con-
strained customization of 3D characters using 3D object selection
and manipulation tasks.

2 RELATED WORK

Our contributions are based upon the rich body of work in 3D mod-
elling and 3D user interfaces. 3D modelling applications can im-

∗e-mail: jg@jensgrubert.de

plement various functions, input methods and interaction designs.
However, most of them share some basic functions that can be
grouped together into object manipulation, viewpoint manipulation
and application control [12].

There is a large body of relevant work in 3D User Interfaces for
Virtual and Augmented Reality scenarios (for an overview see [6]).
Here, we focus on object selection and manipulation in mobile AR.
Interaction techniques typically rely on camera-based input (e.g.,
[16, 15], also in combination with touch input [3, 26, 35]), mid-air
hand or ﬁnger input (e.g., [18, 7, 3]), tangible objects (e.g., [20, 4,
2, 31]) or a combination thereof.

Camera control is challenging in handheld AR as the camera can
be manipulated with 6 degrees of freedom but it is typically hard
for users to accurately and precisely align the device with a spe-
ciﬁc pose. Approaches for supporting the user in this tasks encom-
pass, e.g., attention funnels [5], iron sight visualizations [13, 14]
or freezing the camera view [24, 8]. For object selection, applica-
tions often use a ray casting metaphor. Examples include 3DTouch
and HOMER-S [27], TransVision [30], the Personal Interaction
Panel [32] and Napkin Sketch [37]. DrillSample [28] also uses the
pointing metaphor by interpreting taps on a smartphone screen, but
extends the selection process by adding the so-called DrillSample
view to display all objects, that could be selected by this tap, includ-
ing all hits instead of only the ﬁrst one. Gesture-based selection of
objects has also been investigated, e.g., employing ﬁnger tracking
and pinching two ﬁngers together above an object to select it (e.g.,
[18, 7]), bringing the original HeadCrusher idea [29] to mobile AR.
Lee et al. propose to use marker occlussion to select object [23],
similar to Vuforia’s virtual button technique1. Also, tangible user
interfaces (TUIs) were explored for object selection (and manipu-
lation), such as VOMAR [20] or project Magic Cup [4]. For trans-
lation and scaling tasks, it is common to allow free positioning in
3D by attaching the object to a tool or the tracked hand. Examples
include the Personal Interaction Panel [32], FingARtips [7], Hand-
yAR [25], Magic Cup [4], VOMAR [20] or, recently, work by Kim
et al. [21]. In HOMER-S [27], the object doesn’t get locked to a
tool or hand, but instead locks its relative position directly to the
device’s camera. The user can therefore move the device around
and to the desired location considering the relative positioning of
the object to the camera. The combination of multi-touch and de-
vice movements was also investigated [26, 35]. For rotation tasks,
approaches commonly rely on constraint rotation around individual
axes (e.g., [1, 4, 27, 18] and some on free rotation by attaching the
object to a hand or prop (e.g., [20, 7].

3 INITIAL INTERACTIVE PROTOTYPES

We initially investigated both a camera-based approach and a tan-
gible AR system for manipulating individual body parts of a 3D
character (head, arms, torso, legs). An important requirement when
developing the prototypes was to strive for an entertaining experi-
ence while maintaining a satisfying precision and efﬁciency. Since
a character editor is part of a game, people are using it with the in-
tention of having fun with the game. Therefore, it is a good idea
to make the process of creating the character as fun and entertain-

1https://developer.vuforia.com/

 
 
 
 
 
 
ing as possible. It should also be noted that most games only offer
character customization instead of actual character creation. This
is because games typically rely on the character to follow certain
restrictions. Hence, we restricted the prototypes on standard spa-
tial manipulation tasks for certain body parts. In the ﬁrst iteration,
we only focused on selection and scale tasks, while in the ﬁnal AR
prototype we also included translation and rotation.

3.1 Camera-based approach
In the initial camera-based approach the 3D pose of a handheld de-
vice is used both for viewport manipulation and object manipula-
tion (similar to [15]). Object selection is done through raycasting
(the user touches the projection of a 3D object on screen). For scal-
ing, the device is moved closer or further towards the object and
the selected body part is enlarged as the device is moving away or
shrunk of the device moves closer. When scaling, all body parts
automatically adjust their positions in a way that their point of in-
tersection with the body remain unchanged. A clutch mechanism
(using an on-screen button) is used for activating the action.

3.2 Tangible UI
We used a pen metaphor for spatial manipulation of character
parts. The device could be used for interactions using a pointing
metaphor, where the pen tip is the pointer. Rotating the pen to a
side with a different marker could trigger a new manipulation mode,
which additionally has to be activated by pressing a lock button on
the touchscreen. For the scaling interaction, as visualized in Fig-
ure 1, the associated scale marker must be tracked by the device’s
camera. By this, the scale mode is activated and the user can start
the manipulation phase by pressing the lock button. The selected
object will now always scale to a size, where its hull touches the
MarkerPen’s tip. When the user moves the MarkerPen away from
the object, the object increases in size, following the pen tip and
when tip is moved towards or into the object, it scales down to again
match the size pointed out by the tip. By pressing the lock button
again, the object is released from the manipulation mode and the
scale is applied.

Figure 1: MarkerPen-based approach: Interaction steps for scaling:
1) Arm is preselected and scale marker is tracked 2) the MarkerPen
is moved and the arm is resized to touch the pen’s tip. Top: with
directional scaling, the arm keeps its relative position to the torso.
Bottom: without directional scaling

3.3 Initial Evaluation
The ﬁrst evaluation compared two early-stage prototypes of the
camera-based approach and the MarkerPen version for scaling
an object. A repeated-measures design was used. The subjects
could test both approaches, ﬁlled out the user experience question-
naire (UEQ) [22] and gave qualitative feedback as part of a semi-
structured interview. The target of this iteration was to get a im-
pression of how the users are interacting with and responding to
the prototypes, if the prototypes are suitable for the task and which

improvements might be necessary. Finally, one protoype should be
selected for further development.

Six students with background in computer science participated

in the study (1 female, 5 male, mean age 25.6 years sd=3.4).

The test application for the initial evaluation cycle was built
Unity3D and consisted of a simple menu, from which either pro-
totype could be launched, and the prototypes themselves. This ap-
plication was installed on a HTC One M7 running Android 5.0.2.
Next to the actual prototype application, a screen and microphone
recorder was running to create audio and video material for later
analysis and reference. Each prototype showed the same model
which consisted out of a cube as body and a sphere as head with
some basic textures. No selection was possible, the head was pre-
selected and the only possible interaction was the resizing of the
head. The evaluations took place in a laboratory environment.

At the beginning of the evaluation, every participant was given a
short informal introduction on the procedure of the experiment and
they were asked if they agree to the voice recording, which all of
them did. Following the concept of a think-aloud protocol , par-
ticipants were asked to continuously express their thoughts to gain
further insights into users’ expectations and understanding of the
user interface. After this introduction, voice recording was started
and the test person was asked to try out the ﬁrst prototype. No time
limit was given to the participants so they could experiment with
the prototype as long as they wanted to. Most of them tested each
prototype for about two to ﬁve minutes while expressing opinions,
comments and ideas for improvement. The participants were then
asked to ﬁll the UEQ questionnaire. After they ﬁnished testing the
ﬁrst prototype, the test setup was changed according to the proto-
type (e.g. positioning the marker correctly, preparing the mounting,
...) and the participant was asked to start testing the other prototype.
During the evaluation, the probands were allowed to ask questions
or ask for help if needed. The starting order of the applications was
randomized.

3.4 Results and Discussion

Figure 2 shows the results from the UEQ questionnaire. The val-
ues represent the means of the scales, ranging from -3 to +3 where
-3 means an extremely bad performance and +3 an extraordinary
high performance. The camera-based prototype scored high in per-
spicuity, efﬁciency and dependability while scoring lower on attrac-
tiveness, stimulation and novelty. The ﬁgure also shows how well
the camera-based prototype performed in relation to other products
and innovations from the UEQ benchmark data set. The bench-
mark includes data from 4818 persons from 163 studies about var-
ious products and ”allows conclusions about the relative quality of
the evaluated product compared to other products” [17]. Findings
from qualitative analysis show that the camera-based prototype was
well received for its practical and functional aspects. Participants
described it as easy to understand, that it worked well and that the
tracking was good.

the
Compared to other products from the UEQ benchmark,
MarkerPen prototype scored well in stimulation and novelty, but
only scored average and below average for the other measures. The
approach scored lowest for efﬁciency and dependability. The mean
of the dependability scale for the MarkerPen prototype has a high
deviation. As the tracking of the frame marker was prone to errors
and easily affected by changing lighting conditions, it is possible
that this scale could improve substantially when the frame marker
tracking of the prototype is further improved. Some participants
had problems with learning the interaction with the MarkerPen.
They stated to not feel in control and having problems with holding
the pen correctly. This seemed to improve when they get accus-
tomed to the interaction. Then, those participants found the pro-
totype useful and even intuitive and thought the interaction ”feels
good”.

When comparing the UEQ ﬁndings of the camera-based and the
MarkerPen prototype, one prominent difference shows in the per-
formance in hedonistic and pragmatic measures. While the camera-
based approach scores high on pragmatic quality but lacks hedonic
quality, the MarkerPen-based prototype scores high on hedonic, but
low on pragmatic quality. No signiﬁcance tests were made due to
the small number of participants. Furthermore, there was no ne-
cessity for it, as the evaluation was primarily conducted to gain
information for future prototype development decisions.

Figure 2: Results of the UEQ for the TUI-based prototype (top row)
and camera-based prototype (bottom row) in the inital evaluation.

Figure 3: Final prototype of the MarkerPen in use (top row) and
screenshot of application (bottom row)

This research aims to ﬁnd a suitable interaction design for a 3D
AR character editing tool for games. For the goal of providing
simple interactions that allow fast as well as more detailed mod-
eling, both prototypes provided a satisfying experience, however
the camera-based approach was easier to learn and it outranked the
MarkerPen prototype in terms of efﬁciency. It could not be inferred
at this stage if fast prototyping as well as detailed modeling are eas-
ily supported by the prototypes. An important requirement, is to
strive for an entertaining experience, as long as a satisfying degree
of precision and efﬁciency can still be provided.Since the hedo-
nic quality of the MarkerPen-based approach is substantially higher
than that of the camera-based approach, and due to the assump-
tion that the pragmatic measures of the MarkerPen prototype will
improve with further development and enhancements of the frame
marker tracking, the MarkerPen approach was developed further.

4 REFINED PROTOTYPES AND EVALUATION
The ﬁnal evaluation compared a reﬁned version of the MarkerPen
prototype to a Non-AR prototype. The aim of this evaluation was
to determine how well the developed AR prototype performs rela-
tive to a traditional approach to mobile character editing. The ﬁnal
evaluation again used a repeated-measures design, with counterbal-
anced starting order of the prototypes.

4.1 Reﬁned tangible UI
The ﬁnal prototype was built similarly to the previous one. This
time however, foam board was used for the marker cube instead of
cardboard, to provide a better stability. Also, a hexagonal pencil
was used instead of a round one and hexagonal holes were cut into
the foam board cube to stick the pencil through. This prevented the
marker cube from spinning around the pencil. Figure 3 shows the
AR prototype in use.

Four different frame markers were created for the prototype, one
for each manipulation mode. Each of them features its own color,
a matching icon in its center and a descriptive verb beneath it to
make it easier to understand and distinguish between the modes.
Each marker was attached to one side of the foam board cube. The

on-screen mode trigger button for starting and stopping manipula-
tions, which was introduced with the ﬁrst prototypes worked well
but the naming (”Lock”/”Release”) and appearance confused the
users in the ﬁrst place. Therefore, the button was improved in the
ﬁnal prototype and is now only visible if the MarkerPen is tracked.
Furthermore, it displays the same icon as can be seen on the tracked
operation marker. This emphasises the relationship between the
tracking of a mode marker and the button on the touchscreen. Up-
dating the buttons icon depending on the tracked operation marker
also helps the user to understand what the mode trigger does. As
depth perception can be a challenge in AR applications, a shadow
for the MarkerPen’s tip was added to give the user a better under-
standing of the pen’s location in depth.

4.2 Non-AR comparison application

We compared a number of mobile 3D editing applications (Cre-
ationist 3D modeling, Qubism 3D modeling FormIt 360, Sketcher
3D, Spacedraw). However, none of them allowed the implementa-
tion of target objects that could be used to visualize the target ma-
nipulation of an object to solve spatial manipulation tasks. To this
end, an existing in-house character editing software was adapted to
meet the requirements of this research. This prototypical software
aimed to implement transform handles similar to the ones used in
3D Creationist2 that could be applied to any 3D object. It includes
the basic transformations rotation, translation and scale and just like
in 3D Creationist, the handle bars can be dragged to apply those
manipulations along that axis, see Figure 4.

4.3 Participants

For the ﬁnal evaluation, ten probands of different professions and
experiences with smart phones and gaming participated in the study
(4 female, 6 male, age: 22-29 years). Eight test persons stated that
they are experienced or very experienced in the use of smartphones

2http://www.3dcreationist.com/

and nine play games on their mobile devices at least occasionally.
This matches the target group of this research, which consists of
intermediate and advanced smartphone users interested in mobile
gaming. Five probands had experience in professional 3D modeling
and seven already had experiences with AR. Two persons indicated
to be very experienced with AR applications, and stated that they
used AR apps frequently. Nine of ten participants used a charac-
ter editor at least once before, eight of them used character editors
more than once.

Figure 4: Screenshot of the Non-AR prototype. The current task is
displayed in red, the selected action is highlighted in dark green, the
target pose is indicated by a semi-transparent copy of the body part
to be manipulated.

4.4 Hypotheses
Our ﬁrst hypothesis was H1: Touch-based manipulation will be
faster than the MarkerPen approach. This hypothesis originates
from the fact that it costs some time to rotate the MarkerPen and
(re-)track the markers. Additionally, handling and coordinating the
MarkerPen and the smart phone probably costs more time than only
interacting with the touch screen, where only small movements are
required. Tracking problems can affect the accuracy and efﬁciency,
therefore the second hypothesis was Hence, the second hypothesis
was H2: MarkerPen-based manipulation will be more exciting and
fun to use than the touch-based approach.

4.5 Procedure
The procedure was adopted from the ﬁrst evaluation with follow-
ing changes: After a free testing phase (for every prototype and
every function), participants completed a given task set, repeated
the task with the second prototype. After all tasks were completed
the participants ﬁlled out the UEQ and a preference questionnaire.
For data analysis of performance measures, outliers (distance from
median > 1.5 interquartile range) were removed.

4.6 Tasks
In total, the participants had to perform 56 tasks: seven for each
operation (select, scale, rotate, translate) and prototype (AR and
non-AR prototype). The tasks were the same for each prototype to
ensure the results are comparable. In every task set for an opera-
tion, there was at least one task for each body part of the model,
to make sure different conditions such as different object sizes are
tested. For the same reason, the tasks were designed to cover dif-
ferent target transformations. For rotation for example, some tasks
only required small rotations while others required big or even mul-
tiple ones around different axes.

For every task, the same character model was displayed in the
so called T-pose, as can be seen in ﬁgure 4. The T-pose is a typi-
cal modeling pose where the character stands on straight legs and
the arms point sideways. The size of the camera frustum the model
takes up was matched between prototypes. The model consisted

of seven body parts: head, neck, two arms, two legs and the torso.
For a better distinction of the body parts, they all featured differ-
ent colors. To ensure that rotations could be seen correctly, they
furthermore had a checkerboard texture with a diagonal gradient
applied to them.

At the bottom of the screen a text box displayed the task to ac-
complish, such as ”Select: Head” or ”Translate: Green Arm”. For
body parts that are not unique, such as arms and legs, the color of
the associated body part was added to the task text instead of di-
rections such as right and left to prevent confusion and additional
cognitive load. For selection tasks, there were no further aids. For
other operation tasks however, some further assistance was imple-
mented to allow the user to carry out the task without distractions
or dependencies on other interactions. One such assistance was the
preselection of the concerned body part. This assistance is impor-
tant to measure the performance of the operations without inﬂuenc-
ing it with the performance of the selection interaction. When all
task sets had been ﬁnished, the application prompted the user to
ﬁll out the concluding questionnaire and quit when the user pressed
conﬁrm.

For all tasks except for selection tasks, a semi-transparent du-
plicate of the affected body part was shown in the same place as
the original body part. This duplicate visualizes the transformation
objective and will subsequently be referred to as ”hint” or ”ghost”.
The ghost is spatially registered in the 3D environment, which can
be seen in Figure 4 for the non-AR prototype, and can be occluded
by other objects, such as body parts.

A task was ﬁnished by tapping a check mark button (lower left 4)
in Figure. A task could be ﬁnished at any time by the user without
regard to progress, accuracy or correctness. Whenever a task was
ﬁnished, information about the performance of the user in this task
was stored on the device. This includes the total time needed to
fulﬁll the task, the time needed since the last reset, the count of
resets used and the deviation from the target. For rotation tasks,
the angle in degrees between the target and actual rotation is stored
as a ﬂoating point value. For scale and translation operations, the
deviation was calculated for every axis by subtracting the position
or scale vector of the ghost object from the according vector of the
actual body part object.

4.7 Results

The mean task completion times (TCTs) for the individual tasks
were as follows for the AR and non-AR (NAR) prototype. Se-
lection: AR: 8.14s (sd=3.41) NAR: 2.67s (sd=0.92). Transla-
tion: AR: 38.55s (sd=21.65), NAR: 17.34s (sd=8.97). Rotation:
AR: 75.96s (sd=61.28), NAR: 79.33 (sd=46.49). Scaling: AR:
15.64s (sd=6.79), NAR: 15.45s (sd=6.77). For selection and trans-
lation, the non-AR prototype was signiﬁcantly faster as indicated
by Wilcoxon signed rank tests (as data was not normal distributed
as indicated by Shapiro-Wilk normality tests), but not for rotation
and scaling. Selection: p<0.0001, Z=6.78, Cohen’s d=1.38. Trans-
lation: p<0.0001, Z=5.01, d=0.92. Rotation: p=0.051, Z=-1.95,
d=-0.33. Scale: p=0.06, Z=0.52, d=0.088.

The results of the UEQ are shown in Figure 5. Wilcoxon signed
rank tests indicated statistically signiﬁcant differences for stimu-
lation (p=0.016, Z=2.40, Cohen’s d=1.27, median AR=1.88, me-
dian NAR=-0.25) and novelty (p=0.005, Z=2.80, d=1.61, median
AR=2.38, median NAR=-0.63), but for no other dimension.

80% of the partakers explicitly described the TUI-based proto-
type to be fun to use and ﬁve out of ten think it is innovative, excit-
ing and more aesthetically pleasing than the traditional version.

A problem with the rotation was that 30% of the users did not
fully understand the interaction: instead of drawing circles with the
tip of the pen to rotate the object, they only moved it in one dimen-
sion, either up and down or left and right, which still worked but
probably led to a different user experience than intended. This mis-

probands did not even needed instructions. One of those probands
however mentioned to have needed the manual for understanding
the rotations but did not need it for the other functions. Four of the
probands liked being able to work only on one axis without affect-
ing the others as this for example prevented unintended translations
in depth.

80% stated to prefer the AR prototype. The main reason for
that was, that the AR prototype was more exciting and fun to use,
as this was stated by six out of eight participants who preferred
the AR version. Speciﬁcally, they described it as cool, innovative
and refreshingly different. Two partakers stated practical reasons
for their preference: One user liked being able to manipulate the
character and the viewport at the same time. Two others stated the
interaction feels more real and direct, creating a better feeling of
control. Of the eight users who prefer the AR prototype, ﬁve prefer
to use it without a smart phone mounting. Of the two who prefer
the non-AR version, one person stated that it is quicker to use. If
the editor would be part of a game, the person stated to like to play
instead of spending extra time on character editing. The second
person explained their preference with the non-AR version being
more simple, predictable and stable.

4.8 Discussion

The study indicated that participants found the tangible AR pro-
totype innovative and exciting to use. Although the performance
of the prototype was good in terms of hedonic measures and efﬁ-
ciency, further experiments with interaction designs should be made
and compared to maximize the usability. The task completion times
indicated, while for simple tasks such as selection, the non-ar pro-
totype was signiﬁcantly faster, their was no signiﬁcance difference
for more complex tasks such as rotation. This might be due to the
fact, that in the non-AR prototype rotation can require multiple sub-
sequent actions while in AR (theoretically) a single motion with the
MarkerPen is sufﬁcient. Regarding selection tasks, a traditional ap-
proach should be considered if the user has a free hand available
for interacting with the touch screen, as the selection using tap ges-
tures is signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient and the users are accustomed to
it. A design that allows selection on the touch screen as well as
with the marker enriched device could also be a promising way to
go, as then people who use a mounting can use their free hand for
selection on the touch screen. An interesting general ﬁnding was
the lower correlation between the satisfaction with the time needed
and the actual time passed for the AR prototype. This leads to the
assumption, that the actually passed time is a less important factor
in the AR version, which might be caused by the participants having
more fun than with the non-AR prototype, as people tend to under-
estimate durations while having fun [33]. Another possible reason
might be a different demand in concentration for both prototypes,
which could also affect the time perception [19]. However, the AR
version also was perceived as more difﬁcult compared to the non-
AR prototype. The reasons for those effects could be investigated
in future research to gain further insights into perceived differences
between both prototypes.

Overall, the proposed AR prototype performed well in the eval-
uation. While it is indicated that it can’t compete with the tradi-
tional prototype regarding pragmatic measures such as efﬁciency
and dependability, for which it can however still deliver fairly satis-
fying results, it performs well in terms of hedonistic measures. This
could make it suitable for mobile AR games, for which efﬁciency
and accuracy might not as important as an innovative and fun in-
teraction design. The presented prototypes only implemented the
four basic manipulations selection, rotation, scale and translation.
There are further manipulations that might be suitable for AR char-
acter editing, such as deformation. Furthermore, character editors
often implement various other functions, such as changing colours
and textures of objects. How well the AR environment and the

Figure 5: Results of the UEQ for the ﬁnal TUI-based prototype (top
row) and non-AR prototype (bottom row) in the ﬁnal evaluation.

understanding occurred even though they had time to try out these
interactions in the free testing period in which the participants were
free to ask for help but were not corrected proactively. In general,
the rotation was said to sometimes require too much effort, espe-
cially when standing up for rotations around the Y axis is required,
which was even stated to be annoying.

Some people were surprised by the operations to result in abso-
lute changes instead of relative ones. Five people mentioned that for
the rotation interaction and four for the translation. While for some
this was only surprising, a few found that annoying, stating by that
they are not able to make smaller reﬁnements after an initial manip-
ulation. About the MarkerPen itself, four participants stated that the
cube to which the markers are applied is too big and gets in the way
when being close to the smart phone or table surface. This experi-
ence was highly affected by how the user held and interacted with
the MarkerPen. While some participants skilfully rotated the pen
around or de- and increased the distance to the camera as needed,
others interacted with the pen in a less swift and ﬂexible manner,
leading to the problems stated above. The usage of the MarkerPen
needed some practice as three participants stated, but after that, one
of the participants stated, it is very easy to use.

Three people seemed to have problems with the perception of
depth in this environment. Especially in translation tasks, they were
repeatedly surprised where they placed the object in depth when
viewing it from the side. The same users stated that the translation
interaction is annoying, frustrating and too sensitive. Nonetheless,
participants highly improved after ﬁnding out they could use the
shadows of the pen tip and the ghost object as hints to match the
depths of the objects.

To be required to interact also with buttons on the touchscreen
of the device was annoying according to three users and they would
prefer hardware buttons on the pen itself. Particularly unpleasant
was the placement of the buttons to start a new task and the reset
button, which were placed in the middle of the screen. This was
especially inconvenient for participants who did not use a mounting
as they already used both of their hands for holding the device and
the MarkerPen.

Camera control was another positively remarked topic. Three
people explicitly stated to like the camera controls, mentioning it
would be easier and more intuitive than in the non-AR approach.
Furthermore, they liked the possibility to manipulate the object and
change camera perspective at the same time.

While the prototype as a whole was perceived as intuitive by
three people, the rotation interaction did not seem intuitive to the
same amount of people, who stated it would require a high cognitive
effort. One participant however also remarked that this it felt like
”a fun puzzle game”.

The non-AR prototype proved to be intuitive to use. Half of the

presented prototype speciﬁcally suit such functions and other ma-
nipulations should be investigated in future research. While the
evaluations tested the performance of individual manipulations in
different tasks, it remains unclear how well the prototype would
perform in a free setting, where the different manipulations are not
isolated from each other and users dont have to solve tasks. Fi-
nally, different types of games will impose different requirements
onto a character editor. Further studies should be conducted, to
investigate the performance of the presented prototype in different
settings, also beyond gaming, e.g., in hedonic oriented touristic [10]
or marketing applications.

5 CONCLUSION

Two AR user interface concepts and according initial prototypes
were developed, one based on camera movements, the other on a
tangible pen. Both proved to be applicable for the task of char-
acter editing, however, the MarkerPen-based approach proved to be
more entertaining.This concept was further developed in further de-
sign iterations. This prototype was then compared to a traditional
non-AR approach. The proposed MarkerPen-based approach per-
formed well in terms of hedonistic measures while also keeping the
performance in pragmatic measures such as efﬁciency on a proﬁ-
cient level. In direct comparison with a traditional approach, most
probands preferred the proposed AR prototype for it being more fun
and exciting, more direct to control and for more intuitive viewport
control. As AR modeling proved to be more entertaining and excit-
ing than traditional approaches, game developers could use this in-
formation to improve the user experience and satisfaction of mobile
AR games by adding an AR character editor based on the proposed
prototype. Furthermore, this work can serve as base for future re-
search in the ﬁelds of AR character editing, AR 3D modeling and
tangible user interfaces.

REFERENCES

[1] O. K.-C. Au, C.-L. Tai, and H. Fu. Multitouch gestures for constrained
transformation of 3d objects. In CG Forum, volume 31, pages 651–
660, 2012.

[2] H. Bai, L. Gao, J. El-Sana, and M. Billinghurst. Free-hand interac-
tion for handheld augmented reality using an rgb-depth camera.
In
SIGGRAPH Asia SMGIA, page 22. ACM, 2013.

[3] H. Bai, G. A. Lee, and M. Billinghurst. Freeze view touch and ﬁn-
ger gesture based interaction methods for handheld augmented reality
interfaces. In Proc. CIVCNZ, pages 126–131. ACM, 2012.

[4] M. Billinghurst, H. Kato, and S. Myojin. Advanced interaction tech-
niques for augmented reality applications. In Virtual and Mixed Real-
ity, pages 13–22. Springer, 2009.

[5] F. Biocca, A. Tang, C. Owen, and F. Xiao. Attention funnel: omni-
directional 3d cursor for mobile augmented reality platforms. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing
systems, pages 1115–1122. ACM, 2006.

[6] D. A. Bowman, S. Coquillart, B. Froehlich, M. Hirose, Y. Kitamura,
K. Kiyokawa, and W. Stuerzlinger. 3d user interfaces: New directions
and perspectives. IEEE CGA, (6):20–36, 2008.

[7] V. Buchmann, S. Violich, M. Billinghurst, and A. Cockburn. Fingar-
tips: gesture based direct manipulation in augmented reality. In Proc.
GRAPHITE’04, pages 212–221. ACM, 2004.

[8] J. Grubert, R. Grasset, and G. Reitmayr. Exploring the design of
In Proc.

hybrid interfaces for augmented posters in public spaces.
NordiCHI’12, pages 238–246. ACM, 2012.

[9] J. Grubert, A. Morrison, H. Munz, and G. Reitmayr. Playing it real:
magic lens and static peephole interfaces for games in a public space.
In Proc. MobileHCI’12, pages 231–240. ACM, 2012.

[10] J. Grubert, M. Pahud, R. Grasset, D. Schmalstieg, and H. Seichter.
The utility of magic lens interfaces on handheld devices for touristic
map navigation. Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 18:88–103, 2015.
[11] J. Grubert and D. Schmalstieg. Playing it real again: a repeated eval-
uation of magic lens and static peephole interfaces in public space. In
Proc. MobileHCI’13, pages 99–102. ACM, 2013.

[12] C. Hand. A survey of 3d interaction techniques. In CG Forum, vol-

ume 16, pages 269–281, 1997.

[13] A. Hartl, J. Grubert, D. Schmalstieg, and G. Reitmayr. Mobile inter-
active hologram veriﬁcation. In Proc. ISMAR ’13, pages 75–82. IEEE,
2013.

[14] A. D. Hartl, C. Arth, J. Grubert, and D. Schmalstieg. Efﬁcient veriﬁ-
cation of holograms using mobile augmented reality. Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 22(7):1843–1851, 2016.
[15] T. Harviainen, O. Korkalo, and C. Woodward. Camera-based interac-
tions for augmented reality. In Proc. ACE’09, pages 307–310. ACM,
2009.

[16] A. Henrysson, J. Marshall, and M. Billinghurst. Experiments in 3d
interaction for mobile phone ar. In Proc. GRAPHITE’07, pages 187–
194. ACM, 2007.

[17] A. Hinderks, M. Schrepp, and J. Thomaschewski. Ueq-online.

http://www.ueq-online.org, 2008.

[18] W. H¨urst and C. Van Wezel. Gesture-based interaction via ﬁnger track-
ing for mobile augmented reality. MT&A, 62(1):233–258, 2013.
[19] M. R. Jones. Time, our lost dimension: toward a new theory of percep-

tion, attention, and memory. Psychological review, 83(5):323, 1976.

[20] H. Kato, M. Billinghurst, I. Poupyrev, K. Imamoto, and K. Tachibana.
Virtual object manipulation on a table-top ar environment. In Proc.
ISAR 2000, pages 111–119. Ieee, 2000.

[21] M. Kim and J. Y. Lee. Touch and hand gesture-based interactions for
directly manipulating 3d virtual objects in mobile augmented reality.
MT&A, pages 1–22, 2016.

[22] B. Laugwitz, T. Held, and M. Schrepp. Construction and evaluation

of a user experience questionnaire. Springer, 2008.

[23] G. A. Lee, M. Billinghurst, and G. J. Kim. Occlusion based interac-
tion methods for tangible augmented reality environments. In Proc.
VRCAI’04, pages 419–426. ACM, 2004.

[24] G. A. Lee, U. Yang, Y. Kim, D. Jo, K.-H. Kim, J. H. Kim, and
J. S. Choi. Freeze-set-go interaction method for handheld mobile
augmented reality environments. In Proc. VRST’09, pages 143–146.
ACM, 2009.

[25] T. Lee and T. H¨ollerer. Handy ar: Markerless inspection of augmented
reality objects using ﬁngertip tracking. In Proc. ISWC’07, pages 83–
90. IEEE, 2007.

[26] A. Marzo, B. Bossavit, and M. Hachet. Combining multi-touch in-
put and device movement for 3d manipulations in mobile augmented
reality environments. In Proc. SUI’14, pages 13–16. ACM, 2014.
[27] A. Mossel, B. Venditti, and H. Kaufmann. 3dtouch and homer-s: in-
tuitive manipulation techniques for one-handed handheld augmented
reality. In Proc. VRIC’13, page 12. ACM, 2013.

[28] A. Mossel, B. Venditti, and H. Kaufmann. Drillsample: precise se-
lection in dense handheld augmented reality environments. In Proc.
VRIC’13, page 10. ACM, 2013.

[29] J. S. Pierce, A. S. Forsberg, M. J. Conway, S. Hong, R. C. Zeleznik,
and M. R. Mine. Image plane interaction techniques in 3d immersive
environments. In Proc. I3D’97, pages 39–ff. ACM, 1997.

[30] J. Rekimoto. Transvision: A hand-held augmented reality system for

collaborative design. In Proc. VSM’96, pages 85–90, 1996.

[31] R. S. Sodhi, B. R. Jones, D. Forsyth, B. P. Bailey, and G. Maciocci.
Bethere: 3d mobile collaboration with spatial input. In Proc. CHI’13,
pages 179–188. ACM, 2013.

[32] Z. Szalav´ari and M. Gervautz. The personal interaction panel–a two-
In CGF, volume 16, pages

handed interface for augmented reality.
C335–C346. Wiley Online Library, 1997.

[33] S. Thayer and W. Schiff. Eye-contact, facial expression, and the ex-
perience of time. The Journal of social psychology, 95(1):117–124,
1975.

[34] B. H. Thomas. A survey of visual, mixed, and augmented reality

gaming. CIE, 10(1):3, 2012.

[35] P. Tiefenbacher, A. Pﬂaum, and G. Rigoll.

[poster] touch gestures
for improved 3d object manipulation in mobile augmented reality. In
Proc. ISMAR’14, pages 315–316. IEEE, 2014.

[36] S. Turkay and C. K. Kinzer. The effects of avatar: Based customiza-

tion on player identiﬁcation. IJGCMS, 6(1):1–25, 2014.

[37] M. Xin, E. Sharlin, and M. C. Sousa. Napkin sketch: handheld mixed
reality 3d sketching. In Proc. VRST’08, pages 223–226. ACM, 2008.

