Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. ﬁnal˙arXiv
September 21, 2021

c(cid:13) ESO 2021

6
1
0
2

g
u
A
6
2

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
8
0
4
7
0
.
8
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Evolution of active region outﬂows throughout an active region
lifetime
L. Zangrilli1 and G. Poletto2

1 Istituto Nazionale di Astroﬁsica (INAF) - Osservatorio Astroﬁsico di Torino, via Osservatorio 20, 10025 Pino Torinese, Italy
2 Istituto Nazionale di Astroﬁsica (INAF) - Osservatorio Astroﬁsico di Arcetri, largo Enrico Fermi 5, 50125 Firenze, Italy

Preprint online version: September 21, 2021

ABSTRACT

Context. We have shown previously that SOHO/UVCS data allow us to detect active region (AR) outﬂows at coronal altitudes higher
than those reached by other instrumentation. These outﬂows are thought to be a component of the slow solar wind.
Aims. Our purpose is to study the evolution of the outﬂows in the intermediate corona from AR 8100, from the time the AR ﬁrst forms
until it dissolves, after several transits at the solar limb.
Methods. Data acquired by SOHO/UVCS at the time of the AR limb transits, at medium latitudes and at altitudes ranging from 1.5
to 2.3 R(cid:12), were used to infer the physical properties of the outﬂows through the AR evolution. To this end, we applied the Doppler
dimming technique to UVCS spectra. These spectra include the H i Lyα line and the O vi doublet lines at 1031.9 and 1037.6 Å.
Results. Plasma speeds and electron densities of the outﬂows were inferred over several rotations of the Sun. AR outﬂows are present
in the newly born AR and persist throughout the entire AR life. Moreover, we found two types of outﬂows at diﬀerent latitudes, both
possibly originating in the same negative polarity area of the AR. We also analyzed the behavior of the Si xii 520 Å line along the
UVCS slit in an attempt to reveal changes in the Si abundance when diﬀerent regions are traversed. Although we found some evidence
for a Si enrichment in the AR outﬂows, alternative interpretations are also plausible.
Conclusions. Our results demonstrate that outﬂows from ARs are detectable in the intermediate corona throughout the whole AR
lifetime. This conﬁrms that outﬂows contribute to the slow wind.

Key words. Sun: solar wind – Sun: UV radiation – Sun: activity

1. Introduction

The recent observations of outﬂows originating from the edges
of active regions (ARs) contributed to identify one of the pos-
sible sources of the slow solar wind, whose origin has not yet
been unambiguously identiﬁed. However, although they have
been observed in many circumstances, the characteristics of up-
ﬂows are not well known, nor is it established whether all reach
the interplanetary space, or if there are motions that rise along
one leg and descend along the other leg of a loop.

By using interplanetary scintillation analysis, Kojima et al.
(1999) found slow wind ﬂows during the minimum of solar
activity. These were associated with open magnetic ﬁeld lines
that apparently originated in one of the polarities of an AR.
Observations with the TRACE satellite have sporadically shown
outﬂows from ARs (Winebarger et al. 2001). The so-called AR
sources have been identiﬁed as slow wind contributors from
the study of Ulysses and ACE in situ observations (see, e.g.,
Neugebauer et al. 2002; Liewer et al. 2004). According to the
analysis made by Neugebauer et al. 2002, the AR outﬂows can
be comprised of diﬀerent substreams, originating from multiple
sites in the AR, and the distribution of open magnetic ﬁeld lines
can change with time.

More recently, continuous outﬂows from the edges of ARs
have been identiﬁed through Hinode/XRT (Sakao et al. 2007)
and Hinode/EIS observations (Harra et al. 2008, Doschek et al.
2008). All
levels.
Analyses of Hinode/EIS line asymmetries (Tian et al. 2011b),

these observations refer to low coronal

Send oﬀprint requests to: luca.zangrilli@inaf.it

combined with SDO/AIA space-time plots, suggested the occur-
rence of two velocity components: a background primary com-
ponent (possibly blueshifted by ≈ 10 km s−1) and a secondary
high speed (≈ 100 km s−1) component, the latter only possibly
reaching high coronal levels (Tian et al. 2011b). Furthermore, it
is not clear whether the ﬂows are continuous or quasi-periodic
(De Pontieu & McIntosh 2010, Tian et al. 2011a).

Several mechanisms have been proposed as drivers of the AR
outﬂows, most of them involving magnetic reconnection (see,
e.g., Harra et al. 2008, Marsch et al. 2008, Del Zanna 2008). It
has been pointed out by Baker et al. (2009) that the strongest AR
outﬂows originate from areas in the proximity of magnetic ﬁeld
conﬁgurations that are known as quasi-separatrix layers (QSLs;
see, e.g., Demoulin et al. 1996). These authors argued that the
magnetic reconnection process, which operates in QSLs and sep-
arates AR loops from open magnetic ﬁeld lines or larger-scale
loops, is a possible mechanism underlying the AR outﬂows. A
diﬀerent mechanism for outﬂows, based on AR expansion, has
been suggested by Murray et al. (2010).

It can be determined whether the outﬂows detected in the low
corona reach the interplanetary medium by comparing the prop-
erties of plasma originating at the periphery of ARs and those of
the in situ wind plasma, which are assumed to originate from that
source. This approach avoids the problem of measuring plasma
ﬂows high up in the corona. The method of comparing the low
corona plasma properties with the wind parameters measured
in situ has been adopted by Ko et al. (2006), for example, who
used SOHO/UVCS data to compare abundances inferred in the
corona at the AR edges with abundances measured in the wind
from ACE/SWICS. Analogously, Liewer et al. (2004) analyzed

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

ACE and Ulysses data and concluded that the O7+/O6+ ratio (a
proxy for the electron temperature of the region where freezing-
in occurs) is higher and more variable in the solar wind streams
that are thought of as originating from ARs than the ratio de-
tected from coronal hole (CH) sources.

An indirect evidence that low corona outﬂows extend into in-
teplanetary space has been proposed by Del Zanna et al. (2011)
and Bradshaw et al. (2011), who compared Hinode/EIS observa-
tions with the radio noise storms mapped by the Nancay radiohe-
liograph. In the scenario proposed by these authors, the observed
noise storms originate in low-energy electron beams propagating
into the high corona, where they are accelerated by interchange
reconnection between closed and open loops in the low corona.
A multi-instrument approach in the study of AR outﬂows has
been adopted by Vanninathan et al. (2015), who excluded the
role of chromospheric jets as possible drivers and instead sug-
gested that the magnetic ﬁeld diﬀusion might be responsible for
the upﬂows. Moreover, these authors obtained evidence of two
outﬂow regimes from observing two velocity components that
they ascribed to magnetic reconnection and a pressure-driven
mechanism.

It is well established that the element abundances with a low
ﬁrst ionization potential (FIP), that is, lower than 10 eV, in the
slow solar wind are signiﬁcantly higher than those of the pho-
tosphere (see, e.g., von Steiger et al. 2000). The degree of en-
hancement of a particular element is commonly evaluated by
the FIP bias factor, which is the ratio of the abundance of this
element relative to that of a high-FIP (i.e., with a ﬁrst ioniza-
tion potential higher than 10 eV) reference element measured
in the corona, with the same relative abundance as measured in
the photosphere. By comparing the abundances determined by
Hinode/EIS and SWICS, Brooks & Warren (2011) made a di-
rect connection between the plasma ﬂowing out from the edge of
an AR with the slow wind detected in situ. These authors found
that this AR outﬂow is characterized by values of the FIP bias
of ∼ 3-4, which distinguishes it from the bias derived from ob-
servations of the polar CH. These show values of ∼ 1.0-1.1, as
expected for the fast wind (see also van Driel-Gesztelyi et al.
2012, Wang 2012).

A recent full-Sun study, combining the analysis of coro-
nal plasma composition, Doppler outﬂow speed mesurements,
large-scale coronal magnetic ﬁeld reconstruction, and in situ
measurements of the solar wind at 1 AU, has been pre-
sented by Brooks et al. (2015). By analyzing Hinode/EIS and
ACE/SWEPAM data, they produced a solar wind source map
that conﬁrmed the role of ARs as slow wind sources. The au-
thors concluded that ARs appear to be the primary contributors
to the slow wind ﬂows.

Plasma ﬂows at the intermediate corona levels, in the range
from 1.5 to 2.5 R(cid:12), have recently been detected by Zangrilli &
Poletto (2012), who analyzed SOHO/UVCS coronal observa-
tions at the time when an AR transits at the solar limb. Applying
the Doppler dimming (DD) technique to data that covered the
NOAA 8124 AR complex on January 2, 1998, these authors
showed that outﬂows were present in a narrow channel at the
edge of a closed loop system, where, according to magnetic po-
tential ﬁeld extrapolations, bundles of open ﬁeld lines connected
the AR to the interplanetary space.

The temporal evolution of AR upﬂows has so far been stud-
ied in the relatively short time interval of a few days. D´emoulin
et al. (2013) analyzed upﬂows from the edge of AR 10978 dur-
ing its transit over the solar disk. They found that the upﬂows
are characterized by a collimated and stationary component, and
that their limb-to-limb evolution is dominated by projection ef-

2

fects onto the line of sight (LOS). Their results are also compati-
ble with an origin of the upﬂows from reconnection along quasi-
separatrix layers. Culhane et al. (2014) followed the evolution of
the plasma upﬂows from ARs over the days of its central merid-
ian passage. The authors found a short timescale variability of
the upﬂows and a strong stationary component and conﬁrmed
that AR upﬂows can contribute to the slow solar wind.

In the present work we address the neglected question of how
plasma outﬂows evolve in the intermediate corona on a longer
timescale by analyzing successive limb transits of an AR in a
time interval of several months, from the time of its birth to the
time of its death. We do not have to cope with projection eﬀects
on the solar disk because we only use limb observations and fo-
cus on possible changes that occurr in the time intervals from
one limb transit to the next. Our purpose is to establish whether
the deduced outﬂow speeds and electron densities are a function
of the AR age or if they occur at typical speed and density levels,
independent of the AR evolution. We also examine the location
from which plasma originates to determine whether it changes
with time or persists throughout the AR lifetime. A change in
the AR outﬂow sources pattern might depend on a variation in
the AR polarities orientation with time and on the AR magnetic
ﬁeld dispersal with the AR age, the latter perhaps leading to a
unipolar ﬁeld or to several low-lying closed loops with no es-
caping plasma. The evolution of the outﬂow properties might
also depend on the activity level of the AR, as the occurrence of
many ﬂares or coronal mass ejections (CME) might indicate the
likelihood of magnetic ﬁeld lines opening. Finally, we analyze
the brightness of the 520 Å second-order line of the Si xii ion,
which is detected in the O vi channel spectra, and discuss the
origin of its changes along the UVCS slit.

The paper is organized as follows: in Sect. 2 we describe
the data, in Sect. 3 we summarize the procedure by which we
inferred the physical parameters of the AR and, in particular,
those of the outﬂowing plasma. Section 4 describes the results,
which are discussed in Sect. 5, where a summary of the main
results and the conclusions are also given.

2. Data

2.1. NOAA 8100 active region

We here study NOAA AR 8100, which is an interesting and
fairly active region that has been the subject of several papers
(see, e.g., Yan et al. 2001, Green et al. 2002, Mandrini et al.
2004), which mainly addressed questions on its topology and
the energy and helicity budget. Most of the literature refers to
November 8, 1997, as the ﬁrst limb passage of this region, when
it was born as AR 8100 a few days before; however, the region
had already been seen at the limb of the Sun on October 26-
27 (Solar Geophysical Data n. 644 lists a ﬂare observed at the
Meudon Observatory from AR 8100, at S20, E75, on October
27, 1997) and made its last limb transit around February 28,
1998. In the following we refer to this active region as AR 8100,
throughout its limb passages, although it was assigned diﬀerent
numbers at successive transits: it is called AR 8112, AR 8124,
and AR 8142 in the second to fourth rotations, after which no
number was assigned to the AR. The estimated number of ﬂares
and CMEs originating from the region is possibly higher than 50.
The AR magnetic ﬁeld exhibits a peculiar evolution as its polar-
ities continued to rotate throughout the AR lifetime, changing
from an ≈ E/W to an ≈ N/S orientation (see Fig. 6 in Mandrini
et al. 2004). This behavior is very convenient for our analysis,
allowing us to see loops both edge-on and face-on, respectively,

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

thus facilitating our understanding of the 3D structure of the re-
gion.

2.2. SOHO/UVCS data

SOHO/UVCS (see, e.g., Domingo et al. 1995, Kohl et al. 1995,
Kohl et al. 1997, Kohl et al. 2006) routinely made synoptic ob-
servations of the Sun, acquiring spectra at eight diﬀerent polar
angles (PAs) every 45 degrees, starting from the north pole. At
every PA, the UVCS slit is set normal to the radial of the Sun,
at a number of heliocentric distances that start at 1.5 R(cid:12) and
reach 3.5 R(cid:12) at the equator, and lower altitudes at the other PAs,
where weaker line intensities are expected. Typically we used
data taken at PA = 135 deg and PA = 225 deg, correspond-
ing to the latitude of −45 deg (southern hemisphere), SE and
SW quadrant, respectively, for the east and west limb passages.
The radial from the Sun center, which deﬁnes the PA, intercepts
the spectrograph slit in an oﬀ-centered position. The resulting
unequal distribution of the pixels along the spatial direction, rel-
atively to the slit PA, implies a shorter coverage of the corona
at low latitudes in the SE quadrant observations than in the SW.
However, at the east limb the AR is marginally within the ﬁeld
of view of the observations taken with the slit at PA = 90 deg
(and also at 135 deg), which are made along the equatorial di-
rection. This circumstance, and the need of a wider coverage of
the corona at low latitudes, caused us to use both mid-latitudes
and equatorial scans when analyzing the transits at the east solar
limb.

SOHO/UVCS acquired data over the ten east and west limb
transits of the AR, from the end of October 1997 to the end
of February 1998. The passage at the west limb on January 2,
1998, has been analyzed by Zangrilli & Poletto (2012). We note
in passing that since UVCS takes data only at the solar limb,
when there is no direct way of knowing the magnetic ﬁeld at the
base of the region, any comparison between the UVCS structure
and the magnetic ﬁeld reconstructions (based on data collected
throughout a solar rotation) is subject to some margin of uncer-
tainty (see discussion in Sect. 3.3).

The ﬁeld of view covered by UVCS (40(cid:48) along the slit di-
rection) is shown in Fig. 1, in which the four slit positions and
the data binning along the spatial direction are also given. The
ﬁxed edge of the UVCS slit, whose projections are represented
in the cartoon as green rectangles, was set at 1.5, 1.8, 2.1 and
2.4 R(cid:12). In the following, we refer to these slit positions as posi-
tions 1, 2, 3 and 4. Data are acquired on two consecutive days,
when synoptic data are available (with the only exception of the
sixth transit on January 2, 1998, owing to the lack of synop-
tic data over two consecutive days), and have been summed up
over a three-degree wide sun-centered angular sector to increase
the signal-to-noise ratio. The synoptic observations typically last
only about 45 minutes over all four slit positions. This time is
often not long enough to guarantee a good statistics, particularly
at positions 3 and 4, and at relatively high latitudes. Hence, we
summed data over two consecutive synoptics after ensuring, by
inspecting SOHO/LASCO images (Brueckner et al. 1995), that
the spatial coronal structures along the slit were stable enough to
allow the data combination. Zangrilli & Poletto (2012) summed
the spatial data over a number of pixels that was the same along
the slit for all the four positions, spanning a decreasing latitude
interval with distance. In the present study, the choice of a con-
stant angular width of the bins at all slit positions allows par-
tially compensating for the decreasing count rate in spectra with
heliocentric distance and matching the observations at medium

Fig. 1. Cartoon illustrating the conﬁguration of the UVCS O vi
channel observations at the west limb: the UVCS ﬁeld of view
is shown in green as the projection onto the plane of the sky of
the slit at the four positions. As an example of the data binning
along the spatial direction, the slit at 1.5 R(cid:12) is divided into the
three-degree wide angular sectors within which UVCS data have
been summed. The slit positions at the two PAs at the east limb
are illustrated in the eastern panels of Fig. 2. As context images,
we show an image from EIT-171, taken on January 2, 1998 when
AR 8100 was at the west limb at a latitude of about −20 deg, and
a LASCO-C2 image, taken on the same day.

latitudes with those taken along the equatorial direction, which
we used here.

UVCS data have been taken in the H i Lyα and O vi channels,
which have diﬀerent characteristics: in the radial direction, the
O vi channel slit width is 0.3 mm , while the H i Lyα channel slit
width is 50 µm, thus covering diﬀerent intervals of heliocentric
distances, corresponding to 83(cid:48)(cid:48) and 14(cid:48)(cid:48) in the plane of the sky,
respectively. Data have originally been acquired with a spatial
resolution of 21(cid:48)(cid:48) per bin in the plane of the sky, which has then
been degraded by averaging data over three-degree wide sun-
centered latitude sectors, as we discussed above.

Spectra acquired in the O vi channel include the doublet O vi
lines at 1031.9 and 1037.6 Å, the H i Lyβ line at 1025.7 Å, and
the weaker line of the Si xii doublet at 520.7 Å (in the second
order). The spectral resolution of O vi data is 0.594 Å per bin.
In the H i Lyα channel the spectral resolution is 0.14 Å per bin.
We point out that data are taken with exposure times that in-
crease with the slit heliocentric altitude in an attempt to make
counts at the largest distances accumulate long enough to be-
come statistically signiﬁcant. However, as the distance from the
Sun increases along the slit as well (it is higher for pixels at the
slit ends), there are cases when the exposure time is not long
enough to provide signiﬁcant data all along the slit, hence these
positions were not considered in the study.

Data were analyzed using the UVCS - Data Analysis
Software, which takes care of wavelength and radiometric cali-
bration. Stray-light eﬀects have been corrected through the semi-
empirical relationship given by Cranmer et al. (2010). Line in-
tensities were calculated after ﬁtting the observed line proﬁles
with a Gaussian and then integrating over wavelength.

3

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

2.3. SOHO/EIT context images

As context data, we used wavelet-enhanced images from
SOHO/EIT (Delaboudini`ere et al. 1995) to infer the loop con-
ﬁgurations in the low corona at the times when the AR crosses
the limb of the Sun. EIT images were acquired in the 195 and
171 Å wavebands, and, as far as possible, at the same dates as
the SOHO/UVCS data we analyzed. The occurrence of weaker
emission regions in EIT images might help us to identify the
source regions of outﬂows, if any. Long-lived upﬂows have been
recognized in Hinode/EIS analyses to correspond to low-density
and low-electron temperature regions (e.g., Doschek et al. 2008,
Del Zanna 2008, Hara et al. 2008, D´emoulin et al. 2013). In par-
ticular, Doschek et al. (2008) found evidence that low-intensity
regions in ARs are signiﬁcantly Doppler-shifted and are associ-
ated with open magnetic ﬁeld lines that extend into the helio-
sphere; the estimated electron densities and temperatures in the
outﬂows are considered rather low for an active region. We there-
fore expect to ﬁnd the low-corona counterparts of the outﬂows
we detect in the intermediate corona as weaker emission regions
in EIT images.

At higher levels, we used potential ﬁeld extrapolations that
we obtained with the potential ﬁeld source surface (PFSS) rou-
tine in the solar software (SSW) package (see, e.g., Schrijver
2001, Schrijver & De Rosa 2003). We used both EIT images and
PFSS extrapolations as guidelines to infer where the magnetic
ﬁeld may be open and compared this with the outcome from
UVCS data analysis. We point out that UVCS data are taken at
altitudes high enough to be close to the source surface height (at
least for the two highest positions of the slit), hence we expect
the large-scale magnetic ﬁeld there to be reasonably close to a
potential ﬁeld.

3. Data analysis

3.1. Doppler dimming analysis

The eﬃciency of the chromospheric radiation scattering process
by a coronal ion is reduced when the plasma is moving, relative
to the case of a static plasma, because the central wavelength of
the scattering proﬁle is Doppler shifted with respect to that of the
line emitted from the solar disk. This is known as Doppler dim-
ming (DD) eﬀect, and its application as a diagnostic tool to mea-
sure the radial components of the outﬂow speeds in the corona
has been extensively studied in the literature (see, e.g., Hyder
& Lites 1970, Withbroe et al. 1982, Noci et al. 1987, Noci &
Maccari 1999).

In the following, we brieﬂy summarize the method (based on
the DD eﬀect) by which we determined plasma outﬂow speeds
and electron densities. A more complete description is provided
in Zangrilli et al. (2002) and Zangrilli & Poletto (2012). Brieﬂy,
we recall that the intensities of the H i Lyα and O vi doublet lines
depend on the plasma density, the outﬂow speed, and the ele-
ment abundance; other parameters such as the plasma electron
temperature and the ion kinetic temperatures along and across
the magnetic ﬁeld direction play a secondary role. The data we
used are the intensities of the H i Lyα line and the O vi doublet
lines at 1031.9 and 1037.6 Å, which, provided the temperatures
are known by some other means, are expected to allow us to in-
fer the three unknowns: electron density, outﬂow speed, and el-
ement abundance. This is indeed the case whenever protons and
oxygen ions ﬂow at the same speed; while in CHs this probably
does not occur (see, e.g., Cranmer 2009), we made this assump-

4

tion at intermediate latitudes, hence we have enough parameters
to solve the problem.

The coronal UV lines form by collisional and radiative exci-
tations (see, e.g., Noci & Maccari 1999). To estimate the plasma
speed, we need to know by how much the radiative component
of the coronal line intensities has been dimmed. To this end, we
have to calculate the intensity of the line on the basis of a coronal
model, starting with trial values of the plasma speed and electron
density, and integrating the calculated local emissivities along
the LOS on the basis of the proﬁles of the physical parameters
prescribed by the model. When the calculated intensity does not
reproduce observations, the plasma speed and electron density
are changed until the intensity converges toward the observed
value, hence identifying the correct plasma outﬂow speed and
density.

For the values assumed for the plasma temperatures, we
adopted the electron temperature radial proﬁle given by Gibson
et al. (1999) and the O vi kinetic temperature proﬁle measured
by Strachan et al. (2004), both obtained for a coronal streamer
during a solar activity minimum. Parallel and normal (to the
magnetic ﬁeld) temperatures were assumed to have the same
value. This is consistent with the results of Frazin et al. (2003),
who claimed that kinetic temperature anisotropy in streamer re-
gions, if any, starts above an altitude of 2.6 R(cid:12). Neutral hydro-
gen kinetic temperatures were evaluated from our own data set
of H i Lyman α proﬁles, taking into account corrections for the
instrumental proﬁle function and the spectrometer slit width.

A further parameter we did not discuss so far is the solar disk
intensity, which aﬀects the intensity of the coronal radiative line
components. H i Lyman α disk intensities have been measured
in the time interval we analyze by the SOLSTICE experiment
on the UARS satellite (see Woods et al. 2000). We point out
that SOLSTICE measures the disk intensity from the same van-
tage point as Earth, while a coronal ion lying in the plane of the
sky, directly above the AR, or in other words, in the most eﬃ-
cient geometrical scattering position, can be excited by a higher
H i Lyman α ﬂux originating from both the AR and the disk.
A study of the AR contribution to the disk intensity has been
made by Ko et al. (2002), who concluded that the AR contribu-
tion at the distances of the intermediate corona only amounts to
a few percent of the total disk brightness. We took into account
the small variation in the H i Lyman α disk brightness induced
by the AR, adopting the value measured by SOLSTICE when
the AR was at the central meridian, that is, six days before (for
the west) or after (for the east) limb transit. Because there are
no routine measurements of the O vi disk intensities, we used
the values of 387.0 and 199.5 (erg/s/cm2/sr) for the 1031.9 and
1037.6 Å lines, respectively, derived from UVCS disk observa-
tions taken on December 4, 1996 (see Zangrilli et al. 2002). The
adopted line widths are taken from Warren et al. (1997).

3.2. Si xii 520.7 Å line analysis

The Si xii doublet line at 520.7 Å, which is detected in the
second-order spectra of the O vi channel, oﬀers us the opportu-
nity of analyzing the behavior of a low-FIP element line intensity
along the UVCS slit. As we mentioned in the Introduction, the
low-FIP element abundances are enhanced in the slow wind with
respect to fast wind abundances, which are approximately pho-
tospheric. Unfortunately, from the 520.7 Å Si xii line intensity,
I(Si xii), and the electron density derived from the DD analysis
alone, we cannot establish whether I(Si xii) changes across the
AR because of variations in the Si abundance or in the electron

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

temperature, or as a result of a combination of these factors. We
discuss our results in Sect. 5.

We know that the Si xii 520.7 Å line is collisionally excited,
and its intensity is given by (see, e.g., Withbroe et al. 1982, Noci
& Maccari 1999)

I(Si xii) = hν0
4π

0.83ASi

(cid:90)

LOS

RSi+11(Te)n2

eCcoll(Te)dx,

(1)

where the Si+11 ionization ratio, RSi+11 = nSi+11 /nSi, is dic-
tated by the ionization balance assumption and is a function of
the electron temperature, Te; nSi+11 and nSi are the Si+11 and sil-
icon number density, respectively; ASi = nSi/nH is the silicon
abundance relative to hydrogen, nH/ne = 0.83 is the hydrogen
abundance relative to electrons, for a plasma composition with
10% of helium, ne is the electron density; and Ccoll is the colli-
sional coeﬃcient of the transition, which is a function of Te.

Equation (1) can be written as

I(Si xii) ∝ [ASi][n2

e] f (Te)Ln2

e

,

(2)

e

e], the integration length scale Ln2

where [n2
and f (Te) are usually
evaluated around the temperature at which the line forms most
strongly. In the following, we discard data acquired at the lowest
slit position because the DD technique is more sensitive to the
high-speed regime, and we discard data taken at slit positions 3
and 4 because counts in the line are often too few to guarantee a
statistically signiﬁcant result. Hence we use only data from slit
position 2. For convenience, we write I(Si xii)/[n2
e] below, which
is proportional to [ASi] f (Te) when the integration length scale
Ln2
is constant. We are interested in changes across the AR of
the I(Si xii)/[n2
e] quantity, therefore we choose to give its proﬁle
along the slit, in arbitrary units normalizing to its mean value
over the altitude interval −63 to −54 deg, avoiding uncertainties
in the calibration of UVCS second-order spectra.

e

3.3. Potential ﬁeld extrapolation

Inferring the coronal magnetic ﬁeld topology allows us to iden-
tify the sources of the outﬂows detected by the DD analy-
sis, and, possibly, to locate them at lower levels. The potential
ﬁeld source surface (PFSS) extrapolation technique (see, e.g.,
Schrijver 2001, Schrijver & De Rosa 2003) gives basic infor-
mation on the magnetic ﬁeld structure of the quiet corona. In
particular, we used this approach to locate areas within the ac-
tive region in which open magnetic ﬁeld lines are rooted, as-
suming that the solar wind ﬂows along open lines to eventually
escape into interplanetary space. The PFSS package included in
the SSW tree (Schrijver & De Rosa 2003) relies on a database
of solar surface magnetic ﬁeld models, calculated with a six-
hour cadence, obtained from SOHO/MDI. These magnetic ﬁeld
models are given for any heliographic latitude and Carrington
longitude, and allow magnetic ﬁeld lines to also be extrapolated
at the time ARs are at the solar limb, as in the case of UVCS
observations.

We extrapolated magnetic ﬁeld lines in a longitude inter-
val of ±10 deg across the plane of the sky in a latitude inter-
val spanning from the equator to the south pole, thus covering
the whole extent of AR 8100. The lines were traced on a grid
uniform in latitude and longitude, without setting any treshold
for the magnetic ﬂux at the solar surface. In the following, we
roughly assume that open lines originating from latitudes higher
than −60 deg belong to the polar CH region.

4. Results

In this section we illustrate the results inferred from the DD
technique described in Sect. 3.1 and from the analysis of the
Si xii 520.7 Å line, starting from the ﬁrst limb transit of AR 8100,
which occurred on October 26-27, 1997, to the last one, on
February 27-28, 1998. The outﬂow speed results are shown as
isocontour maps, obtained by interpolating the results of the DD
analysis (see Fig. 2) as a function of latitude and heliocentric
distance. Evidence for outﬂow channel candidates is provided
by isocontour maps, dipping down, with respect to adjacent po-
sitions, toward lower altitudes. We required this to occur at sev-
eral speed levels and at positions where open bundles of mag-
netic ﬁeld lines, originating within the AR, are present. A fur-
ther guide to identifying the AR outﬂow channels was obtained
from the intensity ratio of the O vi doublet lines at 1031.9 and
1037.6 Å, IO VI−1031.9/IO VI−1037.6. This diagnostic technique has
been illustrated by many authors (see, e.g., Noci et al. 1987,
Li et al. 1998), here it suﬃces to say that the intensity ratio is
a decreasing function of the plasma speed, v, at least for v <
100 km/s. Examples of the proﬁles of IO VI−1031.9/IO VI−1037.6
along the UVCS slit are discussed in Sects. 4.2 and 4.3 at the
times of the second and third AR limb transits. When the bun-
dles of open lines clearly originated solely from the south CH,
(i.e., at southern latitudes roughly higher than 60 deg), we dis-
carded the channel candidate from our analysis. The occurrence
of open lines that project onto the same area and originate from
both the CH and the AR, as is often the case in channels at inter-
mediate latitude, is discussed in Sect. 5.

The speeds and electron densities inferred from the DD anal-
ysis that belong to outﬂow channel candidates, which are tenta-
tively classiﬁed as low-latitude and intermediate-latitude chan-
nels, are also given in separate diagrams (see Fig. 3). The error
bars were estimated from the total counts statistics in the line in-
tensites. The main source of error in the values inferred for the
outﬂow speed and electron density is the statistical uncertainty in
the intensity line ratio IO VI−1031.9/IO VI−1037.6 (the H i Lyman α
intensity is aﬀected by a negligible error). We estimated the up-
per and lower limits in v and ne by setting the value of the ra-
tio IO VI−1031.9/IO VI−1037.6 to its highest and lowest value in the
DD analysis, according to the Poissonian statistics of the intensi-
ties of individual lines. Owing to the non-linear relationship be-
tween the oxygen doublet intensity ratio and the outﬂow speed
(see, e.g., Noci et al. 1987), values inferred from the DD study
that are lower than about 50 km/s, which are obtained mostly at
low heliocentric distances, tend to be more uncertain than those
relative to higher speed regimes, in spite of the more favorable
count statistics. Typical outﬂow speed and electron density er-
rors range within the intervals of 10-40 percent, and 2-10 per-
cent, respectively. For a thorough discussion on the inﬂuence of
DD model parameters on the ﬁnal results we refer to Zangrilli &
Poletto (2012).

The contour maps of Fig. 4 describe the distribution
and the evolution of
the surface (photospheric) magnetic
ﬁeld strength of AR 8100 and the change in the orienta-
tion of the ﬁeld polarities during Carrington rotations (CR)
from 1929 to 1933. The data of these magnetograms are
taken from the synoptic charts published by the Wilcox Solar
Observatory (http://wso.stanford.edu/synopticl.html). The CH
boundaries are also shown in Fig. 4a; data are taken from
the synoptic maps of the He I 10830Å line equivalent width
of the Kitt Peak telescope of the National Solar Observatory
(ftp://vso.nso.edu/kpvt/synoptic/).

5

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

Fig. 2. Isocontour maps of the outﬂow speed for the ten limb transits of AR 8100. Open negative magnetic ﬁeld lines originating
from latitudes lower (higher) than −60 deg are shown in green (orange). In panels e and g positive open lines are also shown
(red), originating from AR 8100 and from AR 8141 (in the northern emisphere), respectively. The UVCS slits are shown as a
sequence of red dots that represent the individual bins. Full triangles (squares) identify data points within the intermediate- (low-)
latitude outﬂow channel candidates. Additional outﬂow channels whose latitudes are slightly shifted equatorward with respect to
the latitudes at which intermediate- and low-latitude channels are found are indicated with open triangles and squares.

We show in Fig. 3 the outﬂow speeds and densities for every
limb transit of the AR and in Fig. 5 the proﬁles of I(Si xii)/[n2
e]
along the slit (set at position 2) for the AR west limb transits.
Features for each limb passage are illustrated in individual sub-
section and discussed in Sect. 5.

4.1. First limb transit

The results from the DD analysis of the ﬁrst limb transit, which
occurred in the SE quadrant on October 26 and 27, 1997,
are shown in Fig. 2a. Red dots indicate the location of the
UVCS data used in our modeling; magnetic ﬁeld lines obtained
from PFSS extrapolations are labeled with diﬀerent colors, gray
(closed ﬁeld lines), green (open), and orange (open, but origi-
nating from southern latitudes greater than −60 deg that pertain
to the south polar CH. Hints of three outﬂow channels appear
in the intermediate corona at latitudes −15, −25, and −35 deg;
they are identiﬁed in panel (a) of Fig. 2 by dips in the con-
tour levels of the speed map that occur at diﬀerent altitudes
where bundles of open lines are found. They originate in a loop
system and in the boundary of the active region and the coro-

nal hole (AR-CH). Their positions correspond to local minima in
the IO VI−1031.9/IO VI−1037.6 proﬁles. We classiﬁed two of them as
low-latitude and intermediate-latitude channels: these are identi-
ﬁed by full squares and full triangles, respectively in the map of
Fig. 2a. A third outﬂow is indicated by open squares and appar-
ently bifurcates from the low-latitude outﬂow at 1.7 R(cid:12) to then
extend closer to the east equator. We note that the intermediate-
latitude channel is also partially associated with open lines orig-
inating from the south polar CH. These lines project onto the
same areas as those rooted in the AR.

Figure 3a shows the speed proﬁles of the three outﬂow chan-
nels we found from the DD analysis. The low-latitude speed pro-
ﬁle (solid squares) possibly attains values lower than those of
the intermediate-latitude proﬁle (solid triangles), particularly at
distances smaller than 2 R(cid:12), while at higher altitudes the two
proﬁles reach similar values. However, the relatively large er-
rors do not allow us to draw any clear conclusion about pos-
sible diﬀerences in the speed regime between the two outﬂows.
The secondary branch of the low-latitude channel (open squares)
continues at relatively low speed values, also at distances larger
than 2 R(cid:12).

6

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

Fig. 3. Outﬂow speed and electron density vs. distance for the ten limb transits; the dotted and dashed curves are typical density
proﬁles for a CH and a streamer, respectively (see Guhathakurta et al. 1999 and Gibson et al. 1999). The solid blue triangles and
the solid red squares are the intermediate- and low-latitude outﬂow speeds, respectively. The ﬁve- and ten-point stars represent
the electron density values for the intermediate- and low-latitude outﬂows, respectively. The error bars in the electron density are
not shown as they are barely distinguishable in a logarithmic plot; see text for a discussion about the error estimate for v and ne.
Analogously to Fig. 2, open triangles and squares refer to the outﬂow speeds in secondary intermediate- and low-latitude channels;
the relative electron densities are given as open ten- and ﬁve-point stars.

The low-percentage errors in the calculated electron densi-
ties allow us to state that the three density proﬁles (see Fig. 3a)
are diﬀerent: in particular, two proﬁles are intermediate between
typical streamer and CH proﬁles, and the third one, pertaining
to the equatorial region, is more similar to typical streamer val-
ues. Moreover, the highest latitude channel appears to show a
mixture of plasma from the AR and the polar CH.

The panels of Fig. 6 show the west and east side of AR 8100,
as the AR moves from the east to the west limb passage.
Moreover, the gradual rotation of the AR polarities occasion-
ally brings diﬀerent parts of its structure into the foreground.
These parts appear to consist of three loop families. The ﬁrst
system is closest to the equator and consists of slanted loops,
which are seen neither exactly face-on nor edge-on during the
ﬁrst transit. The second family appears at medium latitudes as
a fainter and apparently higher reaching system than the ﬁrst. It
gradually brightens with time and evolves to a face-on orienta-
tion owing to the AR rotation, clearly revealing a fan-loop struc-
ture (see Fig. 6e). The third family is located at higher southern
latitudes and consists of several bright features whose geometry

is initially not easy to interpret. They are connected in the N-S
direction.

After the solar rotation dragged the AR close to the central
meridian, where better magnetic ﬁeld data could be acquired,
multiple episodes of ﬂux emergence were observed. The AR
produced some 35 ﬂares and 25 CMEs at this location dur-
ing its ﬁrst transit (see Green et al. 2002). Although the high
variability makes any comparison between extreme ultraviolet
(EUV) morphology and isocontour maps rather uncertain, we
searched EIT images for areas of weaker EUV emission within
the UVCS FOV because long-lived upﬂows have been recog-
nized from Hinode/EIS analyses to correspond to low-intensity
regions (e.g., Doschek et al. 2008, Del Zanna 2008, Hara et al.
2008, D´emoulin et al. 2013). The EIT 195 Å image in Fig. 6a
clearly shows the occurrence of a weaker emission area in be-
tween the ﬁrst and second loop system (latitude ≈ −24 deg)
and, analogously, of a wide gap at the southern boundary of the
second system at about −43 deg latitude. These positions nicely
correspond to the region from which open magnetic ﬁeld line
bundles originate and are then superposed onto the channels in

7

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

Fig. 4. Photospheric magnetic ﬁeld distribution around AR 8100,
taken during Carrington rotations from 1929 to 1933, adapted
from the synoptic maps provided by the Wilcox Solar
Observatory. The neutral ﬁeld line is drawn as a black solid line,
while positive and negative contours are drawn as colored solid
and dashed lines. The greenish squares in panel (a) are the foot-
points of the open magnetic ﬁeld lines. The CH boundaries are
based on He I 10830Å line observations from the Kitt Peak tele-
scope and are shown as a gray long-dashed contour.

the outﬂow map. The positions of the weaker emission areas that
we identify in the EIT images of the ten AR limb transits, and
that we claim to be the low corona counterparts of the outﬂows
we detected in the intermediate corona with the DD analysis, are
indicated with red arrows in the panels of Fig. 6.

The clues we collected in the ﬁrst AR 8100 limb transit that
are in favor of the occurrence of outﬂow channels in regions of
open ﬁeld lines and where the EIT images show low-density ar-
eas, would be corroborated if the following limb transits showed
a similar behavior. We therefore analyzed successive limb pas-
sages of AR 8100 to provide further support of the evidence pro-
vided so far.

4.2. Second limb transit

During the second AR limb transit, AR 8100 was fairly ac-
tive: the shearing motions have been highlighted by Green
et al. (2002), and according to the LASCO CME catalog
(http://cdaw.gsfc.nasa.gov/CME list/), on November 8 a CME
spanning 76 degrees occurred at PA = 271 deg at 08:59 UT,
and two CMEs occurred on the previous day at PAs 270 deg

Fig. 5. Proﬁle along the slit of the normalized (see Sect. 3.2)
quantity I(Si xii)/[n2
e], for the limb transits 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10. The
equator corresponds to 0 deg, the south pole to −90 deg. The
vertical dotted line deﬁnes the boundary with the south polar
CH.

and 278 deg, respectively. This shows that the magnetic conﬁg-
uration of the region experienced disruptions, although no event
is recorded on November 9. We mention that a X9.4 ﬂare oc-
curred on November 6 at 11:49 UT, followed by a halo CME at
12:10 UT, whose source has been identiﬁed in the AR 8100 site.
Analogously to the ﬁrst transit, the outﬂow speed map in
Fig. 2b is characterized by three systems of channels above the
AR at latitudes −20, −35, and −45 deg; two of them appear to
belong to the intermediate-latitude (solid and open triangles) and
the third to the low-latitude family (solid squares).

Figure 3b shows the outﬂow speed and electron density pro-
ﬁles of the low- and intermediate-latitude channels: the prop-
erties of the outﬂows appear indistinguishable in outﬂow speed
and electron density. Figure 7a shows the proﬁle of the O vi dou-
blet line intensity ratio, IO VI−1031.9/IO VI−1037.6, along the UVCS
slit at the time of the second limb transit of the AR in the four
diﬀerent positions of the UVCS slit at PA = 235 deg. It is ob-
vious from the plot that the O vi line ratio is lowest at the high
outﬂow channels.

The magnetic PFSS extrapolation is characterized by three
loop systems with open ﬁeld lines originating far apart on the
east side (see Fig. 2b). The open magnetic ﬁeld lines from the
AR site deﬁne reasonably well the outﬂow lanes we found on
the basis of the criteria we established. The most relevant dif-
ference with respect to the ﬁrst transit concerns the topology of

8

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

the open magnetic ﬁeld lines, which clearly appear to originate
from a common region inside the AR, as shown in Fig. 2b. The
AR magnetic ﬁeld map for CRs 1928/1929 is also presented in
Fig. 4a, where all the footpoints of the open ﬁeld lines (green-
ish squares, corresponding to the green open lines of Fig. 2b) lie
within the same portion of negative polarity of the AR and are
far from the AR-CH boundary (gray long-dashed contour).

The conﬁguration of the AR at its second west limb pas-
sage is presented in Fig. 6b, which shows a wavelet-enhanced
EIT 171 Å image taken on November 6, 1997, one day before
the time interval we considered in the DD analysis, because no
wavelet EIT images are available on November 7-8. Figure 6b
clearly shows a dark lane at the southern latitudes ≈ −40 and
−25 deg (both marked with red arrows), matching the positions
of the outﬂow channels and of the open ﬁeld lines in the PFSS
extrapolation (see Fig. 2b).

A diﬀerent view of the ﬁeld line geometry is shown in Fig. 8,
from a vantage point on the west limb of the Sun, that is, above
the AR at the time it crosses the west limb (the view is rotated
by 90 deg with respect to that of Fig. 2b), where the green open
lines originate from the AR, and the orange lines from the CH.
The west AR side is characterized by a fan-loop structure, while
from the east side the closed lines connect the main polarity to
the network magnetic ﬁeld. The bundle of open ﬁeld lines that
have been shown to overlie the outﬂow channels inferred from
the DD analysis in corona originates in between these two loop
structures. Recent studies revealed that fan-loop structures are
often associated with quasi-separatrix layers (QSLs; see, e.g.,
Schrijver et al. 2010). Baker et al. (2009) identiﬁed the QSLs
that separate closed ﬁeld lines, where the magnetic ﬁeld connec-
tivity experiences a drastic change, as regions from which AR
outﬂows may originate. Although detailed calculations are re-
quired to ﬁnd the possible location of QSLs in the AR magnetic
ﬁeld topology, the magnetic ﬁeld structure shown in Fig. 8 in-
deed suggests the occurrence of QSLs at the border separating
the open magnetic ﬁeld lines from the fan-loop system, hence
enforcing our claim of having identiﬁed AR outﬂows in the in-
termediate corona.

Panel a of Fig. 5 shows the proﬁle of I(Si xii)/[n2

e] across the
UVCS slit at the time of the second limb transit of the AR and
an altitude of 1.8 R(cid:12): the proﬁle shows two peaks at latitudes
≈ −25 and ≈ −50 deg, which coincide with the positions of the
two main outﬂows identiﬁed in the DD analysis (see Fig. 2b).
Under the hypothesis that the electron temperature, hence the
function f (Te), is constant along the UVCS slit (see the discus-
sion in Sect. 3.2), the variation in the ratio I(Si xii)/[n2
e] can be
explained by invoking a silicon enrichment in the coronal plasma
at the positions of the two peaks, which is where we detected
slow wind outﬂows. This interpretation is also valid when the
temperature in the channel is lower than the temperature of ad-
jacent regions because f (Te,channel) < f (Te,AR) (according to the
ionization balance calculations given in the literature, see, e.g.,
Arnaud & Rothenﬂug 1985, we have the maximum of Si xii frac-
tion for Te ≈ 2 × 106 K, which is above the electron temperature
regime we expect at these altitudes; see the discussion in Sect. 5)
and a higher Si abundance would be required to account for our
results. This means that the plot would be consistent with the en-
richment of the low FIP elements found by other authors in AR
outﬂows, as mentioned in Sect. 1. At the altitude we examine,
however, the Si xii ion is very likey frozen-in, and we have no
means to know the temperatures at which this phenomenon oc-
curs in the channels and in the AR. Because (see Sect. 3.2) the
Si xii abundance is extremely sensitive to temperature variations,
we cannot rule out the hypothesis that our results have been dic-

9

Fig. 6. EIT 171Å and 195Å wavelet-enhanced images, acquired
during the AR limb transits. In the panels the red arrows point
to weak emission regions, which we identify as the low corona
counterparts of the low- and intermediate-latitude outﬂow chan-
nels that we infer from the DD analysis of UVCS data. We con-
sidered EIT 195Å images when the 171Å channel data were not
available. For the second limb transit (panel b), we had to con-
sider images taken on November 6 because no EIT data were
available for November 7 and 8.

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

Fig. 7. Proﬁles of the O vi doublet intensity ratio along the UVCS slit at four slit positions from data taken at PA = 225 deg (panel
a), and PA = 135 deg and PA = 90 deg (panel b) for the second and third limb transit, respectively. The positions of the AR
outﬂows are shown by arrows, and the vertical dotted line deﬁnes the boundary with the south polar CH.

In the EIT image shown in Fig. 6c, the three-loop conﬁguration
is now less evident, and the dark lanes are probably partially
covered by the large central loop system. Nonetheless, in Fig. 2c
plasma regions at relatively high outﬂow speed are distinguish-
able at latitudes −20 and −40 deg, supporting results obtained in
the preceding limb transits. Another somewhat less evident out-
ﬂow can be distinguished just below the east equator, associated
with a few open lines. It reaches latitudes of about −10 deg.
The IO VI−1031.9/IO VI−1037.6 proﬁles in Fig. 7b conﬁrm the sys-
tem of three outﬂows from the AR (two low-latitude and one
intermediate-latitude channels), at their positions derived from
the map in Fig. 2c.

Green et al. (2002) made linear force-free extrapolations of
the coronal ﬁeld to match low-lying Yohokh SXT loops for ﬁve
rotations of AR 8100. In their Fig. 5 the authors present the ex-
trapolation for November 29, 1997 and show that an α value
of 0.94 (10−2Mm−1) best reproduces the X-ray Yohkoh loops.
Although obviously diﬀerent from the potential ﬁeld we com-
puted, the three-loop system is still apparent in the Green et al.
(2002) extrapolation, which supports the results of our tech-
nique, which compares UV features at high heliocentric altitudes
with potential coronal ﬁelds.

The fourth limb transit of the AR, on December 3-4, 1997,
occurred at a time when its conﬁguration was quite clear in EIT
maps. Figure 6d shows the EIT 171 Å map on December 4, 1997,
where the three-loop system conﬁguration is clearly visible. It is
obvious that the AR consists of a northern, southern, and central
loop system. The central system originates in the western part of
the AR and is now seen edge-on, leaving a clearly deﬁned dark
lane from the site of the AR in the foreground and a less evi-
dent lane from the AR-CH boundary. Two bright ribbons, ori-
ented along the N-S direction, whose separation increases with
increasing latitude, are easily distinguished in the EIT image.
The dark lane seems to originate from these two ribbons. They
are visible in the ﬁrst two west transits in Figs. 6b and d and are
probably covered by the central loops when they are at the east
limb.

Fig. 8. PFSS extrapolation above the AR at the second limb tran-
sit, as seen from an observer directly above the AR, on the west
limb of the Sun. The arrow points to the position of UVCS at the
time of observations.

tated by diﬀerent temperature regimes along the UVCS slit and
not by changes in the Si abundance.

4.3. Third and fourth limb transits

The third limb transit of the AR occurred on November 21-22,
1997, when the AR was still very active and changing features
appeared at diﬀerent times. The shearing motion of the AR grad-
ually brought the negative polarity closer to the south polar CH
(see Fig. 4b), which is the reason for the edge-on view of some
of the fan-loop system that makes up the western part of the AR.

10

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

The coronal PFSS extrapolation for the same day (see
Fig. 2d) shows open ﬁed lines originating from latitude −25 deg
and from the boundary of the AR with the south CH, and ex-
tending in the intermediate corona approximately along the ra-
dial directions at −25 and −35 deg. A partial overlay of open
magnetic lines from the south CH with those coming from the
AR aﬀects the intermediate-latitude outﬂow. The agreement be-
tween the occurrence of the obvious dark lanes in the EIT image
with the high-speed lanes in the UVCS outﬂow speed maps and
the occurrence of open ﬁeld lines in Fig. 2d appears here more
strongly than in previous limb transits.

The corresponding magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration is detected
in the Wilcox Solar Observatory synoptic map for CR 1930,
where the northernmost polarities of the AR are adjacent (see
Fig. 4b). The map also accounts for the occurrence of large-scale
trans-equatorial loops joining the south AR we analyzed and the
AR at the limb in the northern hemisphere, which is partially vis-
ible in the EIT map. This conﬁguration results in face-on transe-
quatorial loops and edge-on central loops, separated by darker
lanes, giving us a good opportunity of identifying the source re-
gion of high-speed lanes.

The proﬁle of the ratio I(Si xii)/[n2

e] during the fourth tran-
sit is shown in Fig. 5b, where we can recognize two peaks at
−20 and −30 deg, more or less corresponding to the channel
positions in Fig. 2d, and a higher maximum between −40 and
−45 deg, which corresponds to open lines from latitudes higher
than −60 deg, however. We must add that a CME occurred on
December 5, 08:27 UT, PA = 275 deg, spanning 98 degrees, and
PFSS extrapolation might not accurately represent the magnetic
ﬁeld topology during the fourth limb transit.

4.4. Fifth and sixth limb transit

The ﬁfth passage occurred on December 19-20, 1997, when the
AR conﬁguration appeared to evolve toward a morphology con-
sisting of only two loop systems, as can be deduced from Fig. 6e.
This is probably to be ascribed to the AR progressive rotation,
which oriented the central loop system to a more face-on angle.
In addition to the evident channels at −32 and −45 deg, a hint of
a third channel is visible in Fig. 2e at latitude −25 deg, which is
probably associated with positive open lines from the northeast
side of the AR and is plotted as red lines in the same ﬁgure. In the
EIT images the two ribbons of the AR, which during the fourth
transit where N-S oriented, now appear to rotate (see Fig. 6e),
following the AR polarity evolution (see also Fig. 4c, showing
the AR polarity rotation).

The sixth AR limb transit occurred on January 2, 1998, and
has been the subject of the Zangrilli & Poletto (2012) paper. We
refer to this paper for detailed information on that limb tran-
sit. Here it suﬃces to recall that the authors concluded that a
narrow channel at a latitude of −45 deg was the site of high-
speed outﬂows, originating from the southernmost edge of the
AR. This is visible in Fig. 2f (solid triangles), where we also
show a second intermediate-latitude outﬂow from the AR (open
triangles at −35 deg) and a low-latitude outﬂow, between −20
and −30 deg (solid squares). The three channels are associated
with three distinct bundles of open lines, two originating from
latitudes between −30 and −40 deg and one from the AR-CH
boundary. We point out that in the −45 deg channel open ﬁeld
lines both from the AR and from the south polar CH contribute
to the observed outﬂow, analogously to the outﬂows we found
in similar circumstances in other limb transits. We recall that the
speed map in the present work has been made by averaging over
a latitudinal width of three degrees, while Zangrilli & Poletto

(2012) averaged over the original data to obtain a constant spa-
tial resolution of 105 arcsec along the slit for all the four slits
of the dataset. This may account for minor diﬀerences between
plots in this and the previous paper.

The conﬁguration of the AR in previous transits and its con-
ﬁguration in this passage is changed remarkably: this is illus-
trated in Fig. 4c, where the WSO magnetogram of AR 8100 for
CR 1931 shows the AR polarity rotation at its early stages, and
Fig. 6f, where we show a large face-on loop system, with little
evidence of the loop families imaged in earlier transits.
In Fig. 5c we show two maxima in the I(Si xii)/[n2

e] proﬁle,
as expected on the basis of the well-deﬁned low-latitude outﬂow,
which is now quite distinct from the channel visible at −45 deg.
A small peak at −38 deg possibly accounts for the third outﬂow,
as shown in the speed map of Fig. 2f.

4.5. Seventh and eighth limb transits

The seventh and eighth AR limb transits occurred on January
16-17 and 29-30, 1998, respectively. The AR conﬁguration is
similar to that of the preceding sixth transit (see Figs. 6g and
h), and it is dictated by the E-W alignement of the neutral line,
as shown in Fig. 4d. Figure 6h shows that the AR ribbons now
appear almost E-W oriented. This is an especially quiet time for
AR 8100: no ﬂare originated in the region until January 22. The
outﬂow speed maps are shown in Figs. 2g and h.

In the seventh transit we probably have only a low-latitude
channel (the intermediate-latitude channel is largely covered by
open lines from the south polar CH). The red positive open
lines, partially visible in the equatorial side of Fig. 2g, pertain
to AR 8141, which is in the northern hemisphere, and possibly
account for the humps and dips in the speed map at equatorial
latitudes. In the eighth passage the intermediate-latitude outﬂow
is perhaps recognizable again, and only partially to be ascribed
to open lines originating from the south polar CH, as demon-
strated by the PFSS extrapolation in Fig. 2h. This also agrees
with the absence of a clear intermediate-latitude peak of the ratio
I(Si xii)/[n2
e] in Fig. 5d; analogously, the low-latitude maximum
is barely distinguishable in a globally ﬂattened proﬁle.

4.6. Last two transits

The last two transits of AR 8100 occurred on 13-14 and 27-
28 February, 1998. After that time, the dispersal of the mag-
netic ﬁeld in the network between growing nearby young ARs,
AR 8162 on the east side and AR 8156 on the west side,
makes AR 8100 barely identiﬁable (see Fig. 4e). In Figs. 2i
and j the outﬂow maps pertaining to transits 9 and 10 are
shown. The last period of the AR life is characterized by
two remarkable facts: the ﬂattening of the speed proﬁles in
both the low- and intermediate-latitude outﬂows, and the ﬂat-
tening of the I(Si xii)/[n2
e] proﬁle (see Fig. 5e). Although the
intermediate-latitude outﬂow still persists (two channels can be
distinguished), the magnetic ﬁeld of the AR negative polarity is
weakening, as demonstrated by the map shown in Fig. 4e.

5. Discussion and conclusions

The purpose of this work is to analyze the evolution of AR out-
ﬂows detected by the SOHO/UVCS spectrometer in the inter-
mediate corona throughout the lifetime of NOAA AR 8100. The
observations covered a period of four months from the end of
October 1997 to the end of February 1998. Previous works about

11

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

AR outﬂows evolution (e.g., D´emoulin et al. 2013; Culhane et al.
2014) mainly focused on the time interval of the AR solar disk
crossing, or took into account only a single AR limb transit
(Zangrilli & Poletto 2012).

Our present study provides direct evidence that channels of
coronal outﬂow originate from AR 8100, which appear at the
very beginning of the AR life, and persist throughout the en-
tire AR evolution. We observed at least two spatially distinct
types of outﬂow channels: low-latitude outﬂows, associated with
bundles of open magnetic ﬁeld lines radially extending roughly
from within the AR, and intermediate-latitude outﬂows, which,
although detected close to the CH boundary, are often clearly as-
sociated with open ﬁeld lines whose footpoints lie in the AR or
in its immediate neighborhood. The evolution of the morphology
and outﬂow locations in the corona is illustrated in Fig. 2, from
which we conclude that a two-channel pattern roughly persists
throughout the whole AR evolution, with minor changes in the
latitudes at which the channels appear.

Our data do not allow us to show how far the outﬂows can be
identiﬁed: do they really reach outer interplanetary space? ACE
slow wind observations conﬁrm what we proved out to ≈ 2.5 R(cid:12):
AR 8100, during CR 1929, has been recognized as source of
low-speed solar wind and as a site of open magnetic ﬁeld lines
by Rust et al. (2008) (see the synoptic chart shown in Fig. 6
therein), who traced back the slow wind observed by ACE at
1 AU to AR 8100.

The speed vs. heliocentric distance proﬁles in the channels
are shown for each limb transit in Fig. 3. The speed proﬁles ap-
pear relatively ﬂat early in the AR life; conversely, during the
central part of the AR evolution, they reveal a more pronounced
acceleration and ﬁnally tend to level oﬀ with the AR age. Both
outﬂow speed and electron density appear to have diﬀerent pro-
ﬁles in the two channels in several transits of the AR, as shown in
Fig. 3. Electron densities in the low-latitude channels often tend
to be higher than densities in the high-latitude channel, while the
opposite occurs for the outﬂow speed proﬁles.

However, the exceptions represented by the second and pos-
sibly, although with a lower degree of evidence, by the ﬁrst limb
passage (see Figs. 3a and b), where the density proﬁles are al-
most indistinguishable, lead us to hypothesize that in some case,
data may have been contaminated at intermediate latitudes by
plasma from the south polar CH. It is diﬃcult to estimate how
large this contamination might be, hence to draw quantitative
conclusions about physical diﬀerences between the two types of
outﬂow channels, that, as we pointed out, are likely to share a
common origin (see, e.g., the PFSS extrapolations).

As we discussed in Sect. 3, in some cases (e.g., during the
second limb transit) the PFSS extrapolation suggested that the
two types of outﬂows we found (low-latitude and intermediate-
latitude) might originate from a single portion of the AR, as
some of the open ﬁeld lines from the AR sharply bend toward
the south polar CH boundary and then expand radially at the lo-
cations of intermediate latitude outﬂow channels. In some cases,
open ﬁeld lines from the south polar CH are clearly detected,
for instance, during limb transits 6 and 8, which project onto the
plane of the sky above the intermediate-latitude channel. The
speed and density values deduced from the DD analysis in these
cases might be an average of the two outﬂow regimes, that from
the AR and that from the CH. It is possible that the south polar
CH open ﬁeld lines physically come close together in the open
bundles from the AR, as during the AR evolution the magnetic
ﬁeld topology changes and the AR rotation brings the CH bound-
ary closer to the area of the AR from which the open ﬁeld lines
originate.

12

In this context, it is interesting to note that when in the
intermediate-latitude outﬂow channels there is less superposi-
tion of CH and AR open ﬁeld lines, we ﬁnd that the outﬂow
speed and density proﬁles appear indistinguishable from the
low-latitude channels (see, e.g., Fig. 3b, which summarizes the
results of the second limb transit). This result supports the hy-
pothesis that all outﬂow channels we found have the same origin
in the AR, and diﬀerences in the speed proﬁles originate from a
contamination with CH outﬂows.

As we mentioned in Sect. 4.2,

the AR structure from
SOHO/EIT images and from its magnetic ﬁeld topology, as in-
ferred from PFSS extrapolation, suggest that the origin of the
outﬂows we detect in the intermediated corona is inside the neg-
ative AR polarity, at the boundary with a fan-loop system. This
conﬁguration is similar to other cases described in the literature
(see Schrijver et al. 2010, Baker et al. 2009), in which QSLs in
the vicinity of fan-loops and open magnetic ﬁeld lines have been
associated with AR outﬂows detected in the low corona.

A direct comparison of the speed values we derived here with
measurements of AR outﬂow speeds in the literature cannot be
done because we analyzed data at intermediate corona altitudes,
whose speed regime has only been probed by UVCS with the
DD technique. On average, the speed proﬁles radially acceler-
ate from about 50 up to 150 km/s from 1.5 to 2.5 R(cid:12). This
suggests that the AR outﬂows we observed have initial speeds
lower than 50 km/s, which is lower than the values we could
expect for the high-speed component seen by Hinode/EIS (see
Tian et al. 2011b) at lower altitudes. We may fail to observe the
high-velocity component described by Tian et al. either because
the high-speed AR outﬂows are episodic, transient, or quasi-
periodic (see De Pontieu & McIntosh 2010, Tian et al. 2011a)
and UVCS only measures an average speed value over a two-
day interval or because the three-degree spatial averaging we
adopted is too coarse and they are smeared out.
the

second-order
Si xii 520.7 Å line was to determine whether it might sup-
port the hypothesis that the outﬂows detected by UVCS in the
intermediate corona are a component of the slow wind. The
proﬁles of the quantity I(Si xii)/[n2
e] along the UVCS slit, shown
in Fig. 5, are characterized, especially during the early stages of
the AR life, by two peaks at latitudes that fairly well match those
of the AR outﬂows. This seemingly supports our claim; the
strong dependence of the Si xii abundance on temperature and
the lack of information on the precise proﬁles of temperature vs.
height in the channels and in the AR allow us only to state that
our results are consistent with the hypothesis of an enhancement
of low FIP elements in slow wind, however. We found a general
tendency of levelling-oﬀ of the I(Si xii)/[n2
e] proﬁles across
the UVCS slit at the end of the AR life, in agreement with the
weakened evidence for outﬂow channels during the last two
limb transits.

The purpose of

analysis of

the

Evidence has been obtained in the low corona by Doschek
et al. (2008), for example, for lower electron temperatures inside
the AR outﬂows (1.2−1.4×106 K), with respect to the surround-
ing closed corona. The Si xii curve of the ionization balance (see,
e.g., Arnaud & Rothenﬂug 1985) peaks at about 2 × 106 K, well
above the values estimated by Doschek et al. (2008). Under the
hypothesis that Te inside the AR outﬂows is maintained at values
lower than the surrounding corona at the altitudes of UVCS ob-
servations, we would expect a decrease in the I(Si xii)/[n2
e] pro-
ﬁles across the AR, which is the opposite of what we obtained.
For this reason, we could speculate that we observe an eﬀect of
silicon abundance enhancement, the electron temperature possi-
bly giving a negligible contribution. Moreover, because silicon

Zangrilli and Poletto: AR outﬂows

is a low-FIP element, this would be consistent with the expecta-
tions for slow wind ﬂows. The limited information we can obtain
from our data prevents us from drawing any conclusion about a
possible enhancement of the abundance of low-FIP elements in
the outﬂow channels, leaving a clearer interpretation to future
studies.

In conclusion, we have shown that ARs contribute through-
out their lifetime to the slow wind. Whether their contribution is
time dependent on short timescales cannot be determined from
this analysis. On the other hand, our work provides strong sup-
port to the claim by D´emoulin et al. (2013) that the upﬂow driver
acts over a prolonged time, here shown to be on the order of a
few months.

Acknowledgements. We would like to thank the anonymous referee for the
helpful comments and suggestions. The authors acknowledge the use of data
of the Kitt Peak telescope of the National Solar Observatory; NSO/Kitt Peak
data used here are produced cooperatively by NSF/NOAO, NASA/GSFC, and
NOAA/SEL. We also thank the Wilcox Solar Observatory for the use of the
synoptic maps of photospheric magnetic ﬁeld distribution. G.P. acknowledges
support from ASI I/023/09/0.

References

Arnaud, M. & Rothenﬂug, R. 1985, A&AS, 60, 425
Baker, D., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Mandrini, C. H., D´emoulin, P., & Murray,

M. J. 2009, ApJ, 705, 926

Bradshaw, S. J., Aulanier, G., & Del Zanna, G. 2011, ApJ, 743, 66
Brooks, D. H., Ugarte-Urra, I., & Warren, H. P. 2015, Nature Communications,

6, 5947

Brooks, D. H. & Warren, H. P. 2011, ApJ, 727, L13
Brueckner, G. E., Howard, R. A., Koomen, M. J., et al. 1995, Sol. Phys., 162,

357

Cranmer, S. R. 2009, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 6, 3
Cranmer, S. R., Gardner, L. D., & Kohl, J. L. 2010, Sol. Phys., 263, 275
Culhane, J. L., Brooks, D. H., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., et al. 2014, Sol. Phys.,

289, 3799

De Pontieu, B. & McIntosh, S. W. 2010, ApJ, 722, 1013
Del Zanna, G. 2008, A&A, 481, L49
Del Zanna, G., Aulanier, G., Klein, K.-L., & T¨or¨ok, T. 2011, A&A, 526, A137,

articoloAA2012

Delaboudini`ere, J.-P., Artzner, G. E., Brunaud, J., et al. 1995, Sol. Phys., 162,

291

D´emoulin, P., Baker, D., Mandrini, C. H., & van Driel-Gesztelyi, L. 2013,

Sol. Phys., 283, 341

Demoulin, P., Henoux, J. C., Priest, E. R., & Mandrini, C. H. 1996, A&A, 308,

643

Domingo, V., Fleck, B., & Poland, A. I. 1995, Sol. Phys., 162, 1, articoloAA2012
Doschek, G. A., Warren, H. P., Mariska, J. T., et al. 2008, ApJ, 686, 1362
Frazin, R. A., Cranmer, S. R., & Kohl, J. L. 2003, ApJ, 597, 1145
Gibson, S. E., Fludra, A., Bagenal, F., et al. 1999, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 9691
Green, L. M., L´opez fuentes, M. C., Mandrini, C. H., et al. 2002, Sol. Phys., 208,

43

Guhathakurta, M., Fludra, A., Gibson, S. E., Biesecker, D., & Fisher, R. 1999,

J. Geophys. Res., 104, 9801, articoloAA2012

Hara, H., Watanabe, T., Matsuzaki, K., et al. 2008, PASJ, 60, 275
Harra, L. K., Sakao, T., Mandrini, C. H., et al. 2008, ApJ, 676, L147
Hyder, C. L. & Lites, B. W. 1970, Sol. Phys., 14, 147
Ko, Y.-K., Raymond, J. C., Li, J., et al. 2002, ApJ, 578, 979
Ko, Y.-K., Raymond, J. C., Zurbuchen, T. H., et al. 2006, ApJ, 646, 1275
Kohl, J. L., Esser, R., Gardner, L. D., et al. 1995, Sol. Phys., 162, 313
Kohl, J. L., Noci, G., Antonucci, E., et al. 1997, Sol. Phys., 175, 613, arti-

coloAA2012

Kohl, J. L., Noci, G., Cranmer, S. R., & Raymond, J. C. 2006, A&A Rev., 13, 31
Kojima, M., Fujiki, K., Ohmi, T., et al. 1999, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 16993,

articoloAA2012

Li, X., Habbal, S. R., Kohl, J. L., & Noci, G. 1998, ApJ, 501, L133
Liewer, P. C., Neugebauer, M., & Zurbuchen, T. 2004, Sol. Phys., 223, 209
Mandrini, C. H., D´emoulin, P., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., et al. 2004, Ap&SS, 290,

319

Marsch, E., Tian, H., Sun, J., Curdt, W., & Wiegelmann, T. 2008, ApJ, 685, 1262
Murray, M. J., Baker, D., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., & Sun, J. 2010, Sol. Phys.,

261, 253

Neugebauer, M., Liewer, P. C., Smith, E. J., Skoug, R. M., & Zurbuchen, T. H.

2002, Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics), 107, 1488

Noci, G., Kohl, J. L., & Withbroe, G. L. 1987, ApJ, 315, 706
Noci, G. & Maccari, L. 1999, A&A, 341, 275
Rust, D. M., Haggerty, D. K., Georgoulis, M. K., et al. 2008, ApJ, 687, 635
Sakao, T., Kano, R., Narukage, N., et al. 2007, Science, 318, 1585, arti-

coloAA2012

Schrijver, C. J. 2001, ApJ, 547, 475
Schrijver, C. J. & De Rosa, M. L. 2003, Sol. Phys., 212, 165
Schrijver, C. J., DeRosa, M. L., & Title, A. M. 2010, ApJ, 719, 1083
Strachan, L., Baham, M., Miralles, M. P., & Panasyuk, A. V. 2004, in ESA
Special Publication, Vol. 575, SOHO 15 Coronal Heating, ed. R. W. Walsh,
J. Ireland, D. Danesy, & B. Fleck, 148, articoloAA2012

Tian, H., McIntosh, S. W., & De Pontieu, B. 2011a, ApJ, 727, L37
Tian, H., McIntosh, S. W., De Pontieu, B., et al. 2011b, ApJ, 738, 18
van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Culhane, J. L., Baker, D., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 281,

237

Vanninathan, K., Madjarska, M. S., Galsgaard, K., Huang, Z., & Doyle, J. G.

2015, A&A, 584, A38

von Steiger, R., Schwadron, N. A., Fisk, L. A., et al. 2000, J. Geophys. Res.,

105, 27217

Wang, Y.-M. 2012, Space Sci. Rev., 172, 123
Warren, H. P., Mariska, J. T., Wilhelm, K., & Lemaire, P. 1997, ApJ, 484, L91
Winebarger, A. R., DeLuca, E. E., & Golub, L. 2001, ApJ, 553, L81
Withbroe, G. L., Kohl, J. L., Weiser, H., & Munro, R. H. 1982, Space Sci. Rev.,

33, 17

Woods, T. N., Tobiska, W. K., Rottman, G. J., & Worden, J. R. 2000,

J. Geophys. Res., 105, 27195

Yan, Y., Liu, Y., Akioka, M., & Wei, F. 2001, Sol. Phys., 201, 337
Zangrilli, L. & Poletto, G. 2012, A&A, 545, A8
Zangrilli, L., Poletto, G., Nicolosi, P., Noci, G., & Romoli, M. 2002, ApJ, 574,

477

13

