Synthesis	  and	  characterization	  of	  dense	  Gd2Ti2O7	  pyrochlore	  thin	  films	  deposited	  
using	  RF	  magnetron	  sputtering	  

Cortney	  R.	  Kreller1,	  Rangachary	  Mukundan1,	  Eric	  L.	  Brosha1,	  Todd	  Williamson2,	  
Terry	  Holesinger3,	  James	  Valdez4,	  Yong	  Q.	  Wang4,	  and	  Blas	  P.	  	  Uberuaga4	  

1MPA-­‐11:	  Materials	  Synthesis	  and	  Integrated	  Devices,	  Los	  Alamos	  National	  
Laboratory,	  Los	  Alamos,	  NM	  87545	  
2C-­‐NR:	  Nuclear	  and	  Radiochemistry,	  Los	  Alamos	  National	  Laboratory,	  Los	  Alamos,	  NM	  
87545	  
3MST-­‐16:	  Nuclear	  Materials	  Science,	  Los	  Alamos	  National	  Laboratory,	  Los	  Alamos,	  NM	  
87545	  
4MST-­‐8:	  Materials	  Science	  in	  Radiation	  and	  Dynamics	  Extremes,	  Los	  Alamos	  National	  
Laboratory,	  Los	  Alamos,	  NM	  87545	  

Thin	   films	   of	   phase	   pure	   pyrochlore	   Gd2Ti2O7	   have	   been	   synthesized	   by	   RF	  
magnetron	   sputtering.	   	   The	   films	   were	   prepared	   from	   oxide	   targets	   in	   50%O2/Ar	  
atmosphere	   and	   deposited	   on	   111	   yttria-­‐stabilized	   zirconia	   (YSZ)	   substrates	   at	   a	  
temperature	  of	  800˚C.	  	  The	  pyrochlore	  structure	  was	  confirmed	  via	  grazing	  angle	  x-­‐
ray	  diffraction	  and	  selected	  area	  electron	  diffraction	  (SAED).	  	  Transmission	  electron	  
microscopy	   (TEM)	   analysis	   also	   showed	   that	   the	   films	   were	   dense	   and	   of	   uniform	  
thickness	   with	   surface	   roughness	   of	   approximately	   8nm.	   	   The	   total	   conductivity	  
measured	   with	   AC	   impedance	   spectroscopy	   was	   found	   to	   be	   independent	   of	  
thickness	  and	  comparable	  in	  magnitude	  to	  that	  of	  bulk	  Gd2Ti2O7.	  	  Differences	  were	  
observed	  in	  the	  Arrhenius	  behavior	  between	  the	  bulk	  and	  thin	  film	  samples	  and	  are	  
attributed	  to	  varying	  levels	  of	  background	  impurities.	  

Introduction	  
The	  solid	  solution	  Gd2ZrxTi1-­‐xO7	  has	  been	  studied	  extensively	  for	  its	  properties	  of	  
fast	  ion	  conduction	  and	  radiation	  tolerance1-­‐3.	  	  For	  both	  applications,	  a	  key	  enabling	  
property	  is	  the	  ability	  for	  the	  cations	  to	  disorder.	  The	  ordered	  pyrochlore	  end	  
member	  Gd2Ti2O7	  (GTO)	  is	  generally	  regarded	  as	  an	  insulating	  extrinsic	  ionic	  
conductor,	  while	  the	  more	  easily	  disordered	  Gd2Zr2O7	  (GZO)	  exhibits	  intrinsic	  fast	  
ion	  conduction.	  	  	  

3+B2

4+O7	  can	  be	  regarded	  as	  a	  defect-­‐fluorite	  type	  

The	  pyrochlore	  structure	  A2
structure	  with	  ordering	  on	  both	  the	  cation	  and	  anion	  sublattice	  yielding	  a	  
superstructure	  with	  twice	  the	  lattice	  constant	  of	  the	  parent	  fluorite.	  	  The	  A	  and	  B	  
site	  cations	  order	  in	  the	  <110>	  directions	  with	  each	  cation	  occupying	  alternate	  rows	  
with	  the	  larger	  A3+	  cation	  8-­‐fold	  coordinated	  and	  the	  smaller	  B4+	  cation	  6-­‐fold	  
coordinated.	  	  The	  structure	  consists	  of	  three	  distinct	  oxygen	  sites:	  48f	  with	  two	  A	  
and	  two	  B	  nearest	  neighbors,	  8a	  with	  four	  A	  nearest	  neighbors	  and	  a	  vacant	  8b	  site	  
with	  four	  B	  nearest	  neighbors4.	  	  Previous	  studies	  have	  shown	  that,	  generally,	  the	  
pyrochlore	  structure	  forms	  when	  1.46<RA/RB<1.80.	  	  	  Below	  1.46	  the	  cation	  radii	  are	  
of	  similar	  enough	  size	  that	  anti-­‐site	  order	  is	  introduced	  giving	  rise	  to	  the	  defect	  
fluorite	  phase5.	  Disorder	  on	  the	  cation	  sublattice	  is	  accompanied,	  or	  perhaps	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
preceded	  by6,	  disorder	  on	  the	  anion	  sublattice.	  	  Disorder	  on	  the	  anion	  sublattice	  
serves	  to	  increase	  the	  number	  of	  mobile	  oxygen	  vacancies	  through	  the	  formation	  of	  
Frenkel	  defects	  consisting	  of	  a	  vacancy	  on	  the	  48f	  site	  and	  an	  oxygen	  interstitial	  ion	  
on	  the	  8b	  site7.	  

Numerous	  works	  have	  correlated	  increasing	  disorder	  with	  increasing	  ionic	  
conductivity.	  For	  example,	  Moon	  and	  Tuller	  have	  shown	  that	  the	  isovalent	  
substitution	  of	  Zr	  for	  Ti	  in	  Gd2ZrxTi1-­‐xO7	  results	  in	  an	  approximately	  4	  order	  of	  
magnitude	  increase	  in	  conductivity	  at	  600˚C	  between	  x=0	  and	  x=1.08.	  	  Recent	  
modeling	  results	  have	  indicated	  that	  cation	  disorder	  enhances	  ionic	  conductivity	  by	  
increasing	  both	  the	  concentration	  of	  mobile	  charge	  carriers	  and	  their	  individual	  
mobility9.	  	  Conversely,	  other	  researchers	  have	  shown	  that	  disorder	  serves	  to	  
increase	  the	  amount	  mobile	  oxygen	  in	  the	  lattice,	  i.e.	  carrier	  concentration,	  but	  that	  
order	  actually	  provides	  a	  preferential	  pathway	  for	  transport	  and	  thus	  a	  reduced	  
activation	  energy.	  	  This	  is	  supported	  by	  the	  work	  of	  Diaz-­‐Guillen	  et	  al.	  who	  
examined	  the	  effect	  of	  homovalent	  lanthanide	  (Ln)	  A-­‐site	  substitution	  on	  the	  
pyrochlore	  phase	  of	  Gd2-­‐yLnyZr2O7	  and	  demonstrated	  that	  activation	  energy	  
decreased	  and	  conductivity	  increased,	  albeit	  slightly,	  with	  larger	  cations	  on	  the	  A-­‐
site	  (i.e.	  increasing	  order)10.	  	  

Quantifying	  the	  extent	  of	  disorder	  in	  pyrochlore	  materials	  can	  be	  challenging.	  	  XRD	  
patterns	  consist	  of	  two	  subsets	  of	  patterns.	  The	  first	  set	  arises	  from	  the	  defect	  
fluorite	  structure,	  which	  is	  present	  in	  all	  materials	  regardless	  of	  order.	  	  The	  second	  
subset	  is	  attributable	  to	  the	  pyrochlore	  superstructure.	  A	  common	  method	  for	  
defining	  the	  extent	  of	  disorder	  is	  to	  use	  the	  ratio	  of	  the	  intensities	  of	  pyrochlore	  to	  
fluorite	  peaks	  to	  calculate	  the	  cation	  order	  parameter8,	  11.	  	  The	  superstructure	  peaks,	  
however,	  are	  much	  weaker	  than	  those	  of	  the	  fluorite	  phase	  even	  in	  a	  fully	  ordered	  
material,	  and	  decrease	  rapidly	  with	  increasing	  disorder6.	  Thus,	  the	  unambiguous	  
determination	  of	  order	  is	  difficult	  from	  XRD	  data	  alone.	  	  Another	  factor	  complicating	  
structural	  analysis	  in	  polycrystalline	  samples	  is	  the	  possibility	  of	  locally	  ordered	  
phases	  in	  a	  matrix	  exhibiting	  long-­‐range	  disorder12,	  13,	  or	  vice	  versa.	  	  An	  early	  study	  
by	  van	  Dijk	  et	  al.	  used	  selected	  area	  electron	  diffraction	  (SAED)	  to	  identify	  ordered	  
pyrochlore	  microdomains	  in	  a	  disordered	  fluorite	  structure13.	  	  A	  recent	  study	  by	  
Blanchard	  et	  al.	  coupled	  neutron	  and	  X-­‐ray	  powder	  diffraction	  with	  X-­‐ray	  
absorption	  near	  edge	  structure	  analysis	  of	  the	  Zr	  L-­‐edge	  across	  the	  lanthanoid	  
series	  of	  	  Ln2Zr2O7	  14.	  This	  study	  showed	  increasing	  local	  disorder	  with	  decreasing	  
RA/RB	  across	  the	  compositions	  identified	  as	  pyrochlore	  via	  neutron	  and	  x-­‐ray	  
diffraction,	  demonstrating	  the	  gradual	  nature	  of	  the	  transition	  from	  ordered	  
pyrochlore	  to	  defect	  fluorite	  phase.	  

Unlike	  bulk	  polycrystalline	  materials,	  thin	  films	  provide	  a	  platform	  for	  precise	  phase	  
control	  through	  epitaxial	  growth	  on	  substrates	  with	  appropriate	  lattice	  match.	  	  
While	  the	  use	  of	  thin	  films	  to	  explore	  and	  exploit	  properties	  of	  fast	  ion	  conductors	  
has	  gained	  a	  great	  deal	  of	  interest	  in	  recent	  literature15,	  16,	  this	  platform	  has	  not	  yet	  
been	  utilized	  to	  control	  the	  structure	  and	  study	  the	  conductivity	  of	  pyrochlore	  
materials.	  	  In	  this	  work	  we	  report	  conductivity	  measurements	  on	  thin	  films	  of	  the	  

	  
	  
	  
fully	  ordered	  pyrochlore	  Gd2Ti2O7.	  To	  the	  best	  of	  our	  knowledge,	  this	  is	  the	  first	  
synthesis	  of	  a	  dense	  thin	  film	  of	  a	  lanthanide-­‐bearing	  pyrochlore.	  

Experimental	  Details	  
RF	  magnetron	  sputtering-­‐	  	  Thin	  films	  were	  prepared	  using	  RF	  magnetron	  sputtering	  
on	  111	  oriented	  single-­‐crystal	  YSZ	  substrates	  (8	  mol%	  Y2O3-­‐stabilized	  ZrO2,	  one-­‐
side	  polished,	  MTI	  corporation).	  	  The	  substrates	  were	  ultrasonically	  cleaned	  in	  DI	  
water	  and	  Acetone	  and	  dried	  in	  air	  at	  150˚C	  for	  several	  hours.	  	  The	  YSZ	  substrates	  
were	  affixed	  to	  the	  Ni	  faceplate	  of	  a	  heater	  box	  using	  silver	  epoxy	  (AREMCO).	  	  A	  
stoichiometric	  Gd2Ti2O7	  target	  was	  synthesized	  from	  high	  purity	  Gd2O3	  and	  TiO2	  
powders.	  	  Powders	  were	  mixed	  in	  an	  inert	  atmosphere	  glove	  box,	  milled	  for	  6	  hours	  
in	  a	  Retsch	  rotary	  mill,	  dried	  on	  a	  shlink	  line,	  and	  then	  calcined	  as	  a	  loose	  powder	  
for	  10	  hours	  under	  25%O2/	  Ar	  gas	  flow	  at	  700°C.	  	  Powder	  was	  loaded	  into	  a	  2.125	  
inch	  die	  and	  pressed	  at	  15	  lbs.	  This	  target	  was	  then	  sintered	  at	  1575°C	  for	  100	  hours	  
in	  an	  oxygen	  atmosphere	  furnace	  on	  a	  bed	  of	  loose	  powder	  in	  a	  high	  purity	  alumina	  
boat.	  	  Shrinkage	  during	  the	  sintering	  cycle	  resulted	  in	  an	  approximately	  2	  inch	  
diameter	  target.	  	  Before	  use,	  the	  target	  was	  sanded	  to	  remove	  any	  adhered	  powder	  
from	  the	  sintering	  process.	  	  Phase	  purity	  of	  the	  Gd2Ti2O7	  target	  was	  confirmed	  by	  
XRD.	  	  The	  sintered	  target	  was	  mounted	  in	  a	  2-­‐in.	  diameter	  copper	  RF	  magnetron	  
sputter	  cup	  using	  Ag	  epoxy	  (Ted	  Paella).	  	  	  The	  heater	  box	  with	  the	  affixed	  substrate	  
was	  mounted	  off-­‐axis	  3.5	  inches	  from	  the	  target.	  	  The	  substrate	  was	  maintained	  at	  
800˚C	  using	  a	  photo	  lamp	  heater	  bulb	  (Wiko).	  	  The	  films	  were	  grown	  in	  
50%O2/balance	  Ar	  atmosphere	  with	  total	  pressure	  maintained	  at	  25mTorr	  and	  at	  a	  
power	  setting	  of	  100W.	  	  These	  sputtering	  conditions	  yielded	  a	  deposition	  rate	  of	  
roughly	  17Å/min.	  	  Films	  with	  thicknesses	  of	  480nm	  and	  850nm	  were	  produced	  by	  5	  
hour	  and	  8-­‐hour	  deposition	  times,	  respectively.	  

Film	  Characterization-­‐	  Films	  were	  characterized	  by	  grazing	  incidence	  X-­‐ray	  
diffraction	  (GIXRD)	  and	  transmission	  electron	  microscopy	  (TEM).	  GIXRD	  
measurements	  were	  performed	  using	  a	  Bruker	  AXS	  D8	  Advance	  X-­‐ray	  
diffractometer,	  with	  a	  Cu-­‐Kα	  radiation	  (λ=1.5406Å)	  X-­‐ray	  source	  operating	  in	  θ-­‐2θ	  
geometry,	  and	  at	  the	  fixed	  angle	  of	  incidence	  (γ)	  of	  1°	  relative	  to	  the	  specimen	  
surface.	  The	  X-­‐ray	  diffractometer	  exit	  source	  was	  equipped	  with	  a	  Göebel	  mirror	  
diffraction	  optic	  used	  to	  achieve	  a	  parallel	  beam	  condition	  that	  is	  highly	  sensitive	  to	  
near	  surface	  features	  in	  thin	  films.	  The	  θ-­‐2θ	  scans	  were	  performed	  using	  a	  step	  size	  
of	  0.02°	  and	  a	  dwell	  time	  of	  4	  seconds	  per	  step.	  	  Diffracted	  intensities	  from	  the	  
specimens	  were	  collected	  using	  a	  solid-­‐state	  detector	  to	  suppress	  fluorescence	  from	  
the	  rare-­‐earth	  gadolinium	  constituent.	  	  
The	  structure	  of	  the	  films	  was	  examined	  in	  a	  FEI	  Titan	  300kV	  image	  corrected	  
(scanning)	  transmission	  electron	  microscope	  (S/TEM).	  	  Specimens	  for	  S/TEM	  
analysis	  were	  prepared	  via	  a	  focused	  ion	  beam	  (FIB)	  process.	  	  The	  specimen	  was	  cut	  
from	  the	  film,	  plucked	  and	  attached	  to	  a	  copper	  FIB	  grid,	  and	  then	  thinned	  to	  
electron	  transparency.	  

	  
	  
	  
Electrochemical	  measurements-­‐	  Platinum	  ink	  (Heraeus	  6082)	  was	  painted	  onto	  the	  
unpolished	  side	  of	  the	  YSZ	  and	  used	  to	  adhere	  the	  substrate	  to	  a	  Pt	  foil	  counter	  
electrode.	  	  The	  ink	  was	  cured	  at	  950˚C	  for	  30	  minutes.	  A	  shadow	  mask	  (Photo	  Etch)	  
was	  used	  to	  sputter	  platinum	  electrodes	  ranging	  from	  0.1	  to	  1mm	  in	  diameter	  onto	  
the	  GTO	  film.	  	  A	  microprobe	  station	  (Cascade	  Microtech)	  equipped	  with	  a	  high	  
temperature	  furnace	  stage	  (Linkham)	  was	  used	  to	  collect	  the	  impedance	  spectra.	  	  
Gold	  coated	  tungsten	  probe	  tips	  were	  contacted	  to	  the	  Pt	  foil	  counter	  electrode	  and	  
a	  Pt	  working	  electrode	  on	  the	  surface	  of	  the	  GTO	  film.	  	  AC	  impedance	  measurements	  
were	  performed	  using	  a	  PARSTAT	  2273	  potentiostat/FRA	  in	  the	  frequency	  range	  of	  
106-­‐0.1	  Hz	  as	  a	  function	  of	  temperature	  (500-­‐900˚C)	  in	  ambient	  gas	  environment.	  

Bulk	  powder	  synthesis	  and	  characterization-­‐	  In	  order	  to	  compare	  the	  epitaxial	  thin	  
films	  to	  bulk	  measurements,	  powders	  of	  GTO	  were	  synthesized	  from	  the	  oxide	  
precursors	  Gd2O3	  (Alfa	  Aesar,	  99.999%	  purity)	  and	  TiO2	  (Alfa	  Aesar,	  99.995%	  
purity),	  by	  conventional	  ceramic	  solid	  state	  processing.	  	  The	  oxide	  powders	  were	  
first	  calcined	  at	  1000˚C	  for	  24	  hours,	  then	  ball-­‐milled	  in	  a	  Spex	  Certiprep	  8800	  high	  
energy	  ball-­‐mill	  for	  12	  hours	  in	  ZrO2	  vials	  with	  ZrO2	  balls	  using	  a	  10:1	  ball	  to	  
powder	  ratio	  for	  optimum	  milling	  and	  blending.	  	  The	  resulting	  powders	  were	  then	  
pressed	  at	  a	  pressure	  of	  440	  MPa	  in	  a	  13	  mm	  diameter	  stainless	  steel	  die.	  The	  
resulting	  pellets	  were	  then	  sintered	  at	  1200°C	  for	  24	  hours,	  then	  re-­‐milled	  (same	  
routine	  previously	  discussed),	  re-­‐pressed	  and	  re-­‐sintered	  at	  1600°C	  for	  24	  hours.	  
The	  measured	  (geometric)	  density	  of	  the	  final	  Gd2Ti2O7	  pellets	  were	  80%	  of	  the	  
theoretical	  values.	  Sections	  of	  ~1mm	  thickness	  were	  then	  polished	  to	  a	  mirror	  finish	  
using	  diamond	  impregnated	  lapping	  films	  and	  oil	  as	  lubricant	  followed	  by	  a	  final	  
polishing	  step	  using	  SYTON®	  HT-­‐50	  on	  a	  flocked	  twill	  cloth.	  X-­‐ray	  diffraction	  
measurements	  obtained	  from	  the	  samples	  showed	  them	  to	  be	  phase	  pure	  with	  the	  
pyrochlore	  structure	  belonging	  to	  space	  group	  Fd-­‐3m.	  	  Despite	  best	  efforts	  to	  
minimize	  contamination,	  the	  final	  cation	  stoichiometry	  was	  0.04:0.96	  Zr:Ti	  as	  
identified	  by	  XRF	  (Thermo	  Scientific	  Quant’x)	  using	  a	  fundamental	  parameters	  
model.	  	  Al	  was	  also	  identified	  as	  a	  minor	  impurity	  via	  XRF.	  Platinum	  ink	  (Heraeus	  
6082)	  electrodes	  were	  painted	  on	  opposite	  sides	  of	  the	  pellet	  and	  cured	  at	  950˚C	  
according	  to	  the	  manufacturers	  firing	  schedule.	  The	  pellets	  were	  compressed	  
between	  two	  sheets	  of	  Pt	  foil	  using	  a	  standard	  spring-­‐compression	  set-­‐up.	  	  The	  
assembly	  was	  placed	  inside	  a	  quartz	  tube	  and	  electrochemical	  measurements	  were	  
made	  as	  a	  function	  of	  temperature	  (600-­‐1000˚C)	  under	  ambient	  conditions	  in	  a	  tube	  
furnace.	  

Results	  and	  Discussion	  
X-­‐ray	  diffraction	  patterns	  of	  the	  bulk	  polycrystalline	  sample	  and	  the	  480nm	  thin	  
film	  are	  shown	  in	  Figure	  1	  along	  with	  the	  JCP	  pattern	  for	  Gd2Ti2O7	  pyrochlore	  (Fd-­‐
3m).	  The	  bulk	  polycrystalline	  sample	  exhibits	  the	  characteristic	  pyrochlore	  (111)	  
and	  (331)	  superstructure	  peaks	  at	  ~15	  and	  37˚	  2θ,	  respectively.	  The	  signal	  to	  noise	  
ratio	  is	  much	  lower	  for	  the	  thin	  film	  sample,	  however,	  the	  same	  superstructure	  
peaks	  are	  observable	  in	  the	  thin	  film	  diffraction	  pattern,	  along	  with	  the	  family	  of	  
peaks	  arising	  from	  the	  parent	  fluorite	  structure.	  	  	  

	  
	  
A	  TEM	  micrograph	  of	  a	  film	  deposited	  under	  the	  same	  sputtering	  conditions	  but	  for	  
only	  1	  hour	  is	  shown	  in	  Figure	  2a.	  	  The	  film	  is	  dense	  with	  no	  interior	  or	  interfacial	  
porosity	  and	  exhibits	  a	  columnar	  structure.	  	  The	  epitaxial	  nature	  of	  the	  film	  growth	  
from	  the	  YSZ	  interface	  can	  be	  seen	  in	  the	  high	  resolution	  image	  of	  Figure	  2b.	  	  The	  
dark/light	  regions	  in	  the	  substrate	  and	  film	  are	  indicative	  of	  residual	  strain	  within	  
in	  the	  structure.	  The	  selected	  area	  diffraction	  pattern	  in	  Figure	  2c	  clearly	  identifies	  
the	  pyrochlore	  structure	  of	  the	  film.	  	  STEM	  line	  scans	  across	  the	  film	  show	  a	  uniform	  
composition	  from	  the	  surface	  to	  the	  substrate	  interface.	  	  The	  average	  semi-­‐
quantitative	  film	  composition	  was	  16.7:18.5:65.7	  (Gd:Ti:O),	  consistent	  with	  the	  
intended	  stoichiometry	  for	  a	  pyrochlore	  film.	  

A	  representative	  impedance	  spectrum	  obtained	  from	  a	  2-­‐probe	  through-­‐plane	  
measurement	  of	  the	  480nm	  film	  using	  a	  1mm	  diameter	  Pt-­‐working	  electrode	  is	  
shown	  in	  Figure	  3.	  The	  low	  frequency	  arc	  is	  due	  to	  interfacial	  processes	  (Pt||GTO,	  
GTO||YSZ,	  YSZ||Pt);	  the	  analysis	  of	  these	  processes	  was	  beyond	  the	  scope	  of	  this	  
work.	  The	  intermediate	  frequency	  arc	  was	  of	  primary	  interest	  and	  is	  attributable	  to	  
the	  GTO	  thin	  film.	  	  The	  high	  frequency	  intercept	  yields	  the	  ohmic	  resistance	  of	  the	  
YSZ	  substrate,	  as	  electronic	  resistances	  were	  minimal.	  Fits	  to	  the	  high	  and	  
intermediate	  frequency	  features	  were	  performed	  using	  ZView	  with	  an	  equivalent	  
circuit	  of	  the	  form	  shown	  in	  Figure	  4.	  

The	  conductivity	  of	  the	  YSZ	  substrate	  calculated	  from	  the	  fits	  of	  RYSZ	  was	  found	  to	  be	  
in	  close	  agreement	  with	  literature	  values	  for	  all	  electrode	  diameters	  and	  both	  film	  
thicknesses.	  	  The	  capacitance	  values	  obtained	  from	  fitting	  CGTO	  to	  the	  intermediate	  
frequency	  arc	  scaled	  as	  expected	  with	  electrode	  area	  and	  film	  thickness	  yielding	  an	  
average	  dielectric	  constant	  of	  66,	  obtained	  from	  the	  relationship:	  

ε' =

CL
εoA
Where	  L	  is	  the	  thickness	  of	  the	  sample,	  A	  is	  the	  area	  of	  the	  smaller,	  working	  
electrode	  and	  εo	  is	  the	  permittivity	  of	  vacuum	  (8.85x10-­‐12	  Fm-­‐1).	  This	  value	  is	  in	  
agreement	  with	  prior	  literature	  reports17.	  	  RGTO	  was	  then	  used	  to	  calculate	  the	  
conductivity	  according	  to:	  

(1)	  

(2)	  

σGTO =

1
RGTO

L
A
The	  conductivity	  of	  the	  thin	  films	  along	  with	  measurements	  of	  bulk	  polycrystalline	  
samples	  is	  shown	  in	  Figure	  5.	  	  No	  dependence	  on	  film	  thickness	  is	  observed	  in	  the	  
conductivity	  of	  the	  480	  and	  850nm	  films	  indicating	  that	  any	  substrate-­‐induced	  
strain	  is	  not	  influencing	  the	  conductivity.	  	  This	  is	  expected	  since	  the	  strain	  is	  
expected	  to	  relax	  within	  the	  first	  100nm	  away	  from	  the	  interface.	  The	  magnitude	  of	  
the	  conductivity	  is	  similar	  between	  the	  thin	  films	  and	  the	  bulk	  sample,	  however	  the	  
Arrhenius	  response	  differs	  between	  the	  two.	  	  	  

The	  standard	  Arrhenius	  equation	  describing	  ionic	  conductivity	  is	  expressed	  as:	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  
σ =

−EA
kT
where	  the	  pre-­‐exponential	  constant	  σo	  is	  proportional	  to	  the	  carrier	  concentration,	  
EA	  is	  the	  activation	  energy	  of	  the	  bulk	  conduction	  process,	  and	  k	  is	  the	  Boltzmann	  
constant.	  

σo
T

(3)	  

Exp

%
' 	  
&

"
$
#

The	  activation	  energy	  of	  2.24eV	  found	  for	  the	  bulk	  polycrystalline	  GTO	  samples	  in	  
this	  study	  is	  comparable	  to	  activation	  energies	  of	  2.26eV	  and	  2.09eV	  extracted	  from	  
Kramer18	  and	  Moon17,	  respectively,	  for	  the	  nominally	  pure	  GTO	  material.	  	  The	  pre-­‐
exponential	  constants	  are	  also	  consistent	  with	  these	  studies	  (107.4-­‐8	  SKcm-­‐1).	  	  The	  
thin	  films	  exhibit	  lower	  activation	  energies	  of	  1.58	  and	  1.41eV	  for	  the	  480	  and	  
850nm	  films	  respectively,	  as	  well	  as	  a	  lower	  pre-­‐exponential	  constant	  (103.7-­‐4.5	  
SKcm-­‐1),	  indicating	  both	  a	  reduced	  barrier	  to	  transport,	  as	  well	  as	  a	  lower	  
concentration	  of	  mobile	  charge	  carriers.	  	  This	  explains	  why	  the	  conductivity	  of	  the	  
thin	  films	  is	  higher	  than	  that	  of	  the	  bulk	  at	  lower	  temperatures,	  when	  the	  lower	  
activation	  energy	  enables	  bulk	  diffusion,	  versus	  higher	  temperatures,	  where	  the	  
higher	  concentration	  of	  mobile	  charge	  carriers	  leads	  to	  faster	  conduction	  in	  the	  bulk	  
sample.	  	  	  

The	  differences	  in	  conductivity	  observed	  between	  the	  thin	  films	  and	  bulk	  
polycrystalline	  material	  reported	  herein	  as	  well	  as	  in	  the	  literature	  is	  likely	  due	  to	  
differences	  in	  extents	  of	  minor	  impurities	  in	  the	  material.	  	  The	  bulk	  material	  in	  this	  
work	  was	  not	  pure	  GTO,	  but	  rather	  Gd2Ti0.96Zr0.04O7,	  and	  also	  contained	  Al	  as	  a	  
minor	  impurity	  as	  identified	  via	  XRF.	  Other	  minor	  impurities	  may	  have	  been	  present	  
as	  well	  but	  at	  ppm	  levels	  below	  the	  detection	  limit	  of	  XRF.	  	  The	  GTO	  material	  
reported	  by	  Moon	  was	  analyzed	  using	  spark	  source	  mass	  spectrographic	  (SSMS)	  
analysis	  and	  was	  found	  to	  contain	  a	  number	  of	  impurities	  including	  Ca,	  Al,	  Si,	  and	  Hf,	  
as	  well	  as	  90ppm	  of	  Zr17.	  	  Such	  impurity	  loadings	  could	  be	  regarded	  as	  
inconsequential	  for	  an	  intrinsic	  ion	  conductor,	  however	  the	  charge	  compensation	  
mechanisms	  of	  the	  material	  due	  to	  unintentional	  aliovalent	  dopants	  (such	  as	  Ca2+	  on	  
the	  A-­‐site	  or	  Al3+	  on	  the	  B-­‐site)	  could	  have	  a	  significant	  effect	  on	  a	  poor	  conductor	  
such	  as	  GTO.	  	  Recent	  molecular	  dynamics	  simulations	  have	  shown	  that	  introducing	  
an	  intrinsic	  defect,	  either	  an	  oxygen	  vacancy	  or	  interstitial,	  into	  an	  ordered	  material	  
results	  in	  a	  marked	  decrease	  in	  activation	  energy,	  whereas	  the	  effect	  is	  minimal	  in	  a	  
disordered	  material	  where	  structural	  vacancies	  are	  already	  mobile9.	  Kramer	  
reported	  on	  an	  additional	  GTO	  sample	  with	  different	  cation	  stoichiometry	  and	  
higher	  background	  impurities18	  than	  the	  sample	  referenced	  above.	  	  This	  sample	  
exhibited	  an	  activation	  energy	  of	  0.94eV,	  which	  is	  lower	  than	  that	  of	  both	  the	  other	  
bulk	  samples	  and	  the	  thin	  films,	  and	  a	  pre-­‐exponential	  constant	  of	  103.14	  SKcm-­‐1,	  
which	  is	  comparable,	  but	  slightly	  less	  than	  that	  of	  the	  thin	  films.	  	  This	  would	  suggest	  
that	  the	  thin	  films	  contain	  an	  impurity	  level	  with	  concentrations	  between	  the	  bulk	  
sample	  reported	  herein	  and	  the	  material	  reported	  by	  Kramer,	  though	  further	  work	  
is	  needed	  to	  quantify	  the	  impurities	  in	  the	  thin	  films.	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
As	  Gd2Ti2O7,	  even	  with	  5	  mol%	  Zr,	  is	  well	  within	  the	  pyrochlore	  stability	  field,	  it	  is	  
unlikely	  that	  any	  large	  microdomains	  of	  disorder	  within	  the	  material	  are	  
contributing	  to	  the	  differences	  in	  the	  observed	  conductivity.	  	  However,	  it	  is	  possible	  
that	  in	  addition	  to	  carrier	  creation	  via	  charge	  compensation,	  aliovalent	  impurity	  
dopants	  may	  also	  serve	  to	  induce	  disorder,	  such	  as	  anti-­‐site	  formation,	  locally	  
within	  the	  lattice.	  	  Unfortunately	  it	  is	  not	  possible	  to	  de-­‐convolute	  these	  two	  effects	  
in	  GTO.	  	  Thin	  films	  of	  the	  intrinsic	  fast	  ion	  conductor	  Gd2ZrxTi1-­‐xO7	  with	  x>0.4	  will	  be	  
studied	  in	  the	  future	  in	  order	  to	  more	  fully	  explore	  the	  effects	  of	  order/disorder	  on	  
oxygen	  transport	  in	  pyrochlore/defect	  fluorite	  materials.	  

Conclusions	  
Dense	  thin	  films	  of	  the	  ordered	  pyrochlore	  Gd2Ti2O7	  were,	  for	  the	  first	  time,	  
synthesized	  via	  RF	  magnetron	  sputtering.	  	  GIXRD	  patterns	  of	  the	  films	  exhibited	  the	  
characteristic	  \	  pyrochlore	  superstructure	  diffraction	  peaks	  at	  ~15˚	  and	  38˚	  2θ,	  and	  
SAED	  patterns	  showed	  sharp	  spots	  at	  positions	  corresponding	  to	  the	  pyrochlore	  
structure.	  AC	  impedance	  measurements	  were	  used	  to	  isolate	  the	  impedance	  
response	  of	  the	  GTO	  thin	  film,	  with	  the	  capacitance	  values	  scaling	  as	  expected	  with	  
electrode	  area	  and	  film	  thickness.	  The	  total	  conductivity	  of	  the	  thin	  films	  was	  found	  
to	  be	  independent	  of	  thickness	  and	  comparable	  in	  magnitude	  to	  that	  of	  the	  bulk	  
polycrystalline	  material.	  Differences	  in	  the	  Arrhenius	  responses	  are	  likely	  
attributable	  to	  varying	  background	  aliovalent	  impurities	  which	  have	  a	  marked	  
influence	  on	  the	  carrier	  concentration	  and	  activation	  energy	  of	  migration	  in	  the	  
extrinsic	  conductor	  GTO.	  The	  results	  of	  this	  study	  show	  that	  GTO	  thin	  films	  exhibit	  
similar	  properties	  to	  the	  bulk	  polycrystalline	  material.	  	  The	  phase	  control	  enabled	  
by	  epitaxial	  growth	  provides	  a	  means	  of	  tailoring	  the	  order	  in	  pyrochlore/defect-­‐
fluorite	  thin	  films.	  	  Future	  work	  will	  focus	  on	  thin	  films	  of	  the	  extended	  series	  of	  
Gd2ZrxTi1-­‐xO7	  in	  order	  to	  better	  understand	  the	  relationship	  between	  order	  and	  
transport.	  

Acknowledgements	  
This	  work	  was	  supported	  by	  the	  U.S.	  Department	  of	  Energy,	  Office	  of	  Science,	  Basic	  
Energy	  Sciences,	  Materials	  Sciences	  and	  Engineering	  Division.	  LANL,	  an	  affirmative	  
action/equal	  opportunity	  employer,	  is	  operated	  by	  Los	  Alamos	  National	  Security,	  
LLC,	  for	  the	  National	  Nuclear	  Security	  Administration	  of	  the	  U.S.	  Department	  of	  
Energy	  under	  contract	  DE-­‐AC52-­‐06NA25396.	  

Zhang,	  J.;	  Lian,	  J.;	  Zhang,	  F.;	  Wang,	  J.;	  Fuentes,	  A.	  F.;	  Ewing,	  R.	  C.,	  Intrinsic	  

References	  
1.	  
Structural	  Disorder	  and	  Radiation	  Response	  of	  Nanocrystalline	  
Gd2(Ti0.65Zr0.35)2O7	  Pyrochlore.	  Journal	  of	  Physical	  Chemistry	  C	  2010,	  114,	  
11810-­‐11815.	  
2.	  
Enhanced	  radiation	  resistance	  of	  nanocrystalline	  pyrochlore	  Gd-­‐
2(Ti0.65Zr0.35)(2)O-­‐7.	  Applied	  Physics	  Letters	  2009,	  94	  (24).	  

Zhang,	  J.	  M.;	  Lian,	  J.;	  Fuentes,	  A.	  F.;	  Zhang,	  F.	  X.;	  Lang,	  M.;	  Lu,	  F.	  Y.;	  Ewing,	  R.	  C.,	  

	  
	  
	  
Perriot,	  R.;	  Uberuaga,	  B.	  P.,	  Structural	  vs.	  intrinsic	  carriers:	  contrasting	  effects	  

Moon,	  P.	  K.;	  Tuller,	  H.	  L.,	  Intrinsic	  Fast	  Oxygen	  Ionic	  Conductivity	  in	  the	  

Burggraaf,	  A.	  J.;	  van	  Dijk,	  T.;	  Verkerk,	  M.	  J.,	  Structure	  and	  Conductivity	  of	  

Wuensch,	  B.	  J.;	  Eberman,	  K.	  W.;	  Heremans,	  C.;	  Ku,	  E.	  M.;	  Onnerud,	  P.;	  Yeo,	  E.	  

Begg,	  B.	  D.;	  Hess,	  N.	  J.;	  McCready,	  D.	  E.;	  Thevuthasan,	  S.;	  Weber,	  W.	  J.,	  Heavy-­‐

Subramanian,	  M.	  A.;	  Aravamundan,	  G.;	  Subba	  Rao,	  G.	  V.,	  Oxide	  Pyrochlores-­‐	  A	  

3.	  
ion	  irradiation	  effects	  in	  Gd-­‐2(Ti2-­‐xZrx)O-­‐7	  pyrochlores.	  Journal	  of	  Nuclear	  
Materials	  2001,	  289	  (1-­‐2),	  188-­‐193.	  
4.	  
Pyrochlore	  and	  Fluorite	  Type	  Solid	  Solutions.	  Solid	  State	  Ionics	  1981,	  5,	  519-­‐522.	  
5.	  
Review.	  Progress	  in	  Solid	  State	  Chemistry	  1983,	  15,	  55-­‐143.	  
6.	  
M.	  E.;	  Haile,	  S.	  M.;	  Stalick,	  J.	  K.;	  Jorgensen,	  J.	  D.,	  Connection	  between	  oxygen-­‐ion	  
conductivity	  of	  pyrochlore	  fuel-­‐cell	  materials	  and	  structural	  change	  with	  
composition	  and	  temperature.	  Solid	  State	  Ionics	  2000,	  129,	  111-­‐133.	  
van	  Dijk,	  M.	  P.;	  Burggraaf,	  A.	  J.;	  Cormack,	  A.	  N.;	  Catlow,	  C.	  R.	  A.,	  Defect	  
7.	  
Structures	  and	  Migration	  Mechanisms	  in	  Oxide	  Pyrochlores.	  Solid	  State	  Ionics	  1985,	  
17,	  159-­‐167.	  
8.	  
Gd2(ZrxTi1-­‐x)2O7	  and	  Y2(ZrxTi1-­‐x)2O7	  Pyrochlore	  Systems.	  Materials	  Research	  
Society	  Symposium	  Proceedings	  1989,	  135,	  149-­‐163.	  
9.	  
of	  cation	  chemistry	  and	  disorder	  on	  ionic	  conductivity	  in	  pyrochlores.	  Journal	  of	  
Materials	  Chemistry	  A	  2015,	  3,	  11554-­‐11565.	  
10.	  
Díaz-­‐Guillén,	  J.	  A.;	  Fuentes,	  A.	  F.;	  Díaz-­‐Guillén,	  M.	  R.;	  Almanza,	  J.	  M.;	  
Santamaría,	  J.;	  León,	  C.,	  The	  effect	  of	  homovalent	  A-­‐site	  substitutions	  on	  the	  ionic	  
conductivity	  of	  pyrochlore-­‐type	  Gd2Zr2O7.	  Journal	  of	  Power	  Sources	  2009,	  186	  (2),	  
349-­‐352.	  
11.	  
Applied	  Physics	  Letters	  2015,	  106	  (19).	  
12.	   Whittle,	  K.	  R.;	  Cranswick,	  L.	  M.	  D.;	  Redfern,	  S.	  A.	  T.;	  Swainson,	  I.	  P.;	  Lumpkin,	  
G.	  R.,	  Lanthanum	  pyrochlores	  and	  the	  effect	  of	  yttrium	  addition	  in	  the	  systems	  La2-­‐
xYxZr2O7	  and	  La2-­‐xYxHf2O7.	  Journal	  of	  Solid	  State	  Chemistry	  2009,	  182	  (3),	  442-­‐
450.	  
13.	  
Vandijk,	  M.	  P.;	  Mijlhoff,	  F.	  C.;	  Burggraaf,	  A.	  J.,	  PYROCHLORE	  MICRODOMAIN	  
FORMATION	  IN	  FLUORITE	  OXIDES.	  Journal	  of	  Solid	  State	  Chemistry	  1986,	  62	  (3),	  
377-­‐385.	  
14.	  
M.;	  Stampfl,	  A.	  P.;	  Zhang,	  Z.;	  Jang,	  L.	  Y.,	  Does	  local	  disorder	  occur	  in	  the	  pyrochlore	  
zirconates?	  Inorg	  Chem	  2012,	  51	  (24),	  13237-­‐44.	  
15.	  
thin	  films.	  Solid	  State	  Ionics	  2012,	  207,	  1-­‐13.	  
16.	  
Leaon,	  C.;	  Pennycook,	  S.	  J.;	  Santamaria,	  J.,	  Colossal	  Ionic	  Conductivity	  at	  Interfaces	  of	  
Epitaxial	  ZrO2:Y2O3/SrTiO3	  Heterostructures.	  Science	  2008,	  231,	  676-­‐680.	  
17.	   Moon,	  P.	  K.	  Electrical	  conductivity	  and	  structural	  disorder	  in	  Gd2Ti2O7-­‐
Gd2Zr2O7	  and	  Y2Ti2O7-­‐Y2Zr2O7	  solid	  solutions.	  Massachusetts	  Institute	  of	  
Technology,	  Cambridge,	  1988.	  

Blanchard,	  P.	  E.;	  Clements,	  R.;	  Kennedy,	  B.	  J.;	  Ling,	  C.	  D.;	  Reynolds,	  E.;	  Avdeev,	  

Zhang,	  F.	  X.;	  Lang,	  M.;	  Ewing,	  R.	  C.,	  Atomic	  disorder	  in	  Gd2Zr2O7	  pyrochlore.	  

Rupp,	  J.	  L.	  M.,	  Ionic	  diffusion	  as	  a	  matter	  of	  lattice-­‐strain	  for	  electroceramic	  

García-­‐Barriocanal,	  J.;	  Rivera-­‐Calzada,	  A.;	  Varela,	  M.;	  Sefrioui,	  Z.;	  Iborra,	  E.;	  

Kramer,	  S.	  A.	  Mixed	  ionic-­‐electronic	  conduction	  in	  rare	  earth	  

18.	  
titanate/zirconate	  pyrochlore	  compounds.	  Massachusetts	  Institute	  of	  Technology,	  
1994.	  

Figures	  

480nm thin film 
Bulk sample 
JCP 00-023-0259 

)
.

U
A

.

(

y
t
i
s
n
e
n

t

I

14

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

2θ (degrees) 
Figure	  1:GIXRD	  pattern	  of	  480nm	  thin	  film	  (blue),	  Bulk	  polycrystalline	  material	  
(black)	  and	  JCP	  pattern	  for	  pyrochlore	  (Fd-­‐3m)	  Gd2Ti2O7	  (red).	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
 
 
Figure	  2:	  a)	  TEM	  of	  GTO	  thin	  film	  on	  111	  oriented	  YSZ	  substrate	  b)	  High	  resolution	  
micrograph	  showing	  epitaxy	  of	  GTO	  film	  with	  YSZ	  substrate	  and	  c)	  SAED	  pattern	  
showing	  sharp	  spots	  corresponding	  to	  pyrochlore	  structure.	  

Figure	  3:	  Impedance	  spectra	  obtained	  for	  480nm	  film	  at	  700˚C	  using	  2-­‐probe	  
through	  plane	  measurements	  between	  a	  1mm	  diameter	  working	  electrode	  and	  the	  
counter	  electrode	  (data	  points)	  and	  the	  corresponding	  fit	  obtained	  from	  Zview	  using	  
the	  equivalent	  circuit	  shown	  in	  Figure	  4.	  

	  
	  
RYSZ

RGTO

CGTO

Figure	  4:	  Equivalent	  circuit	  used	  to	  fit	  the	  high	  and	  intermediate	  frequency	  features	  
of	  the	  impedance	  spectra	  of	  GTO	  thin	  films	  on	  YSZ	  substrates.	  

Figure	  5:	  Arrhenius	  plot	  of	  conductivity	  of	  bulk	  polycrystalline	  GTO	  and	  GTO	  think	  
films	  of	  480	  and	  850nm	  thickness.	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
