6
1
0
2

g
u
A
7
1

]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
0
6
8
4
0
.
8
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Momentum mapping of continuum electron wave packet interference

Weifeng Yang,1 Huatang Zhang,1 Cheng Lin,1 Jingwen Xu,1 Zhihao
Sheng,1 Xiaohong Song,1, ∗ Shilin Hu,2, 3 and Jing Chen2, 3, †
1Department of Physics, College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, Guangdong 515063, China
2CAPT, HEDPS, and IFSA Collaborative Innovation Center of MoE
College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100084, China
3Institute of Applied Physics and Computational Mathematics, P. O. Box 8009, Beijing 100088,China
(Dated: September 12, 2018)

We analyze the two-dimensional photoelectrons momentum distribution of Ar atom ionized by
midinfrared laser pulses and mainly concentrate on the energy range below 2Up. By using a general-
ized quantum trajectory Monte Carlo (GQTMC) simulation and comparing with the numerical so-
lution of time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation (TDSE), we show that in the deep tunneling regime,
the rescattered electron trajectories plays unimportant role and the interplay between the intra-
cycle and inter-cycle results in a ring-like interference pattern. The ring-like interference pattern
will mask the holographic interference structure in the low longitudinal momentum region. When
the nonadiabatic tunneling contributes signiﬁcantly to ionization, i.e., the Keldysh parameter γ ∼ 1,
the contribution of the rescattered electron trajectories become large, thus holographic interference
pattern can be clearly observed. Our results help paving the way for gaining physical insight into
ultrafast electron dynamic process with attosecond temporal resolution.

PACS numbers: 32.80.Wr, 33.60.+q, 61.05.jp

I. INTRODUCTION

Atomic photoionization under intense laser irradiation
is a fundamental process in strong-ﬁeld light-matter in-
teraction. The physical picture is understood by the sim-
ple man’s model [1]. Within this model, the electron
is released ﬁrst from its parent atomic core by ioniza-
tion, then is accelerated in the laser ﬁeld and redirected
to the parent ion, and ﬁnally re-collides with the par-
ent ion. Usually, the ionization process is divided into
two regimes: multiphoton ionization and tunneling ion-
Ip
ization. The Keldysh parameter, γ =
(Ip is the
2Up
ionization potential, and Up = I
4ω2 denotes the pondero-
motive energy, where I is the laser intensity and ω is the
angular frequency), is an indicator as to distinguishing
these two ionization regimes [2]. When γ is much less
than 1, the ionization process is in the tunneling regime,
where quasi-static approximation is valid. When γ is
much larger than 1, it is in the multiphoton ionization
regime. When γ
1, it is considered to be a transition
from the tunneling regime to the multiphoton regime,
and the barrier in the combined Coulomb and laser ﬁeld
potential changes signiﬁcantly during tunneling [3].

q

∼

Interference is a very important concept of coherent
matter waves which has been extended successfully to
explore highly nonlinear quantum-mechanical phenom-
ena in strong-ﬁeld light-matter interaction. The interfer-
ence of the two electron wave packets (EWPs) ionized
with exactly one optical cycle relative delay reaching the
same ﬁnal momentum gives rise to above-threshold ion-
ization (ATI) rings, i.e., the intercycle interference, that
are spaced by the energy of one photon in photoelectron
In addition to the intercycle interference, a
spectrum.

temporal double-slit pattern can be veriﬁed as signature
of EWP interference emitted from the successive max-
ima of the absolute value of the electron ﬁeld, which is
the intracycle interference [4, 5]. The interference pat-
tern of the interplay between intra- and intercycle in-
terferences in multicycle photoelectron spectra has been
identiﬁed as diﬀraction pattern for a time grating [5–9].
Recently, a holographic structure has been observed in
photoionization and it is demonstrated to be the inter-
ference between the direct and rescattered EWPs ionized
within the same quarter-cycle of the laser pulse [10–15].
In the total photoelectron momentum distribution spec-
trum, all these interference processes will interplay with
each other, and various interference patterns will mix to-
gether. As a result, establishing an unambiguous one-to-
one relationship between certain interference pattern and
the corresponding electronic dynamic process is essential
for retrieving the information of electronic dynamics from
the measured photoelectron momentum spectrum.

∼

On the other hand, with the development of intense
mid-IR sources, experimental probing deep into the tun-
neling regime has become possible. Using a high rep-
etition rate OPCPA, Keldysh parameters approaching
γ
0.1 can be achieved [16]. In this regime, unexpected
low energy structure, very low energy structure, and even
zero energy structure have been observed [17–20]. All
these experimental results and the following theoretical
analysis greatly advances people’s understanding in this
ﬁeld. In the original paper of strong-ﬁeld photoelectron
holography, tunneling ionization had been assumed to be
essential for the holographic interference (in that exper-
iment, γ = 0.76) [10]. Subsequently, further investiga-
tions indicated that the holographic interference pattern
can also be observed under the conditions belong to the

 
 
 
 
 
 
≪

multiphoton regime (γ > 1) [11]. However, whether the
photoelectron hologram can be observed in deep tunnel-
ing regime (i.e., γ

1) has not yet been analyzed.

In the present work, we analyze the photoelectron an-
gular distributions (PADs) in atomic ATI with midin-
frared laser pulses. A profound ring-like interference pat-
tern is identiﬁed by both of time-dependent Schr¨odinger
equation (TDSE) and generalized quantum-trajectory
Monte Carlo (GQTMC) simulations in the deep tunnel-
ing regime. Within the description of the GQTMC, the
ring-like interference pattern is demonstrated to be the
superposition between the intra- and inter-cycle interfer-
ence. The center of the ring-like interference pattern lies
in where separations between adjacent temporal double-
slit interference fringes are nearly the same as those of the
ATI rings. Moreover, Coulomb potential plays a negli-
gible role on the formation of the ring-like interference
pattern. The existent of the ring-like interference pat-
tern will mask the holographic interference pattern in
the low ﬁnal longitudinal momentum range, so that the
holographic interference pattern can only be observed in
the high ﬁnal longitudinal momentum range. As a re-
sult, we identify that deep tunneling is not a appropriate
condition for observing the holographic interference pat-
tern.
In the nonadiabatic regime, the contribution of
the rescattering electron trajectories will increase, so the
holographic interference will be clearly observed.

This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we in-
troduce the theoretical methods including the numerical
solutions of the TDSE and the GQTMC model. In Sec.
III, ﬁrstly, we show diﬀerent characteristics of the inter-
ference structures in PADs in diﬀerent laser parameter
regions using the TDSE and GQTMC simulations. Sec-
ondly, the underlying mechanism of the ring-like pattern
is discussed based on the GQTMC method. Moreover,
the intra-, intercycle interference and the Coulomb po-
tential eﬀects on the interference pattern are discussed.
We summarize our results and conclude in Sec. IV.

2

where ˆz is the laser polarization direction, with f (t) the
pulse envelope function. E0 is peak ﬁeld strength. We
solve the atomic TDSE

i

∂
∂t

Ψ(r, t) =

p2
2

{

+ p

A(t) + V(r)
}

·

Ψ(r, t).

(2)

t

− R

Here, p is the momentum, V(r) is the atomic potential
0 E(t′)dt′ is the vector potential, and
of Ar, A(t) =
r the position of the electron. The exact time evolu-
tion of the wave function Ψ(t) is evaluated by using the
split-operation method in energy representation [21, 22].
The space is split into two parts,
i.e., the inner and
outer region where the atomic potential becomes neg-
ligible compared to the kinetic energy. When the time-
dependent wave function in space reaches the outer re-
gion, we project the outer region wave function on Volkov
states to obtain the momentum distribution [13, 23].

The generalized quantum trajectory Monte Carlo
method

To explore the physical reason of the TDSE results, we
apply a GQTMC method [15] based on the nonadiabatic
ionization theory [24, 25], classical dynamics with com-
bined laser and Coulomb ﬁelds [26–28], and the Feyn-
man’s path integral approach [29, 30]. The ionization
rate is given as:

Γ(t) = N (t) exp(

−

E2

0 f 2(t)
ω3 Φ(γ(t), θ(t))),

(3)

where θ(t) is the phase of the laser electric ﬁeld. For con-
venience of analysis, the laser pulse envelope f (t) is half-
trapezoidal, constant for the ﬁrst four cycles and ramped
oﬀ linearly within the last two cycles. The preexponen-
tial factor is

II. THEORETICAL MODELS

N (t) = An∗,l∗ Bl,|m|( 3κ
γ3 )

1

2 CIp( 2(2Ip)
E(t)

3/2

∗

)2n

−|m|−1

(4)

In this section, we summarize the numerical solution
of the TDSE and the GQTMC method. The numerical
solution of the TDSE is considered to be exact and can
be used as a benchmark for assessing the validity of the
GQTMC method.

The numerical solution of the time-dependent
Schr¨odinger equation

We consider an atom interacting with a linearly polar-
ized laser ﬁeld within the single active electron approxi-
mation. The electric ﬁeld of the laser pulse is

E(t) = E0f (t)cos(wt)ˆz,

(1)

κ = ln(γ +

γ2 + 1)

p

γ
√γ2+1

−

where the coeﬃcient An∗,l∗ and Bl,|m| coming from the
radial and angular part of the wave function, are given
[24]. C = (1 + γ2)|m|/2+3/4Am(ω, γ)
by Eq.(2) of Ref.
is the Perelomov-Popov-Terent’ev correction to the qua-
1 of the Coulomb preexponential
sistatic limit γ
factor with Am given by Eqs.
(55) and (56) of Ref.
[25]. The tunnelled electrons have a Gaussian distri-
bution on the initial transverse momentum Ω(vj
[vj
r
p
The coordinate of the tunnel exit shifts toward the
atomic core due to the nonadiabatic eﬀects [25], and the

E(t0)
|

E(t0)
|

2Ip(vj

r, t0)

r)2/

] exp[

2Ip/

p

≪

∝

].

|

|

tunnel exit point is

Z0 =

2Ip
E(t0)

(1 +

1 + γ2(t0))−1

p

(5)

Thereafter, the classical motion of the electrons in the
combined laser and Coulomb ﬁelds is governed by the
Newtonian equation:

d2
dt2 r =

E(t)

−

− ▽

(V(r)).

(6)

According to the Feynman’s path integral approach, the
phase of the jth electron trajectory is given by the clas-
sical action along the trajectory

Sj(p, t0) =

+∞

Z

t0

v2
p(τ )/2 + Ip −

{

1/

|

r(t)

|}

dτ

(7)

where p is the asymptotic momentum of the jth electron
trajectory. The probability of each asymptotic momen-
tum is determined by

2 =

Ψp

|

|

| Xj

q

Γ(t0, vj

r)exp(

2.

iSj )
|

(8)

−

With GQTMC method, as showing in the following
section, one can reproduce the TDSE results and extract
all the information about the electron trajectory includ-
ing the initial ionization phase and velocity. Moreover,
by GQTMC method, one can reconstruct momentum dis-
tribution with the photoelectrons from special subcycle
time windows, which is in favour of exploring the inter-
ference and Coulomb potential eﬀects.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

×

Using the TDSE [Figs. 1 (a) and (c)] and GQTMC
[Figs.
1 (b) and (d)], we have calculated PADs of
ionization from Ar atom in linearly polarized laser
ﬁelds with diﬀerent laser parameters (1850 nm, 1.05
×
1014W/cm2, corresponding to γ = 0.48, and 1300 nm,
1014W/cm2, corresponding to γ = 1.11). The
0.4
GQTMC simulations agree well with the TDSE results
in both of the tunneling ionization regime and the transi-
tion regime. Both of the TDSE and GQTMC simulations
show that, in the tunneling ionization regime, in addi-
tion to the ATI rings which center at zero, another ring-
0.56a.u.
like interference pattern centers at about pz ∼
and pr = 0 can be clearly observed. However, in the
transition regime where γ
1, the ring-like interference
∼
pattern disappears, whereas the holographic “fork” in-
terference structure can be identiﬁed in the PADs. Next
we will discuss the physical mechanism of the ring-like
interference pattern and the conditions required for the
appearance of these diﬀerent interference patterns.

3

With the help of the GQTMC back analysis of the
PADs, we can disentangle diﬀerent contributions of pho-
toelectrons emitted from diﬀerent time windows and an-
alyze the interplay among them. We ﬁnd the photoelec-
trons contributing to the ring-like fringes come from at
least three sub-cycle time windows, which are labeled as
A, B and C in Fig. 2(a). It is found that in the time win-
dows A or B, there are two kinds of typical trajectories:
the rescattering trajectory (trajectory R in Fig. 2(b))
and the so-called indirect trajectory (trajectory ID in Fig.
2(c)). The main distinction between these two kinds of
trajectories lies in that the wave packet of the trajectory
ID does not interact with the parent ion when it comes
back close to z = 0. The interference between these two
types of trajectories from single A or B will induce the
fork-like holographic interference pattern. In window C,
there is only one kind of typical trajectory: direct trajec-
tory (trajectory D in Fig. 2(d)). It has been well-known
that the intercycle interference of EWPs liberated with
a relative time delay of one optical cycle (for example,
the interference between EWPs coming from window A
and B) will induce a series of ATI rings separated by
one photon energy. While the intracycle interference of
EWPs from window A and C induces a temporal double-
slit interference pattern which has been studied both ex-
perimentally and theoretically [4].

Fig. 3 shows reconstructed photoelectron momentum
spectra from diﬀerent kinds of interference. Figs. 3(a)
and (d) show the temporal double-slit interference pat-
tern reconstructed with EWPs released from time win-
dows A and C; Figs. 3(b) and 3(e) are the ATI interfer-
ence pattern reconstructed with EWPs from time win-
dows A and B; whereas Figs. 3(c) and (f) are photo-
electron spectra reconstructed with EWPs released from
all these three time windows A, B, and C. One can see
that, compared with the outgoing ATI rings, the tempo-
ral double-slit interference pattern is a ring-like structure
centered a much higher ﬁnal momentum pz. Moreover,
the separations of neighbor ring-like fringes are unequal
and, on the contrary to the ATI rings, gradually increase
with energy in the momentum distribution map.

To show more clearly the inﬂuence of the Coulomb po-
tential, we further present in Fig. 4 the results without
considering the Coulomb potential. Comparing with Fig.
3, we can see that the impact of the Coulomb potential
is reﬂected mainly in: (i) it distorts substantially the
PADs in the low momentum ranges; (ii) it introduces the
rescattered trajectory, i.e., the trajectory R. Without the
Coulomb potential, the trajectory R will not exist, and
so does the holographic interference. In both Figs. 3(a)
and 3(b), the holographic interference structures can be
hardly seen, which means that the contribution of trajec-
tory R is quite small under the laser condition γ = 0.48.
Most interestingly, when we reconstruct the momentum
distribution of photoelectrons from all the three windows,
the ring-like interference pattern comes out in both cases

4

FIG. 1: (color online). Simulated two-dimensional photoelectron momentum spectra of Ar atom. Left panel: TDSE results;
right panel: GQTMC simulations. (a)-(c): γ = 0.55, I = 7.0 × 1013 W/cm2, λ = 1700 nm. (d)-(f): γ = 1.11, I = 1.5 × 1013
W/cm2, λ = 1700 nm.

FIG. 2: (color online). Upper row (a): The electric ﬁeld of laser. Lower row:(b) the collections of typical trajectory R,(c) the
collections of typical trajectory ID,(d) the collections of typical trajectory D.

with and without considering the Coulomb potential (see
Fig. 3(c)and Fig. 4(c)], demonstrating that the Coulomb
potential and the so-induced trajectory R play an negli-
gible role in this interference structure.

In the case of γ = 1.11, the situation is quit diﬀer-
ent. The contribution of trajectory R can already be dis-
cerned in the intracycle temporal double-slit interference
structure.
In the intercycle interference photoelectron
momentum distribution (see Fig. 3 (e)), both the fork-
like holographic interference pattern along with the ATI

rings can be clearly distinguished. Remarkably diﬀerent
from the case of γ = 0.48, the momentum distribution
of photoelectrons from these three windows cannot form
ring-like structure. On the contrary, the holographic in-
terference structure can be clearly observed (see Fig. 3
(f)). This demonstrates that the rescattered trajectory
R indeed contributes importantly to holographic interfer-
ence in the total photoelectron momentum distribution
in this laser condition.

The above analysis can be further demonstrated by

5

FIG. 3: (color online). Reconstructed photoelectron momentum spectra with EWPs from diﬀerent time windows: (a) and (d)
with EWPs from time windows A and B; (b)and (e) with EWPs from time windows A and C; (c) and (f) with EWPs from
time windows A, B, and C. (a)-(c):γ = 0.48. (d)-(f): γ = 1.11.

FIG. 4: (color online). Same with Fig.3 but without considering the Coulomb potential.

FIG. 5: (color online). (a) and (e) present zooms into Figs. 3(a) and (d) with 3 sampling points indicated. (b-d) and (f-h)
show the probabilities of the summed trajectories Ψp in the complex plane.

6

FIG. 6: (color online). Same with Fig. 5 but for three sampling points in Figs. 3(b) and (e).

the statistical trajectory-based analysis in the complex
plane [31]. Figs. 5(a) and (e) present zooms into Figs.
3(a) and (d). Figs. 5(b-d) and (f-h) show the proba-
bilities of the trajectories Ψp in the complex plane (the

|q

Γ(t0, vj
r)
|

and the angle
radius represents the weight
represents the phase Sj of each trajectory) for 3 sampling
points indicated in Figs. 5(a) and 5(e), respectively. Fig.
6 shows the same analysis but for the intracycle inter-
It can be seen that for
ference (Figs. 3 (b) and (e)).
each sampling points in the intracycle interference pat-
tern, there are three arcs which correspond to the three
diﬀerent kinds of electron trajectories (trajectories D, ID
and R), whereas for intercycle interference, only two arcs
corresponding trajectories D and R contribute to the in-
terference pattern. The outermost arc corresponds to the
rescattered trajectory R. When the two arcs align in the
same direction, constructive interference occurs, other-
wise, the opposite alignment leads to destructive inter-
ference. By comparing the two cases with diﬀerent laser
conditions, we can see that, for γ = 0.48, the number of
the rescattered trajectory R is greatly reduced. On the
contrary, for γ = 1.11, the rescattered trajectory R con-
tributes greatly to the total momentum spectrum. As a
result, holographic interference structure can be clearly
distinguished from the the total momentum distribution
spectra (see Figs. 1 (c) and (d)). All these are consistent
with the above analysis. Therefore, we can conclude that
the rescattered trajectory R is very vital: when the con-
tribution of rescattered trajectory R increases, the holo-
graphic interference pattern will be clearly visible, oth-
erwise, the ring-like interference structure will be formed
due to the interplay between the intracycle and intercycle
interference of direct and indirect electron trajectories.

Since the Coulomb potential plays an negligible role
in the ring-like interference, to shed more light on the
physical origination of the ring-like interference pattern,

our further analysis will be based on our GQTMC simu-
lations without considering the Coulomb potential. Figs.
7(a),(b) and (c) show the temporal double-slit interfer-
ence patterns, ATI rings, and the total momentum dis-
tribution spectrum, respectively. The red lines indicate
the momentum spectrum for pr = 0. We ﬁnd that at
small momentum range (i.e., pz < 0.56a.u.), the separa-
tions between adjacent temporal double-slit interference
fringes are smaller than those of the ATI rings, as a re-
sult, the total photoelectron spectrum clearly shows the
modulation of the intracycle double-slit interference by
0.56a.u., the
the intercycle interference. At around pz ∼
separations between adjacent temporal double-slit inter-
ference fringes are nearly the same as those of the ATI
rings.
In the total momentum distribution spectrum,
this forms the center of the ring-like interference pat-
tern. Above this momentum region, the separations of
temporal double-slit interference fringes are larger than
those of the ATI fringes, so the double-slit interference
fringes are imprinted a modulation envelope of the ATI
fringes. We collect the phases of indirect and direct elec-
tron trajectories from time windows A, B and C result-
ing in the ring-like pattern, and found that the phase
diﬀerence between electron trajectories from A and B is
approximately equal to that from A and C, which con-
ﬁrms the above analysis of Fig. 7. In ref.[6], it has been
shown through a 1D “simple man’s” model that the en-
ergy separation between adjacent peaks will reach a max-
imum and then decrease with increasing photoelectron
energy. It means that with increasing pz, there will be
more than one chance that the separations between ad-
jacent fringes for the two interference processes become
nearly the same, and so there would be more than one
ring-like interference structures in the total momentum
distribution spectrum if the scattered trajectory R do not
contribute signiﬁcant.

In Fig. 8, we further show the TDSE simulation with

7

FIG. 7: (color online). (a)temporal double-slit interference patten, (b) ATI rings, (c) the total momentum distribution spectrum
reconstructed with EWPs from three time windows A, B and C. The red lines indicates the momentum spectrum for pr = 0a.u.

FIG. 8: (color online). TDSE simulation in deep tunneling regime: γ = 0.28, I = 2.76 × 1014 W/cm2, λ = 2000 nm.

laser conditions of γ = 0.28 which is in the deep tunnel-
2a.u., there
ing regime. It can be seen that below pz ∼
are several ring-like interference structures, which means
that the direct and indirect electron trajectories play a
dominant role on the total momentum distribution spec-
trum, and the interplay between the intracycle and in-

tercycle interferences induces these ring-like interference
patterns. Such ring-like interference pattern will blur
the fork-like holographic interference structure which can
only be clearly visible at larger pz.

IV. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we have theoretically investigated
2D photoelectron momentum distributions in diﬀerent
Keldysh parameter regimes. We found in deep tunnel-
ing regime, profound ring-like interference pattern can
be observed. We have identiﬁed that the ring-like in-
terference pattern is induced by the interplay between
the intra- and inter-cycle interference of electron trajec-
tories. The center of the ring-like interference pattern lies
in where separations between adjacent temporal double-
slit interference fringes are nearly the same as those of the
ATI fringes, which records electron dynamic information
on attosecond sub-cycle resolution. The appearance of
ring-like interference pattern implies that the rescattered
electrons play a negligible role. The holographic inter-
ference pattern can only be visible at larger pz, where
the contribution of the rescattered electrons can be dis-
cerned. In the nonadiabatic tunneling regime, the eﬀect
of Coulomb potential will increase, so the contribution
of the rescattered electron trajectories will increase, and
the holographic interference pattern can be clearly dis-
tinguished. Our results indicate that the deep tunneling
is not a appropriate condition for observation of the holo-
graphic interference which is more clearly visible near the
nonadiabatic regime.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We beneﬁted from discussions with X. Liu and X.
Xie. The work was supported by the National Basic Re-
search Program of China Grant (No. 2013CB922201),
the NNSF of China (Grant Nos. 11374202, 11274220,
11274050, 11334009 and 11425414), Guangdong NSF
(Grant No. 2014A030311019), and the Open Fund of
the State Key Laboratory of High Field Laser Physics
(SIOM). W. Y. is supported by the “YangFan” Talent
Project of Guangdong Province.

∗ Electronic address: songxh@stu.edu.cn
† Electronic address: chen jing@iapcm.ac.cn

[1] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993).
[2] L. V. Keldysh, Sov. Phys. JETP. 20,1307-1314 (1965).
[3] M. Yu. Ivanov, M. Spanner, and O. Smirnova, J. Mod.

Opt. 52, 165 (2005).

[4] F. Lindneret al., D. B. Miloˇsevi´c, D. Bauer, W. Becker,
and G.G.Paulus, Phys. Rev. Lett 95, 040401 (2005).
[5] R. Gopalet al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 053001 (2009).

8

[6] D. G. Arb´o, K. L. Ishikawa, K. Schiessl, E. Persson, and
J. Burgd¨orfer, Phys. Rev. A 81, 021403(R) (2010).
[7] D. G. Arb´o, K. L. Ishikawa, K. Schiessl, E. Persson, and

J. Burgd¨orfer, Phys. Rev. A 82, 043426 (2010).

[8] X. Xie, S. Roither, D. Kartashov, E. Persson, D. G. Arb´o,
L. Zhang, S. Gr¨afe, M. S. Sch¨oﬄer, J. Burgd¨orfer, A.
Baltuˇska, and M. Kitzler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 193004
(2012).

[9] T. Remetter, P. Johnsson, J. Mauritsson, K. Varj´u, Y.
Ni, F. L´epine, E. Gustafsson, M. Kling, J. Khan, R.
L´opez-Martens, K. J. Schafer, M. J. J. Vrakking, and
A. L’Huillier, Nat. Phys. 2, 323 (2006).

[10] Y. Huismans, A. Rouz´ee, A. Gijsbertsen, J. H. Jung-
mann, A. S. Smolkowska, P. S. W. M. Logman, F. L´epine,
C. Cauchy, S. Zamith, T. Marchenko, J. M. Bakker, G.
Berden, B. Redlich, A. F. G. van der Meer, H. G. Muller,
W. Vermin, K. J. Schafer, M. Spanner, M. Yu. Ivanov,
O. Smirnova, D. Bauer, S. V. Popruzhenko, and M. J. J.
Vrakking, Science 331, 61 (2011).

[11] T. Marchenko, Y. Huismans, K. J. Schafer, and M. J. J.

Vrakking, Phys. Rev. A 84, 053427 (2011).

[12] D. D. Hichstein et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 073004

(2012).

[13] W. Yang et al., Opt. Express 22, 2519 (2014).
[14] M. Meckel et al., Nature Phys. 10, 594 (2014).
[15] X. Song, C. Lin, Z. Sheng, P. Liu, Z. Chen, W. Yang, S.

Hu, C. D. Lin, and J. Chen, Sci. Rep. 6, 28392 (2016).

[16] M. G. Pullen et al., J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 47,

204010 (2014).

[17] C. I. Blaga et al., Nat. Phys. 5, 335 (2009).
[18] W. Quan et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 093001 (2009).
[19] C. Wu et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 043001 (2012).
[20] J. Dura et al., Sci. Rep. 3, 2675 (2013).
[21] X. M. Tong and S. I. Chu, Chem. Phys. 217, 119 (1997).
[22] W. Yang, X. Song, and Z. Chen, Opt. Express 20, 12067

(2012).

[23] X. Tong, K. Hino, and N. Toshima, Phys. Rev. A 74,

013405(R) (2006).

[24] G. L. Yudin and M. Yu. Ivanov, Phys. Rev. A 64, 013409

(2001).

[25] A. M. Perelomov, V. S. Popov, and M. V. Terent’ev, Zh.
´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 50, 1393 (1966) [Sov. Phys. JETP 23,
924 (1966)].

[26] T. Brabec, M. Y. Ivanov, and P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev.

A 54, R2551 (1996).

[27] B. Hu, J. Liu, and S. G. Chen, Phys. Lett. A 236, 533

(1997).

[28] J. Chen, J. Liu, and S. G. Chen, Phys. Rev. A 61, 033402

(2000).

[29] P. Sali`eres, B. Carr`e, L. Le D`eroﬀ et al., Science 292, 902

(2001).

[30] M. Li et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 113002 (2014).
[31] T.-M. Yan, S. V. Popruzhenko, and D. Bauer, in Progress
in Ultrafast Intense Laser Science, edited by K. Ya-
manouchi, K. Midorikawa (Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg,
2013).

