6
1
0
2

g
u
A
4

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
1
6
1
0
.
8
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Deploying learning materials to game content for serious
education game development: A case study

Harits Ar Rosyid1,∗, Matt Palmerlee2, Ke Chen1

1School of Computer Science, The University of Manchester
2Engineering at Mastered Software, Los Angeles

Abstract

The ultimate goals of serious education games (SEG) are to facilitate learning and maximizing enjoyment during playing
SEGs. In SEG development, there are normally two spaces to be taken into account: knowledge space regarding learning
materials and content space regarding games to be used to convey learning materials. How to deploy the learning materials
seamlessly and effectively into game content becomes one of the most challenging problems in SEG development. Unlike
previous work where experts in education have to be used heavily, we proposed a novel approach that works toward
minimizing the efforts of education experts in mapping learning materials to content space. For a proof-of-concept, we
apply the proposed approach in developing an SEG game, named Chem Dungeon, as a case study in order to demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed approach. This SEG game has been tested with a number of users, and the user survey
suggests our method works reasonably well.

Keywords: serious educational game, serious game development, learning material deployment, game content generation, Chem
Dungeon, user survey

1. Introduction

Serious Educational Game (SEG) refers to an alternative
learning methodology that applies game technology to
primarily promoting players’ learning along with gaining
positive cognitive and affective experience during such a
learning process [1]. Elements of challenge and learning
within such a game construct activities for motivation and
amusement [2]. SEG is also named in different terminologies
such as game-based learning or educational games. In this
paper, we treat all those terminologies interchangeably and
refers the SEG development to the procedure that builds up a
game for a learning purpose.

There are useful approaches

to game development
for a learning purpose, such as [3, 4]. Most of those
approaches emphasize that the design of a serious game
is mainly from learning materials in a subject. Moreover,
the proposed development
frameworks require rigorous
procedures that may involve interviews with target users
(including teachers and students) and various experts (e.g.
game development, education, psychology and so on),
lengthy development stages and testing units. Hence, those
development frameworks have to rely on a close relationship
between learning materials and game design (proprietary
educational game). Such development frameworks inevitably
is
incur

this development process

the high cost as

∗Corresponding author. Email: harits.arrosyid@manchester.ac.uk

laborious and time-consuming and hence limit the growth of
educational games.

In general, SEG development has to involve two key
components: knowledge and game content spaces [5, 6].
The knowledge space is formed to encode learning materials
concerning the subject knowledge to be learned by players,
while the game content space is formed with playable game
elements that convey the knowledge chunks implicitly. This
is generally required by any serious games as argued in [7, 8]
where serious game is deﬁned as a computer program that
combines serious (for knowledge learning ) and game (for
entertainment) purposes. Thus, how to map the knowledge
space to content space becomes one of the most important
problems in SEG development. To our knowledge, however,
the mapping is a bottle-neck in SEG development as this has
to be handcrafted by game developers closely working with
education experts in most of existing SEGs.

Unlike most of existing approaches, we propose an
alternative SEG development
framework in this paper
to address the mapping issue by embedding annotated
knowledge chunks into categorized game content/elements
seamlessly during SEG development. On one hand, there are
abundant educational resources (e.g. syllabus) that provides
the connection between underlying knowledge chunks as
instruction [4] for learning them. Our
well as sufﬁcient
framework would exploit such information so that knowledge
chunks and their connections can be easily annotated by game
developers or automatically acquired by using information

1

Research Article

 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Ar Rosyid, M. Palmerlee, K. Chen

techniques. On the other hand,

retrieval
the “purpose-
shifting” approach has been proposed for SEG development
[9, 10], which diverts the purpose of an existing commercial
game for educational propose. This approach exploits the
education-related properties of existing commercial games,
e.g., in order to play a game, a player has to learn game
rules, objectives and strategy to success unconsciously, which
is also required for learning in traditional education systems.
As an alternative game development methodology, procedural
content generation can generate game content automatically
via algorithms, which signiﬁcantly lowers the cost in game
development. Moreover, the latest PCG work [11] suggests
that a proper use of the categorized game content may
facilitate eliciting positive gameplay experience. Motivated
by the aforementioned works, our framework would advocate
making use of PCG and existing entertainment games in
SEG development. In particular, we believe that the mapping
between two spaces may better done by embedding annotated
knowledge chunks into categorized game content/elements.

The main contributions of the work presented in this paper
are summarized as follows: a) we propose an alternative
framework for effective and efﬁcient SEG development;
b) under our proposed framework, we develop a proof-of-
concept SEG, Chem Dungeon, to demonstrate the usefulness
of our proposed framework; and c) we test this SEG with
human players via user survey and statistical analysis.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
2 reviews the related works. Section 3 presents our SEG
framework and Section 4 describes our proof-of-concept
SEG, Chem Dungeon. Section 5 reports user test and
statistical analysis results. The last section draws conclusions.

2. Related Work

In this section, we outline connections and main differences
to relevant SEG development approaches.

As argued by Damir et al. [5] based on their interview with
education experts, game developers and players who involve
in SEG, it is crucial to have seamless connection between
knowledge and game content spaces in SEG development.
Moreover, they further emphasize that two spaces must be
controllable [5] to allow for gaining the controllability in
tailoring game elements that are likely affecting different
kinds of the player’s experience, e.g. learning, enjoyment,
motivation, engagement and so on. Moreover, it is suggested
by Hussaan et al. [6] that there are three components in SEG.
Apart from learning and game resources, domain concept
should be introduced to specify the relationships between
learning materials to facilitate using learning resources to
formulate strategies in carrying out learning based on game
resources. Nevertheless, this approach [6] emphasizes that all
of those components have to be carried by education experts
via interactions with students or game players.

Gamiﬁcation [12] is a typical SEG development approach
that explicitly takes knowledge and game content spaces
in development. The basic idea underlying
into account

gamiﬁcation is directly embedding game elements (e.g.
avatar, badges, levels and scores) into the learning process.
Doing so expects that students would more actively engaged
in the learning process when they are situated in a game-like
presentation of the learning materials. In this work [12], the
connection between two spaces has been handcrafted by both
education experts and game developers, which is laborious
and time consuming. Similarly, Belloti et al. proposed a
generic approach for adaptive experience in serious games
via building up the proper connection between knowledge
and game content spaces [13]. In their approach, a serious
game is manually broken down into a number of subsequent
tasks by considering diversiﬁed connections between learning
materials and game elements. Then adaptation is carried out
by offering a proper task sequence to an individual player
to maximize their positive learning and positive affective
experience [13]. However, the game design (in particular,
mapping between two spaces) has to heavily rely on education
experts, and it is infeasible to develop such serious games
involving education experts. Due to the use of
without
education experts, the cost in serious game development is
often very high. Technically, such an approach is also subject
to limitation since the mapping task becomes extremely
challenging when either of two spaces is of a high complexity.
Hence, this approach is not scalable in SEG development.

Unlike the above approaches, our proposed SEG frame-
work would exploit the existing educational resources and
make use of appropriate PCG techniques towards minimizing
the cost and seamlessly connecting knowledge and game
content spaces in SEG development.

3. Methodology

In this section, we propose an alternative framework for SEG
development especially for addressing the mapping issue
pertaining to two spaces via exploiting learning resources and
making use of the latest PCG techniques.

The advantage of structuring serious game content
in
knowledge and game content spaces provides a higher
degree of control for the game generation. In the existing
SEG approaches, however, education experts have to be
the prominent force in the process of deploying learning
materials into an SEG. Thus, an expert
is expected to
deeply understand characteristics of learning materials and
game content according to their expertise in order to link
two spaces. However, it becomes infeasible and scalable
in presence of complex game content space. Hence, game
developers are expected to utilize the natural and inherent
game elements to deal with the knowledge deployment issue.
This is feasible since sophisticated education resources are
accessible easily and the PCG techniques allow for ﬂexibly
controlling game elements to embed knowledge chunks.
Thus, we believe that exploiting learning resources and
making use of the latest PCG techniques could signiﬁcantly
lower the cost of SEG development; given the semantic
the developer can
descriptions of those content spaces,

2

Research Article

formulate different aspects between them, which sparks a
proper deployment.

To address the issues mentioned above, we propose an
alternative framework for SEG development as illustrated
in Fig. 1. First, learning materials and game elements are
in separate spaces. In one hand, annotation takes place to
describe education materials naturally from the meta-data
retrievable from reliable resources. Then, we need to establish
the strategy for presenting them to players, based on their
retrieved properties or using the corresponding educational
resources. On the other hand, categorisation of game content
space consists of a couple of steps. It starts with a difﬁculty
categorisation which groups game content according to the
level of challenge. Subsequently, within each of the pre-
deﬁned content categories, e.g. difﬁculty levels, and given a
number of education materials, clustering analysis is applied
to group similar game content. Hence, the aspects underlying
the descriptive learning materials and game elements can
guide a developer to use their logic in formulating the
mapping between learning materials and game content. The
outcome is an SEG content library comprised of playable
games for learning.

3.1. Knowledge Space

Knowledge space of an SEG refers to all
the relevant
learning materials consisting of items to be learned by
a player. Assuming that no organization had taken place,
Belloti [14] demonstrates an annotation technique for serious
games’
tasks which inspires us in structuring learning
materials. However, the author employs experts to annotate
subjective attributes. Again, the author fails to assure whether
learning
his approach can handle the growing size of
materials. Especially for serious games, where a large number
of education materials are recalled, such as memorizing
vocabulary, biology terms, geographical items.

the developer must select

On the other hand, we argue that the ideal properties
for learning materials originate from its inherent description
provided by reliable education resources (e.g. syllabus)
and the representation of the knowledge (e.g. text, image,
audio or video). Hence, annotation operates in the natural
descriptions of the learning materials with little involvement
from experts. Speciﬁcally,
the
relevant properties/attributes based on the recalling purpose
and/or their representation within the game. Given the
available documented resources, an information retrieval
technique –beyond our scope –automates the annotation
process.
In addition, a simple computer program that
measures speciﬁcations of a content representation (e.g.
text, image, audio or video) also annotates the attributes
automatically. Such as, the number of words of the text-
based learning material or the length of an educational
the education content space provides
video. Altogether,
comprehensive detail to initiate the strategy for delivering the
learning materials. If no relationship exists (e.g. prerequisites
learning words are recognising the letter and their
of

A case study of deploying learning materials into game content

Figure 1. An alternative SEG development framework.

conjunctions) between education materials, an automated
method (e.g. rule-based) establishes the strategy based on
the attribute values. Otherwise, a syllabus or a teaching
handout can show the strategy explicitly. Consequently, with
an established strategy, players will recall the knowledge
accordingly.

3.2. Game content space

Game content space of an SEG refers to all the playable
games generated by an entertainment game engine to
facilitate the learning deﬁned via knowledge space for a
player. Our approach applies procedural content generation
for each element in the game because, ideally, it provides
details of the content in the parameters. Given the large space
for the generated content, manually identifying the category
for the content space is not feasible. Therefore, we adopt a
set of steps applied in entertainment game procedural content
including: difﬁculty categorisation and
generation[11],
similarity categorisation. Difﬁculty categorisation provides
games for players with different abilities for playing the
game[15]. Meanwhile, similarity categorisation beneﬁts the
large space of the content which provides abundant choices
of games which support repetitive sessions of learning.

Robert and Chen suggest [11] that the use of categorized
game content can facilitate eliciting positive affective
experience via a proof-of-concept ﬁrst-person shooter game
where content has been categorized via difﬁculty levels
learned from game examples annotated by developers. For
specifying difﬁculty levels, a developer can also adopt a
rule-based approach. As a result, the rules are formulated
by taking into account a small number of game controlling
parameters where developers have to decide the threshold
values of
those parameters to split content space into
proper regions of different difﬁculty levels. Consequently,
content categorisation naturally takes place with the speciﬁed
difﬁculty levels. Nevertheless, compared to the aim in [11],
a different purpose of clustering analysis occurs here. Given
the value of k as a total number of chunks of knowledge, the
analysis identiﬁes k groups of similar game content for each

3

Research Article

H. Ar Rosyid, M. Palmerlee, K. Chen

education material and prevents boredom developing when
multiple repetitions of a game session required.

4.1. Chem Fight

3.3. Mapping between Knowledge and Game
Content Spaces

Mapping between knowledge and game content spaces is the
essential step that deploys each learning material into game
content based on their underlying characteristics. An arbitrary
or sampling-based mapping may be the simplest method.
However, it may promote ineffective learning for different
players. In fact, learning and playing in an educational game
involves various factors [16]. For instance, arbitrary mapping
has a greater possibility to assign an uncomplicated recall
materials with difﬁcult games. Hence, a novice player may
struggle playing difﬁcult games trying to overcome such
challenges. This situation could hinder a player’s aim to
recall the learning material. In other words, using arbitrary
or sample-based mapping can produce imbalanced outcomes
for the players.

Therefore, mapping should follow speciﬁc rules that
produce acceptable deployment of learning materials and
produce relatively fair experiences for various types of player.
For now, our strategy employs the developer’s intelligence
to exploit the in-depth characteristics of each content space.
According to the content structures, the crucial mapping
rule embeds an education material into a unique cluster of
game content from each difﬁculty level. Therefore, it can
prevent boredom growing when they need to repeat learning
the same knowledge. Additionally, we recommend creating
a rather detailed rule set through the following steps. Let
the education materials be a series of learning tasks. One
can identify the situations that elicit different outcomes when
learning adjacent, signiﬁcantly different (e.g. ﬁrst and last
chunk) or correlated knowledge chunks. Identifying those
in the
situations is somewhat abstract; however,
developer’s mind. Essentially, the developer must estimate
the speciﬁcations of a game cluster that supports an identiﬁed
condition. Hence, additional rules can drive a more acceptable
mapping concerning the player’s experiences. Using the rule
set, we can deploy learning materials and game elements
automatically even when both have large spaces.

it still

4. Case Study: Chem Dungeon for recalling
Chemical Compounds

Using the method presented in Sect. 3, it allows a developer to
transform an existing entertainment game into an educational
game by embedding learning materials. Conceptually, the
method should be applicable for combining various learning
subjects and various games. Therefore, the next subsections
describe an implementation of our method based on and
existing game, Chem Fight, including the solutions tackling
the practical challenges.

One of the authors (MP) developed the Chem Fight open
sourced under MIT licensing1, a turn-based game that
confronts a single-player versus a Non-Player Character in
a chemical compound battle. Whereas, attributes of known
20 atoms from the Periodic Table (PT) and the atom bonding
rules construct the gameplay.

Both players have a number of lives (red heart icon),
energy (blue ﬂash icon) and Atom Bucks (yellow dollar sign).
The following paragraph explains the game mechanics with
clariﬁcations2.

The game consists of a number of rounds until one of
the players loses all their lives. Each round consists of a
purchasing mode; one turn for the player to defend and
another for attacking the NPC. The purchasing mode allows
each player to buy atoms from the periodic table at a
price speciﬁed by its atomic number (e.g. Helium [He] with
atomic number 2 costs two Atom Bucks). On the ﬁrst turn,
one player attacks with a single atom, the defender (the
other player) only sees the valence electron count for the
attacking atom, thus, it earns a chance to appoint a number
of atoms for defence. If the attacking atom creates a chemical
bond with one or more of the defender’s chosen atoms (a
successful defence), the defending player receives rewards
composed of a number of Atom Bucks and Energy Units.
Otherwise, if there is no known possible compound between
the attacking element and any of the defending elements,
the attack is successful and the defending player receives
a penalty for those unbounded defending elements. In fact,
such a rule should discourage players from just defending
with every element they own each time. Meanwhile, regaining
the unused defending elements costs a decrease in energy.
However, if the player has insufﬁcient energy, their health
decreases in proportion to the deﬁcit. Once each turn ends,
players earn a number of Atom Bucks to allow them to spend
on additional elements.

4.2. Chem Dungeon

Inspired by Chem Fight, we apply our proposed approach in
Sect. 3 to develop a new SEG: Chem Dungeon which has
entirely different game mechanics compared to the original.
Indeed, we use the library of education materials and the basic
game rule (pairing atoms to create a compound) as the core of
Chem Dungeon. Moreover, an existing rogue-like game 3 is
employed to represent the game content. Given both spaces
are available, the following subsections describe the process
details.

1accessible online: http://js13kgames.com/games/chem-fight, and
the source code is available online: https://github.com/mpalmerlee/
ChemFight.
2available online: https://github.com/mpalmerlee/ChemFight
3available from http://www.kiwijs.org/

4

Research Article

Learning Materials: Chemical Compounds. The educa-
tional game has a purpose in promoting the memorization of
chemical compounds for players. For this case study, there are
100 compounds composed of at least two atoms to learn by
the players. The textual representation informs a compound’s
symbol, name and the atoms. For instance,"2 Hydrogen and
1 Oxygen construct an H2O (water)" represents the water
compound. One of the atoms (e.g. H) comprises of a singleton
while the other allows multiple atoms of the same type (e.g.
2O). Meanwhile, a single atom appears as a game object
with a text-based atomic symbol, e.g. O, Ca, Cl. Otherwise,
if numerous atoms of the same type are involved it appears
as a concatenation of strings between the total atom and the
atomic symbol, e.g. 2O, 2H, 2Cl, 6B.

According to Fig. 1, there are two general steps to proceed.
First, given the periodic table data, attributes appointment
operates according to the forming atoms and compound
representation. Attributes of the forming atoms (atom-1 and
atom-2) include atom-1-number (discrete), atom-2-number
total-types-of-atom (discrete) and total-atom
(discrete),
(discrete). Attributes associated with compound and atom
representations include: total-character-symbol-1 (discrete)
and total-character-symbol-2 (discrete). Subsequently, a
computer program retrieves necessary data from the periodic
table and measures the total characters for the involving
atoms,
then, annotates the attributes automatically. For
instance CO2 comprised of one Carbon and two Oxygen
atoms. The annotated values of this compound are atom-
1-number=6 (C), atom-2-number=8 (O), total-types-of-atom
CO2 is 2 (1 C + 1 O), the total-atom is 3 (1 C + 2 O), total-
character-symbol-1 and total-character-symbol-2 are both 1.

Second, with the fact that no correlations exist between
compounds, the strategy of remembering them takes into
account the properties. In fact, recalling them should be
driven by the complexity of each compound. In other words,
the more complex the representation of a compound, the
more difﬁcult it is to memorise. Accordingly, the strategy
in our case associates with structuring education materials
in a speciﬁc order based on the priority of attributes for
sorting. Therefore, based on recall priority, compounds are
ordered based on total-types-of-atom, total-atom, atom-1-
number and atom-2-number, total-character-symbol-1 and
total-character-symbol-2, respectively. As a result, the easiest
compound to remember is H2 (composed of two Hydrogen
is CaB6 (formed from
to recall
atoms) and the hardest
one Calcium atom with six Boron atoms). Hence,
the
sorted compounds are then represented by the CompoundID
attribute which has numeric values from 1 to 100.

Game Content Space: Rogue-like Maze. The game
content space was constructed from an existing rogue-like and
maze game to conﬁrm that it segregates from the learning
materials. Henceforth,
the categorization and mapping
processes become revealing for our demonstration. As an
overview, generating game elements using parameter values

A case study of deploying learning materials into game content

Table 1. Difﬁculty Categorisation Rule Set.

Difﬁculty

enemy-
type

total-
enemy

total-
bullets

maze

Easy

Medium

Hard

0
0
1
1

<4
>3
<3
<2

any

Figure 2. Exemplary games of different difﬁculty levels (left-
right): Easy, Medium, Hard.

applies here which consist of maze-id (categorical), enemy-
type (0: random-move enemy, and 1: smart enemy), total-
enemy (1-5), total-bullets (1-5). By default, the game content
space counts 48600 different parameter conﬁgurations.

In difﬁculty categorisation, three levels of challenges
separate the game content. To our best knowledge,
the
parameters enemy-type and total-enemy distinguish the
difﬁculty quite noticeably within the rule set in Table 1. As
a result, 22365 of game content is categorised as Easy, 15660
is Medium-level game content and 10575 of content has a
Hard difﬁculty level. Fig. 2 illustrates three different levels
of difﬁculty. The image on the left is identiﬁed as an Easy
game. Due to this fact, there is merely a single obstacle from
one enemy which moves randomly, but the avatar can wander
around the maze freely without very much concern being
hit by the sole enemy. The image in the middle and on the
right are Medium and Hard difﬁculty levels, respectively. A
medium game, provided with four enemies moving randomly
allows free movement for the avatar with added challenges
to avoid collision with these enemies. Meanwhile, the game
content with ﬁve Smart enemies demands a high level of
tactical practice in decision-making because these enemies
are capable of traversing the shortest path to the avatar.

Our goal in the similarity categorisation is to provide a
selection of similar game content for each learning material.
To accommodate this, a clustering analysis builds (k =
100) clusters of similar game content inside a difﬁculty
group. Given that maze-id parameter do not describe a maze
explicitly, ﬁve numeric parameters represent it measuring
the maze’s total-path, total-corners, total-intersections, total-
deadend and complexity. Aside from this, awareness was
raised over a number of challenges: 1) the large size of game
content space, and 2) the dynamic size of the content space
due to the previously played games. Accordingly, our choice
falls to Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering using

5

Research Article

H. Ar Rosyid, M. Palmerlee, K. Chen

Figure 3. Mapping result in terms of number of games in a
cluster.

Figure 4. Mapping result in terms of the sum of standard
deviation of game content parameters in a cluster.

Hierarchies (BIRCH) which is fast and ﬂexible even with very
large samples (details available in [17]).

For our case, conﬁguring BIRCH with k = 100 and setting
the branching factor B = 2 constructs a binary tree of
game content space for easier visualisation. Subsequently, the
BIRCH operates to search for an optimum threshold value
T which identiﬁes 100 clusters with the highest silhouette
score as an evaluation measure. The result of BIRCH on
game content space under normalised values attests to Low,
Medium and High difﬁculty groups using a threshold Tl =
Tm = Th = 0.02 to reach the highest silhouette of 0.23, 0.2
and 0.23, respectively.

Overall, 300 clusters identiﬁed and equally divided into 3
difﬁculty levels are ready for deployment with the education
materials.

Mapping: A Rule-based Approach. Previous steps suc-
cessfully arranged the chemical compounds from the simplest
to the most complex to memorize, and the game clusters
carry details including total game content, linear sum of each
parameter, the sum of square of each parameter and the
centroid points of the cluster. In addition, statistics for each
cluster can serve as the game content description.

Our deployment strategy operates a rule-based method.
Given the speciﬁcations found in learning material and
content space, the following crucial rule applies: a compound
deploys into three unique content clusters, all from different
difﬁculty levels. Indeed, this rule ascertains no duplicates of
game content for multiple compounds. However, additional
criteria ensures an appropriate mapping based on our
notion of possible learning conditions between simple
versus complex compounds. Essentially, difﬁcult or complex
compounds may need a higher number of games to play
with. In fact, the likelihood of failures to recall complex
compounds may be higher than the easier ones. Thus, a higher
frequency of repetitions may transpire for learning complex
compounds. As a consequence, a slight difference in the game
elements for recurrence of memorization may accustom the
player to those games without the fear of boredom growing.
Therefore, the player may have a wider space for focusing

on the learning goal. Given these expectations, the cluster
details resemble those aforementioned conditions including
the quantity of game content (represents the number of
repetitions) and the sum of standard deviations of game
content features (represents the variety of games) under non-
normalized parameter values. The following pseudo-code
shows the deployment rules in practice.

1. Assign education materials with string ID E j, where

j : 0, 1, ...n (n is the learning materials size).

2. Within each cluster (j: 0,1,...n) of each difﬁculty level
(i: 0,1,...m total difﬁculty levels): count games (Ni
j),
sum the standard deviations of parameters (Si
j) and
assign the game content with string ID Gi
j.

3. Sort clusters within each difﬁculty level based on
the value of N (ascending) and S (descending),
respectively.

4. Create pairs of [E j, Gi

j], where j:0-n and i:0-m, enabling
an education material gets a cluster of game content
from each difﬁculty level.

Mapping priority starts with the number of games in a
cluster (Fig. 3 depicts result details regarding the number of
games for each compound) and is followed by the standard
deviation of the cluster (Fig. 4 shows deployment details with
respect to variations of the game content). SQL-based tables
store the mapping result and both content space details.

4.3. SEG Game Engine

Given the structure of the content of a relatively new
game, a game engine should properly situate different
players accordingly. Fig. 5 shows several stages in the
SEG game engine. Initially, a new player should accustom
him/herself with the game-play in the practice game session
which contains the educational game with dummy learning
materials. Meanwhile, an existing player may enter the
practice game session for updating his/her Player Level. As

6

Research Article

A case study of deploying learning materials into game content

Figure 6. The Chem Dungeon layout.

the bottom-right of the maze. Actors in the game consist of
an avatar and a number of opponents, each with a spawn
point. The avatar carries an atom within its shield of which
information is shown near its spawn point (top-left corner),
a button to open the periodic table and a Help button to
pause the game and show mission objectives. Meanwhile,
information regarding a compound-forming result or an atom
properties are at the top-centre of the game arena. The right
side of the game (from top to bottom) contains: lives (heart
icon), experience in a red bar, ammunition (number), bonds
made (number) and the remaining time (90 to 0 seconds).
Inside the maze, bullets (yellow object), atom objects (blue
object) and live potion (red object) are collectible for the
avatar. Each bullet collected adds some ammunition for the
avatar. A live potion can restore the avatar’s life to full.

The objectives of the game comprise of the forming of a
compound and entering the exit gate within the 90-second
time limit. Initially, the avatar starts from its spawn point
while the enemies start in the diagonal paths of the maze
(bottom-left to top-right). The avatar can walk in 4-degrees
of freedom: left, down, right, up controlled by keyboard keys
a, s, d, w, respectively. When exploring the maze, the avatar
should avoid colliding with an enemy or an atom object.
In fact, it will surrender one life when colliding with an
incorrect atom object or a normal enemy. Luckily, shooting
an atom object opens a path due to the shot atom changing its
position to another empty tile. Meanwhile, shooting an enemy
transforms it to a weak mode (white-coloured character). A
weak enemy re-spawns back to its home when crashing with
the avatar, thus, opening another clear route. Accordingly, the
avatar can seek and assemble the correct atom object which
creates a compound. At this point, an educative message
pops up which contains information concerning the chemical
compound. Indeed, this game state should encourage players
to read and retain knowledge in their memory. When the
avatar has collected the correct atom object ten times, the exit

7

Research Article

Figure 5. Procedure in an SEG game session.

a matter of fact, this session estimates the mastery level
(denoted as V ) of the player with the game based on his/her
score achievement. Whereas, the mastery level V corresponds
to the difﬁculty level of the game content.

In principle, the score originates from the player’s game
actions which consist of positive (a+) and negative (a−)
actions. Logically, positive game actions increase score such
as through successful navigation or accurate shots while
negative game actions reduce score, for instance, a failed
navigation or failed battle. In addition, various weights (if
known by the developer) on particular actions may yield a
i βia−
i αia+
i − ∑l
more accurate scoring. Equation score = ∑k
i
provides the basic formula for scoring, where a+
i be the ith
positive game action and a−
i be the ith negative game action.
A value of k counts the number of positive game actions while
l measures the total negative game actions. Values of αi and
βi set the ith weights for positive and negative game actions,
respectively. Then, the threshold values of score categorise a
player into a particular level V .

Initially, a new player starts playing the game with the
ﬁrst education material (E). Meanwhile, an existing player
may progress the educational game according to his/her game
session record (List of Played SEG). Based on V and E, the
generation engine searches through the content library for
a speciﬁc education material, and the corresponding game
content cluster, as game content candidates. For a new player,
the candidates are all games in the selected cluster. On the
other hand, the played game content is excluded from being a
candidate. Subsequently, a centroid-based selection chooses
the closest game to the centroid xm, measured by (1), of the
pool as the newly selected game. Whereas, xi be the ith game
content in the pool and n be the number of game content
candidates.

xm =

∑n
i xi
n

(1)

the game engine generates the newly selected
Finally,
game composed of parameters incorporating the education-id
(based on the value of E) and the value of V which associates
the game content features.

4.4. Game Mechanics

This section demonstrates the game-play of the newly-
developed SEG as observed in Fig. 6. The game ﬁeld consists
of pathways and walls that form a maze with intersections
and cul-de-sac. An exit gate, initially closed, is hidden at

H. Ar Rosyid, M. Palmerlee, K. Chen

Figure 7. Procedure for user survey.

gate reveals to open. Finally, by entering the exit gate, the
avatar gets a Victory. Otherwise, losing all lives or out of time
issues a Defeat.

The following illustrates some helpful hints for players to
play the game. Although each game contains different atom
objects, its aim is to form one compound (repeatedly). Novice
players can adopt a trial-and-error strategy and are fully aware
not to lose all their lives. Therefore, the player ought to
actively read the text message at the top-centre position of
the game which holds the latest result for the compound-
forming attempt. Meanwhile, if only one life remains, a player
can regain full lives by collecting a potion. Or, similarly, by
accumulating experience (XP) bars through accurate shots
and hit weak enemies. Once the XP reaches a full bar, one
additional life replaces it. However, such an endeavour should
consider the remaining bullets/ammunition and the 90-second
time limit. These restrictions impede players abusing such
tactical practices merely for entertainment while disregarding
the goal of playing the game: memorising compound forming.

5. User Test

Developing an educational game using the method presented
in this paper can produce a ’new’ game, due to the mix of
education materials and game content. Therefore, a survey
containing the SEG allows players to play the game and report
their experiences. The survey opens only for players at least
18 years old and computer literate.

Fig. 7 depicts the procedures for the survey commencing
with a Consent form, Demographic form, Practice (training)
session and Pre-game Exam (randomly chosen learning
materials). Afterwards, players play a pair of games, each
with a single education material contained in the Pre-game
Exam and a difﬁculty level for the game content according
to his/her level measured from the Practice game session.
Following each pair of games a questionnaire is provided
for players to report fun/enjoyment from the latest played
games and a Post-game Exam. In addition, each game session
produces a log of gaming activities for further analysis. The
consent form conﬁrms a player’s participation in the survey.
Meanwhile, the Demographic form records participant data,
including age, location, player-id, email address and a unique
code for players to re-enter the survey. A 4-afc questionnaire
expects a player to compare his/her enjoyment between both

games [18, 19]. Question wording for the reported enjoyment
appears as follows: a) Game N+1 is more FUN than Game
N, b) Game N is more FUN than Game N+1, c) Both Games
are FUN and d) NONE of the Games are FUN. Meanwhile,
Pre and Post-game Exams employ Multiple Choice Question
(MCQ) design [20, 21].

Subsequently, a player may revisit the training session
if he/she requires improving his/her gaming ability before
continuing to the next section of the survey. Alternatively,
he/she may opt to directly play a new pair of games initialised
by completing another pre-game exam, or just quit the survey.

5.1. Data Analysis

The survey ran for
three months and the 50 players
participating were allowed to play several pairs of games,
hence, 540 reports obtained. Ten games were played
on average. Four players played only a pair of games
while 85% played between 4 to 14 games. One player
played and reported 15 pairs of games. Regarding the
reported experiences, a z-test will
the difference
between contrasting affective experiences, e.g. proportion of
enjoyment versus no enjoyment.

infer

In terms of reporting Enjoyment, 352 reports conﬁrmed
that the games were entertaining while 188 games reported
they were not enjoyable. Table 2 summarises three z-tests
evaluating H0 against Ha. The null hypothesis H0 : π = 0.5,
where π indicates the proportion of FUN reports. Given the
0.01 signiﬁcance level, two z-tests reject the null hypothesis
while 99% conﬁdent the proportion of FUN reports (0.652) is
greater 0.5 proportion.

By looking into play-logs, we observe that there are slight
differences between various gaming activities that separate
the reported Fun and Not Fun. This is due to the fact that
the Fun experience is a very subjective matter. One player
may feel ’entertained’ due to the game content ﬁts his skill,
while another player may feel an enjoyment when the game
content choice is more difﬁcult to play for his/her skill. This
is a factor among many others as it is common that different
players could have various perceptual/cognitive experience
in response to the same stimuli. Moreover, the affective
experience may change overtime or known as concept
drift [11]. To be more precise, the questionnaire should have
contained a thorough questions that accommodate various
aspects of enjoyment [22]. The observation also suggests that
the game content adaptation should be introduced in SEG
development.

Regarding the learning performance of the players, each
question item in an exam represented a learning material.
Thus, pre and post-game exams produced binary values
indicating prior knowledge and recalling results, respectively.
The difference in scores between pre and post-game
exams produced three types of learning performances, i.e.
unchanged,
improvement and decay. However, only the
unchanged and improved learning performances will be used
due to the negative score (decay) likely to be produced

8

Research Article

Table 2. Z-test on Proportion of Gained Enjoyment.

Table 4. Survey Results: Learning Outcome vs. Affective
Experience.

A case study of deploying learning materials into game content

Z-test, H0 against:
Indicators Ha : π (cid:44) 0.5 Ha : π > 0.5 Ha : π < 0.5
p-value
99% conf.
intervals
H0 status

0.00000
0.59-0.74

0.00000
0.6-1.0

1
N/A

Rejected

Rejected

Rejection
Failed

Table 3. Z-test on Proportion of Improved Learning.

Z-test, H0 against:
Indicators Ha : π (cid:44) 0.5 Ha : π > 0.5 Ha : π < 0.5
p-value
99% conf.
intervals
H0 status

0.00000
0.65 to 0.73

0.00000
0.66 to 1.0

1
N/A

Rejected

Rejected

Rejection
Failed

from arbitrary answers or random guess [23]. In addition,
game sessions exist containing known learning material
that
the exam design was not designed to measure for
the improvement of learning in such cases. Therefore, 309
reports involving not known prior knowledge were divided
into 219 game sessions which helped players improve their
learning performances, while 90 sessions failed to improve
learning performance. For this case, the same z-tests operate
using the same values for the null hypothesis and alternative
hypotheses while π indicates the proportion of improved
Learning. Table 3 summarises three z-tests results. Given the
0.01 signiﬁcance level, two z-tests reject the null hypothesis
while 99% conﬁdent the proportion of Improved Learning
reports (0.694) is greater 0.5 proportion.

Furthermore, we investigate the recorded gaming activities
corresponding to learning and not learning outcome and
ﬁnd gaming activities seem correlated to learning outcome.
In general, a game session where players recalled most of
the education materials has more gaming activities than a
game session where players only recalled few or no the
education materials. In fact, the total time spent in reading the
successfully collected compound corresponding to learning
actions take around 15 seconds on average. In contrast, the not
learning actions always take less than three seconds. Overall,
the total actions in learning game sessions over the not
learning in-game activities have been doubled approximately.
This is due to the fact that the goal of this educational game
is designed to collect as many bond-able atoms as possible,
which properly reﬂects learning.

The statistical evidence shown in Table 3 conﬁrms that
the Chem Dungeon game is considered successful from the
players’ perspective regarding their learning and enjoyment,
which is consistent with Pavlas’ testimony [16].

NotLearning

Learning

NotFun
Fun

42
48

65
154

the game sessions. It

On the other hand, we also look into the relationship
between learning outcome and affective experience reported
by the survey participants. Table 4 summarizes such
information collected from all
is
evident from Table 4 that our SEG allows more players
to gain positive learning outcome and Fun together as
there are 154 out of 309 falling into this category. This
clearly demonstrates that the use of separate content spaces
and a proper mapping proposed in our framework may
lead to an SEG that ﬁts all the characteristics described
by Abt in 1970s [24]: in a serious game, learning may
be primary but other experiences involved should not be
overlooked! Furthermore, serious games involve learning and
entertainment dimension as a unity during game sessions [25–
28]. Recent research by Pavlas found that enjoyment arising
from the playing activities may affect the learning of a player
in a serious game [16]. While the learning in serious games is
a primary objective that any players have to achieve, our work
emphasizes the importance of enjoyment (entertainment).
Overall, the experimental results reported above indicate that,
to a great extent, our game content and rules may elicit
positive affective experience and many players gain such
enjoyment when they engage in learning via game playing.

6. Conclusion

We have successfully developed Chem Dungeon using
a strategy that combines education materials and an
the
entertainment game. Retrieving inherent details of
learning materials demonstrates advantages in two regards.
First,
the learning materials has a natural description
held by the attributes enabling a developer to organize
them semantically. In the second, computer programs can
automatically annotate those attributes with little interference
from experts and with a concern merely for the learning
materials’ size. On the other hand, the procedurally generated
game elements in our approach unlock another route towards
rapid development of SEG in which categorization becomes
automated using a combination of
rule-based approach
and machine learning. Hence, those detailed descriptions
underlying both content spaces facilitate a developer in
establishing the mapping rules based on his/her knowledge.
Moreover, the new educational game we have developed
using our method has shown reasonable results in supporting
players’ learning and entertaining them.

It is worth stating that our current case study based on
Chem Fight is subject to limitation. Chem Fight was designed
purely for SEG and therefore many of its game mechanics

9

Research Article

H. Ar Rosyid, M. Palmerlee, K. Chen

were designed by taking the properties of atoms and
compounds into account. Nevertheless, the Chem Dungeon
emphasizes a PCG-based SEG which tolerates the recalling
type of learning. Hence, it opens opportunities to adjust
the method for a different type of learning speciﬁed by
the knowledge. In addition, the two-space structure could
be a baseline for research in procedural serious game-
play generation wherein attributions are concerning learning
materials, game elements and game rules.

In our ongoing research, we are further developing the
game to enable it to predict players’ experiences via gaming
data, which would lead to a corresponding adaptation method
for personalized learning in the SEG. In addition, we are
also going to investigate our proposed approach to new SEG
development by combining PCG-based entertainment game
platforms and appropriate learning materials.

References

[1] MICHAEL, D. and CHEN, S. (2006) Serious games: Games
that educate, train, and inform (Thomson Course Technology).
[2] GEE, J.P. (2005) Good video games and good learning. In Phi
Kappa Phi Forum (THE HONOR SOCIETY OF PHI KAPPA
PHI), 85: 33.

[3] DE FREITAS, S. and JARVIS, S.
(2006) A framework
learner needs.
for developing serious games
Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation and Education
Conference .

to meet

[4] IBRAHIM, R. and JAAFAR, A. (2009) Educational games
(eg) design framework: Combination of game design,
pedagogy and content modeling. In Electrical Engineering
and Informatics, 2009. ICEEI’09. International Conference on
(IEEE), 1: 293–298.

[5] ISMAILOVI ´C, D., HALADJIAN, J., KÖHLER, B., PAGANO, D.
and BRÜGGE, B. (2012) Adaptive serious game development.
In Games and Software Engineering (GAS), 2012 2nd
International Workshop on (IEEE): 23–26.

[6] HUSSAAN, A.M., SEHABA, K. and MILLE, A.

(2011)
Tailoring serious games with adaptive pedagogical scenarios:
A serious game for persons with cognitive disabilities. In
ICALT: 486–490.

[7] DJAOUTI, D., ALVAREZ,

J.P.

J. and JESSEL,

(2011)
Classifying serious games: The G/P/S model. In FELICIA,
[ed.] Handbook of Research on Improving Learning
P.
and Motivation through Educational Games (IGI Global),
chap. 6, 118–136. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-495-0.ch006,
URL http://www.ludoscience.com/files/ressources/
classifying_serious_games.pdf.

[8] ALVAREZ, J. and DJAOUTI, D. (2011) An introduction to
serious game deﬁnitions and concepts. Serious Games &
Simulation for Risks Management : 11.

[9] GEE, J.P. (2003) What video games have to teach us about
learning and literacy. Computers in Entertainment (CIE) 1(1):
20–20.

[10] SHAFFER, D.W. (2006) How computer games help children

learn (Macmillan).

[11] ROBERTS, J. and CHEN, K. (2015) Learning-based procedural
content generation. IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Game 7(1):
88–101.
[12] KAPP, K.M.

learning and
(2012) The gamiﬁcation of
instruction: game-based methods and strategies for training
and education (John Wiley & Sons).

[13] BELLOTTI, F., BERTA, R., GLORIA, A.D. and PRIMAVERA,
L. (2009) Adaptive experience engine for serious games. IEEE
Trans. Comput. Intell. AI Game 1(4): 264–280.

[14] BELLOTTI, F., BERTA, R., DE GLORIA, A. and PRIMAVERA,
L. (2009) A task annotation model for sandbox serious games.
In Computational Intelligence and Games, 2009. CIG 2009.
IEEE Symposium on, 233–240.

[15] CSIKSZENTMIHALYI, M. (1990) Flow: The Psychology of

Optimal Experience (USA:Harper Perennial).

[16] PAVLAS, D. (2010) A Model of Flow and Play in Game-based
Learning: The Impact of Game Characteristics, Player Traits,
and Player States. Ph.D. thesis, University of Central Florida.
[17] ZHANG, T., RAMAKRISHNAN, R. and LIVNY, M. (1996)
Birch: an efﬁcient data clustering method for very large
databases. In ACM Sigmod Record (ACM), 25: 103–114.
[18] PEDERSEN, C., TOGELIUS, J. and YANNAKAKIS, G.N.
(2010) Modeling player experience for content creation. Com-
putational Intelligence and AI in Games, IEEE Transactions
on 2(1): 54–67.

[19] JÄKEL, F. and WICHMANN, F.A.

(2006) Spatial

four-
alternative forced-choice method is the preferred psychophysi-
cal method for naïve observers. Journal of Vision 6(11): 13–13.
(2009) Digital game-based learning
in high school computer science education:
Impact on
educational effectiveness and student motivation. Computers
& Education 52(1): 1–12.

[20] PAPASTERGIOU, M.

[21] MANSKE, M. and CONATI, C. (2005) Modelling learning in
an educational game. In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education: Supporting Learning
Through Intelligent and Socially Informed Technology (Ams-
terdam, The Netherlands, The Netherlands: IOS Press): 411–
418.

[22] FU, F.L., SU, R.C. and YU, S.C. (2009) Egameﬂow: A
scale to measure learnersâ ˘A ´Z enjoyment of e-learning games.
Computers & Education 52(1): 101–112.

[23] BAO, L. (1999) Dynamics of student modeling: A theory,
algorithms, and application to quantum mechanics. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Maryland at College Park.
[24] ABT, C. (1970) Serious Games (Viking Press).
[25] MICHAUD, L. and ALVAREZ, J. (2008) Serious games:
Advergaming, edugaming, training and more. IDATE Consult-
ing & Research .

[26] JANTKE, K.P. (2010) Toward a taxonomy of game based
learning. In Progress in Informatics and Computing (PIC),
2010 IEEE International Conference on (IEEE), 2: 858–862.
[27] ZYDA, M. (2011) Computer, chap. From visual simulation to

virtual reality to games, 25–32.

[28] RITTERFELD, U., CODY, M. and VORDERER, P. (2009)

Serious games: Mechanisms and effects (Routledge).

10

Research Article

