6
1
0
2

g
u
A
3

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
9
5
1
1
0
.
8
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Novel Reﬂectometer for Relative Reﬂectance
Measurements of CCDs

Murdock Harta, Robert H. Barkhousera, James E. Gunnb, and Stephen A. Smeea
aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 21218
(USA);
bDepartment of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 08544 (USA)

ABSTRACT

The high quantum eﬃciencies (QE) of backside illuminated charge coupled devices (CCD) has ushered in the age
of the large scale astronomical survey. The QE of these devices can be greater than 90%, and is dependent upon
the operating temperature, device thickness, backside charging mechanisms, and anti-reﬂection (AR) coatings.
But at optical wavelengths the QE is well approximated as one minus the reﬂectance, thus the measurement of
the backside reﬂectivity of these devices provides a second independent measure of their QE.

We have designed and constructed a novel instrument to measure the relative specular reﬂectance of CCD
detectors, with a signiﬁcant portion of this device being constructed using a 3D fused deposition model (FDM)
printer. This device implements both a monitor and measurement photodiode to simultaneously collect in-
cident and reﬂected measurements reducing errors introduced by the relative reﬂectance calibration process.
While most relative reﬂectometers are highly dependent upon a precisely repeatable target distance for accurate
measurements, we have implemented a method of measurement which minimizes these errors.

Using the reﬂectometer we have measured the reﬂectance of two types of Hamamatsu CCD detectors. The
ﬁrst device is a Hamamatsu 2k x 4k backside illuminated high resistivity p-type silicon detector which has been
optimized to operate in the blue from 380 nm - 650 nm. The second detector being a 2k x 4k backside illuminated
high resistivity p-type silicon detector optimized for use in the red from 640 nm - 960 nm. We have not only been
able to measure the reﬂectance of these devices as a function of wavelength we have also sampled the reﬂectance
as a function of position on the device, and found a reﬂection gradient across these devices.

Keywords: Relative Reﬂectance, CCD, Quantum Eﬃciency, 3D Printing, Fused Deposition Model

1. REFLECTOMETER DEVICE

The reﬂectometer was designed to measure the specular reﬂectance relative to a silicon calibration standard at
wavelengths from 380 nm to 1100 nm. To perform a measurement a collimated beam of light 8 mm in diameter is
incident upon a target surface at an angle 15◦ from normal. The eﬀects upon the reﬂectance due to polarization
can be neglected as the collimated beam is not polarized and these eﬀects are also negligible at a 15◦ angle from
normal incidence, the reﬂectance is taken to be the average of the s and p polarizations.

The main structure of the reﬂectometer was 3D printed from acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plas-
tic. The 3D printing fabrication process allowed for greater design freedom, and the ﬁnal structure was both
lightweight and rigid. A cross section view of the reﬂectometer is shown in Fig.1. The illumination source for
the reﬂectometer is a Horiba iHR-320 monochromator which is equipped with both a quartz tungsten halogen
lamp (QTH) and a xenon arc lamp. The monochromator allows for the reﬂectance measurements to be per-
formed through a range of wavelengths, and a slit to round Fiberguide ﬁber optic couples the monochromator
to the reﬂectometer. The exit of the ﬁber illuminates a ground glass diﬀuser, which in turn illuminates a second
ground glass diﬀuser. This pair of diﬀusers is intended to create a uniform illumination pattern, with the second
diﬀuser being imaged by the pinhole. The pinhole is imaged by an aspheric lens, creating a collimated beam
for the incident illumination of the sample. The required distance from the pinhole to the collimating lens is
dependent upon wavelength. Over the intended operational bandpass of the reﬂectometer the aspheric lens to
object distance varies by approximately 2 mm. To minimize the eﬀects of the shifting focus distance aspheric
lenses which are optimized for a narrower bandpasses were selected. The aspheric lenses were mounted at their

 
 
 
 
 
 
required distances from the pinhole, and each has a broadband anti-reﬂective (AR) coating with bandpasses
optimized for 350 nm - 700 nm, 650 nm - 1050 nm, and 1050 nm - 1700 nm. The collimated beam is reﬂected
oﬀ the surface to be measured, and the reﬂection is collected by the signal photodiode. The active surface of
the signal photodiode is 6.6 mm square and is overﬁlled by the 8 mm diameter collimated beam. The signal
photodiode is mounted on an X-Y linear stage to allow for minor adjustments to the alignment of the photodiode
to the collimated beam. The monitor diode is placed to measure the output of the second ground glass diﬀuser.

Figure 1: Reﬂectometer cross section view. A slit to round ﬁber couples the reﬂectometer to a monochromator
source. The ﬁber illuminates a pair of ground glass diﬀusers to create an even illumination pattern. The second
ground glass diﬀuser is imaged by a pinhole, and the pinhole is imaged by an aspheric lens. The aspheric lens
creates a collimated beam which is incident upon the surface to be measured 15◦ from normal. Finally the
collimated beam is reﬂected back to a signal photodiode. A monitor diode is placed to measure the output of
the second ground glass diﬀuser.

The photodiodes used for the signal and monitor measurements are OSI PIN-44DPI. The PIN-44DPI is a
photovoltaic photodiode, which oﬀers low noise at the expense of response speed. The response of the photodiode
is shown in Fig.2. A Keithley 6482 dual channel pico-ammeter is used to measure the photodiode currents
simultaneously. Fig.3 are the noise distributions for the entire signal chains of the signal and monitor photodiodes
with zero illumination, and the noise does not signiﬁcantly impact reﬂectance measurements.

Reﬂectance measurements are performed in a Wenzel XO-87 coordinate measuring machine (CMM). A test
cryostat is mounted in the CMM, and serves as the ﬁxture for holding detectors. The reﬂectometer is attached
to the CMM’s ram, which allows for the reﬂectometer to be precisely positioned to perform measurements. Since
the reﬂectance measurements are performed through the test cryostats window, and the reﬂectance of these
devices can be as low as a few percent, the dewar windows can have a signiﬁcant impact upon a reﬂectance
measurement. The cryostat windows have been coated with a broadband AR coating to minimize the reﬂections
from the window.

2. REFLECTANCE MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUE

Reﬂectance is the fraction of incident electromagnetic power that is not transmitted at an interface. The reﬂec-
tometer uses a monitor diode to measure the incident power, and a signal diode to measure the reﬂected power.

Figure 2: The response curve of the OSI PIN-
44DPI photodiode.

Figure 3: Noise distribution of the signal and
monitor photodiodes.

Using a monitor diode minimizes errors due to temporal variations in the illumination source. The top panel in
Fig.4 are the measured monitor and signal currents for a reﬂectance measurement. A reﬂectance measurement
is taken to be the ratio of the signal to monitor current, the second panel in Fig.4 is the ratio of the currents.
For a typical reﬂectance measurement the incident power is approximately 100 times greater than the reﬂected
power.

Figure 4: Reﬂectance Measurement, the top panel shows the signal and monitor photodiode currents. The second
panel is the ratio of the photodiode currents. The third panel is the calculated reﬂectance of silicon, and the
bottom panel is the calibration factor.

The reﬂectometer measures reﬂectance relative to a silicon standard. The standard is a 2” silicon wafer
which has been chemically mechanically polished (CMP) on one side. Since the reﬂectometer measures specular
reﬂectance the calibration standard needs to have a similar surface roughness. Shen et al.1 measured the
bi-directional reﬂection distribution function (BRDF) for a range of silicon wafer roughnesses, and showed for
surfaces where the Rayleigh criterion holds minimal amounts of light are diﬀusely scattered. By the Rayleigh
criterion a surface is optically smooth if ∆h < λ/8, where h is the RMS surface roughness and λ is the wavelength
of the incident light. While it is clear the CMP polished surface of the silicon standard is well below the Rayleigh
criterion, the surface roughness of the device to be measured has not been quantiﬁed. But typically the wet
chemical etching processes used to thin silicon decrease surface roughness, thus it is a reasonable assumption
that the devices to be measured are also well below the Rayleigh criterion.

Using the Fresnel equations, along with the indices of refraction (n) and extinction coeﬃcients (κ ) for silicon
taken from Green,2 the reﬂectance of silicon can be calculated. In Fig.4 the third panel shows the calculated
reﬂectance of silicon. To derive a reﬂectance from a measured current ratio a wavelength dependent calibration
factor is necessary. The calibration factor is found by dividing the silicon calculated reﬂectance by the silicon
measured current ratio. The bottom panel in Fig.4 is an example of the calibration factor used to convert a
current ratio into a reﬂectance. The reﬂectance of the device to be measured is found by multiplying the current
ratio by the calibration factor.

Relative reﬂectance measurements are susceptible to errors due to diﬀering alignments of the calibration
standard and the surfaces to be measured. Lesser3 uses an optical method by which to precisely align the surface
to be tested to the same position as the calibration standard. In our reﬂectometer the distance to the target
from the reﬂectometer aﬀects where the collimated beam is reﬂected onto the signal photodiode. To overcome
this limitation the CMM is used to measure reﬂectance through a range of target distances, with the peak signal
taken to represent the measured reﬂectance. In Fig.5 the current ratio is plotted versus shifts in distance to the
target, and the peak signal is used to calculate the reﬂectance.

Figure 5: Current ratio versus shift in distance to target. The peak signal is used to calculate the reﬂectance.

3. CCD REFLECTANCE MEASUREMENTS

Two types of Hamamatsu CCDs have been measured for their reﬂectance, a blue optimized CCD and red
optimized CCD. The blue optimized CCD is a Hamamatsu part number S10892-1628(X), which is a backside
illuminated fully depleted p-type device with a format of 4192 x 2048 15 µm pixels and is fabricated on 100-
micron thick high-resistivity silicon with a broadband AR coating applied to the backside. These devices are
detailed in Kamata et al.4 and Gunn et al.5 The red optimized detector is a Hamamatsu S10892-1629(X), and
is similar to the blue with the same geometry and mask, but it is fabricated on 200 µm thick high-resistivity
silicon, and has an AR coating optimized for the red applied to the backside. Fig.6 is the measured reﬂectance
of a blue optimized CCD, and Fig.7 is the measured reﬂectance of a red optimized CCD. Fabricius et al.6 shows
that between 500 - 900 nm the QE = 1 − R and more generally QE ≤ 1 − R. Fig.8 is the 1 − R quantum
eﬃciency for the blue optimized CCD, and Fig.9 is the 1 − R quantum eﬃciency for the red optimized CCD.
Kamata et al.4 measured the QE of the red optimized devices, and their QE curve is nearly identical to the
reﬂectance measured QE from 600 nm - 950 nm. The intrinsic QE of the devices as measured by Kamata et
al.4 begin to rapidly drop past 1,000 nm as the wavelengths approach the cutoﬀ wavelength of silicon, and the
measured reﬂectance is unable to capture this behavior.

The precise positioning ability of the CMM also allows for the measurement of the reﬂectance across the
extent of a device to reveal reﬂectance gradients. The diameter of the reﬂectometer’s collimated beam is 8 mm
and the photodiode is 6.6 mm square, thus a reﬂectance measurement is sampling an area which is similar in
extent to the photodiode. The Hamamatsu CCDs have an active area approximately 30 mm wide in the serial
direction and 60 mm long in the parallel direction. The surface reﬂectance was sampled using three stripes
spaced 10 mm apart, where a stripe runs in the parallel direction, and each stripe is sampled every 3 mm. The
reﬂectance of the surfaces were measured through a range of wavelengths, with the blue optimized CCDs being
measured from 350 nm - 700 nm at a 10 nm interval, and the red optimized CCDs were measured from 600 nm

Figure 6: Measured reﬂectance of the blue opti-
mized Hamamatsu CCD.

Figure 7: Measured reﬂectance of the red opti-
mized Hamamatsu CCD.

Figure 8: The reﬂectance measured quantum ef-
ﬁciency of the blue optimized Hamamatsu CCD.

Figure 9: The reﬂectance measured quantum ef-
ﬁciency of the red optimized Hamamatsu CCD.

- 1,100 nm at a 50 nm interval. The reﬂectance was found to be a slowly varying function of wavelength. Fig.10
is the reﬂectance across a blue optimized CCD taken at 400 nm. Fig.11 is the reﬂectance across the surface of a
red optimized CCD taken at 950 nm. Both CCDs show reﬂectance gradients in the parallel direction which has
been attributed to the coating process, and the variation in reﬂectance in the serial direction is minimal. The
shape and magnitude of the reﬂectance gradient is wavelength dependent.

Figure 10: The surface reﬂectance of a blue optimized CCD taken at 400 nm. There is approximately a 1%
reﬂectance gradient in the parallel direction.

Figure 11: The surface reﬂectance of a red optimized CCD taken at 950 nm. There is approximately a 0.5%
reﬂectance gradient in the parallel direction.

4. CONCLUSION

We have built a novel reﬂectometer which used 3D printing to fabricate the super structure. The 3D printing
process oﬀers more design freedom, and dramatically reduces manufacturing times. By implementing a monitor
and signal diode we have minimized measurement errors due to the temporal variations of the illumination source,
and the relative reﬂectance method. The reﬂectometer measures reﬂectance relative to a silicon standard, and
the errors due to the positioning diﬀerences between the standard and the device under test have been minimized
by measuring the reﬂectance through a range of target distances and taking the peak value as the reﬂectance
measurement.

The reﬂectance of red and blue optimized Hamamatsu CCDs has been measured, and reﬂectance measured
QE have been computed. The reﬂectance measured QE of the red optimized CCD matches the measured QE
found for these devices given in other publications. We are currently preparing to measure the QE of the blue
optimized devices, and we will then contrast the QE found by the two diﬀerent techniques.

Having the ability to measure the reﬂectance across the surface of the CCD has allowed us to quantify the
reﬂectance gradient as a function of position and wavelength. We have measured a gradient in reﬂectance which
is directed in the parallel direction of the CCDs, and the size and shape of the gradient has been found to be
wavelength dependent. The reﬂectance gradient is attributed to the process by which the AR coating is applied.

REFERENCES

1. Y. J. Shen, Z. M. Zhang, B. K. Tsai, and D. P. Dewitt, “Bidirectional Reﬂectance Distribution Function of

Rough Silicon Wafers,” International Journal of Thermophysics 22, pp. 1311–1326, July 2001.

2. M. A. Green, “Self-consistent optical parameters of intrinsic silicon at 300K including temperature coeﬃ-

cients,” Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 92, pp. 1305–1310, Nov. 2008.

3. M. Lesser, “Silicon sensor quantum eﬃciency, reﬂectance, and calibration,” in SPIE Astronomical Telescopes

+ Instrumentation, pp. 915411–1 – 915411–12, SPIE, July 2014.

4. Y. Kamata, S. Miyazaki, H. Nakaya, H. Suzuki, Y. Miyazaki, and M. Muramatsu, “Characterization and
performance of hyper Suprime-Cam CCD,” in SPIE Astronomical Telescopes and Instrumentation: Obser-
vational Frontiers of Astronomy for the New Decade, pp. 774229–774229–11, SPIE, 2010.

5. J. E. Gunn, M. Carr, S. A. Smee, J. D. Orndorﬀ, R. H. Barkhouser, M. Hart, C. L. Bennett, J. E. Greene,
T. Heckman, H. Karoji, O. LeFevre, H.-H. Ling, L. Martin, B. Menard, H. Murayama, E. Prieto, D. Spergel,
M. A. Strauss, H. Sugai, A. Ueda, S.-Y. Wang, R. Wyse, and N. Zakamska, “Detectors and cryostat design
for the SuMIRe Prime Focus Spectrograph (PFS),” arXiv.org , Oct. 2012.

6. M. Fabricius, C. J. Bebek, D. E. Groom, A. Karcher, and N. Roe, “Quantum eﬃciency characterization of

back-illuminated CCDs Part 2: reﬂectivity measurements,” SPIE 6068, pp. 101–111, Jan. 2006.

