6
1
0
2

p
e
S
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
9
2
3
0
0
.
9
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Solar Physics
DOI: 10.1007/•••••-•••-•••-••••-•

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

Mariano Poisson1 · Pascal D´emoulin2 ·
Marcelo L´opez Fuentes1 ·
Cristina H. Mandrini1,3

c(cid:13) Springer ••••

Abstract The photospheric spatial distribution of the main magnetic polarities
of bipolar active regions (ARs) presents during their emergence deformations
are known as magnetic tongues. They are attributed to the presence of twist in
the toroidal magnetic ﬂux-tubes that form the ARs. The aim of this article is to
study the twist of newly emerged ARs from the evolution of magnetic tongues
observed in photospheric line-of-sight magnetograms. We apply the procedure
described by Poisson et al. (2015, Solar Phys. 290, 727) to ARs observed over
the full Solar Cycle 23 and the beginning of Cycle 24. Our results show that
the hemispherical rule obtained using the tongues as a proxy of the twist has a
weak sign-dominance (53 % in the southern hemisphere and 58 % in the northern
hemisphere). By deﬁning the variation of the tongue angle, we characterize the
strength of the magnetic tongues during diﬀerent phases of the AR emergence.
We ﬁnd that there is a tendency of the tongues to be stronger during the begin-
ning of the emergence and to become weaker as the AR reaches its maximum
magnetic ﬂux. We compare this evolution with the emergence of a toroidal ﬂux-
rope model with non-uniform twist. The variety of evolution of the tongues in
the analyzed ARs can only be reproduced when using a broad range of twist
proﬁles, in particular having a large variety of twist gradient in the direction
vertical to the photosphere. Although the analytical model used is a special
case, selected to minimize the complexity of the problem, the results obtained
set new observational constraints to theoretical models of ﬂux-rope emergence
that form bipolar ARs.

(cid:66) M.Poisson

mpoisson@iafe.uba.ar

1

Instituto de Astronom´ıa y F´ısica del Espacio (IAFE), CONICET-UBA, Buenos
Aires, Argentina

2 Observatoire de Paris, LESIA, UMR 8109 (CNRS), F-92195 Meudon Principal

Cedex, France

3

Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales (FCEN), UBA, Buenos Aires, Argentina

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: Active Regions, Magnetic Fields; Corona, Structures; Helicity, Mag-
netic; Helicity, Observations

M. Poisson et al.

1. Introduction

The study of the solar-cycle properties is the basis for understanding how the
solar dynamo produces and ampliﬁes the magnetic ﬁeld in the solar interior.
In the last ﬁve decades, several models have proposed a dynamo mechanism
located at the bottom of the convective zone (CZ). In this scenario, the magnetic
ﬂux at the base of the CZ is ampliﬁed and distorted by diﬀerential rotation
and convection and, ﬁnally, it is destabilized by a buoyant-instability process.
Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) numerical simulations show the way that this
instability creates coherent magnetic-tubes that rise from the deep layers of the
CZ and manifest as the emergence of solar active regions (ARs) observed at
photospheric heights (Fan, 2009). An important prediction of these simulations
is that the emerging structures should form twisted ﬂux tubes or ﬂux ropes (FR)
in order to maintain their consistency during the transit through the turbulent
CZ.

In this view, ARs are the consequence of the emergence of FRs. Other mech-
anisms, however, have been proposed to explain the formation of ARs (see
Cheung and Isobe (2014) and references therein). There is much observational
evidence of twist in ARs (i.e. sunspot whorls, non-potentiality of coronal loops,
prominences, X-ray sigmoids; see the review of Pevtsov et al., 2014). ARs with
complex magnetic-ﬁeld distribution, associated with highly twisted FRs, are
more productive in terms of ﬂares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs) due to the
amount of free magnetic energy and helicity stored in their structures (Kusano
et al., 2004; Liu, Zhang, and Zhang, 2008; Tziotziou, Georgoulis, and Raouaﬁ,
2012; Szajko et al., 2013).

The tendency of magnetic helicity to have a diﬀerent sign in each solar hemi-
spheres was ﬁrst proposed by Hale from the evidence of vortical patterns in the
chromospheric ﬁbrils surrounding the ARs sunspots (Hale, 1925). According to
this “hemispherical rule”, there is a predominancy of positive (negative) helicity
in the southern (northern) hemisphere. The strength of the rule has been tested
using several estimations of the magnetic and current helicity (Bao, Ai, and
Zhang, 2000; LaBonte, Georgoulis, and Rust, 2007; Pevtsov et al., 2008; Liu,
Hoeksema, and Sun, 2014). However, a wide range of variation is observed in
the rule, e.g. it is weaker for ARs (≈ 60 % – 70 %) than for quiescent ﬁlaments
(≈ 80 %; Wang, 2013; Pevtsov et al., 2014). The signiﬁcant scatter exhibited by
the hemispheric rule implies that turbulence in the convection zone may play
an important role in the generation of the observed chirality trends (Longcope,
Fisher, and Pevtsov, 1998; Nandy, 2006).

L´opez Fuentes et al. (2000) reported a proxy of the twist associated with the
deformation of the magnetic polarities observed in line-of-sight magnetograms.
These observed features, called magnetic tongues (or tails), are produced by the
azimuthal ﬁeld component of the emerging FR projected on the line-of-sight.
The magnetic-ﬂux distribution due to the magnetic tongues is directly related

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 2

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

to the sign of the twist in an emerging AR, so the deformation or elongation of the
magnetic polarities can be used as a proxy for the sign of the helicity. Luoni et al.
(2011) computed the elongation of the AR polarities and the evolution of the
polarity inversion line (PIL) to characterize the strength of the magnetic tongues.
They found that the twist sign inferred from the observed magnetic tongues
is consistent with the helicity sign deduced from other proxies (photospheric-
helicity ﬂux, sheared coronal loops, sigmoids, ﬂare ribbons, and/or the associated
magnetic cloud).

Poisson et al. (2015b) introduced a systematic method to quantify the eﬀect
of the magnetic tongues by studying the PIL evolution during the emergence of
ARs. This less user-dependent procedure consists in the systematic computation
of a linear approximation of the PIL in between the strong magnetic polarities.
This is done by minimizing the opposite-sign magnetic-ﬂux component on each
side of the computed PIL (see Section 2.2). From the acute angle between the
computed PIL and the line orthogonal to the AR bipole axis [τ ] we estimated the
average number of turns in the sub-photospheric emerging ﬂux rope, assuming
that it can be represented by a uniformly twisted half torus. We found that the
number of turns [Nt] is typically below unity; then, sub-photospheric ﬂux-ropes
have in general a low amount of twist.

In a more recent article Poisson et al. (2015a) compared Nt with the twist of
simple bipolar ARs calculated from linear force-free ﬁeld extrapolations of their
line-of-sight (LOS) magnetic ﬁeld to the corona. The signs of the twist obtained
with both methods are consistent. Moreover, we found a linear relation between
Nt computed at the photospheric level from the tongues and the number of turns
obtained from coronal ﬁeld modeling.

In this article, we use the procedure described by Poisson et al. (2015b) to
explore the properties of the twist of emerging ARs during a complete solar
cycle. Our main aim is to search for any dependence of the parameters (i.e. Nt,
τ ) characterizing magnetic tongues on the diﬀerent phases of the cycle and to
expand the previous results to a larger statistical sample. Moreover, we quantify
the strength of the tongues in the diﬀerent stages of the AR emergence. This
provides further information about how the twist is distributed in the FR. In
Section 2, we describe the data used and the selected sample of ARs. We also
deﬁne the procedure to derive the tongue characteristics. In Section 3, we study
the properties of the magnetic tongues; in particular, along the solar cycle. In
Section 4, we compare the evolution of the PIL angle during an AR emergence
with the emergence of a FR model that we develop to interpret the variety in
the evolution of the magnetic tongues. In particular, we show that a broad range
of twist proﬁles is required to interpret the observations. Finally, in Section 5,
we summarize our results and conclude.

2. Observations and Methods

2.1. Active Regions Studied

We used line-of-sight magnetograms from the Michelson Doppler Imager (MDI:
Scherrer et al., 1995), onboard the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO).

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 3

M. Poisson et al.

The full-disk magnetograms consist of 1024 × 1024 pixel arrays and are cali-
brated at level 1.8. These 96-minute cadence maps are constructed using
either one-minute or ﬁve-minute averaged magnetograms. The data
series consist of 15 magnetograms per day with a spatial resolution
of 1.98(cid:48)(cid:48)and an error in the ﬂux density of 16 G or 9 G per pixel,
respectively.

We selected ARs that appeared on the solar disk during the full operational
period of the MDI instrument, from the beginning of Solar Cycle 23 (≈ July
1996) until the beginning of Cycle 24 (around January 2010). We systematically
searched for ARs with dominantly bipolar magnetic-ﬁeld conﬁgurations and
low background ﬂux in this period of time (≈ 13 years). These are the same
criteria used by Poisson et al. (2015b). The selection was made by examining
SOHO/MDI images provided by the Helio-viewer website (www.helioviewer.org).
After selecting the ARs in this way, we retrieved the corresponding original data
from the MDI instrument data base.

Since we are interested in the emergence phase of the ARs, we need to track
their evolution through the largest possible part of their transit, but minimizing
the projection and foreshortening eﬀects. Therefore, we selected ARs that started
emerging between 30◦ East and the central meridian (CM). We found 187 well-
isolated bipolar ARs emerging in areas devoid of signiﬁcant background ﬁeld
during this period of time. The constraints on the characteristics of the selected
ARs limit the statistical size of our sample; however, our aim is to have a set of
clearly observed emerging ARs.

We processed the full-disk magnetograms using standard Solar-Software tools.
We ﬁrst transformed the magnetic-ﬂux density measured in the observer’s direc-
tion to the solar radial direction neglecting the contribution of the components
on the photospheric plane. This is a small correction as we selected ARs that are
close to the disk center (the eﬀects of this transformation were studied, e.g., by
Green et al. (2003)). Then, we proceeded to rotate the magnetograms to the date
when the AR was located at the CM; this rotation reduces the foreshortening
eﬀect which is present away from the CMP (a small eﬀect since we analyze ARs
closer than 30◦ from CMP). We removed from the set any magnetogram with
evidence of bad quality measurements. Finally, we selected a large sub-region
of the magnetograms where the AR is located during the emergence phase and
later evolution. The selected sub-region is the same for all of the magnetograms
containing the observed AR. All of the processed data can be easily stored in a
three-dimensional array (two spatial dimensions for each map and one for the
temporal evolution).

Next, we chose rectangular boxes of variable size encompassing the AR polar-
ities during all of the emergence phase. Movies for each AR were made to verify
that the variable-size box included all of the magnetic ﬂux of the AR at all times.
All of the AR parameters were computed considering only the pixels inside these
rectangular regions from the AR’s ﬁrst emergence until the maximum ﬂux was
reached and/or projection and foreshortening eﬀects were too important (when
the distance to the CM passage was larger than 30◦).

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 4

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

2.2. Characterizing Magnetic Tongues

As we described in Section 1, magnetic tongues are evident during the emergence
of ARs (at least the ones that are not too complex and where multipolarities
can mask or distort new emergences). For twisted FRs, the projection of the
magnetic-ﬁeld components on the observer’s direction results into an elongation
of the AR polarities that can be seen in MDI magnetograms (Luoni et al.,
2011). We used the polarity inversion line (PIL) method described by Poisson
et al. (2015b) to characterize the deformation of the polarities along the AR
evolution. Although the PIL can be a complicated curved line, the method ﬁnds
the coeﬃcients a, b, c to approximate the PIL to a straight line by minimizing
the function D(a, b, c) deﬁned as:

D(a, b, c) =

(cid:90)

x,y

| sign(ax + by + c) |Bo| − Bo|2 dx dy,

(1)

where Bo = Bo(x, y) is the observed ﬁeld at location (x, y) and the integration
is done over a rectangular region surrounding the AR (avoiding the ﬂux not
belonging to the AR). The minimization of D(a, b, c) ﬁnds the straight line that
separates in the best possible way the AR in two distinct polarity regions. The
main AR ﬁeld is not contributing to D(a, b, c) as its contribution cancels in the
integrand by construction. Only the polarities in the vicinity of the PIL have a
variable contribution when the coeﬃcients a, b, c are changed around the values
minimizing D(a, b, c). A further description of the method has been given by
Poisson et al. (2015b). Finally, we deﬁne the PIL angle [θ] as the angle between
the straight PIL and the East–West direction (see Figure 1a).

We also compute the tilt angle of the AR. To do so, we use the line that
joins the ﬂux-weighted centers (which we call barycenters) of the positive and
negative magnetic polarities (L´opez Fuentes et al., 2000) and we give the name
of the bipole vector to the oriented axis that joins the following to the leading
barycenters. The tilt angle [φ] of an AR is deﬁned as the angle between the
East–West direction and the bipole vector.

Next, we deﬁne the tongue angle [τ ] as the acute angle between the PIL

direction and the direction orthogonal to the AR bipole vector as:

τ = φ − θ + 90◦ .

(2)

Since φ lies between −90◦ and 90◦ and the PIL direction is deﬁned modulo
180◦, we select θ so that θ − φ lies between 0◦ and 180◦. This implies that τ
lies between −90◦ and 90◦, and τ has the same sign as the twist that is inferred
from the shape of the tongues (Poisson et al., 2015b).

Since for some ARs a large amount of magnetic ﬂux is present in the magnetic
tongues, their temporal evolution has an eﬀect on the bipole tilt. That is why we
deﬁne a corrected tilt angle considering that the ﬂux-tube axis direction can be
inferred from the tilt angle when the tongues have retracted and before another
emergence or dispersion further modiﬁes the bipole tilt. We consider the time of
maximum ﬂux as the one satisfying both conditions, as inferred from the analysis

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 5

M. Poisson et al.

Figure 1. (a,c) Two magnetogram examples of emerging ARs observed by MDI (see Electronic
Supplementary Materials Movie1a and Movie1c). The continuous (dashed) lines are isocontours
of the positive (negative) magnetic ﬁeld component normal to the photosphere, drawn for 100,
500, 1000, and 1500 G (and the corresponding negative values). The red- and blue-shaded
regions indicate positive and negative polarities, respectively. The thin-black continuous line
is the best straight PIL computed by the method described in Section 2.2. In (a) the mean
positions of the polarities are marked by black dots and a straight line is added to deﬁne the
bipole direction. Its orthogonal direction is also drawn. The horizontal-dashed line is along
the East–West direction. The θ, φ, and τ angles are deﬁned using these lines. (b,d) Evolution
of the magnetic ﬂux (violet-continuous line), the tongue angle (τ , green line), the corrected
tongue angle (τc, pink line), and the tilt angle (φ, orange line) for the ARs in panels a and
c, respectively. A linear ﬁt to the τc curve is drawn with a continuous-black line. Pairs of
vertical-dashed black lines mark the time periods of emergence and pairs of vertical-dashed
purple lines those where we perform the least-square’s ﬁt of τc (in (b) the end times and in (d)
the beginning times are superposed). The orange-vertical-dashed line indicates the AR CM
passage. In panel d the τ -curve is mostly superposed by the one of τc (negligible correction
from Equation (3)).

of the evolution of ARs (see examples in Figure 1 and Figures 4 to 10 of Poisson
et al. (2015b)). Then, we deﬁne the corrected angles [τc,φc] as

τc(t) = τ (t) − φc(t) ,
φc(t) = φ(t) − φmax ﬂux ,

(3)

(4)

τc(t) is the tongue angle with respect to the direction deﬁned by φmax ﬂux (rather
than φ) and φc(t) is the variation of the tilt angle. In a following step, we compute
an average of τc(t) [τc] and a maximum value [τc,max] within the emerging time
period as deﬁned in the next section.

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 6

Magnetic FluxMagnetic FluxProperties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

In Figure 1 we present the results derived for two observed ARs with positive
twist. We plot the AR tilt [φ] (orange line), the magnetic ﬂux (violet continuous
line), τ (green line), and τc (pink line) during the emergence time. The plots
show that there is a characteristic evolution of these AR parameters associated
with the formation of the tongues. In particular, the sign of τc is well deﬁned
during all of the emergence, as shown in Figure 1b,d, and it corresponds to
positively twisted ﬂux tubes (see, e.g. , Figure 1a of Poisson et al., 2015b). In
the movies for both ARs, included as Electronic Supplementary Material, we
can see a continuous evolution of the PIL direction and the tilt as the magnetic
tongues retract. For AR 8913 (Figure 1b), the tilt variation is low during the
emergence and it quickly becomes stable once the maximum ﬂux is reached. The
eﬀect of the tongues on the tilt inclination can be seen in the diﬀerence between
τ and τc in Figure 1b. For AR 8753 the magnetic ﬂux in the tongues is small,
this implies τc ≈ τ (Figure 1d). Finally, |τc| is signiﬁcant for both ARs and takes
typical values (20 – 50 ◦, see Figure 2a).

2.3. Analyzing the Temporal Evolution of the Tongue Angle

To study the evolution of the tongue angle, we deﬁne the emergence-time range
as [tstart, tFmax] between the beginning of the emergence and the maximum value
of the magnetic ﬂux. The time interval during which the measurements of τc are
done is [tinit, tend] (see the black-dashed lines in Figure 1b,d). Due to data gaps
or too strong ﬂuctuations because of parasitic bipole emergences (mostly at the
beginning of the emergence time) or to a signiﬁcant secondary emergence, this
last time interval could be shorter than the full AR emergence duration:

tstart ≤ tinit < tend ≤ tFmax .

(5)

We characterize the evolution of the magnetic tongues during the emergence

phase using a linear ﬁt of τc within the interval [tinit, tend] as given by

τc,L.ﬁt(t) = a + b t,

(6)

where a and b are the y-intercept and the slope in the linear ﬁt. Examples of
these linear ﬁts are shown in Figure 1b,d. These ﬁts capture the mean evolution
of τc, ﬁltering the ﬂuctuations of the emergence. However, in 38 over 187 ARs
the ﬂuctuations were dominant so that a linear ﬁt had no meaning and was not
performed. In the rest of the ARs a linear trend is dominant in more than 50
% of the emerging time. We have also tried a second-order-polynomial ﬁt but
obtained no further signiﬁcant information. All of the values derived from the
τc evolution, such as the average and the maximum of τc [τc, τc,max], are also
computed within this time interval.

We can repeat the same procedure for the ﬁt of τc within the time inter-
val [tinit, tend], but redeﬁning τc as a function of the normalized magnetic ﬂux
[F/Fmax, where Fmax is the maximum ﬂux]. We perform a linear ﬁt of τc:

τc,L.ﬁt(F ) = a(cid:48) + b(cid:48) F/Fmax .

(7)

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 7

M. Poisson et al.

Figure 2. Histogram of the mean tongue angle [τc] and its signed maximum [τc,max] for 149
ARs; these are the ones for which the computation of these parameters could be done during
more than 50 % of the AR emergence time (ARs represented with ﬁlled triangles in Figure 3).

Then, we deﬁne the signed change of |τc| as

∆|τc| = sign(τc) b(cid:48) .

(8)

In this way we remove the dependence of ∆|τc| on the rate and the duration of
the emergence, obtaining a more comparable set of parameters for all the ARs.
The amount of background ﬂux (or any disturbing ﬂux) is very case-dependent,
limiting the time interval [tinit, tend] to a variable fraction of [tstart, tFmax]. Be-
cause F/Fmax varies in the interval [0, 1] in the deﬁnition of ∆|τc|, given by
Equation (8), we continue computing ∆|τc| within [tstart, tFmax] to minimize the
eﬀect of various perturbations to the ﬂux. This assumes that τc(t) follows the
same trend during all the AR emergence phase.

We include sign(τc) in the ∆|τc| deﬁnition, given by Equation (8), to compare
directly the ARs with positive and negative τc. Then, for both cases, when
∆|τc| > 0 the tongues are weaker at the beginning of the emergence but become
stronger as the AR reaches the maximum ﬂux and vice versa. Figure 1 shows
two examples with the same sign of τc and diﬀerent signs of ∆|τc| (for AR 8913
∆|τc| = −54◦ and for AR 8753 ∆|τc| = 28◦).

3. Properties of Magnetic Tongues

3.1. How Important is the Eﬀect of Magnetic Tongues?

Magnetic tongues are created by the azimuthal magnetic-ﬁeld component of
the FR projected on the local vertical (Bz, and more generally along the line
of sight). However, both azimuthal and axial components in a magnetic FR
contribute to Bz in diﬀerent proportions, which vary continuously across the AR
magnetogram. This implies that the contribution of the azimuthal ﬂux cannot

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 8

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

Figure 3. AR latitudes for the full Solar Cycle 23. Positive (negative) helicity sign, as deduced
from magnetic tongues, is indicated with a red (blue) triangle. Filled triangles mark ARs where
the period of time in which we perform the computations is more than 50 % of the total
emergence (149 ARs for a total of 187 ARs). Solar cycle 23 is fully covered.

be estimated. We can only estimate the total axial ﬂux when the FR cross-
section has fully emerged through the photosphere and the magnetic tongues
have retracted.

Still, the PIL location results from a balance between the azimuthal and axial
magnetic-ﬁeld components and its orientation characterizes the importance of
the tongues. Tongues are absent for τc ≈ 0 and become stronger as |τc| is closer to
90◦, a limit where the azimuthal ﬂux totally dominates the axial ﬂux, i.e. when
the FR is very twisted. A coherent evolution of τc is present in the majority
of ARs (two examples are shown in Figure 1). However, in some ARs, 38 of
187, τc(t) has strong variations because extra background or emerging ﬂux is
present. We analyze below only the 149 ARs where a linear ﬁt of τc is a good
approximation to its evolution in more than 50% of the AR-emergence duration.
Magnetic tongues are clearly observed in the large majority of emerging ARs
that follow the selection criteria described in Section 2.1, as shown from the
signiﬁcant values of τc (Figure 2a) and, even more, if we analyze the maximum
value of τc (Figure 2b). The mean of |τc| ≈ 30◦ and the one of |τc,max| ≈ 50◦
conﬁrms the results of Poisson et al. (2015b) for a larger sample of ARs: an
isolated bipolar AR is typically formed by an emerging FR with a signiﬁcant
twist.

The sign of τc is a direct proxy for the sign of the magnetic helicity (Luoni
et al., 2011). The distributions of both τc and τc,max (Figure 2) are very similar
within statistical ﬂuctuations for positive and negative τc. The mean of τc is ap-
proximately 31◦ for the positive distribution and −29◦ for the negative one, both
having the same standard deviation (≈ 14◦). We ﬁnd the same correspondence
for τc,max distributions. This implies that emerging active regions (following the
criteria described in Section 2.1) with positive and negative twist have similar
statistical properties for τc and τc,max.

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 9

M. Poisson et al.

Figure 4. Helicity-sign dependence in function of latitude. (a) The pink histogram, in the
background, shows the latitude for all the studied ARs. The blue histogram shows negative
twisted ARs (τc < 0), then the visible pink part of the total histogram shows the positive
twisted ARs. (b) Mean absolute value of the tongue angle, |τc|, vs. latitude for positive
(negative) twist ARs shown in red (blue). 53 % of ARs from the southern hemisphere have
positive τc and 58 % from the northern hemisphere have negative τc.

3.2. Distribution of the Tongues with Latitude and during the Solar

Cycle

The distribution of the studied ARs in a latitude vs. time plot shows the clas-
sical butterﬂy diagram (Figure 3). Indeed, our selection of ARs is based on
their distance to the CM passage and the absence of signiﬁcant magnetic-ﬁeld
background at the AR emergence; therefore, the selection should not be biased
in latitude and time apart from a small number of ARs selected around solar
maximum when a stronger nesting eﬀect is present. During the solar maximum
more emerging ARs were rejected because they appear either too close to, or
even within, a pre-existing AR or they are too complex; so ﬁnally they are not
satisfying the selection criteria described in Section 2.1. Nevertheless, the number
of selected ARs is still larger per year around the solar maximum.

The sign of τc is mixed both in latitude and time with no clear dominant
helicity sign in each hemisphere (Figure 3). Figure 4a conﬁrms quantitatively
that the helicity-sign hemispherical-rule is weak. This result, derived for iso-
lated bipolar ARs, agrees with those of other studies (see Section 1) in which
the segregation by hemisphere of the magnetic helicity-sign is weak for young
magnetic structures, getting stronger as the structures are older. For example,
the hemispherical rule (H < 0 in the northern hemisphere and H > 0 in the
southern one) typically has an imbalance in the range 60 – 70 % for the magnetic
ﬁeld of mature ARs, with an imbalance higher than 90 % for quiescent ﬁlaments
outside ARs (Pevtsov, 2002; Pevtsov et al., 2008).

The previous results are not due to weak |τc| values, which could be more
sensitive to noise, because the mixture of signs is equally present for all |τc|
strengths, as well as for all latitudes (Figure 4b). There is also no evidence of

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 10

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

Figure 5.
(a) Mean tongue angle [τc] shown for the 149 ARs observed mostly during Solar
Cycle 23 (red: τc > 0, blue τc < 0). (b) 20-point running mean for τc along the cycle. Error
bars represent the standard deviation of each 20-point sample.

the evolution of the value of |τc| during the solar cycle as the mean value and
the dispersion of |τc| is mostly independent of time (Figure 5). More precisely,
the temporal variation of |τc| is only of the order of 10◦ and within the standard
error bars (Figure 5b).

The above results correspond to the subset of 149 ARs for which at least 50 %
of the observed emergence can be linearly ﬁtted (see Section 2.3). Similar results
are obtained for the full set of 187 ARs for the helicity-sign hemispherical rule
(≈54 % in the southern hemisphere and ≈60 % in the northern hemisphere),
showing that the restriction of the 50 % threshold, which only aﬀects 20 % of
the AR sample, has no impact on the weakness of the helicity-sign dependence.
Increasing the threshold of the linear ﬁt to 75 % of the AR emergence, reduces the
sample by more than 45 % while the helicity-sign dependence is sligthly modiﬁed
(it turns out to be ≈ 49 % in the southern hemisphere and ≈60 % in the northern
hemisphere). Therefore, the 50 % threshold chosen for the computation does not
signiﬁcantly aﬀect the results, and it still guarantees a large statistical sample.

3.3. Is the Tongue Angle Correlated with the AR Parameters?

The absolute value of the mean tongue angle [|τc|] has a broad distribution for
both signs (Figure 2). We ask now if |τc| is related to the global parameters

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 11

M. Poisson et al.

Figure 6. (a) Maximum magnetic ﬂux vs. τc for 149 ARs during their emergence. Red and blue
triangles represent positive and negative values of τc, respectively. (b) Maximum magnetic ﬂux
vs. the change of |τc| [∆|τc|] during the AR emergence phases. Linear ﬁts for positive (red line)
and negative (blue line) twist are shown. For both plots we include the correlation parameter
of the linear ﬁt [ρ] and the standard deviation of the residuals [Sres].

characterizing the ARs, such as the magnetic ﬂux, the size of the magnetic
polarities, and the tilt angle.

Figure 6a shows a weak correlation and a large standard deviation between
the AR maximum magnetic ﬂux and |τc|. Then, while the mean dependance is
the same for both positive and negative helicity, there is, at most, only a weak
dependance of |τc| on the AR magnetic ﬂux. Otherwise, we found no correlation
between |τc| or |τc,max| and the distance between the magnetic polarities (the AR
size) or their extension at the maximum of the ﬂux emergence (e.g. for |τc| the
correlation parameter is 0.0004 and 0.004 and the standard deviation 14.7 and
14.4 in function of the AR size and extension, respectively. Similar values are also
found for |τc,max|). Neither |τc| nor |τc,max| are related to the AR mean tilt nor
to the duration of the emergence (e.g. for |τc|: correlation parameter = 0.07, 0.12
and standard deviation = 14.7, 14.6, for the tilt and duration, respectively).

Therefore, we conclude for isolated bipolar ARs that |τc| and |τc,max| are
independent of most of the AR characteristics, which implies that the amount
and distribution of magnetic twist present in an AR has no measurable eﬀect on
other global AR properties.

3.4. Evolution of the Tongue Angle During the Emergence

During ﬂux emergence τc(t) can have very diﬀerent proﬁles as a function of
time for the ARs studied. Two examples are shown in Figure 1. Fluctuations
are present in general due to small bipolar emergences that change the PIL
locally and quasi-randomly. These small bipole emergences are at the center of
photospheric ﬂux emergence in ARs; i.e. they are a consequence of the vertical
sharp plasma-pressure gradient at the photospheric level. These small bipolar
emergences are only partially ﬁltered out by the spatial resolution of MDI and
by the PIL-ﬁtting method, resulting in τc ﬂuctuations, which are occasionally
large enough to reverse the sign of τc. In this article, we are only analyzing the
long-term evolution of τc using a linear ﬁt (see Section 2.3).

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 12

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

Figure 7. (a) Correlation between the mean corrected τ angle [τc] and the change of |τc|
[∆|τc|] during the emerging phase. (b) Correlation between the signed maximum value of the
corrected τ angle [τc,max] and ∆|τc|. Linear ﬁts for positive (red line) and negative (blue line)
τc are shown. For both plots we include the correlation parameter of the linear ﬁt [ρ] and the
standard deviation of the residuals [Sres].

Figure 8. Histogram of the change of |τc| [∆|τc|] during the emergence phase of the 149
ARs. The vertical-black line shows the mean value of ∆|τc|. The distribution is ﬁtted with a
Gaussian function using the least-squares method (light-blue line).

As happens for |τc|, its slope, or its change during the full emergence period
[∆|τc| deﬁned in Equation (8)] is broadly distributed with no relation with the
AR magnetic ﬂux (Figure 6b). Furthermore, as for |τc|, we found no relation, or
only a weak one, between ∆|τc| and other AR parameters, such as τc or τc,max
(Figure 7), the phase of the cycle, the AR latitude, the distance between the
magnetic polarities or their extension at the maximum of ﬂux emergence, the
AR mean tilt, or the duration of the emergence (not shown).

Still, a remarkable result is that ∆|τc| is almost normally distributed (Fig-
ure 8). Indeed, apart from four outliers with ∆|τc| < −80◦, the distribution is
very symmetric around its median. The most striking result, however, is a narrow

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 13

M. Poisson et al.

√

peak located at its mean/median value. The statistical ﬂuctuations around that
N ≈ ±3 where N is the number of cases per bin. This
value are estimated to be
is corroborated by the ﬂuctuations present on both sides of this peak, while the
peak is three times higher than these ﬂuctuations. Then, a mechanism is present
that favors the formation of ARs with this mean ∆|τc|-value, while another
mechanism is producing a normally distributed ∆|τc|. The simplest FR model,
the one with a uniform twist (see Section 4), is close to this mean ∆|τc|-value
(with values ≈ −5 to −7◦, see Figure 10); however, this does not explain why
this value should be the most frequent one.

4. Comparison with a Simple Flux-Rope Model

4.1. Brief Description of the Basic Model

Luoni et al. (2011) used a simple toroidal FR model to explain the origin of the
magnetic tongues in emerging ARs as due to the eﬀect of the azimuthal ﬁeld-
component. This model was further compared quantitatively to emerging ARs
by Poisson et al. (2015b). The model was designed to be the simplest possible,
while representing the basic characteristics of magnetic tongues. It consisted of
a toroidal FR with uniform twist (both along and across its axis). The upper
half of the torus was set to progressively emerge without distortion. Therefore,
this simple model did not take into account the deformations and reconnec-
tions occurring during the emergence. These reconnection processes, although
transforming the internal structure and allowing the emergence (by letting the
dense plasma escape), were not expected to change very signiﬁcantly the global
distribution of the magnetic ﬁeld, i.e. for the scales of the order or larger than
the FR cross-section size. Therefore, the observed photospheric magnetic ﬁeld
was expected to reﬂect the global distribution of the FR magnetic ﬁeld below the
photosphere. The emergence of the FR at the photospheric level provide a series
of synthetic magnetograms (see an example in Figure 9b), which were analyzed
in exactly the same way as observed magnetograms.

As in Poisson et al. (2015b), we link the FR number of turns [Nt,0] of the ﬁeld
lines around half of the torus azimuthal axis, with the tongue angle [τc] present
in the synthetic magnetograms. The present observations show a broad range of
|τc|, within the interval [0◦, 70◦], corresponding to a broad range of |Nt,0|, within
the interval [0, 1.3].

The same parameters as in observations, but derived from the model, are
shown in Figure 9a for Nt,0 = 0.5. This case corresponds to the basic model with
a uniformly twisted ﬂux tube, as the one in Luoni et al. (2011). The correction
from τ to τc is relatively important due to the strong magnetic ﬂux present in
the tongues. This induces an apparent rotation of the bipole, hence a change in
the tilt φ as the FR is emerging. It also implies that τc is slightly decreasing
with time (even when the twist is uniform). The ∆|τc| value for this model, with
Nt,0 = 0.5, is ≈ −7◦ (see Figure 9a) and is comparable with the mean value
obtained in Figure 8. Changing the value of Nt,0 in the model aﬀects mainly
the mean value of τc; however, by doing so, we can interpret qualitatively only a

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 14

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

Figure 9. Evolution of the magnetic ﬂux (violet-continuous line), the tongue angle [τ ] (green
line), its corrected value [τc] (Equation (3), pink line), and the tilt angle [φ] (orange line),
for a toroidal FR model with diﬀerent h- and g-parameters (see Appendix A). The vertical–
dashed-black line mark the timestep of the maximum magnetic ﬂux (the end of the emergence
phase) and the period where we perform the least-squares ﬁt of τc. (a) Basic model with
uniform twist (Section 4.1; see Movie9a). (c) – (d) Two extreme cases of the twist proﬁle [Nt(ρ)]
(Equation (13))(see Movie9c for h = 1 and Movie9d for h = −1). (e) – (f) Two extreme cases of
the vertical dependence of the axial ﬁeld component (Equation (14))(see Movie9e for g = 0.8
and Movie9f for g = −0.8). Panel b shows a synthetic magnetogram obtained with a uniformly
twisted FR having a positive twist [Nt,0 = 0.5] and an aspect ratio a/R = 0.4. The axis that
joins the barycenters (straight-thin-black line) is approximately in the x-direction and the PIL
is indicated with a straight-thick-black line. The continuous (dashed) lines are isocontours of
the positive (negative) magnetic-ﬁeld component normal to the photosphere, drawn for four
diﬀerent values taken at 10, 25, 50, and 70% of the axial ﬁeld strength Bmax = 1000 G. The
red- and blue-shaded regions indicate positive and negative polarities, respectively.

fraction of the observed ARs. Therefore, our simple model needs to be extended

so that a much larger variety of τc-slopes can be included to represent those

shown by the observed ARs (e.g. compare Figure 9a with panels b and d of

Figure 1).

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 15

Magnetic FluxMagnetic FluxMagnetic FluxMagnetic FluxMagnetic FluxM. Poisson et al.

4.2. Extension of the Flux Rope Model

We ﬁrst test if a non-uniform twist in the FR cross-section, depending on the
small radius of the torus [ρ] could result in diﬀerent τc(t) proﬁles. We still
consider ﬁeld lines located on toroidal shapes (i.e. with ρ independent of φ), then
we introduce a dependance of Nt only with ρ (Nt is uniform on each of these tori
and changes from torus to torus with ρ). More precisely, we assume a parabolic
shape for Nt(ρ) controlled by the unique parameter h (see Equation (13) in
Appendix A.2). For h = 0 the twist is uniform (this corresponds to the case
described in Section 4.1). For h > 0 the twist is more concentrated at the
periphery, being twice as large at the FR periphery as at its center for h = 1.
Conversely, for h < 0 the twist is maximum at the FR center and it vanishes at
the periphery for h = −1. The twist is set to zero at larger ρ-values as indicated
by Equation (13).

The mean value of τc is aﬀected by the value of h (see Figure 9c – d), but this
can be compensated by changing Nt,0. In what follows, we keep Nt,0 = 0.5 in
all ﬁgures, unless explicitly stated otherwise. The global slope (from a linear ﬁt)
of τc is only weakly aﬀected by h (e.g. Figure 9c,d). Indeed, because the twist
proﬁle is symmetric around the FR axis (see Equation (13)), changing the value
of h aﬀects the PIL orientation in a similar way when both the top and the
bottom parts of the FR apex cross z = 0. This twist non-uniformity modiﬁes
the PIL orientation (and then τc) similarly at the beginning and at the end of
the emergence phase. Therefore, changing the twist proﬁle does not eﬃciently
change the τc(t)-dependence. To have a larger variety of τc(t)-proﬁles, we would
need a twist concentrated either at the top or at the bottom of the FR apex.
However, the very nature of a FR is to have ﬁeld lines spiraling around its axis
satisfying the conservation of the magnetic ﬂux; so, it is diﬃcult to envision a
very diﬀerent azimuthal ﬁeld component at the top from that at the bottom of
a FR. The eﬀect of bending the FR axis is already taken into account by solving
∇ · B = 0; this implies a stronger azimuthal ﬁeld component at the FR bottom
(see Equation (12)).

The model discussed in the two previous paragraphs still needs to be extended
to understand the variety of observed cases (e.g. Figure 8). Analyzing diﬀerent
modiﬁcations, we ﬁnd that the most relevant one is to include a dependence
of the axial ﬁeld component on the local vertical direction, more precisely in
the direction away from the torus center (Equation (14) in Appendix A.2). This
change introduces a redistribution of the axial ﬁeld within the ﬂux rope cross-
section which satisﬁes the ∇ · B = 0 constraint. As in the models discussed
previously, we do not solve the balance of forces in order to keep them analytically
as simple as possible. We could add a plasma pressure to balance the Lorentz
force for z < 0. For the coronal region, z > 0, the model would need a numerical
relaxation to a force-free ﬁeld; however this is not required for our purpose since
we do not analyze this coronal part in this study.

The asymmetry of the axial ﬁeld component is taken into account by simply
introducing another parameter [g] which is within the interval [−1, 1] to avoid
a reversal of the axial ﬁeld in some part of the FR (see Appendix A.2). The
parameter g has an important eﬀect on τc(t) as it introduces a strong asymmetry

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 16

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

between the top and the bottom parts of the FR cross-section; so, this extension
of the model can aﬀect strongly the evolution of the magnetic tongues. A more
negative g-value decreases the slope of τc(t) (Figure 9f), while a suﬃciently large
positive value of g can induce a signiﬁcant positive slope (Figure 9e) as observed
for some ARs (e.g. Figure 1d, and more generally Figure 8). This trend is general
as shown in Section 4.3 and Figure 10.

In summary, the new model presented in this section has two new non-
dimensional free parameters [h and g] which are both typically within the interval
[−1, 1] in order to produce synthetic magnetograms having the main character-
istics of observed emerging ARs. This extension of the basic FR model with
uniform twist is the minimum required to interpret all the observations of ARs,
as shown in the next section.

4.3. Comparison of the Model to Observations

The model described in Appendix A depends on several parameters, such as
the torus radius, its thickness, the emergence time-duration, and the axial ﬂux,
which can be scaled to any observed AR. It can also be rotated to any tilt. The
most relevant parameters to have well-deﬁned magnetic tongues are the number
of turns around the axis of a half torus [Nt,0] and the parameters [h and g]
controlling the azimuthal and axial ﬁeld components. These latter parameters
deﬁne the magnitude and the evolution of the relative PIL orientation, measured
by τc(t), as well as the variation of the tilt angle [φc(t)].

The conﬁgurations with τc and −τc, or equivalently Nt and −Nt, are mirror
images one of the other (e.g. see Figure 1 of Luoni et al., 2011). They can be
compared by plotting |τc| and ∆|τc|. They also show an opposite variation of the
tilt angle due to the retraction of the tongues after they dominated the evolution
of the tilt angle during the earlier emergence phase of the ARs. We deﬁne the
corrected tilt angle [φc] by subtracting the tilt at the maximum magnetic ﬂux
from φ (Equation (4)). Then, as for τc, we compute ∆|φc| to better compare
ARs with positive and negative magnetic helicity. Figure 10 shows that ARs
with both τc signs are similarly spread in the diagram ∆|φc| [∆|τc|]. The same
conclusion was reached before when using other AR parameters (Figures 3 – 7).
Then, as expected, emerging ARs have properties that are independent of their
magnetic-helicity sign.

We ﬁrst describe the results for the model with uniform twist [h = g = 0] as
shown by the curve g = 0 in Figure 10a. This model can represent only a very
small fraction of ARs by varying the axial number of turns [Nt,0]. The untwisted
case, located at the origin of the plot (black dot), has no special relevance for
the observations (i.e. the ARs are not especially clustered around this case).
Introducing a twist proﬁle [h (cid:54)= 0] allows us to interpret a few other ARs, only a
slightly larger fraction along the curve g = 0 in Figure 10b. Therefore, combining
scans of the parameters Nt,0 and h with g = 0 allows us to interpret a small
fraction of the emerging ARs; only the ones with a small evolution of τc [∆|τc|
slightly negative in Figure 10].

It is only by varying g within its full allowable range that the variety of results
for observed ARs can be reproduced. Varying g in the interval [−0.8, 0.8] allows

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 17

M. Poisson et al.

Figure 10. Comparison of the observations with the torus model (Appendix A) within the
parameter space describing the variations of the tilt angle [∆|φc|] and of the corrected tongue
angle [∆|τc|] during the emergence phase of ARs. The ARs with positive (negative) τc, i.e.
twist, are represented with red (blue) triangles, respectively. A − (+) sign is added in front
of ∆|φc| for positive (negative) twist in order to superpose all the ARs on the same plot.
The results of the model are overlaid with curves having a constant value of the indicated
parameter. (a) Eﬀect of the number of turns [Nt,0] in half of the torus (shown in Figure 11)
and of the parameter g controlling the vertical asymmetry of the axial ﬁeld (Equation (14)).
All of the models have Nt independent of ρ (h = 0). (b) Same as (a) but with the eﬀect of a
variable twist proﬁle as controlled by the parameters h and g (Equations (13) and (14)) for
Nt = 0.5.

us to reproduce most of the observed range of ∆|τc| (Figure 10). This indicates
that there are two extreme cases with a full spectrum in between. In
the ﬁrst case, the axial ﬁeld strength is stronger at the beginning of
the emergence, while in the second case the axial ﬁeld is stronger at
the end. This is equivalent to a local twist that is weaker at the top
compared to the bottom of the emerging FR apex in the ﬁrst case,
and vice versa in the second case (see Equation (16) for the local-twist
deﬁnition). Such variety of emerging FRs is intriguing. We cannot identify
any other AR characteristic that can be related to g (e.g. there is no total-ﬂux

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 18

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

dependence of ∆|τc|, as shown in Figure 6, and a possible interaction with other
polarities existing before the FR emergence is prohibited by our emerging AR
selection, since they emerge in a nearly ﬁeld-free environment). Moreover, as far
as we know, this property has never been analyzed in numerical simulations of
FR emergence.

We conclude that the FRs forming isolated bipolar ARs have a broad range of
twist proﬁles when the observed results are interpreted using the simple model
developed in Appendix A. To explain this, a variable asymmetry between the top
and bottom of the FR apex is required. In fact, adding a variation of the twist
around the FR axis allows the model to reproduce the main characteristics of the
observations. In particular, the variation of the magnetic-tongue strengths can be
interpreted changing the parameters h, g within the interval [-1,1] (Figure 10b),
but we cannot exclude the presence of a variable axial twist [Nt,0] (Figure 10a).
In fact, slightly diﬀerent sets of Nt,0, g, h values could describe a particular AR
especially because of the interplay between Nt,0 and h.

Extending the range of Nt,0 to larger values does not signiﬁcantly extend
the range covered by the model in Figure 10 (e.g. for Nt = 1.3 there is only a
small extension to ∆|τc| ≈ −70 in the bottom left corner of the covered domain of
Figure 10b). Moreover, such a high value of Nt,0 creates synthetic magnetograms
with large tongues having too much magnetic ﬂux when compared to observed
ARs. Extending the ranges of g or h also creates synthetic magnetograms that are
not representative of observed ARs (because Bθ or Bz change of sign within the
ﬂux rope). Then, while the model can describe the distribution of the majority
of ARs (62 % of the ARs are included in Figure 10b), it cannot describe the
ARs at the periphery of this domain. This points again to the limitations of this
analytical model.

The broad distribution of g could have its origin in the dynamo process
building up FRs or during their transport, especially at the storage phase below
the photosphere before emergence. The involved process has an intrinsic random
eﬀect shown by the nearly Gaussian distribution of ∆|τc| (Figure 8), while being
inhibited in some cases (narrow central peak of the distribution). This points to
a plausible eﬀect of large convective cells on the studied emerging ARs through
a diﬀerential diverging/converging eﬀect of convective ﬂows across the FR cross-
section. More precisely, the top part of an emerging FR that is more dominantly
in a divergent ﬂow pattern than its bottom part would have a lower twist per
unit length at its top part than at its bottom; so, |τc| would increase during the
emergence. The reverse would happen when the top part is in a more converging
ﬂow pattern. This implies that the evolution of τc(t) during the emergence phase
would depend on the location of the AR emergence within the convective-cell
pattern.

5. Conclusions

We analyze the emergence phase of bipolar ARs using photospheric line-of-sight
magnetograms during Solar Cycle 23 and the beginning of Cycle 24. To have
clearer results we select bipolar ARs whose emergence occurred around the

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 19

M. Poisson et al.

central meridian. Our selection included 187 ARs in a temporal range of 13
years. At least 80 % of the studied ARs present clear observable elongations of
their magnetic polarities, or tongues, during more than 50 % of their emergence
time (when the background ﬂux or any disturbing extra ﬂux was not high enough
to aﬀect signiﬁcantly the magnetic tongues). We apply the method described by
Poisson et al. (2015b) to deﬁne the mean PIL inclinations of the bipolar ARs.
This method deﬁnes the tongue angle [τc] that characterizes the twist of emerg-
ing ﬂux-ropes (FRs) producing ARs. The method has proven to be eﬃcient in
reducing the large amount of data (more than 4000 line-of-sight magnetograms)
to a few parameters that characterize the tongue evolution of the ARs.

We deﬁne the mean and maximum values of τc, τc, and τc,max, during the full
emergence period. Both τc and τc,max have only a weak sign dominance in each
solar hemisphere (53 and 58 % of dominance); so, as in previous studies involving
young ARs (e.g. Pevtsov et al., 2014), the hemispherical rule is weak. We also
study the variation of τc during the full emergence, being ∆τc its total change.
We ﬁnd no relation between the observed tongue characteristics [τc, τc,max, ∆τc]
and the diﬀerent periods of the solar cycle. The same happens for the amount
of magnetic ﬂux, size of the magnetic polarities, latitude, emergence rate, etc..
Therefore, the helicity in the studied ARs must be generated independently from
other FR properties.

A striking result is that the total change of τc [∆τc] has a Gaussian distribution
with an added very narrow peak at the position of its mean value (Figure 8).
After comparing the results derived from observations with those of a FR model,
we propose that this distribution could be the result of large convective cells
having a diﬀerential eﬀect between the top and bottom part of the FR cross-
section. This would imply a variation of the local twist per unit length along the
FR axis, as traced by the evolution of τc during the FR emergence.

More generally, we can summarize the magnetic-tongue evolution during an
AR emergence with three main parameters: the mean tongue angle [τc] and its
total change, ∆τc, as well as the tilt change [∆φc] during the full emergence
phase. The distribution of the main characteristics of the magnetic tongues [τc,
∆τc, and ∆φc] can be reproduced by the simple analytical model of Appendix A,
which extends the previous uniformly twisted model (Luoni et al., 2011). τc is
predominantly aﬀected by the amount of twist and its sign corresponds to the
magnetic-helicity sign (Luoni et al., 2011). ∆τc and ∆φc are broadly distributed
according to the twist magnitude and its distribution within the FR, as follows.
We search for the minimal model, i.e. the one with the lowest number of free
parameters, that can reproduce the main characteristics of the observations. The
main parameters of the model are its axial twist [Nt,0: the number of turns for
a half torus], and two dimensionless parameters [h and g] that characterize the
twist distribution. We set the constraint of no reversal for both the azimuthal-
and axial-ﬁeld components within the FR model to avoid the presence of para-
sitic polarities with unobserved characteristics in the synthetic magnetograms.
Within these limits, the scan of the three main parameters of the model [Nt,0, h
and g] allows us to describe the observed variety of emerging ARs (Figure 10).
This constrains the type of FRs that form isolated bipolar ARs, as well as it
challenges dynamo and transport models to create such a large variety of FRs.

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 20

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

However, we cannot deﬁne the twist magnitude and its proﬁle independently
from the magnetic-tongue evolution since there is an overlap in the observable
consequences of twist magnitude and proﬁle (i.e. changing Nt,0 and h cover a
common portion of the parameter space, see Figure 10). We can still claim that
uniformly twisted ﬂux tubes are not enough to interpret the observations and
that proﬁles with less twist at the periphery (h < 0) are required to explain a
signiﬁcant part of the present AR observations.

The simplicity of the analytical model, with no force balance, arising from
a special treatment of the divergence-free property of the ﬁeld and assumed
functions for Nt(ρ) and asy(θ), allows us to do a complete scan over the limits
of the free parameters with small computational eﬀort. However, it is obvious
from the acquired results, as detailed in Section 4.3 and in the conclusions of
this article, that a more realistic numerical model with proper full treatment of
the equations and relevant forces is necessary to fully explain the properties of
bipolar ARs, as the chosen simple analytical model fails to explain 38 % of the
selected AR sample.

Even more unexpected is the fact that the variety of emerging-AR properties
is reproduced only if a large gradient of the axial magnetic ﬁeld is present or,
equivalently, that the FR is diﬀerentially twisted at the top and bottom parts
of its apex. As far as we know, such twist gradient and its variation have never
been reported by numerical simulations of emergence and its origin is unknown.
One possibility is that it is produced during the magnetic-ﬁeld storage that
occurs below the photosphere before the undulatory instability leads to the
emergence of the main FR broken into smaller ﬂux tubes. A diﬀerential eﬀect
of ﬂow divergence between the top and bottom parts of the FR apex, due to
the ﬂow motion in a large convective cell, could be at the origin of the observed
variety of tongue evolutions during AR emergence. This process needs to be
tested using numerical simulations, before any ﬁrm conclusions can be achieved.

Acknowledgments
SOHO is a project of international cooperation between ESA and
NASA. MP, MLF, and CHM acknowledge ﬁnancial support from grants PICT 2012-0973
(ANPCyT), PIP 2012-01-403 (CONICET), and UBACyT 20020130100321 (UBA). MLF and
CHM are members of the Carrera del Investigador Cient´ıﬁco of the Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas y T´ecnicas (CONICET) of Argentina. MP is a CONICET Fellow.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest

The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.

Appendix

A. Twisted Flux Tube Model

A.1. Geometry of the Model

In this section, we describe a simple model to describe the main properties of
magnetic tongues in terms of the emergence of an Ω-shaped twisted ﬂux-tube.

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 21

M. Poisson et al.

Figure 11. Model of a twisted ﬂux tube having a half-torus shape with a main radius R and
a center located at z = −d below the photospheric level (z = 0). The twist is positive and
uniform (Nt = 0.5 turn in half a torus, h = g = 0 in Equations (13) and (14)). The photospheric
magnetogram of Bz is shown with isocontours and color levels as for observations (Figure 1)
and the superposed brown ellipses (continuous/dashed lines) show the intersection of the FR
with z = −d and z = 0. The torus is outlined for a minor radius ρ. The red line is an example
of a magnetic-ﬁeld line (drawn with an enhanced twist by a factor ≈ 6 to better outline the
FR structure). φ and θ are the angular coordinates along and around the axis, respectively.

The ﬂux-tube shape is half a torus with a main radius R (Figure 11). The torus
center is located at the height z = −d below the photosphere, which is located
at z = 0. Progressively decreasing d ≥ 0 simulates a very simpliﬁed emergence,
i.e. the FR is emerging without any deformation (in contrast to the results of
numerical simulations). Our aim is to illustrate the global, and expected to be
robust, implications of the FR twist on the magnetic-tongue evolution; therefore,
this very simple model is selected with this purpose.

Cartesian coordinates, {x, y, z}, are adopted to describe the model magne-
togram located at z = 0. However, the natural coordinates for the torus are
{ρ, φ, θ}, where ρ is the distance to the torus axis, φ deﬁnes the location along
the ﬂux tube axis, and θ corresponds to the rotation angle around the ﬂux-tube
axis (Figure 11). These are the toroidal curved cylindrical coordinates that we
simply call torus coordinates below. In the axis plane, the unit vector normal to
the axis is denoted as (cid:98)uR and the unit vector along the axis (toroidal direction)
is denoted as (cid:98)uφ. Finally, the unit vector around the FR (poloidal direction) is
noted (cid:98)uθ and the unit vector along the ρ-direction, so both normal to the axis
and to (cid:98)uθ, is noted (cid:98)uρ. Their {x, y, z} components are:

(cid:98)uR = {cos φ, 0, sin φ}
(cid:98)uφ = {− sin φ, 0, cos φ}
(cid:98)uρ = {cos φ cos θ, sin θ, sin φ cos θ}
(cid:98)uθ = {− cos φ sin θ, cos θ, − sin φ sin θ}

(9)

The torus coordinates need to be transformed to Cartesian ones to obtain
synthetic photospheric magnetograms. A point M in the torus is located at
OM = R (cid:98)uR + ρ (cid:98)uρ − d (cid:98)uz (with O being at the torus center). Then, in

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 22

z!y!φ#θ!R!ρ!#d!R#d!0!M#PIL!x!Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

Cartesian coordinates,

OM = {x, y, z}

= {(R + ρ cos θ) cos φ, ρ sin θ, (R + ρ cos θ) sin φ − d} ,

(10)

which provides the transformation of torus coordinates to Cartesian ones and
the reverse transformation after some algebraic computations.

A.2. Deﬁnition of the Magnetic Field

The magnetic ﬁeld [B] satisﬁes ∇ · B = 0. In torus coordinates, is written as

∇ · B =

(cid:18) ∂ρ (R + ρ cos θ) Bρ
∂ρ
ρ (cid:0)R + ρ cos θ(cid:1)(cid:17)

(cid:46)(cid:16)

= 0 .

+

∂(R + ρ cos θ) Bθ
∂θ

+ ρ

(cid:19)

∂Bφ
∂φ

(11)

In order to derive a simple analytical model we do not specify a force balance.
We rather assume that ﬁeld lines are located on torus shapes with ρ independent
of φ. This implies Bρ = 0. Next, we cancel separately the two remaining terms
in ∇ · B = 0, so Bθ (cid:98)uθ and Bφ (cid:98)uφ are both divergence-free. This separate
cancellation is only a special case selected to minimize the complexity of the
following analytical derivation that poses certain limitations and implications
discussed in Sections 4.3 and 5. This implies Bθ = fθ(ρ, φ)/(R + ρ cos θ) and
Bφ = fφ(ρ, θ) where fθ and fφ are two general functions.

The dependence on fθ in φ would introduce an asymmetry between the two
legs, but we do not consider this asymmetry here, so fθ(ρ). If fφ is only a function
of ρ, the integration of ﬁeld lines implies Bθ = 2 ρ Nt(ρ) Bφ/(R + ρ cos θ) where
Nt(ρ) is the number of turns in half the torus of small radius ρ. Following
previous studies (see, e.g., Emonet and Moreno-Insertis, 1998) the axial ﬁeld
is typically deﬁned as Bφ = B0 exp(−(ρ/a)2), where a deﬁnes the FR thickness
and B0 the ﬁeld strength on the axis, then the azimuthal ﬁeld is deﬁned as

Bθ(ρ, θ) = 2 ρ Nt(ρ) B0 e−(ρ/a)2

/(R + ρ cos θ) .

We explore the eﬀect of a non-uniform twist proﬁle by deﬁning

Nt(ρ) = Nt,0 max(1 + h (ρ/a)2, 0) ,

(12)

(13)

where h is a parameter. For h = 0, the FR is uniformly twisted. A value of
h > 0 implies a twist more concentrated at the edge; as an example, if h = 1
the twist at ρ = a duplicates its value at the center. Similarly, h < 0 implies a
twist decreasing from the axis to the FR border. Taking the maximum of the
parenthesis in Equation (13) avoids the change of sign of Nt(ρ) within the FR,
which would produce strong magnetic tongues with opposite sign to that in the
core, a case typically not observed. We further set h ≥ −1 so that the strong
ﬁeld, within ρ < a, is not aﬀected.

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 23

M. Poisson et al.

For the axial component [Bφ] Equation (11) allows a general form with a θ-
dependence (with fφ(ρ, θ)). Since Bθ and Bφ are independent (no force balance
is solved), we exploit this possibility by introducing the simplest θ-dependence
needed for our purpose:

Bφ(ρ, θ) = B0 asy(θ) e−(ρ/a)2

,

with asy(θ) = (1 + g cos θ) ,

(14)

where g is a parameter controlling the non-axisymmetric level of Bφ. The term in
cos θ introduces a linear spatial variation of Bφ in the direction (cid:98)uR (orthogonal
to the FR axis). It has also the property of preserving the total ﬂux of Bφ;
therefore, changing the value of g only redistributes Bφ within the FR.

A ﬁeld line is deﬁned by the curve tangent to B, so where dOM is parallel

to B, with:

dOM = dρ (cid:98)uρ + ρ dθ (cid:98)uθ + (R + ρ cos θ) dφ (cid:98)uφ .

Then, the ﬁeld line equation can be written:

dθ
dφ

=

R + ρ cos θ
ρ

Bθ
Bφ

=

2Nt(ρ)
1 + g cos θ

.

(15)

(16)

This implies that the local twist [dθ/dφ] is lower in the top part (θ ≈ 0) than in
the bottom one (θ ≈ π) of the FR for g > 0 and the reverse for g < 0.

A.3. Synthetic Magnetogram

The model magnetogram is deﬁned at the height z = 0 as:

Bz(x, y) = B0 (x asy − 2 y Nt d /u) e−(ρ/a)2

/u ,

(17)

√

x2 + d2. As d decreases from d ≈ R + a to d ≈ 0, Bz(x, y) describes
with u =
the evolution of a theoretical magnetogram where a twisted Ω-shaped ﬂux tube
is emerging without deformation.

From Equation (17) the PIL of Bz is

x = 2 y Nt d /(asy

(cid:112)

x2 + d2) .

(18)

For the central part of the magnetogram, so for |x| << d, Equation (18) is
approximately

x ≈ 2 y Nt,0 (1 + h ρ2/a2)/(1 + g cos θ) ,

(19)

where ρ and θ can be expressed in function of (x, y, d) (and z = 0). The PIL
equation further simpliﬁes to

x ≈ 2 y Nt,0

or

tan τc = 2 Nt,0 ,

(20)

for a uniform twist [h = g = 0]. This limit corresponds to the model used in
Luoni et al. (2011). For a uniform twist, the PIL is straight and τc is constant

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 24

Properties of Magnetic Tongues over a Solar Cycle

during the emergence (Equation (18) implies x ∝ y for |x| (cid:28) d, so around
the central part of the bipole with a spatial extension decreasing with d, then
during the emergence). For a non-uniform twist [h (cid:54)= 0] and/or an asymmetric
twist [g (cid:54)= 0] across the FR, the PIL is curved according to the twist proﬁle as
described by Equation (19). It is also function of d, Equation (18), so the PIL
evolves during the emergence. The model results are described in Section 4.

References

Bao, S.D., Ai, G.X., Zhang, H.Q.: 2000, The Hemispheric Sign Rule of Current Helicity During

the Rising Phase of Cycle 23. Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy 21, 303. DOI.

Cheung, M.C.M., Isobe, H.: 2014, Flux Emergence (Theory). Living Reviews in Solar Physics

11, 3. DOI. ADS.

Emonet, T., Moreno-Insertis, F.: 1998, The physics of twisted magnetic tubes rising in a

stratiﬁed medium: two-dimensional results. Astrophys. J. 492, 804 – 821. DOI. ADS.

Fan, Y.: 2009, Magnetic Fields in the Solar Convection Zone. Living Reviews in Solar Physics

6, 4. DOI. ADS.

Green, L.M., D´emoulin, P., Mandrini, C.H., Van Driel-Gesztelyi, L.: 2003, How are Emerging
Flux, Flares and CMEs Related to Magnetic Polarity Imbalance in MDI Data? Solar Phys.
215, 307 – 325. DOI. ADS.

Hale, G.E.: 1925, Nature of the Hydrogen Vortices Surrounding Sun-spots. Pub. Astron. Soc.

Pac. 37, 268. DOI.

Kusano, K., Maeshiro, T., Yokoyama, T., Sakurai, T.: 2004, The Trigger Mechanism of Solar
Flares in a Coronal Arcade with Reversed Magnetic Shear. Astrophys. J. 610, 537 – 549.
ADS.

LaBonte, B.J., Georgoulis, M.K., Rust, D.M.: 2007, Survey of magnetic helicity injection in

regions producing X-class ﬂares. Astrophys. J. 671, 955 – 963. DOI.

Liu, J., Zhang, Y., Zhang, H.: 2008, Relationship between powerful ﬂares and dynamic

evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld at the solar surface. Solar Phys. 248, 67 – 84. DOI.

Liu, Y., Hoeksema, J.T., Sun, X.: 2014, Test of the Hemispheric Rule of Magnetic Helicity
in the Sun Using the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) Data. Astrophys. J. Lett.
783, L1. DOI.

Longcope, D.W., Fisher, G.H., Pevtsov, A.A.: 1998, Flux-Tube Twist Resulting from Helical

Turbulence: The Σ-Eﬀect. Astrophys. J. 507, 417 – 432. DOI.

L´opez Fuentes, M.C., D´emoulin, P., Mandrini, C.H., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L.: 2000, The

counterkink rotation of a non-Hale active region. Astrophys. J. 544, 540 – 549. DOI.

Luoni, M.L., D´emoulin, P., Mandrini, C.H., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L.: 2011, Twisted Flux Tube
Emergence Evidenced in Longitudinal Magnetograms: Magnetic Tongues. Solar Phys. 270,
45 – 74. DOI. ADS.

Nandy, D.: 2006, Magnetic helicity and ﬂux tube dynamics in the solar convection zone:

Comparisons between observation and theory. J. Geophys. Res. 111(A12S01). DOI.

Pevtsov, A.A.: 2002, Active-Region Filaments and X-ray Sigmoids. Solar Phys. 207, 111 – 123.

DOI. ADS.

Pevtsov, A.A., Canﬁeld, R.C., Sakurai, T., Hagino, M.: 2008, On the solar cycle variation of

the hemispheric rule. Astrophys. J. 677, 719 – 722. DOI. ADS.

Pevtsov, A.A., Berger, M.A., Nindos, A., Norton, A.A., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L.: 2014, Magnetic

Helicity, Tilt, and Twist. Space Sci. Rev. 186, 285 – 324. DOI. ADS.

Poisson, M., L´opez Fuentes, M., Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P.: 2015a, Active-Region Twist
Derived from Magnetic Tongues and Linear Force-Free Extrapolations. Solar Phys. 290,
3279 – 3294. DOI. ADS.

Poisson, M., Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P., L´opez Fuentes, M.: 2015b, Evidence of Twisted

Flux-Tube Emergence in Active Regions. Solar Phys. 290, 727 – 751. DOI. ADS.

Scherrer, P.H., Bogart, R.S., Bush, R.I., Hoeksema, J.T., Kosovichev, A.G., Schou, J., Rosen-
berg, W., Springer, L., Tarbell, T.D., Title, A., Wolfson, C.J., Zayer, I., MDI Engineering
Team: 1995, The Solar Oscillations Investigation - Michelson Doppler Imager. Solar Phys.
162, 129 – 188. DOI. ADS.

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 25

M. Poisson et al.

Szajko, N.S., Cristiani, G., Mandrini, C.H., Dal Lago, A.: 2013, Very intense geomagnetic
storms and their relation to interplanetary and solar active phenomena. Advances in Space
Research 51, 1842 – 1856. DOI.

Tziotziou, K., Georgoulis, M.K., Raouaﬁ, N.-E.: 2012, The Magnetic Energy-Helicity Diagram

of Solar Active Regions. Astrophys. J. Lett. 759, L4. DOI.

Wang, Y.-M.: 2013, On the Strength of the Hemispheric Rule and the Origin of Active-region

Helicity. Astrophys. J. Lett. 775, L46. DOI.

SOLA: tongues-o-solar-cycle.tex; 26 September 2018; 15:44; p. 26

