6
1
0
2

t
c
O
6
1

]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
8
0
8
4
0
.
0
1
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mentoring partnerships in science education

Andria C. Schwortza,b

Andrea C. Burrowsc

Sarah Katie Guﬀeyc

aPhysics & Astronomy, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY, USA

bNatural Sciences, Quinsigamond Community College, Worcester, MA, USA

cSecondary Education, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY, USA

aschwort@uwyo.edu

ABSTRACT

The authors use an action research (AR) approach in a collegiate studio physics
class to investigate the power of partnerships via conferences as they relate to issues of
establishing a student/mentor rapport, empowering students to reduce inequity, and the
successes and barriers to hearing students’ voices. The graduate teaching assistant (TA,
Author 1) conducted one-on-one conferences with 29 students, elicited student opinions
about the progress of the course, and talked with faculty, TAs, and an undergraduate
supplemental instructor for other sections of the course. At the end of the semester, the
students reported increased knowledge of the TA as a person and as an instructor, and
vice versa. Sixty-ﬁve percent of students reported no interest in changing circumstances
to make it easier to talk about personal concerns with the TA. College students reluc-
tantly voiced their opinions about the course, possibly due to the power structure of the
classroom. Other TAs in the department expressed mostly disinterest in the project,
while faculty members were interested in student learning but skeptical of student em-
powerment. A case study of one student is presented, wherein his attendance improved
in the course and he received additional help outside class, both possibly as a result of
the student/TA conferences. Students in this studio physics section were more likely to
interact directly with faculty or TAs during lectures, but less likely to do so during lab
sessions, than were students in a non-studio physics section.

1.

Introduction

Teaching at all levels and subjects requires a relationship between instructor and students (for
example, Burrows 2011). Instructors grow to know their students’ academic strengths and weak-
nesses through pedagogical content knowledge (Kriner 2004). Students must trust their instructors

 
 
 
 
 
 
– 2 –

to guide them through their challenges, even when unaware of these challenges. A partnership
requires give and take between both sides of the educational equation, with both sides providing
feedback to the other as they work towards the mutual goal of student success (Burrows 2011). Yet
so much of education, in K-12 and especially in college, continues to follow the traditional model,
where the instructor is the source of all knowledge and the student’s job is to passively absorb
information (for example, Breslow 2010).

The authors use action research (AR) in a collegiate studio physics classroom in order to
break down the traditional academic model. All three authors are experienced science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) educators at the secondary and college level and came to this
project with questions about improving their teaching within an AR perspective. They saw multiple
instances of inequity among collegiate students despite the equal access to education aﬀorded by the
public system. For example, while US K-12 students might have the right to secondary education,
accessing education can be diﬃcult when they are responsible for helping to raise siblings while their
parents work multiple jobs. All students in both secondary and college classrooms may be able or
even required to take science courses; however, these science courses may be viewed as just another
pointless hurdle in schooling.
‘Equal access’ to a resource, such as education, is not suﬃcient in
the context of complex overlapping inequities of race, gender, income, family educational history,
current family status, geography, and more. The authors address some of this classroom inequity
by providing a platform for a larger student voice and by supporting them in establishing a rapport
with one or more mentors in science.

This AR study is about mentoring partnerships in collegiate science education. The inﬂuence
of conferences on college physics students with a graduate teaching assistant (TA) is important,
as there are a number of current gaps in the literature. The gaps include a dearth of qualitative
studies on science classroom environments, student/teacher conferences in science, and approaches
to reducing the domination of the classroom by the teacher. Accordingly, ‘The challenge for all
of us is to continue to think about how the curriculum can be used to improve the teaching and
learning in science for all’ (DeBoer 2014, 576). The curriculum in this study is more than just the
content, but includes the relationship between the student and the TA.

This study was set in a collegiate calculus-based Physics II course for physics majors and
engineers at a research university in the western United States. The course contained 36 students,
and all were engineering majors or engineering double-majors. Physics II is traditionally taught in
a teacher-centered format with separate lecture, lab, and discussion sections. A faculty member
typically teaches the lecture, whereas diﬀerent TAs instruct the lab and discussion sections, all
of which are typically held in diﬀerent locations and taught by diﬀerent methods. For example,
lectures may be focused on conceptual ideas and discussion on problem-solving. The authors studied
a section taught in a studio physics format without distinction between the diﬀerent modalities of
lecture, lab, and discussion. The faculty member and TA (Author 1) were present for nearly all of
the sessions.

– 3 –

Physics is traditionally taught via a teacher-centered format. Studio physics is an attempt at
changing this power structure (as discussed in the literature Review section). The authors explored
whether student/TA conferences, where the collegiate student and TA converse, could further
empower the students in their own education in the studio physics class format. The stakeholders
for this project were primarily the students themselves, but also the departmental community
composed of other faculty and TAs. The wider university and physics departments elsewhere can
be seen as a larger community, although they were not directly involved in this study.

2. Literature Review

The authors engage with mentoring partnerships in a science classroom in conjunction with
the principles of AR. This article primarily revolves around collegiate education, so it is helpful
to deﬁne terms in this context. Because fewer studies exist on collegiate education, this literature
review includes both collegiate and K-12 classrooms. For this AR study, the ‘student’ is the college
student, the ‘teacher’ is a K-12 teacher, and the ‘faculty’ refers to collegiate faculty members.
The term ‘instructor’ is used as an umbrella category, including teachers, faculty members, TAs,
and undergraduate supplemental instructors (SIs). ‘Conference’ is deﬁned as a one-on-one meeting
between an instructor and a student.

2.1. Action research

Although various deﬁnitions of AR exist, all revolve around the three key concepts of demo-

cratic participation, social justice, and community empowerment (Brydon-Miller 1997; DePalma & l. Teague
2008; Somekh & Zeichner 2009; Zeni 1998). In the context of AR, democratic participation refers
to the practice of allowing the participants themselves to have a voice in the subject matter being
studied, and in the progress of the study itself. Action researchers are no longer objective observers
of their subjects, but instead all stake- holders work together to reach a common goal. Social
justice is not merely allowing equal access to resources, because not all individuals are able to take
advantage of supposedly equal access. To embrace social justice, one must be aware of past and
current systematic inequities, and make changes to counteract these inequalities. The philosophy
of community empowerment acknowledges that the researcher and participants exit with others.
Indeed, community members can make valuable contributions to both the research project and the
problem itself, with the goal of providing insight into the original research question(s).

2.2. Action research in an educational setting

AR is especially powerful in an educational setting, because K-12 teachers are traditionally
powerless as the creators of pedagogy or the instigators of research (Ioannidou-Koutselinia & Patsalidou

– 4 –

2015; Kayaoglu 2015). The movement of reﬂective practice or ‘teacher-as-researcher’ does allow for
both K-12 teachers and collegiate faculty to investigate their own teaching, but ‘students are often
positioned as objects of teacher’s study rather than collaborative partners or allies’ (Brydon-Miller
1997, 83). This study purposefully includes student stakeholders.

Beyond the AR practices described earlier, participatory AR as a form of reﬂective practice
allows teachers to reﬂect upon their learning and inﬂuence the progress of an ongoing course (for
example, Anderson et al. 2015). Moreover, the mandate of community engage- ment gives teachers
a venue for soliciting feedback from colleagues, and has often been used in teacher training programs
(for example, Hoedebeck 2011; Steele 2012).
engaging students in their own education is one
avenue to increase the democratic participation of students and reduce inequity. Simply allowing
all students equal access to education and fair grading is not suﬃcient for social justice, as students
have barriers to the access. Students from a lower socioeconomic class can ill aﬀord educational
materials ranging from pen and paper to textbooks and personal computers (Tan et al. 2012). In
male-dominated ﬁelds such as physics, females may face (even unintentionally) additional social
hurdles to their successranging from peer and parental pressure to study more gender-appropriate
topics through to stereotype threat (Hill et al. 2010).

Reducing inequity in education requires that students are provided equal access to resources,
and that proactive steps are made by those in power to assist students in accessing resources.
Taking positive actions to reduce inequity allows students to reach a privileged state.

Community empowerment refers to allowing a larger set of stakeholders to voice their opinions
and inﬂuence the course of action in the classroom. In the case of education, the community can
refer to students’ parents, the people of the town in which the school is situated, other educators,
and academics or scientists at other institutions.

2.3. Action research in the science classroom

AR projects are common in science courses (for example, Cavicci et al. 2001; Nyhof-Young
2000; Nystr¨om 2007). These studies stress the importance of partnerships between learners and
educators (Cavicci et al. 2001). They also highlight some diﬃculties of engaging in AR in a science
classroom (Nyhof-Young 2000).

Understanding one’s own biases is important to the goals of AR (Nyhof-Young 2000; Nystr¨om
2007). Researchers must confront the assumptions inherent in their own viewpoints (Nyhof-Young
2000) - all researchers must struggle with overcoming this, but especially AR researchers due to
their key position in multiple roles (e.g.
If AR researchers wish to ﬁx
problems of exclusion in classrooms, then they must ﬁrst understand the existing power structure
(Nyhof-Young 2000).

educator, researcher).

– 5 –

3. Partnerships

The deﬁnition of ‘partnership’ has evolved in the last decade, starting with vague partner-
ship deﬁnitions and functions in educational settings (Cliﬀord et al. 2008), and increasingly taking
better form. Burrows (2011) deﬁnes partnership, based loosely on Goodlad’s 1991 deﬁnition, as
a planned, mutually beneﬁcial, relationship between two or more parties which values diﬀerences;
supports inquiry into practices to encourage change; expects dialog on expectations/goals/agendas;
clearly outlines products and timelines; and, above all, builds relationships between participants by
focusing on communication, trust, community issues, context, and culture. This deﬁnition grounds
the partnership in the relationship, and people actually create the concept of partnership. Part-
nership itself is an abstract idea enacted by participants through interaction, comprised of people,
and the relationship amongst the individuals, which is vital to the partnership’s success (Burrows
2011, 2015; Burrows & Harkness 2015). All aspects of a school and culture interact as partnerships
create products, such as physical objects, works of art, or written documents. The expectations,
goals, and agendas of participants shape the partnership (Burrows 2011). while partnerships may
be most commonly thought of as being between two or more individuals of similar levels of expe-
rience and power, this is not necessarily the case with mentoring partnerships, such as a student
and a teacher.

3.1. Mentoring partnerships

A mentoring partnership is deﬁned as a situation where one person, a leader or mentor, acts
as the catalyst for the partnership, increasing the rate of reaction. The mentor(s) in a part-
nership focus on relationship-building and asking questions to enact changes where needed. The
partnership group should decide on the areas of focus, and the individuals in a partnership ideally
focus on each other’s needs and strengths (Burrows 2011). within the context of formal education,
instructors most frequently take on this role of mentor. The notion of partner equality is important
to partnerships (Lefever-Davis et al. 2007), and this becomes even more crucial in the context of
an AR project: democratic participation of the learners necessitates that they are not the only
ones receiving beneﬁt, and social justice requires a neutralization of the power diﬀerential between
mentors and mentees. This is similar to coaching in that both consist of two partners working
towards a common goal with one partner having more experience. however, in coaching it is
assumed that the coachee is the individual with a problem that must be solved, and thus will be
the only individual beneﬁting (for example, Gavriel 2014; Passmore & Townsend 2012).

3.2. University student mentoring partnerships

To a large extent, traditional classroom teaching is steeped in a power structure: the faculty
has the knowledge, the faculty controls the classroom, and the faculty assigns the grade. This

– 6 –

power is often expressed in language, such as the formality of speech (Schoerning et al. 2015) or
the assertiveness of the words and body language chosen (Brown 2004). Similarly, the traditional
modality of collegiate physics sets up the instructor as the ultimate authority in the classroom.

It is well known that any form of active learning (or student-centered classroom) results in
better student outcomes than does traditional lecture or teacher-centered classroom pedagogy
(Beichner 2008; Hake 1998). Studio physics begins to change the teacher-centered paradigm as
the focus is shifted towards a learner-centered approach. When the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (with the Technology enabled Active learning project) switched to studio physics in
the new format, ‘the instructor’s “command center,” from which he or she can control all the
technology in the room, was purposely placed in the middle to move the faculty member from a
position of authority at the front of the classroom’ (Breslow 2010, 25).

The setting of studio physics is conducive to the breakdown of traditional lines of authority.
AR’s core value of democratic participation ﬁts well with studio physics, making the course a good
one on which to perform an AR project. Because of the lack of literature about the student/TA
relationship and the call to examine the curriculum, the authors conducted this study about the
student/teacher relationship, extending the concept of the curriculum to include the personal in-
teractions.

As shown in the previous parts of this literature review, the authors propose that partnerships
and mentoring are important to student success, but these strategies are often not used in traditional
science classes. Conferences are another means to form a partnership with students (Goldstein and
Conrad 1990) to solve issues that arise in the course (Arbur 1977). Conferences show evidence
of producing not only content gains but also improving student/teacher relationships; speciﬁcally,
conferences ’facilitate a more personal and more “real”, teacher-student interaction’ (Fassler 1978,
190). Furthermore, conferences allow for the negotiation of meaning (Goldstein & Conrad 1990)
rather than employing a top-down model from the faculty member. Unfortunately, there is a dearth
of modern literature on the mentoring subject, and the older studies focus on English classes rather
than STEM content areas.

4. Theoretical framework and gap in the literature

This AR study was framed using a social constructivist perspective where knowledge is built
based on group interactions to produce meaning (Vygotsky 1978; Koro-Ljungberg et al. 2009).
Thus, the authors viewed the data through a lens of community concept-building and understanding
of the interactions taking place. This is similar to the approach of activity theory, situating the
individual within his or her social context (for example, McNicholl & Blake 2013), but diﬀers in that
the power of the individual is given precedence in accordance with the principles of AR. The goals
of AR, social justice, democratic participation, and community empowerment touch upon a number
of open ﬁelds of research relevant to this study, many of which are discussed in the Handbook of

– 7 –

Research on Science Education (Abell & Lederman 2013). Further qualitative research of classroom
environments is needed to under- stand the context of student learning (Fraser 2010). while the
role of the teacher in the K-12 science laboratory is well studied, the role of the TA in the collegiate
science laboratory is not as explored (Lunetta et al. 2010). Physics classrooms are dominated by
‘teacher-centered instruction,’ despite many ﬁndings that active student-centered learning is more
eﬀective, and approaches to changing this dynamic are needed (for example, Hake 1998; Duit et al.
2007). There is also a lack of literature about student/ teacher conferences in science, about
student/faculty conferences in higher education, and about student/TA conferences. As DeBoer
states, ‘The challenge for all of us is to continue to think about how the curriculum can be used
to improve the teaching and learning in science for all’ (2014, 576). Student/TA conferences are a
means of manipulating the standard curriculum for student opinions and concerns to be expressed
through instructor/student interactions.

5. Research questions

The authors sought how to utilize student/TA conferences to address aspects of partnering,
mentoring, and inequity that occur in the collegiate classroom. The main goals of the study were
to reduce inequity and provide college science students with a voice where usually that voice is
silenced. These questions are written as they were asked ? that is, in the ﬁrst person ? and
include the following: (1) ‘How diﬃcult will it be for us to empower the students to use their voice
for personal success in the classroom?’; (2) ‘What sorts of successes and barriers exist for giving
the students a voice in certain situations, and are these successes/ barriers within the students
themselves, within us as educator-researchers, or within the other community members?’; (3) ‘Will
we be able to establish a rapport between students and one or more mentors in science?’; (4) ‘Will
we see any evidence that establishing a rapport actually helps to reduce inequity for our students
either in the classroom or in their greater lives?’; (5) ‘Will having student/TA conferences allow me
(the TA) to better learn and remem- ber students? names to enable a more personable connection?’;
and, ﬁnally, (6) ‘How will this process unfold and to what extent will our eﬀorts change the culture
in the traditional science classroom?’ These questions can be organized into three major themes,
as follows:

I. Establishing a rapport with a mentor (Questions 3, 4, and 5).

II. Empowering students and reducing inequity (Questions 1, 4, and 5).

III. Successes and barriers to hearing students’ voices (Questions 2, 5, and 6).

– 8 –

6. Methodology

The authors used the three core principles of AR to address issues of systemic inequality in the
classroom, and they attempted to give students a voice to improve their democratic participation.
The authors had numerous conversations with other members of their academic communities, and
they focused on reducing known issues of social injustice.
In addition to this AR focus, both
quantitative and qualitative data were collected to determine whether these goals were being met.
This section is organized with a description of the sample, the student/TA conference format, and
speciﬁc methods of data collection. The methods are further broken down by viewpoint and goal
of the particular form of data collected.

7. Sample

All 36 students in the studio physics course were invited to participate in the study. Twenty-
nine students (81%) chose to participate, and 27 (75% of the class or 93% of participants) attended
conferences. To reduce the chance of triggering stereotype threat, the demographics for this study
were based on the TA’s observations of student gender and race/ethnicity. The demographics
consisted of 22 (76%) white males, six (21%) white females, and one (3%) hispanic male.

8. Methods and student/TA conference format

This study took place over the course of nine weeks during the Fall of 2014, and the data
collection methods were various and included:
interview, survey, observational ﬁeld notes, and
personal reﬂections. More detail on these methods follows. The original goal of the data collection
was to determine the empowerment of the students within the class, and data were collected to
identify possible barriers in the participants’ self-expression. The student/TA conferences consisted
of 15-minute informal conversations between a student and the TA. The purpose of the conferences
was for the TA to learn more about the whole student, such as their interests, families, reasons for
taking the course, academic goals, and learning style, and was intended to give the participants an
outlet for their voice to be heard and respected. It was not expected that all of these topics would
be made clear in every conference due to the short duration, but these were the types of topics
that the TA touched upon with the students. The questions asked (Appendix A, see Supplemental
Material) served only as a starting point for conversation, rather than as strict guidelines.

The following subsections further detail the methods of the particular forms of data collected.

– 9 –

8.1. Viewpoint of participants and community

The viewpoints of the participants were explicitly solicited during each 15-minute one- on-one
conference (27 times). The post-survey included both speciﬁc questions soliciting student input and
an open-ended question prompting students to share additional insights about the study or their
participation in it. The TA expressed that she was open to hearing from the students at numerous
other instances, including class time, oﬃce hours, by appointment at other times, or via email.

The TA also held informal conversations about the course, teaching, and student learning in
general, with the studio physics faculty, the two non-studio physics faculty, the TAs for the non-
studio sections, and the SI for one of the non-studio sections. These conversations took place in
person, either by the TA dropping in to the oﬃce of the faculty members or by running into the
other TA or the SI in the hallway. The TA reﬂected upon her interactions with the students and
these other educators throughout the semester, and after the termination of the study.

8.2. Qualitative data collected

The pre-survey (see Appendix A, see Supplemental Material) was administered during class
time before the commencement of student/TA conferences and after their ﬁrst examination, and
contained both quantitative (yes/no, ordinal, and Likert, as per Likert 1932) and qualitative (free
response) questions. The post-survey included ﬁve additional free response questions not on the
pre-survey prompting participants to address other ways the TA could have helped them to feel
more comfortable asking questions during class, outside of class, or to help the student’s learning
and motivation. The ﬁnal question asked whether participants wanted to share anything regarding
the study or their participation in it. The TA kept observational ﬁeld notes during student/TA
conferences and during class time (total of eight pages), and wrote additional reﬂections both during
and after the course sessions (total of 17 pages).

8.3. Quantitative data collected

Author 1, classically trained in the pure sciences but stretching into AR, valued quantitative
data, and thus felt reassured using a survey as part of the data-set. There were nine questions that
were answered on a bubble sheet. Counts of student/instructor interactions were recorded on eight
class dates (approximately three weeks of class, or 16 contact hours) after the completion of the
student/TA conferences. Two assistants were recruited to count student/instructor interactions
in non-studio sections of the course for comparison with the studio section. The post-survey was
administered in class after the completion of the tallies.

– 10 –

9. Analysis

The authors analyzed the data including ﬁeld notes, survey responses, and tally of interactions
in a number of ways, including searching for the voice of the participants and community, qualitative
coding for themes, and quantitative statistical calculations. These approaches are shown in the
following sections.

9.1. Voice of the participants and community

The authors sought commonalities and patterns within the data throughout the analysis.
Some of the patterns were discovered in participant answers to free response questions on pre/post-
surveys, and in conversations with the authors and other community members involved in the
study. Input from community members was gained through emailed and face-to-face discussions.
In addition, the authors reﬂected upon the process and their experiences both individually and in
correspondence with each other.

9.2. Qualitative

The authors coded participants’ answers on free response questions for themes, and looked
for individual words or phrases that one participant repeated multiple times, or that multiple
participants used. when ideas were found to recur across diﬀerent participants within the study,
the responses of other participants were examined for similar ideas using diﬀerent words. These
ideas were then grouped into overarching ideas.

9.3. Quantitative

The authors recorded the number and percent of yes/no question answers, as well as the
number of ‘Agree’ or ‘Strongly Agree’ responses to Likert-scale questions. The authors compared
the counts of student/TA interactions between diﬀerent sections of physics (studio and non-studio)
and between diﬀerent class styles (lecture, discussion, and lab). For the studio physics section,
‘lab’ was deﬁned as those times when the lab manual was in use. ‘Discussion’ was deﬁned as the
times when the students were working in groups on work- sheets, primarily addressing conceptual
questions. The ‘lecture-like’ modality included teacher-centric activities where the instructor talked
while displaying lecture notes on an lCD projector, demonstrated problem-solving, or had students
respond to clicker questions. These numbers were analyzed using statistical methods after the
course for triangulation with the non-quantitative data.

– 11 –

10. Results and ﬁndings

The following results and ﬁndings are separated into sections on the three themes that emerged
from the research questions: establishing a rapport with a mentor; empowering students and re-
ducing inequity; and successes and barriers to hearing students’ voices. Table 1 showcases selected
student responses on the post-survey, broken down by category.

10.1. Theme I: Establishing a rapport with a mentor

The TA (Author 1) has extensive experience interacting with students as a community college
faculty, but not in a larger university setting. During the physics conferences, some students were
comfortable just chatting while others needed additional prompting. Students asked questions
about the TA as well (e.g. hometown) and this sometimes led to conversations about the beneﬁts
and drawbacks of both large urban areas and smaller, more close-knit communities. Many of the
students expressed their appreciation of the outdoors.

A few students preferred to use the time for tutoring on the course content, and the TA followed
the students’ guidance rather than forcing the students out of their comfort zone. Some students
preferred to discuss speciﬁc problems from their homework assignments. while this choice may not
have directly fostered the emotional connection of a mentorship, these students received assistance
they might not have sought out otherwise.

On the pre/post-survey, the second and third questions dug deeper into the perception of how
well the TA knew the students. On the pre-survey 12.5% of respondents felt that she knew them
as students, while on the post-survey 34.3% said they felt she knew them as students. On the
pre-survey 0% said they felt that the TA knew them as individuals, while on the post-survey 34.3%
responded that she did. The additional Questions 10-12 on the post-survey revolved around the
students’ comfort with the TA. eighty percent of respondents said that they felt comfortable asking
the TA questions during class, while 69% felt comfortable doing so outside of class.

Only one individual (3%) reported feeling comfortable talking to the TA about personal issues
or for emotional support. Seven students had substantive responses to the free response post-
survey question about sharing personal issues with or seeking emotional support from the TA (see
examples in Table 1.). Three students said they would never bring personal issues to a TA (such
as Author 1) or professor, and two students said they would only bring such issues to people with
whom they felt close.

The ﬁnal three multiple-choice questions on the post-survey were about student perceptions on
knowing the TA. All participants indicated that they knew the TA’s name. Students were evenly
split on whether they felt that they knew the TA’s strengths and weaknesses as an educator (43%
yes, 46% no, 11% no response). The minority of students felt that they knew the TA as a person,
including her hobbies or interests (63% no, 23% yes, 14% no response).

– 12 –

10.2. Theme II: Empowering students and reducing inequity

The authors addressed inequity through student voice in this AR study. The participants
frequently referred to external motivators for the course on the post-survey. Grades served as a
strong motivation, and a few participants suggested that providing extra credit would give them
more motivation. Increased grade feedback was suggested as another motivator, such as posting
their grades to either the school-provided learning management system or to the publisher-provided
homework system. Five students referred to internal motivation, mostly saying that the TA or
professor cannot motivate the student, but that students can motivate themselves. See Table 1 for
examples of these comments.

Students expressed reluctance to break the hierarchy of faculty being ‘superior’ to TAs, who
are in turn ‘superior’ to students. Table 1 highlights two instances of this: in one case the student
chastised the TA for breaking the hierarchy, while in the other the student asks the TA to intervene
on the behalf of students.

10.3. Theme III: Successes and barriers to hearing students’ voices

10.3.1. Successes and barriers within the students themselves

One student discussed how his motivation to succeed was based upon the fact that he was on
a full scholarship with a stipend, and had an infant child and a wife to support - should he lose the
stipend, he would be unable to support his family. Another was so wrapped up in the conversation
that she talked for more than 20 minutes, ﬁve minutes longer than the intended duration of the
conference. One student talked about his ambition of becoming an audio engineer, which the TA
referenced when the topic of tuning circuits consisting of a resistor, inductor, and capacitor (RlC
circuits) emerged in class.

Many of the responses on the post-survey were opinions on how the course could be improved
or how the instructors could give additional feedback to the students. On the other hand, students
were often reluctant to speak up and voice their opinions aloud. This was also reﬂected in the
responses on the participants’ post-surveys, where many students responded with rote phrases
such as ‘ﬁne as is,’ ‘things are ﬁne,’ or ‘nothing,’ as shown in Table 1.

10.3.2. Case study: Brandon - successes and barriers

One student in particular, who is referred to as Brandon, is an interesting case and the authors
explore his situation closely here. he was struggling in physics and had already been contacted by
the TA for his poor attendance. Because only three students in the course had poor attendance
during the semester, Brandon’s absenteeism was conspicuous. Brandon failed to show up for his

– 13 –

scheduled conference and the TA approached him about this when she next saw him. he expressed
contrition and they scheduled another meeting one week later. At this conference, Brandon volun-
teered contributing factors to his absenteeism, and he expressed concern at his lack of progress in
the course.

The TA and Brandon decided to meet every week for the ﬁnal six weeks of the semester.
Brandon attended approximately half of these sessions, without informing the TA beforehand of
intended absences. Brandon brought the work he had begun on that week’s homework assignment
to these meetings, and the TA assisted him to complete as many problems as possible over the
course of an hour. This led Brandon to complete more of the homework assignments than he would
have had he not met with the TA.

The course professor also reported that Brandon was meeting with him occasionally (with
even less regularity) to go over material. Brandon had disclosed more of the circumstances of
his absenteeism to the faculty, and the faculty ended up introducing Brandon to another graduate
student with similar life circumstances who could serve as a mentor in a similar situation. Brandon’s
signiﬁcance to this study is explored later in the article.

10.3.3. Successes and barriers within the educator-researchers

At the start of the study, the TA knew approximately 50% of students’ names. After the
student/TA conferences, she recalled 77% of the names. During the last week of the semester, the
TA found that she could recall 75% of students’ names from their faces. Thus, the TA had an
increase in name recognition and personal student connections.

10.3.4. Successes and barriers within the university physics community

In addition to talking with the student participants in the student/TA conferences and during
class time, she also interacted with the other course instructors. The SI of one non-studio physics
section was glad to help with this project. he was fascinated with the process of education research,
and eagerly suggested ideas to attempt. In fact, it was the SI’s suggestion to separate the counts
of interactions by what style of teaching was happening at the moment (lecture, discussion, or
lab-like), and the authors embraced and incorporated the idea into the AR project.

Author 1 reached out to all four graduate TAs for the non-studio sections of the course, and
found one TA willing to help with this study. The professor leading the studio physics section
expressed an interest in doing student/faculty conferences himself, but he conducted none during
his class. From observing the class and from previous interactions, the professor appeared vested
in student learning, but did not take the next step into personal student conferences.

Another professor, known to Author 1 for caring about student learning, ascribed to a pos-

– 14 –

itivist or teacher-centered model of education. Author 1 and this professor had previously held
a number of conversations where he expressed distrust in the results of educational research. he
attributed the success of learner-centered teaching methods to a reaction eﬀect where students re-
spond positively to any change in their learning environment. The conversations between Author 1
and this instructor about this project were more frequent than with other faculty members. Based
on these interactions, the authors attempted to capture the voices of the instructors for this AR
project.

10.3.5. Successes and barriers of the studio physics format

To provide context, a table of data (Table 2) is presented for the reader. This table includes
the: average number of students enrolled in each section; the number of sessions observed; the
number of interactions; the calculated interaction rate (i.e. the number of interactions per session
per student); and the ratio of this value for studio physics to non-studio physics. The interaction
rate is expressed as the number of interactions per student per session, and thus is scaled by the
number of days observed and the size of the class. larger numerical values show more interaction.
In lecture sessions, studio physics students interacted 2.7 times more with their TA than non-studio
physics students did with either of their instructors. The values for discussion sections are similar
between the two forms of physics.

11. Discussion and conclusions

The students participating in this study showed evidence of enjoying the student/TA conference
process. They talked about themselves and asked questions about the TA as a person. however,
it was diﬃcult to engage students as active partners in either their education or the study itself.
even those participants who enjoyed the conferences were reluctant to voice their opinions during
or after class time. while the authors did not explicitly explore the causes of this reluctance, the
pre-existing power structure of the classroom - the traditional teacher in a seemingly superior role
- is speculated as a contributing factor.

This section discusses the ﬁrst two themes of establishing a rapport with a mentor (including
Brandon’s case), and empowering students and ameliorating inequity, a modiﬁed third theme of
improving opportunities for hearing students’ voices, and also explores limitations of the study.

11.1. Theme I: Establishing a rapport with a mentor

Rapport is built upon interactions, and the TA observed that it was harder to develop a rapport
with students at the research university than at a community college. Factors such as larger class

– 15 –

size and fewer student contact hours per instructor at the research university could be part of the
explanation. However, the interactions were improved when she ﬁrst served as a TA in studio
physics the semester before this study - the smaller class size and larger number of contact hours in
studio physics allowed the TA to get to know her students, but there was room for growth. Overall,
the TA engaged the students more with conferences, and built a mentoring rapport with Brandon,
but neither that connection nor any others persisted forwards. In the future, the TA should create
a follow-up plan to keep lines of communication open.

11.1.1. Case study: Brandon - discussion

The student/TA conferences had a beneﬁcial impact for intervention in cases of poor student
performance. Traditionally, the initiative must come from the student for performance to change.
If an instructor only schedules meetings with struggling students, then students may not possess
any initiative to improve their work, and negative connotations of student/teacher meetings may
dominate the interaction. On the other hand, if all students are meeting with the instructor, this
could provide the extra push for the student to voice an opinion.

In Brandon’s case in particular, there was an improvement upon his original situation. The
student’s eﬀorts to sometimes attend weekly meetings with the TA may be evidence that his
motivation increased. While another student mentioned motivation and the TA’s role by stating
‘[letting] me know at a personal level that my education and future is important to her,’ it remains
unclear whether the conference for this particular student had a positive eﬀect on motivation.

11.2. Theme II: Empowering students and ameliorating inequity

11.2.1. Empowering students

This study empowered collegiate studio physics students in their education, but found chal-
lenges to this AR process, primarily from the students themselves. Many of the students did exhibit
enjoyment and eagerness to discuss personal stories with the TA. However, they were considerably
more inhibited when it came to expressing opinions about the course or the study, whether face to
face or on paper.

The sheer diﬃculty of soliciting feedback from the students was surprising to the TA, whether
in person or on the post-survey. Many of the students responded with rote responses such as ‘Fine
as is,’ borrowing the wording suggested on the survey. A number of other students responded that
discussing personal matters with the TA was either not appropriate or not something they would
normally do. Perhaps this AR study was such an anomaly to the physics students that they were
unable to balance the seeming power diﬀerential and their solicited voice.

– 16 –

Students exhibited external motivation on their post-surveys, such as discussing extra credit
or food as motivators. However, their wish for more grading feedback could either support this
wish for more external motivation (grades) or could imply that they are looking for assistance with
their metacognitive processes. One student (appropriately) criticized this study:
‘I don’t believe
this study had anything to do with motivation. It only helped you be more open to questions.’
Possibly, this student, although rightfully cautious and skeptical, took the ﬁrst steps towards ﬁnding
and using a voice with this strong statement.

11.3. Ameliorating inequity

While the authors kept best intentions for ameliorating inequity in their classrooms, providing
the students a voice in the educational process was the only means of addressing injustice. The
students felt that the TA cared about their opinions of the course, yet they were reluctant to vocalize
substantial feedback. There are multiple possible causes for this lack of student expression. It could
be a holdover of the power structure in which the TAs are superior to the students. A TA’s status
in the classroom hierarchy (i.e.
‘below’ the professor) might have led the students to feel that
voicing their concerns would negatively travel to the professor or ‘one in charge.’ The students
may have felt that the class was optimally eﬀective for them, although the TA feels this is unlikely
because there were students who did not pass the course. Lastly, it could be that the students’
metacognition or self-awareness is weak, or they felt uncomfortable when the TA asked for useful
feedback.

11.3.1. Student names

The students’ perceptions of the TA’s knowledge of student names appeared to be signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from her own perception of how well she knew their names. Over the course of the study,
the students did feel that the TA improved in how well she knew the students, both with regards
to their strengths and their weaknesses as students, and as individuals. The TA’s perception of
her knowledge of student names also improved over this AR study. The students’ answers to the
questions about how well the TA knew them do show evidence that her personal connection to the
students increased. Learning student names is an important step towards recognizing students as
complete human beings, thus giving them more power and validating their role as active contributors
to the classroom experience.

11.4. Modiﬁed Theme III: Improving opportunities for hearing students’ voices

The authors identiﬁed a number of future opportunities to help students voice their ideas,
most obviously to explicitly encourage and value student participation and openness. However,

– 17 –

one possibility for the students’ reluctance to voice an opinion is that they could have unused
metacognition skills and may not understand how to assess what would enhance their learning.
Another possibility is that the power structure of the classroom could be stiﬂing those students who
do have ideas for feedback. Students could be afraid that expressing their opinions could be taken
as criticism of the TA or the instructor in charge of the course, and they might fear inadvertently
negatively impacting their grade. A third possible cause is that students could just be accustomed
to the social contract of sitting quietly in class and parroting back what the instructor says on
examinations, rather than actively engaging with their learning and even improving it.

Author 1’s own reluctance to press the students for more information was an unexpected bar-
rier, and is one that she needs to examine critically. There is a boundary of when it is acceptable to
lead students past their comfort zone for the sake of their metacognitive growth. As an experienced
physics teacher, the TA knows where this boundary lies with regards to academic content and skills
growth, but as a novice AR researcher she does not yet know where it lies with regards to student
empowerment. As a result, when the students seemed uncomfortable, she preferred to err on the
side of light pressure. Author 1 needs to grow as an AR researcher to learn where the acceptable
boundaries lie.

Another issue was that there were diﬃculties in working with the other TAs and faculty
for the non-studio course. Some of these were partially due to departmental cultural customs
regarding organization of TAs and faculty for large courses. The physics department has a limited
number of mechanisms in place for interaction of instructors. On weeks when faculty meetings did
not take place, one of the non-research faculty members typically scheduled ‘teaching chats,’ but
these were limited in scope. The organizing individual was faculty for one of the two non-studio
physics sections, speciﬁcally the one who has expressed skepticism of educational research. For
the semester in question only one teaching chat was scheduled, and it involved a demonstration
of display technology rather than actual discussion of the teaching or learning in the courses. In
addition, attendance at these teaching chats was low, typically in the single digits. This small
group has the potential to begin change with student voices, but the group has not yet embraced
this culture.

In future semesters, Author 1 wishes to reach out further to other members of her department.
Many physics professors are skeptical of the results of educational research, thinking that while
more active forms of teaching may work in certain situations, they will not work in their own
situation. At research universities, departments are focused on content rather than on teaching
pedagogy and the importance of student interactions. Thus, it is often an uphill battle to convince
instructors to adopt the results of educational research. The authors continue to encourage faculty
to perform their own studies, empowering them to make their own investigations, and inspiring
them to involve their students’ opinions.

– 18 –

11.4.1. Number of student/instructor interactions

The authors found it surprising that the interaction rates for lab sections were greater in non-
studio physics than in studio physics. There are a number of factors that could contribute to this,
including the three described here. First, the studio physics numbers referred only to the number
of interactions the students had with their TA. If the students had the same number of interactions
with the faculty, then the interaction rate might be doubled to 0.667 - greater than the non-studio
physics value of 0.538. Secondly, if non-studio physics students ask fewer questions in lecture,
perhaps they need to ask more questions of their TA than the studio physics students do. lastly,
the introduction to the studio physics labs was always given by the faculty, so it was possible that
the professor explained the lab more clearly than did the TA of the non-studio labs. Despite these
suggestions, data can be interpreted as evidence that the TA communicated with her studio physics
students post-conference more than did other instructors with their non-studio physics students.

11.5. Limitations

There are several limitations to this AR study. These can be separated into categories of the
sample, the study design, and selection eﬀects and demographics of the assistants and TA. These
limitations are now discussed.

The sample size and the lack of diversity in the sample result in limitations to the study. The
small sample size means that it cannot be generalized quantitatively to larger populations, only
qualitatively. no barriers to either women or non-white domestic students were observed, perhaps
due to the student demographics: 22 (76%) white male, six (21%) white female, and one (3%)
Hispanic male.

The study design has a number of limitations. Qualitative data were collected and analyzed by
a single individual, so no inter-rater reliabilities are possible. The interaction score was normalized
as per session, but sessions were of diﬀerent lengths depending upon the modality - all studio physics
class meetings were one hour and 50 minutes in length, while non-studio physics lectures studied
here were one hour and 15 minutes, discussions were 50 minutes, and labs were one hour and 50
minutes. Another non-studio physics lecture section with 50-minute sessions was not studied here.
It is possible that the lack of complete anonymity on the post-survey may have contributed to this
as participants were asked for their names to track changes. names were used rather than codes
primarily so that the TA could make connections between discussions with the students and their
responses.

The selection and demographics of the TA herself and her assistants are another limitation.
Only one TA from a non-studio physics section was willing to assist with this study, so there may
be selection eﬀects as a result of only comparing that TA’s sections with the studio physics class.
The TA for the studio physics class (Author 1) was female, while all faculty and assistants (one

– 19 –

TA and one SI) in both the studio physics class and the non-studio classes were male, which could
have introduced additional power diﬀerential eﬀects.

12.

Implications

educators are often searching for ways to test new potential solutions for problems in the
classroom. AR not only addresses this need, but is also a radical approach to science education
(especially in physics) in which some power is moved from the hands of the educator to the hands
of the students and community. when looking to form a mentoring partnership between students
and educators in science classes, AR can be a powerful tool for reducing inequities and engaging
students. This study provides a path for novice AR researchers and helps to identify some of the
successes and challenges inherent in taking on a beginning AR project.

12.1. Mentoring

The mentoring partnership is one that is inherently unbalanced, with one individual taking an
experienced role and the other being a novice learner. It can be diﬃcult to overcome this inequity,
and the learning partner may resist eﬀorts to overturn this system. When a mentee seeks out a
mentor precisely to learn from her/his expertise, this sets up a power diﬀerential that the mentee
may feel is inherent to the learning. Similarly, the mentor may feel that she/ he deserves to be
the person of greater power in the relationship due to her/his greater knowledge. But without the
need of the mentee to learn, the mentor’s role would be empty, and therefore a mentor should take
care to elicit the mentee’s needs within the mentoring partnership.

Educational research increasingly acknowledges the necessity for teachers to meet students at
their level, for example using diﬀerentiated instruction. Moreover, the very philosophy of AR in
the context of education requires that the educator-researcher determines the systematic inequities
standing in the way of each student’s access to education. An educator-researcher who does not
determine her students’ challenges cannot meet her students’ needs, and therefore will not be
espousing the philosophy of social justice.

12.2. Partnerships

While partnerships are important in STEM disciplines, the interpersonal skills learned carry
over into many additional ﬁelds and careers. Communication skills learned through partnerships
serve as a stepping-stone for all career paths, and can help improve the workforce. Students
who learn to establish and work in a partnership in school can transfer this skill to working with
supervisors, peers, and supervisees in their professional career.

– 20 –

12.3. Action research

In a phrase so often quoted that it has been attributed to many sources, ‘social justice is
deﬁned as promoting a just society by challenging injustice and valuing diversity.’
In its ideal
form, AR involves the participants and their community working with the researcher(s). Together
all stakeholders identify the problems they face, and pursue solutions which allow individuals and
their societies to ﬂourish together. while the researcher can serve as a guide in this process, her voice
is no more signiﬁcant or important than that of any other person involved. AR allows oppressed
Importantly,
peoples to address issues that concern them and participate as fellow researchers.
the ultimate goals of AR in education are twofold: to empower students in their education so that
they are equally responsible for their learning and the classroom environment; and to bring them
into the research process so that they are equally accountable for the creation of new knowledge in
educational research with strong voices.

13. Acknowledgement

The authors would like to thank the participants of the study. Andria C. Schwortz would like
to thank the members of the University of Wyoming Physics Department for their support during
the course of this study.

The Version of Record of this manuscript has been published and is available in Educational Ac-

tion Research, 03 October 2016, http://www.tandfonline.com/, DOI:10.1080/09650792.2016.1221838.

14. Disclosure statement

No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.

15. Funding

The authors acknowledge partial funding for this study from the grants LASSI [DOE WDE

MSP #WY140202]; and SQARMS [NSF DUE #1339853].

REFERENCES

Abell, S. K., & Lederman, N. G. 2013, Handbook of Research on Science Education (New York:

Focal Press)

Anderson, V., McKenzie, M., Allan, S., et al. 2015, Teaching Education, 26, 179

– 21 –

Arbur, R. 1977, College Composition and Communication, 28, 338

Beichner, R. 2008, The SCAle-uP Project: A Student-Centered Active learning envi-
ronment for Undergraduate Programs., Tech. rep., National Academy of Sciences,
http://publish.illinois.edu/disruptivespaces/ﬁles/2014/07/SCAle-UP-Paper1.pdf

Breslow, l. 2010, Change, 42, 23

Brown, D. F. 2004, Urban Education, 39, 266

Brydon-Miller, M. 1997, Journal of Social Issues, 53, 657

Burrows, A. C. 2011, PhD thesis, University of Cincinnati, Ohio

—. 2015, Problems of Education in the 21st Century, 65, 28

Burrows, A. C., & Harkness,

S.
doi:10.1080/09650792.2015.1 108211.

S.

2015,

Educational Action Research,

1,

Cavicci, E., Lucht, P., & Hughes-Mcdonnell, F. 2001, Educational Action Research, 9, 25

Cliﬀord, M., Millar, S., Smith, Z., Hora, M., & DeLima, L. 2008, K-20 Partnerships: Literature
Review and Recommendations for Research, Tech. rep., Wisconsin Center for Education
Research, Madison, WI

DeBoer, G. E. 2014, The History of Science Curriculum Reform in the United States (New York:
Routledge), 559–578, in Handbook of Research on Science Education. II Vols, edited by S.
K. Abell and N. G. Lederman

DePalma, R., & l. Teague. 2008, Educational Action Research, 16, 441

Duit, R., Niedderer, H., & Schecker, H. 2007, Teaching Physics (New York: Routledge), 599–630,
in Handbook of Research on Science Education, edited by S. K. Abell and N. G. Lederman

Fassler, B. 1978, College English, 40, 186

Fraser, B. J. 2010, Classroom Learning Environments (New York: Routledge), 103–124, in Hand-
book of Research on Science Education, edited by S. K. Abell and N. G. Lederman

Gavriel, J. 2014, Education for Primary Care, 25, 168

Goldstein, l. M., & Conrad, S. 1990, TESOL Quarterly, 24, 443

Goodlad, J. 1991, Education Digest, 8, 58

Hake, R. 1998, American Journal of Physics, 66, 64

Hill, C., Corbett, C., & St.Rose, A. 2010, Why So Few? Women in Science, Technology, Engineer-

ing, and Mathematics, Tech. rep., AAUW, Washington, DC

– 22 –

Hoedebeck, E. 2011, PhD thesis, New Mexico State University

Ioannidou-Koutselinia, M., & Patsalidou, F. 2015, Educational Action Research, 23, 124

Kayaoglu, M. N. 2015, Educational Action Research, 23, 140

Koro-Ljungberg, M., Yendol-Hoppey, D., Smith, J. J., & Hayes, S. B. 2009, Educational Researcher,

38, 687

Kriner, A. 2004, Ciencia & Educacao, 10, 111

Lefever-Davis, S., Johnson, C., & Pearman, C. 2007, Journal of Educational Research, 100, 204=210

Likert, R. 1932, A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes, In Archives of Psychology, 22 vols,

edited by R. S. Woodworth, pages1-55, New York City: Columbia University

Lunetta, V. N., Hofstein, A., & Clough, M. P. 2010, Learning and Teaching in the School Science
Laboratory: An Analysis of Research, Theory, and Practice (New York: Routledge), 393–
442, in Handbook of Research on Science Education, edited by S. K. Abell and N. G.
Lederman

McNicholl, J., & Blake, A. 2013, Journal of Education for Teaching: International Research and

Pedagogy, 39, 281

Nyhof-Young, J. 2000, Educational Action Research, 8, 471

Nystr¨om, E. 2007, Educational Action Research, 15, 417

Passmore, J., & Townsend, C. 2012, Policing, 35, 785

Schoerning, E., Hand, B., Shelley, M., & Therrien, W. 2015, Science Education, 99, 238

Somekh, B., & Zeichner, K. 2009, Educational Action Research, 17, 5

Steele, A. 2012, The Canadian Journal of Action Research, 13, 17

Tan, E., Barton, A. C., Turner, E., & Guti´errez, M. V. 2012, Empowering Science and Mathematics

Education in Urban Schools (Chicago, Il: The University of Chicago Press)

Vygotsky, l. S. 1978, Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Mental Process (Cambridge,

MA: Harvard College Press)

Zeni, J. 1998, Educational Action Research, 6, 9

This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.2.

Theme
I: Establishing a rapport
with a mentor

II: Empowering students
and reducing inequity

III: Hearing student voices

– 23 –

Successes
In response to how the TA could
motivate students to talk about
‘Express
their personal
her personal issues.’
‘Oﬀer points back on assign-
ments if we come discuss it in of-
ﬁce hours.’

issues,

‘Not grade as harshly on assign-
ments, labs, and tests when we
clearly have the concepts and
only messed up the work. Eas-
ier to want to do better when
we’re not afraid of being thrown
on the chopping block for small
mistakes.’
‘Maybe encourage students to set
up study groups.’
‘Post a % grade! It bothers me
not knowing, and if I had a lower
grade I would work much harder.’

‘I think that more application ex-
amples could be used in class like
where these principles in class are
applied.’
‘This study seems bias[ed] due to
only yes/no answers on opinion,
but could deﬁnitely be applica-
ble.’
‘I don’t believe this study had
anything to do with motivation.
It only helped you be more open
to questions.’

Barriers
‘i think it is just a personal prob-
lem that I would need to focus
more and do more work outside
of class.’
‘Not really one to talk about
personal problems with people i
don?t know very well.’
‘Teachers/professors
shouldn’t
be too involved in personal life.’

‘Not
interrupting the teacher
while he is teaching to interject
her opinion on how to do a prob-
lem.’
Many responses were about clar-
ifying or expanding the existing
‘clearer
power structure (e.g.
guidelines for lab reports/ home-
work,’ ‘hold study sessions every
week.’)

Four of the six free response
questions had more blank and
non-substantive responses (e.g.,
‘Fine as is, “nothing”) than sub-
stantive responses.
A total of 61.0% of free-response
questions
left
blank or had non-substantive
responses.

either

were

Table 1: Qualitative data showcasing selected post-survey responses.

– 24 –

Studio physics (after conferences)
Number of students enrolled
Number of sessions observed
Number of interactions
Interaction rate

Non-studio physics (no conferences)
Number of students enrolled (average per section)
Number of sessions observed
Number of interactions
Interaction rate

Modality

Lecture Discussion

Lab

36
8
37
0.128

63
4
12
0.0476

36
7
72
0.286

35
2
15
0.214

36
5
60
0.333

26
2
28
0.538

Ratio of studio/non-studio interactions rate

2.7

1.3

0.62

Table 2: interaction rate (number of interactions per session per student) in the diﬀerent modalities.

