Effects of bulk and interfacial anharmonicity on thermal conductance at

solid/solid interfaces

Nam Q. Le,1, ∗ Carlos A. Polanco,2 Rouzbeh Rastgarkafshgarkolaei,1

Jingjie Zhang,2 Avik W. Ghosh,2, 3 and Pamela M. Norris1, †

1Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering,

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904

2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904

3Department of Physics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904

(Dated: October 18, 2021)

Abstract

We present the results of classical molecular dynamics simulations to assess the relative contributions to

interfacial thermal conductance from inelastic phonon processes at the interface and in the adjacent bulk

materials. The simulated system is the prototypical interface between argon and “heavy argon” crystals,

which enables comparison with many past computational studies. We run simulations interchanging the

Lennard-Jones potential with its harmonic approximation to test the effect of anharmonicity on conductance.

The results conﬁrm that the presence of anharmonicity is correlated with increasing thermal conductance

with temperature, which supports conclusions from prior experimental and theoretical work. However, in

the model Ar/heavy-Ar system, anharmonic effects at the interface itself contribute a surprisingly small part

of the total thermal conductance. The larger fraction of the thermal conductance at high temperatures arises

from anharmonic effects away from the interface. These observations are supported by comparisons of the

spectral energy density, which suggest that bulk anharmonic processes increase interfacial conductance by

thermalizing energy from modes with low transmission to modes with high transmission.

6
1
0
2

t
c
O
4

]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
5
1
0
1
0
.
0
1
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
I.

INTRODUCTION

The contribution of inelastic phonon processes to the thermal conductance at solid/solid inter-

faces is a topic of enduring interest. At interfaces between metal ﬁlms and dielectric substrates

whose phonon spectra are extremely mismatched—e.g., Pb/diamond—experimentally measured
values can far exceed the phonon radiation limit,1–4 which represents the upper limit of conduc-

tance when accounting only for elastic (i.e., frequency-preserving) phonon transmission. The

measured values also increase monotonically with temperature, in common with calculations of

conductance from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations which naturally include anharmonic ef-
fects.5–7 These observations strongly suggest that inelastic scattering (i.e., energy transfer among

modes of different frequency) contribute a large fraction of conductance at high temperature. Since

inelastic processes arise from anharmonicity of interatomic forces, the contribution is also ex-

pected to grow as temperature (and hence atomic displacement) increases, making it relevant to

thermal engineering in applications with high operating temperatures such as high-power electron-
ics.8–10

The seminal models for predicting conductance, the acoustic mismatch model11,12 and dif-
fuse mismatch model (DMM),13,14 only account for elastic transmission processes. Only elastic

processes are expected in a system with harmonic interatomic forces or, alternatively, in an an-

harmonic system under small displacements. Under this assumption, the DMM provides a ﬁrst

approximation for estimating the conductance. Based on comparison with experimental data, the

DMM appears to generally overestimate the conductance between vibrationally well-matched ma-
terials and underestimate the conductance between mismatched materials.15 The degree of match-

ing is often summarized in the ratio of Debye temperatures, θD, and the transition between these
two regimes is observed empirically when θD of the substrate is ∼3–4 times that of the ﬁlm.15

For example, lead and diamond have an extraordinarily high mismatch in vibrational spectra: the
highest-frequency phonons in Pb are ∼2.2 THz, while those in diamond are ∼39.2 THz.16,17 The

expected conductance due only to elastic phonon transmission is correspondingly low, on the or-
der of 2 MW m−2 K−1. However, this underestimates experimental measurements by a full order
of magnitude, with reported values ranging roughly 20–60 MW m−2 K−1.2–4

Several modiﬁcations to the DMM have been proposed to account for inelastic transmission
processes in predictions of conductance.18–22 For example, Hopkins and coworkers proposed two
modiﬁcations to the DMM: the higher harmonic inelastic model (HHIM)20 and the anharmonic

2

inelastic model (AIM)21 which provide expressions for the transmissivities corresponding to n-

phonon processes: ω1 + ω2 + · · · + ωn−1 ↔ ωn, where ω denotes phonon frequency. By compar-

ison an elastic (2-phonon) process would be denoted ω → ω. The HHIM only allows processes

that combine phonons of equal frequency (ω1 = · · · = ωn−1), while the AIM allows the combi-

nation of phonons of arbitrary frequency. Duda and coworkers also proposed a modiﬁcation to

the DMM that incorporates bulk-like scattering near the interface rather than at the interface itself,
which they used to predict an increasing conductance with temperature in the classical limit.22 De-

spite making different assumptions about the details of inelastic processes, these models improve

agreement with conductance measurements to similar degrees, making it difﬁcult to determine

their relative validity.

Several recent works have elucidated the details of inelastic processes and their contributions
to thermal conductance. The theoretical and computational work by S¨a¨askilahti et al.7 showed that

frequency-doubling and -halving processes dominate the inelastic contribution to conductance in
MD simulations, lending support to the assumptions of the HHIM. However, Hohensee et al.4

observed experimentally that the conductance of metal/diamond interfaces depends only weakly

on pressure, from which they inferred that inelastic processes involving two metal phonons of

equal frequency cannot be the dominant contribution to the conductance. Both works observed that

their conclusions may be reconciled by careful consideration of the inelastic processes in the bulk-

like regions near the interface. This precise question was investigated in Refs. 23 and 24. Using
MD, Wu and Luo23 simulated the conductance between one crystal with a monatomic basis and

another crystal with a diatomic basis. They observed that increasing an anharmonic force constant

in the diatomic lattice increased the total conductance dramatically due to increased coupling

between acoustic and optical modes. By contrast, increasing an anharmonic force constant of the

interfacial interaction had no effect on the conductance. This is broadly consistent with our results,

but differs with our observation that the interfacial contribution is signiﬁcant (though smaller than

the bulk contribution). Furthermore, the present results expand on how the relative contributions

change with temperature. A related difference is that size effects were observed, which did not

affect their qualitative conclusions but precluded the quantitative comparison of the contributions

from elastic, bulk inelastic, and interfacial inelastic processes. Nevertheless, we observe the same

general mechanism that Wuo and Luo identiﬁed: inelastic processes contribute to conductance

via the bulk thermalization of modes with low transmissivity. In a different work, Murakami et
al.24 made related conclusions from MD simulations of PbTe/PbS and Si/Ge interfaces, in which

3

they demonstrated the importance of inelastic processes in a broad transition region (TR) rather

than only at the plane of the interface. Inelastic processes in the TR downconvert energy from

high-frequency to low-frequency modes, which then transmit elastically, in agreement with our

observations. However, their analysis did not provide a direct calculation of the separate elastic

and inelastic contributions to conductance, nor the temperature dependence of the contributions,

which will be essential for testing models that correctly incorporate inelastic processes.

Therefore, the goal of the present work is to decompose the thermal conductance at a model

interface into explicit contributions from the harmonic dynamics, the anharmonic effects at the

interface, and the anharmonic effects in the bulk materials. Our model system is a planar interface

between Ar and “heavy Ar,” which has been the prototypical model system for studying these

phenomena. In Sec. II we present calculations of the conductance in the model system with dif-

ferent conﬁgurations of harmonic and anharmonic forces between atoms. The results conﬁrm that

conductance rises with temperature only in the systems with anharmonic forces, which presum-

ably enable inelastic phonon processes. However, at high temperatures, the anharmonicity at the

interface itself appears to contribute less than half of the total conductance in our model system;

the anharmonicity in the bulk materials is responsible for the rest. These observations are cor-

roborated in Sec. III, in which use the wavelet transform to calculate the spectral energy densities

throughout the interfacial systems. Those spectra show that energy reﬂected from the interface

is in strong non-equilibrium, and anharmonicity enables its thermalization, suggesting a mecha-

nism to explain the increase in interfacial conductance. We summarize the ﬁndings in Sec. IV and

comment on their relation to other research on this topic.

II. EFFECT OF LOCAL ANHARMONICITY ON INTERFACIAL THERMAL CONDUCTANCE

In this section, we present calculations of interfacial thermal conductance using non-equilibrium

molecular dynamics (NEMD). Further simulation details are given in Appendix A. As a prototypi-
cal anharmonic potential, we use the Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential ULJ(ri j) = 4ε (cid:2)(σ /ri j)12 − (σ /ri j)6(cid:3)
where ri j is the distance between atoms i and j, ε is the energy scale, and σ is the length scale.

The LJ potential is strongly anharmonic, which induces inelastic phonon processes.

In order

to suppress inelastic phonon processes in certain regions, we replace the LJ potential with its
second-order Taylor expansion about the equilibrium separation req = 21/6σ , Uharmonic(ri j) =
1
2k(ri j − req)2, where k = 36(2)2/3ε/σ 2. In all simulations, atoms interact only with their nearest

4

neighbors. This is a signiﬁcant difference from other MD work. The main reason is that, since the

harmonic potential does not tend to zero as ri j → ∞, it is ill suited to describe the forces of more

distant neighbors. We limit the interactions within both potentials to include nearest neighbors

only so that Uharmonic approximates ULJ in a straightforward manner.

We have calculated the interfacial thermal conductance in systems with four different conﬁgu-

rations of these forces: (a) all LJ, (b) all LJ except with harmonic interactions across the interface,

(c) all harmonic except with LJ interface, and (d) all harmonic. Examples of steady-state tem-

perature proﬁles from all four cases under otherwise identical simulation conditions are shown in

Fig. 1. Each data point represents the average temperature in each bin as described in Appendix A,

and the shaded region indicates the 95% prediction interval for the bin temperatures. We note that

the temperature proﬁles in cases (c) and (d) have effectively zero slope, corresponding to the di-

verging conductivity expected in a material with no phonon–phonon scattering.

In order to calculate the interfacial thermal conductance from each simulation, the temperatures

in the bulk leads are ﬁtted to a linear proﬁle and extrapolated to the interface, which allows the
deﬁnition of the temperature drop ∆T .25 The conductance is then

h =

˙Q
A ∆T

,

(1)

where A is the cross-sectional area and ˙Q is the steady heat current added to the heat source and

removed from the heat sink. Ten such simulations were performed in each system at each tem-

perature with randomized initial velocities to provide independent trials. The mean conductance

values from those trials are plotted in Fig. 2 with error bars indicating 95% conﬁdence intervals.

The conductances in all four systems converge at low temperatures, since displacements are

small and the LJ potential is well approximated by the harmonic potential. As temperature in-

creases, the conductance increases in case (a), as has been observed in MD simulations in previous
work.5–7 The conductance also increases with temperature in cases (b) and (c), although at smaller

rates. In contrast, the conductance in the harmonic case (d) is constant with temperature. These

results are consistent with the hypothesis that, in the classical limit, increasing conductance with

temperature is caused by inelastic processes, which are enabled by anharmonicity. The average
and standard deviation of these values is 24.9 ± 0.8 MW m−2 K−1. Empirically, we note that

adding the “excess” conductance from cases (b) and (c) to the harmonic case (d) at each temper-

ature produces conductance values (gray dashed line) very similar to those obtained in the all-LJ

case (a). This lends support to the notion that the anharmonic contributions from the interface and

5

from the bulk regions are simply additive.

For comparison, we have also calculated the conductance of the harmonic system using atom-
istic Green’s functions (AGF)26 as 21.69 MW m−2 K−1, converged within 0.01 MW m−2 K−1

with respect to wavevector and frequency sampling. Details of this calculation are given in Ap-

pendix B. There is a ∼13% difference between the values obtained by AGF and by harmonic MD.

We attribute the discrepancy to a difference in deﬁnitions of conductance between the two meth-

ods: AGF provides the total conductance between the two reservoirs, while NEMD provides the

conductance at the interface between the leads. In other words, they differ in whether they include

the additional resistance at the contacts with the external baths. Additional evidence is given in

Appendix B to show that the contact resistance is responsible for the discrepancy. For our present

purposes, the AGF calculation corroborates the magnitude of the conductance values from NEMD

in the harmonic system, and provides additional evidence that our results are free of serious size
and edge effects as cautioned in other work.27,28

The key observation from Fig. 2 is that the system consisting of LJ solids joined by harmonic

interfacial forces [case (b)] exhibits a consistently higher conductance than the system of harmonic

solids joined by LJ forces [case (c)]. Moreover, the discrepancy grows with temperature. We

therefore conclude that, in this system, inelastic phonon processes in the bulk materials make a

larger contribution to the conductance than inelastic processes at the interface.

III. ROLE OF BULK INELASTIC SCATTERING

In this section, we present calculations of the energy distributions among the normal modes in

the same NEMD simulations described in the previous section. By comparing the energy distri-

butions, we elucidate the phonon phenomena that are responsible for the differences in conduc-

tance observed in Section II. We use the wavelet transform, which has been applied previously

to analyze the distribution of energy in MD simulations in spatial and spectral domains simul-
taneously.29 To collect the signal to be transformed, we sampled atomic velocities every 40 ns

during the same period in which the temperature proﬁles were collected. We chose to sample nor-

mal modes with wavevector q parallel to the (cid:104)001(cid:105) direction; therefore, we obtained the average

velocity ¯v of atoms in each monolayer (i.e., each (002) plane) to form a one-dimensional signal
wα (z) = (cid:112)m(z)/2 ¯vα (z) corresponding to each Cartesian component α. The wavelet transform
of that signal, ˜w(z(cid:48), q(cid:48)), is then used to calculate a kinetic energy density EK(z, q) as a function of

6

both space and wavenumber. For ease of interpretation, we convert this to an equivalent temper-

ature, Tequiv(z, q); i.e., the temperature of a classical system at thermal equilibrium with an equal

energy density. Details of this calculation are given in Appendix C. In principle, the same proce-

dure can also be used to obtain the spectra of modes in directions other than (001) by sampling the

corresponding planar velocities. However, the geometry of the system introduces complications

in the interpretation of spectra in off-axis directions, so we present spectra along (001) only. For

brevity, we also present only the spectra corresponding to longitudinal polarization; the spectra

corresponding to transverse modes are very similar and lead to the same conclusions.

The resulting kinetic energy densities from six sets of NEMD simulations are plotted in Fig. 3.

To reduce noise, the energy density shown in each panel is obtained from averaging those of ten

identical simulations. Each paired row of panels is taken at the same temperature, increasing from

top to bottom: (a, b) 2 K, (c, d) 26 K, and (e, f) 50 K. In each pair, the left panel is from an all-LJ

system, and the right panel is from an all-harmonic system. As expected, the densities look similar

at low temperature [panels (a) and (b)]. As temperature increases, the distributions diverge.

Interestingly, the energy distribution is in signiﬁcant nonequilibrium on the Ar side in the LJ

system at low temperature [panel (a)] and in the harmonic system at all temperatures [panels (b,

d, f)]. Namely, there is excess energy in the modes with wavenumber above q ≈ 0.4qmax, while

there is a deﬁcit of energy below that threshold. The threshold coincides with the wavenum-

ber of the Ar mode that has the same frequency as the cutoff frequency of heavy Ar, q/qmax =
2π −1 sin−1(mAr/mh-Ar). Therefore, we attribute the nonequilibrium to the fact that, in the har-
monic system and in the low-temperature LJ system, phonons can only transmit elastically at the

interface. High-frequency phonons originating in the Ar are therefore completely reﬂected at the

interface, since there are no available modes of the same frequency in the heavy Ar.

As temperature increases in the LJ system, the atomic displacements increase, and the anhar-

monic forces enable the exchange of energy among modes of different frequency—i.e., the rates of

inelastic processes increase. This leads to thermalization of vibrational energy in the Ar in the se-

quence from panel (a) to (c) to (e): the energy that is conﬁned above q/qmax ≈ 0.4 steadily relaxes

into modes below the threshold. In light of the results of Section II, this thermalization correlates

with a drastic increase in thermal conductance of the interface. We therefore infer that conduc-

tance increases due to an increasing rate of thermalization of excess energy in high-frequency,

non-transmitting modes to low-frequency modes with a high transmission.

The kinetic energy spectra of the remaining two types of systems are shown in Fig. 4: the

7

left panels are from LJ systems with harmonic interfacial forces, and the right panels are from

harmonic systems with LJ interfacial forces.

In other words, the systems differ from those of

Fig. 3 only in the forces at the interface. The energy distributions of corresponding panels look

remarkably similar, which implies that the interfacial forces have only a minor effect on the ther-

malization of modes in the Ar. In particular, we note that the LJ forces at the interface between

harmonic solids only promotes thermalization very weakly if at all. This is associated with a rel-

atively small increase in conductance with temperature in case (c) of Fig. 2, which we attribute to
the bona ﬁde interfacial inelastic phonon processes investigated in detail by S¨a¨askilahti et al.7

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have used classical molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the contributions to in-

terfacial thermal conductance from anharmonic effects at the interface and in the nearby bulk ma-

terials. First, we conﬁrmed that anharmonicity of interatomic forces is responsible for the increase

of conductance with temperature. The results support the physically appealing model that the total

thermal conductance at an interface is the sum of a contribution from elastic phonon transmission

(which is constant in the classical limit) and a contribution from inelastic phonon processes that

increases with temperature. We found that the inelastic part of the conductance can be further

decomposed into contributions from bulk inelastic and interfacial inelastic processes. Between

the two, the contribution from bulk inelastic processes is larger than that from the interface itself,

and this difference grows with temperature. We then used the wavelet transform to obtain kinetic

energy spectra, which demonstrate that the enhancement from bulk anharmonicity is due to an

increased rate of thermalization of energy trapped in non-transmitting modes.

The present conclusions apply strictly to the Ar/heavy-Ar interface, which has been used exten-

sively as a model system for interfacial thermal conductance. There are some aspects that should

be investigated further to extend the ﬁndings to other systems, such as metal/diamond interfaces

that have been measured experimentally. Like most other MD work on this problem, the mate-

rials are much more closely vibrationally matched than, e.g., the Pb/diamond interface; Gordiz

and Henry recently investigated the effects of increasing mismatch explicitly, and showed that

the anharmonic contribution to conductance becomes particularly important at large mismatch in
bonding strength.30 Nevertheless, the present ﬁndings provide important general guidance for the

development of interfacial thermal conductance models that can accurately incorporate inelastic

8

processes. Namely, our results show that it is not sufﬁcient for conductance models to account
only for frequency conversion at the interface, as done e.g. in the HHIM20 and the AIM.21 In

addition, it is necessary to account for the effective increase of incident phonon ﬂux due to rether-

malization of energy in modes with low transmission. New models that incorporate these effects

should be able to take the parameters of the Ar/heavy-Ar system as input and test their predictions

directly against the conductance contributions from elastic, bulk inelastic, and interfacial inelastic

processes provided in this work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

N.Q.L., R.R., and P.M.N. acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the Air Force Ofﬁce of Scien-

tiﬁc Research (FA9550-14-1-0395). C.A.P., J.Z., and A.W.G. acknowledge ﬁnancial support from

NSF-CAREER (QMHP 1028883) and NSF-IDR (CBET 1134311). Computational work was per-

formed using resources of the Advanced Research Computing Services at the University of Vir-

ginia and the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) (DMR130123)

supported by National Science Foundation (ACI-1053575). The authors are also grateful for useful

discussions with C.H. Baker, P.E. Hopkins, and A.J.H. McGaughey.

Appendix A: Ar/heavy Ar simulation details

All molecular dynamics simulations were performed with the LAMMPS code package.31 In

choosing the model system, we sought the simplest system in which one can observe the effect of

anharmonicity on thermal conductance and on phonon transport. A system meeting these criteria,
similar to systems used in past MD studies of interfacial conductance,5,7,25 is a coherent [001]

interface between solid Ar (40 amu) and solid “heavy Ar” (120 amu). In this work, we use the

LJ parameters ε = 0.01617 eV and σ = 3.347 ˚A, which correspond to the harmonic parameters
k = 0.8249 eV ˚A−2 and req = 3.757 ˚A.

These interatomic potentials produce a cubic lattice parameter of 5.313 ˚A at 0 K, compared with
5.311 ˚A extrapolated for Ar from experimental data.32 The potentials produce phonon dispersions
in good agreement with neutron scattering measurements in solid Ar,33 as shown in Fig. 5. The

highest-frequency mode has a vibrational period of 500 fs, based on which we select a timestep of

2 fs. To account for thermal expansion in the systems with LJ forces, simulations were performed

9

to determine the zero-pressure lattice constant as a function of temperature. The simulations pro-

duced values of a(T ) that were ﬁtted to a third-order polynomial function

a(T ) = a0 + a1T + a2T 2 + a3T 3.

(A1)

The ﬁtted coefﬁcients are provided in Table I.

The NEMD simulation domain has dimensions of 10 × 10 × 60 conventional unit cells. The

boundary conditions are periodic in the plane of the interface, approximating the interface be-

tween two slabs of inﬁnite cross section. On each end, two (002) planes are held ﬁxed as walls

(400 atoms), and the temperature of the next twenty (002) planes (4000 atoms) is controlled us-
ing a Langevin thermostat with a time constant of 2.14 ps. S¨a¨askilahti et al.7 determined that

this geometry was sufﬁciently large to avoid size effects in their system. Since (1) the forces in

some of our systems are purely harmonic and (2) our LJ potential is limited to nearest-neighbor

interactions, presumably reducing phonon–phonon scattering even in our anharmonic systems, we

also performed additional simulations to check for size effects. Namely, we ran three series of

simulations with increased cross-section (15 × 15 cells), increased length (90 cells), and decreased

thermostat time constants (1.07 and 0.54 ps) with no statistically signiﬁcant change in conduc-

tance. The conductance from our AGF calculation (Section II and Appendix B) also provides

evidence that any size effects are not severe.

Each simulation began with the atoms in their equilibrium positions and with kinetic energy

equivalent to twice the nominal temperature. For simplicity, the initial atomic velocities were set
to the corresponding uniform magnitude of |v| = (2dkBTnominal/m)1/2 with random orientation.
The simulation then ran for 20 ps in order to reach thermal equilibrium. The thermostats were then

applied at target temperatures of (1 ± 1/10)Tnominal for 4 ns, at which point we conﬁrmed that the

temperature distributions had reached steady state. To determine the temperature distribution, we

divided the atoms into 120 bins along the transport direction, each bin containing one monolayer

(200 atoms). The temperature was sampled in each bin in intervals of 1 ps. Running averages

were stored in memory and written to disk every 40 ps, and those averages were collected for 8 ns,

which provided 200 samples of the temperature in each bin.

Each simulation thus provided a one-dimensional temperature distribution T (z). We used an

established procedure for extracting the thermal conductance at the interface: we ﬁt a linear model

to the temperature proﬁles in the two “bulk-like” regions and extrapolated them to the interface.

We calculated ∆T as the difference between the extrapolated values, from which we calculated

10

the conductance using Eq. (1). This conductance is physically different from the conductance

calculated by atomistic Green’s functions (AGF), since it excludes the small contact resistances

between the two leads and the temperature baths. In Section II we comment that this is the most

likely explanation for the ∼13% discrepancy between the NEMD conductance in the harmonic

system and the AGF conductance. This is supported by re-calculating the NEMD conductance us-

ing the bath temperatures to calculate ∆T rather than the extrapolated temperatures at the interface.

Those data are shown in Fig. 6 (blue circles) in comparison with the conductance calculated in the

usual manner (red crosses) and the AGF value (gray line). The inclusion of the contact resistances

appears to be a plausible explanation for the discrepancy between the methods.

Appendix B: Atomistic Green’s Functions

According to the formalism of atomistic Green’s functions (AGF) in the harmonic limit, the

thermal conductance across a device in between two contacts, each at thermal equilibrium, is
given by34,35

h =

1
2πA

¯hω

∂ N
∂ T

ΓlGΓrG†(cid:111)
(cid:110)

Tr

dω,

(B1)

∞
(cid:90)

0

where A is the cross-sectional area, ¯hω is the phonon energy, N the Bose–Einstein distribution, and

T is the temperature. G is the retarded Green’s function for the dynamical equation of the device,

which describes the response of the device’s degrees of freedom upon an impulse excitation. Γl

(Γr) is the anti-Hermitian part of the left (right) contact self-energy. This quantity is related to the
rate at which phonons leak from the device into the left (right) contact.35 Detailed explanations of
the method and its numerical implementation are available in the literature;34–38 here we discuss

details relevant to the present systems.

To compare the conductances calculated from AGF and classical MD simulations, we take

the classical limit (¯hω (cid:28) kBT ) of Eq. B1. In that limit, the factor ¯hω(∂ N/∂ T ) reduces to the

Boltzmann constant, kB, and the thermal conductance becomes

h =

kB
2πA

∞
(cid:90)

0

ΓlGΓrG†(cid:111)
(cid:110)

Tr

dω.

(B2)

We used AGF to calculate the conductance at the Ar/heavy-Ar interface in the harmonic limit.

The interatomic force constants were calculated from the Taylor expansion of the total energy, and
we veriﬁed that they produce the same spectrum of normal modes. To calculate Tr (cid:8)ΓlGΓrG†(cid:9), we

11

use the transverse symmetry of the system to decompose the problem into a sum of independent
systems in the transverse k-space.39 The transverse Brillouin zone was sampled with a grid of

200 × 200 equally spaced k-points.

Appendix C: The wavelet transform

The wavelet transform ˜w(q, z) of a signal w(z) is an integral transform,

˜w(z(cid:48), q(cid:48)) = W {w(z)} =

(cid:90) ∞

−∞

w(z) ψ ∗

z(cid:48),q(cid:48)(z) dz,

(C1)

where the kernel functions ψz(cid:48),q(cid:48) are wavelets. We use the convention of Baker et al.29 in which
each “daughter wavelet,” corresponding to a speciﬁc location z(cid:48) and wavenumber q(cid:48), is deﬁned as

ψz(cid:48),q(cid:48)(z) = π −1/4

(cid:18) q(cid:48)
q0

(cid:19)1/2

exp (cid:2)iq(cid:48)(z − z(cid:48))(cid:3) ×
(cid:35)

(cid:19)2

(z − z(cid:48))2

(cid:18) q(cid:48)
q0

1
2

(cid:34)

exp

−

.

(C2)

This is a scaled and translated version of a mother wavelet ψz(cid:48),q0 whose dominant wavenumber
is q0. The deﬁnition is normalized so that the energy density per length, per wavenumber is

calculated as

1
Cq0
We use the combination w(z) = (cid:112)m(z)/2 v(z) as the signal to be transformed so that the wavelet

Eψ (z(cid:48), q(cid:48)) =

| ˜w(z(cid:48), q(cid:48))|2.

(C3)

energy density calculated by Eq. (C3) corresponds to the density of kinetic energy per length, per

wavenumber. The constant C accounts for the fact that, unlike the plane waves that form the basis

functions for the Fourier transform, the wavelets are not orthogonal:

C =

(cid:90) ∞

−∞

| ¯ψz(cid:48),q0(q)|2
|q|

dq,

(C4)

(q) is the Fourier spectrum of the mother wavelet. We choose the wavenumber of

where ¯ψz(cid:48),q(cid:48)
the mother wavelet as q0 = 10/a and minimum and maximum wavenumbers corresponding to

0

constants η = 0.05 and φ = 1 as described in Ref. 29. These settings produce energy spectra with

useful information in the range of wavenumbers between qlow ≈ 0.19qmax and qhigh ≈ 0.83qmax,

12

which correspond to the limits on the vertical axes in Figs. 3 and 4. To facilitate interpretation, the

values plotted in those ﬁgures are not E(z, q) itself, but rather the equivalent temperature

Tequiv(z, q) =

2Lz(qhigh − qlow)
kB

E(z, q),

(C5)

where Lz is the system length in the z direction. That is, if a system were at thermal equilibrium

with a uniform energy density of E(z, q), then its temperature would be equal to Tequiv(z, q).

∗ nql6u@virginia.edu; Present Address: US Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375

† pamela@virginia.edu

1 R. J. Stoner, H. J. Maris, T. R. Anthony, and W. F. Banholzer, Physical Review Letters 68, 1563 (1992).

2 R. J. Stoner and H. J. Maris, Physical Review B 48, 16373 (1993).

3 H. K. Lyeo and D. G. Cahill, Physical Review B 73, 144301 (2006).

4 G. T. Hohensee, R. B. Wilson, and D. G. Cahill, Nature Communications 6, 6578 (2015).

5 R. J. Stevens, L. V. Zhigilei, and P. M. Norris, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 50, 3977

(2007).

6 E. S. Landry and A. J. H. McGaughey, Physical Review B 80, 165304 (2009).

7 K. S¨a¨askilahti, J. Oksanen, J. Tulkki, and S. Volz, Physical Review B 90, 134312 (2014).

8 A. Sarua, H. Ji, K. P. Hilton, D. J. Wallis, M. J. Uren, T. Martin, and M. Kuball, IEEE Transactions on

Electron Devices 54, 3152 (2007).

9 J. Kuzm´ık, S. Bychikhin, D. Pogany, C. Gaqui`ere, E. Pichonat, and E. Morvan, Journal of Applied

Physics 101, 054508 (2007).

10 U. K. Mishra, L. Shen, T. E. Kazior, and Y.-F. Wu, Proceedings of the IEEE 96, 287 (2008).

11 I. M. Khalatnikov, Zhurnal Eksperimental’noi i Teoreticheskoi Fiziki 22, 687 (1952).

12 W. A. Little, Canadian Journal of Physics 37, 334 (1959).

13 E. T. Swartz and R. O. Pohl, Applied Physics Letters 51, 2200 (1987).

14 E. T. Swartz and R. O. Pohl, Reviews of Modern Physics 61, 605 (1989).

15 R. J. Stevens, A. N. Smith, and P. M. Norris, Journal of Heat Transfer 127, 315 (2005).

16 B. N. Brockhouse, T. Arase, G. Caglioti, K. R. Rao, and A. D. B. Woods, Physical Review 128, 1099

(1962).

17 J. L. Warren, J. L. Yarnell, G. Dolling, and R. A. Cowley, Physical Review 158, 805 (1967).

13

18 Y. A. Kosevich, Physical Review B 52, 1017 (1995).

19 P. E. Hopkins and P. M. Norris, Nanoscale and Microscale Thermophysical Engineering 11, 247 (2007).

20 P. E. Hopkins, Journal of Applied Physics 106, 013528 (2009).

21 P. E. Hopkins, J. C. Duda, and P. M. Norris, Journal of Heat Transfer 133, 062401 (2011).

22 J. C. Duda, P. M. Norris, and P. E. Hopkins, Journal of Heat Transfer 133, 074501 (2011).

23 X. Wu and T. Luo, Journal of Applied Physics 115, 014901 (2014).

24 T. Murakami, T. Hori, T. Shiga, and J. Shiomi, Applied Physics Express 7, 121801 (2014).

25 T. S. English, J. C. Duda, J. L. Smoyer, D. A. Jordan, P. M. Norris, and L. V. Zhigilei, Physical Review

B 85, 035438 (2012).

26 N. Mingo and L. Yang, Physical Review B 68, 245406 (2003).

27 R. E. Jones, J. C. Duda, X. W. Zhou, C. J. Kimmer, and P. E. Hopkins, Applied Physics Letters 102,

183119 (2013).

28 Z. Liang and P. Keblinski, Physical Review B 90, 075411 (2014).

29 C. H. Baker, D. A. Jordan, and P. M. Norris, Physical Review B 86, 104306 (2012).

30 K. Gordiz and A. Henry, Scientifc Reports 5, 18361 (2015).

31 S. Plimpton, Journal of Computational Physics 117, 1 (1995), code available at lammps.sandia.

gov.

32 O. G. Peterson, D. N. Batchelder, and R. O. Simmons, Physical Review 150, 703 (1966).

33 D. N. Batchelder, M. F. Collins, B. C. G. Haywood, and G. R. Sidey, Journal of Physics C: Solid State

Physics 3, 249 (1970).

34 N. Mingo and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B 68, 245406 (2003).

35 S. Datta, Quantum Transport: Atom to Transistor, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, 2005).

36 W. Zhang, T. S. Fisher, and N. Mingo, Numerical Heat Transfer, Part B: Fundamentals 51, 333 (2007).

37 J.-S. Wang, J. Wang, and J. T. L, The European Physical Journal B 62, 381 (2008).

38 P. E. Hopkins, P. M. Norris, M. S. Tsegaye, and A. W. Ghosh, Journal of Applied Physics 106, 063503

(2009).

39 W. Zhang, T. S. Fisher, and N. Mingo, Journal of Heat Transfer 129, 483 (2006).

14

FIGURES

15

FIG. 1. Steady-state temperature proﬁles in four identical systems except for the anharmonicity of the

interatomic forces. The nominal temperature of these simulations is T = 26 K.

16

     232629 T, K(a) LJ     232629 (b) LJ + harmonic interface     232629 (c) Harmonic + LJ interface-15-7.507.515232629z, nm(d) HarmonicFIG. 2. Thermal boundary conductance as a function of temperature in the same systems as in Fig. 1.

The conductance calculated using atomistic Green’s functions (solid gray) is expected to be similar to the

conductance in the harmonic system. The dashed gray line is the sum of the harmonic conductance of case

(d) with the “excess” conductances from cases (b) and (c).

17

01020304050020406080100120T, Kh,MW m-2K-1AGF(a) LJ(b) LJ + harmonic interface(c) Harmonic + LJ interface(d) HarmonicFIG. 3. Distributions of kinetic energy in longitudinal (cid:104)001(cid:105) modes during the NEMD simulations of

Section II obtained by using the wavelet transform. The interface lies at z = 0 (dashed black), and modes

with q/qmax ≈ 0.4 in Ar (solid red) have the same frequency as the highest-frequency modes in heavy Ar.

The nominal temperature increases from top to bottom: (a, b) 2 K, (c, d) 26 K, and (e, f) 50 K. The left

panels (a, c, e) are calculated from systems with all LJ forces and the right panels (b, d, f) from systems

with all harmonic forces.

18

FIG. 4. The same as Fig. 3, but the left panels (a, c, e) are calculated from LJ systems with harmonic

interfacial forces and the right panels (b, d, f) are from harmonic systems with LJ interfacial forces.

19

FIG. 5. Dispersion of normal modes in simulated argon from lattice dynamics (LD) and from normal mode

decomposition from molecular dynamics simulations (MD) compared with experimental measurements

from Ref. 33.

20

ΓX00.51.01.52.02.5ω/ (2π), THzKΓLLD (0 K)MD (5 K)MD (45 K)Expt. (4 K)FIG. 6. Conductance in the harmonic system calculated from NEMD using the lead temperatures extrap-

olated to the interface (red crosses) and the bath temperatures (blue circles), compared with the prediction

from AGF.

21

010203040501618202224262830T,KAGFh, MW m2 K-1Harmonic, interface onlyHarmonic, interface + contactsTABLES

22

TABLE I. Coefﬁcients for Temperature-Dependent Lattice Parameter of LJ Argon [Eq. (A1)]

Parameter

Fitted Value

a0

a1

a2

a3

5.313 ˚A

1.813 ×10−3 ˚A K−1

4.792 ×10−6 ˚A K−2

1.394 ×10−8 ˚A K−3

23

