Exploring Non-Reversing Magic Mirrors for Screen-Based Augmented
Reality Systems

Felix Bork∗
Technische Universit ¨at M ¨unchen
Munich, Germany

Roghayeh Barmaki†
Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore MD, United States

Ulrich Eck‡
Technische Universit ¨at M ¨unchen
Munich Germany

Pascal Fallavollita§
University of Ottawa
Ottawa Canada

Bernhard Fuerst¶
Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore MD, United States

Nassir Navab(cid:107)
Technische Universit ¨at M ¨unchen, Munich Germany
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore MD, United States

6
1
0
2
c
e
D
7

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
4
5
3
3
0
.
1
1
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Screen-based Augmented Reality (AR) systems can be built as a
window into the real world as often done in mobile AR applications
or using the Magic Mirror metaphor, where users can see them-
selves with augmented graphics on a large display. Such Magic
Mirror systems have been used in digital clothing environments to
create virtual dressing rooms, to teach human anatomy, and for col-
laborative design tasks. The term Magic Mirror implies that the
display shows the users enantiomorph, i.e. the mirror image, such
that the system mimics a real-world physical mirror. However, the
question arises whether one should design a traditional mirror, or
instead display the true mirror image by means of a non-reversing
mirror? This is an intriguing perceptual question, as the image one
observes in a mirror is not a real view, as it would be seen by an ex-
ternal observer, but a reﬂection, i.e. a front-to-back reversed image.
In this paper, we discuss the perceptual differences between these
two mirror visualization concepts and present a ﬁrst comparative
study in the context of Magic Mirror anatomy teaching. We inves-
tigate the ability of users to identify the correct placement of virtual
anatomical structures in our screen-based AR system for two condi-
tions: a regular mirror and a non-reversing mirror setup. The results
of our study indicate that the latter is more suitable for applications
where previously acquired domain-speciﬁc knowledge plays an im-
portant role. The lessons learned open up new research directions
in the ﬁelds of user interfaces and interaction in non-reversing mir-
ror environments and could impact the implementation of general
screen-based AR systems in other domains.

Index Terms: H.5.1 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
Multimedia Information Systems—Artiﬁcial, augmented, and vir-
tual realities; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User
Interfaces—Ergonomics;

1 INTRODUCTION
“Mirror, mirror on the wall...”. Throughout history, people have
always been fascinated by surfaces in which they could see a re-
ﬂection of themselves. From the ﬁrst ancient obsidian fragments,
polished metals, and wealth-reﬂecting status objects of kings and
aristocrats to the nowadays ubiquitous everyday item - mirrors have
undergone a remarkable evolution accompanied by a profound im-
pact on religion, sciences, and arts [24, 21]. Many legends have

∗e-mail:felix.bork@tum.de
†e-mail:rl@jhu.edu
‡e-mail:eck@tum.de
§e-mail:pfallavo@uottawa.ca
¶e-mail:pfallavo@uottawa.ca
(cid:107)e-mail:nassir.navab@tum.de

sprung around mirrors and they are still subject to countless myths,
superstitions, and rituals around the world. According to one of
those, mirrors are “portals to another world or dimension”.

On ﬁrst thought, this might sound like a quote form a science-ﬁction
story. However, Bertamini argues that mirrors are in fact a win-
dow into a completely virtual world [2]. According to him, every-
thing we see inside a mirror is completely virtual, which in a sense
makes a mirror the perfect Virtual Reality (VR) system. Our brain
is tricked into thinking that people or objects we see inside a mir-
ror physically exist. Due to this phenomenon, mirrors have been
the subject of extensive research in the ﬁelds of psychology and
human perception. Especially the well known ’left-right-reversal’
is a characteristic which immediately comes to the mind of most
people when talking about mirrors. Lifting your right hand in front
of a mirror results in your enantiomorph lifting the left hand. Con-
trary to this, a non-reversing mirror presents a view as seen by an
external observer standing in front of the person. Lifting your right
hand now corresponds to your true mirror image also lifting the
right hand.

By means of a video camera and a display device, it is possible to
create a virtual mirror mimicking the properties of a physical mir-
ror. In the ﬁeld of Augmented Reality (AR), such systems are re-
ferred to as Magic Mirrors as soon as virtual graphics are superim-
posed on top of the video image. Magic Mirrors have been success-
fully employed in various disciplines, such as collaborative design
tasks [27], virtual shopping environments [31], and anatomy teach-
ing [7]. Up to now, all these Magic Mirrors have naturally adopted
the mirror metaphor and designed the system to mimic a traditional,
physical mirror. To the best of our knowledge, neither has a non-
reversing Magic Mirror system been published before, nor has work
discussing the perceptual aspects of non-reversing Magic Mirrors.

In this paper, we ﬁll this gap by investigating the perceptual differ-
ences between Magic Mirror and non-reversing Magic Mirror sys-
tems. One prime application area in which a non-reversing Magic
Mirror could be superior to a traditional Magic Mirror is human
anatomy teaching. By learning anatomy from textbooks and pa-
tient examinations, medical students and medical professionals are
primed to having a third-person view onto the anatomy of someone
else. However, they are not used to facing themselves in a mirror.
We designed a preliminary user study consisting of two experiments
to investigate the ability of medical students to identify the cor-
rect placement of virtual, anatomical structures in both a traditional
Magic Mirror and a non-reversing Magic Mirror setup. The results
presented in this paper indicate that in the case of anatomy teaching,
a non-reversing Magic Mirror yields signiﬁcant beneﬁts over a tra-
ditional Magic Mirror. Our results will help designing Magic Mir-
ror systems in other domains, in which previous, domain-speciﬁc
knowledge can be assumed.

In section 2, we discuss related work on mirror perception and pre-

 
 
 
 
 
 
viously proposed Magic Mirror AR systems. Section 3 is dedi-
cated to our user study and provides an overview of our employed
research protocol and investigated conditions. Subsequently, we
present the results of the study in section 4 and discuss their rel-
evance and implications in the context of general non-reversing
Magic Mirror systems.

2 BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK

In order to explore the potential of a non-reversing Magic Mirror
setup for AR applications, we ﬁrst need to understand the percep-
tual phenomena occurring in real-life mirror environments. We re-
viewed the human perception and psychology literature and discuss
how these concepts can be transferred to an AR Magic Mirror con-
text. Furthermore, we analyzed previously proposed Magic Mirror
systems and examine whether instead using a non-reversing mirror
setup would be beneﬁcial with respect to their intended purpose.

2.1 General Mirror Perception

Illusion of explanatory depth is a common phenomenon occurring
in many different areas of our daily life [26]. People have the ten-
dency to overestimate their knowledge of certain procedures or ob-
jects, as demonstrated by Lawson et al. on the example of bicycles
[18]. The same illusion of explanatory depth principle holds true
for mirrors as well. Even though we gaze into them multiple times
a day, most of us do not have an in-depth understanding of what ex-
actly happens on the surface of a mirror. Betamini and Parks have
shown during experiments, that people failed to accurately judge
the size of their enantiomorph’s face, especially with varying dis-
tance from the mirror [5]. In another study, Lawson and Bertamini
provide evidence that people generally expect to see their own mir-
ror image earlier when approaching a covered mirror from the side
[19]. Closely related to this research is the so called Venus effect
[3, 4]. In painting, such as The Robeky Venus by Vel´azquez, it oc-
curs if both a mirror and an actor looking into the mirror are present,
with the reﬂection in the mirror not corresponding to the view of the
actor but the view of the observer of the painting. Most people de-
scribe such a painting as if the actor is looking at her own reﬂection
in the mirror.

All of these misperceptions manifest the simultaneous simplicity
and complexity of mirrors. Especially the questions about why mir-
rors reverse left and right, but not up and down? has been a con-
troversial topic for decades [11, 29, 9, 30]. In mathematical terms,
mirrors reverse across the axis perpendicular to their surface, such
that front and back are reversed, similar to a glove being turned in-
side out. This corresponds to a change of coordinate systems from a
right handed to a left handed one (or vice versa). However, Ittelson
et al. showed that the reversal happens across the axis of greatest
perceived symmetry [14]. Due to the bilateral symmetry of the hu-
man body, this axis coincided with the left-right axis. Therefore,
people tend to believe that their mirror image is formed by a rota-
tion around the vertical (up-down) axis, i.e. by walking around the
mirror to become the virtual self [6, 2]. However, the resulting im-
age is not how a regular enantiomorph looks like, but resembles the
image produced by a non-reversing mirror. Non-reversing mirrors
show the true mirror image and can be built physically by plac-
ing two mirrors perpendicular to each other to form two sides of
an equilateral triangle [32], or as proposed more recently, by com-
bining a multitude of tiny mirrors to form a curved surface, which
directs incoming light rays back to the observers eye such that the
image is horizontally ﬂipped [12].

In AR applications, implementing a virtual non-reversing mirror
is as easy as rearranging the columns of a digital camera image.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no published work has
yet discussed the possibility of employing the non-reversing mirror
paradigm for AR. In the following section, we explore the usage of

mirrors in practice by reviewing previously proposed Magic Mirror
systems in both AR and VR and discussing their potential to apply
the non-reversing mirror paradigm.

2.2 Interactive Mirrors
Magic Mirrors have been widely used in fashion apparel simula-
tions and virtual clothing. Kim and Cheeyoung [17] presented a
fashion coordination prototype that combined user recognition and
the augmentation of face styles, make-up, glasses and dress ﬁt-
ting simulations in a mirror-like image representations. For cos-
metics and grooming, the Smart Makeup Mirror system [15] was
introduced by Iwabuchi and Siio to facilitate and support wearing
make up in form of a virtual dressing table. Two other examples
were published by Rahman et al.
in form of a prototype assist-
ing in the selection of cosmetic products [25], and by Chu et al.
who presented an advanced Magic Mirror jewelry shopping tool
[8]. Another application area for Magic Mirrors are intelligent ﬁt-
ting rooms [36], superimposing virtual garments onto the user, e.g.
shirts [13] or virtual shoes [10]. Zhang et. al presented an archi-
tecture for physical retail ﬁtting rooms [36]. Among all reported
cosmetic and clothing Magic Mirrors, only the Smart Makeup Mir-
ror system [15] implemented both a traditional Magic Mirror and
a non-reversing one as two distinct views of the user. They stated
that professional makeup artists always recommend the to validate a
person’s appearance from the viewpoint of another person standing
in front using a non-reversing mirror. Some scholars used virtual
reality technology for the purpose of medical rehabilitation. Ob-
drzalek et al. [23] presented a real-time pose detection and tracking
system from vision-based 3D data tele-rehabilitation in a virtual
mirror environments. Furthermore, Kallman et al. [16] proposed
a direct motion demonstration system showing an overlapped vir-
tual avatar on a large display screen during rehabilitation exercises.
Since the avatar mirrors the poses of the user in real-time, this sys-
tem could be considered as a Magic Mirror and it uses a similar
approach to that of mirror therapy rehabilitation. Yavuzer et al. in-
vestigated the impact of Mirror Therapy (using a physical mirror
for some upper limb exercises) on upper-extremity motor recovery
inpatients with subacute stroke [34]. Another interesting applica-
tion area for Magic Mirror systems is human anatomy education
and training. Several works have been published before [7, 1, 20].
Learning human anatomy is critical to medical students, but the
learning process itself can be challenging. Students spend countless
hours participating in traditional cadaver labs and studying physical
anatomy models and atlases of anatomy. Such traditional education
practices have changed relatively little in the last few decades, and
while these practices have advantages, they also have signiﬁcant
drawbacks.

In this work, we chose anatomy learning as a sample application.
Left-right confusion is a topic medical students have to deal with
a lot. Infamous errors occurred when e.g.
the wrong kidney was
removed, or a cut was made on the wrong side. Therefore, it is crit-
ical for an AR system to follow medical conventions from textbooks
or other educational resources. This made us choose anatomy ed-
ucation as application for investigating the perceptual differences
between traditional Magic Mirror and non-reversing Magic Mirror
systems.

3 USER STUDY
To investigate the potential of a non-reversing Magic Mirror (NRM)
system and the beneﬁts such a design could provide over a tradi-
tional Magic Mirror (MM), we implemented both of these visu-
alizations in an AR anatomy learning demo application, enabling
the augmentation of 3-dimensional organ models on top of the user
standing in front of the system. We designed a preliminary user
study to compare the performance of medical students in identify-
ing the correct placement of virtual anatomical structures in these

two setups. Two different experiments were conducted: in the ﬁrst
one, the virtual organs were augmented on top of the body of a sec-
ond person facing the participant, creating the familiar patient ex-
amination view. In the second experiment, both the NRM and RM
conditions were presented to the participants, while they could see
their mirror image augmented with virtual organs on the display de-
vice. Throughout our user study, we used ﬁve different organ mod-
els for augmentation: the liver, gallbladder, colon, pancreas, and
stomach. All of these organs can clearly be associated to either the
left or right side of the human body. In the following sections, we
give a detailed overview of our hardware setup and the two exper-
iments conducted during our preliminary user study. Furthermore,
we describe the results of a pilot study preceding our main user
study.

3.1 Hardware Setup

In accordance with all of the previously mentioned AR Magic Mir-
ror systems, the hardware components of our anatomy teaching ap-
plication are a video camera and a large, 60 inch display device. For
the former, we chose the Microsoft Kinect V2 sensor which com-
bines both an RGB and a depth camera in a single housing. The
Kinect was mounted on top of the display device at a height of two
meters facing downwards with an angle of 17 degrees. We posi-
tioned participants 150 cm away from the display device during the
entire time of the user study. For experiment 1, the second person
was positioned on the other side of the display device at the same
distance as the participant. For the purpose of augmenting virtual
organs on top of the user, we employed the Kinect skeleton track-
ing API. During the experiments, participants were asked to decide
whether these organs are displayed on the anatomically correct side
of the body or not. This decision process was controlled by means
of two buttons on a Logitech R400 presenter. A third button on
the bottom was programmed to switch to the next condition dur-
ing the experiments, such that the entire experiment procedure was
controlled by the participant.

3.2 Experiment 1 - See-Through Window

In experiment 1, we used a see-through window (STW) approach
instead of designing a RM or NRM setup. Both the participant and
the second person volunteering in the user study were positioned on
opposite sides of the display device, with the Kinect sensor facing
the volunteer. Using this system setup, participants were presented
with an observatory view known to them from countless patient ex-
aminations and from anatomy textbooks. During the course of the
experiment, the aforementioned ﬁve organs were augmented onto
the body of the volunteer, either on the anatomically correct side or
not. Therefore, two different conditions were subject to investiga-
tion during experiment one:

1. STW-NF: See-Through Window, Organs Not Flipped

2. STW-F: See-Through Window, Organs Flipped

The ﬁrst condition (STW-NF) corresponded to the anatomically
correct placement. This experiment had 10 different conditions (1
(NRM view) ×2 (organs not ﬂipped vs. ﬂipped views) ×5 (organ
types), and two trials or repetitions, such that each participant made
a total of 20 decisions during the experiment 1. We employed a bal-
anced Latin square matrix for randomizing these conditions across
the study participants [33].

The goals of experiment 1 are three-fold: i) making participants fa-
miliar with the entire system and decision procedure; ii) verify that
they have enough anatomical knowledge to successfully participate
in the user study. People who did not manage to answer at least 80%
of the questions correct were excluded from the user study evalua-
tion; and iii) conﬁrming that medical students are comfortable with

the patient examination view from their studies and do not have any
difﬁculties in providing correct answers for this setup.

3.3 Experiment 2 - Non-Reversing vs. Reversing Mirror

After successful completion of the eligibility test in experiment 1,
participants moved over to the main part of the user study in form
of experiment 2. We turned the Kinect sensor back to its original
position to face the participant. The same ﬁve virtual organs were
now augmented onto the participant’s body and he was asked to
choose whether the placement is anatomically correct or not. Four
different conditions were traversed:

1. NRM-NF: Non-Reversing Mirror, Organs Not Flipped

2. NRM-F: Non-Reversing Mirror, Organs Flipped

3. RM-NF: Reversing Mirror, Organs Not Flipped

4. RM-F:

Reversing Mirror, Organs Flipped

Similar to experiment 1, the conditions for which the organs were
ﬂipped (NRM-F & RM-F) corresponded to an anatomically wrong
placement. Experiment 2 had a 2 (NRM vs. RM views) ×2 (organs
not ﬂipped vs. ﬂipped views) ×5 (organ types) within-subjects de-
sign with two trials, leading to 20 different conditions and 40 (20
conditions ×2 trials) total decisions for each participant. Again,
the experiment was fully randomized using a balanced Latin square
matrix. After the participants provided an answer by means of the
hand held presenter, we displayed a black screen and the participant
was asked to continue with the next condition by pressing a button
on the presented. Only after this, the camera image became visible
again. This design choice was made in order to avoid too obvious
switches between the NRM and RM conditions.

The main goal of experiment 2 was to study whether an NRM
provides perceptual beneﬁts over the traditional RM design and
whether these in return yield an increased overall rate of correct
answers. An AR view of all four different conditions is shown in
Fig. 1.

3.4 Pilot Study

We conducted a pilot study (N=4, 1 F) with advanced medical stu-
dents from a surgical clinic of the afﬁliated university. Two of them
were in their fourth medical year ﬁnishing their clinical rotations,
while the other two were juniors. Our goals for the pilot study were
to verify the feasibility of our study protocol, identifying potential
ﬂaws and areas of confusion, and ﬁnally to come up with hypothe-
ses for the subsequent full scale user study.

All participants achieved sufﬁciently high scores in experiment 1,
such that none of them would have been excluded from the statisti-
cal analysis during our main user study. Examining the percentage
of correct answers showed a much better overall performance for
the two NRM conditions. The fourth-year senior participants com-
pletely failed to answer correctly for the RM-condition questions
while the other two (juniors) performed comparably well for both
NRM and RM visualizations. In a post-experiment interview, the
two former participants mentioned that they solely focused on the
location of virtual organs, therefore ignoring the difference between
the NRM and RM conditions completely. Further elaboration about
this observation is reported in the discussion section. Though the
system should be intuitively usable without any introduction, we
decided to improve upon the design of our study protocol by ex-
plicitly introducing the two different views (NRM and MM) to the
participants prior to experiment 2 for the main user study. That way,
we can ensure that all participants understand the two visualizations
and take the current view into consideration when deciding whether
a virtual organ is placed correctly or not.

Based on the ﬁndings during our pilot study, we formulated the fol-
lowing four hypotheses subject to statistical tests in the subsequent
full-scale user study:

H 1. The percentage of correctly identiﬁed virtual organs is
higher for the NRM conditions in comparison to the reg-
ular RM conditions among the medical students with
anatomical pre-knowledge.

H 2. The average decision or response time (in seconds) is
smaller for the NRM conditions compared to the RM con-
ditions for medical students.

H 3. All of the ﬁve augmented organs perform similar in terms
of correct placement identiﬁcation among all the partici-
pants and across the four main conditions of the study.

H 4. The seniority level of participants does have an impact on
the percentage of correctly identiﬁed virtual organs.

Furthermore, we expect the vast majority of participants to prefer
the NRM conditions and to quickly establish the link between these
views and the familiar patient examination and textbook view.

3.5 Main Study

In order to test the hypotheses listed in the previous section, we
recruited 21 medical students (10M, 11F), almost half of which
(N=10) were in their fourth year, while the other half were dis-
tributed equally among the second and third year. We excluded one
male, second-year student from the study who did not manage to
reach an average of at least 80% correct answers in experiment 1.
Therefore, the total number of participants was 20 (9M, 11F and 10
Senior, 10 Junior). None of the pilot study participants took part in
the main user study.

Participants were shown examples of NRM and RM conditions to
familiarize themselves with the system. Furthermore, the previ-
ously discussed improvement to the user study protocol in the form
of explicitly presenting the type of view for both the NRM and RM
conditions was considered in this experiment. Besides these slight
changes, we kept the user study protocol and the hardware setup the
same for experiments 1 and 2.

4 RESULTS

In this section, we calculate the correlations of task completion
times and correct answers with the independent variables of the
user study and report the results. The average percentage of correct
answers in experiment 1 was beyond 90% (STW-NF: 94.5%; STW-
F: 92%), conﬁrming that all participants had sufﬁcient knowledge
about the human anatomy to verify the correct placement of all 5
organs of interest (liver, colon, gallbladder, pancreas, and stomach).
The average of decision times for both of the two conditions in ex-
periment 1 were almost identical (STW-NF: 3.78±2.06 s; STW-F:
3.85±2.07 s), see table 1. On average, participants had shorter de-
cision times for the liver (3.26 s), stomach (3.34 s), and colon (3.45
s), compared to the gallbladder (3.94 s) and pancreas (5.01 s). This
was accompanied by a slightly higher average of correct answers
for the former three organs (liver: 97.5%, stomach & colon: 95%;
pancreas: 90%; gallbladder: 88.75%).

In order to investigate the differences between an NRM and a tradi-
tional RM design in anatomy learning application and to test our
previously formulated hypotheses, we analyzed results obtained
from experiment 2. Figure 2 a) shows the average percentage of
correct answers of all four conditions among participants. There
were large deviations for the RM conditions, compared to very
small deviations for the NRM conditions. The average of correct
answers for both NRM conditions was 92.25% compared to only

75.5% for the two RM conditions. This difference was statistically
signiﬁcant (F1,19 = 10.92, p < .005), see also Fig. 2 a) by com-
paring the two left box-plots with the other two. We chose a sim-
ilar approach for analyzing the average decision times among all
20 participants for experiment 2, summarized in Fig. 3. It shows
that participants were slightly faster in the two NRM conditions
and were relatively slow for the RM-F condition. The mean deci-
sion times were 4.77 s for both NRM conditions and 5.49 s for the
RM conditions. As there was substantial variation in the observa-
tions across participants, the difference was not statistically signif-
icant as revealed in an analysis of variances (F1,19 = 1.56, ns). An
overview of the average of decision times for the 4 individual con-
ditions can be obtained from table 1. Comparing the percentage of

Figure 3: Comparison of average decision times from experiment 2
for the 4 underlying conditions.

correct answers for each of the 5 different organs among all partici-
pants revealed comparable numbers to those of experiment 1. In the
NRM conditions, the pancreas was the best performing organ (97.5
% correct answers), followed by the liver (93.75 %), colon and gall-
bladder (91.25 %), and the stomach (88.75 %). Overall results for
the RM conditions were worse. Especially the stomach was iden-
tiﬁed as correctly placed only in 65 % of all cases. The other per-
centages were: liver (75 %), gallbladder & pancreas (78.75 %), and
the colon (80 %).

Lastly, we examined whether the seniority level of participants af-
fects the outcome of the user study. We split all participants into
two groups: To the ﬁrst group, hereafter referred to as the junior
group, all medical students in their second or third year were as-
signed. Consequently, all fourth year medical students formed the
senior group. The two groups were balanced and both contained 10
participants. For correct answer percentages, we observed an inter-
esting difference among juniors and seniors. Juniors performed sig-
niﬁcantly better for the RM conditions than seniors (F1,18 = 5.09,
p < .05). Furthermore, the decision response time was not strongly
correlated with seniority for all four conditions (F1,18 = 0.98, ns).
Figures 2 b) and 2 c) illustrate these results graphically.

Following the user study, we conducted post-experiment interviews
with all participants. Three users responded that they did not have
any trouble identifying correct placements of virtual organs in both
the NRM and RM conditions. Uniformly, all the others stated that
the NRM conditions were more intuitive while the RM conditions
required more mental workload.

5 DISCUSSION & FUTURE WORK
Our results show that an NRM provides clear beneﬁts over a regular
RM design in the area of anatomy teaching. Participants performed

NRM-FNRM-NFRM-FRM-NF024681012141618avg. decision times in secondsTable 1: Comparison of average correct answers and decision times among all 20 participants for all conditions of experiment 1 and 2. The NRM
conditions provide a higher overall average of correct answers with slightly smaller decision times compared to the RM conditions. Conditions
where organs were ﬂipped correspond to anatomically incorrect organ placements.

Conditions

Avg. Correct Answers

Avg. Decision Times

(STW-NF) See-Through Window, Organs Not Flipped

(STW-F)

See-Through Window, Organs Flipped

(NRM-NF) Non-Reversing Mirror, Organs Not Flipped

(NRM-F) Non-Reversing Mirror, Organs Flipped

(RM-NF) Reversing Mirror, Organs Not Flipped

(RM-F)

Reversing Mirror, Organs Flipped

Mean µ

94.50%

92.00%

92.50%

92.00%

74.00%

77.00%

SD σ

9.46%

12.40%

10.20%

12.40%

27.41%

27.16%

Mean µ

3.78 s

3.85 s

4.50 s

5.03 s

5.29 s

5.70 s

SD σ

2.06 s

2.07 s

1.77 s

2.57 s

3.39 s

3.39 s

signiﬁcantly better in identifying the correct placement of virtual
anatomical structures when their true mirror image was shown in
form of a NRM, therefore conﬁrming hypothesis 1. The average of
correct answers for the NRM conditions in experiments 2 were even
comparable to the see-through window conditions of experiment
1, which resembled a patient examination and textbook anatomy
view medical students are primed to. These results also demon-
strate the potential of an AR anatomy teaching system following
the NRM paradigm. Medical students are capable of quickly adapt-
ing to such a view, which could be due to the mere-exposure effect
[35, 22], a psychological phenomenon by which a person develops
a strong preference for a certain stimulus through continuous expo-
sure. Therefore, a RM visualization is not consistent with what they
usually observe. Another interesting usage scenario are student-
teacher interactions. Assuming a teacher is explaining anatomy
to students by means of his own body in front of a Magic Mirror
AR system, the students can develop a much better understanding
of the anatomy and link it to their previously acquired knowledge
from textbooks with an NRM system. Regarding hypothesis 2, av-
erage decision times among participants were also slightly smaller
for the NRM, though we did not observe signiﬁcant differences.
Throughout the user study, ﬁve different virtual organs were tra-
versed for the different conditions. Our statistical analysis did not
reveal signiﬁcant differences between these organs, showing that
overall results were not inﬂuenced by one organ performing better
or worse compared to the others. Hence, we could conﬁrm hy-
pothesis 3. Lastly, we had to reject hypothesis 4, as senior par-
ticipants performed signiﬁcantly worse for the RM conditions than
junior participants. These results could also be related to the pre-
viously discussed mere-exposure effect, as senior medical students
have been exposed to the NRM view throughout their studies and
multiple patient examinations. In future work, we plan to measure
the impact of participants’ visuo-spatial reasoning skills on both the
percentage of correct answers and decision times. Performance dur-
ing mental rotation tests such as the one proposed by Shepard and
Metzlar could be correlated to how well participants perform in our
user study [28]. Especially in the ﬁeld of radiology and orthopedics,
spatial ability is important as x-ray images or entire CT and MRI
volumes have to be mentally processed and rotated to match the
patient. Participants from such disciplines would be an interesting
control group for a follow-up user study. Furthermore, the develop-
ment of guidelines for the design of NRM systems for screen-based
AR is part of our future research. Now that the potential of NRM
designs for screen-based AR application in the ﬁeld of anatomy

learning has been demonstrated, it is intriguing to discuss the conse-
quences those results have on other ﬁelds of AR research. One that
immediately comes to mind is interaction. In our user study, we did
not test for interaction differences as participants made decisions by
means of a hand held presenter. Designing user interfaces for NRM
systems should take the reversed interaction into consideration. An-
other alluring topic to discuss is whether the results from our user
study can be transferred to other disciplines. Our chosen scenario
was special in a sense that although RM systems have been applied
previously in anatomy learning environments, a mirror view is not
the most natural way to present anatomy data. In a shopping envi-
ronment for example, people are accustomed to examining clothes
in a mirror. We believe that NRM systems should be considered in
scenarios where directions (i.e. left and right) are of crucial impor-
tance and for which domain-speciﬁc pre-knowledge and the mere-
exposure effect play an important role.

6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have explored the potential of non-reversing Magic
Mirror systems in the context of anatomy learning and discussed
perceptual beneﬁts such a design could privde over traditional re-
versing Magic Mirror systems. While the latter present a virtual
enantiomorph to the user, a non-reversing Magic Mirror shows the
true mirror image of a person standing in front of the system, such
that left and right are not reversed.

We conducted a ﬁrst preliminary user study comparing both visu-
alizations to each other. Non-reversing mirrors proved to be the
more natural choice for the task of identifying the correct placement
of virtual organs. Medical students achieved higher percentages of
correct answers while simultaneously needing less time for their de-
cision. This coincided with participants qualitative opinions, who
found that the non-reversing Mirror visualization is a much better
ﬁt for the context of AR anatomy learning. In this work we have
shown that it is important for application designers to consider the
intent of their application and the type of users before deciding on
the type of mirror visualization for their system. Previously ac-
quired domain knowledge, as in the case of anatomy learning, as
well as the mere-exposure effect, can make a non-reversing Magic
Mirror design the better choice for screen-based AR applications.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Anna-Maria von der Heide, Severine Habert, and
Alexander Keppler for their help during the user study de-

tem for decision support in cosmetic products selection. In Distributed
Simulation and Real Time Applications (DS-RT), 2010 IEEE/ACM
14th International Symposium on, pages 203–206. IEEE, 2010.
[26] L. Rozenblit and F. Keil. The misunderstood limits of folk science:
An illusion of explanatory depth. Cog. science, 26(5):521–562, 2002.
[27] D. Saakes, H.-S. Yeo, S.-T. Noh, G. Han, and W. Woo. Mirror mirror:
An on-body t-shirt design system. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 6058–
6063. ACM, 2016.

[28] S. Shepard and D. Metzler. Mental rotation: effects of dimensional-
ity of objects and type of task. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 14(1):3, 1988.

[29] Y. Takano. Why does a mirror image look left-right reversed? A
hypothesis of multiple processes. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
5(1):37–55, 1998.

[30] Y. Takano. Mirror reversal of slanted objects: A psycho-optic expla-

nation. Philosophical Psychology, 28(2):240–259, 2015.

[31] L. Wang, R. Villamil, S. Samarasekera, and R. Kumar. Magic mirror:
A virtual handbag shopping system. IEEE Computer Society Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pages
19–24, 2012.

[32] W. Watson. Non-reversing mirror device with perceived depth per-

spective, Apr. 8 1986. US Patent 4,580,880.

[33] E. Williams. Experimental designs balanced for the estimation of
Australian Journal of Chemistry,

residual effects of treatments.
2(2):149–168, 1949.

[34] G. Yavuzer, R. Selles, N. Sezer, S. S¨utbeyaz, J. B. Bussmann,
F. K¨oseo˘glu, M. B. Atay, and H. J. Stam. Mirror therapy improves
hand function in subacute stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Arch.
of phys. medicine and rehabilitation, 89(3):393–398, 2008.

[35] R. B. Zajonc. Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of Exper-

imental Social Psychology, 7(4):461–472, 1971.

[36] W. Zhang, T. Matsumoto, J. Liu, M. Chu, and B. Begole. An intel-
ligent ﬁtting room using multi-camera perception. In Proceedings of
the 13th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, pages
60–69. ACM, 2008.

sign and execution.
http://www.plasticboy.co.uk.

Anatomy models were obtained from

REFERENCES

[1] A. Bauer, A.-H. Dicko, O. Palombi, F. Faure, and J. Troccaz. Liv-
In SA’15

ing book of anatomy project: See your insides in motion!
Emerging Technologies, November 02-06, 2015, Kobe, Japan, 2015.
[2] M. Bertamini. Mirrors and the mind. Psychologist, 23(2):112, 2010.
[3] M. Bertamini, R. Latto, and A. Spooner. The venus effect: Peo-
ple’s understanding of mirror reﬂections in paintings. Perception,
32(5):593–599, 2003.

[4] M. Bertamini, R. Lawson, L. Jones, and M. Winters. The venus ef-
fect in real life and in photographs. Attention, Perception, & Psy-
chophysics, 72(7):1948–1964, 2010.

[5] M. Bertamini and T. E. Parks. On what people know about images on

mirrors. Cognition, 98(1):85–104, 2005.

[6] M. Bertamini, A. Spooner, and H. Hecht. Naive optics: Predicting and
perceiving reﬂections in mirrors. Journal of experimental psychology.
Human perception and performance, 29(5):982–1002, 2003.

[7] T. Blum, V. Kleeberger, C. Bichlmeier, and N. Navab. mirracle: An
augmented reality magic mirror system for anatomy education. 2012
IEEE Virtual Reality (VR), pages 115–116, mar 2012.

[8] M. Chu, B. Dalal, A. Walendowski, and B. Begole. Countertop re-
sponsive mirror: supporting physical retail shopping for sellers, buy-
ers and companions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems, pages 2533–2542. ACM, 2010.

[9] C. Corballis. Much ado about mirrors michael. Psychonomic Bulletin

& Review, 7(1):163–169, 2000.

[10] P. Eisert, P. Fechteler, and J. Rurainsky. 3-d tracking of shoes for vir-
tual mirror applications. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2008. CVPR 2008. IEEE Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2008.
[11] R. L. Gregory. Mirrors in mind. Penguin Harmondsworth, UK, 1998.
[12] R. A. Hicks. Wide angle substantially non-distorting mirror, May 15

2012. US Patent 8,180,606.

[13] A. Hilsmann and P. Eisert. Tracking and retexturing cloth for real-
In International Conference on
time virtual clothing applications.
Computer Vision/Computer Graphics Collaboration Techniques and
Applications, pages 94–105. Springer, 2009.

[14] W. H. Ittelson, L. Mowafy, and D. Magid. The perception of mirror-

reﬂected objects. 20(August 1990):567–584, 1991.

[15] E. Iwabuchi, M. Nakagawa, and I. Siio.

Smart makeup mirror:
In Interna-
computer-augmented mirror to aid makeup application.
tional Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, pages 495–503.
Springer, 2009.

[16] M. Kallmann, C. Camporesi, and J. Han. Vr-assisted physical reha-
bilitation: Adapting to the needs of therapists and patients. In Virtual
Realities, pages 147–168. Springer, 2015.

[17] M. Kim and K. Cheeyong. Augmented reality fashion apparel sim-
ulation using a magic mirror. International Journal of Smart Home,
9(2):169–178, 2015.

[18] R. Lawson. The science of cycology: Failures to understand how
everyday objects work. Memory & cognition, 34(8):1667–1675, 2006.
[19] R. Lawson and M. Bertamini. Errors in judging information about

reﬂections in mirrors. Perception, 35(9):1265–1288, 2006.

[20] M. MA, P. Jutzi, F. Bork, I. Seelbach, A. M. Von der Heide, N. Navab,
and P. Fallavollita. Interactive mixed reality for muscle structure and
function learning. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference,
MIAR 2016, Bern Switzerland, August 24-26, pages 117–128, 2016.

[21] S. Melchior-Bonnet and K. H. Jewett. The mirror: A history. Psychol-

ogy Press, 2002.

[22] T. H. Mita, M. Dermer, and J. Knight. Reversed facial images and
the mere-exposure hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 35(8):597–601, 1977.

[23] S. Obdrˇz´alek, G. Kurillo, J. Han, T. Abresch, and R. Bajcsy. Real-time
human pose detection and tracking for tele-rehabilitation in virtual re-
ality. Studies in health technology and informatics, 173:320, 2012.

[24] M. Pendergrast. Mirror mirror: a history of the human love affair with

reﬂection. Basic Books, 2009.

[25] A. M. Rahman, T. T. Tran, S. A. Hossain, and A. El Saddik. Aug-
mented rendering of makeup features in a smart interactive mirror sys-

Figure 1: Comparison of the four different user study conditions: a) NRM-NF, b) NRM-F, c) RM-NF, d) RM-F. The participant is lifting the right
hand and chooses by means of a pointer device whether the presented augmentation is anatomically correct. For the anatomically correct
conditions a) and c), the liver is augmented on the right side of the body.

Figure 2: Comparison of average correct answers given for the task of identifying virtual organs superimposed on the participants bodies for the
two NRM and two RM conditions for a) all participants, b) junior participants, and c) senior participants.

