6
1
0
2

c
e
D
4

]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
8
0
1
1
0
.
2
1
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Aspect ratio eﬀect on particle transport in turbulent duct ﬂows

A. Noorani, R. Vinuesa, L. Brandt, and P. Schlattera)
Swedish e-Science Research Centre (SeRC) and Linn´e FLOW Centre, KTH Mechanics,
SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden

(Dated: 20 October 2018)

The dynamics of dilute micron-sized spherical inertial particles in turbulent duct ﬂows is studied
by means of direct numerical simulations of the carrier phase turbulence with one-way coupled La-
grangian particles. The geometries are a square and a rectangular duct with width-to-height aspect
ratio AR of 3 operating at Reτ,c = 360 (based on the centerplane friction velocity and duct half-
height). The present study is designed to determine the eﬀect of turbulence-driven secondary motion
on the particle dynamics. Our results show that a weak cross-ﬂow secondary motion signiﬁcantly
changes the cross-sectional map of the particle concentration, mean velocity and ﬂuctuations. As
the geometry of the duct is widened from AR = 1 to 3, the secondary vortex on the horizontal wall
signiﬁcantly expands in the spanwise direction, and although the kinetic energy of the secondary
ﬂow increases close to the corner, it decays towards the duct centreplane in the AR = 3 case so
as the turbulent carrier phase approaches the behavior in spanwise-periodic channel ﬂows, a fact
that signiﬁcantly aﬀects the particle statistics. In the square duct the particle concentration in the
viscous sublayer is maximum at the duct centreplane, whereas the maximum is found closer to the
corner, at a distance of |z/h| ≈ 1.25 from the centreplane, in the AR = 3 case. Interestingly the
centreplane concentration in the rectangular duct is around 3 times lower than that in the square
duct. Moreover, a second peak in the accumulation distribution is found right at the corners for
both ducts. At this location the concentration increases with particle inertia. The secondary mo-
tion changes also the cross-stream map of the particle velocities signiﬁcantly in comparison to the
ﬂuid ﬂow statistics. These directly aﬀect the particle velocity ﬂuctuations such that multiple peaks
appear near the duct walls for the particle streamwise and wall-normal velocity ﬂuctuations.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The transport of micron-sized inertial particles in turbulent wall-bounded ﬂows has a wide range of in-
dustrial, environmental and biological applications. Droplets suspended in turbulent ﬂow in an engine
combustion chamber or pollen particles transported by the atmospheric boundary layer are some typical
examples. These particle-laden ﬂows are mainly characterised by two speciﬁc phenomena: preferential ac-
cumulation or small-scale clustering and turbophoresis. In the latter, heavy particles accumulate near the
wall due to the gradients in the turbulent kinetic energy proﬁle,1,2 while in the former, heavier-than-ﬂuid
particles aggregate in regions characterised by higher values of the turbulent kinetic energy dissipation rate
and zero acceleration. Turbophoresis occurs in wall-dominated turbulence; however, preferential accumu-
lation appears in both homogeneous and inhomogeneous particle-laden turbulent ﬂows (see for instance
Balachandar and Eaton 3 or Toschi and Bodenschatz 4 for a review).

In the context of wall-bounded ﬂows, particle dispersion has been mainly studied in canonical ﬂows
(channels, pipes and boundary layers) despite the fact that internal ﬂows relevant to industrial applica-
tions often contain parts with geometrical complexities which promotes complex ﬂow phenomena such as
secondary ﬂows, separation, etc. It is therefore fundamental to investigate the particulate phase behaviour
in more complex non-canonical geometries where a slight modiﬁcation of the characteristics of the ﬂow can
induce a signiﬁcant change in the vortical structures and consequently in particle clustering and near-wall
turbophoresis.

Among the principal mechanisms driving secondary motions the lateral curvature of the main ﬂow and the
gradients of the Reynolds stresses are the most common. The former is generally found in arched geometries
where the imbalance between the cross-stream pressure gradient and centrifugal forces causes a secondary
motion. This skew-induced cross-ﬂow motion (due to an inviscid process) is usually referred to as Prandtl’s
secondary motion of ﬁrst kind. In the latter mechanism mean streamwise vortices are formed as a result

a)Electronic mail: pschlatt@mech.kth.se

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

of the local variation of Reynolds stresses. These are known as Prandtl’s secondary motion of second kind
(or stress-induced vortices) and are observed in, for instance, turbulent ﬂows through straight ducts with
noncircular cross-section.5 The eﬀect of the geometry-induced centrifugal forces on particle dynamics was
recently addressed by Noorani et al.,6,7 who performed direct numerical simulations (DNS) of particle-laden
turbulent ﬂow in straight, mildly curved and strongly bent pipes.

The focus of the present paper is therefore on the eﬀect of turbulence-driven secondary motion on particle
dynamics in turbulent duct ﬂows with diﬀerent width-to-height aspect ratios. The in-plane ﬂow in turbulent
ducts consists of four pairs of counter-rotating vortices (one on each quadrant of the duct). The magnitude
of this cross-ﬂow motion only amounts to around 2 − 3% of the bulk velocity ub, and its eﬀect on particle
transport is usually ignored in practical applications. The objective of the current study is to carefully
quantify the impact of such small in-plane ﬂow on the transport and dynamics of micron-sized heavy inertial
solid spherical particles, which turns out to be signiﬁcant.

The turbulent carrier phase through a square duct has been analysed in a number of numerical and
experimental studies, which are reviewed in Vinuesa et al. 8,9 Limited number of studies also analysed the
dispersion and deposition of heavy inertial particles in a turbulent square duct. Winkler et al. 10 studied the
preferential concentration of inertial point particles in a downward square duct using large-eddy simulation
(LES) of the ﬂuid ﬂow at Reτ = 180 (Reτ is deﬁned in terms of the duct half-height h and the mean friction
velocity uτ ). They assessed the usefulness of diﬀerent vortex identiﬁcation methods for analysing preferential
accumulation of particles in four locations within the square duct cross-section. These authors also used the
same geometry to study the wall-deposition of particles in various locations of the duct.11 They reported
that deposition is least likely in the duct corner and most likely in the duct centre. The role of the secondary
ﬂows in the mixing and dispersion of one-way coupled inertial point particles in a turbulent square duct
ﬂow at Reτ = 180 was investigated by Sharma and Phares 12 and Phares and Sharma.13 Analysing statistics
of single-particle and particle-pair dispersion, it was found that lateral mixing is increased for low-inertia
particles due to the outward advective transport absent in the canonical straight pipe and channels ﬂows.
Heavy inertial particles accumulate close to the wall, and tend to mix more eﬃciently in the streamwise
direction due to the fact that a large number of the particles spend more time in a region where the mean
ﬂuid velocity is smaller than the bulk ﬂow. Yao and Fairweather 14 studied particle re-suspension in a
turbulent square duct ﬂow by means of LES and Lagrangian particle tracking (LPT) of one-way coupled
inertial particles. They reported that turbulence-driven secondary ﬂows within the duct play an important
role in the re-suspension process of particles. These authors also analysed the particle deposition under
the same condition and their result conﬁrmed the previous ﬁndings of Winkler et al. 11 and Sharma and
Phares.12 Recently Zhang et al. 15 investigated the eﬀect of collisions on the particle deposition in turbulent
square duct ﬂows. This group suggested that the inter-particle collisions increase the particle diﬀusion in
the wall-normal direction, which makes the particles distribution more uniform close to the wall.

The ﬂow through a rectangular duct of aspect ratio AR = W/H (where W is the total duct width and H
is the duct full height) adds an additional degree of complexity to the physics of wall-bounded turbulence,
since the corner bisector symmetry is lost, which signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the secondary ﬂow pattern. It is
known from studies on the carrier phase that the ﬂow characteristics near the duct centerplane approach
those of canonical spanwise-periodic turbulent channels when the aspect ratio increases. The response of the
particulate phase dynamics to such changes in the aspect ratio of the duct has not been explored yet. The
aim of this study is then to evaluate the Eulerian statistics of dispersed inertial micro-particles in square
and non-square ducts and analyse the changes in solid phase dynamics when the duct becomes wider and
approaches a canonical channel ﬂow in the centerplane. To the authors’ knowledge there are no studies
in the literature regarding inertial point particles in non-square duct geometries, which makes the present
in §II we
study a ﬁrst work to characterise the particle behaviour. The paper is organised as follows:
introduce computational methodology for the DNS and LPT which will be followed by a discussion of the
basic ﬂow features in §III A. The results and analysis of particulate phase data are presented in §III B.
Finally, concluding remarks are given in §IV.

II. COMPUTATIONAL METHODOLOGY

A. Flow conﬁguration and governing equations

In the present study we consider two duct-ﬂow cases: a square duct (AR = 1), and a rectangular duct
with aspect ratio 3. The x coordinate denotes streamwise direction while y and z the vertical and spanwise

3

wall-normal directions. The corresponding ﬂow velocity components are ux, uy and uz. The streamwise
length of the computational domain was chosen to be Lx = 25h in both cases. This length is long enough to
capture the longest streamwise turbulent structures according to the pipe ﬂow experiments by Guala et al. 16
and the DNSs of turbulent channel ﬂows by Jim´enez and Hoyas 17. The same length was considered in our
previous DNSs of straight pipe18, curved pipe19 and duct8,9 ﬂows. Note that the ﬂow is assumed to be fully-
developed in the streamwise direction, and therefore periodicity is imposed in x. No-slip and no-penetration
conditions are imposed at the four walls of the duct. The duct full height (H) is chosen to be 2h in the
two cases, the length of the side walls (vertical walls). The duct width (W ) is adjusted according to the
aspect ratio under consideration. The dimension of the horizontal walls (bottom/top plates) is, therefore,
2h × AR. In this paper the vertical plane of symmetry is the horizontal wall bisector or duct centerplane
(z/h = 0), and the horizontal plane of symmetry indicates the vertical (side) wall bisector (y/h = 0) in
the rectangular geometry. In addition, a well-resolved channel ﬂow DNS (with streamwise and spanwise
periodicity) is performed in a standard domain of dimensions 25h × 2h × 10h, with the same Cartesian
coordinates as the ducts.

For the carrier phase, the nondimensional incompressible Navier–Stokes equations,

∇ · u = 0,

∂u
∂t

+ (u · ∇) u = −∇p +

1
Reb

∇2u,

(1)

(2)

are integrated in time, where p is the pressure, u is the carrier phase velocity vector and Reb = ubh/ν is the
bulk Reynolds number, with ν and ub as the ﬂuid kinematic viscosity and total bulk velocity in the duct
cross-section.

B. Numerical approach for the carrier phase

The spectral element code nek5000, developed by Fischer et al. 20 at the Argonne National Laboratory
(ANL), is used in the present work to perform DNS of the two duct ﬂows. This massively parallelised code is
based on the spectral-element method (SEM), originally proposed by Patera,21 in which the incompressible
Navier–Stokes equations are discretised in space by means of the Galerkin approximation. In this study
we considered the PN − PN −2 formulation by Maday and Patera,22 where the velocity is represented by
Lagrange polynomials of order N , and the pressure by polynomials two degrees lower. The domain is
divided into a number of hexahedral local spectral elements within which the solution is represented by the
previously mentioned polynomials at the Gauss–Lobatto–Legendre (GLL) quadrature points. As concerns
time integration, the nonlinear terms are treated explicitly by third-order extrapolation (EXT3), whereas
the viscous terms are treated implicitly by a third-order backward diﬀerentiation scheme (BFD3) leading
to a linear symmetric Stokes system for the basis coeﬃcient vectors un and pn to be solved at every time
step. To solve the ﬁnal problem, velocity and pressure are decoupled and solved iteratively using conjugate
gradient and the generalised minimal residual (GMRES) method.

In order to simulate the ﬂow, spectral elements were distributed uniformly along x, and the spacing was
chosen so that ∆x+
max < 10. Here ‘+’ denotes scaling with either the viscous length (cid:96)∗ = ν/uτ,c, or the
friction velocity uτ,c. Note that for the duct cases the viscous scaling is based on the friction velocity in
the duct centerplane uτ,c. The mesh in the inhomogeneous directions was designed so that the maximum
spacing ∆y+
max was below 5 viscous units; moreover, we have 4 grid points below y+ = 1, and 15 grid points
below y+ = 10. The spectral elements followed a Gauss–Lobatto–Chebyshev distribution close to the wall
and they were uniformly distributed in the core region. The two distributions were blended respecting the
two previous restrictions. In the channel ﬂow simulation the spectral elements were uniformly distributed
in the spanwise direction, and the spacing was such that ∆z+
max < 5. A summary of the details of the
simulations, including number of spectral elements and grid-points, as well as mesh resolutions, is provided
in table I.

The carrier phase simulation procedure in terms of ﬂow initialisation, tripping method and statistics is
similar to the one described in Vinuesa et al. 8 As in the work by Vinuesa et al.,8 we ﬁx the conditions
at the duct centreplane for increasing aspect ratios, so that it is possible to assess the eﬀect of secondary
ﬂow and side-wall boundary layers on the ﬂow in comparison to the corresponding channel data. Table II
summarises the characteristics of both duct cases and the channel ﬂow simulation.

AR # elements # grid points
122.4 × 106
326.5 × 106
505.0 × 106

70 848
1
3
188 928
∞ 292 248

∆x+

∆y+

∆z+

(1.99, 9.91) (0.15, 4.67) (0.15, 4.67)
(2.03, 10.07) (0.16, 4.75) (0.16, 4.96)
(2.01, 9.98) (0.15, 4.12) (0.98, 4.87)

TABLE I. Details of the present turbulent duct ﬂow simulations. The channel ﬂow simulation is denoted by AR → ∞.

4

AR Reb,c Reb Reτ,c Reτ Averaging time frame
6253 5693 357 342
1
6273 5817 363 336
3
∞ 6240 6240 360 360

3000
3000
2200

TABLE II. Simulation parameters of the present study. While Reb = ubh/ν (ub being the total bulk velocity
per cross-section), Reb,c is deﬁned as ub,ch/ν at the centreplane of the ducts where ub,c is the mean velocity (at
z/h = 0). The non-dimensional friction Reynolds number Reτ is deﬁned as huτ /ν where the mean friction velocity
uτ is averaged over all the walls. The same variable in the centreplane of the duct is deﬁned as Reτ,c = huτ,c/ν
where uτ,c is the friction velocity of the wall bisector (horizontal wall bisector in the case of rectangular duct). The
channel case is denoted with AR → ∞. The time t is normalised by h/ub.

C. Numerical approach for the particulate phase

In the current research we are concerned with low volume fractions of spherical micro-size dilute heavier-
than-ﬂuid particles which are assumed to be smaller than the smallest spatial scales of the ﬂow. The
particulate phase is then described as point particles without considering feedback on the ﬂow or inter-
particle collisions (i.e. one-way coupled). Considering large enough density ratios (ρp/ρf ∼ 103; ρp and ρf
being the particle and ﬂuid density) the particles are only subjected to the non-linear Stokes drag. For the
current investigation, the eﬀect of gravitational acceleration is neglected to allow isolation of the eﬀect of
the turbulence-driven secondary cells on the particle behaviour. Hence the particle equations of motion read

dvp
dt
dxp
dt

=

u(xp, t) − vp
Stb

f (Rep),

= vp,

(3)

(4)

where xp is the particle position, vp and u(xp, t) the particle velocity and the ﬂuid velocity at the particle
position. Equation (3) expresses the particle acceleration (ap) according to the steady-state aerodynamic
drag acting on the spherical solid particle in a uniform velocity ﬁeld. The non-linear correction term f (Rep)
is due to the ﬁnite particle Reynolds number23 and is expressed as (1 + 0.15Re0.687
). The instantaneous
particle Reynolds number Rep is deﬁned as |vp − u(xp, t)|dp/ν. The bulk Stokes number Stb is given as
the ratio of particle relaxation time τp to the bulk ﬂow residence time (tb = h/ub). The particle relaxation
time τp = ρpd2
p/(18ρf ν) where dp is the particle diameter and ﬁnally the Stokes number in terms of viscous
time-scale may be given as St+ = τpu2

p

τ /ν.

The ﬂuid velocity at the particle position is evaluated using a spectrally-accurate interpolation scheme
with an order of accuracy equal to the one of the spectral element method, i.e., N = 11 in the current
simulations. The time integration was performed using the classical 3rd order multistep Adams–Bashforth
(AB3 ) scheme. As for the carrier phase solver, the time step (∆t) is ﬁxed such that the Courant–Friedrichs–
Lewy (CF L) condition is always below 0.5, and the particle time step ∆t is set to be equal to that of the
ﬂow solver. Assessment of the maximum possible time step for the AB3 method and the relevant right-hand
sides in the particle equations indicates that the mentioned choice of time step is always within the region
of absolute stability of the AB3 scheme. Extensive validation and veriﬁcation tests regarding the time-
integration scheme of the particle-phase solver are reported by Noorani.24 The wall-particle interaction is
treated as purely elastic collisions, i.e., the total kinetic energy is conserved in the collision process. Similar
to the carrier phase, periodic boundary conditions were used for the dispersed phase in the axial direction
(and spanwise direction of the channel case). This Lagrangian particle tracking (LPT) module was veriﬁed
and validated for a classical particle-laden turbulent channel ﬂow against Sardina et al. 25 and was used in
the previous studies of Noorani et al. 6,7 The implementation, validation and veriﬁcation of the LPT module

5

(AR=3) Rep,max,channel

Case

Stb
0.0

St+
dp/h
0.0
n/a
Stp0
3.727 × 10−4 0.0451 1.0
Stp1
8.333 × 10−4 0.2257 5.0
Stp5
Stp10 1.179 × 10−3 0.4514 10.0
Stp25 1.863 × 10−3 1.1284 25.0
Stp50 2.635 × 10−3 2.2569 50.0
Stp100 3.727 × 10−3 4.5139 100.0

channel St+
0.0
0.9375
4.6915
9.3829
23.455
46.912
93.827

(AR=1) St+
0.0
0.8494
4.2510
8.5019
21.253
42.508
85.018

0.0
0.02
0.2
0.5
1.3
2.2
3.6

TABLE III. Parameters for the particle populations: number of particles per population Np = 1.28 × 105. The
density ratio ρp/ρf is ﬁxed to 1000 for all populations. The bulk Stokes number Stb and particle diameter dp/h
are ﬁxed while the duct aspect ratio varies. The maximum particle Reynolds number in the turbulent channel is
also reported for each population. Note that n/a refers to not applicable, due to the fact that the Stp0 population
corresponds to ﬂuid tracers, and that the channel values are normalised for Reτ = 360 and ρp/ρf = 1000.

are reported by Noorani 26

In the present study, seven particle populations with diﬀerent Stb are simulated. While the density ratio
is ﬁxed to ρp/ρf ≈ 1000, each particle population Stb is deﬁned by the radius of the particles. The bulk
Stokes number of each population is ﬁxed for the various conﬁgurations, which implies ﬁxing the physical
characteristics of particles (i.e. the particle density and radius) when varying the aspect ratio of the duct.
The Stb of these populations are chosen to be identical to the particle-laden turbulent ﬂow simulations of
bent pipes by Noorani et al.,6,7 which makes it possible to compare the results directly the eﬀect of the
two diﬀerent kinds of secondary motions on particle transport. The code names of the particle populations
and their corresponding parameters are presented in table III. Hereinafter, heavier or larger particles are
referred to as Stp25 and Stp50, and smaller, lighter or less inertial populations as Stp1 and Stp5. The
Stp100 population is simulated in order to investigate the asymptotic ballistic behaviour of very heavy
inertial particles. Note that the Stp0 population corresponds to ﬂuid tracers.

In order to obtain Eulerian statistics from the Lagrangian particle data the computational domain is
divided into wall-parallel slabs to form 2D cells in the duct cross-section. The slabs are distributed non-
uniformly according to the function: r = h(1 − (sinh γη)/(sinh γ)), where γ = 2 is chosen as the stretching
factor, and η indicates a uniformly spaced grid. As a result, the binning is more resolved near the wall
than near the the duct centreline. The particles are binned into these cells and averaged in time, streamwise
direction and over all four quadrants to obtain the Eulerian 2D maps presented hereinafter. A total of 40 000
cells are used for the 2D representation of the statistics. The statistical analysis in the wall bisectors (vertical
and horizontal planes of symmetry of the duct) is carried out with 100 wall-parallel slabs (from the wall to
the duct middle) with stretching factor of γ = 2 in the distribution function above and a constant cell-width
of 10 viscous units. Similarly, a coarser grid is used with the ﬁrst near-wall cell width of ∆y = 0.0185
(≈ 5 wall units) and 1600 equally distributed cells to cover the duct cross-sections. The proﬁles evaluated
along the walls in the buﬀer layer and the viscus sublayer (e.g. Fig. 8 (right)) are obtained from the coarser
binning. The Eulerian statistics of particulate phase in the channel are computed as for the wall bisector of
the duct, with the diﬀerence that the spanwise homogeneity is exploited.

III. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

The results of the carrier phase are brieﬂy discussed ﬁrst to characterise the general ﬂow features of
turbulence in square and rectangular duct geometries. This is mainly to provide a clear overview of the
carrier phase turbulence before analysing the complex dynamics of the particulate phase. The main focus
is then on characterising the Eulerian statistics of the particle phase.

A. Carrier phase

The level of detail obtained in the present simulations can be appreciated in Fig. 1, where several instanta-
neous visualisations of the ﬂow are shown. The cross-sectional view of the instantaneous streamwise velocity
ux in both ducts (Fig. 1 a) shows that the smallest turbulence structures close to the walls are properly

6

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 1. (a) Pseudocolours of instantaneous streamwise velocity ux (left panel) and instantaneous streamwise vorticity
ωx (right panel) in a cross-section of the ducts with diﬀerent aspect ratio, normalised with bulk values. Here, ωx
(scaled with Ub and h) is plotted in the range of (−7, 7) with dark blue denoting minimum and dark red maximum
values. For ux the colours vary from 0 (black) to 1.3 (white). A cross-sectional view of a quarter-section of the
computational mesh is also shown. (b,c) Top view of instantaneous streamwise velocity (at y/h = −0.95, ≈ 18+
from the wall) from the square and AR = 3 ducts, respectively. In these two panels the ﬂow direction is from left to
right and the colours of ux vary from 0.25 (black) to 1.3 (white).

resolved. As discussed by Huser and Biringen,27 the corners are of special interest due to the interaction
between the bursting events from the vertical and horizontal walls, which is the basic mechanism responsible
for the appearance of the secondary ﬂow. The instantaneous streamwise vorticity ωx, shown in the right
panels, clearly displays the complexity of the turbulent vortices in the ﬂow, as well as the emerging scale
disparity even at this relatively low Reynolds number. Top views of the instantaneous streamwise velocity
(ux) are presented at y/h = −0.95 (a distance of ≈ 18+ from the wall) for the square and the AR = 3
ducts in Fig. 1 (b,c) to show the elongated near-wall streaky structures. Note that close to the corners the
formation of streaks is reduced by the presence of the side wall. This was also observed at lower Reynolds
numbers by Pinelli et al. 28 and Vinuesa et al. 8,29

Some selected statistics of the mean ﬂow are shown in Fig. 2. The left panel illustrates the magnitude of
the in-plane velocity, (cid:112)((cid:104)uy(cid:105)2 + (cid:104)uz(cid:105)2), which represents the intensity of the secondary ﬂow. The mean over
the streamwise direction and time is indicated by (cid:104)(cid:105). The vector plot shows the direction of the secondary
ﬂow. Such in-plane motion convects momentum from the core of the duct towards the duct bisectors, forming
the characteristic eight vortex pattern which can also be observed in the stream function ψ; see plots in the
right panel. While the magnitude of the secondary ﬂow is largest adjacent to the walls and at the corner
bisectors in the square duct, the portion of the secondary vortices near the longer side is modiﬁed when
increasing the aspect ratio: these vortices stretch in the spanwise direction, and introduce an asymmetry in
the ﬂow. This asymmetry is reﬂected in the locations of the cores of the secondary vortices, as well as in the
streamline pattern. Another manifestation of the eﬀect of the secondary ﬂow is shown by the isocontours
of the streamwise velocity shown on the right panel of the ﬁgure. In the square duct case, the mean proﬁle

7

FIG. 2. (Left panel ) Pseudocolours of the magnitude of mean in-plane velocities of the carrier phase ((cid:112)((cid:104)uy(cid:105)2+(cid:104)uz(cid:105)2))
with vector plot in the two ducts under consideration. (Right panel ) Pseudocolours of the streamwise component of
the mean ﬂuid velocity and some of its isocontours ((cid:104)ux(cid:105) ∈ [0.5, 1.3]/0.1) in grey. Isocontours of the cross-ﬂow stream
function also projected on top where dashed lines represent negative values of ψ (note that (ψmin, ψmax) × 103 for
the square duct is (−2, 2) and (−1.5, 4.5) for the duct with AR = 3). White dots indicate the core of the secondary
ﬂow vortices. The velocity and length scales used in this ﬁgure are the bulk velocity ub and the duct half-height h,
respectively.

FIG. 3. Pseudocolours of turbulent kinetic energy k of the carrier phase (normalised with the corresponding u2
for each aspect ratio case.

τ,c)

is lifted up at the centerplane (with the corresponding slight reduction in wall shear), and the isocontours
are deformed towards the corner. The lack of symmetry in the rectangular duct leads to a slightly more
complicated picture, although with a similar transfer of momentum from the core towards the corner of the
duct.

The turbulence kinetic energy (TKE) over the cross-sectional area is shown in Fig. 3. As expected the
maximum TKE is observed close to the four walls, which approximately corresponds to the location of the
inner peak in the streamwise turbulence intensity, found at y+ (cid:39) 15. Note that the maximum TKE is
slightly lower in the rectangular duct than in the square one. This can be explained by the fact that these
plots are normalised with the corresponding centreplane friction velocity uτ,c, and as shown in table II the
AR = 3 case has slightly larger skin friction at z/h = 0. It is also important to highlight that in the region
around the duct corners the TKE is essentially zero, due to the inhibiting eﬀect of the side wall on near-wall
turbulence, also connected with the lack of streaks observed in this region in Fig. 1 (b,c). In addition, the
TKE contours show low values along the lines where the secondary vortices meet: in the case of the square
duct, at the corner bisector, in the case of the AR = 3 this line has a diﬀerent slope due to the deformation
of the corner vortices. Note that the viscous diﬀusion process taking place along this line is produced by
the interaction of the two corner vortices. The maximum kinetic energy of the secondary ﬂow (deﬁned as
K = 1/2 (cid:0)(cid:104)uy(cid:105)2 + (cid:104)uz(cid:105)2(cid:1) ) represents around 1.2% of the maximum TKE in the square duct, and around
1.6% in the AR = 3 case. This shows that despite the relatively small magnitude of the secondary ﬂow of
second kind, its impact on the duct-ﬂow physics is signiﬁcant.

(a)

(b)

8

Instantaneous particle concentration C in the viscous sublayer (y+(z+) ≤ 5) normalised with the mean
FIG. 4.
particle concentration in the domain as a function of convection time: (a) AR = 1 (b) AR = 3 . (cid:4) Stp0, • Stp1,

Stp5,

Stp10,

Stp25,

Stp50,

Stp100.

B. Particulate phase

1. Temporal convergence

The Lagrangian particle tracking is initialised by introducing the particle populations randomly into the
fully developed turbulent ﬂow with the initial velocity set equal to the local ﬂow velocity at the particle
positions. The instantaneous particle concentration C, deﬁned as the number of particles per unit volume,
normalised with the mean (bulk) concentration, is monitored in the viscous sublayer of all the walls (i.e.
y(z) ≤ 0.01415 or y+(z+) ≤ 5). Doing so, it is possible to identify when the particle dispersion reaches
a statistically stationary stage. Usually, after injecting particles in canonical wall turbulence the near-wall
concentration increases due to turbophoresis until the statistically-steady state. Drifting particles with small
momentum engage in a slow and diﬀusive process before segregating near the wall. According to Sikovsky 30
the time for this process is almost inversely proportional to the particle Stokes number, which makes the
current observable (instantaneous C in the viscous sublayer) a strict but suitable indicator for the steady
state. The evolution of this indicator versus the convective time of the simulation is illustrated in Fig. 4.
For both duct ﬂows, after an initial increase in C, its value levels oﬀ at t > 500h/ub for large particles. This
time is considerably longer for Stp5 as the particle distribution reaches a steady state at about 1500h/ub
in the square duct and 2000h/ub in the rectangular duct.

2.

Instantaneous particle distribution

Fig. 5 displays the instantaneous particle distribution of the Stp25 population for both conﬁgurations
at the ﬁnal time of the simulations. From the projected front view it can be clearly seen that the particles
are largely segregated near the wall and have generated clusters. These streaky structures are due to the
preferential localisation of particles with regards to near-wall carrier phase dynamics.25,31 Clearly the particle
clusters are not distributed homogeneously over the walls as less particles are found near the corner. This is
more obvious from the cut-away view of the rectangular duct (Fig. 5 bottom) where the particle streaks are
mostly near the side-wall centre while hardly any clusters can be found near the corners. Visually, in terms
of the particle aggregation, the centre region of the bottom plate (AR = 3) is very similar to a channel;
however, half-way towards the corners a larger amount of particle streaks is visible. A long thin and almost
continuous streak of particles is also obvious right at the corners of the duct. These are the particles that
are deposited at the corner by the secondary motion and are trapped due to the weakness of the secondary
motions and ﬂow perturbations in the corner region (c.f. Yao et al. 32 and Fig. 11 therein).

Provided that the magnitude of the secondary motion in a duct is similar to a weakly curved pipe, the
distribution of particle streaks on the duct wall is directly comparable to that in the mildly curved pipe
(c.f. Fig. 11 (b) in Noorani et al. 6). The large accumulation of particle streaks near the saddle point of the

9

x/h

(cid:45)z/h

(cid:105)

(cid:105)

y/h

(cid:54)

(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:30)

(cid:10)

(cid:26)(cid:62)

(cid:26)

(cid:19)(cid:55)

(cid:19)

(cid:10)

FIG. 5. (Top) Projected instantaneous front views of particles (Stp25) distributed in square duct and rectangular
duct with AR = 3. (Bottom) A cut-away view of the particles (Stp25) distributed in one half of the rectangular duct
(beneath the diagonal from top left to bottom right corner). Circles and arrows indicate sample particle clusters,
and the duct frame of reference is also shown.

secondary ﬂow vortices on the wall bisector of the square duct and the side walls of the rectangular geometry
is very similar to that near the stagnation point of the mean Dean cells in the inner side of the mildly curved
pipe. Note that the TKE of the carrier phase is minimum in the stagnation point of mean Dean cells in
the inner bend; however, in a duct, the TKE of the carrier phase is maximum in the stagnation point of
secondary ﬂow vortices on the wall bisector. Hence, the appearance of such large particle segregation is
mainly due to the eﬀect of mean in-plane secondary motion cells.

The large-scale organisation of the particle streaks that were previously observed in channel ﬂow by
Sardina et al. 25 is also clearly visible in the duct simulations. These large-scale motions modulate the
smaller-scale accumulation and are of the order of the duct half-height h. These structures, however, are
absent in the curved conﬁgurations where the particle streaks are rather elongated in the axial direction of
the pipe inclined uniformly in the azimuthal direction to point towards the inner bend to generate helicoidal
shapes. In fact, the streaks in the bent pipe form ﬁsh-bone like structures and the inclination of these helices
appears to be directly connected to the magnitude of in-plane motion of the carrier phase in bends. However,
that inclination in the direction of the secondary ﬂow was not found in the duct geometry. This could be
related to the relatively weaker amplitude of the secondary ﬂow in the duct, and the more restricted spatial
extent of the region with signiﬁcant amplitudes of the cross-ﬂow components.

10

z

z

FIG. 6. Some typical particle trajectories projected in the streamwise direction of square duct (left) and rectangular
duct with AR = 3 (right). From top: Stp5, Stp25 and Stp100 population. The −→ • indicates the beginning
of the track and ∗ shows the ﬁnal time of the trajectory. Diﬀerent colours indicate diﬀerent particle tracks. All
trajectories span a time interval of 1500 convective units.

3. Particle trajectories

Some typical trajectories of Stp5, Stp25 and Stp100 particles within the last 1500h/ub convection time
units of the simulation are shown in Fig. 6. For both ducts, the lighter particles spend longer time away
from the walls. They are erratically modulated by the ﬂow turbulence unless they are trapped close to
the wall. The trajectories of heavier particles indicate that the ones that enter the vicinity of a corner are
almost immobilised. The particles trapped in the wall viscous sublayer also remain in this region for a long
period. Even though the common assumption is that these inertial particles sample one single low-speed
streak each, they are transported from the corner towards the wall bisector slowly by the cross-ﬂow motion.
These large particles in the duct core are re-suspended by ejection towards the duct centre region. Heavier
particles are also modulated by the turbulence; however, they roughly follow the mean secondary vortex
performing a spiralling motion through the duct. The particles follow the mean vortical cells and as soon
as they are ejected to the duct centre they are absorbed by another cell. Interestingly, most of the particles
in the square duct and near the vertical plates of the rectangular duct eject near the plane of symmetry,
whereas heavy particles near the horizontal plate of the rectangular duct typically are re-suspended before
reaching the bisector where the secondary motion is most prominent.

11

4. Concentration statistics

To quantify particle accumulation in the duct cross-section the particle concentration C, normalized
with the mean concentration, is computed. Fig. 7 shows this normalised mean particle concentration in
logarithmic scale for three populations in the square and rectangular ducts. As in canonical wall-bounded
geometries, the particles largely accumulate near the wall. The largest values for concentration are found
in the corners and at the wall bisectors. These high concentration regions at the horizontal and vertical
symmetry planes extend towards the duct centreline. This is due to the outward cross-ﬂow motion of the
secondary-ﬂow vortices. Except for the heaviest populations (Stp100 particles in square duct and Stp50
and Stp100 particles in the rectangular case), which have the largest accumulation in the corners, the
peak on the wall bisector is generally larger than the one in the corner (c.f. Fig. 8 e-g). Interestingly, in the
AR = 3 duct the minimum concentration does not occur at the duct centreline but rather close to the corner
bisector where the in-plane motion is most pronounced, an eﬀect that is most noticeable in the Stp25 and
Stp50 populations. On the other hand, in the square duct the minimum concentration is observed at the
duct centreline (except for the Stp25 particles), which is connected to the fact that the centreplane energy
of the secondary ﬂow is lower in the AR = 3 duct than in the square case. In fact, a large portion in the
middle of the rectangular duct cross-section (|z/h| (cid:46) 1) is similar to that of a spanwise-periodic channel for
all populations. In both ducts, the largest diﬀerence between the concentration near the wall and that in
the bulk can be found for Stp25 which is four orders of magnitude.

Fig. 8 (a-c) displays the wall-normal distribution of the particle concentration at the horizontal and vertical
symmetry planes of the ducts. As expected, the Lagrangian tracers (Stp0) are uniformly distributed (C =
1), whereas the inertial heavy particles accumulate close to the wall and the maximum concentration appears
at the wall. Qualitatively speaking, the trends in those three plots are similar to the wall-normal distribution
of concentration in canonical channel ﬂows (shown in Fig. 8 (d)) where the maximum concentration at
the wall appears for the Stp25 population and the minimum concentration is in the centre for the same
population (see also Young and Leeming,2 Noorani et al.,6 Sardina et al.,25 Picano et al.33).

Further insight can be gained by measuring the distribution of the particle concentration in the viscous
sublayer (y+ (cid:46) 5) along the walls (Fig. 8 e-g).
In the square duct and vertical wall of the AR = 3
duct, the peak values of concentration occur at the corners and wall bisectors. Note that the trend of the
maximum concentration for various populations at the corners diﬀers from that in the centreplanes. The
values at the corner increase with Stokes number as opposed to the above mentioned trend for the wall
bisectors, which is similar to a canonical channel. In the square duct and the vertical wall of the rectangular
geometry, traversing from the corner towards the duct centreplane, the concentration decreases to reach a
minimum around z/h(y/h) ≈ −0.85 before increasing again to reach another maximum at z/h = 0. Along
the horizontal wall of the rectangular duct, however, the second maximum is not at the wall bisector but
rather half-way through at z/h ≈ −1.25. This conﬁrms the observations from the instantaneous snapshots
in Fig. 5 (bottom). Except for the corner cluster, the current statistics clarify that heavy particles are
densely clustered around the region of maximum outward motion of the secondary vortex on the horizontal
wall.
In Fig. 2 it can be observed that the maximum V component of the horizontal vortex is located
at a wall-normal distance of around y/h ≈ 0.3 from the horizontal wall in the two ducts, and at spanwise
distances from the centreplane of z/h ≈ 0 and z/h ≈ 1.25 in the square and AR = 3 duct cases, respectively.
More importantly, in the horizontal wall of the rectangular case (Fig. 8 g), moving farther towards the wall
bisector the concentration proﬁles decrease to reach a plateau. This is due to the fact that the secondary
motion is signiﬁcantly attenuated in this region and the ﬂow progressively becomes more similar to a channel
ﬂow.

In order to quantify the eﬀect of aspect ratio on the wall accumulation of particles with diﬀerent Stokes
numbers we provide a comparison between channel and ducts with diﬀerent aspect ratios in terms of maxi-
mum concentration in the viscous sublayer for various populations. The results are shown in Fig. 8 (h). The
data for the duct cases are obtained in the wall bisector (horizontal wall bisector for the rectangular duct)
and the concentration is averaged over the viscous sublayer of each case (y+(z+) ≤ 5 or y(z) < 0.01415).
Note that the width of the averaging cell is twice the height, and that spanwise periodicity is exploited in
the channel case. According to Vinuesa et al. 29 when AR → 10 the ﬂow characteristics approach the ones of
a spanwise-periodic channel. Therefore, the channel data are shown for AR = 10 on the abscissa of the Fig.
8 (h). A simple exponential curve ﬁt of the data for each population is also projected on top of the ﬁgure.
From Fig. 8 (h) it is obvious that the lightest populations (Stp1) are most insensitive to any changes in the
duct aspect ratio and the values for maximum concentration are close to those for a channel. On the other
hand, heavier particles exhibit much larger accumulations at the viscous sublayer of the square duct wall

12

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f )

FIG. 7. Logarithmic representation (log10(C)) of the mean normalised concentration map of particle dispersion in
square and rectangular duct with AR = 3. From top: Stp5, Stp25, Stp50 and Stp100. The maximum and
minimum particle concentrations are indicated with

and ∗ respectively.

(cid:50)

bisector compared to the rectangular case. The results smoothly converges to a channel with increasing the
aspect ratio of the duct.

5. Particle velocities

Fig. 9 displays the mean streamwise particle velocity, (cid:104)vxp (cid:105), and the magnitude of the in-plane velocities,
(cid:112)((cid:104)vyp (cid:105)2 + (cid:104)vzp (cid:105)2), in the cross-section of the square and rectangular duct. The velocities are normalised
with the bulk ﬂow (ub). In order to provide a clearer overview of the changes in inertial particle dynamics
compared to ﬂuid tracers, the diﬀerence between the velocity components of particles and tracers is shown
in Fig. 10. From Figs. 9 and 10 (right panels) it can be seen that the mean particle velocities are very similar

(a)

(e)

13

(b)

(c)

(f )

(g)

(d)

(h)

FIG. 8. Left: Wall-normal distribution of the mean normalised particle concentration in (a) vertical cut AR = 1,
(e) (b) horizontal cut AR = 3, (c) vertical cut AR = 3, and (d) spanwise periodic channel. Right: mean normalised
particle concentration close to the wall (y+ (cid:46) 5) of the square duct (e), the rectangular duct (AR = 3) along the
side plate (f ) and bottom plate (g). The corners are located at z/h = −1, z/h = −3 and y/h = −1. (h) Particle
concentration at the viscous sublayer (y < 0.01415, y+ < 5) of the wall bisector for the square duct, the horizontal
wall-bisector of the rectangular duct and the channel wall. The channel data are used for a hypothetical large aspect
ratio duct (AR = 10). (cid:4) Stp0, • Stp1,

Stp100.

Stp25,

Stp50,

Stp10,

Stp5,

14

FIG. 9.
(Left panel ) Pseudocolours of the magnitude of mean in-plane velocities of the particulate phase in the
same conﬁguration with the vectors for the in-plane motion projected on top. (Right panel ) Pseudocolours of the
streamwise component of the mean particle velocity. White dots indicate the core of the mean vortical structures
associated with the particulate phase data. From top: Stp1, Stp5, Stp10, Stp25, Stp50, Stp100. The velocity
and length scales used in this ﬁgure are the bulk velocity ub and the duct half-height h, respectively.

to the ﬂow velocities although the streamwise velocity becomes less than that of the ﬂuid in the buﬀer layer
and the edge of outer-layer regions (5 (cid:46) y+(z+) (cid:46) 100). This diﬀerence increases with increasing Stb up
to the Stp25 particles, after which the trend reverses. In the rest of the outer layer (y+(z+) (cid:38) 100) the
particle streamwise velocity becomes mildly faster than the ﬂow with increasing particle inertia. These are
linked to preferential accumulation of inertial particles in low-speed regions of the turbulent ﬁeld as already
discussed in the context of canonical wall-bounded turbulent particle-laden ﬂows.34,35.

For both conﬁgurations the particle mean in-plane velocities largely deviate from that of the ﬂuid ﬂow. On

15

the one hand, the magnitude of the in-plane motion of the particle phase adjacent to the walls signiﬁcantly
decreases with increasing particle inertia such that it is almost zero for heavier populations (c.f. Figs. 9
and 10 left panels). On the other hand, across the tangent line between the two corner vortices, this
magnitude largely increases. The largest increase in this position can be found for Stp25 particles in both
conﬁgurations. As a result, the mean in-plane motion of the solid phase becomes the most intense along the
corner bisectors. This is similar to the eﬀect of the particle inertia on the secondary motion in mildly curved
pipes (c.f. Fig. 3 of Noorani et al. 7 ). Unlike the bent pipe, however, this eﬀect does not alter the core of
the mean secondary motion cells or the position of secondary motion extrema signiﬁcantly. It is important
to note that in the horizontal symmetry plane of the rectangular duct the secondary motion still eﬀectively
removes particles from the centre region of the duct.

6. Particle velocity ﬂuctuations

The turbulent kinetic energy of the particle phase in the cross-section of the ducts is displayed in Fig.
11. For the solid phase, the TKE is deﬁned as kp = (cid:104)v(cid:48)
(cid:105)/2 where primes indicate particle ﬂuctuating
ip
velocity. In the two ducts, the ﬂuctuation energy k decreases with increasing Stb ≥ Stp5 particularly near
the walls. This is similar to what was previously observed in turbulent canonical channels and pipes34,36
and is caused by the damping eﬀect of particle inertia that ﬁlters the fastest turbulent motions.

v(cid:48)
ip

Further details on the individual components of the velocity ﬂuctuations in the plane of symmetry of ducts
are provided by the r.m.s. of the streamwise and the wall normal velocity in Fig. 12. The r.m.s. value for a
general particle characteristic (Xp) in an individual Eulerian slab is computed from the following relation:

Np,tot

nt(cid:88)

np(j)
(cid:88)

j=1

k=1

X2

p(k, j) −

(cid:104) nt(cid:88)

np(j)
(cid:88)

j=1

k=1

(cid:105)2

Xp(k, j)

Np,tot(Np,tot − 1)

X2

rmsp

=

,

(5)

where Np,tot is the total number of particles per slab for the total observation time, nt is the number of
Lagrangian-ﬁeld snapshots and np is total number of particles per individual Eulerian slab for a speciﬁc
time instance.

In both ducts, the streamwise particle velocity ﬂuctuations, vx,rmsp , are larger than those of the ﬂow in
the edge of outer layer (y+(z+) ≈ 50). This is similar to canonical particle-laden turbulent wall-bounded
ﬂows. As explained among others by Portela et al. 34 considering the mean ﬂuid-velocity gradient, this larger
vx,rmsp is due to the wall-normal motions between regions of high and low (cid:104)ux(cid:105). A similar trend for vx,rmsp of
diﬀerent populations continues into the buﬀer layer of the rectangular duct (Fig. 12 b), as the vicinity of the
vertical symmetry plane is very similar to a canonical channel. However, the mean wall-normal ﬂow towards
the duct centreline alters the trend of vx,rmsp slightly as the results in the buﬀer layer of the square duct
and the side wall of the rectangular duct are diﬀerent from the vertical symmetry plane of the rectangular
geometry. In those cases (Fig. 12 a,c) near the peak of the vx,rmsp the order with respect to diﬀerent Stokes
number, is altered and the peak for tracers (ﬂuid particles) is situated in between the peaks associated with
the solid phases. That is purely due to the outward weak secondary motion in this region. If the secondary
motion is stronger, the eﬀect of cross-ﬂow motion will be further emphasised as is shown by Noorani et al. 7
(Fig. 8 a,b therein) where the ﬂow peak is dominant in the inner bend position of the curved pipes.

For all cases, the wall-normal velocity ﬂuctuations are lower than those of the ﬂuid phase. Unlike in
the canonical channel there is a mean wall-normal particle velocity in duct conﬁgurations towards the duct
centre line in the plane of symmetry. This means the drag force due to the in-plane motion works against
the turbophoretic drift towards the wall at these symmetry planes.

Another important and yet unexpected eﬀect of the secondary motion on the dispersion of particulate
phase can be deduced from the two-dimensional TKE map of particles in Fig. 11 and the proﬁles in Fig.
12. It is readily seen that for lighter particles in the square duct and along the side wall of the rectangular
geometry there is only one peak adjacent to the wall located on the plane of symmetry. This peak , however,
disappears and the TKE is signiﬁcantly reduced in the wall bisector with increasing particle inertia. In turn,
two other peaks appear close to the corners in both cases. This process is diﬀerent near the horizontal walls
of the rectangular duct. The near-wall peak of TKE decreases half-way through the corner with increasing
particle inertia. This generates two peaks close to the corner (|z/h| ≈ 2.5) while the one on the horizontal
wall bisector endures.

16

FIG. 10. (Left panel ) Pseudocolours of the diﬀerence between magnitude of mean in-plane velocities of the par-
ticulate phase and the ﬂuid tracers in ducts (the vectors for the in-plane motion projected on top). (Right panel )
Pseudocolours of the diﬀerence between streamwise component of the mean particle velocity and ﬂuid tracers. White
dots indicate the core of the mean vortical structures associated with the particulate phase data. From top: Stp1,
Stp5, Stp10, Stp25, Stp50, Stp100. The velocity and length scales used in this ﬁgure are the bulk velocity ub
and the duct half-height h, respectively.

17

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f )

FIG. 11. Pseudocolours of the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) of the particulate phase normalised with the friction
velocity u2
τ,c of the ﬂuid ﬂow (at the midplane). From top: Stp5, Stp25, Stp100. The positions of local TKE
maxima are indicated by arrows.

The weak but resilient secondary motion in ducts can lead to the particle behaviour sketched in Fig.
13. The streamlines adjacent to the corner bisectors may directly transport inertial particles towards the
corners. However, the oﬀ-corner-bisector wall-ward streamlines push the particulate phase with large Stokes
number (and thus long enough memory) from a highly ﬂuctuating region towards the quiescent region at the
wall. Inertia prevents the particles to follow these curved streamlines and the particulate phase is inevitably
centrifuged towards the wall viscous sublayer (grey arrow in 13 b). The eﬀect is larger for heavier particles
as the peak appears closer to the corner for heavier populations (c.f. Fig. 12). On the other hand, farther
away from the corners, the less ﬂuctuating particles engaged in a diﬀusive process deep in the viscous
sublayer of the duct are extracted and directed towards the duct centre by the action of these outward
(vertical) streamlines which in turn reduces the ﬂuctuation value in the buﬀer layer (black arrow in Fig. 13
b). This explains the maximum-minimum pattern in the velocity ﬂuctuations away from the corners. In
the rectangular duct (larger AR), however, the eﬀect of the secondary cells near the horizontal wall bisector
(vertical symmetry plane) of the duct is progressively attenuated and the state of the ﬂow approaches to that
of a spanwise-periodic channel. As a result, the TKE and velocity ﬂuctuations in the buﬀer layer near the
vertical symmetry plane increase again in the AR = 3 duct, and consequently the peak of TKE is recovered
in this region.

18

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f )

FIG. 12. Particle streamwise r.m.s. velocity (left) and wall-normal r.m.s. velocity (right) normalised with the ﬂow
friction velocity (u2
τ,c). (a,d) in the horizontal/vertical plane of symmetry of the square duct; (b,e) vertical plane of
symmetry of the rectangular duct and (c,f ) horizontal plane of symmetry of rectangular duct. The wall distance in
inner units is presented in logarithmic scale in the plot insets. (cid:4)
Stp10,

Stp0,

Stp1,

Stp5,

•

Stp25,

Stp50,

Stp100.

7. Dispersed phase ﬂux

In order to further investigate transport phenomena in turbulent ducts, the particle mean streamwise
ﬂux (cid:104)Jstr,tot(cid:105) is computed and compared to that in a circular duct (straight pipe), as illustrated in Fig.
14. Although the Reynolds numbers of the two cases are slightly diﬀerent, provided that the mass ﬂux
and characteristics of particles are the same, the values are comparable. The particle ﬂux J is deﬁned as
particle number density per unit volume multiplied by the corresponding velocities and normalised with
the tracer ﬂux in the straight pipe of Noorani et al. 7 It can be seen the (cid:104)Jstr,tot(cid:105) of tracers in a square
and in a rectangular duct are smaller than that in pipe purely due to the larger cross-sectional area of
the former. For inertial particles when increasing the particle relaxation time, the axial particle ﬂux ﬁrst

19

(a)

(b)

FIG. 13. (a) Schematic illustration of the secondary motion in a typical rectangular duct. The dark grey arrow
represents the motion towards the corner while the light grey arrows show the wall-ward and outward transport of
the inertial particles in the duct. The gradient grey area displays the region similar to spanwise-periodic channel
where the inﬂuence of secondary cells is negligible. (b) close-up view of the dotted region in (a).

decreases drastically and then slowly recovers, independent of the geometry. This behaviour is similar to
what is observed in bent pipes and is related to the eﬃciency of a population to remain a longer period in
the viscous sublayer of the wall-bounded ﬂow. More importantly, for Stp10 particles and larger, the particle
ﬂux in the streamwise direction of the rectangular duct and pipe is almost identical while the ﬂux in the

FIG. 14. Total mean axial particle ﬂux in square duct (
of Noorani et al. 7 (

). Fluxes are normalised with the tracers’ ﬂux in the straight pipe.

) and rectangular duct (

) and the straight pipe

20

square duct is larger. This is caused by the secondary motion that prevails over the whole cross-section of
the square duct and transports the particles out from the wall towards regions with high streamwise velocity
before sweeping them back to the near wall regions. During this process the particulate phase has time to
speed up and the ﬂux increases. The same mechanism exists also in the rectangular duct, though it is only
signiﬁcant near the corners. Considering the inﬂuence of the secondary cells is almost attenuated in the duct
centre and in the vicinity of the horizontal wall bisector, the turbophoresis is the only eﬀect in this region
and the ﬂux of the particulate phase is reduced to approximately the level of a canonical pipe or channel.

8. Acceleration statistics

From the previous study by Noorani et al. 7 it is known that particle acceleration statistics are strongly
aﬀected by the secondary ﬂow. An adequate description of the acceleration statistics is necessary for mod-
elling the solid particulate dispersion in wall-bounded turbulent ﬂows. The experimental and numerical
studies of Gerashchenko et al.,37 Yeo et al.,38 Lavezzo et al. 39 and Zamansky et al. 40 addressed the near-
wall behaviour of the particle acceleration and its variance. From Ayyalasomayajula et al. 41 and Bec et
al.,42 it is known that in a particle-laden homogeneous isotropic turbulence (HIT) the r.m.s. of the acceler-
ation decreases with increasing particle inertia. This is explained by Bec et al. 42 in terms of two concurrent
mechanisms: the preferential concentration of inertial particles and their damping of the high-frequency
turbulent ﬂuctuations. While the ﬁltering eﬀect is more eﬀective for larger particle inertia, the former mech-
anism (particle centrifugation out of intense vortices) is more important at lower St. According to Eaton
and Fessler 43 the preferential concentration can aﬀect the particle acceleration variance by increasing the
residence time of the particle in the high-strain (low-vorticity) regions.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f )

FIG. 15. Pseudocolours of mean streamwise particle acceleration (cid:104)axp (cid:105)+ normalised with the u3
ﬂuid ﬂow in ducts. From top: Stp5, Stp25, Stp100.

τ,c/ν value of the

21

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

FIG. 16. Wall-normal distribution of (top) mean streamwise particle acceleration; (bottom) mean wall-normal particle
acceleration in (a,c) the square duct symmetry plane (b,d) the vertical symmetry plane of rectangular duct. The
proﬁles are normalised with the u3
Stp25,

τ,c/ν values of the ﬂuid ﬂow.

Stp10,

Stp1,

Stp5,

•

Stp50,

Stp100.

The two-dimensional map of the mean streamwise particle acceleration (cid:104)axp (cid:105) in ducts is illustrated in
Fig. 15. To oﬀer a quantitative comparison of the streamwise and wall-normal particle acceleration between
diﬀerent populations the proﬁles along the wall bisector of the square duct and the vertical plane of symmetry
of the rectangular geometry are also shown in Fig. 16. Except in the near-wall regions, (cid:104)axp (cid:105) is almost uniform
across the duct section and takes similar values for the various populations. In the rectangular duct, the (cid:104)axp (cid:105)
proﬁle reaches a minimum in all the populations within the buﬀer layer, at approximately y+ ≈ 10. Farther
from the wall, the various populations also reach a maximum at approximately the same location, y+ ≈ 40,
with values of around 0.01 in all the cases. Regarding the square duct, only the two lightest populations
(Stp1 and Stp5) exhibit a minimum within the buﬀer layer. Interestingly, this minimum is also located at
y+ ≈ 10, and whereas the minimum of the Stp1 population takes approximately the same value of ≈ −0.06
in the AR = 1 and 3 cases, the minimum from the Stp5 population is less pronounced in the square duct
(≈ −0.02 instead of ≈ −0.035). The heavier populations do not exhibit a minimum in the buﬀer layer,
and show diﬀerent maximum values ranging from around 0.02 to 0.03; note that these maxima are located
between y+ (cid:39) 25 and 40, revealing a diﬀerent acceleration behaviour in the square duct compared to the
rectangular case. The trend observed in the latter is identical to the behaviour observed in canonical channel
ﬂows (see e.g. Zamansky et al. 40) where this deceleration is explained in terms of the dissipative nature of
the Stokes drag. Although along the wall bisector of the square duct the lighter populations have a similar
trend, the negative peak near the wall is signiﬁcantly reduced for heavier particles while the maximum is
doubled in magnitude. This is due to the anti-alignment of the ﬂow shear and outward secondary motion
of the carrier phase and is almost identical to what is observed in the inner bend of particle-laden mildly
curved pipes (c.f. Noorani et al. 7). This mean wall-normal motion also aﬀects (cid:104)ayp (cid:105) such that its near-wall

22

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

FIG. 17. Wall-normal distribution of particle acceleration r.m.s. (top) streamwise component; (bottom) wall-normal
component, in (a,c) the square duct wall bisector and (b,d) the vertical symmetry plane of rectangular duct. The
proﬁles are normalised with the u3
τ,c/ν of the ﬂuid ﬂow. Same symbols as Fig. 12.

peak in the wall bisector of the square duct is almost half of that in the horizontal wall bisector of the
rectangular duct (c.f. Fig. 16 c,d ).

A qualitative eﬀect of the mean in-plane motion on the two-dimensional map of (cid:104)axp (cid:105) can be observed in
Fig. 15 where the stripe of the large positive values of (cid:104)axp (cid:105) distributed over the walls of the square duct and
the side wall of rectangular geometry are further localised around the wall bisectors and protruded towards
the wall with increasing particle inertia. Close to the wall bisectors the wall-normal secondary motion
transports the particles outward from the wall towards regions with high streamwise velocity. This velocity
diﬀerence between the slow moving particles and relatively faster ﬂuid causes the large positive values of
(cid:104)axp (cid:105). Comparison of Figs. 15 and 10 reveals that the heavier particles are aﬀected more by the in-plane ﬂow,
particularly where the wall-normal secondary motion is stronger. The single stripe of maximum acceleration
for lighter particles near the horizontal walls of the rectangular duct is divided into two parts with increasing
particle Stokes number. This behaviour is in excellent agreement with the mechanism previously mentioned
in §III B 6. In Fig. 15, the near-wall positions where the (cid:104)axp (cid:105) is localised coincides exactly with the locations
where the turbulent kinetic energy of particles (Fig. 11) decreases.

As reported for canonical particle-laden wall-bounded turbulent ﬂows, the streamwise component of the
acceleration variance reaches a maximum near the wall. This peak increases with the Stokes number, up
to St+ ∼ 5, before decreasing with further increasing particle inertia.37,40 The wall-normal acceleration
r.m.s., however, is reported to decrease with increasing St, and for all populations its value remains lower in
magnitude compared to the streamwise component. To investigate this behaviour, the streamwise (ax,rmsp )
and wall-normal (ay,rmsp ) components of the acceleration variance are shown in the plane of symmetry of
the square duct and vertical symmetry plane of AR = 3 duct in Fig. 17. The results in both conﬁgurations
show the same trend observed in straight channels;40 in addition, the magnitude of the peak values is directly
comparable to the inner bend position of the curved pipes by Noorani et al. 7 (Fig. 13 therein). This, in
fact, shows that with increasing outward secondary motion the peak values will decrease signiﬁcantly.

23

IV. CONCLUSIONS

The aim of the present study is to determine and characterise the dispersion of dilute inertial heavy
micro-particles in turbulent duct ﬂow with width-to-height aspect ratios AR of 1 and 3. The carrier phase
is simulated in duct geometries and a spanwise-periodic channel with well-resolved DNSs in suﬃciently long
domains while seven populations of Lagrangian spherical particles, with inner-scaled Stokes numbers St+
ranging from 0 (ﬂuid tracers) to 100 (very heavy inertial particles), are tracked using one-way coupling.
The main goal was to evaluate the eﬀect of turbulence-driven secondary motion on the particle dynamics
by computing the Eulerian statistics of particle data.

From the mean in-plane velocity of the carrier phase it becomes obvious that the turbulent ﬁeld at the
centreplane of the rectangular duct approaches a spanwise-periodic canonical channel ﬂow. As a consequence,
the Eulerian particle statistics in the rectangular duct signiﬁcantly diﬀer from the ones observed in the square
duct. Note that the secondary motion vortices, in general, alter the cross-sectional map of the particle mean
and ﬂuctuation data, since they have a signiﬁcant impact on the carrier phase through momentum transport
from the duct centreplane towards the corner bisectors. Moreover, the secondary ﬂow exhibits signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent topologies in the AR = 1 and 3 cases, where in the rectangular duct the vortex on the horizontal
wall signiﬁcantly expands in the horizontal direction. A manifestation of the convergence towards spanwise-
periodic channel conditions can be observed in the buﬀer layer particle concentration at the duct centreplane,
which is up to 3 times larger in the square duct than in the AR = 3 case. On the other hand, the mean
normalised particle concentration at the viscous sublayer along the square duct walls show that the largest
concentration is in the duct centreplane, except for the heaviest populations. Note that another peak for
particle accumulation is also found in the corner of the duct.
Interestingly, the largest concentration at
the horizontal plates of the rectangular duct did not occur on the plane of symmetry but at |z/h| ≈ 1.25
from the centreplane. In addition, the secondary cells change the in-plane map of the particle velocities
signiﬁcantly in comparison to ﬂuid ﬂow statistics. These directly aﬀected the particle velocity ﬂuctuations
such that multiple peaks near the duct walls appear for the particle streamwise and wall-normal velocity
ﬂuctuations. We also observe an attenuation of the particle turbulent kinetic energy maxima at the buﬀer
layer for progressively heavier populations: this value decreased by around 18% from the Stp5 to the
Stp100 populations. This eﬀect, which can be explained by the action of the secondary motion on the
solid phase velocity ﬂuctuations, highlights the fact that the various particle populations respond diﬀerently
to the secondary ﬂow. The particle mean acceleration and its variance are also reported, and our results
indicate that both decrease with increasing particle inertia.

The database of particle phase statistics in turbulent ﬂow through square and rectangular ducts reported in
the present study constitute an interesting platform to study the eﬀect of turbulence-induced secondary ﬂows
on particle motions, especially when compared with similar data in bent pipes,6 where stronger skew-induced
secondary motions are present. The diﬀerent natures of the two types of secondary ﬂows, as well as the eﬀect
of the geometry, are of great relevance to achieve a deeper understanding in the fundamenal mechanisms
present in particle-laden wall-bounded turbulent ﬂows. Moreover, this comparison may facilitate modelling
advancement for dispersed multiphase turbulent ﬂow in wall-bounded ﬂows with cross-ﬂow motion.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors gratefully acknowledge computer-time allocation from the Swedish National Infrastructure
for Computing (SNIC). This research is also supported by the ERC grant ‘2013-CoG-616186, TRITOS’ to
L.B.

1M. W. Reeks, The transport of discrete particles in inhomogeneous turbulence, J. Aerosol Sci. 14, 729 (1983).
2J. Young and A. Leeming, A theory of particle deposition in turbulent pipe ﬂow, J. Fluid Mech. 340, 129 (1997).
3S. Balachandar and J. K. Eaton, Turbulent dispersed multiphase ﬂow, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 42, 111 (2010).
4F. Toschi and E. Bodenschatz, Lagrangian properties of particles in turbulence, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 41, 375 (2009).
5P. Bradshaw, Turbulent secondary ﬂows, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 19, 53 (1987).
6A. Noorani, G. Sardina, L. Brandt, and P. Schlatter, Particle transport in turbulent curved pipe ﬂows, J Fluid Mech. 793,
248 (2016).
7A. Noorani, G. Sardina, L. Brandt, and P. Schlatter, Particle velocity and acceleration in turbulent bent pipe ﬂows, Flow
Turb. Combust. 95, 539 (2015).
8R. Vinuesa, A. Noorani, A. Lozano-Dur´an, G. K. El Khoury, P. Schlatter, P. F. Fischer, and H. M. Nagib, Aspect ratio eﬀects
in turbulent duct ﬂows studied through direct numerical simulation, J. Turb. 15, 677 (2014).

24

9R. Vinuesa, P. Schlatter, and H. M. Nagib, On minimum aspect ratio for duct ﬂow facilities and the role of side walls in
generating secondary ﬂows, J. Turb. 16, 588 (2015).

10C. Winkler, S. Rani, and S. Vanka, Preferential concentration of particles in a fully developed turbulent square duct ﬂow,

Int. J. Multiphase Flow 30, 27 (2004).

11C. Winkler, S. Rani, and S. Vanka, A numerical study of particle wall-deposition in a turbulent square duct ﬂow, Powder

Tech. 170, 12 (2006).

12G. Sharma and D. Phares, Turbulent transport of particles in a straight square duct, Int. J. Multiphase ﬂow 32, 823 (2006).
13D. Phares and G. Sharma, A DNS study of aerosol deposition in a turbulent square duct ﬂow, Aerosol Sci. Tech. 40, 1016

(2006).

14J. Yao and M. Fairweather, Inertial particle resuspension in a turbulent, square duct ﬂow, Phys. Fluids 22, 033303 (2010).
15H. Zhang, F. Trias, A. Gorobets, A. Oliva, D. Yang, Y. Tan, and Y. Sheng, Eﬀect of collisions on the particle behavior in a

turbulent square duct ﬂow, Powder Tech. 269, 320 (2015).

16M. Guala, S. E. Hommema, and R. J. Adrian, Large-scale and very-large-scale motions in turbulent pipe ﬂow, J. Fluid Mech.

554, 521 (2006).

17J. Jim´enez and S. Hoyas, Turbulent ﬂuctuations above the buﬀer layer of wall-bounded ﬂows, J. Fluid Mech. 611, 215 (2010).
18G. K. El Khoury, P. Schlatter, A. Noorani, P. F. Fischer, G. Brethouwer, and A. V. Johansson, Direct numerical simulation

of turbulent pipe ﬂow at moderately high Reynolds numbers, Flow, Turb. Combust. 91, 475 (2013).

19A. Noorani, G. K. El Khoury, and P. Schlatter, Evolution of turbulence characteristics from straight to curved pipes, Int. J.

Heat Fluid Flow 41, 16 (2013).

20P. F. Fischer, J. W. Lottes, and S. G. Kerkemeier, Nek5000: Open source spectral element CFD solver. Available at:

http: // nek5000. mcs. anl. gov (2008).

21A. T. Patera, A spectral element method for ﬂuid dynamics: laminar ﬂow in a channel expansion, J. Comput. Phys. 54,

468 (1984).

22Y. Maday and A. T. Patera, Spectral element methods for the Navier–Stokes equations, In State of the Art Surveys in

Computational Mechanics, A.K. Noor, ed., New York pp. 71–143 (1989).

23L. Schiller and A. Naumann, ¨Uber die grundlegenden berechnungen bei der schwerkraftaufbereitung, Ver. Deut. Ing 77, 318

(1933).

24A. Noorani, Particle-laden turbulent wall-bounded ﬂows in moderately complex geometries (2015).
25G. Sardina, P. Schlatter, L. Brandt, F. Picano, and C. M. Casciola, Wall accumulation and spatial localization in particle-

laden wall ﬂows, J. Fluid Mech. 699, 50 (2012).

26A. Noorani, Tech. Rep., KTH, Mechanics (2014), licenciate Thesis.
27A. Huser and S. Biringen, Direct numerical simulation of turbulent ﬂow in a square duct, J. Fluid Mech. 257, 65 (1993).
28A. Pinelli, M. Uhlmann, A. Sekimoto, and G. Kawahara, Reynolds number dependence of mean ﬂow structure in square duct

turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 644, 107 (2009).

29R. Vinuesa, P. Schlatter, and H. M. Nagib, Characterization of the secondary ﬂow in turbulent rectangular ducts with varying

aspect ratio, Proc. 9th Intl Symp. on Turbulence and Shear Flow Phenomena, Melbourne, Australia pp. 1–6 (2015).

30D. P. Sikovsky, Singularity of inertial particle concentration in the viscous sublayer of wall-bounded turbulent ﬂows, Flow,

Turb. Combust. 92, 41 (2014).

31C. Marchioli and A. Soldati, Mechanisms for particle transfer and segregation in a turbulent boundary layer, J. Fluid Mech.

468, 283 (2002).

32J. Yao, M. Fairweather, and Y. Zhao, Numerical simulation of particle deposition in turbulent duct ﬂows, Ind. Eng. Chem.

Res. 53, 3329 (2014).

33F. Picano, G. Sardina, and C. M. Casciola, Spatial development of particle-laden turbulent pipe ﬂow, Phys. Fluids 21 (2009).
34L. Portela, P. Cota, and R. Oliemans, Numerical study of the near-wall behaviour of particles in turbulent pipe ﬂows, Powder

Tech. 125, 149 (2002).

35C. Marchioli, A. Giusti, M. V. Salvetti, and A. Soldati, Direct numerical simulation of particle wall transfer and deposition

in upward turbulent pipe ﬂow, Int. J. Multiphase Flow 29, 1017 (2003).

36M. Picciotto, C. Marchioli, and A. Soldati, Characterization of near-wall accumulation regions for inertial particles in

turbulent boundary layers, Phys. Fluids 17, 098101 (2005).

37S. Gerashchenko, N. Sharp, S. Neuscamman, and Z. Warhaft, Lagrangian measurements of inertial particle accelerations in

a turbulent boundary layer, J. Fluid Mech. 617, 255 (2008).

38K. Yeo, B. Kim, and C. Lee, On the near-wall characteristics of acceleration in turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 659, 405 (2010).
39V. Lavezzo, A. Soldati, S. Gerashchenko, Z. Warhaft, and L. Collins, On the role of gravity and shear on inertial particle

accelerations in near-wall turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 658, 229 (2010).

40R. Zamansky, I. Vinkovic, and M. Gorokhovski, Acceleration statistics of solid particles in turbulent channel ﬂow, Phys.

Fluids 23, 113304 (2011).

41S. Ayyalasomayajula, A. Gylfason, L. Collins, E. Bodenschatz, and Z. Warhaft, Lagrangian measurements of inertial particle

accelerations in grid generated wind tunnel turbulence, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 144507 (2006).

42J. Bec, L. Biferale, G. Boﬀetta, A. Celani, M. Cencini, A. Lanotte, S. Musacchio, and F. Toschi, Acceleration statistics of

heavy particles in turbulence, J Fluid Mech. 550, 349 (2006).

43J. Eaton and J. Fessler, Preferential concentration of particles by turbulence, Int. J. Multiphase Flow 20, 169 (1994).

