Preparation of clean surfaces and Se vacancy formation in Bi2Se3 by ion bombardment 

and annealing   

Weimin Zhou, Haoshan Zhu, Connie M. Valles and Jory A. Yarmoff* 

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Riverside CA 92521 

Abstract 

Bismuth  Selenide  (Bi2Se3)  is  a  topological  insulator  (TI)  with  a  structure  consisting  of 

stacked  quintuple  layers.  Single  crystal  surfaces  are  commonly  prepared  by  mechanical 

cleaving. This work explores the use of low energy Ar+ ion bombardment and annealing (IBA) 

as an alternative method to produce reproducible and stable Bi2Se3 surfaces under ultra-high 

vacuum (UHV). It is found that a well-ordered surface can be prepared by a single cycle of 1 

keV Ar+ ion bombardment and 30 min of annealing. Low energy electron diffraction (LEED) 

and  detailed  low  energy  ion  scattering  (LEIS)  measurements  show  no  differences  between 

IBA-prepared surfaces and those prepared by in situ cleaving in UHV. Analysis of the LEED 

patterns shows that the optimal annealing temperature is 450°C. Angular LEIS scans reveal 

the formation of surface Se vacancies when the annealing temperature exceeds 520°C. 

____________ 

*Corresponding author, E-mail: yarmoff@ucr.edu 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. Introduction 

Bi2Se3  has  been  studied  for  decades  as  a  classic  thermoelectric  material  [1,2]  and 

recently has drawn more attention as a second generation three-dimensional (3D) topological 

insulator (TI) with a practical band gap around 0.3 eV [3,4]. The topological surface states 

(TSS)  of  a  TI  material  make  its  boundaries  conductive  while  the  bulk  remains  insulating. 

This  unique  property  makes  it  promising  for  use  in  applications  such  as  topological 

superconductors [5], quantum computers [6] and spintronics-based devices [7,8]. 

Bi2Se3 is  a  layered  material  consisting  of  stacked  quintuple  layers  (QL)  that  are  held 

together  by  weak  van  der  Waals  forces  [9].  Although  this  enables  ordered  surfaces  to  be 

prepared  by  mechanical  cleaving  along  the  (001)  plane,  cleaving  has  many  disadvantages. 

For  example,  in  situ  cleaving  under  ultra-high  vacuum  (UHV)  requires  special  preparation 

by attaching parts to each individual sample [10] and installation of tools inside the chamber 

[11].  More  importantly,  the  in  situ  procedure  cannot  guarantee  an  optimal  cleave,  as 

sometimes a flat surface is obtained only after several consecutive cleaves from a particular 

sample.  Ex  situ  cleaving  is  even  more  problematic  as  the  resulting  surface  structures  have 

been  found  to  vary  from  sample  to  sample  [11-15].  For  example,  some  studies  indicate  a 

Se-termination [15], as expected from the bulk crystal structure, while others suggest that the 

bulk-terminated surface is covered by an extra bilayer of Bi [13,16].   

Ion bombardment and annealing (IBA) is a straightforward and powerful UHV surface 

preparation method that has been utilized for more than 60 years since the pioneering work 

of  Farnsworth  et  al.  [17].  IBA  involves  the  removal  of  surface  contaminants  by  sputtering 

2 

 
with low energy inert noble gas ions followed by recrystallization of the damaged surface by 

annealing in vacuum.   

There  have  been  some  previous  investigations  in  which  IBA  was  used  to  prepare 

Bi2(Se,Te)3  materials.  Most  of  these  employed  low  energy  electron  diffraction  (LEED)  or 

scanning  tunneling  microscopy  (STM),  although  neither  of  these  can  directly  provide  the 

surface composition or local structure below the top atomic layer. Haneman used LEED to 

show that Bi2Te3 surfaces prepared by in situ cleaving and IBA using annealing temperatures 

in the range of 200°C to 260°C have similar symmetries, but the detailed surface structure 

was  not  investigated  [18].  STM  images  by  Coelho  et  al.  show  that  IBA-prepared  Bi2Te3 

using an annealing temperature of 300°C is approximately terminated half by Te and half by 

a  Bi  bilayer  [19].  These  terminations  were  inferred  from  STM  line-profiles  using  the  fact 

that the thickness of a Bi bilayer is about half that of a Bi2Te3 QL. Cavallin et al. used STM 

to  show  that  a  Bi-bilayer  film  appears  on  IBA-prepared  Bi2Se3  surfaces  when  annealed  at 

around 320°C [20].   

A previous study from our group used low energy ion scattering (LEIS) to compare 

surfaces prepared by in situ cleaving, ex situ cleaving and IBA [11]. In contrast to STM or 

LEED, LEIS directly reveals the surface composition and structure of the outermost two to 

three  atomic  layers  [21].  It  was  found  that  in  situ  cleaved  and  IBA-prepared  surfaces  are 

Se-terminated and the surface atomic structures are very similar, but ex situ cleaved surfaces 

can either have a Se-termination or be Bi-rich [11]. XPS and LEIS showed the presence of 

surface  contamination  on  ex  situ  cleaved  surfaces,  and  it  was  inferred  that  a  chemical 

reaction with the contaminants contributes to the non-reproducibility of their termination.   

3 

 
 
In this paper, surface preparation of Bi2Se3 by IBA is investigated in more detail using 

LEIS and LEED. It is shown that a well-ordered Se-terminated surface can be successfully 

prepared  by  IBA  using  an  optimized  annealing  temperature,  and  that  such  a  surface  has 

excellent  stability  even  after  exposure  to  air.  In  addition,  impact  collision  ion  scattering 

spectroscopy (ICISS), an advanced variation of LEIS, reveals the formation of Se vacancies 

in  the  near-surface  region  after  annealing  at  higher  temperatures.  Such  vacancies  are  not 

observable  by  LEED  alone.  The  ability  to  experimentally  detect  Se  vacancies  is  of  great 

importance as they are believed to be responsible for the natural n-type doping of Bi2Se3 that 

mixes the TSS with the bulk conduction states [1,22,23]. 

II. Experimental Procedure 

Single crystals of Bi2Se3.12 were grown by melting stoichiometric mixtures of Bi and Se 

shot in an evacuated quartz ampule and then following a slow-cooling protocol [23,24]. The 

details of the sample growth recipe and surface preparation methods are provided elsewhere 

[11], so only the basic information is given here. The samples were synthesized with a slight 

enrichment  of  Se  to  compensate  for  the  possibility  of  bulk  Se  vacancies,  but  such  a 

stoichiometry adjustment does not affect the surface properties [11]. After growth, the ingots 

are fragmented with a razor blade to obtain flat and shiny pieces. These pieces can be easily 

cleaved  along  the  (001)  plane  by  conventional  exfoliation  methods  to  produce  a  surface 

suitable for investigation. A typical sample diameter is around 10 mm. 

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements are conducted in tapping mode using a 

Dimension  5000  AFM  (Digital  Instruments)  with  TESPA-V2  silicon  tips  (Bruker).  The 

4 

 
 
samples  prepared  by  IBA  are  removed  from  UHV  and  exposed  to  air  during  the  AFM 

measurements. 

Ar+  ion  bombardment,  LEED  and  LEIS  are  all  carried  out  in  a  UHV  chamber  with  a 

base  pressure  of  2×10-10  Torr.  The  UHV  chamber  is  attached  to  a  load  lock  that  enables 

quick  introduction  of  new  samples  without  the  need  for  baking  the  main  chamber.  The 

samples are attached to transferable Ta sample holders (Thermionics) that have a diameter of 

30 mm and a thickness of 1 mm. The holders are fitted in UHV onto the foot of a vertical 

x-y-z manipulator that has two rotational degrees of freedom. 

The foot of the manipulator contains a filament mounted behind the sample holder that 

includes the ability to operate as an electron beam heater by biasing the filament with a high 

negative voltage relative to the sample. For the work performed here, however, the samples 

are simply heated radiatively by running current through the filament without applying a bias 

voltage.  A  calibration  of  the  sample  temperature  to  the  filament  current  was  performed  by 

temporarily attaching several thermocouples to  an empty sample holder and monitoring the 

temperature as a function of filament current. Thermocouple measurements showed that the 

temperature in the center of the sample holder is about 20°C hotter than it is 5 mm from the 

center and about 100°C hotter than it is 10 mm away, but it is the temperature at the center of 

the  sample  holder  that  is  reported  here.  Also,  as  the  calibration  was  done  with  no  sample 

attached  to  the  holder,  the  temperatures  reported  could  be  slightly  larger  than  the  actual 

temperature of the Bi2Se3 samples. Finally, note that it takes more than half an hour for the 

sample holder temperature to stabilize and the thickness of the sample also affects the surface 

temperature.  An  infrared  pyrometer,  which  can  detect  temperatures  above  about  300°C,  is 

5 

 
also used during annealing to roughly monitor temperature changes over time. These issues 

with  the  temperature  measurement  lead  to  a  larger  uncertainty  that  is  the  sample  may  be 

cooler  than  reported,  rather  than  warmer,  and  are  thus  estimated  to  be  about  -50°C, +20°C. 

Despite  concerns  about  the  absolute  accuracy  of  the  temperature  measurements,  however, 

they correctly provide relative values when compared to each other. 

Samples that are to be prepared by IBA are mounted onto the transferable sample holder 

using spot welded Ta strips. The samples are cleaved in air by carbon tape multiple times to 

obtain a visibly flat surface. Note that some of these ex situ cleaved samples are measured by 

AFM  without  any  additional  surface  treatment.  The  samples  to  be  subjected  to  IBA  are 

inserted  into  the  main  UHV  chamber  and  subjected  to  multiple  cycles  of  Ar+  ion 

bombardment using a backfilled sputter ion gun (Perkin-Elmer) and annealing. Ion energies 

employed for sputtering are in the range of 0.5 to 1.0 keV and the background pressure of Ar 

is 2×10-5 Torr. The size of the sputter ion beam is defocused to be larger than the sample to 

minimize  any  non-uniformity  in  the  flux.  The  surface  atomic  density  of  Bi2Se3  is  about 

6.8×10#$  cm-2. The average beam flux is about 200 nA cm-2 as measured by a Faraday cup, 

so  that  after  30  min  of  bombardment  the  ion  fluence  will  be  2.3×10#%  cm-2,  which  is 

sufficient to remove the top few atomic layers. After sputtering, the samples are annealed in 

UHV to desorb the embedded Ar and recrystallize the surfaces.   

Samples to be cleaved in situ are mounted onto the transferable holder with Ag paste, 

while  a  small  Al  bar  is  attached  to  the  front  of  the  sample  with  Torr-Seal,  as  described  in 

Refs. [10,11]. The Al bar is knocked off inside the UHV chamber to cleave the sample and 

obtain a flat and shiny surface.   

6 

 
A  Na+  thermionic  emission  ion  gun  (Kimball  Physics)  is  used  for  the  LEIS 

measurements. For the experiments performed here, the incident ion beam energy is fixed at 

3.0 keV. The ion gun is mounted on a turntable that can rotate around the vertical axis of the 

chamber. The diameter of the focused ion beam is less than 1 mm. The manipulator allows 

the samples to rotate azimuthally around the surface normal and about the vertical axis that 

is in the plane of the sample’s surface. In this way, the scattering angle, the polar angle and 

the azimuthal angle can each be changed independently. The polar angles are reported with 

respect to the plane of the sample surface. A stepper motor is controlled by a computer to 

automatically adjust the polar angle. The chamber contains two detectors for LEIS, a straight 

tube for time-of-flight (TOF) and a hemispherical electrostatic analyzer (ESA). The incident 

ion fluence for all LEIS data is kept below 1% of a monolayer to limit any surface damage. 

TOF  uses  a  pulsed  ion  beam  and  measures  the  flight  time  of  the  scattered  ionic  and 

neutral projectiles, as previously described [25]. For the work performed here, only the total 

scattered yield is presented. The Na+ ion beam is pulsed at 80 to 100 kHz by using deflection 

plates  to  pass  the  beam  across  a  1  mm  aperture  mounted  in  front  of  the  ion  gun.  The 

scattered  particles  are  detected  by  a  triple  microchannelplate  (MCP)  array  mounted  at  the 

end of a 0.57 m long flight tube at a scattering angle of 125°. The entrance to the MCP is 

held at ground potential so that the sensitivity to neutral and ionic species is the same. There 

are two 3 mm diameter apertures in the flight tube, which limits the acceptance angle to less 

than 1°.   

Energy  spectra  and  of  the  scattered  ion  yield  and  ICISS  angular  distributions  are 

measured using a 160° Comstock AC-901 hemispherical ESA that has a radius of 47.6 mm 

7 

 
and 2 mm diameter entrance and exit apertures, making the acceptance angle approximately 

2°. The scattering angle used with the ESA is 161°.   

ICISS  simulations  were  performed  with  Kalypso,  a  software  package  that  uses 

molecular dynamics (MD) to simulate atomic collisions in solids [26]. The recoil interaction 

approximation (RIA) is utilized so that only the repulsive interactions between the projectile 

and  individual  target  atoms  need  to  be  considered.  The  Thomas-Fermi-Moliére  repulsive 

screening potential is used with the Firsov screening length corrected by a factor of 0.8 and a 

potential  cut-off  distance  of  2.9  Å  [27].  The  structural  parameters  of  the  Se-terminated 

simulation  target  is  the  average  of  the  two  sets  of  experimental  parameters  obtained  via 

LEED and SXRD [28] with the spacing between the first and second atomic layer set to 1.55 

Å as determined in Ref. [27]. The vibrational amplitudes of the atoms in the bulk crystal are 

established  using  the  bulk  Debye  temperature  of  200  K  [29].  The  mean  square  vibrational 

amplitudes of the top two atomic layers are isotropically enhanced by a factor of 2 by setting 

their  Debye  temperature  to  140  K.  The  acceptance  range  of  the  scattering  angles  for  the 

simulations is chosen to be 2° to match that of the experimental data. 

III. Results and Discussion 

LEED patterns provide the symmetry of the two-dimensional surface unit cell and can 

be used as a measure of the crystallinity in the near-surface region [30]. In the present work, 

they  are  also  used  to  identify  the  appropriate  annealing  temperature  and  the  minimum 

number  of  cycles  needed  for  IBA  to  produce  a  highly  ordered  surface.  The  LEED  pattern 

8 

 
 
collected from a sample that is cleaved ex situ before being subjected to the IBA process is 

very dim indicating a disordered surface due to atmospheric contaminants [11].   

After insertion into the UHV main chamber, the samples are first degassed at 130°C for 

several  hours  to  remove  adsorbed  water  and  hydrocarbons,  followed  by  two-hours  of  Ar+ 

sputtering and then a 30 min anneal at 130°C. The samples are next subjected to successive 

IBA  cycles  using  higher  annealing  temperatures,  with  LEED  patterns  collected  after  each 

cycle. One IBA cycle is defined here as 30 min of 0.5 to 1.0 keV Ar+ bombardment and 30 

min of annealing.   

Figure 1(a) shows a representative LEED pattern collected from a Bi2Se3(001) surface 

after  a  30  min  1.0  keV  Ar+  ion  bombardment  and  a  30  min  anneal  at  510°C.  Figure  1(b) 

shows  the  gray  scale  line  profile  along  the  line  indicated  in  Fig.  1(a)  determined  with  the 

ImageJ software package. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the peaks in Fig. 1(b) 

are  used  to  represent  the  diameters  of  the  LEED  spots.  The  FWHM’s  are  then  used  to 

calculate  the  average  domain  sizes  of  the  surface  assuming  that  domain  size  is  the  only 

factor  that  contributes  to  the  width  of  the  LEED  spots,  i.e.,  other  contributions  to  the  spot 

size,  such  as  the  diameter  of  the  electron  beam  and  aberrations  in  the  LEED  optics,  are 

ignored.  Although  such  domain  sizes  are  not  accurate,  relative  changes  to  their  sizes  as  a 

function of sample treatment do provide useful information.   

Figure 2 shows the calculated domain sizes as a function of annealing temperature. For 

ion  bombarded  samples,  a  blurry  LEED  pattern  with  large  spots  is  always  visible  prior  to 

annealing  even  after  hours  of  sputtering  as  indicated  by  the  first  point  in  Fig.  2.  After 

annealing,  the  domain  size  increases  until  it  reaches  a  maximum  at  around  450°C  after 

9 

 
which it starts to decline, suggesting that 450°C is the optimal annealing temperature. The 

domain size after a 450°C anneal is comparable to that of an in situ cleaved surface, which is 

also  indicated  in  Fig.  2.  Once  a  particular  sample  has  been  treated  with  the  preliminary 

degassing  and  low  temperature  annealing  procedure,  a  single  IBA  cycle  is  sufficient  to 

achieve a sharp LEED pattern.   

AFM shows that IBA produces surfaces with uniform steps and flat terraces. Figure 3 

shows  typical  AFM  images  collected  from  an  IBA-prepared  surface  annealed  at  490°C. 

Figure 3(a) shows the image in a 3D, oblique perspective that acts to highlight the edges of 

the  steps.  Many  step  edges  and  large  triangles  of  a  size  on  the  order  of  µm  are  observed 

across  the  surface.  Figure  3(b)  is  a  two-dimensional  (2D)  representation  of  a  selected  area 

that uses a color scheme to indicate the height directly. Many flats terraces separated by step 

edges are seen in Fig. 3(b). Figure 3(c) is a line profile measured along the line indicated in 

Fig. 3(b). The heights of all of the steps in the line profile are around 1 nm, which is close to 

the 0.95 nm height of a bulk Bi2Se3 QL [12]. The terraces are 0.2 µm wide on average and 

the roughness on the terraces is typically around 0.5 Å, which is close to the resolution of the 

AFM instrument. This measured roughness is smaller than the typical 0.8 Å roughness that 

is measured on ex situ cleaved surfaces. Ex situ cleaved surfaces also show a much smaller 

density of step edges due to their increased roughness.   

LEIS,  a  straightforward  and  powerful  technique  for  surface  analysis  [21],  is  employed 

here  to  determine  the  surface  composition  and  local  atomic  structure  on  the  terraces.  The 

incident  kinetic  energies  in  LEIS  are  on  the  order  of  keV,  which  are  much  larger  than  the 

surface  bonding  energies,  so  that  interactions  between  target  atoms  can  be  ignored. 

10 

 
Furthermore, the scattering cross sections are smaller than interatomic spacings allowing for 

the  use  of  the  binary  collision  approximation  (BCA),  which  assumes  that  the  projectiles 

interact  with  only  a  single  target  atom  at  a  time.  Also,  in  the  low  energy  ion  range,  the 

collisions can be considered to be completely classical as the de Broglie wavelength is on the 

order of a hundredth of an Å. If a projectile escapes the sample after only one collision, the 

kinetic energy of the scattered projectile will primarily depend on the projectile/target mass 

ratio and the scattering angle [21]. In this way, each surface element that is directly visible to 

both  the  ion  beam  and  the  detector  contributes  a  single  scattering  peak  (SSP)  to  a  LEIS 

spectrum. The particles singly scattered from heavier target atoms will have a larger kinetic 

energy than those singly scattered from lighter elements.   

The  surface  sensitivity  in  LEIS  with  alkali  projectiles  is  largely  due  to  shadowing  and 

blocking  effects  [21].  A  shadow  cone  is  defined  as  the  region  behind  a  surface  atom  into 

which a projectile cannot penetrate because of the repulsive interatomic potential. A blocking 

cone  is  a  similar  concept,  but  applies  to  projectiles  that  are  blocked  by  shallower  atoms  as 

they  exit  the  surface  after  undergoing  a  large  angle  collision  with  a  deeper  lying  atom. 

Because  the  size  of  the  scattering  cross  sections  is  comparable  to  the  interatomic  spacings, 

atoms can effectively shadow or block projectiles from regions behind a target atom leading 

to the ability to define how many atomic layers a particular measurement will probe.   

Figure 4 shows TOF spectra collected from a surface prepared by IBA with an annealing 

temperature of 510°C and from an in situ cleaved surface. In TOF-LEIS, the more energetic 

particles reach the detector more quickly, which is why the x-axis is plotted in reverse. Thus, 

the projectiles singly scattered from Bi will arrive at the detector earlier than those scattered 

11 

 
from Se. The large backgrounds in Fig. 4 that extend from about 9.0 to about 4.5 µs are due 

to  multiple  scattering  trajectories.  The  actual  background  should  increase  at  longer  flight 

times as a consequence of the cascade of multiply scattered particles, but the efficiency of the 

MCP  detector  goes  down  quickly  at  lower  impact  energies  [31]  leading  to  an  apparent 

decrease in intensity at longer flight times.   

A double alignment orientation is used for the spectra shown in Fig. 4 so that only the 

outermost atomic layer contributes to the SSP, as described in Ref. [11]. Double alignment 

implies  that  both  the  incident  ion  beam  and  the  detector  are  positioned  along  low  index 

crystalline directions. The use of normal incidence prevents the incident ions from reaching 

beyond  the  third  atomic  layer,  as  ions  scattered  from  the  first  layer  shadow  those  in  the 

fourth  layer,  the  second  layer  shadows  the  fifth  and  the  third  layer  shadows  the  sixth.  By 

placing the detector at the outgoing low index direction corresponding to the [210] azimuth 

at a polar angle of 36°, the ions scattered from the third layer are blocked by the second layer 

and those scattered from the second layer are blocked by the atoms in the first layer. Thus, in 

this  orientation  only  single  scattering  events  from  the  outermost  layer  are  detected.  The 

TOF-LEIS  spectra  in  Fig.  4  show  only  one  feature  at  6.3  µs,  which  is  identified  as  the  Se 

SSP.  The  Bi  SSP  would  appear  at  4.8  µs,  but  its  absence  indicates  that  both  the 

IBA-prepared and in situ cleaved surfaces are Se-terminated, in agreement with Ref. [11].   

The  angular  dependence  of  the  SSP  intensities  is  sensitive  to  the  detailed  atomic 

structure  of  the  outermost  few  layers.  As  the  sample  orientation  is  adjusted,  scattered 

projectiles are deflected in and out of the shadow and blocking cones leading to changes in 

the scattered ion yield. Since the flux of projectiles is maximized at the edges of the shadow 

12 

 
and  blocking  cones,  the  detailed  shape  of  the  angular  distributions  can  be  rather  complex. 

When  a  large  scattering  angle  is  employed,  the  features  in  the  angular  scans  are  primarily 

due to shadowing effects. This experimental arrangement is known as ICISS [32,33].   

Figure 5 shows a representative energy spectrum collected with the ESA using 3.0 keV 

Na+ scattering from an IBA-prepared surface. The peak at 0.8 keV is the Se SSP while the 

peak  at  1.8  keV  is  the  Bi  SSP.  Both  SSP’s  are  visible  as  this  is  not  a  double  alignment 

orientation.  The  background  is  considerably  different  than  in  the  TOF  spectra  because  the 

ESA  only  measures  the  yield  of  ions  and,  unlike  the  MCP  detector  used  for  TOF,  its 

transmission function does not decrease with scattered energy. This spectrum is shown here 

as  it  is  used  to  locate  the  energies  of  Se  and  Bi  SSPs  so  that  the  ESA  can  be  fixed  at  a 

particular SSP energy to collect an ICISS angular distribution.   

Figure  6  shows  ICISS  scans  of  the  Se  SSP  intensity  as  the  incident  polar  angle  is 

adjusted by the stepper motor along the [010] azimuth from surfaces prepared by IBA with 

annealing  temperatures  of  510°C  and  520°C,  along  with  the  data  from  an  in  situ  cleaved 

surface.  The  features  in  these  scans  are  formed  as  the  sample  rotates  such  that  flux  at  the 

edges of the shadow and blocking cones interacts with other atoms in the crystal from which 

the projectiles singly scatter.   

When  the  incident  beam  is  close  to  the  plane  of  the  surface,  there  will  be  no 

backscattered yield because all of the surface atoms are located within the shadow cones of 

their neighboring surface atoms. As the incident polar angle increases to a point called the 

critical  angle,  the  edges  of  the  shadow  cones  of  the  first  layer  will  pass  through  their 

neighboring first layer atoms, which is illustrated in the upper drawing in the inset to Fig. 6. 

13 

 
As  the  ion  beam  is  rotated,  the  intensity  of  the  Se  SSP  reaches  a  maximum  due  to  the 

increased flux at the shadow cone edges. Such a maximum due to interaction of a first layer 

shadow cone with its nearest neighboring first layer atom is called a surface flux peak (SFP). 

The  peak  at  around  23°  in  Fig.  6  is  the  SFP,  although  in  this  case  it  results  from  a 

combination  of  the  first  and  third  Se  layers  since  these  are  equivalent  planes  that  are  both 

visible to the beam and detector along the [010] azimuth, as discussed below.   

As the polar angle increases beyond the SFP, interactions of the shadow cones formed 

around  the  surface  atoms  with  deeper  lying  atoms  lead  to  additional  features  in  the  ICISS 

polar scans. In this manner, every feature in an ICISS polar scan generally corresponds to a 

pair of interacting atoms in the solid created when the edge of the shadow cone of one atom 

passes through another atom in the crystal structure. By careful analysis, it is thus possible to 

identify  each  feature  in  an  ICISS  polar  scan  by  considering  all  of  the  pairs  of  interacting 

atoms.   

The  Bi2Se3  structure  along  the  [010]  azimuth  is  a  complicated  case,  however,  as  there 

are three inequivalent (300) planes visible to the ion beam and detector that are particularly 

close to each other, as illustrated in Fig. 7. Two of the (300) planes indicated by the vertical 

strips (right and left) are terminated with Se in the first and third layers, respectively, while 

the  other  (300)  plane  (middle)  is  terminated  with  Bi  in  the  second  layer.  The  distance 

between the (300) planes is only 1.2 Å, which is smaller than the radius of the shadow and 

blocking cones arising from atoms in the top two layers. Thus, ions singly scattered from the 

third  layer  atoms  not  only  interact  with  atoms  within  their  plane,  but  are  also  affected  by 

out-of-plane  scattering  between  atoms  in  the  top  two  layers.  This  causes  the  SFP  peak 

14 

 
position  from  the  third  Se  layer  to  be  slightly  different  than  the  SFP  from  the  topmost  Se 

layer, which leads to a weakly resolved double SFP in the region from approximately 16° to 

30° in Fig. 6.   

Despite the complications in understanding the ICISS features, however, the fact that the 

positions  and  shapes  of  all  the  features  of  the  surface  prepared  by  IBA  with  a  510°C 

annealing  temperature  and  the  in  situ  cleaved  surface  match  each  other  indicates  that  their 

terminations  and  surface  atomic  structures  are  the  same.  This  further  confirms  the 

conclusion reached in Ref. [11] that IBA can prepare surfaces that are as well ordered and 

have the same structure as those prepared by in situ cleaving.   

Figure 6 also shows that when the annealing temperature increases from 510°C to 520°C, 

however, a new feature appears at polar angles in the range of about 5° to 10°. A new feature 

at  a  smaller  polar  angle  suggests  that  annealing  above  510°C  induces  Se  vacancies  on  the 

surface. The inset to Fig. 6 illustrates how an absent Se atom causes the distance between the 

two  nearest  neighbor  surface  atoms  to  increase  so  that  the  critical  angle  decreases  and  the 

SFP moves to a smaller polar angle [34].   

Kalypso  simulations  are  performed  to  verify  that  Se  vacancies  can  create  such  a  new 

feature,  with  the  results  shown  in  Fig.  8.  A  one-dimensional  Se  chain  with  an  interatomic 

distance  of  4.14  Å  is  used  to  simplify  the  simulations.  Six  different  target  models  are 

employed with different percentages of surface Se vacancies: 0%, 5.6%, 10%, 16.7%, 25% 

and  50%.  The  Se  vacancies  are  modeled  by  removing  a  fraction  of  the  surface  Se  atoms 

periodically. The simulations clearly show a new peak emerging at around 5°-15° that is close 

to the position of the new feature in Fig. 6 for the 520°C annealed sample, and the intensity 

15 

 
of this peak increases with the fraction of Se vacancies. Thus, the simulated polar angle scans 

support  the  supposition  that  the  new  feature  results  from  Se  vacancies  created  by  the  high 

annealing temperature. Note that these vacancies can be located in either or both the first or 

third Se layers because of the two inequivalent (300) planes that are terminated by Se.   

The  simulations  indicate  that  the  polar  angle  scans  are  only  moderately  sensitive  to  Se 

vacancies  as  a  concentration  of  5.6%  shows  just  a  minimal  feature  around  10°.  Thus,  the 

absence of such a feature in the experimental data of Fig. 6 implies that the concentration of 

Se vacancy defects is well below 5% on the in situ cleaved surfaces and on surfaces prepared 

by  IBA  with  an  annealing  temperature  of  510°C  or  less.  Furthermore,  the  experimental 

observation of the new feature after annealing at 520°C implies that the concentration of Se 

vacancies  formed  on  the  surface  after  annealing  at  520°C  is  large  enough  to  monitor  with 

ICISS.  A  rough  comparison  of  the  experimental  data  in  Fig.  6  to  the  simulations  in  Fig.  8 

would suggest a vacancy concentration in the range of 10-15%. 

LEIS  measurements  of  the  sample  holder  provide  additional  evidence  for  Se  removal 

from the sample by annealing. Figure 9 shows a set of energy spectra collected with the ESA 

from the Ta sample holder after IBA cycles using different annealing temperatures. The peak 

at around 0.8 keV is the Se SSP, while the peak at around 1.7 keV is the Ta SSP. Figure 9 

shows  that  Ta  sample  holder  was  free  of  Se  after  sputtering  and  when  the  annealing 

temperature  was  less  than  510°C  (bottom  spectrum),  but  that  a  Se  SSP  emerges  when  the 

annealing  temperature  exceeds  540°C.  Note  that  after  many  annealing  cycles,  the  chamber 

windows opposite to the sample become covered with a material, presumably Se, suggesting 

that at least some of the Se desorbs from the Bi2Se3 surface into vacuum. Although Se could 

16 

 
desorb from the sample, scatter from the chamber walls and then land on the holder next to 

the  sample,  which  would  explain  the  results  shown  in  Fig.  9,  this  is  an  unlikely  scenario. 

More feasible is that some of the Se also leaves the Bi2Se3 surface by lateral diffusion from 

the sample to the sample holder, but more work is needed to explore the specific mechanisms 

responsible for the formation of the Se vacancies.   

In  addition,  the  IBA-prepared  samples  are  particularly  robust  to  reaction  with 

atmospheric contaminants. Figure 10 shows a TOF-LEIS spectrum collected from an ex situ 

cleaved  surface  as  well  as  spectra  collected  from  an  in  situ  cleaved  surface  and  an 

IBA-prepared  surface  that  had  been  exposed  to  air.  The  IBA-prepared  and  in  situ  cleaved 

samples were removed from vacuum, exposed to air for about two hours and then reinserted 

into the UHV chamber. The TOF-LEIS spectra collected from these samples show that all of 

the surfaces remain Se-terminated as the Se SSP is still present and a Bi SSP does not appear. 

In  addition  to  SSPs,  however,  some  LEIS  spectra  show  features  that  result  from  direct 

recoiling of light adsorbates. Direct recoiling is the removal of fast atoms from a surface by 

direct collision with the projectile, and it is particularly sensitive to light adsorbates [21]. For 

Bi2Se3, direct recoiling has been observed at shorter flight times than the Bi SSP in Ref. [11], 

and  these  are  indicated  in  Fig.  10.  Direct  recoiling  of  surface  contaminants  for  the 

air-exposed  IBA-prepared  surface  is  barely  visible  in  the  data  which  implies  that  the 

concentration of contaminants is much smaller than on an air-exposed cleaved surfaces. This 

suggests that IBA-prepared surfaces are more resistant to surface chemical reaction than are 

cleaved surfaces, whether the cleaving is in situ or ex situ. In Ref. [11], it was proposed that 

surface  adsorption  and  subsequent  chemical  reaction  was  greatly  increased  in  the  presence 

17 

 
atomic-scale  defects,  such  as  those  induced  by  mechanical  cleaving.  The  present  results 

suggest  that  IBA  as  a  surface  preparation  method  produces  materials  with  fewer  of  these 

reactive defects. The fact that AFM images show a higher density of steps on IBA-prepared 

surfaces than on cleaved surfaces suggests that the steps are not the chemically reactive sites. 

Instead, atomic scale defects are the likely nucleation sites at which contaminants adsorb and 

subsequently react. 

IV. Conclusions 

After a single crystal Bi2Se3.12 sample is initially degassed, one 30 min ion bombardment 

and  30  min  annealing  cycle  is  sufficient  to  form  a  well-ordered  surface  that  has  the  same 

atomic structure as an in situ cleaved surface. As it was previously shown that Bi2Se3 surfaces 

cleaved  ex  situ  have  a  non-reproducible  termination  [11],  the  work  presented  here 

demonstrate that IBA can be used to restore such surfaces to a well-ordered Se-termination.   

The  optimal  annealing  temperature  range  for  IBA  is  between  400°C  and  510°C.  If  the 

temperature is below this range, the surface won’t crystallize well enough to produce a sharp 

LEED pattern. If the annealing temperature is above this range, then Se vacancies will form 

even  though  the  sample  still  displays  a  reasonably  sharp  LEED  pattern.  The  vacancies  are 

indicated  by  a  new  ICISS  polar  scan  feature  at  ~5°-10°  and  the  emergence  of  Se  on  the 

sample holder. Whether annealing above 510°C causes Se atoms to desorb or diffuse from the 

sample is still an open question.   

The ion scattering methodology used here shows that ICISS can directly measure surface 

vacancies.  This  methodology  will  be  improved  in  subsequent  investigations  by  collecting 

18 

 
 
data  using  different  projectiles  and  performing  simulations  with  improved  statistics.  For 

example,  Li+  has  a  lighter  mass  and  therefore  smaller  shadow  cones  than  Na+,  while  He+ 

neutralizes through an Auger-type mechanism that makes it even more surface sensitive [21]. 

Thus, a comparison of data collected with these projectiles would make it possible to clearly 

differentiate  between  first  and  third  layer  Se  vacancies.  Such  information  will  be  of  great 

utility in investigations that correlate the electronic and structural properties of TI materials.   

IBA-prepared surfaces are also more resistant to air contamination than cleaved surfaces 

and  are  thus  likely  to  be  more  free  of  defects.  Therefore,  IBA  preparation  of  single  crystal 

Bi2Se3 surfaces is a recommended method for sample preparation for UHV surface and other 

investigations of this class of materials.   

V. Acknowledgements 

This  material  is  based  on  work  supported  by,  or  in  part  by,  the  U.S.  Army  Research 

Laboratory  and  the  U.S.  Army  Research  Office  under  Grant  No.  63852-PH-H.  CMV  was 

supported  by  MacREU,  a  National  Science  Foundation  Research  Experience  for 

Undergraduate students site funded under NSF DMR 1359136. 

19 

 
 
 
 
References 

1. 

Y.  S.  Hor,  A.  Richardella,  P.  Roushan,  Y.  Xia,  J.  G.  Checkelsky,  A.  Yazdani,  M.  Z. 

Hasan, N. P. Ong, and R. J. Cava, Phys. Rev. B 79, 195208 (2009). 

2. 

3. 

S. K. Mishra, S. Satpathy, and O. Jepsen, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 9, 461 (1997). 

H. Zhang, C.-X. Liu, X.-L. Qi, X. Dai, Z. Fang, and S.-C. Zhang, Nat. Phys. 5, 438 

(2009). 

4. 

Y. Xia, D. Qian, D. Hsieh, L. Wray, A. Pal, H. Lin, A. Bansil, D. Grauer, Y. S. Hor, R. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

J. Cava, and M. Z. Hasan, Nat. Phys. 5, 398 (2009). 

X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1057 (2011). 

C. Nayak, S. H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman, and S. Das Sarma, Rev. Mod. Phys. 

80, 1083 (2008). 

I. Žutić, J. Fabian, and S. Das Sarma, Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 323 (2004). 

Z. Jiang, C.-Z. Chang, M. R. Masir, C. Tang, Y. Xu, J. S. Moodera, A. H. MacDonald, 

and J. Shi, Nat. Commun. 7, 11458 (2016). 

9. 

R. W. G. Wyckoff, Crystal Structures - Volume 2 : Inorganic Compounds RXn, RnMX2, 

RnMX3 (Interscience Publishers, New York, 1964). 

10. 

R.  D.  Gann,  J.  Wen,  Z.  Xu,  G.  D.  Gu,  and  J.  A.  Yarmoff,  Phys.  Rev.  B  84,  165411 

(2011). 

11.  W. Zhou, H. Zhu, and J. A. Yarmoff, Phys. Rev. B 94, 195408 (2016). 

12. 

A. S. Hewitt, J. Wang, J. Boltersdorf, P. A. Maggard, and D. B. Dougherty, J. Vac. Sci. 

Technol. B 32, 04E103 (2014). 

13.  M. T. Edmonds, J. T. Hellerstedt, A. Tadich, A. Schenk, K. M. O’Donnell, J. Tosado, 

20 

 
N.  P.  Butch,  P.  Syers,  J.  Paglione,  and  M.  S.  Fuhrer,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  C  118,  20413 

(2014). 

14.  D. Kong, J. J. Cha, K. Lai, H. Peng, J. G. Analytis, S. Meister, Y. Chen, H.-J. Zhang, I. 

R. Fisher, Z.-X. Shen, and Y. Cui, ACS Nano 5, 4698 (2011). 

15. 

V. V. Atuchin, V. A. Golyashov, K. A. Kokh, I. V. Korolkov, A. S. Kozhukhov, V. N. 

Kruchinin, S. V. Makarenko, L. D. Pokrovsky, I. P. Prosvirin, K. N. Romanyuk, and O. 

E. Tereshchenko, Cryst. Growth Des. 11, 5507 (2011). 

16. 

X. He, W. Zhou, Z. Y. Wang, Y. N. Zhang, J. Shi, R. Q. Wu, and J. A. Yarmoff, Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 110, 156101 (2013). 

17. 

H. E. Farnsworth, R. E. Schlier, T. H. George, and R. M. Burger, J. Appl. Phys. 26, 

252 (1955). 

18. 

D. Haneman, Phys. Rev. 119, 563 (1960). 

19. 

P. M. Coelho, G. A. S. Ribeiro, A. Malachias, V. L. Pimentel, W. S. Silva, D. D. Reis, 

M. S. C. Mazzoni, and R. Magalhães-Paniago, Nano Lett. 13, 4517 (2013). 

20. 

A. Cavallin, V. Sevriuk, K. N. Fischer, S. Manna, S. Ouazi, M. Ellguth, C. Tusche, H. 

L. Meyerheim, D. Sander, and J. Kirschner, Surf. Sci. 646, 72 (2016). 

21.  W.  J.  Rabalais,  Principles  and  applications  of  ion  scattering  spectrometry  :  surface 

chemical and structural analysis (Wiley, New York, 2003). 

22. 

J. Dai, D. West, X. Wang, Y. Wang, D. Kwok, S. W. Cheong, S. B. Zhang, and W. Wu, 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 106401 (2016). 

23. 

J. G. Analytis, J.-H. Chu, Y. Chen, F. Corredor, R. D. McDonald, Z. X. Shen, and I. R. 

Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 81, 205407 (2010). 

21 

 
24. 

Z. Wang, T. Lin, P. Wei, X. Liu, R. Dumas, K. Liu, and J. Shi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 

042112 (2010). 

25. 

C. B. Weare and J. A. Yarmoff, Surf. Sci. 348, 359 (1996). 

26.  M. A. Karolewski, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res. B 230, 402 (2005). 

27.  W. Zhou, H. Zhu, and J. A. Yarmoff, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 34, 04J108 (2016). 

28. 

D. D. dos Reis, L. Barreto, M. Bianchi, G. A. S. Ribeiro, E. A. Soares, W. S. Silva, V. 

E.  de Carvalho,  J.  Rawle,  M.  Hoesch,  C.  Nicklin,  W.  P.  Fernandes,  J.  Mi,  B.  B. 

Iversen, and P. Hofmann, Phys. Rev. B 88, 041404 (2013). 

29. 

G. E. Shoemake, J. A. Rayne, and R. W. Ure, Phys. Rev. 185, 1046 (1969). 

30. 

J. B. Pendry, in Interaction of Atoms and Molecules with Solid Surfaces, edited by V. 

Bortolani, N. H. March and M. P. Tosi (Springer US, Boston, MA, 1990), p. 201. 

31.  M.  Barat,  J.  C.  Brenot,  J.  A.  Fayeton,  and  Y.  J.  Picard,  Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.  71,  2050 

(2000). 

32.  M.  Aono,  C.  Oshima,  S.  Zaima,  S.  Otani,  and  Y.  Ishizawa,  Jpn.  J.  Appl.  Phys.  20, 

L829 (1981). 

33. 

Th. Fauster, Vacuum 38, 129 (1988). 

34.  M. Aono, Y. Hou, R. Souda, C. Oshima, S. Otani, and Y. Ishizawa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 

1293 (1983). 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. (a) A representative LEED pattern collected with an electron beam energy of 25.9 

eV from a Bi2Se3.12 surface prepared by IBA using an annealing temperature of 510°C. (b) A 

gray scale profile along the line indicated in (a), with the FWHM’s for LEED spots (0,1) and 

(1,0) indicated.  

23 

 
 
 
Figure  2.  Calculated  domain  sizes  of  IBA-prepared  Bi2Se3.12  as  a  function  of  annealing 

temperature.  The  domain  sizes  of  an  in  situ  cleaved  surface  and  a  surface  after  1  keV  Ar+ 

bombardment (sputtering) for 30 min, but prior to annealing, are included for comparison.  

24 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. (a) An AFM image of a Bi2Se3 surface prepared by IBA with annealing at 490°C 

shown in an oblique 3D perspective. (b) A close-up of the boxed area in (a) shown as a 2D 

image  with  the  indicated  color  scale  representing  height.  (c)  The  height  profile  measured 

along the line indicated in (b).  

25 

 
 
 
Figure  4.  TOF  spectra  collected  at  a  126°  scattering  angle  along  the  [210]  azimuth 

employing normally incident 3 keV Na+ ions. The samples are Bi2Se3.12 prepared by in situ 

cleaving (upper panel) and IBA with a 510°C annealing temperature (lower panel).   

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Energy spectrum collected with the ESA using 3 keV Na+ scattering from 

IBA-prepared Bi2Se3.12 surface with incident polar angle of 57º along [010] azimuth and a 

scattering angle of 161º. The sample was prepared using an annealing temperature of 510°C.   

27 

 
 
 
 
Figure 6. ICISS polar scans of the Se SSP using 3 keV Na+ scattering from Bi2Se3.12 along 

the [010] azimuth for in situ cleaved surface (short dashed line) and IBA-prepared surfaces 

with annealing temperatures of 510°C (long dashed line) and 520°C (solid line). Inset:    A 

schematic  illustration  of  the  surface  Se  atoms  with  the  incident  ion  beam  orientated  along 

the critical angle. The upper drawing shows a complete chain of Se atoms, while the lower 

drawing illustrates a chain with a Se vacancy.  

28 

 
 
 
 
Figure  7.  A  schematic  diagram  of  the  outermost  QL  of  Bi2Se3(001)  indicating  the  three 

inequivalent (300) planes along the [010] azimuth. The atoms are labeled with their chemical 

symbol  and  the  atomic  layer  in  which  they  reside  within  the  QL.  For  example,  “Se-1” 

indicates the first layer Se in the QL. The sizes of the atoms are shown as their ionic radii. 

Three of the planes are highlighted by rectangular vertical strips.  

29 

 
 
 
 
Figure  8.  Calculated  ICISS  polar  scans  of  the  Se  SSP  intensity  collected  along  the  [010] 

azimuth  using  3  keV  Na+  scattering  from  Bi2Se3  surfaces  with  different  percentages  of  Se 

vacancies.  

30 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure  9.  Energy  spectra  collected  with  the  ESA  for  3  keV  Na+  scattered  at  a  161°  angle 

from  the  same  spot  on  the  Ta  sample  holder  after  the  Bi2Se3  samples  were  annealed  at 

different temperatures.  

31 

 
 
 
 
Figure  10.  TOF  spectra  employing  normally  incident  3  keV  Na+  ions  collected  at  a  126° 

scattering  angle  along  the  [210]  azimuth  from  an  IBA-prepared  sample  after  140  mins’  air 

exposure  (dashed  line),  an  in  situ  cleaved  sample  after  158  mins’  air  exposure  (thick  line), 

and an ex situ cleaved sample with less than 5 mins’ air exposure (thin line). The feature due 

to direct recoiling of light surface contaminants is marked.   

32 

 
 
 
 
 
