A new method to quantify and reduce projection error in whole-solar-active-
region parameters measured from vector magnetograms 

David A. Falconer1,2, Sanjiv K. Tiwari1, Ronald L. Moore1,2, Igor Khazanov2,3 

1.  NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL 35812, USA 
2.  Center for Space Plasma and Aeronomic Research, University of Alabama in Huntsville, 

Huntsville, AL 35899, USA 

3.  Archarithms Inc., Huntsville, AL 35801, USA 

Corresponding author Email: David.a.Falconer@nasa.gov 

Abstract:  

Projection error limits the use of vector magnetograms of active regions (ARs) far from disk center. In 
this Letter, for ARs observed up to 60o from disk center, we demonstrate a method of measuring and 
reducing the projection error in the magnitude of any whole-AR parameter derived from a vector 
magnetogram that has been deprojected to disk center. The method assumes that the center-to-limb curve 
of the average of the parameter’s absolute values measured from the disk passage of a large number of 
ARs and normalized to each AR’s absolute value of the parameter at central meridian, gives the average 
fractional projection error at each radial distance from disk center. To demonstrate the method, we use a 
large set of large-flux ARs and apply the method to a whole-AR parameter that is among the simplest to 
measure: whole-AR magnetic flux. We measure 30,845 SDO/HMI vector magnetograms covering the disk 
passage of 272 large-flux ARs, each having whole-AR flux >1022 Mx. We obtain the center-to-limb 
radial-distance run of the average projection error in measured whole-AR flux from a Chebyshev fit to the 
radial-distance plot of the 30,845 normalized measured values. The average projection error in the 
measured whole-AR flux of an AR at a given radial distance is removed by multiplying the measured flux 
by the correction factor given by the fit. The correction is important for both the study of evolution of 
ARs and for improving the accuracy of forecasting an AR’s major flare/CME productivity.               

Keywords: Solar: Magnetic Fields, Solar: Photosphere, Solar: Activity 

1  Introduction 
Full disk, high cadence observations of Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI: Schou et al. 
2012) vector magnetograms allow us to consistently measure magnetic parameters of solar active 
regions (ARs) even when they are far from disk center. However, vector magnetograms away 
from disk center suffer from projection error. Projection error increases with distance from solar 
disk center. Based on a limited data sample of 36 AR vector magnetograms, Falconer et al. 
(2006) concluded that projection error in whole-AR magnetic flux measured from line-of-sight 
(LOS) magnetograms of ARs within 30o from solar disk center can be corrected by dividing it by 
cos2,  being heliocentric angle of the AR’s position. Thus, for measuring AR magnetic flux, a 
LOS magnetogram can be used for ARs observed within 30o of disk center by applying the above 

1 

 
 
correction, but additional projection error becomes 
significant beyond 30o and deprojection of vector 
magnetograms to disk center becomes necessary.   

In Figure 1, we show HMI magnetograms, LOS 
and vertical-field components, for AR 11944 at 
seven different positions/times during its disk 
passage. The LOS component of AR 
magnetograms far from disk center shows fictitious 
neutral lines, which occur when there is a change 
of polarity in the LOS component of the magnetic 
field but not in the vertical component of the 
magnetic field.  Fictitious polarities always occur 
on the limb side of sunspots far from disk center 
and are typically crescent-shaped as in Figure 1. 
These artifacts are a projection effect.  

Several deprojection problems degrade the 
measurement of total magnetic flux. These include 
ambiguity resolution, large transverse field noise, 
and foreshortening.    

The transverse magnetic field direction in a vector 
magnetogram has an 180o ambiguity. This comes 
from the transverse field direction measured from 
the linear polarization of light, which has only an 
180o range. Several techniques have been 
developed to resolve this ambiguity (Metcalf et al 
2006; Leka et al. 2009; Georgoulis 2012). We use 
the HMI definitive data, already disambiguated by 
the minimum energy method (Leka et al. 2009; 
Borrero et al 2011). We expect that disambiguation 
error increases with AR distance from disk center.    

The noise in the LOS field in HMI vector 
magnetograms is 5-10 G while the transverse field 
noise is ~100 G (Liu et. al. 2012; Hoeksema et al. 
2014). The farther the AR is from the disk center 
the greater the component of the observed 
transverse field in the vertical field of the 
deprojected magnetograms, increasing the noise in 
the (deprojected) vertical magnetic field. This 

2 

Figure 1: Seven snapshots covering the disk 
transit of AR 11944 in HMI LOS 
magnetograms (left) and in the vertical-field 
component of the deprojected vector 
magnetograms (right). The AR was 8o south of 
disk center when it was centered on the central 
meridian at 01:36 UT on 2014 January 08. The 
red bar is 100 arcsec long. The LOS 
magnetograms show increasingly obvious 
foreshortening and false polarity inversion lines 
with increasing distance from disk center, while 
the deprojected magnetograms show that the 
AR’s true flux arrangement evolved only 
gradually during disk transit of the AR.  

 
 
 
produces an overestimate of the AR’s total magnetic flux. This error increases with increasing 
radial distance of the AR. This transverse-field-noise effect can be clearly seen in Figure 1, 
where deprojected HMI active-region patches (HARPs) from original HARPs far from disk 
center show obvious light and dark gray noise in quiet regions, which does not occur when the 
original HARP is near disk center, as on 2014 January 8 in Figure 1.   

There is also projection error due to foreshortening, which causes an underestimate of the AR’s 
total magnetic flux.  This error results from flux of both polarities being in the pixels that have 
the polarity inversion lines in the LOS field.  The farther AR from disk center, the larger the area 
of the Sun is covered by these pixels, and the more the lost flux.  By blurring these pixels, the 
point spread function (PSF) further increases this flux loss (Yeo et al 2014).   The flux loss is 
further increased with distance from disk center by the increasing occurrence of false polarity 
inversion lines in the LOS magnetograms.    

Some methods developed in the past to remove projection error by transforming the AR’s vector 
magnetogram to disk center (Venkatakrishnan & Gary 1988; Venkatakrishnan et al. 1988; Gary 
& Hagyard 1990) retain some significant projection error for ARs beyond 45o from disk center.  
An alternative way to cope with the projection error is to quantify the radial-distance dependence 
of the projection error in a measured whole-AR magnetic parameter and then correct for it. This 
is what we do in this Letter, i.e., we establish a method to quantify and reduce projection error in 
the magnitude (absolute value) of any whole-AR magnetic parameter measured from deprojected 
vector magnetograms. For demonstration of the method, we have used large-flux ARs (flux > 
1022 Mx) and one of the simplest magnetic parameters, AR total magnetic flux. We have used 
HMI vector magnetograms in the present demonstration but the method should work for any 
vector magnetograms. 

2  Measurement of Total Magnetic Flux  
We use the MAG4 (short for Magnetogram forecast) tool to measure total magnetic flux of ARs. 
MAG4 is a code that automatically downloads and processes HMI magnetograms to forecast 
major flares, coronal mass ejections (CMEs), and solar proton events (Falconer et al 2011, 2012, 
2014).  In summer of 2015, MAG4 was upgraded to process vector magnetograms. Before that 
MAG4 used only LOS magnetograms. Now MAG4 first converts a vector magnetogram into 
vertical and horizontal field-vector components. This magnetogram is still in plane-of-sky pixels. 
MAG4 then resamples the magnetogram and creates square uniform pixels mapping the surface 
of the Sun at disk center using the method of Venkatakrishnan et al. (1988). Due to the relatively 
small size of HARPs, MAG4 does not take the spherical curvature of the Sun into account. We 
calculate the potential field from Bz (Alissandrakis, 1981). In this Letter, we use a sample of 
30,845 definitive-data HARP vector magnetograms. Although MAG4 measures many whole-AR 
magnetic parameters, here we establish the new method by concentrating on one parameter, AR 
total magnetic flux, measurement of which is the most straightforward and least erroneous. The 

3 

 
total magnetic flux is chosen also because 
it is one of the slowest evolving 
parameters of a mid-life AR.  

The total magnetic flux is given by   

Φ = ʃ |Bz| da. 

where Bz is the vertical magnetic field 
and the integral is over all pixels of the 
deprojected HARP with >100 G absolute 
field. The magnetic centroid of the 
deprojected HARP and the distance of 
that point from disk center in the plane-
of-the-sky HARP are also determined. 
Since MAG4 analyzes only strong-field 
ARs, we use two other parameters 
measured from the deprojected HARPs  
to select strong-field ARs. One is 
magnetic area 

A = ʃ da, 

where the integral is over the same pixels 
as for Φ, and the other is length of strong-
field neutral line 

                           LS = ʃ dl, 

Figure 2: Disk-transit plots of the total magnetic flux 
(obtained from deprojected vector magnetograms) for five 
ARs (11944 gold, 11899 green, 12109 magenta, 12014 red, 
11543 blue) that were chosen for having nearly constant 
flux during passage through the < 0.5 RS central disk. Total 
magnetic flux of each AR is plotted as a function of 
distance from the solar disk center, with the distance taken 
to be negative/positive when the AR is east/west of central 
meridian. The vertical lines mark 60o from disk center.  

where the integral is along all neutral-line intervals on which the potential horizontal magnetic 
field is greater than 150 G and separates opposite-polarity vertical magnetic field no weaker than 
20 G.  

For the present Letter, we use the MAG4 HMI database, which has only ARs that are observed 
by HMI and that qualify as so-called strong-field ARs.  MAG4 uses only strong-field ARs in 
order for the horizontal field on much of the AR neutral line to be well above the noise level, for 
low-noise evaluation of free-energy proxies given by integrals of the horizontal field along the 
strong-field intervals of the neutral line.  Following all of our previous work in developing 
MAG4 (Falcone et al 2011, 2012, 2014, and our foundational earlier work cited therein), we 
define a strong-field AR to be any AR for which the length LS of strong-field neutral line 
exceeds 75% of the square root of the area A of the vertical-field flux Φ of vertical field stronger 
than 100 G : LS/A0.5 > 0.75. 

4 

 
 
 
Figure 3: Observed average projection error in measured AR total magnetic flux in deprojected magnetograms as a 
function of distance from disk center (left) and after correction for it (middle). In the left panel, we have 
normalized the total magnetic flux measured in each HARP magnetogram by the HARP’s average value of flux at 
central meridian. We show the 2D-histogram of the distribution, the average value in each distance bin (yellow 
curve), the standard deviation (dashed yellow), and the Chebyshev fit (green dotted curve). The vertical lines mark 
30, 45 and 60 heliocentric degrees from disk center, and the horizontal lines mark 1.5, 2, 3, and 5 (and inverse) 
values of the flux ratio.   In the middle panel, the average projection error has been removed from each of the 
30,845 measured flux ratios by dividing by the value of the Chebyshev fit at the measured AR’s distance from disk 
center. In the right panel, we plot the growth and decay of each AR’s normalized magnetic flux as a function of 
time. The red curves show the standard deviation of the normalized flux as a function of absolute difference of time 
between the time of each AR’s magnetogram, and same AR’s farthest east (or west) magnetogram during the inner 
45 heliocentric degrees passage of the AR.  The unity line is solid yellow; the dashed yellow horizontal lines mark 
the maximum standard deviation at 60o from the middle panel.     

For this Letter only ARs with Φ > 1022 Mx are used. The 1022 Mx threshold was chosen because 
such large-flux ARs are the primary drivers of severe space weather.  The same method can be 
applied to smaller-flux ARs, by using a large set of smaller-flux (Φ < 1022 Mx) ARs to obtain the 
center-to-limb correction curve for those ARs.   

Note that we have measured whole HARPs for the analysis. Some of these HARPs contain more 
than one NOAA AR. We measure all of the strong-field regions in a HARP, treating them as a 
single AR. This does not affect the results presented in the current paper. Accordingly, in this 
paper we often refer to a HARP as an AR.  

3  Radial dependence of Average Projection Error in AR Total Magnetic 

Flux and its Removal   

The plots of measured magnetic flux Φ of five ARs through their disk transits are shown in 
Figure 2, each of which shows an upside-down U profile and an artificial 24-hour oscillation 
(Hoeksema et al 2014, and Couvidat et al 2016). Note that the X-axis is distance from disk 
center. The ARs in the east are given a negative distance so as not to have the east and west 
tracks overlie each other. Since none of these ARs transited through disk center, none of the ARs 

5 

 
 
 
     
 
 
 
reached R = 0. For each AR, 
due to projection error from 
foreshortening, the measured 
values of the total magnetic 
flux are much smaller near 
the limbs than those near disk 
center. The selected five ARs 
showed only little evolution 
in total flux during central-
disk passage. In other words, 
their flux did not rapidly 
grow or decay. The upside-
down U profile is common to 
all ARs, including those that 
do show a real trend of 
growing or shrinking in size. 
The upside-down U profile 
makes using time derivatives 
of an AR’s flux problematic 
for analysis. For example, for 
an AR far east of central 
meridian, we would not know 
if the AR’s flux were actually 
growing as the AR rotated 
farther from the limb.  

Figure 4: Disk-transit plots of the corrected total magnetic flux for the 
five ARs shown in Figure 2. The format is the same as Figure 2. Between 
60 heliocentric degrees east and west and a little farther, there is no 
apparent systematic radial dependence, no noticeable falloff from any 
residual projection error. As an AR rotates on (or off) the disk, the total 
magnetic flux changes rapidly, because of extreme foreshortening and 
because progressively more (or less) of the AR is observed.    

We quantify the average 
radial dependence of the projection error by using a large set of deprojected HARP 
magnetograms that yield disk-passage measurements of the total magnetic flux Φ of each of 272 
HARPs.  For each HARP, we average the measured flux in the strong-field area of that HARP 
over the HARP’s magnetograms taken during the time when the magnetic centroid of the 
HARP’s strong-field area is within 100” of central meridian. Then, each measured Φ from that 
HARP during its disk passage is divided by that average flux. Figure 3 (left and middle panels) 
shows a 2D histogram of the distribution of this flux ratio from a sample of 30,845 individual 
HARP magnetograms, all with strong-field flux of greater than 1022 Mx. Unlike in Figure 2, we 
leave the distance from disk center unsigned in Figure 3.  

In Figure 3 (left panel), the yellow solid curve shows the average value of Φ in each of 20 equal 
radial-distance bins. It has a slight rise starting near 0.4 RS or 25o (before the 30o leftmost vertical 
line)  and  then  falls  back  to  1  by  45o  (the  middle  vertical  line).  At  60o  the  solid  yellow  curve 
shows that the uncorrected total magnetic flux is 2/3 of the true value. The dashed yellow lines 

6 

 
 
 
show the 1σ standard deviation, (roughly 2/3 of the data points are within the two dashed lines). 
This  standard  deviation  should  not  be  thought  of  as  error.  As  described  later,  nearly  all  of  the 
spread  is  due  to  growth  or  decay  of  the  ARs.  Most  ARs  are  not  as  steady  as  those  shown  in 
Figure 2.  

In Figure 3 (left panel), a Chebyshev fit is done to all the data points, using the first five even 
terms (Press et al 1992). This fit is shown by the green dotted curve. The Chebyshev fit matches 
the bin-average curve and provides a continuous function, used for applying the correction. The 
fit shows that Φ is slightly overvalued in the ~ 30o – 45o distance from disk center, and is 
significantly undervalued beyond 50o.  The values of the Chebyshev coefficients of the fit are 
0.0049, 0.00087, -0.0016, 0.00084, and -0.000081. 

Figure 3 (middle panel), shows the corrected distribution with the standard deviation of the 
corrected distribution around the average curve. The average of the corrected AR flux values 
shows hardly any deviation from 1.  

The standard deviation of the corrected distribution grows with distance from disk center.   The 
predominant cause of the growth of the standard deviation is AR evolution (Figure 3, right 
panel).  To estimate the average growth/decay of the magnetic flux of our ARs, we use the same 
sample during the inner 45o disk passage where the correction factor is negligible.  We 
normalized these not by central meridian passage, but by furthest east as well as furthest west 
measured AR Φ, so each HARP magnetogram between these two extreme positions is used 
twice. In effect we are treating the eastern most point as central meridian to simulate evolution in 
the western hemisphere, and treating the western most point as central meridian to simulate 
evolution in the eastern hemisphere.  These are then folded, in a similar way as the other two 
panels of Figure 3. Absolute time relative to eastern most or western most magnetogram is 
plotted on the horizontal axis. This gives the flux evolution of our 272 ARs plotted in Figure 3, 
right panel.  In 3-4 days, the standard deviation grows to the size seen at 60 heliocentric degrees 
in the Figure 3, middle panel. Comparison of the scatter in the right panel with that in the central 
panel of Figure 3 indicates that most of the scatter in the central panel is from AR evolution and 
that little (~20% or less) in the central panel is from variance in the projection error among the 
272 ARs. 

For the five AR HARPs of Figure 2, we show the corrected flux in Figure 4.  Artificial 24-hour 
oscillation remains in the corrected flux. We can see that within 60o the ARs show no inverted-U 
trend during central disk passage. For tracking the evolution of an AR’s total magnetic flux, this 
gives us confidence to use the magnetic flux measured from deprojected vector magnetograms of 
the AR out to 60o degrees, from which we have removed the radial-distance average projection 
error shown in Figure 3. Very close to the limb (R > 0.95 RS), all ARs show a rapid fall in Φ. 
This is due to extreme foreshortening that near the limb and to the ARs taking a finite time to 
rotate on or off the disk, effects that are not corrected by our method.  

7 

 
4  Discussion and Conclusions 
A deprojected vector magnetogram of an AR is not exactly the same as the vector magnetogram 
of the AR if it were observed on the solar disk center. This is due to foreshortening (a pixel 
covers larger area towards limb), to the point spread function, to large transverse field noise that 
increases the noise in the vertical component of the deprojected magnetogram of ARs nearer the 
limb, and to error in 180o ambiguity resolution for ARs near the limb. These combined effects 
result in measured AR uncorrected total magnetic flux being 2/3 of the true value at 60o from 
disk center (Figure 3). Between 30o - 45o heliocentric angles there is a slight overvaluation of the 
total magnetic flux of an AR. Our interpretation for this is that transverse-field noise (and 
perhaps disambiguation error) causes the average curve in Figure 3 to rise with distance from 
disk center and that these projection effects are overcome and dominated by foreshortening error 
far enough from disk center, resulting in the fall of the average curve with increasing distance 
from disk center beyond about 40o.  [This interpretation was confirmed by projecting a 
deprojected vector magnetogram of AR 11944 to different longitudes, converting back to LOS 
and transverse magnetic field maps, and applying the PSF to these maps, then deprojecting the 
magnetogram, and measuring the total magnetic flux.  The center-to-limb curve obtained was 
qualitatively the same as that in the left panel of Figure 3 (showed the same trends) but was 
quantitatively different. To do this more correctly would require constructing the Stokes-
parameter maps for the projected magnetograms with PSF applied (i.e., construct what the HMI 
vector magnetograph would have recorded).]  The projection-error curve in Figure 3 was found 
by using a large sample of ARs, assuming that the average AR normalized true total magnetic 
flux is not a function of AR position on the disk. From this curve, the average projection error in 
an AR’s total magnetic flux can be removed as in Figure 4. This correction is good out to at least 
60 heliocentric degrees from disk center and is needed for improvement of scientific studies, for 
example, of evolutionary changes in AR magnetic flux.   

Please remember that the correction curve we obtain from the method presented here is based on 
the average total flux of a large number of ARs during their disk-passage. The basic assumption 
is that the center-to-limb changes from the real evolution of ARs average out, e.g., that equal 
number of ARs grow or decay during their disk-passage. Given the large number of ARs in our 
sample, this assumption seems appropriate. To the degree that this assumption is true, an 
increase or decrease in the corrected Φ out to 60o from disk center is due solely to the AR’s 
growth or decay.  We have also ignored the small east-west asymmetry in the HMI 
magnetograph (Hoeksema et al. 2014).       

After the correction is applied, there is still the error due to the 24-hour artificial oscillation 
shown in Figures 2 and 4, which is a few percent and is practically negligible for some 
applications. This can be corrected by a fitting (e.g., see Hoeksema et al (2014) and Couvidat et 
al (2016)) that we do not apply here.  

8 

 
By correcting for the projection error and filtering out the 24 hour dependence, the magnitude of 
an AR’s Φ can be well determined out to 60o from disk center.  Most of the standard deviation in 
Figure 3, central panel, is due to AR evolution.  The correction of projection-error shown in 
Figure 3 is especially needed if the AR’s time derivative of Φ is of interest. Figure 3 indicates 
that without the correction applied only ARs within 45 heliocentric degrees can be used without 
much concern.  

Although in this Letter we present the method by applying it to the simplest-to-measure magnetic 
parameter of an AR, the total magnetic flux, the method is suitable for correcting the magnitude 
(absolute value) of any whole-AR magnetic parameter, e.g., the various size, twist and free-
energy proxies studied in Tiwari et al. (2015) and Bobra and Couvidat (2015).   Correcting free-
energy proxies out to 60o from disk center is needed for improving forecasting of AR’s 
CME/flare productivity.  

In conclusion, we have presented a new method to quantify and reduce the projection error in 
whole-active-region parameters that are measured from deprojected vector magnetograms. In 
this Letter, we have established the method by applying it to the total strong-field magnetic flux 
of 30,845 HARPs of 272 large-flux (Φ > 1022 Mx) ARs. We show that, with the correction 
applied, this parameter can be reliably used for scientific analysis of large-flux ARs observed up 
to 60o away from the solar disk center. We have found that the method works well for finding the 
center-to-limb correction curves for the absolute value of many other whole-AR magnetic 
parameters, including several free-energy proxies and signed parameters such as whole-AR 
magnetic twist. These curves will be presented in a more extensive future publication.  

We thank the referee for leading us to make several improvements in the paper.  Support for 
MAG4 development came from NASA's Game Changing Development Program, and Johnson 
Space Center's Space Radiation Analysis Group (SRAG). In particular, the authors want to 
gratefully acknowledge the continued support and guidance of Dan Fry (NASA-JSC) and David 
Moore (NASA-LaRC).   DF acknowledges support from NextGen Federal Systems for the 
completion of this work.  SKT is supported by an appointment to the NASA Postdoctoral 
Program at the NASA/MSFC, administered by USRA through a contract with NASA. 

5  References   

Alissandrakis, C. E., 1981, A&A, 100, 197  

Bobra, M. G., Sun, X., Hoeksema, J. T., Turmon, M., Liu, Y., Hayashi, K., Barnes, G., Leka, K. D., 2014, 

Sol. Phys., 289, 3549 

Bobra, M. G., Couvidat, S. 2015, ApJ, 798, 135 

Borrero, J. M., Tomczyk, S., Kubo, M., Socas-Navarro, H., Schou, J., Couvidat, S., Bogart, R.  2011, Sol. 

Phys., 273, 267 

9 

 
Couvidat, S. Schou, J., Hoeksema, J. T., Bogart, R.S., Bush R. I., Duvall, T. L. Jr, Liu, Y., Norton A. A., 

and Scherrer, P.H., 2016, Sol. Phys., DOI 10.1007 

Falconer, D. A., Moore, R. L., and Gary, G.A., 2006, ApJ 644, 1256 

Falconer, D. A., Barghouty, A. F., Khazanov, I., and Moore, R. L., 2011, Space Weather 9, S04003  

Falconer, D. A., Moore, R. L., Barghouty, A. F., and Khazanov, I., 2012, ApJ., 757, 32 

Falconer, D. A., Moore, R. L., Barghouty, A. F., and Khazanov, I., 2014, Space Weather 12, 306 

Gary, G. Allen, Hagyard, M. J. 1990, Sol. Phys., 126, 21 

Georgoulis, M. K., 2012, Sol. Phys., 276, 423 

Hoeksema, J. T., Liu, Y., Hayashi, K., Sun, X., Schou, J., Couvidat, S., Norton, A., Bobra, M., 
Centeno, R., Leka, K. D., Barnes, G., Turmon, M., 2014, Sol. Phys., 289, 3483 

Leka, K. D., Barnes, G., Crouch, A. D., Metcalf, T. R., Gary, G. A., Jing, Ju, Liu, Y., 2009, Sol. Phys., 

260, 83L 

Liu, Y., Hoeksema, J. T., Scherrer, P. H., Schou, J., Couvidat, S., Bush, R. I., Duvall, T. L., Hayashi, K., 

Sun, X., Zhao, X.,2012, Sol. Phys., 279, 295 

Metcalf, T. R., Leka, K. D., Barnes, G., Lites, B. W., Georgoulis, M. K., Pevtsov, A. A., 

Balasubramaniam, K. S., Gary, G. A., Jing, Ju, Li, Jing, Liu, Y., Wang, H. N., Abramenko, V., 
Yurchyshyn, V., Moon, Y.-J. 2006, Sol. Phys., 237, 267  

Press, W.H., Teukolsky, S.A., Vettering W.T., Flannery, B.R., 1992, “Numerical Recipes in C,” 190-196 

Schou, J., Scherrer, P. H., Bush, R. I., Wachter, R., Couvidat, S., Rabello-Soares, M. C., Bogart, R. S., 

Hoeksema, J. T., Liu, Y., Duvall, T. L., Akin, D. J., Allard, B. A., Miles, J. W., Rairden, R., 
Shine, R. A., Tarbell, T. D., Title, A. M., Wolfson, C. J., Elmore, D. F., Norton, A. A., 
Tomczyk, S., 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 229 

Tiwari, S. K., Falconer, D. A., Moore, R. L., Venkatakrishnan, P., Winebarger, A. R., J, Khazanov, I.G., 

2015, GRL, 42, 5702  

Venkatakrishnan, P., Gary, G. A., 1989, Sol. Phys., 120, 235 

Venkatakrishnan, P., Hagyard, M. J., Hathaway, D. H., 1988, Sol. Phys. 115, 125 

Yeo, K. L.,  Feller, A., Solanki, S. K.,  Couvidat, S. Danilovic, S., Krivova, N. A., 2014 , A&A, 561, A22  

10 

 
 
