Formation of a p-n junction on the GaAs-surface by an Ar+ ion beam 

V.M. Mikoushkin1), V.V. Bryzgalov1), S.Yu. Nikonov1),  
A.P. Solonitsyna1), D.E. Marchenko2,3), 

1)  Ioffe Institute, 194021 Saint-Petersburg, Russia 
2)  Technische Universität Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, Germany 
3)  Helmholtz-Zentrum BESSY II, German-Russian Laboratory, D-12489 Berlin, Germany 

Abstract.   The core-level and valence band electronic structure of the well-defined near-surface layer of 
n-GaAs (100) has been studied by synchrotron-based high-resolution photoelectron spectroscopy before 
and after modification of the layer by an Ar+ ion beam in the 1.5 - 2.5 keV energy range. Conversion of the 
conductivity  type  from  n  into  p  has  been  revealed  in  the  irradiated  layer  several  nm  thick.  The  effect 
manifests itself in shifts of the core-levels and valence band edge by the value comparable to the bandgap 
width.  Transformation  on  the  conductivity  type  has  been  assumed  to  be  caused  by  Ga-antisite  point 
defects generated by ion bombardment. The possibility of local formation of a p-n nanojunction within 
the ion-beam spot has been shown.   

I. INTRODUCTION  

GaAs  and  GaAs-based  semiconductors  have  played  an  important  role  in  modern  high- 
frequency  electronics  due  to  their  high  electron  mobility  [1,2].  Therefore  development  of 
different methods for preparation of the semiconductor surfaces for further technological stages 
of device fabrication has been of great importance. Chemical etching and mechanopolishing are 
the  widely  used  among  these  methods  [1,3-5].  They  are  exploited  for  etching  of  the  native 
oxides, surface passivation, and reconstruction of the surface atomic structure [1]. Treatment of 
the GaAs surface by chemically neutral argon projectiles has been also widely used for decades 
in research and development of this material. For example, etching of the GaAs surface by low- 
and mid-energy Ar+ ion beams is one of the most exploited methods for removing native oxides 
and surface contaminations in order to prepare an atomically clean surface for both further high 
vacuum  treatments  and  studying  the  GaAs-based  semiconductors  by  surface-sensitive  methods 
including  different  kinds  of  electron  spectroscopy  [6,7].  Chemical  neutrality  ensures  pure 
mechanical  action  of  accelerated  argon  atoms  on  the  material.  An  important  advantage  of  the 
argon projectiles is that argon atoms do not remain in materials after thermalization. They escape 
the irradiated layer due to diffusion. Ar+ ion beams have been shown to be a sophisticated tool 
for nano-structuring of the GaAs surface resulting in creation of a dot-like relief [8-10]. The Ar+ 
ion  beam  was  utilized  also  for  homogenization  of  the  GaAs  near-surface  nitrided  layer  by  its 
mixing  [11].  Development  of  the  Ar+  ion  techniques  has  been  scientifically  supported  by 
research of the structure and elemental composition of layers irradiated and modified by Ar+ ion 
beams. In particular, the effect of the irradiated layer enrichment with gallium due to preferential 
sputtering of arsenic atoms has been revealed and studied in the wide energy range: from 100 eV 
to 100 keV [12-16]. In this paper, we show how the Ga-enrichment effect modifies the electronic 
structure  of  the  irradiated  layer  and  results  in  creation  of  the  p-n  junction  in  the  near-surface 
nanolayer of GaAs.  

II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 

Two  sets  of  experiments  were  carried  out  in  different  times  in  ultrahigh  vacuum  at  the 
Russian–German synchrotron radiation beamline of the BESSY-II electron storage ring (Berlin) 
[17]  by  using  two  end-stations:    the  photoelectron  spectrometer  (“Mustang”)  equipped  with 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hemispherical  analyzer  SPECS  Phoibos  150  (SPECS  GmbH)  and  the  spectrometer  with 
hemispherical  analyzer  CLAM-4  (VG).  The  data  obtained  with  the  latter  spectrometer  are 
specially noted in the text below.  The photoelectron (photoemission) spectra were measured at 
the  normal  direction  from  the  sample  irradiated  by  a  monochromatic  x-ray  photon  beam  at  an 
angle θ = 55o. The spectra were measured at photon energies from the range hν = 135 - 800 eV 
providing  different  information  depths.  The  photon  energy  scale  of  the  plane-grating 
monochromator  (RG-PGM) was regularly calibrated using the Au 4f7/2 line of gold in order to 
maintain the accuracy of the binding energy determination better than ± 0.05 eV. The analyzer 
operating mode was chosen for the major part of measurements so as to provide high sensitivity 
and statistics, though with sufficiently high energy resolution of ΔE < 300 meV. This resolution 
was sufficient to study the relatively  broad 3d lines of  Ga  and As characterized  by large spin-
orbit splitting exceeding the resolution. The better resolution ΔE ~ 150 meV was also used when 
it was needed, for example in determining the valence band edge position.  

Fig. 1.  Photoelectron spectra of a pristine n-GaAs (100) wafer covered by a layer of native oxide (initial) 
and of the same after removal of the oxide layer by the beam of Ar+ ions with energy Ei = 2500 eV (Ar+): 
(a)  survey spectra measured in a wide energy range, (b) As3d and Ga3d spectra normalized to the area of 
the As 3d line; the photon energy (hν) are indicated above the corresponding curves.   

A commercial GaAs (100) n-type  (n ~ 1018 cm-3) wafer was studied before and after strong  
irradiation by Ar+ ions with energies  Ei = 2500 eV and Ei = 1500 eV directly in the preparation 
chamber  of  the  spectrometer  vacuum  system.  The  survey  spectra  of  the  sample  measured  in  a 
wide binding  energy  range are  represented  in  Fig.  1a. The  initial spectrum  (initial - solid line) 
was  measured 
the  minimal  dose  density 
D < 1*1014 ions/cm2  sufficient  only  to  remove  carbon  contaminations  from  the  surface.  After 

the  sample  slightly 

irradiated  at 

from 

 
 
 
 
 
etching the GaAs surface by Ar+ ions with the dose density D ~ 3*1015 ions/cm2 (Ar+ - dotted 
line), the spectrum exhibits virtually absence of the O1s and C1s lines as well as of the lines of 
possible  impurities,  which  evidences  removal  of  the  native  oxide  layer.  The  dose  density  D  ~ 
1016 Q/cm-2 was sufficient to completely remove the layer of native oxide and a part of the bulk 
layer in the stationary sputtering regime. Thickness <x> of the irradiated layer was estimated as 
the  width  at  the  half  maximum  of  the  concentration  depth  distribution  of  the  implanted 
projectiles calculated using the commonly known SRIM 2006 code [18].The depth profile for the 
ion energy Ei = 2500 eV is shown in Fig. 2a. The thicknesses of the irradiated layers were <x> ~ 
7.5 and 5.4 nm for ion energies Ei = 2500 eV and Ei = 1500 eV, correspondingly.  The maximum 
of the depth distribution corresponds to the projected range Rp which is approximately equal to a 
half of the thickness (Rp ~ ½<x>) and can be obtained by SRIM code with more ease.  

Fig. 2.  (a) Depth distribution of the concentration of the thermalized Ar projectiles irradiating the n-
GaAs (100) surface. (b) Band diagram of the p-GaAs nanolayer formed on the n-GaAs (100) surface by 
Ar+ ion irradiation.  

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  

A.  Elemental  and  chemical  composition  of  the  initial  and  ion  etched  GaAs  near-surface 
layers.  

Elemental  composition  of  the  GaAs  initial  surface  and  its  modification  due  to  Ar+  ion 
bombardment was quantitatively studied in this work by measuring the photoelectron spectra in 
the relatively narrow energy range containing the As3d and Ga3d lines. Fig.1b shows the spectra 
measured at different photon energies in the binding energy scale. The spectra exhibit chemical 
shifts of the lines due to removal of the native oxide layer from the initial surface by Ar+ ions 
and  some  redistribution  of  the  line  intensities  evidencing  modification  of  the  elemental 
composition.  The  spectra  were  normalized  to  the  area  of  the  As3d  line,  that  is  to  the  atomic 
concentration of As atoms. Nevertheless, direct comparison of the Ga3d line intensities does not 

 
 
 
 
  
 
    
give the relative elemental composition and its modification due to Ar+ etching since relative line 
intensities  are  shaped  by  the  excitation  probability  depending  on  the  photon  energy.  The 
elemental  composition  was  obtained  by  normalizing  the  line  intensities  (areas)  to  the 
corresponding photoemission cross-sections [19]. The obtained relative concentrations of As and 
Ga atoms in the GaAs near-surface layer are given in Table I.    

The spectra were measured at different photon energies to probe the near-surface layers of 
different  thickness.  The  information  depth  is  directly  determined  by  the  mean  free  path  (λ)  of 
normally ejected photoelectrons. The mean free path value for GaAs was taken from theoretical 
calculations  [20].  To  obtain  the  unknown  data  for  GaAs  oxides,  the  modified  Bethe  equation 
simple  in  form  was  used  [21]  for  Ga2O3  ,  As2O3  and  GaAs.  Then,  the  roughly  estimates  data 
were reduced to more reliable data of Ref. [20] for GaAs by comparing the estimates for GaAs 
with those obtained in Ref [20]. Possible error of the procedure was assumed to be small since 
the estimated photoelectron mean free path in oxides proved to be only ~10% longer than that 
estimated for pure GaAs. The previously known and obtained here mean free paths are given in 
Table 1. These data shows that the elemental content was probed in the range as far as λ ~ 3 nm, 
covering the surface and the bulk of studied material.   

Table I.  Relative concentrations of As and Ga atoms in the GaAs near-surface layer of thickness λ 
before and after etching of the native oxide layer by Ar+ ions of energy Ei = 2500 eV.  

hν 
eV 

800 
650   

λ 
nm 

2.8 
2.5 

650   
150   

2.5 
1.0   

[As] 

[Ga]  

[Ga]/[As] 

Pristine native oxide surface 

0.57 
0.61 

0.44  
0.39 
Ar+ etched surface 
0.46 
0.45 

0.54 
0.55 

1.30 
1.56  

1.24 
1.22 

Table  I  represents  relative  concentrations  of  As  and  Ga  atoms  in  the  GaAs  near-surface 
layer  of  thickness  λ  before  and  after  Ar+  etching  of  the  native  oxide  layer  which  consists  of  a 
mixture of Ga2O3  and As2O3 oxides as it is shown below (see Fig.4a). The data on initial native 
oxide layer shows that oxidation of the GaAs surface results in strong enrichment of the layer by 
gallium. The Ga enrichment appeared to be more significant when approaching the surface, since 
the ratio [Ga]/[As] increases (1.3 → 1.6) when information depth  l  ~ λ becomes smaller (2.8 → 
2.5).  The  essential  lack  of  As2O3  in  thermal  oxide  has  been  explained  in  former  studies  by 
relatively high volatility of this oxide [22]. Indeed, the As2O3 melting point is 312.2oC contrary 
to  1900oC  of  Ga2O3  .  A  different  mechanism  may  be  assumed  for  native  oxidation  at  room 
temperature: Ga atoms are quickly oxidized due to higher affinity for oxygen and remain fixed at 
some positions while As atoms diffuse away.  

Table  I  shows  that,  contrary  to  significant  Ga-enrichment  of  the  native  oxide  layer,  ion 
irradiation  induces  a  rather  moderate  Ga-enrichment  of  the  near-surface  layer:  the  Ga  atomic 
concentration  is  higher  than  the  As  concentration  only  by  a  factor  of  ~  1.2  at  ion  energy  Ei  = 
2500 eV, which  is in qualitative agreement with  the previously reported  effect [12-14].  In this 
case, the enrichment mechanism is related to preferential sputtering of As atoms [12]. The data 
obtained at different photon energies (hν = 650, 150 eV) demonstrates to a first approximation a 
homogeneous distribution of Ga atoms throughout the depth of about 2.5 nm. Though, Table  I 
shows  some  depletion  of  the  Ga  concentration  comparable  to  the  measurement  error  in  near-
surface layers. The point important for physical properties of the irradiated layer is what is the 
chemical state of the excess Ga atoms. Analysis of the spectral line chemical shifts is presented 
in Sec. C.   

 
 
 
  
 
B. Determination of the conductivity type of the ion-treated GaAs surface.  

Physical  properties  of  pristine  and  treated  GaAs  near-surface  layers  were  studied  via 
photoemission  valence  band  spectra  characterizing  the  density  of  occupied  states.  Fig.  3 
demonstrates  the  valence  band  spectra  of  a  pristine  native  oxide  (GaAs-ox)  layer  covering  the 
surface of an n-GaAs wafer, as well as spectra from the same sample after removal of the native 
oxide and ion irradiation of the atomically clean GaAs surface (p-GaAs). The spectra of the ion- 
treated surface were measured relative to the Fermi level with ordinary energy resolution ΔE ~ 
300 meV (dotted curve) and high energy resolution ΔE ~ 150 meV (solid curves). Comparison of 
the  spectra  measured  with  different  resolutions  shows  that  the  spectrum  tail  above  the  Fermi 
level  is  caused  by  the  finite  energy  resolution  of  the  spectrometer.  However,  conventional 
extrapolation  of  the  spectrum  brink  enables  determination  of  the  valence  band  edge  position 
which,  as  the  figure  shows,  proves  to  be  ~  0.14  eV  below  the  Fermi  level  for  the  ion  etched 
surface and ~ 1.0 eV for the initial oxidized surface. The closeness of the valence band edge of 
the ion-treated surface to the Fermi level evidences for occurrence of a p-type of the near-surface 
layer after removing the native oxide and ion irradiation of the n-GaAs near- surface layer. Thus 
ion irradiation has been revealed to change the GaAs semiconductor type from n to p, resulting 
in creation of the p-n junction whose scheme is presented in Fig. 2b. This process manifests itself 
in shifting the valence band edge by ~ 1 eV (Fig. 3.)  

Fig.  3.    Valence  band  (VB)  photoelectron  spectrum  of  a  pristine  n-GaAs(100)  wafer  with  a  layer  of 
native  oxide  (GaAs-ox)  and  the  p-GaAs  nanolayer  formed  on  the  n-GaAs(100)  surface  by  Ar+  ion 
irradiation (p-GaAs). The spectra were measured with ordinary energy resolution ΔE ~ 300 meV (dotted 
curve) and a higher energy resolution ΔE ~ 150 meV (solid curves).  

The VB photoelectrons measured at photon energy hν = 150 eV are characterized by short 
mean free path  λ = 1 nm. This fact allows the  conclusion that the p-layer thickness exceeds 1 
nm.  However  the  VB  spectra  do  not  provide  more  accurate  information  and  leave  open  the 
question about the thickness of the p-type layer. The answer to this question has been obtained 
by studying the p-n junction via the core-level spectra represented in Sec. C.  

C. Studying the p-n junction via core-level spectra.   

The chemical state of atoms in the GaAs near-surface layer was characterized by core-level 
photoelectron  spectra.  These  spectra  also  confirm  the  revealed  conversion  of  the  conductivity 
type of the n-GaAs near-surface layer under ion irradiation.  Fig. 4a shows Ga3d photoelectron 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spectra of the sample before (Ga2O3) and after (p-GaAs) ion etching. The spectra were measured 
at the photon energy hν = 150 providing information from the bulk as deep as l ~ 2λ = 2 nm. The 
spectrum  of  the  initial  surface  consists  of  a  broad  peak  centered  at  the  energy  EB  =  20.5  eV 
corresponding to Ga2O3 according to the data of Table II. This observation evidences a decay of 
the  GaAs  near-surface  layer  in  oxidation  process  resulting  in  formation  of  a  mixture  of 
elementary  oxides  (Ga2O3  ,  As2O3).  The  Ga3d  line  “p-GaAs”  in  Fig.  4a  was  detected  after 
complete  removal  of  the  native  oxide  layer,  which  was  also  controlled  by  the  oxygen  O1s 
photoelectron  line  (Fig.  1a).  The  Ga3d  line  consists  of  an  unresolved  doublet  (3d3/2,1/2).  The 
averaged binding energy of this line almost fully coincides with our former data [23] and proves 
to  be  very  close  to  the  previously  published  data  (Table  II)  obtained  for  the  GaAs  surfaces 
prepared  in  completely  different  ways  resulting  in  either  crystalline  or  amorphous  structures 
[6,7]. Approximate  equality of the binding energies evidences the proximity of the  short-range 
order in crystalline GaAs and GaAs made amorphous by ion or chemical etching. The spectrum 
of the modified layer enriched with gallium may contain an essential unresolved contribution of 
a metallic phase at EB = 18.6 eV. Thus, the considered data evidence formation by ion etching a 
well-defined state of the atomically clean GaAs surface and near-surface layer enriched with Ga 
atoms more or less homogeneously (Table I).  

Table II. Binding energies (EB) of Ga3d core-electron in different materials averaged over the data of 
Ref. [6,7] and of this work. The EB values are counted from the Fermi-level.  

Ga3d 
EB , eV 
18.6  
Ga-metal 
Ga-metal 
18.6  
GaAs-cath.amorph.  19.0 
19.3 
GaAs-cleav. 
19.3 
GaAs-chem. etch. 
19.4 
GaAs-Ar+ etch. 
19.3-19.35 
p-GaAs-Ar+ etch. 
18.0 
n-GaAs. 
20.3 – 21.0 
Ga2O3  
20.5 
Ga2O3  

Ref. 

6,7 
this work 
6,7 
6,7 
6,7 
23 
this work 
this work 
6,7 
this work 

In  discussing  the  data  on  the  binding  energies  in  GaAs,  the  only  assumption  should  be 
made that all the EB data in Table. II refer to the same type of the semiconductor conductivity (n 
or p). Otherwise, the data spread should be of about the GaAs bandgap width (ΔEg = 1.42 eV) 
because  the  binding  energy  counted  from  the  Fermi-level  increases  by  the  Fermi-level  shift  in 
the  bandgap  (ΔEF  ~  ΔEg  )  in  turning  from  p-  to  n-type.  We  show  here  that  the  Ga3d  binding 
energies for GaAs obtained in this and other works ( see Table II) refer to the p-type GaAs. This 
fact  follows  from  the  valence  band  (Fig.  3)  and  Ga3d  core-level  (Fig.  4,5)  spectra  discussed 
below.  

Fig. 4b presents a Ga3d photoemission spectrum of the ion-treated GaAs surface measured 
at  essentially  higher  photon  energy  hν  =  650  eV  (and  larger  pass  energy).  In  this  case,  the 
information depth  (l  ~  2λ = 5  nm) was comparable to the  thickness of  the irradiated  layer  and 
expected  to  be  sufficient  to  observe  the  unirradiated  n-GaAs  layer  underneath.  As  mentioned 
above, the Ga3d line of the n-type layer should be shifted towards higher binding energies by ~ 
ΔEg = 1.42 eV.  Indeed, the spectrum in Fig. 4b may contain the expected line at EB = 20.7 eV in 
the high-energy tail of the main line. Unfortunately a  reliable conclusion cannot be made from 
the spectrum presented in Fig 4b since the instrumental function in the mode with a larger pass 
energy  has  proved  to  be  a  bit  specific.  For  this  reason,  additional  data  obtained  using  another 
spectrometer  (CLAM-4)  with  better  instrumental  function  and  higher  resolution  were  involved 
into the research.   

 
 
  
 
Fig. 4.  Ga3d photoelectron spectra of a pristine n-GaAs(100) wafer covered by a layer of native oxide  
(Ga2O3) and of the same sample after removal of the oxide layer by the beam of Ar+ ions with energy Ei = 
2500  eV  (p-GaAs):  (a)  spectra  measured  at  the  photon  energy  hν  =  150  eV  and  (b)  the  spectrum 
measured  at  the  photon  energy  hν  =  650  eV.  A  possible  contribution  of  initial  n-GaAs  bulk  layer 
underneath the irradiated surface layer (dotted curve) is shown in panel (b).   

Fig.  5  shows  Ga3d  photoemission  spectra  of  the  GaAs  surface  treated  by  Ar+  ions  of 
energy  Ei = 1500 eV and measured with the spectrometer CLAM-4 in one and the same mode at 
two  photon  energies  hν  =  150  and  350  eV  characterizing  thin  and  relatively  thick  layers  of 
material.  To  completely  exclude  possible  influence  of  negligible  oxidation  in  high  vacuum 
during measurements on the spectral shape, the spectrum  presumably containing the sought-for 
effect  at  higher  photon  energy  was  measured  first.  Fig.5a  shows  also  a  difference  between  the 
spectra. This difference reveals a small but statistically reliable contribution of the top of the n-
GaAs  bulk  underneath  the  modified  p-GaAs  layer.  The  binding  energy  of  the  revealed 
contribution (EB = 20.15 eV) proved to be less than the maximal value (EB = 20.7 eV) possible 
for n-GaAs because of an insufficient photoelectron mean free path (λ ~1.8  nm) restricting the 
probing  depth  (l  ~  2λ  =  3.6  nm)  to  the  area  lying  between  the  p-layer  and  n-bulk,  namey,  the 
upper part of the p-GaAs/n-GaAs interface. The revealed n-GaAs contribution is also confirmed 
by second derivatives of the initial spectra (Fig. 5b). In the differentiated spectrum measured at 
hν = 350 eV, this contribution looks like a negative peak at binding energy EB = 20.2 eV. This 
negative  peak  reduces  the  intensity  of  the  positive  high-energy  part  of  the  main  p-GaAs  line. 
Using  the  revealed  contribution  of  the  top  of  the  n-GaAs  bulk  into  the  Ga3d  spectrum,  it  is 
possible to estimate the thickness of the p-GaAs layer as d = λ ln(Ip/In +1) , where Ip and In are 
the p- and n-contributions (areas) to the Ga3d line intensity. The estimation gives value d = 5.5 

 
 
 
 
 
nm  which  proved  to  be  equal  to  the  calculated  thickness  <x>  ~  2Rp  =  5.4  nm  of  the  layer 
irradiated by the 1500-eV ions. A replicate experiment gave a close value: d = 4.7 nm.  

Fig. 5.  (a) Ga3d photoelectron spectra of the sample n-GaAs irradiated by the 1500-eV Ar+ ion beam 
and  measured  at  the  CLAM-4  (VG)  station  with  photon  energies  hν  =  150  eV  and  hν  =  350  eV.  (b) 
Second derivative of the spectrum measured at photon energy hν = 350 eV and presented in panel (a).   

As  mentioned  above,  Ar+  ion  etching  of  the  GaAs  near-surface  layers  results  in  their 
amorphization and enrichment of the irradiated layer with gallium due to preferable sputtering of 
arsenic atoms. Therefore, transformation of  the conductivity type in  the irradiated  layer should 
be naturally associated with these processes. At the Ar+ ion energy Ei = 2500 eV, the gallium to 
arsenic ratio reaches the value [Ga]/[As] =1.2 (see Table I). So, approximately 20 % of Ga atoms 
can create interstitial and antisite defects as well as segregate into metallic clusters. Indeed, Fig 5 
demonstrates  the  presence  of  metallic  Ga  at  binding  energy  EB  =  18.55  eV  when  the  photon 
energy increases from 150 to 350 eV and, thus, the thickness of the layer accessible for studying 
increases.  Enrichment  with  metallic  Ga  of  deeper  layers  can  be  explained  by  more  rapid 
diffusion of Ga atoms away from the surface and near-surface layers even at room temperature. 
Analysis of the Ga3d line showed that the metallic phase contains only a part of the excess Ga 
atoms.  An  essential  part  of  Ga  atoms  can  occupy  the  As  positions  and  create  antisite  defects 
imparting to the material the p-type conductivity. On the other hand, the initial concentration of 
n-doping  atoms  should  decrease  under  the  ion  bombardment  due  to  their  excitation  into 
interstitial position followed by outward diffusing.     

 
 
 
 
 
Thereby, bombardment of the n-GaAs surface was shown to change the conductivity type 
in the near-surface layer throughout the irradiated layer thickness approximately equal to double 
projected range. For ion energy Ei = 1500 eV, it is equal to d = 5.5 nm ~ <x> ~ 2Rp .  As a result, 
a p-n junction arises. Fig.2b shows the scheme  of the p-n junction with an abrupt interface for 
Ar+ ion energy Ei = 2500 eV. In fact, the p-n junction width should be comparable to the area 
where  the  concentration  of  the  created  p-type  defects  becomes  higher  than  that  of  n-doping 
atoms.  In  any  case,  the  junction  width  should  be  much  less  than  the  tail  distribution  of  the 
thermalized  Ar  atoms  represented  in  Fig.2a.  Evidently,  the  obtained  thin  nanostructure  can  be 
cleaned from relatively loosely coupled interstitial and metallic Ga atoms by heating.   

III. CONCLUSION  

In conclusion, the change of the conductivity type from n to p has been revealed in the well 
defined  n-GaAs  layer  irradiated  by  an  Ar+  ion  beam.  The  p-layer  thickness  was  shown  to 
virtually coincide with the double projected range which can be easily calculated by SRIM code. 
For example, the p-layer thickness in the studied ion energy range Ei = 1.5 - 2.5 keV turns out to 
the range from 5.5 to 7.2 nm. As a result, the p-n junction was created on the GaAs-surface by 
the  ion  beam.  The  effect  manifests  itself  both  in  shifting  the  core-levels  to  higher  binding 
energies by the value of about the bandgap width and in shifting the valence band edge to lower 
binding  energies  as  far  as  the  edge  abutment  to  the  Fermi-level.  Transformation  of  the 
conductivity type was assumed to be connected with preferable sputtering of arsenic atoms and 
enrichment  of  the  irradiated  layer  with  gallium  followed  by  creation  of  the  Ga  antisite  p-type 
centers. The revealed effect can be used to form p-n nanojunctions on the GaAs surface directly 
by an Ar+ ion beam with the lateral resolution determined by the ion beam diameter.   

ACKNOWLEDGMENT   

The research was partially supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, 

Project N 16-02-00665-a. The authors thank HZB for the allocation of synchrotron radiation 
beamtime and the Russian German Laboratory at BESSY II Helmholtz Zentrum Berlin for the 
support in the synchrotron radiation study. 

References  

[1]  A.G. Baca, C.I.H. Ashby, Fabrication of GaAs devices,  Institution of Electrical Engineers 

IET, London, United Kindom, 2005.  

[2]  M. Kuzuhara, S. Tanaka, “GaAs-based high-freaquenvy and high-speed devices”,  JSAP 

International No7, 4-10 (January 2003).  

[3]  J.P. Contour, J.Massies, A.Saletes, “X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Study of GaAs (001) 

and InP (001) Cleaning Procedures Prior to Molecular Beam Epitaxy”,  Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 24, L563-
L565 (1985).   

[4]  M.R. Vilar, J. El Beghdadi, F. Debontridder, R. Artzi, R. Naaman, A.M. Ferraria, A.M. 
Botelho do Rego, “Characterization of wet-etched GaAs (100) surfaces”, Surf. Interface Anal. 37, 673–
682 (2005).  

[5]  E. Papis,  A. Baranska, P. Karbownik, A.Szerling, A.Wojcik-Jedlinska, M. Bugalski, W. 

Rzodkiewicz, J. szade, A. Wawro,   “(100) GaAs surface treatment prior to contact metal deposition in 
AlGaAs/GaAs quantum cascade laser processing”, Optica Applicata, Vol. XXXIX, No. 4, 787-797 
(2009).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[6]  C. D. Wagner, W. M. Riggs, L. E. Davis, and J. F. Moulder,  Handbook of X-ray photoelectron 

spectroscopy, Perking-Elmer Corporation, Physical Electronics Division, 1979.   

[7]  D. Briggs, M.P. Seah, Eds., Practical Surface Analysis by Auger and X-Ray Photoelectron 

Spectroscopy, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1983.  

[8] Y. Wang,  S.F. Yoon,  C.Y. Ngo,  C.Z. Tong,  C.Y. Liu, “Low energy Ar+ sputtering-induced 

GaAs quantum dot formation and evolution”, J. Appl. Phys. 106, 024301-5 (2009).-  

[9]  V. Venugopal,  S.K. Garga, T. Basua, O.P. Sinhac, D. Kanjilal, S.R. Bhattacharyyae, T. Soma, 
“Nanostructures on GaAs surfaces due to 60 keV Ar+-ion beam sputtering”,  Appl. Surf. Sci.  258, 4144–
4147  (2012).   

[10]  T. Kumar, S.A. Khan, U.B. Singh, S. Verma, D. Kanjilal, “Formation of nanodots on GaAs 

by 50 keV Ar+ ion irradiation”, Appl. Surf.  Sci. 258, 4148– 4151  (2012).   

[11]  V.M. Mikoushkin, “Chemical Effect of Inert Argon Beam on Nitride Nanolayer Formed by 

Ion Implantation into GaAs Surface”, Technical Phys. Lett. 36, 1136–1139 (2010).  

[12]  I. L. Singer, J. S. Murday, J. Comas, “Preferential sputtering from disordered GaAs”, J. Vac. 

Sci. Technol. 18, 161 (1981).   

[13]  S. Valeri, M. Lolli,  “AES, EELS and XPS study of ion-induced GaAs and InP(110) surface 

and subsurface modifications”,  Surf. Interface Anal. 16, 59–64 (1990).  

[14]  J. B. Malherbe, W. O. Barnard, I. Le R. Strydom, C. W. Louw, “Preferential sputtering of 

GaAs”,  Surf. Interf. Anal. 18 (7), 491–495 (1992).  

[15]  H. Gnaser, B. Heinz, W. Bock, and H. Oechsner, “Surface modification of GaAs(110) by 

low-energy ion irradiation”, Phys. Rev.B 52 (19), 14086-14092 (1995).  

[16] Y. Mizuhara, T. Bungo, T. Nagatomi, and Y. Takai, “Preferential sputtering observed in 

Auger electron spectroscopy sputter depth proﬁling of AlAs/GaAs superlattice using low-energy ions”, 
Surf. Interface Anal. 37, 343–347 (2005).  

[17]  S.I. Fedoseenko, D.V. Vyalikh et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A  505, 718 (2003).  
[18]  J. F. Ziegler, J. P. Biersack, U Littmark., The Stopping and Range of Ions in Solids, Pergamon 

Press, New York, 1985.   

[19]  J.J. Yeh, Atomic Calculation of Photoionization Cross-Sections and Asymmetry Parameters, 

Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, Langhorne, PE (USA), 1993 and from J.J. Yeh and I.Lindau, 
Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables, 32, 1-155 (1985).  

[20]  C. J. Powell, A. Jablonski, Nucl. Instr. Methods Phys. Res. A. 2009, 54, 601. 
[21]  C. J. Powell, A. Jablonski A, “Progress in quantitative surface analysis by X-ray 
photoelectron spectroscopy: Current status and perspectives”,  J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 
178–179, 331–346  (2010). 

[22]  T. Ishikawa, H. Ikoma “X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopic Analysis of the Oxide of GaAs”,  

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 31(12A), 3981-3987 (1992). 

[23]  V.M. Mikoushkin, V.V. Bryzgalov, Yu.S. Gordeev, S.Yu. Nikonov, A.P. Solonitsina,  M.M. 

Brzhezinskaya, “Chemical composition of GaAs-nitride nanolayers formed by implantation”, Phys. Status 
Solidi С 6 (12), 2655-2657 (2009).   

 
 
 
 
 
