Physics and Chemistry of Solid State17(3) (2016), 336-341 

DOI: 10.15330/pcss.17.3.336-341

D.M. Zayachuk1, V.E. Slynko2, and A. Csik3

Morphology of PbTe Crystal Surface Sputtered by Argon Plasma
under Secondary Neutral Mass Spectrometry Conditions

1Lviv Polytechnic National University, Lviv, Ukraine
2Institute of Material Science NASU, Chernivtsy, Ukraine
3Institute for Nuclear Research, Hungarian Academy of Sciences (ATOMKI), Debrecen, Hungary

We have investigated morphology of the lateral surfaces of PbTe crystal samples grown from melt by the
Bridgman method sputtered by Ar+ plasma with ion energy of 50 – 550 eV for 5 - 50 minutes under Secondary
Neutral Mass Spectrometry (SNMS) conditions. The sputtered PbTe crystal surface was found to be
simultaneously both the source of sputtered material and the efficient substrate for re-deposition of the sputtered
material during the depth profiling. During sputtering PbTe crystal surface is forming the dimple relief. To be re-
deposited the sputtered Pb and Te form arrays of the microscopic surface structures in the shapes of hillocks,
pyramids, cones and others on the PbTe crystal sputtered surface. Correlation between the density of re-deposited
microscopic surface structures, their shape, and average size, on the one hand, and the energy and duration of
sputtering, on the other, is revealed.

Introduction

[1-3].

SNMS is known to be an effective method for
composition analysis and element depth profiling of
Its high
multicomponent and doped solids
sensitivity (down to a ppm range) makes it suitable for
successful analysis of solid surfaces and thin films, for
the elemental characterization of samples in different
fields [4-8]. One of the preconditions for the successful
application of SNMS method for the correct quantitative
composition analysis is having the flat surface to be
sputtered by plasma ions. However, for many practical
objectives this requirement cannot be accomplished a
priori. In particular, such a situation occurs in the case of
lateral profiling of crystal
ingots having a conical-
cylindrical shape. The need for such investigations arises,
primarily,
in studying the distribution of doping
impurities in the surface layers of crystals grown from
doped melts.
recently
succeeded in establishing the unique behavior of the rare
earth element Eu impurity introduced in small (at the
level of 1019 cm-3) amounts into the initial melt for
growth of PbTe:Eu doped crystals by the Bridgman
method [9].

In particular,

such studies

sputtered under SNMS conditions,

there is no guarantee that it will remain such throughout
the sputtering process. This can be especially relevant in
the studies of multicomponent systems with preferential
sputtering [1, 10, 11]. In particular, when PbTe crystals
are
extremely
nontrivial features of formation of Pb and Te sputtered
phase arise such as the huge preference of Te sputtering
under low sputtering energy below 160 eV, oscillations
of Pb and Te sputter yield during prolonged sputtering,
decrease of the average intensity of Pb and Te signals
with sputtering time at
low sputtering energy and
increase at high [12]. One of the reasons for such
behaviour of sputtered phase of PbTe crystals is the state
of their surface, which is covered by the array of
crystalline formations re-depositing on the sputtering
surface during the depth profiling experiment. In this
work we continue our investigation of sputtering of PbTe
crystals by Ar+ ions in the SNMS conditions started in
[12]; it is devoted to detailed study of morphology of the
sputtered lateral surfaces of the crystals grown from melt
by the Bridgman method.

I. Experiment

Profiling to a large depth (in tens of micrometers)
requires prolonged surface sputtering – tens of minutes
or more. Even if the initial surface of the sample is flat,

The PbTe crystal ingot used for investigation was
grown from melt by the Bridgman method. High-purity

336

Morphology of PbTe Crystal Surface Sputtered by Argon Plasma...

bombardment and post-ionization of sputtered neutral
particles were done at
low pressure by Electron
Cyclotron Wave Resonance (ECWR) argon plasma. In
the direct bombardment mode, Ar+ ions are extracted
from low pressure plasma and bombard a negatively
biased (-50…-550 V) sample surface with a current
density of ~ 1 mA/cm2, performing a controlled surface
erosion. The sputtered area was confined to a circle of
2 mm in diameter by a Ta mask. Post-ionized neutral
particles are directed into a quadruple mass spectrometer
Balzers QMA 410 by electrostatic lenses and a broad-
pass energy analyzer.

The surface morphology of

ion
sputtering has been analyzed by Scanning Electron
Microscopy
S-4300 CFE). The
composition of the samples was verified by Energy
Dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis.

(SEM, Hitachi

samples after

II. Results

Systematic SEM studies of the surfaces of PbTe
crystal samples sputtered by Ar+ plasma at different
energies and time showed that the surface morphology
significantly changes under impact of Ar+ beams during
the sputtering process.

The initial lateral surfaces of the samples had a
characteristic metallic gloss;
they were smooth and
contained some number of growth defects caused as
usual by contact with the growth ampoule and the crystal
surface. The same surfaces sputtered by Ar+ beam always
had a characteristic dimple relief and were covered by
like hillocks,
the arrays of small surface structures,
pyramids, cones and others. Fig. 2 shows some examples
for SEM images of the crystal surfaces after
their
sputtering by Ar plasma with 350 eV ions energy
throughout the different sputtering times from 5 till 50
minutes. Fig. 3 shows the impact of different sputtering

Fig. 1. The general view of the PbTe crystal ingot,
which was used for manufacturing of the samples for
investigations.

lead and tellurium were used for PbTe crystal
ingot
growing. Despite a rather low content of background
impurities additional cleaning of the initial materials was
applied. Special attention was given to its clearing from
oxygen, because both lead and tellurium easily oxidized
in air. The quartz ampoule, as usual coated inside with a
thin layer of pyrolytic graphite, has been used for
growing crystal.

The general view of the grown ingot is shown in

Fig. 1.

The ingot had a conical-cylindrical shape. The
diameter of its cylindrical part using for manufacturing
of the samples for investigations was 11.5 mm. Such
transverse dimensions of the crystal ingot were sufficient
to provide quite suitable conditions for sputtering of the
lateral crystal surface by the beam of Ar+ ions through a
Ta mask with an aperture of diameter of 2 mm. On the
other hand, cylindrical shape of the crystal ingot gave an
opportunity to carry out sputtering of PbTe crystal
samples along different crystallographic directions, thus
examining impact of the sputtering direction on the result
of sputtering of the PbTe crystal surface.

The lateral

surfaces were sputtered. Sputtering
experiments were carried out on INA-X type SNMS
system produced by SPECS GmbH, Berlin. The surface

a

c

b

d

Fig. 2. SEM images of lateral surface of PbTe crystal after sputtering by Ar plasma with 350 eV ions energy
during: a – 5 min; b – 15 min; c – 35 min; d – 50 min.

337

a

c

b

d

Fig. 3. SEM images of the lateral surface of PbTe crystal after sputtering by Ar plasma for 50 min, with ion
energy: a – 50 eV; b – 80 eV; c – 160 eV; d – 550 eV.

a

b

Fig 4. SEM images of the lateral surface of PbTe crystal after sputtering by Ar plasma with 350 eV ions energy
during: a – 5 min; b – 25 min.

energy on the state of lateral PbTe crystal surfaces
sputtered for the same time, namely 50 minutes.

One can see that the relief of sputtered surfaces as
well as the average size, shape, and density of the surface
structures re-deposited on the sputtered surface are
significantly modified when both duration of sputtering
and sputtering energy are changing.

The main experimental results can be systematized

as follows.

2.1. Duration of sputtering and relief of

the

sputtered surfaces.

in

time

used

The minimum sputtering

our
experiments was five minutes. During this time the relief
of sputtering surface formed by the Ar+ ions consists in
array of incipient dimples with low surface density
(Fig. 2, a). In the next experiment duration of sputtering
was 15 minutes. With such sputtering duration the
surface dimples become significantly larger in both the
area and the depth. Their surface density increases too,
but
the dimples are still for the most part spatially
separated from each other (Fig 2,b). At longer sputtering
(35 minutes and more), practically the entire crystal

surface covered with the dimples of various area and
depth, which are overlapped with each other (Fig 2, c, d).
2.2. Sputtering and re-deposition of the sputtered

components

re-deposition of

impact of Ar+ plasma,

Simultaneously with forming of the surface relief
the
under
sputtered material onto the sputtering surface is taking
place. In this study we will focus only on those aspects of
this phenomenon which have direct relation,
in our
opinion, to the peculiarities of the formation of Pb and Te
sputtered phase in the SNMS method in quantitative
analysis of PbTe samples, which we reported in [12].

For any duration of sputtering of PbTe crystal during
the depth profiling measurement, its resulting surface is
always covered with some array of microscopic re-
deposition structures formed on the surface in the process
of its sputtering. When duration of surface sputtering is
smaller,
the average size of re-deposited microscopic
structures is smaller as well, and their surface density is
higher (Fig. 2). The re-deposited structures are localized
on the natural growth defects of crystal surface as well as
within the limits of the dimples of relief of sputtered

338

a

d

g

b

e

h

c

f

i

Fig. 5. SEM images of the predominant modifications
of the surface structures forming on the dimple relief
of PbTe sputtered surface.

lateral surface (Fig. 4).

The re-deposited surface structures associated with
the natural growth defects of the initial crystal surface
have often no certain dominant
forms and spatial
orientation. The view of re-deposited surface structures
associated with the dimple relief of sputtered surface
depends first of all on the duration of both sputtering and
re-deposition as well as the crystallographic orientation
of the surface serving as a substrate.

structures:

For the short sputtering and re-deposition time of
about 5 minutes, it is difficult to discern any particular
faceting and orientation of the re-deposited structures. If
the sputtering time is 15 minutes they already become
forms are
quite strongly pronounced. The dominant
pyramidal
pyramids
quadrangular
the
corresponding to the growth directions <100> (Fig. 5, a);
the triangular pyramids corresponding to the growth
directions <111> (Fig 5, b); or the pyramids put on edge
corresponding to the growth directions <110> (Fig 5, c)
for the crystals with cubic symmetry. After the prolonged
sputtering of the sample, accompanied by the increase of
the
a
considerable variety of the structure shapes is observed –
additional faceting of the structures (Fig. 5, d); cone-
shaped structures with a pyramidal (Fig 5e), conical (Fig
5f) or elongated (Fig 5, g) tops; pyramids of hexagonal
type (Fig 5, h); coalescence without re-crystallization of
the separate surface structures in larger
formations
(Fig. 5, i).

re-deposited

structures,

surface

sizes

of

At constant duration of sputtering of PbTe crystal
lateral surfaces the final surface density of re-deposited
structures formed on the sputtering surface, shape of the
structures, their average size and size distribution depend
essentially on the sputtering energy (Fig. 3). Comparing
the SEM images of the PbTe crystal surfaces after their
sputtering by Ar+ ions with energies from 50 to 550 eV
throughout the 50 minutes of sputtering times (Fig. 3), it
can be seen that when the sputtering energy is lower, the
density of surface structures re-deposited on the sputtered
surface is higher. It can be also found that the average
sizes of the surface structures are smaller. At the same

339

time the probability of the simultaneous existence of the
surface structures of different sizes is higher.

The size range of the PbTe surface structures re-
deposited on the lateral crystal surface during its
sputtering is very wide on any stage of sputtering process
for any sputtering energy (Fig. 2 - 4).

III. Discussion

Intense re-deposition of

Formation of surface reliefs, hillocks, pyramids,
cones, whiskers and other structures on the sputtered
surface of solids under impact of ions is a common
phenomenon [13-17].
the
sputtered Pb and Te on the sputtering PbTe crystal
surface shows that the sputtered phase over the sputtering
surface is strongly supersaturated. A specific feature of
takes place in the
this re-deposition is that
conditions of continuous sputtering of
re-depositing
materials. Let us analyze the obtained results based on
these two obvious inferences.

that

it

As is well known, deposition of any structures on
solid substrate starts from nucleation of depositing
material. High density of the structures re-deposited on
sputtering surface at
the initial stages of sputtering
indicates that on the initial lateral surface of PbTe crystal
grown from melt by the Bridgman method there are a lot
of effective nucleation centers. Decrease of density of the
re-deposited microscopic structures accompanied by
increase the structure sizes under impact of the stable Ar+
plasma during prolonged crystal depth profiling suggest
that,
the vast majority of the nuclei of re-
deposited structures are formed on the sputtering lateral
surface of PbTe crystal at
re-
deposition, and, secondly, the longer the PbTe crystal
surface is sputtered, the less efficiently the new nuclei of
re-depositing phase are formed on it.

the early stages of

firstly,

is

close

always

technological method

We believe that decrease of effectiveness of relief
dimples as the nucleation centers for re-deposition of
sputtered Pb and Te during prolonged PbTe crystal depth
profiling is due to the features of both the phase diagrams
of PbTe and the PbTe crystals sputtering. PbTe is a
semiconductor with a quite narrow homogeneity range
[18]. Therefore, composition of PbTe crystals grown by
any
to
stoichiometric [19]. This should also take place in the
process of re-deposition of Pb and Te from the sputtered
phase. To form a stoichiometric nucleus, Pb and Te
atoms should be re-deposited on the sputtering surface in
equal amounts. As we have reported recently [12]
sputtering of the PbTe crystal is preferential. Preferential
component
changes
sputtering
surface
concentrations
of
on
multicomponent material, which
becomes more
pronounced during longer sputtering. In the initial state
the surface concentrations of Pb and Te in the PbTe
crystal are equal to each other. Therefore the little dimple
on such surface is the best place for nucleation of PbTe
re-deposited phase. For sputtered PbTe crystal surface
the Pb and Te concentrations differ from each other, and
the longer sputtering,
the stronger. So, during the
prolonged sputtering, nucleation on the sputtered PbTe
crystal surface under the same level of supersaturation

ratio between
sputtering

the

the

closer

surface

surface,

sputtered

somewhat

composition of

of
to
but
stoichiometric ratio – its average value was found to be
conical
Pb0.508Te0.492. The
structures, similar to the structure 3 (Fig. 6), was found to
be strongly enriched with lead – maximum enrichment
was estimated as Pb0.63Te0.37. On the other hand, the
surface structures, similar to the structure 4 (Fig. 6),
appeared strongly enriched with tellurium (maximum
enrichment Pb0.39Te0.61). Dark flat surface similar to the
point 5 (Fig 6) of the re-deposited structures without any
defined shape and spatial orientation contained a lot of
Si, O, and C.

Conclusions

is

for 5-50 minutes

Morphology of lateral surface of the PbTe crystal
grown from melt by the Bridgman method and sputtered
by Ar plasma with ion energy 50-550 eV under SNMS
investigated. The
conditions
sputtering PbTe crystal surface in the process of depth
profiling was found to be simultaneously both the source
of sputtered material and the efficient substrate for re-
deposition of the sputtered material. Consequently the
sputtered phase of PbTe crystal to be analyzed by SNMS
method
two
of
interdependent processes, namely sputtering and re-
deposition.

superposition

result

the

of

is

Sputtering of PbTe crystal forms the dimple relief on
its surface. Re-deposition of sputtered Pb and Te leads to
covering of the sputtering surfaces with an array of small
microscopic surface structures, like hillocks, pyramids,
cones and others for any duration of PbTe crystal
sputtering by Ar plasma of any energy. The surface
structures originate on both the natural growth defects
and dimples of sputtered lateral surfaces of the PbTe
crystal samples. Under constant sputtering energy, the
smaller is the duration of surface sputtering, the smaller
is the average size of re-deposited microscopic surface
structures, but the higher is their surface density. The
same behaviour of the re-deposited microscopic surface
structures take place under constant sputtering time of
PbTe samples when the sputtering energy changes.

3

2

1

4

5

Fig. 6. SEM image of the fragment of lateral surface
of PbTe crystal after sputtering by Ar+ plasma with
energy of 50 eV during 50 min investigated by EDX
method.

must be suppressed, and this is what we are observing.

these

sputtering

The composition of the re-deposited microscopic
structures that have overcome the potential barrier of the
critical nucleus formation must be changing during their
growth, reflecting the changes of the original surface due
to re-sputtering. To evaluate these changes, we carried
out EDX analysis of the sample subjected to sputtering
for 50 minutes by Ar plasma with energy of 50 eV.
Under
integrated Te
sputtering yield was higher by a factor of six compared
to the integrated sputtering yield of Pb [12]. Therefore,
one might expect measurable changes in composition of
ten
sputtered surface. The surface composition at
statistically random points of both the un-sputtered and
sputtered surfaces, as well as the composition of ten
surface structures associated with the dimple relief of
sputtered surface, was estimated. The view of studied
sputtered surface is shown in Fig. 6.

conditions

As might be expected, within the accuracy of the
method composition of
the un-sputtered surface is
stoichiometric. The composition of sputtered surface
averaging over ten measurements at points similar to the
point 1 (Fig. 6) was found to be slightly enriched with
lead, namely Pb0.517Te0.483. Such result
is also to be
expected, given strong Te enrichment of the sputtered
phase. With regard to the re-deposited surface structures
the situation appeared less definitive. The composition of
the predominant pyramidal structures similar
to the
structures 2 (Fig. 6) was very similar to the composition

[1] H. Oechsner, Secondary Neutral Mass Spectrometry (SNMS) and Its Application to Depth Profile and
Interface Analysis. In: Thin Film and Depth Profile Analysis (Ed. by Oechsner H, Springer-Verlag, 1984).

[2] H. Oechsner, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 33, 918 (1988).
[3]

I.V. Veryovkin, W.F. Calaway, J.F. Moore, M.J. Pellin, J.W. Lewellen, Y. Li, S.V. Milton, B.V. King,
M. Petravic, Applied Surface Science 231-232, 962 (2004).

[4] T. Albers, M. Neumann, D. Lipinsky, A. Benninghoven, Applies Surface Science 70-71, 49 (1993).
[5] T.A. Dang, T.A. Frist, Surface and Coatings Technology 106, 60 (1998).
[6] G.L. Katona, Z. Berényi, L. Péter, K. Vad, Vacuum 82(2), 270 (2007).
[7] T. Schneider, M. Sommer, J. Goschnick, Applied Surface Science 252(1), 257 (2005).
[8] Vasile-Dan Hodoroaba, Wolfgang E.S Unger, Holger Jenett, Volker Hoffmann, Birgit Hagenhoff, Sven

Kayser, Klaus Wetzig, Applied Surface Science 179(1-4), 30 (2001).

340

[9] D.M. Zayachuk, O.S. Ilyina, A.V. Pashuk, V.I. Mikityuk, V.V. Shlemkevych, A. Csik, and D. Kaczorowski,

J. Cryst Growth 376, 28 (2013).

[10] P. Sigmund, Elements of Sputtering Theory, In: Nanofabrication by Ion-Beam Sputtering. T. Som, D. Kanjilal

(Pan Stanford Publishing, 2013).

[11] M. Kopnarski, H. Jennet, Electron Impact

In:
Friedbacher, Bubert H., editors. Surface and Thin Film Analysis. A Compendium of Principles,
Instrumentation, and Applications ґ(Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.KGaA, 2011).
[12] D.M. Zayachuk, E.I. Slynko, V.E. Slynko, and A. Csik, Materials Letters 173, 167 (2016).
[13] P. Sarobol, J.E. Blendell, C.A. Handwerker, Acta Materialia 61/6 (2013) 1991-2003
[14] Qintao Li, Zhichun Ni, Shumin Yang, Jinlong Gong, Dezhang Zhu, Zhiyuan Zhu, Nuclear Instruments and

(EI) Secondary Neutral Mass Spectrometry (SNMS).

Methods B 266, 197 (2008).

[15] L.B. Begrambekov, A.M. Zakharov, V.G. Telkovsky, Nuclear Instruments and Methods B 115(1-4), 456

(1996).

[16] F. Okuyama, J. Kato, Surface Science 338(1-3), )L857 (1995).
[17] Z.W. Kowalski, Vacuum 63(4),603 (2001).
[18] H. Maier, J. Hesse: in Crystals, Growth, Properties and Applications, v. 4 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New

York, 1980).

[19] G. Nimtz, B. Schlicht (Eds.), Narrow-Gap Semiconductors: Narrow Gap Lead Salts (Springer, Berlin, 1985).

341

