Materials Letters 173 (2016) 167 –169

doi - 10.1016/j.matlet.2016.03.038

Oscillations and huge preferences of PbTe crystal surface sputtering
under Secondary Neutral Mass Spectrometry conditions
D.M. Zayachuka, E.I. Slynkob, V.E. Slynkob, A . Csikc
a Lviv Polytechnic National University, Lviv, Ukraine
b Institute of Material Science NASU, Chernivtsy, Ukraine
c Institute for Nuclear Research, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Debrecen, Hungary

a b s t r a c t

Sputtering of PbTe crystals by Ar þ plasma with ion energies 50–550 eV is investigated. A dependence of
sputter yields of the Te and Pb on the sputtering ion energy and sputtering time is measured. New
phenomena: aperiodical oscillations of Pb and Te sputtering; a huge preference of Te sputtering reaching
more than two orders of magnitude at the beginning of sputtering process; and a signiﬁcant excess of Te
integrated sputter yield over that of Pb for prolonged sputtering by low energy plasma at 50–160 eV, are
observed. It is substantiated that these phenomena can be caused by the peculiarities of the charge states
of the interstitial Pb and Te in PbTe crystal matrix and the processes of re-deposition of sputtered atoms
on the sputtered surface.

1.

Introduction

from PbTe crystal surface by Ar plasma under SNMS conditions.

Application of sputtering in Secondary Neutral Mass Spectro-
metry (SNMS) is known to be an effective method for composition
analysis and depth proﬁling of multicomponent and doped solids
[1–3]. Recently we successfully used this method for depth pro-
ﬁling across of Eu-doped PbTe single crystals grown from melt [4].
In SNMS method the composition of multicomponent systems is
determined by measuring the relative content of the sputtered
species. In this case, the problem of preferential sputtering arises
and should always be considered [5]. According to linear cascade
theory for E»U (E is the beam energy and U is the surface binding
energy) the ratio of partial sputter yields Y of 1 and 2 elements
are:

m

m

.

≃

⎛
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎝

Y
1
Y
2

U
2
U
1

S
N
1
S
N
2

M
2
M
1

−
1 2
⎞
⎟
⎠

S
Here Ni

2
⎞
⎟
⎠
( )
1
and Мi are the respective surface concentration and
mass of the ith species, m is the exponent in the low energy power
cross section, a quantity close to zero [1]. Under prolonged sput-
tering the ratio of sputter yields monotonically tends to the ratio of
the bulk element concentrations [5].

Herein, we focus on the speciﬁcs of the Pb and Te sputtering

2. Experiment

The crystals for investigations were grown from melt by the
Bridgman method. The high purity Pb and Te, taken in stoichio-
metric ratio, were used for crystal growth. The lateral cylindrical
surfaces of crystal were used for sputtering and analysis by SNMS
method. Conditions for SNMS were the same as described in [4].
The analysis of the samples was performed in the direct bom-
bardment mode by using Ar þ ions with energy 50-550 eV. Ions
were extracted from the Ar plasma by a negatively biased sample.
The erosion area was conﬁned to a circle of 2 mm in diameter by a
Ta mask.

3. Results

Features of formation of the PbTe sputtered phase under im-
pact of Ar þ plasma in the SNMS conditions deserving special at-
tention are the following.

(cid:2) The intensity of Pb and Te signals varies during the prolonged
sputtering, exhibiting the pronounced features of aperiodical
oscillation process. Fig. 1 shows an example for the Te sputter-
ing by Ar þ plasma using different energies throughout one
minute sputtering time.

168

Pb
Fig. 3. Integrated sputter yields Ytot
sputtering time for different sputtering energies.

Te
(open symbols), and Ytot

(solid symbols) vs.

Fig. 1. Normalized by the mean Te signal vs. sputtering time, measured on PbTe
lateral surface for different sputtering energies throughout one minute sputtering
time.

(cid:2) The amplitude of oscillations of the Pb and Te intensities in-
creases when sputtering energy decreases. The maximum de-
viations of the measured magnitudes from their average values
reached 80% for sputtering energy 50 eV and 10% for energy
550 eV.

(cid:2) The average intensity of Pb and Te signals also varies during
prolonged sputtering. It decreases with sputtering time at a
sputtering energy of about 160 eV and less and increases at
about 350 eV and higher (Fig. 2).

(cid:2) A preferential sputtering process takes place during the sput-
tering, which depends on the energy of Ar þ beam. At low
sputtering energies of about 160 eV and less in the beginning of
the process Te dominates in sputtered phase, but Pb dominates
at high energies of about 350 eV and higher (Fig. 3 and Fig. 4).
(cid:2) The degree of preferential Te sputtering at the lowest energy
50 eV is very large, exceeding two orders of magnitude (curve 1,
Fig. 4). When Pb dominates in the sputtered phase, we observe
much smaller differences between Pb and Te integrated sputter
Pb
Te – they don’t exceed approximately 12%
yields Ytot
(curves 3,4, Fig. 4).
Te
Y/tot

oscillates during prolonged sputtering. Only for
high sputtering energies 350 and 550 eV it tends to unity. For
sputtering energies of about 160 eV and less ratio Y
does

(cid:2) Ratio Y

and Ytot

Pb
tot

Te
Y/tot

Pb
tot

Fig. 2. Te signal intensity (normalized by the mean in the range from 10 to 100 sec)
vs. sputtering time for different sputtering energies.

Fig. 4. Ratio of integrated sputter yields Y
sputtering energies.

Te
tot

Y/

Pb
tot

vs. sputtering time for different

not approach unity even after almost one hour of sputtering
(Fig. 4).

4. Discussion

Let us ﬁrst consider why the preference of Pb and Te sputtering
changes over when sputtering energy changes. Ratio of Pb and Te
partial sputter yields can be estimated using the Eq. (1).Their in-
itial surface concentrations in PbTe crystals are equal. So, heavy Pb
can dominate over light Te in the initial PbTe sputtered phase,
exceeding the sputtering rate of Te at given sputtering energy, only
if its surface binding energy is lower. That is what we are obser-
ving for sputtering with energy 350 and 550 eV (curves 4, 5,
Fig. 4). Thus we conclude that surface binding energy of Pb in PbTe
is indeed lower than that of Te.

Then why is the amount of Te higher in PbTe sputtered phase at
low sputtering energies? We suggest that the reason lies in pe-
culiarities of charge states of the interstitial defects in PbTe lattice.
There interstitial Pb is double-charged donor with zero activation
energy, and interstitial Te is electrically neutral [6]. Low energy
sputtering around and below 160 eV is near-threshold sputter
process. In this case, the primary recoil atoms dominate in sput-
tered ﬂux [7,8]. Back-scattered neutral Te atom knocked out from
an own site into an interstitial position is free to leave the PbTe
sputtered surface. On the other hand, back-scattered Pb2 þ ion

169

sputtering of crystal surface leads to its enrichment by the com-
ponent of PbTe crystal with lower sputter yield. This enrichment,
in turn, leads to the increase of the other component sputter yield
and the reduction of the ﬁrst one from the crystal surfaces. Sput-
tering of surface of each newly deposited crystallite repeats the
process.

Nucleation of the new formations on sputtering surface is a
random process. Hence, the deposition rate of the sputtered ma-
terial on the sputtering surface will not be constant too. Over-
laying the two processes occurring at variable rates, one of which
increases the amount of material in the sputtered phase while the
other decreases it, can cause non-periodic oscillations of sputter
yields of Pb and Te during prolonged sputtering of the PbTe sur-
face, and that is what we are observing. As mentioned before the
density of crystalline formations increases when sputtering energy
decreases. So, nucleation and growth of the new formations on the
sputtering surface is apparently responsible for decrease of Pb and
Te sputter yields with time, as well as for signiﬁcant deviation of
Te
Y/tot
Y
ratio from unity for large sputtering times at low energies
of about 160 eV and less.

Pb
tot

5. Conclusions

Summarizing, it should be emphasized that the presence of
oscillatory sputtering of PbTe components will affect the de-
termination of concentrations of various elements in the crystal
matrix. To reduce this effect measurement is best done with high-
energy plasma of about 300 eV or higher. On the other hand,
sputtering at low energy of about 100 eV and lower under favor-
able conditions may be used for testing the difference of charge
states of native interstitial atoms in crystal matrix.

References

[1] Sigmund P: Elements of Sputtering Theory. In: Nanofabrication by Ion-Beam

Sputtering. T. Som, D. Kanjilal. Pan Stanford Publishing, 2013, p. 1–40.

[2] Kopnarski M, Jennet H. Electron Impact (EI) Secondary Neutral Mass Spectro-
metry (SNMS). In: Friedbacher, Bubert H., editors. Surface and Thin Film Ana-
lysis. A Compendium of Principles, Instrumentation, and Applications, Wiley-
VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA, 2011, p. 161-178.

[3] H. Oechsner, Secondary neutral Mass spectrometry (SNMS) and its application
to depth proﬁle and interface analysis, in: H. Oechsner (Ed.), Thin Film and
Depth Proﬁle Analysis, Springer-Verlag, 1984, pp. 63–86.

[4] D.M. Zayachuk, O.S. Ilyina, A.V. Pashuk, V.I. Mikityuk, V.V. Shlemkevych, A. Csik,

D. Kaczorowski, J. Cryst. Growth 376 (2013) 28–34.

[5] Feldman LC, Mayer JW: Fundamentals of Surface and Thin Film Analysis, North-

Holland, 1986.

[6] H. Heinrich, Lect. Notes Phys. 133 (1980) 407–426.
[7] R. Kelly, Surf. Sci. 100 (1980) 85–107.
[8] V.I. Shulga, P. Sigmund, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 119 (1996) 359–374.

Fig. 5. Scanning electron microscope picture of PbTe crystal surface after sputtering
by argon plasma with 160 eV ions energy for 3200 s.

ejected from site into interstitial experiences difﬁculties in sput-
tering because it must overcome an additional potential barrier
created by the positive potential of Ar plasma. Therefore, at low
sputtering energies Te should signiﬁcantly dominate in sputtered
phase, despite the fact that its surface binding energy is higher
than that of Pb. That is what we observe in the experiment (curves
1–3, Fig. 4).

Why do the Pb and Te sputter yields oscillate? To explain this
unusual phenomenon we will consider the following. First, during
prolonged sputtering the combined integrated sputter yield of
material as a whole oscillates as well as Pb and Te sputter yields.
Second, at any sputtering stage the surface of sputtered PbTe
crystal is covered by the array of crystalline formations that are
deposited on the sputtered surface during its sputtering (Fig. 5).

Study of the PbTe sputtered surface morphology is a subject of
separate investigation, and its results will be published. Here we
only emphasize two important facts. First, the density of crystalline
formations on the sputtered surface at comparable sputter times
increases when sputtering energy decreases. Second, the results of
energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) measurements show
that the composition of both newly formed crystallites and sput-
tered crystal surface is the same, to a ﬁrst approximation. So, one
can deﬁnitely assume that the sputtered phase of PbTe crystals is
formed by the superposition of two simultaneous processes –
material sputtering by the Ar plasma and deposition of the sput-
tered material on the sputtering surface. The ﬁrst process increases
the amount of sputtered material, the second decreases it.

As the sputtering process is preferential the sputtering rate of
Pb and Te from the PbTe crystal surface will change over time. The

