Towards an Understanding of the Effects of Augmented
Reality Games on Disaster Management

Markus Luczak-Roesch
School of Information Management
Victoria University of Wellington
New Zealand
markus.luczak-roesch@vuw.ac.nz

7
1
0
2

b
e
F
1
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
1
6
6
0
.
2
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Location-based augmented reality games have entered the
mainstream with the nearly overnight success of Niantic’s
Pok´emon Go. Unlike traditional video games, the fact that
players of such games carry out actions in the external, phys-
ical world to accomplish in-game objectives means that the
large-scale adoption of such games motivate people, en masse,
to do things and go places they would not have otherwise done
in unprecedented ways. The social implications of such mass-
mobilisation of individual players are, in general, difﬁcult
to anticipate or characterise, even for the short-term. In this
work, we focus on disaster relief, and the short- and long-term
implications that a proliferation of AR games like Pok´emon
Go, may have in disaster-prone regions of the world. We
take a distributed cognition approach and focus on one natural
disaster-prone region of New Zealand, the city of Wellington.

INTRODUCTION
The nearly overnight success of the game Pok´emon Go in July
2016 suddenly brought location-based augmented reality (AR)
games into our every-day lives. We now see people swiping on
their smartphone screens while sitting on the bus, we can read
about people getting into dangerous situations because they
tried to capture a valuable Pok´emon1, or we may even play
the game ourselves. All of a sudden we are now confronted
with a seamless overlap of AR gameplay and the real world,
independent from whether we actively take part or just cross
the path of players. The implications of this novel intersection
aren’t very well understood yet, but we can quite certainly
expect it to become a central public concern with more games
of that kind being released.

Quantitative data about the Pok´emon Go activities of indi-
viduals is – maybe rightfully so – not available for research.
Furthermore, due to the novelty of the phenomenon, also no
qualitative studies have been conducted yet (or at least nothing

1goo.gl/6mxFXH

has been published as of early September 2016). Hence, we
can only investigate this new phenomenon from an abstract
viewpoint aiming to crystallize the most relevant hypothesis to
inform future research and to raise awareness amongst policy
makers so that these are enabled to prepare the adequate policy
instruments to deal with this new public concern.

In this research note we report on our ongoing efforts to con-
solidate information about general effects of location-based
AR games on urban disaster management. In particular, we
present a case study of a city with high vulnerability to natural
disasters – the city of Wellington in New Zealand – focused on
describing the touching points between the Pok´emon Go game-
play mechanisms and the city’s emergency response plans.
Our ﬁndings suggest that there is a largely unexplored ambiva-
lence in the promises and perils of location-based AR games
with respect to disaster management. This is manifested in
an unclear situation about the intersection of public spaces
with individuals stimulated by time- and location-dependent
incentives of AR games. The implications of this insufﬁciently
investigated area range from uncertainty about the obligations
of AR game providers for supporting disaster management
not only with mobility data but also by reducing the gameplay
interference with crisis locations to an epistemic gap about the
behaviour of human AR game players in crisis situations.

RESEARCH METHOD AND SETTING
Our research was conducted as a case study involving a single
case as it is commonly done in the information systems dis-
cipline [1]. Since this is early stage work on a novel research
problem, namely the interplay of location-based AR games
and urban disaster management, this case study approach is the
adequate choice to contribute rigorously informed new hypoth-
esis about the interdependence of artifacts within a complex
socio-technical setting [5, 18]. This method is anchored within
HCI research as kind of distributed cognition approach. We
are aiming at ”paying close attention to the activities of people
and their interactions with material”, so far contributing one
dimension of a comprehensive ethnographic study, namely the
review of documents related to the case, to investigate how
”groups of individual agents interacting with each other in a
particular environment” [14].

Case study setup
Our case study draws upon the collection of publicly available
information from various sources that are ofﬁcially related to:

 
 
 
 
 
 
a) the disaster management and response plans of the city of
Wellington; and b) the make up of the Pok´emon Go gameplay.

Wellington: Disaster prone capital city
Wellington is the capital city of New Zealand, a country that is
highly vulnerable to natural disasters of various kinds, mostly
due to the fact that it is a group of volcanic islands. Home
to about 400, 000 people and a stationary age group distribu-
tion (median age of 37.2 years)2, Wellington is located at the
south end of the north island. Additionally, the city attracts
a large amount of tourists and business travellers, counting
more than 1.4 million reported guest nights in various forms
of accommodation3. Since the midst of the 19th century the
city was affected by numerous heavy earhquakes, which has
its most likely cause in two fault lines that are located in the
wider region. But also heavy weather conditions are a common
cause of emergency response in Wellington. Hence, disaster
readiness has become a fundamental concern in the every-day
life of Wellingtonians, informed and supported by various
services provided by the local council as well as the national
government.

Pok ´emon Go: A location-based augmented reality game
Mid of July 2016 the company Niantec, Inc. released the
location-based augmented reality game Pok´emon Go as a fol-
low up to the game Ingress that falls into the same category.
In contrast to Ingress, Pok´emon Go has become a massive
success in its early days featuring a massive burst of player
activity. The gameplay narrative in Pok´emon Go is given as
follows: (1) Players create an individually styled avatar; (2)
the avatar is placed on a map in the virtual world depending
on the location of the player in the real-world; (3) in particu-
lar locations players can pick up items with their avatar that
feature a Pok´eStop or they can join team battles with other
players’ avatars if they are local to a so called Pok´emon gym;
(4) Pok´emon creatures are algorithmically placed on the map
and the players are incentivized for catching them via in-game
currencies.

Investigated documents and material
By ”ofﬁcially related information” we mean that we only
regard information that were published on the Web by organ-
isational entities that act with ofﬁcial capacity related to the
two aforementioned two areas. This includes the Wellington
City Council, the Ministry of Civil Defence and Emergency
Management, the Earthquake and War Damages Commission
(EQC), and GNS Science on the one hand as well as Niantic,
Inc. on the other. The seed list of URIs for our online research
is given in Table1. Starting from this seed list, we thoroughly
explored the online presences of the aforementioned informa-
tion providers and collected all relevant documents including
documents provided by other sources but explicitly referred
to from these ofﬁcial ones. Relevant documents were inves-
tigated in depth and a mapping was created to link a set of
core disaster management themes to aspects of the Pok´emon
Go gameplay that may have a speciﬁc impact on particular
themes.

2Source: http://goo.gl/pMm21Z
3Source: http://goo.gl/TKyF6R

Seed URIs

related to disaster management
http://getthru.govt.nz/
http://www.getprepared.org.nz/
http://www.geonet.org.nz/
http://www.gw.govt.nz/
http://www.eqc.govt.nz/
http://www.civildefence.govt.nz/
http://wellington.govt.nz/
http://www.nrc.govt.nz/civildefence/
http://www.nzdf.mil.nz/default.htm
related to Pokemon Go
http://www.pokemongo.com/
https://support.pokemongo.nianticlabs.com
Table 1. Seed URIs for our online research, which happened in the time
window between 15/07/2016 and 01/09/2016.

MAPPING LOCATION-BASED AR GAMEPLAY MECHA-

NISM AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT
In this section we are going to present two mappings between
disaster management themes identiﬁed in the context of the
city of Wellington and a set of generic AR gameplay mech-
anisms present within Pok´emon Go. For each mapping we
formulate a hypothesis to qualify the potential impact the AR
gameplay may have on disaster management in case of an
actual disaster. We seek to create an overarching picture of
how these disaster management themes can be linked to the
generic AR gameplay mechanisms in order to set the line for a
constructive embedding of this emerging technology with the
particulars of every-day-life in areas that are highly vulnerable
to disasters. Hence, Table2 shows hypotheses about possibly
problematic effects in case of a disaster and Table3 comple-
ments this by showing hypotheses about possibly positive
effects.

Our structured review of disaster management material re-
sulted in an agreement that the distinction into (1) disaster
awareness, (2) real-time and in situ disaster relief, and (3)
post-disaster phases suits best to put the various disaster
management activities and recommendations described in the
context of the city of Wellington into themes. Most of the
ofﬁcial online resources use this pattern to organize informa-
tion for the citizens independent from the disaster type, which
usually is used as the top level categorization. Additionally
we ﬁnd that within these three dimensions three classes of
involvements in disaster response occur regularly: (a) places;
(b) procedures; (c) stakeholders.

The review of the selected material describing Pok´emon Go
brought out that the following two gameplay mechanisms
stand out most:First, a goal within the game is to capture in-
centives or compete with others at as many times as possible.
But the value of these incentives is not only determined by time
(incentives may be available for only a short period of time
or may be picked up on a ﬁrst come ﬁrst serve basis) but also
by location, since incentives captured in different places may
have different value. We describe these gameplay mechanisms
as time-dependent incentivization and location-dependent
incentivization and highlight that in many cases these occur in
combination. Second, the incentivizaton strategy is supported
by a very extensive UX design addressing multiple senses
to get players attention. We summarize this aspect, which is
related to the cognitive focus of players as well as the com-

Disaster manage-
ment themes

Places

Procedures

Stakeholders

Location-based AR gameplay mecha-
nisms

Disaster awareness

safe spaces

household
emer-
gency plan, prac-
tice behaviour

family, care givers

resource demanding interaction design

endangered
spaces

information
dissemination

governmental
agencies

combination of
dependent incentivization

location-

and time-

Real-time and in
situ disaster relief

critically affected
areas, endangered
areas, safe spaces

ofﬁcial disaster re-
sponse actions, in-
formation dissem-
ination

governmental
agencies, national
and international
aid organization

combination of
dependent incentivization

location-

and time-

Post-disaster
phases

critically affected
areas, endangered
areas, safe spaces

self-relief
guide-
lines, information
dissemination

family,
givers, friends

care

resource demanding interaction design,
time-dependent incentivization

critically affected
areas, endangered
areas, safe spaces

ofﬁcial disaster re-
sponse actions, in-
formation dissem-
ination

governmental
agencies, national
and international
aid organization

combination of
dependent incentivization

location-

and time-

Hypothetical problematic effects of
location-based AR gameplay mecha-
nism on disaster management

Information dissemination: People may
get into ﬂow within the game and miss
important messages passed via other chan-
nels about a disaster.
Risk assessment: People may interpret
moderate early warnings in the way that it
is still safe enough to approach an endan-
gered location in order to get an advantage
over people who already avoid that place.

Evacuation (guided or self-managed):
Particular safe spaces get disproportion-
ally and unexpectedly crowded so that
not all people can beneﬁt from those safe
spaces.

Self-relief guidelines: Smartphone bat-
teries may get drained quicker so people
are unable to contact relatives and friends
to a) inform them about a disaster or b)
ﬁnd out about their situation or position
to organize post-disaster help.
Return from evacuation: People may
want
to return to the game quickly
to avoid being disadvantaged too much.
This may result in a tendency to return
to areas of a crisis region too early and
even before these are declared fully safe.
And even when areas are declared safe
people coming for gaming may negatively
impact the return experience of other af-
fected people (technically in terms of in-
terferences with relief work as well as so-
cially in terms of additional distress).

Table 2. Mapping A between disaster management themes and Pok´emon Go gameplay mechanism: Hypothetical problematic effects.

putational load put on their devices, as resource demanding
interaction design.

DISCUSSION
In this section we are going to contextualize our hypothesis
generating investigation about the impact of AR games on
disaster response with established knowledge from related
literature as well as disaster management practice.

Can AR game data be used in digital disaster response?
The emerging ﬁeld of digital humanitarianism involving digi-
tal disaster response has gained wide attention over the recent
years [11]. Beside the great prospects, which are fueled by
widely visible efforts such as Ushahidi and Flowminder, this
area is also facing an increasing amount of critical voices [4].
Researchers question the adequacy of using private data with-
out permission but also that, if this data is used, this sometimes
happens under non-transparent conditions giving selected par-
ties exclusive access. This does not mean that there is a trivial
way out of this situation, because sharing crisis data is an ethi-
cally ambivalent dilemma as it always comes with the danger
of misleading interpretation if not adequately analysed for ex-
ample. But while the scholarly world is debating to overcome
the transparency and reproducibility crisis in research through
data sharing, crisis data seems to be a protected good for a
few.

This stress ﬁeld of digital disaster response is a critical chal-
lenge for location-based AR games. While the mobility pat-
terns of players are a great source for quantitative insight
before, during, and after a crisis situation, our mapping of

gameplay characteristics throws up the following important
question: Do people have to be reported when the game data
reveals that they were approaching an endangered area to gain
points? Is the game provider responsible to take all location-
based incentives off the map during a disaster to avoid people
being attracted by endangered spaces? Do we need default
mechanisms to interrupt attention demanding apps in order
to broadcast important crisis-related information? This study
cannot give an answer to those question, but it reveals how im-
portant it will be to have a critical discussion about them. This
is particularly important because location-based AR games
do not happen in the private spaces of individuals, they
reach out to public spaces and necessarily interfere with pub-
lic interests in those spaces. All this will become even more
important as affordable technologies to make AR increasingly
ubiquitous and invasive (e.g. AR goggles and other forms of
wearable devices) are on the rise.

Do AR games create new barriers in disaster manage-

ment?
The barriers to effective crisis relief are a central concern in
disaster management research. Typically the scientiﬁc inquire
is focused on challenges within the disaster management orga-
nizations delivering crisis relief. Previous work has identiﬁed
the typical areas of interest in this regard to be communication
and information sharing, authority, and command, as well as
coordination and causality ﬂow [12, 2]. The actual behaviors
of those affected by a disaster has mostly been investigated
from the perspective of social resilience and response to crisis

Disaster manage-
ment themes

Places

Procedures

Stakeholders

Location-based AR gameplay mecha-
nisms

Disaster awareness

endangered areas,
safe spaces

information
dissemination

players

resource demanding interaction design,
time-dependent incentivization

Post-disaster
phases

critically affected
areas, endangered
areas, safe spaces

self-relief
guide-
lines, information
dissemination

resource demanding interaction design,
time-dependent incentivization

family,
givers,
players,
mental
aid organizations

care
friends,
govern-
agencies,

Hypothetical positive effects of location-
based AR gameplay mechanism on dis-
aster management

Information dissemination: A signiﬁ-
cant change in the behaviour of other play-
ers (e.g. disproportionate amount of play-
ers disappear from map, team members
do not show up for in-game meeting) may
trigger awareness of some event in the real
world and motivate a player to check by
pausing to play for a moment.

Relief (guided or self-managed): Some
people may carry additional equipment
(e.g. battery packs, food) in order to reach
valuable locations or just generally play
longer. This turns them into a particularly
interesting group for ofﬁcial relief work-
ers when seeking for solutions to dissem-
inate information or deal with a general
resource shortage.

Table 3. Mapping B between disaster management themes and Pok´emon Go gameplay mechanism: Hypothetical positive effects.

[13, 6] rather than any real-time and in-situ interdependency
with crisis management as in our investigation.

It is noteworthy that this cross-disciplinary viewpoint has long
been requested as articulated by Masten and Obradovic in
[10]: “Preparing a large population for any kind of disaster
will require a developmental perspective on human resilience,
risk, and vulnerability, as well as the integration of ideas on
resilience from the sciences of communication, engineering,
computing, public health, and ecology, among others.” And
Gunderson emphasizes that ”appropriate responses must in-
clude anticipating unexpected never-before-experienced ef-
fects and impacts” [7]. In the light of these demands our study
suggests that the time- and location-based incentivisation
of AR games may change people’s usual mobility patterns
and impact disaster management due to misleading pre-
suppositions.

Towards socio-technical emergency response augmenta-

tion?
Many countries already provide Emergency Alert Systems
(EAS), broadcasting systems that can exploit any available
telecommunications, radio, television and satellite infrastruc-
ture in order to send out wide ranging or precisely scoped
information in case of a disaster situation4. This study raises
important new challenges for future EAS. The mapping of
problematic effects of AR gameplay mechanisms shows how
essential it will be to widen the broadcasting capabilities of
EAS to reach players while these are in attention demanding
game ﬂow. Furthermore, one can also abstract from the case
of AR games and consider any kind of wearable technology
or IoT device to become equally important receivers for EAS
broadcasting in the future.

Bringing the mapping of positive effects in at this point lets
us consider the potential to generally augment emergency
response with the power of the digitized citizen embodied

4See
https://www.fcc.gov/general/
emergency-alert-system-eas and http://www.mass.gov/eopss/
agencies/mema/be-prepared/be-informed/ for examples from the
US.

in decentralised resource hubs made up of wearable tech-
nologies and mobile device batteries for example. While
this has the potential to be a promising extension of the ex-
isting technical augmentation of response teams [16], it also
raises important research questions about the psychological
and social effects when such a critical responsibility is implic-
itly passed on to members of the general public.

CONCLUSION
Following previous studies on location-based AR games in
the context of culture [15, 3], health [9], as well as digital
economy[8], our work addressed the impact of this emerg-
ing phenomenon on disaster management. It raises important
questions about the opportunities but also new barriers disaster
management is facing due to location-based AR games. The
importance of adapting laws and policies to deal with the new
phenomenon of location-based AR has already been identiﬁed
[17] but needs to be re-emphasized in the light of our sugges-
tions, to ensure that the virtual and the real world can meet in
a structured way even in case of unanticipated crisis.

The work described in this note is the tipping point of a larger
research agenda. We presented the initial ﬁndings of our
hypotheses generation process, which was supported by a rig-
orously designed case study. Even though we can assign to
our work that it underwent careful and critical reﬂection, it
does not represent empirical evidence for the potential clashes
between urban disaster management and location-based AR
games. Because of the vitally important role of disaster man-
agement, this needs to be articulated clearly and openly to
avoid that any wrong conclusions are drawn that may change
disaster management plans under wrong assumptions.

With this work we set the line for subsequent empirical in-
vestigation of the actual behavior of location-based AR game
players in urban environments and provide policy makers with
material to inform their handling of this emerging challenge of
public interest. This research agenda, shaped by the outcomes
of this initial investigation, aims at running an ethnographic
study involving ﬁeld observations of players of location-based
AR games in the Wellington CBD area and focus groups with
representatives from different demographic backgrounds. We
also seek to expand our structured document analysis to cover

material about disaster management planning from further
places with a varying vulnerability to a wider range of pos-
sible disasters. Ultimately this kind of work will be vital to
ensure that augmented reality is not only integrated with the
real world for the gameplay and the business purposes of the
provider, but also for more effective crisis relief in case of an
actual disastrous event.

REFERENCES
1. Izak Benbasat, David K Goldstein, and Melissa Mead.

1987. The case research strategy in studies of information
systems. MIS quarterly (1987), 369–386.

2. Nitesh Bharosa, Jinkyu Lee, and Marijn Janssen. 2010.
Challenges and obstacles in sharing and coordinating
information during multi-agency disaster response:
Propositions from ﬁeld exercises. Information Systems
Frontiers 12, 1 (2010), 49–65.

3. Shira Chess. 2014. Augmented regionalism: Ingress as

geomediated gaming narrative. Information,
Communication & Society 17, 9 (2014), 1105–1117.

4. Kate Crawford and Megan Finn. 2015. The limits of
crisis data: analytical and ethical challenges of using
social and mobile data to understand disasters.
GeoJournal 80, 4 (2015), 491–502.

5. Kathleen M Eisenhardt. 1989. Building theories from

case study research. Academy of management review 14,
4 (1989), 532–550.

6. James R Elliott and Jeremy Pais. 2006. Race, class, and
Hurricane Katrina: Social differences in human responses
to disaster. Social Science Research 35, 2 (2006),
295–321.

7. Lance Gunderson. 2010. Ecological and human

community resilience in response to natural disasters.
Ecology and Society 15, 2 (2010), 18.

8. Nathan Hulsey and Joshua Reeves. 2014. The gift that

keeps on giving: Google, Ingress, and the gift of
surveillance. Surveillance & Society 12, 3 (2014), 389.

9. Minhua Ma, Lakhmi C Jain, Paul Anderson, and others
(Eds.). 2014. Virtual, augmented reality and serious
games for healthcare 1. Vol. 1. Springer.

10. Ann S Masten and Jelena Obradovic. 2008. Disaster
preparation and recovery: Lessons from research on
resilience in human development. Ecology and Society
13, 1 (2008), 9.

11. Patrick Meier. 2015. Digital humanitarians: how big data
is changing the face of humanitarian response. Crc Press.

12. Patricia A O Neill. 2005. The ABC’s of disaster response.
Scandinavian Journal of Surgery 94, 4 (2005), 259.

13. Enrico L Quarantelli and Russell R Dynes. 1977.

Response to social crisis and disaster. Annual review of
sociology (1977), 23–49.

14. Yvonne Rogers. 2004. New theoretical approaches for

HCI. Annual review of information science and
technology 38, 1 (2004), 87–143.

15. Erin Stark. 2016. Playful places: Uncovering hidden

heritage with Ingress. Social, Casual and Mobile Games:
The Changing Gaming Landscape (2016), 149.

16. Daniel Steingart, Joel Wilson, Andrew Redfern, Paul
Wright, Russell Romero, and Lloyd Lim. 2005.
Augmented cognition for ﬁre emergency response: An
iterative user study. In 1st International Conference on
Augmented Cognition.

17. Brian Wassom. 2014. Augmented Reality Law, Privacy,

and Ethics: Law, Society, and Emerging AR Technologies.
Syngress.

18. Robert K Yin. 1981. The case study crisis: Some answers.
Administrative science quarterly 26, 1 (1981), 58–65.

