Pulsating dynamics of thermal plumes and its implications for multiple
eruption events in the Deccan Traps, India

Urmi Duttaa† and Nibir Mandal b

a School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Shefﬁeld,
Shefﬁeld S3 7RH, United Kingdom

b Department of Geological Sciences, Jadavapur University, Kolkata 700032, India

Abstract

In Earth’s mantle gravity instabilities initiated by density inversion lead to upwelling of
hot materials as plumes. This study focuses upon the problem of their ascent dynamics to
provide an explanation of the periodic multiple eruption events in large igneous provinces and
hotspots. We demonstrate from physical experiments that plumes can ascend in a continuous
process to form a single large head trailing into a long slender tail, typically described in the
literature only under speciﬁc physical conditions. Alternatively, they ascend in a pulsating
fashion, and produce multiple in-axis heads of varying dimensions. Based on the Volume of
Fluid (VOF) method, we performed computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) simulations to con-
strain the thermo-mechanical conditions that decide the continuous versus pulsating dynamics.
Our CFD simulations suggest the density (ρ∗) and the viscosity (R) ratios of the ambient to
the plume materials and the inﬂux rates (Re) are the prime factors in controlling the ascent
dynamics. Conditions with large R (>50) develop pulsating plumes, which are sustained
preferentially under low ρ∗ and Re conditions. Again, the increasing temperature difference
between the plume and the ambient medium is found to promote pulsating behaviour. From
these CFD simulations we show the thermal structures of a plume, and predict the peak thermal
events near the surface that commence periodically as pulses with a time interval of 1.4-3 Ma.
The pulsating plume model explains the multiple eruption events in the Deccan Traps in India,
where the time scale of their intervals estimated from the available 40Ar/39Ar geochronologi-
cal data shows an excellent match with our simulation results.

Keywords: Analogue modelling, ﬂuid, buoyancy, volume of ﬂuid method, phase and ther-

mal structures, CFD simulations, pulsating eruption events

7
1
0
2

b
e
F
8
2

]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
5
8
0
0
0
.
3
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

† u.dutta@sheffield.ac.uk

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

1

Introduction

2 Plumes in analogue models

3 CFD simulations: the theoretical basis

3.1 The VOF method .

.

.

.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 Temperature dependent density and viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 Model design .

.

.

.

.

.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

4

7

7

8

9

3.4 Non-dimensionalization of the physical variables

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. 10

4 Simulation results

11

4.1 Ascent behaviour

.

.

.

.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

4.2 Threshold conditions for pulsating plumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. 14

5 Discussion

16

5.1 Geological relevance of the continuous and pulsating plume models

. . . . . . . . 16

5.2 Explanation for the pulsating plume dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. 17

5.3 Time scale of plume pulses and Deccan Trap eruption events . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

6 Conclusions

21

1

Introduction

Thermal plumes play a major role in controlling crucial geodynamic processes in the Earth, such
as mantle upwelling from core-mantle boundary; melt advection beneath mid-oceanic ridges and
evolution of large igneous provinces (LIPs) and hotspots [1–4]. These are initiated by Rayleigh-
Taylor instabilities in hot, buoyant layers resting beneath a relatively cold, denser ﬂuid. However,
in some geodynamic settings, e.g. subduction zones plumes are driven by compositional buoyancy

2

forces [5,6]. Irrespective of their driving mechanism, plumes typically show bulbous heads trailing
into slender, cylindrical tails. Turcotte and Schubert [7] have used Stokes formula to enumerate
their ascent velocity as a function of density contrast and other physical variables, e.g., mantle
viscosity and the size of plume head. Their theoretical work, however, applies to a steady state
condition of the plume ascent, accounting a balance between the rate of material inﬂux and the
ascent rate of spherical head under constant shape and size. In reality, the ascent process is much
more complex than that predicted from such a simple hydrodynamic model. Physical as well as
numerical model experiments suggest their strongly unsteady state behavior, displaying transient
responses to various physical and geometrical conditions [8–10]. Predicting such unsteady plume
dynamics has opened a new direction of plume research in recent time.

Earlier theoretical and experimental studies have recognized a range of physical factors, such
as viscosity and density ratios between plume and ambient mantle [8, 11–16], and the role of ther-
mal/chemical boundary layers (TBL and CBL) at the base [9, 10, 17], P and S velocity attenuation
anomalies for modelling synthetic seismic plumes [18] and density stratiﬁcation in mantle [19]
that control the mode of plume ascent. For example, viscosity ratio (R) determines the magnitude
of viscous drag exerted by the ambient medium to the rising plumes and thereby largely dictates
their ascent modes, leading to either balloon- or mushroom-like single heads trailing into narrow
tails [11, 15, 16]. Some workers demonstrated from experiments a completely different ascent dy-
namics, where plumes form a train of heads of varying sizes, each of them migrate upward in the
form of solitary waves [20, 21]. A range of theoretical models have been proposed to explain such
pulsating ascent behavior, e.g. shear ﬂow along tilted tails [22] and temporal ﬂuctuations in a con-
duit ﬂow, leading to solitary wave propagation [20,21,23]. Olson and Christensen [21] showed that
long-wavelength solitary waves initiated by density-driven instability can travel through a vertical
ﬂuid conduit, conﬁned by another ﬂuid medium of higher viscosity. On the other hand, numerical
models suggest that these solitary waves are actually conduit waves, which are formed when small
diapiric bodies are continuously generated from TBL at the base of the existing plume and rise
along the plume stem [23].

Despite signiﬁcant progress in plume research, as discussed above there is a lack of systematic
study of the hydrodynamic conditions in controlling the mode of plume growth- varying from a
single, large head with a slender tail (continuous dynamics) to multiple heads in a train, ascending
as solitons (pulsating dynamics). Our present study aims to address this issue, as it has signiﬁcant
implications in interpreting various geological phenomena, such as time-dependent variability of
eruption activities and hotspot tracks, e.g. Emperor-Hawaiian island chain, Iceland, Yellowstone
and episodic patterns of volcanic activities in recent and ancient LIPs, e.g. Columbia river plane,
Deccan, Madagascar. These evidences strongly suggest the ascent of mantle plumes in pulses.

3

Schubert et al. [23] proposed a theoretical model to show the time scale of such pulses as a func-
tion of mantle viscosity. Their model predicts a time scale of 9 Ma for viscosity ∼ 1022 Pa S, which
decreases to 1 Ma when the viscosity is ∼ 1021 Pa S. The prime focus of our present work aims to
recognize thermo-mechanical conditions that favour pulsating ascent of thermal plumes over con-
tinuous, and also to characterize the frequency and timescale of such pulses. We demonstrate in
analogue physical experiments these two ascent dynamics, and show their characteristic plume ge-
ometry. The pulsating dynamics produces a train of in-axis multiple heads of varying dimensions.
Using the VOF (volume of ﬂuid) method we performed computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) sim-
ulations to evaluate the threshold physical conditions for the transition of continuous to pulsating
plume dynamics. Using the simulation results we show maximum thermal peak events to occur
periodically near the surface, and provide a time scale of such periodicity in thermal events. The
cretaceous Deccan Trap has been reported to have evolved in multiple eruption events [24, 25].
The available 40Ar/39Ar geochronological data suggest a time scale of their intervals as 1.1-2.1
Ma. Using the pulsating plume dynamics we model the multiple eruption events in the Deccan
Traps, and explain the time scale of their eruption events.

2 Plumes in analogue models

Using an analogue modelling approach we investigated the ascent behaviour of thermal plumes
in laboratory experiments. The experiments were performed in the following way. We chose
transparent glycerin (viscosity 0.8 Pa S, density 1260 kg/m3) to simulate the long time scale ﬂuid
behaviour of Earth’s mantle. This kind of low-viscosity ﬂuids has been widely used for plume and
convection experiments in geosciences [26]. The glycerin shows strongly temperature dependent
viscosity. We took a volume of glycerin in a glass-walled tank (12 cm×6 cm×8 cm) which con-
tained a small passage (diameter ∼ 4 mm) for injecting ﬂuid through the base. In the beginning the
tank was subjected to heating in order to keep the base at an elevated temperature of 45◦C. The top
surface of the glycerin column was exposed to the ambient temperature (∼ 29◦C). Using thermo-
couples we monitored the temperature of glycerin varying with depth. When the experimental
setup attained nearly a steady state thermal state, we injected into the tank the same glycerin, but
of varying temperatures through the passage at the tank base. The injected ﬂuid was coloured to
make the plume structures visible through the transparent ambient medium. We also used engine
oil (viscosity 0.155 Pa S; density 872.5 kg/m3) as an injecting ﬂuid into the glycerin medium for
a different set of experiment. The oil viscosity decreased rapidly with increasing temperature. A
summary of the experimental data is given in Table1. We captured the images of evolving plume
structures during an experimental run, keeping the camera at ﬁxed focal length.

4

Figure 1: Development of thermal plume in analogue models - continuous (top) and pulsating (bottom)
ascent dynamics. A-E denote progressive stages in each case.

A set of experiments was performed with an injecting ﬂuid of higher temperature (∼ 60◦C)
than the ambient. The experiments produced plumes, which continuously ascended through the
ambient medium to form a single structure with big head and slender tail (Fig.1 top row). The

5

Material
Glycerin

Temperature
20◦C
30◦C

Density
1261 Kg/m3
1255 Kg/m3

Viscosity
1.0 Pa S
0.8 Pa S

Engine Oil

20◦C
30◦C

878 Kg/m3
872 Kg/m3

0.287 Pa S
0.155 Pa S

Table 1: Analogue materials and their corresponding physical properties used in experiments.

plume heads underwent curling as they rose up, and their overall structures displayed typically
mushroom geometry similar to those shown in many earlier studies [9, 14]. However, the entire
ascent remains as a continuous event, maintaining steady connection between a single head to the
root through a very narrow tail. The next set of experiments with engine oil as the injecting ﬂuid
showed a completely different mode of plume ascent (Fig.1 bottom row). These plumes ascended
in a pulsating fashion, producing a train of isolated heads, often connected through narrow tails.
These heads interacted with one another during their ascent. They ﬁnally accreted to the model
surface as successive pulses with speciﬁc time periodicity, and formed an aggregate of isolated
masses that resemble a cluster of volcanic islands, e.g., the Hawaiian island chains. Olson and
Christensen [21], in their leading experiment with aqueous ethyl alcohol found similar diapiric
rise followed by formation of periodic wave train in the tail. According to this study, the steady,
cylindrical tail of a diapir rising can act as a conduit and the ﬂows within it follow the Poiseuille’s
law. Their solution yielded both fast solitary wave and slow periodic wave depending on the
conduit conditions.

To summarize our experimental ﬁndings, we found two distinct modes of unsteady thermal
plume structures ascending through a viscous matrix - 1) continuous and 2) pulsating. The phys-
ical experiments provide a qualitative basis for recognizing these varying ascent processes. The
fundamental difference between them is the continuity of material supply from the source to plume
head. The pulsating plume is the most likely form of upwelling beneath the Hotspots and LIPs,
thus needs a detailed study.

We performed Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations with well constrained phys-
ical parameters to determine the precise thermo-mechanical conditions controlling hot upwelling
process in mantle with an emphasis on the phenomenon-pulsation of plumes.

6

3 CFD simulations: the theoretical basis

3.1 The VOF method

This section presents the theoretical method used for tracking the interface between two ﬂuids in
a two-dimensional, non-reacting, incompressible ﬂow. In recent years a number of methods have
been developed to deal with the problems of ﬂuid interface detection in multiphase ﬂows. Among
them, we adopted the volume of ﬂuid (VOF) method which uses a speciﬁc implicit advection
scheme with predeﬁned ﬁxed grid to delineate the ﬂuid interface. The VOF method, ﬁrst introduced
by Hirt and Nichols [27] employs the ﬂow equations based on volume averaging, and tracks the
interface of two ﬂuid phases using a Heaviside function. The function extrapolates the phase
interface, deﬁned by 0 < γ < 1, where γ stands for volume fraction. In this case, the Navier-Stokes
equations are handled with a “one-ﬂuid formulation” which deals with only one set of equations
for two immiscible ﬂuids having different densities and viscosities. The volume fraction is used to
compute physical properties and local geometry of the interface. The theoretical calculations are
based on the three fundamental equations: equation of continuity, momentum balance equation,
heat equation and transport equation for the volume fraction (γ). Their expressions are as follows.

∇ · vvv = 0

ρ

∂vvv
∂t

+ ρ∇ · (vvvvvv) = −∇p + ∇ · (2µ ¯¯D) + Fb

∂T
∂t

+ vvv · ∇T =

k
ρc

∆T

∂γ
∂t

+ vvv · ∇γ = 0

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The ﬁrst term in Eqn.2 is related to the inertial force which is negligibly small for this study.
Fb is the body force due to gravity and ¯¯D is symmetric part of the strain tensor which has the
following expression

¯¯D = {(∇vvv + ∇vvvT ) −

2
3

(∇ · vvv)I}

(5)

In Eqn.2-5, vvv is the ﬂuid velocity, p is the ﬂuid pressure, ρ is the ﬂuid density, µ is the ﬂuid
dynamic viscosity, T is ﬂuid temperature k is the thermal conductivity, c is the speciﬁc heat at

7

constant pressure and I is the unit stress tensor. ρ and µ vary throughout physical domain, but their
value depends on the volume fraction (γ) as:

ρ = {γρ1 + (1 − γ)ρ2}

µ = {γµ1 + (1 − γ)µ2}

(6)

(7)

We have implemented the VOF method using the CFD code of FLUENT [28,29]. In our previ-
ous study [6], we performed the validation of this code for Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities, applicable
to large-scale geodynamic ﬂows.

3.2 Temperature dependent density and viscosity

In Earth’s interior, density and viscosity strongly vary with the change in temperature [30]. How-
ever, inclusion of this temperature dependence of material properties complicates the numerical
calculations. VOF incorporates the Boussinesq model for density variation as a function of tem-
perature. Here the convergence rate is faster than the calculations done by assigning different
density for different temperature separately. This approximation has been extensively used in the
theoretical modelling of mantle convection [31]. The Boussinesq approximation neglects all the
effects of thermally driven density ﬂuctuations, except for the buoyancy term in the momentum
equation as,

(ρT − ρT0)ggg ≈ ρT0gggθ∆T

(8)

where ρT is the variable density of liquid and ρT0 is the reference density. ∆T represents the
temperature ﬂuctuations with respect to the reference temperature (T1). θ is the co-efﬁcient of
thermal expansion. This approximation is accurate as long as changes in the actual density are
small; speciﬁcally, the Boussinesq approximation is valid when θ∆T << 1.

In our model we chose a power-law relation where the viscosity ratio of the ﬂuids varies from
1-100. For a wide range of geodynamic problems the following power-law function has been
used [7, 32],

µ = µ0

(cid:17)n

(cid:16) T
T0

(9)

where, n is the temperature exponent (negative), T and µ are the temperature and the viscosity

of the ﬂuid, and T0 and µ0 are their respective reference values

8

3.3 Model design

For the VOF model simulations, we chose a two-dimensional Eulerian reference scheme to deﬁne
the ﬂuid phases. The model space of horizontal dimension (Lm) 1.5 times the vertical dimension
(Hm) was initially ﬁlled with a homogeneous ﬂuid phase. The model base had an oriﬁce for
injecting another ﬂuid phase into the existing ﬂuid and d is the diameter of that base opening.
The whole model was considered to be axisymmetric. We imposed a free-slip condition at the
top boundary, whereas a non-slip condition at the base (Fig.2). The top and bottom boundaries
were subjected to contrasting temperatures, Ttop and Tb, ensuring a condition of no heat or mass
ﬂux across the lateral model boundaries. The two ﬂuids were treated as mechanically distinct,
immiscible phases with contrasting viscosity and density ratios and there is no surface tension
acting between them. In the simulations, we always chose the ambient viscosity greater than that
of the plume.

Figure 2: Consideration of model setup and associated thermal and mechanical boundary conditions for
CFD simulations based on volume-of-ﬂuid (VOF) method.

We meshed the model with a Lagrangian reference frame, considering tetrahedron (patch con-
forming) type (Fig.2). The computation involved a transient analysis using a pressure-based non-
iterative solver that increased the speed and efﬁciency of the calculations. We utilized the fractional

9

step scheme of pressure-velocity coupling in the Fluent. For the spatial discretization, the Green-
Gauss Cell-based method was employed to evaluate the gradients of a scalar at the cell center. The
pressure calculation was performed with the Pressure Staggering Option (PRESTO), which uses
the staggered control volume of a numerical ’face’ to interpolate the pressure. The volume fraction
calculation involved geometric reconstructions in which a special interpolation treatment is applied
to the cells at the phase interface.

3.4 Non-dimensionalization of the physical variables

For handling of multiphase ﬂuid ﬂow problems, it is convenient to take all the physical variables in
non-dimensional form. In this study a ﬂuid of viscosity µp and density ρp is injected into another
ﬂuid phase with viscosity µa and density ρa. We take their ratios, R = µa
as
µp
non-dimensional parameters. Plumes triggered by thermal anomalies should have lower density
(ρ∗ >1) than the ambient due to the strong dependence on temperature. Earlier studies have
suggested that plumes show 2.25% higher density with respect to the background [33]. Similarly,
many workers [11, 15, 16] found the viscosity ratio, R to be an inﬂuential parameter for plume
study, which has been varied in a range of 0.5 to 100. In our modeling we have chosen the density
ratio (ρ∗) to vary upto 1.2 and the viscosity ratio (R) up to 100.

and ρ∗ = ρa
ρp

In this study the rate of inﬂux (Vi) has been non-dimensionalized in terms of the Reynolds

Number (Re) as,

Re =

ρpVid
µp

(10)

Experiments on mantle plumes are strictly restricted in simulating the ﬂow with Re < 1 [34].
Bercovici [35] in their experiments showed that the different parts of a single plume body can have
different Re values. His results yielded the plume-head perimeter having Re = 5 × 10−4 whereas
the Re along the plume axis had a value of 0.1. Besides, Upper mantle- decompression melting
also produces plume-like upwelling of hot buoyant masses. Re values for these upper mantle
plumes are higher than lower mantle plumes due to drop in viscosity during partial melting [36].
Kerr and M´eriaux [37] also studied the effect of shear on plumes with Re > 1. Albeit, these
instabilities developed in varied tectonic regimes have important implications in magma transport
to the surface, their kinematics are less studied than deep mantle plumes with Re << 1. To get
a better understanding of the controlling factors covering a wide spectrum of plume structures
occurring inside Earth, we chose Re in the range of 0.5 to 10.

Temperature difference is a crucial parameter in studying the plume dynamics. Fig.2 marks the
different thermal boundary conditions in our model. Tr represents the normalized temperature of

10

the plume with respect to the temperature at the model top (Ttop) that represents a thermal boundary
inside the Earth. The plume temperature is then expressed as a normalized form,

Tr =

Tp
Ttop

(11)

To summarize, here we deal with the following four dimensionless parameters- density ratio,

viscosity ratio, Reynolds number and normalized plume temperature,

ρ∗ =

ρa
ρp

, R =

µa
µp

, Re =

ρpVid
µp

, Tr =

Tp
Ttop

(12)

We also use a set of additional non-dimensional parameters-normalized height (H ∗), normal-
ized temperature of the system (T ∗), temperature ratio (Tn) and normalized velocity (v∗), expressed
as

H ∗ =

, T ∗ =

, Tn =

, v∗ =

T
Ttop

Tb
Ttop

v
vi

H
Hm

(13)

4 Simulation results

4.1 Ascent behaviour

We simulated thermal plumes for varying the non-dimensional parameters: density ratio (ρ∗), vis-
cosity ratio (R) and the material inﬂux rate (Re). The model plumes show their ascent as continu-
ous as well as pulsating processes. The continuous process involves expansion of the plume head
by curling, whereas the pulsating process results in generation of discrete, multiple heads in the
course of a single ascent event, as observed in the laboratory experiments (Fig.1). From the sim-
ulation results we describe below the speciﬁc physical conditions required for each type of ascent
processes.

Continuous plume dynamics: The continuous plume dynamics gives rise to a single large head
trailing into a cylindrical tail, resembling typical head-and-tail structures widely reported earlier
from both physical and numerical experiments [10, 14, 38]. During the continuous ascent process,
plume heads curl to produce mushroom geometry in conditions of low density ratios (ρ∗ < 1.2),
and high inﬂux rates (Re ∼ 10) (Fig.3a). During the initial stage they grow mostly in the vertical
direction without any signiﬁcant head development until they attain a height, H ∗ = 0.72. Their
continuous vertical growth far dominates over the lateral growth, and forms a long, slender tail
with a small balloon-shaped head. The plume heads start to curl only when they ascend to a height,
H ∗ = 0.9. The curling process ﬁnally becomes most active after the heads encounter the top surface

11

Figure 3: Development of thermal plumes in VOF models: (a) phase boundary and (b) thermal structure
of a continuous plume for inﬂux rate, Re ∼10. (c) phase deﬁned geometry and (d) thermal structure of a
pulsating plume for Re = 1.89. Density ratio ρ∗= 1.09; temperature ratio Tn ∼2. The corresponding colour
bars at the top and bottom represent volume fraction (γ) and normalized temperature (T / Tp) respectively.

(H ∗ ∼ 1) (Fig.3a), as observed in our physical experiments (Fig.1). The curling is coupled with
enlargement of the plume head, mostly by their spreading in the horizontal direction. However,
the continuous supply of material is balanced mainly by lateral spreading when the curling starts
to weaken. A characteristic feature of this continuous plume dynamics is that the tails attain a
speciﬁc diameter (∼ 0.5d), which remains virtually unchanged throughout the plume history.

We mapped the temperature distribution to reveal the thermal structure of a plume (Fig.3b).
The maximum temperatures (T ∗ = 2.5) localize on the plume axis at a shallow depth beneath the
surface. The thermal layers are spread laterally away from the plume axis, and redirect their loca-
tions to a deeper region, ﬁnally showing vigorous thermal mixing with the relatively cold ambient
materials being entrained by the plume. The thermal structures of curling plumes geometrically
show a remarkable difference with those obtained from the phase boundary mapping, especially in
the early stages of their evolution. For example, in the second stage shown in Fig.3b, their phase
boundaries deﬁne a spectacular curling geometry, whereas the corresponding thermal structure de-
scribes grossly balloon-shaped geometry. In the advanced stages the thermal structure too curls,
but quite weaker than the phase boundary. The thermal maximum zone at the top of the plume
head remains steady under the continuous plume dynamics. This zone provides the most probable
location of decompression partial melting, and acts as a source for continuous magma supply to

12

the overlying volcanic province.

Pulsating plume dynamics: Like laboratory experiments (Fig.1), our numerical model results
suggest that plumes can also ascend in a pulsating manner to produce multiple in-axis heads
(Fig.3c). This kind of pulsating dynamics occurs when the viscosity ratios are high (R ∼100),
but the inﬂux rates and density ratios are low (Re = 1.89; ρ∗ ∼ 1.09). In an early stage of their
growth (H ∗ ∼ 0.3) both the phase and the thermal boundaries show a small tail with a distinct
balloon-shaped head. The phase boundary shows that as the plume advances upward (second stage
of Fig.3c) the tail starts to narrow down in its middle with a tendency of the large head to curl,
forming a mushroom-like shape. However, the internal thermal structure suggests a convective
ﬂow, while overall shape lacks curling (Fig.3d). The plumes subsequently undergo a dramatic
change in both their head and tail structures. The narrow tail region swells locally to form a train
of secondary heads (Fig.3c). The principal head gets detached from the main body followed by
sequential separation of the secondary heads from one another. The detachment process advances
downward, resulting in generation of further secondary heads of varying sizes (Fig.3c). All of
them ascend as isolated pulses to the surface, as observed in the physical experiments.

The thermal structures provide a spectacular view of the pulsating nature of plumes (Fig.3d).
The thermal structure of the principal head near the surface describes an overall pattern similar
to that of a continuous plume-head (Fig.3b). The temperature gradually diffuses outward in both
head and tail. Secondary upwelling pulses show localization of the highest temperatures at their
centres. Along-axis temperature contour shows a decreasing trend in temperature in the upward
direction (Fig.3d), and upon reaching near the surface they coalesce with the principal head, form-
ing a shallow high temperature zone. However, the temperature at the top of a pulsating plume is
signiﬁcantly lower than the temperature of a continuous plume at the equivalent location (Fig.3b).
The lowering of temperature is more active in case of pulsating process as the continuous sup-
ply of hot materials from the root gets disrupted, which eventually disturbs the heat transport by
advection.

Fig.4 shows temperature and velocity proﬁles along the axis of both continuous and pulsating
plumes of same age (8 Ma). The continuous ascent process leads to large temperature variations
along the plume axis, where the tail region is much hotter (T ∗ = 2.44) than the head region (T ∗ ∼
2.3). There is a well-deﬁned zone of relatively low-temperature (T ∗ ∼ 2.2), after which the temper-
ature increases towards the top of the plume head (Fig.4a blue line). The fact that the temperature
remain high even at H ∗ = 1, suggests that the plume head reached the surface. On the other hand,
the pulsating ascent process gives rise to a drastically different temperature proﬁle. Along-axis
temperature proﬁle shows a periodic variation of the temperature with depth, remarkably decreas-
ing in the upward direction (Fig.4a red line). The temperature peaks are located at the centres of

13

Figure 4: Along-axis variations in (a) normalized temperature (T ∗) and (b) normalized ﬂow velocity (v∗)
with normalized height (H ∗) inside continuous and pulsating plumes.

consecutive secondary heads at an average depth interval of ∼ 0.05H. The plot shows that the
temperature (T ∗) near the root region is ∼ 2.4, which becomes unsteady, and the ﬂuctuations are
intensiﬁed in the ascent direction and T ∗ drops down to a minimum of 1.8. Finally, the temperature
sharply drops at H ∗ =0.68 to approach T ∗ = 1.

The two ascent processes: continuous and pulsating display contrasting upwelling patterns.
The continuous plumes show a steep decrease of the upward ﬂow velocity in tail region, almost
zero close to the top surface of the head (Fig.4b blue line). However, there occurs a single peak
in the variation, suggesting a slight increase in the velocity within the tail. The upwelling ﬂow
velocity patterns undergo a dramatic change with the transition of continuous to pulsating ascent.
The upwelling velocity becomes unsteady, showing periodic variations in the magnitudes (Fig.4b
red line). The termination of pulsating pattern at H ∗ = 0.68 corresponds to top of the plume head.

4.2 Threshold conditions for pulsating plumes

Based on the simulation results, we evaluated the speciﬁc conditions required for the transition of
continuous to pulsating plumes. The viscosity ratio, R is found to be the most crucial parameters to
determine this transition, and to control the onset of pulsating plume formation. Our results show
that R must exceed 50 to develop plumes in a pulsating fashion, subject to speciﬁc inﬂux rates(Re)
and density ratios (ρ∗). Here we present the phase and temperature boundary plots for Re = 9.5 and
ρ∗ = 1.09 to show the transition between continuous to pulsating ascent with increasing R (Fig.5a,
b). The phase boundary plots suggest onset of mechanical instability in the tail at a low value of R

14

(10), although the hot ﬂuid inﬂux into head is continuous (Fig.5a). However, larger viscosity ratio
(R = 50) promotes the tail to undergo along-axis break up, leading to formation of discreet heads.
The pulsating nature becomes further strong as R > 50. The corresponding thermal structures
clearly suggest the effects of increasing R in promoting the pulsating process (Fig.5b).

Figure 5: Mapping of (a) phase, (b) thermal structures showing transition from continuous to pulsating
ascent of plumes with increasing viscosity ratio (R). (c)-(h) demonstrate the effects of initial plume temper-
ature (Tr) on the thermal structure and along-axis temperature proﬁles of different pulsating plumes.

We also evaluated the effect of temperature (Tr) on the episodic nature of pulsating plume
heads. We varied Tr (2 to 3.6) to study the effects of initial temperature on the pulsating plumes
(Fig.5c-h). The viscosity ratio (R) decides the onset of pulsating plumes, as discussed above.
However, the nature and frequency of pulses depend largely on the initial temperature ratio (Tr).
Fig.5c, e, g show the thermal boundary plots of plumes, whereas Fig.5d, f, h represent correspond-
ing along-axis temperature proﬁles, where the normalized highest temperatures (T ∗) are consistent
with the initial temperature (Tr) in each case. The ascent process strengthens discrete pulses when
the plume has a high initial temperature. Furthermore, the principal plume head evolve to a larger

15

extent as the thermal diffusion process is more efﬁcient for high initial temperatures (Tr = 3.6,
Fig.5g). The plume temperature substantially decreases towards top, but not monotonically; it
varies to attain a peak value, and then drops to a minimum in a nearly periodic fashion. The overall
thermal gradients steepen with increasing Tr, which support a stronger thermal interaction between
the ambient and the plume. Under low Tr (= 2) conditions the thermal peaks are weak and irregular
in their magnitudes (Fig.5d). The peak spacing are relatively regular at Tr = 2.8 (Fig.5f). On the
other hand, for Tr = 3.6 the peaks are ampliﬁed and very close to one another (Fig.5h) proving the
existence of small but isolated hot pulses.

5 Discussion

5.1 Geological relevance of the continuous and pulsating plume models

Our laboratory experiments indicate that the ascent of thermal plumes can occur in a pulsating
fashion, forming a train of in-axis multiple heads, in contrast to large, single heads produced by
a continuous ascent process. We ran numerical simulations to understand the continuous versus
pulsating plume ascent considering two mechanical parameters- viscosity ratio (R) and density
ratio (ρ∗). These two physical parameters were chosen as they are the most crucial mechanical
attributes to the ﬂow dynamics in multiphase ﬂows. We also chose Reynolds number (Re), a
hydrodynamic parameter as a measure of material inﬂux rates. The plume processes may encounter
various geological factors, such as partial melting and phase transitions. However, all these factors
play their role ultimately via the aforesaid parameters.

We have varied the viscosity ratio between 1 and 102 in our numerical simulations. Based on
petrological and seismological studies, plume viscosity has been estimated in the order of 1018 -
1019 Pa S, whereas the mantle viscosity varying in the range of 1020 - 1021 Pa S [39]. The viscosity
of thermal plumes depends to a large extent on the melt fraction in the hot masses, and it decreases
exponentially with increasing melt fraction [39].For a melt fraction of 0.1, the mantle viscosity
drops to ∼ 1018 Pa S. Our simulations predict a transition of continuous to pulsating ascent for
viscosity ratios in the order of 102. Our present study thus suggests that plumes originated from
such partially molten zones evolve in a pulsating fashion, giving rise to periodic material ﬂuxes
to the surface, as often reported from many ﬂood basalt or hotspot volcanisms (e.g. Deccan Trap,
Columbia River ﬂood basalt, Yellowstone super-eruptions, Iceland hotspot etc.). We will later
discuss the time scale of such plume pulses from the available data in literature.

Our simulation study provides an insight into the crucial roles the inﬂux rate of materials
into plume tails play in controlling the plume ascent behaviour. Under a given physical condition

16

(i.e. viscosity and density ratios) increasing Re restrict occurrence of pulsating plume. Rather, a
plume with strongly curled big head develops which has a signiﬁcant implication in the large scale
advection process. These continuous plumes need higher material ﬂow rates through continuous,
narrow tails when the viscosity ratio lies below a threshold value. The rate of material inﬂux into a
plume will depend upon the number of underlying geological factors, e.g. source layer thickness,
number of plumes growing from the TBL and role of a possible CBL [17]. For a given setting in a
region the net ﬂux into individual plumes will decline as the TBL ﬂow is partitioned into multiple
plumes.

In summary, our simulation results indicate that thermal plumes under geological conditions
may not always ascend in a continuous manner, as generally conceived in most of the plume
models [10, 14, 38]. They can evolve in a pulsating manner in speciﬁc mechanical conditions with
high viscosity ratios ∼ 50 - 100. This pulsating behavior of plumes has signiﬁcant implications in
understanding the evolution of hotspot volcanisms, which we discuss later in Sec.5.3.

5.2 Explanation for the pulsating plume dynamics

Our simulations produced pulsating plumes displaying a train of secondary heads (swell zones)
trailing the principal large head. In this section we explore the possible mechanism of periodic
swelling in the tail to produce multiple regular pulses. Earlier studies on ﬂood basalt, hotspot
swells, mantle plume evolution and melt migration in shallow mantle have shown that vertical ﬂuid
conduits embedded in another ﬂuid can sustain nonlinear solitary waves [20, 21, 23, 40]. Propaga-
tion of such waves causes the ﬂuid conduit column to undergo alternate thickening and thinning,
a phenomenon similar to pipe instability (Scott et al., 1986). Helfrich and Whitehead [40] have
proposed the essential criteria for solitary wave growth as a function of the viscosity ratio between
two ﬂuid mediums. In a recent study Lowman and Hoefer [41] have shown that the conduit wave
propagation is a consequence of the interplay between nonlinearity and dispersion across the ﬂuid
interface of a conduit. [41]

We performed numerical simulations to directly study the mechanical instability of a conduit
as a mechanism of plume pulse generation. Fig.6 illustrates a headless vertical conduit, subjected
to a very slow but steady buoyant ﬂuid supply. We chose a high viscosity ratio (R = 100) in this
particular experiment. Any mechanical interaction along the interface of the ﬂuids due to surface
tension was absent in the simulation. The model develops an instability at the wall, as predicted
from the theory of solitary conduit wave, forming a train of secondary pulses, as observed in our
experiments (Fig.1. & Fig.3). The simulation results conﬁrm the origin of pulsating plumes as
a consequence of mechanical instability in their tails. They can develop in geodynamic settings

17

Figure 6: Progressive stages of wall instability growth in a low viscosity vertical conduit embedded in a
ﬂuid of higher viscosity found (R = 100) in VOF models.

where the viscosity ratio between the mantle and plume is sufﬁciently large (R > 50).

5.3 Time scale of plume pulses and Deccan Trap eruption events

In both our laboratory experiments and numerical models pulsating plumes show hot upwelling of
lower viscosity materials as discrete surges in more or less a periodic fashion. These surges meet
the surface sequentially at a regular time interval. Understanding the nature and the timescale of
this periodicity is important to explain a range of plume- associated geological phenomena, such
as episodic eruption events in large igneous provinces, evolution of hotspots chains (Table2) and
temporally varying heat ﬂux. We thus analyzed the time scale of two consecutive thermal surges
from our simulations, assuming that these thermal peaks represent either major eruption events in
volcanic provinces or high heat ﬂux events in a craton. This time scale analysis was performed in
the following way.

We measured the plume temperature (T ∗) at a ﬁxed depth, close to the surface (H ∗ = 0.92)
from CFD simulations run under varying initial thermal boundary condition (Tr), and then plotted

18

Figure 7: Periodic variations of temperature with time (calculated from CFD simulations), suggesting
incoming of multiple hot pulses near the surface. Temperatures recorded (a) at H ∗ = 0.92 for a ﬁxed
viscosity ratio (R = 100) and different initial temperature contrast (Tr = 2 - 3.6), (b) at H ∗ = 0.87 for a ﬁxed
initial temperature contrast (Tr = 2.6) and different viscosity ratios (R = 10 - 100).

the calculated temperatures as a function of real time (Fig.7a). The real time was obtained from the
equivalent model run time. Models with Tr = 2 show only two pulses within 20 Ma of the plume
age and they occur at 16 Ma and 19 Ma (Fig.7a). The pulse frequency multiplies with increasing
Tr; for Tr = 2.8, four pulses are produced at 14 Ma, 16.4 Ma, 17.8 Ma and ∼ 20 Ma, whereas
for Tr = 3.6, it is six pulses at 12.1 Ma, 13.5 Ma, 14.7 Ma, 16.4 Ma, 18.1 Ma and 20 Ma. The
periodicity of pulses becomes more regular at larger values of Tr. Our model results thus provide
an estimate of 1.4-3 Ma as the average time interval between two consecutive eruptions. We also
plotted T ∗ versus time for varying viscosity ratio (R) at ﬁxed Tr (= 2.8) and H ∗ = 0.87. The plot
(Fig.7b) suggests that the pulsating nature strengthens with increasing viscosity ratio. However,
the pulses show more regular time intervals (1.2-2.4 Ma) for intermediate viscosity ratio (R = 50).

Large igneous provinces (LIPs), which are predicted to have originated from a plume-like
source, generally show multiple eruption events [42]. In this study we focus upon the Deccan
Trap, one of the remarkable LIPs in the world, and discuss the time scale of plume pulses in the
light of available data for major eruption events in this volcanic province. The Deccan Traps show
an enormous volume (∼ 1.5 × 106 km3) of continental ﬂood basalts covering almost one third of
peninsular India (Fig.8a). The eruption events are postulated to have initiated with the Reunion
hotspot activities at the time of Cretaceous-Tertiary transition. Despite a debate on the age and du-
ration of Deccan volcanism, different lines of geochronological studies based on paleontological,
radiometric and paleomagnetic evidences suggest a broad time frame within 73 to 60 Ma [24, 25].

19

Figure 8: Multiple eruption events in the Deccan Traps. (a) An overview of the geographic distribution
of the Deccan eruption (orange colour) in peninsular India (location shown in the inset). (b) Conceptual
pulsating plume model for the eruption events. (c) Time scales of the major eruption events (marked by the
peak values) obtained from 40Ar/39Ar geochronology.

Pande [24] has analyzed the Deccan volcanic events using 40Ar/39Ar age calculations of the sig-
niﬁcant amount of available samples from the whole plateau revealed several peaks at 62.0-62.5,
63.5-63.6, 64.2-64.5, 65.0-65.4, 66.5-66.8, 67.1-67.4, 69.5-69.8 Ma. clearly suggesting that the
Deccan volcanism occurred not in a single pulse, but multiple pulses. We can recognize distinct
peaks at 62.5, 63.7, 65.6, 66.6, 67.8 and 69.7 Ma, which mark the major eruption events. In a
recent study, Parisio et al. [25] collected different older data and with their results of 40Ar/39Ar
dating for Deccan tholeiitic and alkaline rocks. Their study showed prominent peaks at 64.1, 65.2,
66.2, 67.5 and 69.6 Ma. According to Pande [24], the time interval between two consecutive events
scales in the range of 1-1.9 Ma., which is 1.1-2.1 Ma from the work of Parisio et al. [25] (Fig.8c).
Interestingly, our simulations produce pulsating plumes with a time interval of 1.4-3 Ma (Fig.7a).
Based on this close agreement, we propose a pulsating type of plume model for the Deccan LIP.

Similar type of episodic eruption events have been reported from various continental ﬂood
basalt provinces and hotspots across the world [24, 43–49] (Table2). However, the time scale of
their episodic eruption shows some variations. Here we take an example of the Caldera super-
eruptions in Yellowstone to discuss the scale of such variations. The eruption events have been

20

Continental ﬂood basalts and Hotspots
Columbia River
Deccan Traps
Madagascar
Parana (Serra Geral)
Yellowstone Supervolcano
Hawaiian-Emperor chain
Iceland

Age (Ma)
17-6
73-60
91-84
133-128
0.174-0.007
5.1-0.4
65-Present day
∗ Not well-constrained (for North Atlantic Tertiary only).

Number of peaks
3
5
3
4
3
8
205 [48]

Volume (km3)
∼ 1.75 × 105 [43]
> 1.5 × 106 [24]
∼ 1.75 × 105 [44]
1.5 × 106 [45]
∼ 6 × 103 [46]
∼ 1.08 × 106 [47]
∼ 2 × 106 [45] ∗

Table 2: Age, number of eruption peaks, preserved volumes for different continental ﬂood volcanic
provinces and hotspots showing episodic eruption.

dated as 0.62 Ma, 1.3 Ma, and 2.1 Ma, which yields a maximum interval of 0.8 Ma between
two consecutive eruption events. In a recent study on Yellowstone super-volcano [50], the cross-
sectional tomographic P-wave model has detected hot pulses in the upper mantle. These discrete
bodies, most probably pockets of partial melts represent episodic pulses produced by a large plume
source beneath Yellowstone, as observed in our numerical models. According to Wotzlaw et al.
[51], the erupted magma volume dropped signiﬁcantly from the ﬁrst to the second event, which
also agrees with our models where the size as well as the temperature of the later pulses drops after
the primary head by about 20% (Fig.5). The same pulsating plume model explains such temporally
varying eruption events in Yellowstone.

6 Conclusions

The results of our numerical simulations, based on VOF method, have demonstrated the transition
of plume dynamics from continuous to pulsating. The continuous mode of ascent gives rise to
a plume characterized with a single large head trailing into a slender vertical tail. By contrast,
the pulsating dynamics gives rise to a plume with segmented structures, characterized a train of
multiple heads. High inﬂux rates promote the curling behaviour of plume, whereas pulsating
plume dynamics dominates in a condition of high viscosity ratio (∼ 50). Continuous and pulsating
dynamics lead to characteristic thermal structures; the latter show localization of thermal peaks
at multiple locations along the plume axis. The continuous process, on the other hand, causes
the high temperature material in the plume head to spread laterally once it reaches the surface.
The plume temperature (Tr) has signiﬁcant impact on the pulsating plume structure. A dramatic

21

change occurs in the plume structure at Tr = 3.6, resulting in vigorous segmentation of the plume
tail and stronger thermal interaction between the ambient medium and the plume. Pulsating plume
dynamics gives rise to thermal ﬂuxes to the surface in a periodic manner, where the temperature
rises to a maximum and then drops down to a minimum with a time cycle of around 1.4 to 3 Ma.
Based on the matching of this time scale we predict that the Deccan Traps in India is a consequence
of the pulsating plume dynamics, and thereby evolved in major ﬁve eruption events with a time
interval of ∼ 2 Ma.

Acknowledgments

UD would like to thank the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences (University of Cam-
bridge) for support and hospitality, where part of this work has been done during the programme
‘Melt in the Mantle’. This work has been partially supported by Department of Science and Tech-
nology, Government of India under J.C. Bose Fellowship awarded to NM. We thank Dr. A. P.
Willis for his valuable comments on the manuscript.

References

[1] W Jason Morgan. Convection plumes in the lower mantle. Nature, 230:42–43, 1971.

[2] Robert White and Dan McKenzie. Magmatism at rift zones:

the generation of volcanic
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth,

continental margins and ﬂood basalts.
94(B6):7685–7729, 1989.

[3] Ian H Campbell and Ross W Grifﬁths. Implications of mantle plume structure for the evolu-

tion of ﬂood basalts. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 99(1-2):79–93, 1990.

[4] Gautam Sen and D Chandrasekharam. Deccan traps ﬂood basalt province: An evaluation of
the thermochemical plume model. In Topics in igneous petrology, pages 29–53. Springer,
2011.

[5] Taras V Gerya and David A Yuen. Rayleigh–taylor instabilities from hydration and melting
propel cold plumes at subduction zones. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 212(1):47–62,
2003.

22

[6] Urmi Dutta, Amiya Baruah, and Nibir Mandal. Role of source-layer tilts in the axi-
asymmetric growth of diapirs triggered by a rayleigh–taylor instability. Geophysical Journal
International, 206(3):1814–1830, 2016.

[7] Donald L Turcotte and Gerald Schubert. Geodynamics. Cambridge University Press, 2014.

[8] Ross W Grifﬁths and Ian H Campbell. Stirring and structure in mantle starting plumes. Earth

and Planetary Science Letters, 99(1-2):66–78, 1990.

[9] Anne Davaille and Judith Vatteville. On the transient nature of mantle plumes. Geophysical

Research Letters, 32(14), 2005.

[10] Shu-Chuan Lin and Peter E van Keken. Dynamics of thermochemical plumes: 1. plume
formation and entrainment of a dense layer. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 7(2),
2006.

[11] Peter Olson and Harvey Singer. Creeping plumes. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 158:511–531,

1985.

[12] JA Whitehead. Buoyancy-driven instabilities of low-viscosity zones as models of magma-rich

zones. J. geophys. Res, 91:9303–9314, 1986.

[13] A Mark Jellinek, Ross C Kerr, and Ross W Grifﬁths. Mixing and compositional stratiﬁcation
produced by natural convection: 1. experiments and their application to earth’s core and
mantle. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 104(B4):7183–7201, 1999.

[14] Cinzia G Farnetani, Bernard Legras, and Paul J Tackley. Mixing and deformations in mantle

plumes. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 196(1):1–15, 2002.

[15] Urmi Dutta, Shamik Sarkar, and Nibir Mandal. Ballooning versus curling of mantle plumes:

views from numerical models. Current Science(Bangalore), 104(7):893–903, 2013.

[16] Urmi Dutta, Shamik Sarkar, Amiya Baruah, and Nibir Mandal. Ascent modes of jets and
International Journal of Multiphase

plumes in a stationary ﬂuid of contrasting viscosity.
Flow, 63:1–10, 2014.

[17] Shu-Chuan Lin and Peter E Van Keken. Dynamics of thermochemical plumes: 2. complexity
of plume structures and its implications for mapping mantle plumes. Geochemistry, Geo-
physics, Geosystems, 7(3), 2006.

[18] Saskia Goes, Fabio Cammarano, and Ulrich Hansen. Synthetic seismic signature of thermal

mantle plumes. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 218(3):403–419, 2004.

23

[19] Juliane Dannberg and Stephan V Sobolev. Low-buoyancy thermochemical plumes resolve

controversy of classical mantle plume concept. Nature communications, 6, 2015.

[20] David R Scott, David J Stevensont, and John A Whitehead Jrt. Observations of solitary waves

in a viscously deformante pipe. Nature, 319:27, 1986.

[21] Peter Olson and Ulrich Christensen. Solitary wave propagation in a ﬂuid conduit within a
viscous matrix. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 91(B6):6367–6374, 1986.

[22] John N Skilbeck. Formation of discrete islandsin linear island chains. Nature, 6, 1978.

[23] G Schubert, P Olson, C Anderson, and P Goldman. Solitary waves in mantle plumes. Journal

of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 94(B7):9523–9532, 1989.

[24] Kanchan Pande. Age and duration of the deccan traps, india: A review of radiometric and
paleomagnetic constraints. Proceedings- Indian Academy of Sciences Earth and Planetary
Sciences., 111(2):115–124, 2002.

[25] Laura Parisio, Fred Jourdan, Andrea Marzoli, Leone Melluso, Sam F Sethna, and Giuliano
40Ar/39Ar ages of alkaline and tholeiitic rocks from the northern deccan traps:
Bellieni.
implications for magmatic processes and the K-Pg boundary. Journal of the Geological
Society, 173(4):679–688, 2016.

[26] L Sh Bazarov, VI Gordeeva, and EI Petrushin. An experimental study in the structure of con-
vective ﬂows of magma melts in a complete system: Mantle chamber-intermediate chamber-
volcano. Journal of Volcanology and Seismology, 2(5):347–355, 2008.

[27] Cyril W Hirt and Billy D Nichols. Volume of ﬂuid (vof) method for the dynamics of free

boundaries. Journal of computational physics, 39(1):201–225, 1981.

[28] Fluent 6.0. Users guide documentation. Fluent Inc, 2001.

[29] Vinay R Gopala and Berend GM van Wachem. Volume of ﬂuid methods for immiscible-ﬂuid

and free-surface ﬂows. Chemical Engineering Journal, 141(1):204–221, 2008.

[30] Giorgio Ranalli. Rheology of the Earth. Springer Science & Business Media, 1995.

[31] Gerald Schubert. Mantle convection in the Earth and planets. Cambridge University Press,

2001.

[32] Shamik Sarkar, Amiya Baruah, Urmi Dutta, and Nibir Mandal. Role of random thermal
perturbations in the magmatic segmentation of mid-oceanic ridges: Insights from numerical
simulations. Tectonophysics, 636:83–99, 2014.

24

[33] Eh Tan and Michael Gurnis. Metastable superplumes and mantle compressibility. Geophysi-

cal Research Letters, 32(20), 2005.

[34] John A Whitehead. Instabilities of ﬂuid conduits in a ﬂowing earthare plates lubricated by

the asthenosphere? Geophysical Journal International, 70(2):415–433, 1982.

[35] David Bercovici. Wave dynamics in mantle plume heads and hotspot swells. Geophysical

research letters, 19(17):1791–1794, 1992.

[36] Donald L Turcotte. Physics of magma segregation processes. Magmatic Processes: Physic-

ochemical Principles. Geochemical Society Special Publication, 1:69–74, 1987.

[37] Ross C Kerr and Catherine M´eriaux. Structure and dynamics of sheared mantle plumes.

Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 5(12), 2004.

[38] Peter van Keken. Evolution of starting mantle plumes: a comparison between numerical and

laboratory models. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 148(1-2):1–11, 1997.

[39] T Scott and DL Kohlstedt. The effect of large melt fraction on the deformation behavior of

peridotite. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 246(3):177–187, 2006.

[40] Karl R Helfrich and John A Whitehead. Solitary waves on conduits of buoyant ﬂuid in a
more viscous ﬂuid. Geophysical & Astrophysical Fluid Dynamics, 51(1-4):35–52, 1990.

[41] Nicholas K Lowman and Mark A Hoefer. Dispersive hydrodynamics in viscous ﬂuid con-

duits. Physical Review E, 88(2):023016, 2013.

[42] Bruce M Haggerty. Episodes of ﬂood-basalt volcanism deﬁned by 40Ar/39Ar age distribu-
tions: correlation with mass extinctions. Journal of Undergraduate Research, 3:155–164,
1996.

[43] Terry L Tolan, Stephen P Reidel, Marvin H Beeson, James Lee Anderson, Karl R Fecht, and
Donald A Swanson. Revisions to the estimates of the areal extent and volume of the columbia
river basalt group. Geological Society of America Special Papers, 239:1–20, 1989.

[44] Vincent E Courtillot and Paul R Renne. On the ages of ﬂood basalt events. Comptes Rendus

Geoscience, 335(1):113–140, 2003.

[45] Mark A Richards, Robert A Duncan, and Vincent E Courtillot. Flood basalts and hot-spot

tracks: plume heads and tails. Science, 246(4926):103, 1989.

25

[46] Guillaume Girard and John Stix. Future volcanism at yellowstone caldera: Insights from geo-
chemistry of young volcanic units and monitoring of volcanic unrest. GSA Today, 22(9):4–10,
2012.

[47] Keith E Bargar and Everett D Jackson. Calculated volumes of individual shield volcanoes

along the hawaiian-emperor chain. J. Res. US Geol. Surv, 2(5):545–550, 1974.

[48] Thorvaldur Thordarson and Gudr´un Larsen. Volcanism in iceland in historical time: Volcano

types, eruption styles and eruptive history. Journal of Geodynamics, 43(1):118–152, 2007.

[49] Anthony Hildenbrand, Pedro Madureira, Fernando Ornelas Marques, Inˆes Cruz, Bernard
Henry, and Pedro Silva. Multi-stage evolution of a sub-aerial volcanic ridge over the last 1.3
myr: S. jorge island, azores triple junction. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 273(3):289–
298, 2008.

[50] Hsin-Hua Huang, Fan-Chi Lin, Brandon Schmandt, Jamie Farrell, Robert B Smith, and Vic-
tor C Tsai. The yellowstone magmatic system from the mantle plume to the upper crust.
Science, 348(6236):773–776, 2015.

[51] J¨orn-Frederik Wotzlaw, Ilya N Bindeman, Richard A Stern, Francois-Xavier DAbzac, and
Urs Schaltegger. Rapid heterogeneous assembly of multiple magma reservoirs prior to yel-
lowstone supereruptions. Scientiﬁc reports, 5, 2015.

26

