Electron neutral collision frequency measurement
with the hairpin resonator probe

David J Peterson[1], Philip Kraus[2], Thai Cheng Chua[2],
Lynda Larson[3], Steven C Shannon[1]
[1] North Carolina State University, Nuclear Engineering Department, Raleigh
NC, USA
[2] Applied Materials, Sunnyvale CA, USA
[3] Treasure Isle Jewelers, Cary NC, USA

E-mail: djpeter5@ncsu.edu

March 2017

Abstract. Electron neutral collision frequency is measured using both grounded
and ﬂoating hairpin resonator probes in a 27 MHz parallel plate capacitively
coupled plasma (CCP). Operating conditions are 0.1-2 Torr (13.3-267 Pa) in Ar,
He, and Ar-He gas mixtures. The method treats the hairpin probe as a two
wire transmission line immersed in a dielectric medium. A minimization method
is applied during the pressure and sheath correction process by sweeping over
assumed collision frequencies in order to obtain the measured collision frequency.
Results are compared to hybrid plasma equipment module (HPEM) simulations
and show good agreement.

7
1
0
2

r
a

M
7
2

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
4
3
3
9
0
.
3
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Collision frequency measurement with the hairpin resonator probe

2

1. Introduction

Moderate pressure plasmas (1 − 10 Torr) are an
area of growing interest as they have potential for
faster processing, and are especially useful for thin
ﬁlm deposition[1].
Standard diagnostic approaches
like Langmuir probes have formidable complications
at these pressures due to the complex nature of
collisional sheath dynamics[2]. Given the lack of
easily implemented localized measurements at these
pressures, any extra information that can be obtained
is useful for improving industrial source design and
validation eﬀorts for plasma chemistry models.

The hairpin resonance probe operates on a similar
principle to the cavity perturbation technique. Both
rely on the resonance frequency shift induced by the
plasma’s lossy dielectric properties to infer electron
density (ne), while the hairpin probe has the added
It has
beneﬁt of allowing localized measurements.
been previously suggested that resonance broadening
can be used to directly determine the electron-neutral
collision frequency[3-4]. This work extends the hairpin
probe’s capabilities, allowing measurement of electron
neutral collision frequency (νen) using a relationship
between hairpin probe resonance broadening and
electron neutral collisions.

2. Hairpin Theory

The vacuum resonant frequency of a hairpin resonator,
with tine lengths l, is given by f0 = c/4l, where c is
the vacuum speed of light. In a plasma, the resonance
(cid:15)(cid:48), where (cid:15)(cid:48) is
shifts to a higher frequency fr = c/4l
the real part of the complex plasma permittivity

√

(cid:15)p = 1 −

ω2
p
ωr (ωr − iνen)

.

(1)

The previous relations,

the angular resonant
frequency ωr = 2πfr, and the electron plasma
frequency ωp = (nee2/me(cid:15)0)1/2 can be combined with
measurements and a simple result from transmission
line theory to produce a closed system of equations
where νen is the only unknown.

This approach implicitly assumes ne is accurately
determined by the hairpin probe. A value for electron
temperature (Te) must be assumed to correct for the
presence of a sheath around the hairpin tines. Since
the probe is not biased, sheaths act primarily as a
geometric eﬀect pertaining to the volume of free space
between the hairpin width (w). Experimental error
introduced by uncertainty in the sheath width (b) is
therefore a quantity subject to optimization through
probe design, further discussed in section 3.2.

Sheath and pressure corrections must be applied
to accurately determine ne. The sheath correction

factor is the same used by Sands et al [5], shown in
equation (2).

ξs = 1 −

f 2
0
f 2
r

(cid:104)
ln

(cid:16) w−a
w−b

(cid:17)

+ ln (cid:0) b
(cid:1)

a

(cid:1)(cid:105)

(2)

ln (cid:0) w−a

a

The correction is applied using the iterative approach
developed by Piejak [6]. The sheath is assumed to
extend one electron Debye length (λD = (cid:15)0kBTe/e2ne)
out from the radius of the hairpin tine (a) for both
types of probes. Here (cid:15)0, kB, and e are the permittivity
of free space, boltzmann’s constant, and electronic
charge, respectively. Measurements in this work are
made with both ﬂoating and grounded hairpin probes.
This is done primarily to quantify the error introduced
by using grounded probes, as opposed to measurements
made with a ﬂoating probe which only require a DC
sheath correction [7]. Diﬀerences between ﬂoating and
grounded probes are discussed in section 3.2.

A pressure correction factor (ξp) must be applied
at moderate pressures in order to correct for the
centerline shift in the resonance frequency. This is done
using the expression given by Sands,

ξp =

1
(cid:16) νen
2πf0

(cid:17)2 .

1 +

(3)

The pressure and sheath corrections update ne in the
manner shown in equation (4). The pressure correction
is applied ﬁrst and then sent to the sheath correction,
which iteratively solves for the corrected ne.

ne =

πme
e2

r2 − f 2
f 2
0
ξpξs

(4)

The simplest approach to determining νen is to
treat the plasma as a lossy dielectric. The plasma
quality factor (QP lasma) can be deﬁned using the ratio
of the real and complex plasma permittivity [8], as seen
in equation (5).

QP lasma =

(cid:15)(cid:48)
(cid:15)(cid:48)(cid:48) =

1 −

νen
ωr

ω2

ω2
p
r +ν2
en
ω2
p
r +ν2
en

ω2

(5)

The same result can also be obtained from transmission
line theory, where the attenuation constant (α) is
deﬁned using distributed parameters and assumes
negligible resistive losses in the probe. This is a valid
assumption considering the conducting material of the
probe is silver. The analysis assumes weak attenuation,
where αl (cid:28) 1, also a valid assumption for the pressure
regimes being investigated. A complete description of
transmission line analysis of the hairpin probe can be
found by Xu et al [4].

When the probe is immersed in plasma, the
hairpin can be treated as a loaded resonant quarter

Collision frequency measurement with the hairpin resonator probe

3

wave transmission line[9], resulting in the coupling of
Q values in the manner shown by equation (6).

1
QM easured

=

1
QV acuum

+

1
QP lasma

(6)

Qvacuum is the measured quality factor of the hairpin
inside the chamber at vacuum. Measurements are
made inside the chamber in order to completely
account for parasitic loading of chamber components.
Solving for QP lasma using equation (6), we see
that it now consists entirely of measured quantities.
Both QV acuum and QM easured are measured using Q =
fr/∆fr, where ∆fr is the full width half max (FWHM)
of the Lorentzian resonance proﬁle. Collision frequency
can then be determined by combining equations (5)
and (6), since ωr and ωp are both known.

3. Experimental

3.1. Experimental Setup

Experiments are performed on the Modular Radiofre-
quency Plasma Chamber (MrPC). MrPC is a paral-
lel plate CCP reactor with two 150 mm diameter alu-
minum electrodes. The electrodes are mechanically fas-
tened to spindles for adjusting the distance between
the electrodes and their position inside the reactor.
The electrode gap was 1.91 cm for all measurements.
The electrodes are housed in a Rexolite plastic shroud
which provides 180 pF of electrical isolation to the sur-
rounding ground plate. One electrode is powered and
the other grounded. The powered electrode is con-
nected to a matching network through RG-393 MIL-C-
17 RF cable and terminated on each end with N-Type
connectors. MrPC is a stainless steel vessel pumped
by a turbomolecular pump (TMP) with a base pressure
<0.2 mTorr. The leak rate of the reactor when isolated
from the TMP was 7.6 mTorr/min. The gas introduced
by the leak is negligible compared to the controlled gas
ﬂow for all experiments. Gas is fed to the chamber us-
ing an analog mass ﬂow controller (MFC) and pressure
is controlled with a closed-loop capacitance manome-
ter and throttle valve. Operating conditions are 0.1-2
Torr in Ar, He, and Ar-He gas mixtures powered by
a 27.12 MHz LVG RF generator from ENI Products.
A computer controlled HP8753C network analyzer is
used for probe data acquisition. A diagram of the ex-
perimental setup is shown in ﬁgure 1. A more complete
description of the setup has been given previously by
Zhang et al[10].

3.2. Hairpin Design and Calibration

Grounded hairpin probes provide a simple design for
producing high Q resonances, which are necessary for
measurements at moderate pressures. The high Q

Figure 1. Experimental setup for measurements in the CCP
parallel plate conﬁguration.

resonances are a result of direct electrical connection
between the driving loop and the hairpin tines.
Grounded probes come with a caveat. They require
more sophisticated sheath analysis due to the presence
of a grounded RF sheath across wire surfaces.

Floating hairpin probes are used in this experi-
ment to simplify the sheath correction process, only
requiring DC sheath corrections. The ﬂoating probe
design used in this work is optimized to keep Q high
while still isolating the hairpin from ground to en-
sure no RF driven sheath is formed. A diagram of
the design is shown in ﬁgure 2. A quartz sleeve en-
sures a small capacitive impedance for the microwave
frequencies sent to the probe, which are typically in
the low GHz range. Meanwhile, the drive frequency
(27 MHz) impedance remains large enough to inhibit
the formation of a RF driven sheath. This is done by
keeping the thickness of the quartz sleeve (t) relatively
thin, around 1.0 mm. The ﬂoating probe used in this
work had t=1.15 mm, which corresponds to a capaci-
tive impedance approximately 15 Ω at 2 GHz. Based
on observed Q of this probe, a thinner quartz sleeve
would further improve performance without introduc-
ing a signiﬁcant RF sheath. Length of the metal ring
(L) serves as an additional parameter for ﬁne tuning of
impedance by changing the eﬀective area of the capac-
itor. Microwave plasmas can avoid this optimization
step since RF driven sheaths will not exist with drive
frequencies above the plasma frequency.

The ﬂoating and grounded probe wire radii (a)
and width (w) used in this experiment were a=0.22 and
0.325 mm, and w=1.85 and 3.05 mm, respectively. All
probe components were made of sterling silver, which
was annealed and then drawn through a draw plate to

Collision frequency measurement with the hairpin resonator probe

4

the speciﬁed radii. Rounding pliers were used to shape
the loop to the correct orientation. The loop and tines
were then TIG welded to their respective positions. A
drop of silver was deposited to the base of the hairpin
tines before welding in order to avoid unintentionally
destroying the tines. Metal notches were used to secure
the position of the quartz sleeve for the ﬂoating probe.

put around the open circuit end of the hairpin. This
ensures that good electrical contact is made on both
tines, shorting the open circuit, and ﬁts well enough to
not fall oﬀ during experiments.

Figure 2. Diagram of ﬂoating probe design. The inner
grounded jacket is copper and the outer grounded jacket is
Inconel. The normal direction to the center of the driving loop
is coincident with the center of the hairpin tines, not shown
for illustrative purposes. The hairpin tines, driving loop, and
capacitive metal ring (shown in black) are all made of silver.
The quartz sleeve is blue.

Hairpin resonances are ﬁt with Lorentz curves
since they can be characterized as a RLC resonant
circuit [11]. Acquired data is fed into open source
Python and Fityk[12] scripts for automated peak
ﬁtting and data analysis. These were developed in-
house and are freely available upon request. The
collision frequency measurement technique relies on
accurate determination of the FWHM of the hairpin
resonance in both vacuum and plasma. A calibration
is required to ensure accuracy.
The calibration
removes transmission line eﬀects of the probe, which
can produce substantially diﬀerent Q factors. An
illustration of these diﬀerences is shown in ﬁgure
3.
Figure 3a shows an uncalibrated curve which
has the characteristic transmission line curve along
with the resonance. Figure 3b shows the same curve
with an applied calibration, obtained by subtracting
the calibration curve from the original. Applying
the calibration produces up to a 20% diﬀerence in
measured Q factors due to distortion of the resonance
peak.

Calibration curves are obtained by shorting the far
end of the hairpin tines. In this case, copper tape was
rolled up in way that produces two holes at each end,
with one side being crimped, and the un-crimped side

Figure 3.
(a) Uncalibrated reﬂection coeﬃcient of hairpin
resonance probe and a Lorentz ﬁt showing clear transmission
line properties. (b) The calibrated version of the same resonance
with a ﬁt. The uncalibrated curve in (a) is artiﬁcially broadened
at the base due to the transmission line eﬀect, resulting in a 20%
diﬀerence in measured quality factor.

Since transmission line properties shift when
immersed in plasma, calibrations were taken for each
unique set of plasma conditions in order to ensure
accurate FWHM measurements. Calibrations obtained
for diﬀerent plasma conditions result in diﬀerences
in Q that are typically less than the uncertainty
resulting from the ﬁt itself. Uncertainty in peak center
and FWHM associated with ﬁtting are typically both
around 0.5%. As a result, only one calibration is
used for all plasma conditions. QV acuum is measured
immediately after the plasma is extinguished. This
ensures that ion heating of the probe is taken into
account since it slightly decreases the quality factor and
resonant frequency, a phenomenon previously noted by

Collision frequency measurement with the hairpin resonator probe

5

Piejak.

At higher pressures, one must also take steps
to avoid probe perturbation of the plasma due to
the drawing of excessive current. This begins to
occur as the electron mean free path approaches the
dimensions of the probe. The hairpin tine diameter is
approximately 5 times larger than the electron mean
free path at 1 Torr in argon, meaning that some
plasma perturbation occurred during measurements.
The perturbation presents a probe design optimization
dilemma. Experimental design necessitates ﬁnding a
balance between the desire for minimal perturbation
and the need for a high enough Q factor to perform
measurements at higher pressures.

Measurements are limited to conditions where
electron density can accurately be measured. The
smallest measurable ne, suggested by Karkari et al [13],
corresponds to a plasma frequency fp ∼ (2/Q)1/2f0.
The probes used in this experiment have QV acuum ≈
380, which corresponds to a lower density limit near
3 × 108 cm−3. Measurements are also bound by an
upper ne limit that stems from the degradation in
signal quality. It is suggested that the vacuum resonant
frequency be larger than the plasma frequency in order
to avoid exciting waves in the plasma, which further
perturbs local parameters and introduces an additional
nonlinear loss mechanism. Avoiding this nonlinear loss
mechanism is particularly important for this method.
Pressure also acts as a limiting parameter to these
measurements. At low pressures,
in the 10 mTorr
range, collisional broadening contributes a smaller
fractional amount to the overall broadening and
becomes harder to measure. The lowest measurable
pressure for this experiment was 0.1 Torr. At higher
pressures, in the 10 Torr range, resonances broaden
signiﬁcantly due to collisional damping. Novel probe
designs with higher vacuum quality factors are capable
of extending the measurable parameter space, and is
the subject of future work.

3.3. Determination of νen from Q

In ﬁgure 4, QM easured is ﬁt with equation (6) by as-
suming a constant pressure normalized collision fre-
quency νen/p=2.5 GHz/Torr. The ﬁt clearly captures
the shape of QM easured, conﬁrming expectations that
pressure and sheath corrected ne plays an important
role in determining resonance width. The peak in qual-
ity factor is accompanied by a drop in measured elec-
tron density, making the probe less lossy, which results
in the unusual shape. Electron temperature can ap-
preciably change over such a relatively large pressure
range, contributing to deviations in the ﬁt caused by
assuming a constant pressure normalized collision fre-
quency.

Instead of assuming the value of νen, it can be

Figure 4. Black squares show measured Q values over a range of
pressures at constant applied power, P =100 W. Solid lines, with
markers at pressures where measured values exist, are analytical
ﬁts. The red line with triangles is the ﬁt given by using equation
(5) in equation (6), while the blue line with circles is only from
equation (5).

solved for directly using equation (5). However, the
ne used for electron plasma frequency is a value that
has already been modiﬁed by a νen dependent pressure
correction. This apparent problem can be decoupled
by sweeping over the initial collision frequency (νi
en),
producing a range of possible ne. An example of this
is illustrated in ﬁgure 5. The dark region corresponds
to 1000 diﬀerent pressure and sheath corrected density
proﬁles, each assuming diﬀerent normalized collision
frequencies spanning 2-4 GHz. The unusual ne proﬁle
is a result of shifts in the spatial distribution of ne
as pressure increases, a phenomenon also observed in
simulations done for this work.

Diﬀerent νi

en that are used for the pressure cor-
rection yield diﬀerent measured collision frequencies
(νm
en) for the same experimental conditions. An ac-
curate pressure correction will minimize the diﬀerence
between νi
en, which provides a path for the
direct measurement of νen.

en and νm

4. Results and Discussion

Floating and grounded probe measurements are taken
in pure Ar over a pressure range of 0.1-2 Torr and
compared with hybrid plasma equipment module [14]
(HPEM) simulations in ﬁgure 6(a). The ﬂoating probe
measurements are limited to a smaller pressure range
of 0.2-1 Torr due to a lower QV acuum. Measurements
fall between the maximum (Max) and hairpin location
speciﬁc (at HP) simulated νen produced by HPEM.

Collision frequency measurement with the hairpin resonator probe

6

Figure 5. Blue circles show uncorrected electron density
for pure Ar and P =60W using a grounded hairpin probe.
The darker
region is 1000 diﬀerent pressure and sheath
corrected densities, each assuming diﬀerent normalized collision
frequencies spanning 2-4 GHz. The ﬁnal corrected electron
densities are given by red outlined white squares.

The large range of simulated νen stems from the
This means
fact that Ar is a Ramsauer gas.
that relatively small diﬀerences in Te can produce
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent νen. For example, the simulated
Te that correspond to the maximum and at hairpin νen
are approximately 1.8-3.3 eV, respectively. Floating
probe measurements yielded smaller νen than the
grounded probe measurements because ﬂoating probes
only exhibit DC sheaths. The sheath on a ﬂoating
probe will always be smaller than that of the grounded
probe due to the rectiﬁcation of RF current that occurs
with grounded probes. The smaller sheath of the
ﬂoating probe will result in a larger, and thus more
accurate, uncorrected ne.

If identical sheath corrections are applied to both
cases, as done in ﬁgures 6 (a) and (b), one would
expect the larger ne from the ﬂoating probe to yield
smaller corresponding νen, easily seen in equation (5).
Sheath corrections assume Te=3.2 eV, a typical value
simulated in HPEM. Error bars correspond to sheath
corrections with 1 eV < Te <5 eV, shown primarily
to capture rough uncertainty values resulting from an
unknown Te. HPEM simulations for pure Ar used an
applied voltage of 55 V, corresponding to an simulated
input power of 60 W, when assuming a matched 50
Ω load. Applied voltage was kept constant for all
simulations, as opposed to letting voltage vary to
reach a speciﬁed input power. Fixing applied voltage
produced more consistent results and is recommended
practice.

Measurements are made in pure He with P =20 W
in ﬁgure 6(b). Floating and grounded probe νen values
start to diverge near 0.2 Torr in the expected directions
for the same reason previously mentioned. Floating
probe measurements were again limited to 0.1-0.8

Figure 6. (a) Measured collision frequency using the grounded
hairpin probe in a pure argon discharge with P =60 W spanning
p=0.1-2.0 Torr. Also included are the maximum and probe
localized νen HPEM results over the same pressures. The sheath
correction assumes Te=3.2 eV. Error bars correspond to a sheath
correction using 1 eV< Te <5 eV and do not consider diﬀerent
sheath models. (b) Repeated measurements for pure helium at
P =20 W. The sheath correction assumes Te=4 eV. Error bars
correspond to 2 eV < Te <6 eV for the sheath correction.

Torr because Qvacuum was too low. The measurable
pressure range for the ﬂoating probe in He was slightly
lower than for Ar because He measurements yielded
higher ne and νen for the same conditions. This
limited the measurable range due to signal loss. Sheath
corrections assume Te=4 eV, a typical value simulated
in HPEM. Error bars correspond to 2 eV < Te <6
eV. HPEM simulations required larger than expected
applied voltages of 140 V in order to achieve reasonable
densities. Very close agreement between experiment
and simulation is observed until around 1 Torr. Above
1 Torr, grounded probe collision frequency remains
lower than simulated values. A slightly logarithmic
trend in νen, as opposed to linear,
is expected
with increasing pressure since higher collisionality will
shift the electron energy distribution function towards
lower energies.
This nonlinear trend is observed
in ﬁgure 6(b) but is not clearly exhibited in ﬁgure
6(a). An explanation for this discrepancy is still an

Collision frequency measurement with the hairpin resonator probe

7

unresolved issue. The measured νen at higher pressures
correspond to Te ≈ 2.5 eV, while HPEM simulated
Te ≈ 3.7 eV at the location of the probe.

Additional measurements are taken over a range
of gas compositions in Ar-He mixture plasmas and
compared to HPEM runs at p=0.75 Torr and P =20 W.
Sheath corrections assume Te=4 eV. Error associated
with uncertainty in Te is similar in magnitude to
those in ﬁgure 6, but error bars were not included
for illustrative purposes. Close agreement between
measurement and simulation can be observed in ﬁgure
7. A notable increase in collision frequency from 90%
→ 100% He was observed in both experiment and
simulation. This phenomenon is a result of a moderate
increase in Te when transitioning to pure He. All
mixing simulations were run at a slightly larger than
expected applied voltage of 45 V (corresponding to
P =32 W) in order to achieve reasonable densities,
except for the 100% He case which again required 140
V. Increasing the applied voltage typically decreased
Te in the simulation. If the 100% He case was capable
of simulation at the self-consistent applied voltage of 45
V, one would expect simulation to yield a slightly more
exaggerated increase in the 90%-100% He transition.

Figure 7. Gas composition sweep of an argon-helium mixture
with p=0.75 Torr and P =20 W. The sheath correction assumes
Te=4 eV.

Reaction rates may be obtained from hairpin
measurements of collision frequency using the ideal gas
law, shown in equation (7).

K(Te) =

TgkBνen
p

(7)

If this is used in conjunction with a tunable diode laser
absorption measurement of neutral gas temperature
(Tg), Te may be self-consistently determined with the
sheath correction at conditions that are diﬃcult to
obtain with standard techniques. This can easily
be done by comparing the measured reaction rate
to expected reaction rates using BOLSIG+[15]. The

method developed here may even be sensitive enough
to infer Te in non-Ramsauer gases, albeit with less
accuracy. Measurements are also amenable to time
resolution using the boxcar method[13].

5. Conclusions

Collision frequency measurements are obtained using
the hairpin resonance probe for Ar, He, and Ar-
He mixture plasmas. Measurements match closely
with simulation results, and have a maximum of
approximately 20% diﬀerence. Primary sources of
error for this method stem from assuming electron
temperatures and one Debye length sheaths. The
route for
presented technique presents an useful
obtaining important information from plasmas at
conditions that are becoming increasingly desirable
for a number of industrial applications. This seems
particularly useful for accurately determining electron
temperature in moderate pressure plasmas considering
the diﬃculty associated with using Langmuir probes at
these pressures, and a notable lack of other available
Extending the technique
diagnostic techniques.
developed here to determine Te is the subject of future
work.

6. Acknowledgements

This work is supported through a generous gift by
Applied Materials Inc. The author would like to
thank Yiting Zhang for her invaluable help with HPEM
simulations.

7. References

[1] Hassouni K, Gicquel A, Capitelli M and Lourreiro J 1999

Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 8 494

[2] Godyak V A and Demidov V I 2011 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.

44 233001

[3] Lieberman M A and Lichtenberg A J, Principles of Plasma
Discharges and Materials Processing. 2nd edn (New
Jersey: Wiley)

[4] Xu J, Nakamura K, Zhang Q and Sugai H 2009 Plasma

Sources Sci. Technol. 18 045009

[5] Sands B L, Siefert S N, Ganguly N B 2007 Plasma Sources

Sci. Technol. 16 716

[6] Piejak R B, Godyak V A, Garner R, Alexandrovich B M
and Sternberg N 2004 J. Appl. Phys. 95 3785-91
[7] Piejak R B, Al-Kuzee J and Braithwaite N St J 2005 Plasma

Sources Sci. Technol. 14 734-43

[8] Chen L F, Microwave Electronics: Measurement and
Materials Characterization. Chichester: Wiley, 2004.
Print.

[9] Pozar D M, Microwave Engineering. Hoboken, NJ: J. Wiley,

2005.

[10] Zhang Y, Zafar A, Coumou D J, Shannon S C and Kushner

M J 2015 J. Appl. Phys. 117 233302

[11] Serway R A and Beichner R J, Physics for Scientists and
Engineers, 5th Ed., Saunders College Publishing, 2000.

[12] Wojdyr M 2010 J. Appl. Cryst. 43, 1126-1128 [reprint]

Collision frequency measurement with the hairpin resonator probe

8

[13] Karkari S K, Gaman C, Ellingboe A R, Swindells I and
Bradley J W 2007 Meas. Sci. Technol. 18 2649

[14] Kushner M J 2009 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 42 194013
[15] Hagelaar G J M and Pitchford L C 2005 Plasma Sci Sources

and Tech 14, 722-33.

