Augmented Coaching Ecosystem for Non-
obtrusive Adaptive Personalized Elderly Care on 
the Basis of Cloud-Fog-Dew Computing 
Paradigm 

Yu.Gordienko1*, S.Stirenko1, O.Alienin1, K.Skala2, Z.Soyat2, A.Rojbi3, J.R.López Benito4, E.Artetxe 
González4, U.Lushchyk5, L.Sajn6, A.Llorente Coto7, G.Jervan8 
1 National Technical University of Ukraine "Igor SIkorsky Kyiv Polytechic Institute" (NTUU KPI), Kyiv, Ukraine 
2 Ruder Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia 
3 University of Paris 8, Paris, France 
4 CreativiTIC Innova SL, Logroño, Spain 
5 Medical Research Center "Veritas", Kyiv, Ukraine 
6 University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia 
7 Private Planet, London, United Kingdom 
8 Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia 
* yuri.gordienko@gmail.com 

(MMUI),  augmented  reality 

Abstract  -  The  concept  of  the  augmented  coaching 
ecosystem  for  non-obtrusive  adaptive  personalized  elderly 
care is proposed on the  basis of  the integration of  new and 
available  ICT  approaches.  They  include  multimodal  user 
interface 
(AR),  machine 
learning  (ML),  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  and  machine-to-
machine (M2M) interactions. The ecosystem is based on the 
Cloud-Fog-Dew  computing  paradigm  services,  providing  a 
full symbiosis by integrating the whole range from low level 
sensors up to high level services using integration efficiency 
inherent in synergistic use of applied technologies. Inside of 
this ecosystem, all of them are encapsulated in the following 
network  layers:  Dew,  Fog,  and  Cloud  computing  layer. 
Instead of the "spaghetti connections", "mosaic of buttons", 
"puzzles  of  output  data",  etc.,  the  proposed  ecosystem 
provides  the  strict  division  in  the  following  dataflow 
channel,  machine 
interaction 
channels: 
interaction channel, and caregiver interaction channel. This 
concept  allows  to  decrease  the  physical,  cognitive,  and 
mental  load  on  elderly  care  stakeholders  by  decreasing  the 
secondary  human-to-human 
(H2H),  human-to-machine 
(H2M), and machine-to-human (M2H) interactions in favor 
of  M2M  interactions  and  distributed  Dew  Computing 
services  environment.  It  allows  to  apply  this  non-obtrusive 
augmented  reality  ecosystem  for  effective  personalized 
elderly care to preserve their physical, cognitive, mental and 
social well-being. 

consumer 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

A.  Background 

The advances  in  medicine and living  standards  in the 
last  century  have  resulted  in  a  significant  increase  in  the 
number  of  elderly  people  in  Europe  and  most  other 
developed countries in the world. Over the  next decades, 
the  worldwide  number  of  older  people  will  further 
increase dramatically. In Europe, this development is even 
more pronounced: for example, in Portugal, Spain, Croatia 
and  other  European  countries,  the  old  age  dependency 

ratio,  which  gives  the  quotient  of  people  65+  will  reach 
~30-36% with pan-European average value up to 29.6% in 
2050  [1].  These  demographic  changes  have  drastic 
structural,  societal  and  economic 
implications,  and 
challenge  elderly  care  stakeholders  like  policymakers, 
families,  businesses  and  healthcare  providers  alike.  The 
ever  increasing  percentage  of  old  people  in  the  most 
advanced Western and Eastern countries is posing a great 
challenge in social healthcare systems. The effort required 
by  formal  caregivers  for  supporting  older  people  can  be 
enormous,  and  this  requires  an  increase  in  the  efficiency 
and  effectiveness  of  today  care.  One  way  for  achieving 
such a goal is the use of information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) for supporting and assisting people in 
their own homes. 

Older  generations  need  to  be  included  as  active  and 
integral pillars  of  our  society instead of being  isolated  in 
the  special  elderly  care  facilities.  They  should  remain 
active  members  of  the  work  force  as  long  as  possible, 
since the traditional assumption that retirement equals the 
worker’s final exit from the labor force does not hold true 
any longer. The required transition of society can only be 
successful  if  huge  efforts  are  made  on  various  levels  to 
foster independence of this age group, from more flexible 
employment arrangements, remote services in care giving 
(telecare), support of independent living (ambient assisted 
living 
to 
to 
transportation  (accessibility),  to  specific  communication 
services and devices as well as entrepreneur approaches in 
educational offers like life-long learning (LLL).  

information,  access 

-  AAL),  access 

ICT  is  believed  to  play  a  key  role  in  all  these  fields. 
However,  ICT  can  successfully  contribute 
their 
individual well being, and help to meet the challenges of 
an  aging  society  in  general,  if  ICT  could  be  non-
obtrusively adapted to the older adults’ knowledge, needs, 
and  abilities.  Furthermore,  the  whole  of  our  society  can 

to 

 
 
gain enormous benefits by integrating the knowledge and 
skills  and  high  degree  of  experience  the  elderly  can 
provide to the coming generations, in all aspects of living, 
from  technological  expertise  in  any  field,  to  everyday 
living  experiences.  Current  ICTs  range  from  systems  for 
reminding  appointments  and  activities  [2],  for  medical 
assistance  and  tele-healthcare  [3],  to  human-computer 
interfaces  for  older  persons  or  people  with  special  needs 
[2]. Usually, these ICTs incorporate application dependent 
sensors,  such  as  sensors,  cameras  or  microphones.  Many 
studies  [4]  have  demonstrated  that  people  prefer  non-
invasive sensors, such as microphones, over cameras and 
wearable sensors, and this drove the scientific community 
to  develop  systems  and  technologies  based  on  non-
invasive approaches only. 

life, 

including  older  adults, 

ICTs  have  become  an 

integral  component  of 
everyone’s 
to  continue 
education,  obtain  health  information,  communicate  and 
exchange experiences, as well as online banking/shopping 
etc.  Though  recent  research  has  shown  that  older  adults 
are receptive to using ICTs, a commonly held belief is still 
prevalent  that  supports  the  idea  that  older  adults  are 
unwilling to use ICTs due to bodily and cognitive decline 
in working memory, attention, and spatial abilities [5,6]. 

The main problem is that despite the current progress 
of  elderly  care  facilities  the  vast  majority  of  EU  older 
people  wish  to  live  independently  at  home  as  long  as 
possible; meeting their needs can be a major challenge [7]. 
The  different  providers  often  work  under  conditions  of 
poor coordination among ICT experts, elderly caregivers, 
patients, and their families [8-9]. 

B.  State of the Art (Similar Works) 

integrated 

(http://beyondsilos.eu), 

ICTs  are  promising  for  the  long-term  care  of  elderly 
people.  As  all  European  member  states  are  facing  an 
increasing  complexity  of  health  and  social  care,  good 
practices  in  ICTs  should  be  identified  and  evaluated. 
Recently,  several  projects  funded  by  DG  CNECT  were 
related  to  Active  and  Healthy  Ageing  (AHA).  They 
provided:  independent  living  and  integrated  services  — 
BeyondSilos 
care 
coordination, patient empowerment and home support  — 
CareWell  (www.carewell-project.eu),  set  of  standard 
functional specifications for an ICT platform enabling the 
delivery of integrated care to older patients — SmartCare 
initiatives 
(http://pilotsmartcare.eu/).  Some  successful 
were  initiated  in  Europe  and  supported  by  EU,  for 
example, European Rosetta project [11], research network 
for  design  of  environments  for  ageing  (GAL)  [10], 
assisted  living  environment  for  independent  care  and 
(ENRICHME), 
health  monitoring  of 
responsive  engagement  of  the  elderly  promoting  activity 
and customized healthcare (REACH), digital environment 
for  cognitive  inclusion  (DECI),  integrated  intelligent 
home  environment  for  the  provision  of  health,  nutrition 
and  mobility  services  to  the  elderly  (MOBISERV), 
unobtrusive  smart  environments  for  independent  living 
(USEFIL),  open  architecture  for  accessible  services 
integration and standardization (OASIS) and others. 

the  elderly 

C.  Unresolved Problems 

These  innovations  can  improve  health  outcomes, 
quality  of  life  and  efficiency  of  care  processes,  while 

the 

and 

and 

supporting  independent  living.  However,  in  the  face  of 
new  challenges  some  disruptive  innovations  should  be 
proposed 
new 
implemented, 
challenges/problems  should  be  addressed.  The  potential 
radically  new  solution  should  take  into  account  the 
following  additional  set  of  aspects/problems  related  to 
quite  different  (1)  targeted  communities;  (2)  level  of 
functional  (technical/computer/digital) 
the 
targeted  communities;  (3)  realistic  time  of  massive 
implementation  of  the  proposed  technologies  for  these 
communities  with  people  of  various  functional  literacy; 
(4)  differences  in  national  and  geographical  mentality  as 
to elderly care in Europe. 

literacy  of 

Targeted  communities  in  the  context  of  elderly  care 

consist of:  

• 

• 

• 

• 

individuals  —  self-directed  elderly  care,  where 
elders  control  both  the  objectives  and  means  of 
elderly care; 

families,  i.e.  individuals  inside  family  and/or 
supported  by  family  —  informal  elderly  care, 
where  elders  control  the  means/tools,  but  not  the 
objectives of elderly care; 

assisted  elderly  care  —  non-formal  elderly  care, 
where  elders  control  the  objectives  but  not  the 
means/tools of elderly care; 

specialized elderly care facilities — formal elderly 
care,  where  elders  have  no  or  little  control  over 
the objectives or means/tools of elderly care. 

Level  of  functional/computer/digital  literacy  of  the 
targeted  communities  (in  the  order  from  the  lowest  to 
highest): absolute computer illiteracy, digital phobic, basic 
computer  literacy,  digital  immigrants  [12],  intermediate 
computer 
[13],  proficient 
computer  literacy,  digital  residents  [13],  digitally  native 
[12]. 

literacy,  digital  visitors 

the 

technologies/environments  depends  on 
and 
of 

The  proposed  time  of  massive  implementation  of  the 
the 
proposed 
the 
available 
maturity 
functional/computer/digital  literacy  level  of  the  targeted 
community: now (the current mature technologies can be 
applied 
(the 
perspective technologies can be mature in the nearest 2-3 
later  future  (the  perspective 
years), 
technologies can be mature at unknown time). 

immediately), 

the  nearest 

the  much 

solutions 

future 

in 

in 

Differences  in  national  and  geographical  mentality  as 
to  elderly  care  in  Europe  were  observed  and  reported 
elsewhere [14,15]: 

• 

• 

• 

informal  care  is  more  common  in  South  than  in 
North Europe; 

informal  care  is  more  common  in  the  "new" 
member  states  in  the  "East"  than  in  the  "old" 
member states in the "West"; 

is 

informal  care  provision  to  someone  outside  the 
the 
comparatively 
household 
Mediterranean countries, elderly care to someone 
in  the  home  is  more  common  in  these  countries 
than in the EU-states on average; 

rare 

in 

interoperability,  collaboration  with  ICT  suppliers  and 
ICT-related service providers. 

B.  Main aims 

The main aims of AGE-Care ecosystem are as follows: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

to  develop,  test,  and  validate  radically  new  ICT 
based concept of non-obtrusive augmented reality 
learning  and  coaching  ecosystem  for  effective 
personalized elderly care to improve and maintain 
their  independence,  functional  capacity,  health 
status  as  well  as  preserving 
their  physical, 
cognitive, mental and social well-being, 

to  develop  and  implement  the  synergetic  user-
centered  design  of  intuitive  human-to-machine 
(H2M) and machine-to-human (M2H) interactions 
on  the  basis  of  information  and  communication 
technologies  (ICTs)  including  internet  of  things 
(IoT),  multimodal  augmented  reality  (AR),  and 
predictive machine learning (ML) approaches, 

to  decrease  the  physical,  cognitive,  and  mental 
load  on  elderly  care  stakeholders  by  decreasing 
the secondary human-to-human (H2H), human-to-
machine  (H2M),  and  machine-to-human  (M2H) 
in  favor  of  machine-to-machine 
interactions 
(M2M) 
distributed  Dew 
interactions 
Computing services environment, 

and 

to  overcome  cognitive,  mental, 
institutional, 
regional,  and  national  barriers  enabling  delivery 
of  integrated  elderly  care  on  the  European  scale 
by  joining  efforts  across  governmental,  non-
care 
and  volunteer 
governmental, 
organizations and individuals. 

elderly 

The following radically new ICT based main concepts 
and approaches are planned to be used to reach these aims 
(Figure 1): 

•  multimodal  user  interface  (MMUI)  —  for  the 
more accessible and effective intuitive H2M/M2H 
interaction  on  the  basis  combination  of  creative 
"artistic" approaches; 

• 

augmented  reality  (AR)  —  for  non-obtrusive 
H2M/M2H interactions, 

•  machine  learning  (ML)  —  for  virtual  decision 

making and virtual guidance of users, 

• 

Internet of Things (IoT)  + Internet of  Everything 
(IoT)  +  machine-to-machine  (M2M)  interactions 
encapsulated  inside  Dew  computing  layer  —  to 
hide  "behind 
the  mental  and 
cognitive overloads, and  shift  them  from  H2H  to 
M2M interaction zone. 

the  curtains" 

C.  Basic Principles 

The proposed open  AGE-Care ecosystem  is  based on 

the several basic principles: 

• 

dominance 
interaction over human-to-human (H2H); 

of  machine-to-machine 

(M2M) 

•  multimodal instead of single-modal interactions; 

Figure 1.   The integration concept of non-obtrusive augmented reality 
learning and coaching ecosystem for effective personalized elderly care. 

• 

the  low  proportion  of  people  providing  care 
within  households  is  explained  by  the  rarity  of 
multigenerational households in Nordic Europe. 

The  proposed  Augmented  Coaching  Ecosystem  for 
Non-obtrusive Adaptive Personalized Elderly Care (AGE-
Care)  is  focused  on  the  provision  of  the  virtual  care, 
support,  and  coaching  to  elderly  people  in  the  various 
targeted 
different 
communities 
targeted 
functional/computer/digital 
communities.  It  will  be  achieved  by  enhancement  of 
available  ICT-enabled  elderly  care  services, development 
of  new  ones,  and  their  application  with  the  tight 
coordination, monitoring, self-management and caregivers 
involvement inside the proposed AGE-Care ecosystem. 

literacy  of 

with 

and 

the 

II.  CONCEPT, MAIN AIMS, AND BASIC PRINCIPLES 

A.  General concept 

the 

integration  of 

The  proposed  AGE-Care  ecosystem  is  assumed  to  be 
based  on 
the  several  new  ICT 
approaches and available ones, which should be enhanced 
by  the  radically  new  ICT  based  technologies  concepts 
(shown  in  Figure  1)  in  favor  of  the  elderly  care 
stakeholders.  They  include  multimodal  user  interface 
(MMUI),  augmented  reality  (AR),  machine  learning 
(ML),  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  Internet  of  Everything 
(IoT),  machine-to-machine (M2M) interactions, based on 
the  Cloud-Fog-Dew  computing  paradigm 
services, 
providing a full symbiosis by integrating the whole range 
from  low  level  sensors  up  to  high  level  services  using 
integration  efficiency  inherent  in  synergistic  use  of 
applied technologies. 

The AGE-Care ecosystem is assumed to penetrate any 
organizational,  national,  mental,  gender,  and  cultural 
division lines, boundaries, and limits. It will use the most 
resources  and  elderly  care, 
appropriate  available 
healthcare,  and  social  care  services.  The  AGE-Care 
ecosystem  will be based on open standards, multi-vendor 

 
•  Dew  computing  layer:  the  raw  sensor  data  and 
basic  multimodal 
are 
concentrated,  pre-processed,  and  resumed  in  the 
smallest scale local network (Dew) at the level of 
the  IoT-controllers  (individuals)  and  shared  with 
the upper Fog computing layer; 

actuator 

actions 

•  Fog  computing  layer:  the  resumed  IoT-controller 
data and advanced actuator actions are located in 
the  medium  scale  regional  network  unit  (Fog)  at 
the level of the IoT-gateway (family/room/office) 
and  shared  with  the  lower  Dew  computing  layer 
and upper Cloud computing layer; 

•  Cloud  computing  layer:  the  accumulated  IoT-

• 

• 

• 

• 

non-obtrusive augmented reality feedback instead 
of obtrusive direct communication with numerous 
high-tech sensors, actuators, devices, and gadgets; 

virtual decision making and coaching by machine 
learning instead of real human-related services, 

short  adaptive  learning  curve  by  selection  of 
specific  and  context-related  virtual  coaching 
methods  based  on  LLL  principles  instead  of  the 
obsolete  and  awkward  "user  guide"  and  "context 
help" approaches; 

highly  distributed  service  oriented  local  and 
distance communication and service facilities. 

III.  STRUCTURE, WORKFLOWS, AND SOME EXAMPLES 

A.  Hierarhical Structure 

This  basic  hierarchical  structure  of  the  AGE-Care 
ecosystem  is  virtualized  at  different  levels  and  visually 
presented in Figure 2. In contrast to the current concept of 
elderly care (Fig. 2a), the proposed concept (Fig. 2b) will 
allow stakeholders: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

to  decrease  significantly  (and  avoid  in  the  most 
situations)  the  level  of  H2H  interactions  — by 
emphasis  on  the  M2M  interactions  for  the  basic 
technological scenarios; 

to  avoid  technological  H2H  interactions,  but 
emphasize emotional H2H interactions in favor of 
emotional  positive  feedback  from  elderly  people 
due  to  involvement  of  augmented  multimedia 
channels  like  observed  and  even  performed  art, 
music, dance, etc.; 

to  increase  efficiency  of  H2M/M2H  interactions 
— by introduction of multimodal communication 
channels like  audio,  visual, tactile, odor,  etc.,  so-
called  Augmented  Reality  Human-to-IoT 
(ARH2IoT) interactions; 

to  increase  the  acceptance  level  of  the  available 
ICT technologies for elderly care — by providing 
their  functional  abilities  through  non-obtrusive 
augmented reality pathways; 

to eliminate the gap between the newest available 
ICT  technologies  for  elderly  care  and  computer 
literacy  of  the  targeted  communities  —   by 
context-related,  problem-based,  and  personalized 
virtual AR-related coaching; 

to  decrease  the  market  entry  threshold  for  the 
future  ICT  technologies  for  elderly  care  —  by 
providing the related open platform specifications 
based  on  the  best  practices  and  lessons  learned 
during the project; 

to  provide  more  security  and  privacy  —  by  the 
localization  of  the  personal  consumer  data  at  the 
lower scales of the AGE-Care ecosystem. 

B.  Workflows and Network Layers 

Inside  of  AGE-Care  ecosystem  all  workflows  are 

encapsulated in the following network layers: 

Figure 2.   The current concept of elderly care (a, top), and the proposed 
concept of Augmented Coaching Ecosystem for Non-obtrusive 
Adaptive Personalized Elderly Care (AGE-Care) (b, bottom). 

 
 
gateway  data  are  thoroughly  analyzed  by  ML 
methods to provide virtual decisions and coaching 
advices  in  the  highest  scale  global  network 
(Cloud)  at  the  level  of  the  global  computing 
centers 
authorities, 
associations,  corporations,  etc.)  and  delivered  to 
the lower Fog and Dew Computing layer. 

(hospitals, 

healthcare 

C.  Communication Flows and Interactions 

The  typical  communication  flows  inside  the  AGE-
Care  ecosystem  are  schematically  shown  in  Fig. 2b  by 
arrows,  where  the  higher  emphases  (in  contrast  to  the 
current concept of elderly care) are placed on: 

•  ARH2IoT  interactions  —  under  Dew  computing 
layer:  green  arrows  depict  the  main  dataflows 
from/to consumers by the familiar communication 
channels  and  devices,  but  with  context-sensitive 
information 
the  multimodal 
augmented reality; 

provided 

by 

•  M2M 

interactions  —   mainly 

inside  Dew 
computing  layer:  light  blue  circle  depicts  the 
undercover  dataflows 
and 
actuators,  which  are  laid  in  the  base  of  the 
multimodal  augmented 
in  ARH2IoT 
interactions; 

sensors 

among 

reality 

•  Cloud-Fog  interactions  —   between  Cloud  and 
Fog  computing  layers:  red  arrows  denote  the 
familiar  dataflows  between  the  global  computing 
centers and the medium scale network unit (Fog) 
at 
IoT-gateway 
of 
(family/room/office); 

level 

the 

the 

•  Cloud-Dew  interactions  —   between  Cloud  and 
Dew  computing  layers:  blue  arrow  denotes  the 
dataflows  between  the  global  computing  centers 
and the IoT-controllers. 

the  newest 

increasing  variety  of 

It  will  allow  to  decrease  cognitive  overload  on  the 
stakeholders,  because  in  the  current  concept  of  elderly 
care  (Fig. 2a)  the  stakeholders  are  overwhelmed  by  the 
ICT 
everyday 
technologies, the related devices and unusual practices. In 
the  current  paradigm  of  eHealth  and  elderly  care,  the 
stakeholders  have  to  go  by  the  long,  complicated,  and 
non-familiar  learning  curve  to  leverage  the  new  ICT 
technologies.  In  contrast  to  it,  the  AGE-Care  ecosystem 
proposes  them  to  use  the  familiar  information  pathways 
(devices  like  television  and  radio  broadcasting,  landline 
phone  communication),  that  seem  to  be  the  same  old 
things,  but  actually  enhanced  by  newest  AR  and  AI 
technologies under the hood. 

Instead of the "spaghetti connections" to the numerous 
sensors,  actuators,  devices,  and  gadgets  with  sporadic 
dataflows,  "mosaic  of  buttons",  and  "puzzles  of  output 
data" for each device/technology, etc. (Fig. 2a), the AGE-
Care  ecosystem  will  provide  the  strict  division  in  the 
following dataflow channels (Fig. 2b): 

• 

consumer  interaction  channel  —   by  allowing 
feedback data from all applied eHealth and elderly 
care  ICT  technologies  through  augmented  reality 
pathway only at ARH2IoT layer; 

•  machine  interaction  channel  —  by  integration  of 
all  sensor/actuator  technologies  and  isolation  of 
their raw data at Dew computing layer, 

• 

caregiver interaction channel — by integration of 
Dew, Fog, and Cloud computing layers. 

In general, the AGE-Care ecosystem will decrease the 
high  cognitive  load  on  customers,  increase  the efficiency 
of caregivers, and provide a unified way for incorporation 
of any future ICTs by division of dataflows into the above 
mentioned  consumer,  machine,  and  caregiver  channels. 
This  work  will  include  the  necessary  formalization 
procedures:  standardization,  definitions  of  customer  and 
stakeholder  interfaces,  identification  of  data  models  and 
data  processing  tools,  and  privacy  and  security  policies 
and recommendations. 

The  necessary  conditions  for  incorporation  of  the 
available and future ICTs to the AGE-Care ecosystem are 
mostly related with adaptation to the paradigms of: 

•  multimodal  augmented  reality  (AR)  data  output 

for consumers; 

•  Dew  computing  (and  available  M2M  standards 
inside it) for basic and automatic decision making; 

•  multilayer  interaction  between  Cloud,  Fog,  and 
Dew  computing  for  advanced  (mostly  automatic 
and limited manual) decision making. 

D.  Some Implemented Combinations of Components 

Several  combinations  of  the  new  ICTs  (which  are 
actually the components of the AGE-Care ecosystem) are 
their  detailed 
already 
explanation  and  related  background  can  be  found 
elsewhere in the related publications, for example: 

implemented  by  authors  and 

•  Frameworks  for  Integration  of  Workflows  and 
Distributed  Computing  Resources:  gateway 
approaches in science and education [16-18]; 

•  Dew  (+  Fog  +  Cloud)  computing  +  IoT  +  IoE: 
the  conceptual  approach  for  organization  of  the 
vertical  hierarchical  links  between  the  scalable 
distributed 
Cloud 
Computing, Fog Computing and Dew Computing, 
which  decrease 
the 
performance, particularly for IoT and IoE [19]; 

the  cost  and 

paradigms: 

computing 

improve 

•  AR  +  visual  +  tactile  interaction  modes:  to 
provide  tactile  metaphors  in  education  to  help 
students in memorizing the learning terms by the 
sense of touch in addition to the AR tools [20,21]; 

•  ML  +  visual  +  tactile  interaction  mode:  to 
produce  the  tactile  map  for  people  with  visual 
impairment  and  recognize  text  within  the  image 
by advanced image processing and ML [22]; 

• 

IoT  for  eHealth  (wearable  electronics)  +  ML  + 
AR  +  brain-computing 
interface  +  visual 
interaction  mode: 
to  monitor,  analyze,  and 
estimate  the  accumulated  fatigue  by  various 
gadgets  and  visualize  the  output  data  by  AR 
means [23-25]. 

IV.  CONCLUSIONS 
The proposed integrated ecosystem provides the basis 
for  effective  personalized  elderly  care  by  introduction  of 
multimodal  personalized  communication  channels.  It 
allows end users to get cumulative effect from mixture of 
ICTs  like  IoT/IoE,  multimodal  AR,  and  predictive  ML 
approaches.  As  a  result,  it  could  exclude  obtrusive 
H2M/M2H  technological  interactions  by  delivering  them 
to  M2M  interactions  encapsulated  in  Dew  Computing 
layer,  and  enhancing  the  pleasant  multimedia  H2M/M2H 
intuitive  interactions.  It  hides  "behind  the  curtains"  the 
mental  and  cognitive  overloads  by:  shifting  the  most 
portion  of  ICT-related  interactions  from  H2H  to  M2M 
zone; using AR pathways for delivering status information 
and advices for elderly end users; increasing AR-readiness 
of  the  available  ICTs  for  AR-output  of  data  for  non-
obtrusive  H2M/M2H  interactions,  and  improving  every-
day  communication  and  service  needs.  It  could  be  the 
integral platform and paradigm for overcoming cognitive, 
cultural, mental, gender/ethical, institutional, regional, and 
national  barriers  and  enabling  the  targeted  delivery  of 
integrated elderly  care on  European and  worldwide  scale 
by joining efforts across governmental, non-governmental, 
and  volunteer  elderly  care  organizations  and  individuals. 
In this way elimination of any kinds of “borders” between 
people  at  European  (and  worldwide)  scale  by  targeted 
efforts  can  strengthen  the  relationships  between  the 
different  age  categories  of  people  and  various  elderly 
communities despite their intrinsic or imposed differences. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT  

The  work  was  partially  supported  by  Ukraine-France 
(Programme  PHC  DNIPRO) 
Collaboration  Project 
(http://www.campusfrance.org/fr/dnipro),  EU  TEMPUS 
LeAGUe  project  (http://tempusleague.eu),  and  Croatian 
Centre  of  Research  Excellence  for  Data  Science  and 
Advanced Cooperative Systems. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Vienna 

Institute 
(http://www.populationeurope.org) 

of 

Demography 

(2016) 

[2]  Boll,  S.,  Heuten,  W.,  Meyer,  E.  M.,  &  Meis,  M.  (2010). 
Development  of  a  multimodal  reminder  system  for  older  persons 
in  their  residential  home.  Informatics  for  health  and  Social  Care, 
35(3-4), 104-124.  

[3]  Lisetti,  C.,  Nasoz,  F.,  LeRouge,  C.,  Ozyer,  O.,  &  Alvarez,  K. 
(2003). Developing multimodal intelligent affective interfaces for 
tele-home  health  care.  International  Journal  of  Human-Computer 
Studies, 59(1), 245-255.  

[4]  Ziefle,  M.,  Rocker,  C.,  &  Holzinger,  A.  (2011).  Medical 
technology  in  smart  homes:  exploring  the  user's  perspective  on 
privacy,  intimacy  and  trust.  In  IEEE  Proc.  35  Annual  Computer 
Software and Applications Conference Workshops (pp. 410-415). 
[5]  Czaja, S. J., & Lee, C. C. (2007). The impact of aging on access to 
technology.  Universal  Access  in  the  Information  Society,  5(4), 
341-349. 

[6]  Smith,  A.  (2014).  Older  adults  and  technology  use:  Adoption  is 
increasing but many seniors remain isolated from digital life. Pew 
Research  Center  (http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/04/03/older-
adults-and-technology-use). 

[7]  Dimitrova  R.  (2013).  Growth  in  the  intersection  of  eHealth  and 
active and healthy ageing. Technol Health Care; 21(2):169-72. 
[8]  Hernandez  C,  Alonso  A,  et  al.  Integrated  care  services:  lessons 
learned  from  the  deployment  of  the  NEXES  project.  Int  J  Integr 
Care. 2015; 15. 

[9]  Frenk  J.  (2009).  Reinventing  primary  health  care:  the  need  for 

systems integration. Lancet.  374 (9684): 170-3. 

[10]  Haux R, Hein A, Kolb G, Kunemund H, Eichelberg M, Appell JE, 
et  al.  (2014).  Information  and  communication  technologies  for 
promoting  and  sustaining  quality  of  life,  health  and  self-
sufficiency  in  ageing  societies--outcomes  of  the  Lower  Saxony 
Research  Network  Design  of  Environments  for  Ageing  (GAL). 
Inform Health Soc Care, 39(3-4):166-87. 

[11]  Meiland  FJ,  Hattink  BJ,  Overmars-Marx  T,  de  Boer  ME, 
Jedlitschka A, Ebben PW, et al. (2014). Participation of end users 
in the design of assistive technology for people with mild to severe 
project. 
cognitive 
IntPsychogeriatr., 26(5):769-79. 

problems; 

European 

Rosetta 

the 

[12]  Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants part 1. On 

the horizon, 9(5), 1-6. 

[13]  White,  D.  S.,  &  Le  Cornu,  A.  (2011).  Visitors  and  Residents:  A 
new typology for online engagement. First Monday, 16(9). 
[14]  Haberkern,  K.,  &  Szydlik,  M.  (2010).  State  care  provision, 
societal  opinion  and  children's  care  of  older  parents  in  11 
European countries. Ageing and Society, 30(02), 299-323. 

[15]  Jacobs, M. T., van Groenou, M. I. B., Aartsen, M. J., & Deeg, D. 
J. (2016). Diversity in older adults’ care networks: the added value 
of individual beliefs and social network proximity. J.Gerontol. B, 
Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci, DOI: 10.1093/geronb/gbw012. 

[16]  Davidović,  D.,  Lipić,  T.,  &  Skala,  K.  (2013),  AdriaScience 
gateway:  Application 
advanced 
specific 
meteorological  predictions  on  croatian  distributed  computing 
infrastructures.  In  Proc.  IEEE  36th  International  Convention  on 
Information  &  Communication  Technology  Electronics  & 
Microelectronics (MIPRO), (pp. 217-221). 

gateway 

for 

[17]  Gordienko,  Y.,  Bekenov,  L.,  Baskova,  O.,  Gatsenko,  O., 
Zasimchuk,  E.,  &  Stirenko,  S.  (2015).  IMP  Science  Gateway: 
from  the  Portal  to  the  Hub  of  Virtual  Experimental  Labs  in  e-
Science  and  Multiscale  Courses  in  e-Learning.  Concurrency  and 
Computation: Practice and Experience, 27(16), 4451-4464. 
[18]  Gordienko, Y., Stirenko, S., Gatsenko, O., & Bekenov, L. (2015). 
Science gateway for distributed multiscale course management in 
e-Science and e-Learning—Use case for study and investigation of 
functionalized  nanomaterials.  In  Proc.  IEEE  38th  International 
Convention  on  Information  and  Communication  Technology, 
Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO)  pp. 178-183.  

[19]  Skala, K., Davidovic, D., Afgan, E., Sovic, I., & Sojat, Z. (2015). 
Scalable  distributed  computing  hierarchy:  Cloud,  fog  and  dew 
computing. Open Journal of Cloud Comp. (OJCC), 2(1), 16-24. 
[20]  E.  Artetxe  González,  F.  Souvestre,  J.R.  López  Benito  (2016), 
Augmented  Reality  Interface  for  E2LP:  Assistance  in  Electronic 
Laboratories 
in  Embedded 
Engineering  Education,  Advances  in  Intelligent  Systems  and 
Computing (Volume 421, Chapter 6), Springer. 

through  Augmented  Reality, 

[21]  I.  Kastelan,  J.R.  Lopez  Benito,  E.  Artetxe  Gonzalez,  J.  Piwinski, 
M.  Barak,  M.  Temerinac  (2014),  E2LP:  A  Unified  Embedded 
Engineering 
and 
Microsystems, Elsevier, Vol. 38, Issue 8, Part B, pp. 933-946. 
[22]  Nizar Bouhlel and Anis Rojbi (2014), New Tools for Automating 
Tactile  Geographic  Map  Translation,  Proc.  16th  Int.  ACM 
SIGACCESS Conf. on Computers & Accessibility, pp.313-314. 

Platform,  Microprocessors 

Learning 

[23]  Gordienko,  N.,  Lodygensky,  O.,  Fedak,  G.,  &  Gordienko,  Y. 
(2015).  Synergy  of  volunteer  measurements  and  volunteer 
computing for effective data collecting, processing, simulating and 
analyzing on a worldwide scale. In Proc. IEEE 38th International 
Convention  on  Information  and  Communication  Technology, 
Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO) (pp. 193-198). 

[24]  Gordienko,  N.  (2016).  Multi-Parametric  Statistical  Method  for 
Estimation  of  Accumulated  Fatigue  by  Sensors  in  Ordinary 
Gadgets, arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.04984. 

[25]  Stirenko,  S.,  Gordienko,  Yu.,  Shemsedinov,  T.,  Alienin,  O., 
Kochura,  Yu.,  Gordienko,  N.,  Rojbi,  A.,  López  Benito,  J.R., 
Artetxe  González,  E.  (2017)  User-driven  Intelligent  Interface  on 
the Basis of Multimodal Augmented Reality and Brain-Computer 
Interaction for People with Functional Disabilities, IEEE Ukraine 
Conf. on Electrical and Computer Engineering (UKRCON-2017). 

 
