7
1
0
2

r
p
A
4
2

]

O
C
.
h
t
a
m

[

1
v
9
5
1
7
0
.
4
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON THE RADIUS AND THE ATTACHMENT NUMBER OF
TETRAVALENT HALF-ARC-TRANSITIVE GRAPHS

PRIMOˇZ POTO ˇCNIK AND PRIMOˇZ ˇSPARL∗

Abstract. In this paper, we study the relationship between the radius r
and the attachment number a of a tetravalent graph admitting a half-arc-
transitive group of automorphisms. These two parameters were ﬁrst intro-
duced in [J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 73 (1998), 41–76], where among other
things it was proved that a always divides 2r. Intrigued by the empirical data
from the census [Ars Math. Contemp. 8 (2015)] of all such graphs of order
up to 1000 we pose the question of whether all examples for which a does not
divide r are arc-transitive. We prove that the answer to this question is pos-
itive in the case when a is twice an odd number. In addition, we completely
characterize the tetravalent graphs admitting a half-arc-transitive group with
r = 3 and a = 2, and prove that they arise as non-sectional split 2-fold covers
of line graphs of 2-arc-transitive cubic graphs.

1. Introduction

This paper stems from our research of ﬁnite simple connected tetravalent graphs
that admit a group of automorphisms acting transitively on vertices and edges but
not on the arcs of the graph; such groups of automorphisms are said to be half-arc-
transitive. Observe that the full automorphism group Aut(Γ) of such a graph Γ is
then either arc-transitive or itself half-arc-transitive. In the latter case the graph Γ
is called half-arc-transitive.

Tetravalent graphs admitting a half-arc-transitive group of automorphisms are
surprisingly rich combinatorial objects with connections to several other areas of
mathematics (see, for example, [1, 9, 10, 11, 13, 16, 18]). One of the most fruitful
tools for analysing the structure of a tetravalent graph Γ admitting a half-arc-
transitive group G is to study a certain G-invariant decomposition of the edge set
E(Γ) of Γ into the G-alternating cycles of some even length 2r; the parameter r
is then called the G-radius and denoted radG(Γ) (see Section 2 for more detailed
deﬁnitions). Since G is edge-transitive and the decomposition into G-alternating
cycles is G-invariant, any two intersecting G-alternating cycles meet in the same
number of vertices; this number is then called the attachment number and denoted
attG(Γ). When G = Aut(Γ) the subscript G will be omitted in the above notation.
It is well known and easy to see that attG(Γ) divides 2 radG(Γ). However, for all
known tetravalent half-arc-transitive graphs the attachment number in fact divides
the radius. This brings us to the following question that we would like to propose
and address in this paper:

2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 05C25, 20B25.
Key words and phrases. graph, half-arc-transitive, radius, attachment number, split cover.
* corresponding author.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

P. POTO ˇCNIK AND P. ˇSPARL

Question 1. Is it true that the attachment number att(Γ) of an arbitrary tetrava-
lent half-arc-transitive graph Γ divides the radius rad(Γ)?

By checking the complete list of all tetravalent half-arc-transitive graphs on up to
1000 vertices (see [15]), we see the that answer to the above question is aﬃrmative
for the graphs in that range. Further, as was proved in [14, Theorem 1.2], the
question has an aﬃrmative answer in the case att(Γ) = 2. In Section 3, we generalise
this result by proving the following theorem.

Theorem 2. Let Γ be a tetravalent half-arc-transitive graph. If its radius rad(Γ) is
odd, then att(Γ) divides rad(Γ). Consequently, if att(Γ) is not divisible by 4, then
att(Γ) divides rad(Γ).

As a consequence of our second main result (Theorem 3) we see that, in contrast
to Theorem 2, there exist inﬁnitely many arc-transitive tetravalent graphs Γ admit-
ting a half-arc-transitive group G with radG(Γ) = 3 and attG(Γ) = 2. In fact, in
Section 2, we characterise these graphs completely and prove the following theorem
(see Section 2.2 for the deﬁnition of the dart graph).

Theorem 3. Let Γ be a connected tetravalent graph. Then Γ is G-half-arc-transitive
for some G ≤ Aut(Γ) with radG(Γ) = 3 and attG(Γ) = 2 if and only if Γ is the
dart graph of some 2-arc-transitive cubic graph.

The third main result of this paper, stemming from our analysis of the situation
described by Theorem 3, reveals a surprising connection to the theory of covering
projections of graphs. This theory has become one of the central tools in the
study of symmetries of graphs. A particularly thrilling development started with
the seminal work of Malniˇc, Nedela and ˇSkoviera [5] who analysed the condition
under which a given automorphism group of the base graph lifts along the covering
projection. Recently, the question of determining the structure of the lifted group
received a lot of attention (see [2, 6, 7]).

To be more precise, let ℘ : ˜Γ → Γ be a covering projection of connected graphs
and let CT(℘) be the corresponding group of covering transformations (see [5], for
example, for the deﬁnitions pertaining to the theory of graph covers). Furthermore,
let G ≤ Aut(Γ) be a subgroup that lifts along ℘. Then the lifted group ˜G is an
extension of CT(℘) by G. If this extension is split then the covering projection ℘
is called G-split. The most natural way in which this can occur is that there exists
a complement ¯G of CT(℘) in ˜G and a ¯G-invariant subset S of V (˜Γ), that intersects
each ﬁbre of ℘ in exactly one vertex. In such a case we say that S is a section for ¯G
and that ¯G is a sectional complement of CT(℘). Split covering projections without
any sectional complement are called non-sectional. These turn out to be rather
elusive and hard to analyse. To the best of our knowledge, the only known inﬁnite
family of non-sectional split covers was presented in [2, Section 4]. This family
of non-sectional split covers involves cubic arc-transitive graphs of extremely large
order.

In this paper we show that each connected tetravalent graph Γ admitting a half-
arc-transitive group G of automorphisms such that attG(Γ) = 2 and radG(Γ) = 3 is
a 2-fold cover of the line graph of a cubic 2-arc-transitive graph, and that in the case
when Γ is not bipartite the corresponding covering projection is non-sectional. This
thus provides a new and rather simple inﬁnite family of the somewhat mysterious
case of non-sectional split covering projections (see Section 4 for more details).

RADIUS AND ATTACHMENT NUMBER

3

2. Half-arc-transitive group actions on graphs

In the next two paragraphs we brieﬂy review some concepts and results pertain-
ing half-arc-transitive group actions on tetravalent graphs that we shall need in the
remainder of this section. For more details see [8], where most of these notions were
introduced.

A tetravalent graph Γ admitting a half-arc-transitive (that is vertex- and edge-
but not arc-transitive) group of automorphisms G is said to be G-half-arc-transitive.
The action of G induces two paired orientations of the edges of Γ and for any
one of them each vertex of Γ is the head of two and the tail of the other two
of its incident edges. (The fact that the edge uv is oriented from u to v will be
denoted by u → v.) A cycle of Γ for which every two consecutive edges either
have a common head or common tail with respect to this orientation is called a
G-alternating cycle. Since the action of G is vertex- and edge-transitive all of
the G-alternating cycles have the same even length 2 radG(Γ) and any two non-
disjoint G-alternating cycles intersect in the same number attG(Γ) of vertices. These
intersections, called the G-attachment sets, form an imprimitivity block system for
the group G. The numbers radG(Γ) and attG(Γ) are called the G-radius and G-
attachment number of Γ, respectively. If G = Aut(Γ) we suppress the preﬁx and
subscript Aut(Γ) in all of the above deﬁnitions.

It was shown in [8, Proposition 2.4] that a tetravalent G-half-arc-transitive graph
Γ has at least three G-alternating cycles unless attG(Γ) = 2 radG(Γ) in which case
Γ is isomorphic to a particular Cayley graph of a cyclic group (and is thus arc-
transitive). Moreover, in the case that Γ has at least three G-alternating cycles,
attG(Γ) ≤ radG(Γ) holds and attG(Γ) divides 2 radG(Γ). In addition, the restriction
of the action of G to any G-alternating cycle is isomorphic to the dihedral group of
order 2 radG(Γ) (or to the Klein 4-group in the case of radG(Γ) = 2) with the cyclic
subgroup of order radG(Γ) being the subgroup generated by a two-step rotation
of the G-alternating cycle in question. In addition, if C = (v0, v1, . . . , v2r−1) is a
G-alternating cycle of Γ with r = radG(Γ) and C′ is the other G-alternating cycle
of Γ containing v0 then C ∩ C′ = {viℓ : 0 ≤ i < a} where a = attG(Γ) and ℓ = 2r/a
(see [8, Proposition 2.6] and [12, Proposition 3.4]).

As mentioned in the Introduction one of the goals of this paper is to characterize
the tetravalent G-half-arc-transitive graphs Γ with radG(Γ) = 3 and attG(Γ) =
2. The bijective correspondence between such graphs and 2-arc-transitive cubic
graphs (see Theorem 3) is given via two pairwise inverse constructions: the graph
of alternating cycles construction and the dart graph construction. We ﬁrst deﬁne
the former.

2.1. The graph of alternating cycles. Let Γ be a tetravalent G-half-arc-transitive
graph for some G ≤ Aut(Γ). The graph of G-alternating cycles AltG(Γ) is the graph
whose vertex set consists of all G-alternating cycles of Γ with two of them being
adjacent whenever they have at least one vertex in common. We record some basic
properties of the graph AltG(Γ).

Proposition 4. Let Γ be a connected tetravalent G-half-arc-transitive graph for
some G ≤ Aut(Γ) having at least three G-alternating cycles. Then the graph
AltG(Γ) is a regular graph of valence 2 radG(Γ)/ attG(Γ) and the induced action of
G on AltG(Γ) is vertex- and edge-transitive. Moreover, this action is arc-transitive
if and only if radG(Γ) does not divide attG(Γ).

4

P. POTO ˇCNIK AND P. ˇSPARL

Proof. To simplify notation, denote r = radG(Γ) and a = attG(Γ). Since each
vertex of Γ lies on exactly two G-alternating cycles and the intersection of any two
non-disjoint G-alternating cycles is of size a it is clear that each G-alternating cycle
is adjacent to ℓ = 2r/a other G-alternating cycles in AltG(Γ). Moreover, since G
acts edge-transitively on Γ and each edge of Γ is contained in a unique G-alternating
cycle, the induced action of G on AltG(Γ) is vertex-transitive. That this action is
also edge-transitive follows from the fact that G acts vertex-transitively on Γ and
that the edges of AltG(Γ) correspond to G-attachment sets of Γ.

For the rest of the proof ﬁx one of the two paired orientations of Γ given by the
action of G, let C = (v0, v1, . . . , v2r−1) be a G-alternating cycle such that v0 → v1
and let C′ be the other G-alternating cycle containing v0, so that C ∩C′ = {viℓ : 0 ≤
i < a}. Since every other vertex of C is the tail of the two edges of C incident to
it, the vertex vℓ is the tail of the two edges of C incident to it if and only if ℓ is
even (in which case each viℓ has this property).

Now, if ℓ is odd, then each element of G, mapping v0 to vℓ necessarily inter-
changes C and C′, proving that in this case the induced action of G on AltG(Γ) is
in fact arc-transitive. We remark that this also follows from the fact, ﬁrst observed
by Tutte [19], that a vertex- and edge-transitive group of automorphisms of a graph
of odd valence is necessarily arc-transitive. To complete the proof we thus only need
to show that the induced action of G on AltG(Γ) is not arc-transitive when ℓ is even.
Recall that in this case each vertex viℓ ∈ C ∩ C′ is the tail of the two edges of C
incident to it. Therefore, since any element of G, mapping the pair {C, C′} to itself
of course preserves the intersection C ∩ C′ it is clear that any such element ﬁxes
each of C and C′ setwise, and so no element of G can interchange C and C′. This
(cid:3)
proves that the induced action of G on AltG(Γ) is half-arc-transitive.

2.2. The dart graph and its relation to AltG(Γ). The dart graph of a cubic
graph was investigated in [4] (we remark that this construction can also be viewed
as a special kind of the arc graph construction from [3]). Of course the dart graph
construction can be applied to arbitrary graphs but here, as in [4], we are only
interested in dart graphs of cubic graphs. We ﬁrst recall the deﬁnition. Let Λ be
a cubic graph. Then its dart graph Dart(Λ) is the graph whose vertex set consists
of all the arcs (called darts in [4]) of Λ with (u, v) adjacent to (u′, v′) if and only if
either u′ = v but u 6= v′, or u = v′ but u′ 6= v. In other words, the edges of Dart(Λ)
correspond to the 2-arcs of Λ. Note that this enables a natural orientation of the
edges of Dart(Λ) where the edge (u, v)(v, w) is oriented from (u, v) to (v, w).

Clearly, Aut(Λ) can be viewed as a subgroup of Aut(Dart(Λ)) preserving the
natural orientation. Furthermore, the permutation τ of V (Dart(Λ)), exchanging
each (u, v) with (v, u), is an orientation reversing automorphism of Dart(Λ).

We now establish the correspondence between the 2-arc-transitive cubic graphs
and the tetravalent graphs admitting a half-arc-transitive group of automorphisms
with the corresponding radius 3 and attachment number 2. We do this in two steps.

Proposition 5. Let Λ be a connected cubic graph admitting a 2-arc-transitive group
of automorphisms G and let Γ = Dart(Λ). Then Γ is a tetravalent G-half-arc-
transitive graph such that radG(Γ) = 3 and attG(Γ) = 2 with AltG(Γ) ∼= Λ. More-
over, the natural orientation of Γ, viewed as Dart(Λ), coincides with one of the two
paired orientations induced by the action of G.

RADIUS AND ATTACHMENT NUMBER

5

Proof. That the natural action of G on Γ is half-arc-transitive can easily be ver-
iﬁed (see also [4]). Now, ﬁx an edge (u, v)(v, w) of Γ and choose the G-induced
orientation of Γ in such a way that (u, v) → (v, w). Since G is 2-arc-transitive on
Λ, the other edge of Γ, for which (u, v) is its tail, is (u, v)(v, w′), where w′ is the
remaining neighbour of v in Λ (other than u and w). It is now clear that for each
pair of adjacent vertices (x, y) and (y, z) of Γ the corresponding edge is oriented
from (x, y) to (y, z), and so the chosen G-induced orientation of Γ is the natural
orientation of Dart(Λ).

Finally, let v be a vertex of Λ and let u, u′, u′′ be its three neighbours. The
G-alternating cycle of Γ containing the edge (u, v)(v, u′) is then clearly Cv =
((u, v), (v, u′), (u′′, v), (v, u), (u′, v), (v, u′′)), implying that radG(Γ) = 3. This also
shows that the G-alternating cycles of Γ naturally correspond to vertices of Λ. Since
the three G-alternating cycles of Γ that have a nonempty intersection with Cv are
the ones corresponding to the vertices u, u′ and u′′, this correspondence in fact
(cid:3)
shows that AltG(Γ) and Λ are isomorphic and that attG(Γ) = 2.

Proposition 6. Let Γ be a connected tetravalent G-half-arc-transitive graph for
some G ≤ Aut(Γ) with radG(Γ) = 3 and attG(Γ) = 2, and let Λ = AltG(Γ). Then
the group G induces a 2-arc-transitive action on Λ and Dart(Λ) ∼= Γ. In fact, an
isomorphism Ψ : Dart(Λ) → Γ exists which maps the natural orientation of Dart(Λ)
to a G-induced orientation of Γ.

Proof. By Proposition 4 the graph Λ is cubic and the induced action of G on it
is arc-transitive. Since radG(Γ) = 3 and attG(Γ) = 2 it is easy to see that Γ
and Dart(Λ) are of the same order. Furthermore, let C = (v0, v1, . . . , v5) be a
G-alternating cycle of Γ and C′, C′′, C′′′ be the other G-alternating cycles of Γ
containing v0, v1 and v5, respectively. Then C ∩ C′ = {v0, v3}, C ∩ C′′ = {v1, v4}
and C ∩C′′′ = {v2, v5}. It is thus clear that any element of G, ﬁxing v0 and mapping
v1 to v5 (which exists since C is G-alternating and G is edge-transitive on Γ), ﬁxes
both C and C′ but maps C′′ to C′′′. Therefore, the induced action of G on Λ is
2-arc-transitive.

To complete the proof we exhibit a particular isomorphism Ψ : Dart(Λ) → Γ.
Fix an orientation of the edges of Γ, induced by the action of G, and let C and C′
be two G-alternating cycles of Γ with a nonempty intersection. Then (C, C′) and
(C′, C) are vertices of Dart(Λ). Let C ∩ C′ = {u, u′} and observe that precisely
one of u and u′ is the head of both of the edges of C incident to it. Without loss
of generality assume it is u. Then of course u′ is the head of both of the edges of
C′ incident to it. We then set Ψ((C, C′)) = u and Ψ((C′, C)) = u′. Therefore, for
non-disjoint G-alternating cycles C and C′ of Γ we map (C, C′) to the unique vertex
in C ∩ C′ which is the head of both of the edges of C incident to it. Since each pair
of non-disjoint G-alternating cycles meets in precisely two vertices and each vertex
of Γ belongs to two G-alternating cycles of Γ, this mapping is injective and thus
also bijective. We now only need to show that it preserves adjacency and maps the
natural orientation of Dart(Λ) to the chosen G-induced orientation of Γ. To this end
let C, C′ and C′′ be three G-alternating cycles of Γ such that C has a nonempty
intersection with both C′ and C′′. Recall that then the edge (C′, C)(C, C′′) is
oriented from (C′, C) to (C, C′′) in the natural orientation of Dart(Λ). Denote
C = (v0, v1, . . . , v5) and without loss of generality assume C ∩ C′ = {v0, v3} and
C ∩ C′′ = {v1, v4}.

6

P. POTO ˇCNIK AND P. ˇSPARL

Suppose ﬁrst that v0 → v1. Then v0 is the head of both of the edges of C′
incident to it, and so Ψ((C′, C)) = v0. Similarly, v1 is the head of both of the
edges of C incident to it, and so Ψ((C, C′′)) = v1. If on the other hand v1 → v0,
then Ψ((C′, C)) = v3 and Ψ((C, C′′)) = v4. In both cases, Ψ maps the oriented
edge (C′, C)(C, C′′) to an oriented edge of Γ, proving that it is an isomorphism of
graphs, mapping the the natural orientation of Dart(Λ) to the chosen G-induced
(cid:3)
orientation of Γ.

Theorem 3 now follows directly from Propositions 5 and 6.

3. Partial answer to Question 1 and proof of Theorem 2

In this section we prove Theorem 2 giving a partial answer to Question 1. We

ﬁrst prove an auxiliary result.
Proposition 7. Let Γ be a tetravalent G-half-arc-transitive graph with attG(Γ)
even. Then for each vertex v of Γ and the two G-alternating cycles C and C′,
containing v, the antipodal vertex of v on C coincides with the antipodal vertex of
v on C′. Moreover, the involution τ interchanging each pair of antipodal vertices
on all G-alternating cycles of Γ is an automorphism of Γ centralising G.

Proof. Denote r = radG(Γ) and a = attG(Γ). Let v be a vertex of Γ and let C and
C′ be the two G-alternating cycles of Γ containing v. Denote C = (v0, v1, . . . , v2r−1)
with v = v0. Recall that then C ∩ C′ = {viℓ : 0 ≤ i < a}, where ℓ = 2r/a. Since a is
even vr ∈ C ∩C′. Now, take any element g ∈ Gv interchanging v1 with v2r−1 as well
as the other two neighbours of v (which are of course neighbours of v on C′). Then
g reﬂects both C and C′ with respect to v. Since vr is antipodal to v on C, it must
be ﬁxed by g, but since vr is also contained in C′, this implies that it is in fact also
the antipodal vertex of v on C′. This shows that for each G-alternating cycle C and
each vertex v of C the vertex v and its antipodal counterpart on C both belong to
the same pair of G-alternating cycles (this implies that the G-transversals, as they
were deﬁned in [8], are of length 2) and are also antipodal on the other G-alternating
cycle containing them.

It is now clear that τ is a well deﬁned involution on the vertex set of Γ. Since
the antipodal vertex of a neighbor v1 of v = v0 on C is the neighbor vr+1 of the
antipodal vertex vr, it is clear that τ is in fact an automorphism of Γ. Since any
element of G maps G-alternating cycles to G-alternating cycles it is clear that τ
(cid:3)
centralises G.

We are now ready to prove Theorem 2. Let Γ be a tetravalent half-arc-transitive
graph. Denote r = rad(Γ) and a = att(Γ), and assume r is odd. Recall that a
divides 2r. We thus only need to prove that a is odd. Suppose to the contrary
that a is even, and so by assumption a ≡ 2 (mod 4). Then the graph Γ admits the
automorphism τ from Proposition 7. Now, ﬁx one of the two paired orientations
of the edges induced by the action of Aut(Γ) and let C = (v0, v1, . . . , v2r−1) be an
alternating cycle of Γ with v0 being the tail of the edge v0v1. Since vτ
0 = vr and
vτ
1 = vr+1 it follows that vr is the tail of the edge vrvr+1. But since r is odd this
contradicts the fact that every other vertex of C is the tail of the two edges of C
incident to it. Thus a is odd, as claimed.

To prove the second part of the theorem assume that a is not divisible by 4. If r
is even then the fact that a divides 2r implies that a divides r as well. If however
r is odd, we can apply the ﬁrst part of the theorem. This completes the proof.

RADIUS AND ATTACHMENT NUMBER

7

4. An infinite family of non-sectional split covers

As announced in the introduction, tetravalent G-half-arc-transitive graphs Γ with
radG(Γ) = 3 and attG(Γ) = 2 yield surprising examples of the elusive non-sectional
split covers. In this section, we present this connection in some detail.

Theorem 8. Let Γ be a connected non-bipartite G-half-arc-transitive graph Γ of
order greater than 12 with radG(Γ) = 3 and attG(Γ) = 2. Then there exists a 2-fold
covering projection ℘ : Γ → Γ′ and an arc-transitive group H ≤ Aut(Γ′) which lifts
along ℘ in such a way that Γ is a non-sectional H-split cover of Γ′.

Proof. Since attG(Γ) = 2, each G-attachment set consists of a pair of antipodal
vertices on a G-alternating cycle of Γ. Let B be the set of all G-attachment sets
in Γ. By Proposition 7, there exists an automorphism τ of Γ centralising G, which
interchanges the two vertices in each element of B. Let ˜G = hG, τ i and note that
˜G acts transitively on the arcs of Γ. Since τ is an involution centralising G not
contained in G, we see that ˜G = G × hτ i.

Let Γ′ be the quotient graph with respect to the group hτ i, that is, the graph
whose vertices are the orbits of hτ i and with two such orbits adjacent whenever they
are joined by an edge in Γ. Since ˜G is arc-transitive and hτ i is normal in ˜G, each
hτ i-orbit is an independent set. Moreover, if two hτ i-orbits B and C are adjacent
in Γ′, then the induced subgraph Γ[B ∪ C] is clearly vertex- and arc-transitive and
is thus either K2,2 or 2K2. In the former case, it is easy to see that Γ is isomorphic
to the lexicographic product of a cycle with the edge-less graph on two vertices.
Since radG(Γ) = 3 and the orbits of hτ i coincide with the elements of B, this implies
that Γ has only 6 vertices, contradicting our assumption on the order of Γ. This
contradiction implies that Γ[B ∪ C] ∼= 2K2 for any pair of adjacent hτ i-orbits B
and C, and hence the quotient projection ℘ : Γ → Γ′ is a 2-fold covering projection
with hτ i being its group of covering transformations.

Since τ normalises G, the group ˜G projects along ℘ and the quotient group
H = ˜G/hτ i acts faithfully as an arc-transitive group of automorphisms on Γ′. In
particular, since the group of covering projection hτ i has a complement G in ˜G, the
covering projection ℘ is H-split.

By [2, Proposition 3.3], if ℘ had a sectional complement with respect to H, then
Γ would be a canonical double cover of Γ′, contradicting the assumption that Γ is
(cid:3)
not bipartite.

Remark. In [4, Proposition 9] it was shown that a cubic graph Λ is bipartite
if and only if Dart(Λ) is bipartite. Since there exist inﬁnitely many connected
non-bipartite cubic 2-arc-transitive graphs, Theorem 3 thus implies that there are
indeed inﬁnitely many connected non-bipartite G-half-arc-transitive graphs Γ with
radG(Γ) = 3 and attG(Γ) = 2. In view of Theorem 8, these yield inﬁnitely many
non-sectional split covers, as announced in the introduction. Furthermore, note
that the G-alternating 6-cycles in the graph Γ appearing in the proof of the above
theorem project by ℘ to cycles of length 3, implying that Γ′ is a tetravalent arc-
transitive graph of girth 3. Since it is assumed that the order of Γ is larger than 12
(and thus the order of Γ′ is larger than 6), we may now use [17, Theorem 5.1] to
conclude that Γ′ is isomorphic to the line graph of a 2-arc-transitive cubic graph.

8

P. POTO ˇCNIK AND P. ˇSPARL

Acknowledgment. The ﬁrst author was supported in part by Slovenian Research
Agency, program P1-0294. The second author was supported in part by Slovenian
Research Agency, program P1-0285 and projects N1-0038, J1-6720 and J1-7051.

References

[1] M. D. E. Conder, P. Potoˇcnik, P. ˇSparl, Some recent discoveries about half-arc-transitive

graphs, Ars. Math. Contemp. 8 (2015).

[2] Y.-Q. Feng, K. Kutnar, A. Malniˇc, D. Maruˇsiˇc, On 2-fold covers of graphs, J. Combin. Theory

Ser. B 98 (2008) 324–341.

[3] C. Godsil and G. Royle, “Algebraic graph theory”, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001.
[4] A. Hill, S. Wilson, Four constructions of highly symmetric graphs, J. Graph Theory 71 (2012),

229–244.

[5] A. Malniˇc, R. Nedela, and M. ˇSkoviera, Lifting Graph Automorphisms by Voltage Assign-

ments, European J. Combin. 21 (2000), 927–947.

[6] A. Malniˇc, R. Poˇzar, On the split structure of lifted groups, Ars Math. Contemp. 10 (2016),

113–134.

[7] A. Malniˇc, R. Poˇzar, On split liftings with sectional complements, submitted.
[8] D. Maruˇsiˇc, Half-transitive group actions on ﬁnite graphs of valency 4, J. Combin. Theory

Ser. B 73 (1998), 41–76.

[9] D. Maruˇsiˇc, R. Nedela, Maps and half-transitive graphs of valency 4, European J. Combin.

19 (1998), 345–354.

[10] D. Maruˇsiˇc, R. Nedela, On the point stabilizers of transitive groups with non-self-paired

suborbits of length 2, J. Group Theory 4 (2001), 19–43.

[11] D. Maruˇsiˇc, T. Pisanski, Weakly ﬂag-transitive conﬁgurations and

ropean J. Combin. 20 (1999), 559–570.

1
2 -transitive graphs, Eu-

[12] D. Maruˇsiˇc, C. E. Praeger, Tetravalent graphs admitting half-transitive group actions: alter-

nating cycles, J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 75 (1999), 188–205.

[13] D. Maruˇsiˇc, P. ˇSparl, On quartic half-arc-transitive metacirculants, J. Algebr. Comb. 28

(2008), 365–395.

[14] D. Maruˇsiˇc, A. O. Waller, Half-transitive graphs of valency 4 with prescribed attachment

numbers, J. Graph Theory 34 (2000), 89–99.

[15] P. Potoˇcnik, P. Spiga, G. Verret, A census of 4-valent half-arc-transitive graphs and arc-

transitive digraphs of valence two, Ars Math. Contemp. 8 (2015).

[16] P. Potoˇcnik, P. Spiga, G. Verret, Groups of order at most 6 000 generated by two elements,
one of which is an involution, and related structures, in “Symmetries in Graphs, Maps, and
Polytopes; 5th SIGMAP Workshop, West Malvern, UK, July 2014” (eds. J. ˇSir´aˇn, R. Jajcay),
Springer Proceedings in Mathematics and Statistics (2016).

[17] P. Potoˇcnik, S. Wilson, Tetravalent edge-transitive graphs of girth at most 4, J. Combin.

Theory Ser. B 97 (2007), 217–236.

[18] P. Spiga, G. Verret, On the order of vertex-stabilisers in edge- and vertex-transitive graphs

with local group Zp × Zp or Zp wr Z2, arXiv.

[19] W. T. Tutte, Connectivity in graphs, University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1966.

Primoˇz Potoˇcnik,

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia;
also affiliated with
Institute of Mathematics, Physics, and Mechanics, Ljubljana, Slovenia

E-mail address: primoz.potocnik@fmf.uni-lj.si

Primoˇz ˇSparl,

Faculty of Education, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia;
also affiliated with
IAM, University of Primorska, Koper, Slovenia and
Institute of Mathematics, Physics, and Mechanics, Ljubljana, Slovenia

E-mail address: primoz.sparl@pef.uni-lj.si

