Towards an augmented reality fourth generation social networks 

Andrés Montero 

The Concept Foundation, Madrid, Spain  

Borja Belaza 

Conception Singularity Innovations, Madrid, Spain  

contact@conception.is 

(Dated: May 11, 2017) 

Abstract 

A  concept  of  fourth  generation  social  network  is  described  as  one  that,  built  on  the 
features  of  augmented  reality  (AR),  is  able  to  implement  an  enriched  layer  of  digital 
information  that  displays  in  People  Augmented  Reality  (PAR)  devices  data  shared  by 
users in social networks. This PAR layer is accessed by the users in their devices through 
camera effects when targeting with a mobile phone to a user holding a mobile device with 
AGPS and with a profile in social media. The social network of fourth generation will be 
a combination between Facebook and Pokemon Go. 

Keywords: augmented reality, social media, location-based services 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Currently the concept of social networks is directly associated with social media based 
on  the  World  Wide  Web,  such  as  Twitter,  Facebook,  Google+,  Qzone  (China)  or 
VKontakte (Russia), among others. 

However, the seed of social networks, which could be considered the  first generation 
of social networks, was in the inter-connection of users through terminal emulators (tty) 
in  discussion  groups,  bulletin  board  systems  (BBS)  and  electronic  mailing  lists  (eg 
LISTSERV) of the late 1970s and early 1980s in the 20th century. All of these systems of 
connection between individuals were computer-mediated communications (CMC) where 
users  interacted  with  each  other  via  early  modems  based  on  acoustic  couplers  to  handle 
analogical  telephone  operations  [1].  The  interaction  was  mainly  developed  in  text  mode 
and was displayed on monochrome monitors in the pre-internet era; in fact, one of those 
early  first  generation  social  networks  was  ARPANET,  considered  a  precursor  of  the 
Internet due to its implementation of the TCP/IP protocol in 1982. 

The second generation of social networks could be considered those that, based on the 
previous ones, move to reside in the Word Wide Web and adopt the protocol TCP/IP for 
communications  and  smartmodems  to  get  connected.  Tripod,  GeoCities  or  TheGlobe 
were the clearest representatives of this second wave of social networks that did not have 
the epicentre in the individual but in the creation of online communities where individuals 
met to exchange information and discuss various topics and interests, adopting usually the 
format of a forum or an online chat. 

The  third  generation  of  social  networks  appeared  when  the  community  of  shared 
interests  on  the  web  was  replaced  by  the  individual  profiles  that  constitute  their  own 
communities  in  the  form  of  groups  of  friends.  This  third  generation  took  benefit  from 
technological advances in hardware, software and communications, such as the expansion 
of  broadband  (asymmetric  digital  subscriber  line,  ADSL)  modems  or  smartphones,  thus 
social  networks  becoming  mobile.  The  first  of  these  third  generation  social  networks 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

came  up  in  the  late  nineties  of  the  20th  century  with  SixDegrees,  Makeoutclub  or 
Friendster, followed quickly by the best known MySpace, Linkedin, Orkut or 4Chan, to 
give way for Facebook in 2004. 

Leaving  aside  technological  innovations  in  terms  of  telecommunication  from  which 
undoubtedly  all  current  social  networks  have  been  fed,  from  a  strictly  functional 
perspective  the  defining  characteristics  of  third  generation  social  networks  are  in  their 
user-centrality:  they  connect  personal  profiles  through  a  website  or  a  mobile  app;  are 
designed for the mass dissemination of user-generated content (UGC) in any format; and 
are moving forward to implement ways of instant communication between users such as 
instant messaging or video calling. 

II. DIGITAL ‘2D’ REALITY  

Since its first generation social networks have been mainly vehicles for the connection 
between  individuals  and  the  transmission  of  information  in  a  two  dimensional  virtual 
space. 

The social media contents are generated (or captured in audio, image or video) by the 
users  and  shared  in  a  web  or  in  a  mobile  app.  The  content  resides  in  a  virtual  two-
dimensional  space  (web  or  mobile  app)  that  the  users  visit  telematically  to  interact  with 
those contents or other users. 

The  contents  shared  in  social  networks  are  therefore  two-dimensional  representations 
displayed in a screen of three-dimensional realities in the physical world: photographs or 
videos  of  the  user  himself,  of  buildings  and  places,  along  with  comments  in  text  that 
represent thoughts, feelings or behaviours of people, along with the transmission of ideas 
or  interests  representing  collectives.  This  set  creates  a  digital  reality  (DR)  in  the  cyber 
universe  which  is  a  two-dimensional  (plane)  representation  of  analogical  reality  in  the 
three dimensional physical universe (volume). 

III. VIRTUAL VS. AUGMENTED ‘3D’ REALITIES 

Although  cyberspace  is  currently  a  concept  with  many  meanings  several  of  them 
related  to  the  field  of  military  defence  [2],  it  is  often  used  as  an  Internet  metaphor  to 
describe the presence of objects and identities that "exist in cyberspace" through contents 
located and shared on the Internet [3]. 

In  this  last  metaphorical  sense,  social  networks  in  particular  would  be  understood  as 
territories  within  that  cyberspace  where  identities  and  objects  of  the  analogical  world 
represented  by  means  of  two-dimensional  digital  contents  in  the  form  of  text,  images, 
audios and videos would have a residence. However, even social networks (or websites of 
various types without the features of a social network) can represent objects or identities 
without any correspondence with an analogical reality of the physical world: they can be 
simply 
imagined  or  fictitious  digital  realities,  created  by  users  with  different 
intentionality. 

Thus,  social  networks  represent  the  physical  world  digitally  but  are  not  the  physical 
world.  In  terms  of  mathematical  set  theory,  the  correspondence  between  physical 
analogical  reality  and  digital  reality  of  social  networks  would  be  an  injective  function 
without properties of morphism (f: R3→DR2). That is, the digital representation (DR2) of 
the analogical reality of the physical world (R3) provided by third-generation social media 
does  not  preserve  the  three-dimensional  structure,  albeit  digitally,  of  the  represented 
reality. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

In  contrast  to  virtual  (VR)  and  augmented  (RA)  realities,  what  could  be  called  two-
dimensional digital reality  (DR2)  of  third-generation  social  networks  does  not  have  the 
vocation  to  embody,  nor  even  from  a  representational  point  of  view,  the  three-
dimensional reality of the analogical physical space. 

This vocation to digitize analogical reality by embedding it in a representational three-
dimensional space is being developed in parallel by two differentiated technological lines, 
which  are  nevertheless  looking  for  convergence:  augmented  reality  (AR)  and  virtual 
reality (VR). 

Augmented  reality  (AR)  is  an  enriched  digital  version  of  analogical  physical  reality 
overlapping  by  technological  means  a  layer  of  digital  information.  The  aim  of  AR  is  to 
inject  computer-generated  sensory  input  (geo-location  data,  text,  audio,  video,  graphics) 
into a two-dimensional plane of analogical reality displayed through an interface, usually 
the  screen  of  a  smartphone  mobile,  tablet,  computer  or  other  device  (glasses,  for 
example). The most popular device of AR in the recent years has been the Google Glass 
[4]. 

Within the very same formalism of set theory, augmented reality could be equated with 
a  surjective  function  of  the  analogical  reality  of  the  physical  world  (R3)  onto  an 
intersection  of  a  layer  of  two-dimensional  digital  reality  (DR2)  and  a  R2  representation 
displayed on a screen of the analogical reality of the physical world (R3). In this sense, it 
would  be  said  that  it  performs  the  inverse  path  to  the  traditional  function  of  general 
representativity  of  the  Internet  or  social  networks:  instead  of  digitally  representing  the 
physical  world,  augmented  reality  creates  digital  contents  that  it  projects  on  a  two-
dimensional plane of the physical world (f: R3→DR2∩R2). 

Regarding  virtual  reality  (VR),  it  is  a  computer-generated  digital  representation  of  an 
environment  that  can  be  a  bijective  correspondence  of  analogical  reality,  a  modified 
recreation  or  directly  an  imaginary  setting.  The  main  feature  of  VR  is  its  three-
dimensionality  (3D).  In  order  for  this  3D  to  be  perceived  by  an  user  some  kind  of  VR 
tools are used as interfaces, being currently a headset connected to a smartphone the most 
widespread device. 

Therefore, the VR takes the user to a three-dimensional representation that may or may 
not correspond to the analogical physical universe. In the formalization of set theory, the 
VR  could  even be  a  3D  bijective  isomorphism  between  analogical  and  digital  reality  (f: 
R3⇔VR3). 

The combination of augmented and virtual reality could lead to a homomorphism from 
analogical reality in R3 to a digital reality in VR3, further enriched with an additional layer 
of  topologies  in  AR2:  the  digital  content  added  by  augmented  reality  to  the  digital 
representation of the analogical reality (f: R3→AR2∩VR3). 

The main difference between AR and VR as it relates to the user experience is that AR 
projects  digital  content  over  a  digital  representation  of  physical  reality  and  the  user  can 
access  an  augmented  reality  by  targeting  his/her  mobile  device  over  a  geo-positioned 
coordinate of three-dimensional physical reality, displaying the augmented reality on the 
2D screen of the device. That is, the user "stay digitally out" of the augmented reality and 
accedes  to  it  as  a  "participant  viewer".  In  contrast,  in  VR  the  user  "enters"  into  digital 
reality  as  a  "digital  actor"  by  paying  the  price  of  carrying  a  specific  audiovisual  device, 
usually a combination of a headset and a handset connected to a smartphone, sometimes 
with manual devices for remote control of movement. 

Until the arrival of Facebook Spaces in the early 2017 [5], the VR was somehow out to 
social  networks  (for  instance,  ‘Second  Life’  is  a  virtual  world  community)  and  still 
remains so the AR as a feature in the structural capabilities deployed by the main social 
media  platform  for  their  users.  Facebook  is  introducing  AR  into  its  social  network 
through the recently launched 'Camera Effects Platform', whereby developers will be able 

 
 
 
4 

to  use  AR  Studio  to  inject  2D  digital  content  on  the  representation  of  the  analogical 
physical reality captured by the camera of a mobile device. 

In social networks, an AR ersartz was limited to creating digital effects or frames that 
users  could  overlap  to  images  or  videos,  features  that  have  been  available  for  a  quite 
while in Snapchat, Instagram or WhatsApp. With the new AR Studio platform Facebook 
provide  the  developers  with  the  capabilities  to  "code  against  the  real  world;  to  create 
experiences that are responsive to the environment around you"[6]. 

Therefore,  while  the  VR  connects  social  networks  with  a  virtualized  3D  environment 
through head-mounted display devices, the AR adds a digital layer to analogical physical 
reality through the camera of the mobile device, without the need for the user to "mount" 
other devices on himself, not even some glasses that could operate as interface. 

IV. PEOPLE AUGMENTED REALITY 

Although through AR Studio Facebook is proposing to developers to inject a layer of 
AR  in  all  user  experiences  with  the  analogical  reality  of  the  physical  universe,  the  real 
potential  revolution  of  AR  in  user  interaction  with  a  digital  representation  (DR2)  of 
analogical reality (R3) arrived in July 2016 with an augmented reality game, Pokemon Go. 
Pokemon  Go  is  designed  for  users  to  interact  with  analogical  reality  (R3)  through  a 
digital reality layer (DR2) by displaying a 2D experience on the screen of a mobile device 
that  is  a  two-dimensional  representation  of  a  physical  three-dimensional  space  enriched 
by a layer of digital information in two dimensions (f: R3→DR2∩AR2). 

The game allows for a fictional digital reality consisting of avatars and Pokemon (up to 
802  fictional  species  of  monsters)  to  take  part  of  the  two-dimensional  visual 
representation  of  physical  analogical  reality  and  for  that  combination  to  be  the  "field  of 
play"  where  the  user  interacts  with  DR2∩AR2  through  his/her  mobile  device.  As  it 
currently  proposes  Facebook,  the  Pokemon  Go  AR  is  built  on  the  screen  of  the  mobile 
device  through  the  action  of  the  camera.  The  digital  layer  of  AR  is  injected  onto  the 
digital representation of physical reality on a cartographic plane based on the geospatial 
location  of  the  mobile  device  obtained  through  AGPS  (assisted  GPS,  a  combination  of 
GPS, cell phone towers and WiFi networks signals). 

The  combination  of  Pokemon  Go's  interactive  AR  with  an  additional  step  in  the 
currently  limited  AR  proposed  by  Facebook  could  lead  to  the  fourth  generation  social 
media, based on user social interaction with a digitally enhanced analogical reality. 

Facebook  conceives  [7]  three  types  of  qualitative  increases  in  the  user  experience 
based  on  AR:  augmenting  objects  in  analogical  physical  reality  with  additional  digital 
information  like  putting  a  restaurant’s  reviews  on  their  storefront  to  be  displayed  in  the 
screen  of  the  user’s  smartphone,  tablet  or  computer  when  targeting  the  object  with  its 
camera; layering VR2 objects onto analogical physical reality; and enhancing real objects 
(the  screen  digital  display  of  real  objects)  with  extra  camera  effects,  like  the  currently 
available for static photos or recorded videos in Instragram, Snapchat or Whatsapp. 

However,  both  Facebook  and  other  social  networks  will  provide  the  true  advance 
towards fourth generation social media when the enhancement inherent to AR is injected 
onto the people’s digital representation (DR2) as well as onto the objects captured in R3 by 
the  cameras  of  mobile  devices.  In  this  way,  social  networks  will  implement  a  layer  of 
People Augmented Reality (PAR) that will join what could be called the current Objects 
Augmented Reality (OAR). 

Every person with a profile on social networks and the AGPS geolocation enabled on 
his/her  mobile  device  can  be  an  "object"  with  AR  information  popped  up  when  that 

 
 
 
 
5 

person is targeted by the camera of another user's mobile device working in AR enhanced 
camera effects mode. 

The  AR  layer  representing  people  with  profiles  in  social  networks  can  display  other 
users  basic  or  extended  information  of  their  profiles  in  social  media,  shared  interests, 
images and, actually, everything that the user has defined by privacy criteria that can be 
shared  through  a  PAR  enriched  layer.  Likewise  the  person  can  share  OAR  information 
regarding his personal objects, such as if his/her car or his house connected to the Internet 
are for sale. Similarly, any company or business with profiles in social media might use 
OAR and PAR to, as their buildings or facilities are targeted with a camera of a mobile 
device,  display  on  the  screen  of  that  device  AR  information  about  the  company,  its 
employees or any other data that may be shared in one or more layers of AR. Even public 
organizations can deploy AR information addressed to the people through a visible OAR 
layer on the screen of the users' mobile device through the camera effects. 

Therefore,  a  fourth  generation  social  network  will  be  one  that  represents  digital  and 
two-dimensional  (DR2)  physical  reality  (R3)  by  enhancing  it  with  a  layer  of  OAR  and 
another layer of PAR, resulting in f: R3→DR2∩OAR2∩PAR2. 

V. REFERENCES 

[1]  C.  Thurlow,  L.  Lengen  and  A.  Tomic,  “Computer  Mediated  Communication:  Social  Interaction  and 

Internet. Sage, London (2004). 

[2]  F.D.  Kramer,  S.  Starr,  L.K.  Wentz  (eds),  “Cyberpower  and  National  Security”,  National  Defense 

University Press (2009). 

[3]  M.  Graham,  “Geography/Internet:  Ethereal,  Alternate  Dimensiones  of  Cyberspace  or  Grounded 

Augmented Realities?, The Geographical Journal vol. 179, no. 2 (2012), pp. 177-188. 

[4]  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Glass, visited on 5/1/2017 

[5]  https://www.facebook.com/spaces, visited on 5/5/2017 

[6]  https://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/2017/04/18/Introducing-Camera-Effects-Platform/, visited on 

5/6/2017  

[7]  https://techcrunch.com/2017/04/18/facebook-camera-effects-platform/, visited on 5/6/2017. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
