7
1
0
2

n
u
J

6
2

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
7
5
0
0
0
.
6
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Magnetic Flux Rope Shredding by a Hyperbolic Flux Tube: The Detrimental
Eﬀects of Magnetic Topology on Solar Eruptions

Georgios Chintzoglou

Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory, 3176 Porter Dr, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA

University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO 80307-3000,USA

gchintzo@lmsal.com

and

Angelos Vourlidas1

The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD 20723, USA

and

Antonia Savcheva and Svetlin Tassev

Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

and

Samuel Tun Beltran and Guillermo Stenborg

Space Science Division, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375, USA

ABSTRACT

We present the analysis of an unusual failed eruption captured in high cadence and in
many wavelengths during the observing campaign in support of the VAULT2.0 sounding
rocket launch. The refurbished Very high Angular resolution Ultraviolet Telescope
(VAULT2.0 ) is a Lyα (λ 1216 ˚A) spectroheliograph launched on September 30, 2014.
The campaign targeted active region NOAA AR 12172 and was closely coordinated
with the Hinode and IRIS missions and several ground-based observatories (NSO/IBIS,
SOLIS, and BBSO). A ﬁlament eruption accompanied by a low level ﬂaring event (at the
GOES C-class level) occurred around the VAULT2.0 launch. No Coronal Mass Ejection
(CME) was observed. The eruption and its source region, however, were recorded by the
campaign instruments in many atmospheric heights ranging from the photosphere to
the corona in high cadence and spatial resolution. This is a rare occasion which enables

1Also at IAASARS, National Observatory of Athens, GR-15236, Penteli, Greece

 
 
 
 
 
 
– 2 –

us to perform a comprehensive investigation on a failed eruption. We ﬁnd that a rising
Magnetic Flux Rope-like (MFR) structure was destroyed during its interaction with
the ambient magnetic ﬁeld creating downﬂows of cool plasma and diﬀuse hot coronal
structures reminiscent of “cusps”. We employ magnetofrictional simulations to show
that the magnetic topology of the ambient ﬁeld is responsible for the destruction of the
MFR. Our unique observations suggest that the magnetic topology of the corona is a
key ingredient for a successful eruption.

1.

Introduction

The magnetic ﬁeld drives the dynamics of the solar atmosphere, from the highly structured
extreme ultraviolet (EUV) corona to the spectacular coronal mass ejections (CMEs). The quest
for the cause of eruptive activity on the Sun revolves around the release of magnetic energy into
thermal and kinetic energies that propel magnetic structures, called magnetic ﬂux ropes (MFRs),
out into the heliosphere. The topology of the coronal magnetic ﬁelds is key because it can either
enable the release of magnetic energy via reconnection (Priest & D´emoulin 1995, see review by
Longcope 2005) or provide an escape route to a CME (e.g. Antiochos et al. 1999, Aulanier et al.
2000, Lugaz et al. 2011, Sun et al. 2012, Sun et al. 2013, Jiang et al. 2013).

In a 2D magnetized conducting medium, a special location may exist in it, where the mag-
netic ﬁeld magnitude goes to zero, i.e.
|B| = 0. Null points are common features of magnetic
ﬁelds originating from multiple sources, e.g. two adjacent bipoles on the sun. In such a simple
2D quadrupolar conﬁguration the magnetic ﬁeld connectivity can be organized into four domains,
separated by two imaginary intersecting lines, the separatrices. Right at the intersection of the
separatrices, an X-type null point exists giving rise to the so-called “X-type” magnetic conﬁgura-
tion. Such topological features tend to be locally unstable when the magnetic sources (e.g. ﬂux
concentrations such as sunspots) are free to evolve (Dungey 1953). This process, known as X-type
point collapse, leads from an initial equilibrium state to a current sheet − a necessary ingredient
for the reconnection of magnetic ﬁeld lines to occur.

In 3D, a quadrupolar conﬁguration may or may not yield these unstable topological features
- the 3D null points. Indeed, 3D null points are unable to explain the variety of observed ﬂaring
conﬁgurations in Active Regions (AR) on the sun. Priest & D´emoulin (1995) explored a way for
magnetic reconnection to occur in 3D in the absence of 3D null points, in electric current surfaces
associated with topological features known as the Quasi-separatrix Layers (QSLs; see review by
Longcope 2005). These ﬁnite-thickness current surfaces (hence layers) form when there is an abrupt
change in the magnetic ﬁeld line linkage. This is a typical case in multiple-source AR conﬁgurations.
The more abrupt the change in the ﬁeld line linkage, the more intense and thin these current layers
are. When two QSLs intersect, they form another topological feature known as a Hyperbolic Flux
Tube (HFT) (Titov et al. 2002, 2003). In the limit where QSLs reach inﬁnitesimal thickness, an

– 3 –

HFT becomes a line, the separator. The separator is a locus of X-points in 3D and harbors the
strongest topologically-induced electric currents (over which the mapping of magnetic ﬁeld lines is
discontinuous). For completeness, we should also mention here the topological case of a 3D null-
point in the corona with a single QSL dome. This dome-shaped QSL (also known as “the fan”) is
manifested by ﬁeld lines deﬂecting around (or “fanning out” from) the 3D null-point and each of
them ending at diﬀerent points at the base of the dome (at the surface). In this case where there
is only one QSL dome there is no HFT/separator, but a special ﬁeld line passing right through the
null point called the “spine”.

Since the aforementioned topological features emanate from the instantaneous conﬁguration of
magnetic sources in the photosphere, their lifetimes are dependent on the persistence of the relative
position of the magnetic sources on the surface. These features may last for days, gradually evolving
in timescales similar to the timescales of photospheric motions of the magnetic polarities.

Most of the literature on the initiation of CMEs has focused on the role of topology in facili-
tating solar eruptions. Aulanier et al. (2000) analyzed an eruptive ﬂare originating from a δ-spot
quadrupolar AR which formed after the emergence of a parasitic bipole. Magnetic ﬁeld extrapola-
tions suggested that the topology was of the “fan” and “spine” type and that break-out reconnection
(Antiochos et al. 1999) at the null-point was the trigger for the destabilization of a ﬁlament and
its eruption. Sun et al. (2012) has reported observations of a non-radial (highly inclined initial
trajectory) eruption giving its place to a stable, jet-like inverted-“Y”-shaped structure in its wake.
A non-Linear Force-Free Field (in short, NLFFF) extrapolation suggested the existence of a coronal
3D null-point with the wide part of the inverted-Y-shape structure likely due to the lines of the fan
separatrix surface. They concluded that this special ﬁeld geometry guided the non-radial eruption
during its observed initial stage. Recently, Sun et al. (2013) reported another eruption associated
with the presence of the same topological features. They associated the triggering of the eruption
to break-out reconnection at the null-point. This scenario has been investigated numerically by
Lugaz et al. (2011) (with an out-of-equilibrium initial ﬂux-rope embedded in a “fan”-“spine” topol-
ogy) and Jiang et al. (2013) (starting with a NLFFF equilibrium). In both cases the null-point
reconnection intensiﬁed and the fan dome opened up. While the MFR will most likely begin recon-
necting with the overlying ﬁeld, a current sheet forms behind it as it rises giving birth to standard
“ﬂare reconnection”. These works, and much additional literature, suggest that the magnetic ﬁeld
topology over an unstable region plays a facilitating role to the eruption and hence much attention
has been devoted in locating such topologies. On the other hand, the question on whether (and
how) topology could prevent an eruption has not received much attention.

In this work we present evidence for the “preventative” role magnetic topology can play for an
erupting MFR and explain how it can ‘kill’ the eruption at its initial stage by destroying the rising
magnetic structure. The event was captured by a unique and comprehensive set of instruments
during the observing campaign in support of the launch of VAULT2.0 (Vourlidas et al. 2016) on
September 30, 2014.

– 4 –

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present the observations around the time
of the event followed by a detailed observational analysis focused on the dynamic nature of the
“cusps” in Section 3. Next, we expand on the extrapolation method we used to obtain a model
for our target active region’s magnetic ﬁeld and its evolution in Section 4 and then we undertake a
topological analysis in Section 5. We discuss our results in Section 6 and summarize and conclude
in Section 7.

2. Campaign Observations

VAULT2.0 ’s observing window lasted for ﬁve minutes (18:09 - 18:13 UT). However, the cam-
paign observations were initiated before and ended much later than VAULT2.0 ’s ﬂight. For this
work we used continuous observations from the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA; Lemen et al.
2011) onboard the Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO; Pesnell et al. 2012) covering the entire solar
disk at 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)6 pix−1 every 12 s in several coronal passbands (sensitive to diﬀerent plasma tempera-
tures) − here we used image time series in 304 ˚A (50,000K), 94 ˚A (6.4 MK) and 131 ˚A (∼10 MK).
For the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld distribution we used magnetograms from the Helioseismic and
Magnetic Imager (HMI ; Scherrer et al. 2012) also onboard SDO. The SDO spacecraft orbits the
Earth at an inclined geosynchronous orbit. For assessing whether there was a CME associated with
our event, we used data from the Large Angle Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO; Brueckner
et al. 1995) aboard the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO; Domingo et al. 1995), which
observes from the Lagrangian L1 point between the Sun-Earth line. The Interface Region Imaging
Spectrograph (IRIS ; De Pontieu et al. 2014) provided slit-jaw image time-series in Si IV 1400 ˚A with
0.(cid:48)(cid:48)16 pix−1 every 13 s and with a ﬁeld of view (FOV) of 120(cid:48)(cid:48)×120(cid:48)(cid:48). In addition, the Solar Optical
Telescope (SOT ; Tsuneta et al. 2008) onboard the Hinode spacecraft provided rasters in the Ca II
H 3968 ˚A (3 s time cadence at 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)054 pix−1 and a FOV of 55(cid:48)(cid:48)×55(cid:48)(cid:48)). The coordinated observation
of the target with IRIS/SJI and SOT is a challenging task (in particular, maximizing the overlap
between the FOVs of these instruments). In our observational campaign, SOT has 71% overlap
with IRIS/SJI with a common FOV of 44(cid:48)(cid:48)×49(cid:48)(cid:48).

An eruption began over the northern bend of AR12172’s inverse “U”-shape ﬁlament at 17:50
UT and was observed by IRIS, SOT and AIA (Figure 1 (a-b)). The heliographic position of the
target AR on the solar disk was S12◦W54◦. The event exhibited all the typical signatures of an
eruption, such as extended ribbons, rising loops, brightenings, coronal rain and several million
degree heating. However, there was no CME or any signiﬁcant radial outﬂow high in the corona
(no such signatures in LASCO Coronagraphs). Hence, it was a failed eruption.

Thanks to the on-disk location of AR12172, observations of the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld
were obtained by the HMI instrument. As seen in Figure 1 (c) the photospheric conﬁguration
for this AR is quadrupolar, with two Polarity Inversion Lines (PILs). This quadrupolar AR is the
result of colision between a strong pre-existing bipole (with PIL1) and a secondary bipole (primarily
responsible for causing the East-West portion of PIL2). This colision occured several days before

– 5 –

Fig. 1.— (a) The FOV of each instrument (IRIS Slit-Jaw Imager and SOT) superimposed on a
131 ˚A snapshot image from SDO/AIA. (b) Image from SDO/AIA at 304 ˚A showing the ﬁlament and
other annotated features in the core of target AR12172. Contours of photospheric |BLOS|=200 G
(positive/light blue; negative/yellow) are overplotted on the 304 ˚A image. (c) |BLOS| map from
SDO/HMI of the same area of panel (b) showing the general quadrupolar conﬁguration of AR12172.
The PILs are traced with colored dots in both panels.

– 6 –

the failed eruption. Furthermore, there is a small tertiary emergence event within the secondary
bipole in PIL2 (Figure 1 (b)) lasting throughout our observations.

The inverse U-shaped ﬁlament is in fact sitting above the PIL1 but cool material is also seen
above PIL2. In actuality, the southwestern part of the inverse-U shape ﬁlament seems to be inactive
at all times, possibly due to the strong magnetic ﬁelds about that part of the PIL1. Images taken
with SDO/AIA in 304 ˚A and IRIS SJI in 1400 ˚A suggest that the southwestern part of the ﬁlament
is not continuous with the rest of the ﬁlament. Thus, the relevant length of the ﬁlament reduces
its inverse U-shape into a forward “S”-shape (as delineated by PIL1 in Figure 1 (b-c)). Over time,
brightenings and ﬂows suggest that this shape extends towards the west, over PIL2 (more below).

The SOT observations at the Ca II H 3968 ˚A line (small FOV raster scans at an ultra fast 3 s
cadence) are centered on the north bend of PIL1. In these observations the ﬁlament is invisible
(although it is seen in IRIS 1400 ˚A and AIA passbands). During the time of the ﬁrst ﬁlament
brightenings (∼ 17:52 UT) a location above the north bend of PIL1 shows “ﬁnger”-like structures
to slowly brighten while they exhibit rotational/unwinding behavior. A few snapshots showing
these structures are presented in the SOT panels of Figure 2. Despite the strong background
photospheric emission, these dynamic structures stand out in the corresponding running-diﬀerence
image series (∆t Ca II panels; Figure 2 and “movie1.mp4”). These apparent rotational motions
occur above the PIL1 where the ﬁlament resides and within a few minutes extend well along the
entire north segment of the PIL1 and neighboring PIL2. In addition, these bright structures seem to
be moving upwards as suggested by their relative northwest shift with respect to the dark ﬁlament
which remains still in the background. Ca II brightenings are usually associated with transient
heating of chromospheric material or microﬂare reconnection in the corona (Shimizu 2011).

This extension of activity along the PILs is accompanied by similar motions and brightenings
in transition region temperatures (∼80,000 K seen in IRIS Si IV 1400 ˚A) suggesting the heating of
structures right above the dark ﬁlament. In addition, the bright SOT “ﬁnger-like” structures seem
to migrate westwards towards the neighboring PIL2 and seem to be related to a bright patch in
Si IV 1400 ˚A that behaves similarly. Interesting connectivity seems to link the bright patch to other
locations along the ﬁlament (IRIS SJI panels 17:58:40 - 18:00:52 in Figure 2).

In tandem with the activity in the chromosphere and the transition region (TR), there was
a coronal response with multi million-Kelvin plasma emission above the ﬁlament (Figure 2 (a)).
A movie covering the evolution in the corona and TR is available in the online version of the
journal (“movie2.mp4”). As seen in 94 ˚A (6.4 MK) a narrow loop arcade over the north bend of
the ﬁlament from NE to SW brightens in sync with the chromospheric/TR brightenings (i.e. SOT
“ﬁngers” and their IRIS counterparts). In fact, the narrow arcade’s footpoints correspond to bright
ribbon-like pairs in 1400 ˚A from IRIS (17:52:06 1400 ˚A panel, Figure 4; also in 1600 ˚A and 304 ˚A
from SDO/AIA but not shown here). At the time of the appearance of the bright patch in 1400 ˚A
(17:58) the narrow loop arcade has extended towards the south in the fashion of post-ﬂare loop
arcades (hot hook-shaped East loop arcade and bright West arcade; Figure 2 (b)), accompanied by

– 7 –

extended ribbon brightenings at the footpoints of those loops (e.g. 18:00:12 1400 ˚A panel Figure 4).

After its launch at 18:09 UT, VAULT2.0 observed the declining phase of the eruption and
captured cooling downﬂows and bright ribbons (also seen in 304 ˚A and 1400 ˚A). This is the ﬁrst
time, to our knowledge, that such a wide range of instruments captured the initiation of an eruption.

3. Dynamics - Rapid Loop Motions in the 10 MK Corona

As we already mentioned, the corona responded instantly to the activation of the north bend
of the ﬁlament (ﬁlament bulging). A system of ribbons brightens in sync with the activations, with
the ribbon showing the fastest growth towards the south (Figure 3 (c)). The ribbon brightenings
correspond to the footpoints of the hot loop arcades, namely the 6.4 MK hot hook-shaped arcade
in the East and a bright arcade in the West (Figure 3 (a)). The East hook-shaped arcade shows
up almost instantly indicating of very rapid loop motions suggesting rapid pile-up of newly formed
loops (≈ 400 km s−1).

Just two minutes after the appearance of the bright East and West arcades, the East hook-
shaped arcade disappears from the 94 ˚A passband leaving a “pinch”-like gap behind it (Figure 3
In addition, the East hook-shaped arcade doesn’t appear in any other
compare (a) and (d)).
coronal passband. This rapid disappearance is not accompanied by evidence of cooling or heating
of these structures given the short period of time. Also, we don’t expect to have signiﬁcant heating
(i.e. T>10 MK) given the small magnitude of the X-ray ﬂux (C2.0 level). Note that at that
time (18:02), the bulging of the ﬁlament has propagated to the West, above PIL2. We observe
brightening of structures above and across the PIL of the ﬁlament in 94 ˚A and 131 ˚A (Figure 3 (d)
and (e) respectively) together with ﬂows along those bright structures (panel (f)). At the time of
the disappearance of the East hook-shaped loops, the East-West overlying connectivity (that seems
to link the outer ribbon with the leading positive sunspot, therefore, a large-scale connectivity)
intensiﬁes, suggesting very high temperatures (131 ˚A around 10 MK). The dissapearance of a hot
system and the rapid appearance of another hot system suggests the possibility that these loop
systems are interacting through reconnection.

Between 18:02 to 18:18, the ribbons and the 10 MK large-scale East-West loop arcade extend
southward. Overall, the East-West axis of this large-scale arcade appears to follow the shape of
the ﬁlament channel (Figure 3 (a) for the ﬁlament; also compare the red and blue dotted envelopes
in the 10 MK panels (e) and (h)). The middle part of this East-West curvature can be described
as “V”-shaped (convex part pointing Southward), with its North envelope/boundary remaining
largely in place and the South envelope growing southward following the ribbon growth.

Immediately after the disappearance of the 6.4 MK hook-shaped arcade at 18:02 UT, a “V-
cusp” shaped structure appears to match the convex-up part of the “V”-shaped North envelope of
the 131 ˚A East-West loop system (Figure 3 (e) thick red V-shape). Interesting activity accompanies
this cusp: bright loop structures appear suddenly near the convex side of the cusp (i.e. just South of

– 8 –

Fig. 2.— Snapshots during the time of the ﬁlament activation. The activation appears to begin
with rotation/unwinding of bright structures above the N part of the ﬁlament. The brightenings
spread above and along the length of the ﬁlament (shown here over a period of 6 min) with apparent
rising of these bright structures (a running diﬀerence movie of the SOT observations is available in
the online version of the journal.) Bottom panels: (a) The response in the corona is instantaneous,
with hot loops brightening in 94 ˚A passband of AIA (6.4 MK). (b) 6 mins later, as the connectivities
seen in SOT and IRIS extend westward, a hot (6.4 MK) hook-shaped post-ﬂare loop arcade is seen
in the East above the ﬁlament (94 ˚A; orange dots). The propagation of the activation towards the
West is also reﬂected in 94 ˚A (long connectivities above PIL2; below white dots) in addition to the
bright hot arcade in the West (orange dots).

– 9 –

it) coalescing with the cusp. This rapid hot loop coalescence enhances the emission in the overlying
arcade (Figure 3 (e); dark dotted line) and also at the ribbons lower in the atmosphere (Figure 3
(f)). Since this “V”-cusp (and the rapid loop coalescence) is seen only in 131 ˚A it likely corresponds
to ≈ 10 MK plasma. This cusp seems to be stationary at all times, suggesting its collocation with
the also stationary North envelope of the East-West overlying arcade. We dub this “V”-cusp, the
“North cusp”.

At the south envelope, another “V”-cusp seems to form within minutes (18:04 UT) from the
ﬁrst appearance of the North cusp, with its convex part pointing to the same southward orientation.
We dub this the South cusp. The South cusp apparently leads the expansion/growth of the overlying
hot EW loop arcade (Figure 3; compare blue-dotted envelope in panels (e), (h) and (k)), essentially
marking its position as a bright front. The rapid coalescence of bright loops towards the cusps
continues with loops coalescing to the convex side of the North cusp and loops coalescing towards
the concave part of the South cusp (pointed by the yellow arrows in Figure 3 in panels (b), (e),
(h) and (k)). Note that the loop coalescence at the South cusp is much faster than the apparent
southward migration of the South cusp. As the South cusp migrates south, hook-shaped loop
arcades gradually reappear in the East, seemingly anchored to the elongated ribbon and the East
of the inner ribbons. At around 18:18 UT the loop coalescence towards the North cusp ceases and
the cusp fades. The South cusp continues to be active up until 18:40 UT, where it fades as well.
The observations we described up to here are organized in three stages (I, II and III) in Table 1.

By extracting a ﬁxed 100(cid:48)(cid:48)-long linear strip (or “cut”) of pixels in each 131 ˚A and 94 ˚A frame of
the image series by SDO/AIA and by stacking each strip along the time-dimension (i.e. space-time
plot), we can measure the speed of the coalescing bright loops along the dimension of the strip (see
bottom space-time plots in Figure 4). The linear cut intersects both cusps.

As we have already mentioned, the North/South cusps and the coalescing loops are seen in
131 ˚A suggesting temperatures of 10 MK in these structures. However, as it can be seen in panels (b)
and (d) of Figure 3, the cusp structures are faint (especially at later times) but also are seen against
strong background emission, either due to hot and bright structures at lower heights in 131 ˚A but
also due to a cool line component (Fe VIII; 400,000 K) near the 131 ˚A Fe XXIII (10 MK), which
also contributes to the passband. The latter is not an issue in 94 ˚A images as they predominantly
show plasma emission at ∼6.4 MK. However, the 94 ˚A image series is only able to capture traces
of the bright fronts of the cusps, but not the loop coalescence towards the cusps. To improve
the visibility of the imprints the moving features leave in the space-time plots, we also show the
time-derivative (Figure 4 (a) and (c)). A two-panel movie with both the direct 131 ˚A observations
and their running diﬀerence is available in the online version of the journal (“movie3.mp4”.)

Starting with the hot loop rapid pile-up in the W arcade at 17:52-17:58 UT (Figure 3 panels
and space-time plot and Figure 3 panel (b)) their estimated plane-of-the-sky speeds are ∼ 400 km
s−1 (positive speeds are Northward along slit, negative southward), which occur at the time when
the E hook-shaped loop arcade ﬁrst appears in 94 ˚A (17:53 UT; Stage I in Table 1). From the

– 10 –

Fig. 3.— Multipanel ﬁgure organized in wavelengths (columns of 94 ˚A, 131 ˚A and 1400 ˚A) at four
diﬀerent times (rows) summarizing the observations. The small FOV of 1400 ˚A is complemented
by the respective 131 ˚A images. See text for discussion. A movie of this ﬁgure is available in the
online version of the journal (“movie2.mp4”).

– 11 –

Fig. 4.— Upper panels: Top row: IRIS 1400 ˚A with 131 ˚A complementing the non-observed area
by IRIS. Bright ribbon structures extend southwards during and following the ﬁlament activation.
Middle row: AIA 94 ˚A (T ≈ 6.4 MK). Bottom row: AIA 131 ˚A (T ≈ 10 MK). A narrow loop
“bundle” above the ﬁlament brightens and expands southward. “V”-like cusps form, both leading
a “post-ﬂare-loop”-like expansion anchored to the ribbons. Hot loops are seen to coalesce rapidly at
the cusps (only seen in 131 ˚A signifying that they are very hot structures). The position of the image
cut used in the time-distance analysis is shown as a transparency on each image. Bottom panels:
Space-time plots for 94 ˚A and 131 ˚A and their time derivatives (∆t). The fast loop coalescence
towards the cusps (red and blue dotted envelopes) is best seen in 131 ˚A ∆t revealing a “herring
bone” pattern which indicates motions towards N and S direction along the slit. Selected slopes
are annotated with apparent speeds in km s−1. The South cusp migrates towards the south, while
the North cusp remains more stationary. A running diﬀerence movie showing the cusps in 131 ˚A is
available in the online version of the journal (“movie3.mp4”).

– 12 –

way the loops are bent, it seems that the Northward motions are essentially downward motions,
hence the characterization “loop pile-up”. The speeds drop to 300 km s−1 at 18:00 UT. This Stage
I activity ceases with the disappearance of the hook-shaped loops seen in 94 ˚A.

At 18:02 UT (Stage II in Table 1) we have the formation of the North cusp by rapid coalescence
of loops with speeds of ∼250 km s−1. Simultanesously to the coalescence of loops, the hook-shaped
loop arcade seen in 94 ˚Adisappears. Not too late after the formation of the North cusp, the South
cusp appears to move southward with -50 km s−1 for about 4 minutes; a speed suggestive of a slow
quasi-static evolution. After this initial southward expansion, the South cusp moves southward
with ∼ -5 km s−1. Contrary to the initial evolution seen in the North cusp, the initial (ﬁrst 4
minutes) loop coalescence speed in the South cusp is comparable to the latter’s proper motion, i.e.
between 60-75 km s−1. At 18:18 UT, the loop coalescence speed for the North cusp dropped to
150 km s−1, while the South cusp coalescence speed reaches a maximum of -190 km s−1.

Later on, at 18:20 UT (well into Stage III, Table 1), the North cusp loop coalescence stops,
while coalescence continues in the South cusp with -150 km s−1 and with a southward proper motion
for the cusp/front at ∼ -5 km s−1. The speed of loops of ∼ 150 km s−1 is a fraction of the Alfv´en
speed at intermediate heights and magnetic ﬁeld strength in the corona (vA ≈ 1, 000 km s−1).

The occurrence of two slowly moving convex 10 MK cusps is an interesting coronal phenomenon
which requires further investigation. This “V”-shape loop structure (which as we said occurs at
two distinct locations) cannot be maintained in static conditions due to the restoring eﬀect of the
magnetic tension along the loops. However, the magnetic topology may play a role in forging such
magnetic structures close to locations of topological features (e.g. QSLs, HFT, etc).

Indeed, the existence of a topological feature at the observed location of the cusps is suggested
by a Potential Field Source Surface extrapolation (PFSS; Schatten et al. 1969) around the time of
the event (2014-09-30 17:34 UT; Figure 5). For the boundary conditions of the PFSS extrapolation
we updated a synoptic magnetogram map for Carrington rotation 2155 by patching a 10◦×10◦
magnetogram (appropriately mapped to Carrington heliographic coordinates). The PFSS extrap-
olation was performed with 330 orders for the spherical harmonics. As viewed from the south (left
and right panel of Figure 5), the structuring of magnetic ﬁeld lines seems to follow an X-type null-
point topology, suggesting the existence of an HFT oriented North to South along the “X-type”
topology above the ﬁlament.

There is another interesting “needle”-like feature associated with the 131 ˚A cusps (inset image
of Figure 5). This “needle”-like structure is very similar to a non-radial inverse-“Y”-shaped feature
reported in the work of Sun et al. (2012) right after a ﬁlament eruption in a fan-spine topology.
Despite this morphological (or topological?) similarity, there was no CME associated with our
event. The “needle” structure is seen only in 131 ˚A (10 MK plasma emission) suggesting that is
associated with excess plasma heating along the separator/HFT (corresponding to the extrapolated
ﬁeld lines in Figure 5).

Indications for the topological features we seek were found reasonably close to their expected

– 13 –

Table 1. Summary of Observed Failed Eruption.∗

Temperature (λ)

STAGE I (17:52-18:02)

STAGE II (18:02-18:15)

STAGE III (18:15-18:40)

10 MK (131 ˚A)

6.4 MK (94 ˚A)

W hot loop
rapid pile-up
E hook-shaped arcade
appears

80,000 K (1400 ˚A) ﬁlament bulging at N bend/

outer ribbons

hot loop rushing
to N/S-cusp
E hook-shaped arcade
vanishes, “pinch”-like gap
Bulging propagates W/
extended outer ribbons

N-cusp rushing ends
S-cusp extends S
E hook-shaped arcade
reappears extending S
Extended outer/
inner ribbons

∗Times are given in Universal Time (UT)

Fig. 5.— Left: Result of the PFSS extrapolation with boundary conditions appropriately updated
for the area of AR12172 at 2014-09-30 17:34 UT (∼30 mins before VAULT2.0 ﬂight).
In this
view the ﬁeld is visualized in spherical coordinates. Selected Green lines show lines converging
southwards from the East and white lines converging southwards from the west suggesting the
existence of a topological feature recovered in our PFSS extrapolation. Lines that seem to be
converging from the East and West sides of the AR yield an apparent “V”-cusp morphology around
the location of convergence. Right: Extrapolation viewed in Cartesian coordinates from the south;
note the location of the “X-type” conﬁguration. Inset image of 131 ˚A shows the cusp morphology
(dotted lines) and an apparent “needle”-like structure, similar to a non-radial inverse-“Y”-shaped
feature reported by Sun et al. (2012). (The view for both ﬁgures is from the South towards the
North.)

– 14 –

positions, given the assumptions of the PFSS model. However, the PFSS model is by construction
not able to model current-carrying structures in the corona (e.g. a ﬁlament), not to mention that
it is a static model and it does not capture the dynamic evolution. The activity and the dynamics
we observed in this AR involves a ﬁlament, and thus it is necessary to consider its presense when
modeling the coronal magnetic ﬁeld. Non-linear Force-Free Field (NLFFF) extrapolations have been
successful in reproducing ﬁlaments and strong indications for MFR-like structures (e.g. Chintzoglou
et al. 2015; also see review by Wiegelmann & Sakurai 2012). This class of models implements the
full magnetic vector at the photosphere for the lower boundary condition. Vector magnetograms,
while nowadays routinely obtained by the HMI instrument in high spatiotemporal resolution, suﬀer
from instrumental eﬀects (namely high noise levels for the transverse component of the magnetic
ﬁeld increasing with the distance from the center of the solar disk). Indeed, due to the position of
AR12172, which is oﬀ the center of the disk (S12◦W54◦), the noise levels in the vector magnetograms
are high and the ﬁlament cannot be realistically reproduced from the vector boundary conditions
by a NLFFF extrapolation method. Representing the ﬁlament in the model is necessary in order
to investigate its interaction with the magnetic topology of its host AR. An NLFFF model that
can account for the aforementioned limitations is the Magnetic Flux Rope-insertion method (van
Ballegooijen 2004). We discuss this model in the following section.

4. NLFFF Modelling of the event with the MFR-insertion method

The purpose of the NLFFF modeling is to determine whether the observed structures seen
in the chromosphere (ﬁlament) and the corona (brightenings & interaction of an MFR with the
overlying ﬁeld topology) can be explained in terms of stable quasi-static models (as suggested by
the relatively slow evolution of the event). NLFFF extrapolations (e.g. Wiegelmann 2004) and
potential (Schmidt 1964) extrapolations, while capable of capturing the topological structures, are
merely “static” models, incapable to illustrate any evolution of the system.

In order to capture the dynamic interaction in the system we used the ﬂux-rope insertion
method (van Ballegooijen 2004; Savcheva & van Ballegooijen 2009; Su et al. 2009; Savcheva et al.
2012a; Bobra et al. 2008). The 3D magnetic ﬁeld of the solar corona is modeled using line-of-sight
(LoS) magnetograms. An MFR is inserted in a high-resolution potential ﬁeld extrapolation along
the path of the observed ﬁlament in AIA 304 ˚A. The conﬁguration is relaxed to a force-free state
by magnetofrictional relaxation (Yang et al. 1986; van Ballegooijen et al. 2000). Magnetofriction
(MF) assumes that the Lorentz force in the corona acts against an ad-hoc frictional force. MF
consists in evolving the coronal ﬁeld via the ideal induction equation, expressed in terms of the
vector potential:

where A is the vector potential, B = ∇ × A, j = ∇ × B is the current density, and v is the

∂A
∂t

= v × B + ηj +

B
B2 ∇ · (η4B2∇α),

(1)

– 15 –

j×B
magnetofrictional velocity, v = 1
B2 , with ν the coeﬃcient of friction. The coeﬃcient η is the
ν
ordinary diﬀusion. η4 is the 4-th order diﬀusion, called hyperdiﬀusion (van Ballegooijen et al. 2000),
which acts to smooth gradients in the torsion (force-free) parameter,

α =

j · B
B2 ,

(2)

which for a NLFFF is constant along a given ﬁeld line but allowed to vary from ﬁeld line to ﬁeld
line. For a NLFFF, the induction equation is iterated until the MF velocity vanishes as per the
assumption that the conﬁguration is in equilibrium for a stable NLFFF model. For an unstable
model there is a residual Lorentz force and the velocity does not reach zero, meaning that the
MFR continues to evolve with each subsequent iteration of the MF equation. The uniqueness of
the method lies in the ability to produce viable unstable models.

A grid of models with diﬀerent combinations of poloidal and axial ﬂux in the subject MFR
was constructed. The next step would be to match ﬁeld lines from the models to observed coronal
loops in X-rays and EUV, thus ﬁnding the best candidate model. However, in this case we model
an unstable conﬁguration, and have no suitable AIA or XRT loops to use so we use the elongated
brightenings that appear as the ﬁlament material is activated.

Bobra et al. (2008) and Su et al. (2011) found that the MF relaxation has two possible outcomes.
Either the MFR settles into a force-free state, or the ﬁeld expands indeﬁnitely never reaching a
force-free state. This loss of equilibrium occurs when the axial ﬂux is larger than a certain value
(the “stability limit”). This means that the MFR-insertion method is the appropriate model to
use in order to capture the dynamics of a quasi-static evolution inferred from the observations.
Savcheva et al. (2015, 2016) showed the usefulness of using unstable models to represent erupting
conﬁgurations.

For our investigations we produced MFR models of the following characteristics: (a) a stable
MFR, with axial ﬂux of 1 × 1021 Mx and poloidal ﬂux 5 × 109 Mx cm−1, and (b) an unstable MFR,
with axial ﬂux 2 × 1021 Mx and poloidal ﬂux 5 × 1010 Mx cm−1. The stable model took 40,000
iterations to converge, while the unstable model never achieved convergence. Instead, the unstable
model evolves via MF where it inﬂates and interacts with the HFT towards the South (see next
section). For our investigation, we stored several selected snapshots during the MF relaxation of
the stable (snapshot of iteration 40,000) and unstable model (snaphsots of iteration 10,000, 20,000,
30,000, 45,000).

5. Topological Analysis

One way to extract physically relevant information from complex magnetic ﬁeld models is
to analyze their magnetic topology. This is done by grouping ﬁeld lines into separate bundles
which connect disparate regions on the solar surface. These domains are bound by separatrices

– 16 –

or QSLs. Savcheva et al. (2012b) presented the ﬁrst topological analysis of a NLFFF magnetic
ﬁeld constrained by observations, demonstrating that topological analysis is extremely useful for
pinpointing the probable sites of reconnection. Thus, after obtaining the NLFFF for this AR, we
can compute the squashing factor Q that deﬁnes the strength of QSLs (Titov et al. 2002; Titov
2007). The Q value is computed by tracing two closely-spaced ﬁeld lines at one end, and measuring
the distance between their conjugate footpoints, as deﬁned by

Q =





2
(cid:88)

i,j=1

(cid:18) ∂Xi
∂xj



(cid:19)2

 /|Bz,0/Bz,1|,

(3)

where Xi is the coordinate of the conjugate footpoint, and Bz,0 and Bz,1 are the vertical ﬁeld
strength at the two footpoints of a ﬁeld line. This implies the tracing of massive numbers of ﬁeld
lines on a mesh, the resolution of which can be more than an order of magnitude higher than the
original magnetic ﬁeld data. The QSL computations are therefore relying on intensive ﬁeld line
tracing computation.

To address this computationally challenging problem, an eﬃcient line-tracing code is imple-
mented. It is capable of calculating the Q factor for about a million ﬁeld lines per minute within a
typical AR making use of graphics processing units (GPU). This allows us to explore the topology
of regions of interest in two as well as three dimensions with the necessary accuracy (Q reaching
values as high as ∼1010). The method we employ is based on Titov (2007) and Pariat & D´emoulin
(2012). The method is described in detail in Tassev & Savcheva (2017).

The calculation of Q was performed for the entire volume of the selected “snapshot” cubes for
both the stable and the unstable models. In our analysis we visualize these Q-factor 3D cubes in
an “optically thin” fashion to allow for simultaneous plotting of ﬁeld lines from the corresponding
MF magnetic ﬁeld cubes. In all of the cases, the overall 3D topology, arising from the (largely)
quadrupolar photospheric magnetic ﬁeld distribution, comprises two 3D QSL “dome” structures
(QSL1 in the East, QSL2 in the West of the AR) in such close proximity to each other that intersect
in the corona. Their intersection gives birth to an HFT, essentially a volumetric structure in the
shape of an arc with a cross section resembling the letter “X”, where each slant of X (“\” and
“/”) represents the cross section of each QSL around the location of their intersection. Due to the
relative position of the QSLs, their intersection results to an HFT essentially running along the
N-S direction. The height of this HFT structure runs from ≈10 Mm at its North end (i.e. at W
end of PIL1) to 45 Mm (middle/apex) and then dissolves back down to 20 Mm at its South end.

In addition to QSL1, QSL2 and HFT structures, there is a QSL structure associated with the
inserted MFR, which modulates and intersects/merges with the two aforementioned intersecting
QSL domes. This multi-QSL topology makes our analysis a challenging task. The MFR has been
inserted along the North part of PIL1 and PIL2 as delineated by the ﬁlament structure at the north
of the AR core. This PIL is formed by the opposite quiet sun ﬂux elements and the four dominant
polarities of the AR. The MFR is initially contained lower than the maximum height of the two

– 17 –

QSLs. In the unstable models, the MFR inﬂates and so is the MFR-associated QSL. Furthermore,
there are two QSLs around the MFR, an interior one which exists due to the MFR and an exterior
one which exists due to the incompatibility of the expanding arcade around the MFR with respect
to the ambient ﬁeld. The latter MFR-binding QSL expands as MF relaxation proceeds.

6. Discussion

The evolution in the low corona exhibits all the characteristics of a successful eruption, yet there
is no CME. The AR contains two PILs that are hosts to a ﬁlament (seen as an absorption feature in
most wavelengths), which at some point during our observing run brightens along the North bend
of PIL1. Then, these bright structures seem to rise while the cool material remains largely static
low in the atmosphere. In the Ca II rasters, ﬁne, thread-like structures seem to peel-oﬀ above the
ﬁlament, initially at the north bend and progressively along its length towards the West. Some
bright patches show up along these thread-like structures. In coronal/TR wavelengths, the North
bend seems to bulge and this bulging continues to PIL2. This succession of events, together with
the hot (≥ 10 MK) moving structures (cusps) at larger heights, suggest that magnetic reconnection
was driven higher in the corona by these ascending magnetic structures associated with the activity
observed above the ﬁlament channel.

Sheared magnetic arcade-like structures may expand upwards with increased shearing of their
photospheric footpoints (Mikic & Linker 1994). However, there is no indication for signiﬁcant
photospheric shearing motions during the short timescale of our event (≈ 1 h, in total). So, it is
tempting to consider the possibility of an ideal MHD instability of an MFR-like ﬁlament channel
as the driver of the observed activity. In this view, the cool ﬁlament material is suspended on the
convex-up ﬁeld lines of a twisted MFR structure. The MFR structure is primarily axial as the
ﬁlament follows the PIL2 very closely. This is suggestive of a weakly twisted MFR (justifying our
choice of a weakly twisted unstable MFR model). A low amount of twist in the MFR rules out the
possibility for the Kink instability (T¨or¨ok & Kliem 2005) and favors the Torus instability, which
has a lower twist threshold (Kliem & T¨or¨ok 2006).

Evidence for the existence of an HFT in the observations comes from the brightening of loop
tops anchored in the two inner ribbons (Figure 2 (b)). When the inner ribbons are bright, so are the
loops anchored in them, presumably delineating the inner arcade that occupies the volume under
the two intersecting QSLs. Indeed, the dynamics we observe, namely the moving cusps, occur just
above those looptops. In fact, when the South cusp migrates southward, the rapid loop coalescence
and the proper motion of that South cusp follows the apparent height of these loop tops. These
loop tops are seen best in 94 ˚A since they are not obstructed by the overlying hot South cusp (also
see “movie2.mp4”).

This in fact explains the time evolution of the cusps: the ﬁrst cusp shows up when the MFR
begins to inﬂate (lower height) and the second cusp follows when parts of the MFR expand above

– 18 –

the HFT at higher heights. The split of the cusps (Figure 4) is not a real split, but an apparent
one due to LOS projection of these (quasi-)static (i.e. HFT) and dynamic (i.e. MFR) systems.

In Figure 6 we present renderings of the HFT and MFR lines for the stable and unstable
MFR model snapshots. When more axial ﬂux is included to the MFR to make it unstable, the
MFR responds by lifting up, but it does not penetrate through the nearby overlying QSL domes.
There are clear model ﬁeld lines that are bent and curved in the same way as in the observations
of the cusp-shaped loops. The southward motion of the south cusps is captured in panels (b-d) of
Figure 6. However, the model is not able to capture the rapid dynamics and the full evolution of
the event, namely the “cusp splitting”.

There are two possibilities for this. The ﬁrst is the sparsity of the set of snapshot cubes.
Our ﬁrst snapshot cube is at 10,000 iterations which may be too late to capture the ﬁrst set of
cusped loops. Numerical diﬀusion and hyper-diﬀusion may act quickly at the early stages of the
MF relaxation. The second possibility is that we may have not waited long enough for the system
to relax. It is usually best to allow the MF relaxation to advance for several thousand iterations
as there could be many strong discontinuities that can render the modeled ﬁeld unphysical. This
empirical limitation made us to choose 10,000 iterations as our ﬁrst snapshot. Nevertheless, the
model does portray the essence of the MFR interaction with the topological features (HFT).

The way the relaxation of the unstable MFR proceeds as depicted in the snapshots of Figure 6
shows that reconnection occurs at the locations of topologically-induced currents (primarily at
the HFT). This reconnection eﬀectively removes the excess axial or poloidal ﬂux (depending on
which part of the MFR is in contact with the HFT), which initially caused the MFR to expand. By
removing the excess axial or poloidal ﬂux, the MFR weakens and fails to erupt. This is in accordance
with the observations, where the ﬁlament (cool and dense chromospheric material presumably
sitting on the convex-up lines of the MFR structure) does not lift from the PIL throughout the
evolution of the phenomenon. This suggests that the removal of the poloidal or axial ﬂux from the
HFT/QSLs has brought the, now weakened, MFR back into the stable regime for the ideal MHD
Torus instability. In other words, the overlying topology “shreds” the unstable MFR and whatever
is left of it stays into a stable conﬁguration (switching oﬀ the eruption).

In Figure 7 we present a synthesis of all the phenomenology into a cartoon model. We have
shown that due to the quadrupolar conﬁguration of our target AR we have two QSLs (QSL1
and QSL2) and their intersection results into an HFT. The two intersecting QSLs naturally split
the coronal volume into four discrete connectivity domains; a supra-arcade, i.e. the large-scale
connectivity of the two exterior polarities outside the QSLs, one infra-arcade per QSL and a mid-
arcade in the domain below the intersection of the QSLs (Figure 7 (a)). The quadrupolar AR
has two PILs under East-West connectivities that support cool ﬁlament material and we consider
the case of magnetic ﬂux rope-like ﬁlament channel. An ideal MHD instability like the torus
instability would initially cause the top part of ﬁlament channels (Figure 7 (b)) to bulge while the
bottom part remains relatively inert (and so is the cool ﬁlament material). We will now discuss the

– 19 –

Fig. 6.— Overview of the stable and unstable MFR models with selected ﬁeld lines from two
viewpoints (top row panels: Earth view, bottom row: top view). High log10Q-factor values (volu-
metric rendering in 3D) show the two intersecting QSLs (QSL1 and QSL2) creating the hyperbolic
ﬂux tube (HFT) oriented along the N-S. Close to the surface the QSLs roughly correspond to the
locations of the ﬂare ribbons (bottom panels (e-h)). The ﬁrst column (panels (a) and (e)) shows
the stable model after 40,000 iterations where it converged. The rest of the columns show the un-
stable modelled MFR at three snapshots during its evolution (10,000, 20,000, and 30,000 iterations
respectively). The selected ﬁeld lines show MFR ﬁeld lines that exhibit the “cusp” morphology.
Note that as the time proceeds the “cusp” ﬁeldlines move southward as in the observations.

– 20 –

phenomenology described in Stages I, II, and III summarized in Table 1 and explain the underlying
physical mechanisms behind this failed eruption (see Figure 7).

During Stage I, the ﬁlament channel in PIL1 undergoes bulging in its North bend but the
PIL1 section underneath QSL1 next to the HFT does not support favorable ﬁeld line orientation
to interact with the HFT. Interaction is possible with the section of the ﬁlament channel across
PIL2 once it begins to bulge (Figure 7, black ﬁeld line originating in the positive polarity West
of PIL2 and pointing East). The sections of the ﬁlament channel that undergo bulging are right
at the North of the HFT’s northward extent, therefore belonging to the supra-arcade ﬂux domain
(outside of the QSLs; Fig 7 a). The bulging essentially increases the magnetic pressure locally
in the supra-arcade domain above the HFT and forces appropriately oriented MFR ﬁeld lines to
reconnect at the HFT (yellow star, Figure 7 (d)) with lines of the mid-arcade and increase the
ﬂux content in the infra-arcades (outﬂow). This is manifested with infra-arcade structures of hot
plasma emission in the newly added ﬂux content in these domains, i.e. the hook-shaped loop arcade
in Figure 2 (b) and Figure 3 (a). In addition, ribbons demarkate the footpoints of loops associated
with the reconnection event. The rapid loop “pile-up” of 400 km s−1 we observed in 131 ˚A at the
West arcade can be understood to follow the reconnection of MFR ﬁeldlines forced against the HFT
due to the bulging MFR. We summarize the phenomenology of Stage I (Table 1) as supra-arcade
pressure forcing leading to infra-arcade heating.

In Stage II, the bulging of the ﬁlament channel is seen to propagate westward (PIL2; Figure 3
(d-f)) well past the HFT. As the hot West infra-arcade structures suggest, the bulging occurs right
next (or even under) QSL2 (Figure 7 (e)). This bulging exherts force to the West infra-arcade due
to the increased magnetic pressure in this infra-arcade.
In turn, this forces ﬂux from the West
infra-arcade to reconnect with ﬂux in the East infra-arcade at the HFT. This has the eﬀect of
“killing” the 6.4 MK hook-shaped East arcade via reconnection with the West infra-arcade and
transferring ﬂux to the supra-arcade (East-West large-scale connectivity). The disappearance of
the hot infra-arcade in 94 ˚A leaves behind a “pinch”-like gap (Figure 3 (d)) and coincides with
enhanced emission seen in 131 ˚A, as an outﬂow (∼ 250 to 150 km s−1) towards a newly formed
North cusp (white arrow pointing North; Figure 7 (e)). This succession of events suggests that
reconnection between the two hot infra-arcades occurs. We dub this process infra-arcade pressure
forcing, which leads to supra-arcade heating. Note that the North cusp is static (i.e. no proper
motions other than coalescence/outﬂows), which can be understood since it forms right at the
North edge of the infra-arcades (primarily due to the forcing exherted by the bulging MFR above
PIL2).

In Stage III (which basically has an overlap with Stage II in terms of evolution) we consider
the South cusp, which is a dynamic feature evolving quasi-statically (initially moves southwards
with 50 km s−1). Following its wake, emission enhances primarily in 94 ˚A, which in the East arcade
coincides with the reappearance of the hook-shape arcades along the southward direction. We
interpret this observation again as supra-arcade pressure forcing (i.e. forcing of loops to reconnect
from above the HFT) for two reasons. First, the loop coalescence towards the concave part of the

– 21 –

South cusp is only seen in 131 ˚A, which clearly shows the large-scale nature of the connectivity
following the South cusp. Second, the loop coalescence is comprised of loops traversing clearly
20(cid:48)(cid:48) from N to S, a large distance over which the loops are tracked and resolved (Figure 4 (c)). In
addition to these reasons, our MF model for an unstable ﬁlament channel reveals an almost identical
evolution for the South cusp. That is, an expanding (i.e. bulging) top part of the unstable model
MFR creates a supra-arcade “front” at its intersection with the HFT that propagates southward.
At each time, this intersection of MFR supra-arcade lines with the HFT manifests itself as a moving
front − the South cusp.

We therefore conclude that the expanding MFR causes supra-arcade pressure forcing, which
further consumes ﬂux from the expanding MFR through reconnection at the HFT, inﬂow speeds of
-190 to -150 km s−1 and re-heating of the infra-arcades (Figure 7 (f)). Both Stage I and Stage III
are interpretted as supra-arcade pressure forcing for the same reason (expanding top of an MFR
forcing reconnection). The succession of events suggests that Stage III is a natural continuation
of Stage I and, in essence, they are associated with the initial and later stages of MFR expansion
reconnecting at the HFT. A more simpliﬁed diagram focusing on the nature of the cusps is in
Figure 8.

Liu et al. (2014) reported a failed eruption with similarities to our event; namely, a conﬁned
ﬂare, quasi-static cusp structures and ribbon brightenings. The authors used an NLFFF model and
deduced that the event involved two adjacent sheared arcades (one of them containing an MFR)
separated by a “T-type” HFT. They concluded that a ﬂux emergence event triggered the ﬂare, and
the HFT and the MFR dictated the structure and dynamics of the ﬂare loops. They also mention
the existence of a QSL high above the HFT as an attempt to explain the cusp shaped loops. The
loop coalescence reported in Liu et al. (2014) happens at a much slower rate - they mention “a few
tens of km s−1” - much lower than our reported speeds of >150 km s−1. In addition, the conﬁned
ﬂare is quite strong, i.e. an X1.9 ﬂare. The event in their case study is rather energetic compared
to the one in this paper. In their view, the reconnection at the HFT explained the long duration
of the X1.9 ﬂare, while the ﬂare peak happens at the Bald Patch Separatrix Surface (BPSS) below
In our observations the ﬂare is of a rather
the MFR (i.e.
low magnitude, a mere C2.0. Since the MFR never fully lifts from the surface (ﬁlament material
sits stably above the PIL), this means that the activity we observe is predominantly due to the
reconnection of the top parts of the MFR at the HFT and not due to reconnection below the MFR.

the MFR lifts but stays conﬁned).

7. Conclusions

Thanks to the coordinated campaign in support of the VAULT2.0 rocket launch, we were able
to capture the initial stages of a failed eruption with unprecedented temporal, spatial and spectral
coverage. In contrast to the majority of modeling and observational work on the role of magnetic
topology in intiating CMEs, our analysis shows, for the ﬁrst time, how magnetic topology can
suppress ejections already in progress. In a nutshell, a Hyperbolic Flux Tube can shred a rising

– 22 –

Fig. 7.— (a) Schematic showing the simpliﬁed magnetic topology at a vertical cross-section aligned
with the E-W direction. The QSL domes and the HFT extend both outwards and inwards the plane
of the page. The quadrupolar topology divides the corona into four ﬂux connectivity domains: a
“supra-arcade” above the QSLs and two “infra-arcades” under the QSLs separated by a smaller
“mid-arcade”. (b) Simpliﬁed cartoon model of a ﬁlament channel. The cool ﬁlament material sits
on the convex-up lines of a MFR-like structure, the ﬁlament channel. These lines correspond to
the bottom part of the channel. (c) Simpliﬁed 3D graphic representation of the topology shown in
panel (a). The ﬁlament channel lies below the East infra-arcade. (d-f) The three main stages of
the failed eruption.

– 23 –

Fig. 8.— Top row: Simpliﬁed cusp diagrams explaining the phenomenology of the failed eruption.
Bottom row: Simpliﬁed perspective view to illustrate the forcing of ﬁeld lines due to the bulging of
the ﬁlament channel in the infra and supra arcades. Magenta arrows denote inﬂows/forcing of ﬁeld
lines towards the HFT. Dashed black loops denote disappearance after their reconnection. Newly
reconnected ﬁeld lines are shown with red color.

– 24 –

ﬂux rope attempting to pass through it and results in a failed eruption. We summarize the main
points of our analysis as follows:

1. Observed heating along the intersection of the two Quasi-Separatrix Layers, i.e. heating along
the Hyperbolic Flux Tube (seen in 131 ˚A; matches with topology recovered from extrapola-
tion).

2. Observed cooling downﬂows along ﬁlament (seen by VAULT2.0, IRIS, SOT).

3. The ribbon-like simultaneous brightenings at remote locations during the activity suggest the

presence of topological structures (Quasi-Separatrix Layers, Hyperbolic Flux Tube).

4. No CME.

The conclusion of our analysis can be summarized as follows:

1. The expanding magnetic ﬂux rope meets the nearby Quasi-Separatrix Layers & Hyperbolic
Flux Tube, shreds (reconnects) and cool material returns back to the lower atmosphere as
coronal rain.

2. Reconnection during Stage I and Stage III (supra-arcade forcing) essentially transfers ﬂux
from the ﬂux rope and repartitions it to the subdomains under the Quasi-Separatrix Layers
(infra-arcades).

3. Lack of ﬁlament rise means that the ﬂux rope shreds and weakens before its rise phase kicks
in and before subsequent “ﬂare reconnection” could take over and eject the ﬁlament/ﬂux rope
as a CME.

Thus, topology is not only acting to facilitate an eruption as it has been previously reported
in the literature, but it may also lead to the “killing” of an unstable magnetic ﬂux rope, preventing
an eruption to occur. This work presents the beneﬁts of observations in high time-cadence (ﬁrst
observation of eruption initiation in high cadence from SOT Ca II; 3 s) and excellent temperature
coverage from the campaign observations in support of the VAULT2.0 mission.

The authors are grateful to the anonymous referee for the careful review and constructive
comments. The authors wish to thank Drs. V. Titov, B. Kliem, T. T¨or¨ok and the International
Space Science Institute (Bern, Switzerland) for supporting the International Working Team on
Decoding the Pre-Eruptive Magnetic Conﬁguration of Coronal Mass Ejections led by S. Patsourakos
and A. Vourlidas for valuable discussions. G. Chintzoglou also thanks Prof. C.E. Alissandrakis, A.
Nindos, J. Zhang and J. Karpen for inspiring conversation and encouragement. G.C. acknowledges
support by NASA contract NNG04EA00C (SDO/AIA). G.C. was also supported by the NASA

– 25 –

Earth and Space Science Fellowship Program - Grant NNX12AL73H. G.C. thanks NASA and
the Wallops Space Flight Center for their approval to participate as a graduate student at the
VAULT2.0 launch operations. The VAULT2.0 project and launch operations (A.V., G.C., S.T.B.)
were supported by NASA NNG12WF67I. The participation of A.V in this work was partially funded
by the NASA LWS program through ROSES NNH13ZDA001N. A.S. and S.T. acknowledge partial
support by NASA contract NNM07AB07C to SAO, support by the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc
Research under award FA9550-15-1-0030 to UCAR and subaward to SAO Z15-12504 AFGL and
NASA HSR grant to SAO NNX16AH87G. The work of G.S. was supported by NASA contract S-
13631-Y to NRL. Hinode is a Japanese mission developed, launched, and operated by ISAS/JAXA
in partnership with NAOJ, NASA, and STFC (UK). Additional operational support is provided by
European Space Agency (ESA), NSC (Norway). IRIS is a NASA small explorer mission developed
and operated by LMSAL with mission operations executed at NASA Ames Research center and
major contributions to downlink communications funded by ESA and the NSC. HMI and AIA are
instruments on board SDO, a mission for NASA’s Living with a Star program.

REFERENCES

Antiochos, S. K., DeVore, C. R., & Klimchuk, J. A. 1999, ApJ, 510, 485

Aulanier, G., DeLuca, E. E., Antiochos, S. K., McMullen, R. A., & Golub, L. 2000, ApJ, 540, 1126

Bobra, M. G., van Ballegooijen, A. A., & DeLuca, E. E. 2008, ApJ, 672, 1209

Brueckner, G. E., Howard, R. A., Koomen, M. J., et al. 1995, Sol. Phys., 162, 357

Chintzoglou, G., Patsourakos, S., & Vourlidas, A. 2015, ApJ, 809, 34

De Pontieu, B., Title, A. M., Lemen, J. R., et al. 2014, Sol. Phys., 289, 2733

Domingo, V., Fleck, B., & Poland, A. I. 1995, Sol. Phys., 162, 1

Dungey, J. W. 1953, MNRAS, 113, 679

Jiang, C., Feng, X., Wu, S. T., & Hu, Q. 2013, ApJ, 771, L30

Kliem, B., & T¨or¨ok, T. 2006, Physical Review Letters, 96, 255002

Lemen, J. R., Title, A. M., Akin, D. J., et al. 2011, Sol. Phys., 115

Liu, R., Titov, V. S., Gou, T., et al. 2014, ApJ, 790, 8

Longcope, D. W. 2005, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 2

Lugaz, N., Downs, C., Shibata, K., et al. 2011, ApJ, 738, 127

Mikic, Z., & Linker, J. A. 1994, ApJ, 430, 898

– 26 –

Pariat, E., & D´emoulin, P. 2012, A&A, 541, A78

Pesnell, W. D., Thompson, B. J., & Chamberlin, P. C. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 3

Priest, E. R., & D´emoulin, P. 1995, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 23443

Savcheva, A., Pariat, E., McKillop, S., et al. 2015, ApJ, 810, 96

Savcheva, A., Pariat, E., McKillop, S., et al. 2016, ApJ, 817, 43

Savcheva, A., Pariat, E., van Ballegooijen, A., Aulanier, G., & DeLuca, E. 2012a, ApJ, 750, 15

Savcheva, A., & van Ballegooijen, A. 2009, ApJ, 703, 1766

Savcheva, A. S., Green, L. M., van Ballegooijen, A. A., & DeLuca, E. E. 2012b, ApJ, 759, 105

Schatten, K. H., Wilcox, J. M., & Ness, N. F. 1969, Sol. Phys., 6, 442

Scherrer, P. H., Schou, J., Bush, R. I., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 207

Schmidt, H. U. 1964, NASA Special Publication, 50, 107

Shimizu, T. 2011, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 273, IAU Symposium, ed. D. Prasad Choudhary &

K. G. Strassmeier, 157–163

Su, Y., Surges, V., van Ballegooijen, A., DeLuca, E., & Golub, L. 2011, ApJ, 734, 53

Su, Y., van Ballegooijen, A., Schmieder, B., et al. 2009, ApJ, 704, 341

Sun, X., Hoeksema, J. T., Liu, Y., et al. 2013, ApJ, 778, 139

Sun, X., Hoeksema, J. T., Liu, Y., Chen, Q., & Hayashi, K. 2012, ApJ, 757, 149

Tassev, S., & Savcheva, A. 2017, ApJ, 840, 89

Titov, V. S. 2007, ApJ, 660, 863

Titov, V. S., Galsgaard, K., & Neukirch, T. 2003, ApJ, 582, 1172

Titov, V. S., Hornig, G., & D´emoulin, P. 2002, Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics),

107, 1164

T¨or¨ok, T., & Kliem, B. 2005, ApJ, 630, L97

Tsuneta, S., Ichimoto, K., Katsukawa, Y., et al. 2008, Solar Physics, 249, 167

van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2004, ApJ, 612, 519

van Ballegooijen, A. A., Priest, E. R., & Mackay, D. H. 2000, ApJ, 539, 983

– 27 –

Vourlidas, A., Beltran, S. T., Chintzoglou, G., et al. 2016, Journal of Astronomical Instrumentation,

5, 1640003

Wiegelmann, T. 2004, Sol. Phys., 219, 87

Wiegelmann, T., & Sakurai, T. 2012, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 9, 5

Yang, W. H., Sturrock, P. A., & Antiochos, S. K. 1986, ApJ, 309, 383

This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.2.

