Multiband NFC for High-Throughput Wireless Computer Vision Sensor 
Network 
Fei Y. Li, Jason Y. Du 

09212020027@fudan.edu.cn 

Vision sensors lie in the heart of computer vision. In many computer vision applications, such 

as  AR/VR  [1],  non-contacting  near-field  communication  (NFC)  with  high  throughput  is 

required to transfer information to algorithms. In this work, we proposed a novel NFC system 

which utilizes multiple frequency bands to achieve high throughput.       

1.  Computer Vision and Sensors 

With  emerging  machine  learning  algorithms  [1-5],  computer  vision  tasks  such  as  face 

recognition,  object  detection  and  simultaneous  localization  and  mapping  (SLAM)  are  now 

using more and more machine learning methods. In order to achieve good results, large amount 

of data is required to feed into algorithm. This not only requires energy-efficient computation 

[6-7], but energy-efficient data transfer is also necessary.   

Point-to-point file exchange among smart devices has attracted people’s attention today. The 

smart devices support high-definition photo/video capture (some smart phones even support 4K 

definition photo/video capture), and many people are actually using smart devices to replace 

camera. As 4K photos and videos have large file size (>10 MB per photo and >300 MB for 

video per minute), the most convenient way to share those photos with friends is by high-speed 

point-to-point  link.  In  addition  to  file  transfer,  many  computer  vision  application  categories 

such as embedded systems and military applications also desire to have vision sensors coupled 

to  computation  unit  wirelessly.  Therefore,  the  connection/coupling  between  sensor  and 

processor can be more flexible and more reliable. The distance between sensor and processor 

does not necessarily to be long, and near-field communication is a good match for this case (Fig. 

1). 

Vision	
Sensor	

NFC	

Processor	

Fig. 1 Processor and vision sensor coupled by NFC 

However, data rate of NFC is usually low. Currently several standards and products have been 

proposed for high-speed point-to-point communication. Bluetooth 4.0 has one HS mode, which 

uses ad-hoc point-to-point WiFi link to transfer data. The highest data rate can reach 25 Mbps. 

WiFi Alliance also proposed similar WiFI Direct technology, which supports data rate as high 

as 250 Mbps. However, the protocols of Bluetooth and WiFi both require a long time (can be 

as long as >10 seconds) to establish link (searching and pairing), and the user experience is not 

very smooth. In addition the bandwidth of WiFi and Bluetooth is not scalable due to spectrum 

regulation,  and  the  data  rate  upgrade  of  Bluetooth/WiFi  is  much  slower  than  the  growth  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
computer vision requirements 

2.  Multiband RF Interconnect for NFC 

High-speed NFC has the potential to solve above issues. Per FCC regulation, NFC must work 

in several pre-defined license-free industry, science and medic (ISM) bands, such as 900 MHz, 

2.4 GHz, 5.8 GHz, etc [8]. Each frequency band only has limited bandwidth, so the conventional 

NFC which only uses one frequency band has limited data rate. On the other hand, NFC limits 

communication range to <3 cm, and therefore output power of TX can be low enough to pass 

spectrum  regulation.  This  means  that  NFC  can  use  broader  bandwidth  for  data  transfer.  In 

addition,  high  speed  NFC  can  use  a  simple  protocol  for  link.  By  selecting  frequency  band 

properly, we can make sure there is no interference from other communications. There is only 

one TX-RX pair within communication range, and protocol can be simplified. This means the 

link establishment can be very quick, and user experience for data sharing will be very smooth. 

The diagram using high-speed NFC is shown in Fig. 2. A designed coupler is placed between 

sensor and processor, and the other part of device is shielded to reduce RF power leakage. 

Fig. 2 Processor and vision sensor interface with coupler/shielding. 

On the other hand, multiband RF signaling can be used to enhance data rate. By divide data 

stream into multiple sub-streams and each up-converted to one ISM band, multiple data streams 

can be transferred simultaneously. The multiple RF signals can be combined by power combiner 

[9]. 

Output	
RF	signal	

RF	signal	1	

(data	stream1)	

RF	signal	2	

(data	stream2)	

Fig. 3 Multi-band NFC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  All-Digital Transmitter (ADTX) with FPGA 

An all-digital transmitter design methodology has been proposed by Li et al. in [10]. In [10], 

transmitter  is  implemented  by  synthesis,  therefore  greatly  reduces  the  turnaround  time  of 

transmitter design. It is an ideal solution to our prototyping of high-speed NFC. 

We used the same transmitter architecture as in [10], using SDM and XOR mixing to convert 

analog signal into high-speed RF signal. The transmitter architecture is shown in Fig. 4. 

mixer buffer	chain

PA

ADTX	chip

I-path	
data

Σ-Δ

n-bit

1-bit	
pulses

fLO,I

fLO,Q

Q-path	
data

n-bit

Σ-Δ

1-bit	
pulses

Fig. 4 ADTX architecture 

Further, we used FPGA to fast implement ADTX circuit. Also, due to flexible reconfiguration 

of FPGA, we can repeatedly iterate our design until design goal is met. 

4.  Implementation Results 

We  implemented  our  high-speed  NFC  system,  including  one  coupler  and  one  FPGA-based 

ADTX. The coupler is shown in Fig. 5, and its coupling loss is around 10-20 dB for near-field 

(Fig. 6). 

Fig. 5. Coupler design. 

 
 
 
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 Simulation results of coupling loss 

The output spectrum of NFC system is captured by spectrum analyzer, as shown in Fig. 7. We 

used 250MHz and 400 MHz as carrier bands, and two peaks appear in spectrum analyzer. 

Fig. 7 Spectrum of TX output 

The demodulated waveform is shown in Fig. 8. QAM-16 is used for modulation, and it can be 

demodulated successfully. The data rate per band is 16 Mbps, and total data rate is 32 Mbps. 

The data rate is limited by carrier frequency, and carrier frequency is limited by speed of FPGA. 

With ASIC implementation, we expect carrier frequency as high as 6 GHz [10], as total data 

 
 
 
 
 
rate of greater than 300 Mbps can be achieved, which can meet the requirement of computer 

vision. 

Fig. 8 Demodulated QAM-16 data at 450 MHz. 

Conclusion 

In  this  work,  we  proposed  a  high-speed  NFC  system  for  computer  vision  applications.  This 

system includes coupler and ADTX to achieve high speed data transfer, while achieves faster 

prototyping  for  non-contact  data  transfer.  The  data  rate  can  be  further  boosted  with  ASIC 

implementation. 

References 

[1] B. Kang et al., "Hand Segmentation for Hand-Object Interaction from Depth map", arXiv 

preprint arXiv:1603.02345, 2016. 

[2]  P.  Ballester  and  R.  Araujo,  "On  the  performance  of  GoogLeNet  and  AlexNet  applied  to 

sketches", in Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. AAAI 

Press, 2016. 

[3]  Hongxiang  Li  et  al.,  "A  convolutional  neural  network  cascade  for  face  detection",  in 

Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015. 

[4]  C.  Szegedy,  et  al.,  "Going  deeper  with  convolutions",  in  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE 

Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015. 

[5]  T.  N.  Sainath  et  al.,  "Deep  convolutional  neural  networks  for  large-scale  speech  tasks", 

Neural Networks, pp.39-48, 2015. 

 
 
 
 
[6]  Y.-H.  Chen  et  al.,  "Eyeriss:  An  energy-efficient  reconfigurable  accelerator  for  deep 

convolutional neural networks", IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits vol. 52, no. 1, 2017. 

[7] C.-P. Lu, "AI, Native Supercomputing and The Revival of Moore's Law", arXiv preprint 

arXiv:1705.05983, 2017.   

[8]  Emission  Mask/Analog  Capability  Requirements  on  Public  Safety  Channels  [Online]. 

Available: https://www.fcc.gov 

[9] D. M. Pozar, "Microwave Engineering", third edition, 2005. 

[10] Y. Li et al., "A Novel Fully Synthesizable All-Digital RF Transmitter for IoT Applications", 

IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 2017. 

 
