Tittle:  

A comment on the paper “Prediction of Kidney Function from Biopsy Images 
using Convolutional Neural Networks” 

Authors:  

Washington LC dos-Santos1, Angelo A Duarte2, Luiz AR de Freitas1 

1 Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Instituto Gonçalo Moniz, Salvador, BA, Brazil. 

2 Universidade Federal de Estadual de Feira de Santana, Laboratório de 
Computação de Alto Desempenho, Feira de Santana, BA, Brazil. 

Category: 

LG - Machine Learning (stat.ML); Quantitative Methods (q-bio.QM) 

Letter 

Dear Sir/Madam, 

The paper “Prediction of Kidney Function from Biopsy Images using 
Convolutional Neural Networks” by Ledbetter et al. (2017)(Ledbetter et al., 2017) 
deals with the interesting subject of automatized estimate of kidney function from 
histological images. The authors report that using Convolutional Neural Network 
(CNN) associated with some image processing techniques of renal biopsies the 12 
mo glomerular filtration rate can be predicted with a mean absolute error of 
17.55 ml/min. Notwithstanding the importance of the work and the huge effort 
made for preparing the dataset and for configuring and training the CNN, there 
are some points that require attention and a prompt revision of the published 
article and the of the presented data. The figures 2, 5 and 6 from the Ledbetter et 
al. (2017) paper represent skin sections and not kidney samples. The skin 
sections in figure 2, 5 and 6 show an intradermal nevus and the structure 
showed in detail is, in fact a dilated hair follicle containing a keratin plug. 
Misusing skin instead of kidney sections for training or validating the system may 
compromise the accuracy of the proposed estimate. Histological sections of 
normal skin (a and b) and normal kidney (c and d), with glomerulus in detail (d) 
are shown in the figure accompanying this letter for effect of comparison. 
Moreover, information on the amount of renal cortical tissue required for the 
estimates of glomerular filtration rate is missing. Renal biopsies containing at 
least 8 glomeruli are usually accepted as adequate renal cortex representation for 
most diagnosis in Nephropathology (Corwin et al., 1988; Fogo, 2003). Finally, we 
neither found the number of images used in the training dataset nor the amount 
of images used to validation dataset. According to the article, it seems that 
images from 60 patients were used to create the training dataset, however, it is 
not clear how many images were generated from these patients’ biopsies. 

References: 

 
 
Corwin, H.L., Schwartz, M.M., Lewis, E.J., 1988, The importance of sample size 
in the interpretation of the renal biopsy. Am J Nephrol 8, 85-89. 

Fogo, A.B., 2003, Approach to renal biopsy. Am J Kidney Dis 42, 826-836. 
Ledbetter, D., Ho, L., Lemley, K.V., 2017, Prediction of Kidney Function from 

Biopsy Images Using Convolutional Neural Networks. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1702.01816. 

 
 
