Characterization of Carbon-Contaminated B4C-Coated Optics  

after Chemically Selective Cleaning with Low-Pressure RF Plasma  

H. Moreno Fernándeza*, D. Roglerb, G. Sauthierc,  
M. Thomassetd, R. Dietschb, V. Carlinoe, E. Pellegrina* 

aCELLS-ALBA, Carrer de la Llum 2-26, E-08290 Cerdanyola del Valles, Spain 
bAXO DRESDEN GmbH, D-01237 Dresden, Germany 
cICN2, UAB Campus, E-08193 Bellaterra, Spain 
dSOLEIL Synchrotron, L’Orme des Merisiers, F-91192 Gif-sur-Yvette, France 
eibss Group Inc., Burlingame, CA 94010, USA 

ABSTRACT   

Boron carbide (B4C) is one of the few materials that is expected to be mostly resilient with respect 

to the extremely high brilliance of the photon beam generated by free electron lasers (FELs) and is 

thus of considerable interest for optical applications in this field. However, as in the case of many 

other optics operated at modern  light source facilities, B4C-coated optics are subject to ubiquitous 

carbon  contaminations.  These  contaminations  represent  a  serious  issue  for  the  operation  of  high 

performance  FEL  beamlines  due  to  severe  reduction  of  photon  flux,  beam  coherence,  creation  of 

destructive  interference,  and  scattering  losses.  A  variety  of  B4C  cleaning  technologies  were 

developed  at  different  laboratories  with  varying  success.  We  present  a  study  regarding  the  low-

pressure  RF  plasma  cleaning  of  carbon  contaminated  B4C  test  samples  via  inductively  coupled 

O2/Ar,  H2/Ar,  and  pure  O2  RF  plasma  produced  following  previous  studies  using  the  same  IBSS 

GV10x downstream plasma source. Results regarding the  chemistry,  morphology as well as other 

aspects of the B4C optical coating before and after the plasma cleaning are reported. We conclude 

from these comparative plasma processes that pure O2 feedstock plasma only exhibits the required 

chemical selectivity for maintaining the integrity of the B4C optical coating. 

Keywords: Boron carbide optical coatings, carbon contamination, beamline optics, low-pressure 

RF plasma cleaning, free electron lasers, synchrotron radiation 

*Corresponding author. Tel.: +34 93 592 4418. E-mail: epellegrin@cells.es (Eric Pellegrin) 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION  

Boron carbide (B4C) as an engineering  material  has a  long track record of applications  in  various 

fields  of  applications  [1],  although  some  of  its  polytypism  is  still  not  under  full  control,  which  is 

obviously  due  to  the  chemical  similarity  between  its  B  and  C  atomic  constituents.  Nevertheless, 

optical  engineering  is  presently  increasing  the  usage  of  B4C  as  an  optical  coating  material  for  a 

large range of optical application  [2],  including  beamline optics  in accelerator-based  light sources 

such as synchrotron as well as free electron laser (FEL) facilities together with materials of similar 

hardness  such  as,  e.g.,  SiC,  cubic  BN  etc.  where  B4C  is  preferably  used  in  the  soft  x-ray  photon 

energy range (0.5 to 2.5 keV photon energy) while SiC is employed in the hard x-ray range (2 to 20 

keV).  This  usage  includes  single  coatings  as  well  as  multilayer  mirror  coatings  based  on,  e.g., 

SiC/B4C multilayers. 

While the cleaning of carbon contaminations of beamline optics based on metallic reflective coating 

has  become  a  widespread  activity  [3–5](still  occasionally  suffering  from  heavy  setbacks  due  to  a 

lack of control and understanding of the basic cleaning process parameters), more complex optical 

surfaces and coatings such as, e.g., amorphous carbon, diamond-like carbon (DLC), silicon carbide 

(SiC),  and  boron  carbide  (B4C)  are  now  at the  center of  interest  due  to their  unique  capability  of 

withstanding the high brilliance of the pulsed photon beam emitted from FEL light sources, which – 

at the  same  time  –  leads  to  higher  carbon  contamination  rates on  the optical  surfaces  within  FEL 

beamline optics.  

On  the  other  hand,  the  extreme  requirements  imposed  by  FEL  applications  on  the  quality  of 

beamline optical components and their preservation (especially when  it comes to coherence-based 

experiments) imperatively call for the development of in-situ cleaning processes that warrant for the 

safe, efficient, and well-understood cleaning of FEL optical components with carbon-based optical 

coatings (e.g., such as the above B4C, SiC etc.). Obviously, as carbon is present in both the coating 

as well as the surface contamination the cleaning technique to be used should necessarily include an 

inherent chemical selectivity for distinguishing these two different carbon species from each other 

in order to prevent any harm from the optical coating. To our present knowledge, several attempts 

have  been  performed  so  far  regarding  a  cleaning  of  B4C-coated  optics  using  oxygen-  as  well  as 

ozone-based in-situ and ex-situ techniques, but all of them so far did lead to a degraded B4C coating 

and were thus not deemed acceptable. 

In  this  paper,  we  describe  an  experimental  approach  based  on  the  low-pressure  RF  downstream 

plasma  cleaning  of  various  B4C-coated  test  objects,  which  includes  a  variation  of  the  plasma 

chemistry (and thus its chemical activity) by a variation of the plasma feedstock gases. Although the 

employed  experimental  procedure  is  similar  to  the  one  described  in  previous  studies  [6,7],  the 

present  results  turn  out to  be  completely  different  from  those  based  on  the  cleaning  of  noble  and 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
non-noble metallic reflective optical coatings. In more detail, the results obtained give evidence for 

a satisfactory cleaning performance only for pure O2 plasma, while an O2/Ar feedstock gas mixture 

results  into an efficient carbon cleaning as well,  but combined  with significant degradation of the 

B4C layer. The latter effect is even more pronounced in the case of Ar/H2 feedstock gas mixtures, 

leading to a substantial reduction of the B4C layer thickness. We tentatively attribute these findings 

to a detrimental effect from the  kinetic contribution from the plasma  induced  by  especially the Ar 

species within the plasma. Thus, avoiding plasma species with elevated  masses (such as, e.g., Ar) 

reduces the kinetic contribution within the plasma cleaning process, thus emphasizing the chemical 

contribution  to the  cleaning  process  while  at  the  same  time  reducing  its  detrimental  effect  on  the 

optical coating. In addition, we did find evidence for the plasma-induced surface conversion process 

of the B2O3 phase  inherent to the B4C bulk  layer into surface  boron oxy-carbides, resulting  into a 

significant reduction of cleaning rates. 

2.1 Coating processes 

B4C coating 

2.  EXPERIMENT 

Amorphous  B4C-layers  with  a  nominal  thickness  of  30±5  nm  were  fabricated  by  AXO  Dresden 
GmbH on standard Si(100) wafers (10  x 10  mm2 size) and optically polished single-crystalline Si 

substrates  (<0.2  nm  rms  micro-roughness).  All  substrates  were  provided  with  a  2  nm  (nominal 

thickness)  Cr  buffer  layer  between  the  Si  substrate  and  the  B4C  coating.  The  B4C  layer  was 

deposited using a Dual Ion Beam Sputtering (DIBS) device from Roth & Rau AG (IONSYS1600).  

For the synthesis of the investigated B4C-layers a sputter ion energy of 1000 eV was applied, which 

yields a B4C deposition rate of 0.2 Å/s. 

Amorphous carbon contamination coating 

For the deposition of amorphous carbon  (a-C) layers – i.e., for simulating a photon-beam  induced 

carbon contamination - onto the above B4C test samples a commercial e-beam deposition chamber 

has  been  used,  that  allows  for  a  deposition  of  about  180  nm  of  carbon  within  about  200  seconds 

deposition  time.  Typical  examples  regarding  the  results  from  that  amorphous  carbon  coating 

process in the specific case of the present B4C test samples can be seen in Figs. 1 and 2. 

2.2 Si wafer and mirror test objects & systematic approach  

Analytical techniques 

The following techniques were used for investigating the B4C-coated test samples: SEM, EDX, 

XPS, XRR, XPS, and interference microscopy. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Si test wafers 

Si(100)  wafer  pieces,  coated  with  an  amorphous  B4C  layer  (see  Fig.  1)  were  used  in  order  to 

characterize changes in the B4C surface chemistry as induced by the plasma treatment using x-ray 

photoemission spectroscopy (XPS). In addition, an energy-dispersive  x-ray analysis (EDX) and/or 

scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  analysis  was  performed  on  these  Si  test  wafers  in  order  to 

obtain  information  on  the  bulk  versus  surface  chemical  stoichiometry  as  well  as  changes  in  the 

surface  morphology  of  the  B4C  coatings.  A  partial/central  amorphous  carbon  coating  spot  was 

applied  in  order  to  investigate  the  influence  of  the  direct  exposure  of  the  plasma  onto  the  B4C 

coating (i.e., with or without the amorphous carbon top coating). 

Fig. 1: Si(100) test wafers (10x10 mm2 size) provided with a B4C coating stripe (ocher color – see left hand 

side panel) plus a central amorphous carbon contamination spot (dark grey color – see right hand side panel) 

on top of the B4C layer. 

Optical Test mirrors 

The  second  type  of  test objects  consists  of  single-crystalline  Si  substrates  with  one  inch  diameter 

and an optical polishing with a surface micro-roughness of less than 0.2 nm rms. As in the case of 

the above Si(100) test wafers, the same B4C coating  has  been applied (see Fig.  2). Also, a partial 

amorphous  carbon  coating  has  been  applied  in  order  to  investigate  the  influence  of  the  direct 

exposure of the plasma onto the B4C coating. The surface micro-roughness measurements on these 

test mirrors were performed using a standard ZYGO interference microscope setup.  

Fig. 2: Optically polished Si test mirrors with one inch diameter. The mirror on the left hand side shows a 

pristine B4C coating, while the mirror on the right hand side exhibits one half of its surface (i.e., the darker 

part) coated with an additional amorphous carbon layer with 70 nm thickness. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As  in  the  previous  studies  [7,8]  a  standard  quartz  crystal  microbalance  (QCM)  including  gold-

coated and a-C contaminated quartz crystals was used to determine the carbon removal rate during 

the plasma process  for optimizing the plasma operation parameters towards the required  optimum 

carbon cleaning rates. 

2.3 Cleaning test setup 

The  test  chamber  setup  for  the  plasma  cleaning  consists  of  a  custom  UHV  chamber  with  a  base 
pressure of 3x10-7 mbar (unbaked), pumped by a combination of a turbo pump and a scroll pump in 

order to cover a wide range of gas pressures while actively pumping the system for cleaning studies 

utilizing  a  dynamic  gas  supply  regime  for  the  cleaning  process.  The  complete  cleaning  chamber 

setup including the plasma source and plasma diagnostics are described in detail in a previous study 

[8]. 

2.4 GV10x inductively coupled RF plasma source 

A commercial RF gun (model GV10x Downstream Asher,  made by ibss Group, Inc., Burlingame, 

CA 940101, USA) has been used, based on the inductive coupling of the RF  into the plasma tube 

inside the plasma source. This  “downstream asher” RF plasma source runs a plasma  in  a separate 

volume  upstream  the  chamber  with  the  objects  to  be  cleaned.  This  allows  for  an  operation  of  the 

plasma chamber at higher pressures (plasma operation regime) with the cleaning chamber at lower 

pressures (i.e., larger reactant mean free path length) and, at the same time, reduces the detrimental 

kinetic  effects  from  the  plasma  species  in  the  downstream  (or  afterglow)  plasma.  In  addition,  the 

pressure  gradient  results  in  a  gas  jet  of  chemically  active  species  between  the  two  chambers 

volumes,  thus  facilitating  the  distribution  of  these  active  species  across  the  downstream  cleaning 

chamber volume. 

The plasma parameters used  for the different cleaning runs are given  in Table I. Typical cleaning 

times  required  for  an  O2/Ar  or  pure  O2  plasma  were  in  the  range  of  2.5  hours,  whereas  the 

corresponding cleaning times for an Ar/H2 plasma were in the range of 12.5 hours, starting from a-

C  coatings  with  the  same  thickness.  This  significant  difference  in  terms  of  carbon  cleaning  rate 

between oxygen- and hydrogen-based downstream plasma by a factor of up to roughly seven could 

already be observed in previous studies [7,8].  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working 

Gas Mixture 

Pressure 

[mbar] 

O2/Ar 

0.005 

H2/Ar 

0.002 

Feedstock 

RF Power 

Optical Emission 

Emission Line 

Gas Ratio 

[W] 

Lines from Radicals 

Ratio 

Ar 10% 

O2 90% 

H2 65% 

Ar 35% 

100 

100 

100 

Ar I 750.4 nm 

H I (H*) 656.3 nm 

O* 95% 

Ar 5% 

Ar 93% 

H* 7% 

O I (O*) 777.2 nm 

-- 

O2 

0.006 

O2 100% 

Table I: Plasma parameters used for the different cleaning runs 

2.5 B4C bulk thin film and surface characterization 

The  B4C  test  samples  were  analyzed  by  X-Ray  Reflectometry  (XRR)  using  Cu  Kα  radiation 

(EPh=8.04132  eV  photon  energy)  before  and  after  amorphous  carbon  coating  plus  subsequent  RF 

plasma cleaning  in order to detect changes  in the B4C  layer thickness and  in the roughness of the 

B4C/air  interface.  Simulations  of  the  XRR  results  were  perform  using  the  IMD  program  [9]. 

Changes  regarding  the  B4C  sample  surface  chemistry  were  analyzed  by  XPS  using  a  SPECS 

Phoibos 150 electron energy analyzer in conjunction with a monochromatized Al Kα x-ray source. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 O2/Ar plasma cleaning 

3.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

In Fig. S1 (see Supplementary Information  file),  we show B4C-coated Si test wafers after the a-C 

deposition (180 nm thickness) as well after the subsequent cleaning with an O2/Ar plasma. As can 

be seen from the visual appearance of the plasma-processed test wafer, a residue from the a-C spot 

can still be observed, that could not be fully removed without a visual degradation of the blank B4C 

coating. This is in stark contrast to previous findings on metallic optical coatings where a complete 

cleaning of the metal surface could be performed (i.e., without any visual residues) [8] and indicates 

the  formation  of  a  chemically  stable  that  is  more  persistent  the  oxidative  cleaning  by  the  O2/Ar 

plasma. 

X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) analysis from B4C-coated Si test wafer 

Fig. 3: High-resolution C1s and B1s XPS spectra of the B4C-coated test wafer before (black solid lines) and 

after O2/Ar RF plasma cleaning (red solid lines). Left panel: XPS data taken on the amorphous carbon 

contamination spot. Right panel: XPS data taken off the amorphous carbon contamination spot on the bare 

B4C coating. 

Fig.  3  shows  the  XPS  high  resolution  spectra  from  the  Si  test  wafers  in  Fig.  S1,  with  the 

measurements  being  performed  off  as  well  as  on  the  a-C  spot  before  and  after  the  O2/Ar  plasma 

cleaning.  We  first  consider  the  “on  spot”  spectra  before/after  the  plasma  cleaning.  Here,  one  can 

clearly distinguish the absence and the appearance of the B1s XPS line before and after the plasma 

processing, respectively, together with a significant reduction of the C1s core level line. 

The cleaning efficiency becomes clear from the increase (reduction) of the B1s (C1s) lines for the 

“on spot” via the cleaning process, as well as from the overall similarity of the B1s and C1s lines 

between the “on spot” and “off  spot” locations after cleaning. Taking a closer  look at the spectra, 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one can assign the different constituents of the XPS lines as shown in Table II. These assignments 

are in good agreement with the previous XPS study by Jacobsohn et al. and Jacques et al. [10,11]. 

XPS line 

C1s 

B1s 

O1s 

B.E. [eV] 

282.58  284.94 

286.6 

288.58 

188.12 

189.49 

191.40  193.3 

533.0 

Assignment 

C in 

B4C 

C-C 

C-O 

(e.g., 

in 

BOC) 

B-B and 

C=O 

B-C in 

B4C 

B in 

B in 

B in 

O in 

BC2O 

BCO2 

B2O3 

B2O3 

Table II: XPS core level line assignments (“BOC” refers to boron oxy-carbides) 

According  to  the  XPS  line  assignments  given  in  Table  II,  one  can  interpret  the  high  resolution 

spectra in such a way that the O2/Ar plasma surface treatment leads to: 

 

A substantial reduction of the C-C C1s peak (“on spot” and “off spot”) as well as the 

C-O and the C=O peaks (“off spot”), that are all related to adventitious or purposeful surface 

artifacts. 

 

The appearance of the B-B and B-C B1s line and the associated B-C peak in the C1s 

spectra (“off spot” and “on spot”) being due to B and C in bulk B4C, respectively.  

 

A  weak  B1s  peak  at  191.4  eV  B.E.  due  to  the  occurrence  of  boron  oxy-carbide 

(BOC).   

On  the  other  hand,  we  observe  for  the  post-treatment  spectra  that  the  spectral  fingerprint  of 

especially the C1s XPS lines invariably exhibits the three peaks associated with B4C, C-C, and C=O 

(with some  minor  shoulder at 286.6 eV due to C-O). This  indicates the  existence of a chemically 

stable layer at the B4C surface that is either resilient with respect to the plasma surface interaction 

and/or is a direct result from the latter. Similar results will be apparent from other plasma treatments 

with different feedstock gas combinations as will be shown in the next sections.  

Using the same samples and systematics as used for the high resolution XPS spectra in Fig. 3, Fig. 

S4 shows the XPS survey spectra for the “on spot” and “off spot” sample locations before and after 

O2/Ar  plasma  processing.  Taking  a  look  at  the  “off  spot”  survey  spectra,  one  can  distinguish  an 

increase  of  the  B1s/C1s  line  ratio  together  with  the  removal  of  adventitious  N  by  the  plasma 

treatment.  Last  but  not  least,  the  post-treatment  “on  spot”  and  “off  spot”  survey  spectra  display 

roughly  the  same  intensities  for  the  B1s,  C1s,  and  O1s  lines.  A  quantitative  analysis  of  the  B4C-

related B1s and C1s XPS lines shown in Fig. S8 gives a B/C atomic ratio of 4.19, which is close to 

the expected stoichiometry of 4. Summarizing, this gives evidence for an efficient cleaning of the a-

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C spot, without a significant oxidation of the B4C layer that would be evident from an increase of 

the O1s line. 

Regarding the foreign materials other than those to be expected from B4C, we note the occurrence 

of Au4f, N1s, and Fe2p lines. As the Au4f lines are present in the “off spot” survey spectrum, we 

attribute  its  occurrence  due  to  an  Au  contamination  during  the  B4C  deposition  process,  while  the 

N1s  line  is due to adventitious contaminations  from exposure to the atmosphere being completely 

removed  by the plasma process. In  contrast to this, the Fe2p  line  -  also being present  in the  “off 

spot”  spectrum  of  the  pristine  material  –  is  enhanced  by  the  plasma  process,  thus  raising  the 

possibility of sputtering processes due to the heavy Ar species within the O2/Ar plasma. 

X-Ray Reflectometry (XRR) analysis 

In order to probe the effect of the O2/Ar plasma treatment onto the integrity of the B4C coating and 

the roughness of the B4C/air interface, we have performed XRR measurements on both the Si wafer 

test  coupons  and  the  B4C-coated  test  mirrors.  The  results  from  both  types  of  test  specimen  are 

depicted in Figs. 4 and 5 and the parameters resulting from the IMD simulations of the experimental 

XRR data are given  in Table III. All the XRR data simulation shown  here  include the Cr binding 

layer with about 2.2 nm thickness between the B4C coating and the Si substrate.   

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Fig. 4: XRR data from (a) pristine B4C-coated Si test wafer right after B4C deposition, (b) after 7 months of 

storage in air, and (c) after O2/Ar plasma cleaning  (red solid lines: experimental XRR data; black solid lines: 

IMD simulation) 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5: XRR data from B4C-coated test mirror right after O2/Ar plasma cleaning. Left hand side: Non a-C 

coated part; right hand side: Formerly a-C coated part (red solid lines: experimental XRR data; black solid 

lines: IMD simulation) 

Si wafer test sample 

After B4C deposition 

After 7 months in air 

After O2/Ar plasma 

cleaning 

Mirror test sample 

After B4C deposition 

After 7 months in air 

After O2/Ar plasma 

cleaning – 

non a-C coated part 

After O2/Ar plasma 

cleaning – 

a-C coated part 

B4C coating thickness 

B4C/air interface rms 

[nm] 

29.9 

31.0 

29.3 

roughness [nm] 

~ 0.4 

~ 0.5 

~ 0.6 

B4C coating thickness 

B4C/air interface rms 

B4C rms surface 

roughness [nm] 

roughness [nm] (*) 

[nm] 

26.0 

26.9 

25.1 

0.5-0.6 

~ 0.5 

~ 0.6 

25.9 

~ 0.7 

0.11 

0.09 

0.12 

0.17 

Table III: Results from the IMD simulations of the XRR measurements as shown in Figs. 4 and 5. 

(*) Surface roughness values from interference microscopy. 

When comparing the XRR results from the pristine Si test wafer (i.e., measured right after the B4C 

deposition) with those from the Si wafer stored in air for 7 months, there is an apparent increase in 

B4C layer thickness (i.e., 31.0 nm as compared to 29.9 nm). This is ascribed to the oxidation of the 

B4C  surface  due  to the  exposure  to  atmospheric  air,  leading  to the  formation  of  BC2O  and  BCO2 

together  with  the  adsorption  of  adventitious  carbon  from  atmospheric  gases.  Due  to  the  limited 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chemical selectivity/sensitivity of the XRR analysis, we are left with the resulting apparent increase 

of the B4C layer by roughly 1.1 nm. 

On the upside, the O2/Ar plasma treatment of such a B4C layer after such an extended exposure to 

atmospheric  air  results  in  the  removal  of  the  physisorbed  surface  contaminations  together  with  a 

reduction of the B4C layer thickness by 0.6 nm (i.e., 29.3 nm as compared to originally 29.9 nm). 

On the downside, the plasma treatment incurs an increase in rms surface roughness from 0.4 nm to 

0.6 nm (see the upper part of Table III). 

The XRR analysis from the B4C-coated mirror in the lower part of Table III basically conveys the 

same message: A reduction of the B4C layer thickness between 0.9 and 0.1 nm (for the formerly C-

coated  and  non  C-coated  part,  respectively)  together  with  an  increase  of  rms  surface  roughness 

between 0.1 and 0.2 nm. 

The  obvious  differences  in  terms  of  absolute  surface  roughness  numbers  between  the  results 

obtained  from  XRR  and  interference  microscopy  can  be  understood  by  the  different  level  of 

sensitivity of these two techniques depending on the frequency range of the one-dimensional power 

spectral  density  function  (PSD).  The  same  argument  applies  when  comparing,  e.g.,  results  from 

interference  microscopy  and  AFM.  Nevertheless,  although  being  different  in  absolute  size,  both 

techniques should in principle observe the same trends. 

Fig. 6: Comparison of XRR total reflection data at low grazing angles for a pristine B4C-coated test mirror 

(black line) and after a-C coating plus subsequent O2/Ar plasma cleaning (green line: formerly a-C coated 

area; red line: non a-C coated area). 

Additional information on the changes regarding especially the optical performance of the mirrors 

at Cu Kα wavelength for correspondingly larger penetration depths (i.e., as compared to XPS)  can 

be obtained by evaluating the total reflection part of the XRR data at low grazing incidence angles. 

In that respect, Fig. 6 gives evidence for an incomplete carbon cleaning of the mirror surface due to 

the deviation of the spectrum formerly a-C coated mirror surface (green line) at about 0.25 degree 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grazing incidence as compared to the spectra for the pristine and non a-C coated samples (black and 

red  lines,  respectively).  Also,  the  further  discrepancies  around  0.3  degree  grazing  incidence 

corroborate  the  changes  in  B4C  layer  thickness  mentioned  above.  The  results  from  the  surface 

roughness  measurements  via  interference  microscopy  give  –  although  being  quantitatively  lower 

than the XRR data – the same increase in terms of surface roughness by the plasma treatment (see 

Table III). Especially the deviations of the reflectivity edge of the formerly a-C coated material as 

compared  to  the  pristine  reflectivity  are  far  from  acceptable  in  terms  of  the  expected  optical 

performance.   

SEM results 

The B4C surface morphology of the Si test wafers in the SEM images shown in Fig. 7 give a visual 

account for the increase in rms surface roughness: Starting from the pristine test wafer in Fig. 7(a), 

one  can  distinguish  small  bright  spots  of  about  10  nm  diameter  that  are  distributed  across  the 

surface in an irregular manner. Similar “hillocks” – but of micrometric size - have been observed in 

other studies [12] where they were attributed to crystalline B4C intergrowths in a B-doped pyrolytic 

carbon matrix formed during the post-growth heat treatment of B4C thin films as grown by CVD. 

After a-C contamination and subsequent O2/Ar plasma treatment of the Si test wafer, there is a clear 

increase regarding the density of these hillocks  in the SEM image  in the non a-C coated part (see 

Fig. 7(c)) that obviously  leads to an  increase of the surface roughness observed  in the XRR data. 

Regarding  Fig.  7(b),  the  residual  carbon  interface  layer  (see  Fig.  S1)  apparently  leads  to  lower 

density of these hillocks as compared to the formerly non a-C coated counterpart in Fig. 7(c). We 

attribute these hillocks to the formation of boron oxy-carbides that are actually more prominent in 

the case of B4C coatings treated with an Ar/H2 plasma that will be discussed in a later section.      

(a) 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

(c) 

Fig. 7: SEM images of B4C-coated test wafers taken at 20 kV electron acceleration voltage with a 250 000-

fold magnification: (a) Pristine B4C-coated test wafer, (b) O2/Ar-plasma cleaned – formerly a-C coated part, 

and (c) O2/Ar-plasma cleaned – non a-C coated part 

Summarizing  the  results  from  the  O2/Ar  plasma  cleaning  of  B4C-coated  optical  surfaces,  this 

approach  gives  somewhat  fair  results  in  terms  of  preservation  of  the  B4C  layer  thickness  and 

morphology,  but  the  carbon  cleaning  appears  to  be  somewhat  poor  as  evidenced  by  the  total 

refection  XRR  data  as  well  as  by  the  persistent  non  B4C-related  contribution  in  the  C1s  XPS 

spectra. This calls for an improvement of the present approach regarding the cleaning procedure. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2 H2/Ar plasma cleaning 

In this section, we  follow the same approach as  in the previous part, but this time using an H2/Ar 

feedstock  gas  plasma  that  has  been  successfully  used  for  the  cleaning  of  optical  surfaces  coated 

with  non-noble  metals  such  as,  e.g.,  Rh  or  Ni  that  are  inherently  incompatible  with  an  oxidizing 

plasma as the latter would result in an oxidation of the optical coatings (thus merely replacing the 

carbon contamination with an oxide contamination). 

In Fig. S2, we show the a-C coated Si wafer and mirror test items before (left hand side) and after 

(right  hand  side)  the  H2/Ar  plasma  cleaning.  According  to the  visual  impression,  the  a-C  residue 

appears to be less than in the case of the O2/Ar-plasma cleaned test objects (see Fig. S1). However, 

especially  in  the  case  of  the  test  mirror the  non  a-C  coated  part  appears to  have  lost  some  of  the 

ocher color from the original B4C coating.  

X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) analysis 

The high resolution XPS spectra in Fig. 8 yield the same results as their O2/Ar analogues in Fig. 3: 

An almost complete removal of the a-C contamination, including a persistent three peak structure in 

the  C1s  XPS  range.  However,  we  note that  in  this  specific  case  a  significant  increase  of  the  B1s 

peak at 191.6 eV B.E. occurs that we relate to boron oxy-carbides.  

Fig. 8: High-resolution C1s and B1s XPS spectra of the B4C-coated test wafer before (black solid lines) and 

after H2/Ar RF plasma cleaning (red solid lines). Left panel: XPS data taken on the amorphous carbon 

contamination spot. Right panel: XPS data taken off the amorphous carbon contamination spot on the bare 

B4C coating. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The XPS survey scans in Fig. S5 before/after H2/Ar plasma cleaning basically give the same results 

as  in the case of the analogue spectra for the O2/Ar plasma treatment  in Fig. S1 and also  yield an 

efficient a-C removal from the sample surface. This resilience of the O1s line is surprising in a way 

as  one  would  expect  a  decrease  of  the  oxygen  surface  species  due  to  the  chemically  reducing 

character of the H2/Ar plasma. However, a separate XPS depth profiling analysis (see Fig. S7) did 

reveal  that  the  amorphous  B4C  layer  contains  a  significant  amount  of  oxygen,  most  probably  as 

BC2O,  BCO2,  and  B2O3  so  that  the  simultaneously  occurring  removal  of  B4C  surface  layers  (see 

below)  leads to a persistent presence of oxygen species on the sample  surface.  As with the O2/Ar 

plasma appeared the Fe2p line, we attribute the latter to the plasma process, most probably due to 

sputtering phenomena related with heavy Ar species within the H2/Ar plasma. 

X-Ray Reflectometry (XRR) analysis 

The  significant  drawbacks  from  the  H2/Ar  plasma  cleaning  become  apparent  from  the  XRR 

measurements presented in Fig. 9. As is already obvious from the data, there is an almost complete 

loss  of  Kiessig  fringes  throughout the  complete  angular  range,  which  applies  to  both the  non  a-C 

coated  and  the  formerly  a-C  coated  part.  Taking  a  closer  look  at  the  results  from  the  IMD 

simulations  in  Table  IV,  one  can  conclude  that  there  has  been  a  substantial  reduction  of  the  B4C 

layer thickness between about 8 and 4 nm for the non a-C coated and the formerly a-C coated part, 

respectively,  together  with  a  large  increase  of  the  B4C/air  interface  roughness  beyond  3  nm  rms. 

These latter large numbers are probably partly due to some sample non-uniformities that may well 

contribute to the surface roughness. Nevertheless, the contribution from surface roughness itself is 

still substantial.  

Fig. 9: XRR data from B4C-coated test mirror right after H2/Ar plasma cleaning. Left hand side: Non a-C 

coated part; right hand side: Formerly a-C coated part (red solid lines: experimental XRR data; black solid 

lines: IMD simulation) 

The surface micro-roughness data from interference microscopy (see Table IV) give a quantitatively 

more realistic picture, but still indicating a significant increase by the plasma treatment. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mirror test sample 

B4C coating 

thickness [nm] 

After B4C deposition 

After H2/Ar plasma cleaning – 

non a-C coated part 

After H2/Ar plasma cleaning – 

a-C coated part 

26.0 

18.2 

21.7 

B4C/air interface 

B4C rms surface 

rms roughness 

roughness [nm] 

[nm] 

~ 0.5-0.6 

~ 3.4 

~ 3.5 

(*) 

0.12 

0.15 

0.17 

Table IV: Results from the IMD simulations of the XRR measurements as shown in Fig. 11.  

(*) Surface roughness values from interference microscopy. 

The total reflection data shown in Fig. 10 again indicate the structural changes for the B4C layer at 

angles  beyond 0.26 degree, while  from the chemical perspective the deviation  in the XRR data at 

about  0.25  degree  indicate  a  satisfactory  cleaning,  which  does  not  come  as  a  surprise  taking  into 

account  the  loss  of  B4C  layer  thickness  mentioned  above.  Nevertheless,  the  clearly  observable 

changes in the reflectivity edge for the plasma treated samples as compared to the pristine samples 

(i.e., distinct changes of the edges slope plus the occurrence of additional steps at about 0.18 degree 

grazing angle) indicate a severe and presumably unacceptable change of the optical performance of 

the  B4C  coating  due  to,  e.g.,  a  chemical  residue  from  the  plasma  cleaning,  a  change  of  the  B4C 

density, and/or B4C surface roughness.   

Fig. 10: Comparison of XRR total reflection data at low grazing angles for a pristine B4C-coated test mirror 

(black line) and after a-C coating plus subsequent H2/Ar plasma cleaning (green line: formerly a-C coated 

area; red line: non a-C coated area). 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEM results 

The SEM results from a H2/Ar -cleaned B4C-coated test coupon are depicted in Fig. 11. Comparing 

these results with their analogues from the O2/Ar plasma cleaning in Fig. 7, the images taken in the 

formerly a-C coated part appear to be very similar (i.e., visually indicating a carbonaceous residue 

on  the  samples  surface),  whereas  the  non  a-C  coated  part  of  the  H2/Ar-cleaned  B4C-coated  test 

coupon exhibits  fewer, but more distinct/larger hillocks that we attribute to the boron oxycarbides 

that appears more strongly in the B1s XPS line in Fig. 8 (“off spot” after cleaning). It is obviously 

somewhat surprising that these hillocks can still be observed after a reducing H2/Ar plasma process, 

but our XPS depth profile analysis shows that the B4C bulk material within the layers include quite 

some boron oxide phase that emerges to the surface during the sputtering by the Ar species within 

the  plasma.  Thus,  we  presume  that  there  is  a  plasma-induced  formation  of  boron  oxy-carbide 

hillocks  that  are  created  by  the  interaction  of  the  plasma  with  the  B2O3  phases  and  B4C  phases 

emerging at the sample surface. 

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 11: SEM images of B4C-coated test wafers taken at 20 kV electron acceleration voltage with a 250000-

fold magnification after cleaning with H2/Ar plasma: (a) Formerly a-C coated part, and (b) non a-C coated 

part 

Summarizing  the  results  from  the  H2/Ar  plasma  cleaning  of  B4C-coated  optical  surfaces,  this 

approach gives contrary results as compared to those from the O2/Ar plasma cleaning described  in 

the  previous  section:  Fair  results  in  terms  of  carbon  cleaning,  but  very  bad  results  regarding  the 

preservation  of  the  B4C  layer  thickness  and  morphology  as  evidenced  by  the  total  refection  XRR 

data. This also calls for an improvement of the present approach. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
3.3 Pure O2 plasma cleaning 

In  this  section,  we  describe  the  results  from  the  low-pressure  RF  plasma  cleaning  using  pure  O2 

feedstock gas, as the previous sections based on either O2/Ar or H2/Arplasma cleaning did not really 

provide overall satisfactory results. In Fig. S3, we show a B4C-coated Si test mirror during various 

stages  of  the  experimental  process.  As  can  be  seen  from  these  photographs,  the  fully  processed 

mirror  compares  visually  quite  well  to  the  pristine  mirror,  which  gives  a  first  positive  indication 

regarding the completeness of the cleaning process as the preservation of the B4C coating. 

X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) analysis 

In Fig. 12, we show the high resolution C1s and  B1s XPS spectra taken off as well as on the a-C 

spot before and after the pure O2 plasma cleaning. As can be observed from the C1s spectra, there is 

a strong reduction of the C1s lines related to C=O, C-O, and C-C species for both the “off spot” and 

the  “on  spot”  spectra  due to the  plasma  cleaning  process,  whereas  the  B1s  line  to  188.3  eV  B.E. 

related to B4C shows up after the plasma treatment. In the case of the B1s spectra, the  “off spot” 

spectra  exhibit  a  shift  of  the  B1s  line  to  lower  B.E.  (plus  a  decrease  of  the  line  width)  and  the 

appearance  of  a  small  additional  peak  at  about  192.2  eV, that  we  attribute  to oxidized  boron  and 

boron oxy-carbides, respectively.    

Fig. 12: High-resolution C1s and B1s XPS spectra of the B4C-coated test wafer before (black solid lines) and 

after pure O2 RF plasma cleaning (red solid lines). Left panel: XPS data taken on the amorphous carbon 

contamination spot. Right panel: XPS data taken off the amorphous carbon contamination spot on the bare 

B4C coating. 

Fig. S6 shows the XPS survey spectra from B4C-coated Si test wafers with the XPS measurements 

being  performed  off  as  well  as  on  the  a-C  spot  before  and  after  the  pure  O2  plasma  cleaning.  As 

observed  in the previous  sections, the  “on spot” spectra give evidence  for an efficient removal of 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the previously deposited a-C layer based on the significant reduction of the C1s line together with 

the  appearance  of  the  B1s  line  from  the  B4C  layer.  The  same  applies  to  the  “off  spot”  spectra, 

although with an obviously  less spectacular reduction of the C1s line (as we are dealing with “off 

spot” spectra). 

Regarding foreign elements, we again note the occurrence of a small amount of Au4f lines that have 

been identified as intrinsic to the B4C coating as they are already present in the “off spot” spectrum 

of the sample before plasma treatment. It can also be noted that there is no Fe2p line visible in the 

survey spectra of the plasma-processed samples. This is in contrast to the previous section and can 

be attributed to the fact that there has been no Ar gas added to the pure O2 feedstock gas mixture, 

which would otherwise lead to the aforementioned sputtering phenomena resulting in the deposition 

of a small amount of Fe. 

X-Ray Reflectometry (XRR) analysis 

Fig. 13: XRR data from B4C-coated test mirror after cleaning with pure O2 plasma cleaning. (red solid lines: 

experimental XRR data; black solid lines: IMD simulation) 

The  measured  XRR  data  in  Fig.  13  together  with  the  results  from  the  IMD  simulations  given  in 

Table V fully corroborate the results from the visual impression by the photographs in Fig. S3. As 

can  be  seen  from  the  measured  data,  the  Kiessig  fringes  throughout  the  full  angular  range  are 

maintained and the parameters resulting from the pertinent IMD simulations yield a slight reduction 

of  the  B4C  coating  thickness  (i.e.,  25.5  nm  as  compared  to  26.0  nm)  together  with  an  unaltered 

B4C/air interface roughness of 0.5 nm rms.  

On  the  other  hand,  the  micro-roughness  data  from  interference  microscopy  show  a  substantial 

increase  from 0.1o to 0.26 nm rms, which  is  at variance  with the results  from XRR.  We attribute 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these  contrasting  trends  to  the  technical  differences  between  these  two  surface  characterization 

techniques that will be discussed in the context of the SEM images.  

Mirror test sample 

After B4C deposition 

After 7 months in air 

After pure O2 plasma cleaning – 

a-C coated part 

B4C coating 

thickness [nm] 

26.0 

27.0 

25.5 

B4C/air interface 

B4C rms surface 

rms roughness 

roughness [nm] 

[nm] 

~ 0.5-0.6 

~ 0.6 

~ 0.5 

(*) 

0.10 

-- 

0.26 

Table V: Results from the IMD simulations of the XRR measurements as shown in Fig. 16. 

(*) Surface roughness values from interference microscopy. 

The XRR total reflection data from a B4C-coated test mirror in Fig. 14 give further support for a full 

recovery  of  the  B4C  surface  at  negligible  losses  regarding  the  integrity  of  the  B4C  layer.  The 

spectrum for the a-C coated (i.e., non plasma-cleaned) mirror surface shows the expected chemical 

and structural deviations in the range from 0.2 to 0.26 degree and beyond 0.26 degree, respectively, 

due  to  the  additional  a-C  top  layer.  On  the  other  hand,  the  spectrum  of  the  subsequently  plasma 

cleaned sample nicely overlaps with the spectrum from the pristine untreated mirror in terms of the 

shape and slope of the reflectivity edge, beside a small shift regarding the edge position to slightly 

higher angular values. This leads to the conclusion for a full chemical and structural recovery of the 

test mirror from the perspective of Cu Kα wavelengths and also applies to the optical performance 

of  the  fully  processed  mirror.  Nevertheless,  taking  into  account  nowadays  B4C  optical  coating 

manufacturing technologies a rms roughness figure of 0.26 nm appears acceptable.   

Fig. 14: Comparison of XRR total reflection data for a pristine B4C-coated test mirror (black line), after a-C 

coating (red line), and after subsequent cleaning with pure O2 plasma (green line). 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEM results 

In  Fig.  15,  we  show  the  SEM  images  of  a  fully  processed  B4C-coated  test  coupon  that  has  been 

cleaned with pure O2 plasma. What can be immediately concluded from the images is that whereas 

the appearance of the non a-C coated part in Fig. 15(b) is similar to that of the B4C reference sample 

in Fig. 7(a) as well as the corresponding images from the other plasma processed samples in Figs. 

7(c) and 11(b). In stark contrast to this, the image from the formerly a-C coated part in Fig. 15(a) 

exhibits a large density of small structures with diameters between 15 and 20 nm. As according the 

XPS results given in Fig. 12 the surface chemistry of the formerly a-C coated part is very similar to 

the ones from the O2/Ar and H2/Ar plasma treatment (see Figs. 3 and 8, respectively), we conclude 

that  the  surface  modification  in  Fig.  15(a)  is  of  a  pure  morphological  nature,  without  apparently 

alternating  the  surface  chemical  characteristics  that  are  basically  given  by  the  aforementioned 

plasma-induced conversion of the B4C and B2O3 bulk phases into boron oxy-carbides.   

As  mentioned  above,  the  B4C/air  interface  roughness  as  measured  with  XRR  remains  unchanged 

(see  Table  V),  whereas  the  interference  microscopy  gives  an  increase  from  0.10  to  0.26  nm  rms. 

Taking into account the rather enhanced density of hillocks in Fig. 15(a) - that almost equals a full 

surface  coverage  -  together  with  the  fact  that  XRR  is  measured  at  grazing  incidence,  it  seems 

plausible that  interference  microscopy  (close to normal  incidence)  gives the  more reliable surface 

roughness information, consistent with the SEM results.   

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 15: SEM images of B4C-coated test wafers taken at 20 kV electron acceleration voltage with a 250000-

fold magnification after cleaning with pure O2 plasma: (a) Formerly a-C coated part, and (b) non a-C coated 

part 

Summarizing  the  results  from  the  pure  O2  downstream  plasma  cleaning,  we  conclude  that  this 

approach is so far the only promising pathway that leads to an efficient cleaning together with the 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
desirable preservation of the B4C surface morphology and chemistry, together with a conservation 

of the B4C  bulk  layer thickness. This also applies to the expected optical performance of the B4C 

coating as derived from the total reflection data. Nevertheless, the applied plasma cleaning time still 

has to be carefully taken into account in view of avoiding an over-cleaning of the surface coating.  

3.4 Considerations on a-C plasma cleaning mechanisms and cleaning speed  

In  Table  VI,  we  give  a  brief  summary  of  the  experimentally  derived  a-C  cleaning  rates  that  have 

been  determined  in  the  present  study  on  a-C  contaminated  B4C-coated  test  objects  (extrapolated 

values) and on Au-coated QCM crystals that have been achieved in a previous study [6,7]. 

As has been observed previously, there is a large difference by roughly a factor of 7 between the a-

C  cleaning  rates  that  can  be  achieved  using  either  O2/Ar  or  H2/Ar  feedstock  gases  on  metallic 

substrates.  One  the  other  hand,  it  is  clear  from  these  numbers  that  while  going  from  Au  to  B4C 

coatings, the cleaning rates for the O2 and O2/Ar-based plasma are strongly reduced (roughly by a 

factor of 2 to 2.5), whereas the cleaning rates for the H2/Ar-based plasma is basically maintained. 

Plasma type  

and cleaning 

mechanism 

Pure O2  

(chemical cleaning) 

O2/Ar  

B4C coated test 

coupons  

(this study; 

extrapolated) 

Au-coated QCM 

crystal 

 (previous study*) 

3.5 Å/min. 

8.4 Å/min. 

(mostly chemical 

4.6 Å/min. 

11.6 Å/min. 

cleaning) 

H2/Ar  

(mostly kinetic cleaning) 

2.3 Å/min. 

1.7 Å/min. 

Table VI: Experimentally derived a-C cleaning rates for different types of plasma feedstock gases for either 

B4C-coated test coupons and Au-coated QCM crystals. All values were measured using 100 W plasma RF 

power at a plasma vacuum pressure of 0.005 mbar (* = data taken from Ref. [6,7]) 

We basically attribute these changes in a-C cleaning rates for the different substrate coatings – i.e., 

more specifically the reduction of cleaning rates for the O2-gas based plasma when going from Au 

to B4C coatings – to two different phenomena: 

 

The  plasma-induced  formation  of  a  chemically  resilient  carbonaceous  layer  on  the 

sample surface. This is corroborated by the observation of an ubiquitous non-removable and 

optically  visible  residue  at  the  location  of  the  formation  a-C  contamination  as  well  as  the 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
resilience  and,  at the  same  time,  the  close  similarity  of  the  XPS  spectra  after the  cleaning 

process.  

 

The  fundamentally  different  processes  that  lead  to  the  removal  of  the  a-C 

contamination as a function of the chemical composition of the plasma feedstock gas. In the 

oxygen-rich/argon-poor  O2  and  O2/Ar  plasma,  we  assign  most  of  the  cleaning  to  the 

chemical activity of the oxygen species within the plasma. On the other hand, in the case of 

the  argon-rich  H2/Ar  plasma,  a  significant  (or  may  be  even  dominant)  part  of  the  a-C 

removal  is  done  via  the  kinetic  effect  from  the  Ar  species  in  the  plasma  as  well  as  UV 

photochemical contributions from an Ar metastable state. 

The  above  two  phenomena  apparently  result  in  the  reduction  of  carbon  cleaning  rates  due  to  the 

chemical resilience of the carbonaceous BOC layer, especially in the case of the chemical cleaning 

using  the  oxygen-based  plasma.  In  contrast  to  this,  the  cleaning  speed  by  the  argon-rich  H2/Ar 

plasma is maintained as the kinetic cleaning is kept up also in the case of the carbon-contaminated 

B4C-coated optics, which is corroborated by our findings regarding the reduction of the B4C layer 

thickness  due  to  the  H2/Ar  plasma  as  discussed  in  section  3.2.  The  latter  does  obviously  not 
necessarily exclude the reductive effect of the H• radicals that could be observed for the cleaning a-

C contaminated metal foils, where a reduction of Ni2O3 and Rh2O3 to metallic Ni and Rh could be 

observed.  

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK 

In this paper, we report on different approaches regarding the chemically selective low pressure RF 

downstream  plasma  cleaning  of  B4C-coated  and  amorphous  carbon-contaminated  optics  by  the 

variation  of  the  plasma  feedstock  gas  and  thus  the  inherent  plasma  chemistry.  We  thereby  also 

report on the  first successful plasma cleaning  of such optics,  i.e., without incurring damage of the 

B4C optical coating and its surface resulting into a fully maintained optical performance. 

In  more  detail,  we  have  performed  an  extensive  test  series  on  various  test  objects  using  O2/Ar, 

H2/Ar  and  pure  O2  gas  mixtures  as  plasma  feedstock  gases  in  order  to  determine  the  optimum 

plasma  chemistry  for  the  cleaning  of  B4C  optical  surface  coatings.  The  analysis  of  these  B4C 

coatings  and  surfaces  as  a  function  of  the  a-C  contamination  and  cleaning  process  has  been 

performed  using  XPS,  XRR,  SEM,  and  interference  microscopy  in  order  to  track  changes  in  the 

B4C bulk as well as surface. 

Based on our analysis, we conclude that the O2/Ar plasma cleaning yields fair results in terms of the 

preservation  of  the  B4C  layer,  while  the  removal  of  amorphous  carbon  contaminations  can  be 

considered as poor. On the other hand, the H2/Ar plasma treatment leads to a significant damage of 

the B4C coating – both regarding the layer thickness and surface roughness – while the removal of 

amorphous carbon contaminations seems to be fairly satisfactory. However,  it has to be taken into 

account that the latter is apparently an obvious consequence from the former. Last but not least, the 

plasma cleaning using pure O2 feedstock gas yields excellent results regarding both the a-C cleaning 

as well as the preservation of the B4C layer. 

From  the  above  observations,  we  conclude  that  the  Ar  species  within  the  plasma  –  especially  in 

conjunction  with  the  reduced  a-C  cleaning  rates  and  thus  enhanced  cleaning  times  of  an  H2/Ar 

plasma – result into sputtering phenomena on the B4C layers that lead to the observed reduction in 

layer thickness and enhanced surface roughness. Thus, a pure O2 feedstock gas plasma (i.e., without 

admixture  of  heavy  Ar  gas  atoms)  offers  a  damage-free  and  fast  cleaning,  based  on  the  chemical 

activity  of  the  O  species.  First  measurements  using  plasma  mass  spectroscopy  indicate  that  the 

predominant oxygen species within an O2/Ar feedstock gas plasma consist of O2

+ species. 

Almost  independent  from  the  plasma  used,  we  have  observed  the  formation  of  a  fair  amount  of 

boron oxy-carbides  on  the  B4C  surfaces  that  presumably  appear  as  hillocks  on  these  surfaces  and 

thus contribute to the surface micro-roughness. This especially applies to the H2/Ar plasma-cleaned 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
test samples. The formation of this chemically rather resilient carbonaceous layer could be observed 

both  visually  as  well  as  based  on  XPS  data  and  appears  to  contribute  to  the  required  extended 

cleaning  times  as  compared  to,  e.g.,  the  cleaning  of  metallic  optical  coatings.  Everything 

considered,  we  conjecture  that  the  formation  of  this  surface  boron  oxy-carbide  layer  is  the  result 

from the surface interaction of the plasma with the B2O3 and B4C phases inherent to the bulk of the 

B4C coating, resulting into the formation of the said surface boron oxy-carbides.  

The  apparent  sensitivity  of  the  B4C  layers  with  respect  to  a  plasma-induced  damage  (i.e.,  as 

compared to apparently less sensitive metallic optical coatings) emphasizes the importance of an in 

situ  monitoring  of  the  cleaning  process  in  view  of  avoiding  a  cleaning  process  beyond  the  time 

required  for  the  removal  of  the  carbon  contaminations.  To  this  end,  an  optical  in  situ  end  point 

detection  scheme  is  presently  under  development  that  allows  monitoring  the  progress  of  the 

cleaning process in order to stop the treatment once a clean optical surface has been achieved. 

Acknowledgements 

We  acknowledge  initial  motivation  and  support of  the  B4C  plasma  cleaning  project  by  R.  Barrett 

(ESRF), the support by technical staff of the CELLS Synchrotron Light Source facility, especially 

the expert assistance by L. Ginés and D. Calderon (CELLS). The skillful technical assistance by M. 

Rosado (ICN2) for the SEM and EDX analysis is also gratefully acknowledged. 

Funding 

The  research  by  HMF  is  supported  by  funding  from  the  “Generalitat  de  Catalunya,  Departament 

d’Empresa i Coneixement” within the “Doctorats Industrials” program (dossier no. 2014 DI 037).     

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

[1] 

V. Domnich, S. Reynaud, R.A. Haber, M. Chhowalla, Boron carbide: Structure, 

properties, and stability under stress, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 94 (2011) 3605–3628. 

doi:10.1111/j.1551-2916.2011.04865.x. 

[2] 

M. Stoermer, F. Siewert, H. Sinn, Preparation and characterization of B4C coatings 

for advanced research light sources, J. Synchrotron Radiat. 23 (2016) 50–58. 

doi:10.1107/S1600577515020901. 

[3] 

B. Mertens, B. Wolschrijn, R. Jansen, N.B. Koster, M. Weiss, M. Wedowski et al., 

EUV time-resolved studies on carbon growth and cleaning, in: R.L. Engelstad (Ed.), 2003: p. 

95. doi:10.1117/12.504542. 

[4] 

K. Boller, R.-P. Haelbich, H. Hogrefe, W. Jark, C. Kunz, Investigation of carbon 

contamination of mirror surfaces exposed to synchrotron radiation, Nucl. Instruments 

Methods Phys. Res. 208 (1983) 273–279. doi:10.1016/0167-5087(83)91134-1. 

[5] 

T. Koide, S. Sato, T. Shidara, M. Niwano, M. Yanagihara, A. Yamada et al., 

Investigation of carbon contamination of synchrotron radiation mirrors, Nucl. Instruments 

Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 246 (1986) 215–

218. doi:10.1016/0168-9002(86)90077-X. 

[6] 

E. Pellegrin, I. Sics, J. Reyes-Herrera, C. Perez Sempere, J.J. Lopez Alcolea, M. 

Langlois et al., Characterization, optimization and surface physics aspects of in situ plasma 

mirror cleaning., J. Synchrotron Radiat. 21 (2014) 300–14. 

doi:10.1107/S1600577513032402. 

[7] 

M.G. Cuxart, J. Reyes-Herrera, I. Šics, A.R. Goñi, H.M. Fernandez, V. Carlin et al., 

Remote plasma cleaning of optical surfaces: Cleaning rates of different carbon allotropes as a 

function of RF powers and distances, Appl. Surf. Sci. 362 (2016) 448–458. 

doi:10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.11.117. 

[8] 

E. Pellegrin, I. Šics, C.P. Sempere, J.R. Herrera, V. Carlino, RF plasma cleaning of 

mirror surfaces: Characterization, optimization, and surface physics aspects of plasma 

cleaning, in: Proc. SPIE - Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2013. doi:10.1117/12.2019216. 

[9] 

D.L. Windt, IMD—Software for modeling the optical properties of multilayer films, 

Comput. Phys. 12 (1998) 360. doi:10.1063/1.168689. 

[10] 

L.G. Jacobsohn, R.K. Schulze, M.E.H. Maia Da Costa, M. Nastasi, X-ray 

photoelectron spectroscopy investigation of boron carbide films deposited by sputtering, 

Surf. Sci. 572 (2004) 418–424. doi:10.1016/j.susc.2004.09.020. 

[11] 

S. Jacques, A. Guette, X. Bourrat, F. Langlais, C. Guimon, C. Labrugere, LPCVD 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
and characterization of boron-containing pyrocarbon materials, Carbon N. Y. 34 (1996) 

1135–1143. doi:10.1016/0008-6223(96)00075-9. 

[12] 

S. Li, B. Zeng, Z. Feng, Y. Liu, W. Yang, L. Cheng et al., Effects of heat treatment 

on the microstructure of amorphous boron carbide coating deposited on graphite substrates 

by chemical vapor deposition, Thin Solid Films. 519 (2010) 251–258. 

doi:10.1016/j.tsf.2010.08.099. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
