Real-time Geometry-Aware Augmented Reality in Minimally Invasive Surgery

Long Chen1, Wen Tang1 and Nigel W. John2

1Bournemouth University
2University of Chester

To appear in Healthcare Technology Letters.

7
1
0
2

g
u
A
3

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
3
2
1
0
.
8
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The potential of Augmented Reality (AR) technology to assist minimally invasive surgeries (MIS) lies in its computational performance
and accuracy in dealing with challenging MIS scenes. Even with the latest hardware and software technologies, achieving both real-time
and accurate augmented information overlay in MIS is still a formidable task. In this paper, we present a novel real-time AR framework
for MIS that achieves interactive geometric aware augmented reality in endoscopic surgery with stereo views. Our framework tracks the
movement of the endoscopic camera and simultaneously reconstructs a dense geometric mesh of the MIS scene. The movement of the camera
is predicted by minimising the re-projection error to achieve a fast tracking performance, while the 3D mesh is incrementally built by a dense
zero mean normalised cross correlation stereo matching method to improve the accuracy of the surface reconstruction. Our proposed system
does not require any prior template or pre-operative scan and can infer the geometric information intra-operatively in real-time. With the
geometric information available, our proposed AR framework is able to interactively add annotations, localisation of tumours and vessels,
and measurement labelling with greater precision and accuracy compared with the state of the art approaches.

1. Introduction: Laparoscopic surgery is a Minimally Invasive
Surgical (MIS) procedure using endoscopes with small incisions
to carry out internal operations on patients. While MIS offers
considerable advantages over open surgeries, it also imposes big
challenges on surgeons’ performance due to the well known MIS
issues associated with the ﬁeld of view (FOV), hand-eye dis-
alignment and disorientation. Augmented Reality(AR) technology
can help overcome the limitations by overlaying additional
information with the real scene through augmentation of target
surgical locations, annotations [1], labels [2], tumour measurement
[3] or even 3D reconstruction of anatomic structures [4] [5].

Despite recent advances in powerful miniaturised AR hardware
devices and improvements on vision based software algorithms,
many issues in medical AR remain unsolved. Especially,
the
dramatic changes
in tissue surface illumination and tissue
deformation as well as the rapid movements of the endoscope
during the insertion and the extrusion all give rise to a set of unique
challenges that call for innovative approaches.

As with in any technological assisted medical procedures,
accuracy of AR in MIS is paramount. With the use of traditional
2D feature based tracking algorithms such as those used in [6]
,[7], [1] and [8], the rapid endoscope movement can easily cause
feature points extracted from the vision algorithms to fall out of
the ﬁeld of view, resulting in poor quality visual guidance. The
latest visual SLAM (Simultaneous Location and Mapping) based
approaches have the potential to overcome this issue by building an
entire 3D map of the internal cavity of the MIS environment, but
SLAM algorithms are often not robust enough when dealing with
tissue deformations and scene illuminations [9] [10] [10] [11] [12].
Furthermore, in order to meet the demand of high computational
performance, sparse landmark points are often used in MIS AR,
and augmented information are mapped using planar detection
algorithms such as Random Sample Consensus (RANSAC) [13]
[14]. As a result, AR content is mapped onto planes rather than
curved organ surfaces.

In this paper, we introduce a novel MIS AR framework that
allows accurate overlay of augmented information onto curved
surfaces,
i.e. accurate annotation and labelling, and tumour
measurements along the curved soft tissue surfaces. There are two
key features of our proposed framework: 1) real-time computation
of robust 3D tracking through a robust feature-based SLAM
approach; 2) an interactive geometry-aware AR environment

http://longchen.uk

Healthcare Technology Letters, pp. 1–6

through incrementally building a geometric mesh via zero mean
normalised cross correlation (ZNCC) stereo matching.

2. Related Work: The traditional MIS AR approaches usually
employ feature points tracking methods for information overlay.
Feature based 2D tracking methods such as Kanade-Lucas Tomasi
(KLT) features [6] [7], Scale-Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT)
[1], Speeded Up Robust Features (SURF) [15], even those methods
speciﬁcally designed to cater for the scale, rotation and brightness
of soft tissue [8] have a major drawback for AR, because selected
feature points extracted from vision algorithms must be within the
ﬁeld of view. Therefore, traditional feature tracking methods can
severely affect the precision of procedure guidance, especially in
surgical scenes where the accuracy is paramount.

Recently, SLAM (Simultaneous localization and Mapping)
algorithms have led to new approaches to endoscopic camera
tracking in MIS. Originally designed for robot navigation in
unknown environments, the algorithms can be adapted for tracking
the pose of endoscopic cameras while simultaneously building
landmark maps inside the patient body during MIS procedures.
SLAM-enabled AR systems not only improve the usability of AR in
MIS due to no optical or magnetic tracking devices to obstruct the
surgeons’ view, but they also offer greater accuracy and robustness
compared with traditional feature-based AR systems.

Direct-based SLAM algorithms compare pixels

[16] or
reconstructed models [17] [9] of two images to estimate camera
poses and reconstruct a dense 3D map by minimising the
photometric errors. However, direct methods are more likely to
fail when dealing with deformable scenes or when the illumination
of the scene is inconsistent. Feature-based SLAM systems [10]
[11] only compare a set of sparse feature points that are extracted
from images. These methods estimate camera poses by minimising
the re-projection error of the feature points. Therefore, feature-
based SLAM methods are more suitable for MIS scenes due to it’s
tolerance to illumination changes and small deformations. Feature-
based SLAM such as EKF-SLAM has been used with laparoscopic
image sequences [18] [19] [14] and a further motion compensation
model [20] and stereo semi-dense reconstruction method [21] were
integrated into the EKF-SLAM framework to deal with periodic
deformation. However, the accuracy of EKF-SLAM tracking is not
guaranteed and prone to inconsistent estimation and drifting due to
the linearization of motion and sensor models approximated by a
ﬁrst-order Taylor series expansion.

1
c(cid:13) The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2013

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Flowchart describing the whole framework

We adopt Oriented FAST and Rotated BRIEF (ORB) [22] feature
descriptors for feature points extraction, encoding and comparison
to match landmark points in left and right stereo images. ORB
is a binary feature point descriptor that is an order of magnitude
faster than SURF [23], more than two orders faster than SIFT
[24] and also offers better accuracy than SURF and SIFT [22]. In
addition, ORB features are invariant to rotation, illumination and
scale, hence, capable of dealing with challenge endoscope camera
scenes (rapid rotating, zooming and changing of brightness).

We apply the ORB detector and ﬁnd the matched keypoints on
left and right images. Let xl
P and xr
P be the x coordinates on the
left and right images, respectively. Assuming the left image and the
right image are already rectiﬁed, the focal length of both cameras f
and the baseline B are known ﬁxed values, by similar triangles, the
depth or the perpendicular distance Z between the points and the
endoscope can be found according to similar triangles (see Figure
1).

B − (cid:0)xl

P − xr
P

(cid:1)

Z − f

=

B
Z

⇒ Z =

f · B
dP

(1)

P − xr

Where xl

P is the disparity dP of the two corresponding
keypoints in the left and the right images detected by the ORB
feature.

We then perform a specular reﬂection detection by removing the
keypoints that have intensities above a threshold for efﬁciency. This
could effectively remove the inﬂuence of specular reﬂections from
the next stage of computation.

3.2. Frame by Frame Camera Pose Estimation: Any AR
application requires the real-time frame by frame tracking to
continuously update the overlay positions. To meet the real-time
requirement, after initialization, we employ the constant velocity
motion model used by MonoSLAM [25] to roughly estimate the
position rt+1 and quaternion rotation qt+1 of the camera position
based on the current linear velocity vt and angular velocity wt in a
small period ∆t:

rt+1 = rt + vt · ∆t
qt+1 = qt × q (ωt · ∆t)
vt = vt−1 + at−1 · ∆t
ωt = ωt−1 + αt−1 · ∆t






(2)

Based on the predicted camera pose (rt+1, qt+1), the potential
regions where the feature points may appear on the image are
estimate by re-projection of 3D points, hence reducing searching
areas and computational cost.

A RANSAC procedure is then performed to obtain the rotation
and translation estimations from the set of all the inlier points.
During each RANSAC iteration, 3 pairs of corresponding 3D
points from current point set pi
t+1
are selected randomly to calculate the rotation matrix R and the
translation t, which minimizes the following objective function:

t and point set in next period pi

min

n
(cid:88)

i=1

(cid:13)
(cid:13)pi
(cid:13)

t −

(cid:16)

R ∗ pi

t+1 + T

(cid:17)(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

(3)

Healthcare Technology Letters, pp. 2–6

Figure 1 By using a stereo endoscope, the 3D position of any point in the
view can be directly estimated by using stereo triangulation.

The ﬁrst keyframe-based SLAM – PTAM (Parallel Tracking
and Mapping) [10] was a breakthrough in visual SLAM and has
been used in MIS for stereoscope tracking [13]. The extension
of PTAM – ORBSLAM [11] has also been tested on endoscope
videos with map point densifying modiﬁcations [12], but the loss
of accuracy still exists. Furthermore, since feature-based SLAM
systems can only reconstruct maps based on sparse landmark-
points that barely describe the detailed 3D structure of the
environment, the augmented AR content has to be mapped onto a
plan through planar detection algorithms such as Random Sample
Consensus (RANSAC) [13]. Although feature-based SLAM is
computationally efﬁcient, different to real-life environments, in
MIS scenes, ﬂat surfaces are rare and organs and tissues do
have smooth and curved surfaces, hence, resulting in inaccurate
AR content registration. One example is the inaccurate labelling
and measurement of tumour size without accurate surface ﬁt for
information overlay, which can be dangerous and misleading during
MIS.

In this paper we present a novel real-time AR framework
that provides 3D geometric information for accurate AR content
registration and overlay in MIS. We propose a new approach
to achieving robust 3D tracking through a feature-based SLAM
for real-time performance and accuracy required for endoscopy
camera tracking. To obtain accurate geometric information, we
incrementally build a dense 3D point cloud by using zero
mean normalised cross correlation (ZNCC) stereo matching.
Therefore, our framework handles the challenging situations of
rapid endoscopy movements with robust real-time tracking, while
providing an interactive geometry-aware AR environment.

3. Methods: As can be seen from the ﬂowchart in Figure 2, our
proposed framework starts with a SLAM system that can track and
estimate the camera pose frame by frame. The following stereo
matching algorithm based on ZNCC is used to reconstruct dense
surface at each keyframe, which is then transformed and stitched
to a global surface based on the inverse transformation of the
camera pose. Finally, the global surface is re-projected to 2D based
on the camera pose and overlaid on the image frame, serving as
an interactive geometric layer. The geometric layer enables the
interactive AR applications such as online measurement which will
be explained in Section 4.

3.1. Landmark Point Detection and Triangulation: In medical
interventions, real-time performance and accuracy are both critical.

2
c(cid:13) The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2012

BStereo EndoscopeImage PlaneTarget OrganZPfx(cid:2607)lx(cid:2607)rFrom the set with smallest re-projection error, the set of outlier
points is rejected and all the inliers are used for a reﬁnement of
the ﬁnal rotation and translation estimations.

During the inlier/outlier identiﬁcation scheme by RANSAC,
false matched ORB feature points, moving specular reﬂection
points and deforming points are effectively rejected. This is a very
important step for a MIS scene where the tissue deformation caused
by respiration and heartbeat, as well as blood, smoke and surgical
instruments can have impact on the tracking stability. Therefore, at
this stage, we use the strategy to ﬁlter out any inﬂuence caused by
occlusion and deformation to recover the camera pose. Indeed, the
deformable surface is an unsolved challenge in MIS AR, we address
this issue by reconstructing a dense 3D map through a more efﬁcient
stereo matching method (see Section 3.4).

3.3. Keyframe-based Bundle Adjustment: As our camera pose
the accumulation
estimation is only based on the last state,
of error over time would cause system drifting. However, we
cannot perform a global optimization for every frame as this
will slow down the system over time. We follow the successful
approach of PTAM [10] and ORBSLAM [11] in correcting system
drafting, which use the keyframe-based SLAM framework to save
“snapshots” of some frames as keyframes to enhance the robustness
of the tracking whilst not increasing computational load on the
system. Each keyframe is selected based on the criteria that
the common keypoints of the two keyframes are less than 80%
keypoints but the total number exceeds 50.

Once a keyframe is assigned, bundle adjustment (BA) is applied
to reﬁne the 3D positions of each stored keyframe KFi and the
landmark points Pj by minimising the total Huber robust cost
function w.r.t the re-projection error between 2D matched keypoints
pi,j and camera perspective projections of the 3D positions of
keyframes KFi and the landmark points Pj:

arg min
KFi,Pj

(cid:88)

i,j

ρh ((cid:107)pi,j − CamP roj (KFi, Pj)(cid:107))

(4)

3.4. ZNCC Dense Stereo Matching: We create a feature-based
visual odometry system for the endoscopic camera tracking and
landmark points mapping, which takes into account of illumination
changes, specular reﬂections and tissue deformations in MIS
scenes. However, as the sparse landmark points can barely describe
the challenging environment of MIS scenes, we perform a dense
stereo matching upon the landmark points to create a dense
reconstruction result.

The dissimilarity measure used during the stereo matching is a
patch-based ZNCC method. The cost value C(p, d) for a pixel p at
disparity d is derived by measuring the ZNCC of the pixel in the
left image and the corresponding the pixel p − d in the right image:

C (p, d) =

(cid:114)

(cid:80)

q∈Np (IL(q)− ¯IL(p))·(IR(q−d)− ¯IR(p−d))

(cid:80)

q∈Np (IL(q)− ¯IL(p))2

·(cid:80)

q∈Np (IR(q−d)− ¯IR(p−d))2

(5)

where ¯I (p) = 1
Np
Np centered at p.

(cid:80)

q∈Np

I (q) is the mean intensity of the patch

ZNCC is proven to be less sensitive to illumination changes and
can be parallelised efﬁciently on a GPU [26]. A WTA (Winner-
Takes-All) strategy is applied to choose the best disparity value for
each pixel p, followed by a convex optimization to solve the cost
volume constructed by Huber-L1 variational energy function [27]
for a smooth disparity map. We used the GPU implement of ZNCC
and convex optimization for the efﬁcient disparity map estimation
and ﬁltering in real-time.

3.5.
Incremental Building of Geometric Mesh : The 3D dense
points estimated by stereo matching are transformed to the world
coordinate system by the transformation matrix from frame space

Healthcare Technology Letters, pp. 3–6

Figure 3 Incrementally building the geometric mesh. Rectangular boxes are
the estimated camera pose; Green points are detected landmark points.

to the world space Tf 2w that was estimated by our feature-based
SLAM system. A fast triangulation method [28] is then used to
incrementally reconstruct the dense points into a surface mesh. Fig.
3 demonstrates the incrementally building process from Frame 1 to
900. The ﬁrst and third rows are the reconstructed geometric mesh
while the second and fourth rows are the current video frames. The
geometric mesh can be built incrementally to form a global mesh
that can then be re-projected back to the camera’s view using the
estimated camera pose for the augmented view (see (a) and (c) in
Fig. 4 and Fig. 5).

4. Results and Discussion: We have designed a two-parts
assessment process to evaluate our AR framework: (i) using a
realistic 3D simulated MIS scene as the ground truth study to
measure the reconstruction error by measuring the difference
between the ground truth values and the reconstructed values;
in vivo video acquired from the Hamlyn
(ii) using a real
Centre Laparoscopic/Endoscopic Video Datasets [29] [30] to
assess the quality of applications of our proposed framework i.e.
measurements, adding AR labels and areas highlighting.

4.1. System setup: Our system is implemented in an Ubuntu
14.04 environment using C/C++. All experiments are conducted
on a workstation equipped with Intel Xeon(R) 2.8 GHz quad core
CPU, 32G Memory, and one NVIDIA GeForce GTX 970 graphics
card. The size of the simulation image sequences and in vivo
endoscope videos is 840 X 640 pixels. The AR framework and
3D surface reconstruction run in different threads. The 3D surface
reconstruction process takes about 200ms to traverse the entire
pipeline for each frame. Our proposed AR framework can run
in real-time at 26 FPS when the reconstruction only performs at
keyframes.

4.2. Ground truth study using simulation data: The performance
of our proposed framework is measured in terms of reconstruction
accuracy by comparing the reconstructed surface with the 3D model
used to render the simulation video.

To quantitatively evaluate the performance of the progressive
reconstruction result, we used Blender [31] – an open source
3D software to render realistic image sequences of a simulated
abdominal cavity scene using a set of pre-deﬁned endoscopic

3
c(cid:13) The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2012

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 5 Measurement application of our proposed geometry-aware AR
framework. Note that the measuring lines (green lines) accurately follow
along the curve surface.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4. Reconstruction error map.

camera movements. The simulated scene contains models scaled
to real life size according to an average measured liver diameter of
14.0 cm [32], and the digestive system is rendered with appropriate
textures to make the scene as realistic as possible. The material
property is set with a strong specularity component to simulate
the smooth and reﬂective liver surface tissue. The luminance is
intentionally set high to simulate an endoscope camera as shown
in Fig. 5 with a realistic endoscopic lighting condition by using a
spot light attached to the main camera. We have designed a camera
trajectory that hovers around the 3D models. There are a total of 900
frames of image sequences at a frame-rate of 30 fps being rendered,
which is equivalent to a 30 seconds video.

Root Mean Square Distance (RMSD) is used to evaluate the
overall distance between the simulated and the reconstructed
surfaces. By aligning the surfaces to the real world coordinate
system, we apply a grid sample to get a series of x,y coordinate
points based on the surface area, and then compared the distance of
the z value of the two surfaces.

RM SD =

(cid:118)
(cid:117)
(cid:117)
(cid:116)

1
mn

m
(cid:88)

n
(cid:88)

x=1

y=1

(Zx,y − zx,y)2

The RMSD measurement for the two surface alignments has
shown a good surface reconstruction results from our proposed
methods, compared to the ground truth surface, the RMSD is 2.37
mm. The reconstruction error map can be viewed in Fig. 4.

Figure 6 Applications of our proposed geometry-aware AR framework: (a)
Adding AR labels according to the norm of the geometric surface. (b) The
side-view of labels in mesh view. (c) Area highlight and measurement. (b)
The side-view of highlighted area in mesh view.

4.3. Real endoscopic video evaluation: To qualitatively evaluate
the performance of our proposed surface reconstruction framework,
we applied the proposed approach on in vivo videos that we
acquired from Hamlyn Centre Laparoscopic / Endoscopic Video
Datasets [29] [30]. Fig. 6 (a) shows the reconstruction result from
our 3D reconstruction framework with the augmented view of in
vivo video sequences. By clicking the mesh, augmented objects
(colored planes) can be superimposed at corresponding positions
with correct poses based on the normals of the points at the click
locations. Fig. 6 (b) shows the side-view of the mesh; note that
the colored planes (which could be labels) are sticking onto the
mesh correctly to create a realistic augmented environment. Fig.
6 (c) shows the area highlighting function of our proposed AR
framework. And Fig. 6 (d) is the corresponding mesh view. The
area highlighting function can be extended to an area measurement
and line measurement (such as shown in Fig. 5) application once
the extrinsic parameters of the camera are known.

4
c(cid:13) The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2012

5. Conclusions:
In this paper, we presented a novel AR
framework for MIS. Our framework handles the two intertwined
issues of tracking the rapid endoscope camera movements and
providing accurate information overlay onto the curved surfaces
of organs and tissues. By adapting the latest SLAM algorithms,
we take a set of innovative approaches at
the each stage of
the AR process to improve the computational performances and
AR registration accuracy. As a result, an interactive real-time
geometric aware AR system has been developed. The system
is capable of dealing with small soft tissue deformations, rapid
endoscope movement and illumination change, which are common
challenges in MIS AR. Our proposed system does not require
any prior template or pre-operative scan. The system can overlay
accurate augmented information such as annotations, labelling, and
measurements of a tumour over curved surfaces, greatly improving
the quality of AR technology in MIS.

Healthcare Technology Letters, pp. 4–6

In future work we will carry out a clinical pilot study. A case
scenario will be investigated in collaboration with a practicing
surgeon, and comparisons will be made as to the effectiveness of
our system with the current procedural approach used.

[12] Alexandre Hostettler Christophe Doignon Luc Soler Jacques
Marescaux J.M.M. Montiel Nader Mahmoud, Inigo Cirauqui.
Orbslam-based endoscope tracking and 3d reconstruction. In
MICCAI 2016 CARE, 2016.

6. Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.

References

[1] Jae-Hak Kim, Adrien Bartoli, Toby Collins, and Richard
Hartley.
interactive image
augmentation in laparoscopy. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 246–255, 2012.

Tracking by detection for

[2] Li-Ming Su, Balazs P. Vagvolgyi, Rahul Agarwal,
Carol E. Reiley, Russell H. Taylor, and Gregory D. Hager.
Augmented reality during robot-assisted laparoscopic partial
nephrectomy: Toward real-time 3D-CT to stereoscopic video
registration. Urology, 73(4):896–900, April 2009.

[3] Nicolas Bourdel, Toby Collins, Daniel Pizarro, Clement
Debize, Anne-Sophie Grï£¡meau, Adrien Bartoli, and Michel
Canis. Use of augmented reality in laparoscopic gynecology
to visualize myomas. Fertility and sterility, 107:737–739,
March 2017.

[4] Nazim Haouchine, Jeremie Dequidt, Igor Peterlik, Erwan
Kerrien, Marie-Odile Berger, and StÃl’phane Cotin. Image-
guided simulation of heterogeneous tissue deformation for
In Mixed
augmented reality during hepatic surgery.
and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2013 IEEE International
Symposium on, pages 199–208. IEEE, 2013.

[5] Nazim Haouchine, Stephane Cotin, Igor Peterlik, Jeremie
Dequidt, Mario Sanz Lopez, Erwan Kerrien, and Marie-Odile
Impact of soft tissue heterogeneity on augmented
Berger.
Visualization and Computer
reality for
Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 21(5):584–597, 2015.

liver surgery.

[6] Xiaofei Du, Neil Clancy, Shobhit Arya, George B Hanna,
and Danail Stoyanov.
John Kelly, Daniel S Elson,
intensity
Robust
International journal of
and illumination compensation.
computer assisted radiology and surgery, 10(12):1915–1926,
2015.

surface tracking combining features,

[7] Rosalie Planteféve, Igor Peterlik, Nazim Haouchine, and
Stéphane Cotin. Patient-speciﬁc biomechanical modeling for
guidance during minimally-invasive hepatic surgery. Ann
Biomed Eng, 44(1):139–153, January 2016.

[8] Peter Mountney and Guang-Zhong Yang. Soft tissue tracking
for minimally invasive surgery: learning local deformation
online. Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv, 11(Pt
2):364–372, 2008.

[9] M. Turan, Y. Almalioglu, H. Araujo, E. Konukoglu, and
M. Sitti. A Non-Rigid Map Fusion-Based RGB-Depth SLAM
Method for Endoscopic Capsule Robots. ArXiv e-prints, May
2017.

[10] G. Klein and D. Murray. Parallel tracking and mapping for
small ar workspaces. In Proc. 6th IEEE and ACM Int. Symp.
Mixed and Augmented Reality, pages 225–234, November
2007.

[11] R. Mur-Artal, J. M. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tardós. Orb-SLAM:
IEEE
A versatile and accurate monocular SLAM system.
Transactions on Robotics, 31(5):114–1163, October 2015.

Healthcare Technology Letters, pp. 5–6

[13] Bingxiong Lin, Adrian Johnson, Xiaoning Qian, Jaime
Sanchez, and Yu Sun.
tracking, 3D
reconstruction and deforming point detection for stereoscope
guided surgery. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
35–44, 2013.

Simultaneous

[14] Oscar G Grasa, Ernesto Bernal, Santiago Casado, Iñigo Gil,
and JM Montiel. Visual slam for handheld monocular
IEEE Transactions on,
Imaging,
endoscope.
33(1):135–146, 2014.

Medical

[15] Atul Kumar, Yen-Yu Wang, Ching-Jen Wu, Kai-Che Liu, and
Hurng-Sheng Wu. Stereoscopic visualization of laparoscope
image using depth information from 3D model. Computer
Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 113(3):862–868,
March 2014.

[16] Jakob Engel, Thomas Schï£¡ps, and Daniel Cremers. LSD-
In Computer
SLAM: Large-scale direct monocular SLAM.
Vision – ECCV 2014, pages 834–849. Springer Nature, 2014.

[17] Ping-Lin Chang, Ankur Handa, Andrew J Davison, Danail
Stoyanov, et al. Robust real-time visual odometry for stereo
endoscopy using dense quadrifocal tracking. In International
Conference on Information Processing in Computer-Assisted
Interventions, pages 11–20. Springer, 2014.

[18] Peter Mountney, Danail Stoyanov, Andrew Davison, and
Guang-Zhong Yang. Simultaneous stereoscope localization
and soft-tissue mapping for minimal
invasive surgery.
In Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention - MICCAI 2006. Springer, January 2006.

[19] P. Mountney and G. Z. Yang. Dynamic view expansion for
minimally invasive surgery using simultaneous localization
In 2009 Annual International Conference of
and mapping.
the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, pages
1184–1187, September 2009.

[20] Peter Mountney and Guang-Zhong Yang.

Motion
compensated slam for image guided surgery. Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention -
MICCAI 2010, January 2010.

[21] Johannes Totz, Peter Mountney, Danail Stoyanov, and Guang-
Zhong Yang. Dense surface reconstruction for enhanced
navigation in mis. Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention - MICCAI 2011, January 2011.

[22] Ethan Rublee, Vincent Rabaud, Kurt Konolige, and Gary
Bradski.
Orb: an efﬁcient alternative to sift or surf.
In Computer Vision (ICCV), 2011 IEEE International
Conference on, pages 2564–2571. IEEE, 2011.

[23] Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. Surf:
Speeded up robust features. In Computer vision–ECCV 2006,
pages 404–417. Springer, 2006.

[24] David G Lowe. Distinctive image features from scale-
invariant keypoints. International journal of computer vision,
60(2):91–110, 2004.

[25] A. J. Davison, I. D. Reid, N. D. Molton, and O. Stasse.
IEEE
Monoslam: Real-time single camera SLAM.
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
29(6):1052–1067, June 2007.

5
c(cid:13) The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2012

[26] Danail Stoyanov, Marco Visentini Scarzanella, Philip Pratt,
and Guang-Zhong Yang. Real-time stereo reconstruction
in robotically assisted minimally invasive surgery. Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention -
MICCAI 2010, January 2010.

[27] Ping-Lin Chang, Danail Stoyanov, Andrew J. Davison, and
Philip Eddie Edwards. Real-time dense stereo reconstruction
using convex optimisation with a cost-volume for image-
guided robotic surgery. Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention - MICCAI 2013, January
2013.

[28] Z. C. Marton, R. B. Rusu, and M. Beetz. On fast surface
reconstruction methods for large and noisy point clouds.
In 2009 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, pages 3218–3223, May 2009.

[29] Imperial College London. Hamlyn centre laparoscopic /
[Accessed 6 Nov. 2016]

endoscopic video datasets, 2016.
http://hamlyn.doc.ic.ac.uk/vision/.

[30] Peter Mountney, Danail Stoyanov, and Guang-Zhong Yang.
Three-dimensional tissue deformation recovery and tracking.
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 27(4):14–24, July 2010.

[31] Blender. Blender - free and open 3d creation software, 2016.

[Accessed 6 Nov. 2016] https://www.blender.org/.

[32] Wolfgang Kratzer, Violetta Fritz, Richard A Mason, Mark M
Haenle, Volker Kaechele, and Roemerstein Study Group.
Factors affecting liver size: a sonographic survey of 2080
Journal of ultrasound in medicine : ofﬁcial
subjects.
journal of the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine,
22:1155–1161, November 2003.

6
c(cid:13) The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2012

Healthcare Technology Letters, pp. 6–6

