Mitigating E-beam-induced Hydrocarbon Deposition on Graphene for Atomic-Scale 
Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy Studies 

Notice: This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under Contract No. DE-AC05-
00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the 
publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States 
Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or 
reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States 
Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of 
federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan 
(http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan). 

1 

 
 
 
Mitigating E-beam-induced Hydrocarbon Deposition 
on Graphene for Atomic-Scale Scanning Transmission 
Electron Microscopy Studies 

Ondrej Dycka), Songkil Kim, Sergei V. Kalinin, and Stephen Jesse 

The Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 

Tennessee, 37831, USA 

The Institute for Functional Imaging of Materials, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 

Tennessee, 37831, USA 

a)Electronic mail: dyckoe@ornl.gov  

CVD grown graphene used in (scanning) transmission electron microscopy ((S)TEM) studies 

must undergo a careful transfer of the one-atom-thick membrane from the growth surface 

(typically a Cu foil) to the TEM grid. During this transfer process, the graphene invariably 

becomes contaminated with foreign material. This contamination proves to be very problematic 

in the (S)TEM because often >95% of the graphene is obscured and imaging of the pristine areas 

results in e-beam-induced hydrocarbon deposition which further acts to obscure the desired 

imaging area. In this article, we examine two cleaning techniques for CVD grown graphene that 

mitigate both aspects of the contamination problem: visible contamination covering the 

graphene, and “invisible” contamination that deposits onto the graphene under e-beam 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
irradiation. The visible contamination may be removed quickly by a rapid thermal annealing to 

1200 oC in situ and the invisible e-beam-deposited contamination may be removed through an 

Ar/O2 annealing procedure prior to imaging in the (S)TEM.  

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Atomically resolved imaging via scanning probe and electron microscopy has opened the 

doors to the nanoworld by providing a pathway to visualize atomic structure and explore 

functional properties on a single atom and molecule level.1 Multiple examples of these studies 

include the order parameter fields in ferroic materials,2, 3 octahedra tilts4-7 and chemical strains,8 

and local chemical properties9, 10 in (scanning) transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and 

energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). In the field of scanning probes (SPM), the examples include 

the superconductive order parameter mapping,11 protein unfolding spectroscopies,12, 13 exotic 

Kitaev phases14 and many others.  

However, both for (S)TEM and SPM, the success of atomically resolved imaging often 

hinges on the availability of the well-prepared samples. For (S)TEM, typically the requirements 

include the stability and ability to form thin foils, whereas the surface stability on the order of 1-

2 nm is often irrelevant. In comparison, SPM studies are critically dependent on the stability of 

the top surface layer, and as a result the SPM studies are often centered on material that can be 

prepared by cleaving (layered materials), or sputtering and annealing and related techniques 

(metals, semiconductors). The number of SPM studies of materials that require more complex 

sample preparation such as in-situ pulsed laser deposition15-22 or magnetron sputtering23 growth 

is much more limited. 

3 

 
 
 
 
The requirements for the sample preparation are becoming much more stringent on 

transition from imaging to fabrication. In STM, more than 25 years was required to transition 

from the first atomic manipulation experiments by Don Eigler24 to the single-atom device 

fabrication by M. Simmons25-27 and others. Nowadays, it is recognized that STEM can also be 

used as a tool for single atom fabrication, where the electron beam is employed to induce 

controllable chemical transformation including vacancy,28, 29 ad-atom,30 and interstitial motion,31, 

32 bond formation,31, 33-35 vacancy ordering,36 phase changes,37 etc.38, 39 that can further be 

atomically resolved. Combination of STEM with controlled beam motion and image-based 

feedback further enables atom-by-atom fabrication in STEM. 

  Similar to SPM, the fabrication of atomic structures via STEM necessitates high-quality 

sample preparation. In many cases, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) grown graphene samples 

are prepared for (S)TEM investigation using a poly(methyl-methacrylate) (PMMA) -mediated 

approach for transfer from the growth substrate to the TEM grid.40-42 With this technique, after 

the graphene is grown on a metal foil substrate, it is mechanically stabilized with a coating of 

PMMA, after which the metal foil is etched away. The graphene, attached to the layer of PMMA, 

may then be transferred to an arbitrary substrate and the PMMA removed with solvents. Though 

this approach appears to be quite common, it leaves behind PMMA and other organic residue so 

that the graphene is almost completely obscured from view when examined in a (S)TEM (see 

Figure 1). In addition, samples prepared in this way also exhibit significant e-beam induced 

hydrocarbon deposition, so that the small areas of pristine graphene will become covered in 

mobile contaminants upon imaging and thus obscured. Many attempts have been made to 

address these issues with varied success and they generally involve a thermal annealing of some 

kind. Van Dorp et. al.43 show that heating exfoliated few-layer graphene to 500 oC for 10 

4 

 
 
 
minutes in the microscope is sufficient to remove the contaminant materials. These results are 

supported by the investigations of Xie et. al.44 who performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 

(XPS) and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS). Lin et. al.45, 46 advance 

an air and H2/Ar 200 oC annealing procedure prior to examination in the TEM, which appears to 

be quite effective. Liang et. al.47 introduce an alternate PMMA transfer method that appears to 

clean graphene but they fail to demonstrate cleanliness at the atomic level. Finally, Li et. al.48 

give evidence that exposing clean CVD-grown graphene to air results in significant hydrocarbon 

contamination within just a few minutes. This may result in conflicting reports where graphene 

that has undergone a cleaning treatment, is no longer clean when investigated in the (S)TEM and 

the cleaning treatment is assumed to have failed. What none of these studies address is the e-

beam-deposited hydrocarbon contamination that typically occurs under high magnification in the 

STEM. 

Here we investigate two methods for cleaning graphene to address both visible contaminant 

materials present on the graphene surface and particularly focus on contamination resulting from 

e-beam-induced hydrocarbon deposition and discuss our observations. The first method we 

investigate is an ex situ Ar/O2 anneal suggested by Garcia et. al..49 The second method we 

investigate is in situ annealing.  

II.  EXPERIMENTAL 

CVD-grown graphene was transferred from the Cu foil growth substrate to a TEM sample 

grid followed by an Ar/O2 anneal for removal of volatile adsorbents. The Cu foil was spin-coated 

with PMMA to stabilize the graphene and the Cu foil was etched away in a bath of ammonium 

persulfate-DI water solution.  The graphene/PMMA layer was transferred to  a DI water bath  to 

remove residues of ammonium persulfate. The graphene was transferred to the final TEM substrate 

5 

 
by scooping it from the bath and letting it dry at room temperature. TEM samples were baked in 

an oven under an Ar/O2 (90%/10%) environment to remove residual PMMA and volatile organic 

compounds.  

For the in-situ heating experiments graphene was transferred to a Protochips Aduro 

heating holder and heated at a rate of 1000 oC/ms in the microscope. 

Imaging of the samples was performed in a Nion UltraSTEM U100 at an accelerating 

voltage of 60 kV in high angle annular dark field (HAADF) imaging mode. The samples were 

loaded into the microscope using our standard loading procedure, where the microscope 

magazine, cartridges, and samples are baked in a vacuum chamber at 160 oC for eight hours prior 

to insertion into the microscope, except where explicitly indicated in the text (i.e. discussion 

related to the results presented in Figure 5 (a, b, c)).  

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

A.  Control Sample 

To compare the cleaning techniques to a standard sample, images were taken of a graphene 

sample prior to any cleaning. Figure 1 shows an as deposited sample at a variety of 

magnification levels, exhibiting heavy contamination. The observable clean areas are extremely 

small and not even visible at the lowest magnification shown. Even when these small, clean 

areas are found, hydrocarbon e-beam deposition is often an intractable problem which acts to 

quickly cover the region of interest with amorphous carbon. This problem can be mitigated to 

some extent by performing a so-called “beam shower” by illuminating a large area for ~30 

minutes. It is thought that this procedure deposits volatile contamination onto the sample across 

the exposed area leaving the vacuum slightly cleaner. In our experience, this technique appears 

6 

 
to work to some degree for a period of time, sometimes as long as 1-2 hours, before it must be 

repeated. Nevertheless, this situation is not ideal and here we explore other options. 

Figure 1 (a, b, c) example images at a variety of magnification levels of an as-transferred graphene sample prior to cleaning. In 
(c) we can see a small patch of clean graphene about 5 nm wide, indicated by the arrow. 

B.  Ar/O2 Annealing 

To produce more favorable graphene samples for STEM studies that exhibit no e-beam 

hydrocarbon deposition we adopted the cleaning procedure of Garcia et. al..49 This procedure 

involves heating the graphene sample to 500 oC in an environment  of Ar (90%) and O2 (10%). 

The studies of Garcia et. al. investigated sample cleanliness through the use of raman 

spectroscopy and were primarily targeted at removing adhesive residue from exfoliated h-BN. 

We applied this technique to CVD grown graphene, transferred to a TEM grid through a PMMA-

stabilized transfer process as described in the experimental section. 

Figure 2 shows the contamination morphology after the Ar/O2 cleaning procedure. 

Figures (a-d) show the observed morphology at a variety of magnifications after microscope 

alignment. The central area in each image displays pristine areas of graphene due to exposure to 

the electron beam during alignment. These areas appear dark as they are only a single atom thick. 

Initially, there appears to be a significant amount of contamination covering the graphene (the 

7 

 
 
 
areas away from the center). It is unclear, quantitatively, whether it is truly cleaner than the as-

transferred graphene as far as contamination coverage is concerned because the contamination 

appears to contract on itself or move away from the illuminated area under e-beam influence. In 

other words, simply observing the sample acts to change it. Lattice resolved images produce 

large (10-20 nm) clean areas of graphene within a few seconds which were not present 

previously. To illustrate this phenomenon on a mesoscopic scale, a large area was selected and 

illuminated in parallel (not scanned) for 20-30 mins. The before and after images are shown in 

(e, f), where we observe a significant increase in pristine graphene areas over the entire 

illumination area (dashed circles). The insets in (e, f) show a zoomed-in portion of the same area 

before and after illumination. We can see that the exposed contamination is revealing pristine 

graphene similar to the central portion of (b). Additional images and a video time-lapse series of 

this phenomenon are provided in the supporting materials. Of note: smaller areas scanned with 

the beam become clean more quickly so that, after microscope alignment, imaging and 

experimentation can begin immediately with ample areas of pristine graphene. 

While this result was rather unexpected and fortuitous, the truly remarkable property of 

such samples (remarkable based on our previous experience with graphene samples) is that we 

have not observed any e-beam induced hydrocarbon deposition at any magnification on samples 

cleaned with this method. Lattice resolved images may be taken at leisure for many hours 

without fear of encroaching contamination. Indeed, the contamination contracts away from the 

irradiated area, exposing more pristine graphene. This is important, as graphene sample quality 

has historically made atomic level studies difficult and sometimes impossible. The mechanisms 

of motion and chemical make-up of the contamination observed are beyond the scope of this 

8 

 
 
article. We simply wish to highlight this recipe as a highly effective way to produce atomically 

clean areas of CVD grown graphene for (S)TEM studies. 

Figure 2 (a-d) show a series of HAADF images acquired at a variety of magnifications showing the mesoscopic and atomic-level 
contaminant morphology. The boxed areas indicate the acquisition location of each subsequent image. In (d) we observe 

9 

 
 
significant streaking of the surface contamination indicating high mobility under e-beam irradiation. As short video clip of this 
motion is included in the supplementary information. In (e, f) we show the result of parallel e-beam illumination on the 
contaminant morphology. The image in (e) was acquired before significant e-beam irradiation. The large circle indicates the 
approximate illumination area and the inset shows a zoomed-in portion of the same image to show more clearly the smaller 
features. In (f) we show the results after e-beam illumination over the area indicated by the circle. The inset shows the same area 
shown inset in (e). We observe a significant increase of contamination-free areas (i.e. the darkest regions). 

C. 

In-Situ Rapid Thermal Cleaning 

While the above described method for cleaning graphene produces highly agreeable samples for 

(S)TEM studies, the samples are nevertheless, still covered in contaminant material. In order to 

fabricate a graphene sample that is atomically clean on the micron length scale we used a 

Protochips Aduro heater chip to heat the sample to 1200 oC at a rate of 1000 oC/ms. The results 

are summarized in Figure 3. In (a, b, c) we see the typical contamination of an as-prepared 

sample at several magnifications. After heating the sample, the images in (d, e, f) were acquired 

and we see that the suspended graphene film is mostly atomically clean graphene over the entire 

observable window. The location that remained dirtiest is boxed in (d, e) and corresponds to the 

previously irradiated area, discussed later. This rapid thermal cleaning procedure was repeated 

with several different samples with similar results. 

Several observations are noteworthy:  

1) After returning the sample to room temperature, the sample remained clean while in the 

microscope.  

2) After returning the sample to room temperature, high e-beam fluence, such as that produced 

when performing lattice resolved images or under a stationary beam, produced heavy e-beam-

induced hydrocarbon deposition. This deposition is shown in Figure 4 (a, b) and may be 

controllably deposited with the e-beam, (b). We posit that this contamination comes from areas 

of the heater chip that remain cool even while the chip is heated (the heated area is concentrated 

to within a few tens of microns around the sample).  

10 

 
 
3) This amorphous deposited carbon contamination can be converted to graphitic carbon upon 

heating again to 1200 oC (see supplemental materials).  

4) Heating the sample again to 500 oC still shows e-beam deposited contamination but heating to 

800 oC prevents this deposition (see supplemental materials). This is important in practice 

because, although the heater chip has the capability to ramp to 1200 oC, we find that the sample 

usually exhibits a slight mechanical instability (vibration) at this temperature, reducing 

resolution. Backing off from this limit appears to be more mechanically stable. As a result, the 

lattice resolved image in Figure 3 (f) was acquired at 800 oC since lattice resolution was not 

possible at 1200 oC ((d, e) were acquired at 1200 oC). Though there is much to be explored here, 

we limit this paper to these cursory observations.  

5) We note that any areas that had previously undergone e-beam irradiation or deposition do not 

become clean with the described heating procedure (see also the observations of van Dorp et. 

al.43) but can be made graphitic upon heating. Figure 4 (c) shows a suspended sheet of graphene 

that had been previously imaged in an SEM to check for the success of the sample transfer. The 

entire region remains mostly covered in contamination, save for a few smaller patches, and areas 

exposed to higher e-beam fluence by increasing magnification in the SEM are clearly visible as 

areas with higher contaminant coverage (i.e. the brighter patches in (c)).  This appears to be 

similar to the adherence of the contamination noted in Figure 3 (d, e) which had been exposed 

briefly to the STEM beam before heating. Though, undesirable for cleaning graphene, this is 

interesting because it immediately suggests possible patterning in a lower magnification 

instrument (SEM, FIB, etc.) and subsequent thermal treatment to remove the unexposed 

materials. This technique may be amenable to producing conductive carbon nanowires on h-BN, 

for example. 

11 

 
Figure 3 (a, b, c) show the initial contamination morphology of the as-deposited sample prior to heating at three magnification 
levels. We see the typical contamination expected with only very small pristine areas. (d, e, f) show the suspended graphene film 
at a variety of magnifications after the rapid thermal annealing. We note that atomically clean graphene exists over a majority of 
the film extending ~2 microns. The inset in (f) is an image of a higher magnification to more clearly show the graphene lattice. 

Figure 4 (a) shows the e-beam deposited hydrocarbon contamination after brief exposure. (b) illustrates the controllable 
deposition of hydrocarbon contamination. Exposure to an electron beam prior to heating acts to “pin” the contamination to the 
sample. (c) shows an area of the sample which was exposed to an SEM beam with varying degrees of exposure prior to 
examination in the STEM. We see that the graphene remains highly contaminated even after heating and the greater the degree of 
exposure (i.e. the smaller the scan area in SEM) the more contamination remains and in the highly exposed areas appear to have 
additional carbon deposited on them.  

12 

 
 
 
Finally, we wanted to explore what happens upon removal of a clean graphene surface 

from the STEM vacuum and exposure to the laboratory air. We thus, cleaned a graphene sample 

with the above described heating procedure, cooled the sample back to room temperature, 

removed the sample from the microscope vacuum, and let it sit on a “gloves only” sample 

exchange table under a plastic (non-airtight) cover to prevent environmental dust from settling 

on it. After approximately four hours the sample was reintroduced into the microscope and 

imaged again.  

Figure 5 (a) shows the graphene sample at 1200 oC. The structural support material for this particular sample failed upon heating 
and much of the sample was lost. Nevertheless, the region shown contains pristine single and multi-layer graphene, labeled. The 
brighter material entering the image at the top right is the carbon support material from the heater chip which covered a portion of 
the suspended graphene upon heating. (b) shows the circled area of the sample after four hours of air exposure and reintroduction 
into the STEM. We observed extremely heavy e-beam induced hydrocarbon contamination. Re-heating this sample was not 
possible as the microscope vacuum levels began to degrade and the heater had to be turned off. (c) shows a magnified view of the 
area circled in (b). (d, e, f) show the same sample featured in Figure 3 and 4 after being removed from the microscope and 
reintroduced the next week using the standard sample loading procedure (160 oC in vacuum for 8 hours). (d) shows the sample as 
it appeared after the initial in situ heating (i.e. Figure 3 (d)) with the dotted box indicating the location of previous e-beam 
exposure that did not become as clean. (e) shows the same suspended area after storage in air for a week. The largest differences 
are the presence of dendritic structures protruding from the edge onto the graphene surface as well as smaller speckles of 
contamination observed over the extent of the graphene. The inset shows a magnified view of the boxed area to better show fine 
detail. We note that the sample appears mostly clean, in contrast to (a, b, c). (f) shows a similar view as (e) after heating again to 
1200 oC. Most of the dendritic structure and speckling of contamination was removed. 

13 

 
 
 Figure 5 (a, b, c) show the results of this procedure. The image in (a) was acquired while 

the sample was being held at 1200 oC. We observe the same atomically clean graphene over 

extended lengths. The heater chip support material failed during heating and can be seen laying 

over the graphene (labeled). After removing the sample from the microscope for four hours and 

rintroducing it, the image shown in (b) was acquired. We observe severe e-beam deposition of 

hydrocarbon contamination and what appears to be a continuous layer of contamination over the 

entire sheet of graphene, (c) shows a magnified view of the contamination layer and deposition. 

Lattice resolved images were not possible due to the e-beam deposition, so it is possible there 

were small, nanometer-sized, areas of pristine graphene remaining. It is unclear whether the 

heavy contamination is sourced from the air or from adjacent areas of the sample which hadn’t 

been heated, nevertheless we feel it is sufficient to conclude that pristine graphene is highly 

susceptible to the adsorption of hydrocarbon contamination in agreement with the investigations 

of Li et. al..48 What is interesting, however, is that loading a sample following our standard 

loading proceedure, where we heat the magazene and cartridge with the sample to 160 oC for 

eight hours, is sufficient to remove the volitile hydrocarbon contamination observed in (b). 

Images of this observation are shown in (d, e, f). The sample shown in Figure 3 and 4 was 

removed from the microscope and stored for a week before being imaged again. We observe 

modest additional contamination following this prodedure. The sample still exhibited e-beam-

induced hydrocarbon contamination (see supplemental materials) but it is not nearely as severe 

as that shown in (b, c) and visible contaminants observed on the surface were limited to a few 

dendritic structures that appear to have grown from the edge of the support substrate as well as 

speckles of contamination over the entire surface of the graphene. Upon heating again to 1200 

oC, (f), most of this additional contamination was removed. 

14 

 
This result suggests that, although pristine graphene becomes heavily contaminated in air 

(Figure 5 (a, b, c)), a vast majority of this contamination may be removed by heating to 160 oC in 

vacuum for 8 hours (Figure 5 (d)) which is starkly different from the kind of contamination 

observed in Figure 1 on the control sample which had also undergone the same heating 

proceedure, yet remained heavily contaminated. 

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

We have explored two effective graphene cleaning procedures which we have been using to 

clean graphene for our STEM studies and we have provided our observations regarding their 

effectiveness for this purpose. In particular, we note that the Ar/O2 cleaning procedure produces 

very agreeable samples for (S)TEM investigation at room temperature without risk of e-beam-

induced hydrocarbon deposition. From a physics standpoint these samples are most interesting 

because there are other “contaminant” atoms sitting on the surface and frequently found in the 

lattice, or can even be put into the lattice, as we have recently demonstrated.50 This provides a 

wealth of physical phenomenon to explore on a single sample. From an engineering perspective 

(building devices) such a sample may not be ideal since it is still technically covered with 

contamination. In order to produce atomically clean graphene on a mesoscopic scale (microns) 

for device fabrication, the Ar/O2 cleaning procedure may be insufficient. In order address this, 

we demonstrated the effectiveness of a rapid thermal annealing procedure where the sample is 

heated to 1200 oC at a rate of 1000 oC/ms, which immediately§ produces atomically clean 

§ We were unable to determine how quickly this process occurs. In the time it took to open the gun valve and 
examine the sample again, the graphene was clean. So, for practical purposes in (S)TEM investigations, this 
procedure appears to “immediately” produce clean graphene. 

15 

 
 
                                                 
graphene. We also detail several observations regarding what occurred at various temperatures 

following the cleaning, namely: returning to room temperature retains the clean graphene but 

significant e-beam hydrocarbon deposition is observed, reheating of the amorphous deposited 

carbon converts it to graphite, and heating to 800 oC is sufficient to prevent hydrocarbon 

deposition under the e-beam. In addition, we also observe that clean graphene readily 

contaminates with volatile species in air which can mostly be removed by a 160 oC anneal for 

eight hours in a vacuum chamber. While the observations noted here are wide ranging, and each 

result is not extensively investigated from a physical perspective, we hope that, from a practical 

perspective, these results will be of help to the microscopy community in preparing 

contamination free graphene samples for atomic-scale studies. 

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION 

See supplementary material at [URL will be inserted by AIP Publishing] for additional images 

and a video of the ArO2-cleaned samples under e-beam exposure, and additional images 

documenting hydrocarbon deposition under various conditions. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We would like to thank Dr. Ivan Vlassiouk for provision of the graphene samples and Dr. 

Francois Amet for performing the argon-oxygen cleaning procedure. 

Research supported by Oak Ridge National Laboratory’s Center for Nanophase Materials 

Sciences (CNMS), which is sponsored by the Scientific User Facilities Division, Office of Basic 

Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy (S.V.K.), and by the Laboratory Directed Research 

16 

 
 
and Development Program of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, managed by UT-Battelle, LLC, 

for the U.S. Department of Energy (O.D, S.K., S.J.). 

J. He, A. Borisevich, S. V. Kalinin, S. J. Pennycook and S. T. Pantelides, Physical 

C. L. Jia, V. Nagarajan, J. Q. He, L. Houben, T. Zhao, R. Ramesh, K. Urban and R. 

A. Borisevich, O. S. Ovchinnikov, H. J. Chang, M. P. Oxley, P. Yu, J. Seidel, E. A. 

M. Varela, M. P. Oxley, W. Luo, J. Tao, M. Watanabe, A. R. Lupini, S. T. Pantelides and 

A. Y. Borisevich, H. J. Chang, M. Huijben, M. P. Oxley, S. Okamoto, M. K. Niranjan, J. 

Q. He, R. Ishikawa, A. R. Lupini, L. Qiao, E. J. Moon, O. Ovchinnikov, S. J. May, M. D. 

C. Gerber and H. P. Lang, Nature Nanotechnology 1 (1), 3-5 (2006). 
C. L. Jia, S. B. Mi, K. Urban, I. Vrejoiu, M. Alexe and D. Hesse, Nat. Mater. 7 (1), 57-61 

1. 
2. 
(2008). 
3. 
Waser, Nat. Mater. 6 (1), 64-69 (2007). 
4. 
D. Burton, E. Y. Tsymbal, Y. H. Chu, P. Yu, R. Ramesh, S. V. Kalinin and S. J. Pennycook, 
Physical Review Letters 105 (8) (2010). 
5. 
Review Letters 105 (22) (2010). 
6. 
Eliseev, A. N. Morozovska, R. Ramesh, S. J. Pennycook and S. V. Kalinin, Acs Nano 4 (10), 
6071-6079 (2010). 
7. 
Biegalski and A. Y. Borisevich, Acs Nano 9 (8), 8412-8419 (2015). 
8. 
Y. M. Kim, J. He, M. D. Biegalski, H. Ambaye, V. Lauter, H. M. Christen, S. T. 
Pantelides, S. J. Pennycook, S. V. Kalinin and A. Y. Borisevich, Nat. Mater. 11 (10), 888-894 
(2012). 
9. 
S. J. Pennycook, Physical Review B 79 (8) (2009). 
10. 
Borisevich, M. P. Oxley, W. Luo and S. T. Pantelides, in Advances in Imaging and Electron 
Physics, Vol 153, edited by P. W. Hawkes (Elsevier Academic Press Inc, San Diego, 2008), Vol. 
153, pp. 327-+. 
11. 
(6771), 746-750 (2000). 
12. 
Biol. 4 (5), 524-530 (2000). 
13.  M. Rief, F. Oesterhelt, B. Heymann and H. E. Gaub, Science 275 (5304), 1295-1297 
(1997). 
14.  M. Ziatdinov, A. Banerjee, A. Maksov, T. Berlijn, W. Zhou, H. B. Cao, J. Q. Yan, C. A. 
Bridges, D. G. Mandrus, S. E. Nagler, A. P. Baddorf and S. V. Kalinin,  7, 13774 (2016). 
15. 
S. V. Kalinin, Acs Nano 7 (5), 4403-4413 (2013). 
16. 
Phys. Lett. 106 (14) (2015). 
17. 
Baddorf, Acs Nano 4 (7), 4190-4196 (2010). 
18. 
Kalinin and A. P. Baddorf, Nano Letters 9 (11), 3720-3725 (2009). 
19. 

S. H. Pan, E. W. Hudson, K. M. Lang, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida and J. C. Davis, Nature 403 

J. Shin, A. Y. Borisevich, V. Meunier, J. Zhou, E. W. Plummer, S. V. Kalinin and A. P. 

A. Tselev, P. Ganesh, L. Qiao, W. Siemons, Z. Gai, M. D. Biegalski, A. P. Baddorf and 

H. Clausen-Schaumann, M. Seitz, R. Krautbauer and H. E. Gaub, Curr. Opin. Chem. 

J. Shin, V. B. Nascimento, G. Geneste, J. Rundgren, E. W. Plummer, B. Dkhil, S. V. 

J. Shin, S. V. Kalinin, E. W. Plummer and A. P. Baddorf, Appl. Phys. Lett. 95 (3) (2009). 

S. J. Pennycook, M. F. Chisholm, A. R. Lupini, M. Varela, K. van Benthem, A. Y. 

R. K. Vasudevan, A. Tselev, A. G. Gianfrancesco, A. P. Baddorf and S. V. Kalinin, Appl. 

17 

 
J. Shin, V. B. Nascimento, A. Y. Borisevich, E. W. Plummer, S. V. Kalinin and A. P. 

S. Forster, K. Meinel, R. Hammer, M. Trautmann and W. Widdra, Nature 502 (7470), 

S. R. Schofield, N. J. Curson, M. Y. Simmons, F. J. Ruess, T. Hallam, L. Oberbeck and 

S. Gerhold, M. Riva, B. Yildiz, M. Schmid and U. Diebold, Surface Science 651, 76-83 

T. Hitosugi, R. Shimizu, T. Ohsawa and K. Iwaya, The Chemical Record 14 (5), 935-943 

T. Susi, J. C. Meyer and J. Kotakoski, Ultramicroscopy (2017). 
Z. He, K. He, A. W. Robertson, A. I. Kirkland, D. Kim, J. Ihm, E. Yoon, G.-D. Lee and J. 

R. Sharma, Journal of Materials Research 20 (7), 1695-1707 (2005). 
A. V. Krasheninnikov and F. Banhart, Nat Mater 6 (10), 723-733 (2007). 
J. C. Meyer, C. O. Girit, M. F. Crommie and A. Zettl, Nature 454 (7202), 319-322 

20. 
Baddorf, Physical Review B 77 (24) (2008). 
21. 
(2014). 
22. 
(2016). 
23. 
215-218 (2013). 
24. 
D. M. Eigler and E. K. Schweizer, Nature 344 (6266), 524-526 (1990). 
25.  M. Fuechsle, J. A. Miwa, S. Mahapatra, H. Ryu, S. Lee, O. Warschkow, L. C. L. 
Hollenberg, G. Klimeck and M. Y. Simmons, Nature Nanotechnology 7 (4), 242-246 (2012). 
B. Weber, S. Mahapatra, H. Ryu, S. Lee, A. Fuhrer, T. C. G. Reusch, D. L. Thompson, 
26. 
W. C. T. Lee, G. Klimeck, L. C. L. Hollenberg and M. Y. Simmons, Science 335 (6064), 64-67 
(2012). 
27. 
R. G. Clark, Physical Review Letters 91 (13) (2003). 
28. 
29. 
30. 
(2008). 
31. 
32. 
H. Warner, Nano Letters 14 (7), 3766-3772 (2014). 
33. 
Scott, Nano Letters 13 (10), 4989-4995 (2013). 
34. 
(2013). 
35. 
Y. Yin and E. Ma,  1, 24 (2010). 
36. 
Zheng, A. I. Kirkland and J. H. Warner, Nano Letters 15 (9), 5950-5955 (2015). 
37. 
S. Jesse, Q. He, A. R. Lupini, D. N. Leonard, M. P. Oxley, O. Ovchinnikov, R. R. 
Unocic, A. Tselev, M. Fuentes-Cabrera, B. G. Sumpter, S. J. Pennycook, S. V. Kalinin and A. Y. 
Borisevich, Small 11 (44), 5895-5900 (2015). 
38. 
(2010). 
39. 
40. 
Physical Chemistry C 112 (46), 17741-17744 (2008). 
41. 
Ruoff, Nano Letters 9 (12), 4359-4363 (2009). 
42. 
Society 130 (38), 12612-12613 (2008). 
43.  W. F. v. Dorp, X. Zhang, B. L. Feringa, J. B. Wagner, T. W. Hansen and J. T. M. D. 
Hosson, Nanotechnology 22 (50), 505303 (2011). 
44.  W. Xie, L.-T. Weng, K. M. Ng, C. K. Chan and C.-M. Chan, Carbon 94, 740-748 (2015). 

J. Nan, Reports on Progress in Physics 79 (1), 016501 (2016). 
A. Reina, H. Son, L. Jiao, B. Fan, M. S. Dresselhaus, Z. Liu and J. Kong, The Journal of 

K. Zheng, C. Wang, Y.-Q. Cheng, Y. Yue, X. Han, Z. Zhang, Z. Shan, S. X. Mao, M. Ye, 

X. Li, Y. Zhu, W. Cai, M. Borysiak, B. Han, D. Chen, R. D. Piner, L. Colombo and R. S. 

L. Jiao, B. Fan, X. Xian, Z. Wu, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Journal of the American Chemical 

Z. Wei, Z. Qiang, Z. Meng-Qiang and K. Luise Theil, Nanotechnology 24 (27), 275301 

A. W. Robertson, G.-D. Lee, K. He, Y. Fan, C. S. Allen, S. Lee, H. Kim, E. Yoon, H. 

Q. M. Ramasse, C. R. Seabourne, D.-M. Kepaptsoglou, R. Zan, U. Bangert and A. J. 

A. V. Krasheninnikov and K. Nordlund, Journal of Applied Physics 107 (7), 071301 

18 

 
Y.-C. Lin, C.-C. Lu, C.-H. Yeh, C. Jin, K. Suenaga and P.-W. Chiu, Nano Letters 12 (1), 

Y.-C. Lin, C. Jin, J.-C. Lee, S.-F. Jen, K. Suenaga and P.-W. Chiu, ACS Nano 5 (3), 

X. Liang, B. A. Sperling, I. Calizo, G. Cheng, C. A. Hacker, Q. Zhang, Y. Obeng, K. 

45. 
414-419 (2012). 
46. 
2362-2368 (2011). 
47. 
Yan, H. Peng, Q. Li, X. Zhu, H. Yuan, A. R. Hight Walker, Z. Liu, L.-m. Peng and C. A. 
Richter, ACS Nano 5 (11), 9144-9153 (2011). 
Z. Li, Y. Wang, A. Kozbial, G. Shenoy, F. Zhou, R. McGinley, P. Ireland, B. 
48. 
Morganstein, A. Kunkel, S. P. Surwade, L. Li and H. Liu, Nat Mater 12 (10), 925-931 (2013). 
49. 
A. G. F. Garcia, M. Neumann, F. Amet, J. R. Williams, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and 
D. Goldhaber-Gordon, Nano Letters 12 (9), 4449-4454 (2012). 
50. 

O. Dyck, S. Kim, S. V. Kalinin and S. Jesse, ArXiv preprint arXiv:1708.01523 (2017). 

19 

 
 
 
 
Supplementary Information 

In Figure S1 we show several example images of an Ar/O2 cleaned sample. In a) we 

show how scanning the beam over the material causes the contamination to contract and reveal 

pristine graphene. b) and c) show higher magnification images of the pristine areas of graphene 

where we can see the adsorbed atoms and those occupying hole edges and substitutional 

positions in the lattice. d) and e) are the first and last frames of the accompanying time-lapse 

video of the contamination dynamics. The two images were acquired 3.7 minutes apart. 

Figure S2 (a, b) show the results of heating the hydrocarbon deposition to 1200 oC. By 

the discrete steps in intensity we conclude that the amorphous contamination was converted to a 

graphitic structure. After the initial 1200 oC cleaning, (c, d, e) show a series of HAADF images, 

acquired in succession, illustrating the hydrocarbon deposition observed at 500 oC. This 

deposition occurs more gradually than that observed at room temperature and appears to be 

graphitic as evidenced by the steps in intensity observed in (f), which was acquired after the 

deposition in (c, d, e) at a lower magnification. (g, h) were acquired at 800 oC after the initial 

1200 oC cleaning. E-beam deposition was no longer observed at this temperature and lattice 

images were able to be acquired. 

Figure S3 shows what we observed after removing the cleaned sample from the 

microscope, storing it for a week, and reexamining it. Prior to loading the sample, it was baked 

in vacuum at 160 oC for eight hours. The most notable change observed was the presence of 

dendritic carbonaceous material extending from the edges of the support membrane. 

This result is in stark contrast to that observed in Figure 5 (b, c) where excessive 

hydrocarbon contamination was observed to cover the graphene. We thus conclude that the mild 

20 

 
heat treatment (160 oC for eight hours in vacuum) is sufficient to remove most of this type of 

contamination from graphene. Nevertheless, higher beam fluence occurring from smaller scan 

areas like those shown in Figure S3 (b, c, d) exhibited hydrocarbon deposition, as expected. 

Heating the sample again to 1200 oC removes much of the dendritic structure, as shown in Figure 

S3 (f, g). 

21 

 
 
 
Figure S1 (a, b, c) show a variety of magnifications of the Ar/O2 cleaned sample after the e-beam was scanned over several 
locations. In particular, in (a) we can clearly distinguish several locations where the beam was scanning that have become cleaner 
in large square patches. In (b, c) we can clearly see the graphene lattice, illustrating how clean it becomes and the interesting 
adsorbed atoms on the surface, in holes, and substitutional positions. (d, e) are the first and last frames from the accompanying 
time lapse series (3.7 minutes real time) of the contamination dynamics.  

22 

 
 
 
Figure S2 (a, b) show the conversion of the amorphous hydrocarbon deposition from Figure 4 (b) in the text to graphitic carbon 
upon heating to 1200 oC. This is evidenced by the discrete steps in intensity indicating steps in number of layers of the underlying 
material which is not present in amorphous materials. (c, d, e) show a series of images acquired back-to-back at 500 oC after the 
initial 1200 oC cleaning. We observe a steady deposition of hydrocarbon contamination. Rather than amorphous carbon, this 
appears to be forming a layered structure indicative of graphite. (f) shows a lower magnification view of the deposition 
introduced in (c, d, e) where the intensity steps are more clearly discernable. (g, h) are images acquired at 800 oC after the initial 
1200 oC cleaning. E-beam deposition was no longer observed. 

23 

 
 
 
Figure S3 (a, b, c, d, e) illustrate the growth of graphitic carbon contamination under e-beam exposure. (b, c, d) are images 
scanned over the area circled in (a) and the circle in (e) shows the result. (f, g) show the dendritic structure before and after 
heating to 1200 oC. We see that most of this contamination is freed by the heating process but some remained stuck to the 
surface. It is unclear if this is due to e-beam exposure prior to heating. 

24 

 
 
 
