7
1
0
2

t
c
O
2

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

3
v
7
3
5
1
0
.
9
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Published in Astroparticle Physics as DOI:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2017.09.001

Spectral Calibration of the Fluorescence
Telescopes of the Pierre Auger Observatory

A. Aabbz, P. Abreubq, M. Agliettaax,aw, I. Al Samaraiaf,
I.F.M. Albuquerquer, I. Allekottea, A. Almelah,k, J. Alvarez Castillobm,
J. Alvarez-Mu˜nizby, G.A. Anastasiao,aq, L. Anchordoquicf, B. Andradah,
S. Andringabq, C. Aramoau, F. Arquerosbw, N. Arsenebs, H. Asoreya,aa,
P. Assisbq, J. Aublinaf, G. Avilai,j, A.M. Badescubt, A. Balaceanubr,
F. Barbatobe, R.J. Barreira Luzbq, J.J. Beattyck, K.H. Beckerah,
J.A. Bellidol, C. Beratag, M.E. Bertainabg,aw, P.L. Biermanncp, J. Biteauae,
S.G. Blaessl, A. Blancobq, J. Blazekac, C. Bleveba,as, M. Boh´aˇcov´aac,
D. Boncioliaq,cr, C. Bonifazix, N. Borodaibn, A.M. Bottih,aj, J. Brackcv,
I. Brancusbr, T. Bretzal, A. Bridgemanaj, F.L. Briechleal, P. Buchholzan,
A. Buenobx, S. Buitinkbz, M. Buscemibc,ar, K.S. Caballero-Morabk,
L. Caccianigabd, A. Canciok,h, F. Canforabz, L. Carametebs, R. Carusobc,ar,
A. Castellinaax,aw, F. Catalanir, G. Cataldias, L. Cazonbq, A.G. Chavezbl,
J.A. Chinellatos, J. Chudobaac, R.W. Clayl, A. Cobosh, R. Colalillobe,au,
A. Colemancl, L. Collicaaw, M.R. Colucciaba,as, R. Concei¸c˜aobq,
G. Consolatiat,ay, F. Contrerasi,j, M.J. Cooperl, S. Coutucl, C.E. Covaultcd,
J. Cronincm, S. D’Amicoaz,as, B. Daniels, S. Dassoe,c, K. Daumilleraj,
B.R. Dawsonl, R.M. de Almeidaz, S.J. de Jongbz,cb, G. De Maurobz,
J.R.T. de Mello Netox,y, I. De Mitriba,as, J. de Oliveiraz, V. de Souzaq,
J. Debatinaj, O. Delignyae, M.L. D´ıaz Castros, F. Diogobq, C. Dobrigkeits,
J.C. D’Olivobm, Q. Dorostian, R.C. dos Anjosw, M.T. Dovad,
A. Dundovicam, J. Ebrac, R. Engelaj, M. Erdmannal, M. Erfanian,
C.O. Escobarct, J. Espadanalbq, A. Etchegoyenh,k, H. Falckebz,cc,cb,
J. Farmercm, G. Farrarci, A.C. Fauths, N. Fazzinict, F. Fenubg,aw, B. Fickch,
J.M. Figueirah, A. Filipˇciˇcbu,bv, O. Fratubt, M.M. Freiref, T. Fujiicm,
A. Fusterh,k, R. Gaioraf, B. Garc´ıag, D. Garcia-Pintobw, F. Gat´ecs,

∗Corresponding Author. E-mail address: auger spokespersons@fnal.gov

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

October 3, 2017

 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Gemmekeak, A. Gherghel-Lascubr, P.L. Ghiaae, U. Giaccarix,
M. Giammarchiat, M. Gillerbo, D. G(cid:32)lasbp, C. Glaseral, G. Golupa, M. G´omez
Berissoa, P.F. G´omez Vitalei,j, N. Gonz´alezh,aj, B. Gookincv, A. Gorgiax,aw,
P. Gorhamcw, A.F. Grilloaq, T.D. Grubbl, F. Guarinobe,au, G.P. Guedest,
R. Hallidaycd, M.R. Hampelh, P. Hansend, D. Hararia, T.A. Harrisonl,
J.L. Hartoncv, A. Haungsaj, T. Hebbekeral, D. Heckaj, P. Heimannan,
A.E. Herveai, G.C. Hilll, C. Hojvatct, E. Holtaj,h, P. Homolabn,
J.R. H¨orandelbz,cb, P. Horvathad, M. Hrabovsk´yad, T. Huegeaj,
J. Hulsmanh,aj, A. Insoliabc,ar, P.G. Isarbs, I. Jandtah, J.A. Johnsence,
M. Josebachuilih, J. Jurysekac, A. K¨a¨ap¨aah, O. Kambeitzai,
K.H. Kampertah, B. Keilhaueraj, N. Kemmerichr, E. Kemps, J. Kempal,
R.M. Kieckhaferch, H.O. Klagesaj, M. Kleifgesak, J. Kleinfelleri, R. Krauseal,
N. Krohmah, D. Kuempelal, G. Kukec Mezekbv, N. Kunkaak, A. Kuotb
Awadaj, B.L. Lagoo, D. LaHurdcd, R.G. Langq, M. Lauscheral,
R. Leguminabo, M.A. Leigui de Oliveirav, A. Letessier-Selvonaf,
I. Lhenry-Yvonae, K. Linkai, D. Lo Prestibc, L. Lopesbq, R. L´opezbh,
A. L´opez Casadoby, R. Lorekcd, Q. Luceae, A. Luceroh,k, M. Malacaricm,
M. Mallamacibd,at, D. Mandatac, P. Mantschct, A.G. Mariazzid, I.C. Mari¸sm,
G. Marsellaba,as, D. Martelloba,as, H. Martinezbi, O. Mart´ınez Bravobh,
J.J. Mas´ıas Mezac, H.J. Mathesaj, S. Mathysah, J. Matthewscg,
J.A.J. Matthewscx, G. Matthiaebf,av, E. Mayotteah, P.O. Mazurct,
C. Medinace, G. Medina-Tancobm, D. Meloh, A. Menshikovak,
K.-D. Merendace, S. Michalad, M.I. Michelettif, L. Middendorfal,
L. Miramontibd,at, B. Mitricabr, D. Mocklerai, S. Molleracha, F. Montanetag,
C. Morelloax,aw, M. Mostaf´acl, A.L. M¨ullerh,aj, G. M¨ulleral, M.A. Mullers,u,
S. M¨ulleraj,h, R. Mussaaw, I. Naranjoa, L. Nellenbm, P.H. Nguyenl,
M. Niculescu-Oglinzanubr, M. Niechciolan, L. Niemietzah, T. Niggemannal,
D. Nitzch, D. Nosekab, V. Novotnyab, L. Noˇzkaad, L.A. N´u˜nezaa, L. Ochiloan,
F. Oikonomoucl, A. Olintocm, M. Palatkaac, J. Pallottab, P. Papenbreerah,
G. Parenteby, A. Parrabh, T. Paulcf, M. Pechac, F. Pedreiraby, J. P¸ekalabn,
R. Pelayobj, J. Pe˜na-Rodriguezaa, L. A. S. Pereiras, M. Perlinh,
L. Perroneba,as, C. Petersal, S. Petreraao,aq, J. Phuntsokcl, R. Piegaiac,
T. Pierogaj, M. Pimentabq, V. Pirronellobc,ar, M. Platinoh, M. Plumal,
C. Porowskibn, R.R. Pradoq, P. Priviteracm, M. Prouzaac, E.J. Quelb,
S. Querchfeldah, S. Quinncd, R. Ramos-Pollanaa, J. Rautenbergah,
D. Ravignanih, J. Ridkyac, F. Riehnbq, M. Rissean, P. Ristorib, V. Rizibb,aq,
W. Rodrigues de Carvalhor, G. Rodriguez Fernandezbf,av, J. Rodriguez
Rojoi, D. Rogozinaj, M.J. Roncoronih, M. Rothaj, E. Rouleta, A.C. Roveroe,

2

P. Ruehlan, S.J. Saﬃl, A. Saftoiubr, F. Salamidabb,aq, H. Salazarbh,
A. Salehbv, F. Salesa Greuscl, G. Salinaav, F. S´anchezh, P. Sanchez-Lucasbx,
E.M. Santosr, E. Santosh, F. Sarazince, R. Sarmentobq, C. Sarmiento-Canoh,
R. Satoi, M. Schauerah, V. Scherinias, H. Schieleraj, M. Schimpah,
D. Schmidtaj,h, O. Scholtenca,cq, P. Schov´anekac, F.G. Schr¨oderaj,
S. Schr¨oderah, A. Schulzai, J. Schumacheral, S.J. Sciuttod, A. Segretoap,ar,
A. Shadkamcg, R.C. Shellardn, G. Siglam, G. Sillih,aj, O. Simacu,
A. ´Smia(cid:32)lkowskibo, R. ˇSm´ıdaaj, G.R. Snowcn, P. Sommerscl, S. Sonntagan,
R. Squartinii, D. Stancabr, S. Staniˇcbv, J. Stasielakbn, P. Stassiag,
M. Stolpovskiyag, F. Strafellaba,as, A. Streichai, F. Suarezh,k, M. Suarez
Dur´anaa, T. Sudholzl, T. Suomij¨arviae, A.D. Supanitskye, J. ˇSup´ıkad,
J. Swaincj, Z. Szadkowskibp, A. Taboadaai, O.A. Tabordaa, V.M. Theodoros,
C. Timmermanscb,bz, C.J. Todero Peixotop, L. Tomankovaaj, B. Tom´ebq,
G. Torralba Elipeby, P. Travnicekac, M. Trinibv, R. Ulrichaj, M. Ungeraj,
M. Urbanal, J.F. Vald´es Galiciabm, I. Vali˜noby, L. Valorebe,au, G. van Aarbz,
P. van Bodegoml, A.M. van den Bergca, A. van Vlietbz, E. Varelabh,
B. Vargas C´ardenasbm, G. Varnercw, R.A. V´azquezby, D. Veberiˇcaj,
C. Venturay, I.D. Vergara Quisped, V. Verziav, J. Vichaac, L. Villase˜norbl,
S. Vorobiovbv, H. Wahlbergd, O. Wainbergh,k, D. Walzal, A.A. Watsonco,
M. Weberak, A. Weindlaj, L. Wienckece, H. Wilczy´nskibn, M. Wirtzal,
D. Wittkowskiah, B. Wundheilerh, L. Yangbv, A. Yushkovh, E. Zasby,
D. Zavrtanikbv,bu, M. Zavrtanikbu,bv, A. Zepedabi, B. Zimmermannak,
M. Ziolkowskian, Z. Zongae, F. Zuccarellobc,ar, The Pierre Auger
Collaboration∗

aCentro At´omico Bariloche and Instituto Balseiro (CNEA-UNCuyo-CONICET), San
Carlos de Bariloche, Argentina
bCentro de Investigaciones en L´aseres y Aplicaciones, CITEDEF and CONICET, Villa
Martelli, Argentina
cDepartamento de F´ısica and Departamento de Ciencias de la Atm´osfera y los Oc´eanos,
FCEyN, Universidad de Buenos Aires and CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina
dIFLP, Universidad Nacional de La Plata and CONICET, La Plata, Argentina
eInstituto de Astronom´ıa y F´ısica del Espacio (IAFE, CONICET-UBA), Buenos Aires,
Argentina
fInstituto de F´ısica de Rosario (IFIR) – CONICET/U.N.R. and Facultad de Ciencias
Bioqu´ımicas y Farmac´euticas U.N.R., Rosario, Argentina
gInstituto de Tecnolog´ıas en Detecci´on y Astropart´ıculas (CNEA, CONICET, UNSAM),
and Universidad Tecnol´ogica Nacional – Facultad Regional Mendoza
(CONICET/CNEA), Mendoza, Argentina
hInstituto de Tecnolog´ıas en Detecci´on y Astropart´ıculas (CNEA, CONICET, UNSAM),
Buenos Aires, Argentina

3

iObservatorio Pierre Auger, Malarg¨ue, Argentina
jObservatorio Pierre Auger and Comisi´on Nacional de Energ´ıa At´omica, Malarg¨ue,
Argentina
kUniversidad Tecnol´ogica Nacional – Facultad Regional Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina
lUniversity of Adelaide, Adelaide, S.A., Australia
mUniversit´e Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium
nCentro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
oCentro Federal de Educa¸c˜ao Tecnol´ogica Celso Suckow da Fonseca, Nova Friburgo,
Brazil
pUniversidade de S˜ao Paulo, Escola de Engenharia de Lorena, Lorena, SP, Brazil
qUniversidade de S˜ao Paulo, Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos, S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil
rUniversidade de S˜ao Paulo, Instituto de F´ısica, S˜ao Paulo, SP, Brazil
sUniversidade Estadual de Campinas, IFGW, Campinas, SP, Brazil
tUniversidade Estadual de Feira de Santana, Feira de Santana, Brazil
uUniversidade Federal de Pelotas, Pelotas, RS, Brazil
vUniversidade Federal do ABC, Santo Andr´e, SP, Brazil
wUniversidade Federal do Paran´a, Setor Palotina, Palotina, Brazil
xUniversidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Instituto de F´ısica, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
yUniversidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Observat´orio do Valongo, Rio de
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
zUniversidade Federal Fluminense, EEIMVR, Volta Redonda, RJ, Brazil
aaUniversidad Industrial de Santander, Bucaramanga, Colombia
abCharles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Institute of Particle and
Nuclear Physics, Prague, Czech Republic
acInstitute of Physics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic
adPalacky University, RCPTM, Olomouc, Czech Republic
aeInstitut de Physique Nucl´eaire d’Orsay (IPNO), Universit´e Paris-Sud, Univ.
Paris/Saclay, CNRS-IN2P3, Orsay, France
afLaboratoire de Physique Nucl´eaire et de Hautes Energies (LPNHE), Universit´es Paris
6 et Paris 7, CNRS-IN2P3, Paris, France
agLaboratoire de Physique Subatomique et de Cosmologie (LPSC), Universit´e
Grenoble-Alpes, CNRS/IN2P3, Grenoble, France
ahBergische Universit¨at Wuppertal, Department of Physics, Wuppertal, Germany
aiKarlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institut f¨ur Experimentelle Kernphysik (IEKP),
Karlsruhe, Germany
ajKarlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institut f¨ur Kernphysik, Karlsruhe, Germany
akKarlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institut f¨ur Prozessdatenverarbeitung und
Elektronik, Karlsruhe, Germany
alRWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut A, Aachen, Germany
amUniversit¨at Hamburg, II. Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Hamburg, Germany
anUniversit¨at Siegen, Fachbereich 7 Physik – Experimentelle Teilchenphysik, Siegen,
Germany
aoGran Sasso Science Institute (INFN), L’Aquila, Italy
apINAF – Istituto di Astroﬁsica Spaziale e Fisica Cosmica di Palermo, Palermo, Italy

4

aqINFN Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso, Assergi (L’Aquila), Italy
arINFN, Sezione di Catania, Catania, Italy
asINFN, Sezione di Lecce, Lecce, Italy
atINFN, Sezione di Milano, Milano, Italy
auINFN, Sezione di Napoli, Napoli, Italy
avINFN, Sezione di Roma ”Tor Vergata”, Roma, Italy
awINFN, Sezione di Torino, Torino, Italy
axOsservatorio Astroﬁsico di Torino (INAF), Torino, Italy
ayPolitecnico di Milano, Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Aerospaziali , Milano, Italy
azUniversit`a del Salento, Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Lecce, Italy
baUniversit`a del Salento, Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica “E. De Giorgi”, Lecce,
Italy
bbUniversit`a dell’Aquila, Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche e Chimiche, L’Aquila, Italy
bcUniversit`a di Catania, Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Catania, Italy
bdUniversit`a di Milano, Dipartimento di Fisica, Milano, Italy
beUniversit`a di Napoli ”Federico II”, Dipartimento di Fisica “Ettore Pancini“, Napoli,
Italy
bfUniversit`a di Roma “Tor Vergata”, Dipartimento di Fisica, Roma, Italy
bgUniversit`a Torino, Dipartimento di Fisica, Torino, Italy
bhBenem´erita Universidad Aut´onoma de Puebla, Puebla, M´exico
biCentro de Investigaci´on y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN (CINVESTAV), M´exico,
D.F., M´exico
bjUnidad Profesional Interdisciplinaria en Ingenier´ıa y Tecnolog´ıas Avanzadas del
Instituto Polit´ecnico Nacional (UPIITA-IPN), M´exico, D.F., M´exico
bkUniversidad Aut´onoma de Chiapas, Tuxtla Guti´errez, Chiapas, M´exico
blUniversidad Michoacana de San Nicol´as de Hidalgo, Morelia, Michoac´an, M´exico
bmUniversidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico, M´exico, D.F., M´exico
bnInstitute of Nuclear Physics PAN, Krakow, Poland
boUniversity of (cid:32)L´od´z, Faculty of Astrophysics, (cid:32)L´od´z, Poland
bpUniversity of (cid:32)L´od´z, Faculty of High-Energy Astrophysics,(cid:32)L´od´z, Poland
bqLaborat´orio de Instrumenta¸c˜ao e F´ısica Experimental de Part´ıculas – LIP and Instituto
Superior T´ecnico – IST, Universidade de Lisboa – UL, Lisboa, Portugal
br“Horia Hulubei” National Institute for Physics and Nuclear Engineering,
Bucharest-Magurele, Romania
bsInstitute of Space Science, Bucharest-Magurele, Romania
btUniversity Politehnica of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania
buExperimental Particle Physics Department, J. Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia
bvCenter for Astrophysics and Cosmology (CAC), University of Nova Gorica, Nova
Gorica, Slovenia
bwUniversidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
bxUniversidad de Granada and C.A.F.P.E., Granada, Spain
byUniversidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain
bzIMAPP, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
caKVI – Center for Advanced Radiation Technology, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands

5

cbNationaal Instituut voor Kernfysica en Hoge Energie Fysica (NIKHEF), Science Park,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
ccStichting Astronomisch Onderzoek in Nederland (ASTRON), Dwingeloo, The
Netherlands
cdCase Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA
ceColorado School of Mines, Golden, CO, USA
cfDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Lehman College, City University of New York,
Bronx, NY, USA
cgLouisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA
chMichigan Technological University, Houghton, MI, USA
ciNew York University, New York, NY, USA
cjNortheastern University, Boston, MA, USA
ckOhio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
clPennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA
cmUniversity of Chicago, Enrico Fermi Institute, Chicago, IL, USA
cnUniversity of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA
coSchool of Physics and Astronomy, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom
cpMax-Planck-Institut f¨ur Radioastronomie, Bonn, Germany
cqalso at Vrije Universiteit Brussels, Brussels, Belgium
crnow at Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY), Zeuthen, Germany
csSUBATECH, ´Ecole des Mines de Nantes, CNRS-IN2P3, Universit´e de Nantes, France
ctFermi National Accelerator Laboratory, USA
cuUniversity of Bucharest, Physics Department, Bucharest, Romania
cvColorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
cwUniversity of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA
cxUniversity of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA

Abstract

We present a novel method to measure precisely the relative spectral re-
sponse of the ﬂuorescence telescopes of the Pierre Auger Observatory. We
used a portable light source based on a xenon ﬂasher and a monochromator
to measure the relative spectral eﬃciencies of eight telescopes in steps of 5
nm from 280 nm to 440 nm. Each point in a scan had approximately 2 nm
FWHM out of the monochromator. Diﬀerent sets of telescopes in the obser-
vatory have diﬀerent optical components, and the eight telescopes measured
represent two each of the four combinations of components represented in
the observatory. We made an end-to-end measurement of the response from
diﬀerent combinations of optical components, and the monochromator setup
allowed for more precise and complete measurements than our previous multi-

6

wavelength calibrations. We ﬁnd an overall uncertainty in the calibration of
the spectral response of most of the telescopes of 1.5% for all wavelengths;
the six oldest telescopes have larger overall uncertainties of about 2.2%. We
also report changes in physics measureables due to the change in calibration,
which are generally small.

Keywords: Auger Observatory, Nitrogen Fluorescence, Extensive Air
Shower, Calibration

1. Introduction

The Pierre Auger Observatory [1] has been designed to study the origin
and the nature of ultra high-energy cosmic rays, which have energies above
1018 eV. The construction of the complete observatory following the original
design ﬁnished in 2008. The observatory is located in Malarg¨ue, Argentina,
and consists of two complementary detector systems, which provide inde-
pendent information on the cosmic ray events. Extensive Air Showers (EAS)
initiated by cosmic rays in the Earth’s atmosphere are measured by the Sur-
face Detector (SD) and the Fluorescence Detector (FD). The SD is composed
of 1660 water Cherenkov detectors located mostly on a triangular array of
1.5 km spacing covering an area of roughly 3000 km2. The SD measures the
EAS secondary particles reaching ground level [2]. The FD is designed to
measure the nitrogen ﬂuorescence light produced in the atmosphere by the
EAS secondary particles. The FD is composed of 27 telescopes overlooking
the SD array from four sites, Los Leones (LL), Los Morados (LM), Loma
Amarilla (LA), and Coihueco (CO) [3]. The SD takes data continuously, but
the FD operates only on clear nights, and care is taken to avoid exposure to
too much moonlight.

The energy of the primary cosmic ray is a key measurable for the science of
the observatory, and the FD measurement of the energy, with lower indepen-
dent systematic uncertainties, is used to calibrate the SD energy scale using
events observed by both detectors. The work described here explains how the
FD calibration at wavelengths across the nitrogen ﬂuorescence spectrum has
recently been improved, resulting in smaller related systematic uncertainties.
The buildings at the four FD sites each have six independent telescopes,
and each telescope has a 30°× 30° ﬁeld of view, leading to a 180° coverage in
azimuth and from 2° to 32° in elevation at each building. Additionally, three
specialized telescopes called HEAT [4] are located near Coihueco to overlook

7

a portion of the SD array at higher elevations, from 32° to 62°, to register
EAS of lower energies. All these telescopes are housed in climate-controlled
buildings, isolated from dust and day light. The layout of the observatory is
shown schematically in Figure 1.

Figure 1: A schematic of the Pierre Auger Observatory where each black dot is a water
Cherenkov detector. Locations of the ﬂuorescence telescopes are shown along the perimeter
of the surface detector array, where the blue lines indicate their individual ﬁeld of view.
The ﬁeld of view of the HEAT telescopes are indicated with red lines.

Each FD telescope is composed of several optical components as shown in
Figure 2: a 2.2 m aperture diaphragm, a UV ﬁlter to reduce the background
light, a Schmidt corrector annulus, a 3.5 m × 3.5 m tessellated spherical
mirror, and a camera formed by an array of 440 hexagonal photomultipliers
(PMT) each with a ﬁeld of view of 1.5° full angle. Each PMT has a light
concentrator approximating a hexagonal Winston cone to reduce dead spaces
between PMTs [3].

The energy calibration of the data [5, 6] for the Pierre Auger Observa-
tory, including events observed by the SD only, relies on the calibration of
the FD. Events observed by both FD and SD provide the link from the FD,
which is absolutely calibrated, to the SD data. To calibrate the FD three
diﬀerent procedures are performed: the absolute [7], the relative [8], and the
spectral (or multi-wavelength) calibrations [9]. We focus here on the spectral
calibration, which is a relative measurement that relates the absolute cali-
bration performed at 365 nm to wavelengths across the nitrogen ﬂuorescence
spectrum, which is shown in Figure 3.

8

Figure 2: The optical components of an individual ﬂuorescence telescope.

To perform this measurement the drum-shaped portable light source used
for the absolute calibration [7] was adapted to emit UV light across the
wavelength range of interest. The drum light source is designed to uniformly
illuminate all 440 PMTs in a single camera simultaneously when it is placed
at the aperture of the FD telescope, enabling the end-to-end calibration.

The FD response as a function of wavelength was initially calculated as
a convolution of separate reﬂection or transmission measurements of each
optical component used in the ﬁrst Los Leones telescopes [11]. The ﬁrst end-
to-end spectral calibration of the FD was performed using the drum light
source with a xenon ﬂasher and ﬁlter wheel to provide ﬁve points across the
FD wavelength response [9]. This measurement represented an improvement
for the energy estimation of all events observed by the Pierre Auger Obser-
vatory as it has been shown to increase the reconstructed energy of events
by nearly 4% for all energies [12]. However, that result has two limitations:
ﬁrst, the diﬀerences in FD optical components were not measured since only
one telescope was calibrated; and second, determining the FD spectral re-
sponse curve using only ﬁve points involved a complicated ﬁtting procedure,
and was particularly diﬃcult considering the large width of the ﬁlters, which
resulted in relatively large systematic uncertainties.

The aim of the work described in this paper was to measure the FD
eﬃciency at many points across the nitrogen ﬂuorescence spectrum with a

9

Figure 3: The nitrogen ﬂuorescence spectrum as measured by the AIRFLY collaboration
[10] showing the 21 major transitions.

reduced wavelength bite at each point, and to do it at enough telescopes
to cover the diﬀerent combinations of optical components making up all the
telescopes within the Auger Observatory. The spectral calibration described
here proceeds in three steps. First, the relative drum emission spectrum is
measured in the dark hall lab in Malarg¨ue with a speciﬁc calibration PMT,
called the “Lab-PMT”, observing the drum at a large distance, in a simi-
lar fashion to the absolute calibration of the drum; see [7] and explanatory
drawings therein. Knowing the intensity of the drum at each wavelength, we
next measure the response of the FD telescopes to the output of the multi-
wavelength drum over the course of several nights, while recording data from
a monitoring photodiode (PD) exposed to the narrow-band light at each point
to ensure knowledge of the relative drum spectrum. Finally, the FD telescope
response is normalized by the measured relative drum emission spectrum at
every wavelength, and we evaluate the associated systematic uncertainties in
the ﬁnal calculation of the eﬃciency.

This following sections describe the measurements and analysis of data
taken during March 2014: FD optical components in section 2; the new drum
light source in section 3; measurements of the drum light source spectrum
in section 4; calibrations performed at the FD telescopes in section 5; FD
eﬃciency as a function of wavelength in section 6; and ﬁnal calibration results
in section 7. Eﬀects on physics measurables due to changing calibrations are
discussed in section 8.

10

2. Optical Components of the Fluorescence Telescopes

There are two types of mirrors used in the telescopes, and the glass used
for the corrector rings was produced using two diﬀerent glass-making proce-
dures. The 12 mirrors at Los Leones and Los Morados are aluminum with a
2 mm AlMgSiO5 layer glued on as the reﬂective surface, and the 12 mirrors
at Coihueco and Loma Amarilla are composed of a borosilicate glass with
a 90 nm Al layer and then a 110 nm SiO2 layer (see [3] for more details).
Two diﬀerent procedures were used to grow the borosilicate glass used in
the corrector rings, both by Schott Glass Manufactures1. One type is called
Boroﬂoat 332, and the other is a crown glass labeled P-BK73, and the trans-
mission of UV light diﬀers for these two products.

Given the diﬀerent wavelength dependencies of the above components,
our aim was to measure the four combinations of mirrors and corrector rings
present in the FDs. This meant calibrating at three of the four FD build-
ings. Table 1 shows the eight telescopes we calibrated at the three FD sites
along with which components make up each telescope. Calibration of these
eight telescopes gives a complete coverage of the diﬀerent components and a
duplicate measure of each combination.

As seen in Table 1, the telescopes CO 4/5 are the only ones that have
same nominal components as those located at other FD buildings, which have
diﬀerent construction dates. It is usualy the case that optical components
degrade their properties when exposed to light and ambient conditions (age-
ing), whose eﬀect depends on exposure time. Even if FD telescopes are kept
in climate-controlled buildings, an analysis of ageing follows. Regarding the
spectral calibration, what has to be evaluated is the change in the spectral
response of a given FD telescope, i.e. the shape of the response curve vs
wavelength. This kind of diﬀerential degradation is not obviously seen at
the FD telescopes. One way to evaluate whether there is any change in the
spectral response is to track the absolute calibration done periodically at 375
nm [1, 2]. The absolute calibration is scaled at any given date by using the
nightly relative calibration, which is done at 470 nm [1, 2]. Because these
two calibrations are done at diﬀerent wavelengths, any change in the spec-

1Schott Glass, http://www.us.schott.com/english/index.html
2Boroﬂoat, http://www.us.schott.com/borofloat/english/attribute/optical
3P-BK7, http://www.schott.com/advanced_optics/us/abbe_datasheets/schott_

datasheet_all_us.pdf

11

Table 1: List of the FD telescopes we calibrated and their respective optical components.
Calibration at these eight FD telescopes gives a complete coverage of the diﬀerent compo-
nents and a duplicate measure of each combination. The last column indicates all other
(unmeasured) telescopes with the same optical components.

FD telescope Mirror Type Corrector Ring FDs with same
components

Coihueco 2
Coihueco 3
Coihueco 4
Coihueco 5
Los Morados 4
Los Morados 5
Los Leones 3
Los Leones 4

Glass
Glass
Glass
Glass
Aluminum
Aluminum
Aluminum
Aluminum

BK7
BK7
Boroﬂoat 33
Boroﬂoat 33
Boroﬂoat 33
Boroﬂoat 33
BK7
BK7

CO2/3
CO1,4-6, LA,
HEAT

LM

LL1-6

tral response would translate in a drift of the absolute calibration with time.
In Table 2 we show the variations of the ratio (R) of absolute calibrations
performed in 2010 and 2013, where R = (Abs2013 − Abs2010)/Abs2013, along
with the date of ﬁnished construction for telescopes at a given building. As
seen in the table, the variations do not respond to any ageing pattern, e.g.
for the oldest telescopes there is a positive variation for LL and a negative
variation for CO. Moreover, the overall eﬀect that telescopes could have in
data analysis do not change the ﬁnal reconstructed energy signiﬁcantly (see
Fig. 49 in [1]). For these reasons, we consider that diﬀerent time of telescope
construction do not play a role in the spectral calibration described in this
paper and, consequently, CO 4/5 can be taken as representative of LA and
HEAT.

3. Monochromator Drum Setup

The work described in [9] was the ﬁrst in-situ end-to-end measurement
of the FD eﬃciency as a function of wavelength. It limited the measurement
to only ﬁve points across the ∼150 nm wide acceptance of the FDs, and the
ﬁlters had a fairly wide spectral width, about ∼15 nm FWHM, as shown in
the bottom of Figure 4. The large spectral width led to a complicated pro-

12

Table 2: List of FD buildings and dates when construction was ﬁnished and operation
started. ∆t is the elapsed time until measurements done for this work (March 2014). R is
the ratio of absolute calibrations performed in 2010 and 2013 (see text).

FD building
Los Leones
Coihueco
Los Morados
Loma Amarilla
HEAT

Built ∆t [yr] R [%]
9.8 + 1.4
5/2004
– 1.6
9.8
5/2004
– 0.5
9.0
3/2005
7.1
2/2007
– 0.8
4.5
9/2009

cedure of accounting for the width eﬀects along the rising and falling edges
of the eﬃciency curve [9]. In addition, since there were only ﬁve measured
points, the resulting calibration curve had to be interpolated between the
points, and the original piece-wise eﬃciency curve [11] was used as the start-
ing point. In the ﬁve-point measurement [9] the eﬃciency was assumed to go
to zero below 290 nm and above 425 nm since the ﬁlters did not extend to
these wavelengths, thus the values resulting from the piece-wise convolution
of the component eﬃciencies [11] were the only data for wavelengths below
290 nm and above 425 nm.

These reasons are the motivation for using a monochromator to select
the wavelengths out of a UV spectrum. A monochromator allows for a high
resolution probe across the FD acceptance, and a far more detailed mea-
surement can be performed. The top of Figure 4 shows the output of the
monochromator in 5 nm steps from 275 nm to 450 nm with a xenon ﬂasher as
the input, each step with a 2 nm FWHM. The xenon ﬂasher is an Excelitas
PAX-10 model4 with improved EM noise reduction and variable ﬂash inten-
sity. The monochromator output width was chosen to provide a reasonable
compromise between wavelength resolution and the drum intensity required
for use at the FDs.

For the work described here, an enclosure housing the monochromator
and xenon ﬂasher was mounted onto the rear of the drum. The enclosure

4PAX-10 10-Watt Precision-Aligned Pulsed Xenon Light Source - http://www.

excelitas.com/downloads/dts_pax10.pdf

13

Figure 4: A comparison showing the spectral width of the output of the monochromator
sampled every 5 nm (top, this work) and the notch ﬁlter spectral transmission (bottom,
[9]). The y-axes are the intensity in arbitrary units for the monochromator and the
normalized transmission for the notch ﬁlters.

was insulated and contained a heater and associated controlling circuitry to
maintain a stable 20±2 ℃ temperature for monochromator reliability.

A custom 25.4 mm diameter aluminum tube was fabricated and attached
to the output of the monochromator; it protrudes into the interior of the
drum. At the end of the tube a 0.23 mm thick Teﬂon diﬀuser ensured that
the illumination of the front face of the drum was uniform as measured with
long-exposure CCD images, similar to what had been measured previously
[3, 13].

A photodiode (PD) was mounted near the output of the monochroma-
tor, but upstream of the tube that protruded into the drum, allowing for
pulse-by-pulse monitoring of the emission spectrum from the monochroma-
tor. The monochromator and xenon ﬂasher were controlled with the same
common gateway interface (CGI) web page and calibration electronics that
have been used in the absolute calibration [7]. Scanning of the monochroma-
tor, triggering of the ﬂasher, and data acquisition from monitoring devices

14

and the FD were all fully automated using CGI code and cURL5 scripts over
the wireless LAN used for drum calibrations.

4. Lab Measurements and the Drum Spectrum

To characterize the drum emission as a function of wavelength, several
measurements were needed in the laboratory. For the one-week calibration
campaign described here, four measurements were performed in the lab, two
prior to any ﬁeld work at the FD telescopes, one two days later and the last
one at the end of the week.

4.1. Drum Emission

With the automated scanning of the monochromator and data acquisi-
tion we took measurements of the relative drum emission spectrum as viewed
by the calibration Lab-PMT. The monitoring PD detector measured the
monochromator output as described above. The setup for these measure-
ments had the drum at the far end of the dark hall and the Lab-PMT inside
the darkbox in the calibration room, about 16 m away from the Teﬂon face
of the drum. See [7] for a detailed description of the dark hall calibration
setup.

The average response of the Lab-PMT to 100 pulses of the drum was
recorded as a function of wavelength from 250 nm to 450 nm, in steps of
1 nm. The uncertainty in the average for a given wavelength was calculated
as the standard deviation of the mean, σDrum√
. The solid grey line in Figure 5
100
shows an example of one of these spectra. We took averages of the four
spectra at each wavelength as the ﬁnal measurement of the drum spectrum,
which is shown in the same ﬁgure as blue dots. This ﬁnal drum spectrum
used measurements in steps of 5 nm corresponding to the step size used when
calibrating the FD telescopes. For wavelengths between 320 nm and 390 nm,
the four measurements were generally statistically consistent. But for wave-
lengths at the low and high ends of the spectrum there was disagreement;
section 4.3 explains how we introduce a systematic uncertainty to account
for this disagreement.

For each of these four spectra measured with the Lab-PMT there are data
from the monitoring PD. The monitoring PD data were handled in the same

5cURL Documentation - http://curl.haxx.se/

15

Figure 5: Drum emission spectra. Solid grey line: one of the measured spectra taken with
the Lab-PMT; the line shows the average responses to 100 pulses of the drum as a function
of wavelength, in steps of 1 nm. Blue points: the averaged drum spectrum as measured
by the Lab-PMT throughout the calibration campaign; the spectrum is taken in steps of
5 nm as this is what is used to measure the FD responses; error bars are the statistical
uncertainties, which are generally smaller than the plotted points. Black line and points:
the averaged drum spectrum as measured by the monitoring photodiode (PD) throughout
the calibration campaign, in steps of 5 nm.

way; we made an average of the four spectra recorded by the PD and an
associated error based on the spread of the four measurements. These data
are shown in Figure 5 as black line and points.

4.2. Lab-PMT Quantum Eﬃciency

A measurement of the quantum eﬃciency (QE) of the Lab-PMT, which
is used to measure the relative drum emission spectrum, has to be performed
to measure the relative response of a given FD telescope at diﬀerent wave-
lengths. The method used here is similar to what was done previously [9]
except, instead of a DC deuterium lamp, we used the xenon ﬂasher as the
UV light source into the monochromator. For the work reported here we
only needed a relative measurement of the QE, and so several uncertainties
associated with an absolute QE measurement are not included in this work.
Several measurements of the Lab-PMT QE were performed prior to and
after the FD spectral calibration campaign, and these measurements typically

16

Figure 6: Shown in black squares is the measured relative Lab-PMT QE. The error bars
are the statistical uncertainty associated with the distribution of the response of the PMT
at each wavelength. The blue circles are a fourth order polynomial ﬁt to the data that
serves to smooth out the measurement.

yielded curves consistent with the data shown as black squares in Figure 6.
The error bars are the statistical uncertainty associated with the spread in
the response of the PMT to 100 pulses at each wavelength. The variations
in the QE from point to point are typical when this kind of measurement is
performed (e.g. see [9]), although they are not expected. In an attempt to
smooth out these variations we ﬁt the PMT QE curve with a fourth order
polynomial shown as blue circles in the ﬁgure. The error bars in the ﬁt
are the relative statistical uncertainty for a given wavelength applied to the
interpolated values in the ﬁt. Deviations of the ﬁt from measured points are
largest at both the lower and upper ends of the wavelength range. However,
the FD response is signiﬁcant only in the range 310-410 nm (see Figure 9)
where the deviations are less than 2% with RMS of approximately 1%. We
take this 1% as a conservative estimate of the systematic uncertainty in the
measurement of the Lab-PMT QE: δDrum

QESyst(λ) ≈ 1%.

Changing the nature of the ﬁtted curve or using simply the measured
black points from Figure 6 has little eﬀect on measurements of EAS events.

17

For example a change of order 0.1% on the reconstructed energy would result
from using the measured QE points instead of the smoothed curve. The small
eﬀect on energy occurs because in the region at high and low wavelengths
where the ﬁt deviates most from the measured points the FD eﬃciency is
very low and the nitrogen ﬂuorescence spectrum has no large features.

4.3. Uncertainties in Lab Measurements

The estimate of the statistical uncertainties for the various response distri-
butions to the xenon ﬂasher are taken as the standard deviation of the mean.
Figure 7 shows the response distribution of the Lab-PMT to 100 ﬂashes of
the drum at 375 nm where δDrum
≈ 1% of
the average response SDrum(λ = 375nm). The intensity at the monochroma-
tor output is known to be stable (with associated statistical uncertainties)
through the monitoring PD spectra taken at the same time as the Lab-PMT
data. A similar distribution was produced for each wavelength in the Lab-
PMT QE measurement and gives δDrum

PMTStat(λ = 375 nm) = σ(λ=375 nm)

QEStat(λ) ≈ 1%.

√

N

Figure 7: Distribution of the response of the Lab-PMT to 100 ﬂashes of the drum at 375
nm.

Estimating the systematic uncertainties associated with the relative drum
emission spectrum is done by comparing the diﬀerent drum emission spec-
tra measured using the Lab-PMT over the course of the one-week campaign.
Prior to the comparison, the Lab-PMT data are normalized by the simultane-
ous PD data at each wavelength to account for changes in the monochromator
emission spectrum. Shown in the top panel of Figure 8 are the four drum

18

spectra measured with the Lab-PMT that are used to calculate an average
spectrum of the drum, and the middle plot shows the residuals from the
average in percent as a function of wavelength.

Over most of the wavelength region where the FD eﬃciency is nonzero,
300 nm to 420 nm, the residuals plotted in Figure 8 are close to agreement
with each other within the statistical uncertainties. To estimate the system-
atic uncertainty of the drum emission at each wavelength we introduce an
additive parameter, εDrum
Syst (λ), such that calculating a χ2 per degree of free-
(cid:46) 1, and then this parameter is
dom comparison via equation (1) gives χ2
taken as the systematic uncertainty:

ndf

χ2

ndf(λ) =

1
3

4
(cid:88)

n=1

(cid:0)SDrum(λ)n − SDrum(λ)(cid:1)2
PMTStat(λ)n

(cid:1)2 + (cid:0)εDrum

Syst (λ)(cid:1)2

(cid:0)δDrum

(cid:46) 1 .

(1)

In equation (1) the Lab-PMT response (or drum emission) at a given
PMTStat(λ),

wavelength is SDrum(λ), the associated statistical uncertainty is δDrum
and the average spectrum is SDrum(λ).

For a few wavelengths χ2

ndf(λ) < 1 without adding the systematic term in
the denominator, and the corresponding systematic uncertainty is set to zero.
But most wavelengths result in χ2
ndf(λ) > 1 without the added term, so we
calculate the systematic uncertainty for those wavelengths. The result of this
procedure is that the non-zero Lab-PMT systematic uncertainties vary from
less than 1% to approximately 3%, and in the important region from 300 nm
to 400 nm the average systematic uncertainty is, conservatively, about 1%,
see the bottom panel of Figure 8.

As a check, the PD spectra were treated with a similar evaluation of a sys-
tematic uncertainty at each wavelength as in equation (1). The correspond-
ing systematic uncertainty estimates for the PD would all be approximately
1% or smaller. But there is no need to assess a systematic uncertainty on the
drum intensity due to the PD since the PD data are only used to normalize
the PMT data to reduce the spread in PMT measurements, and we use the
spread in (normalized) PMT data for the systematic uncertainty.

We estimate the overall systematic uncertainty on the intensity of the
drum at each wavelength based on the QE measurement of the Lab-PMT
(δDrum
QESyst(λ) ≈ 1% ) and the four measurements of the drum spectrum
(εDrum
Syst (λ) ≈ 1%). Each of these uncertainties is conservatively about 1%
in the main region of the FD eﬃciency and nitrogen ﬂuorescence spectrum,

19

Figure 8: Four drum emission spectra as measured by the Lab-PMT (top), residuals from
the average in percent (middle), the resulting systematic uncertainty εDrum
Syst (λ) shown as
a percent of the PMT response at a given wavelength (bottom).

so a reasonable estimate of the overall systematic uncertainty of the drum
intensity is found by adding them in quadrature: 1.4%.

5. FD Measurements

During the March 2014 calibration campaign we measured the response of
the eight telescopes, as speciﬁed in Table 1, in steps of 5 nm, over the course
of ﬁve days. Data from the monitoring PD were also acquired during the FD
measurements to be able to control for changes in the drum spectral emission.
The procedure for measuring the telescope response to the multi-wavelength
drum was to ﬁrst scan from 255 nm to 445 nm in steps of 10 nm, and then
scan from 250 nm to 450 nm in steps of 10 nm. At each wavelength a series
of 100 pulses from the drum was recorded by the FD data acquisition at a

20

rate of 1 Hz. A full telescope response is then an interleaving of these scans.
Later in analysis, wavelengths that result in essentially zero FD eﬃciency -
at low and high wavelengths in the scan corresponding to the edges of the
nitrogen spectrum - were dropped and set to zero.

In the previous sections we evaluated the systematic uncertainty in the
drum light source intensity as a function of wavelength. The contributions
to this uncertainty are the spread in the four measurements of the drum
intensity over the week of the calibration campaign and the systematic un-
certainty in the quantum eﬃciency of the PMT used to measure the drum
output.

In this section we evaluate the uncertainty in the responses of the tele-
scopes to the drum by comparing the responses of telescopes with the same
optical components - see Table 1. We do this comparison because we have
not measured every telescope in the observatory, so we have to develop a
single calibration constant for each wavelength for each of the four sets of
optical components in the table. Then we use these calibration constants
for all telescopes with like components (again, see Table 1), including those
not measured. Combining this uncertainty on the FD response, described
below, with the drum emission systematic uncertainty will give the overall
systematic uncertainties on the spectral calibration of the telescopes. As we
will see below, of the four combinations of optical components in Table 1
three will result in systematics on FD response well below the systematics
from the drum emission, but one pair of telescopes will have signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent responses to the drum resulting in a systematic uncertainty larger
than that from the drum intensity.

5.1. FD Systematic Uncertainties Evaluated by Comparing Similar Telescopes
We assume that the FDs built with like components - the same mirror
and corrector ring types - should give similar responses, and to test that
assumption we make a comparison between them to derive a meaningful
systematic uncertainty. To that end we perform a χ2 test and introduce
(cid:46) 1 for ndf = 34, where
parameters to minimize the χ2 such that χ2
there are 35 wavelengths used in the comparison. The parameters introduced
are an overall scale factor β that is applied to one of the FD responses,
and then εFD which is an estimate of a systematic uncertainty that would
be needed to account for the diﬀerence between the two telescopes. Thus
the raw response of one of the FDs as a function of wavelength is then
β ∗ (cid:0)F DResp(λ) ± δFD
Stat(λ) is the

(cid:1) in the comparison, where δFD

Stat(λ) ± εFD

ndf

21

statistical uncertainty (small) as mentioned at the end of this section. The
scale factor β does not represent a systematic uncertainty, it just accounts
for any overall diﬀerence in response between the two telescopes. This is
similar to performing a relative calibration analysis as in [14] between the
two telescopes.

The minimization is done in two steps according to equation (2) where

the sum is over the Nλ measured wavelength points:

χ2

ndf =

1
34

Nλ(cid:88)

n=1

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

δFD1
Stat (λ)n

F D1(λ)n − β ∗ F D2(λ)n
(cid:17)2

(cid:17)2

(cid:16)

+

β ∗ δFD2

Stat (λ)n

+

(cid:17)2

(cid:16)

(cid:17)2 .

(2)

β ∗ εFD

ndf

First a minimum in χ2 is found by setting εFD = 0 and allowing the scale
factor β to vary. Once β has been determined, εFD is allowed to vary until
(cid:46) 1. Prior to the minimization the F D2(λ) response data are normalized
χ2
by the ratio of the monitoring PD response as measured at F D1 and F D2 for
a given wavelength. This serves to divide out any change in intensity of the
light source as measured by the PD just downstream of the monochromator,
and this normalization does, as expected, improve the agreement in response
for some telescope pairs.

Table 3: εFD and β values obtained via equation (2) for the similarly constructed tele-
scopes. The εFD for a given pair of telescopes is given in percentage relative to the averaged
response of the pair of telescopes at 375 nm.

FDs
Coihueco 2/3
Coihueco 4/5
Los Morados 4/5
Los Leones 3/4

εFD [%]
0.34
0.48
0.14
1.7

β
0.97
1.02
1.01
1.05

The values for εFD and β are listed in Table 3 for each pair of telescopes
that are constructed with nominally identical components, and the system-
atic uncertainties, εFD, are reported as a percentage of the average response
of the two telescopes at 375 nm.

Aside from Los Leones telescopes 3 and 4, the εFD values derived through
this minimization technique are all less than 0.5 % , and the β scale factors

22

are all within about 3 % of unity. The values obtained for Los Leones,
although larger than the others, are still small. By trying to ﬁnd a reason
for this diﬀerence we note that telescope 4 was part of the Engineering Array
(EA, [15]) together with telescope 5. However, both telescopes were rebuilt
after the EA operation, particularly the mirrors were all replaced by new
ones after re-setting the design parameters. So, the discrepancy between LL
3 and 4 is highly probably not caused by any diﬀerence in used materials
and, in any case, is included in the uncertainties.

We use the εFD calculated for a given pair of FD telescopes as a system-
atic uncertainty across all wavelengths for all telescopes of the corresponding
construction; see Table 1. These systematic uncertainties are then normal-
ized by the telescope response at 375 nm and are added in quadrature with
the uncertainties associated with the spread in Lab-PMT measurements of
the drum (about 1% in important wavelength range, a function of wave-
length), and the Lab-PMT QE (1%, not wavelength dependent) to calcu-
late the overall systematic uncertainty on telescopes of each combination of
optical components. An example result is plotted as the red brackets in
Figure 9 for the Los Morados telescopes 4 and 5; for this pair (and like
telescopes) the overall systematic uncertainty on the FD response is approx-
12 + 12 + 0.142 = 1.4%, and it is dominated by the uncertainty
imately
in the drum intensity. For the Coihueco instruments the overall systematic
uncertainty is about 1.5%. For the telescopes at Los Leones the uncertainty
from the diﬀerence in response between the two telescopes is larger than the
drum-related systematic uncertainties, and the overall systematic uncertainty
on all of the Los Leones telescopes is about 2.2%.

√

The statistics of the data taken with the drum light source at the FD
telescopes also contribute to the uncertainties on the calibration constants.
The typical spread in the average response of the 440 PMTs to the 100 drum
pulses at a given wavelength is 0.4% RMS, which is much smaller than the
systematic uncertainties. Adding the statistical uncertainty in quadrature
with the systematic uncertainties yields the overall uncertainties on the cal-
ibration constants listed in Table 4, which are the main result of this work.

5.2. Photodiode Monitor Data

We performed a comparison between the average dark hall PD spectrum
and each of the spectra measured for the data-taking nights at the FDs to
ensure that the light source was stable and was consistent with what had
been measured in the lab. An overall correction of 1.00 ± 0.01 night to night

23

Table 4: Overall uncertainties on spectral calibration constants for the pairs of telescopes
measured and all other (unmeasured) telescopes with the same optical components.

FDs

Coihueco 2/3
Coihueco 4/5
Los Morados 4/5
Los Leones 3/4

Overall
uncertainty [%]
1.5
1.5
1.5
2.2

FDs with same
components
CO2/3
CO1,4-6, LA, HEAT
LM
LL1-6

was found as the average ratio of the PD response at the FD to that at
the lab to accommodate any overall variations in intensity or response due
to temperature eﬀects, and then we performed a χ2 comparison for all the
measured wavelengths. For all measuring nights at the FDs the PD spectra
agree very well, the comparison gives a χ2
ndf ∼ 1 where ndf = 34 for each,
implying that the spectrum as observed by the PD was the same at all
locations.

6. Calculation of the FD Eﬃciency

We calculate the relative FD eﬃciency for each telescope by dividing the
measured telescope response to the drum by the measured drum emission
spectrum. The relative drum emission spectrum is measured as described in
section 4 and takes into account the Lab-PMT quantum eﬃciency over the
range from 250 nm to 450 nm.

The relative eﬃciency for a given telescope at a given wavelength, F DRel
is calculated for each wavelength from 280 nm to 440 nm in steps of 5 nm:

eﬀ (λ),

F DRel

eﬀ (λ) =

F DResp(λ) ∗ QELab

PMT(λ)

SDrum(λ)

∗

1
F Deﬀ(λ = 375 nm)

.

(3)

The curves are taken relative to the eﬃciency of the telescope at 375 nm
since this is what is used in the Pierre Auger Observatory reconstruction
software [16] for all FD calculations. The range in wavelength from 280 nm
to 440 nm used for evaluating the FD eﬃciency is smaller than the range
measured in the lab because below 280 nm and above 440 nm the light level
is near zero intensity for the nitrogen emission spectrum and the FD response

24

is also very near zero. As an example, Figure 9 shows the relative eﬃciency
for the Los Morados telescopes 4 and 5 based on this work compared with
the previous measurement [9].

Figure 9: Relative eﬃciencies for the average of Los Morados telescopes 4 and 5. Top:
the ﬁve ﬁlter curve shown as a dashed blue line [9] and the monochromator result shown
as the solid line. Error bars are statistical uncertainties, and the red brackets are the
systematic uncertainties calculated as described in section 5. Bottom: diﬀerence between
the ﬁve ﬁlter result and this work. The error bars and brackets are the same as in the top
plot, shown here for clarity.

The uncertainties in the FD eﬃciencies have statistical and systematic
components associated with the measurement of the relative emission spec-
trum of the drum, the Lab-PMT QE, and the FD response to the multi-
wavelength drum. The statistical uncertainties associated with the lab work
and the FD responses are propagated through the calculation of the FD
eﬃciency via equation (3) as a function of wavelength. All systematic uncer-

25

tainties described above associated with the lab work, the Lab-PMT and its
QE, the FD response, and εFD for a given FD telescope, are added together
in quadrature as a function of wavelength.

For much of the wavelength range the new results agree with the older
ﬁve-point scan. The disagreement at the shortest and longest wavelengths is
perhaps not surprising since the previous lowest and highest measurements
were at 320 nm and 405 nm, and the eﬃciency was extrapolated to zero from
those points following the piecewise curve [11]. The eﬃciency was assumed
to go to zero below 295 nm and above 425 nm.

7. Comparison of telescopes with diﬀering optical components

After estimating the systematic uncertainties for each measured FD tele-
scope, εFD, we made a χ2 comparison between the six combinations of unlike
FD optical components listed in Table 1 to determine whether the unlike com-
ponents result in any diﬀerent telescope responses. In calculating the χ2
ndf
for the diﬀerently constructed FD telescopes we use the ratio of the PD data
taken at the corresponding FDs to normalize the average response of one of
the FD types. The PD data from the two FD data-taking nights are averaged
as a function of wavelength and the ratio of the PD averages from the two
types of FDs are applied to the combined FD response along with the statis-
tical and systematic uncertainties. Using this normalization serves to divide
out any diﬀerences in the drum spectrum between the two measurements of
the FD types. An example for calculating the χ2 between the average of
Coihueco 2 and Coihueco 3 (SCO23(λ)n) and the average of Coihueco 4 and
5 follows. The uncertainties in equation 4 have obvious labels; for example
εCO23
is the systematic uncertainty for the Coihueco telescopes 2 and 3 from
FD
Table 3.

χ2

ndf =

1
34

Nλ(cid:88)

n=1

(cid:0)δCO23

Stat (λ)n

P DRatio(λ) ≡

SPD
CO23(λ)
SPD
CO45(λ)

.

(cid:16)

SCO23(λ)n − P DRatio(λ)n ∗ SCO45(λ)n
(cid:1)2 + (cid:0)εCO23

(cid:1)2 + (cid:0)P DRatio(λ)n ∗ δCO45

Stat (λ)n

FD

(cid:17)2

(cid:1)2 + (cid:0)εCO45

FD

(cid:1)2 ,

(4)

26

The results of the comparisons are shown in Table 5. The telescopes with
diﬀerent components are all signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other except
when comparing the average of Los Leones telescopes 3 and 4 to the average
of Los Morados telescopes 4 and 5. In principle this low χ2 could indicate that
all telescopes constructed with components like those at Los Leones 3 and
4 and those constructed like Los Morados telescopes 4 and 5 have the same
response, and therefore could share the relative calibration constants that
are the goal of this work. However, the two detectors at Los Leones have a
much greater diﬀerence in response between them than do the two telescopes
from Los Morados: the systematic uncertainty in Table 3 for Los Leones
telescopes is more than a factor of 10 larger than that for Los Morados ones.
The large systematic uncertainty for the telescopes at Los Leones could be
masking a real diﬀerence with those at Los Morados. For this reason we feel
it is reasonable not to combine the Los Leones and Los Morados telescopes
to calculate the ﬁnal spectral calibration constants.

We conclude that all four sets of FD telescopes listed in Table 1 need
diﬀerent spectral calibrations, and four sets of calibration constants have
been computed.

Examining the results in Table 5 and Table 1 we note that the largest χ2
ndf
values in Table 5 are associated with changing mirrors not changing corrector
rings. For example, comparing Coihueco 4/5 with Los Morados 4/5 changes
only the mirror and gives a χ2
ndf of 55, but comparing Coihueco 4/5 with
Coihueco 2/3, which changes only the corrector ring, yields a χ2
ndf of 5.6.
Changing both components by comparing Coihueco 2/3 with Los Morados
4/5 gives a χ2
ndf of 161, but we note that the telescopes at Los Morados have
a very small systematic uncertainty in Table 3. These examples have so far
left out the Los Leones telescopes. The large systematic uncertainty derived
by comparing the two Los Leones telescopes reduces the χ2
ndf values when
comparing to other telescopes, but the idea that the mirrors are the main
eﬀect is still present when comparing the Los Leones telescopes to the others.

8. Eﬀect on Physics Measurables

To evaluate the eﬀect a new calibration has on physics measurables, we
reconstructed a set of events using the new calibration and compare to re-
sults from that same set of events using the prior calibration. When we
did this exercise upon changing from initial piecewise to the ﬁve-point cali-
bration, the reconstructed energies increased about 4% at 1018 eV, and the

27

Table 5: Comparison of spectral response for FD telescopes with diﬀerent components.
χ2

ndf values obtained for the sets in Table 1, where ndf = 34.

Comparison
Coihueco 2/3 vs. Coihueco 4/5
Los Morados 4/5 vs. Los Leones 3/4
Coihueco 4/5 vs Los Morados 4/5
Coihueco 2/3 vs. Los Leones 3/4
Coihueco 2/3 vs. Los Morados 4/5
Los Leones 3/4 vs. Coihueco 4/5

χ2
ndf
2.4
0.21
57
10
144
6.7

increase lessened slightly to 3.6% at 1019 eV [12]. The lessening of the en-
ergy increase due the ﬁve-point calibration is understood because much of the
change in calibration was at low wavelengths, and the ﬁve-point calibration
makes the FDs less eﬃcient at short wavelengths making the reconstructed
energy higher. The higher energy events make more light, and they can be
detected at greater distances than lower energy events. But at greater dis-
tances more of the short wavelength light will be Rayleigh scattered away,
so the lower wavelengths - and the change in calibration there - do not aﬀect
the higher energy events as much when we change to the new calibration.

When we change from the ﬁve-point to the calibration described here, the
reconstructed energies increase on average over all FD telescopes by about
1%, and that increase is relatively ﬂat in energy. However, this increase is
not the same at all the telescopes. The increase in reconstructed energy is
greatest at Los Leones, about 2.8% at 1018 eV falling to 2.5% at 1019 eV. For
Los Morados the reconstructed event energies increase by about 1.8% without
much energy dependence. For all other telescopes the energy increases, but
those increases are less than 0.35% for all energies.

All these changes in the reconstructed energy are important to know
to fully characterize the telescopes. Regarding the associated uncertainties,
they are all signiﬁcantly smaller than the uncertainties involved in the energy
scale for the FD telescopes (see Table 3 in [1]), particularly the 3.6% from
the Fluorescence yield and the 9.9% from the FD calibration.

28

9. Conclusions

Determining the spectral response of the Pierre Auger Observatory ﬂuo-
rescence telescopes is essential to the success of the experiment. A method us-
ing a monochromator-based portable light source has been used for eight FD
telescopes with measurements performed every ﬁve nanometers from 280 nm
to 440 nm. With the calibration of these eight telescopes, the four possible
combinations of diﬀerent optical components in the FD were covered, thus
assuring the spectral calibration of all FD telescopes at the observatory.

The uncertainty associated with the emission spectrum of the drum light
source used for the calibration was found to be 1.4%, which is an improvement
on our previous 3.5% [9].

For the present work we compared telescopes with nominally the same
optical components, and we ﬁnd that such pairs have the same spectral re-
sponse within a fraction of a percent - as expected - for three out of the
four pairs of like telescopes. But one pair with like components, the old-
est telescopes in the observatory, shows a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in spectral
response.

The overall uncertainty in the FD spectral response is 1.5% for 21 of
the 27 telescopes. The overall systematic uncertainty for the remaining six
telescopes is 2.2%, and is somewhat larger on account of the larger diﬀerence
between the two telescopes measured.

We also compared the diﬀerently constructed telescopes. These compar-
isons show signiﬁcantly diﬀerent eﬃciencies as a function of wavelength, with
diﬀerences mainly in the rising edge of the eﬃciency curve between 300 nm
and 340 nm. The diﬀerences seem to come mostly from the two diﬀerent mir-
ror types, and they are reﬂected in diﬀerent calibration constants for each of
the four combinations of optical components.

The new calibration constants aﬀect the reconstruction of EAS events,
and we looked at two important quantities. The primary cosmic ray energy
increases by 1.8% to 2.8% for half of the telescopes in the observatory, and
for the other half the change in energy is negligible. The position of the
maximum in shower development in the atmosphere, Xmax, is not changed
signiﬁcantly by the change in calibration.

Acknowledgments

The successful installation, commissioning, and operation of the Pierre
Auger Observatory would not have been possible without the strong com-

29

mitment and eﬀort from the technical and administrative staﬀ in Malarg¨ue.
We are very grateful to the following agencies and organizations for ﬁnancial
support:

Argentina – Comisi´on Nacional de Energ´ıa At´omica; Agencia Nacional
de Promoci´on Cient´ıﬁca y Tecnol´ogica (ANPCyT); Consejo Nacional de In-
vestigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas y T´ecnicas (CONICET); Gobierno de la Provin-
cia de Mendoza; Municipalidad de Malarg¨ue; NDM Holdings and Valle
Las Le˜nas; in gratitude for their continuing cooperation over land access;
Australia – the Australian Research Council; Brazil – Conselho Nacional
de Desenvolvimento Cient´ıﬁco e Tecnol´ogico (CNPq); Financiadora de Es-
tudos e Projetos (FINEP); Funda¸c˜ao de Amparo `a Pesquisa do Estado
de Rio de Janeiro (FAPERJ); S˜ao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP)
Grants No. 2010/07359-6 and No. 1999/05404-3; Minist´erio de Ciˆencia e
Tecnologia (MCT); Czech Republic – Grant No. MSMT CR LG15014,
LO1305, LM2015038 and CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16 013/0001402; France –
Centre de Calcul IN2P3/CNRS; Centre National de la Recherche Sci-
entiﬁque (CNRS); Conseil R´egional Ile-de-France; D´epartement Physique
Nucl´eaire et Corpusculaire (PNC-IN2P3/CNRS); D´epartement Sciences de
l’Univers (SDU-INSU/CNRS); Institut Lagrange de Paris (ILP) Grant No.
LABEX ANR-10-LABX-63 within the Investissements d’Avenir Programme
Grant No. ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02; Germany – Bundesministerium f¨ur Bil-
dung und Forschung (BMBF); Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG);
Finanzministerium Baden-W¨urttemberg; Helmholtz Alliance for Astropar-
ticle Physics (HAP); Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft Deutscher Forschungszen-
tren (HGF); Ministerium f¨ur Innovation, Wissenschaft und Forschung
des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen; Ministerium f¨ur Wissenschaft, Forschung
und Kunst des Landes Baden-W¨urttemberg; Italy – Istituto Nazionale di
Fisica Nucleare (INFN); Istituto Nazionale di Astroﬁsica (INAF); Min-
istero dell’Istruzione, dell’Universit´a e della Ricerca (MIUR); CETEMPS
Center of Excellence; Ministero degli Aﬀari Esteri (MAE); Mexico – Con-
sejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnolog´ıa (CONACYT) No. 167733; Univer-
sidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico (UNAM); PAPIIT DGAPA-UNAM;
The Netherlands – Ministerie van Onderwijs, Cultuur en Wetenschap; Ned-
erlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (NWO); Stichting
voor Fundamenteel Onderzoek der Materie (FOM); Poland – National Cen-
tre for Research and Development, Grants No. ERA-NET-ASPERA/01/11
and No. ERA-NET-ASPERA/02/11; National Science Centre, Grants No.
2013/08/M/ST9/00322, No. 2013/08/M/ST9/00728 and No. HARMONIA

30

5–2013/10/M/ST9/00062, UMO-2016/22/M/ST9/00198; Portugal – Por-
tuguese national funds and FEDER funds within Programa Operacional
Factores de Competitividade through Funda¸c˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tec-
nologia (COMPETE); Romania – Romanian Authority for Scientiﬁc Re-
search ANCS; CNDI-UEFISCDI partnership projects Grants No. 20/2012
and No.194/2012 and PN 16 42 01 02; Slovenia – Slovenian Research
Agency; Spain – Comunidad de Madrid; Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Re-
gional (FEDER) funds; Ministerio de Econom´ıa y Competitividad; Xunta
de Galicia; European Community 7th Framework Program Grant No. FP7-
PEOPLE-2012-IEF-328826; USA – Department of Energy, Contracts No.
DE-AC02-07CH11359, No. DE-FR02-04ER41300, No. DE-FG02-99ER41107
and No. de-sc0011689; National Science Foundation, Grant No. 0450696;
The Grainger Foundation; Marie Curie-IRSES/EPLANET; European Parti-
cle Physics Latin American Network; European Union 7th Framework Pro-
gram, Grant No. PIRSES-2009-GA-246806; European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme (Grant No. 646623); and UNESCO.

References

[1] A. Aab, et al., The Pierre Auger Cosmic Ray Observatory, Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,
Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 798 (2015) 172–
213.

[2] I. Allekotte, et al., The Surface Detector System of the Pierre Auger Ob-
servatory, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section
A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment
586 (3) (2008) 409–420. doi:10.1016/j.nima.2007.12.016.

[3] J. Abraham, et al., The Fluorescence Detector of the Pierre Auger Ob-
servatory, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section
A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment
620 (2-3) (2010) 227–251. doi:10.1016/j.nima.2010.04.023.

31

[4] T. H.-J. Mathes, et al., The HEAT Telescopes of the Pierre Auger Ob-
servatory Status and First Data, Proc. of the 32nd ICRC, Beijing, China,
2011, pp. 153–156.

[5] M. Roth, et al., Measurement of the UHECR energy spectrum using
data from the Surface Detector of the Pierre Auger Observatory, Proc.
of the 30th ICRC, M´erida, Mexico, 2007.

[6] J. Abraham, et al., Observation of the Suppression of the Flux of Cosmic
Rays above 4×1019 eV, Physical Review Letters 101 (2008) 061101. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.061101.

[7] J. Brack, et al., Absolute Calibration of a Large-diameter Light Source,
JINST 8 (2013) P05014. arXiv:1305.1329, doi:10.1088/1748-0221.

[8] R. Knapik, et al., The Absolute, Relative and Multi-wavelength Cali-
bration of the Pierre Auger Observatory Fluorescence Detectors, Proc.
of the 30th ICRC, M´erida, Mexico, 2007.

[9] A. Rovero, P. Bauleo, J. Brack, J. Harton, R. Knapik, Multi-wavelength
Calibration Procedure for the Pierre Auger Observatory Fluorescence
Detectors, Astroparticle Physics 31 (4) (2009) 305–311. doi:10.1016/
j.astropartphys.2009.02.009.

[10] M. Ave, et al., Spectrally Resolved Pressure Dependence Measurements
of Air Fluorescence Emission with AIRFLY, Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers,
Detectors and Associated Equipment 597 (1) (2008) 41–45.

[11] J. A. Matthews, Optical Calibration of the Auger Fluorescence Tele-
scopes, in: Astronomical Telescopes and Instrumentation, International
Society for Optics and Photonics, 2003, pp. 121–130.

[12] A. Aab, et al., The Pierre Auger Observatory: Contributions to the 33rd
International Cosmic Ray Conference (ICRC 2013) arXiv:1307.5059.

[13] J. Brack, R. Meyhandan, G. Hofman, J. Matthews, Absolute Photomet-
ric Calibration of Large Aperture Optical Systems, Astroparticle Physics
20 (6) (2004) 653–659.

32

[14] C. Aramo, et al., Optical Relative Calibration and Stability Monitoring
for the Auger Fluorescence Detector, Proc. of the 29th ICRC, Pune,
India, 2005.

[15] J. Abraham, et al., Properties and performance of the prototype in-
strument for the Pierre Auger Observatory, Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research A 523 (2004) 50–95. doi:10.1016/j.
nima.2003.12.012.

[16] S. Argir`o, et al., The Oﬄine Software Framework of the Pierre Auger
Observatory, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Sec-
tion A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equip-
ment 580 (3) (2007) 1485–1496.

33

