Magnetic  field  suppression  of  Andreev  conductance  at  superconductor–
graphene interfaces 

Piranavan Kumaravadivel*1,‡, Scott mills*1, and Xu Du1† 

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, New York 11794-3800, USA. 

Studying the interplay between superconductivity and quantum magnetotransport in two-

dimensional  materials  has  been  a  topic  of  interest  in  recent  years.  Towards  such  a  goal  it  is 

important to understand the impact of magnetic field on the charge transport at the superconductor-

normal  channel  (SN)  interface.  Here  we  carried  out  a  comprehensive  study  of  Andreev 

conductance  under  weak  magnetic  fields  using  diffusive  superconductor-  graphene  Josephson 

weak links. We observe that the Andreev conductance is suppressed even in magnetic fields far 

below  the  upper  critical  field  of  the  superconductor.  The  suppression  of  Andreev  conductance 

depends on and can be minimized by controlling the ramping of the magnetic field. We identify 

that the key factor behind this suppression is the reduction of the superconducting gap due to the 

piling of vortices on the superconducting contacts. In devices where superconducting gap at the 

superconductor-graphene  interface  is  heavily  reduced  by  proximity  effect,  the  enlarged  vortex 

cores overlap quickly with increasing magnetic field, resulting in a rapid decrease of the interfacial 

gap.  However,  in  weak  links  with  relatively  large  effective  superconducting  gap  the  AR 

conductance persists up to the upper critical field. Our results provide guidance to the study of 

quantum  material-superconductor  systems  in  presence  of  magnetic  field,  where  'survival'  of 

induced superconductivity is critical.  

* These authors contributed equally to this work. 

‡ Present address: School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 
9PL, UK. 
† Email: xu.du@stonybrook.edu  

 
 
 
Superconducting  weak  links  on  two-dimensional  electron  systems  (2DES)  have  been 

extensively studied for exploring many of the emergent phenomena in condensed matter physics. 

In recent years there has been a growing interest in studying these structures in the presence of 

relatively strong magnetic fields for understanding the interplay between quantum Hall edge states 

and superconducting correlations. With the advent of graphene and a plethora of other 2D materials 

and  topological  insulators,  the  combination  of  chiral  edge  states  and  superconductivity  holds 

promise  in  the  study  of  novel  phenomena  such  as  Majorana  fermions,  non-abelian  anyons, 

quantum  Hall  edge  state  supercurrent,  and  Andreev  conversion  of  QH  edge  states[1-8]. 

Experimentally, the delicate nature of these phenomena requires devices of the highest quality in 

both  the  2DES  channels  and  superconductor-normal  metal  (SN)  interface,  as  well  as 

superconductor  electrodes  that  can  retain  superconducting  correlations  in  high  magnetic  fields. 

However, due to the emergence of Meissner and vortex phases in superconducting thin films and 

type II superconductors in the presence of magnetic fields, the charge transport at sample specific 

SN interface can be significantly complicated. Such effects have rarely been discussed in previous 

works. A careful systematic study of intrinsic and extrinsic factors affecting charge transport in 

these devices is therefore of significant importance. Charge transport in SN junctions takes place 

primarily via the Andreev reflection (AR) process: an electron (hole) enters the superconductor 

from the normal side and gets retro-reflected as a quasiparticle hole (electron) so that a Cooper 

pair  can  form  inside  the  superconductor.  The  coherent  propagation  of  these  phase  conjugated 

quasiparticles  enhances  the  conductivity  of  the  SN  interface.  In  the  diffusive  limit  and  in  low 

magnetic  fields  prior  to  the  formation  of  Landau  levels  and  cyclotron  orbits,  because  the 

incident/reflected quasiparticles follow the same trajectory on the normal side of the interface they 

are  immune  to  phase  breaking  effect  by  magnetic  fields.  On  the  other  hand,  the  impact  of  the 

magnetic  field  on  Andreev  reflection  may  be  expected  [9,  10]  considering  the  presence  of 

screening currents on the surface of the superconductor in magnetic field. Screening currents are 

composed  of  a  moving  Cooper  pair  condensate  and  in  order  to  accommodate  this  Cooper  pair 

momentum, the incident and Andreev-reflected quasiparticles also acquire a momentum shift at 

the SN interface. When the applied magnetic field is sufficient that the associated energy shift is 

comparable  to  the  superconducting  gap  at  the  SN  interface,  Andreev  reflection  probability 

becomes significantly suppressed, diminishing the conductance enhancement.  Besides the above 

“Doppler shift” scenario, the presence of superconducting vortices may also play an important role 

in the charge transport at the SN interface and has not previously been studied.  

Experimental study of AR in magnetic field has been previously carried out with niobium-

semiconductor 2DEG junctions [11] . There it was observed that at low magnetic field of a few 

100 mT (well below the upper critical field of niobium Bc2~2 T), the AR is almost completely 

suppressed. The suppression was explained using the Doppler shift model, considering only the 

diamagnetic Meissner currents in the superconducting leads  which rapidly suppresses the zero-

bias  AR  conductance  with  increasing  magnetic  field.  Despite  the  qualitative  agreement,  the 

Doppler shift model has several major discrepancies with the experimental observations. First of 

all, the model predicts that the screening currents broaden the energy (bias voltage) range of the 

gap features  in  the differential  conductance[10, 12] that has  not been observed in  experiments. 

Secondly, it is established that in superconductor thin films, magnetic flux lines begin penetrating 

and forming  vortices in extremely low fields [13]. Both the distribution of the screening current 

and local order parameter should therefore be affected by how these vortices are distributed on 

superconducting films. The distribution will in turn depend on the dynamics by which the vortices 

enter and exit the superconducting thin films when ramping the magnetic field up or down to the 

desired value. The impact of the superconducting vortices on Andreev reflection therefore should 

be considered when exploring magneto-transport in SN junctions. Moreover, as shown by some 

recent works, including our own observations discussed below, the magnetic suppression of the 

AR appears to be  sample dependent[11, 14]. This  indicates that such phenomenon  may not  be 

intrinsic  but  instead  strongly  affected  by  certain  characteristics  of  the  individual  devices. 

Unraveling  these  effects  and  exploring  ways  to  preserve  the  superconducting  coherence  can 

therefore be a useful guide for future investigations on the interplay between superconductivity 

and quantum magnetotransport phenomena. 

In this work, we carried out a comprehensive study on charge transport in superconductor-

graphene-superconductor (SGS) Josephson weak links in the presence of weak magnetic fields. A 

suppression of AR conductance is observed even in magnetic fields far below the upper critical 

field (B<<Bc2). The dependence of the AR conductance on the ramping dynamics of the magnetic 

field reveals the important role of vortices and vortex pinning. The key factor behind the rapid AR 

suppression is identified to be the strongly reduced superconducting gap at the superconductor-

graphene  (SG)  interfaces  compared  to  that  of  the  bulk  superconducting  leads.  As  a  result  the 

superconducting coherence length, and hence the size of the vortex cores are enlarged. Combined 

with vortex pinning, the overlapping of the vortices rapidly reduces the effective superconducting 

gap  and  thereby  the  AR  conductance.  By  improving  the  SG  interface,  we  can      optimize  the 

effective  superconducting  gap  to  reach  a  value  closer  to  the  intrinsic  BCS  gap  of  the 

superconducting leads. In these devices the impact of the vortices on AR is minimized and the AR 

conductance persists closer to the upper critical field of the superconducting contacts.  

 
Methods 

SGS  Josephson  weak  links  are  fabricated  on  SiO2/Si  substrates  using  mechanically 

exfoliated  highly  oriented  pyrolytic  graphite  (HOPG).  A  buffer  layer  is  deposited  between 

graphene and the superconductor to facilitate both good adhesion and improve charge transmission 

between graphene and the superconducting contacts. Four types of buffer layers: Ti (1 nm), Ti (2 

nm)/Pd (1.5 nm), Ti (2 nm)/Au(2 nm), and V(2 nm) are tested, by thermal (e-beam) evaporation 

in  a  UHV  environment.  Immediately  after  the  evaporation  and  without  breaking  vacuum, 

superconducting thin film of Nb or NbN is coated onto the samples via DC magnetron sputtering. 

For Nb thin films, sputtering is done in pure Ar environment[15]. For NbN thin films, reactive DC 

Magnetron sputtering is carried out in a mixture of N2 and Ar [16]. All samples have graphene 

channels that are of length ~ 0.7 μm and width ~1.5-10 μm in width (Figure 1A). The mobility of 

the  graphene  channel  is  estimated  to  be 

~5000-6000  cm2/Vs  from  two-terminal 

conductivity just below the transition temperature (TC) of the superconducting leads (TC ~ 11 K 

for NbN and ~8.5 K for Nb). The mean free path is calculated to be  

~ 50-60 nm (see 

Supplementary Information).  

Results 

Basic  characterizations of the samples are  presented in  Figure  1B.  At low temperatures 

T<<TC, all devices show supercurrent or a precursor of supercurrent through a vanishing or sharply 

reduced  differential  resistance  (dV/dI)  at  zero  bias  current.  The  strong  Josephson  coupling 

indicates  a  highly  transparent  interface  between  graphene  and  the  superconducting  contacts. 

Besides supercurrent, clear evidence of multiple Andreev reflections (MARs) is observed from the 

ne/nelmfp2 
dV/dI versus bias voltage(Vbias) curves, as shown from an NbN-graphene device at T = 0.4K in 

Figure 1B. The valleys of the differential resistance oscillations appear at the expected values for 

MARs  at 𝑉𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 =

2∆𝑒𝑓𝑓
𝑁𝑒

 ,  where ∆𝑒𝑓𝑓 is  an  effective  energy  gap  and  N=1,2,3..  is  an  integer.  We 

notice  that  ∆𝑒𝑓𝑓  is  sample  dependent  and  is  usually  significantly  reduced  from  the  bulk 

superconducting gap of the leads (~1.3 meV for Nb and ~1.7 meV for NbN, estimated using BCS 

theory 

 with Tc ~8.5 K for Nb and 11 K for NbN as measured in our samples. For 

example for the NbN junction shown in Figure 1B, ∆𝑒𝑓𝑓~0.15 meV; while in all our other devices, 

∆𝑒𝑓𝑓 ranging between 0.3~0.95 meV  is observed. In our analysis, we used the outermost valley 

in  the  dV/dI  vs.  bias  curves  to  identify  the  value  of  2eff.  This  is  based  on  the  theoretical 

calculations of the MAR spectrums in both ballistic and diffusive SNS weak links[17-19],  where 

the outermost dV/dI valley (i.e., conductance peak) appear to give a good estimation to the value 

of the superconducting gap. In addition, while temperature and disorder may affect the accuracy 

of the gap values, because all the measurements were carried out at the same temperature and in 

devices with similar mobility, the parallel comparisons between different samples and in different 

magnetic fields  (discussed later) are still reasonable. With these values  of ∆𝑒𝑓𝑓 , the coherence 

length in our diffusive devices is estimated to be 

 nm which is 

slightly less than the junction length.  

The reduction of superconducting gap is commonly observed and reported in SNS weak 

links[15, 20-22]. The reduced superconductor pairing potential can be a result of either proximity 

effect  at  the  SN  interface  in  presence  of  the  buffer  layers[23],  or  interfacial  mixing/diffusion 

between the superconductor and the buffer layer. In any case we found that such gap reduction can 

CBBCSTk76.1500200~effmfpFefflvDbe minimized by reducing the thickness of the buffer layer. The largest effective gap was achieved 

in Nb-Ti(1 nm)-G samples. In these samples, Ti does not form a continuous thin film but instead 

islands. The Ti islands aid in the mechanical adhesion of the superconducting contacts and charge 

transmission takes place predominantly between the superconductors and graphene where Ti is 

absent. As a result, a larger effective gap of ∆𝑒𝑓𝑓= ~0.6 − 0.95 meV is routinely observed. The 

remaining  gap  reduction  is  presumably  due  to  the  antiproximity  effect  from  the  presence  of 

graphene at the SG interface. The effective gap of ~0.95 meV is comparable to the bulk gap of Nb, 

and is consistent with the highest values reported in similar SGS Josephson weak links[6, 8]. 

Next  we  focus  on  the  characteristics  of  AR  in  presence  of  weak  magnetic  field  (i.e., 

1-2 T). The cyclotron orbit and Landau levels are not formed in the diffusive graphene 

samples and magnetotransport is classical, enabling us to focus on the impact of magnetic field on 

the SN interface. The main results are summarized in Figure 2 with dV/dI values normalized by 

the normal resistance of the junction (RN) just below Tc. When a magnetic field is applied after 

the  samples  are  zero-field  cool  (ZFC)-ed  belowTC  ,  the  AR-associated  gap  feature  in  the 

differential resistance curve becomes suppressed.  In some of the samples (e.g., the NbN-Pd/Ti-G 

sample shown in Figure 2A) the oscillatory MARs features become completely suppressed under 

a very small magnetic field, less than 10 mT. Further, monotonously increasing the magnetic field 

to different values at a fixed ramp rate and measuring the dV/dI as a function of Vbias we find that 

the AR enhancement of conductance (~20% at Vbias ~2Δeff at B=0) quickly reduces and eventually 

vanishes around B=200mT which is much lower than the upper critical field of NbN (BC2 > 10 T). 

The magnetic suppression of AR conductance appears to be sample dependent. For example in the 

Nb-Au/Ti-G sample shown in Figures 2A, the AR conductance enhancement remains observable 

~1Bin magnetic field B~1 T. In particular with the Nb-Ti(1 nm)-G sample, the AR conductance is only 

very weakly affected by the magnetic field and persists close to the upper critical field (BC2 ~ 2 T 

at T = 4.2K). The effect of magnetic field on single ARs at the SN interface can be better evaluated 

using the excess current (Iexc). The excess current is obtained by extrapolating the normal section 

of the IV curve and identifying its intersection on the current axis at zero bias. The excess current 

contains  information  on  Andreev  reflection  and  is  insensitive  to  decoherence  compared  to 

supercurrent. IexcRN at various ZFC-ed field values is shown in Figure 2B.  Evidently the magnetic 

suppression of AR varies significantly in different samples. 

Along with the magnetic suppression of the AR conductance, a suppression of the effective 

superconducting gap is also observed in all our samples. This is evident from the width of the sub 

gap valley feature in the (1/RN) dV/dI_ versus Vbias plots shown in Figure 2A. For samples with 

large effective gaps, we can reliably obtain the values of the effective gap from the sharp kink in 

the dV/dI curve at 

. As shown in Figure 2A for a Nb-Ti(1nm)-G sample, the effective 

gap  decreases  with  increasing  magnetic  field  to  100  mT  then  to  1  T.  For  samples  with  small 

effective  gap,  it  is  difficult  to  extract  the  effective  gap  in  magnetic  field  because  of  the  rather 

featureless “V”-shaped dV/dI curves. Nevertheless, one can clearly see that the width of the “V”-

shaped valley decreases with increasing magnetic field. 

To identify the origin of the strong magnetic suppression of AR, several possible factors 

are considered. First AR is affected by the charge transmission properties of the SG interface which 

may  depend  on  magnetic  field.  The  various  buffer  layers  studied  here  give  rise  to  different 

transparencies.  We  found  that  both  Ti/Pd  and  Ti/Au  buffer  layers  offer  excellent  and  reliable 

charge transmission with graphene, indicated by the strong zero-field and zero-bias conductance 

effbiasV2enhancement. A very thin (discontinuous) layer of Ti gives reasonable transparency, although less 

transparent compared to that in the Ti/Pd and Ti/Au buffered samples. The V buffer layer generally 

yields large stress and poor interface transparency. But overall the samples are still weak-link-like 

(as  opposed  to  be  “tunneling”-like  where  supercurrent  is  absent  and  the  resistance  shows  a 

maximum when Vbias is within the superconducting gap and quasiparticle tunneling is suppressed). 

Despite the vast qualitative differences in their charge transmission, a comparative study of all the 

buffer  layers  shows  no  systematic  dependence  of  the  suppression  rate  on  the  interface 

transparency.  

Secondly,  the  bulk  superconductor  gap  (1.3  meV  for  Nb  and  1.7  meV  for  NbN)  of  the 

contacts also does not show a systematic influence on the suppression rate of AR in magnetic field. 

However, for devices with relatively large effective superconducting gap (i.e., a broader AR gap 

feature in the dV/dI vs.Vbias curve), AR is consistently less susceptible to the magnetic field. As 

shown in Figure 2B, the rate of the magnetic suppression of AR with increasing magnetic field has 

a clear monotonic dependence on the width (in Vbias ) of the sub-gap conductance in the (1/ RN) 

dV/dI vs.  Vbias curves for the different samples studied. At fixed low magnetic field, temperature 

appears to play little role on the magnetic field suppression of AR when it is well below TC. Figure 

2C shows a comparison between the magnetic field dependence of IexcRN measured at 0.4 K and 

4.2 K, for devices with Ti/Pd and V buffer layers and Nb contacts (Tc ~ 8.5 K). In both cases, the 

excess  current  follows  qualitatively  the  same  dependence  on  magnetic  field,  practically 

independent of the temperature. Far below TC, such weak temperature dependence of IexcRN is in 

qualitatively agreement with the BTK model (see Supplementary Information). 

Thirdly, we explored the impact of the dynamics of the magnetic field on AR conductance.  

Besides ZFC, we studied two other sequences: one is the field-cool (FC) process, where a sample 

is cooled down  below TC after a magnetic field is applied and the other is the “down-ramping” 

(DR) procedure, magnetic field is ramped up from zero at T (<< TC ), first to a high value (B > 1 

T)  and  then  decreased  back  down  to  the  desired  value  where  dV/dI  as  a  function  of  Vbias  is 

measured. As for the ZFC, a fixed ramping rate is maintained for all measurements. Figure 3 shows 

a  comparison  of  the  AR  related  features  the  NbN-  and  Nb-based  devices  under  the  different 

magnetic field ramping sequences. For a given low field between 10~700 mT, NbN-based samples 

show significantly larger dip in the sub-gap differential resistance and hence a higher IexcRN for 

both  ZFC  and  DR  procedures,  compared  to  that  in  the  ZFC  procedure.  In  particular,  the  DR 

procedure allows the AR enhancement of conductance to persist up to ~1 T. For Nb-based devices 

the DR procedure similarly allows AR to be less susceptible to magnetic field for B < 200 mT. 

However the difference between ZFC and DR is less significant compared to that for the NbN-

based devices. We note that magnetic hysteresis from the superconducting magnet has negligible 

role in these observations. 

DISCUSSION 

The  observation  of  the  dynamics-dependent  magnetic  suppression  of  AR  suggests  the 

important role of superconducting vortices in these measurements. Indeed it is established that for 

thin film superconductors, vortices form a stable state once the magnetic field is above a critical 

value of the order of 

, where  

is the magnetic flux quantum and L is the width 

of  the  superconducting  thin  film[13].  For  the  geometry  of  our  devices  (L~1-2  m),

 mT, 

which is at the very low end of the magnetic fields applied here. Furthermore, the dynamics of the 

vortices is different when entering and exiting the superconducting pads and it directly affects their 

spatial distribution[24, 25]. With increasing magnetic field and in the case of ZFC, vortices tend 

20~LBmeh2/01~mBto pile up at the edge of the superconducting thin films  (where they enter the thin film)  due to 

pinning. On the other hand, when the magnetic field decreases (in the case of DR), the vortices at 

the edge of the superconducting film rapidly exit from the superconductor, leaving a much lower 

density  regime  for  vortices  at  the  edge.  In  the  case  of  FC,  the  vortices  are  formed  during  the 

superconducting  transition  and  distribute  more  uniformly  inside  the  superconductor.  The 

difference in the vortex density distributions between ZFC and FC, as well as between ZFC and 

DR  is  expected  to  be  stronger  for  a  strong-pinning  superconductor  (such  as  NbN)  than  for  a 

relatively  weak  pinning  superconductor  (such  as  Nb).  This  is  consistent  with  our  observations 

where much stronger hysteresis in the IexcRN vs. magnetic field was observed for the NbN-based 

device (Figure 3B) compared to that for the Nb-based devices (Figure 3D). 

The effect of magnetic field on AR in  relation to the  spatial distribution of the vortices 

can  be  explained  considering  the  strong  current  crowding  effect[26]  at  the  SG  contacts  as 

illustrated  in  Figure  4D.  In  this  simplified  picture  where  the  SG  interface  is  modeled  as  a 

transmission  line  of  resistor  network  with  uniformly  distributed  contact  resistance  and  sheet 

resistance,  the  current  I  flows  from  the  superconductor  to  graphene  with  spatial  distribution 

 where 

 , L is the width of the superconducting contact, RC is the 

interfacial resistance between graphene and superconductor, and RS is the resistance of graphene 

underneath the contact. In a high transparency contact: Rc << Rs, current flows from the contacts 

into graphene primarily at the inner edge of the contacts (

).  It is in this region vortices enter 

and exit the superconducting contacts, with their density determined by the magnetic field ramping 

procedure. During ZFC-ed field measurements the vortices are denser at the edges. When cycled 

back to the same field by the DR procedure, the edges have a lower vortex density compared to 

)sinh(/cosh)(aLaxILaxjCSRRaLxthe ZFC for the same field.  As a result, one expects a strong magnetic field and ramping dynamics 

dependence in charge transport characteristics.  

With both vortex and current crowding at the inner edges of the superconducting contacts, 

the  suppression  of  AR  can  be  explained  by  the  magnetic  field  dependence  of  the  averaged 

superconducting gap at the SG interface. For each vortex, the superconducting order parameter 

decreases towards the vortex core over a distance of ξ, the superconducting coherence length. With 

increasing magnetic field and hence  increased vortex density at the edges, the vortices become 

increasingly overlapped and the average order parameter in the superconductor decreases. This is 

reflected in the decreasing effective gap with increasing magnetic field as observed in our dV/dI 

(Vbias) measurements (Figure 4A). The gap reduction is expected to be more sensitive to magnetic 

field when the zero-field gap is small and therefore 

 (or the vortex core size) is large. As 

a result the vortices overlap and reduce the average superconducting gap more quickly compared 

to when the effective superconducting gap is larger.  

To highlight the impact of the effective superconducting gap on AR we plot IexcRN versus 

the effective gap in various magnetic fields in Figure 4B, taken from the Nb-Ti-G sample. While 

both IexcRN and the effective gap show hysteretic magnetic field dependence, the relation between 

the  excess  current  and  the  effective  gap  is  non-hysteretic  and  linear  within  the  experimental 

uncertainty.  The  linear  dependence  which  extrapolates  to  the  origin  of  the  plot  is  qualitatively 

consistent with the theories[17, 27, 28] on the gap dependence of the IexcRN (see Supplementary 

Information).  Besides  excess  current,  we  also  compare  the  bias  dependence  of  the  differential 

resistance under ZFC and ZFC-down ramps. It is found that the line shape of differential resistance 

taken at different ramping procedures closely match with each other whenever they have the same 

effDeffective gap. Our observations suggest that for a given device, the magnetic suppression of AR 

conductance is predominantly caused by the suppression of the effective gap by the magnetic field. 

While our result suggests that the vortex suppression of gap energy plays a critical role in 

the AR suppression, it does not rule against the contribution from the “Doppler shift” model [9] 

especially in the very low magnetic field regime where vortex density is very low. The Doppler 

shift model considers AR process between normal electrons and diamagnetic supercurrent which 

leads to a shift in the canonical momentum

 . Here 

 is the London penetration depth 

and 

 is the magnetic constant. As a result the superconducting gap “seen” by the normal charges 

at the Fermi level is shifted by 

 . This energy shift effectively reduces the zero-bias 

AR conductance. The magnitude of such Doppler effect is determined by the diamagnetic current 

density at the SN interface, which increases linearly with magnetic field before the inclusion of 

vortices. On the other hand, in presence of high vortex density the net diamagnetic current density 

is  largely  determined  by  the  vortex  density  gradient  and  does  not  increase  beyond  the  critical 

current.  Considering  proximity  effect  at  the  SN  interface,  the  local  critical  current  density  is 

expected  to  be  significantly  reduced  compared  to  the  bulk  superconductor.  Hence  the  low 

diamagnetic supercurrent density at the SN interface only has minor contribution to the magnetic 

suppression of the AR. 

In summary, magnetic suppression of Andreev conductance is observed in diffusive SGS 

Josephson weak links in weak magnetic fields. The suppression depends both on the magnitude 

and the ramping procedure of the magnetic field. We identify the key factor behind the magnetic 

suppression of Andreev conductance to be the suppression of superconducting gap from the piling 

of  vortices.  Due  to  the  proximity  reduction  of  the  effective  superconducting  gap  at  the  SN 

jeAe200jevF20~~interface, ξ and hence the vortex cores are enlarged, resulting rapid decrease of interfacial gap with 

increasing magnetic field.  In weak links with relatively large effective superconducting gap the 

AR persists approaching Bc2. Our work established an understanding of the charge transport across 

SN  interfaces  in  presence  of  magnetic  field.  Moreover,  it  provides  useful  guidance  for  the 

fabrication and characterization of quantum material-superconductor systems, where study of the 

interplay  between  superconductivity  and  novel  quantum  phenomena  requires  “survival”  of 

superconductivity in presence of magnetic field. 

References 

[1] N.H. Lindner, E. Berg, G. Refael, A. Stern, Fractionalizing Majorana Fermions: Non-Abelian Statistics on 
the Edges of Abelian Quantum Hall States, Physical Review X, 2 (2012) 041002. 
[2] D.J. Clarke, J. Alicea, K. Shtengel, Exotic non-Abelian anyons from conventional fractional quantum Hall 
states, Nature Communications, 4 (2013) 1348. 
[3] A. Jason, New directions in the pursuit of Majorana fermions in solid state systems, Reports on Progress 
in Physics, 75 (2012) 076501. 
[4]  R.S.K. Mong,  D.J.  Clarke,  J.  Alicea,  N.H.  Lindner, P.  Fendley,  C.  Nayak,  Y. Oreg,  A.  Stern,  E. Berg, K. 
Shtengel,  M.P.A.  Fisher,  Universal  Topological  Quantum  Computation  from  a  Superconductor-Abelian 
Quantum Hall Heterostructure, Physical Review X, 4 (2014) 011036. 
[5] G.-H. Lee, K.-F. Huang, D.K. Efetov, D.S. Wei, S. Hart, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, A. Yacoby, P. Kim, 
Inducing superconducting correlation in quantum Hall edge states, Nat Phys, advance online publication 
(2017). 
[6] F. Amet, C.T. Ke, I.V. Borzenets, J. Wang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R.S. Deacon, M. Yamamoto, Y. 
Bomze, S. Tarucha, G. Finkelstein, Supercurrent in the quantum Hall regime, Science, 352 (2016) 966-969. 
[7] P. San-Jose, J.L. Lado, R. Aguado, F. Guinea, J. Fernández-Rossier, Majorana Zero Modes in Graphene, 
Physical Review X, 5 (2015) 041042. 
[8]  M.  Ben  Shalom,  M.J.  Zhu,  V.I.  Falko,  A.  Mishchenko,  A.V.  Kretinin,  K.S.  Novoselov,  C.R.  Woods,  K. 
Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A.K. Geim, J.R. Prance, Quantum oscillations of the critical current and high-field 
superconducting proximity in ballistic graphene, Nat Phys, 12 (2016) 318-322. 
[9]  G.  Tkachov,  V.I.  Fal'ko,  Magnetic  field  influence  on  the  proximity  effect  in  semiconductor-
superconductor hybrid structures and their thermal conductance, Phys Rev B, 69 (2004) 092503. 

 
 
 
 
[10]  G.  Tkachov,  K.  Richter,  Andreev  magnetotransport  in  low-dimensional  proximity  structures:  Spin-
dependent conductance enhancement, Phys Rev B, 71 (2005) 094517. 
[11] F. Rohlfing, G. Tkachov, F. Otto, K. Richter, D. Weiss, G. Borghs, C. Strunk, Doppler shift in Andreev 
reflection from a moving superconducting condensate  in Nb/InAs Josephson junctions, Phys  Rev B, 80 
(2009) 220507. 
[12]  D.  Zhang,  C.S.  Ting,  C.R.  Hu,  Conductance  characteristics  between  a  normal  metal  and  a  clean 
superconductor carrying a supercurrent, Phys Rev B, 70 (2004) 172508. 
[13]  G.  Stan,  S.B.  Field,  J.M.  Martinis,  Critical  Field  for  Complete  Vortex  Expulsion  from  Narrow 
Superconducting Strips, Physical Review Letters, 92 (2004) 097003. 
[14]  P.  Rickhaus,  M.  Weiss,  L.  Marot,  C.  Schönenberger,  Quantum  Hall  Effect  in  Graphene  with 
Superconducting Electrodes, Nano Letters, 12 (2012) 1942-1945. 
[15]  P.  Kumaravadivel,  X.  Du,  Signatures  of  evanescent  transport  in  ballistic  suspended  graphene-
superconductor junctions, Scientific Reports, 6 (2016) 24274. 
[16] N. Mizuno, B. Nielsen, X. Du, Ballistic-like supercurrent in suspended graphene Josephson weak links, 
Nature Communications, 4 (2013) 2716. 
[17] A. Bardas, D.V. Averin, Electron transport in mesoscopic disordered superconductor normal-metal 
superconductor junctions, Phys Rev B, 56 (1997) R8518-R8521. 
[18]  J.C.  Cuevas,  J.  Hammer,  J.  Kopu,  J.K.  Viljas,  M.  Eschrig,  Proximity  effect  and  multiple  Andreev 
reflections  in  diffusive  superconductor  normal-metal  superconductor  junctions,  Phys  Rev  B,  73  (2006) 
184505. 
[19] J.C. Cuevas, A.L. Yeyati, Subharmonic gap structure in short ballistic graphene junctions, Phys Rev B, 
74 (2006) 180501. 
[20]  C.  Ojeda-Aristizabal,  M.  Ferrier,  S.  Guéron,  H.  Bouchiat,  Tuning  the  proximity  effect  in  a 
superconductor-graphene-superconductor junction, Phys Rev B, 79 (2009) 165436. 
[21] X. Du, I. Skachko, E.Y. Andrei, Josephson current and multiple Andreev reflections in graphene SNS 
junctions, Phys Rev B, 77 (2008) 184507. 
[22]  H.B.  Heersche,  P.  Jarillo-Herrero,  J.B.  Oostinga,  L.M.K.  Vandersypen,  A.F.  Morpurgo,  Bipolar 
supercurrent in graphene, Nature, 446 (2007) 56-59. 
[23] P.G. De Gennes, Boundary Effects in Superconductors, Reviews of Modern Physics, 36 (1964) 225-
237. 
[24] M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity, 2 ed., McGraw-Hill1996. 
[25] C.P. Bean, Magnetization of High-Field Superconductors, Reviews of Modern Physics, 36 (1964) 31-
39. 
[26]  A.  Allain,  J.  Kang,  K.  Banerjee,  A.  Kis,  Electrical  contacts  to  two-dimensional  semiconductors,  Nat 
Mater, 14 (2015) 1195-1205. 
[27]  G.E.  Blonder,  M.  Tinkham,  T.M.  Klapwijk,  Transition  from  Metallic  to  Tunneling  Regimes  in 
Superconducting Micro-Constrictions - Excess Current, Charge Imbalance, and Super-Current Conversion, 
Phys Rev B, 25 (1982) 4515-4532. 
[28]  M.  Octavio,  M.  Tinkham,  G.E.  Blonder,  T.M.  Klapwijk,  Subharmonic  energy-gap  structure  in 
superconducting constrictions, Phys Rev B, 27 (1983) 6739-6746. 

 
 
 
 
Acknowledgement 

The  author  would  like  to  acknowledge  Dmitri  Averin  and  Konstantin  Likharev  for  insightful 

discussions, Laszlo Mihaly for support with cryogenic facilities, and Peter Stephens for providing 

single crystal HOPG. This work was supported by AFOSR under grant FA9550-14-1-0405. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURES 

FIGURE 1. 

A 

B 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2 

A 

B 

C 

 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 3 

A 

B 

C 

D 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 4. 

A 

B 

C 

D 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE  1:  Device  Characteristics.  (a)  Device  geometry  and  magnetic  field  direction.  (b)  A 

typical  differential  resistance  (dV/dI)  measurement  at  T  =  0.4K  showing  subharmonic  gap 

structures (indicated by arrows) at 𝑉𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 =

2∆𝑒𝑓𝑓
𝑁𝑒

 due to MAR and supercurrent. Here  Δeff is the 

effective superconducting gap. 

FIGURE  2:  Suppression  of  Andreev  Reflection  in  Magnetic  Field.  (a)  Dependence  of 

normalized differential resistance 1/RN (dV/dI) versus bias voltage (Vbias) on applied magnetic field 

for different buffer layers (from top down): Ti (2 nm)/Pd (1.5 nm), Ti(2 nm)/Au(2 nm), V(2 nm) and 

Ti (1 nm), measured at T = 4.2K. Magnetic field B =0 (black), 10(red), 100 (blue) and 1000 (pink) 

mT. The first inflection point after dV/dI begins to decrease, where Vbias = 2Δeff, is denoted by the 

arrows. (b) IexcRN dependence on applied magnetic field at T = 4.2K  for the samples in (a). The 

samples  with  a  larger  effective  gap  has  a  weaker  dependence  on  magnetic  field  and  shows 

significant  excess  current  even  at  B  =  1  T.  (c)  Temperature  dependence  of  IexcRN,  showing 

temperature is not a significant factor for the samples measured. 

FIGURE  3:  IexcRN  and  Andreev  Reflection  Dependence  on  Ramping  Direction  of  Applied 

Field. (a) (1/RN) dV/dI versus Vbias for zero field cooled (ZFC) up-ramp, field cooled and zero field 

cooled down-ramp at B = 200 mT at T = 4.2K for the NbN sample from (Figure 2). (b) IexcRN versus 

magnetic  field  for  ZFC  up  and  down  ramp  (DR)  for  the  sample  in  (a),  the  larger  hysteresis  is 

attributed to the stronger vortex pinning in NbN compared to Nb. (c)-(d) Same as (a)-(b) for the 

Ti/Au/Nb  sample  from  (Figure  2),  showing  the  weaker  dependence  on  ramping  direction 

characteristic of the Nb samples compared to NbN. 

FIGURE 4: Effective Gap Dependence on Applied Field. (a) Dependence of the effective gap 

on  the  ramping  sequence  of  the  applied  field  for  the  Nb-Ti-G  sample.  (b)  Linear  relationship 

between  IexcRN  and  effective  gap.  (c)  Matching  of  (1/RN)  dV/dI  curves  with  the  same  value  of 

excess  current,  but  different  procedures:  ZFC  and  DR,  for  applying  the  magnetic  field.  (d) 

Transmission line model of superconducting contacts with vortices piling along the edge of the 

interface. The current from the lead to the sample is concentrated near the edge, so the effective 

gap seen during AR changes when vortices enter the lead. 

 
