8
1
0
2

p
e
S
4

]
T
G
.
h
t
a
m

[

3
v
5
5
0
8
0
.
0
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN
PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

Abstract. We establish a structural understanding of the involutive Heegaard Floer homol-
ogy for all linear combinations of almost-rational (AR) plumbed three-manifolds. We use this
to show that the Neumann-Siebenmann invariant is a homology cobordism invariant for all
linear combinations of AR plumbed homology spheres. As a corollary, we prove that if Y is
a linear combination of AR plumbed homology spheres with µpY q “ 1, then Y is not torsion
in the homology cobordism group. A general computation of the involutive Heegaard Floer
correction terms for these spaces is also included.

1. Introduction and Results

The aim of the present work is to investigate the involutive Heegaard Floer homology of
a certain class of plumbed three-manifolds, as a means for understanding their span in the
homology cobordism group. The application of Floer theory to the problem of homology
cobordism is well-known and has an established history in the literature; see e.g. [7], [9],
In this paper, we build on the set-up of [6], which uses the involutive Floer
[8], [20], [15].
package developed by Hendricks-Manolescu [10] and Hendricks-Manolescu-Zemke [11] to study
the family of almost-rational plumbed three-manifolds. (We refer to these as AR plumbed
manifolds, for short.) This family, which includes all Seifert ﬁbered rational homology spheres
with base orbifold S2, is deﬁned via placing certain combinatorial constraints on the usual
three-dimensional plumbing construction; see Section 2.2. In [6], the involutive Floer homology
of the class of AR plumbed manifolds was computed and a start was made on understanding
connected sums of such manifolds in a restricted range of cases.

Our main result (see Theorem 1.1 below) provides a structural understanding of the invo-
lutive Floer homology for all linear combinations of AR plumbed manifolds. We use this to
derive a nontorsion result for all linear combinations Y of AR plumbed homology spheres with
Rokhlin invariant µpY q “ 1. We are also able to relate the Neumann-Siebenmann invariant to
the involutive Floer homology (in the case of linear combinations of AR manifolds), and carry
out a general computation of the involutive Floer correction terms ¯d and d for these spaces.

1.1. Overview and Motivation.

Historically, the homology cobordism group Θ3

Z has occupied a central place in the devel-
opment of three- and four-manifold topology. Several gauge-theoretic invariants have been
Z has a Z8 subgroup (originally
used to derive results involving Θ3
Z, including a proof that Θ3
due to Furuta [9] and Fintushel-Stern [7]). In turn, the structure of Θ3
Z has turned out to be
connected to several questions in classical topology, especially concerning the triangulability of
high-dimensional topological manifolds. Following this program, in [15] Manolescu disproved

2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 57R58, 57M27.
Key words and phrases. Involutive Floer homology, homology cobordism.
ID was partially supported by NSF grant DGE-1148900.
MS was partially supported by NSF grant DMS-1702532.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

the triangulation conjecture by ruling out 2-torsion in Θ3
Z with Rohklin invariant one. This was
established via the introduction of a new gauge-theoretic invariant, called Pin(2)-equivariant
Seiberg-Witten Floer homology, along with a related suite of homology cobordism invariants
α, β, and γ. (See also work of Lin [13].) Despite these advances, many problems involving the
structure of Θ3
Z contains
any torsion. In light of Manolescu’s result, it is also natural to ask this in the more restricted
setting of having Rokhlin invariant one, in which case there is no 2-torsion. For further results
in this direction, see work of Saveliev [24] and Lin-Ruberman-Saveliev [14].

Z remain open. One particularly obvious question to ask is whether Θ3

Recently, work by the second author has involved understanding the Pin(2)-equivariant
Seiberg-Witten Floer homology of Seifert ﬁbered spaces (see [26], [27]). These Floer homologies
have explicit algebraic models which make them amenable to computation; and, in addition,
one can attempt to identify classical invariants such as the Neumann-Siebenmann invariant
(deﬁned in [19], [25]) for such spaces in terms of their Floer homology (see [15, Conjecture 4.1]).
Using the formulation of Pin(2)-equivariant monopole Floer homology by Lin [13], many of
these results can be extended to the class of AR plumbed manifolds by utilizing combinatorial
techniques inspired by the work of N´emethi on lattice homology [18]. (See work by the ﬁrst
author in [5].) Although this gives a good understanding of the Pin(2)-homology of individual
AR manifolds, a general description of the Pin(2)-homology of connected sums is more diﬃcult.
See [27] for results in this direction. In the present paper, we will study the subgroups of Θ3
Z
generated by Seifert spaces and AR plumbed manifolds; these will be denoted by ΘSF and
ΘAR, respectively.

On the symplectic geometry side, in [10] Hendricks and Manolescu deﬁned a new three-
manifold invariant called involutive Heegaard Floer homology. This is a modiﬁcation of the
usual Heegaard Floer homology of Ozsv´ath and Szab´o, taking into account the conjugation
action ι on the Heegaard Floer complex coming from interchanging the α- and β-curves. More
precisely, given a rational homology sphere Y equipped with a self-conjugate spinc-structure
s, one can associate to the pair pY, sq an algebraic object called an ι-complex, from which
one constructs a well-deﬁned three-manifold invariant HFI ´pY, sq.1 (There are analogous con-
structions for the other three ﬂavors of Heegaard Floer homology.) This is a module over
FrU, Qs{pQ2q, where F “ Z{2Z and the degrees of U and Q are ´2 and ´1, respectively.
We also have the involutive Floer correction terms ¯d and d, which are the analogues of the
d-invariant in Heegaard Floer homology. These are homology cobordism invariants, but are
not additive under connected sum. See Section 2.1 for a review of involutive Floer homology.
In [11], Hendricks, Manolescu, and Zemke constructed an abelian group IQ, consisting of
all possible ι-complexes up to an algebraic equivalence relation called local equivalence.2 This
notion is modeled on the relation of homology cobordism, in the sense that if two (integer)
homology spheres are homology cobordant, then their ι-complexes are locally equivalent. The
group operation on IQ is given by tensor product. If Y is a rational homology sphere equipped
with a self-conjugate spinc-structure s, then taking the local equivalence class of the (grading-
shifted) ι-complex of pY, sq gives an element of IQ, which we denote by hpY, sq:

pY, sq ÞÑ hpY, sq P IQ.

1Involutive Floer homology is deﬁned for all three-manifolds Y , but in this paper we will only need the case

where Y is a rational homology sphere.

2In [11], only the case of integer homology spheres was considered, but the construction is essentially the

same. See Section 2.1.

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

3

In [11] it was shown that h takes connected sums to tensor products, and hence that restricting
to the case of integer homology spheres yields a homomorphism

h : Θ3

Z Ñ IQ.

This is the analogue in the involutive Floer setting of the chain local equivalence group CLE,
deﬁned by the second author in [26] for Pin(2)-homology. We can thus attempt to study Θ3
Z
by understanding the structure of the group IQ and the image of the map h. One should think
of IQ as capturing all of the information contained in the involutive Floer homology, from the
point of view of homology cobordism. Note that we can further restrict h to the subgroups
ΘSF and ΘAR of Θ3
Z. See Section 2.1 for a more precise discussion of local equivalence and the
construction of IQ.

As in the Pin(2)-case, one can use the lattice homology construction of Ozsv´ath-Szab´o [21]
and N´emethi [18] to determine the involutive Heegaard Floer homology of the class of AR
manifolds. This was carried out by the ﬁrst author and Manolescu in [6]. In this paper, we
use the algebraic model developed in [6] to complete the analysis of hpΘSF q and hpΘARq.
In addition to providing a structural understanding of the involutive Floer homology for all
linear combinations of AR manifolds, this will allow us to derive some applications about the
subgroups ΘSF and ΘAR.

1.2. Statement of Results.

Consider the Brieskorn homology spheres Σpp, 2p ´ 1, 2p ` 1q for p ě 3 odd. In [27] it was
shown that these are linearly independent in Θ3
Z by using the Manolescu correction terms α, β,
and γ. An analogous argument was given in [6] using the involutive Floer homology. For
convenience, we re-parameterize slightly and denote by Yi the local equivalence class

Yi “ hpΣp2i ` 1, 4i ` 1, 4i ` 3qq

for i ě 1.3
(Here, we suppress writing the spinc-structure, since in the case of an integer
homology sphere the spinc-structure is unique.) A schematic picture of the Yi is given in
Figure 1. Our main result is that these classes in fact form a basis for hpΘARq:

Theorem 1.1. We have

hpΘSF q “ hpΘARq – Z8.
An explicit basis may be given by (the image of ) the Poincar´e homology sphere, together with
(the images of ) the Brieskorn homology spheres Σpp, 2p ´ 1, 2p ` 1q for p ě 3 odd.

There is nothing particularly special about the manifolds Σpp, 2p ´ 1, 2p ` 1q, except that they
happen to realize a convenient set of ι-complexes. The inclusion of Σp2, 3, 5q should be thought
of as accounting for the possibility of an overall grading shift. Indeed, we have the following
generalization of Theorem 1.1:

Theorem 1.2. Let Y be a linear combination of almost-rational plumbed three-manifolds, and
let s be a self-conjugate spinc-structure on Y . Then hpY, sq is equal to a linear combination of
the Yi, up to a grading shift by some ∆ P Q :
˜

¸

ÿ

hpY, sq “

ciYi

r∆s.

i
This expression is unique, in the sense that any such expansion for hpY, sq must have the same
ci and the same ∆. Moreover,

∆ “ 2¯µpY, sq,

3This is a slight abuse of notation from e.g. [27], [6], where Yp is used to denote Σpp, 2p ´ 1, 2p ` 1q.

4

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

where ¯µpY, sq is the Neumann-Siebenmann invariant of pY, sq. In addition, the class hpY, sq can
be represented (up to orientation reversal) by an individual almost-rational plumbed manifold
only if:

(1) We have ci P t´1, 0, 1u for all i, and
(2) The nonzero coeﬃcients ci alternate in sign. More precisely, for each ci ‰ 0, we require

that the next nonzero coeﬃcient cj (with j ą i) be given by cj “ ´ci.

If Y is to have the usual orientation, then the last nonzero coeﬃcient must be `1; for Y to
have reversed orientation, the last nonzero coeﬃcient must be ´1.

Note that in order for hpY, sq to be zero in IQ, both the coeﬃcients ci and the grading shift
∆ must be zero.
In further sections, we will describe a convenient way of thinking about
ι-complexes and explain how to explicitly decompose the ι-complex of a connected sum of AR
manifolds as a linear combination of the Yi.

Figure 1. Schematic picture of the Yi. Here, Yi may be thought of as a
particular submodule of the (grading-shifted) Heegaard Floer homology of
Σp2i ` 1, 4i ` 1, 4i ` 3q. See Section 4 for details.

Theorem 1.1 shows that the Neumann-Siebenmann invariant of pY, sq can be read oﬀ from
the local equivalence class of its involutive Floer homology, at least for linear combinations of
AR manifolds. In particular, this implies that the Neumann-Siebenmann invariant restricted
to ΘAR is a homology cobordism invariant:

Corollary 1.3. The Neumann-Siebenmann invariant descends to a well-deﬁned homomor-
phism ¯µ : ΘAR Ñ Z.

Proof. It is easy to check from the deﬁnitions that ¯µ changes sign under orientation reversal
and is additive under connected sum. The local equivalence class hpY q is an invariant of
(cid:3)
homology cobordism, so the claim follows from the uniqueness part of Theorem 1.2.

This provides a partial proof of a conjecture by Neumann [19], which states that the Neumann-
Siebenmann invariant is a homology cobordism invariant in general. Corollary 1.3 may be
viewed as a strengthening of e.g. [26, Theorem 1.3], [5, Theorem 1.3], [6, Theorem 1.2].

Corollary 1.3 also implies that if Y is a linear combination of AR homology spheres with
¯µpY q ‰ 0, then Y is not torsion in the homology cobordism group. We can phrase this in
terms of the Rokhlin invariant µ instead, which has the advantage of being deﬁned for all
three-manifolds:

Corollary 1.4. Let Y be homology cobordant to a linear combination of AR homology spheres,
so that rY s P ΘAR. If µpY q “ 1, then rY s is not torsion in Θ3
Z.

Proof. The Neumann-Siebenmann invariant reduces to the Rokhlin invariant mod 2.

(cid:3)

Y1Y2Yi···020402iON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

5

More generally, if Y is a manifold as above for which hpY q is nonzero, then Theorem 1.1
evidently implies that the cobordism class rY s cannot be torsion in Θ3
Z. Corollaries 1.3 and
1.4 can be thought of as stating that if the Rokhlin invariant (or the Neumann-Siebenmann
invariant) of a linear combination of AR manifolds is nontrivial, then hpY q ‰ 0.

In another direction, we can also use the decomposition of Theorem 1.2 to carry out a
computation of the involutive Floer correction terms ¯d and d. Consider a linear combination
in IQ of the form

pYs1 ` Ys2 ` . . . ` Ysmq ´ pYt1 ` Yt2 ` . . . ` Ytnq,
where the Yi are the basis elements of Theorem 1.2. Without loss of generality, we assume
that the si are distinct from the ti, and that s1 ě s2 ě ¨ ¨ ¨ ě sm and t1 ě t2 ě ¨ ¨ ¨ ě tn. Then
we have:

Theorem 1.5. Let Y be a linear combination of almost-rational plumbed three-manifolds, and
let s be a self-conjugate spinc-structure on Y . Suppose that hpY, sq decomposes as a linear
combination

pYs1 ` Ys2 ` . . . ` Ysmq ´ pYt1 ` Yt2 ` . . . ` Ytnq

as above, shifted by some grading ∆. Deﬁne the quantities
˜

¸

iÿ

iÿ

Pi “ 2

tj ´

sj

for 0 ď i ď minpm, nq, and

˜

j“1
iÿ

j“1
i`1ÿ

¸

Qi “ 2

tj ´

sj

for 0 ď i ď minpm ´ 1, nq.

j“1

j“1

Note that P0 “ 0 and Q0 “ ´2s1. Then

dpY, sq “ dpY, sq ` maxt minpP0, Q0q,

minpP0, P1, Q1q,

...

minpP0, P1, P2, . . . , Pminpm,nq, Qminpm,nqqu,

with the understanding that if minpm, nq “ m, the Qminpm,nq in the last line should be deleted.

Note that if m “ 0, then minpm, nq “ m, and the above expression reduces to

dpY, sq “ dpY, sq ` maxtminpP0qu “ dpY, sq.

Similarly, if n “ 0 (but m ą 0), then the above expression reduces to

dpY, sq “ dpY, sq ` maxtminpP0, Q0qu “ dpY, sq ´ 2s1.

Compare with [6, Corollary 1.4].

Since orientation reversal corresponds to negation in IQ, changing Y to ´Y interchanges
the index sets tsiu and ttiu. Due to the fact that ¯dpY, sq “ ´dp´Y, sq, Theorem 1.5 can also be
used to compute ¯dpY, sq. We will give some motivation for the terms appearing in the actual
formula when we give the proof in Section 5.

Although the statement of Theorem 1.5 is rather cumbersome, it is still possible to use it
to derive some general facts about ¯d and d. To this end, we have the following asymptotic
characterization of the involutive Floer correction terms:

6

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

Corollary 1.6. Let Y be a linear combination of almost-rational plumbed three-manifolds,
and let s be a self-conjugate spinc-structure on Y . Suppose that hpY, sq is given by a linear
combination

pYs1 ` Ys2 ` . . . ` Ysmq ´ pYt1 ` Yt2 ` . . . ` Ytnq
as in the statement of Theorem 1.5. Then the involutive Floer correction terms of #kpY, sq for
k suﬃciently large are as follows. If t1 ą s1, then for k suﬃciently large, we have

¯dp#kpY, sqq “ k ¨ dpY, sq ` 2t1 and
dp#kpY, sqq “ k ¨ dpY, sq.

If s1 ą t1, then for k suﬃciently large, we have

¯dp#kpY, sqq “ k ¨ dpY, sq and
dp#kpY, sqq “ k ¨ dpY, sq ´ 2s1.

We currently do not know whether a similar “stabilization” result holds more generally for
all rational homology spheres; if not, then Corollary 1.6 provides an interesting obstruction to
being a connected sum of AR plumbed manifolds. Theorem 1.5 and Corollary 1.6 should be
compared with other expressions derived for various Floer correction terms in e.g. [27, Theorem
1.4], [6, Theorem 1.3], [6, Corollary 1.5]. It is possible (although actually rather involved) to
show that Theorem 1.5 reduces to [6, Theorem 1.3] in the appropriate cases.

We also have the following realization result:

Corollary 1.7. Let d, ¯d, and d be any triple of even integers such that d ď d ď ¯d and d, ¯d, and
d are not all equal to each other. In addition, let ¯µ be any integer. Then there are inﬁnitely
many distinct classes in ΘSF with the invariants d, ¯d, d, and ¯µ.

Given Theorem 1.1, Corollary 1.7 is not particularly surprising, although it does establish
that ¯µ is almost entirely independent from the involutive Floer correction terms. Note that if
d “ d “ ¯d, then it is not hard to show the corresponding local equivalence class must be trivial
(up to grading shift); in our case, this also implies d “ ´2¯µ.

Organization of the paper. In Section 2, we review the construction of involutive Heegaard
Floer homology and describe the set-up of [6] concerning the involutive Floer homology of
AR plumbed manifolds. In Section 3, we establish the main technical result needed to prove
Theorems 1.1 and 1.2, which we do in Section 4. In Section 5, we prove Theorem 1.5 on the
involutive Floer correction terms ¯d and d. Finally, in Section 6, we give some examples and
prove Corollaries 1.6 and 1.7.

Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Jen Hom, Tye Lidman, Francesco Lin, and
Christopher Scaduto for helpful conversations and suggestions, as well as Duncan McCoy for
pointing out several interesting examples to us. We would also like to thank our advisors,
Zolt´an Szab´o and Ciprian Manolescu, respectively, for their continued support and guidance.
We note that Theorem 1.1 has also been independently established by Hendricks-Hom-Lidman.

2. Preliminary Notions

In this section, we give the necessary background required for the rest of the paper. Much of
the exposition here is taken from [6], but since familiarity with the relevant constructions (and
their notation) will be critical in future sections, we have included it as a matter of convenience
to the reader.

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

7

2.1. Involutive Heegaard Floer Homology.

We begin by reviewing the construction of involutive Heegaard Floer homology as given
in [10]. We restrict ourselves to the case where Y is a rational homology sphere and s is a
self-conjugate spinc-structure on Y . Let H “ pH, Jq be a Heegaard pair for Y , consisting of
a pointed Heegaard splitting H “ pΣ, α, β, zq of Y , together with a family of almost-complex
structures J on SymgpΣq. Associated to H, we have the Heegaard Floer complex CF ´pH, sq,
which is a Q-graded, free FrU s-module generated by the intersection points TαXTβ in SymgpΣq.
There are also three other variants of this complex, related by

yCF “ CF ´{pU “ 0q, CF 8 “ U ´1CF ´, and CF ` “ CF 8{CF ´.
We denote these by CF ˝ for ˝ “ p, 8, `, ´. If H and H1 are two Heegaard pairs for Y with
the same basepoint z, then by work of Juh´asz and Thurston [12], any sequence of Heegaard
moves relating H and H1 deﬁnes a homotopy equivalence

ΦpH, H1q : CF ˝pH, sq Ñ CF ˝pH1, sq.

This assignation is itself unique up to chain homotopy, in the sense that any two sequences of
Heegaard moves deﬁne chain-homotopic maps Φ; see also [10, Proposition 2.3]. This justiﬁes
the use of the notation CF ˝pY, sq, rather than CF ˝pH, sq. Taking the homology of CF ˝pY, sq
yields the Heegaard Floer homology HF ˝pY, sq constructed by Ozsv´ath and Szab´o in [22], [23].
Now consider the conjugate Heegaard pair H “ pH, ¯Jq. This is deﬁned by reversing the

orientation on Σ and interchanging the α and β curves to give the Heegaard splitting

H “ p´Σ, β, α, zq,
and taking the conjugate family ¯J of almost-complex structures on Symgp´Σq. The points
of Tα X Tβ are in obvious correspondence with the points of Tβ X Tα, and J-holomorphic
disks with boundary on pTα, Tβq are in bijection with ¯J-holomorphic disks with boundary on
pTβ, Tαq. This yields a canonical isomorphism

η : CF ˝pH, sq Ñ CF ˝pH, sq,

where here we have used the fact that s “ ¯s, since s is self-conjugate. Note that this is not the
map ΦpH, Hq deﬁned in the previous paragraph. Instead, deﬁning

ι “ ΦpH, Hq ˝ η,
we obtain a chain map from CF ˝pH, sq to itself. In [10, Section 2.2] it is shown that ι is a
homotopy involution and is independent (up to the notion of equivalence deﬁned later in this
section) of the choice of H. The involutive Heegaard Floer complex is then deﬁned to be the
mapping cone

ˆ

˙

(1)

CFI ˝pY, sq “

CF ˝pY, sq

Qp1`ιq

ÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ Q¨CF ˝pY, sqr´1s

.

Here, Q is a formal variable marking the right-hand copy of CF ˝pY, sq. Taking the homology
of CFI ˝pY, sq yields the involutive Heegaard Floer homology HFI ˝pY, sq. In [10, Proposition
2.8] it is shown that the quasi-isomorphism type of CFI ˝pY, sq is an invariant of pY, sq. In this
paper, we will mainly deal with the minus version of the involutive Floer complex, CFI ´.

We formalize the algebra underlying CFI ´ by recalling [11, Section 8]:

Deﬁnition 2.1. [11, Deﬁnition 8.1] An ι-complex is a pair pC, ιq, consisting of

‚ a Q-graded, ﬁnitely generated, free chain complex C over the ring FrU s, where degpU q “
´2. Moreover, we ask that there is some τ P Q such that the complex C is supported

8

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

in degrees diﬀering from τ by integers. We also require that there is a relatively graded
isomorphism

U ´1H˚pCq – FrU, U ´1s,
and that U ´1H˚pCq is supported in degrees diﬀering from τ by even integers;

‚ a grading-preserving chain homomorphism ι : C Ñ C, such that ι2 is chain homotopic

to the identity.

The set of ι-complexes comes with a natural equivalence relation, as follows:
Deﬁnition 2.2. [11, Deﬁnition 8.3] Two ι-complexes pC, ιq and pC1, ι1q are called equivalent
if there exist chain homotopy equivalences

F : C Ñ C1, G : C1 Ñ C

that are homotopy inverses to each other, and such that

F ˝ ι » ι1 ˝ F, G ˝ ι1 » ι ˝ G,

where » denotes FrU s-equivariant chain homotopy.
Given pY, sq as above, the pair pCF ´pY, sq, ιq is evidently a ι-complex. Note that if Y is an
integer homology sphere, then CF ´pY, sq is Z-graded, rather than Q-graded (and we may take
τ “ 0).
It is shown in [10] that choosing diﬀerent Heegaard pairs for Y yields equivalent
ι-complexes in the sense of Deﬁnition 2.2. Hence we use the notation pCF ´pY, sq, ιq, rather
than pCF ´pH, sq, ιq. Given an arbitrary ι-complex, we can of course take the homology of its
mapping cone as in (1), which we refer to as the involutive homology of pC, ιq. In [10] it is
shown that an equivalence of ι-complexes induces a quasi-isomorphism between their mapping
cones.

The following important structural result about involutive Floer homology was proven by

Hendricks, Manolescu, and Zemke in [11]:

Theorem 2.3. [11, Theorem 1.1] Suppose Y1 and Y2 are rational homology spheres equipped
with self-conjugate spinc-structures s1 and s2. Let ι1, ι2 and ι denote the conjugation involu-
tions on the Floer complexes CF ´pY1, s1q, CF ´pY2, s2q, and CF ´pY1#Y2, s1#s2q, respectively.
Then, the equivalence class of the ι-complex pCF ´pY1#Y2q, ιq is the same as that of

`

CF ´pY1, s1q bFrU s CF ´pY2, s2qr´2s, ι1 b ι2

˘

,

where r´2s denotes a grading shift.

One can also consider a coarser equivalence relation on the set of ι-complexes, as discussed

in [11, Section 8]:
Deﬁnition 2.4. [11, Deﬁnition 8.5] Two ι-complexes pC, ιq and pC1, ι1q are called locally equiv-
alent if there exist (grading-preserving) chain maps

such that

F : C Ñ C1, G : C1 Ñ C

F ˝ ι » ι1 ˝ F, G ˝ ι1 » ι ˝ G,

and F and G induce isomorphisms on homology after inverting the action of U .
We call a map F as above a local map from pC, ιq to pC1, ι1q, and similarly we refer to G
as a local map in the other direction. The relation of local equivalence is modeled on that
of homology cobordism, in that if Y1 and Y2 are homology cobordant, then their respective
ι-complexes are locally equivalent. In [11, Section 8], it is shown that the set of ι-complexes up
to local equivalence forms a group, with the group operation being given by tensor product.
We call this group the involutive Floer group and denote it by IQ:

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

9

Deﬁnition 2.5. [11, Proposition 8.8] Let IQ be the set of ι-complexes up to local equivalence.
This has a multiplication given by tensor product, which sends (the local equivalence classes
of ) two ι-complexes pC1, ι1q and pC2, ι2q to (the local equivalence class of ) their tensor product
complex pC1 b C2, ι1 b ι2q.
The identity element of IQ is given by the trivial complex consisting of a single FrU s-tower
starting in grading zero, together with the identity map on this complex. Inverses in IQ are
given by dualizing. There is an obvious subgroup of IQ generated by the set of ι-complexes
which are Z-graded; we denote this by I. Clearly, IQ consists of an inﬁnite number of copies
of I, one for each rτ s P Q{2Z. See [11, Section 8] for further discussion, and also [26] for the
construction of the analogous group CLE in Pin(2)-homology. We will sometimes use additive
notations for elements of IQ.

Let h be the map sending a pair pY, sq to the local equivalence class of its (grading-shifted)

ι-complex:

hpY, sq “ pCF ´pY, sq, ιqr´2s.
In light of Theorem 2.3, restricting to the case of integer homology spheres, we obtain a
homomorphism

h : Θ3
We can further restrict h to the subgroup of Θ3
Z generated by Seifert ﬁbered spaces (respectively,
AR plumbed homology spheres), which we denote by ΘSF (respectively, ΘAR). As described
in Section 1, in this paper we will use the algebraic set-up of [6] to complete the analysis of
hpΘSF q and hpΘARq.

Finally, we review the deﬁnition of the involutive Floer correction terms ¯d and d. These are

Z Ñ I.

given by

dpY, sq “ maxtr | D x P HFI ´

r pY, sq, @ n ě 0, U nx ‰ 0 and U nx R ImpQqu ` 1

and

¯dpY, sq “ maxtr | D x P HFI ´

r pY, sq, @ n ě 0, U nx ‰ 0; D m ě 0 s. t. U mx P ImpQqu ` 2.

See [10, Lemma 2.9].
(The shifts by one and two in these deﬁnitions are chosen so that
d “ d “ ¯d “ 0 for Y “ S3.) Like the Ozsv´ath-Szab´o d-invariant, it is easily checked that the
involutive Floer correction terms are invariant under homology cobordism, although it should
be noted that they are not homomorphisms; see [10, Theorem 1.3]. More generally, we can
deﬁne

¯d, d : IQ Ñ Q
by taking the involutive homology of any ι-complex and using a similar deﬁnition as before.
In this paper, we will use a slightly diﬀerent convention than in [11, Section 8], and subtract
two from the above deﬁnitions of ¯d and d when deﬁning them on IQ. This is to cancel out the
grading shift in the deﬁnition of h, so that

¯dpY, sq “ ¯dphpY, sqq and dpY, sq “ dphpY, sqq.
(2)
Note that the conventions in [11, Section 8] are such that ¯dpY, sq “ ¯dpCF ´pY, sq, ιq and dpY, sq “
dpCF ´pY, sq, ιq.

2.2. Almost-Rational Plumbed Manifolds.

We now deﬁne the class of AR plumbed manifolds. The motivation behind these spaces
originally comes from the study of complex singularities (see e.g. [18]). However, from the
viewpoint of involutive Floer homology, it will be more convenient to think of AR manifolds
simply as a class of three-manifolds whose Floer homology always takes a certain form; see

10

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

Theorem 2.8. Thus the topological details of the construction will not actually be of much
consequence in the rest of the paper, but we include them here for completeness.

Let G be a decorated graph, and denote the decoration of a vertex v in G by mpvq P Z. Let
L be the integer lattice spanned by the vertices of G. We deﬁne a bilinear pairing on L by
setting

xv, wy “

$
’&
mpvq
1
’%
0

if v “ w,
if v and w are connected by an edge, and
otherwise,

and extending linearly to L. We call this pairing the intersection form associated to G. Denote
the dual lattice of L by L1 “ HompL, Zq, and deﬁne the canonical characteristic element K P L1
by setting

Kpvq “ ´mpvq ´ 2,
for all vertices v. If x is a vector in L, then we write x ą 0 if all of the coeﬃcients of x are
non-negative and if x ‰ 0.

Now let Y “ Y pGq be the manifold deﬁned by the usual three-dimensional plumbing con-
struction on G. This means that Y is the boundary of the oriented four-manifold W “ W pGq
obtained by attaching two-handles to B4 according to G. (Note that Y is oriented as the
boundary of W .) We further suppose that G is a tree and that its intersection form is negative
deﬁnite; this is equivalent to the claim that Y is a rational homology sphere realized as the
link of a normal surface singularity. Such a singularity is called rational if its geometric genus
is zero. According to a theorem of Artin (see [1], [2]), this occurs if and only if

´pKpxq ` xx, xyq{2 ě 1,

for all x ą 0 in L. A graph satisfying this property is called a rational plumbing graph. See
[16, Section 8] for further discussion.

Deﬁnition 2.6. [16, Deﬁnition 8.1] Let G be a tree with negative deﬁnite intersection form.
We say that G is an almost-rational graph if there exists a vertex v of G such that by replacing
the decoration mpvq with some other m1 ď mpvq, we obtain a rational plumbing graph G1. In
this situation, we refer to Y “ Y pGq as an almost-rational plumbed manifold.

The family of AR plumbed manifolds includes all Seifert ﬁbered rational homology spheres
with base orbifold S2, and, more generally, all one-bad-vertex plumbed manifolds in the sense
of Ozsv´ath and Szab´o [21]. In the case that Y is also an (integer) homology sphere, we will refer
to Y as an AR plumbed homology sphere. Note that the class of AR manifolds is not closed
under connected sum or orientation reversal, although in the latter case the Floer homology
is still easy to understand via dualizing. Usually, we will refer to a connected sum of AR
manifolds (some with reversed orientation) as a linear combination of AR manifolds.

Remark 2.7. All Seifert ﬁbered rational homology spheres have base orbifold with underlying
space S2 or RP2. (Further, if they are integer homology spheres, this has to be S2.) When the
underlying space is RP2, then the Seifert ﬁbered rational homology sphere is an L-space by [3,
Proposition 18]. In such cases, it is straightforward to show that the involutive Heegaard Floer
homology is determined by the ordinary Heegaard Floer homology (and is uninteresting).

2.3. Graded Roots and Standard Complexes.

We now turn to a discussion of the involutive Floer homology of AR manifolds. For those
unfamiliar with the results of [6] and related papers, a brief outline of the ideas is as follows.
Let Y be an AR plumbed three-manifold and let s be a spinc-structure on Y . Then it is a
consequence of the isomorphism between lattice homology and Heegaard Floer homology (see

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

11

e.g. [21], [16], [18]) that the Heegaard Floer homology HF ´pY, sq may be compactly expressed
If s is self-conjugate, then the
in the form of a combinatorial object called a graded root.
graded root R associated to pY, sq encodes not only the Heegaard Floer homology, but also the
homological action of ι˚ on HF ´pY, sq (see [6], [5]). One of the main results of [6] is that the
ι-complex pCF ´pY, sq, ιq can be recovered from R together with this homological involution.
More precisely, associated to R we may deﬁne a chain complex C˚pRq, called the standard
complex of R, together with an involution J0 on C˚pRq such that pCF ´pY, sq, ιq and pC˚pRq, J0q
are equivalent ι-complexes. In general, of course, the homotopy type of CFI ´pY, sq cannot be
recovered from HF ´pY, sq, even with the knowledge of ι˚. However, for AR manifolds the
Heegaard Floer homology has certain structural constraints (coming from lattice homology)
which imply that in such cases the equivalence class of pCF ´pY, sq, ιq is determined for purely
algebraic reasons. The standard complex pC˚pRq, J0q has the advantage of being a particularly
simple model for pCF ´pY, sq, ιq, and has a pleasing geometric/combinatorial interpretation
which makes understanding and manipulating such complexes easier. (Indeed, the remainder of
[6] is devoted to using this geometric picture to perform computations of ¯d and d for connected
sums of AR manifolds.) In this paper, we will similarly manipulate these complexes to prove
Theorems 1.1 and 1.2.

We now give the precise deﬁnition of a graded root. Let R be an inﬁnite tree, and let
gr : VertpRq Ñ Q be a grading function from the vertices of R to a coset of 2Z in Q. We say
that R (together with the grading function gr) is a graded root if the following conditions are
satisﬁed:

‚ grpuq ´ grpvq “ ˘2 for any edge pu, vq,
‚ grpuq ă maxtgrpvq, grpwqu for any edges pu, vq and pu, wq with v ‰ w,
‚ gr is bounded above,
‚ gr´1pkq is ﬁnite for any k P Q, and
‚ #gr´1pkq “ 1 for all k ! 0 in the image of gr.

Note that this deﬁnition diﬀers from the one given in [6, Section 2.3] by a factor of two in
the grading function. We think of the grading of a vertex v as corresponding to its height, so
that geometrically a graded root may be realized as an upwards-opening tree with an inﬁnite
downwards stem, as pictured in Figure 2. See [17] for further discussion.

Given a graded root R, we deﬁne a graded FrU s-module H´pRq by giving H´pRq one gen-
erator for each vertex v of R, located in the same grading as grpvq. (These are generators of
H´pRq over F.) We deﬁne the U -action by specifying

U ¨ v “ w if pv, wq is an edge and grpvq ´ grpwq “ 2.
Clearly, U has degree ´2. Since R and H´pRq evidently contain precisely the same information,
we will sometimes abuse notation and refer to them interchangeably. As alluded to earlier, the
following theorem is a consequence of the isomorphism between lattice homology and Heegaard
Floer homology:

Theorem 2.8. [18, Theorem 5.2.2] Let Y be an almost-rational plumbed three-manifold, and
let s be a spinc-structure on Y . Then HF ´pY, sq is isomorphic to H´pRq (as a graded FrU s-
module) for some graded root R.

See also [21, Theorem 1.2], [16, Theorem 8.3].

In our case, we will be considering graded roots which have an additional symmetry corre-
sponding to the homological action of ι˚ on HF ´pY, sq. To this end, we deﬁne a symmetric
graded root to be a graded root R with an involution J satisfying the following properties:

‚ grpvq “ grpJvq for any vertex v,

12

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

v2

v1

v5

v6

v3

v4

α2

α3

α4

α1 α5

...

Figure 2. Graded root (with leaf and angle labels) for HF ´pΣp2, 7, 15qq.
Uppermost vertices have Maslov grading ´2; successive rows have grading dif-
ference two. (Taken from [6].)

‚ pv, wq is an edge in R if and only if pJv, Jwq is an edge in R, and
‚ for every k P Q, there is at most one J-invariant vertex v with grpvq “ k.

See also [6, Deﬁnition 2.11]. Geometrically, a symmetric graded root is simply a graded root
which is symmetric under reﬂection about the obvious central vertical axis. It is clear that the
action of J on R may be viewed as an involution on H´pRq commuting with the action of U .
As described in the beginning of the section, if s is self-conjugate, then HF ´pY, sq is in fact
isomorphic to a symmetric graded root R, and this isomorphism takes the action of ι˚ to the
involution on R. See [6, Theorem 3.1]; also [5, Lemma 2.5] for the corresponding statement in
the monopole category.

Now suppose that R is a symmetric graded root. Following [6, Section 4], we construct a
free FrU s-complex whose homology is H´pRq, as follows. Let v1, v2, . . . , vn be the leaves of
R, enumerated in left-to-right lexicographic order. We also enumerate by α1, α2, . . . , αn´1 the
n ´ 1 upward-opening angles in left-to-right lexicographic order. The appropriate labels for
the case of HF ´pΣp2, 7, 15qq are shown above in Figure 2. We denote by grpviq the grading of
vertex vi and by grpαiq the grading of the vertex supporting angle αi.

The generators (over FrU s) of our complex are given as follows. For each leaf vi, we place a
single generator in grading grpviq, which by abuse of notation we also denote by vi. Note that
vi is a generator of our complex over FrU s, so that as an abelian group we are introducing an
entire tower of generators FrU svi. For each angle αi, we similarly place a single generator in
grading grpαiq ` 1, denoting this by αi. (The gradings of these generators are motivated by
the notion of a geometric complex, to appear in Section 2.4.) We deﬁne our diﬀerential to be
identically zero on the vi, and set

Bαi “ U pgrpviq´grpαiqq{2vi ` U pgrpvi`1q´grpαiqq{2vi`1
on the αi, extending to the entire complex linearly and U -equivariantly. We call this complex
the standard complex of R and denote it by C˚pRq. The standard complex associated to the
graded root given in Figure 2 is shown in Figure 3.

It is easy to check that the homology of C˚pRq is isomorphic to H´pRq; see [6, Lemma 4.1].
There is an obvious involution J0 on C˚pRq given by sending vi to vn´i`1, αi to αn´i, and
extending linearly and U -equivariantly. This induces the involution on H´pRq corresponding

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

13

v3

v4

v2

v5

α2

α3

α4

v1

...

α1
...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

α5
...

v6

...

Figure 3. Standard complex associated to the FrU s-module HF ´pΣp2, 7, 15qq.
Solid lines represent the action of U ; dashed lines represent the action of B.
(Taken from [6].)

to the symmetry of R. Given a symmetric chain complex pC, J0q of this form, we deﬁne the
absolute value of the index of a generator to be minpi, n ´ i ` 1q for leaf generators vi and
minpi, n ´ iq for angle generators αi. Where no confusion is possible, we denote this by |i|.

As discussed in the beginning of the subsection, we now have:

Theorem 2.9. [6, Theorem 4.5] Let Y be an almost-rational plumbed three-manifold, and let s
be a self-conjugate spinc-structure on Y . Let R be the symmetric graded root corresponding to
HF ´pY, sq aﬀorded by the isomorphism between lattice homology and Heegaard Floer homology.
Then pCF ´pY, sq, ιq and pC˚pRq, J0q are equivalent ι-complexes.

We will often refer to a symmetric graded root R, its standard complex C˚pRq, and its asso-
ciated ι-complex pC˚pRq, J0q interchangeably.

2.4. Geometric Complexes.

Given Theorems 2.3 and 2.9, it is clear that to understand the image of ΘAR in I, we must
understand tensor products of complexes of the form C˚pRq and their duals. To this end, we
describe a simple geometric/combinatorial representation of C˚pRq which will be useful in later
sections. For each generator vi of C˚pRq, we draw a single 0-cell as in Figure 4, placing these
on a horizontal line from left-to-right in the same order as they appear in C˚pRq. For each
generator αi of C˚pRq, we then draw a 1-cell connecting the two 0-cells corresponding to the
terms in Bαi. We also remember the gradings grpviq and grpαiq of the generators associated
to each of these cells. The generators of C˚pRq are thus identiﬁed with the cellular generators
of this (rather trivial) cell complex, tensored with FrU s. Under this correspondence, we see
that the diﬀerential on C˚pRq is the usual cellular diﬀerential, except twisted by powers of U
according to the gradings of the relevant generators:

ÿ

(3)

Bp˝eq “

˝e´1P bdryp˝eq

U pgrp˝e´1q´grp˝eqq{2 ˝e´1 .

Here, ˝e is a e-cell, and we sum over the pe ´ 1q-cells appearing in the usual cellular boundary
of ˝e. We have written grp˝eq to mean either grpviq or grpαiq, depending on whether d is zero
or one. The twisted diﬀerential should be thought of exactly as the usual cellular diﬀerential,
only multiplied by the necessary powers of U so as to be of degree ´1 with respect to the
grading coming from C˚pRq. We call this cell complex (over FrU s) with its twisted diﬀerential
(extended linearly and U -equivariantly) the geometric realization of C˚pRq. See Figure 4.

14

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

v1

v4

v2

v3

α2

α1 α3

...

grpv1q = grpv4q = 0
grpv2q = grpv3q = ´ 2
grpα2q = ´ 4
grpα1q = grpα3q = ´ 6

v1

v2

α1

α2

v3

α3

v4

Figure 4. Geometric realization (right) of a graded root (left). The leaves v1
and v4 in this example have grading zero. It is helpful to think of the picture
on the right as being obtained by projecting the graded root on the left onto a
horizontal line.

More generally, we can formalize the above discussion as follows. Let C be a cell complex
(in the usual sense), and let gr be a function from the cells of C to a coset of 2Z in Q such
that grp˝eq ď grp˝e´1q whenever ˝e´1 is in the cellular boundary of ˝e. We give C b FrU s a
grading by deﬁning a e-cell ˝e to have grading grp˝eq ` e, and declaring U to have degree ´2.4
Then the twisted diﬀerential (3) is of degree ´1 and turns C b FrU s into a chain complex.
We call a complex deﬁned in this way a geometric complex and refer to the underlying cell
complex C (with its usual cellular diﬀerential) as the skeleton of such a complex. The preceding
discussion states that every standard complex has a geometric realization whose skeleton is
homeomorphic to a line. Note that the passage from a geometric complex to its skeleton may
be obtained by setting U “ 1.

Remark 2.10. This is almost identical to the construction of lattice homology given in [18,
Deﬁnition 3.1.4]. See [18, Theorem 3.1.12] for a discussion of the relationship between this
construction and the sublevel set construction of e.g. [18, Deﬁnition 3.1.11], [6, Section 7].

If X and Y are two geometric complexes, then there is an obvious geometric complex which
realizes X b Y , deﬁned as follows. The skeleton of X b Y is given by the usual product of
the skeleton of X and the skeleton of Y . We then deﬁne the grading of a e-cell x ˆ y by
setting grpx ˆ yq “ grpxq ` grpyq. This construction evidently extends to the product of any
number of geometric complexes, so that if R1, . . . , Rk are a set of k symmetric graded roots,
then C˚pR1q b ¨ ¨ ¨ b C˚pRkq has an obvious geometric realization as a product k-dimensional
rectangular cell complex. The action of J0 “ J0 b ¨ ¨ ¨ b J0 on this complex corresponds to
reﬂection through the center of its skeleton. See Figure 5.

3. Local Equivalence

We now turn to a discussion of local equivalence, beginning with the case of a single graded
root. Following [6, Section 6], we deﬁne a special class of symmetric graded roots which we
call monotone, as follows. Let pC, J0q be a symmetric chain complex as in Section 2.3, with 2n
leaf generators and 2n ´ 1 angle generators. Thus the leaf and angle generators of C occur in
symmetric pairs, with the exception of the single J0-invariant generator αn. If the inequalities

4We use the term “grading” to refer both to the actual chain complex grading and the grading function gr.

The former is given by gr ` e, while we reserve the notation gr for the latter.

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

15

Figure 5. Skeleton of the tensor product of two roots (k “ 2). Points (0-cells)
represent generators x “ x1 b x2 where both x1 and x2 are leaf generators;
edges (1-cells) represent generators where precisely one of x1 and x2 is an angle
generator; squares (2-cells) represent generators where both of the xi are angle
generators. Note the symmetry about each coordinate axis.

(1) grpv1q ą grpv2q ą ¨ ¨ ¨ ą grpvnq,
(2) grpα1q ă grpα2q ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă grpαnq, and
(3) grpvnq ě grpαnq

hold, then we say that the symmetric graded root M corresponding to the homology of C is a
monotone root of type n. To emphasize the 2n parameters grpviq and grpαiq, we write

M “ M pgrpv1q, grpα1q; . . . ; grpvnq, grpαnqq.

Examples of monotone roots are given in Figure 6. Note that if grpvnq ą grpαnq, then M itself
has 2n leaves, while if grpvnq “ grpαnq, we are in the slightly degenerate case where on the
level of homology vn and vn`1 are collapsed into a single J0-invariant leaf. In the special case
that a monotone root M “ M ph1, r1q has only two parameters, we will sometimes refer to M
as a projective root, following [26, Fact 5.6]. In this case it will be convenient to deﬁne5

The graded roots Yi of Figure 1 are projective, with ˜δpYiq “ 2i for all i ě 1.

˜δpM q “ h1 ´ r1.

Figure 6. Examples of monotone roots pn “ 2q. Most of the vertices in the
diagram have not been drawn explicitly.

5This convention diﬀers from ˜δ in [27] in that the present ˜δ is twice that of [27].

M(h1,r1;h2,r2);h2>r2h1r1h2r2M(h1,r1;h2,r2);h2=r2h1r1h2=r216

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

We will also be interested in a slightly more general class of symmetric graded roots, deﬁned

as follows. If C is a complex as above for which the slightly modiﬁed conditions

(1) grpv1q ě grpv2q ě ¨ ¨ ¨ ě grpvnq,
(2) grpα1q ď grpα2q ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď grpαnq, and
(3) grpvnq ě grpαnq

hold, then we say that the homology M of C is a weakly monotone root of type n, and we
parameterize it similarly as above.

It should be noted that occasionally the parameterized complex C does not quite coincide
with the standard complex of M , at least as deﬁned in Section 2.3. For example, if M is
a (strictly) monotone root for which grpvnq “ grpαnq, then the standard complex of M has
2n ´ 1 leaf generators, while C as deﬁned above has 2n leaf generators. Similarly, if M “
M ph1, r1; . . . ; hn, rnq is a weakly monotone root, then appending any number of pairs prn, rnq
to the end of the parameter list yields a larger complex whose weakly monotone root

M “ M ph1, r1; . . . ; hn, rn; rn, rn; . . . ; rn, rnq
is easily checked to be isomorphic to the original, but whose associated complex C has more
generators. However, it is easy to see that all of these complexes are homotopy equivalent (via
a J0-equivariant chain homotopy), and that they are in fact homotopic to the usual standard
complex of M . Hence when discussing chain complexes of monotone roots, we will freely
use either the parameterized complex C or the usual standard complex, whichever is more
convenient.

The importance of the class of monotone roots lies in the following pair of theorems estab-

lished in [6]:

Theorem 3.1. [6, Theorem 6.1] Every symmetric graded root is locally equivalent to some
(strictly) monotone root (which is in fact a subroot of the original).

Theorem 3.2. [6, Theorem 6.2] Two (strictly) monotone roots are locally equivalent if and
only if they have the same set of ordered parameters.

Here, we again abuse notation slightly and say that two symmetric graded roots are locally
equivalent if there is a local equivalence between their ι-complexes. We will similarly make
reference to the tensor product of two graded roots to mean the tensor product of their standard
(or parameterized) complexes, and so on.

According to Theorems 3.1 and 3.2, monotone roots parameterize the local equivalence
classes of (positively oriented) AR manifolds in IQ. Indeed, if one is given two graded roots, to
see if they are locally equivalent it suﬃces to extract their monotone subroots and determine
if they are the same. (A straightforward algorithm for doing this is given in [6, Section 6].)
However, it turns out that there are non-trivial local equivalences between tensor products of
monotone roots which introduce unexpected relations in IQ. The remainder of this section will
be devoted to establishing some of these equivalences.

We begin by describing a convenient way of deﬁning maps between geometric complexes.
Let X and Y be two geometric complexes graded by the same coset of 2Z in Q. Suppose that
we have a cellular map f from the skeleton of X to the skeleton of Y . Thus f takes each e-cell
in the skeleton of X to a sum of e-cells in the skeleton of Y , and preserves the usual cellular
diﬀerential.6 We wish to know if f can be promoted to a true grading-preserving chain map

6Here, we abuse language slightly and refer to any chain map between the cellular chain complexes of skeleta
as a “cellular map”, in order to distinguish these from chain maps between FrU s-complexes. Thus, e-cells are
allowed to be taken to sums of e-cells and/or zero. In all of the examples considered in this paper, these maps
will have a clear topological interpretation (which somewhat justiﬁes their terminology).

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

17

between X and Y . Suppose that

ÿ

f pxq “

yi,

i

where x is a e-cell in the skeleton of X and the yi are distinct e-cells in the skeleton of Y .
Then there is an obvious choice of grading-preserving lift given by

(4)

rf pxq “

U pgrpyiq´grpxqq{2yi,

ÿ

i

where now we think of x and the yi as actual generators in X and Y and the same set of yi
appears in the sum. In order for this to be well-deﬁned, we must check that each e-cell yi
appearing in f pxq satisﬁes the inequality grpyiq ě grpxq. If this condition holds for every x in
the skeleton of X, then f evidently lifts to a grading-preserving map from X to Y , and it is
easily veriﬁed that this preserves the twisted diﬀerential (3). We formalize this in the following
lemma:

Lemma 3.3. Let X be a geometric complex such that:

(a) The skeleton of X is contractible, and
(b) There is an involution J0 on the skeleton of X respecting the usual cellular diﬀerential.
Then pX, J0q is an ι-complex, where J0 is the induced map on X coming from the involution
on its skeleton. In suﬃciently low gradings, the FrU s-homology of X is generated by U -powers
of rxs, where rxs is the (appropriately homogenized) generator of the cellular homology of the
skeleton of X.

Now suppose that X and Y are two such geometric complexes graded by the same coset of

2Z in Q. Let f be a cellular map between their skeleta satisfying the following conditions:

(a) (Lifting condition.) grpyiq ě grpxq holds whenever yi appears in f pxq,
(b) The map f is J0-equivariant, and
(c) The map f takes each 0-cell in the skeleton of X to the sum of an odd number of 0-cells

in the skeleton of Y .

Then the lift (4) of f is a local map from X to Y .

Proof. Given that the skeleton of X is contractible, it is straightforward to check that the
homology of X in suﬃciently negative gradings (congruent to τ mod 2) is isomorphic to F,
and is generated in these gradings by the sum of any odd number of 0-cells (multiplied by
appropriate powers of U ). As J0 obviously lifts to an involution on X, this easily implies the
ﬁrst claim. For the second claim, the fact that f is an isomorphism after inverting the action
of U follows from the requirement that f takes each 0-cell in X to an odd number of 0-cells in
(cid:3)
Y . See also [6, Lemma 7.1].

Example 3.4. We illustrate the use of Lemma 3.3 with the following example. Let x and y be
two (negative) even integers for which x ă y ă 0. We establish the local equivalence

M p0, x; y, yq ` M p0, x ´ yq “ M p0, xq.

One can of course instead write M p0, x; y, yq “ M p0, xq ´ M p0, x ´ yq; this expresses the type-2
root on the left as the tensor product of a type-1 root and the dual of a type-1 root. The
monotone roots in question are displayed in Figure 7, together with their standard complexes.
We have also displayed the geometric realization of M p0, x; y, yq ` M p0, x ´ yq on the left-
(Both 2-cells have grading
hand side in Figure 8, together with the gradings of its cells.
x ` px ´ yq “ 2x ´ y.) Note that the middle vertical 1-cell in the diagram corresponds to
the tensor product of the J0-invariant 0-cell of M p0, x; y, yq with the J0-invariant 1-cell of

18

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

Figure 7. Monotone roots of Example 3.4 (above) and the geometric realiza-
tions of their standard complexes (below). Gradings of leaf and angle generators
are marked in both parts of the diagram.

M p0, x ´ yq and thus has grading y ` px ´ yq “ x. For brevity we will refer to the skeleton of
M p0, x; y, yq ` M p0, x ´ yq as A and the skeleton of M p0, xq as B.

Figure 8. Geometric realizations of M p0, x; y, yq b M p0, x ´ yq (left) and
M p0, xq (right).

We now describe a local map from M p0, x; y, yq`M p0, x´yq to M p0, xq by deﬁning a cellular
map between their skeleta. We send the bottom-left, top-left, and top-middle 0-cells of A to
the left-hand 0-cell in B. We similarly map the bottom-right, top-right, and bottom-middle
0-cells of A to the right-hand 0-cell in B. Note that since y ă 0, this correspondence satisﬁes
the lifting condition of Lemma 3.3. We now send the three red 1-cells in A to the single 1-cell in
B, and send all the other 1- and 2-cells to zero. It is easily checked that this is a J0-equivariant
cellular map (over Z{2Z). Applying Lemma 3.3, we obtain the local map in question.

Deﬁning a local map from M p0, xq to M p0, x; y, yq ` M p0, x ´ yq is even simpler: we send
the left-hand 0-cell in B to the bottom-left 0-cell in A, and the right-hand 0-cell in B to the
top-right 0-cell in A. We then send the single 1-cell in B to the sum of the three red 1-cells in
(cid:3)
A. Applying Lemma 3.3, we obtain the desired local equivalence.

M(0,x;y,y)0+M(0,x−y)0x−y=M(0,x)0xxy00y0000xxxx−yM(0,x;y,y)⊗M(0,x−y)M(0,x)000000x−yx−yxxxxxyyx2x−y2x−yON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

19

We now proceed to the main theorem of the section. In order to formulate this, we will need
to set up a bit of extra notation. Let X and Y be two weakly monotone roots. We say that
two roots X 1 and Y 1 are obtained from X and Y via a swap operation if they are related as in
Figure 9. More precisely, suppose that X is a type-m root, and ﬁx any 1 ď a ď m. Consider
the set of leaves in X whose indices are strictly greater than a in absolute value. Let SX be
the subgraph of X formed by taking the union over the paths connecting these leaves to the
vertex supporting the angle αa in X. This subgraph is marked in blue in Figure 9. Letting Y
be a type-n root and 1 ď b ď n, we deﬁne SY similarly. We then form X 1 and Y 1 by cutting
out SX and SY from X and Y , respectively, and interchanging them. We say that X 1 and Y 1
are a valid swapped pair if X 1 and Y 1 are still weakly monotone.

Figure 9. Swap operation on two monotone roots X and Y . In this example,
m “ 3, n “ 2, and a “ b “ 1.

To see what this does to the parameters of X and Y , let

X “ M pp1, s1; . . . ; pm, smq and
Y “ M pq1, t1; . . . ; qn, tnq.

Fix any pair of integers 1 ď a ď m and 1 ď b ď n, and let ∆ “ sa ´ tb. Then the swapped
roots X 1 and Y 1 are deﬁned by the parameters

X 1 “ M pp1, s1; . . . ; pa, sa; qb`1 ` ∆, tb`1 ` ∆; . . . ; qn ` ∆, tn ` ∆q and
Y 1 “ M pq1, t1; . . . ; qb, tb; pa`1 ´ ∆, sa`1 ´ ∆; . . . ; pm ´ ∆, sm ´ ∆q.
The condition that X 1 and Y 1 are a valid swapped pair is equivalent to the pair of inequalities
pa ě qb`1 ` ∆ and
qb ě pa`1 ´ ∆,

(5)

since the other monotone inequalities are automatically satisﬁed. (For example, sa ď tb`1`∆ “
sa ` ptb`1 ´ tbq, and so on.) Note that we allow the swapping operation even if one of the
subgraphs is empty, which occurs if a “ m or b “ n. In this case, the monotonicity condition
for one of the swapped roots is then trivial.

We now have the main result of this section:

Theorem 3.5. Let X and Y be two weakly monotone roots, and suppose X 1 and Y 1 are a
valid swapped pair obtained from X and Y . Then X b Y is locally equivalent to X 1 b Y 1.

Proof. Let X and Y be two weakly monotone roots as above, and assume that X 1 and Y 1 are
a valid swapped pair. In order to communicate the idea of the proof, we will ﬁrst establish

XYX(cid:48)Y(cid:48)SXSYS(cid:48)XS(cid:48)Y20

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

the claim under the assumption that m “ n and a “ b “ 1. The general case will follow easily
from this simpler one with some minor modiﬁcations.

i and α1

For ease of notation, let the leaf and angle generators of X be denoted by vi and αi,
respectively, and let the leaf and angle generators of Y be denoted by wi and βi. Likewise, let
the generators of X 1 be v1
i. In case we need to
refer to a generator of X or X 1 without specifying whether it is a leaf or an angle generator, we
will use the notation xi or x1
i for Y or Y 1). Note that there is an obvious
gr-preserving identiﬁcation between the unprimed and primed generators of index |i| “ 1. For
generators of index |i| ą 1, we think of x1
i as corresponding to yi, except with shifted grading
grpx1
iq “ grpyiq ` ∆.

i, and let the generators of Y 1 be w1

i (and similarly yi or y1

i and β1

Likewise, y1

i may be identiﬁed with xi, except that7

grpy1

iq “ grpxiq ´ ∆.
As in Example 3.4, we proceed by analyzing the skeleta of X b Y and X 1 b Y 1. Because
m “ n, these two skeleta are identical to each other, and are in fact just 2m ˆ 2m squares.
Hence the subtlety will come from understanding the grading function gr deﬁned on each. We
have displayed the skeleta of X b Y and X 1 b Y 1 in Figure 10, together with some notational
colorings, which we now explain.

Figure 10. Skeleta of X bY and X 1 bY 1. On the left, the inner box represents
cells of the form xi ˆ yj with |i|, |j| ą 1; similarly for cells x1
j on the right.

i ˆ y1

Consider the skeleton of X b Y , displayed on the left in Figure 10. We divide this into
several parts, as follows. First, instead of explicitly drawing the 0-, 1-, and 2-cells appearing
in the center of the complex, we have drawn a 2pm ´ 1q ˆ 2pm ´ 1q square box enveloping
them. We refer to the collection of cells appearing inside this square as the inner box. These
are the cells coming from products of leaf generators and angle generators internal to SX and
SY ; that is, cells of the form

xi ˆ yj, with |i|, |j| ą 1.

7Here, we use the term “identiﬁcation” rather loosely, as we have not (yet) made any claim about constructing
maps between the unprimed and primed complexes. As the leaf and angle generators of various complexes are
just 0- and 1-cells, we obviously have a tautological “identiﬁcation” between any two generators of the same
dimension, although this may not preserve gr. However, given the geometric nature of the swapping operation,
it is clear that certain generators in the unprimed and primed complexes should be naturally thought of as
related to each other.

X⊗YX(cid:48)⊗Y(cid:48)ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

21

Also appearing in the picture are the four corners of the overall square, together with the

eight 1-cells and four 2-cells incident to them. These are cells of the form

xi ˆ yj, with |i| “ |j| “ 1.

We refer to the collection of these cells as the corner cells and have colored/shaded them black
in Figure 10. Next, there are the 0- and 1-cells which occur along the faces of the overall
square, but are not corner cells. These are of the form

vi ˆ yj, with |i| “ 1 and |j| ą 1, or
xi ˆ wj, with |i| ą 1 and |j| “ 1.

We call these cells the side panels and color them purple. Finally, there are also the 1- and
2-cells running between the inner box and the side panels. These are either of the form

αi ˆ yj, with |i| “ 1 and |j| ą 1, or
xi ˆ βj, with |i| ą 1 and |j| “ 1.

We refer to these as the bridge cells. In Figure 10, we have colored/shaded the bridge cells of
the ﬁrst kind blue and the second kind red. We deﬁne a similar decomposition of X 1 b Y 1,
displayed on the right in Figure 10, except that we switch the coloring of the red and blue
cells. (The reason for this change will become clear presently.)

Now let us compare the tensor products X b Y and X 1 b Y 1. First, observe that because
of the natural identiﬁcation of unprimed and primed generators when |i| “ 1, the obvious
bijection between the corner cells of X b Y and the corner cells of X 1 b Y 1 preserves the
grading function gr. Explicitly, one can check that in both cases, the following gradings hold:
all four 0-cells have gr “ p1 ` q1, the four horizontal 1-cells have gr “ s1 ` q1, the four vertical
1-cells have gr “ p1 ` t1, and the four 2-cells have gr “ s1 ` t1.

Next, consider the inner boxes of the two complexes. For |i|, |j| ą 1, we have

grpx1

i ˆ y1

jq “ pgrpyiq ` ∆q ` pgrpxjq ´ ∆q “ grpyi ˆ xjq.
Hence the correspondence between the two inner boxes deﬁned by sending x1
j to yi ˆ xj for
|i|, |j| ą 1 preserves gr. We may think of this geometrically as identifying the inner boxes via
reﬂection across the diagonal. Note that since each complex is symmetric about the vertical
and horizontal axes, we can also eﬀect a gr-preserving correspondence by using a ninety-degree
rotation in either the clockwise or counter-clockwise direction.

i ˆ y1

Finally, consider the bridge cells. For X b Y , we have already described the possible forms

that these can take. In X 1 b Y 1, the bridge cells are of the form
α1
i ˆ y1
j, with |i| “ 1 and |j| ą 1, or
i ˆ β1
x1
j, with |i| ą 1 and |j| “ 1.

Gradings of cells of the ﬁrst kind are given by

s1 ` grpy1

jq “ s1 ` grpxjq ´ ∆ “ grpxjq ` t1

for |j| ą 1. These are precisely the same as the gradings of bridge cells of the second kind in
X b Y . Similarly, gradings of cells of the second kind in X 1 b Y 1 are given by

grpx1

iq ` t1 “ grpyiq ` ∆ ` t1 “ s1 ` grpyiq,

for |i| ą 1, which are the same as the gradings of bridge cells of the ﬁrst kind in X b Y . Hence
we see that, as in the inner-box case, we again have a gr-preserving correspondence between
the two sets of bridge cells, given by a ninety-degree rotation in either direction. To represent
this identiﬁcation, we have interchanged the red and blue colorings in X 1 b Y 1, so that the

22

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

obvious bijection between the red (respectively, blue) cells in X b Y and the red (respectively,
blue) cells in X 1 b Y 1 given by either rotation preserves gr.

These observations give some intuition for how to deﬁne a map between the skeleton of
X b Y and the skeleton of X 1 b Y 1. Roughly speaking, we map the corner cells to each other
via the obvious identity bijection, while using a ninety-degree rotation on the inner box and
bridge cells. There are several evident diﬃculties with this suggestion. First, it is unclear how
to extend this to an actual cellular map from one skeleton to the other while still preserving
the cellular diﬀerential. Second, we have not speciﬁed how to deﬁne our map on the side
panels. Indeed, one can check that the gradings of the cells in the side panels do not work out
to produce any such similar correspondence, either by an identity bijection or a ninety-degree
rotation. We thus proceed instead by ﬁrst constructing two auxiliary complexes which are
locally equivalent to X b Y and X 1 b Y 1. As we will see, these auxiliary complexes will turn
out to be more amenable to the intuition we have built up over the last several paragraphs.

We begin by deﬁning a geometric complex A which is locally equivalent to X b Y . The
skeleton of A is displayed on the right in Figure 11. Like X b Y , the skeleton of A has a
2pm ´ 1q ˆ 2pm ´ 1q inner box, which we deﬁne to be exactly same as that of X b Y . More
precisely, we let the cells in the inner box of A be duplicates of those in X b Y , and we set gr
on the inner box of A to be the same as it is on X b Y . Next, the skeleton of A contains a
collection of red and blue 1- and 2-cells. These are in obvious bijection with the red and blue
bridge cells in X b Y , as indicated by the correspondence in Figure 11. We deﬁne gr on these
cells as being equal to gr of their counterparts in X b Y . Finally, A contains a total of twelve
black 0-, 1-, and 2-cells. We deﬁne gr on these cells as follows: the four 0-cells have gr “ p1 `q1,
the two horizontal 1-cells have gr “ s1 ` q1, the two vertical 1-cells have gr “ p1 ` t1, and
the four 2-cells have gr “ s1 ` t1. These gradings should be compared with the gradings of
the corner cells in X b Y . Note that A has an obvious involution given by reﬂection in each
coordinate.

Figure 11. Auxiliary complex A (right), locally equivalent to X b Y (left).

This deﬁnes a geometric complex A which we claim is locally equivalent to X b Y . We begin
by constructing a local map from X b Y to A by deﬁning a map f between their skeleta. We
let f be given by the identity on the inner box, and deﬁne f on the red and blue cells via the
bijection indicated in Figure 12. Next, we send the four corners of X b Y to the four corners
of A, and the four black 2-cells of X b Y to the four black 2-cells of A via the correspondence
shown in Figure 12. It remains to deﬁne f on the black 1-cells and the side panels.

X⊗YAON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

23

Figure 12. Schematic depiction of a map from X b Y to A. Solid arrows
denote maps of 1-cells and dashed arrows denote maps of 2-cells. We have only
indicated the map on a single red 1-cell and 2-cell; the map on the other red
cells is deﬁned similarly. Extension to the rest of X b Y (not displayed in the
ﬁgure) is achieved by repeatedly rotating the picture by ninety degrees.

Consider (for example) the uppermost face of X b Y . We send all of the purple 0-cells
contained in this face to the nearest counter-clockwise corner 0-cell, which in this case is the
top-left corner of A. We deﬁne f to be zero on all of the 1-cells contained in this face, except
for the right-hand black 1-cell, which we map to the uppermost face in A. One should think of
f restricted to the top face of X b Y as a map from the interval to itself, ﬁxing the endpoints,
where everything to the left of the right-hand black 1-cell is crushed to the left endpoint and the
remaining 1-cell is “stretched out” over the full interval. We deﬁne f similarly in a “counter-
clockwise” manner on the other three sides of X b Y . It is straightforward to check that this
map preserves the cellular diﬀerential.

Note that f actually maps each cell of X b Y either to a single cell of A or to zero. Because
of the way gr is deﬁned on A, in the former case f actually preserves gr everywhere except for
possibly on the purple 0-cells. Now, the purple 0-cells contained in the top face of X b Y have
gradings

gr “ pi ` q1, with 2 ď i ď m.
Due to the monotonicity of X, these are all less than or equal to p1 ` q1, which is the grading
of the top-left corner of A. A similar argument for the other purple 0-cells using the mono-
tonicity of Y shows that f satisﬁes the lifting condition of Lemma 3.3. Since f is evidently
J0-equivariant and maps each 0-cell of X b Y to exactly one 0-cell of A, applying Lemma 3.3
yields the desired local map.

We now construct a local map from A to X b Y by deﬁning a map g from the skeleton
of A to the skeleton of X b Y . We set g to be the inverse of f on the inner box, as well
as all black, red, and blue 2-cells. We deﬁne g on the corner 0-cells via the obvious identity
correspondence, and deﬁne g on the black 1-cells by sending each face of A to the sum of 1-cells
constituting the corresponding face in X b Y . Finally, we deﬁne g on the red and blue 1-cells
of A according to the prescription of Figure 13. More precisely, we send a red or blue 1-cell in
A to the corresponding red or blue 1-cell in X b Y , summed together with the chain of purple
and black 1-cells running from that 1-cell to the nearest counter-clockwise corner 0-cell. With
some care, one can check that g preserves the cellular diﬀerential (over Z{2Z).

We now check that g satisﬁes the lifting condition of Lemma 3.3. Note that, except in the
case of the black 1-cells and bridge 1-cells of A, g maps each cell of A to a single cell in X bY of

X⊗YA24

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

Figure 13. Slanted red 1-cell in A mapped to the sum of 1-cells in X b Y
displayed on the left.

the same grading. We thus consider the black 1-cells ﬁrst. As described, g takes the uppermost
face of A to the sum of 1-cells constituting the top face of X b Y . The gradings of these latter
1-cells are given by

gr “ si ` q1, with 1 ď i ď m.
Due to the monotonicity of X, these are all greater than or equal to s1 ` q1, which is the
grading of the top face of A. A similar computation using the monotonicity of Y holds for the
other three sides, verifying the lifting condition for the black 1-cells.

Now consider a red 1-cell in A, as in Figure 13. This has grading gr “ pi ` t1 for some
ﬁxed |i| ą 1. Note that this is less than or equal to p2 ` t1, by the monotonicity of X. The
corresponding red 1-cell in the image of g has exactly the same grading as the original, while
the remaining 1-cells in the image of g all lie in the uppermost face of X bY , and have gradings
bounded below by s1 ` q1 (by the previous paragraph). Thus, in this instance, to verify the
monotonicity condition it suﬃces to establish the inequality

p2 ` t1 ď s1 ` q1.

However, rearranging this yields the inequality q1 ě p2 ´ ∆, which is precisely the condition
that Y 1 is weakly monotone, as in (5). A similar argument for the blue cells using the fact
that X 1 is weakly monotone proves that g satisﬁes the lifting condition for all cells. Applying
Lemma 3.3 then yields the desired local equivalence.

We have thus constructed a somewhat simpler geometric complex A which is locally equiva-
lent to X b Y . Note that (roughly speaking) A consists entirely of the corner cells, inner box,
and bridge cells of X b Y , with the side panels having “disappeared”. We now construct a
similar geometric complex B which is locally equivalent to X 1 b Y 1, displayed on the right in
Figure 14. This is deﬁned in exactly the same way as A, except with one important modiﬁca-
tion. Whereas before we mapped the purple 0-cells in X b Y to the nearest counter-clockwise
corner 0-cell, we now map the purple 0-cells in X 1 b Y 1 to the nearest clockwise corner 0-cell.
(We likewise reverse the chirality of the various other maps needed to deﬁne the local equiv-
alence.) This results in the complex B shown in Figure 14. Again, the fact that B is locally
equivalent to X 1 b Y 1 follows from the fact that X, Y , X 1, and Y 1 are all weakly monotone.

We now observe, however, that there is actually a gr-preserving isomorphism between A and
B. This is most easily described geometrically, as follows. We view the black 0- and 1-cells
as constituting a ﬁxed outer frame, and we think of the black 2-cells together with the red
and blue cells as being malleable strings/rubber sheets connecting the frame to the inner box.
To map A onto B, we rotate the inner box by ninety degrees counter-clockwise, while keeping
the outer frame ﬁxed. This “drags” the remaining cells of A into bijection with the cells of
B. Moreover, because of our discussion at the beginning of the proof, this correspondence
preserves gr. Similarly, to map B onto A, we rotate the inner box clockwise by ninety degrees.
This shows that A and B are actually the same complex, and thus proves the theorem in the
case that m “ n and a “ b “ 1.

X⊗YAON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

25

Figure 14. Geometric complexes A and B, locally equivalent to X b Y and
X 1 b Y 1. Compare with Figure 10.

We now relax the conditions on m, n, a, and b by allowing these to vary. For the moment,
we will still assume that m ´ a “ n ´ b. As before, we again divide X b Y into four types of
cells. These have been color-coded and displayed on the left in Figure 15. First, we consider
cells of the form

xi ˆ yj, with |i| ą a and |j| ą b.
These constitute a 2pm ´ aq ˆ 2pm ´ aq box of cells which we again think of as being the inner
box. Next, we have cells of the form

xi ˆ yj, with |i| ď a and |j| ď b,

which generalize the corner cells from before. In Figure 15, we have avoided drawing most of
the corner cells, and have instead covered the majority of them with four black corner wedges.
Roughly speaking, these correspond to the corner 0-cells of the previous case. We also have
appropriate generalizations of the side panels and the bridge cells. Cells in the side panels are
now of the form

xi ˆ yj, with |i| ă a and |j| ą b, or
vi ˆ yj, with |i| “ a and |j| ą b, or
xi ˆ yj, with |i| ą a and |j| ă b, or
xi ˆ wj, with |i| ą a and |j| “ b.

Meanwhile, bridge cells are of the form

αi ˆ yj, with |i| “ a and |j| ą b, or
xi ˆ βj, with |i| ą a and |j| “ b.

As before, it is easily checked that the corner cells of X b Y and X 1 b Y 1 are identical, while
the inner boxes and bridge cells are related by a ninety-degree rotation.

We will not re-formulate the entire argument here in the more general case. The idea is, of
course, to construct an auxiliary complex A which (roughly speaking) retains the corner cells,
inner box, and bridge cells of X b Y , while throwing out the side panels. Such a complex is
displayed on the right in Figure 15. The map from X b Y to A should again be thought of
as taking (for example) the uppermost group of side panels and crushing them directly left
towards the top-left corner wedge. In contrast to the previous case, there are now some purple
1-cells on which our map is non-zero, as well as some new black and purple 2-cells that must

AB26

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

Figure 15. The case where m ´ a “ n ´ b. Auxiliary complex A (right),
locally equivalent to X b Y (left). We have avoided shading the 2-cells in order
to prevent clutter in the diagram.

be considered. However, the desired maps on these cells are deﬁned using the same intuition
as before. We leave it to the reader to complete the generalization of the proof.

Finally, we consider the case when m ´ a ‰ n ´ b. This initially seems more diﬃcult, since
if m ´ a ‰ n ´ b, then the obvious inner box is no longer square, and hence cannot exhibit
the desired rotational symmetry. However, if (without loss of generality) m ´ a ă n ´ b, then
as discussed in the beginning of the section we may pad the complex of X with redundant
parameters, in order to create an equivalent complex with a larger number of generators. More
precisely, we append any number of copies of psm, smq to the end of our parameter list to obtain
a graded root

rX “ M pp1, s1; . . . ; pm, sm; sm, sm; . . . ; sm, smq.
which is isomorphic to X. Replacing our original complex with this “fattened” one does not
alter the homotopy class or change the parameters a and b of the swapping operation. Hence
(cid:3)
we can always reduce to the case when m ´ a “ n ´ b. This completes the proof.

4. The Structure of ΘAR

In this section, we use the local equivalence of Theorem 3.5 to prove Theorems 1.1 and 1.2.
These will follow from a structural result expressing any monotone root as a linear combination
of type-one roots and their duals. In order to establish this latter theorem, we will need the
following special case of Theorem 3.1. For completeness, we give a sketch of the proof here in
the language of geometric complexes:

Lemma 4.1. Let M “ M ph1, r1; . . . ; hn, rnq be a weakly monotone root. If hi “ hi`1 for some
1 ď i ă n, then M is locally equivalent to the weakly monotone root

ĂM “ M ph1, r1; . . . ; hi´1, ri´1; hi`1, ri`1; . . . ; hn, rnq

obtained by deleting the parameters phi, riq.

Proof. In Figure 16, we have displayed the two monotone roots in question, together with their
associated skeleta. As before, we apply Lemma 3.3. To deﬁne the map from the left-hand to
the right-hand side, we send the two 0-cells marked gr “ hi on the left to the two 0-cells marked
gr “ hi`1 on the right, and the two 1-cells with gr “ ri on the left to zero. We map all the
other 0- and 1-cells via the obvious gr-preserving bijection. The map in the other direction is
given by sending each of the two 1-cells with gr “ ri´1 on the right (if any) to the appropriate
sum of 1-cells on the left with gr “ ri´1 and gr “ ri, and again using the obvious bijection on
(cid:3)
the remaining cells. See Figure 16.

cornerwedgecornerwedgecornerwedgecornerwedgecornerwedgecornerwedgecornerwedgecornerwedgeX⊗YAON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

27

Figure 16. Weakly monotone root (left) and its locally equivalent subroot
(right). Gradings of cells are marked in the skeleta. Here i “ 2.

With Lemma 4.1 in hand, we now prove the central result of this section:

Theorem 4.2. Let M “ M ph1, r1; . . . ; hn, rnq be a monotone root. Then we have the local
equivalence

¸

˜

nÿ

¸

˜

n´1ÿ

M “

M phi, riq

´

M phi`1, riq

.

i“1

i“1

Proof. We proceed by induction on n. If n “ 1, then M is already a type-one root, and there
is nothing to prove. Otherwise, we have the local equivalence

M “ M ` M ph2, r1q ´ M ph2, r1q

trivially obtained by taking the tensor product of M with M ph2, r1q and its dual. We now
apply Theorem 3.5 to X “ M and Y “ M ph2, r1q, with the swapping parameters a “ b “ 1.
This yields the valid swapped pair

X 1 “ M ph1, r1q

and

Y 1 “ M ph2, r1; h2, r2; . . . ; hn, rnq,
as displayed in Figure 17. Note that in this case the subgraph SY is empty. We thus have the
chain of local equivalences

M “ M ` M ph2, r1q ´ M ph2, r1q

“ M ph1, r1q ` M ph2, r1; h2, r2; . . . ; hn, rnq ´ M ph2, r1q
“ M ph1, r1q ` M ph2, r2; . . . ; hn, rnq ´ M ph2, r1q,

where in the last line we have applied Lemma 4.1 to obtain a monotone root of type n ´ 1.
(cid:3)
This establishes the inductive step and completes the proof. See Figure 17.

Note that in view of Theorems 2.3 and 2.9, this immediately implies that the ι-complex of any
connected sum of AR manifolds is locally equivalent to a linear combination of type-one roots.

Now let M “ tMiuiě1 be a family of type-one roots such that

˜δpMiq “ 2i

h1h2h3h4h3h2h1h1h3h4h3h1M(cid:102)Mr1r2r3r3r2r1r1r1r3r328

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

Figure 17. Proof of Theorem 4.2.

for all i ě 1. If this holds, then we call M a good family of roots. If M is any good family
of roots, then it is clear that every (nontrivial) type-one root is equal to an element of M
up to a grading shift by some rational number. It follows that if Y is any connected sum of
AR manifolds, then hpY q is equal to a linear combination of type-one roots drawn from M,
together with an overall grading shift:

˜

ÿ

¸

(6)

hpY q “

ciMi

r∆s.

i

It is not hard to alter the proof of [6, Theorem 1.7] to show that this decomposition is unique,
as follows:

Lemma 4.3. [6, Theorem 1.7] Let M “ tMiu be a good family of roots. If we have a local
equivalence

¸

˜

¸

˜

ÿ

ciMi

r∆s “

i

ÿ

i

c1
iMi

r∆1s,

then the linear combinations of the Mi on either side are identical and ∆ “ ∆1.

=+=M(h2,r1)+M(h1,r1)=M(h1,r1;...;hn,rn)M(h1,r1;...;hn,rn)M(h2,r1;h2,r2;...;hn,rn)M(h1,r1)M(h2,r2;...;hn,rn)+–––M(h2,r1)M(h2,r1)M(h2,r1)ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

29

Proof. After appropriately moving factors around, we obtain a local equivalence
¸

˜

¸

˜

ÿ

ÿ

aiMi

r∆s “

iPI

jPJ

ajMj

r∆1s,

ř

i Mi is a sum

with all the ai, aj ą 0 and I X J “ H. According to [6, Corollary 1.4], if M “
of type-one roots (with the same orientation), then

¯dpM q ´ dpM q “ max

i

˜δpMiq.

(Note that here ¯dpM q “ dpM q by [6, Theorem 1.3].) Let I∆ (respectively, I∆1) be the graded
root consisting of a single FrU s-tower starting in grading ´∆ (respectively, ´∆1). Then it is
easily seen that applying a grading shift by ∆ is equivalent to tensoring with I∆. Viewing I∆
and I∆1 as degenerate type-one roots, applying [6, Corollary 1.4] to both sides of the above
local equivalence shows that in fact we must have I “ J “ H. This is only possible if the two
original linear combinations are the same. We then additionally see that I∆ “ I∆1, showing
(cid:3)
that ∆ “ ∆1, as desired.

There are two obvious choices for good families of roots. Let X “ tXiu and Y “ tYiu be

given by

and

Xi “ M p0, ´2iq

Yi “ M p2i, 0q.

The family Y has the beneﬁt that it is explicitly realized by the Brieskorn homology spheres
Σpp, 2p ´ 1, 2p ` 1q for p ě 3 odd. More precisely, it is a consequence of [27, Theorem 1.8] that
for such p,

hpΣpp, 2p ´ 1, 2p ` 1qq “ M pp ´ 1, 0q,

as displayed in Figure 1. Hence as p varies, we obtain all of the elements of Y. This immediately
yields a proof of Theorem 1.1:

Proof of Theorem 1.1. Since hpΣp2, 3, 5qq “ I2, we can eﬀect any even grading shift with an
appropriate multiple of hpΣp2, 3, 5qq. Noting that Σp2, 3, 5q and the Σpp, 2p´1, 2p`1q are them-
selves Seifert ﬁbered, the claim then follows from Theorem 4.2 (together with Theorems 2.3
(cid:3)
and 2.9) and Lemma 4.3.

We now make a more careful study of the grading shift in the decomposition (6). Fix any
good family of roots M “ tMiu, and let Y be a linear combination of AR plumbed manifolds
equipped with a self-conjugate spinc-structure s. We deﬁne ∆MpY, sq P Q to be the grading
shift associated to hpY, sq when using the family M in (6), so that

˜

ÿ

¸

hpY, sq “

ciMi

r∆MpY, sqs.

i

In view of Lemma 4.3, ∆MpY, sq is well-deﬁned and descends to a homomorphism from the
subgroup of IQ spanned by (standard complexes of) graded roots to Q. More precisely, the
grading shift ∆ of (6) clearly changes sign under orientation reversal and is additive under
connected sum. Moreover, by Lemma 4.3, ∆MpY, sq depends only on the local equivalence
class hpY, sq.

¸

¸

30

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

Now let us consider the speciﬁc families X and Y. If M is a single monotone root, then we

may rearrange the decomposition of Theorem 4.2 to read

˜

nÿ

¸

˜

n´1ÿ

M “

M p0, ri ´ hiqr´his

´

M p0, ri ´ hi`1qr´hi`1s

˜

i“1
nÿ

“

M p0, ri ´ hiq ´

i“1

i“1

¸

M p0, ri ´ hi`1q

r´h1s.

n´1ÿ

i“1

Hence in the case of a single monotone root, the overall grading shift for the family X is given
by ´h1. Meanwhile,

˜

nÿ

¸

˜

n´1ÿ

M “

M phi ´ ri, 0qr´ris

´

M phi`1 ´ ri, 0qr´ris

˜

i“1
nÿ

“

M phi ´ ri, 0q ´

i“1

i“1

¸

M phi`1 ´ ri, 0q

r´rns.

n´1ÿ

i“1

Thus, the overall grading shift if we use Y is given by ´rn. We now quote the following result
from [6] (see also [26], [5]):

Theorem 4.4. [6, Section 8] Let Y be an AR plumbed three-manifold and let s be a self-
conjugate spinc-structure on Y . If M ph1, r1; . . . ; hn, rnq is the monotone root parameterizing
the local equivalence class of hpY, sq, then h1 “ dpY, sq and rn “ ´2¯µpY, sq.

It follows that if Y is a single AR plumbed three-manifold, then

∆X pY, sq “ ´dpY, sq

and

∆Y pY, sq “ 2¯µpY, sq.
Consider the former. Since we already know that the d-invariant is a homomorphism, the fact
that ∆X is also a homomorphism implies that ∆X pY, sq “ ´dpY, sq for any linear combination
of AR plumbed manifolds. A similar argument for ∆Y yields a proof of Theorem 1.2:

Proof of Theorem 1.2. We have already proven the existence and the uniqueness parts of the
decomposition. It thus remains to establish the equality ∆ “ ∆Y “ 2¯µpY, sq. It is easily seen
from the deﬁnitions that the Neumann-Siebenmann invariant changes sign under orientation
reversal and is additive under connected sum; that is,

¯µp´Y, sq “ ´¯µpY, sq

and

¯µpY1#Y2, s1#s2q “ ¯µpY1, s1q ` ¯µpY2, s2q.
Even though we do not a priori know that ¯µ is a homology cobordism invariant, we do know
that ∆Y is also additive under connected sum and changes sign under orientation reversal.
Hence the fact that ∆Y pY, sq coincides with 2¯µpY, sq for each individual AR plumbed manifold
establishes the equality in general for connected sums.8 The fact that ∆Y depends only on the
local equivalence class hpY, sq then implies the same for ¯µpY, sq.

Finally, note that writing the decomposition of Theorem 4.2 in order of decreasing ˜δ yields an
alternating sum in which the leading basis element appears with a coeﬃcient of `1. Since this

8Note that if Y “ Y1# ¨ ¨ ¨ #Yk is a linear combination of plumbed manifolds, then any self-conjugate spinc-

structure s on Y is of the form s “ s1# ¨ ¨ ¨ #sk, where each si is a self-conjugate spinc-structure on Yi.

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

31

expression is invariant under homology cobordism, this (together with the fact that orientation
(cid:3)
reversal corresponds to multiplication by ´1) establishes the last part of Theorem 1.2.

5. Involutive Floer Correction Terms
We now turn to a computation of ¯d and d for linear combinations of AR manifolds. In [6]
this was done for connected sums of AR manifolds with the same orientation, but it turns out
that allowing mixed orientations makes the calculation signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult. Our main
advantage here will be to observe that in light of Theorem 1.2, it suﬃces to consider the case
when all of the summands are of projective type. To this end, we begin by deﬁning a class of
geometric complexes that will be useful for describing products of type-one roots.

Let Bn be the standard n-dimensional unit ball, and let J0 be the usual involution on Bn
given by reﬂection through the origin. There is an obvious J0-equivariant cellular decomposi-
tion of Bn which consists of exactly one symmetric pair of cells in each dimension 0 through
n ´ 1, and a single J0-invariant cell in dimension n. We denote the cells lying in dimension
i by ei and J0ei, with the understanding that en “ J0en. The cellular boundary operator is
given by

Bpeiq “ BpJ0eiq “ ei´1 ` J0ei´1,
with the convention that ei “ J0ei “ 0 for i ă 0. See Figure 18.

Now let d P Q and let p∆1, ∆2, . . . , ∆nq be a sequence of non-negative even integers. We
associate a geometric complex to these parameters as follows. The skeleton of our complex is
deﬁned to be the above cellular decomposition of Bn. The function gr is deﬁned by setting

and

grpe0q “ grpJ0e0q “ d

˜

iÿ

¸

grpeiq “ grpJ0eiq “ d ´

∆j

j“1

for 1 ď i ď n. Note that this means the diﬀerential on our complex is given by

We call such a complex a spherical complex and denote it by

Bpeiq “ BpJ0eiq “ U ∆i{2pei´1 ` J0ei´1q.

See Figure 18.

S “ Spd, n; ∆1, . . . , ∆nq.

Figure 18. Spherical complex Spd, n; ∆1, . . . , ∆nq with n “ 2.

e0J0e0e1J0e1e2=J0e2gr(e0)=dgr(e1)=d−∆1gr(e2)=d−∆1−∆232

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

ř
n

Remark 5.1. Note that spherical complexes also arise naturally in the setting of Pinp2q-
equivariant Floer homology. In particular, a connected sum of (negatively oriented) Seifert
i“1 Σi, with ˜δi :“ ˜δpΣiq, is chain locally equivalent to the unre-
integer homology spheres
duced suspension of a certain free Pinp2q-space X, with a natural projection map π : X Ñ
BSp0, n; ˜δ1, . . . , ˜δnq whose ﬁbers are determined by the ˜δi (cf. [27, Section 4]).
Lemma 5.2. Let M1, . . . , Mn be a family of type-one roots parameterized by Mi “ phi, riq for
1 ď i ď n. Without loss of generality, suppose that

˜δpM1q ě ˜δpM2q ě ¨ ¨ ¨ ě ˜δpMnq.

Then we have the local equivalence

M1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` Mn “ Spd, n; ˜δpM1q, . . . , ˜δpMnqq,

where d “ h1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` hn.

Proof. We proceed by induction on n. If n “ 1, then the spherical complex in question is the
same as the standard complex deﬁned in Section 2.3. To establish the inductive step, it suﬃces
to prove the local equivalence

M ph, rq ` Spd, n; ∆1, . . . , ∆nq “ Spd ` h, n ` 1; h ´ r, ∆1, . . . , ∆nq,

where without loss of generality we have assumed that h ´ r ě ∆i for all ∆i. Denote the
cells of M ph, rq by v, J0v, and α “ J0α. For convenience, we denote the cells of the left-hand
spherical complex by xi for 0 ď i ď n, and the cells of the right-hand spherical complex by yi
for 0 ď i ď n ` 1. Note that xn “ J0xn and yn`1 “ J0yn`1.

As usual, we apply Lemma 3.3. The skeleta of the product complex on the left and the
spherical complex on the right are displayed in Figure 19. To deﬁne a cellular map f from the
left- to the right-hand side, we send

f pv ˆ x0q “ f pv ˆ J0x0q “ y0,
f pv ˆ xiq “ f pv ˆ J0xiq “ 0 for 1 ď i ď n, and
f pα ˆ xiq “ yi`1 for 0 ď i ď n,

extending J0-equivariantly. It is easily checked that this preserves the cellular diﬀerential by
computing (for example)

Bf pα ˆ xiq “ Byi`1 “ yi ` J0yi

and

f Bpα ˆ xiq “ f pα ˆ pxi´1 ` J0xi´1q ` pv ` J0vq ˆ xiq “ yi ` J0yi.
To see that f satisﬁes the lifting condition, we check that f preserves gr wherever it is nonzero:

grpv ˆ x0q “ grpv ˆ J0x0q “ h ` d “ grpy0q

and

˜

¸

iÿ

˜

grpα ˆ xiq “ r `

d ´

∆j

“ pd ` hq ´

ph ´ rq `

This gives the local map in one direction.

To deﬁne the map in the other direction, set

j“1

¸

∆j

“ grpyi`1q.

iÿ

j“1

gpyiq “ v ˆ xi ` α ˆ J0xi´1 for 0 ď i ď n, and
gpyn`1q “ α ˆ xn,

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

33

again extending J0-equivariantly. Note that gpy0q “ v ˆ x0. We check that this preserves the
cellular diﬀerential (over Z{2Z) by computing

Bgpyiq “ Bpv ˆ xi ` α ˆ J0xi´1q

“ v ˆ pxi´1 ` J0xi´1q ` pv ` J0vq ˆ J0xi´1 ` α ˆ pxi´2 ` J0xi´2q
“ v ˆ xi´1 ` J0v ˆ J0xi´1 ` α ˆ xi´2 ` α ˆ J0xi´2

and

gBpyiq “ gpyi´1 ` J0yi´1q

“ v ˆ xi´1 ` α ˆ J0xi´2 ` J0v ˆ J0xi´1 ` α ˆ xi´2

for 1 ď i ď n. A similar computation holds for yn`1, utilizing the fact that J0xn “ xn. To see
that g satisﬁes the lifting condition, consider the two summands v ˆ xi and α ˆ J0xi´1 of gpyiq.
The grading of the second term follows from the computation of the previous paragraph and
is equal to grpyiq. The grading of the ﬁrst term is given by

grpv ˆ xiq “ h ` d ´

∆j

.

˜

¸

iÿ

j“1

This is greater than or equal to grpyiq, since h ´ r ě ∆i for all ∆i. Applying Lemma 3.3
establishes the local equivalence and completes the proof. We leave it to the reader to give
(cid:3)
geometric interpretations to f and g; see Figure 19.

Figure 19. Skeleta of the complexes considered in the proof of Lemma 5.2.

It follows from Lemma 5.2 that to understand linear combinations of type-one roots, it
suﬃces to consider the case of a single spherical complex, tensored with the inverse of another
spherical complex. Denote the inverse complex of S by S_ “ Spd, n; ∆1, . . . , ∆nq_. This may
be explicitly described as follows. Dualizing the skeleton of S yields a complex with 2n ` 1
generators, which we denote by e_
for 1 ď i ď n (with the understanding that
n “ J0e_
e_

n ). The diﬀerential on this complex is given by

i and J0e_
i

Bpe_
Bpe_
Bpe_

n q “ 0,
n´1q “ BpJ0e_
i q “ BpJ0e_

n , and
i`1 ` J0e_
We refer to this data as the skeleton of S_, even though technically we have not given it an
interpretation as a cellular complex in the usual sense. (See however Remark 5.3.) An explicit

i`1 for 0 ď i ă n ´ 1.

i q “ e_

n´1q “ e_

fgM(h,r)⊗S(d,n;∆1,...,∆n)S(d+h,n+1;h−r,∆1,...,∆n)34

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

computation (simply by taking the kernel and image of B) shows that the homology of the
skeleton is isomorphic to F and is generated by e_

0 ` J0e_
0 .

We deﬁne gr on the skeleton of S_ to be the negative of gr on S after dualizing, so that
0 q “ grpJ0e_

0 q “ ´d

grpe_

and

grpe_

i q “ grpJ0e_

i q “ ´d `

iÿ

j“1

∆j.

We give the dual skeleton tensored with FrU s a grading by subtracting the cellular dimension,
so that e_
i q ´ i. For clarity, we refer to this quantity (and similarly its coun-
terpart grpeiq`i in the non-dualized case) as the chain complex grading, in order to distinguish
it from gr. As before, we declare U to be of degree ´2. Then the obvious prescription

i has grading grpe_

ÿ

Bp˝_

i q “

U pgrp˝_

i`1q´grp˝_

i qq{2˝_

i`1

has degree ´1 and turns this into a graded chain complex, which is evidently the inverse of S
in the sense of [11, Section 8]. Explicitly, we have

i`1P bdryp˝_
˝_
i q

Bpe_
Bpe_
Bpe_

n q “ 0,
n´1q “ BpJ0e_
i q “ BpJ0e_

n´1q “ U ∆n{2e_
i q “ U ∆i`1{2pe_

n , and
i`1 ` J0e_

i`1q for 0 ď i ă n ´ 1.

Remark 5.3. It is possible to give the dual complex S_ a geometric interpretation by using a
relative cell complex, as in Figure 20. More precisely, we can give Bn a J0-equivariant decom-
position in such a way so that the skeleton of S_ is identiﬁed with the relative cellular complex
pBn, Sn´1q. (This is simply a manifestation of Poincar´e duality applied to the manifold-with-
boundary Bn.) This picture can be used to gain some geometric intuition for Lemmas 5.4 and
5.5 below. Note that the homology of the skeleton in this case is still isomorphic to F, even
though its generator rxs no longer has dimensional grading zero.

Figure 20. Dual complex S_pd, n; ∆1, . . . , ∆nq with n “ 2.

We are now in a position to carry out our computation of ¯d and d. We will henceforth
suppress writing down powers of U , so that when we write a sum of generators Σ (of the same
dimension), we mean that each term of Σ is implicitly multiplied by the appropriate power of
U so that its (chain complex) grading is equal to that of the lowest-grading generator in Σ.
By grpΣq we thus mean the minimum of gr over the terms appearing in Σ. Similarly, when we
write that two sums of generators are equal to each other, we mean equality after multiplying
one or both sides by a suﬃciently high power of U .

e∨2=J0e∨2e∨1J0e∨1J0e∨0e∨0gr(e∨0)=−dgr(e∨1)=−d+∆1gr(e∨2)=−d+∆1+∆2ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

35

We proceed by explicitly understanding the mapping cone of S1bS_

2 . Recall from Section 2.1

that if pC, ιq is an ι-complex, then its mapping cone is given by

C˚

Qp1`ιq

ÝÝÝÝÝÝÑ Q ¨ C˚r´1s.

Explicitly, this consists of the complex Cr´1s b FrQs{pQ2q, together with the total diﬀerential
Btot “ B ` Q ¨ p1 ` ιq,

where B is the diﬀerential on C. Thus elements of C in the mapping cone which are not
decorated by a Q have grading one higher than their usual chain complex grading in C, while
multiplying by Q shifts grading by ´1. Where confusion with other gradings is possible, we
will refer to this as the total grading or the mapping cone grading. We also remind the reader
of our convention from Section 2.1 regarding the deﬁnition of ¯d and d for ι-complexes; these
are shifted by two relative to their usual deﬁnition. See (2).

Recall that in suﬃciently low gradings, the involutive homology HFI ´ consists entirely of
two U -nontorsion towers, one of which is taken to the other via multiplication by Q. We refer
to these as the ¯d- and d-towers depending on their mod 2 gradings relative to τ . (The ¯d-tower
is the tower in the image of Q.) It is easily checked that an element x P HFI ´ satisﬁes the
conditions in the deﬁnition of ¯d or d if and only if suﬃciently high U -powers of x lie in the ¯d-
or d-tower, respectively. The following lemma gives preferred representatives of these elements
in CFI ´pS1 b S_

2 q.

For brevity, we now stop writing the product symbol ˆ and the subscript on J0.

Lemma 5.4. Let S1 “ Spd1, m; A1, . . . , Amq and S2 “ Spd2, n; B1, . . . , Bnq. Denote the gen-
erators of S1 by xi and the generators of S2 by yi. In suﬃciently low gradings, elements in the
¯d-tower of HFI ´pS1 b S_

2 q may be represented by U -powers of
Q ¨ x0py_

0 ` Jy_

0 q.

Similarly, in suﬃciently low gradings, elements in the d-tower may be represented by U -powers
of

0 q ` Q ¨ x1py_
Recall, in the latter equation, the convention that we implicitly homogenize by multiplying
x0py_

0 q by an appropriate power of U .

0 ` Jy_

0 ` Jy_

0 ` Jy_

x0py_

0 q.

Proof. It is straightforward to check that Btot applied to both of the above expressions is zero.
To prove the lemma, consider the term x0py_
0 ` Jy_
0 q, viewed as a cycle in the usual homology
2 . Note that this element generates the homology of the skeleton of S1 b S_
of S1 b S_
2 , which
is F by the K¨unneth formula. By the same argument as in Lemma 3.3, we then see that
x0py_
2 q. An easy argument using the mapping cone
exact sequence (see [10, Proposition 4.6]) shows that the U -powers of Q ¨ x0py_
0 ` Jy_
0 q must
then generate the ¯d-tower. The claim for x0py_
0 q follows from the
fact that in suﬃciently low gradings, multiplication by Q is an isomorphism (on the level of
homology) from the d-tower onto the ¯d-tower.
(cid:3)

0 q is U -nontorsion in H˚pS1 b S_

0 q ` Q ¨ x1py_

0 ` Jy_

0 ` Jy_

0 ` Jy_

We now establish lower bounds for ¯dpS1 b S_

2 q. Our strategy for doing this
will be to exhibit explicit elements in the mapping cone of S1 b S_
2 which are homologous
(after multiplying by suﬃcient powers of U ) to the generators of Lemma 5.4. Since this means
that these elements satisfy the relevant conditions in the deﬁnitions of ¯d and d, taking their
(mapping cone) gradings lead to lower bounds for ¯d and d. As with Remark 5.3, it is possible
to frame this argument in a more geometric fashion, but since this will not be needed elsewhere
in the paper, we take a more direct route and simply present the algebraic details.

2 q and dpS1 b S_

36

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

Lemma 5.5. Let S1 “ Spd1, m; A1, . . . , Amq and S2 “ Spd2, n; B1, . . . , Bnq. Deﬁne

iÿ

iÿ

Pi “

Bj ´

Aj for 0 ď i ď minpm, nq,

j“1
iÿ

j“1
i`1ÿ

Qi “

Bj ´

Aj for 0 ď i ď minpm ´ 1, nq, and

j“1
iÿ

j“1
i´1ÿ

Ri “

Bj ´

Aj for 1 ď i ď minpm ` 1, nq.

j“1
Note that P0 “ 0 and Q0 “ ´A1. Then

j“1

¯dpS1 b S_

2 q ě d1 ´ d2 ` maxtP0, minpR1, P1q,

minpR1, R2, P2q,

...

minpR1, R2, . . . , Rminpm`1,nq, Pminpm`1,nqqu,

with the understanding that if minpm ` 1, nq “ m ` 1, the Pminpm`1,nq in the last line should
be deleted. Similarly,
dpS1 b S_

2 q ě d1 ´ d2 ` maxt minpP0, Q0q,

minpP0, P1, Q1q,

...

minpP0, P1, P2, . . . , Pminpm,nq, Qminpm,nqqu,

with the understanding that if minpm, nq “ m, the Qminpm,nq in the last line should be deleted.

Proof. By shifting gradings, it is clear that we may assume d1 “ d2 “ 0. For convenience,
deﬁne

k´1ÿ

Σu

k “

pxi´1Jy_

i ` Jxi´1y_
i q

for 0 ď k ď minpm ` 1, nq, and

i“0

Σl

k “

k´1ÿ

i“0

pxiJy_

i ` Jxiy_
i q

for 0 ď k ď minpm, nq. (Here we set x´1 “ 0.) Note that the total grading of an element
xi1yi2 in the mapping cone of S1 b S_

2 is given by

i1 ´ i2 ` grpxi1yi2q ` 1 “ i1 ´ i2 ´

Aj `

Bj ` 1,

j“1

j“1

i1ÿ

i2ÿ

since the chain complex grading of xi1yi2 is i1 ´ i2 ` grpxi1yi2q. Similarly, the total grading of
Q ¨ xi1yi2 is given by the above expression, minus one.

We begin with the desired lower bound for ¯d. To do this, we deﬁne a sequence of generators
Uk for all 0 ď k ď minpm ` 1, nq. There is some extra casework when k “ minpm ` 1, nq, so
for the moment, let 0 ď k ă minpm ` 1, nq. Deﬁne
k ` Jy_

k q ` Q ¨ xkpy_

k ` xk´1py_

k ` Jy_

Uk “ Σu

k q.

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

37

Note that U0 is the generator of the ¯d-tower from Lemma 5.4. We claim that all of the Uk are
homologous to each other, and thus to U0. To see this, let 0 ď k ă minpm ` 1, nq ´ 1. Then
one can check that

Uk ` Uk`1 “ pxk´1Jy_
Q ¨ xkpy_

k ` Jxk´1y_
k ` Jy_

k q ` xk´1py_
k q ` Q ¨ xk`1py_

“ pxk´1 ` Jxk´1qy_

k ` xkpy_

k`1 ` Jy_

Q ¨ xkpy_
“ Btotpxky_

k ` Jy_
k ` Q ¨ xk`1Jy_

k q ` Q ¨ xk`1py_
k q,

k`1 ` Jy_

k`1q `

k q ` xkpy_
k`1q

k ` Jy_
k`1 ` Jy_
k`1q `
k`1 ` Jy_

k`1q

where in the ﬁrst line we have canceled most of the terms in Σu
k. We also deﬁne
Uk in the special case that k “ minpm ` 1, nq, as follows. If n ă m ` 1, then we deﬁne Un by
replacing all instances of py_

k`1 against Σu

n , so that

k ` Jy_

Un “ Σu

k q in the usual deﬁnition of Uk with y_
n ` Q ¨ xny_
n .
n , rather than y_

n ` xn´1y_
n´1 “ y_

n ` Jy_

This is simply to reﬂect the fact that By_
n . It is easily checked
that Un is still homologous to Un´1 via essentially the same chain of equalities as above. If
m ` 1 ă n, we instead deﬁne

Um`1 “ Um ` Btotpxmy_

mq “ Σu

m`1 ` xmpy_

m`1 ` Jy_

m`1q,

where here we have used the fact that Jxm “ xm. If m ` 1 “ n, then the py_
the expression for Um`1 above should be replaced by y_
minpm ` 1, nq. The total gradings of the elements Uk in the mapping cone are given by

m`1q in
m`1. This deﬁnes Uk for all 0 ď k ď

m`1 ` Jy_

total grading of Uk “ mintR1, . . . , Rk, Pku if k ď m, and
total grading of Um`1 “ mintR1, . . . , Rm`1u else.

This establishes the desired lower bound for ¯d.

We now turn to d. Let 0 ď k ă minpm, nq. Deﬁne

Lk “ Σl

k ` xkpy_

k ` Jy_

k q ` Q ¨ xk`1py_

k ` Jy_

k q.

Note that L0 is the generator of the d-tower from Lemma 5.4. We claim that all of the Lk are
homologous to each other, and thus to L0. To see this, let 0 ď k ă minpm, nq ´ 1. Then

Lk ` Lk`1 “ pxkJy_

k ` Jxky_

k q ` xkpy_

k`1 ` Jy_

k`1q `

Q ¨ xk`1py_
“ pxk ` Jxkqy_
Q ¨ xk`1py_
“ Btotpxk`1y_

k ` Jy_

k ` Jy_
k q ` Q ¨ xk`2py_
k`1 ` Jy_
k q ` Q ¨ xk`2py_
k q.

k q ` xk`1py_
k`1 ` Jy_
k`1q
k`1q `
k`1 ` Jy_

k`1q

k ` Jy_
k ` Q ¨ xk`2Jy_

k ` xk`1py_

We also deﬁne Lk in the special case that k “ minpm, nq. As before, if n ă m, we deﬁne Ln
by replacing all instances of py_

k ` Jy_
Ln “ Σl

k q with y_
n :
n ` xny_

n ` Q ¨ xn`1y_
n .

If m ă n, we instead deﬁne

Lm “ Lm´1 ` Btotpxmy_

m´1q “ Σl

m ` xmpy_

m ` Jy_

mq,

38

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

where if m “ n, we replace y_
by

m ` Jy_

m with y_

m. The mapping cone gradings of the Lk are given

total grading of Lk “ mintP0, . . . , Pk, Qku ` 1 if k ă m, and
total grading of Lm “ mintP0, . . . , Pmu ` 1 else.

This establishes the desired lower bound for d and completes the proof.

(cid:3)

We now use the lower bound for ¯d derived in Lemma 5.5 to provide an upper bound for d

by interchanging the roles of S1 and S2. More precisely, since
1 b S2q,

2 q “ ´ ¯dpS_
we obtain an upper bound for dpS1 b S_
2 q by exchanging the roles of S1 and S2 in the lower
bound for ¯dpS1 b S_
2 q and multiplying through by ´1. Swapping Ai and Bi sends Pi to ´Pi,
Ri to ´Qi´1, and interchanges m and n. Applying this to the lower bound for ¯d yields the
expression

dpS1 b S_

mintP0, maxpQ0, P1q, maxpQ0, Q1, P2q, . . . , maxpQ0, . . . , Qminpm´1,nq, Pminpm,n`1qqu,
with the understanding that if minpm, n ` 1q “ n ` 1, the ﬁnal Pminpm,n`1q should be deleted.
(Note that in the above expression, the Pi and Qi are still are as deﬁned in Lemma 5.5 for
2 , and not the analogous deﬁnitions for S_
S1 b S_
1 b S2.) We claim that this upper bound for
dpS1bS_
2 q coincides with the lower bound derived in Lemma 5.4. This is a purely combinatorial
lemma, which we prove below:

Lemma 5.6. Let Pi and Qi be as in Theorem 1.5. Deﬁne

S “ maxtminpP0, Q0q, minpP0, P1, Q1q, . . . , minpP0, P1, P2, . . . , Pminpm,nq, Qminpm,nqqu,

where if minpm, nq “ m, we delete the ﬁnal Qminpm,nq. Deﬁne

T “ mintP0, maxpQ0, P1q, maxpQ0, Q1, P2q, . . . , maxpQ0, . . . , Qminpm´1,nq, Pminpm,n`1qqu,

where if minpm, n ` 1q “ n ` 1, we delete the ﬁnal Pminpm,n`1q. Then T ď S.

Proof. We proceed by casework on the value of T . Let k be the least index for which T is
equal to the term

T “ maxpQ0, . . . , Qk´1, Pkq,
where as usual the Pk in the above expression may be deleted if k “ minpm, n ` 1q. (That
is, we consider the ﬁrst term in the expression for T which achieves the desired minimum.)
Suppose moreover that

T “ maxpQ0, . . . , Qk´1, Pkq “ Qi
for some 0 ď i ă k. We claim that then Qi ă Pj for all j ď i. Indeed, by minimality of k, we
have the strict inequality

Qi ă maxpQ0, . . . , Qj´1, Pjq
for all such j. Since we already know that Q0, . . . , Qk´1 are bounded above by Qi, this implies
the claim. In particular, we thus see that

minpP0, . . . , Pi, Qiq “ Qi.

Since this term appears in the above expression for S, we conclude that T “ Qi ď S, as
desired. Note that i ă k ď m, so there is no problem with the possible deletion of Qminpm,nq.

Now suppose instead that

T “ maxpQ0, . . . , Qk´1, Pkq “ Pk.

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

39

Note that implicitly this means k ď n. We claim that Pk ă Pj for all j ă k. Indeed, as before,
we have

Pk ă maxpQ0, . . . , Qj´1, Pjq
for all j ă k, so the fact that Q0, . . . , Qk´1 are bounded above by Pk implies the claim. In
addition, for all r ą k, we have

Pk ď maxpQ0, . . . , Qr´1, Prq

and hence

Pk ď maxpQk, . . . , Qr´1, Prq,
again by the fact that Q0, . . . , Qk´1 are bounded above by Pk. (As usual, we delete Pr from
the above expression if r “ minpm, n`1q “ n`1.) There are now two subcases. First, suppose
that for all r ą k, the above maximum is given by Pr. Then we have that Pk ď Pj for all
possible values of j. Note that implicitly in this case Pminpm,n`1q is not deleted, so we know
that m ă n ` 1. Hence minpm, nq “ m, and the ﬁnal term in the expression for S is given by

This shows that T ď S, as desired.

In the second subcase, let r ą k be the least index such that

minpP0, P1, . . . , Pmq “ Pk.

maxpQk, . . . , Qr´1, Prq “ Qs
for some k ď s ă r. (That is, we consider the ﬁrst value of r ą k for which the expression
maxpQk, . . . , Qr´1, Prq is equal to some Qs, rather than Pr.) Then Pk ď Pj for all j ă r, and
also Pk ď Qs. Thus

minpP0, . . . , Ps, Qsq “ Pk.
Since this term appears in the expression for S, we conclude that T ď S. This completes the
(cid:3)
proof.

Putting everything together, we thus obtain:

Proof of Theorem 1.5. According to Lemma 5.2, we need only calculate the d-invariant of
Sp0, m; 2s1, . . . , 2smq b Sp0, n; 2t1, . . . , 2tnq_. We obtain lower bounds for d of the tensor prod-
uct from Lemma 5.5, as well as an upper bound using duality applied to the lower bound for ¯d
in the same lemma. Lemma 5.6 shows that the upper and lower bounds are equal, giving the
(cid:3)
calculation of d as in Theorem 1.5.

For the purposes of distinguishing linear combinations of AR manifolds, Theorem 1.5 is of
course overshadowed by the explicit decomposition aﬀorded by Theorem 1.2. However, since
¯d and d are deﬁned for all rational homology spheres, Theorem 1.5 can be used to compare
linear combinations of AR manifolds with other rational homology spheres whose involutive
Floer correction terms have been computed by diﬀerent methods.

6. Examples and Applications

In this section, we give some examples and applications of Theorems 1.2 and 1.5. We begin

by illustrating the basis decomposition into Yi aﬀorded by Theorem 1.2:

Example 6.1. Let Y “ Σp5, 8, 13q. The graded root associated to hpY q can be computed
using the numerical semigroups algorithm of Can and Karakurt [4], and the relevant monotone
subroot can then be extracted by using the procedure described in [6, Section 6]. We have
drawn part of the graded root associated to hpY q on the left in Figure 21; the monotone
subroot is displayed on the right. (The full graded root corresponding to hpY q has several

40

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

other length-one branches occurring in lower gradings which we have suppressed for brevity.)
Applying Theorem 4.2, we see that

hpΣp5, 8, 13qq “ M p4, 0; 2, 2q

“ M p4, 0q ` M p2, 2q ´ M p2, 0q
“ pY2 ´ Y1qr´2s.

Figure 21. Graded root and monotone subroot for hpΣp5, 8, 13qq. See also [26].

Example 6.2. Let Y “ Σp13, 21, 34q. We have drawn part of the graded root associated to hpY q
on the left in Figure 22; the monotone subroot is displayed on the right. (The full graded root
is signiﬁcantly more complicated, but we have displayed only the portion which is relevant for
computing the local equivalence class.) Applying Theorem 4.2, we see that

hpΣp13, 21, 34qq “ M p12, 0; 10, 2q

“ M p12, 0q ` M p10, 2q ´ M p10, 0q
“ pY6 ` Y4 ´ Y5qr´2s.

Figure 22. Graded root and monotone subroot for hpΣp13, 21, 34qq.

......420-2-4h(Σ(5,8,13))M(4,0;2,2)121086420-2h(Σ(13,21,34))M(12,0;10,2)......ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

41

As evidenced by the above examples, most “small” Brieskorn spheres have a fairly simple
decomposition into the Yi. Indeed, several familiar classes of Brieskorn spheres are actually of
projective type, as discussed in [26]. However, it appears that arbitrarily high complexity can
be achieved by considering Brieskorn spheres with suﬃciently large parameters; for example,
using parameters on the order of 100 „ 500, one can construct examples that decompose into a
linear combination of upwards of twenty basis elements. (These, as well as Example 6.2 above,
are due to Duncan McCoy.)

We now turn to the proof of Corollaries 1.6 and 1.7:

Proof of Corollary 1.6. Let hpY, sq be as in the statement of the corollary. Putting #kpY, sq
into the statement of Theorem 1.5, observe that for 0 ď i ď k, we then have

and that for 0 ď i ă k, we have

Pi “ 2ipt1 ´ s1q,

Qi “ 2ipt1 ´ s1q ´ 2s1.

Now assume t1 ą s1. Suppose k is large enough so that

Qk´1 “ 2pk ´ 1qpt1 ´ s1q ´ 2s1 ě 0.

Since P1, . . . , Pk´1 are all also greater than zero, this means that we have

minpP0, P1, . . . , Pk´1, Qk´1q “ P0 “ 0.
Every other term appearing inside the max in the expression for d is certainly bounded above
by zero, since P0 “ 0. Hence dp#kpY, sqq “ k ¨ dpY, sq.

Now assume t1 ă s1. Suppose k is large enough so that

Pk “ 2kpt1 ´ s1q ď ´2s1.
We claim that every term appearing inside the max in the expression for d is bounded above
by Q0 “ ´2s1. To see this, observe that Qi ď Q0 for all 0 ď i ă k. Since every such term in
the expression for d either contains such a Qi or contains Pk, this implies the bound. Hence
dp#kpY, sqq “ k ¨ dpY, sq ´ 2s1. Considering ´Y instead of Y establishes the theorem for ¯d. (cid:3)
Proof of Corollary 1.7. For simplicity, we ﬁrst apply an overall grading shift so that ¯µ “ 0. It
then suﬃces to exhibit distinct linear combinations of basis elements Yi with the invariants
d, ¯d, and d. Let

¯d ´ d “ 2M and
d ´ d “ 2N,

with the understanding that M and N are not both zero. In order to give some intuition for
the proof, we begin by considering the ansatz

Σ “ Ya ´ Yb ´ Yc ´ nY1,
for non-negative integers a ě b ě c ě 1 and non-negative parameter n. Applying Theorem 1.5,
we have

dpΣq “ dpΣq ` maxtminp0, ´2aq, minp0, 2pb ´ aqqu

“ dpΣq ´ 2pa ´ bq.

Computing ¯d, we have

dp´Σq “ dp´Σq ` maxtminp0, ´2bq, minp0, 2pa ´ bq, 2pa ´ b ´ cqqu

“ dp´Σq ` minp0, 2pa ´ b ´ cqq,

42

IRVING DAI AND MATTHEW STOFFREGEN

which shows that ¯dpΣq “ dpΣq ` maxp0, 2p´a ` b ` cqq. Note that the diﬀerences ¯dpΣq ´ dpΣq
and dpΣq ´ dpΣq are independent of n. The system

is solved by

2p´a ` b ` cq “ 2M
2pa ´ bq “ 2N

c “ M ` N
b “ M ` N ` k
a “ M ` 2N ` k

for any k ě 0. (Note that b ` c ě a.) Linear combinations Σ with these parameters thus yield
the desired diﬀerences ¯d ´ d and d ´ d. Moreover, we have

dpΣq “ 2pa ´ b ´ c ´ nq “ ´2M ´ 2n.

Hence if d ď ´2M , then there is some ﬁxed n ě 0 for which the one-parameter family

Σn,k “ YM `2N `k ´ YM `N `k ´ YM `N ´ nY1
has the desired invariants for all k ě 0. In the case that d ą ´2M , we construct the slightly
more complicated ansatz

Σ1

n,k “ YM `2N `1`k ´ YM `N `1`k ´ YM `N `1 ` 2Y1 ` nY1

with n ě 0 and k ě 0. Then

dpΣ1

n,kq “ ´2M ` 2 ` 2n.

Applying Theorem 1.5, we obtain
n,kq “ dpΣ1

dpΣ1

n,kq ` maxt minp0, ´2pM ` 2N ` 1 ` kqq,

Similarly,

“ dpΣ1

n,kq ´ 2N.

minp0, ´2N, ´2N ´ 2q,
minp0, ´2N, 2M, 2M ´ 2qu

dp´Σ1

n,kq “ dp´Σ1

n,kq ` maxt minp0, ´2pM ` N ` 1 ` kqq,

minp0, 2N, ´2M ´ 2q,
minp0, 2N, ´2M qu

“ dp´Σ1

n,kq ´ 2M,

which shows that ¯dpΣ1
n ě 0 again yields a one-parameter family of examples with the desired d, ¯d, and d.

n,kq ` 2M . Hence if d ą ´2M , then the appropriate choice of
(cid:3)

n,kq “ dpΣ1

References

[1] M. Artin, Some numerical criteria for contractability of curves on algebraic surfaces, Amer. J. Math.,

84(1962), 485–496.

[2] M. Artin, On isolated rational singularities of surfaces, Amer. J. Math., 88(1966), 129–136.
[3] S. Boyer, C. M. Gordon, and L. Watson, On L-spaces and left-orderable fundamental groups, Math. Ann.,

356(2013), no. 4, 1213–1245.

[4] M. B. Can and C¸ . Karakurt, Calculating Heegaard-Floer homology by counting lattice points in tetrahedra,

Acta Math. Hungar., 144(2014), no. 1, 43–75.

[5] I. Dai, On the Pin(2)-equivariant monopole Floer homology of plumbed 3-manifolds, e-print, arXiv:1607.

03171.

ON HOMOLOGY COBORDISM AND LOCAL EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLUMBED MANIFOLDS

43

[6] I. Dai and C. Manolescu, Involutive Heegaard Floer homology and plumbed three-manifolds, e-print, arxiv:

1704.02020.

[7] R. Fintushel and R. J. Stern, Instanton homology of Seifert ﬁbred homology three spheres, Proc. London

Math. Soc. (3), 61(1990), no. 1, 109–137.

[8] K. A. Frøyshov, Equivariant aspects of Yang-Mills Floer theory, Topology, 41(2002), 525–552.
[9] M. Furuta, Homology cobordism group of homology 3-spheres, Invent. Math., 100(1990), no. 2, 339–355.
[10] K. Hendricks and C. Manolescu, Involutive Heegaard Floer homology, Duke Math. J., 166(2017), no. 7,

1211–1299.

[11] K. Hendricks, C. Manolescu, and I. Zemke, A connected sum formula for involutive Heegaard Floer homol-

ogy, e-print, arXiv:1607.07499.

[12] A. Juh´asz and D. P. Thurston, Naturality and mapping class groups in Heegaard Floer homology, e-print,

arXiv:1210.4996.

[13] F. Lin, Morse-Bott singularities in monopole Floer homology and the triangulation conjecture, e-print,

arXiv:1404.4561.

[14] J. Lin, D. Ruberman, and N. Saveliev, A splitting theorem for the Seiberg-Witten invariants of a homology

S1 ˆ S3, e-print, arXiv:1702.04417.

[15] C. Manolescu, Pin(2)-equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer homology and the triangulation conjecture, J. Amer.

Math. Soc., 29(2016), no. 1, 147–176.

[16] A. N´emethi, On the Ozsv´ath-Szab´o invariant of negative deﬁnite plumbed 3-manifolds, Geom. Topol.,

9(2005), 991–1042.

[17] A. N´emethi, Graded roots and singularities, in Singularities in geometry and topology, World Sci. Publ.,

Hackensack, NJ, pp. 394–463, 2007.

[18] A. N´emethi, Lattice cohomology of normal surface singularities, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci., 44(2008), no. 2,

507–543.

[19] W. D. Neumann, An invariant of plumbed homology spheres, in Topology Symposium, Siegen 1979 (Proc.
Sympos., Univ. Siegen, Siegen, 1979), Springer, Berlin, volume 788 of Lecture Notes in Math., pp. 125–144,
1980.

[20] P. S. Ozsv´ath and Z. Szab´o, Absolutely graded Floer homologies and intersection forms for four-manifolds

with boundary, Adv. Math., 173(2003), no. 2, 179–261.

[21] P. S. Ozsv´ath and Z. Szab´o, On the Floer homology of plumbed three-manifolds, Geometry and Topology,

7(2003), 185–224.

[22] P. S. Ozsv´ath and Z. Szab´o, Holomorphic disks and topological invariants for closed three-manifolds, Ann.

of Math. (2), 159(2004), no. 3, 1027–1158.

[23] P. S. Ozsv´ath and Z. Szab´o, Holomorphic disks and three-manifold invariants: properties and applications,

Ann. of Math. (2), 159(2004), no. 3, 1159–1245.

[24] N. Saveliev, Fukumoto-Furuta invariants of plumbed homology 3-spheres, Paciﬁc J. Math., 205(2002), 465–

490.

[25] L. Siebenmann, On vanishing of the Rohlin invariant and nonﬁnitely amphicheiral homology 3-spheres, in
Topology Symposium, Siegen 1979 (Proc. Sympos., Univ. Siegen, Siegen, 1979), Springer, Berlin, volume
788 of Lecture Notes in Math., pp. 172–222, 1980.

[26] M. Stoﬀregen, Pin(2)-equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer homology of Seifert ﬁbrations, e-print, arXiv:1505.

03234.

[27] M. Stoﬀregen, Manolescu invariants of connected sums, e-print, arXiv:1510.01286.

Department of Mathematics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540
E-mail address: idai@math.princeton.edu

Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142
E-mail address: mstoff@mit.edu

