7
1
0
2

t
c
O
7
1

]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
7
7
3
6
0
.

0
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Construction and evaluation of an ultrahigh-vacuum-compatible sputter
deposition source

Peter Lackner,1 Joong-Il Jake Choi,1, a) Ulrike Diebold,1 and Michael Schmid1
Institute of Applied Physics, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria

(Dated: 7 March 2018)

A sputter deposition source for use in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) is described and some proper-
ties of the source are analyzed. The operating principle is based on the design developed by
Mayr et al. [Rev. Sci. Instrum. 84, 094103 (2013)], where electrons emitted from a ﬁlament
ionize argon gas, and the Ar+ ions are accelerated to the target. In contrast to the original de-
sign, two grids are used to direct a large fraction of the Ar+ ions to the target, and the source
has a housing cooled by liquid nitrogen to reduce contaminations. The source has been used
for deposition of zirconium, a material that is difﬁcult to evaporate in standard UHV evapora-
tors. At an Ar pressure of 9 × 10−6 mbar in the UHV chamber and moderate emission current,
a highly reproducible deposition rate of ≈ 1 monolayer in 250 s was achieved at the substrate
(at a distance of ≈ 50 mm from the target). Higher deposition rates are easily possible. X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy shows a high purity of the deposited ﬁlms. Depending on the grid
voltages, the substrate gets mildly sputtered by Ar+ ions; in addition, the substrate is also
reached by electrons from the negatively biased sputter target.

PACS numbers:
81.15.Cd Deposition by sputtering
61.80.Jh Ion radiation effects
81.10.Pq Crystal growth in vacuum
81.10.St Crystal growth in controlled gaseous atmospheres
Keywords: sputter deposition, thin-ﬁlm growth, ultra-high vacuum

I.

INTRODUCTION

Growth of (ultra-)thin ﬁlms for surface-science exper-
iments in an ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV) environment is
usually performed by evaporation, using resistive heating
for low to medium temperatures and electron-beam evap-
oration for materials that require high temperatures for
evaporation. For materials that reach a sufﬁciently high
vapor pressure below or at the melting point, electron-
beam evaporation from a rod is the method of choice, hav-
ing the advantage that the material is not in contact with
anything that could be a source of contaminations. Other
materials require temperatures well above the melting
point for sufﬁcient vapor pressures. When the end of a
rod gets heated to such a high temperature, a droplet
would form and detach from the rod. Thus, such mate-
rials (e.g., Al, Au, Sn, Pb) are usually evaporated from
crucibles. This requires that the material must not react
with the crucible at high temperatures. The crucibles of
large electron-beam evaporators (kilowatt range) can be
cooled while the melt is at higher temperatures, but this
is not the case for small evaporators, where the electrons
impinge on the crucible, not the melt. A particularly no-
torious material for evaporation is zirconium, which has
a vapor pressure of only ≈ 4 × 10−5 mbar at the melting
point (≈ 1850 ◦C), corresponding to evaporation of about
two monolayers (ML) per second; the deposition rate at

a)Present address: Center for Nanomaterials and Chemical Reactions,
Institute for Basic Science (IBS) and Graduate School of EEWS, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 305-
701, South Korea.

the substrate is typically lower by four orders of magni-
tude. Thus, evaporation from rods is very slow. Zr forms
eutectic alloys with the refractory metals Mo, Ru, Ta, W,
Re, and Ir, which precludes the use of metal crucibles.
Zr also reacts with graphite crucibles. Fortunately, these
problems are not relevant for sputter deposition.

In many cases, a further advantage of sputter depo-
sition, compared to evaporation, is better layer-by-layer
growth of the ﬁlms. One reason for improved growth
is the higher kinetic energy of the sputtered atoms (few
eV compared to sub-eV for evaporated atoms) and also
the presence of other energetic particles during sputter
deposition.1 Compared to evaporation, additional advan-
tages of sputter deposition are the possibility to grow com-
pounds with the ﬁlm composition being close to that of the
sputter target, and better stability and reproducibility of
the deposition rate compared to most UHV evaporators.

Conventional magnetron sputter sources using a gas
discharge typically operate at pressures between 10−3
and 10−2 mbar and deposition rates of nanometers per
second, which is hard to reconcile with UHV surface-
science experiments. A way out is using a standard UHV-
type ion source for sputtering and collecting the sputtered
material at the substrate1,4,5. This technique is some-
times referred to as ion-beam sputter deposition (IBSD)
and requires a special setup of the vacuum chamber. To
circumvent the rather low deposition rates achieved with
standard (electron-impact ionization) UHV ion sources,
high-current ion sources such as duoplasmatron or Kauf-
man sources can be used.4,5 A much simpler approach is
a dedicated UHV-compatible sputter deposition source, as
recently designed by Mayr et al. for deposition of Zr.2,3.
This source was also found to be useful for oxides, e.g.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

FIG. 1. Cross sections and equipotential lines (ignoring space-charge effects) of (a) the original sputter source design by Mayr et
al.2,3 and (b) the design presented in this work. Schematic particle trajectories are shown in (c). The light-red shading shows the
region where the electron energy exceeds 50 eV; this is roughly the volume where efﬁcient ionization of Ar is possible. Equipotential
lines are drawn in 50 V intervals for positive and 500 V intervals for negative voltages.

ZrO2 or YSZ (yttria-stabilized ZrO2). As there is no gas
discharge involved, this type of deposition source can be
operated at much lower Ar pressures than magnetrons.

The design by Mayr et al.2 comprises a ﬁlament at
ground potential emitting ≈ 150 mA and a grid at +300 V
collecting the electrons. When the vacuum chamber is
backﬁlled with Ar, Ar+ ions created by electron-impact
ionization are accelerated onto the sputter target biased
at −2 keV. At an Ar pressure of 10−4 mbar, an ion current
of 50–100 µA at the target was obtained.2 A closer analy-
sis of the design reveals, however, that the electron cloud
ionizing the Ar gas [light red in Fig. 1(a)] is mainly at the
front side of the grid, where the ﬁlament is placed, and
at the periphery. The Ar+ ions generated there bombard
the shield at the top side of the sputter source and the
surrounding vacuum chamber, which may cause deposi-
tion of unwanted material onto the substrate and target
as well as desorption of molecules into the residual gas.
The maximum kinetic energy of the Ar+ ions, when im-
pinging on grounded surfaces, is given by the grid voltage
(300 eV). At the other side of the grid, facing the target,
the electrons are repelled by the negative high voltage of
the target, so ionization is possible only in a rather small
volume close to the grid. Ar+ ions created at this side of
grid near the axis are accelerated to the target for sputter-
ing (the desired effect). It should be noted that the num-
ber of ions impinging near the target center could be opti-
mized by placing the target somewhat further away from
the grid than shown in Fig. 1(a); the design in Fig. 1(a) is
a compromise between optimum sputtering and sufﬁcient
heating of the target by thermal radiation from the ﬁla-
ment (which is required for sputtering of materials that
are insulating at room temperature).6

II. DESCRIPTION OF THE SOURCE

A. Two-Grid Design

The problem of only a small fraction of the ionized Ar
impinging onto the target can be avoided by using our
new design, which has two grids [Fig. 1(b); grids are thin
dots in the cross section, only the grid holder rings ap-
pear as thick dots]. In the region between the two grids,

the electric ﬁeld directs Ar+ ions in the direction towards
the target, and the concentric shape of the grids ensures
good focusing onto the central area of the target. Never-
theless, some Ar+ ions are also created at the other side
of the front grid; these ions bombard either the housing
of the source or the substrate, see Fig. 1(c). Compared to
the original one-grid design,2 the efﬁciency of the two-grid
source is signiﬁcantly better: With grid voltages of +300
and +200 V for the front and target-side grid, respectively,
a target current of 66 µA can be achieved with an emis-
sion current of 22 + 12 mA (values at the front and rear
grid, respectively). This is roughly a quarter of the emis-
sion current needed for the same ion current in the one-
grid design, at a much lower Ar gas pressure in the UHV
system. We used a pressure of 9 × 10−6 mbar Ar in the
vacuum chamber. As the Ar leak valve is connected to the
inside of the source housing, the pressure in the source is
27 times higher, about a factor of 2–3 above the pressure
used by Mayr et al. (≈ 10−4 mbar in the UHV chamber,
equal to the pressure in the source2). The ratio of source
and chamber pressures can be determined either from the
ratio between the pumping speed and conductance of the
oriﬁce or from comparing the target current with Ar sup-
plied to the source and that obtained by backﬁlling the
chamber with Ar from a leak valve not connected to the
source. These two values agree very well (< 3 % differ-
ence).

We can also use lower grid voltages of +150 and 100 V,
as shown in Fig. 1(b). This requires a higher ﬁlament
current (2.4 A through a 0.15 mm diameter W wire) and
yields a target current of 66 µA at 27 mA emission cur-
rent (thereof 18 mA into the front grid and 9 mA into the
back grid). At these conditions, the total power dissipated
by electron impact on the grids is only 3.6 W, compared to
45 W in the original one-grid design. We have also tried
higher gas pressures and found that the ion current is
proportional to the Ar pressure up to ≈ 2.5 × 10−5 mbar
(corresponding to ≈ 7×10−4 mbar in the source); at higher
pressures the efﬁciency (ion current at the target per
emitted electron and gas pressure) decreases. We could
not determine the exact reason for this behavior; possibly
it is related to the space charge of the ions.

shielding (GND)filament (≈ GND)grid (+300 V)target (−2000 V)front grid (+150 V)rear grid (+100 V)−500 V0 V+50 V(a)(b)(c)10 mmAr+e−sputteredmaterialAr+e−Ar+−500 V+50 Vto the substrateto the substrate3

to the supply wires (0.8 mm Ta) ; the negative terminal of
the ﬁlament supply is at ground potential. The grids have
the shape of spherical caps, with the center of curvature
roughly in the center of the target, to focus the Ar+ ions to
the target center [see the bright erosion spot in the center
of the target in Fig. 2(a)]. This yields a uniform deposi-
tion rate on the substrate, without vignetting. The grids
are made from 0.175 mm W wire spot-welded onto rings
(≈ 20 mm outer diameter) made from 0.8 mm Ta wire. A
previous attempt to make the rings from stainless steel
was unsuccessful; at high power (+300 V at the front grid),
the steel ring got hot enough to soften and deform, ﬁnally
touching the housing of the source. The rings of the grids
are held by fork-like arms (three per grid); these protrude
through the source housing and are held by ceramic in-
sulators [Fig. 2(c)]. Washers protect the insulators from
sputtered material scattered by the Ar gas. For mounting
the grids inside the housing, the grids have to be tem-
porarily held in position from the open end of the source
housing, then the forks are inserted radially from the out-
side. Spring plates (one of them marked in Fig. 2) prevent
the forks from sliding back. For Zr deposition, the target
is a disk of Zr metal (diameter 18 mm, thickness 1 mm)
with 99.9% purity (HMW Hauner, Germany). The target
was spot welded to a support rod at its back side; the rod
is held by the high-voltage feedthrough in the back plate
of the source housing.

The source is placed on a DN63CF base ﬂange (4.5"
outer diameter). The base ﬂange has DN16CF (1.25"
outer diameter) ports for the electrical feedthroughs, the
LN2 tube and the Ar gas. As the source is rather com-
pact, there is enough space for further components on
the same base ﬂange. We have added a hydrogen cracker
similar to Refs. 7 and 8; the housing of the H cracker is
cooled together with the sputter source. In addition, for
future extensions, there is some space for mounting fur-
ther sources, e.g.
tiny crucibles for evaporation, at the
sides of the sputter source (to make space, two sides of
the source housing are milled ﬂat, as visible in Fig. 2(a).

III. EVALUATION OF THE SOURCE

A. Deposition Rate

We can calculate the deposition rate F from the source
by assuming a cosine (Lambertian) angular distribution
of the sputtered atoms. Assuming an incident ion current
Isp, a sputter yield Y , and r being the distance between
the target and the substrate, we obtain

F(r) =

IspY
r2π|e|

=

ItY
r2π|e|(1 + γ)

(1)

for emission perpendicular to the target, which is the di-
rection to the substrate (Fig. 1). The charge of the ions
is |e|, and the factor (1 + γ) in the denominator of the last
term accounts for the fact that the measured target cur-
rent It is higher than that of the incident ions (Isp) due to
ion-induced electron emission, with γ being the electron
yield upon ion impact. Equation (1) neglects the effects
of resonant neutralization of fast Ar+ ions by collisions

FIG. 2. (a, b) Photos of the sputter source (the hydrogen cracker
also seen is unrelated to the function of the sputter source). (a)
Front view with the top cover removed; note the bright eroded
spot in the middle of the otherwise dark target, where the Ar+
ions are focused to (visible behind the grids). (c) Cross section
through the housing at the position of one of the insulated fork
arms holding a grid.

B. Design Details

The source region is enclosed by a housing cooled with
liquid nitrogen (LN2). With deposition of reactive met-
als (such as Zr) on the inner walls, there is also some
pumping of reactive residual-gas molecules (similar to a
titanium sublimation pump), which helps to ensure op-
timum purity of the ﬁlms deposited. For less stringent
purity requirements, the source could also be cooled by
water. The housing has the shape of a tube with 24 mm
inner and 36 mm outer diameter, made of a CuCrZr alloy
(CW106C) with good thermal conductivity (Fig. 2). At the
outside, this housing has a groove tightly ﬁtting a stain-
less steel tube with 8 mm outer diameter (OD) for cooling
[Fig. 2(a)]; a concentric inner tube (3 mm OD) transports
the LN2 to the closed end of the 8 mm tube. The source
housing is pressed against the LN2-cooled tube; this tube
also serves as support rod to ﬁx the source on the base
ﬂange. The end plate of the source at the front side has
a 9 mm hole (oriﬁce for the sputtered material). The back
plate contains a high-voltage feedthrough for the target
voltage and the Ar gas inlet, connected by hydraulically
formed bellows to the weld in the base ﬂange where the
tube from the leak valve enters.

The ﬁlament is a loop of 0.15 mm W wire, spot welded

base flangeLN2 cooling tubeAr gas linetarget voltage wireH cracker housingfilamentgridsfilament supply wiresspring plate,fork arms behind,see detail in (c)(a)(b)(c)housingsteel insertinsulatorsspring plateTa ringgrid wirefork armwasher6 mmorificewith neutral Ar. This is justiﬁed when considering the
short path of the Ar+ ions (1–2 cm). With a target current
of 66 µA, r = 50 mm, Y = 1.15 (for 2 keV Ar+ → Zr, Ref.
9), and γ in the range of 0.1–0.2 (consistent with the mea-
sured electron current at the substrate, see below), Eq. (1)
yields a deposited ﬂux F between 5 and 5.5 × 1012 atoms
per cm2 and second.

Since the deposition rate determined with a quartz
crystal microbalance (QCM) is not very accurate in this
case (see below), we have determined the deposition rate
by submonolayer growth of Zr on a well-deﬁned single-
crystal substrate, Rh(111), and determined the area cov-
ered by Zr islands by scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM). To determine the deposition rate from the Zr-
covered area, we assume that the density of Zr atoms
in the islands is equal to that in the basal plane of Zr,
1.11 × 1015 cm−2. The analysis of the STM images yields
a deposition rate of 4.5 × 1012 cm−2s−1. Considering the
uncertainty of the sputter yield and the angular distri-
bution, the agreement must be considered excellent. As
the quantities in Eq. 1 are not expected to change with
time, this also indicates that the sputter source should
have excellent stability of the deposition rate, which per-
fectly agrees with our experience (provided that the sput-
ter target is sufﬁciently clean, which is usually the case
after a few minutes of operation). The deposition rate re-
mains also unchanged when the source is operated at an
additional oxygen partial pressure of 10−6 mbar for grow-
ing ZrO2 ﬁlms (we monitored the reproducibility of the
deposition rate by checking for completion of the 5th ZrO2
layer with STM; this should be accurate within a few per-
cent).

B. Purity of the Films

Figure 3(a–c) shows x-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS)
of a clean Rh(111) surface and immediately after deposi-
tion of 2.9 ML Zr with the UHV sputter source.10 We de-
ﬁne 1 ML as the areal density of Zr in the basal plane
(1.11 × 1015 cm−2). The Rh(111) substrate was at room
temperature during deposition and the measurements.
The spectra were acquired with a non-monochromatized
Mg Kα source and a Specs Phoibos 100 energy analyzer
in an analysis chamber coupled to the chamber with the
sputter source (the base pressure in both chambers is
below 10−10 mbar). The only impurity detectable is a
small amount of oxygen, probably from oxygen implanted
into the Zr target or dissolved there during many previ-
ous experiments at 10−6 mbar O2 for growing ZrO2 ﬁlms.
The C 1s region does not show any indication of carbon-
containing impurities; the small peaks found in this range
after Zr deposition are due to excitation of stronger lines
by satellite lines of the x-ray source, as well as Ru, which
is an impurity in our Rh substrate [Fig. 3(b)]. Zooming
in onto the Zr 3d lines shows only metallic Zr peaks [Fig.
3(c)]. The Zr 3d5/2 binding energy of 179.4 eV is slightly
higher than usually reported for pure Zr bulk (178.7–
178.9 eV). We attribute this peak shift partly to the sur-
face core level shift, which is about half an eV to higher
BE for close-packed surfaces of the early 4d transition

4

FIG. 3.
(a–c) XPS of a clean Rh(111) surface and after deposi-
tion of 2.9 ML (0.74 nm) Zr. The C 1s region (b) was measured
with high sensitivity; the range of typical carbon impurities (ad-
ventitious carbon and species with C–O bonds) is indicated. The
detailed spectrum of the Zr 3d range (c) shows only metallic Zr
(Zr 3d5/2 at 179.4 eV) as indicated by the ﬁt; a slight shoulder
to the left, if any, has very low intensity. Spectra obtained after
Zr deposition in 10−6 mbar O2 [1.0 nm Zr corresponding to 5 ML
ZrO2(111)] show (d) the absence of (oxidized) tungsten and (e)
only oxidic Zr peaks. Analyzer pass energy (a) 20 eV (b) 50 eV
(for increased count rate); in all other spectra 16 eV.

metals.11,12 A further contribution will come from inter-
action of Zr with Rh at the interface, as Zr 3d5/2 ener-
gies of ≈ 179.6 eV are found for Zr alloys with other late
transition metals (Pt3Zr and Pd3Zr, Refs. 13 and 14). To
some degree, the shift may be also related to interaction
with oxygen impurities.
In addition, curve ﬁtting can-
not exclude an extremely weak shoulder to the left (Zr
3d3/2 at 184–184.5 eV, corresponding to 3d5/2 at ≈ 182 eV),
possibly also related to oxygen: Ultrathin and bulk-like
ZrO2 would have the Zr 3d5/2 peaks at 180.7 and around

Rh 3dRh 4sRh 4pZr 4pRh 3p3/2Rh 3p1/2O 1sRh 3sRh MNNZr 3p3/2Zr 3sO KLLZr 3d (O Kα excitation)(c)  Zr 3d3d3/23d5/2fitdataC 1sRh 3d5/2(Mg Kα5)Rh 3d5/2(Mg Kα6)Zr 3p3/2(Mg Kβ)C rangeRu 3d5/2(b)Zr 3dZr 3p1/2Rh(111)Rh(111) + 2.9 ML ZrRh(111)Rh(111) + 5 ML ZrO2(e)  Zr 3d(a)(d)Mg Kα3 satellitesW 4f7/2W 4f5/2Zr 4p1/2+3/2metalZr 3d5/2interf.ZrO2Rh 4p(Mg Kα3, Kα4)182.8 eV, respectively.13

Figure 3(d, e) shows spectra obtained after Zr deposi-
tion on Rh(111) at an additional oxygen partial pressure
of 10−6 mbar at room temperature. At these conditions, a
ZrO2 ﬁlm grows, but without post-annealing the oxide is
poorly ordered. The main peak at 183.3 eV is from ZrO2
(due to the large band gap of ≈ 5 eV, the band alignment
and, thus, the binding energies can shift considerably).
There is also a minor peak at 180.4 eV, which decreases
with increasing ﬁlm thickness, thus it must come from Zr
at the interface. As this peak does not disappear upon
annealing under oxidizing conditions, we attribute it to
ZrO2, not to a lower oxidation state of Zr, in agreement
with DFT calculations that predict a lower Zr 3d bind-
ing energy at the ZrO2-metal interface.13 The spectrum
shows no metallic Zr. Mayr et al. have reported that their
source, when operated with O2 in the background gas, can
lead to tungsten and tantalum impurities in the ﬁlms,
presumably from formation of volatile oxides on the ﬁl-
ament and grid materials (W and Ta, respectively; due to
the high power these grids get very hot).2 We also checked
for tungsten impurities coming from the ﬁlament or grid
wires (in our source, both are W). Fig. 3(d) shows no in-
dication of any W signal at the positions where it was
observed by Mayr et al. (dashed lines in the ﬁgure). W
would show a sharp doublet there, superimposed on the
broad Rh 4p Mg Kα3 + Kα4 satellite, thus we can exclude
such a problem for our source.

C. Ar+ Ion and Electron Emission

Apart from sputtered target material, two types of par-
ticles are emitted from the source [Fig. 1(c)]: Ar+ ions and
electrons. As mentioned above, Ar gas ionized in the re-
gion above the front grid will not be accelerated towards
the target but rather to the end plate with the oriﬁce or
out of the source, towards the substrate. These ions can
sputter material from the inside of the source housing
onto the target. Fortunately, after short operation of the
source, all the inside of the housing is covered with tar-
get material, so there is no contamination of the target
by wall material. Some Ar+ ions (with energies in eV up
to the voltage of the front grid) also reach the substrate;
these Ar+ ions will lead to mild sputtering of the target.
Indeed, in our experiments with sputter deposition of Zr
onto well-prepared Rh(111) single crystals, we have ob-
served the formation of vacancy islands in the Rh sur-
face. The scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) images
in Figure 4(a) show the vacancy islands as small black
patches. These vacancy islands can be explained only by
sputtering of the sample, which happens in addition to the
deposition of sputtered target material. In some cases,
this effect can be desired (ion-beam assisted deposition,
IBAD)1,15. Impingement of particles with energies above
≈ 150 eV leads to an increased density of nuclei, which
can promote layer-by-layer growth in some cases.16 A dis-
advantage of mild sputtering is reduced accuracy of the
deposition rate due to mass removal. When growing ox-
ides or compound materials, preferential sputtering will
also alter the composition of the ﬁlm. For the experiment

5

FIG. 4. STM images of a Rh(111) surface after deposition of 0.35
ML of Zr with front/rear grid voltages of (a) 300 V/200 V and (b)
150 V/100 V. Vacancy islands appear as small black patches in
the images. The sputter damage can be reduced drastically by
reducing the grid voltages.

shown in Fig. 4(a) the grid voltages were 300 and 200 V for
the front and rear grid, respectively (Ar+ energies up to
300 eV). We usually choose grid voltages of 150 and 100 V.
In this case, the sputter yield Y at the maximum ion en-
ergy (150 eV) is sufﬁciently low to avoid these problems
(e.g., Y ≈ 0.34 for 150 eV Ar+ → Rh, Ref. 9). This is also
seen in Fig. 4(b), where only very few and small vacancy
islands are found.

The sputter deposition source also emits electrons,
which are liberated by ion impact at the target [Fig. 1(c)].
These electrons are accelerated to 2 keV by the target volt-
age. Quantiﬁcation of the electron current on the sub-
strate is not easy, because only the sum of the electron
and Ar+ ion current can be measured; the emission of sec-
ondary electrons upon 2 keV-electron impact at the sub-
strate further complicates the problem. The substrate
current is given by

Isubstr = Iion + Iel(1 − δ)

(2)

where δ is the secondary electron yield for electron impact
at the substrate (due to the low ion energies, ion-induced
electron emission from the substrate can be neglected).
We have studied this effect with a Pt(111) single crys-
tal serving as substrate. In the initial phase of the de-
position, while the substrate was essentially uncovered,
we have measured a substrate current of IPt = 2.2 µA;
with increasing Zr coverage it was found to decrease to
IZr = −1.2 µA. With these two values, and δ = 1.22 (0.51)
for Pt (Zr) at 2 keV,17 we obtain an electron current of

Iel = −

IPt − IZr
δPt − δZr

≈ −4.8 µA

(3)

and an ion current of ≈ 1.1 µA. Eq. (3) contains the dif-
ference between two secondary electron yield values δ,
which are not known with high accuracy; the exact value
of δ may also depend on the crystallographic properties of
the material and electron scattering in the layers below
(Pt single crystal and Zr thin ﬁlm in our experiment vs. δ
values of polycrystalline material in the literature). Thus,
some uncertainty of the electron current is to be expected.
This uncertainty has a signiﬁcant impact on the ion cur-
rent, which is calculated as the difference of two larger

100451006810 nm10046(a)5 nm5 nm(b)Rh stepquantities according to Eq. (2). We have also tried to de-
termine the secondary electron yields with a 2 keV elec-
tron source from the difference between the sample cur-
rent with and without a positive 30 V sample bias, yield-
ing δPt = 1.82 and δZr = 0.68. These values would result in
Iel = −3.0 µA, but a negative ion current (−0.2 µA). Thus,
the ion current cannot be determined with reasonable ac-
curacy by this method. Based on the sputter damage ob-
served by STM, we estimate that the ion current is ac-
tually in between these two values; i.e. a few tenths of a
µA.

Due to the high kinetic energy of the electrons, they
dissipate a power of ≈ 10 mW at the substrate. This is
not an issue for most substrates, but it affects the read-
ing of a quartz crystal microbalance used to determine
the deposition rate. In our experience, with standard AT-
cut 6 MHz quartz crystals used for thin-ﬁlm deposition
monitors18 and a water-cooled crystal holder, the time
for equilibration (until a stable deposition rate is dis-
played) is about 10–20 min for thermal evaporation, but
about an hour with the sputter deposition source (SC-
cut quartz crystals, which are also used for sputter yield
measurements,19 are less sensitive to thermal stress and
would perform better). In our experience, even after equi-
libration the QCM readings scatter by more than 10%.
We rather rely on the deposition rate determined once
(months ago) from the coverage determined by STM. To
ensure best reproducibility, we adjust the gas pressure to
get the same target current each time. In other words, the
reproducibility of the deposition rate of the sputter source
(estimated to be better than a few percent over several
months, including several bakeout cycles of the UHV sys-
tem) is better than that of the QCM readings.

In case that electron or ion emission causes a substan-
tial problem, it would be possible to add an extra electrode
at the oriﬁce to repel or deﬂect these charged species. If
the position of the front end of the source is constrained
by having to avoid collisions with the sample holder, this
would slightly increase the target-to-substrate distance
and thereby reduce the deposition rate. If the substrate
can be biased, this would provide another possibility to re-
pel either electrons or ions (at the cost of increased kinetic
energy of the other species).

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have presented a sputter deposition source opti-
mized for growth of clean ﬁlms in ultrahigh vacuum.
Compared to the design by Mayr et al.2, the source oper-
ates at more benign values of ﬁlament and emission cur-
rent and lower Ar gas pressures in the UHV chamber for
comparable target current and deposition rate. If desired,
higher deposition rates could be achieved by increasing
the gas pressure or emission current. The source also
features excellent long-time reproducibility and the ﬁlms

6

grown show very high purity. During deposition, the sub-
strate is subject to a ﬂux of both electrons and low-energy
Ar+ ions. The energy of the latter can be controlled by
the grid voltages, so the source provides the possibility of
either ion-beam-assisted deposition or negligible sputter-
ing of the substrate and ﬁlms by Ar+ ions. Apart from
materials that are difﬁcult to evaporate in UHV (such as
Zr), due to the high purity of the ﬁlms grown we consider
our source a good choice also for many other materials,
especially when considering the advantages of sputter de-
position mentioned in the introduction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank Peter Varga for help-
ful discussions, Herbert Schmidt and Rainer Gärtner for
the machine shop work and fruitful discussions about con-
struction details, and Martin Leichtfried for designing
some of the parts and assembling the source. This work
was supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) under
project number F4505 (Functional Oxide Surfaces and In-
terfaces – FOXSI).

1T. Michely, M. Kalff, and G. Comsa, Mat. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 528,
179 (1998).
2L. Mayr, N. Köpﬂe, A. Auer, B. Klötzer, and S. Penner, Rev. Sci. In-
strum. 84, 094103 (2013).
3T. Götsch, W. Wallisch, M. Stöger-Pollach, B. Klötzer, and S. Penner,
AIP Advances 6, 025119 (2016).
4C. Schwebel, F. Meyer, G. Gautherin, and C. Pellet, Journal of Vacuum
Science & Technology B: Microelectronics Processing and Phenomena
4, 1153 (1986).
5N. Lee, G. Xue, and J. E. Greene, Journal of Applied Physics 80, 769
(1996).
6B. Klötzer and S. Penner, private communication.
7U. Bischler and E. Bertel, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 11, 458 (1993).
8C. Eibl, G. Lackner, and A. Winkler, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 16, 2979
(1998).
9N. Matsunami, Y. Yamamura, Y. Itikawa, N. Itoh, Y. Kazumata,
S. Miyagawa, K. Morita, R. Shimizu, and H. Tawara, “Energy de-
pendence of the yields of ion-induced sputtering of monatomic solids,”
Tech. Rep. IPPJ-AM-32 (Institute of Plasma Physics, Nagoya Univer-
sity, Japan, 1983).

10We have used 99.999% Ar (CANgas, www.messergroup.com).
11R. G. Jordan, A. M. Begley, S. D. Barrett, P. J. Durham, and W. M.

Temmerman, Sol. State Commun. 76, 579 (1990).

12M. Methfessel, D. Hennig, and M. Schefﬂer, Surf. Sci. 287, 785 (1993).
13H. Li, J.-I. J. Choi, W. Mayr-Schmölzer, C. Weilach, C. Rameshan,
F. Mittendorfer, J. Redinger, M. Schmid, and G. Rupprechter, J. Phys.
Chem. C 119, 2462 (2015).

14J. I. J. Choi, W. Mayr-Schmölzer, F. Mittendorfer, J. Redinger,
U. Diebold, and M. Schmid, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 26, 225003
(2014).

15J. M. E. Harper, J. J. Cuomo, R. J. Gambino, and H. R. Kaufman,

Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 7–8, 886 (1985).

16M. Schmid, C. Lenauer, A. Buchsbaum, F. Wimmer, G. Rauchbauer,
P. Scheiber, G. Betz, and P. Varga, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 076101 (2009).

17Y. Lin and D. C. Joy, Surf. Interface Anal. 37, 895 (2005).
18E. Benes, M. Gröschl, W. Burger, and M. Schmid, Sensor. Actuator. A

48, 1 (1995).

19G. Hayderer, M. Schmid, P. Varga, H. Winter, and F. Aumayr, Rev. Sci.

Instrum. 70, 3696 (1999).

