7
1
0
2

v
o
N
5

]
x
e
-
l
c
u
n
[

1
v
1
7
6
1
0
.
1
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Probing electron-argon scattering for liquid-argon based neutrino-oscillation program∗

V. Pandey,1, † D. Abrams,2 S. Alsalmi,3 A. M. Ankowski,4 J. Bane,5 O. Benhar,6
H. Dai,1 D. B. Day,2 D. W. Higinbotham,7 C. Mariani,1 M. Murphy,1 and D. Nguyen2
(for the Jeﬀerson Lab E12-14-012 Collaboration)
1Center for Neutrino Physics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA
2Department of Physics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22904, USA
3Department of Physics, Kent State University, Kent, OH 44242, USA
4SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford University, Menlo Park, CA, 94025, USA
5Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, USA
6INFN and Department of Physics, “Sapienza” Universit`a di Roma, I-00185 Roma, Italy
7Thomas Jeﬀerson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, VA, 23606, USA

The electron scattering has been a vital tool to study the properties of the target nucleus for
over ﬁve decades. Though, the particular interest on 40Ar nucleus stemmed from the progress
in the accelerator-based neutrino-oscillation experiments. The complexity of nuclei comprising the
detectors and their weak response turned out to be one of the major hurdles in the quest of achieving
unprecedented precision in these experiments. The challenges are further magniﬁed by the use
of Liquid Argon Time Projection Chambers (LArTPCs) in the short- (SBN) and long-baseline
(DUNE) neutrino program, with almost non-existence electron-argon scattering data and hence
with no empirical basis to test and develop nuclear models for 40Ar. In light of these challenges, an
electron-argon experiment, E12-14-012, was proposed at Jeﬀerson Lab. The experiment has recently
successfully completed collecting data for (e, e(cid:48)p) and (e, e(cid:48)) processes, not just on 40Ar but also on
48Ti, and 12C targets. While the analysis is running with full steam, in this contribution, we present
a brief overview of the experiment.

PACS numbers: 25.30.Fj, 25.30.Pt, 24.10.Cn, 13.15.+g

I.

INTRODUCTION

Most of our current knowledge about the complexity of
nuclear environment - nuclear structure, dynamics, and
reaction mechanisms - has been accumulated by study-
ing electron scattering oﬀ target nuclei. The electron
scattering of nucleus, governed by quantum electrody-
namics, has advantage over the proton or pion scattering
oﬀ nuclei which are dominated by strong forces. The
electromagnetic interaction is well known within quan-
tum electrodynamics and is weak compared to hadronic
interaction and hence the interaction between the in-
cident electron and the nucleus can be treated within
the Born approximation, i.e. within a single-photon ex-
change mechanism.

In the last few decades, a wealth of high precision elec-
tron scattering data has been collected, over a variety of
nuclei ranging from 3He to 208Pb, at several facilities in-
cluding Bates, Saclay, Frascati, DESY, SLAC, NIKHEF,
Jeﬀerson Lab, etc., among others. The ability to vary
electron energy, and scattering angle and hence the en-
ergy and moment transferred to the nucleus (ω, q) - com-
bined with the advancement in high-intensity electron
beams, high performance spectrometers and detectors -
resulted into investigating processes ranging from quasi-
elastic (QE) to the ∆ resonance to complete inelastic

∗ Presented at the International Workshop on (e,e’p) Processes,

July 2-6, 2017, Bled, Slovenia.
† Speaker, email: vishvas@vt.edu

(resonant, non-resonant, and the deep inelastic scatter-
ings (DIS)) with signiﬁcant details. A number of those
datasets were further utilized to separate the longitudi-
nal and transverse response functions through the Rosen-
bluth separation. Several decades of experimental work
has provided suﬃcient testbed to assess and validate
several theoretical approximations and predictions and
hence propelled the theoretical progress staged around
nuclear ground state properties, nuclear many-body the-
ories, nuclear correlations, form factors, nucleon-nucleon
interactions, etc. For a detailed recent review on electron
scattering, we refer readers to Ref. [1], a web-archive of
accumulated data is maintained at Ref. [2].

The electron scattering, besides being immensely inter-
esting in itself, turned out to be of great importance for
accelerator-based neutrino-oscillation experiments. The
quest of measuring neutrino oscillation parameters with
an unprecedented level of precision, search for CP vio-
lation in leptonic sector, and exploration of a possible
fourth generation of neutrinos - relies greatly on an ac-
curate description of the nucleus and its electroweak re-
sponse. To this end, the data collected with electron-
nucleus scattering has provided the benchmark to test the
nuclear models that can be further extended to neutrino-
nucleus scattering. The extension of the formalism from
electron-nucleus scattering, where only vector current
contributes, to neutrino is rather straightforward with
the main diﬀerence being the additional axial current
contribution to neutrino scattering. Despite the fact that
(unpolarized) electron scattering provide access to only
vector response, the vector current is conserved between

 
 
 
 
 
 
electromagnetic and weak response through conserved
vector current (CVC).

The current motivation for another electron scattering
experiment, especially on 40Ar nucleus, emerged from the
surge in the progress and need of the liquid-argon time
projection chamber (LArTPC) based short- (SBN) [3]
and long-baseline (DUNE) [4] neutrino program. The
current status of systematic uncertainties even with the
relatively well-know isospin symmetric nuclei such as 12C
and 16O (pertinent for water Cherenkov and mineral-oil
detectors) of which a range of electron scattering data is
available, are already of the order of 10%. The magnitude
of uncertainty is expected to rise signiﬁcantly considering
almost non-existence (an inclusive cross section measure-
ment performed at Frascati is the only data available on
argon [5]) electron scattering studies on argon, and hence
no empirical testbed available to develop accurate mod-
els. Furthermore, in comparison to otherwise widely used
isospin symmetric nuclei, argon consists of few extra neu-
trons than protons which may impact the test for the CP
violation if neutrino and antineutrino behold diﬀerent nu-
clear eﬀects on argon.

In light of these needs, a dedicated electron experi-
ment on 40Ar, E12-14-012, is recently proposed at Jeﬀer-
son lab [6]. We aim to measure spectral functions (SF)
of 40Ar, as well as to measure the inclusive and exclu-
sive cross sections on 40Ar, 48Ti, and 12C. The SF can
provide indispensable information about the initial en-
ergy and momentum of the nucleons bound in the argon
nucleus which can be utilized in the reconstruction of
neutrino energy and accurate predictions of event rates.
In addition, measuring SF of argon nucleus will provide
a vital input in the further development of a uniﬁed nu-
clear model based on nuclear many-body theory and the
spectral function formalism [7], that has been successful
in describing the electron scattering in a variety of kine-
matics [8–10]. Nevertheless, a new high precision cross
section data will provide a bench mark to test and val-
idate the theoretical models that have recently reported
neutrino scattering on argon nucleus [11–13] or the ones
intended to extend their models to neutrino-argon scat-
terings.

The article is structured as follows.

In Sec. II, a
brief discussion on the impact of nuclear eﬀects on the
accelerator-based neutrino-oscillation experiments is pre-
sented. We will then move on to give an overview of the
E12-14-012 experiment in Sec. III. The summary is pre-
sented in Sec. IV.

2

and their energy - is subjected to detector type, detection
thresholds, and the accuracy of particle identiﬁcation and
background reduction processes. The necessity of an ac-
curate nuclear model is essential at almost every step of
the analysis. For recent reviews on this subject, we refer
readers to Refs. [14–16].

In the event of a neutrino oscillating from νi to νj and
for a given observable topology, the observed event rate
at far detector is a convolution of neutrino ﬂux at near
detector (φνi ), probability of oscillation from ﬂavor i to j,
and the neutrino-nucleus cross section σνj , and detection
eﬃciency (cid:15)νj at far detector

R(νi → νj) ∝ φνi ⊗ P (νi → νj) ⊗ σνj ⊗ (cid:15)νj

(1)

with oscillation probability, considering simple example
of two neutrino ﬂavors, given as:

P (νi → νj) (cid:39) sin2 2θ sin2

(cid:18) ∆m2L
4E

(cid:19)

,

(2)

with θ and ∆m2 are mixing angle, and the squared-
mass diﬀerence, respectively. The accuracy of the mea-
surement of the (energy-dependent) neutrino oscillation
probability relies strongly on the accuracy with which
a nuclear model (implemented in a Monte-Carlo event
generator), can describe all neutrino-nucleus interaction
types that can produce the observed topology (that de-
pends both on initial and ﬁnal state nuclear eﬀects). The
Monte Carlo simulations of neutrino interactions used in
data analysis are typically based on relativistic Fermi gas
(RFG) model, which cannot reproduce the relevant cross
sections with suﬃcient accuracy. As it stands currently,
a lack of reliable nuclear recipe contributes to the main
source of systematic uncertainty and is considered one
of the main hurdles in further increasing the obtained
precision.

Let us consider, for example, the case of neutrino en-
ergy determination. This situation diﬀers dramatically
from the electron scattering experiments, where the in-
teracting charged lepton energy is precisely known on
event-by-event basis. In neutrino scattering the neutrino
energy can only be estimated based on what is observed
in the detector. The observed event topology and en-
ergy, i.e. particle identiﬁcation and their momentum are
utilized, using a nuclear model, to identify the neutrino
energy at the interaction vertex. Now, assuming a single-
nucleon knockout process, the reconstructed neutrino en-
ergy can be expressed as

II. THE IMPACT OF NUCLEAR EFFECTS ON
NEUTRINO-OSCILLATION EXPERIMENTS

Eνl =

M 2

l − E2

n − m2
2(En − El − |(cid:126)pn| cos θn + |(cid:126)kl| cos θl)

n + 2EnEl − 2(cid:126)pn · (cid:126)kl + |(cid:126)pn|2

.

(3)

The systematic challenges in neutrino experiments are
manifold. The energy of the interacting neutrino is not
known, the kinematics of the interaction in the target
nucleus is not known and the only known (to some de-
gree) quantity - the topology of the ﬁnal state particles

Where, ml, El, (cid:126)kl, and θl are the mass, energy, mo-
mentum, and scattering angle of the outgoing charged
lepton, these are either known or measured quantities.
Mn is the mass of the nucleon, while (cid:126)pn and En are
the momentum and energy of the interacting neutron.

Existing simulation codes routinely approximate the en-
ergy and momentum of the nuclear system as: pn = 0
, En = Mn − (cid:15), where (cid:15) (separation energy) is approx-
imated as a constant number.
In a realistic picture of
a nucleus the struck nucleon carries a momentum and
energy distribution which are characteristic of a speciﬁc
target nucleus. These, for example, can be derived from
the spectral functions of the nucleons and can signiﬁ-
cantly improve the accuracy with which the energy is
reconstructed.

FIG. 1: Processes considered in the E12-14-012 experi-
ment: (a) Coincidence (e, e(cid:48)p) reaction, where scattered
electron and knocked out proton are measured in coinci-
dence and the residual nucleus is left undetected, and (b)
(e, e(cid:48)) reaction, where only scattered electron is detected.

III. E12-14-012 EXPERIMENT

The E12-14-012 experiment was proposed in 2014 [6].
The experiment was performed in Hall A of Jeﬀerson
Lab from February to March 2017. We initially pro-
posed measurements on a coincidence (e, e(cid:48)p) scattering
oﬀ 40Ar. Though, the physics reach is later extended to
additional target nucleus, 48Ti and 12C, and included an
inclusive measurement for a single kinematics.

A.

(e, e(cid:48)p) and (e, e(cid:48)) Reactions

We considered coincidence (e, e(cid:48)p) process, as shown
in Fig 1(a), where an electron of four-momentum ke ≡
(Ee, (cid:126)ke) scatters oﬀ a nuclear target A and knocks-out a
proton of four-momentum p ≡ (Ep, (cid:126)p), leaving the resid-

3

ual (A − 1) system in any (undetected) bound or contin-
uum state:

e + A → e(cid:48) + p + (A − 1).

(4)

The knocked out proton is detected in coincidence with
the scattered electron of four-momentum ke(cid:48) ≡ (Ee(cid:48), (cid:126)ke(cid:48)).
The transferred four-momentum of the process is given
as

q = ke − ke(cid:48) ≡ (ω, (cid:126)q)

(5)

Such a reaction is a valuable source of information on
the single-particle aspects of nuclear structure where one
can deﬁne missing energy, Em, from the energy conser-
vation. Now, within the Plane Wave Impulse Approxi-
mation (PWIA) scheme, i.e. on the assumptions that at
momentum transfers q (cid:29) 1
d where d is the average inter-
nucleon distance - the scattering from the nucleus can be
reduced to incoherent sum of scattering from individual
nucleons and that the ﬁnal state interaction (FSI) be-
tween the produced hadron and the residual nucleus are
negligible, the missing momentum, (cid:126)pm, can be estimate
as

(cid:126)pm = (cid:126)p − (cid:126)q

(6)

and the missing energy, in the limit of low missing mo-
mentum, can be reduced to

Em = ω − Tp

(7)

where Tp = Ep − m, is the kinetic energy of the outgo-
ing proton. It is worth pointing out that despite PWIA
scheme can provide a clear manifest of the description of
the (e, e(cid:48)p) reaction, the corrections arising from the FSI
between outgoing nucleon and the residual nucleus are
not negligible. These, for example, can be treated within
the Distorted Wave Impulse Approximation (DWIA) de-
scription [17], and will be taken care of in the analysis of
the (e, e(cid:48)p) data.

The total Spectral Function (SF), which describes the
probability distribution of ﬁnding a nucleon with mo-
mentum pm and removal energy Em in the target ground
state, can be expressed as the combination of experimen-
tally measured mean-ﬁeld (MF) and theoretically calcu-
lated correlation part

P (pm, Em) = PM F (pm, Em) + Pcorr(pm, Em).

(8)

The mean-ﬁeld part of the SF, PM F (pm, Em), which cor-
responds to low missing momentum and energy region
and hence where the shell model dynamics dominates,
can be extracted from coincidence (e, e(cid:48)p) data. While
correlation part of the SF, Pcorr(pm, Em), which corre-
sponds to the ground state nucleon-nucleon (short-range)
correlations, is evaluated from theoretical calculations of
uniform nuclear matter and Local Density Approxima-
tion (LDA).

)ek , ee (E)e'k , e'e' (Eg)q, w(A(A-1)(a)) p , pp (E)ek , ee (E)e'k , e'e' (Eg)q, w(AX(b)The (e, e(cid:48)) process, as shown in Fig 1(b), where an
electron of four-momentum ke ≡ (Ee, (cid:126)ke) scatters oﬀ a
nuclear target A

e + A → e(cid:48) + X

(9)

and only scattered electron is detected. Here, the cross
section includes all available ﬁnal states.

4

and momentum and provide a good resolution in position
and angle.

After passing through the magnet conﬁguration, the
particle enters the detector stack consists of a number
of sub packages. There are scintillator planes which are
used to form the trigger to activate the data-acquisition
system and for the precise timing information of time-
of-ﬂight measurements and coincidence determination.
Vertical Drift Chambers are used for particle tracking,
i.e. to determine the position and direction of the scat-
tered particles. The particles are identiﬁed using a va-
riety of Cherenkov type detectors (aerogel and gas) and
lead-glass shower counters. For a detailed description of
Hall A setup, we refer readers to Ref. [18].

FIG. 2: A schematic layout of Hall A: representing
the beamline, and both the Left and the Right High-
Resolution Spectrometers as electron and hadron arms,
respectively.

B. Experimental Setup

A schematic layout of Hall A is shown in Fig. 2.
The electron beam of energy 2.222 GeV is provided by
the Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility (CE-
BAF) at JLab. There are multiple diagnostic tools along
the beamline such as beam current and position moni-
tors. The beam current is monitored using two Beam
Current Monitors (BCMs) which are resonant RF cavi-
ties where one cavity is denoted as upstream and other
as downstream based on their relative positions along the
beamline. The position of the beam, in the plane trans-
verse to the beam direction at the target, is monitored
by two Beam Position Monitors (BPMs). Beam position
determination is important for vertex reconstruction and
momentum calculation of scattered electron.

The scattered electron goes

to the Left High-
Resolution Spectrometer (LHRS) and the scattered
hadron goes to the Right High-Resolution Spectrometer
(RHRS). HRS has the capability of running at high lumi-
nosity, and has a high resolution in both the momentum
and the angle reconstruction of the scattered particles.
The scattered particles go through two superconducting
quadrupole magnets (which focus the charged particles),
followed by a superconducting dipole magnet (that bends
the charged particles by 45 degrees), the particle further
passes through another quadrupole magnet. Supercon-
ducting magnets allow a large acceptance in both angle

FIG. 3: Shell model structure of 40Ar and 48Ti nucleus.
Note that the proton structure of titanium mirrors to
that of the neutron structure of argon.

Ee

θe
(MeV) (MeV) (deg) (MeV/c) (deg)

Ee(cid:48)

Pp

θp

Exclusive
kin 1
kin 2
kin 3
kin 4
kin 5
Inclusive
kin 5

2222
2222
2222
2222
2222

1799
1716
1799
1799
1716

21.5
20.0
17.5
15.5
15.5

915
1030
915
915
1030

-50.0
-44.0
-47.0
-44.5
-39.0

2222

-

15.5

-

-

TABLE I: The exclusive and inclusive kinematics for
which the electron scattering data is collected on diﬀerent
target nucleus.

C. Nuclear Targets and Kinematic Setup

The proton spectral function of argon nucleus can
be extracted from coincidence (e, e(cid:48)p) reaction on 40Ar.

4018Arp’sn’s4822Tip’sn’sFrom the proton SF, the energy and momentum distri-
bution of protons in the argon can be achieved and can
be used in the reconstruction of antineutrino energy in
liquid argon. For the reconstruction of neutrino energy in
liquid argon detectors, one requires the neutron spectral
function of argon. To this end, we introduced the idea
of titanium nucleus, as can be seen in Fig. 3, the proton
level structure of titanium mirrors to that of the neutron
level structure of argon. Utilizing this level correspon-
dence, the neutron SF of argon can be obtained from the
proton SF extracted from 48Ti(e, e(cid:48)p). For the calibra-
tion of spectrometer pointing, the data is also collected
on the single and multi foil optics target, 12C. Further
data-sets are collected on the aluminum dummy target
which will allow us to subtract the background generated
at the end-caps of the target cell.

The measurements are successfully performed at ﬁve
diﬀerent kinematics for exclusive reactions and one kine-
matics for inclusive reaction, as shown in Table I. The
incoming electron beam energy, Ee, the scattered elec-
tron energy, Ee(cid:48), (and therefore the energy transfer) and
the momentum of knocked out proton, Pp, are held ﬁxed.
Now, by varying the electron scattering angle, θe, (and
moving the HRS accordingly), we spanned over diﬀerent
missing momentum. The kinematics are chosen to scan
the region where shell model dynamics is known to dom-
inate, and single-particle aspects of the nuclear structure
can be probed. Note that the SF, that we aim to extract
in this experiment, describes the ground state properties
of the nucleus. Hence, it can be used in the description
of any interaction involving single nucleon, independent
of the ﬁnal state.

IV. SUMMARY

5

The systematic uncertainties related to neutrino-
nucleus signal in the detector present the biggest hur-
dle in achieving the precision goals of accelerator-based
neutrino-oscillation experiments. To this end, the elec-
tron scattering data has been playing a signiﬁcant role by
providing the testbed to assess and validate diﬀerent nu-
clear models intended to be used in neutrino experiments.
Though, the challenges are appearing to amplify with the
use of LArTPC in short- and long-baseline neutrino pro-
gram with almost non-existence electron scattering data
on argon nucleus, and hence ceasing any development to-
wards an accurate neutrino-argon modeling. In light of
these challenges, an electron argon experiment, E12-14-
012, has recently been proposed at Jeﬀerson lab. The
experiment has recently been completed collecting data
for (e, e(cid:48)p) and (e, e(cid:48)) processes on 40Ar, 48Ti, and 12C
targets for various kinematics. We hope that the Spec-
tral functions and the cross sections extracted from this
(only available high-precision) data on 40Ar nucleus will
help reducing the systematic uncertainties, and will en-
able us achieving high-precision goals in the liquid-argon
based short- and long-baseline neutrino program.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

VP is grateful to the organizers of the workshop for
the invitation and hospitality. VP, and CM acknowledge
the support from the National Science Foundation un-
der grant no. PHY−1352106. This work would not have
been possible without the immense support of Hall A col-
laboration members of JLab, and without the contribu-
tion of the rest of the E12-14-012 collaboration members.

[1] O. Benhar, D. Day, I. Sick, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 189

[9] N. Rocco, A. Lovato, O. Benhar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116,

(2008).

[2] O. Benhar, D. Day, and I. Sick, arXiv:0603032 [nucl-ex].
http://faculty.virginia.edu/qes-archive/index.
html

[3] M. Antonello et al.

ICARUS-WA104 Collaborations),
[physics.ins-det].

(MicroBooNE, LAr1-ND, and
arXiv:1503.01520

192501 (2016).
[10] E. Vagnoni,

O.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 142502 (2017).

Benhar,

and D. Meloni,

[11] N. Van Dessel, N. Jachowicz, R. Gonz´alez-Jim´enez,
V. Pandey and T. Van Cuyck, arXiv:1704.07817 [nucl-
th].

[12] V. Pandey, N. Jachowicz, T. Van Cuyck, J. Ryckebusch

[4] R.

Acciari

et

al.

(DUNE

Collaboration),

and M. Martini, Phys. Rev. C92, no. 2, 024606 (2015).

arXiv:1512.06148 [physics.ins-det].

[5] M. Anghinolﬁ et al., J. Phys. G21, L9 (1995).
[6] O. Benhar, et al. (Jeﬀerson Lab E12-14-012 Collabora-

[13] A. V. Butkevich, Phys. Rev. C85, 065501 (2012).
[14] O. Benhar, P. Huber, C. Mariani and D. Meloni,

Phys. Rept. 700, 1 (2017).

tion), arXiv:1406.4080 [nucl-ex].

[7] O. Benhar, N. Farina, H. Nakamura, M. Sakuda and

[15] L. Alvarez-Ruso et al., arXiv:1706.03621 [hep-ph].
[16] A. M. Ankowski and C. Mariani, J. Phys. G44, no. 5,

R. Seki, Phys. Rev. D72, 053005 (2005).

054001 (2017).

[8] A. M. Ankowski, O. Benhar, M. Sakuda, Phys. Rev. D91,

[17] S. Boﬃ, C. Giusti, and F. D. Pacati, Phys. Rep. 226, 1

054616 (2015).

(1993).

[18] J. Alcorn et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A522, 294 (2004).

