7
1
0
2
c
e
D
9
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
2
0
9
6
0
.
2
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Solar Physics
DOI: 10.1007/•••••-•••-•••-••••-•

Active Region Photospheric Magnetic Properties
Derived from Line-of-sight and Radial Fields

J.A. Guerra1 · S.-H. Park1 ·
P.T. Gallagher1 · I. Kontogiannis2 ·
M.K. Georgoulis2 · D.S. Bloomﬁeld3

c(cid:13) Springer ••••

Abstract The eﬀect of using two representations of the normal-to-surface mag-
netic ﬁeld to calculate photospheric measures that are related to active region
(AR) potential for ﬂaring is presented. Several AR properties were computed us-
ing line-of-sight (Blos) and spherical-radial (Br) magnetograms from the Space-
weather HMI Active Region Patch (SHARP) products of the Solar Dynamics
Observatory, characterizing the presence and features of magnetic polarity inver-
sion lines, fractality, and magnetic connectivity of the AR photospheric ﬁeld. The
data analyzed corresponds to ≈ 4,000 AR observations, achieved by randomly
selecting 25% of days between September 2012 and May 2016 for analysis at
6-hr cadence. Results from this statistical study include: i) the Br component
results in a slight upwards shift of property values in a manner consistent with
a ﬁeld-strength underestimation by the Blos component; ii) using the Br com-
ponent results in signiﬁcantly lower inter-property correlation in one-third of

J.A. Guerra
jordan.a.guerra@tcd.ie

S.-H. Park
sunpark@tcd.ie

P.T. Gallagher
peter.gallagher@tcd.ie

I. Kontogiannis
jkonto@noa.gr

M.K. Georgoulis
manolis.georgoulis@academyofathens.gr

D.S. Bloomﬁeld
shaun.bloomﬁeld@northumbria.ac.uk

1

School of Physics, Trinity College Dublin, College Green, Dublin 2, Ireland

2 Research Center for Astronomy and Applied Mathematics (RCAAM), Academy of

Athens, 4 Soranou Efesiou Street, Athens, GR-11527, Greece

3 Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 1

 
 
 
 
 
 
J.A. Guerra et al.

the cases, implying more independent information about the state of the AR
photospheric magnetic ﬁeld; iii) ﬂaring rates for each property vary between the
ﬁeld components in a manner consistent with the diﬀerences in property-value
ranges resulting from the components; iv) ﬂaring rates generally increase for
higher values of properties, except Fourier spectral power index that has ﬂare
rates peaking around a value of 5/3. These ﬁndings indicate that there may be
advantages in using Br rather than Blos in calculating ﬂare-related AR magnetic
properties, especially for regions located far from central meridian.

Keywords: Active Regions, Magnetic Fields; Flares, Forecasting; Flares, Rela-
tion to Magnetic Field; Magnetic ﬁelds, Photosphere

1. Introduction

It is well known that the energy that powers solar ﬂares and coronal mass
ejections (CMEs) is slowly built-up in the magnetically-structured coronae of
active regions (ARs) and then quickly released via the reconﬁguration of mag-
netic ﬁeld (Aschwanden et al., 2017). In the absence of direct measurements of
the coronal magnetic ﬁeld (or uniquely deﬁned non-potential reconstructions),
ﬂare forecasting has relied on photospheric information instead. In particular,
ﬂare prediction has given great importance to the normal-to-surface ﬁeld com-
ponent, Bn, for several reasons. First, because the normal component can be
assumed from the line-of-sight (LOS) component under certain circumstances
(i.e., close to disk centre). Second, the normal component provides the positive-
and negative-polarity areas in the photosphere where the 3D magnetic ﬁeld –
that extends into the corona – is rooted. In this sense, the normal component
should provide information about the magnetic energy ﬂux that ﬂows from the
photosphere into the coronal volume occupied by the AR.

Previous studies have focused on quantifying spatial patterns of the photo-
spheric ﬁeld using the LOS component restricted to regions near disk centre. In
terms of the physical characteristic or process to be analyzed, these studies can
be group into a few categories:

i) those detecting and parameterizing magnetic polarity inversion lines (MPILs)
as proxies of current-carrying magnetic structures emerging through the pho-
tosphere (e.g., Falconer, Moore, and Gary, 2003; Schrijver, 2007);

ii) those quantifying the complex spatial patterns of the photospheric ﬁeld in
terms of the ﬁeld’s multi-scale behavior (e.g. Abramenko, 2005; Hewett et al.,
2008; Guerra et al., 2015) and fractal properties (e.g. Conlon et al., 2008,
2010; Ermolli et al., 2014; McAteer, Gallagher, and Ireland, 2005);

iii) those characterizing the ﬁeld connectivity based on photospheric information
(e.g., Georgoulis and Rust, 2007; Ahmed et al., 2010; Zuccarello et al., 2014;
Barnes and Leka, 2006).

For ARs away from disk centre, some considerations need to be taken into
account when using LOS data. As ARs move away from disk centre, the observing
angle, θ(cid:48), increases and the contributions of magnetic vector magnitude and

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 2

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

direction to the LOS component change (Leka, Barnes, and Wagner, 2017). In
addition, the LOS component samples an increasing portion of the parallel-to-
surface component, resulting in artifacts like unphysical limb-eﬀect MPILs in
magnetic structures such as ARs. The common µ-angle correction, Bn = Blos/µ
where µ = cos (θ(cid:48)), assumes all photospheric ﬁeld is normal and therefore results
in enhancement of such artifacts. Thus, it seems reasonable to assume that a
more sophisticated approximation of the normal component of the magnetic ﬁeld
will represent more consistently any property calculated far from disk centre.

Before the launch of Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO; Pesnell, Thompson,
and Chamberlin, 2012), some statistical studies of ﬂaring-related magnetic prop-
erties of ARs employed a more realistic normal component measured from space-
and ground-based vector magnetograms (see e.g. Leka and Barnes, 2007). These
studies contributed greatly to the understanding of ﬂaring active regions, but the
regular use of vector-magnetic ﬁeld in ﬂare forecasting was not practical until the
Heliospheric Magnetic Imager (HMI; Scherrer et al., 2012) on board SDO started
providing near-realtime full-disk vector magnetograms. The HMI vector data
preparation pipeline provide the Blos component from the Mharp series and the
surface-normal component in the form of the spherical-radial ﬁeld, Br from the
Milne-Eddington (ME) inversion series. Therefore, a statistical study focusing
on the diﬀerence between AR properties calculated from Blos and Br seems
appropriate and timely. In Section 2, the data sample used and pre-processing
methods are described, while Section 3 describes the AR properties investigated.
Section 4 presents the results, focusing on the diﬀerence in properties calculated
using the Blos and Br data (Section 4.1), their variation with AR longitudinal
position (Section 4.2), the correlation between properties (Section 4.3), and their
ﬂare association (Section 4.4). Finally, Section 5 presents concluding remarks.

2. Data Sample

The AR properties included in this study were calculated from the Space-weather
HMI Active Region Patch (SHARP; Bobra et al., 2014) data products from SDO.
SHARP data products contain AR magnetograms derived from the HMI full-disk
magnetograms. Vector and LOS maps are derived from the hmi.ME 720s fd10
and hmi.Mharp 720s series, respectively. ARs are detected as a group of pixels
exceeding a threshold value of 100 G in the unsigned LOS ﬁeld. These group of
strong ﬁeld pixels are then separated into individual HMI Active Region Patches
(HARPs; Hoeksema et al., 2014), each uniquely identiﬁed by a HARP number
and the observation time. SHARP data contain, amongst other information,
the disambiguated photospheric magnetic ﬁeld in two sampling systems: ﬁeld
magnitude, azimuth and inclination angles (with respect to the LOS) in native
image-plane sampling; spherical radial, longitudinal and latitudinal components
of the ﬁeld in cylindrical equal area (CEA) deprojected sampling. The near-
realtime (NRT) version of SHARP data is created and made available with short
delay from the observation time. In this version the selected HARP ﬁeld-of-view
(FOV) varies according to the AR evolution.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 3

J.A. Guerra et al.

Figure 1. Graphic representation of the of the data sample analyzed. Sample corresponds to
25% of days randomly selected between 15 September 2012 and 17 May 2016. Distribution of
the selected days by year (left panel) and solar disk locations of SHARPs (right panel).

For this study, CEA NRT data were accessed from the hmi.sharp cea 720s nrt
series. A robust sample of the entire SHARP repository was selected to per-
form a signiﬁcant statistical study of ﬂare-related AR properties. This sample
corresponds to 25% of days between 15 September 2012 and 17 May 2016,
selected from a random uniform distribution. The distribution of selected days
is displayed in the left panel of Figure 1. For each selected day, four time stamps
are analyzed that correspond to a cadence of 6 hr (i.e. times closest to 00:00,
06:00, 12:00, and 18:00 UT). On average there are approximately ten SHARP
regions on disk at any time in the sample. Thus 12,733 SHARPs were analyzed,
with the right panel of Figure 1 displaying the spatial distribution of heliographic
(HG) coordinates (φ and θ for longitude and latitude, respectively). It can be
seen that SHARP locations are distributed uniformly over the two hemispheric
active latitude bands and across all longitudes.

Data quality selection is done before calculating the properties. In the pre-
processing stage, ﬁrst NRT SHARP data is checked for bad-quality images
(images containing mostly null values), missing header information, or failing
of the world coordinate system (WCS; Thompson, 2006) calculation. If any of
these problems are encountered, the HARP is considered as bad data and no
properties are calculated from it. HARP FOVs can contain oﬀ-limb pixels when
the patches are detected near the solar limb. Thus, HARPs are pre-processed in
order to exclude oﬀ-limb pixels from subsequent calculations. An edge-detection
procedure was implemented to detect the solar limb in CEA de-projected images.
First, the gradient of the image is calculated by convolving the image with a
Sobel ﬁlter (see e.g. Al-Ghraibah, Boucheron, and McAteer, 2015). Then using
the WCS, the HG location can be assigned to each pixel on the limb. Finally, the
lowest value of longitudinal distance is selected as the new maximum longitude
for the HARP FOV. The result of this process is an image trimmed in the
horizontal (i.e. longitudinal) direction.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 4

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

3. Active Region Magnetic Properties

The quantities considered here correspond to AR magnetic ﬁeld properties for
most of which signiﬁcance in ﬂare prediction has been shown (see e.g. Barnes and
Leka, 2008). Each feature described below can provide one or more properties to
the study. However, properties presented here correspond to a subgroup selected
for the purpose of illustrating diﬀerences between Blos- and Br-calculated prop-
erties. This subgroup covers diﬀerent aspects of ARs, from photospheric features
of interest such as MPILs, to the entire AR ﬂux distribution.

3.1. Magnetic Polarity Inversion Line (MPIL) Properties

MPILs, or neutral lines, in the photosphere of ARs separate distinct patches
of positive and negative ﬂux and several studies have related ﬂare occurrence
to MPIL properties (e.g. Schrijver, 2007; Mason and Hoeksema, 2010; Falconer
et al., 2012). A subset of MPILs have also been identiﬁed as strong MPILs (or
(cid:63)MPILs) based on:

i) strong horizontal gradients in the vertical-ﬁeld component across the MPIL;
ii) strong horizontal-ﬁeld component over the MPIL.

(cid:63)MPILs can be considered as photospheric evidence of the emergence of highly
twisted ﬁelds and the place in ARs where ﬂux cancellation is likely to take place.
Bokenkamp (2007) developed an algorithm to deﬁne (cid:63)MPILs using a three-stage
process based on the original (cid:63)MPIL detection routine of Falconer, Moore, and
Gary (2003). First, MPILs are identiﬁed as contours of zero ﬁeld in a strongly-
smoothed Bn. Then a vector-magnetic ﬁeld map is calculated from the smoothed
Bn image using a potential-ﬁeld model (e.g. Alissandrakis, 1981). (cid:63)MPILs are
then extracted from the detected MPILs by thresholding: i) the gradient of the
vertical magnetic ﬁeld; ii) the strength of the horizontal magnetic ﬁeld in the
potential-ﬁeld model. Second, the same process of detection is repeated for a less-
smoothed Bn image. (cid:63)MPILs are determined by comparing between (cid:63)MPILs1
and (cid:63)MPILs2 identiﬁed in the ﬁrst and second stages, respectively; retained
(cid:63)MPILs correspond to portions of (cid:63)MPILs2 that are separated from (cid:63)MPILs1
by distances less than a speciﬁed threshold of 11 Mm. Finally, this comparison
method is applied between (cid:63)MPILs identiﬁed from an unsmoothed image and
the newly identiﬁed (cid:63)MPILs with the same distance threshold of 11 Mm. Note
that in ARs with complicated magnetic conﬁgurations, the (cid:63)MPIL detection
algorithm usually identiﬁes multiple (cid:63)MPILs within one magnetogram FOV.

In this study, a modiﬁcation of the Bokenkamp (2007) detection algorithm
was implemented by skipping the ﬁnal stage in the three-stage process to reduce
computation time. Comparison between original- and modiﬁed-algorithm results
show very little diﬀerence between detected (cid:63)MPILs. Therefore, the modiﬁed
two-stage process is used here to ﬁnd (cid:63)MPILs using Bn = Br and Bn =
µ−corrected Blos, with smoothing factors of 6 and 3 pixels used in the ﬁrst
and second stages of the calculation, respectively. Flux threshold values used
to deﬁne the strong segments of MPILs are 120 and 100 Mx cm−2 in each
stage, correspondingly. From the determined (cid:63)MPILs, several properties can be

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 5

J.A. Guerra et al.

obtained such as maximum and total lengths of (cid:63)MPIL segments (Lmax and Ltot,
respectively), and the total unsigned ﬂux ΦMPIL near (cid:63)MPILs. In this paper, only
the total length is reported.

3.2. Decay Index

The horizontal ﬁeld decay index, nhor, is a quantity related to the onset of the
torus instability for current-carrying ﬂux ropes in ARs. The torus instability
has been extensively studied in relation to the success or failure of ARs in
producing CMEs (e.g. Liu, 2008b; Zuccarello et al., 2014; Zuccarello, Aulanier,
and Gilchrist, 2015). However, a statistical study of how the decay index relates
to ﬂare occurrence has not been conducted. In order to determine nhor, a 3D
vector-magnetic ﬁeld is required to be derived from the photospheric ﬁeld using
a ﬁeld extrapolation. In the coronal volume of an AR, nhor is deﬁned as the
localized gradient of the logarithmic horizontal magnetic ﬁeld with logarithmic
height,

nhor = −

d log (Bhor)
d log (h)

,

(1)

where Bhor is the horizontal component of the magnetic ﬁeld and h is height
above the photosphere. In order to derive the 3D vector-magnetic ﬁeld above
the AR, a potential-ﬁeld model is implemented (e.g. Alissandrakis, 1981), using
Br or µ−corrected Blos as photospheric lower boundary input. After a 3D array
of localized nhor values is determined from this model, several (cid:63)MPIL-related
decay index properties can be derived. Included here are: i) minimum height
of critical decay index (ncr = 1.5) above (cid:63)MPILs, hmin; ii) maximum ratio of
(cid:63)MPIL length to hmin from each (cid:63)MPIL in an AR, (L/hmin)max. A decay index
calculation based on a potential ﬁeld provides an estimate of how quickly the
horizontal component of the ﬁeld due to sources (e.g. overlying arcade ﬁelds
in active regions), external to a current-carrying non-potential ﬁeld, decreases
with height. There have been several studies (T¨or¨ok and Kliem, 2005; Kliem
and T¨or¨ok, 2006; Fan and Gibson, 2007; Liu, 2008a) establishing the gradient of
a magnetic ﬁeld overlying an erupted ﬂux rope as important to understanding
kink and torus instabilities for solar eruptions.

3.3. Schrijver’s R value

The R value quantiﬁes the unsigned photospheric magnetic ﬂux near (i.e. within
≈ 15 Mm of) strong-ﬁeld high-gradient MPILs within active regions. This prop-
erty and its usefulness in forecasting was ﬁrst investigated by Schrijver (2007).
The presence of such MPILs indicates that twisted magnetic structures which
carry electrical currents (associated with the potential for ﬂare activity) have
emerged into the active region through the solar surface. Therefore, R represents
a proxy for the free magnetic energy that is available for release in a ﬂare.

The algorithm for calculating R is relatively simple, computationally inexpen-
sive, and was developed using Blos magnetograms from the Michelson Doppler
Imager (MDI; Scherrer et al., 1995) onboard the Solar and Heliospheric Observa-
tory (SOHO: Domingo, Fleck, and Poland, 1995). First, a bitmap is constructed

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 6

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

for each polarity in a magnetogram, indicating where the absolute magnitude
of the magnetic ﬂux density exceeds the threshold value of 150 Mx cm−2. These
bitmaps are then dilated by a square kernel of 3 × 3 pixels and the areas where
the bitmaps overlap are deﬁned as strong-ﬁeld MPILs. This combined bitmap
is then convolved with a Gaussian ﬁlter of 15 Mm FWHM, which corresponds
to the peak value of the distribution of ﬂare ribbons distance (as observed in
EUV images) from MPILs (see Schrijver (2007) for further detail). Finally, the
Gaussian-convolved bitmap is multiplied with the absolute ﬂux value of the Blos
magnetogram and R is calculated as the sum over all pixels.

For calculating R values from the magnetogram sample, it is necessary to pre-
process the data and implement some changes in the corresponding algorithms.
First, SHARP magnetograms are resampled from 0.03o pixel−1 to 0.12o pixel−1
(i.e. equivalent to MDI resolution in a CEA deprojection) to match the deﬁni-
tion in Schrijver (2007). Second, to calculate R using the Br component it is
necessary to use a diﬀerent (and higher) threshold of 300 Mx cm−2 in deﬁning
strong-ﬁeld MPILs. This is because the Br component has increasing levels
of noise at increasing distances from disk centre, due to larger contributions
from the linear Stokes polarization (that has a higher noise level than the
circular Stokes polarization which provides the Blos component). This value
was determined by making a series of test calculations of R for HARP/AR full
disk passage for threshold values in the range 150 − 500 Mx cm−2. The chosen
value of 300 Mx cm−2 corresponds to the threshold making log [R (Br)] closest
to log [R (Blos)] when the regions are located within 45◦ of central meridian.

3.4. Fourier Spectral Power Index

The spectral power index, α, (also referred to as exponent) corresponds to the
power-law exponent achieved in ﬁtting the function E (k) ∝ k−α to the 1D power
spectral density E (k) in magnetograms. This ﬁeld-fractality related property pa-
rameterizes the power contained in magnetic structures at spatial scales l = k−1
belonging to the inertial range of magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Empirically,
ARs with high spectral power index display an overall high productivity of
ﬂares (see e.g. Abramenko, 2005; Guerra et al., 2015). Historically, α has been
calculated using Blos under the assumption that it represents the normal-ﬁeld
component at small distances from disk centre. First, a magnetogram is pro-
cessed using a FFT to yield E (kx, ky), the 2D power spectral density (PSD) that
is the squared absolute value of the FFT. To convert 2D PSD from wave numbers
kx and ky to the 1D PSD E (k) with isotropic wavenumber k = (cid:0)k2
, it
is necessary to integrate E (kx, ky) over angular direction in Fourier space and
multiply by a factor of 2πk. Finally, a power-law ﬁt is performed as a linear
ﬁt to the log-log representation of E (k) vs k and the slope (i.e. α) is obtained
over the inertial range corresponding to 2 − 20 Mm (i.e. k = 0.05 − 0.5 Mm−1).
Power spectral indices are calculated for both Blos and Br as described here –
no changes were necessary between the two data formats.

x + k2
y

(cid:1)0.5

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 7

J.A. Guerra et al.

3.5. Eﬀective Connected Magnetic Field Strength

The eﬀective connected magnetic ﬁeld strength, Beﬀ , is a morphological proxy
that aims to quantify strong MPILs at the photosphere of an AR. It was ﬁrst
introduced by Georgoulis and Rust (2007) and modiﬁed by Georgoulis (2010,
2013). Beﬀ is based on the idea that an AR may be represented by a dipole with
foot-point separation equal to the magnetogram pixel size and total ﬂux equal to
the total connected ﬂux of the AR. First, patches of both magnetic polarities are
identiﬁed using the partitioning method of Barnes, Longcope, and Leka (2005),
producing a set of non-overlapping areas with known outlines, magnetic ﬂux
content, and ﬂux-weighted centroid positions. Second, a connectivity matrix is
deﬁned for the ﬂuxes Φij committed to opposite-polarity partition pairs ij. Each
connection is given a length, Lij, that is the distance between the ﬂux-weighted
centroids of the partition pair. Fluxes in the connectivity matrix are found via
a simulated annealing method designed to emphasize MPILs. This is achieved
through preferably connecting closest opposite-polarity ﬂuxes by minimizing

(cid:18) |ri − rj |
lmax

(cid:88)

ij

+

|Φi + Φj|
|Φi| + |Φj|

(cid:19)

,

(2)

where r and Φ are the position vector and ﬂux of each partition, i and j indicate
positive- and negative-ﬂux partitions, respectively, lmax is the diagonal length of
the magnetogram, and the sum is performed over all opposite-polarity pairs.

For ﬂux-balanced ARs, a connectivity matrix contains only opposite-polarity
connections after the annealing process. However, ARs are rarely ﬂux balanced,
mostly due to large-scale connections to ﬂux beyond the FOV. To rectify this, a
ring of “mirror ﬂux” is placed a large distance from the AR. Connections between
excess AR ﬂux and the mirror ﬂux are treated as open and not included in Beﬀ .
From the connectivity matrix, Beﬀ is measured in magnetic intensity units as

Beﬀ =

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i

j

Φij
L2
ij

.

(3)

To calculate Beﬀ , the entire AR must be taken into account while partitions
belonging to the quiet Sun or small isolated partitions (that do not contribute
to ﬂare activity) must be excluded. To this end, minimum thresholds are imposed
on ﬂux density (100 Mx cm−2), partition area (40 pixels, ≈ 5.3 Mm2 from SHARP
CEA pixel size of 0.03◦), and enclosed ﬂux (5 × 1019 Mx), with values chosen
following AR time-series tests. Threshold selection also aﬀects calculation speed;
lower thresholds include larger portions of magnetic ﬂux, producing more par-
titions at the expense of slower calculations. Since Beﬀ is a quantity calculated
from the normal-ﬁeld component, the same thresholds are used for both Br
and Blos to compare the values produced, keeping in mind that in principle Br
values are higher than the corresponding Blos when considering ARs far from
disk centre. According to Barnes and Leka (2008), Beﬀ can be seen as an R-
value with the ﬂux-weighting given by the connectivity matrix. Therefore some
correlation between these two properties can be expected.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 8

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

3.6. Ising Energy

The term Ising energy originates from the solid state physics model with the
same name. This model is use to characterize the state of magnetic systems
in which opposite polarities can have short and long range interactions, such
as ferromagnetic materials. This quantity was proposed as a measure of AR
magnetic complexity in MDI LOS magnetograms by Ahmed et al. (2010) and
corresponds to interaction energy between pairs of magnetic polarities. First,
ﬂux values are byte-scaled to 0 − 255. Second, low values (0 − 30) represent
strongest negative ﬁelds and are ﬂagged with −1, while high values (230 − 255)
represent strongest positive ﬁelds and are ﬂagged with +1; intermediate values
(31 − 229) represent lower absolute ﬁeld strength and are set to 0 and ignored.
Finally, Ising energy is calculated as

EIsing = −

(cid:88)

ij

SiSj
d2

,

(4)

where Si = +1 and Sj = −1 for positive and negative pixels, respectively, and d is
distance between opposite-polarity pixel pairs ij. EIsing correlates with AR ﬂare
productivity according to Ahmed et al. (2010), but has not been implemented in
the forecasting literature. For the calculation of Ising energy, it is necessary to
deﬁne ranges that correspond to strong positive and negative pixels. Unlike the
byte-scaling applied in Ahmed et al. (2010), an absolute ﬂux threshold is used
here; only pixels of absolute value greater than 100 Mx cm−2 are considered, and
ﬂagged with +1 (−1) if their value is positive (negative).

EIsing and Beﬀ show a similar functional form. However, in the former, unipo-
lar magnetic elements correspond to strong pixels (ﬁeld strength > 100 Mx cm−2)
while for latter, the same are represented by non-overlapping partitions. For Ising
energy, the connectivity accounts for all possible connections between strong
pixels pairs, without, however, taking into account the magnetic ﬂux of these
pixels. Some degree of correlation between EIsing and Beﬀ is expected. Thus, by
deﬁnition, Ising energy is a non-zero quantity as long as there are at least two
strong opposite polarity pixels within a HARP but at least two sizable, non-
overlapping opposite polarity magnetic partitions are required for a non-zero
Beﬀ .

4. Results

A total of 12, 773 SHARP magnetograms were available in the selected sample.
This sample was then ﬁltered to leave only those HARP numbers that were
associated to (one or more) NOAA-numbered regions at any time during the
HARP disk passage. A total of 3, 999 SHARPs (31.3%) are included in the results
presented in this section. On occasions, the dynamic evolution of active regions
within a HARP associated to multiple NOAA regions can lead to the splitting
of the HARP into two or more patches. This particular scenario is important to
consider if the full disk passage of HARPs is studied at any cadence. However,

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 9

J.A. Guerra et al.

the data sample in this study was randomly selected, and therefore the evolution
of any particular region is unlikely to be included.

Results from this statistical study are shown with emphasis on four aspects:
diﬀerences in property values from using Blos or Br data (Section 4.1); variation
of properties with AR longitudinal position (Section 4.2); correlations between
properties (Section 4.3); ﬂaring association of individual properties (Section 4.4).

4.1. LOS- versus Radial-ﬁeld Comparison

Most properties studied here are strictly speaking deﬁned in terms of the surface-
normal (Bn) component of the photospheric ﬁeld. In their original implemen-
tations, properties are calculated either using only Blos (if restricted to disk
centre) or µ-angle corrected Blos. The availability of Br (equivalent to Bn) and
Blos in the SHARP data products allows direct comparison between the resulting
properties that each produces. However, SHARP Blos and Br magnetograms are
derived from diﬀerent polarization signal (i.e. diﬀerent detectors) and therefore
the LOS component from the ME inversion (|B| cos(γ); |B| = ﬁeld strength, γ =
inclination angle respect to the LOS) does not necessarily match Blos. Therefore,
comparison between |B| cos(γ) and Blos in the plane-of-sky coordinate system
should be done before proceeding with the AR-property calculations. Figure 2a
presents the density histogram from a pixel-by-pixel comparison of all HARP
regions on 6 August 2014 at 00:00 UT. This date was chosen because multiple
regions of diﬀerent sizes are present and more or less distribute all over the solar
disk. Figure 2b, on the other hand, shows the average percentage diﬀerence
between the two signals as a function of |B| cos(γ), for each polarity separately.
Figure 2a shows that for pixels with > 500 G, Blos underestimates the ﬁeld
strength. Positive and negative polarities (black and red curves in Figure 2b,
respectively) show similar average diﬀerence between Blos and |B| cos(γ) values,
up to ≈ 1.5 kG, when negative polarities are observed to have larger diﬀerence.
At the highest common value, positive and negative polarities are, on average,
underestimated by Blos by 25% and 30%, respectively. Although, in Figure 2a
it is observed that such big diﬀerences display a density of only about 10−5.

Thus, the relatively small diﬀerence between the two LOS signals allows the
use of the readily available SHARP Blos in this study. In addition, the well-known
lower noise level (5–10 G; compared to 60–150 G of the ME inversion LOS) and
the diﬃculty to recover the LOS component from the CEA ﬁelds, make the
SHARP Blos more useful in real time forecasting applications. Figure 3 contains
six panels displaying the distribution of values for all properties calculated. In
all panels of Figure 3, grey-scale shading displays the distributions from Blos
(light grey) and from Br (mid-grey), while regions of distribution overlap are
indicated in dark grey.

Figure 3 (panels a-c) presents the histograms for the MPIL-related properties.
Distributions of the total length of strong-gradient MPILs (Ltot; Figure 3a) show
that very similar behaviour is found from Blos and Br – both distributions cover
a similar range of values. Lower occurrence at high values of Ltot reﬂects the
drop-oﬀ in observation of large/complex ARs while the decrease in occurrence
for small values appears to be related to the fact that strong MPILs are rarely

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 10

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

Figure 2. Pixel-by-pixel comparative density histogram (a) between the SHARP Blos signal
and the LOS signal recovered from the Milne-Eddington inversion, |B| cos(γ). Average absolute
diﬀerence percentage (b) as a function of |B| cos(γ) for each polarity separately. Data used to
produced these plots correspond to all HARPs present on 6 August 00:00 UT. Blos seems to
systemically underestimate the ﬁeld in pixels with absolute strength greater than 500 G. The
maximum observed diﬀerence between the two signals for strong-ﬁeld pixels (≈ 1.8 kG) is 25%
and 30% for positive and negative polarity pixels, correspondingly. Error bars correspond to
the 1σ values.

found in only one or two magnetogram’s pixels. For (L/hmin)max, the maximum
ratio of MPIL length to minimal height of critical decay index (Figure 3b),
as with Ltot, both Blos and Br show similar shape and span similar ranges of
values. Both distributions for this property are slightly skewed to higher values.
This skewness implies that most probable value of this property comes from
ARs that display L > hmin. This property combines two AR measures ((cid:63)MPIL
length and minimum height of critical decay index), so it is diﬃcult to assess
the variation between Blos and Br as both properties vary between data types.
In the distributions of Schrijver’s R (Figure 3c) the main observed diﬀerence is
the Br distribution being slightly shifted towards higher values in comparison
to the Blos distribution. This diﬀerence results from the higher ﬂux threshold
used with Br, which removes some of the low R-values (log(R) = 1 – 2.5), and
from the systematic underestimation of ﬁeld strength by Blos (Figure 2), which
aﬀects those regions producing larger values (log(R) > 3).

In Figure 3d, the α (Fourier power spectral index) distributions are shown.
Notably, the range of values from Blos data is reduced when using Br data.
Guerra et al. (2015) reported values of α > 2.5 from Blos data as AR NOAA
11158 approached the limb, implying that the values of α which are most diﬀerent
when using Br likely correspond to ARs far from disk centre. This can be veriﬁed
in Section 4.2 since the property dependence on AR location will be analyzed.
The modiﬁcation of such values appears to cause a slight shift to lower values in
the Br distribution, although both distributions display a relatively well-deﬁned
peak in the bin 1.55 – 1.70. This property-value range includes α = 1.67 ≈ 5/3,
the Kolmogorov exponent (Kolmogorov, 1941), implying that a large portion of
studied HARPs correspond to ARs which photospheric plasma is in (or near to)
a fully developed hydrodynamical turbulence.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 11

abJ.A. Guerra et al.

Figure 3. Frequency distributions of AR properties: (a) total (cid:63)MPIL length, Ltot; (b) max-
imum ratio of (cid:63)MPIL length to minimum height of critical decay index, (L/hmin)max; (c)
Schrijver’s R value; (d) Fourier spectral power index, α; (e) eﬀective connected ﬁeld strength,
Beﬀ ; (f) Ising energy, EIsing. In all panels, grey-scale shading displays the distributions from
Blos (light grey) and from Br (mid-grey), while regions of distribution overlap are indicated
in dark grey.

Figures 3e-f display the histograms of the magnetic connectivity properties,
respectively. Distributions of the eﬀective connected magnetic ﬁeld strength,
Beﬀ , display a similar behaviour as Schrijver’s R value in Figure 3c (i.e. a slight
shift to larger values when using Br data). This behaviour is in correspondence
with the ﬁeld-strength underestimation of Blos, and puts in evidence the correla-
tion between Beﬀ and R. For the Ising energy, EIsing, distributions from Blos and

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 12

0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Log(Ltot)100101102103OccurrenceaBlosBr0.51.01.52.02.53.03.5α100101102103OccurrencedBlosBr2.52.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.5Log[(L/hmin)max]100101102103OccurrencebBlosBr0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Log(Beff)100101102103OccurrenceeBlosBr123456Log(R)100101102103OccurrencecBlosBr1012345Log(Eising)100101102103OccurrencefBlosBrActive Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

Table 1. Distribution moments of the diﬀerence between property values from the
ﬁeld components Blos and Br.

Property

Min

Max Mean

Std. Dev. Kurtosis

Skewness

(cid:17)

(cid:105)

max

log(Ltot)
(cid:104)(cid:16) L
log

hmin

log(R)
α
log(Beﬀ )
log(EIsing)

-1.560

-2.451

-1.888
-1.953
-2.129
-2.616

2.093

2.173

2.624
0.350
3.235
4.289

0.178

-0.067

0.018
-0.264
0.430
0.489

0.349

0.509

0.673
0.321
0.478
0.575

2.212

0.768

0.912
2.650
3.552
5.077

0.464

-0.130

0.706
-1.698
0.958
0.820

Br span the same range and show a similar distinctive shape, unlike any other
properties. First, there is a clear tendency of the occurrence to increase with
the Eising value – most NOAA-numbered HARPs show complex connectivity
dominated by strong (i.e. > 100 Mx cm2) opposite-polarity pixels pairs close to
each other. On the other hand, the presence of a peak at low values of 0.1–1.0
pixel−2 is due to the deﬁnition of Eising – unlike Beﬀ , only the distance separating
pixels is used and not magnetic ﬂux. Therefore, some of the HARPs containing
early stages of AR formation (i.e. small numbers of signiﬁcant-ﬂux pixels that
separate during spot formation, before additional ﬂux emergence partially ﬁlls
the AR interior) can produce the number of low-value regions observed in that
peak.

4.2. Variation with AR Longitudinal Position

One objective of this study is to investigate the dependence of derived prop-
erties on SHARP Heliographic (HG) position. Since AR evolution shows very
little variation in latitudinal position, more emphasis is given to the variation
of properties with the HG longitude, φ. Figures 4 and 5 present diﬀerences
between Blos- and Br-derived properties in two forms. First, panels a, c, and
e show scatter plots of property values derived from Blos versus Br, where the
diagonal black line is unity and data points are colour-coded to represent three
groups of SHARP longitudes: |φ| < 60◦ (black); 60◦ (cid:54) |φ| < 75◦ (blue); |φ| (cid:62) 75◦
(red). Second, panels b, d, and f present locations and magnitudes of diﬀerence
in Blos- and Br-derived properties, with each data point at the SHARP centroid
position at the observation time and colour representing magnitude of diﬀerence
between property values from the ﬁeld components. The diﬀerence is deﬁned as
X (Br) − X (Blos) where X can be any of the properties studied, such that when
Br yields a larger property value than Blos the diﬀerence is positive. In all cases
except α, diﬀerences are calculated after taking the logarithm of the property, in
order to better visualize diﬀerences. In addition, Table 1 presents maximum and
minimum values and the ﬁrst four moments (mean, standard deviation, kurtosis,
and skewness) for the distributions of diﬀerences (all φ groups included). Mean
and ±σ values are depicted in Figures 4 and 5 (a, c, e) as solid and dotted grey
diagonal lines, correspondingly.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 13

J.A. Guerra et al.

Figure 4. Diﬀerences between Blos- and Br-derived properties: (a)–(b) Ltot, (c)–(d)
(L/hmin)max; (e)–(f) log (R). Left-hand panels (a, c, and e) show scatter plots of properties
derived from Blos vs Br, where the diagonal line is unity and data points are colour-coded
to represent three longitude groups: |φ| < 60◦ (black); 60◦ (cid:54) |φ| < 75◦ (blue); |φ| (cid:62) 75◦
(red). Right-hand panels (b, d, and f) present locations and magnitude diﬀerences between
Br- and Blos-derived properties, with each data point at the SHARP centroid position at the
observation time and colour representing magnitude of diﬀerence between property values from
the ﬁeld components.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 14

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

The Ltot scatter plot in Figure 4a displays a linear log-log correlation between
values calculated from Blos and those from Br. The distribution of points around
the unity diagonal shows a small positive mean, implying that Br values are
larger on average. This correlation shows a low level of dispersion, with 2/3 of
points (2σ – the distance between dotted grey lines) spanning ≈ 0.7, less than an
order of magnitude. There appears to be no systematic dependence on longitude
as blue and red symbols (60◦ (cid:54) |φ| < 75◦ and |φ| (cid:62) 75◦, respectively) appear to
fall within the scatter of black symbols (|φ| < 60◦). In Figure 4b, the majority
of points have diﬀerences close to zero (green symbols) and few non-zero values
are found for |φ| < 30◦. At greater φ, Ltot values from Br are marginally larger
than those from Blos (yellow symbols). Overall the largest diﬀerences are on
the order of tens of Mm, with these magnitudes restricted to Br resulting in
larger values than Blos (red symbols). The (cid:63)MPIL detection process is identical
for both ﬁeld components, so larger Br values are due to more pixels passing
the (cid:63)MPIL ﬂux threshold, as a consequence of ﬁeld-strength underestimation
of Blos. In addition, two characteristics are clearly identiﬁed in Figure 4b: i) a
systematically larger Br values (positive diﬀerences) with increasing |φ|, and ii)
asymmetric distribution of values over the disk, with higher diﬀerences achieved
for western longitudes. These two observations seem to be consistent with the
spatial and temporal variations of noise levels in the HMI inverted magnetic ﬁeld
data (Hoeksema et al., 2014). The noise in the vector ﬁeld strength exhibits a
center-to-limb variation (≈ 60 – 150 G) that also varies with the satellite orbital
velocity. This variation produces an east-west asymmetry in the noise pattern
which appears periodically around 1:00, 7:00, 13:00, and 19:00 UT (see Figures
6 and 7 in Hoeksema et al., 2014). These times are close to the daily sampling
times used in this study. Furthermore, the (cid:63)MPIL detection algorithm uses a
ﬂux threshold of 100 – 120 Mx cm−2, which is not high enough for eliminating
these noise contributions to the calculated property values.

In Figure 4c, a linear log-log correlation is observed for (L/hmin)max. Points
show a very small negative mean value and seem to be almost symmetrically
distributed around it. This correlation shows a larger scatter in comparison to
Ltot – most points are distributed over almost an order of magnitude around the
mean. Figure 4d shows a slightly diﬀerent scenario to Ltot: near-zero diﬀerences
(green symbols) dominate for (L/hmin)max over all φ values, but some large-
magnitude diﬀerences (predominantly blue symbols) also occur. There seems to
be no obvious indication that non-zero values dominate over any longitudes,
with the larger scatter attributed to this property being the combination of two
independent AR properties. The largest diﬀerences between Br- and Blos-derived
(L/hmin)max are on the order of hundreds of gauss and seem to occur mostly
when using Blos. Again, it is diﬃcult to assess diﬀerences between Blos and Br as
both (cid:63)MPIL length and hmin above these MPILs vary between ﬁeld components.
The scatter plot for log (R) in Figure 4e shows a reasonable linear correlation
for data points from |φ| < 60◦ (black symbols). The linear correlation shifts
above the unity diagonal for 60◦ (cid:54) |φ| < 75◦ (blue symbols) and more so
for |φ| (cid:62) 75◦ (red symbols), indicating that Blos gives systematically lower
values compared to Br further from disk centre. All points are more or less
equally distributed around the unity diagonal with the smallest mean value of

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 15

J.A. Guerra et al.

all properties and with most points distributed over ≈ 1.3 orders of magnitude.
However, visualization of the data in Figure 4f shows that property diﬀerences for
|φ| < 60◦ are a mixture of negative (Blos yielding larger R values; blue symbols)
and near-zero values (green symbols). This behavior, in locations where both
property values should be essentially the same (disk centre), can be attributed
to the diﬀerent magnetic ﬂux thresholds applied in determining R-value MPILs.
For |φ| (cid:62) 60◦, log [R (Br)] becomes larger than log [R (Blos)] (yellow – red sym-
bols), with diﬀerences increasing at |φ| (cid:62) 75◦. Since in this case, both ﬂux
thresholds used are above the typical noise levels (150 and 300 G for Blos and
Br, respectively), larger Br values with increasing |φ| must arise from a better
deﬁnition of the MPILs, specially at far distances from the central meridian.

Figure 5a presents the scatter plot for Fourier spectral power index, α, that
has a mostly linear relationship over low values (i.e. 0.5 − 2.0). Beyond that
range, α (Br) appears to saturate while α (Blos) continues increasing, with the
divergence from linearity and scatter increasing progressively with |φ| (blue and
red symbols). The distribution of all diﬀerences is clearly skewed towards Blos
values with a mean value lying bellow the unity diagonal and negative large
skewness. In this case, the 2σ spread is only ≈ 0.6, since most points come from
region with |φ| < 60◦. This location dependence is easily observed in Figure 5b,
where most data points for |φ| < 45◦ have near-zero diﬀerences (green symbols)
and those for |φ| > 45◦ are dominated by negative diﬀerences (Blos yielding
larger α values; blue symbols). Although Blos and Br are equally aﬀected by
foreshortening eﬀects that cut oﬀ small size scales at greater |φ|, diﬀerences in
the structure of magnetic features with diﬀering sizes will aﬀect Blos spatial-
frequency sampling another way. While small-scale mostly-vertical ﬂux tubes
(i.e. network/plage ﬁelds) experience the usual diminishing of Blos ﬁeld strength
by viewing-angle, large-scale ﬁelds contained in AR sunspots will experience less
diminishing of Blos in comparison to small-scale ﬁelds. This unbalanced decrease
of LOS signal occurs because when viewed obliquely, large-scale (sunspot) ﬁelds
include horizontal ﬁeld strength components which are not detectable by HMI
in the small-scale ﬁelds. Therefore this eﬀect produces systematic diminishing
of Fourier power at small scales (i.e. large k) more than that at large scales (i.e.
small k), hence increasing the α calculated from Blos.

For Beﬀ , Figure 5c shows a generally linear log-log relation between Blos- and
Br-derived values. Similar to Ltot, the majority of data points (and therefore
the diﬀerence mean) lie above the unity diagonal – Beﬀ (Br) is typically greater
than Beﬀ (Blos), as a consequence of the Blos ﬁeld-strength underestimation. The
distribution of all points around the unity diagonal shows a spread of 2σ = 0.9,
almost a order of magnitude. The correlation weakens for 60 (cid:54) |φ| < 75◦ (blue
symbols) and practically disappears for |φ| (cid:62) 75◦ (red symbols), but these data
points still fall within the scatter for |φ| < 60◦ (black symbols). As shown in Fig-
ure 5d, Br yields values almost equal to or slightly larger than those from Blos for
|φ| < 30◦ (yellowish-green symbols) with a higher frequency of large diﬀerences
starting at |φ| (cid:62) 30◦. As explained for the Ltot case, the ﬂux threshold value
of 100 Mx cm−2 used for Beﬀ does not remove the eﬀects of vector-ﬁeld noise
spatio-temporal patterns and therefore the asymmetric increasing diﬀerence with
|φ| appears.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 16

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

Figure 5. As Figure 4, but for properties: (a)–(b) α, (c)–(d) Beﬀ ; (e)–(f) EIsing.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 17

J.A. Guerra et al.

Finally, Figures 5e and 5f present EIsing as showing similar behaviour to Beﬀ ;
a generally linear log-log relation with large scatter (2σ ≈ 1.15 orders of magni-
tude) and data points lying almost exclusively above the unity diagonal (positive
mean). In contrast to Beﬀ , there is a very wide range of values for EIsing (Br)
over the smallest values of EIsing (Blos), that correspond to the secondary (low-
frequency) peaks in Figure 3f. Values of EIsing (Blos) < 1.0 result from SHARPs
containing small ARs in the early stages of formation (i.e. a small number
of quite separated opposite-polarity pixels). Correspondingly larger values of
EIsing (Br) (observed at many longitudes) arise from the underestimation of
ﬁeld strength by Blos. Although Eising uses a pixel-consideration threshold of
100 Mx cm−2 – lower than the maximum noise level in Br – no longitudinal
variation and/or east-west asymmetry is observed likely due to contributions
from noisy pixels being few and small (opposite-polarity pixels separated by
large distances).

On one hand, the LOS component is known to be less noisy (≈ 5–10 G)
but it also presents issues related to the viewing angle obliqueness: not only a
ﬁeld strength decrease but also, in extreme cases, the presence of false MPILs
in complex sunspot ARs. The former issue is particularly clear in the behaviour
of α with the longitudinal distance. The eﬀect of false MPILs in MPIL-related
properties could be diﬃcult to observed since properties such as Ltot and R
sum the contributions of all (cid:63)MPIL segments and their contribution will be
small in comparison to the real MPILs present in NOAA-numbered regions.
On the other hand, the eﬀect of noise patterns seen in Br-calculated properties
can be alleviated by choosing a high enough ﬂux threshold or, alternatively,
by performing statistical corrective analysis such as in Falconer et al. (2016).
However, using Br data should result in more consistent property representation
with AR disk position.

No property in this study was observed to have signiﬁcant variation with the
HG latitudinal position. Although, the longitudinal variation of properties here
found might not apply to ARs located at higher latitudes than those included
in this study.

4.3. Property-property Correlations

In addition to exploring the behaviour between Blos- and Br-derived values of a
given property, it is worth investigating correlations between diﬀerent properties
for a given ﬁeld component. This is presented in Figure 6 in the form of scatter
plots for all pair-wise combinations of the six properties derived from Blos (panels
A1-15) and Br (panels B1-15). Data points are colour-coded in the same way as
those in the left-hand panels of Figures 4 and 5: |φ| < 60◦ (black); 60◦ (cid:54) |φ| <
75◦ (blue); |φ| (cid:62) 75◦ (red). For practical purposes, a random 25% of data points
from |φ| < 60◦ are provided in each plot. Property self-correlation panels (i.e.
on the diagonal) are omitted. Linear (Pearson) and nonlinear-rank (Spearman)
correlation coeﬃcients (CC) for each property pair are given in Tables 2 and 3
of Appendix A for Blos and Br data, respectively. Uncertainty estimates for CC
values are given in Figure 8.

Relationships between Blos-derived properties in Figure 6 (A panels) and
Table 2 span the full range of correlations from very weak to very strong. As

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 18

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

expected, properties related to the same features correlate well – e.g. correlations
between the MPIL-related property pairs Ltot-(L/hmin)max and Ltot-R are very
strong (|CC| (cid:62) 0.8) and that for the magnetic-connectivity pair Beﬀ -EIsing is
strong (0.6 (cid:54) |CC| < 0.8). However, good correlation is observed between pairs
of diﬀerent property types – e.g. Beﬀ and EIsing show at least strong correlation
(|CC| (cid:62) 0.6) with Ltot and R. This is due to the magnetic-connectivity prop-
erties scaling with the amount and proximity of opposite-polarity ﬂux; deﬁning
features of strong/long MPILs. CCs decrease with increasing |φ| for all property
pairs, while the fractality-related property α shows at most moderate correlation
(|CC| < 0.6) with all properties.

Comparative Br-derived property-property correlations are given in Figure 6
(B panels) and Table 3, with results generally similar to the Blos case. Diﬀerences
include most Br-derived CCs being lower than those from Blos (although less
clear in pairs with a magnetic-connectivity property) and the CC decrease with
increasing |φ| being smaller in magnitude than for Blos. The variation of linear
and nonlinear CCs from Blos to Br can be understood in terms of more consistent
property representation from Br. As shown in Section 4.2, using Br to calculate
properties results in the reduction of viewing-angle bias in Blos, such that CCs
between some viewing-angle sensitive and insensitive property pairs increase for
|φ| (cid:62) 75◦ with Br. This is expected for some property pairs as one property
inﬂuences the calculation of the other – e.g. Ltot-R, where MPIL location (and
hence length) is used to determine the spatial region within which ﬂux is inte-
grated into R. Without the common bias in Blos, CCs between property pairs
that are sensitive to viewing angle decrease for |φ| (cid:62) 75◦ with Br (e.g. R-Beﬀ ,
R-EIsing, and Beﬀ -EIsing).

From a total of 90 property-pair correlations (45 linear/45 nonlinear), 59
(29/30) decreased when Blos was replaced by Br in property calculations. Only
33 (13/20) of those correlations decreased by values larger than their associated
standard errors (see Figure 8 in Appendix for details). Such decreases in CC
indicate that these properties may have a greater degree of independence than
previously thought from Blos data. Although, only about 37% of the studied
properties showed signiﬁcant decrease.

4.4. Flaring Association

For the purposes of ﬂare forecasting it is necessary to know the relation between
the calculated properties and observed ﬂaring activity. As mentioned before,
most of these properties have been reported as having useful association with
occurrence of ﬂares/CMEs in the AR they represent. Attention is paid here
to the overall diﬀerences in ﬂaring rates associated with Blos- and Br-derived
properties. Figure 7 presents average ﬂaring rates observed in a 24-hr window
after the property observation time. In each panel, rates are displayed for ﬂares
of C-class and greater for Blos (light grey, top plot), Br (dark grey, bottom
plot), with error bars indicating Poisson uncertainties (i.e. N −1/2, where N is
the number of HARPs in a property-value bin). It is very important to note that
Blos- and Br-derived ﬂaring rates for the same property-value bin do not relate
to the same HARPs, due to the diﬀerences between Blos and Br property values
presented in the scatter-plots of Figures 4 and 5.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 19

J.A. Guerra et al.

Figure 6. Property-property plots for values calculated using Blos (A panels; below diagonal)
and Br (B panels; above diagonal). All panels in a given row share a common abscissa (left
for panels A, right for panels B), while all panels in a given column share a common ordinate
(bottom for panels A, top for panels B). In the Blos case, from top to bottom (and left to
right) properties are displayed in the order: Ltot; (L/hmin)max; log (R); α; Beﬀ ; EIsing. For
Br, properties order is reverse as for Blos. As in the left-hand panels of Figures 4 and 5, data
points are colour-coded to represent three longitude groups: |φ| < 60◦ (black); 60◦ (cid:54) |φ| < 75◦
(blue); |φ| (cid:62) 75◦ (red). In comparing the eﬀect of Blos/Br for same property pair, match the
same number in panels A and B.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 20

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

Figure 7. Average C-class and greater ﬂaring rates in the subsequent 24 hr, with error bars in-
dicating Poisson uncertainties (i.e. N −1/2, where N is number of SHARPs in a property-value
bin). In each panel, grey-scale shading displays the ﬂaring rates for properties calculated from
Blos (light grey) and from Br (dark grey), while regions of overlap are indicated in mid-grey.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 21

1.01.52.02.53.03.51.02.03.04.0Sum of MPIL's Lengths (a)Blos1.01.52.02.53.03.5log(Ltot)1.02.03.04.0Ave. 24-h Flare RateBr0.51.01.52.02.53.00.51.01.5Fourier Power Spectral Index (d)Blos0.51.01.52.02.53.0α0.51.01.5Ave. 24-h Flare RateBr2.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.5246Max. L over hmin ratio (b)Blos2.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.5log[(L/hmin)max]246Ave. 24-h Flare RateBr1.01.52.02.53.03.54.0246Effective connected Field (e)Blos1.01.52.02.53.03.54.0log[Beff]246Ave. 24-h Flare RateBr1.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5369Schijver's R (c)Blos1.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5log(R)369Ave. 24-h Flare RateBr1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.01234Ising Energy (f)Blos1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0log[EIsing]1234Ave. 24-h Flare RateBrJ.A. Guerra et al.

The general behaviour of most panels in Figure 7 (i.e. except panel d that
represents α) is that average ﬂaring rates increase with increasing property value.
This tendency is a good indicator that those properties might capture good sta-
tistical association of future ﬂaring activity levels in ARs. In addition, although
properties like R and Beﬀ span diﬀerent dynamic ranges between Br and Blos
values, Br distributions appear to show a diﬀerent (i.e. slower) rate in increase
in comparison to the Blos distributions. The diﬀerence between Br- and Blos-
associated ﬂaring rates is due to many of the HARPs being corrected upwards
into the higher-valued property bins. Distinctly diﬀerent behaviour is displayed
by α in Figure 7d, where restriction of values to α < 2.5 presented in Figures 3d
and 5a,b is again evident. Folding of Blos-derived values into the smaller Br
range yields a slight increase in most Br ﬂaring rates in that range, enhancing
the peak around α = 5/3 ≈ 1.67. However, the maximum rate achieved by α
is lower than all other properties by at least a factor of 2. This implies that
there is a much greater mixture of ﬂaring and non-ﬂaring populations in all α
property-value bins, indicating that, although better determine by Br, it is less
useful as ﬂare predictor than other properties here studied. In order to determine
the forecasting advantage of using Br data over Blos, proper forecasting and
veriﬁcation analysis must be performed, which lies beyond the scope of this
investigation.

5. Conclusions

This work presents a statistical study of diﬀerences in AR properties calculated
from diﬀerent components of the magnetic ﬁeld, focusing on six properties that
have been claimed to quantify AR potential to produce ﬂares/CMEs: total length
of strong MPILs, Ltot; maximum ratio of strong MPIL length to minimum height
of critical decay index, (L/hmin)max; Schrijver’s R value; Fourier spectral power
index, α; eﬀective connected magnetic ﬁeld strength, Beﬀ ; Ising energy, EIsing.
All six properties were calculated from SDO/HMI SHARP CEA NRT LOS (Blos)
and spherical-radial (Br) magnetograms, with the dependence on longitudinal
position, inter-property correlations, and associated ﬂaring rates studied.

Overall, property-value distributions calculated from Blos and Br are similar.
Diﬀerences in observed ranges indicate that Br typically yields marginally larger
values than Blos for all properties except (L/hmin)max (that shows a scatter of
values from Blos sometimes larger than those from Br) and α (that shows a
constraining of values from Br to < 2.5, compared to those from Blos spreading
out to 3.3). Properties such as Ltot, (L/hmin)max, and EIsing do not show a strong
dependence on longitudinal position, while log (R) (Br greater), α (Blos greater),
and Beﬀ (Br greater) display progressively increasing diﬀerences between Blos
and Br with increasing absolute longitude. Although Br data contains higher
levels of noise with complex spatio-temporal patterns, considering the diﬃculty
that the LOS component has in estimating the normal-to-surface ﬁeld at in-
creasing longitudinal distance from central meridian, and the systematic ﬁeld
strength underestimation, the results here presented support the conclusion that
Br-derived properties are a more consistent representation of AR properties.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 22

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

The properties considered here show a wide range of correlations, with linear
(Pearson) and nonlinear-rank (Spearman) correlation coeﬃcients similar in value
for all cases. All property-pair correlations become weaker with increasing longi-
tudinal distance from central meridian, with decreases for Blos more pronounced
than those for Br). While most property pairs show lower correlation levels
from Br than from Blos, only approximately a third of them show signiﬁcantly
lower values when compared to their associated errors. This implies that some
properties calculated from Br data may provide more independent information
about the physical state of the AR photospheric magnetic ﬁeld than the same
properties calculated from Blos.

Binned property-value 24-hr ﬂaring rates from Blos and Br diﬀer, due to each
SHARP resulting in diﬀerent values for a given property. However, the diﬀerences
in ﬂaring rate distributions between these two forms of magnetogram data are
consistent with the redistribution of properties to values that are typically larger
for Br than for Blos (except α, which is folded into a more constrained prop-
erty range). Notably, ﬂaring rates for most properties increase with increasing
property values, apart from α where they peak for values close to 5/3.

Although Br data seem to provide more consistent determination of AR
properties across the solar disk, there is an additional aspect of these data to
consider. While it appears that Br should be preferentially considered over Blos
for locations with signiﬁcant viewing-angle bias, the less noisy Blos data may be
more suitable towards disk centre. However, to determine the real utility of Br
data for ﬂare forecasting, AR properties calculated from both ﬁeld components
should be compared using a variety of forecast methods (e.g. discriminant anal-
ysis, machine learning, etc.) Deﬁnitive statements on the forecasting advantage
of using Br-derived properties over those from Blos can only then be made after
forecast veriﬁcation.

Acknowledgments This research was funded by the European Union Horizon 2020 research

and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 640216 (FLARECAST). SHARP data

were provided courtesy of NASA/SDO and the HMI science team, and hosted for FLARECAST

(http://ﬂarecast.eu) by the MEDOC data and operations centre (http://medoc.ias.u-psud.fr;

CNES/CNRS/Univ. Paris-Sud). We thank the anonymous referee for their comments; they

certainly helped improving the manuscript.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest

The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.

References

Abramenko, V.I.: 2005, Relationship between Magnetic Power Spectrum and Flare Productiv-

ity in Solar Active Regions. ApJ 629, 1141. DOI. ADS.

Ahmed, O., Qahwaji, R., Colak, T., Dudok De Wit, T., Ipson, S.: 2010, A new technique for
the calculation and 3D visualisation of magnetic complexities on solar satellite images. The
Visual Computer 26, 385. DOI. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00371-010-0418-1.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 23

J.A. Guerra et al.

Al-Ghraibah, A., Boucheron, L.E., McAteer, R.T.J.: 2015, An automated classiﬁcation ap-
proach to ranking photospheric proxies of magnetic energy build-up. Astron. Astrophys.
579, A64. DOI. ADS.

Alissandrakis, C.E.: 1981, On the computation of constant alpha force-free magnetic ﬁeld.

Astron. Astrophys. 100, 197. ADS.

Aschwanden, M.J., Caspi, A., Cohen, C.M.S., Holman, G., Jing, J., Kretzschmar, M., Kon-
tar, E.P., McTiernan, J.M., Mewaldt, R.A., O’Flannagain, A., Richardson, I.G., Ryan, D.,
Warren, H.P., Xu, Y.: 2017, Global Energetics of Solar Flares. V. Energy Closure in Flares
and Coronal Mass Ejections. Astrophys. J. 836, 17. DOI. ADS.

Barnes, G., Leka, K.D.: 2006, Photospheric Magnetic Field Properties of Flaring versus Flare-
quiet Active Regions. III. Magnetic Charge Topology Models. Astrophys. J. 646, 1303.
DOI. ADS.

Barnes, G., Leka, K.D.: 2008, Evaluating the Performance of Solar Flare Forecasting Methods.

Astrophys. J. Lett. 688, L107. DOI. ADS.

Barnes, G., Longcope, D.W., Leka, K.D.: 2005, Implementing a Magnetic Charge Topology

Model for Solar Active Regions. Astrophys. J. 629, 561. DOI. ADS.

Bobra, M.G., Sun, X., Hoeksema, J.T., Turmon, M., Liu, Y., Hayashi, K., Barnes, G., Leka,
K.D.: 2014, The Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) Vector Magnetic Field Pipeline:
SHARPs - Space-Weather HMI Active Region Patches. Solar Phys. 289, 3549. DOI. ADS.
Bokenkamp, N.: 2007, Statistical relationships between solar active region photospheric

magnetic properties and ﬂare events. PhD thesis, Stanford University.

Conlon, P.A., Gallagher, P.T., McAteer, R.T.J., Ireland, J., Young, C.A., Kestener, P., Hewett,
R.J., Maguire, K.: 2008, Multifractal Properties of Evolving Active Regions. Solar Phys.
248, 297. DOI. ADS.

Conlon, P.A., McAteer, R.T.J., Gallagher, P.T., Fennell, L.: 2010, Quantifying the Evolving

Magnetic Structure of Active Regions. Astrophys. J. 722, 577. DOI. ADS.

Domingo, V., Fleck, B., Poland, A.I.: 1995, The SOHO Mission: an Overview. Solar Phys.

162, 1. DOI. ADS.

Ermolli, I., Giorgi, F., Romano, P., Zuccarello, F., Criscuoli, S., Stangalini, M.: 2014, Fractal
and Multifractal Properties of Active Regions as Flare Precursors: A Case Study Based on
SOHO/MDI and SDO/HMI Observations. Solar Phys. 289, 2525. DOI. ADS.

Falconer, D.A., Moore, R.L., Gary, G.A.: 2003, A measure from line-of-sight magnetograms
for prediction of coronal mass ejections. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics)
108, 1380. DOI. ADS.

Falconer, D.A., Moore, R.L., Barghouty, A.F., Khazanov, I.: 2012, Prior Flaring as a Com-
plement to Free Magnetic Energy for Forecasting Solar Eruptions. Astrophys. J. 757, 32.
DOI. ADS.

Falconer, D.A., Tiwari, S.K., Moore, R.L., Khazanov, I.: 2016, A New Method to Quantify and
Reduce the net Projection Error in Whole-solar-active-region Parameters Measured from
Vector Magnetograms. Astrophys. J. Lett. 833, L31. DOI. ADS.

Fan, Y., Gibson, S.E.: 2007, Onset of Coronal Mass Ejections Due to Loss of Conﬁnement of

Coronal Flux Ropes. Astrophys. J. 668, 1232. DOI. ADS.

Georgoulis, M.: 2013, Toward an eﬃcient prediction of solar ﬂares: Which parameters, and

how? Entropy 15(11), 5022. DOI. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/e15115022.

Georgoulis, M.K.: 2010, Pre-eruption magnetic conﬁgurations in the active-region solar

photosphere. 6(S273), 495. DOI.

Georgoulis, M.K., Rust, D.M.: 2007, Quantitative Forecasting of Major Solar Flares. Astro-

phys. J. Lett. 661, L109. DOI. ADS.

Guerra, J.A., Pulkkinen, A., Uritsky, V.M., Yashiro, S.: 2015, Spatio-Temporal Scaling of
Turbulent Photospheric Line-of-Sight Magnetic Field in Active Region NOAA 11158. Sol.
Phys. 290, 335. DOI. ADS.

Hewett, R.J., Gallagher, P.T., McAteer, R.T.J., Young, C.A., Ireland, J., Conlon, P.A.,
Maguire, K.: 2008, Multiscale Analysis of Active Region Evolution. Solar Phys. 248, 311.
DOI. ADS.

Hoeksema, J.T., Liu, Y., Hayashi, K., Sun, X., Schou, J., Couvidat, S., Norton, A., Bobra, M.,
Centeno, R., Leka, K.D., Barnes, G., Turmon, M.: 2014, The Helioseismic and Magnetic
Imager (HMI) Vector Magnetic Field Pipeline: Overview and Performance. Solar Phys.
289, 3483. DOI. ADS.

Kliem, B., T¨or¨ok, T.: 2006, Torus Instability. Physical Review Letters 96(25), 255002. DOI.

ADS.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 24

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

Kolmogorov, A.: 1941, The Local Structure of Turbulence in Incompressible Viscous Fluid for

Very Large Reynolds’ Numbers. Doklady Akad. Nauk. SSSR 30, 301. ADS.

Leka, K.D., Barnes, G.: 2007, Photospheric Magnetic Field Properties of Flaring versus Flare-
quiet Active Regions. IV. A Statistically Signiﬁcant Sample. Astrophys. J. 656, 1173. DOI.
ADS.

Leka, K.D., Barnes, G., Wagner, E.L.: 2017, Evaluating (and Improving) Estimates of the Solar
Radial Magnetic Field Component from Line-of-Sight Magnetograms. Solar Phys. 292, 36.
DOI. ADS.

Liu, Y.: 2008a, A Study of Surges: II. On the Relationship between Chromospheric Surges and

Coronal Mass Ejections. Solar Phys. 249, 75. DOI. ADS.

Liu, Y.: 2008b, Magnetic Field Overlying Solar Eruption Regions and Kink and Torus

Instabilities. Astrophys. J. Lett. 679, L151. DOI. ADS.

Mason, J.P., Hoeksema, J.T.: 2010, Testing Automated Solar Flare Forecasting with 13 Years

of Michelson Doppler Imager Magnetograms. Astrophys. J. 723, 634. DOI. ADS.

McAteer, R.T.J., Gallagher, P.T., Ireland, J.: 2005, Statistics of Active Region Complexity: A

Large-Scale Fractal Dimension Survey. Astrophys. J. 631, 628. DOI. ADS.

Pesnell, W.D., Thompson, B.J., Chamberlin, P.C.: 2012, The Solar Dynamics Observatory

(SDO). Solar Phys. 275, 3. DOI. ADS.

Scherrer, P.H., Bogart, R.S., Bush, R.I., Hoeksema, J.T., Kosovichev, A.G., Schou, J., et al.:
1995, The Solar Oscillations Investigation - Michelson Doppler Imager. Solar Phys. 162,
129. DOI. ADS.

Scherrer, P.H., Schou, J., Bush, R.I., Kosovichev, A.G., Bogart, R.S., Hoeksema, J.T., et al.:
2012, The helioseismic and magnetic imager (hmi) investigation for the solar dynamics ob-
servatory (sdo). Solar Phys. 275, 207. DOI. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11207-011-9834-2.
Schrijver, C.J.: 2007, A Characteristic Magnetic Field Pattern Associated with All Major Solar

Flares and Its Use in Flare Forecasting. ApJL 655, L117. DOI. ADS.

Thompson, W.T.: 2006, Coordinate systems for solar image data. Astron. Astrophys. 449,

791. DOI. ADS.

T¨or¨ok, T., Kliem, B.: 2005, Conﬁned and Ejective Eruptions of Kink-unstable Flux Ropes.

Astrophys. J. Lett. 630, L97. DOI. ADS.

Zuccarello, F.P., Aulanier, G., Gilchrist, S.A.: 2015, Critical Decay Index at the Onset of Solar

Eruptions. Astrophys. J. 814, 126. DOI. ADS.

Zuccarello, F.P., Seaton, D.B., Mierla, M., Poedts, S., Rachmeler, L.A., Romano, P., Zuccarello,
F.: 2014, Observational Evidence of Torus Instability as Trigger Mechanism for Coronal
Mass Ejections: The 2011 August 4 Filament Eruption. Astrophys. J. 785, 88. DOI. ADS.

Appendix

A. Correlation Coeﬃcients

Tables 2 and 3 each contain values of linear (Pearson) and nonlinear-rank (Spear-
man) correlation coeﬃcients (CC) for all AR property-pair combinations for
Blos and Br, respectively. Coeﬃcients are calculated separately for the three
groups of SHARP longitudes with data points colour-coded in Figures 6 and 6:
|φ| < 60◦ (black); 60 (cid:54) |φ| < 75◦ (blue); |φ| (cid:62) 75◦ (red). Figure 8 presents the
errors for correlation coeﬃcients contained in Tables 2 and 3. In both panels,
plots of standard error versus CC value for linear (ﬁlled circles) and non-linear
(open circles) correlations in all three longitudinal-position groups (same colour
code applies). Left panel correspond to Blos-calculated properties and right panel
corresponds to Br-calculated properties. Standard error for a (linear/non-linear)
correlation coeﬃcient is estimated as

SEr =

(cid:114) 1 − r2
n − 2

;

(5)

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 25

where r can be Pearson or Spearman CC, and n is the number of points used in
their calculations. Dotted lines in Figure 8 plots mark ranges for expressing the
standard errors in percentage of the CC value.

J.A. Guerra et al.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 26

Table 2. Linear (Pearson) and nonlinear-rank (Spearman) correlation coeﬃcients for Blos-derived properties.

HG
longitude
[◦]

Ordinate
property

log

|φ| < 60 . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

log

. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .

60 (cid:54) |φ| < 75

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

log

. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .

|φ| (cid:62) 75 . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

log

. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .

log (Ltot)
(cid:17)
(cid:104)(cid:16) L

(cid:105)

max

hmin
log (R)
α
log (Beﬀ )

log (Ltot)
(cid:17)
(cid:104)(cid:16) L

(cid:105)

max

hmin
log (R)
α
log (Beﬀ )

log (Ltot)
(cid:104)(cid:16) L
(cid:17)

(cid:105)

max

hmin
log (R)
α
log (Beﬀ )

S
O
L
A
:

m
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t
.
t
e
x
;

1

M
a
r
c
h

2
0
2
2
;

2
1
:
1
6
;

p
.

2
7

(cid:104)(cid:16) L

(cid:17)

(cid:105)

hmin

max

Linear correlation coeﬃcient

log (R)

α

log (Beﬀ ) log (cid:0)EIsing

(cid:1) log

Nonlinear-rank correlation coeﬃcient
(cid:17)

(cid:105)

log (R)

α

log (Beﬀ ) log (cid:0)EIsing

(cid:104)(cid:16) L

hmin

max

Abscissa property

0.809

0.864

0.475

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.651

0.527

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.396
. . .
. . .

0.513

0.608

0.185

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.312

0.412

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.241
. . .
. . .

0.217

0.236 −0.262

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.002 −0.039

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.424
. . .
. . .

0.716

0.545

0.778
0.401
. . .

0.536

0.476

0.777
0.592
. . .

0.102

0.048

0.663
0.384
. . .

0.775

0.524

0.827
0.304
0.851

0.767

0.495

0.797
0.344
0.776

0.450

0.188

0.446
−0.197
0.431

0.780

0.879

0.519

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.635

0.556

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.417
. . .
. . .

0.425

0.622

0.134

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.347

0.369

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.226
. . .
. . .

0.289

0.273 −0.227

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.002 −0.025

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.417
. . .
. . .

0.760

0.568

0.823
0.440
. . .

0.507

0.424

0.809
0.546
. . .

0.139

0.078

0.706
0.382
. . .

0.822

0.546

0.851
0.358
0.861

0.809

0.471

0.799
0.274
0.739

0.560

0.199

0.463
−0.249
0.458

(cid:1)

A
c
t
i
v
e
R
e
g
i
o
n
P
r
o
p
e
r
t
i
e
s

f
r
o
m
L
O
S
-
/
R
a
d
i
a
l
-

m
a
g
n
e
t
o
g
r
a
m

s

Table 3. Linear (Pearson) and nonlinear-rank (Spearman) correlation coeﬃcients for Br-derived properties.

HG
longitude
[◦]

Ordinate
property

log

|φ| < 60 . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

log

. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .

60 (cid:54) |φ| < 75

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

log

. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .

|φ| (cid:62) 75 . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

log

. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .

log (Ltot)
(cid:17)
(cid:104)(cid:16) L

(cid:105)

max

hmin
log (R)
α
log (Beﬀ )

log (Ltot)
(cid:17)
(cid:104)(cid:16) L

(cid:105)

max

hmin
log (R)
α
log (Beﬀ )

log (Ltot)
(cid:104)(cid:16) L
(cid:17)

(cid:105)

max

hmin
log (R)
α
log (Beﬀ )

S
O
L
A
:

m
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t
.
t
e
x
;

1

M
a
r
c
h

2
0
2
2
;

2
1
:
1
6
;

p
.

2
8

(cid:104)(cid:16) L

(cid:17)

(cid:105)

hmin

max

Linear correlation coeﬃcient

log (R)

α

log (Beﬀ ) log (cid:0)EIsing

(cid:1) log

Nonlinear-rank correlation coeﬃcient
(cid:17)

(cid:105)

log (R)

α

log (Beﬀ ) log (cid:0)EIsing

(cid:104)(cid:16) L

hmin

max

Abscissa property

0.724

0.795

0.442

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.480

0.410

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.369
. . .
. . .

0.230

0.594 −0.008

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.283

0.270

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.329
. . .
. . .

0.268

0.516

0.140

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.418

0.202

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.342
. . .
. . .

0.778

0.567

0.755
0.412
. . .

0.676

0.390

0.722
0.136
. . .

0.467

0.250

0.628
0.146
. . .

0.760

0.485

0.616
0.386
0.792

0.633

0.229

0.436
−0.097
0.533

0.910

0.296

0.309
0.095
0.392

0.700

0.809

0.458

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.464

0.415

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.374
. . .
. . .

0.193

0.588 −0.095

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.244

0.253

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.326
. . .
. . .

0.246

0.548

0.200

. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.413

0.207

. . .
. . .
. . .

0.379
. . .
. . .

0.826

0.583

0.779
0.444
. . .

0.683

0.328

0.725
0.132
. . .

0.502

0.337

0.684
0.153
. . .

0.803

0.483

0.661
0.373
0.809

0.677

0.243

0.470
−0.103
0.564

0.928

0.297

0.285
0.096
0.285

(cid:1)

J
.
A

.

G
u
e
r
r
a

e
t

a
l
.

Active Region Properties from LOS-/Radial-magnetograms

Figure 8. Error analysis for correlation coeﬃcients displayed in Tables 2 and 3. Left and right
panels corresponds to property-pair (linear and nonlinear) correlations calculated from Blos
and Br, correspondingly. Color code corresponds to the same used in Figure 6.

SOLA: manuscript.tex; 1 March 2022; 21:16; p. 29

