Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. Deep˙spec˙Sun
December 20, 2017

ESO 2017

c
(cid:13)

PEPSI deep spectra⋆
I. The Sun-as-a-star

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen

Leibniz-Institute for Astrophysics Potsdam (AIP), An der Sternwarte 16, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany;
e-mail: kstrassmeier@aip.de, e-mail: ilyin@aip.de, e-mail: msteffen@aip.de

Received ... ; accepted ...

ABSTRACT

Context. Full-disk solar ﬂux spectra can be directly compared to stellar spectra and thereby serve as our most important reference
source for, for example stellar chemical abundances, magnetic activity phenomena, radial-velocity signatures or global pulsations.
Aims. As part of the ﬁrst Potsdam Echelle Polarimetric and Spectroscopic Instrument (PEPSI) key-science project, we aim to provide
well-exposed and average-combined (viz. deep) high-resolution spectra of representative stellar targets. Such deep spectra contain an
overwhelming amount of information, typically much more than what could be analyzed and discussed within a single publication.
Therefore, these spectra will be made available in form of (electronic) atlases. The ﬁrst star in this series of papers is our Sun. It also
acts as a system-performance cornerstone.
Methods. The Sun was monitored with PEPSI at the Large Binocular Telescope (LBT). Instead of the LBT we used a small robotic
solar disk integration (SDI) telescope. The deep spectra in this paper are the results of combining up to
100 consecutive exposures
per wavelength setting and are compared with other solar ﬂux atlases.
Results. Our software for the optimal data extraction and reduction of PEPSI spectra is described and veriﬁed with the solar data.
Three deep solar ﬂux spectra with a spectral resolution of up to 270,000, a continuous wavelength coverage from 383 nm to 914 nm,
and a photon signal to noise ratio (S/N) of between 2,000-8,000:1 depending on wavelength are presented. Additionally, a time-series
of 996 high-cadence spectra in one cross disperser is used to search for intrinsic solar modulations. The wavelength calibration based
1 (rms) with respect
on Th-Ar exposures and simultaneous Fabry-P´erot combs enables an absolute wavelength solution within 10 m s−
1 for one day. For science demonstration, we redetermined the
to the HARPS laser-comb solar atlas and a relative rms of 1.2 m s−
disk-average solar Li abundance to 1.09
0.04 dex on the basis of 3D NLTE model atmospheres. We detected disk-averaged p-mode
RV oscillations with a full amplitude of 47 cm s−
Conclusions. Comparisons with two solar FTS atlases, as well as with the HARPS solar atlas, validate the PEPSI data product. Now,
PEPSI/SDI solar-ﬂux spectra are being taken with a sampling of one deep spectrum per day, and are supposed to continue a full
magnetic cycle of the Sun.

1 at 5.5 min.

≈

±

Key words. Sun: photosphere – atlases – methods: observational – techniques: spectroscopic

1. Introduction

Cool stars similar to the Sun exhibit such a rich amount of spec-
tral lines that high spectral resolution is mandatory to see their
subtle details and arrive at a correct interpretation. A good exam-
ple is the problem of the solar lithium abundance (e.g., Brault &
M¨uller 1975), which must be derived from a spectral line of only
a few mÅ of equivalent width. Its value is particularly important
because of its reference for stellar nucleosynthesis and evolution
models. Compared to the meteoritic Li abundance of 3.28
0.05
(Lodders 2003), lithium is depleted by a factor 150 in the solar
photosphere. This amount of depletion cannot be explained by

±

⋆ Based on data acquired with PEPSI fed by the solar disk in-
tegration (SDI) telescope operated by AIP at the Large Binocular
Telescope Observatory (LBTO). The LBT is an international collab-
oration among institutions in the United States, Italy and Germany.
LBT Corporation partners are: The University of Arizona on behalf of
the Arizona Board of Regents; Istituto Nazionale di Astroﬁsica, Italy;
LBT Beteiligungsgesellschaft, Germany, representing the Max-Planck
Society, The Leibniz Institute for Astrophysics Potsdam (AIP), and
Heidelberg University; The Ohio State University, and The Research
Corporation, on behalf of The University of Notre Dame, University of
Minnesota and University of Virginia.

standard solar evolution models but requires additional mixing
beyond the base of the convection zone.

Besides the Li problem, a multitude of other science cases
has led in the past to the creation of high-ﬁdelity solar spectral
atlases either disk centered or disk averaged. Among the ﬁrst was
the Utrecht atlas by Minnaert et al. (1940) and several followed,
most notably the Sacramento Peak atlas (Beckers et al. 1976),
the Li`ege atlas (Delbouille et al. 1973) and the Hamburg atlas
(Neckel & Labs 1984) (see the recent comparison of the latter
two by Doerr et al. 2016). Subsequent solar atlases were also
used to identify blended transitions in stellar spectra that other-
wise do not reach comparable spectral resolutions. Also, the Sun
is a long-period variable with a cyclic changing “solar constant”
(c.f. Fr¨ohlich 2013). Monitoring it on a synoptic basis proved
extremely valuable (Livingston et al. 2007). Among Livingston
et al.’s ﬁndings was that not only Ca ii H&K traced the magnetic
cycle of the Sun but that even the cores of high photosphere lines
likely vary with the 22-yr Hale cycle. The latter has yet to be
veriﬁed and understood. With PEPSI and its solar feed we are
now able to observe the Sun on a daily basis and thus may ver-
ify Livingston et al.’s claim. In any case, solar feeds for modern
high-precision (night-time) spectrographs became more valued
in the past due to the ever increasing importance of the solar-

1

7
1
0
2
c
e
D
9
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
0
6
9
6
0
.
2
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

stellar connection in the exoplanet era (e.g., Pevtsov et al. 2014,
Hall & Lockwood 1995, Lanza et al. 2016). In addition, solar
data allow a comparison of properties of disk-resolved images
with disk-integrated spectra, which is useful for the interpreta-
tion of stellar Doppler images (Strassmeier 2009).

The ﬁrst modern solar ﬂux atlases were probably those of
Kurucz et al. (1984) and Brault & Neckel (1987), obtained with
the McMath-Pierce telescope of the National Solar Observatory
(NSO) at Kitt Peak and NSO’s Fourier Transform Spectrograph
(FTS). These were succeeded by the atlases of Wallace et al.
(2007) for the disk center and Wallace et al. (2011) for the inte-
grated disk, obtained with the same telescope and FTS but cor-
rected for telluric features and with an empirical Doppler cor-
rection. Both atlases reached a resolution between 350,000 and
700,000 depending on wavelength. Extensions to the infrared
(0.7 to 22 µm) were added in separate volumes (e.g., Wallace
et al. 1996). Later, Kurucz (2005) reprocessed the old 1980-81
data and incorporated a synthetic telluric spectrum to model the
telluric contamination. More recently, Reiners et al. (2016) intro-
duced a new FTS solar ﬂux atlas obtained with a small telescope
and a Bruker FTS at the Institute for Astrophysics in G¨ottingen
(IAG) for the wavelength range 405–2300 nm. From a compar-
ison with the Wallace et al. Kitt Peak NSO atlases the authors
arrived at a wavelength calibration for the IAG atlas accurate to
1 for the 405–1065 nm region, while the Kitt Peak at-

±
lases showed deviations between several ten to 100 m s−

10 m s−

1.

For stars, radial velocity (RV) stability became center stage
after the ﬁrst extra-solar planets were discovered in the nineties
and a very accurate wavelength calibration became a necessity.
The spearhead instrument in this respect was ESO’s HARPS
spectrograph (Pepe et al. 2000) which is now equipped, like
its northern-hemisphere counterpart on La Palma (HARPS-N;
Cosentino et al. 2012), with a ﬁbre-based laser frequency comb
for wavelength calibration. Laser-comb calibrated solar spec-
troscopy was investigated previously by Probst et al. (2015).
Solar-ﬂux spectra were obtained with both HARPS instruments
and an R
115,000 comb-calibrated atlas for two wavelength
ranges between 476 and 585 nm was presented by Molaro et
al. (2013). Only in this work it was realized that there is a
wavelength distortion in every HARPS ´echelle order of up to
1 caused by the stitching of CCD sections. Sun-as-a-star
±
observations with HARPS-N by Dumusque et al. (2015) led to
1 after correcting for
a time series with residual RVs of 60 cm s−
sunspot and plage perturbations (see also Haywood et al. 2016,
Molaro & Munai 2012 and Molaro et al. 2016 for asteroid-based
solar-RV observations). While the RV stability of HARPS re-
mained unaﬀected, it nevertheless proved how important it is to
use the Sun for a detailed spectrograph characterization.

40 m s−

≈

We have just put into operation the optical high-resolution
´echelle spectrograph PEPSI (Strassmeier et al. 2015) at the eﬀec-
tive 11.8 m Large Binocular Telescope (LBT; Hill et al. 2012).
PEPSI provides a nominal spectral resolution of up to 270,000
for the wavelength range 383–907 nm and can alternatively be
(ﬁbre) fed by the nearby 1.8 m Vatican Advanced Technology
Telescope (VATT) of the Vatican Observatory or by a 13 mm
Solar Disk Integration (SDI) telescope. We emphasize that the
VATT and the SDI feed starlight or Sunlight in exactly the same
way to the spectrograph as during nominal LBT use which al-
lows for a straightforward comparison of solar and stellar spec-
tra. PEPSI and SDI take at least one, typically three, “deep” solar
spectra on a daily basis. The aim is to cover the full optical spec-
trum several times a day for the entirety of the solar magnetic ac-
tivity cycle, continuing the program of Livingston et al. (2007)
but with extended spectral coverage and enhanced cadence. A

2

similar attempt is already ongoing at NSO with its SOLIS/ISS
project (Pevtsov et al. 2014) in a number of selected wavelength
regions but with an instrument not applicable to night-time stel-
lar observations. SOLIS’s integrated sunlight spectrometer (ISS)
is a double-pass spectrograph that produces daily high-quality
spectra for Sun-as-a-star studies in eight typically 1-nm wide
wavelength windows (Keller et al. 2003).

In the current paper, we present ﬁrst PEPSI spectra of the Sun
observed as a star. These initial data were taken during October
and November 2016 while still in commissioning. Deep spec-
tra of the Gaia benchmark stars and other M-K standards will
be presented in paper II (Strassmeier et al. 2017) and a chemi-
cal analysis of the ancient planet-system host star Kepler-444 is
presented in paper III (Mack et al. 2018). Section 2 describes the
observations and the spectrograph while Sect. 3 gives details of
the data extraction and reduction. In Section 4, we compare our
spectra with other solar-ﬂux spectra and describe its character-
istics in terms of S/N, resolution, wavelength scale and various
blemishes. Section 5 presents our detection of the solar 5-min
oscillation and an attempt to redetermine the solar Li abundance
from deep spectra with the most up-to-date non-LTE 3D model
atmospheres and line blending. Section 6 is a summary.

2. Observations

Solar ﬂux spectra were obtained with the Potsdam Echelle
Polarimetric and Spectroscopic Instrument (Strassmeier et al.
2015) and the 13 mm diameter SDI telescope. PEPSI is an asym-
metric ﬁber-fed white-pupil ´echelle spectrograph with two arms
(blue and red optimized) covering the wavelength range 383–
914 nm with six diﬀerent cross dispersers (CD). In this paper the
wavelength coverage was slightly extended on both wavelength
edges by extracting an extra half of an ´echelle order. The instru-
ment is stabilized in a pressure and thermally controlled chamber
and is fed by three pairs of octagonal ﬁbres per telescope. The
diﬀerent core diameters of the ﬁbres and their respective image
slicers set the three diﬀerent nominal resolutions of the spectro-
graph (43,000, 120,000 and 250,000). The 250,000-mode is used
for the spectra in this paper and is made possible with a 7-slice
image slicer and a 100-µm ﬁbre core through a projected sky
aperture of 0.74′′, comparable to the median seeing of the LBT
site. Its resolution element is sampled with two pixels. All ob-
servations in this paper were made with the version-2 waveguide
10.3k
image slicer described in Beckert et al. (2008). Two 10.3k
STA1600LN (Bredthauer et al. 2012) CCDs with 9-µm pixels
record a total of 92 ´echelle orders in the six wavelength settings.
The average dispersion is 7 mÅ/pix.

×

The SDI telescope is mounted on the kitchen balcony of the
LBT-Observatory and consists of an eﬀective 13 mm diameter
reﬂecting telescope, with a f = 100 mm oﬀ-axis-parabola il-
luminating an integration sphere. The integration sphere feeds
light into a pair of ﬁbres, just like for the LBT. The SDI tele-
scope itself is fully robotic. It acquires the Sun shortly after sun-
rise and guides on it all day long until sunset. Daily monitoring
of the Sun in the full wavelength range of PEPSI is SDI’s default
science operation. During November 15-17, 2016, daily consec-
utive exposures were taken with integration times of 15 s, 5 s,
3 s, 2 s, 2 s, and 1.5 s for the six wavelength settings from blue to
red, respectively.

The cadence is driven by the CCD overhead rather than the
exposure time; 55 s CCD readout, 9 s transfer and disk writing,
4 s CCD cleaning and 2 s other overhead, in total 70 s. Then, the
entire cycle with all wavelength settings is repeated 3–4 times
depending on weather conditions. Individual exposures reach

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

Fig. 1. Representative PEPSI solar spectrum taken with the SDI telescope (x-axis is wavelength in Angstroems, y-axis is relative
intensity). Each spectrum covers the wavelength range 382.2–914.6 nm without gaps with a sampling of 430,000 pixels at an average
dispersion of 12 mÅ/pix. The diﬀerent colors indicate the wavelength regions covered by the six cross dispersers.

Table 1. Summary of PEPSI deep solar spectra.

Day (UT)

I/404d

II/450

III/508

IV/584

V/685

VI/825

R = λ/∆λa
S/Nb single spectrum
Exp. time single spectrum (s)

220,000
330
15

230,000
350
5

240,000
370
3

250,000
620
2

240,000
960
2

240,000
590
1.5

N single spectrac

Nov. 15, 2016
Nov. 16, 2016
Nov. 17, 2016

S/N deep spectra

Nov. 15, 2016
Nov. 16, 2016
Nov. 17, 2016

N for time series

Oct. 14, 2016
Oct. 15, 2016
Oct. 16, 2016

28
40
100

40
52
100

40
60
112

40
53
100

40
60
112

29
41
100

1050
1250
2000

2050
2350
3300

2850
3450
4700

3950
4550
6250

5150
6350
8600

3500
4150
6500

. . .
. . .
. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

263
386
347

. . .
. . .
. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

Notes. aMedian resolution at mid of ´echelle order. bS/N per pixel in the continuum at the mid wavelength of each cross disperser. cNumber N of
individual spectra observed with PEPSI. dI/404 (e.g.,) means CD I with center wavelength 404 nm. The time series Oct. 14-16, 2016 was taken
only in CD III.

signal-to-noise ratios (S/N) between 50:1 in the cores of the Ca ii
H&K lines in 15 s and about 850:1 for continuum regions near
700 nm in 1.5 s. One full deep spectrum consists of a total of be-
tween 28-112 individual exposures per CD and peaks at a formal
S/N of 8,600:1. We thus record up to
600 solar exposures per
day. During October 14-16, 2016, a time series of 996 consecu-
tive spectra was taken in CD III. Its log is given in Table 1. The
upper part of Table 1 is the observing log for the deep spectra
from November, while the lower part is the log of the time-series
data from October.

≈

The six wavelength settings are deﬁned by the six cross dis-
persers, CD I to VI, three per arm and two always simultane-
ously. Thus, it takes three exposures to cover the entire wave-
length range as shown in Fig. 1. Due to the binocular nature of
the LBT (and the SDI), each of the two CCDs record two target
exposures for every ´echelle order simultaneously, one from each
of the binocular telescopes (called SX and DX). Additionally,
these two target spectra are ﬂanked by one “sky” ﬁbre each. The
time-series SDI observations in October 2016 used both avail-
able sky ﬁbres for simultaneous recording of the light from a sta-
bilized Fabry-P´erot etalon (FPE). These exposures consist thus

of four spectra per ´echelle order in the spatial sequence FPE-
target-target-FPE, that is, wavelength calibration is recorded on
the same exposure and spatially adjacent to the target spectra.
Thousands of ﬂat ﬁeld exposures from a halogen lamp and bias
readouts were recorded throughout the observing program and
are used to create the super-master ﬂat (same lamp for all four
simultaneous spectra).

Reduced FITS ﬁles of the three deep solar spectra in Table 1
are made available just like a solar atlas and are deposited for
download (see Sect. 6). The time-series data are also available
but on individual demand. The FITS headers contain all neces-
sary meta data. All spectra are shifted to solar barycentric veloc-
ity based on the KPNO Th-Ar wavelengths.

3. Details of the CCD data reduction

The Spectroscopic Data Systems for PEPSI (SDS4PEPSI) is a
generic package in C++ under Linux based on a numerical tem-
plate library and graphical toolkits. It is implemented as the con-
trol system for various distributed units of the PEPSI spectro-
graph and is also used for comprehensive ´echelle image process-

3

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

Fig. 2. Wavelength region around the solar C i line at 5380.3 Å. Dots indicate one of the PEPSI deep spectra and the dark blue and
bright red line is the IAG FTS atlas from Reiners et al. (2016) and the HARPS spectrum from Molaro et al. (2013), respectively.
The zoom shows the Fe i 5379.6-Å line. The FTS atlas has a spectral resolution of

670,000, the HARPS spectrum 115,000.

≈

ing, reduction, and analysis of the resulting spectra. As such, it is
based on the 4A package for the NOT spectrograph SoFin (Ilyin
2000). We apply SDS4PEPSI the same way for regular stellar
spectra or for the present solar spectra. The incorporated image
processing and reduction toolkit relies on adaptive selection of
parameters by using statistical inference and robust estimators.
The standard components include bias overscan detection and
subtraction, scattered light surface extraction and subtraction,
deﬁnition of ´echelle orders, weighted extraction of spectral or-
ders, wavelength calibration, and a self-consistent continuum ﬁt
to the full 2D image of extracted orders. The ﬁnal data product
is shown in Fig. 2 for a 6-Å wavelength excerpt of a deep solar
spectrum around the carbon C i line at 5380.3 Å. Also shown in
this ﬁgure is a comparison with the IAG FTS and the HARPS
atlases. The line depths due to the three diﬀerent spectral resolu-
tions are highlighted.

3.1. CCD biascorrection

The CCD overscan in both directions is used for the bias level
curves. The curves are smoothed with an appropriate spline
function before subtracting. During the subtraction, the original
FITS image is transformed from the original integer format to a
ﬂoating-point image.

3.2. Photon-noise estimation

Once the bias is correctly removed, the photon noise is estimated
for each CCD pixel and stored in the variance plane of the FITS
image. The ﬁnal variance of the reduced spectra deﬁnes the re-
sulting S/N value for each wavelength pixel and results from the
error propagation introduced at each step of the data-reduction
process. The variance of pixel intensities is estimated according
to the known read-out noise and the CCD gain factor.

The STA1600 CCD gain calibration is done for each of its
16 ampliﬁers by using the ratio of two de-focused images of
master ﬂat ﬁelds repeated at diﬀerent illumination levels. The

conversion factor is the intercept of the ﬁt line to the gain fac-
tor as a function of ADUs. The variance for each pixel is esti-
mated according to the linear ﬁt. Instrumental details are given
in Strassmeier et al. (2015).

3.3. Flat-ﬁeld correction

The ﬂat-ﬁeld correction removes the ﬁxed pattern noise of the
CCD. The ﬂat-ﬁeld spectrum must have suﬃciently high S/N in
order to avoid degradation of the scientiﬁc image, which is a par-
ticular challenge for solar-ﬂux spectra. To achieve this, we em-
ploy master ﬂat-ﬁeld spectra with typical S/N ratios of 2,000:1.
Division by the master ﬂat ﬁeld will still contribute to the vari-
ances of the object image according to the respective variances
of the ﬂat ﬁeld pixels. It is normally expected that only one set
of master ﬂat ﬁelds for each spectral region, that is CD set-
ting, is needed. Because the CCD pixel-to-pixel noise is dif-
ferent for each wavelength, it is required that the master ﬂats
are taken for each cross-disperser separately. Furthermore, each
pixel shows its own non-linear response to diﬀerent illumination
levels. Therefore, we apply an illumination level correction in
order to correct for the CCD spatial noise pattern for each pixel
(see later in Sect. 4.4).

The master ﬂat ﬁeld images are obtained by de-focusing the
halogen ´echelle image. The result is that the spectral orders are
smeared out and no voids between spectral orders are left. One
master ﬂat ﬁeld consists of a sum of 70 individual exposures. In
order to account for the change of the response function versus
illumination light level, we make such master ﬂat ﬁelds also at
70 diﬀerent exposure levels. The resulting super master ﬂat ﬁeld
is the polynomial approximation of 7th degree of the response
function versus number of photoelectrons for each CCD pixel.
The normalized response function for each master ﬂat ﬁeld is
obtained with a 2D smoothing spline ﬁt which removes any gra-
dients in the image. It preserves the structure of the spatial proﬁle
of the corrected image.

4

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

4000

5000

6000

7000

8000

9000

a.

330000

300000

270000

240000

210000

b.

1000

800

600

400

200

0

4000

5000

6000

7000

8000

9000

Fig. 3. PEPSI deep spectra characteristics. a. Two-pixel spectrograph resolution as a function of wavelength. Shown is the free
spectral range per ´echelle order. b. S/N for an example spectrum. The spectra from the individual cross dispersers are identiﬁed with
diﬀerent colors and are, from left to right, CD I to CD VI. Quasiperiodic peaks indicate the ´echelle orders.

To reduce the eﬀective gate resistance of the STA1600 CCDs
the producer placed a metal grid over the CCD imaging area
during production. Three micron metal lines run vertically and
horizontally over the poly-silicon gates. This CCD bussing re-
appears in our images as a ﬁxed pattern and is mostly pro-
nounced at red wavelengths where it is seen every 165 pixel
rows with an amplitude of up to 5%. A similar periodic struc-
ture exists along the CCD columns every 330 pixels. Another
38 pixel periodicity
ﬁxed-pattern contamination is seen with a
and 1 % amplitude at very high exposure levels. It corresponds
to pixel aliasing related to the contact points during the mixed
mask generation of the CCD’s poly-silicon gate structure.

∼

3.4. Scattered lightsubtraction

Scattered light on the CCD image is formed by the many stray-
light possibilities in an ´echelle spectrograph and the natural
inter-order scattering. Scattered light acts like an extra contin-
uum and results in a reduction of the residual depth of the
spectral lines. The scattered light surface for our ´echelle im-
ages is reconstructed from the 2D least-squares ﬁt of a con-
strained smoothing spline to the inter-order gaps (the constrained
smoothing is necessary in order to prevent negative intensities).
After the ﬁrst initial ﬁt of the spline to the image, the residuals
of the data are analyzed with ordered statistics to mask out any
echelle orders in the data. This is subsequently used for the ﬁt
in the next iteration. This process is applied to every relevant
CCD image because the scattered-light contamination increases
with the brightness of the target and will vary, for example when
optics were re-coated or extra light traps installed. Solar spec-
tra are naturally the most prone to scattered light. The following
constant scattered-light contamination is seen in the spectra in
this paper; up to 4% in CD I, 2% in CD II, 1% in CD III, 2%

in CD IV, 1% in CD V, and 0.5% in CD VI, and was properly
removed.

3.5. Deﬁnition of spectral orders

The order deﬁnition is obtained from the traced ﬂat-ﬁeld expo-
sures made separately for each image slicer. The overall curva-
ture and its sign is obtained from the global cross-correlation
of all orders. An elongated Gaussian proﬁle is matched to each
slice of every order to form a 3D matrix of Chebyshev poly-
nomials coeﬃcients for the ﬁnal global ﬁt. The overall curva-
ture and width of the traces are obtained from a global cross-
correlation of adjacent CCD rows in dispersion direction. This
ﬁrst approximation is used to detect all spectral orders and their
slices for the subsequent non-linear least-squares ﬁt to its elon-
gated Gaussian proﬁles. Note that, e.g., IRAF cannot deal with
tilted image slicers. The ﬁnal global approximation with a 3D
Chebyshev polynomial involves the ﬁt of each spectral order and
their slices versus CCD row number. The polynomial degree in
cross-dispersion direction is not ﬁxed but is selected according
to the curvature of the ´echelle orders. Image slices within ´echelle
orders are well spaced and approximated by the ﬁrst polynomial
degree.

3.6. Optimal extraction of spectral orders

Optimal extraction aims for a maximization of the S/N and for
the rejection of cosmic-ray hits. The most important part of the
optimal extraction is the calculation of the correct spatial proﬁle
for the full ´echelle image. The spatial proﬁle, or illumination
function, is derived from the raw image for every CCD pixel in
each spectral order after normalization to the total ﬂux. A robust
spline ﬁt is used to smooth the spatial proﬁle along the dispersion

5

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

1.01

1

0.99

6427.8

6428

6428.2

6428.4

Fig. 4. Deep PEPSI spectrum (dots with error bars) and its individual 20 exposures (lines) for a 1-Å wavelength region around
the Cr i 6428.1-Å line. The twenty individual back-to-back spectra are oﬀset in continuum by +0.01 for better visibility. The deep
spectrum is unshifted and directly compared with the IAG (blue line) and NSO (red line) FTS atlases. We note that the equivalent
width of the Cr line at 6428.1 Å is just 1.8 mÅ.

direction. This is done for all orders in a global ﬁt with a number
of iterations in order to eliminate outliers in the data. The ﬂux in
every CCD pixel is formed as a weighted average with variances
for all slices after the wavelength calibration. The cosmic-ray
spikes are rejected during the ﬁt according to a statistical test
based on the pixel variances.

3.7. Wavelength calibration

The wavelength calibration is done for each image slicer sep-
arately by forming a 3D Chebyshev polynomial ﬁt to its nor-
malized wavelength, order number, and slice number. A typical
error of the ﬁt in the central part of a single CCD image is 3–5
1. The initial starting point for each image is given by the
m s−
approximate value of the wavelength in the ﬁrst ´echelle order of
the spectrograph and the central order number for a given CD.
With the use of a robust polynomial ﬁt, it ﬁnds the best match of
spectral-line wavelengths to the wavelength table.

The line-centering algorithm uses an un-weighted Gaussian
ﬁt to each emission line in each extracted slice in each spectral
order. The centering algorithm usually selects about 70 of the
best-ﬁt emission lines. The wavelength calibration comprises a
robust 3D Chebyshev polynomial ﬁt to the wavelength table of
the order number, slice number and CCD row. Robust means that
deviating points in the wavelength ﬁt are rejected with the use of
an F-test. The wavelength identiﬁcation is done with the aid of a
search algorithm which gives a list of solutions with the best ﬁt
atop of it. The Th-Ar line list is a compilation from line lists of
Norlen (1973) (for Ar) and Palmer & Engleman (1983) (for Th).
While the Th-Ar solution basically sets the absolute zero
point of the wavelength calibration, the FPE sets the wavelength
calibration from frame to frame. It also records the RV distor-
tions due to, e.g., temperature variations in the spectrograph
chamber e.g. introduced by coolant variations. In a recent paper,
Bauer et al. (2015) studied the combined RV eﬀects of hollow-
cathode lamps with Fabry-P´erot interferometers for HARPS and
1 when
concluded that FPEs can reach a precision of 10 m s−
compared to a laser frequency comb.

Following standard practice the wavelengths are in air at
standard temperature and pressure (15◦C, 1013.25 hPa; Edl´en
1 was removed
1966). A solar gravitational redshift of 633.4 m s−
from the data. The wavelength scale of the spectra are reduced
to the solar barycentric rest frame with the orbital and rotational
velocities of the Earth removed, as well as the barycentric mo-
tion of the solar system due to rotation of the major planets. We
use NOVAS 2 to perform these velocity corrections (Kaplan et
al. 1989).

3.8. Shapingthe spectra

In this step, the orders are corrected for the ´echelle blaze func-
tion and also for vignetting eﬀects if present. Another correction
is due to the optical interference in the CCD substrate known
as fringing. Its amplitude increases to a peak of 15% but aﬀects
only the wavelengths of the reddest CD VI. All these eﬀects are
removed with a master ﬂat ﬁeld spectrum which is the sum of
300 individual exposures. The resulting S/N in such a spectrum
is about 15,000 to ensure that there is no degradation after divi-
sion of the solar spectrum. We found no change of the fringing
amplitude versus light accumulation level in the ﬂat ﬁeld spec-
trum. The master ﬂat ﬁeld spectrum is extracted exactly the same
way as any science image and used for normalization at the very
last stage of image processing prior to continuum normalization.
For the spectra in this paper, we were not able to distinguish be-
tween blaze and vignetting eﬀects in wavelength direction which
we interpret to be a sign of negligible vignetting if any. However,
vignetting by the red-arm shutter at its upper edge was suspected
but has been removed in the meantime.

3.9. Global continuum ﬁt and order merging

For the solar spectra in this paper, we make use of the telluric-
corrected FTS atlas of Wallace et al. (2011) as a continuum
guide. This is particular important for wavelengths shorter than
400 nm, i.e. CD I, where the standard clip-and-ﬁt algorithm fails
because of the unspeciﬁed location of the continuum due to line
blanketing.

6

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

For the rest of the spectrum and for stellar spectra, the con-
tinuum ﬁt to the extracted spectral orders is done by default with
a robust 2D smoothing spline on a regular grid of CCD pixels
and ´echelle order numbers. The ﬁt is made ﬁrst in the cross-
dispersion direction then in the dispersion direction. The essen-
tial part is to secure the spline from being aﬀected by numerous
outliers in form of absorption and emission lines. The outliers
are detected and masked with the aid of robust noise estima-
tors for which we use ordered statistics. A number of subsequent
clip-and-ﬁt iterations follow until the process is converged. The
resulting regular and smoothed continuum surface provides the
transition from the end of one spectral order to the beginning of
the next.

3.10. Telluriclines

≈

The blue part of the spectrum up to
500 nm is essentially free
of telluric lines. H2O bands start to show up at this wavelength in
the solar spectrum and by 579 nm are joined by O2 (see Wallace
et al. 2011). While the O2 bands are constant because well mixed
in the atmosphere, the H2O bands are highly variable and much
more problematic. Our solar spectra are all contaminated by such
lines. We did not attempt to correct for any of these telluric lines.

4. Characteristics of the SDI spectra

4.1. Spectral resolution

≈

The eﬀective spectral resolution λ/∆λ for the data in this pa-
per is obtained from the full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM)
of the FPE fringes with the focus position 2990 and 7480 for
the blue and the red arm, respectively. Focus sequences for all
cross dispersers were made with a halogen lamp as the light
source. An automated FFT auto-correlation of the approximately
1,700 fringes across the full CCD determines the FPE FWHM
at any position on the CCD. In dispersion direction one ´echelle
order is covered by a little more than 100 fringes (one fringe ev-
ery
0.5 Å). The FPE FWHM is then related to the Th-Ar line
widths nearest in position on the CCD but from separate Th-
Ar images. The intrinsic line width of the Th-Ar lines is taken
from the NIST Th-Ar atlas (Kerber et al. 2008) and calibrated
against our Th-Ar widths and then removed from the PEPSI Th-
Ar spectra. In this way, we determine the spectrograph focus at
any location of the CCD and convert it to eﬀective spectral reso-
lution λ/∆λ. For the data in this paper the resolution ranges from
an average of 220,000 in the blue to an average of 250,000 in the
red. The respective deviation along an ´echelle order can be as
30,000, in particular for the red CDs. Note that these
large as
numbers are for the spectra from September 2015 and October
2016 with image slicer #2, but will be closer to the nominal two-
pixel resolution for future spectra because of a new image slicer
implemented 12/2016.

±

The spectrograph resolution is shown in Fig. 3a versus wave-
length for all CDs. Resolution varies along an ´echelle order by
up to 30% due to ﬁnite image quality, pixel under-sampling, and
uncorrected ´echelle anamorphic magniﬁcation (cf. Schweizer
1979). This plot is deduced from a two-pixel sampling of the res-
olution element and represents the best-focus situation. In prac-
tice the spectral resolution depends on the achieved focus for
the two optical cameras. There is residual astigmatism which
could not be removed during the ﬁnal alignment. If the focus
achieved is, e.g., 2.5 pix FWHM, then the R numbers in Fig. 3a
must be multiplied by 2/2.5 = 0.8. We note that the spectra in
this paper were all taken with camera foci selected to suit all re-

spective CDs simultaneously, i.e., without refocusing for partic-
ular wavelengths. One could refocus for every CD combination
and reach a slightly higher average resolution but that was not
done during the commissioning process leading to the present
data. Therefore, resolution reaches 270,000 only at certain wave-
lengths in the yellow and red parts of the present spectra.

4.2. Signal-to-noiseratio

≈

≈

Table 1 lists the measured S/N of the individual spectra and the
S/N of the combined (“deep”) spectra at the central wavelength
of each CD. S/N is always given per pixel. We see that the S/N
for an individual integration runs from at worst
200 for the blue
wavelength limit to up to a peak of
850 near 700 nm and a fall
≈
oﬀ to
650 at the long wavelength limit. Daily deep spectra are
built by average combining between 20 to 110 consecutive ex-
posures, which boosts the S/N by factors of between
4–10. At
the typical plotting scale from 0 to 1 in Fig. 2 the (photon) noise
in the spectra is not visible anymore (the noise seen in the con-
tinuum is from the over plotted HARPS spectrum). Fig. 3b is
an example of the S/N of a single individual spectrum for the
full PEPSI wavelength range. Normally, we record two SDI ex-
posures simultaneously with two diﬀerent ﬁbres mimicking the
two LBT sides. Their combination further increases the S/N by
a factor of √2 with respect to the numbers given in Table 1.

≈

While the individual exposures are considered surface snap-
shots with respect to the ﬁve-minute oscillation pattern of the
Sun, the deep spectra can be considered smeared surface aver-
ages and thus are better representatives of the average undis-
turbed photosphere. Their time coverage per CD ranges between
37 min for CD I/404 nm to 24 min for CD VI/825 nm. Taking 20
individual exposures per CD thus samples the fundamental os-
cillation between 7.3 and 4.8 times from the bluest to the reddest
wavelengths. The rms of these averaged spectra is not only ex-
pected to be a function of wavelength but also to vary with line
strength in relation with the amplitude of the pulsation mode at
that particular line-formation depth. Fig. 4 shows a deep spec-
trum along with the individual spectra for a narrow wavelength
strip of 1 Å centered around a weak line (Cr i 6428.1 Å, equiva-
lent width 1.8 mÅ). The un-weighted rms from these 20 spectra
is less than 0.1%/pix, just as expected from the individual S/N
ratio. A variance spectrum and a periodogram also did not show
a clear systematic pattern or signal. We conclude that we did not
see intrinsic variability at these wavelengths for the duration of
the exposure time at the date of our observations.

We note that for some wavelength regions the spectacular
S/N of the average-combined spectra of several thousands to one
is artiﬁcial because of the dominance of the ﬁxed-pattern noise in
some sections of the STA CCDs. These regions are limited to an
equivalent S/N of approximately 1,300:1, independent of its ex-
posure level (see Sect. 4.4). Unnoticed intrinsic solar changes in
certain spectral lines during integration can further lower the ac-
tual S/N. For example, in the Ca ii H&K line cores, such changes
dominate over photon noise already at a S/N of as low as 20:1.

4.3. Wavelength scale and RV zero point

Each individual solar spectrum is wavelength calibrated before
2,000 Th-Ar based
average-combining them. The rms from
1 over the course of two
wavelength solutions was 4–8 m s−
weeks in September 2015 (depending on wavelength and always
excluding CD-I). However, many individual spectra during this
time showed more than twice this RV uncertainty. This was be-

≈

7

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

cause the earlier version of the (robotic) SDI telescope intro-
duced systematic guiding jitter due to disk vignetting in its ﬁbre
injection, a limitation also noticed by other groups (Dumusque
et al. 2015, Lemke & Reiners 2016). The new version of the SDI
telescope (operative since October 2016) employs an integration
sphere and a single oﬀ-axis reﬂecting telescope and is now es-
sentially free of guiding jitter. The spectra in this paper have an
1 (see
average rms from a series of Th-Ar solutions of 1.2 m s−
later Sect. 5.1). The remaining uncertainties are the sum of sev-
eral blemishes described in the next chapter. For example, gra-
dients of the CCD temperature (from one corner of the chip to
another) can be as much as 18 mK and cause RV variations of up
1. However, these are easily identiﬁed and corrected
to 100 m s−
due to their persistent nature and were removed for the RV rms
measurements above. Cross correlations of PEPSI spectra in the
450–600 nm region with the laser-comb calibrated HARPS so-
lar spectrum from Molaro et al. (2013) revealed an average RV
deviation of just 10 m s−

1.

We recall that the wafer mask of the STA1600 CCDs is cre-
ated by raster scanning the desired pattern and then imprint-
ing on the wafer using an electron beam or laser. Only a small
section of the mask is written initially, most of the wafer-sized
CCD area is created by mechanically moving the small section
to bring the next area under the beam. Small errors in the me-
chanical steps of the mask motion can show up as a pattern that
is eﬀectively a pixel-size variation on the CCD at the borders
between consecutive mask steps. This problem had been identi-
ﬁed by STA who created now higher resolution masks for better
uniformity (Bredthauer & Boggs 2016). However, our current
CCDs were still produced with the older and lower-resolution
masks.

Similar eﬀects arise from a stepper mask CCD production,
for example in 512-pixel sections depending on the producer. Its
stitching introduces systematic pixel-size discontinuities. For the
HARPS e2v CCDs this resulted in distortions of the Th-Ar wave-
1 along an ´echelle order and across
length solution of
the entire wavelength range (Molaro et al. 2013). The stable and
accurate zero point from laser combs pinpoints these CCD de-
ﬁciencies and allows us to correct for them. No such stitching
of subsections exists for the PEPSI STA CCDs due to the diﬀer-
ent production scheme but the mask motion errors introduce in
practice the same problem (see Sect. 3.3).

40 m s−

±

4.4. Blemishes

Residual CCD ﬁxed-pattern noise. There are several sources that
contribute to ﬁxed-pattern noise in our CCDs. Firstly, the PEPSI
STA CCDs have 16 ampliﬁers which are grouped in two rows
with eight ampliﬁers on adjacent sides of the chip. This means
that every ´echelle order once crosses an ampliﬁer border in dis-
persion direction (in the middle of the chip). In cross-dispersion
direction the CCD is sectioned eight times. Because every ampli-
ﬁer section is read out with its own gain factor, there is at least
one intensity jump along the dispersion trace and up to seven
jumps along a cross-dispersion trace. The ﬂat ﬁeld division takes
care of these jumps unless there were unnoticed gain variations.
No inter-ampliﬁer space exists and therefore does not interrupt
the wavelength solution. Secondly, we noticed a periodic ﬁxed-
pattern noise in the master ﬂat ﬁelds at very high exposure level
that results likely from a back reﬂection from the CCD substrate.
This eﬀect is not visible in normal target exposures but can be
noted in single ﬂat-ﬁeld exposures if exposed near the edge of
the linearity regime. The simple cure of the problem is to use ﬂat-
ﬁeld exposures well below the full well of the chip with count

8

rates similar to the target count rates. The practical problem is
that one needs at least 30 well-exposed ﬂat ﬁelds to make up a
master ﬂat appropriate for the high-level average-combined solar
exposures.

Thirdly, pixel photo response nonuniformity causes random
and structured patterns from errors in the (CCD)mask-creation
process. Not all of the response nonuniformity patterns are per-
fectly removed by the regular master-ﬂat division because the
CCD response appears to be a function of ADU counts in some
sections (“taps”) in our devices (a tap relates to an ampliﬁer).
For those pixels, we ﬁnd that the gain varies by approximately
5 % (from zero ADU to saturation ADU) and also appears with
a pattern with a main spacing of 38 pixels along rows. Thus,
the response of some of the 112 million pixels is nonlinearly in-
creasing with exposure level. We incorporate this behavior in the
standard data reduction process by using a “super master ﬂat”.
Such a super master ﬂat takes about 30 master ﬂats with diﬀer-
ent illumination levels ranging from nearly zero to saturation.
One master ﬂat is already the sum of 70 regular ﬂats (per CD
setting) and thus our super master ﬂat consists of approximately
2,000 individual ﬂat-ﬁeld exposures. The remaining (residual)
pixel-to-pixel nonuniformity after the super master ﬂat division
currently limits the S/N of the aﬀected CCD taps to a conser-
1,300:1. It leaves ripples with a main periodicity of 38
vative
pixels in the spectrum. While the ripple’s amplitudes are larger
on the blue CCD, where basically no wavelength dependency is
seen, the amplitude is only half of that on the red CCD but a
wavelength dependency exists. A polynomial ﬁt for every expo-
sure level of every pixel for every CD setting is then tabulated
and used in the automatic data reduction.

≈

Order merging. The spectrum at the beginning and the end of
an ´echelle order repeats in adjacent orders. To average the over-
lapping parts of the orders, one must merge spectra from op-
posite sections of the CCD. The two-dimensional pixel-to-pixel
sensitivity is taken out by the ﬂat-ﬁeld division while we min-
imize its residuals in time by an illumination-dependent super
master ﬂat ﬁeld (see above). But the remaining issue in PEPSI
is the non-telecentric focus deviation across the geometric ﬁeld
of view of the huge CCDs (10 cm
10 cm). It causes the focus
and thus the Th-Ar line width to be diﬀerent at opposite edges
of the CCD. Fig. 3a demonstrates this in terms of the FWHM
of Th-Ar emission lines. We proceed with order merging by re-
sampling the overlapping orders to an average dispersion before
co-adding with a weight function which is the inverse of the re-
spective pixel variances. One could dub this procedure optimal
merging. Nevertheless, it could introduce a wavy continuum rec-
tiﬁcation around the merging wavelengths. The present spectra
are free of such an eﬀect above the 0.1% level.

×

Partial order extraction. Due to the tilt of the dispersion di-
rection with respect to the CCD rows, the very ﬁrst ´echelle or-
der (#160 in CD-I) and the very last order (#68 in CD-VI) are
recorded only partially (see Fig. 15 in Strassmeier et al. 2015).
These two orders cover the extreme wavelengths of the spec-
trograph at wavelengths longer than λ9001.6 Å and shorter than
λ3849.8 Å. Its extraction and rectiﬁcation suﬀers greater un-
certainty than the fully recorded orders, suggesting equivalent-
width measurements of these regions to be less precise. Note
that the orders on the edge of the other CDs are also just par-
tially recorded but are not used because these orders repeat as
full orders in adjacent CDs.

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

4.5. Comparisons with other solaratlases

5. Science examples

Fig. 5 shows several representative comparisons with the Kitt
Peak NSO FTS ﬂux atlas (Wallace et al. 2011) and the new IAG
FTS atlas (Reiners et al. 2016). The wavelength examples show
the full Ca ii H&K doublet, a zoom into the core of the K line, the
Mn i 5394.7-Å line, and one of the O i triplet lines at 7771.9 Å.
The Ca ii K line core (Fig. 5b) shows a markable diﬀerence be-
tween the NSO FTS atlas taken in 1981 near the peak of solar
cycle 21 and the PEPSI spectrum (dots) taken in 2016 in the mid-
dle of the declining activity of cycle 24. Cycle 24 was already
among the weakest cycles ever recorded in history (e.g., Jiang
et al. 2015) and our H&K spectrum seems to reﬂect this. Note
that the IAG FTS does not cover the 390 nm region and thus al-
lows no comparison. A total of three such deep spectra of the full
PEPSI wavelength range, and with the time coverage indicated
in Table 1, are provided in this paper for further comparisons.

Our spectra ﬁt in resolution in between the FTS ﬂux atlases
and the HARPS atlas. The wavelength range in Fig. 2 shows sev-
eral line cores of relatively strong lines where this is obvious. For
most weaker lines, e.g. C i in this ﬁgure, the FTS and the PEPSI
spectra are basically indistinguishable while the HARPS spec-
trum appears noticeably weaker in the line core and more noisy.
At this point, we note again that the PEPSI solar spectra in this
paper did not reach the full 2-pixel resolution at all wavelengths
but about 80% of it on average. For comparison, lower than pre-
dicted resolution was also found for the Li´ege disk-center atlas
by Doerr et al. (2016), but with even two to six times lesser res-
olution than speciﬁed.

≈

The continuum levels for wavelengths longer than

460 nm
agree generally very well with the FTS atlases except maybe at
regions contaminated by telluric bands. Several strips of spec-
trum with almost no lines indicate oﬀsets of 0.7% on aver-
460 nm the diﬀerences are only
age. For wavelengths below
390 nm, say 1%. However, for wave-
marginally larger until
lengths shorter than this the discrepancy gets increasingly worse,
reaching 10% or more at 384 nm. This is mostly due to limited
S/N, unaccounted stray light, and the fact that there is no con-
tinuum seen because of the overwhelming line blanketing. For
wavelengths shorter than 390 nm, we consider the NSO FTS at-
las more reliable than PEPSI.

≈

≈

The LBT site on Mt. Graham in Arizona can be a very dry
place and accordingly weak is the intrinsic telluric water con-
tamination in the PEPSI spectra. Of course, this depends on the
observing season. The considerable atmospheric contamination
of the solar spectrum led Wallace et al. (2011) early on to ob-
serve the Sun at various air masses and then remove the telluric
contamination. Their spectrum represents a “dry” optical solar
ﬂux spectrum. A close comparison of a wavelength region of
general astrophysical interest that is aﬀected by telluric lines is
shown in Fig. 6. This wavelength region contains several 12CN
and 13CN blends that are commonly used to determine the car-
bon isotope ratio 12C/13C, which is a primary indicator for the
evolutionary status of the stellar fusion process. The ﬁgure also
shows a PEPSI spectrum of the solar-twin 18 Sco for compar-
ison with the Sun. Its telluric contamination appears shifted by
0.26 Å with respect to the solar spectrum (because of the diﬀer-
−
ence of radial velocity) but can be otherwise directly compared
with the solar spectrum. It is immediately seen that the IAG FTS
atlas suﬀers from very strong telluric lines due to being taken in
the city of G¨ottingen in Germany and that the NSO FTS spec-
tra are approximately three times noisier in this wavelength re-
gion than even the LBT/PEPSI 18 Sco observation. All spectra
in Fig. 6 are plotted at their respective spectral resolution though.

Many archival science cases could be tackled with our spectra,
e.g., the many spectral lines may be measured for systematic RV
changes to determine convective blueshift (Dravins et al. 1981,
Reiners et al. 2016), or elemental abundances of some rare-Earth
elements having only extremely weak lines, or the iron mass
fraction through Fe/Si abundance ratios that has been proposed
to be a critical ingredient for rocky planet models (Santos et al.
2015). For this initial paper, we pick out two early-science ex-
amples.

5.1. Solarp-mode oscillation from disk-averaged spectra

Many physical processes and phenomena contribute to the so-
lar disk RV proﬁle (see, e.g., Pall´e et al. 1995, Meunier et al.
2015, Lanza et al. 2016, Haywood et al. 2016). Besides global
phenomena like rotation and diﬀerential rotation, local phenom-
ena like spots and plages and their associated local velocity
ﬁelds signiﬁcantly contribute to the disk-averaged radial veloc-
ity at any given time, and also vary with the solar cycle. The fa-
mous acoustic oscillations (p-modes) are even acting on various
length scales, from global to local, and additionally also on short
(minutes) and medium (days) time scales. Due to the stochastic-
excitation nature of p-modes disk-integrated spectra taken over
longer periods of time are diﬃcult to combine; as nicely demon-
strated by the SOHO/GOLF data (e.g., Pall´e et al. 1999). Most
of the oscillatory power is between 2.5-4.5 mHz and a length
scale of close to 104 km. However, a short-term high-cadence se-
quence should preserve the phase of the typical 5-min oscillation
even from (disk-averaged) radial velocities. Such an observing
sequence was obtained with SDI and PEPSI for demonstration
purposes on three consecutive days during October 14-16, 2016.
A total of 996 back-to-back spectra were taken with CD III
(λ480–544 nm) and resulted in approximately 300 velocities ev-
ery day for 8.5 hours. Exposure time was 3 s. Air mass varied
between 1.4 to 4.4 and S/N between 490 to 410, respectively.
Figure 7a shows the results from the second day (Oct. 15, 2016).
The two other days are consistent with this result. However, the
combination of all three days results in a phase smearing which
diminishes the RV amplitude below our detection threshold, as
is expected from the stochastic excitation of the oscillations and
its coverage with a cadence of 92 s.

For the period search we performed a least-squares ﬁt for
each trial frequency with subsequent statistical F-test at each
step against the null hypothesis of the absence of periodicity.
For all three days we consistently found a preferred frequency
at 3.04 mHz, corresponding to a period of 5.5 min. It peaks at an
1 with a signiﬁcance of 5.2σ with a FAP of
amplitude of 47 cm s−
4 and χ2 = 106. The extended scatter of the data around
5
×
the best ﬁt is caused both by the seeing eﬀect due to short inte-
grations as well as the super-granulation variations on the sur-
face of the Sun. The peak with the highest signiﬁcance is used
for the non-linear least-squares ﬁt to the data (Fig.7b). The daily
rms RV scatter is 1.2 m s−

10−

1.

5.2. SolarLi abundance

The analysis of isotopic ratios and their relative contributions re-
quires extremely clean, high-quality spectra. We recall that the
equivalent width of the Li i doublet is typically 1 mÅ in the inter-
stellar medium. Disk-resolved solar observations show not only
signiﬁcant center-to-limb variations of the many CN blends that
aﬀect the Li line but also a larger Li equivalent width at the limb

9

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

≤

0.1 and 6Li/7Li

than in the disk center (3.7 vs. 5.7 mÅ; Brault & M¨uller 1975).
M¨uller et al. (1975) showed this to be partially a non-LTE ef-
fect and that the elemental abundance is actually the same. Their
analysis resulted in A(Li)=1.0
0.01; our to-
±
day’s still accepted solar lithium abundance and isotopic ratio1.
A Li determination from a high-resolution spectrum of a sunspot
umbra by Ritzenhoﬀ et al. (1997) resulted in a LTE abundance
of 1.02
0.12 together with an upper limit for the isotope ratio
of 0.03. Despite that its analysis lacked a full non-LTE treat-
ment and that additional uncertainty is involved from the not
well-known TiO contamination in cool sunspots, it indicated the
same Li abundance than for the undisturbed photosphere. We
0.03 isotope ratio is in agreement with the
also note that the
≤
solar-wind Li isotope ratio of 0.032
0.004 measured in lunar
soil (Chaussidon & Robert 1999).

±

±

±

More recently, Caﬀau et al. (2011) compared synthetic 3D
NLTE spectra with the solar spectra of Neckel & Labs (1984)
and of Kurucz (2005) but assumed no 6Li contribution. Their
ﬁnal choice for the blending line-list was that of Ghezzi et al.
(2009) with a few updated oscillator strengths. A logarithmic
0.03 was obtained, well within the error lim-
abundance of 1.03
its of the M¨uller et al. (1975) and Ritzenhoﬀ et al. (1997) results,
where the uncertainty reﬂects the dispersion among the results
for the diﬀerent observed spectra rather than deﬁciencies in the
line list or the model. The photospheric solar lithium abundance
is thus approximately 160 times lower than that measured in me-
teorites (Asplund et al. 2009). The isotopic line ratio in the in-
terstellar medium was determined earlier to
8% by Lemoine et
al. (1995) and others, and matches well the meteoritic value of
8.33% listed in the review by Asplund et al. (2009).

≈

We apply the most recent 3D hydrodynamical CO5BOLD
model atmosphere of the Sun (Ludwig et al. 2009). A full NLTE
line synthesis is done with NLTE3D+LINFOR3D2 in combina-
tion with the recent blending line list from Mel´endez et al. (2012)
as well as Ghezzi et al. (2009). Our synthesis also considers the
full isotopic and hyper-ﬁne structure represented by twelve com-
ponents, six of which belong to 6Li and six to 7Li (a table of all
blending transitions is available in Caﬀau et al. 2015 and Mott et
al. 2017). We also adjusted the transition probability of a vana-
dium blend (Lawler et al. 2014; see Mott et al. 2017 for applica-
tion details).

We started by comparing the 670.70–670.87 nm region of
all spectra listed in Table 1 and inspecting them for system-
atic diﬀerences like unnoticed small cosmic-ray hits or residual
continuum oﬀsets and wavelength shifts. Then we build three
daily deep spectra out of the pool in Table 1 and use them for
the analysis. These data are not limited by photon noise any-
more but by the residual ﬁxed-pattern noise of the CCD (see
Sect. 4.4). Unfortunately, the Li wavelength region is aﬀected
by this. Fig. 8a shows a 1.8-Å section of one deep spectrum with
a nominal S/N of 8,000:1 which is, however, reduced at the Li
wavelengths to 1,300:1. We employ the least-squares ﬁtting al-
gorithm MPFIT (Markwardt 2009) in a procedure described in
detail in Steﬀen et al. (2015). It adjusts iteratively four ﬁtting
parameters until the best ﬁt (minimum χ2) is achieved. The four
free parameters were A(Li), 6Li/7Li, a global wavelength shift,
and a global Gaussian line broadening (FWHM). Rotational
1 and the level of the continuum
broadening v sin i of 1.8 km s−
were kept ﬁxed (the instrumental broadening at the Li wave-
1). The best ﬁts for the Li lines are always
length is 1.37 km s−

1 throughout this paper, we give logarithmic abundances, A(Li), on a

scale deﬁned by A(Li) = log n(Li)

log n(H) + 12.00

2 http://www.aip.de/Members/msteﬀen/linfor3d

−

10

achieved with the line list of Ghezzi et al. (2009) expanded with
the revised log g f for V i 6708.1 Å from Lawler et al. (2014).
We also increased the g f values of all CN lines by 30% because
Ghezzi et al. had used a higher solar CNO abundance than we
do in this paper, and this compensates for it. The formal χ2 ﬁt
level is 966 compared to 388 with the expanded Mel´endez et al.
(2012) list. However, the formal χ2 is not relevant in our case
because it includes the full spectral range where the Mel´endez et
al. line list better ﬁts the edges of the spectral range than Li,
in particular the Fe i+CN blend. Considering only the Li-line
range, the Ghezzi et al. line list is a better ﬁt. Both line lists con-
verge on an identical Li abundance though. Our best-ﬁt value is
A(Li)=1.09
0.006 is the internal ﬁt error, the
±
0.04 is estimated from repeated measurements with diﬀerent
±
continuum locations, the diﬀerent line lists, and the three diﬀer-
ent observations. The best-ﬁt isotope ratio 6Li/7Li is 1.4
1.6 %,
and thus appears consistent with zero 6Li content.

0.04. The

0.006

±

±

±

6. Summary and conclusions

≈

We present a homogeneous set of solar ﬂux spectra taken with
the new PEPSI spectrograph of the LBT and use it to verify
the capabilities of the instrument. Detailed comparisons with
solar FTS atlases, as well as with the HARPS solar atlas, val-
idate the future PEPSI data product. We found excellent inten-
sity agreement down to the sub-percent level and a spread of
1 with respect to the HARPS so-
RVs with an rms of 10 m s−
lar atlas. The photon noise in the continua of the deep spec-
tra is boosted to a S/N of
8,000:1 for the red wavelength re-
gions, and still 600:1 for the Ca ii H&K line core. The contin-
uum placement uncertainty is only sub-percent for wavelengths
longer than
400 nm but deviates up to 1% at 390 nm and up
to 10% at the blue cut-oﬀ wavelength at 384 nm. The latter
mostly due to the inherent line blanketing at these wavelengths
and the limited S/N ratio. We recall that the resolving power is
not constant along the entire wavelength range of PEPSI, i.e.
spanning 530 nm, and also varies along an ´echelle order, itself
6 nm wide. The nominal two-pixel resolution is
on average
≈
1) but the data in this
30,000 (
270,000
i
1)
paper have typically 240,000
due to imperfect camera focus (red and blue cameras) at the time
of the observations.

of 1.11 km s−
30,000 (

FWHM
h

FWHM
h

of 1.25 km s−

≈

±

±

i

Three mini time series of

300 spectra per day with a ca-
≈
dence of 92 s are used to detect the disk-integrated p-mode oscil-
lations of the Sun. We employed PEPSI’s CD-III (λ480-544 nm)
1
only, and found a disk-averaged RV amplitude of 47 cm s−
with a period of 5.5 min. This value is within the measurements
from SOHO/GOLF (Garcia et al. 2005). GOLF measured disk-
averaged RVs from the Na D doublet wings and found ampli-
1 depending on
tudes between basically zero and up to 5 m s−
time. Our measurement is just a (daily) snapshot and more repre-
sentative of the undisturbed solar photosphere because we used
basically all detectable spectral lines within CD III. The one
PEPSI measurement and the GOLF time series are hardly com-
parable because of the large time diﬀerence but also because the
sodium D lines are aﬀected by magnetic activity, but neverthe-
less agree with each other.

The deep spectra are used to re-determine the solar Li abun-
dance. A 3D NLTE ﬁt with the line list of Ghezzi et al. (2009),
expanded by a vanadium blend and increased CN strength, pro-
vides the best-ﬁt solution of A(Li)=1.09
0.04. An isotope ratio
6Li/7Li of 1.4 % remained insigniﬁcant though and is consistent
with zero 6Li. The derived Li abundance is fully consistent with
previous estimates found in the literature. Grevesse & Sauval

±

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

(1998) and Lodders (2003) both quote A(Li)=1.10
0.10, while
±
0.10. A slightly lower
Asplund et al. (2009) recommend 1.05
±
0.03 is given by Caﬀau et al. (2011). The solar
value of 1.03
±
system isotopic ratio is 6Li/7Li
0.08 (Lodders 2003). Because
≈
the lighter isotope 6Li is signiﬁcantly more fragile than the main
isotope 7Li, i.e. is more easily destroyed by nuclear reaction with
protons, the depletion of 6Li in the solar convection zone must
proceed at a much higher rate than that of 7Li. Hence it is ex-
pected that 6Li is completely destroyed in the solar convection
zone. Any detection of 6Li in the solar photosphere would imply
a very eﬃcient external production mechanism. However, our
measurement is consistent with zero photospheric 6Li content.

We conclude that the night-time spectrograph PEPSI can de-
liver high-quality spectra both in terms of intensity and radial ve-
locity. No conclusions can be made on its long-term RV stability
yet but data of the bright planet-host stars τ Boo and 51 Peg are
being taken as a reference through the PEPSI-VATT ﬁber con-
nection.

The reduced 1D deep spectra as well as the time series 1D
spectra can be downloaded in FITS format from our web page at

https://pepsi.aip.de .

On demand, we also provide the data prior to continuum rectiﬁ-
cation.

Acknowledgements. We thank all engineers and technicians involved in PEPSI,
in particular our Forschungstechnik team and its late Emil Popow who passed
away much too early. Special thanks are also due to LBTO’s Christian Veillet,
Mark Wagner and John Little and the entire LBTO mountain crew and particu-
larly to Mike Lesser and his University of Arizona ITL CCD aﬁcionados with-
out whom we could not have solved the zillions of problems. Finally, we want
to thank the referee for his/her careful reading which clearly improved the pa-
per. It is also a pleasure to thank the German Federal Ministry (BMBF) for the
year-long support for the construction of PEPSI through their Verbundforschung
grants 05AL2BA1/3 and 05A08BAC that also were the basis for our involvement
in the next generation ELT spectrographs. This research has made use of NASAs
Astrophysics Data System and of CDS’s Simbad database.

References

Asplund, M., Grevesse, N., Sauval, A. J., & Scott, P. 2009, ARA&A, 47, 481
Bauer, F. F., Zechmeister, M., & Reiners, A. 2015, A&A, 581, A117
Beckers, J. M., Bridges, C. A., & Gilliam, L. B. 1976, A high resolution spectral
atlas of the solar irradiance from 380 to 700 nanometers, Vol. 2: Graphical
form

Beckert, E., Strassmeier, K. G., Woche, M., Eberhardt, R., T¨unnermann, A., &

Andersen, M. 2008, SPIE, 7018, 70182J

Brault, J. W., & M¨uller, E. A. 1975, Solar Phys., 41, 43
Brault, J. W., & Neckel, H. 1987, Spectral Atlas of Solar Absolute Disk-Averaged
and Disk-Center Intensity from 3290 to 12510 Å, unpublished (tape-copy
from KIS IDL library)

Bredthauer, G., & Boggs, K. 2016, SPIE, 9915
Bredthauer, R., Boggs, K., Bredthauer, G., & Lesser, M. 2012, SPIE, 8453
Caﬀau, E., Ludwig, H.-G., Steﬀen, M., Freytag, B., & Bonifacio, P. 2011, SP,

268, 255

Caﬀau, E., Mott, A., Steﬀen, M., et al. 2015, AN, 336, 968
Chaussidon, M., & Robert, F. 1999, Nature, 402, 270
Cosentino, R., Lovis, C., Pepe, F., et al. 2012, SPIE, 8446
Delbouille, L., Roland, G., & Neven, L. 1973, Atlas photometrique du spectre

solaire de λ3000 a λ10000

Doerr, H.-P., Vitas, N., & Fabbian, D. 2016, A&A, 590, A118
Dravins, D., Lindegren, L., & Nordlund, A. 1981, A&A, 96, 345
Dumusque, X., Glenday, A., Phillips, D. F., et al. 2015, ApJ, 814, L21
Edl´en, B. 1966, Metrologia, 2, 71
Fr¨ohlich, C. 2013, Space Sci. Rev., 176, 237
Garcia, R. A:, Turck-Chieze, S., Boumier, P., et al. 2005, A&A, 442, 385
Ghezzi, L., Cunha, K., Smith, V. V., Margheim, S., Schuler, S., de Ara´ujo, F. X.,

& de la Reza, R. 2009, ApJ, 698, 451

Grevesse, N. & Sauval, A. J. 1998, SSRv, 85, 161
Haywood, R. D., Collier-Cameron, A., Unruh, Y., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 457,

3637

Hill, J., Green, R. F., Ashby, D. S. et al. 2012, SPIE, 8444-1
Ilyin, I. 2000, PhD Thesis, Univ. of Oulu
Hall, J. C., & Lockwood, G. W. 1995, ApJ, 438, 404
Jiang, J., Cameron, R. H., & Schssler, M. 2015, ApJ, 808, L28
Kaplan, G. H., Hughes, J. A., Seidelmann, P. K., Smith, C. A., & Yallop, B. D.

1989, AJ, 97, 1197

Keller, C. U., Harvey, J. W., & Giampapa, M. S. 2003, SPIE, 4853, 194
Kerber, F., Nave, G., & Sansonetti, C. J. 2008, ApJS, 178, 374
Kurucz, R. L. 2005, Mem. Soc. Astron. Italiana Suppl., 8, 189
Kurucz, R. L., Furenlid, I., Brault, J., & Testerman, L. 1984, Solar Flux Atlas
from 296 to 1300nm, National Solar Observatory Atlas No. 1, Harvard
University

Lanza, A. F., Molaro, P., Monaco, L., & Haywood, R. D. 2016, A&A, 587, A103
Lawler, J. E., Wood, M. P., Den Hartog, E. A., et al. 2014, ApJS, 215, 20
Lemke, U., & Reiners, A. 2016, PASP, 128, 095002
Lemoine, M., Ferlet, R., & Vidal-Madjar, A. 1995, A&A, 298, 879
Livingston, W., Wallace, L., Whitre, O. R., & Giampapa, M. 2007, ApJ, 657,

1137

Lodders, K. 2003, ApJ, 591, 1220
Ludwig H.-G., Caﬀau, E., Steﬀen, M., Freytag, B., Bonifacio, P. & Kucinskas,

A. 2009, Mem. Soc. Astron. Italiana, Vol. 80, 711

Mack, C. E. III, Strassmeier, K. G., Ilyin, I., Schuler, S. C., & Spada, F. 2018,

A&A, submitted (paper III)

Markwardt, C. B. 2009, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference
Series, Vol. 411, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XVIII,
ed. D. A. Bohlender, D. Durand, & P. Dowler, 251

Mel´endez, J., Bergemann, M., Cohen, J. G., et al. 2012, A&A, 543, A29
Meunier N., Lagrange A.-M., Borgniet S., & Rieutord M. 2015, A&A, 583,

A118

Minnaert, M., Houtgast, J., & Mulders, G. F. W. 1940, Photometric atlas of the
solar spectrum from 3612 to 8771 with an appendix from 3332 to 3637

Molaro, P., & Monai, S. 2012, A&A, 544, A125
Molaro, P., Esposito, M., Monai, S., et al. 2013, A&A, 560, A61
Molaro, P., Lanza, A. F., Monaco, L., Tosi, F., Lo Curto, G., Fulle, M., &

Pasquini, L. 2016, MNRAS, 458, L54

Mott, A., Steﬀen, M., Caﬀau, E., Spada, F., & Strassmeier, K. G. 2017, A&A,

604, A44

M¨uller, E. A., Peytremann, E., & de la Reza, R. 1975, Solar Phys., 41, 53
Neckel, H., & Labs, D. 1984, Solar Phys., 90, 205
Norlen, G. 1973, Phys. Scripta, 8, 249
Pall´e, P. L., Jimenez, A., Perez Hernandez, F., et al. 1995, ApJ, 441, 952
Pall´e, P. L., R´egulo, C., Roca Cort´ez, T., et al. 1999, A&A, 341, 625
Palmer, B. A., & Engleman, R. Jr. 1983, Atlas of the Thorium Spectrum, ed.

H. Sinoradzky, Los Alamos National Laboratory

Pepe, F., Mayor, M., Delabre, B., et al. 2000, SPIE, 4008, 582
Pevtsov, A., Bertello, L., & Marble, A. R. 2014, AN, 335, 21
Probst, R. A., Wang, L., Doerr, H.-P. et al. 2015, New J. Phys., 17, 023048
Reiners, A., Mrotzek, N., Lemke, U., Hinrichs, J., & Reinsch, K. 2016, A&A,

587, A65

Ritzenhoﬀ, S., Schr¨oter, E. H., & Schmidt, W. 1997, A&A, 328, 695
Santos, N. C., Adibekyan, V., Mordasini, C., et al. 2015, A&A, 580, L13
Schweizer, F. 1979, PASP, 91, 149
Steﬀen, M., Prakapavicius, D., Caﬀau, E., et al. 2015, A&A, 583, A57
Strassmeier, K. G. 2009, A&ARv, 17, 251
Strassmeier, K. G., Ilyin, I., Jaervinen, A., et al. 2015, AN, 336, 324
Strassmeier, K. G., Ilyin, I., & Weber, M. 2017, A&A, in press (paper II)
Wallace, L., Hinkle, K., & Livingston, W. 2007, An Atlas of the Spectrum of the
1 (2942 to 7405Å), National

Solar Photosphere from 13,500 to 33,980 cm−
Optical Astronomy Observatories, Tucson, AZ

Wallace, L., Hinkle, K. H., Livingston, W. C., & Davis, S. P. 2011, ApJS, 195, 6
Wallace, L., Livingston, W., Hinkle, K., & Bernath, P. 1996, ApJS, 106, 165

11

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

Fig. 6. Terrestrial water-vapor lines in the CN-line region near
8000 Å for the Sun (top) and the solar-twin 18 Sco (bottom;
shifted by –0.15). The PEPSI spectra are shown as dots. The so-
lar spectrum is compared with the IAG FTS atlas (the deep-lined
spectrum in red) and the “dry” NSO FTS atlas (weaker lined in
blue). The IAG FTS spectrum is contaminated by very strong
telluric lines while the NSO spectrum is comparably more nois-
ier. Note that the 18 Sco spectrum was shifted to match the solar
spectrum.

a.

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
3910

3920

3930

3940

3950

3960

3970

3980

3990

b.

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

c.

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

3928

3930

3932

3934

3936

3938

Fe I

Mn I

5394.2

5394.4

5394.6

5394.8

5395

5395.2

5395.4

d.

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

7771.6

7771.7

7771.8

7771.9

7772

7772.1

7772.2

Fig. 5. Comparison of four representative wavelength portions
with FTS solar atlases. The PEPSI spectrum is always plotted as
big black dots except in panel a where only the PEPSI spectrum
is shown. Panel a. shows the full Ca ii H&K doublet; b. is a zoom
into the core of the Ca ii K line compared with the NSO FTS
atlas (line); c. shows the Mn i 5394.7-Å line. The NSO and IAG
FTS atlases are plotted as lines (the more blueshifted line is the
NSO atlas). Panel d. shows the O i triplet line at 7771.9 Å. In this
panel the IAG FTS is plotted as a line and the NSO FTS as small
blue dots. Both atlases are adopted with their nominal spectral
resolution.

12

K. G. Strassmeier, I. Ilyin, and M. Steﬀen: PEPSI deep spectra. I. The Sun as a star

a.

s
/
m

,
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
a
V
R

b.

/

s
m

,

y
t
i

c
o
e
v

l

l

a
i
d
a
R

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0.001

0.002

0.003

0.004

0.005

Frequency, Hz

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-0.25

0

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

1.25

Phased with P=5.5 min

Fig. 7. Detection of solar p-mode oscillations with Sun-as-a-star
PEPSI spectra. a. Frequency ﬁts from the time series of 8.5 hours
on Oct. 15, 2016. The peak at 3 mHz (5.5 min) appears with an
1 (the blue line is the window function).
amplitude of 47 cm s−
b. RV versus phase combined with the best-ﬁt period. Its rms is
1.2 m s−

1.

a.

x
u

l
f

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

b.

x
u
l
f

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

1.00

0.99

0.98

0.97

0.96

0.95

A(Li)
6Li/7Li
shift
FWHM  =  2.15 km/s

 =  1.09 +/- 0.006
 =  1.44 +/- 1.646 [%]
 = -0.0710 km/s

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

)
s
b
o

-

t

h
n
y
s
(

x

0
0
1

l

i

a
u
d
s
e
R

6707.0

6707.5

6708.0

6708.5

λ [A]

0.998

0.996

0.994

0.992

0.990

0.988

0.986

0.984

7Li

7Li

6Li

6Li

observation
6Li/7Li =   0.0%
6Li/7Li =   1.4%
6Li/7Li = 10.0%

6707.6

6707.7

6707.8

6707.9
λ [A]

6708.0

6708.1

6708.2

Fig. 8. Li i 6707.8-Å line of the Sun. a. A 1.8-Å section of a
deep PEPSI spectrum (thick black line) and the ﬁt with a syn-
thetic 3D NLTE spectrum (dashed line). The insert lists the best-
ﬁt free parameters. The residuals (thin lines) are enhanced by a
factor 100 for better visibility and oﬀset to
0.96 units in ﬂux.
b. A zoom into a 0.6 Å subsection centered on the two Li dou-
blets. Observations are now indicated as open diamonds with
error bars. The colored lines are based on the best ﬁt from panel
a but for three diﬀerent isotope ratios as indicated in the insert.
The dashed line is the best ﬁt.

≈

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
