Status and Objectives of the Dedicated Accelerator R&D Facility ”SINBAD” at DESY

U. Dorda, B. Marchetti, J. Zhu, F. Mayet, W. Kuropka, T. Vinatier, G. Vashchenko, K. Galaydych, P.A. Walker, D. Marx, R.
Brinkmann, R. Assmanna, N.H. Matlis, A. Fallahi, F. X. Kaertnerb

aDESY, Hamburg, Germany
bCFEL, Hamburg, Germany

Abstract

We present a status update on the dedicated R&D facility SINBAD which is currently under construction at DESY. The facility
will host multiple independent experiments on the acceleration of ultra-short electron bunches and novel, high gradient acceleration
methods. The ﬁrst experiment is the ARES-experiment with a normal conducting 100 MeV S-band linac at its core. We present
the objectives of this experiment ranging from the study of compression techniques to sub-fs level to its application as injector for
various advanced acceleration schemes e.g. the plans to use ARES as a test-site for DLA experiments in the context of the ACHIP
collaboration. The time-line including the planned extension with laser driven plasma-wakeﬁeld acceleration is presented. The
second initial experiment is AXSIS which aims to accelerate fs-electron bunches to 15 MeV in a THz driven dielectric structure
and subsequently create X-rays by inverse Compton scattering.

Keywords: SINBAD, Accelerator R&D, Research facility, DESY

1. Introduction

The Helmholtz foundation has identiﬁed accelerator R&D as
one of its core tasks. In line with this objective, DESY is cur-
rently setting up the dedicated, long term accelerator R&D fa-
cility ”SINBAD” in the premises of the old DORIS accelerator
complex.

After 40 years of successful operation, the DORIS accelera-
tor at DESY was shut down at the end of 2012. In the past two
years the old accelerator has been removed, the building refur-
bished, and the installation of the required technical infrastruc-
ture is currently ﬁnishing. Conveniently located at the heart of
DESY, the existing 300 m long race-track shaped tunnel, fea-
tures two 70 m long 5-9 m wide straight sections and two arcs
(Fig. 1).

The SINBAD project is the framework for all R&D activities
in this area and intends to set up multiple independent experi-
ments in ultra-fast science and high gradient accelerator mod-
ules. The ﬁrst objective includes topics like synchronization
R&D, fs to as-regime electron beams, high brightness beams
from RF photo injectors as well as sophisticated beam shaping
and will be studied in the ﬁrst of the two initial experiments,
the ARES-linac. Moreover, SINBAD will perform experiments
on novel acceleration techniques by applying various diﬀerent
laser-driven approaches with external or internal electron beam
injection. This will on the one hand side be done with dielec-
tric structures in the context of the ACHIP collaboration [4]
with DLAs at ARES and with THz driven dielectric loaded
structures at AXSIS. Finally, laser-driven plasma acceleration
as second step behind the ARES linac will be studied in close
collaboration with the University of Hamburg and in the con-
text of the Helmholtz wide collaboration on plasma acceleration
”ATHENA”.

Figure 1: Rendering of the SINBAD facility with the two initial experiments
indicated

2. The AXSIS experiment

One of the two initial experiments, the ’AXSIS’ project [11],
is a ERC-synergy grant funded collaboration of 4 groups aim-
ing to develop a THz-laser driven, all-optical, compact X-ray
source. The millimeter scale of the driving ﬁeld promises to
oﬀer a favorable compromise between conventional accelera-
tors and other advanced accelerators like plasma-based or laser-
driven devices with signiﬁcantly smaller structure dimensions.
While one part of the team is pushing the amount of achiev-
able THz (300 GHz) power towards the required levels, vari-
ous diﬀerent THz-based guns are designed [2]. Initial tests of
a prototype THz-gun were performed and produced keV level
acceleration of electrons using micro Joule, single-cycle THz
pulses. While the performance must still be signiﬁcantly in-
creased with the next guns, the experimental results are now
well understood [18]. With the ﬁnal gun design, pC level elec-
tron bunches will be extracted from a photo-cathode and accel-

Preprint submitted to Nuclear Instruments and Methods A

January 10, 2018

8
1
0
2

n
a
J

9

]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
5
2
8
2
0
.
1
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
erated to ≈ 800 keV.

In order to not let the space charge eﬀect blow up the bunch,
the linac will be located right after the gun. The linac is made
from a dielectric loaded waveguide of ≈ 10 cm length [15]. The
dielectric loading allows to slow down the phase-velocity of the
THz-pulse. In the ﬁnal stage, the electron beam will be focused
and collided with an optical laser to create X-rays.

With the corresponding laser labs being constructed right
now and the tunnel area infrastructure being installed, we aim
to start experiments in the ﬁnal AXSIS site, in one of the arcs
of the SINBAD facility, in fall 2018.

3. The SINBAD-ARES experiment

The ARES-linac [8] is a S-band (2.998 GHz) linac which ac-
celerates electron bunches to 100 MeV while compressing them
to fs-length. These ultrashort bunches can then subsequently be
used for experiments.

3.1. The linac setup

A CAD rendering of the linac section can be seen in Fig-
ure 2. The electron bunches of typically 0.3-30 pC are created
and accelerated in a 1.6 cell RF-gun (modiﬁed version of the
one used at DESY-REGAE [3]) to 5 MeV. The electrons are ex-
tracted by photoemission by a 1 mJ Yb doped laser at 257 nm
with a variable FWHM pulse length between 180 fs and 10 ps.
During the ﬁrst commissioning phase, the ﬁrst solenoid will be
located ≈ 0.4m after the photo-cathode. A ﬁrst iteration of a
design for an additional solenoid right at the RF-gun exit has
already been developed and is planned to be installed together
with a bucking coil in 2019 leading to a reduction of the mini-
mal achievable transverse emittances. Several beam diagnostic
devices including screens, Faraday cups etc and a spectrome-
ter dipole, cover about 2.5 m until the start of the ﬁrst of two
traveling wave linac structures (TWS). These 4.2 m long TWS
with external RF-dump are surrounded by solenoids for emit-
tance compensation. Each one will be powered by a dedicated
45 MW RF station and could - if operated on-crest - provide
75 MV energy gain. In practice one or both will be operated
oﬀ-crest,to compress the bunch to fs-length [7, 22, 23]. The
compression will either be done via velocity bunching in the
ﬁrst TWS or via a magnetic bunch compressor after the linac or
a hybrid compression scheme. The two structures are separated
by a about 1.2 m long intertank section containing the neces-
sary beam diagnostic and orbit correctors. The space reserved
for the installation of a third TWS will at the start be used for
initial experiments. At the end a dedicated beam diagnostic line
allow characterization of the beam and optimization of the linac
performance. The linac will run in single bunch mode with up
to 50Hz repetition rate. The beam line design as well as the
whole layout is - within the restrictions of the given building
- designed for minimal arrival time jitter. At ARES, the linac
itself will be the object of studies including e.g. comparison of
various compression methods, synchronization R&D and beam
shaping techniques. In parallel it will then be used to provide
beams for downstream experiments. The ultra short bunches

Figure 2: Rendering of the ARES linac showing the beam line in the tunnel as
well as the associated infrastructure (RF-stations, photo-cathode laser and rack
room)

will be ideally suited for injection into advanced schemes and
allow probing their phase space acceptance.

The installation of the gun stage is currently starting up and
beam commissioning is aimed for spring 2018. The linac stage
will be added in fall 2018, allowing for ﬁrst experiments in
spring 2019.

3.2. X-band TDS for 6D tomography

In collaboration with CERN and PSI, an X-band transverse
deﬂecting structure (TDS) with variable polarization is cur-
rently being developed [9].
In addition to its main objective
to measure the longitudinal beam proﬁle with fs resolution (to
study and optimize the compression methods), this novel de-
vice will allow to select the streaking direction. Using the
data from multiple shots with diﬀerent streaking angles, tomo-
graphic methods will be applied to characterize the complete
6D phase-space. [10]

3.3. Dielectric structure experiments

The SINBAD-ARES linac is one of the intended future test
sites for the ACHIP collaboration [4] which studies DLA-type
structures. In the ﬁrst stage it is foreseen to place the experi-
ment at the location which is reserved for a third traveling wave
structure (Figure 3). The required strong focusing of the exter-
nal beam to the µ-scale structures is provided by the solenoids
surrounding the two up-stream TWS structures [14]. Initially,
a part of the photocathode laser will be split oﬀ and used to
power the DLA structures. It is not yet decided if an optical
parametric ampliﬁer will be added to convert the laser from
1 um to 2 um. Naturally the DLA structure size needs to be
adapted accordingly. This setup has the advantage of intrinsic
synchronization between the photo-cathode laser- and the DLA
drive laser-beams. The relative electron to laser phase jitter at
the DLA is hence mainly given by the RF-induced beam arrival
time jitter contribution.

In previous acceleration experiments with such structures,
the bunch length has been signiﬁcantly longer than the laser

2

ﬁnal approval stage from the Helmholtz foundation. Together
with university partners, it aims to push this technology by set-
ting up two ﬂag-ship programs. While studies on laser plasma
acceleration of ions will be performed at HZDR in Dresden, the
electron activities will be focused at SINBAD. For this purpose,
a high power laser lab will be installed in the large central hall
in the next few years. The high power laser will then be used
to serve multiple experiments. While experiments using the ex-
ternally injected beam from ARES will be done in one straight
section, internal injection will be studied in the second straight
section. Like this SINBAD will be a important preparation step
towards the implementation of the EUPRAXIA design study
[21, 17].

3.6. External access via ARIES TNA

While SINBAD is a DESY project, access will be possible
to external researchers. This will mainly be done in the con-
text of collaborations, but also via the ARIES transnational ac-
cess program free of charge [1]. This EU-funded Integrating
Activity project aims to develop European particle accelerator
infrastructures and contains the task to open research facilities
to external users.

4. Summary/Conclusion

We have presented the objectives and status of the SINBAD
facility and its two initial experiments, AXSIS & ARES. The
installation of the dedicated accelerator R&D facility is pro-
gressing well and experiments on ultra-fast science and ad-
vanced acceleration schemes are developed.

5. Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge the work of all the DESY technical
groups involved in the renovation, planning and construction of
the facility. In addition, we would like to mention our collabo-
ration partners at LAOLA, ATHENA & ACHIP. The AXSIS re-
lated research leading to these results has received funding from
the European Research Council under the European Union’s
Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013) / ERC Grant
Agreement n. 609920’. Access via the ARIES-TNA program
will partially be sponsored via the European Unions Horizon
2020 Research and Innovation programme under grant agree-
ment No 730871. ACHIP related activities are partially funded
by the Gordon and Betty Moore foundation (GBMF4744).

References

[1] Accelerator research and innovation for european science and society.

https://aries.web.cern.ch/.

[2] A. Fallahi and et. al. Short electron bunch generation using single-cycle
ultrafast electron guns. Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams, 19:081302, Aug 2016.
[3] Klaus Floettmann and et. al. ”REGAE: New source for atomically re-

solved dynamics”. Research in Optical Sciences, 2012.

[4] R. Ischebeck and et. al. The accelerator on a chip international pro-
gram ACHIP. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research
Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equip-
ment, 2017.

Figure 3: Sketch of the ACHIP experimental area at ARES and the laser split
of from the photocathode laser

Figure 4: Beam energy distribution before the DLA and after it showing that the
shortness of the ARES-linac beam should allow net-acceleration for selected
single shots. Depending on the arrival time jitter from shot to shot, the electron
to laser phase will vary and thus also cases with net energy loss be observed.
Here the ideal case of maximal acceleration is shown.

length and thus all electron-to-laser phases have been covered.
The shortness of the ARES bunches will allow injecting the
bunch only to a limited phase range (< 90 degree at 2 um).
While the design of the ARES-linac is optimized to minimize
also this RF-induced arrival time jitter, a sub-fs level synchro-
nization will probably still be out of reach. For the shots where
the phase happens to be at maximum, net acceleration will be
observed (Figure 4). In other cases, also net-energy loss or only
energy modulation will occur [5].

In order to address this issue, in another experiment the DLA-
laser beam will be split to not only power the structure but also
to micro-bunch the linac beam upstream of the DLA. Similar to
the work presented in [16], this will be done by energy modu-
lating the beam by overlapping it in an undulator and then com-
pressing the bunches in a small magnetic chicane. This creates
a number of microbunches spaced at the correct distance for the
DLA and intrinsically synchronized to it [13, 12].

Furthermore, in another planned experiment the suitability of

such structures as transverse deﬂectors will be studied [6].

3.4. THz experiments at ARES

In parallel to the all optical eﬀorts for THz acceleration in
the AXSIS experiments, the linac stage may be tested with the
well characterized beam from the ARES linac [20]. In addi-
tion to these acceleration experiments, the high frequency of the
THz ﬁelds will be used in testing THz streaking experiments or
bunch length measurements via the 3 phase method [19].

3.5. Laser plasma wakeﬁeld acceleration experiments

A proposal by 6 Helmholtz centers for a joint laser plasma
accelerator research program ”ATHENA” has just entered the

3

Matching Section+ Spectrometer for CommissioningARES-linac13.5 mCathode Laser (Pharos SP-200)CollimatorTarget Chamber257 nm1000 nmVacuum ValveScreenSteerers(H/V)DLAnot to scaleto scale17.5 mDLA Laser Table and DiagnosticsQuadrupoleDLA Laser Systemnot to scale[5] W. Kuropka and et. al. Full PIC simulation of ﬁrst ACHIP experiment
@ SINBAD. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research
Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equip-
ment, 2017.

[6] W. Kuropka and et. al. Simulation of deﬂecting structures for dielectric
laser driven accelerators. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associ-
ated Equipment, 2017.

[7] B. Marchetti and et. al. Electron-beam manipulation techniques in the
SINBAD linac for external injection in plasma wake-ﬁeld acceleration.
Nucl. Instr. and Methods in Physics A, 829, 2016.

[8] B. Marchetti and et. al. Status update of the SINBAD-ARES linac under
construction at DESY. In Proceedings of the 8th International Particle
Accelerator Conference, 2017.

[9] B. Marchetti and et. al. X-band TDS project. In Proceedings of the 8th

International Particle Accelerator Conference, 2017.

[10] D. Marx and et. al.

”new measurement techniques using a novel X-
band transverse deﬂecting structure with variable polarization”. Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,
Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2017.

[11] N. Matlis and et. al. Acceleration of electrons in THz driven structures:
ﬁrst steps towards AXSIS. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associ-
ated Equipment, 2017.

[12] F. Mayet and et. al. A concept for phase-synchronous acceleration of mi-
crobunch trains in DLA structures at SINBAD. In Proc. IPAC’17, 2017.
[13] F. Mayet and et. al. Simulations and plans for possible DLA experi-
ments at SINBAD. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research
Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equip-
ment, 2017.

[14] F. Mayet and et. al. Using short drive laser pulses to achieve net focusing
forces in tailored dual grating dielectric structures. Nuclear Instruments
and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers,
Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2017.

[15] E. Nanni and et. al. Terahertz-driven linear electron acceleration. Nature

communications, 2015.

[16] C. Sears. Production, Characterization, and Acceleration of Optical Mi-

crobunches. PhD thesis, Stanford university, 2008.

[17] E. Svystun and et. al. Beam quality preservation in a laser-plasma ac-
celerator with external injection in the context of EuPRAXIA. Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,
Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2017.

[18] G. Vashchenko and et. al. Performance of the prototype THz-driven elec-
tron gun for the AXSIS project. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and
Associated Equipment, 2017.

[19] T. Vinatier and et. al. Possible experiments using dielectric-loaded waveg-
uides on the ARES linac. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associ-
ated Equipment, 2017.

[20] T. Vinatier and et. al. Simulations of an hybrid and compact attosecond
X-ray source based on RF and THz technologies. Nuclear Instruments
and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers,
Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2017.

[21] P. A. Walker and et. al. Horizon 2020 EuPRAXIA design study. Journal

of Physics: Conference Series, 874(1):012029, 2017.

[22] J. Zhu. Design Study for Generating Sub-femtosecond to Femtosecond
Electron Bunches for Advanced Accelerator Development at SINBAD.
PhD thesis, Hamburg University, 2017.

[23] J. Zhu and et. al. Sub-fs bunch generation with sub-10-fs bunch arrival
time jitter via bunch slicing in a magnetic chicane. Phys. Rev. ST Accel.
Beams, 19, 2016.

4

