Journal of Low Temperature Physics manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Stacked Wafer Gradient Index Silicon Optics with Integral
Anti-reﬂection Layers

F. Defrance, G. Chattopadhyay, J. Connors, S.
Golwala, M. I. Hollister, C. Jung-Kubiak , E. Padilla,
S. Radford, J. Sayers , E. C. Tong, H. Yoshida

8
1
0
2

n
u
J

8
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
4
5
8
4
0
.
2
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later

Abstract Silicon optics with wide bandwidth anti-reﬂection (AR) coatings, made of multi-
layer textured silicon surfaces, are developed for millimeter and submillimeter wavelengths.
Single and double layer AR coatings were designed for an optimal transmission centered on
250 GHz, and fabricated using the DRIE (Deep Reaction Ion Etching) technique. Tests of
high resistivity silicon wafers with single-layer coatings between 75 GHz and 330 GHz are
presented and compared with the simulations.

Keywords THz, GHz, metasurface, anti-reﬂection, coating, DRIE, silicon, multilayer,
optics.

1 Introduction

Observations at millimeter and submillimeter wavelengths (tens of GHz to THz frequencies)
are central to addressing a range of forefront topics in astronomy. Studies of the polariza-
tion of the Cosmic Microwave Background radiation (CMB) and of the structure, internal
motions, and evolution of galaxy clusters, share the primary technical requirements of high
sensitivity and wide ﬁeld imaging across a wide spectral bandwidth. Achromatic transmis-
sion optics, including lenses and windows, are a critical technology. Although the require-
ments of future astronomy missions (on the ground and in space) are the primary motivation
for developing this technology, other applications include studies of planets and other solar
system objects, monitoring the earth’s atmosphere, and emerging reconnaissance and secu-
rity uses. Silicon’s high refractive index and low loss make it an ideal optical material for
developing achromatic transmission optics at these frequencies. It is even possible to use
silicon for ambient temperature vacuum windows. Silicon’s large refractive index, however,
necessitates anti-reﬂection (AR) coating. Moreover, multilayer anti-reﬂection treatments are
necessary for wide spectral bandwidths, with wider bandwidths requiring more layers. To
this end, we are developing multilayer coatings for silicon by bonding together wafers in-
dividually patterned with deep reactive ion etching (DRIE). While a standard approach to
anti-reﬂection coating is to deposit or laminate dielectric layers of appropriate refractive

Division of Physics, Mathematics and Astronomy, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA 91125, US
E-mail: fdefranc@caltech.edu

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

F. Defrance et al.

index [1], it is difﬁcult (but not impossible) to ﬁnd low loss dielectrics with the correct re-
fractive index and other properties to match silicon well, especially if more than one layer is
required, operation up to THz frequencies is desired, and/or the optic will be used cryogeni-
cally. Textured surfaces are an attractive alternative to dielectric anti-reﬂection coatings. For
millimeter wavelengths, multi-layer anti-reﬂection textures with up to 4:1 bandwidths have
been cut successfully into silicon lens surfaces with a dicing saw [2, 3] but this technique
becomes unusable at frequencies of 300 GHz and higher given the saw dimensions. Laser
machining is being explored but demonstrations are not yet available. DRIE works well on
ﬂat surfaces (and has been demonstrated for narrowband windows to THz frequencies), but
there are limits to the depth and aspect ratio of the features it can create. Furthermore etch-
ing has not been adapted to large, curved optics. We are pursuing a hybrid approach to this
problem: construct a silicon optic by stacking ﬂat patterned wafers. The starting point is
a multilayer optical design incorporating both an axial gradient in the refractive index for
anti-reﬂection and a radial index gradient for focusing. For each optical layer, a hole or post
pattern is used to achieve the required effective index of refraction. Using a novel multilayer
etching procedure, several layers of the optical structure are fabricated on a ﬂat wafer. Sev-
eral individually patterned wafers are stacked and bonded together to produce the completed
optic. This approach can thus address the aspect ratio limitations of DRIE, and it obviates
etching on curved surfaces. We present our results to date, which include measurements at
75-330 GHz of single-layer coatings. These measurements indicate the basic technique is
sound. Our near-term goal is to produce a 10-cm lens with a 7-layer coating providing 5.5:1
bandwidth from 75 to 420 GHz, eventually scaling up to 15-cm, 30-cm, and larger elements.

2 Design and Simulation

2.1 Effective refractive index

Texturing an optical surface can reduce reﬂections by effectively reducing the refractive
index of the surface layer. Textured surfaces are an attractive alternative to dielectric AR
coatings. Artiﬁcial AR structures have been produced for wavelengths from the UV [4] to
the microwave [5]. So long as the characteristic size of the surface texture is (much) smaller
than the wavelength, the AR structure behaves like a continuous medium. By suitable choice
of the structure geometry, layers with speciﬁc refractive indexes can be fabricated. The re-
fractive index obtained by texturing the surface is called effective refractive index (cf. ﬁg. 1).

Fig. 1: Example of a double layer AR structure with two different effective refractive indexes

Different pattern geometries give different effective refractive indexes for a same ﬁlling
factor. Fig 2 shows the effective refractive indexes of holes, posts and grooves of different
shapes made of (or made in) silicon. Two groove directions were studied, parallel to the

Stacked Wafer Gradient Index Silicon Optics with Integral Anti-reﬂection Layers

3

electric ﬁeld (TE or ordinary) and perpendicular to the electric ﬁeld (TM or extraordinary),
as explained by Brundrett et al. [6]. We notice that the relation between effective refractive
index and ﬁlling factor is also very different for posts and holes, but the shape of these posts
or holes (square, circular, hexagonal, hexagonal) has little effect. The effective refractive
index of posts is detailed by Biber et al. [7].

Fig. 2: Relation between ﬁlling factor ( fs) and effective index (ne f f ) for different geometries.
HFSS simulations (symbols) and models predictions (lines).

2.2 Current design

We designed and fabricated two single-layer AR coatings (one with square holes and one
with square posts), and one double-layer AR coating (with square holes and square posts).
These designs were optimized to have a maximum transmission around 250 GHz and the
spatial period of the patterns is 125 µm (cf. ﬁgs. 3 & 4).

– The two single-layer AR coatings were designed with a thickness of 162 µm (λ0/(4.ne f f )),
where ne f f = 1.85, and λ0 is the wavelength in vacuum (1.2 mm for a frequency of
250 GHz). The side of the holes is 101 µm and the side of the posts is 99 µm.

– The double-layer AR coating was designed with a top layer of square posts (ne f f = 1.39,
height = 215 µm and side = 72 µm) and a bottom layer of square holes (ne f f = 2.46,
height = 121 µm and side = 77 µm).

3 Fabrication

The fabrication of the 1- and 2-layer AR coatings was done at JPL (Jet Propulsion Labora-
tory) with DRIE (Deep Reactive Ion Etching) on high and low resistivity silicon wafers [8].

4

F. Defrance et al.

Low-resistivity wafers are not suitable for optical testing due to in-band absorption loss, but
were useful for developing and verifying the fabrication process. We have now progressed
to fabricating 2-layer designs on high resistivity wafers that are suitable for optical testing.
The etching was done on 1 mm thick and 100 mm diameter silicon wafers. The dimensions
of the fabricated structures are very close to the design dimensions (±3µm), as shown on
ﬁg 4.

Fig. 3: SEM pictures of fabricated single layer silicon wafers, with ne f f = 1.85 and a height
of 162 µm. Left, square posts (side = 99 µm) and right, square holes (side = 101 µm).

Fig. 4: SEM pictures of fabricated double layer silicon wafers. Top layer: square posts
(ne f f = 1.39, height = 215 µm and side = 72 µm), bottom layer: square holes (ne f f = 2.46,
height = 121 µm and side = 77 µm)

4 Measurement Bench

The measurement bench (cf. ﬁg 5) is made of a solid-state frequency multiplier chain gen-
erating a signal (Gaussian beam) between 75 GHz and 330 GHz, a quasi-optical setup with
3 parabolic mirrors and a translating support holding the samples, and two Schottky detec-
tors which receive the signals transmitted and reﬂected by the sample. To cover a frequency
between 75 GHz and 330 GHz, we have to measure three frequency bands separately (75-
115 GHz, 150-230 GHz, and 225-345 GHz). For band 1 (75-115 GHz), the frequency of
the synthesizer is only multiplied by a tripler, for band 2 a doubler is added at the end of
the chain, and for band 3 the doubler is replaced by a tripler. The signal generated by the
frequency synthesizer is modulated (in amplitude) at 10 Hz which allows the use of lockin
ampliﬁers to read the signals at the output of the Schottky detectors. The translating support
makes a 15o angle with the incident beam and has ﬁve slots, three are used for samples, one

Stacked Wafer Gradient Index Silicon Optics with Integral Anti-reﬂection Layers

5

is a hole and one is a mirror. To measure the transmission of the samples, we calculate the
ratio of the power transmitted by the hole and by the sample, and the reﬂection is the ratio
of the power reﬂected by the sample and by the mirror. A 10 dB foam absorber has been
installed after the ﬁrst parabolic mirror to reduce the standing waves.

Fig. 5: Schematic of the test setup to characterize the silicon wafers

5 Single AR layer wafers: Test Results

Only the single-layer high resistivity silicon wafers have been tested (the double-layer sam-
ples will be tested soon). Three different conﬁgurations were fabricated and tested: single
sided wafers with square holes and posts (cf. ﬁgs. 6 a & b), double sided wafers with square
holes (cf. ﬁg. 6 c), two single sided wafers bonded together with square holes and posts
(cf. ﬁgs. 6 d & e). For each of these 3 conﬁgurations and for the 2 geometries (holes and
posts), the test results have been compared with the simulation results given by HFSS.

6 Conclusion

The tests of single-layer AR coatings agree well with the HFSS simulations, which vali-
dates the fabrication and testing setup. The transmission of the tested single-layer double
sided sample is better than 90% between 170 GHz and 330 GHz. However, to study the po-
larization of the CMB and the galaxy clusters, we need a transmission better than 99% be-
tween 75 GHz and 420 GHz, which will require a 7 layer AR coating. Double-layer samples
have already been successfully fabricated, and new designs with more layers, incorporating
wafer-bonding, are planned to be fabricated in a near future. Finally, our goal is to combine
this broadband multilayer AR coating with gradient index focusing optics.

Acknowledgements This work was funded by NASA (Grant NNX15AE01G).

6

F. Defrance et al.

a) Single sided, single layer, square posts

b) Single sided, single layer, square holes

c) Double sided, single layer, square holes

d) Two Single sided, single layer, square posts wafers bonded together

e) Two Single sided, single layer, square holes wafers bonded together

Fig. 6: Measured transmission and reﬂection of high resistivity silicon single layer wafers
compared with HFSS simulations, Left, linear plots and Right, log plots

.

Stacked Wafer Gradient Index Silicon Optics with Integral Anti-reﬂection Layers

7

References

1. A. J. Gatesman, J. Waldman, M. Ji, C. Musante, and S. Yagvesson, Microwave and

Guided Wave Letters, IEEE 10, 264, (2000).

2. R. Datta, C. D. Munson, M. D. Niemack, J. J. McMahon, J. Britton, E. J. Wollack,
J. Beall, M. J. Devlin, J. Fowler, P. Gallardo, J. Hubmayr, K. Irwin, L. Newburgh, J.
P. Nibarger, L. Page, M. A. Quijada, B. L. Schmitt, S. T. Staggs, R. Thornton, and L.
Zhang, Appl. Opt. 52, 8747, (2013).

3. J. D. Wheeler, B. Koopman, P. Gallardo, P. R. Maloney, S. Brugger, G. Cortes-Medellin,
R. Datta, C. D. Dowell, J. Glenn, S. Golwala, C. McKenney, J. J. McMahon, C. D.
Munson, M. Niemack, S. Parshley, and G. Stacey, Millimeter, Submillimeter, and Far-
Infrared Detectors and Instrumentation for Astronomy VII 9153, 91532Z, (2014), DOI:
10.1117/12.2057011.

4. Y.-F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y.-J. Jen, C.-Y. Peng, T.-A. Liu, Y.-K. Hsu, C.-L. Pan,
H.-C. Lo, C.-H. Hsu, Y.-H. Chang, C.-S. Lee, K.-H. Chen, and L.-C. Chen, Nature
Nanotechnology 2, 770, (2007).

5. J. W. Lamb, Int. J. Infrared and Millimeter Waves 17, 2159, (1996).
6. D. L. Brundrett, E. N. Glytsis, and T. K. Gaylord, Appl. Opt. 33, 2695, (1994).
7. S. Biber, J. Richter, S. Martius, and L.-P. Schmidt, 33rd European Microwave Confer-

ence Proceedings 3, 1115, (2003).

8. C. Jung-Kubiak, J. Sayers, M. I. Hollister, A. Bose, H. Yoshida, L. Liao, J. Wong, S.
Radford, G. Chattopadhyay, and S. Golwala, 11th European Conference on Antennas
and Propagation, 959, (2017), DOI: 10.23919/EuCAP.2017.7928608.

