Full PIC simulation of a ﬁrst ACHIP experiment @ SINBAD

W. Kuropkaa,b, F. Mayeta,b, R. Aßmanna, U. Dordaa

aDeutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestraße 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany
bUniversität Hamburg, Mittelweg 177, 20148 Hamburg, Germany

8
1
0
2

b
e
F
8

]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
4
7
8
2
0
.
2
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

In laser illuminated dielectric accelerators (DLA) high acceleration gradients can be achieved due to high damage
thresholds of the materials at optical frequencies. This is a necessity for developing more compact particle accelerator
technologies. The Accelerator on a CHip International Program (ACHIP) funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore
Foundation is researching such devices. DESY Hamburg is part of the collaboration. The dedicated accelerator research
facility SINBAD is particularly well suited for DLA experiments at relativistic electron energies. High quality beams
and short bunch lengths are anticipated from the ARES linac which is currently under construction at SINBAD. The
aim of the experiment is the injection of a short electron bunch from the ARES linac into a DLA. In this study the
results of one of the ﬁrst possible experiments at the facility are estimated via a combination of particle-in-cell (PIC)
and tracking simulations. ASTRA is used to simulate an electron bunch from the ARES linac at a suitable working
point. The dielectric part of the setup will be simulated using the PIC code from CST Particle Studio incorporating the
retrieved bunch from the ASTRA simulation. The energy spectra of the electron bunches are calculated as would be
measured from a spectrometer dipole with and without the laser ﬁelds.

Keywords: dielectric laser accelerator, PIC, SINBAD, ACHIP

1. Introduction

The Accelerator on a CHip International Program
(ACHIP) is a research project funded by the Gordon and
Betty Moore Foundation. It aims at the construction of
a compact fully laser driven dielectric electron accelerator
for radiation generation and atto-second science. Several
Universities in Europe and the USA and the national Lab-
oratories PSI, DESY and SLAC are involved [1].

This research ﬁeld gains more attention in recent years
as the search for compact particle acceleration technologies
continues. Fully dielectric laser driven acceleration struc-
tures are foreseen to sustain high acceleration gradients in
the GV m−1 regime. This is mainly due to the high laser
damage thresholds of dielectrics at optical frequencies.
The advancement in micro- and nano-fabrication from the
semiconductor industry can be leveraged in the manufac-
turing of these structures limiting production costs. Also
the ongoing development in laser technologies promises
higher repetition rates and average powers suitable for
DLAs [2].

DESY Hamburg contributes to the ACHIP project by
granting access to its SINBAD facility and support from
the ARD (accelerator research and development) and laser
groups. SINBAD is the upcoming dedicated lon term ac-
celerator research and development facility at DESY. At

Email address: willi.kuropka@desy.de (W. Kuropka)

the moment two projects are foreseen to be implemented.
The ﬁrst is ARES (Accelerator Research Experiment at
Sinbad), which is based on a linac consisting of an S-band,
normal conducting radio frequency gun and traveling wave
accelerator structures. The second project is called AX-
SIS (Frontiers in Attosecond X-ray Science: Imaging and
Spectroscopy [3]) and aims at X-ray radiation generation
via inverse compton-scattering with electrons from THz-
driven dielectric lined waveguides [4].

The location of the ACHIP related experiments will be
at the ARES linac. It is foreseen to inject already relativis-
tic electron bunches at around 100 MeV from the linac into
the DLA structures. Its high beam quality and short fem-
tosecond electron bunches are well suited for DLA exper-
iments with small apertures and optical drive laser wave-
lengths. By driving the DLA with at least 2 µm wavelength
a single bunch net-acceleration experiment is feasible.

In this work we present a full PIC (CST Particle Studio
[5]) simulation of the DLA interaction with an ASTRA
[6] simulated electron bunch from the ARES linac. The
energy spectra with and without the laser ﬁeld are cal-
culated as anticipated from a dipole spectrometer. The
results are compared with a simpliﬁed simulation code for
DLAs developed in-house in our group [7].

Preprint submitted to Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A

September 20, 2018

 
 
 
 
 
 
2. ARES working point and experimental setup

The ARES linac consists of an S-band gun and two trav-
eling wave structures (TW). The experimental area will
be situated after the second TW shown in ﬁgure 1. For
this working point the ﬁrst TW is used oﬀ-crest for ve-
locity bunching yielding a longitudinal focus into the sec-
ond TW structure where the compressed bunch length is
ﬁxed due to reaching high Lorentz-factor. The TWs are
equipped with solenoid magnets to focus the beam trans-
versely. With this setup the working point shown in table
1 is achievable in simulation.

The cathode laser pulse has to be short to achieve the
short bunch lengths necessary, about 120 fs. The laser
pulse duration at the DLA is identical to the duration
at the cathode. The temporal and spatial shape of the
laser pulse are Gaussian. Table 2 shows the collected laser
parameters. The maximum electric ﬁeld amplitude in the
channel for the given pulse energy is around 4 GV m−1.
These parameters are still well below the anticipated dam-
age threshold of fused silica [10]. To have the maximum
possible energy gain the interaction length is elongated by
introducing a 45◦ pulse front tilt to the DLA drive pulse.
The resulting interaction length is 100 µm. The DLA for
the simulation is assumed with this length containing ca.
50 periods.

Table 2: laser pulse parameters

Parameter @ IP Value
Wavelength [µm]
σt [fs]
Energy [µJ]
σx [µm]
σy [µm]

2
120
14
50
10

Figure 1: Overview of the ARES linac with reserved space for the
experimental area.

Table 1: Simulated working point at structure center for minimal
bunch length using velocity bunching from [8]

Parameter @ IP

Value

Charge [pC]
Bunch Length [fs, FWHM]
E [MeV]
∆E/E [%]
σxy [µm]
(cid:15)n,xy [nm]

0.5
2.1 (0.3 * λ0)
99.1
0.12
7.8
105

For the ﬁrst experiments the drive laser power for the
DLA is split from the ARES cathode laser. A small part
of the power is converted to UV via a fourth-harmonic
generator. An optical parametric ampliﬁer is used to con-
vert the remaining laser power from 1 µm to 2 µm. This
is feasible due to low charge requirements for this kind
of experiment. The cathode laser delivers 1 mJ. For this
setup the split-oﬀ and the conversion eﬃciency of an OPA
of around 10 % only allow for low two digit µJ pulse en-
ergy at the 2 µm wavelength. Using this wavelength with
a period of 6.67 fs a net-gain in particle energy is possi-
ble since the bunch only covers a limited phase range of
around one third of the accelerating ﬁeld. Other methods
can be implemented to achieve net-gain of a bunch train
and to reduce arrival time jitter [9].

3. PIC simulation

The particle-in-cell code from CST Studio Suite 2017
was used for this simulation. A grating type pillar struc-
ture with 50 periods of fused silica illuminated from both
sides was simulated (see ﬁgure 2). The total laser pulse
energy is 14 µJ. Spatially a Gaussian intensity proﬁle of
the laser is assumed. The electron beam is assumed to
be collimated horizontally to the gap size of the DLA and
to a full width of 10 µm in vertical direction allowing only
small transmission of around 25 fC. The beam size does
not change signiﬁcantly along the structure. This should
still be detectable with an intensiﬁed CCD camera setup
[11].

At ﬁrst zero emittance test beams comprised of single
electrons emitted at each timestep from point sources were
simulated. Figure 3 shows the dependency of various par-
ticle parameters after the DLA interaction on the injection
time. As expected the accelerating electron-to-laser-phase
shows transverse defocusing.

At the phase of the highest achievable energy gain the
bunch from the ARES simulation was injected. The same
particle distribution was propagated using the in-house
code.

4. Results

In ﬁgure 4 the energy spectra of the bunch after the
DLA are shown with laser illumination and without. The

2

Figure 2: Schematic of the pillar grating type DLA with parameters
λ0 = 2 µm, A = 0.5 ∗ λ0, C = 0.37 ∗ λ0, H = 0.87 ∗ λ0.

Figure 4: Shown are the histograms of the particle energy distribu-
tion after the DLA. The ﬁrst histogram is without the laser ﬁeld.
The second one is from the PIC simulation with laser ﬁeld. And the
third one shows the spectrum from the in-house code.

random laser to electron phase. With a maximum repeti-
tion rate of 50 Hz sorting of the recorded spectra is feasible
to look at the single shot spectra. Methods to mitigate the
arrival time jitter are under investigation [12].

5. Outlook

The simulations have to be extended to include pos-
sible laser system upgrades to show the full potential of
the setup. Additional conventional or permanent mag-
net based focusing of the electron beam into the DLA
should be investigated to increase electron beam transmis-
sion. Methods to mitigate the arrival time jitter have to
be developed to show stable net acceleration and to scan
the electron to laser phase to fully characterize DLA struc-
tures. Optimization of the DLA structures with respect to
acceleration gradients and transverse beam manipulation
are underway.

6. Conclusion

It was shown that under the assumed conditions net-
acceleration in a DLA structure is possible at the ARES
linac with only minor modiﬁcations to the beam line. Such
an experiment has not been conducted so far, to the best
of our knowledge. Furthermore it was shown that the
in-house code can be used to model the electron-DLA-
interaction under the assumed conditions.

3

Figure 3: Shown is the data of three test particle beams from point
sources at the center of the structure gap and at a horizontal oﬀ-
sets from the center of 150 nm. The ﬁrst plot shows the horizontal
transverse kick of the particles. The second plot shows the horizon-
tal transverse oﬀset from the starting position. And the third shows
the particle energy. All show the corresponding diﬀerence before and
after the structure dependent on the injection time zoomed to the
period of maximum achievable energy gain.

interaction with the structure due to wakeﬁelds and beam
loading are not visible in the spectrum, which is to be
expected due to the symmetry of the beam and the low
charge. This is most likely due to the low bunch charge.
The spectrum with the laser ﬁeld shows a mean net-gain
in particle energy of 43.2 keV. This corresponds to an
acceleration gradient of 432 MeV/m.

The third histogram in ﬁgure 4 shows the result from
the in-house code, which is in good agreement with the full
PIC simulation. The transverse phase spaces are virtually
the same in all three scenarios. The short propagation
distance allows for no conclusion about the accuracy of
the code with respect to the PIC simulation.

It is important to mention the arrival time jitter of the
ARES linac, which is expected to be in the order of 10 fs.
This means that the actual bunches will be injected at a

7. Acknowledgments

References

This research was conducted under the Accelerator on a
CHip International Program (ACHIP) funded by the Gor-
don and Betty Moore Foundation via grant GBMF4744.

[1] Rasmus Ischebeck et. al. The accelerator-on-a-chip international

program. NIMA Proceedings, 2017.

[2] R Joel England, Robert J Noble, Karl Bane, David H Dow-
ell, Cho-Kuen Ng, James E Spencer, Sami Tantawi, Ziran Wu,
Robert L Byer, Edgar Peralta, et al. Dielectric laser accelera-
tors. Reviews of Modern Physics, 86(4):1337, 2014.

[3] Axsis. URL @Misc{CST,title={CST},url={https://www.cst.

com/},}.

[4] Ulrich Dorda et. al. Status and objectives of the dedicated
accelerator r&d facility "sinbad" at desy. NIMA Proceedings,
2017.

[5] Cst. URL https://www.cst.com/.
[6] Klaus Floettmann. Astra. URL http://www.desy.de/~mpyflo/.
[7] Willi Kuropka et. al. Simulation of a many period dielectric
IPAC2017 - Proceedings,

grating-based electron accelerator.
2017.

[8] F. Mayet, R.W. Aßmann, U. Dorda, W. Kuropka, B. Marchetti,
and J. Zhu. Simulations and Plans for a Dielectric Laser Ac-
In Proc. of International
celeration Experiment at SINBAD.
Particle Accelerator Conference (IPAC’17), Copenhagen,
Denmark, 14th-19th May, 2017, number 8 in International
Particle Accelerator Conference, pages 3264–3267, Geneva,
Switzerland, May 2017. JACoW. ISBN 978-3-95450-182-3. doi:
https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-IPAC2017-WEPVA007.
URL
https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-IPAC2017-WEPVA007.
[9] Frank Mayet et. al. Simulations and plans for possible dla ex-

http://jacow.org/ipac2017/papers/wepva007.pdf.

periments at sinbad. NIMA Proceedings, 2017.

[10] TQ Jia, HX Chen, M Huang, FL Zhao, XX Li, SZ Xu, HY Sun,
DH Feng, CB Li, XF Wang, et al. Ultraviolet-infrared fem-
tosecond laser-induced damage in fused silica and caf 2 crystals.
Physical Review B, 73(5):054105, 2006.

[11] M. Hachmann and K. Flöttmann. Measurement of ultra low
transverse emittance at REGAE. Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research A, 829:318–320, September 2016.
doi: 10.1016/j.nima.2016.01.065.

[12] F. Mayet et al.

A Concept for Phase-Synchronous Ac-
celeration of Microbunch Trains
in DLA Structures at
In Proc. of International Particle Accelerator
SINBAD.
Conference (IPAC’17), Copenhagen, Denmark, 14th-19th
May, 2017, number 8 in International Particle Accel-
Switzer-
erator Conference,
pages
land, May 2017. JACoW.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-IPAC2017-WEPVA006.
URL
https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-IPAC2017-WEPVA006.

http://jacow.org/ipac2017/papers/wepva006.pdf.

3260–3263, Geneva,
ISBN 978-3-95450-182-3.

4

