8
1
0
2

b
e
F
7

]
E
H
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
4
2
3
2
0
.
2
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–11 (2015)

Printed 10 September 2021

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

Hadronic model for the non-thermal radiation from

the binary system AR Scorpii

W. Bednarek

Department of Astrophysics, The University of  L´od´z, ul. Pomorska 149/153, 90-236  L´od´z, Poland,

bednar@uni.lodz.pl

Accepted . Received ; in original form

ABSTRACT

AR Scorpii is a close binary system containing a rotation powered white dwarf

and a low mass M type companion star. This system shows non-thermal

emission extending up to the X-ray energy range. We consider hybrid (lepto-

hadronic) and pure hadronic models for the high energy non-thermal processes

in this binary system. Relativistic electrons and hadrons are assumed to be

accelerated in a strongly magnetised, turbulent region formed in collision of a

rotating white dwarf magnetosphere and a magnetosphere/dense atmosphere

of the M dwarf star. We propose that the non-thermal X-ray emission is pro-
duced either by the primary electrons or the secondary e± pairs from decay of

charged pions created in collisions of hadrons with the companion star atmo-

sphere. We show that the accompanying γ-ray emission from decay of neutral

pions, that are produced by these same protons, is expected to be on the

detectability level of the present and/or the future satellite and Cherenkov

telescopes. The γ-ray observations of the binary system AR Sco should allow

to constrain the eﬃciency of hadron and electron acceleration and also the

details of the radiation processes.

Key words: white dwarfs — pulsars: general — X-rays: binaries — radiation

mechanisms: non-thermal — gamma-rays: stars

1

INTRODUCTION

The pulsed emission (from radio up to ultraviolet) has been recently discovered from the

binary system AR Sco containing a white dwarf (WD) and a low mass M type star (Marsh

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 W. Bednarek

et al. 2016, Buckley et al. 2017). This emission varies with the orbital period of the binary

system 3.56 hr and also with the rotation period of the white dwarf 1.97 min. Moreover, the

emission is accompanied by the non-thermal X-ray emission in the energy range between 0.3-

10 keV (Marsh et al. 2016). X-ray emission shows modulation with a pulse fraction of 14%

(Takata et al. 2017). The spin-period seems to slow down indicating that the white dwarf
acts like a pulsar with the spin down luminosity ≃ 3×1033 erg s−1. This is clear evidence that

not only neutron stars but also magnetized white dwarfs can act under the pulsar mechanism

emitting non-thermal radiation (e.g. Paczy´nski 1990, Usov 1993, Zhang & Gil 2005, Ikhsanov

& Biermann 2006, Malheiro et al. 2012, Bednarek 2012). Such WD pulsars are expected to

originate in the initial spin-up phase due to the accretion of matter from the companion

star (e.g. Beskrovnaya & Ikhsanov 2016). The inferred spin-down luminosity is suﬃcient to

power the observed multi-wavelength emission from the system. The lack of evidence of any

mass transfer from the companion star to the white dwarf (e.g. Marsh et al. 2016) suggests

that the total spin down reservoir is channelled into non-thermal emission (e.g. Marsh et al.

2016, Buckley et al. 2017), which makes AR Sco unique amongst the close binaries. Most

of the emission observed from AR Sco is interpreted in terms of the synchrotron process of

relativistic electrons accelerated in the interaction of the white dwarf magnetosphere with

the wind from the M dwarf star (Geng et al. 2016, Buckley et al. 2017). In this model,

the white dwarf pulsar injects a magnetized plasma which interact with the stellar wind

producing a bow shock. On the other hand, Katz (2017) proposes that the spin down power

is dissipated in the direct interaction of the WD magnetic ﬁeld with a dense matter of the

M dwarf star atmosphere. Then, particles can be accelerated in a turbulent collision region

either in the Fermi acceleration mechanism and/or the magnetic reconnection. In this paper,

we assume that electrons and/or protons can be accelerated to TeV energies close to the

surface of the M star in the turbulent magnetized collision region as postulated by the models

mentioned above. Relativistic protons interact with the matter in the M dwarf atmosphere
(p + p → π± + π0), producing secondary e± pairs and high energy γ-rays via decay of pions.

Primary and/or secondary leptons are responsible for the non-thermal synchrotron X-ray

emission from AR Sco. The level of this non-thermal emission allows us to predict the γ-ray

ﬂux that is instantaneously produced by protons.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–11

Hadronic model for AR Sco

3

ε

e

ε

e

γ

e+

e

γ

star

atmosphere

turbulent region

p

magnetic lines

Figure 1. Schematic presentation of the considered scenario. The white dwarf magnetosphere collides with the atmosphere of
the dwarf M type star forming a turbulent collision region. Protons and electrons can be accelerated in such a turbulent region
in the Fermi acceleration mechanism. Relativistic primary electrons cool on the synchrotron process in the magnetic ﬁeld.
Relativistic protons interact with the matter in the atmosphere creating the high energy γ-rays (from decay of neutral pions)
and e± pairs (from decay of charged pions). The e± pairs cool rapidly close to the production place in the synchrotron process.
γ-rays partially escape and partially move towards denser regions in the atmosphere interacting with the matter (γ + p → e±).

2 ACCELERATION OF PARTICLES

We assume that particles are accelerated in a turbulent region or a shock formed as a result

of the interaction between the WD magnetosphere or the plasma from the white dwarf

with the atmosphere (magnetosphere) of the companion star (see schematic representation

in Fig. 1). In such turbulent magnetized plasma, electrons and hadrons can be accelerated

in the second order Fermi acceleration mechanism, on small scale shocks (the ﬁrst order

Fermi mechanism) and possibly also in the magnetic reconnection of the turbulent magnetic

ﬁeld which enter the collision region from the site of the WD and the companion star. We

consider the process of acceleration of particles in the turbulent plasma by parametrising

their acceleration time scale by,

τacc = RL/cχ ≈ 1ETeV/χ−3B2

s,

(1)

where RL is the Larmor radius of the particle, Ee,p = 1ETeV TeV is the particle energy, χ =
10−3χ−3 is the so called acceleration coeﬃcient, B = 100B2 G is the magnetic ﬁeld strength

in the acceleration region, and c is the speed of light. The value of the acceleration coeﬃcient,

χ, is related to the characteristic velocities of the scattering centres in the turbulent plasma.
It can be estimated from χ ∼ 0.1β2 ∼ 10−3 (Malkov & Durry 2001), where β = v/c is the

relative velocity of the scattering centres in respect to the velocity of light c. v is assumed

to be smaller but of the order of the rotation velocity, vrot, of the WD magnetosphere at
the location of the companion star. vrot is equal to 2πd/PWD ≈ 4.1 × 109 cm s−1, where the

rotation period of the WD is PWD = 117 s and the distance between the companion stars is

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–11

4 W. Bednarek

d ∼ 7.6×1010 cm (Marsh et al. 2016). Such a simple description of the acceleration process is

frequently used in modelling of the radiation processes in cosmic sources due to still not well

known details of the physics of complicated processes related to the injection, acceleration,

and interaction of particles with the magnetized medium (e.g. see review article by Malkov

& Durry 2001).

The acceleration process of electrons is usually saturated by their synchrotron energy

losses. The cooling time scale of electrons in the synchrotron process is,

τsyn = 3mec2/4cσTUBγe ≈ 2.8 × 10−2/(ETeVB2
2)

s,

(2)

where γe = Ee/mec2 is the Lorentz factor of electrons, UB = B2/8π is the energy density

of the magnetic ﬁeld, σT is the Thomson cross section, and me is the electron rest mass.

The magnetic ﬁelds of the order of a hundred Gauss are expected to be provided to the

turbulent region from the WD magnetosphere (e.g. Katz 2017, Takata et al. 2017). On the

other hand, the polar surface magnetic ﬁelds of the low mass companion stars can be up
to ∼ 3000 G (e.g. Meintjes & Jurua 2006, Donati & Landstreet 2009). Therefore, these

turbulent regions are expected to be strongly magnetized allowing for very eﬃcient cooling

of accelerated electrons.

By comparing these two time scales, we estimate the characteristic energies of accelerated

electrons,

Emax
e

≈ 0.17(χ−3/B2)1/2 TeV.

Then, the maximum energies of synchrotron photons produced by these electrons are,

εsyn ≈ mec2(B/Bcr)γ2

e± ∼ 100χ−3 keV,

(3)

(4)

where Bcr = 2πm2

ec3/he = 4.4 × 1013 G is the critical magnetic ﬁeld strength, me is the elec-
tron rest mass, h is the Planck constant, and e is the charge of electron. We have calculated

the synchrotron spectrum produced in the process of a complete cooling of electrons with the

power law spectrum and an exponential cut-oﬀ at Emax

e

, i.e. dNe/dEe ∝ E−α

e

exp(−Ee/Emax

e

),

where α is the spectral index. The Swift X-ray spectrum is reported to have the spectral
index close to -2 in the energy range 0.3−10 keV (Marsh et al. 2016). More recent analysis of
the Swift data reports the spectral index of the pulsed component equal to 2.3±0.5 (Takata

et al. 2017). The synchrotron spectrum with such spectral index is produced by a completely

cooled electrons that are injected also with the spectral index close to -2. In fact, electrons

with such spectral index are expected to be accelerated in the Fermi process.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–11

Hadronic model for AR Sco

5

We also consider the possibility that the non-thermal X-ray emission is produced in the

synchrotron process by leptons which are secondary products of the interactions of relativistic

protons with the matter in the companion star atmosphere. Protons are accelerated in the

mentioned above turbulent region of the WD magnetosphere. The acceleration of protons is

limited by their escape from the turbulent region. The escape time scale is estimated as,

τesc = 2R⋆/vadv ≈ 50/v9

s,

(5)

where vadv = 109v9 cm s−1 is the characteristic advection velocity assumed to be smaller

than the velocity of the magnetic ﬁeld lines of the WD at the location of the companion
star, and R⋆ = 2.5 × 1010 cm is the radius of the star. By comparing the acceleration time

scale of protons with their escape time scale, we obtain the maximum energies of accelerated

protons,

Ep ≈ 50B2χ−3/v9 TeV.

(6)

For the magnetic ﬁeld strengths mentioned above, i.e. ∼ 100 G, the acceleration coeﬃcient

ξ = 10−3 and the advection velocity vadv = 109 cm s−1, protons are expected to be accelerated
up to ∼ 100 TeV. Note that the Larmor radius of protons with such energies in the magnetic
ﬁeld of 100 G, equal to RL = 3 × 109 cm, is about an order of magnitude smaller than the

radius of the companion star.

Hadrons with the multi-TeV energies can ﬁnd enough target in the atmosphere of the

dwarf star suﬀering eﬃcient hadronic collisions with the matter. They are expected to pro-
duce γ-rays and e± pairs from decay of pions (p + p → π0 + π±). We assume that the

non-thermal X-ray emission, observed from the binary system AR Sco, can be produced by

those secondary e± pairs in the synchrotron process. The energies of these e± pairs can be
simply estimated from, Ee± ≈ κEp/4µpp ∼ 1 TeV, κ ≈ 0.5 is the inelasticity in the p-p inter-
actions, µpp ≈ 2.57 × ln(2EGeV) − 6.45 is the pion multiplicity in p-p interactions, and EGeV
is the proton energy in GeV (Orth & Buﬃngton 1976). The e± pairs produce characteristic

synchrotron radiation with energies,

εsyn ≈ mec2(B/Bcr)γ2

e± ≈ 5B2 MeV.

(7)

Therefore, hadronic model predicts the synchrotron spectrum from secondary e± pairs ex-

tending through the hard X-ray up to the soft γ-ray energy range. Since the cooling time

scale of e± pairs is short (see estimates above), these pairs lose energy already in the tur-

bulent region. However, the fate of the γ-rays, produced from decay of neutral pions, can

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–11

6 W. Bednarek

be diﬀerent. A signiﬁcant part of these γ-rays is expected to be directed towards the dense

atmosphere of the companion star due to the geometrical eﬀects and also due to the colli-

mation of charged protons by the ordered component of the magnetic ﬁeld of the companion

star. Therefore, γ-rays can be partially absorbed in the inner dense atmosphere of the com-
panion star since the cross section for their absorption in the matter (γ + p → e±) is of the

order of the cross section for the pion production in collisions of relativistic protons with

the matter (e.g. Lang 1999).

Below we calculate the synchrotron spectra produced by the secondary e± pairs and

also the γ-ray spectra from decay of pions. From the ﬁtting of the observed X-ray spectrum

by the synchrotron emission from the secondary e± pairs, we determine the power which

should be transferred to the relativistic electrons. Based on this normalization, we predict

the expected γ-ray spectrum in the GeV-TeV energy range in terms of such hadronic model.

We show that the hadronic model can be tested by the observations with the HESS array,

the planned Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA) and also through the analysis of the available

Fermi-LAT data.

3 NON-THERMAL RADIATION

The non-thermal X-ray emission from AR Sco indicates on the presence of relativistic elec-

trons in this source. However, it is not clear whether electrons are accelerated directly in

the turbulent collision region between the WD magnetosphere and the companion star at-

mosphere or they are the secondary products from other processes. Therefore, we consider

two general scenarios. In the ﬁrst one, electrons and protons are accelerated with a speciﬁc

ratio of the powers described by the factor η = Le−/Lp and the spectral indexes equal to -2.

In this case, we interpret the Swift X-ray observations of AR Sco as due to the synchrotron

emission from the primary electrons in the strong magnetic ﬁeld of the turbulent region (see

Fig. 2a). The obtained ﬁt is consistent with the lower limit on the Swift X-ray spectrum.

The upper limit will require ﬂatter injection spectrum of particles than -2. In principle, it

can be obtained in the acceleration process in the magnetic reconnection regions. However,

the ﬁtting of the Swift upper limit on the X-ray ﬂux does not have signiﬁcant eﬀect on the

predicted γ-ray spectrum from decay of pions since the Swift ﬁt is obtained by the upper

energy part of the synchrotron spectrum. The power transferred to relativistic electrons has
to be 2.6 × 1031 erg s−1 in order to explain the observed level of the Swift emission and as-

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–11

Hadronic model for AR Sco

7

suming the complete cooling of electrons. This means that the WD should transfer about 1%

of its rotation energy to the relativistic electrons. In this scenario we postulate that the ac-

celeration and radiation processes of primary electrons occur at a relatively rare parts of the

companion star atmosphere. However, even if it occurs in a quite dense region of the compan-

ion star atmosphere, then the synchrotron process of the primary electrons likely overcomes
their possible cooling on the bremsstrahlung process since τbrem = 1.3 × 1015/n [s] ≫ τsyn,
where n is the density of matter in cm−3 (see Eq. 2 and Lang 1999). Electrons with sub-TeV

energies are captured eﬀectively by the strong magnetic ﬁeld since their Larmor radii are

much lower than the radius of the companion star. Therefore, X-rays, propagating along

the straight lines, are expected to escape without signiﬁcant absorption in the matter of the

WD atmosphere.

However, relativistic protons are also likely to be accelerated in the turbulent region.

Their acceleration site should be linked with the dense regions of the M dwarf companion

star by its large scale magnetic ﬁeld. Therefore, protons are expected to be driven towards

dense regions of the stellar atmosphere. They can eﬃciently interact with the matter of the

companion star atmosphere producing secondary e± pairs and γ-rays from decay of pions.

We calculate the synchrotron emission from the secondary e± pairs and the accompanying

γ-ray emission assuming that these particles are produced in the pion decay originated

in a single interaction of protons (see Fig. 2a) and in the process of complete cooling of

protons (Fig. 2b). If more energy is transferred to relativistic protons than to electrons, then

the synchrotron spectra (from secondary e± pairs) and the γ-ray spectra are proportionally

enhanced (see the dotted curve for the ratio of the electron to proton powers equal to η = 1/3

and the dot-dashed curve for η = 1/10 in Figs. 2a,b).

We also consider the non-thermal processes in AR Sco under the hypothesis that the

Swift X-ray emission is produced only by the secondary e± pairs, i.e. primary electrons are

not accelerated to large energies in the turbulent region (see Fig. 2c). In this case we also

show the γ-ray spectra that might be signiﬁcantly absorbed in collisions with the matter of
the atmosphere in the process γ + p → e± (see dashed and dotted curves in Fig. 2c) for the

case in which only 10% and 30% γ-rays escape from the companion star atmosphere).

It is expected that the column density of the matter traversed by relativistic protons is

much larger than that traversed by γ-rays. In fact, protons will be captured by the magnetic
ﬁeld on a characteristic distance scale corresponding to their Larmor radii, RL = E/eB ≈
3 × 107ETeV/B2 cm. Then, the column density traversed by rectilinearly propagating γ-rays

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–11

8 W. Bednarek

-10

(a)

)
1
-
s
2
-

m
c
g
r
e
/

/

E
d
N
d
2
E
(
g
o

-10.5

-11

-11.5

l

-12

-12.5

-13

-13.5

-14

CTA

MAGIC

Fermi

HESS

Swift

-e

±e

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

log(E / GeV)

-10

-10.5

-11

-11.5

-12

-12.5

-13

-13.5

-14

CTA

MAGIC

Fermi

HESS

(b)

Swift

-e

±e

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

log(E / GeV)

-10

-10.5

-11

-11.5

-12

-12.5

-13

-13.5

-14

CTA

MAGIC

Fermi

HESS

(c)

Swift

±e

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

log(E / GeV)

Figure 2. (a) The non-thermal X-ray spectrum observed by the Swift satellite from the binary system AR Sco (Marsh et
al. 2016, thin solid lines) is compared with the synchrotron emission of the primary electrons (e−, dashed curves) and the
synchrotron emission of the secondary e± pairs (e±, solid curve). The secondary pairs are produced in the decay process of
charged pions originated in a single collision of relativistic protons with the matter in the M dwarf companion star atmosphere.
It is assumed that the electrons and protons obtain the power law spectra with the spectral index close to -2 with the
exponential cut-oﬀ at some maximum energies deﬁned in Sect. 2. The γ-ray spectrum from decay of neutral pions, produced
by the relativistic protons with the power equal to the power of relativistic electrons, i.e. η = Le− /Lp = 1, is shown by the
solid curve. The synchrotron and γ-ray emission in the case of η = 1/3 and 1/10 are marked by the dotted and dot-dashed
curves, respectively. In order to ﬁt the X-ray emission, the primary electrons has to gain Le− = 2.6 × 1031 erg s−1 energy from
the acceleration mechanism (see dashed curve marked by e−). The synchrotron emission produced by the secondary e± pairs
from decay of charged pions (p + p → π±) and γ-rays from decay of neutral pions (p + p → π0) are marked by the solid curves.
(b) As in ﬁgure (a) but for the case of a complete cooling of relativistic protons in the interaction with the matter. (c) In this
model only protons are accelerated. The Swift X-ray emission is described by the synchrotron emission from the secondary e±
pairs from decay of charged pions. Pions (and γ-rays and e± pairs) are produced in a single interaction of protons with the
matter (solid curve). We accept that the γ-rays can be also partially absorbed in the matter assuming that only 30% of γ-rays
(dotted curve) or 10% of γ-rays (dashed curve) are able to escape without absorption. The γ-ray emission is confronted with
the sensitivities of the Fermi-LAT (10 yrs, see dot-dot-dashed curve, Funk et al. 2013), the HESS array (25 hrs, thin dotted
curve, HESS Colab.) the MAGIC array (50 hrs, thin dot-dashed curve, Aleksi´c et al. 2012) and the planned CTA array (50
hrs, thin dashed curve, Maier et al. 2017).

should be a factor of RL/a << 1 lower. Therefore, it is expected that protons can eﬃciently

produce γ-rays in collisions with the matter of the companion star atmosphere. On the

other hand, produced γ-rays can escape without signiﬁcant absorption due to the relatively

low column density of matter along their straight paths. Due to the eﬀective capturing of

relativistic protons, the production of secondary leptons can already occur in a relatively

rare matter allowing free escape of produced by them synchrotron X-rays without strong

absorption.

Note that in the optimistic case, i.e. more energy transferred to relativistic protons than
to relativistic electrons (η ≪ 1) and the level of γ-ray absorption is low, the γ-ray ﬂuxes

are predicted within the sensitivity limits of the present Cherenkov telescopes in the TeV

energy range. In fact, the HESS array have the best conditions for the observations of AR

Sco since it is located on the southern hemisphere. The spectrum predicted in the optimistic

case should be detected by the HESS in 2-3 hours. This γ-ray emission should be also

detected in the GeV energy range by the Fermi-LAT telescope in about a month. However,
in the pessimistic case, i.e. the ratio of η ∼ 1 (Fig.2a) or only 10% of γ-rays escape from the

companion atmosphere (Fig. 2c), the γ-ray emission is close to the 30 hours sensitivity of the

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–11

 
 
 
Hadronic model for AR Sco

9

planned CTA and also within 8 years of sensitivity of the Fermi-LAT telescope. Therefore, we

conclude that the extensive observations of the binary system AR Sco at γ-ray energies can

provide important constraints on the acceleration processes of diﬀerent types of particles

(leptons and hadrons) in the magnetised turbulent plasma formed in the collision of the

rotating magnetosphere of the WD with the dense atmosphere of a companion star.

In the above calculations we neglected the energy losses of relativistic electrons in the

inverse Compton scattering (ICS) of thermal radiation emitted from the surface of the M

star and the white dwarf in respect to their energy losses on the synchrotron process. These

energy losses depend on the energy densities of the magnetic and radiation ﬁelds in the

acceleration region of electrons. The basic parameters of these stars has been estimated on:
surface temperature of M star T⋆ = 3100 K and its radius 2.5 × 1010 cm and the white
dwarf T⋆ = 9750 K and the radius 7 × 108 cm (Marsh et al. 2016). Then, the energy density
of radiation from the M star is estimated on ∼0.7 erg cm−3 and from the white dwarf on
∼ 70(RWD/a)2 ∼0.07 erg cm−3. In the case of the WD we take into account that its radiation
is diluted due to the large separation of the stars within the binary system a = 8 × 1010 cm.

On the other hand, the energy density of the magnetic ﬁeld with the applied strength of
100 Gs is ∼ 440 erg cm−3. We conclude that the IC energy losses of electrons can be safely

neglected in respect to their synchrotron energy losses. The IC γ-ray spectra produced by
electrons should be by a factor of ∼ 10−3 lower than the synchrotron spectra shown in Fig. 2.

4 CONCLUSION

We consider the consequences of the hypothesis that both electrons and protons are being

accelerated within the binary system AR Sco. Protons can be accelerated to the multi-TeV

energies close to the dense atmosphere of the M type star. Thus, they can ﬁnd enough target

for eﬃcient interaction. As a result, they produce secondary e± pairs and γ-rays from decay

of pions. We interpret the observed non-thermal X-ray emission from this binary in terms

of three scenarios. In the ﬁrst one, both electrons and protons are accelerated with some

ratio of the powers η. The synchrotron emission of electrons is responsible for the observed

non-thermal X -ray emission. On the other hand, γ-rays originate from the decay of neutral

pions that are in turn produced by protons in a single interaction with the matter of the

stellar atmosphere. The γ-ray emission can be detected by the Fermi-LAT and future CTA
provided that η ∼ 1 (see Fig. 2a). The present Cherenkov telescopes (e.g. the HESS array)

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–11

10 W. Bednarek

could detect this γ-ray emission provided that η < 1/3. In the second scenario, the X-ray

emission is explained by the synchrotron emission of primary electrons (and/or secondary

e± pairs) but protons are transported to dense regions of the M dwarf atmosphere suﬀering

complete cooling in the hadronic collisions. Then, the γ-ray ﬂuxes are clearly larger (see

Fig. 2b). These γ-rays have a chance to be detected by the HESS array provided that η < 1

and by the Fermi-LAT for η < 3, i.e. the power in relativistic electrons is a factor of 3

larger than the power in relativistic protons. In the third scenario, we assumed that only

protons are eﬃciently accelerated. Then, the non-thermal X-ray emission is explained by

the synchrotron radiation from the secondary e± pairs. The γ-ray emission is expected to

be clearly above the sensitivity limits of the Fermi-LAT telescope and the HESS array (see

Fig. 2c). However, this emission might be additionally inﬂuenced by the absorption of γ-rays
in the matter (γ + p → e±). We conclude that even if only a small part of the γ-rays can

escape from the M dwarf atmosphere (e.g. µ = 10%), then their ﬂux should be within the

sensitivity of the Fermi-LAT telescope and the HESS array. A partial absorption of γ-rays

might in principle also aﬀect the constraints obtained above in terms of the ﬁrst and the

second scenarios. Therefore, in principle the limits obtained above should refer to η/µ but

not only to η. The predictions of the GeV-TeV γ-ray emission from AR Sco, obtained in

terms of the hadronic model, look quite encouraging. They could be tested by the present

and future Cherenkov telescopes and also by the analysis of the available data collected by

the Fermi-LAT telescope.

Since AR Sco is the only discovered binary system in which the companion M type

star is immersed directly in the inner, rigidly rotating magnetosphere of a compact object

(in this case the white dwarf) similar processes are not expected to occur in other type of

binary systems with compact objects such as LMXBs (containing accreting neutron stars),

black widow/red-back binaries (containing millisecond pulsars) or binary systems of classical

radio pulsars with massive companion stars such as PSR 1259-63/LS2883. Some of those

compact binaries emit (or are expected to emit) high energy γ-rays in diﬀerent geometrical

and radiative scenarios.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank the Referee for useful comments. This work is supported by the grant

through the Polish Narodowe Centrum Nauki No. 2011/01/B/ST9/00411.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–11

Hadronic model for AR Sco

11

REFERENCES

Aleksi´c, J. et al. (MAGIC Collaboration) 2012, APh 35, 435

Bednarek, W. 2012 J.Phys.G: Nucl.Part.Phys. 39, 065001

Beskrovnaya, N.G., Ikhsanov, N.R. 2016 in Proc. ”Stars from collapse to collapse” (Nizhnij Arkhyz, Special Astrophysical

Observatory of the Russian Acad. of Sci.), arXiv:1612.07831

Buckley, D.A.H., Meintjes, P.J., Potter, S.B., Marsh, T.R., G¨ansicke, B.T. 2017 Nat.Astron. 1, 0029

Donati, J.-F., Landstreet, J.D. 2009, ARAA 47, 333

Funk, S., Hinton, J.A. (CTA Consortium) 2013, APh 43, 348

HESS Colaboration, https://www.mpi-hd.mpg.de/hfm/HESS/pages/home/proposals/sc sens.pdf

Geng, J.-J., Zhang, B., Huang, Y-F. 2016 apJ 831, L10

Ikhsanov, N.R., Biermann, P.L. 2006 A&A 445, 305

Katz, J.I. 2017 ApJ 835, 150

Lang, K.R. Astrophysical Formulae, Astronomy and astrophysics Library, Springer-Verlag, 1999, p.433

Maier, G. et al. (CTA Consortium) 2017, in Proc. 35th ICRC (Busan, Korea), PoS(ICRC2017), 846

Malheiro, M., Rueda, J.A., Ruﬃni, R. 2012 PASJ, 64, 56

Malkov, M.A., Drury, L. OC. 2001 Rep.Prog.Phys. 64, 429

Marsh, T.R. et al. 2016 Nature 537, 374

Meintjes, P.J., Jurua, E. 2006 MNRAS 372, 1279

Orth, C. D., Buﬃngton, A. 1976 ApJ 206, 312

Paczy´nski, B. 1990 ApJL 365, L9

Takata, J., Yang, H., Cheng, K.S., 2017, ApJ, 851, 143

Usov, V.V. 1993, ApJ 410, 761

Zhang, B., Gil, J. 2005 ApJL 631, L143

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–11

