Extreme-ultraviolet-initiated High-harmonic Generation in Ar+

D. D. A. Clarke,∗ H. W. van der Hart, and A. C. Brown
Centre for Theoretical Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics, School of Mathematics and Physics,
Queen’s University Belfast, University Road, Belfast, BT7 1NN, Northern Ireland

We employ the R-matrix with time-dependence method to investigate extreme-ultraviolet-
initiated high-harmonic generation (XIHHG) in Ar+. Using a combination of extreme-ultraviolet
(XUV, 92 nm, 3 × 1012 Wcm−2) and time-delayed, infrared (IR, 800 nm, 3 × 1014 Wcm−2) laser
pulses, we demonstrate that control over both the mechanism, and timing, of ionization can aﬀord
signiﬁcant enhancements in the yield of plateau, and sub-threshold, harmonics alike. The presence
of the XUV pulse is also shown to alter the relative contribution of diﬀerent electron emission path-
ways. Manifestation of the Ar+ electronic structure is found in the appearance of a pronounced
Cooper minimum. Interferences amongst the outer-valence 3p, and inner-valence 3s, electrons are
found to incur only a minor suppression of the harmonic intensities, at least for the present com-
bination of XUV and IR laser light. Additionally, the dependence of the XIHHG eﬃciency on time
delay is discussed, and rationalized with the aid of classical trajectory simulations.

I.

INTRODUCTION

sub-femtosecond timescales.

High-harmonic generation (HHG) has emerged as the
canonical representative for non-linear and ultrafast op-
tical eﬀects. The production of high-order harmonics of
intense, femtosecond laser radiation, focused onto atomic
or molecular gases, constitutes an indispensable capabil-
ity for a myriad of scientiﬁc and technological endeav-
ours. In particular, HHG has become a cornerstone of at-
tosecond physics [1], wherein its innately ultrafast nature
has enabled the synthesis of coherent extreme-ultraviolet
(XUV) and soft X-ray light pulses, with ever-shortening
durations [2–4].

HHG is most simply understood in terms of the semi-
classical three-step model [5], a simple and physically ap-
pealing scheme that captures the gross features of the
process. Here, an electron (i) tunnels through the laser-
suppressed Coulomb barrier, (ii) is accelerated by the
ﬁeld, and (iii) radiatively recombines with the parent ion,
all within a single cycle of the driving laser ﬁeld.

In more recent years, research in HHG has diversiﬁed
beyond the development of light sources, acquiring new
leitmotivs that reﬂect its potential as a sensitive probe
of structure and dynamics. On the one hand, techniques
of harmonic spectroscopy [6–8] can facilitate the acqui-
sition of intricate, ﬁeld-free structural information. It is
well-recognised, for instance, that HHG bears an inti-
mate relation with the process of photoionization, and
should thus encode details of the electronic structure of
the irradiated target [9–11]. On the other hand, the devel-
opment of advanced experimental techniques for assess-
ing and controlling the spectral intensity [12, 13], phase
[13, 14], polarization state [15, 16] and spatial divergence
[17, 18] of high-harmonic radiation has inspired novel ap-
proaches for monitoring photophysical processes in real-
time. These include molecular structural changes [19] and
charge migration [20], as well as chiral activity [15] on

∗ dclarke23@qub.ac.uk

Concomitant with this growth of interest in the spec-
troscopic utilization of HHG has been a demand for en-
hanced control and optimization of the process, especially
at the single-atom or single-molecule level. Tackling this
demand necessitates a careful consideration of essentially
all aspects of the three-step scheme, including the mech-
anism and timing of electron emission [21], the inﬂuence
of multiple orbitals and ionization thresholds [6, 22], the
shape of the continuum electron wavepacket [23], as well
as the energy and orientation of the recollision event [24].
In particular, tunnel ionization from the initial state, tra-
ditionally recognised as the ﬁrst step, yields only poor
temporal control and a low conversion eﬃciency, being
both conﬁned to a ﬁxed time interval during the laser
pulse evolution, and restricted to the emission of an elec-
tron from the outermost atomic shell.

Acknowledging these limitations, several authors have
advocated schemes based on two-color laser ﬁelds [21, 25,
26], whereby the target is subject to a strong visible or
infrared (IR) driving pulse, as well as a short-duration,
often somewhat weaker, XUV pulse. The HHG process
can then be initiated by direct photoionization, or by
excitation to a high-lying Rydberg state of the target,
with subsequent tunnelling. Such alternatives to tunnel
ionization, from the ground state, represent more eﬃcient
means of driving HHG in single atoms, oﬀering improved
control over the timing of the initial ionization event.

The aforementioned schemes of XUV-initiated HHG
(XIHHG) have constituted the focus of several experi-
mental studies, exploring core excitation and correlated
electron-hole dynamics in small molecules [27, 28]. The
three-step process has also been simulated in a number
of theoretical works [29, 30]. More recently, XIHHG has
been exploited to assess the relative contribution of inner-
and outer-valence electrons to the harmonic response of
Ne [31]. With a suitable combination of XUV and IR
laser light, it was shown that the action of the 2p elec-
trons may be selectively suppressed, and that of the 2s
electrons thereby revealed. An important implication of
this work is the possibility for HHG spectroscopy of more

8
1
0
2

b
e
F
9

]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
5
2
2
3
0
.
2
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
deeply bound electrons, and of the interference dynamics
amongst inner- and outer-valence electrons.

The potential of XIHHG, both as a more eﬃcient mode
of single-atom HHG, and as a spectroscopic tool, mer-
its further investigation in general atomic and molecular
systems. In this manuscript, we explore XIHHG in the
Ar+ ion, employing the ab initio R-matrix with time-
dependence (RMT) methodology [32]. We devote partic-
ular attention to the role of an inner-valence excitation
for this process. By tuning the XUV pulse appropriately,
it is possible to excite the Ar+ ion into a superposition of
the 3s23p5 2P o ground and 3s3p6 2Se ﬁrst excited states.
Such tailoring of the initial state, with the potential to
activate diﬀerent ionization or recombination pathways,
could represent a novel means of controlling the charac-
teristics of the harmonic response.

Eﬀects arising from quantum interference, and their
implications for atomic harmonic generation, have been
treated in a number of theoretical works. It has been
demonstrated, for instance, that if the system is prepared
in a coherent superposition of diﬀerent bound states [33–
35], in which ionization proceeds primarily from the most
weakly bound, the harmonic spectrum can present two
distinct plateaus, with diﬀerent conversion eﬃciencies
[36, 37]. More recently, HHG from excited states was ad-
dressed experimentally, exploiting the attosecond light-
house eﬀect [38]. There, it was shown that population of
high-lying Rydberg states can lead to either XUV free-
induction decay [39, 40], or near-threshold ionization fol-
lowed by recombination to the ground state. We empha-
size, however, that the present investigation diﬀers from
previous theoretical works in two key ways. Firstly, we
consider the dynamics of a complex ion within a fully ab
initio framework, as opposed to a few-level model [33] or
one-electron system [37]. Secondly, we examine a plethora
of additional eﬀects that arise from XUV irradiation, oth-
erwise absent in a single-color HHG scheme.

More generally, atomic ions represent attractive tar-
gets for studies of HHG. They oﬀer a stringent test
for emerging theoretical techniques, whether in describ-
ing their ﬁeld-free energy level structure, or ﬁeld-driven
response dynamics. Furthermore, higher electron bind-
ing energies, with respect to their neutral counterparts,
imply increased cutoﬀ energies, especially for the more
strongly bound core electrons. Correspondingly, the har-
monic spectra would present extended plateau struc-
tures, supporting the synthesis of ever-shorter attosec-
ond pulses. The harmonic response of atomic ions has
also proven of importance for interpreting experimental
data: although experimental studies of HHG have ad-
dressed primarily neutral, noble gas targets, it has been
suggested that the very highest-order harmonics detected
arise from ionised species, generated during the intense
laser-target interaction [41]. Moreover, the prospect of
harnessing HHG from ions, and thereby of extending fre-
quency up-conversion techniques into still-shorter wave-
length regimes, has been realised through the develop-
ment of strategies for mitigating plasma-induced beam

2

defocusing and phase mismatch [41, 42] eﬀects, which
would otherwise limit the highest observable photon en-
ergies. It is thus of considerable practical interest to as-
sess the HHG yields from noble gas ions, such as Ne+
and Ar+, both to inform, and direct, experimental HHG
research.

This manuscript is organized as follows. We begin with
a brief summary of the RMT method. Following this, we
examine the consequences of XUV multiphoton processes
for IR-driven HHG in Ar+. The possible role of the ﬁrst
excited state in providing an intermediate resonance, as
well as of multielectron interference eﬀects, involving the
outer-valence 3p and inner-valence 3s electrons, are then
discussed. To illustrate the importance of temporal con-
trol over the ionization event, we also address the de-
pendence of the XIHHG eﬃciency on time delay, and
supplement the analysis by means of classical trajectory
simulations. The corresponding conclusions will close the
manuscript.

II. THEORY

The study of ultrafast atomic dynamics in intense
light ﬁelds demands sophisticated theoretical techniques,
possessing the predictive capacity needed to explore
multielectron correlations, and their consequences, in a
ﬁrst-principles manner. RMT theory oﬀers an ab ini-
tio and non-perturbative technique for solving the time-
dependent Schr¨odinger equation (TDSE), appropriate to
general multielectron atoms and atomic ions in strong
laser ﬁelds. It represents the latest evolution in the de-
velopment of a time-dependent R-matrix formalism [43–
45], whose ﬂexibility and generality have been reﬂected
in a plethora of recent applications. These include multi-
electron correlation in doubly and core-excited states of
Ne [46], strong-ﬁeld rescattering in F− [47], and spectral
caustics in two-color HHG schemes [48]

A detailed exposition of RMT theory has been given in
[32], and so we merely provide a brief overview here. The
method employs the traditional R-matrix paradigm of di-
viding conﬁguration space into two separate regions. This
partition is eﬀected with respect to the radial coordinate
of an ejected electron, and yields an inner region, contain-
ing the target nucleus, and an outer region of relatively
large radial extent. Within the inner region, multielec-
tron exchange and correlation eﬀects are accounted for
in the construction of the many-body wavefunction. In
the outer region, the ionised electron is regarded as suf-
ﬁciently distant from the residual ion that exchange may
be neglected. This electron is thus subject only to the
long-range, multipole potential of the residual system,
as well as the applied laser ﬁeld. Importantly, RMT re-
lies on a hybrid numerical scheme, consisting of a unique
integration of basis set and ﬁnite-diﬀerence techniques.
This enables the most appropriate method for solving
the TDSE to be applied in each region.

In the inner region, the time-dependent, N -electron

wavefunction is represented by an expansion in terms of
R-matrix basis functions, where the time-dependence is
incorporated in the expansion coeﬃcients. These basis
functions are generated from the (N − 1)-electron wave-
functions of the residual ion states, as well as from a
complete set of one-electron continuum functions describ-
ing the motion of the ejected electron. Additional N -
electron correlation functions can be added to improve
the quality of the basis set. The outer region wavefunc-
tion, in contrast, is constructed by means of the residual
ion wavefunctions and radial wavefunctions of the ejected
electron in each admissible channel. The latter are rep-
resented throughout a ﬁnite-diﬀerence grid, which not
only aﬀords a controllable discretization, but also a nat-
ural mode of parallelisation (through domain decomposi-
tion), which can be combined with other data decompo-
sition approaches (appropriate for the inner region) in an
eﬃcient and scalable implementation. Continuity of the
total wavefunction is enforced explicitly at the boundary,
rather than via an R-matrix [32]. Indeed, the outer re-
gion grid is extended into the inner region, and the inner
region wavefunction is evaluated at these interior points.
This provides the boundary condition for the solution of
the TDSE in the outer region. A derivative of the outer
region wave function at the boundary is also made avail-
able to the inner region, enabling the inner region wave
function to be updated.

Whereas previous implementations of time-dependent
R-matrix theory relied on the solution of a system of lin-
ear equations, and a low-order Crank-Nicolson propaga-
tor [45], the RMT approach adopts a high-order Arnoldi
scheme [49]. This replaces the solution of a linear alge-
braic system with a series of matrix-vector multiplica-
tions, which may reduce the numerical error in both the
temporal and spatial propagation of the wavefunction.
Since the Arnoldi algorithm is dominated by such op-
erations, the RMT methodology oﬀers substantially im-
proved parallel scalability, making feasible calculations
that exploit massively parallel computing resources (with
more than 1000 cores).

Within the framework of RMT theory, harmonic spec-
tra can be established following the method discussed in
[50]. Speciﬁcally, the spectra presented in this work are
found from the expectation value of the dipole length
operator,

d(t) ∝ (cid:104)Ψ(t)|z|Ψ(t)(cid:105),

where z is the total position operator along the laser po-
larization axis, and Ψ is the wavefunction. The harmonic
yield is proportional to ω4|d(ω)|2, where ω is the laser fre-
quency and d(ω) is the Fourier transform of d(t). How-
ever, as demonstrated in previous studies [48, 50], the
spectra may also be ascertained through the expectation
value of dipole velocity,

˙d(t) ∝

d
dt

(cid:104)Ψ(t)|z|Ψ(t)(cid:105),

where the harmonic yield is proportional to ω2| ˙d(ω)|2.

3

The acceleration form, in contrast, is less appropriate
for the RMT approach, as restrictions on the basis set
mean that inner-shell electrons, such as the 1s electrons,
are often maintained frozen. As a consequence, the cal-
culations incorporate the action of the 1s electrons on
those of the valence shell, but the back-action of the lat-
ter is not accounted for. This limitation precludes the use
of the dipole acceleration in computing harmonic spec-
tra for complex, multielectron atoms and ions. It should
be noted that, independently of the manner in which
the spectra are represented, we have consistently chosen
to propagate the wavefunction in the length gauge. The
latter has been found to give better results in conjunc-
tion with the description of atomic structure employed
in time-dependent R-matrix calculations [51].

The possibility of assessing the harmonic response, in
either length or velocity form, oﬀers an important check
for accuracy within a simulation. As a relevant exam-
ple, Figure 1 compares the harmonic spectra of Ar+,
subject to the IR ﬁeld considered in this work, as com-
puted from the dipole length and velocity. We observe
only small discrepancies between the spectra, until well
beyond the cutoﬀ region (around 90 eV). Those diﬀer-
ences, in turn, can be attributed to the limited basis
set adopted for the Ar2+ residual ion states (see Section
III). Indeed, the present choice of basis ensures that the
lowest ionization thresholds, corresponding to the Ar2+
3s23p4 3P e, 1Se and 1De states, are most faithfully repre-
sented. This facilitates good agreement between the spec-
tra for energies up to approximately 30 eV, where their
associated Rydberg series are active. More signiﬁcant de-
viations are found in the range 35 eV to 55 eV, which is
dominated by excitations from the 3s subshell. Further
expansion of the basis set, to include additional, suitably
optimized orbitals, might improve the description of the
Ar2+ 3s3p5 3P o and 1P o states, and provide still better
agreement among the spectra in this region. Notwith-
standing these diﬀerences, the generally high degree of
consistency, among the spectra, is suggestive of the nu-
merical quality of the wavefunction data employed in the
present calculations.

To supplement analysis of the harmonic spectra, we
perform classical trajectory simulations based on the
three-step model
[5]. We assume that an electron is
tunnel-ionized into the continuum with zero initial ve-
locity, and for each possible ionization time, the elec-
tron velocity and position are determined through nu-
merical solution of the classical (Newtonian) equation
of motion. Those electrons which recollide, and thereby
elicit high-harmonic emission, describe trajectories which
pass through the origin. The energy of the harmonic pho-
tons is then readily calculated from the electron recolli-
sion energy and the ionization potential. Whilst such a
model possesses obvious limitations, we ﬁnd it to be a
particularly simple and convenient means of estimating
harmonic cutoﬀ energies, for both single and multi-color
ﬁeld conﬁgurations.

4

3 × 1012 Wcm−2 and a central wavelength of 92.0 nm
(or a central photon energy of ¯hωXUV ≈ 13.5 eV), and
a time-delayed, six-cycle IR pulse, with peak intensity
3 × 1014 Wcm−2 and central wavelength 800 nm. The
former is responsible for initiating an excitation and/or
ionization response from the Ar+ target. In particular,
a one-photon absorption event can excite the ion into
a superposition of the 3s23p5 2P o ground and 3s3p6 2Se
ﬁrst excited states. The latter,
in contrast, mediates
the electron recollision dynamics, thereby eliciting high-
harmonic emission. Both pulses are linearly polarized
along the z-axis, and are assumed to exhibit a sine-
squared ramp-on/oﬀ temporal proﬁle. The time delay, ∆,
is measured between the central peaks of the two pulses,
and is always chosen such that the XUV pulse attains
peak intensity before the IR pulse.

FIG. 1.
(Color online) Harmonic spectra generated by the
Ar+ ion, subject to an 800 nm, 3 × 1014 Wcm−2, IR laser
pulse, as computed from the dipole length (solid, black line)
and velocity (dashed, red line).

IV. RESULTS

A. Two-color Harmonic Spectrum

III. CALCULATION PARAMETERS

The Ar+ target considered in this work is as discussed
in previous R-matrix studies [22, 52]. Within the inner re-
gion, we regard the ion as Ar2+ to which is added a single
electron. To describe the structure of Ar2+, we employ
a set of Hartree-Fock 1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p orbitals, acquired
for the Ar2+ ground state from the data of Clementi and
Roetti [53]. The 3s23p4 3P e, 1Se, 1De and 3s3p5 3P o, 1P o
states of Ar2+ are obtained in the form of conﬁguration-
interaction expansions, comprising the 3s23p4, 3s3p5 and
3p6 conﬁgurations. Such an approach permits ﬂexibility
in the degree of atomic structure included in the calcu-
lations, which has proven especially important in assess-
ing the relative contribution of diﬀerent electron emission
channels to the harmonic spectrum [22, 52]. The initial
state is the Ar+ 3s23p5 2P o ground state, with total mag-
netic quantum number M = 0. This corresponds to the
dominant (non-relativistic) Ar+ ground state level fol-
lowing strong-ﬁeld ionization of Ar at short wavelengths.
The radial extent of the inner region is 20 a.u., which
suﬃces to eﬀectively conﬁne the orbitals of the resid-
ual Ar2+ ion. The inner region continuum functions are
generated using a set of 60 B-splines of order 13 for
each available orbital angular momentum of the out-
going electron. We retain all admissible 3s23p4(cid:15)l and
3s3p5(cid:15)l channels up to a maximum total orbital angular
momentum Lmax = 70. The outer region boundary ra-
dius is 2000 a.u., ensuring that no unphysical interference
structure in the wavefunctions arise through reﬂection
of the ejected electron wavepacket. The ﬁnite-diﬀerence
grid spacing is 0.08 a.u., and a time-step of 0.01 a.u. is
adopted for propagation of the wavefunction.

We employ a two-color irradiation scheme, compris-
ing a four-cycle XUV pulse, with a peak intensity of

To assess the features of XIHHG from Ar+, we con-
sider the harmonic spectra produced upon subjecting the
ion to both single-color (IR only) and two-color (IR +
XUV) ﬁeld conﬁgurations. For the latter, we assume a
ﬁxed time delay between the pulses, such that the XUV
peak is near-coincident in time with the penultimate
IR peak. This corresponds to a delay of approximately
∆ = 3.5TXUV, where TXUV = 2π/ωXUV is the XUV pulse
period and ωXUV the central frequency. According to the
three-step model, electrons released into the ﬁeld at this
time describe the optimal trajectories for HHG. We thus
expect any promotion of ionization, aﬀorded by the XUV
pulse, to be manifested most clearly under these condi-
tions.

Figure 2 displays the single- and two-color harmonic
spectra. Perhaps the most striking consequence of XUV
irradiation is an enhancement, by up to four orders of
magnitude, in the yield of low-energy harmonics over the
single-ﬁeld case. This eﬀect is particularly noteworthy
at energies comparable to both ¯hωXUV (unsurprisingly),
and to the ionization threshold for the 3p subshell (I3p ≈
27.6 eV). A sustained enhancement, by as much as two
orders of magnitude, is also found throughout the plateau
region, which spans around 60 eV.

The high-order harmonics are of particular interest,
given their role in frequency up-conversion applications.
We attribute the increased response above the ionization
threshold to multiphoton processes, mediated by one or
both laser ﬁelds. Indeed, absorption of two XUV photons
can excite the ion into a Rydberg state of the series con-
verging onto any of the 3p thresholds. This dramatically
increases the susceptibility of the ion to tunnel ioniza-
tion in the IR ﬁeld. Such a two-stage process enables the
electron to be released into the ﬁeld with approximately
zero energy, which is desirable for optimizing the three-
step recollision process. The ﬁnite bandwidth of the XUV

5

under the given ﬁeld conditions. We can therefore ratio-
nalize the higher yield of cutoﬀ harmonics in terms of
enhanced ionization from the 3p subshell, driven directly
by or assisted with the XUV pulse, within an optimal
sub-cycle time period.

The choice of XUV photon energy (¯hωXUV ≈ 13.5 eV)
was made with the aim of probing the 3s3p6 2Se state,
and we discuss the importance of this excitation in Sec-
tion IV D. The present XIHHG scheme thus requires the
absorption of at least two XUV photons to excite a 3p
electron close to the ionization threshold (2¯hωXUV ≈
I3p). It is natural to question, however, if the enhanced
harmonic response, observed in Figure 2, could have
been achieved through a single-photon process alone. In-
deed, we could envisage direct excitation of Ar+ from the
ground state, to either a weakly bound Rydberg state,
or even to the continuum, by the absorption of a single,
suﬃciently energetic photon (¯hωXUV ≈ I3p), with oth-
erwise little selectivity warranted in the choice of pulse
frequency. Such a scheme would be somewhat akin to
that proposed by Brown and van der Hart [31], who em-
ployed below-threshold, XUV laser light to populate se-
lected Rydberg series of Ne.

To address this question, we have ascertained the two-
color spectrum in the case ¯hωXUV ≈ 27.0 eV (not shown).
The results suggest that, whilst the qualitative features
of the spectrum remain unchanged above the 3p ioniza-
tion threshold, the yield of high-order harmonics can be
raised by as much as an order of magnitude. The latter
can be understood most simply on the basis of relative
probabilities, pertaining to XUV single- and multiphoton
processes: a one-photon absorption event is more proba-
ble than any higher-order process, in which two or more
photons are absorbed. A further advantage, oﬀered by
this one-photon XIHHG strategy, is that enhanced har-
monic yields could likely be realised with still-lower XUV
peak intensities.

B. Competition amongst the 3s23p4 3P e, 1Se and 1De
Thresholds

Previous R-matrix studies [22, 52] have shown that,
for single-ﬁeld harmonic generation in Ar+, aligned with
M = 0, channels associated with the 1Se, and especially
1De, thresholds are most inﬂuential for the harmonic
yield. Tunnel ionization, leaving Ar2+ in the ground 3P e
state, was found to contribute much less signiﬁcantly
to the total yield. We emphasize that the distribution
of single-electron magnetic quantum number values, m,
plays a fundamental role in suppressing the 3P e chan-
nels in an IR-only HHG scheme. The 3P e threshold is
unavailable for emission/excitation of an electron with
m = 0, requiring the transition of one with m = ±1.
Such a condition will be most restrictive during the ini-
tial ionization phase of the three-step mechanism, where
IR photon absorption will favour excitation from an or-
bital aligned along the laser polarization axis (m = 0).

FIG. 2.
(Color online) Harmonic spectra generated by the
Ar+ ion, subject to single-color (solid, black line) and two-
color (dashed, red line) laser ﬁeld conﬁgurations. The single-
color ﬁeld comprises an 800 nm, 3 × 1014 Wcm−2, IR laser
pulse. The two-color scheme consists of the same IR pulse, in
combination with a 92 nm, 3 × 1012 Wcm−2, XUV pulse. The
latter is timed to coincide with the penultimate maximum of
the IR ﬁeld.

pulse (approximately 6.8 eV), however, may also support
direct photoionization from the 3p subshell, through ab-
sorption of at least two photons. This is also expected to
contribute to the increased response at threshold. Note
that the Ar+ 3s3p6 2Se state, accessible by one-photon
absorption from the XUV ﬁeld, may provide a resonant
enhancement of these multiphoton processes, whether
they result in Rydberg state excitation, or direct ioniza-
tion to the continuum. However, we must establish conﬁr-
mation that this state truly participates in the dynamics,
before making such an assertion (see Section IV D).

The aforementioned XUV-dependent mechanisms of
ionization also inﬂuence the harmonic yield in the cut-
oﬀ region. For the single-ﬁeld spectrum, we ﬁnd the har-
monic cutoﬀ to be consistent with the semiclassically pre-
dicted value [54],

EIR

co ≈ 1.2I3p + 3.2Up ≈ 90.5 eV,

where Up is the ponderomotive energy, and we have as-
sumed ionization from the 3p subshell. The comparable
cutoﬀ energy, observed for the two-color spectrum, sug-
gests that the highest-energy harmonics there are also
determined by the action of a 3p electron, with the recol-
lision dynamics driven almost solely by the IR ﬁeld. The
choice of time delay (3.5TXUV, or approximately one half-
cycle of the IR pulse) ensures that ionization, or increased
susceptibility to it, is realised within a temporal interval
in which the IR pulse attains its penultimate peak. As
emphasized previously, an electron ejected within this
interval will not only recollide with the parent ion, but
do so with the maximum possible kinetic energy acquired

6

sight into the role of the 1De threshold. We ﬁnd that its
removal reduces the yield of plateau harmonics by up to
an order of magnitude, principally mitigating the ehance-
ments (observed in Figure 2) in the cutoﬀ region, as well
as at energies comparable to I3p. Interestingly, however,
the presence of the XUV ﬁeld actually improves the rel-
ative contribution of the 3P e threshold, by more than a
factor of 5 for harmonic photon energies exceeding 40 eV.
We claim that the presence of an additional XUV pulse
alters the relative importance of m = 0 and m = ±1
electron emission pathways. An XUV ﬁeld interacts with
both m = 0 and m = ±1 electrons of the valence 3p sub-
shell, albeit more strongly with the former. Absorption
of one or more XUV photons can promote an electron
to some higher energy state, giving rise to a Rydberg
state of the ion, or some virtual state. Once an exci-
tation has been realised, the electron can interact more
freely with the IR ﬁeld, so that the initial m value (orbital
alignment) plays a reduced role. We therefore expect that
the emission pathway for m = ±1 electrons will be en-
hanced when ionization proceeds from an XUV-excited
state, rather than from the ground state (as in single-
color HHG). This would reduce the discrepancy between
the contributions of m = 0 and m = ±1 electron emis-
sion for a two-color scheme, reﬂected in an increased yield
arising from the 3P e channels.

C. Cooper Minimum

The single-ﬁeld spectrum of Figure 2 displays a rather
prominent minimum, localized to the energy range 40 eV
to 80 eV. This feature persists in the two-color spec-
trum also. In general, the presence of minima in atomic
or molecular harmonic spectra can be attributed to any
one of several possible eﬀects. Perhaps the most actively
studied are those that pertain to the intrinsic structure
of the irradiated target, whether electronic (such as the
well-known Cooper minimum [9, 55]) or geometric (as
in molecular multi-centre interference [56]). Recent work
has suggested, however, that suppression of the har-
monic yield can also result from the ﬁeld-driven, post-
ionization dynamics of the ejected electron or residual
system [57]. A crucial discriminant between structure-
and dynamically-derived eﬀects, as already discussed by
W¨orner et al. [9], is that the latter should present a sen-
sitive dependence on irradiation conditions, with their
characteristic spectral features being controlled, in par-
ticular, by the laser light intensity and wavelength.

To constrain the possible origins of the minimum in the
single-ﬁeld spectrum of Ar+, we have performed a series
of calculations for a range of IR pulse peak intensities and
wavelengths. In each case, and following Higuet et al. [55],
we estimate the position of the minimum by means of a
Gaussian ﬁlter, as demonstrated in Figure 4 for the IR-
only spectrum. There, we locate the feature at 61.5 eV.
The inﬂuence of laser intensity on the Ar+ spectrum
is demonstrated in Figure 5. As expected, an increase

FIG. 3.
(Color online) Harmonic spectra generated by the
Ar+ ion, subject to single-color and two-color laser ﬁeld
conﬁgurations. The single-color ﬁeld comprises an 800 nm,
3 × 1014 Wcm−2, IR laser pulse. The two-color scheme con-
sists of the same IR pulse, in combination with a 92 nm,
3 × 1012 Wcm−2, XUV pulse. The latter is timed to coincide
with the penultimate maximum of the IR ﬁeld. The yields are
compared for diﬀerent descriptions of the Ar+ structure, in-
corporating the Ar2+ 3s23p4 1Se and 1De thresholds (lower,
solid black line and upper, solid blue line), or 3P e and 1Se
thresholds (lower, dashed red line and upper, dashed green
line).

As such, electrons with m = ±1 exhibit a weak ionization
response, and channels associated with the 3P e threshold
are poorly populated.

The aforementioned works treated exclusively the dy-
namics of HHG in a single-color ﬁeld. In contrast, we
have here chosen to enhance the conversion eﬃciency by
means of an additional XUV pulse, which provides an ini-
tial excitation of the electron to be ejected. The question
arises as to whether XUV irradiation might also aﬀect
the competition amongst low-lying ionization thresholds,
especially of the 3P e and 1De thresholds in the Ar+ har-
monic response. To reveal their interplay in the present
XIHHG scheme, we have eﬀected a change in the ﬁeld-
free, Ar+ electronic structure, selectively removing each
of the two thresholds, and computing the harmonic spec-
trum in each case.

Figure 3 evidences the eﬀect of restricting the num-
ber of ionization thresholds on the HHG yield, for both
single- and two-color ﬁeld conﬁgurations. For clarity, we
have omitted the full spectrum pertaining to each of these
(but shown in Figure 2), which account for the inﬂu-
ence of all three 3p ionization thresholds (3P e, 1Se, 1De).
Indeed, we have found the latter spectra to be well-
approximated through inclusion of only the Ar2+ 1Se
and 1De thresholds, suggesting that, as in single-ﬁeld
HHG [22, 52], channels connected to these excited resid-
ual ion states are dominant. Comparison of the two-color
(3P e, 1Se) and (1De, 1Se) spectra provides additional in-

7

for this species. More signiﬁcantly, theoretical predictions
for such electronic structure features can be rather sensi-
tive to the quality of atomic wavefunctions. In particular,
a faithful representation of low-lying residual ion states
is essential for the accuracy of photoionization data. Pre-
vious time-independent R-matrix studies [59] have sug-
gested that elaborate Ar2+ descriptions, employing large
numbers of conﬁgurations and relativistic corrections to
the Hamiltonian, are necessary for a reliable account of
Ar+ single-photon photoionization, even from the valence
shell. Thus, whilst the limited degree of atomic structure,
adopted in this work, is suﬃcient to identify the most im-
portant facets of the XIHHG process, quantitative pre-
dictions for such features, depending very sensitively on
that structure, should be made with care.

D. Role of the 3s3p6 2Se Excited State

As mentioned previously, the choice of XUV photon
energy (¯hωXUV ≈ 13.5 eV) was made with the aim of
probing the 3s3p6 2Se excited state. The two-color spec-
trum of Figure 2 presents a broad peak structure at en-
ergies comparable to the 3s23p5 2P o → 3s3p6 2Se transi-
tion energy. To establish whether the excited 2Se state
truly plays a mediating role in the present two-color HHG
process, we must examine its contribution in greater de-
tail.

Supplementary RMT calculations (results not shown)
reveal that this state is only weakly populated during
XUV irradiation, with the maximum population attained
of order 10−3. Systematic detuning from the expected
resonance, through variation of the XUV central pho-
ton energy by ±10 eV, yields only a simple reduction in
the occupancy for both positive and negative changes in
¯hωXUV. We note that this behaviour points to the ab-
sence of a strong ponderomotive shift in the 2Se state,
which would otherwise ensure its resonant population at
a somewhat higher or lower XUV frequency. Moreover,
by selectively removing this state from the dynamics, we
have found only insigniﬁcant alterations in the aforemen-
tioned peak structure of Figure 2. We therefore conclude
that excitation of the Ar+ 3s3p6 2Se state is inconsequen-
tial for the present XIHHG scheme.

A plausible explanation, for the apparent insigniﬁcance
of the 2Se intermediate resonance, may lie in the rela-
tive magnitudes of the dipole matrix elements for tran-
sitions amongst diﬀerent low-lying, bound states of Ar+.
Indeed, time-independent R-matrix calculations for the
static Ar+ structure, performed by the present authors,
indicate that the dipole matrix element for a 3s → 3p
transition can be up to an order of magnitude lower than
those relevant for other transitions, including 3p → 4s,
3p → 3d, 3d → 4p and 4s → 4p. These predictions are
supported by the data of both Hibbert and Hansen [60]
and Berrington et al. [61], which indicate that the corre-
sponding discrepancy in oscillator strengths can readily
exceed an order of magnitude. This would suggest that

FIG. 4. (Color online) Harmonic spectrum generated by the
Ar+ ion, subject to an 800 nm, 3×1014 Wcm−2, IR laser pulse
(solid, red line), with Gaussian smoothing (dashed, black
line). The arrow indicates the position of the minimum, at
approximately 61.5 eV.

in peak intensity eﬀects both a rise in the cutoﬀ en-
ergy, as well as in the global harmonic yield. Crucially,
the position of the minimum remains largely unaﬀected,
with shifts that are both unsystematic, and typically
of a sub-electron-volt scale. Similarly, in Figure 6, we
consider possible changes in the location of the mini-
mum for three distinct IR wavelengths. Note that those
shorter than 800 nm, for the ﬁxed intensity of interest
(3×1014 Wcm−2), reduce the harmonic cutoﬀ energy suf-
ﬁciently that the minimum no longer appears well-deﬁned
(if at all). We thus restrict the comparison of harmonic
yields to those at longer wavelengths. Despite an increase
of over 50% in this quantity, and correspondingly of al-
most 69 eV in the ponderomotive energy, we ﬁnd compar-
atively minor shifts in the minimum. The general robust-
ness of this feature, with respect to changes in irradiation
conditions, favours the conclusion that it must be asso-
ciated, in some fashion, with the electronic structure of
the Ar+ ion, as opposed to the dynamics of laser-driven
recollision.

Perhaps the most plausible explanation for this fea-
ture, given the Ar-like nature of the system, is that the
suppression of yield reﬂects the emergence of a Cooper
minimum [9, 55]. This is supported by recent experimen-
tal [58] and theoretical [59] investigations of the photoion-
ization spectrum of Ar+, which clearly demonstrate the
existence of such a feature. Importantly, however, the
minimum observed in photoionization spectra arises at a
somewhat lower energy, in the range 45 eV to 50 eV. This
is in line with studies of the Cooper minimum in neutral
Ar, which has been reported to systematically shift be-
tween harmonic and photoionization spectra [55]. Due to
the paucity of experimental data for HHG in Ar+, it is
diﬃcult to state conclusively that such a shift also occurs

8

E.

3s versus 3p Emission

A long-standing feature of time-dependent R-matrix
techniques has been their capacity for exploring the
correlated response of multiple electrons in laser-driven
atomic processes. For instance, the impact of window res-
onances on low-order harmonic generation from Ar has
been described in a ﬁrst-principles manner [62]. More re-
cently, the predictive capabilities of the RMT methodol-
ogy were exploited in a study of XIHHG from neon [31].
There, a novel scheme had been proposed for resolving
the contribution of inner- and outer-valence electrons to
the harmonic response, with implications for HHG spec-
troscopy of their interference dynamics.

Given the rich behaviour observed in these studies, and
notwithstanding the conclusions of the preceding section,
it is natural to question if any signatures of a 3s-electron
response are manifest in the present XIHHG scheme. To
this end, we ﬁnd that even a gross analysis of the two-
color spectrum (Figure 2) yields some insight. The pro-
nounced intensity of harmonics, around the 3p ionization
threshold, suggests that the outer-valence electrons dom-
inate the ionization yield. The higher binding energy of 3s
electrons would also give rise to a double-plateau struc-
ture, with a second cutoﬀ feature (above 110 eV). Since
the two-color spectrum displays only a single cutoﬀ, in
the energy range expected for 3p electron dynamics alone,
we cannot claim that the 3s electrons elicit the generation
of the highest observable harmonics.

In order to isolate the contribution of the 3s elec-
trons more eﬀectively, and thereby conduct a more sys-
tematic assessment of their role, we modify the present
description of the ﬁeld-free, Ar+ electronic structure.
More speciﬁcally, we selectively remove the 3s3p5 3P o
and 3s3p5 1P o Ar2+ ionization thresholds, tantamount
to neglecting ionization from the 3s subshell. Note that
a similar approach had been adopted to investigate the
contribution of the 3s and 3p electrons to low-energy,
single-ﬁeld harmonic generation in both Ne+ [63] and
Ar+ [22].

Figure 7 compares the two-color spectra, in a restricted
energy range, as generated with the aforementioned ionic
structure conﬁgurations. We ﬁnd that the gross features
of the spectrum are largely preserved upon precluding
ionization of a 3s electron. The latter conﬁrms that both
the plateau, and cutoﬀ, harmonics arise primarily from
the action of a 3p electron. Above the target ionization
threshold, calculations neglecting the emission of a 3s
electron display a moderately enhanced yield (typically
less than an order of magnitude). Importantly, the energy
range 35 eV to 55 eV is spanned by two Rydberg series,
converging onto the 3s3p5 3P o and 3s3p5 1P o Ar2+ ion-
ization thresholds (see [22] for the precise threshold en-
ergies). We can thus assume that the reaction of multiple
electrons, to the laser ﬁeld, actually hinders HHG in the
present scheme.

Given the dominance of the 1De and 1Se thresholds
for the Ar+ harmonic response (see Section IV B), we

FIG. 5.
(Color online) Harmonic spectra generated by the
Ar+ ion, subject to an 800 nm, IR laser pulse of variable peak
intensity. The spectra are successively oﬀset by a factor of
105, and all intensities are expressed in units of Wcm−2. The
approximate position of the minimum, which varies weakly
about 61.5 eV, is indicated by the dashed line.

FIG. 6.
(Color online) Harmonic spectra generated by the
Ar+ ion, subject to a 3 × 1014 Wcm−2, IR laser pulse of vari-
able wavelength. The spectra are successively oﬀset by a factor
of 105, and all wavelengths are expressed in units of nm. The
approximate position of the minimum, which varies weakly
about 61.5 eV, is indicated by the dashed line.

the ﬁrst excited (2Se) state of Ar+ may not be optimal
for realising resonantly enhanced, multiphoton ionization
yields in XIHHG schemes, or of driving HHG from an
excited state. In connection with the latter, alternative
strategies based on XUV free-induction decay [38–40], or
direct ionization from an excited state followed by re-
combination to the ground state [38], oﬀer considerable
promise.

9

F. Time delay Scan of the Harmonic Response

Having conﬁrmed that a combination of XUV and IR
laser light, with appropriately chosen time delay, can af-
ford enhanced HHG yields from Ar+, we now consider
the eﬀect of varying the time delay between the pulses.
In doing so, we may assess the implications, for the HHG
yield, of a more systematic control over the timing of the
initial ionization event.

Figure 8 presents a time delay scan of the Ar+ har-
monic response. Perhaps the most notable eﬀect is the en-
hancement in the harmonic yield both above, and some-
what below, the ionization threshold, for time delays sat-
isfying 0.0TXUV < ∆ < 1.0TXUV and 3.0TXUV < ∆ <
4.0TXUV. In these cases, the central peak of the XUV
pulse is near-coincident in time with either the primary,
or penultimate, peak of the IR ﬁeld. The XIHHG mech-
anism, discussed previously in the case ∆ = 3.5TXUV,
is then most eﬃcient. Multiphoton absorption, from the
XUV ﬁeld, can drive direct photoionization from the 3p
subshell, or excite the ion into high-lying 3s23p4nl Ry-
dberg states, from which the intense IR ﬁeld can medi-
ate tunnel ionization. Multiphoton processes, enabled by
one or both laser ﬁelds, thereby enhance dipolar emission
throughout the plateau region, and especially around the
3p ionization threshold.

The eﬃcacy of the XIHHG excitation/tunnelling pro-
cess, for time delays that fall within the aforementioned
ranges, accounts for the pronounced intensities of the
plateau harmonics. In comparison, for 1.0TXUV < ∆ <
2.0TXUV, XUV-driven transitions are not followed with
signiﬁcant tunnel ionization, by virtue of the decreasing
intensity of the IR ﬁeld. We thus expect a reduction in
the degree of ionization, and consequently, a reduction
in the harmonic yield. Moreover, by ejecting an electron
when the ﬁeld is weak, we fail to promote energetic rec-
ollision trajectories, thereby compromising the eﬃciency
of the HHG process.

The timing of the XUV pulse is important in yet an-
other respect. When the XUV pulse temporally overlaps
the primary peak of the IR ﬁeld, as for 0.0TXUV < ∆ <
1.0TXUV, the cutoﬀ appears around 81 eV. However, for
somewhat longer time delays, spanning 3.0TXUV < ∆ <
4.0TXUV, the cutoﬀ emerges around 90 eV. We claim that
this is a consequence of strong-ﬁeld dynamics alone, and
provide conﬁrmation by simulating the classical, laser-
driven motion of an ejected electron.

Figure 9 presents the distribution of harmonic pho-
ton energies, assuming ionization at diﬀerent instants of
time in the IR ﬁeld (the weak XUV ﬁeld modiﬁes the
recollision energies negligibly). If the XUV pulse excites
the target into a (superposition of) Rydberg state(s), its
susceptibility to tunnel ionization is increased. Since, for
0.0TXUV < ∆ < 1.0TXUV, this occurs around the pri-
mary peak of the IR pulse, we might anticipate that
the ionization response there dominates. From Figure
9, we ﬁnd that an electron released into the ﬁeld near
this peak will recollide with the parent ion, but give

FIG. 7.
(Color online) Harmonic spectra generated by the
Ar+ ion, subject to a two-color irradiation scheme. This com-
prises an 800 nm, 3 × 1014 Wcm−2, IR laser pulse, in com-
bination with a 92 nm, 3 × 1012 Wcm−2, XUV pulse. The
latter is timed to coincide with the penultimate maximum of
the IR ﬁeld. The yields are compared for two ionic structure
conﬁgurations, in which all Ar2+ 3s23p4 and 3s3p5 ionization
thresholds are retained (solid, black line), or only the 3s23p4
thresholds (dashed, red line).

expect that the XIHHG excitation/tunnelling mecha-
nism will be mediated by substantial populations in the
3s23p4 (1De)nl and 3s23p4 (1Se)nl Rydberg states. These
may couple to the 3s3p5 (1P o)nl states via an IR- or
XUV-driven, single-electron 3s → 3p transition. Ryd-
berg series converging onto the 3s3p5 thresholds eﬀec-
tively describe the excitation of an inner-valence 3s elec-
tron, whilst the harmonic response is primarily deter-
mined by the action of an outer-valence 3p electron. The
existence of such distinct pathways for ionic HHG, com-
peting for electronic population, has a suppressive eﬀect
on the overall yield.

As for the above-threshold harmonics, we ﬁnd only mi-
nor deviations in yield (less than a factor of 3 on aver-
age) below the ionization threshold. In particular, the
dipolar response at energies comparable to the 3s3p6 2Se
excitation threshold (around 13.5 eV) appears largely in-
dependent of the presence, or absence, of the 3s3p5nl
Rydberg series. This echoes the conclusions of the pre-
ceding section, wherein it had been established that the
2Se state plays no essential role in the XIHHG process.
These ﬁndings suggest that, despite the choice of XUV
pulse parameters (especially the central frequency), we
cannot selectively resolve the dynamics of the 3s electron
under these conditions. The HHG process is dictated by
the ionization and recollision dynamics of a 3p electron,
with the XUV ﬁeld merely promoting the former through
provision of high-energy photons. Inner-valence emission
channels are manifest only in their suppressive eﬀect for
the total harmonic yield, which is ultimately mediated
by interference amongst competing excitation pathways.

10

FIG. 9. (Color online) Harmonic photon energies (black, ﬁlled
circles), arising from ionization at given instants of time, in
an 800 nm, 3 × 1014 Wcm−2, IR laser pulse (solid, red line),
assuming a classical trajectory model.

an optimal, sub-cycle time interval (about the penulti-
mate IR peak), giving rise to the most energetic rec-
ollisions possible under the prevalent ﬁeld conditions.
This yields higher cutoﬀ energies, and longer harmonic
plateaus. Note that, in both cases, the XUV-mediated
ionization aﬀords enhanced intensities in their respective
cutoﬀ regions. Otherwise, the timing of the XUV pulse
limits the eﬃciency of the XIHHG process, as reﬂected
by lower cutoﬀ yields.

There is some current interest in the characterization
of sub-threshold harmonics, given that the details of the
target atomic structure can be imprinted on the spec-
tral emission [22, 62, 64, 65]. The use of combined (XUV
+ IR) ﬁelds has traditionally been the concern of multi-
dimensional absorption spectroscopies [46, 66–68], but
Figure 8 suggests that such a scheme may also eﬀect non-
negligible changes in the harmonic response, especially
below the target ionization threshold. We observe that,
for time delays satisfying ∆ ≈ 0.0TXUV and 3.0TXUV <
∆ < 4.0TXUV, the harmonics which span the range 20 eV
to 25 eV accumulate considerable intensity. This is an
unexpected feature of the present results. The three-step
(recollision) process should not contribute to the yield of
sub-threshold harmonics, being initiated only at energies
exceeding the ionization threshold. The characteristics
of low-order harmonics are often determined by dipole-
allowed transitions amongst resonantly-coupled bound
states. We propose that low-lying 3s23p4nl Rydberg
states, spanning the aforementioned energy range, be-
come resonantly populated through XUV, or (XUV +
IR), few-photon absorption. When the XUV pulse is co-
incident with a peak of the IR ﬁeld, the latter may stim-
ulate the ion to de-excite, with radiative emission. When
the timing of the XUV pulse is otherwise, these Rydberg
states do not depopulate so eﬃciently, and the lower-

(Color online) Time delay scan of the harmonic
FIG. 8.
response of Ar+, subject to a combination of IR (800 nm,
3 × 1014 Wcm−2) and XUV (92 nm, 3 × 1012 Wcm−2) laser
light. (a) Evolution of the two-color harmonic spectrum with
time delay. (b) Two-color ﬁeld conﬁguration, with separate
depiction of the XUV (dashed, magenta line) and IR (solid,
red line) pulses. Filled circles (black) indicate, for speciﬁed
time delays, the IR ﬁeld when the XUV pulse attains peak
intensity. All time delays are measured between the peaks of
the XUV and IR pulses, and expressed in units of the XUV
pulse period, TXUV ≈ 0.31 fs.

rise to a photon energy no higher than about 81 eV.
Thus, short IR time delays promote only sub-optimal
recollision trajectories, leading to lower cutoﬀ energies,
and hence shorter plateau structures. In contrast, for
3.0TXUV < ∆ < 4.0TXUV, ionization is enhanced within

order harmonics exhibit reduced intensities.

V. CONCLUSIONS

We have applied ab initio RMT theory to investigate
XIHHG in Ar+. With an appropriate choice of time de-
lay between the XUV and IR pulses, we ﬁnd that XUV-
mediated multiphoton processes aﬀord substantial en-
hancements in the yield of plateau harmonics, including
those below the target ionization threshold. The single-
color spectrum presents an important signature of the
target electronic structure, in the form of a pronounced
Cooper minimum. The latter has previously been ob-
served in photoionization spectra of Ar+, reinforcing the
notion that HHG could enable a novel mode of spec-
troscopy. This minimum also persists in the two-color
spectrum, suggesting that the XIHHG scheme we pro-
pose retains the spectroscopic potential of single-ﬁeld
HHG, whilst oﬀering improved conversion eﬃciencies.
In general, the measurement of ionic harmonic yields
may facilitate the retrieval of their photoionization, and
photorecombination, cross-sections throughout a broad
range of energies, as demonstrated for neutral atoms [7].
The competition amongst low-lying ionization thresh-
olds, whose separation is comparable to the IR photon
energy, has long been of interest in atomic HHG. We have
shown that multi-color ﬁeld conﬁgurations can alter the
relative importance of diﬀerent electron emission chan-
nels. Speciﬁcally, by driving HHG from an XUV-excited
state, the eﬀect of orbital alignment in the ground state,
which ensures a weaker excitation/ionization response of
m = ±1, as opposed to m = 0, electrons can be made less
signiﬁcant. In HHG from Ar+, this leads to an enhanced
population of channels connected with the 3P e threshold,
accessible only by m = ±1 emission. The present ﬁnd-
ings could, however, be considerably more far-reaching
for the control of ultrafast and strong-ﬁeld processes. In
molecules, for instance, excitation of particular electronic
or vibrational states, via an appropriate multi-color irra-
diation strategy, could contribute to the enhancement of
selected ionization, dissociation or even HHG pathways.
This would aid in the manipulation of complex, multi-
channel dynamics in such systems.

We have examined the potential role of an intermediate
resonance for the present XIHHG scheme. Excitation of
the low-lying 3s3p6 2Se state was eﬀected via an XUV-
driven, 3s → 3p transition. However, little population
transfer was achieved, and no signatures of HHG from
this state were observed. Higher XUV peak intensities
may enable a more eﬀective participation of such a state
in the HHG process. Alternatively, schemes surrounding
the excitation of outer-valence electrons, and high-lying
Rydberg states, could prove more fruitful [38].

Additionally, the general consequences of multielectron
interference eﬀects, involving the outer-shell 3s and 3p
electrons, have been highlighted. Selective closure of 3s
emission channels incurs only a minor enhancement in

11

the yield of plateau harmonics, indicating that competing
excitation pathways actually hinder HHG in the present
scheme. Our ﬁndings seed doubt that such weak eﬀects
could be detected in an experimental realization. The rel-
atively low probability of ionizing an inner-valence elec-
tron ensures that, even with a tuned XUV pulse, the
outer-valence electrons dominate the HHG process. To
resolve inner-valence excitations, we must devise more
carefully a multi-color irradiation scheme, with appro-
priately selected spectral and temporal properties [31].

implementation of

The importance of a systematic control, over the tim-
ing of the initial ionization event, has been demonstrated
for XIHHG in Ar+. In particular, we have conﬁrmed
that XUV multiphoton processes confer the greatest in-
creases in yield whenever the XUV pulse coincides, in
time, with a peak of the IR pulse. Moreover, depend-
ing on the phase of the IR ﬁeld when ionization is pro-
moted, the harmonic cutoﬀ energy may be varied. Inter-
estingly, the characteristics of the harmonics below the
target ionization threshold, which are often dictated by
intricate, bound state dynamics, also appear somewhat
sensitive to the time delay between the pulses. These ﬁnd-
ings suggest that (XUV + IR) irradiation schemes, tradi-
tionally employed in absorption spectroscopy techniques,
may also hold considerable promise for multi-dimensional
harmonic spectroscopy.
An experimental

the XIHHG
scheme proposed here presents several challenges. Not
least among these is the preparation of the Ar+ target.
However, we note that in past experimental works, the
highest-order harmonics from laser-irradiated Ar have in-
deed been attributed to Ar+ [41, 69]. These arise from
a sequential process, in which Ar ﬁrst ionizes, and then
undergoes HHG. Moreover, although ionization in a lin-
early polarized ﬁeld will leave Ar+ predominantly in the
M = 0 state, the ion will subsequently evolve under the
spin-orbit interaction. As a consequence, after a time of
the order of 10 fs, a signiﬁcant M = 1 population will
arise. Previous R-matrix studies have demonstrated that
enhanced HHG can be achieved with M = 1 alignment,
in both Ne+ [63] and Ar+ [52]. It would thus be of consid-
erable interest to explore the role of spin-orbit dynamics
in ionic XIHHG schemes, especially those in which vari-
able XUV pulse time delays play a fundamental role. Ef-
forts to incorporate spin-orbit coupling, within the RMT
formalism, are on the horizon.

Furthermore, the laser regime which optimizes the
resolution of XUV-initiated dynamics is not yet well
understood. Our previous work has shown that long-
wavelength driving pulses hold much promise, reducing
the direct contribution of the IR ﬁeld to the harmonic
spectrum [31]. Although this was formerly thought un-
tenable - most experiments in attosecond physics em-
ploy the ubiquitous (800 nm) Ti:sapphire laser - a re-
cent report has demonstrated the stable production of
ultrashort, XUV pulses with a 1.8 µm driver [70]. Such
developments enhance the possibility that spectroscopic
XIHHG strategies, similar to the one outlined in this arti-

cle, might become experimentally viable within the next
several years.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

DDAC acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the UK
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council

12

(EPSRC). HWvdH and ACB also acknowledge ﬁnancial
support from EPSRC, under Grant No. EP/P013953/1.
This work relied on the ARCHER UK National Super-
computing Service (www.archer.ac.uk). The data pre-
sented in this paper may be found using Ref. [71].

[1] F. Krausz and M. Ivanov, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 163

(2009).

[2] E. Goulielmakis et al., Science 320, 1614 (2008).
[3] K. Zhao, Q. Zhang, M. Chini, Y. Wu, X. Wang and Z.

Chang, Opt. Lett. 37, 3891 (2012).

[4] T. Popmintchev et al., Science 336, 1287 (2012).
[5] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993).
[6] O. Smirnova, Y. Mairesse, S. Patchkovskii, N. Dudovich,
D. Villeneuve, P. Corkum and M. Y. Ivanov, Nature 460,
972 (2009).

[7] A. D. Shiner, B. E. Schmidt, C. Trallero-Herrero, H. J.
W¨orner, S. Patchkovskii, P. B. Corkum, J-C. Kieﬀer, F.
L´egar´e and D. M. Villeneuve, Nat. Phys. 7, 464 (2011).
[8] B. D. Bruner, H. Soifer, D. Shaﬁr, V. Serbinenko, O.
Smirnova and N. Dudovich, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.
Phys. 48, 174006 (2015).

[9] H. J. W¨orner, H. Niikura, J. B. Bertrand, P. B. Corkum
and D. M. Villeneuve, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 103901
(2009).

[10] A. D. Shiner, B. E. Schmidt, C. Trallero-Herrero, P. B.
Corkum, J.-C. Kieﬀer, F. L´egar´e and D. M. Villeneuve,
J.Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 45, 074010 (2012).
[11] M. C. H. Wong, A.-T. Le, A. F. Alharbi, A. E. Bo-
guslavskiy, R. R. Lucchese, J.-P. Brichta, C. D. Lin and
V. R. Bhardwaj, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 033006 (2013).

[12] R. Torres et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 203007 (2007).
[13] R. M. Lock, X. Zhou, W. Li, M. M. Murnane and H. C.

Kapteyn, Chem Phys. 366, 22 (2009).
[14] Y. Mairesse et al., Science 302, 1540 (2003).
[15] A. Ferr´e et al., Nat. Phot. 9, 93 (2015).
[16] G. Lambert et al., Nat. Comm. 6, 6167 (2015).
[17] J. P. Farrell, L. S. Spector, B. K. McFarland, P. H. Bucks-
baum, M. G¨uhr, M. B. Gaarde and K. J. Schafer, Phys.
Rev. A 83, 023420 (2011).

[18] A. Za¨ır et al., Chem Phys. 414, 184 (2013).
[19] S. Baker et al., Science 312, 424 (2006).
[20] P. M. Kraus et al., Science 350, 790 (2015).
[21] M. B. Gaarde, K. J. Schafer, A. Heinrich, J. Biegert and

U. Keller, Phys. Rev. A 72, 013411 (2005).

[29] J. Biegert et al., J. Mod. Opt. 53, 87 (2006).
[30] G. Gademann et al., New J. Phys. 13, 033002 (2011).
[31] A. C. Brown and H. W. van der Hart, Phys. Rev. Lett.

117, 093201 (2016).

[32] L. R. Moore, M. A. Lysaght, L. A. A. Nikolopoulos, J.
S. Parker, H. W. van der Hart and K. T. Taylor, J. Mod.
Optics 58, 1132 (2011).

[33] S. E. Harris, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1033 (1989).
[34] P. Mandel and O. Kocharovskaya, Phys. Rev. A 47, 5003

(1993).

[35] F. I. Gauthey, C. H. Keitel, P. L. Knight and A. Maquet,

Phys. Rev. A 52, 525 (1995).

[36] J. B. Watson, A. Sanpera, X. Chen and K. Burnett, Phys.

Rev. A 53, R1962(R) (1996).

[37] A. Sanpera, J. B. Watson, M. Lewenstein and K. Bur-

nett, Phys. Rev. A 54, 4320 (1996).

[38] S. Beaulieu et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 203001 (2016).
[39] A. R. Beck et al., New J. Phys. 16, 113016 (2014).
[40] S. Camp, K. J. Schafer and M. B. Gaarde, Phys. Rev. A

92, 013404 (2015).

[41] E. A. Gibson et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 033001 (2004).
[42] D. M. Gaudiosi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 203001 (2006).
[43] P. G. Burke and V. M. Burke, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.

Phys. 30, L383 (1997).

[44] X. Guan et al., Phys. Rev. A 76, 053411 (2007).
[45] M. A. Lysaght, H. W. van der Hart and P. G. Burke,

Phys. Rev. A 79, 053411 (2009).

[46] T. Ding et al., Opt. Lett. 41, 709 (2016).
[47] O. Hassouneh, S. Law, S. F. C. Shearer, A. C. Brown and
H. W. van der Hart, Phys. Rev. A 91, 031404 (2015).
[48] K. R. Hamilton, H. W. van der Hart and A. C. Brown,

Phys. Rev. A 95, 013408 (2017).

[49] E. S. Smyth, J.S. Parker and K.T. Taylor, Comp. Phys.

Comm. 114, 1 (1998).

[50] A. C. Brown, D. J. Robinson and H. W. van der Hart,

Phys. Rev. A 86, 053420 (2012).

[51] S. Hutchinson, M. A. Lysaght and H. W. van der Hart,
J.Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 43, 095603 (2010).
[52] A. C. Brown and H. W. van der Hart, Phys. Rev. A 88,

[22] A. C. Brown and H. W. van der Hart, Phys. Rev. A 86,

033419 (2013).

063416 (2012).

[53] E. Clementi and C. Roetti, At. Data Nucl. Data Tables

[23] M. V. Frolov et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 243901 (2009).
[24] D. A. Telnov and S.-I. Chu, Phys. Rev. A 80, 043412

(2009).

[25] E. J. Takahashi, T. Kanai, K. L. Ishikawa, Y. Nabekawa
and K. Midorikawa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 053904 (2007).
[26] M. Tudorovskaya and M. Lein, J. Mod. Opt. 61, 845

(2014).

[27] J. Leeuwenburgh, B. Cooper, V. Averbukh, J. P. Maran-
gos and M. Ivanov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 123002 (2013).

[28] C. Buth, Eur. Phys. J. D 69, 234 (2015).

14, 268 (1974).

[54] J. L. Krause, K. J. Schafer and K. C. Kulander, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 68, 3535 (1992).

[55] J. Higuet et al., Phys. Rev. A 83, 053401 (2011).
[56] B. Manschwetus et al., J. Phys. Chem. A 119, 6111

(2015).

[57] T. Kanai, E. J. Takahashi, Y. Nabekawa and K. Mi-

dorikawa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 153904 (2007).

[58] A. M. Covington et al., Phys. Rev. A 84, 013413 (2011).
[59] N. B. Tyndall, C. A. Ramsbottom, C. P. Ballance and

A. Hibbert, MNRAS 456, 366 (2016).

[65] W.-H. Xiong, L.-Y. Peng and Q. Gong, J. Phys. B: At.

[60] A. Hibbert and J. E. Hansen, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.

Mol. Opt. Phys. 50, L383 (2017).

Phys. 27, 3325 (1994).

[61] K. A. Berrington, J. C. Pelan and J. A. Waldock, J. Phys.

[66] H. Wang et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 143002 (2010).
[67] M. Holler, F. Schapper, L. Gallmann and U. Keller, Phys.

B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 34, L419 (2001).

Rev. Lett. 106, 123601 (2011).

[62] A. C. Brown, S. Hutchinson, M. A. Lysaght and H. W.
van der Hart, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 063006 (2012).
[63] O. Hassouneh, A. C. Brown and H. W. van der Hart,

Phys. Rev. A 89, 033409 (2014).

[68] B. Bernhardt et al., Phys. Rev. A 89, 023408 (2014).
[69] M. Zepf et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 143901 (2007).
[70] T. Gaumnitz et al., Opt. Exp. 25, 27506 (2017).
[71] http://pure.qub.ac.uk/portal/en/datasets/search.

[64] H. Soifer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 143904 (2010).

html.

13

