Prepared for submission to JINST

LIDINE 2017: Light Detection in Noble Elements
22-24 September 2017
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory

Increasing the eﬃciency of photon collection in LArTPCs:

the ARAPUCA light trap

G. Cancelo,a F. Cavanna,a C. O. Escobar,a E. Kemp,a,b,1
Segreto,b D. Totani,e D. Warner f

A. A. Machado,c A. Para,a E.

aFermilab National Accelerator Laboratory,
Batavia, 60510 (IL) USA
bUniversidade Estadual de Campinas - UNICAMP,
Campinas, 13083-859 (SP) Brazil
cUniversidade Federal do ABC,
Santo André, 09210-580 (SP) Brazil
dUniversità degli Studi dell’Aquila,
L’Aquila, 67100 (ABR), Italia
eColorado State University,
Fort Collins, 80523 (CO), USA

E-mail: kemp@ifi.unicamp.br

Abstract: The Liquid Argon Time Projection Chambers (LArTPCs) are a choice for the next
generation of large neutrino detectors due to their optimal performance in particle tracking and
calorimetry. The detection of Argon scintillation light plays a crucial role in the event reconstruction
as well as the time reference for non-beam physics such as supernovae neutrino detection and baryon
number violation studies. In this contribution, we present the current R&D work on the ARAPUCA
(Argon R&D Advanced Program at UNICAMP), a light trap device to enhance Ar scintillation
light collection and thus the overall performance of LArTPCs. The ARAPUCA working principle
is based on a suitable combination of dichroic ﬁlters and wavelength shifters to achieve a high
eﬃciency in light collection. We discuss the operational principles, the last results of laboratory
tests and the application of the ARAPUCA as the alternative photon detection system in the
protoDUNE detector.

Keywords: Noble liquid detectors (scintillation, ionization, double-phase), Neutrino detectors,
Scintillators, scintillation and light emission processes (solid, gas and liquid scintillators)

ArXiv ePrint: 1802.09726

1Corresponding author.

8
1
0
2

r
a

M
5

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

2
v
6
2
7
9
0
.
2
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

1 Overview

2 ARAPUCA device: the working principles and concepts

3 The experiment at TallBo cryostat

4 Data Analysis: Eﬃciency Calculation

5 ARAPUCAs at protoDUNE

6 Conclusions

1

2

2

5

6

6

1 Overview

Liquid Argon Time Projection Chambers (LArTPCs) technology are the best choice for the next
generation of large neutrino experiments [1, 2] and frequently has been also an option for Dark
Matter detectors [3]. Neutrinos or Dark Matter candidates can interact with argon nuclei producing
charged particles as ﬁnal states. The charged particles cross the liquid argon (LAr) medium promptly
producing scintillation light and free electrons by ionization. The scintillation is produced either
by the direct excitation of an Ar atom followed by the formation of an excimer which then decays
2 → 2Ar + γ (128nm)) or by ionization, recombination, and ﬁnally de-excitation
(Ar ∗ + Ar → Ar ∗
(Ar + + Ar → Ar +
2 → 2Ar + γ (128nm)). These characteristic 128 nm photons -
2 + e− → Ar ∗
VUV photons (Vacuum Ultra-Violet) - are abundantly emitted, about 40,000 photons per MeV of
ionization energy loss. Light emission is much faster (∼ ns) than the drift of ionized charges to the
anode planes (∼ µs). Therefore the collection of these photons provides a natural time reference
(t0) for the particle interactions inside the TPC and is essential to improve the timing accuracy of
the event dynamics and thus the reconstruction of the particles tracks. Moreover, the scintillation
light provides the t0 for non-beam events such as supernovae neutrinos and nucleon decay rare
signatures. The LArTPCs can use both charge and light for trigger purposes and also to improve the
detector performance. A fraction of the ionization electrons is not collected due to their capture by
electronegative impurities in the LAr (mainly O2). The eﬃciency of the photon detection for low
energy events, such as those of supernovae neutrinos, depends critically on the signal-to-noise ratio.
It is extremely advantageous to eliminate background events of 39 Ar and 222Rn, which requires
a threshold in few photoelectrons (PE). The light might also be used to ﬁnd the vertex of the
interaction improving the energy resolution relevant for supernova neutrinos. Furthermore, typical
light sensors for particle detectors based on liqueﬁed noble gases, whether cryogenic phototubes
(PMTs) or silicon photomultipliers (SiPMs) generally are not suitable for VUV photons1 since the

1There are special devices built for VUV at very high cost.

– 1 –

quantum eﬃciencies of these devices are optimal only at wavelengths λ > 300 nm. Thus, there is
a great challenge to developing photon collection systems for LArTPCs that increase the detection
eﬃciency allowing the experiments to fully achieve the scientiﬁc goals. This can be done exploring
the direct detection of VUV photons or by down-shifting the photon wavelengths before detection.
In both cases, higher eﬃciencies is a strong requirement that can be achieved by a high-performance
photon collection device.

2 ARAPUCA device: the working principles and concepts

One proposal for an eﬃcient photon collector is a light trap called ARAPUCA2 [4]. The central
concept of ARAPUCA is to capture photons within a box with highly reﬂective internal surfaces
(> 98% reﬂectivity). The key point of the device is a dichroic ﬁlter made from a vitreous substrate
with acrylic multilayer ﬁlm. The ﬁlter has the property of being highly transparent to wavelengths
below a cut (λcut ) and highly reﬂective above it. The dichroic ﬁlter is the acceptance window for
the device. The ﬁlter has its outer side coated by a wavelength shifter (WLS). The WLS on the
outer side, Wout , ﬁrst converts the scintillation light from the LAr to a wavelength λ1, with λ1 <
λcut , and the ﬁlter is transparent to the photons, allowing them to enter the box. Another WLS
layer, Win, coats the inner side of the ﬁlter, or alternatively, the inner walls of the box. The Win
makes a second conversion on the photons to a wavelength λ2, with λ2 > λcut . After the second
Inside the
conversion the ﬁlter becomes highly reﬂective, trapping the photons in the the box.
ARAPUCA there are photosensors viewing the internal volume. So far we have used SiPMs as
photosensors, ﬁlters with λcut = 400nm, P-Terphenyl3 (pTp, emmison peak at λ = 338 nm) as
Wout , and Tetra-Phenyl-Butadiene4 (TPB, emmison peak at λ = 420 nm) as Win.

3 The experiment at TallBo cryostat

The experiment described in this section was aimed i) to check the performances of basic components
of the ARAPUCAs; and ii) obtain a measurement of the absolute eﬃciency for photon collection.
The experiment was performed at TallBo cryostat, in March/2017. TallBo is a cylindrical cryostat
with 56 cm inner diameter and up to a 183 cm liquid depth for a total volume of liquid argon of 451
liters available in the cryogenic facilities at Fermilab. The cryostat is vacuum-jacketed for insulating
the liquid argon. The argon is ﬁltered to remove oxygen and water contamination. TallBo has a
nitrogen cooled condenser in order to provide a closed system without boil-oﬀ of the liquid argon.
A vertical mover, 6 feet in length, is available. It consists of a slotted channel and a screw capable
of vertically moving objects mounted on it. The screw has a radial distance from the cylinder center
dr =12.7 cm. The vertical position z can be controlled from outside by a graduated scale. The
experiment was performed by testing six diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the ARAPUCAs. A summary
of the conﬁgurations can be found in Table 1. In the conﬁgurations with Vikuit®3M Enhanced

2Arapuca is a handcrafted trap originally used by the Guarani Brazilian Indians to catch birds, monkeys and other

small animals

31,4-Diphenylbenzene
41,1,4,4-Tetraphenyl-1,3-butadiene

– 2 –

Specular Reﬂector5, the lining was applied only over the bottom of the ARAPUCAs. All other
cases the reﬂectivity on the bottom or on the side walls was provided by the properties of the box
materials themselves (PTFE6 or Accuﬂect®Light-Reﬂecting Ceramic7). Filters with same technical
speciﬁcations but from diﬀerent vendors were also tested to compare their relative performances8.
In a ﬁrst approximation, the inner reﬂectors have no considerable diﬀerences in their reﬂection
coeﬃcients, one of the purposes of the test was to assess the ease of machining, handling, and
assembly with diﬀerent materials. The WLS coatings were made using evaporation technique. The
thickness of the coatings is controlled by monitoring the vibrational frequency of a piezoelectric
quartz crystal placed inside the vacuum chamber of the evaporator.

Table 1. Conﬁgurations of the ARAPUCAs tested at TallBo cryostat. Conﬁguration 1 used two (2) ﬁlter
plates to achieve a comparable window area to the others. The wavelength cut-oﬀ of all ﬁlters is λcut = 400
nm. In ﬁrst column, there is the channel numbering, relevant for further discussions in this paper, and the
position of each ARAPUCAs in the frame (row and column of the frame, see more details in Fig. 1). The
Wi coating (TPB) was applied in two diﬀerent conﬁgurations: over the inner side of the ﬁlter plate (denoted
by f in the table) or over the lining reﬂector placed on the backplane of the ARAPUCA (denoted by l).

Conﬁguration

Filter
(vendor and size)

1: ch0, r1c1
2: ch1, r2c1
3: ch3, r2c2
4: ch4, r3c2
5: ch5, r1c3
6: ch6, r3c3

2 Edmund* 2.5×3.6 cm2
Asahi† 5.0×5.0 cm2
Omega‡ 5.0×7.0 cm2
Omega 5.0×7.0 cm2
Omega 5.0×5.0 cm2
Asahi 5.0×5.0 cm2

pTp thickness TPB thickness

µg/cm2
200
200
300
500
300
200

µg/cm2
250 f
250 f
250 l
250 l
300 f
250 f

Internal reﬂector
lining

Teﬂon
Vikuit
Vikuit
Vikuit
Vikuit
Accuﬂect

The six ARAPUCAs were mounted in a rack9 which in turn was placed inside the cryostat.
The ARAPUCA’s rack was hung by a ﬁxture rod coincident with the cylinder axis. An alpha source
(241 Am – 1µ Ci – 5.4 MeV line) was mounted on the mover. On top of the source holder was
installed a SiPM coated with TPB for trigger purposes (reference SiPM). Figure 1 shows a picture
of the rack and its installation in TallBo.

Each ARAPUCA was instrumented with two 6 × 6 mm2 Sensl MicroFC-60035-SMT10 SiPMs
connected in parallel, soldered in a single board. The experiment was performed by digitizing the
waveforms of all ARAPUCAs with a custom SiPM Signal Processor (SSP) described in [5]. The
SSP was triggered by signals from the reference SiPM. We took data scanning the ARAPUCAs

5https://www.3m.com/3M/en_US/company-us/search/?Ntt=ESR&LC=en_US&co=cc&gsaAction=scBR&

type=cc

6Polytetraﬂuoroethylene .
7http://accuratus.com/accuflprods.html
8 * https://www.edmundoptics.com/ ; † http://www.asahi-spectra.com ; ‡http://www.omegafilters.com.
9An additional array of bare SiPMs coated with TPB was also mounted in the rack, with the purpose to test a summing

pre-ampliﬁer board, but the discussion on this device is out of the scope of this work.

10http://sensl.com

– 3 –

Figure 1. Center panel: The diﬀerent ARAPUCAs in the rack. The correspondence with the Conﬁgurations
in Table 1 are made by row (r1, r2, r3 from top to bottom) and column (c1, c2, c3 from left to right). The
reference SiPM (trigger) is shown in the detail. Left panel: The rack installation inside TallBo. Right panel:
exploded view of the ARAPUCA basic design, showing the box base and walls, SiPM board, dichroic ﬁlter
window, and its ﬁxture frames.

plane with the source, keeping dr =12.7 cm ﬁxed and at diﬀerent z positions. Changes in the solid
angle Ω(z) between the source and each ARAPUCA modulate the number of detected photons
Ndet (z). Figure 2 illustrates this eﬀect. The maxima of the curves indeed correspond to z that
maximizes the solid angle viewed by the correspondent ARAPUCA.

Figure 2. ARAPUCAs counting rate in a common prescaled time for all channels as function of the source
position z. LAr level is ∼ 9200. This plot shows and excellent correspondence with the disposition of the
ARAPUCAs in the mounting frame (see Table 1 for details on the ARAPUCAs’ positions.) Curves are
splines connecting points measured in steps of z =200. Channel 2 is the array of SiPMs (see footnote 9).

– 4 –

4 Data Analysis: Eﬃciency Calculation

Photo-counting is achieved using as normalization factor the integrated charge of the waveforms
from single avalanches in the SiPMs, easy to be identiﬁed in dark pulses. Then, for each source
position we have the average number of detected photo-electrons Ndet (z) obtained from the PE
number spectrum of each ARAPUCA. Ndet (z) can be factorized as:

Ndet (z) = Nph ×

Ω(z)
4π

× (cid:15)ar ap

(4.1)

where Nph is the expected number of photons produced in each α-decay from the source and
(cid:15)ar ap is the eﬃciency of the ARAPUCA. Nph is obtained from Nph = <Eα >
· q, where < Eα >
Wph
is the average value of the smeared energy11 spectrum of the α-decays from 241 Am. < Eα >= 4.1
MeV was estimated by extraction of random values from the experimental Eα distribution found
in [6]; Wph = 19.5 eV is the average energy to produce a single photon; q = 0.72 ± 0.04 is the
quenching factor for α particles in LAr [7]. Background is taken into account by subtraction from
PE spectra of each ARAPUCA the dark spectra obtained from data with z corresponding to the ﬂat
part of counting curves of Figure 2. Figure 3 shows a plot for the ARAPUCA at (ch0, r1c1) with two
data sets: the expected number of photons calculated from Eq. 4.1 in the assumption of (cid:15)ar ap = 1.0
(red squares), and Ndet (z) (black dots). All other ARAPUCAs have similar behavior. Since (cid:15)ar ap
is the overall scale factor between the two data sets, it can be obtained for each ARAPUCA by χ2
minimization between the expected and observed data taking (cid:15)ar ap as free parameter.

Figure 3. The expected number of photons per α-decay in the case (cid:15)ar ap = 1 (red) and true data (black).
The overall scale factor is given by the eﬀective value of (cid:15)ar ap.

Moreover, for the sake of comparison between diﬀerent conﬁgurations, one can deﬁne an
eﬀective photo-collection area by the product Ae f f = A × (cid:15)ar ap, where A is the acceptance window
area. Table 2 summarizes the results obtained in the TallBo experiment.

11The 241 Am α-line is smeared by the thin protection gold plate of the source assembly.

– 5 –

Table 2. Eﬃciencies of the six ARAPUCAs.

Conﬁguration

1: ch0, r1c1
2: ch1, r2c1
3: ch3, r2c2
4: ch4, r3c2
5: ch5, r1c3
6: ch6, r3c3

(cid:15)ar ap[%]
0.45 ± 0.03
0.41 ± 0.03
0.33 ± 0.01
0.25 ± 0.02
0.40 ± 0.02
0.40 ± 0.03

Ae f f [cm2]
0.081 ± 0.003
0.102 ± 0.008
0.116 ± 0.004
0.088 ± 0.004
0.100 ± 0.006
0.100 ± 0.008

5 ARAPUCAs at protoDUNE

The protoDUNE experimental program will test and validate the technologies and design that will
be applied to the construction of the DUNE Far Detector at the Sanford Underground Research
Facility (SURF) [1]. The protoDUNE detectors will be run in a dedicated beam line at the CERN
SPS accelerator complex. The protoDUNE elements are 1:1 scale as the current DUNE’s design.
In protoDUNE we will equip the Photon Detection System (PDS) with 2 ARAPUCA modules
as already agreed by the DUNE collaboration. Figure 4 shows the ARAPUCA modules in the
protoDUNE detector. The ARAPUCAs for protoDUNE have modiﬁcations aiming to increase the
overall performance. The SiPMs are soldered on the backplane, looking towards the internal side
of the ﬁlter. This choice was driven by results from GEANT4 simulation, comparing the proposed
design for protoDUNE with the previous TallBo conﬁguration. Another possibility is to increase
the SiPM number from 4 up to 12 and thus the ARAPUCA eﬃciency. The ﬁnal number will be
decided after the results from ongoing tests on the signal to noise ratio dependence on the number
of SiPMs passively ganged.

6 Conclusions

Noble liquids/gases detectors are the new paradigm in the ﬁeld of neutrinos and dark matter
research. Detection of scintillation light is a key piece on the detector performance. ARAPUCA
is a promising device to be used as a photon detector in LArTPCs. We tested six diﬀerent
conﬁgurations. The average eﬃciency considering the six tested ARAPUCAs is < (cid:15)ar ap >=
0.37 ± 0.01(sys) ± 0.03(stat)%, which is comparable to other devices with same purposes [8].
No substantial diﬀerences can be quoted on the performance of individual components, despite
one should note that by considering Ae f f and (cid:15)ar ap side-by-side is possible to see that some
ampliﬁcation is achieved taking into account the ratio between sensitive area (the total area of
SiPMs) and the acceptance window. However, it is worth mentioning that a R&D program is on
the way to improve the performance of the ARAPUCAs. Simulations to determine an optimal
geometry are in course. Improvements on reﬂectors and WLS can be achieved. SiPMs ganging
circuits (under development) can enlarge the sensitive area while keeping the number of readout
channels. We foresee the possibility to reach few % based only on the baseline design presented in

– 6 –

Figure 4.
Left: The protoDUNE detector drawing showing the placement of two ARAPUCA modules
(orange lines). The modules were designed to perfectly ﬁt in the slots of the current PDS acrylic bars light
guides [8]. Right: Detail of the ARAPUCA module (2 m long), each module hosts 4 cartuchos, which is an
assembling of 4 ARAPUCA 10 × 8 cm2 cells.

this work and all the possible enhancements identiﬁed with the ﬁrst experiments. A realistic scale
test should be done in protoDUNE Photon Detection System (2018). Moreover, the same device
can be used in Dark Matter experiments – based on liqueﬁed noble gases – which requires large
sensitive areas for photon detection. In this case the ARAPUCA concept can be adapted to increase
the sensitive area in a cost-eﬀective manner.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Kenneth Treptow, William Miner and Ronald P. Davis for their valuable knowl-
edge and technical support. This work was supported by the Fermilab Neutrino Division through the
NPC Fellowship program, and by the Brazilian agencies São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP),
and National Council for Scientiﬁc and Technological Development (CNPq).

Note added.
paper shown (cid:15)ar ap ∼ 1.0%. Possible causes for the discrepancy are under analysis.

It is worth to mention that another experiment made after the one reported in this

References

[1] R.Acciarri et al., Neutrino Facility (LBNF) and Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) :

Volume 1: The LBNF and DUNE Projects, arXiv:1601.05471.

[2] R.Acciarri et al., A Proposal for a Three Detector Short-Baseline Neutrino Oscillation Program in the

Fermilab Booster Neutrino Beam, arXiv:1503.01520v1.

[3] V. Chepel and H. Araújo, Liquid noble gas detectors for low energy particle physics, J. Instrum. 8

(2013) R04001.

– 7 –

[4] A.A. Machado and E. Segreto, ARAPUCA a new device for liquid argon scintillation light detection,

J. Instrum. 11 (2016) C02004.

[5] D. Whittington, S. Mufson, B. Howard. Scintillation Light from Cosmic-Ray Muons in Liquid Argon.

J. Instrum. 11 (2016), P05016.

[6] J. Liu et. al, Neutron Calibration Sources in the Daya Bay Experiment. Nucl.Instrum.Meth. A797

(2015) 260.

[7] T. Doke et. al, Absolute Scintillation Yields in Liquid Argon and Xenon for Various Particles, Jpn. J.

Appl. Phys. 41 (2002) 1538.

[8] B. Howard et al., A Novel Use of Light Guides and Wavelength Shifting Plates for the Detection of

Scintillation Photons in Large Liquid Argon Detectors, arXiv:1710.11233v2.

– 8 –

