8
1
0
2

r
a

M
7
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
9
2
5
6
0
.
3
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Solar Physics
DOI: 10.1007/•••••-•••-•••-••••-•

Connecting Coronal Mass Ejections to their Solar
Active Region Sources: Combining Results from the
HELCATS and FLARECAST Projects

Sophie A. Murray1
Pietro Zucca3 · Sung-Hong Park4
P. Carley1,5 · Peter T. Gallagher1
Nicole Vilmer5,6 · Volker Bothmer7

· Jordan A. Guerra2
· Eoin
·

·

c(cid:13) Springer ••••

Abstract Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) and other solar eruptive phenomena
can be physically linked by combining data from a multitude of ground-based
and space-based instruments alongside models, however this can be challenging
for automated operational systems. The EU Framework Package 7 HELCATS
project provides catalogues of CME observations and properties from the Helio-
spheric Imagers onboard the two NASA/STEREO spacecraft in order to track
the evolution of CMEs in the inner heliosphere. From the main HICAT catalogue
of over 2,000 CME detections, an automated algorithm has been developed to
connect the CMEs observed by STEREO to any corresponding solar ﬂares and
active region (AR) sources on the solar surface. CME kinematic properties, such
as speed and angular width, are compared with AR magnetic ﬁeld properties,
such as magnetic ﬂux, area, and neutral line characteristics. The resulting LOW-

(cid:66) S. A. Murray

sophie.murray@tcd.ie

1 Astrophysics Research Group, School of Physics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland

2 Department of Physics, Villanova University, Villanova PA, USA

3 ASTRON Netherlands Institute for Radio Astronomy, Postbus 2, 7990 AA

Dwingeloo, The Netherlands

4

5

6

7

Institute for Space-Earth Environmental Research (ISEE), Nagoya University, Japan

LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, PSL Research University, CNRS, Sorbonne
Universit`es, UPMC Univ. Paris 06, Univ. Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cit`e, 5 place
Jules Janssen, 92195 Meudon, France

Station de Radioastronomie de Nancay, Observatoire de Paris, PSL Research
University, CNRS, Univ. Orle`ans, 18330 Nancay, France

Institute of Astrophysics, University of G¨ottingen, Germany

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 1

 
 
 
 
 
 
S.A. Murray et al.

CAT catalogue is also compared to the extensive AR property database created
by the EU Horizon 2020 FLARECAST project, which provides more complex
magnetic ﬁeld parameters derived from vector magnetograms. Initial statistical
analysis has been undertaken on the new data to provide insight into the link
between ﬂare and CME events, and characteristics of eruptive ARs. Warning
thresholds determined from analysis of the evolution of these parameters is
shown to be a useful output for operational space weather purposes. Parameters
of particular interest for further analysis include total unsigned ﬂux, vertical
current, and current helicity. The automated method developed to create the
LOWCAT catalogue may also be useful for future eﬀorts to develop operational
CME forecasting.

Keywords: Active Regions, Magnetic Fields; Coronal Mass Ejections, Initiation
and Propagation; Flares, Forecasting, Relation to Magnetic Field; Sunspots,
Magnetic Fields

1. Introduction

Severe space weather has the potential to signiﬁcantly impact a range of vital
technologies, both on Earth and in near-Earth space. Adverse space weather
is known to result from solar eruptions in the form of solar ﬂares ,and coronal
mass ejections (CMEs), as well as associated solar energetic particle events.
These eruptions often originate from turbulent and highly complex active region
(AR) magnetic ﬁelds. Understanding the processes involved in these solar erup-
tions, as well as their sources, is imperative to provide accurate space weather
forecasts. CMEs are a main focus of current space weather operational systems
considering their potentially severe impact on Earth, such as communication
and navigation system disruption, power blackouts, and damage to spacecraft
instrumentation (see e.g. Eastwood et al., 2017, for an economic perspective).
There are considerable research eﬀorts underway to improve our understanding
of CMEs to feedback to operational space weather forecasting eﬀorts.

Catalogues of CME events have proven useful in order to better study their
propagation. The NASA CDAW Data Center catalogue (Gopalswamy et al.,
2009) contains manually identiﬁed CMEs since 1996 from the Large Angle and
Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) onboard the Solar and Heliospheric Obser-
vatory (SOHO; Brueckner et al., 1995) spacecraft. Automated catalogues such
as CACTUS (Robbrecht and Berghmans, 2004) and CORIMP (Byrne et al.,
2012; Morgan, Byrne, and Habbal, 2012) have become increasingly popular in
recent years, considering the diﬃcult task of manually identifying the signiﬁcant
number of CME events that are observed in an age of improved availability of
spacecraft observations. Much previous work has been undertaken to statistically
analyze properties of the CMEs made available by these catalogues (see Webb
and Howard, 2012, and references therein).

Most CME catalogues currently available have made use of the LASCO
coronagraphs. However since 2007 the Solar TErrestrial RElations Observatory
(STEREO; Kaiser et al., 2008) mission has provided an unprecedented insight

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 2

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

into CME propagation, including a 3D perspective when the two STEREO A and
B spacecraft were in the correct orbital position. Wide-angle imaging of the inner
heliosphere has revolutionised our understanding of CMEs, solar wind, and co-
rotating interaction regions (Harrison et al., 2017). Heliospheric imaging provides
the ability to track the evolution of these phenomena as they propagate through
the inner heliosphere. Heliospheric Cataloguing, Analysis and Techniques Service
(HELCATS) is a European Union Framework Package 7 project that provides
the deﬁnitive catalogue of CME events observed by the STEREO Heliospheric
Imagers (HI; Eyles et al., 2009).

Thus far the results of the HELCATS project have been successful in enhanc-
ing our understanding of CMEs and their propagation (see e.g. Plotnikov et al.,
2016; Moestl et al., 2017; Rouillard et al., 2017). The results are particularly
useful for improving CME arrival time predictions at Earth, and even at other
planets in our solar system. However, forecasting when the CME itself will erupt
remains elusive (Zheng, 2013). The more established ﬁeld of ﬂare forecasting now
uses an extensive variety of methods to create predictions, from simple Poisson
statistics (Bloomﬁeld et al., 2012) to more complex machine learning methods
(Ahmed et al., 2013). Unfortunately it is still unclear what methods are the best
or even better than climatology (Barnes et al., 2016), and many operational fore-
casting centers still rely on human forecasters to tailor predictions (Murray et al.,
2017a). Flare Likelihood And Region Eruption foreCASTing (FLARECAST) is
a European Union Horizon 2020 project that aims to solve this uncertainty by
creating an automated system that forecasts ﬂares with unprecedented accuracy.
In order to achieve such a goal, FLARECAST has created a large database
of ﬂaring activity predictors related to their AR sources and is undertaking a
comprehensive evaluation of the many advanced prediction algorithms.

While there are a considerable number of diﬀerent ﬂare forecasting methods
available, the vast majority of them use very similar predictors, namely some
measure of the “complexity” of the solar surface AR magnetic ﬁeld. It is natural
to expect that AR magnetic ﬁelds may also prove to be key for CME forecasting
purposes. Previous work has investigated correlations between AR photospheric
magnetic ﬁeld and CME properties (e.g. Venkatakrishnan and Ravindra, 2003;
Guo, Zhang, and Chumak, 2007; Park et al., 2012; Lee, Moon, and Lee, 2015;
Tiwari et al., 2015), as well as studied the locations of CME sources on the
solar disk (Lara, 2008; Yashiro et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2011). The connection
between CMEs and associated ﬂares has also been extensively studied, partic-
ularly between the duration and intensity of the ﬂares and CME speed (e.g.
Harrison, 1995; Andrews, 2003; Youssef, 2012; Harra et al., 2016). Statistical
analyses of these AR properties are important to investigate the solar surface
source of CMEs in order to make the ﬁrst steps towards CME forecasting, just
as the ﬁeld of ﬂare forecasting has done before it. However this work is limited
by the observations available at the time of study and the considerable time it
takes to manually associate the CMEs in these large databases with ﬂares and
ARs.

The main deliverables of the HELCATS project are focused on creating cat-
alogue parameters related to STEREO CME observations in the heliosphere,

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 3

S.A. Murray et al.

however the aim of HELCATS Deliverable 3.4 is to develop an automated algo-
rithm to determine the solar surface source of the CME events. The algorithm
is used to create the HELCATS LOWCAT catalogue, linking the STEREO/HI-
observed CMEs to observations of associated solar ﬂares and ARs, if any. This
HELCATS catalogue provides an excellent opportunity for cross-collaboration
with the FLARECAST project and their database of AR properties. It is worth
noting that these projects focus on associations between CMEs and ﬂares (and
their AR sources). However CMEs can be also associated with other phenomena
such as ﬁlament or prominence eruptions, with or without ﬂares (see e.g. Moon
et al., 2002; Jing et al., 2004).

This paper outlines the main algorithm steps in creating the LOWCAT cata-
logue, and the ﬁrst initial scientiﬁc investigations using CME, ﬂare, and AR data
from both HELCATS and FLARECAST projects are also described. Section 2
describes the algorithm and resulting catalogue properties in detail, and high-
lights some initial results. Section 3 outlines the FLARECAST AR property
database, and presents some example property comparisons between the two
project databases. Discussion and conclusions are found in Section 4, particularly
highlighting the availability of the data to the community and encouraging its
use for future research eﬀorts.

2. The LOWCAT Catalogue

2.1. Algorithm Development

With over 2,000 CME observations from mid 2007 until early 2017 available
for analysis in the HICAT catalogue developed in HELCATS Work Package 21
(Barnes et al., 2015), manually identifying each solar surface source for that many
events was not feasible. To that end, an automatic algorithm has been developed
that uses back-propagation to identify ﬂare events and AR sources correlated
with the CME events listed. The algorithm ﬁrst associates the HI events to
COR2 observations closer to the Sun, then to solar ﬂare events, and ﬁnally
to ARs on the solar surface. Note that while this simple method is suﬃcient
for the purposes of this work, more complex methods could be used in future
developments (see e.g. Davies et al., 2013). Thomson scattering eﬀects and 3D
geometries need to be taken into account for events observed far away from
the solar surface (Vourlidas and Howard, 2006; Davies et al., 2012). This is
particularly important for observations by HI-2, however only HI-1 observations
from either STEREO A or B were used to create the HICAT catalogue.

Assuming constant radial velocity and constant CME width, a simple ballistic
propagation model is used to search for candidates. First the algorithm identiﬁes
a time window during which a STEREO/HI-observed CME might have been
observed by the STEREO/COR2 coronagraph. Here the initial distance can be
taken as 12 R(cid:12), ﬁnal distance 2 R(cid:12), and a typical range of CME speeds (150-
1500 km) deﬁned by Yurchyshyn et al. (2005) is used to constrain the search.

1see https://www.helcats-fp7.eu/catalogues/wp2 cat.html.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 4

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

The CACTUS database, which contains CME events identiﬁed by an automated
method, is searched for events occurring during this time window. The database
was originally developed for LASCO/C2 observations, however was extended to
include STEREO data during the HELCATS project (Pant et al., 2016). The
algorithm selects a COR2-observed CME with the closest angular width to the
HI-observed CME, constrained by the north and south position angles.

Ballistic propagation is again used to deﬁne a time window of possible associ-
ated ﬂares, using the identiﬁed COR2 CME event speeds where available. Here,
the initial distance is taken as 2 R(cid:12) and ﬁnal distance can be set as high as 0.5 R(cid:12)
to take into account the non-constant speed of the initial CME phase (Byrne
et al., 2010). The algorithm searches for ﬂare events in the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration Space Weather Prediction Center (NOAA/SWPC)
Edited Solar Event Lists2 by default. It will also check the NASA Reuven Ramaty
High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (RHESSI) ﬂare list3 if no events are
found in the NOAA ﬂare list, and for those events without any given location.
The resulting ﬂare list is further constrained by solar hemispheric location, en-
suring the CME position angle corresponds to the quadrant where the potential
ﬂare peaks are located. If multiple ﬂares are found within the search window the
closest ﬂare to the time window start is selected. The algorithm also limits the
output to ﬂares of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)
magnitude B-class and above, and for the RHESSI event list it allows only
conﬁrmed ﬂare detections with a high-quality level deﬁned in the list ﬂags4.

Finally, the algorithm associates any identiﬁed ﬂare events with corresponding
NOAA-numbered ARs. The ﬂare peak location is used to search for nearby
ARs on the solar disk if no number has been listed in the ﬂare database. Some
basic properties of these AR sources can be obtained from the NOAA/SWPC
Solar Region Summaries, including the Hale (particularly the Modiﬁed Mount
Wilson which includes δ spots; K¨unzel, 1965) and McIntosh (McIntosh, 1990)
classiﬁcations.

2.2. Solar Monitor Active Region Tracker

In order to complete the HELCATS database, the Solar Monitor Active Region
Tracker algorithm (SMART; Higgins et al., 2011) is then run to obtain mag-
netic ﬁeld properties of the identiﬁed ARs. SMART is an automated system
for detecting, tracking, and cataloguing ARs throughout their evolution. The
algorithm uses consecutive image diﬀerencing to remove quiet-Sun and transient
magnetic features, then region-growing techniques to group ﬂux concentrations
into classiﬁable features. See Higgins et al. (2011) for more details about how the
algorithm works. Figure 1 shows an example of a SMART detection on 21 June
2011. The dark blue lines in the Figure indicate the boundaries of the SMART
AR detections, within which various magnetic ﬁeld properties are calculated.

2see ftp://ftp.swpc.noaa.gov/pub/warehouse.
3see http://hesperia.gsfc.nasa.gov/hessidata/dbase/hessi ﬂare list.txt.
4see http://sprg.ssl.berkeley.edu/$\sim$jimm/hessi/hsi ﬂare list.html.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 5

S.A. Murray et al.

Figure 1. SMART detections for a HMI line-of-sight magnetogram on 21 June 2011 04:00
UTC (left). The zoomed-in region (right; green box on left) shows detection number 3, which
corresponds to NOAA AR number 11236, and was the source of a C-class ﬂare on 21 June
2011 as listed in the LOWCAT database. The dark blue line indicates the detection boundary,
and light blue line the PIL.

SMART is run on regions using SOHO’s Michelson Doppler Imager (MDI;
Scherrer et al., 1995) and Solar Dynamics Observatory Helioseismic and Mag-
netic Imager (SDO/HMI; Scherrer et al., 2012) line-of-sight (LOS) magne-
tograms, depending on the date of the observations (HMI data being available
from mid 2010). The ﬂare peak time and location can be used to check for
SMART regions even if no NOAA regions were identiﬁed. SMART calculates
more complex magnetic properties related to the polarity inversion line (PIL),
including PIL length, bipole separation, R value (Schrijver, 2007a) and WLsg
(Falconer, Moore, and Gary, 2008). Note that the gradient-weighted integral
length of neutral line, WLsg, is deﬁned as the line integral of the vertical ﬁeld
horizontal gradient over all PIL intervals where the value of potential horizontal
ﬁeld is greater than 150 gauss. This threshold is similarly used for the R value,
which describes total unsigned ﬂux near a strong-ﬁeld, high-gradient PIL. A full
list of AR information outputted by the algorithm is shown in Table 1.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 6

C
o
m
b
n

i

i

Table 1. Magnetic source active region properties obtained from the SWPC Solar Region Summary and SMART algorithm outputs.

Source

Property

Unit

Description

srs no
srs mcintosh
sr hale
srs area
srs ll
srs nn

SWPC-determined active region number of candidate region
SWPC-determined McIntosh classiﬁcation of the group
SWPC-determined Hale classiﬁcation
SWPC-determined active region total corrected area
SWPC-determined longitudinal extent
SWPC-determined total number of visible sunspots in the group
Total magnetic ﬂux of SMART region
Total magnetic ﬂux in positive polarity part of SMART region
Total magnetic ﬂux in negative polarity part of SMART region
Flux fraction of SMART region, i.e. (posﬂx - negﬂx) / totﬂx

-
NOAA
-
NOAA
-
NOAA
millionths of a solar hemisphere
NOAA
heliographic degrees
NOAA
-
NOAA
maxwell
SMART smart totﬂx
maxwell
SMART smart posﬂx
maxwell
SMART smart negﬂx
-
SMART smart frcﬂx
millionths of a solar hemisphere Total magnetic area of SMART region
SMART smart totarea
millionths of a solar hemisphere Total magnetic area of positive polarity part of SMART region
SMART smart posarea
millionths of a solar hemisphere Total magnetic area of negative polarity part of SMART region
SMART smart negarea
gauss
SMART smart bmin
SMART smart bmax
gauss
gauss
SMART smart bmean
SMART smart psllen
megameters
SMART smart bipolesep megameters
SMART smart rvalue
SMART smart wlsg

Total negative magnetic ﬁeld strength of SMART region
Total positive magnetic ﬁeld strength of SMART region
Mean magnetic ﬁeld strength of SMART region
Polarity inversion line length of SMART region
Bipolar separation of SMART region
R value of SMART region
WLsg value of SMART region

maxwell
gauss

n
g

r
e
s
u
l
t
s

f
r
o
m
H
E
L
C
A
T
S

a
n
d

F
L
A
R
E
C
A
S
T

S
O
L
A
:

m
a
i
n
.
t
e
x
;

2
0

M
a
r
c
h

2
0
1
8
;

0
:
2
8
;

p
.

7

S.A. Murray et al.

Figure 2. Flowchart outlining the steps involved in the automated algorithm used to create
the LOWCAT catalogue. The event lists used are identiﬁed by ovals, input observations by
rectangles, and the SMART algorithm by a diamond. Colours indicate steps in the main
process, namely green for CME association, blue for ﬂare association, purple for active region
association, and magenta indicates the resulting LOWCAT catalogue.

2.3. Resulting Catalogue

All steps involved in the automated algorithm used to create the catalogue of
properties are summarised by the ﬂowchart in Figure 2. The resulting LOWCAT
catalogue is freely available online at ﬁgshare.com5 (Murray et al., 2017b), which
is also linked from the HELCATS website. The algorithm has been run with
version 4 of the HICAT catalogue, which contains 2,020 HI-observed CMEs, the
ﬁrst of which launched on 15 April 2007 and the last on 26 February 2017. In
total there are 1,591 COR2 events, 714 ﬂare events, 552 NOAA regions, and 451
SMART regions in the LOWCAT catalogue besides the original 2,020 HI events.
It is worth noting the SMART algorithm has also been run for the Framework
Package 7 AFFECTS project KINCAT catalogue6 as part of HELCATS Deliv-
erable 3.3, which contains a small selection of manually identiﬁed CME events.
The same properties listed in Table 1 are provided as well as an estimation of
the tilt of the PIL.

The entries in the LOWCAT catalogue for every 50th event in the HICAT
catalogue were manually inspected for veriﬁcation purposes, checking that the
correct COR2 observation (85% correct), ﬂare event (87.5% correct), and AR
(95% correct), if any, were listed. Missed CME and ﬂare entries were generally
due to being outside the time search window. Limb events were the only ones
missed by the AR detection part of the algorithm for the events examined,
although these could not have been analysed even if they were included. The
results of this basic validation are positive for the automated method, and
highlights the feasibility of such a simple method for big data analysis. The

5see https://ﬁgshare.com/articles/HELCATS LOWCAT/4970222 .
6see https://www.helcats-fp7.eu/catalogues/wp3 kincat.html .

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 8

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

CME detection accuracy is comparable to the validation eﬀorts for the CACTUS
database, which reproduced ≈ 75% of the catalogued CMEs (Berghmans, Foing,
and Fleck, 2002), although more events were analysed in this study.

The ﬁrst part of the LOWCAT catalogue contains the ID of the HELCATS
HICAT event, for example, the HCME B 20120305 01 event, which has been
previously been studied by Magdaleni´c et al. (2014), as well as the position and
launch time of CME. The automated algorithm identiﬁed a COR2 CME from
the CACTUS database to be associated with this particular event, starting at
2012-03-05 02:54 UT, which matches well with the expected launch times from
the ﬁxed-phi (02:06 UT), self-similar expansion (02:18 UT), and harmonic mean
models (02:25 UT) as listed in the HICAT event information7. The LOWCAT
catalogue lists properties of this event such as the COR2 CME mean speed,
position angle, and width. The automated algorithm associated the COR2 event
with a GOES X1.1 ﬂare starting at 2012-03-05 02:30 UT from NOAA AR 11429.
Flare magnitude, location, and start, peak, and end times are listed in the
catalogue, followed by the SWPC and SMART properties listed in Table 1 as
well as observation time and location.

The locations on the solar disk of all ﬂare events and SMART locations in the
LOWCAT catalogue are shown in Figure 3. The transition of regions towards
lower latitudes throughout the solar cycle is clear from the colour bar indicating
observation date. A large majority of ﬂare events and their AR sources are from
around 2012 - 2014. This is unsurprising considering the period of deep solar
minimum around 2009 during which there were considerably less ARs on the
solar disk. Note that there is an approximately one year gap in STEREO-A
data from 2014 October while the spacecraft was behind the Sun, and data
from STEREO-B is not available after 2014 September since contact with the
spacecraft had not yet been re-established at the time of the end of the HI-
CAT catalogue development. Comparison between the left and right plots also
highlights the diﬃculty the SMART algorithm has detecting regions on the limb
(and magnetic ﬁeld analysis of these regions would not be as accurate anyway).
However, the automated method still identiﬁes ≈ 45% of the COR2 CME events
to be associated with ﬂare events, and ≈ 80% of those ﬂare events have SWPC
regions associated with them.

2.4. Initial Analysis

Figures 4 and 5 show the percentage occurrence of all the main properties in the
LOWCAT catalogue. A typical range of CME speeds is found as expected from
previous studies, conﬁrming the choice of values for the automated algorithm,
with a large amount of the CMEs in this catalogue ranging between ≈ 200 -
600 kms−1. The histogram of COR2 CME width shows that there is only a small
number of halo events in the catalogue. Most of the SMART properties highlight
typical ranges for these AR characteristics, particularly those associated with
ﬂaring activity. Interestingly, some parameters are distributed such that most

7see https://www.helcats-fp7.eu/catalogues/event page.html?id=HCME B 20120305 01 .

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 9

S.A. Murray et al.

Figure 3. Locations of ﬂare events (left) and SMART detections (right) identiﬁed in the
LOWCAT catalogue. The colour bar indicates the day of ﬂare peak (left) or magnetogram
observation (right).

Figure 4. Percentage occurrence of a number of entries in the LOWCAT catalogue; the
upper row shows COR2 CME properties, and lower row SWPC ﬂare event properties. Bins
left-to-right top-to-bottom are 15◦, 50 kms−1, 0.1 Wm−2, and 5 minutes.

values exist above a certain value, for example the R and WLsg values. This
spurred some initial investigations into potential correlations between the CME,
ﬂare, and AR properties in the catalogue.

In order to conﬁrm regions are being matched by the algorithm as expected
(as a supplement to the manual checking), correlations between the ﬂare event
and NOAA numbers were examined. It is well established in the research com-
munity that large, complex ARs that have a history of ﬂaring are likely to
ﬂare again, and AR properties are widely used for ﬂare forecasting purposes
(see e.g. Barnes et al., 2016, and references within). Figure 6 shows the peak
ﬂare intensity versus the area of the LOWCAT regions as identiﬁed by SWPC
forecasters, with colours indicating Hale class at the nearest time to the ﬂare
peak. The plot highlights that bigger ﬂare events in the catalogue occur in bigger

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 10

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

Figure 5. Percentage occurrence of the SMART properties available in the LOWCAT cat-
alogue. Bins left-to-right top-to-bottom are 200 millionths of a solar hemisphere (m.s.h.),
5 × 1021 Mx, 200 G, 200 G, 50 Mm, 10 Mm, 0.25 Mx, and 0.25 GMm−1.

regions with more complex Hale magnetic classiﬁcation sunspot groups, and
βγδ regions produce the biggest ﬂares in the catalogue. This is unsurprising,
and is particularly reminiscent of Figure 2 of Sammis, Tang, and Zirin (2000),
presenting the same axes and labels for 2,789 NOAA-numbered regions. It must
be noted that in the LOWCAT catalogue several events may have the same
source region, and the Sammis, Tang, and Zirin work plots the largest quantities
at any time in the AR’s lifetime (not necessarily at ﬂare peak). Nevertheless, the
expected results encouraged further investigations into other correlations that
may be found between various LOWCAT catalogue properties.

Figure 7 presents comparisons between COR2 CME speeds (y-axes) and a
selection of other LOWCAT properties (x -axes). The upper row in particular
shows GOES ﬂare peak intensities (left) and SMART region WLsg (right), with
colour indicating COR2 CME width, such that yellow highlights halo CME
events. It is clear that there is trend of larger ﬂares associated with faster CMEs,
although there is some amount of scatter. There is even more scatter found for
WLsg, however both plots show wider CMEs for larger property values with the

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 11

S.A. Murray et al.

Figure 6. GOES ﬂux versus NOAA/SRS sunspot group area, with colours indicating Hale
class.

halo events tending towards the top right corner of the plot. This suggests the
faster wider CMEs are associated with bigger ﬂares and ARs with high WLsg
values. For example, if forecasters were only interested in CMEs with speeds
above 600 kms−1, the LOWCAT catalogue suggests ﬂares greater than B class
and a WLsg value greater than 4 would be of interest. The other rows of Figure 7
show more SMART properties, with similar scatter to the upper row, however
the colour now highlights the ﬂare magnitude. X-class ﬂares in yellow mainly
tend towards the top right corner of the plots similar to the halo events but with
more spread in values.

Previous work has suggested thresholds of importance for ﬂare forecasting and
CME forecasting alike may exist for these sorts of ﬂaring AR properties (see e.g.
Falconer, Moore, and Gary, 2008; Higgins, 2012). Although one must be careful
interpreting these results considering the small number of halo CME and X-
class ﬂare events relative to the rest of the catalogue (see Appendix), the results
of this initial investigation comparing the LOWCAT CME and AR properties
suggests some of these parameters may indeed be useful for CME warning eﬀorts.
However, scatter plots can be diﬃcult to interpret, particularly if hoping to
draw conclusions regarding what parameters might be most useful for forecasting
eﬀorts. To better investigate this idea of warning thresholds, the FLARECAST
project database was examined using diﬀerent analytical techniques to expand
upon the AR properties available for comparison.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 12

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

Figure 7. Selection of LOWCAT ﬂare and active region properties versus CME speed. The
upper row colourbar highlights CME width, whilst the colours in the other rows show ﬂare
peak intensity (B-class in dark blue, C-class in light blue, M-class in green, and X-class in
yellow). Note that all y-axes are in log space, and x -axes in log10 space.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 13

−8−7−6−5−4−3−2100234567891000234567090180270360θ [ o] GOES flux [Wm -2]WL sg[G]CME speed [kms -1]2.533.541002345678910002.533.541234100234567891000212223240123410023456789100034567−7−6−5−4−3GOES flux[Wm -2]B min[G]B max[G]Total area [m.s.h]Total flux [Mx]PSLlength [Mm]R value [Mx]CME speed [kms -1]S.A. Murray et al.

3. FLARECAST Active Region Properties

FLARECAST (ﬂarecast.eu aims to create an automated system for forecast-
ing solar ﬂares with unprecedented accuracy by combining advanced machine
learning algorithms with a comprehensive database of ﬂaring activity predictors.
The AR property database8 consists of AR photospheric magnetic properties
extracted from the Spaceweather HMI Active Region Patches (SHARP, Bobra
et al., 2014a). SHARP data products contain AR data maps obtained from
SDO/HMI (Scherrer et al., 2012) full-disk data. Since the FLARECAST system
under development is planned to be operational, all magnetic properties are
calculated from the near-real-time (NRT) version of the Cylindrical Equal Area
(CEA) de-projection of SHARP data (series hmi.sharp cea 720s nrt). See Bobra
et al. (2014a) for further details on the SHARP data products.

Table 2 lists the AR property groups included in the FLARECAST properties
database. Each property group contains several properties. Property groups in
Table 2, in turn, appear grouped according to the data source they are derived
from (SWPC AR catalogues, SHARP vector, LOS magnetograms, and intensity
maps). The property database encompasses diﬀerent AR physical phenomena
and areas, for example, magnetic polarity inversion lines, (multi-) fractal distri-
bution of ﬁeld, photospheric proxies for coronal connectivity, magnetic helicity,
and photopsheric ﬂows, among others. The majority of properties included in
the FLARECAST property database have been reported as having a relevant
association with the occurrence of ﬂares (see references in Table 2) and others
have been developed and tested in the framework of FLARECAST.

8see http://api.ﬂarecast.eu.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 14

Table 2. FLARECAST Active Region Magnetic Properties

Data source

Property group

Reference

SWPC
catalogues

Solar Region Summary (SRS) properties
GOES soft X-ray ﬂare events

Line-of-sight
magnetograms

Eﬀective connected magnetic ﬁeld strength Georgoulis and Rust (2007),

Fractal and multifractal parameters
Fourier and wavelet power spectral indices

Decay index

Magnetic polarity inversion line properties

3D magnetic null points

Ising energy
Magnetic helicity injection rate proxy

Vector
magnetograms

SHARP properties
Magnetic helicity injection rate
Magnetic energy injection rate
Non-neutralized currents
Diverging/converging/shear ﬂows

Georgoulis (2010, 2013)
Conlon et al. (2008)
Guerra et al. (2015),
Abramenko et al. (2002),
Hewett et al. (2008)
Liu (2008),
Zuccarello et al. (2014)
Falconer et al. (2012),
Schrijver (2007b),
Mason and Hoeksema (2010)
Haynes and Parnell (2007),
Pontin, Priest, and Galsgaard (2013)
Ahmed et al. (2010)
Park, Chae, and Wang (2010),
Park et al. (2012)

Bobra et al. (2014b)
Berger and Field (1984)
Kusano et al. (2002)
Georgoulis, Titov, and Miki (2012)
Yang et al. (2004),
Wang et al. (2014),
Deng et al. (2006)

Intensity images

Flow ﬁeld properties

Kors´os, Baranyi, and Ludmny (2014)

C
o
m
b
n

i

i

n
g

r
e
s
u
l
t
s

f
r
o
m
H
E
L
C
A
T
S

a
n
d

F
L
A
R
E
C
A
S
T

S
O
L
A
:

m
a
i
n
.
t
e
x
;

2
0

M
a
r
c
h

2
0
1
8
;

0
:
2
8
;

p
.

1
5

S.A. Murray et al.

Figure 8. FLARECAST active region property database coverage. Property database covers
the entire lifespan of the SHARP data repository (September 2012 - April 2016) with properties
calculated every hour. Here the number of property values per 30 days is shown. Maximum
(grey bars) and minimum (white bars) values for any 30-days bin are a consequence of diﬀerent
properties having longer computation times.

At present, the FLARECAST property database spans from the beginning
of the SHARP data availability (September 2012) to April 20169. Although
SHARP data is produced at a 12-minute cadence, properties are calculated only
hourly. Figure 8 displays the property data coverage. The number of property
values present in the database is shown in time with a 30-days bin. Grey and
white bars correspond to maximum and minimal numbers of properties present
in each 30-days bin. Minimum and maximum values are due to the diﬀerences in
computation time among diﬀerent property-calculating algorithms. For proper-
ties that require longer computation times, their values can (at the moment) be
found at cadences of 6, 12, and 24 hours. It is found that the maximum number
of property values is quite small in June and July of 2013, mainly because many
of SHARP data, in the FLARECAST HMI/SHARP service, have insuﬃcient
metadata pointing information for the property calculation.

3.1. Catalogue Comparisons

In order to cross-correlate the LOWCAT catalogue to the FLARECAST prop-
erty database, an algorithm was developed that matches the source regions
reported in the former to the regions listed in the latter. Source regions in
the LOWCAT catalogue are labelled by their NOAA/SWPC AR number, if
available, and/or SMART solar disk location. Regions in the FLARECAST
database are primarily identiﬁed by HARP number, location, and NOAA num-
ber, if available. For each event in the LOWCAT catalogue registered after
1 September 2012, the algorithm searches for all entries in the FLARECAST

9Properties between this date and September 2017 need to be re-calculated due to defective
NRT SHARP data.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 16

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

Figure 9. Quantitative measure for the location-based matching between LOWCAT CME
source regions and FLARECAST property database regions. Left and right panels show the
histogram and heliographic-spatial distribution of the quality factor. Majority of regions (81%)
are matched within a 5-degree radius from each other and there is no apparent systematic bias
with the heliographic location of regions.

database with time closest to the associated ﬂare start or peak time, rounded to
the hour before. Subsequently, the region matching is done by using the NOAA
number (if available) or position. In the case of matching regions by position, a
tolerance of 15 degrees in total position (= [longitude2 + latitude2]1/2) is used.
This implies that for a LOWCAT source region to be matched to a FLARECAST
region, the former must be located within a circle of radius 15 degrees centred
at the latter location. Once the LOWCAT source region has been matched to
the FLARECAST region, any photospheric magnetic ﬁeld property present in
the database can then be associated to that LOWCAT event.

It is important to consider that SHARP regions can on some occasions include
more than one NOAA region. Such cases are excluded from our analysis since
properties can then be overestimated due to the presence of multiple ARs in the
ﬁeld of view. Between 1 September 2012 and 31 April 2016 a total of 812 HI and
665 COR2 CME events are registered in the LOWCAT catalogue. A total of 196
events are matched to FLARECAST regions, according to the criteria stated
above. For each LOWCAT source region matched to a FLARECAST region, a
matching quality factor is assigned. If the matching was done by means of the
NOAA number, a zero value is assigned. On the other hand, if the source region
is matched by location, the diﬀerence in distance between the regions is used as
quality factor. he lower the quality factor the better, with zero values meaning
the matching of regions was done exactly. Figure 9 shows the statistics of region
matching quality. On the left, a histogram of the quality factor is displayed,
while on the right the quality factor is displayed as a function of the heliographic
(HG) position of the LOWCAT source regions. More than half (≈ 120 or 60%) of
matched regions are done so exactly or within 1 degree (Figure 9, left), although,
90% of the regions are matched with a quality factor less than ten degrees. On
the other hand, no apparent systematic bias of the quality factor with the HG
location is seen in Figure 9.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 17

Table 3. Photospheric active-region properties. This table brieﬂy describe the properties
from the FLARECAST property database studied in this investigation. Keywords are used
throughout as short names for properties.

Property

Description

Units

Keyword

S.A. Murray et al.

Total unsigned vertical current (= (cid:80) |Jz|dA)
A
Iz,tot
Iz,max
Max unsigned vertical current (= max{|Jz|dA|}) A
WLSG(Br) Gradient-weighted integral length of neutral line G
G
R(Br)
Mx
Φtot
G2 m−1
Hc,ave

Schrijver’s R value from Br
Total unsigned ﬂux density (= (cid:80) |Bz|dA)
Average unsigned current helicity,
(cid:80) |BzJz|)
Bz contribution (= 1
N
Total unsigned current helicity, Bz contribution G2 m−1
Bz contribution (= (cid:80) |BzJz|)
Max unsigned current helicity, Bz contribution G2 m−1
Bz contribution (= max{|BzJz|})

Hc,tot

Hc,max

usiz tot
usiz max
wlsg br
r values br
usﬂux total
ushz ave

ushz tot

ushz max

EIsing(Blos) Ising energy from Blos
Si(Blos)Sj (Blos)
(= − (cid:80)
d2
Magnetic helicity injection energy

Hm
(L/hmin)tot Sum of PIL-length over minimal height of

ij

)

critical decay index ratios
Max vertical current density (∝ { ∂By

Jz,max
∇h(Bh)max Max horizontal gradient of horizontal ﬁeld
Fourier power spectral index
α(Br)

di4 br

jz max

∂x − ∂Bx

∂y }) mA m−2

G Mm−1 hgrad bh max

alpha ﬀt br

pixel−2

ising energy blos

Mx2 hr−1 abs tot dhdt

Using the FLARECAST property database allows the investigation of a great
variety of photospheric properties in relation to CME production. Of particu-
lar interest are properties that are extracted from vector magnetic ﬁeld data,
since only LOS magnetograms are analysed by SMART for the LOWCAT cata-
logue. Due to the large amount of the properties in the FLARECAST property
database (over 100 at the time of publication), this investigation focused on a
subset of properties which have been found to be the top predictors for ﬂare
occurrence, tested using four diﬀerent machine learning methods for prediction
(Campi and Benvenuto, 2017). Table 3 lists and describes the subset of studied
properties selected. The resulting distribution of values for these properties in
Table 3 are shown in Figures 10 and 11.

3.2. Superposed Epoch Analysis

This section presents an example of how the FLARECAST property database
can be used along with the LOWCAT catalogue for understanding photospheric
conditions leading to eruptive ﬂares. One powerful resource of the FLARECAST
property database is that time series of AR properties can be constructed to
observe the evolution of a property before the ﬂare-CME event. Due to the
relatively high number of CME events matched to AR properties, empirical
average evolution of properties can be determined by performing a superposed
epoch analysis.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 18

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

Figure 10. Percentage occurrence of the FLARECAST database active region properties used
to compare with the LOWCAT catalogue. Bins left-to-right top-to-bottom are 10,000, 0.25,
30,000, 200, 5, and 0.1.

For all 196 LOWCAT events matched to FLARECAST regions, the 24-hour
evolution prior to the eruption start time is saved for each studied property.
No substantial diﬀerence was found using the peak instead of start time, since
the cadence at which properties are registered is an hour and the diﬀerence
between start and peak time in a solar soft-Xray ﬂare is usually few to tens
of minutes (Drake, 1971; Shibata and Magara, 2011). The superposed epoch
analysis is performed separately for three groups according to the CME speed
value: i) slow (vCME < 420 km−1), ii) average-speed (420 km−1 ≤ vCME < 630
km−1), and iii) fast (vCME ≥ 630 km−1). These boundary CME-speed values
correspond to median(vCME) and median(vCME) + σ(vCME) values derived from
the CME speed distribution (Figure 4 in Appendix section). In all related plots
(e.g. Figures 12, 13, and 14), green, blue, and red curves are associated to the
slow, average-speed, and fast CMEs groups, correspondingly.

For this analysis only events with vCME (cid:54)= 0 are considered from the HEL-
CATS catalogue. These zero-speed events correspond to events that have an
initial HI-identiﬁed CME but no associated COR2 events are found. Out of 196
matched CME-AR cases, 150 have non-zero CME speed. From these cases, 67 are
slow CMEs, 50 average-speed CMEs, and 33 fast CMEs. It must be noted that
not all cases are included in each CME-speed group, depending on the speciﬁc
AR property in consideration. This variation is caused by incompleteness of the
property time series – in some cases not all 24 hourly values are present in the
property database, and therefore null values can be present. In order to make

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 19

S.A. Murray et al.

Figure 11. Percentage occurrence of the FLARECAST database active region properties, par-
ticularly SHARP properties, used to compare with the LOWCAT catalogue. Bins left-to-right
top-to-bottom are 1011 A, 5 × 109 A, 0.005 G2m−1, 1 G2m−1, 5 × 1021 Mx, 30 mAm−2, and
300 GMm−1.

the present analysis and its results meaningful, a ﬁltering of the time series is
performed. In this investigation a similar procedure to Singh and Badruddin
(2006) is followed, which suggests the F test can be used to determine the sta-
tistical signiﬁcance of the average time series. In this test, the sample is assumed
to have a F -distribution, and the null hypothesis is rejected at a particular level
of conﬁdence. See Singh and Badruddin (2006) and references therein for more
details.

The average time series depends on the number of samples, k, included in
each vCME group. In this case, k is determined by the maximum number of null
values allowed in any time series, nnull. As a ﬁrst approximation to this selection
procedure, nnull < 12, is used. That is, any sample with more than half of their
epochs as valid values, is considered. For any null value in the selected time
series, interpolated values are calculated. Once k is determined in each CME-
speed group for each property, the average time series and its associated F -value
is calculated. Finally, Fα, the tabulated F -distribution value, is calculated using

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 20

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

Table 4. Photospheric properties showing statistically signiﬁcant aver-
age temporal behaviour from 24 hours prior to CME-associated ﬂares.
Properties are listed according to their results in the F-test. From top
to bottom the number of signiﬁcant average time series per property per
CME-speed groups decreases.

Property

CME-speed group

F

# of curves

F-test result

usﬂux total

usiz tot

ushz tot

wlsg br

r values br

usiz max

alpha ﬀt br

Slow
Medium
Fast
Slow
Medium
Fast
Slow
Medium
Fast
Slow
Medium
Fast
Slow
Medium
Fast
Slow
Medium
Fast
Slow
Medium
Fast

2.44
1.36
4.99
1.23
1.36
1.99
0.85
4.82
2.54
1.28
1.77
0.64
1.13
1.92
0.93
0.77
1.70
0.91
1.68
0.96
0.61

52
39
32
54
44
33
52
39
33
52
39
33
54
44
33
52
39
33
54
44
33

Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Insigniﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Insigniﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Insigniﬁcant
Insigniﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Insigniﬁcant
Insigniﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Insigniﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Insigniﬁcant
Insigniﬁcant

n−2 and k(n−2) degrees of freedom at α = 95% conﬁdence, where n = 24 is the
number of epochs. For those properties/CME-speed groups where F > Fα, the
average time series is then statistically signiﬁcant at α level. Table 4 summarizes
the results from the F test, for all properties that showed signiﬁcant results in
at least one CME-speed group.

Figures 12, 13, and 14 show the superposed epoch plots for the top three
performing properties from Table 4, namely usﬂux total, usiz tot, and ushz tot.
Figure 12 (left panels) shows that the initial value of total unsigned ﬂux (Φtot,
usﬂux tot), which is measured 24 hours before the eruption start time, has a
dependence on the vCME-group. The minimal initial value in each group increases
with the CME-speed groups: slow CMEs show a minimal initial value of ≈ 1.0×
1020 Mx cm−2, medium-speed CMEs show ≈ 1.0 × 1021 Mx cm−2, and fast
CMEs show ≈ 3.0 × 1021 Mx cm−2. This ﬁnding is consistent with the well-
known concept that AR containing large amounts of magnetic ﬂux are prone
to eruptive activity. However, and according to Figure 12, the higher the total
unsigned ﬂux 24 hours before eruption, the bigger the chance of this eruption
to be associated to fast CME speeds. On the other hand, Figure 12 (right)
shows that in all three CME-speed groups usﬂux total average time series seem

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 21

S.A. Murray et al.

Figure 12. Superposed epoch analysis for the total unsigned magnetic ﬂux (Φtot, usﬂux total).
In the left plot, three panels show the superposed time series for each CME-speed group: slow
(top, green), medium (middle, blue), and fast (bottom, red). The plot on the right displays
the average time series for each group in the left panels. Included time series and averages are
determined to have statistical signiﬁcance according to the F test.

to systematically decrease over the 24-hour period prior to the eruption. This
trend could be a manifestation of decaying ARs. Average time series for slow
and average-speed CMEs (green and blue) show close values between hours 21
and 9 before eruption, but for any other epoch AR that produced average-speed
CMEs show higher Φtot values. Values of Φtot for fast-CMEs associated ARs
(red) are well above the two other categories.

Corresponding superposed epoch analysis for the total unsigned vertical cur-
rent (Iz,tot, usiz tot) is shown in Figure 13. As in the previous case, the minimal
initial value of Iz,tot seems to increase with the CME-speed group: 2×1011 A,
5×1011 A, and 5×1012 A for slow, average-speed, and fast CMEs, respectively. In
comparison to Φtot, more variations of Iz,tot (up to several order of magnitudes)
can be seen in all three panels. This variation could be spurious, a consequence
of the interpolation done for null values. Although, their appearance on the
average time series (Figure 13, right) for average-speed and fast CMEs (the
statistically signiﬁcant cases for this property) suggests that rapidly changing
vertical currents could be present in regions before erupting. This eﬀect, real
or artefact, could be better studied by constructing higher-cadence time series,
particularly making use of the highest SHARP data cadence of 12 min. It is
important to remark that statistically signiﬁcant time series in Figure 13 (right,
blue and red curves) decrease in value with increasing vCME.

Figure 14 displays the superposed epoch analysis for the total unsigned cur-
rent helicity due to the Bz component (Hc,tot, ushz tot). As in previous cases,
time series of Hc,tot per CME-speed group (Figure 14, left) show the spread
over the property value’s range decreasing from slow to medium-speed to fast
CME speeds. In particular, minimal initial values (24 hours before eruption) of
total Bz-contribution unsigned helicity are observed to increase with the CME-
speed group: (cid:46) 10 G2 m−1 for slow CMEs, ≈ 20 G2 m−1 for medium-speed
CMEs, and 200 G2 m−1 for fast CMEs. The level of hourly variations within
the 24-hour study period appear to be in between those of Iz,tot and Φtot. This
last ﬁnding becomes clearer by inspection of the average time series/CME-speed

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 22

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

Figure 13. Same as Figure 12 but for total unsigned vertical current (Iz,tot, usiz tot).

Figure 14. Same as Figure 12 and 14 but for total unsigned Bz-contribution current helicity
(Hc,tot, ushz tot).

group (Figure 14, right). The average time series for medium-speed CMEs (blue)
is also observed to systematically decrease over a day before the eruption. On
the other hand, fast and slow CMEs (red and green, respectively) appear to
have a seemingly ﬂat period, between hour 21 and 9, then a decrease over two
hours, follow by a less steep decrease from 7-6 hours before eruption. Although,
only red and blue curves are statistically signiﬁcant according Table 4. More AR
properties could display statistically signiﬁcant results in the superposed epoch
analysis by performing a better ﬁltering of the timeseries sample.

Time series of photospheric AR properties associated to eruptive events allows
us to investigate statistical associations between CME characteristics (speed
and/or angle) with parametrizations of the 24-hour distribution of values. It is
clear from Figure 7 that scatter plots display large levels of dispersion to claim
any (linear or non-linear) correlation between the variables. As an alternative,
box-and-whisker plots allow a better deﬁned association between CME charac-
teristics and photospheric properties. Figure 15 presents the box-and-whisker
plots for CME speed, vCME, versus 24-hours Φtot distribution mean, median,
and standard deviation (top row) and minimum, maximum, and initial values
(bottom row). Box-and-whisker plots present groups of numerical data through

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 23

S.A. Murray et al.

Figure 15. Box-and-whiskers plots of CME speed versus the 24-hour Φtot mean, median,
standard deviation (top panels), minimum, maximum, and initial value (bottom panels). Solid
black line corresponds to a ﬁt of the median values (red horizontal lines) using a third-degree
polynomial. Values in the horizontal axis are binned so the residual between the data and ﬁt
is minimized.

their distribution quartiles. In order to do so, the data is binned in the abscissa
variable thus providing a distribution of values in the ordinate variable per bin.
For a bin in any panel of Figure 15, the red horizontal bar corresponds to the
median value (second quartile), and the top and bottom of the blue box mark the
third and ﬁrst quartile, correspondingly. The whiskers (dashed lines) represent
the maximum and minimum values of the distribution, excluding outliers (black
crosses). In this way, the CME speed is represented by the median value of the
distribution in each Φtot bin.

In order to test for a linear or non-linear association between the variables,
for each box-and-whiskers plot in Figure 15 a third polynomial curve (solid black
line) is estimated by ﬁtting the median values. In addition, linear (Pearson) and
non-linear (rank Spearman) correlation coeﬃcients are calculated and displayed.
The polynomial degree and number of bins in the abscissa coordinate were
selected to minimize the residuals between the binned data and ﬁt. By visual
inspection of the data-ﬁt curves, median values of CME speeds seem to show an
increasing relation with all 24-hour Φtot distribution-related quantities in Figure
15 but one, the 24-hour Φtot standard deviation. At least two relationships show
moderate to strong correlations (value s = 0.5 – 0.75): maximum value and
standard deviation of the 24-hour Φtot. In the case of vCME and the 24-hour
σ(Φtot) (although the number of data points in each plot is small; between 5
and 7), correlation coeﬃcients show the CME speed having a moderate, negative,

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 24

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

and slightly more linear relation with the 24-hour Φtot standard deviation. This
statistical association might suggest that fast CMEs can originate from regions
in which the total unsigned ﬂux varies little over the 24-hour window leading to
the eruption. On the other hand, vCME and the maximum value of Φtot 24 hours
before eruption, show a moderate, positive, and linear correlation association,
implying that the higher the maximum measured value of Φtot, a faster CME
could be expected. It should be kept in mind these statistical results correspond
to CMEs associated to ﬂares and ARs. Therefore similar analyses using non-
eruptive ﬂaring or quiet active regions should be performed for completeness.
Such comparative analyses could then provide precursor signals and/or proba-
bilistic relationships for CME characteristics inferred from the evolution of AR
photospheric properties.

4. Conclusions and Future Work

An automatic back propagation algorithm has been developed to identify source
regions associated with CME events. The algorithm traces HI-identiﬁed events
back to COR-identiﬁed events, associates ﬂares with these COR-identiﬁed events,
and then associates the ﬂares with their AR sources. SMART is used to obtain
complex photospheric magnetic ﬁeld properties of these identiﬁed ARs. This
algorithm (as summarised in Figure 2) has been run on the HELCATS project
HICAT catalogue, producing the LOWCAT catalogue.

The LOWCAT catalogue is available open-access online (Murray et al., 2017a),
containing properties of the ≈ 2,000 HICAT CME events, ≈ 720 ﬂares (≈ 45% of
the CME events), and ≈ 550 NOAA/SWPC ARs sources. Although some events
may be missed due to the strict algorithm constraints, the automated method
enables easier study of such a large number of events, unlike the signiﬁcant time
eﬀort involved with manual association. The solar cycle period during which
observations were taken also limits associations, however the resulting numbers
do compare well with similar large catalogue studies. Andrews (2003) found all
X-class ﬂares and ≈ 55% of the M-class ﬂares were associated with 311 LASCO-
observed CMEs from 1996 to 1999, supporting the conclusion of Harrison (1995)
that particular ﬂare intensities and durations do not guarantee CME association.
Yashiro et al. (2005) found 20% C-class ﬂares associated with 1,301 CMEs in
a larger statistical study, and half of the CMEs associated with the C-class
ﬂares were invisible in LASCO. Regarding eruption location on the solar disk,
Lara (2008) previously found that CME activity has a slight preference for the
northern and southern hemispheres during the ﬁrst and second halves of a solar
cycle, respectively. The LOWCAT events seem generally evenly distributed in
Figure 3, although the data gaps do not allow any more conclusions to be drawn
regarding spatial correlations.

The simple correlations between the properties available within LOWCAT
presented in Section 2.4 are comparable to previous investigations involving other
catalogues of LASCO CME observations (rather than STEREO). Yashiro et al.
(2005) found CMEs associated with X-class ﬂares were faster, with wider extents,
than those associated with C-class ﬂares. In a study of 86 ﬂare-associated CMEs,

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 25

S.A. Murray et al.

Guo, Zhang, and Chumak (2007) found faster ﬂare-associated CMEs tend to be
accompanied by more intense ﬂares. Further, for CMEs associated with 55 ARs,
Guo, Zhang, and Chumak found that fast CMEs initiated from ARs with large
total ﬂux and eﬀective distance (a parameter quantifying magnetic complexity).
Similar trends between CME, ﬂare, and AR properties are found in Figure 7, with
the fast halo CMEs being associated with X-class ﬂares and big, complex ARs.
However, it is apparent that the traditional scatter plot method generally does
not clearly highlight potential correlations, and the more detailed analysis used
for the LOWCAT-FLARECAST comparisons has proven to be more insightful
in this case into what particular AR properties may be most useful for CME
warning purposes.

The initial exploration of the FLARECAST AR property database in relation
to eruption/CME characteristics demonstrate the importance of investigating
full-vector ﬁeld photospheric properties, in accordance with previous studies (Ti-
wari et al., 2015; Venkatakrishnan and Ravindra, 2003). It is made clear in this
investigation that the 24-hour time evolution of photospheric properties provides
more insight than single values at the eruption onset and improve the statisti-
cal quality of results. According to the results presented here, three properties
show signiﬁcant statistical association with the CME speed: total unsigned ﬂux,
total unsigned vertical current, and the total unsigned Bz-contribution helicity
current. In all three cases, the minimal property value 24 hours before eruption
showed an increasing tendency from slow, to medium-speed, to fast CMEs. The
evolution during the study period showed two interesting behaviours of the prop-
erties: for eruption-associated ARs, on average i) the total unsigned magnetic
ﬂux decreases relatively steadily, ii) total unsigned vertical current shows short-
time oscillations. On the other hand, using alternative data representations to
traditional scatter plots, empirical relations between the CME speed and the
24-hour property distribution descriptors for total unsigned magnetic ﬂux were
found: i) a negatively linear correlation between CME speed and the standard
deviation, and ii) a positively linear correlation between CME speed and the
maximum measured values in 24 hours.

The results presented in this paper highlight some initial investigations with
the properties listed in the new LOWCAT catalogue and FLARECAST database.
It must be noted that the analyses presented here serve to show examples of
what can be done with the datasets in the hope they will be used extensively
in the future. With both data sets freely available online the authors encourage
the community to continue these initial investigations. Comparison with other
catalogues may prove interesting in the future, such as associating the CME
events with ﬁlament eruptions (e.g. the SDO catalogue of McCauley et al.,
2015). The HELCATS project has also developed numerous other catalogues
(such as ARRCAT, CIRCAT, ICMECAT, LINKCAT, and RADCAT) which are
all also open access and could be used for more detailed studies of CMEs as
they propagate out from their source into interplanetary space (some impacting
Earth).

Ultimately these statistical analyses on large datasets provide important in-
sight into the link between CME and ﬂare events, as well as characteristics of
eruptive active regions. The correlation algorithms presented here have been

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 26

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

written such that other catalogues could be easily integrated, for example they
could be run with LASCO CME catalogues in the future. The code is freely
available to anyone who may wish to use it, and may prove useful for future
operational CME forecasting eﬀorts.

Acknowledgments The FLARECAST database is available at http://api.ﬂarecast.eu/, HI-
CAT catalogue at https://www.helcats-fp7.eu/catalogues/wp2 cat.html, and LOWCAT at https:
//ﬁgshare.com/articles/HELCATS LOWCAT/4970222. The authors wish to acknowledge the use
of the Overleaf to prepare the manuscript, and also the following Python libraries and packages
used when creating the ﬁgures in this paper: Astropy, Matplotlib, NumPy, pandas, Plotly,
SciPy, and SunPy. The STEREO/SECCHI data used here are produced by an international
consortium of the Naval Research Laboratory (USA), Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics
Laboratory (USA), NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (USA), Rutherford Appleton Labora-
tory (UK), University of Birmingham (UK), Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Sonnensystemforschung
(Germany), Centre Spatial de Li`ege (Belgium), Institut d’Optique Th´eorique et Appliqu´e
(France), and Institut dAstrophysique Spatiale (France). SDO is a mission for NASA’s Living
With a Star (LWS) program, with the SDO/HMI data provided by the Joint Science Opera-
tion Center (JSOC). E.C., P.Z., and S.A.M were supported by the European Union Seventh
Framework Program under grant agreement No. 606692 (HELCATS project). J.G.A., S.A.M.,
and S.-H.P were supported by the European Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program under grant agreement No. 640216 (FLARECAST project). VB acknowledges support
of the CGAUSS (Coronagraphic German and US Solar Probe Plus Survey) project for WISPR
by the German Space Agency DLR under grant 50 OL 1601. S.A.M. acknowledges the IRC
Postdoctoral Fellowship Scheme and AFOSR award FA9550-17-1-039. The authors would like
to thank the anonymous referee for their suggestions to improve the paper.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have
no conﬂicts of interest.

References

Abramenko, V.I., Yurchyshyn, V.B., Wang, H., Spirock, T.J., Goode, P.R.: 2002, Scaling
Behavior of Structure Functions of the Longitudinal Magnetic Field in Active Regions on
the Sun. Astrophys. J. 577, 487. DOI. ADS.

Ahmed, O.W., Qahwaji, R., Colak, T., DudokDe Wit, T., Ipson, S.: 2010, A new technique
for the calculation and 3d visualisation ofmagnetic complexities on solar satellite images.
The Visual Computer 26(5), 385. DOI. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-010-0418-1.

Ahmed, O.W., Qahwaji, R., Colak, T., Higgins, P.A., Gallagher, P.T., Bloomﬁeld, D.S.: 2013,
Solar Flare Prediction Using Advanced Feature Extraction, Machine Learning, and Feature
Selection. Solar Phys. 283, 157. DOI. ADS.

Andrews, M.D.: 2003, A Search for CMEs Associated with Big Flares. Solar Phys. 218, 261.

DOI. ADS.

Barnes, D., Byrne, J., Davies, J., Harrison, R., Helcats, E.U.: 2015, HELCATS
HCME WP2 V02. DOI. https://ﬁgshare.com/articles/HELCATS HCME WP2 V02/1492351.
Barnes, G., Leka, K.D., Schrijver, C.J., Colak, T., Qahwaji, R., Ashamari, O.W., Yuan, Y.,
Zhang, J., McAteer, R.T.J., Bloomﬁeld, D.S., Higgins, P.A., Gallagher, P.T., Falconer, D.A.,
Georgoulis, M.K., Wheatland, M.S., Balch, C., Dunn, T., Wagner, E.L.: 2016, A Comparison
of Flare Forecasting Methods. I. Results from the ‘All-Clear’ Workshop. Astrophys. J. 829,
89. DOI. ADS.

Berger, M.A., Field, G.B.: 1984, The topological properties of magnetic helicity. Journal of

Fluid Mechanics 147, 133148. DOI.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 27

S.A. Murray et al.

Berghmans, D., Foing, B.H., Fleck, B.: 2002, Automated detection of CMEs in LASCO data.
In: Wilson, A. (ed.) From Solar Min to Max: Half a Solar Cycle with SOHO, ESA Special
Publication 508, 437. ADS.

Bloomﬁeld, D.S., Higgins, P.A., McAteer, R.T.J., Gallagher, P.T.: 2012, Toward Reliable
Benchmarking of Solar Flare Forecasting Methods. Astrophys. J. Lett. 747, L41. DOI.
ADS.

Bobra, M.G., Sun, X., Hoeksema, J.T., Turmon, M., Liu, Y., Hayashi, K., Barnes, G., Leka,
K.D.: 2014a, The Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) Vector Magnetic Field Pipeline:
SHARPs - Space-Weather HMI Active Region Patches. Solar Phys. 289, 3549. DOI. ADS.
Bobra, M.G., Sun, X., Hoeksema, J.T., Turmon, M., Liu, Y., Hayashi, K., Barnes, G., Leka,
K.D.: 2014b, The Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) Vector Magnetic Field Pipeline:
SHARPs - Space-Weather HMI Active Region Patches. Solar Phys. 289, 3549. DOI. ADS.
Brueckner, G.E., Howard, R.A., Koomen, M.J., Korendyke, C.M., Michels, D.J., Moses, J.D.,
Socker, D.G., Dere, K.P., Lamy, P.L., Llebaria, A., Bout, M.V., Schwenn, R., Simnett, G.M.,
Bedford, D.K., Eyles, C.J.: 1995, The Large Angle Spectroscopic Coronagraph (LASCO).
Solar Phys. 162, 357. DOI. ADS.

Byrne, J.P., Maloney, S.A., McAteer, R.T.J., Refojo, J.M., Gallagher, P.T.: 2010, Propagation
of an Earth-directed coronal mass ejection in three dimensions. Nature Communications 1,
74. DOI. ADS.

Byrne, J.P., Morgan, H., Habbal, S.R., Gallagher, P.T.: 2012, Automatic Detection and Track-
ing of Coronal Mass Ejections. II. Multiscale Filtering of Coronagraph Images. Astrophys.
J. 752, 145. DOI. ADS.

Campi, C., Benvenuto, F.: 2017, Feature selection for ﬂarecast. private communication.
Conlon, P.A., Gallagher, P.T., McAteer, R.T.J., Ireland, J., Young, C.A., Kestener, P., Hewett,
R.J., Maguire, K.: 2008, Multifractal properties of evolving active regions. Solar Phys.
248(2), 297. DOI. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11207-007-9074-7.

Davies, J.A., Harrison, R.A., Perry, C.H., M¨ostl, C., Lugaz, N., Rollett, T., Davis, C.J.,
Crothers, S.R., Temmer, M., Eyles, C.J., Savani, N.P.: 2012, A Self-similar Expansion Model
for Use in Solar Wind Transient Propagation Studies. Astrophys. J. 750, 23. DOI. ADS.
Davies, J.A., Perry, C.H., Trines, R.M.G.M., Harrison, R.A., Lugaz, N., M¨ostl, C., Liu, Y.D.,
Steed, K.: 2013, Establishing a Stereoscopic Technique for Determining the Kinematic Prop-
erties of Solar Wind Transients based on a Generalized Self-similarly Expanding Circular
Geometry. Astrophys. J. 777, 167. DOI. ADS.

Deng, N., Xu, Y., Yang, G., Cao, W., Liu, C., Rimmele, T.R., Wang, H., Denker, C.: 2006,
Multiwavelength study of ﬂow ﬁelds in ﬂaring super active region noaa10486. Astrophys.
J. 644(2), 1278. http://stacks.iop.org/0004-637X/644/i=2/a=1278.

Drake, J.F.: 1971, Characteristics of Soft Solar X-Ray Bursts. Solar Phys. 16, 152. DOI. ADS.
Eastwood, J.P., Biﬃs, E., Hapgood, M.A., Green, L., Bisi, M.M., Bentley, R.D., Wicks, R.,
McKinnell, L.-A., Gibbs, M., Burnett, C.: 2017, The economic impact of space weather:
Where do we stand? Risk Analysis 37(2), 206. DOI. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/risa.12765.
Eyles, C.J., Harrison, R.A., Davis, C.J., Waltham, N.R., Shaughnessy, B.M., Mapson-Menard,
H.C.A., Bewsher, D., Crothers, S.R., Davies, J.A., Simnett, G.M., Howard, R.A., Moses,
J.D., Newmark, J.S., Socker, D.G., Halain, J.-P., Deﬁse, J.-M., Mazy, E., Rochus, P.: 2009,
The Heliospheric Imagers Onboard the STEREO Mission. Solar Phys. 254, 387. DOI. ADS.
Falconer, D.A., Moore, R.L., Gary, G.A.: 2008, Magnetogram Measures of Total Nonpoten-
tiality for Prediction of Solar Coronal Mass Ejections from Active Regions of Any Degree
of Magnetic Complexity. Astrophys. J. 689, 1433. DOI. ADS.

Falconer, D.A., Moore, R.L., Barghouty, A.F., Khazanov, I.: 2012, Prior Flaring as a Com-
plement to Free Magnetic Energy for Forecasting Solar Eruptions. Astrophys. J. 757, 32.
DOI. ADS.

Georgoulis, M.: 2013, Toward an eﬃcient prediction of solar ﬂares: Which parameters, and

how? Entropy 15(11), 5022. DOI. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/e15115022.

Georgoulis, M.K.: 2010, Pre-eruption magnetic conﬁgurations in the active-region solar

photosphere. 6(S273), 495. DOI.

Georgoulis, M.K., Rust, D.M.: 2007, Quantitative Forecasting of Major Solar Flares. Astro-

phys. J. Lett. 661, L109. DOI. ADS.

Georgoulis, M.K., Titov, V.S., Miki, Z.: 2012, Non-neutralized electric current patterns in
solar active regions: Origin of the shear-generating lorentz force. Astrophys. J. 761(1), 61.
http://stacks.iop.org/0004-637X/761/i=1/a=61.

Gopalswamy, N., Yashiro, S., Michalek, G., Stenborg, G., Vourlidas, A., Freeland, S., Howard,
R.: 2009, The SOHO/LASCO CME Catalog. Earth Moon and Planets 104, 295. DOI. ADS.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 28

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

Guerra, J.A., Pulkkinen, A., Uritsky, V.M., Yashiro, S.: 2015, Spatio-Temporal Scaling of
Turbulent Photospheric Line-of-Sight Magnetic Field in Active Region NOAA 11158. Solar
Phys. 290, 335. DOI. ADS.

Guo, J., Zhang, H.Q., Chumak, O.V.: 2007, Magnetic properties of ﬂare-CME productive

active regions and CME speed. Astron. Astrophys. 462, 1121. DOI. ADS.

Harra, L.K., Schrijver, C.J., Janvier, M., Toriumi, S., Hudson, H., Matthews, S., Woods,
M.M., Hara, H., Guedel, M., Kowalski, A., Osten, R., Kusano, K., Lueftinger, T.: 2016,
The Characteristics of Solar X-Class Flares and CMEs: A Paradigm for Stellar Superﬂares
and Eruptions? Solar Phys. 291, 1761. DOI. ADS.

Harrison, R.A.: 1995, The nature of solar ﬂares associated with coronal mass ejection. Astron.

Astrophys. 304, 585. ADS.

Harrison, R.A., Davies, J.A., Biesecker, D., Gibbs, M.: 2017, The application of heliospheric
imaging to space weather operations: Lessons learned from published studies. Space Weather
15(8), 985. 2017SW001633. DOI. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2017SW001633.

Haynes, A.L., Parnell, C.E.: 2007, A trilinear method for ﬁnding null points in a three-
dimensional vector space. Physics of Plasmas 14(8), 082107. DOI. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1063/1.2756751.

Hewett, R.J., Gallagher, P.T., McAteer, R.T.J., Young, C.A., Ireland, J., Conlon, P.A.,
Maguire, K.: 2008, Multiscale Analysis of Active Region Evolution. Solar Phys. 248, 311.
DOI. ADS.

Higgins, P.A.: 2012, Sunspot group evolution and the global magnetic ﬁeld of the Sun. Thesis,

Trinity College Dublin.

Higgins, P.A., Gallagher, P.T., McAteer, R.T.J., Bloomﬁeld, D.S.: 2011, Solar magnetic feature
detection and tracking for space weather monitoring. Advances in Space Research 47, 2105.
DOI. ADS.

Jing, J., Yurchyshyn, V.B., Yang, G., Xu, Y., Wang, H.: 2004, On the Relation between
Filament Eruptions, Flares, and Coronal Mass Ejections. Astrophys. J. 614, 1054. DOI.
ADS.

Kaiser, M.L., Kucera, T.A., Davila, J.M., St. Cyr, O.C., Guhathakurta, M., Christian, E.:

2008, The STEREO Mission: An Introduction. Space Sci. Rev. 136, 5. DOI. ADS.

Kors´os, M.B., Baranyi, T., Ludmny, A.: 2014, Pre-ﬂare dynamics of sunspot groups. Astrophys.

J. 789(2), 107. http://stacks.iop.org/0004-637X/789/i=2/a=107.

K¨unzel, H.: 1965, Zur Klassiﬁkation von Sonnenﬂeckengruppen. Astronomische Nachrichten

288, 177. ADS.

Kusano, K., Maeshiro, T., Yokoyama, T., Sakurai, T.: 2002, Measurement of magnetic helicity
injection and free energy loading into the solar corona. Astrophys. J. 577(1), 501. http:
//stacks.iop.org/0004-637X/577/i=1/a=501.

Lara, A.: 2008, The Source Region of Coronal Mass Ejections. Astrophys. J. 688, 647. DOI.

ADS.

Lee, K., Moon, Y.-J., Lee, J.-Y.: 2015, Forecast of a Daily Halo CME Occurrence Probability
Depending on Class and Area Change of the Associated Sunspot. Solar Phys. 290, 1661.
DOI. ADS.

Liu, Y.: 2008, Magnetic ﬁeld overlying solar eruption regions and kink and torus instabilities.

Astrophys. J. Lett. 679(2), L151. http://stacks.iop.org/1538-4357/679/i=2/a=L151.

Magdaleni´c, J., Marqu´e, C., Krupar, V., Mierla, M., Zhukov, A.N., Rodriguez, L., Maksimovi´c,
M., Cecconi, B.: 2014, Tracking the CME-driven Shock Wave on 2012 March 5 and Radio
Triangulation of Associated Radio Emission. Astrophys. J. 791, 115. DOI. ADS.

Mason, J.P., Hoeksema, J.T.: 2010, Testing Automated Solar Flare Forecasting with 13 Years

of Michelson Doppler Imager Magnetograms. Astrophys. J. 723, 634. DOI. ADS.

McCauley, P.I., Su, Y.N., Schanche, N., Evans, K.E., Su, C., McKillop, S., Reeves, K.K.:
2015, Prominence and Filament Eruptions Observed by the Solar Dynamics Observatory:
Statistical Properties, Kinematics, and Online Catalog. Solar Phys. 290, 1703. DOI. ADS.
McIntosh, P.S.: 1990, The classiﬁcation of sunspot groups. Solar Phys. 125, 251. DOI. ADS.
Moestl, C., Isavnin, A., Boakes, P.D., Kilpua, E.K.J., Davies, J.A., Harrison, R.A., Barnes,
D., Krupar, V., Eastwood, J.P., Good, S.W., Forsyth, R.J., Bothmer, V., Reiss, M.A.,
Amerstorfer, T., Winslow, R.M., Anderson, B.J., Philpott, L.C., Rodriguez, L., Rouillard,
A.P., Gallagher, P., Nieves-Chinchilla, T., Zhang, T.L.: 2017, Modeling observations of
solar coronal mass ejections with heliospheric imagers veriﬁed with the heliophysics system
observatory. Space Weather 15(7), 955. 2017SW001614. DOI. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
2017SW001614.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 29

S.A. Murray et al.

Moon, Y.-J., Choe, G.S., Wang, H., Park, Y.D., Gopalswamy, N., Yang, G., Yashiro, S.: 2002,
A Statistical Study of Two Classes of Coronal Mass Ejections. Astrophys. J. 581, 694.
DOI. ADS.

Morgan, H., Byrne, J.P., Habbal, S.R.: 2012, Automatically Detecting and Tracking Coro-
nal Mass Ejections. I. Separation of Dynamic and Quiescent Components in Coronagraph
Images. Astrophys. J. 752, 144. DOI. ADS.

Murray, S.A., Bingham, S., Sharpe, M., Jackson, D.R.: 2017a, Flare forecasting at the Met

Oﬃce Space Weather Operations Centre. Space Weather 15, 577. DOI. ADS.

Murray, S.A., Zucca, P., Carley, E., Gallagher, P.: 2017b, HELCATS LOWCAT. ﬁgshare. DOI.
Pant, V., Willems, S., Rodriguez, L., Mierla, M., Banerjee, D., Davies, J.A.: 2016, Automated
Detection of Coronal Mass Ejections in STEREO Heliospheric Imager Data. Astrophys. J.
833, 80. DOI. ADS.

Park, S.-H., Chae, J., Wang, H.: 2010, Productivity of solar ﬂares and magnetic helicity
injection in active regions. Astrophys. J. 718(1), 43. http://stacks.iop.org/0004-637X/718/
i=1/a=43.

Park, S.-H., Cho, K.-S., Bong, S.-C., Kumar, P., Chae, J., Liu, R., Wang, H.: 2012, The
occurrence and speed of cmes related to two characteristic evolution patterns of helicity
injection in their solar source regions. Astrophys. J. 750(1), 48. http://stacks.iop.org/
0004-637X/750/i=1/a=48.

Park, S.-H., Cho, K.-S., Bong, S.-C., Kumar, P., Chae, J., Liu, R., Wang, H.: 2012, The Oc-
currence and Speed of CMEs Related to Two Characteristic Evolution Patterns of Helicity
Injection in Their Solar Source Regions. Astrophys. J. 750, 48. DOI. ADS.

Plotnikov, I., Rouillard, A.P., Davies, J.A., Bothmer, V., Eastwood, J.P., Gallagher, P., Harri-
son, R.A., Kilpua, E., M¨ostl, C., Perry, C.H., Rodriguez, L., Lavraud, B., G´enot, V., Pinto,
R.F., Sanchez-Diaz, E.: 2016, Long-Term Tracking of Corotating Density Structures Using
Heliospheric Imaging. Solar Phys. 291, 1853. DOI. ADS.

Pontin, D.I., Priest, E.R., Galsgaard, K.: 2013, On the nature of reconnection at a solar
coronal null point above a separatrix dome. Astrophys. J. 774(2), 154. http://stacks.iop.
org/0004-637X/774/i=2/a=154.

Robbrecht, E., Berghmans, D.: 2004, Automated recognition of coronal mass ejections (CMEs)

in near-real-time data. Astron. Astrophys. 425, 1097. DOI. ADS.

Rouillard, A.P., Lavraud, B., Genot, V., Bouchemit, M., Dufourg, N., Plotnikov, I., Pinto,
R.F., Sanchez-Diaz, E., Lavarra, M., Penou, M., Jacquey, C., Andre, N., Caussarieu, S.,
Toniutti, J.-P., Popescu, D., Buchlin, E., Caminade, S., Alingery, P., Davies, J.A., Odstrcil,
D., Mays, L.: 2017, A propagation tool to connect remote-sensing observations with in-situ
measurements of heliospheric structures. ArXiv e-prints. ADS.

Sammis, I., Tang, F., Zirin, H.: 2000, The Dependence of Large Flare Occurrence on the

Magnetic Structure of Sunspots. Astrophys. J. 540, 583. DOI. ADS.

Scherrer, P.H., Bogart, R.S., Bush, R.I., Hoeksema, J.T., Kosovichev, A.G., Schou, J., Rosen-
berg, W., Springer, L., Tarbell, T.D., Title, A., Wolfson, C.J., Zayer, I., MDI Engineering
Team: 1995, The Solar Oscillations Investigation - Michelson Doppler Imager. Solar Phys.
162, 129. DOI. ADS.

Scherrer, P.H., Schou, J., Bush, R.I., Kosovichev, A.G., Bogart, R.S., Hoeksema, J.T., Liu, Y.,
Duvall, T.L., Zhao, J., Title, A.M., Schrijver, C.J., Tarbell, T.D., Tomczyk, S.: 2012, The
Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) Investigation for the Solar Dynamics Observatory
(SDO). Solar Phys. 275, 207. DOI. ADS.

Scherrer, P.H., Schou, J., Bush, R.I., Kosovichev, A.G., Bogart, R.S., Hoeksema, J.T.: 2012,
The helioseismic and magnetic imager (hmi) investigation for the solar dynamics observa-
tory (sdo). Solar Phys. 275, 207. DOI. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11207-011-9834-2.

Schrijver, C.J.: 2007a, A Characteristic Magnetic Field Pattern Associated with All Major
Solar Flares and Its Use in Flare Forecasting. Astrophys. J. Lett. 655, L117. DOI. ADS.
Schrijver, C.J.: 2007b, A Characteristic Magnetic Field Pattern Associated with All Major
Solar Flares and Its Use in Flare Forecasting. Astrophys. J. Lett. 655, L117. DOI. ADS.
Shibata, K., Magara, T.: 2011, Solar Flares: Magnetohydrodynamic Processes. Living Rev.

Solar Phys. 8, 6. ADS.

Singh, Y.P., Badruddin: 2006, Statistical considerations in superposed epoch analysis and its

applications in space research. J. Atmos. Solar-Terr. Phys. 68, 803. DOI. ADS.

Tiwari, S.K., Falconer, D.A., Moore, R.L., Venkatakrishnan, P., Winebarger, A.R., Khazanov,
I.G.: 2015, Near-Sun speed of CMEs and the magnetic nonpotentiality of their source active
regions. Geophys. Res. Lett. 42, 5702. DOI. ADS.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 30

Combining results from HELCATS and FLARECAST

Venkatakrishnan, P., Ravindra, B.: 2003, Relationship between CME velocity and active region

magnetic energy. Geophys. Res. Lett. 30, 2181. DOI. ADS.

Vourlidas, A., Howard, R.A.: 2006, The Proper Treatment of Coronal Mass Ejection Brightness:
A New Methodology and Implications for Observations. Astrophys. J. 642, 1216. DOI.
ADS.

Wang, S., Liu, C., Deng, N., Wang, H.: 2014, Sudden photospheric motion and sunspot rotation
associated with the x2.2 ﬂare on 2011 february 15. Astrophys. J. Lett. 782(2), L31. http:
//stacks.iop.org/2041-8205/782/i=2/a=L31.

Wang, Y., Chen, C., Gui, B., Shen, C., Ye, P., Wang, S.: 2011, Statistical study of coronal
mass ejection source locations: Understanding CMEs viewed in coronagraphs. J. Geophys.
Res.(Space Physics) 116, A04104. DOI. ADS.

Webb, D.F., Howard, T.A.: 2012, Coronal Mass Ejections: Observations. Living Reviews in

Solar Physics 9, 3. DOI. ADS.

Yang, G., Xu, Y., Cao, W., Wang, H., Denker, C., Rimmele, T.R.: 2004, Photospheric shear
ﬂows along the magnetic neutral line of active region 10486 prior to an x10 ﬂare. Astrophys.
J. Lett. 617(2), L151. http://stacks.iop.org/1538-4357/617/i=2/a=L151.

Yashiro, S., Gopalswamy, N., Akiyama, S., Michalek, G., Howard, R.A.: 2005, Visibility of
coronal mass ejections as a function of ﬂare location and intensity. J. Geophys. Res.(Space
Physics) 110, A12S05. DOI. ADS.

Yashiro, S., Michalek, G., Akiyama, S., Gopalswamy, N., Howard, R.A.: 2008, Spatial Rela-
tionship between Solar Flares and Coronal Mass Ejections. Astrophys. J. 673, 1174. DOI.
ADS.

Youssef, M.: 2012, On the relation between the CMEs and the solar ﬂares. NRIAG Journal of

Astronomy and Geophysics 1, 172. DOI. ADS.

Yurchyshyn, V., Yashiro, S., Abramenko, V., Wang, H., Gopalswamy, N.: 2005, Statistical
Distributions of Speeds of Coronal Mass Ejections. Astrophys. J. 619, 599. DOI. ADS.
Zheng, Y.: 2013, Improving cme forecasting capability: An urgent need. Space Weather 11(11),

641. 2013SW001004. DOI. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2013SW001004.

Zuccarello, F.P., Seaton, D.B., Mierla, M., Poedts, S., Rachmeler, L.A., Romano, P., Zuccarello,
F.: 2014, Observational evidence of torus instability as trigger mechanism for coronal mass
ejections: The 2011 august 4 ﬁlament eruption. Astrophys. J. Lett. 785(2), 88. http://
stacks.iop.org/0004-637X/785/i=2/a=88.

SOLA: main.tex; 20 March 2018; 0:28; p. 31

