J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

Chemical bonding in carbide MXene nanosheets  

Martin Magnuson1*, Joseph Halim1,2 and Lars-Åke Näslund1 

1Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, IFM, Thin Film Physics Division, 
Linköping University, SE-58183 Linköping, Sweden. 
2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Drexel University,  
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 

* Corresponding author: Martin.Magnuson@ifm.liu.se 

Abstract 
The chemical bonding in the carbide core and the surface chemistry in a new group of 
transition-metal carbides Tin+1Cn-Tx (n=1,2) called MXenes have been investigated by 
surface-sensitive  valence  band  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy.  Changes  in  band 
structures of stacked nano sheets of different thicknesses are analyzed in connection 
to  known  hybridization  regions  of  TiC  and  TiO2  that  affect  elastic  and  transport 
properties.  By  employing  high  excitation  energy, the  photoelectron  cross-section  for 
the C 2s - Ti 3d hybridization region at the bottom of the valence band is enhanced. 
As shown in this work, the O 2p and F 2p bands are shown to strongly depend both on 
the bond lengths to the surface groups and the adsorption sites. The effect of surface 
oxidation and Ar+ sputtering on the electronic structure is also discussed. 

1. Introduction 
In the quest for new 2D materials outperforming graphene [1], research on other more 
advanced 2D materials has greatly intensified. Despite the large interest in graphene, 
the  lack  of  a  natural  band  gap  and  the  difficulty  of  artificially  producing  one, 
encourage  to  explore  other  2D  materials.  Classes  of  non-graphene  2D  materials 
include  hexagonal  boron-nitride  (BN),  molybdenum  di-sulphide  (MoS2)  used  as  dry 
lubricant  in  gears,  tungsten  di-sulphide  (WS2)  and  MXenes,  a  new  family  of  2D 
transition  metal  carbides  denoted  Mn+1Xn,  where  M  is  a  transition  metal  and  X  is 
either carbon or nitrogen [2,3,4]. These complex layered structures that contain more 
than  one  element  may  offer  semiconducting  and  magnetic  properties  useful  for 
transistors and spintronics. Many other potential applications for MXenes are similar 
as  for  doped  graphene;  2D-based  electronics  and  screens  but  on  top  of  that,  also 
energy  storage  systems  such  as  supercapacitors, Li-ion  batteries,  fuel  and  solar  cells 
as  well  as  transparent  conductive  electrodes  and  composite  materials  with  high 
strength.  

For MXenes, the parent precursor compounds are inherently nanolaminated materials 
known  as  Mn+1AXn  (211  for  n=1,  312  for  n=2,  or  413  for  n=3)  [5]  (space  group 
P63/mmc) phases, where A is a p-element that usually belongs to groups IIIA or IVA 
in  the  periodic  table.  These  phases  contain  more  than  70  variants,  including Ti2AlC 
[6] and Ti3AlC2 [7] that are precursors for the Ti2C and Ti3C2 MXenes, respectively. 
To  make  MXene  from  Mn+1AXn,  the  weakly  bound  and  most  reactive  A-layers  are 
etched  away  and  replaced  by  surface  termination  groups  (-Tx)  in  the  exfoliation 
process [2] where the selection of termination groups, e.g. -O, -OH and –F, influences 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

and 

result 

Figure  1:  Schematic  picture  of  a  M2C-Tx  structure  showing 
various  termination  sites  of  -Tx:  a)  -OH  adsorbed  on  Ti,  b)  -
OH adsorbed on C, c) -O adsorbed on Ti, d) -O adsorbed on C 
e) a bridged oxygen and e) a -F atom. Blue and black spheres 
are Ti and C atoms in the M2X layer, respectively.  

the  material  properties.  The 
delamination 
in 
weakly  bound  stacks  of  2D 
sheets  with  Mn+1Xn-Tx 
larger 
composition 
lattice  parameters  along  the 
c-axis 
than  MAX-phases 
(Ti2AlC has c=13.6 Å while 
Ti2C  has  c=15.04  Å).  The 
parent  Mn+1AXn  precursors 
are  known  to  have  strong 
M-X  bonds  and  weak  M-A 
bonds  [6-10],  but  little  is 
known about the electronic structure and chemical bonds of the valence bands in the 
MXenes.  Generally,  MXenes  consist  of  a  core  of  a  few  atoms  thick  2D  Mn+1Xn 
conductive carbide layers that are crystalline in the basal plane and a transition metal 
surface that can be functionalized for different properties by changing the chemistry 
of the termination groups. Complex layered structures like MXenes containing more 
than one element offer better variation of physical properties than pure materials such 
as  graphene  since  they  can  provide  a  larger  number  of  compositional  variables  that 
can  be  tuned  for  achieving  specific  properties.  Modeling  is  important  for  the 
understanding of the structure of MXene. Previous works of the electronic structure of 
MXenes have mainly been based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations [11-
13]. 

In this work, we aim to present experimentally the electronic structure and chemical 
bonding in the valence bands of Ti2C-Tx and Ti3C2-Tx MXenes in comparison to TiC 
as  a  reference  material  by  using  valence  band  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy 
(XPS).  By  employing  X-rays  with  relatively  high  energy  (Al  Ka  1486.6  eV),  we 
enhance the photoelectron cross-section for the hybridization region of the Ti 3d - C 
2s  states  at  the  bottom  of  the  valence  band.  The  XPS  valence  band  spectra  are 
modeled  by  different  structure  components  by  electronic  structure  calculations  to 
explore the sensitivity to various adsorption sites for different -O, -OH and -F surface 
groups  as  schematically  shown  in  Fig.  1.  For  detailed  electronic  structure  studies  of 
termination groups, the necessity of clean non-oxidized surfaces is discussed. 

2. Experimental details 

2.1 Sample preparation 
Flakes  of  Ti2C-Tx  were  produced  by  immersion  of  Ti2AlC  powders  (3-ONE-2, 
Voorhees,  NJ,  >  92  wt.  %  purity)  of  particle  size  of  <  35  µm  in  10  %  conc. 
Hydrofluoric  acid  (HF(aq))  (Fisher  Scientific,  Fair  Lawn,  NJ)  for  10  h  at  room 
temperature.  For  more  details,  see  Refs.  [2-4,14].  Similarly,  flakes  of  Ti3C2Tx  were 
produced  by  immersion  of  Ti3AlC2  powders  in  50%  conc.  HF(aq) for  18  h  at  room 
temperature.  The  Ti3AlC2  powders  were  prepared  by  mixing  commercial  Ti2AlC 
powders (Kanthal, Sweden, -325 mesh) with TiC (Alfa Aesar, Ward Hill, USA, 99.5 
wt.%  purity,  -325  mesh)  in  a  1:1  molar  ratio  (after  adjusting  for  the  ~  12  wt.% 
Ti3AlC2 already present in the commercial powder), followed by ball milling for 18 h 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

to  ensure  mixing  of  the  powders.  The  mixture  was  then  heated  in  a  tube  furnace  to 
1350 °C with a rate of 10 °C min-1 for 2 h under flowing argon (Ar). 

After the HF treatment, the etched powders were washed in cycles of deionized water, 
centrifugation,  decanting,  followed  by  filtration  using  a  vacuum  assisted  filtering 
device  to  dry  the  powder  from  the  water  or  suspension  in  ethanol  and  dried  by 
evaporation to yield the MXene powders.  The dried powders were then cold pressed 
using a load corresponding to a stress of 1 GPa in a steel die to produce freestanding 
discs that were used in this study. 

The  TiC  sample  was  made  from  powder  (Alfa  Aesar,  Ward  Hill,  USA,  99.5  wt.% 
purity, -325 mesh) that was cold pressed, performed similar to the Ti3C2 and Ti2C.  

2.2 Valence band XPS measurements 
The valence band XPS measurements were performed using a surface analysis system 
(Kratos AXIS UltraDLD, Manchester, U.K.) using monochromatic Al-Kα (1486.6 eV) 
radiation.  The  X-ray  beam  irradiated  the  surface  of  the  samples  at  an  angle  of  45°, 
with  respect  to  the  surface,  and  provided  an  X-ray  spot  size  of  300  x  800  µm.  The 
electron  energy  analyzer  accepted  the  photoelectrons  perpendicular  to  the  sample 
surface with an acceptance angle of ± 15°. XPS spectra were recorded for the valence 
bands  with  a  step  size  of  0.1  eV  and  a  pass  energy  of  20  eV,  which  provided  an 
overall  energy  resolution  better  than  0.5  eV.  The  binding  energy  scale  of  all  XPS 
the 
spectra  was 
Fermi-edge (Ef), which was set to a 
binding  energy  of  zero  eV.  The 
this  work  were 
MXenes 
examined  before  and  after 
low 
angle  incident  (20°)  Ar+  sputtering 
for  600  s  using  a  4  keV  Ar+  beam 
raster  of  2x2  mm2  over  the  probed 
area. 

referenced 

in 

to 

[15]. 

initio 

ab 
(VASP) 

2.3 DFT calculations 
First  principle  calculations  were 
carried out using density functional 
theory  (DFT)  implemented  in  the 
simulation 
Vienna 
package 
The 
projected  augmented  wave  (PAW) 
[16] method and the Perdue-Burke-
Ernzerhof  (PBE)  functional  of  the 
generalized  gradient  approximation 
(GGA)  [17]  with  a  k-point  grid  of 
the 
21x21x3  was 
calculations.  Figure  1  illustrates  an 
M2C-Tx structure showing various -
Tx  termination  sites  positioned  on 
top of Ti, on to of C, and in a Ti-Ti 
bridged position. 

used 

in 

Figure 2: Valence-band XPS spectra of Ti2C–Tx and 
Ti3C2–Tx,  before  and  after  Ar+  sputtering, 
in 
comparison to TiC and amorphous TiO2. The vertical 
dashed line at 0 eV represents the Fermi level (EF) on 
the binding energy scale (Eb). 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

structures 

respectively 
three 

3. Results 
Figure 2 shows valence-band XPS spectra of Ti2C–Tx and Ti3C2–Tx before and after 
sputtering  in  comparison  to  TiC  and  amorphous  anatase-like  TiO2.  The  benefit  of 
using 1487 eV photon energy is obvious, i.e. the structures at the bottom of the band 
are  dominating  the  spectra;  the  drawback  is,  however,  the  broadening  of  the 
structures. The valence band structure of TiC, obtained using 1487 eV photon energy, 
has been presented previously [20] and a direct comparison with that work shows that 
the  structures  A  at  0.5  eV,  B  at  3.5  eV,  and  D  at  10.9  eV  are  associated  with  the 
metallic  Ti  3d  –  Ti  3d  hybridization,  the  Ti  3d  -  C  2p  hybridization,  and  the  C  2s 
[18,20,21]. 
states, 
These 
are 
accompanied by a fourth structure at 
7.5  eV,  denoted  by  C  in  Figure  2, 
which  does  not  originate  from  TiC. 
A comparison with the valence band 
structure  of  pure  TiO2  suggests  that 
C  is  associated  with  the  O  2p  states 
of  oxidized  Ti.  The  intensity  of  all 
is  enhanced  after  Ar+ 
structures 
sputtering.  Even  the  O  2p  structure 
is  enhanced,  which  indicates  that 
TiO2  is  still  present  although  the  O 
1s  XPS  indicates  that  the  surface 
oxide  is  removed.  However,  as  the 
valence  band  XPS  has  a  larger 
probing  depth  than  the  O  1s  XPS, 
the  oxygen  contribution  in  the  VB 
spectra  (after  sputtering)  originates 
from  atomic 
the 
surface  that  are  not  detectable  by  O 
1s  XPS.  Moreover, 
the 
photoemission energy of the valence 
band spectra, oxygen has three times 
higher  photoionization  cross-section 
than  carbon.  Thus,  for  TiC,  the 
origin  of  peak  C  after  sputtering  is 
associated  with  the  relatively  large 
sensitivity of oxygen in combination 
with the large probe depth. 

Figure  3:  Valence  band  XPS  spectra  of  TiC  before 
and  after  Ar+  sputtering  of  the  surface  compared  to 
UPS  data  [18]  before  and  after  oxygenation.  DFT 
calculations with -O adsorption on top of the Ti and C 
sites  are  shown  below  together  with  bare  TiC  and 
TiO2 oxide in the form of anatase.  

layers  below 

for 

The dashed lines highlight the trend in the peak structures A-D observed for the TiC 
and  the  corresponding  valence  band  structures  shown  in  the  spectra for  Ti2C-Tx  and 
Ti3C2-Tx. As observed, bands A, B, and C remain at the same binding energies for all 
carbon-containing samples. The intensity of the peak at ~0.5 eV, corresponding to the 
Ti 3d – Ti 3d orbital overlaps, is enhanced after Ar+ sputtering. The intensity at the EF 
is  significantly  smaller  for  TiC  and  is  consistent  with  the  higher  resistivity  in 
comparison  to  both  Ti2C  and  the  more  carbidic  Ti3C2  [6,7].  Also  band  B  at  3.7  eV 
appears more clearly after surface cleaning. The position of band C coincides with the 
main  peak  at  7.5  eV  of  amorphous  TiO2.  The  bandgap  of  the  insulator  TiO2  in  the 
form  of  amorphous  anatase  is  ~3.0  eV  as  indicated  by  the  horizontal  arrow  at  the 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

bottom. 

For Ti2C and Ti3C2, the spectra before sputtering (black curves) exhibit a plateau with 
high intensity in the region corresponding to amorphous TiO2 that is mainly caused by 
oxidation of the surfaces. After sputtering (red curves), the intensity corresponding to 
the carbide structures becomes clearer, however, the signal from the surface oxide is 
not reduced because of the reasons mentioned above. Contrary to bands A-C, the C 2s 
band  D  at  the  bottom  of  the  valence  band  exhibit  dispersion  from  the  Ef  as  the  C-
content increases. The energy shift of the C 2s states towards the Ef indicates different 
Ti-C bonding in the MXenes than in the reference sample TiC. Furthermore, the Ti-C 
bond strength in Ti2C-Tx appears to be different than in Ti3C2-Tx, which probably is 
because of thinner layers and additional interfaces. The valence band spectra of Ti2C-
Tx  and Ti3C2-Tx show,  in  addition  to  bands  A-D,  structures  around  4.5,  5.6,  and  8.9 
eV,  which  probably  originate  from 
the termination groups on the Ti2C 
and  Ti3C2  surfaces.  In  order  to 
obtain  a  deeper  understanding  and 
interpretation  of  the  nature  of  the 
the 
spectral  band  features  and 
influence of termination groups, we 
compare 
the  measured  valence 
band  spectra  to  calculations  with 
different components. 

the 

spectra 

Generally, 

Figure  3  shows 
reference 
carbide  material  TiC  together  with 
modeled 
using  DFT 
calculations as described in section 
2.3.  Ultraviolet 
photoemission 
spectra  (UPS)  of  bare  and  -O 
covered  TiC  are  also  shown  for 
reference at the top (dotted curves) 
[18,20,21]. 
the 
in  good 
calculated  peaks  are 
agreement  with  the  experimental 
spectra.  For  comparison,  the  UPS 
after 
spectra 
oxygenation  [18]  of  clean  TiC  are 
well reproduced by the calculations 
at  the  bottom  of Fig.  3.  UPS  has  a 
photoemission  cross-section  more 
suitable for probing the Ti 3d states 
close  to  the  Ef.  Generally,  a  high 
density  of  states  (DOS)  at  the 
Fermi  level  (EF)  is  correlated  to 
low  resistivity  and  we  note  that  there  are  states  at  the  Ef  indicating  that  TiC  is  a 
conductor (resistivity 2.5 µWm [6]), although there are also other issues that affect the 
transport  properties  [3,19].  Adsorption  of  oxygen  at  the  TiC  surface  gives  rise  to  a 
peak at ~6 eV in the UPS spectrum. However, the adsorption site of oxygen on a TiC 
surface  is  known  to  depend  on  the  surface  cutting  (100  or  111)  [19,20].  For 

Figure  4:  Valence  band  XPS  spectra  of  Ti2C-Tx 
before  and  after  Ar+  sputtering  of  the  surface.  DFT 
calculations  with  -O,  -OH  and  -F  termination  groups 
at different adsorption sites (O on Ti and C as well as 
bridge  position) and bare Ti2C and TiO2  oxide  in  the 
form of anatase are shown below.  

before 

and 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

comparison, N on a TiN surface prefers to adsorb on top of N rather than on top of Ti 
[21].  Our  DFT  calculations  show  that  O  adsorbed  on  top  of Ti  would  give  rise  to  a 
band at 16 eV due to Ti 3d – O 2s hybridization and this band would not occur in the 
case of O adsorbed on C. As the XPS spectra in Figure 3 do not exhibit this band we 
conclude  that  oxygen  probably  does  not  adsorb  on  top  of  Ti  for  TiC.  It  is  also 
observed  that  the  O  2p  band  position  in  the  calculations  changes  between  6-8  eV 
depending on the bond length between the surface and the adsorbate.  

Figure  4  shows  Ti2C-Tx  MXene  together  with  calculated  spectra  with  different 
termination  groups  and  adsorption  sites.  Bare  Ti2C  is  predicted  to  be  metallic  with 
more Ti 3d states at Ef than Ti2AlC [12]. Peaks that are associated with bands from –
O and –F termination species are indicated with I and II, respectively. When –F and –
OH  surface  termination  groups  are  included  in  the  calculations,  new  bands  are 
formed. Generally, the calculations predict that there are states at Ef except for pure –
O  termination  that  gives  a  semiconductor  with  a  bandgap  of  ~0.24  eV  [12],  as 
indicated  in  Fig.  4.  Experimentally,  Ti2C-Tx  has  a  resistivity  of  68  µW.m  [3,22,23]. 
Bands  A  and  B  are  essentially  the 
same  as  for  TiC.  Theoretically,  the 
positions  of  bands  I  (5-7  eV)  and  II 
(8-10  eV)  corresponding  to  O  2p  and 
F  2p  states,  respectively,  strongly 
depend  on  both  the  adsorption  site 
the  –Tx 
and 
species.  

the  bond 

length 

to 

length 

arrows 

the  calculated 

spectra, 
indicate 

the 
For 
horizontal 
the 
relatively large span of band positions 
that  occur  for  different  Ti-Tx  bond 
lengths.  Generally,  a  longer  (weaker) 
Ti-Tx  bond  length  for  a  particular 
structure  results  in  a  shorter  energy 
distance  from  the  EF  [7,8,19].  The 
calculated (relaxed) Ti-O bond length 
(~1.99  Å)  is  shorter  than  the  Ti-F 
bond 
is 
probably  related  to  the  difference  in 
the  number  of  2pn  valence  electrons 
and the difference in electronegativity 
between  O  and  F  that  causes  smaller 
in 
charge-transfer 
comparison  to  F  (~2e-)  from  Ti2C 
[11].  Theoretically, 
absolute 
energy positions of the O and F bands 
also  depend  on 
the  choice  of 
exchange  correlation  functional  [12] 
in the DFT calculations. 

(~2.15  Å).  This 

to  O 

(~1e-) 

the 

Figure  5:  Valence  band  XPS  spectra  of  Ti3C2-Tx 
before and after Ar+ sputtering of the surface. DFT 
calculations  with  -O,  -OH  and  -F  termination 
groups at different adsorption sites (O on Ti and C 
as well as bridge position) and bare Ti3C2 and TiO2 
oxide in the form of anatase are shown below.  

Figure  5  shows  Ti3C2-Tx  MXene  together  with  calculated  spectra  with  different 
adsorption sites and termination groups. Peaks that are associated with bands from –O 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

and –F terminations are indicated with I and II, respectively. As in the case of Ti2C-
Tx,  the  DFT  calculations  predict  bare  Ti3C2 MXene  to  be  metallic  with  finite  Ti  3d 
states at Ef. The DOS at Ef for bare Ti3C2 is higher than for the Ti3AlC2 parent MAX-
phase. Theoretically, the DOS at Ef increases with n [12] and for Ti3C2-Tx, there are 
always  states  at  Ef,  even  for  pure  –O  surface  groups.  Generally,  the  metallic 
properties weaken with increasing n as more Ti-C bonds are formed. Experimentally, 
the resistivity of the Ti3C2-Tx sample is ~5 µWm [3,23].  

Band I is the O 2p states and is located at 5-7 eV. The Ti-O hybridization appears to 
be weaker for Ti3C2-O than in the case of Ti2C-O based on intensity differences. Band 
II is associated with F 2p states and is located at 8-10 eV. As in the case of Ti2C-Tx 
MXene, the calculated positions of the O 2p and F 2p bands strongly depend both on 
the  –Tx  bond  length  and  the  absorption  site.  Recently,  calculated  predictions  have 
indicated  that  the  surface  groups  are  more  likely  located  in  hollow  adsorption  sites 
[11-13].  However,  the  exact  locations  of  the  surface  groups  are  complicated  and 
largely depend of the structure n and elements involved as well as temperature. Based 
on the difference in energy positions from the EF, the -F termination groups appear to 
be differently bonded to the surface than the –O termination species. 

4. Discussion 
Several  interesting  observations  are  obtained  from  the  valence  band  XPS  spectra 
shown  in  Figs.  2-5.  The  weight  of  the  peaks  and  their  energy  positions  give 
information  about  the  hybridization  regions  in  the  strength  of  the  chemical  bonds 
between  the  containing  elements  that  affect  mechanical  properties  such  as  ductility 
and elasticity. The valence band XPS data show intensity redistributions of the C 2s 
states  between  9  and  11  eV  at  the  bottom  of  the  valence  band.  The  intensity 
redistributions might suggest a weaker Ti-C bond strength in Ti2C-Tx than in Ti3C2-Tx 
and TiC. However, in the calculations, the C 2s peak appear at 9.2-10 eV for TiC, at 
10.1-10.7 eV for Ti3C2 and 10.2-10.9 eV for Ti2C.  

Generally,  a  weaker  bond  in  one  direction  is  compensated  by  a  stronger  bond  in 
another  direction  [8,19].  This  has  previously  been  observed  by  strengthening  of  the 
Ti-C bond as the Al-layer is inserted in the MAX-phases e.g., Ti2AlC [6], Ti3AlC2 [7]. 
A strengthening of the covalent Ti-C bond in MAX-phases compared to TiC was also 
theoretically  confirmed  by  balanced  overlap  population  analysis  [9,10],  where  the 
distance  from  the  Ef  and  the  intensity  of  the  overlap  determines  the  strength  of  the 
bond. For example, the Ti-Al overlap appears closer to the Ef in comparison to Ti-Si 
and Ti-Ge overlaps, signifying a weaker covalent bond. In analogy, the bare MXenes 
Ti2C  and  Ti3C2  without  surface  groups  would  have  stronger  Ti-C  bonds  than  the 
corresponding MAX-phases Ti2AlC (2.102 Å), Ti3AlC2 (2.086 Å) and TiC (2.164 Å). 
However,  surface  groups  of  MXenes  withdraws  charge  from  the  Ti-C  bonds  of  the 
conductive carbide core and, thus, weakens these bonds, which affect the C 2s - Ti 3d 
hybridization  region  at  the  bottom  of  the  valence  band.  As  shown  by  the  intensity 
redistributions in the C 2s - Ti 3d hybridization region towards the Ef, the Ti-C bond 
is lengthened in Ti2C-Tx compared to Ti3C2-Tx. This may affect both the transport and 
elastic properties of the MXene materials. 

More interestingly, our DFT calculations show that the positions of the O 2p and F 2p 
bands  strongly  depend  both  on  the  adsorption  sites  and  bond  lengths  to  the  surface 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

groups. This implies that the bond strength can be modified to optimize the elasticity. 
Moreover, moving the bands is useful to tailor-make the catalytic ability and surface 
oxidation  resistance  for  different  MXenes  by  the  choice  of  transition  elements  and 
termination species. Ti in Ti2C likely has a higher oxidation state than Ti in Ti3C2 due 
to  more  interfaces  and  functional  groups (-OH,  -O  and  -F). Theoretical  modeling  of 
different adsorption sites show that adsorption sites close to Ti gives higher oxidation 
states  for  Ti  than  for  adsorption  sites  close  to  C.  However,  the  surface  groups  may 
also adsorb in bridge positions or with bonds in an angle relative to the surface plane 
rather than straight on top of Ti and C [13]. 

Generally, the calculated spectra on top of Ti than on top of C in Fig. 4 and 5 appear 
to be in better agreement with the experimental data. Thus, the peak structures in the 
calculations indicate that adsorption on top of Ti may be more likely than adsorption 
on top of C. However, there may be other more energy favorable adsorption sites such 
as  bridge  and  hollow  sites  that.  Recent  ground  state  calculations  (neglecting 
temperature  effects  such  as  phonons)  indicate  that  -F  may  first  adsorbs  in  a  hollow 
position  in  a  FCC  arrangement  vis-à-vis  the  other  atoms  in  the  structure  [11-13], 
while -O is more “itinerant” and may adsorb either on the same hollow site position if 
it is empty from –F or otherwise at other adsorption sites. Based on these predictions, 
other  adsorption  sites  than  on-top  sites,  such  as  bridge  and  hollow  sites  should  be 
worth further investigation.  

In MAX-phases, like in TiC and TiN, there are metal bonds and covalent bonds with 
ionic character that depend on the electronegativity of the constituent elements. As in 
the case of MAX-phases, the chemical bonding in the conductive carbide core of the 
MXenes is dominated by covalent bonds. However, the transition metal oxide surface 
has  more  ionic  character  in  the  chemical  bonds.  By  changing  the  surface  groups,  it 
may become possible to modify the bond strength by changing the ionicity and tailor 
these  materials  with  desired  macroscopic  properties  such  as  conductivity  and 
magnetism [19]. Generally, a high density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level (EF) is 
correlated with low resistivity but there are also other issues that affect the transport 
properties [19]. In particular, the resistivity is higher in Ti2C (68µW.m) than in Ti3C2 
(5µW.m) [23] but the DOS is similar at the EF and calls for deeper structural analysis. 
Contrary  to  bare  MXene  that is  metallic,  terminated  MXene  may  become  a  narrow-
band  gap  semiconductor  material.  It  is  therefore  of  fundamental  interest  for  the 
development of semiconductor components to be able to tune the electronic properties 
to achieve a direct band gap. 

Generally,  MXenes  are  explored  for  many  potential  applications  such  as  anodes  in 
lithium-ion  batteries,  supercapacitors  and  in  catalysis  [2,3,4].  This  is  because  of  the 
2D nature of the material with a large surface area and good thermal conductivity [24] 
in the conductive carbide core of the MXenes. Furthermore, according to the “d-band 
center  theory”  [25],  the  valence  band  maximum  can  be  modified  to  optimize  the 
catalytic ability for different MXenes. In this way, the electronic band filling and thus 
the  position  of  the  3d  or  4d-band  can  be  moved  by  the  choice  of  transition  metal. 
Moreover,  the  surface  chemistry  of  MXenes  can  be  changed  by  using  different 
termination  species  to  optimize  different  surface  reactions.  Here,  we  point  out  the 
possibilities of influencing the d-band structure by the choice of layer thickness, n. In 
addition,  the  choice  of  transition  elements  in  the  conductive  carbide  core  of  the 
MXene  in  combination  with  a  choice  of  different  termination  species.  Up  to  now, 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

only  the  O/F  ratio  can  be  tuned  in  the  synthesis  process  by  changing  the  etching 
parameters such as acid, concentration and etching time on MAX-phases. However, it 
is not known how to freely tune termination species or how to produce bare or pure 
MXene with only one type of termination species. 

However, all aged carbide samples may contain TiO2 on the surface that largely affect 
the electronic structure and make valence band XPS studies difficult. In addition, Ar+ 
sputtering  of  the  samples  will  remove  termination  groups  and  simply  damage  or 
destroy the surface of the studies MXene samples. Furthermore, a decreasing oxygen 
signal  at  the  surface  was  monitored  by  the  O  1s  XPS  peak.  Still  the  valence  band 
spectra  suggest  that  there  is  a  significant  contribution  from  oxidized  Ti.  The  reason 
suggests being that as the valence band XPS spectra have a larger probe depth (~20 
Å) than the O 1s XPS spectra (~15 Å) and the plane distances in MXenes are about 10 
Å,  the  oxygen  contribution  in  the  valence  band  spectra  (after  sputtering)  originates 
from atomic layers below the surface that are not detectable by O 1s XPS. Moreover, 
for  the  photoemission  energy  of  the  valence  band  spectra,  oxygen  has  three  times 
higher  photoionization  cross-section  than  carbon. Thus, for  TiC,  the  origin  of  “band 
C” after sputtering is because of the higher sensitivity of oxygen in combination with 
the large probe depth. 

Although  this  study  was  made  on  aged  cold-pressed  powder  samples  to  emphasize 
problems associated with oxidation of MXene, interesting information is obtained by 
valence band XPS. The higher intensity for Ti3C2 MXene at ~9 eV can be associated 
with  a  higher  fraction  of  the  -F  termination  in  comparison  to  Ti2C  MXene.  This  is 
consistent  with  core-level  XPS  studies  that  provide  information  about  relative 
fractions  of  the  termination  groups  [14].  However,  more  systematic  spectroscopy 
measurements  in  comparison  to  calculated  spectra  is  needed  to  clarify  this  issue. 
Future  studies  may  involve  in-situ  preparation  of  thin-film  samples  to  avoid  surface 
oxides  to  more  clearly  isolate  spectrum  features  related  to  the  termination  groups. 
From a computational point of view, we also emphasize a suitable choice of exchange 
correlation functional to model band gaps and realistic peak structures close to the EF. 
Structural  models  often  include  one  termination  species  while  in  reality,  there  is  a 
mixture  of  termination  species  that  may  have  a  combined  effect  on  stability  and 
properties. Future more advanced models may include photoemission matrix elements 
and cross section effects as well as temperature effects and phonon stabilization.  

Thus,  there  are  many  remaining  challenges  for  MXene  to  be  useful  in  potential 
applications.  We  anticipate  that  spectroscopies  such  as  X-ray  absorption,  resonant 
photoemission  and  angular-resolved  photoemission  spectroscopy  (ARPES)  will  be 
useful  tools  to  identify  the  details  of  the  bonding  of  the  surface  groups  at  the 
interfaces. For TiC surfaces, the photoionization cross section vary considerably with 
incident  photon  energy  as  best  observed  using  synchrotron  radiation.  By  taking 
advantage  of  polarized  and  tunable  synchrotron  radiation,  a  better  insight  into  the 
origin  of  the  atomic  orbitals  through  detailed  energy-dependent  cross  section  and 
depth analysis may be obtained.  

5. Conclusions 
Valence-band X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of Tin+1Xn-Tx MXenes can be used to 
probe  changes  in  Ti-C  bond  strength  of  the  conductive  carbide  core  that  depend  on 
the  carbon  content  and  atomic  layer  thickness.  The  effect  of  the  termination  groups 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

and  especially  how  they  withdraw  charge  from  the  Ti-C  carbide  bonds  in  the 
conductive core layers can also be studied. As shown, the energy positions of the O 
2p (~6 eV) and F 2p (~9 eV) bands strongly depend both on the adsorption sites and 
the bond lengths to the surface groups. However, a prerequisite for a qualitative study 
is  that  the  samples  are  free  from  oxidized  material,  i.e.  the  samples  must  be  freshly 
made in operando, and Ar+ sputtering must be avoided. 

6. Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank M. Barsoum for fruitful discussions. This work was supported 
by  the  Swedish  Research  Council  (VR)  Linnaeus  Grant  LiLi-NFM,  the  FUNCASE 
project  supported  by  the  Swedish  Strategic  Research  Foundation  (SSF).  MM 
acknowledges financial support from the Swedish Energy Research (no. 43606-1), the 
Swedish  Foundation  for  Strategic  Research  (SSF)  (no.  RMA11-0029)  through  the 
synergy  grant  FUNCASE  and 
(CTS16:303, 
CTS14:310).  We  would  like  to  express  our  thanks  to  the  reviewers  of  the  present 
work for very insightful and helpful comments. 

the  Carl  Tryggers  Foundation 

7. References 
[1]   S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, 

I. V. Grigorieva, A. A. Firsov; Science 306, 666 (2004).  

[2]   M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. 

Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum; Adv. Mater. 23, 4248 (2011). 

[3]   M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi 

and M. W. Barsoum; ACS Nano 6, 1322 (2012). 

[4]   M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi; Adv. Mat. 26, 

992 (2014). 

[5]   M. W. Barsoum; Prog. Solid State Chem. 28, 201 (2000). 
[6]   M. Magnuson, O. Wilhelmsson, J.-P. Palmquist, U. Jansson, M. Mattesini, S. 

Li, R. Ahuja, and O. Eriksson; Phys. Rev. B 74, 195108 (2006).(cid:0)   
[7]   M. Magnuson, J.-P. Palmquist, M. Mattesini, S. Li, R. Ahuja, O. Eriksson, J. 
Emmerlich, O. Wilhelmsson, P. Eklund, H. Högberg, L. Hultman, and U. 
Jansson; Phys. Rev. B 72, 245101 (2005).(cid:0)   

[8]   M. Magnuson, M. Mattesini, O. Wilhelmsson, J. Emmerlich, J.-P. Palmquist, S. 
Li, R. Ahuja, L. Hultman, O. Eriksson, and U. Jansson; Phys. Rev. B 74, 
205102 (2006). 

[9]   M. Magnuson, M. Mattesini, S. Li, C. Höglund, M. Beckers, L. Hultman, and 

O. Eriksson; Phys. Rev. B 76, 195127 (2007).(cid:0)   

[10]   M. Magnuson, O. Wilhelmsson, M. Mattesini, S. Li, R. Ahuja, O. Eriksson, H. 
Högberg, L. Hultman and U. Jansson; Phys. Rev. B 78, 035117 (2008).(cid:0)   
[11]   M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, C.-Y. Chung, N. S. Venkataramanan, M. 
Estili, Y. Sakka and Y. Kawazoe; Adv. Func. Mat. 23, 2185 (2013).  

[12]   Y. Xie and P. R. C. Kent; Phys. Rev. B 87, 235441 (2013).  
[13]   Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen; J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 16909 (2012).  
[14]   J. Halim, K. M. Cook, Michael Naguib, Per Eklund, Yury Gogotsi, Johanna 

Rosen, M. W. Barsoum; Appl. Surf. Sci. 362, 406 (2016). 
[15]   G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller; Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996). 
[16]   P. E. Blöchl; Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994). 
[17]   J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof; Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996). 
[18]   S. V. Didziulis, K. D. Butcher and S. S. Perry; Inorg. Chem. 42, 7766 (2003). 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Elec. Spec. 224, 27-32 (2018) 

[19]  M. Magnuson and M. Mattesini; Thin Solid Films. 621, 108-130 (2017). 
[20]   S. V. Didziulis, J. R. Lince, T. B. Stewart and E. A. Eklund;	Inorg. Chem. 33, 

1979 (1994). 

[21]   S. V. Didziulis and K. D. Butcher; Coordination Chem. Rev. 257, 93 (2013).  
[22]   C. Tholander, B. Alling, F. Tasnádi, J.E. Greene, L. Hultman; Surf. Sci. 630, 28 

(2014). 

[23]  M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, 

and M. W. Barsoum; ACS Nano 6(2) 1322–1331 (2012). 

[24]   X. Li, G. Fan and C. Zeng; Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 39, 14927 (2014).  
[25]   B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, in Impact of Surface Science on Catalysis, 

Advances in Catalysis, Academic Press 45, 71-129 (2000). 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
