Prepared for submission to JINST

Ion backﬂow studies with a triple-GEM stack with

increasing hole pitch

P. Bhattacharyab L.A.S. Filhoa L.E.F.M. Françaa

H. Natal da Luza,1
aInstituto de Física da Universidade de São Paulo
Rua do Matão 1371, 05508-090 Cidade Universitária, São Paulo, Brasil
bDepartment of Particle Physics and AstroPhysics, Weizmann Institute of Science, 234 Herzl St., Rehovot,
Israel

E-mail: hugonluz@if.usp.br

Abstract: Gas Electron Multipliers have undergone a very consistent development since their
invention in 1997. Their production procedures have been tuned in such a way that nowadays it is
possible to produce foils with areas of the order of the square meter that can operate at a reasonable
gain, uniform over large areas and with a good stability in what concerns electrical discharges. For
the 3rd run of LHC, they will be included in the CMS and ALICE experiments after signiﬁcant
upgrades of the detectors, conﬁrming that these structures are suitable for very large experiments.
In the special case of Time Projection Chambers, the ion backﬂow and the energy resolution are
sensitive issues that must be addressed and the GEM has shown to be able to deal with both of them.
In this work, a stack of three GEMs with diﬀerent pitches has been studied as a possible future
approach for ion backﬂow suppression to be used in TPCs and other detection concepts. With this
approach, an ion backﬂow of 1 % with an energy resolution of 12 % at 5.9 keV has been achieved
with the detector operating in an Ar/CO2 (90/10) mixture at a gain of ∼ 2000.

Keywords: Micro Pattern gaseous detectors (MSGC, GEM, THGEM, RETHGEM, MHSP, MI-
CROPIC, MICROMEGAS, InGrid, etc); Avalanche-induced secondary eﬀects; Charge transport
and multiplication in gas

ArXiv ePrint: 1803.09382

1Corresponding author.

8
1
0
2

n
u
J

1

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

2
v
2
8
3
9
0
.
3
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

1

Introduction

2 Experimental setup
2.1 Basic principle
2.2 The detector

3 Results and discussion

3.1 Experimental results
3.2 Simulations

4 Conclusions

1

Introduction

1

2
2
4

5
7
9

14

Gas Electron Multipliers (GEM) [1, 2] and other Micropattern Gaseous Detectors, such as the
MICROMEGAS [3] and Thick-GEMs [4] became established technologies for very large detectors
and their use is foreseen for upgrades in some High Energy Physics experiments, such as ALICE [5],
CMS [6] or COMPASS [7]. The choice for this type of detectors is related to their cost per unit of
sensitive area, moderate energy and position resolution and other less obvious – although important
– eﬀects, such as their intrinsic ion backﬂow (IB) suppression. IB is the ﬂow of the positive ions
resulting from the electron avalanches in the gas in the direction of the drift region. The presence
of these ions in the drift region of the detector gives origin to distortions in the electric ﬁeld that in
most of the cases should be uniform. Not every detector concept is sensitive to IB but, for example,
in Time Projection Chambers (TPC) the reconstruction of particle tracks relies on the assumption
that the drift ﬁeld is uniform to estimate the x, y, z position of each voxel. Depending on the amount
of IB, the position and speciﬁc energy loss (dE/dx) resolution can be compromised.

There have been consistent and successful studies for the optimization of GEM geometries and
high-voltage parameters to reduce the IB enough to make these structures suitable for their use in
a continuously operated TPC, which is a technological breakthrough, increasing its performance
in terms of event rate capability [8–10]. In case of the ALICE TPC upgrade the geometry studies
converged to a cascade of four GEMs where the ﬁrst and the last ones use a standard 140 µm hole
pitch and the two in between have a hole pitch of 280 µm. The experiment requires IB below 1 % and
energy resolution below 12 % at 5.9 keV (σ/E). The chosen geometry fulﬁlled the requirements
with a gas mixture of Ne/CO2/N2 (90/10/5) and speciﬁc HV settings. The large amount of degrees
of freedom in the high voltage parameters gives a very good ﬂexibility for this setup, specially due to
the fact that the operational conditions that optimize the IB without exceedingly compromising the
energy resolution demands voltage conﬁgurations that are usually less stable in terms of discharge
probability.

– 1 –

Despite the advantages of the quadruple GEM, it is interesting to address and compare the
performance of a simpler, triple GEM stack. Therefore, we tried to beneﬁt from the collection
and extraction eﬃciencies of GEMs with diﬀerent hole pitches to optimize the IB suppression of
this stack. The work described in this paper studied the performance of a triple GEM stack where
each of the three GEMs have a diﬀerent pitch, operating in an Ar/CO2 (90/10) mixture. The work
consisted of laboratory measurements and numerical simulations using Garﬁeld [11].

2 Experimental setup

Throughout this text, the detector is described with the cathode on top with the electrons moving
down towards the anode. The nomenclature of the ﬁelds follow the standard used in this type of
detectors. The ﬁeld above the stack, where the radiation is absorbed and the primary eletrons drift
towards the ﬁrst GEM is the drift ﬁeld, and the ﬁeld below the stack where the electrons are pulled
towards the anode is the induction ﬁeld. The ﬁeld between two GEMs is the transfer ﬁeld and can
be called the extraction ﬁeld (Eextr) of the GEM at the top or the collection ﬁeld (Ecoll) of the GEM
at the bottom. The GEMs in a stack are numbered from top to bottom.

2.1 Basic principle

The working principle proposed for this GEM stack is based on two important concepts related to
the GEM: the collection eﬃciency and the extraction eﬃciency.

The collection eﬃciency is deﬁned as the fraction of free electrons drifting towards the GEM
that enter the holes. The ability of the GEM to focus the electrons towards the holes depends on the
ratio between the drift ﬁeld (the ﬁeld above the GEM) and the ﬁeld inside the holes. At moderate
drift ﬁelds, just enough to prevent the recombination of the ion pairs, the drift electric ﬁeld lines
are mostly focused to the holes of the GEM. In this setup, most of the electrons in the drift region
are able to reach the holes and the collection eﬃciency is close to unity. If the drift electric ﬁeld is
increased with respect to the GEM voltage, the ﬁeld lines will curve towards the GEM holes closer
to the GEM copper surface. Above a certain threshold, some of the ﬁeld lines will no longer curve
towards the holes, ending on the copper surface between them. As a consequence, some of the
electrons in the drift region are lost to the copper surface, resulting in a continuous reduction of the
collection eﬃciency as the drift ﬁeld further increases [12]. To restore the collection eﬃciency, the
voltage across the GEM must be increased (with the consequent increase of its absolute gain) [13].
It is relatively simple to understand that if the hole pitch is larger, the threshold in the drift ﬁeld for
collection eﬃciency reduction will be at a lower drift ﬁeld [12] due to the smaller ratio between the
area of the holes and the whole area of the GEM (deﬁned here as the optical transparency), and the
opposite happens for smaller pitch. Ref. [14] shows a comparative study of the anode current as the
drift ﬁeld changes for GEMs and Thick-GEMs of diﬀerent hole pitch.

After being multiplied, the electrons must be pulled out of the holes. Some of them will be
collected on the bottom copper surface of the GEM and some of them will make their way through
the induction ﬁeld towards the anode. The extraction eﬃciency is deﬁned as the fraction of electrons
leaving the GEM and reaching the anode plane. The extraction depends on the ratio between the
induction ﬁeld (below the GEM) and the ﬁeld inside the holes. When the voltage across the GEM
is kept constant, at low induction ﬁelds, most of the electric ﬁeld lines leaving the holes are curved

– 2 –

back to the bottom copper surface of the GEM, resulting in a very small number of electrons
reaching the anode. An increase of the induction ﬁeld will bring these lines closer to the anode
before they bend and more electrons reach the anode, increasing the extraction eﬃciency more or
less linearly. Again, above a certain threshold, the induction ﬁeld is so high that there are no more
lines bending from the holes towards the bottom surface of the GEM. In this regime, the current
in the anode continues to increase at a smaller rate, partly due to the increase of the extraction
eﬃciency and partly due to the inﬂuence of the induction ﬁeld in the ﬁeld inside the GEM holes,
which increases its absolute gain [12]. Eventually, at some even higher ﬁeld, the current increases
again at a higher rate due to the onset of Townsend avalanches also in this region. The threshold
will also move for lower induction ﬁelds when the hole pitch is larger and the opposite will happen
for smaller pitch.

For the case of ions, the same eﬀect takes place, but coming from below the GEM in the
opposite direction. Taking that into account, the way to increase the stream of electrons extracted
from one GEM while reducing the number of ions in the opposite direction is to increase the
induction ﬁeld. In fact, as seen before, the electron extraction eﬃciency increases while the amount
of ions entering the holes from below decreases. However, in a GEM stack, although the transfer
ﬁeld is the extraction ﬁeld of the GEM on the top, it is the collection ﬁeld of the GEM at the bottom,
which means that the advantages of increasing this ﬁeld to improve the extraction from the ﬁrst
GEM will be lost by the loss of collection eﬃciency on the second GEM. The results relating the
electron transparency with the optical transparency [12] suggest that using a second GEM with a
smaller pitch, the ﬁeld can go higher while keeping the collection eﬃciency close to unity.

A very good model describing these eﬀects and their consequences, including parametrization
of both the collection and extraction eﬃciencies can be found in [15]. The ratio between both is
described in terms of the external ﬁeld and the ﬁeld inside the holes of the GEMs:

X
C

=

1

Topt

Eext
Eh

,

(2.1)

where Topt is the optical transparency of the GEM, deﬁned here as the ratio between the area of
the holes and the total area of the GEM, Eext and Eh are the external ﬁeld and the ﬁeld inside
the holes of the GEM. X and C are the extraction and collection eﬃciencies, for ions/electrons
and electrons/ions, according to the side to which Eext refers to. The extraction and collection
eﬃciencies can be represented as X + and C+ for ions and X − and C− for electrons. For example,
the eﬀective gain of a single GEM detector is given by:

Geﬀ = C−Gabs X −,

(2.2)

where Geﬀ and Gabs are the eﬀective and absolute gain, respectively. By deﬁnition, the IB is the
number of positive ions reaching the cathode (Ni) per number of electrons reaching the anode (Ne).
For a triple GEM stack, this can be expressed in terms of the extraction and collection eﬃciencies
for ions and electrons (X ±
i

) and the absolute gain (Gi) of each GEM:

and C±
i

I B = Ni
Ne

=

1 G1 X +
C+
Np · C−

1 · C+
1 G1 X −

2 G2 X +
1 · C−

2 · G3 X +
2 · C−

3 + Np
3 G3 X −
3

2 G2 X −

,

(2.3)

– 3 –

1 G1 X −

where C−
GEM stack and Np is the number of primary electron-ion pairs.

3 G3 X −

2 G2 X −

2 · C−

1 · C−

3 , from the denominator, is the eﬀective gain Geﬀ of a triple

Reorganizing and replacing according to equation 2.1, naming the external ﬁelds following the

convention of GEM detectors, one gets:

I B = X+
1
C−
1

· C+
1
X−
1

· X+
2
C−
2

· C+
2
X−
2

· X+
3
C−
3

·

1
NpX−
3

· + 1
Geﬀ

(2.4)

= 1
Topt1

Edrift
Eh1

· Topt1

Eh1
Etrans1

·

1
Topt2

Etrans1
Eh2

· Topt2

Eh2
Etrans2

·

1
Topt3

Etrans2
Eh3

·

1
NpX−
3

· + 1

Geﬀ ,

where Edrift is the ﬁeld in the drift region, Ehi is the ﬁeld inside the holes of GEM i, Etransi is the
transfer ﬁeld below GEM i and Topti is the optical transparency of GEM i. Simplifying the whole
expression results in:

I B =

Edrift
Topt3Eh3Np X −
e

+

1

Geﬀ

.

(2.5)

This expression conﬁrms the well known eﬀects of how the IB increases by increasing the
magnitude of the drift ﬁeld or by decreasing the gain in GEM-like detectors. It also shows that
for the same eﬀective gain of the detector, increasing the absolute gain of the last GEM will help
reducing the IB, which is somehow expected, since this means the absolute gain of the GEMs closer
to the cathode must be reduced, reducing the number of ions in that region.

It is also very interesting how the optical transparency of the last GEM can also have a great
inﬂuence in blocking the ions. This is the main principle exploited in this work. In fact, by using
three GEMs with increasing optical transparency, it is possible to apply transfer ﬁelds that provide
a high electron extraction eﬃciency from one GEM, while still providing a high electron collection
eﬃciency in the following one.

2.2 The detector

The experimental setup used for this study is shown in ﬁg. 1. A triple GEM stack was mounted
using 50 µm thick GEMs built at CERN with hole pitch 280 µm (LP, top GEM), 140 µm (S, middle
GEM) and 90 µm (SP, bottom GEM). The cathode was made of a copper clad 50 µm Kapton™ foil.
The drift, transfer 1 and 2, and induction gaps were 7.2, 2.2 and 1.6 mm thick, respectively. The
readout was composed of 120 10 × 8.2 mm2 pads covering the whole 10 × 10 cm2 area of the GEMs.
An Ar/CO2 (90/10) gas mixture was used in open ﬂow at a rate around 6 l/h. To generate the
electrons inside the drift gap, either an 55Fe radioactive source or an Amptek Mini-X silver target
X-ray tube were used.

The detector was biased using seven independent high voltage channels from CAEN VME
power supplies, through loading resistors connected to the top electrode of each GEM and grounding
resistors that protected the GEMs in case of electrical discharge, draining the excess current to the
ground instead of forcing it into the HV supply.

The current in the anode was measured with a Keithley 6517b electrometer and the current
in the cathode was measured with a ﬂoating femtoamperemeter developed at CERN within the
RD51 collaboration. In the femtoamperemeter, an operational ampliﬁer measures the voltage at a
silicon diode, allowing to measure currents over a very wide range. It was calibrated by plotting

– 4 –

the currents measured by the electrometer against the voltage supplied by the diode, read by a
Fluke Scopemeter 124 handheld oscilloscope. To supply the currents, the cathode was biased with
a positive voltage while ions were collected on the top electrode of the ﬁrst GEM, when the gas
was irradiated by X-rays. The charge pre-ampliﬁer, shaping ampliﬁer, logic and ADC for the pulse
height distributions were all standard nuclear instrumentation NIM and CAMAC modules. The
pulse height distributions and the current measurements were performed simultaneously by reading
the current induced through a coupling capacitor. The measurements of the current were tested also
without the capacitor and the values were the same, excluding the possibility of charge sharing.
The IB and the energy resolution measurements were done simply by interchanging the two X-ray
sources, keeping the voltage settings.

It is known that high ion space-charge charge density in the drift region near the GEM inﬂuence
systematically the IB [22]. This charge density aﬀects mainly the ions. The currents measured in
the cathode Idrift were around 100 pA. Since the X-ray source was collimated by a 2 mm diameter
hole and the drift gap had a length of 7.2 mm, the areal charge density σQ (given by the product of
the charge density ρ by the drift length d) is given by [22]:

σQ = Idrift · d
A · vion

,

(2.6)

where A is the area covered by the X-ray beam and vion is the ion drift velocity for the electric ﬁeld
and the gas mixture used. Assuming a drift velocity of 450 cm s−1 for argon ions in Ar-CO2 with a
ﬁeld of 300 V/cm, the areal charge density is around 5 pC/cm2, below the 104 fC/cm2 measured as
the limit above which there is a strong decrease in the measured IB. The typical counting rate was
around 1 kHz/cm2, well under the limit for which the high charge densities start aﬀecting the gain
in a GEM [23].

The gain, tuned to 2000 ± 50 throughout all the scans, was measured by counting the rate of
the Kα peak of the manganese line from the 55Fe radioactive source to obtain the primary current
and correcting the anode current to remove the small contribution of the argon escape peak. This
gain was used as a reference in order to have a comparison term with the baseline settings of
ALICE, which is the most systematic study carried out so far, with all parameters unambiguously
described [5].

3 Results and discussion

Figure 2 shows a pulse height distribution obtained with a 55Fe radioactive source, with the detector
operating at gain 2000. Although the energy resolution (σE), deﬁned as the ratio between the stan-
dard deviation and the centroid of a gaussian distribution ﬁtted to the pulse height distribution, does
not depend only on the hole size distribution uniformity, the reliability of the GEMs manufactured
at CERN nowadays is well known and the areal non-uniformity for small foils (10 × 10 cm2) such as
the ones used in this work does not seam to play an important role. In fact, even without collimating
the X-ray source, it was possible to achieve a very satisfactory resolution. The settings used for this
pulse height distribution were not optimized for ion backﬂow suppression.

– 5 –

Figure 1. Experimental setup. The GEM stack is composed of three GEMs with pitch 280 µm, 140 µm and
90 µm. The gain and the energy resolution were measured using a 55Fe radioactive source.

Figure 2. Pulse height distribution from an 55Fe source, with the detector operating at a charge gain 2000.
This distribution was obtained with a non collimated source placed on the detector Kapton™ window (∼1 cm
from the cathode). It shows a very good resolution for this gain regime, demonstrating the good quality of the
GEMs manufactured at CERN. The main peak was ﬁt with two gaussians, corresponding to the Kα and Kβ
at 5.9 and 6.5 keV, respectively. The smaller peak is the argon escape peak and was ﬁtted with two gaussians
centered in the K-lines minus the argon absorption edge. The voltages are not optimized for IB suppression.

– 6 –

3.1 Experimental results

The energy resolution and ion backﬂow are two properties that are competing against each other.
Figure 3 depicts the energy resolution for IB values obtained with diﬀerent high voltage settings in
this experimental setup. The data points were measured by scanning the voltage of the ﬁrst GEM
in the stack (the LP GEM), while tuning the gain by changing the voltage of the last GEM. None of
the other voltages was optimized for IB suppression, but it clearly shows that decreasing the voltage
of the ﬁrst GEM to reduce the IB has the eﬀect of increasing the energy resolution and vice versa.
The decrease of the IB as the voltage in the last GEM increases is understood from eq. 2.5. In fact,
by increasing the voltage in the last multiplication stage while decreasing it in the ﬁrst GEM the
IB is reduced due to the smaller number of ions in its holes — they are mostly concentrated in the
last GEM and must drift through the ﬁrst two GEMs in a stack before reaching the drift region. A
drawback is the deterioration of the energy resolution in optimal IB conditions.

Figure 3. ∆VLP and ∆VSP scan. Since the gain was kept constant, when ∆VLP increased, ∆VSP decreased and
vice-versa. The ratio ∆VLP/∆VSP is shown as the secondary x-axis to show that the ion backﬂow increases by
decreasing ∆VSP. The ion backﬂow and the energy resolutions are two competing properties and, in this scan,
whenever one of them improves, the other worsens. This is not necessarily true for all the parameters.

In GEM detectors, each multiplication or transfer stage is introducing statistical ﬂuctuations
that deteriorate the resolution. The charge collected in the anode of a triple GEM stack is given by:

Q = NpeGeﬀ1Geﬀ2Geﬀ3,

(3.1)

where N is the number of electrons from the primary cloud, e is the electron charge and Geﬀ1, Geﬀ2
and Geﬀ3 are the eﬀective gains of GEMs 1, 2 and 3, as shown in eq. 2.2.

Assuming the gain of each GEM independent from the others and from the number of primary
electrons, one can estimate the detector energy resolution from the charge, applying the error
propagation formula to eq. 3.1:

(cid:19) 2

=

(cid:18) σQ
Q

(cid:18) σNp
Np

(cid:19) 2

+

(cid:18) σG1
G1

(cid:19) 2

+

(cid:18) σG2
G2

(cid:19) 2

+

(cid:19) 2

.

(cid:18) σG3
G3

(3.2)

– 7 –

The absolute gain of each GEM is the average of the multiplication factor of each independent

avalanche A:

Gi =

1

Ni

Ni(cid:213)

j=1

Aji,

i = 1, 2, 3

(3.3)

where Ni is the number of electrons available for multiplication in GEM i: N1 = Np, N2 = NpG1
and N3 = NpG1G2. Using the error propagation formula again, this time on eq. 3.3, one gets:

σ2
Gi

=

(cid:18) 1

(cid:19) 2 Ni(cid:213)

Ni

j=1

σ2
A j i

σ2
Gi

=

1

Ni

σ2
Ai

Finally, equation 3.2 can be written by:

(cid:19) 2

(cid:18) σQ
Q

= F
Np

+

1

Np

(cid:18) σA1
G1

(cid:19) 2

+

1

NpG1

(cid:19) 2

+

(cid:18) σA2
G2

1

NpG1G2

(cid:19) 2

,

(cid:18) σA3
G3

(3.4)

(3.5)

where F = σ2
/Np is the Fano factor accounting for diﬀerences between the observed ﬂuctuations in
Np
the number of primary electrons and those predicted by Poisson statistics. Equation 3.5 demonstrates
that changing the gain of GEM 1 has much more inﬂuence on the energy resolution than changing
the gain of any other GEM.

The term

(cid:19) 2

+

(cid:18) σA1
G1

1

G1

(cid:18) σA2
G2

(cid:19) 2

+

1

G1G2

(cid:19) 2

,

(cid:18) σA3
G3

accounts for the variance in the size of single electron avalanches. It is known that at the electric
ﬁeld regimes of proportional counters, the probability distribution of the number of electrons
resulting from single electron avalanche has a deviation from the exponential behavior, being more
accurately described by a Polya distribution [24, 25]. This eﬀect has been noticed and studied in
GEM based [26] detectors and also in MICROMEGAS [27] showing that MPGD have an improved
intrinsic energy resolution thanks to their non exponential single electron response.

Equation 3.5 shows that to improve the energy resolution it is advisable to increase the gain
in the ﬁrst GEM. As mentioned before, this will automatically aﬀect IB. However there are other
parameters that can be tuned which can improve either the energy resolution (or IB), without
degrading IB (or energy resolution). In fact, as it can be seen in ﬁg. 4, by applying a high ﬁeld
in the ﬁrst transfer region, between GEMs LP and S and a low ﬁeld in the second transfer region,
between GEMs S and SP, it is possible to minimize the IB, without signiﬁcantly changing the
energy resolution. This has been noticed before in other geometries, and related with the need
of applying the highest gain in the last multiplication stage stage [28, 29], including the ALICE
base line conﬁguration [5]. The energy resolution is kept constant because the losses in collection
eﬃciency from one GEM are compensated by the gains in the extraction eﬃciency from the previous
GEM, giving origin to a long plateau with constant energy resolution. This is one of the expected
consequences of using GEMs with decreasing pitch. The most probable reason for the decrease of
the ion backﬂow when the second transfer ﬁeld is decreased is, in one hand, the very poor collection

– 8 –

Figure 4. Scans of the electric ﬁeld in both transfer regions (Etrans1: between GEMs LP and S and Etrans2:
between GEMs S and SP). The best settings for ion backﬂow reduction are when Etrans1 is highest and Etrans2
is lowest. The energy resolution does not change considerably. Discussion in the text.

of ions in the holes of the LP GEM, due to the high ﬁeld and, on the other hand, the poor extraction
of the ions generated in the SP GEM.

Finally the voltage in the S GEM, in the middle of the stack was scanned, keeping the eﬀective
gain constant, with a constant ∆VLP/∆VSP ratio. Figure 5 shows again that while the energy resolution
remains constant over a wide range of voltages, the ion backﬂow drops to a plateau of optimal values
between 200 and 300 V. The increase of ion backﬂow for lower voltages can be explained by the
need to increase both ∆VSP and ∆VLP. This increases the number of ions generated in the ﬁrst GEM
(LP) which can drift to the cathode. For higher voltages, the collection eﬃciency of the few ions
extracted from the SP GEM is close to unity and these are very well extracted from the S GEM due
to the high ﬁeld in the ﬁrst transfer region. This can explain the increase of the ion backﬂow for
voltages higher than 300 V in the S GEM.

By optimizing the transfer ﬁelds, several ∆VLP/∆VSP scans were again performed for diﬀerent
voltages in the S GEM, to try to reduce the values of the curve of ﬁgure 3. Figure 6 shows the
diﬀerent scans of ∆VLP/∆VSP performed changing the voltage of the S GEM. As expected, as the
voltage in the second GEM was close to the values in the plateau, the curves approached the optimal
values for IB suppression and energy resolution. It can be seen that for voltages of 280 and 300 V
it was possible to obtain an ion backﬂow around 1 % and an energy resolution of 12 %.

3.2 Simulations

In conjunction with the experimental measurements presented in this work, Garﬁeld simulation
framework [11] has been used to estimate the energy resolution and ion backﬂow fraction for the
present conﬁguration and have been compared with the available experimental data. The 3D electro-
static ﬁeld simulation has been carried out using neBEM (nearly exact Boundary Element Method)
toolkit [16, 17]. Besides neBEM, HEED [18, 19] has been used for primary ionization calculation
and Magboltz [20, 21] for computing drift, diﬀusion, Townsend and attachment coeﬃcients.

The model of a basic GEM cell built using Garﬁeld, is shown in ﬁg. 7. It represents three
GEM foils, having bi-conical shaped holes which are placed in between the drift and the read-out

– 9 –

Figure 5. Scan of the S GEM. The energy resolution is kept constant, but the ion backﬂow has an optimal
value plateau between 200 and 300 V. Discussion in the body text.

Figure 6. ∆VLP/∆VSP scans performed at diﬀerent voltages applied in the second GEM, after optimizing the
transfer ﬁelds. It was possible to reach an ion backﬂow around 1 % and an energy resolution around 12 %.

plane. The ﬁrst GEM after the drift plane has the pitch of 280 µm, whereas the second and third
foils have the pitch of 140 and 90 µm, respectively. The central holes of the basic units from all the
three GEM foils are perfectly aligned. The basic cell structure then has been repeated along both
positive and negative X and Y-Axes to represent a real detector. With the help of these models, the
ﬁeld conﬁgurations of the detector have been simulated using appropriate voltage settings. These
are followed by the simulation of energy resolution and ion backﬂow fraction.

For estimating electron transmission within GEM detector, electron tracks generated by 5.9 keV
photons have been considered in the drift volume. The primary electrons created in the drift region
are then made to drift towards the GEM foil and produce avalanche inside the holes. For this

– 10 –

Figure 7. Model of the basic GEM cell used in the Garﬁeld simulations.

calculation Monte Carlo routine has been used. The procedure drifts the primary electrons from
their starting position towards the ﬁrst GEM. Once the ﬁeld is above the threshold of multiplication,
the avalanche starts. At each step, a number of secondary electrons is produced according to the
local Townsend and attachment coeﬃcients and the newly produced electrons are traced like the
initial electrons. More details of the MC routine used to simulate the avalanche can be found in [11].
In parallel, the ion drift lines are also traced. The primary ions in the drift region and the ions
created in the avalanche have been considered for the estimation of the backﬂow fraction.

As mentioned before, the backﬂow fraction is deﬁned as:

I B = Ni
Ne

,

where Ni and Ne are the number of ions collected on the drift plane and the number of electrons
collected in the read-out plane, respectively. The 5.9 keV photo-peak of the simulated charge
spectrum has been ﬁtted using a Gaussian distribution. The energy resolution has been estimated
from the mean and the sigma of this distribution.

The variation of the energy resolution and ion backﬂow fraction with ∆VLP and ∆VSP are shown
in ﬁgure 8, for a ﬁxed ∆VS = 300 V, as in the the experimental data. The large ampliﬁcation in
the ﬁrst GEM (LP) is the main cause of improvement of the energy resolution, as discussed in
section 2.1. On the other hand, the increase of the last GEM voltage is also suitable for getting low
backﬂow fraction. Although the simulation data for the energy resolution follow the experimental
trend, there is a clear discrepancy for the ion backﬂow data, where the simulated curve is roughly
four times higher than the experimental.

Reference [13] shows that the misaligned holes can aﬀect the backﬂow fraction by one order
of magnitude. This was also conﬁrmed in more recent works (for example [22]) and simulations

– 11 –

of a quadruple GEM stack [31]. The simulations were repeated with the S GEM shifted by 70 µm
in one direction, resulting in misaligned holes. The results obtained are also depicted in the plots
and show a 10-fold change in the ion backﬂow fraction, bringing the simulated curve closer to
the experimental results. This suggests that the main reason for the discrepancy between the
experimental and simulated ion backﬂow results is related to the misalignment of holes in the
experimental setup. In fact, besides the impossibility of perfectly align the holes, the ﬁrst GEM in
the stack (LP) is rotated by 90◦ with respect to the other two GEMs due to geometrical constraints
of the chamber.

Figure 8. Ion backﬂow fraction and energy resolution obtained with simulation data and compared with the
experimental data shown in the previous section. The plot also shows the result obtained when the S GEM
is shifted by 70 µm in the simulation. Discussion in the body text.

Figure 9 shows the correlation between the energy resolution and ion backﬂow fraction. As
expected from the previous plots, the results are comparable to the experimental ones when the
simulated geometry has the holes of the GEM in the middle misaligned, whereas there is a large
discrepancy for the case of aligned holes.

To try to understand what is happening in the detector, the collection and extraction eﬃciencies
(C− and X −, respectively) as well as the fraction of ions captured in each GEM should be taken into
account. In ﬁgure 10 it is possible to see how the electron collection and extraction eﬃciencies in
each GEM vary as the voltages of the LP and SP GEMs change, with the voltage of the S GEM
and the transfer ﬁelds optimized. At this point of optimization, the values of the eﬃciencies do
not change considerably. This means that the IB is now much more inﬂuenced by the gain of each
GEM.

However, by looking at the data in the perspective of the variation of the product of the electron
collection eﬃciency with the extraction eﬃciency (C− · X − or Gabs/Geﬀ according to equation 2.2)
as they cross the GEMs, in the optimal voltage settings, it is clear that the already mentioned high
voltage settings, where the ﬁrst transfer ﬁeld must be high and the second must be low, results
in a high electron transmission in the ﬁrst and third stages and a very low transmission in the
intermediate stage, as shown in ﬁg. 11. The fraction of ions blocked in each GEM with respect to
the total number of ions generated in the avalanches is listed in table 1. Besides showing that only
a very small fraction of ions (just below 1 %) is not blocked, it is clear that the great majority of

– 12 –

Figure 9. Energy resolution and ion backﬂow fraction obtained with simulation data and compared with the
experimental data shown in the previous section. The results obtained when the S GEM is shifted by 70 µm
in the simulation is also shown. Discussion in the body text.

Figure 10. Electron collection and extraction eﬃciencies (C− and X −, respectively) for the three GEM foils
as the voltages in the LP and SP GEMs are changed. The solid lines are the collection eﬃciency and the
dashed lines are the extraction eﬃciency.

ions is blocked already in the SP GEM, thanks to the very low ion extraction ﬁeld above the SP
GEM. The S GEM has a high ion collection ﬁeld (opposite to what happens with electrons) but the
amount of ions to be collected and extracted is already small. The LP GEM blocks the remaining
few ions, including those coming from the S GEM.

The very low fraction of ions (with respect to the total number of ions) that reach the cathode
suggests that it is the transmission of electrons that must be improved to achieve better IB suppres-
sion. Figure 11 shows there is a clear bottleneck in the S GEM. A structure in the place of the S

– 13 –

GEM 1 (LP)
GEM 2 (S)
GEM 3 (SP)
Total

0.0450
0.0396
0.9055
0.9905

Table 1. The fraction of ions blocked by each GEM foil with respect to the total number of ions produced in
the detector.

GEM allowing to keep the same ﬁelds above and bellow while providing a high transmission of
electrons, even at a reduced gain in charge, would be a breakthrough, reducing even more the IB
fraction in gaseous detectors, eventually without the need of misaligning the holes.

Figure 11. The product of the collection eﬃciency by the extraction eﬃciency for electrons for the optimal
case of 1 % IB and 12 % σ/E in each GEM foil.

4 Conclusions

This proposed geometry for ion backﬂow suppression using a stack of three GEMs has been able
to reduce the ﬂow of ions towards the absorption region to about 1 %, while the energy resolution
was kept below 12 %, operating at a gain of 2000.

The simple model described in subsection 2.1 has suggested the advantage of using a GEM
with a higher transparency in the last multiplication stage to reduce the ion backﬂow. Based on
that, with the proposed setup we try to take advantage of decreasing hole pitch between the GEMs
which would allow to tune the transfer ﬁelds at magnitudes promoting a good extraction eﬃciency
while keeping a high collection eﬃciency in the subsequent stage. This would mean that the second
transfer ﬁeld should be higher than the ﬁrst. This did not happen and the settings that satisfy the
condition for low ion backﬂow and good energy resolution are those already known and proposed
in other studies: one transfer stage with a very high electron extraction eﬃciency (and consequently

– 14 –

low ion collection), followed by a transfer stage with a low ﬁeld, providing a high electron collection
eﬃciency (and low ion extraction). This is what happens in the transfer zones, suggesting that one
of the functions of the S GEM is to provide this transition from high electric ﬁeld to a smaller one.
Another important feature, also already known and conﬁrmed in this study, is the importance
of the misalignment of the holes between diﬀerent GEMs. The diﬀerent GEM pitch can promote a
larger misalignment, with the result of a smaller ion backﬂow. This can also be considered as an
advantage of this setup. Nevertheless, the fact that the energy resolution was kept constant for a
transfer ﬁeld range larger than usual means that the transfer to a GEM with a smaller pitch is playing
an important role.

One of the constraints of this study was to keep the charge gain of the detector near 2000. This
value is relatively small compared to what has been achieved with triple GEM stacks, suggesting
that the stability of the system against discharges might not be an issue. However, a dedicated study
must be carried out to assess the stability of this system and compare it with the existing solutions.
One possible disadvantage can be the fact that the last GEM, with a smaller pitch, has a larger
number of holes, where discharges due to defects are more likely to occur. The voltages scanned in
the ﬁrst (LP) and last (SP) GEMs to build the curve from ﬁgure 9 were 230 to 280 V for the ﬁrst and
310 to 365 for the third GEM foils. These values are well within the range of stable operation of
GEMs. For comparison, other large experiments, such as COMPASS and LHCb, have been using
triple GEM stacks for several years as high rate trackers, optimized for stability. These GEM based
detectors operate at gains well above 2000 and use voltages much higher than the ones reached in
this work for the IB and energy resolution optimization (410, 274 and 328 V for GEMs 1, 2 and 3
in COMPASS [32] and 415 for the three GEMs in LHCb [33]).

Future work will consist on studying if it is possible to divide the transfer regions into a
ﬁrst zone with high electric ﬁeld increasing the extraction of electrons, followed by a zone with
a low ﬁeld to focus the electrons into the holes of the next GEM. This setup would have the
opposite behavior for ions, allowing for a system that would strongly suppress ion backﬂow, without
jeopardizing the energy resolution. The division can be made replacing the S GEM, in the middle,
by a dense conductive mesh. Preliminary tests are under way and results will be described in a
future publication.

Acknowledgments

H. Natal da Luz acknowledges grant 2016/05282-2, São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP).
L.A.S. Filho acknowledges grant 2016/23355-7, São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP). This
work has partly been performed in the framework of the RD51 Collaboration. We wish to acknowl-
edge the members of the RD51 Collaboration for their help and suggestions.
We thank our respective Institutions for providing us with the necessary facilities.

References

[1] F. Sauli, GEM: A new concept for electron ampliﬁcation in gas detectors, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 386

(1997) 531–534.

– 15 –

[2] F. Sauli, The gas electron multiplier (GEM): Operating principles and applications, Nucl. Instr. Meth.

A 805 (2016) 2 – 24.

[3] Y. Giomataris, P. Rebourgeard, J. Robert and G. Charpak, Micromegas: a high-granularity

position-sensitive gaseous detector for high particle-ﬂux environments, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 376
(1996) 29–35.

[4] A. Breskin, R. Alon, M. Cortesi, R. Chechik, J. Miyamoto, V. Dangendorf et al., A concise review on

{THGEM} detectors, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 598 (2009) 107 – 111.

[5] The ALICE TPC Upgrade Collaboration, Upgrade of the ALICE Time Projection Chamber, Tech.

Rep. CERN-LHCC-2013-020. ALICE-TDR-016, CERN LHC; ALICE, Oct, 2013.

[6] A. Colaleo, A. Safonov, A. Sharma and M. Tytgat, CMS Technical Design Report for the Muon

Endcap GEM Upgrade, Tech. Rep. CERN-LHCC-2015-012. CMS-TDR-013, CERN LHC; CMS,
Jun, 2015.

[7] M. Alexeev, R. Birsa, F. Bradamante, A. Bressan, M. Chiosso, P. Ciliberti et al., Hybrid MPGD-based

detectors of single photons for the upgrade of COMPASS RICH-1, .

[8] ALICE TPC collaboration, P. Gasik, Development of GEM-based Read-Out Chambers for the

upgrade of the ALICE TPC, JINST 9 (2014) C04035.

[9] ALICE collaboration, S. Biswas, ALICE TPC upgrade for High-Rate operations. ALICE TPC

upgrade for High-Rate operations, PoS ICPAQGP2015 (Nov, 2015) 094. 5 p.

[10] A. Deisting for the ALICE Collaboration, Status of the R&D activities for the upgrade of the ALICE

TPC, arXiv:1601.02183 (2016) .

[11] R. Veenhof, Garﬁeld, a drift chamber simulation program, Conf. Proc. C9306149 (1993) 66–71.

[12] S. Bachmann, A. Bressan, L. Ropelewski, F. Sauli, A. Sharma and D. Mörmann, Charge ampliﬁcation

and transfer processes in the gas electron multiplier, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 438 (1999) 376.

[13] F. Sauli, L. Ropelewski and P. Everaerts, Ion feedback suppression in time projection chambers, Nucl.

Instr. Meth. A 560 (2006) 269.

[14] H. Natal da Luz, F.A. Souza, M. Moralles, N. Carlin, R.A.N. Oliveira, M. Bregant, A.A.P. Suaide,

J.F.D. Chubaci, M. Matsuoka, T.F. Silva, M.V. Moro, C.L. Rodrigues and M.G. Munhoz,
Characterization of multilayer Thick-GEM geometries as 10B converters aiming thermal neutron
detection, EPJ Web of Conf. 174, 01012 (2018).

[15] M. Killenberg, S. Lotze, J. Mnich, S. Roth, R. Schulte, B. Sobloher et al., Modelling and

measurement of charge transfer in multiple gem structures, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 498 (2003) 369 – 383.

[16] S. Mukhopadhyay and N. Majumdar, A nearly exact Boundary Element Method, online at

http://cern.ch/neBEM

[17] N. Majumdar and S. Mukhopadhay, Simulation of 3D electrostatic conﬁguration in gaseous detectors,

JINST 2 (2007) P09006.

[18] I.B. Smirnov, Interactions of particles with gases, online at http://cern.ch/heed.

[19] I.B. Smirnov, Modelling of ionization produced by fast charged particles in gas, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A

554 (2005) 474

[20] S. Biagi, Magboltz — Transport of electrons in gas mixture, online at http://cern.ch/magboltz.

[21] S. F. Biagi, Monte Carlo simulation of electron drift and diﬀusion in counting gases under the

inﬂuence of electric and magnetic ﬁeld, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 421 (1999) 234.

– 16 –

[22] M. Ball, K. Eckstein and T. Gunji, Ion backﬂow studies for the ALICE TPC upgrade with GEMs,

JINST 9 (2014) C04025.

[23] F. Resnati et al., Eﬀects of high charge densities in multi-GEM detectors, arXiv:1512.04968 (2015)

[24] J. Byrne, Statistics of electron avalanches in the proportional counter, Nucl. Instr. Meth. 74 (1969)

291.

[25] H. Genz, Single electron detection in proportional gas counters, Nucl. Instr. Meth. 112 (1973) 83.

[26] A. László, G. Hamar, G. Kissa and D. Varga, Single electron multiplication distribution in GEM

avalanches JINST 11 (2016) P10017.

[27] T. Zerguerras, B. Genolini, V. Lepeltier, J. Peyre, J. Pouthas and P. Rosier, Single-electron response

and energy resolution of a Micromegas detector, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 608 (2009) 397.

[28] B. Ketzer, A time projection chamber for high-rate experiments: Towards an upgrade of the ALICE

TPC, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 732 (2013) 237

[29] V. Ratza, M Ball, M. Liebtrau and B. Ketzer for the ALICE TPC Collaboration, Characterization of a
hybrid GEM-Micromegas detector with respect to its application in a continuously read out TPC, EPJ
Web of Conf. 174, 01016 (2018).

[30] G. Charpak, R. Bouclier, T. Bressani, J. Favier, and C. Zupancić. Use of multiwire proportional

counters to select and localize charged particles, Nucl. Instr. Meth. 62(3):262, 1968.

[31] P. Bhattacharya, B. Mohanty, S. Mukhopadhyay, N. Majumdar and H. N. da Luz, 3D simulation of
electron and ion transmission of GEM-based detectors, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 870 (2017) 64.

[32] C. Altunbas at al., Construction, test and commissioning of the triple-gem tracking detector for

compass, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 490 (2002) 177

[33] Alessandro Cardini, Giovanni Bencivenni and Patrizia De Simone, The Operational Experience of the
Triple-GEM Detectors of the LHCb Muon System: Summary of 2 Years of Data Taking, IEEE
NSS/MIC Proceedings, 759, 2012

– 17 –

