Broadband spectroscopy of thermodynamic magnetization ﬂuctuations through a
ferromagnetic spin-reorientation transition

A. L. Balk1, F. Li2,3, I. Gilbert4, J. Unguris4, N. A. Sinitsyn2, S. A. Crooker1
1National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
2Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
3Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA and
4Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA

We use scanning optical magnetometry to study the broadband frequency spectra of spontaneous
magnetization ﬂuctuations, or “magnetization noise”, in an archetypal ferromagnetic ﬁlm that can
be smoothly tuned through a spin reorientation transition (SRT). The SRT is achieved by laterally
varying the magnetic anisotropy across an ultrathin Pt/Co/Pt trilayer, from the perpendicular to
in-plane direction, via graded Ar+ irradiation. In regions exhibiting perpendicular anisotropy, the
power spectrum of the magnetization noise, S(ν), exhibits a remarkably robust ν−3/2 power law
over frequencies ν from 1 kHz to 1 MHz. As the SRT region is traversed, however, S(ν) spectra
develop a steadily-increasing critical frequency, ν0, below which the noise power is spectrally ﬂat,
indicating an evolving low-frequency cutoﬀ for magnetization ﬂuctuations. The magnetization noise
depends strongly on applied in- and out-of-plane magnetic ﬁelds, revealing local anisotropies and
also a ﬁeld-induced emergence of ﬂuctuations in otherwise stable ferromagnetic ﬁlms. Finally, we
demonstrate that higher-order correlators can be computed from the noise. These results highlight
broadband spectroscopy of thermodynamic ﬂuctuations as a powerful tool to characterize the inter-
play between thermal and magnetic energy scales, and as a means of characterizing phase transitions
in ferromagnets.

Spontaneous magnetization ﬂuctuations can occur in
ferromagnetic materials, even in thermal equilibrium,
particularly when the magnetic anisotropy energy be-
comes comparable to or less than the available thermal
energy [1–7]. These intrinsic thermodynamic ﬂuctuations
encode valuable information about the magnetization dy-
namics of the system itself, because their frequency spec-
trum S(ν) is intimately and necessarily related to the dis-
sipative (imaginary) part of the magnetic susceptibility
χ(cid:48)(cid:48)(ν), in accord with the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theo-
rem [2, 8] (namely, χ(cid:48)(cid:48)(ν) ∼ ν
kB T S(ν), where kBT is the
thermal energy). Spectroscopy of this intrinsic “magneti-
zation noise” can therefore provide an alternative and en-
tirely passive means of measuring magnetization dynam-
ics, that does not require driving, exciting, or perturbing
the system away from thermal equilibrium – in contrast
to most conventional methods for measuring magnetic
resonance or ac susceptibility.

A fascinating and technologically-relevant testbed in
which to study thermodynamic magnetization ﬂuctu-
ations are thin ferromagnetic ﬁlms, because magnetic
anisotropy energies can be readily engineered over a
very wide range via material choice and by growth
and post-processing conditions [9, 10]. This tunability
arises from the competition and delicate balance between
shape anisotropy (which generally favors in-plane mag-
netic alignment) and interfacial anisotropy (which can
favor out-of-plane magnetic alignment for certain ma-
terial combinations). Especially interesting are ﬁlms
in which the total magnetic anisotropy is continuously
tuned to and through zero, by laterally varying either
the ﬁlm’s thickness [11, 12] or its degree of interfacial
In this case the ﬁlm can exhibit a
disorder [13, 14].

spin-reorientation transition (SRT) [15–18] wherein the
direction of ferromagnetic ordering transitions from out-
of-plane (perpendicular) to in-plane. In perpendicularly-
magnetized ﬁlms with small net anisotropy, it is well es-
tablished that the combination of exchange and dipolar
energies leads to the formation of maze-like patterns of
magnetic domains [19, 20], as observed and studied ex-
tensively in ultrathin ﬁlms of (Fe/Ni)/Cu [21–23], Co/Pt
[24–26], and CoFeB [27]. As the SRT is approached
and the net magnetic anisotropy is reduced to zero, it
has recently been observed that these domain patterns
begin to ﬂuctuate markedly in time. These thermody-
namic magnetization ﬂuctuations have been measured by
electron microscopy [23, 28–30], magneto-optic Kerr ef-
fect (MOKE) [25, 31], x-ray scattering [32], and trans-
port [33], revealing spatial correlations, topological ef-
fects, suceptibilities, and higher-order anisotropy. How-
ever, timescales of these measurements are typically slow,
being limited to >1 ms. Fluctuations at frequency scales
faster than 1 kHz were not resolved. However, the full
frequency spectrum of these ﬂuctuations contains rich
information about the distributions of relaxation rates
and the evolution of the anisotropy landscape through
the SRT, which provide important insight for developing
theoretical models.

To address this need and to complement these re-
cent studies, here we develop a fast optical magnetome-
ter to investigate the broadband frequency spectrum of
thermodynamic magnetization ﬂuctuations in ferromag-
netic ﬁlms that are smoothly tuned through a SRT. Us-
ing Pt/Co/Pt trilayers with laterally-graded magnetic
anisotropy, we ﬁnd that the frequency spectrum of the
magnetization noise, S(ν), exhibits a remarkably robust

8
1
0
2

r
a

M
2

]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
2
6
9
0
0
.
3
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
ν−3/2 power law from 1 kHz to 1 MHz in regions ex-
hibiting perpendicular magnetization, indicating a broad
distribution of ﬂuctuation rates. However as the SRT re-
gion is traversed, S(ν) develops a steadily-increasing crit-
ical frequency (ν0) below which the noise tends towards
spectrally ﬂat, indicating a minimum relaxation rate that
becomes increasingly fast through the SRT. The magneti-
zation ﬂuctuations also depend strongly on applied mag-
netic ﬁelds, which can be understood within the context
of the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem and from consider-
ations of the magnetic free energy. Field-dependent maps
of the noise reveal detailed local magnetic anisotropies,
and ﬁeld-induced ﬂuctuations are found to emerge even
in trilayers with nominally stable perpendicular ferro-
magnetism. Finally we show that these methods can
be used to analyze higher-order noise correlations, which
can probe non-gaussian noise and time-reversal break-
ing eﬀects. These results demonstrate that broadband
optical detection of magnetization ﬂuctuations provides
a powerful and straightforward method for studying the
subtle interplay between thermal energy and magnetic
anisotropy that can drive phase transitions in ferromag-
nets, and in particular the spin-reorientation transition
in ultrathin ﬁlms.

Pt/Co/Pt trilayers with laterally-graded magnetic
anisotropy

Figure 1a depicts the experiment and samples. The
samples are Ta(3.8 nm)/Pt(3.9 nm)/Co(0.8 nm)/Pt(1.9
nm) ultrathin ferromagnetic ﬁlms sputtered on Si sub-
strates under high vacuum conditions. Conventional
polar MOKE measurements of the average out-of-plane
magnetization (mz versus Bz) conﬁrm that the as-grown
ﬁlms have perpendicularly-oriented magnetization, with
approximately square hysteresis loops and coercive ﬁelds
µ0Hc ≈ 2 mT. To tune the magnitude and direction
of the net magnetic anisotropy, we irradiate the sam-
ples with a laterally-varying dose of low-energy (100 eV)
Ar+, which generates disorder and reduces the interfa-
cial (perpendicular) magnetic anisotropy [13]. The net
magnetization direction that results from the competi-
tion between interfacial and shape anisotropy is there-
fore oriented out-of-plane ((cid:107) ±ˆz) on regions of the sam-
ple with lower disorder, but switches to in-plane orien-
tation (⊥ ˆz) on sample regions with higher disorder, as
depicted. Between these regions the spin reorientation
transition occurs.

Shown below the cartoon of the trilayer is a mag-
netic contrast image of the surface of a laterally-graded
Pt/Co/Pt trilayer (obtained via MOKE), showing the
maze-like magnetic domain patterns that exist at B=0
in its fully relaxed and demagnetized state. Dark and
bright domains correspond to out-of-plane magnetiza-
tion oriented along +ˆz and −ˆz, respectively. As also

2

observed in many prior studies of ultrathin ferromag-
nets [21, 23, 29, 31], the characteristic size of the do-
mains decreases as the SRT region is approached and
the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy is reduced. Near
the SRT, the images become increasingly blurry as ther-
modynamic ﬂuctuations of the domain walls increase and
become faster than the image acquisition rate (typically
video-rate, or ≈30 Hz [25, 29, 31], but as fast as 1 kHz
in recent work by Kronseder [30]). Our goal is to mea-
sure the relevant timescales and frequency distributions
of these magnetization ﬂuctuations over a much broader
range of timescales and deep into (and through) the SRT,
where the temporal resolution of imaging techniques can
be limited.

Figure 1b shows conventional polar MOKE measure-
ments of mz(Bz) across the sample, conﬁrming the
graded magnetic anisotropy: The open hysteresis loops
become narrower as perpendicular anisotropy is reduced,
and the coercive ﬁeld µ0Hc → 0 as the SRT is ap-
proached. Near the SRT, no hysteresis is observed and
the low-ﬁeld magnetization is eﬀectively linear (constant
susceptibility dmz/dBz), indicating that the trilayer is
able to relax to an equilibrium maze domain pattern on
a timescale faster than the (slow) sweep rate of the the
applied ﬁeld Bz. Beyond the SRT the magnetization di-
rection switches to in-plane and mz is suppressed.

Optical spectroscopy of magnetization ﬂuctuations

To detect and quantify the broadband magnetization
ﬂuctuations that exist in thermal equilibrium in these
Pt/Co/Pt trilayers, we developed a real-time optical
noise magnetometer based on polar MOKE. A linearly-
polarized probe laser (632.8 nm, ≈1 mW) is focused
to a small (4 µm diameter) spot on the sample, which
in turn is mounted on an x-y positioning stage for lat-
eral scanning. This arrangement exclusively measures
stochastic magnetization ﬂuctuations in the out-of-plane
direction, δmz(t), which impart a ﬂuctuating Kerr rota-
tion δθK(t) on the reﬂected probe laser that is detected
using balanced photodiodes. The resulting noise signal
δθK(t) ∝ δmz(t) is continuously digitized, processed, and
averaged in real time. Typically we compute and analyze
S(ν), the power spectral density of the ﬂuctuation signal.
That is, S(ν) = (cid:104)a(ν)a∗(ν)(cid:105) where a(ν) is the Fourier
transform of δmz(t) and the brackets indicate an average
over repeated measurements. Equivalently, S(ν) is the
real Fourier transform of the second-order (two-point)
time correlator (cid:104)δmz(0)δmz(t)(cid:105).
Importantly, we note
that this setup also allows for measurement and analysis
of higher-than-second order noise correlators, as demon-
strated in the last section.

The measurement bandwidth is determined by the
speed of the photodetectors and digitizers. For these
Pt/Co/Pt trilayers we use low-noise detectors and am-

3

FIG. 1. a) Experimental schematic: A scanning broadband optical magnetometer based on polar MOKE measures the sponta-
neously ﬂuctuating out-of-plane magnetization δmz(t) within a small (4 µm) spot on the sample. The power spectral density
of this magnetization noise, S(ν), is continuously computed and averaged in real time. The sample is a Pt/Co/Pt trilayer
irradiated with a laterally-varying dose of Ar+, generating a gradient of interfacial magnetic anisotropy. Red and blue dots
depict Co and Pt atoms; arrows depict the net magnetization direction, with yellow arrows indicating the region where the
spin reorientation transition (SRT) occurs. The magnetic contrast image of the trilayer (adapted from [31]) surface shows the
maze-like domain patterns that form in graded trilayers of this type. The patterns become blurry near the SRT as ﬂuctuations
increase and occur faster than the image acquisition time. b) Conventional magnetization measurements mz(Bz) show that
the coercive ﬁeld µ0Hc → 0 as the SRT is approached. c) Characteristic Kerr rotation ﬂuctuations, δθK (t), reveal the thermo-
dynamic magnetization ﬂuctuations δmz(t). d) S(ν) falls as a ν−3/2 power law over the measured 1 kHz to 1 MHz range in
regions of the trilayer exhibiting perpendicular magnetization. Discussion of measurement uncertainties in this and subsequent
ﬁgures can be found in the Supplemental Material.

√

√

pliﬁers with frequency response of several megahertz.
The spectral density of the measured Kerr rotation is
small, typically below 1 µrad/
Hz. The fundamental
photon shot noise of the probe laser itself contributes
Hz of (white) background noise; this con-
∼50 nrad/
stitutes the dominant source of non-magnetic noise at
frequencies above a few hundred hertz. This shot noise
can be mitigated by signal averaging and background
subtraction. At lower frequencies, acoustic noise and
mechanical vibrations limit accurate recovery of small
magnetization ﬂuctuations. Unless otherwise noted, we
therefore restrict detailed analysis to frequencies ν >
1 kHz. These methods are adapted from studies of “op-
tical spin noise spectroscopy” in atomic vapors and semi-
conductors, which are typically based on Faraday rota-
tion at much higher (MHz) frequencies [34–37].

Figure 1c shows an example of the spontaneous magne-
tization ﬂuctuations δmz(t) that are measured in thermal
equilibrium at an out-of-plane region of the Pt/Co/Pt tri-
layer, at room temperature (T =295 K) and without any
applied magnetic ﬁeld. The induced Kerr rotation sig-
nal, δθK(t), ﬂuctuates in time about zero with a typical
standard deviation of several microradians. Figure 1d
shows the corresponding power spectral density of this
magnetization noise, S(ν), averaged over many minutes.

Strikingly, S(ν) exhibits a very robust power-law decay
over the frequency range from ν=1 kHz to 1 MHz, falling
as ν−α where α (cid:39) 3/2. As shown below, this power-law
exponent is very robust and is independent of changes
in magnetic anisotropy, temperature, and small applied
magnetic ﬁelds B.

In general, power law dynamics indicate that a system
cannot be characterized by a single timescale but rather
exhibits a broad distribution of relaxation and ﬂuctu-
ation timescales [38–40]. Given that many magnetic
domains and ﬂuctuating domain walls are simultane-
ously probed within the focused laser spot, it is therefore
worthwhile to ask what distribution of timescales or re-
laxation rates might generate the measured S(ν) ∼ ν−3/2
noise spectrum.

In a simple case, consider a system comprising many
independent simple ﬂuctuators, each characterized by
a single exponentially-decaying correlation time τi (i.e.,
(cid:104)m(0)m(t)(cid:105) ∼ e−t/τi).
Individually, each ﬂuctuator
therefore contributes a Lorentzian power spectral den-
sity, Si(ν) ∼ 1/(ν2 + γ2
i ), to the total measured noise
spectrum; that is, Si(ν) is approximately ﬂat up to the
characteristic relaxation rate γi = τ −1
before falling oﬀ
as ν−2 at high frequencies. In this case the total noise
spectrum is the weighted sum of many Lorentzians [40],

i

where the weight is determined by the distribution, D(γ),
of ﬂuctuators having characteristic relaxation rate γ:

S(ν) ∝

(cid:88)

i

1
ν2 + γ2
i

≈

(cid:90) γmax

γmin

D(γ)
ν2 + γ2 dγ.

(1)

The distribution D(γ) determines the functional form
of S(ν), and the upper and lower cutoﬀs prevent diver-
gences. If D(γ) itself follows a power-law D(γ) ∝ γ−β,
then S(ν) ≈ ν−(β+1) for γmin (cid:28) ν (cid:28) γmax. Note that if
D(γ) is truncated below some minimum relaxation rate
γmin, then S(ν) will deviate from a pure power law and
will tend towards spectrally ﬂat at low frequencies below
γmin, as will become relevant in the next section. More-
over, if D(γ) is truncated above a maximum rate γmax,
then S(ν) will eventually decay as ν−2 at high frequen-
cies. Therefore the ν−3/2 noise spectrum measured in
Fig. 1d is (at least) consistent with an ensemble of sim-
ple ﬂuctuators with distribution D(γ) ∝ γ−1/2. Further-
more, no signature of γmin or γmax is evident in the data –
at this location on the sample these limits clearly lie well
below and above our measured frequency range, respec-
tively. While clearly an oversimpliﬁcation –ferromagnets
are, after all, correlated systems and are not composed of
independent ﬂuctuators– these arguments help to provide
a basis for understanding how changes in the functional
form of S(ν) can emerge.

A broad distribution of relaxation rates can be ex-
pected in ultrathin ferromagnetic ﬁlms due to micro-
scopic variations of the magnetic exchange, anisotropy,
and dipolar energies. In particular, these variations can
be caused by a spatially disordered magnetic energy land-
scape arising from the interface roughness, which can
be comparable to ﬁlm thickness.
Indeed, a disordered
magnetic energy forms the basis for a variety of statis-
tical models [41–43] which have been applied to under-
stand, e.g., the Barkhausen (magnetic switching) noise
that arises in ferromagnets that are driven by a changing
applied magnetic ﬁeld. Predictions and measurements
[44, 45] of the Barkhausen noise spectrum often yield
power laws with exponents in the range of −1.5 to −2, in
potential correspondence with the value of α determined
in our studies of purely thermodynamic (undriven) mag-
netization ﬂuctuations.

Laterally scanning through the SRT at ﬁxed
temperature

Having established a ν−3/2 power-law spectrum of
magnetic ﬂuctuations in a region of the trilayer exhibiting
out-of-plane ferromagnetism, we now explore the much
more interesting question of how the ﬂuctuation spec-
trum evolves when the net magnetic anisotropy is re-
duced through zero and the sample undergoes a SRT.
Figure 2 shows S(ν) as the probe laser is scanned later-

4

FIG. 2. a) Power spectra of the magnetization ﬂuctuations,
S(ν), at diﬀerent lateral positions x on the Pt/Co/Pt trilayer.
In regions with perpendicular magnetization, S(ν) ∝ ν−3/2.
Upon entering and traversing the SRT region, S(ν) develops
a steadily increasing critical frequency, ν0, below which the
noise tends toward spectrally ﬂat, consistent with an evolving
low-frequency cutoﬀ in the distribution of ﬂuctuation rates.
Empirically, all spectra can be ﬁt by S(ν) ∝ (ν + ν0)−3/2
(dashed lines). b) The integrated noise power, P = (cid:82) S(ν)dν,
exhibits a peak in the SRT region. Concomitantly, ν0 rapidly
increases through the measurement bandwidth (red points).

ally across the sample, beginning (on the left) at a re-
gion of low interfacial disorder and strong perpendicular
magnetic anisotropy, then moving through regions of in-
creasing disorder where the sample undergoes a SRT, and
ending (on the right) in the region of large disorder where
the magnetization orientation is in-plane. As discussed
in the previous section, Fig. 2a shows that S(ν) ∼ ν−3/2
in regions of perpendicular magnetization. As the probe
laser is scanned toward the SRT region and perpendicu-
lar magnetic anisotropy becomes weaker, S(ν) continues
to exhibit a robust ν−3/2 power law. However, the mag-
nitude of S(ν) and therefore also the integrated noise
power, P = (cid:82) S(ν)dν, increases signiﬁcantly. Given that
the thermal energy kBT is not changing, the increase in
thermodynamic ﬂuctuations is consistent with the reduc-
tion of magnetic anisotropy as the SRT is approached.

Crucially, the functional form of the magnetization

ﬂuctuation spectrum begins to evolve dramatically upon
entering the SRT region. As seen in Fig. 2a, S(ν) spec-
tra develop a critical frequency, ν0, below which the noise
power rolls oﬀ and tends toward approximately ﬂat. This
critical frequency increases rapidly as the SRT region is
traversed. Concomitantly, the integrated noise power
P markedly decreases. Beyond the SRT region, where
the magnetization is in-plane, ν0 exceeds the measure-
ment bandwidth and S(ν) is small and nearly frequency-
independent. Besides an overall scaling factor [34], we
emphasize that the spectral shape of S(ν) is not aﬀected
by the size of the laser spot.

Empirically, we ﬁnd that all these noise spectra can be
reasonably ﬁt over the measured frequency range to the
functional form S(ν) ∝ (ν + ν0)−3/2. Examples of the
ﬁts are shown by dashed lines in Fig. 2a. Although not
strictly physical [in principle, S(ν) should equal S(−ν)],
this ﬁtting allows us to better identify how the total noise
power P and the critical frequency ν0 evolve through the
SRT. Figure 2b shows how these parameters vary as a
function of the lateral position x across the sample. P
reaches a maximum at the location where the coercive
ﬁeld µ0Hc → 0. Near this point, ν0 begins to increase
rapidly through the measurement frequency range and P
is subsequently rapidly suppressed.

As discussed in the previous section, the presence of
ν0 is consistent with the development of a low-frequency
truncation, or minimum rate γmin, in the distribution
D(γ) of relaxation rates exhibited by the Pt/Co/Pt
ﬁlm. The slowest out-of-plane magnetization ﬂuctuations
δmz(t), with characteristic relaxation rate less than ν0,
are the ﬁrst to be suppressed upon entering the SRT re-
gion. As the SRT region is traversed and the magnetic
anisotropy is further reduced, this low-frequency cutoﬀ
increases rapidly through our measurement bandwidth,
after which point all out-of-plane ﬂuctuations are very
weak and the sample magnetization lies entirely in-plane.
These trends therefore provide a means of characteriz-
ing the loss of perpendicular magnetic order through the
spin-reorientation transition by the frequency distribu-
tion of the thermodynamic ﬂuctuations.

Temperature-tuning through the SRT

Because the SRT is deﬁned by the interplay between
magnetic anisotropy and thermal energy, we also can ex-
pect that the temperature T will have a signiﬁcant in-
ﬂuence on the location of the SRT on the sample [15–
17], and therefore on the magnetization ﬂuctuations mea-
sured at a ﬁxed location. This is conﬁrmed in Fig.
3, where S(ν) is measured at a ﬁxed location on the
Pt/Co/Pt ﬁlm as a function of T . Eﬀectively, changing T
moves the SRT region through the location of the probe
laser. We ﬁnd that S(ν) ﬁrst exhibits a ν−3/2 power law
across the measured 0.1 kHz to 200 kHz frequency range

5

FIG. 3. a) Magnetization noise spectra S(ν) at diﬀerent tem-
peratures T , measured at a ﬁxed location on the trilayer
that exhibits perpendicular magnetization at low tempera-
tures (T < 290 K), and in-plane magnetization at high tem-
peratures (T > 300 K). S(ν) exhibits robust ν−3/2 power-
law behavior at low T . With increasing T , S(ν) grows in
magnitude but then develops a steadily-increasing critical fre-
quency, ν0, below which the noise tends toward spectrally ﬂat.
Again, all spectra can be empirically ﬁt by S(ν) ∝ (ν+ν0)−3/2
(dashed lines). b) Integrated noise power P and critical fre-
quency ν0 versus T , indicating that the SRT region has been
temperature-tuned through the ﬁxed location of the probe.

at low T (where the magnetization is out-of-plane), then
follows a (ν + ν0)−3/2 dependence at intermediate T (in
the SRT regime), and ﬁnally evolves at high T towards
spectrally ﬂat and small (where the magnetization has
switched to in-plane).

The eﬀect of increased T on S(ν) at a ﬁxed loca-
tion is therefore eﬀectively equivalent to measuring dif-
ferent sample regions with increasing interfacial disorder
at ﬁxed T (as in Fig. 2), and again we ﬁnd that ν0 can
be used to characterize the SRT. It is also noteworthy
that the exponent of the power-law decay, α = −3/2, is
insensitive to T over the range of the experiment.

At other lateral positions on the sample with diﬀerent
net magnetic anisotropy, the SRT occurs at diﬀerent tem-
peratures. Qualitatively similar thermodynamic ﬂuctua-
tions are nonetheless obtained (albeit peaked at diﬀerent
temperatures), as shown in Supplemental Fig. S1. In all
cases studied, S(ν) ∝ ν−3/2 at low T , but develop an
increasing cutoﬀ frequency ν0 as T is increased through

the SRT.

Magnetization ﬂuctuations in applied out-of-plane
ﬁelds Bz, and relation to the susceptibility via the
ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem

Since the magnetization of these Pt/Co/Pt trilayers is
strongly ﬁeld-dependent, we next investigate how mag-
netization ﬂuctuations δmz(t) are inﬂuenced by applied
ﬁelds, beginning with the simplest case of purely out-of-
plane ﬁelds Bz. Here we expect that suﬃciently large
|Bz| will completely align and saturate the magnetiza-
tion mz along ±ˆz, thereby suppressing ﬂuctuations. For
reference, Fig. 4a shows the magnetization mz(Bz) at
a location near the SRT, as measured by conventional
polar MOKE using a very slow (quasi-static) ﬁeld sweep
rate of 22 µT/s. The magnetization exhibits no hystere-
sis and varies approximately linearly with Bz (indicating
a constant dc magnetic susceptibility), until it saturates
when |Bz| > Bsat, where Bsat (cid:39) 0.5 mT. The absence
of hysteresis indicates that at this location the trilayer
can relax to an equilibrium maze-like magnetic domain
pattern on timescales faster than the sweep rate of the
external ﬁeld.

Figure 4b shows a color surface map of the ﬂuctuation
spectra S(ν) versus ν and Bz, measured at the same loca-
tion. Note that S(ν) and ν are both shown on logarithmic
scales, so that equally-spaced contours indicate power-
law decays. For all small applied ﬁelds |Bz| < Bsat, S(ν)
spectra are largely unaﬀected, and they decay with the
same power-law exponent α (cid:39) −3/2. However, S(ν) → 0
at all frequencies when |Bz| > Bsat and the magnetiza-
tion saturates.

Figure 4c shows the integrated magnetization noise
power, P = (cid:82) S(ν)dν, as a function of Bz. Crucially,
we note the close correspondence between P (which is
measured via magnetization ﬂuctuation spectroscopy in
Fig. 4b) and the quasi-dc magnetic susceptibility, χ =
dmz/dBz (which is measured via conventional magne-
tometry in Fig. 4a). P is large and approximately con-
stant between ±Bsat, where χ is also large and approxi-
mately constant. However, both P and χ are rapidly sup-
pressed to zero when |Bz| > Bsat. This correspondence is
in line with the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem [8], which
relates frequency-dependent magnetization ﬂuctuations
S(ν) to the frequency-dependent imaginary (i.e., dissi-
pative) part of the magnetic susceptibility, χ(cid:48)(cid:48)(ν):

2kBT
πµ0

χ(cid:48)(cid:48)(ν) = νS(ν).

(2)

To relate χ(cid:48)(cid:48)(ν) to the real dc magnetic susceptibility
that was measured in Fig. 4a, we note that the real
and imaginary parts of the susceptibility are necessarily
coupled via Kramers-Kronig relations. The dc (ν (cid:39) 0)

6

FIG. 4. a) The average magnetization mz versus applied
perpendicular magnetic ﬁeld Bz (measured by conventional
MOKE), at a location on the trilayer near the SRT. mz in-
creases linearly with Bz (indicating constant magnetic sus-
ceptibility χ = dmz/dBz), until it saturates for |Bz| > Bsat.
b) Intensity map of the noise spectra S(ν) at diﬀerent Bz. For
all |Bz| < Bsat, S(ν) is unaﬀected (and follows ν−3/2), but
S(ν) → 0 when |Bz| > Bsat. c) The integrated magnetization
noise P = (cid:82) S(ν)dν versus Bz. The correspondence between
P and χ is in accord with the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem.
Moreover, the detailed dependence of P (and mz) on Bz can
be qualitatively captured by simple considerations of the free
energy of a mixture of magnetic domains, as shown by the
red lines in panels (c) and (a) – see text.

susceptibility is therefore given by

χ(ν (cid:39) 0) =

2
π

(cid:90) ∞

0

χ(cid:48)(cid:48)(ν(cid:48))
ν(cid:48)

dν(cid:48).

(3)

Combining Eq. 2 and 3, we ﬁnd that χ = dmz/dBz ∝
(cid:82) S(ν)dν = P . Signiﬁcant magnetization noise is there-
fore expected when the dc magnetic susceptibility is large
[2, 29, 33], in agreement with our measurements.

Relating the magnetization noise to a simple model
of the magnetic free energy

We further note that the ﬁeld dependence of both the
average magnetization mz and the integrated magnetiza-
tion noise P can also be qualitatively captured by con-
sidering the free energy of a mixture of magnetic do-
mains that are oriented along ±ˆz (i.e., within a domain
the average magnetization mz = ±1). We use a min-

imal mean-ﬁeld model to describe the free energy (per
moment), F = U − T S. It contains only a quadratic ex-
change term, a linear Zeeman energy term, and a typical
Bragg-Williams mixing term for the entropy S:

F = am2

z − bBzmz −

1
2

kBT [2ln2 − (1 + mz)ln(1 + mz)−

(1 − mz)ln(1 − mz)],
(4)

where a and b are scaling constants. Since the data in
Fig. 4a indicates that mz=0 when Bz=0, F has a min-
imum here and therefore we take the coeﬃcient a to
be positive. F (mz) therefore has a single global mini-
mum for any Bz. At any Bz, the equilibrium average
magnetization (cid:104)mz(cid:105) is given approximately by the value
of mz for which F is minimized (see Supplemental Fig.
S2). More importantly, the curvature of F (mz) at this
minimum value dictates the magnitude of ﬂuctuations:
if F (mz) increases only slightly for a given ﬂuctuation
(cid:104)mz(cid:105) ± δmz (i.e., if the curvature d2F/dm2
z is small),
then ﬂuctuations cost little energy and are thermody-
namically likely.
In other words the curvature of F is
inversely related to the variance of magnetization ﬂuc-
z)−1 ∼ (cid:104)(δmz)2(cid:105) ∼ P (for details see
tuations, (d2F/dm2
Supplemental Fig. S2).

The red lines in Figs. 4a and 4c show mz(Bz) and
P (Bz) calculated using Eq. 4, using a common set of
coeﬃcients a and b that are adjusted to match the ex-
perimental data. The minimum of F (mz) occurs at a
value of mz that increases approximately linearly with
Bz until mz approaches ±1, and the curvature of F (mz)
at this minimum is small and relatively constant until
it increases sharply as mz → ±1. The overall trends
are qualitatively captured, and again establish the link
between the magnetization noise power P and the dc
magnetic susceptibility χ.

Mapping magnetization ﬂuctuations in both
out-of-plane and in-plane magnetic ﬁelds

We also investigate how magnetization ﬂuctuations
in Pt/Co/Pt evolve under the additional inﬂuence of
applied in-plane magnetic ﬁelds Bx.
In contrast to
out-of-plane ﬁelds Bz, small in-plane ﬁelds are not ex-
pected to directly contribute to the Zeeman energy of
perpendicularly-oriented magnetic domains, since Bx ⊥
ˆz. However, in-plane ﬁelds can inﬂuence the energy of
the domain walls that bound the domains [46, 47]. The
change in domain wall energy at a particular location
depends on the relative orientation of Bx with respect
to the local magnetization direction in the wall. The lo-
cal energy can therefore increase or decrease. However,
when integrating the total domain wall energy around
a closed path, linear changes in energy cancel out by

7

FIG. 5. a-d) Intensity maps of the integrated magnetization
noise P = (cid:82) S(ν)dν versus in-plane and out-of-plane applied
ﬁeld (Bx, Bz). The four panels are acquired at slightly dif-
ferent locations on the Pt/Co/Pt ﬁlm, separated by <10 µm.
The bowtie shape of these images is determined by the bal-
ance between the ﬁxed thermal energy kBT and the ﬁeld-
dependent energy required to spontaneously form magnetic
domains (see text). The very diﬀerent patterns within each
bowtie, and the lack of reﬂection symmetry about the Bx,z =
0 axes reveal a spatially-varying magnetic anisotropy that is
canted slightly away from perfectly out of plane. Dashed line
in a) shows a quadratic ﬁt to the edge of the bowtie.

symmetry and the total domain wall energy typically de-
creases quadratically as B2
x [46, 47]. Besides inﬂuencing
the energy (and ﬂuctuations) of existing domain walls,
application of Bx at a point very near magnetic satura-
tion can therefore also increase the likelihood of sponta-
neously forming new magnetic domains (such as bubble
domains) [48].

Figures 5a-d show intensity plots of the integrated
magnetization noise power P as a function of both Bz
(vertical axis) and also Bx (horizontal axis), at four loca-
tions on the sample that are separated by only a few mi-
crons. Rather striking “bowtie” structures are revealed
(note, however, the factor-of-ten larger ﬁeld scale for Bx).
A vertical line-cut through the bowtie at Bx = 0 gives a
cross-section that corresponds to the plot of P (Bz) shown
in Fig. 4c. The magnetic ﬁeld at which P falls abruptly
to zero is therefore revealed by the upper and lower bor-
ders of the bowtie – this is the applied ﬁeld at which the
average magnetization mz saturates along ±ˆz, which was
deﬁned in Fig. 4 as Bz = Bsat for the case when Bx=0.
Several interesting properties of these ﬂuctuation maps
are immediately apparent. The ﬁrst obvious aspect is
that magnetization ﬂuctuations persist out to larger |Bz|
when ±Bx is applied, and that this relationship is ap-
proximately quadratic in Bx, leading to the characteris-
tic bowtie shape. This is consistent with the preceding
discussion of how the net energy cost to form a closed
domain wall decreases as B2
x: Consider, for example, a

Pt/Co/Pt trilayer in an applied perpendicular ﬁeld Bz
slightly larger than Bsat, so that mz is saturated, the
susceptibility χ = dmz/dBz is zero, and no magnetic do-
mains are present. The available thermal energy kBT
is not quite suﬃcient to induce the spontaneous forma-
tion of oppositely-oriented domains, and no ﬂuctuations
δmz(t) are present. However, when Bx is applied, the
domain-formation energy falls below kBT , at which point
domains can spontaneously form and disappear, mz will
no longer be saturated, χ will no longer equal zero, and
magnetization ﬂuctuations will appear. Only by increas-
ing Bz further (by an amount proportional to B2
x) will
the magnetization again achieve saturation.

A second obvious property of these images is that the
total noise power P is not constant within a bowtie. Pat-
terns exist, but interestingly the patterns clearly lack re-
ﬂection symmetry about the horizontal (Bz=0) and verti-
cal axes (Bx=0). Rather, the images exhibit point inver-
sion symmetry about the Bx,z=0 origin. This is consis-
tent with a uniaxial magnetic anisotropy at the measure-
ment location that is canted slightly away from perfectly
out-of-plane (i.e., it has some in-plane component), so
that for a given Bz the inﬂuence of +Bx will in general
be diﬀerent than that of −Bx (and similarly, at a given
Bx the inﬂuence of +Bz and −Bz will be diﬀerent). How-
ever, reversing both Bx and Bz preserves the symmetry
and gives the same magnetic free energy, susceptibility,
and noise, in keeping with the images in Fig. 5.

The ﬁnal aspect that is quite apparent in Fig. 5 is that
the four maps of P (Bx, Bz) exhibit markedly diﬀerent
patterns, even though they were acquired at only slightly
diﬀerent locations on the Pt/Co/Pt trilayer (< 10 µm
apart). This indicates that deviations of the magnetic
anisotropy away from ±ˆz are strongly position depen-
dent in the Pt/Co/Pt ﬁlm, at least down to length scales
on the order of the laser spot (4 µm). We emphasize
that in order to acquire a map of P (Bx, Bz), the sample
is forced to undergo many saturation and demagnetiza-
tion cycles; therefore the patterns cannot be due to some
temporary or metastable domain conﬁguration but must
instead originate in a physical property of the sample.
These variations in the magnetic anisotropy landscape
likely derive from spatial inhomogeneity in the disorder
that is induced by the Ar+ irradiation and the fact that
Co and Pt are not lattice matched.

Inducing magnetization ﬂuctuations in otherwise
stable ferromagnetic ﬁlms

We now investigate how these noise maps evolve over
a broad range of magnetic anisotropy. Figure 6 shows
maps of P (Bx, Bz) acquired at very diﬀerent lateral po-
sitions on the sample, starting in panel (a) in the region
with in-plane magnetization where ﬂuctuations δmz(t)
are small, continuing in panel (b) through the SRT re-

8

FIG. 6. Intensity maps of the integrated magnetization noise
P (Bx, Bz) at diﬀerent locations across the Pt/Co/Pt sample,
beginning in a) regions of the sample with in-plane magneti-
zation, where P is small. b) Near the SRT, P is large when
|Bz| < Bsat (cf. Fig. 5). c-e) In regions with less disor-
der and therefore increasingly stable perpendicular magneti-
zation, µ0Hc increases and ﬂuctuations vanish at Bx,z = 0.
However, ﬂuctuations re-emerge when larger |Bx| is applied.

gion that was discussed in the previous section, and ﬁ-
nally moving in panels (c-e) to less disordered regions
of the sample with perpendicular magnetization and in-
creasingly stable out-of-plane ferromagnetism. For ref-
erence, the corresponding mz(Bz) magnetization curves
(at Bx=0) are also shown. Of particular interest are
Figs. 6 (c-e), which show how magnetization ﬂuctua-
tions evolve as the trilayer exhibits increasingly strong
and stable perpendicular ferromagnetism. The bowties
split apart, with ﬂuctuations appearing at larger |Bx|.
As expected, no ﬂuctuations are observed near zero ﬁeld
when the trilayer exhibits stable perpendicular ferromag-
netism, which we deﬁne as the presence of an open hys-
teresis loop and a stable remnant magnetization. The
is that even in trilayers that are
key point, however,
nominally very stable ferromagnets at zero ﬁeld, mag-
netization ﬂuctuations δmz(t) can emerge in suﬃciently
large in-plane ﬁelds Bx. Studies of non-irradiated trilay-
ers with even larger µ0Hc conﬁrm this to be generally
true (see Supplemental Fig. S3).

This result has a number of consequences. Similar to
the data shown in Fig. 5, these noise maps show signif-
icant nonuniformity, indicating that even ﬁlms with ro-
bust perpendicular ferromagnetism exhibit some degree
of microstructured in-plane anisotropy, which could play
a role, for example, during magnetic switching in tech-

9

nological applications. Further, it shows that measure-
ments which use ﬂuctuations to detect subtle micromag-
netic eﬀects [49] may be possible in materials with sig-
niﬁcant perpendicular anisotropy. Finally, we speculate
that these results may be applicable to future neuromor-
phic magnetic computation schemes [50], which require
the capability to reversibly tune the ﬂuctuations of indi-
vidual magnetic elements and the interactions between
them.

Higher-order correlations of the magnetization noise

In this last section, we demonstrate an important con-
sequence and potential advantage of measuring ﬂuctua-
tions δmz(t) directly in the time domain, which is that
all possible time correlators can, in principle, be retrieved
and analyzed from the noise signal. Thus far, we have fo-
cused on S(ν), the power spectral density of the measured
ﬂuctuations, which is derived from the second-order
(or two-point) time correlator C2(t) = (cid:104)δmz(0)δmz(t)(cid:105).
As previously described, S(ν) = (cid:104)a(ν)a∗(ν)(cid:105) where
0 δmz(t)eiνtdt is the Fourier transform
a(ν) = (1/
of δmz(t) measured over a suﬃciently long duration τ .

τ ) (cid:82) τ

√

Importantly, however, the nth-order time correlator
Cn(t1, t2, ..., tn−1) = (cid:104)δmz(0)δmz(t1)...δmz(tn−1)(cid:105) can
contain additional information that is not trivially re-
lated to S(ν), particularly in the presence of interactions,
inhomogeneous broadening eﬀects, and/or non-gaussian
noise due to (for example) the discrete nature of the sys-
tem. In general, only the full set of all correlators con-
tains complete information about an interacting system.
Higher-order correlations have been studied theoretically
[51, 52] and experimentally in magnetic systems such as
spin glasses [5] and amorphous magnets [53], but we are
not aware of any prior experimental studies of higher-
order correlations of ﬂuctuations in magnetic ﬁlms in
thermal equilibrium. Such correlators, however, play an
important role in the theory of phase transitions and non-
linear thermodynamics [54]. Therefore their experimen-
tal measurement is highly desirable as a tool for charac-
terization of material phases and for tests of fundamental
theoretical predictions, such as higher-order ﬂuctuation
relations and for testing the universality of scaling expo-
nents.

By way of example we compute from our noise mea-
surements the simplest nontrivial higher (third) order
correlator C3(t1, t2), which can be expressed in the fre-
quency domain as

C3(ν1, ν2) = (cid:104)a(ν1)a(ν2)a∗(ν1 + ν2)(cid:105).

(5)

C3 contains essentially diﬀerent information compared
to a two-point correlator. By construction, it describes
correlations between diﬀerent frequencies and is therefore
typically represented as a two-dimensional intensity plot.
Its real
Furthermore, note that C3 is complex-valued.

FIG. 7. Measuring higher-order correlations of the magneti-
zation noise at a location on the sample near the SRT that
exhibits linear magnetization and large ﬂuctuations (similar
to Fig. 4). a) The real part of the third-order correlator,
Re[C3(ν1, ν2)], acquired at Bz=0 mT, 0.5 mT, and 0.9 mT. b)
The integral (cid:82) Re[C3]dν1dν2 measured as a continuous func-
tion of Bz. The red line shows this dependence calculated
from the magnetic free energy (see Supplemental Material for
details). c) The simultaneously-measured total noise power
P = (cid:82) S(ν)dν versus Bz (similar to Fig. 4c). d) The average
magnetization mz(Bz) at this same location, as measured by
conventional conventional MOKE, showing a constant suscep-
tibility for |Bz| < Bsat (similar to Fig. 4a). The third-order
correlator is approximately zero except when |Bz| (cid:39) Bsat,
indicating a skewness in the distribution of δmz(t).

and imaginary components have diﬀerent physical mean-
ing, and in principle it is possible for ﬂuctuations δmz(t)
to exhibit a real C3, or an imaginary C3, or both. The
real part of C3 is, for example, sensitive to any skewness
or third moment in the distribution of δmz(t) about its
mean – e.g., if a simple magnetic ﬂuctuator spends more
time in its +ˆz state than in its −ˆz state (that being just
one example of a non-gaussian noise distribution, as often
exempliﬁed by random telegraph noise with statistically
inequivalent dwell times in the high and low state).

The imaginary part of C3 is sensitive to time-reversal
symmetry breaking of the measured signal, meaning that
δmz(t) (cid:54)= δmz(−t) in a statistical sense. For example a
sawtooth wave, though not a noise signal per se, breaks
time-reversal symmetry, but a triangular wave or sine
wave does not. Random telegraph noise with statistically
inequivalent rise and fall times would also generate an
imaginary C3, even when the dwell times in the high and

low states are equivalent and the distribution of δmz(t)
has no skewness.
In general, magnetic systems can of
course break time-reversal symmetry. However, Im[C3] =
0 is expected to hold for Ising-Glauber spin dynamics
that satisfy detailed balance at thermal equilibrium [51].
Figure 7 shows the real part of C3, measured at a lo-
cation on the trilayer where mz(Bz) increases linearly
(and the noise power S(ν) is large) when |Bz| < Bsat.
Fluctuations at this location are very similar to those
shown earlier in Fig. 4, where Bsat ≈ 0.5 mT. Fig-
ure 7a shows Re[C3(ν1, ν2)] measured at Bz=0 mT,
0.5 mT, and 0.9 mT. Furthermore, Fig.
7b shows
the integral (cid:82) Re[C3]dν1dν2 as a continuous function of
Bz. For comparison and completeness, Figs. 7c and
7d show the simultaneously-measured total noise power
P = (cid:82) S(ν)dν and the average magnetization mz as con-
tinuous functions of Bz (cf. Fig. 4).

The real part of C3 is found to be non-zero when
Bz ≈ Bsat and mz approaches saturation. This indicates
a measurable skewness (third moment) in the probabil-
ity distribution of the noise signal δmz(t) about its mean,
which can be viewed as arising from a cubic nonlinearity
(i.e., a nonzero third derivative) of the free energy F (mz)
at its minimum value. To show this, we note that in-
tegrating Re[C3(ν1, ν2)] over both frequencies yields the
equal-time correlator (cid:104)δmz(t)3(cid:105), which in turn is propor-
tional to d3F/dm3
z (see Supplemental Fig. S2). By in-
spection of Eq. 4, this cubic nonlinearity arises from the
entropic contribution to F when Bz (cid:54)= 0. The data are
in good qualitative agreement with predictions from Eq.
4, where Re[C3] is small when |Bz| << Bsat (because the
ﬂuctuations are nearly gaussian) and when |Bz| >> Bsat
(because the ﬂuctuations are strongly suppressed), but
reaches a local maximum when |Bz| ≈ Bsat where both
the cubic nonlinearity and the ﬂuctuations are large. The
red line in Fig. 7b shows the real part of C3 calculated
from the magnetic free energy (derived in detail in the
Supplementary Information), showing very good agree-
ment. We further note that other experimental gaussian
noise sources such as photon shot noise do not produce
a background level to C3 that must be subtracted oﬀ
(in contrast to S(ν)), which further motivates analysis of
C3 to reveal subtle non-gaussianity eﬀects in ﬂuctuation
signals.

Finally, we ﬁnd that Im[C3(ν1, ν2)]=0 to within our ex-
perimental accuracy, for all applied Bz. This means that
the measured ﬂuctuation signal δmz(t) in our Pt/Co/Pt
trilayers did not explicitly break time-reversal symmetry,
and that in thermal equilibrium δmz(t) remained indis-
tinguishable from δmz(−t) in a statistical sense.

Summary

We have used Kerr magnetometry to study the broad-
band frequency spectra of thermodynamic magnetiza-

10

tion ﬂuctuations in an archetypal ultrathin ferromagnet
(a Pt/Co/Pt trilayer). The power spectral density of
the ﬂuctuations, S(ν), is found to follow a robust ν−3/2
power law on regions of the trilayer exhibiting out-of-
plane magnetization, indicating a broad distribution of
ﬂuctuation and relaxation rates. However, the func-
tional form of S(ν) changes dramatically as the mag-
netic anisotropy is reduced to zero and the trilayer is
tuned through a SRT (either by increasing temperature
or by increasing interfacial disorder). Namely, as the SRT
is traversed, S(ν) develops a steadily-increasing critical
frequency ν0 below which the noise power tends towards
spectrally ﬂat, indicating an evolving low-frequency cut-
oﬀ for out-of-plane magnetization ﬂuctuations. These re-
sults therefore provide a means of characterizing phase
transitions in ferromagnets via their inﬂuence on spon-
taneous dynamics. The ﬂuctuations are found to be
strongly dependent on applied magnetic ﬁelds, which can
be understood within the framework of the ﬂuctuation-
dissipation theorem and from considerations of the mag-
netic free energy. Suﬃciently large in-plane ﬁelds can
induce spontaneous ﬂuctuations in ﬁlms that otherwise
exhibit stable out-of-plane ferromagnetism. Finally, we
demonstrate that higher-than-second order correlators
can be computed and analyzed from the measured ﬂuctu-
ations, which can potentially provide a sensitive and pow-
erful means of revealing subtle inﬂuence of non-gaussian
noise and time-reversal breaking eﬀects.

We thank Dan Pierce, Vivien Zapf, Mark Stiles, Alice
Mizrahi, and Carl Boone for useful discussions. Work at
the NHMFL was supported by the Los Alamos LDRD
program, National Science Foundation DMR-1157490,
the State of Florida, and the US Department of Energy.

[1] H. Bittel, Noise of Ferromagnetic Materials, IEEE Trans.

Magn. 5, 359 (1969).

[2] M. Ocio, H. Bouchiat, and P. Monod, Observation of 1/f
Magnetic Fluctuations in Spin Glasses, J. Magn. Magn.
Mater 54-57, 11 (1986).

[3] T. J. Silva and H. N. Bertram, Magnetization Fluctua-
tions in Uniformly Magnetized Thin-ﬁlm Recording Me-
dia, IEEE Trans. Magn. 26, 3129 (1990).

[4] N. Smith and P. Arnett, White-noise Magnetization Fluc-
tuations in Magnetoresistive Heads, Appl. Phys. Lett. 78,
1448 (2001).

[5] M. B. Weissman, What is a spin glass? A glimpse via
mesoscopic noise, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 829 (1993).
[6] C. P. Bean and J. D. Livingston, Superparamagnetism,

J. Appl. Phys. 30, S120 (1959).

[7] O. Sinwani, J. W. Reiner, and L. Klien, Monitor-
ing Superparamagnetic Langevin Behavior of Individual
SrRuO3 Nanostructures, Phys. Rev. B 89, 020404(R)
(2014).

[8] R. Kubo, The ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem, Rep. Prog.

Phys. 29, 255 (1966).

[9] M. T. Johnson, P. J. H. Bloemen, F. J. A. den Broeder

and J. J. de Vries, Magnetic Anisotropy in Metallic Mul-
tilayers, Rep. Prog. Phys. 59, 1409 (1996).

[10] C. A. F. Vaz, J. A. C. Bland, and G. Lauhoﬀ, Magnetism
in ultrathin ﬁlm structures, Rep. Prog. Phys. 71, 056501
(2008).

[11] R. Allenspach and A. Bischof, Magnetization direction
switching in Fe/Cu(100) epitaxial ﬁlms: Temperature
and thickness dependence, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3385
(1992).

[12] Z. Q. Qiu, J. Pearson, and S. D. Bader, Asymmetry of
the Spin Reorientation Transitition in Ultrathin Fe Films
and Wedges Grown on Ag(100), Phys. Rev. Lett. 70,
1006 (1993).

[13] C. Chappert, H. Bernas, J. Ferr´e, V. Kottler, J.-P. Jamet,
Y. Chen, E. Cambril, T. Devolder, F. Rousseaux, V. Ma-
thet, H. Launois, Planar Patterned Magnetic Media Ob-
tained by Ion Irradiation, Science 280, 1919 (1998).
[14] J. Fassbender, D. Ravelosona, and Y. Samson, Tailoring
magnetism by light-ion irradiation, J. Phys. D.: Appl.
Phys. 37, R179 (2004).

[15] D. P. Pappas, K. P. K¨amper, and H. Hopster, Reversible
Transition Between Perpendicular and In-plane Magne-
tization in Ultrathin Films, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 3179
(1990).

[16] D. Pescia and V. L. Pokrovsky, Perpendicular Versus In-
plane Magnetization in a 2D Heisenberg Monolayer at
Finite Temperatures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2599 (1990).

[17] P. J. Jensen and K. H. Bennemann, Direction of the mag-
netization of thin ﬁlms and sandwiches as a function of
temperature, Phys. Rev. B 42, 849 (1990).

[18] Y. Millev and J. Kirschner, Reorientation transi-
tions in ultrathin ferromagnetic ﬁlms by thickness- and
temperature-driven anisotropy ﬂows, Phys. Rev. B 54,
4137 (1996).

[19] A. Hubert and R. Sch¨afer, Magnetic Domains: The Anal-
ysis of Magnetic Microstructures, (Springer Science &
Business Media, Berlin 2008).

[20] Y. Yafet and E. M. Gyorgy, Ferromagnetic strip domains
in an atomic monolayer, Phys. Rev. B 38, 9145 (1988).
[21] Y. Z. Wu, C. Won, A. Scholl, A. Doran, H. W. Zhao, X.
F. Jin, and Z. Q. Qiu, Magnetic Stripe Domains in Cou-
pled Magnetic Sandwiches, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 117205
(2004).

[22] C. Won, Y. Z. Wu, J. Choi, W. Kim, A. Scholl, A. Doran,
T. Owens, J. Wu, X. F. Jin, H. W. Zhao, and Z. Q. Qiu,
Magnetic stripe melting at the spin reorientation transi-
tion in FeNiCu(001), Phys. Rev. B 71, 224429 (2005).

[23] M. Kronseder, M. Buchner, H. G. Bauer, and C. H. Back
Dipolar-energy-activated magnetic domain pattern trans-
formation driven by thermal ﬂuctuations, Nat. Comm. 4,
2054 (2013).

[24] L. Belliard, J. Miltat, V Kottler, V. Mathet, and C.
Chappert, Stripe Domains Morphology Versus Layers
Thickness in CoPt Multilayers, Jour. Appl. Phys. 81,
5315 (1997).

[25] N. Bergeard, J. Jamet, A. Mougin, J. Ferr´e, J. Gierak,
E. Bourhis, and R. Stamps, Dynamic Fluctuations
and Two-dimensional Melting at the Spin Reorientation
Transition, Phys. Rev. B 86, 094431 (2012).

[26] F. Ando, H. Kakizakai, T. Koyama, K. Yamada, M.
Kawaguchi, S. Kim, K.-J. Kim, T. Moriyama, D. Chiba,
and T. Ono, Modulation of the Magnetic Domain Size In-
duced by an Electric Field, Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 022401
(2016).

11

[27] M. Yamanouchi, A. Jande, P. Dhagat, S. Ikeda, F. Mat-
sukura, and H. Ohno, Domain Structure in CoFeB Thin
Films With Perpendicular Magnetic Anisotropy, IEEE
Magn. Lett. 2, 30000304 (2011).

[28] O. Portmann, A. Vaterlaus, and D. Pescia, Observation
of Stripe Mobility in a Dipolar Frustrated Ferromagnet,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 047212 (2006).

[29] T. N. G. Meier, M. Kronseder, M. Zimmermann, and
C. H. Back, Quantiﬁcation of Thermal Fluctuations in
Stripe Domain Patterns, Phys. Rev. B 93, 064424 (2016).
[30] M. Kronseder, T. N. G. Meier, M. Zimmermann, M.
Buchner, M. Vogel, and C. H. Back, Real-time Observa-
tion of Domain Fluctuations in a Two-dimensional Mag-
netic Model System, Nat. Comm. 6, 6932 (2015).

[31] A. L. Balk, M. D. Stiles, and J. Unguris, Critical Be-
havior of Zero-ﬁeld Magnetic Fluctuations in Perpendic-
ularly Magnetized Thin Films, Phys. Rev. B 90, 184404
(2014).

[32] K. A. Seu, S. Roy, J. J. Turner, S. Park, C. M. Falco, and
S. D. Kevan, Cone Phase and Magnetization Fluctuations
in Au/Co/Au Thin Films Near the Spin-reorientation
Transition, Phys. Rev. B 82, 012404 (2010).

[33] Z. Diao, E. R. Nowak, G. Feng, and J. M. D. Coey, Mag-
netic Noise in Structured Hard Magnets, Phys. Rev. Lett.
104, 047202 (2010).

[34] S. A. Crooker, D. G. Rickel, A. V. Balatsky, and D.
L. Smith, Spectroscopy of Spontaneous Spin Noise as a
Probe of Spin Dynamics and Magnetic Resonance, Na-
ture 431, 49 (2004).

[35] M. Oestreich, M. R¨omer, R. J. Haug, and D. H¨agele, Spin
Noise Spectroscopy in GaAs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 216603
(2005).

[36] S. A. Crooker, J. Brandt, C. Sandfort, A. Greilich, D. R.
Yakovlev, D. Reuter, A. D. Wieck, and M. Bayer, Spin
noise of electrons and holes in self-assembled (In,Ga)As
quantum dots, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 036601 (2010).
[37] V. S. Zapasskii, A. Greilich, S. A. Crooker, Yan Li, G.
G. Kozlov, D. R. Yakovlev, D. Reuter, A. D. Wieck, and
M. Bayer, Optical Spectroscopy of Spin Noise, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 110, 176601 (2013).

[38] W. H. Press, Flicker Noises in Astronomy and Elsewhere,

Comments Astrophys. 7, 103 (1978).

[39] M. B. Weissman, 1/f Noise and Other Slow, Nonexpo-
nential Kinetics in Condensed Matter, Rev. Mod. Phys.
60, 537 (1988).

[40] E. Milotti, Linear Processes that Produce 1/f or Flicker

Noise, Phys. Rev. E 51, 4 (1995).

[41] B. Alessandro, C. Beatrice, G. Bertotti, and A. Montorsi,
Domain-wall dynamics and Barkhausen eﬀect in metallic
ferromagnetic materials. I. Theory, J. Appl. Phys. 68,
2901 (1990).

[42] P. Cizeau, S. Zapperi, G. Durin, and H. E. Stanley,
Dynamics of a Ferromagnetic Domain Wall and the
Barkhausen Eﬀect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4669 (1997).
[43] M. C. Kuntz and J. P. Sethna, Noise in Disordered Sys-
tems: The Power Spectrum and Dynamic Exponents in
Avalanche Models, Phys. Rev. B 62, 11699 (2000).
[44] O. Narayan, Self-Similar Barkhausen Noise in Magnetic
Domain Wall Motion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 3855 (1996).
[45] F. Bohn, M. A. Correa, M. Carara, S. Papanikolaou,
G. Durin, and R. L. Sommer, Statistical properties
of Barkhausen noise in amorphous ferromagnetic ﬁlms,
Phys. Rev. E 90, 032821 (2014).

[46] A. Thiaville, S. Rohart, E. Jue, V. Cros, and A. Fert, Dy-

12

namics of Dzyaloshinskii domain walls in ultrathin mag-
netic ﬁlms, Europhys. Lett. 100, 57002 (2012).

[47] S.-G. Je, D.-H. Kim, S.-C. Yoo, B.-C. Min, K.-J. Lee, and
S.-B. Choe, Asymmetric Magnetic Domain-wall Motion
by the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction, Phys. Rev. B
88, 214401 (2013).

[48] J. Choi, J. Wu, C. Won, Y. Z. Wu, A. Scholl, A. Do-
ran, T. Owens, and Z. Q. Qiu, Magnetic Bubble Do-
main Phase at the Spin Reorientation Transition of Ul-
trathin Fe/Ni/Cu(001) Film, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 207205
(2007).

[49] V. E. Demidov, S. Urazhdin, E. R. J. Edwards, M. D.
Stiles, R. D. McMichael, and S. O. Demokritov, Control
of Magnetic Fluctuations by Spin Current, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 107, 107204 (2011).

H. Kubota, S. Yuasa, V. Cros, J.-V. Kim, J. Grol-
lier, and D. Querlioz, Magnetic Stochastic Oscillators:
Noise-Induced Synchronization to Underthreshold Exci-
tation and Comprehensive Compact Model, IEEE Trans.
Magn. 51, 1 (2015).

[51] F. Li, A. Saxena, D. Smith, and N. A. Sinitsyn, Higher-
order Spin Noise Statistics, New J. Phys. 15, 113038
(2013).

[52] P. Schad, B. N. Narozhny, Gerd Sch¨on, and A. Shnir-
man, Nonequilibrium Spin Noise and Noise of Suceptibil-
ity, Phys. Rev. B 90, 205419 (2014).

[53] J. R. Petta, M. B. Weissman, and G. Durin, Barkhausen
Pulse Structure in an Amorphous Ferromagnet: Charac-
terization by High-order Spectra, Phys. Rev. E 57, 6363
(1998).

[50] A. Mizrahi, N. Locatelli, R. Matsumoto, A. Fukushima,

[54] R. L. Stratonovich, Nonlinear Nonequilibrium Thermo-

dynamics I, Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg (1992).

