Progress in measurements of 0.1–10 GeV neutrino-nucleus

scattering and anticipated results from future experiments

Kendall Mahn,1 Chris Marshall,2 and Callum Wilkinson3

1Department of Physics and Astronomy,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA, 48823∗
2Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, USA, 94720
3University of Bern, Albert Einstein Center for Fundamental Physics,

Laboratory for High Energy Physics (LHEP), Bern 3012, Switzerland

(Dated: March 26, 2018)

Abstract

Neutrino interactions with nuclei have been the subject of intense interest over the last 15 years.

Current and future measurements of neutrino oscillation and exotic physics use order 0.1–10 GeV
neutrinos on a range of nuclear targets (12C, 16O, 40Ar). As the precision of these experiments

has increased, information from their detectors and dedicated experiments indicate deﬁciencies

in the modeling of neutrino interactions on nuclear targets. Here, we present the current state

of knowledge about neutrino-nucleus interactions, the challenge of extracting the cross section of

these processes, and current experimental puzzles in the ﬁeld. We also look forward to new and

novel measurements and eﬀorts in the future which seek to resolve these questions.

8
1
0
2

r
a

M
3
2

]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[

1
v
8
4
8
8
0
.
3
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ mahn@pa.msu.edu

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS

I. Introduction

II. Making neutrino interaction measurements

A. What can we measure?

B. Cross section extraction method

1. Selection

2. Unfolding

3. Systematic uncertainties

4. Neutrino interaction model uncertainties and biases in measurements

III. Quasi-elastic and Quasi-elastic-like scattering (0π)

IV. Single pion production

A. Resonance pion production

B. Coherent pion production

V. Rare processes

VI. Inclusive scattering, other notable processes

VII. Future experiment possibilities

VIII. Summary

Disclosure statement

Acknowledgments

References

A. Reference model

2

3

8

8

9

9

10

11

13

15

21

22

24

25

26

29

30

31

31

32

40

I.

INTRODUCTION

Neutrino interactions in the medium energy 0.1–10 GeV range are of great interest to
a variety of physics programs1. In particular, accelerator neutrino oscillation experiments

use intense beams of predominantly muon neutrinos or anti-neutrinos, sent over short (km)

or long (hundreds of km) distances in order to measure non-standard or three-ﬂavor oscil-

lations [2]. In these experiments, neutrino oscillations are inferred from ﬂavor transitions

between the source and detector, either by measuring the disappearance of muon (anti-

)neutrinos, or the appearance of electron (anti-)neutrinos. In a disappearance measurement,

a deﬁcit of muon (anti-)neutrinos is observed, due to oscillations to electron or tau ﬂavor.

In an electron (anti-)neutrino appearance search, an excess of electron-like candidates is

observed over background. The determination of the neutrino mass ordering and search for

CP violation is possible by comparing neutrino and antineutrino oscillation rates in both

modes.

Experiments cannot measure the oscillation probability directly, instead, it is inferred

from the charged-current (CC, ν(–)
ν(–)
l + X) event rates, which can generically be expressed as

l + A → l−(+) + X) and neutral-current (NC, ν(–)

l + A →

R((cid:126)x) =

process
(cid:88)

target
(cid:88)

(cid:90) Emax

i

j

Emin

Φ(Eν) × σi(Eν, (cid:126)x) × (cid:15)((cid:126)x) × Nj × P (νA → νB)

(1)

where R((cid:126)x) is the total event rate for all processes as a function of the reconstructed kine-

matic variables (cid:126)x, Φν(Eν) is the neutrino ﬂux as a function of the neutrino energy Eν, σi

is the neutrino cross section for a particular mode, (cid:15) is the detector eﬃciency and Nj is

the number of target nuclei in the detector ﬁducial volume for target type j. To infer the

oscillation probability from the event rate, it is necessary to construct an estimator for the

neutrino energy from the measurable quantities in the detector, the reconstructed kinematic

variables, (cid:126)x, and particle composition of the ﬁnal state. This implicitly relies on the cross

section σi(Eν, (cid:126)x), which is why the cross section model has such a central importance for

neutrino oscillation experiments.

Figure 1 shows the total CC and NC cross sections for νµ–CH interactions as a function

of neutrino energy, Eν. In CC interactions, the ﬂavor of the neutrino ν(–)
1 An exciting program of physics is also possible with lower energy neutrinos produced from supernova, the

is by deﬁnition

l

Sun, reactors and astrophysical sources, but in general, the interaction rates are better known and outside

the scope of this review (see, for example, Ref. [1] for a recent review.)

3

FIG. 1. Neutrino ﬂuxes, as a function of energy, of current and future accelerator-based neutrino

experiments. The ﬂuxes relevant to neutrino interaction measurements are shown, from the T2K

experiment oﬀ-axis near detector (ND) [3], NOvA ND [4], and MINERvA (Low Energy conﬁgura-

tion only [5]). One future program, DUNE [6], is shown; the HK ﬂux is very similar to the T2K

ND oﬀ-axis ﬂux. Also overlaid are the total CC cross section divided by energy, according to the

GENIE 2.12.8 reference model (described in Appendix A).

the ﬂavor of the charged lepton produced, the charge of which also distinguishes neutrinos

from anti-neutrinos. The main contributions to the CC cross section for the GENIE 2.12.8

reference model used throughout this review are also shown. The reference model is described

in Appendix A, and is an up to date Monte Carlo simulation used widely in the ﬁeld. At
low Eν (cid:46) 1 GeV, the cross section is dominated by the lowest energy transfer process,
charged-current quasi-elastic (CCQE) scattering ( ν(–)
l + A → l−(+) + A(cid:48) + p(n)), which
is also called single nucleon knock-out, or 1p1h (one particle, one hole). There are also

signiﬁcant contributions from multiple-nucleon knock-out (2p2h), where the interaction is
with more than one nucleon in the nucleus (νl + A(n, p) → l− + A(cid:48) + p + p and νl + A(n, p) →
l+ +A(cid:48) +n+n2). At higher energy transfers, nucleon resonances (RES) can be excited, which

2 Note this is an approximation for illustration. There are signiﬁcant questions about the proton, neutron

4

Eν(GeV)012345σ(Eν)/Eν(1038cm2nucleon−1GeV−1)00.511.52νµFlux(arbitrarynorm.)GENIE2.12.8,σνµch(Eν)CC-TotalCC-RESCC1p1h+2p2hNC-TotalT2K:NDoﬀ-axisNOνA:NDoﬀ-axisDUNECDRRef.MINERνAL.E.decay to produce pions and nucleons in the ﬁnal state ( ν(–)

l +N (cid:48) +π+/−/0). At large
energy transfers, the interaction is with a constituent quark within the nucleon, the so-called
deep inelastic scattering (DIS) region. DIS is well understood, and dominates for Eν (cid:38) 10
GeV. The transition between these diﬀerent interaction modes is a signiﬁcant challenge to

l +N → ν(–)

model because of the change in the underlying physical assumptions between them. Figure 1

also shows the neutrino ﬂux distributions for current and planned long baseline oscillation

experiments T2K (also Hyper-K), NOvA, and DUNE. It is clear that the ﬂuxes for these

experiments include all of these processes, including the diﬃcult transition region.

In addition to the broad neutrino ﬂux, the choice of target material is important for

understanding neutrino interactions relevant for oscillation programs. Neutrino experiments

use medium to heavy nuclei, including carbon, water, and argon, as interaction targets. As

these have a higher cross section than hydrogen, this choice boosts event rates for, typically

statistics limited, oscillation experiments. However, interactions on any target material that

is not hydrogen will also include nuclear eﬀects. Measuring neutrino interactions on nuclear

targets convolves single nucleon uncertainties with signiﬁcant uncertainties related to the

nucleus. These nuclear eﬀects include initial-state interactions between nucleons, as well as

ﬁnal-state interactions (FSI) between outgoing hadrons and the residual nucleus.

Neutrino interaction uncertainties are currently one of the largest sources of systematic

uncertainty for operating experiments. As an example, the T2K experiment’s largest source

of systematic uncertainty on the νe-appearance rate in an initially νµ dominated beam come

from cross section related uncertainties. The total fractional uncertainty is 5.4%, with 3.9%

from the interaction model, with comparable uncertainties on νe-appearance rates [7]. Bias

in the determination oscillation parameters is possible due to mis-modeling of neutrino

interactions, as has been demonstrated by multiple groups [7–18].

Exotic physics searches are also accessible with accelerator-produced neutrino beams.

Searches for “sterile” neutrinos, neutrinos which do not couple to the weak force, use accel-

erator neutrino beams, and detectors close to the neutrino production point to search for

oscillation inconsistent with three ﬂavors [2]. Sterile neutrino appearance and disappear-

ance searches are similar to the three-ﬂavor case, but may have larger backgrounds due to a

smaller oscillation probability. NC interactions are also used as the signal channel for exotic

physics. In NC disappearance searches, the presence of sterile neutrinos would reduce the

composition of the ﬁnal state for 2p2h.

5

observed number of active neutrinos determined from NC interactions [19]. Other exotic

physics which use NC events as signal are searches for sub-GeV dark matter particles pro-

duction, visible as an excess of neutrino NC-like interactions [20]. These kinds of analyses

rely on a prediction for what NC interactions look like in the detector to characterize the

signal.

Searches for proton decay, which is predicted by Grand Uniﬁed Theories (GUTs) [2], also

rely on a good understanding of neutrino cross sections, as atmospheric neutrino interactions

can mimic proton decay signatures, and are the dominant background. The simplest GUTs
predict p → e+π0 to be the dominant proton decay channel. For free protons at rest, the
signal is a back-to-back positron and π0, but the energy and angle of the decay products are

smeared by initial-state nucleon momentum in a bound nucleus, as well as by FSI. Neutrinos
can also produce an electron and pion in a detector νen → e−pπ0, where the electron and
pion can conspire to give an invariant mass near that of a proton. In Super-Kamiokande

(SK), which has the most stringent experimental limits on proton decay for this channel and

in general [21, 22], this is indistinguishable from signal as SK has a high threshold to detect

protons and cannot distinguish electrons from positrons. Another important decay channel
is p → K +¯ν, which is favored by supersymmetric GUTs. Since the outgoing neutrino is not

observed, the signal is a single kaon, possibly with a de-excitation photon from the residual
nucleus. Neutral-current neutrino production of K +, ν(–)
l nK +, also has the same
signature in SK. Due to the unique nature of the proton decay signal, typical background

l p → ν(–)

rates from atmospheric neutrinos are on the order of a few events per Megaton year. Neutrino

interactions processes contributing to proton decay backgrounds are very rare, or have very

limited phase space relevant for proton decay. Thus, it is important to consider not only the

uncertainty on the rate of the underlying interaction process that contributes to the proton

decay background, but also uncertainties on the shape, for example in kinematics that aﬀect

the invariant mass reconstruction.

Over the last decade, an numerous neutrino scattering measurements have been made

with neutrino and antineutrino beams on a range of nuclear targets. Table I summarizes

recent and planned experiments, including the choice of target material, beam properties

and detection methods.

2 MiniBooNE is also sensitive to a mono-energetic beam of neutrinos from kaon decay at rest.
4 MINERvA has the capability to run in diﬀerent beam energies, and will have data at higher energies.

6

TABLE I. Recent and planned near-term neutrino scattering experiments. The peak energy is

listed, and in general the mean of the ﬂux and the peak are not the same. Future measurements

are denoted with an asterisk.

Experiment

Flavor

Flux Peak (GeV)

Target

NOMAD

K2K
MiniBooNEab

MINOS

ArgoNeuT

SciBooNE

νµ,νµ

νµ

νµ,νµ

νµ

νµ,νµ

νµ,νµ

10, 5

1.3

0.6, 0.4

3.0

6.5,5.5

0.6,0.4

T2K oﬀ-axis

νµ,νµ,νe,νe

∗

0.6,0.6,1,1

T2K on-axis
MINERvAba

∗

νµ,νµ

νµ,νµ,νe

1,1

3.5

NOvA∗
MicroBooNE∗
ANNIE∗
WAGASCI∗
NINJA∗

νµ,νµ,νe, νe

2,∗,1,∗

νµ

νµ

νµ,νµ

νµ,νµ

0.6

0.6

1,1

1,1

C

CH, H2O

CH2

Fe

Ar

CH

CH,H2O
CH, H2O∗, Fe
He∗, C, CH,
H2O∗, Fe, Pb

CH2

Ar

H2O

H2O

H2O, Fe

Detection

Tracking

Tracking

Cherenkov

Tracking

Tracking+Calorimetry

Tracking

Tracking

Tracking

Tracking+Calorimetry

Tracking+Calorimetry

Tracking+Calorimetry

Cherenkov

Tracking

Emulsion

Progress in the ﬁeld has resulted in improved understanding of experimental techniques

and new measurements. In Section II, we give an overview of how neutrino cross-section

measurements are generally made, and discuss how these methods can lead to a hidden re-

liance on the Monte Carlo model used to simulate the experiment during the analysis. Then

we go on to give an overview of the available neutrino-nucleus scattering data, and discuss

the compatibility of diﬀerent datasets with each other and with theoretical models. We note

there is an important, vibrant program in model development from theory and experimental

groups [23–27], not discussed here, but which facilitates the comparisons and discussion in

this work. In Sections III and IV we describe QE-like and single pion production measure-

ments respectively. Rare processes are described in Section V and inclusive measurements

7

are discussed in Section VI. We make extensive use of a reference theoretical model to facil-

itate comparisons to data, which is described in Appendix A. Finally, we discuss expected

future results and experiments in Section VII, and present a summary in Section VIII.

II. MAKING NEUTRINO INTERACTION MEASUREMENTS

A. What can we measure?

Cross section measurements are extracted from the event rate measured in a detector,

and rearranging Equation 1. Generally they are made close to the neutrino production

point, where P (νA → νB) = 0, and oscillations can be neglected. Unfortunately, we cannot

observe interaction level processes on nucleons. After a neutrino interacts inside a nucleus,

particles produced at the vertex have to propagate through the dense nuclear medium, where

many outgoing hadrons will re-interact (FSI). As we do not want to assume a model for

these processes, we can only measure cross sections for a given post-FSI observable particle

content, or topology, (cid:101)σk:

(cid:101)σk((cid:126)y) =

(cid:90) Emax

(cid:88)

i

Emin

σi(Eν, (cid:126)x) × FSI((cid:126)x, (cid:126)y)dEν,

(2)

where σi is the contribution of true process category (mode) i to the ﬁnal state topology

k. For example, we cannot in general measure CCQE, all we can observe are events with

a topology of a single charged lepton and no pions (CC0π). The CC0π topology could be

further sub-divided, for example by the number of protons in the ﬁnal states, CC0π+0p,

CC0π+1p, and so on.

Clearly there is some disconnect between what we can measure, and what we want to know

for oscillation experiments. Firstly, we cannot directly measure the cross section, σi(Eν, (cid:126)x),

for the ith mode as is required for oscillation analyses, instead, we measure some topological

cross section (cid:101)σk((cid:126)y), which is averaged over the broad neutrino energy distribution of an
experiment5 Secondly, because the incoming neutrino energy is not known on an event by

event basis, in general it is not possible to measure cross sections as a function of “interaction

level” variables, like energy transfer or neutrino energy.

Instead, measurements must be

5 We note that there is confusion in the literature over whether to call this a “ﬂux-averaged” or “ﬂux-

integrated” cross section and that experiments may calculate this diﬀerently.

8

made as a function of outgoing particle kinematics (cid:126)y, such as pµ, cos θµ, or some variable

derived from a combination of them. Theorists and other users of neutrino scattering data

(such as oscillation analyzers) want to compare and constrain their predictions for σi(Eν, (cid:126)x)
using measurements of (cid:101)σk((cid:126)y). Because of the complexity of this comparison, a lot of data is
required, ideally from diﬀerent experiments with diﬀerent neutrino ﬂuxes.

B. Cross section extraction method

Cross section measurements typically use the same formula to extract the diﬀerential

cross section in the ith bin of a true kinematic variable x, dσ/dxi:

dσ
dxi

=

(cid:80)

j (cid:101)U −1

(cid:0)Nj − Bj

ij
ΦνT ∆xi(cid:15)i

(cid:1)

,

(3)

where Nj (Bj) is the number of selected (predicted background) events in reconstructed bin

j, Φν is the total integrated ﬂux, T is the number of target nuclei, ∆xi is the width of the
true bin, (cid:15)i is the selection eﬃciency, and (cid:101)U −1
the matrix, Uij which describes detector smearing). Equation 3 is readily extended to an

is the unfolding matrix (the pseudoinverse of

ij

N -dimensional diﬀerential cross section measurement by allowing indices i, j to identify a

single bin in N -d space, and replacing ∆xi with the product of the N bin widths.

The experiment’s Monte Carlo simulation is used to calculate the eﬃciency of the detector

response to the particle(s) in the interaction. In principle, eﬃciency corrections are only

dependent on properties of the detector modeling, which is relatively well understood.

1. Selection

Somewhat obviously, the aim of selection cuts is to increase the proportion of signal

events. Two important metrics are the selection eﬃciency, and purity:

Purity =

# selected signal
# total selected

;

Eﬃciency =

# selected signal
# total signal

.

A low eﬃciency selection is more susceptible to variations in the signal or background

model, although the eﬃciency does not have to be high to make a measurement as long as it

is well understood. A low purity selection is more susceptible to how background processes

are modeled. In a real analysis, there is a trade-oﬀ between the eﬃciency and purity of a

9

selection, and cuts are generally optimized by maximizing a ﬁgure of merit which combines

the two, such as selection eﬃciency × purity.

For analyses when the purity is low, the model dependence of the background is critical,

and additional background-enhanced “control” samples are used. Often, using the same lan-

guage as collider physics, these are referred to as “sidebands”, which comes from analyses

where regions to the side of a peak in some variable could be used to eﬀectively constrain

the background under the peak. For neutrino cross section measurements, the same prin-

ciple applies, a region distinct from the signal selection is selected, and used to constrain

the background. However, it is not possible to cut on the variable of interest, so instead

some selection cut is inverted. The background samples can then be used to constrain the

backgrounds and reduce the modeling uncertainty.

2. Unfolding

Unfolding, or deconvolution, is the general term for removing the eﬀect of a measuring

device from a measurement [28–30].

In the context of Equation 3, this means taking a

measurement in bins of reconstructed variable, j, and producing a result in bins of true
variable, i, and is performed by (cid:101)U −1
describes the mapping between true and reconstructed bins. In the simplest case, one can

ij , the pseudoinverse of the smearing matrix Uij, which

simply invert the smearing matrix, but this often leads to large ﬂuctuations in the data,

as statistical uncertainty in the reconstructed space is blown up by the inversion [28–30].

This is because neighboring bins in true space have very similar responses in reconstructed

space, and so a small ﬂuctuation in reconstructed space can be ﬁt with a large ﬂuctuation

of one true bin, with compensating changes in neighboring true bins to preserve the total

normalization, giving the characteristic bin-to-bin anti-correlations. Various methods exist

for regularizing, or smoothing, unfolded results, where the allowed solutions are restricted

to those in which the result ﬁts some prior expectation [28–30]. For example, we do not

expect large ﬂuctuations in the cross section on small scales, so smoothing out the large

oscillations in the result may seem reasonable. The regularized unfolding matrix is therefore

the pseudoinverse of the smearing matrix.

The most popular method used in the ﬁeld is D’Agostini unfolding [31], which has

been characterized as an algorithm for maximum-likelihood estimation with early stop-

10

ping [29, 30]6. When the algorithm converges, the result is equivalent to a matrix inversion

in the Gaussian limit [29, 30]. Another popular approach to the unfolding problem is tem-

plate likelihood ﬁtting, where each true bin i has a template in the reconstructed bins j which

describes the true to reconstructed smearing, essentially a single column of the matrix Uij.

By ﬁtting the normalizations of these templates, and minimizing some goodness-of-ﬁt statis-

tic between the prediction in reconstructed space and the data in reconstructed space, the

unsmeared data in true space is found [29, 30]. In the Gaussian limit, and with no regulariza-

tion, this method is also functionally equivalent to matrix inversion, but naturally supports

non-Gaussian statistics by using a Poisson-Likelihood as the goodness-of-ﬁt statistic [29, 30].

It is also easy to add additional regularization terms to the ﬁt. This iterative forward folding

technique is very robust for large problems because there is no need to invert a large matrix

(which could even be singular). The prediction at each step of the ﬁt is formed by folding

the Monte Carlo prediction with the smearing matrix Uij, which can be easily calculated.

A third approach is to not unfold; this can be expressed (in comparison with Equation 3)

as

dσ
dxj

=

(cid:1)

(cid:0)Nj − Bj
ΦνT ∆xj

,

dσth
dxj

(cid:88)

=

Uij σth
i ,

i

(4)

where the cross section result is in the reconstructed space, and a theoretical prediction can

be smeared from the true to the reconstructed space with the smearing matrix Uij. Examples

of results which have been presented in reconstructed space can be found in Refs. [32, 33].

3. Systematic uncertainties

Flux, detector and cross section systematic uncertainties aﬀect Equation 3 in various

ways. Uncertainty on the detector response is typically determined by a combination of

calibration samples (e.g, cosmic muons, electrons from pair production) in conjunction with

standalone tests of the detector (e.g. measurement of response of the light detection system).

In addition, charged particle beam data using a similar or identical detector, can be used to

validate the detector model or reduce detector uncertainties.

Often the limiting systematic uncertainty for cross section measurements are ﬂux uncer-

tainties. For a conventional neutrino beam, which focuses mesons produced in collisions

6 We note that although this method is widely known as “Bayesian unfolding” in the ﬁeld, this is a misnomer

as it is a fully frequentist method [29].

11

between accelerated protons oﬀ of a target, the uncertainties on the resulting ﬂux prediction

are approximately 10%, due to dedicated hadron production experiments [34–39]. In-situ

constraints from measurements of processes with known cross sections can further reduce

uncertainties on the ﬂux prediction for neutrino cross section. Two primary methods have

been used: neutrino-electron elastic scattering νe → νe, and the low-ν technique.

Neutrino-electron elastic scattering Neutrino-electron elastic scattering is a pure

electroweak process, with a known cross section up to radiative corrections. For νe, a

charged-current contribution interferes with the neutral-current contribution that is equal

for all ﬂavors, and enhances the cross section by about a factor of 6. The signal is a single,

forward electron and no other particles, subject to the the kinematic constraint for the

two-body process

Eν =

Ee
1 − Ee(1−cos θ)

m

≈

Ee
1 − Eeθ2

2m

,

Eeθ2

e = 2me(1 − y) < 2me.

(5)

Backgrounds typically come from charged-current processes initiated by νe at very low Q2,
and from neutral-current π0 production where a photon from π0 → γγ is mistaken for an

electron.

MINERvA demonstrated a technique for constraining the NuMI ﬂux with a sample of

127 νe → νe candidate events, on an expected background of 30 and an estimated signal

eﬃciency of 73% [40]. The uncertainty on the total ﬂux was reduced to 6%. In principle,

this technique is somewhat sensitive to the ﬂux shape. However, the Ee spectrum does

not uniquely determine the neutrino ﬂux energy distribution, and in practice very little

improvement to the shape uncertainties is obtained, compared to the a priori prediction

constrained by hadron production. Better shape resolution could be obtained by using the

electron angular information in addition to Ee and measuring the neutrino energy directly as

in Equation 5, but the feasibility of this has not been demonstrated for a realistic detector.

The Low-ν method The diﬀerential cross section for charged-current cross neutrino

scattering as a function of the hadronic energy, ν, can be written as

dσ
dν

= A + B

ν
E

− C

ν2
2E2

(6)

where E is the neutrino energy, and the coeﬃcients A, B, and C are integrals of structure

functions. The cross section is independent of the neutrino energy when ν/E is small. This

12

can be used to measure the relative shape of the neutrino ﬂux in situ by selecting a sample of

events ν below some ﬁxed value ν0. This technique was ﬁrst used by high energy experiments

CCFR [41] and NuTeV [42].

Extending the low-ν technique to lower neutrino energies is challenging [43].

If ν0 is

too large, the B and C terms in Equation 6 become signiﬁcant and introduce modeling

uncertainties. However, a very small ν0 limits the statistical power of the sample. To use a

low-ν ﬂux constraint in a cross section measurement, it is also important that the ν < ν0

sample does not overlap signiﬁcantly with the signal. MINOS [44] and MINERvA [45] have

dealt with these challenges by using diﬀerent ν0 cuts for diﬀerent regions of neutrino energy.

4. Neutrino interaction model uncertainties and biases in measurements

In an ideal scenario, a neutrino cross section measurement should only depend on data

and the detector response model, not the neutrino interaction model used by a particular

experiment. We note some of the conditions where the dependence of the experiment’s choice

of signal or background model enters into cross section measurements, which can result in

larger uncertainties on the measurement, or bias the result. We also suggest possible future

approaches to mitigate or minimize these issues.

Treatment of backgrounds: The metric of eﬃciency × purity is often used, which
is equivalent to S/(cid:112)(S + B) where S (B) is the number of signal (background) events.

This is only optimal when the systematic uncertainty on the background can be neglected.

This is appropriate for many applications in particle physics, such as peak ﬁnding with

a background which has a well understood shape, but is not the case for medium-energy

neutrino cross section measurements, where the background processes are generally not well

understood.

The use of background enhanced control regions helps mitigate some of the dependence

on the background model, although the extrapolation of the background constraint into the

signal region still relies on the model. This model dependence can be mitigated by deﬁning

background control regions with similar underlying kinematics to the background in the

signal region.

Eﬃciency and phase space: There are a number of ways that the eﬃciency can couple

to the signal interaction model. The most obvious is when there are regions of phase space

13

which have zero eﬃciency. For example, if you measure a cross section in terms of the

outgoing muon kinematics, pµ, cos θµ, but have no sensitivity to backward (cos θµ < 0)

events, reporting a single-diﬀerential dσ/dpµ cross section without restricting the cos θµ

range would add model dependence, as the eﬃciency correction would be correcting for

missing events without any data at all to inform the backward region. This example serves

to highlight a more subtle issue of regions of rapidly changing eﬃciency. Reporting a dσ/dpµ

cross section using Equation 3 where the eﬃciency correction is integrated over any region

in cos θµ where the eﬃciency is not ﬂat implicitly adds Monte Carlo bias, as it assumes

that the relationship between diﬀerent regions of cos θµ for that pµ bin is correctly modeled.

This problem can be mitigated by restricting the phase space to regions of phase space with
ﬂat eﬃciencies, and can be avoided by extracting a two-dimensional d2σ/dpµd cos θµ cross
section, and collapsing the cos θµ axis. Unfortunately, restricting the measured region of

phase space has the consequence of reducing the impact of the measurement.

Of course, the problem described above becomes more complicated when measuring cross

sections with multiple particles in the ﬁnal state as the eﬃciency will depend on all of the

particles.

It is, of course, not practical to calculate an N -dimensional cross section and

collapse it on the desired axes, but the general problem needs to be treated with care, and

can be mitigated by adding additional dimensions to the cross section extraction method,

restricting the measurement to regions of particle kinematics where the eﬃciency is ﬂat,

or by ensuring that the cross section measurement would not be signiﬁcantly changed by

making large distortions to the signal model.

Unfolding: All regularization methods add some bias, as unfolding algorithms move

away from solutions which are contrary to our expectation. Various methods exist to tune

the strength of the regularization (e.g., to what extent the unfolding algorithm is allowed

to bias the result), which try to balance the bias in the result with the variance in each bin

(known as the bias–variance trade-oﬀ). It should be noted that methods for optimizing the

regularization strength are generally designed to give the best estimate of the central values,

and are not guaranteed to give good coverage, which may lead to underestimated errors for

regularized, unfolded, results [28–30]. We note also that unfolding results necessarily makes

all bins strongly correlated, so bias tests can be extremely misleading if only the bin-by-bin
It is necessary to check for biases in the χ2 produced with the full

bias is investigated.

output covariance matrix, or some other goodness-of-ﬁt metric.

14

In the widely used D’Agostini method [31], each iteration of the algorithm reduces the

bias towards the input Monte Carlo simulation, and increase the size of the variance in

each bin. The main problem for the D’Agostini method is that the stopping criterion is

generally set by Monte Carlo studies of the potential bias. If the simulations used for those

studies are substantially wrong, it is likely that the result is strongly aﬀected by the bias

towards the input Monte Carlo, in a way which cannot be adequately assessed after the fact.

This problem is likely to be particularly bad for a small number (< 10) of iterations of the

algorithm, which are typical in the ﬁeld. We note that version of the D’Agostini method often

does not include the updates described in Ref. [46], which includes a simultaneous unfolding

of signal and background, and may partially mitigate the pathologies of the original method.

The advantage to unfolding is simply to allow diﬀerent results to be presented in the same

way, and directly compared, although in general, this is not possible for our purposes be-

cause diﬀerent experiments publish results averaged over diﬀerent ﬂuxes (Φν in Equation 3).

Regularization is simply helpful for guiding the eye, as it is produces smoother results with

reduced correlations. This is useful to understand if the data agrees with a particular model

at a coarse level. However, as many of the data sets produced are highly correlated, addi-

tional goodness-of-ﬁt tests are desirable where the smoother results do not add any beneﬁt.

Problems have been found attempting to ﬁt to existing unfolded (and regularized) data [47].

Indeed, it has been argued that it is always better to smear theory to match data, as in

Equation 4, rather than trying to unsmear data to match theory [48].

Looking to the future, where underlying cross section parameters will need to be con-

strained with a large number of datasets, it would be ideal for to have both types of results

available, where unregularized results are available if a regularization method has been em-

ployed for the main result, and folded results are made available if unfolding is used.

III. QUASI-ELASTIC AND QUASI-ELASTIC-LIKE SCATTERING (0π)

Charged-current scattering with no ﬁnal-state pions (CC0π) is the dominant interaction

channel for neutrino energies below 1 GeV (see Figure 1), and is an important contribution to

the signal for oscillation experiments in the few GeV regime. In neutrino-nucleus scattering,

CC0π includes processes with any number of ﬁnal-state nucleons, but no mesons or photons.

In the absence of nuclear eﬀects, it is a clean reaction known as charged-current quasi-elastic

15

(CCQE) scattering:

νln → l−p

¯νlp → l+n

(7)

where lepton ﬂavor l = e, µ, τ .

The free nucleon CCQE cross section can be calculated from electroweak theory in terms

of nucleon form factors, in the Llewellyn-Smith formalism [49]. Where the nucleon form

factors are constrained by data from electron-nucleon scattering, pion electroproduction, and
neutrino-deuterium scattering [50]. In measurements of νµn → µ−p by deuterium bubble
chambers, the muon and proton are both observed, as well as the spectator proton (not

involved in the initial interaction) in a subset of events [51, 52]. The data are in reasonable

agreement with a dipole axial form factor and axial mass MA ∼ 1 GeV, however, new eﬀorts

rooted in lattice QCD are revisiting whether or not a dipole approximation is suﬃcient for

the uncertainties [53].

Historically, the most common neutrino interaction simulation packages (“event genera-

tors”) GENIE [54], NEUT [55], and NUANCE [56], extended the Llewellyn-Smith formula

to larger nuclei with the relativistic Fermi Gas (RFG) model, which treats nucleons as

quasi-free with Fermi momentum, in the mean ﬁeld of the nucleus [57], where the nuclear

parameters are tuned to electron-scattering data [58]. However, recent data do not agree

with this prediction; ﬁts to MA assuming the RFG model with a dipole axial form factor

on heavy targets suggest a larger cross section than what is expected based on deuterium

data [59–62].

For a target nucleon at rest, the neutrino energy, Eν, and four-momentum transfer, Q2,
can be calculated from the kinematics of the outgoing lepton, assuming a nuclear binding

energy Eb:

EQE

ν =

M 2

f − (Mi − Eb)2 − m2

l + 2(Mi − Eb)El

Q2

QE = 2EQE

ν

2(Mi − Eb − El + pl cos θl)

(El − pl cos θl) − ml,

,

(8)

where Mi (Mf ) is the mass of the struck (ﬁnal-state) nucleon, and El, pl, θl, and ml are

the energy, three-momentum, angle with respect to the neutrino, and mass of the ﬁnal-state

lepton, respectively.

16

On heavy nuclei, CC0π is complicated by the presence of many nucleons within the

nucleus.

In addition to CCQE interactions with a single nucleon (1p1h), the scattering

target can be a bound state of two (2p2h) or more (npnh) correlated nucleons. FSI between

scattered nucleons and the residual nucleus also modify the ﬁnal state. Pions can be absorbed

or produced in FSI, moving events into or out of a CC0π sample. The relationship between
QE, and the underlying Eν or Q2, depends on the nuclear
detector observables EQE

or Q2

ν

model.

As modern measurements are given in terms of ﬂux-averaged diﬀerential cross sections

(see Equation 2), it is diﬃcult to compare results from diﬀerent experiments on a single

ﬁgure. Diﬀerences between experiments in target nucleus, phase space restrictions, and sig-

nal deﬁnitions further complicate comparisons. Instead, results of various measurements are

shown as fractional deviations between data and a reference model, in this case the widely-

used GENIE event generator [54] is used with models enabled in version 2.12.8 (details in

Appendix A). Experimental diﬀerences are taken out by incorporating into the reference

model the ﬂux, target, phase space restrictions, and signal deﬁnition of each measurement

using NUISANCE [63]. The main disadvantage of this is the necessity of choosing a partic-

ular reference model for comparison; we chose a consistent 1p1h+2p2h model, and updated

resonance model for these comparisons.

Figure 2 shows shape-only ratios of ﬂux-integrated diﬀerential cross section measurements

to the reference GENIE model, as a function of Q2

QE. MiniBooNE has a peak energy of 0.6

(0.4) GeV for νµ (¯νµ), and has 4π angular acceptance down to muon kinetic energy of 200

MeV. The signal deﬁnition includes all processes which have no ﬁnal-state pions [64, 65].

The detector has no sensitivity to ﬁnal-state protons due to the high Cherenkov threshold.

MINERvA is sensitive to ﬁnal-state protons, and has published cross sections with respect
QE as measured from both the muon and proton side7 with a peak neutrino energy
to dσ/dQ2
of 3.5 GeV [66–68, 70]. The muon-side measurement for both neutrinos and antineutrinos

is corrected to CCQE, using the GENIE version 2.6.2 model, tuned to control samples,

to subtract non-QE backgrounds. The version of GENIE used did not include any npnh

processes. To mitigate this, the region around the interaction vertex, where additional

proton energy would be expected in these events, is deliberately excluded from the analysis,

7 Q2

QE is reconstructed from the proton kinematics with Q2

QE = (Mi − Eb)2 − M 2

f + 2(Mi − Eb(Tp + Mf −

Mi + Eb), where Tp is the proton kinetic energy [68].

17

FIG. 2. Diﬀerential cross sections for QE and 0π, measured by MiniBooNE (MB) and MINERvA
(MIN), are shown as a function of Q2

QE as fractional residuals to the reference model, using NUI-

SANCE [63]. The datasets are taken from Refs. [64–70].

however, it is not clear to what extent the measurement includes npnh eﬀects. Acceptance
is limited to muons above about 1 GeV and at forward angles below about 20◦ due to

the requirement that tracks enter the magnetized MINOS near detector. The proton-side
measurement is of CC0π on 12C, CH, 56Fe, and 208Pb targets (CH and 208Pb are shown). It

includes CCQE-like processes, and requires at least one proton with momentum greater than

450 MeV to exclude the region below the proton tracking threshold. Also shown in Fig. 2 is

MINERvA’s measurement of CC0π for νe, using the roughly 1% beam “contamination” in

the mostly-νµ conﬁguration [69]. The MINERvA result is in agreement with reference model

and lepton universality, but lacks the precision to test potential unsimulated cross section

diﬀerences, such as those proposed in [71]. The data are in reasonable agreement with the
reference GENIE model. MiniBooNE observes a larger suppression at very low Q2
predicted by the reference GENIE model, and an enhancement at moderate Q2

QE than is

QE. There is

some tension in the shape between MINERvA and MiniBooNE.

Double diﬀerential cross sections for CC0π with respect to muon energy and angle,
d2σ/dTµd cos θµ, have been published by T2K [72, 73], MiniBooNE [64, 65]; MINERvA
produced their result in the transverse and longitudinal components of the muon momen-

18

FIG. 3. The T2K CC0π double-diﬀerential cross section dσ/dpµd cos θµ is shown as a function of

pµ in angular bins, as a fractional diﬀerence between the published data and the reference GENIE

model, produced using NUISANCE [63]. The data used are taken from Ref. [72].

tum relative to the incident beam [74]. This is experimentally less model dependent than
measuring dσ/dQ2

QE. Detector acceptance typically depends strongly on muon kinematics,

with experiments having minimum muon energies, maximum muon angles, or both. Since
diﬀerential cross section measurements integrate over neutrino energy, a given bin of Q2

QE

contains events at a wide range of muon energy and angle. Ratios to the reference model
of d2σ/dTµd cos θµ for CC0π νµ-C8H8 interactions, measured by T2K are shown in Fig. 3
as a function of pµ in selected bins of cos θµ. The T2K data are from the ND280 oﬀ-axis

near detector, with peak neutrino energy of 0.6 GeV. A deﬁcit is observed with respect

to the reference GENIE model in the most forward angular bins, especially at low muon

momentum. The data agree with the reference model for backward and high-angle muons.

MINERvA has also made a double-diﬀerential measurement with respect to energy

and three-momentum transfer, dσ/dEavaildq3, for charged-current (inclusive) reactions [76].

While this is not explicitly CC0π, it covers a region of three-momentum transfer (q3 ≤

0.8 GeV) dominated by CC0π and CC1π. The quantity Eavail is deﬁned as the sum over
kinetic energy of all protons and π±, and total energy of all photons and π0. It is essentially

the observable hadronic energy in the detector, and serves as a proxy for true energy transfer

19

FIG. 4. MINERvA charged-current inclusive data as a function of available energy, Eavail (described

in the text), in slices of three-momentum transfer, q3, compared to four predictions from diﬀerent

simulations [54, 55, 75], produced using NUISANCE [63]. The data is taken from Ref. [76].

q0 = Eν − Eµ while avoiding model dependence that would be introduced by correcting for

unobserved hadronic energy, for example from neutrons. The reconstruction of q3 intro-

duces some model dependence by correcting to true neutrino energy, including unobserved

hadrons. The data are compared with four diﬀerent models in Figure 4: GENIE version 2.8.6

and the reference GENIE version 2.12.8 model, NEUT v5.4.0 [55], and NuWro v11q [75].

The diﬀerent panels in Figure 4 show diﬀerent slices of q3. At ﬁxed q3, quasi-elastic (1p1h)

events appear at low Eavail, with resonance pion production at high Eavail. Multi-nucleon

processes ﬁll in the “dip” region between the QE and ∆ peaks. The data disfavor GENIE

2.8.6, which lacks any npnh simulation. The data are well described by the reference GENIE

model, although an excess is observed at very low Eavail.

Additional measurements are also important for a complete picture of CCQE-like scatter-

ing. A new analysis on MiniBooNE uses a kaon decay at rest beam to provide information

from a mono-energetic beam [77]. This provides a unique case of known energy transfer in

neutrino interactions, which will provide new constraints on models. Neutral current elastic

20

 (GeV)availE)2/GeV2 cm-42 10· (3dqavaildEs2d00.10.20.30.4012 0.2£ 3 q£0.0 DATAGENIE v2.8.6GENIE v2.12.8NEUT 5.4.0NuWro 11q 0.2£ 3 q£0.0 00.20.40.60.8024 0.5£ 3 q£0.4  0.5£ 3 q£0.4 00.10.20.30.40246 0.3£ 3 q£0.2  0.3£ 3 q£0.2 00.20.40.60.80246 0.6£ 3 q£0.5  0.6£ 3 q£0.5 00.10.20.30.40246 0.4£ 3 q£0.3  0.4£ 3 q£0.3 00.20.40.60.801234 0.8£ 3 q£0.6  0.8£ 3 q£0.6 (NCE) scattering, ν(n, p) → ν(n, p), is sensitive to the strange quark contribution to the nu-

cleus and may be used as a signal sample in searches for oscillations to sterile neutrinos. The

only observable particles in the ﬁnal state are protons and neutrons. The signal is typically a

single proton track. In addition to backgrounds from charged-current processes, experiments

face an additional challenge from neutrons produced outside the detector, which knock out
protons inside the detector. The NCE diﬀerential cross section dσ/dQ2 was measured at

BNL [78], and more recently by MiniBooNE [79, 80], who also published ratios of NCE to

CCQE.

IV. SINGLE PION PRODUCTION

With suﬃciently large energy transfer to the struck nucleon, a nucleon resonance is pro-

duced, which typically decays to produce a proton or neutron, and either a charged or

neutral pion. Resonances can also decay to produce multi-pion ﬁnal states, photons, or

other mesons. The latter cases are discussed in Section V. Resonant production is the

dominant single pion production process in the 0.1–10 GeV energy range of interest for

neutrino scattering experiments. However, non-resonant processes also produce single pion

ﬁnal states, which can either come from non-resonant interactions with the whole nucleon,

or at higher energy transfers, soft-DIS processes where the interaction is with a constituent

quark, and the subsequent hadronization yields a single pion. Modeling the transition be-

tween non-resonant nucleon-level and quark-level interactions is a signiﬁcant challenge for

the community.

As is familiar from the discussion of CCQE/CC0π in Section III, the relationship between

the experimental and theoretical deﬁnitions of single pion production is complicated by FSI.

Multi-pion or soft-DIS interactions can contribute events where only a single pion escapes the

nucleus. Additionally, FSI may modify the outgoing pion charge, momentum and direction

for interactions for which a single pion was produced at the vertex. Indeed, some such events

will enter the CC0π signal if the pion is absorbed, as has been discussed previously. Due

to the complications of FSI, and the number of interaction processes which can contribute

to single ﬁnal-state pion production in an experiment, it is very challenging to use single

ﬁnal-state pion production data to constrain theoretical model parameters without use of a

Monte Carlo event generator. It is also challenging to attribute disagreement with data to

21

any speciﬁc model deﬁciency.

Other datasets can provide constraints on the single pion production model outlined

above. Much use is made of the rather limited set of νµ-deuterium bubble chamber data

from the 1970s and 1980s [81–84] to test and tune models of single pion production at the

vertex. Although a long-standing discrepancy between some of these datasets appears to

have recently been resolved [85], the low-statistics involved mean that these datasets can

only constrain model parameters at the ∼5–10% level [86]. Additionally, it is not clear

that FSI eﬀects can be safely neglected for deuterium [87]. A large body of pion-nucleus

and nucleon-nucleus scattering measurements are used to constrain the absorption, inelastic,

elastic and charge exchange interaction probabilities which underpin models of FSI, although

a model is required to relate the scattering of external particles on ground-state nuclei to

intra-nuclear scattering within an excited nuclear remnant [88]. Again, the datasets used

to constrain the FSI models typically date from the 1960s-1980s (for a review, see, for

example, Ref. [15]), and are often incomplete, e.g., correlations between data points and for

diﬀerent measurements produced by the same experiment are not available. A notable recent

exception are new datasets from the DUET experiment [89, 90], which recently published
results of π+-12C charge exchange and absorption for pion momentum 200 ≤ pπ ≤ 300 MeV,
including correlations between all data points [90].

In order to satisfy the stringent error budgets of future neutrino oscillation experi-

ments [91, 92], it is necessary both to have a theoretical model which adequately describes

single pion production in neutrino-nucleus scattering, and which has smaller uncertainties

than can be obtained by tuning the aspects of the model to the independent datasets out-

lined above. Therefore, it is important that we have a model which consistently describes all

of the currently available neutrino–nucleus scattering data, and that we have suﬃcient data

to constrain the model. This discussion will occupy much of the remainder of this section.

A. Resonance pion production

In recent years, many new high-statistics neutrino–nucleus single pion production datasets

on medium mass targets (hydrocarbon and water) diﬀerential in a number of variables have

become available from the MiniBooNE [93–95], MINERνA [96–98] and T2K [99] experi-

ments. Additionally, the ﬁrst measurements of neutrino–argon single pion production have

22

been published from the ArgoNeuT experiment [100], although without suﬃcient statistics

to produce diﬀerential results.

FIG. 5. Flux-averaged diﬀerential cross section predictions are made using the reference GE-

NIE model and NUISANCE [63] for various measurements. The fractional diﬀerence between the

published data and the reference model is shown to allow results from multiple experiments to be

plotted on the same axis as a function of pµ. The datasets used are taken from Refs. [94, 95, 98, 99].

Figures 5 and 6 show fractional deviations between data and the reference GENIE model

(see Appendix A for details). As with CC0π in Section III, the reference model predic-

tion incorporates the ﬂux, signal deﬁnition, and phase space of each measurement, and the

comparisons shown in Figures 5 and 6 are shape-only, as each experiment has a large nor-

malization uncertainty due to uncertainty in the neutrino ﬂux. We can see from Figure 5

that there is broad agreement between the reference model and various datasets in terms

of the momentum of the outgoing muon, pµ; and we can see from Figure 6 that the same

agreement is not seen in terms of the momentum of the outgoing pion, pπ. However, it is

interesting that the deviations in terms of pion kinematics appears to be relatively consistent
across experiments, and between CC1π+, CC1π0 and NC1π0 measurements, with a deﬁcit

of strength in data deﬁcit relative to GENIE at very low momentum, an excess of strength

in data for the intermediate 0.2 ≤ pπ ≤ 0.4 GeV region, where much of the data lies, and

23

FIG. 6. Flux-averaged diﬀerential cross section predictions are made using the reference GE-

NIE model and NUISANCE [63] for various measurements. The fractional diﬀerence between the

published data and the reference model is shown to allow results from multiple experiments to

be plotted on the same axis as a function of pπ. The datasets used are taken from Refs. [93–

95, 98, 99, 101].

with similarly consistent structure at higher pπ. While NC measurements are limited to
NCπ0 only, CCπ+ and NCπ0 are similar in shape-only comparisons. When normalizations

are included, CC and NC are less consistent.

B. Coherent pion production

At very low energy transfer, neutrinos can interact inelastically with the entire nucleus in

a coherent manner, producing either a charged or neutral pion, but leaving the nucleus intact

and in its ground state. Coherent pion production is of particular interest to neutrino oscil-
lation experiments because NC coherent interactions produce a π0, and are a background to
ν(–)
e -appearance measurements with a large uncertainty. CC production, with minimal recoil

of the nucleus, provides an interesting handle on neutrino energy for oscillation experiments,

but such analyses suﬀer from signiﬁcant resonant background contributions. Various his-

torical measurements of coherent pion production exist for both CC and NC processes on a

24

number of targets at neutrino energies Eν > 2 GeV, which are reviewed in Refs. [1, 102, 103],

but at low neutrino energies (Eν < 2 GeV), results presented a confusing picture. Measure-
ments of NC coherent π0 with average neutrino energies of ∼1 GeV were reported [104, 105],

but measurements of CC coherent pion production found no evidence [106–108]. Further-

more, the apparent diﬀerence between NC and CC coherent pion production conﬂicted with

the available theoretical models [109].

production for ν(–)

However, recent MINERvA [110, 111] and T2K [112] measurements of CC coherent pion
µ –12C at low energies observe coherent production, which disagrees with
the previous null results. The high-statistics MINERvA dataset is of particular interest as

the results are presented as single diﬀerential cross sections as a function of the outgoing

pion momentum, angle with respect to the incoming neutrino beam, and the neutrino en-
ergy [110]. Additionally, a recent measurement of NC νµ–56Fe coherent pion production
has been produced by the MINOS collaboration [113], and the ﬁrst measurements of CC
ν(–)
µ –40Ar coherent pion production have been presented by ArgoNeuT [114]. These results
are important to test how the coherent pion production cross section scales between nuclei,

but both the MINOS and ArgoNeuT results have average neutrino energies of ∼5 GeV or

greater.

Diﬀractive pion production is a similar process to coherent pion production where the

interaction is with a free proton, and the proton remains in an unexcited state. The ﬁrst
experimental evidence for NC diﬀractive π0 production has recently been presented by the
MINERvA collaboration [115]. As with coherent pion production, NC diﬀractive π0 pro-
duction constitutes a background for ν(–)

e -appearance measurements in experiments with a

hydrogen component. The potential problem is highlighted by the fact that the MIN-

ERvA diﬀractive sample was isolated after anomalies were found during the analysis of νe

events [69]. Currently, diﬀractive pion production is only modeled theoretically for invariant

masses W ≥ 2 GeV [116], so the potential size of the eﬀect in 0.1 ≤ Eν ≤ 10 GeV oscillation

experiments is not under control.

V. RARE PROCESSES

As described in Section I, charged kaon production by neutrinos is a background in
searches for the proton decay channel p → K +ν. The most stringent limits on p → K +ν

25

come from SK, where the largest background is from neutral-current K + by atmospheric neu-

trinos where no ﬁnal-state particles are above Cherenkov threshold [22]. Recently, diﬀerential
cross sections for CC and NC K + production have been measured by MINERvA [117, 118].
The MINERvA data for NC K + is the ﬁrst high-statistics test of the cross section models

employed by experiments.

In charged-current reactions, there are also Cabibbo-suppressed processes with a single
exotic (anti)quark in the ﬁnal state, for example νµp → µ−K +n or ¯νµp → µ+Λ. These
events have been seen in bubble chambers but exclusive cross sections have not been mea-
sured with high statistics. Cabibbo-suppressed CCQE ¯νµp → µ+Λ could be a few percent of
the total CCQE cross section for antineutrino scattering, with no neutrino analogue. MIN-
ERvA observed the ﬁrst evidence for the Cabibbo-suppressed charged-current coherent K +

production at 3σ signiﬁcance [119].

VI.

INCLUSIVE SCATTERING, OTHER NOTABLE PROCESSES

Charged-current inclusive scattering, to which all processes which produce a charged

lepton at the vertex contribute, has the simplest experimental deﬁnition. It is used as the

signal for neutrino oscillation experiments which have peak beam energies over ∼1 GeV,

which are not dominated by CCQE. Because of this, the energy cannot be reconstructed

using only the outgoing lepton information, as in Equation 8, but instead has to use both

leptonic and hadronic information

Erec

ν = El + Ehad,

(9)

where El is the energy of the outgoing lepton, and Ehad is the reconstructed hadronic energy.

In a perfect detector, the reconstructed hadronic energy would be the sum of the kinetic

energy of nucleons, and the total energy of all other outgoing particles. This would result in

accurate neutrino energy reconstruction, assuming that nucleons are not produced through

hadronization, and neglecting initial state binding and Fermi motion eﬀects. In a realistic

detector, neutron reconstruction is typically so poor that they can be neglected, and many

particles will not be suﬃciently energetic to identify individually. Model dependent correc-

tions are therefore used to correct for the missing energy due to neutrons, and to estimate

average multiplicities for particles which could not be reconstructed, but which still deposit

26

energy in the detector.

Theoretically, CC-inclusive processes can seem easier to model than exclusive processes.

Theorists are used to inclusive electron scattering measurements, where only the outgoing

lepton kinematics are detected.

Inclusive neutrino scattering cross section measurements

diﬀerential in the outgoing charged lepton kinematics are very similar, and allow the hadronic

state to be integrated over, thus avoiding the issues of FSI which make it diﬃcult to predict

exclusive ﬁnal states such as CC0π or CC1π. However, for neutrino oscillation experiments,

the relative energy fraction lost to neutrons, and the average pion and proton multiplicities

are very important for the reconstruction method outlined in Equation 9. Unfortunately,

the task of producing a CC-inclusive model suitable for neutrino oscillation experiments is

signiﬁcantly more challenging than for much of the electron-scattering data, and does not

sidestep the issue of FSI.

As well as the CC0π and CC single pion production channels, multi-pion and heavy meson

production processes contribute to the CC-inclusive cross section (for example, the rare

processes described in Section V). These additional processes are at predominantly DIS at

larger invariant masses, where the interaction is with a constituent quark within the nucleon,

rather than with the nucleon itself. Although DIS is well deﬁned theoretically, and is the

dominant interaction for Eν ≥ 3 GeV, it is not a well-deﬁned topology, so cannot easily be

selected experimentally. For example, DIS can produce a single pion and no other mesons in

the ﬁnal state, and thus is indistinguishable from resonant pion production, and conversely, it

is possible for a nucleon resonance to decay to produce multiple pions. Hadronization models

for DIS are tuned to high energy neutrino scattering data, and are not valid for low invariant

masses [120]. This is readily understandable, as the hadronization models are only valid for

neutrino–quark interactions. Unfortunately, the transition region between neutrino–nucleon

and neutrino–quark interactions is not well understood, and neutrino interaction generators

typically extrapolate both models outside the regions where they are expected to be valid,

and blend the two in an unphysical way to predict the cross section. A signiﬁcant number

of events for current and future neutrino oscillation experiments will lie in this transition

region, so inclusive data, which can be used to improve and validate models for this region

is very important.

It is, however, very challenging to use neutrino CC-inclusive data to validate single aspects

of a model. Broad band neutrino ﬂuxes, and the inability to reconstruct neutrino energy

27

on an event-by-event basis mean that the model has to be integrated over all interaction

kinematics. Figure 4 demonstrated how diﬃcult it is to identify the cause of data–MC

disagreement as a function of interaction kinematics for a broad band neutrino ﬂux. CC-

inclusive results as a function of outgoing particle kinematics are even more challenging to

disentangle. Taking similar measurements with diﬀerent neutrino ﬂuxes and diﬀerent target

conﬁgurations provides a way to break degeneracies, and so inclusive measurements from

multiple experiments is desirable.

There are a number of issues which make it more challenging to measure an inclusive

cross section than exclusive channels like CC0π or single pion production. Typically, events

with more ﬁnal state particles are more diﬃcult to reconstruct and enter the selection with

a lower eﬃciency, which may also depend on the kinematics of those ﬁnal state particles.

This can lead to the implicit input Monto Carlo bias outlined in Section II B 4. It also makes

it challenging to measure a cross section diﬀerential in the number of ﬁnal state particles

with modern experiments. The limited data that exists on track multiplicity all comes from

old bubble chamber experiments. Older measurements typically give results as a function

of neutrino energy [120–122], but recent measurements have mostly been made diﬀerential

in muon kinematics [123–126], or as single bin measurements [127, 128]. Recent exceptions

have been from the MINERvA experiment which have attempted to reconstruct interaction-

level kinematics in various ways [32, 76, 129, 130]. One such example is a series of heavy

target ratios, as a function of reconstructed Bjorken x [32], which is reconstructed using
reconstructed Eµ, θµ and ν: Eν = Eµ + ν, Q2 = 4EνEµ sin2 (cid:16) θµ
2MNν , where MN
is the average of the proton and neutron masses. Comparisons with the reference GENIE

, x = Q2

(cid:17)

2

model are shown in Figure 7, from which it is clear that there are discrepancies at both high

and low x, which increase with the size of nuclear target used in the numerator. However,

in making the comparison to data using the reference GENIE model, the smearing matrix

published by MINERvA to relate reconstructed x with true x was used. That matrix was

created using an earlier version of GENIE (v2.6.2), which may add model dependence to the

smearing matrix through the relationship between reconstructed and true energy transfer.

28

FIG. 7. Predictions for the ﬂux-averaged CC-inclusive heavy target ratio measurements from

MINERvA as a function of reconstructed Bjorken x are produced using the reference GENIE

model and NUISANCE [63]. The fractional diﬀerence between the published data and the reference

GENIE model is shown for the published rations. The data used are taken from Ref. [32]. Smearing

matrices which relate true x and x as reconstructed by the MINERvA detector are also provided

in the data used, and are used in NUISANCE to fold detector eﬀects into the GENIE prediction

and make an appropriate comparison with data.

VII. FUTURE EXPERIMENT POSSIBILITIES

In the next ﬁve years, the current generation of neutrino scattering experiments (T2K,

MINERvA, NOvA, MicroBooNE [131]) programs will produce ﬁnal, high statistics, mea-

surements for many topologies with neutrino and antineutrino conﬁgurations. Future de-

tectors in the T2K beam (T2K ND Upgrade Project, WAGASCI [132], NINJA [133]) will

expand the phase space available to measure or provide new detection methods. There

is a burgeoning program of measurements of not only the leptonic side but the hadronic

side. These experiments are also developing creative new methods or measurements to ex-

pand our understanding. Thoughtful projections of observables may yield new information

about nuclear eﬀects [134], and such measurements are underway on T2K and MINERvA

experiments. Over this time period, all experiments will include signiﬁcant improvements

to sources of systematic uncertainty. The most clear case is that of the neutrino ﬂux follow-

ing methods discussed in Section II B 3; neutrino-electron scattering, for example, beneﬁts

from as long a run period (increased statistics) as possible. There may also be improve-

29

ments to other sources of systematic uncertainty. For example, data from LArIAT [135] and

ProtoDUNE [136] will beneﬁt the short baseline program at Fermilab [137] and DUNE.

Another critical new category of measurement not readily possible before will come from

measurements of neutrons out of neutrino interactions. Neutron multiplicity and energy

varies enormously from generator to generator, these measurements, if feasible, could help

reﬁne where and how model implementation breaks down, especially in conjunction with

other hadronic state measurements. MINERvA and NOvA calorimeter experiments can use

neutron scatters in the detector as an estimate of neutron energy and multiplicity. There
are also dedicated experiments, CAPTAIN (40Ar) and ANNIE (H2O). CAPTAIN [138] is a
small LAr detector placed near a neutron source used to determine if neutron scatters can

be tagged. ANNIE [139] will use neutron capture on Gadolinium in a neutrino beam to infer

neutron multiplicity.

One can also use the neutrino beam itself to yield new information about the cross section

model. T2K recently produced a measurement using a comparison of neutrino interactions

across the beam [127], as the beam changes. The ﬂux diﬀerences provide information about

the energy dependence of the cross section for nearly identical detectors. This technique

(“NuPRISM”) [140] can be expanded and is under consideration for the future near detectors

of the Hyper-Kamiokande and DUNE experiments.

VIII. SUMMARY

Neutrino interactions play a critical role in neutrino oscillation experiments, which has

motivated an extensive experimental program to measure neutrino scattering cross sections.

Recent theoretical improvements over a number of years have produced CC0π models which

show broad qualitative agreement with data, but more eﬀort is needed to understand re-

gions of disagreements between models and experiments, especially in the forward scatter-

ing region. There has been less theoretical work on single pion production, and there is

considerable tension between neutrino-nucleus scattering data and theoretical predictions,

particularly for the outgoing pion kinematics. That said, the discrepancies with data appear

to be reasonably consistent between charged and neutral current and between charged and

neutral pions. Less data exists for inclusive measurements, particularly at the energies most

relevant for NOvA and DUNE, who use CC-inclusive events as the signal for oscillation

30

measurements. Modeling the transition region between resonant pion production, and DIS

interactions with a quark inside the nucleus is a signiﬁcant theoretical challenge for the

future, and there are fewer recent datasets which are appropriate for tuning models of this

higher invariant mass region.

Other critical neutrino scattering issues for oscillation experiments are the lack of ν(–)

e cross

section measurements, so models tuned with ν(–)

µ data must rely on theoretical arguments to

relate the two (vital for appearance measurements). Similarly, most of the current measure-

ments are taken on hydrocarbon or water targets, a critical problem for the short baseline

and DUNE oscillation programs, which use argon targets. There is an exciting future pro-

gram of neutrino scattering to address many of these issues, with a host of new technologies

and techniques being used. In particular, many new results are anticipated which will probe
QE-like interactions in detail, measurements on 40Ar targets, neutrons, or which use novel

projections of existing data sets.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

While the authors experimental aﬃliations do not aﬀect the objectivity of this review,

we wish to include them for transparency. KM and CW are current members of the T2K

and DUNE collaborations. KM is a former member of the K2K, SciBooNE and MiniBooNE

collaborations. CM is a former member of MINERvA, and a current member of the DUNE

experiment. The authors are not aware of any funding, or ﬁnancial holdings that might be

perceived as aﬀecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge the support of the Oﬃce of Science, Oﬃce of High Energy Physics, of

the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract Number DOE OHEP DE-AC02-05CH11231

and award DE-SC0015903, the Swiss National Science Foundation and SERI, and the Alfred

P. Sloan Foundation.

This document was prepared as an account of work sponsored by the United States Gov-

ernment. While this document is believed to contain correct information, neither the United

States Government nor any agency thereof, nor the Regents of the University of California,

31

nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal

responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus,

product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned

rights. Reference herein to any speciﬁc commercial product, process, or service by its trade

name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its

endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency

thereof, or the Regents of the University of California. The views and opinions of authors

expressed herein do not necessarily state or reﬂect those of the United States Government

or any agency thereof or the Regents of the University of California.

[1] J. A. Formaggio and G. P. Zeller, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1307 (2012).

[2] C. Patrignani et al. (Particle Data Group), Chin. Phys. C40, 100001 (2016).

[3] K. Abe

et al.

(T2K), Phys. Rev. D87,

012001

(2013),

[Addendum:

Phys.

Rev.D87,no.1,019902(2013)], arXiv:1211.0469 [hep-ex].

[4] NOvA collaboration, publicly available ﬂux prediction.

[5] L. Aliaga et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. D94, 092005 (2016),

[Addendum: Phys.

Rev.D95,no.3,039903(2017)], arXiv:1607.00704 [hep-ex].

[6] R. Acciarri et al. (DUNE), (2015), arXiv:1512.06148 [physics.ins-det].

[7] K. Abe et al. (T2K), Phys. Rev. D96, 092006 (2017), arXiv:1707.01048 [hep-ex].

[8] E. Fernandez-Martinez and D. Meloni, Phys. Lett. B697, 477 (2011), arXiv:1010.2329 [hep-

ph].

[9] O. Lalakulich, U. Mosel,

and K. Gallmeister, Phys. Rev. C86, 054606 (2012),

arXiv:1208.3678 [nucl-th].

[10] D. Meloni and M. Martini, Phys. Lett. B716, 186 (2012), arXiv:1203.3335 [hep-ph].

[11] P. Coloma and P. Huber, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 221802 (2013), arXiv:1307.1243 [hep-ph].

[12] M. Martini, M. Ericson, and G. Chanfray, Phys. Rev. D87, 013009 (2013), arXiv:1211.1523

[hep-ph].

[13] P. Coloma, P. Huber, C.-M. Jen,

and C. Mariani, Phys. Rev. D89, 073015 (2014),

arXiv:1311.4506 [hep-ph].

32

[14] C. M. Jen, A. Ankowski, O. Benhar, A. P. Furmanski, L. N. Kalousis, and C. Mariani, Phys.

Rev. D90, 093004 (2014), arXiv:1402.6651 [hep-ex].

[15] K. Abe et al. (T2K), Phys. Rev. D91, 072010 (2015), arXiv:1502.01550 [hep-ex].

[16] A. M. Ankowski, O. Benhar, C. Mariani, and E. Vagnoni, Phys. Rev. D93, 113004 (2016),

arXiv:1603.01072 [hep-ph].

[17] U. Mosel, O. Lalakulich,

and K. Gallmeister, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 151802 (2014),

arXiv:1311.7288 [nucl-th].

[18] A. M. Ankowski, P. Coloma, P. Huber, C. Mariani, and E. Vagnoni, Phys. Rev. D92, 091301

(2015), arXiv:1507.08561 [hep-ph].

[19] P. Adamson et al. (MINOS), Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 011802 (2011), arXiv:1104.3922 [hep-ex].

[20] A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE), Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 221803 (2017),

arXiv:1702.02688 [hep-ex].

[21] K. Abe, Y. Haga, Y. Hayato, M. Ikeda, et al. (Super-Kamiokande Collaboration), Phys. Rev.

D 95, 012004 (2017).

[22] K. Abe, Y. Hayato, K. Iyogi, J. Kameda, et al. (Super-Kamiokande Collaboration), Phys.

Rev. D 90, 072005 (2014).

[23] L. Alvarez-Ruso, Y. Hayato, and J. Nieves, New J. Phys. 16, 075015 (2014), arXiv:1403.2673

[hep-ph].

[24] G. T. Garvey, D. A. Harris, H. A. Tanaka, R. Tayloe, and G. P. Zeller, Phys. Rept. 580, 1

(2015), arXiv:1412.4294 [hep-ex].

[25] U. Mosel, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 66, 171 (2016), arXiv:1602.00696 [nucl-th].

[26] T. Katori and M. Martini, J. Phys. G45, 013001 (2018), arXiv:1611.07770 [hep-ph].

[27] L. Alvarez-Ruso et al., (2017), arXiv:1706.03621 [hep-ph].

[28] H. B. Prosper and L. Lyons, eds., Proceedings, PHYSTAT 2011 Workshop on Statistical

Issues Related to Discovery Claims in Search Experiments and Unfolding, CERN, Geneva,

Switzerland 17-20 January 2011 , CERN (CERN, Geneva, 2011).

[29] M. Kuusela, Statistical Issues in Unfolding Methods for High Energy Physics, Master’s thesis,

Aalto University (2012).

[30] M. J. Kuusela, Uncertainty quantiﬁcation in unfolding elementary particle spectra at the

Large Hadron Collider, Ph.D. thesis, SB, Lausanne (2016).

[31] G. D’Agostini, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A362, 487 (1995).

33

[32] B. G. Tice et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. Lett. (2014), arXiv:1403.2103 [hep-ex].

[33] A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE), Phys. Rev. D82, 092005 (2010), arXiv:1007.4730

[hep-ex].

[34] D. S. Barton, G. W. Brandenburg, W. Busza, T. Dobrowolski, et al., Phys. Rev. D 27, 2580

(1983).

[35] G. Ambrosini et al. (SPY), Phys. Lett. B420, 225 (1998).

[36] G. Ambrosini et al. (SPY), Phys. Lett. B425, 208 (1998).

[37] R. Raja, Proceedings, 5th International Workshop on Ring Imaging Cherenkov Detectors

(RICH 2004): Playa de Carmen, Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico, November 30-December 5,

2004, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A553, 225 (2005).

[38] M. G. Catanesi et al. (HARP), Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A571, 527 (2007).

[39] N. Abgrall et al. (NA61), JINST 9, P06005 (2014), arXiv:1401.4699 [physics.ins-det].

[40] J. Park, L. Aliaga, O. Altinok, L. Bellantoni, et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. D 93, 112007

(2016).

[41] W. G. Seligman, C. G. Arroyo, L. de Barbaro, P. de Barbaro, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79,

1213 (1997).

[42] M. Tzanov, D. Naples, S. Boyd, J. McDonald, et al., Phys. Rev. D 74, 012008 (2006).

[43] A. Bodek, U. Sarica, D. Naples, and L. Ren, The European Physical Journal C 72, 1973

(2012).

[44] P. Adamson, C. Andreopoulos, K. E. Arms, R. Armstrong, et al. (MINOS Collaboration),

Phys. Rev. D 81, 072002 (2010).

[45] J. Devan, L. Ren, L. Aliaga, O. Altinok, et al. (The MINERvA Collaboration), Phys. Rev.

D 94, 112007 (2016).

[46] G. D’Agostini, (2010), arXiv:1010.0632 [physics].

[47] C. Wilkinson et al., Phys. Rev. D93, 072010 (2016), arXiv:1601.05592 [hep-ex].

[48] R. D. Cousins et al., (2016), arXiv:1607.07038 [physics.data-an].

[49] C. H. Llewellyn Smith, Gauge Theories and Neutrino Physics, Jacob, 1978:0175, Phys. Rept.

3, 261 (1972).

[50] A. Bodek, S. Avvakumov, R. Bradford, and H. S. Budd, High energy physics. Proceedings,

Europhysics Conference, HEP 2007, Manchester, UK, July 19-25, 2007, J. Phys. Conf. Ser.

110, 082004 (2008), arXiv:0709.3538 [hep-ex].

34

[51] S. J. Barish, J. Campbell, G. Charlton, Y. Cho, et al., Phys. Rev. D 16, 3103 (1977).

[52] N. J. Baker, A. M. Cnops, P. L. Connolly, S. A. Kahn, et al., Phys. Rev. D 23, 2499 (1981).

[53] A. S. Meyer, M. Betancourt, R. Gran, and R. J. Hill, Phys. Rev. D93, 113015 (2016),

arXiv:1603.03048 [hep-ph].

[54] C. Andreopoulos et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A614, 87 (2010), arXiv:0905.2517 [hep-ph].

[55] Y. Hayato, Neutrino interactions: From theory to Monte Carlo simulations. Proceedings,

45th Karpacz Winter School in Theoretical Physics, Ladek-Zdroj, Poland, February 2-11,

2009, Acta Phys. Polon. B40, 2477 (2009).

[56] D. Casper, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 112, 161 (2002), arXiv:hep-ph/0208030 [hep-ph].

[57] R. A. Smith and E. J. Moniz, Nucl. Phys. B43, 605 (1972),

[Erratum: Nucl.

Phys.B101,547(1975)].

[58] E. J. Moniz, I. Sick, R. R. Whitney, J. R. Ficenec, R. D. Kephart, and W. P. Trower, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 26, 445 (1971).

[59] R. Gran, E. J. Jeon, E. Aliu, S. Andringa, et al. (K2K Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D 74,

052002 (2006).

[60] A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo, A. O. Bazarko, S. J. Brice, B. C. Brown, et al. (MiniBooNE Collab-

oration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 032301 (2008).

[61] P. Adamson, I. Anghel, A. Aurisano, G. Barr, et al. (MINOS Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D

91, 012005 (2015).

[62] K. Abe et al. (T2K Collaboration), (2014), arXiv:1411.6264 [hep-ex].

[63] P. Stowell et al., JINST 12, P01016 (2017), arXiv:1612.07393 [hep-ex].

[64] A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D81, 092005 (2010),

arXiv:1002.2680 [hep-ex].

[65] A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D88, 032001 (2013),

arXiv:1301.7067 [hep-ex].

[66] L. Fields et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 022501 (2013), arXiv:1305.2234 [hep-ex].

[67] G. A. Fiorentini et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 022502 (2013), arXiv:1305.2243

[hep-ex].

[68] T. Walton et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. D91, 071301 (2015), arXiv:1409.4497 [hep-ex].

[69] J. Wolcott et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 081802 (2016), arXiv:1509.05729 [hep-

ex].

35

[70] M. Betancourt et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 082001 (2017), arXiv:1705.03791

[hep-ex].

[71] M. Day and K. S. McFarland, Phys. Rev. D86, 053003 (2012), arXiv:1206.6745 [hep-ph].

[72] K. Abe et al. (T2K), Phys. Rev. D93, 112012 (2016), arXiv:1602.03652 [hep-ex].

[73] K. Abe et al. (T2K), Phys. Rev. D97, 012001 (2018), arXiv:1708.06771 [hep-ex].

[74] C. E. Patrick et al. (MINERvA), (2018), arXiv:1801.01197 [hep-ex].

[75] C. Juszczak, Neutrino interactions: From theory to Monte Carlo simulations. Proceedings,

45th Karpacz Winter School in Theoretical Physics, Ladek-Zdroj, Poland, February 2-11,

2009, Acta Phys. Polon. B40, 2507 (2009), arXiv:0909.1492 [hep-ex].

[76] P. A. Rodrigues et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 071802 (2016), arXiv:1511.05944

[hep-ex].

[77] A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE), (2018), arXiv:1801.03848 [hep-ex].

[78] L. A. Ahrens, S. H. Aronson, P. L. Connolly, B. G. Gibbard, et al., Phys. Rev. D 35, 785

(1987).

[79] A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo, C. E. Anderson, A. O. Bazarko, S. J. Brice, et al. (MiniBooNE

Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D 82, 092005 (2010).

[80] A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D91, 012004 (2015),

arXiv:1309.7257 [hep-ex].

[81] S. Barish, M. Derrick, T. Dombeck, L. Hyman, K. Jaeger, et al., Phys. Rev. D19, 2521

(1979).

[82] G. Radecky, V. Barnes, D. Carmony, A. Garﬁnkel, M. Derrick, et al., Phys. Rev. D25, 1161

(1982).

[83] T. Kitagaki, H. Yuta, S. Tanaka, A. Yamaguchi, K. Abe, et al., Phys. Rev. D34, 2554 (1986).

[84] T. Kitagaki, H. Yuta, S. Tanaka, A. Yamaguchi, K. Abe, et al., Phys. Rev. D42, 1331 (1990).

[85] C. Wilkinson, P. Rodrigues, S. Cartwright, L. Thompson, and K. McFarland, Phys. Rev.

D90, 112017 (2014), arXiv:1411.4482 [hep-ex].

[86] P. Rodrigues, C. Wilkinson,

and K. McFarland, Eur. Phys. J. C76, 474 (2016),

arXiv:1601.01888 [hep-ex].

[87] J.-J. Wu, T. Sato, and T. S. H. Lee, Phys. Rev. C91, 035203 (2015), arXiv:1412.2415

[nucl-th].

[88] L. Salcedo et al., Nucl. Phys. A484, 557 (1988).

36

[89] K. Ieki et al. (DUET), Phys. Rev. C92, 035205 (2015), arXiv:1506.07783 [hep-ex].

[90] E. S. Pinzon Guerra et al. (DUET), Phys. Rev. C95, 045203 (2017), arXiv:1611.05612 [hep-

ex].

[91] C. Adams et al. (LBNE Collaboration), (2013), arXiv:1307.7335 [hep-ex].

[92] K. Abe et al. (T2K Collaboration), PTEP 2015, 043C01 (2015), arXiv:1409.7469 [hep-ex].

[93] A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE), Phys. Rev. D81, 013005 (2010), arXiv:0911.2063

[hep-ex].

[94] A.A.Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE), Phys. Rev. D83, 052009 (2011), arXiv:1010.3264

[hep-ex].

[95] A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE), Phys. Rev. D83, 052007 (2011), arXiv:1011.3572

[hep-ex].

[96] B. Eberly et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. D92, 092008 (2015), arXiv:1406.6415 [hep-ex].

[97] L. Aliaga et al., Phys. Lett. B749, 130 (2015), arXiv:1503.02107 [hep-ex].

[98] C. L. McGivern et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. D94, 052005 (2016), arXiv:1606.07127 [hep-

ex].

[99] K. Abe et al. (T2K), Phys. Rev. D95, 012010 (2017), arXiv:1605.07964 [hep-ex].

[100] R. Acciarri et al. (ArgoNeuT), Phys.Rev. D96, 012006 (2017), arXiv:1511.00941 [hep-ex].

[101] S. Nakayama (K2K), Phys. Lett. B619, 255 (2005), arXiv:hep-ex/0408134.

[102] P. Vilain et al. (CHARM-II), Phys. Lett. B313, 267 (1993).

[103] K. A. Olive et al. (Particle Data Group), Chin. Phys. C38, 090001 (2014).

[104] D. Schmitz et al. (MiniBooNE), Phys. Lett. B664, 41 (2008), arXiv:0803.3423 [hep-ex].

[105] Y. Kurimoto et al. (SciBooNE), Phys. Rev. D81, 033004 (2010), arXiv:0910.5768 [hep-ex].

[106] M. Hasegawa et al. (K2K), Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 252301 (2005), arXiv:hep-ex/0506008 [hep-

ex].

[107] K. Hiraide et al. (SciBooNE), Phys. Rev. D78, 112004 (2008), arXiv:0811.0369 [hep-ex].

[108] H.-K. Tanaka, Proceedings, 6th International Workshop on Neutrino-nucleus interactions in

the few GeV region (NUINT 09): Sitges, Spain, May 18-22, 2009, AIP Conf. Proc. 1189,

255 (2009), arXiv:0910.4754 [hep-ex].

[109] Y. Kurimoto et al. (SciBooNE), Phys. Rev. D81, 111102 (2010), arXiv:1005.0059 [hep-ex].

[110] A. Higuera et al. (MINERνA Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 261802 (2014),

arXiv:1409.3835 [hep-ex].

37

[111] A. Mislivec et al. (Minerva), (2017), arXiv:1711.01178 [hep-ex].

[112] K. Abe et al. (T2K), Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 192501 (2016), arXiv:1604.04406 [hep-ex].

[113] P. Adamson et al. (MINOS), Phys. Rev. D94, 072006 (2016), arXiv:1608.05702 [hep-ex].

[114] R. Acciarri et al. (ArgoNeuT), Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 261801 (2014), [erratum: Phys. Rev.

Lett.114,no.3,039901(2015)], arXiv:1408.0598 [hep-ex].

[115] J. Wolcott et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 111801 (2016), arXiv:1604.01728 [hep-

ex].

[116] D. Rein, Nucl. Phys. B278, 61 (1986).

[117] C. M. Marshall, L. Aliaga, O. Altinok, L. Bellantoni, et al. (MINERvA Collaboration), Phys.

Rev. D 94, 012002 (2016).

[118] C. M. Marshall, L. Aliaga, O. Altinok, L. Bellantoni, et al. (MINERvA Collaboration), Phys.

Rev. Lett. 119, 011802 (2017).

[119] Z. Wang, C. M. Marshall, L. Aliaga, O. Altinok, et al. (MINERvA Collaboration), Phys.

Rev. Lett. 117, 061802 (2016).

[120] M. Tzanov et al. (NuTeV), Phys. Rev. D74, 012008 (2006), arXiv:hep-ex/0509010 [hep-ex].

[121] Q. Wu et al. (NOMAD), Phys. Lett. B660, 19 (2008), arXiv:0711.1183 [hep-ex].

[122] P. Adamson et al. (MINOS), Phys. Rev. D81, 072002 (2010), arXiv:0910.2201 [hep-ex].

[123] C. Anderson et al. (ArgoNeuT), Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 161802 (2012), arXiv:1111.0103 [hep-

ex].

[124] K. Abe et al. (T2K), Phys. Rev. D87, 092003 (2013), arXiv:1302.4908 [hep-ex].

[125] R. Acciarri et al. (ArgoNeuT), Phys. Rev. D89, 112003 (2014), arXiv:1404.4809 [hep-ex].

[126] Y. Nakajima et al. (SciBooNE), Phys. Rev. D83, 012005 (2011), arXiv:1011.2131 [hep-ex].

[127] K. Abe et al. (T2K), Phys. Rev. D93, 072002 (2016), arXiv:1509.06940 [hep-ex].

[128] K. Abe et al. (T2K), Phys. Rev. D96, 052001 (2017), arXiv:1706.04257 [hep-ex].

[129] J. Devan et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. D94, 112007 (2016), arXiv:1610.04746 [hep-ex].

[130] L. Ren et al. (MINERvA), Phys. Rev. D95, 072009 (2017), arXiv:1701.04857 [hep-ex].

[131] H. Chen et al. (MicroBooNE), (2007).

[132] K. Kin, J. Harada, Y. Seiya, and K. Yamamoto (WAGASCI), Proceedings, 27th Interna-

tional Conference on Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics (Neutrino 2016): London, United

Kingdom, July 4-9, 2016, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 888, 012125 (2017).

38

[133] T. Fukuda (NINJA), Proceedings, 3rd International Symposium on Quest for the Origin of

Particles and the Universe (KMI2017): Nagoya, Japan, January 5-7, 2017, PoS KMI2017,

012 (2017).

[134] X. G. Lu, L. Pickering, S. Dolan, G. Barr, et al., Phys. Rev. C94, 015503 (2016),

arXiv:1512.05748 [nucl-th].

[135] F. Cavanna, M. Kordosky, J. Raaf,

and B. Rebel (LArIAT),

(2014), arXiv:1406.5560

[physics.ins-det].

[136] B. Abi et al. (DUNE), (2017), arXiv:1706.07081 [physics.ins-det].

[137] M. Antonello et al. (LAr1-ND, ICARUS-WA104, MicroBooNE), (2015), arXiv:1503.01520

[physics.ins-det].

[138] H. Berns et al. (CAPTAIN), in Proceedings, 2013 Community Summer Study on the Future

of U.S. Particle Physics: Snowmass on the Mississippi (CSS2013): Minneapolis, MN, USA,

July 29-August 6, 2013 (2013) arXiv:1309.1740 [physics.ins-det].

[139] I. Anghel et al. (ANNIE), (2015), arXiv:1504.01480 [physics.ins-det].

[140] S. Bhadra et al. (nuPRISM), (2014), arXiv:1412.3086 [physics.ins-det].

[141] J. Nieves, J. E. Amaro, and M. Valverde, Phys. Rev. C70, 055503 (2004), [Erratum: Phys.

Rev.C72,019902(2005)], arXiv:nucl-th/0408005 [nucl-th].

[142] A. Bodek and J. L. Ritchie, Phys. Rev. D 23, 1070 (1981).

[143] J. Nieves, I. R. Simo, and M. J. V. Vacas, Phys. Rev. C 83, 045501 (2011).

[144] R. Gran, J. Nieves, F. Sanchez, and M. J. Vicente Vacas, Phys. Rev. D88, 113007 (2013),

arXiv:1307.8105 [hep-ph].

[145] J. Schwehr, D. Cherdack, and R. Gran, (2016), arXiv:1601.02038 [hep-ph].

[146] D. Rein and L. M. Sehgal, Annals Phys. 133, 79 (1981).

[147] D. Rein and L. M. Sehgal, Phys. Lett. B657, 207 (2007), arXiv:hep-ph/0606185 [hep-ph].

[148] C. Berger and L. M. Sehgal, Phys. Rev. D79, 053003 (2009), arXiv:0812.2653 [hep-ph].

[149] A.Bodek and U. Yang, AIP Conf. Proc. 670, 110 (2003).

[150] T. Yang, C. Andreopoulos, H. Gallagher, K. Hoﬀmann, and P. Kehayias, Eur. Phys. J. C63,

1 (2009), arXiv:0904.4043 [hep-ph].

39

Appendix A: Reference model

In this review, we used one of the out-of-the-box conﬁguration of GENIE v2.12.8 as a

reference model. The conﬁguration is labeled “ValenciaQEBergerSehgalCOHRES” in GE-

NIE, and is described below. We note that this conﬁguration is not the default option for

this GENIE version, but is provided by the GENIE authors. We chose this conﬁguration

option based on internal model consistency and because it includes many recent theoretically

motivated improvements. No additional tuning is applied.

QE: The QE model is a Local Fermi Gas (LFG), with momentum distributions based

on Nieves et. al [141] and uses an axial mass of M QE

A = 1.05 GeV. This model includes the

Relativistic Phase Approximation (RPA) and Coulomb eﬀects for the outgoing muon.

Nuclear model: For all processes other than QE, the Bodek-Ritchie model [142] is used

to to describe the initial state nucleon momentum distribution.

2p2h: A consistent model with QE is used for multi-nucleon processes [143, 144], the

GENIE implementation for which is described in Ref. [145].

1π: The resonant model is based on the Rein-Sehgal model [146, 147], which has been

updated to include lepton mass corrections to the phase space limits (although not the

cross section calculation itself). Details of the GENIE resonant model can be found in

Refs. [54, 86]. The coherent model is based on Berger-Seghal [148] in the conﬁguration used

in this work.

Transition region and DIS: The Bodek-Yang [149] model is used to model the DIS

cross section, with hadronization described by the AKGY model [150]. These models also

provide the non-resonant background under the resonant region for W ≥ 1.7 GeV.

FSI model: Final state interactions are described by a custom GENIE model, tuned

to hadron-scattering data, where a single interaction is used to approximate cascade model

behavior [54] is applied to all processes.

40

