Journal of Low Temperature Physics manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Pushing the Limits of Broadband and High Frequency
Metamaterial Silicon Antireﬂection Coatings

K.P. Coughlin · J.J. McMahon · K.T. Crowley ·
B.J. Koopman · K.H. Miller · S.M. Simon · E.J.
Wollack

8
1
0
2

r
p
A
3
2

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
8
6
3
8
0
.
4
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later

Abstract Broadband refractive optics realized from high index materials provide com-
pelling design solutions for the next generation of observatories for the Cosmic Microwave
Background (CMB), and for sub-millimeter astronomy. In this paper, work is presented
which extends the state of the art in silicon lenses with metamaterial antireﬂection (AR)
coatings towards larger bandwidth and higher frequency operation. Examples presented in-
clude octave bandwidth coatings with less than 0.5% reﬂection, a prototype 4:1 bandwidth
coating, and a coating optimized for 1.4 THz. For these coatings the detailed design, fabri-
cation and testing processes are described as well as the inherent performance trade offs.

Keywords Optics, Metamaterials

1 Introduction

Current and planned ground-based CMB experiments [1–5] and sub-millimeter observato-
ries [6, 7] use photon noise limited detectors. Improving the sensitivity of these instruments
requires deploying a greater number of detectors. The two approaches being pursued are
development of optical systems with large ﬁelds of view, and multichroic detectors. The
former usually requires lenses fabricated from high index of refraction materials. The latter
requires optical systems operating over broad bandwidths. Simultaneously meeting these
design requirements necessitates the realization of high performance AR coatings.

Silicon lenses with metamaterial AR coatings represent a rapidly maturing technology
that can meet these needs. These coatings offer excellent optical performance (low reﬂec-
tion, low dielectric losses, and low scattering [8]), are robust to thermal cycling, and can be

K.P. Coughlin E-mail: kpcoughl@umich.edu · J.J. McMahon · S.M. Simon
Department of Physics, University of Michigan, 450 Church St., Ann Arbor, MI, 48109

K.T. Crowley
Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 08544

B.J. Koopman
Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850

K.H. Miller · E.J. Wollack
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, 20771

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

K.P. Coughlin et al.

reliably manufactured. Moreover, these coatings offer ﬁne control over dielectric properties.
By tailoring the subwavelength features in the surface of the silicon, the dielectric constant
can be tuned to a broad range of values between pure silicon and vacuum [8]. This freedom
allows these coatings to be optimized for a wide variety of applications.

In this paper, we present work done to explore the range of applications possible with
silicon dielectric metamaterial AR coatings. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents the design and fabrication methods for these coatings. Section 3 discusses testing
and performance. Section 4 presents three types of coatings: 3 layer with 3:1 bandwidth
from 75-170 GHz and 125-280 GHz ; 5 layer with 4:1 bandwidth from 75-320 GHz; and a
single layer coating centered at 1.4 THz. Section 5 concludes with discussion of the appli-
cability of this coating technology, including the trade-offs between broad bandwidth and
high frequency operation.

2 Design and Fabrication

The metamaterial AR coatings discussed here are periodic structures fabricated with sili-
con dicing blades. Figure 1 shows the dielectric metamaterial unit cells corresponding to
1, 3 and 5 layer AR coatings, as modeled in Ansys High Frequency Structural Simulator
(HFSS). These structures are fabricated by making arrays of evenly spaced grooves in the
silicon surface, rotating the substrate by 90 degrees, and repeating. By changing the blade
thickness and spacing of the cuts, one can tune the dielectric constant of each metamate-
rial layer. Creating multilayer coatings requires realizing nested cuts with multiple widths.
These coatings perform exactly like layers of dielectric up to a high frequency limit that is
set by the pitch of the unit cell [9–11].

The design of these AR coatings requires tuning of a number of free parameters and
adhering to practical constraints. The free parameters are the pitch of the cuts, kerf (kerf
is the term that describes the width of the cut) and depth of each layer, giving 2n + 1 free
parameters for an n-layer coating. The constraints come from particulars of the fabrication
system approach and scattering as discussed in the next section.

2.1 Constraints

The primary constraint comes from the blades which are manufactured with a maximum
exposure-to-kerf ratio of 50:1. This limits the ratio of the depth to the widths of the cuts.
For example, 20 µm wide cuts must be below 1 mm in depth. Beyond this limit, the blade
wanders while cutting, which increases pillar breakage, wear, and probability of breakage
of the blade, and can increase scattering. This constraint limits how many layers the AR
coating can have and limits the maximum effective index of the deepest AR layer.

A second effect limits the kerfs of successive layers. While the cut proﬁles are usually
quite sharp and square, there is always some taper to the cuts. If two successive cuts are too
close in intended kerf, the interface between the two cuts begin to blend together, reducing
performance. There are also practical limitations to the minimum achievable blade thick-
ness. Presently, the diamond-nickel blades we use are available down to 12 µm in thickness.
This limits the frequency of single layer coatings to approximately 2 THz.

A fundamental constraint of these metamaterials is that the deﬁned features need to be
sufﬁciently small that they act as a simple dielectric material. This requires the pitch of the
cuts to be less than about half the wavelength [10, 11]. For a given geometry, increasing the

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

3

Frequency Range
1 Layer 125-165 GHz
1 Layer 1.3-1.5 THz
3 Layer 75-170 GHz

Pitch (µm)
200
30
450

3 Layer 125-280 GHz

285

5 Layer 70-350 GHz

225

Kerf (µm)
80
12
230
110
25
168
82
22
152
129
80
42
20

Depth (µm)
250
25
500
320
252
296
187
143
280
270
165
150
125

Table 1 This table lists the cut parameters for the various AR coatings which have been fabricated using our
dicing saw

frequency beyond this breakdown frequency will lead to scattering and a rapid degradation
in performance.

2.2 Optimization

The design process is a three step process following Datta et al [8]. The ﬁrst step uses an
analytic transmission line model to perform a Monte Carlo minimization of in-band reﬂec-
tion. This model treats each metamaterial layer as an ideal dielectric. Next, an empirical
model is used to convert the tuned indicies of refraction of each layer into a ﬁll fraction to
follow the effective mean ﬁeld theory from Rytov [9]. While this works relatively well for
single layers, its performance degrades for multilayer coatings [8]. Despite this, it serves as
a useful starting point for the ﬁnal numerical optimization.

The last step in the optimization uses numerical modeling in HFSS. The calculation
represents the coating as a single unit cell with periodic boundaries and ﬂoquet ports which
simulate an inﬁnite array. The prior step design parameters are used as initial conditions.
HFSS’s optimization algorithms are used to minimize the reﬂection across the band, subject
to the fabrication constraints described above.

We used this procedure to design three coatings which are presented here: (1) a 3 layer
octave bandwidth coatings prototype of 75-170 GHz and 125-280 GHz bands (2) a 5 layer
4:1 ratio bandwidth coating optimized using blades we had on hand, and (3) a single layer
coating for 1.4 THz.

For the high-frequency coating, the kerf was ﬁxed at 12 µm, the minimum blade size,
allowing only the pitch and depth to vary. For the 5 layer, we constrain each of the cut
widths to the kerf of blades that we currently have in stock. The minimum blade width for
the deepest cut was ﬁxed at 20 µm. The total depth was kept below the minimum of 1 mm.
The ﬁnal designs are shown in Figure 1.

4

K.P. Coughlin et al.

Fig. 1 HFSS models of the 1, 3, and 5 layer coatings.

2.3 Fabrication

These designs are fabricated using a custom 3-axis dicing saw [12]. A µm precision contact
metrology probe is used to measure the surface of the silicon. A surface model is then
constructed and used to create cut paths which are followed by the saw.

The cutting is done using diamond-embedded nickel dicing blades of varying thick-
nesses. For a single layer AR coating, only a single blade is used. Before and after each
set of cuts is made, we made a test cut in a separate silicon wafer and examined the blade
proﬁle to ensure that the kerf is within tolerance. By tracking the behavior of the blade as
it cuts, we can better understand our fabrication process, and more accurately predict the
overall performance of the coating. For most blades, the kerf changes by less than 2 µm
while cutting a 30 cm lens (∼ 100 m of cuts).

For a multilayer geometry, the cutting is typically done thickest to thinnest blade. This
is preferred so that as each blade cuts, the wear across the blade is uniform. For the two
thinnest cuts for the 5 layer (40 µm and 20 µm widths), the cut order is reversed. The
proﬁle of the thinnest blade degrades signiﬁcantly near the top of the cut (to about 50 µm
depth). By reversing the order of the cuts, this degraded part of the cut is removed by the 40
µm wide layer.

For our 75-170 GHz 3-layer design, we had to again change our cutting technique. The
cut for the top layer of the coating is 230 µm wide, 500 µm deep. Using this thickness blade
for this cut proved to be too much of a strain on our gantry. Our solution was to use multiple
passes to make the cut. We made two cuts using an 80 µm wide blade to deﬁne the edges of
the cut, and then came in with a 180 µm wide blade to clear out the remaining silicon. This
results in a very sharply deﬁned layer without causing undue stress on our gantry.

The overall yield of the fabrication is very high, with fewer than one pillar broken per
100,000 on the 5 layer coating, and zero broken pillars on the high frequency coating. The
largest lenses done to date are just over 30 cm, but our fabrication system can handle up to
46 cm lenses which is set by the size of available single-crystal silicon. We don’t foresee
any new issues going to larger size silicon.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

5

Fig. 2 A schematic diagram of our reﬂection measurement set up. The ﬁrst collimating mirror directs the
beam at a 10 degree angle of incidence. The second mirror collects the reﬂected beam, and has an absorbing
stop above it, limiting the aperture before directing the beam to the detector.

3 Testing

These prototypes were tested using a combination of a coherent reﬂectometer below 300
GHz and a Fourier Transform Spectrometer (FTS) for the higher frequencies.

The reﬂectometer setup is depicted in Figure 2. The core of the system is a Virginia
Diodes active multiplier chain operates from 75-250 GHz. A feed horn couples this source
to a collimating mirror, which directs the beam to the sample to be measured. The sample is
mounted horizontally on a three point mount. Each point can be adjusted using a precision
micrometer. An aperture-limiting stop is placed above an identical mirror, which then col-
lects the reﬂected light and directs it to an identical feed horn, coupled to a detector diode.
This detector feed is mounted on a three axis mount, which is used to adjust the position
of the feed to maximize the signal. The diode is readout using a lock-in ampliﬁer with the
source chopped at 200 Hz. By comparing the AR coated surface to a reﬂective surface, we
can get a measurement for the fractional power reﬂected. The beam size of our measurement
is 3 inches. We test the uniformity of the coating by measuring various spots on the surface
of the plate.

4 Results and Discussion

In this section, we discuss the measured performance of these AR coating prototypes.

6

K.P. Coughlin et al.

Fig. 3 (Left) Comparison between the modeled and measured reﬂection performance for the two sided 5-
layer AR coating prototype. While the reﬂections are quite large at some frequencies, this serves as a proof
of principle, that the computer simulation of this structure matches very well with the real fabricated version.
(Right) Comparison of 4- and 5-layer AR coatings. These are computer simulations of single sided AR
structures constrained by our fabrication system. As can be seen, the 5-layer does not signiﬁcantly outperform
the 4-layer. This is mainly due to the depth constraint. By having a hard limit on the depth of the thinnest cut
(at 50x the width of that cut), each layer is made slightly thinner, degrading the performance. With one fewer
layer, the 4-layer allows for better optimization of the depth of each layer, recovering performance lost by
losing a layer.

4.1 3 layer coating

We fabricated 3 layer AR coatings covering the 75-170 GHz and 125-280 GHz bands for the
Advanced ACTPol project [1]. The reﬂection data for these is shown in Figure 4. Both of
those designs achieved octave bandwidth with subpercent reﬂection and excellent agreement
with predicted reﬂection. Based on a loss tangent of 7e-4 (our upper limit for loss tangent of
this material) we predict a dielectric loss of less than 0.5% for each coating. These coatings
represent a mature, high performance broad bandwidth application of this technology.

4.2 5 layer coating

The 5-layer coating was fabricated on both sides of a 3 cm thick piece of low loss silicon.
The results from the reﬂection measurement are shown in Figure 3. The ﬁgure shows that
in the frequency ranges the coating was measured, it follows the modeled behavior very
closely.

This prototype coating shows that these coatings can be produced in relevant sizes (22
cm diameter) and perform as modeled. Further, optimization of these blades widths was sub-
ject to what was available in lab. Further optimization could lead to signiﬁcantly improved
performance.

From our experience making this 5 layer AR coating, we ﬁnd it is impractical to go to
any higher number of layers. Since the dicing blades have a limit on the kerf-to-exposure
ratio, we cannot fully optimize our 5 layer design, in that each layer would ideally be deeper
than our constraints allow. Going down to a four layer allows for each layer to be thicker,
and better optimized, thus performance does not signiﬁcantly decrease with one less layer.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

7

Additionally, taking away a layer signiﬁcantly eases the fabrication. It takes less time to
make, as well as reducing the chance of two layers blending together, as with fewer layers
the kerfs are generally more distinct. For the four-layer design shown in Figure 3, the ﬁnal
two layers are at 80 µm and 20 µm, so the difference between these two kerfs it three times
larger than the difference between the last two cuts of the 5 layer. We therefore argue that
4:1 bandwidth realized with a 4 layer coating is near the limit for this technology.

Fig. 4 Plot of reﬂection as a function of frequency, showing several previously made AR coatings. The
coatings all show good performance, as well as excellent agreement with predicted theory.

4.3 Single Layer Coating

Single layer AR coatings have been fabricated both on lenses (concave-convex) and on ﬂat
prototypes. Having only a single layer effectively ﬁxes the bandwidth of the coating. We
have previously fabricated a single layer AR coating for the PIPER balloon CMB experi-
ment. It was a narrow band coating centered at 200 GHz. The reﬂection for this coating was
measured with our reﬂectometer and is shown in Figure 4

The high frequency single layer AR coating was optimized at 1.4 THz. The transmission
performance of a coated 1 inch silicon wafer as measured by an FTS is show in Figure 5.
It is possible to go to slightly higher frequencies. By decreasing the pitch, we can increase
the breakdown frequency. However, since decreasing the pitch changes the ﬁll fraction, and
we cannot compensate by making the blade any smaller, this limits what the effective index
of the simulated dielectric can be, and thus the performance of the AR coating begins to
degrade past about 2 THz. That said, the performance is still reasonable (∼ 2% reﬂection)
as high as 3 THz.

AdvACT MF (90/150)AdvACT HF(150/230)PIPER 2005 layer preliminary designprototype 50% completemeasurementssimulations  1% reflectance90 GHz band150 GHz band230 GHz band8

K.P. Coughlin et al.

Fig. 5 Plot of transmission of our one inch high-frequency AR coating as measured by an FTS. This shows
the transmission of the coating peaks at 1.43 THz. The FTS used a 125 µm mylar beamspliter and the source
was a mercury arc lamp.

Additionally, there is a limitation to the precision of our dicing saw. We can control the
depth of our cuts to within less than 5 µm, but at such high frequencies, even this small error
can degrade the performance.

5 Conclusion

We have explored the frequency and bandwidth scalability of this technology. We have pre-
sented results from a fully optimized octave bandwidth 3 layer coating, and proof of prin-
ciple measurements of an extreme bandwidth 5 layer coating and a high frequency 1.4 THz
coating.

This work demonstrates that metamaterial silicon AR coatings can realize low reﬂectance
with broad bandwidths and high frequency. These demonstrated test cases span the space of
applicability of these coatings fabricated with silicon dicing saws. The bandwidth is limited
by our ability to produce high aspect ratio multilayer structures, the availability of blades
narrow enough for a given high frequency limit for the band, and the criteria for optimiza-
tion. Thus the exact limits live in a complex space. Practical constraints conspire to favor
four layer coatings as the maximum number worth implementing. If reﬂectance of 2% can
be tolerated, we ﬁnd that we can achieve 4:1 bandwidth with 4 layers operating up to 350
GHz. Extending to higher frequencies requires narrower blades with large exposures. This
limits the number of layers possible as the frequency increases. With fewer layers, high
frequency is possible as we showed with the 1.4 THz single layer prototype. Provided one
navigates the optimization and constraints procedure with great care, metamaterial silicon
offers excellent performance over a wide range of frequencies and bandwidths.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

9

Acknowledgements This work was supported by a NASA Ofﬁce of the Chief Technologists Space Tech-
nology Research Fellowship # NNX15AP46H. McMahon Lab efforts were supported by NNX13AE56G,
NNX14AB58G, and de-sc0015799

10

References

K.P. Coughlin et al.

1. S.W. Henderson, R. Allison, J. Austermann, T. Baildon, N. Battaglia, J.A. Beall, D.
Becker, F. De Bernardis, J.R. Bond, E. Calabrese, S.K. Choi, K.P. Coughlin, K.T. Crow-
ley, R. Datta, M.J. Devlin, S.M. Duff, J. Dunkley, R. D
”unner, A. van Engelen, P.A. Gallardo, E. Grace, M. Hasselﬁeld, F.B. Hills, G.C. Hilton,
A.D. Hincks, R. Hlozek, S.P. Ho, J. Hubmayr, K. Huffenberger, J.P. Hughes, K.D. Irwin,
B.J. Koopman, A.B. Kosowsky, D. Li, J.J. McMahon, C.D. Munson, F. Nati, L. New-
burgh, M.D Niemack, P. Niraula, L.A. Page, C.G. Pappas, M. Salatino, A. Schillaci,
B.L. Schmitt, N. Sehgal, B.D. Sherwin, J.L. Sievers, S.M. Simon, D.N. Spergel, S.T.
Staggs, J.R. Stevens, R. Thornton, J. Van Lanen, E.M. Vavagiakis, J.T. Ward, and E.
Wollack, J of Low Temp Phys, 184, 772, (2016)

2. Y. Inoue, P. Ade, Y. Akiba, C. Aleman, K. Arnold, C. Baccigalupi, B. Barch, D. Barron,
A. Bender, D. Boettger, J. Borrill, S. Chapman, Y. Chinone, A. Cukierman, T.de Haan,
M.A. Dobbs, A. Ducout, R. Dnner, T. Elleﬂot, J. Errard, G. Fabbian, S. Feeney, C. Feng,
G. Fuller, A.J. Gilbert, N. Goeckner-Wald, J. Groh, G. Hall, N. Halverson, T. Hamada,
M. Hasegawa, K. Hattori, M. Hazumi, C. Hill, W.L. Holzapfel, Y. Hori, L. Howe, F.
Irie, G. Jaehnig, A. Jaffe, O. Jeong, N. Katayama, J.P. Kaufman, K. Kazemzadeh, B.G.
Keating, Z. Kermish, R. Keskitalo, T.S. Kisner, A. Kusaka, M. Le Jeune, A.T. Lee,
D. Leon, E.V. Linder, L. Lowry, F. Matsuda, T. Matsumura, N. Miller, K. Mizukami,
J. Montgomery, M. Navaroli, H. Nishino, H. Paar, J. Peloton, D. Poletti, G. Puglisi,
C.R. Raum, G.M. Rebeiz, C.L. Reichardt, P.L. Richards, C. Ross, K.M. Rotermund, Y.
Segawa, B.D. Sherwin, I. Shirley, P. Siritanasak, N. Stebor, R. Stompor, J. Suzuki, A.
Suzuki, O. Tajima, S. Takada, S. Takatori, G.P. Teply, A. Tikhomirov, T. Tomaru, N.
Whitehorn, A. Zahn, and O. Zahn, Proc.SPIE, 9914, 99141I. (2016)

3. B.A. Benson, P.A.R. Ade, Z. Ahmed, S.W. Allen, K. Arnold, J.E. Austermann, A.N.
Bender, L.E. Bleem, J.E. Carlstrom, C.L. Chang, H.M. Cho, J.F. Cliche, T.M. Craw-
ford, A. Cukierman, T. de Haan, M.A. Dobbs, D. Dutcher, W. Everett, A. Gilbert, N.W.
Halverson, D. Hanson, N.L. Harrington, K. Hattori, J.W. Henning, G.C. Hilton, G.P.
Holder, W.L. Holzapfel, K.D. Irwin, R. Keisler, L. Knox, D. Kubik, C.L. Kuo, A.T.
Lee, E.M. Leitch, D. Li, M. McDonald, S.S. Meyer, J. Montgomery, M. Myers, T. Na-
toli, H. Nguyen, V. Novosad, S. Padin, Z. Pan, J. Pearson, C. Reichardt, J.E. Ruhl, B.R.
Saliwanchik, G. Simard, G. Smecher, J.T. Sayre, E. Shirokoff, A.A. Stark, K. Story, A.
Suzuki, K.L. Thompson, C. Tucker, K. Vanderlinde, J.D. Vieira, A. Vikhlinin, G. Wang,
V. Yefremenko, and K.W. Yoon, Proc.SPIE, 9153, 91531P, (2014)

4. T. Essinger-Hileman, A. Ali, M. Amiri, J.W. Appel, D. Araujo, C.L. Bennett, F. Boone,
M. Chan, H. Cho, D.T. Chuss, F. Colazo, E. Crowe, K. Denis, R. Dnner, J. Eimer, D.
Gothe, M. Halpern, K. Harrington, G.C. Hilton, G.F. Hinshaw, C. Huang, K. Irwin,
G. Jones, J. Karakla, A.J. Kogut, D. Larson, M. Limon, L. Lowry, T. Marriage, N.
Mehrle, A.D. Miller, N. Miller, S.H. Moseley, G. Novak, C. Reintsema, K. Rostem, T.
Stevenson, D. Towner, K. U-Yen, E. Wagner, D. Watts, E.J. Wollack, Z. Xu,L. Zeng,
Proc.SPIE 9153, 91531I, (2014)

5. J.A. Grayson, P.A.R. Ade, Z. Ahmed, K.D. Alexander, M. Amiri, D. Barkats, S.J. Ben-
ton, C.A. Bischoff, J.J. Bock, H. Boenish, R. Bowens-Rubin, I. Buder, E. Bullock, V.
Buza, J. Connors, J.P. Filippini, S. Fliescher, M. Halpern, S. Harrison, G.C. Hilton,
V.V. Hristov, H. Hui, K.D. Irwin, J. Kang, K.S. Karkare, E. Karpel, S. Kefeli, S.A. Ker-
nasovskiy, J.M. Kovac, C.L. Kuo, E.M. Leitch, M. Lueker, K.G. Megerian, V. Monticue,
T. Namikawa, C.B. Netterﬁeld, H.T. Nguyen, R. O’Brient, R.W. Ogburn, C. Pryke,
C.D. Reintsema, S. Richter, R. Schwarz, C. Sorenson, C.D. Sheehy, Z.K. Staniszewski,

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

11

B. Steinbach, G.P. Teply, K.L. Thompson, J.E. Tolan, C. Tucker, A.D. Turner, A.G.
Vieregg, A. Wandui, A.C. Weber, D.V. Wiebe, J. Willmert, W.L.K. Wu, and K.W. Yoon,
Proc.SPIE, 9914, 99140S, (2016)

6. W.S. Holland, D. Bintley, E.L. Chapin, A. Chrysostomou, G.R. Davis, J.T. Dempsey,
W.D. Duncan, M. Fich, P. Friberg, M. Halpern, K.D. Irwin, T. Jenness, B.D. Kelly, M.J.
MacIntosh, E.I. Robson, D. Scott, P.A.R. Ade, E. Atad-Ettedgui, D.S. Berry, S.C. Craig,
X. Gao, A.G. Gibb, G.C. Hilton, M.I. Hollister, J.B. Kycia, D.W. Lunney, H. McGre-
gor, D. Montgomery, W. Parkes, R.P.J. Tilanus, J.N. Ullom, C.A. Walther, A.J. Wal-
ton, A.L. Woodcraft, M. Amiri, D. Atkinson, B. Burger, T. Chuter, I.M. Coulson, W.B.
Doriese, C. Dunare, F. Economou, M.D. Niemack, H.A.L. Parsons, C.D. Reintsema, B.
Sibthorpe, I. Smail, R. Sudiwala, and H.S. Thomas, Mon Not R Astron Soc, 430, 2513,
(2013)

7. G. Novak, D.T. Chuss, J.A. Davidson, J.L. Dotson, C. Darren Dowell, R.H. Hildebrand,
M. Houde, L. Kirby, M. Krejny,A. Lazarian, H. Li, S.H. Moseley, J.E. Vaillancourt, and
F. Yusef-Zadeh, Proc.SPIE, 5498, 279, (2004)

8. R. Datta, C.D. Munson, M.D. Niemack, J.J. McMahon, J.Britton, E.J. Wollack, J.Beall,
M.J. Devlin, J. Fowler, P. Gallardo, J. Hubmayr, K. Irwin, L. Newburgh, J. P. Nibarger,
L. Page, M.A. Quijada, B.L. Schmitt, S.T. Staggs, R. Thornton, and L. Zhang, Appl.
Opt. 52, 8747, (2013)

9. S.M. Rytov, Soviet Phys. JETP, 2, 466, (1956)
10. W.G. Egan and D.E. Aspnes, Phys Rev B 26, 5313, (1982)
11. D.H. Raguin and G.M. Morris, Appl Opt, 32, 2582, (1993)
12. C.D. Munson, Technology Development for Cosmic Microwave Background Cosmol-

ogy. (Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 2016), pp. 4279

