8
1
0
2

r
p
A
5

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

2
v
3
5
2
1
0
.
4
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

How could we ignore the lens and
pupils of eyeballs: Metamaterial optics
for retinal projection

Yoichi Ochiai∗1, 2

1University of Tsukuba
2Pixie Dust Technologies, Inc.

1 Introduction:

Democratization of Retinal Projection

Retinal projection is required for xR applications that can deliver immersive vi-
sual experience throughout the day. If general-purpose retinal projection meth-
ods can be realized at a low cost, not only could the image be displayed on the
retina using less energy, but there is also the possibility of cutting oﬀ the weight
of projection unit itself from the AR goggles. Several retinal projection methods
have been previously proposed; however, as the lenses and iris of the eyeball are
in front of the retina, which is a limitation of the eyeball, the proposal of retinal
projection is generally fraught with narrow viewing angles and small eyebox
problems. In this short technical report, we introduce ideas and samples of an
optical system for solving the common problems of retinal projection by using
the metamaterial mirror (plane symmetric transfer optical system). Using this
projection method, the designing of retinal projection can becomes easy, and
if appropriate optics are available, it would be possible to construct an optical
system that allows the quick follow-up of retinal projection hardware.

∗wizard@slis.tsukuba.ac.jp

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Problem:

Movable Varifocal Lens and Movable Auto
Aperture in front of Retinal Screen

Several methods for projecting onto the retina without the inﬂuence of the
lenses and iris of the eyeballs exist. Some such methods include a projection
system [1] that passes through the center of the lens, a projection system that
uses the lens of the eye for Fourier transformation [2], and an imaging system
that includes the focus adjustment of the eye lens [3]. There are various studies
in this ﬁeld; however, all of them have common problems. Their objective is
to project an image on the retinal screen, but there exist “variable iris” and
“variable focus lenses” that move in the x and y directions. Fig.1 shows the
image of an eye, and Fig.2 shows the equivalent optical system of an eye. It is
easy to understand that an equivalent circuit is an imaging system with a lens
in the optical path moving along the x and y directions and changing its focus
along the z-axis. Owing to this lens, the projected image is distorted, blurred,
or masked. Furthermore, the full image is not projected on the retina when the
iris moves or the hole in the light path becomes narrow. We thus propose the
use of the optical system shown in Fig.3. With the placement shown in this
ﬁgure, the image does not change even if the lens moves, and the ﬁeld of view
is not lost even if the iris moves. However, it is diﬃcult to place an eyeball
itself in a material projection lens. However, this might be possible with real
lenses using metamaterial mirrors [4, 5]. In the previous method, we observe
the image by forming an aerial lens and looking into it.
Instead, if a retina
projection system that places the aerial real image lens of the projector at the
eyeball position is set up, the use of a physical lens becomes unnecessary. Even
if the iris moves, the viewing angle of the image does not change although the
amount of light changes. In addition, the eﬀect of the variable focus lens can
be reduced. The size of the eyebox is the same as the lens size at the end of
the projection system. In addition, as the ghost image that caused problems in
[4] and [5] would be cut by the iris, there is a possibility that a clearer image
could be formed on using this method. Fig.4 shows the optical schematics of
the aerial image and eye.

2

3 Experimental Result and Discussion

As shown in the optics setup in Fig.5, even if an aperture or lens is placed at the
aerial projection lens, the projection image is clearly visible on the screen even
if the aperture or lens is moved. The image captured with a camera at the aerial
image of the projection lens is shown in Fig.6. The ghost image is cut by the
aperture. This result indicates the possibilities of realizing a transmissive optical
system for retinal projection with a large eyebox. The aerial optical system at
the “focal point” of the TMD is essentially very similar to the pinlight display
[6]; however, the pinlight that forms the aerial image of the projection lens is
arranged as the number of aerial light source as the same number of grids of the
metamaterial mirror. Therefore, the viewing angle is subject to constraints on
the incident angle and reﬂection angle of the metamaterial mirror. Although,
theoretically, the viewing angle is limited to approximately 90 degrees by a
single planner mirror. In contrast, it is not necessary to physically arrange the
array of pinlights in front of the eyes, and the density of the light source can
be large. Moreover, it can be placed in the eyeball. Therefore, it is diﬃcult for
the image to be aﬀected by the eye lens and iris. In addition to improving the
design possibilities, the calculation cost is also reduced. This method is just a
2D image projection that ignores the eﬀect of the lens and iris. There are several
issues that are yet to be addressed such as the subject experiments using this
method and the presentation of detailed reports on the implementation systems,
and the methods for reducing its size in the production process. We hope that
these subjects will be reported on in the near future.

References

[1] Joel Kollin. A retinal display for virtual-environment applications. In Pro-
ceedings of SID International Symposium, Digest of Technical Papers, 1993,
1993.

3

[2] Liang Shi, Fu-Chung Huang, Ward Lopes, Wojciech Matusik, and David
Luebke. Near-eye light ﬁeld holographic rendering with spherical waves for
wide ﬁeld of view interactive 3d computer graphics. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 36(6):236, 2017.

[3] Erik Viirre, Homer Pryor, Satoru Nagata, Thomas A., and Furness III. The
virtual retinal display: A new technology for virtual reality and augmented
vision in medicine. Medicine Meets Virtual Reality: Art, Science, Technol-
ogy: Healthcare (r) evolution, 50:252 – 257, 1998.

[4] Kazuki Otao, Yuta Itoh, Kazuki Takazawa, Hiroyuki Osone, and Yoichi
Ochiai. Air mounted eyepiece: Optical see-through hmd design with aerial
optical functions. In Proceedings of the 9th Augmented Human International
Conference, AH ’18, pages 1:1–1:7, New York, NY, USA, 2018. ACM.

[5] Kazuki Otao, Yuta Itoh, Hiroyuki Osone, Kazuki Takazawa, Shunnosuke
Kataoka, and Yoichi Ochiai. Light ﬁeld blender: Designing optics and ren-
dering methods for see-through and aerial near-eye display. In SIGGRAPH
Asia 2017 Technical Briefs, SA ’17, pages 9:1–9:4, New York, NY, USA,
2017. ACM.

4

