Implementation of Augmented Reality in Autonomous

Warehouses: Challenges and Opportunities

David Puljiz
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
IAR-IPR
Karlsruhe, Germany
david.puljiz@kit.edu

Gleb Gorbachev
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
IAR-IPR
Karlsruhe, Germany
gleb_gorbachev_2003@mail.ru

Björn Hein
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
IAR-IPR
Karlsruhe, Germany
bjoern.hein@kit.edu

ABSTRACT
Autonomous warehouses with mobile, rack-carrying robots are
starting to become commonplace, with systems such as Amazon’s
Kiva and Swisslog’s CarryPick already implemented in functional
warehouses. Such warehouses however still require human inter-
vention for object picking and maintenance. In the European project
SafeLog we are developing a safety-vest, used for safety-critical
ranging and stopping of mobile robots, an improved planner that
can handle large leets of heterogeneous agents as well as an AR
interaction system to navigate and support human workers in
such automated environments. Here we present the AR interaction
modalities, namely navigation, pick-by-AR and general system in-
teractions that were developed at the moment of writing, as well
as the overall system concept and planned future work.

CCS CONCEPTS
· Human-centered computing → Mixed / augmented reality;
User interface programming; Scenario-based design; · Computer
systems organization → External interfaces for robotics; ·
Social and professional topics → Automation;

KEYWORDS
Augmented Reality, Human-Robot Interaction, Logistics, Mobile
Robotics, User Interface

ACM Reference Format:
David Puljiz, Gleb Gorbachev, and Björn Hein. 2018. Implementation of
Augmented Reality in Autonomous
Warehouses: Challenges and Opportunities. In Proceedings of 1st Inter-
national Workshop on Virtual, Augmented, and Mixed Reality for Human-
Robot Interactions (VAM-HRI’18), Tom Williams, Daniel Szair, Tathagata
Chakraborti, Heni Ben Amor (Ed.). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 7 pages.
https://doi.org/10.475/123_4

1 INTRODUCTION
Automating intralogistics with mobile robots has been a major
research direction for more than a decade now, with the KIVA
system being the irst widely adopted system of this kind [21]. Many
other such systems have been developed and are being developed

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the irst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
VAM-HRI’18, March 2018, Chicago, Illinois USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06.
https://doi.org/10.475/123_4

since then including Swisslog’s CarryPick [17], Scallog’s Scallog
system [16], Fetch Robotics’ Freight [15] etc. Although autonomous
picking from racks has seen major progress in recent years, in part
also due to the Amazon Picking Challenge [4], it has still to become
more robust to be implemented into real warehouses. Thus, even
though the robots carry the racks, the warehouses themselves are
far from being fully automated and still require human presence.
The automated rack carrying system however has allowed a big
increase in eiciency [6].

In such a system the area containing the racks is of-limits to
human workers, usually separated by heavy-duty fences and laser
curtains, as prescribed by e.g. [2] 1 Mobile robots navigate in that
space, pick-up the racks, and deliver them to the picking stations
where human workers pick ordered objects. These robots don’t
posses any sensor except a camera for detecting markers, which
are used for navigation, and perhaps bumpers. The navigation and
control are and should be kept simple. This is to keep the cost of
the robots low and allow scalability. If a human needs to enter the
warehouse the entire leet of mobile robots needs to stop resulting
in signiicant downtime. There are three main reason why a human
worker would need to enter the mobile robot area: repairing a
broken robot, pre-picking or going to centrally located picking
stations. Broken robots can be quite troublesome, as mobile robots
in automated warehouses usually use loor markers to navigate.
This means that if the signal to a robot is lost, an entire aisle may be
blocked since the exact position of the robot is not precisely known,
lowering eiciency and complicating planing. Pre-picking is done
when it is ineicient to order a mobile robot to bring an entire rack
for picking, instead sending a human worker into a warehouse to
pick desired objects. This is impossible to do with current systems
and safety guidelines. Finally, by placing the picking stations in the
center of the warehouse, travel time to and from the stations could
be greatly reduced. This would however also require planing for
forklifts (autonomous or manned) and other vehicles that would
ferry packages from the station to the delivery vehicles outside the
warehouse.

In the future warehouse, where humans and mobile robots can
work side-by-side, augmented reality would play a major role in
helping the human workers navigate the ever-changing warehouse
environment, assist with picking and generally enable new inter-
action modalities with the system. Augmented Reality has already
been tested and proven in unautomated warehouses in companies
such as Intel [20], resulting in increased eiciency. We strongly

1This is according to the quite strict EU safety guidelines, the KIVA system for example
just separates the workspaces with a line on the loor

VAM-HRI’18, March 2018, Chicago, Illinois USA

David Puljiz, Gleb Gorbachev, and Björn Hein

believe that coupling the native eiciency gains of automated ware-
houses and AR could produce a warehouse more eicient than the
sum of it’s parts.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The next section
presents the general system architecture of automated warehouses
as well as the new system components developed by the project with
the emphasis on the interaction modalities ofered by AR in such a
setting. Section 3 describes the elements already implemented. In
Section 4 we go over the future work and the possible challenges.
Section 5 gives a recap and some concluding remarks. The paper
concludes with acknowledgements.

2 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The main parts of a standard automated warehouse are the Ware-
house Management System (WMS) and the Fleet Management Sys-
tem (FMS). The WMS takes care about the orders - which product
needs to be be delivered as well as when and where. It has a database
which contains information about the location of products in racks,
thus it knows precisely which rack contains the wanted product.
The WMS gives commands to the FMS in the form of which rack
should be brought to which picking station and at what time. The
FMS then coordinates the leet of mobile robots to try and fulill all
of the commands.

The project SafeLog implements an improved FMS system that
can work with bigger, heterogeneous leets. In most cases this will
include mobile robots and human workers, however manned or
unmanned forklifts or other vehicles can also be managed. The
planner also takes care that no mobile robots come into vicinity of
human workers. A planner however is incapable of being safety
certiiable, mostly due to the fact that the computing power and
libraries required by such a system would require safety certiicates
on every single component. This is why a safety vest was also de-
veloped to be safety certiiable and take care of the ranging and
provide a inal safety barrier in case the planer fails. If a mobile
robot comes within the irst safety radius (8-10 m) it is slowed down.
If it comes within 8 m it is stopped completely. The safety radius
can of course be increased or decreased. The mobile robots them-
selves navigate using ground markers usually 0.5m apart. These
ground nodes can be thought of as vertices on a graph and are
useful both for localization and for rendering the path in AR. These
systems are crucial to understanding the limits and possibilities
of AR interactions in automated warehouses. An example of an
automated warehouse layout can be seen in Figure 1.

Regarding the components used, the automated warehouse com-
ponents are part of the CarryPick system provided by our partner
Swisslog. For AR interaction we use the Microsoft Hololens [9]
due to the (so far) robust localization and the fact that it’s unteth-
ered. For the programing environment Unity 2017.1.1f [19] is used
together with Microsoft’s Mixed Reality Toolkit [10] and Vuforia
[5].

As mentioned before, the AR interaction with the system can be
separated into four main categories: assistance during navigation
of the warehouse, assistance for object picking, assistance for robot
repair and other system interactions. For object picking and robot
repair we decided that having both hands free using an AR headset
(instead of e.g. having a tablet) is especially important. The basic

Figure 1: An example of an autonomous warehouses taken
from the simulator. Red squares are navigation nodes,
gray squares are rack position nodes, yellow squares are
charge/maintenance nodes, light blue squares are queue
nodes, dark blue squares are picking nodes. The dark blue
lines around the picking nodes symbolize the picking sta-
tions. Robots are shown in pink while robots carrying racks
have a green polygon around them.The large blue square
indicates the no-entry zone for human workers. This illus-
trates the sort of environment the worker needs to navigate
in

navigation modalities could be implemented using a standard tablet
even without AR with a map that was constantly updated. This
however would provide less interaction modalities and require
the worker to look at the tablet constantly, reducing situational
awareness and comfort. Additionally the platform would need to
be changed for diferent interaction modalities. It was therefore
decided to implement everything on a single AR headset platform.

2.1 Navigation Assistance and localization
Large unautomated warehouses can be diicult to navigate and
automated ones, which aren’t designed to be easily navigated by
people, even more so. Perhaps the biggest challenge is that the goal
is unknown. In case a human worker is sent to repair a broken
robot, the robot needs to be localized. Likewise if a worker enters
the warehouse for pre-picking, the position of the racks are not
ixed. The same rack can be picked up from one place and dropped
of in another, making ixed signs and maps unusable. When a
worker needs to enter the warehouse, the FMS updates the position
of her or his goal and calculates the path to the goal in such a
way that the encounters with mobile robots are non-existent or at
least minimized. The path is then shown on the AR glasses using
diferent modalities:

Implementation of Augmented Reality in Autonomous
Warehouses: Challenges and Opportunities

• A line on the loor is shown that guides the worker through
the aisles to the goal position. Lines connect the ground
nodes and are subject to occlusion and distance culling. This
reduces the rendering requirements and gives the worker a
more immersive feeling in the case of occlusion culling. The
distances to the goal may also be rendered.

• Overhead a particle stream also guides the worker. This is
done so that the worker may look up and around without
losing the path information

• when the worker is in close proximity of the goal, an arrow

points at the direction of the goal.

• Both 2D and 3D minimaps can be opened by the worker
showing the live status of the warehouse including current
position of racks, mobile robots and other workers in the
warehouse.

To make the worker feel more comfortable in an environment where
mobile robots carrying 600+ kg payloads may pass within 10-15m
from him, we give the worker X-ray vision. By this we mean that
robots within a certain radius (e.g. from 10 to 20 meters away) will
have their 3D models rendered even through obstacles, as well as
their path. This should provide situational awareness to the worker
and make the trek through the warehouse more comfortable. The
worker may also choose to display the safety radius around her-
/himself. Again this is to make the worker aware how close a robot
is and improve her or his comfort with the system.

A big challenge here is the localization of the AR device. Al-
though the present-day SLAM algorithms [22] running on most
AR devices provide precise and robust localization, the algorithm
needs to work in a monotonous, changing environment presenting
signiicant problems to standard algorithms which require stable,
distinct features. The problems can be mitigated by detecting the
already mentioned ground nodes used for robot navigation as well
as updating the environment map on the ly. Since the changes in
the environment are predictable and well known this can be done
reliably. More about the implementation will be presented in the
next two sections. An entry procedure will also be developed to
ensure that we know the exact position and orientation of the AR
Device at the start. This would also then enable the fallback strategy
of using pure Visual-Inertial Odometry [12] combined with ground
marker detection [18] instead of the in-built SLAM algorithm.

2.2 Pick-by-AR
Once the worker reaches the goal and the goal happens to be picking
an object from a rack, the AR-based picking assistance will be
activated. The WMS knows the structure of the rack and the (at
least rough) position of the object in the rack. The rough position
of the object is highlighted on the rack and either an arrow or a
line points from the center of the ield of view to the center of the
highlight. An object description and picture may be invoked for
easier recognition which should be especially helpful for cluttered
racks. Once the object is picked, the camera on the AR Device
performs either object detection if available or barcode reading,
to check if it’s the right object and to log that the object has been
picked. This is being done by our partners in Fraunhofer IML [7].
Although we know the exact position of the rack, the localization
of the AR Device may be a bit of. For this reason a rack detection

VAM-HRI’18, March 2018, Chicago, Illinois USA

algorithm based on rectilinear structure detection via Gaussian
Spheres [1] is being developed by our partners at CVUT. This should
localize the rack relative to the AR Device without the need to have
precise global localization of the AR Device itself.

The AR Device can also be used at the picking stations. In this
can the AR Device would also show where to place the picked
object. However the pick-to-light system, consisting usually of an
overhead projector lighting up the position of the object to pick, a
barcode scanner and a screen giving additional information such as
object description, is already being widely used and has proven to be
extremely efective. We ind it doubtful that an AR-based approach
could signiicantly improve this system, although research by Guo
et al. seems to indicate that HUD based methods are indeed faster
[3]. However tests will be made and the approaches compared in
the future.

2.3 Robot repair
Being developed by our partners at Fraunhofer IML [7], the ro-
bot repair assistant can guide a worker through diagnostics and
repair of a broken mobile robot on the spot. That means that the
technicians have access to the technical manual everywhere they
go. This would also enable untrained workers in the warehouse to
quickly respond and diagnose malfunctioning robots. The camera
stream can also be used and an expert queried remotely in case of
unforeseen malfunctions.

2.4 Other Interaction Modalities
The live camera feed can also be used if the worker inside the ware-
house notices some other malfunctions, e.g. objects fallen from
the rack that might get caught in the wheels of the mobile robots,
misaligned racks etc. The supervisor can then cross reference the
object with the appropriate rack by querying the WMS, or send ad-
ditional workers or robots to help realign the rack. As an additional
beneit to having onboard localization, we can perform intention
recognition of the workers (human intention recognition - HIR).
This is being developed by our partners at the UNIZG-FER [14].
By using Markov chains, the goal of the worker may be predicted.
Although most of the time the goal will be the one the worker was
given in the irst place, this algorithm can for example detect if the
user is going to the right goal but got lost, if the user started to
go back without picking an object from the rack, or if the user is
running towards the exit which would indicate a state of emergency
and the mobile robots could be stopped.

In this section we irst presented the standard system archi-
tecture of autonomous warehouses and the new systems that the
SafeLog project is introducing. We then proceeded to explain all of
the possible interaction modalities that AR enables, the reasoning
behind them, as well as some challenges. In the next section we give
a brief overview of the parts of the system already implemented at
the moment of writing.

3 IMPLEMENTATION
In this section we give an overview of the implemented compo-
nents which were discussed in the previous section as well as the
considerations and challenges presented by implementing the com-
ponents from the conceptual system design to real hardware and

VAM-HRI’18, March 2018, Chicago, Illinois USA

David Puljiz, Gleb Gorbachev, and Björn Hein

(a) A menu overlayed above a textured image

(b) A 2D minimap overlayed above a textured image

Figure 2: The menu overlayed atop of a highly-texture paper in a) and a 2D minimap showing the user’s current position, racks
and goal in b). The overlays were done in Vuforia. One can see the overlay has full 6 degrees of freedom and depends on the
position and orientation of the paper. The mesh is made visible for debugging purposes

real world surroundings. The work will be presented in the same
order as presented in the previous section.

Implementing line navigation was irst attempted using spatial
anchors [11], linking the user to the goal also through obstacles
since the Hololens isn’t connected to any sort of path planner at
the moment. Holograms should stay within a 3m radius of the
spatial anchor. We at irst considered having spatial anchors at
every ground node which are 0.5m apart. That would mean that the
line segments are 0.5m long and well within spatial anchor limits.
However as mentioned in [11], one should avoid making grids of
spatial anchors, instead choosing a stationary frame of reference.
This is also recommended for dynamic holograms, such as the
holographic robots used in the X-Ray vision. The stationary frame
of reference can be robustly implemented in our case since we have
a structured environment with known entry points. Known entry
points are important since the Hololens lacks a global origin point.
The origin point is instead taken as the point where the program
starts. The worker will have an entry procedure where she or he will
need to look at diferent markers at one of the entry points, which
will be scanned using the already mentioned ground node detection
algorithm [18]. That way the "true" origin of the world coordinate
system can be set which should enable a robust stationary frame
of reference. While implementing the line guidance we noticed
that the user would be required to look at the loor constantly,
so it was decided to implement the particle guidance overhead to
prevent such discomfort. The distance to the goal (or in the future
the distance to the next turn) was also implemented on the line for
better situational awareness. The minimap was irst thought to be
implemented as head locked content, however head locked content
is discouraged for comfort reasons [8]. The problem also arose
that the minimap blocks a large portion of the ield of view (FoV).
The minimap and the other menus are therefore shown as loating
menus. This menu can be invoked using a very textured picture on a
piece of paper. Vuforia provides options to then overlay holograms
over such an image. The hologram has full 6 degrees of freedom.

This can be seen in Figure 2a for an overlayed menu as well as in
Figure 2b for an overlayed 2D minimap. The implementation of the
line following can be seen in Figure 3.

The X-Ray vision for robots can be seen in Figure 5. This was
implemented using full 3D robot models to simulate real robots,

Figure 3: Line following interaction with the distance to the
goal visible. Here one can also see that the safety level dis-
play was enabled, with the inner circle corresponding to
safety level A where robots need to stop, while the outer one
is safety level B where the robots slow down. The mesh is
once again made visible for debugging purposes

Implementation of Augmented Reality in Autonomous
Warehouses: Challenges and Opportunities

VAM-HRI’18, March 2018, Chicago, Illinois USA

while the X-Ray vision was implemented by highlighting the edges
of the model. This has proven to work well with occlusions both
from real obstacles (Figure 5a) and other holograms (Figure 5b).
Implementing spatial sound is also being considered so the worker
can also track robots which aren’t directly in the FoV.

The irst implementation of pick-by-AR can be seen in Figure 4,
implemented with a virtual rack. Here head locked content such as
a line or an arrow are allowed since the entire interaction only takes
place for a few second and the arrow disappears when the center
of the FoV is near the highlighted rack area. The highlight basically
emulates a pick-to-light system while the arrow tries to minimize
unnecessary head movement while looking for the highlighted area.
A "game" was implemented where the user is timed for picking a
random order of boxes. When implemented or real racks, this will
provide good estimation of the eiciency of diferent interaction
modalities for picking.

The object detection for picking and placing help has been im-
plemented by Fraunhofer IML and works well with test objects,
however it needs irst to be integrated with the pick-by-AR and
evaluated for a inal conclusion.

The Robot repair developed was also developed by Fraunhofer
IML for an in-house robot design to demonstrate the assistance
while exchanging a battery for the robot.

The human intention recognition was implemented and tested
on a 2D occupancy grid with good results. Details of the implemen-
tation and results can be found in [14] by Petković et al.

Among the other implementation considerations perhaps the
important is that 3D models should be used sparsely and with the
lowest resolution possible as to avoid framedrops. Framedrops are
particularly bad in AR and VR applications as they can induce phys-
ical discomfort and even dizziness and nausea [13]. The camera
stream requires high bandwidth and was usually found to be lag-
ging about 10s no matter the amount of bandwidth available using
the Hololens’ Device portal. Attention should be given to provide
enough bandwidth and care should be given to prevent lag during
camera data streaming.

4 FUTURE WORK
As mentioned in the previous section the vast majority of the inter-
action modalities have been implemented and evaluated within the
project. In case of the navigation and pick-by-AR these interaction
modalities need to be implemented with real world object in testable
scenarios. The interaction modalities for navigation, pick-by-AR
and robot repair can then be evaluated by independent users to
evaluate which interaction modality, or the combination thereof
gives the user the best experience and eiciency. Once evaluated
all of these components should be integrated in a single framework
and tested in relevant environments to evaluate the whole system
and detect possible conlicts (e.g. the navigation assistance displays
the arrow to the goal while at the same time the pick-by-AR dis-
plays the arrow towards the object on the rack). The robustness of
the rack detection algorithm needs to be tested as well as a robot
detection algorithm implemented, since, as mentioned before, when
a robot loses connection we cannot be sure about it’s exact position,
unlike the racks.

Figure 4: The irst version of pick-by-AR with a virtual rack.
One can see the standard Hololens cursor with an added ar-
row pointing at the object to pick. The area where the ob-
ject is located is highlighted in green. In the upper left cor-
ner is the description of the object. This can also be replaced
by an image of the object itself. In this scenario the user is
timed while picking objects in a random order to evaluate
the speed of diferent interaction strategies

Testing should also be done in regards to the possible localization
problems and fallback strategies implemented if the localization
proves to be lacking in such an environment. This brings us to
problem of inding relevant test environments. Users of automated
warehouses would experience signiicant downtime during the
tests, with an opportunities to test the system in the actual envi-
ronment arising only during scheduled maintenance periods. Small
test environments do exist and by the time you are reading this the
irst tests may have already been made. Although evaluated in such
a test environment the system may not perform well in full scale
warehouses. This is why in parallel we are working on a Virtual
Reality test environment for rapid prototyping where AR and other
components may be tested and possible problems not replicable in
small scale setups detected.

Such an approach will be tested in the coming moths comparing
the results of Human Intention Recognition using data from the
Hololens and the data from the VR test environment to evaluate how
the results change and improve future versions of the algorithm.
In the inal section we will give a short recap and the conclusions
reached so far during implementation and system design for AR
interactions in automated warehouses.

5 CONCLUSION
Allowing human workers to freely and safely move through an
automated warehouse is the next logical step for warehouse au-
tomation. Such a scenario provides numerous challenges especially
in regards of supporting the workers in a warehouse environment
not designed for humans and diicult to adapt to be both comfort-
able for humans and simple for the robots to work in. Augmented
reality provides a solid alternative where the environment can be
made simple for the almost sensorless robots to efectively work,
however the workers are still supported and comfortable due to
additional information provided by the AR device.

VAM-HRI’18, March 2018, Chicago, Illinois USA

David Puljiz, Gleb Gorbachev, and Björn Hein

(a) The X-ray vision behind a physical object

(b) X-Ray vision behind a virtual obstacles

Figure 5: The X-Ray vision can be seen in a) behind real obstacles and in b) behind virtual obstacles. It was achieved by high-
lighting the edges of the 3D model. The mesh is made visible for debugging purposes

As described in Section 2, navigation, assistance for picking and
robot repair as well as other system interactions such as Human
Intention Recognition (HRI) all need to be addressed. Navigation in
particular is important for an environment that constantly changes.
Care should be given to make the human comfortable in an envi-
ronment with heavy mobile robots passing in the vicinity. This can
most easily be done through increased situational awareness. The
assistance during picking and robot repair increases the speed and
eiciency of the worker in the warehouse. With the live camera
feed and communication options enabled by the AR device, quick
interventions or even preventions can be made by the workers
inside the warehouse with the support of remote specialists. All
of this combined should see a large increase in eiciency for such
systems.

This approach is not without challenges however, the biggest of
which may be the need for robust localization in a changing monot-
onous environment, where current SLAM techniques may struggle.
Secondly, although the ield of view of AR devices has seen a steady
increase, it still remains relatively small and attention should be
given not to overload it with too much information. One should
especially be wary of head-locked content since it takes up a lot
of the FoV and usually makes the users uncomfortable. Whenever
possible information should be outsourced to body-locked loating
menus.

We are still at the beginning of the development of AR for the
assistance of workers in automated warehouses, however we see
great promise in this direction and no doubt, more challenges ahead.

6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work presented in this paper was conducted within the EU
project SafeLog - "Safe human-robot interaction in logistic appli-
cations for highly lexible warehouses" co-founded by European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant
agreement No 688117.

REFERENCES
[1] Jean-Charles Bazin and Marc Pollefeys. 2012. 3-line ransac for orthogonal van-
ishing point detection. In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on. IEEE, 4282ś4287.

[2] Health Great Britain, Safety Executive Staf, Great Britain. Health, and Safety
Executive. 2007. Warehousing and Storage: A Guide to Health and Safety. HSE
Books. https://books.google.de/books?id=HNXMMgEACAAJ

[3] Anhong Guo, Shashank Raghu, Xuwen Xie, Saad Ismail, Xiaohui Luo, Joseph
Simoneau, Scott Gilliland, Hannes Baumann, Caleb Southern, and Thad Starner.
2014. A Comparison of Order Picking Assisted by Head-up Display (HUD),
Cart-mounted Display (CMD), Light, and Paper Pick List. In Proceedings of the
2014 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers (ISWC ’14). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 71ś78. https://doi.org/10.1145/2634317.2634321

[4] Carlos Hernandez, Mukunda Bharatheesha, Wilson Ko, Hans Gaiser, Jethro
Tan, Kanter van Deurzen, Maarten de Vries, Bas Van Mil, Jef van Egmond,
Ruben Burger, Mihai Morariu, Jihong Ju, Xander Gerrmann, Ronald Ensing, Jan
Van Frankenhuyzen, and Martijn Wisse. 2017. Team Delft’s Robot Winner of
the Amazon Picking Challenge 2016. In RoboCup 2016: Robot World Cup XX,
Sven Behnke, Raymond Sheh, Sanem Sarıel, and Daniel D. Lee (Eds.). Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 613ś624.

[5] Vuforia / PTC Inc. 2018. Vuforia. https://www.vuforia.com/. (2018). Accessed:

2018-02-09.

[6] Eugene Kim. 2016.

Amazon’s $775 million deal for robotics company
Kiva is starting to look really smart.
http:http://www.businessinsider.de/
kiva-robots-save-money-for-amazon-2016-6?r=US&IR=T. (2016). Accessed:
2018-02-07.

[7] Thomas Kirks, Jana Jost, and Benedikt MÃďttig. 2017. AR for Optimization of
Processes in Intralogistics. (06 2017). https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
320489972_AR_for_Optimization_of_Processes_in_Intralogistics

[8] Microsoft. 2018. Coordinate Systems - Avoid Heal Locked Content. https:
//developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/mixed-reality/coordinate_systems.
(2018). Accessed: 2018-02-09.

[9] Microsoft. 2018. Microsoft Hololens. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/hololens.

(2018). Accessed: 2018-02-09.

[10] Microsoft. 2018. Mixed Reality Toolkit.

https://github.com/Microsoft/

MixedRealityToolkit-Unity. (2018). Accessed: 2018-02-09.
Spatial Anchors.

[11] Microsoft. 2018.

https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/

windows/mixed-reality/spatial_anchors. (2018). Accessed: 2018-02-09.

[12] D. Nister, O. Naroditsky, and J. Bergen. 2004. Visual odometry. In Proceedings
of the 2004 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2004. CVPR 2004., Vol. 1. Iś652śIś659 Vol.1. https://doi.org/10.1109/
CVPR.2004.1315094

[13] Charles M Oman. 1989. Sensory conlict in motion sickness: an observer theory

approach. (1989).

[14] Tomislav Petković, Ivan Marković, and Ivan Petrović. 2018. Human Intention
Recognition in Flexible Robotized Warehouses Based on Markov Decision Pro-
cesses. In ROBOT 2017: Third Iberian Robotics Conference, Anibal Ollero, Alberto

Implementation of Augmented Reality in Autonomous
Warehouses: Challenges and Opportunities

VAM-HRI’18, March 2018, Chicago, Illinois USA

Sanfeliu, Luis Montano, Nuno Lau, and Carlos Cardeira (Eds.). Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, Cham, 629ś640.

[15] Fetch Robotics. 2018.

Virtual Conveyor.

http://fetchrobotics.com/

automated-material-transport-v3/. (2018). Accessed: 2018-02-09.

[16] Scallog. 2018. Scallog System. http://www.scallog.com/en/goods-to-man/. (2018).

Accessed: 2018-02-09.

2018.
order

[17] Swisslog.
age
and
en-us/warehouse-logistics-distribution-center-automation/
products-systems-solutions/asrs-automated-storage-,-a-,-retrieval-systems/
boxes-cartons-small-parts-items/carrypick-storage-and-picking-system. (2018).
Accessed: 2018-02-09.

stor-
https://www.swisslog.com/

CarryPick:
system.

and modular

Flexible

picking

[18] Jérémy Taquet, Gaël Ecorchard, and Libor Přeučil. 2017. Real-Time Visual Locali-

sation in a Tagged Environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02283 (2017).
[19] Unity Technologies. 2018. Unity3D. https://unity3d.com/. (2018). Accessed:

2018-02-09.
[20] Ubimax. 2017.

Intel Case Study.

http://www.ubimax.com/en/references/

intel-casestudy.html. (2017). Accessed: 2018-02-09.

[21] Peter R. Wurman, Rafaello D’Andrea, and Mick Mountz. 2007. Coordinating
Hundreds of Cooperative, Autonomous Vehicles in Warehouses. In Proceedings
of the 19th National Conference on Innovative Applications of Artiicial Intelligence
- Volume 2 (IAAI’07). AAAI Press, 1752ś1759. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
1620113.1620125

[22] Khalid Yousif, Alireza Bab-Hadiashar, and Reza Hoseinnezhad. 2015. An Overview
to Visual Odometry and Visual SLAM: Applications to Mobile Robotics. Intel-
ligent Industrial Systems 1, 4 (01 Dec 2015), 289ś311. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40903-015-0032-7

