8
1
0
2

n
u
J

2
2

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
1
8
8
0
.
6
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Augmented Reality-based Feedback for
Technician-in-the-loop C-arm Repositioning

Mathias Unberath1,∗, Javad Fotouhi1,∗, Jonas Hajek1,2,∗, Andreas Maier2, Greg Osgood3, Russell Taylor4,
Mehran Armand5, and Nassir Navab1
1Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Johns Hopkins University
2Pattern Recognition Laboratory, FAU Erlangen-Nuremberg
3Orthopaedic Trauma, Johns Hopkins University
4Laboratory for Computational Sensing and Robotics, Johns Hopkins University
5Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University
∗These authors are considered joint ﬁrst authors.
Email: unberath@jhu.edu

Abstract—Interventional C-arm imaging is crucial to percu-
taneous orthopedic procedures as it enables the surgeon to
monitor the progress of surgery on the anatomy level. Minimally
invasive interventions require repeated acquisition of X-ray
images from different anatomical views to verify tool placement.
Achieving and reproducing these views often comes at the cost
of increased surgical time and radiation dose to both patient and
staff. This work proposes a marker-free ”technician-in-the-loop”
Augmented Reality (AR) solution for C-arm repositioning. The X-
ray technician operating the C-arm interventionally is equipped
with a head-mounted display capable of recording desired C-
arm poses in 3D via an integrated infrared sensor. For C-arm
repositioning to a particular target view, the recorded C-arm
pose is restored as a virtual object and visualized in an AR
environment, serving as a perceptual reference for the technician.
We conduct experiments in a setting simulating orthopedic
trauma surgery. Our proof-of-principle ﬁndings indicate that the
proposed system can decrease the 2.76 X-ray images required
per desired view down to zero, suggesting substantial reductions
of radiation dose during C-arm repositioning. The proposed AR
solution is a ﬁrst step towards facilitating communication between
the surgeon and the surgical staff,
improving the quality of
surgical image acquisition, and enabling context-aware guidance
for surgery rooms of the future. The concept of technician-in-
the-loop design will become relevant to various interventions
considering the expected advancements of sensing and wearable
computing in the near future.

I. INTRODUCTION

Percutaneous approaches are the current clinical standard
for internal ﬁxation of many skeletal fractures, including pelvic
trauma. This type of minimally invasive surgery is enabled
by C-arm X-ray imaging systems that intra-operatively supply
projective 2D images of the 3D surgical scene, i. e. tools and
anatomy. Appropriate placement of implants is crucial for
satisfactory outcome [1], [2], but verifying acceptable progress
interventionally is challenging. This is because it requires the
mental mapping of desired screw trajectories to the fractured
anatomy in 3D based on 2D X-ray images acquired from
different view points [3], [4], [5]. To alleviate the associated
challenges, surgeons are trained to use well deﬁned X-ray
views speciﬁc to the current task, such as the inlet or obturator
oblique view of the pelvis [6], [7]. Achieving these views,

however, is not straight forward in practice due to multiple
reasons. First, the desired views are usually difﬁcult to obtain
since the position of the internal anatomy is not obvious from
the outside. Second, C-arm systems most commonly used
today are non-robotic but have many degrees of freedom.
Consequently, when trying to achieve a particular view, the
X-ray technician operating the C-arm positions the device by
repeated trial-and-error. Doing so increases the radiation dose
to patient and surgical team. In surgical workﬂows where the
C-arm has to be moved out of the way to ease access to
the patient (as is the case in pelvis ﬁxation), the problem of
increased dose during so-called ”ﬂuoro hunting” [8] is further
ampliﬁed. The above reasoning suggests that a computer-
assisted solution that aids the X-ray technician in ﬁnding the
desired view has great potential in reducing X-ray dose to
patient and surgical staff.

Most previous work have focused on digitally rendering
X-ray images from CT data rather than physically acquiring
them. [9], [10], [11] use ”virtual ﬂuoroscopy” to improve train-
ing of X-ray technicians and surgeons, while [12], [13] and [8]
generate digitally rendered radiographs intra-operatively from
pre-operative CT. Doing so requires 3D/2D registration of
the CT volume to the patient and tracking of the C-arm,
which is achieved using an additional RGB camera or C-
arm encoders, respectively. A complementary method most
similar to the approach discussed here uses an external outside-
in tracking system that accurately tracks an optical marker
on the C-arm to verify accurate repositioning [14]. All the
above approaches successfully reduce radiation dose due to
C-arm repositioning, however, they make strong assumptions
on the surgical environment by requiring pre-operative CT, an
encoded C-arm, or external tracking systems.

In [15], a user interface concept is introduced for navigating
and repositioning angiographic C-arms. First,
the surgeon
identiﬁes the desired imaging outcome based on radiographs
simulated from pre-operative CTA images on a tablet PC
system. The 6 degree-of-freedom pose of the C-arm scanner
is automatically estimated by using this planning information,
the registration between the patient and the scanner, and the

 
 
 
 
 
 
HMD to dynamically calibrate the headset, and thus the
technician, to its environment. Using image features obtained
via depth sensors or stereo cameras, SLAM incrementally
constructs a spatial map of the environment and localizes the
sensing device therein [16]. In particular, SLAM solves
(cid:16)
P W ˆTT(t)xT(t)

WTT(t) = arg min

(cid:105)
, fT(t)

(cid:104)
d

(1)

fW

(cid:17)

,

W ˆTT

where WTT(t) is the desired pose of the technician relative to
an arbitrary but static world coordinate system at time t, fT(t)
are image features at that time, xT(t) are the 3D locations of
these feature, P is the projection operator, and d[·, ·] is the
feature similarity to be optimized [16], [5].

b) Sensing the C-arm Position: In contrast to the tech-
nician, the C-arm is not tracked explicitly but only imaged in
3D using an infrared depth camera integrated in the HMD
worn by the technician. Since the X-ray technician works
in reasonable proximity of the C-arm, the infrared sensor
will constantly observe a large area of the C-arm’s surface
(cf. Fig. 2). Once the C-arm has been moved to the desired
location, the technician can save the C-arm position by either
voice command (e. g. ”Save Position 1”) or by pressing a
button on a hand-held remote control. Here, saving the position
refers to saving the current point cloud {xP
i | i = 1, . . . , N }
relative to the world coordinate system via

·P T−1

WTP(t0) =W T−1

T (t0) ·IR T−1
where t0 is the time of voice command, IRTT is the HMD-
speciﬁc transformation from tracking module of the HMD to
its infrared camera, and PTIR is the mapping from infrared
sensor to metric 3D points xP.

IR · xP,

(2)

T

B. Guidance by Visualization

The process of saving C-arm positions is repeated for
every desired X-ray view such that point clouds of the C-
arm device in every pose are available. During the procedure
when previous C-arm views have to be re-produced, the X-ray
technician requests visualization of the desired position via
voice command (”Show Position 1”). Since the point cloud
{xP
j,i | i = 1, . . . , Nj} of C-arm position j is stored relative to
the world coordinate frame, it can be visualized to the X-ray
technician in an AR environment at position

j,i(t) =T TW(t) · WTP(tj
xT

(cid:124)

j,i(tj
0)
(cid:125)

0) · xP
(cid:123)(cid:122)
xW
j,i

,

(3)

where tj
0 denotes the time of calibration of view j, t is the
j,i is the ith point in point cloud j in the world
current time, xW
coordinate frame, and WTP is computed according to Eq. 2.
An example of the AR environment during visualization of a
representative point cloud is provided in Fig. 2b).
In contrast to previous approaches, there is no explicit guid-
ance but intuitive 3D visualization of the desired position. The
X-ray technician adjusts the position of the C-arm using all
available degrees of freedom (axial, orbital and swivel rotation
the
in addition to base and gantry translations) such that

Fig. 1: Spatial relations that must be estimated dynamically to
enable the proposed AR environment. Transformations shown
in black are estimated directly while transformations shown in
orange are derived.

inverse kinematics of the C-arm. Consequently, this solution
provides a transparent interface to the control of the imaging
device. However, a major challenge associated to it is the
ofﬂine planning stage which prohibits its application and use-
fulness for percutaneous orthopedic interventions considering
their ergonomics and dynamic workﬂow.

In this work, we propose a technician-in-the-loop solution
to C-arm repositioning during orthopedic surgery in unpre-
pared operating theaters. This is achieved by equipping the
X-ray technician with an optical see-through head-mounted
display (OST HMD) that tracks itself within its environment.
Then, once the C-arm is positioned appropriately, the 3D
point cloud of the C-arm is stored. When a particular pose
must be restored, the respective 3D scene is visualized to
the technician in an Augmented Reality (AR) environment,
providing intuitive feedback on C-arm positioning in 3D.

II. METHODS

Similarly to the AR environment delivered by the camera-
augmented C-arm [3], the proposed solution for C-arm repo-
sitioning does not actively track the device to be positioned
but intuitively visualizes spatial relations and thus improves
user performance. To this end, several transformations need to
be estimated dynamically. These transforms are illustrated in
Fig. 1 and their estimation is discussed in the remainder of
this section.

A. Localization in the Operating Theater

a) Tracking the Technician: The central mechanism of
the proposed system is the ability to store the 3D appearance
of a C-arm conﬁguration (i. e. the 3D point cloud as shown
in Fig. 2) at the respective position in 3D space; and to
recreate it in an AR environment. We use the Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM) capabilities of the OST

Fig. 2: All images are shown from the X-ray technician’s point of view. In a) the live 3D point cloud computed from the
infrared depth image is displayed in red. This point cloud is then saved for re-use. In b) the C-arm has been moved to a different
pose; the previously saved point cloud is visualized in green and serves as a reference to achieve the previous pose. After
successful repositioning of the C-arm shown in c), the saved and current point clouds shown in green and red, respectively,
coincide. This means that the C-arm has been repositioned appropriately.

surface of the real C-arm perfectly matches the virtual point
cloud. The live point cloud {xPi(t) | i = 1, . . . , N (t)} can be
toggled on or off for additional virtual-on-virtual assessment
(see Fig. 2).

C. Experiments and Study

TABLE I: C-arm pose differences as per infrared marker
tracking.

Mean Distance ± SD
Angle ± SD

Proposed

Conventional
51.6 ± 19.2 mm 16.7 ± 6.3 mm
1.23 ± 0.45◦

1.54 ± 0.92◦

To test the described system we setup an experiment mim-
icking pelvic trauma surgery using an anthropomorphic Saw-
bones pelvis phantom (Sawbones, Vashon, WA). The phantom
was completely covered with surgical drape and had metallic
markers attached to deﬁne keypoints for evaluation. During
this study, the C-arm was operated by a board-certiﬁed X-
ray technician, who usually operates C-arm imaging systems
during surgery. During the experiment and for every run, the
X-ray technician was asked to: First, move the system into
two clinically relevant C-arm poses, e. g. inlet and outlet view;
second, retract the C-arm and reset to neutral position; and
third, accurately reproduce the two previously deﬁned C-arm
positions using the conventional method (i. e. no assistance)
and the proposed AR environment. Representative angulations
of the C-arm are shown in Fig. 3. For direct quantitative
comparison between C-arm poses, an infrared optical marker
was rigidly attached to the gantry of the C-arm and tracked
using an external tracking camera, namely a Polaris Spectra
(Northern Digital Inc., Shelburne, VT). The workﬂow for one
run was as follows:

Step 1: Deﬁne two target C-arm poses, save X-ray images, point
cloud using HMD, and C-arm position using external
tracker

Step 2: Retract C-arm from scene and set in neutral position
Step 3: Restore target views

– Conventional: Store all X-ray views required for
repositioning, and ﬁnal C-arm position using external
marker

– Proposed: Store ﬁnal C-arm position, and one X-ray

image for evaluation

Step 4: Repeat Step 3 with other method (conventional/proposed)
We designed four runs covering a total of six different poses:

Run 1: Inlet/outlet
Run 2: Cranial oblique / Caudal oblique
Run 3: Cranial oblique / Caudal oblique (opposing)
Run 4: Inlet / outlet

To avoid training bias, we alternate the order in which con-
ventional and proposed approach are utilized for every run.
For quantitative evaluation, we report the mean Euclidean
and angular difference of ﬁnal C-arm poses compared to the
target pose as measured by the external tracker. Further, we
manually annotate the keypoint locations in all X-ray images
and compute the average projection domain displacement
using the ﬁrst and ﬁnal X-ray for the conventional approach,
and using the veriﬁcation X-ray for the proposed method.
Finally, we record the total number of X-rays used during
the conventional repositioning.

III. RESULTS

We have omitted Run 3 from the quantitative evaluation,
since the X-ray technician erroneously restored the cranial
oblique view as requested in Run 2. This is because inclusion
of this run would strongly bias the quantitative results of the
conventional approach, and thus, positively bias the assessment
of the proposed AR environment. In clinical practice, such
errors unnecessarily increase the dose to patient and surgical
staff but could be avoided using the proposed system.
Differences between target and restored C-arm pose as per
the external tracker are provided in Table I for the proposed
and conventional approach, respectively. We state residuals
averaged over all C-arm poses separately for translation and
rotation and compute the mean Euclidean displacement and
angular deviation of the reference marker, respectively. While
the orientation of the C-arm is equally well restored in both

TABLE II: Projection domain keypoint displacement in pixels
(px).

Proposed
210 ± 105 px

Conventional on ﬁrst try
257 ± 171 px

Conventional
68 ± 36 px

proposed and conventional approach, the positional error is
larger for the proposed method. This observation will be
discussed in the following section.
In addition, we state the average displacement of projection
domain keypoints relative to the target X-ray images. We
evaluate this error for the veriﬁcation X-ray images after
C-arm repositioning with the proposed method, and for the
initial and reﬁned X-ray images acquired in the conventional
approach. The values stated in Table II reﬂect the mean pixel
displacement over all poses and keypoints. 3 to 4 keypoints
were used per image, depending on the ﬁeld of view deter-
mined by the C-arm pose. Based on this projection domain
metric, the proposed method outperforms C-arm repositioning
the conventional approach
i. e.
based on user recollection,
before iterative reﬁnement. However, when X-ray images are
acquired to verify and adjust the C-arm pose, the conventional
approach substantially outperforms the proposed system.
Finally, we report the number of X-ray images acquired during
C-arm repositioning. With the conventional method, a total
of 16 X-rays where required to restore 6 poses yielding, on
average, 2.76 X-rays per C-arm position. Using the proposed
approach, the number of acquired images for C-arm pose
restoration drops to zero, since our experiment did not allow
for iterative reﬁnement when the proposed technology was
used.

IV. DISCUSSION

Our results suggest

that substantial dose reductions are
possible with the proposed AR system. Once the desired
views have been identiﬁed and stored, C-arm repositioning
can be achieved with clinically acceptable accuracy without
any further X-ray acquisitions. At the same time, our results
reveal that further research on improving tracking accuracy
and perceptual quality will be required for X-ray technicians
to not only save dose but also deliver improved performance.
The experimental design described here is limited since only
a single X-ray technician and four runs were considered.
We understand the reported experiments as an exploratory
study designed to reveal shortcomings of the current proto-
type. Based upon these very preliminary results, we envision
necessary reﬁnements of the system that address the current
challenges discussed in greater detail below.
In contrast to previous methods [12], [13], [8], our approach
can be directly deployed in the operating theater without
any preparation of the environment or assumptions on the
procedure. This translates to two immediate beneﬁts: First, our
method does not require pre- or intra-operative 3D imaging,
and therefore, circumvents intra-operative 3D/2D registration,
a major challenge in clinical deployment [17], [18]. Second,
there is no need for additional markers and external trackers as

in Matthews et al.
[14], or access to internal encoders of the
C-arm as in De Silva et al.
[8]. While internal encoders can
be considered more elegant than external trackers, they are not
yet widely available in mobile C-arms since these systems are
usually non-robotic, and therefore, do not require encoding.
In addition, the most recent C-arms that are commercially
available, such as the Ziehm Vision RFD 3D (Ziehm Imag-
ing, Vienna, Austria) or the Siemens Cios Alpha (Siemens
Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany) have at most 4 robotized
axes [8], [19], suggesting that not all of the required 6 degrees
of freedom can be monitored.
The proposed system does not currently provide quantitative
feedback on how well a previously achieved pose was restored,
but relies on the user’s assessment. The current prototype,
however, is capable of simultaneously displaying stored and
live point clouds, as described in Sec. II-B. A natural next
step would be to use quantitative methods such as the iter-
ative closest point (ICP) algorithm [20] to provide rigorous
feedback on both the accuracy of alignment and the required
adjustments. We strongly believe that such information would
substantially improve the performance of the proposed system
since current veriﬁcation is solely based on perception. Our
results suggest that relying on perception works well for restor-
ing C-arm orientation but does not perform well for restoring
position. This limitation partly arises from the disadvantages
and challenges with current technology, particularly because
of two reasons: First, there is no interaction between real and
virtual object, such as shadow or occlusion. Second, available
hardware, such as the Microsoft HoloLens or the Meta 2,
will render virtual content in a ﬁxed focal plane, irrespective
of the virtual objects position. Consequently, virtual and real
content may not be in focus simultaneously despite occupying
the exact same physical space [4], [5]. Integrating quantitative
feedback, however, will require optimized implementations of
rendering and alignment to deliver a pleasant user experience
without substantial lag; a challenge that already arises for
pure visualization due to the immense computational load
associated with real-time SLAM.
In addition to shortcomings regarding perception, the per-
formance of our prototype system is further compromised
by the SLAM-tracking performance of purchasable hardware.
Our prototype was materialized using the Meta 2 (Meta,
San Mateo, CA) since it was the only HMD that provided
developer access to the infrared depth sensor at the time of
implementation. Unfortunately, we have found the SLAM-
tracking provided by the Meta 2 to be inferior to the HoloLens
with respect to both lag and accuracy. In addition, the Meta 2
is cable-bound, which limits its appropriateness in highly dy-
namic environments such as operating theaters. While previous
work suggests that the display quality of current HMDs may
be sufﬁcient for intra-operative visualization [21], [22], [23],
the accuracy and reliability of vision-based SLAM seems yet
insufﬁcient to warrant immediate clinical deployment [4], [5].
While incorporating external tracking may be a solution [24],
we believe that this prerequisite will inhibit wide acceptance,
as was observed with previous navigation techniques. Con-

[4] S. Andress, A. Johnson, M. Unberath, A. F. Winkler, K. Yu, J. Fotouhi,
S. Weidert, G. Osgood, and N. Navab, “On-the-ﬂy augmented reality
for orthopedic surgery using a multimodal ﬁducial,” Journal of Medical
Imaging, vol. 5, no. 2, p. 021209, 2018.

[5] J. Hajek, M. Unberath, J. Fotouhi, B. Bier, S. C. Lee, G. Osgood,
A. Maier, M. Armand, and N. Navab, “Closing the Calibration Loop:
An Inside-out-tracking Paradigm for Augmented Reality in Orthopedic
Surgery,” in Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Inter-
vention, 2018, p. to appear.

[6] C. R. Wheeless, Wheeless’ textbook of orthopaedics, Chapter: Radiology

of Pelvic Fractures. CR Wheeless, MD, 1996.

[7] “AO Foundation surgical reference,” https://www2.aofoundation.org/

wps/portal/surgery, 2018, accessed: 2018-06-11.

[8] T. De Silva, J. Punnoose, A. Uneri, M. Mahesh, J. Grres, and M. Ja-
cobson, “Virtual ﬂuoroscopy for intraoperative C-arm positioning and
radiation dose reduction,” vol. 5, p. 1, 02 2018.

[9] O. J. Bott, K. Dresing, M. Wagner, B.-W. Raab, and M. Teistler,
“Informatics in radiology: use of a c-arm ﬂuoroscopy simulator to
support training in intraoperative radiography,” Radiographics, vol. 31,
no. 3, pp. E65–E75, 2011.

[10] R. H. Gong, B. Jenkins, R. W. Sze, and Z. Yaniv, “A cost effective
and high ﬁdelity ﬂuoroscopy simulator using the image-guided surgery
toolkit (igstk),” in Medical Imaging 2014: Image-Guided Procedures,
Robotic Interventions, and Modeling, vol. 9036.
International Society
for Optics and Photonics, 2014, p. 903618.

[11] P. Stefan, S. Habert, A. Winkler, M. Lazarovici, J. F¨urmetz, U. Eck,
and N. Navab, “A mixed-reality approach to radiation-free training of
c-arm based surgery,” in International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2017, pp.
540–547.

[12] T. Klein, S. Benhimane, J. Traub, S. M. Heining, E. Euler, and N. Navab,
“Interactive guidance system for c-arm repositioning without radiation,”
in Bildverarbeitung f¨ur die Medizin 2007. Springer, 2007, pp. 21–25.
[13] P. Dressel, L. Wang, O. Kutter, J. Traub, S.-M. Heining, and N. Navab,
“Intraoperative positioning of mobile c-arms using artiﬁcial ﬂuo-
roscopy,” in Medical Imaging 2010: Visualization, Image-Guided Pro-
cedures, and Modeling, vol. 7625.
International Society for Optics and
Photonics, 2010, p. 762506.

[14] F. Matthews, D. J. Hoigne, M. Weiser, G. A. Wanner, P. Regazzoni,
N. Suhm, and P. Messmer, “Navigating the ﬂuoroscope’s c-arm back
into position: an accurate and practicable solution to cut radiation
and optimize intraoperative workﬂow,” Journal of orthopaedic trauma,
vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 687–692, 2007.

[15] P. Fallavollita, A. Winkler, S. Habert, P. Wucherer, P. Stefan, R. Mansour,
R. Ghotbi, and N. Navab, “Desired-view controlled positioning of
angiographic c-arms,” in International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2014, pp.
659–666.

[16] F. Endres, J. Hess, N. Engelhard, J. Sturm, D. Cremers, and W. Bur-
gard, “An evaluation of the RGB-D SLAM system,” in Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE,
2012, pp. 1691–1696.

[17] B. Bier, M. Unberath, J.-N. Zaech, J. Fotouhi, M. Armand, G. Osgood,
N. Navab, and A. Maier, “X-ray-transform invariant anatomical land-
mark detection for pelvic trauma surgery,” in Medical Image Computing
and Computer Assisted Intervention, 2018, p. to appear.

[18] J. Fotouhi, B. Fuerst, A. Johnson, S. C. Lee, R. Taylor, G. Osgood,
N. Navab, and M. Armand, “Pose-aware C-arm for automatic re-
initialization of interventional 2D/3D image registration,” International
journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery, vol. 12, no. 7, pp.
1221–1230, 2017.

[19] “Ziehm Imaging ziehm vision rfd 3d,” https://www.ziehm.com/en/

us/products/c-arms-with-ﬂat-panel-detector/ziehm-vision-rfd-3d.html,
2018, accessed: 2018-06-11.

[20] P. J. Besl and N. D. McKay, “Method for registration of 3-d shapes,” in
Sensor Fusion IV: Control Paradigms and Data Structures, vol. 1611.
International Society for Optics and Photonics, 1992, pp. 586–607.
[21] L. Qian, M. Unberath, K. Yu, B. Fuerst, A. Johnson, N. Navab, and
G. Osgood, “Towards virtual monitors for image guided interventions-
real-time streaming to optical see-through head-mounted displays,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.00808, 2017.

[22] G. Deib, A. Johnson, M. Unberath, K. Yu, S. Andress, L. Qian, G. Os-
good, N. Navab, F. Hui, and P. Gailloud, “Image guided percutaneous
spine procedures using an optical see-through head mounted display:

Fig. 3: The X-ray technician operating the C-arm during
the experiment. Typical angulations for pelvic trauma surgery
were selected according to [6]. We show inlet and outlet views
in a) and b), caudal oblique views in c) and d), and cranial
oblique views in e) and f), respectively.

sequently, developing OST HMDs speciﬁcally designed to
meet clinical needs, particularly regarding perceptual quality
and tracking accuracy, will be of critical importance to bring
medical AR into the operating room.

V. CONCLUSION

We have proposed a technician-in-the-loop solution to C-
arm repositioning during ﬂuoroscopy-guided procedures. Our
system stores 3D representations of the desired C-arm views
using real-time 3D sensing via infrared depth cameras that
are then stored. When a previously achieved pose needs to
be restored, the corresponding 3D scene is displayed to the
technician in an OST HMD-based AR environment. Achieving
the target view then requires alignment of the real C-arm
gantry with the virtual model thereof. In our proof-of-principle
experiments we have found that use of our system 1) is
associated with a reduction in X-ray dose, and 2) may prevent
operator errors, such as restoring the wrong view. We have
found that relying on perception as the only performance feed-
back mechanism is challenging with current HMD hardware,
suggesting that future work should investigate possibilities to
provide quantitative feedback on C-arm operator performance
in real time.

REFERENCES

[1] P. Korovessis, A. Baikousis, M. Stamatakis, and P. Katonis, “Medium-
and long-term results of open reduction and internal ﬁxation for unstable
pelvic ring fractures,” Orthopedics, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1165–1171, 2000.
[2] K. Mardanpour and M. Rahbar, “The outcome of surgically treated
traumatic unstable pelvic fractures by open reduction and internal
ﬁxation,” Journal of injury and violence research, vol. 5, no. 2, p. 77,
2013.

[3] E. Tucker, J. Fotouhi, M. Unberath, S. C. Lee, B. Fuerst, A. Johnson,
M. Armand, G. M. Osgood, and N. Navab, “Towards clinical translation
of augmented orthopedic surgery: from pre-op CT to intra-op x-ray
via RGBD sensing,” in Medical Imaging 2018: Imaging Informatics
for Healthcare, Research, and Applications, vol. 10579.
International
Society for Optics and Photonics, 2018, p. 105790J.

proof of concept and rationale,” Journal of neurointerventional surgery,
pp. neurintsurg–2017, 2018.

[23] L. Qian, A. Barthel, A. Johnson, G. Osgood, P. Kazanzides, N. Navab,
and B. Fuerst, “Comparison of optical see-through head-mounted dis-
plays for surgical interventions with object-anchored 2d-display,” Inter-
national journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery, vol. 12,
no. 6, pp. 901–910, 2017.

[24] X. Chen, L. Xu, Y. Wang, H. Wang, F. Wang, X. Zeng, Q. Wang,
and J. Egger, “Development of a surgical navigation system based on
augmented reality using an optical see-through head-mounted display,”
Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 55, pp. 124–131, 2015.

