Uniﬁed Scheduling for Predictable Communication
Reliability in Cellular Networks with D2D Links

Yuwei Xie
Elec. & Comp. Eng. Department
Iowa State University
yuweix@iastate.edu

Hongwei Zhang
Elec. & Comp. Eng. Department
Iowa State University
hongwei@iastate.edu

Pengfei Ren
Computer Science Department
Wayne State University
pengfei@wayne.edu

8
1
0
2

l
u
J

2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
7
4
0
0
.
7
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

to control

Abstract—Cellular networks with D2D links are increasingly
being explored for mission-critical applications (e.g., real-time
control and AR/VR) which require predictable communication
reliability. Thus it is critical
interference among
concurrent transmissions in a predictable manner to ensure
the required communication reliability. To this end, we propose
a Uniﬁed Cellular Scheduling (UCS) framework that, based
on the Physical-Ratio-K (PRK) interference model, schedules
uplink, downlink, and D2D transmissions in a uniﬁed manner to
ensure predictable communication reliability while maximizing
channel spatial reuse. UCS also provides a simple, effective
approach to mode selection that maximizes the communication
capacity for each involved communication pair. UCS effectively
uses multiple channels for high throughput as well as resilience
to channel fading and external
interference. Leveraging the
availability of base stations (BSes) as well as high-speed, out-
of-band connectivity between BSes, UCS effectively orchestrates
the functionalities of BSes and user equipment (UE) for light-
weight control signaling and ease of incremental deployment
and integration with existing cellular standards. We have imple-
mented UCS using the open-source, standards-compliant cellular
networking platform OpenAirInterface. We have validated the
OpenAirInterface implementation using USRP B210 software-
deﬁned radios and lab deployment. We have also evaluated
UCS through high-ﬁdelity, at-scale simulation studies; we observe
that UCS ensures predictable communication reliability while
achieving a higher channel spatial reuse rate than existing
mechanisms, and that the distributed UCS framework enables a
channel spatial reuse rate statistically equal to that in the state-
of-the-art centralized scheduling algorithm iOrder.

I. INTRODUCTION

LTE-Advanced Pro and 5G cellular networks with device-
to-device (D2D) communications are increasingly being ex-
plored for mission-critical applications such as real-time con-
trol and AR/VR [1], [2], [3]. For these applications, pre-
dictable communication reliability is not only important by
itself, it is also the basis of real-time communication since
unpredictable communication reliability will make it difﬁcult
to ensure timely delivery of messages [4], [5]. Controlling
communication reliability in a predictable manner is also a
basis for controlling the inherent trade-off between commu-
nication reliability, delay, and throughput, which is important
for system-level optimization [4], [6]. Cellular communication,
however, is subject to complex dynamics and uncertainties,
and interference among concurrent transmissions is a major
source of uncertainty [4], [5]. For predictable communication
reliability in mission-critical cellular networks, it is critical to

schedule concurrent transmissions so that interference among
them is controlled in a predictable manner.

Related work For controlling interference in cellular networks
with D2D links, power control, channel assignment, and
scheduling have been considered in existing studies [7], [8],
[9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19],
[20]. The existing cellular technology LTE has also deﬁned the
High Interference Indicator (HII) and Overload Indicator (OI)
for uplinks as well as Relative Narrowband Transmit Power
(RNTP) for downlinks in order for a cell to inform neighboring
cells of the Resource Blocks (RBs) that are susceptible to
interference [21]. For more precise interference control in
coordinated multi-point (CoMP) transmission and reception,
LTE has also deﬁned coordinated scheduling mechanisms
such as dynamic point blanking which dynamically prevent
transmission at certain time-frequency resource. The existing
mechanisms, however, do not ensure predictable interference
control and communication reliability due to the following
reasons: considering single-cell settings only without address-
ing inter-cell interference [7], [8], [9], [10], using inaccurate
interference models [11], [12], assuming uniform wireless
channel fading across networks which is unrealistic in prac-
tice [13], [14], assuming exclusion-regions around receivers
without mechanisms for identifying the exclusion-regions in
practice [7], not considering the interference from cellular-
mode transmitters to D2D receivers [15], not considering
interference between D2D links [16], not considering inter-
cell interference among cellular and D2D links [17], [18], [22],
and/or maximizing throughput without addressing reliability-
throughput
tradeoff [7], [8], [9]. Several pieces of work
[17], [18], [22] do not consider spectrum reuse across D2D
links either, which unnecessarily reduces achievable network
capacity.

Wireless networks such as those based on WirelessHART,
ISA100.11p, WIA-PA, and IETF 6TiSCH [23], [24] have
been studied for industrial applications. Focusing on low-rate
wireless networks based on IEEE 802.15.4/4e, those studies do
not focus on cellular networks with D2D links, nor have they
focused on distributed scheduling with predictable interference
control and maximum channel spatial reuse [4].

Contributions of this work Towards predictable communica-
tion reliability in industrial cellular networks with D2D links,

 
 
 
 
 
 
we propose a Uniﬁed Cellular Scheduling (UCS) framework
and we make the following contributions:

• Based on the Physical-Ratio-K (PRK) interference model
which is suitable for developing ﬁeld-deployable dis-
tributed scheduling algorithms [5], our UCS framework
schedules uplink, downlink, and D2D transmissions in
a uniﬁed manner to ensure predictable communication
reliability while maximizing channel spatial reuse and
allocating communication resources to uplink, downlink,
and D2D transmissions on a need basis. UCS also pro-
vides a simple, effective approach to mode selection that
maximizes the communication capacity for each involved
communication pair.

• Extending the distributed scheduling protocol PRKS [4]
to multi-channel settings, UCS effectively uses multiple
communication channels for high throughput as well as
for resilience to channel fading and external interference.
• To leverage the computational power of base stations
(BSes) as well as high-speed, out-of-band connectivity
between BSes, UCS places the scheduling decisions at
BSes and having UEs share their local state information
with corresponding BSes at relatively low-frequencies.
This BS-UE functional orchestration mechanism enables
light-weight control signaling, and it facilitates incremen-
tal deployment of UCS as well as technology evolution.
• We have implemented UCS using the open-source,
standards-compliant cellular networking platform Ope-
nAirInterface. We have validated the OpenAirInterface
implementation of UCS using USRP B210 software-
deﬁned radios and a small-scale deployment. We have
also studied the behavior of UCS using at-scale, high-
ﬁdelity simulation. We have observed that, unlike existing
mechanisms which cannot enable predictable commu-
nication reliability, UCS ensures predictable communi-
cation reliability while achieving higher channel spatial
reuse rate. We have also observed that the distributed
UCS scheduling framework enables a channel spatial
reuse rate statistically equal to that in the state-of-the-art
centralized scheduling algorithm iOrder [25].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the system model, problem speciﬁcation, PRK in-
terference model, and PRK-based scheduling protocol PRKS.
Section III presents our Uniﬁed Cellular Scheduling (UCS)
framework. We evaluate UCS in Section IV, and we summa-
rize our concluding remarks in Section V.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. System Model and Problem Speciﬁcation

We consider cellular networks of multiple cells where each
cell has a Base Station (BS) and a number of user equipment
(UEs). Each cell has a set of uplinks (i.e., transmissions from
UEs to the BS) and downlinks (i.e., transmissions from the
BS to UEs). A UE may also transmit data to another UE
in the network. The transmission from one UE to another
can be in cellular mode (i.e., an uplink transmission followed

by a downlink transmission) or in D2D mode where the
transmitter UE sends data directly to the receiver UE without
using any BS in data delivery. If a UE sends data directly
to another UE, we regard the communication link as a D2D
link. In line with the current wireless systems, e.g., LTE-
type systems, the basic resource allocation unit is Resource
Block (BS), which consists of 12 consecutive subcarriers in the
frequency domain and one 0.5ms time slot in the time domain,
with each subcarrier occupying a 15KHz spectrum and the
central frequencies of two consecutive subcarriers separated
by 15KHz. For convenience of exposition, we regard the 12
consecutive subcarriers of a RB as one carrier. According
to the LTE standard, each cell may use multiple component
carriers, with each component carrier consisting of 6 - 100
carriers (i.e., with bandwidth ranging from 1.4MHz to 20MHz)
[21]. For reducing scheduling overhead, the LTE standard also
groups a certain number carriers into a carrier group, and
the speciﬁc grouping methods depend on the bandwidth of
a component carrier.

The uplinks, downlinks, and D2D links of a cellular network
share the wireless spectrum available. The objectives of this
work are to develop 1) an algorithm that, for each UE-to-UE
communication pair, decides whether the communication shall
be in cellular mode or D2D mode for maximum communica-
tion throughput while satisfying the required communication
reliability, and 2) an algorithm that, given a time slot and the
set of uplinks, downlinks, and D2D links (if any), schedules
a maximal subset of the links to transmit at the time slot so
that the required communication reliability is guaranteed.

As a ﬁrst-step towards ﬁeld-deployable solutions that ensure
predictable communication reliability in cellular networks with
D2D links, we assume that UEs are static or move slowly
such that the average channel gain and the average background
noise power tend to be stable at timescales of seconds, minutes
or even longer (e.g., in industrial network settings of slow
motion) [2], [4]. Focusing on the problem of transmission
scheduling, we assume that transmission power for each node
(i.e., BS or UE) is ﬁxed, even though different nodes may
use different transmission powers. For highly mobile networks
(e.g., those with vehicles) and transmission power control,
techniques such as those by Li et al. [26] and Wang et al.
[27] may be applied, but detailed study is beyond the scope
of this work.

B. Interference Model

For

predictable

interference
control in transmission scheduling,
the Physical-Ratio-K
we adopt
[21]
interference model
(PRK)
in our study. The PRK model
integrates
the protocol model’s
locality with the physical model’s
high-ﬁdelity, and it is suitable for
designing distributed scheduling
protocols that ensure predictable
interference control in the presence

Fig. 1.
model

PRK interference

of dynamics and uncertainties. As shown in Figure 1, in the
PRK model, a node C (cid:48) is regarded as not interfering and thus
can transmit concurrently with the transmission form another
node S to its receiver R if and only if P (C (cid:48), R) < P (S,R)
,
KS,R,TS,R
where P (C (cid:48), R) and P (S, R) is the average strength of
signals reaching R from C (cid:48) and S respectively, KS,R,TS,R is
the minimum real number chosen such that, in the presence
of cumulative interference from all concurrent transmitters,
the probability for R to successfully receive packets from S
is no less than the minimum link reliability TS,R required by
applications.

the

For

predictable

interference

the “control

parameter
control,
KS,R,TS,R of
the PRK model needs to be instantiated
for every link (S, R) according to in-situ, potentially
unpredictable network and environmental conditions. To
this end, Zhang et al [4] have formulated the PRK model
instantiation problem as a regulation control problem where
the “plant“ is the link (S, R), the “reference input“ is the
required link reliability TS,R, the “output“ is the actual link
reliability YS,R from S to R,
input“ is the
PRK model parameter KS,R,TS,R , and the objective of the
regulation control is to adjust the control input so that the
plant output is no less than the reference input [4]. For every
link (S, R), using its instantiated PRK model parameter
KS,R,TS,R and the local signal maps that contain the average
signal power attenuation between S, R and every other close-
by node C that may interfere with the transmission from S
to R, link (S, R) and every close-by node C become aware
of their mutual interference relations. Based on nodes/links
mutual
interference relations, non-interfering transmissions
can be scheduled to ensure the required communication
reliability across individual links.

PRK-based scheduling has been shown to enable predictable
interference control in single-channel ad hoc networks [4],
[26]. In this work, we will verify the suitability and address
the challenges of applying the PRK model to scheduling in
multi-channel cellular networks with D2D links.

III. UNIFIED CELLULAR SCHEDULING FRAMEWORK

A. Overview

For scheduling with predictable communication reliability
in cellular networks, a fundamental task is to identify the
interference relations between uplinks, downlinks, and D2D
links (if any). Given that the PRK interference model is a
high-ﬁdelity model speciﬁcally designed for distributed pro-
tocol design in dynamic, uncertain network settings [5] and
considering the demonstrated predictable interference control
in PRK-based scheduling for single-channel ad hoc networks
[4], we adopt the PRK interference model in our design.
The PRK model is a generic model, and it is applicable to
communication links of different technologies. In particular,
the impact of different communication technologies (e.g.,
modulation and coding schemes, multi-antenna systems) is
captured by the relation between the packet-delivery-reliability
(PDR) and signal-to-interference-plus-noise-ratio (SINR) for

a link, and the PDR-SINR relation is used to instantiate the
PRK model for each link [4]. Therefore, with the PRK model
instantiated for the uplinks, downlinks, and D2D links (if any)
of a cellular network, the PRK model serves as a uniﬁed
approach to modeling interference relations between uplinks,
downlinks, and D2D links despite the differences between
these links (e.g., different types of transmitter/receiver radios).
Accordingly, with inter-link interference relations identiﬁed,
the cellular network scheduling problem is transformed into
a uniﬁed problem of identifying maximal independent sets in
a conﬂict graph capturing the inter-link interference relations,
thus enabling maximizing spectrum spatial reuse while ensur-
ing predictable communication reliability.

The availability of multiple communication channels (e.g.,
carriers) in cellular networks introduces the scalability chal-
in control signaling
lenge of PRK-based scheduling (e.g.,
overhead), and it also provides the opportunity of channel-
hopping for increased resilience against channel fading and
external interference. In general, a link may maintain one
PRK model parameter K for a group of n channels (e.g.,
carrier, carrier group, or component carrier), and the choice
of n reﬂects the tradeoff between control signaling overhead,
data communication performance, and ease of implementation
with existing LTE standard framework and thus incremental
deployment. We will analyze the tradeoff in Section III-B,
and we will present a PRK-based multi-channel scheduling
algorithm that leverages channel hopping to balance communi-
cation load across multiple channels and to increase resilience
against channel fading and external interference.

The PRK model uniﬁes the scheduling of uplinks, down-
links, and D2D links in cellular networks, thus PRK-based
cellular network scheduling bears similarity to that in ad hoc
networks and provides a uniﬁed framework for reasoning
about interference-control-oriented wireless network schedul-
ing. In addition, the availability of BSes and high-speed, out-
of-band interconnections between BSes (e.g., wired optical
networks) in cellular networks provide unique opportunities of
orchestrating the functionalities of BSes and UEs in ways to
reduce control signaling overhead and to facilitate incremental
deployment and technology evolution.

Figure 2 shows the architecture of the Uniﬁed Cellular
Scheduling (UCS) framework. In the architecture, based on

Fig. 2. UCS architecture

tx.statusControl PlaneData Planelink reliability feedbackparametersignal mapset of concurrent transmission linksSignal Map MaintenanceMulti-Channel ONAMA SchedulingProtocol SignalingLink Reliability EstimationMulti-Channel PRK ModelingData Packet TransmissionRSTRSK,,,samples of signal power attenuation Mode SelectionBS & UE FunctionNotation:BS Functionthe status (i.e., success or failure) of uplink transmissions
as well as downlink and D2D link transmissions, the BSes
and UEs estimate the uplink communication reliability as
well as the downlink and D2D link communication reliability
respectively. Then,
through collaborative control signaling,
close-by nodes (i.e., BSes and UEs) estimate the average
channel gain between themselves and use local signal maps
to record such estimates. To facilitate incremental deployment
and technology evolution, we keep the functionality of UEs to
the minimum, and UEs share their communication reliability
estimates and local signal maps with their respective BSes.
This way,
the information
needed to estimate the PRK model parameters of uplinks,
downlinks, and D2D links and then make decisions on mode
selection and transmission scheduling. Then, each BS can
inform the corresponding UEs of the transmission modes and
schedules using existing LTE signaling mechanisms or their
simple extensions. In what follows, we elaborate on the design
and key components of the UCS framework.

the BSes collectively have all

B. Multi-Channel PRK Modeling

PRK-based scheduling guarantees predictable communica-
tion reliability by maintaining one PRK model parameter K
for each channel in ad hoc networks, but it is neither practical
nor necessary in cellular networks with D2D links. In the LTE-
type systems, each component carriers may contain up to 100
carriers and each cell may have multiple component carriers,
which means there are hundreds of channels for each link. For
maintaining one K for each channel, a node needs to transmit
the average channel gain between itself and neighboring nodes
for each channel to the BS. In this situation, the number of
pieces of control information can reach tens of thousands in
each feedback period. The excessive control information will
occupy resources for data transmission, resulting in scheduling
delay and reducing overall system throughput. Consequently,
maintaining one K for each channel is not practical in the
LTE-type cellular networks.

To reduce control signaling overhead, LTE deﬁnes the car-
rier group as the scheduling unit depending on the bandwidth
of the component carrier, which means that BSes do not need
to know the channel gain for each carrier. Maintaining one
K for each channel in cellular networks may not be able to
further improve the accuracy of interference control, and it
will also introduce control signaling overhead.

Maintaining one K for too many carriers, however, will
increase the number of control steps needed for the system
to converge. When a new link requests transmissions or when
environment changes, inaccurate K may incorrectly add nodes
to an exclusion region or delete nodes from it due to the
differences of those carriers in the frequency domain, which
means the scheduler needs more steps to make the value of K
converge. The average link communication reliability will be
affected by the increased convergence time. Consequently, the
number of carriers sharing a common PRK model parameter
K should be properly selected to guarantee control accuracy.

UCS maintains one K for a certain number of adjacent
carriers on one component carrier to guarantee predictable
communication reliability. As we will show in Section III-E,
the availability of multiple carriers for a shared K enables
UCS to the channel hopping to increase resilience against
channel fading and external interference for improved com-
munication reliability. Experiments have shown that a suitable
number of carriers sharing one K can not only guarantee
predictable communication reliability but reduce control sig-
naling overhead greatly. For example, consider the scenario
where 20 UEs share a component carrier with 100 carriers.
If it maintains one K for each carrier, each UE needs to
transmit 19 × 100 = 1, 900 pieces of information about
average channel gains, and the whole system needs to transmit
1, 900 × 20 = 38, 000 pieces of average channel gain infor-
mation during each feedback period. If it maintains one K for
every 25 adjacent carriers while also guaranteeing predictable
communication reliability, each UE just needs to transmit
19 × 4 = 76 average channel gain information and the whole
system needs to transmit 76 × 20 = 1, 520 pieces of average
channel gain information during each feedback period. The
control information will be reduced by more than 90%.

For each link (S, R),

the PRK model parameter K is
initialized such that the initial exclusion region around the
receiver R includes every strong interferer whose concurrent
transmission alone in the same carrier as that of (S, R)
can make the communication reliability along (S, R) drop
below the required reliability TS,R. After its initialization, the
PRK model parameter is adapted according to in-situ network
and environmental conditions to ensure the required com-
munication reliability, and the adaptation uses the regulation
feedback control mechanism of Zhang et al. [4] which we have
discussed in Section II-B. The method of Zhang et al. [4] was
proposed for single-carrier networks. In cellular networks of
N wireless carriers and using the scheduling algorithm to be
presented in Section III-E shortly, a link uses a speciﬁc carrier
at a time slot in probability 1
N . Assuming that the average
strength of the interference signal from an interferer C to the
receiver R is P (C, R) when both C and R are in the same
communication carrier, the expected interference from C to
R shall be computed as P (C,R)
(instead of as P (C, R) in the
original feedback control mechanism [4]) since C may not use
the same carrier as R.

N

C. Mode Selection

The aim of mode selection for UE-to-UE communication
pairs is to accommodate as many concurrently-transmitting
links as possible for a given communication reliability re-
quirement. Consequently, a UE needs to choose a transmis-
sion mode that allows more links to transmit concurrently
with it. To this end, the mode selection question becomes a
comparison of the number of concurrent links between D2D
transmission mode and cellular transmission mode. The PRK
model provides a good basis for addressing this issue because
the value of K exactly determines which links can or cannot
transmit concurrently.

From the PRK interference model, each link maintains a K
to satisfy its reliability requirement, and thus each K deﬁnes
an exclusion region E. For each link (S, R), node C is in the
exclusion region of the receiver R and thus shall not transmit
concurrently with the transmission from S to R if and only if
P (C, R) ≥ P (S,R)
holds. For the D2D transmission mode,
KS,R,TS,R
only one transmission link is needed, from the transmitter
to the receiver directly. For the cellular transmission mode,
two transmission links are required - an uplink followed by a
downlink. This means that a UE needs to compare the number
of interference links of the D2D link with the total number of
interference links of both the uplink and downlink to make the
decision. Consequently, the mode selection algorithm is based
on the number of nodes in the exclusion region deﬁned by K.
When a pair of UEs request transmissions, the BS calculates
the exclusion region for the D2D link (ED2D), uplink (EU p)
and downlink (EDown) respectively according to their PRK
model parameters. If |ED2D| > |EU p| + |EDown|, the UEs
shall communicate through the BS in the cellular mode. If
|ED2D| < |EU p| + |EDown|,
the UEs shall communicate
directly in the D2D mode.

To realize the above design in practice, we shall consider
the fact that the values of |ED2D| and |EU p| + |EDown| for a
UE-to-UE communication pair have to be learned by the UEs,
the UEs cannot learn about |ED2D|(or |EU p|+|EDown|) unless
they communicate in the D2D (or cellular) mode, and |ED2D|
as well as |EU p| + |EDown| are potentially time-varying. In
particular, the mode selection problem considering these real-
world challenges can be modeled as a restless multi-armed
bandit (MAB) problem [28]. A MAB problem can be seen
as a set of real distributions B = {R1, ..., RK}, with each
distribution Rk(1 ≤ k ≤ K) being associated with the rewards
delivered by the k-th arm (i.e., decision options) and having
a mean value of µk. A gambler iteratively plays one arm at
a time and collects the associated reward. The objective is
to maximize the sum of the collected rewards. For a given
play strategy, the realized regret ρ after T plays is deﬁned as
follows:

Rreal(T ) = T µ∗ −

T
(cid:88)

(µαt − βtcαt)

t=1

where µ∗ = maxK
k=1 µk, αt denotes the arm selected at time
t, cαt is the cost of observing the reward of arm αt, βt is
equal to 1 if the gambler observes the reward of αt at time t
and 0 otherwise.

In the mode selection problem, we can treat the rewards of
the D2D mode and cellular mode as −|ED2D| and −|EU p| −
|EDown| respectively, and then we can apply the History-
Dependent Sequencing of Exploration and Exploitation (HD-
SEE) [28] algorithm in mode selection. In particular, let Sk,t
be the number of reward observations for arm k by time t and
Nk,t be the number of times arm k has been selected by time
t. The realized regret can be rewritten as follows:

Rreal(T ) =

K
(cid:88)

((cid:77)k Nk,T + ckSk,T )

k=1

where (cid:52)k = µ∗ −µk is called the suboptimality gap of arm k.
At each time t, the algorithm starts by calculating the estimated
optimal arm:

ˆk∗
t = arg max

ˆµk,t,

k∈K

where ˆµk,t is the estimated mean reward of arm k by time t.
Denoting the set of available arms as K, then, for each arm
k ∈ K − k∗

t , it calculates the estimated suboptimality gap

ˆ(cid:77)k,t = ˆµk∗

t ,t − ˆµk,t.

For each arm k ∈ K, a control number Dk,t is calculated
based on the estimated suboptimality gap and the number of
times that arm has been explored. For k ∈ K − k∗
t the control
number is given as

Dk,t =

L2 log(tK/δ)
J 2
k,t

where

(cid:40)

(cid:115)

Jk,t = max

0, ˆ(cid:52)k,t − 2

L1 log(tK/δ)
t ,t)
min(Sk,t, Sk∗

(cid:41)

.

Here L1 > 0 and L2 > 0 are constants. The control number
for the estimated optimal arm k∗

t is calculated as

Dk∗

t ,t =

L2 log(tK/δ)
J 2
mink∈K−k∗
k,t

t

For the selection process, if Sk,t (cid:62) Dk,t for all k ∈ K, the
algorithm chooses the arm ˆk∗
t , if not, the algorithm randomly
chooses an arm for which Sk,t < Dk,t.In the mode selection
problem, each BS only has two arms. Therefore, if Sk,t (cid:62) Dk,t
holds for the suboptimal arm, the BS chooses the optimal arm;
otherwise, the BS chooses the suboptimal arm.

In the HD-SEE algorithm, the number of times a suboptimal
arm is chosen depends on the suboptimality gap of the arm.
An arm with a larger suboptimality gap will be explored
(i.e., chosen) fewer number of times compared to an arm
with a smaller suboptimality gap. The regret in the HD-SEE
algorithm is logarithmic in time, which is the best possible
[28].

D. BS and UE Functional Orchestration

The main difference between cellular networks and ad hoc
networks is the availability of BSes in cellular networks.
Cellular networks also provide high-speed, out-of-band in-
terconnections between BSes to exchange control signaling
information (e.g., those needed for transmission scheduling).
The availability of BSes and the high-speed, out-of-band
interconnections in between provides the opportunity of having
each BS collect information about network state information
in its cell (e.g., local signal maps containing wireless channel
gains and communication reliability across different
links)
through existing LTE BS-UE control signaling mechanisms,
having BSes coordinate with one another in deciding network-
wide transmission schedules, and then having each BS inform
UEs in its cell of their transmission modes and schedules. This
approach of placing core intelligence (i.e., decision making

logic) at BSes and keeping UEs functionality to the minimum
of estimating communication reliability and maintaining local
signal maps helps facilitate incremental deployment and tech-
nology evolution; this is because the number of BSes tend to
be much less than that of UEs.

UCS also utilizes the inter-cell interference coordination
(ICIC) mechanism of cellular networks to reduce control
signaling overhead. The ICIC mechanism transmits some indi-
cator message using the X2 interface to help with the schedul-
ing process of neighboring BSes. The transmission along
the X2 interface usually adopts high-speed wired networks
such as optical ﬁber networks and does not consume wireless
spectrum. Therefore, X2 interface transmission can be used to
further reduce control signaling overhead in wireless channels.
From the PRK interference model, to calculate the exclusion
region for each link, the BS needs to know the receiver’s
local signal map and the value of Ks of the close-by links.
However, some close-by links are in the neighboring cells
and thus require inter-cell coordination. In UCS, the values
of the PRK model parameter K and local signal maps are
treated as the data part of the ICIC-related messages, and they
are transmitted to the neighboring cell using the X2 interface
to avoid using wireless resources. By the ICIC mechanism,
transmission of inter-cell coordination control information no
longer requires wireless transmissions.

E. Multi-Channel ONAMA Scheduling

Based on the interference relations between the uplinks,
downlinks, and D2D links (if any as a result of mode se-
lection) as identiﬁed by the PRK interference model, data
transmissions along all the links can be scheduled in a uniﬁed
manner to fully utilize the available wireless communication
carriers. In particular, the objective of the uniﬁed scheduler is
to schedule data transmissions so that a maximal set of non-
interfering links are scheduled to transmit at each carrier and
each time slot and that a link is scheduled to transmit only if
there exists at least one data packet queued for transmission at
the beginning of a time slot. Unlike existing cellular network
scheduling algorithms which are based on a limited set of
preconﬁgured frequency-division-duplexing (FDD) or time-
division-duplexing (TDD) transmission patterns, the uniﬁed
scheduler is adaptive to application trafﬁc demand, and it
ensures predictable communication reliability by respecting
the interference relations as identiﬁed by the PRK model.

More speciﬁcally, the uniﬁed scheduler is based on the
ONAMA TDMA scheduling algorithm [29]. ONAMA sched-
ules a maximal set of non-interfering links to transmit at
each time slot, but it is designed for single-carrier wireless
networks, and it is not adaptive to trafﬁc demand. In this study,
we extend the ONAMA algorithm to consider the speciﬁc
cellular network properties such as the availability of multiple
carriers and base stations (BSes) as well as the trafﬁc demand
across individual links. Based on the BS and UE functional
orchestration mechanism presented in Section III-D, each BS
I knows the set of transmitters in its cell and the associated
links LI (whose receivers may be in a neighboring cell), and,

for each such link i, the BS also knows the set of links Mi that
interfere with link i. For each time slot t, the BS can also get
the trafﬁc demand di (i.e., number of data packets queued for
transmission) for each link i ∈ LI , and the BS knows the set
of available carriers RB. Then, the multi-channel transmission
schedule for each time slot is identiﬁed by the BSes in a
distributed manner as follows:
1) Each BS I initializes the state of each link i ∈ LI as
UNDECIDED for each carrier rb ∈ RB, and I also sets
the state of every link in Mi as UNDECIDED for each
carrier;

2) For each link i ∈ LI , the BS I computes a priority for
each link k ∈ Mi ∪ i and each carrier rb ∈ RB for dk
times:

P rio.k.rb.d = Hash(k ⊕ d ⊕ t ⊕ rb) ⊕ k ⊕ d, 1 ≤ d ≤ dk,

where Hash(x) is a message digest generator that returns
a random integer by hashing x. Note the fourth and ﬁfth
XOR operator ⊕ are necessary for guaranteeing that all
links’ priorities are distinct even when Hash() returns the
same number on different inputs. This also means that a
link with demand dk will have dk different priorities.
3) For each link i ∈ LI , the BS I computes a priority for

each link k ∈ Mi ∪ i and each carrier rb ∈ RB:

P rio.k.rb = M axdk

d=1P rio.k.rb.d

That is, each link k ∈ Mi ∪ i maintains a speciﬁc priority
for each available carrier rb.

4) For each link i ∈ LI , the BS I iterates the following steps
until the state of i in each carrier is either ACTIVE or
INACTIVE: A) for the carriers in which the state of i is
UNDECIDED, I tries to assign a different state to i in
the increasing order of the IDs of the carriers; for a given
carrier rb, if i’s priority is higher than that of every other
ACTIVE and UNDECIDED member in Mi, i’s state is
set as ACTIVE in carrier rb, and its trafﬁc demand di is
reduced by one; conversely, if any ACTIVE member of
Mi ∪ i has a higher priority than i, the state of i in carrier
rb is set as INACTIVE; if the trafﬁc demand of i becomes
zero, i’s state is set as INACTIVE for each carrier in which
its state is UNDECIDED; B) the BS I shared the state of i
with other BSes whose cells may have links that interfere
with i.

5) If the state of a link i is ACTIVE for carrier rb at time slot
t, link i can transmit a data packet at carrier rb and time
slot t.

The details of the above multi-channel ONAMA scheduling
algorithm for time slot t are shown in Algorithm 1.

Similar to the original ONAMA algorithm [29], the above
algorithm can be readily shown to converge for each time slot.
In particular, we have the following:

Theorem 1. The set of all ACTIVE links at each time slot is
a maximal set of non-interfering links for each carrier.

Proof. When the iteration terminates, a link is either ACTIVE
or INACTIVE in each carrier. For each INACTIVE link i in

Algorithm 1 Multi-Channel ONAMA Scheduling at BS I

Mi: set of interfering links of a link i ∈ LI ;
dk: trafﬁc demand of link k ∈ Mi ∪ i;
Perform the following actions for ∀i ∈ LI :

1: state.i.rb = UNDECIDED, ∀rb ∈ RB;

Step 1: Priority Calculation

2: P rio.k.rb.d = Hash(k ⊕ d ⊕ t ⊕ rb) ⊕ k ⊕ d, ∀k ∈

Mi ∪ i, ∀rb ∈ RB, ∀d ∈ [1, dk];

3: P rio.k.rb = M axdk

d=1P rio.k.rb.d, ∀k ∈ Mi ∪ i, ∀rb ∈

RB;
Step 2: State Selection (i.e., Scheduling)

4: done = false;
5: while done == false do
done = true;
6:
for each rb ∈ RB in increasing order of rb ID do
7:
8:

if di > 0 && state.i.rb == UNDECIDED &&
P rio.i.rb > P rio.k.rb for each ACTIVE/UNDECIDED
k ∈ Mi then

9:
10:
11:

12:
13:
14:
15:
16:

17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:

23:

state.i.rb = ACTIVE;
di = di − 1
if di == 0 then

state.i.rb2 = INACTIVE, for each rb2 ∈
RB where state.i.rb2 == UNDECIDED;

end if

end if
if P rio.i.rb < P rio.k.rb for any ACTIVE k ∈ Mi

then

state.i.rb = INACTIVE;

end if
if state.i.rb == UNDECIDED then

done = false;

end if

end for
Share state.i.rb, ∀rb ∈ RB; update state.k.rb, ∀k ∈

Mi, ∀rb ∈ RB based on information from other BSes;

24: end while

carrier, there always exists an ACTIVE neighboring link in
the set, whose priority is higher than that of i. Adding any
additional link to the set of ACTIVE links for a given time
slot - carrier resource block would end up with having two
interfering links scheduled to transmit in the same time slot
- carrier resource block , which is not allowed. Hence, The
set of all ACTIVE links at a time slot t is a maximal set of
non-interfering links in each carrier.

It usually takes a few rounds of coordination between
close-by BSes for Algorithm 1 to converge to a transmission
schedule for each time slot. Given that the number of BSes is
usually much less than that of UEs, the convergence is much
faster than if we have every UE participate in the scheduling
process. To make sure that the schedule is readily available
when the time reaches a time slot t, the schedule for t is
pre-computed before time reaches t, and the schedules of

consecutive time slots are computed in a pipeline manner as
in the original ONAMA algorithm [29]. Due to randomization
in the above algorithm (e.g., in computing priorities), a link
may well use different carriers across different time slots, and
this channel hopping behavior can help improve resilience
against channel fading and external interference. Additionally,
the above algorithm considers trafﬁc demands of different
links, and a link with higher demands is more likely to get
the highest priority to transmit.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

We have implemented the UCS framework in the Ope-
nAirInterface cellular network platform [30]. In what follows,
we ﬁrst evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of UCS
using a small-scale indoor deployment of software-deﬁned-
radio (SDR) implementation of UCS, and then we evaluate
UCS through at-scale, high-ﬁdelity simulation.

A. SDR Prototyping and Evaluation

Hardware platform We have implemented the UCS frame-
work using the OpenAirInterface platform. OpenAirInterface
is an open-source prototyping and experimentation platform
for cellular networks, and it can be used for system simulation,
system emulation, and real-world deployment and measure-
ment [30], [31]. The protocol stack of OpenAirInterface is
shown in Figure 3, and we have implemented the UCS
framework by modifying its MAC component.

Fig. 3. The OpenAirInterface protocol stack

To validate the feasibility of realizing the UCS frame-
work with the LTE-compatible OpenAirInterface platform and
commodity hardware, we deploy our OpenAirInterface imple-
mentation with the USRP B210 software-deﬁned-radio (SDR)
hardware in a single-cell cellular network. In the network,
one Dell desktop with USRP B210 serves as the BS, and
three Intel NUC mini PCs with USRP B210 serve as UEs.
UE1 communicates with the BS directly, forming a cellular
link. UE2 and UE3 are conﬁgured to communicate with each
other, forming a UE-to-UE communication pair. The UE-to-
UE communication can be in cellular mode or D2D mode,
and the decision is to be made by UCS. The network is
deployed inside a university building, with UEs randomly
distributed such that the signal power attenuation between the
UEs and BS is about 50dB. The packet-delivery-reliability
(PDR) requirement for the communications is set as 90%. The
measurement study setup is showed in Figure 4.
Measurement results With the network setup mentioned
above, the UE-to-UE communication pair chooses to operate
in the D2D mode, thus forming a D2D link in the network.
Figure 5 shows the packet-delivery-reliability (PDR) across

communication pair can be in cellular mode or D2D mode,
with the speciﬁc mode to be selected by UCS.

To understand the behavior of UCS in different network
settings, we experiment with both random and grid network
topologies, where the UEs of each cell are spatially distributed
in a uniform-random and grid manner respectively. The base
station (BS) of each cell is located at the center of the cell.
We also experiment with different LTE channel models of
different path-loss exponents and fading models. To study
UCS’ capability of ensuring predictable control of interference
and thus predictable communication reliability, we experiment
with different packet-delivery-reliability (PDR) requirements
of 80%, 85%, 90%, and 95%.

The main parameters used in a typical simulation are
summarized in Table I. To understand the behavior of UCS
in heterogeneous network settings, we also study the scenario
where each UE randomly chooses a PDR requirement of
80%, 85%, 90%, or 95%, as well as the scenario where each
transmitter randomly chooses a transmission power of 15dBm,
20dBm, or 25dBm.

TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS USED IN OPENAIRINTERFACE SIMULATION

Parameter
# of eNBs (i.e., base stations)
# of UEs
Area of each cell
Topology
# of available carriers
Path-loss exponent
Fading type
eNB transmission power
UE transmission power
Frequency band
Simulation duration
PHY layer abstraction
Trafﬁc type
Mobility
# of runs per expt. conﬁg.

Value
9
135
500m × 500m
random, grid
25, 50, 100
3.0, 3.5, 4.0
Rayleigh, Rice, AWGN
40dBm
20dBm
band 7 (center freq.: 2.6GHz)
10000 TTIs
Yes
Full buffer
Static
10

Scheduling Protocols To understand the effectiveness of the
UCS scheduling framework in ensuring predictable communi-
cation reliability and high channel spatial reuse, we compare
it with the following scheduling protocols:

• IAS: a interference-aware scheduling scheme that ex-
ploits the multi-user diversity of the cellular network such
that the performance of the D2D underlay is optimized
while maintaining a target performance level of the cellu-
lar network. The D2D terminals sense the radio spectrum
and aid the BS in generating local awareness of the
radio environment. The BS then uses this information in
interference-aware resource allocation among the cellular
and D2D links [19].

• QAS: a QoS-aware scheduling scheme that utilizes chan-
nel statistical characteristics to maximize the overall
throughput of the cellular users and admissible D2D pairs
while guaranteeing a target signal-to-interference-plus-
noise ratio (SINR) for each receiver. A D2D receiver only
feeds back the channel-state-information (CSI) for a few

Fig. 4. Hardware test environment Fig. 5. Reliability guarantee in the

single cell LTE network

the cellular link and D2D link. We see that both links have a
PDR above the required reliability of 90%. In the prototyping
cellular network, the deployment of the cellular link and D2D
link is such that they interfere with each other, and UCS is
able to discover the interference relation and schedule the two
links so that they do not use the same carrier at the same
time. Due to the availability of multiple carriers, however, the
two links are able to transmit concurrently with each other at
different channels, with channel hopping exercised along the
way. (Besides the communication reliability requirement of
90%, we have experimented with other reliability requirements
such as 80% and 70%, and we have observed similar system
behavior.)

B. Simulation Evaluation

Having validated the feasibility of realizing the UCS frame-
work using commodity software and hardware platforms,
we use the simulator of OpenAirInterface to evaluate the
performance of UCS with at-scale, high-ﬁdelity simulation.
Simulation platform OpenAirInterface comes with a high-
ﬁdelity simulator for OpenAirLTE networks. The OpenAirIn-
terface simulator enables simulation with the full PHY layer
and synthetic radio channels, or with a PHY layer abstraction.
In both PHY layer simulation modes, the full protocol stack
of the UCS-variant of LTE is executed as is the case with
USRP B210 hardware implementation and validation. The
PHY layer of the OpenAirInterface provides the abstraction
for all the transmission channels in LTE and the simulation
for a large amount of channel types (e.g., Rayleigh, Rice and
AWGN) with different parameter settings, which can cover
a variety of actual scenarios. Consequently, the simulation in
OpenAirInterface has a high degree of ﬁdelity.
Simulation Scenarios We focus on multi-cell scenarios where
a total of 135 UEs are distributed in 9 cells, which are
organized in a 3 × 3 grid manner such that each cell covers
a square area of 500m × 500m and the 9 cells covers a
square area of 1, 500m × 1, 500m. Each cell has 15 UEs
deployed; ﬁve UEs are randomly chosen to communicate
with the BS directly, forming ﬁve cellular links, with both
uplink and downlink data transmissions; the remaining 10 UEs
form ﬁve UE-to-UE communication pairs, with the source
UE and destination UE randomly picked. Each UE-to-UE

best potential partner cellular users to reduce feedback
overhead [20].

For understanding the optimality of the UCS scheduling
framework, we also compare it with iOrder [25], a state-of-
the-art centralized scheduling scheme that maximizes channel
spatial reuse while ensuring the required PDRs by considering
both the interference budget (i.e., tolerable interference power
at receivers) and queue length in scheduling. When construct-
ing the schedule for a time slot, iOrder ﬁrst picks a link with
the maximum number of queued packets; then iOrder adds
links to the slot one at a time in a way that maximizes the
interference budget at each step; this process repeats until no
additional link can be added to the slot in any communication
channel without violating the application requirement on link
reliability [25]. When experimenting with iOrder, we assume
that all the channel state information is available (which is
unrealistic but serves as a reference for understanding the
optimality of UCS), and we use the same set of cellular links
and D2D links as those in the experiments for UCS. (Note:
the original iOrder algorithm was designed for single-channel
settings. We extend it to multi-channel settings in this study
by using the core idea of the iOrder algorithm in centrally
scheduling concurrent transmissions for each channel.)

Simulation results To understand UCS’ capability in ensuring
predictable communication reliability, we measure the actual
packet-delivery-reliability (PDR) when using a same PRK
model parameter K for different number of carriers (i.e., 25,
50 and 100). From Figures 6 and 7, we see that maintaining
one K for 25 and 50 adjacent carriers can ensure application
required PDRs. Figure 8 shows that maintaining one K for 100
adjacent carriers also can also guarantee PDRs up to 90%, but
it does not always ensure the required high PDR of 95%. We
see that, by choosing the right number n of carriers/channels
for which to maintain a single PRK model parameter K, UCS
can ensure the required PDRs. The fact that too large a n
(i.e., 100 in this study) cannot always ensure the required high
PDRs also demonstrate the tradeoff between control signaling
overhead, modeling accuracy, and protocol performance, as
discussed in Section III-B. For the ﬁgures in the rest of this
section, we use the data for scenarios when UCS maintains a
PRK model parameter K for every 25 adjacent carriers.

The reason why UCS ensures the required communication
reliability is because it adapts the PRK model parameter and
the thus the size of the exclusion region (ER) around each
receiver (i.e., number of nodes in the ER) according to the
application-required PDR and in-situ network and environ-
mental conditions. As shown by Figures 9 and 10 for cellular
links and D2D links respectively, higher PDRs are achieved
by increasing the value of parameter K and thus expanding
the ER size.

To understand the frequency reuse efﬁciency for the mode
selection algorithm of the UCS framework, Figure 11 shows,
for the set of UE-to-UE communication pairs operating in
the D2D mode, the ER size in the cellular mode minus that
in the D2D mode, with the ER size for the cellular mode

calculated as the sum of the ER sizes of the involved uplink
and downlink. We see that, for these communication pairs,
operating in the D2D mode signiﬁcantly reduces the ER size
and thus improves the transmission concurrency and channel
spatial reuse.

To understand the effect of the number of available carriers
on the behavior of UCS, we compared the value of parameter
K and the size of exclusion region when different communica-
tion bandwidth is used. For instance, Figure 12 and 13 shows
the values of K and ER size when the communication PDR
requirement is 90%. With the increase of available carriers, the
interference between concurrent transmitting links decreases.
Accordingly, UCS reduces the size of exclusion regions by
adjusting the value of parameter K dynamically to ensure the
required communication reliability while maximizing carrier
spatial reuse.

For the heterogenous network setting where each link
randomly chooses a PDR requirement, Figures 14 and 15
show the communication reliability and corresponding ER size
for each reliability requirement. We see that UCS ensures
application-required PDR in these settings too. Compared with
the homogeneous scenario where each link has the same PDR
requirement, the average communication PDR of some links
with lower reliability requirements (e.g., 80%) is a little higher.
This is because the heterogeneous setting has more links with
higher reliability requirements, which tend to have larger ERs
as reﬂected in Figure 15.

For the heterogenous network setting where each transmitter
randomly picks a transmission power, Figure 16 shows the
communication reliability in UCS. We see that UCS ensures
application-required PDR. For the communication pairs with
PDR requirement of 90%, Figure 17 shows the ER size
for links with different
transmission powers. We see that
transmission power can inﬂuence the ER size, and thus af-
fecting communication concurrency and throughput. The links
with the lower transmission power tend to tolerate lower
interference power, thus they maintain larger ERs to guarantee
the required communication reliability.

Figures 18 and 19 show the PDR and carrier reuse rate
in different protocols respectively. We see that the existing
cellular protocols IAS and QAS cannot ensure predictable
interference control (as explained in Section I) and thus cannot
ensure predictable communication reliability, for instance, not
able to ensure the required high reliability of 95%.

To highlight the advantages of UCS in the predictable com-
munication reliability guarantee, we further compared UCS
with IAS and QAS separately in Figure 20 and Figure 21
in different network setting. In Figure 20, we reduced the
area of each cell to 150m ∗ 150m to increase the interference
of concurrent transmission links; IAS cannot even guarantee
the communication reliability up to 60% because it only
avoids the strong interference, not considering the interference
accumulation. In Figure 21, we changed the channel type from
Rayleigh model to Rice model; QAS cannot guarantee the
communication reliability up to 85% because it only targets for
Rayleigh model, not considering potentially different channel

Fig. 6. Same K for adjacent 25
carriers

Fig. 7. Same K for adjacent 50
carriers

Fig. 8. Same K for adjacent 100
carriers

Fig. 9. The value of the parameter
K

Fig. 10. Exclusion region size

Fig. 11. Comparison of ER size in
D2D and cellular modes for UE-to-
UE pairs choosing D2D mode

Fig. 12. The value of the parameter
K for different bandwidth

Fig. 13. Exclusion region size for
different bandwidth

Fig. 14. Communication reliability
in heterogeneous reliability scenario

Fig. 15. Exclusion region size in
heterogeneous reliability scenario

Fig. 16. Communication reliability
in heterogeneous power scenario

Fig. 17. Exclusion region size in
heterogeneous power scenario

Fig. 18. Predictable reliability guar-
antee for random topology

Fig. 19. Mean carrier reuse rate with
the random topology

Fig. 20. Predictable reliability guar-
antee comparison with IAS

Fig. 21. Predictable reliability guar-
antee comparison with QAS

the number of links using a carrier at each time slot). In
fact, Figures 22 and 23 show the distributed UCS scheduling
framework achieves a carrier reuse rate statistically equal to
that of the centralized, state-of-the-art scheduling algorithm
iOrder, showing the optimality of the UCS framework 1.

V. CONCLUSION

We have proposed a ﬁeld-deployable, uniﬁed cellular
scheduling framework UCS to ensure predictable communi-
cation reliability in cellular networks with D2D links. The
UCS framework effectively leverages the PRK interference
model and addresses the challenges of multi-channel PRK-
based scheduling in cellular networks. UCS provides a simple

1The carrier reuse rates in the random and grid networks are statistically

similar.

Fig. 22. Comparison with iOrder
under the random topology

Fig. 23. Comparison with iOrder
under the grid topology

models and reality. In contrast, UCS ensures the required
PDR for different cell ranges and channel models while
achieving a higher carrier reuse rate (which is deﬁned as

[19] P. Janis, V. Koivunen, C. Ribeiro, J. Korhonen, K. Doppler, and K. Hugl,
“Interference-aware resource allocation for device-to-device radio under-
laying cellular networks,” in Vehicular Technology Conference, 2009.
VTC Spring 2009. IEEE 69th.

IEEE, 2009.

[20] D. Feng, L. Lu, Y.-W. Yi, G. Y. Li, G. Feng, and S. Li, “Qos-aware
resource allocation for device-to-device communications with channel
uncertainty,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 8,
2016.

[21] E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Skold, 4G LTE/LTE-Advanced for

Mobile Broadband. Elsevier Ltd, 2011.

[22] H. Min, W. Seo, J. Lee, S. Park, and D. Hong, “Reliability improvement
using receive mode selection in the device-to-device uplink period
underlaying cellular networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Com-
munications, vol. 10, no. 2, 2011.

[23] R. Z. (Editor), Industrial Communication Technology Handbook. CRC

Press, 2015.

[24] A. Saifullah, Y. Xu, C. Lu, and Y. Chen, “Real-time scheduling in

WirelessHART networks,” in IEEE RTSS, 2010.

[25] X. Che, H. Zhang, and X. Ju, “The case for addressing the ordering
effect in interference-limited wireless scheduling,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 13, no. 9, 2014.

[26] C. Li, H. Zhang, J. Rao, L. Y. Wang, and G. Yin, “Cyber-Physical
Scheduling for Predictable Reliability of Inter-Vehicle Communica-
tions,” in ACM/IEEE IoTDI (short paper), 2018.

[27] L. Wang, H. Zhang, and P. Ren, “Distributed scheduling and power
control for predictable iot communication reliability,” in IEEE ICC,
2018.

[28] C. Tekin, M. Liu et al., “Online learning methods for networking,”

Foundations and Trends R(cid:13) in Networking, vol. 8, no. 4, 2015.

[29] X. Liu, Y. Chen, and H. Zhang, “A maximal concurrency and low
latency distributed scheduling protocol for wireless sensor networks,”
International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 11, no. 8,
2015.

[30] N. Nikaein, M. K. Marina, S. Manickam, A. Dawson, R. Knopp, and
C. Bonnet, “OpenAirInterface: A Flexible Platform for 5G Research,”
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 44, no. 5,
2014.

[31] A. Virdis, N. Iardella, G. Stea, and D. Sabella, “Performance analysis
of openairinterface system emulation,” in Future Internet of Things and
Cloud (FiCloud), 2015 3rd International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015.

mode selection mechanism which, together with PRK-based
cellular scheduling, maximizes communication throughput
while ensuring communication reliability. UCS also effectively
leverages cellular network structures (e.g.,
the availability
of BSes and high-speed, out-of-band networks in-between)
to orchestrate BS and UE functionalities for light-weight
control signaling and ease of incremental deployment and
technology evolution. The feasibility and performance of UCS
have been veriﬁed through high-ﬁdelity simulation and real-
world hardware and software implementation.

REFERENCES

[1] E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Skold, 4G, LTE-Advanced Pro and The

Road to 5G. Academic Press, 2016.

[2] S. Essakiappan, S. Harb, and A. Solar-schultz, “Machine-Type Commu-
nications: Current Status and Future Perspectives Toward 5G Systems,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, September 2015.

[3] M. N. Tehrani, M. Uysal, and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Device-to-device
communication in 5G cellular networks: challenges, solutions, and
future directions,” IEEE Communications Magazine, may 2014.

[4] H. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Li, Y. Chen, X. Che, L. Y. Wang, F. Lin, and G. Yin,
“Scheduling with predictable link reliability for wireless networked
control,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 16, no. 9,
2017.

[5] H. Zhang, X. Che, X. Liu, and X. Ju, “Adaptive instantiation of the
protocol interference model in wireless networked sensing and control,”
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks (TOSN), vol. 10, no. 2, 2014.

[6] J. R. Moyne and D. M. Tilbury, “Control and communication challenges
in networked real-time systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 95, no. 1,
2007.

[7] H. Min, J. Lee, S. Park, and D. Hong, “Capacity enhancement using
an interference limited area for Device-to-Device uplink underlaying
cellular networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 10, no. 12, 2011.

[8] Q. Ye, M. Al-Shalash, C. Caramanis, and J. G. Andrews, “Distributed
resource allocation in Device-to-Device enhanced cellular networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 63, no. 2, 2015.

[9] Q. Ye, M. Al-shalash, C. Caramanis, and J. A. and, “Distributed
Resource Allocation in Device-to-Device Enhanced Cellular Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 63, no. 2, 2015.

[10] L. Lei, Y. Kuang, X. Shen, C. Lin, and Z. Zhong, “Resource control
in network assisted Device-to-Device communications: Solutions and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 6, 2014.
[11] W. Wang, F. Zhang, and V. K. N. Lau, “Dynamic power control
for delay-aware Device-to-Device communications,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 33, no. 1, 2015.

[12] Y. Cui, V. K. N. Lau, R. Wang, H. Huang, and S. Zhang, “A Survey on
Delay-Aware Resource Control for Wireless Systems: Large Deviation
Theory, Stochastic Lyapunov Drift, and Distributed Stochastic Learn-
ing,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 58, no. 3, 2012.

[13] D. Verenzuela and G. Miao, “Scalable D2D Communications for Fre-

quency Reuse >>1 in 5G,” vol. 16, no. 6, 2017.

[14] S. Lv, C. Xing, Z. Zhang, and K. Long, “Guard Zone Based Interference
Management for D2D-Aided Underlaying Cellular Networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 66, no. 6, 2017.

[15] K. Doppler, M. Rinne, C. Wijting, C. B. Ribeiro, and K. Hugl, “Device-
to-device communication as an underlay to lte-advanced networks,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 12, 2009.

[16] T. Peng, Q. Lu, H. Wang, S. Xu, and W. Wang, “Interference avoidance
mechanisms in the hybrid cellular and device-to-device systems,” in
Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 2009 IEEE 20th
International Symposium on.

IEEE, 2009.

[17] H. Min, J. Lee, S. Park, and D. Hong, “Capacity enhancement using an
interference limited area for device-to-device uplink underlaying cellular
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 10,
no. 12, 2011.

[18] C.-H. Yu, K. Doppler, C. Ribeiro, and O. Tirkkonen, “Performance
impact of fading interference to device-to-device communication un-
derlaying cellular networks,” in Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications, 2009 IEEE 20th International Symposium on.
IEEE,
2009.

