Surface Structures of Epitaxial B20 FeGe(𝟏̅𝟏̅𝟏̅) Thin Films via Scanning 
Tunneling Microscopy 

J. P. Corbett,1 T. Zhu,1 A. S. Ahmed,1 S. J. Tjung ,1 J. J. Repicky,1 T. Takeuchi,2 
R. K. Kawakami,1 and J. A. Gupta1,a) 

1 Department of Physics, the Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA 

2 Integrated Graduate School of Medicine, Engineering, and Agricultural Science, University of Yamanashi, Kofu, 400- 

We grew 20-100 nm thick films of B20 FeGe by molecular beam epitaxy and investigated the surface 

structures  via  scanning  tunneling  microscopy.  We  observed  the  atomic  resolution  of  each  of  the  four 

possible chemical layers in FeGe(1̅1̅1̅). An average hexagonal surface unit cell is observed via scanning 

tunneling  microscopy,  low  energy  electron  diffraction,  and  reflection  high  energy  electron  diffraction 

resulting in a size of ~6.84 Å in agreement with the bulk expectation. Furthermore, the atomic resolution 

and registry across triple-layer step edges definitively determine the grain orientation as (111) or (1̅1̅1̅). 

Further verification of the grain orientation is made by Ar+ sputtering FeGe(1̅1̅1̅) surface allowing direct 

imaging of the subsurface layer. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

FeGe can crystalize into three polymorphs, a hexagonal phase, a monoclinic phase, and the 

cubic B20 phase1 of interest here. The B20 family of materials (e.g., FeGe, MnSi, PdGa, AlPd, 

MnGe) have the interesting property of breaking inversion symmetry along the {111} planes which 

can  lead  to  magnetic  skyrmions2,3,  topologically  protected  spin  textures4.  Skyrmion  sizes  have 

been reported down to nanometer scales5–7, which is attractive for high density storage4,5,8. Though 

B20 materials host skyrmions in the bulk, there is interest in adding interfacial tuning to further 

decrease the size and increase critical temperature (TC) above room temperature9. The sensitivity 

of these effects  to  interface quality  and termination  motivates the study  with  atomic resolution 

imaging  techniques  including  scanning  tunneling  microscopy  (STM)  and  transmission  electron 

 
 
 
 
microscopy  (TEM),  as  well  as  spin  sensitive  extensions  (i.e.,  spin-polarized  STM  and  Lorentz 

TEM).  

Previous STM studies on B20 MnSi have revealed the characteristic layered structure, and the 

coexistence of multiple surface terminations corresponding to sparse10 and dense11,12 atomic layers 

in  the  B20  structures.  These  terminations  were  evident  as  terraces  with  distinct  levels  of 

corrugation in atomic resolution images, separated by varying fractions of the characteristic B20 

quadruple layer (QL) structure11,10,12. Density functional theory (DFT) of MnSi and AlPd predicted 

both spare and dense layers as the lowest energy chemical terminations for both orientations of the 

(111) or (1̅1̅1̅)10,13. Comparison of the experimental data with DFT calculations helped unravel 

the complex surface structure of MnSi including adatom features10.  

Here, we report the first STM study of B20-phase FeGe. Epitaxial thin films are grown by 

molecular  beam  epitaxy  (MBE).  We  observe  four  distinct  levels  of  corrugation  in  atomic 

resolution images of the FeGe(1̅1̅1̅), which we denote as very high corrugation (vHC), very low 

corrugation (vLC), high corrugation (HC), and low corrugation (LC). Thorough analysis of the 

surface structure registry across terrace steps and comparing tunneling spectroscopy with recent 

theory calculations14, we assign the four corrugations vHC, HC, LC, and vLC to the Fe-dense (Fe-

d), Fe-sparse (Fe-S), Ge-d (Ge-d), and Ge-sparse (Ge-s) surfaces, respectively. These represent the 

four  possible  chemical  terminations  within  the  quadruple  layer  stacking  sequence  in  FeGe.  By 

resolving the stacking sequence across fractional QL steps and in partially exposed surfaces via 

Ar+ sputtering, we are able to distinguish between (111) or (1̅1̅1̅) orientations, which is difficult 

by  conventional  techniques  such  as  x-ray  diffraction  since  the  interatomic  spacing  of  both 

orientations  are  equal.  This  capability  is  important  for  SP-STM  imaging  of  skyrmions,  as  the 

2 

 
orientation of the grain determines the chirality of the skyrmion.  Additionally, knowledge of the 

chirality and terminating layer is of importance for the interfacial tuning of B20 superlattices.  

II. EXPERIMENTAL 

Epitaxial growth of FeGe thin films is achieved using a custom-built MBE system with a base 

pressure of  ~1.0 × 10−10 Torr.  The growth is monitored in real-time with a 10 KeV reflection 

high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) system from STAIB Instruments, while the fluxes are 

calibrated using a quartz crystal thickness monitor. The Si(111) substrates are prepared by first 

precleaning the substrate ultrasonically with  acetone, then isopropanol for 5 minutes each. The 

Si(111) substrate is subsequently dipped in a buffered HF solution for 2 minutes to chemically 

remove  the  oxide  layer  and  H  terminate  the  Si(111)  surface.  The  substrates  are  immediately 

transferred into the MBE chamber via a load lock to prevent re-oxidation. The Si(111) substrates 

are then annealed at  800 °C for 20 minutes until RHEED shows a streaky  7 × 7 reconstruction 

pattern. The substrate is then cooled to the growth temperature of 300 °C and Fe and Ge are co-

deposited using thermal effusion cells with fluxes matched 1:1 in order to achieve a stoichiometric 

film. Films were grown with 20-100 nm thickness; all data reported here were on the 20 nm films, 

but were consistent across samples. Further details and additional characterizations of the growth 

are reported elsewhere9.  

Shortly after growth, the FeGe samples are transferred in-situ into a Ferrovac UHV vacuum 

suitcase with a base pressure of ~1.0 × 10−9 Torr and transferred to another lab housing a Createc 

LT-STM  system  with  its  own  UHV  load  lock  and  analysis  chambers.  LEED  patterns  were 

collected at normal incidence with a 140 eV beam energy to confirm crystallinity of the films. 

FeGe  samples  were  directly  transferred  into  the  cold  STM  without  any  additional  surface 

preparation  to  minimize  contamination  and  preserve  the  as-grown  film  quality.  STM 

3 

 
 
measurements were performed at 5K using cut PtIr tips. Tunneling spectroscopy was performed 

by adding a 20mV modulation voltage to the DC bias.  Image processing and analysis is preformed 

using Gwyddion and WxSM for RHEED, LEED and STM data.15,16 

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

From a growth perspective, breaking the inversion symmetry of the {111} planes leads to two 

possible stacking directions, along [111] or [1̅1̅1̅]. The QL structure in FeGe(1̅1̅1̅) is shown in 

FIG. 1 where a chemical sequence of  Fe-S, Ge-S, Fe-d, and Ge-d layers repeats three times (3 

QL) before returning to the same relative atomic positions, thus resulting in a 12 layer unit cell. 

Sparse layers correspond to monomer Fe, Ge in a hexagonal lattice, while dense layers correspond 

to trimers of Fe, Ge arranged in the same lattice. In FeGe(111) the stacking also follows a repeating 

3QL  pattern,  but  with  a  different  chemical  sequence  (Fe-s,  Ge-d,  Fe-d,  and  Ge-s).  We  present 

below a detailed analysis which helps distinguish between these two grain orientations in our STM 

images.  

Morphology and Surface Unit Cell Determination  

 Error! Reference source not found. Shows the LEED and RHEED images of the as-grown 

FeGe  surface.  The  ‘streaky’  RHEED  pattern  indicates  high  quality,  uniform  film  growth.  The 

LEED pattern was taken after the UHV vacuum  suitcase transfer from  the MBE system to  the 

STM  system,  which  demonstrates  that  the  suitcase  transfer  does  not  add  significant  surface 

contaminants.  LEED  shows  a  hexagonal  pattern,  which  is  in  agreement  with  the  expected 

symmetry of FeGe{111} (c.f., top views in FIG. 1). We measure surface lattice constants of 6.6  ±

0.50 Å  (LEED)  and  6.74   ± 0.50 Å,  (RHEED)  which  are  in  good  agreement  with  bulk  FeGe 

crystals (6.64 Å)9.  

4 

 
 
 
 
From  the  RHEED  and  LEED  measurements  we  expect  to  see  large  flat  terraces  with  a 

hexagonal atomic structure terminating the surface. Error! Reference source not found.(a) shows 

an STM image of the surface, indeed showing several large, atomically flat terraces. The shape 

and edge angles of the terraces match the symmetry of a (111) film orientation with edges meeting 

at 60° and 120° angles. As expected from the LEED pattern, atomic resolution images of these 

terraces  (FIG.  3a,  inset)  reveals  a  hexagonal  lattice  with  a  surface  unit  cell  length  of    6.91   ±

0.14 Å,  within uncertainty of the RHEED and LEED surface unit cell measurements. The apparent 

step height between each terrace in FIG. 0 measures 2.77 ± 0.23 Å (FIG. 3b), in good agreement 

with x-ray diffraction measurements of 2.703 Å for the FeGe(111) QL.9  

Determination of surface terminations  

Figures 4(a,e) show atomic resolution STM images of the FeGe surface which reveal regions 

with four distinct atomic corrugations. Bright features in all regions define a hexagonal lattice with 

a lattice constant of 6.9 Å. Figures 4(a-b) shows adjacent terraces of ‘high corrugation’ (HC) and 

‘low corrugation’ (LC) surfaces, exhibiting ~ 20pm  and ~10pm corrugation respectively in  the 

atomic resolution images. Figure 4(e-f) shows an STM image of adjacent terraces of two additional 

distinct regions, we denote by ‘very high’ and ‘very low’ corrugations of ~ 40pm (vHC) and ~ 

6pm (vLC) respectively. From our survey of the FeGe(111) surface the LC and vLC corrugations 

are predominately observed, with small regions of neighboring HC and vHC respectively.  

Because these regions are imaged simultaneously, these differences cannot be attributed to the 

tip sharpness; we instead suggest that they represent distinct chemical terminations. Analysis of 

the step heights between these distinct regions is an initial step toward the chemical assignments. 

We note that in general there are topographic and electronic contributions to the apparent height 

5 

 
 
in STM measurements.  A true topographic height difference is measured between two terraces if 

they are chemically identical. For example, the apparent height difference between two adjacent 

HC regions is 2.7 ± 0.2 Å, consistent with the FeGe QL as shown in FIG. 3. Fractions of a QL 

however, are observed between HC and LC regions, and are indicated in FIG. 4a. For example, 

starting from the LC region in the middle of FIG. 4a, there is a 0.81 ± 0.15 Å step down to the HC 

region in the top center, and a 1.92 ± 0.10 Å angstrom step up to the HC region on the left. These 

are within uncertainty to the expected height differences for mono (ML) and triple layer (TL) steps 

in  the  FeGe  B20  structure  respectively  (c.f.,  FIG.  1).  Since  a  partial  QL  step  moves  between 

different  terminations,  the  apparent  step  height  is  expected  to  be  a  mixture  of  electronic  and 

topographic  contributions.  For  the  +1  V  scanning  bias  used  during  imaging,  the  electronic 

contribution to the topographical signal appears to be small given we observe the expected ML 

and TL steps.  Similarly, we observe atomic QL steps between two adjacent vLC terraces, while 

fractional  QL  steps  are  observed  between  adjacent  vLC  and  vHC  terraces.  In  FIG.  4(e)  for 

example, we observe a ML step down from the vLC region to a vHC region, followed by a TL 

step down to the next vLC region. Since the FeGe(111) structure alternates in chemical termination 

every  odd  #  of  layers,  these  step  heights  and  distinct  contrast  suggest  that  these  regions  have 

distinct chemical terminations, with an atomic structure and local density of states that translates 

to distinct apparent corrugations in STM images.  

To determine which chemical species corresponds to these regions, we performed tunneling 

spectroscopy shown in FIG. 4(c), with the tip positioned over bright spots in vHC and vLC regions 

as  indicated  in  FIG.  4(e).  A  much  larger  dI/dV  signal  is  observed  on  vHC  regions,  with  two 

prominent broad peaks at ~-0.3 V and +0.2V visible as shoulders above the background, while 

spectroscopy on the LC regions reveals a smaller conductivity and is relatively flat and featureless. 

6 

 
This comparison is consistent with spatial mapping of the dI/dV signal at +1.0 V in FIG. 4(d). HC 

regions show a bright contrast (yellow), compared to the LC, which shows a dark contrast (purple). 

These data indicate that  HC regions  have a higher local  density of states than  LC regions.  For 

comparison, Yamada et al. performed self-consistent linear-muffin tin orbital  calculations on B20 

FeGe showing peaks near the Fermi level predominantly derived from Fe states and in agreement 

with our observed peaks, while the DOS of Ge is low and flat14.  

We  propose  a  structural  model  assigning  the  vHC  (LC)  corrugations  to  Fe-d  (Ge-d) 

terminations  respectively,  and  the  HC  (vLC)  corrugations  to  Fe-s  (Ge-s)  terminations.  Sparse 

layers  correspond  to  monomer  Fe,Ge  in  a  hexagonal  lattice,  while  dense  layers  correspond  to 

trimers of Fe,Ge arranged in the same lattice. To confirm this picture, we show high resolution 

filled state images of the four surface terminations and corresponding atomic models in FIG. 5. 

Our results are in qualitative agreement with Tersoff-Hamann simulations of AlPd{111}, which 

showed similar contrast for Al-sparse and Pd-dense surface terminations as we discuss below13.   

For  the  Fe-s  surface  termination  FIG.  5(a-b),  Fe  atoms  (yellow  in  FIG.  5)  are  located  in 

threefold hollow sites of an underlying Ge-s (blue in FIG. 5b) lattice, and as observed in the STM 

image  in  FIG.  5a)  there  is  a  triangular,  medium  contrast  region  at  the  geometric  center  of 

spherically  symmetric  protrusions,  hinting  at  the  underlying  Ge-s  lattice.  The  G-s  surface 

termination appears as spherical protrusions sitting atop of the Fe-d sublattice FIG. 5(c-d). The Ge 

atoms in the Ge-s lattice sit atop of the medium-sized isosceles triangle of Fe atoms in the dense 

lattice.  Similar hints of the sublattice are observed for the Ge-s termination, in this case arising 

from  trimers in  the underlying  Fe-d layer  (FIG.  5c-d). Discussed below is  an STM image of  a 

sputtered Fe-s surface, where this underlying lattice is resolved even more clearly.  

7 

 
A high-resolution STM image of the Fe-d termination and accompanying atomic model are 

shown in FIG. 5(e-f). In this surface, Fe trimers are arranged in a triangular lattice over a Ge-d 

sublattice. The triangular shape of the protrusions in the STM image is clearly distinct from the 

more spherical shape of the atoms in the Fe-s termination. The lateral size and orientation of the 

triangular protrusions agree well with the model’s trimer size and orientation. Lastly, FIG. 5(g-h) 

shows  the  Ge-d  termination.  The  protrusions  do  not  exhibit  triangular  shape  as  in  the  Fe-d 

termination, which may be due to the smaller size of the Ge trimers and/or the lower DOS of Ge 

in the FeGE surface. Nevertheless, these features do exhibit more of an oblong shape compared to 

the more spherically symmetric Ge-s surface, which we attribute to the Ge-trimers in the dense 

termination.  

  As further evidence in our assignment of the FeGe surface terminations, FIG. 6 (a) shows an 

STM  image  of  the  Ar+  sputtered  FeGe(1̅1̅1̅)  surface,  where  the  surface  termination  layer  was 

partly  removed.  The  topmost  atoms  (orange)  retain  their  hexagonal  symmetry  and  even  form 

complete patches of the surface unit cell, with a corrugation that matches the HC structure (FIG. 

6(b)), indicating that this is the Fe-s termination. Where topmost Fe atoms have been removed, 

small medium-contrast (purple) protrusions can be seen which are arranged in triangular manner 

around the Fe-s atoms. FIG. 6(c) is a model of the Fe-s layer atop of a Ge-s layer,  with selected 

Fe atoms removed from the surface structure to match the STM image. We find excellent registry 

of both the topmost Fe atoms, as well as the Ge-s subsurface layer.  

We find the Fe-s and Ge-s terminations to dominate the surface, suggesting that these have the 

lowest surface energies under our growth conditions. The lowest surface energy depends on the 

growth composition (i.e. the flux ratio), where growth under Fe-deficit or Fe-rich conditions can 

8 

 
impact  the  local  surface  structure.  For  MnSi  the  lowest  energy  structure  of  the  (111)  direction 

depends on the growth stoichiometry where the surface structure transitions from the Si-sparse 

termination to the Mn-dense termination with decreasing Si-richness13. We find Ge-d and Fe-d 

regions  on  the  edges  of  incomplete  QL  terraces,  indicating  a  local  deficiency  of  Fe  or  Ge 

respectively in the terrace formation.  

Chirality determination via atomic registry across QL and TL steps  

An interesting, and important point is that FeGe(111) is distinguishable from the FeGe(1̅1̅1̅)  

as these orientations have different stacking chirality. For (1̅1̅1̅), we expect a stacking order of Fe-

s→Ge-s→Fe-d→Ge-d, while for (111), we expect a different order of Fe-s→Ge-d→Fe-d→Ge-s. 

This sequence can be revealed in STM images of topographic areas showing terraces separated by 

incomplete QL steps (i.e., ML or TL), and is confirmed by looking at the registry of the lattices 

across these steps. From FIG. 1, we expect a shift in the atomic lattices between terraces separated 

by a QL. For ML steps, we expect a change in atomic contrast as well as a shift in lattice, while 

for TL steps, we expect a change in atomic contrast, but no shift in lattice.  FIG. 7 shows Laplacian 

filtered STM images across QL and TL steps with accompanying atomic models to confirm this 

registry. FIG. 7(a) shows a QL step (indicated by the blue dashed line) between two Fe-s terraces. 

Three white lines are overlaid in the STM image and aligned to the hexagonal structure on the 

bottom  terrace.  Extending  these  lines  to  the  upper  terrace,  we  see  that  the  two  structures  align 

along the  [112̅] direction (with an apparent shift of  √3
6

𝑎) , but do not align along the  [101̅] or 

[011̅] directions. This behavior is reproduced in the corresponding atomic model of the Fe(1̅1̅1̅) 

surface, showing the Fe-s termination atop a Ge-s layer (FIG. 7FIG. 5b). The model has excellent 

agreement with the experimental image, as the two lattices align along the [112̅] direction with 

9 

 
the apparent shift of √3
6

𝑎 , but do not align along the [101̅] or [011̅] directions.  Likewise, in FIG. 

7(c) a QL step between two Ge-s terraces shows the same registry agreement and apparent shift as 

anticipated from the crystal structure of FeGe, and is in agreement with the structural model.  

FIG. 7(e-f) shows a Laplacian filtered STM image with a TL step up in topography from a Ge-

s region to a Fe-d region and the accompanying atomic model. The registry of the Ge-s to Fe-d 

layers  as  well  as  the  lateral  size  and  orientation  of  the  Fe  trimers  are  in  excellent  agreement 

between the experimental image and the structural model. The three white lines overlaid in FIG. 

7(e) are aligned to the hexagonal structure of the Ge-s lattice and extended onto the Fe-d lattice. 

Both lattices align along all three directions and show no apparent shift which is expected from 

the alignment of the Ge-s to Fe-d layer across a TL step. FIG. 7(g-h) shows an STM image with a 

TL step down from a Fe-s surface to a Ge-d surface and the accompanying structural model. The 

registry and lack of apparent shift in the two lattices is in good agreement.  

From our observation of partial QL steps and the sputtered surfaces we find we only imagined 

FeGe(1̅1̅1̅)  grains, but our analysis enabled us to definitively determine the chirality which is a 

key ingredient in the interpretation of spin-polarized STM imaging of skyrmions. 

III. CONCLUSIONS 

  We observe atomic resolution of each of the four possible chemical layers in our FeGe(1̅1̅1̅) 

MBE prepared thin films. The four surface structures all have the same surface unit cell length of 

in agreement with complimentary LEED and RHEED measurements given an average unit cell 

length of ~6.84 Å. Moreover, the atomic resolution and registry across a TL step edges enables 

definitive  determination  of  the  grain  orientation  as  (111)  or  (1̅1̅1̅)  planes.  As  an  additional 

10 

 
verification  of  the  grain  orientation,  Ar+  sputtering  the  surface  enables  direct  imaging  of  the 

subsurface layer to confirm grain orientation. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

  We acknowledge the support of from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (Grant No. D18AP00008) 

The authors thank  R. K. Smith for useful discussions. 

REFERENCES 

1. 

Zeng, C. et al. Epitaxial stabilization of ferromagnetism in the nanophase of FeGe. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 2–5 

(2006). 

2. 

Zhao, X. et al. Direct imaging of magnetic field-driven transitions of skyrmion cluster states in FeGe 

nanodisks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 4918–4923 (2016). 

3. 

Turgut, E. et al. Engineering Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in B20 thin film chiral magnets. arXiv 3–5 

(2018). 

4. 

Wiesendanger, R. Nanoscale magnetic skyrmions in metallic films and multilayers: A new twist for 

spintronics. Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, (2016). 

5. 

6. 

Jiang, W. et al. Blowing magnetic skyrmion bubbles. Science (80-. ). 349, 283–286 (2015). 

Tanigaki, T. et al. Real-Space Observation of Short-Period Cubic Lattice of Skyrmions in MnGe. Nano Lett. 

15, 5438–5442 (2015). 

7. 

Grenz, J., Köhler, A., Schwarz, A. & Wiesendanger, R. Probing the Nano-Skyrmion Lattice on Fe/Ir(111) 

8. 

9. 

with Magnetic Exchange Force Microscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 1–4 (2017). 

Fert, A., Cros, V. & Sampaio, J. Skyrmions on the track. Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 152–156 (2013). 

Ahmed, A. S., Esser, B. D., Rowland, J., McComb, D. W. & Kawakami, R. K. Molecular beam epitaxy 

growth of [CrGe/MnGe/FeGe] superlattices: Toward artificial B20 skyrmion materials with tunable 

interactions. J. Cryst. Growth 467, 38–46 (2017). 

10. 

Geisler, B. et al. Growth mode and atomic structure of MnSi thin films on Si(111). Phys. Rev. B - Condens. 

Matter Mater. Phys. 86, 1–7 (2012). 

11. 

Azatyan, S. G., Utas, O. A., Denisov, N. V., Zotov, A. V. & Saranin, A. A. Variable termination of 

MnSi/Si(111)√3× √3 films and its effect on surface properties. Surf. Sci. 605, 289–295 (2011). 

11 

 
12. 

Suzuki, T. et al. Surface morphology of MnSi thin films grown on Si(111). Surf. Sci. 617, 106–112 (2013). 

13. 

Krajčí, M. & Hafner, J. Surfaces of intermetallic compounds: An ab initio DFT study for B20-type AlPd. 

Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 87, 1–15 (2013). 

14. 

Yamada, H., Terao, K., Ohta, H. & Kulatov, E. Electronic structure and magnetism of FeGe with B20-type 

structure. Phys. B Condens. Matter 329–333, 1131–1133 (2003). 

15. 

Nečas, D. & Klapetek, P. Gwyddion: An open-source software for SPM data analysis. Cent. Eur. J. Phys. 

10, 181–188 (2012). 

16. 

Horcas, I. et al. WSXM: A software for scanning probe microscopy and a tool for nanotechnology. Rev. Sci. 

Instrum. 78, (2007). 

17. 

Smith, A. R. Atomic-Scale Spin-Polarized Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Atomic Force Microscopy: 

A Review. J. Scanning Probe Microsc. 1, 3–20 (2006). 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
FIG. 1 Side view (left) of the model crystal structure of the FeGe(𝟏̅𝟏̅𝟏̅). 
There are four distinct chemical layers in 1 QL of FeGe(𝟏̅𝟏̅𝟏̅), a Fe-s, Ge-
d, Fe-d, and Ge-s layer which are shown to the right in a top view.  The 
dotted  zig-zag  line  indicates  the  staircase  structure  of  the  FeGe{111} 
layers. 

13 

 
 
 
 
FIG. 2 LEED and RHEED patterns of the FeGe(111) surface. (a) LEED pattern taken at normal incidence with a 140 eV energy 
beam. The reciprocal lattice distances are indicated with green and red markers. (b-c) The RHEED patterns taken along the [𝟏𝟏𝟐̅] 
and [𝟏𝟏̅𝟎] direction respectively with a 10 keV energy. The 0th order reciprocal spacings are labeled for each direction, with a red 
and green color correspondence to the equivalent LEED spot spacing.  

14 

 
 
 
 
 
FIG.  3  STM  image  and  line  profile  of  the  FeGe(𝟏̅𝟏̅𝟏̅)   
surface (a) Large area STM image of an atomically smooth 
surface.  The  inset  in  the  upper  right  corner  is  a  high-
resolution image of the hexagonal surface structure found 
on the terrace. The black line indicates a line profile across 
two step edges, which is shown in (b). (b) Line profile from 
(a)  showing  the  step  height  to  be  a  QL.    scanning 
conditions: V = +1 V, I = 30 pA. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
FIG. 4 STM images of the vHC, HC, LC, and  vLC surface structures with corresponding line profiles and STS. (a) STM image 
of across a valley region with resolved atomic structures. The dashed blue line indicates the boundary between the HC and LC 
structures. We observe three types of apparent step heights a ML, TL, and QL. Line profiles of the LC (black dashed) and HC (blue 
solid) are shown in (b). (b) Line profiles of the HC and LC structures taken from (a).The apparent corrugation of the HC surface 
structure is ~2 as deep as the LC. The lattice size of the HC and LC are in agreement. (c) Point spectroscopy atop of the vHC atoms 
and vLC atoms from the image in part (e). The positions of the spectroscopy are mark with a red and black circles where the red 
cicle is for vLC and black circle for vHC. A significant increase in conductance on the vHC, and relatively flat and  low conductance 
of the vLC tells us the vHC is formed of Fe atoms while the vLC is Ge. (d) dI/dV map of the HC and LC with the same boundary 
marked in (a). A contrast between HC (bright yellow) and LC (dark purple) is observed indicating a chemical difference between 
the two regions. Similar to part (c) a relatively higher conductance is measured for the HC versus the LC region suggesting HC is 
comprised of Fe and LC of Ge (e) A stepped region showing a ML, TL, and QL step with the vLC and vHC being observed. The 
blue dashed line indicates the boundary between the vLC and vHC stuctures. The line profiles of the vHC and the vLC structures 
are ploted in (f) where the solid blue line is across the vHC structure and the black dash is across the vLC.structure. (f) the line 
profiles of the vLC and vHC structures taken from (e). The vHC is ~10 larger than the vLC and ~2 the HC.  Scanning conditions: 
V = +1 V, I = 30- 50 pA. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
FIG. 5 STM images and to scale models of the four possible unreconstructed layersof the FeGe(𝟏̅𝟏̅𝟏̅) stacking. (a) 
Filled  state  image  of  Fe-s  termination,  the  bright  (yellow)  protrusions  are  individual  Fe  atoms  arranged  in  a 
hexagonal unit cell. The inset in (a) is the empty state image of the upper right corner of the filled state STM image. 
The size scales are of (a) and the inset are identical. (b) Model of the Fe-s termination on a Ge-s subsurface. (c) 
Filled state imaging of the Fe-d termination. The bright triangular protrusions are Fe trimers arranged in a hexagonal 
unit cell. (d) Model of the Fe-d layer atop a Ge-d subsurface. (e) Filled state imaging of the Ge-s layer. The bright 
protrusions are individual Ge atoms in a hexagonal unit cell. (f) The model of the Ge-s layer atop of a Fe-d sublattice.  
(g) The filled state imaging of the Ge-d termination. The bright oblong protrusions are Ge-trimers. (h) The model 
of the Ge-d layer atop of an Fe-s subsurface layer. Filled sate scanning conditions: V = +1 V, I = 30- 50 pA. Empty 
state scanning condition. V = - 200 mV, I = 30 pA  

17 

 
 
 
 
 
FIG.  6  Fill  state  STM  image  and  surface  model  of  the  Ar+ 
sputtered  Fe-s  surface.  (a)  STM  image  of  an  Fe-s  layer  with 
significant amount of Fe atoms (orange protrusions) removed 
from the Ge-s subsurface layer. The Ge atoms can be seen as 
purple  protusions  between  the  orange  Fe  atoms.      The  white 
parrallegram indicates  the  unit  mesh,  which is  still preserved 
despite the sputtering. The black solid line is the position of a 
line profile shown in (b). (b) Line profile from (a) showing the 
corrugation and atomic spacing to be that of the Fe-s layer. (c) 
Model of the Fe-s layer with selected Fe atoms (yellow circles) 
removed to match the surface. Scanning conditions: V = 1 V, I 
= 30 pA. 

18 

 
 
 
 
FIG. 7 STM images and models across step edges. The dashed blue line indicates a step edge, while the white and black solid lines 
are drawn to show relative atomic positions across a step edge. (a) STM image of the HC structure with a QL step edge running 
through the center. The white lines are aligned to the bottom region and show relative shift of the HC lattice after traversing a QL. 
(b) Model of the Fe-s to Fe-s termination separated by a QL drawn to the scale of (a).The solid black lines show the relative shift 
of the HC after stepping by a QL. (c) STM image of the vLC structure with a QL step edge diagonal through the center. The white 
lines are aligned to the bottom region and show relative shift of the vLC lattice after traversing a QL. (d) Model of the Ge-s to Ge-
s termination separated by a QL drawn to the scale of (a).The solid black lines show the relative shift of the vLC after stepping by 
a QL. (e) STM image of the vLC structure separated by TL down to a vHC structure. The white line is aligned to the vHC and 
show no relative shift compared to the vLC. (h) Model of the Ge-s to Fe-d termination separated by a TL drawn to the scale of (e). 
(g) STM image of the HC structure separated by TL down to a LC structure. The white line is aligned to the HC and show no 
relative shift compared to the LC. (h) Model of the Fe-s to Ge-d termination separated by a TL drawn to the scale of (g). Scanning 
conditions: V = +1 V, I = 30- 50 pA. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
