ToARist: An Augmented Reality Tourism App
created through User-Centred Design

Meredydd Williams
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
meredydd.williams@cs.ox.ac.uk

Kelvin K. K. Yao
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
kelvin.khoo@stx.ox.ac.uk

Jason R. C. Nurse
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
jason.nurse@cs.ox.ac.uk

8
1
0
2

l
u
J

6
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
5
7
5
0
.
7
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Through Augmented Reality (AR), virtual graphics can transform the physical world. This offers beneﬁts to
mobile tourism, where points of interest (POIs) can be annotated on a smartphone screen. Although several
of these applications exist, usability issues can discourage adoption. User-centred design (UCD) solicits
frequent feedback, often contributing to usable products. While AR mock-ups have been constructed through
UCD, we develop a novel and functional tourism app. We solicit requirements through a synthesis of domain
analysis, tourist observation and semi-structured interviews. Through four rounds of iterative development,
users test and reﬁne the app. The ﬁnal product, dubbed ToARist, is evaluated by 20 participants, who engage
in a tourism task around a UK city. Users regard the system as usable, but ﬁnd technical issues can disrupt
AR. We ﬁnish by reﬂecting on our design and critiquing the challenges of a strict user-centred methodology.

Augmented reality, user-centred design, mobile, tourism, user study, system development

1.

INTRODUCTION

Augmented Reality (AR) projects virtual graphics into
real environments, helping users absorb information
in an intuitive manner. Such tools can be useful
for navigation, enabling tourists to eschew paper-
based maps. While AR once required head-
mounted displays, smartphones can now support the
technology. With mobile devices pervading our lives,
tourism apps have grown in popularity. Although AR
offers many advantages, tools have been criticised
for usability issues. Displays are often cluttered
with icons (Julier et al. 2000), a particular issue
when overlays collide. Furthermore, AR apps have
a limited ﬁeld of view (Tokusho and Feiner 2009) and
often require an awkward stance.

Usability is a key goal of user-centred design
(UCD), where feedback is sought throughout the
development process (Vredenburg et al. 2002).
Through iteratively reﬁning prototypes, the product
is often better-suited to users’ needs.

In this paper, we address usability in the context
of Augmented Reality. Our contribution stems from
the application of UCD to an AR tourism app,
dubbed ToARist. We ﬁrst extract our requirements
from a synthesis of domain analysis, interviews and
tourist observations. We then proceed through four
rounds of iterative prototyping; designing, building

and testing at each stage. Rather than developing
frameworks, as done in previous work (Olsson
and Salo 2011), we implement a full application.
To empirically evaluate our system, we engage
in tourism scenarios in a UK city (N = 20). Our
participants judge the app to be usable, but ﬁnd
issues can disrupt AR. We ﬁnish by
technical
critically analysing the challenges of UCD.

2. RELATED WORK

Vredenburg et al.
(2002) deﬁne user-centred
design (UCD) as “the active involvement of users
for a clear understanding of user and task
requirements, iterative design and evaluation, and
a multi-disciplinary approach”. The process involves
participatory design where user feedback is solicited
throughout development. As AR is often plagued by
usability issues, UCD might deliver improvements.

We now reﬂect on existing AR tourism literature.
Tokusho and Feiner
(2009) developed an AR
equivalent for Google StreetView. They found several
usability challenges, including a limited ﬁeld of vision.
Although this tool also operated on an Android
smartphone, its requirements were not informed by
target users. Schinke et al. (2010) suggested 3D
arrows would contribute to usable navigation. While
user studies indicated shapes were beneﬁcial, their
tests only included four POIs per screen.

c(cid:13) The Authors. Published by BISL.
Proceedings of British HCI 2017 - Digital Make Believe, Sunderland, UK.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design
Williams • Yao • Nurse

Yovcheva et al. (2015) created mock annotations,
before evaluating them through a user study.
Participants were found to value names and
descriptions, and these ﬁndings will
inﬂuence our
early prototypes. While this work informed AR
design, it did not produce an implemented system.
Gabbard et al. (1999) constructed a methodology
which combined task analysis, expert guidelines
and user-centred evaluation. We apply a modiﬁed
approach to AR tourism, extracting our requirements
from participant observation and domain analysis.

With AR offering advantages over conventional
apps, tourism tools have grown popular. Wikitude
offers both AR browsers and development kits.
Their app interfaces with Google Places, populating
a locale with nearby attractions. However,
it
possesses usability issues, often obscuring the
current location with POI annotations. ARNav offers
similar functionality, even identifying mountains from
their GPS position. Rather than crowding the screen
with icons, the app presents a list of attractions to
be selected. However, this approach also challenges
usability, with POI selection being a cumbersome
process. We learn from such works and move on to
present our user-centred requirements gathering.

3. REQUIREMENTS GATHERING

3.1. Domain Analysis

Firstly, we designed our foundations on existing best
practice. We surveyed Google Play apps using the
search phrase of ‘augmented reality tourism’. We
retrieved 192 applications, with 22 of these being
AR, English-language and rated over 3/5. While we
might have gained other lessons from a random
sample, we sought best practice from the most-
valued tools. We found overhead maps and icon
annotations to be popular, with these features added
to our requirements. We then surveyed user studies
and usability guidelines. Olsson and Salo (2011)
found visual cluttering to be troublesome, and so we
sought to minimise this. Yovcheva (2015) advised
prioritising details for nearby attractions; another
wise suggestion. By following guidelines by Nielsen
(1994), we trust our app will be well-informed.

3.2. Tourist Observation

To inform both our requirements and user interviews,
we conducted participant observation with real
tourists. Six adults were selected in situ from the
general public of Oxford (UK), a tourist destination.
Our participants were predominantly travelling with
their families and were recruited beside a local
attraction. We observed these individuals from a
10-metre distance for 10 minutes, before soliciting
their experiences. All participants had planned their

trips to popular attractions. They appeared more
encouraged by images than by the history of iconic
buildings. Several expressed that while they wished
to learn about
they had no access
to this information. This implies that apps with
ofﬂine content could be of beneﬁt. Since route
features and decision-making seemed
planning,
most
interview
questions around these topics.

important, we constructed our

the sites,

3.3. User Interviews

Our semi-structured interviews were key to gathering
ﬁnal requirements. For this, we recruited 14 overseas
students from a local university. While these users
were not tourists, they were not strongly acquainted
with the local environment. The interviews were
contextualised around a tourism scenario, with
durations ranging from 30 to 45 minutes. Participants
were asked 8 questions, with their
responses
manually noted. As most individuals reported using
Google Maps to ﬁnd attractions, a tourism app might
be beneﬁcial.

Respondents next ranked app features in order of
importance. The highest-rated functions were top at-
tractions and local restaurants, with events deemed
least important. Suggested features included nearby
toilets and optimised routes, with these points added
to our requirements. To assess decision-making,
participants disclosed what inﬂuences their POI se-
lection. We found distance and reputation were most
important, with these opinions directly fed into our
requirements.

4.

ITERATIVE DEVELOPMENT

Stage 1: Initial Mock-ups. To inform our iterative
development, we recruited 10 distinct overseas
students. Tourist participation was impractical
for
a process which requires a consistent sample for
several weeks. We ﬁrst created low-ﬁdelity mock-
ups, enabling rapid reﬁnement. We developed ﬁve
annotations around three factors: size, clarity and
detail. When soliciting user feedback, 80% agreed
that POI distance assists navigation. They also
claimed ratings can help ﬁlter out undesirable
premises. We therefore selected four annotation
details: name, type, distance and rating.

Stage 2: Map Prototypes. Without an overhead
projection, annotations can lose spatial relevance.
Therefore, before we implemented AR, we proto-
typed our maps. We developed a skeleton Android
app, populating attractions with Wikipedia data. In
our participant feedback, users complained that POI
navigation was cumbersome. Reacting to this, we
reﬁned interface transitions. As details were now

2

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design
Williams • Yao • Nurse

revealed by an upward swipe, information could be
browsed without changing screens.

Stage 3: Route Planner Prototypes. Through
both our domain analysis and tourist observation,
route planners appeared popular. In our enhanced
prototype (Figure 1), users created trips by selecting
POIs. We designed icons for each type, with bars
represented by a cocktail glass.

To account
for this, we allowed the overlay size
to be adjusted. With AR unused when the phone
faces downwards, we conﬁgured the interface to
automatically switch to the map.

Stage 5: Final Design. Before completion, we
added one additional feature: ofﬂine content. This
functionality was requested in our observations,
as many tourists lack Internet access. Through
following a UCD approach, we believe our ﬁnal
ToARist app (Figure 3) to be well informed.

Figure 1: Initial route planner prototype

To test the usability of our planner, we requested
user feedback. Participants noted that once POIs
were included, they could not be removed. They
also disliked the set tour sequence, as tourists can
arrive from different locations. Reﬁning the app, we
allowed POIs to be toggled through checkboxes.
Start and end points also became adjustable, with
routes automatically updated.

Stage 4: AR Browser Prototypes. We prototyped a
basic browser (Figure 2), including a search bar and
icon overlays. Through comments, users suggested
that annotation size should represent proximity. We
also found that
individuals only used landscape
orientation for the AR browser. Reacting to these
comments, we added auto-rotate functionality. To
test
the annotations, we replaced our icons with
three alternatives: text, detailed text and images.

Figure 2: Initial AR browser prototype

Most participants preferred the ‘detailed text’
annotations, as they provided more data. However,
users claimed the verbosity led to screen cluttering.

3

Figure 3: Final AR tourism app

This tool has been tested and reﬁned through an
iterative process. However,
to ascertain whether
ToARist
is usable, we move on to evaluate the
system in its entirety.

5. EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION

Rather than using the same participants, we wished
to explore the wider applicability of their opinions.
To both validate our design and evaluate at a
larger scale, we recruited 10 additional overseas
students. We feel this approach was more feasible
than inconveniencing 20 holidaymakers. To test the
system in a real-world environment, we developed
a 60-minute tourism activity. Users were observed
navigating Oxford (UK) using ToARist. They opened
the browser at deﬁned points, using the interface
to explore their surroundings. After they ﬁnished the
activity, they completed an exit questionnaire.

5.1. Findings and Discussion

Most participants remarked that the app was simple
and usable. Several even claimed they would be
more likely to explore their area if they had the tool.
Rather than concerning design, the most frequent
complaint came from phone hardware. Several

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design
Williams • Yao • Nurse

users encountered magnetic interference, which
reduced the accuracy of POI annotations. While the
icon overlays offered a high-level overview, many
preferred the map unless in close proximity. Since
our users regarded the app as usable, we believe
this extols the beneﬁts of user-centred design.

Reﬂecting on our ﬁndings, we found that
tourist
navigation can be grouped into three categories.
trip in detail and
Some users planned their
visited attractions through the shortest path. Other
individuals attended the POIs but navigated the city
ﬂexibly. Yet other users were exploratory, locating
new attractions in situ. A successful AR tourism app
must cater for the needs of all three groups.

While users appreciated our overlays, annotations
often cluttered the screen. When POIs are distant,
small icons could be used to advertise attractions.
Since distance was displayed in the browser, users
also used these details to locate POIs. As bearings
are prone to magnetic interference, this data could
prove helpful to disorientated tourists. The transition
gesture proved popular, with it enabling quick
navigation between the map and browser. This
suggests tourists would use both tools to locate
attractions. If users visualise distant POIs better on
a map, this choice should not be obstructed. With
screen size limited on phones, AR designers should
further explore the role of gestures.

5.2. User-Centred Design Challenges

While we believe UCD offers beneﬁts, we would like
to highlight our challenges. Users often requested
the perfect system: one that was functional, usable
and attractive. Contradictory requests were frequent,
most often originating from different individuals. As
users express a wide range of opinions, there can
be a temptation to design by committee. We were
required to make several executive decisions, as a
composite approach might have crippled usability.
Development without best practice could produce
an undesirable hybrid of subjective suggestions.
There were also practical issues, with each round of
development delayed by feedback. While no users
withdrew from our process, enthusiasm waned as
the study progressed.

6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We developed an AR tourism app through an iter-
ative process of user-centred design. Requirements
were informed by ordinary users, achieved through
a synthesis of domain analysis, tourist observations
and interviews. We prototyped our application, feed-
ing user opinions back into the design. The app was
evaluated through a live scenario with 20 partici-
pants. Through performing real tourist exercises, our

users found the AR browser to be usable. We ﬁnally
reﬂected on our ﬁndings and the challenges of UCD.

Despite our contribution, we accept limitations to our
work. Firstly, while our sample is not insigniﬁcant,
it would have beneﬁted from more participants.
Secondly, whereas our users valued the app, their
opinions were not made relative to other systems.
We would therefore like to evaluate our tool against
popular alternatives. Since earlier prototypes lacked
AR functionality, we could compare their success to
that of later versions. After considering feedback, we
developed several suggestions for further work. Our
participants praised the gesture which transitioned
from the browser to the map. Future studies could
explore the role of AR gestures and whether they
can simplify cluttered interfaces. With the overhead
map preferred for distant POIs, AR should attempt
to enhance the experience. This could be achieved
through 3D isometric projections, with the view
updated based on smartphone sensors.

REFERENCES

Gabbard, J. L., D. Hix and J. E. Swan. 1999.
“User-centered design and evaluation of virtual
IEEE Computer Graphics and
environments.”
Applications 19(6):51–59.

Julier, S., M. Lanzagorta, Y. Baillot, L. Rosenblum,
S. Feiner, T. H ¨ollerer and S. Sestito. 2000.
Information ﬁltering for mobile augmented reality.
In Proc. of the 2000 International Symposium on
Augmented Reality. pp. 3–11.

Nielsen, J. 1994. Usability engineering. Elsevier.

Olsson, T. and M. Salo. 2011. Online user survey
on current mobile augmented reality applications.
In Proc. of the 10th IEEE International Symposium
on Mixed and Augmented Reality. pp. 75–84.

Schinke, T., N. Henze and S. Boll. 2010. Visual-
ization of off-screen objects in mobile augmented
reality. In Proc. of the 12th International Confer-
ence on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services. pp. 313–316.

Tokusho, Y. and S. Feiner. 2009.

Prototyping
an outdoor mobile augmented reality street view
application.
ISMAR Workshop on
In Proc. of
Outdoor Mixed and Augmented Reality.

Vredenburg, K., J. Y. Mao, P. W. Smith and T. Carey.
2002. A survey of user-centered design practice.
In Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 471–478.

Yovcheva, Z. 2015.

User-centred design of
smartphone augmented reality in urban tourism
context. PhD Thesis, Bournemouth University.

4

