Real-time Analog Pixel-to-pixel Dynamic Frame
Differencing with Memristive Sensing Circuits

Olga Krestinskaya, and Alex Pappachen James
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Nazarbayev University, Astana, Kazakhstan
Email: {ok, apj}@ieee.org

8
1
0
2

g
u
A
1
2

]
T
E
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
8
7
6
0
.
8
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—In this paper, we propose an analog pixel differenc-
ing circuit for differentiating pixels between frames directly from
CMOS pixels. The analog information processing at sensor is a
topic of growing appeal to develop edge AI devices. The pro-
posed circuit is integrated into a pixel-parallel and pixel-column
architectures. The proposed system is design using TSMC 180nm
CMOS technology. The power dissipation of the proposed circuit
is 96.64mW , and on-chip ares is 531.66µm2. The architectures
are tested for moving object detection application.

I. INTRODUCTION
In the conventional real time object detection and tracking
systems, the analog signals from the sensor is converted to
digital domain using analog-to-digital converter (ADC) before
the pixel differences are calculated. The sampling rates of
the ADC, the need to store the pixels in a memory, and the
circuit delays from the pixel arrays reduces the processing
speed. The co-processing systems are digital and very often
built on FPGA [1], [2], [3] to have near sensor computing. An
alternative to this approach is to move the processing to sensor
in analog domain before the ADC stage. The continuous
domain processing of pixel information potentially allows to
improve the speed, and capture motions of ultra high speed
objects. However, the high speed processing of the signals
from pixel sensors in analog domain is an open problem.
This problem can be addressed using memristor based analog
circuits. Memristor has been proven to be useful for various
object detection systems [4], [5], edge detection [6] and image
ﬁltering applications [7], [8].

In this paper, we propose programmable analog near CMOS
pixel sensor processing unit useful for various visual data
processing applications. The proposed circuit can be used
for various similarity calculations tasks in static and dynamic
systems. The memristor is used to control between the static
and dynamic application of the circuit. The static application
include ﬁltering operations performed on a single image. The
dynamic application include the processing and comparison of
several images in time useful for high speed motion detection
and edge detection. In particular, this paper demonstrates high
speed object detection application.

Fig. 1. Proposed circuit design.

+

(1)

R4
Rm

R4
Rm

Vo = Vr(

+ 1) − Va

R4
R3
The memristor Rm is used to control the functionality of
the circuit. The memristor can be programmed to either low
resistance state Ron or high resistance state Rof f . We set
R4 = R3 = R1 = R, R2 = 2R1 = 2R, Ron = R and
Rof f = 100R. In case of Rm = Ron, Vo = 3Vr −3Vin, which
corresponds to the calculation of the difference between two
pixels. In case of Rm = Rof f , Vo = 2.01Vr − 0.03Vin, which
corresponds to the preservation of the Vr pixel.

The system was designed using TSMC 180µm CMOS
technology. The operational ampliﬁer (OpAmp) parameters
are the following: VDD = 4V , M1 = 0.18µ/3µ, M2 =
0.18µ/30µ, M3 = M4 = 0.18µ/36µ, M5 = M6 = 0.18µ/6µ,
M7 = 0.18µ/45µ, M8 = M9 = M10 = 0.18µ/18µ and the
capacitors C = 1pF and R = 1kΩ. The resistor values are
R1 = 1kΩ, R2 = 2kΩ, R3 = 1kΩ and R4 = 1kΩ. The high
resistance state of memristor Rm is Rof f = 100kΩ, and low
resistance state is Ron = 1kΩ.

II. PIXEL FRAME DIFFERENCING CIRCUIT

B. System design

A. Circuit design

Fig. 1 illustrate the proposed circuit. Eq. 1 show the output
voltage of the circuit. where Vin and Vr are the input pixels
and Va = Vin(1 + R2/R1).

1) Static system: For the static systems, the proposed circuit
is placed inside each CMOS pixel sensor [9], making it a pixel
parallel processing. The memristor serves as a switch between
the difference operation and for obtaining the pure background

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. System level design for dynamic system.

Fig. 3. System level design for dynamic system and reduced number of
components.

information, which makes the system programmable. The
background information is supplied to Vr. If the memristor
is programmed to high resistance Rof f , we observe purely
background information provided by Vr. If the memristor is
programmed to a low resistance Ron, we obtain the difference
between the background and input pixel Vin.

2) Dynamic system: In the dynamic system, the pixel dif-
ference in time is obtained. The dynamic system conﬁguration
is shown in Fig. 2. The inputs Vr and Vin are the inputs from
the subsequent frames in time. The capacitive effect in the
delay circuit provides a programmable delay to the system.
As the system is analog, the output of the circuit produces
a difference calculation in time without sampling the input
and conversion to digital domain. In such system, each pixel
should be connected to a separate proposed circuit to ensure
parallel processing of the images and avoid implementation of
an additional memory unit.

However, for the large images, the trade-off between pro-
cessing speed and power consumption of the circuit should
be achieved. The system shown in Fig. 3 can reduce the
power consumption of a pixel parallel approach. In this system,
the rows of the image are read sequentially and stored in
memristive analog memory unit. This approach allow to reduce
the number of required circuit components. For the pixel array
size of n × m, where n is a number of rows and m is a
number of columns in the image, the number of required
components to implement the overall system can be reduced
by (1 − 1/m) × 100%.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS

The system level simulations for moving object detection
have been performed using MATLAB scripts taking realistic
SPICE device models for characterizing the underlying func-
tional blocks. The simulated system corresponds to the case
shown in Fig. 2, where each image pixel contains a separate
detector circuit. The simulation results for the dynamic system
are shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4 (a) corresponds to the actual
sequence of images. Fig. 4 (b) illustrates the detection of the

moving objects for the case of ideal memristor. However, in
most of the cases, the memristor can have variations in Ron
and Rof f values. Therefore, we performed the simulations
with the mismatch in the ﬁnal memristor value. Fig. 4 (c),
Fig. 4 (d) and Fig. 4 (e) show the object detection results for
the random variation of resistance of the memristor for 10%,
30% and 50%, respectively. The simulation results show that
for the mismatch in the value of the memristor up to 30%,
the object is moving object is clear and it is possible to detect
the moving object without additional ﬁltering operations. For
highly inaccurate memristors (approximately 50% mismatch in
the resistance values), the object can still be detected applying
additional ﬁltering operation.

The circuit level simulations have been performed in SPICE
and results are shown in Fig. 5-6. Fig. 5 shown the amplitude
of the signal for different values of Vin and Vr = 1V . Fig 5
(a) illustrates the ampliﬁed voltage Va after the ﬁrst OpAmp
(Fig. 1). Fig. 5 (b) shows the output voltage Vo for Rm =
Ron, and Fig. 5 (c) illustrate the output voltage variation for
Rm = Rof f . There is a variation for the high resistance of
the memristor, however variation is insigniﬁcant and can be
neglected, as it will not effect the output background image.
The transient analysis is shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6 (a) illustrate
an example of an input pixel signal in time from the object
under study. Fig. 6 (b) corresponds to the ampliﬁed input Va,
and Fig. 6 (c) and Fig. 6 (d) shows the output signal Vo
corresponding to Rm = Ron and Rm = Rof f , respectively.
The power dissipation of the proposed circuit is 96.64mW ,
and on-chip ares is 531.66µm2.

IV. DISCUSSION

The proposed analog domain signal processing near sensor
system uses fewer number of circuit components in comparing
to similar digital and mixed signal solutions for motion detec-
tion [10], [11], [12]; the number of transistors and complexity
of the circuits in the proposed analog design is signiﬁcantly
reduced. One of the main application of the proposed system
is the background subtraction in analog domain near to the
sensor, reducing the need to have complex designs for ADC,
digital memory array and control circuits. The other applica-
tion of the proposed system is an average similarity calculation
and multiple pixel comparison for a static systems. In this
process, the central pixel is compared to all nearby pixels and
the average value of the similarity is calculated by the simple
averaging circuit. This allows to obtain the average similarity
score used in various ﬁltering operation, objects detection tasks
[5].

One of the possible applications of the proposed memris-
tive detector is information encoding and cryptography. The
dynamic system can be useful for encoding of the information
in time, as set of video frames, which will be difﬁcult to
change due to the variability introduced by time domain
switching. The decoder circuit for the inverse operation for
this application should be also designed on hardware with
sequencing circuits built using memristor logic gates [13].
The hardware implementation of such system would make an

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 4. System level simulations of the proposed method for objection: (a) original image and detected object for (b) ideally programmed memristor, (c) 10%
variation of memristor resistance, (d) 30% variation in memristor resistance, and (e) 50% variation of the resistance state of the memristor.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 5. Circuit simulations for difference input Vin with Vr = 1V : (a) Va voltage, (b) output voltage Vo for Ron memristor state, and (c) Vo for Rof f
memristor state.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 6. Transient analysis of the circuit for Vr = 1V : (a) input voltage Vin voltage, (b) ampliﬁed input voltage Va, (c) output voltage Vo for Ron memristor
state, and (d) Vo for Rof f memristor state.

encryption process secure, as memristive threshold logic gates
will be impossible to identify on chip, as the memristors are
programmed to different resistance levels. The application of
the circuit can also be extended to detect the other variations
from the real time sensors, like the temperature variations.

The extension of this work will

include the design of
the delay circuit based on ﬂux-charge capacitance devices
and analog resistive memories for studying time dynamics of
multiple fast moving objects. In addition, the possibility of
integration of the proposed system directly to the log-linear

CMOS pixel arrays will be investigated. The memristor related
problems will be analyzed, such as switching time, switching
probability and different non-linear effects.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a near pixel analog signal
processing circuit for high speed object detection task in real-
time settings. The system can be useful for static and dynamic
application and can be integrated directly into image sensor.
The functionality of the system is controlled by programming
the memristor levels. The future work includes the system

integration of various modules such as the delay circuit, pixel
sensor and analog memory unit along with the processing
circuits.

REFERENCES

[1] E. M. Saad, A. Hamdy, and M. M. Abutaleb, “Fpga-based implemen-
tation of a low cost and area real-time motion detection,” in 2008 15th
International Conference on Mixed Design of Integrated Circuits and
Systems, June 2008, pp. 249–254.

[2] X. Ren and Y. Wang, “Design of a fpga hardware architecture to detect
real-time moving objects using the background subtraction algorithm,”
in 2016 5th International Conference on Computer Science and Network
Technology (ICCSNT), Dec 2016, pp. 428–433.

[3] S. Cherian, C. S. Singh, and M. M, “Implementation of real time
moving object detection using background subtraction in fpga,” in 2014
International Conference on Communication and Signal Processing,
April 2014, pp. 867–871.

[4] O. A. Olumodeji, A. P. Bramanti, and M. Gottardi, “A memristive
pixel architecture for real-time tracking,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16,
no. 22, pp. 7911–7918, Nov 2016.

[5] N. Dastanova, S. Duisenbay, O. Krestinskaya, and A. P. James, “Bit-
plane extracted moving-object detection using memristive crossbar-cam
arrays for edge computing image devices,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
18 954–18 966, 2018.

[6] Y. Shim, A. Sengupta, and K. Roy, “Low-power approximate con-
volution computing unit with domain-wall motion based x201c;spin-
memristor x201d; for image processing applications,” in 2016 53nd
ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), June 2016,
pp. 1–6.

[7] A. Irmanova, O. Krestinskaya, and A. P. James, “Neuromorphic adaptive
edge-preserving denoising ﬁlter,” in Rebooting Computing (ICRC), 2017
IEEE International Conference on.

IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.

[8] A. P. James, O. Krestinskaya, and J. J. Mathew, “Uniﬁed model for
contrast enhancement and denoising,” in VLSI (ISVLSI), 2017 IEEE
Computer Society Annual Symposium on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 379–384.

[9] A. M. Brunetti and B. Choubey, “A low dark current wide dynamic
range cmos pixel,” in 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits
and Systems (ISCAS), May 2016, pp. 2523–2526.

[10] M. Jahiruzzaman, S. Saha, and M. A. K. Hawlader, “Dynamically
reconﬁgurable parallel architecture implementation of 2d convolution
for image processing over fpga,” in 2015 International Conference
on Electrical Engineering and Information Communication Technology
(ICEEICT), May 2015, pp. 1–6.

[11] K. Nishio, Y. Miyauchi, and S. Ideta, “Simple motion detection circuits
and system for mobile robot based on biological vision system,” in 2014
13th International Conference on Control Automation Robotics Vision
(ICARCV), Dec 2014, pp. 65–69.

[12] X. Liu, M. Zhang, and J. V. der Spiegel, “A low power multi-mode
cmos image sensor with integrated on-chip motion detection,” in 2013
IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS2013),
May 2013, pp. 2416–2419.

[13] A. K. Maan, D. A. Jayadevi, and A. P. James, “A survey of memristive
threshold logic circuits,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
Learning Systems, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 1734–1746, Aug 2017.

