Q-Pix : Pixel-scale Signal Capture for Kiloton Liquid Argon TPC Detectors:
Time-to-Charge Waveform Capture, Local Clocks, Dynamic Networks

David Nygrena,∗, Yuan Meib

aUniversity of Texas at Arlington
bLawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

8
1
0
2

p
e
S
6
2

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
3
1
2
0
1
.
9
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

We describe a novel ionization signal capture and waveform digitization scheme for kiloton-scale liquid argon Time
Projection Chamber (TPC) detectors. The scheme is based on a pixel-scale self-triggering ‘charge integrate/reset’ block,
local clocks running at unconstrained frequencies and dynamically established data networks. The scheme facilitates
detailed capture of waveforms of arbitrary complexity from a sequence of varying time intervals, each of which corresponds
to a ﬁxed charge integral. An absolute charge auto-calibration process based on intrinsic 39Ar decay current is a major
beneﬁt. A ﬂat electronic architecture with self-guided network generation provides exceptionally high resilience against
single-point failure. Integrated photon detection, although highly speculative, may also be possible. The goal is optimized
discovery potential. Much might be at stake.

Keywords: Pixel, Charge sensor, Readout, LAr, TPC

1. Introduction

1.1. Context

The DUNE project is the ﬂagship enterprise of US
HEP[1]. Deﬁnitive results are expected for neutrino mass
ordering, with high sensitivity to CP-violation in the lep-
ton sector, supernova dynamics, other neutrino topics and
the search for baryon decay. The DUNE neutrino physics
program depends on many things, but accurate classiﬁca-
tion of events is the one big thing:
is the apparent sin-
gle electron in this event really caused by neutrino ﬂavor
change, or is that track a misidentiﬁed π0 or γ? For CP-
violation studies, discrimination among various neutrino
ﬂavor interactions and nuclear/hadron/electron recoils is
of paramount importance. In the end, after several years
of running, the number of true events is likely to be mea-
sured in tens to a few hundred.

Many processes of fundamental interest lead to events
that display complex signal waveforms with highly vari-
able features in space, amplitude and time. As the in-
trinsic quality of information inherent in a kiloton liquid
argon TPC (LArTPC) is very high, the central technical
goal must be to capture these events with high eﬃciency,
and in exquisite detail. High quality data may ultimately
contain surprises whose signiﬁcance may exceed what is
now foreseen.

The massive scale of the DUNE far detector (FD) mod-
ules invites compromises in signal capture and data qual-
ity. But are such compromises really necessary? Will any

∗Corresponding author
Email address: nygren@uta.edu (David Nygren)

unexpected phenomenon, however subtle but above intrin-
sic sensitivity threshold, be recognized as new physics, be
dismissed as artifact, or just not seen? We seek here to
optimize discovery potential.

In the era of DUNE operation as a full system, however,
much more will have become known about primary goals
from other experiments. The mass ordering of light neu-
trinos is likely to have been well clariﬁed, and no follow-on
experiment based on a particular value of CP-violation is
apparent. The enormous investment, with sustained eﬀort
for two decades by thousands of people, is likely to exceed
US$2 × 109. From this mixed perspective, how should the
DUNE program be viewed?

We believe an obligation exists within the HEP com-
munity to ensure that data extracted from the DUNE FD
is captured with the highest quality to the extent possible
within constraints of time, resources, and our capacity to
innovate, so that any subtle new phenomena near the limit
of detection may be revealed. A search for an optimal,
intrinsically 3D signal capture approach with low signal
threshold seems accordingly very well motivated. Dwyer
et al.[2] have recently demonstrated a true 3D pixelized
information capture technique, proposed for the DUNE
near detector. That work provides evidence that impres-
sive performance is possible, and is thus a seminal advance.
Our pixelization concept is aimed toward the DUNE
FD. While this goal may seem impractically ambitious,
that perception may not be true. When a true signal event
occurs, high-quality capture of all spatial and topological
information, energy loss, and event time is desired over
a huge addressable volume-time space. However, almost
all the time, nothing interesting happens. The circuitry

Preprint submitted to

September 28, 2018

 
 
 
 
 
 
must hence do as little as possible yet respond properly
to the arrival of signal. This very low rate of intrinsically
interesting signals can be exploited to technical advantage.
At the same time, the technical approach must display
operational availability well above 99 % for a decade and
be extremely resilient against single-point failure.

Given the challenges here, any complete solution—should

any exist—will likely appear unorthodox. In stark contrast
to tradition, our concept, Q-Pix , captures waveforms by
measuring time per unit charge. Q-Pix is thus a radical
departure for information capture, but one that arguably
may provide an enabling technical advantage for discovery.

1.2. Information quality in time and space

Reconstruction accuracy is limited in large measure by
diﬀusion of the drifting electrons, up to ∼ 4 mm rms trans-
verse and ∼ 14 mm rms longitudinal at the maximum drift
distance, which is taken here to be ∼ 7 m. Track-pair sep-
aration and practical minimum signal size suggest a pix-
elization scale of 4×4 mm2. This choice is likely near a soft
optimum. Electromagnetic showers, with scattered point-
like energy depositions and numerous gaps of a few mm
along apparent tracks, etc., should be reliably detected.

With 4 × 4 mm2 pixels, there are 62 500 pixels per
m2 and more than 108 addressable channels per 10 kTon
module (but not so diﬀerent from an LHC pixelized ver-
tex detector[3]). The 3D voxel size is on the order of
4 × 4 × 4 mm3, corresponding to a granularity exceeding
1011.

If a prompt scintillation signal S1 is available and can
be associated with a particular track, time resolution bet-
ter than 0.05 µs is possible. Assuming a typical drift ve-
locity of 1.6 mm/µs, placement along the drift coordinate
is accordingly sub-mm. However, if S1 signals are not re-
liably detected and associated, placement along the drift
coordinate is problematic. The alternative is then to make
highly accurate measurements of longitudinal and trans-
verse diﬀusion and of signal attenuation to provide an ap-
proximate measurement of drift distance.

A LAr TPC can provide highly accurate, detailed track
proﬁles, and Q-Pix is intended to provide the desired mea-
surement quality. A muon with 1 GeV energy will have
track proﬁles measured about 1500 times, leading to statis-
tically very precise measurements of diﬀusion during drift.
This capability could be of critical importance.

For SN events, data rates become very high for one
second or so, with a range of deposited energy up to ∼
25 MeV. The longest tracks are hence at most a few cm;
perhaps the high level of track detail captured by Q-Pix
can yield a sense of electron directionality. In our scenario,
local buﬀer depth is deep enough to capture all data from
nearby (but not too close!) SN.

1.3. Resilience and reliability

The detection elements within LAr must be considered
inaccessible during the entire lifetime of the experiment.

We take as a fundamental axiom that, for any design to be
considered, it must display very robust resilience against
Single Point Failure (SPF). This coupled issue of reliabil-
ity and inaccessibility was successfully confronted in Ice-
Cube, which deployed 5000 complex Digital Optical Mod-
ules (DOM) permanently in deep Antarctic ice. The DOM
ensemble has demonstrated excellent overall reliability in
deployment: ∼ 98 % viability, as well as essentially 100 %
operational availability. Of the ∼ 2 % losses, half (∼ 1 %)
is due to cable connector failure. We take this successful
experience as a guidepost in the development of our con-
cept. We assert that it is reasonable to deploy all signal
capture electronics permanently within the FD LAr, for
the entire lifetime of DUNE.

2. Q-Pix : time-to-charge ionization signal capture

2.1. The Charge-Integrate/Reset Circuit

Waveforms of arbitrary complexity and wide dynamic
range must be captured and time-stamped. For pixels,
the classic approach of continuous waveform sampling and
digitization is clearly inappropriate.
In design, we must
follow, in spirit and in practice, an electronic equivalent of
the principle of ‘Least Action’. How, then, to be normally
‘OFF’ but then instantly ‘ON’ ?

An unorthodox but surprisingly natural overall solu-
tion begins with the simple Charge-Integrate/Reset
(CIR) circuit block, as shown in Fig. 1. This approach
is combined with a less familiar but now well-proven time-
stamping scenario based on free-running local clocks, as
proven in IceCube[4].

Figure 1: A symbolic representation of the charge integrator/reset is
illustrated. For clarity, polarities, power, ground, biases, thresholds,
etc., are not shown. A charge-sensitive ampliﬁer, on the left, drives
a regenerative comparator, on the right. When the ampliﬁer has
integrated charge suﬃcient to present a voltage above comparator
threshold, the regenerative comparator switches rapidly and com-
pletely due to positive feedback. This transition resets the ampliﬁer
and the comparator switches back. The sequence produces a short
standardized reset signal.

In Q-Pix , a charge sensitive ampliﬁer (CSA) contin-
uously integrates incoming signal on a feedback capaci-
tor until a threshold on the regenerative comparator (a
Schmitt trigger) is met. When that threshold is met, the
comparator initiates a ‘reset’ transition that rapidly drains

2

InASOutMfCfthe feedback capacitor and returns the circuitry to stable
(arbitrary) baseline. The cycle then begins again, ad in-
ﬁnitum.

Older, truly ancient implementations of this type of
circuit were used to integrate macroscopic currents over
long times by using the reset pulse to increment a me-
chanical or electrical counter. The ‘charge counter’ sum is
a measure of total integrated charge since counting began.

Our scenario is diﬀerent from the original ‘charge counter’

discussed above. Here, the reset transition pulse is used
to capture and store the current value of a local clock
within one ASIC that serves a group of 16 (or perhaps up
In Q-Pix some current is lost during the
to 32) pixels.
short ‘reset’ transition but this is likely a small manage-
able correction. The charge loss during reset can also be
minimized with additional elements in circuit design (see
discussion below).

We acknowledge that the engineering design challenges,
to operate multiple sensitive analog input circuits with
proximate active digital circuitry, are formidable. Nev-
ertheless, this situation has been successfully confronted
in (Dwyer[2]) and other small-signal applications.

2.2. Minimum-Ionization Signals

From (Dwyer[2]) the most probably energy loss for a
Min-I particle in LAr is about 1.66 MeV/cm. Taking the
average energy to produce a free electron-ion pair in LAr
to be 33 eV, about 5 × 104 electrons comprise the average
signal per cm. For a 4 × 4 mm2 pixel, a typical charge of
an arriving track segment parallel to the readout plane is
at least 20 000 electrons, or ∼ 3.3 fC. Of course charge
varies considerably with angle of incidence and/or closest
distance of approach to pixel center, etc.

2.3. Dynamic range

We suspect the actual track dynamic range require-
ment does not exceed about 30. dE/dx ranges from the
predominant minimum-ionizing muons and electrons, to
more ionizing tracks such as protons or K +, etc.
(per-
haps from baryon decay in argon nuclei), and ﬁnally up
to maximally ionizing nuclear fragments. Measured en-
ergy and dE/dx for the most strongly ionizing ‘tracks’ will
be strongly aﬀected by nuclear eﬀects and columnar plus
volume electron-ion recombination. While it seems likely
to us that clean spatial reconstruction is far more impor-
tant than precise measurements of dE/dx for highly ion-
izing nuclear fragments, this question awaits careful sim-
ulation studies. The given dynamic range and precision
requirements[1] are intertwined and surely await further
clariﬁcation.

3. Basic information datum: reset time diﬀerences

What we can exploit here is something new: the es-
sential quantum of information for each pixel is the time

3

diﬀerence between one clock capture and the next sequen-
tial capture: the Reset Time Diﬀerence (RTD). The RTD
measures the time to integrate a pre-deﬁned integrated
charge: ∆Q.

RTDs are not generated locally within the LAr, but by
surface computing systems that perform subtractions in
sequence from the string of reset times associated with a
particular pixel. The appearance of a sequence of short (µs
scale) RTDs indicates that signal is present, as suggested in
Fig. 2. In the absence of signal, quiescent input current
to the pixel is miniscule, ideally only from 39Ar decay.
Cosmic muons and radioactivity in cryostat and detector
plane materials also contribute, at a level presently unde-
termined. If the quiescent ionization current is predomi-
nantly from 39Ar decay, the time interval between resets
will be on the scale of seconds.

Figure 2: Illustration of inverse relationship between reset intervals
and current. The small background current takes many seconds to
initiate a reset whereas signal currents lead to a sequence of short
reset intervals on a sub-µs scale. Of course an illustration cannot
display this important feature accurately on a linear scale.

The arrival of signiﬁcant signal current leads to very
short time intervals between resets, on the scale of µs. In
other words, input current and reset time diﬀerences are
inversely correlated: I ∝ 1/RTD, where I is the average cur-
rent over an interval ∆T such that I ·∆T = (cid:82) I(t)dt = ∆Q.
Here, signal currents are captured with ﬁxed quantization
∆Q but varying time intervals. The interval ∆T must of
course be measured with a precision that facilitates accu-
rate waveform reconstruction. This places a requirement
on time base frequency F . F , as discussed further below,
is expected to be in the 50 - 100 MHz range.

To recapitulate, when a track segment arrives at a
pixel, a sequence of rapid resets begins abruptly, contin-
ues for some period of time and then stops. A sequence
of short RTDs essentially ‘digitizes’ the current waveform:
a sequence of varying time intervals, each of which repre-
sents a ﬁxed charge ‘quantum’. There is no diﬀerentiation
of the signal current. This novel form of waveform dig-
itization appears to oﬀer several beneﬁts for information
capture in DUNE.

If all sources of leakage current at pixel input are van-
ishingly small relative to that arising within the active LAr
itself, then this current provides a mechanism for absolute
calibration of ∆Q. Due to ASIC manufacturing variations,
∆Q will vary from one pixel to the next, likely over a sig-
niﬁcant range for all 108 pixels in one module. But since
the current from 39Ar decays to each pixel is known and
identical, a calibration of charge sensitivity, both absolute
and relative is possible.

timeBackgroundSignal3.1. The proper charge quantum

Any pixel reaching the ∆Q value triggers a reset. What
is the charge ∆Q needed to develop an accurate represen-
tative waveform from RTDs? ∆Q might plausibly be chosen
to correspond to ∼ 1/5 of a track crossing the pixel cen-
trally. For a 4 × 4 mm2 pixel this is ∼ 1 mm. The charge
generated in a 1 mm track segment for a Min-I particle in
LAr is ∼ 5000 electrons = 5/6 fC. Taking 1 mm as the
sample size:

∆Q ≡ 5000 electrons .

As 39Ar decays provide a continuous average current,
the CIR block may be in any state between zero and (near)
∆Q when signal current arrives. Prior to the arrival of
signal the actual threshold for information capture is thus
not ∆Q but extends from ∆Q down to nearly zero. This
unusual aspect, we argue below, should be regarded not as
a bug, but as a feature.

For a Min-I track segment arriving normally and as-
suming an electron drift velocity in LAr of 1.6 mm/µs, a
‘waveform’ sample would be taken on average each 0.63 µs.
For this (atypical) track segment the instantaneous current
I is 1.3 nA. For tracks arriving parallel to the pixel plane,
the instantaneous signal is spread by diﬀusion but will typ-
ically be ∼ 5 times larger. In either case several waveform
samples (i.e. RTDs) per µs would occur. For any angle of
incidence, however, the proﬁle in space-time for any track
falling appreciably on a pixel will captured in good detail.
This capability could become of paramount importance if
photon detection eﬃciency falls short of expectations, lim-
iting event placement in drift coordinate.

3.2. Maximum recordable current

The shortest possible time diﬀerence between two rec-
ognizable resets establishes, at ﬁrst glance, the maximum
recordable current; this might be an RTD of 2. Is this the
maximum dynamic range? Perhaps not. The reset circuit
could be designed, at least to a good approximation, to re-
move precisely ∆Q per reset. In the event of instantaneous
current much higher than ∆Q/t0, where t0 = 1/F , a con-
tinuous sequence of the shortest possible RTDs would occur
as the input charge is nibbled down to a value that leads
to an RTD larger than the minimum. This should allow, at
least to a good approximation, a greatly increased dynamic
range. Corrections will be substantial, but are still likely
of adequate accuracy. In other words, the total integrated
charge for extremely highly ionizing track segments should
be rather well captured although instantaneous currents
above ∼ 20 nA are not as accurately represented in time.
In any case, extremely highly ionizing nuclear fragments
generally do not produce distinct tracks.

The reset interval ∆T is assumed to require only a
single clock tick: 20 ns. The instantaneous reset current
needed is tiny, 1 fC/20ns = 0.05 µA; baseline is restored in
a few ns. If realized in practice, the magnitude of a charge
loss correction for min-I particles is ∼ 1 %.

An important approach to this issue in the context
of Q-Pix has been studied by Mitch Newcomer (private
communication). In that study, an additional switch was
interposed between the CSA and the pixel current input
electrode. The additional switch is normally on, allowing
integration to proceed, but during reset, this switch is mo-
mentarily turned oﬀ to prevent charge dumping during the
reset transition. The presence of the switch may introduce
ﬁxed pattern noise/oﬀset, but will merit further study as
the best mitigation for dynamic range limitations, should
that remain an issue.

3.3. Noise, time resolution and frequency

To provide good track proﬁles for true signals as well
as to eliminate spurious transitions, total electronic charge
noise, δQ, should not exceed about 300 electrons rms. If
achieved, the signal to noise ratio ∆Q/δQ per sample is
approximately 17. CIR circuitry charge noise will be man-
ifest as ﬂuctuations in reset time. Jitter in timing, δt, at
the moment of reset is given by δQ/I, where I is current at
input. Thus δt ∝ δQ/I determines a maximum frequency
Fmax ∝ 1/δt, beyond which, for a particular instantaneous
current, gain in timing precision with higher F is marginal.
During the appearance of signal, these δt ﬂuctuations will
be small, while in the absence of signal or pulses from 39Ar
decay, δt will be very large.

For typical minimum-ionizing tracks with ionization
signal current of 1 nA, timing jitter δt is ∼ 50 ns rms. For
more highly ionizing tracks Fmax is correspondingly larger.
We argue that extremely precise dE/dx measurements for
the most highly ionizing tracks is unlikely to contribute
usefully to physical interpretation. Even though RTDs for
these are small, the total charge should be well measured.
We choose F = 50 MHz. This value provides very good
capture for all tracks except nuclear fragments, which in
any case, do not generally produce signiﬁcant tracks.

3.4. Ampliﬁer characteristics

A high transconductance of at least 0.1 V/fC is needed.
The small pixel capacitance facilitates high ampliﬁer gain
and low noise for small internal transistor currents. The
reset transistor, as indicated in Fig. 1, operates at LAr
temperature and must quiescently have eﬀectively inﬁnite
resistance to facilitate the use of current from 39Ar decays
for calibration. For the same reason, the input transistor
of the CSA must have negligible leakage current across its
gate. These are critical requirements for Q-Pix .

3.5. Nonlinear beneﬁts?

The CSA must be continuously sensitive, but perhaps
the comparator design can display a useful non-linear power
dissipation response (in the sense of class AB or B au-
dio ampliﬁers). Speciﬁcally, one may imagine that as the
integrated charge nears the transition point, comparator
current would increase to improve bandwidth and hence
response time. After a reset transition, internal currents

4

could remain high for a few µs to enable high-bandwidth
response if the transition is the precursor to an extended
series of rapid reset (a track!). If no track is present, the
circuit would relax in a few µs to the ultra-low power state.

4. Time stamping

The most conventional approach is to distribute master
clock timing signals in a cascading hierarchy down to the
pixel level. A phase-locked loop for control allows use of a
lower frequency to reduce power and noise. But nasty co-
herent noise from the ‘space-ﬁlling’ time distribution net-
work can show up only when a substantial portion of the
system is realized. While there can be little doubt that this
conventional approach can be made to work, we neverthe-
less persist here in considering an unorthodox approach
for time-stamping because it completely avoids this SPF
risk, oﬀers a ﬂat electronic architecture and eliminates a
hardware layer.

4.1. Local Clock

Instead of a distributed master clock, we choose to im-
plement a local clock within the ASIC. The local clock is
based on an oscillator free-running at its own natural fre-
quency F , ± some design spec, likely a few %. The local
oscillator is expected to run at F = 50–100 MHz. As power
dissipation for this circuit element is linearly proportional
to F , an optimization here is important.

A running calibration will be maintained, with the up-
date rate determined by drift and dead-time considera-
tions. In other words, the time-stamping function is de-
volved maximally, to the extreme local level. This is the
approach which has been proven to be very successful in
IceCube. We assert that the problem of calibration of
many local clocks is a much better problem to have than
the distribution of a master clock, which presents an in-
trinsic and signiﬁcant SPF risk.

The instantaneous value of the local clock is captured
in a buﬀer register when a reset transition occurs among
one or more of its cluster of pixels. This is schemati-
cally illustrated in Fig. 3. The string of reset times from
the free-running local clock are periodically transmitted to
computers outside but near the cryostat. The calibration
task is a simple linear transformation from local clock fre-
quencies to a central master clock. The RTDs are derived
simply by sequential subtraction of calibrated reset times.
At 100 MHz, a 32-bit clock rolls over in 43 seconds, which
turns out to be more than suﬃcient for the DAQ function.
This scenario may seem clumsy, but works extremely
well in IceCube; the process is reliable, eﬃcient and in-
In IceCube, Digital Optical Modules embedded
visible.
within a cubic km of ice are calibrated relatively to ±2 ns
by this method, including electrical lengths of km-scale
twisted quad cables. This remarkably successful process
occurs as a separate thread; everyone now just accepts
this as ‘natural’. The essential insight is that interroga-
tion of the local clock by ‘surface’ systems need occur only

as frequently necessary to monitor and correct for oscil-
lator drift, so that the timing requirement is met. Here,
the timing requirement, ±1 µs global accuracy correspond-
ing to ∼ 1.5 mm in the drift dimension, is 1000 times less
demanding than for IceCube.

Figure 3: A free-running oscillator increments a Gray-code counter
to create a local clock. The oscillator frequency is 50 MHz. A reset
signal causes the local clock value to be stored in a buﬀer register.
Data is a string of clock snapshots, from which the RTD is calculated
by oﬀ-detector computers.

In addition, the interrogation rate must be suﬃciently
low that dead-time for clock calibration is negligible. This,
in turn, implies stability requirements for the local oscil-
lators. For example, if local clock stability is 1 ppm over a
second, then interrogation at ∼ 1 Hz will suﬃce for ∼ 1 µs
accuracy; stability at 0.1 ppm implies a 10 second interval
between interrogations. If drift behavior is smooth, a ﬁt to
extended contiguous data would of course permit a lower
interrogation rate.

We are conﬁdent—although we cannot yet oﬀer evidence—

that under the stable temperature conditions of LAr and
nearly constant and minuscule power dissipation, a re-
quirement of δF/F < 1 ppm/sec can be met. The local
clock might be a simple ring oscillator based on starved
gates; other approaches are also possible.

5. Waveforms: conversion from charge to current

A contiguous sequence of short RTDs indicates the pres-
ence of interesting signal. A contiguous sequence of short
RTDs is the ‘waveform’; A conventional current waveform
can be directly reconstructed. The absence of diﬀerentia-
tion allows current waveforms of arbitrary length and char-
acter to be captured without correlated distortion/loss/baseline
droop. This waveform, although unorthodox, can provide
a complete measure of any signal of arbitrary complexity
and time duration. The input current is the same wave-
form in these ﬁgures, but ∆Q diﬀers by a factor of ∼ 3.
See Fig. 4, 5. The ﬁgures suggest that an optimum value
for ∆Q likely lies between 0.3 and 1.0 fC, perhaps near
0.7 fC.

From our idealized perspective, charge per sample is
‘ﬁxed and exact’ and uncertainties exist mainly in time
stamping. But even for the very largest signal currents,
where the RTD is very small—although with losses due to
reset—the absolute timing error is tiny, ∼ 50 ns.

The unorthodox Q(t) ∝ 1/RTD relationship means that
larger signals will have less apparent ‘resolution’—but as

5

InASOutMfCf32-bitlatchandbuﬀer32-bitGray-codecounterClockbefore the rapidly changing sequence begins. Similarly, the
very last sub-threshold sample must wait for background
current to induce reset. But a partial correction may be
inferred in either case.

For pixels adjacent to one receiving charge, there will
be a small bipolar induced signal of net zero charge as
charge is collected. This well understood neighbor eﬀect
could lead to premature, false triggers for pixels nearly
ready to trigger. But, due to diﬀusion, this premature or
false trigger seems likely to be a small eﬀect.

6. Auto-calibration with 39Ar decay

Aside from occasional signal, the abiding current is due
to 39Ar. These β-decays lead to a steady ﬂow of low-
energy pulses plus an approximately steady current due
to electron attachment. The electron track length of any
39Ar decay is less than 3 mm. In the charge-integrate/reset
electronic architecture proposed here, with an assumption
that input stage leakage current is negligible relative to
39Ar decay current, the automatic detection of this current
can provide an essential calibration function. Instead of
an unwanted vice, 39Ar decays can be regarded as a major
virtue, generating regular “heartbeat” reset pulses.

The charge quantum ∆Q corresponds to ∼ 1/4 the end-
point energy loss of β particles in 39Ar decay, ∼ 0.6 MeV.
∆Q is close to the average energy generated in these de-
cays. Each pixel views a volume of 4×4×7000 ≈ 1.1 × 105 mm3,
or about 0.11 liters. Assuming one 39Ar decay per second
per liter of LAr, one charge ‘pulse’ occurs generally every
9 seconds within the column viewed by one pixel. Signiﬁ-
cant sharing among neighboring pixels from diﬀusion does
not aﬀect average current.

The average 39Ar background current is tiny, about
100 aA. Since other input leakage currents must be negligi-
ble relative to this value, the Q-Pix scheme can only work
at cryogenic temperatures, and may also require special
dielectric surfaces and ASIC design features and/or pack-
aging.

6.1. Electron attachment

Negative ions due to attachment arrive as an approx-
imately DC current. For example, if average signal loss
due to attachment is taken as 40 %, then 40 % of the total
time-averaged current arriving at the pixel is in the form
of negative ions, whereas the remainder arrives as signal
pulses of varying amplitude down to zero. The attachment
process tends to ‘paint’ the drift ﬁeld lines with negative
ions. Many of these slowly moving ‘stripes’ will overlap
during the long ionic drift time. Lumpiness seems likely
to endure. Recombination of negative ions with positive
ions during drift is unlikely. So the input current is a com-
bination of approximately DC negative ion current and
varying charge pulses from 39Ar decay and other rare inci-
dental processes from γ-rays, neutrinos, muons, etc. Prior
to neutralization, negative ions congregate at the metallic

Figure 4: Transistor-level Charge Integration simulation results for
a generic Min-I track current in LAr. In this simulation of Charge-
Integrate/Reset, ∆Q was chosen to be 1 fC. The top panel shows
charge integration in purple, reset transitions in green. In the bot-
tom panel, The input current (purple) and reconstructed waveform
(green) is seen to be a good match. The beginning and end of the
current waveform are less well captured, but can be recovered by
ﬁtting.

charge per RTD is ﬁxed, only ‘resolution’ in time varies.
Smaller current signals will have ‘more’, contrary to the
conventional ADC. A typical signal pulse leads to reset af-
ter one µs integration and about 50 clock ticks are recorded
for that waveform segment. The track segment time is
quite accurately obtained from a ﬁt to RTD sequence or
track proﬁle.

Figure 5: Transistor-level Charge Integration simulation results for
a generic Min-I track current in LAr. In this simulation of Charge
Integrate-Reset, ∆Q was chosen to be ∼ 0.3 fC. The top panel shows
In the bot-
CSA integration in purple, reset transitions in green.
tom panel, The input current (purple) and reconstructed waveform
(green) are a good match. The beginning and end of the current
waveform are also well captured but at the cost of very low thresh-
old.

Due to the time-varying background current from 39Ar,
an uncertainty exists in the level of charge present just

6

 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1Voltage [V]Analog outputSchmitt trigger output 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5406080100120140Current [nA]t [µs]Charge inputReconstructed signal 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5406080100120140 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1Voltage [V]Analog outputSchmitt trigger output 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5406080100120140Current [nA]t [µs]Charge inputReconstructed signal 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5406080100120140pixel anode surface. Such a charge sheath will increase
the local electric ﬁeld. The enhanced electric ﬁeld will
augment tunneling and thereby hasten neutralization (see
electrostatics, below).

6.5. Summary

Overall, it is plausible to argue that the current due
to 39Ar decays, pulses and quasi-DC current, provides an
automatic charge sensitivity calibration for each pixel.

6.2. Heartbeat

The average current from 39Ar decay can be expected
to be quite stable over a long period and independent of at-
tachment level. Every live pixel thus maintains an individ-
ual but statistically regular ‘heartbeat’ at about 11 bpm.
Due to ASIC manufacturing variations, individual pixel
feedback capacitance and the diﬀerence in reset baseline
and reset threshold voltages will vary, and signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in heartbeat rate among pixels is expected. Since
oﬀsets and capacitances are constant at LAr temperature,
they will have no adverse eﬀect on stability of the clock
or heartbeat rate of a given pixel. The heartbeats thus
calibrate charge sensitivity automatically.

6.3. RTD distribution

The RTD spectrum can reveal much about free electron
lifetime. Even with electronegative impurities attaching
perhaps up to 40 % of the charge for maximum drift, the
RTD spectrum will be extremely bi-modal, with a histogram
of broadly peaked large RTDs (seconds → no signal) with a
tail out to the largest RTD deﬁning an RTDmax, plus a nar-
row peak at very much lower RTD (µs → signal) values. The
histogram of RTDs provides automatically a excellent but
complex measure of pixel stability and performance. If a
pixel stops producing heartbeats, that pixel is likely dead.
The shape of the RTD distribution should also provide an
accurate dynamic measure of the liquid purity during com-
missioning and operation.

The RTD distribution is also aﬀected by the unknown
amount of 39Ar background charge present in the CSA
prior to the appearance of true signal current. This will
lead to a sprinkling of intermediate RTD values. For pixels
whose CSA state is near reset threshold, charge impulses
much smaller than ∆Q will trigger a transition.

A useful perspective for this is that a 10 kton LAr
detector equipped with Q-Pix has, at any instant, ap-
proximately one kiloton of LAr with a threshold of about
10 keVee. Or, 100 tons would be continually viewed with
thresholds near 1 keVee. In this fanciful scenario, the de-
tector could capture an intense wave of WIMPs passing
through, or would be sensitive to the annual modulation
of WIMP velocities.

6.4. Hydrodynamics?

Large-scale time-varying LAr mass-ﬂow convection cur-
rents could be present in the detector, carrying negative
ions with it and deﬂecting ﬂows. This would alter the av-
erage input DC current and aﬀect RTD distributions, pro-
viding a measure of time-dependent LAr hydrodynamics
while possibly compromising charge calibration.

7. Electronic considerations and ASIC design

7.1. Architectural structure—physical and electronic

For simplicity, and for resilience against SPF, which
must be built in during design, a ﬂat architecture is de-
sired. Although the ASIC is itself a genuine if elemen-
tary system-on-a-chip, a more fundamental system block
is the tile, deﬁned as a 64 × 64 = 4096 pixel block (see
Fig. 6). With the assumption of 4 × 4 mm2 pixels, the tile
is 256 mm × 256 mm, a natural physical scale for produc-
tion, handling and integration. The organization of the
tile is conceived to be as indiﬀerent as possible to any of
various possible failure modes in any of the 256 ASICs,
even in the cases where several ASICs manifest partial or
catastrophic faults or display intermittencies. The inter-
nal network of the ASICs within a tile is dynamic and
intrinsically fault-tolerant.

Figure 6: A 16 × 16 array a 4 × 4 pixel sub-arrays forms the ‘tile’
of 4092 pixels. Local time capture and data transfer can naturally
proceed from any of the four corners, or even any edge ASIC, oﬀering
a very high level of SPF protection. This illustration is suggestive of
chip-on-board but packaged chips may be better.

Only one ASIC type exists on a tile. Each ASIC serves
16 pixels (or perhaps 32) and comprises a complete, semi-
autonomous data acquisition block. ASIC has signal sens-
ing, triggering, local clock, time-stamping, buﬀering, I/O
If ASIC serves 16 pixels,
and state machine capability.

7

256 ASICs will be needed; for 32 pixels per ASIC just 128
ASICs will be present.

In the case of 32 pixels per ASIC, ASIC could be di-
vided into two halves, requiring one bit to identify which
half is being read out. In either case, 8 bits are required
to specify ASIC position within a tile. Sixteen bits are
needed to ﬂag which pixel or set of pixels within its group
of 16 initiated the reset (more than one simultaneous re-
set is likely). Tracks falling simultaneously on adjacent
16-pixel groups do not interfere.

The local clock is required to track events beyond the
longest plausible time between clock/data interrogations.
At 100 MHz, a register width of 32 bits provides 43 seconds
before wrap-around. This is more than suﬃcient because
interrogation occurs at least once every 10 seconds.

Eight bits remain unspeciﬁed for the moment and are
available as tags or other purposes. ASIC senses all re-
set transition pulses and records 32-bit time information
along with pixel tags. ASIC makes no logical decisions
about meanings of a datum. All data, whether individual
heartbeats, ionization signals or timing interrogations are
64 bits and have identical structure. All analog functions
are contained in the CIR circuit block (see Fig. 1). ASIC is
connected by the shortest possible wire-bonds and traces
to a 4 × 4 (or perhaps 4 × 8) sub-array of pixels. Ionization
currents arrive to a small metallic ‘button’ exposed to the
active LAr, and are transported by direct via through a
dielectric layer to traces. The button is on the scale of
0.1 mm diameter, much smaller than the 4 × 4 mm2 pixel
itself.

No FPGA needs to lurk within the LAr, as data rates
oﬀ-plane are remarkably low. ASIC simply ﬁlls its buﬀer
with clock values and tags until a clock interrogation mes-
sage arrives bringing a ‘time-stamp token’. At that point,
the instantaneous clock value is logged with appropriate
tag, and an output sequence starts.

The surface computer systems can easily recognize the
heartbeat RTDs and enter them into histograms, one for
each pixel in the detector. Timing data is extracted to
that thread while re-timed RTDs for signals are passed on
to surface computers for waveform reconstruction and sub-
sequent event building. Only data corresponding to track
ionization arrives at the surface. The energy threshold for
pulse detection varies from near zero, when charge on a
pixel is high due to accumulated 39Ar current, to about
120 keV, just after reset. This leads to degraded sample
information for the beginning and end of a typical wave-
form, but, these are the smallest contributions and can
be reconstructed from the waveform proﬁle with good ac-
curacy, or possibly ignored. Any system with a deﬁned
threshold will miss signals smaller, but here, the threshold
extends down to practically zero.

ASIC design likely will employ a low-cost foundry pro-
cess away from the bleeding edge for acceptable costs.
While ASIC design is complicated by the paucity of tran-
sistor/device models at LAr temperature, internal DACs
in prototypes will allow needed bias optimization. The

8

oscillator/clock must be tightly conﬁned within the ASIC
to minimize noise propagation and power consumption.
The major engineering challenge may well be reset tran-
sition parasitic couplings that may cause transitions in
In addition to minimized parasitic
other nearby pixels.
couplings, the input traces to the CIR must obviously be
as short as possible to realize noise goals.

7.2. Power dissipation

Power dissipation and electronic noise are crucial per-
formance desiderata. Power dissipation must likely be less
than 6 W/m2, hence held to less than 100 µW per pixel.
The Berkeley/LBNL work shows that power dissipation,
with good noise characteristics, can be in the range of few
tens of µW/pixel. For the local clock in Q-Pix , which a
fortiori runs all the time, the power dissipation will ap-
proximate (1/2)CV 2F , where C is the capacitance in sil-
icon, V is supply voltage and F is the clock frequency.
This implies the total C involved in the clock function
cannot exceed about 1/2 pF. Our preliminary studies of
power dissipation for a 32-bit Gray code clock operating
at 100 MHz in a 55 nm CMOS process indicate a power
dissipation of 20 µW. This is further encouragement that
Q-Pix may be able to meet all technical requirements.

Quiescent power dissipation occurs in three compo-
nents: 1) the front-end charge integration; 2) in the quies-
cent current of the regenerative comparator (Schmitt trig-
ger); 3) in the shared local free-running clock. For the
CIR block, it seems clear that power dissipation is accept-
able. For the comparator, with momentary positive feed-
back and high instantaneous current in the comparator,
the time-averaged fraction of reset transition is negligible.

8. DAQ, state machine and network

Within the tile, all ASICs will be in one of six states,
except for brief moments of state transition. The transi-
tion period between states contributes negligibly to dead-
time. A major feature of Q-Pix is dynamic network gen-
eration within a tile. This architecture faces the issue of
clock domain crossing, since each ASIC clock has no re-
lation to another; Gray code is a natural communication
protocol here. A transfer clock, if needed, must be that
of the ASIC performing transfer into a neighbor ASIC’s
buﬀer. Completion of transfer releases the transfer clock
from the neighbor’s buﬀer. Most of the time is spent in
data acquisition (DAQ). The order here is only suggestive
of normal state transitions. The allowed states are:

A. Data Acquisition (DAQ) Each ASIC records CIR
transitions and adds 64-bit data to its buﬀer, with-
out reference to activity in any other ASIC. The du-
ration of the DAQ state depends directly on short-
term clock stability, but is expected to last normally
at least one second, but likely not more than 10.

B. Local Time Capture (LTC) A transition to this state

begins with the introduction of an accurately timed
‘time stamp token’ at a chosen place on the periph-
ery of the tile. More than one available entry point
is foreseen to reduce SPF risk. From Fig. 6, a clock
interrogation signal—the time token—is applied to
a peripheral ASIC. This ﬁrst ASIC to receive the to-
ken then asserts the token in a deﬁned sequence to
all of its other x-y neighbors; in principle, up to three
neighbors could accept.

C. Wave Propagation (WP) Subsequently, a possible
simultaneous assertion to one ASIC by two neighbors
is resolved by the accepting ASIC choosing just one,
following a pre-programmed sequence. Each ASIC
in this chain remembers from whom it has accepted
the token. A signal introduced anywhere peripher-
ally thus induces a wave propagating fully across the
tile. Unresponsive chips will be bypassed by the
encircling wave. Propagation time across the tile
may take a fraction of one µs, an eﬀect easily cor-
rected for or ignored. An intra-tile network is thus
dynamically established and maintained. Should an
ASIC fail at any time, though, a new dynamic net-
work must, and will, automatically establish itself.
Although the network pattern itself is irrelevant, it
can be recovered from the sequence of received data.

D. Data Transfer (DT) As soon as the ﬁrst ASIC learns
that the proﬀered time-stamp token has been either
accepted or rejected by all of its neighbors, read-
out of all of its data captured since the previous
time-stamp token will commence. Data will include
at least the one forced time capture caused by the
time-stamp token, but all data captured due to CIR
transitions (signal or 39Ar) will also be pushed out.
The tile begins a transition from the relatively brief
LTC state to a data transfer DT state (even before
the LTC state completes) as each ASIC attempts to
push backward its data to the ASIC from whence
it accepted the time-stamp token. When an ASIC
is empty after data transfer it must accept a data
transfer token impressed from any neighbor (again
following a sequence).

All data is pushed through the dynamically estab-
lished network to complete the DT. The DT phase
reproduces the LTC wave in reverse but much more
slowly. Data are likely to be pushed through an aver-
age of perhaps 16 ASICs but it seems unlikely to be
pushed through more than 32 ASICs. While an in-
eﬃciency is present here, the data load is very small
and infrequent. Very substantial resilience and me-
chanical simplicity is obtained. Oﬀ-plane data ac-
quisition external to the cryostat determines when
all ASICs have reported data, permitting transition
back to DAQ through initiation of another DAQ
phase.

E. Initiate DAQ (IDAQ) Transition to this state is an-
other wave rapidly propagating across the tile. In
principle, no data need be captured or transferred
by this wave. IDAQ follows immediately after a tile
has been fully emptied through DAQ.

F. Control State (CS) This state allows individual ac-
cess to a single ASIC to permit adjustments to lo-
cal oscillator frequency or internal biases, thresholds,
etc. All tokens except the CS state may be four bits
long. The CS state token is possibly 24 bits to allow
for individual ASIC control and trim.

8.1. Exception states

Inevitably there will be several exception/error states
that must be thought through carefully, with robust ac-
commodation provided for at the design stage. The sim-
plest exception is a completely unresponsive ASIC. In this
case the wave passes around the unresponsive ASIC with-
out diﬃculty. Another possible error state is an ASIC that
successfully enters and exits the LTC state but has become
unable to complete data transfer and/or enable state tran-
sition back to DAQ state (or the reverse disease). Also, in
the event of a failure mode that leads to production of non-
sense data, such as an oscillatory charge integrator, each
ASIC must either possess built-in sensing for this that en-
ables a kill switch, or be responsive to a message targeted
to that ASIC. It seems possible that both corrective sce-
narios can co-exist for this exception.

Perhaps the most lethal failure would be the short
circuit, boiling LAr and/or causing a tile to go oﬄine.
Other nasty possibilities surely remain unmentioned here.
It will take time and eﬀort, as usual, to ensure that all the
many devils in such details have been exposed, vanquished
and/or banished.

8.2. Data Flow and Dead-time

Altogether, the clock calibration routine, running once
a second, perhaps less often, acquires 16 384 bits/tile . Of
course, more data will be read out per ASIC when ener-
getic signal events and/or 39Ar events have occurred. If
inter-chip transfer can occur at 50 Mbits/s, then this data
load can be extracted with dead-time of ∼ 4 × 10−4. For a
4-bit transfer, the dead-time becomes proportionally less,
∼ 1 × 10−4, and so forth. The tiles would experience clock
calibration in a round robin sequence, so that less than one
tile in ∼ 104 would be temporarily oﬄine.

One 10 kton detector (12 m height×58 m length) re-
quires 11 136 tiles per anode plane. A 7 m drift is imagined
here, but does not aﬀect the number of tiles per plane. For
the single-phase implementation, a drift length of ∼ 7 m
permits two anode planes with one cathode plane per mod-
ule and seems a reasonable choice. Quiescent data rate is
then 22 272 × 16 384 bits/s ≈ 40.5 Mbytes/s. This rate
seems easily manageable, and since almost all data is for
the running calibration of clocks, all of that timing data is
consumed locally near the LAr TPC itself and committed

9

to RTD histograms and other monitoring. A tiny fraction
of re-timed signal data for event candidates is transmitted
onward for analysis.

Q-Pix pixel planes would demonstrate continuous sensitiv-
ity with power on, serving as an essential stepping stone
for implementation at the FD.

This approach for data acquisition, as proposed here,
incurs a small power penalty in that data are pushed through
an average of maybe 16 chips. The power cost depends
slightly on how eﬃciently the wave swept through. This
seems likely to be an easily acceptable cost since the DT
state is infrequent and the average number of bits/(second-
tile) is small.

9.4. Costs

At this point, no useful estimate of cost, relative or ab-
solute, is available. While this is a critical aspect for any
kiloton LAr TPC detector concept, only a careful, detailed
study of costs—R&D, engineering, QA, integration, pro-
duction, QC, commissioning, etc.–will have genuine value.

9. Some system considerations

9.1. Reliability—QA

The chargeintegrate/reset signal capture concept ex-
plicitly places essential electronic functions permanently
within the LAr itself, inaccessible for the entire experi-
ment. It is obvious that QA practices must ensure very
high long-term reliability.
IceCube, although tempera-
tures only reached to about −50 °C, faced a similar inac-
cessibility problem and met those challenges successfully.
IceCube QA emphasized quality in part lists, manufac-
ture and assembly, without recourse to either Mil-spec or
NASA-style protocols. Operational performance at the
98 % level for the ensemble of 5000 Digital Optical Mod-
ules (DOM) has been achieved, and half of the 2 % losses
are attributed to cabling and connector problems during
deployment. While the temperature of LAr is much lower
than in IceCube, already there exists experience with cir-
cuitry at LAr temperatures. The most likely issue at LAr
temperatures is a lack of any annealing of damage caused
by hot electrons.

9.2. Drift direction?

The drift direction could either be vertical as in the
dual-phase scenario or in the horizontal plane and perpen-
dicular to the beam, as in the single-phase. In either case,
large two-edge-buttable staves of pixels could be assembled
from smaller 4-edge-buttable boards, 25 × 25 cm2 in area.
These staves could be positioned and held in vertical slots
built into the cryostat internal skeleton. Guide rails that
move the staves into place after insertion seem straight-
forward to incorporate. The power dissipation, however
small it might be, may still induce vertical convection cur-
rents that may need counter-ﬂow of cold LAr on the back
side.

9.3. Near Detector?

Q-Pix ideas and performance could be demonstrated
ﬁrst in a LAr ‘near detector’ such as the ‘ArgonCube’
concept or similar. This is the direction pursued by the
LBNL/Bern/UTA groups. For sure, a near detector only
active during beam spill could employ more conventional
electronic concepts with high momentary power dissipa-
tion. Nonetheless, a LAr TPC near detector equipped with

10. Electrostatics at the pixel

The condition we require is that (almost) all charge
shall be collected on the pixel anode; therefore, almost all
drift ﬁeld lines reaching the pixel area must terminate on
the metallic anode. If the pixel anode, instead of a space-
ﬁlling metallic surface, could be a small ‘button’ covering
perhaps only ∼ 5 % of the pixel area, then both pixel in-
put capacitance and inter-pixel coupling are substantially
reduced. But when the TPC HV is ﬁrst turned on to es-
tablish the drift ﬁeld, a large fraction of drift ﬁeld lines
penetrate the ﬁrst dielectric layer and terminate on some
ground or power plane.

One obvious solution would be a metallic lacework at
the periphery of the pixel. This structure would be neg-
atively biased to drive electrons that arrive within the
4 × 4 mm2 pixel boundary to the ‘grounded’ pixel anode
button. The bias voltage might be in the range of −200 V
or so. This metallic lacework should work well enough,
but is almost certainly not necessary in our view, and may
act as a charge source that exacerbates charge creep.

At LAr temperature, the solution may be straightfor-
ward and automatic. The dielectric facing the active vol-
ume should be chosen to have essentially “inﬁnite” surface
and volume resistivity. In this perspective, with drift ﬁeld
on, the pixel dielectric surface will charge up to reach a
new electrostatic equilibrium.
If ﬁeld lines near the di-
electric surface are not parallel to the dielectric surface,
then charge drifting in will move to that insulating surface
and quench that ﬁeld line. Non-parallel ﬁeld lines will be
almost completely eliminated at electrostatic equilibrium.
Almost all ﬁeld lines from the drift region will eventually
terminate on the metallic pixel button.

The 39Ar current supplies about 400 fC/hour to each
pixel. A rough estimate of the surface charge needed to
approach drift ﬁeld-on electrostatic equilibrium is about
1000 fC, so equilibrium should be reached in a few hours
after drift ﬁeld application. Here, “inﬁnite resistivity” im-
plies a relaxation time on the order of days; this should
be possible to realize at LAr temperature with ordinary
dielectric materials such as Teﬂon. So the desired electro-
static result may be automatic.

Random pulses due to charge creep along the dielec-
tric surface to pixel input at LAr temperature are a con-
cern and would be problematic if excessive. These events

10

will likely be very large pulses and not resemble physics
events of interest. To avoid undesirable electric ﬁeld en-
hancement at the anode due to surface asperities incurred
during PCB manufacture, ‘electroless’ gold plating (EGP)
of the pixel button may be valuable, as EGP creates an
extremely smooth surface even at atomic scale.

The possibility to use a small metallic anode button
exposes most of the dielectric surface directly to LAr. In
other words, perhaps 95 % of the entire anode plane is
“available” for some other purpose: might that purpose
be photon detection?

11. Photon detection

The detection of the extreme VUV scintillation (λ ≈
128 nm) in LAr facilitates placement of events within the
ﬁducial volume, unambiguously in the absence of pile-
up. The immense scale of the DUNE far detectors leads,
in any scenario, to an S1 VUV signal of weak intensity
spread over a very large area. The presence of substan-
tial Rayleigh scattering at a scale that is small relative
to FD dimensions, however, dilutes optical intensity and
unavoidably degrades VUV detection eﬃciency. Various
scenarios are in development, requiring additional scintil-
lator/wavelength shifter/photo-detector elements.

The realization of practical high-quality signal capture
for both ionization and scintillation components in the FD
remains a severe technical challenge. The ideal concept
would be an integrated tracking/photo-detector system
with high performance and resilience. The challenge of
the very weak S1 signal intensity at the huge anode plane
surface might be met, and perhaps only, by making the a
large fraction of the anode plane surface photo-sensitive.
Among the ﬁeld cage structures in DUNE FD geome-
try, the ﬁeld cage surfaces are the smallest and hence least
attractive candidate surface to exploit for photon detec-
tion. The cathode plane, at very high voltage, seems best
left alone. So the S1 photons that strike the anode plane—
the pixel plane dielectric “wall”—is the best option.

Some additional mechanism must be incorporated in
Q-Pix to generate an S1 signal. Contemporary single-
photon avalanche detector (SPAD) arrays, commonly known
as silicon photomultipliers (SiPM), might be integrated
within the Q-Pix ASIC, depending on foundry availability.
But the use of standard opaque chip carriers would then be
prohibited, and the optical path from LAr to ASIC would
require wavelength shift and multiple reﬂections, likely a
severe overall cost in eﬃciency. A separate SiPM facing
LAr directly seems likely to add costs, as well as complex-
ity and fragility in manufacturing and handling. While
conceivable, such choices seem to oﬀer marginal perfor-
mance.

But there might be additional mechanisms available.
Suppose, for consideration, that the pixel dielectric sur-
face is coated with a photoconductor such as amorphous

selenium (a-Se)1. At LAr temperature, we must presume
that quiescent elevation of carriers to the conduction band
is negligible. The steady-state electrostatic ﬁeld lies some-
where between r1 and r2 near the pixel button. When
a-Se is hit by a LAr photon, however, an electron (per-
haps more than one) may be elevated to the conduction
band and will move in the electric ﬁeld toward the button.
It is very unlikely that any single pixel will be hit by more
than one S1 photon. But there are many pixels.

If we press our imagination a bit further, let us suppose
that the ﬁeld near the button is suﬃciently large that a sin-
gle electron reaching that zone will initiate an avalanche.
Thus one converted S1 photon may lead to an avalanche
charge of at least ∆Q, ∼ 5000 electrons. That pixel will
ﬁre and record the time of S1; a “Hit” is generated. The
idea is that although the probability of any pixel detecting
an S1 photon is small, the ensemble of ∼ 108 pixels can
produce a statistically signiﬁcant set of struck pixels with
similar and usefully precise timing. A coherent S1 signal
is extracted by the appearance of a statistically signiﬁcant
peak in the time-ﬂow of re-timed pixel “Hits”.

Another fanciful scenario might be that absorption of
a single photon at the pixel surface could initiate charge-
jumping along the surface. Motion of suﬃcient charge
through suﬃcient potential diﬀerence will lead to a pixel
trigger. A large fraction of pixels will be close to trigger-
ing due to the 39Ar current. In this notion, we invoke the
phenomenon of self-organized criticality (SOC). A system
displaying SOC has static friction greater than dynamic
friction and is pushed to the point of instability by con-
stant low-level energy input. Here, the energy is stored by
charge trapped on the surface of the pixel anode. Charge
from 39Ar decays continually brings charge to the anode
surface, until the surface charge is suﬃcient to repel the
ﬁeld lines and cause all drifting charge to go to the metal-
lic button. Dielectric properties will clearly be important
for any success along this line.

The photon detection scheme suggested here does not
employ RTDs, but searches for statistically signiﬁcant bumps
in the ﬂow of all retimed resets, viewed in this context
as “Hits”. The continuous scintillation background due
to 39Ar decay contributes a rate of Hits that will force a
threshold for detection of S1 independent of any photon
detection scheme. There is likely to be a further contribu-
tion of VUV from neutralization of positive Argon ions and
dimers at the cathode. That cathode phenomenon might
be suppressed by a semi-porous coating that encourages
non-radiative de-excitation through complex formation.

12. Perspective

We have embraced the spirit of the Principle of Least
Action, to develop for a large LAr TPC a self-calibrating

1Other photoconductive materials, such as the polymers used in
laser printers, may be better, but a-Se is used here as a natural
exemplar.

11

References

[1] R. Acciarri, et al., Long-Baseline Neutrino Facility (LBNF)
and Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE), arXiv:
1601.05471.

[2] D. A. Dwyer, et al., LArPix: Demonstration of low-power 3D
pixelated charge readout for liquid argon time projection cham-
bers, arXiv: 1808.02969.

[3] B. Abelev et al., The ALICE Collaboration, Technical Design
Report for the Upgrade of the ALICE Inner Tracking Sys-
tem, Journal of Physics G: Nuclear and Particle Physics 41 (8)
(2014) 087002, URL http://stacks.iop.org/0954-3899/41/i=
8/a=087002.

[4] M. G. Aartsen, et al., The IceCube Neutrino Observatory:
Instrumentation and Online Systems, JINST 12 (03) (2017)
P03012.

approach for detailed information capture with very low
SPF risk. The CIR circuit, in concert with free-running
local clocks, does as little as possible until something hap-
pens, yet provides readiness for detailed capture of wave-
forms of arbitrary complexity. Track proﬁles will provide
useful measures of diﬀusion during drift, oﬀering a sec-
ondary means for placement in the drift dimension. It is
continuously ready for a massive data acquisition burst
should a SN event occur. The Q-Pix detector, based on
CIR, maintains a quiescent heartbeat at ∼ 1010 ns/beat,
but automatically responds to signal with ∼ 10 ns wake-
up. Due to the charge-centric architecture, information
capture is eﬃcient. An absolute charge calibration and
monitor of detector performance is naturally obtained.

IceCube ($270 M project cost) has shown that a very
large electronic investment can be successfully deployed in
an inaccessible cold environment. IceCube is also the pre-
mier exemplar of a beneﬁcial paradigm shift away from the
conventional centralized analog signal capture (AMANDA)
to a decentralized digital network-based DAQ. Perhaps
something similar in impact but with very diﬀerent im-
plementation can happen here. Even though the Q-Pix
concept for waveform capture is unfamiliar and may be
regarded as a radical approach, it may become a common-
place once shown to work. That transition happened in
IceCube, as everyone now sees the DOM architecture as
‘obvious’ even though initial resistance was quite strong.
In short, as in IceCube, if the sausage tastes good, we
won’t care how it is made.

The main challenge now, perhaps, is perhaps not tech-
nical, but a sociological one: to ﬁrst imagine that a really
good technical opportunity exists that can optimize dis-
covery potential for DUNE, and then pursue it, strongly.

13. Summary

Waveform capture of the high quality described here
extracts essentially all information, and may substantially
extend DUNE scientiﬁc reach and discovery potential. Two
very important additional features are automatic absolute
charge calibration by 39Ar and robust resilience against
SPF.

We wish to acknowledge particularly helpful conver-
sations with Milind Diwan, Dan Dwyer and Mitch New-
comer. We thank Dan Dwyer for providing simulated
charge drifting signal in LAr. We also thank Jonathan
Asaadi, Jerry Blazey, Alan Bross, Eric Church, Marcel
Demarteau, Zelimir Djurcic, Roxanne Guenette, Rick Van
Berg, Le Xiao and Vishnu Zutshi for supportive contri-
butions. The authors welcome comments, criticisms, or
expressions of interest. This work was supported in part
by University of Texas at Arlington Grant #311587. Yuan
Mei is supported by a grant through Berkeley Lab, pro-
vided by the Director, Oﬃce of Science, of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.

12

