DEPENDENCE OF ECS ON TEMPORAL CORRELATION STRUCTURE

DEPENDENCE OF INFERRED CLIMATE
SENSITIVITY ON THE DISCREPANCY MODEL
Balu Nadiga1, Nathan Urban1

8
1
0
2

p
e
S
0
1

]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
8
6
0
4
0
.
9
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—We consider the effect of different temporal
error structures on the inference of equilibrium climate
sensitivity1(ECS), in the context of an energy balance
model (EBM) that is commonly employed in analyzing
earth system models (ESM) and observations. We con-
sider error structures ranging from uncorrelated (IID
normal) to AR(1) to Gaussian correlation (Gaussian Pro-
cess GP) to analyze the abrupt 4xCO2 CMIP5 experiment
in twenty-one different ESMs. For seven of the ESMs,
the posterior distribution of ECS is seen to depend rather
weakly on the discrepancy model used suggesting that the
discrepancies were largely uncorrelated. However, large
differences for four, and moderate differences for the
rest of the ESMs, leads us to suggest that AR(1) is an
appropriate discrepancy correlation structure to use in
situations such as the one considered in this article.

Other signiﬁcant ﬁndings include: (a) When estimates
of ECS (mode) were differrent, estimates using IID were
higher (b) For four of the ESMs, uncertainty in the
inference of ECS was higher with the IID discrepancy
structure than with the other correlated structures, and
(c) Uncertainty in the estimation of GP parameters were
much higher than with the estimation of IID or AR(1)
parameters, possibly due to identiﬁability issues. They
need to be investigated further.

I. INTRODUCTION

land surface,

On the one hand, Earth System Models (ESMs)
that comprise of atmosphere-ocean general circulation
models (AOGCMs) coupled to other earth system com-
ponents such as ice sheets,
terrestrial
biosphere, and glaciers are central to developing our
understanding of of the workings of the climate system,
and are proving to be the most comprehensive tool
available to study climate change and develop climate
projections [1]. Concomitantly, simple concepts such
as climate sensitivities—metrics used to characterise
the response of the global climate system to a given
forcing—are central not only to climate modeling, but
also to discussions of the ongoing global warming (e.g.,
see [2], [3]. Nevertheless, the immense computational

Corresponding author: B.T. Nadiga, balu@lanl.gov
1Los Alamos National Lab, Los Alamos, NM 87544

1ECS is deﬁned as the realized equilibrium surface warming—
globally-averaged surface air temperature—for a doubling of CO2

infrastructure required and the cost incurred in running
ESMs precludes the direct evaluation of such metrics.
Simple climate models (SCMs) on the other hand
consider only integral balances of important quantities
such as mass and/or energy, are computationally cheap
and can be used in myriad differnt ways (unlike ESMs
that are typically run only in the forward mode). It is for
these reasons that the use of SCMs to estimate climate
sensitivities, both in the context of ESMs and actual
observations, is now well established (e.g., see [4], [5]
and others).

II. METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
A particular form of an SCM that has been popular
in summarizing integral thermal properties of AOGCMs
and/or ESMs is the anomaly-based upwelling-diffusion
(UD) energy-balance model (EBM) [4]. To brieﬂy de-
scribe such a model, consider a horizontally-integrated
model of the climate system that is partitioned into two
active layers in the vertical. An upper (surface) layer
that that comprises the oceanic mixed layer, atmosphere
and land surface and and a bottom layer that comprises
the ocean beneath the mixed layer. Evolution of the
upper surface heat content anomaly per unit area is
given by

Cu

dTu
dt

= F − λTu − γ (Tu − Td)

(1)

where λ represents. Exchange of heat between the
surface layer and the ocean beneath is parameterized
by the difference in temperature between the two lay-
ers. Similarly, evolution of the subsurface ocean heat
content anomaly (again per unit area ) is given by

Cd

dTd
dt

= −γ (Tu − Td) .

(2)

Such two layer models have been used extensively
to obtain point estimates of ECS of AOGCMs/ESMs
(e.g., see [5], [6], and others). However, and to the
best of our knowledge, the dependence of estimates
of ECS on the assumed temporal structure of the
discrepancy between ESM representation of the surface
air temperature (SAT) and the above EBM’s (Eqs. 1 &
2) representation of it has not been investigated:

T ESM
u

(t) = T EBM

u

(t) + (cid:15)t

(3)

 
 
 
 
 
 
NADIGA, URBAN

Fig. 1.

Inferred ECS for the 21 models considered using CMIP5 experiment abrupt4xCO2.

DEPENDENCE OF ECS ON TEMPORAL CORRELATION STRUCTURE

the
The equation above arises from the fact
anomaly-based EBM considered has no representation
of climate variability, unlike the more comprehensive
ESM that
is used to analyze. We consider three
correlation structures for (cid:15)t:

that

it

1) IID: Σ(t − s) = σ2δ(t − s)
2) AR(1): Σ(t − s) = σ2ρ|t−s|
3) AR(1)+GP: Σ(t − s) = σ2 exp(− (t−s)2

λ2

)

where structure AR(1)+GP uses the sum of the covari-
ances indicated in items 2 and 3 above

In the context of globally-averaged SAT (of which
sea surface temperature or SST is a large compo-
nent), we know, e.g., following the work of [7], that
the mixed layer integrates (high-frequency) weather
noise. Thus, SST (and therefore SAT) is expected to
be auto-correlated in time, although the correlations
themselves are highly spatiotemporally variable (e.g,
winter SST anomalies are more persistent than summer
SST anomalies, the tropical Paciﬁc may display larger
persistence than the tropical Atlantic, etc...). However,
such correlations rarely exceed about six months and
we are considering annual-averaged SAT. Physically,
correlations on the interannual time scales are related to
internal climate dynamics (phenomena such as the re-
emergence of the winter mixed layer, delay-oscillations
and others). While a casual inspection of some actual
climate timeseries may suggest the unlikeliness of IID
variability, it is not the case for the globally-averaged
SAT timeseries in the abrupt4xCO2 CMIP5 experiment
that we analyze, and as we will see later. However,
it should also be noted that if the discrepancies are
actually correlated, then an inference of EBM param-
eters using the IID discrepency structure will result in
estimates of uncertainty that are smaller than actual,
and again as we will see later.

Figure 1 shows the posterior distribution of ECS with
the three error structures (indicated in the legend) for
the 21 ESMs. The prior is shown in the bottom-left
panel. In this ﬁgure it is seen that

• For a substantial number of

the
three error structures lead to similar estimates
of ECS (CNRMCM5, MIROC5, MPIESML/MR,
MPIESMP, MRICGCM3, NorESM1M)

the ESMs,

• When the estimates of ECS are differrent, es-
timates using IID tend to be higher (CCSM4,
FGOALSs2, GFDLESM2G/M, HadGEM2ES, in-
mcm4)

• Differences in ECS estimates from that between
AR(1) and AR(1)+GP tend to be smaller than that
between either and IID

• In a majority of the ESMs considered, IID leads
to smaller estimates of uncertainty in ECS sug-
gesting that the discrepancies in those models are

temporally correlated. The exceptions (CCSM4,
GOALSs2, GFDLESM2G/M), are therfore surpris-
ing and need to be investigated further.

We also note that there was far more uncertainty in the
estimation of GP parameters as opposed to estimateion
of either IID and AR(1) parameters. This is likely due
not only to the shortness of the ESM runs considered
(150 years) from the point of low-frequency variabil-
ity that the GP component was intended to capture,
but may involve issues of identiﬁability and needs to
be investigated further. However, when such problems
occur, the parameters involved act more as nuisance
parameters and do not prevent reasonable inference of
ECS and other EBM parameters.

III. DISCUSSION
Simple climate models play a valuable role in help-
ing interpret both observations and the responses of
comprehensive ESMs. As such, we used a simple and
popular EBM in a Bayesian framework to interpret the
abrupt4xCO2 CMIP5 experiment in 21 ESMs, in terms
of their SAT response. We used three different statistical
models to represent the discrepancy in the SAT response
of the ESMs and SCMs. This discrepancy is largely
due to natural variability—an aspect of climate that
represented in the ESMs, but not in the SCMs. For
seven of these models, the posterior distribution of ECS
depended only very weakly on the discrepancy model
the discrepancies were largely
used suggesting that
uncorrelated. For four of the models, the differences
were large and for the rest of the models, the differences
were moderate. Signiﬁcant differences in a majority of
the models, therefore, indicate the existence of temporal
correlations in the discrepancies and the imprtance of
accounting for them in a Bayesian inference framework.
Next, the differences in estimated ECSs were much
smaller for inferences using AR(1) and AR(1)+GP as
compared to differences between inferences using either
of these models and IID. This coupled with the fact that
the uncertainty in the estimation of GP parameters was
much larger than that in the estimation of AR or IID
parameters, leads us to conclude that AR(1) is a good
choice2 in situations such as the one considered in this
article.

A number of other issues need to be investigated
further: the higher estimates of ECS when using the IID
structure for some of the ESMs, the higher uncertainty
in the estimation of ECS when using the IID structure
for some of the ESMs, and the increased uncertainty in
the estimation of GP parameters as compared to that in
the estimation of IID or AR(1) parameters.

2Additionally, the existence of an analytic inverse for the co-
variance of an AR(1) process makes it faster to compute with as
compared to with a GP.

NADIGA, URBAN

REFERENCES

[1] G. Flato, J. Marotzke, B. Abiodun, P. Braconnot, S. C. Chou,
W. J. Collins, P. Cox, F. Driouech, S. Emori, V. Eyring, et al.,
“Evaluation of climate models. in: Climate change 2013: The
physical science basis. contribution of working group i
to
the ﬁfth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on
climate change,” Climate Change 2013, vol. 5, pp. 741–866,
2013.

[2] J. Mitchell, S. Manabe, V. Meleshko, and T. Tokioka, “Equilib-
rium climate change and its implications for the future,” 1990.
[3] G. H. Roe and M. B. Baker, “Why is climate sensitivity so
unpredictable?,” Science, vol. 318, no. 5850, pp. 629–632,
2007.

[4] M. I. Hoffert, A. J. Callegari, and C.-T. Hsieh, “The role of deep
sea heat storage in the secular response to climatic forcing,”
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, vol. 85, no. C11,
pp. 6667–6679, 1980.

[5] I. M. Held, M. Winton, K. Takahashi, T. Delworth, F. Zeng,
and G. K. Vallis, “Probing the fast and slow components of
global warming by returning abruptly to preindustrial forcing,”
Journal of Climate, vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 2418–2427, 2010.
[6] O. Geoffroy, D. Saint-Martin, D. J. Olivi´e, A. Voldoire, G. Bel-
lon, and S. Tyt´eca, “Transient climate response in a two-
layer energy-balance model. part i: Analytical solution and
parameter calibration using cmip5 aogcm experiments,” Journal
of Climate, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 1841–1857, 2013.
[7] K. Hasselmann, “Stochastic climate models part

theory,”

i.

Tellus, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 473–485, 1976.

