8
1
0
2

p
e
S
3
2

]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
6
0
6
8
0
.
9
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Resistive cooling of highly charged ions in a Penning trap to a ﬂuid-like state

M.S. Ebrahimi, Z. Guo, and M. Vogel
GSI Helmholtzzentrum f¨ur Schwerionenforschung, 64291 Darmstadt, Germany

M. Wiesel
GSI Helmholtzzentrum f¨ur Schwerionenforschung, 64291 Darmstadt, Germany and
Institut f¨ur Angewandte Physik, Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany

G. Birkl
Institut f¨ur Angewandte Physik, Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany

W. Quint
GSI Helmholtzzentrum f¨ur Schwerionenforschung, 64291 Darmstadt, Germany and
Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

We have performed a detailed experimental study of resistive cooling of large ensembles of highly
charged ions such as Ar13+ in a cryogenic Penning trap. Diﬀerent from the measurements reported
in [M. Vogel et al., Phys. Rev. A 90, 043412 (2014)], we observe purely exponential cooling behavior
when conditions are chosen to allow collisional thermalization of the ions. We provide evidence that
in this situation, resistive cooling time constants and ﬁnal temperatures are independent of the
initial ion energy, and that the cooling time constant of a thermalized ion ensemble is identical to
the single-ion cooling time constant. For suﬃciently high ion number densities, our measurements
show discontinuities in the spectra of motional resonances which indicate a transition of the ion
ensemble to a ﬂuid-like state when cooled to temperatures below approximately 14 K. With the
ﬁnal ion temperature presently being 7.5 K, ions of the highest charge states are expected to form
ion crystals by mere resistive cooling, in particular not requiring the use of laser cooling.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Resistive cooling is a well-established technique for
slowing down the motion and reducing the amplitude
of oscillation of charged particles in Penning traps [1–
3].
It is based on the dissipation of particle kinetic
energy into resistive elements that represent a heat
bath at some low target temperature. To this end,
a resistive circuit is set up to connect geometrically
suited trap electrodes [4]. The particle oscillation in
the trap causes oscillations of the image charges in-
duced in these electrodes (Shockley-Ramo theorem
[5, 6]) and leads to an image current through the resis-
tive circuit that is hence extenuated to the point where
the conﬁned charged particles are in thermal equilib-
rium with the circuit. Usually, a resonant (RLC) cir-
cuit is used, based on the high achievable resonance
resistances which lead to eﬃcient cooling [7–9]. For
highly charged ions, resistive cooling is particularly
suited due to the scaling of the cooling rate with the
square of the particle charge q [3]. Highly charged
ions are inapt for laser cooling due to their lack of
broad optical transitions [10], and have large charge
exchange cross sections that make buﬀer gas cooling
or electron cooling unfavourable. They can be sym-
pathetically [11, 12] cooled to a crystalline state well
below the ambience temperature by interaction with
singly charged laser-cooled ions [13] when storage of
both species with suﬃcient proximity and laser access
is possible.

In the present ARTEMIS experiment [14, 15], cool-

ing of the trapped ions is used to suppress Doppler
eﬀects in optical and microwave spectroscopy which
will be used to determine the magnetic moments of the
ionic nucleus and the bound electron in highly charged
ions. The work presented has been performed in the
framework of the HITRAP facility at GSI, Germany
[16, 17].

In the following, we will give a short account of our
setup and experimental procedures, particularly for
in-trap production of highly charged ions, their non-
destructive detection and resistive cooling. Note that
presently, detection and cooling are both aspects of
the same interaction of the conﬁned ions with the re-
sistive circuit. We will brieﬂy review the theory of
resistive cooling and of mass spectrometry of ion en-
sembles in a Penning trap, discuss their thermaliza-
tion behavior, and how they are described in terms
of a non-neutral plasma. The results section then
shows spectrometric data, allowing us to determine
the energy, spectral width, and spectral position of all
species present in the ion ensembles during resistive
cooling. While at low ion number densities, purely
exponential cooling behavior in agreement with naive
theory is observed, dense ion ensembles show spectral
discontinuities that agree with predictions of a transi-
tion to a ﬂuid-like state. As we present measurements
with ion numbers of the order of several thousands
and above, these ensembles are distinct from both the
well-known single-ion case and the small ensembles
studied in [3], and show collective behavior, depend-
ing mainly on the rate of thermalization. We compare
the cooling dynamics to the non-exponential behav-

 
 
 
 
 
 
ior reported earlier [3] to show that fast thermaliza-
tion within the ensemble is critical for eﬃcient cooling
of ion ensembles, rather than achieving high eﬀective
resistances with high cooling rates, but limited to a
narrow energy distribution. This points to a poten-
tial limitation for resistive cooling in traps with highly
tuned potentials or narrow-band cooling circuits.

II. SETUP AND PROCEDURES

The experimental setup has been described in detail
in [14, 15]. Brieﬂy, an arrangement of stacked cylindri-
cal Penning traps is located in the homogeneous ﬁeld
of a superconducting magnet and is cooled to liquid
helium temperature (Fig. 1). This arrangement con-
sists of a creation trap with multiple potential wells
for ion conﬁnement, and of a trap optimized for opti-
cal and microwave spectroscopy of conﬁned ions under
large solid angles [18].

2

destructively, which is used to perform charge-to-mass
spectrometry of the stored particles. At present, we
are concerned with the detection and cooling of the
axial motion only. In the creation trap, ensembles of
highly charged ions are produced by impact ionization
of gas by an electron beam from a ﬁeld emission tip,
in close similarity to the charge-breeding process in
electron-beam ion sources [15, 20].

Figure 2 shows the part of the creation trap rele-
vant for ion detection and the cooling measurements:
Three electrodes A, B, and C form a geometrically
compensated trap [21] with B acting as the ring elec-
trode and A and C being the endcaps. Electrode A
is connected to a resonant (RLC) circuit for detection
of the axial ion motion. The trap voltage U0 is sym-
metrically split between ring and endcap electrodes as
indicated.

FIG. 1. (Color online) Left: Stacked conﬁguration of Pen-
ning traps for ion creation, selection, and cooling (lower
part) and spectroscopy (upper part). Right: Overview
of setup showing the cryogenic trap chamber in the ﬁeld
centre of the superconducting magnet.

In a Penning trap, the homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld
B0 along the z-direction forces the charged particles
on orbits, hence conﬁning them radially, while the
electrode voltages of the trap are chosen to create a
well at z = 0 in the axial direction, thereby conﬁn-
ing the ions to a small volume around the trap center
ρ = z = 0. In the absence of ion-ion interactions, each
individual ion performs an oscillatory motion consist-
ing of three eigenmotions, two in the radial plane per-
pendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld, and one axial oscil-
lation parallel to the trap axis [19].

In a cloud of interacting ions, the overall motion
is more complicated on account of ion-ion interac-
tions. Nevertheless, the axial and radial oscillatory
motions in arbitrary ion clouds can be detected non-

FIG. 2. (Color online) Schematic of the part of the cre-
ation trap used for the cooling measurements (cut for pre-
sentation of the inner structure): electrode A is connected
to a resonant (RLC) circuit used for both detection and
cooling of the axial ion motion and is read out by a spec-
trum analyzer via two ampliﬁers. All elements within the
dotted box are cooled to liquid-helium temperature.

Non-destructive spectrometry of the conﬁned ions
is performed by recording the signal induced in the
axial resonator circuit used for cooling as a func-
tion of the trap voltage (Fig.
3). Presently, the
detection system is resonant at a ﬁxed frequency of
ωR = 2π × 741.23 kHz and has a quality factor of
about Q = 900, such that the spectral width of the
circuit is δωR = ωR/Q ≈ 2π × 820 Hz. When the
trap voltage U0 is scanned, ion species with diﬀerent
charge-to-mass ratios q/m subsequently come into res-
onance when their axial oscillation frequency ωz(U0)
(see Eq.
(4)) matches the resonance frequency ωR
of the detection system, i.e. when for their speciﬁc
value of q/m we have ωz(U0) = ωR. Since the detec-
tion system records a spectral power density within
its frequency band for a certain scan time, each peak
area is proportional to an energy. To be more precise,
it is proportional to the individual particle kinetic en-
ergy times the number of particles contributing to that
peak. This means that at constant particle number,

the area measures the individual particle energy.

again using the SWIFT technique [23].

3

In our experiment, the particle number can indeed
be regarded as constant, since ion loss due to colli-
sion or charge exchange with neutral species has been
observed to be negligible on the time scale of the cool-
ing experiments. As expected from kinetic gas theory,
the cryogenic temperature of about 4 K ensures eﬃ-
cient cryo-pumping of residual gases. From a mea-
surement of the ion signal as a function of time over
the course of 48 hours, a charge state lifetime (half-
life) for Ar13+ of 22 days is extracted, which at a
cross section for charge exchange with helium gas of
(3.25 ± 0.25) × 10−15 cm2 [22] indicates a residual gas
pressure of about 3 × 10−16 hPa.

Figure 3 shows a spectrum of ions produced from
supplied argon gas which also contains tungsten ions
sputtered from the ﬁeld emission tip. The signals in-
between could not be assigned to an ion species. The
spectrum is cleaned from all ions except argon prior
to the following measurements by application of the
SWIFT technique [23] to the axial motion, i.e. by
simultaneous resonant ejection of all unwanted species
from the trap. This selective excitation increases the
axial ion kinetic energy of unwanted species until it
exceeds the trap depth and the ions are axially lost
from conﬁnement. The procedure takes place on the
milli-second time scale and is presently combined with
a temporal lowering of the trap potential to ease the
ejection. Depending on the details, the number of
unwanted ions is lowered to undetectable levels, while
spurious excitation reduces the number of wanted ions
by up to about 50 %. The result of this procedure
(upon further cooling) is a spectrum as shown in Fig.
7. The argon ions are conﬁned in a speciﬁc well of the

FIG. 3. Ion spectrum upon ion creation. It shows charge
states 9+ to 16+ of the desired argon ions and a number
of charge states of tungsten from the ﬁeld emission tip.

creation trap for the present experiments, see Fig. 2.
In full similarity to the cleaning procedure above, pure
ion clouds containing only a single ion species even
in a selected q/m-state can be produced by resonant
ejection of unwanted ions from the trap. This is done
by resonant dipole excitation of the axial oscillation

III. THEORY OF RESISTIVE COOLING

In an ideal cylindrical Penning trap, a single con-

ﬁned ion obeys the axial equation of motion [24]

d2
dt2 z + ω2

z z = 0,

(1)

where the axial oscillation frequency ωz follows from
the axial trapping potential

according to

V (z) =

U0C2
2d2 z2

ω2

z z =

q
m

dV
dz

,

(2)

(3)

such that for the present geometry the frequency of
axial oscillation ωz is given by [24]

ωz =

(cid:114)

qU0C2
md2

with d2 =

z2
0
2

+

ρ2
0
4

.

(4)

Here, C2U0 constitutes the depth of the potential well
for axial conﬁnement, z0 and ρ0 are the axial and ra-
dial dimensions of the trap leading to d = 6.73 mm,
and C2 = 0.563 is a coeﬃcient that accounts for our
cylindrical trap geometry [19, 25].

Within this description, resistive cooling may be
modelled as a friction force which depends on the ax-
ial ion velocity dz/dt. The equation of motion then
reads [24]

d2
dt2 z − γ

d
dt

z + ω2

z z = 0,

(5)

where γ denotes the cooling rate. It is given by [26]

γ =

R
D2

q2
m

,

(6)

where R is the resonance resistance of the circuit used
for cooling and D is the so-called eﬀective electrode
distance which will be detailed below. The evolution
of the ion kinetic energy in the presence of resistive
cooling is given by an exponential decay of the kind
[24]

E = E0 exp (−γt) .

(7)

Note, that the cooling rate γ and the exponential
shape of the cooling curve (energy as a function of
time) according to equations (6) and (7) is predicted
to be independent of time and of the absolute value
of the energy E0 at the beginning of the cooling.

Further, it is an important prediction of a detailed
calculation that for a thermal ensemble of identical

particles, the cooling rate of the total kinetic energy
is expected to be identical to the single-particle case
[3, 24, 26].

The eﬀective electrode distance D in equation (6)
contains the information about the location and the
geometry of the electrodes connected by the circuit
with respect to the center of the ion oscillation [26].
For the present geometry (see ﬁgure 2) with electrode
(A) used for pick-up of the signal while the trap center
is in electrode (B), D can be calculated by [26]

D−1(ρ, z) =

∂
∂z

Ξ(ρ, z).

(8)

where Ξ(ρ, z) reads

Ξ(ρ, z) =

−1
ρ0π

(cid:90) ∞

0

I0 (xρ/ρ0)
I0 (x)

Gdx,

in which the geometry function G is given by

G = sinc(x

z − zF
πρ0

)(z − zF ) − sinc(x

z − zN
πρ0

)(z − zN )

and ρ0 is the inner radius of the cylindrical electrodes,
zN and zF are the distances from the center of the trap
to the nearest and farthest edge of the electrode used

FIG. 4. (Color online) Plot of the eﬀective electrode dis-
tance D according to Eq. (8) as a function of the axial
position z for diﬀerent values of the radial coordinate ρ
for the geometry shown in Fig. 2.

for cooling (against ground), and I0(x) is the modi-
ﬁed Bessel function of ﬁrst kind. In our case, we have
geometry values of ρ0 = 8.70 mm, zN = 7.46 mm and
zF = 21.57 mm. Figure 4 shows the values of D re-
sulting from equation (8) as a function of the axial po-
sition z for diﬀerent radial positions between the trap
centre ρ = 0 and the inner electrode surface ρ = ρ0.
Obviously, the value of D depends on both the axial
and radial position in the trap, such that the expected
cooling rate γ (and likewise the cooling time constant
τ = 1/γ) also depends on the ion location. Hence,
for a large and/or hot ion ensemble that occupies a
signiﬁcant volume around the trap centre, this eﬀect
needs to be taken into account and the cooling rate
has to determined via integration over the full ion dis-
tribution.

4

IV.

ION ENSEMBLE PROPERTIES

A.

Ion Number and Space-Charge Eﬀects

The ion number density in the trap can be deduced
from the observed space-charge shift of the axial os-
cillation frequency of a given ion species upon pro-
duction and initial cooling. The presence of the other
charges eﬀectively reduces the trap potential experi-
enced by an ion and thus reduces its axial frequency
to a value [27]

(cid:115)

ω(cid:48)

z = ωz

1 −

ω2
p
3ω2
z

,

(9)

where ω2
p = q2n/((cid:15)0m) is the plasma frequency that
depends mainly on the ion charge q and ion number
density n. In spectrometry, the space-charge shift is
seen as a shift of the observed trap voltage U (cid:48)
0 that
brings a given ion species into resonance with the
detection circuit relative to the single-ion value U0.
From this shift, the ion number density can be calcu-
lated as

n =

3(cid:15)0m
q2 ω2

R

(cid:20)

1 −

(cid:19)(cid:21)

.

(cid:18) U (cid:48)
0
U0

(10)

In the present measurements, n is between a few 103
cm−3 and a few 106 cm−3, depending on the values of
the creation parameters (trap depth, charge breeding
duration, electron current and gas density). Repro-
duction of a speciﬁc ion number density is diﬃcult, a
given value can be measured by the voltage shift to a
factor of less than two. At the present trap param-
eters, the density is hence up to 10 % of the electric
trap limit (from the stability criterion ω2
z with
ωc = qB0/m [26]) and up to 1 % of the Brillouin limit
[26, 28] at the magnetic ﬁeld strength of 7 T. The ob-
served corresponding shifts are non-negligible and care
is required for a proper identiﬁcation of the ion species
in the spectrum.

c > 2ω2

B. Spectral Properties as a Function of Energy

Imperfections of the conﬁning electric or magnetic
ﬁelds make the axial oscillation frequency of any given
ion dependent on its kinetic energy. The most relevant
imperfections of the conﬁning ﬁelds are deviations of
the electric ﬁeld from the quadrupolar case. These ef-
fects have been carefully discussed in [19, 25, 29]. In
traps like the present one, the dominant contributions
to an energy-dependent shift of the axial frequency
come from higher-order dependences of the axial trap-
ping potential on the coordinates and are quantiﬁed
by coeﬃcients C4 and C6 as deﬁned in [19, 25]. The
relative shift of the axial oscillation frequency of any

given ion with its axial energy Ez is given by [25]

∆ωz
ωz

=

3
2

C4
C 2
2

Ez
qU0

+

15
4

C6
C 3
2

(cid:18) Ez
qU0

(cid:19)2

.

(11)

Hence, for a thermal distribution of ion energies we
expect a corresponding distribution of axial oscillation
frequencies, shifting and broadening the signal of each
ion species in the spectrum. For a thermalized ion
cloud at temperature T , the distribution of axial and
radial energies is Boltzmann-like, with the expectation
value (cid:104)Ez(cid:105) = kBT /2 and a typical width of roughly
2kBT [3]. Hence, we expect the average relative shift
of the axial oscillation frequency distribution of each
ion species (with respect to T =0) to be given by

(cid:104)

∆ωz
ωz

(cid:105) =

3
4

C4
C 2
2

kBT
qU0

+

15
16

C6
C 3
2

(cid:18) kBT
qU0

(cid:19)2

,

(12)

and the relative width of the axial oscillation fre-
quency distribution of each ion species to be given
by

δωz
ωz

≈

3C4
C 2
2

kBT
qU0

+

15C6
C 3
2

(cid:18) kBT
qU0

(cid:19)2

.

(13)

In principle, the ensemble temperature T can be de-
termined either from an observed signal shift or width
when the coeﬃcients Ci are known, however the de-
termination via the shift requires zero-point informa-
tion and also can be obstructed by space-charge ef-
fects. Thus, a determination via the observed signal
width is preferred. In the present experiment, we have
C2 = 0.563, C4 = 0.001, and C6 = 0.05. These coef-
ﬁcients have been calculated from the measured trap
geometry according to the formalism in [25]. The cor-
responding dependence of the relative signal width on
the ensemble temperature is shown in Fig. 5 for a
trap potential chosen such that the ion species are in
resonance with the circuit at ωR = 2π × 741.23 kHz.
Note that in a thermal ensemble, the relative widths
of the signals as a function of temperature are identi-
cal for all ion species, i.e. identical for all ion charge
states present in a spectrum.

C. Collisional Thermalization

Assuming an ion cloud with an arbitrary initial en-
ergy distribution and in the absence of external forces,
ion-ion interactions (Coulomb collisions) thermalize
the ions, eventually leading to the same Boltzmann
distribution of energies within each degree of freedom.
To quantify the time scale for this, we use the ther-
malization time constant (’Spitzer self-collision time’),
estimated by [28]

√
m (kBT )3/2
τT ≈ (4π(cid:15)0)2 3
√
π n q4 ln Λ
4

,

(14)

5

FIG. 5. (Color online) Relative frequency width δωz/ωz of
the axial ion oscillation as a function of the ion ensemble
temperature T , according to Eq. (13).

where ln Λ is the so-called ’Coulomb logarithm’ given
by [28]

ln Λ = 23 − ln

(cid:18) 2nq6
e6T 3

(cid:19)1/2

,

(15)

where the ion number density n is given in units of
cm−3 and T is given in units of eV. Assuming argon
ions of an average charge state of 11 (which is the aver-
age squared charge state of the ion distribution), even
at high ion energies upon production of 10 eV and
low densities of order 103 cm−3, we have ln Λ ≈ 15,
and the thermalization time constant is below one sec-
ond. This is much smaller than the scan time of 550 s
for recording of an ion spectrum such as Fig. 3 and
also smaller than the time of each voltage step applied
during the scan. Additionally, during cooling, as the
density increases, the thermalization time constant
becomes successively smaller. From this, we deduce
that in all present measurements, the ion ensembles
are thermalized during cooling and spectrometry.

D.

Ion Ensemble as a Plasma

An ensemble of ions conﬁned in a Penning trap can
be characterized in terms of a non-neutral plasma [30].
Depending on the strength of the ion-ion interaction
via the Coulomb force in relation to the ion kinetic
energy, the collective behavior of the ion ensemble can
be gas-like, ﬂuid-like, or crystal-like. The strength of
the motional correlation is usually expressed by the
so-called ‘plasma parameter’ [26]

Γ =

q2
4π(cid:15)0akBT

,

(16)

where a3 = 3/(4πn). We have a weakly correlated
plasma (gas-like state, independent-ion picture) for
Γ (cid:28) 1, an intermediate correlation (ﬂuid-like state)
between Γ ≈ 2 and Γ ≈ 170, and strong correlation

(ions crystals) for about Γ > 170 [31]. Due to the
factor q2 in the numerator, highly charged ions have
much higher degrees of correlation at the same given
temperature when compared to singly charged ions.
In turn, they reach ﬂuid-like or solid-like states al-
ready at higher temperatures.

An ion ﬂuid can be seen as a distinct state between
the largely uncorrelated ion gas and the rigid ion crys-
tal.
In an ion crystal, a geometric ordering results
from the mutual repulsion of the ions within the com-
mon potential well of the trap, and the dominance
of the Coulomb interaction energy between ions over
their kinetic energy leads to a high degree of motional
correlation, with each ion being bound to a ﬁxed lo-
cation within the geometric structure [32]. Ions in a
ﬂuid perform larger excursions within a certain vol-
ume around these locations on account of their higher
kinetic ion energy, and may thermally ‘hop’ from one
such volume to another one. Correspondingly, in an
ion ﬂuid, the amplitude of motion of each individ-
ual ion is comparable to the average ion-ion distance,
whereas in an ion crystal, it is at least one order of
magnitude smaller. Still, the degree of motional cor-
relation is too high for independent-particle pictures
to be applicable, as the Coulomb interaction energy is
at least comparable to the ion kinetic energy. Possi-
ble scientiﬁc applications of such highly correlated ion
systems have been discussed in [33].

6

below 15 K the regime of intermediate (ﬂuid-like) cor-
relations should be accessible. For comparison, Γ is
shown also for Pb81+ ions. Here, the same plasma pa-
rameter Γ is reached already at higher temperatures
T and even the crystal-like state might be achieved
solely by resistive cooling.

V. RESULTS

A. Cooling Eﬀect on the Ion Energy

Argon ions have been created, conﬁned, and cooled
in the creation trap segment of the stacked Penning
trap setup shown in Fig.
1. Cooling is achieved
by scanning the trap voltage and hence subsequently
bringing each part of the ion spectrum into resonance
with the cooling circuit, detecting the spectrum at
the same time, see also Fig. 2. Each individual scan
(’cooling cycle’) takes 550 s and is repeated to monitor
the temporal evolution of the spectrum. So each data
point of the resulting cooling curve is the outcome of
one such scan. Figure 7 shows a typical spectrum.
The full width at half maximum of a peak is indi-

FIG. 6. (Color online) Plasma parameter Γ as a function
of the ion number density according to equation (16) for
Ar13+ at three diﬀerent values of the ensemble temper-
ature T . For comparison, the same is shown for Pb81+
ions.

Figure 6 shows the plasma parameter Γ according
to Eq. (16) for Ar13+ at temperatures of 4.2 K, 7.5 K,
and 14 K as a function of the ion number density n.
The dotted lines indicate Γ = 2 and Γ = 170 above
which a ﬂuid-like and crystal-like behavior of the ion
ensemble is expected, respectively. Accordingly, for
our conditions with ion number densities in the range
of a few 103 cm−3 to a few 106 cm−3 and temperatures

FIG. 7.
(Color online) Ion signal as a function of trap
voltage. This is a typical spectrum obtained from a voltage
scan (‘cooling cycle’).

cated by δU0, see for example the peak of Ar11+ in
Fig. 7. The value of δU0 yields the width δωz of the
corresponding axial frequency distribution according
to

δωz =

(cid:16) q

(cid:17)1/2

md2

U −1/2
0

δU0.

(17)

For the present measurements, we have chosen the
timing conditions such that thermalization amongst
all ion species is much faster than resistive cooling,
so that cooling aﬀects all ion species similarly at all
times. The time constant for thermalization τT (see

Eq. 14) is of order seconds and below, which is much
smaller than the time of 550 s used for each individ-
ual voltage scan. This is done to investigate whether
the non-exponential cooling behaviour of ensembles
of highly charged ions reported earlier [3] can be at-
tributed to insuﬃcient thermalization.

In order to bring the present measurements of cool-
ing by subsequently putting all species in the ion spec-
trum in resonance with the ﬁxed circuit in accordance
to the model of cooling underlying Eq.
(6) (which
assumes that any ion is in resonance with the circuit
all of the time), we introduce two correction factors:
One accounts for the fraction of the resonator band-
width with respect to the total frequency span of the
spectrum. The frequency span δ of the spectrum is
roughly 2π × 330 kHz, of which the resonator cov-
ers δωR ≈ 2π × 820 Hz at a time. Hence, the ratio
δωR/δ ≈ 1/400 accounts for how much of the com-
plete spectrum is covered by the resonator at any time.
The second correction factor concerns the shape of
the spectrum, in speciﬁc the fact that the spectrum
consists of discrete resonance lines. Cooling is only
eﬀective within a resonance line but not between the
lines. To compare this to a situation in which all ions
are in resonance all of the time, the summed widths
of the resonance lines with respect to the full span of
the spectrum has to be accounted for. When we use
the sum p of all peak widths and the total spectral
span δ, the ratio p/δ is a reasonable correction fac-
tor accounting for the spectral shape. The equivalent
duration teq of a cooling cycle is then given by the
product of the cycle time tcyc and the two correction
factors,

teq =

p
δ

δωR
δ

tcyc =

pδωR
δ2

tcyc.

(18)

and the eﬀective time t after a certain number of cycles
is just the sum of all teq summed up to this point.
From here on, the time t used in the discussions is the
eﬀective time obtained with this procedure.

Figure 8 shows the ion energy as a function of time
when the ensemble is cooled and re-heated by white
noise several times. In all four cycles which represent
diﬀerent initial energies and trapping times, the ob-
served cooling is exponential and occurs at the same
rate. Thus,
’resistive cooling has no memory’, as
known for the single-particle case, and also as ex-
pected from theory for large ensembles. From the
production parameters and the space-charge shift, the
ion number density is estimated to be around 3 x 103
cm−3 in these measurements [34].

The two indicated parts ‘A’ and ‘B’ of the cooling
curve from Fig. 8 have been evaluated separately. In
Fig. 9 (top), the total ion kinetic energy of measure-
ments A and B is given as a function of the eﬀective
time t. A single exponential decay of the form

E(t) = E∞ + E0e−t/τ
ﬁts the data well, yielding a cooling time constant of
τ = 1/γ = 4.65(79) s (measurement ‘A’). Here, E∞

(19)

7

FIG. 8. (Color online) Ion kinetic energy as a function of
time when the ensemble is resistively cooled and re-heated
by white noise (indicated by red arrows) several times.
The parts marked ‘A’ and ‘B’ are identical to the ones in
Fig. 9 (top).

is the energy oﬀset, i.e. the energy at the end point
of cooling. A second measurement starting at lower
initial energy yields a time constant of τ = 4.76(83) s
(measurement ‘B’), in agreement with the ﬁrst one.

A similar measurement has been performed with
an ensemble of pure Ar13+ ions. To that end, the
same creation procedure as before has been used, and
all unwanted ion species have been removed from the
spectrum by selective excitation of their axial motion
beyond the conﬁning well of the trap. This has been
achieved with the so-called SWIFT technique applied
to axial dipole excitation. Fig. 10 shows the ion en-
ergy as a function of time for Ar13+ and the signal for
Ar12+. The Ar13+ signal shows an exponential decay
like observed in the cooling of mixed ion ensembles,
and the cooling time constant is in fair agreement with
the previous values. The fact that the signal of Ar12+
remains at zero for the complete measurement time
conﬁrms the eﬃciency of the SWIFT process and cor-
roborates the above-stated absence of charge exchange
which would produce Ar12+ from Ar13+.

Let us compare the observed cooling times with ex-
pected values. The resonance circuit used for cooling
and detection of the axial ion motion is resonant at
a frequency of 2π × 741.23 kHz and has a Q-value of
about 900. Its inductance is about 3 mH, and corre-
spondingly it represents a resonance resistance of

R = QLωz ≈ 12.5MΩ.

(20)

Inserting this value into Eq. (6) and averaging the ef-
fective electrode distance D over the relevant trap vol-
ume we have (cid:104)D2(cid:105)1/2 ≈ 40 mm, and using the average
squared ion charge state (cid:104)q2(cid:105) for q=8 to q=15, we have
an expected cooling time constant of τ = 1/γ ≈ 4 s,

8

FIG. 10. (Color online) Ion energy of a pure Ar13+ en-
semble as a function of time and the corresponding Ar12
signal.

the dilute ion cloud in the highly tuned trap used in
[3], leading to a complicated time dependence of the
In the present work, ther-
observed ion energy [3].
malization amongst all degrees of freedom is made to
be faster than resistive cooling at any time during the
process, leading to the energies in all degrees of free-
dom being reduced at the same rate, and hence leading
to a single-exponential cooling behaviour.

B. Cooling Eﬀect on Signal Width and Shift

The middle and lower panels of Fig. 9 show the
observed signal peak width of Ar13+ and the corre-
sponding center frequency of that peak as a function
of time, respectively. From our discussion in section
IV B we expect the thermal width of each peak to de-
crease with decreasing energy according to Eq. (13),
i.e. to decrease with ongoing cooling time. This is in
fact what is observed. The two measured time con-
stants of τ = 8.34(95) s (for measurement ‘A’) and
τ = 6.71(89) s for measurement ‘B’ agree within their
uncertainties. They diﬀer from the time constants ob-
served for the decrease of the ion kinetic energy, be-
cause of the higher-order contributions of the temper-
ature in Eq. (13). The presence of higher-order contri-
butions makes the eﬀect of the temperature decrease
during cooling non-proportional to the temperature
itself, and leads to a diﬀerent observed time constant.
The same is true for the shift of the center frequency
as a function of time. Also here, the two measure-
ments ‘A’ and ‘B’ agree with each other, but do not
necessarily give the same time constant as the ion en-
ergy. The observed shift of the center frequency is of
the order of several hundreds of hertz which is a rela-
tive value of about 10−3 and can be attributed to the
thermal change of the distribution in the presence of

FIG. 9.
(Color online) Eﬀects of resistive cooling as a
function of time: on the total ion kinetic energy (top), on
the individual thermal signal width of Ar13+ (middle), and
on the individual center frequency of Ar13+.

which is in agreement with the measured values, both
for the mixed and pure ion ensembles.

The observed cooling behavior is diﬀerent from the
one reported in [3] as it does not display two largely
diﬀerent cooling time constants with a plateau-like
structure between the two domains of the cooling
curve belonging to diﬀerent cooling time constants.
Such a feature can apparently only be expected when
the axial and radial degrees of freedom are cooled with
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent time constants, as is the case for

the given ﬁeld imperfections.

C. Final Temperature and Plasma Parameter

From the known coeﬃcients C2, C4 and C6 of the
trap potential and the measured width of the signal
peaks, the ensemble temperature can be derived by
inversion of Eq.
(13), see also Fig. 5. The ﬁnal
width of the Ar13+ signal at the endpoint of cooling
is δωz ≈ 2π × 7.3 kHz (Fig. 9, middle), which cor-
responds to a relative width of δωz/ωz of just below
0.01. According to Eq. (13) and Fig. 5, this corre-
sponds to a temperature of about 7.5 K, just above
the ambient temperature of 4.2 K.

According to Fig. 6, resistive cooling to a tempera-
ture of 7.5 K in combination with an ion number den-
sity of several 104 cm−3 brings the ion ensembles into
the regime of non-negligible correlation with values of
Γ above 2, where ﬂuid-like behavior can be expected.
With our upper limit of ion number densities of several
106 cm−3, values of Γ up to 10 are accessible for this
temperature. In addition, at these ion number densi-
ties, temperatures as high as about 15 K should still al-
low us to reach Γ=2. Note, that the ﬁnal temperature
of resistive cooling is the electronic noise temperature
of the circuit, not the physical ambient temperature,
as has experimentally been shown in [35]. Often, the
noise temperature is slightly above the ambient tem-
perature, see for example [36]. Presently, the lowest
observed temperature, irrespective of the ion number
density and species, is around 7.5 K.

D.

Indication of a Phase Transition

We have performed cooling measurements like the
one shown in Fig. 9 at a signiﬁcantly higher ion num-
ber density of a few times 106 cm−3. Note, that
the values of the axial frequencies are diﬀerent from
the previous measurements (Fig. 9) due to diﬀerent
choices of the trapping voltage and the RLC-circuit
resonance frequency. Figure 11 shows the eﬀect of
resistive cooling on the ion energy, the signal peak
width, and the signal center frequency for two selected
ion species from the spectrum.

The axial energy of the ions follows an exponen-
tial decay like in all cases discussed above with simi-
lar time constants. The same is initially true for the
peak width. There is, however, a signiﬁcant disconti-
nuity in the peak width as well as the center frequency
of the ion resonances. After that discontinuity, they
both remain nearly constant at a low level. The ini-
tial behavior of the ion frequency is qualitatively dif-
ferent from the case shown in Fig. 9 (bottom): In-
stead of an exponential dependence with slightly in-
creasing frequency, the frequency here decreases non-
exponentially by some kHz. This variation is on the
percent scale and hence more pronounced than the

9

FIG. 11. (Color online) Measurement as the one shown
in Fig. 9, but at much higher ion number density: Ef-
fects of resistive cooling on the total ion energy (top), the
peak widths (middle), and the axial oscillation frequency
(bottom) of Ar11+ and Ar12+.

thermal shift shown in Fig. 9 by more than one order
of magnitude.

The same behavior is also present for the remaining
ions in the spectrum (Ar8+ to Ar14+) and is indepen-
dent of the step size of the voltage scan, i.e. the dis-
continuity occurs at the same eﬀective cooling time
for all ion species and step sizes. The fact that the
discontinuity is observed for all ions at the same time
during cooling corroborates the assumption of a well-
thermalized mixed ion ensemble.

From the observed relative spectral width δωz/ωz ≈
0.035 at the discontinuity (dotted line in Fig. 11),
Eq. (13) and Fig. 5 yield an ensemble temperature
of about 14 K. Although the phase transition around
14 K collapses the line width to an apparently constant
value and therefore it cannot be used to extract the
plasma temperature anymore, we believe that the en-
semble keeps cooling to a ﬁnal temperature of around
7.5 K, similar to the cases where the number density
is not suﬃcient to observe the phase transition. While
for the measurement in Fig. 9 the plasma parameter
according to Eq. (13) remains well below Γ = 2 all of
the time, the estimated value at the present discon-
tinuity is Γ ≈ 5. Hence, during cooling, the present
ensemble crosses the expected transition from gas-like
to ﬂuid-like behavior.

Based on this, the observed discontinuity can be
attributed to the onset of a signiﬁcant level of correla-
tions of the axial ion motions, leading to a sudden nar-
rowing of the distribution of axial oscillation frequen-
cies (see Fig. 11 (middle)) and a sudden downward
shift of the axial oscillation frequency by about 25 kHz
out of about 1 MHz (see Fig. 11 (bottom)). This can
be explained by a higher ion number density in the ax-
ial direction leading to a corresponding space-charge
shift towards lower axial frequencies. So while the ax-
ial ion energies and thus axial oscillation amplitudes
of all ions decrease continuously, at the critical tem-
perature the motional correlation changes the oscilla-
tion frequency distribution non-continuously. Based
on the observed discontinuities in the ion spectra and
the quantitative determination of values of the plasma
parameter Γ ≈ 5, we infer that a ﬂuid-like state of the
conﬁned ion ensemble has been reached by pure resis-
tive cooling.

VI. CONCLUSION

We have measured the resistive cooling behavior of
large ensembles of highly charged argon ions in a Pen-

10

ning trap under conditions ensuring eﬃcient thermal-
ization of the ensemble during the cooling process.
Under these conditions, the cooling of an ion ensem-
ble is observed as a decrease of the ion kinetic energy
that leads to a narrowing and shift of the ion sig-
nal peaks. We have shown that all of these temporal
evolutions can be described by a simple exponential
decay, in contrast to earlier observations made under
conditions which lead to ineﬃcient thermalization and
consequently to the occurrence of more involved cool-
ing dynamics.

We have also shown that the exponential nature
of resistive cooling of large ion ensembles and their
cooling time constant τ and ﬁnal temperature are in-
dependent of the initial ion kinetic energy and of the
number of previous cooling or heating cycles (‘resis-
tive cooling has no memory’), as expected from the
case of a single ion. Our observations further cor-
roborate the theoretical expectation that the cooling
time constant and ﬁnal temperature of a thermalized
ensemble is identical to the single-ion case, which at
present is shown to be true for both mixed and pure
ion ensembles.

The ﬁnal temperatures reached in the present ex-
periments are slightly above the ambient temperature
of liquid helium, for which plasma parameters Γ up to
about 10 are accessible, depending on the actual ion
number density.

While for low ion number densities, the observed
cooling behavior is continuous down to the ﬁnal
temperature, for ion ensembles of high density, we
have observed a signiﬁcantly discontinuous behavior
of spectral features during cooling, indicating an evo-
lution of the ion ensemble across the Γ ≈ 2 phase
transition. From this, we infer that the present ion
ensembles reach a ﬂuid-like state at temperatures of
around 14 K without the need to apply laser cooling.
As a consequence, candidate ions for the envisaged op-
tical spectroscopy measurements [14] such as Pb81+,
Bi82+, or U91+ are expected to form ion crystals by
mere resistive cooling, which facilitates highly precise
optical and microwave spectroscopy.

[1] W.M. Itano, J.C. Bergquist, J.J. Bollinger and D.J.

Lett. 68, 2007 (1992)

Wineland, Physica Scripta T59, 106 (1995)

[2] D.J. Wineland and H.G. Dehmelt, J. Appl. Phys. 46,

919 (1975)

[3] M. Vogel et al., Phys. Rev. A 90, 043412 (2014)
[4] D.F.A. Winters, M. Vogel, D. Segal and R.C. Thomp-

[12] S. Schmidt et al., J. Mod. Opt. 65, 538 (2018)
[13] L. Schm¨oger et al., Science 347, 1233 (2015)
[14] W. Quint, D.L. Moskovkhin, V.M. Shabaev and M.

Vogel, Phys. Rev. A 78, 032517 (2008)

[15] D. von Lindenfels et al., Phys. Rev. A 87, 023412

son, J. Phys. B 39, 3131 (2006)

(2013)

[5] W. Shockley, J. Appl. Phys. 9, 635 (1938)
[6] S. Ramo, Proceedings of the IRE 27 (9), 584 (1939)
[7] M.S. Ebrahimi et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 87 075110

(2016)

[16] H.-J. Kluge et al., Advances in Quantum Chemistry

53, 83 (2007)

[17] S. Sturm, M. Vogel, F. K¨ohler, W. Quint and K.

Blaum, Atoms 5, 4 (2017)

[8] S. Ulmer et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 80, 123302 (2009)
[9] M. Bonaldi et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 69, 3690 (1998)

[18] M. Wiesel et al., Rev. Sci. Inst. 88, 123101 (2017)
[19] L.S. Brown and G. Gabrielse, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58,

[10] M. Vogel and W. Quint, Phys. Rep. 490, 1 (2010)
[11] I. Waki, S. Kassner, G. Birkl, H. Walther, Phys. Rev.

233 (1986)

[20] J. Alonso et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 77, 03A901 (2006)

11

[21] G. Gabrielse, F.C. Macintosh, Int. J. Mass. Spectrom.

10, 2169 (2010)

Ion Proc. 57, 1 (1984)

[22] R. Mann, Z. Phys. D 3, 85 (1986)
[23] G. Li, S. Guan and A.G. Marshall, J. Am. Soc. Mass.

Spectrom. 9, 473 (1998)

[30] D.H.E. Dubin, Plasmas in Penning traps, in Trapped
Charged Particles, ed. by M. Knoop, N. Madsen, R.C.
Thompson (World Scientiﬁc, 2016)

[31] D.H.E. Dubin and T.M. O’Neil, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71,

[24] P. Ghosh, Ion Traps, Oxford University Press, Oxford

87 (1999)

(1995)

[32] M. Drewsen, Ion Coulomb crystals. Physica B: Con-

[25] G. Gabrielse, L. Haarsma and S.L. Rolston, Int. J.

densed Matter 460, 105 (2015)

Mass Spectr. Ion Proc. 88, 319 (1989)

[26] M. Vogel, Particle Conﬁnement in Penning Traps,

Springer, Heidelberg (2018)

[27] J. Yu, M. Desaintfuscien, F. Plumelle, Appl. Phys. B

48, 51 (1989)

[28] NRL Plasma Formulary, J.D. Huba, Beam Physics
Branch, Plasma Physics Division, Naval Research
Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375 (2013)

[29] M. Vogel, W. Quint and W. N¨ortersh¨auser, Sensors

[33] M. Drewsen, Ion Coulomb crystals and their applica-
tions, in Trapped Charged Particles, ed. by M. Knoop,
N. Madsen, R.C. Thompson (World Scientiﬁc, 2016)
[34] M.S. Ebrahimi, Non-Destructive Detection and Re-
sistive Cooling of Highly-Charged-Ion Ensembles for
Precision Spectroscopy in the ARTEMIS Penning
Trap, PhD thesis, University of Heidelberg (2018)

[35] S. Djekic et al., Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 451 (2004)
[36] H. H¨aﬀner et al., Eur. Phys. J. D 22, 163 (2003)

