Solar Physics
DOI: 10.1007/•••••-•••-•••-••••-•

Physical processes involved in the EUV “Surge”
Event of 09 May 2012

Marcelo L´opez Fuentes 1
Mandrini 1,2
D´emoulin3
Fernando M. L´opez4 · Maria Luisa Luoni1

· Mariano Poisson1
· Germ´an Cristiani1,2

· Cristina H.

· Pascal
·

8
1
0
2

t
c
O
9
2

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
3
0
4
2
1
.
0
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

c(cid:13) Springer ••••

Abstract We study an EUV conﬁned ejection observed on 09 May 2012 in
active region (AR) NOAA 11476. For the analysis we use observations in multiple
wavelengths (EUV, X-rays, Hα, and magnetograms) from a variety of ground-
based and space instruments. The magnetic conﬁguration showed the presence of
two rotating bipoles within the following polarity of the AR. This evolution was
present along some tens of hours before the studied event and continued even
later. During this period the magnetic ﬂux of both bipoles was continuously
decreasing. A miniﬁlament with a length of ≈ 30(cid:48)(cid:48) lay along the photospheric
inversion line of the largest bipole. The miniﬁlament was observed to erupt
accompanied by an M4.7 ﬂare (SOL20120509T12:23:00). Consequently, dense
material, as well as twist, was injected along closed loops in the form of a
very broad ejection whose morphology resembles that of typical Hα surges. We
conclude that the ﬂare and eruption can be explained as due to two reconnection
processes, one occurring below the erupting miniﬁlament and another one above
it. This second process injects the miniﬁlament plasma within the reconnected
closed loops linking the main AR polarities. Analyzing the magnetic topology
using a force-free model of the coronal ﬁeld, we identify the location of quasi-
separatix layers (QSLs), where reconnection is prone to occur, and present a
detailed interpretation of the chromospheric and coronal eruption observations.

(cid:66) M.L´opez Fuentes
lopezf@iafe.uba.ar

1

2

3

4

Instituto de Astronom´ıa y F´ısica del Espacio (IAFE), CONICET-UBA, Buenos
Aires, Argentina

Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales (FCEN), UBA, Buenos Aires, Argentina

LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, Universit´e PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Universit´e, Univ.
Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cit´e, 5 place Jules Janssen, 92195 Meudon, France

Instituto de Ciencias Astron´omicas, de la Tierra y del Espacio (ICATE), CONICET,
San Juan, Argentina

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 1

 
 
 
 
 
 
M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

In particular, this event, contrary to what has been proposed in several models
explaining surges and/or jets, is not originated by magnetic ﬂux emergence but
by magnetic ﬂux cancellation accompanied by the rotation of the bipoles. In fact,
the conjunction of these two processes, ﬂux cancellation and bipole rotations,
is at the origin of a series of events, homologous to the one we analyze in this
article, that occurred in AR 11476 from 08 to 10 May 2012.

Keywords: Active Regions, Models – Flares, Relation to Magnetic Field –
Magnetic Reconnection, Observational Signatures – Surges – Jets

1. Introduction

Solar activity produces a variety of ejecta such as coronal mass ejections (CMEs),
jets, surges, sprays, etc. They are usually classiﬁed according to their evolution,
observed size, geometry, associated energies, and masses involved, but also ac-
cording to the instruments, and hence wavelengths, with which they have been
observed (e.g., Rust et al., 1980).

Surges and sprays, in particular, have been originally identiﬁed in Hα images
as the eruption of cold chromospheric material into the corona. While the ma-
terial ejected in sprays does not apparently come back to the coronal base, in
surges the material decelerates and then falls down along the same magnetic
structure through which it was originally ascending (Roy, 1973) and/or reaches
the opposite end of the closed structure. Surges have typical velocities in the
range of 50 to 200 km s−1, they reach heights up to 2×105 km, and have
durations of a few tens of minutes (Foukal, 2004). They are often, though not
always, observed in coincidence with the occurrence of ﬂares (Schmieder et al.,
1988).

With the advent of extreme ultraviolet (EUV) instruments it became clear
that these ejections were also observable in this range (Schmahl, 1981). Multi-
wavelength analysis also demonstrated their connection with X-ray brightenings
and jets (Harrison, Sime, and Pearce, 1990; Schmieder et al., 1995; Canﬁeld et al.,
1996). A main diﬀerence between surges and jets is their magnetic conﬁguration,
which is closed or open, respectively. Jet like ejections observed in EUV have
been named EUV jets by some authors (Moore et al., 2010; Liu and Kurokawa,
2004). Observed in this band, the typical temperature of the ejected material is
of a few 105 K; while densities have been found to be in the range from 108 to
109 cm−3 (Raouaﬁ et al., 2016).

Concerning the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration where surges and
jets occur, observations in the 1990s suggested that they could be indirectly
originated due to the emergence of parasitic polarities, accompanied sometimes
by ﬂux cancellation (see, e.g., Schmieder et al., 1995; Canﬁeld et al., 1996; Chae
et al., 1999). High-resolution observations (Jibben and Canﬁeld, 2004; Brooks,
Kurokawa, and Berger, 2007; Guglielmino et al., 2010; Uddin et al., 2012; Vargas
Dom´ınguez, Kosovichev, and Yurchyshyn, 2014) also provide additional evidence
for the close and repeated relation between ﬂux emergence, chromospheric cold
plasma ejections, and hot jets. Other investigations have shown that a combi-
nation of ﬂux emergence and cancellation can play a role in the triggering of

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 2

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

diﬀerent types of jets (Liu et al., 2011; Panesar, Sterling, and Moore, 2016),
while in others no ﬂux emergence is observed (Young and Muglach, 2014a,b;
Chandra et al., 2017).

Based on several of the observations discussed in the previous paragraph
and the pioneer ﬂux emergence model by Heyvaerts, Priest, and Rust (1977),
Shibata et al. (1992) and Yokoyama and Shibata (1995, 1996) proposed a 2.5D
numerical model in which the emergence of magnetic ﬂux in an initial uniform
coronal ﬁeld could lead, via reconnection, to the ejection of cold plasma close to a
hot jet. These authors described surges as resulting from a “sling-shot eﬀect due
to reconnection, which produces a whip-like [plasma] motion”. Canﬁeld et al.
(1996), following the analysis of a series of Hα surges and related X-ray jets,
proposed a phenomenological 2D model based on reconnection to explain the
observed evolution.

More recently, Moreno-Insertis and Galsgaard (2013) found in their 3D MHD
simulation of an emerging region, the presence of a domain of dense cool plasma.
MacTaggart et al. (2015) performed 3D MHD simulations of the emergence
of small-scale ARs in the presence of diﬀerent ambient ﬁeld conﬁgurations to
determine where reconnection occurred and the characteristics of the ﬂow of
the dense plasma in diﬀerent observed events. To understand the physical pro-
cesses occurring in the photosphere, chromosphere, and corona during surges,
N´obrega-Siverio, Moreno-Insertis, and Mart´ınez-Sykora (2016) performed a 2.5D
radiative-MHD numerical simulation of the emergence of a twisted magnetic
tube in a statistically stationary magneto-convection conﬁguration formed by the
uppermost layers of the convective zone up to the corona. During the evolution
of the system part of the emerged cold and dense material is ejected as in a
surge.

In the previously discussed models and simulations magnetic reconnection is
driven by ﬂux emergence; however, there are other simulations mainly applied to
jets in which reconnection is forced by imposing horizontal photospheric twisting
motions to a magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration that includes a coronal magnetic null-
point (Pariat, Antiochos, and DeVore, 2009, 2010; Pariat et al., 2015, 2016).

Recent observations of coronal jets, either in coronal holes or in ARs, have
identiﬁed the presence and eruption of small-scale ﬁlaments, called miniﬁla-
ments, being part of the ejected material (Shen et al., 2012; Adams et al.,
2014; Sterling et al., 2015, 2016; Panesar et al., 2016; Joshi et al., 2018; Yang
and Zhang, 2018; Moore, Sterling, and Panesar, 2018). In another example,
where lower resolution observations were analyzed, the presence of a constantly
reformed miniﬁlament and its eruption was postulated as the origin of a series
of blow-out jets and the chain of consequent events (ﬂares and narrow CMEs,
Chandra et al., 2017). In the observed examples, the mechanism associated to
the destabilization of the miniﬁlament was the cancellation of magnetic ﬂux
along the polarity inversion line where it lay. Magnetic reconnection below the
miniﬁlament was responsible for an observed ﬂare, while the same mechanism
above the miniﬁlament favoured the injection of its material into open ﬁeld lines
to form the jet.

The identiﬁcation of miniﬁlament eruptions as the main origin of the plasma
ejected in jets led Wyper, Antiochos, and DeVore (2017) and Wyper, DeVore,

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 3

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

and Antiochos (2018) to propose that these mass ejections are produced by
a break-out mechanism similar to what has been proposed to explain larger
events like CMEs (see, e.g., Karpen, Antiochos, and DeVore, 2012). In these
simulations, an emerged bipole is embedded in a unipolar uniform ambient ﬁeld
where a 3D coronal null-point is present. A small ﬂux rope or miniﬁlament is
formed by shearing motions that also provide energy to the system. This strongly
sheared ﬁeld expands towards the null point and a reconnection process occurs
which, like in the standard breakout CME model, removes the ﬁeld restraining
the small ﬂux rope. Simultaneously, reconnection occurs below the small twisted
ﬂux rope as proposed in the articles mentioned in the previous paragraph, further
building the ﬂux rope. Finally, reconnection between the twisted ﬂux rope and
the background open ﬁeld launches a jet.

In several magnetic conﬁgurations associated to jets and surges, Hα bright-
enings at the sites of the events have a circular shape that can be closed (or
almost closed, see, e.g., Joshi et al., 2015; Sterling et al., 2016; Li et al., 2018).
In magnetic ﬁeld models where a null point is found, the intersection of the
separatrix (fan of the null) with the photospheric or chromospheric plane has a
typical circular-like shape that agrees with observed chromospheric brightenings
(see, e.g., Mandrini et al., 2015; Masson et al., 2012, 2017, for several examples).
Null-point topology is also supported by a large number of jet observations (see
the review by Raouaﬁ et al., 2016, and references therein).

Other magnetic topologies calculated from coronal extrapolation models have
been found associated with jet and surge observations. Quasi-separatix layers
(QSLs, see, e.g., D´emoulin et al., 1996, for the original deﬁnition) were identiﬁed
by Mandrini et al. (1996) and Guo et al. (2013), with no magnetic null point
present, in the case of jets. Hα surges were observed in magnetic conﬁgurations
having QSLs by Cristiani et al. (2007) and in other conﬁgurations having bald
patches by Mandrini et al. (2002). The latter topological structures where also
observed during a series of blow-out jets and associated narrow CMEs by Chan-
dra et al. (2017). Finally, the examples with and without a magnetic null point
are not conceptually diﬀerent when considered within the QSL point of view,
because a separatrix is only the extreme case when the ﬁeld line mapping is
becoming discontinuous in the QSL core.

The event studied in this article is much less collimated than typical blow-
out and EUV jets. Furthermore, like in surges, the material is ejected upwards,
stays enclosed in the magnetic structures of the active region, and falls back along
those structures. We will henceforth refer to it as an EUV “surge” event, as it is
most prominent in this wavelength range. We use quotation marks to indicate
that it also bears diﬀerences with the classical surges analyzed elsewhere (see
references at the beginning of this section). This EUV event occurred in active
region (AR) NOAA 11576 on 09 May 2012 and is associated to an M4.7 ﬂare
with a peak in GOES soft X-ray light curve at ≈ 12:32 UT. Preliminary results
of our analysis were discussed elsewhere (L´opez Fuentes et al., 2015).

In Sections 2.2–2.8 we study the evolution of the event in several wavelengths
using data from the instruments described in Section 2.1. After modeling the AR
magnetic ﬁeld and computing its coronal topology, in Section 3 we interpret the
role of QSLs in the magnetic conﬁguration and we propose a phenomenological

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 4

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

explanation of the event in terms of the eruption of the observed miniﬁlament
and its interaction with the surrounding magnetic structure. In Section 4 we
discuss our results and present concluding remarks.

2. Flare and EUV “Surge” Observations

2.1. Data Description

To analyze the events on 09 May 2012, we use EUV data from the Atmospheric
Imaging Assembly (AIA: Lemen et al., 2012), onboard the Solar Dynamics Ob-
servatory (SDO), and from the Sun-Earth Connection Coronal and Heliospheric
Investigation (SECCHI: Howard et al., 2008), onboard the Solar Terrestrial Re-
lations Observatory (STEREO) spacecraft B, Hα data from the H-alpha Solar
Telescope for Argentina (HASTA: Bagal´a et al., 1999; Fernandez Borda et al.,
2002), soft X-ray data from the X-ray Telescope (XRT: Golub et al., 2007)
onboard Hinode, hard X-ray data from the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar
Spectroscopic Imager (RHESSI: Lin et al., 2002), and magnetograms from the
Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI: Scherrer et al., 2012), onboard SDO.
EUV data from SDO/AIA correspond to the 304 ˚A and 171 ˚A channels
(henceforth, AIA 304 and 171). We select, from full disk images, subimages
containing AR 11576 for the temporal range corresponding to the analyzed
event. Coaligning these images to compensate for solar rotation we construct
the EUV movies that accompany this article (Section 2.4). The images used for
the movies are represented in logarithmic intensity scale for better contrast. We
complement the SDO/AIA data with observations from the 195 ˚A channel of
the SECCHI instrument on board STEREO-B. We use the 195 ˚A band because
it has the highest temporal resolution (5 minutes) among the SECCHI channels.
On 09 May 2012, STEREO-B spacecraft was located at an Earth ecliptic (HEE)
longitude of -118◦ away from Earth, from this location AR 11576 is seen at the
solar limb.

The analyzed SDO/HMI data consist of line-of-sight (LOS) magnetograms
of AR 11576, selected from full-disk data. These magnetograms are used to
study the evolution of the AR magnetic ﬁeld, as described in Section 2.2, and
as boundary condition for the model described in Section 3.1.

The Hα data from HASTA have a resolution of approximately 2”and are
automatically taken in two diﬀerent modes: normal (or patrol) and ﬂare. In
normal mode, during routine observations, the telescope takes full images once
every 1 to 5 minutes. When a ﬂare begins the instrument changes to ﬂare mode
and images are taken up to a rate of 2 per s. The data set used here consists
of images taken in both modes depending on the time of observation, normal
for before and after the analyzed ﬂare and ﬂare mode during the event (see the
description of the timing in Section 2.3). Similarly, Hinode/XRT images taken
during the ﬂare alternate between diﬀerent ﬁlters (Ti-poly, Al-mesh, and Al-
thick) and short or long exposure times. We combine these data in composite
images in which the saturated pixels in the long-exposure images are replaced
by the same corresponding pixels from the non-saturated short-exposure images.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 5

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

Figure 1. SDO/HMI line-of-sight magnetogram of AR 11476, located at N12 E26, on 09
May 2012 at 12:08 UT. The arrows indicate the locations of the two rotating bipoles (B1 and
B2) described in Section 2.2. The ﬂare and related “surge” originated in their vicinity. The
polarities involved in the studied event are numbered: 1 and 2 for the AR polarities, 3 and 4
for those of bipole B1. Black corresponds to negative magnetic ﬁeld (pointing away from the
observer) and white corresponds to positive ﬁeld (towards the observer), the values of the ﬁeld
have been saturated above (below) 500 G (-500 G). The horizontal and vertical sizes of this
image are 350”and 250”, respectively. On the top left, a black segment has been added to the
panel to indicate the approximate scale size. A movie showing the magnetic ﬁeld evolution
along three days (HMI.mp4) is attached as electronic supplementary material.

The XRT movie that accompanies this article has been made using these com-
posite images (see Section 2.8). Finally, RHESSI processed data correspond to
hard X-ray counts in the channels of 10 – 30 keV and above 40 keV, integrated
during periods of 20 s at the time of the soft X-ray GOES ﬂare emission peak
(at ≈ 12:32 UT, see Section 2.3).

2.2. Photospheric Magnetic Field Evolution

AR 11476 appeared on the eastern solar limb on 04 May 2012. By 06 May
it is clearly seen as having a global bipolar structure with a compact preced-
ing negative polarity (numbered 1) and a disperse following positive polarity
(numbered 2) that presents substantial magnetic ﬂux fragmentation. A small
bipole was located at the center of the positive polarity, well visible on 07 May.
However, as the AR evolved, what looked as a single bipole appeared as two
independent ones (see the area within the black box in the movie HMI.mp4
included as supplementary material). The two bipoles have been identiﬁed as

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 6

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

Figure 2. The panels show four snapshots of the rotation of the bipoles B1 and B2. The
dates and times are indicated at the top of each panel. The short black segments joining the
asterisks (the positive and negative polarity barycenters) indicate the tilt angle. The long
black straight line corresponds to the estimated mean polarity inversion line (PIL) of the
largest bipole (B1). This bipole is enclosed by a green contour that surrounds the magnetic
ﬂux used in the computation of its polarity centers and rotation, as also done for B2. In these
magnetograms the red (blue) areas correspond to positive (negative) magnetic ﬁeld. Magnetic
ﬁeld contours of ± 1000, 1500, 2000 G are also included as reference. A movie included as
electronic supplementary material shows the evolution of B1 (B1.mp4).

B1 and B2 (Figure 1). The negative and positive polarities of B1 are identiﬁed
as 3 and 4, respectively. The ﬂare and mass ejection occurred in their vicinity.
An analysis of the evolution of B1 and B2 starting 36 h before the studied
events indicates a rapid clockwise rotation of both bipoles, which implies a fast
injection of magnetic helicity whose characteristics depend on the magnetic
connectivities. This helicity injection is associated with free magnetic energy
accumulation and might also contribute to the miniﬁlament destabilization as
proposed by Wyper, Antiochos, and DeVore (2017) and Wyper, DeVore, and
Antiochos (2018). The panels of Figure 2 show four diﬀerent stages of the rotation
of the bipoles. The full evolution can be seen in the movie that accompanies this
article (B1.mp4).

The rotation of each bipole implies also the rotation of their polarity inversion
lines (PILs). The long black straight line in Figure 2 and in the corresponding
movie is the PIL of B1, which we compute following the procedure developed
by Poisson et al. (2015). The position of this straight line is deﬁned to best
separate the negative and positive polarities of the bipole B1. Following Poisson

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 7

B1B2M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

et al. (2015, 2016), the shape of the polarities at both sides of the PIL is an
indication of a bipole formed by a negatively twisted ﬂux rope.

To characterize quantitatively the rotation, we follow the evolution of the tilt
angle of both bipoles. We ﬁrst compute the positions of the barycenters of their
positive and negative polarities (indicated by asterisks in Figure 2) limiting the
computation to the bipoles themselves, i.e. to the ﬂux encircled by the green
curve for B1 and B2, as shown in Figure 2. Then, we deﬁne the tilt angle as the
angle that the segment joining both barycenters forms with the solar equator
direction. The evolution of the segment indicates that B1 rotates approximately
140◦ clockwise during 36 h before the ﬂare and continues rotating ≈ 40◦ more
until 10 May around 22:00 UT. In the case of B2, the rotation before the ejection
and ﬂare on 09 May is of ≈ 50◦ clockwise, continuing for another 50◦ in the same
sense until it fully disappeared by ≈ 10:00 UT on 10 May.

During the time period we measure the rotation of both bipoles, their mag-
netic ﬂux decreased steeply as it cancelled with the surrounding magnetic ﬁeld
and probably also dispersed in the case of B2. In the case of B1, its negative
ﬂux is clearly seen decreasing against the positive ﬂux concentration to the west
(see HMI.mp4). As discussed in Section 3.4, this ﬂux cancellation, together with
B1 rotation, could play a key role in the triggering of the miniﬁlament eruption.
The magnetic ﬂux of B1 decreased by around 90% from 8 May until 10 May at
≈ 22:00 UT.

2.3. Chromospheric Evolution

An M4.7 ﬂare was observed starting at 12:23 UT in GOES soft X-ray ligth-
curve (SOL20120509T12:23:0) with maximum at ≈ 12:32 UT. Figure 3 shows
Hα images from HASTA at six diﬀerent times during the ﬂare evolution. A
movie starting at 11:55 UT and ending at 13:15 UT is included as electronic
supplementary material (HASTA.mp4). There is a change in the cadence of the
data shown in the movie as the telescope changes to ﬂare mode around the start
time of the ﬂare (≈ 12:23 UT). The data acquisition goes back to the normal
cadence (an image every 2 to 4 minutes) at around 12:37 UT.

Figure 3a shows the AR at approximately the time at which the ﬂare started.
Magnetic ﬁeld contours are overlaid as a guide to the photospheric counter-
part of the observed Hα brightenings. To improve the visibility of the “surge”
in the HASTA data, we apply a cross-correlation technique to minimize the
atmospheric jittering of the images. In order to increase the contrast of the
moving material and any brightness variation in the data, we construct a base
diﬀerence image sequence by subtracting from each image of the set the pre-
event image obtained at 12:23:51 UT. In what follows we refer to the images
processed in this way as base diﬀerence images. Panels b, e and f of Figure 3
are base diﬀerence images. We also include as supplementary material a movie
containing the obtained sequence of base diﬀerence images (HASTA-diﬀ.mp4).
In Figure 3b, we show a base diﬀerence image at ≈ 12:27 UT. In this panel, we
identify an elongated brightening to the west overlapping part of the negative B1
polarity and indicating the presence of ﬂare kernels. A less intense brightening
is seen to the north-east (see the thick white arrow). This brightening elongates

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 8

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

Figure 3. HASTA images showing the ﬂare evolution. The times are indicated at the bottom
left of each panel. In panel a, ±300 G HMI contours are included as reference. As in Figure 2
red (blue) corresponds to positive (negative) magnetic ﬁeld. A black box is added to indicate
the location of bipoles B1 and B2, it approximately covers the ﬁeld of view of the panels
in Figure 2. The larger gray box indicates the FOV of Figure 4. A black segment has been
added at the top right to indicate the ﬁgure scale size. Panels b, e, and f correspond to base
diﬀerence images (see Section 2.3). The white arrow in panel b points to a north-eastern
brightening that probably corresponds to heated “surge” plasmas it starts ﬂowing upwards
(see also the movie surge-closeup.mp4 that accompanies this article). In panel c, the ﬂare
kernels are labeled k1—k4 following the numbering used to label the magnetic polarities in
Figure 1. k3’ and k4’ indicate the kernels associated to the footpoints of loops that result from
the internal reconnection process described in Section 3.4. The brightening pointed with a
black arrow, and identiﬁed with the label k3’+k4’+k3, is composed by those three kernels (see
also Figure 4d). The upper white arrows in panels e and f show the location of the “surge”.
The lower white arrow in panel f points to a second ﬂare unrelated to the event studied in this
article (see text in Section 2.3). A movie showing the Hα evolution (HASTA.mp4) is attached
as electronic supplementary material. The square panels have a side length of approximately
380”.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 9

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

Figure 4. (a) Enlarged view of the ﬁeld covered by the gray box in Figure 3a at a time
previous to the event. The white arrow on the left indicates the circular brightening partially
surrounding bipoles B1 and B2 (see Section 2.2). The white arrow on the right indicates a
brightening on the main negative polarity of the AR. The white segment on top right of the
panel is added to indicate the approximate scale size of the images. (b) Same ﬁeld of view for
HMI data for reference. (c) Same ﬁeld of view for AIA 304 data (see also Figure 5). The white
arrows indicate the same corresponding features as in panel a, and the black arrow indicates
the location of the miniﬁlament. (d) AIA 304 image close to the event start time. Kernels k1
to k4, k3’ and k4’ are indicated. See also the accompanying movie included as supplementary
material (surge-closeup.mp4).

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 10

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

to the north and, when comparing this image and its corresponding movie with
the AIA 304 observations of Figure 5b and its corresponding movie, we conclude
that it corresponds to heated “surge” material seen as it starts moving upwards.
As the ﬂare developed (Figure 3c) another elongated kernel became visible to
the east of the ﬁrst one, labeled k2, and a distant and extended one became
prominent on the opposite side of the AR, labeled k1. These kernels are also
present in AIA 304 images taken at the same times (Figure 5). Comparing
Figures 3 and 5, and according to the analysis of Section 3.4, we conclude that the
brightening labeled as “Flare kernels” in Figure 3b correspond to the overlapped
emission of kernels k3’, k4’ and k3, while k4 is the smaller kernel at the south-
east (see labels in Figure 3c). A second series of brightenings (indicated with a
white arrow in panel f) are observed in the south-west portion of the AR at later
times (Figure 3e–f) that are apparently not related to the studied ﬂare.

Although barely discernible, we identify in Figure 3e–f the “surge” (indicated
with white arrows) as a dark feature in absorption at the north-east of the
AR. The “surge” can also be appreciated in absorption in the Hα movies that
accompany this article (HASTA.mp4 and HASTA-diﬀ.mp4), where it is seen in
motion.

For a better identiﬁcation of the Hα features and their comparison with AIA
observations, in Figure 4a we show a zoomed image of the area indicated with
a gray box in Figure 3a at a time just before the event (12:20 UT). Notice the
circular-shape brightening, pointed with a white arrow to the left, that surrounds
the negative polarity of B1, part of its positive polarity, and all of B2, as described
in Section 2.2. This circular brightening is also observable in AIA 304 (also
indicated with a white arrow in Figure 4c) since around 08 May. The presence
of this circular brightening strongly suggests that energy release at a very low
rate was occurring accompanying the rotation of the bipoles probably because of
their interaction with the overlaying magnetic ﬁeld. The identiﬁcation of these
kernels is conﬁrmed by a close inspection of AIA 304 image shown in Figure 4d,
where they are labeled individually. k3’ and k4’ are the kernels associated to the
footpoints of loops that result from the internal reconnection process thoroughly
described in Section 3.3. Later on, the kernels extend and after the ﬂare peak
(12:32 UT) their intensity decreases.

2.4. EUV Evolution from the Earth Point of View

In AIA 304 images we also observe bright areas at the location of the Hα plage
regions, as expected. For a better comparison, in Figure 4c we show the same
area (indicated with a gray box in Figure 3a) for AIA 304 before the event (12:20
UT). The white arrows indicate, respectively, the circular-shape brightening that
surrounds the negative and part of the positive polarities of B1 and all of B2
(on the left) and the elongated distant kernel, k1 (on the right).

As described in Section 1, recent observations relate jets to the eruption of
miniﬁlaments which, as the word indicates, are smaller versions of normal large-
scale ﬁlaments. High resolution observations as those presently obtained with
imagers like SDO/AIA, allow identifying structures that were unobservable with
the previous generation of solar instruments. Figure 4c shows the presence of

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 11

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

Figure 5. SDO/AIA 304 images for the same times as those in Figure 3. Times are indicated
in the the bottom left of the panels. Panel a includes ± 300 G HMI contours as reference. Red
(blue) corresponds to positive (negative) magnetic ﬁeld. A white segment has been added on
the top right of the panel a to indicate the approximate scale size. Panel c shows the location of
RHESSI 40–80 keV contours (in red) at 40, 60, and 80% of the maximum, integrated between
12:31:56 and 12:32:16 UT (around the time of the peak emission of the ﬂare in soft X-rays). A
small black arrow is added to facilitate viewing the location of the RHESSI contours. The inset
in the lower right corner of this panel is a zoom of the rectangle that surrounds the brightest
region in this AIA image. RHESSI contours in the inset are overlaid on the corresponding HMI
magnetogram. A movie showing the AIA 304 evolution (AIA304.mp4) is attached as electronic
supplementary material. The square panels have a side length of approximately 380”. The inset
in panel c covers approximately 50”×50”.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 12

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

Figure 6. SDO/AIA 171 images for the same times and ﬁelds of view as in Figures 3 and
5. The corresponding times are indicated in the bottom left of the panels. A white segment
has been added on the top right of the panel a to indicate the approximate scale size. These
images show the evolution of the EUV “surge” and also part of the global structure of the
AR as revealed by long EUV loops. A movie showing the AIA 171 evolution (AIA171.mp4) is
attached as electronic supplementary material.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 13

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

an elongated dark structure along B1 PIL compatible with the presence of a
miniﬁlament (see the black arrow in this panel). We also include as supplemen-
tary material a movie of this region (surge-closeup.mp4) with a high temporal
resolution (5 images per minute) showing the destabilization and eruption of the
miniﬁlament. In Section 3.4 we analyze and discuss the role of this structure in
the studied events.

Figures 5 and 6 show AIA 304 and 171 images at approximately the same
times as those of HASTA in Figure 3. An HMI magnetogram contour is overlaid
on the image in Figure 5a as a reference. In Figure 5 panels b–e, as for the Hα
images, the main ﬂare kernels are seen at the site of the main rotating bipole. The
most striking feature seen in Figures 5 and 6 is the dense EUV “surge” moving
towards the north-west part of the main negative AR polarity (numbered 1).
This evolution starts right after the ﬁrst appearance of the ﬂare kernels. This
is better seen in the corresponding movies that accompany the article as sup-
plementary material (AIA171.mp4, AIA304.mp4, and surge-closeup.mp4). The
ejected material is seen to ascend fastly along the magnetic structure overlying
the main bipole. This is clearer in the AIA 171 images in Figure 6, where the
AR loop structure before and during the event is well observed.

We can make a rough estimation of the mean velocity of the EUV “surge”
front on the plane of the sky. Since the “surge” motion is dominantly northward,
we choose to follow the northward motion of the leading point of the front as
a proxy for the “surge” velocity projected on the plane of the sky. We obtain a
value of ≈ 90 km s−1, which agrees with the typical values measured in other
“surge” events (see references in Section 1).

As observed in the AIA 304 and 171 movies, as soon as the EUV “surge”
reaches its maximum height part of the material drains towards the western
footpoints of the loops along which it moves and part drains back to their eastern
footpoints. The western loop footpoints, containing the draining plasma, end at
the ﬂare kernel k1, observed both in Hα and AIA 304 images (Figure 3c and
Figure 5b). The intensity of this region increases simultaneously with the ﬂare.
As previously reported (e.g., Canﬁeld et al., 1996; Chae et al., 1999) and
also observed in the EUV movies that accompany this article (AIA171.mp4,
AIA304.mp4), the upward motion of the “surge” material has a torsional com-
ponent. We associate the helicity accumulation to the precursory rotation of the
bipolar structures described in Section 2.2 and its release in large-scale AR loops
as due to the magnetic reconnection process associated to the ﬂare. Although a
rotational component is evident in the evolution of the “surge” observed in AIA
171 and 304 data, the complex structure of the ejected material as projected on
the plane of the sky makes it very diﬃcult to obtain a deﬁnite answer regarding
a sense of rotation and even more a quantitative estimation of this rotation.

Comparing the evolution of the “surge” in Hα and AIA 304 (Figures 3 and 5),
the “surge” seems to start with the ascent of material at the 304 ˚A temperature
range. We ﬁrst see a bright elongation in HASTA images towards the north at
≈ 12:27 UT; the “surge” is more prominent in AIA 304 at the same time, while
it is only later that the material is observed barely expanding in absorption in
Hα when we compared the images in AIA 304 at the same times (Figure 3e–f
to Figure 5e–f). Assuming that reconnection between the erupting miniﬁlament

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 14

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

and the overlying ﬁeld starts at low coronal heights, we expect to see the just
described evolution. First, the plasma is heated up, rises, is seen bright in Hα
and dominantly in 304 ˚A. Then, part of the ejected material cools down and
becomes visible in absorption in Hα.

The presence of the circular-shape brightening around the bipoles and their
sustained rotation, from before the event analyzed in this article and until
more than a day after (10 May at around 22:00 UT for B1), motivated us to
look for similar patterns of activity in this range of time. Using Helioviewer
(https://helioviewer.org/), we are able to identify four extra EUV “surges” in
AIA 304, associated to M-class ﬂares, one on 8 May at ≈13:05 UT (ﬂare M1.4),
another one on 9 May at ≈21:05 UT (ﬂare M4.1), and two on 10 May at ≈04:15
UT (ﬂare M5.7, see, e.g., Yang and Zhang, 2018) and at ≈20:25 UT (ﬂare M1.7).
All these ﬂares and “surges” started where the two rotating bipoles were located
and the plasma evolved along large-scale loops with footpoints on the negative
main AR polarity (numbered as 1) to the west, as is the case of the event studied
in this article. This implies a recurrence of energy storage, probably miniﬁlament
rebuilding as proposed by Chandra et al. (2017) (see also the simulations of
Wyper, Antiochos, and DeVore, 2017; Wyper, DeVore, and Antiochos, 2018),
and energy release processes with a time scale between 7 and 23 hours and a
mean of about 14 hours.

2.5. EUV Evolution from STEREO-B Point of View

Complementing AIA data, we use SECCHI observations from STEREO-B, which
at the time of the event was located towards the east solar limb as observed from
Earth. From STEREO-B point of view, AR 11476 appeared on its northern right
solar limb, as shown in Figure 7. The panels of this ﬁgure correspond to diﬀerent
times in SECCHI 195 ˚A channel closest to the times of Figures 5 and 6. We
use this wavelength because it has the highest available temporal resolution (5
minutes). We also produce a SECCHI 195 ˚A movie that covers the evolution
from 12:00 UT to 14:55 UT (see STEREOB-195.mp4 included as supplementary
material). This movie and Figure 7 illustrate the evolution of the ﬂare and EUV
“surge” as observed at the limb by STEREO-B, above a series of saturated pixels
because of the ﬂare.

The vantage point of view of STEREO-B provides information, on the EUV
“surge” structure, which is inaccessible from Earth’s line of sight. For instance,
an estimation of the “surge” velocity using STEREO-B data gives ≈ 120 km
s−1 in the plane of sky, which is consistent with typical velocity values cited in
Section 1. For this computation we follow the central point of the leading edge
of the “surge” seen against the dark and less dense background. The northward
component of this motion is ≈ 98 km s−1. Considering that both spacecraft are
located at Earth’s ecliptic plane, this value is consistent with the 90 km s−1
computed for the northward motion of the “surge” as observed on the plane
of the sky by SDO. The small diﬀerence is likely due to the geometrical (dif-
ferent plasma depth columns) and temporal diﬀerences (diﬀerent instrumental
cadences), errors involved, and the fact that observations correspond to diﬀerent
wavelength bands (304 ˚A and 195 ˚A) with diﬀerent temperature responses.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 15

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

Figure 7. STEREO-B/SECCHI images of AR 11476 in the 195 ˚A channel. At the date of
observation the spacecraft was approximately located on the ecliptic at 118◦ east of Earth.
From this position the AR is observed on the solar limb. The saturated pixels correspond to
the ﬂare. The EUV “surge” evolution is clearly identiﬁable in the images. The observation
times are provided in the bottom left of the panels and are the closest possible to those of
Figures 3–6. A white segment has been added on the top right of the panel a to indicate the
ﬁgure scale-size. A movie (STEREOB-195.mp4) showing the evolution of the EUV “surge” in
SECCHI images is attached as electronic supplementary material.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 16

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

2.6. Estimation of Temperature and Density

The observed width of the EUV “surge” from a direction which is almost per-
pendicular (≈118◦) to SDO line of sight lets us also estimate the depth of the
emitting material observed by AIA. We can use this information to make a
rough calculation of the temperature and density of the “surge” plasma by
applying the so-called ﬁlter ratio technique to AIA 171 and 304 observed in-
tensities. The procedure consists in assuming a quasi-uniform temperature for
the “surge” plasma. In this case, the intensity observed in a given AIA channel
can be considered as the emission measure [EM ] of the plasma multiplied by
the instrument response function in that channel, Ich1 = EM Sch1(T ) (see,
e.g., L´opez Fuentes, Klimchuk, and Mandrini, 2007). In this way, the ratio of
the intensities in two diﬀerent channels is a function only of the temperature,
R(T ) = Ich1/Ich2. Inverting this function we obtain T . Once the temperature is
known, the density is computed from ne = [EM/(f d)]1/2, where f is the ﬁlling
factor and d is the depth of the observed plasma column.

We apply this procedure to the intensities averaged on the same corresponding
“surge” areas observed in AIA 171 and 304. We do this computation at the time
when the EUV “surge” has its maximum apparent volume (at ≈ 12:39 UT).
We determine a temperature of 2 × 105 K. Using the width of the EUV “surge”
observed by SECCHI, estimated to be approximately 50 Mm (indicated with
white arrows in Figure 7e), as the depth of the plasma column [d] observed by
AIA and setting f = 1, we obtain ne = 1.8 × 109 cm−3.

We repeat the computation subtracting a mean of the background on both
sides of the “surge” for both AIA bands. For AIA 304 the background is very
small compared with the “surge” intensity, but for AIA 171 the background can
be as high as 80% of the “surge” intensity. Also, due to the presence of AR coronal
loops the AIA 171 background tends to be particularly noisy in the vicinity of the
surge. Therefore, diﬀerent background choices provide a variety of temperature
results. Trying diﬀerent background combinations we obtain temperature values
between 1.4 and 1.8×105 K and corresponding densities from 1 to 1.5×109 cm−3.
These values continue to be within the ranges measured in previously studied
surge events (see references in Section 1). A larger eﬀect on the derived density
comes from the assumed ﬁlling factor, since if f ≈ 0.1 it implies a factor of ≈ 3
on the computed density. Then, the obtained densities are lower limits if f < 1.
Interestingly, although progressively less visible for hotter AIA bands, the
“surge” is still observable in AIA 193 and 211. Applying the ﬁlter ratio technique,
using the same “surge” and background selection as above, we obtain for the
193/171 combination T = 1.5 × 106 K and for the 193/211 combination T =
1.8 × 106. In both cases, ne ≈ 1 × 108 cm−3, more than one order of magnitude
smaller than for the 304/171 combination. This conﬁrms that the bulk of the
mass of the “surge” emits at a temperature around the maximum AIA 304
response, while surprisingly the plasma pressure is comparable when using all
ratio pairs.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 17

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

Images in panels b, c, and d are composites of images with short and long
exposure times. The series of black pixels seen in these images are due to the
eﬀect of the composition. The bright structures associated with the ﬂare are
clearly seen in panels a to d. Their locations agree with those of the magnetic
bipoles described in Section 2 and shown in Figure 2. A movie (XRT.mp4)
showing the evolution of the large-scale loops in XRT images is attached as
electronic supplementary material.

Figure 8. Hinode/XRT images of AR 11476 for diﬀerent times along the analyzed event
evolution, but as close as possible to those of Figures 3–6 and with the same ﬁeld of view. The
times are shown in the bottom left of the panels. A white segment has been added on the top
right of the panel a to indicate the ﬁgure scale-size.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 18

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

2.7. Hard X-Ray Evolution

RHESSI data in the 10 – 30 keV and 40 – 80 keV bands integrated during 20 s
at the time of the ﬂare peak (≈12:32 UT) indicate the presence of hard X-ray
emission at a very concentrated area close to the ﬁrst Hα elongated kernel (see
Figure 5c). A small black arrow is added to indicate the location of RHESSI
contours in the AIA 304 image. The observed RHESSI emission is also close to
the location of the miniﬁlament (see Section 2.4) whose eruption was at the origin
of the events described in this article. The inset in Figure 5c shows (in red) an
overlay of the RHESSI 40–80 keV contours at 40, 60, and 80% of the maximum
on a simultaneous HMI magnetogram. Notice that the estimated error in the
location of RHESSI high energy source, coming from the processing procedure
and coalignment between diﬀerent instruments, is around 5”(Lin et al., 2002).

The magnetogram in the inset shows a region of pixels displaying a magnetic
ﬁeld sign reversal with apparent positive (in white) polarity within the negative
polarity of the main rotating bipole (compare with the magnetogram of Figure 1,
taken at 12:08 UT). This kind of anomaly has been observed in Michelson
Doppler Imaging magnetograms at locations where beams of high energy par-
ticles precipitated at the maximum of some ﬂares, see an explanation and the
example shown by Qiu and Gary (2003) and another example in Mandrini et al.
(2006). Taking into account the uncertainty in the location of RHESSI sources,
the ﬁeld sign reversal region would agree with the highest intensity RHESSI
contour.

2.8. Soft X-Ray Evolution

Figure 8 shows the evolution of the ﬂare observed with Hinode/XRT. Panels
a–d of Figure 8 are for the same times as the corresponding ones in Figures 3–
6. Figure 8e and f show images at slightly later times (4 and 12 minutes later
than the corresponding panels of Figures 3–6). An XRT movie showing the
evolution from 12:17 UT to 13:52 UT is available as electronic supplementary
material (XRT.mp4). The ﬂare onset appears in the XRT images as an intensity
increase in small elongated loop-like features at the location of the bipoles. Note
in Figure 8c–d the vertical set of dark pixels corresponding to the saturated area
of the images that has been replaced with the corresponding pixels from images
with shorter exposure times. Some of the pixels in these areas look black because
the composite routine sets a value 0 to the pixels from the short exposure images
that have intensities below the minimum of the long exposure images. Despite
this, the bright loop-like features associated to the ﬂare are clearly discernible
in these images.

A set of longer loops connects the AR zone around the small bipoles to the
western portion of the AR. These loops increase both in intensity and projected
height as the extension and brightness of the ﬂaring area increases (Figure 8c–d).
The time at which this set of long loops reaches its maximum projected height
coincides with the time at which the “surge” observed in the EUV bands reaches
its maximum height and apparent volume (around 12:39 UT).

A few minutes after the soft X-ray intensity peak, during the gradual phase of
the ﬂare (Figure 8e–f), two clear sets of loops are identiﬁable: short (low-lying)

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 19

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

very bright loops at the location of the rotating bipoles and long loops that
connect to the western part of the AR. The footpoints of these two sets of loops
agree with the ﬂare kernel locations in the Hα images (Figure 3) and in AIA 304
images (Figure 5). The topological analysis of the AR structure (Section 3) will
help us understand the role of these observed structures.

Finally, it is also worth to mention that comparing the timing of the AIA 304
and XRT movies (AIA304.mp4, XRT.mp4), the XRT set of large-scale loops
have a much longer duration than the “surge”. They remain bright well after
the “surge” material has fallen back to the chromosphere.

3. Magnetic Field Topology of the Flare and EUV ”Surge”

Region

3.1. The Coronal Field Model

To understand the role of the magnetic structures in AR 11476 during the ﬂare
and EUV “surge”, we ﬁrst model its coronal ﬁeld and later compute its magnetic
topology. We extrapolate the HMI LOS magnetic ﬁeld to the corona using the
discrete fast Fourier transform method described by Alissandrakis (1981), under
the linear force-free ﬁeld (LFFF) approach (∇ × B = αB, with α constant).

Figure 9a shows an AIA 171 image before the ﬂare (12:07 UT) in which large
scale magnetic loops are visible. Figure 9b displays the coronal model overlaid
on the same AIA image. We use as the boundary condition for the model, the
HMI magnetogram closest in time. We also apply a transformation of coordinates
from the local frame (in which the computations are done) to the observed one so
that our model can be compared to the ﬂare brightenings and the EUV “surge”
loops. Although this model cannot take into account the distribution of currents
at the photospheric level and the strong shear that the rotation of the bipoles
could have created, but only the shear in the global magnetic conﬁguration, it is
fast and has proven to be eﬃcient to compute the magnetic ﬁeld topology to be
compared with observed active events (see references in Section 3.2). Therefore,
our magnetic ﬁeld model and following topology computation represents the
global AR magnetic structure (see Section 3.2).

The value of α, the free parameter of the model, is set to best match the
observed loops (as discussed by Green et al., 2002). The best-matching value for
the larger scale loops is α = -6.2 × 10−4 Mm−1, while for the shorter loops in the
same image it is -3.1 × 10−3 Mm−1. This large-scale non-potentiality is related
to the main AR polarities and not to the small rotating bipoles. The AR appears
on the eastern solar limb already emerged, therefore we cannot determine its age.
However, its photospheric magnetic ﬁeld, with strong sunspots that still have a
distribution showing magnetic tongues (Figure 1), indicates that it is a young
AR close to its maximum ﬂux stage. The tongue-like pattern (see Poisson et al.,
2015) present for the main polarities of the AR is compatible with the sign of α.

3.2. Quasi-Separatrix Layers

D´emoulin et al. (1996) introduced the concept of quasi-separatrix layers (QSLs).
They are 3D thin volumes where the coronal ﬁeld-line connectivity experiences

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 20

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

Figure 9. (a) SDO/AIA 171 image at 12:07 UT overlaid with HMI isocontours with the same
values as the ones in panel b, magenta (blue) for positive (negative) values of the ﬁeld. (b)
Coronal magnetic ﬁeld model of AR 11476 overlaid on the 171 ˚A image in panel a. Magnetic
ﬁeld lines (thick continuous orange lines) have been superimposed to be compared to the AR
loops (see Section 3.1 for the details on the model and α values). Isocontours of the ﬁeld
of ± 100, 500 G for positive (negative) values are shown in magenta (blue) color. The axis
coordinates are in Mm in panel b; these are the units used in the computation of the model.
The inclination of these axes indicates that the AR is slightly away from the disk center as
seen from the perspective point of view of an observer at Earth.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 21

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

a drastic change. QSLs are preferred sites for the formation of current layers
and, therefore, locations where magnetic reconnection is expected to occur.
Several numerical experiments support this idea (see, e.g., Milano et al., 1999;
Aulanier, Pariat, and D´emoulin, 2005; B¨uchner, 2006; Pariat, Aulanier, and
D´emoulin, 2006; Wilmot-Smith, Hornig, and Pontin, 2009; Eﬀenberger et al.,
2011; Savcheva, van Ballegooijen, and DeLuca, 2012; Janvier et al., 2013).

As concerns solar active phenomena, the computation of QSLs helps to inter-
pret where ﬂare kernels or other energy release manifestations should be observed
(e.g., D´emoulin et al., 1997; Bagal´a et al., 2000; Mandrini et al., 2006, 2014, 2015;
Cristiani et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2014; Savcheva et al., 2015; Janvier et al., 2016;
Polito et al., 2017; Joshi et al., 2017). Furthermore, for moderately sheared or
twisted magnetic structuring, the properties of QSLs in complex (multi-polar)
conﬁgurations depend strongly on the photospheric distribution of the vertical
ﬁeld component and weakly on the details of the magnetic ﬁeld model (i.e. the
spatial distribution of α). In this sense, QSLs are a strong tool to understand
where energy release proceeds during active phenomena and to learn about the
properties of energy release sites (see the reviews by Longcope, 2005; D´emoulin,
2006; Mandrini, 2010).

The original method to ﬁnd the location of QSLs was described by D´emoulin
et al. (1996). QSLs were deﬁned using the norm of the Jacobian matrix of the
ﬁeld-line mapping. In this method the value of the norm depends on the direction
chosen to compute the mapping (from positive to negative photospheric polari-
ties or the reverse). Then, the norm has diﬀerent values at both footpoints of a
ﬁeld line on the photosphere. This ambiguity was solved by Titov, Hornig, and
D´emoulin (2002) who deﬁned the squashing degree [Q], which is independent
of the mapping direction. Q is the norm squared divided by the ratio of the
vertical component of the photospheric ﬁeld at both ends of a ﬁeld line. In this
way Q could be assigned to have a constant value along each ﬁeld line. QSLs are
computed by integrating extremely high numbers of ﬁeld lines in a very precise
way. To decrease the computation time we use an adaptive mesh to progressively
reﬁne the computation of ﬁeld lines where Q has the highest values. We follow
this iterative method until the QSL is locally well resolved or when the limit of
the integration precision is reached (see more details in Mandrini et al., 2015).
As in other previous examples, we select large values of Q to show the exten-
sion of the QSL traces at the photospheric level. Figure 10 displays the location of
the intersection of QSLs with the photospheric plane. These photospheric traces
are computed using the same HMI magnetogram shown in Figure 9, when the
magnetic data do not show unrealistic values because of the injection of high-
energy particles in the photosphere (see the inset of Figure 5c). The results shown
are computed with the highest |α| value, but similar results are obtained with
the lowest |α| value (Section 3.1). QSL traces, shown as black continuous thick
lines for simplicity and clarity, are overlaid on the photospheric magnetogram
indicated as isocontours of the vertical component of the magnetic ﬁeld. The
value of Q for all QSL traces stays above 108, implying that these QSLs are very
thin.

Panel a of Figure 10 depicts an image of AIA 304 where the circular brighten-
ing at the location of the bipoles, the “surge” at an early stage, and the far AIA

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 22

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

(a) AIA 304 image at 12:27 UT overlaid by HMI isocontours. The ﬂare kernels
Figure 10.
at the bipole locations and the elongated far kernel on the western negative AR polarity
(numbered 1) are clearly visible. The EUV “surge” is observed rising from eastern side of the
bipoles. (b) Intersection of QSL traces (black thick continuous lines) with the photospheric
plane for the same ﬁeld of view as that shown in panel a. Two sets of ﬁeld lines, representing
the pre-reconnected (in blue) and reconnected ﬁeld lines (in red), as inferred from the ﬂare
and “surge” evolution, have been added (see also Figure 11). QSL traces match those of ﬂare
brightenings and the shape of the red ﬁeld lines approximately follow the trajectory of the EUV
“surge”. (c) A zoom of the QSL traces in the neighborhood of the bipoles whose rotation and
cancellation forced the miniﬁlament eruption and the initiation of the ﬂare and EUV “surge”.
An arrow points to the location of the miniﬁlament along the PIL of bipole B1. Panels b and
c are shown from the observer’s point of view. (d) A diﬀerent point of view selected to better
display the 3D structure of the ﬁeld lines. The axes in panels b, c, and d are in Mm and the
isocontours of the ﬁeld in all panels correspond to ± 100 and 500 G in continuous magenta
(blue) style for the positive (negative) values. The numbers 1–4 label the polarities mainly
involved in the event and correspond to those in Figures 1 and 11 (see Section 3.4). The ﬁeld
of view of panel c does not include polarity 1, which is far to the west as indicated with the
arrow.

304 kernel, k1, on the main AR negative polarity, are observed. Comparing with
panel b, which is at the same scale, we see that the QSL photospheric traces
agree well with the ﬂare brightenings, while the EUV “surge” is cospatial with
the set of large-scale red ﬁeld lines (see also the “surge” evolution in the movie
surge-closeup.mp4). Figure 10c shows a closer view of the shape of the QSLs
around the rotating bipoles, as well as the QSL trace on the negative polarity of
bipole B1 (numbered 3). Moreover, comparing panels a and b of Figure 10, the
shape of the QSL trace far to the west matches the curved shape of the distant

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 23

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

ﬂare kernel, k1. Consequently, as in other analyzed examples, QSLs lie where
ﬂare kernels or other energy release manifestations are observed (see references
at the beginning of this sub-section).

The distribution of the positive magnetic ﬁeld around the negative polarity
of B1, suggests the possibility of the presence of an associated coronal magnetic
null-point in the global AR magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration (see, e.g., the topology
computations in Mandrini et al., 2014). Furthermore, this is also the case for the
almost circular shape of the QSLs and the observed brightening at the location of
the rotating bipoles (see references in Section 1). We searched for a magnetic null
point in the model shown in Figure 9 and did not ﬁnd one that could be linked to
the ﬂare and “surge”. The reason why a null point is not present could be the fact
that the negative B1 polarity is not completely surrounded by positive magnetic
ﬁeld (a negative extension is seen to the north of B1). However, no magnetic
null-point and associated separatrices are needed in an observed conﬁguration
for energy release during an active event, as has been shown in many other
examples (see references at the beginning of this section) or proposed in jet
and/or surge models and simulations (see references in Section 1). QSLs with
a ﬁnite thickness are a generalization of the inﬁnitely thin separatrices. If a
null point is present its separatices surfaces will be found where QSLs are the
thinnest and embedded within them (see Masson et al., 2009, 2017; Mandrini
et al., 2014).

Finally, we notice that the much smaller circular shape of the central QSL on
the negative polarity of B1 (Figure 10c) appears because of a parasitic positive
polarity that is present for a few hours at that location (this is a real parasitic po-
larity and not the artifact created by energetic particles, as shown in Figure 5c).
There is no ﬂare brightening or activity related to this small polarity. Indeed, we
claim that this parasitic polarity is not related to the ﬂare and “surge” studied
in this article and we do not show the ﬁeld line connectivity associated to it.

3.3. Comparison of the Computed Topology to Observations

Panels b and d of Figure 10 show a set of ﬁeld lines computed from both sides
of the circular QSL. Considering the observed evolution (Figures 3–6), we have
drawn in blue ﬁeld lines that represent loops before reconnection, while ﬁeld
lines in red correspond to loops after reconnection. From the observation and
model results, we conclude that the short blue ﬁeld lines anchored at polarities
labeled as 3 and 4 above the PIL of B1 reconnect with the long blue ﬁeld lines
anchored at 1 and 2. A local zoom of the connectivities is shown in Figure 10c.
The two sets of red ﬁeld lines are the result of this interaction. The shorter set is
anchored at 2 and 3, where we observe ﬂare kernels k2 and k3 in Figures 3–6 at
around 12:31 UT. The longer set follows the shape of the EUV “surge” material
moving to the west. This set of ﬁeld lines starts at polarity 4, where kernel k4 is
located, and ends at polarity 1, where the distant ﬂare kernel k1 lies (compare
panels a and b; see also panel d, which shows a more favorable view point, where
we have not included the QSLs for clarity).

Finally, when looking at the movie showing a close-up view of the miniﬁlament
eruption and “surge” (surge-closeup.mp4) one can see that the plasma ﬁrst moves

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 24

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

Figure 11. 2D Sketch illustrating the evolution of the ﬂare and EUV “surge”. (a) Sets of
blue magnetic ﬁeld lines connecting polarities labeled 1–4. The small black circle surrounded
by a black ﬁeld line represents the location of the miniﬁlament. This panel corresponds to the
magnetic conﬁguration before the eruption. (b) As the miniﬁlament erupts two reconnection
processes take place. Internal reconnection below the miniﬁlament, indicated with a green
short segment, and external reconnection, also indicated with a green segment above the
miniﬁlament. (c) The two reconnection processes at work. Internal reconnection transforms
the black ﬁeld lines, located around the miniﬁlament, in panel b in the pink ﬁeld lines in this
panel. The result of this internal reconnection process is the appearance of ﬂare kernels k3’and
k4’. Simultaneously, external reconnection, between the blue lines connecting 3 and 4 and the
longer blue lines connecting 1 and 2 in panel b, results in the red ﬁeld lines connecting 2
with 3 and 1 with 4 indicated in this panel. The outcome of this second reconnection process
is the injection of plasma forming the “surge” in the reconnected ﬁeld lines. For a complete
description of both reconnection processes, see Section 3.4. (d) The downward ﬂows are shown
with dark green arrows. They occur later on in the previously reconnected ﬁeld lines.

up along the longer set of red ﬁelds lines anchored at 1 and 4 and, by the end of
the movie, it is seen to ﬂow back towards the footpoints of the same ﬁeld lines.
Though, more diﬃcult to see because the set of red ﬁeld lines anchored at 2 and
3 is much shorter, a similar motion of the plasma along them is present. Finally,
the ﬁeld of view of the movie does not include the far kernel on the main AR
polarity labeled as 1, but it is clearly observed in Figures 3–5, and the respective
movies HASTA.mp4 and AIA304.mp4.

3.4. Physical Processes Involved

We now discuss a possible scenario to explain the observed events by analyzing
in detail the connectivity of ﬁeld lines traced starting integration at both sides of

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 25

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

the QSLs. Since our connectivity analysis provides only a static view, to facilitate
our discussion of the progression of the processes that occur from the beginning
of the events analyzed in this article, we include the schematic drawing shown
in Figure 11. This sketch is similar to others proposed to explain jets (see, e.g.,
Sterling et al., 2015, 2016; Joshi et al., 2018; Moore, Sterling, and Panesar, 2018)
in open ﬁeld conﬁgurations; however, in our example the background magnetic
ﬁeld is not open and unipolar but closed and bipolar.

Panel a in Figure 11 corresponds to the situation before the ﬂare and “surge”.
The numbers at the base of the ﬁeld lines are labeling the magnetic polarities
mainly involved in the events, as done in Figure 1. The set of short blue ﬁeld
lines (anchored at 3–4) in Figure 11a overlays the miniﬁlament that is located
along the PIL of B1, while the set of long blue ﬁeld lines (anchored at 1–2)
constitute the background ﬁeld, which is closed.

Due, to a combination of ﬂux cancellation along the B1 PIL and the bipole
rotations, the miniﬁlament destabilizes and starts rising (see Figure 11b). Mag-
netic reconnection sets in below the miniﬁlament (indicated with a short thick
green segment) as in a classical prominence eruption (see e.g., Aulanier et al.,
2010; Webb and Howard, 2012). The pink lines in Figure 11c correspond to the
reconnected ﬁeld lines resulting from this process, which has been called internal
in several articles (see e.g., Sterling et al., 2015; Moore, Sterling, and Panesar,
2018).

Short blue ﬁeld lines still restraining the miniﬁlament start reconnecting with
the large-scale blue lines (see Figure 11b and c). This second reconnection pro-
cess, indicated with a short thick green segment above the miniﬁlament, has
been called external in the just mentioned references. The main diﬀerence with
our particular case is that the conﬁguration is closed.

In the case analyzed here, even if the magnetic tension above the miniﬁl-
ament could decrease as some of the overlying ﬁeld lines are transformed by
reconnection in the red ﬁeld lines at both sides, anchored at 2–3 and 1–4 in
Figure 11c (see, e.g., Antiochos, DeVore, and Klimchuk, 1999), the plasma fails
to reach farther out. As a result, it is injected into these red reconnected ﬁeld
lines. The material is seen ﬂowing along them forming a “surge” (see Figure 11c).
Finally, in Figure 11d we only indicate the direction of downﬂows along already
reconnected lines as it occurs later on. To avoid an over busy panel, we omit any
reconnection process in this panel.

Summarizing, the ﬁrst internal reconnection process would give the observed
intense kernels at both sides of the PIL of B1, labeled k3’ and k4’ in Figure 4d and
Figure 11c, and very short loops joining them. This location roughly corresponds
to the place of the RHESSI contours that indicate the deposition of accelerated
particles (Figure 5c). The second external reconnection process associated to
kernels k1, k2, k3, and k4, observed in Hα and EUV (Figures 3–5), is what is
captured by our global AR model and topology computation (Figure 10).

3.5. Comparison with Numerical Simulations

This observed case is close to the results of the simulations of Wyper, Antiochos,
and DeVore (2017) and Wyper, DeVore, and Antiochos (2018) (see also, Pariat

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 26

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

et al., 2016, and references therein, though in these simulations no miniﬁlament
is formed by the imposed twisting motions). In fact, both global magnetic con-
ﬁgurations (ours and that in the simulations) are comparable with an embedded
polarity within the dominant polarity of opposite sign. The driver in both cases
is the shearing of the arcade below the magnetic dome, in contrast with other
cases where emergence is the dominant driver. Furthermore, in our observed case
magnetic ﬂux cancellation plays also a role.

There are still several diﬀerences between our observations and the simu-
lations. A main diﬀerence is that the observed central polarity is not fully
surrounded by the opposite sign polarity, which is plausibly why a magnetic
null is not present in our extrapolation. From the QSL point of view, this does
not imply a big diﬀerence since QSLs stay in place with a thickness which is
very thin in comparison with MHD scales.

A second diﬀerence is the fully closed ﬁeld conﬁguration of our observations
compared to the open ﬁeld present in the simulations. Finally, the EUV “surge”
is much less collimated than the jet found in the simulations. Apart these diﬀer-
ences, the underlying physical mechanism is the same: magnetic reconnection of
a sheared arcade where the miniﬁlament is embedded with a large scale ﬁeld.

3.6. Repetitive Events

The above described processes started well before our analyzed example, as indi-
cated by the fact that a “surge” and ﬂare with similar characteristics occurred on
8 May (Section 2.4). In fact, the storage then release of magnetic energy process
is expected to continue for as long as the magnetic bipoles, their rotation, and
ﬁeld cancelation sustains. This evolution induces the reformation of a similar
magnetic conﬁguration including the miniﬁlament.

Indeed three “surges” and ﬂares with similar characteristics occurred on 9
and 10 May after the one studied here. Of course, the location of QSLs on the
region of the rotating bipoles would slightly change following their evolution,
but the main characteristics are expected to be kept with a circular QSL and
a distant one, since this topology is robust for as long as the negative polarity
exists within the positive surrounding. The same repetitive series of event was
also found in some of the numerical simulations cited above (Pariat et al., 2016,
and references therein).

4. Conclusions

In this article we analyze the solar ﬂare and conﬁned ejection that occurred in
NOAA AR 11476 on 09 May 2012. For the analysis we use magnetic, Hα, EUV,
soft and hard X-ray data from multiple space and ground-based instruments (see
Section 2). The way in which the plasma ejection develops is similar to the so-
called blowout jets (see references in Section 1). The main diﬀerence is that in the
event studied here the material is ejected into closed magnetic ﬁeld lines, while
blowout jets usually occur (as regular jets do) along open magnetic structures.
The velocity, angular span, and the fact that the ejection occurs in a closed mag-
netic structure reminds of classical surges, typically observed in Hα. However, it

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 27

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

also bears diﬀerences with classical surges because a miniﬁlament, whose plasma
forms part of the ejection, is present in the conﬁguration. Furthermore, as we
show in Section 2, the Hα counterpart of the clearly observed ejection in AIA
304 and 171 is barely identiﬁable, that is why we call this conﬁned ejection an
EUV “surge”. This is further conﬁrmed by the thermal diagnostic analysis of
Section 2.6, where we ﬁnd that the “surge” material has its maximum emission
at an approximate temperature between 1.4 and 1.8×105 K, corresponding to
the peak response of the AIA 304 channel.

Studying the evolution of the AR photospheric magnetic ﬁeld during three
days around the event, we identify two rotating bipoles in the central part of the
main positive (following) polarity of the AR, that coincide in location with the
ﬂare and “surge” ejection. The magnetic ﬂux of these bipoles decreases steeply
during the period when the rotation is observed. A miniﬁlament is seen lying
along the PIL of the largest rotating bipole. We conclude that the sustained
rotation of the bipoles is the main source of helicity and free magnetic energy
accumulation that is later released during the events.

We estimate a northward “surge” velocity of 90 km s−1 on the plane of the
sky as seen from Earth, which is consistent with the velocity estimation of 120
km s−1 as observed from STEREO-B point of view (see Sections 2.4 and 2.5).
These are typical velocity values observed in previously studied jets and surges
(see Section 1). We also identify a torsional component in the development of the
ejection, which is very likely associated to the magnetic helicity injected during
the rotation of the bipoles.

As in several recent observations of coronal jets, a miniﬁlament is present
along the PIL of the main rotating bipole. We propose that its rotation, combined
with ﬂux cancellation, destabilizes the miniﬁlament and brings it to eruption.
Magnetic reconnection below the miniﬁlament, called internal reconnection, is
mainly responsible for the brightest ﬂare kernels and particle acceleration whose
deposition sites are seen as elongated RHESSI contours. Simultaneously, exter-
nal magnetic reconnection occurs between the loops within which the erupting
miniﬁlament is embedded and the closed AR loops forming the background ﬁeld.
This reconnection is at the origin of four ﬂare kernels. Two are located on the
main rotating bipole while the two others are located on the AR polarities.

Next, we combine the observations with coronal magnetic ﬁeld extrapolations
using HMI magnetograms as boundary condition (Section 3.1). Our global mag-
netic ﬁeld model lets us explain the external reconnection process occurring as
the miniﬁlament and its ﬁeld conﬁguration are destabilized and erupted. We
determine the location of the QSL traces at the photospheric level and relate
them with the observed location of ﬂare kernels (Section 3.4). In particular, the
shapes and locations of QSL traces consist of an almost circular QSL surrounding
most of the two rotating bipoles plus an elongated QSL on the main AR negative
polarity to the west (see Figure 10). The circular QSL trace coincides with the
ﬂare kernels observed both in Hα and EUV, while the elongated one corresponds
to a far ﬂare kernel (Section 3.4).

Furthermore, a continuous faint brightening at the location of the circular
QSL is observable about a day before our analyzed event, showing that the
above topology was present long before. We argue that the sustained bipole

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 28

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

rotations (≈ 72 hs) allows for magnetic helicity and energy storage between, at
least ﬁve ﬂare and “surge” events (one on 8 May and two on both 9 and 10 May)
and also, most probably, contributes to the reformation of the miniﬁlament. We
ﬁnd that the time scale of energy storage (with slow reconnection involved) is
between 7 and 23 hours, with a mean of about 14 hours.

Going deeper in the analysis, we select as a starting integration points both
sides of the computed QSLs to compute sets of magnetic ﬁeld lines with diﬀerent
connectivities and reconstruct the spatial evolution of the event, which allows us
to determine the role of the diﬀerent loop structures. The computed connectiv-
ities conﬁrm the above interpretation, as summarized in Figure 10. This allows
us to derive a detailed scenario of the physics involved (Figure 11).

What is remarkable in the events analyzed here is that, contrary to what
has been proposed in numerical jet and surge simulations (see references in the
Section 1), the “surge” and ﬂare do not seem to have been driven by magnetic
ﬂux emergence. This has been also shown to be the case in other jet observations
(see e.g., Adams et al., 2014; Panesar, Sterling, and Moore, 2016; Joshi et al.,
2018). The magnetic ﬂux measurements indicate that the bipoles (mainly B1)
are in decay, strongly suggesting that the main driver is the shearing of the
arcade and ﬂux cancellation within bipole B1.

This observed example is similar to the results of the simulations by Wyper,
Antiochos, and DeVore (2017) and Wyper, DeVore, and Antiochos (2018) (see
also, Pariat et al., 2016, and references therein). The magnetic conﬁgurations,
observed in our case and simulated in the previous articles, are comparable,
since both have an embedded polarity within a dominant polarity of opposite
sign. The driver in both cases is due to the shearing of an arcade, with ﬂux
cancellation also playing a role in the ﬁlament destabilization. A diﬀerence is
that our conﬁguration is formed by closed ﬁeld lines compared to the open ﬁeld
in the simulations and, furthermore, the EUV “surge” is less collimated than
the jet found in the numerical model.

Finally, the global AR magnetic ﬁeld structure analyzed here lets us con-
clude that no magnetic null-point and associated separatrices are needed in an
observed conﬁguration for energy release, as has been shown in many other
examples (see references in Section 3.2). QSLs with a ﬁnite thickness are a
generalization of the inﬁnitely thin separatrices. If a null point is present its
separatices are located where QSLs are the thinnest and embedded within them
(see Masson et al., 2009, 2017; Mandrini et al., 2014).

Acknowledgments The authors are grateful for the insightful referee who stimulated us
to improve several parts of the manuscript. The authors would like to thank Dr. Carlos
Francile from the Astronomical Observatory Felix Aguilar, University of San Juan, for his
invaluable help in the processing of HASTA data. MLF, CHM and GC are members of the
Carrera del Investigador Cient´ıﬁco of the Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas y
T´ecnicas (CONICET) of Argentina. MP and FL are CONICET Fellows. MP, MLF, GC and
CHM acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Argentinean grants PICT 2012-0973 (ANPCyT),
UBACyT 20020130100321 and PIP 2012-01-403 (CONICET).

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest

The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 29

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

References

Adams, M., Sterling, A.C., Moore, R.L., Gary, G.A.: 2014, A Small-scale Eruption Leading
to a Blowout Macrospicule Jet in an On-disk Coronal Hole. Astrophys. J. 783, 11. DOI.
ADS.

Alissandrakis, C.E.: 1981, On the computation of constant alpha force-free magnetic ﬁeld.

Astron. Astrophys. 100, 197. ADS.

Antiochos, S.K., DeVore, C.R., Klimchuk, J.A.: 1999, A Model for Solar Coronal Mass

Ejections. Astrophys. J. 510, 485. DOI. ADS.

Aulanier, G., Pariat, E., D´emoulin, P.: 2005, Current sheet formation in quasi-separatrix layers

and hyperbolic ﬂux tubes. Astron. Astrophys. 444, 961. DOI. ADS.

Aulanier, G., T¨or¨ok, T., D´emoulin, P., DeLuca, E.E.: 2010, Formation of Torus-Unstable Flux
Ropes and Electric Currents in Erupting Sigmoids. Astrophys. J. 708, 314. DOI. ADS.
Bagal´a, L.G., Mandrini, C.H., Rovira, M.G., D´emoulin, P.: 2000, Magnetic reconnection: a
common origin for ﬂares and AR interconnecting arcs. Astron. Astrophys. 363, 779. ADS.
Bagal´a, L.G., Bauer, O.H., Fern´andez Borda, R., Francile, C., Haerendel, G., Rieger, R.,
Rovira, M.G.: 1999, The New Hα Solar Telescope at the German-Argentinian Solar Ob-
servatory. In: Wilson, A., et al.(eds.) Magnetic Fields and Solar Processes, ESA Special
Publication 448, 469. ADS.

Brooks, D.H., Kurokawa, H., Berger, T.E.: 2007, An Hα Surge Provoked by Moving Magnetic

Features near an Emerging Flux Region. Astrophys. J. 656, 1197. DOI. ADS.

B¨uchner, J.: 2006, Locating Current Sheets in the Solar Corona. Space Sci. Rev. 122, 149.

DOI. ADS.

Canﬁeld, R.C., Reardon, K.P., Leka, K.D., Shibata, K., Yokoyama, T., Shimojo, M.: 1996, H

alpha Surges and X-Ray Jets in AR 7260. Astrophys. J. 464, 1016. DOI. ADS.

Chae, J., Qiu, J., Wang, H., Goode, P.R.: 1999, Extreme-Ultraviolet Jets and Hα Surges in

Solar Microﬂares. Astrophys. J. Lett. 513, L75. DOI. ADS.

Chandra, R., Mandrini, C.H., Schmieder, B., Joshi, B., Cristiani, G.D., Cremades, H., Pariat,
E., Nuevo, F.A., Srivastava, A.K., Uddin, W.: 2017, Blowout jets and impulsive eruptive
ﬂares in a bald-patch topology. Astron. Astrophys. 598, A41. DOI. ADS.

Cristiani, G., Martinez, G., Mandrini, C.H., Gim´enez de Castro, C.G., da Silva, C.W., Rovira,
M.G., Kaufmann, P.: 2007, Spatial Characterization of a Flare Using Radio Observations
and Magnetic Field Topology. Solar Phys. 240, 271. DOI. ADS.

D´emoulin, P.: 2006, Extending the concept of separatrices to QSLs for magnetic reconnection.

Adv. Space Res. 37, 1269. DOI. ADS.

D´emoulin, P., H´enoux, J.C., Priest, E.R., Mandrini, C.H.: 1996, Quasi-Separatrix layers in

solar ﬂares. I. Method. Astron. Astrophys. 308, 643. ADS.

D´emoulin, P., Bagal´a, L.G., Mandrini, C.H., H´enoux, J.C., Rovira, M.G.: 1997, Quasi-
separatrix layers in solar ﬂares. II. Observed magnetic conﬁgurations. Astron. Astrophys.
325, 305. ADS.

Eﬀenberger, F., Thust, K., Arnold, L., Grauer, R., Dreher, J.: 2011, Numerical Simulation of
Current Sheet Formation in a Quasi-Separatrix Layer using Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement .
Phys. Plasmas 18, 32902.

Fernandez Borda, R.A., Mininni, P.D., Mandrini, C.H., G´omez, D.O., Bauer, O.H., Rovira,
M.G.: 2002, Automatic Solar Flare Detection Using Neural Network Techniques. Solar Phys.
206, 347. DOI. ADS.

Foukal, P.V.: 2004, Solar Astrophysics, 2nd, Revised Edition, 480. ADS.
Golub, L., Deluca, E., Austin, G., Bookbinder, J., Caldwell, D., Cheimets, P., et al.: 2007, The

X-Ray Telescope (XRT) for the Hinode Mission. Solar Phys. 243, 63. DOI. ADS.

Green, L.M., L´opez fuentes, M.C., Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P., Van Driel-Gesztelyi, L.,
Culhane, J.L.: 2002, The Magnetic Helicity Budget of a cme-Proliﬁc Active Region. Solar
Phys. 208, 43. DOI. ADS.

Guglielmino, S.L., Bellot Rubio, L.R., Zuccarello, F., Aulanier, G., Vargas Dom´ınguez, S.,
Kamio, S.: 2010, Multiwavelength Observations of Small-scale Reconnection Events Trig-
gered by Magnetic Flux Emergence in the Solar Atmosphere. Astrophys. J. 724, 1083.
DOI. ADS.

Guo, Y., D´emoulin, P., Schmieder, B., Ding, M.D., Vargas Dom´ınguez, S., Liu, Y.: 2013, Recur-
rent coronal jets induced by repetitively accumulated electric currents. Astron. Astrophys.
555, A19. DOI. ADS.

Harrison, R.A., Sime, D.G., Pearce, G.: 1990, The surge events of June 28 and October 30,

1980. Astron. Astrophys. 238, 347. ADS.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 30

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

Heyvaerts, J., Priest, E., Rust, D.M.: 1977, An emerging ﬂux model for solar ﬂares. Solar Phys.

53, 255. DOI. ADS.

Howard, R.A., Moses, J.D., Vourlidas, A., Newmark, J.S., Socker, D.G., Plunkett, S.P., et al.:
2008, Sun Earth Connection Coronal and Heliospheric Investigation (SECCHI). Space Sci.
Rev. 136, 67. DOI. ADS.

Janvier, M., Aulanier, G., Pariat, E., D´emoulin, P.: 2013, The standard ﬂare model in three
dimensions. III. Slip-running reconnection properties. Astron. Astrophys. 555, A77. DOI.
ADS.

Janvier, M., Savcheva, A., Pariat, E., Tassev, S., Millholland, S., Bommier, V., McCauley,
P., McKillop, S., Dougan, F.: 2016, Evolution of ﬂare ribbons, electric currents, and quasi-
separatrix layers during an X-class ﬂare. Astron. Astrophys. 591, A141. DOI. ADS.

Jibben, P., Canﬁeld, R.C.: 2004, Twist Propagation in Hα Surges. Astrophys. J. 610, 1129.

DOI. ADS.

Joshi, N.C., Liu, C., Sun, X., Wang, H., Magara, T., Moon, Y.-J.: 2015, The Role of Erupt-
ing Sigmoid in Triggering a Flare with Parallel and Large-scale Quasi-circular Ribbons.
Astrophys. J. 812, 50. DOI. ADS.

Joshi, N.C., Sterling, A.C., Moore, R.L., Magara, T., Moon, Y.-J.: 2017, Onset of a Large
Ejective Solar Eruption from a Typical Coronal-jet-base Field Conﬁguration. Astrophys.
J. 845, 26. DOI. ADS.

Joshi, N.C., Nishizuka, N., Filippov, B., Magara, T., Tlatov, A.G.: 2018, Flux rope breaking
and formation of a rotating blowout jet. Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 476, 1286. DOI.
ADS.

Karpen, J.T., Antiochos, S.K., DeVore, C.R.: 2012, The Mechanisms for the Onset and Ex-
plosive Eruption of Coronal Mass Ejections and Eruptive Flares. Astrophys. J. 760, 81.
DOI. ADS.

Lemen, J.R., Title, A.M., Akin, D.J., Boerner, P.F., Chou, C., Drake, J.F., et al.: 2012, The
Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA) on the Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO). Solar
Phys. 275, 17. DOI. ADS.

Li, H., Yang, J., Jiang, Y., Bi, Y., Qu, Z., Chen, H.: 2018, The surge-like eruption of a miniature
ﬁlament associated with circular ﬂare ribbon. Astrophys. Space Sci. 363, 26. DOI. ADS.
Lin, R.P., Dennis, B.R., Hurford, G.J., Smith, D.M., Zehnder, A., Harvey, P.R., et al.: 2002,
The Reuven Ramaty High-Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (RHESSI). Solar Phys. 210,
3. DOI. ADS.

Liu, C., Deng, N., Liu, R., Ugarte-Urra, I., Wang, S., Wang, H.: 2011, A Standard-to-blowout

Jet. Astrophys. J. Lett. 735, L18. DOI. ADS.

Liu, Y., Kurokawa, H.: 2004, On a Surge: Properties of an Emerging Flux Region. Astrophys.

J. 610, 1136. DOI. ADS.

Longcope, D.W.: 2005, Topological Methods for the Analysis of Solar Magnetic Fields. Liv.

Rev. Solar Phys. 2, 7. DOI. ADS.

L´opez Fuentes, M.C., Klimchuk, J.A., Mandrini, C.H.: 2007, The Temporal Evolution of

Coronal Loops Observed by GOES SXI. Astrophys. J. 657, 1127. DOI. ADS.

L´opez Fuentes, M.C., Poisson, M., Mandrini, C.H., Luoni, M.L., Cristiani, G.D., D´emoulin,
P.: 2015, An´alisis de un evento eyectivo en una arcada cerrada. In: CRAAA 58, 37.
http://www.astronomiaargentina.org.ar/uploads/docs/craaa58.pdf.

MacTaggart, D., Guglielmino, S.L., Haynes, A.L., Simitev, R., Zuccarello, F.: 2015, The mag-
netic structure of surges in small-scale emerging ﬂux regions. Astron. Astrophys. 576, A4.
DOI. ADS.

Mandrini, C.H.: 2010, Magnetic energy release: ﬂares and coronal mass ejections. In:
Kosovichev, A.G., Andrei, A.H., Rozelot, J.-P. (eds.) IAU Symposium 264, 257. DOI. ADS.
Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Schmieder, B., Cauzzi, G., Hofmann,
A.: 1996, 3D Magnetic Reconnection at an X-Ray Bright Point. Solar Phys. 168, 115. DOI.
ADS.

Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P., Schmieder, B., Deng, Y.Y., Rudawy, P.: 2002, The role of
magnetic bald patches in surges and arch ﬁlament systems. Astron. Astrophys. 391, 317.
DOI. ADS.

Mandrini, C.H., Demoulin, P., Schmieder, B., Deluca, E.E., Pariat, E., Uddin, W.: 2006,
Companion Event and Precursor of the X17 Flare on 28 October 2003. Solar Phys. 238,
293. DOI. ADS.

Mandrini, C.H., Schmieder, B., D´emoulin, P., Guo, Y., Cristiani, G.D.: 2014, Topological
Analysis of Emerging Bipole Clusters Producing Violent Solar Events. Solar Phys. 289,
2041. DOI. ADS.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 31

M. L´opez Fuentes et al.

Mandrini, C.H., Baker, D., D´emoulin, P., Cristiani, G.D., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Var-
gas Dom´ınguez, S., Nuevo, F.A., V´asquez, A.M., Pick, M.: 2015, Parallel Evolution of
Quasi-separatrix Layers and Active Region Upﬂows. Astrophys. J. 809, 73. DOI. ADS.
Masson, S., Pariat, E., Aulanier, G., Schrijver, C.J.: 2009, The Nature of Flare Ribbons in

Coronal Null-Point Topology. Astrophys. J. 700, 559. DOI. ADS.

Masson, S., Aulanier, G., Pariat, E., Klein, K.-L.: 2012, Interchange Slip-Running Reconnection

and Sweeping SEP Beams. Solar Phys. 276, 199. DOI. ADS.

Masson, S., Pariat, ´E., Valori, G., Deng, N., Liu, C., Wang, H., Reid, H.: 2017, Flux rope,
hyperbolic ﬂux tube, and late extreme ultraviolet phases in a non-eruptive circular-ribbon
ﬂare. Astron. Astrophys. 604, A76. DOI. ADS.

Milano, L.J., Dmitruk, P., Mandrini, C.H., G´omez, D.O., D´emoulin, P.: 1999, Quasi-Separatrix
Layers in a Reduced Magnetohydrodynamic Model of a Coronal Loop. Astrophys. J. 521,
889.

Moore, R.L., Sterling, A.C., Panesar, N.K.: 2018, Onset of the Magnetic Explosion in Solar

Polar Coronal X-Ray Jets. Astrophys. J. 859, 3. DOI. ADS.

Moore, R.L., Cirtain, J.W., Sterling, A.C., Falconer, D.A.: 2010, Dichotomy of Solar Coronal

Jets: Standard Jets and Blowout Jets. Astrophys. J. 720, 757. DOI. ADS.

Moreno-Insertis, F., Galsgaard, K.: 2013, Plasma Jets and Eruptions in Solar Coronal Holes:
A Three-dimensional Flux Emergence Experiment. Astrophys. J. 771, 20. DOI. ADS.
N´obrega-Siverio, D., Moreno-Insertis, F., Mart´ınez-Sykora, J.: 2016, The Cool Surge Following
Flux Emergence in a Radiation-MHD Experiment. Astrophys. J. 822, 18. DOI. ADS.
Panesar, N.K., Sterling, A.C., Moore, R.L.: 2016, Homologous Jet-driven Coronal Mass

Ejections from Solar Active Region 12192. Astrophys. J. Lett. 822, L23. DOI. ADS.

Panesar, N.K., Sterling, A.C., Moore, R.L., Chakrapani, P.: 2016, Magnetic Flux Cancelation
as the Trigger of Solar Quiet-region Coronal Jets. Astrophys. J. Lett. 832, L7. DOI. ADS.
Pariat, E., Antiochos, S.K., DeVore, C.R.: 2009, A Model for Solar Polar Jets. Astrophys. J.

691, 61. DOI. ADS.

Pariat, E., Antiochos, S.K., DeVore, C.R.: 2010, Three-dimensional Modeling of Quasi-

homologous Solar Jets. Astrophys. J. 714, 1762. DOI. ADS.

Pariat, E., Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P.: 2006, A new concept for magnetic reconnection : slip-
running reconnection. In: Barret, D., Casoli, F., Lagache, G., Lecavelier, A., Pagani, L.
(eds.) SF2A-2006: Semaine de l’Astrophysique Francaise, 559. ADS.

Pariat, E., Dalmasse, K., DeVore, C.R., Antiochos, S.K., Karpen, J.T.: 2015, Model for
straight and helical solar jets. I. Parametric studies of the magnetic ﬁeld geometry. Astron.
Astrophys. 573, A130. DOI. ADS.

Pariat, E., Dalmasse, K., DeVore, C.R., Antiochos, S.K., Karpen, J.T.: 2016, A model for
straight and helical solar jets. II. Parametric study of the plasma beta. Astron. Astrophys.
596, A36. DOI. ADS.

Poisson, M., Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P., L´opez Fuentes, M.: 2015, Evidence of Twisted

Flux-Tube Emergence in Active Regions. Solar Phys. 290, 727. DOI. ADS.

Poisson, M., D´emoulin, P., L´opez Fuentes, M., Mandrini, C.H.: 2016, Properties of Magnetic

Tongues over a Solar Cycle. Solar Phys. 291, 1625. DOI. ADS.

Polito, V., Del Zanna, G., Valori, G., Pariat, E., Mason, H.E., Dud´ık, J., Janvier, M.: 2017,
Analysis and modelling of recurrent solar ﬂares observed with Hinode/EIS on March 9,
2012. Astron. Astrophys. 601, A39. DOI. ADS.

Qiu, J., Gary, D.E.: 2003, Flare-related Magnetic Anomaly with a Sign Reversal. Astrophys.

J. 599, 615. DOI. ADS.

Raouaﬁ, N.E., Patsourakos, S., Pariat, E., Young, P.R., Sterling, A.C., Savcheva, A., Shimojo,
M., Moreno-Insertis, F., DeVore, C.R., Archontis, V., T¨or¨ok, T., Mason, H., Curdt, W.,
Meyer, K., Dalmasse, K., Matsui, Y.: 2016, Solar Coronal Jets: Observations, Theory, and
Modeling. Space Sci. Rev. 201, 1. DOI. ADS.

Roy, J.R.: 1973, The Magnetic Properties of Solar Surges. Solar Phys. 28, 95. DOI. ADS.
Rust, D.M., Hildner, E., Hansen, R.T., Dryer, M., McClymont, A.N., McKenna-Lawlor, S.M.P.,
McLean, D.J., Schmahl, E.J., Steinolfson, R.S., Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1980, Mass ejections.
In: Sturrock, P.A. (ed.) Skylab Solar Workshop II, 273. ADS.

Savcheva, A.S., van Ballegooijen, A.A., DeLuca, E.E.: 2012, Field Topology Analysis of a

Long-lasting Coronal Sigmoid. Astrophys. J. 744, 78. DOI. ADS.

Savcheva, A., Pariat, E., McKillop, S., McCauley, P., Hanson, E., Su, Y., Werner, E., DeLuca,
E.E.: 2015, The Relation between Solar Eruption Topologies and Observed Flare Features.
I. Flare Ribbons. Astrophys. J. 810, 96. DOI. ADS.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 32

Analysis of the “Surge” of 09–May–2012

Scherrer, P.H., Schou, J., Bush, R.I., Kosovichev, A.G., Bogart, R.S., Hoeksema, J.T., et al.:
2012, The Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) Investigation for the Solar Dynamics
Observatory (SDO). Solar Phys. 275, 207. DOI. ADS.

Schmahl, E.J.: 1981, The physical relationship between ﬂares and surges observed in the

extreme ultraviolet. Solar Phys. 69, 135. DOI. ADS.

Schmieder, B., Mein, P., Simnett, G.M., Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1988, An example of the
association of X-ray and UV emission with H-alpha surges. Astron. Astrophys. 201, 327.
ADS.

Schmieder, B., Shibata, K., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Freeland, S.: 1995, H alpha surges and

associated soft X-ray loops. Solar Phys. 156, 245. DOI. ADS.

Shen, Y., Liu, Y., Su, J., Deng, Y.: 2012, On a Coronal Blowout Jet: The First Observation
of a Simultaneously Produced Bubble-like CME and a Jet-like CME in a Solar Event.
Astrophys. J. 745, 164. DOI. ADS.

Shibata, K., Ishido, Y., Acton, L.W., Strong, K.T., Hirayama, T., Uchida, Y., et al.: 1992,
Observations of X-ray jets with the YOHKOH Soft X-ray Telescope. Pub. Astron. Soc.
Japan 44, L173. ADS.

Sterling, A.C., Moore, R.L., Falconer, D.A., Adams, M.: 2015, Small-scale ﬁlament eruptions

as the driver of X-ray jets in solar coronal holes. Nature 523, 437. DOI. ADS.

Sterling, A.C., Moore, R.L., Falconer, D.A., Panesar, N.K., Akiyama, S., Yashiro, S., Gopal-
swamy, N.: 2016, Miniﬁlament Eruptions that Drive Coronal Jets in a Solar Active Region.
Astrophys. J. 821, 100. DOI. ADS.

Titov, V.S., Hornig, G., D´emoulin, P.: 2002, Theory of magnetic connectivity in the solar

corona. J. Geophys. Res. 107, 1164.

Uddin, W., Schmieder, B., Chandra, R., Srivastava, A.K., Kumar, P., Bisht, S.: 2012, Observa-
tions of Multiple Surges Associated with Magnetic Activities in AR 10484 on 2003 October
25. Astrophys. J. 752, 70. DOI. ADS.

Vargas Dom´ınguez, S., Kosovichev, A., Yurchyshyn, V.: 2014, Multi-wavelength High-
resolution Observations of a Small-scale Emerging Magnetic Flux Event and the Chro-
mospheric and Coronal Response. Astrophys. J. 794, 140. DOI. ADS.

Webb, D.F., Howard, T.A.: 2012, Coronal Mass Ejections: Observations. Living Reviews in

Solar Physics 9, 3. DOI. ADS.

Wilmot-Smith, A.L., Hornig, G., Pontin, D.I.: 2009, Magnetic Braiding and Parallel Electric

Fields. Astrophys. J. 696, 1339.

Wyper, P.F., Antiochos, S.K., DeVore, C.R.: 2017, A universal model for solar eruptions.

Nature 544, 452. DOI. ADS.

Wyper, P.F., DeVore, C.R., Antiochos, S.K.: 2018, A Breakout Model for Solar Coronal Jets

with Filaments. Astrophys. J. 852, 98. DOI. ADS.

Yang, S., Zhang, J.: 2018, Mini-ﬁlament Eruptions Triggering Conﬁned Solar Flares Observed

by ONSET and SDO. Astrophys. J. Lett. 860, L25. DOI. ADS.

Yokoyama, T., Shibata, K.: 1995, Magnetic reconnection as the origin of X-ray jets and Hα

surges on the Sun. Nature 375, 42. DOI. ADS.

Yokoyama, T., Shibata, K.: 1996, MHD Simulation of Solar Coronal X-ray Jets: Emerging

Flux Reconnection Model. Astrophysical Letters and Communications 34, 133. ADS.

Young, P.R., Muglach, K.: 2014a, A coronal hole jet observed with Hinode and the Solar

Dynamics Observatory. Pub. Astron. Soc. Japan 66, S12. DOI. ADS.

Young, P.R., Muglach, K.: 2014b, Solar Dynamics Observatory and Hinode Observations of a

Blowout Jet in a Coronal Hole. Solar Phys. 289, 3313. DOI. ADS.

Zhao, J., Li, H., Pariat, E., Schmieder, B., Guo, Y., Wiegelmann, T.: 2014, Temporal Evolution
of the Magnetic Topology of the NOAA Active Region 11158. Astrophys. J. 787, 88. DOI.
ADS.

SOLA: paper_surge_astro-ph.tex; 31 October 2018; 0:28; p. 33

