Triplet p-wave superconductivity with ABM state in epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers 

G. J. Zhao1, 2*, X. X. Gong3*, J. C. He3*, J. A. Gifford2, H. X. Zhou3, Y. Chen3,5, X. F. Jin3,5, C. L. 

Chien4,6,7, and T. Y. Chen1, 2  

1 

1Institute for Quantum Science and Engineering and Department of Physics, Southern 

University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China 

2Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ  85287, USA 

3Department of Physics and State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics, Fudan University, 

Shanghai 200433, China  

4Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, 

USA 

5Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing 210093, China 

6Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11519, Taiwan 

7Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 10617, Taiwan 

* Authors have equal contributions for this work 

 
 
 
 
2 

Abstract 

We report observation of spin triplet superconductivity in epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers with TC 

up to 4 K and 2/kBTC ≈ 12.  Andreev reflection spectroscopy (ARS) with ballistic injection 

of unpolarized and spin-polarized electrons conclusively reveals spin triplet p-wave 

superconductivity. The gap structure measured by ARS in multiple crystal directions shows 

the ABM (Anderson-Brinkman-Morel) state, the same as that in superfluid 3He.  

Significance 

Triplet p-wave superconductors, fundamentally important to understand unconventional 

superconductivity, are also the simplest systems to realize Majorana-zero-mode based 

quantum computing.  Verified triplet superconductors are very rare, with p-wave pairing in 

3He at 2.7 mK the only established example.  Here we report the observation of p-wave 

triplet ABM (Anderson-Brinkman-Morel) state up to 4 K in epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers, using 

Andreev reflection spectroscopy (ARS) with unpolarized and highly spin-polarized 

currents.  ARS experiments in multiple directions determine the 3D gap structure and 

symmetry.  The realization of p-wave superconductors in the solid state has important 

implication for topological Majorana physics and Weyl superconductivity.   

 
 
 
 
 
3 

Most superconductors (SCs) with known pairing states are singlet SCs [1], where the 

Cooper pairs have antiparallel spins, most commonly s-wave (e.g., Nb) with an isotropic 

energy gap (2Δ), and some d-wave (e.g., high-TC cuprates) with an anisotropic gap 

structure with nodes [2].  Conspicuously lacking is triplet p-wave SCs, which feature 

prominently in realizing Majorana bound-state quantum computing [3, 4].  Some (e.g., 

Sr2RuO4) have been suspected to be, but remain unconfirmed as, p-wave SCs [5-7].  

Superfluid 3He has been demonstrated as triplet p-wave pairing [8].  

With the recent advent of topological superconductivity [9-11], the novel 

topological surface state may offer new routes to the elusive p-wave SCs.  Since strong spin 

orbit coupling is an essential ingredient we focus our attention on materials that contain 

heavy elements, especially Bi, the heaviest non-radioactive element.  Indeed, we have 

recently observed half quantum flux in Bi2Pd, consistent with p-wave pairing [12].  In this 

work, we report the realization of triplet p-wave in epitaxial Bi(110)/Ni(100) bilayers.  

To ascertain a triplet SC, thermodynamic measurements, e.g., upper crucial field, are 

suggestive but insufficient.  NMR Knight shift to measure spin susceptibility across Tc is 

often used [13].  Muon spin relaxation (SR) [14] and magneto-optic Kerr effect (MOKE) 

[15] can detect time reversal symmetry (TRS) breaking across TC, a necessary signature of 

triplet pairing.  To ascertain the nature of a SC, one needs to measure the spin state of the 

Cooper pairs and the gap structure as Andreev reflection spectroscopy (ARS) can provide.  

We show in this work, ARS with ballistic injections of both unpolarized and highly spin-

polarized electrons can reveal a singlet or triplet SC, and when administered in multiple 

crystalline directions, can also determine the 3D gap structure.   

 
4 

The defining difference between a singlet SC and a triplet SC is the spin states in the 

Cooper pair.  The triplet p-wave pairing has three possible spin states, |> (Sz = 1), 

|>+|> (Sz = 0), and |> (Sz = -1).  Triplet p-wave pairing has been established in 

superfluid 3He, in which there are A-phase and B-phase.  In the B-phase, generally 

associated with the Balian-Werthamer (BW) state [16], the three spin states are populated 

with equal probability, resulting in an isotropic gap.  For the A-phase associated with the 

Anderson-Brinkman-Morel (ABM) state [17, 18], the Sz = 0 state is completely depleted.  

The ABM state, which can carry spin angular momentum and is related to quantum 

computing, is more interesting.  For a large spin polarization of Cooper pairs, only one 

component Sz = +1 exists with a supercurrent carrying a spin angular momentum. The gap 

of the ABM state is anisotropic as described by,  

(1) 

(2) 

where k and k are spherical coordinates to describe the gap function.   The 3D donut 

shape gap structure sink with an extremal gap value  specifies the ABM state.  The ± k 

halves have opposite signs.   Previously, the ABM state has only been observed in 3He at 

temperature near 2.7 mK [4]. 

ARS has been utilized to determine spin polarization (P) of magnetic materials [19, 

20], including some highly spin-polarized material [21, 22] and half metals [23, 24].  ARS 

has also been utilized to measure the gap of many s-wave SCs, MgB2 with two gaps, and the 

Fe-SCs [25]. The ARS involves ballistic injection of electrons through a sharp tip from a 

metal into a SC or vice versa.  When electrons are injected into a SC, only two electrons of 

 
 
 
 
 
5 

appropriate spin can enter the gap as a Cooper pair.  A normal metal with unpolarized 

electrons (P = 0, e.g., Cu and Au) has equal spin-up and spin-down bands at the Fermi 

energy EF [Fig. 1(a)].   Injection of a spin-up electron with |E| <  into a singlet SC must be 

accompanied by a spin-down electron, thus a reflected spin-down hole, the Andreev 

reflection process [26], and doubling the conductance within the gap (Fig. 1c).  The same 

scenario occurs for a triplet SC as shown in Fig. 1.   Thus, the ARS results for ballistic spin 

injection from a normal metal into either a singlet or a triplet SC are qualitatively the same 

with increased conductance within the gap as shown in Fig. 1(c).  On the other hand, in a 

half metal with fully polarized electrons [P = 1, e.g., CrO2 and La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 (LSMO)], there 

is only one spin band [Fig. 1(b)] with no electron of opposite spin available at EF, thus the 

Andreev reflection process is blocked with depressed conductance within the gap (Fig. 1d).  

However, in a triplet SC with parallel pairing, the Andreev reflection process is allowed for 

both a half-metal (Fig. 1b) and a normal metal (Fig. 1a) with increased conductance within 

the gap in both cases.  Hence the AR spectra with a half metal, or a highly polarized metal, 

are qualitatively different for singlet and triplet SCs, suitable for clear identification.   

The ARS results shown in Fig. 1 are for an ideal interface at T = 0 K with one-

dimensional spin injection.   Real contacts encounter interfacial scattering (Z), inelastic 

scattering (), thermal smearing (T), extra resistance (rE), and injection from all angles, 

which distort the ARS spectra and require more detailed analyses [27].   The ARS of an s-

wave SC shows the same double-peak spectrum with injection from all angles, where the 

separation of the two peaks gives the gap value of 2 [28].  For the ARS of d-wave or p-

wave SCs with anisotropic gap structure, the ARS spectrum, the gap value and its phase 

depend on injection directions due to interference.  The ARS spectra can be quantitatively 

 
6 

fitted with the calculated the spectra for s-, p- and d-wave SCs as described in the 

Supplementary to obtain the gap value for each injection direction.   

We use Au as the normal-metal tip and single crystal LSMO with P over 80% [29] as 

the half-metal tip.   For comparison, we first show results of s-wave Pb and d-wave YBCO in 

Fig. 2.  In both Pb and YBCO, the Au contact shows enhanced ARS spectra, whereas the 

LSMO contact shows depressed ARS spectra, revealing that both are singlet SCs.  The solid 

curves are quantitative fits and the obtained essentially the same gap values using Au or 

LSMO tip for the same SC.  The ARS results provide unequivocal identification of singlet 

SCs, either s-wave in Pb or d-wave in YBCO.   We next discuss the results on epitaxial Bi/Ni 

bilayers.  

Co-existence of superconductivity and magnetism has previously been observed in 

polycrystalline Bi/Ni bilayers [30, 31].  The epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers have been fabricated by 

molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on either MgO (001) or Si(111) substrates to acquire 

respectively epitaxial Bi(110) or Bi(111) layers with various thicknesses of fcc Ni (tNi = 0 - 

7.5 nm) and rhombohedral Bi (tBi = 0 - 500nm) [32].  The appearance of superconductivity 

depends sensitively on the epitaxial orientation.  Only Bi(110) exhibits superconductivity 

whereas Bi(111) does not.  For the Bi(110)/Ni(100) films, for the same thicknesses, the 

layer order of Bi/Ni and Ni/Bi is not important.  In the following, we discuss the results of 

Bi(110)/Ni(100).  Neither Bi nor ferromagnetic Ni, but remarkably Bi(20nm)/Ni(2nm), is 

superconducting with TC ≈ 4 K as shown in Fig. S1(a).  Furthermore, Bi/Ni has a very 

unusual thickness dependence as shown in Fig. S1(d).  For a given Bi thickness, increasing 

Ni thickness always depresses TC.  However, a thicker Bi layer readily restores the 

depressed TC.  Thus, TC of every Bi thickness has its own dependence on Ni thickness.  In 

 
7 

addition, the parallel upper critical field (HC2||) shows values exceeding the Pauli limit of 

1.83 TC ≈ 7 T as shown in Fig. S1(c), highly suggestive of an unconventional SC.    

We use ARS with both Au and LSMO tips on the top Bi(110) surface of the 

Bi(20nm)/Ni(2nm) bilayer.  As shown in Fig. 2(c), the ARS using both Au and LSMO show 

enhanced conductance within the gap, a defining characteristic of a triplet SC as discussed 

in Fig. 1.  The ARS spectra can be well described quantitatively by the ABM state of triplet 

pairing, as shown by the solid curves.   From the measured gap value of   2.2meV and TC 

= 4.0 K, we found 2/kBTC ≈ 12, far larger than the value of 2/kBTC ≈ 3.53, universally 

observed in BCS s-wave SCs [1], another unusual feature.   

We measured many contacts with various contact resistances in the ballistic limit as 

shown in Fig. 3.  When the Au tip is contact on the top surface (Fig. 3a), all the AR spectra 

with contact resistance from a few Ω to 1700 Ω show enhanced conductance (Fig 3b). 

Importantly, the AR spectra with a LSMO tip from a few Ω to over 1000 Ω also show 

enhanced conductance (Fig. 3d).  We further show the measured dI/dV of one Au contact 

(Fig. 3c) and one LSMO contact (Fig. 3e) at various temperatures.  The peak structure of the 

enhanced conductance in both Au and LSMO contact vary systematically and disappears at 

TC .  At T < TC, the normal state conductance (dI/dV)normal outside the gap remains finite for 

both Au and LSMO contacts, but decreases sharply near TC.   Concurrently, the peak 

intensity in both Au and LSMO contacts steadily reduce and vanishes at TC, hence all 

originated from a triplet SC. The non-monotonous feature in the LSMO contact (Fig. 3e) 

may be due to the misalignment of the magnetizations of Ni and LSMO since it disappears 

in a small field of 1 kOe.  These ARS results using injection from both Au and LSMO using 

many contacts and at various temperatures all indicate Bi/Ni is a triplet SC.  

 
8 

To determine the 3D gap structure, in addition to injection from the top surface, we 

measured ARS in the two other perpendicular directions of the epitaxial Bi/Ni samples cut 

along perpendicular crystal directions.  Since point contact is unfeasible, we used Au or 

LSMO sharp blades to make contacts with Bi/Ni on the side of the sample, as schematically 

shown in Fig. 3f and 3i.  The Ni magnetization was aligned by a magnetic field of 1 kOe and 

two directions of Fig. 3f and 3i are defined by the magnetization direction indicated by the 

arrow.   The ARS spectra of the Bi/Ni bilayer are very different in the three directions, as 

summarized in Fig. 4(a-c).  The spectra are similar in the A and C directions, but different in 

the B direction.  This anisotropic gap structure rules out the triplet p-wave Balian-

Werthamer (BW) state with a quasi-isotropic gap. The triplet p-wave ABM gap structure 

from Eq. (1) is an anisotropic 3D donut with its nodal direction along the B direction, as 

shown in the center of Fig. 4.  In both A and C directions, the incident and reflected 

wavevectors have opposite x-component, thus an opposite phase from Eq. (1), giving rise to 

a single peak, as shown in Fig. 4(d), which is a cross section of the donut-like structure with 

two halves of opposite signs.  One notes that the tunneling spectrum with a zero-bias 

coherent peak for d-wave SC (Fig. 2b) is due to the same physics [33].  In the B direction, 

however, the incident and reflected wave-vectors have the same sign, causing a double 

peak feature, as shown in Fig. 4(e).  All the experimentally observed AR spectra can be 

excellently reproduced as the solid curves shown in Fig. 4(a,-c) using the ABM state.   

To further establish the ABM structure, we measure the ARS at one direction 

(labeled B) using an in-plane magnetic field of 3 kOe (less than the upper critical field) to 

change the Ni magnetization to different direction.  The ARS results with the Ni 

magnetization at angles of  = 0°, 45°, 90°, 135°, 180° are shown in Fig. 4(f).  The results 

 
9 

shows a single peak at  = 0°, 180° (direction C), a double peak at  = 90° (direction B) and 

a triple peak at  = 45°, 135°, which is the superposition of the previous two.  These results 

conclusively show the two-fold axis of the ABM donut structure and that the Ni 

magnetization dictates its orientation.  All the results in Fig, 4(f) have been observed from 

one contact, and all the determined gap values are consistently at   2.1 meV.  Recent Kerr 

measurement on Bi/Ni bilayers, showing spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking 

below TC [15], is consistent with the triplet nature.  Our ARS measurements quantitatively 

demonstrate epitaxial Bi/Ni as the first material in which the triplet p-wave ABM state has 

been realized in the solid state.  

The mechanism of the superconductivity in Bi/Ni, likely the results of topological 

superconductivity, is intimately related to both Bi and Ni.  Bi is an unusual semimetal with 

bulk SC recently discovered at 0.53 mK [34]. The presence of ferromagnetic Ni initiates 

superconductivity with TC up to 4 K and the Ni magnetization direction dictates the 

orientation of the triplet p-wave ABM state. The itinerant Ni appears to be essential, since 

neither Bi/Co nor Bi/Fe show superconductivity.  The ABM state has two gapless nodes on 

the Fermi surface which correspond to topological superconductor with two chiral edge 

Weyl points protected by Chern number as “magnetic” monopole [35].  As opposed to the 

ABM state in superﬂuid 3He occurring at less than 3 mK, many exploration and 

manipulation techniques can be readily utilized in the solid state of Bi/Ni at 4 K. The 3D 

triplet p-wave superconducting Bi/Ni bilayers may offer an ideal platform to explore 

topological Weyl superconductivity and Majorana physics.   

 
 
This work was supported as part of SHINES, an EFRC center funded by the U. S. 

Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Science, under award SC0012670.   

10 

 
 
 
11 

Fig. 1 Andreev reflection of a singlet and a triplet SC at T = 0 K using a normal metal (P = 0) 

and a half metal (P = 1) in 1D. Schematic energy diagrams of Andreev reflection of a singlet 

SC (right) and a triplet SC (left) using (a) a normal metal and (b) a half metal.  Andreev 

spectra of a (c) singlet SC and (d) triplet SC, using a normal metal (dashed blue lines) and a 

half metal (solid red line) tip.  

 
 
 
 
 
12 

Fig. 2 Andreev spectra of (a) s-wave SC Pb, (b) d-wave SC YBCO tips, (c) p-wave SC of Bi/Ni 

fitted with the ABM state using Au and LSMO tips with fitted results as the solid curves.   

 
 
 
 
 
13 

Fig. 3 ARS of Bi/Ni at 1.5 K with injection into the top surface (a-e), side surface (f-h) and 

other side surface (i-k). Results of injection from top surface using Au tip (red) with (b) 

various contact resistances, (c) one Au contact at various temperatures, and LSMO tip 

(blue) with (d) various contact resistances, (f) one LSMO contact at various temperatures. 

Representative ARS results on the side of Bi/Ni in the direction along the magnetization 

(M) direction of Ni with (g) Au tip and (h) LSMO tip. Representative ARS results on the side 

of Bi/Ni in the direction perpendicular to M with (j) Au tip and (k) LSMO tip. The remnant 

magnetization of the Ni layer is indicated by the red arrow.  

 
   
 
14 

Fig. 4 Donut-like 3D ABM gap structure of the Bi/Ni bilayer with EF set to 0. (a-c), Andreev 

reflection spectra observed at the three directions A, B and C respectively.  (d) Andreev 

reflection spectra at the A and C interfaces, where incident and reflection have opposite 

phase.  (e) Andreev reflection spectra at B interface where incident and reflection have the 

same phase. (f) Andreev spectra of one point contact along B with an in-plane magnetic 

field of H = 3 kOe (H << HC) applied in different directions at angle  angle with respect to C 

with gap values indicated.   

 
 
 
 
 
References:   

15 

1.  M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996).  
2.  J. R. Kirtley, C. C. Tsuei, J. Z. Sun, C. C. Chi, L. S. Yu-Jahnes, A. Gupta, M. Rupp, M. B. 

Ketchen, Symmetry of the order parameter in the high-Tc superconductor 
YBa2Cu3O7-δ. Nature 373, 225 (1995). 

3.  C. Nayak, S. H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman, S. D. Sarma, Non-Abelian anyons and 
topological quantum computation. Reviews of Modern Physics 80, 1083 (2008). 
4.  F. Romeo, R. Citro, Cooper pairs spintronics in triplet spin valves. Physical Review 

Letters 111, (2013).  

5.  A. P. Mackenzie, Y. Maeno, The superconductivity of Sr2RuO4 and the physics of spin-

triplet pairing. Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 657 (2003). 

6.  Y. Maeno, S. Kittaka, T. Nomura, S. Yonezawa, K. Ishida, Evaluation of spin-triplet 

superconductivity in Sr2RuO4. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 81, 011009 (2012). 

7.  Y. Liu, Z.-Q. Mao, Unconventional superconductivity in Sr2RuO4. Physica C 514, 339 

(2015). 

8.  D. D. Osheroff, B. C. Richardson, D. M. Lee, Evidence for a new phase of solid He3. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 29, 920 (1972).  

9.  L. Fu, C. Kane, and E. Mele., Topological insulators in three dimensions. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 98, 106803 (2007). 

10. L. Fu and C. Kane, Superconducting proximity effect and majorana fermions at the 

surface of a topological insulator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407 (2008). 

11. C. W. J. Beenakker, Search for Majorana fermions in superconductors. Annu. Rev. 

Conden. Matter Phys. 4, 113–136 (2013). 

12. Yufan Li, Xiaoying Xu and C. L. Chien (submitted).  
13. K. Ishida, H. Mukuda, Y. Kitaoka, K. Asayama, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Mori, Y. Maeno, Spin-

triplet superconductivity in Sr2RuO4 identified by 17O Knight shift. Nature 396, 658 
(1998). 

14. G. M. Luke, Y. Fudamoto, K. M. Kojima, M. I. Larkin, J. Merrin, B. Nachumi, Y. J. 
Uemura, Y. Maeno, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Mori, H. Nakamura, M. Sigrist, Time-reversal 
symmetry-breaking superconductivity in Sr2RuO4. Nature 394, 558 (1998). 

15. X. Gong, M. Kargarian, A. Stern, D. Yue, H. Zhou, X. Jin, V. M. Galitski, V. M. Yakovenko, 

J. Xia, Time-reversal symmetry-breaking superconductivity in epitaxial 
bismuth/nickel bilayers. Science Advances 3 (3), e1602579 (2017). 

16. R. Balian, N. R. Werthamer, Superconductivity with pairs in a relative p wave. Phys. 

Rev. 131, 1553 (1963).  

17. P. W. Anderson, P. Morel, Generalized Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer states and aligned 
orbital angular momentum in the proposed low-temperature phase of liquid He3. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 136 (1960).  

18. P. W. Anderson, W. F. Brinkman, Anisotropic superfluidity in He3: A possible 

interpretation of its stability as a spin-fluctuation effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 1108 
(1973).  

19. R. J. Soulen, J. M. Byers, M. S. Osofsky, B. Nadgorny, T. Ambrose, S. F. Cheng, P. R. 
Broussard, C. T. Tanaka, J. Nowak, J. S. Moodera, A. Barry, Measuring the spin 
polarization of a metal with a superconducting point contact. Science 282, 85 
(1998).  

 
16 

20. S. K. Upadhyay, A. Palanisami, R. N. Louie, R. A. Buhrman, Probing ferromagnets with 

Andreev reflection. Physical Review Letters 81, 3247 (1998). 

21. L. Wang, K. Umemoto, R. M. Wentzcovitch, T. Y. Chen, C. L. Chien, J. G. Checkelsky, J. C. 

Eckert, E. D. Dahlberg, C. Leighton, A Tunable Source of Highly Spin-Polarized 
Electrons. Physical Review Letters 94, 056602 (2005). 

22. M. Vahidi, J. A. Gifford, S. K. Zhang, S. Krishnamurthy, Z. G. Yu, L. Yu, M. Huang, C. 

Youngbull, T. Y. Chen, N. Newman, APL Materials 2, 046108 (2014). 

23. Y. Ji, G. J. Strijkers, F. Y. Yang, C. L. Chien, J. M. Byers, A. Anguelouch, G. Xiao, and A. 

Gupta, Fabrication of highly spin-polarized Co2FeAl0.5Si0.5 thin-films. Physical Review 
Letters 86, 5585 (2001). 

24. J. S. Parker, S. M. Watts, P. G. Ivanov, P. Xiong, Spin polarization of CrO2 at and across 

an artificial barrier. Physical Review Letters 88, (2002).   

25. T. Y. Chen, Z. Tesanovic, R. H. Liu, X. H. Chen, C. L. Chien, A BCS-like gap in the 

superconductor SmFeAsO0.85F0.15. Nature 453, 1224 (2008).  

26. A. F. Andreev, The thermal conductivity of the intermediate state in 

superconductors. Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 46, 1823 (1964) [Sov. Phys.–J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 
19, 1228 (1964)].  

27. T. Y. Chen, S. X. Huang, C. L. Chien, Pronounced effects of additional resistance in 
Andreev reflection spectroscopy.  Phys. Rev. B 81, 214444(2010); T. Y. Chen, Z. 
Tesanovic, C. L. Chien, Unified formalism of Andreev reflection at a 
ferromagnet/superconductor interface. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 146602 (2012). 
28. J. A. Gifford, G. J. Zhao, B. C. Li, J. Zhang, D. R. Kim, T. Y. Chen, Zero bias anomaly in 
Andreev reflection spectroscopy. Journal of Applied Physics 120, 163901 (2016). 
29. J. A. Gifford, B. B. Chen, J. Zhang, G. J. Zhao,D. R. Kim, B. C. Li, D. Wu and T. Y. Chen, 
Determination of spin polarization using an unconventional iron superconductor, 
AIP Adv., 6, 115023 (2016).  

30. J. S. Moodera, R. Meservey, Superconducting phases of Bi and Ga induced by 

deposition on a Ni sublayer. Phys. Rev. B 42, 179 (1990). 

31. P. LeClair, J. S. Moodera, J. Philip, D. Heiman, Coexistence of Ferromagnetism and 

Superconductivity in Ni/Bi Bilayers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 037006 (2005). 

32. X.-X. Gong, H.-X. Zhou, P.-C. Xu, D. Yue, K. Zhu, X.-F. Jin, H. Tian, G.-J. Zhao, T.-Y. Chen, 

Possible p-wave superconductivity in epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers. Chinese Physics Letters 
32, 067402 (2015).  

33. C. -R. Hu, Midgap surface states as a novel signature for 𝑑𝑥𝑎

2 -𝑥𝑏

2-wave 

superconductivity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1526 (1994). 

34. O. Prakash, A. Kumar, A. Thamizhavel, S. Ramakrishnan, Evidence for bulk 

superconductivity in pure bismuth single crystals at ambient pressure. Science 355, 
52 (2016).  

35. G. E. Volovik, The Universe in a Helium Droplet (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 

2009).    

 
 
 
 
17 

Supplementary Materials 

More Experimental Details 

The superconductivity in epitaxial Bi/Ni depends systematically on the layer 

thicknesses of both Bi and Ni, as summarized in Fig. S1(d).  For a fixed thickness of Bi, e.g., 

tBi = 20 nm, a Ni layer with increasing thickness always suppresses superconductivity. For 

tNi = 2nm, TC is about 4 K but reduced to 2 K for tNi = 4nm.  Remarkably, increasing tBi can 

restore the suppressed superconductivity and TC recovers back to about 4 K.  This unusual 

thickness dependence cannot be simply explained by the assumption that the 

superconductivity occurs at the interface then decays into the Bi and Ni layers.  In contrast, 

no superconductivity has been detected in either Bi/Co or Bi/Fe, illustrating the unique 

role of Ni in the system.  

We have also measured the upper critical fields in Bi(20nm)/Ni(2nm) for both 

perpendicular (HC2

) (Fig. S1a) and parallel (HC2||) (Fig. S1b) to the film plane.  To describe 

the field dependence, we use three characteristic temperatures of onset (0.95 RN), mid-

point (0.5 RN) and zero-resistance (0.05 RN), where RN is the normal state resistance.  The 

T-dependences of the upper critical fields in the two directions are displayed in Fig. S1(c).  

Fitting the results of perpendicular field (open symbols) to the Werthamer–Helfand–

Hohenberg formula of  

 [S1], the upper perpendicular critical field 

at T = 0 K is about 1.9 T. For the parallel field (solid symbols), the upper critical field can be 

well described by 

. The onset data (solid purple triangles) in Fig. 

S1C can be well described by exponent  = 2/3 (solid purple curve), as found in other 

quasi-2D SCs [S2,S3].  The upper parallel critical fields extrapolated to T = 0 K are 

substantially above the Pauli limit of BPauli = 1.83TC = 7.1T [S4-S6], which has often been 

CC2C2C(0)0.69d/d|THHT////C2C2C()(0)(1)HTHTT 
 
taken as an indication of unconventional, including p-wave superconductivity.  These 

features of Bi/Ni are highly unusual but conclusive triplet pairing requires spin injection 

within the gap. 

18 

Fig. S1 | Superconducting properties of epitaxial Bi(110)/Ni(001)/MgO(001).  

Superconducting transition of Bi(20nm)/Ni(2nm)/MgO in (a) perpendicular and (b) parallel 

magnetic field. (c) Temperature dependence of upper critical fields

for perpendicular 

(open symbols) and parallel (solid symbols). (d) Dependence on superconducting transition 

temperature TC on Ni thickness for different Bi thicknesses.  The lines are guides to the eyes.   

2CH 
 
 
 
19 

Theoretical Formalism 

As shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), a spin polarized current from LSMO seriously suppresses 

the conductance in both s-wave and d-wave superconductors. But the conductance for the 

Ni/Bi bilayer is not suppressed but much larger than 2.  This cannot be described by the 

singlet BTK model. Here we develop a triplet model to describe our data. For the Normal 

metal-Superconductor (N-S) junction [S7], the plane wave at normal metal side can be 

expressed by a four-component wave function 

 , 

(S1) 

where  

 and  

  are wave vector components parallel and vertical to interface 

respectively, the dimensionless real number 

 is related to spin polarization 

, i.e. 

. The first row of right hand side of Eq. (S1) represents the electron with spin 

up incident plane wave and normal reflection wave  

, the second row 

represents the electron with spin down wave 

, the third row represents the hole with spin 

down Andreev reflection wave 

 and the fourth row represents the hole with spin up 

evanescent wave 

. We can always choose the spin direction of incident electron 

as the positive 

 direction, the superconducting state could either be singlet pairing or 

triplet pairing, the coefficients (

,

 and  ) can be solved from the boundary conditions 

below.   

The wave function at the superconductor side is given by,  

 
 
 
20 

(S2) 

where 

 and  

 denote electron-like and hole-like respectively, 

 , 

, 

,  and 

 are 

coherence factors which come from the equation 

where  

  labels the spin index ,

 , denotes annihilation operator of electron, 

corresponds to annihilation operator of quasiparticle.  

For unitary solution [S8] of a superconductor, 

(S3) 

(S4) 

where 

case 

, and 

 is a 

 pairing matrix. For singlet pairing 

where 

 is an even function. For triplet pairing case 

where 

 is an odd vector function.  

          The boundary conditions satisfy 

(S5) 

(S6) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For ballistic transport, the normalized conductance with a bias voltage 

 is 

21 

(S7) 

(S8) 

where 

, 

  and 

. Considering the effects of additional resistance on Andreev reflection 

spectrum, we adopted a self-consistent method for extracting 

  from the 

measured 

 [S9].    

FIG.S2: The parameter  

  depicts the electron incident angle and 

  represents the angle 

between the  

 axis of the p-wave (or 

 -wave) and the normal direction of interface. 

The transmitted hole-like quasiparticle and electron-like quasiparticle have different 

effective pairing potentials 

 and 

, respectively, with 

 and 

. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 

     As studied in the superfluid state of 3He, there are two thermodynamically stable spin 

triplet p-wave pairing states [S10]. One is the Anderson-Brinkman-Morel (ABM) state [S11] 

with its superconducting order parameter as 

(S9) 

We can easily obtain 

 which imply the solution of ABM state is 

unitary. So we can impose Eq. (S7) to obtain its coherence factors which are elements of 

matrices 

, 

 .  The 

obtained coefficients 

 , 

 , 

 , 

 , 

 are listed in Table S. The normalized conductance 

spectra of ABM state are presented in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. The solid red lines are the best fit 

using our model. Our theoretical analysis of experimental data illustrates that there is ABM 

state in Bi/Ni bilayer system.  

As shown in Fig.4, the 3D gap of ABM state is like a donut and there are two nodal 

points. Meanwhile, its nodal direction is parallel to the B direction, which is same as the Ni 

magnetization direction.  We find the fitting value of superconducting gap in B direction is 

slightly smaller than that of A and C directions (the fitting values of superconducting gap in 

A and C directions are quite close). We think that experimentally the point contact in B 

direction may change the local orientation of the surface so that the nodal direction of ABM 

state may deviate slightly from the normal direction of the surface. This may cause the pair 

breaking effect [S12] and result in a smaller superconducting gap in B direction.  

 The Balian-Werthamer (BW) state [S13], the so-called B phase in 3He, is another typical 

candidate of p-wave pairing states. Owing to the isotropy of the single particle spectrum, 

the BW state is in many respects similar to the s-wave pairing state. Our theoretical results 

 
 
 
  
show that BW state is unable to explain the main features of Andreev reflection 

experimental results. 

23 

            The ABM state, or the A-phase, is an equal spin pairing state, where only Cooper 

pairs with Sz=+1 and Sz=-1 exist, while the Sz=0 component is absent. The external 

magnetic field may imbalance the population of Sz=+1 and Sz=-1 Cooper pairs and result in 

the emergence of the so-called A2-phase with finite spin polarization of Cooper pairs. If the 

spin polarization of Cooper pairs becomes quite large, only one component Sz=+1 exists, 

this state is called the A1-phase. So if one progressively increases the external magnetic 

field, there may be two phase transitions from A-phase, to A2-phase and then to A1-phase. It 

is rather interesting that all the gap parameters of A, A1 and A2 phases have the same axial 

structure or nodal structure, which reflects the topological nature of these pairing 

states[S10].  

In Bi/Ni bilayer, Ni layer acts not only as a pairing inducer due to enhanced 

ferromagnetic spin fluctuation in Bi layer but also a pairing breaker due to the static Ni 

ferromagnetism. Because of the Ni layer, in principle all three topological phases (A, A1 or 

A2) could be the candidate. As shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, in the absence of external 

magnetic field, the nice data fitting based on A-phase may suggest that the ground state is 

close to A-phase. The formation of 20nm thick non-superconducting Bi layer sandwiched 

by Ni layer and Bi superconducting layer may greatly suppress the external magnetic field 

exerted by Ni layer to Bi superconducting layer. That may explain why Bi superconducting 

layer corresponds to equal spin pairing state or ABM state. In the presence of 3 kOe 

 
 
external magnetic field, the Bi superconducting state may enter into A2-phase with finite 

spin polarization of the Cooper pairs. 

24 

TABLE S: Coefficients for ABM state.  

 ,  

 , 

 , 

,  

 ,

, 

 ,  

 , 

 (illustrated in Fig.S2) and 

 , 

 representing inelastic electron-

electron scattering factor. 

Some possible superconducting Bi-Ni materials 

One might suspect the triplet superconductivity in Bi/Ni bilayers is due to superconducting 

Bi-Ni alloys or compounds at the Bi/Ni interface.  The NiBi3 is indeed superconducting with 

TC of about 4 K, but decidedly s-wave [S14]. 

References 

S1. N. R. Werthamer, E. Helfand, P. C. Hohenberg, Temperature and purity dependence of 

the superconducting critical field, Hc2. III. electron spin and spin-orbit effects.  Phys. Rev. 
147, 295 (1966). 

S2. Y. Kozuka, M. Kim, C. Bell, B. G. Kim, Y. Hikita, H. Y. Hwang, Two-dimensional normal-
state quantum oscillations in a superconducting heterostructure. Nature 462, 487 
(2009). 

S3. Q. L. He, H. Liu, M. He, Y. H. Lai, H. He, G. Wang, K. T. Law, R. Lortz, J. Wang, I. K. Sou, 

Two-dimensional superconductivity at the interface of a Bi2Te3/FeTe heterostructure. 
Nature Communications 5, (2014). 

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 

S4. A. M. Clogston, Upper limit for the critical field in hard superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

9, 266 (1962). 

S5. B. S. Chandrasekhar, A note on the maximum critical field of high‐field superconductors. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 1, 7 (1962). 

S6. Y. Mizukami, H. Shishido, T. Shibauchi, M. Shimozawa, S. Yasumoto, D. Watanabe, M. 

Yamashita, H. Ikeda, T. Terashima, H. Kontani, Y. Matsuda, Extremely strong-coupling 
superconductivity in artificial two-dimensional Kondo lattices.  Nature Physics 7, 849 
(2011). 

S7. G. E. Blonder, M. Thinkham, T. M. Klapwijk, Transition from metallic to tunneling 

regimes in superconducting microconstrictions: Excess current, charge imbalance, and 
supercurrent conversion. Phys. Rev. B 25, 4515 (1982). 

S8. M. Sigrist, K. Ueda, Phenomenological theory of unconventional superconductivity. Rev. 

Mod. Phys. 63, 239 (1991). 

S9. T. Y. Chen, Z. Tesanovic, C. L. Chien, Unified formalism of Andreev reflection at a 
ferromagnet/superconductor interface. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 146602 (2012). 
S10. D. Vollhardt, P. Wölfle, The Superfluid Phases of Helium 3(Dover Publications, Inc., 

Mineola, NY, 2013). 

S11. P. W. Anderson, P. Morel, Generalized Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer states and aligned 

orbital angular momentum in the proposed low-temperature phase of liquid He3. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 5, 136 (1960); P. W. Anderson, W. F.  Brinkman, Anisotropic Superfluidity in 
He3: A possible interpretation of its stability as a spin-fluctuation effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
30, 1108 (1973). 

S12. T. Mizushima, Y. Tsutsumi, T. Kawakami, M. Sato, M. Ichioka, K. Machida, Symmetry-
protected topological superfluids and superconductors—From the basics to 3He—. J. 
Phys. Soc. Jpn. 85, 022001 (2016). 

S13. R. Balian, N. R. Werthamer, Superconductivity with pairs in a relative p wave. Phys. Rev. 

131, 1553 (1963).  

S14. G. J. Zhao, X. X. Gong, P. C. Xu, B. C. Li, Z. Y. Huang, X F. Jin, X. D. Zhu and T. Y. Chen, Singlet 

superconductivity in single-crystal NiBi3 superconductor. arXiv 1805.09811. 

 
