9
1
0
2

n
a
J

0
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
6
8
1
2
0
.
1
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Origin of Major Solar Activity - Collisional Shearing Between
Nonconjugated Polarities of Multiple Bipoles Emerging Within Active Regions

Georgios Chintzoglou1,2

gchintzo@lmsal.com

and

Jie Zhang3

and

Mark C. M. Cheung1,4

and

Maria Kazachenko5

ABSTRACT

Active Regions (ARs) that exhibit compact Polarity Inversion Lines (PILs) are
known to be very ﬂare-productive. However, the physical mechanisms behind this
statistical inference have not been demonstrated conclusively. We show that such PILs
can occur due to the collision between two emerging ﬂux tubes nested within the same
AR. In such multipolar ARs, the ﬂux tubes may emerge simultaneously or sequentially,
each initially producing a bipolar magnetic region (BMR) at the surface. During each
ﬂux tube’s emergence phase, the magnetic polarities can migrate such that opposite
polarities belonging to diﬀerent BMRs collide, resulting in shearing and cancellation of
magnetic ﬂux. We name this process “collisional shearing” to emphasize that the shear-
ing and ﬂux cancellation develops due to the collision. Collisional shearing is a process
diﬀerent from the known concept of ﬂux cancellation occurring between polarities of a
single bipole, a process that has been commonly used in many numerical models. High
spatial and temporal resolution observations from the Solar Dynamics Observatory for
two emerging ARs, AR11158 and AR12017, show the continuous cancellation of up to

1Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory, 3176 Porter Dr, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA

2University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO 80307-3000, USA

3Department of Physics and Astronomy, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, 22030, USA

4Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

5Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA

 
 
 
 
 
 
– 2 –

40% of the unsigned magnetic ﬂux of the smallest BMR, which occurs at the collisional
PIL for as long as the collision persists. The ﬂux cancellation is accompanied by a
succession of solar ﬂares and CMEs, products of magnetic reconnection along the colli-
sional PIL. Our results suggest that the quantiﬁcation of magnetic cancellation driven
by collisional shearing needs to be taken into consideration in order to improve the
prediction of solar energetic events and space weather.

1.

Introduction

The extraordinary discovery of the magnetic nature of our star and its sunspots by Hale (1908)
has forever transformed our understanding on the universal role magnetic ﬁelds play in the solar
system and beyond (Harvey 1999). Following this discovery, the theory of magnetic reconnection
was proposed in the 1940s (Giovanelli 1946) to explain the catastrophic release of magnetic energy
associated with solar ﬂares (then observed from the ground, in lines like Hα). Since then, a lot
of progress has been made towards uncovering the physics involved, thanks to the improvement
of ground-based and space-borne instrumentation, as well as the advent of computational power
allowing for physics-based 3D numerical simulations. However, our understanding on what triggers
solar activity is still limited in part due to our inability to predict the photospheric evolution
of magnetic ﬁelds and also due to our inability to observe the full magnetic ﬁeld vector in the
magnetized atmosphere of our star – the solar corona (Cargill 2009). Thus, accurately predicting
solar activity is as of now not possible.

1.1. Observational Background

Sunspots often come in pairs; one of positive polarity where the magnetic ﬁeld is pointing
outwards from the surface and one of negative polarity with magnetic ﬁeld pointing back to the solar
interior. In addition, 90% of these sunspot pairs have the same east-west polarity orientation on the
solar surface, a trend that reverses between the north and south hemispheres (Hale’s hemispheric
polarity rule) and also with every solar cycle (22-year Hale cycle). This observation has led to the
understanding that the simple case of bipolar sunspot pairs results from the emergence of 3D “Ω-
shaped” magnetic ﬂux tube structures from the solar interior – the Solar Convection Zone (SCZ;
the outer 28% of the solar radius spanning ≈ 198 Mm below the surface; Spruit 1974; Christensen-
Dalsgaard et al. 1991; Cheung & Isobe 2014). These magnetic ﬂux tube structures are believed to
be part of a toroidal system of magnetic ﬁelds created by a dynamo process that acts at a depth
in the SCZ (Charbonneau 2005); small perturbations lead these magnetic ﬂux tubes to develop an
Ω-shape and buoyantly traverse the entire SCZ (by means of the magnetic buoyancy instability;
Parker 1955). Once such an Ω-shaped ﬂux-tube emerges, its cross-section with the photosphere
causes it to manifest itself in the form of a conjugated magnetic polarity pair, i.e. a positive and a
negative magnetic polarity originating from the axial ﬁeld of the same magnetic ﬂux tube (Figure 1

– 3 –

b,c). During the emergence phase, these two conjugated polarities are seen to separate from each
other (we call this hereafter “self-separation”) until the end of the emergence, when they assume
their maximum separation and ﬁnal positions on the rotating surface of the Sun (Figure 1 d). At
all times during the evolution of the system, the two opposite polarities are naturally divided by
a line where the magnetic polarity sign ﬂips, the so-called polarity inversion line (in short, PIL).
A PIL is a curve whose shape changes with time, depending on the relative position, shape and
proximity (bipole compactness) of the self-separating polarities.

During the emergence of buoyant magnetic ﬂux tube structures and the subsequent formation
of polarities (manifested as sunspots), there is an increased likelihood for solar activity to occur in
the form of plasma heating and high-energy radiation from solar ﬂares and Coronal Mass Ejections
(CMEs; Schrijver 2007, 2009). Areas where magnetic ﬁeld concentrations are seen on the solar
surface are therefore called “Active Regions” (ARs). Often, these ARs turn out to be the source
of the most energetic events in the solar system and have the potential in making the near-Earth
space a hazardous place for advanced technological systems and human space travel.

Depending on the complexity of the emerging magnetic ﬁelds, the resultant ARs may be
composed of one or more sunspots giving the impression of sunspot groups. The statistical clas-
siﬁcation of sunspot groups in terms of their complexity (Hale & Nicholson 1938) has shown that
the likelihood of ﬂare productivity scales with increasing complexity of their photospheric magnetic
distribution (e.g. Gallagher et al. 2002; Georgoulis & Rust 2007). The most ﬂare-productive of
these magnetic distributions is the class of so-called “δ-spot” ARs (introduced by K¨unzel 1960).
These are clusters of sunspot groups in such close proximity to each other that two or more sunspot
umbrae of opposite polarity are seen to share a single penumbra at the PIL. Due to this proximity,
these sunspot groups exhibit a compact or strong (spatial) gradient PIL (Schrijver 2007). Since
the determination of the high ﬂare productivity of δ-spots, continuing investigations attempt to
explain the origin behind this activity, both through observations (Zirin & Liggett 1987; Schrijver
2007) and modeling (Linton et al. 1998, 1999; Toriumi et al. 2014; Takasao et al. 2015; Fang & Fan
2015). However, there are inherent limitations in both approaches since the exact subsurface 3D
structure of ARs is not known. In addition, for the case of eruptive ﬂares (i.e. ﬂares associated
with CMEs), several possibilities have been proposed regarding magnetic conﬁgurations which may
lead to eruptions. The theories suggest that the core structure of the CME, the Magnetic Flux
Rope (MFR), is formed either on-the-ﬂy (e.g., Antiochos et al. 1999; Lynch et al. 2008) or exists
before the eruption (e.g., Kliem & T¨or¨ok 2006) with increasing evidence for the latter case (e.g.
Zhang et al. 2012; Patsourakos et al. 2013; Chintzoglou et al. 2015 and references therein). The
eruptive MFR may be formed at diﬀerent layers of the solar atmosphere, ranging from the photo-
sphere/lower chromosphere to the corona, or even “bodily” emerge from the SCZ (as in Okamoto
et al. 2008; MacTaggart & Hood 2010; however, bodily emergence cannot happen due to the pres-
sure stratiﬁcation at shallow depths below the photosphere; Cheung & Isobe 2014).

Apart from the appearance of magnetic ﬁelds on the Sun after their emergence, observations
often reveal the disappearance/annihilation of small magnetic elements, a process known as pho-

– 4 –

tospheric cancellation. Cancellation was ﬁrst observed in the 1980s as the mutual disappearance
of small, closely-spaced magnetic ﬁeld patches of opposite polarity in the quiet Sun (QS) and de-
caying ARs (Livi et al. 1985; Martin et al. 1985; Zwaan 1987). A cancellation event is regarded as
a manifestation of either the emergence of a small (cid:83)-shaped ﬂux tube (Parker 1984; Spruit et al.
1987) or the submergence of a small Ω ﬂux tube (Zwaan 1987). In order for a ﬂux tube to sub-
merge under the photosphere, it must overcome its upward magnetic buoyancy force (in addition,
convective downﬂows can pump small loops down; Abbett et al. 2004). This can be obtained if
the downward magnetic tension force of a loop-like ﬂux tube becomes signiﬁcant (small radius of
curvature). Parker (1979) showed that this occurs if the separation of the bipole’s polarities at the
photosphere is less than ≈ 0.9 Mm, which is consistent with the observations (cancelling polarities
in close contact to each other at the resolution limit of modern magnetograms; for HMI this is 1(cid:48)(cid:48)
equivalent to ≈ 0.76 Mm at the center of the solar disk).

Decaying ARs are an apparent source of continuous cancellation of opposite magnetic elements
as the latter diﬀuse away from their decaying source polarities. ARs typically enter their decay phase
just after the emergence phase stops (see cartoon model in Figure 1 panel a; also compare panels d
and e). Naturally, magnetic ﬂux is dispersed away from its initial concentrations, leading decaying
ARs to lose their large-scale magnetic complexity and appear largely bipolar (van Driel-Gesztelyi &
Culhane 2009). These diﬀuse bipoles can often be seen over multiple solar rotations. They further
decay by additional spreading (due to turbulent diﬀusion, diﬀerential rotation, and meridional ﬂow)
and magnetic cancellation along their extended PIL, until they become completely indistinguishable
from the background magnetic ﬁeld of the QS. If the decaying bipole AR is isolated, the PIL
separating the diﬀuse polarities is named internal and if there are several decaying ARs in close
proximity to each other, they also form external PILs (Mackay et al. 2008; Karna et al. 2017). Often,
a ﬁlament is seen above the resultant PILs of those decaying bipoles, and, in many cases, these
ﬁlaments erupt causing a CME. Typically, prior to the CME, Soft X-ray imaging shows sigmoidal
magnetic ﬁeld structures, which are regarded as the manifestation of a coronal ﬂux rope (Rust &
Kumar 1996). However, while decaying ARs can indeed produce eruptive events, the most energetic
events originate in still evolving, emerging ARs (Schrijver 2009).

1.2. Theoretical Background and Previous Modeling Eﬀorts

Apart from the CSHKP “standard” eruptive model (acronym acknowledging collectively the
work of Carmichael 1964; Sturrock 1966; Hirayama 1974; Kopp & Pneuman 1976), a plethora of
numerical models has been produced towards improving the theoretical understanding of major
solar activity. These works can be organized in three modeling classes: (1) data-inspired, (2)
data-constrained, and, (3) data-driven models.

– 5 –

1.2.1. Data-Inspired Models

Thanks to increases in computational power over the last two decades, we saw a multitude of
3D MHD models that simulated an eruption from ﬁrst principles. These models can be described
as data-inspired, since their numerical setups do not directly implement the observational data but
rather are inspired by the latter (Cheung & Isobe 2014). These models can be further split into
two sub-categories: (a) emergence-based models, and (b) cancellation-based (or diﬀusion-based )
models.

The majority of the data-inspired models consider an emerging, simple bipolar AR. These
emergence-based 3D MHD models start with a single twisted ﬂux tube under the photosphere that
is made buoyant to emerge in a stratiﬁed atmosphere containing the top parts of the SCZ all the way
into the corona; the tube emerges and a conjugated polarity pair forms on the photosphere, followed
by a successful eruption (e.g. Fan 2001; Manchester et al. 2004; Gibson & Fan 2006; Archontis &
T¨or¨ok 2008; MacTaggart & Hood 2009; Archontis & Hood 2010; Roussev et al. 2012; Leake et al.
2013; Magara 2015; Syntelis et al. 2017; also see review by Cheung & Isobe 2014). Typically, in
these models, a compact PIL is formed between the conjugated polarities, accompanied by shearing
motions along its length. This typically lasts for as long as the conjugated pair is self-separating
during the emergence process.

The sub-category of cancellation-based 3D numerical models is also capable of producing erup-
tions by allowing ﬂux cancellation between the model-prescribed, conjugated polarities of a single
bipole (e.g. van Ballegooijen & Martens 1989; Martens & Zwaan 2001; Amari et al. 2003; Mackay
& van Ballegooijen 2006; Aulanier et al. 2010; Amari et al. 2011; Zuccarello et al. 2016). This is
obtained either (1) by shearing the ﬁeld at the PIL and introducing convergence and diﬀusion at
the PIL, or, (2) by only imposing shear and diﬀusion at the PIL (but no convergence of the polarity
centroids) in order to simulate the cancellation process. The ﬁrst, and representative theoretical
model of this sub-category, known as the photospheric cancellation scenario (van Ballegooijen &
Martens 1989), invokes (i) shearing ﬂows, and (ii) convergence of magnetic elements of opposite
polarity to produce cancellation by means of magnetic reconnection occurring at the photosphere
(or up to a few photospheric pressure scale heights). This model has been used to explain the
creation of ﬁlament channels and MFRs in the corona. In observational studies, evidence for the
validity of this mechanism is commonly found in discrete locations at PILs of decaying ARs where
small opposite polarity patches cancel out in sync with the appearance (above the PIL) of sigmoidal
coronal structures (Rust & Kumar 1996; Green et al. 2011; Savcheva et al. 2012b).

1.2.2. Data-Constrained Models

In this category, models utilize observations of the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld to model the
3D coronal magnetic ﬁeld and thus we name them as data-constrained models. These models are
commonly employed to estimate the 3D coronal magnetic ﬁeld above an AR as the solution of

– 6 –

a boundary value problem (with the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld as the bottom boundary) either
by neglecting the presence of currents in the corona, i.e. potential ﬁeld extrapolation (Schmidt
1964), or by assuming that currents are aligned with the magnetic ﬁeld and therefore are in force
balance, i.e.
the special case of linear force-free ﬁeld (in short, LFFF; e.g. computed via fast
Fourier transforms; Alissandrakis 1981) and the more general case of the non-linear force-free ﬁeld
(NLFFF, e.g. computed via optimization techniques Wheatland et al. 2000; Wiegelmann et al.
2006). Given a magnetogram image series of an AR, it is possible to construct models for each time
frame and study the evolution of the coronal magnetic ﬁeld of an AR, despite that these model
outputs represent static equilibria. In the force-free models, it is assumed that the photospheric
surface is force-free and torque-free, which is in general not true, but there are techniques that
impose this condition (e.g. Wiegelmann et al. 2006). However, the NLFFF is known to reproduce
magnetic ﬂux ropes in modeled eruptive ARs, in agreement with observational evidence in the
multi-million degree corona (e.g. Chintzoglou et al. 2015).

An alternative approach to achieving an NLFFF ﬁeld is by starting from the more realistic non-
force-free and non-torque-free initial condition (already contained in photospheric vector magnetic
ﬁeld observations) and by iteratively reducing the magnetic stress in the model via the Magnetofric-
tional method (in short, MF; Yang et al. 1986) using a simpliﬁed set of MHD equations in vacuum.
The MF method modiﬁes the initial model ﬁeld by assuming an ad-hoc inductive velocity, v, par-
allel to the Lorentz force, eventually relaxing the ﬁeld into a NLFFF state. This method has been
also used to insert a ﬂux rope structure into a potential ﬁeld model of an AR (e.g. to simulate a
ﬁlament channel as seen in observations, which naturally cannot be modeled as a potential ﬁeld)
and obtain an NLFFF solution by relaxing it to a static NLFFF equilibrium state (the so-called
“ﬂux-rope insertion method”, e.g. van Ballegooijen 2004; Savcheva et al. 2012a). Other methods
take a more computationally expensive approach and evolve the ﬁeld by solving the full set of the
MHD equations and by introducing necessary assumptions about the thermodynamics of the solar
atmosphere (e.g. Jiang & Feng 2013; Jiang et al. 2013, or zero-β, e.g. Inoue et al. 2015, 2018).
However, all these approaches generate static equilibria which are not applicable to eruptions.

1.2.3. Data-Driven Models

All data-constrained models (such as the Potential, LFFF, NLFFF, Flux-rope insertion, MHD
relaxation methods) produce static equilibria. The category of data-driven models is distinctly
diﬀerent than that of data-constrained models, since the latter use data only from one time instant.
Cheung & DeRosa (2012) presented the possibility of moving a step forward from solutions of
static equilibria and produce evolutionary models, by driving the MF with vector magnetic ﬁeld
observations at the bottom boundary. In this article we implement the data-driven approach of
Cheung & DeRosa (2012) to properly capture the dynamics in the evolution of magnetic ﬁelds
(similarly to Cheung et al. 2015; Fisher et al. 2015). This approach is necessary to overcome the
limitations in studies based on static solutions, which are unable to capture the dynamic processes

that stress and energize magnetic ﬁelds in the solar atmosphere.

– 7 –

1.3. Remaining Issues between Observations and Modeling

In this article, we present the analysis of observations of two highly ﬂare- and CME-productive
ARs of an overall quadrupolar nature. An evolving quadrupolar conﬁguration (bipole-bipole in-
teraction) essentially represents the next step in terms of “simpliﬁed realism” which is needed in
order to capture the complex processes leading to energetic ﬂares and eruptions. Both of the ﬂare-
and CME-productive quadrupolar ARs we present in this article had a long period of time in their
emergence phase during which there was virtually no activity at all. Flaring activity occurred only
when their individual bipoles, with their conjugated polarity pair “self-separating” naturally due
to the emergence process, collided with their nonconjugated opposite polarities. The bipoles may
emerge either (a) simultaneously or (b) sequentially, driving the collision with their self-separation.
The ﬂare (and CME) activity did not occur above the self-PIL of the bipoles (as it is typically
produced in the aforementioned simulations) but rather above the PIL segment which formed due
to the collision of (opposite) nonconjugated polarities. Here, we call this PIL between the colliding
nonconjugated polarities the “collisional PIL”. The multi-day ﬂare activity clusters lasted for as
long as the collision was taking place and culminated with eruptive ﬂares. In this study, we examine
the amount of ﬂux cancelled in collisional PILs and the timing of ﬂux cancellation with respect to
ﬂare activity.

In the Zirin & Liggett (1987) paper, the authors proposed three ways through which a ﬂare-
productive delta spot develops. (1) Emergence of a single complex AR formed below the surface.
This is in direct contrast with our ﬁndings. We ﬁnd that the complexity is caused by the inter-
action of multiple relatively simple ﬂux tubes that emerge through the surface simultaneously or
sequentially. (2) Emergence of satellite spots near a large older spot. This is possibly similar to our
scenario of sequential emergence. (3) Collision of spots of opposite polarity from diﬀerent bipoles.
Interestingly, Zirin & Liggett
This is likely similar to our scenario of simultaneous emergence.
(1987) found that cases (1) and (2) are the cause of large ﬂares, but not case (3). Also, the authors
agreed with the ﬁndings of K¨unzel (1960) that the complexity is correlated with ﬂare activity, which
we also generally agree. However, the Zirin & Liggett (1987) paper does not explicitly recognize
that the ﬂux cancellation is the key ingredient of ﬂaring activity. Furthermore, that article lacks
quantitative analyses of the physical parameters during the observed bipole-bipole interaction.

Contrary to the approach of data-driven and data-constrained modeling (where actual data are
utilized as a basis), the aforementioned data-inspired types of numerical experiments (emergence-
based and cancellation-based simulations) aim to reproduce the conditions leading to solar eruptions
from ﬁrst principles, typically considering only a single bipole (the latter imposed mainly by com-
putational power constraints). However, despite the soundness of their simplistic approach (the
latter mainly due to computational power constraints), our observations of two well-studied ARs
are in contrast with these scenarios, (a) at least during the phases of simple bipolar AR emergence

– 8 –

and (b) as they evolve to maturity (but before they enter the decay phase and the cancellation of
diﬀused polarities takes place). It is also important to note that even the standard eruptive ﬂare
model, the CSHKP model, invokes a simple bipole, also not consistent with our ﬁndings.

This article is organized as follows: in § 2 we present the observations and describe the general
evolution of the ARs as well as the various quantities used to characterize their evolution. In § 3
we introduce the method of conjugate ﬂux deﬁcit and report the results of our analysis. In § 4
we outline the physics of collisional shearing together with an evolutionary data-driven model of
the corona above a collisional PIL, followed by a detailed discussion of the wider implications of
collisional shearing in § 5. We conclude in § 6.

2. Observations

The Sun is rotating about its axis in ∼25 days at the equator. However, because of our
changing vantage point from the Earth as it orbits the Sun, its apparent (synodic) rotation period
is ∼28 days. Therefore, we are only able to study the magnetic evolution of ARs for <14 days.
In addition to this limitation, ARs appear to emerge at random longitudes and as a result, the
chance of observing their complete evolution becomes rather low (e.g. ARs may begin to emerge
on the west visible hemisphere of the sun, but then the solar rotation progressively takes them out
of sight). In fact, while in the current solar cycle there have been several ARs that were extremely
ﬂare-productive, only a small fraction of these ﬂare-productive ARs has been observed since the
beginning of their emergence phase; many of them appeared on the east limb of the solar disk
rather complex and already developed, entering their decay phase. Therefore, in order to properly
answer the important question of “what is the way ARs evolve to produce extreme solar activity? ”,
it is imperative to observe such ARs from the very moment of their birth all the way to their decay
phase. Here, we investigate the evolution of two such well-observed, well-studied, ﬂare- and CME-
productive solar ARs catalogued by the US National and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
with AR numbers 11158 (Schrijver et al. 2011; Jiang et al. 2012; Sun et al. 2012b; Liu & Schuck
2012; Cheung & DeRosa 2012; Chintzoglou & Zhang 2013; Tziotziou et al. 2013; Toriumi et al.
2014; Aschwanden et al. 2014; Kazachenko et al. 2015; Inoue et al. 2018) and 12017 (Judge et al.
2014; Kleint et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2015; Rubio da Costa et al. 2016). AR11158 began emerging in
the east hemisphere of the solar disk on 10 February 2011 (heliographic coordinates E53◦S20◦) and
AR12017 on 22 March 2014 (E65◦N10◦).

The complete emergence period of these ARs has been uninterruptedly recorded in high spatial
(0.(cid:48)(cid:48)5 pix−1) resolution observations of the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld and Doppler velocity ﬁeld
with the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI; Schou et al. 2012) onboard the Solar Dynamics
Observatory (SDO; Pesnell et al. 2012). The HMI instrument captures a 4096 × 4096 pixel full disk
map of the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld projected along the line of sight (LOS) every 45 s, and every
720 s, the photospheric vector magnetic ﬁeld by composing the full Stokes vector, S=(I,Q,U,V ).
The Stokes data are then fed into the HMI data pipeline (Hoeksema et al. 2014) and are inverted

– 9 –

(assuming a Milne-Eddington atmosphere) producing full-disk Doppler velocities, line continuum
intensities and the photospheric vector magnetic ﬁeld observations as maps of the magnitude of
the magnetic ﬁeld, the inclination and its azimuth, B=(|B|,θ,φ). In addition, the 180◦ ambiguity
for the azimuth maps, φ, is resolved as described in Hoeksema et al. (2014), which allows the
decomposition of B into a radial, north-south and east-west component on a sphere, (Br, Bt, Bp).
The ﬁnal observing period we considered spans ≈ 10 days for AR 11158, from 10-Feb-2011 21:58
UT until 19-Feb-2011 05:58 UT (1000 full-disk vector magnetogram frames and Dopplergrams at
12 min cadence) and ≈ 11 days for AR12017, from 22-Mar-2014 06:58 UT until 01-Apr-2014 21:58
UT (1263 frames respectively), fully covering the entire evolution of these ARs until they entered
their decay phase.

For calculating the amount of magnetic ﬂux, Φ, that perforates the solar surface, the natural
choice is to integrate the radial component of the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld vector, Br over the
area, A, occupied by the magnetic ﬂux concentration as:

(cid:90)

Φ =

BrdA

(1)

For the magnetic ﬁeld measurements, the noise level for the Br (from HMI vector maps) is estimated
to be that of |B| ∼100 G (1-σ level; Hoeksema et al. 2014) and for the BLOS at around 10 G
(Couvidat et al. 2016). It is reported (Hoeksema et al. 2014) that computing the ﬂux from the Br
can lead to spurious increases of this integral toward the limb. This is due to the increased noise
levels in the measurements (primarily due to the measurement of the transverse component of the
ﬁeld), especially for locations Θ (cid:38) 30◦ from the disk center (also producing artiﬁcial peaks for the
total unsigned ﬂux at Θ ≈ 60◦; Hoeksema et al. 2014, Figure 5 and discussion therein). In other
words, while the AR is not emerging, the measured ﬂux would seem to increase rapidly as the AR
transits the solar disk past Θ = 30◦, giving the erroneous impression that it is still emerging. In
order to mitigate this eﬀect, one should either (1) compute the ﬂux using only pixels with suﬃcient
magnetic signal (|B| (cid:38) 100 G), or (2) use line-of-sight magnetograms, BLOS, for the ﬂux calculation.
For our purpose, we chose approach (2) (more details below).

The major activity of AR11158 (that is, ﬂux emergence, ﬂares and CME eruptions) was clus-
tered around the central meridian during its transit, i.e. between Stonyhurst longitudes 30◦E to
30◦W (roughly within the acceptable limit of Θ (cid:46) 30◦). Therefore, according to our previous dis-
cussion on noise considerations, it is safe to use the radial component of the ﬁeld, Br, derived from
the vector HMI observations, which is nevertheless the natural choice for measuring the magnetic
ﬂux. On the other hand, AR12017 began emerging as an inactive bipole at the east limb and
transited the solar disk uneventfully, until a week later, when a second bipole emerged within the
AR when it was at a Stonyhurst longitude 30◦W. This heliographic longitude is at the limit of
calculating accurately the ﬂux from the Br product from the vector HMI observations. Therefore,
for the case of AR12017 we chose approach (2), i.e. we used the LOS series. Our choice for im-
plementing approach (2) is justiﬁed further since imposing a threshold would impact our ability to

– 10 –

characterize PILs. In addition, the observed LOS ﬁeld is not truly radial but rather projected to the
LOS. To partially account for this modulation, in our analysis the observed LOS ﬁeld, Braw
LOS, was
deprojected from the LOS at each pixel assuming the ﬁeld is radially oriented, as BLOS = Braw
LOS/µ,
where µ is the cosine of the angle between the LOS and the local normal at the solar surface.

Before the ﬂux calculations, we ﬁrst created cutout maps from the full-disk Br and BLOS prod-
ucts with a FOV of 400(cid:48)(cid:48)×300(cid:48)(cid:48) (large enough to contain an AR) commoving with the AR guiding
center at the solar diﬀerential rotation rate (adopting the diﬀerential rotation coeﬃcient values
from Snodgrass & Ulrich 1990). We transformed the cutout maps from their native helioprojective
system of coordinates into a local Cartesian system of coordinates by remapping the data into a
Cylindrical Equal Area (CEA) projection, which preserves the pixel scale in the entire cutout FOV
(approach detailed in Hoeksema et al. 2014). The ﬁnal size of the cutout series in physical units is
250 Mm×130 Mm (×1000 frames) at a time cadence of 12 min for the duration of the observations.

We then calculate the ﬂux of each polarity in the CEA projection as

(cid:90)

Φ =

Bdxdy

(2)

where B = BLOS for the case of AR12017, B = Br for AR11158 respectively, and dx = dy =
0.36×108 cm, the physical pixel scale of the CEA magnetograms. Given the evolution the ARs
undergo during their transit period over the solar disk, the relative position of their conjugate
polarities changes signiﬁcantly over time. This evolution is morphing the AR’s magnetic spatial
distribution as well as the shape of its PIL(s). We track the proper motions of the self-separating
polarities of the bipoles in the CEA FOV via their ﬂux-weighted centroids, calculated inside a radius
of 5 Mm around the peak intensity of each of the polarities at each frame in the magnetogram series.
This tracking method produced the best results in terms of tracking accurately the motions of the
polarities in a smooth and uniform way, by ensuring centroids are not biased/inﬂuenced by the
presence of like-signed ﬂux in the near vicinity of the major individual polarities (especially when
like-signed strong polarities reach close proximity). We use the centroid information to advance the
positions of the masks used in the calculation of the magnetic ﬂux for each polarity. It is relatively
straightforward to track and isolate the individual polarities with minimal intervention (results in
§ 3). The polarity separation distance (or “self-separation”) of each bipole is measured via the
same centroid information.

We also produced a second CEA dataset per AR with the magnitude of the full photospheric
magnetic vector, |B|, same in FOV and cadence with the previously described CEA map series.
We used the |B| CEA maps to infer the 3D subphotospheric conﬁguration of the bipoles during
their emergence stage with the Time-Stacking Method, described in Chintzoglou & Zhang (2013).

When the polarities collide, they compress against each other and develop a deformation. To
characterize this deformation we ﬁt an ellipse around the polarities. There is no expectation for
the polarities to be strictly elliptical, however, they can be minimally represented by an elliptical

– 11 –

“blob” as a measure of their deviation from an overall undisturbed, circular shape. We perform
the ﬁtting on an image series of magnetogram bitmaps (binary maps above a ﬁxed magnetic ﬁeld
threshold value) so as to show the core ﬁeld of the polarity, corresponding to the sunspot umbra
(threshold choice is -1100 G for AR11158 and -1400 G for AR12017). We preferred magnetogram
bitmaps instead of using continuum images for the sunspots due to the ease of separating opposite
polarities by their diﬀerent polarity signs. Nevertheless, our choices for the thresholds correspond
well to the shapes of the sunspot umbras seen in images of the continuum. The oblateness of an
ellipse is deﬁned as

f =

(a − b)
a

× 100%

(3)

where a and b the lengths of the semimajor and semiminor axes of the ellipse. It reaches a lower
limit, f = 0%, for the case of a perfect circle, and an upper limit f = 100% for a degenerate ellipse,
i.e. a linear segment of length a. The magnitude of the oblateness quantiﬁes the magnitude of
the deformation of the polarities and thus the severity of the collision. The uncertainty associated
with measuring the polarity oblateness was estimated by considering the impact of the SDO’s
orbital velocity variation in the magnetic ﬁeld measurements of the HMI data (e.g. Hoeksema
et al. 2014; we found it to be up to a maximum ∼10% peak-to-peak variation in ﬂux), together
with the increasing noise levels in the measurements approaching Θ (cid:38) 30◦ from disk center. Such
variations could impact the appearance and/or the oblateness of the polarity as measured in the
magnetogram bitmaps above a ﬁxed threshold. The maximum uncertainty in the oblateness was
found to be ∼10%.

The use of Doppler velocities at the photospheric surface can help diﬀerentiate between the
diﬀerent cases of magnetic cancellation at a PIL. If during a cancellation event the disappearing
magnetic ﬂux is submerging at the PIL as a small Ω-loop structure, a dominant redshift is expected
to be found at that PIL. Inversely, if in that PIL a blueshift is found instead, this may suggest the
emergence of a (cid:83)-loop structure through the photosphere. Thus, proper zero-point calibration of
the raw Doppler maps, vraw, obtained by the HMI instrument is important for our investigation.
We correct the full-disk Doppler maps for the SDO’s velocity vector, vSDO, (which is known very
well, to an accuracy of a few cm), and for the diﬀerential rotation, vrotation, the North-South
“rotation” (instrumental eﬀect due to heating of the front door of HMI; P. Scherrer 2018; private
communication), vN/S rot, and the red limb shift eﬀect, vred limb shift, we performed a least-squares
ﬁt to obtain time-dependent global ﬁt coeﬃcients for the aforementioned eﬀects. The calibrated
Dopplergram series, vDoppler, is obtained as:

vDoppler = vraw − vSDO − vrotation − vN/S rot − vred limb shift

(4)

with the data remapped to heliographic as a CEA projection. The FOV in each frame of the CEA
Doppler series is identical to the BLOS and vector Br magnetogram CEA series. With regards to

– 12 –

the convective blueshift, our experimentation (following the method by Welsch et al. 2013) showed
that it alters the zero-point of our mean Doppler velocities by only ∼+0.1 km s−1. See § 3 for
discussion.

The activity these ARs caused in the corona was recorded by the SDO’s Atmospheric Imag-
ing Assembly (AIA; Lemen et al. 2011) at ∼ 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)6 pix−1 every 12 s, in six passbands of extreme
ultraviolet emission (EUV): 171 ˚A containing emission from Fe IX (corresponding to plasma tem-
perature T≈0.6 MK), 193 ˚A with Fe XII and Fe XXIV (1.6 and 20 MK), 211 ˚A Fe XIV (2.0 MK),
335 ˚A Fe XVI (2.5 MK), 94 ˚A Fe XVIII (6.0 MK) and 131 ˚A with Fe VIII and Fe XXI (0.4 and
10 MK). The formation of ﬁlament channels in the core of the ARs was monitored in 304 ˚A imaging
by SDO/AIA (He II; T≈50,000 K), in same time-cadence and resolution with the aforementioned
passbands. To inspect the spatial distribution and evolution of ﬂare ribbons we used imaging by the
1600 ˚A SDO/AIA passband in the ultraviolet (UV) part of the spectrum that contains emission
from C IV 1550 ˚A (≈100,000 K; chromosphere-corona transition region) and the UV continuum
(photosphere).
Individual ﬂaring events seen in those wavelengths were detected both by auto-
mated detection modules and human observers, and were registered in the Heliophysics Events
Knowledgebase (HEK; Hurlburt et al. 2012). Solar activity in higher energies, was monitored in
soft X-rays ﬂux (between λ 1-8 ˚A) by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s
(NOAA) Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) 13 and 15 (the latter after
2012) and in 6-12 keV photon energies (λ ≈ 1-2 ˚A) with the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar
Spectroscopic Imager (RHESSI ; Lin et al. 2002). The GOES and RHESSI X-ray ﬂare event lists
also provide the time and location for most of the ﬂares. During the Spring and Fall season, the
GOES satellite undergoes a daily eclipse period, when the spacecraft’s solar view is obstructed by
the Earth. The GOES eclipse period can last from 1-3 hours over the Spring and Fall season. On
the other hand, RHESSI, which is in a 38◦ inclined Low Earth Orbit, suﬀers from an hourly eclipse
period as well as passing through the Earth’s South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA). This produces hourly
data gaps of irregular length, typically 30-40 min long depending on the overlap of the eclipse and
SAA transit period. Using RHESSI data alone, the determination of the ﬂare centering on the solar
disk becomes a challenging task. A combination of the GOES time-series with RHESSI mitigates
this observational coverage problem.

The determination of the centering for each ﬂare (magnitudes > C1.0) is vital to assess the
importance of these ARs in contributing to the solar activity (as measured by the GOES and
RHESSI ﬂux). To alleviate the issues due to the aforementioned data gaps as well as potential
erroneous entries, we use the HEK database as a third source of centering for ﬂares, in which the
ﬂare centering is determined by the coronal EUV image series from SDO/AIA (Hurlburt et al.
2012). That way we obtained three sources to intercorrelate ﬂare events with time and per AR.
For the intercorrelation of the event lists we allowed a maximum tolerance of 30 minutes between
GOES, RHESSI and HEK events and centerings within 20◦×15◦ from the guiding center of the AR.
Once the relevant ﬂares per AR were selected, we adopted the centering derived from the mean
centering for each common intercorrelated ﬂare event in the GOES, RHESSI and HEK event lists

– 13 –

(or a subset of them, depending on whether there was a matching entry in all three event lists).
Finally, we categorized the importance of all ﬂare events above C1.0 magnitude into two groups:
(a) sub-ﬂaring events (ﬂare magnitudes between C1.0 to C9.9) and (b) major ﬂares (for any ﬂare
magnitude ≥M1.0). This way we obtained a comprehensive list of timing and centering of ﬂare
events, which allowed us to assess which location (or PIL) within the AR was associated with the
energy release. The results for AR11158 and AR12017 are presented in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.
We also complemented the ﬂare centering information by also noting which ﬂaring events were
eruptive (column with the plane-of-the-sky CME speeds obtained from the CDAW online catalog
at https://cdaw.gsfc.nasa.gov/CME_list/; Yashiro et al. 2004). Composing a comprehensive
dataset with ﬂare times, ﬂare centering and CME occurrences is necessary in assessing whether
activity originates in the self-PIL of the bipoles or somewhere else in the AR. The answer to this
question has signiﬁcant implications on what drives solar activity (see § 5).

2.1. The Formation of Collisional Polarity Inversion Lines

Qualitatively, both of the ARs we studied exhibit a general quadrupolar conﬁguration either
from the very beginning or after some time as they evolve (Figure 2 panels a,g). AR11158 was
initially (end of February 10) composed of two emerging bipoles with each of their conjugated
polarities growing in size and magnetic ﬂux content over time (conjugate polarities denoted with
the same number; P1 N1 for bipole 1 and P2 N2 for bipole 2). In addition, as they were emerging,
their “self”-separation)
both bipoles were increasing their conjugated polarity separation (i.e.
rather uneventfully but still in relatively close proximity to each other (Figure 2a). At that time,
NOAA classiﬁed AR11158 with a β magnetic conﬁguration since only the N1 P1 bipole was strong
enough to produce sunspots, thus it appeared in white light observations as a singular bipole AR
all the way until the end of February 11 (therefore, a simple, “monotonic” PIL could be drawn
between the sunspots in this AR). We show the ﬂux evolution of each polarity of the two bipoles
in Figure 3a, also noting the daily NOAA Mt Wilson classiﬁcation of the AR. Suddenly, after the
beginning of February 12, polarity P1 was seen to displace towards the north direction by 10 Mm for
the following ∼60 h (similar displacement for N1; see polarity tracking for P1 and N1 in Figure 4a).
During the end of the second day of emergence (February 12) a second, stronger episode of emerging
ﬂux occurred within each pre-existing bipole almost simultaneously (Figure 3a). We use the term
“second episode” to describe the subsequent emergence of a secondary bipole within the self-PIL
of the pre-existing (or ﬁrst episode) bipole. On the other hand, if subsequent emergence occurs
right next to a pre-existing polarity but in the exterior part of the BMR, we call this emergence
“parasitic”.

During the aforementioned second episodes, each bipole accelerated its self-separation motions
(Figure 2 and Figure 3a). As a result of this additional self-separation, the two nonconjugated
polarities (i.e. not belonging to the same bipole; N1 and P2) collided and formed a high spatial
gradient (or compact) PIL, evidently as a result of their extremely close proximity. Since this

– 14 –

compact PIL formed as a result of the collision of these nonconjugated polarities, we introduce the
term “collisional PIL” (in short, “cPIL”). We make this distinction to diﬀerentiate from the PIL
portion that still separates opposite ﬂux from the original conjugated polarities (i.e. the self-PILs
separating N1 from P1, N2 from P2; in short, “sPIL1” and “sPIL2”) of the individual bipoles).
The full PIL of the AR is then the integral system of sPIL2/cPIL/sPIL1 (as shown in Figure 2b,c).
Despite all this dynamic evolution, it is striking that the Mt Wilson classiﬁcation for AR11158 has
been a mere β up to February 13. As it can be seen in Figure 3a, initially, both bipoles have very
comparable ﬂuxes. What is diﬀerent is the cohesion of the individual magnetic concentrations –
while N1P1 had formed a strong sunspot, N2P2 appears more of as a collection of pores instead
of a well-formed pair of sunspots. This justiﬁes the classiﬁcation of AR11158 only as β until the
beginning of February 13. In the meantime, on February 13, a small parasitic bipole emerged right
next to polarity N2 with its parasitic negative polarity grazing next to N2 and its positive polarity
moving in between N2 and N1. During the course of this parasitic bipole emergence (lasted for
about one day from February 13 to February 14; Figure 3a) a narrow-width (or jet-like) non-radial
eruption occurred (studied in detail by Sun et al. 2012a). Here, the collisional PIL between N2
and P1 is dominating in terms of activity, and thus for simplicity we do not consider the activity
associated with the small parasitic emergence (more in §3). The ﬂaring activity centered at the
location of the parasitic emergence is shown in Figure 3a with grey vertical lines. NOAA promoted
AR11158 to a βγ conﬁguration on February 14 until February 16 when the AR was classiﬁed as
βγδ, with the additional emergence of two bipoles within sPIL2 (to simplify the analysis due to
these additional bipoles, here we only consider the period up to 12:00 UT of February 15, i.e. before
they emerged).

We extract the location and shape of the cPIL by performing a gradient operation on the
CEA magnetogram series described in Schrijver (2007). The cPIL is calculated when opposite
polarity elements in the region of interest (i.e. the collision site) are at a distance of ≤ 5 pixels
or 1.8 Mm. The use of 100 G threshold for the magnetograms in calculating the gradient with the
method of Schrijver (2007) yielded consistent results than higher thresholds that tend to weaken
the sensitivity of the method in extracting the cPIL. To measure the length of collisional PIL, we
perform a “thinning operation” (using a standard IDL image processing routine named morph thin)
on the extracted PIL until it becomes 1-pixel thick; then the cPIL length is found by summing
the pixels and multiplying by the pixel scale (0.36 Mm pix−1 in the CEA magnetograms). The
uncertainty associated with that method was estimated by considering the impact of the SDO’s
orbital velocity variation in HMI data (e.g. Hoeksema et al. 2014; we found it to be up to ∼10%
peak-to-peak variation in ﬂux) given the choice of a single threshold. The uncertainty in the
measured cPIL length is of order ∼10-15%. We also use the cPIL information as way to deﬁne
the onset of collision, tcollision. We routinely deﬁne that moment from the time of the frame in
our magnetogram series when the cPIL’s continuous length deﬁnitely exceeds 40 Mm; for AR11158
this occurred on 04:00 UT, February 13, 2011. This deﬁnition for tcollision appears to provide a
consistent onset time with that determined visually from the CEA magnetogram observations.

– 15 –

The self-separation of the main bipoles in AR11158 continues well into the following days (Fig-
ure 3c), with P2 rapidly overtaking N1 and reaching P1 (Figure 2 and accompanying animation).
Note that N1 and P2 have antiparallel speed orientations. The self-separation speeds begin with
a maximum value of ∼ 400 m s−1 on February 13 and gradually reduce as the collision progresses.
Also, the compact cPIL gradually weakens as P2 overtakes N1 and the cPIL is only due to N1 and
some dispersed ﬂux trailing from P2 (Figure 2 panels c to d). Note that as the collision takes place,
the polarities involved (N1 and P2) progressively deform into oblate shapes with their semi-major
axes aligned with the collisional PIL (see the animation of Figure 2 and the following section).

The onset, duration and location of collision of these two simultaneously emerging bipoles
within AR11158 correlate well, both in terms of space and time, with a cluster of ﬂare activity
and several CMEs (see § 5). Similar behavior is seen in AR12017. In this case, the ﬁrst bipole
N1 P1 emerged within about two days (between March 22 to end of March 23) was classiﬁed by
NOAA as a β magnetic conﬁguration for each of these two days respectively. Since the end of
its ﬁrst emergence episode, the conjugated polarities have almost assumed 70% of their maximum
self-separation (Figure 2e,f and Figure 3b,d). On March 24 03:00 UT a second episode, shorter in
duration (∼ 20 h) and lower ﬂux content than the ﬁrst, occurred within the same sPIL of N1P1
(Figure 2f right by sPIL1; also see Figure 3b,d). While AR12017 was classiﬁed as a βγ AR due to
this new episode, emergence occurred rather uneventfully (no collision of opposite polarities and
ﬂare activity) by adding ∼ 2×1021 Mx in the AR’s total unsigned ﬂux. With the end of this second
episode (end of March 25 and beginning of 26) the bipole reached its maximum self-separation of
87 Mm and the AR has reverted back to a β conﬁguration, since there was only a simple sPIL
separating the polarities. Meanwhile, the positive polarity P1 is seen to lose its cohesion and decay,
dispersing its ﬂux rapidly after the second emergence episode. The dispersed ﬂux was seen to cancel
slowly but steadily with diﬀuse negative ﬂux in the area south of P1. Part of that negative ﬂux
originated from the neighboring AR12018 (trailing just 5◦ south of AR12017) which quickly entered
its decay phase. The resulting PIL extends from the south end of sPIL1 and separates the opposite
ﬂuxes between these two diﬀerent ARs; thus it is an external PIL (in short ePIL; Figure 2e,f,g,h).
A total of ∼ 2×1021 Mx in P1 cancelled over a period of ﬁve days (between March 25-30; blue
dashed line in Figure 3b). However, except for a few subﬂaring (low C-class) events on March 23
during the ﬁrst emergence episode, centered in the sPIL of AR12017, no ﬂaring occurred until ≈5
days later (Figure 3b).

Interestingly, after March 26 the leading polarity, N1, suddenly appears to become oblate
(develops a semi-major or principal axis along the east-west direction) and also migrates towards
the south by about 8 Mm (compare N1 polarity’s location with local line of latitude in Figure 2 f,g
and the accompanying animation). The southward migration speed was slow and constant at ≈
35 m s−1 for a duration of about 60 h (see displacement in N1 polarity tracking Figure 5a; similar
to the one we saw before the second episode in N1 P1 of AR11158). Remarkably, on March 28
(Figure 2 g) magnetic ﬂux begins to emerge (Figure 3b,d) at the location N1 occupied before its
southward migration. This parasitic ﬂux emergence appears to be composed of two bipoles; ﬁrst,

– 16 –

due to a bipole oriented along the north-south direction and a second bipole oriented along the
east-west direction (see the animation of Figure 2). It also appears that the positive ﬂux of both
bipoles emerges at almost the same location mixing/piling up together; this renders the use of
any straightforward method for tracking the individual positive ﬂux an impractical task. We thus
treat these positive polarities, say P2NS and P2EW, as a single positive polarity P2. That polarity
forms a collisional PIL (“cPIL1”) with the dispersed negative ﬂux next to pre-existing sunspot N1.
The tcollision for the parasitic positive ﬂux with pre-existing negative ﬂux in AR12017 was at 03:00
UT March 28, 2014. On the other hand, it is rather easy to distinguish the negative polarities
associated with P2 since they do not mix together or mix with the dispersed negative ﬂux of N1.
Thus, we can measure their ﬂuxes separately for the north-south and the east-west bipole’s negative
polarities (we will be referring to as N2NS and N2EW respectively). The negative east-west polarity
seems to develop a circular shape (resembling a small sunspot to the west of sunspot N1), while
the negative north-south polarity lies just north of N1 and develops an irregular elongated shape,
resembling an east-west oriented negative “patch” in the HMI magnetogram observations (e.g. as
shown in Figure 2g). However, due to the inseparable boundaries between their conjugate positive
polarities (i.e. P2) we group these bipoles as one, thus the total conjugate negative ﬂux, N2, is

If there was no cancellation of P2 with N1, the above should also equal P2, i.e.

ΦN2 = ΦN2NS + ΦN2EW

|ΦN2| = ΦP2

(5)

(6)

The parasitic emergence (ﬁrst episode) is followed by a second episode, i.e. a stronger east-west
oriented bipole emerging within the sPIL of N2 P2 (Figure 3b). At that time (March 29) NOAA
classiﬁed the AR as βδ (β since the AR retained an overall β appearance but also δ due to polarity
P2 right next to N1). Our natural choice is to group this second episode with the east-west oriented
N2 P2 bipole of the ﬁrst emergence episode. The justiﬁcation is that the new episode’s positive
ﬂux merged with the ﬁrst episode’s P2 ﬂux and its negative ﬂux merged with that of N2EW. From
the moment of the second emergence episode of N2 P2, the new positive polarity separated from
its conjugate quite rapidly (Figure 3d), and as a result of its close proximity, P2 was forced to
collide and grind against the nearby dispersed negative ﬂux N1 and with the negative ﬂux of the
north-south bipole, N2NS. This essentially produced two collisional PILs, i.e. one oriented along
the north-south direction,“cPIL1”, which is the one already formed after the emergence of the
ﬁrst parasitic episode next to the N1 dispersed ﬂux, and “cPIL2”, which formed after the collision
between (a) the second parasitic episode’s new positive ﬂux and (b) the ﬁrst episode’s N2NS ﬂux.
The latter occupies the space between P2 and the sunspot N1 and it is oriented along the east-west
direction. Irrespective of whether the emergence has occurred within a previous self-PIL of the ﬁrst
episode, this PIL segment, cPIL2, formed as a result of collision between newly emerging ﬂux and
pre-existing ﬂux (dashed orange line, Figure 2g,h). The sequential emergence in two episodes of

– 17 –

the N2 P2 bipole in AR12017 coincided with strong clusters of signiﬁcant ﬂare activity and CMEs
(Figure 3b,d; see § 3).

This dynamic evolution can be summarized best in a 3D representation (2D in space and 1D in
time; Figures 4b and 5b) by means of the Time-Stacking Method (Chintzoglou & Zhang 2013). In
this space-time representation, the proper motions of magnetic polarities during the ﬂux emergence
phase (i.e. the mutual or “self”-separation of the conjugated polarities as the two Ω-shaped ﬂux
tubes emerge) are naturally visualized into a self-consistent picture of individual bipoles, in which an
emerging subsurface conﬁguration is driving the evolution of the system during its emergence. Due
to the strong stratiﬁcation of pressure in the subphotospheric layers, an emerging magnetic ﬂux tube
is not expected to break through the photosphere as a solid structure but rather emerge laterally
deformed (“pancaked”; Cheung & Isobe 2014). Nevertheless, the overall large-scale morphology
and connectivity is maintained as also typically seen in 3D MHD simulations of AR emergence
(e.g. Fan 2009; Cheung et al. 2010; Toriumi et al. 2014). The collisional PIL forms exactly at the
locations where the magnetic ﬂux tubes collide with each other as they emerge.

3. Collisional Shearing - Spatio-temporal Correlation with Major Activity

Activity emanating from solar ARs is frequently associated with magnetically unstable struc-
tures, i.e. MFRs and/or electric current sheets (allowing magnetic reconnection to release free
magnetic energy). An intrinsic limitation in predicting solar eruptive activity is associated with
the inability to know the 3D pre-ﬂare (or pre-eruption) magnetic conﬁguration in ARs. What is
certain is that accumulations of magnetic ﬂux, in the form of magnetic ﬂux tubes, must reach the
photospheric surface before even creating the conditions for extreme activity in the corona. How-
ever, not all ARs are ﬂare productive, and, in actuality, only a subset of them are CME-productive.
For instance, about 10% of the ARs in a solar cycle will ever produce major ﬂares (i.e. ﬂare
classes >M1.0; Georgoulis & Rust 2007). In our case, both AR11158 and AR12017 were extremely
ﬂare-productive as well as CME-productive.

The space-time representation (Figure 4b and Figure 5b) captures the 3D nature of collision
between emerging magnetic ﬂux tubes as they form ﬂare-productive ARs. In fact, two types of col-
lision (photospheric “bipole-bipole” interaction) are possible based on the timing of the emergence
of the two ﬂux tubes: (i) simultaneous, i.e. when two ﬂux tubes are emerging simultaneously and in
very close proximity to each other (AR11158; Figure 4a,b), and (ii) sequential, when the ﬁrst ﬂux
tube has already emerged with its sunspots fully developed before a second ﬂux tube collides with
its opposite-signed polarity as it emerges (AR12017; Figure 5a,b). In the simultaneous case, the
collision occurs as a result of the relative proximity and orientation/tilt of the two bipoles on the
heliographic plane. In the sequential collision, the conjugated polarities of the ﬁrst (pre-existing)
bipole N1 P1 are already formed and developed (i.e. the ﬁrst ﬂux tube’s emergence has ceased for
days), and have entered their decay phase. In addition, in the latter case, the collision is observed to
occur in a diﬀerent way, since the second bipole N2 P2 emerges at the location originally occupied

– 18 –

by the mature leading sunspot N1. Thus, we surmise that the collision ﬁrst started in 3D under the
surface (manifested by the progressively increasing oblateness of N1 and its ≈ 8 Mm displacement
towards the south).

Both cases of photospheric bipole-bipole interaction (simultaneous and sequential emergence)
provide the conditions for convergence and shearing along the cPIL. The convergence of opposite-
signed magnetic elements is expected to cause cancellation of ﬂux along the cPIL. This is due to
the fact that cPILs are high spatial gradient PILs, which means that magnetic elements meeting
on each side of the cPIL can reach a critical distance for submergence (≈ 0.9 Mm). Likewise,
the colliding polarities, as they overtake each other while self-separating, naturally produce strong
shearing motions along the cPIL. The characteristic way of how convergence and shearing occurs
in two colliding bipoles is fundamentally diﬀerent than the one often simulated by the emergence of
a simple conjugate bipole. In simulations of a simple conjugate bipole, the major activity occurs in
its self-PIL (in this case there is no collisional PIL, since there is no collision happening in a single
conjugate bipole). In either “emergence-based” or “cancellation-based” numerical experiments, all
simulated major activity is typically emanating from the sPIL in a solitary conjugate bipole. Here,
both of our ARs under study did not exhibit conjugate bipoles with compact sPILs (except when the
two bipoles collided and formed a cPIL), and virtually no major activity (i.e. ﬂare clusters, CMEs)
occurred along the sPIL of any bipole of these two ARs. To summarize the characteristic way proper
motions of emerging bipoles drive convergence and shearing, we coin the term collisional shearing,
to emphasize that cancellation occurs at the cPIL due to the collision between nonconjugated
polarities of multiple bipoles. In the following subsections we provide a detailed analysis for each
AR elucidating the local physics and the process of collisional shearing forming cPILs.

3.1. The Conjugate Flux Deﬁcit Method

ARs that are composed of more than one bipole may eventually become sites of collisional
shearing due to the self-separation and relative orientation of the bipoles. If collision occurs between
like-signed polarities then no cPIL will form, not to mention that the local 3D orientation of the
magnetic ﬁelds is not favorable for reconnection. However, if the collision occurs between opposite-
signed polarities, a cPIL will form. If the proximity is too close, magnetic ﬂux cancellation via
submergence is also expected to occur. Characterizing cPILs is very much related to the cancellation
process. It is therefore necessary to be able to quantify cancellation occurring in cPILs in order to
help understand why these are the kernels of extreme activity in ARs.

In decaying ARs, it is rather easy to quantify cancellation over a period ∆t; it is as simple as
measuring the time evolution of the total (unsigned) magnetic ﬂux, Φtot, and ﬁnding the amount
it dropped over that period after it reaches its peak value (t = tpeak presumably at the end of
emergence phase of the AR), i.e.

– 19 –

Φcanceled = Φtot(t = tpeak) − Φtot(tpeak < t < tpeak + ∆t)

(7)

In addition, in decaying ARs cancellation can be directly visible in magnetogram image series
as canceling discrete patches along the PIL. However, in emerging ARs the situation is rather
complex. It is very hard to observe the ongoing cancellation (unless it is rather visible as small
discrete cancelling polarity elements; such cases are typically associated with Ellerman bombs in
sPILs) and what fraction of ﬂux is canceled during the emergence stage in complex ARs still remains
as a big question. In compact PILs (and thus cPILs) the proximity of strong polarities can be so
close that any such individual cancellation events would be spatially underresolved in observations
by current magnetograph instruments.

In Figure 6 we outline a method that allows to measure cancellation in complex ARs during
their emergence phase. In the case of an emerging solitary bipole (Figure 6a), the magnetic ﬂux
evolves as shown in the plots for each polarity – it is increasing during the emergence process and
the positive and negative ﬂux is found to be balanced. Therefore, if we subtract the (unsigned)
negative ﬂux from its conjugate positive,

∆N1P1 = |ΦN1| − ΦP1,

(8)

it should yield zero for the duration of the emergence of this solitary bipole. However, if two bipoles
are emerging in close proximity to each other in such ways that opposite polarities are bound to
collide, ﬂux cancellation occurs (between polarities P2 and N1; Figure 6b) and a reduction of ﬂux
occurs in the colliding polarities, evident if compared against the ﬂux of the conjugate polarities
(in this case comparing N1 with P1 and N2 with P2). Thus we use the term conjugate ﬂux deﬁcit
(Figure 6c), symbolized with ∆, to emphasize that due to cancellation there would always be a
reduction of ﬂux of the colliding polarities, instead of an increase. The higher the deﬁcit ∆ for
a colliding conjugate bipole, the lower the ﬂux becomes in the nonconjugated colliding polarities
(e.g. N1 and P2 in Figure 6b). Moreover, while the two bipoles may have diﬀerent total unsigned
ﬂux (i.e. one bipole may be stronger in terms of ﬂux than the other), the ∆ measured between the
two polarities would also have the following property:

∆N1P1 = −∆N2P2 = |∆|.

(9)

since ∆ is deﬁned by subtracting positive ﬂux from the (unsigned) conjugate negative for either
of the bipoles. Due to the “diﬀerential” nature of our proposed detection method, the cumulative
cancellation of ﬂux can be measured via eq. (8) irrespectively of whether the colliding bipoles are
emerging or have stopped to emerge. The ﬂux cancellation rate, dΦ/dt is derived from the slope
of the deﬁcit (Figure 6c) as

– 20 –

dΦ
dt

= −

d|∆|
dt

.

(10)

The basis of the proposed approach in tracking the ﬂux content in evolving magnetic polarities
is much simpler than the approach taken by Tarr & Longcope (2012) or Tarr et al. (2013) in which
the authors track individual polarities (with necessary assumptions on how they are connected).
The condition here is that the non-colliding conjugate polarities are adequately isolated from other
bipoles so that they can serve as a “calibration” or reference ﬂux level. This allows the robust
inference of the deﬁcit. However, instrumental eﬀects may also inhibit clean measurements of ∆
or parasitic ﬂux may also have an impact in the measurement of the imbalance. In the following
paragraphs of this subsection, we discuss the possible sources of uncertainty in the measurements
of the deﬁcit.

We chose not to apply a noise threshold in the magnetogram series since this impacts our ability
to track weak ﬂux that cancels and also characterize the cPILs (such as in AR12017 where P2 cancels
with the dispersed N1 ﬂux). A noise threshold may also impact other locations of intermediate
magnetic intensity where magnetic ﬂux may cancel (such as in external PILs).
It is critical to
be able to properly resolve all locations of cancellation in an AR’s neutral line. Nevertheless, we
have applied noise thresholds at diﬀerent levels and determined that for the Br series (vector data)
progressive noise thresholds of up to |B|= 100 G (1-σ noise level; Hoeksema et al. 2014) reduce
the maximum deﬁcit by 20% while a higher threshold of |B|= 200 G (corresponding to a 2-σ noise
level), reduces the deﬁcit by 30%. For the BLOS, a choice of a very conservative noise threshold
of 50 G has minimal impact to the deﬁcit of about 3%. One has to apply even higher threshold
values for the BLOS, e.g. 200 G, to see the deﬁcit reducing to about 24% of the non-thresholded
value, although such noise threshold is unreasonably high given the sensitivity of the BLOS which
is ∼ 10 G (Couvidat et al. 2016). Nevertheless, for AR 12017, such reduction for the deﬁcit at that
threshold in the BLOS series is happening after March 30, where the N2 and P2 ﬂux concentrations
begin to disperse (i.e. they are entering their decay phase; see animation of Figure 2). This means
that once the ﬂux begins to disperse, it progressively ﬁlls wider areas with lower intensities or even
becomes under-resolved and thus is measured as weaker in the magnetograms. This may cause
a gross underestimation of the deﬁcit.
In AR12017, the N2 polarity loses its cohesion and the
deﬁcit decreases. Similarly, in AR11158, the N2 polarity has already began to decay, especially the
south part of N2 that belonged to the ﬁrst emergence episode of N2 P2 (see animation of Figure
2).
Imposing the noise threshold for |B|=100 G masks out signiﬁcant amount of negative ﬂux,
eﬀectively reducing the deﬁcit. Thus, attempting to reduce the instrumental noise in the vector
data, has an impact in the deﬁcit, but has much less of an impact in the deﬁcit from BLOS data.
Nevertheless, this constitutes a source of uncertainty for the ﬂux deﬁcit calculation, unoise.

A second source of uncertainty in measuring the deﬁcit is due to deviations from ﬂux balance in
the entire FOV of the magnetogram data, ubalance. This may be due to instrumental eﬀects or due
to either including ﬂux in the FOV that doesn’t belong to the target AR or failing to include ﬂux
that belongs to the AR. In both the Br and the BLOS data series in this study, the magnetograms

– 21 –

are balanced to about 2.5% to 3%.

Last, a third source of uncertainty comes from diﬃculties in grouping the polarities in individ-
ual ﬂux emergence episodes, ugrouping. We estimate this uncertainty by attempting two diﬀerent
groupings in the negative ﬂuxes of the sequential emergence in AR12017. For instance, if the neg-
ative patch above sunspot N1, i.e. polarity N2NS, is treated as part of N1, the maximum measured
deﬁcit is reduced by ≈50% as compared to the deﬁcit when that patch is considered part of N2.
Thus, for AR12017 we estimate an uncertainty for ∆ of

uAR12017
∆

=

(cid:113)

u2
noise + u2

balance + u2

grouping =

(cid:112)

(3%)2 + (3%)2 + (50%)2 = 50.2%

(11)

As for AR11158, it is certain that the colliding polarities (N1 and P2) are part of two separate
colliding bipoles (due to their proper motions and origin; hence they are nonconjugated), thus we
remove the uncertainty for grouping. However, since we are using ﬂux calculated from Br from
vector magnetogram data, the total uncertainty for ∆ is

uAR11158
∆

=

(cid:113)

noise + u2
u2

balance + u2

grouping =

(cid:112)

(20%)2 + (3%)2 + (0%)2 = 20.2%

(12)

Special care must be taken in fully isolating the polarities of the colliding bipoles. Visual
inspection and validation is also necessary during the interpretation of the results. Typically, the
measurements are easy to make in the early stages of emergence, until tertiary (i.e. subsequent)
bipoles are too hard to exclude when measuring the ﬂux. On the other hand, the latter does not
pose a problem if the ﬂuxes of such tertiary parasitic emerging bipoles can be absorbed separately
in the positive and negative ﬂux of one of the two main bipoles (see Section 3.2 and following
sections).

Last we should also mention the following possibility. If the submerged ﬁeld (that cancelled at
the collisional PIL) accumulates under the surface and the colliding polarities drift past each other
and away from the initial cancellation region (i.e. the collisional PIL), then the cancelled ﬂux (or a
fraction of it) may be free to emerge again (i.e. to “re-emerge”). If such re-emerging ﬂux at/near
the cPIL is included in the like-signed ﬂux of each of the colliding polarities, then the cumulative
cancelled ﬂux represented by the deﬁcit will appear to reduce (denoting emergence).

3.2. AR11158: Collisional Shearing Forced by Simultaneous Emergence

In Figure 7 we show the time evolution of the magnetic ﬂux measured at the photospheric
surface for one of the conjugated bipoles (N2 P2) that is nested within AR11158 (Figure 7a). As
we already showed in Figure 3a, ﬂux emergence in AR11158 occurred in two-episodes simultaneously
for each of the two bipoles. Even at the end of the ﬁrst emergence episode, the polarities N1, P1,
N2, and P2 still remain well-isolated from each other (Figure 2 a). During this time, we see little

– 22 –

diﬀerence between the ﬂux of the conjugated polarities N2 and P2 (Figure 7; also between N1 and
P1 as shown in Figure 3a); each bipole’s ﬂux is balanced to about 2.5%, considering that AR11158
is at an angular distance of Θ (cid:38)30 ◦ from disk center and the noise is signiﬁcantly high in the
radial component of the vector magnetic ﬁeld, Br (see discussion in § 2). Conveniently, at around
the end of the ﬁrst episode, the AR progresses towards disk center distances below the 30 ◦ limit.
Then a stronger, second ﬂux emergence episode begins in both bipoles. Following that moment,
the rapid self-separation of N2 P2 (and similarly N1 P1) drives the P2 polarity to collide with
N1. The leading polarities move faster (P1, P2) than the trailing conjugate polarities (N1, N2).
Thus the velocity shear at the PIL between P2 and N1 can be determined by the proper motions
of the polarities (via the self-separation speed measurements in Figure 3) and it is quite high; in
Figure 3c (solid red curve) vN2P2 is at ∼400 m s−1 for the day of February 13 and after February 14
it gradually drops to ∼200 m s−1 (February 15) and ∼100 m s−1 (February 16th). In tandem with
the rapid shear, upon impact (February 13 03:00 UT), an imbalance develops almost immediately
between the ﬂux of each bipole’s conjugated polarities (see Figure 7 a). This imbalance is captured
in the ∆N2P2 (solid curve in Figure 7 c) and it occurs because P2 ﬂux is gradually reduced compared
to its conjugate N2 ﬂux (evident in Figure 7 a).

During the ﬁrst 7 days of evolution considered here for AR11158, the shape of its PIL system
changed signiﬁcantly due to the proper motions of the colliding polarities. The collision between P2
and N1 lasted for three days after the collision onset in the beginning of February 13. Remarkably,
out of the total of 38 ﬂares that occurred in AR11158 (both conﬁned and eruptive; Table 1), an
impressive number of 30 ﬂares were produced/centered in the collisional segments of the PIL in
the area between N1 and P2. The remaining 8 ﬂares (each marked with an asterisk in Table 1) are
spatio-temporally correlated with the sequential emergence of a small parasitic bipole near polarity
N2 (marked with a dashed ellipse in Figure 2 c).
Indeed the emergence of this bipole can be
considered as a sequential-type emergence (e.g. the kind of emergence we consider in the following
subsection § 3.3) producing a second collisional PIL between N2 and the positive parasitic polarity.
However, the negative parasitic polarity merged with N2 making the detailed analysis challenging.
Thus, to simplify the analysis, we also absorb the parasitic bipole’s positive and negative ﬂux in the
ﬂuxes of bipole N2 P2 by adding the positive ﬂux in the respective ﬂux of P2. In other words, we
treat that new bipole as part of bipole N2 P2 (having sPIL2 in common) so that mutual cancellation
in the sPIL2 could not aﬀect the measurement of the deﬁcit ∆. Further justiﬁcation for doing so is
the dominance of activity at the collisional PIL (30 out of 38 ﬂares occurred there) resulting from
the collision of N1 with P2 (see Figure 4 and Table 1).

For each ﬂare event, we cross-checked the centering we provide in Table 1 with centering
inferred by the temporal evolution and spatial distribution of the ﬂare ribbons seen best in imaging
taken in the SDO/AIA 1600 ˚A passband. Our inspection for the period after February 15 showed
that 10 out of these 30 ﬂares (marked in Table 1) were centered in the collisional PIL that formed
due to another tertiary sequential emergence in the wake of P2’s tail. During this two-day period,
negative polarity elements rapidly moved and merged with polarity N2, while colliding with the

– 23 –

dispersed ﬂux that is trailing behind P2. We speculate that the origin of this tertiary emergence is
due to the cancelled ﬂux that re-emerged in the wake of P2 polarity’s collision with N1. No matter
what the origin of this tertiary emergence is, the polarity proper motions create the conditions for
a collisional PIL at the surface enriching the ﬂare activity in AR11158.

In the case where there are no subsequent parasitic emergence events, the deﬁcit ∆ eﬀectively
measures the cumulative cancelled ﬂux between the colliding nonconjugated polarities N1 and
P2. This measurement (calculated for each conjugate bipole) strongly indicates that cancellation
of magnetic ﬂux is taking place along the cPIL. The cancellation of ﬂux is independent of the
ﬂux increase (due to the emergence process) and it kicks in only at the onset of collision (onset
shown with an arrow in Figure 7a). The deﬁcit ∆N2P2 reaches its peak value within a day (∆ ≈
0.9×1021 Mx) near the time when the collision distance (measured from the ﬂux centroid of the
colliding polarities/sunspots) is minimum (∼ 10 Mm; Figure 7d). Over this period of one day the
rate of ﬂux cancellation calculated with equation (10) is ∼ -8.3×1015 Mx s−1. Due to the complexity
of the AR (that would require us to track multiple polarities to measure the deﬁcit accurately), we
restrict our analysis for the time period up to February 15 during which only four polarities (and
those of the tertiary bipole emerging above N2 absorbed in the N2 P2 bipole) are present.

The increase in ﬂux deﬁcit is accompanied by a dominance of average redshifts over blueshifts
at the collisional PIL (values at ≈ 0.35 km s−1, higher than the average trend of the nearby QS
∼0.2 km s−1; dashed curves Figure 7 b). Indeed, the average blueshifts seem more comparable in
magnitude to that of the QS. We interpret this dominant average redshift signal at the cPIL to
be consistent with the submergence into the photosphere of post-reconnected loops. In this case,
the reconnection associated with cancellation would occur (on average) above the formation height
of the Fe I 6173 ˚A line used by HMI, which is at a height of ≈0.3 Mm (Norton et al. 2006). In
Figure 8 we show the evolution of the Doppler signal at the location of the collisional PIL. In
Figure 8a we show how the photospheric Doppler velocity ﬁeld appears in a large patch between
P2 and N1, before the onset of collision (tcollision). The granulation pattern is dominant and the
velocities are the same with the nearby QS, suggesting that nothing special occurs at that location
before tcollision. However, after tcollision, (Figure 8b,c,d) the photospheric velocities along the cPIL
are predominantly positive, signifying downﬂows as measured at the formation height of the Fe I
6173 ˚A line. Some small patches appear along the length of the cPIL suggesting that the cancellation
occurs across diﬀerent segments along the cPIL (or at a lower height compared to that of the Fe I
line). This pattern continues for as long as the collision takes place.

The collision is evidently so intense that forces the colliding sunspots to become severely
oblate; The south fragment of N1 (produced during the second episode within N1 P1) exceeds 60%
oblateness right after the minimum collision distance (suggesting maximum compression) and drops
back to 40% after the end of the close encounter, which is still a very high number. Furthermore,
the collisional PIL maintains a more or less consistent length of ≈ 60 Mm and it quickly reaches
this value in only 12 hours after the onset of collision (tcollision).

– 24 –

Just 12 hours after the onset of deﬁcit increase and the dominance of redshifts at the cPIL
(Figure 7 b,c) a ﬂare activity cluster is triggered, also originating from the cPIL (Figure 4 a,b).
The emergence of N2 P2 continues well into February 16. The deﬁcit plot for N2 P2 reveals a
total cumulative amount for the cancelled ﬂux of ∆ ≈ 1 ×1021 Mx for the period up to February
15. This number amounts to ≈ 6% of the total unsigned ﬂux of a perfectly balanced N2 P2 and ≈
8% for a balanced N1 P1. After February 15, the cPIL weakens as P2 ﬂux rushes away from N1
and conglomerates right by the location of P1 polarity (Figure 2c,d, 4b). Moreover, the activity in
AR11158 continues well into February 17, following additional rapid proper motions from parasitic
emergence on February 15 and 16 (righ by or within the previous cPIL and in the tail of P2), and
on February 17 (emergence and collision in the location of previous parasitic bipole emergence by
N1 and N2 polarities).

Remarkably, a sigmoidal structure appears at the cPIL ≈ 5 hours after tcollision, becoming
progressively more coherent (Figure 9a,b). The structure is discernible as a dark feature in 304 ˚A
passband (dark feature due to free-free absorption in EUV by cooler plasma; also in other coro-
nal passbands such as 171 ˚A ) and is aligned with the cPIL. This signiﬁes a location where cool
chromospheric ﬁlament material can be supported in locations where the magnetic ﬁeld has a
“convex-up” or “dipped” local geometry, consistent with the presence or progressive formation of
a weakly-twisted MFR structure. However, this growing structure is accompanied by transient
brightenings along its length, similar to the observations reported by Chintzoglou et al. (2015). We
surmise that this MFR structure above the cPIL inevitably interacts/reconnects with the immedi-
ately neighboring ambient sheared-arcade ﬁeld, and/or that the brightenings signify reconnection
between individual stressed magnetic structures comprising the sigmoidal structure. This period
of transient brightenings of weakly coherent structures seen in the corona across compact PILs has
been previously associated with transient reconnection events eventually producing more mono-
lithic structures (e.g. Chintzoglou et al. 2015). Indeed, this transient coronal activity accompanies
the photospheric evolution in our observations to the point where coherent monolithic structures
are seen best in the 10 MK passband of AIA/SDO (Figure 9b,d and the accompanying animation).

Toriumi et al. (2014) considered possible scenarios for the subsurface magnetic structure of
AR11158.
In both cases modeled using numerical MHD simulations, a pair of BMRs emerged
simultaneously. In one of the cases (Case 1 therein), the BMRs emanate from a single ﬂux tube
underneath the surface, whereas in the other case (Case 2 therein) the two are disjoint. Neither
model reproduces the fact that a deﬁcit develops between the nonconjugated polarities. For Case
1, instead of a deﬁcit there is an excess of ﬂux during the collision, and for Case 2 the ﬂux was
balanced. While for the former (Case 1) it is not thoroughly investigated why there was an increase,
the latter (Case 2) remained in ﬂux balance because collision between the nonconjugated polarities
simply did not occur; the lateral distance between the two ﬂux tubes was large enough that the
nonconjugated polarities never approached each other signiﬁcantly for cancellation to happen. see
Section 5.3 for a discussion).

– 25 –

Table 1. Flare events and CMEs produced during the evolution of NOAA AR11158

# Flare Start (UT) Carrington Longitude† Heliographic Latitude† Flare Class

vCME

‡ (km s−1)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

2011-02-13 13:44
2011-02-13 17:28
2011-02-13 21:17
2011-02-14 02:35
2011-02-14 04:29
2011-02-14 06:51
2011-02-14 12:41
2011-02-14 13:47
2011-02-14 17:20
2011-02-14 19:23
2011-02-14 23:14
2011-02-14 23:40
2011-02-15 00:31
2011-02-15 01:44
2011-02-15 04:27
2011-02-15 10:02
2011-02-15 14:32
2011-02-15 19:30
2011-02-15 22:49
2011-02-16 01:32
2011-02-16 01:56
2011-02-16 05:40
2011-02-16 06:18
2011-02-16 09:02
2011-02-16 10:25
2011-02-16 11:58
2011-02-16 14:19
2011-02-16 15:27
2011-02-16 19:29
2011-02-16 20:11
2011-02-16 21:06
2011-02-16 23:02
2011-02-17 01:41

33.◦3
34.◦2
36.◦9
29.◦9
34.◦2
32.◦2
29.◦8
33.◦4
30.◦6
29.◦2
32.◦1
37.◦1
29.◦5
32.◦9
31.◦0
32.◦8
30.◦3
33.◦2
36.◦0
32.◦4
24.◦6
33.◦0
33.◦5
33.◦8
33.◦7
32.◦7
32.◦7
34.◦0
33.◦9
35.◦2
33.◦5
38.◦4
33.◦7

-20.◦5
-20.◦6
-19.◦6
-20.◦9
-20.◦5
-20.◦6
-20.◦6
-20.◦7
-20.◦3
-20.◦5
-21.◦2
-18.◦6
-20.◦8
-20.◦3
-20.◦9
-21.◦0
-20.◦8
-20.◦4
-19.◦4
-20.◦5
-46.◦1
-20.◦9
-20.◦5
-21.◦1
-20.◦6
-21.◦2
-20.◦9
-20.◦5
-20.◦9
-21.◦0
-20.◦5
-18.◦3
-21.◦1

C4.7
M6.6
C1.1
C1.6
C8.3
C6.6
C9.4
C7.0
M2.2
C6.6
C1.2
C2.7
C2.7
X2.2
C4.8
C1.0
C4.8
C6.6
C1.3
M1.0
C2.2
C5.9
C2.2
C9.9
C3.2
C1.0
M1.6
C7.7
C1.3
C1.1
C4.2
C2.8
C6.1

-
373
-
-*
-
-*
-*
-
229*
-*
-
-
-*
669
-*
-
-*
-**
-
-
-**
-
-**
-**
-**
-
-**
-**
-
-
-**
-**
-**

– 26 –

Table 1—Continued

# Flare Start (UT) Carrington Longitude† Heliographic Latitude† Flare Class

vCME

‡ (km s−1)

34
35
36
37
38

2011-02-17 04:09
2011-02-17 05:33
2011-02-17 06:44
2011-02-17 08:09
2011-02-17 09:24

33.◦9
34.◦7
33.◦8
34.◦5
33.◦0

-20.◦7
-20.◦5
-21.◦1
-20.◦0
-20.◦9

C1.5
C1.0
C1.2
C1.2
C1.9

-
-
-
-
-

†Flare centering obtained by intercorrelating the GOES, RHESSI and HEK event lists.

‡CME velocity (linear ﬁt) obtained from CDAW CME catalog.

∗Activity occurred in separate collisional PIL of parasitic (sequential) emergence near polarity N2.

∗∗After the middle of February 15, activity is seen to occur due to collisional shearing of tertiary

emergence within the wake of P2.

– 27 –

3.3. AR12017: Collisional Shearing Forced by Sequential Emergence

In Figure 10 we show the results of our analysis for AR12017. Five days after the initial
emergence of the ﬁrst emergence episode forming N1 P1 (March 22, 2014) the AR is entering its
decay phase. This is revealed by its trailing magnetic polarity P1, which appears very dispersed (see
the animation or compare panels f,g in Figure 2). On March 24, a second ﬂux emergence episode
occurred within the sPIL1 and no collision between opposite polarities occurred. No ﬂaring activity
accompanied the self-separation of the second episode in N1 P1. The negative ﬂux originating from
to the leading polarity of that second episode dispersed east of the negative sunspot in N1.

As we discussed in detail in § 2.1, in the beginning of March 28, a N2 P2 north-south oriented
bipole and an east-west oriented bipole begin to emerge at the north of N1 (Figure 8e) in close
proximity to the dispersed negative ﬂux (in part originating from the second episode of N1 P1
and also due to the decay of N1; dispersed ﬂux is also labeled as N1). Their positive polarities
appear to be concentrating at the same location, rendering them impossible to separate. As for
their conjugate negative polarities, they moved to locations spaced far apart, which allowed the
measurement of their ﬂuxes and the tracking of their motions with ease. We label them as N2NS
for the negative polarity of the north-south bipole (Figure 8e), and N2EW for the negative polarity
of the east-west bipole (Figure 8f). Adding them together amounts the total N2 ﬂux (solid red line
in Figure 10a).

However, if one measures the newly emerging N2 P2 bipole ﬂux, it would show a spurious
imbalance (excess negative ﬂux bias of about 5×1020 Mx) due to a pre-existing ﬂux distribution
belonging to N1 next to the area of the emergence of N2 P2 (imbalance shown in Figure 3b). In
order to remove this bias from our measurements of N2 ﬂux, for consistency we correct both N2 and
P2 ﬂuxes by subtracting their corresponding pre-existing ﬂux bias from the ﬁrst measurement seen
in Figure 10a, which in this case was the initial ﬂux level at about two days before the emergence of
N2 P2. This produces a minimal imbalance until the beginning of N2 P2 emergence (e.g. Figure 10c
shows a ﬂat line for the deﬁcit ∆). Most importantly, after the onset of emergence of the parasitic
bipole N2 P2, the ﬂux was balanced. Only upon collision of P2 with N1 the ﬂux deﬁcit began to
increase, starting at around 03:00 UT of March 28, 2014 (Figure 10c). A cluster of subﬂaring activity
with two major eruptive ﬂares accompanied the continuous increase in the ﬂux deﬁcit ∆. The shear
motions in the collisional PIL between P2 and the dispersed N1 persisted as additional emerging
ﬂux piled up at P2 pushing it eastwards. Despite that the self-separation was primarily due to
the westward motion of N2EW and not due to P2 (Figure 3b; self-separation speed ∼400-500 m
s−1), the P2 polarity was still under collision with the nonconjugated negative ﬂux N1 at the cPIL1
(e.g. Figure 8f). Rapid cancellation was seen to develop as shown in the deﬁcit plot (Figure 10c).
Imaging in EUV wavelengths from AIA shows that a low-lying ﬁlamentary helical structure (of
similar shape and length with the cPIL), activated abruptly in the collisional PIL, immediately
after 10:00 UT and persisted up until its eruption (Figure 11a,b,c,d and associated animation).
This structure above the cPIL undergoes multiple brightenings along its length suggesting that
reconnection occured within or beneath the structure. This evolution is fully consistent with that

– 28 –

of a similar structure observed in the collisional PIL of AR11158 (see previous subsection).

At the end of March 28, the rapid cancellation and the associated ﬂare activity cluster (and
CMEs; see Table 2 and Figure 5) is succeeded by a much stronger emergence event occurring within
the self-PIL of N2 P2. This new bipole is also oriented along the east-west direction and emerges
at the sPIL2 part that was shared by the previous east-west bipole. Thus we consider this to be a
second emergence episode of the ﬁrst parasitic east-west bipole. For this reason, and also because
it is impossible to isolate the new positive and negative ﬂux from the pre-existing, we group the
respective ﬂuxes with the P2 and N2EW ﬂux (blue solid curve and red dotted curve in Figure 10a).
In this second episode, the newly emerging positive ﬂux appeared to move rapidly to the east and
at the same time collided with the pre-existing positive P2 ﬂux (north of it) and also with the
opposite-signed N2NS polarity at the south. Moreover, it pushed the pre-existing positive ﬂux to
collide and shear with the N1 dispersed ﬂux at the east. By tracking the magnitude of the velocity
of the newly emerging and rapidly moving P2 we ﬁnd that the velocity shear at the collisional PIL
is in the range of ∼150-200 m s−1 and persists for 48 hours after the emergence onset. Note that
(as in AR11158) the second emergence event did not immediately lead to ﬂaring activity. In fact,
this emergence onset precedes the second cluster of ﬂare activity on March 29 by at least 8 hours.

These multiple parasitic emergence events in AR12017 present a great opportunity to demon-
strate our proposed ﬂux-deﬁcit method as we apply it to more complex and evolving conﬁgurations.
As we said above, during the emergence of the second episode, the positive polarity of the secondary
east-west oriented bipole collides with the pre-existing north-south bipole’s negative polarity N2NS
forming a cPIL2. Due to limitations in measuring the ﬂux in individual polarities that eventually
merge we ended up grouping these emergence episodes into a single bipole (i.e. N2 P2). However, if
collision occurs between polarities of two bipoles that now have been grouped into one bipole, then
the deﬁcit in the newly grouped bipole would not change and thus would not yield the canceled ﬂux
as collision progresses. This is equivalent to the case where a collisional PIL between two colliding
bipoles (either emerging simultaneously or sequentially; for instance, that in Figure 6b) eﬀectively
becomes a “self-PIL” of one “bipolar AR” (i.e. equivalent with going from the conﬁguration shown
in Figure 6b to that in Figure 6a due to the grouping of the two bipoles; therefore, we would not
be able to measure cancellation between the two grouped bipoles). Note, however, that in the
meantime the AR12017 P2 ﬂux has been cancelling continuously with N1 ﬂux at cPIL1, which is
captured by the deﬁcit (shown by the black solid line in Figure 10c), irrespective of the cancellation
due to collision within the groupped N2EW bipole. This discussion shows that by grouping together
bipoles that at some point happen to collide, there is a danger of eventually underestimating the
cancelled ﬂux in an emerging and developing complex AR. On the other hand, by “absorbing”
a tertiary bipole via grouping is a good way to ignore its inﬂuence if this is desired and would
simplify the analysis (for example, because such collision caused minor activity, or because it is
away from main cPIL/activity core of the AR). That was the case in the previous subsection where
we ignored the sequential parasitic emergence in AR11158. Here, however, we cannot ignore the
collision between those bipoles because it happens in the very core of AR12017.

– 29 –

We tackle this limitation by directly measuring the drop in ﬂux in either one of the two
polarities that collide. The polarity that is the easiest to isolate and measure its ﬂux is the N2NS
(ﬂux shown with a red dashed line in Figure 10a). In Figure 10a we see that indeed the emergence
of the second episode coincides with the moment when N2NS reaches its peak ﬂux at 18:00 UT of
March 28 2014 (t = tpeak). The drop in N2NS ﬂux indeed occurs right after the emergence of the
second east-west bipole (Figure 10a), speciﬁcally when the newly emerging positive ﬂux (“P2EW”)
collides with N2NS. This N2NS ﬂux that has canceled is the correction to the deﬁcit, ∆corr, and is
measured as

(cid:40)

∆corr =

0,
ΦN2NS(t = tpeak) − ΦN2NS(t > tpeak),

t < tpeak
t ≥ tpeak

(13)

The correction term that contains the missing cancelled ﬂux is then applied to the old deﬁcit as

∆new = ∆old + |∆corr|

(14)

This step is reﬂected in the ﬂux deﬁcit plot for N2 P2 (the deﬁcit is in solid black ∆N2P2
and the correction ∆corr is shown as a dotted-dashed red line; Figure 10c). Indeed, after applying
the correction for the cancellation forced by the emergence of the second episode of the east-west
bipole, the deﬁcit is progressively corrected for up to 4×1020 Mx (about 25%), yielding a total of
2×1021 Mx of ﬂux cancelled during this extended emergence phase in AR12017.

The ﬁrst cluster occurs during a period of cancellation with a rate of ∼ -1.85×1016 Mx s−1,
leading to a peak deﬁcit at ∆ ≈ 1.1×1020 Mx over 12 h. Before the second activity cluster, the (cor-
rected) deﬁcit reaches a maximum of ∆ ≈ 1.7×1020 Mx with a cancellation rate of ∼ -2.4×1016 Mx
s−1 over a period of 8 h. The total ﬂux cancelled due to the P2 N1 collision (deﬁcit at the end of
activity on March 29) is ∆ ≈ 2×1021 Mx. We ﬁnd that the total cancelled ﬂux amounts to ∼ 14%
of the total unsigned ﬂux for AR12017 but also ∼ 40% of the unsigned ﬂux of a perfectly balanced
secondary bipole N2 P2. The latter is quite a signiﬁcant number and is more meaningful than the
percentage related to the total unsigned ﬂux of the whole AR since not all of the ﬂux from the
pre-existing bipole is participating in the collision.

The average Doppler velocities at the collisional PIL (Figure 10b) show clear dominance for
redshifts (mean ≈ 0.6 km s−1 at around the time of the activity), which are also dominant with
respect to the average Doppler velocities in the nearby QS. The QS Doppler shifts result from the
photospheric granulation velocity ﬁeld. In Figure 8e,f we demonstrate visually the Doppler velocity
measurements at cPIL1. After the second emergence episode, cPIL2 is formed right by cPIL1
producing an extended region of strong downﬂows is revealed (Figure 8g). A brief increase of the
average blueshift seems to occur between March 29 and 30, following the second ﬂux emergence,
which also slightly strengthened the P2 polarity. During the self-separation of this newly emerging

– 30 –

bipole, the new P2 polarity moved farther away from sunspot N1 to the east. As it moved to the
east, it began to develop a penumbra in the south. The Evershed ﬂow in the weak penumbra is
directed towards the LOS (the AR is in the North hemisphere), resulting in strong blueshifts at
that segment of the cPIL. However, the penumbra dissolves within a day (see the animation of
Figure 2) possibly due to the natural decay of the P2 polarity, which on March 30 is seen to weaken
and disperse completely. This is also seen in Figure 8h (inset ﬁgure showing blue patch in Doppler
velocities within the south-east side of the cPIL2). Nevertheless, the redshifts seem consistent and
dominate over the period covering the collision of the polarities. Doppler redshifts reach maximum
speeds as high as 2.5 km s−1 at the time of collision, signifying strong downﬂows. It is possible that
these ﬂows may be even stronger and the HMI instrument could not properly measure them. At any
rate, this consistency between reduction of ﬂux and persistently strong average redshifts strongly
suggests that we observe the submergence of magnetic ﬂux as it is cancelling at the collisional PIL.

In Figure 10d we can see that the shape of the polarity N2NS transforms from moderately
elliptical into a strongly elongated shape of 80% oblateness within 6-10 hours before the onset of
the eruptive ﬂares. This fact, together with the 8 Mm southward displacement of the N1 sunspot
suggests that collision had started from below the photospheric surface. The collision distance
(deﬁned as the distance between the ﬂux centroids of the colliding nonconjugated polarities of the
second emergence episode’s positive polarity and N2NS) reaches a minimum value of ∼ 12 Mm
at the time of high oblateness. This rapid change in the collision distance is due to the rapid
anti-parallel shearing motions between the colliding polarities. The tracking of the N2NS centroid
becomes impossible in the middle of March 29 since it has weakened and has almost completely
dissolved. The second activity cluster ends with an eruptive X1.0 ﬂare on March 29, 17:35 UT.

The length of cPIL1 grows rapidly to about 50 Mm within the ﬁrst half of March 28 (similar to
the growth of AR11158 cPIL length). Then cPIL1 becomes conjoined with the cPIL2 that forms due
to the second episode of the east-west bipole; as a result, a single continuous long cPIL is produced
(reaching a length of about 80 Mm). Note that while cPIL2 lengthens, cPIL1 becomes harder to
track its length, primarily due to the increased noise levels of the HMI instrument for Θ (cid:38)30 ◦. This
led HMI to underresolve both the weak polarity elements of N1 and the positive ﬂux that disperses
from P2 and becoming weaker. Thus, it is possible that the length of cPIL1 is underestimated after
the ﬁrst half of March 28. At the same time, cPIL2 is more robustly extracted since it separates
areas of stronger and more closely spaced opposite magnetic ﬂux (i.e. the newly emerging positive
ﬂux and the elongated strip of N2NS). Nevertheless, the overall shape of the conjoined system of
cPILs visually corresponds to the ﬁlament channel system seen in Figure 11c,d,e,f panels which
corresponds to the location of the pre-eruptive structure before the eruptive ﬂares at the end of
March 28 and March 29. On March 30 The cPIL length is brieﬂy seen to reach again a large
value (∼ 90 Mm) as P2 moves away from N1 and becomes surrounded by dispersed negative ﬂux
(belonging to N1 ﬁrst and second episodes) in the east and northeast of P2. This is created a cPIL
system that almost encircled P2, eﬀectively doubling the cPIL length. However, at that time P2
has weakened signiﬁcantly and has lost its cohesion – a manifestation of a rapid transition to the

– 31 –

N2 P2 bipole’s decay phase. An eruptive ﬂare follows in the decay phase, 12 hours into March 30,
marking the end of eruptive activity for AR12017.

4. The Physics of Collisional Shearing and its Relation to Major Solar Activity

The observations we report in this article have signiﬁcant implications regarding our theoretical
understanding of the mechanisms causing major solar activity. First, for each AR we studied there
was a phase during which rapid emergence of new ﬂux was ongoing and there was virtually no
major activity produced in the corona. This is true for the ﬁrst (double) ﬂux emergence episode of
AR11158 (Figure 7), but also for AR12017, which initially begins its life as a strong bipole (only
producing four minor subﬂaring events in its self-PIL and then remained inactive for a period of
5 days; Figure 10). Evidently, the emergence phase doesn’t lead immediately to ﬂaring activity or
eruptions, despite that the most intense activity is expected during that stage in the evolution of
complex ARs (Schrijver 2009). What stands out clearly is the contrast of activity before and after
the onset of collision. The collision occurs between nonconjugated polarities of the opposite sign.
Magnetic polarities are guided into a collision course due to their relative tilt and self-separation.
The colliding polarities slip past each other with several hundreds of meters per second (average
shear velocities between 200-400 m s−1 measured in both fundamentally diﬀerent ARs).

Just before the onset of collision, the relative proximity due to the convergence of the opposite
nonconjugated polarities permits the development of a direct connectivity between them. As a
result of the “frozen-in eﬀect” (Alfv´en 1942), the connectivity in the atmosphere behaves as if it is
“anchored” to footpoints in the respective polarities at the high-density photosphere. Therefore,
after the onset of the collision phase, the continuous proper motions of the nonconjugated polarities
are driving the shear of the “line-tied” ﬁeld about (and above) the collisional PIL. We name this
process collisional shearing to emphasize the fact that the shear and convergence develop simul-
taneously due to the proper motions of the polarities during the collision. Cancellation naturally
occurs in the collisional PIL, resulting in connectivity changes of the sheared arcade into a helical
(poloidal) structure (as suggested by van Ballegooijen & Martens 1989 at least for the formation of
ﬁlament channels in decaying ARs). We present this idea in a cartoon model in Figure 12, where
photospheric reconnection occurs above the collisional PIL (shown with yellow color).
Initially,
the arcades converge and also begin to shear due to the collision. This brings them into such
proximity and relative ﬁeld line orientation (near the sheared loop footpoints along the cPIL) that
reconnection begins at a height above the cPIL. The reconnection produces two post-reconnection
connectivities, i.e. (1) predominantly axial structures aligned along the cPIL (magenta dashed line
in Figure 12a), and (2) loops of small radius of curvature (black line in Figure 12a) which submerge
below the photosphere (ﬂux cancellation at the cPIL is currently underresolved by contemporary
magnetograph instrumentation). With ongoing collisional shearing driving the photospheric recon-
nection, additional ﬂux is wrapped around the axial structure (i.e. is added as poloidal ﬂux) and an
equal amount of ﬂux is submerged under the surface. The location of the changes in connectivity

– 32 –

Table 2. Flare events and CMEs produced during the evolution of NOAA AR12017

# Flare Start (UT) Carrington Longitude† Heliographic Latitude† Flare Class

vCME

‡ (km s−1)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

2014/03/23 01:20
2014/03/23 05:35
2014/03/23 14:09
2014/03/23 18:37
2014/03/28 12:55
2014/03/28 16:03
2014/03/28 17:30
2014/03/28 17:56
2014/03/28 19:04
2014/03/28 23:14
2014/03/28 23:44
2014/03/29 07:50
2014/03/29 09:53
2014/03/29 10:48
2014/03/29 12:41
2014/03/29 13:18
2014/03/29 14:26
2014/03/29 16:20
2014/03/29 17:35
2014/03/30 11:48
2014/03/30 21:10

140.◦8
140.◦5
140.◦0
140.◦6
147.◦7
147.◦7
147.◦4
147.◦9
147.◦4
147.◦4
146.◦2
146.◦4
144.◦3
146.◦6
147.◦6
147.◦6
142.◦9
148.◦5
146.◦3
146.◦8
147.◦0

9.◦3
11.◦3
10.◦2
11.◦2
11.◦1
11.◦4
11.◦5
11.◦1
10.◦8
11.◦2
10.◦6
10.◦2
9.◦1
11.◦0
11.◦9
10.◦6
10.◦1
11.◦4
10.◦5
10.◦2
10.◦2

C1.7
C2.6
C1.3
C1.3
C1.1
C1.0
C1.2
C2.3
M2.0
C1.0
M2.6
C2.1
C1.4
C1.7
C1.5
C1.0
C3.3
C1.1
X1.0
M2.1
C7.6

-*
-*
-*
-*
-
-
-
-
420
-
514
-
-
-
-
-
-**
-
528
487***
-***

†Flare centering obtained by intercorrelating the GOES, RHESSI and HEK event lists.

‡CME velocity (linear ﬁt) obtained from CDAW CME catalog.

∗Minor activity occurred in early phase of N1 P1 emergence.

∗∗Event occurred during decay phase in sPIL1 as suggested from ﬂare ribbons seen in 1600 ˚A from

SDO/AIA.

∗∗∗Event occurred during decay phase.

– 33 –

due to the cancellation scenario at the cPIL coincides with conﬁned sub-ﬂaring and major ﬂare
activity at the cPIL (and not at the sPILs). This is conﬁrmed by visual inspection of EUV imaging
(e.g. Figures 9, 11) and by the three diﬀerent sources for the centering of ﬂare events (i.e. the
GOES, RHESSI and HEK intercorrelated events in Table 1 and Table 2, and Figures 4, 5).

The ambient/large-scale magnetic ﬁeld conﬁgurations are expected to interact with the pres-
ence of a stressed magnetic ﬂux system in the corona, the MFR, that forms due to photospheric
cancellation driven by collisional shearing (cartoon Figure 12 c). The MFR is manifested by a
sigmoidal structure in coronal EUV imaging in both ARs, which eventually becomes unstable and
lifts and drives a CME. In addition, the Doppler measurements provide us with additional insight
about the process. The fact that blueshifts and redshifts co-exist in the same collisional PIL has
several implications regarding the physical processes involved. Indeed the cPIL average redshift
dominates over the cPIL blueshift and also the average Doppler signatures of the QS, suggesting
submergence at the collisional PIL. However, average blueshifts are also present in the cPIL (see
Figure 8). This suggests the possibility that cancellation occurs in a fragmented fashion along the
PIL (i.e. small “pockets” where sheared ﬂux is oriented appropriately for photospheric reconnec-
tion to occur), which may then produce several stressed and twisted segments of MFR structures
above the collisional PIL. These in turn may interact with each other via reconnection in the chro-
mosphere and corona that is manifested as transient brightenings, forcing them to merge into a
more monolithic system (e.g. Chintzoglou et al. 2015). Another possibility is that blueshifts rep-
resent locations where reconnection occurs below the formation height of the Fe I line. However,
photospheric reconnection alone cannot explain the transient activity in the corona by itself as can
be explained in the former case of fragmented formation of MFRs which would interact with each
other or with sheared ﬁeld near them, producing ﬂare reconnection in the corona. In addition, an
MFR can also lose poloidal ﬂux by reconnecting with nearby ﬂux systems if it is conﬁned to stay
above a PIL (Chintzoglou et al. 2017).

In Figure 13 we show results from an evolutionary Cartesian MF model (Cheung & DeRosa
2012; Fisher et al. 2015) for the coronal ﬁeld of AR11158. The magnetic ﬁeld is evolved (data-
driven) by electric ﬁelds, E, calculated with Faraday’s law of induction

∂B
∂t

= −∇ × E

(15)

at the bottom boundary (photosphere) directly from the full photospheric vector magnetic ﬁeld
observations, B, as E = −v × B + ηJ (Ohm’s law for a conducting ﬂuid), where η the magnetic
diﬀusivity, v the inductive velocity, and J the electric current density. The details of the electric
ﬁeld and energy ﬂux analysis in AR11158 can be found in Kazachenko et al. (2015). The vector
ﬁelds were projected onto a Cartesian system of reference. The simulation domain is 512×512×192
pixels3 with dx = dy =0.36 Mm and dz = 1.5dx. The Cartesian MF code solves the following form
of the induction equation

where

– 34 –

∂A
∂t

= v × B − ηJ

B = ∇ × A

J = ∇ × B

v =

J × B
ν

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

where A the magnetic vector potential and ν the magnetofrictional coeﬃcient (a parameter that
modiﬁes the velocity to ensure numerical convergence).

Stressed magnetic structures appear to form in the atmosphere self consistently due to col-
lisional shearing acting at the cPIL (Figure 13a,b,c,d). The MF model captures the two bipole
emergences initially as two separate conjugate ﬂux systems (Figure 13a), which then interact as
collision proceeds with time. The proper motions of the colliding polarities show P2 to overtake N1,
slipping rapidly to the west. The connectivity between P2 and N1 in the low corona progressively
delineates the PIL shape (Figure 13b,c,d). The location of the stressed magnetic structure coin-
cides with the collisional PIL, the location where intermittent sub-ﬂaring (ﬂares up to C9.9 level)
and major ﬂare activity occurs in the corona (Figure 4 and Table 1). This localized activity lasts
for as long as the collisional PIL exists. Note that the connectivity above self-PILs (i.e. conjugate
bipoles N2 P2 and N1 P1) is nearly-potential (and consequently less stressed/energized) at all times
(Figure 13a,b,c,d), in agreement with the observation that no ﬂares occurred in the self-PILs of
N1P1 and N2P2 (Table 1 and Figure 5). However, the most striking ﬁnding from the MF model is
the formation of a coronal magnetic ﬂux rope structure at the collisional PIL only (Figure 14) in
agreement with our interpretation of the observations of collisional shearing. The MFR structure
and the neighboring sheared arcade ﬁeld lines were both traced from a region of strong electric
ﬁeld magnitude, |E|, at the cPIL. That region of cPIL is both at a location where cancellation
occurs (creating the MFR structure) and at a location where the MFR begins to interact with its
immediate environment, i.e. with a simply sheared arcade (i.e. not a highly twisted structure)
neighboring with the MFR. This ﬁnding from the model may also explain the conﬁned transient
activity observed above compact cPILs in complex emerging ARs (Chintzoglou et al. 2015).

– 35 –

5. Discussion

Strong activity originates from complex emerging ARs throughout the solar cycle. Our obser-
vations of highly ﬂare- and CME-productive (emerging) ARs are in contrast with the commonly
investigated theoretical scenarios with (a) emergence-based data-inspired modeling, i.e. simulating
eruptions during the emergence phase of simple bipolar AR, and (b) works based on the cancellation
scenario in a simple emerging bipole or based on simple shear (no cancellation) in quadrupolar con-
ﬁgurations. In the following paragraphs we discuss how our scenario and data-driven MF modeling
is in contrast with commonly proposed scenarios to explain extreme ﬂare activity and eruptions.

First, virtually no eruption/signiﬁcant activity is seen to originate from the “self-PILs” of the
individual “constituent” bipoles. That is, no singular bipole during the emergence phase produced
intense events in our observations. Emergence-based simulations of ARs that produced eruption(s)
were obtained from the emergence of a single but highly twisted ﬂux tube, forming a bipole with a
compact self-PIL (e.g. Fan 2001; Manchester et al. 2004; Gibson & Fan 2006; Archontis & T¨or¨ok
2008; MacTaggart & Hood 2009; Archontis & Hood 2010; Roussev et al. 2012; Leake et al. 2013;
Magara 2015; Syntelis et al. 2017). Diﬀusion/cancellation-based simulations consider the conditions
of shear and convergence in a single bipole (e.g. van Ballegooijen & Martens 1989; Martens &
Zwaan 2001; Amari et al. 2003; Mackay & van Ballegooijen 2006; Aulanier et al. 2010; Amari
et al. 2011; Zuccarello et al. 2016; note that we do not consider the case of inter-AR interactions,
since at least one AR could be in its decaying phase). However, the cancellation-based models
are, by construction, unable to capture the dynamics of the evolution of ARs as a result of the
polarity proper motions (in such simuations the polarities are ﬁxed and/or prescribed by the pre-
emergence shape of the ﬂux tubes). Instead, these models operate on an initial bipolar magnetic
ﬁeld distribution at the surface by varying surface ﬂows (leading to diﬀusion, convergence and
shearing). While numerical setups require a certain degree of simplicity oﬀered by the choice of a
simple bipole, here we demonstrate that our attention needs to be shifted to the local physics of
collisional-PILs (requiring at least two colliding nonconjugated polarities) and not in their respective
self-PILs (i.e. originating in polarities belonging to the same bipole) in order to properly explain
the associated solar activity. Shearing and convergence of opposite-signed ﬂux required for the
cancellation scenario is naturally provided by the proper motion of nonconjugated sunspots that
drive the collision. The proper motions are prescribed by the self-separation and tilt of the bipoles.

5.1. Are “simple” δ-spot ARs truly quadrupolar or bipolar?

There is evidence that δ-spot ARs, which largely look bipolar, do not seem to host ﬂares and
spew eruptions simply due to their emergence. Such an example of a well-observed, seemingly
“bipolar” delta spot (with polarities predominantly separated by a long and compact PIL) is the
case of NOAA AR11429. Chintzoglou et al. (2015) showed that secondary and tertiary emergence of
small bipoles are “enriching” the ﬂaring and eruptive potential of this emerging “bipolar” AR. The

– 36 –

emergence of a small bipole began at the north-east part of the PIL and continued to self-separate
against the AR11429 PIL, in which collision and shear with the pre-existing nonconjugated polarity
distributions naturally occurred due to the proper motions of the self-separating emerging bipole
(Chintzoglou et al. 2015; see Figure 3 and discussion therein). Emergence did not seem to trigger
an eruption immediately, but it took ∼ 1.5 days from the moment of this secondary emergence for
the ﬁrst CME to occur. However, in the meantime, the AR showed transient conﬁned subﬂaring
and ﬂaring activity. An inherent limitation in such large compact PIL δ-spots is that since the PIL
is of such strong spatial gradients, the contrast of the spatial distribution in magnetic ﬁeld values
in individual elements along the PIL is rather low. AR11429 was a case observed continuously
with modern, high resolution magnetograms (from SDO/HMI) which allowed us to capture the
course of the secondary bipole’s self-separation along the compact-PIL. Note that this behavior
is not captured in the simulation by Takasao et al. (2015). The latter work claims only a rough
comparison of the surface evolution of a kink-unstable ﬂux tube to the observed AR11429. We
must stress here that the authors would not be able to consider the early phases of this AR’s
emergence, since it already appeared emerging and developing in the east limb. In addition, in
Takasao et al. (2015), Figure 16, where there is an attempted comparison between the compact
PILs of the simulation with the observations, they do not consider the trailing negative sunspots
in the east of AR11429. We argue here that the conclusion, suggesting that the overall evolution of
this AR being due to the emergence of a single idealized kink unstable ﬂux tube (such as in Linton
et al. 1998, 1999, must be taken with caution. The multipolarity seen in this AR, is certainly higher
than that of a simple quadrupole. While at some stage the polarities could even be largely grouped
as “quadrupolar” (and to some extent, even “bipolar”), this AR was indeed the result of several
individual ﬂux tubes, either emerging sequentially or simultaneously. This can be conﬁrmed for as
long as the individual polarities can be counted (up to the point they congregate with each other as
it is seen later in the evolution of AR11429). We stress here the importance of using well-observed
ARs (meaning from the very beginning of their emergence stage all the way to maturity) in order to
draw safer conclusions about the drivers of intense solar activity. Since δ-spot ARs are rare and our
basic knowledge originates from conclusions that were drawn from previous sparse-in-time ground
based observations (and low-resolution observations by SOHO/MDI, albeit continuous), it may
not be safe to consider δ-spots as simply “bipolar” or “quadrupolar” structures. Low-resolution
SOHO/MDI observations and sporadic (sometimes only daily) ground-based magnetograms from
solar cycles before the 24th, may be giving a wrong impression that “bipolar” δ-spots or “island”-
δ-spots are compatible with idealized eruptive bipole models (see following subsections and also
§ 1.2). All the above suggest that numerical models need to account for the observed complexity
(proper motions, multipolarity) that is often seen in ﬂare-productive ARs. This now seems to
become possible thanks to advances in computing power over the last decade.

– 37 –

5.2.

Implications for Previous Emergence-based Data-inspired Models

As mentioned earlier, the characteristic way of how convergence and shearing occurs in two
colliding bipoles is fundamentally diﬀerent than the one often simulated by the emergence of a
In such simulations of a simple conjugate bipole, the major activity
simple conjugate bipole.
occurs in its self-PIL (in this case there is no collisional PIL, since there is no collision happening
in a single conjugate bipole). In “emergence-based” numerical experiments, all simulated major
activity is typically emanating from the PIL in a solitary conjugate bipole. Here, both of our ARs
under study did not exhibit conjugate bipoles with compact self PILs (except when the two bipoles
collided and formed a collisional PIL), and, unsurprisingly, no major activity (i.e. ﬂare clusters,
CMEs) occurred along the sPIL of any bipole of these two ARs.

A diﬀerent approach has been taken by Toriumi et al. (2014), in which the evolution of the
well-observed AR11158 is modeled in two scenarios, ﬁrst, “Case 1” where the AR evolves as a result
of the emergence of a single ﬂux tube with a dip in the middle of its length (causing two bipoles
at the surface), and “Case 2” where the evolution is a result of two buoyant ﬂux tubes that are
relatively near to each other. These two cases in Toriumi et al. (2014) were produced to infer the
subphotospheric origin of AR11158 by comparing the proper motions and the non-potential shear
at the PIL. Case 2 was rejected over Case 1 with the argument that the polarities N1 P2 did not
collide and thus did not produce a compact PIL, as it happened in the actual AR11158. However,
Case 1 did produce a compact PIL with non-potential shear and, due to that, it was presented
as the best candidate for the subphotospheric origin and structure of AR11158. This simulation
setup was also used in the work of Fang & Fan (2015) and later on, Toriumi & Takasao 2017 who
considered possible formation mechanisms for δ-spot ARs. Our observations are in contrast with
this scenario for two main reasons as we explain below.

First, while the proper motions in Case 1 lead N1 P2 into a collision course consequently
producing a compact PIL, at the moment of minimum centroid distance (i.e. maximum compression
due to collision) they stop moving and remain interlocked for the remainder of the simulation. The
multi-day observations for AR11158 (extending past the CME of February 15) reveal a diﬀerent
behavior for the proper motions between N1 P2 of Figure 4. Our observations of AR11158 (also
fully described in Chintzoglou & Zhang 2013) show that the polarities P2 and N1 do not stay
interlocked after they collide but instead P2 slips rapidly by N1 and then migrates toward the west
to meet polarity P1. In the Toriumi et al. (2014) the authors track the individual polarities with
a ﬂux-weighted centroid which it is a crude, yet adequate enough method to track the motion of
the polarities. Our point is demonstrated by comparing Figure 5 (Case 1) and Figure 6 (Case
In their Figure 5, one can still see that the ﬂux-weighted centroid
2) in Toriumi et al. (2014).
tracking follows the leading portion of polarity P2 reasonably well. Consequently, one can see how
the position of the leading edge of P2 changes with time, since it is also near the ﬂux-weighted
centroid. It is clear that in Case 1 the ﬁnal distance (i.e. last panel at t/τ0=150) between the strong
ﬂux leading edge of P2 is as far as 40 x/H0 normalized distance units from the core of the P1 polarity.
In comparison, the conjugate polarity separation of the individual bipoles is about 50 x/H0. In

– 38 –

addition, P2 appears to interlock with N1 quickly, since P2 assumes its ﬁnal position at t/τ0=100.
For Case 2, the ﬁnal distance between P2 and P1 is comparatively very small, ∼ 10 x/H0 with
bipole separations of ∼ 70 x/H0, which is more consistent to the observed ﬁnal separation of the P1
and P2 polarities (compare the strong ﬂux leading edge of P2 polarity in the actual observations of
AR11158 in our online movie1). This discrepancy between the observations and the simulated Case
1 can be well understood if we consider a physical limitation in the construction of Case 1. Because
the colliding polarities P2 and N1 are sharing a “dip” at the bottom of the simulation’s domain (i.e.
since they were made out of a single progenitor ﬂux tube), this numerical setup strongly anchors
these two polarities below the photosphere. Therefore, while this setup succeeds in bringing N1
and P2 together to collide, it also conﬁnes their photospheric proper motions not to move far from
the location of the dip. Hence it is impossible to model the observed evolution of AR11158.

Second, in Figure 8a of Toriumi et al. (2014), we can see that while the ﬂux increases during
the time of increasing self-separation distance, during collision, the ﬂux in the colliding polarities
is increasing even more, in excess to that of the non-colliding polarities.
In our measurements
presented in Figure 3a, in the beginning of February 14 during which polarity N1 and P2 are
well into their collision phase, their conjugated non-colliding sunspots happen to reach the same
amount of ﬂux, i.e. ΦP1 = |ΦN2| = 7 × 1021 Mx. At that time we can see that ΦP1 > ΦP2, with
their diﬀerence equivalent to the measured ﬂux deﬁcit which should follow equation (9). However,
according to Case 1, where before the onset of collision the bipoles are completely symmetric and
balanced, after collision ΦP2 > ΦP1 (Toriumi et al. 2014; Figure 8a), in contrast to our observations
of AR11158. For Case 2, the disagreement with the observations seems to be somewhat milder, at
least from the scope of proper motions. As the two parallel ﬂux tubes emerge and the polarities
self-separate, N1 moves to meet N2, and P2 separates from its conjugate N2 to meet the leading
polarity P1. This is very consistent with the observations of AR11158 (Figure 4 and accompanying
animation of Figure 2). While the authors rejected this case due to the absence of a compact PIL
between N1 P2, we support that Case 2 describes the observations more closely (albeit without a
compact cPIL), suggesting that AR11158 was a product of two individual emerging ﬂux tubes.

In a recent simulation by Toriumi & Takasao (2017) the former two scenarios (Case 1 and 2)
are reproduced in twice the spatial resolution (5123 domain size) with the addition of two more
scenarios. That is, a (linear) “Quadrupole” emergence (similar to Case 1), two ﬂux tube emergence
named as “inter-AR” emergence (but similar to Case 2), kink-unstable bipolar emergence referred to
as “spot-spot” emergence, and parasitic bipole emergence called therein as “spot-satellite” emer-
gence.
In all cases, a current sheet forms above the PILs, with the strongest being the one of
bipolar AR emergence (their “spot-spot” case, arising from a single highly twisted, kink-unstable
ﬂux tube). These simulated cases investigating δ-spot formation produced high non-potential shear
in the resulting compact PILs. Cancellation is not investigated in these cases and no eruption was
produced. Nevertheless, the cases of simultaneous emergence (“inter-AR”) and parasitic emergence
(“spot-satellite”) roughly capture the large-scale proper motions as shown in our observations of
the two ARs studied here. We suggest that a reduction in the relative spacing between two colliding

– 39 –

ﬂux tubes in the simulations may be a promising approach for future emergence-based simulations.

5.3.

Implications for Previous Shear-based or Cancellation-based Data-Inspired
Models

Numerical models that operate by diﬀusion and shearing (i.e. cancellation-based and not
emergence-based) seem more appropriate for the mature or decaying phase of ARs where turbulent
diﬀusion and diﬀerential rotation drive the decay in ARs. These ARs, despite they are on their
decaying phase, are observed to produce an eruption even although less energetic than those pro-
duced in emerging ﬂux regions. In complex emerging ARs, it is not uncommon to have recurring
eruptions (such as in the cases we present in this article). Our proposed scenario naturally explains
the solar activity in the collisional PIL by means of cancellation but without the ad hoc assump-
tions of diﬀusion and shearing occurring in individual bipoles; the proper motions self-consistently
drive cancellation for as long as the collision between opposite-signed polarities of nonconjugated
bipoles persists.

There is another class of eruptive models that energize the pre-eruptive structure solely by
shearing, known as the “Break out” (introduced by Antiochos et al. 1999; also Lynch et al. 2008;
Wyper et al. 2017). In the case that is relevant in forming CMEs (i.e. Antiochos et al. 1999 and
Figure 3 in Wyper et al. 2017), four polarities are required to create a speciﬁc type of magnetic
topology that could lead to an eruption. Similar to the other models in this category, this model
completely disregards the occurrence of cancellation and considers just the shearing of an initial
arcade. The arcade is driven at its footpoints to shear and as a result expands upwards (Mikic &
Linker 1994), forcing its reconnection with the overlying ﬂux at a topological feature (i.e. a null
point or a separator line). Then, as the sheared arcade is free to expand further, “standard model”
reconnection is triggered underneath the expanded arcade and accelerates the eruption by adding
more poloidal ﬁeld around the escaping structure (a positive feedback resistive process forming an
MFR). However, the simple shearing of the arcade is not able to explain the transient ﬂaring and
sub-ﬂaring activity seen above the collisional PIL for as long as the collision takes place. Contrary
to the emergence-based and cancellation-based models, the ﬂux rope in the “break out” model
forms after the onset of the eruption and not before the eruption. This is in contrast with our
observations of collisional shearing (for example, see Figure 9, 11 and accompanying animations).
While a quadrupolar conﬁguration is the bare minimum for creating interesting magnetic topology
in the corona (needed for the Break out model to operate), the amount of cancellation we measure
due to the colliding ﬂux tubes in ARs suggests that ﬂux ropes naturally form prior to their eruption.
The pre-existence of a magnetic ﬂux rope forming at the collisional PIL is fully supported by our
data-driven MF model of collisional shearing as discussed in § 4.

– 40 –

5.4.

Incompatibility with the CSHKP Standard Model and 2D Models in General

The CSHKP Standard Eruptive Model (a collection of cartoons and 2D analytical modeling
found in the works of Carmichael 1964; Sturrock 1966; Hirayama 1974; Kopp & Pneuman 1976) is
essentially a simplistic 2D model that considers only one bipole to explain eruptive ﬂares. We need
to stress here that our proposed scenario for ﬂare productive ARs shows the limitations of CSHKP,
again for the same reasons as above (as in emergence-based single-bipole simulations), since more
than one bipole was required to produce the eruptions, at least during the emergence phase. Also,
due to its 2D nature, the CSHKP cannot account for the observed behavior in bipoles (i.e. shearing
and/or cancellation).

This eruptive model has been recently extended to 3D (Aulanier et al. 2010) in an attempt to
include the mechanisms of cancellation and shearing, but again, only involving a single bipole. Note
that the diﬀerences of this “3D CSHKP” model with diﬀusion-based models are minimal. We should
acknowledge that the authors strive for realism, by composing an asymmetric magnetic distribution
at the photosphere, something that distinguishes it from the previous diﬀusion-based models. As
we already mentioned in §5.3, the approach of a diﬀusion-based simulation is more appropriate
for the conditions in decaying ARs. Not surprisingly, in Aulanier et al. (2010) a decaying AR
was chosen, instead of an emerging AR, to demonstrate a crude similarity of the modeled coronal
sigmoid with the observations. The authors do mention that the numerical setup for cancellation
they used (i.e. diﬀusion) is not appropriate for emerging ARs but probably loosely appropriate for
decaying ARs. With regards to shearing motions, a maximum shear velocity of 5% of the Alfv´en
speed at the photosphere was prescribed about the self PIL, peaking at 50 m s−1, which is a very
slow speed as compared to the hundreds of m s−1 of collisional shearing we observe in PILs. We
thus consider this “3D CSHKP” model as an attempted simulation of an eruption inspired from
a decaying single bipole AR but not consistent with the conditions found in a complex emerging,
and still evolving AR.

The above “3D CSHKP” model is in strong contrast with our observations of collisional shear-
ing in emerging ARs. In the observations, the long period of inactivity before the onset of collision
also suggests that in none of each bipole’s self-PILs a ﬂux rope was formed or was forming during
their emergence. If this was not the case, we would have expected to either (a) see activity ema-
nating from the self-PILs and/or from associated sigmoids/stressed magnetic structures about the
self-PILs, or (b) expect the activity to scale in the entire PIL path, i.e. the self-PIL/collisional-
PIL/self-PIL integral system (leading to a huge ribbon system during/after an eruptive ﬂare).
Moreover, if there were two ﬂux ropes, each of them formed above the respective bipole’s self-PIL,
the ribbons from the eruptive ﬂare should occur above the self-PILs. However, this is not the case
in the observations. We do not see any ribbon brightenings or eruptive activity in the self-PILs,
at least before the time the ARs enter their decay phase. In the decay phase, a collisional PIL
does not exist but instead there is only one integral PIL, typical of those in diﬀuse decaying ARs.
Therefore we conclude that the collisional-PIL is the location where physical conditions lead to
eruption. This is a strong constraint for computational models since our observations disagree with

– 41 –

all simulations that produce eruptions in the self-PIL of a single emerging bipole.

Chen & Shibata (2000) constructed a 2D eruptive model that in part involves the 2D standard
model reconnection for the destabilization of a pre-existing “MFR” (we write MFR in quotes
because an MFR is naturally a 3D structure and in a 2D model is not properly described). This
model attempts to explain the observation that CMEs often occur in bipolar ARs that eventually
become quadrupolar by the subsequent emergence of a new bipole inside or outside the initial self-
PIL. The authors acknowledge the limitations of this 2D over-simpliﬁed approach, however they
claim that this model reproduces key characteristics of solar eruptions. The assumption behind
this model is that there is an “MFR” (i.e. O-loop system in 2D) pre-existing above the PIL, until
secondary emergence (with orientation for the emerging poloidal ﬁeld “favoring” reconnection in
the 2D corona) causes a loss of equilibrium. In the case where emergence occurs inside the self-PIL,
reconnection with the arcade below the “MFR” removes magnetic pressure and the ﬂanks of the
strapping ﬂux move toward the PIL and form a current sheet underneath the “MFR”. Then the
“MFR” rises in the same fashion as in the CSHKP model. In the case where the emergence occurs
outside of the self-PIL, reconnection of the emerging ﬂux with the overlying ﬂux (“strapping”
the “MFR” at a ﬁxed height) weakens the latter and the MFR begins to lift. However, being a
2D model, the model by Chen & Shibata (2000) cannot possibly account for the shearing and the
cancellation occurring in diﬀerent conﬁgurations of magnetic distributions. Our observations of two
ARs that are fundamentally diﬀerent from each other, disagree with this model. The emergence
of the bipoles (either simultaneous or sequential) drives the proper motions and forces collisional
shearing, resulting in cancellation that creates the MFR. In the simultaneous case (AR11158), there
was not an MFR above any segment of the PIL before the collision. This is simply because the
conditions that could create a ﬂux rope were not met in any part of the PIL before the collision. We
conclude the same for the case of sequential emergence (AR12017), especially because the emergence
of a parasitic bipole occurred in proximity to one of the two pre-existing polarities (i.e. N1) and a
ﬁlament channel/MFR formed only during the collision in the photosphere. In both cases, multiple
CMEs were produced during the period of collisional shearing (CME speeds of these are provided
in Tables 1 and 2), suggesting a diﬀerent trigger mechanism for the CMEs, not inconsistent with
that of ideal MHD instabilities (either the torus or the helical kink ﬂux rope instabilities).

5.5. Towards More Realistic Physics-Based Models

In recent years, fully 3D radiative-convective MHD simulations of an emerging single ﬂux tube
have become possible using new sophisticated techniques and thanks to the increased computational
power (e.g. Cheung et al. 2010). The realistic treatment of the radiative physics adds the missing
complexity in the photospheric layers, such as reproducing the photospheric granulation as observed,
and, account for the natural decay of polarities once they form and after they emerge. However,
proper motions of polarities of emerging bipolar ARs in radiative-convective MHD simulations do
not obey the self-separation seen in the observations: the polarities are seen to pop up in the

– 42 –

photospheric surface at locations aﬃxed by the footpoints of the emerging ﬂux tube at the bottom
of the computational domain (e.g. Cheung et al. 2010; see Figure 1 and space-time plot of Figure
7 therein).
In addition, the characteristic cohesion of the conjugated polarities as they form a
real bipolar AR is not reproduced in those models (i.e. polarities in those simulations look very
dispersed or decayed-like even as they form during ﬂux emergence). Thus, the next step for this
kind of advanced models would be to simulate the collision of two individual emerging bipoles and
reproduce the cancellation we detect with the ∆, as well as conﬁned and eruptive ﬂares associated
with the formation of a ﬂux rope. This can be done in an idealized fashion, or by running data-
driven simulations like the MF model studied here, but extended to fully-compressible 3D MHD
with the relevant physics.

5.6.

Implications for Improving the Prediction of Flares

It is striking that for the time AR11158 was producing conﬁned and eruptive ﬂares, its magnetic
conﬁguration was classiﬁed by NOAA as a β and it wasn’t until February 14 when the AR was
classiﬁed as βγ, and then February 16 when it was ﬁnally classiﬁed as βγδ. An AR with a βγδ
conﬁguration has overall βγ AR characteristics, but also has umbrae of opposite polarity within
the same penumbra. As for AR12017, initially a β on March 22 and 23, was a βγ on March 24
without any ﬂaring activity produced. After a long gap of activity, the AR was classiﬁed as β
even though a strong cluster of activity happened on March 28 (2 M-class ﬂares and 2 CMEs).
Main activity (including the X1.0 eruptive ﬂare) happened on March 29 with the AR being in a βδ
conﬁguration. The AR was ﬁnally classiﬁed as βγδ on March 30 when only one M-ﬂare and one
C-ﬂare occurred, before decaying back to βγ and β for the two following days. It is evident from
both of our ﬂare- and CME-productive ARs that the Mt Wilson classiﬁcation scheme captures the
crude complexity of the AR but with a gross latency (such as in the ﬁrst 5 days of AR11158; see
evolution of ﬂux and Mt Wilson class in Figure 3a and likewise in AR12017; Figure 3b). With this
loosely deﬁned classiﬁcation scheme, it is possible to have ARs that are classiﬁed as β or βγ but
being as ﬂare productive as δ ARs. In the statistical sense, this introduces signiﬁcant problems in
blindly predicting solar activity based on the Mt. Wilson classiﬁcation of magnetic conﬁgurations
used by NOAA, since the underlying physics are not properly captured. Therefore in order to
explain the activity of AR11158 and AR12017, it is necessary to look into the local physics around
the PIL of the AR and identify the causality behind this activity.

An example of an approach where the local physics are considered for ﬂare prediction was
In that work they performed statistical tests on a large
undertaken by Leka & Barnes (2007).
dataset of ∼ 500 ARs using daily vector magnetogram data from the ground-based Imaging Vector
Magnetograph (IVM) of the University of Hawaii. They considered multiple photospheric variables
(such as the total unsigned magnetic ﬂux Φtot, vertical electric current Jz, force-free parameter α,
etc) and combinations of them and they found that the quantity with the most predictive power is
the total ﬂux Φtot. The best success rate for Φtot in that work was found to be 77%, making it the

– 43 –

best predictor for ﬂare activity.

Similarly, in the work by Welsch et al. (2009), the authors explored several correlations between
intensive and extensive parameters in ﬂaring ARs from SOHO/MDI magnetograms (low resolution
and sensitivity as compared to SDO/HMI). They noted that one extensive property associated
with ﬂows, SR, a simpliﬁed estimate of the Poynting ﬂux, was associated at a level compatible with
the R parameter (which quantiﬁes the ﬂux near the PIL; Schrijver 2007). They also noted that SR
was also more strongly associated with ﬂares than |B|2, implying that the square of the magnetic
ﬁeld strength is not solely responsible for the association. In conclusion, they mention that the
ﬂows (including shearing) are an essential factor in associating their quantity SR with ﬂare activity.
Our proposed interpretation, therefore, is still consistent with this aspect of Welsch et al. (2009)
work. Furthermore, the authors considered additional parameters, such as the rate of the signed
change of ﬂux, ˙Φ/Φtot (i.e. denoting either emergence or cancellation in an AR). They found it to
be more strongly correlated with ﬂare power than the unsigned rate of change, | ˙Φ|/Φtot, implying
that ﬂux emergence is more strongly correlated with ﬂare energy release than ﬂux cancellation,
which is what the authors also suggest in their interpretation.

In our paper we show that for emerging ARs it is not possible to quantify cancellation by
simply measuring ˙Φ (only meaningful for decaying ARs!), unless one applies our proposed ﬂux
deﬁcit method (see Figure 6 and a discussion of it in § 3.1). Our analysis for two observed cases
shows a very good correlation for the onset of cancellation that precedes the onset of ﬂare clusters.
To our knowledge, such a direct correlation has not been reported by any previous statistical study
of ARs or even in case studies of individual ARs. We suggest that the set of previously used
parameters in the correlations should be augmented with the ﬂux deﬁcit ∆.

None of the aforementioned statistical works have demonstrated that Φtot is a good predictor
of X-ﬂares, since given the same Φtot, there is still a wide distribution of ﬂare classes. For example,
if it were a simple β-type AR with a lot of Φtot, the region has low probability of ﬂaring. Our
observations, however, suggest that the best predictor Φtot may be intimately related to the proper
motions driving the shearing and cancellation between diﬀerent bipoles nested within the same
AR; since strong collision and rapid shearing develops as a result of the proper motions due to the
emergence of each colliding bipole, the motions will last for as long as the emerging ﬂux is increasing
in each bipole. However, here, we show that activity occurs only when cancellation is ongoing due
to the collision between nonconjugated polarities. Φtot (calculated for the entire AR) does not
discriminate between bipoles within the same AR. Thus Φtot will continue to increase if additional
ﬂux emerges in the self-PIL of either of the colliding bipoles (compare Φtot with the individual
polarity ﬂuxes in Figure 3). Note that it is not necessary that a reduction of ﬂux due to cancellation
would be detectable in the emergence phase of the Φtot time proﬁle, especially because the rate
of emergence is much higher than the ﬂux cancellation rate. Had it been diﬀerent, the emergence
of ﬂux through the photosphere wouldn’t occur on the Sun! Also, compare Φtot in Figure 3 with
the corresponding ∆ in Figures 7c, 10c. Therefore, we would expect that only a marginally strong
correlation of ﬂare activity with increasing Φtot will be seen in the statistics, inhibiting the causality

– 44 –

behind ﬂaring activity. Our observations showing a correlation between cancellation and ﬂares,
suggest that the process of collisional shearing shall be taken into consideration for the improvement
of solar activity prediction.

5.7. The General Implications of Collisional Shearing

The observation of continuous cancellation for the entire duration of the collision has signiﬁcant
implications. First, there is no evidence of signiﬁcant (in terms of ﬂux) discrete polarity patches
cancelling at a distance from the collisional PIL, which means the cancellation must occur at
the collision’s contact layer, the collisional PIL. Quite conveniently, at that location, a necessary
condition for cancellation is met: the distance between cancelling opposite polarities is less than
≈0.9 Mm (Parker 1979). Second, the cancellation involves reconnection and topological changes of
ﬁeld lines between heights up to a few pressure scale heights above the photosphere (van Ballegooijen
& Martens 1989). This can happen when opposite polarity footpoints of line-tied magnetic ﬁelds
are brought extremely close to each other (in our observations, collision enforces this condition)
while at a certain orientation due to dragging/sliding (shearing motions, when collision progresses
by shearing of the opposite polarity sunspots) along the PIL. The collisional shearing process
meets these conditions in a self consistent way, as it is observed at the interface between the
colliding polarities. According to the cancellation scenario, after the photospheric reconnection
between colliding and sheared magnetic ﬁeld line bundles, the topology gradually changes from
sheared arcade ﬁeld lines (green lines in Figure 12) into a series of convex-up (red dashed line) and
convex-down (black) ﬁeld lines. The convex-down magnetic ﬁeld is submerging into the SCZ due
to a downward-pointing magnetic tension force exceeding the upward-pointing magnetic buoyancy
force. The convex-up part stays in the atmosphere. This gradually forms a ﬁlament channel
spanning in height from the the photosphere and chromosphere to the corona above the PIL where
the cancellation occurs (Figure 12 c).

Another ﬁnding is that the activity in the corona appears to scale with cancellation rates - the
faster the cancellation the more intense the clusters of activity. We make a quantitative comparison
between the cancellation rates due to collisional shearing and due to that of the slow and intermit-
tent cancellation at the external PIL between AR12017 and AR12018 (discussed in § 2). For the
quantitative comparison we treat this number as an estimate for a nominal cancellation rate that
occurs in PILs of decaying ARs. The rate of continuous cancellation of P1 ﬂux at the external PIL
was dΦP1/dt=-4.6×1015 Mx s−1 over a long period of ∼ 5 days. In the simultaneous emergence
case (AR11158), the cancellation rate (in the ﬁrst 24 hours during the early stage of the second
episode) was 1.8× higher than the decaying AR cancellation rate. Similarly, for the sequential case
(AR12017), during the emergence of N2P2 ﬁrst episode, ﬂux cancelled at a rate of 2.2× faster than
AR11158 (for a duration over ∼12 h) and additionally 2.9× faster after the onset of the second
episode (duration ∼8 h). If we compare those rates to the slow decaying AR cancellation, it is 4.0×
faster for the ﬁrst N2P2 episode and 5.2× faster for the second episode. Also, AR12017 produced

– 45 –

twice as many events than AR11158 in a period of time of one day starting after the ﬁrst ﬂare event
in each AR. However, the cancellation-related reconnection occurs at (or very close to) the photo-
sphere and it is not expected to directly yield EUV or X-ray ﬂare emission as in the case of typical
reconnection in the corona. The key here is that cancellation largely progresses uniformly and not
in discrete “gusts”, since collisional shearing is “feeding” the cancellation continually with sheared
ﬂux along the collisional PIL. This means that the amount of submerged ﬂux is reﬂecting the in-
crease of poloidal ﬂux wrapping around the ﬁlament channel (Green et al. 2011). With more helical
ﬁeld added to the structure, the structure expands higher from the photosphere/chromosphere into
the corona. Since the helical structure is not in vacuum, it would interact with the ambient ﬁeld
and/or magnetic topological features (such as magnetic null points, separators, or quasi-separatrix
layers in the corona). This interaction by means of reconnection in the corona is eﬀectively convert-
ing excess energy stored in the form of non-potential poloidal ﬂux into EUV/X-ray radiation and
plasma heating and as a result, weakening the overall MFR-like structure. This possibility has been
suggested by Chintzoglou et al. (2017) where an MFR structure loses poloidal ﬂux (and thus free
magnetic energy) due to reconnection with nearby ﬂux systems producing transient brightenings
as the MFR forms. The more the cancellation occurs, the more this fresh poloidal ﬂux will expand
and interact with the ambient ﬁeld. When the resulting MFR has accumulated enough poloidal
ﬂux leading to a high twist, it may eventually become unstable and begin to lift. By lifting oﬀ, it
may accumulate additional poloidal ﬂux (e.g. Patsourakos et al. 2013; Chintzoglou et al. 2015) via
conﬁned ﬂaring in X-rays and eventually launch CMEs.

An interesting question is how much ﬂaring activity and eruptions an AR hosts during its
entire lifetime, from the emergence phase all the way to the end of the decay phase. Sporadic
ﬂare activity and eruptions indeed occur in decaying ARs. For the latter, it is understood to be a
result of magnetic cancellation at the PIL that separates the decayed and diﬀuse opposite polarity
distributions (sometimes giving the impresion of a “bipolar” decaying AR, while earlier in its life
may have been multipolar). To distinguish this kind of “slow” cancellation in the decay phase
from the rapid cancellation we observe in emerging ARs we call it “self-cancellation” in the case it
happens in the internal PIL of a decaying AR. It is also possible to have cancellation in an external
PIL forming between two diﬀerent diﬀuse and decaying ARs (e.g. the ePIL between AR12017 and
AR12018; Figure 2e-h). However, this case (inter-AR cancellation) does not address the question
of how much activity a singular AR produces. Here, our observations suggest that the answer
to this question is related to the total amount of ﬂux cancelled in an isolated AR. To measure
the total ﬂux cancelled during the lifetime of an AR, one needs to sum the contributions from
the cancellation during the emergence phase (the ﬂux-deﬁcit |∆| measuring cancellation between
two colliding BMRs within the same AR) and from the cancellation at the decay phase which is
measured by subtracting the end ﬂux (i.e. the total AR ﬂux measured at a time after the end of
emergence, tend) from the peak ﬂux at the end of the emergence phase, max(Φtot), as

– 46 –

Φtotal

canceled =

(cid:88)

|∆|
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
emergence phase

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:21)

+

max

Φtot(tstart < t < tend)

− Φtot(t > tend)

.

(20)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
decay phase

(cid:125)

The emergence phase part of this formula would be composed of only one |∆| in the case of collision
between two nonconjugated polarities. At the event of additional emergence and collision from
additional bipoles(s), additional |∆| should be added to the total cancelled ﬂux in the AR, and so
on. This covers the case of multipolar ARs (AR11158 indeed hosted additional sequential emergence
on February 13 and on February 16 that we did not consider in this work). The decay phase part of
this formula also includes the contribution of cancellation that occurs along external PILs during
the decay phase of an AR, when the AR ﬂux spreads and can interact with neighboring ﬂux
systems external to the AR (inter-AR cancellation). Also, emergence can happen in the decaying
phase of a pre-existing bipole (such as in AR12017). Thus proper care must be taken to ensure
the correct characterization of cancelled ﬂux in the emergence and decay phase of a bipole. Note
that during emergence, small cancellation events occasionally occur in the self-PIL of individual
bipolar ARs. These typically occur when the self-PIL contains intermixed polarities (salt-and-
pepper appearance of small magnetic elements in magnetograms) which motions lead them to
head-on collision (shearing is not necessary in their PILs as they cancel). These events are not
measured by the ﬂux-deﬁcit ∆, since cancellation occurs in the self-PIL of a bipole that is balanced
(no collision occurs between two diﬀerent bipoles and thus no deﬁcit is produced). In essence, it
would have an impact to the total ﬂux Φtot, however the rate of ﬂux emergence is overpowering
the ﬂux decrease in the evolution of the total ﬂux. Such small-scale cancellation events are often
associated with Ellerman bombs (e.g. Georgoulis et al. 2002) and UV bombs (e.g. Peter et al. 2014),
whose contribution to the overall energy release budget from the emerging AR is conﬁned to the
heating of the low atmosphere (chromosphere and transition region).

We summarize the phenomenology of collisional shearing with a cartoon model in Figure 15
demonstrating the essence behind the two possibilities of (a) simultaneous and (b) sequential cases of
emerging bipoles, nested within the same AR. The conﬁned ﬂaring following the onset of collision
and the duration of the ﬂare clusters for periods of ongoing photospheric cancellation points to
the formation of MFR structures in the corona along the cPILs (pre-existing the eruption; e.g.
Patsourakos et al. 2013; Chintzoglou et al. 2015). Reconnection may also occur between adjacent
sheared arcade ﬁeld higher in the corona (as in “tether-cutting” reconnection; Moore et al. 2001)
and/or other weakly twisted MFR structures co-hosted along the length of the same cPIL, which
with additional reconnection may conglomerate into larger and more monolithic structures that
eventually launch as CMEs (Chintzoglou et al. 2015). The interaction of the newly forming MFR
structures with their immediate environment, i.e. near the collisional PIL as well as potential
interaction with the magnetic topology (e.g.
interaction of a conﬁned MFR with the topology of
quadrupolar conﬁguration; Chintzoglou et al. 2017), may also play a role in enriching the activity
of the ﬂare clustering.

– 47 –

6. Conclusion

In this article we presented the analysis of observations of highly ﬂare- and CME-productive
ARs in support of a new scenario for the origin of major solar activity. We examine the amount of
ﬂux cancelled in collisional PILs and the timing of ﬂux cancellation with respect to ﬂare activity.
Using two well observed ﬂare- and CME-productive ARs composed of two conjugate bipoles that
emerged (a) simultaneously (AR11158) and (b) sequentially (AR12017), we show that clusters of
intense ﬂare activity correlate with the onset and duration of magnetic cancellation in collisional
PILs. The cancellation begins at the onset of collision between the opposite-signed nonconjugated
polarities and not at the self-PILs of the individual emerging bipoles/ﬂux tubes.

Both the emergence-based and cancellation-based simulations aim to create the conditions
that lead to eruptions from ﬁrst principles. However, despite the soundness of their simplistic
approach (the latter largely imposed by computational power restrictions in the previous decades),
the results from our observations are in contrast with these scenarios, at least during the phases
of simple bipolar AR emergence (i.e. no activity in the self-PILs of individual bipoles) and as ARs
mature (before they enter the decay phase and cancellation of diﬀused polarities takes place which
may result to ﬂaring and eruptive activity). It is also important to note that even the standard
eruptive ﬂare model, the CSHKP model, invokes a simple bipole, also not consistent with our
ﬁndings.

Our proposed scenario considers cancellation occurring between colliding ﬂux tubes that emerge
simultaneously of sequentially, forming a single ﬂare-productive AR (Figure 15, t0 panels). During
the emergence stage, each ﬂux tube manifests itself at the photospheric surface in the form of two
conjugate polarities of opposite sign. As the emergence stage progresses, these conjugate polarities
undergo a mutual selfseparation, following the canonical diverging polarity motions in each bipole
as seen on the surface. As a result, collision (convergence) and shearing may occur between op-
positesigned nonconjugated polarities, forming a collisional PIL and lasting for as long they are
in close contact and while the bipoles self-separate (Figure 15, t > tcollision onset). Activity fol-
lows shortly after the onset of collision (≈12 h) and persists for the duration of the collision. This
process develops self-consistently due to the proper motions of colliding polarities. To emphasize
the essence of these proper motions leading to collision and to diﬀerentiate from the cancellation
scenario that involves only a single conjugated bipole, we introduce the term “collisional shearing”
to refer to the observed process. As a result of collisional shearing, cancellation occurs in the colli-
sional PIL between the two individual conjugate bipoles (i.e. collision between the opposite-signed
nonconjugated polarities; Figures 4, 12). Doppler measurements show a dominance of average red-
shifts over average blueshifts at the collisional PIL (Figure 8). This is consistent with photospheric
cancellation, by submergence of ﬂux at the collisional PIL. Cancellation is followed by activity
clusters of ﬂaring and conﬁned activity (Figures 4, 5, 7, 10). We emphasize that virtually no ﬂaring
or eruptive activity occurs at the self-PILs separating the conjugated bipoles (Figures 12, 15). The
intense ﬂaring and eruptive activity produced in the corona is rooted at the collisional PIL (Ta-
bles 1 and 2, Figures 4, 5), eﬀects consistent with the formation of stressed and twisted magnetic

– 48 –

segments (i.e. magnetic ﬂux ropes) that progressively reconnect and coalesce into more monolithic
ﬂux systems (e.g. Chintzoglou et al. 2015). Observational evidence (Figures 9, 11) as well as data-
driven modeling (Figures 13, 14) provide additional support to the creation of stressed and twisted
magnetic structures at the collisional PIL, before they drive eruptions.

Traditional measurements of the unsigned magnetic ﬂux taken over the entire surface of a com-
plex multipolar AR are naturally unable to reveal the action and the role of the cancellation process
during emergence (that is, measuring the net reduction of ﬂux even though an AR is emerging; see
Φtot in Figure 3).To overcome this limitation, in this paper we introduced a novel measurement
technique, the conjugate ﬂux deﬁcit method (illustrated in Figure 6), which allows the measure-
ment of the total amount of canceled magnetic ﬂux and also the rate of magnetic cancellation at
the collisional PIL (Figures 7, 10)). The “ﬂux deﬁcit” method reveals when and for how long mag-
netic cancellation occurs by means of recording the ﬂux imbalance (in fact, a deﬁcit) that develops
gradually between nonconjugated polarities upon collision. The fact that cancellation is measured
between nonconjugated polarities in emerging ARs has signiﬁcant implications in understanding
the ﬂare clustering and the origin of eruptive ﬂares. Apart from the usual shearing of magnetic
ﬁelds in emerging ARs, our identiﬁcation of magnetic cancellation in such ARs once again points
to the formation of magnetic ﬂux ropes on the Sun before they destabilize and erupt. Therefore,
revealing the physical processes that take place in collisional PILs is of outmost importance and it
is suggestive that our ﬁndings shall be used to constrain numerical models of eruptive ARs as we
move toward more accurate ﬂare and CME prediction schemes.

With the above we conclude that “bipole-bipole interaction” in the photosphere by means of
collisional shearing is a culprit behind intense solar activity. The activity is hosted at the collision
interface, the collisional PIL. On the other hand, the self-PILs, (i.e. the PIL segments separating the
polarities of conjugate bipoles within the same ARs) do not seem important in hosting the activity
clusters. This view, given it requires at least two bipoles, is inconsistent with the CSHKP standard
model, and the MHD emergence-based and cancellation-based, “data-inspired” 3D models of a
single bipole. Sequential emergence in ARs classiﬁed as δ ARs has been resolved in ﬁne structure
inside their compact PILs (as discussed, for instance, in the present paper and Chintzoglou et al.
2015). This could not have been possible in systematic observations of lower spatial resolution
magnetograms, which was the case before the SDO/HMI era. Finally, we stress that in order to
understand the formation of compact, ﬂare-productive PILs (and essentially δ ARs), it is imperative
to study and use as examples only well-observed emerging ARs, meaning they are observed from
the very beginning of their birth all the way to their maturity.

This work underlines the necessity for future vector magnetograph instruments positioned in
diﬀerent vantage points in the solar system, capable of providing the true radial magnetic ﬁeld at
the solar surface. One possibility is the L5 Lagrangian point at Earth’s orbit, which could allow
us to maximize the observational coverage of the emergence phase of ARs (which often rotate into
Earth view already developed) and with that, our predictive capability for the near-Earth space
weather.

– 49 –

We thank an anonymous referee for comments that impoved the manuscript. G.C. would like
to thank C. Schrijver, B. Welsch, and P. Demoulin for fruitful discussions. G.C. acknowledges sup-
port from NASA Earth & Space Science Fellowship (NESSF) Grant NNX12AL73H that supported
him in the preparation of this work as part of his PhD thesis. G.C. also acknowledges support
by NASA contract NNG04EA00C (SDO/AIA). J.Z. is supported by NSF grants AGS-1249270
and AGS-1156120. M.C.M.C. acknowledges support by NASA’s Heliophysics Grand Challenges
Research grant Physics and Diagnostics of the Drivers of Solar Eruptions (80NSSC18K0025, for-
merly NNX14AI14G to LMSAL) and grant 80NSSC18K0024 (formerly NNX13AJ96G) to LMSAL.
M.K. is supported by the Coronal Global Evolutionary Model (CGEM) award NSF AGS 1321474.
HMI and AIA are instruments on board SDO, a mission for NASA’s Living with a Star program.
We thank Dr. P. H. Scherrer of Stanford University for useful discussion and for providing help in
the proper calibration of the Doppler measurements from the HMI instrument.

Abbett, W. P., Fisher, G. H., Fan, Y., & Bercik, D. J. 2004, ApJ, 612, 557

REFERENCES

Alfv´en, H. 1942, Nature, 150, 405

Alissandrakis, C. E. 1981, A&A, 100, 197

Amari, T., Aly, J.-J., Luciani, J.-F., Mikic, Z., & Linker, J. 2011, ApJ, 742, L27

Amari, T., Luciani, J. F., Aly, J. J., Mikic, Z., & Linker, J. 2003, ApJ, 595, 1231

Antiochos, S. K., DeVore, C. R., & Klimchuk, J. A. 1999, ApJ, 510, 485

Archontis, V., & Hood, A. W. 2010, A&A, 514, A56

Archontis, V., & T¨or¨ok, T. 2008, A&A, 492, L35

Aschwanden, M. J., Sun, X., & Liu, Y. 2014, ApJ, 785, 34

Aulanier, G., T¨or¨ok, T., D´emoulin, P., & DeLuca, E. E. 2010, ApJ, 708, 314

Cargill, P. J. 2009, Space Sci. Rev., 144, 413

Carmichael, H. 1964, NASA Special Publication, 50, 451

Charbonneau, P. 2005, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 2, 2

Chen, P. F., & Shibata, K. 2000, ApJ, 545, 524

Cheung, M. C. M., & DeRosa, M. L. 2012, ApJ, 757, 147

Cheung, M. C. M., & Isobe, H. 2014, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 11, 3

– 50 –

Cheung, M. C. M., Rempel, M., Title, A. M., & Sch¨ussler, M. 2010, ApJ, 720, 233

Cheung, M. C. M., De Pontieu, B., Tarbell, T. D., et al. 2015, ApJ, 801, 83

Chintzoglou, G., Patsourakos, S., & Vourlidas, A. 2015, ApJ, 809, 34

Chintzoglou, G., Vourlidas, A., Savcheva, A., et al. 2017, ApJ, 843, 93

Chintzoglou, G., & Zhang, J. 2013, ApJ, 764, L3

Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Gough, D. O., & Thompson, M. J. 1991, ApJ, 378, 413

Couvidat, S., Schou, J., Hoeksema, J. T., et al. 2016, Sol. Phys., 291, 1887

Fan, Y. 2001, ApJ, 554, L111

—. 2009, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 6, 4

Fang, F., & Fan, Y. 2015, ApJ, 806, 79

Fisher, G. H., Abbett, W. P., Bercik, D. J., et al. 2015, Space Weather, 13, 369

Gallagher, P. T., Moon, Y.-J., & Wang, H. 2002, Sol. Phys., 209, 171

Georgoulis, M. K., & Rust, D. M. 2007, ApJ, 661, L109

Georgoulis, M. K., Rust, D. M., Bernasconi, P. N., & Schmieder, B. 2002, ApJ, 575, 506

Gibson, S. E., & Fan, Y. 2006, ApJ, 637, L65

Giovanelli, R. G. 1946, Nature, 158, 81

Green, L. M., Kliem, B., & Wallace, A. J. 2011, A&A, 526, A2

Hale, G., & Nicholson, S. 1938, Magnetic Observations of Sunspots, 1917-1924 ..., Carnegie insti-

tution of Washington. Publication no.498, py. 1-2 (Carnegie Institution of Washington)

Hale, G. E. 1908, ApJ, 28, 315

Harvey, J. 1999, ApJ, 525, C60

Hirayama, T. 1974, Sol. Phys., 34, 323

Hoeksema, J. T., Liu, Y., Hayashi, K., et al. 2014, Sol. Phys., 289, 3483

Hurlburt, N., Cheung, M., Schrijver, C., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 67

Inoue, S., Hayashi, K., Magara, T., Choe, G. S., & Park, Y. D. 2015, ApJ, 803, 73

Inoue, S., Kusano, K., B¨uchner, J., & Sk´ala, J. 2018, Nature Communications, 9, 2041

– 51 –

Jiang, C., & Feng, X. 2013, ApJ, 769, 144

Jiang, C., Feng, X., Wu, S. T., & Hu, Q. 2013, ApJ, 771, L30

Jiang, Y., Zheng, R., Yang, J., et al. 2012, ApJ, 744, 50

Judge, P. G., Kleint, L., Donea, A., Sainz Dalda, A., & Fletcher, L. 2014, ApJ, 796, 85

Karna, N., Zhang, J., & Pesnell, W. D. 2017, ApJ, 835, 135

Kazachenko, M. D., Fisher, G. H., Welsch, B. T., Liu, Y., & Sun, X. 2015, ApJ, 811, 16

Kleint, L., Battaglia, M., Reardon, K., et al. 2015, ApJ, 806, 9

Kliem, B., & T¨or¨ok, T. 2006, Physical Review Letters, 96, 255002

Kopp, R. A., & Pneuman, G. W. 1976, Sol. Phys., 50, 85

K¨unzel, H. 1960, Astronomische Nachrichten, 285, 271

Leake, J. E., Linton, M. G., & T¨or¨ok, T. 2013, ApJ, 778, 99

Leka, K. D., & Barnes, G. 2007, ApJ, 656, 1173

Lemen, J. R., Title, A. M., Akin, D. J., et al. 2011, Sol. Phys., 115

Lin, R. P., Dennis, B. R., Hurford, G. J., et al. 2002, Sol. Phys., 210, 3

Linton, M. G., Dahlburg, R. B., Fisher, G. H., & Longcope, D. W. 1998, ApJ, 507, 404

Linton, M. G., Fisher, G. H., Dahlburg, R. B., & Fan, Y. 1999, ApJ, 522, 1190

Liu, C., Deng, N., Liu, R., et al. 2015, ApJ, 812, L19

Liu, Y., & Schuck, P. W. 2012, ApJ, 761, 105

Livi, S. H. B., Wang, J., & Martin, S. F. 1985, Australian Journal of Physics, 38, 855

Lynch, B. J., Antiochos, S. K., DeVore, C. R., Luhmann, J. G., & Zurbuchen, T. H. 2008, ApJ,

683, 1192

Mackay, D. H., Gaizauskas, V., & Yeates, A. R. 2008, Sol. Phys., 248, 51

Mackay, D. H., & van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2006, ApJ, 641, 577

MacTaggart, D., & Hood, A. W. 2009, A&A, 507, 995

—. 2010, ApJ, 716, L219

Magara, T. 2015, PASJ, 67, L6

– 52 –

Manchester, IV, W., Gombosi, T., DeZeeuw, D., & Fan, Y. 2004, ApJ, 610, 588

Martens, P. C., & Zwaan, C. 2001, ApJ, 558, 872

Martin, S. F., Livi, S. H. B., & Wang, J. 1985, Australian Journal of Physics, 38, 929

Mikic, Z., & Linker, J. A. 1994, ApJ, 430, 898

Moore, R. L., Sterling, A. C., Hudson, H. S., & Lemen, J. R. 2001, ApJ, 552, 833

Norton, A. A., Graham, J. P., Ulrich, R. K., et al. 2006, Sol. Phys., 239, 69

Okamoto, T. J., Tsuneta, S., Lites, B. W., et al. 2008, ApJ, 673, L215

Parker, E. N. 1955, Astrophys. J., 121, 491

—. 1979, Cosmic magnetic ﬁelds: their origin and their activity (New York: Oxford University

Press)

Parker, E. N. 1984, ApJ, 281, 839

Patsourakos, S., Vourlidas, A., & Stenborg, G. 2013, ApJ, 764, 125

Pesnell, W. D., Thompson, B. J., & Chamberlin, P. C. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 3

Peter, H., Tian, H., Curdt, W., et al. 2014, Science, 346, 1255726

Roussev, I. I., Galsgaard, K., Downs, C., et al. 2012, Nature Physics, 8, 845

Rubio da Costa, F., Kleint, L., Petrosian, V., Liu, W., & Allred, J. C. 2016, ApJ, 827, 38

Rust, D. M., & Kumar, A. 1996, ApJ, 464, L199+

Savcheva, A., Pariat, E., van Ballegooijen, A., Aulanier, G., & DeLuca, E. 2012a, ApJ, 750, 15

Savcheva, A. S., Green, L. M., van Ballegooijen, A. A., & DeLuca, E. E. 2012b, ApJ, 759, 105

Scherrer P., February 2018, Private Communication

Schmidt, H. U. 1964, NASA Special Publication, 50, 107

Schou, J., Scherrer, P. H., Bush, R. I., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 229

Schrijver, C. J. 2007, ApJ, 655, L117

—. 2009, Advances in Space Research, 43, 739

Schrijver, C. J., Aulanier, G., Title, A. M., Pariat, E., & Delann´ee, C. 2011, ApJ, 738, 167

Snodgrass, H. B., & Ulrich, R. K. 1990, ApJ, 351, 309s

– 53 –

Spruit, H. C. 1974, Sol. Phys., 34, 277

Spruit, H. C., Title, A. M., & van Ballegooijen, A. A. 1987, Sol. Phys., 110, 115

Sturrock, P. A. 1966, Nature, 211, 695

Sun, X., Hoeksema, J. T., Liu, Y., Chen, Q., & Hayashi, K. 2012a, ApJ, 757, 149

Sun, X., Hoeksema, J. T., Liu, Y., et al. 2012b, ApJ, 748, 77

Syntelis, P., Archontis, V., & Tsinganos, K. 2017, ApJ, 850, 95

Takasao, S., Fan, Y., Cheung, M. C. M., & Shibata, K. 2015, ApJ, 813, 112

Tarr, L., & Longcope, D. 2012, ApJ, 749, 64

Tarr, L., Longcope, D., & Millhouse, M. 2013, ApJ, 770, 4

Toriumi, S., Iida, Y., Kusano, K., Bamba, Y., & Imada, S. 2014, Sol. Phys., 289, 3351

Toriumi, S., & Takasao, S. 2017, ApJ, 850, 39

Tziotziou, K., Georgoulis, M. K., & Liu, Y. 2013, ApJ, 772, 115

van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2004, ApJ, 612, 519

van Ballegooijen, A. A., & Martens, P. C. H. 1989, ApJ, 343, 971

van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., & Culhane, J. L. 2009, Space Sci. Rev., 144, 351

Welsch, B. T. Li, Y. Schuck, P. W. & Fisher, G. H. 2009, ApJ, 705, 821

Welsch, B. T., Fisher, G. H., & Sun, X. 2013, ApJ, 765, 98

Wheatland, M. S., Sturrock, P. A., & Roumeliotis, G. 2000, ApJ, 540, 1150

Wiegelmann, T., Inhester, B., & Sakurai, T. 2006, Sol. Phys., 233, 215

Wyper, P. F., Antiochos, S. K., & DeVore, C. R. 2017, Nature, 544, 452

Yang, W. H., Sturrock, P. A., & Antiochos, S. K. 1986, ApJ, 309, 383

Yashiro, S., Gopalswamy, N., Michalek, G., et al. 2004, J. Geophys. Res., 109, 7105

Zhang, J., Cheng, X., & Ding, M.-D. 2012, Nature Communications, 3, 747

Zirin, H., & Liggett, M. A. 1987, Sol. Phys., 113, 267

Zuccarello, F. P., Aulanier, G., & Gilchrist, S. A., 2016, ApJ, 821, L23

Zwaan, C. 1987, ARA&A, 25, 83

This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.2.

– 54 –

Fig. 1.— Illustration of the formation and evolution of a simple, bipolar AR from the emergence of
an isolated magnetic ﬂux tube. The local photospheric surface is shown as a grey transparent plane.
Top panel (a) summarizes graphically the evolution of magnetic ﬂux (green color) over the lifetime
of the bipolar AR. Initially (after the onset of emergence, tstart, (c)), the two opposite polarities (N
and P) form a PIL and self-separate rapidly (separation distance and speed are overplotted as black
and white curves repsectively). The self-separation of opposite ﬂux progressively slows down until
the end of the ﬂux emergence phase, where the bipole has assumed its ﬁnal (typically maximum)
self-separation at the surface (tend, (d)). The decay phase begins (tdecay, (e)) when surface eﬀects
spread and transport the ﬂux from the initially compact polarity concentrations and lead them to
cancel out and submerge at the PIL, leading to a reduction of ﬂux observed at the surface.

Before Emergence Phase (t < tstart)buoyantflux tubebuoyantflux tubeldPILNPphotospheresolar interiorPILcoronapolarity separation distancemaximum separation distancePILNPNPflux cancellationdiffused flux centroid distancesubmerging fluxsubmerging fluxsubmerging fluxsubmerging fluxemerging fluxCanonical Evolution of a Simple Conjugate Bipole AR(a) Timeline of emergence and decay phaseststarttendtdecaytimecancelled (submerged) fluxemerged fluxpolarity separation distanceseparationspeedEmergence Phase (tstart< t < tend)End of Emergence (t ~ tend)Decay Phase (t > tdecay)(b)(c)(d)(e)(b)(c)(d)(e)submerging fluxPILpolarity motion– 55 –

Fig. 2.— The emergence stage and subsequent evolution of two ﬂare- and CME-productive ARs.
Top panels (a)-(d): Representative snapshot LOS magnetograms showing the evolution of AR 11158
as observed by SDO/HMI. Both bipoles emerge simultaneously with their conjugated polarities
(annotated; N1 P1 and N2 P2) naturally separating from each other at their respective self-PILs
(sPIL1 and sPIL2). As a result of the natural separation and orientation of the bipoles, a collision
occured between the negative polarity of the westward ﬂux tube (N1) and the leading polarity
of the eastward ﬂux tube (P2). Due to their opposite polarity signs, a collisional PIL (cPIL;
yellow curve) is formed. Thus the overall PIL of AR11158 is composed of the integral system of
sPIL2/cPIL/sPIL1. The apparent self-separation distance for each bipole is shown with a green
and blue line respectively. Note that a smaller parasitic bipole emerged later on (panel (c); dashed
circle). Bottom panels (e)-(h): Selected snapshot LOS magnetograms for AR 12017. Here the
emergence of the two ﬂux tubes is sequential (N1 P1 and N2 P2 emergence onsets separated by
four days). A cPIL develops between P2 and N1. The greyscale magnetograms in all panels are
saturated at ±1,000 G. (An animation of this ﬁgure is available in the online version of the journal.)

– 56 –

Fig. 3.— Top panels: The time evolution of the magnetic ﬂux for each of the four polarities
(dashed lines for bipole 1, solid for bipole 2) with the ﬂare events (vertical lines) produced during
disk transit for AR11158 (a) and AR12017 (b). The dark curve shows the total unsigned magnetic
ﬂux (multiplied by 0.5). The orange background denotes the period over which virtually no ﬂare
activity occurred in the ARs (corresponding to the end of the ﬁrst episode in AR11158 and the
emergence of the ﬁrst bipole of AR12017 which only produced four minor C-class ﬂares). A striking
similarity between each AR is that each individual bipole undergoes a two-stage evolution (two
episodes). The evolution of the daily Mt Wilson sunspot classiﬁcation for the ARs is also shown
with green characters in the time axis. Bottom panels: The time evolution of the self-separation
distance and the self-separation speed for each bipole (dashed lines for bipole 1, solid for bipole
2) of AR11158 (c) and AR12017 (d). Note: for presentation clarity, in panel (d) we don’t display
the self-separation distance and speed for the north-south oriented bipole and we only show the
ﬁrst and second episodes of the east-west bipole that composes N2 P2. Typical to the behavior
of simple emerging bipoles, each individual bipole self-separates rapidly during the early stages of
its emergence. Individual episodes introduce additional magnetic ﬂux and also further extend the
time period of rapid polarity motions within the same AR.

– 57 –

Fig. 4.— 3D collision of emerging ﬂux-tubes at the photosphere as a result of a simultaneous
emergence process (AR11158). Panel a: Multiple day tracking of magnetic polarities (color-coded
traces on the Heliographic plane) superimposed on a CEA magnetogram map of an intermediate
time instance (at 15-Feb-2011 21:58 UT). The emergence occurred in two episodes per ﬂux tube
(marked as 1st and 2nd episodes) with the 2nd episode of emergence being stronger as compared to
the 1st. Proper motions of polarities are more dramatic during the self-separation associated with
2nd episode per each bipole. As a result, a collision occurs between polarities N1 and P2. Overlaid
boxes mark the centroids of ﬂaring activity (large box: M and X class ﬂares, small box: C-class
ﬂares). Note the containment of the activity along the collisional PIL. The dark green boxes denote
events correlated with the emergence of the parasitic bipole north of N2 (see Figure 2) and are not
included in our analysis (minor events in a diﬀerent PIL; also Table 1 marked with asterisk). Panel
b: 3D space-time representation of the collision using isosurfaces of |B|=1,200 G as viewed from
the South. The squares show the location and time of activity, which is predominantly clustered
at the collision site. (An animation of this ﬁgure as a 3D ﬂyby of panel b is available in the online
version of the journal.)

– 58 –

Fig. 5.— 3D collision of emerging ﬂux-tubes at the photosphere as a result of a sequential emergence
process (AR12017). Panel a: Multiple day polarity tracking (background magnetogram at 30-Mar-
2014 02:59:46 UT). Flaring activity occurs at the location of the newly bipole N2P2 emerging right
by the pre-existing polarity N1. Each big box was also a CME. Panel b: 3D view of the collision
for AR12017. The view is from the northwest looking towards the southeast. (An animation of
this ﬁgure as a 3D ﬂy-by of panel b is available in the online version of the journal.)

– 59 –

Fig. 6.— Cartoon illustrating the observed conjugate ﬂux deﬁcit, ∆, as a result of ﬂux imbalance
between two colliding conjugate bipoles. (a) The case of a single bipole emerging in isolation from
other ﬂux concentrations. As a result, the negative ﬂux is in balance with the positive, yielding zero
conjugate ﬂux deﬁcit. After the end of the emergence phase, the decay phase becomes apparent in
the unsigned ﬂuxes due to cancellation of opposite polarity fragments at the self-PIL. (b) The case
of two emerging conjugate bipoles (N1P1 and N2P2 with white arrows showing the self-separation)
comprising a single AR, where collision occurs between the opposite-signed nonconjugated polarities
(N1 and P2). After the collision onset (tcollision) an imbalance develops between the negative and
the positive ﬂux in each conjugate bipole (N1 ﬂux less than P1 ﬂux and inversely, P2 ﬂux less than
N2). (c) The imbalance is the non-zero conjugate ﬂux deﬁcit ∆ for each conjugate bipole (orange
curves), a result of ﬂux cancellation at the collisional PIL. Note that the ﬂux is always balanced
for the quadrupolar AR as a whole (summing the deﬁcits should yield zero).

ΔN2P2Cancellation of Magnetic Flux within a Single Decaying Bipole Cancellation of Magnetic Flux between Colliding Emerging Bipoles self-PIL2self-PIL1self-PIL2self-PIL1self-PILN2P2N1P1self-PILtcollisiontcollisiontcollisiontstarttendΦΦtstarttendtstarttendΦnegative fluxtstarttendcollisional PILtstarttendΔN1P1positive fluxΦΔN1P1P1N1P2N2P1N1Measuring Cancellation due to Collision with Conjugate Flux Deficit Δ |ΦN1| = ΦP1t<tcollision : |ΦN1| = ΦP1; |ΦN2| = ΦP2t>tcollision : |ΦN1| < ΦP1; |ΦN2| > ΦP2(a)(b)(c)– 60 –

Fig. 7.— Panel a: Time evolution of the magnetic ﬂux for bipole 2 of AR11158 (conjugated
polarities N2 and P2). The orange background marks the time range up until the onset of the
second emergence episode. Panel b: Average photospheric Doppler velocities for the nearby QS
(dashed) in addition to average Doppler velocities in the collisional PIL (solid curves). Note the
relative dominance of average redshifts over blueshifts, and also as compared to the QS average
velocities. Panel c: Magnetic ﬂux deﬁcit with C-class ﬂares (purple), M-class and X-class (red)
overplotted. Note that a cluster of ﬂare activity begins after the ascending phase of the deﬁcit in
both bipoles suggesting correlation of the ﬂares with photospheric cancellation. The deﬁcit drops
due to smaller emergence events contaminating the surface used in the calculation of the magnetic
ﬂux. Panel d: Plot of the oblateness of sunspot N1, centroid distance between the colliding N1
and P2 and the resulting collisional PIL length with time. Note the very high oblateness (>60%)
reached around the time of the minimum collision distance related to the higher compression of N1
and P2 sunspots. See text for more discussion.

– 61 –

Fig. 8.— Doppler velocities at the location of the collisional PIL for AR11158 (panels a-d) and
AR12017 (panels e-h). Diﬀerent polarities (positive/white, negative/black magnetic ﬁeld contours)
are annotated, including these produced by diﬀerent ﬂux emergence episodes. To improve visual
clarity and minimize masking from the magnetic ﬁeld contours, the collisional PIL masks are either
augmented in thickness to show larger areas of the velocity patterns within them, or shown in an
inset panel (panel h).

– 62 –

Fig. 9.— Selected composite images from SDO/AIA and HMI observations for AR11158. Left:
composite of 1600 ˚A (grey), the corresponding HMI magnetogram (red/negative, blue/positive) and
304 ˚A (orange) showing the cool ﬁlament material (dark lane) above the cPIL. Right: composite
of 1600 ˚A HMI magnetogram, and 131 ˚A (green) showing plasma emission in 10 MK. In panel d a
clear sigmoidal structure is seen above the cPIL (traced with a dotted line) signifying a pre-existing
MFR. (A movie is available in the online version of the journal.)

– 63 –

Fig. 10.— Panel a: Time evolution for the magnetic ﬂux of the secondary emerging bipole of
AR12017 (conjugated polarities N2 and P2). The ﬂux measurements are base-diﬀerenced to remove
the bias of the pre-existing negative ﬂux in the area where the parasitic emergence occurs (also see
Figure 3 for the bias). The pre-existing bipole N1 P1 was fully emerged for four days before N2
P2 began to emerge and it is in its decay phase throughout the time range shown. The orange
background marks the time range where emergence of the second bipole hasn’t yet started. Bipole
2 carries half the magnetic ﬂux of bipole 1. Panel b: Average photospheric Doppler velocities
for the nearby QS (dashed) in addition to average Doppler velocities in the collisional PIL (solid
curves). The average redshifts in the collisional PIL dominate both the blueshifts and QS average
velocities for the entire period of emergence. Panel c: The evolution of the ﬂux deﬁcit for bipole
2 including the deﬁcit correction ∆corr (solid red line; see text for details). Note that a cluster of
ﬂare activity begins only when the deﬁcit is increasing. Panel d: Plot of the oblateness of polarity
N2NS (green), collision distance between N2NS and the second episode’s P2 (blue) the PIL length
(yellow) with time. Note the rapid increase of the oblateness (from 50% to 80%) for N2NS after
the onset of collision with the second episode within bipole 2. See text for more discussion.

– 64 –

Fig. 11.— Selected composite images from SDO/AIA and HMI observations for AR12017. Note
that the formation of the ﬁlament occurs in the cPIL1, progressively extending to the conjoined
cPIL1/cPIL2/sPIL2 system for the second and third eruption. (A movie is available in the online
version of the journal.)

– 65 –

Fig. 12.— Cartoon demonstrating the physical processes at the collisional PIL between two
nonconjugated polarities (their conjugate polarities are not shown to increase clarity). Proper
motions (shown with white arrows) are due to the self-separation between the conjugate polarities,
bringing them to a collision course and shearing as they overtake each other. As a result, the
arcade connectivity near the collisional PIL shears and once it reconnects at photospheric heights
ﬂux submerges (panel a; small black loop). This manifests as a deﬁcit in the balance of magnetic
ﬂux if colliding ﬂux (e.g. P2) is compared against its conjugate non-colliding polarity ﬂux (e.g.
In the mean time, PIL-aligned connectivity appears low in the corona (red dashed line).
N2).
With ongoing cancellation (panel b), more ﬂux reconnects below the PIL-aligned connectivity with
equal amounts submerged below the photosphere and added as poloidal in the structure above the
cPIL eventually forming a magnetic ﬂux rope (MFR; panel c). This process is also accompanied
by conﬁned sub-ﬂaring and ﬂaring activity in the corona above the collisional PIL, suggesting
additional increase in the poloidal ﬂux due to reconnection below the ﬂux rope (Patsourakos et al.
2013; Chintzoglou et al. 2015).

Photospheric Reconnection Driven by Collisional ShearingMFR axisN1P2N1P2MFRcancellationN1P2(a)(b)(c)self-PIL2self-PIL1N2P1photospheresolar interiorcoronaPhotospheric ReconnectionReconnecting Sheared arcadeNew connectivity (above photosphere)New connectivity (submerging)Collisional PILBipole Separation speed– 66 –

Fig. 13.— Results from the data-driven 3D MF simulation for AR11158 showing the coronal
magnetic ﬁeld at four diﬀerent times (panels a, b, c and d) along the evolution of the AR. The
view is top-down. The red-orange volumetric rendering shows the square of the electric current,
|J|2, which represents spatial deformities in the coronal ﬁeld (obtained by tracing millions of ﬁeld
lines at each snapshot). The maps are overlayed to the HMI magnetogram showing the magnetic
polarities (purple: negative, green: positive) and the PIL is shown with a dark dotted line for
reference. Before the collision onset (panel a) the connectivity is not sheared and resembles closely
a potential conﬁguration. After the collision onset (panels b,c,d), shear builds up at the collisional
PIL due to the proper motions of P2 (moves rapidly towards P1) and N1 (mostly static) and the
line-tied coronal ﬁeld becomes stressed and aligned with respect to the PIL. The ﬁeld connectivity
between the conjugate polarities (N1P1 and N2P2) is potential-like at all times. This energization
of the coronal ﬁeld lasts for as long as the collisional PIL exists. (An animation of this ﬁgure is
available in the online version of the journal.)

– 67 –

Fig. 14.— Panel a: streamlines of the 3D magnetic ﬁeld corresponding to the time in Figure 13
d. Translucent yellow lines show the ambient coronal ﬁeld. The green (Magnetic Flux Rope) and
orange (simply-sheared arcade) ﬁeld lines were traced from the very same region of strong electric
ﬁeld magnitude right at the collisional PIL (magenta volumetric rendering). Panel b: perspective
view of the MFR above the collisional PIL. (An animation of this ﬁgure is available in the online
version of the journal.)

– 68 –

Fig. 15.— Cartoon representation of the simultaneous and sequential collisional shearing processes.
Time t0 shows the AR just before it becomes quadrupolar. For each ﬂux tube that emerges a self-
PIL is separating the opposite conjugated polarities (i.e. N1 P1 for ﬂux tube 1 and N2 P2 for ﬂux
tube 2). However, if the proximity of the two ﬂux tubes emerging within the same AR is close, this
may result into a collision between opposite nonconjugated polarities (at t = tcollision onset). The
collision forms a neutral line, the collisional PIL, linking self-PIL1 with self-PIL2. The orientation
and shape of the long neutral line system, self-PIL1/collisional-PIL/self-PIL2, changes with time
due to the proper motions of the polarities relative to each other. Magnetic cancellation occurs at
the collisional PIL accompanied by rich ﬂaring activity in the corona, in addition to the formation
of MFRs above the collisional PILs. The MFRs may eventually become unstable and escape as
CMEs. Note that sequential collisions may occur at any time during the lifetime of an AR (e.g. it
occurs during the simultaneous collision in AR11158), enriching its ﬂaring and eruptive potential.

flux tube 2flux tube 2Case A: Simultaneous Collision of magnetic flux tubesCase B: Sequential Collision of magnetic flux tubest0t>tcollision onsett0t>tcollision onsetflux tube 1COLLISIONAL SHEARINGflux tube 2flux tube 1flux tube 2flux tube 2flux tube 1self-PIL 1self-PIL 1self-PIL 2self-PIL 2self-PIL 1N2N2N1P2P1N1P2P1N1P1flux tube 1flux tube 1flux tube 1self-PIL 2P2self-PIL 2self-PIL 2self-PIL 2self-PIL 2self-PIL 2self-PIL 2self-PIL 2self-PIL 2self-PIL 1collisional PILcollisional PILphotosphereM  F  RN2N2N2N2N2coronaM  F Rsolar interior