Helium load on W-O coatings grown by pulsed laser deposition 

R. Mateus1,*, D. Dellasega2,3, M. Passoni2,3, Z. Siketić4, 
I. Bogdanović Radović4, A. Hakola5, E. Alves1 

1Instituto de Plasmas e Fusão Nuclear, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 
Av. Rovisco Pais, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal 

2Dipartimento di Energia, Politecnico di Milano, via Ponzio 34/3, 20133 Milano, Italy 

3IFP, CNR, via R. Cozzi 53, Milano 20125, Italy 

4Ruder Bošković Institute, P.O. Box 180, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia 

5VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd., Finland 

*corresponding author: rmateus@ipfn.ist.utl.pt 

Abstract 

W-O deposits with complex morphologies and significant He contents will growth on the surface of plasma 
facing  components  exposed  to  He  discharges.  To  mimic  the  re/co-deposition  process,  W-O  coatings  were 
loaded  with  He  by  implanting  He+  ions  on  W  films  grown  by  pulsed  laser  deposition  (PLD).  The  use  of 
appropriate PLD experimental parameters such as pressurised Ar or He background atmospheres induces the 
deposition of porous or compact W structures enhancing afterwards the gathering of different amounts of O 
under exposure to atmospheric air. After multiple ion implantation stages using 150 keV, 100 keV and 50 
keV  incident  He+  ion  beams  with  a  total  fluence  of  5  x  1017  ion/cm2,  significant  amounts  of  He  were 
identified  in  porous  coatings  by  Rutherford  backscattering  (RBS).  Time-of-flight  elastic  recoil  detection 
(ToF-ERDA)  measurements  showed  that  most  of  the  implanted  He  was  already  released  from  the  porous 
coatings  five  month  after  implantation,  while  for  the  case  of  compact  layers  the  He  content  remains 
significant at deeper layers and smoothly decrease towards the surface, as result of a different morphology 
and  nanostructure.  The  proposed  method  involving  PLD  and  ion  implantation  seems  adequate  to  produce 
W-O films load by He that may be used as reference samples for fusion investigations. 

Keywords: PLD, W coatings, ion implantation, helium load 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Introduction 

During  the  operation  of  fusion  devices  the  plasma  will  strongly  interact  with  plasma  facing  components 

(PFC)  leading  to  the  erosion  of  the  exposed  surfaces,  co-deposition  of  eroded  material  or  environment 

impurities as oxygen (O), and trapping of fuel as well as isotopic products (He-4) of the D-T reaction [1]. 

Tungsten  (W)  is  the  chosen  material  for  the  divertor  of  ITER  [1]  and  the  use  of  full  W  PFC  walls  and 

divertors  is  under  investigation  in  different  plasma  devices  [2,3].  Experimental  results  revealed  that  the 

grown  deposits  may  present  distinct  microstructures  and  compositions  with  various  impurities.  This  is  the 

case  of  compact  W-O  layers  covering  optical  mirrors  located  at  the  first  wall  and  divertor  of  the  ASDEX 

Upgrade tokamak [2], and of porous W-O deposits found on the outer divertor strike point tiles of the same 

device  [3].  The  effects  caused  by  deuterium  and  helium  plasma  exposure  are  related  to  the  different  W-O 

structures.  There  is  therefore  need  to  determine  the  outcomes  arising  from  the  modifications  in  dedicated 

experiments  to  predict  the  properties  and  lifetimes  of  the  irradiated  PFCs.  To  this  purpose,  W-O  coatings 

loaded  with  deuterium  or  helium  (He)  and  resembling  re-deposited  layers  on  PFCs  in  W-based  fusion 

devices are being produced under the EUROfusion consortium [4-6]. The present work reports part of the 

activities aiming the production of W-O coatings loaded by He in order to develop W(He)-based materials 

by ion implantation similar to deposits observed in tokamaks. Two different as-deposited coatings were used 

in  the  experiment:  porous-W  with  an  open  nanocrystalline  structure  and  also  compact-W  presenting  poor 

crystallinity. In order to prevent the occurrence of significant morphological changes enhancing gas release, 

the  use  of  a  moderate  irradiation  dose  for  He  ions  was  established.  The  investigation  of  He  loading  and 

release  dynamics  in  the  two  microstructures,  also  after  long  time  storage,  was  carried  out  by  ion  beam 

analysis. 

2.  Experimental procedure 

Pulsed  Laser  Deposition  (PLD)  technique  has  been  exploited  to  produce  appropriate  coatings  for  the 

research using a pure metallic W target as W source and a proper background pressure of argon (Ar) or He. 

The role of different PLD parameters in the deposition procedure, such as the wavelength of the laser beam 
used to ablate the W source (532 nm in this case), the laser fluence per pulse (close to 15 J/cm2), the target-

to-substrate  distance  (7  cm)  or  the  pressure  and  composition  of  the  used  background  gas  are  detailed 

elsewhere  [4,5].  PLD  parameters  are  properly  tailored  to  produce  porous-W  and  compact-W  coating  that 

mimic W-O re-deposited microstructures observed in tokamaks [2,3] after O absorption [5]. In the present 

experiment,  porous-W  coatings  were  prepared  by  using  a  50  Pa  Ar  atmosphere,  promoting  the  porous 

morphology characterized by the presence of nano-grains disposed along the columnar growth of the films. 

For the compact-W deposition, a 70 Pa atmosphere of He, the same PLD geometry and similar laser pulses 

to  ablate  the  W  target  were  used.  The  compact  morphology  is  only  characterized  by  the  growth  of  nano-

grains spread out along the entire films structure. The gathering of O through the W lattice occurs afterwards 
2 

 
 
by exposing the as-deposited samples to atmospheric air [4,5]. The coatings were deposited on stainless steel 

(SS) 316L substrates. In order to reinforce the adhesion of the coatings to the substrates a pure and thin 150 
nm crystalline W interface was deposited initially in vacuum (10-3 Pa). Table 1 resumes some of the relevant 

parameters  used  to  growth  both  porous  and  compact  W  coatings  and  crystalline  W  interfaces.  Recent 

experiments revealed the absence of Ar or He on the coatings although the PLD depositions are carried out 

under Ar or He background atmospheres [4,5] (section 3.3). 

A Zeiss Supra 40 field emission scanning electron microscope assisted with an X-ray detector was used to 

characterize surface morphologies by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and to quantify the elemental W 

and  O  contents  by  energy  dispersion  X-ray  spectroscopy  (EDX).  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD)  measurements 

were  performed  with  a  Panalytical  X’Pert  PRO  X-ray  diffractometer  in  the  θ-2θ  configuration  using  a 

copper (Cu) X-ray source for phase identification. 

A 210 kV high flux ion implanter was used to irradiate simultaneously all the porous and compact coatings 
with normal incidence of 4He+ ion beams. Aiming to prevent a possible saturation of He on the W lattices, 

the  final  depth  ranges  were  spread  out  and  diluted  through  the  implantation  zone  by  using  three  different 

implantation stages with a sequential decrease in the energy of incident ions. The corresponding ion beam 
energies and fluences of the first, second and third stages were, respectively, 150 keV and 2 x 1017 ion/cm2, 
100  keV  and  2  x  1017  ion/cm2,  and  50  keV  and  1  x  1017  ion/cm2,  being  the  total  dose  equal  to  5  x  1017 
ion/cm2. Current densities of the individual beams of 4.3 µm/cm2 assure that the irradiations of the metallic 

samples  were  performed  at  room  temperature  (RT).  The  depth  ranges  of  ions  within  the  materials  were 

evaluated by using the SRIM code [7]. 

The thickness and the W and O elemental depth profiles of the as-deposited and as-implanted samples were 
analysed by Rutherford backscattering (RBS, with 2 MeV He+) and by elastic backscattering spectrometries 
(EBS, with 1.5 MeV H+, where Gurbich's evaluated non-Rutherford cross-sections for O are about 2.5 times 

higher than the Rutherford cross-section at the same energy [8]) making use of the NDF code [9] enabling 

simultaneous  analysis  involving  different  ion  beam  techniques.  The  analysis  took  into  consideration  the 

main composition of the SS substrates. He retained amounts could be evaluated indirectly by RBS from the 

decrease of the backscattering yields of heavy W in the implanted samples. Nevertheless and particularly for 

a direct quantification of He, time-of-flight elastic recoil detection (ToF-ERDA) experiments using 23 MeV 
127I6+ ion beams at a glancing angle of 20° were also performed to evaluate the release of He and to quantify 

the  depth  profiles  of  a  large  number  of  elements  along  the  superficial  layers.  At  the  end,  O  amounts 

evaluated from SEM-EDX, EBS and ToF-ERDA could be compared. 

A first elemental depth profiling quantification was performed from the time-of-flight data with the POTKU 

software  [10],  which  allows  checking  for  selective  composition  changes  during  spectra  collection.  This  is 

particularly  useful  to  evaluate  possible  losses  of  (weakly  bounded)  helium  during  ion  bombardment.  As  a 

3 

 
second stage of the analysis, the compositions achieved from the POTKU code were used as input files of 

the Monte Carlo CORTEO software [11], which takes into account all the energy spread contributions that 

may affect the final elemental depth quantifications as multiple scattering events and energy straggling, and 

a fine tuning of the elemental POTKU results was obtained. The procedure is particularly useful to check the 

depth profiling of heavy elements as W. 

3.  Results and discussion 
3.1  Characterization of porous and compact morphologies 

As  evidenced  from  the  secondary  electron  SEM  images  of  Fig.  1,  two  distinct  W  microstructures  were 

formed by tuning the PLD deposition parameters. From the top view of a porous-W film (a) we observe the 

cauliflower  morphology,  which  commonly  is  associated  to  a  porous  and  columnar  growth  involving  the 

individual  crystallites.  In  opposition,  any  contrast  is  observed  in  the  top  view  of  a  compact-W  film  (b), 

which is associated to a  smooth, compact and  featureless  growth. The  corresponding cross-section images 

confirm the presence of the two distinct morphologies: the superficial cauliflower morphology of compact-

W  corresponds  to  the  growth  of  nanostructured  columns,  100  nm  wide,  along  the  normal  direction  to  the 

substrate (c); the cross-section view of compact-W reveals the same featureless growth already observed in 

the top view image. Finally, and for the present depositions, a crystalline W adhesion layer on the interface 

between an SS substrate and a porous coating is detailed by a magnified cross-section view image (e). 

It is possible to characterize the crystallinity of the deposited films from the XRD diffractograms in Fig. 2. 

The porous film exhibits a quite broad reflection centered at 39.8 degrees, evidencing the growth of a bcc 

W-based  microstructure.  Nevertheless,  the  reported  value  for  the  (110)  diffraction  peak  of  pure  bcc  W  is 
about 40.3° [12]. From the Bragg’s law, and considering the wavelength of 0.154 nm for the Cu-Kα1 line of 

the  X-ray  source,  a  decrease  in  the  (110)  peak  close  to  0.50  degrees  corresponds  to  an  increment  of  the 

lattice parameter a of the bcc W phase from the reference value of 0.317 nm to about 0.320 nm, and to a 

lattice  expansion  ∆a/a  of  about  1.2%  relative  to  pure  bcc  W.  The  structural  swelling  is  easily  justified  by 

addition of O and other impurities in the W unit cell [13,14]. Considering the broadening of the (110) peak, 

the mean crystallite domain size calculated by using the Scherrer equation is about 7 nm [5,13]. The bcc W 

structure  in  the  porous-W  coatings  is  also  confirmed  by  the  corresponding  diffraction  peaks  detected  with 

lower intensities for planes (200), (112) and (220). On the other side, the diffractogram of compact-W shows 

only a wide and broad band typically centered, once again, at the diffraction peak for plane (110) of bcc W. 

From  the  Scherrer  equation  the  mean  crystalline  size  of  the  grains  is  lower  than  2  nm  [5,13].  These  data 

show that the porous samples exhibit higher crystallinity in respect to the compact ones. This may be related 

to the formation of  crystalline nanoparticles during the ablation process  due to the interaction with the Ar 

atmosphere. 

4 

 
 
The use of an Ar background atmosphere results in a significant decrease of the kinetic energy of the ablated 

W  atoms  impinging  on  the  substrate  due  to  the  scattering  imposed  by  the  Ar  atoms,  thus  leading  to  the 

growth  of  non-compact  but  porous  structures,  as  observed  in  Fig.  1(a)  and  (c).  In  opposition  to  Ar 

atmospheres, He has been chosen as the background gas for the formation of compact-W coatings because it 

is the noble gas with the smallest atomic mass and consequently with the lowest thermalizing effect on the 

ablated  atoms.  An  earlier  investigation  has  shown  a  structural  transition  from  a  crystalline  to  a  highly 

compact morphology  growth in the deposits at about 30 Pa by varying the He background pressure in the 
range from 10-3 Pa to 200 Pa [5], and by raising the He pressure the deposits appear to be formed by even 

smaller grains, with a corresponding decrease in films density and rise of bcc W lattice parameters. Also the 

O content may rise quickly from 5% at. to 20 at.%. within a slight pressure change from 40 Pa to 50 Pa. A 

larger retention of O may be related to the formation of new kinds of defects and energetic traps in the films. 

Nevertheless,  the  final  O  content  (15%-20%)  is  always  lower  compared  to  the  case  of  porous  deposits 

(∼50%) [5]. High surface-to-volume ratio of these microstructures, enhanced by a columnar growth, induces 

the spontaneous gathering of O after deposition in the coatings during exposition to ambient air [4]. The O 

content,  as  quantified  by  EDS  in  the  surface  of  the  porous-W  films  using  in  the  present  experiment  was 

about 55 at.% [4]. Instead, thanks to its compact morphology, compact-W films showed O contents close to 

16  at.%  [5].  Different  experiments  demonstrated  that  O  may  be  absorbed  after  W  deposition  without 

reacting chemically [15] and this is the case of the present samples [16]. 

As a consequence of the PLD deposition procedure, and for a better characterization of the samples before 

implantation, also the phase of the crystallites identified by XRD, and the diluted/trapped O contents present 

in the surface of the samples and evaluated by EDX, were included in Table 1. 

3.2  Multiple implantation stages of helium 

Earlier  implantation  experiments  with  energetic  He  ions  evidenced  drastic  changes  to  the  surface 

morphology  of  polycrystalline  W  maintained  in  the  500-900  ºC  temperature  range  when  the  He  dose 
exceeded 1 x 1018 ion/cm2, promoting the release of He through nanoscale channels by the coalescence and 

movement of He bubbles through the implantation zone [17]. As referred in section 2, the present irradiation 
campaign was performed with a total He+ dose of 5 x 1017 ion/cm2 and keeping the samples at RT. The main 

idea  of  the  procedure  was  to  avoid  major  morphological  changes  that  could  enhance  the  degassing  of  He 

[17].  Depth  ranges  and  path  length  distribution  of  implanted  He  were  calculated  with  the  SRIM  code 

considering  materials  with  very  distinct  O  contents  [7].  The  stopping  power  imposed  by  W-O  matrixes  to 

the incident ions and quantified with a linear combination of the elemental stopping powers by the Bragg’s 

rule, giving rise to very accurate results for the case of heavy elements as O and W [7]. Once the irradiations 

of the coatings were performed simultaneously, lower energy losses imposed to the incident ions and higher 

ion  ranges  are  predicted  within  the  porous  structures,  while  they  present  matrixes  with  lower  average  Z-
5 

 
 
values  [7,18].  Nevertheless,  different  W:O  ratios  could  be  present  along  the  depth  range  of  the  impinging 

ions. Also the calculations do not take into consideration the crystalline structure of the target or the role of 

columnar  or  grain  boundaries  and  lattice  defects  [7,18].  Not  all  the  ions  implanted  with  an  unique  energy 

take  the  same  depth  due  to  the  energy  spread  of  ions  in  matter,  and  by  calculating  the  average  projected 

range,  Rp,  the  corresponding  standard  deviation,  ∆Rp,  and  by  knowing  the  implanted  ion  dose,  Gaussian-

like depth profile ranges and maximum concentrations of the implanted species are predicted [7,18]. Table 2 

presents  Rp  and  ∆Rp  depth  ranges  calculated  for  two  distinct  W:O  compositions:  pure  W  and  the  W:O 

(37:62)  stoichiometry,  the  composition  quantified  by  EBS/RBS  for  the  as-deposited  porous  films  (section 

3.3). Considering the corresponding depth ranges and ion fluences for the three individual irradiation stages 
(performed with 150 keV He+, 100 keV He+ and 50 keV He+), total depth profiles for implanted ions in pure 

W  and  in  the  present  porous-W  are  obtained  (see  Fig.  3).  For  the  porous  films,  maximum  He  contents  of 

about 15 at.% were predicted (Fig. 3). Outcomes arising from lattice defects will lead to higher retentions of 

He close to the surface and to lower He depth ranges. Since the O amount in compact layers is lower than in 

porous  ones,  it  is  predicted  before  the  irradiation  campaign  that  the  impinging  ions  will  not  reach  the  SS 

substrate or the W interface whatever the coating structure, porous or compact.  

3.3  Helium load and release dynamics on porous and compact coatings 

Composition  of  porous  and  compact  W  films  has  been  checked  after  the  deposition  procedure  (as-

deposited),  right  after  He  implantation  (as-implanted)  and  five  months  after  implantation  (aged).  As-

deposited films have been characterized by SEM, EDS, EBS, RBS and ToF-ERDA, as-implanted films have 

been  analysed  by  EBS  and  RBS  and  aged  films  have  been  characterized  by  EBS,  RBS  and  ToF-ERDA. 

Additionally,  and  with  the  purpose  to  confirm  the  origin  of  retained  He,  additional  ToF-ERDA 

measurements had been carried out to new sets of porous and compact films deposited by PLD at the same 

experimental parameters. 

Fig. 4.a shows the EBS spectra collected from the porous coatings before and after implantation, where the 

vertical  arrows  indicate  the  energies  relative  to  the  presence  of  W  and  O  at  the  surface  layer.  From  the 
elastic  scattering  of  incident  protons  by  16O,  16O(p,p)16O,  significant  amounts  of  O  on  porous-W  are 

quantified.  The  same  behaviour  is  also  visible  from  the  decrease  of  the  backscattering  yield  of  heavier  W 

along the coating’s depth. An interface region with pure W (identified as the crystalline W adhesion layer in 

Fig.  1)  is  located  between  the  film  and  the  SS  substrate.  In  comparison  to  the  incidence  of  protons,  the 

energy loss of He ions in matter is higher, since it depends on the square of the incident ion charge [7,18]. 

Therefore we are highly sensitive to changes in the superficial depth profile of heavy W by RBS (Fig. 4.b), 

where  an  expected  decrease  in  the  backscattering  W  yield  after  the  implantation  procedure  is  observed, 

being the behaviour explained by the addition of the He impurity [19,20]. Therefore and despite the absence 

6 

 
 
of  a  He  yield,  a  retained  depth  profile  for  He  may  be  quantified  by  RBS  [19,20].  The  complementary 

EBS/RBS analyses in the as-deposited porous films point to an O content close to 62.5 at.% and to coating's 
thickness  of  about  112  x  1017at/cm2,  followed  by  a  pure  W  interface  close  to  9.8  x  1017at/cm2  (∼155  nm 
considering bulk W density). After implantation the coating's thickness decreases to 107 x 1017at/cm2 due to 

physical sputtering and a maximum He content of 23 at.% is evaluated. Taking into consideration the total 
fluence of He implantation, 5 x 1017 at/cm2, it is predicted large sputtering yield of 0.94 caused by impinging 
energetic He+ on porous-W. Exceptionally large sputtering yields caused by the incidence of heavy energetic 

ions  on  tungsten  oxide  were  observed  before  [21].  The  behaviour  need  to  be  studied  with  further 

experiments. 

In opposition to the case of porous layers, and due to the compact nature of the coatings and possibly, due to 

a lower O content, the erosion by physical sputtering did not occur significantly by irradiating compact-W. 

Moreover, and if a low O content exist, the analysis to EBS (Fig. 4(c) ) and RBS spectra (not presented in 

Fig.  4)  are  not  sensitive  to  quantify  the  existing  amount.  Additional  differences  in  the  elemental  profiles 

before and after implantation are explained by changes in the energy resolution of the detector. 

Fig. 5 presents the depth profiles for He, O and W quantified from the EBS and RBS spectra of the porous 

coatings  collected  before  (a)  and  after  helium  implantation  (b).  As  predicted  by  SRIM,  the  maximum 

retained He amount did not occur at the surface, being the implanted depth zone in the range from 0.5 to 2 x 
1018 at/cm2 (see Fig. 5(b)). SRIM simulations pointed to an implanted depth zone in the depth range from 
1.0 to 4.5 x 1018 at/cm2 with a lower maximum retained He amount (15 at.% vs. 23 at.%) (see Fig. 3)). The 

results seems to agree with the occurrence of a huge physical sputtering [21] in the porous surfaces during 

irradiation and with a fast retention of He atoms along lattice defects, preferentially, in columnar and grain 

boundaries of the porous bcc structure [17,22]. In face of the present results, the formation of He bubbles at 

the present irradiation parameters needs to be investigated. 

Ar  and  He  are  noble  gases,  thus  insoluble  in  metals  and  migrate  rapidly  through  metallic  lattices.  The 

trapping  in  lattice  defects  or  a  degassing  at  the  surface  should  be  quite  fast  [17,22]  even  at  room 

temperature. Due to the grazing geometry of the analysis, ToF-ERDA is really sensitive to the presence of 

the individual elements nearby the superficial layers. Very recent ToF-ERDA measurements carried out in 

new and as-deposited W-O films deposited at PLD parameters similar to those ones of Table 1 revealed the 

superficial elemental contents of both porous-W (15 at.% H, 1.9 at.% C, 2.5 at.% N, 60 at.% O, 20.6 at.% 

W) and compact-W coatings (2.1 at.% H, 0.7 at.% C, 2.0 at.% N, 25 at.% O, 70 at.% W). Higher contents 

for H, C, N and O in porous surfaces agree with an easier trapping behaviour of environmental contaminants 

in a porous structure [22]. As example of the analysis, Fig. 6(a) presents the coincident map collected from 

an  as-deposited  compact-W  sample  obtained  with  the  particle  (ERDA)  detector  and  the  two  time-of-flight 

(ToF)  detectors,  where  all  the  elemental  yields  are  well  separated  (the  yield  for  I  relates  with  the  primary 

7 

 
beam). As it was referred before, and despite the use of a pressurize He atmosphere during deposition, He is 

not present in the as-deposited sample and it it only incorporated under ion implantation. 

Although a huge He retention in as-implanted porous-W coatings has been observed by RBS (maximum of 

23 at.%; Fig. 4.b), ToF-ERDA maps confirmed that most of the retained He has been released already from 

aged  porous-W  five  months  after  implantation  (data  not  shown),  while  a  low  3.1  at.%.  average  He 
concentration  was  quantified  along  a  superficial  depth  close  to  17.0  x  1017  at/cm2.  The  fast  degassing  is 

justified in face of a porous structure acting as a path way through the coatings depth [17,22]. The remaining 

detected elements in the same aged coating were H (7.4 at.%), C (4.2 at.%), N (3.0 at.), O (56 at.%) and W 

(26  at.%).  Nevertheless,  the  equivalent  ToF-ERDA  map  of  Fig.  6(b)  collected  from  an  aged  compact-W 
coating confirmed that a significant amount of He (13.8 at.%) remains within a depth layer of 12.0 x 1017 
at/cm2 five month after irradiation, being the remaining elemental composition H (2.3 at.%), C (2.0 at.%), N 

(1.3 at.%), O (15 at.%) and W (65 at.%). Fig. 7 shows the quantified elemental depth profiles for W, O and 

He  in  the  aged  compact-W  achieved  from  the  POTKU  [10]  and  CORDEO  [11]  codes.  In  particular,  it  is 

observed a smooth increase in the retained  He amounts at deeper depths, being the result compatible with 

the release of He at the surface, while significant He amounts remain present at deeper depths. Confirming 

the  result,  we  may  affirm  that  there  was  no  loss  of  light  elements  as  helium  caused  by  ion  beam  damage 

during  the  ToF-ERDA  measurement  [10],  while  only  a  statistical  fluctuation  of  the  light  elements 

concentration was observed over time. Also the contributions arising from energy spread effects as multiple 

scattering [11] are not sufficient to justify the decrease of W yields at deeper depths. 

X-ray  induced  emission  is  only  sensitive  for  the  analysis  of  superficial  O.  EBS/RBS  is  truly  accurate  to 

quantify significant amounts of O along the entire depth of the film and ToF-ERDA is extremely sensitive 

for the analysis of the superficial layers. The O contents measured at three different research laboratories by 

EDX, EBS/RBS and ToF-ERDA for the  as-deposited porous (54 at.%, 62 at.%  and 60 at.%, respectively) 

and for the compact coatings (16 at.%, not sensitive by RBS, and 25 at.%, respectively) are in impressive 

agreement,  signalising  the  accuracy  of  the  global  analyses.  All  the  campaig  points  ion  implantation  as  a 

promising  technique  to  load  He  in  W  films  produced  by  PLD.  Nevertheless,  the  lifetime  of  enriched  He 

films  will  extremely  depend  of  the  internal  microstructures  and  ion  beam  energies,  implantation  dose  and 

current densities implemented during irradiation. 

4.  Summary 

W-O coatings were prepared by PLD to mimic the load of He on W-O deposits in tokamaks. The use of Ar 

and  He  atmosphere  as  background  gas  and  tuned  PLD  deposition  parameters  induced  the  deposition  of 

porous  and  compact  coatings  avoiding  the  retention  of  the  background  gas  elements.  He  load  was  only 

obtained after ion implantation carried out with sequential implantation stages involving 150 keV, 100 keV 
and 50 keV He+ ion beams, showing that the procedure is suitable to produce W-O coatings containing He 
8 

 
 
that  may  be  used  standards  for  fusion  investigations.  Film  composition  has  been  assessed  by  EDX, 

EBS/RBS and ToF-ERDA showing a substantial agreement between the different techniques. EBS and RBS 

are not sensitive to identify smooth changes in the depth profiles of retained He as observed from structures. 

Conversely ToF-EDA has been demonstrated to be a reliable technique for depth ranges of the order of 1500 
x 1017 at/cm2. 

He retention dynamics is deeply affected by  film morphology, nanostructure  and composition. The results 

evidence  that  a  columnar  morphology  allow  retaining  significant  He  amounts.  Nevertheless,  also  a  fast 

release takes place, and five months after implantation, most of the He amount has been released from the 

surfaces. Significant erosion of the porous surface is predicted to occur under irradiation with energetic ions. 

The compact morphology is able to retain higher amounts of He five months after exposure, being the result 

in  agreement  with  a  smooth  degassing  of  He  and  with  the  retention  of  significant  He  amounts  at  deeper 

depths. Additional experiments should be carried out to characterize the He load and optimize the PLD and 

ion implantation procedures to produce standards of W-O loaded by He. 

Acknowledgements 

This  work  has  been  carried  out  within  the  framework  of  the  EUROfusion  Consortium  and  has  received 

funding from the Euratom research and training programme 2014-2018 under grant agreement No 633053. 

The  activity  was  performed  in  the  scope  of  the  WP  PFC  programme.  IST  also  received  financial  support 

from  "Fundação  para  a  Ciência  e  a  Tecnologia"  through  project  UID/FIS/50010/2013.  The  views  and 

opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect those of the European Commission. 

9 

 
 
 
References 

[1]  Kleyn A.W., Cardozo N.J.L., Samm U., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 8, 1761-1774 (2006). 

[2]  Litnovsky A. et al., Nucl. Fusion, 53, 073033 (20133). 

[3]  Rasinski M. et al., Fusion Eng. Des., 86, 1753–1756  (2011). 

[4]  Maffini A., Uccello A., Dellasega D., Passoni M., Nucl. Fusion, 56, 086008 (2016). 

[5]  Dellasega D., Merlo G., Conti C, Bottani C.E., Passoni M., J. Appl. Phys., 112, 084328 (2012). 

[6]  Brezinsek S. et al., Nucl. Fusion 57, 116041 (2017). 

[7]  Ziegler J.F., Ziegler M.D., Biersack J.P., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B, 268, 1818-1823 (2010). 

[8]  Gurbich A.F., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B, 129, 311-316 (1997). 

[9]  Barradas N.P., C. Jeynes, R.P. Webb, Appl. Phys. Lett., 71, 291-293 (1997). 

[10]  Arstila K. et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B, 331, 34-41 (2014). 

[11]  Schiettekatte F., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B, 266, 1880-1885 (2008). 

[12]  Giorgi A.L., Physica B, 135, 420-422 (1985). 

[13]  Cullity  B.D.,  Elements  of  X-ray  Diffraction,  second  ed.,  Addison-Wesley,  Reading,  Massachusetts, 

USA, 1978. 

[14]  Mateus R., Sequeira M.C., Porosnicu C., Lungu C.P., Hakola A., Alves E., Nucl. Mater. Energy, 12, 

462-467 (2017). 

[15]  Linsmeier Ch., Wanner J., Surf. Sci. 454–456, 305 (2000). 

[16]  Dellasega D. et al., Nanotechnology 26, 365601 (2015). 

[17]  Zenobia S.J., Garrison L.M., Kulcinski G.L., J. Nucl. Mater., 425, 83-92 (2012). 

[18]  Ryssel H. and Ruge I., Ion implantation, Wiley, Chichester, 1986. 

[19]  Mateus R. et al., J. Nucl. Mater., 442, S251-S255 (2013). 

[20]  Dias M. et al., J. Nucl. Mater., 442, 69-74 (2013). 

[21]  Matsunami  N.,  Sataka  M.,  Okayasu  S.,  Kakiuchida  H.,  Nucl.  Instrum.  Methods  Phys.  Res.  B,  268, 

3167-3170 (2010). 

[22]  Sharafat S. et al., J. Nucl. Mater., 347, 217-243 (2005). 

10 

 
Table 1 
Relevant PLD parameters used to grow porous and compact W coatings 
and pure W adhesion layers, identified phases by XRD and O contents 
quantified by EDS in the as-deposited coatings. 

Parameter 

Porous-W 

compact-W  W adhesion layer 

backgroud gas 
gas pressure 

film thickness 
phase 
O (at.%) 

Ar 
50 Pa 

1 µm 
bcc W 
54.3±5  

He 
70 Pa 

1 µm 
bcc W 
16.1±2 

- 
10-3 Pa 

0.15 µm 
bcc W 
- 

Table 2 
Depth  ranges  of  incident  He+  ions  on  pure  W  and  on  W:O  (37:62) 
simulated by SRIM. 

incident beam 

pure W 

W:O (37:62) 

Rp (nm) 

∆Rp (nm) 

  Rp (nm) 

∆Rp (nm) 

150 keV D+ 
100 keV D+ 
50 keV D+ 

287 
207 
119 

99 
81 
54 

556 
406 
233 

166 
139 
95 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure Captions 

Fig.  1.  SEM  images  of  W-O  coatings:  top  views  for  porous  (a)  and  nanostructured  (b)  coatings  and 
corresponding cross-section views in (c) and (d); detail of a cross-section view of a porous coating (e). 

Fig. 2. XRD diffractograms collected from both p-W and a-W coatings in the θ-2θ configuration using a Cu 
X-ray source. 

Fig. 3. Simulated depth profiles of incident He ions on W:O (37:62) by SRIM. 

Fig.  4.  EBS  (a)  and  RBS  spectra  (b)  of  p-W  coatings  and  EBS  spectra  of  nanostructured  coatings  (c) 
collected before and after He+ implantation. The EBS and the RBS experiments were carried out with 1500 
keV H+ and 2000 keV He+ incident ion beams, respectively, at a scattering angle of 165º. 

Fig.  5.  W,  O  and  He  depth  profiles  in  as-deposited  (a)  and  in  as-implanted  (b)  porous-W  coatings  as 
quantified by EBS/RBS. 

Fig. 6. ToF-ERDA overlapped coincidence maps of an as-deposited a-W (a) and of the implanted a-W (b) 
coating. The spectra were carried at a glancing angle of 20° made use of incident 23 MeV 127I6+ ion beams. 

Fig.7. W, O and He depth profiles in implanted a-W quantified with both POTKU and CORTEO codes. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 

Fig. 2 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 

Fig. 4 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 

Fig. 7 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
