EUROGRAPHICS 2017/ A. Peytavie and C. Bosch

Short Paper

AIR: Anywhere Immersive Reality with User-Perspective Projection

8
1
0
2
c
e
D
1

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
3
2
0
0
.
2
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

JungHyun Byun, SeungHo Chae, YoonSik Yang and TackDon Han

Media System Lab., Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University, Korea, Republic of

Abstract
Projection-based augmented reality (AR) has much potential, but is limited in that it requires burdensome installations and
prone to geometric distortions on display surface. To overcome these limitations, we propose AIR. It can be carried and placed
anywhere to project AR using pan/tilting motors, while providing the user with distortion-free projection of a correct 3D view.

Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS):
I.3.8 [Computer Graphics]: Computer Graphics—Applications
H.5.1 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Multimedia Information Systems—Artiﬁcial, augmented, and virtual realities

1. Introduction

Many augmented reality (AR) applications are built on head-worn
or hand-held see-through displays, accompanied by issues of the
limited ﬁeld of view (FOV) and the user fatigue from bulky equip-
ments [BR05]. Projection-based AR in contrast utilizes a projec-
tor to solve these issues. Located off-site, a projector directly aug-
ments graphics of virtually unlimited sizes and FOV onto physical
objects [Ceb13] immersing users’ surroundings, without diverting
their attention from the real world [BWZ14]. However, these fea-
tures come at a price [BEK05]. First, direct augmentation with pro-
jection is prone to geometric distortion. Second, a detached projec-
tor renders graphics that are inconsistent with the user’s viewpoint.

The most crucial problem with projection AR is that the over-
all quality of AR relies heavily on the characteristics of the sur-
face [RWF98]. A diffuse object with smooth geometry is required
for an ideal projection, but that is rarely the case in projection
AR [RWC∗98]. Thus, the projection area is constrained to the size
and shape of the objects’ surfaces [BR05]. Projection on unideal
surfaces with bumps and gaps would otherwise yield distortions.

Another problem in projection AR as well as most AR systems is
inconsistency between the real scene and rendered graphics. Graph-
ics are rendered on captured images from the perspective of the de-
vice, not the user. The former is called device-perspective rendering
(DPR), and the latter user-perspective rendering (UPR) [TIS13].
DPR diminishes the sense of presence of virtual contents and this
sense diminishes further as the camera-eye discrepancy, in terms
of FOV, distortion, and viewpoint, increases. Because in projection
AR, a projector is located independently of the user [BR05], the
risk of diminished realism is much more severe.

To address these issues and realize immersive projection AR, we
propose Anywhere Immersive Reality (AIR), a novel projection sys-
tem for any environment with user perspective rendering. The pro-
posed system is a steerable platform with two cameras and a pro-

c(cid:13) 2017 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c(cid:13) 2017 The Eurographics Association.

jector. It is designed to be carried and placed anywhere, rotated in
any direction, and project contents even on uneven surfaces, while
providing a correct 3D perspective view without distortions.

2. Related Work

2.1. Immersive Projection Display

In spatially immersive display (SID), users are surrounded by pla-
nar or curved screens, onto which multiple projectors display. Stud-
ies like [CNSD93], or [BJW12] implemented stationary versions
of SID which require users to be at predesignated point for immer-
sion. [BWZ14] and [JSM∗14] extended this approach to a room-
scale, non-planar geometry. Users can move around the room and
be provided with correct 3D virtual views regardless of the surface
geometry. However, since these SID approaches require extensive
workloads of physical installations, off-line calibrations, and many
high-cost hardware, they are not appropriate for the everyday user.

In this study, we also aim to realize an immersive projection sys-
tem, but on an accessible budget. Our system is a pan-tilting plat-
form, on which a projector-camera system for AR is built, with
an additional camera unit for user tracking. Rotating the platform
makes it possible to project virtually anywhere without the neces-
sity of multiple units of costly hardware.

2.2. Portable Projection System

Most works on projection AR have predominantly focused on
infrastructure-based spatial-aware systems, which infer the location
and orientation of the device in 3D space based on the notion of one
or more environmental sensors [RVBB∗06]. Recently, the minia-
turization of pico-projectors made it possible for systems to be
portable, serving as an enabling technology for ubiquitous comput-
ing [Hub14]. For a system to be truly portable, it should be not only

 
 
 
 
 
 
JH. Byun, SH. Chae, YS. Yang & TD. Han / AIR: Anywhere Immersive Reality with User-Perspective Projection

spatially aware, but also geometrically aware, i.e., the system con-
structs the 3D structure of the world, and self-contained [MIK∗12].

3.2. System Flow

We also aim to design such a portable projection system. How-
ever, most of these systems are handheld, which can cause fatigue
and limitation in interactions as users have to hold on to the system
at all times. To solve these problems, the proposed system can be
carried and placed, or held, and provide a seamless display.

2.3. Projection Distortion Correction

Many approaches have been proposed to overcome the effect of
surface geometry on projection. In [RB01] and [XHH13], systems
pre-warp images using the homography between a projector and its
display surface, so that the projected image appears as it is desired.
These systems, however, are limited as it can only correct oblique
images on planar surfaces from a certain ﬁxed device viewpoint.

Both [Pin01] and [WBIH12] utilize pan-tilting platforms for a
rotatable viewpoint, but only the latter can adapt to dynamic en-
vironments and users, and correct complex distortions accordingly.
However, pre-construction of the room geometry is required for the
system, and localization of the user via sound demands even further
installations and calibrations. Beyond these limitations, our system
uses only real-time, raw depth data, and still project immersive,
distortion-free AR content without prior knowledge of the space.

The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

• We propose the mathematical modeling of such a system, from

calibration to implementation.

• We propose the concept of a portable projection system, and its

possible applications.

3. Proposed System

Figure 2: System workﬂow

In this section, we present the mathematical model of AIR, from
calibrations to implementations. We extend the algorithm for a
projector-camera system in [RWC∗98] to incorporate rotatable mo-
tors and an additional camera, and handle dynamic environments
and users. The three core steps to realize user-perspective projec-
tion are i) camera-projector-motor calibration, ii) user-perspective
projection, and iii) distortion correction.

3.2.1. Camera-projector-motor Calibration

AIR consists of two cameras, two motors, and one projector, each
of which have their own coordinate systems. The ﬁrst step is to con-
ﬁgure them in one common world coordinate system. We setup the
origin of the world system as the pose of front-facing camera fac-
ing front, with no rotation. For simplicity, we assume that internal
parameters A f ront and Arear of the front and rear camera are known.

First, we model

the movements of the pan/tilting motors.
Because their rotational axes are not exactly perpendicular and
parallel to the ground, we calculate the rotation matrix R(θ) of
angle θ with an arbitrary, unit axis vector (x, y, z) as


cos θ + x2(1 − cos θ)
yx(1 − cos θ) + z sin θ
zx(1 − cos θ) − y sin θ

xy(1 − cos θ) − z sin θ
cos θ + y2(1 − cos θ)
zy(1 − cos θ) + x sin θ
A 3D point Pworld in world coordinates and its corresponding
Pf ront perceived by the front camera can be modeled as

xz(1 − cos θ) + y sin θ
yz(1 − cos θ) − x sin θ
cos θ + z2(1 − cos θ)

 .





Figure 1: Proposed (a) system model and (b) its prototype

3.1. System Overview

Figure 1 describes the system model of AIR. The proposed system
is based on a projector-camera system. It is held up by a platform, to
which servo motors are attached vertically and horizontally, so that
it can pan or tilt freely. We added a rear-facing RGB-D camera that
serves as a dedicated user tracker for user-perspective rendering.

We built a prototype on a personal computer with an Intel i7-
3770 CPU, 8GB RAM, and an NVIDIA GTX 960 GPU. The sys-
tem consists of an Epson projector, a Microsoft Kinect v2, a Mi-
crosoft Kinect 360, servo motors, and an Arduino board for control.

Pworld = R(β)R(α)Pf ront ,

(1)

with panning angle α and tilting β. Matrix product R(β)R(α) can
be thought of as external parameters of the front camera, denoted
as Tf ront→ world. We use a checkerboard of a known size at a ﬁxed
pose and solve for x, y, z with least mean square method for two
rotational axes while rotating the system about each of those axes.

The next step is the calibration of the rear-facing camera. The
projector-camera system is rotated to a certain angle so that there
is enough overlap between the front camera and rear camera for
calibration. Using the coordinates of the checkerboard in equation 1
as the baseline, the relations among the world, front camera, and
rear camera coordinate systems can be expressed as

Pworld = Trear→ worldPrear = R(β)R(α)Pf ront .

(2)

Finally, the calibration between the front-facing RGB-D cam-
era and the projector is performed. We used the calibration method

c(cid:13) 2017 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c(cid:13) 2017 The Eurographics Association.

JH. Byun, SH. Chae, YS. Yang & TD. Han / AIR: Anywhere Immersive Reality with User-Perspective Projection

Figure 3: (a) AIR provides the user with correct projection of (b) a 3D perspective view. (c) The projection is pre-warped to compensate for
distortions. (d) Cameras and a projector are registered in world. Applications for AIR include (e) VR Cave and (f) architecture design.

proposed in [KMK07]. A projector can be thought of as a reverse-
camera model with the same parameters. The projector projects
chessboards, xpro j, of various, pre-known sizes to different planar
surfaces. Applying standard projective geometry, we obtain

sxpro j = Apro jTf ront→ pro jPf ront .

(3)

Since depth data Pf ront are available, we can solve for the internal
parameters of projector Apro j and external parameters Tf ront→ pro j
of the rotations and translations with regard to the front camera.

3.2.2. User-Perspective Projection

Providing the user with a correct 3D perspective view and motion
parallax is the key factor in realizing immersive AR. We setup the
equation of user-perspective rendering [TIS13]. Instead of an ac-
tual tablet, here the screen is located in the virtual world. The sys-
tem tracks poses of the user’s head from the rear camera. The user’s
viewpoint is denoted as Euser = [ex, ey, ez]T , and its perspective pro-
jection matrix Auser. The corresponding equation is as follows:

Aupr = AuserTworld→ rear, where Auser =





−ez 0 ex 0
0 −ez ey 0
0 1 −ez
0



 . (4)

3.2.3. Distortion Correction

Unlike mobile AR that uses a tablet screen, we use an off-site pro-
jector. This causes discrepancies in viewpoints, projection matrices
and so on, which result in distorted projection. To correct these
distortions, we implemented a two-pass rendering pipeline for pro-
jective texture mapping [Eve01], where we simulate the modeling
of a calibrated projector-camera system. First, the system receives
the geometry of the real world, and virtual objects are rendered
from the user’s perspective. Then, the rendered result is used as the
texture to be mapped projectively onto the geometry. The ﬁnal ren-
dering is correct in terms of both user-perspective and geometric
distortions. Figure 2 shows the overall process.

3.3. Applications

ation of multiple users. Figure 3 shows our early implementation of
AIR including 360 panorama and pipe installation applications.

Previously to be immersed in 360 images, systems like VR-
CAVE [CNSD93] were needed, which require large spaces,
screens, and multiple projectors, or bulky head mounted displays
(HMD), which restrict shared experiences. To ease these limita-
tions, we developed a 360 panorama viewer (Figure 3(e)) on AIR
with minimum hardware. It can project correct rotating views of a
360 image on surfaces and users can enjoy them together.

Another ﬁeld in which AIR can be utilized is architecture design
(Figure 3(f)). Previous HMD-based systems required off-line re-
construction of the room geometry and forced solo experience. In
contrast, AIR system can be placed on site and project actual-scale
virtual objects, such as a pipe. Clients and designers together can
get a good sense of how it will turn out before installation.

4. Evaluation and Results

In [BJW12] to evaluate the effect of distortion correction, authors
computed root mean square errors of absolute differences of cor-
rected projections pixel-by-pixel. However, as stated in the paper,
directly measuring pixel differences is susceptible to varying color
conditions, while our only concern here is geometric distortion.

To measure errors without the inﬂuence of color conditions,
we compute differences in structural compositions, point-by-point.
First, we setup the base image by projecting a checkerboard on
a planar surface. Then, we placed different obstacles before the
surface and computed the correct projections. We matched corre-
sponding corner points Pi of the checkerboards with those of the
base image and computed the dislocations of the pixels using

1
N

N
∑
i=1

|Pbase − Pi|, where N: the number of corners.

(5)

Figure 4 shows results of the evaluation. Only projection regions of
original 1920 by 1080 images are cropped. Numbers on the caption
are average dislocation errors in pixel.

In this section, we describe some possible applications for AIR.
Projection-based AR has a lot of potentials, as it can directly aug-
ment physical objects with graphics, promoting interactive cooper-

We tested our method on obstacles of various geometric at-
tributes. Results show that our method corrects distortions in pro-
jection effectively even on (d), (e) complex geometry and (f) a

c(cid:13) 2017 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c(cid:13) 2017 The Eurographics Association.

JH. Byun, SH. Chae, YS. Yang & TD. Han / AIR: Anywhere Immersive Reality with User-Perspective Projection

[BWZ14] BENKO H., WILSON A. D., ZANNIER F.: Dyadic projected
In Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM
spatial augmented reality.
symposium on User interface software and technology (2014), ACM,
pp. 645–655. 1

[Ceb13] CEBULLA A.: Projection-based augmented reality. ETH Zurich

(2013). 1

[CNSD93] CRUZ-NEIRA C., SANDIN D. J., DEFANTI T. A.: Surround-
screen projection-based virtual reality: the design and implementation of
In Proceedings of the 20th annual conference on Computer
the cave.
graphics and interactive techniques (1993), ACM, pp. 135–142. 1, 3

[Eve01] EVERITT C.: Projective texture mapping. White paper, NVidia

Corporation 4 (2001). 3

[Hub14] HUBER J.: A research overview of mobile projected user inter-

faces. Informatik-Spektrum 37, 5 (2014), 464–473. 1

[JSM∗14]

JONES B., SODHI R., MURDOCK M., MEHRA R., BENKO
H., WILSON A., OFEK E., MACINTYRE B., RAGHUVANSHI N.,
SHAPIRA L.: Roomalive: magical experiences enabled by scalable,
adaptive projector-camera units. In Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology (2014), ACM,
pp. 637–644. 1

[KMK07] KIMURA M., MOCHIMARU M., KANADE T.: Projector cal-
In 2007 IEEE
ibration using arbitrary planes and calibrated camera.
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2007), IEEE,
pp. 1–2. 3

[MIK∗12] MOLYNEAUX D., IZADI S., KIM D., HILLIGES O., HODGES
S., CAO X., BUTLER A., GELLERSEN H.:
Interactive environment-
aware handheld projectors for pervasive computing spaces. In Interna-
tional Conference on Pervasive Computing (2012), Springer, pp. 197–
215. 2

[Pin01] PINHANEZ C.: The everywhere displays projector: A device to
create ubiquitous graphical interfaces. In International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing (2001), Springer, pp. 315–331. 2

[RB01] RASKAR R., BEARDSLEY P.: A self-correcting projector.

In
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2001. CVPR 2001. Proceed-
ings of the 2001 IEEE Computer Society Conference on (2001), vol. 2,
IEEE, pp. II–504. 2

[RVBB∗06] RASKAR R., VAN BAAR

WILLWACHER T., RAO S., FORLINES C.:
aware and self-conﬁguring projectors.
Courses (2006), ACM, p. 7. 1

J., BEARDSLEY

P.,
ilamps: geometrically
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2006

[RWC∗98] RASKAR R., WELCH G., CUTTS M., LAKE A., STESIN L.,
FUCHS H.: The ofﬁce of the future: A uniﬁed approach to image-
In Proceedings of
based modeling and spatially immersive displays.
the 25th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive tech-
niques (1998), ACM, pp. 179–188. 1, 2

[RWF98] RASKAR R., WELCH G., FUCHS H.: Spatially augmented re-
ality. In First IEEE Workshop on Augmented Reality (IWAR 98) (1998),
Citeseer, pp. 11–20. 1

[SLK15] SARBOLANDI H., LEFLOCH D., KOLB A.: Kinect range sens-
ing: Structured-light versus time-of-ﬂight kinect. Computer Vision and
Image Understanding 139 (2015), 1–20. 4

[TIS13] TOMIOKA M., IKEDA S., SATO K.: Approximated user-
perspective rendering in tablet-based augmented reality. In Mixed and
Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2013 IEEE International Symposium on
(2013), IEEE, pp. 21–28. 1, 3

[WBIH12] WILSON A., BENKO H., IZADI S., HILLIGES O.: Steerable
augmented reality with the beamatron. In Proceedings of the 25th an-
nual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology (2012),
ACM, pp. 413–422. 2

[XHH13] XIAO R., HARRISON C., HUDSON S. E.: Worldkit: rapid and
easy creation of ad-hoc interactive applications on everyday surfaces. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (2013), ACM, pp. 879–888. 2

c(cid:13) 2017 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c(cid:13) 2017 The Eurographics Association.

Figure 4: Evaluation results of ﬁve obstacles with the base image.
Corner points of the checkerboards are denoted in red dots.

freely deformable object. Rigid (b) and curved geometry (c) caused
the highest errors. This is an expected result, as objects with a ﬂat
angle to the camera lead to a complete lack of depth information.
Speciﬁcally, for angles between 10◦and 30◦the Kinect delivers up
to 100% invalid pixel [SLK15]. As one can see in (b) and (c), dis-
locations were greatest on slopes that are almost parallel to the
depth camera (red dotted region), resulting in wrong depth value
and wrong distortion correction accordingly. Since this is innate
limitation of the Kinect, we leave this problem as our future work.

5. Conclusion and Future Work

We presented AIR, a steerable projection system for anywhere im-
mersive reality. Our system can be carried, placed, and project any-
where without prior knowledge of the room geometry, and still de-
liver a correct 3D view of the virtual world to the user. We also
implemented two applications in which the AIR system would be
useful. An evaluation on projection distortion correction was con-
ducted and the results conﬁrm the usability of AIR.

We intend to further the research on AIR by integrating the sys-
tem with natural user interactions so that users can be immersed
in and interact with an AR space naturally and intuitively. We also
intend to broaden and validate our search for application scenarios.

6. Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of
Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIP) (No.
NRF-2015R1A2A1A10055673).

References

[BEK05] BIMBER O., EMMERLING A., KLEMMER T.: Embedded en-
tertainment with smart projectors. Computer 38, 1 (2005), 48–55. 1

[BJW12] BENKO H., JOTA R., WILSON A.: Miragetable: freehand in-
teraction on a projected augmented reality tabletop. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems (2012),
ACM, pp. 199–208. 1, 3

[BR05] BIMBER O., RASKAR R.: Spatial augmented reality: merging

real and virtual worlds. CRC press, 2005. 1

