8
1
0
2
c
e
D
6

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
9
8
4
2
0
.
2
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Research in Astron. Astrophys. 20XX Vol. X No. XX, 000–000
http://www.raa-journal.org
(LATEX: ms.tex; printed on May 30, 2022; 8:03)

http://www.iop.org/journals/raa

Research in
Astronomy and
Astrophysics

Properties of ﬁlament in Solar cycle 20-23 from McIntosh database

Rakesh Mazumder1

1Center of Excellence in Space Sciences India, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
Kolkata, Mohanpur 741246, West Bengal, India

Received 20XX Month Day; accepted 20XX Month Day

Abstract Filament is a cool, dense structure suspended in the solar corona. The eruption
of a ﬁlament is often associated with coronal mass ejection (CME), which has an adverse
effect on space weather. Hence, the study of ﬁlament has attracted much attention in the
recent past. The tilt angle of active region (AR) magnetic bipoles is a crucial parameter
in the context of the solar dynamo. It governs the conversion efﬁciency of the toroidal
magnetic ﬁeld to poloidal magnetic ﬁeld. The ﬁlament always forms over the Polarity
Inversion Lines (PILs). So the study of tilt angles of the ﬁlament can provide valuable
information about generation of magnetic ﬁeld in the Sun. We study the tilt angle of ﬁla-
ments and other properties of it using McIntosh archive data. We ﬁt a straight line to each
ﬁlament to estimate its tilt angle. We study the variation of mean tilt angle with time. The
latitude distribution of positive tilt angle ﬁlaments and negative tilt angle ﬁlaments reveal
that there is a dominance of positive tilt angle ﬁlaments in the southern hemisphere and
negative tilt angle ﬁlaments dominate in the northern hemisphere. We study the variation
of the mean tilt angle for low and high latitude separately. Study of temporal variation
of ﬁlament number reveals that total ﬁlament number and low latitude ﬁlament number
varies cyclically, in phase with the solar cycle. The number of ﬁlaments in high latitude
is less, and they also show a cyclic pattern in temporal variation. We also study the north-
south asymmetry of ﬁlament for different latitude criteria.

Key words: Sun: ﬁlaments, prominences, Sun: magnetic ﬁelds, Sun: corona, Sun: activ-
ity, (Sun:) sunspots

1 INTRODUCTION

Filaments are cool and dense structures suspended in the solar corona. They appear as dark ﬁlamentary
structures when seen on disk of the Sun. The same feature appears bright when observed in the off limb
region and are known as prominence for historical reasons. Filament always appears in the vicinity of
Polarity Inversion Lines (PILs) (also known as neutral lines) (Martin, 1998). Filament eruption is often
associated with coronal mass ejection (CME), which is hazardous for space weather. Hence, the study
of the ﬁlament is important from the perspective of space weather research (Gopalswamy et al., 2003;
Gilbert et al., 2000; Jing et al., 2004). Filaments are primarily observed in Hα line. Systematic Hα obser-
vations have started since 1915 at the Kodaikanal Observatory (India), 1919 at the Meudon Observatory
(France) (spectroscopic observations), and 1959 at the Kislovodsk Mountain Astronomical Station of
the Main (Pulkovo) Astronomical Observatory of Russian Academy of Sciences. Tlatov et al. (2016) has
studied more than eight solar cycles’ data of ﬁlaments using Meudon observatory and Kislovodsk moun-
tain station synoptic maps. Chatterjee et al. (2017) has studied ﬁlament properties using Kodaikanal

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Mazumder

Observatory (India) data for nine solar cycles. Hao et al. (2015) has studied properties of ﬁlaments us-
ing data from Big Bear Solar Observatory (BBSO) from 1988 to 2013 and Mazumder et al. (2018) has
studied properties of ﬁlaments using McIntosh archive data from 1967 to 2009.

The ﬁlaments are distributed uniformly in longitude (Mazumder et al., 2018). However, the
distribution of ﬁlaments in latitude is not uniform. A bimodal nature in latitudinal distribution of
ﬁlaments is observed (Hao et al., 2015; Mazumder et al., 2018). Tlatov et al. (2016), Chatterjee et al.
(2017), Hao et al. (2015), and Mazumder et al. (2018) have reported a butterﬂy structure in the temporal
variation of the latitudinal distribution of ﬁlaments. The butterﬂy diagram is similar to that of sunspot
except that the spread in latitude is broader in case of ﬁlaments. They have also reported the rush to
the pole of ﬁlaments during the maxima of the solar cycle. The variation of ﬁlament number is found
to be cyclic in close proximity to sunspot number variation (Hao et al., 2015; Li et al., 2010). The
total ﬁlament length in the Carrington map is also found to vary cyclically with time (Tlatov et al.,
2016; Mazumder et al., 2018). Mazumder et al. (2018) further classiﬁed the ﬁlaments as associated and
unassociated to solar activity belt according to their position inside or outside the sunspot activity belt
respectively. They have found the variation in total length of the ﬁlaments is correlated with variation
in sunspot area. However, the temporal variation of length of ﬁlaments unassociated with solar activity
belt is uncorrelated with variation of sunspot area.

The tilt angle of the active region (AR) is a very crucial parameter in the solar dynamo. The tilt angle
of active region (AR) magnetic bipoles governs the conversion efﬁciency of the toroidal magnetic ﬁeld to
poloidal magnetic ﬁeld (Tlatov et al., 2013). Filaments always form over PILs. So the analysis of the tilt
angle of ﬁlaments can give us important insights into the mechanism of the generation of the magnetic
ﬁeld of the Sun. Average tilt angle of ﬁlaments are found to decrease from the equator towards the pole
for both positive tilt and negative tilt (Tlatov et al., 2016; Mazumder et al., 2018) which is consistent
with famous Joy’s law of sunspot pair (Hale et al., 1919). The tilt angle of ﬁlament was observed to
be negative in the northern hemisphere and positive in the southern hemisphere for different length and
sunspot belt association criteria by Mazumder et al. (2018). Following this observation, they concluded
that the origin of most of the ﬁlaments are from large-scale magnetic ﬁeld structure and not from the
active region (AR). However, the geometry of the inter-AR ﬁlament as depicted by Martens & Zwaan
(2001) can also contribute to this apparently unexpected tilt angle orientation in both hemispheres. The
hemispheric asymmetry of the ﬁlament number was studied, and they were found to be asymmetric at
different phases of the solar cycle (Mazumder et al., 2018; Hao et al., 2015; Kong et al., 2015; Li et al.,
2010, 2003).

The mean tilt angle variation with time is observed to follow a solar cycle like variation (Tlatov
et al., 2016). The latitudinal distribution of positive and negative tilt angles of ﬁlaments are found to
behave differently (Tlatov et al., 2016). The time latitude distribution of the ﬁlaments’ tilt angle shows
a positive tilt dominance in mid-latitude and a negative tilt dominance in higher latitude (Tlatov et al.,
2016).

We have organized the paper as follows. In section 2, we describe the data used and discuss the
methods implemented to analyze the data. In section 3, we analyze the results obtained. In section 4, we
summarize our work.

2 DATA AND METHODS

Patrick S McIntosh, a scientist of NOAAs Space Environment Center in Boulder, had drawn the
Carrington maps of the Sun using the various ground as well as space-based satellite data from April
1967 till July 2009. The hand-drawn maps are archived and digitized by McIntosh project (a Boston
College/NOAA/NCAR collaboration, funded by the NSF) at NOAA/NCEI. The data are stored in both
image and ﬁts format and also have been made available online1. For our analysis, we have used level 3
ﬁts ﬁle from McIntosh archive (Gibson et al., 2017; Webb et al., 2017).

1 https://www2.hao.ucar.edu/mcIntosh-archive/four-cycles-solar-synoptic-maps

Properties of ﬁlament from McIntosh database

3

Fig. 1: Level 3 image of Carrington rotation number 1916 in McIntosh archive. Here, gray and light
blue patches represent the negative and positive polarity magnetic ﬁelds respectively. The red and dark
blue patches represent the negative and positive coronal holes respectively. Green and light green lines
represent the ﬁlaments, and Polarity Inversion Lines (PILs) respectively.

Level 3 image of the Carrington rotation number 1916 is presented in Figure 1. The Carrington
maps contain spatial information of various solar features namely, sunspots, plages, ﬁlaments, coronal
holes and Polarity Inversion Lines (PILs). In this work, we have studied different properties of ﬁlaments.
There are three big gaps in the data, ﬁrst from June 1974 to July 1978, second from October 1991 to
January 1994, and the ﬁnal from April 1994 to May 1996. We have reduced the level 3 ﬁts ﬁles using
Interactive Data Language (IDL) and obtained the spatial information of various solar features, namely,
sunspots, plages, ﬁlaments, coronal holes, and Polarity Inversion Lines (PILs). In this study, we are
interested in ﬁlaments alone. So we produce Carrington map that contains only the ﬁlament. In total
available 442 Carrington maps during April 1967 to July 2009, we have detected 67373 ﬁlaments. We
ﬁt a straight line to each ﬁlament. The angle that the straight line makes with the equator is deﬁned as
the tilt angle of that particular ﬁlament. One sample image of Carrington map 1552 containing the only
ﬁlament with the ﬁtted straight line is shown in Figure 2. The ﬁlaments are represented by green lines,
and the ﬁtted straight lines are represented by red lines. We observe that the ﬁtting is good except for a
few cases which can be ignored for statistical analysis. We calculate ﬁlament length using the following
formula

(cid:88)

(cid:113)

L =

n

R2

(cid:12)δθ2 + R2

(cid:12)Cos2θδφ2

(1)

where L is ﬁlament’s length, R(cid:12) is the solar radius, the symbols θ and φ represent the latitude and
longitude of a particular pixel respectively, and n is the total number of pixels associated with the
ﬁlament’s structure. The quantities δθ and δφ are latitudinal and longitudinal differences between two

4

Mazumder

Fig. 2: Fitting of ﬁlaments by straight lines in a sample Carrington map (Carrington number 1552). The
green lines represent ﬁlaments. The red lines represent ﬁtted straight lines.

adjacent pixels, respectively. We add the lengths of all the ﬁlaments in a Carrington map to get the
total length of the all ﬁlaments in it. The sunspot data are taken from the Royal Greenwich Observatory
(RGO) and US Air Force (USAF) - Solar Optical Observing Network (SOON) database.

3 ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

Filament always appears in the vicinity of PILs (Martin, 1998). Filament formation is closely related
to generation of magnetic ﬁeld in the Sun. Figure 3 represents the variation of ﬁlament number with
time. The black line shows the variation of the total ﬁlament number with time. The green line depicts
the variation of low latitude ﬁlament number with time. The red line represents the variation of high
latitude ﬁlament number with time. The variation of sunspot area is depicted by the orange dashed line.
We notice a cyclic variation of the total ﬁlament number and low latitude ﬁlament number which is in
phase with the sunspot area variation. The number of high latitude ﬁlaments is less, but they also show
a cyclic variation (Li et al., 2007).

The tilt angle of the active region (AR) is a very crucial parameter in the solar dynamo. The tilt
angle of active region (AR) magnetic bipoles governs the conversion efﬁciency of the toroidal magnetic
ﬁeld to poloidal magnetic ﬁeld (Tlatov et al., 2013). Filaments always form over PILs. Thus, the
analysis of the tilt angle of ﬁlaments can give us important insights into the magnetic ﬁeld generation
mechanism inside the Sun. Here, we carry out a detailed analysis of the ﬁlaments’ tilt angle. Figure 4
represents the histogram of the ﬁlament tilt angle. Out of a total 67373 ﬁlaments, 33415 ﬁlaments have
positive tilt angle, and 33622 ﬁlaments have negative tilt angle. So, in our database, there are 207 more
ﬁlaments which have a negative tilt angle, when compared to ﬁlaments which have positive tilt angle.

Properties of ﬁlament from McIntosh database

5

Fig. 3: Filament number variation with time. The black line shows the variation in total number of
ﬁlament with time. The green line depicts the variation of low latitude ﬁlament number with time. The
red line represents the variation of high latitude ﬁlament number with time. The sunspot area variation
is depicted by the orange dashed line.

Figure 5 shows the latitudinal distribution of positive tilt angle ﬁlaments. Out of total 33415 positive
tilt angle ﬁlaments, 12113 ﬁlaments are in the northern hemisphere, and 21297 ﬁlaments are in the
southern hemisphere. Figure 6 shows the latitudinal distribution of negative tilt angle. Out of 33622
total negative tilt angle ﬁlaments, 20305 ﬁlaments are in the northern hemisphere, and 13315 ﬁlaments
are in the southern hemisphere. So there exists a dominance of negative tilt angle in the northern
hemisphere while positive tilt angle dominates in the southern hemisphere. The ﬁndings are consistent
with earlier ﬁndings by Mazumder et al. (2018).

Figure 7 depicts the variation of the mean tilt angle with time. We calculate mean of all tilt angles
present in a particular Carrington map and get the mean tilt angle. The black curve in Figure 7 represents
the variation of the mean tilt angle with time. The red line depicts the temporal variation of the mean
tilt angle averaged over 13 Carrington rotations. We further calculate the average tilt angle in each solar
cycle. The green cross represents solar cycle average mean tilt angle. We further investigate the lower
latitude and higher latitude ﬁlaments’ mean tilt angle separately. We deﬁne lower latitude ﬁlaments to be
ﬁlaments situated within latitude ±40◦ ( |θ| < 40◦) and we deﬁne higher latitude ﬁlament as ﬁlaments
having latitude either greater than 50◦ or ﬁlaments having latitude less than −50◦ (|θ| > 50◦). The
total number of low latitude ﬁlaments is 51210, and the total number of high latitude ﬁlaments is 7564.
Figure 8 depicts the variation of low latitude mean tilt angle with time. The black line shows the low
latitude mean tilt angle variation with time. The red line shows the temporal variation of low latitude tilt

6

Mazumder

Fig. 4: Histogram of the tilt angle of ﬁlaments. The negative tilt angle is excess in comparison to positive
tilt angle.

angle averaged over 13 Carrington rotations. The green cross represents solar cycle average mean tilt
angle in low latitude. Figure 9 depicts the variation of high latitude mean tilt angle with time. The black
line shows high latitude mean tilt angle variation with time. The red line shows the temporal variation
of high latitude tilt angle averaged over 13 Carrington rotations. The green cross represents solar cycle
average mean tilt angle in high latitude.

Filament formation is not symmetric in two hemispheres of the Sun. Earlier studies reported the
north-south asymmetry of ﬁlament number (Hao et al., 2015; Kong et al., 2015; Li et al., 2010, 2003), but
we believe that total ﬁlament length captures the magnetic ﬁeld generation information in the Sun better
than the ﬁlament number (Mazumder et al., 2018). So we use the total ﬁlament length in each Carrington
rotation to calculate the north-south asymmetry of the ﬁlament. We deﬁne north-south asymmetry of
sunspot area Asp as

Asp =

Nsp − Ssp
Nsp + Ssp

(2)

where Nsp and Ssp are the total area of the sunspots in the northern and the southern hemispheres,
respectively. If Asp > 0, the total sunspot area in the northern hemisphere dominates than that in the
southern hemisphere and if Asp < 0, the total sunspot area in the southern hemisphere dominates than
that in the northern hemisphere. We deﬁne north-south asymmetry of the ﬁlament (Af il) as

Af il =

Nf il − Sf il
Nf il + Sf il

(3)

where Nf il and Sf il are the total ﬁlament length in northern and southern hemisphere, respectively.
If Af il > 0, the total ﬁlament length in the northern hemisphere dominates than that in the southern
hemisphere and if Af il < 0, the total ﬁlament length in the southern hemisphere dominates than that in
the northern hemisphere.

Figure 10 depicts north-south asymmetry of the ﬁlament length and sunspot area for different lat-
itude criteria. The blue cross represents the north-south asymmetry of all ﬁlaments. The green cross
represents the north-south asymmetry of low latitude ﬁlaments. The red cross represents the north-south

−80−60−40−2002040608002000400060008000100001200014000Tilt angle (in degrees)Number of occurrencesProperties of ﬁlament from McIntosh database

7

Fig. 5: Histogram of latitude of ﬁlaments having positive tilt angle. Southern hemisphere has more pos-
itive tilt angle ﬁlaments than northern hemisphere.

asymmetry of high latitude ﬁlaments. The north-south asymmetry of sunspot area is shown by ﬁlled
orange circles. The temporal variation of north-south asymmetry of the total ﬁlaments and low lati-
tude ﬁlaments show a sunspot area north-south asymmetry like behaviour. The north-south asymmetry
of high latitude ﬁlament ﬂuctuates and does not show any correspondence to sunspot area north-south
asymmetry. However, the north-south asymmetry of high latitude ﬁlaments shows dominance of north-
ern hemisphere in solar cycle 20 whereas, in the solar cycles 21, 22 and 23, the southern hemisphere
shows a dominant character (Li et al. 2009).

4 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

We have analyzed 442 Carrington maps from MacIntosh database and detected 67373 ﬁlaments. Each
ﬁlament is ﬁtted with a straight line, and the tilt angle (angle which the straight line makes with equator)
is estimated. We have noticed a cyclic variation of the total ﬁlament number as well as in low latitude
and high latitude ﬁlament numbers (see Figure 3). A detailed analysis of tilt angles of the ﬁlament is
carried out in this work. Figure 2 shows the example of ﬁtting of the ﬁlament (depicted by green lines)
with the straight line (depicted by red straight lines) for the Carrington map 1552. The histogram of
the tilt angle of all ﬁlaments are plotted (see Figure 4), and we have found an excess of 207 negative
tilt angle ﬁlaments as compared to the positive tilt angle ﬁlaments. Histogram of the latitude of positive
tilt angle ﬁlament reveals that positive tilt angle is dominant in the southern hemisphere (see Figure 5).
Histogram of the latitude of negative tilt angle ﬁlament reveals that negative tilt angle is dominant in
the northern hemisphere (see Figure 6). The ﬁndings are consistent with an earlier report (Mazumder
et al., 2018) and contradict our expectation of positive tilt angle dominance in the northern hemisphere

8

Mazumder

Fig. 6: Histogram of the latitude of ﬁlaments having negative tilt angle. Northern hemisphere has more
negative tilt angle ﬁlaments than southern hemisphere.

and negative tilt angle dominance in the southern hemisphere according to Hale’s polarity law in the
two hemispheres (Hale et al., 1919). It can happen due to the contribution of inter-AR ﬁlament forma-
tion geometry explained by (Martens & Zwaan, 2001). Another possible explanation is that more ﬁla-
ments are formed from large-scale magnetic ﬁeld structure than from the intra-AR ﬁlament (Mazumder
et al., 2018). We examined the variation of mean tilt angle (mean of the tilt angle of all ﬁlaments in a
Carrington map) and cycle-averaged tilt angle (see Figure 7). We also studied mean tilt angle variation
in low latitude (|θ| < 40◦) and high latitude (|θ| > 50◦) (see Figure 8 and Figure 9). Similar analysis
carried out by Tlatov et al. (2016) (from different database) had more extended and continuous data. So
we are skeptical about comparing our result to their ﬁndings. The north-south asymmetry of the total
ﬁlament, low latitude ﬁlament, and high latitude ﬁlament reveals a sunspot area north-south asymmetry
like behaviour in case of the total ﬁlament and low latitude ﬁlament (see Figure 10). The north-south
asymmetry of high latitude ﬁlament ﬂuctuates and does not show any correspondence to sunspot area
north-south asymmetry. However, the north-south asymmetry of high latitude ﬁlaments shows a domi-
nance of northern hemisphere in solar cycle 20 whereas in the solar cycles 21, 22 and 23 the southern
hemisphere shows a dominant character (Li et al., 2009).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We are thankful to Patrick S. McIntosh, from NOAA’s Space Environment Center in Boulder for
developing the archive of hand-drawn Carrington maps using both ground-based and satellite observa-
tions. We are also grateful to the team of McIntosh archive project (a Boston College/NOAA/NCAR
collaboration, funded by the NSF), NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information for creating

Properties of ﬁlament from McIntosh database

9

Fig. 7: Mean tilt angle variation with time. The black line shows the time variation of the mean tilt angle.
The red line depicts temporal variation of the mean tilt angle averaged over 13 Carrington rotations. The
green cross represent solar cycle average mean tilt angle.

a digital archive of McIntosh Carrington maps and make it available online. R.M. acknowledges the
grant from the University Grant Commission, Government of India and CESSI, IISER Kolkata, India.

References

Chatterjee, S., Hegde, M., Banerjee, D., & Ravindra, B. 2017, ApJ, 849, 44
Gibson, S. E., Webb, D., Hewins, I. M., et al. 2017, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 328, Living Around Active

Stars, ed. D. Nandy, A. Valio, & P. Petit, 93

Gilbert, H. R., Holzer, T. E., Burkepile, J. T., & Hundhausen, A. J. 2000, ApJ, 537, 503
Gopalswamy, N., Shimojo, M., Lu, W., et al. 2003, ApJ, 586, 562
Hale, G. E., Ellerman, F., Nicholson, S. B., & Joy, A. H. 1919, ApJ, 49, 153
Hao, Q., Fang, C., Cao, W., & Chen, P. F. 2015, ApJS, 221, 33
Jing, J., Yurchyshyn, V. B., Yang, G., Xu, Y., & Wang, H. 2004, ApJ, 614, 1054
Kong, D.-F., Qu, Z.-N., & Guo, Q.-L. 2015, Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics, 15, 77
Li, K. J., Gao, P. X., Zhan, L. S., Shi, X. J., & Zhu, W. W. 2009, MNRAS, 394, 231
Li, K. J., Liu, X. H., Gao, P. X., & Zhan, L. S. 2010, New Astron., 15, 346
Li, K. J., Liu, X. H., Zhan, L. S., et al. 2003, New Astron., 8, 655
Li, K. J., Mu, J., & Li, Q. X. 2007, MNRAS, 376, L39
Martens, P. C., & Zwaan, C. 2001, ApJ, 558, 872
Martin, S. F. 1998, Sol. Phys., 182, 107
Mazumder, R., Bhowmik, P., & Nandy, D. 2018, ApJ, 868, 52

10

Mazumder

Fig. 8: Mean tilt angle variation of low latitude ﬁlament with time. Black line depicts the low latitude
mean tilt angle variation with time. The red line shows the temporal variation of low latitude mean tilt
angle averaged over 13 Carrington rotations. The green cross represents solar cycle average mean tilt
angle.

Tlatov, A. G., Kuzanyan, K. M., & Vasil’yeva, V. V. 2016, Sol. Phys., 291, 1115
Tlatov, A., Illarionov, E., Sokoloff, D., & Pipin, V. 2013, MNRAS, 432, 2975
Webb, D. F., Gibson, S. E., Hewins, I. M., et al. 2017, Space Weather, n/a, 2017SW001740

Properties of ﬁlament from McIntosh database

11

Fig. 9: Mean tilt angle variation of high latitude ﬁlament with time. Black line depicts the high latitude
mean tilt angle variation with time. The red line shows the temporal variation of high latitude mean tilt
angle averaged over 13 Carrington rotations. The green cross represents solar cycle average mean tilt
angle.

12

Mazumder

Fig. 10: Hemispheric asymmetry of ﬁlament and sunspot area. The blue cross represents the north-
south asymmetry of all ﬁlaments. The green cross represents the north-south asymmetry of low latitude
ﬁlament. The red cross represents the north-south asymmetry of high latitude ﬁlament. The north-south
asymmetry of sunspot area is depicted by ﬁlled orange circles.

