9
1
0
2

n
a
J

6
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
4
7
1
2
0
.
2
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Accepted version December 30, 2018
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX62

Driving the Beat: Time-Resolved Spectra of the White Dwarf Pulsar AR Scorpii

Peter Garnavich,1 Colin Littlefield,1 Stella Kafka,2 Mark Kennedy,3 Paul Callanan,4 Dinshaw S. Balsara,1
and Maxim Lyutikov5

1Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
2American Association of Variable Star Observers, Cambridge, MA
3University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
4Department of Physics, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
5Department of Physics and Astronomy, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907 USA

(Received December 4, 2018; Accepted December 27, 2018)

Accepted for Publication in The Astrophysical Journal

ABSTRACT

We obtained high temporal resolution spectroscopy of the unusual binary system AR Sco covering
nearly an orbit. The Hα emission shows a complex line structure similar to that seen in some polars
during quiescence. Such emission is thought to be due to long-lived prominences originating on the
red dwarf. A diﬀerence between AR Sco and these other systems is that the white dwarf in AR Sco
is rapidly spinning relative to the orbital period. ”Slingshot” prominences stable at 3 to 5 stellar
radii require surface magnetic ﬁelds between 100 and 500 G. This is comparable to the estimated WD
magnetic ﬁeld strength near the surface of the secondary. Our time-resolved spectra also show emission
ﬂuxes, line equivalent widths, and continuum color varying over the orbit and the beat/spin periods of
the system. During much of the orbit, the optical spectral variations are consistent with synchrotron
emission with the highest energy electrons cooling between pulses. On the time-scale of the beat/spin
period we detect red and blue-shifted Hα emission ﬂashes that reach velocities of 700 km s−1. Red-
shifted Balmer emission ﬂashes are correlated with the bright phases of the continuum beat pulses
while blue-shifted ﬂashes appear to prefer the time of minimum in the beat light curve. We propose
that much of the energy generated in AR Sco comes from fast magnetic reconnection events occurring
near the inward face of the secondary and we show that the energy generated by magnetic reconnection
can account for the observed excess luminosity from the system.

Keywords: stars: individual (AR Sco) – novae, cataclysmic variables – stars: magnetic ﬁeld – white

dwarfs – binaries: close

1. INTRODUCTION

The unique variable AR Scorpii (AR Sco) displays
large-amplitude, highly periodic pulsations across the
electromagnetic spectrum on a time scale of minutes
(Marsh et al. 2016; Takata et al. 2018; Marcote et al.
2017; Stanway et al. 2018). A slower modulation at
the binary system’s 3.56-h orbital period is also read-
ily seen in the light curves (Marsh et al. 2016; Stiller et
al. 2018). The strongest pulses of optical light are seen
at a period of 1.97 minutes and appear to be a side-

Corresponding author: Peter Garnavich
pgarnavi@nd.edu

band or beat between the 1.95 minute spin period of the
white dwarf (WD) primary and the orbit (Marsh et al.
2016). Unlike typical cataclysmic variable stars (CVs),
there appears to be little accretion on to the WD from
its M-dwarf companion (Marsh et al. 2016; Takata et al.
2017), meaning gravitational potenitial energy is not the
source of the emission. Instead, AR Sco has been called
a white-dwarf pulsar because its strong light variations
consist of synchrotron radiation apparently powered by
the spin-down of its highly magnetized ((cid:46) 500 MG) WD,
similar to neutron-star pulsars (Buckley et al. 2017).
The spin-down rate has been challenged by Potter &
Buckley (2018), placing the WD-pulsar model in jeop-
ardy. However, Stiller et al. (2018) used a three-year

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Garnavich et al.

baseline to measure a spin period decay rate that can
provide more than enough energy to account for its lu-
minosity.

Exactly how the spin energy is converted into radia-
tion remains uncertain. Takata et al. (2017) and Buck-
ley et al. (2017) have postulated that the pulsed emis-
sion at the beat period is generated through a magneto-
hydrodynamic (MHD) process near the secondary star.
The magnetic interaction may occur with the red star’s
atmosphere (Katz 2017) or its wind (Geng et al. 2016).
Electrons accelerated in the beat interaction may end
up trapped in the WD magnetosphere and continue to
generate synchrotron radiation for long periods of time
(Takata et al. 2017, 2018). Detailed polarimetric ob-
servations made by Potter & Buckley (2018) suggest
that the polarized light comes directly from the mag-
netic poles of the WD.

CVs generally consist of a WD accreting gas from a
cool dwarf. Their optical spectra tend to be dominated
by light from accretion structures (disks for systems with
low magnetic ﬁelds; curtains and columns for systems
In long orbital period sys-
with high ﬁeld strengths).
tems, the spectrum of the secondary can contribute sig-
niﬁcantly at red wavelengths. The AR Sco spectra from
Marsh et al. (2016) shows a blue continuum added to the
red spectrum of a M5-type dwarf (Marsh et al. 2016).
In addition, strong Balmer and neutral helium emission
lines are present. Their velocity variations suggest that
the line emission originates from near the surface of the
M dwarf star facing the WD. The radial velocity varia-
tion of the secondary tell us when the two stars of the bi-
nary are aligned (Marsh et al. 2016). Zero orbital phase
is at inferior conjunction, deﬁned as when the secondary
is closest to us. The minimum of the optical light curve
occurs slightly later than zero orbital phase and the op-
tical maximum occurs slightly before phase 0.5. Even
after removing the eﬀects of the pulsed radiation from
the light curve, the times of minimum and maximum are
oﬀset from the orbital alignment (Stiller et al. 2018).

Here we present moderate spectral resolution, time-
resolved spectroscopy of AR Sco that shows signiﬁcant
structure in the Balmer emission lines as they vary over
the orbit of the binary. We apply tomographic tech-
niques to determine where the emission originates in
the system. We discuss the impact of these structures
on possible models for the source of energy driving the
unusual emission in AR Sco.

2. DATA

We obtained spectra of AR Sco with the Low-
Resolution Imaging Spectrograph (LRIS; Oke et al.
1995) on the Keck-I telescope on 2018 March 15 (UT).

Figure 1. The average spectrum of AR Sco over three hours
of observation. The gap around 5900 ˚A is due to the dichroic
dividing the light into the two arms of LRIS. The spectrum is
dominated by Balmer and neutral helium emission lines. In
the red, broad spectral features of the M-dwarf are evident.
Ca II H&K emission lines are comparable in strength with
the Balmer lines. The red line below the AR Sco spectrum
shows an M5 star spectrum added to a smooth power-law
continuum.

The red and blue arms of the spectrograph were di-
vided using the 560 nm dichroic. On the blue side we
employed the 600/4000 grism, while on the red arm we
used the 900/4000 grating. The 0.7 arcsec wide slit
provided a resolution (FWHM) of 2.1 ˚A in the red and
2.8 ˚A in the blue.

A sequence of 15 sec long exposures was begun at
12:49 (UT) and ﬁnished at 15:54 (UT) during twilight.
There is a gap in the spectral sequence lasting 15 min-
utes when a diﬀerent target was observed. The CCD
detectors were binned 2×2 which reduced the readtime
and overhead to approximately 1 minute. A total of 132
spectra were obtained in the red and 183 spectra in the
blue. The diﬀerence is a result of the shorter overhead
cost for the blue CCD.

The spectra were extracted, wavelength, and ﬂux-
calibrated using packages in IRAF1. The resulting aver-
age spectrum is shown in Figure 1. As noted by Marsh
et al. (2016), an M5 dwarf companion is clearly visible
by the presence of broad band heads and a rising red
continuum. Narrow Balmer features dominate the line
emission and neutral helium lines are also present. A

1 IRAF is distributed by the National Optical Astronomy Ob-
servatory, which is operated by the Association of Universities for
Research in Astronomy (AURA) under a cooperative agreement
with the National Science Foundation.

Prominences in AR Sco

3

Figure 2. The ﬂux of Hα (red line) and Hβ (blue line) as a
function of orbital phase. The continuum ﬂux per ˚A at the
location of Hα (magenta line) and Hβ (cyan line) are shown
with a relative shift to make the plot more compact. The
beat and spin pulses are clearly seen in the continuum light
curves, but are not obvious in the emission line ﬂuxes. The
dotted line is the broad-band orbital modulation of AR Sco
described by Stiller et al. (2018)

weak HeII feature is detected and many metal lines are
seen throughout the optical spectrum with the strongest
being MgI at 5167 ˚A. Two of the most signiﬁcant emis-
sion features in the blue part of the spectrum are CaII at
3933 ˚A and 3968 ˚A. The 3968 line is comparable to, and
blended with H(cid:15) at 3970 ˚A. Marsh et al. (2016) noted
signiﬁcant IR calcium triplet emission in their spectra
of AR Sco.

The average spectrum shows a signiﬁcant jump in
brightness across the Balmer limit and a change in slope
of the continuum. This suggests hydrogen opacity is
strongly inﬂuencing the continuum, possibly from the
irradiated secondary star.

3. ANALYSIS

3.1. Variations on the Orbital Time-scale

Based on the orbital ephemeris by Marsh et al. (2016),
our Keck spectra covered nearly one orbit. There are
two gaps each lasting about 10% of an orbit centered
at phases 0.2 and 0.6. We measured the ﬂuxes and
equivalent widths of the emission lines as well as the

Figure 3. Variability of the emission line equivalent widths
(EW) over a binary orbital period. The three panels show
the EW variations of Hα, Hβ, and, CaII 3933 ˚A emission
lines. The Hα EW does not show a minimum around phase
1.05 because the satellite emission features signiﬁcantly add
to the total ﬂux even around conjunction.

continua ﬂuxes around 5300±200 ˚A (roughly V -band),
4150±150 ˚A (roughly B-band), and 3600±100 ˚A (U -
band). The resulting magnitudes were then corrected
to approximate the Vega system.

3.1.1. Emission Line Equivalent Widths and Fluxes

Figure 2 shows the line and continuum ﬂuxes as a
function of orbital phase. The sky conditions were clear
during the observations, but seeing variations and a nar-
row slit width may have combined to generate false ﬂuc-
tuations. For example, around phase 1.1 when the star
was its faintest, there are major jumps in the line and
continuum ﬂuxes that are not likely real.

The overall continuum variation and emission line ﬂux
variation is similar over the orbit. The minimum ﬂux for
the lines and continua are oﬀset from conjunction with
the secondary star and instead occur around phase 0.1.
After orbital phase 0.1 the ﬂuxes rise quickly to a peak
between phases 0.4 and 0.5. There is then a slow decline
back to minimum just after secondary conjunction. The
light curves are similar to the orbital modulation curve
derived from broad band photometry by Stiller et al.
(2018).

The continuum ﬂuxes show a large-amplitude varia-
tion on a fast time-scale when compared with the line

4

Garnavich et al.

ﬂuxes. This fast variation is a result of the beat and
spin pulses and it is clear that the line emission is not
strongly aﬀected at these periods. Power spectra of the
light curves show a very strong signal at the beat period
in the continua, but the emission line signal is only 5%
of the continua amplitudes.

The emission line equivalent widths (EW) for Hα, Hβ,
and CaII are shown in Figure 3. Rapid variations due
to the beat/spin pulses are seen in the EW plots and
are due primarily to changes in the continuum ﬂux. On
long time-scales the Hα EW is relatively constant be-
tween phases 0.5 and 1.1, while the Hβ and CaII EW
values show a clear minimum at phase 1.05 (slightly ear-
lier than the ﬂux measurements). A detailed look at the
Hα line shows a core with additional blue and red shifted
velocity structure in the emission. These satellite struc-
tures are not as distinct in Hβ and weaken quickly going
to higher-order Balmer lines. The presence of these ad-
ditional emission structures with a steep Balmer decre-
ment keeps the Hα EW relatively ﬂat through the sec-
ondary conjunction.

3.1.2. Color Variations

The approximate V magnitudes and color variations
over an orbit are shown in Figure 4. The B−V and U −B
color curves shows signiﬁcant changes at the beat/spin
time-scales. Over an orbit both colors redden slightly
around orbital phase 0.75 to 0.80. The U − V color
moves signiﬁcantly to the red after conjunction, but the
B − V color shows, at most, only a minor change. The
diﬀerent behavior of these two colors may be explained if
the U -band ﬂux come from an area more compact than
that of the V and B-band emitting regions. Then, near
conjunction, a larger fraction of the ultraviolet emitting
region would be blocked by the secondary when com-
pared with the optical bands. The system is most blue
when it is brightest at orbital phases 0.25 to 0.5.

To study how the continuum slope varies as a func-
tion of brightness, we subtracted the contamination of a
M5 stellar spectrum assuming a brightness of V = 18.9
(Marsh et al. 2016) from each blue spectrum. Since
the non-thermal spectrum is expected to primarily syn-
chrotron emission, we converted the spectral slope after
removing the secondary light into a power-law index, s
deﬁned as Fν ∝ ν−s. In Figure 5, we show how the com-
plex relation between the continuum slope and bright-
ness evolves over an orbit period.

For orbital phases between 0.2 and 0.5, the non-stellar
emission is at its brightest, varying between 15< V <14
mag. The optical power-law index hardly changes at this
phase, remaining around s = 1.2±0.2. At orbital phases
when the emission is fainter, there are signiﬁcant varia-

Figure 4. The variation of brightness and color over an
orbital cycle.
top) Approximate V -band magnitude syn-
thesized from the Keck spectra. center) The U − V color
synthesized from the spectra and plotted as Vega magni-
tudes. Large variations in color are seen at the beat/spin
time scale. The U − V color becomes signiﬁcantly red after
secondary conjunction. bottom) The B − V color derived
from the Keck spectra. Here, no obvious reddening is seen
after secondary conjunction.

tions in the spectral index with extreme values ranging
from 0.8< s <2.0.

For orbital phases between −0.4 to −0.1 (equivalent
to phases 0.6 to 0.9), there appears a linear relationship
between the power-law index and the emission luminos-
ity. Around V = 15 the index is a shallow s ∼ 0.9, then
steepens to 1.9 as the ﬂux fades to V ∼ 16. The rela-
tion between brightness and spectral slope is similar for
orbital phases between −0.1 to 0.2 (that is, phases 0.9
to 1.2), except the emission is a half magnitude fainter
while the index ranges between 0.8 and 1.8.

The spectra of many synchrotron sources in the op-
tically thin regime are found to have power-law indices
of s ≈0.6 to 0.8, corresponding to electron energy dis-
tributions with indices between 2.2 and 2.6 (Rybicki &
Lightman 1986). The AR Sco spectra are consistent
with these spectral indices during the peaks of the beat
emission. The higher energy electrons cool fastest and
steepen the observed spectrum unless energy is contin-
uously replenished. The large brightness variations ob-

Prominences in AR Sco

5

multiple peaks appearing and shifting in velocity. The
continuum subtracted spectra at Hα stacked as a func-
tion of orbital phase are shown in Figure 6. Besides an
“S-wave” from the irradiated face of the secondary star,
there are satellite lines that extend out to 500 km s−1
and that are out of phase with the emission associated
with the secondary. These satellite features, at times,
contribute more than 30% of the total Hα ﬂux. In fact,
near phase 1.1 the emission from the irradiated face is
obscured and the satellite emission lines dominate the
ﬂux.

As noted above, this satellite emission is visible in the
Hβ emission line, but it contributes signiﬁcantly less to
the total ﬂux, suggesting a steeper Balmer decrement
than for the irradiated emission.

A standard tomogram of the spectral series is shown in
Figure 7. The majority of the Hα emission is consistent
with an origin on the face of the secondary star while
the satellite emission forms two “Mickey Mouse ears”
at phases of approximately 0.1 and 0.4 and extending
to more than 500 km s−1. This emission conﬁguration
is similar to that observed by Kafka et al. (2008, 2010)
in magnetic CVs during a period of low accretion rate.
Kafka et al. (2010) attributed these satellite emission
regions to a long-lived prominences (super-prominences,
or slingshot prominences; Collier Cameron et al. (1990);
Steeghs et al. (1996)) on the secondary star. The de-
tached post common envelope binary, QS Vir, also shows

Figure 6. The Hα emission line velocity distribution as a
function of orbital phase. Gaps in the phase coverage be-
tween orbital phases ∼0.15-0.25 and ∼0.5-0.7 have been lin-
early interpolated. The local continuum was subtracted and
line was normalized so that Hα emission has the same total
ﬂux in each spectrum. The phase coverage is repeated for
clarity.

Figure 5. The continuum slope versus the optical brightness
of AR Sco. After subtracting the contamination from a M5
spectrum, the slope of the optical continuum was matched
to a power-law index in frequency. The color of the points
indicate the orbital phase of the observation. When AR Sco
is brightest it shows little change in color. In contrast, at and
prior to secondary conjunction there is an approximate linear
relation between the spectral index and the magnitude. Note
that synchrotron emission typically has an power-law index
of 0.8.

served in AR Sco suggests that the cooling time of the
relativistic electrons is shorter than the spin period of
the WD (Takata et al. 2018).

We note that the spectral slope and system brightness
are always greater that of the M5 dwarf star. It appears
the synchrotron emission is always present at some level
suggesting that the cooling time in parts of the system
is longer than half the spin period.

The spectral slopes observed as the secondary ap-
proaches superior conjunction are puzzling. The spec-
tral index appears relatively constant, implying either
the electrons have a long cooling time or their energy is
continuously replenished. However, the observed slope
is steeper than typical for synchrotron emission from
freshly energized electrons. As the full irradiated face
of the secondary is exposed around orbital phase 0.5, it
may be that thermal emission from the secondary dilutes
the synchrotron spectrum, or we are viewing a region of
the interaction where the cooling time is long.

3.1.3. The Hα Trailed Spectrum

Our spectra were obtained using a moderate disper-
sion grating on the red arm of LRIS and the good seeing
permitted a narrow 0.7 arcsec wide slit to be employed.
The resulting spectral resolution is the highest yet re-
ported for AR Sco. It was clear while taking the spec-
tra that the Hα line proﬁles were quite complex with

6

Garnavich et al.

To study the continuum ﬂux changes over short time-
scales, we phased the brightness and color measurements
to the beat period with the result show in Figure 9. The
double beat pulse seen in the broad-band light curves
of AR Sco (Stiller et al. 2018) are reproduced in the
spectral continua. The U −V and B −V colors also show
a variability at the beat phase with the bluest colors
occurring at the brightest peak of the main beat pulse.
The reddest B − V color is not seen at phase 0.75, the
faintest point of the beat light curve, but shifted earlier
by 0.1 in phase. Beyond the blue peak at conjunction,
the U − V colors show no clear trend.

The long readout time for the detectors meant that
individual beat pulses are not well-sampled in the data.
But the 15s exposures are short compared with the ap-
proximately 2 min beat cycle time, so we have some
information on the spectral variations of the beat/spin
cycle even while not resolving individual pulses. Figure 8
shows short timescale variations in the Hα emission line
around orbital phase 0.75. Rapid emission variations
are seen near phase 0.25 as well, but a gap in the data
prevents fully exploring this part of the orbit.

Figure 8. The Hα trailed spectrum displayed at high con-
trast to show the faint emission extending to 1000 km s−1 at
phases 0.25 and 0.75. This emission suggests a faint promi-
nence extends out multiple stellar radii on the side of the
secondary opposite the white dwarf. The black line show
the phase and amplitude of the Balmer emission on the face
of the secondary, while the red lines indicate the phase and
velocity amplitude of the two bright prominences.

Figure 7. The tomogram of the Hα emission line showing
that the central S-wave comes from the side of the red dwarf
star facing the WD. The satellite emission features are cen-
tered at angular phases of 35◦ and 145◦. The velocity overlay
includes both the Roche lobe of the secondary and the ballis-
tic trajectory of the accretion stream (if it were to exist) for
assumed values of the orbital inclination (i), the mass ratio
(q), and the WD mass.

slingshot prominences that persist for years (Parsons et
al. 2016).

The best examples of satellite emission in magnetic
systems are seen in the polars AM Her and BL Hyi. In
polars, generally the rotation of both the white dwarf
and red dwarf are synchronized to the orbit, so the
magnetic interaction is ﬁxed in the rotating frame. For
AR Sco the situation is very diﬀerent with the WD and
its magnetic ﬁeld rotating past the red dwarf’s magnetic
ﬁeld at the spin rate of the WD. The presence of these
prominences shows a signiﬁcant magnetic ﬁeld on the
secondary and it may be the interaction between the
magnetic ﬁelds of the two stars that drives the energy
production in AR Sco.

When stretching the trailed Hα spectrum to high
contrast, there appears to be weak emission out to
∼ 1000 km s−1 at phases 0.25 and 0.75 (Figure 8). This
would be a faint prominence extending far from the sec-
ondary star on the side opposite the white dwarf.

3.2. Spectral Variability at the Beat/Spin Frequencies

0◦90◦180◦   270◦(v, θ) [km s−1, deg.]2505007506563 Åi: 75◦q: 0.3M1: 0.8 Mﬂγ=0 km s−1Prominences in AR Sco

7

These ﬂashes of emission are most obvious around
quadrature, when the secondary star is seen at its high-
est red or blue shifted velocities. This is also the phase
when the satellite emission lines we identify with promi-
nences are seen at their lowest radial velocities.
It is
not clear if the fast time-scale emission ﬂashes are in-
visible at phases away from secondary quadrature, or if
the prominence emission prevents their detection.

We show stacks of the Hα and Hβ lines (Figure 10) af-
ter zooming in on phase 0.75 and subtracting a median
line proﬁle to make the varying emission more clearly
visible. The ﬂashes of Balmer emission are seen to ex-
tend to ±700 km s−1. The emission ﬂashes appear to
alternate in the red and blue shifted directions. Compar-
ing with the continuum ﬂux variations, the red shifted
ﬂashes appear to occur when the continuum is bright,
while the blue shifted ﬂashes prefer moments when the
continuum is at its faintest.

Figure 9. The brightness and colors phased on the beat
period. top) The relative magnitude variations of the spec-
tral continuum over a beat period. Red and blue continua
measurements were combined to improve the time resolu-
tion. center) The approximate U − V color changes over
a beat/spin period. The orbital modulations have been re-
moved leaving only the relative color changes phased on the
beat/spin period. The blue line is the data averaged into
0.05 wide phase bins. bottom) Same as the center panel
but showing the approximate B − V color variations.

To quantify the timing of the emission line ﬂashes, we
applied the “double Gaussian” (Shafter 1983; Schnei-
der & Young 1980) technique to the Hα and Hβ lines.
The method consists of convolving an emission line with
two Gaussian functions separated in wavelength to avoid
the bright core of the line. The wavelength where both
Gaussian functions contain equal ﬂux is an estimate of
the velocity centroid of the highest velocity emission.
Normally, the double Gaussian method is applied to disk
systems to approximate the motion of the white dwarf
star where the highest velocity emission corresponds to
the disk gas closest to the primary. Here, we aim to
avoid the brightest emission in the lines and detect cen-
troid shift caused by the emission ﬂashes.

For Hα and Hβ, we used Gaussian widths (sigma) of
130 km s−1 and a full separation of 1400 km s−1. The
separation velocity was chosen to maximize the detec-
tion of the line ﬂashes which are seen to extend out
to 700km s−1 from the line center. The resulting ra-
dial velocity curve (Figure 12) shows the overall motion
of the secondary and satellite lines, plus rapid velocity
ﬂuctuations around quadrature with amplitudes of 50 to
100 km s−1.

We repeated the double Gaussian analysis for the
Hβ line, removed the sinusoidal variations and com-
bined the velocity variations observed in the two Balmer
lines. Because the red and blue side of the spectrograph
were running independently, the cadence of the veloc-
ity measurements was signiﬁcantly improved when the
two curves were intertwined. The average time between
spectra was 0.51 minutes after the red and blue sides
were combined. A power spectrum of the velocity vari-
ations showed a strong peak in the velocity variations
at 0.980 min, which is half the beat/spin period. Cau-
tion must be used in this analysis as the periodicity we
see in the Balmer emission ﬂashes is close to twice the
sampling rate.

4. DISCUSSION

4.1. Prominences

From the Hα tomogram, we can estimate the size and
location of the satellite emission that we associate with
prominences by assuming that they are co-rotating with
the secondary star. The projected distance of these fea-
tures from the center of mass (CM) of the binary is
simply r = v/Ω, where v is the inclination-corrected
velocity amplitude of the emission and Ω is the angu-
lar velocity of the secondary. The orbital inclination
is expected to be ∼ 75◦ based on our assumed stellar
masses and the mass function measured by Marsh et
al. (2016). Therefore, the correction between the ra-
dial velocity space velocity is less than 10%. For the

8

Garnavich et al.

In isolated magnetized stars, the co-rotation radius
is where the gravitational pull of the star balances the
centrifugal acceleration of plasma trapped in the ﬁeld.
Prominences found at or beyond the co-rotation radius
are called ”slingshot” prominences (Steeghs et al. 1996).
In binary systems the balance between centrifugal and
gravitational forces is found at the Lagrangian points.
The L4 and L5 points are actually rather broad regions
that make an equilateral triangle with the primary and
secondary stars. For the assumed parameters of the
AR Sco binary, the L4 and L5 points are 370 km s−1
from the CM. The prominences extend more than 30%
farther than L4 and L5 points. The trailing prominence
diﬀers in phase from the L5 point by 20◦.

The L2 point is expected to be at 4.5 Roche radii
from the CM, or a velocity of 500 km/s, while the faint
prominence behind the secondary is seen at twice that
distance. We conclude that the prominence emission
extends well beyond the outer Lagrangian points.

The stability of slingshot prominences has been mod-
elled by Ferreira (2000). Such prominences can be stable
out to ∼ 5 stellar radii if the dipole surface magnetic ﬁeld
is larger than ∼ 100 G, and out to 10 stellar radii for a
500 G ﬁeld. A quadrupole ﬁeld would require ∼ 500 G
for prominence stability at 5 stellar radii.

The WD ﬁeld at the secondary is expected to have
an average ﬁeld strength of order ∼200 Gauss (Takata
et al. 2018), so the magnetic ﬁelds from the two stars
should be comparable just at or above the red dwarf sur-
face. Thus, the energy produced in the AR Sco system
is likely the result of the interaction between the two
star’s magnetic ﬁelds.

4.2. Emission and Continuum Light Curves

We use the light-curve-modelling program ELC
(Orosz & Hauschildt 2000) to create a toy model of the
light variations on an M5 star ﬁlling its Roche lobe. The
strong beat pulses are likely not coming directly from
the secondary star, so we use the light curve created by
Stiller et al. (2018) that excludes pulsed emission by se-
lecting only the lower envelope of the high-cadence ﬂux
measurements. The Stiller et al. (2018) light curve has
the ﬂux minimum shifted from inferior conjunction by
nearly 0.1 in phase and the maximum occurring before
superior conjunction by 0.05 in phase. This is similar
to our continuum- and emission-line-ﬂux curves in Fig-
ure 2. Thus, the rise from minimum to maximum takes
only 35% of an orbit. ELC can model this behavior by
adding two warm spots to the surface of the secondary
(see Figure 11). This may not be a unique solution,
but the addition of warm spots does an adequate job

Figure 10. The stacked Hα and Hβ spectra zoomed in
on orbital phase ∼0.75. A median average of the spectra
was subtracted from each exposure to allow faint features to
stand out. Flashes of high-velocity emission are seen extend-
ing to 700 km s−1 from the secondary. The emission alter-
nates between red and blue shifted velocities on a time scale
of the beat/spin period. The plots to the right of the images
show the continuum light variations matching the phases of
the emission spectra. In general, the redshifted ﬂashes cor-
respond to bright pulses in the continuum light while blue
shifted ﬂashes tend to be associated with the continnum be-
ing faint.

orbital period from Marsh et al. (2016), the inverse an-
gular velocity is 2043 s rad−1. Assuming a mass for
the WD of 0.8 M(cid:12), then the mass ratio of the system
is q ≈ 0.3 for a secondary with a mass typical for an
M5 dwarf. The radius of the secondary’s Roche lobe is
RRD ≈ 2.3 × 105 km (Eggleton 1983). Since the sec-
ondary is probably close to ﬁlling its Roche lobe, we
use this as the stellar radius and compare it to the size
of the prominences. The brightest emission from the
prominences is seen around 500 km s−1, correspond-
ing to 4.4 Roche radii from the center of mass. The
prominences precede and trail the secondary by ±0.15
in phase, meaning that the prominences extend 3 stellar
radii from the surface of the secondary. The faint emis-
sion behind the secondary at 1000 km s−1 corresponds
to 8.7 stellar radii from the CM, or about 5 stellar radii
from the backside of the red dwarf.

     HαHβProminences in AR Sco

9

This would locally heat the photosphere at the magnetic
ﬁeld line foot points. Our direct evidence of a large-scale
magnetic ﬁeld on the secondary star suggests this ”duct-
ing” is possible in the AR Sco system as well.

For an alternative explanation for the shape of the
light curves in AR Sco we can consider a small tilt to
the spin axis of the WD relative to orbital plane, also
called an obliquity. Such a scenario was proposed by
Katz (2017). For simplicity, we can further assume that
the star is an orthogonal rotator, with its magnetic poles
near the equator of the WD. With these assumptions,
any interaction between the magnetic ﬁeld of the WD
and the secondary star will be maximized at the two or-
bital phases where the magnetic axis crosses the orbital
plane. At very high obliquities the interaction producing
the beat pulses would be isolated to these two phases,
but this is not what is observed for AR Sco. Instead,
a mild obliquity would modulate the interaction sinu-
soidally at twice the orbital frequency. A bright spot
near the L1 point generated by the magnetic interac-
tion would be seen to have two maxima and minima per
orbit. Combine this modulation with the typical irra-
diated spot being viewed around an orbit and there are
suﬃcient free parameters to match the observed light
curve variations.

For a simple example we imagined a hot spot at the
L1 point whose viewing angle varies around the orbit.
Its light curve is approximately a sinusoid with a max-
imum at the secondary star’s superior conjunction. We
then multiply by a sinusoid with twice the orbital fre-
quency to represent the inferred interaction modulation
due to an obliquity. The modulation is oﬀset in phase
so that the maxima occur when the WD equator crosses
the orbital plane (the ”equinox” if you will). Using a
modulation amplitude of 20% shifted by 30◦ in orbital
phase provides a fairly good match to our observed con-
tinuum and emission line ﬂux curves as shown in Fig-
ure 11. One sees a rapid rise to maximum taking only
40% of the orbit followed by a slower decay.

4.3. Location of Emission and Absorption Lines

As noted by Marsh et al. (2016), there is signiﬁcant
emission line ﬂux coming from the hemisphere of the
secondary star facing the WD. Such emission is not un-
common in CVs due to the irradiation of the secondary
from energy generated by accretion onto the WD. In
AR Sco however, WD accretion is not the major source
of ionizing radiation, and emission lines coming from
the secondary may provide information on the source of
the hard radiation. The Hα tomogram made from our
spectra (Figure 7) conﬁrms that strong Balmer emis-
sion originates near the L1 point at an orbital velocity

Figure 11. The non-pulsed optical light curve (heavy black
line) from Stiller et al. (2018) is compared with the two-spot
ELC model (red line) and the oblique WD rotator model
(blue line). The orbital phase is based on the radial velocity
measurements of the secondary (Marsh et al. 2016) where
phase 0.5 corresponds to binary superior conjunction. Both
models can match the orbital phase shifts observed in the
minimum and maximum light from the system.

of matching the light variations by shifting the times of
minimum and maximum.

Spot 1 is on the trailing inward-facing quadrant of the
secondary and is signiﬁcantly hotter than the majority of
the M5 star.2 This is the quadrant in which we expect
energy deposition from the magnetic ﬁeld interaction.
By its location on the trailing side adjacent to the L1
point, Spot 1 becomes fully exposed to our view just
before superior conjunction. The location of this warm
spot in the ELC model results in the peak of the light
curve occurring at an orbital phase of 0.45.

The shift in phase of the continuum-ﬂux minimum is
not well explained by the ELC model. For the adopted
inclination angle of 75◦ (see Section 4.1), the warm spot
on the trailing inward face is almost completely self-
eclipsed by the secondary. The observed minimum at
phase 0.1 can be achieved by adding a warm spot on the
outward-facing, leading quadrant with a modest temper-
ature increase above the ambient surface temperature.
A physical motivation for a warm spot on the backside
of the companion is given by Romani & Sanchez (2016)
in modeling the light from ”black widow pulsars”. They
argue that the magnetic ﬁeld of the secondary star may
channel material and energy from the interaction region
to the far-side of the cool star in these pulsar systems.

2 The temperature and area of the warm spots are degenerate

in the model, so we refrain from quantifying the temperature.

10

Garnavich et al.

Figure 12. The Hα emission line velocity centroid as mea-
sured from the wings of the line using a double Gaussian
technique. The large scatter seen at the extreme velocities is
caused by the emission line ﬂashes occurring at the beat/spin
period. The satellite emission dominates the other phases
and likely distorts the radial velocity curve. The solid line is
a sinusoid with an amplitude of 250 km s−1 and phased to
the Marsh orbital ephemeris.

∼ 220 km s−1, and while it suggests that the Hα emis-
sion may be more prominent on the leading side of the
star than the trailing side, the diﬀerence is not deﬁnitive.
A warm spot in the trailing face of the red dwarf sug-
gests an asymmetric irradiation of the secondary from
the source of the synchrotron emission. We have com-
puted tomograms of individual spectral features using
the code from Kotze et al. (2015) to further test for
asymmetric irradiation, and these are shown in Fig-
ure 13.

The HeI 6678˚A emission line is brightest on the
inward-facing side of the secondary and is fairly symmet-
ric about the L1 point. Its distribution on the secondary
is similar to the brightest emission in the tomogram of
Hα as found by Marsh et al. (2016).

The HeII 4686˚A line is weak but present in the indi-
vidual spectra for part of the orbit.3 Its tomogram indi-
cates that HeII emission is concentrated on the trailing
face of the secondary and this maybe where much of the
magnetic interaction is depositing its energy.

The neutral potassium absorption line at 7699˚A is a
good tracer of cool gas because of its low ionization en-
ergy. The KI tomogram shows little absorption on the
inward face of the secondary that is likely irradiated by
the interaction. The distribution of the KI absorption

3 Because Doppler tomography assumes that line-emitting re-
gions are uniformly visible across the orbit, the HeII tomogram
uses spectra from the half of the orbit during which HeII is
strongest (e.g., Potter et al. 2004).

Figure 13. Standard tomograms of three spectral features
with a range of excitations. top: The distribution of He I
(6678 ˚A) emission showing it symmetrically placed near the
L1 point of the secondary star. center: A half-orbit to-
mogram of He II (4686 ˚A), showing the distribution to be
concentrated near the trailing face of the secondary star.
bottom: The strength of K I (7699 ˚A) absorption indicat-
ing that its presence is mainly on the far side of the secondary
away from the WD. The K I absorption appears to avoid the
leading side of the secondary suggesting a warming there.

strength conﬁrms that the backside is cooler than the
inner face of the secondary.

     Prominences in AR Sco

11

4.4. Emission Line Flashes

The Balmer-emission ﬂashes have not been detected
in previous observations of AR Sco. They are observed
around quadrature of the secondary, but that may sim-
ply be due to the prominence emission making them dif-
ﬁcult to see at other phases. After removing the orbital
variations in Figure 12, we phased the velocity centroid
measurements to the beat period and plot the result in
Figure 14. The red-shifted ﬂashes are correlated with
brightening in the continuum, while the blue shifted
emission line ﬂashes occur when the continuum is at its
faintest level over a beat cycle. Because these are cen-
troid shifts, the double Gaussian amplitudes are about a
factor of ten smaller than the maximum velocities seen
of the emission line ﬂashes.

The correlation between the velocity of the ﬂash emis-
sion and the continuum light variations is surprisingly
good considering the poor cadence of these observations
and the limited orbital phase coverage of the ﬂashes.
More data, over several orbits, are needed to conﬁrm
the correlation seen in Figure 14.

Our data shows hydrogen emission ﬂashes on time
scales of the WD beat/spin period and velocities as high
as ∼ 700 km s−1 relative to the secondary star. The
mechanism that accelerates hydrogen to these velocities
and still allows for Balmer emission is not clear. It is
unlikely that protons would be accelerated in magnetic
ﬁelds, then recombine with electrons to generate the
observed Balmer emission. Although, charge exchange
with neutral hydrogen may occur under the correct con-
ditions.

4.5. Implications

The presence of prominences in the AR Sco system
implies that the magnetic ﬁeld of the secondary is com-
parable to that of the WD near the L1 point of the
system. The rapidly spinning WD ﬁeld may generate
a time-dependent interaction between the two magnetic
systems resulting in magnetic ﬁeld reconnection on a
regular 1-minute time-scale. These magnetic reconnec-
tion events produce solar ﬂare-like bursts of energy that
generate the observed synchrotron radiation. The sec-
ondary star would absorb some of the energy from these
ﬂares and be heated around its inner face.

Here we estimate the energy that could be generated
in this scenario. A more detailed model will be pre-
sented in Lyutikov et al. (2019). We assume the WD
is close to being an orthogonal rotator. The direction
of the toroidal magnetic ﬁeld in the WD magnetosphere
ﬂips twice every rotation of the WD, leading to periodic
reconnection events, see Figure. 15.

Figure 14. The Balmer emission velocity centroid from the
double-Gaussian analysis of spectra obtained around orbital
phases 0.25 and 0.75. Hα and Hβ have been combined to
improve the cadence. The circles show the velocity phased
on a period of 1.96 min, close to the beat and spin periods.
The line shows a photometric model of the beat pulses from
Stiller et al. (2018). The red shifted emission line ﬂashes
tend to occur when the beat pulse is bright while the blue
shifted ﬂashes correlate with the beat pulse being faint.

The value of the magnetic ﬁeld of the WD at the lo-
cation of the red dwarf depends on the Alfv´en velocity
in the WD magnetosphere. Within the Alfv´en radius
the ﬁeld falls oﬀ rapidly (B ∝ r−3), while outside the
strength falls oﬀ more gently (B ∝ r−1). The Alfven
velocity in the magnetosphere of the white dwarf is not
known. For an order-of-magnitude estimate we assume
that Alfv´en radius is about the size of the Roche lobe,
so that the dipolar ﬁeld of the WD at the L1 point is
given by

BL1 = BW D

(cid:19)−3

(cid:18) RRoche
RW D

(1)

where BW D is the surface ﬁeld, and RRoche ≈ 6 ×
1010 cm is the radius of the Roche lobe of the WD.
For a surface magnetic ﬁeld of BW D = 500 MG and a
typical WD radius, then the ﬁeld in the interaction re-
gion is about 300 G, similar to that estimated by Takata
et al. (2018).

Thus, we expect reconnection events between the two
magnetic ﬁelds to occur when the ﬁelds are counter-
aligned in the interaction region. The power from re-
connection is the rate at which the magnetic energy
within the reconnection volume is lost. We expect
the interaction to occur near the inner face of the sec-
ondary, so a good estimate of the size of the interac-
tion region is of order the radius of the secondary star,

12

Garnavich et al.

RRD ≈ 2 × 1010 cm. The rate at which the reconnection
can take place is deﬁned by the Alfv´en velocity given
by

(cid:115)

vA =

B2
4πρ

(2)

where ρ is the plasma mass density in the reconnection
region. The electron density in the Solar chromosphere
(Brannon & Longcope 2014) is typically estimated to
be 1011 to 1012 cm−3. The electron density measured
in stellar ﬂares (e.g. AB Dor; Lalitha et al. 2013) is
also in that range. These electron densities roughly cor-
respond to a mass density of ρ ∼ 10−12 g cm−3. For
a magnetic ﬁeld of 300 G, the Alfv´en velocity is then
vA ≈ 108 cm s−1.

Given the above estimates, we ﬁnd the reconnection

power is

Lrec ∼

B2
8π

πR2

RDvA ∼ 6 × 1032ergs−1

(3)

which is comparable to the excess luminosity measured
from AR Sco (Marsh et al. 2016) and only slightly less
than the total power available from the WD spin-down
(Stiller et al. 2018).

The rapid reconnection events should generate “recon-
nection jets” (Shibata et al. 2007) with velocities similar
to the Alfv´en speed. Our rough estimate of an Alfv´en
velocity vA ≈ 103 km s−1 is comparable to the veloci-
ties we observed in the Balmer emission line ﬂashes and
these ﬂashes may well be explained by reconnection jets.
However, the jets will accelerate charged particles and
it is not certain how neutral hydrogen or recombination
emission can result directly from the jet. An examina-
tion of the ion-neutral coupling coeﬃcients from Draine
(1986) or Draine et al. (1983) makes it plausible that
some of the neutral gas would also couple to the ionized
gas; but we leave a detailed examination to Lyutikov et
al. (2019).

In summary, magnetic reconnection events occurring
near the L1 point can account for the power observed
from the AR Sco system using reasonable parameters
for the magnetic ﬁeld, density, and size of the interaction
region. Such reconnection events, like stellar ﬂares, gen-
erate synchrotron emission that can have a short cooling
time. The location of the interaction naturally explains
the ionization seen on the secondary. Further, particles
accelerated during magnetic reconnection may account
for the high velocity emission ﬂashes we detect near sec-
ondary quadrature.

5. CONCLUSION

Moderate resolution spectroscopy of the white dwarf
pulsar AR Sco shows the presence of magnetic loops

Figure 15. A sketch of the AR Sco system suggesting how
the interacting ﬁelds of the two stars might generate emission
and jets in a magnetic reconnection region. The view is from
above the orbital plane and the distances in the diagram are
not to scale. The interaction likely occurs close to the red
dwarf surface resulting in an irradiated region on the inward
face of the secondary.

or prominences originating from the red secondary star.
The prominences extend 3 to 4 Roche radii from the
trailing and leading sides of the secondary. There also
appears weak emission from a loop extending 5 Roche
radii on the back side of the red star. The spectra also
show:

• The prominence emission is strongest in Hα and
due to a steep decrement the becomes less promi-
nent in higher order Balmer lines.

• Beat/spin pulses dominate the continuum vari-
ations, but line emission strengths show little
change during the beat/spin pulses.

• The strength of the emission lines (excluding
prominence emission) reaches a minimum between
orbital phase 0.05 and 0.10, as does the contin-
uum.

• The average U −V color is reddest just after orbital
phase zero while the average B − V color does not
strongly vary over the orbit.

• Based on tomography, the HeII emission comes
from close to the trailing, inner face of the sec-
ondary, suggesting signiﬁcant energy deposition at
that location. In contrast, the neutral potassium
line from the red dwarf is found only on the out-
ward face of the secondary

Prominences in AR Sco

13

• The peak of the beat pulse shows the bluest colors
and the peak color is consistent with synchrotron
emission. As the ﬂux fades from the pulse peak the
continuum reddens with a slope consistent with
synchrotron cooling.

• Flashes of Balmer emission are seen extending
±700 km s−1 during quadrature of the secondary.

• The red-shifted emission ﬂashes appear to be syn-
chronized with the bright continuum pluses. The
blue-shifted ﬂashes is timed with the faint phases
of the beat emission. Sampling of the timing is
limited and further data is needed to conﬁrm this
relationship.

• Magnetic reconnection can account for the energy
production in AR Sco. The location of the recon-
nection can explain the heating and ionization on
the inner face of the secondary. Reconnection jets
are a natural possibility for the source of the high
velocity ﬂashes seen in our spectra.

The existence of long-lived slingshot prominences em-
anating from the secondary in AR Sco suggests a surface
magnetic ﬁeld between 100 and 500 G. As the magnetic
ﬁeld of the WD is expected to be about 300 G near sur-
face of the secondary, we propose that the luminosity
from AR Sco is generated by the magnetic reconnec-
tion between the two magnetic ﬁelds. The interaction
occurs just above the surface of secondary and on its
trailing side. The resulting synchrotron radiation heats
that region of the secondary and generates the irradiated
emission features seen in the spectra.

We thank Josh Walawender, Cindy Wilburn, and the
Keck Observatory for help in obtaining these observa-
tions. DSB acknowledges support via NSF grants NSF-
ACI-1533850, NSF-DMS-1622457, NSF-ACI-1713765,
and NSF-DMS-1821242. Support from a grant by Notre
Dame International is also acknowledged. We thank L.
A. Phillips for insightful comments. MRK is funded
by a Newton International Fellowship from the Royal
Society.

Facility: Keck Observatory

REFERENCES

Brannon, S., & Longcope, D. 2014, ApJ, 792, 50

Marsh, T. R., G¨ansicke, B. T., H¨ummerich, S., et al. 2016,

Buckley, D. A. H., Meintjes, P. J., Potter, S. B., Marsh,
T. R., & G¨ansicke, B. T. 2017, Nature Astronomy, 1,
0029

Collier Cameron, A., Duncan, D. K., Ehrenfreund, P., et al.

1990, MNRAS, 247, 415

Nature, 537, 374

Oke, J. B., Cohen, J. G., Carr, M., et al. 1995, PASP, 107,

375

Orosz, J. A., & Hauschildt, P. H. 2000, aap, 364, 265

Parsons, S. G., Hill, C. A., Marsh, T. R., et al. 2016,

Draine, B. T., Roberge, W. G., & Dalgarno, A. 1983, ApJ,

MNRAS, 458, 2793

264, 485

Draine, B. T. 1986, MNRAS, 220, 133

Eggleton, P. P. 1983, ApJ, 268, 368

Ferreira, J. M. 2000, MNRAS, 316, 647

Geng, J.-J., Zhang, B., & Huang, Y.-F. 2016, ApJL, 831,

L10

Katz, J. I. 2017, ApJ, 835, 15

Kafka, S., Ribeiro, T., Baptista, R., Honeycutt, R. K., &

Robertson, J. W. 2008, ApJ, 688, 1302-1314

Kafka, S., Tappert, C., Ribeiro, T., et al. 2010, ApJ, 721,

1714

Kotze, E. J., Potter, S. B., & McBride, V. A. 2015, A&A,

579, A77

Potter, S. B., Romero-Colmenero, E., Watson, C. A., et al.

2004, MNRAS, 348, 316

Potter, S. B., & Buckley, D. A. H. 2018, MNRAS, 478, L78

Potter, S. B., & Buckley, D. A. H. 2018, MNRAS, 481, 2384

Romani, R. W., & Sanchez, N. 2016, ApJ, 828, 7

Rybicki, G. B., & Lightman, A. P. 1986, Radiative

Processes in Astrophysics, by George B. Rybicki, Alan

P. Lightman, pp. 400. ISBN 0-471-82759-2. Wiley-VCH ,

June 1986., 400

Schneider, D. P., & Young, P. 1980, ApJ, 238, 946

Shafter, A. W. 1983, ApJ, 267, 222

Shibata, K., Nakamura, T., Matsumoto, T., et al. 2007,

Lalitha, S., Fuhrmeister, B., Wolter, U., et al. 2013, A&A,

Science, 318, 1591

560, A69

Stanway, E. R., Marsh, T. R., Chote, P., et al. 2018, A&A,

Lyutikov, M., & Balsara, D. 2019, in prep.

611, A66

Marcote, B., Marsh, T. R., Stanway, E. R., Paragi, Z., &

Steeghs, D., Horne, K., Marsh, T. R., & Donati, J. F. 1996,

Blanchard, J. M. 2017, A&A, 601, L7

MNRAS, 281, 626

14

Garnavich et al.

Stiller, R. A., Littleﬁeld, C., Garnavich, P., et al. 2018, AJ,

Takata, J., Hu, C.-P., Lin, L. C. C., et al. 2018, ApJ, 853,

156, 150

106

Takata, J., Yang, H., & Cheng, K. S. 2017, ApJ, 851, 143

