Phase-only transmissive spatial light modulator based 

on tunable dielectric metasurface 

Shi-Qiang Li, Xuewu Xu, Rasna Maruthiyodan Veetil, Vytautas Valuckas, Ramón Paniagua-

Domínguez, and Arseniy I. Kuznetsov* 

Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology 

and Research), 138634, Singapore 

*Corresponding author, email: arseniy_kuznetsov@imre.a-star.edu.sg 

Abstract 

Rapidly developing augmented reality (AR) and 3D holographic display technologies require 

spatial  light modulators (SLM) with high resolution  and  viewing angle to be able to satisfy 

increasing  customer  demands.  Currently  available  SLMs,  as  well  as  their  performance,  are 

limited  by  their  large  pixel  sizes  of  the  order  of  several  micrometres.  Further  pixel  size 

miniaturization has been stagnant due to the persistent challenge to reduce the inter-pixel 

crosstalk associated with the liquid crystal (LC) cell thickness, which has to be large enough to 

accumulate  the  required  2π  phase  difference.  Here,  we  propose  a  concept  of  tunable 

dielectric metasurfaces modulated by a liquid crystal environment, which can provide abrupt 

phase change and uncouple the phase accumulation  from the LC cell thickness, ultimately 

enabling  the  pixel  size  miniaturization.  We  present  a  proof-of-concept  metasurface-based 

SLM device, configured to generate active beam steering with >35% efficiency and large beam 

1

 
 
deflection angle of 11°, with LC cell thickness of only 1.5 μm, much smaller than conventional 

devices. We achieve the pixel size of 1.14 μm corresponding to the image resolution of 877 

lp/mm, which is 30 times larger comparing to the presently available commercial SLM devices. 

High resolution and viewing angle of the metasurface-based SLMs opens up a new path to 

the next generation of near-eye AR and 3D holographic display technologies.     

Keywords: Tunable metasurfaces, dielectric nanoantennas, spatial light modulators, 

Huygens’ metasurfaces 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction  

Spatial  light  modulators  (SLMs)  have  widespread  applications  ranging  from  3D  video 

projection1 and additive manufacturing2 to quantum3 and adaptive optics.4 The most versatile 

type of SLMs are phase-only SLMs, which are capable of reconfiguring the phase retardation 

of  light  transmitted  through  or  reflected  from  each  pixel  arbitrarily  and  independently 

without changing the light intensity. Ideally, in order to obtain the best performance for a 

phase-only SLM, each pixel in the SLM should be able to provide a phase shift coverage of at 

least 2𝜋 radians. Typically, SLMs achieve this by using liquid crystals (LC) as the active medium, 

which is a liquid like material constituted by anisotropic molecules, called LC directors. These 

directors tend to align with each other, which thus endues the LC medium with a large uniaxial 

anisotropy  of  refractive  index.  The  difference  between  extraordinary  refractive  index  (ne), 

when  light  polarization  is  parallel  to  the  directors,  and  ordinary  one  (no),  when  it  is 

perpendicular, ∆n = ne – no typically ranges from 0.2 to 0.4 in the visible spectral range. These 

directors,  moreover,  rotate  under  the  influence  of  an  applied  electric  field  as  they  have 

induced dipole moments, providing means to dynamically control the refractive index along 

a given direction.  

One of the limitations of current LC-based SLMs is their slow modulation/switching 

speed. They operate at a typical modulation frequency from 60 to 480 Hz for the nematic LCs 

and from 2 to 32.6 kHz for the ferroelectric ones.5 This is sufficient for most of projection and 

display applications but can hardly be used for applications like Light Detection and Ranging 

(LiDAR). The modulation speed could be increased with the reduction of the thickness of the 

LC layer (hLC), as the time constant of LC director rotation is proportional to hLC to the power 

of  two.6  However,  in  order  to  attain  a  phase  modulation  range  of  2𝜋 in  a  transmissive  or 

3

 
reflective  device,  hLC  cannot  be  smaller  than 𝜆/∆𝑛 or 𝜆/2∆𝑛 respectively  (where 𝜆 is  the 

wavelength of operation), which corresponds to the thickness of several microns for visible 

spectral range. 

Another limitation of LC-based SLMs is their large pixel size, which is above 3 microns 

for the best reflective SLM devices. The reason for this limitation is that downsizing the pixels 

further while keeping the required thickness of LC layer introduces a cross-talk between the 

pixels, owing to the broadened phase profile and high level of detrimental fringing fields.6-10 

This, in turn, limits the field of view (FOV) of the SLM, which is defined as the angular coverage 

of the first diffractive order, inversely proportional to the pixel size, and represents one of the 

most important figure of merits (FOMs) for phase-only SLMs. This problem is more severe for 

transmissive SLMs, which have a smaller filling factor due to the space occupied by transistors 

and an LC thickness that is twice larger than that of reflective SLMs to obtain the same phase 

accumulation. As an example, a typical commercial transmissive SLM (such as HOLOEYE LC 

2012)  has  a  pixel  pitch  of  36  microns,  which  gives  a  maximum  FOV  of  0.7°  only.  These 

constraints of existing phase-only SLMs severely limit their application areas. 

Recently, a new class of flat optical components, so called metasurfaces, relying on 

completely different mechanisms to engineer the wavefronts of light, caught great attention 

in the research community. These systems abruptly modify the optical phase of incoming light 

by designated amounts using sub-diffractive optical elements, so-called nanoantennas.11-19  

To  do  so,  several  different  mechanisms  were  proposed,  such  as  using  the  Pancharatnam-

Berry phase20-21 or using resonances excited in the nanoantennas (either plasmonic or Mie-

type22).  Since  they  were  first  proposed,  they  have  found  many  potential  applications, 

including meta-lenses to replace bulky lens systems relying on phase accumulation along the 

direction that light propagates,16-17, 19, 23-24 and generation of complex beams or holography,13, 

4

 
18  just  to  mention  some.  While  these  are  static  optical  components,  for  which  the  phase 

coverage can be achieved via arranging the constituent nanoantennas with different shapes, 

sizes, or orientations, for various applications it is also important to find ways to adaptively 

tune the phase brought to light by the nanoantennas during usage.25-35 Ultimately, if each 

single  nanoantenna  element  of  a  metasurface  could  be  dynamically  tuned  by  applying 

electrical  voltages  then  it  would  act  as  an  SLM  device  with  a  pixel  size  smaller  than  the 

wavelength of light. 

In  this  work,  we  propose  and  demonstrate  an  idea  on  how  to  achieve  this  by 

integrating  the  nanoantennas  into  an  LC-SLM  device.  In  this  case,  the  main  phase 

accumulation  happens  inside  the  nanoantennas  rather  than  in  the  LC  layer  itself,  thus 

uncoupling it from the LC layer thickness. At the same time, switching of the LC orientation 

around the nanoantennas changes their local environment, modifying the spectral position 

of  the  nanoantenna  resonances  and  opening  a  door  to  dynamically  control  the  phase 

retardation experienced by an incoming light beam. This helps to reduce the thickness of the 

LC layer, which is crucial to solve the aforementioned limitations of these devices, while not 

requiring significant modifications to the existing SLM fabrication technology. 

First results on integration of nanoantennas inside LC cells25-26, 28, 36-38 have shown the 

possibility to obtain the spectral shift of nanoantenna resonances and associated amplitude 

modulation  of  light  using  electrically38  and  thermally36-37  induced  LC  directors  switching. 

Recent results have also demonstrated switchable beam deflection at a fixed angle with an 

LC-integrated gradient metasurface.28 However, a universal active device which is capable of 

arbitrary beam manipulation, such as 3D holographic animation or beam steering at multiple 

angles, has not been demonstrated so far. This type of devices requires uniform pixels which 

can be switched individually to give rise to the desired phase front, as discussed above. 

5

 
Here,  we  use  the  large  refractive  index  change  introduced  by  the  electrically 

modulated  LC  layer  to  manipulate  the  Mie  resonances  of  titanium  dioxide  nanoantennas 

embedded within.  We  show  that  integration of  nanoantennas  on  top  of  transmissive  SLM 

pixels may enable them to work with good efficiency with just a 1.5 micron thick LC layer and 

1.14 micron pixel size (less than twice the operational wavelength of 660 nm). To prove our 

concept, we demonstrate an efficient one-dimensional (1-D) 3-phase-level transmissive SLM 

device.  It  enables  the  realization  of  a  beam  deflection  function  with  a  maximum  beam 

steering  angle  of  11°  with  respect  to  the  normal,  corresponding  to  a  FOV  of  22°,  and  a 

diffraction efficiency of 36% with respect to the incident light, significantly outperforming not 

only the state-of-art transmissive LC-SLMs but also solid-state ones, which typically have small 

steering angles of a few degrees only.6, 39-40  

Background and Simulations  

For a transmissive phase-only nanoantenna SLM one need to design each nanoantenna pixel 

to transmit light efficiently and be able to cover the whole 2𝜋 phase range. One possible way 

to  achieve  this  is  using  the  so-called  Huygens’  metasurface  concept,  realized  here  via 

dielectric nanoantennas supporting both electric and magnetic dipole resonaces.15, 41-42 When 

these two modes are simultaneously excited and overlapped, a full-range phase shift from 0 

to  2 𝜋  around  the  resonance  peak  can  be  obtained.41    In  addition,  following  Kerker’s 

theoretical analysis,43 the overlapped and balanced magnetic and electric dipole resonances 

lead to a total cancellation of backward scattering, resulting in a close-to-unity transmission 

through the array.14-15, 44  

To  achieve  high  efficiencies  in  the  visible  spectral  range  we  design  nanoantennas 

made  of  TiO2,24,  45  which  has  negligible  absorption  at  the  visible  wavelengths  as  well  as  a 

6

 
 
relatively high refractive index (n ~2.5) sufficient to obtain resonances inside a liquid crystal 

environment (taken here to be the E7® from Merck, no ~ 1.5 and ne ~ 1.7, see Supplementary 

Information  (SI)  Figure  S1).  The  spectral  positions  and  strengths  of  magnetic  and  electric 

dipoles are strongly dependent on the aspect ratio of the nanoantennas41 as well as on the 

periodicity of the array (p).46  In order to find the optimum dimensions, we perform full-wave 

finite-element-method  simulations  using  COMSOL  Multiphysics  software  to  gain  an 

understanding of the influence of the key parameters. We start by considering a square lattice 

of cylindrical TiO2 nanoantennas embedded in the LC with thickness hLC = 1500 nm. The LC is 

sandwiched  between  two  glass  plates  and  its  director  is  oriented  in-plane,  i.e.  θLC  =  0°  as 

shown in Figure 1a, corresponding to the so-called nematic phase of the LC. The incident light 

wave impinges normally onto the device surface with its electric field polarized parallel to the 

LC director, the wave thus experiencing the extraordinary refractive index of the LC. In Figure 

1b&c, we show the maps of transmission magnitude and phase profile for different radii of 

the TiO2 nanoantennas sweeping around the optimized dimensions in the vicinity of targeted 

wavelength of 660 nm while keeping a fixed height of 205 nm. The period in all cases is p = 

360 nm, so that the unit cell is sub-diffractive. One can see that a high transmission and a full 

2𝜋 phase  coverage  can  be  achieved  in  a  wide  range  of  wavelengths  from  650  to  675  nm 

indicating  a  high  parameter  tolerance  of  our  nanoantenna  design.  This  high  tolerance  is 

optimized for the chosen nanoantenna height and becomes narrower at different heights as 

shown in the Supplementary Information, Figures S2 and S3.  

It should be noticed, however, that there is a strong dispersion of phase around the 

resonance,  making  it  rather  sensitive  to  the  radius  of  the  nanoantennas.  Thus,  the  size 

uniformity needs to be well preserved as, otherwise, it may affect the performance of the 

7

 
device. For example, in Figure 1c, it can be seen that a mere 20 nm radius variation covers the 

entire 2𝜋 phase range at a wavelength of 660 nm.  

With  the  optimized  nanoantenna  dimensions,  we  study  the  phase  coverage  of  the 

transmitted light through the nanoantenna array when the LC director orientation is switched 

from in-plane to out-of-plane. This kind of LC rotation can practically be achieved by applying 

an electrical bias between the top and bottom electrodes sandwiching a nematic LC with pre-

aligned, in-plane parallel directors.47 The rotation of LC directors has two effects. Firstly, it 

modifies  the  permittivity  tensor  of  the  LC  layer,  modulating  the  refracting  index  of  the 

environment around the nanoantennas and thus changing the spectral position and intensity 

of their resonances.28, 36, 38 Consequently, the phase induced by the nanoantenna resonances 

at a particular wavelength changes accordingly. Secondly, the modified permittivity tensor 

also induces a difference in the phase accumulation in the LC layer itself.  

In Figure 2(a), we plot the calculated phase retardation of light incident normally to 

the optimized nanoantenna array (h = 205 nm, R = 135 nm, p = 360 nm, hLC = 1500 nm) across 

the spectrum of interest.  We plot the results for LC directors lying in the x-z plane with θLC 

varying from 0° to 90° with 5° increment, different color markers representing different LC 

director orientations. The size of the markers is proportional to the intensity of transmitted 

light (the size of the markers used in the legend corresponding to 50% transmission). We see 

that above 670 nm, the relative phase difference for the device at different LC orientations 

does not exceed 0.8𝜋, which is not enough to provide 2π phase coverage required for SLMs. 

This is the spectral region in which the nanoantennas are not resonant with the incident light 

and the phase retardation is entirely attributed to the phase accumulation in the LC layer. 

Below 670 nm, the resonances excited in the nanoantennas generate strong phase 

variations.  In  Figure  2(a),  we  have  highlighted  three  series  of  results  corresponding  to  LC 

8

 
director orientations of 0°, 45° and 90°. The phase differences between these three series is 

evenly spaced in the wavelength region between 660 nm and 670 nm with approximate phase 

difference of around 2𝜋/3 to each other. Furthermore, they also have similar transmittance 

ranging between 60% and 90% thus satisfying the two basic criteria for a 3-phase level spatial 

light modulator – high transmission and evenly spaced phase coverage.  

To demonstrate a proof of concept device functionality of the 3-phase-level spatial 

light  modulator,  we  simulate  light  beam  bending  induced  by  a  gradient  phase  profile 

introduced  by  neighboring  nanoantennas  with  the  three  different  LC  orientations  having 

equally spaced phase retardation levels. First, from the simulation we obtained the electric 

field distribution inside the LC cell at the wavelength of 665 nm for the three LC orientations 

separately and put them side-by-side in Figure 2(b). One can see that the wave-fronts of the 

incident plane wave are only slightly affected by the propagation through the LC layer for the 

three cases. This indicates little phase difference accumulated inside the LC cell itself. During 

the interaction with nanoantennas though, the wave-fronts of transmitted light experience a 

different phase retardation with respect to each other, forming three adjacent phase steps. 

As a consequence, in the far field, light transmitted through a system consisting of a periodic 

repetition of these three unit cells should be deflected out of the normal to the surface, in a 

direction perpendicular to the tilted wave front indicated by light dotted lines in Figure 2(b).  

We then simulate a real device structure consisting of cylindrical TiO2 nanoantennas 

placed on ITO electrodes patterned on top of a glass substrate, as schematically shown in 

Figure  3(a).  The  system  is  covered  with  another  ITO-coated  glass,  serving  as  a  common, 

ground electrode, and the LC is sandwiched between the substrate and the cover, embedding 

the nanoantennas. Instead of one nanoantenna for each phase level, we choose to have three 

of them on each bottom electrode. This is to reduce the effect of phase reset at the edge of 

9

 
each unit cell, which may cause phase profile broadening deviating it from the desired phase-

front.  In  addition,  this  gives  enough  width  to  the  electrodes  to  accommodate  the  fringing 

electric field brought about by the finite LC domain wall thickness (i.e. when the LC domain 

on one electrode orients in a different direction to the domain on the adjacent electrodes), 

which is on the order of hundred nanometers.48 According to our simulations, further increase 

of the number of particles per pixel does not significantly improve the performance (see Table 

S1 in SI). The LC orientation above the three neighboring electrodes is put at 0°,45° and 90° 

respectively, corresponding to the respective phase differences of 0, 2π/3 and 4π/3 radians, 

reproducing the gradient phase profile (similar to Figure 2(b)) to deflect the incident beam. 

This structure is then repeated periodically as a supercell of an infinite gradient metasurface. 

The beam deflection efficiency of  the proposed SLM device numerically calculated using a 

commercial Finite-Difference-Time-Domain (FDTD) solver (Lumerical Inc.) is plotted in Figure 

2(c).  It  can  be  observed  that,  at  approximately  665  nm,  there  is  a  clear  increase  of  the 

transmitted  power  into  the  -1  diffraction  order,  together  with  a  strong  reduction  of  the 

transmission  into  the  0  and  +1  orders.  This  translates  into  the  predicted  beam  deflection, 

consistent with the analysis of homogeneous arrays shown in Figure 2(a) and 2(b). 

Experimental Results 

To experimentally realize the proof-of-concept beam deflecting SLM device, rectangular 20 

nm thick ITO electrodes are fabricated on top of a glass substrate. The length and width of 

each electrode are 100 μm and 1.08 μm, respectively, and their spacing is 60 nm. Then 3 rows 

of cylindrical TiO2 nanoantennas with a height of 205 nm, diameter of 270 nm and period of 

360 nm are placed on top of each of the electrodes, as shown in Figure 3(a). The electrodes 

with nanoantennas are then embedded into a 1.5 μm thick LC cell with another ITO electrode 

on  top.  The  top  electrode  is  covered  by  an  LC  alignment  layer  with  preferred  alignment 

10

 
direction perpendicular to the long side of the bottom electrodes. Detailed nanofabrication 

and  LC  cell  assembling  procedures  are  described  in  Methods  section  in  Supplementary 

Information.  Before the LC cell assembly, the dimensions of the fabricated nanostructures 

have  been  verified  through  scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  and  reflectance  spectral 

measurement (see Figure S4). In operation, two of each three neighboring bottom electrodes 

are  connected  to  the  two  terminals  of  an  external  voltage  source.  One  of  the  connected 

electrodes and the top electrode are put to the ground state and the other is biased to induce 

an out-of-plane switching of the LC directors above the electrode (left panel in Figure 3(a)). 

The third electrode is left floating/unconnected to pick up the electric potential in between 

the biased and the grounded electrodes, so that the LC directors can attain an intermediate 

level  of  rotation  leading  to  deflection  of  the  incoming  light  beam.  Note  that  incident  light 

beam can also be deflected to the other direction by switching the applied voltages, as shown 

in the right panel in Figure 3(a). In the case of no bias applied to the electrodes, light beam 

simply  passes  through  the  device  with  exactly  the  same  phase  at  all  three  electrodes,  as 

shown in the central panel in Figure 3(a). 

SEM images of the fabricated device before the liquid crystal infiltration are shown in 

Figures  3(b)  and  3(c).  A  typical  unit  cell,  consisting  of  three  electrodes,  is  highlighted  by  a 

yellow-shaded box. There is an obvious contrast in the SEM images between the unconnected 

electrode (the one at the bottom part of the yellow box) and the other two electrodes. The 

gaps  between  the  electrodes,  which  appear  darker  in  the SEM  images,  can  also  be  clearly 

observed in the magnified views in the right panels of Figures 3(b) and (c). The SEM image 

contrast in both cases is related to the higher conductivity of the connected ITO electrodes 

compared to the floating ones. 

11

 
Optical performance of the device is characterized using the spectrally-resolved back 

focal plane imaging technique23, 49-50 (see Methods section in SI for more details). Figures 4(a) 

and (b) show the beam deflection results at the wavelength of 663 nm under different biases.  

At zero bias, electrodes are in a homogeneous LC environment and the incident light goes 

straight into the zeroth order (situation depicted in Figure 3(a) middle panel). When we start 

to ramp up the electrical bias applied to the set of electrodes on the left side (Figure 3(a), left 

panel) from 0V to values above 6V, the beam starts to get deflected into the first diffraction 

orders. With relatively low voltages (see Figure 4(a) at 6V and 8V), the zeroth order intensity 

decreases and both -1 and +1 diffraction orders increase simultaneously. This implies that the 

unconnected central electrode has not yet gained enough potential at small bias voltages. 

Thus, the LC at the central electrode retains the same orientation as the grounded electrode 

on the right. In this case, the device functions as a symmetric grating splitting the beam to 

both  positive and negative diffraction orders. With further increase of the  bias  on the left 

electrode, the LC directors on top of the left electrode saturate in the out-of-plane position 

keeping  it  for  all  subsequent  higher  voltage  values.  Nevertheless,  for  increasing  bias,  the 

central electrode picks up an increasing electric potential pulled up by the left electrode. This 

rotates the LC directors on top of the central electrode and the phase front starts to tilt. As a 

result, the beam deflects based on the 3-phase level wave front described in Figure 2(b). We 

found that the highest efficiency of beam deflection (at 11° angle) occurs at 12 V, as shown 

in Figure 4(a). For higher bias levels, the electric field and, consequently, LC rotation at the 

unconnected electrode raises above the optimum value and the efficiency drops (see SI Figure 

S5). 

We  also  test  the  beam  deflection  into  the  opposite  direction  by  reverting  the 

configuration, i.e. grounding the top and bottom left electrodes and biasing the bottom right 

12

 
electrodes (as shown schematically in Figure 3(a), right panel). The results are shown in Figure 

4(b). As expected, in this case the beam at an optimum voltage is deflected to the right, a 

reversed situation as compared to the case with the left electrode biased. It should be noted, 

however, that now the zeroth order is more suppressed than in the preceding case and the 

optimum deflection occurs at a slightly higher voltage. We attribute this slight difference to 

imperfections of the fabricated device. The central electrode is slightly closer to one side of 

the connected electrodes, which may be the origin of the observed asymmetry in the beam 

deflection efficiency between the left and right configurations.  

In Figure 4(c) and (d), we plot the measured diffraction efficiency spectra of the device 

(i.e. the transmitted power normalized by the incident one) into the three main diffraction 

orders, -1, 0 and +1 (denoted as T-1, T0 and T+1), at the optimum beam deflection conditions 

for each case (namely left and right deflection configurations). The overall trend agrees well 

with  the  simulated  results  plotted  in  Figure  2(c),  despite  the  efficiency  obtained  from  the 

experiment being slightly lower. In the best case, the experimental beam deflection efficiency 

reaches  36%  of  the  incident  power  channeled  into  the  -1  diffraction  order  at  663  nm 

compared to ~48% obtained from the simulations (Figure 2(c)). One should note that there 

are several effects that are not considered in the FDTD simulations, such as the fringing fields 

at  the  gaps  between  the  electrodes,  size  non-uniformity  of  the  nanoantennas,  and 

imperfections in the LC director alignment, which all may contribute to this slight discrepancy. 

We expect the efficiency to get higher with improvement of the fidelity in the nanofabrication, 

better  LC  alignment,  and  external  biasing  of  the  center  electrode.  The  latter  would  help, 

moreover, to reduce the voltage required to obtain the beam deflection, as no pulling of the 

floating electrode would be necessary. 

13

 
It  is  also  important  to  note  that  while  in  our  proof  of  concept  experiment  only  3 

angular positions (-11°, 0°, +11°) for beam deflection have been demonstrated, the proposed 

3-phase level transmissive SLM is capable to deflect the incoming beam at multiple different 

angles within the maximum demonstrated range of 22°. This will require a proper electrical 

connection and addressing of each ITO electrode individually.  

Conclusions  

We demonstrated a 1D phase-only nanoantenna-based transmissive spatial light modulator 

(SLM) device, which has a good efficiency of 36% with a pixel size of only ~1micron and a large 

viewing angle span of 22°. The device works based on an abrupt phase accumulation provided 

by a tunable Huygens’ metasurface consisting of TiO2 dielectric nanoantennas embedded in 

a  liquid  crystal  cell.  The  phase  accumulation  is  dynamically  modulated  by  changing  the 

nanoantenna environment via liquid crystal director rotation through application of external 

bias. The presence of the nanoantennas allows a reduction of the liquid crystal layer thickness 

required  to  achieve  the  necessary  phase  modulation  by  more  than  a  half  compared  to 

traditional SLMs. This, in turn, alleviates the phase broadening effect and the fringing field 

effect, which are the main limiting factors of the traditional SLM devices, allowing significant 

reduction of the pixel size. This concept can further be extended to 2-dimensional phase-only 

liquid crystals SLMs, opening up the possibility of making ultra-high-resolution devices which 

may perform faster and have a larger field of view with high efficiency. 

14

 
 
 
 
References 

Yang, D.-K.; Wu, S.-T., Fundamentals of liquid crystal devices. John Wiley & Sons: 

Lingel, C.; Haist, T.; Osten, W., Optimizing the diffraction efficiency of SLM-based 

Armitage, D.; Underwood, I.; Wu, S.-T., Introduction to microdisplays. John Wiley & 

Kagalwala, K. H.; Giuseppe, G.; Abouraddy, A. F.; Saleh, B. E. A., Single-photon three-

Stockley, J.; Serati, S. In Advances in liquid crystal beam steering, 2004; International 

Shusteff, M.; Browar, A. E. M.; Kelly, B. E.; Henriksson, J.; Weisgraber, T. H.; Panas, R. 

Ji, N., Adaptive optical fluorescence microscopy. Nature methods 2017, 14 (4), 374. 
Lazarev, G.; Hermerschmidt, A.; Krüger, S.; Osten, S., LCOS spatial light modulators: 

1. 
Sasaki, H.; Yamamoto, K.; Wakunami, K.; Ichihashi, Y.; Oi, R.; Senoh, T., Large size 
three-dimensional video by electronic holography using multiple spatial light modulators. 
Scientific reports 2014, 4, 6177. 
2. 
M.; Fang, N. X.; Spadaccini, C. M., One-step volumetric additive manufacturing of complex 
polymer structures. Science advances 2017, 3 (12), eaao5496. 
3. 
qubit quantum logic using spatial light modulators. Nature Communications 2017, 8 (1), 739. 
4. 
5. 
trends and applications. Optical Imaging and Metrology: Advanced Technologies 2012, 1-29. 
6. 
2014. 
7. 
Sons: 2006; Vol. 11. 
8. 
Society for Optics and Photonics: pp 32-40. 
9. 
Lu, T.; Pivnenko, M.; Robertson, B.; Chu, D., Pixel-level fringing-effect model to 
describe the phase profile and diffraction efficiency of a liquid crystal on silicon device. 
Applied optics 2015, 54 (19), 5903-5910. 
10. 
holography with respect to the fringing field effect. Applied optics 2013, 52 (28), 6877-6883. 
11. 
components. Science 2017, 358 (6367), eaam8100. 
12. 
planar optics: from plasmonic to dielectric metasurfaces. Optica 2017, 4 (1), 139-152. 
13. 
Light propagation with phase discontinuities: generalized laws of reflection and refraction. 
Science 2011, 334 (6054), 333-337. 
14. 
Kuznetsov, A. I.; Miroshnichenko, A. E.; Brongersma, M. L.; Kivshar, Y. S.; 
Luk’yanchuk, B., Optically resonant dielectric nanostructures. Science 2016, 354 (6314), 
2472. 
15. 
A. I., High‐transmission dielectric metasurface with 2π phase control at visible 
wavelengths. Laser & Photonics Reviews 2015, 9 (4), 412-418. 
16. 
retroreflector. Nature Photonics 2017, 11, 415-420. 
17. 
Arbabi, A.; Arbabi, E.; Kamali, S. M.; Horie, Y.; Han, S.; Faraon, A., Miniature optical 
planar camera based on a wide-angle metasurface doublet corrected for monochromatic 
aberrations. Nature Communications 2016, 7, 13682. 
18. 
control of phase and polarization with subwavelength spatial resolution and high 
transmission. Nature Nanotechnology 2015, 10 (11), 937-943. 
19. 
perspectives. Laser & Photonics Reviews 2017, 11 (3), 1600295. 

Yu, Y. F.; Zhu, A. Y.; Paniagua‐Domínguez, R.; Fu, Y. H.; Luk'yanchuk, B.; Kuznetsov, 

Genevet, P.; Capasso, F.; Aieta, F.; Khorasaninejad, M.; Devlin, R., Recent advances in 

Arbabi, A.; Horie, Y.; Bagheri, M.; Faraon, A., Dielectric metasurfaces for complete 

Yu, N.; Genevet, P.; Kats, M. A.; Aieta, F.; Tetienne, J.-P.; Capasso, F.; Gaburro, Z., 

Khorasaninejad, M.; Capasso, F., Metalenses: Versatile multifunctional photonic 

Arbabi, A.; Arbabi, E.; Horie, Y.; Kamali, S. M.; Faraon, A., Planar metasurface 

Lalanne, P.; Chavel, P., Metalenses at visible wavelengths: past, present, 

15

 
 
Howes, A.; Wang, W.; Kravchenko, I.; Valentine, J., Dynamic transmission control 

Paniagua-Dominguez, R.; Yu, Y. F.; Khaidarov, E.; Choi, S.; Leong, V.; Bakker, R. M.; 

Komar, A.; Paniagua-Domínguez, R. n.; Miroshnichenko, A.; Yu, Y. F.; Kivshar, Y. S.; 

Bohn, J.; Bucher, T.; Chong, K. E.; Komar, A.; Choi, D.-Y.; Neshev, D. N.; Kivshar, Y. S.; 

Sarma, R.; Campione, S.; Goldflam, M.; Shank, J.; Noh, J.; Smith, S.; Ye, P. D.; Sinclair, 

Zhu, A. Y.; Kuznetsov, A. I.; Luk’yanchuk, B.; Engheta, N.; Genevet, P., Traditional and 

Bomzon, Z. e.; Biener, G.; Kleiner, V.; Hasman, E., Space-variant Pancharatnam–Berry 

20.  Marrucci, L.; Manzo, C.; Paparo, D., Pancharatnam-Berry phase optical elements for 
wave front shaping in the visible domain: switchable helical mode generation. Applied 
Physics Letters 2006, 88 (22), 221102. 
21. 
phase optical elements with computer-generated subwavelength gratings. Optics letters 
2002, 27 (13), 1141-1143. 
22. 
emerging materials for optical metasurfaces. Nanophotonics 2017, 6 (2), 452-471. 
23. 
Liang, X.; Fu, Y. H.; Valuckas, V.; Krivitsky, L. A.; Kuznetsov, A. I., A metalens with a near-unity 
numerical aperture. Nano letters 2018, 18 (3), 2124-2132. 
Khorasaninejad, M.; Chen, W. T.; Devlin, R. C.; Oh, J.; Zhu, A. Y.; Capasso, F., 
24. 
Metalenses at visible wavelengths: Diffraction-limited focusing and subwavelength 
resolution imaging. Science 2016, 352 (6290), 1190-1194. 
25. 
based on all-dielectric Huygens metasurfaces. Optica 2018, 5 (7), 787-792. 
26. 
Pertsch, T.; Staude, I., Active tuning of spontaneous emission by Mie-resonant dielectric 
metasurfaces. Nano letters 2018, 18 (6), 3461-3465. 
27. 
M.; Klem, J.; Wendt, J., Low dissipation spectral filtering using a field-effect tunable III–V 
hybrid metasurface. Applied Physics Letters 2018, 113 (6), 061108. 
28. 
Kuznetsov, A. I.; Neshev, D., Dynamic beam switching by liquid crystal tunable dielectric 
metasurfaces. ACS Photonics 2018, 5 (5), 1742-1748. 
29. 
Horie, Y.; Arbabi, A.; Arbabi, E.; Kamali, S. M.; Faraon, A., High-speed, phase-
dominant spatial light modulation with silicon-based active resonant antennas. ACS 
Photonics 2017, 5 (5), 1711-1717. 
30. 
tunable dielectric metasurface lens. Nature communications 2018, 9 (1), 812. 
31. 
Metasurface at 1550 nm with Wide (> 300°) Phase Tunability. Nano letters 2018, 18 (5), 
2957-2963. 
32. 
Sweatlock, L. A.; Atwater, H. A., Experimental demonstration of> 230 phase modulation in 
gate-tunable graphene–gold reconfigurable mid-infrared metasurfaces. Nano letters 2017, 
17 (5), 3027-3034. 
She, A.; Zhang, S.; Shian, S.; Clarke, D. R.; Capasso, F., Adaptive metalenses with 
33. 
simultaneous electrical control of focal length, astigmatism, and shift. Science Advances 
2018, 4 (2), eaap9957. 
34.  Wang, Q.; Rogers, E. T. F.; Gholipour, B.; Wang, C.-M.; Yuan, G.; Teng, J.; Zheludev, N. 
I., Optically reconfigurable metasurfaces and photonic devices based on phase change 
materials. Nature Photonics 2016, 10 (1), 60. 
35. 
2012, 11 (11), 917. 
36. 
Active tuning of all-dielectric metasurfaces. ACS nano 2015, 9 (4), 4308-4315. 

Sherrott, M. C.; Hon, P. W. C.; Fountaine, K. T.; Garcia, J. C.; Ponti, S. M.; Brar, V. W.; 

Zheludev, N. I.; Kivshar, Y. S., From metamaterials to metadevices. Nature materials 

Sautter, J.; Staude, I.; Decker, M.; Rusak, E.; Neshev, D. N.; Brener, I.; Kivshar, Y. S., 

Kafaie Shirmanesh, G.; Sokhoyan, R.; Pala, R. A.; Atwater, H. A., Dual-Gated Active 

Arbabi, E.; Arbabi, A.; Kamali, S. M.; Horie, Y.; Faraji-Dana, M.; Faraon, A., MEMS-

16

 
Parry, M.; Komar, A.; Hopkins, B.; Campione, S.; Liu, S.; Miroshnichenko, A. E.; 

Zhang, Z.; You, Z.; Chu, D., Fundamentals of phase-only liquid crystal on silicon 

Staude, I.; Miroshnichenko, A. E.; Decker, M.; Fofang, N. T.; Liu, S.; Gonzales, E.; 

Shalaev, M. I.; Sun, J.; Tsukernik, A.; Pandey, A.; Nikolskiy, K.; Litchinitser, N. M., 

Poulton, C. V.; Byrd, M. J.; Raval, M.; Su, Z.; Li, N.; Timurdogan, E.; Coolbaugh, D.; 

Decker, M.; Staude, I.; Falkner, M.; Dominguez, J.; Neshev, D. N.; Brener, I.; Pertsch, 

Komar, A.; Fang, Z.; Bohn, J.; Sautter, J.; Decker, M.; Miroshnichenko, A.; Pertsch, T.; 

Kerker, M.; Wang, D. S.; Giles, C. L., Electromagnetic scattering by magnetic spheres. 

37. 
Nogan, J.; Sinclair, M. B.; Brener, I.; Neshev, D. N., Active tuning of high-Q dielectric 
metasurfaces. Applied Physics Letters 2017, 111 (5), 053102. 
38. 
Brener, I.; Kivshar, Y. S.; Staude, I., Electrically tunable all-dielectric optical metasurfaces 
based on liquid crystals. Applied Physics Letters 2017, 110 (7), 071109. 
39. 
Vermeulen, D.; Watts, M. R., Large-scale silicon nitride nanophotonic phased arrays at 
infrared and visible wavelengths. Optics letters 2017, 42 (1), 21-24. 
40. 
(LCOS) devices. Light: Science & Applications 2014, 3 (10), e213. 
41. 
T.; Kivshar, Y. S., High‐efficiency dielectric Huygens’ surfaces. Advanced Optical Materials 
2015, 3 (6), 813-820. 
42. 
High-efficiency all-dielectric metasurfaces for ultracompact beam manipulation in 
transmission mode. Nano letters 2015, 15 (9), 6261-6266. 
43. 
JOSA 1983, 73 (6), 765-767. 
44. 
Dominguez, J.; Luk, T. S.; Neshev, D. N.; Brener, I., Tailoring directional scattering through 
magnetic and electric resonances in subwavelength silicon nanodisks. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (9), 
7824-7832. 
45. 
Khaidarov, E.; Hao, H.; Paniagua-Domínguez, R.; Yu, Y. F.; Fu, Y. H.; Valuckas, V.; Yap, 
S. L. K.; Toh, Y. T.; Ng, J. S. K.; Kuznetsov, A. I., Asymmetric nanoantennas for ultrahigh angle 
broadband visible light bending. Nano letters 2017, 17 (10), 6267-6272. 
Chong, K. E.; Staude, I.; James, A.; Dominguez, J.; Liu, S.; Campione, S.; Subramania, 
46. 
G. S.; Luk, T. S.; Decker, M.; Neshev, D. N., Polarization-independent silicon metadevices for 
efficient optical wavefront control. Nano letters 2015, 15 (8), 5369-5374. 
47.  Mukohzaka, N.; Yoshida, N.; Toyoda, H.; Kobayashi, Y.; Hara, T., Diffraction efficiency 
analysis of a parallel-aligned nematic-liquid-crystal spatial light modulator. Applied optics 
1994, 33 (14), 2804-2811. 
48. 
49. 
Kuznetsov, A. I., Directional lasing in resonant semiconductor nanoantenna arrays. Nature 
nanotechnology 2018, 1. 
50. 
Zhang, X.; Tan, S. T.; Demir, H. V.; Kuznetsov, A. I., High-efficiency and low-loss gallium 
nitride dielectric metasurfaces for nanophotonics at visible wavelengths. Applied Physics 
Letters 2017, 111 (22), 221101. 

Prost, J., The physics of liquid crystals. Oxford university press: 1995; Vol. 83. 
Ha, S. T.; Fu, Y. H.; Emani, N. K.; Pan, Z.; Bakker, R. M.; Paniagua-Domínguez, R.; 

Emani, N. K.; Khaidarov, E.; Paniagua-Domínguez, R.; Fu, Y. H.; Valuckas, V.; Lu, S.; 

17

 
 
 
 
Figure Captions 
Figure 1. Optimization of the nanoantenna geometry through simulations. (a) Schematic of 
the simulated unit cell. A TiO2 nanodisk with a height ha and radius R is placed on top of a 
glass substrate. The disk is embedded in a liquid crystal (E7) environment with a thickness hLC 
= 1.5 micron. The liquid crystal directors are initially aligned parallel to the X-axis, while the 
light is incident normal to the surface of the substrate (along the Z-axis) and is polarized along 
the X-axis. A square array of the nanoantennas is formed by translating the unit cell in the 
both X and Y directions with a period p = 360 nm. (b) Zero order transmission spectrum of the 
array for nanoantenna radius sweeping from 130 nm to 150 nm and fixed height of 205 nm. 
(c) Spectrum of the phase of the transmitted wave for nanoantennas with a fixed height of 
205 nm and varying radius, sweeping from 130 nm to 150 nm. The refractive indices of TiO2 
and E7 are plotted in SI (Figure S1). 

Figure  2.  Simulation  results  for  the  device  under  different  LC  director  orientations.  (a) 
Calculated relative phase retardation of the wave front passing through the nanoantenna unit 
cell (with h = 205 nm, R = 135 nm, and p = 360 nm). Color of the markers changes gradually 
from blue to orange to yellow-green mapping the change of orientation of LC directors from 
in-plane (pointing to X-direction, 0°) to out-of-plane (pointing to Z-direction, 90°). The size of 
the markers is proportional to the transmittance calculated with respect to the transmission 
through the LC layer in the absence of the nanoantennas. The size of the markers in the legend 
corresponds to 50% transmittance. The series of markers highlighted are those that are used 
to achieve the optimum 3-phase level SLM device. (b) Electric field distribution (EX) in the unit 
cell under three different LC director orientations at the wavelength of 665 nm. The excitation 
light  is  polarized  along  the  X-axis  and  impinges  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  at  a  normal 
incidence to the substrate surface (indicated by the green solid line as a guide to eyes). The 
light-yellow dotted lines outline the phase fronts which would emerge from the device after 
being retarded differently in adjacent cells having different orientations of LC directors. The 
normal  to  these  lines  represents  the  direction  of  the  outgoing  deflected  beam.  The  slight 
misalignment  of  phase  and  intensity  contrast  above  the  top  boundary  between  glass  and 
liquid  crystal  is  due  to  interference  between  a  small  amount  of  reflected  wave  with  the 
incident wave.  (c) Calculated spectral transmission into the three main diffraction orders: -1, 
0 and +1, denoted by T-1, T0 and T+1, respectively. The beam deflection into -1 order peaks at 
around 665 nm, consistent with the analysis in (a) and (b). 

Figure 3. Metasurface-based SLM: principle of operation and device structure.  (a) Schematic 
drawings  of  the  SLM  and  its  operation  concept.  The  LC  molecules  (E7)  are  pre-aligned 
uniformly along the short axis of the electrodes and parallel to the surface of the substrate. 
When all electrodes are at the same potential, the LC layer is uniformly aligned in-plane and 
the incident beam travels straight through the device, as shown in the center panel. When 
the left electrode is biased, the directors of the LC layer on top the electrode are rotated, 
pointing out-of-plane. The bias difference between the left and right electrodes also induces 
an intermediate bias at the unconnected/floating electrode rotating the LC directors on top 
of it to an intermediate state. This creates a tilted phase front as shown in Figure 2(b), causing 
the beam to be deflected to the left, as depicted in the left panel. Conversely, biasing the 
opposite (right) electrode causes the beam to be deflected to the other direction (right) as 
shown on the right panel. (b) Top view scanning electron microscope (SEM) images showing 
the  fabricated  device  structure.  The  observed  bright  stripes  are  the  unconnected/floating 

18

 
 
 
electrodes inducing charging effect leading to the bright contrast. A zoomed-in view is shown 
on the right panel. (c) Titled SEM images of the whole device structure. Each device covers a 
region of 120 by 100 microns. The zoomed-in view of individual electrodes is shown in the 
right panel. Scale Bars:  Left panel in (b): 5 microns; Right panel in (b): 600 nm; Left panel in 
(c): 15 microns; Right panel in (c): 250 nm. The false color, yellow shaded areas highlight a 
unit cell of the device. 

Figure 4. Performance of the fabricated device. (a) Measured far field beam deflection under 
the bias voltage applied to the bottom left electrode while keeping the top electrode and the 
bottom  right  electrode  grounded.  (b)  Measured  far  field  beam  deflection  under  the  bias 
voltage applied to the bottom right electrode while keeping the top electrode and the bottom 
left electrode grounded. In both cases, the first five diffraction orders are shown (from -2 to 
+2)  at  the  wavelength  of  663  nm.  (c)  Measured  transmission  diffraction  efficiency 
(transmission intensity normalized to incident one) for the three main diffraction orders (from 
-1 to +1) corresponding to 12V bias in (a). (d) Measured transmission diffraction efficiency for 
the three main diffraction orders corresponding to 13V bias in (b). 

19

 
 
 
 
Figure 1 

20

 
 
(a)

(c)

Figure 2 

(b)

2π/3

2π/3

X
E

Z
k

s
s
a
G

l

l

a
t
s
y
r
C
d
u
q
i
L

i

s
s
a
G

l

21

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 

22

 
  
 
 
Figure 4 

23

 
 
  
 
 
Supplementary Materials for 

Phase-only transmissive spatial light modulator based on tunable dielectric 
metasurface 
Shi-Qiang Li, Xuewu Xu, Rasna Maruthiyodan Veetil, Vytautas Valuckas, Ramón Paniagua-
Domínguez, and Arseniy I. Kuznetsov* 
Correspondence to: arseniy_kuznetsov@imre.a-star.edu.sg 

This PDF file includes: 

Materials and Methods 
Figs. S1 to S6 
Tables S1  

24

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Materials and Methods 

Fabrication of the nanoantenna-based SLM device  

We start with a commercial ITO-coated conductive glass slide (Latech Scientific Supply 
Pte.  Ltd,  Singapore)  with  ITO  film  thickness  of  23  ±  5  nm  (Figure  S6a).  Measured 
transmittance of the glass slide is above 87% in the whole visible spectral range and resistivity 
is ~100 Ω/□. Amorphous TiO2 film is then deposited onto the ITO glass slides with Oxford 
Optofab 3000 ion assisted deposition system (Figure S6b). The deposition rate is 0.28 Å/s to 
ensure the smoothness of the films. The surface roughness after the TiO2 film deposition is 
characterized by Vecco DI 3100 Atomic Force Microscope and the root mean square value 
obtained is around 1.0 nm from several random areas with size of 10 by 10 microns. Following 
that, a 30 nm Chromium (Cr) film is evaporated on top of the TiO2 film by an electron-beam 
evaporator (Angstrom EcoVac), as shown in Figure S6c. Electron-beam lithography (EBL) is 
then performed to define the masks for the nanoantennas using Elionix ELS-7000 EBL system. 
A  standard  procedure  is  conducted  using  a  negative  tone  electron-beam  resist,  Hydrogen 
silsesquioxane  (HSQ,  Fox-22,  Dow-Corning  Inc.),  to  define  the  mask  pattern  of  the 
nanoantennas (Figure S6d&e). Following that, the pattern is transferred to the Cr layer by a 
reactive ion etching process in Oxford PlasmaLab 100. Processes with Cl2 and O2 gases are 
used to ensure the fidelity of the pattern transfer due to their etch selectivity of Cr over HSQ 
(Figure S6f). With Cr as a hard mask, formation of the TiO2 nanoantennas is achieved through 
dry etching with CHF3 gas (Figure S6g) in the same etcher. Chromium mask is then removed 
by  immersing  the  sample  in  a  chromium  etchant  solution  (Sigma-Aldrich)  for  4  minutes 
(Figure S6h). A second EBL process is then performed on the sample. The standard process 
for the positive tone electron-beam resist (ZEP520A, ZEONREX Electronic Chemicals) is used 
for the second layer. Electrode pattern is directly transferred from ZEP to the ITO layer by 
another reactive ion etching process in the same etcher. A recipe with CH4 and Ar gases is used 
to achieve good etching selectivity of ITO over ZEP resist and the structure after etching is 
shown schematically in Figure S6i.  

Scanning electron microscopy 

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging of the nanofabricated samples is performed 
on Hitachi SU8200 Ultra-high resolution scanning electron microscope. Electron acceleration 
voltage used is 1 kV with a nominal current of 10 nA. The low voltage is used to prevent the 
charging effect on the samples fabricated on insulating glass substrates.  

Assembly of the nanoantenna-based SLM device 

ITO conductive glass slide with the same specification as the device substrate is used as 
the top covering slide to form the liquid crystal cell. Firstly, a layer of polyimide is spin coated 
on the covering slide followed by curing at 180 °C for 1 hour on a hot plate. The cured slides 
are then rubbed unidirectionally with a piece of soft velvet clothes to define a preferred liquid 
crystal alignment direction of the cell. The rubbing strength and duration are controlled by a 
commercially available rubbing machine (Holmarc Opto-Mechatronics - HO-IAD-BTR-03). 
Following that, the cover slide is pressed onto the device structure, with the spacing defined by 
a layer of glue (Norland optical adhesive NOA81). After the desired gap thickness between the 
two cover slides is reached, the glue layer is cured via ultra-violet light irradiation. The spacing 
and flatness between  the top covering slide and the bottom  substrate is  precisely controlled 
through a home-made press equipped with a multi-point optical profilometer. Lastly, nematic 
liquid crystal molecules (E7 from Merck) are introduced into the gap formed between the top 
covering slide and the bottom substrate by capillary forces and vacuum  pumping. After the 

25

 
 
 
infiltration the nematic liquid crystal directors are aligned parallel with the alignment direction 
introduced by the rubbing process on the covering slide. Figure S6j shows a schematic of the 
assembled device. 

Setup for optical characterization and beam bending measurements.  

The optical characterization setup used in the experiments has been described in details 
elsewhere [49]. In brief, the incident beam from a halogen lamp is linearly polarized along the 
shorter axis of the bottom electrodes of the SLM. A pupil diaphragm on the optical condenser 
is closed to its minimum to limit the angular spread of the incident light to the smallest limit 
(2° from the normal to the device surface). Light transmits through the device and is collected 
through  a  bright  field  objective  lens  (Nikon  50X,  NA  =  0.45).  The  back  focal  plane  of  the 
objective is then imaged to the entrance slit of Andor Spectrograph (SR-303i). The direction 
of the slit is aligned with the short axis of the electrodes so that the beam deflection along that 
direction is spatially resolved. Along the perpendicular direction, light is dispersed by a blazed 
grating so that we obtain the spectral information of the deflected beam. The image with an 
angular resolution of 0.38° and a spectral resolution of 0.34 nm is collected by an EMCCD 
(Andor Newton Series) sensor array and stored in a computer for further analysis. The active 
modulation of the bias voltage on the electrodes is provided by a power supply with a voltage 
resolution of 10 mV. (Keysight Technology U8031A Triple Output DC Power Supply) 

Finite-element-method Simulation 

The  simulations  were  performed  using  COMSOL  Multiphysics  software  package.  The 
detailed procedure is a typical electromagnetic wave simulation in the frequency domain with 
one  unit  cell  of  the  nanoantenna  array  as  the  simulation  cell.  An  example  is  provided  by 
COMSOL Inc at the following link (https://comsol.com/model/plasmonic-wire-grating-wave-
optics-14705; accessed on December 29, 2018) 

26

 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S1. 
(a) Real and imaginary parts of refractive index (n and k) of our TiO2 films extracted from 
ellipsometry measurements; (b) Real and imaginary part of refractive index (n and k) of E7 
liquid crystal obtained from literature data.1 

27

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S2. 
Numerically  calculated  (a)  amplitude  and  (b)  phase  shift  of  the  transmitted  light  for 
nanoantenna arrays with a height of 195 nm. 

28

 
 
 
 
Fig. S3. 
Numerically  calculated  (a)  amplitude  and  (b)  phase  shift  of  the  transmitted  light  for 
nanoantenna arrays with a height of 215 nm. 

29

 
 
 
 
Fig. S4. 
Optical  transmission  measurement  of  a  nanoantenna  array  in  air  and  its  comparison  to  the 
simulations.  Parameters  of  the  simulated  unit  cell  are  similar  to  the  nanoantenna  array 
dimensions  measured  by  SEM.  Height  of  TiO2  nanodisks  -  h  =  205  nm;  radius  of  TiO2 
nanodisks - R = 135 nm; period of the unit cell - p = 360 nm; 60 nm gap is included in the 
direction of the polarization of the incident electric field between every three unit-cells along 
the  same  direction  (to  simulate  the  introduced  gap  between  individual  electrodes).  The 
wavevector of the incident light is normal to the surface of the glass substrate. ITO layer is 
ignored in the simulation as its contribution was verified to be negligible but computationally 
demanding.  

30

 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S5. 
Efficiency of the device beyond optimum voltage. Beyond 12 volts, the efficiency drops as 
plotted. 

31

 
 
 
 
Fig. S6. 
Process Flow of the nanoantenna-based SLM device fabrication 

32

 
 
 
 
 
Table S1. 
Light bending efficiency for 3-phase level SLM for different numbers of TiO2 nanoantenns per 
pixel (Design “3LnP” corresponds to n nanoantennas per pixel). w: Width of each electrode; 
λ: Wavelength corresponding to optimum diffraction efficiency; Ttotal: Total light transmission; 
T0, T+1 and T-1: transmission into 0, +1 and -1 diffraction orders respectively; θ-1: First order 
diffraction angle. 

Design 

3L1P 
3L2P 
3L3P 
3L5P 
3L7P 
3L9P 

T0 

T-1 

T+1 

0.155

Ttotal 

λ 
w 
(μm) 
(nm) 
0.36  666.0  0.002 
0.288 0.520
0.72  665.5  0.0002  0.134  0.506 0.789
1.08  662.5  0.001 
0.537 0.834
1.80  663.0  0.006 
0.539 0.854
2.52  664.0  0.006  0.0520 0.533 0.869
3.24  664.0  0.007  0.0512 0.545 0.890

0.093
0.052

θ-1 (°) 

38.07
17.94 
11.80
7.05
5.04 
3.92 

Reference 
1. 
for display applications. Journal of Display Technology 2005, 1 (1), 51. 

Li, J.; Wen, C.-H.; Gauza, S.; Lu, R.; Wu, S.-T., Refractive indices of liquid crystals 

33

 
 
 
 
 
