Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. ms
January 9, 2019

c(cid:13)ESO 2019

9
1
0
2

n
a
J

8

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
7
3
4
2
0
.
1
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photospheric plasma and magnetic ﬁeld dynamics during the
formation of solar AR 11190

J. I. Campos Rozo1, 2, D. Utz1, 3, S. Vargas Domínguez2, A. Veronig1, and T. Van Doorsselaere4

1 IGAM, Institute of Physics, University of Graz, Universitätsplatz 5, 8010 Graz, Austria

e-mail: jose.campos-rozo@uni-graz.at

2 Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Observatorio Astronómico Nacional, Ed. 413 Bogotá, Colombia

e-mail: svargasd@unal.edu.co

3 Instituto de Astrofísica de Andalucía IAA-CSIC, Es-18008 Granada, Spain

e-mail: dominik.utz@uni-graz.at

4 Centre for Mathematical Plasma Astrophysics, Department of Mathematics, KU Leuven, 3001 Leuven, Belgium

e-mail: tom.vandoorsselaere@kuleuven.be

Received XXX ; accepted XXX

ABSTRACT

Context. The Sun features on its surface typical ﬂow patterns called the granulation, mesogranulation, and supergranulation. These
patterns arise due to convective ﬂows transporting energy from the interior of the Sun to its surface. The other well known elements
structuring the solar photosphere are magnetic ﬁelds arranged from single, isolated, small-scale ﬂux tubes to large and extended
regions visible as sunspots and active regions.
Aims. In this paper we will shed light on the interaction between the convective ﬂows in large-scale cells as well as the large-
scale magnetic ﬁelds in active regions, and investigate in detail the statistical distribution of ﬂow velocities during the evolution and
formation of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) active region 11190.
Methods. To do so, we employed local correlation tracking methods on data obtained by the Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO)
spacecraft in the continuum as well as on processed line-of-sight (LOS) magnetograms.
Results. We ﬁnd that the ﬂow ﬁelds in an active region can be modelled by a two-component distribution. One component is very
stable, follows a Rayleigh distribution, and can be assigned to the background ﬂows, whilst the other component is variable in strength
and velocity range and can be attributed to the ﬂux emergence visible both in the continuum maps as well as magnetograms. Generally,
the plasma ﬂows, as seen by the distribution of the magnitude of the velocity, follow a Rayleigh distribution even through the time
of formation of active regions. However, at certain moments of large-scale fast ﬂux emergence, a second component featuring higher
velocities is formed in the velocity magnitudes distribution.
Conclusions. The plasma ﬂows are generally highly correlated to the motion of magnetic elements and vice versa except during the
times of fast magnetic ﬂux emergence as observed by rising magnetic elements. At these times, the magnetic ﬁelds are found to move
faster than the corresponding plasma.

Key words. Photosphere – granulation – evolution – magnetic ﬁelds – sunspots

1. Introduction

High-resolution observations have shown that the solar photo-
sphere is a non-uniform layer formed by diﬀerent structures that
are constantly evolving at multiple spatial and temporal scales.
Some of these features form patterns, so-called convective cells,
granules, “or in more colloquial terms, bubbles” (Hansen et al.
2004). In the centre, these convective cells feature the emer-
gence of hot plasma with vertical velocities of about 0.4 km s−1,
while towards their boundaries, the plasma motions become
horizontal, moving to the intergranular lanes with velocities of
0.25 km s−1 (Title et al. 1986). Diverse studies have shown how
granular cells can organize themselves in three main size scales:
granulation (∼ 1000 km; Bushby & Favier 2014), mesogranula-
tion (5 − 10 Mm; November et al. 1981), and supergranulation
(> 20 Mm; Rieutord & Rincon 2010).

The evolution of the photospheric granulation pattern is de-
termined by the expansion and the subsequent dissolution of
granular cells (Rezaei et al. 2012; Palacios et al. 2012). When
granules start to show the appearance of bright rings, a dark cen-

tre, and fast outﬂows, they are called exploding granules (Title
et al. 1986, 1989). This happens during the ﬁnal expansion at the
last stage of their life. Such explosive granules are considered
important in the context of the whole solar granulation evolution
(Rösch 1961; Musman 1972; Namba & van Rijsbergen 1977).
Understanding the behaviour of the diﬀerent granulation scales
and granular evolution is important in order to obtain more real-
istic quiet Sun models for the formation, as well as the evolution
and decay of active regions (Roudier et al. 2003). The physical
processes of the emergence of granular-scale magnetic ﬁelds are
likely to be the same in the quiet Sun and active regions (Vargas
Domínguez et al. 2012).

Large-scale granules (mesogranules and supergranules) have
been associated to fast vertical upﬂows (Roudier et al. 2003;
Guglielmino et al. 2010; Palacios et al. 2012; Verma et al. 2016).
Moreover, exploding granules occur with certain preferences in
mesogranular regions (e.g. Massaguer & Zahn 1980; Title et al.
1989) and during the emergence of magnetic ﬁeld and its subse-
quent accumulation within mesogranular borders (Simon et al.
1988; Domínguez Cerdeña 2003; Ishikawa & Tsuneta 2011).

Article number, page 1 of 15

 
 
 
 
 
 
A&A proofs: manuscript no. ms

Fig. 1. Selected active region (AR) as observed on April 11, 2011 exhibits a complex conﬁguration with sunspots harbouring partial penumbrae and
pores. The ﬁrst row shows the time evolution of the continuum images for AR 11190 that displays a rapid evolution. The second row plots series of
LOS magnetograms for AR 11190 with positive and negative (white and black) magnetic polarities used to track the evolution of emergent positive
magnetic ﬁeld. The solid box encloses the region of an initial positive magnetic emergence, while the dashed box outlines a second emergent cell
evolving faster and thus pushing and suppressing the ﬁrst emergence. The colour bar in the ﬁrst row displays the intensity values clipped between
45% and 95% of the image featuring the largest intensity, whereas the colour bar in the second row shows the LOS magnetic ﬁeld maps clipped in
the range between −250 and +250 Gauss. A clearer understanding can be obtained by watching the full evolution of the active region in the movie
provided, which shows the magnetic ﬁeld on a false colour table from −2500 G to +2500 G, and the continuum maps normalized over the average
of all the maximum (additional online supplement to the paper).1

In this paper, we focus on the behaviour of such large-scale gran-
ular cells within the region of interest (ROI) and at the time when
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) ac-
tive region 11190 is formed. Such detailed studies were not pos-
sible, due to the lack of highly resolved, long, and suﬃciently
stable time series for the detailed investigation of the forma-
tion of an active region over days on spatial scales down to the
granulation. With highly sophisticated space instruments like the
SDO spacecraft (Solar Dynamics Observatory, see Pesnell et al.
2012), used in this study, we can follow the long temporal evolu-
tion necessary for the formation and dissolution of whole active
regions.

For the detailed ﬂow investigations performed in this study,
we need to identify the proper surface motions. Several authors
have studied these kinds of proper motions using diﬀerent ap-
proaches (e.g. Hurlburt et al. 1995; Simon et al. 1995; Welsch
et al. 2004; Schuck 2006). Among the most widely applied meth-
ods is the so-called local correlation tracking (LCT) technique.
LCT was employed for the calculation of proper motions of the
solar granulation for the ﬁrst time by November et al. (1986),
and subsequently by November & Simon (1988). The algorithm
is based on ﬁnding the best cross-correlation between two con-
secutive images. It is well known that LCT can produce some
errors due to the method itself when it measures the intensity
changes as these changes can be related to plasma motions but
also may reﬂect phase velocities (e.g. Roudier et al. 1999; Potts
et al. 2003). In addition, LCT may produce errors through phe-

nomena such as the shrinking-sun eﬀect (Lisle & Toomre 2004)
caused by large stationary ﬂows. However, one can correct for
these errors and thus such artefacts can successfully be removed
by subtracting the time average of the velocities from the ﬂow
maps. Some authors (e.g. Yi et al. 1992; Molowny-Horas 1994;
Verma et al. 2013; Louis et al. 2015; Asensio Ramos et al. 2017)
have shown that in the worst cases the underestimations of ve-
locities may amount to 20-30%.

2. Data and pre-processing

In this study we use time series of imaging data showing the
formation and evolution of active region (AR) 11190. The data
were acquired by the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI)
instrument (Hoeksema et al. 2014) on board the SDO space-
craft comprising continuum maps and line-of-sight (LOS) mag-
netograms.

The studied AR 11190 is shown in Fig. 1, and comprises the
formation stage during the time interval for the whole 24 hours
on April 11, 2011 in continuum as well as in LOS magnetic
ﬁeld. The maps are acquired with a cadence of 45 seconds
and a pixel resolution of ∼ 0.504 arcsec (roughly 350 km) for
both observable quantities (continuum, LOS magnetic ﬁeld).
As these data come already prepared at level 1.5, no primary
data reduction such as ﬂat ﬁelding and dark current correction is
necessary.

showing

1 A movie
https://github.com/Hypnus1803/PlotsSunspots/blob/
master/VideoPaper/CubeMag_20110411_hmicmap.mp4.

evolution

full

can

the

be

found

at

Figure 1 shows four diﬀerent instances prior to the formation
of AR 11190 in continuum and LOS magnetic ﬁeld images.
The video linked to the web url mentioned above shows clearly

Article number, page 2 of 15

J. I. Campos Rozo et al.: Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld dynamics during the formation of AR 11190

Fig. 2. Temporal evolution of the velocity ﬁelds within the ROI of AR 11190 at four diﬀerent times computed by local correlation tracking
(LCT) analysis. Horizontal and vertical velocities are inferred from continuum maps as well as from LOS magnetic ﬁeld maps. The top panel
shows the horizontal proper motions (calculated by LCT technique applied to the continuum maps) with the background image being the vertical
velocity map, and the contour lines representing positive vertical velocities with contour values of [0.5, 1., 1.5, 2., 3] km s−1. The second row
displays the horizontal velocities of magnetic elements (calculated from LCT analysis over the LOS magnetograms) where the background image
represents the LOS magnetic ﬁeld strength map and the contour lines are ranged as before. The red arrows show the motions of magnetic elements
with magnetic strengths greater than 50 Gauss, and the blue arrows display the average movements of negative magnetic elements with values
lower than -50 Gauss. The green arrows display horizontal behaviour for weak positive magnetic elements, whereas the yellow arrows display
the horizontal proper motions associated with weak negative magnetic ﬁeld elements. The third row shows a comparison between the evolution
of vertical velocities obtained from the continuum data set and the evolution of positive vertical velocities obtained from the LOS magnetic ﬁeld
data. The black arrow in the bottom right corner represents the length of a velocity vector featuring a magnitude of 300 m s−1.

the emergence of the ﬁrst magnetic bubble (Ortiz et al. 2014;
de la Cruz Rodríguez et al. 2015), and then a second even
faster and more powerful magnetic emergence starts to occur,
lifting more positive magnetic ﬂux to the surface and pushing
the previously emerged ﬂux to the right. The faster emergence
is seen even more clearly in the evolution of magnetograms
compared to the observations in the continuum data. In this
LOS magnetogram, a solid box (see second row in Fig. 1)
encloses an initial positive magnetic ﬁeld emergence, which
starts during the ﬁrst hours of the day, whereas a dashed box
encloses the second magnetic emergence. The LOS maps dis-
played in the ﬁgure were clipped in the range [−250, 250] Gauss.

Moreover, Fig. 1 (LOS maps) shows pre-existent positive
and negative magnetic ﬁeld regions. When the ﬁrst magnetic
bubble appears within the ﬁeld of view (FOV), the positive and
negative magnetic elements further away from the site of emer-
gence (constituting in some way the background magnetic envi-
ronment) do not change noticeably. At the same instant that the
second magnetic bubble starts to emerge, it pushes the ﬁrst emer-
gence away from the location of newly emergent ﬂux. Thus, soon
after, all the previously emerged magnetic elements are pushed
in the same right direction towards the negative magnetic ele-
ments. These magnetic elements in turn start to accumulate at
certain locations, increase there in magnetic ﬂux, and evolve for

Article number, page 3 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. ms

(cid:113)

v2
x

+ v2

Fig. 3. Distribution of magnitudes of veloc-
ities (v =
y; speeds) for weak and
strong magnetic ﬁelds for the times shown
in Fig. 2. Red and blue colours (thick lines)
describe the velocity distributions for pos-
itive and negative magnetic ﬁelds greater
than 50 Gauss, whereas green and yellow
(thin lines) distributions represent the mo-
tions of the weaker magnetic elements. The
ranges for both the weak positive and neg-
ative ﬁeld strengths are [10 < B < 50 &
−50 < B < −10] Gauss. Here, B is the
magnetic ﬁeld strength as obtained from
the magnetograms. The solid lines repre-
sent the positive magnetic polarity, whereas
the dashed lines represent the negative mag-
netic ﬁelds.

Fig. 4. Distribution of speeds. The red
dashed line shows the distribution of v for
the proper motions, whereas the blue and
solid line shows the distribution of magnetic
elements motion. The scale factor σ is asso-
ciated with the mean velocity in this distri-
bution.

the ﬁrst time into small magnetic pores that later on become the
fully evolved AR 11190.

The software used for reducing HMI data (e.g. derotation,
coaligment, and subsonic ﬁltering procedures) was encoded in
the Python language making use of the solar physics library
named Sunpy (SunPy Community et al. 2015). A graphical user
interface (GUI) has been developed to facilitate the detection
and application of the LCT method (see Campos Rozo & Var-
gas Dominguez 2014)2. The ROI was chosen manually in such
a way as to centre on the location where the emergence of fast
and highly notable large-scale granules is happening. The size of
the analyzed FOV is 150(cid:48)(cid:48) × 150(cid:48)(cid:48). All images were aligned and

2 The code can be found at https://github.com/Hypnus1803/
FlowMapsGUI.

Article number, page 4 of 15

a subsonic ﬁltering with a phase-velocity threshold of 4 km s−1
was applied to subtract the solar 5-minutes oscillation (Novem-
ber et al. 1981; Title et al. 1989). Moreover, due to the Sun being
a hot plasma sphere and the sunspot locations spreading along
diﬀerent regions on the solar disc, ﬂow map velocity compo-
nents were properly deprojected (see Vargas Dominguez 2009,
and references therein).

3. Results

We focused on the formation and emergence of AR 11190, and
investigated in detail the evolution and behaviour of the plasma
and magnetic ﬁeld dynamics from horizontal and vertical ve-
locities for diﬀerent time ranges. The LCT technique applied is

J. I. Campos Rozo et al.: Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld dynamics during the formation of AR 11190

Fig. 5. Plots show three test cases for the proposed combination of two-component distributions for the continuum ﬂow maps (lower set of panels)
as well as for the magnetic elements motions (upper set of panels). The ﬁrst row in both six panel sets depicts the case of combining two Rayleigh
distributions for the total ﬁt. They display the two independent Rayleigh components as well as the sum of the two components to form the whole
measured velocity distribution for three diﬀerent times. The second row for each of them displays in the same way the case of the combination of
a Rayleigh background component with a variable Gaussian component. Times are in universal time (UT).

based on Eq. 1 proposed by November & Simon (1988),

Ct,t+τ(δδδ, x) =

(cid:90)

(cid:18)
ζζζ −

Jt

(cid:19)

δδδ
2

Jt+τ

(cid:18)
ζζζ + δδδ
2

(cid:19)
W(x − ζζζ)∂ζζζ,

(1)

where Ct,t+τ(δδδ, x) is a four-dimensional function depending on
two consecutive images, the displacements between these im-
ages, and the localization of the apodization window W(x); and
Jt, Jt+τ are the intensity of the images at two consecutive time
steps t and t + τ. It is worth mentioning that the velocities es-
timated by LCT are not exclusively plasma motions but strictly
speaking horizontal proper motions as the algorithm does not use

plasma physical properties. The LCT algorithm applied in this
work (see Yi et al. 1992; Molowny-Horas 1994) was adapted
in Python to calculate the velocity ﬁelds using an apodization
window adjusted for the comparable size of the features to be
tracked. Authors such as Palacios et al. (2012) have shown that
the emergence of new magnetic ﬂux as well as posterior AR for-
mation are associated with explosive mesogranules.

For that reason we have chosen a full width at half maximum
(FWHM) parameter of 12.5 arcsec (∼ 9 Mm) corresponding to
typical average sizes of ensembles of granules forming the meso-
granular pattern, and a temporal averaging period of 2 hours

Article number, page 5 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. ms

(average lifetimes for large-scale granulation patterns; see Hill
et al. 1984; Rast 2003). These 2 hours correspond to 160 frames
in the data set.3 Vertical velocities are computed by the diver-
gence from the horizontal velocities vx and vy obtained by the
LCT algorithm via the idea of ﬂux conservation (see November
& Simon 1988; Márquez et al. 2006; Vargas Dominguez 2009)
leading to the expression

vz(vx, vy) = hm∇ · vh(vx, vy),

(2)

where hm is a constant of proportionality representing the mass-
ﬂux scale height with a value of 150 ± 12 km (see November
et al. 1987; November 1989). The ﬂow maps are then plotted
over these vertical velocities obtained from continuum maps as
well as from magnetograms.

3.1. Horizontal and vertical ﬂow maps

The studied AR shows exploding mesogranules in locations
where the formation of the active region, as seen by a complex
sunspot group, is initiated. There is a strong connection between
the appearance of these emergent large-scale granules and rapid
vertical upﬂows emerging from the same region. Even when
AR 11190 does not show strong emergences in the continuum
maps, a strong emergence of positive magnetic ﬁeld elements
can be clearly observed in the magnetograms. Horizontal and
vertical ﬂow maps of proper motions as well as of magnetic ﬁeld
elements were calculated with the LCT algorithm to link the
photospheric plasma dynamics with the magnetic ﬁeld evolution.

Figure 2 shows the evolution of the magnetic ﬂux and plasma
emergence during the formation of AR 11190 as well as the be-
haviour of the plasma and the movement of the magnetic ele-
ments as observed in the LOS magnetograms at four diﬀerent
time. The horizontal and vertical velocities are plotted in each
panel showing the behaviour and giving information about the
proper motions of the plasma and the magnetic elements during
the appearance of AR 11190.
The ﬁrst panel displays the evolution and behaviour of the con-
tinuum maps. The horizontal velocities are represented by the
arrows overplotted in the ROI, whereas the vertical velocities
are represented by the background image. These velocities re-
veal several divergences at the following positions: (x(cid:48)(cid:48), y(cid:48)(cid:48)) =
(70, 30), (30, 5), (70, 70), or (50, 130).
We focus now on the emergence centred on the position 70(cid:48)(cid:48) ×
70(cid:48)(cid:48) as it displays a comparably more rapid emergence of strong,
as well as weak, positive magnetic ﬁeld elements, as evidenced
in the second row at the same location, which can be found at the
other emergence sites. Although the other emergences indicate a
certain correspondence of vertical motions between plasma and
the LOS magnetic elements, they do not display horizontal mo-
tions of positive magnetic elements greater than 10 Gauss (lower
limit used in the present work) emerging in those regions.
Before the appearance of the second emerging bubble, the mo-
tions of the magnetic elements follow the paths imposed by
the plasma horizontal motions as well as the up- and down-
ﬂows. When the second magnetic emergence starts to appear,
the proper motions seem to follow the new paths imposed by the
new strong positive magnetic ﬁeld elements, displaying a pre-
ferred motion in the positive x-direction (see also additional on-
line movies). In the ﬁrst row of Fig. 2, the contour lines show

3 We wish to remark that given UT times on the images always corre-
spond to the ﬁrst image of such 160 images containing subsets.

Article number, page 6 of 15

positive vertical velocities enclosing magnitudes of [0.5, 1., 1.5,
2., 3] km s−1 calculated from the continuum data set.

The second row in Fig. 2 features plotted contours of the
vertical velocities calculated from the LOS magnetic ﬁeld data
using the same contour values mentioned before. This panel
shows also the horizontal motions of positive and negative
magnetic elements in the LOS maps. It is possible to identify the
moment when the second magnetic emergence starts to appear
(row=2, column=2). This emergence shows fast motions but
only associated with weak positive magnetic ﬁeld elements that
turn later into strong magnetic ﬁeld elements.

In order to compare the dynamics of plasma and magnetic
elements, Fig. 2, third row, shows in the background the verti-
cal velocities from the continuum data set as well as overplotted
contour lines representing the positive vertical velocities calcu-
lated from the LOS magnetic data cube. Although all vertical
velocities calculated from magnetic LOS elements are linked to
plasma vertical velocities, the best observational correlation is
registered for the emergence located in 70(cid:48)(cid:48) × 70(cid:48)(cid:48). Both ﬂow
patterns seem to evolve at the same rate and look alike.

(cid:113)

v2
x

However, to have an even more robust and quantitative
overview of the ongoing and evolving ﬂows, we will now have
+ v2
a detailed look at the distribution of the magnitudes (
y;
hereafter called speed) separated for the previously mentioned
strong and weak ﬁelds, as well as for the two polarities.
The resulting distribution of speeds for the same four time in-
stances (at the beginning of the ﬁrst emergence, during the sec-
ond emergence, after the second emergence, and to the end of
the evolution) can be seen in Fig. 3. At the beginning of the ﬁrst
emergence (left upper panel) one can see a separation of the pos-
itive and negative polarities.
While the distributions for the positive magnetic ﬁeld elements
look more or less Rayleigh distributed (indicating a two dimen-
sional freely, i.e. randomly, outﬂowing region), the same distri-
bution for the negative magnetic elements features the appear-
ance of a normal distribution, but oﬀset from zero by a certain
constant velocity, indicating a movement leading to a separation
for the two polarities, where the negative magnetic elements tend
to move towards the right side of the FOV. During and just after
the second emergence (panels 2 and 3 in Fig. 3) the distribu-
tions seem to be truncated and merging at horizontal velocities
of around 0.12 km s−1. This behaviour can be explained by the
idea that the created positive magnetic elements catch up with
the negative elements towards the right side. After catching up,
these negative elements then hinder the positive ones in mov-
ing faster. Thus the positive distribution gets truncated at higher
velocities while the distribution for negative elements becomes
truncated for low velocities as the positive elements push into the
slowest negative ones thus either accelerating them to the same
speed or annihilating them when they catch up. The last panel
in Fig. 3 (lower right one) shows the evolved FOV where both
kinds of magnetic elements seem to approach very similar dis-
tributions and thus move and evolve together again.
Figure 4 displays the speeds of the horizontal proper motions
(red dashed line) and the horizontal movements of magnetic el-
ements (blue and solid line; now regardless of their polarity and
strength). The upper panels in Fig. 4 show a correspondence be-
tween the plasma and magnetic ﬁeld distributions, which means
that both are moving following the same behaviour. As they are
evolving (bottom panels), the velocity distribution of the mag-
netic elements shows an increase in its mean value, whereas
the mean velocity obtained from the proper motions appears to

J. I. Campos Rozo et al.: Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld dynamics during the formation of AR 11190

decrease in value most likely being suppressed by the stronger
magnetic ﬁelds. Due to the physical processes creating the ﬂows,
the best description of the distribution of speeds is generally
given by a Rayleigh distribution (Eq. 3)4,

f (v, σ) = v

σ2 exp

(cid:19)

(cid:18) −v2
2σ2

, v > 0,

(3)

where the scalar factor σ is associated with the mean velocity
of such a distribution (Hoﬀman et al. 1975). The mean velocity
for a quiet small region, using temporal averages of 2 hours, is
vInt = 72 ± 8.8 ms−1 for the continuum maps, whereas for LOS
magnetogram data the value amounts to vLOS = 54 ± 10.7 ms−1.
However, when the mean velocity is calculated over the chosen
ROI, the horizontal proper motions obtained from the magnetic
elements data (vLOS = 65 ± 2.2 ms−1) appear to be slightly larger
than the continuum proper motions (vInt = 55 ± 2.5 ms−1). This
diﬀerence can be explained by the second faster emergence of
magnetic ﬁeld. During this emergence the plasma takes some
time until it starts to feel the inﬂuence of these new magnetic
ﬁelds that emerge faster than the ﬁrst appearance and start to
push the old magnetic elements. In the photosphere most of the
plasma is, due to the comparably low temperatures, in a neu-
tral state. Thus, in the beginning of the ﬂux emergence, only the
present ions will react immediately, while some time is needed to
transfer the momentum from the ions to the neutral gas. There-
fore the proper motions linked to the continuum maps and their
velocity distributions can lag behind the distributions of the mag-
netic elements. Besides, we have to have in mind that the forma-
tion height for the continuum maps can be slightly diﬀerent from
the formation height of the magnetograms. The existence of a
strong concordance between both distributions, continuum and
magnetic elements motions, is nevertheless evident even though
the magnetic elements move horizontally slightly faster than the
horizontal motions computed from continuum maps.

3.2. Distribution analysis

Figure 4 shows, for the velocity distribution of the magnetic ﬁeld
elements, distinct enhancements variable in position as well as
amplitude. Due to this behaviour, we introduce and consider
a combined distribution model made up of two components.
While the major part of the histogram follows a Rayleigh dis-
tribution (ﬁrst component) representing undisturbed quiet back-
ground ﬂows, the second component will be generally related to
the ﬂux emergence process creating, for example, a tail of high
velocity measurements. In addition to the increased velocity tail,
it is also possible that during the ﬂux emergence a bifurcation of
the velocity distribution happens due to diﬀerent velocity distri-
butions for the two magnetic ﬁeld polarities, meaning that one
kind of magnetic element moves with a diﬀerent characteristic
speed than the other. Thus the bumpy nature can be explained by
the ﬂux emergence process and/or a bifurcation of the underly-
ing velocity distributions for the two magnetic polarities. Due to
the unknown nature of the second distribution, we will employ
ﬁtting tests with a combination of either two Rayleigh distribu-
tions (see Eq. 4) or a combination of one Rayleigh component

4 Mathematically, a Rayleigh distribution for the magnitude of a two-
dimensional vector is formed when both vector components follow 0-
centred normal distributions with equal σ (standard deviation), which
is common for random walk processes (convective ﬂows)

and one Gaussian component (see Eq. 5):
f (v, σR1 ) + f (v, σR2 ) =
(cid:19)

A1 ·

exp

v
σ2
R1

(cid:18) −v2
2σ2
R1

+ B1 ·

exp

v
σ2
R2

(cid:19)
,

(cid:18) −v2
2σ2
R2

f (v, σR3 ) + f (v, µG, σG) =
+

(cid:19)

exp

A2 ·

(cid:18) −v2
2σ2
R3

v
σ2
R3

B2√
2πσG

exp

(cid:18) −(v − µG)2
2σ2
G

(cid:19)
.

(4)

(5)

In these equations σ represents either the previously intro-
duced scalar parameter of a Rayleigh distribution or the standard
deviation in the case of the Gaussian. Constants Ax and Bx are the
amplitudes or weighting parameters for the two components of
the distribution with x = 1 representing the double Rayleigh dis-
tribution and x = 2 corresponding to the Rayleigh and Gaussian
combined distribution. Finally, µG represents the mean value of
the Gaussian distribution. By applying such a model, we would
implicitly assume that the ﬂux emergence leads in a part of the
FOV to a secondary Rayleigh distribution or a Gaussian one
most likely featuring higher velocities than the background ﬂow
distribution.

Three test cases at diﬀerent time instants of such two-
component modelling of the ﬂows in the FOV of the ﬂux emer-
gence are shown in Fig. 5. The upper part of the ﬁgure shows
a set of six panels created from the LCT analysis of magne-
tograms. The ﬁrst row of these panels shows the combination of
two Rayleigh components while the lower row shows the com-
bination of a Rayleigh component and the Gaussian distribution.
The lower set of panels is arranged in the same way but created
from the LCT analysis of the continuum maps. These three cases
were chosen visually from Fig. 6a at times that showed remark-
able changes in the evolution of the depicted parameters. In these
three test cases it becomes clear that sometimes the combination
of two Rayleigh components ﬁts better, while in other cases the
combination of a Rayleigh component with a Gaussian compo-
nent gives a better ﬁt.

From these modelling eﬀorts, we can learn that it is not
straightforward and clear whether the additional component
should be of Rayleigh or of Gaussian type. For instance, for the
speed histograms created from the continuum maps as depicted
in the ﬁrst column, it is easy to observe that the combination
of a Rayleigh distribution with a Gaussian distribution ﬁts bet-
ter compared to the combination of two Rayleigh distributions.
This is also true for the distribution created by the LOS mag-
netic ﬁeld data set. The middle column of distributions created
from the magnetograms as well as continuum maps seem to be
equally well ﬁtted by both kinds of combined distributions, while
the last column shows that the distributions would be better ﬁt-
ted by the two Rayleigh components combination. The second
ﬁnding is that clearly the amplitude of the secondary component
is variable in position as well as in amplitude.

We do not wish to introduce a model with too many free
parameters and thus we will continue with these models that
only comprise the mentioned two components. However, to shed
more light on the goodness of these combinations, we will now
investigate in more detail the temporal evolution of the param-
eters of such two-component models. Later, we will then also
study the goodness of the ﬁt of the combined models to ascer-
tain which one is more likely to represent the ﬂows in the FOV
during ﬂux emergence events.

Figure 6 displays an example of how the ﬁt parameters be-
have during the time evolution on April 11, 2011. The left col-
umn shows the behaviour for the LOS magnetic ﬁeld data set,

Article number, page 7 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. ms

Fig. 6. Temporal evolution of the parameters associated with the proposed distributions in Eqs. 4 and 5. The ﬁrst row shows the behaviour of the
parameters for the sum of two Rayleigh functions. The second row displays the time evolution for the combination of one Rayleigh function and
one Gaussian function. The temporal evolution followed by the amplitudes (dimensionless – left axis) is plotted with circle markers, whereas the
temporal evolution for the functional parameters are shown with star markers (right axis in km s−1). The blue and green markers are associated to
the ﬁrst Rayleigh function component in both proposed distributions, whereas the red, and yellow markers represent the second component, which
is either a second Rayleigh function or a Gaussian function. The left side of the panels are calculated from the LOS magnetograms, whereas the
right side panels are obtained from the continuum maps. The dashed rectangles enclose the three time instants shown in Fig. 5.

whereas the right column gives the information about the proper
motions obtained from the continuum maps. Figures 6a and 6b
present the parameters A1, B1, σR1 , and σR2 , calculated using a
python least-square algorithm for the case of applying the sum of
two Rayleigh distributions (Eq. 4) for the LOS data set, as well
as for the continuum data. Parameter σR1 is related to the back-
ground velocity at those places of the ROI where the plasma or
the magnetic elements are not aﬀected by ﬂux emergence. One
can clearly observe in Fig. 6a the existence of three strong de-
viations at three diﬀerent times (marked dashed rectangles, and
their respective times) that aﬀect all the parameters at the same
time (see also discussion above). It is easy to observe in Fig. 6a
how, at the beginning of the evolution, σR1 and σR2 appear to
have the same value, which means that the FOV is governed by
a single type of background motion and is not yet aﬀected by the
ﬁrst magnetic emergence. At 04:33 UT, the behaviour changes
drastically showing a splitting between the σR1 and σR2 parame-

ters. Moreover, the amplitude B1 becomes larger than the ampli-
tude A1 giving more importance to the second component at this
moment of evolution. The second time shows a small enhance-
ment of the Rayleigh parameter for the second component. How-
ever, in this instance the amplitude A1 becomes greater than B1.
This change may be associated with the beginning of the second
magnetic emergence. The third and the strongest change in the
Rayleigh parameters related to the second distribution happens
at 09:54:45 UT. At this point the second magnetic emergence be-
comes more active, associated with an increased number of pos-
itive magnetic ﬁeld elements. Figure 6b, which shows the evolu-
tion of the Rayleigh combination for the continuum maps (hor-
izontal proper motion), shows clearly several parameter jumps
at the same times, although the behaviour in general of the pa-
rameters looks more chaotic. However, one can observe that the
splitting between both Rayleigh parameters happens already ear-
lier for the horizontal proper motions compared to the ﬂows ob-

Article number, page 8 of 15

J. I. Campos Rozo et al.: Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld dynamics during the formation of AR 11190

Fig. 7. Normalized reduced χ2 value ((cid:15)x) was calculated for the two ﬁtting combinations to decide the goodness of a ﬁt, that is, which combination
of functions would ﬁt the ﬂow maps better. Panels a and b show the distribution for the diﬀerence between (cid:15)1 and (cid:15)2, for the distributions obtained
from the LOS magnetograms, as well as for the diﬀerence between (cid:15)3 and (cid:15)4, for the distributions obtained from the continuum maps. Normalized
reduced chi squared values (cid:15)1 and (cid:15)3 are related to Eq. 4, whereas (cid:15)2 and (cid:15)4 are related to Eq. 5. Panels c and d show the temporal evolution of the
changes of these diﬀerences between corresponding (cid:15).

tained from the magnetic elements. The combination between
a Rayleigh and a Gaussian distribution for the magnetic mo-
tions (Fig. 6c) shows in general that the Gaussian mean value
is larger than the Rayleigh parameter. However, this behaviour
changes after the third marked time (dashed rectangle), when
the Rayleigh parameter becomes larger than the Gaussian mean.
Contrary to these statements, Fig. 6d seems to show that in gen-
eral the Rayleigh parameter governs the behaviour of the con-
tinuum horizontal proper motions except at certain times that
are not obviously correlated to the changes mentioned before. In
general, the amplitude A2 is greater than B2, implying that the
contribution of this ﬁt component to the overall speed histogram
ﬁt is marginal.

To decide which of the proposed two-component functions
ﬁts the data better, a quality test for the goodness of ﬁtting must
be done. In a ﬁrst step, we compared statistically the goodness
of ﬁtting of the two models with each other. For this purpose,

we obtained the normalized reduced χ2 values5 for both com-
binations of ﬁtting functions, as well as for the LOS magnetic
ﬁeld data and continuum maps, namely the parameters (cid:15)1 and
(cid:15)2, as well as (cid:15)3 and (cid:15)4 for i) the sum of the two Rayleigh func-
tions and ii) the combination consisting of one Rayleigh and one
Gaussian function, respectively. Then we subtracted the two χ2
values from each other, (cid:15)1 - (cid:15)2 and (cid:15)3 - (cid:15)4, respectively, and cre-
ated a histogram plot for this diﬀerence. The result can be seen
in the upper panel of Fig. 7.

The vertical red dashed line in Figs. 7a and 7b marks the
zero line which in principle should separate the two domains of
preferential ﬁtting for the two diﬀerent models. The distributions
obtained from these diﬀerences between (cid:15)1 and (cid:15)2, as well as be-
tween (cid:15)3 and (cid:15)4, deduced from the magnetic ﬁeld and continuum
data, show two diﬀerent regions. It is clearly observable in Fig.
7a that the zero line divides the distribution in two distinct re-

5 Normalized means in this context that the values were normalized to
the maximum chi square number obtained during the considered time
evolution.

Article number, page 9 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. ms

gions. For values larger than 0, the best ﬁtting is given straight-
forwardly by the sum of one Rayleigh function and a Gaussian
function, whereas for values lower than 0 we would argue that
clearly the best ﬁtting can be obtained via a combination of two
Rayleigh distributions for the LOS magnetic ﬁeld data. Accord-
ingly, we can see in Fig. 7b that the diﬀerence between (cid:15)3 and
(cid:15)4 is normally distributed, and shifted to negative values indi-
cating that in general the better ﬁtting could be obtained by the
combination of two Rayleigh components.

Figures 7c and 7d show the temporal evolution for
(cid:18)

(cid:19)
, which can be interpreted as a “quasi-polarization”

and

(cid:15)3−(cid:15)4
(cid:15)3+(cid:15)4

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:15)1−(cid:15)2
(cid:15)1+(cid:15)2

between both combinations and thus gives information about the
times when which combination would actually ﬁt the obtained
velocity distribution better. Figure 7c shows that previous to the
ﬁrst time instant (04:33 UT), the best ﬁtting is given by the com-
bination of one Rayleigh and a Gaussian distribution. After the
second time instant (07:07:30 UT), even if the values are over
the zero line, it is possible to argue that both combinations ﬁt
equally well. Then, after the third time instant (09:54:45 Ut), the
evolution shows that the best ﬁtting is given by the combina-
tion of two Rayleigh distributions. On the other hand, Fig. 7d
shows that in general for the continuum horizontal proper mo-
tions, the distributions will be well ﬁtted by the combination of
two Rayleigh distributions, with the exception of some isolated
short time instants that appear to coincide with the previously
outlined three special points of time we already discussed in Fig.
6. On this occasions it appears that the best ﬁtting is given using
the combination of one Rayleigh and one Gaussian distribution.

4. Discussion

In this work we have analysed time series of images display-
ing the formation of a solar active region in both continuum
maps and LOS magnetograms. Results expose the presence of
large-scale granular cells prior to the formation of the active re-
gion. The horizontal proper motions show strong outﬂows (di-
vergences) at the same places where strong upﬂows can be iden-
tiﬁed. Although the calculated vertical velocities show upﬂows
in diﬀerent sectors within the FOV, these emergences do not ex-
hibit strong and remarkable horizontal velocities. Besides, such
upﬂows are generally only related to the appearance and motion
of weak magnetic ﬁelds (< 10 Gauss). This is in strong con-
trast to the horizontal velocities detected roughly in the centre
of the FOV. Here it seems as if the strong upﬂows are also asso-
ciated to the formation of AR 11190. Generally we would like
to state that the behaviour of the continuum proper motions and
the magnetic ﬁeld element motions are strongly linked. This be-
comes also very clear in the third row in Fig. 2, where both the
vertical velocities obtained from the horizontal velocities (back-
ground map) and the contours resulting from the positive ver-
tical velocities obtained from the LOS magnetic ﬁeld data are
depicted together and display a strong correlation. This can be
clearly seen by applying a Pearson correlation analysis between
the vertical velocities from continuum maps and from the LOS
magnetic ﬁeld.

Figure 8 shows exactly such calculated correlation and its
temporal evolution. The vertical dashed lines represent the same
instants as mentioned in the Fig. 6. All of them are close to points
where the Pearson coeﬃcient evolution changes its slope. In Fig.
8 we can see how the correlation starts at a value of around 0.65
indicating a good correlation before dropping at 2:00 UT to a lo-
cal minimum. This means that in the beginning of the time series

Article number, page 10 of 15

Fig. 8. Pearson coeﬃcients for the vertical velocities in the region at the
centre of the FOV. The size of the window was 90(cid:48)(cid:48) × 65(cid:48)(cid:48).

the plasma ﬂows and the magnetic ﬁeld element motions are well
coupled. However, during the ﬁrst magnetic emergence, the mo-
tions become partly decoupled. This can be due to the idea that
in the ﬁrst moment the newly emerging magnetic ﬁeld is so pow-
erful and strong that it can weaken the coupling conditions for
a moment, expand faster than the local surrounding plasma, and
only slightly later start also to push away the plasma. From about
3:00 UT to 4:00 UT the coupling between the continuum proper
motions and magnetic element motions are gradually restored,
just to be broken again and even more strongly by the second
emergence just after the ﬁrst time instant mentioned above. This
time the coupling gets even more weakened indicating a stronger
emergence and stronger magnetic ﬁelds. Subsequently, after the
second time instant, this leads in the aftermath to a stronger
coupling of the continuum and magnetic ﬁeld element motions
most likely due to the governance of the magnetic ﬁeld over the
plasma owing to the strong emergence. After the third time in-
stant, the ﬂows become more stable and reach a high plateau of
coupling with a correlation coeﬃcient of up to 0.75. Thus we
would conclude that, at least during the emergence of the sec-
ond magnetic bubble, the magnetic ﬁeld was strong enough to
govern the plasma ﬂows, while in other cases normal convection
might advect smaller magnetic elements.

Moreover, we can see in Fig. 8 that the maximum of correla-
tion happens co-temporarily with the large parameter deviations
as shown in Fig. 6a, identiﬁable in velocity distributions calcu-
lated for the magnetic ﬁeld elements indicating again that the
ﬂow ﬁeld is changing at these moments due to the emergence of
new magnetic ﬂux via the magnetic bubbles.

As we have seen and outlined in the results section, the ve-
locity distributions, obtained from the ﬂow maps, are well rep-
resented by the combination of two separate components. The
proposed two diﬀerent combinations as given by Eqs. 4 and 5
feature both a Rayleigh distribution, which we would think of as
ﬁtting the undisturbed background ﬂows, that is, the regions of
the FOV not aﬀected by the ﬂux emergence event, plus a second
component, which is variable in position and relative strength as
it applies for the occupied and eﬀected area of the ﬂux emer-
gence process.
The open question to settle is, which one of the proposed compo-
nents generally ﬁts better? The Gaussian or the Rayleigh distri-
bution? We believe that it might not be clear as there could be a
kind of phase transition between both distributions. A Rayleigh

J. I. Campos Rozo et al.: Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld dynamics during the formation of AR 11190

distribution is formed for the magnitude of the velocity when
both vector components x and y are Gaussian distributed (in the
ideal case) with zero mean velocity and equal standard devia-
tion, for example by a random walk process. Thus this kind of
a distribution is also a good candidate for the background ﬂow
and it might be a good candidate during weak emergences in
which the additional ﬂow component still follows more or less
a random walk but presumably with higher amplitudes. How-
ever, in the case of a strong ﬂux emergence it is highly likely
that all velocities in a larger and aﬀected FOV area get directed
away from the centre. Therefore, while the velocity amplitudes
might still be stronger and weaker, in some way the distribution
becomes one dimensional (only radially orientated away from
the centre of emergence) and hence the component representing
the aﬀected ﬂux emergence pixels follows to a greater extent a
Gaussian distribution instead of the Rayleigh one. A clearer in-
sight could be gained by investigating in the future the formation
of several active regions and looking then, with an even higher
focus, on the velocity distributions to study these last details, as
well as if and how, the secondary component changes.

After the detailed discussion of the results above, we wish to
contextualize our work within the larger ﬁeld of solar physics.
The evolution of active regions is an ongoing research ﬁeld, es-
pecially in regards to the build up of magnetic energy for solar
eruptions, so-called ﬂares (see e.g. Kilcik et al. 2018; Ye et al.
2018). This is generally done by having a detailed look into the
magnetic ﬁeld evolution as well as its conﬁguration over time
(e.g. Dacie et al. 2016). Such investigations are often directly
performed by analysis of magnetograms but increasingly com-
monly also by magnetic ﬁeld extrapolations (e.g. Thalmann &
Wiegelmann 2008). Another possibility for such analysis comes
via simulations and modelling (Cheung & DeRosa 2012). It is
very clear that for a successful modelling of the process of en-
ergy build up, detailed knowledge about the velocity ﬁelds trans-
porting the magnetic ﬁeld above the solar surface, as well as
shredding and twisting the ﬁeld lines, is of great importance.
The detailed measurement of ﬂow ﬁelds, and derivation of the
velocity distributions, are not only important for the evolution
of the active regions themselves, but indeed also necessary for
large-scale ﬂux transport models such as the advective ﬂux trans-
port (AFT) model (see e.g. Ugarte-Urra et al. 2015). Thus a
better knowledge of the velocity ﬁelds will also help in the un-
derstanding of the global dynamo acting on the Sun. Such ﬂux
transport models describe in a simpliﬁed way how the magnetic
ﬁeld emerges (e.g. in active regions), is shredded, and then trans-
ported via the velocity ﬁelds, including the meridional circula-
tion and diﬀerential rotation, to the poles, where the ﬁelds ﬁnally
get submerged. Thus a better parametrization of the velocity
ﬁelds as done for example in this study will be of importance for
such modelling eﬀorts. A ﬁnal interesting ﬁeld for which this re-
search might yield a new approach is the ﬁeld of ﬂux emergence
studies. Authors like Golovko & Salakhutdinova (2015) have
pointed out that ﬂux emergence can be detected in image data
by algorithms using sophisticated multi-fractal spectral analysis
and segmentation. On the other hand, we have shown now that
not only the structures within the FOV are changed (classically
the granulation pattern gets elongated, which can be used within
segmentation algorithms) but that the ﬂow ﬁeld changes remark-
ably leading to changed velocity distributions. Thus by investi-
gating the ﬂow ﬁeld statistics, one can also detect and character-
ize ﬂux emergence events.

5. Conclusion

In this paper we looked into the details of the evolving ﬂow
patterns in velocity maps during the formation of active region
11190. The used data were obtained from the SDO/HMI instru-
ment as continuum maps and magnetograms to investigate both
the continuum proper motions as well as the magnetic ﬁeld ele-
ment motions during two emergence events of positive ﬂux lead-
ing in consequence to the formation of the active region. Gener-
ally we found a high congruence between the plasma ﬂows and
the motions of the magnetic elements. This congruence is weak-
ened and distorted during the emergence of new magnetic ﬂux.
Moreover, the speeds in the FOV can be ﬁtted in general very
accurately with a Rayleigh distribution. Nevertheless, during the
ﬂux emergence events the Rayleigh distributions get distorted
and at least a secondary ﬂow ﬁeld component should be added.
It is plausible that this component can be either a secondary
Rayleigh distribution with a larger width (higher velocities) dur-
ing the emergence or a Gaussian component. The stronger the
emergence, the more likely it is that the secondary component
follows a Gaussian distribution, which can be related to the idea
that strong emergences lead to radial outﬂows and, in that sense,
to a one-dimensional ﬂow distribution (only a vr component ex-
ists, while normally the ﬂow velocities are made up of a vx and
a vy component). In order to support the statement about the ne-
cessity of a two-component distribution, where the second com-
ponent is formed due to the strong changes in the ﬂow pattern
occurring during the formation of AR 11190, we analysed the
evolution of a quiet Sun region during the same day. We found
that for a quiet Sun ﬂow-ﬁeld distribution it is suﬃcient to use
a single Rayleigh distribution to ﬁt the speeds distribution (see
Fig. A.2). It is also possible to observe the temporal evolution of
the ﬁtting parameters over 4 hours (see Fig. A.3), and conclude
that they do not show strong enhancements compared to their
general behaviour.

Acknowledgements. This research received support by the Austrian Science
Fund (FWF) P27800. Jose Iván Campos Rozo and Santiago Vargas Domínguez
acknowledge funding from Universidad Nacional de Colombia research project
code 36127: Magnetic ﬁeld in the solar atmosphere. Additional funding was
possible through an Odysseus grant of the Fund for Scientiﬁc Research-Flanders
(FWO Vlaanderen), the IAP P7/08 CHARM (Belspo), and GOA-2015-014 (KU
Leuven). This work has also received funding from the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and inno-
vation programme (grant agreement No 724326). Jose Iván Campos Rozo is
grateful to the National University, the Research Direction, and the National As-
tronomical Observatory of Colombia for providing him with a travel grant under
the project for new professors and researchers to spend a part of his thesis time at
KU Leuven enabling him to collaborate with Prof. T. Van Doorsselaere for this
study. He also wishes to acknowledge the whole KU-Leuven University for the
space and the academic support provided during his stay in Leuven. HMI/SDO
data are courtesy of NASA/SDO and the AIA, EVE, and HMI science teams,
and they were obtained from the Joint Science Operation Center (JSOC). Part of
this research has been created by using SunPy libraries, an open-source and free
community-developed solar data analysis package written in Python. We wish to
express our gratitude to the editor of A&A, and the anonymous referee for his
or her suggestions and comments about the present work, which improved the
study considerably.

References

Asensio Ramos, A., Requerey, I. S., & Vitas, N. 2017, A&A, 604, A11
Bushby, P. J. & Favier, B. 2014, A&A, 562, A72
Campos Rozo, J. I. & Vargas Dominguez, S. 2014, Central European Astrophys-

ical Bulletin, 38, 67

Cheung, M. C. M. & DeRosa, M. L. 2012, ApJ, 757, 147
Dacie, S., Démoulin, P., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., et al. 2016, A&A, 596, A69
de la Cruz Rodríguez, J., Hansteen, V., Bellot-Rubio, L., & Ortiz, A. 2015, ApJ,

810, 145

Domínguez Cerdeña, I. 2003, A&A, 412, L65

Article number, page 11 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. ms

Golovko, A. A. & Salakhutdinova, I. I. 2015, Astronomy Reports, 59, 776
Guglielmino, S. L., Bellot Rubio, L. R., Zuccarello, F., et al. 2010, ApJ, 724,

1083

Hansen, C. J., Kawaler, S. D., & Trimble, V. 2004, Stellar Interiors, 2nd edn.

(New York: Springer-Verlag), 241

Hill, F., Gough, D., & Toomre, J. 1984, Mem. Soc. Astron. Italiana, 55, 153
Hoeksema, J. T., Liu, Y., Hayashi, K., et al. 2014, Sol. Phys., 289, 3483
Hoﬀman, D., Karst, O. J., & Hoblit, F. M. 1975, Journal of Ship Research, 19,

172

Hurlburt, N. E., Schrijver, C. J., Shine, R. A., & Title, A. M. 1995, in ESA

Special Publication, Vol. 376, Helioseismology, 239

Ishikawa, R. & Tsuneta, S. 2011, ApJ, 735, 74
Kilcik, A., Yurchyshyn, V., Sahin, S., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 477, 293
Lisle, J. & Toomre, J. 2004, in ESA Special Publication, Vol. 559, SOHO 14
Helio- and Asteroseismology: Towards a Golden Future, ed. D. Danesy, 556
Louis, R. E., Ravindra, B., Georgoulis, M. K., & Küker, M. 2015, Sol. Phys.,

290, 1135

Márquez, I., Sánchez Almeida, J., & Bonet, J. A. 2006, ApJ, 638, 553
Massaguer, J. M. & Zahn, J.-P. 1980, A&A, 87, 315
Molowny-Horas, R. 1994, Sol. Phys., 154, 29
Musman, S. 1972, Sol. Phys., 26, 290
Namba, O. & van Rijsbergen, R. 1977, in Lecture Notes in Physics, Berlin
Springer Verlag, Vol. 71, Problems of Stellar Convection, ed. E. A. Spiegel &
J.-P. Zahn, 119–125

November, L. J. 1989, ApJ, 344, 494
November, L. J. & Simon, G. W. 1988, ApJ, 333, 427
November, L. J., Simon, G. W., Tarbell, T. D., & Title, A. M. 1986, in BAAS,

Vol. 18, Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, 665

November, L. J., Simon, G. W., Tarbell, T. D., Title, A. M., & Ferguson, S. H.
1987, in NASA Conference Publication, Vol. 2483, NASA Conference Pub-
lication, ed. G. Athay & D. S. Spicer

November, L. J., Toomre, J., Gebbie, K. B., & Simon, G. W. 1981, ApJ, 245,

L123

Ortiz, A., Bellot Rubio, L. R., Hansteen, V. H., de la Cruz Rodríguez, J., &

Rouppe van der Voort, L. 2014, ApJ, 781, 126

Palacios, J., Blanco Rodríguez, J., Vargas Domínguez, S., et al. 2012, A&A, 537,

A21

Pesnell, W. D., Thompson, B. J., & Chamberlin, P. C. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 3
Potts, H. E., Barrett, R. K., & Diver, D. A. 2003, Sol. Phys., 217, 69
Rast, M. P. 2003, ApJ, 597, 1200
Rezaei, R., Bello González, N., & Schlichenmaier, R. 2012, A&A, 537, A19
Rieutord, M. & Rincon, F. 2010, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 7, 2
Rösch, J. 1961, Il Nuovo Cimento, 22, 313
Roudier, T., Lignières, F., Rieutord, M., Brandt, P. N., & Malherbe, J. M. 2003,

A&A, 409, 299

Roudier, T., Rieutord, M., Malherbe, J. M., & Vigneau, J. 1999, A&A, 349, 301
Schuck, P. W. 2006, ApJ, 646, 1358
Simon, G. W., Title, A. M., Topka, K. P., et al. 1988, ApJ, 327, 964
Simon, G. W., Title, A. M., & Weiss, N. O. 1995, ApJ, 442, 886
SunPy Community, Mumford, S. J., Christe, S., et al. 2015, Computational Sci-

ence and Discovery, 8, 014009

Thalmann, J. K. & Wiegelmann, T. 2008, A&A, 484, 495
Title, A. M., Tarbell, T. D., Acton, L., Duncan, D., & Simon, G. W. 1986, Ad-

vances in Space Research, 6, 253

Title, A. M., Tarbell, T. D., Topka, K. P., et al. 1989, ApJ, 336, 475
Ugarte-Urra, I., Upton, L., Warren, H. P., & Hathaway, D. H. 2015, ApJ, 815, 90
Vargas Dominguez, S. 2009, PhD thesis, PhD Thesis, 2009
Vargas Domínguez, S., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., & Bellot Rubio, L. R. 2012,

Sol. Phys., 278, 99

Verma, M., Denker, C., Balthasar, H., et al. 2016, A&A, 596, A3
Verma, M., Steﬀen, M., & Denker, C. 2013, A&A, 555, A136
Welsch, B. T., Fisher, G. H., Abbett, W. P., & Regnier, S. 2004, ApJ, 610, 1148
Ye, Y., Korsos, M. B., & Erdelyi, R. 2018, ArXiv e-prints [arXiv:1801.00430]
Yi, Z., Darvann, T., & Molowny-Horas, R. 1992, Software for Solar Image Pro-

cessing - Proceedings from lest Mini Workshop, Tech. rep.

Article number, page 12 of 15

J. I. Campos Rozo et al.: Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld dynamics during the formation of AR 11190

Appendix A: Comparison with quiet Sun

To show the necessity of the combined speed distribution in ac-
tive regions, we wish to replicate the analysis for a quiet Sun
region within the period of our data set (from 16:00 UT to 20:00
UT on the same day).6 Figure A.1 shows on the left-hand side
the full disc Sun on the day of observations, with the two anal-
ysed regions of interest marked by rectangles. The continuum
maps and magnetograms of the two regions are shown in the
right panels. Clearly the magnetic ﬁeld activity is very high in
the active region, while it is practically non-existent in the quiet
Sun (as expected). We applied the LCT algorithm on the chosen
quiet Sun region. The data comprise 320 images with the same
cadence as described before and a total time of 4 hours. The pa-
rameters for the LCT algorithm are the same as in the case for
the active region. The principal ﬁrst outcome can be seen in Fig.
A.2. Here we show the histograms of the speeds at three dif-
ferent times, which are independent and not related to the AR
11190 analysis. It becomes clear that a single Rayleigh distribu-
tion ﬁts very well the whole histogram and it is not necessary,
compared to the active region data, to ﬁt the histogram with a
more complex two-component distribution.

As this could be only a special case for three times, we also
replicated Fig. 6 for the quiet Sun as shown in Fig. A.3. The evo-
lution of the parameters shows no signiﬁcant events (like strong
parameter deviations), except for a few small occasional changes
for the combination of Rayleigh distribution with a Gaussian
component. Thus, again we can see that within the quiet Sun
the expected result was realized, namely, the possibility to create
a good single Rayleigh component ﬁt. This is fully understand-
able as this principal distribution will be formed due to random
x/y motions created from the turbulent convection.

6 An analysis of a plage region would complement this study perfectly,
however, due to the considerable size of the current study and the nec-
essary analysis, we postpone such an analysis to a future investigation.

Article number, page 13 of 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. ms

Fig. A.1. Overview of the analysed regions. Left panel: Full disc Sun as seen by SDO/HMI on the day of observations. The two regions of interest
are marked by a red square - active region NOAA 11190 - and blue square - quiet Sun region. Right panel, top row from left to right: A continuum
map of the NOAA 11190 (red square) followed by the corresponding magnetogram is shown. Bottom row: Same, but for the quiet Sun region.
Time shown is April, 11 2011 at 17:45 UT.

Fig. A.2. Similar to Fig. 5, but for the quiet Sun region as outlined in Fig. A.1 for three diﬀerent test cases showing only the distributions obtained
from the continuum maps. Thus the arrangement of the panels is as follows: top row shows the histograms of velocity as computed from the
continuum maps for three diﬀerent times applying a double Rayleigh component distribution ﬁt, while the bottom panels give the combination of
Rayleigh and Gaussian distribution (all cases obtained from continuum maps).

Article number, page 14 of 15

J. I. Campos Rozo et al.: Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld dynamics during the formation of AR 11190

Fig. A.3. Similar to Fig. 6, but for the quiet Sun region as outlined in Fig. A.1 and only showing the continuum proper motion case (due to quiet
Sun conditions, not enough moving magnetic elements are available to obtain velocity distributions).

Article number, page 15 of 15

