Prepared for submission to JCAP

Results from a Hidden Photon Dark
Matter Search Using a Multi-Cathode
Counter

A. Kopylov,1 I. Orekhov, V. Petukhov

Institute for Nuclear Research RAS,
prospect 60-letiya Octyabrya 7a, Moscow 117312, Russia

E-mail: beril@inr.ru

Abstract. Here we present measurements of the rates of emission of single electrons from
the cathode of a proportional counter ﬁlled with a mixture of Ar + CH4 (10%) at 1 bar. We
interpret the results as a possible photoelectric eﬀect associated with hidden photons (HPs).
Our results set upper limits for HPs from cold dark matter (CDM). We also discuss future
options for searches for HPs from CDM using a multi-cathode counter technique.

9
1
0
2

n
u
J

0
2

]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[

4
v
3
7
7
8
0
.
1
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1Corresponding author.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

1 Introduction

2 Measurement strategy

3 Apparatus

4 Data analysis

5 Summary

1 Introduction

1

1

2

4

5

To advance experimental eﬀorts in the search for dark matter, physicists are now looking
for new approaches. One such approach is to use a dish antenna to observe hidden photons
(HPs) from cold dark matter (CDM) [1]. This technique has placed an upper limit on the
HP mass of mγ(cid:48) = 3.1 ± 1.2 eV [2]. This range of masses is limited by the coeﬃcient of
reﬂection of light from the mirror and by the spectral sensitivity of the photomultiplier tube.
At higher frequencies, the light is absorbed by the reﬂecting surface, which results in a loss
of sensitivity for this technique. However, the absorption of higher-frequency light causes the
emission of electrons from the surface if the photon energy is higher than the work function
of the metallic reﬂector. Hence, by counting single electrons emitted from the metal one can
extend the sensitivity of this technique into the vacuum ultraviolet range and higher.

We have developed a special detector for this study—a multi-cathode counter [3]—and
we have previously reported the ﬁrst results of measurements using a counter with a copper
cathode [4]. We have used a new counter of improved design, which employs an aluminium
cathode and focusing rings, to make measurements with increased sensitivity [5]. Here we
summarise the results of all of our measurements and outline our plans for further research.

2 Measurement strategy

If dark matter is composed entirely of HPs, then the power collected by a detector (here, by
a cathode of the counter) is

P = 2α2χ2ρCDM Acath

(2.1)

where α = cos(θ) and θ is the angle between the direction of the HP ﬁeld, when it points
in the same direction everywhere, and the surface of the cathode, with α2 = 2/3 if the HP
vector is distributed randomly; ρCDM ≈ 0.3GeV /cm3 is the energy density of CDM, which
we assume to be equal to the energy density of the HPs; Acath is the area of the cathode of
the counter; and χ is a dimensionless parameter that quantiﬁes the kinetic mixing as it is
explained in [1]. If this power is converted into single electrons that are emitted from the
cathode of the counter, then

– 1 –

P = mγ(cid:48) · RM CC/η

(2.2)

where mγ(cid:48) is the mass (energy) of an HP, η is the quantum eﬃciency for a photon with energy
mγ(cid:48) to yield a single electron from the surface of the metal, and RM CC is the rate at which
single electrons are emitted from the cathode, which is presumed here to be entirely due to
HPs. Thus, by combining (2.1) and (2.2) we obtain:

χsens = 2.9 · 10−12

(cid:18) RM CC
η · 1Hz

(cid:19) 1

2 (cid:16) mγ(cid:48)
1eV

(cid:17) 1
2

(cid:18) 0.3 GeV/cm3
ρCDM

(cid:19) 1

2 (cid:18) 1m2
AM CC

(cid:19) 1

2

(cid:33)

(cid:32) (cid:112)2/3
α

(2.3)

Here we assume the quantum eﬃciency η for the conversion of the HP at the surface
of the metal cathode to be equal to the quantum eﬃciency for a real photon of the same
energy. The sensitivity depends critically upon the dark rate of the counter. Single electrons
can be emitted by defects on the surfaces of the wires, by protrusions, and by heterogeneous
spots on the surface of the cathode. Given these conditions, the value of χ obtained from
(2.3) is only an upper limit. To improve the limit, we need to decrease the dark rate of the
counter. One way to accomplish this would be to apply a surface treatment to diminish the
eﬀects of extraneous sources. Another possibility would be to lower the temperature of the
detector to diminish the contribution from thermionic emission, which depends on the work
function φW of the metal and the temperature T in Kelvins, as expressed by the Richardson
equation:

Rtherm = a · T 2 · e− φW

kT

(2.4)

where Rtherm is the thermionic dark rate, a is a constant, and k is Boltzmann’s constant.
Using an Ar/CH4 mixture enables us to lower the temperature to −40◦C, which can sub-
stantially reduce the thermionic dark rate.

3 Apparatus

Figure 1 shows a schematic illustration of a multi-cathode counter. The counter is ﬁlled with
an Ar + CH4 (10%) mixture at 1 bar. It has three cathodes and one anode made of gold-
plated tungsten-rhenium wire 25 µm in diameter. We apply the low (negative) potential HV1
to cathode 1, the outer cathode, which is fabricated from a metallic sheet, and we measure
the counting rate of individual electrons emitted from the surface of this sheet. The second
cathode is placed 5 mm from the outer cathode. It consists of a series of nichrome wires 50 µm
in diameter, with a pitch of 4.5 mm. This cathode serves as a barrier to the electrons emitted
from outer cathode. We apply the potential HV2 to cathode 2. In conﬁguration 1, HV2 is
higher than HV1, so that electrons emitted from cathode 1 can drift to the central counter
with the still-smaller-diameter cathode 3, which is made of nichrome wires 50 µm in diameter,
with a pitch of 6 mm. The smaller (40 mm) diameter of cathode 3 is used to obtain the high
(≈ 105) gas ampliﬁcation needed to register the signal from single electrons. In conﬁguration
2, the potential HV2 is lower than HV1, so that electrons emitted from the outer cathode are
scattered back from cathode 2 and do not reach the central counter. We use this conﬁguration

– 2 –

to measure the dark rate due to electrons emitted from the wires and to ionising particles
that cross the counter along short tracks at both ends. The two conﬁgurations have similar
geometries and similar electric ﬁelds, so we expect that the diﬀerence R1 − R2 between the
count rates measured in these two conﬁgurations measures the net eﬀect due to electrons
emitted from the outer cathode.

Figure 1. Schematic view of the multi-cathode counter in the shielded cabinet.

To reduce the background due to gamma radiation from the surrounding walls, we
placed the counter in a special cabinet made of steel slabs 30 cm thick. We have measured
the γ-ray spectrum both inside and outside the shielding with a NaI(Tl)detector and the
attenuation was obtained by comparing the two spectra. The attenuation of the gamma
radiation by the shielding was greater than a factor of 100 for gamma rays at the ≈ 200 keV
peak energy of the gamma-spectrum measured by a NaI(Tl) crystal. Measurements with the
copper counter showed that with the counter placed outside the shield the count rate for
single electrons was about 20% higher than the one obtained inside the shield. From here,
we found that for the copper counter inside the shield the contribution to the single-electron
count rate due to gamma radiation is less than 0.2% of the single-electron count rate. The
given estimation of the remaining contribution from ambient gammas is a rough one like an
order estimation. No events have been observed coincident with muons crossing the detector.
The rate RM CC is obtained here as the diﬀerence R1 − R2 between the count rates in the
two conﬁgurations, with diﬀerent potentials at the second cathode [3]; see Figure 1. We
assume that in conﬁguration 1, the count rate is determined by the rate of emission of single
electrons from the cathode of the counter, the wires and particles with short tracks crossing
the counter at both ends (the end eﬀect). In conﬁguration 2, the rate is determined by the
rate of emission from the wires and the end eﬀect. The exact contributions of the end eﬀect
and the wires to the total count rate in conﬁguration 2 is unknown for this technique. This
uncertainty is the main source of our systematic error.

We estimated the number of electrons lost during diﬀusion from the outer cathode of the
counter to the central counter based on the attachment mechanism proposed by Bloch and

– 3 –

Cathode 1Cathode 2Cathode 3PANI-5152Passive ShieldL = 495 mmD = 192 mmBradbury and developed by Herzenberg (BBH model) [6, 7] for electrons of small energies.
The number of free electrons in a gas that contains electronegative impurities (in our case,
oxygen impurities) decreases exponentially:

N (t) = N (0) · e−At

(3.1)

where N(t) is the number of electrons at time t, N(0) is the initial number of electrons, and
A is the attachment rate. The latter is given by the expression

A = P (M ) · P (O2) · CO2,M

(3.2)

where P (M ), P (O2) are the pressure of the working gas and of oxygen, respectively, and
CO2,M is the coeﬃcient of attachment, which does not depend upon the pressure of the gas
or the impurities in the BBH model.

The ﬁeld strength in our detector, as calculated using Maxwell16, is presented in ﬁgure 2.

Figure 2. The calculated electric-ﬁeld strength across the counter.

Using data for the dependence of the drift velocities of the electrons upon E/p in the
argon-methane mixture [8] and for the coeﬃcient of attachment CO2,M from [9], one can
determine the probability for an electron to become attached while drifting from the outer
cathode to the central counter. We found that for our gas mixture this probability is less
than 1%; i.e. it can be neglected.

4 Data analysis

We digitised the pulse shapes in intervals of ± 50 mV at a frequency of 10 MHz and a
sampling step of 400 µV. Each measurement lasted for 12 h, after which we processed the
data oﬄine. To select “true” events, we performed a selection in the three-parameter space
deﬁned by the amplitude of the pulse, the duration of the leading edge of the pulse, and a
parameter β that describes the prehistory of the event. The latter quantity is proportional
to the ﬁrst derivative of the baseline, which we approximated as a straight line during the 50
µsec before the leading edge of the pulse. We estimated the eﬃciency as the probability for
the pulse to belong to the ROI box in this 3-parameter space; we found it to be (88 ± 6)%.
To reduce the inﬂuence of noise on the counting, we selected only intervals with a baseline
deviation not more than 5 mV from zero, taking into account a proper correction for the live
time of the counting, which we found to be about 54%.

– 4 –

To evaluate the contribution to the total measured rate of the rate of emission of elec-
trons from the wires, we need to consider that in conﬁguration 2 only those parts of the
surfaces of the wires that face the centre of the counter produce the eﬀect. Electrons emitted
from the opposite sides are retarded by the potential of the second cathode and cannot drift
toward the central counter. They are thus trapped in the region between the ﬁrst and second
cathodes (ﬁgure 3). This reduces the background measured in conﬁguration 2. Instead of
R1 − R2, which is the appropriate value if the entire rate is due to the end eﬀect, in the case
where the entire rate is due to the wires we should use:

RM CC = R1 −

n3 + n2
n3 + n2/2

R2

(4.1)

Here n2 and n3 are the numbers of wires in the second and third cathodes, respectively,

see [5].

Figure 3. Calculated electric potentials across the counter for the two conﬁgurations.

5 Summary

In this section, we summarise the results of all our measurements, using R1 − R2 to evaluate
the net event rate. We took the limit Cu-1 from the results in [4], which we obtained by
using a counter with a copper outer cathode at room temperature. At the beginning of
these measurements, we observed some instability in the counter, which resulted in large
scattering of the experimental data points and consequently in large errors. This explains
the relatively large uncertainty of these ﬁrst measurements. Later measurements showed that
after working continuously for about a month the instability disappeared. We obtained the
result Cu-2 when the counter had stabilised after this prolonged period of continuous work.

– 5 –

Figure 4. Results of measurements obtained using a counter with a copper cathode at diﬀerent
temperatures.

Figure 5. The distributions of events at 26oC, 31oC and 36oC. The dashed line is the average value
obtained for all measurements, and the dotted lines represent ± 1σ levels from the average value.

After selecting for “true” pulses, we obtained for rM CC = RM CC/Acath: (0.98 ± 0.22) ·
10−4Hz/cm2, (0.75±0.15)·10−4Hz/cm2 and (0.69±0.23)·10−4Hz/cm2 for the temperatures
26oC, 31oC and 36oC, respectively (ﬁgure 5). The fact that the count rate does not exhibit a
clear increase with temperature can be taken as evidence that there is a negligible contribution
from thermionic emission. The average value obtained for all these temperatures is rM CC =
(0.81 ± 0.08) · 10−4Hz/cm2.

We obtained the limit Al-1 from the measurements presented in ﬁgure 6, where we

assumed that the main contribution to the rate is due to the end eﬀect.

The average value found for all the measurements presented in ﬁgure 6: rM CC = (0.8 ±

– 6 –

01020304050607080906,57,07,58,02025303540daysT3T2T1 Configuration 1 Configuration 2 TemperatureTemperature, oCCount rate, Hz253035400,050,100,15Temperature, CDark rate, Hz/cm2 x103oFigure 6. Results of measurements obtained using a counter with an aluminium cathode.

0.25) · 10−5Hz/cm2. This is the lowest result obtained to date.

The limits obtained at a 95% conﬁdence level (CL) are presented in ﬁgure 7. Using (4.1)
to account for the systematic uncertainties would substantially decrease the limits presented
in this ﬁgure. The question of the relevant systematic uncertainty is now under further study.
If we were to assume that electrons emitted from the cathode wires also contribute to the
count rate, i.e. if we were to take into account our systematic errors, the curves for Cu-1,
Cu-2 and Al-1 in ﬁgure 7 would be lower. An advanced surface treatment could further
improve the sensitivity of the measurements.

Figure 7. Limits at a 95% CL obtained from the series of measurements Cu-1, Cu-2 and Al-1. Here
the Tokyo limits are from [2] and the FUNK-1 limits from [10].

We have made good progress using a counter with an aluminium cathode. Further

– 7 –

010203040500,00,10,2510Temperature, oCCount rate, Hz Configuration 1  Configuration 2  TemperaturedaysFUNK-1TokyoSolarlifetimeHBsun globalCu-1Cu-2Al-1Helioscopeimprovements can be made by using Ni or Pt, which have higher work functions, for the
cathode of the counter. Figure 7 shows that our limits are higher than the limits given
by the solar lifetime, so we still need to make signiﬁcant improvements to go beyond these
limits. However one should also take into account possible uncertainties due to two relevant
processes: the emission of hidden photons inside the Sun and the emission of electrons from
the metal surfaces. There is also a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between volume and surface detectors.
In the former, HPs are presumed to be detected by their interactions with valence electrons,
while in the latter, detection is due to the interaction with free electrons in the degenerate
electron gas. Our detector is a surface detector, so the limits obtained by this technique are
related to the interaction of HPs with the free electrons in the degenerate electron gas of the
metal.

Acknowledgments

The work was funded by the Federal Agency for Scientiﬁc Organizations, Russia. The authors
would like to thank Enago (www.enago.com) for the English language review.

References

[1] D. Horns, J. Jaeckel, A. Lindner et al., Searching for WISPy cold dark matter with a dish

antenna, JCAP 04 (2013) 016.

[2] J. Suzuki, T. Horie, Y. Inoue, and M. Minowa, Experimental search for hidden photon CDM in

the eV mass range with a dish antenna, JCAP 09 (2015) 42.

[3] A.V. Kopylov, I.V. Orekhov, V.V. Petukhov, A method to register hidden photons with the aid

of a multi-cathode counter, Tech. Phys. Lett. 42 (2016) 879

[4] A.V. Kopylov, I.V. Orekhov, V.V. Petukhov, On a Search for Hidden Photon CDM by a

Multicathode Counter, Advances In High Energy Phys. 2016 (2016) 2058372

[5] A. Kopylov, I. Orekhov, V. Petukhov, A multi-cathode counter in a single-electron counting

mode, NIM A 910 (2018) 164.

[6] F. Bloch and N. Bradbury, On the mechanism of unimolecular electron capture, Phys. Rev. 48

(1935) 689.

[7] A. Herzenberg, Attachment of Slow Electrons to Oxygen Molecules, J. Chem. Phys. 51 (1969)

4942.

[8] Alan A. Sebastian and J.M. Wadehra, Time-dependent behaviour of electron transport in

methaneargon mixtures J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 38 (2005) 1577

[9] M. Huk, P. Igo-Kemenes and A. Wagner, Electron attachment to oxygen, water, and methanol,

in various drift chamber gas mixtures, NIM A 267 (1988) 107.

[10] R. Engel, D. Veberiˇc, C. Sch¨afer et al., Search for hidden-photon Dark Matter with FUNK,

arXiv:1711.02961v1 [hep-ex]

– 8 –

