Metasurfaces for Near-Eye Augmented Reality 

Shoufeng Lan,†,‡ Xueyue Zhang,†,‡ Mohammad Taghinejad,† Sean Rodrigues,†,§ Kyu-Tae Lee,† 

Zhaocheng Liu,† and Wenshan Cai†,§,* 

† School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332  

§ School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332 

‡ Authors contributed equally to this work 

* Correspondence should be addressed to W.C. (wcai@gatech.edu) 

KEYWORDS: Metasurface, holography, augmented reality, see-through display 

ABSTRACT:  Augmented  reality  (AR)  has  the  potential  to  revolutionize  the  way  in  which 

information is presented by overlaying virtual information onto a person’s direct view of their real-

time surroundings. By placing the display on the surface of the eye, a contact lens display (CLD) 

provides a versatile solution for compact AR. However, an unaided human eye cannot visualize 

patterns on the CLD simply because of the limited accommodation of the eye. Here, we introduce 

a holographic display technology that casts virtual information directly to the retina so that the eye 

sees it while maintaining the visualization of the real-world  intact.  The  key to  our design is  to 

introduce metasurfaces to create a phase distribution that projects virtual information in a pixel-

by-pixel manner. Unlike conventional holographic techniques, our metasurface-based technique 

is able to display arbitrary patterns using a single passive hologram. With a small form-factor, the 

designed metasurface empowers near-eye AR excluding the need of extra optical elements, such 

as a spatial light modulator, for dynamic image control.  

1 

 
 
 
 
Metasurfaces  enable  arbitrary  wavefront  shaping  with  unprecedented  flexibility  by  producing 

controllable abrupt changes in the phase, amplitude, and polarization of light waves at a thickness 

comparable  or  smaller  than  the  wavelength  of  light.1-4  To  enable  such  spatial  variations  in  the 

optical  responses,  metasurfaces  employ  geometric  phase,5,6  coupled  modes,7,8  or  dipolar 

resonances  of  miniature  light  scatterers.9-12  With  their  algorithmic  arrangement  of  two-

dimensional (2D) scatterers, metasurfaces have demonstrated a unique ability to manipulate light 

for  a  wide  range  of  applications  including  wave  concentration,  polarization  control,  and  beam 

steering, all with an ultra-compact device footprint within optically thin films.13-18 Among them, 

metasurface-based holography is a promising display technique which provides a high resolution 

and  low  noise  image  that  corresponds  to  a  static  hologram  by  precisely  reconstructing  the 

amplitude and phase information of light with high efficiency.19-22 Because most optical imaging 

components  are  essentially  shaping  the  wavefront  of  light  to  achieve  a  desired  function, 

metasurfaces  can  replace  the  role  of  these  conventional  lenses  and  mirrors  for  image 

reconstruction,23-25 thus, making possible the reduction of the dimension of image systems such as 

augmented reality (AR).  

AR  is  revolutionizing  the  way  information  is  presented  to  people  by  overlaying  virtual 

information  such  as  graphics  and  captions  onto  a  direct  view  of  a  person’s  real-world 

surroundings.26-28 A central component of AR systems is a display that combines real and virtual 

images so that both are seen at the same time.29 Among the ideation of current display technologies 

for AR, optical see-through displays stand out since they leave the real-world perception largely 

intact and display the AR overlay by means of beamsplitters and miniature projection lenses.30 The 

current prevailing technology for this purpose is in the form of head-mounted displays (HMDs), 

which are bulky and offer a limited field of view (FOV). Furthermore, HMDs substantially hinder 

2 

 
the social acceptance of AR in everyday life owing to the appearance of the user and the privacy 

concern of others. One approach to remove these hurdles is bringing the display closer to the eye 

and integrating it with a contact lens.31  

A contact lens display (CLD) is a promising candidate of the “ultimate display” for AR, 

per Ivan Sutherland’s vision in 1965,32 because it is imperceptible to those around the user. By 

virtue  of  circuitry,  telecommunication,  nanotechnologies,  and  microelectromechanical  systems 

(MEMS), a display system integrated in a contact lens is feasible.33 In recent years, a single pixel 

display  using  a  wireless-powered  light-emitting  diode  (LED)  was  first  developed  on  a  contact 

lens.34 The display was then tested in the eye of a rabbit showing no adverse effects.35 Later, a 

spherically deformed liquid crystal cell was integrated into a contact lens contributing more to a 

realistic  CLD.36  Before  envisioning  the  fascinating  CLD-based  AR,  however,  we  must  solve  a 

fundamental optical problem that the displayed patterns on the corneal surface cannot be faithfully 

observed by the retina because of the finite accommodation of the human eye. Initial attempts to 

solve this problem integrate a micro-Fresnel lens to focus light from  a single pixel,35 however, 

displaying 2D patterns is still challenging.  

In this work, we tackle this challenge by employing a metasurface to holographically cast 

virtual information, from 2D patterns on a CLD, onto the fovea region of the retina in a pixel-by-

pixel manner. This technique holographically casts information that locates on the surface is in 

distinct contrast to that of a meta-lens because of the zero-distance between the object and the lens 

excludes  the  formulating  of  images  governed  by  the  well-known  lens  maker’s  formula.  With 

proper accommodation, the human eye can perceive the pixelated patterns appearing at the near 

point.  The  metasurface,  which  generates  the  predesigned  phase  distribution  using  silicon 

nanobeams,  occupies  only  1%  of  the  pupil  area,  leaving  the  visualization  of  the  real-world 

3 

 
environment  intact.  By  superimposing  the  virtual  and  unaffected  real-world  information,  the 

metasurface-based  display  technique  allows  the  realization  of  AR  on  a  contact  lens.  The 

metasurface  features  the  smallest  form  factor,  adding  a  sub-micrometer  thickness  and  a  sub-

microgram weight to a normal contact lens.  

The main objective behind AR is to superimpose a virtual graphic or caption onto the real-

world environment such that the two visuals are detected by the retina simultaneously, thereby 

augmenting the presence of the real-world with external information. At the intersection of this 

virtual and real-world is the display. Here, we introduce a metasurface-based display technique, as 

shown in Figure 1a, with a miniature footprint for AR on a contact lens. Because of the limited 

accommodation of the eye, patterns embossed on the surface of the contact lens, which sits at the 

cornea,  cannot  be  seen  on  the  retina  by  an  unaided  human  eye.  We  resolve  this  problem  by 

introducing a metasurface to holographically cast the patterns onto the fovea region of the eye. 

With proper accommodation, the retina sees the displayed virtual information and the real-world 

environment  simultaneously.  Figure  1b  shows  that  the  virtual  information  will  be  formed  by  a 

coherent  light  and  a  metasurface  situated  immediately  above  the  virtual  information.  The 

metasurface produces a phase distribution that holographically generates an enlarged image of the 

pattern. When fabricated on a contact lens, the metasurface chip will occupy less than 1% of the 

pupil area, and therefore will have a negligible impact on the normal operation of the eye. As such, 

normal  functions  of  the  human  eye,  including  its  natural  field  of  view,  perception  of  color, 

stereoscopic ability, real-time responses, and so on, are perfectly preserved.   

The  metasurface  in  our  design  is  a  dielectric  gradient  metasurface  composed  of  dense 

arrangements of silicon nanobeams (Figure 1b, right). These nanobeams serve as dielectric optical 

antennas  that  support  a  series  of  Mie  resonances  under  illumination  of  polarized  light.  The 

4 

 
scattered waves of the two input polarizations, with an electric field parallel and perpendicular to 

the nanobeams, exhibit substantial phase retardation, and thusly lead to a strong and controllable 

birefringent behavior. When properly designed, a nanobeam can act as a local half waveplate with 

a relative phase retardance of π between the two primary polarizations. As a result, such silicon 

nanobeams serve as Pancharatnam-Berry (PB) phase elements with geometrically induced abrupt 

phase change.5,6 The magnitude of the induced PB-phase covers from −π to π, and its value is 

determined by the specific orientation of the silicon nanobeams. By manipulating the PB-phase of 

light from a display, the metasurface manages to holographically project the patterns towards the 

eye. To control the propagation of light in an eye by using metasurfaces, however, we must know 

the accurate optical properties of all parts of the eye as well as the accommodation associated with 

the  muscle  movement  of  the  individuals,  which  is  highly  challenging,  if  not  impossible. 

Fortunately,  the  metasurface  hologram  is  designed  to  have  a  conjugate  image  against  the  eye, 

which is in the air with well-defined optical properties. Thus, we can design the patterns on the 

retina by aiming the phase distribution on the metasurface for a targeted conjugate image in the 

air, so that the eye sees the displayed virtual information as if it were at the location of the conjugate 

image, thanks to the intelligent accommodation ability of the human eye.  

Unlike conventional holographic techniques where a phase distribution from a hologram 

only  corresponds  to  a  fixed  image,  our  metasurface  generates  a  phase  distribution  that  forms 

enlarged  images  corresponding  to  arbitrary  patterns  on  the  display.  Figure  2a  shows  that  the 

metasurface with a size of 500 m by 500 m, situated at the center of the contact lens, projects 

virtual information, the letter “F,” onto the fovea region (5 mm by 5 mm) of the retina. With the 

help of the accommodation, the eye perceives the letter “F” as if it is the enlarged and pixelated 

conjugate image, 5 cm by 5 cm in size, 25 cm away from the surface of the contact lens (at the 

5 

 
near  point).  In  this  way,  the  virtual  information  displayed  on  the  surface  of  the  cornea  can  be 

superimposed  onto  the  image  of  the  real-world  environment  on  the  retina.  This  would  not  be 

possible, without the phase manipulating ability of the metasurface.   

To holographically transform the pixelated patterns, we design the phase-retardance of the 

metasurface in the spatial frequency domain, where linear algebra can be performed on the phase 

delay  from  all  optical  components.  By  applying  the  Gerchberg-Saxton  algorithm,37  in  which 

Fourier and inverse Fourier transforms iterate between the two optical planes involved, we obtain 

the phase profile for an array of 10 by 10 pixels in Figure 2b. Each pixel, 50 m by 50 m in size, 

needs  to  possess  a  prescribed  phase  distribution,  which  is  determined  by  both  the  system 

configuration and the specific coordinate location of the pixel. We discretize the PB-phase from 

−π to π into eight values with a step size of π/4 so that it can be experimentally realized while not 

compromising much of the conversion efficiency. We further verify the performance of the device 

with the discretized phase profile by numerically calculating the intensity distribution on the retina 

corresponding to that displayed on the contact lens. Figure 2c shows the 10 by 10 pixels that will 

be  projected  into  the  retina.  As  shown  in  Figure  2d,  the  retinal  detector  visualizes  the  virtual 

information, the letter “F” in this case (inset), generated by the display with the same phase profile 

as that for Figure 2c on the contact lens. In contrast, under the same illumination conditions, the 

retinal detector can only visualize a focused beam spot without the predesigned phase distribution 

and a randomized intensity distribution  with  a random  phase profile (Figure S1). These results 

verify the validity of the phase distribution for holographically forming an image that is viewed 

on the retina in a pixel-by-pixel manner.  

The phase distribution of the metasurface relies on the modification of the space-variant 

geometric phase, or the PB-phase, that associates with the polarization rather than the conventional 

6 

 
phase that results from the path difference of light. We express the polarization of the output light 

from the nanobeams in a helicity basis as the following.  

|𝐸out⟩ = √𝜂E |𝐸in⟩+ √𝜂R 𝑒𝑖2𝜃(𝑥, 𝑦)|𝐸R⟩+√𝜂L𝑒−𝑖2𝜃(𝑥, 𝑦)|𝐸L⟩ 

where  Eout,  Ein,  ER,  and  EL  are  the  electric  field  of  the  output,  input,  right-  and  left-circularly 

polarized light, respectively; 𝜃(𝑥,  𝑦) is the space-variant angle of the nanobeams; and ηE, ηR, and 

ηL  are 

the 

transmission  coefficients  with  𝜂E = |1

2(𝑡TE + 𝑡TM𝑒𝑖∆𝜙)|

2

,  𝜂R = |1

2(𝑡TE −

𝑡TM𝑒𝑖∆𝜙)⟨𝐿|𝐸in⟩|

2

,  and 𝜂L = |1

2(𝑡TE − 𝑡TM𝑒𝑖∆𝜙)⟨𝑅|𝐸in⟩|

2

,  in  which ∆𝜙 is  the  phase  difference 

between the two polarizations (TE and TM) that are parallel and perpendicular to the nanobeams. 

By properly designing the geometry of the nanobeams, 𝑡TE = 𝑡TM and ∆𝜙 = 𝜋, the input light is 

fully converted into a cross circular polarization with a phase twice as large as the angle of the 

nanobeams.  

We experimentally realize the phase distribution by designing the geometry of the silicon 

nanobeams at the specific location. First, we deposit a layer of 155 nm thick polysilicon on a fused 

silica  substrate.  Using  this  surface,  we  extract  the  refractive  index  of  the  polysilicon  film  by 

performing ellipsometry measurements (Figure S2). We then import the optical properties into a 

simulation package to determine the geometric parameters, including the periodicity and width, of 

the nanobeams by numerically simulating the transmission (𝑡TE and 𝑡TM) and phase (∆𝜙) of light 

that passes through the nanobeams (Figure S3a and S3b). The resultant silicon nanobeams must 

faithfully produce circularly polarized light, such that we accomplish the condition where 𝑡TE =

𝑡TM and ∆𝜙 = 𝜋 at the operating wavelength of 543 nm. We optically characterize the fabricated 

nanobeams, with the predesigned geometric parameters (the periodicity is 230 nm and the width 

of the nanobeam is 70 nm), using an interferometry technique described in our previous paper.38 

7 

 
Figure S3 shows that the measured transmission (Figure S3c) and phase (Figure S3d) match the 

simulations  (Figure  S3a  and  S3b)  relatively  well;  the  mismatch  between  the  predicted  and 

experimental responses are due to fabrication and characterization uncertainties. Nevertheless, the 

characterizations  of  transmission  and  phase  for  TE  and  TM  polarizations  provide  a  guide  for 

optimizing the conversion efficiency with metasurfaces using PB phases. 

With  the  predesigned  phase  distribution  generated  from  the  silicon  nanobeams,  we 

demonstrate a metasurface-based display technique for applications of near-eye AR. Figure 3a is 

an SEM image of the fabricated metasurface. The silicon nanobeams are oriented at specific angles 

to realize the phase distribution required to holographically cast virtual information. During the 

experiment, we use an image of a photomask, instead of a real see-through display, to generate the 

virtual  information.  The  virtual  information  and  the  real-world  environment  are  viewed 

simultaneously by a retina camera with an eye-lens in front as shown in Figure S4. When all one-

hundred pixels emit light (543 nm) forming the green uniform square in Figure 3b underneath the 

metasurface, the retina camera sees the whole information in a pixel-by-pixel manner (Figure 3c), 

experimentally  confirming  the  validity  of  the  metasurface-based  display  technique.  To  further 

testify  the  capability  of  our  metasurface  hologram  to  display  arbitrary  patterns,  we  generate 

multiple bar-patterns (Figure 3d - 3g) by moving the image of the photomask from one side of the 

metasurface  to  the  other.  The  retina  camera  recognizes  the  moving  bars  in  Figure  3h  to  3k 

corresponding to the displayed patterns in Figure 3d to 3g, respectively.  

More importantly, when the display generates a virtual graphic by emitting light at specific 

pixels, for example the pixels for the letter “F” (inset) in this case, the retina camera observes the 

enlarged, pixelated pattern in Figure 4a. The bright cross at the center is the zeroth-order diffraction, 

commonly seen in metasurface devices using geometric phases, owing to the imperfectly fulfilled 

8 

 
condition, 𝑡TE = 𝑡TM and ∆𝜙 = 𝜋, together with the discretization of the phase distribution. The 

zeroth-order diffraction can be experimentally eliminated by placing an analyzer that is  crossly 

polarized to the input light. The metasurface, with square side lengths of 500 μm by 500 μm, only 

occupies ~1% of the area of the pupil. This leaves the overall functionality of the eye unaffected 

and enables overlaying of the virtual and real-world information at the retina. Indeed, the retina 

camera  precisely  records  the  virtual  information  (Figure  4a)  and  the  real-world  environment 

(Figure  4b)  simultaneously  in  Figure  4c,  experimentally  demonstrating  the  metasurface-based 

display technique towards AR on a contact lens.  

These  results  clearly  confirm  the  validity  of  the  proposed  method:  a  metasurface  can 

holographically cast virtual information generated by a see-through display onto the retina, making 

possible AR on a contact lens. While the current design demonstrates relatively low resolution, 

augmenting  the  physical  environment  with  simple  annotation  text  and  icons  is  known  to  be 

valuable for various applications such as warning indicators and visual cues in a navigation system. 

Furthermore, by designing more pixels for the display, for example 100 by 100 pixels, we verify 

via numerical simulation that our technique displays complex virtual information, such as a map 

of America (Figure S5), on a contact lens. We also note that stereoscopic binocular displays for 

better depth perception are also possible with the proposed system, as the metasurface chip can be 

individually engineered for each eye. 

In summary, we experimentally demonstrated AR on a contact lens with a metasurface that 

enables the direct visualization of virtual information in a see-through display on the surface of 

the human eye. Our method of holographically casting the virtual information in a pixel-by-pixel 

manner provides a versatile solution to significantly minimize the footprint of AR devices. This 

feature makes AR  imperceptible to  neighboring  people,  which could  make the CLD-based AR 

9 

 
more  socially  accepted  by  the  public.  Moreover,  the  passive  ultrathin  metasurface  allows  for 

integration with current techniques and systems, such as a wearable display, for projecting images 

from a two-dimensional plane to free space without extra optical components, such as a spatial 

light modulator, for dynamic image control. 

Methods 

Numerical  simulation.  The  transmission  and  phase  retardance  of  silicon  nanobeams  were 

simulated using a commercial FEM solver (COMSOL). The optical  properties of the polysilicon 

film  for  the  simulation  were  obtained  from  ellipsometry  measurements,  using  a  Woollam 

ellipsometer. Linearly polarized light was applied as the input to the simulation area with periodic 

boundary conditions on the left and right and perfectly match layers on the top and bottom.   

Fabrication. The polysilicon film was deposited on a fused silica substrate using the Tystar Poly 

Furnace at a temperature of 610 °C and a pressure of 25 mTorr. A thin layer of HSQ was spun on 

top of the polysilicon film to be used as the e-beam resist for e-beam lithography. After e-beam 

lithography pattering, reactive ion etching (RIE) was performed with an STS ICP standard oxide 

etcher  for  transferring  the  patterns  to  the  polysilicon  film.  The  polysilicon  on  the  back  of  the 

substrate was removed by a Xactix Xenon difluoride etcher, while the front was protected by a 

photoresist.  

Optical characterization. The transmission of the nanobeams was measured with a homemade 

setup  dedicated  to  the  spectral  measurement  of  samples  with  microscopic  dimensions.    A 

broadband light source (B&W Tek BPS120) was used to illuminate the sample. A set of linear 

polarizers and waveplates was employed to control the polarization state of the incident light. The 

transmitted signal from the sample was collected by an objective lens (Mitutoyo, 100 × Plan Apo 

10 

 
NIR infinity-corrected) and transformed by another lens to form a magnified image of the sample. 

The transmission was obtained by normalizing the transmitted light from the desire area to that of 

the  substrate.  The  phase  delay  between  the  TE  and  TM  polarizations  was  extracted  with  a 

polarization interferometric technique.  

11 

 
 
 
References 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Kildishev, A. V.; Boltasseva, A.; Shalaev, V. M. Science 2013, 339, (6125), 1232009. 

Yu, N. F.; Capasso, F. Nat. Mater. 2014, 13, (2), 139-150. 

Chen, H. T.; Taylor, A. J.; Yu, N. F. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2016, 79, (7), 076401. 

Ding, F.; Pors, A.; Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2018, 81, (2), 026401. 

Bomzon, Z.; Biener, G.; Kleiner, V.; Hasman, E. Opt. Lett. 2002, 27, (13), 1141-1143. 

Lin, D. M.; Fan, P. Y.; Hasman, E.; Brongersma, M. L. Science 2014, 345, (6194), 298-

302. 

7. 

Yu, N. F.; Genevet, P.; Kats, M. A.; Aieta, F.; Tetienne, J. P.; Capasso, F.; Gaburro, Z. 

Science 2011, 334, (6054), 333-337. 

8. 

Ni, X. J.; Emani, N. K.; Kildishev, A. V.; Boltasseva, A.; Shalaev, V. M. Science 2012, 

335, (6067), 427-427. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

Monticone, F.; Estakhri, N. M.; Alu, A. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, (20), 203903. 

Pfeiffer, C.; Grbic, A. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, (19), 197401. 

Decker, M.; Staude, I.; Falkner, M.; Dominguez, J.; Neshev, D. N.; Brener, I.; Pertsch, 

T.; Kivshar, Y. S. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2015, 3, (6), 813-820. 

12. 

Arbabi, A.; Horie, Y.; Bagheri, M.; Faraon, A. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, (11), 937-

944. 

13. 

Chen, X. Z.; Huang, L. L.; Muhlenbernd, H.; Li, G. X.; Bai, B. F.; Tan, Q. F.; Jin, G. F.; 

Qiu, C. W.; Zhang, S.; Zentgraf, T. Nat. Commun. 2012, 3, 1198. 

14. 

Yin, X. B.; Ye, Z. L.; Rho, J.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, X. Science 2013, 339, (6126), 1405-

1407. 

15. 

Ni, X. J.; Wong, Z. J.; Mrejen, M.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, X. Science 2015, 349, (6254), 

1310-1314. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

Estakhri, N. M.; Alu, A. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 2016, 33, (2), A21-A30. 

Hsiao, H. H.; Chu, C. H.; Tsai, D. P. Small Methods 2017, 1, (4), 1600064. 

Li, K.; Rao, Y.; Chase, C.; Yang, W. J.; Chang-Hasnain, C. J. Optica 2018, 5, (1), 10-13. 

Ni, X. J.; Kildishev, A. V.; Shalaev, V. M. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2807. 

Huang, L. L.; Chen, X. Z.; Muhlenbernd, H.; Zhang, H.; Chen, S. M.; Bai, B. F.; Tan, Q. 

F.; Jin, G. F.; Cheah, K. W.; Qiu, C. W.; Li, J. S.; Zentgraf, T.; Zhang, S. Nat. Commun. 

2013, 4, 2808. 

12 

 
21. 

Zheng, G. X.; Muhlenbernd, H.; Kenney, M.; Li, G. X.; Zentgraf, T.; Zhang, S. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, (4), 308-312. 

22. 

Ye, W. M.; Zeuner, F.; Li, X.; Reineke, B.; He, S.; Qiu, C. W.; Liu, J.; Wang, Y. T.; 

Zhang, S.; Zentgraf, T. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11930. 

23. 

Khorasaninejad, M.; Chen, W. T.; Devlin, R. C.; Oh, J.; Zhu, A. Y.; Capasso, F. Science 

2016, 352, (6290), 1190-1194. 

24. 

Chen, B. H.; Wu, P. C.; Su, V. C.; Lai, Y. C.; Chu, C. H.; Lee, I. C.; Chen, J. W.; Chen, 

Y. H.; Lan, Y. C.; Kuan, C. H.; Tsai, D. P. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, (10), 6345-6352. 

25. 

Arbabi, A.; Arbabi, E.; Horie, Y.; Kamali, S. M.; Faraon, A. Nat. Photonics 2017, 11, (7), 

415-420. 

26. 

Azuma, R.; Baillot, Y.; Behringer, R.; Feiner, S.; Julier, S.; MacIntyre, B. IEEE Comput. 

Graph. 2001, 21, (6), 34-47. 

27. 

Feiner, S. K. Sci. Am. 2002, 286, (4), 48-55. 

28.  Wang, X.; Ong, S. K.; Nee, A. Y. C. Adv. Manuf. 2016, 4, (1), 1-22. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

Azuma, R. T. Presence-Teleop. Virt. 1997, 6, (4), 355-385. 

Drascic, D.; Milgram, P. P. Soc. Photo-Opt. Ins. 1996, 2653, 123-134. 

Parviz, B. A. IEEE Spectrum 2009, 46, (9), 36-41. 

Sutherland, I. Proceedings of IFIP Congres 1965, 1, 506-508. 

Stauth, S. A.; Parviz, B. A. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2006, 103, (38), 13922-13927. 

Pandey, J.; Liao, Y. T.; Lingley, A.; Mirjalili, R.; Parviz, B.; Otis, B. P. IEEE T. Biomed. 

Circ. S 2010, 4, (6), 454-461. 

35. 

Lingley, A. R.; Ali, M.; Liao, Y.; Mirjalili, R.; Klonner, M.; Sopanen, M.; Suihkonen, S.; 

Shen, T.; Otis, B. P.; Lipsanen, H.; Parviz, B. A. J. Micromech. Microeng. 2011, 21, (12), 

125014. 

36. 

De Smet, J.; Avci, A.; Joshi, P.; Schaubroeck, D.; Cuypers, D.; De Smet, H. J. Soc. Inf. 

Display 2013, 21, (9), 399-406. 

Gerchber.Rw; Saxton, W. O. Optik 1972, 35, (2), 237-246. 

Lan, S.; Rodrigues, S. P.; Kang, L.; Cai, W. ACS Photonics 2016, 3, 1176-1181. 

37. 

38. 

13 

 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Metasurfaces enable AR on contact lenses. a, The metasurface on top of a see-through 

display  allows  the  visualization  of  virtual  information  (the  letter  “F”)  on  a  contact  lens,  which 

otherwise  would  not  be  seen  due  to  the  limited accommodation  of  the  human  eye.  The  virtual 

information  coexists  with  the  live  view  of  an  unaffected  real-world  environment,  which  is 

represented  here  as  an  image  of  “Tech  Tower.”  b,  The  envisioned  AR  device  contains  a  see-

through  display  and  metasurface  situated  on  a  contact  lens.  The  metasurface  comprises  the 

predesigned  distribution  of  densely  packed  silicon  nanobeams  as  Pancharatnam-Berry  phase 

elements shown in the SEM image on the right. The scale bar is 5 m.  

14 

 
 
 
Figure  2.  Visualize  virtual  information  in  a  pixel-by-pixel  manner.  a,  The  visualization  of 

displayed information on the surface of an eyeball. The virtual information that generated on the 

see-through display transforms into a pixelated pattern at the fovea region of the retina under the 

aid of the metasurface. With proper accommodation of the eye-lens (not shown), the eye perceives 

the  displayed  information  appearing  at  the  near  point.  b,  Simulated  distribution  of  the  phase 

retardance for holographically casting the received information to an enlarged, pixelated pattern. 

c, All 10 by 10 pixels of the display project onto the retina via the metasurface with the numerically 

predesigned  phase  distribution  (Fig.  2b).  d,  The  retina  visualizes  the  pixels  of  the  virtual 

information, the letter “F” generated on the see-through display (inset), validating the pixel-by-

pixel manner of the displaying technique. The scale bars other than specified are 1 mm.  

15 

 
 
Figure 3. Pattern recognition with the metasurface-based AR device.  a, The SEM image of the 

metasurface with  silicon nano-beams situated at  angles (θ) that generate  the predesigned phase 

distribution (φ) in Figure 2b governed by the relationship of φ = 2θ. b, The optical image of the 

metasurface  and  the  virtual  information,  the  green  square,  on  the  contact  lens  shows  the  full 

illumination of all pixels. c, The retina-camera sees the whole virtual information that comprises 

10  by  10  pixels.  By  illuminating  desired  pixels,  the  display  generates  target  patterns  (d  -  g). 

Subsequently,  mimicked  human  eye  recognizes  the  patterns  (h  -  k)  under  the  help  of  the 

metasurface  to  holographically  project  them  onto  the  retina-camera.  In  this  way,  the  passive 

metasurface-based AR device enables the visualization of virtual information on a contact lens by 

human  eyes.  The  bright  cross  at  the  center  is  the  zeroth-order  diffraction  commonly  seen  in 

gradient metasurfaces with geometric phases. The yellow squares are boundaries for guiding eyes.  

16 

 
 
 
Figure  4.  Human  eye  sees  the  real  world  with  auxiliary  virtual  information.  a,  The  virtual 

information (inset), letter “F,” is an image of the photomask which equivalents to a see-through 

display on a contact lens. The retina-camera visualizes the pixelated “F,” thanks to the ability of 

the metasurface to holographically projecting the virtual information in a pixel-by-pixel manner. 

The dotted line is a guide of eye. b, The real-world environment, “Tech Tower” in this case, is 

unaffected in the presence of the metasurface occupying an area of 500 m by 500 m, around 1% 

of  a  typical  pupil  area.  c,  The  virtual  information  overlays  on  the  real-world  environment, 

demonstrating AR on contact lenses. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Metasurfaces for Near-Eye Augmented Reality 

Shoufeng Lan,†,‡ Xueyue Zhang,†,‡ Mohammad Taghinejad,† Sean Rodrigues,†,§ Kyu-Tae Lee,† 

Zhaocheng Liu,† and Wenshan Cai†,§,* 

† School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332  

§ School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332 

‡ Authors contributed equally to this work 

* Correspondence should be addressed to W.C. (wcai@gatech.edu) 

KEYWORDS: Metasurface, holography, augmented reality, see-through display 

Contents of the Supplementary Information 

S1. Simulation results without predesigned phase distribution 

S2. Optical properties of poly-silicon films 

S3. Transmission and phase of silicon nanobeams 

S4. Schematic of the experimental setup 

S5. Displaying complex virtual information 

S1. Simulation results without a predesigned phase distribution 

We  have  numerically  verified  (Fig.  2)  the  needed  phase  distribution  that  will  be  used  to 

holographically cast patterns onto a retina together with a conjugate image at the near point of the 

eye. We further confirm the proposed imaging method by calculating the intensity distribution on 

the retina without the predesigned phase distribution. The virtual information, the letter “F” in this 

case, is the same as that used in Fig. 2. We also keep all other conditions, such as the wavelength 

of the input light, consistent with that of the main text. Without any phase distribution, the phase 

is zero for all pixels; the display cannot project the patterns. As a result, the retina only sees a small 

1 

 
 
 
 
Figure  S1.  Simulated  images  on  the  retina  without  a  predesigned  phase 

distribution.  a,  In  absence  of  the  metasurface,  the  retina  is  not  able  to  see  the 

virtual graphic of “F” on the see-through display, but rather sees a tiny bright dot 

at the center. b, With random phase-distribution of a metasurface, as expected, 

the retina sees randomized scattering from the virtual graphic on the display.  

beam spot (Fig. S1a). We also calculate the intensity distribution with a random phase profile for 

a metasurface. As expected, the retina sees a randomized intensity distribution (Fig. S1b).  

S2. Optical properties of poly-silicon films 

We design the geometric parameters, such as the width, thickness, and periodicity, of nanobeams 

by using experimentally measured optical properties of the poly-silicon for fully converting the 

input  light  into  the  desired  pattern  while  eliminating  the  zeroth-order  diffraction.  Ideally,  the 

condition  for  achieving  this  is  𝑡TE = 𝑡TM  and  ∆𝜙 = 𝜋  as  depicted  in  the  manuscript.  The 

transmission and phase retardance of the nanobeams is governed by the specific geometry of the 

nanobeams  and  the  optical  properties  of  the  poly-silicon  film  (Fig.  S2),  which  we  obtain  via 

ellipsometry measurements. For the measurements, we deposit poly-silicon onto an oxide layer 

(~400 nm) that is obtained by thermal oxidation of the silicon substrate. Under reflection mode 

with an oblique incidence, the real and imaginary part of the refractive index for the poly-Si film 

2 

 
 
Figure S2. Refractive index of the silicon film for the metasurface. The refractive 

index was measured by a Woollam ellipsometer. The measured data was further 

applied for the design of the silicon nanobeams.  

is  extracted via fitting  the detected optical  signal with  theoretical  models.  In this way, we also 

obtain the thickness of the film, which is further confirmed by measurements with a profilometer.  

S3. Transmission and phase of silicon nanobeams 

With the optical properties of the poly-Si film in Fig. S2, we numerically investigate the optical 

transmission and phase of polarized light  through an array of silicon nanobeams  (Fig. S3a and 

S3b), a one-dimensional grating. We simulate the transmission for input light with polarizations 

both  along  (TE)  and perpendicular to  (TM)  grating strips, we also  extract  the phase difference 

between them (∆𝜙). By varying the geometric parameters, we find the working conditions to be: 

3 

 
 
Figure  S3.  Designing  the  transmission  and  phase  retardance  of  silicon 

nanobeams. a, The simulated transmission for TE and TM polarizations. The TE 

(TM)  polarization 

is  defined  as 

the  electric  field  component  parallel 

(perpendicular) to the nanobeams. b, Simulated phase-retardance between the TE 

and  TM  polarizations.  The  dashed  line  represents  the  phase-retardance  of  180 

degrees. c, d, Experimentally measured transmission and phase retardance of the 

metasurface that has the geometric parameters (periodicity is 230 nm, width of 

the  nanobeam  is  70  nm)  determined  by  the  simulations.  The  inset  is  the  SEM 

image of the fabricated silicon nanobeams with a scale bar of 400 nm. 

a film  thickness  of 155nm,  a grating  width  of 70 nm, and  a  periodicity  of 230 nm. With  these  

geometric  parameters,  the  conditions  of 𝑡TE = 𝑡TM and ∆𝜙 = 𝜋 are  fulfilled  simultaneously.  In 

4 

 
 
principle, the input light fully converts into the output light with a cross polarization, and hence 

eliminate  the  zeroth-order  diffraction.  The  experimental  results  in  Fig.  S3c  and  S3d  match  the 

simulations  relatively  well,  but  not  exactly  due  to  fabrication  uncertainties.  Consequently,  the 

zeroth-order diffraction is not eliminated as shown in the experimental results in Fig. 3 and 4 in 

the manuscript, which is commonly seen in experimental papers using geometric phases. Moreover, 

we can easily get rid of the zeroth-order diffraction by placing a polarizer in front of the retina 

camera  because  the  desired  diffraction  pattern  has  a  cross-polarization.  Nevertheless,  the 

characterizations  of  transmission  and  phase  for  TE  and  TM  polarizations  provide  a  guide  for 

increasing the conversion efficiency with metasurfaces using PB phases.  

S4. Schematic of the experimental setup 

In the experiment, a laser light is circularly polarized by passing through a linear polarizer and a 

quarter waveplate. We use a photomask to generate an image instead of using a real see-through 

display to produce virtual information. In other words, the image of the photomask, which locates 

at  the  metasurface,  is  the  virtual  information  for  AR  in  our  experiments.  Because  of  the 

Figure  S4.  Schematic  of  the  experimental  setup  for  AR.  LP:  Linear  polarizer; 

QWP: quarter waveplate; PM: photomask; BS: beamsplitter.  

5 

 
predesigned phase distribution on the metasurface, the image (virtual information) can be captured, 

or visualized, by the retina-camera with the help of an eye-lens mimicking the real crystalline lens 

of the human eye. In analogy to the optical system of the human eye, we use a focal length of 17 

mm for the eye-lens and a length of 25 mm for the distance between the metasurface and the retina-

camera.  

S5. Displaying complex virtual information 

With the metasurface-based display containing 10 by 10 pixels in the manuscript, we demonstrate 

the visualization of letters and some simple patterns such as bars in Fig. 3 on a contact lens. To 

display more complex patterns, we also numerically design a metasurface containing 100 by 100 

pixels in Fig. S5. Using the same strategy as that in the manuscript, we design a phase distribution 

(Fig. S5a) that empowers the projection of displayed patterns in a pixel-by-pixel manner. Indeed, 

the  retina  sees  a  more  complex  pattern  (Fig.  S5b),  the  American  continents,  generated  from  a 

display (inset) on a contact lens.   

Figure  S5.  A  simulated  phase  distribution  with  100  by  100  pixels  permits 

graphics of higher complexity. a, The profile of the phase-retardance with 100 by 

100  pixels.  The  inset  is  a  close  view  of  the  center  region.  b,  The  retina  sees 

complex virtual information, the America, with the phase distribution in Fig. S4a 

for the metasurface. The scale bars are 1 mm. 

6 

 
