Noble gas as a functional dopant in ZnO  

Oleksandr I. Malyi1*, Kostiantyn V. Sopiha2, and Clas Persson1 

1 – Centre for Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Department of Physics, University of Oslo, P.O. 

Box 1048 Blindern, NO-0316 Oslo, Norway 

2  –  Ångström  Solar  Center,  Solid  State  Electronics,  Department  of  Engineering  Sciences,  Uppsala 

University, Box 534, SE-75121 Uppsala, Sweden 

email: oleksandrmalyi@gmail.com (O.I.M) 

ABSTRACT  

Owing to fully occupied orbitals, noble gases are considered to be chemically inert and to have limited 

effect on materials properties under standard conditions. However, using first-principles calculations, 

we  demonstrate  herein  that  the  insertion  of  noble  gas  (i.e.,  He,  Ne,  or  Ar)  in  ZnO  results  in  local 

destabilization of electron density of the material driven by minimization of an unfavorable overlap 

of  atomic  orbitals  of  the  noble  gas  and  its  surrounding  atoms.  Specifically,  the  noble  gas  defect 

(interstitial or substitutional) in ZnO pushes the electron density of its surrounding atoms away from 

the defect. Simultaneously, the host material confines the electron density of the noble gas.  As a 

consequence, the interaction of He, Ne, or Ar with O vacancies of ZnO in different charge states q 

(ZnO:VO

q) affects the vacancy stability and their electronic structures. Remarkably, we find that the 

noble  gas  is  a  functional  dopant  that  can  delocalize  the  deep  in-gap  VO

q  states  and  lift  electrons 

associated with the vacancy to the conduction band.   

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 

Understanding the role of point defects in materials is the paramount issue in modern solid-state 

physics/chemistry.1,  2  With  the  rapid  development  of  experimental  and  theoretical  methods,  one 

already has some knowledge on defects in many technologically important binary metal oxides and 

can often foresee stabilization of intrinsic donor and acceptor defects under different oxygen partial 

pressures. However, it appears that defect characterization and especially assigning experimentally 

determined materials properties to a specific defect are a formidable challenge.3 The main problem 

arises from a large variety of defects which can be formed. Moreover, many materials can exhibit 

self-doping  caused  by  low  formation  energies  of  the  defects  involving  impurities  that  exist  under 

typical  growth  or  characterization  conditions.  Specifically,  it  has  been  shown  that  n-  or  p-type 

conductivity  of  many  metal  oxides  can  be  caused  by  H  impurities.4,  5,  6  This  discovery  shifted  the 

research interest from intrinsic defects to reactive impurities and their impact on the defect stability 

and materials properties in general.4, 7, 8  

Owing to the fully occupied orbitals, it is intuitively thought that noble gases remain inert during 

the interaction with various materials. Therefore, it is a common belief that the presence of a noble 

gas (e.g., Ar) during sputtering or wet-chemical synthesis inside a glove box does not affect properties 

of  the  product  material.  Moreover,  Ar  implantation  is  often  used  as  a  reference  to  eliminate  the 

influence of implantation damage,9, 10, 11, 12, 13 what implicitly assumes that Ar defects do not change 

the  materials  properties.  Despite  this,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  there  is  no  a  single  work 

confirming  the  negligible  role  of  noble  gases  in  the  stability  of  intrinsic  defects  and  their 

compensation mechanisms. Keeping in mind the existing hypothesis, we investigate the noble gas 

defects in wurtzite ZnO with a primary focus on understanding the interaction of He, Ne, and Ar with 

ZnO:VO

q.  The  material  selection  is  motivated  by  a  deep  knowledge  of  ZnO:VO

q  and  technological 

importance of ZnO in the semiconductor industry.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 Despite the focus on ZnO, we also 

provide common trends that can be extrapolated to other systems. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Interaction of noble gases with ideal ZnO: Utilizing the methodology to screen different insertion 

sites explained in our previous work,21 we find that He and Ne in ZnO tend to occupy the octahedral 

interstitial  site  shown  in  Fig.  1a,  whereas  Ar  breaks  the  Zn-O  bonds  along  the  [001]  direction 

(direction c in Fig. 1a) and locates between the Zn and O atoms (in-bond site). The gain of the Bader 

charges on the noble gas atoms is less than ‒0.07e. However, the prediction of partial charges on 

2 

 
 
each atom in a solid is a complex task that is hindered by the overlap of atomic orbitals. In particular, 

since the Bader charges are calculated by projecting electron density on individual atoms using zero-

flux  surface  approach22,  23,  24,  their  interpretation  in  the  analysis  of  chemical  bonding  can  be 

misleading. To provide a better understanding of the interaction between the noble gases and ZnO, 

we  calculate  spherically  averaged  charge  density  rearrangement  (∆𝜌̅̅̅̅(𝑟))  around  each  interstitial 

noble gas defect as a discrete function of sphere's radius r by averaging the charge density difference 

(∆ρ) within the spherical shell of thickness ∆r = 0.1 Å. Herein, ∆ρ = ρ(ZnO:X) – ρ(ZnO) – ρ(X), where 

the charge density (ρ) of each component is calculated for the atomic positions of the corresponding 

ZnO:X (X is He, Ne, or Ar) system. For ZnO:He (Fig. 1b), the charge density near He (r < 0.5 Å) and its 

nearest  surrounding  atoms  (r  >  1.6  Å)  increases;  while  between  these  two  regions  it  decreases 

strongly. Similar results are also obtained for the interaction of Ne and Ar with ZnO (Fig. S1). Notably, 

the electron density is not shifted from noble gas to the surrounding atoms, which shows that He-

ZnO  interaction  in  not  ionic.  Moreover,  since  the  charge  density  between  the  noble  gas  and  its 

surrounding atoms decreases (no electron sharing/donation is observed), the interaction does not 

have covalent/metallic character either. By analyzing the radial electron distribution for the isolated 

noble gas atom (Fig. S2) and spherically averaged charge density rearrangement around the defect 

(Figs. 1b and S1), we conclude that noble gas insertion results in a local destabilization of the electron 

density  for  the  surrounding  atoms  (which  implies  local  weakening  of  Zn-O  bonds)  caused  by 

minimization of the unfavorable overlap of atomic orbitals of the noble gas and those host atoms. 

Specifically, the noble gas pushes the electrons of its surrounding atoms away, resulting in the charge 

density increase near surrounding atoms, while the host material confines the spread of noble gas 

electron density, leading to charge density increase in the vicinity of the noble gas. Because of this 

interaction nature, the insertion of noble gases in ZnO costs energy: 1.25, 2.90, and 5.55 eV (7.18 eV 

for the octahedral interstitial defect) for interstitial He, Ne, and Ar, respectively.  

To quantify the overall effect of the noble gas defects on the charge density rearrangements, we 

calculate a total deviation of the charge density difference for the system as 𝑠 = ∑ |∆𝜌𝑖|𝑉𝑖

𝑁
𝑖

, where 

∆𝜌𝑖 and 𝑉𝑖 are charge density difference and volume of the i cell in the discrete grid used for the 

summation. The computed total deviations of s = 0.28e, 0.49e, and 0.63e (0.92e for the octahedral 

interstitial defects) for He, Ne, and Ar imply that the strongest local destabilization of the electron 

density  is  caused  by  Ar  insertion,  while  the  smallest  effect  corresponds  to  the  He  defect. 

Unsurprisingly, larger atomic size of the noble gas results in a stronger repulsion between its atomic 

orbitals and those of the surrounding atoms. Because of the nature of the noble gas interaction with 

3 

 
ZnO, the insertion of larger noble gas results in stronger local destabilization of electron density which 

correlates  with  the  insertion  energies  (given  above)  and  atomic  displacements.  For  instance,  the 

shortest He-Zn, Ne-Zn, and Ar-Zn distances are 2.16, 2.23, and 2.24 Å (2.32 Å for the octahedral site), 

respectively. Indeed, the atomic relaxation is the system’s response to the unfavorable overlap of 

atomic orbitals. The large atomic size and high coordination of the octahedral interstitial site force 

Ar to break the Zn-O bond and minimize the number of the nearest neighbors and total deviation of 

the  charge  density  difference.  Specifically,  Ar  at  the  in-bond  site  has  only  2  neighbors  within  the 

distance of 2.60 Å, while it has 12 neighbors at the octahedral site.  

The noble gas defects at octahedral sites do not change the electronic structure of ZnO noticeably 

(Fig. S3). However, Ar in its lowest energy configuration (Fig. 1a) creates an occupied defect state 

above the valence band maximum (VBM) of the ideal ZnO (Fig. 1c). As an illustration, for 96-atom 

supercell, the computed energy gap between the defect state and conduction band is 3.12 eV, while 

the band gap energy of pristine ZnO is 3.42 eV. From the analysis of atom-resolved density of states 

(DOS) (Fig. 1c) and partial charge density corresponding to the defect state (Fig. 1d), we find that the 

defect state is occupied by 2e and is mainly localized on the undercoordinated O atom (the O atom 

formed upon Ar insertion breaking Zn-O bond) and its nearest neighbors. These results suggest that 

the  formation  of  the  defect  state  is due to  breaking  the  Zn-O bond  along  the  [001]  direction  and 

charge density redistribution caused by the Ar insertion. Because of this, it can also be speculated 

that the defect state is a source of photoluminescence that can be used to detect the interstitial Ar 

defects.  

Interaction of noble gases with ZnO:VO: Although the noble gas insertion has limited effect on the 

electronic structure of the pristine ZnO apart from Ar that induces formation of  near-VBM defect 

state, the interaction of the noble gases with vacancy-defected ZnO is different. In fact, the presence 

of VO results in a dependence of the insertion energy on distance d between the vacancy and inserted 

atom (the energy versus distance profile). First, the noble gas can act as an interstitial defect locating 

at a different distance from VO (ZnO:VO-X for d ≠ 0 Å). Second, it can occupy the vacancy site acting 

as a substitutional defect (ZnO:VO-X for d = 0 Å). From the calculations for ZnO:X systems, one can 

expect that the noble gases tend to occupy the vacancy site to minimize the unfavorable overlap of 

their atomic orbitals with those of the surrounding atoms: for the substitutional defect, the shortest 

He-Zn distance is ~2.5 Å, while for the interstitial one it is ~2.2 Å. However, we find that He does not 

act as a substitutional defect but goes to the interstitial site instead (Fig. 2a). Here, despite a variety 

of  unique  interstitial  sites,  the  insertion  energy  does  not  depend  strongly  on  the  distance  to  the 

4 

 
vacancy. Moreover, for the interstitial sites, the He insertion energy is roughly the same (~1.25 eV) 

for both the defective and ideal ZnO systems suggesting that the interaction between the noble gas 

and  VO  is  short-ranged.  To  understand  these  results,  we  first  analyze  the  electronic  structure  of 

ZnO:VO system and how it is affected by the noble gas insertion (Figs. 2 and S4-S7). As known from 

the literature16, 18 and schematically shown in Fig. 2b, the formation of neutral oxygen vacancy leads 

to the appearance of defect state above the VBM of the host material. This defect state is occupied 

by 2e and mainly localized in the vicinity of the defect. Therefore, when He occupies the vacancy site, 

it delocalizes the defect state lifting 2e to the conduction band. According to the analysis of charge 

density difference  (Fig.  2c),  akin  to  X-ZnO  interaction,  He  pushes electrons  away  from  its  vicinity, 

while the host material confines its charge density. Specifically, we observe the increase of charge 

density near He (r < 0.2 Å) and its surrounding atoms (r > 2.0 Å). This behavior  indicates that the 

stability of He at the vacancy site is determined by not only the repulsion of atomic orbitals of He and 

its surrounding atoms but also by the delocalization of otherwise localized vacancy states which costs 

extra energy; this is in contrast to the stability of the interstitial defect that is determined by  the 

minimization of unfavorable overlap of the atomic orbitals.  

The  nature  of  Ne/Ar  interaction  with  ZnO:VO  is  similar  to  that  for  the  He  case  (Fig.  S5-S7).  In 

particular, the formation of the substitutional defects (ZnO:VO-X when d = 0 Å) also delocalizes the 

localized VO states moving 2e to the conduction band. The interstitial noble gas defects in ZnO:VO and 

ideal ZnO systems have roughly the same energetics for all d ≠ 0 Å. Despite this, the analysis of energy 

versus distance profiles (Fig. 2a) suggests that, in contrast to He, both Ne and Ar tend to occupy the 

vacancy site; the lowest insertion energies correspond to d = 0 Å. To quantify this effect, for each 

noble gas, we compute trapping energy as a difference in the insertion energies for interstitial and 

substitutional  defects.  The  formation  of  substitutional  over  interstitial  defect  becomes  more 

favorable with increase in atomic radius of noble gas; the trapping energies for He, Ne, and Ar are ‒

0.78, 0.74, and 2.71 eV, respectively. Since the energy to delocalize the electrons associated with the 

Vo  is  roughly  the  same  for  all  considered  noble  gases,  the  difference  in  the  trapping  behavior  is 

caused by the difference in the repulsion of atomic orbitals for the noble gases and their surrounding 

atoms for  the  substitutional  and  interstitial  sites.  Specifically, for  He  (the  smallest  noble  gas),  the 

energy gain due to the delocalization of localized Vo states exceeds the energy reduction caused by 

minimization of the repulsion of atomic orbitals. As a consequence, He acts as an interstitial defect 

in  the  ZnO:VO system.  In  contrast,  for  Ne  and  Ar  defects  (which  at  the  interstitial  configurations 

5 

 
destabilize  the  electron  density  to  a  larger  extent  than  He  does),  the  insertion  energy  can  be 

minimized via the delocalization of localized defect states and formation of the substitutional defects.   

Interaction of noble gases with ZnO:VO

q: To better understand the interaction between the noble 

gases and vacancies, we analyze the insertion of noble gases in charged ZnO:VO

1+ and ZnO:VO

2+ (Figs. 

3 and 4) in comparison to that of neutral ZnO:VO (as shown in Fig. 2). The set of ZnO:VO

q is considered 

as it is known from literature16, 18 that  each charged state has own effect on the electronic structures 

(Fig. S4). For instance, the formation of ZnO:VO

1+ creates one occupied and one unoccupied defect 

states that are located close to the valence and conduction bands of ideal ZnO, respectively (Fig. 3b). 

Similar to ZnO:VO

 (and to pure ZnO), interstitial He and Ne do not change noticeably the electronic 

structure  of  the  ZnO:VO

1+ system,  while  interstitial  Ar  produces  an  in-gap  defect  state.  Moreover, 

when the noble gas occupies the vacancy side, it delocalizes both defect states, however, lifting up 

only 1e to the conduction band (Figs. 3b-c). Therefore, for the substitutional noble gas defects, the 

delocalization  of  the  vacancy  states  in  ZnO:VO

  system  requires  less  energy  than  that  for  the 

1+

delocalization of 2e in ZnO:VO system. Hence, all three noble gases (including He) prefer to occupy 

the charged vacancy site over the formation of the interstitial defects (Fig. 3a).  

In contrast to ZnO:VO and ZnO:VO

1+, the formation of ZnO:VO

2+ does not create localized defect 

states (Figs. 4b and S4) as there are no donor electrons associated with the vacancy. Because of this, 

neither interstitial nor substitutional noble gas defects (except the interstitial Ar defects) alter the 

electronic structure of ZnO:VO

2+ system. In other words, the variation of insertion energy between 

the interstitial and substitutional defects is mainly determined by the difference in the repulsion of 

atomic  orbitals  of  the  noble  gas  and  its  surrounding  atoms  for  the  interstitial  and  substitutional 

configurations (Figs. 1b and 4c). As a consequence, all three noble gases prefer to occupy the charged 

vacancy site (Fig. 4a). Moreover, of the considered vacancy charge states, the insertion energies of 

noble  gases  in  ZnO:VO

2+  system  are  the  lowest.  For  instance,  for  the  substitutional  Ar  defects  in 

ZnO:VO,  ZnO:VO

1+,  and  ZnO:VO

2+  systems,  the  energies  are  2.84,  1.39,  and  0.95  eV,  respectively. 

Indeed, the comparison of charge density differences for different charged states (Figs. 2c, 3c, 4c and 

S7) shows that charging the vacancy results in smaller deviation of charge density difference (and 

hence  lower  insertion  energy)  as  less  electrons  are  associated  with  the  vacancy  site.  The  distinct 

insertion  energies  also  suggest  that  noble  gas  affects  the  stability  of  ZnO:VO

q  systems  differently 

depending  on  the  size  of  noble  gas  and  number  of  electrons  delocalized  by  the  formation  of  the 

substitutional defect. This behavior also noticeably changes the defect transition levels (Fig. S8).  It 

should  be  noted  that  although  the  formation  of  noble  gas  defects  costs  energy,  the  computed 

6 

 
insertion energies for both interstitial and substitutional noble gas defects are comparable to defect 

formation energies of intrinsic and interstitial H point defects in ZnO.8, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 As an illustration, 

the formation energy of VO in ZnO under O-rich conditions is 4.41 eV, which is almost 3 times higher 

than  that  for  interstitial  He  and  only  1.14  eV  lower  than  that  for  interstitial  Ar  defect.  For  the 

substitutional defects, the insertion energy is as low as 0.13 eV (for ZnO:VO

2+-He system). Moreover, 

despite  the  energy  cost,  when  the  noble  gas  meets  the  charged  or  uncharged  vacancy  during 

materials synthesis or noble gas implantation, it can be energetically trapped by the vacancy owing 

to the large energy difference between the substitutional and interstitial defects. In the other words, 

to diffuse out from the sample, the noble gas should overcome large energy barrier to move from 

the vacancy to the interstitial site. As an example, the trapping energies of Ne for ZnO:VO, ZnO:VO

1+, 

and ZnO:VO

2+  systems are 0.74, 2.18, and 2.60 eV, respectively.  

In summary, our calculations demonstrate that the interaction of the noble gases with ZnO results 

in the repulsion of atomic orbitals of the noble gases and  their surrounding atoms: the noble gas 

pushes the electron density of its surrounding atoms away from its vicinity, while the host material 

confines the spread of the noble gas electron density. We thus explain that despite being chemically 

inert, the noble gas can be a functional dopant. In particular, Ar atom implanted into ideal ZnO breaks 

the Zn-O bond along [001] direction resulting in the formation of occupied defect states close to the 

VBM.  Our  calculations  also  reveal  that  the  insertion  of  noble  gas  can  change  the  stability  and 

electronic structure of ZnO:VO

q. Specifically, when noble gas occupies the vacancy site (e.g., ZnO:VO-

Ne  for  d  =  0  Å),  it  strongly  delocalizes  the  in-gap VO

q  states  moving  electrons  associated  with the 

vacancy to the conduction band. Because of this, the formation of substitutional versus interstitial 

noble  gas  defect  in  ZnO:VO

q systems  is  governed  by:  (I)  the  size  of  noble  gas  in  comparison  with 

volume  of  the  vacancy  or  the  interstitial  sites  determines  the  energy  required  for  repulsion  of 

neighboring atomic orbitals; (II) the energy cost to delocalize in-gap vacancy states by substitutional 

noble  gas  defect.  Therefore,  He  does  not  tend  to  occupy  the  vacancy  site  in  ZnO:VO  system,  but 

instead acts as an interstitial defect. Since the results are generic for materials similar to ZnO, the 

computed results suggest that despite  the fully occupied  atomic orbitals the noble gases  strongly 

alter the electronic states of intrinsic defects in technologically important oxides. We thus anticipate 

that noble gas can serve as a new type of dopants with complementary functionality compared to 

the traditional dopants in semiconductors. 

7 

 
 
 
METHODS 

All  calculations  are  carried  out  using  the  Vienna  Ab  initio  Simulation  Package  (VASP).25,  26,  27  To 

predict the electronic properties  with high accuracy, we perform spin-polarized calculations using 

the originally proposed revised Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE) screened hybrid functional.28 Herein, 

we only modify the fraction of the exact exchange to 0.375 to reproduce the experimental value of 

ZnO’s band gap energy accurately. This methodology is widely accepted for studying defects in ZnO.16, 

19, 20 The search of the defect configurations is performed using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) 

functional.29 In all calculations, the lattice constants are fixed at the experimental values of a = 3.25 

Å and c = 5.21 Å.30 Atomic relaxations are carried out only at the PBE level until the internal forces 

are smaller than 0.01 eV/Å. The resulted systems are used directly in the HSE calculations. The defect 

calculations and the analysis of electronic properties are performed on 96-atom ZnO supercell. The 

cutoff energies for the plane-wave basis are set to 400 eV for all calculations. 2×2×2 and 4×4×4 Г-

centered Monkhorst-Pack k-grids31 are used in the Brillouin-zone integrations for the HSE and PBE 

calculations, respectively. To understand the energetics of the noble gas interaction with the host 

material, the insertion energy (Eins) is calculated as Eins(ZnO:VO

q-X) = ∆H(ZnO:VO

q-X) – ∆H(ZnO:VO

q), 

where ∆H(ZnO:VO

q-X) and ∆H(ZnO:VO

q) are the defect formation energies for the system containing 

both the O vacancy as well as the noble gas X and the system with O vacancy only, respectively. As it 

is easy to see, in the dilute limit, Eins(ZnO:VO

q-X) = E(ZnO:VO

q-X) – E(ZnO:VO

q) – E(X), where E(ZnO:VO

q-

X), E(ZnO:VO

q), and E(X) are energies of the corresponding system. E(X) is calculated for the isolated 

noble gas X. Correspondingly, the insertion energy of the noble gas in ideal ZnO is taken to be equal 

to the formation energy of the interstitial noble gas defect, Eins(ZnO:X) = E(ZnO:X) – E(ZnO) – E(X). 

The  defect  formation  energies  and  finite  size  corrections  are  calculated  within  the  methodology 

described  by  Lany  and  Zunger32,  33  as  implemented  in  the  pylada-defects  code.34  To  calculate  the 

insertion energy versus distance profile, we take oxygen vacancy position as the position of noble gas 

in  the  substitutional  configuration,  which  can  result  in  up  to  0.1  Å  inaccuracy  for  the  distance 

between  the  vacancy  and  noble  gas  defect.  The  trapping  energy  (Etrap)  is  calculated  as                                

Etrap =  Eins(ZnO:X) - Eins(ZnO:VO

q-X for d = 0 Å). It should be noted we use the term trapping energy 

(not binding or clustering energy) since the change in charge density does not lower the total energy, 

which  however  is  the  case  for  a traditional  defect where  chemical  bonding  is  responsible  for  the 

interaction. The results for the energetics and electronic properties (i.e., DOS) are presented for the 

HSE  calculations.  The  analysis  of  Bader  charges,  charge  density  difference,  spherically  averaged 

charge density rearrangements, and total deviation of the charge density difference are performed 

8 

 
at the PBE level. The Bader charges are calculated within the scheme developed by  Henkelman et 

al.22, 23, 24 and presented with respect to that for the neutral isolated atoms. The obtained results are 

analyzed using Vesta35 and pymatgen.36  

DATA AVAILABILITY 

All  data  needed  to  evaluate  the  conclusions  in  the  paper  are  present  in  the  paper  and  the 

Supplementary Materials. Additional data for this study are available from the corresponding author 

upon request. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work is financially supported by the Research Council of Norway (ToppForsk project: 251131). 

We acknowledge Norwegian Metacenter for Computational Science (NOTUR) for providing access to 

supercomputer resources.  

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

O.I.M and C.P designed the project. O.I.M performed calculations and wrote most of the paper. 

O.I.M  and  K.S  analyzed  results.  All  co-authors  participated  in  the  discussions  and  manuscript 

preparation. C.P supervised the theoretical studies.  

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 

Supplementary information accompanying the paper is available.  

COMPETING INTERESTS: the authors declare no competing interests. 

REFERENCES 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 
5. 

Walsh,  A.  &  Zunger,  A.  Instilling  defect  tolerance  in  new  compounds.  Nat.  Mater.  16,  964 
(2017). 
Freysoldt, C., et al. First-principles calculations for point defects in solids. Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 
253-305 (2014). 
Alkauskas, A., McCluskey, M. D. & Van de Walle, C. G. Tutorial: Defects in semiconductors-
combining experiment and theory. J. Appl. Phys. 119, 181101 (2016). 
Kilic, C. & Zunger, A. n-type doping of oxides by hydrogen. Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 73-75 (2002). 
Van  de  Walle,  C.  G.  &  Neugebauer,  J.  Universal  alignment  of  hydrogen  levels  in 
semiconductors, insulators and solutions. Nature 423, 626 (2003). 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 
15. 
16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

Singh, A. K., Janotti, A., Scheffler, M. & Van de Walle, C. G. Sources of electrical conductivity 
in SnO2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 055502 (2008). 
Yim,  K.,  et  al.  Computational  discovery  of  p-type  transparent  oxide  semiconductors  using 
hydrogen descriptor. npj Comput. Mater. 4, 17 (2018). 
Van de Walle, C. G. Hydrogen as a cause of doping in zinc oxide. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1012-1015 
(2000). 
Muller, S., et al. Intense white photoluminescence emission of V-implanted zinc oxide thin 
films. J. Appl. Phys. 104, 123504 (2008). 
Neuvonen, P. T., Vines, L., Svensson, B. G. & Kuznetsov, A. Y. Intrinsic point-defect balance in 
self-ion-implanted ZnO. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 015501 (2013). 
Borges, R. P., et al. Magnetism in ar-implanted ZnO. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter. 19, 476207 
(2007). 
Chattopadhyay,  S.,  et  al.  Optical  property  modification  of  ZnO:  Effect  of  1.2  MeV  Ar 
irradiation. Phys. Status Solidi C 8, 512-515 (2011). 
Schilling, M., Helbig, R. & Pensl, G. Bound exciton luminescence of Ar- and Al-implanted ZnO. 
J. Lumin. 33, 201-212 (1985). 
Janotti, A. & Van de Walle, C. G. Native point defects in ZnO. Phys. Rev. B 76, 165202 (2007). 
Janotti, A. & Van de Walle, C. G. Oxygen vacancies in ZnO. Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 3 (2005). 
Oba, F., et al. Defect energetics in ZnO: A hybrid Hartree-Fock density functional study. Phys. 
Rev. B 77, 245202 (2008). 
Zhang, S. B., Wei, S. H. & Zunger, A. Intrinsic n-type versus p-type doping asymmetry and the 
defect physics of ZnO. Phys. Rev. B 63, 7 (2001). 
Lany, S. & Zunger, A. Many-body GW calculation of the oxygen vacancy in ZnO. Phys. Rev. B 
81, 113201 (2010). 
Dixon,  S.  C.,  et  al.  Transparent  conducting  n-type  ZnO:Sc  –  synthesis,  optoelectronic 
properties and theoretical insight. J. Mater. Chem. C 5, 7585-7597 (2017). 
Oba, F., Choi, M., Togo, A. & Tanaka, I. Point defects in ZnO: an approach from first principles. 
Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 12, 14 (2011). 

24. 

23. 

22. 

21.  Malyi,  O.  I.,  Sopiha,  K.  V.,  Draxl,  C.  &  Persson,  C.  Stability  and  electronic  properties  of 
phosphorene oxides: from 0-dimensional to amorphous 2-dimensional structures. Nanoscale 
9, 2428-2435 (2017). 
Henkelman,  G.,  Arnaldsson,  A.  &  Jónsson,  H.  A  fast  and  robust  algorithm  for  Bader 
decomposition of charge density. Comp. Mater. Sci. 36, 354-360 (2006). 
Sanville, E., Kenny, S. D., Smith, R. & Henkelman, G. Improved grid-based algorithm for Bader 
charge allocation. J. Comput. Chem. 28, 899-908 (2007). 
Tang, W., Sanville, E. & Henkelman, G. A grid-based Bader analysis algorithm without lattice 
bias. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter. 21, 084204 (2009). 
Kresse, G. & Hafner, J. Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals. Phys. Rev. B 47, 558-
561 (1993). 
Kresse,  G.  &  Furthmüller,  J.  Efficiency  of  ab-initio  total  energy  calculations  for  metals  and 
semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Comp. Mater. Sci. 6, 15-50 (1996). 
Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations 
using a plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169-11186 (1996). 
Krukau,  A.  V.,  Vydrov,  O.  A.,  Izmaylov,  A.  F.  &  Scuseria,  G.  E.  Influence  of  the  exchange 
screening parameter on the performance of screened hybrid functionals. J. Chem. Phys. 125, 
224106 (2006). 

25. 

28. 

26. 

27. 

10 

 
29. 

30. 

Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized gradient approximation made simple. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865-3868 (1996). 
Cimino,  A.,  Mazzone,  G.  &  Porta,  P.  A  lattice  parameter  study  of  defective  zinc  oxide.  2. 
Addition of altervalent ions. Z. Phys. Chem. 45, 153-169 (1965). 

31.  Monkhorst, H. J. & Pack, J. D. Special points for brillouin-zone integrations. Phys. Rev. B 13, 

32. 

33. 

34. 

5188-5192 (1976). 
Lany, S. & Zunger, A. Assessment of correction methods for the band-gap problem and for 
finite-size effects in supercell defect calculations: Case studies for ZnO and GaAs. Phys. Rev. B 
78, 235104 (2008). 
Lany, S. & Zunger, A. Accurate prediction of defect properties in density functional supercell 
calculations. Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 17, 084002 (2009). 
Goyal,  A.,  et  al.  A  computational  framework  for  automation  of  point  defect  calculations. 
Comp. Mater. Sci. 130, 1-9 (2017). 

35.  Momma, K. & Izumi, F. VESTA 3 for three-dimensional visualization of crystal, volumetric and 

36. 

morphology data. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 44, 1272-1276 (2011). 
Ong, S. P., et al. Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source python library 
for materials analysis. Comp. Mater. Sci. 68, 314-319 (2013). 

11 

 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Insertion of noble gases in pure ZnO. (a) Schematic illustration of the lowest energy sites for 

Ar (left) and He/Ne (right). (b) Spherically averaged charge density rearrangement (∆𝜌̅̅̅̅(𝑟)) around He 

computed by averaging charge density difference within the spherical shell of thickness ∆r = 0.1 Å. 

The inset shows the charge density difference for ZnO:He system. The charge density difference is 

defined  as  ∆ρ  =  ρ(ZnO:He)  –  ρ(ZnO)  –  ρ(He),    where  the  charge  density (ρ) of each  component  is 

calculated  for  the  atomic  positions  of  ZnO:He  system.  The  blue  and  yellow  regions  represent  the 

charge density reduction and charge density increase regions, respectively (the isosurface is set to 

6.75 me/Å3). (c) DOS for the lowest energy configuration of ZnO:Ar; the DOS for the conduction band 

is multiplied by 40 for better visualization. The vertical dashed lines mark the highest occupied and 

lowest  unoccupied  states,  independent  of  the  spin  component.  (d)  Partial  charge  density  (yellow 

regions) corresponding to the defect state induced by Ar insertion (the isosurface is set at 67.5 me/Å3) 

and its projection on the axis a.  

12 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Interaction of noble gases with ZnO:VO. (a) Insertion energy as a function of the distance 

between the vacancy and the noble gas. For each system, the trapping energy (∆E) is calculated as 

the  difference  of  insertion  energies  for  the  interstitial  and  substitutional  defects.  (b)  Schematic 

illustration showing how He insertion changes the electronic states of ZnO:VO system for the case of 

interstitial and substitutional defect. The inset depicts partial charge density at the defect state (the 

isosurface is set to 67.5 me/Å3). The up down arrow marks the energy gap (Eg

ꞌ) between the highest 

occupied  and  lowest  unoccupied  states.  (c)  Spherically  averaged  charge  density  rearrangement 

(∆𝜌̅̅̅̅(𝑟)) around the substitutional He defect computed by averaging charge density difference within 

the spherical shell of thickness ∆r = 0.1 Å. The inset shows the charge density difference for ZnO:VO-

He (d = 0 Å) computed as ∆ρ = ρ(ZnO:VO-He) – ρ(ZnO:VO) – ρ(He), where the charge density (ρ) of 

each component is calculated for the atomic positions of ZnO:He system. The blue and yellow regions 

represent  the  charge  density  reduction  and  charge  density  increase  regions,  respectively.  The 

isosurface is set at 6.75 me/Å3. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Interaction of noble gases with ZnO:VO

1+. (a) Insertion energy as a function of the distance 

between the vacancy and the noble gas. For each system, the trapping energy (∆E) is calculated as 

the  difference  of  insertion  energies  for  the  interstitial  and  substitutional  defects.  (b)  Schematic 

illustration showing how He insertion changes the electronic states of ZnO:VO

1+ system for the case 

of interstitial and substitutional defect. The inset depicts partial charge density at the defect states 

(the isosurface is set to 33.75 me/Å3). The up down arrow marks the energy gap (Eg

ꞌ) between the 

highest  occupied  and 

lowest  unoccupied  states.  (c)  Spherically  averaged  charge  density 

rearrangement (∆𝜌̅̅̅̅(𝑟)) around the substitutional He defect computed by averaging charge density 

difference  within  the  spherical  shell  of  thickness  ∆r  =  0.1  Å.  The  inset  shows  the  charge  density 

difference for ZnO:VO

1+-He (d = 0 Å) computed as ∆ρ = ρ(ZnO:VO

1+-He) – ρ(ZnO:VO

1+) – ρ(He), where 

the  charge  density  (ρ)  of  each  component  is  calculated  for  the  atomic  positions  of  ZnO:VO

1+-He 

system.  The  blue  and  yellow  regions  represent  the  charge  density  reduction  and  charge  density 

increase regions, respectively. The isosurface is set to 6.75 me/Å3. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Interaction of noble gases with ZnO:VO

2+. (a) Insertion energy as a function of the distance 

between the vacancy and the noble gas. For each system, the trapping energy (∆E) is calculated as 

the  difference  of  insertion  energies  for  the  interstitial  and  substitutional  defects.  (b)  Schematic 

illustration showing how He insertion changes the electronic states of ZnO:VO

2+ system for the case 

of interstitial and substitutional defect. The up down arrow marks the energy gap (Eg

ꞌ) between the 

highest  occupied  and 

lowest  unoccupied  states.  (c)  Spherically  averaged  charge  density 

rearrangement (∆𝜌̅̅̅̅(𝑟)) around the substitutional He defect computed by averaging charge density 

difference  within  the  spherical  shell  of  thickness  ∆r  =  0.1  Å.  The  inset  shows  the  charge  density 

difference for ZnO:VO

2+-He (d = 0 Å) computed as ∆ρ = ρ(ZnO:VO

2+-He) – ρ(ZnO:VO

2+) – ρ(He), where 

the  charge  density  (ρ)  of  each  component  is  calculated  for  the  atomic  positions  of  ZnO:VO

2+-He 

system.  The  blue  and  yellow  regions  represent  the  charge  density  reduction  and  charge  density 

increase regions, respectively. The isosurface is set to 6.75 me/Å3. 

15 

 
 
 
