Designing a Mechanical Tool for Robots with 2-Finger Parallel Grippers

Zhengtao Hu1, Weiwei Wan1,2,∗, and Kensuke Harada1,2

9
1
0
2

b
e
F
5
2

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
5
1
9
0
.
2
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— This work designs a mechanical tool for robots
with 2-ﬁnger parallel grippers, which extends the function of
the robotic gripper without additional requirements on tool
exchangers or other actuators. The fundamental kinematic
structure of the mechanical tool is two symmetric parallelo-
grams which transmit the motion of the robotic gripper to
the mechanical tool. Four torsion springs are attached to the
four inner joints of the two parallelograms to open the tool
as the robotic gripper releases. The forces and transmission
are analyzed in detail to make sure the tool reacts well with
respect to the gripping forces and the spring stiﬀness. Also,
based on the kinematic structure, variety tooltips were designed
for the mechanical tool to perform various tasks. The kinematic
structure can be a platform to apply various skillful gripper
designs. The designed tool could be treated as a normal object
and be picked up and used by automatically planned grasps.
A robot may locate the tool through the AR markers attached
to the tool body, grasp the tool by selecting an automatically
planned grasp, and move the tool from any arbitrary pose to
a speciﬁc pose to grip objects. The robot may also determine
the optimal grasps and usage according to the requirements of
given tasks.

I. Introduction

Manufacturing requires fast reconﬁguration of robotic
systems to adapt
to various products. Especially in the
process of assembly, it is a challenge for robots to process a
variety of components fast and precisely. Thus, developing
robotic systems to handle a wide range of objects in a
reliable and low-cost way is highly demanded. In the past
decades, various robotic hands with advanced functions were
proposed. Each of them had merits in certain aspects. Also,
to deal with diﬀerent objects, tool changers and ﬁnger-tip
changers were designed to expand the feasible grasp scope.
While the tool changers and ﬁnger-tip changers increased
the ﬂexibility of robot systems, their drawbacks are also
obvious. They require power supply, vacuum supply, or
delicate mechanism and control to assure the ﬁrm connection
between the actuators and a robot end. The tools and ﬁnger-
tips have to be designed especially for speciﬁc robots and
switchers.

In this paper, we propose a solution by designing a
mechanical tool for robots with 2-ﬁnger parallel grippers
(Fig.1(b)). Like the many tools designed for human hands
(Fig.1(a)), the mechanical tool is general and independent
from speciﬁc robots. Any robot with 2-ﬁnger parallel grip-
pers could recognize, grasp, and use the tool. The tool could
have lots of variations in the tooltips. A robot may select and
use diﬀerent ones to ﬁnish diﬀerent tasks. The tool is purely

1Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, Japan.
2National Inst. of AIST, Japan. *Correspondent author: Weiwei Wan,
wan@sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp

Fig. 1: (a) Various tools designed for human hands. (b)
A mechanical tool designed for parallel robotic grippers.
is purely mechanical. There are no additional
The tool
requirements for power cables or air tubes. Any robots with
parallel grippers could use it.

mechanical. There are no additional requirements for power
cables or air tubes. There is also no special requirements for
robotic end-eﬀectors. The tool could be used by any robots
with 2-ﬁnger parallel grippers.

The features of the design are: 1) The tool is mechanical
and is only manipulated and actuated by robotic grippers. 2)
The tool can be designed with various tooltips adapted for
diﬀerent tasks. 3) The tool can be placed at an arbitrary pose
in the work space, and be recognized, grasped, manipulated,
and used by parallel robotic grippers.

In the following sections, we will discuss the details of the
design, including the kinematic structure, the analysis and
optimization of grabbing force and sizes, and the consid-
eration of stable placements, recognition, pose adjustment,
and working poses. We carry out experiments to analyze
the performance of the design, as well as develop a robot
system that uses the tools with diﬀerent tips to pick up
various objects. The experiments and analysis show that the
mechanical tool is a ﬂexible alternative to tool changers and
ﬁnger-tip changers. With the help of visual detection and
motion planning algorithms, robots are able to automatically
recognize and use the tool to ﬁnish a wide range of tasks.

 
 
 
 
 
 
II. Related Work
We in this section review the related studies by separating
them into three categories: (1) The design of robot hand
changers, (2) The design of versatile and adaptive grippers,
and (3) Grasp and regrasp planning.

A. The design of robot hand changers

Robot hand changers originate from the tool changers used
in Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machines [1] [2] [3],
and are still widely studied [4] [5]. The reason is to use robots
in industry applications, engineers have to design various
grippers [6] to adapt to diﬀerent tasks and objects.

Recent development

in robot hand changers has two
trends. The ﬁrst is developing automatic tool changers for
mobile manipulators. Some of them are electro-mechanically
actuated, like the one presented in [7]. Some others are
passive, like the one presented in [8]. Which used passive
mechanisms actuated by host robots. Other than the changers,
some studies design interfaces for robot end-eﬀectors. An
example is the da Vinci Surgical Research Kit [9]. The idea
is to set an adapter between the tool and the original end-
eﬀector. A ﬁnger-tip changer [10] shares the similar idea.

The aforementioned studies all provide eﬀective ways to
change hands for robots. However, though those systems can
provide reliable and precise ﬁxing as well as connection,
the eﬃciency of the exchanging process is still a problem.
Also, the tools are adapted for speciﬁc end shapes, and the
peripheral equipment is indispensable, which restricts the
potential applications. Unlike them, we in this paper design
a mechanical tool for parallel robot grippers. The design is
passive and does not need any power or air supply. It is
general and could be grasped and used by any robots with
parallel grippers. To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work
that designs a general mechanical tool for robots.

B. The design of versatile and adaptive gripper

Other than hand changers, more studied are devoted to de-
signing versatile and adaptive gripper. For example, Harada
et al. [11] developed a novel gripper by combing a multi-
ﬁnger mechanism and a granular jamming component, which
can achieve versatile grasping ﬁrmly as well as ﬂexibly.
Triyonoputro et al. [12] developed a double jaw hand for
grasping and assembly. The inner and outer grippers can
work together to ﬁnish a task. The design was inspired by
a human hand holding and manipulating two objects using
one hand in product assembly. Nie et al. [13] proposed a
pair of ﬁngers for arranging screws. The gripper can pick
up and tile a screw to let the screw slide to the bottom of
the ﬁnger so as to achieve the picking and alignment. Hirata
et al. [14] proposed a gripper with tips that can cage and
self-align objects. Laliberte et al. [15] developed an under-
actuated robot hand driven by two motors. The ﬁngers of the
hand could adapt to the shape of objects during grasping. The
hand is essentially a gripper but is versatile and adaptive. Ma
et al. [16] presented a gripper with one underactuated ﬁnger
and a passive ﬁnger, which is helpful to implement adaptive,
shape-enveloping grasps, and also in-hand manipulation.

The versatile and adaptive grippers can perform well for a
group of workpieces, however they can never be completely
universal. Also, the structure has to be carefully designed
to expand the function. Compared to them, using parallel
gripper but preparing a range of mechanical tools could be
a better way to obtain versatility and adaptivity.

C. Grasp and regrasp planning

Besides the design, this work also uses automatic recog-
nition and motion planning to recognize the tool, and plan a
motion to adjust and use the tool. The automatic recognition
and motion planning is based on our previous studies in
grasp and regrasp planning. Some representative ones are
as follows. Wan et al. [17] presented a method for motion
planning to achieve smart assembly tasks. In the work, a
3D vision system was employed to detect human operation,
point clouds and geometric constraints were used to ﬁnd
rough poses. A method was used to plan the motion of
robots to reorient objects. Raessa et al. [18] proposed a
method to teach a dual-arm robot to use common electric
tools. Grasp and regrasp planning were implemented to
adjust the work pose of the tool following [19]. Sanchez et
al. [20] developed a planner with orientation constraints to
manipulate a tethered tool. Beyond our group, similar studies
about the grasp and regrasp planning could be found in [21],
[22], [23], [24], [25], etc.

III. Design and Optimization

including the kinematic structure,

This section presents the details of design and optimiza-
tion,
the analysis and
optimization of forces and sizes, as well as the variation in
tooltips.

A. The kinematic structure

The tools designed for human hands usually have a
rotational joint, as is shown in Fig.1(a). The reason is because
the rotational grab formed by the thumb is the main synergy
of human hands [26], as is shown in Fig.2(a). Likewise, a
tool designed for parallel robotic grippers (Fig.2(b)) is best
to have a parallel mechanism to cater the parallel motion of
the robotic gripper.

Fig. 2: (a) The main synergy of a human hand. The thumb
and the remaining ﬁngers form a rotational grab. The tools
designed for human hands usually have a rotational joint. (b)
The motion of a parallel robotic gripper. The tool designed
for it is best to have a parallel mechanism.

An intuitive idea to implement parallel motion is to use
sliding rails. Linear springs may be attached to the rails
to help return to the initial state after releasing. Fig.3(a)

illustrates the intuitive mechanism. This idea is easy to under-
stand, but is diﬃcult to assure stable parallel motion. Fig.3(b)
shows the free body diagram of the intuitive mechanism.
Since the sliding rail cannot bear force along the moving
direction, FA and FB are all from the springs. While the
ﬁngers keep parallel, the two springs deform equally and
FA is the same as FB. To meet the momentum equilibrium
equation FAdA − FBdB = 0, dA and dB must equal. That
means to assure a stable parallel motion, the contact can only
be applied at the center of the two springs, which severely
decreases the possible grasp conﬁgurations and increases the
diﬃculty of automatic manipulation planning.

Fig. 3: (a) The motion of an intuitive parallel mechanism
made by sliding rails and linear springs. (b) The free body
diagram of the intuitive mechanism. (c) A parallel mecha-
nism made of two symmetric parallelograms. In this case,
the base frame will move backward while the tool is closed.
(d) A similar parallel mechanism as (c). The diﬀerence is in
this case, the base frame will move forward while the tool
is closed.

Instead of the simple sliding rails, we design the tool by
using two symmetric parallelograms, as is shown in Fig.3(c)
and Fig.3(d). The two parallelograms allow the force from
robotic grippers to be evenly distributed to the joints, and
are therefore able to assure stable parallel motion. Both of
the two conﬁgurations in Fig.3(c) and Fig.3(d) can provide
parallel motion transmission. However, for the scheme shown
in Fig.3(d), the grasp is likely to be impaired since the
grasping space will be occupied by the forward moving base.
Also, as the heaviest part of the tool, the forward motion
of the base also impair the stability of grasping. Thus, the
conﬁguration in Fig.3(c) is selected as the kinematic structure
of our design. Besides space, the conﬁguration has another
advantage, which will be explained in detail in the force
analysis section.

Fig.4 shows the design. In Fig.4(a), the jaw of the tool is
opened to its maximum. In Fig.4(b), the jaw is fully closed.
The two parallelograms are installed symmetrically. They
force two tooltips to move in parallel. As is shown in in
Fig.4(a), four torsion springs are installed at joints P1∼P4.
The torsion springs are concentric with their supporting
shafts. The ends of the torsion springs are respectively ﬁxed
to the base frame and the angular linkages. The torsion
springs provide friction to prevent the tool from dropping
as the robotic gripper holds it. They also provide forces to
open the tool as the robotic gripper releases.

The torsion springs are installed with a pre-angle β, which

Fig. 4: The designed mechanical tool. (a) The tool is com-
pletely open. (b) The tool is closed. Torsion springs shown
in the circle are installed at joints P1∼P4.

is determined by the stopper crafted in the base frame. The
force exerted by a spring to an angular linkage is therefore:

Fspring = κ(β + ∆θ)

(1)

where Fspring is the exerted force. β is the pre-angle. κ is the
elastic coeﬃcient. ∆θ is the rotational angle of the angular
linkage. Choosing a proper β is an optimization problem.
On the one hand, with the same ∆θ, a large β provides a
large resistance force to robot grippers and hence provides
larger friction to prevent the tool from dropping out of the
robot gripper. It also leads to a shorter stroke of the robotic
gripper to get the same transmitted force. On the other hand,
if β is too large, the robot gripper has to exert a very large
force to overcome the tension of the torsion springs. In the
worst case, the tool may not be closed. The details of force
analysis will be discussed in the next subsection.

B. Force analysis

In this subsection, we analyze the forces between the tool
and a robot gripper to optimize the design. The subsection
comprises two parts. In the ﬁrst part, we analyze the condi-
tion for a robot gripper to ﬁrmly hold the tool as well as the
relationship between robot grasping force and the resistance
force from the torsion springs when a robot gripper is holding
the tool. In the second part, we analyze the maximum weight
of objects that can be pick up by the tool.

1) Holding the tool: We model the contact between the
robot gripper and the tool as a soft contact. Following [27]
[28], the force and friction exerted by the robot gripper can
be computed by:

f 2 + T 2
e2

(cid:54) µ2F2
n

(2)

where f is the tangential force at the contact. T is the torque
at the contact. Fn is the gripping force exerted by the robot
gripper. e is an eccentricity parameter computed by the ratio
between the maximum friction and friction torque on the
contact surface:

e = max T
max f

(3)

The free body diagram when the tool is held by a robot
is the friction force at

gripper is shown in Fig.5. Here,

f

2) Grasping an object using the tool: We use the symbols
shown in Fig.6 to analyze the maximum weight of objects
that can be pick up by the tool. To simplify the analysis,
we assume the contact between the tooltips and the object is
co-linear with the com of the object.

the contact between the robot ﬁnger and the tool. T is the
torque at the contact. α is the angle between the tool and
the direction of gravity. It is called the tool angle. d is the
distance between the grasping point and the center of mass
com of the tool. By using the symbols shown in the ﬁgure
and the soft ﬁnger contact model, we can get the condition
to hold the tool as:

d (cid:54) max T

(cid:115)

n − G2
4µ2F2
G2 sin α2µ2F2
n

(4)

When d equals 0, there is no torque at the contact. The robot
gripper can hold the tool as long as 2µFn ≥ G. When d is
not 0, the Fn needed to hold the tool is a function of d, G,
µ, and α.

Fig. 6: The free body diagram when the tool is holding an
object. Fn is the force exerted by the robot gripper.

When the force and torque are balanced, we get:

2 f − G − Gob j = 0
Gdcom cos α + 2T − Gob jdob j sin α = 0

(7)

(8)

The maximum weight of the object to be held can be

computed using equations (2), (7), and (8):

a =

1 + d2

ob j sin α2µ2F2
n
4 max T 2

b =

µ2F2

n(G − dob jd sin α2)

2 max T 2

c = G2(max T 2 + d2 sin α2µ2F2
n)
√

4 max T 2

− µ2F2
n

Maximum weight =

−b +

b2 − 4ac
2a

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

The maximum weight of the object is a function of the angle
α and the distance d. While the analytical form of the result
is ugly, the 3D plot of the relationship is shown in Fig.7
(max T is set to a constant value).

Fig. 7: The relation between the maximum weight of the
object, the tool angle, and the tool grasping point.

Fig. 5: The free body diagram when the tool is held by a
robot gripper. Fn is the force exerted by the robot gripper.

If the tool could be held ﬁrmly, namely the friction and
the friction torque on the surface between the gripper and
the tool are enough to prevent the tool from dropping, the
relationship between Fn and the force exerted by the torsional
springs Fspring is:

Fn = G cos α tan θ

2

+

2vFspring
r cos θ

(5)

From the equation we get two conclusions. First, Fn ∝ G
when 0◦ < α < 90◦. Second, d is irrelevant to Fn (the force
is the same as any grasping point).

The ﬁrst conclusion further shows that a larger gravity
leads to a larger contact force between the robot gripper
and the tool, and hence leads to larger friction. That is,
the gravity of the base frame contributes to increasing the
friction between the robot gripper and the tool. The con-
clusion demonstrates another advantage of the conﬁguration
in Fig.3(c) over the one in Fig.3(d). The force relations of
Fig.3(d) is

Fn = −

G cos α tan θ
2

+

2vFspring
r cos θ

(6)

where Fn ∝ −G when 0◦ < α < 90◦. For this conﬁguration,
the gravity of the base frame reduces the friction and makes
the hold unstable. The conﬁguration in Fig.3(c) is preferable
than the one in Fig.3(d) when 0◦ < α < 90◦ (the tooltip faces
downward).

C. Size optimization

In this section, we optimize the dimension of the tool.
We would like the tool to have a large stroke and compact
size. The dimension parameters shown in Fig.8 are used for
optimization.

p (cid:62) k sin θend

h (cid:62) r cos θend + tan θend(daxis + 2redge)

(19)

(20)

D. Variation in tooltips

In addition to the mechanical design, we can make diﬀer-
ent tooltips for diﬀerent tasks. Unlike the versatile gripper
which is designed to adapt to a wide range of tasks, each of
the tooltip is specially designed for a single task. The design
can thus be more compact and reliable. These diﬀerent
tooltips are based on the same mechanism so that a robot
can manipulate them in the same way. Three examples of
the special tooltips are shown in Fig.9.

Fig. 8: The dimension parameters used to optimize the size
of the tool.

Equations (13) and (14) show the relationship between the
width of the tool, the stroke of the tool, and the rotational
angles of the angular linkage.

winit = m + 2r sin θinit
w = 2r sin (θinit − θend)

Given a ﬁxed winit, w is expressed as:

w = linit − m
2sinθinit

sin (θinit − θend)

(13)

(14)

(15)

Equation (15) shows that increasing θinit and decreasing
θend and m will enlarge the stroke l. When θiniti is 90◦, θend
is 0◦, and m is 0, l reaches to its maximum. However, the
relationship between Fn and θinit shown in (5) told that an
overlarge θinitial will signiﬁcantly increase the requirements
on the grasping force Fn and make the tool hard to be
compressed. If θiniti reaches 90◦, the tool can never be used.
Also, if m is 0, the base will disappear. In this case, since
the links have a width in the real world, they are hard to
be designed to move in the same plane unless increasing
the complexity of the design and using an asymmetrical
structure, which changes the position of the center of gravity
and reduces the structural stability of the tool. In order to
install the links appropriately, m should meet:

(16)

m (cid:62) daxis + 2redge
For the same reason, θend cannot be 0◦. It is minimum
can be calculated considering the radius of the joints and
the width of the linkages. The red dot lines in Fig.8(b)
show the situation when θend reaches its minimum. In this
case, the parallel linkage will touch the base frame. The
minimum θend can be computed using Equation (17). p
should meet equations (18) and (19). h should meet equation
(20). Otherwise, the link bars will overlap with each other.

θend = arcsin

q
r
q = daxis + 2redge

(17)

(18)

Fig. 9: Three exemplary special tooltips.

IV. Using the Tool

When performing speciﬁc tasks, the tool is placed in an
arbitrary pose in the work space. A robot
identiﬁes the
tool using AR markers and grasps it using pre-planned
grasp conﬁgurations. To use the tool, the robot should be
constrained to grasp the tool
in speciﬁc poses (working
poses). When the pose of the tool makes it impossible or
diﬃcult to be picked up in a working pose, regrasp planning
[19] may be employed to adjust the grasp conﬁguration.

A. Working poses

There are several pairs of parallel surfaces of the tools that
can be stably grasped, but the tool can be used only when the
sides of the parallel linkages are used as the contact surfaces.
In addition, the angle α of the tool is expected to be within
the range of 0◦ ∼ 90◦ unless there are special requirements.
The angle γ, which is deﬁned as the angle between the hand
and the tool (Fig.10), is also expected to be within the range
of 0◦ ∼ 90◦. The reason is two-fold. For one thing, Fn ∝ G
when 0◦ < α < 90◦, the tool is more stable. For the other, the
gripper is facing backward and does not obstruct the working
space of the tool when 0◦ < γ < 90◦.

Using the holding condition equation (4), the changes
of maximum friction torque when 0◦ < γ < 90◦ can be
computed. The result is shown in Fig.10 (d is set to 0, α is
set to 90◦.). The maximum friction torque increases in the
beginning, and decreases after reaching the peak at γ = 23◦.

Fig. 10: The changes of maximum friction torque in the
range of working poses. The maximum frictional moment
arm increases in the beginning, and reaches the peak at 23◦.

Fig. 12: The experiment system. It has a dual-arm UR3 robot
with Robotiq F85 grippers installed to both of them. Cameras
are also mounted on both grippers.

weight of objects that can be picked by the tool. The test
is repeated with the α angle changing from 0◦ to 75◦. To
simplify the experiment and improve precision, the γ angle
is set to 0◦.

B. Reorienting to the working poses

The tool could be placed in an arbitrary pose in the work
space. The pose is not necessarily able to be picked up into
a working pose. For example, the poses shown in Fig.11 can
never be directly used since the robot gripper can never grab
the sides of the parallel linkages. In that case, reorienting
planners are needed to help the robot adjust the poses. The
authors had been working on reorienting planners for several
years. This paper uses one of our recent results (regrasp using
two arms) [] to plan reorienting tools.

Fig. 11: Some poses of the tool that cannot be directly picked
up into a working pose.

to conduct

V. Experiments
Fig.12 shows our experiment system. We used a dual-
arm UR3 robot
the experiments. Two UR3
robots were mounted symmetrically with 45◦ to the body
frame. Robotiq F-85, a two-ﬁnger parallel-jaw gripper, was
employed for both arms. For visual detection, a camera, ELP-
USBFHD06H-L36 skewless HD, was mounted to one side
of Robotiq F-85.

A. Maximum weight of an object

First, we perform experiments to test

the maximum
weights of objects that can be picked by the tool. DynPick
force sensor is used for measurement. The setting is shown
in Fig.13. The sensor is ﬁxed to a table. A string is used
to connect the sensor and the tooltips. The robot gripper is
used to hold the tool and drag the string up vertically until
the tool is moved. The peak force measured by the force
sensor before the tool moves is recorded as the maximum

Fig. 13: The set up to measure the maximum weights of
objects that can be picked by the tool. The peak force
measured by the force sensor before the tool moves is
recorded as the maximum weight of objects that can be
picked by the tool.

The result is shown in Fig.14. The solid curve shows the
data measured by the experiments. The dash curve is the
computed value using equation (9-12). The measured results
are nearly the same as the theoretical analysis. The proposed
design could pick up an object of 8 kg when the angle
between the tooltip and the gravity direction is 15◦.

B. Using the tool to pick various objects

Second, to test the performance of the tool, we conducted
experiments to pick up a screw, a washer, and a can. These
objects are diﬃcult
to be handled by only the Robotiq
F85 gripper. The screw and washer are too small to be
grasped by the gripper, successfully handling them would
demonstrate the feasibility of the tool for picking up small
mechanical parts. When the screw is on the table, there is
limited grasping space and requires suitable gripper shape
and precise position control. Fig.15 shows the experimental
results of handling a screw. In this case, a thin tooltip was
used [13]. The compliant units at the parallel linkage allowed
contacting the table completely to achieve an available grasp.
Compared to the screw, the washer is even more diﬃcult

Fig. 14: The maximum weight that the tool can pick at
diﬀerent α.

to grasp due to its thin thickness and circular outside. The
tooltip in this case was designed to stretch against
the
inner circle of the washer (radius: 1.5mm). the tool was
compressed fully to insert the tooltips into the inner circle.
After insertion, the gripper opened a bit to hold and pick up
the washer, as is shown in Fig.16.

Fig. 15: Using the tool to pick up a screw.

Fig. 17: (a) Using the tool to grasp and pick up a can from
an upright pose. (b)Using the tool to grasp and pick up a
can from an lateral pose.

the tool can be picked up into a working pose without any
adjustment. The robot recognized the tool, picked it up,
planned a motion to use the tool to pick up the bolt. Fig.19
is the result of the second test. In this case, the tool cannot
be picked up into a working pose directly. Regrasp planning
is used to adjust the pose of the tool. The robot recognized
the tool, planned a regrasp motion to adjust the pose of the
tool (a handover was used to adjust the pose of the tool into
a working pose), and planned a motion to use the tool to
pick up the bolt. Together with the automatic recognition and
planning the tool can be used ﬂexibly without requirements
on power supply, vacuum supply, or delicate mechanism and
control.

VI. Conclusions and Future Work

This paper presented a mechanical

tool designed for
robots. The idea is inspired by the tools designed for human
hands. The tool is purely mechanical. It is free of power
supply, vacuum supply, and delicate mechanism and control.
It is actuated by the gripper force from the robot gripper.
The tool may have various tooltips designed for speciﬁc
tasks to extend the function of robot grippers. The quan-
titative analysis and real-world experiments demonstrate the
feasibility of the tool and show that it is able to be held and
manipulated by a robot gripper and to realize various picking
tasks. Our future work includes diversifying the tooltips to
develop wider applications as well as optimizing the planning
algorithms.

Fig. 16: Using the tool to grasp and pick up a washer.

References

The third object, namely the can,

is easy to deform.
Grippers without feedback control are likely to crash the can.
With a properly designed tooltip, the proposed tool has the
merit to safely pick up a can. Fig.17 shows two examples.
A can has two stable placement poses, and both of them can
be handled using the tool.

C. Automatic recognition and planning

Third, we used the tool to pick up a bolt with automatic
planning. Fig.18 is the result of the ﬁrst test. In this case,

[1] M. I. G¨okler and M. B. Koc¸, “Design of an automatic tool changer with
disc magazine for a cnc horizontal machining center,” International
Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 277–
286, 1997.

[2] K. Lundberg, “Automatic tool changer [25 years ago],” IEEE Control

Systems Magazine, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 18–18, 2011.

[3] J. P. Rogelio and R. G. Baldovino, “Development of an automatic tool
changer (atc) system for the 3-axis computer numerically-controlled
(cnc) router machine: Support program for the productivity and
competitiveness of the metals and engineering industries,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Humanoid, Nanotechnology, Information Tech-
nology, Communication and Control, Environment and Management
(HNICEM), 2014, pp. 1–5.

Fig. 18: Automatic recognition and planning 1. In this case, the tool can be manipulated into a working pose to pick up the
bolt without any adjustment.

Fig. 19: Automatic recognition and planning 2. In this case, the tool cannot be manipulated into a working pose directly.
The robot used a handover to adjust the pose of the tool.

[4] B.-S. Ryuh, S. M. Park, and G. R. Pennock, “An automatic tool
changer and integrated software for a robotic die polishing station,”
Mechanism and Machine Theory, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 415–432, 2006.
[5] M. T. Kordi, M. Husing, and B. Corves, “Development of a multifunc-
tional robot end-eﬀector system for automated manufacture of textile
preforms,” in IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced
Intelligent Mechatronics, 2007, pp. 1–6.

[6] G. J. Monkman, S. Hesse, R. Steinmann, and H. Schunk, Robot

grippers.

John Wiley & Sons, 2007.

[7] D. Gyimothy and A. Toth, “Experimental evaluation of a novel
automatic service robot tool changer,” in IEEE/ASME International
Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics, 2011, pp. 1046–
1051.

[8] R. Berenstein, A. Wallach, P. E. Moudio, P. Cuellar, and K. Goldberg,
“An open-access passive modular tool changing system for mobile ma-
nipulation robots,” in IEEE International Conference on Automation
Science and Engineering, 2018, pp. 592–598.

[9] S. McKinley, A. Garg, S. Sen, D. V. Gealy, J. P. McKinley, Y. Jen,
M. Guo, D. Boyd, and K. Goldberg, “An interchangeable surgi-
cal instrument system with application to supervised automation of
multilateral tumor resection,” in IEEE International Conference on
Automation Science and Engineering, 2016, pp. 821–826.

[10] C. Cl´evy, A. Hubert, J. Agnus, and N. Chaillet, “A micromanipula-
tion cell including a tool changer,” Journal of Micromechanics and
Microengineering, vol. 15, no. 10, p. S292, 2005.

[11] K. Harada, K. Nagata, J. Rojas, I. G. Ramirez-Alpizar, W. Wan,
H. Onda, and T. Tsuji, “Proposal of a shape adaptive gripper for
robotic assembly tasks,” Advanced Robotics, vol. 30, no. 17-18, pp.
1186–1198, 2016.

[12] J. C. Triyonoputro, W. Wan, and K. Harada, “A double jaw hand
designed for multi-object assembly,” in 2018 IEEE-RAS 18th Interna-
tional Conference on Humanoid Robots, 2018, pp. 427–430.

[13] K. Nie, W. Wan, and K. Harada, “A hand combining two simple
grippers to pick up and arrange objects for assembly,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 2019.

[14] Y. Hirata, A. Kaisumi, K. Yamaguchi, and K. Kosuge, “Design of
handling device for caging and aligning circular objects,” in 2011
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2011,
pp. 4370–4377.

[15] T. Lalibert´e, L. Birglen, and C. Gosselin, “Underactuation in robotic
grasping hands,” Machine Intelligence & Robotic Control, vol. 4, no. 3,
pp. 1–11, 2002.

[16] R. R. Ma, A. Spiers, and A. M. Dollar, “M 2 gripper: Extending
the dexterity of a simple, underactuated gripper,” in Advances in
reconﬁgurable mechanisms and robots II, 2016, pp. 795–805.
[17] W. Wan, F. Lu, Z. Wu, and K. Harada, “Teaching robots to do object
assembly using multi-modal 3d vision,” Neurocomputing, vol. 259, pp.
85–93, 2017.

[18] M. Raessa, D. E. S. Aranguren, W. Wan, and K. Harada, “Teaching a
robot to use electric tools with regrasp planning,” CAAI Transactions
on Intelligence Technology, 2019.

[19] W. Wan, K. Harada, and F. Kanehiro, “Preparatory manipulation
planning using automatically determined single and dual arms,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2019.

[20] D. Sanchez, W. Wan, and K. Harada, “Arm manipulation planning
of tethered tools with the help of a tool balancer,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.06296, 2018.

[21] M. Dogar, A. Spielberg, S. Baker, and D. Rus, “Multi-Robot Grasp
Planning for Sequential Assembly Operations,” in IEEE International
Conferene on Robotics and Automation, 2015, pp. 193–200.

[22] P. Lertkultanon and Q.-C. Pham, “A Certiﬁed-Complete Bimanual
Manipulation Planner,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and
Engineering, 2018.

[23] X. Zhou, P. Lertkultanon, and Q.-C. Pham, “Closed-chain Manipula-
tion of Large Objects by Multi-arm Robotic Systems,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 1832–1839, 2017.

[24] F. Su´arez-Ruiz, X. Zhou, and Q.-C. Pham, “Can Robots Assemble an

IKEA Chair?” Science Robotics, vol. 3, no. 17, 2018.

[25] L. Chen, L. F. Figueredo, and M. Dogar, “Manipulation planning under
changing external forces,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2018, pp. 3503–3510.

[26] M. Santello, M. Flanders, and J. F. Soechting, “Postural hand synergies
for tool use,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 18, no. 23, pp. 10 105–
10 115, 1998.

[27] R. D. Howe and M. R. Cutkosky, “Practical force-motion models for
sliding manipulation,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 557–572, 1996.

[28] M. Ciocarlie, C. Lackner, and P. Allen, “Soft ﬁnger model with
adaptive contact geometry for grasping and manipulation tasks,” in
Second Joint EuroHaptics Conference and Symposium on Haptic
Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems, 2007,

pp. 219–224.

