Augmented Reality Prosthesis Training Setup for
Motor Skill Enhancement

Avinash Sharma∗, Wally Niu∗, Christopher L. Hunt∗,
Gy¨orgy L´evay§, Rahul R. Kaliki§, and Nitish Thakor∗¶
∗Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 USA
§Inﬁnite Biomedical Technologies, LLC, Baltimore, MD 21218 USA
¶Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology, National University of Singapore, 119077 Singapore
Email: avinash@jhmi.edu

9
1
0
2

r
a

M
5

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
6
9
1
0
.
3
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Adjusting to amputation can often time be difﬁcult
for the body. Post-surgery, amputees have to wait for up to
several months before receiving a properly ﬁtted prosthesis. In
recent years, there has been a trend toward quantitative outcome
measures. In this paper, we developed the augmented reality (AR)
version of one such measure, the Prosthetic Hand Assessment
Measure (PHAM). The AR version of the PHAM — HoloPHAM,
offers amputees the advantage to train with pattern recognition,
at their own time and convenience, pre- and post-prosthesis
ﬁtting. We provide a rigorous analysis of our system, focusing on
its ability to simulate reach, grasp, and touch in AR. Similarity
of motion joint dynamics for reach in physical and AR space
were compared, with experiments conducted to illustrate how
depth in AR is perceived. To show the effectiveness and validity
of our system for prosthesis training, we conducted a 10-day
study with able-bodied subjects (N = 3) to see the effect that
training on the HoloPHAM had on other established functional
outcome measures. A washout phase of 5 days was incorporated
to observe the effect without training. Comparisons were made
with standardized outcome metrics, along with the progression of
kinematic variability over time. Statistically signiﬁcant (p<0.05)
improvements were observed between pre- and post-training
stages. Our results show that AR can be an effective tool for
prosthesis training with pattern recognition systems, fostering
motor learning for reaching movement tasks, and paving the
possibility of replacing physical training.

I. INTRODUCTION

Figure 1. Our human-machine interaction system for upper limb myoelectric
prosthesis control and training. Interface with the virtual modular prosthetic
limb (vMPL) is through inertial sensing and myoelectric decoding that
controls the kinematic dynamics and grip patterns of the limb respectively.
The AR environment is projected through the Microsoft HoloLensTM where
the subject receives both visual and tactile feedback during interaction with
the virtual objects.

Due to its use in a majority of activities of daily living
(ADL), the upper limb is one of the most essential body
parts [1]. Amputation results in the loss of both motor and
sensory perceptions and with over 60% of the amputees aging
between 21 to 64 years [2], it is pivotal that the loss of limb
should not become an impediment in ones ability to perform
simple daily tasks. From simple prosthesis control training to
repetitive drills for skill improvement, functional assessment
during occupational therapy (OT) is an essential step prior
to the ﬁtting of an actual myoelectric prosthesis [3]. The
goal of OT is to assist amputees, through a series of training
regimes, to strengthen muscle sites, improve endurance, and
generally build conﬁdence with a prosthesis. Post-surgery
training has been known to maintain the overall health of
the
the muscles in the residual
long term success of prosthesis use [5]. At the cortical level,
there is evidence to suggest continued unfavorable sensory
reorganization, immediately after amputation [6]. Therefore it

limb [4], and also affect

is desirable that the prosthetic training stage starts as early as
possible. While currently used functional outcome measures
suffer from several drawbacks ranging from unrealistic training
tasks to subjective scores [7] and limited target amputee
population [8], one of the major problem is the lack of
consideration of practical issues that affect prosthesis use (e.g.
loading and limb position effect in myoelectric decoding [9]).
Previous research has shown that while subjective assessment
and speed of tasks are essential [10], other measures, like
limb kinematics and gaze, can provide deeper insights into
the understanding of skill level [11]–[14]. Major et al. [12]
showed that kinematic variability was negatively associated
with prosthesis experience and emphasized the importance of
complementing motion information with existing functional
clinical outcomes. Kinematic variability, speciﬁcally referring
to joint kinematic trajectories, has been shown to be higher
amongst prosthesis users, in comparison to able-bodied sub-
jects [13]. This difference, is likely due to the compensatory

 
 
 
 
 
 
movements that amputees develop over time [14]. That being
said, there is little to no research investigating the effect that
prosthesis training has on kinematic variability. To overcome
some of the issues mentioned, our group designed the PHAM,
an objective assessment setup allowing amputees to train
over a 3-dimensional space [15]. However, the PHAM, like
most physical outcome measures, requires a large spatial and
economic investment, and is restricted to clinical settings [16].
Prosthesis training often requires repetition of certain well
deﬁned tasks [17]. Such repetitions can be made engaging and
motivating for the subjects through immersive technologies.
Virtual reality (VR) systems create an artiﬁcial environment
which has a broad range of applications ranging from gaming
to medicine. In upper limb prosthesis training, a range of
VR systems have been developed, ranging from simpliﬁed
adaptation of existing physical outcomes [18] to myoelectric
control training through posture matching [19] and even virtual
avatar control in custom-designed games [20], [21]. In a meta-
analysis study, Howard et al. showed that VR rehabilitation
programs are more effective than traditional rehabilitation
programs for physical outcome development [22]. The authors
suggested that user excitement and physical and cognitive
ﬁdelity could account for the increased effectiveness of vir-
training programs. Our group previously showed that
tual
myoelectric training in a virtual environment improves both
consistency and distinguishability of phantom limb pattern
recognition movement classes [23]. Furthermore, Hargrove et
al. recently showed that improvements gained in a physical
task completions correlate linearly with improvements found
in VR rehabilitation tasks [24]. Dijk et al. showed that virtual
training can show improvements in actual prosthesis using
proportional myoelectric control [21].

While VR systems have been shown to be useful, they are
not without their disadvantages. For example, VR systems
require the user to sit in front of a computer or put on a head-
mounted display (occluding the natural physical space), while
also posing several issues like a restricted ﬁeld-of-view [25],
motion sickness [26] and other health issues [27]. An emerging
technology, that overcomes some of these shortcomings, while
also creating an engaging interaction is augmented reality
(AR). AR systems blend virtual objects in the physical space,
while enabling interaction with these virtual objects, creating a
much richer experience in comparison to VR. Several studies
have used AR in stroke rehabilitation [28]–[30], however,
use in upper limb prosthesis rehabilitation has primarily been
restricted to treating phantom limb pain [31], [32]. Our pre-
vious preliminary work has shown that incorporating sensory
feedback in AR environment for upper limb prosthesis training
resulted in improvements in myoelectric control and muscular
effort for able-bodied subjects [33].

The objective of this study was to observe the effect
of HoloPHAM (AR version of PHAM) training on stan-
dardized physical outcome measures. For the physical out-
comes, the clothespin relocation test (CRT) and PHAM were
used. Training was conducted using the proposed AR system
(HoloPHAM) over a period of 10 days and standard metrics

Figure 2.
[Top] Augmented Reality scene with the vMPL and the virtual
model of the PHAM (for clarity we show the scene on a dark background).
(Inset) The vMPL appeared to be attached to the shoulder of the subject
and move with the them in realtime using the built-in inertial sensors on the
Microsoft HoloLensTM. Additional inertial sensors placed on the upper limb
of the subject were used to control the motion of the vMPL which involved
the vMPL reaching for a target object (red cylinder), grasp to pick and move
target object, and ﬁnally drop the target object on the goal position (red tray).
During pick and drop, the hand was required to be oriented to the surface
normal of the objects. [Bottom] Four grip patterns (rest included, but not
shown here) were integrated in our pattern recognition system. As the goal of
the study was to show the effect of AR training, only a minimum number of
classes were chosen, just enough to allow basic object manipulation. [Inlet]
Wave out (WO) and wave in (WI) corresponded to wrist pronation (WP) and
wrist supination (WS) respectively on the vMPL. In our tests, we observed
that LDA could more effectively classify WO and WI, while WP and WS
were often misclassiﬁed with other classes.

for comparison such as completion time and kinematic vari-
ability were studied.

II. METHODS & EXPERIMENT

Three able-bodied volunteers served as subjects and the
experiments were conducted with their informed consent. The
experiment protocol was approved by the Johns Hopkins
Medicine Institutional Review Board.

A. Functional Outcome Measures

To account for reach and grasp motions that are involved
in several ADL, measures that evaluate the aspects of hand,
wrist and elbow functions were used. The CRT has been
an established outcome measure that accounts for precise
myoelectric control as well as the coordinated movement of
the upper limb joints [34]. The PHAM has been shown to
incorporate a range of motions over a 3-dimensional space,
accounting for several DOFs and grasping patterns [15]. Since

Toolkit (Microsoft, Redmond, WA). The HoloLensTMasset was
imported into the scene and the vMPL asset was attached to
the main camera, in a conﬁguration, so as to allow subjects to
freely move around the room while also allowing a ﬁrst person
view of the vMPL. All objects in the scene were deﬁned as
rigid bodies with the mass of the geometric primitive objects
set to 1/10 of the mass of the vMPL. Mass of the HoloPHAM
frame and the vMPL were set to be equal. These properties
were set to enable rigid body collision between the interacting
objects (see Fig. 3).

To provide a sense of touch in the AR space, vibrotactile
feedback was provided to the subjects through the MyoTM arm-
band (Thalmic Labs, Canada) when any contact of the vMPL
was made with the other virtual objects in the scene. To control
the vMPL, inertial sensors (see Section II-B) were placed on
the upper arm and forearm to capture kinematic information.
A total of 6 degrees of freedom (DOF) (3 for shoulder, 1
for elbow ﬂexion/extension, 1 for wrist supination/pronation
and 1 for hand open/close) of the vMPL could be controlled.
While shoulder and elbow DOF were controlled using the
inertial
the wrist DOF was driven using pattern
recognition on the subject’s surface electromyogram (EMG)
signals. EMG data was recorded and streamed through the
MyoTMarmband and pattern movements were decoded using
linear discriminant analysis (LDA). As loading has shown
to have an effect on pattern recognition systems, a dummy
weight, with a mass equal to the physical Modular Prosthetic
Limb, was wrapped around the upper limb while training on
the HoloPHAM [35], [36].

tracking,

B. Inertial Sensing & Kinematic Assessment

In order to both control the vMPL and track joint tra-
jectories, a network of 9-axis MPU9250 (InvenSense, San
Jose, CA) inertial measurement units (IMUs) were used (see
Fig. 2). The three IMUs (on forearm, upperarm and chest)
streamed absolute orientation values as quaternions, at 20 Hz,
to a Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) adapter, connected to a
computer which computed Euler joint angles of the shoulder
and the elbow. A Madgwick ﬁlter was used to efﬁciently ﬁlter
and fuse raw sensor data based on the algorithm described
here [37].

Besides controlling the vMPL, inertial sensing was used
for kinematic comparison. Comparisons were made based on
the rotational joint angle dynamics of the shoulder and elbow

[Top] Interaction between virtual objects were deﬁned as rigid
Figure 3.
body collisions with a dense mesh collider (denoted as green lines inside
the cylinder) to prevent penetration of colliding objects. We show a zoomed
in image of the contact to illustrate the same. [Bottom] To validate this,
force values (F ) were calculated from the impulse (J) during contact and
release. The impulse values (J) were recorded from the ﬁngertips of the vMPL
and were differentiated with time to get force values (J = (cid:82) F dt, here dt
represents the frame rate in Unity3D). Touch information was provided to the
subject through a vibrotactile feedback with a gentle vibration provided by
the Myo TM armband.

the goal of our study was to show training in AR can show
improvement
in performance for such movements, an AR
version of the PHAM setup was developed.

The AR version of the PHAM — HoloPHAM, allows
subjects to perform the same set of tasks as they could with
the physical version. The PHAM consists of a windowpane
structure, with horizontal and vertical pipes where objects of
different types are required to be moved around a large activity
envelope [15]. While involving subtle, orientation-dependent
control, the PHAM also requires reach and grasp motion. With
a greater range of activity, while also preserving the funda-
mental aspects of existing physical prosthesis assessments, the
PHAM provides a technique for evaluating both quantitative
and qualitative prosthesis functionality [15]. The HoloPHAM
setup comprised of a virtual model of the PHAM, viewed
through the Microsoft HoloLensTM. The virtual model could
be placed at any convenient location within the room for sub-
jects to train with. Subjects interacted with the virtual objects
on the HoloPHAM using a virtual version of the Modular
Prosthetic Limb (vMPL, Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel,
MD). The vMPL was also projected through the HoloLensTM.
All AR assets were developed in Unity3D (Unity Technolo-
gies, San Francisco) (see Fig. 2) using the Mixed Reality

during a task. A baseline kinematic proﬁle for each subject was
used for comparison. The joint dynamics while performing the
tasks on the PHAM at the beginning of the study was used
as the baseline kinematic proﬁle. For rotational joint angle
dynamics, time series quaternions were compared using the
dynamic time warping (DTW) algorithm. DTW is a popular
mechanism for calculating similarity between two signals that
may be independent of certain non-linear variations in the
time dimension. DTW aligns the signals by warping the time
dimension iteratively until an optimal warped path (W ) is
found. The detailed algorithm has been described here [38].
DTW has been shown to be a valid method for quantifying
movement quality in upper limb prosthesis use [13]. For two
quaternion time series Q and ˆQ, of lengths |Q| and | ˆQ|
respectively, an optimal warp path W is constructed, with the
distance of the warp path W estimated by:

Dist(W ) =

k=K
(cid:88)

k=1

Dist(wki, wkj)

(1)

where Dist(W ) is the Euclidean distance of the warp path W ,
and Dist(wki, wkj) is the distance between the two quaternion
point indexes (one from Q and one from ˆQ) in the kth element
of the warp path. A lower distance Dist(W ) value represents
a greater similarity between two joint dynamics. Since the
standard DTW algorithm runs in O(N 2), we adopted a slightly
optimized version known as FastDTW, which provides optimal
alignments in O(N ) time and memory complexity [39].

To account for the metabolic cost involved during reaching
tasks, energy expenditure, as an estimate of metabolic effort
during reaching was computed [40]. The formulation estimates
the energy expended to reach a distance d and is given by:

er = amT + b

mdi
T j−1

(2)

where metabolic energy expenditure (er) is given as a function
of the reach duration, T , reach distance, d, effective limb
mass, m and the parametric constants a, b, i, j. For reaching
motor tasks, a = 15, b = 77, i = 1.1, j = 3. These values
are adopted from previous research and have been estimated
based on simulations of reaching movements at different
distances and duration [40]. Reach distance d is the Euclidean
distance traversed by a joint in time T. Estimation of Euclidean
position of joints has been described here [41]. Algorithm 1
describes the three dimensional joint position estimation based
on compounding iteration.

C. Experiment

1) Study Protocol: The study was divided into three phases:
1) initial evaluation phase, 2) training phase, 3) testing phase

Table I
FEATURE PARAMETERS OF TASKS

Task No. (T )
∆d
∆θ

1
1
0

2
1
1

3
-1
0

4
0
0

Figure 4. [Top] The four tasks on the PHAM and HoloPHAM involve reach
and grasp movements which account for three dimensional kinematics and
different grasp patterns. To ensure consistency, subjects stood at an arms
length from the frame. The subjects were required to start and return from
a default position (limbs fully extended to the sides of the trunk) during
each task. The two dimensional relocation of primitive objects share feature
parameters (see Table I) similar to the CRT. The target (in blue) location
represents location from where the object has to be picked and the goal (in
green) location represents the position where it has to be released. The order
of the tasks were randomized during the experiment to prevent cognitive bias.
[Bottom] Average metabolic cost for each of these tasks were computed based
on equation 2. A baseline metabolic cost (≈ 965 J) for reach and return has
been represented by the black dashed line. The error bars represent the stand
error of mean.

and 4) washout phase. In the initial evaluation phase, the
subjects were asked to perform a set of outcome measures
that included the CRT, PHAM and HoloPHAM. For the pur-
poses of analysis, task completion time, EMG and kinematic
information were recorded. The training phase involved the
subjects visiting a local clinic multiple times over 10 days,
with no more than a 2-day gap between the sessions. In each
visit, the subjects trained on the HoloPHAM, through a set
of three repetitions of four tasks that were randomized during
training. After the training phase was over, in the testing phase,

1) Rotation: In our previous work we studied the angular
(polar and azimuthal) accuracy of our kinematic tracking
system [41]. In our study we achieved a mean estimate
accuracy of 2.81◦ with 1.06◦ precision, with a maximum
endpoint hand tracking error of 7.06 cm (see Fig.5) due to
angular perturbation.

Figure 5. Top view showing the estimated and true angles of the vMPL and
actual physical limb rotation. Sensory accuracies were 3.38◦ (1.34◦precision)
and 2.24◦ (0.77◦precision) for polar and azimuthal conﬁgurations, respec-
tively. Inertial sensors were validated with a stepper motor as described
here [41]. A visual latency of the actual movement of the vMPL was observed
to be between 500-800 ms.

2) Translation: To further validate inertial tracking, depth
perception experiment was conducted (see Section II-C-2)
where the virtual depth was compared with the physical hand
displacement. In Fig. 6 we show the conﬁguration of the
experiment for the reach task and the trajectory of the physical
endpoint along the zy plane, where the depth distance is along

the subjects were asked to repeat the set of outcomes that were
used in the initial evaluation phase. Post-training, a washout
period of 5 days was involved were the subjects did not receive
any training.

2) Reach Tasks: For depth perception in AR a series of
reaching tasks with the vMPL was conducted, where the
subjects (N=3) had to guide the vMPL towards a goal endpoint
position from a starting point in the AR space (see Fig. 6a). In
Fig. 6a, dAR (in meters) denotes this distance value, where the
starting point refers to the position where the vMPL is closest
to the subject’s chest and the endpoint refers to the position of
a virtual cylinder in AR space. The cylinder was placed at the
subject’s chest level. Inertial trackers were used to estimate
the endpoint of the physical hand (using Algorithm 1) and its
reach distance was computed. For ﬁve set of trials, mean and
standard deviation of the physical reach distance (µphy and
σphy) was calculated. This experiment was conducted with
three dAR values of 0.2 m, 0.25 m and 0.3 m, respectively. To
ensure that only visual feedback is used to perceive depth, no
additional vibrotactile feedback for touch was provided during
this experiment.

3) PHAM & HoloPHAM Tasks: All tasks involved reach
and grasp movements in a three dimensional space. While both
the PHAM and HoloPHAM are capable of a diverse range
of object manipulations, subjects were asked to complete a
subset of tasks that resembled those of the CRT. Since tasks
on these outcomes account for 2-dimensional movement and
wrist rotation, a task T (∆d, ∆θ) was parameterized by two
features - 1) relative 2-D position (∆d) and 2) relative angular
position (∆θ) of the target location with respect to the initial
location. Relative 2-D position determines whether the object
has to be moved vertically (∆d = −1), diagonally (∆d = 1)
or along the same level (∆d = 0) from the initial position
while the relative angular position describes the orientation
of the target location with respect to the initial location and
whether the subject would be required to rotate the end effector
of the vMPL (∆θ = 1) or not (∆θ = 0). Table I shows
the feature parametrization of all the tasks on the PHAM and
HoloPHAM while Fig.4 shows a visualization of the required
manipulations. For all three outcome measures, there were
three repetitions for each task. The sequence of tasks were
randomized and subjects were allowed to complete them at
their own pace in order to prevent cognitive bias and muscle
fatigue, respectively.

III. RESULTS

A. Inertial Sensing Validation

To enable efﬁcient wireless kinematic tracking, IMUs and
rigid body constraints were used to accurately estimate joint
positions, up to the centimeter
range. Wireless tracking
through inertial sensors are known to be low cost, low weight
and high accuracy solutions over optical and depth trackers.
IMUs have become a popular kinematic tracker for human
machine interfaces, especially for devices that require arm
tracking capabilities [42].

Figure 6. a. The conﬁguration of the vMPL in the starting and end position
during the target reach movement. Subjects were instructed to start from the
same starting position (represented by the red circle) and reach towards the
end point ( represented by the virtual red cylinder) with no time constraints.
No vibrotactile feedback was provided during this experiment.dAR denotes the
distance or depth of the cylinder from the starting position in the AR scene.
b. Trajectory of the physical hand end-point, along the zy plane, is shown for
multiple virtual depth values (dAR). The color spectrum changes from blue to
yellow from the starting till the end point. µphy denotes the mean distance
traversed by the physical hand end-point for the corresponding dAR, while
σphy denotes the standard deviation.

Figure 7. Confusion matrix showing the distances of the warped path (Cij )
between the tasks on our physical (PHAM, along y axis, |Qi|) and augmented
reality (HoloPHAM, along x axis, | ˆQj |) setup based on the DTW algorithm.
Cost (Cij ) represents the mean (over ﬁve trials) measured using equation 1.
A lower cost represents greater similarity between the joint dynamics in the
two tasks.

the x direction. With ﬁve set of trials with three subjects, a
mean error in depth perception was 5.27 cm.

3) Kinematics: Ensuring that HoloPHAM accurately re-
sembles reaching task of the PHAM, kinematic joint dy-
namics were compared in the two modalities. Since the
HoloLensTM uses built-in optical and inertial sensors for
position and orientation tracking, calibration errors can result
in mismatch between the physical and virtual space dynam-
ics [43]. A similarity cost based on the DTW algorithm (see
Eqn. 1) was used to compare the joint angle dynamics of the
tasks performed on the PHAM and HoloPHAM (see Fig.7).

B. Effect of HoloPHAM Training

After a training phase of 10 days, we observed the ef-
fects of performance during tasks on the CRT, PHAM and

Figure 8. Task completion times for subjects (N=3, able-bodied) in the pre-
and post-training phases are reported. * denotes the statistical signiﬁcance at
p <0.05 and ** at p <0.01.

Figure 9. Progression of the warped path distance (similarity cost, C) of joint
dynamics over the training phase across the four tasks on the HoloPHAM. The
references (baselines) are the joint dynamics for each tasks measured on Day 0
with the tasks on the PHAM. Similarity cost after a washout period of 5 days,
post test day, has also been reported. A lower warped path distance signiﬁes
greater similarity between the PHAM and HoloPHAM joint dynamics, for
the same tasks (C = 0 for two exactly same time series signals). The solid
lines represent the average across all subjects (N=3), with the variance in data
represented as shaded patches.

HoloPHAM, where we looked at the average completion times
(see Fig.8). Statistically signiﬁcant improvements were ob-
served in both physical and virtual outcomes, with percentage
reduction in completion times of 22.22%, 23.5% and 28.5%
in CRT, PHAM and HoloPHAM respectively.

During the training phase with the HoloPHAM, the joint
dynamics during each task was recorded. In Fig. 9, we show
the mean and variance in similarity cost of the joint dynamics
of HoloPHAM tasks with the corresponding baseline tasks on
the PHAM. Comparison score was measured as the cost of
the warped path using the DTW algorithm (see Eqn. 1). Cost
from all sessions between the pre- and post-training phases are
reported. There was a general reduction in the cost between
pre- and post-training phase. After the washout phase, there
was however, an increase in the cost across all tasks.

IV. DISCUSSION

Upper limb prosthesis training involves repetition of reach
and grasp movements that are designed to assist motor skill
learning [17]. Current state-of-the-art VR and AR prosthesis
systems are limited as they focus only on a speciﬁc aspect
of prosthesis control. In this work, we developed a multi-
dimensional human-machine interaction system which offers
several DOF control (both kinematic and myoelectric) of a
virtual prosthesis. Prior to using our AR system for training,
we conducted a series of validation experiments. These exper-
iments were performed to understand the transfer of physical
information into the AR space through our interface. To begin
with, rotational and translational error in the interface were
looked at (see Fig.5 and 6). To study how these variables
affect the 3-dimensional reaching and grasp kinematics, joint
dynamics were compared (see Fig.7) Corresponding reaching
tasks on the PHAM and HoloPHAM showed greater simi-

larity, suggesting that there is a linear correlation between
the physical and AR space,
in terms of kinematics. We
then conducted a long-term study to investigate the effects
of training with our AR system on standardized functional
outcome measures. While completion times improved in all
three measures between pre- and post-training (see Fig. 8),
the quality of motion in the HoloPHAM, in terms of joint
dynamics, was also observed to converge towards the PHAM
(see Fig.9). Improvements in task completion times suggests
that training with our AR setup, by in itself, can enhance
motor skill performance, with the effects, also translating to
the physical outcome measures. Subsequent reduction in joint
kinematic cost, while training with the HoloPHAM, suggests
that subjects are able to develop a more intuitive control of the
vMPL with time (see Fig.9). Our results show both quantitative
and qualitative improvements in skill performance with AR
training.

While motor learning processes are an internal phenomenon
and cannot be directly observed, performance of subjects
during skill experiments can be used an indicator for inferring
these effects of training [44]. Such an internal model, believed
to be based primarily in the cerebellar region of the brain, has
been known to have synaptic plasticity, which can be trained
and re-trained in a supervised manner [45]. Motor learning
requires immense amount of sensation and perception [46]. To
facilitate learning, our AR system incorporated several aspects
of these paradigms. The HoloPHAM enabled subjects to see
virtual objects that are blended into the physical space, while
also allowing them to maintain visual contact of the vMPL
(see Fig. 2). Visual contact of the hand and target objects has
been known to provide assistive feedback for motor planning
and control, allowing proper execution of the movement [47].
Vibrotactile feedback allowed subjects to know when they
made contact of virtual objects with the vMPL (see Fig. 3)
. Previous research has shown that a non-invasive mechanical
vibration on the upper limb stump, when coupled with a visual
feedback of the virtual limb, stimulates the sensory-motor
centers in the cortex [48]. Interpretation of sensory information
and feedback enables the perception of the objects and visual
cues in an environment. Accurate perception of virtual objects,
within a range of few centimeters, was accomplished in our
AR setup (see Fig. 6). Lack of depth perception has been
shown to negatively impact reaching performance, quality
of movement as well grasping actions [49]. Joint kinematic
comparison of a physical limb with the virtual limb (vMPL in
our case) throws light on motor coordination and the aspect
of embodiment of virtual objects in AR (see Fig. 9). The
increase in joint kinematic cost, after the washout phase (see
Fig.9), suggests that our system facilitated motor learning and
illustrated the effect of practise for motor retention.

In our current system, a visual latency of the 3-dimensional
movement of virtual limb was in the range of 500-800 ms.
While larger than the real-time limit of 250 ms, our results
suggest this system latency is still within the limits to facilitate
motor learning. While a longer time study would be useful
to see how the similarity between physical and virtual joint

dynamics evolved, it essential to note that an exact similarity
can be hard to achieve with the current technological limi-
tations of current AR systems [50]. Future research in this
space is directed towards observing the effects AR training
has on amputee population’s pattern recognition and kinematic
performance.

V. CONCLUSION

In this work we presented an AR based human-machine
interaction system for prosthesis control. The system provided
both visual and vibrotactile feedback to the subjects during
interaction. Our AR setup, based upon an exisiting physical
functional ouctome measure, allowed both myoelectric and
kinematic control of a virtual prosthesis, with several degrees
of freedom. Kinematic relationship between the physical and
AR space were studied. Furthermore, the effects of training
with our AR setup over a period of 10 days were investigated.
Both quantitative and qualitative aspects of reach and ob-
ject manipulation performance showed improvements. These
effects depreciated, but were still retained, after a washout
phase without training, suggesting that our AR setup facilitated
motor skill learning. Future work will investigate the effects on
a broader subject population (both amputee and able-bodied)
over a longer study duration.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We wish to acknowledge Johns Hopkins Applied Physics
Laboratory (JHU/APL) for developing and making available
the Virtual Integration Environment (VIE), which the virtual
Modular Prosthesis Limb (vMPL) is a part of. The VIE was
developed under the Revolutionizing Prosthetics program. The
authors would like to thank the human subjects who partic-
ipated in this study and Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory for providing the Microsoft HoloLensTM.

REFERENCES

[1] H. Kumahara, H. Tanaka, and Y. Schutz, “Daily physical activity
assessment: what is the importance of upper limb movements vs whole
body movements?” International journal of obesity, vol. 28, no. 9, p.
1105, 2004.

[2] A. Esquenazi, “Amputation rehabilitation and prosthetic restoration.
from surgery to community reintegration,” Disability and rehabilitation,
vol. 26, no. 14-15, pp. 831–836, 2004.

[3] S. S. Johnson and E. Mansﬁeld, “Prosthetic training: upper limb,”
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 133–
151, 2014.

[4] J. Malone, L. Fleming, J. Roberson, J. T. Whitesides, J. Leal, J. Poole,
and R. Grodin, “Immediate, early, and late postsurgical management of
upper-limb amputation.” Journal of rehabilitation research and devel-
opment, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 33–41, 1984.

[5] E. A. Biddiss and T. T. Chau, “Upper limb prosthesis use and aban-
donment: a survey of the last 25 years,” Prosthet. Orthot. Int., vol. 31,
no. 3, pp. 236–257, 2007.

[6] L. A. Wheaton, “Neurorehabilitation in upper limb amputation: under-
standing how neurophysiological changes can affect functional rehabil-
itation,” Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 14, no. 1,
p. 41, 2017.

[7] V. Wright, “Prosthetic outcome measures for use with upper limb
amputees: A systematic review of the peer-reviewed literature, 1970 to
2009,” JPO: Journal of Prosthetics and Orthotics, vol. 21, no. 9, pp.
P3–P63, 2009.

[8] S. A. Prince, K. B. Adamo, M. E. Hamel, J. Hardt, S. C. Gorber, and
M. Tremblay, “A comparison of direct versus self-report measures for
assessing physical activity in adults: a systematic review,” International
Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, vol. 5, no. 1,
p. 56, 2008.

[9] W. Hill, Ø. Stavdahl, L. N. Hermansson, P. Kyberd, S. Swanson, and
S. Hubbard, “Functional outcomes in the who-icf model: establishment
of the upper limb prosthetic outcome measures group,” JPO: Journal of
Prosthetics and Orthotics, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 115–119, 2009.

[10] H. Bouwsema, P. J. Kyberd, W. Hill, C. K. van der Sluis, and R. M.
Bongers, “Determining skill level in myoelectric prosthesis use with
multiple outcome measures,” J Rehabil Res Dev, vol. 49, no. 9, pp.
1331–1348, 2012.

[11] R. M. Bongers, P. J. Kyberd, H. Bouwsema, L. P. Kenney, D. H.
Plettenburg, and C. K. Van der Sluis, “Bernsteins levels of construction
of movements applied to upper limb prosthetics,” JPO: Journal of
Prosthetics and Orthotics, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 67–76, 2012.

[12] M. J. Major, R. L. Stine, C. W. Heckathorne, S. Fatone, and S. A.
Gard, “Comparison of range-of-motion and variability in upper body
movements between transradial prosthesis users and able-bodied controls
when executing goal-oriented tasks,” Journal of neuroengineering and
rehabilitation, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 132, 2014.

[13] S. B. Thies, L. P. Kenney, M. Sobuh, A. Galpin, P. Kyberd, R. Stine,
and M. J. Major, “Skill assessment in upper limb myoelectric prosthesis
users: Validation of a clinically feasible method for characterising upper
limb temporal and amplitude variability during the performance of
functional tasks,” Medical engineering & physics, vol. 47, pp. 137–143,
2017.

[14] A. J. Metzger, A. W. Dromerick, R. J. Holley, and P. S. Lum, “Char-
acterization of compensatory trunk movements during prosthetic upper
limb reaching tasks,” Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation,
vol. 93, no. 11, pp. 2029–2034, 2012.

[15] C. Hunt, R. Yerrabelli, C. Clancy, L. Osborn, R. Kaliki, and N. Thakor,
“Pham: prosthetic hand assessment measure,” in Proc. Myoelec. Controls
Symp., 2017, p. 221.

[16] A. W. Dromerick, C. N. Schabowsky, R. J. Holley, B. Monroe,
A. Markotic, and P. S. Lum, “Effect of training on upper-extremity pros-
thetic performance and motor learning: a single-case study,” Archives of
physical medicine and rehabilitation, vol. 89, no. 6, pp. 1199–1204,
2008.

[17] A. M. Simon, B. A. Lock, and K. A. Stubbleﬁeld, “Patient training for
functional use of pattern recognition–controlled prostheses,” Journal of
prosthetics and orthotics: JPO, vol. 24, no. 2, p. 56, 2012.

[18] L. Hargrove, Y. Losier, B. Lock, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “A
real-time pattern recognition based myoelectric control usability study
implemented in a virtual environment,” in Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, 2007. EMBS 2007. 29th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE.

IEEE, 2007, pp. 4842–4845.

[19] A. M. Simon, L. J. Hargrove, B. A. Lock, and T. A. Kuiken, “The
target achievement control test: Evaluating real-time myoelectric pattern
recognition control of a multifunctional upper-limb prosthesis,” Journal
of rehabilitation research and development, vol. 48, no. 6, p. 619, 2011.
[20] J. M. Lambrecht, C. L. Pulliam, and R. F. Kirsch, “Virtual reality
environment for simulating tasks with a myoelectric prosthesis: an
assessment and training tool,” Journal of prosthetics and orthotics: JPO,
vol. 23, no. 2, p. 89, 2011.

[21] L. van Dijk, C. K. van der Sluis, H. W. van Dijk, and R. M. Bongers,
“Task-oriented gaming for transfer to prosthesis use,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 24, no. 12, pp.
1384–1394, 2016.

[22] M. C. Howard, “A meta-analysis and systematic literature review of
virtual reality rehabilitation programs,” Computers in Human Behavior,
vol. 70, pp. 317–327, 2017.

[23] M. A. Powell, R. R. Kaliki, and N. V. Thakor, “User training for
pattern recognition-based myoelectric prostheses: Improving phantom
limb movement consistency and distinguishability,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 22, no. 3, pp.
522–532, 2014.

[24] L. Hargrove, L. Miller, K. Turner, and T. Kuiken, “Control within a
virtual environment is correlated to functional outcomes when using
a physical prosthesis,” Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation,
vol. 15, no. 1, p. 60, 2018.

[25] F. P. Brooks, “What’s real about virtual reality?” IEEE Computer

graphics and applications, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 16–27, 1999.

[26] S. M. Ebenholtz, “Motion sickness and oculomotor systems in virtual
environments,” Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, vol. 1,
no. 3, pp. 302–305, 1992.

[27] J. P. Wann and M. Mon-Williams, “Health issues with virtual reality
displays: What we do know and what we don’t,” ACM SIGGRAPH
Computer Graphics, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 53–57, 1997.

[28] J. W. Burke, M. McNeill, D. Charles, P. J. Morrow, J. Crosbie,
and S. McDonough, “Augmented reality games for upper-limb stroke
rehabilitation,” in 2010 Second International Conference on Games and
Virtual Worlds for Serious Applications.

IEEE, 2010, pp. 75–78.

[29] X. Luo, T. Kline, H. C. Fischer, K. A. Stubbleﬁeld, R. V. Kenyon, and
D. G. Kamper, “Integration of augmented reality and assistive devices
for post-stroke hand opening rehabilitation,” in 2005 IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology 27th Annual Conference.
IEEE, 2006, pp.
6855–6858.

[30] A. Alamri, J. Cha, and A. El Saddik, “Ar-rehab: An augmented reality
framework for poststroke-patient rehabilitation,” IEEE Transactions on
Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2554–2563, 2010.
[31] J. Dunn, E. Yeo, P. Moghaddampour, B. Chau, and S. Humbert, “Virtual
and augmented reality in the treatment of phantom limb pain: a literature
review,” NeuroRehabilitation, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 595–601, 2017.
[32] M. Ortiz-Catalan, N. Sander, M. B. Kristoffersen, B. H˚akansson, and
R. Br˚anemark, “Treatment of phantom limb pain (plp) based on aug-
mented reality and gaming controlled by myoelectric pattern recognition:
a case study of a chronic plp patient,” Frontiers in neuroscience, vol. 8,
p. 24, 2014.

[33] A. Sharma, C. Hunt, A. Maheshwari, L. Osborn, G. Levay, R. Kaliki,
A. Soares, and N. Thakor, “A mixed- reality training environment for
upper limb prosthesis control,” in 2018 IEEE Biomedical Circuits asnd
Systems.

IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–4.

[34] P. Kyberd, A. Hussaini, and G. Maillet, “Characterisation of the
tool,” Journal
clothespin relocation test as a functional assessment
of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering, vol. 5, p.
2055668317750810, 2018.

[35] J. L. Betthauser, C. L. Hunt, L. E. Osborn, M. R. Masters, G. L´evay,
R. R. Kaliki, and N. V. Thakor, “Limb position tolerant pattern recog-
nition for myoelectric prosthesis control with adaptive sparse repre-
sentations from extreme learning,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 770–778, 2018.

[36] C. Cipriani, R. Sassu, M. Controzzi, and M. C. Carrozza, “Inﬂuence
of the weight actions of the hand prosthesis on the performance of
pattern recognition based myoelectric control: preliminary study,” in
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBC, 2011 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE.

IEEE, 2011, pp. 1620–1623.

[37] S. O. Madgwick, A. J. Harrison, and R. Vaidyanathan, “Estimation
of imu and marg orientation using a gradient descent algorithm,” in
Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), 2011 IEEE International Conference
on.

IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–7.

[38] D. J. Berndt and J. Clifford, “Using dynamic time warping to ﬁnd
Seattle,

patterns in time series.” in KDD workshop, vol. 10, no. 16.
WA, 1994, pp. 359–370.

[39] S. Salvador and P. Chan, “Toward accurate dynamic time warping in
linear time and space,” Intelligent Data Analysis, vol. 11, no. 5, pp.
561–580, 2007.

[40] R. Shadmehr, H. J. Huang, and A. A. Ahmed, “A representation of effort
in decision-making and motor control,” Current biology, vol. 26, no. 14,
pp. 1929–1934, 2016.

[41] C. L. Hunt, A. Sharma, L. E. Osborn, R. R. Kaliki, and N. V. Thakor,
“Predictive trajectory estimation during rehabilitative tasks in augmented
reality using inertial sensors,” in 2018 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and
Systems Conference (BioCAS).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–4.

[42] M. Masters, L. Osborn, N. Thakor, and A. Soares, “Real-time arm
tracking for hmi applications,” in Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor
Networks (BSN), 2015 IEEE 12th International Conference on.
IEEE,
2015, pp. 1–4.

[43] L. Qian, E. Azimi, P. Kazanzides, and N. Navab, “Comprehensive
tracker based display calibration for holographic optical see-through
head-mounted display,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.05834, 2017.
[44] W. H. Edwards, Motor learning and control: From theory to practice.

Cengage Learning, 2010.

[45] M. Kawato, “Internal models for motor control and trajectory planning,”
Current opinion in neurobiology, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 718–727, 1999.
[46] C. Frank, W. M. Land, and T. Schack, “Perceptual-cognitive changes
during motor learning: The inﬂuence of mental and physical practice

on mental representation, gaze behavior, and performance of a complex
action,” Frontiers in psychology, vol. 6, p. 1981, 2016.

[47] A. Churchill, B. Hopkins, L. R¨onnqvist, and S. Vogt, “Vision of the
hand and environmental context in human prehension,” Experimental
Brain Research, vol. 134, no. 1, pp. 81–89, 2000.

[48] M. Kurzynski, A. Jaskolska, J. Marusiak, A. Wolczowski, P. Bierut,
L. Szumowski, J. Witkowski, and K. Kisiel-Sajewicz, “Computer-aided
training sensorimotor cortex functions in humans before the upper limb
transplantation using virtual reality and sensory feedback,” Comput. Biol.
Med., vol. 87, pp. 311–321, 2017.

[49] C. Bozzacchi and F. Domini, “Lack of depth constancy for grasping
movements in both virtual and real environments,” Journal of neuro-
physiology, vol. 114, no. 4, p. 2242, 2015.

[50] R. Radkowski and S. Kanunganti, “Augmented reality system calibration
for assembly support with the microsoft hololens,” in ASME 2018
13th International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference.
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2018, pp. V003T02A021–
V003T02A021.

