9
1
0
2

r
a

M
0
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
6
3
0
4
0
.
3
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Solar Physics
DOI: 10.1007/•••••-•••-•••-••••-•

Reminiscences

Brigitte Schmieder

c(cid:13) Springer ••••

Abstract I would like to thank Solar Physics colleagues for asking me to write
this chapter on my professional life. My main interest has always been focused on
the Sun, our star, from the heating of the corona, to the dynamics of prominences
and their eruptions, ﬂares and coronal mass ejections until their impact on the
Earth. I built a new group in solar physics and gave to them my enthusiasm.
They brought to me a lot of satisfaction. We have made important advances
in solar physics with a step forward to understand the triggers of solar activity
and their terrestrial eﬀects. Our avant-garde research and discovery has opened
new topics for the solar community. Mixing observations obtained on the ground
and in space with theory and numerical simulations brings a new perspective in
research.

1. Early days

1.1. Chilhood

I grew up after the second world war in an intellectual family with my older
sister. My mother always motivated us to learn very hard and get a good job.
She had been a little frustrated by not being able to do what she wanted because
of the war. She travelled before her wedding to Greece and Algeria alone. It
was each time an adventure for her. My father was an engineer who worked
in a shipping company when he was single, landing in famous harbors in Asia
(Yokohama, Hong Kong, and Saigon). Just before the war, he was hired by
an oil company but was rapidly appointed to do charcoal work in a forest in
Burgundy. Therefore we did not go to school and my mother was our teacher
before we passed the exam at age ten to be accepted into the Lyc´ee Marie Curie in
Sceaux (city located 7 km to the South of Paris). My childhood was very peaceful
(Figure 1 top left panel). After literature and Latin, I studied mathematics and
physics with Catherine Lacombe and after the baccalaureate I was accepted in
the Lyc´ee F´enelon in Paris. After studying mathematics with Prof. Dixmier and
mechanic of ﬂuids with Prof. Germain at the Sorbonne I attended the lectures

1 Observatoire de Paris, LESIA, 5 Place Janssen, 92195
Meudon, France email: brigitte.schmieder@obspm.fr 2 PSL
Research University, CNRS Sorbonne Universit´e, Univ. Paris
06, Univ. Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cit´e

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Top left, with my sister, my father, my mother (M. and Mme. Pailhas) and two
of their friends in Combloux (Alps), top right: with the student group of G.Wl´erick at Pic
du Midi, bottom left: high school class-mates, bottom right: Saint Michel l’Observatoire, with
the electronic camera at the focus plan of the 193 cm mirror telescope. I am indicated by red
arrows.

of astrophysics with Profs. Evry Schatzman (the greatest physicist whom I ever
met), Jean-Claude Pecker, Jean Paul Zahn, Henri van Regemorter, Roger Cayrel
and G´erard Wl´erick. During this time I belonged to a group of students and
young post docs, doing sport, skiing and tennis (Figure 1 bottom left panel). We
were meeting every Friday in a caf´e in the Sorbonne square, ”chez Sylvain” to
drink coﬀee and to decide what we would do the next week end. Ngyuen Rieu
belonged to the group and spoke to me about astrophysics. I was fascinated
by this kind of research and by the Observatoire in Meudon where he had a
position in the radio astronomy department. Therefore when G. Wl´erick asked
if students were interested in training, I followed him and went to Meudon once
a week. When I entered his oﬃce for the ﬁrst time, he told me that my name
”Pailhas” was familiar to him because his father, a disciple of Rodin, sculpted
the bust of Mrs. Pailhas when she was very young. In fact, she was the wife of
my grand uncle.

After the master degree in astrophysics, I started to work at the Observatory
of Paris in Meudon (in the stables of the castle) with G. Wl´erick preparing for
a ”Doctorat es Sciences”. The research for my thesis eﬀectively started after
1968, the year of the revolution of French students when Pierre Mein, my thesis
advisor moved from the ”Institut d’Astrophysique” ( IAP) in Paris to Meudon
in the solar department. I defended my thesis in 1977.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 2

1.2. Training time

During this long time period with G. Wl´erik and P. Mein, I learned astrophyiscs
in many of its diﬀerent aspects. My training started by looking at the spectra
obtained during the eclipse of 1961 at the ”Observatoire de Haute Provence”
in Saint Michel. I discovered that G.Wl´erick gave this task to each student
who arrived in his laboratory. Then, I computed theoretically the ratio of the
forbidden Ni XV lines using atomic data updated by Burgess and Seaton in the UK. I
wanted to compare my results with the spectral observations of Bernard Lyot obtained
at Pic du Midi. One morning Audouin Dollfus brought me the boxes containing the
frames made by B. Lyot. One frame was missing and it was just the frame of the
wavelengths of the Ni XV. We never found it. During this time I was also working with
the electronic camera invented and developed by Andr´e Lallemand in a laboratory
in Paris. We had to check the cells and had to make a vacuum in the tube during
half a day before observing. With the group of students of G. Wl´erick we observed
the planets (using UBV ﬁlters) at Pic du Midi and at the ”Observatoire de Haute
Provence” with the new 193 cm telescope (Figure 1 right panels). It was really fun
to wait during the night for a clear sky. One winter we built an igloo in the snow on
the terrace of the Pic du Midi Observatory during our waiting periods. I remember a
few of my colleagues: Pierre Charvin, Loic Vapillon, Michel Combes, Paul Felenbok,
Philippe V´eron, and Michelle Loulergue and many young female students from the
”Ecole Normale Sup´erieure” of Fontenay-aux-Roses.

Back in Meudon, I had to work to build a new spectrograph in a building called
”Petit Siderostat” with the engineers Rolland Hellier and Christian Coutard. It never
really worked because we put a selector of wavelengths after the grating which could
not be adjustable. After that I participated with R.Michard in the construction of the
solar tower telescope implemented by the ﬁrst Multichannel Substrative Double Pass
(MSDP) spectrograph invented by Pierre Mein. The observatory in Meudon developed
quickly during these years and after the construction of the solar tower we moved to new
buildings adjacent to the tower. During this time, I acquired an extensive knowledge
in instrumentation, in astrophysics and in atomic physics. All these diﬀerent works
did not lead to any publication but they would be very helpful for my future work in
science. However, I realized only much later than they did not help me to get a better
position. I learned at my own expense that research not published is not valuable. It
is why now I always push my students and collaborators to publish their results and I
am well known to ask them frequently ”Where is the paper?”.

1.3. Heating of the corona -Thesis- 70’s

When Pierre Mein arrived in Meudon, I ﬁnally got a topic for my thesis: ”Solar
coronal heating by dissipation of acoustic waves: development of a radiative code and
applications to observations”.

In 1948 Evry Schatzmann proposed that acoustic wave dissipation could work for
heating the corona. Grant Athay, an American researcher conﬁrmed this hypothesis
after theoretical computations that such a mechanism could be eﬃcient. In fact nobody
was really measuring the phases, velocities and amplitudes of the waves. With my
observations we concluded that the waves were reﬂected back in the transition region
between the chromosphere and the corona and were mainly standing waves. They could
not heat the corona. The dissipation was too small. Before 1981 I published seven
papers either alone or with Nicole Mein on this topic (Schmieder, 1972; Schmieder,
1976; Schmieder, 1977; Schmieder, 1978; Schmieder, 1979; Schmieder and Mein, 1980;

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 3

Mein and Schmieder, 1981). After my thesis, Christensen Dalsgaard told me that I
had to change my radiative transfer code in LTE (local thermodynamic equilibrium)
from 2 to 3 dimensions because we had discovered that the oscillations were resonant
waves in the 3D sphere of the Sun. I would have to transform my full box of computer
punch cards with small holes to a new code. Each day I had to transport this box to
Orsay where the computer ran the program overnight. Often I came back the next day
to discover that I had forgotten a comma somewhere. It was too tiring to run such a
heavy code. Therefore I decided to change of topic after my thesis defense (see Section
2.1).

About the observations concerning the waves, it had been also a challenge to get
them. The solar tower in Meudon was just built and the spectrograph allowed us to
get spectra of the Mg I b line in the low chromosphere, as well as Hα and Ca K lines
in the chromosphere. After the observations, I was running a Fourier transform code
and discovered that I was measuring the oscillations of the solar tower, or of people
who were going down the stairs. Indeed Jean Claude Pecker and the engineers had an
oﬃce upstairs. The interior and the external towers were tied together in the basement
by concrete. After inspection, M. Remondet, the architect, agreed to separate the two
towers with a hammer drill. At the same time Pierre Mein thought that the best way
to track the granules and the chromospheric pattern was to open the slit and use
computations to follow them. It was the birth of the MSDP. In fact Pierre Mein spent
one year at Sacramento Peak Observatory in New Mexico and the best for me was
to go there (my ﬁrst airplane trip lasted 36 hours!). I observed there during the day
and digitised the spectra during the night. They had great facilities that we did not
have in France at that time. I met many famous scientists in Sac Peak: Dave Rust,
Richard Altrock, Richard Canﬁeld, and only one woman Joan Vorpahl. When Pierre
Mein was at Sac Peak and I was back in Meudon, I could discuss my problems of
radiative transfer with Philippe Delache and Christian Magnan.

I had to develop every thing by myself with no existing material, e.g., codes or
observations. Pierre Mein was there to encourage me and gave me good advice every
six months. I would like really to thank him for his bright ideas. Pierre Mein and
Nicole Mein are still working on the new generation of MSDP and very active to
observe, enthusiastic to take part in coordinated campaigns. I had and still have an
intensive collaboration with them throughout my research career (see my recent paper
on prominence-tornadoes with them using observations made at the Meudon solar
tower with the MSDP (Schmieder et al., 2017b)).

1.4. Family

During my thesis I had also another task to do. A thesis was at that time a long
piece of work and could last for ten years before the change of thesis format to ﬁt
with the international PhD thesis of 3 years. I built a family with three children: one
boy Laurent and two daughters Anne and C´eline (Figure 2). I would like to thank my
husband Eric who always helped me to realize my wishes, to go to Sac Peak for one
month with a baby of two years at home. I could manage the mother’s life with my
work thanks to him. After bringing the children to school at 8:30 am I was back at 6
pm for the homework.

My husband after his university studies, his administration school (”Ecole Nationale
d’administration” - ENA) and his military service entered in the Ministry of health
directed by Simone Veil. He was hard working and came back home only after 8 or 9
pm. We were well organized with a nurse who received nearly all my salary. But I knew
that it would beneﬁt me in the future. This situation lasted only during 15 years. It

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 4

Figure 2. Left, on the French riviera with my 3 children: C´eline, Anne and Laurent, right,
winter sport in the Alps with Anne, Laurent and C´eline.

is a short period of time in a long professional career. I never interrupted my career
for more than 6 weeks even with my three maternity leaves. Research is progressing
fast and we always need to read and update our knowledge to be able to have the
right questions. We enjoyed very much to spend time with our three children during
our holidays in our country house in Faverdines since 1966 (3 hours from Paris), in the
Alps since 1980 (Val Thorens), on the sea side in Rayol Canadel or visiting diﬀerent
countries (Germany, Portugal, Marocco, US) (Figure 3). It was a fascinating time for
us to see them growing so fast. They get very rapidly an autonomy which helped them
for their future. All three children obtained very good jobs. Laurent, after the ”Ecole
des Arts et M´etiers” (ENSAM), is an engineer at the CEA (Commissariat `a l’´energie
atomique) and is building the ITER facility in Cadarache. Anne and C´eline earned very
good diplomas from the school ”Ecole Polytechnique F´eminine” (EPF) and entered in
the bank research and development department. In industry they have to work very
hard until 8 pm. They sometime regret not having chosen a career in the research
where you have a lot of work to do but you are your own manager. They saw their
mother always working but they realized only later the freedom that the researchers
have. By this time I was also involved in discussions about the ethic of research in a
working group at the ”Assembl´ee Nationale” (French Parliament) managed by Alain
Lamassoure, an elected representative of parliament.

Now I have eight grand children and am happy to invite them to our diﬀerent holiday
resorts or to visit diﬀerent countries where meetings take place (Figure 4). They partic-
ularly appreciate watching the solar eclipses and like very much the COSPAR General
Assemblies with their space exhibitions. They discover that the English language is
important to communicate with others.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 5

Figure 3. Where I spend my holidays with my children and friends and now where I am
writing my papers and reviews: Val Thorens in the Alps, Saint Antonin Noble Val in Tarn
et Garonne department, Le Rayol Canadel with its famous beach on the riviera, Faverdines a
charming small house with a large garden that many of my colleagues know.

2. Research

2.1. My concept of research

In 1980 the Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) was launched. The researcher Einar
Tandberg-Hanssen, a Norwegian who had emigrated to the US, and very fond of
France, visited our laboratory (see his memoir - Tandberg-Hanssen, 2011). He was
the principal investigator of the UVSP spectrometer onboard SMM. He demonstrated
to us the interest to combine multi-wavelength observations to understand the activity
of the Sun. These two events changed completely my research topics and my life. During
the preceding ten years I have been mostly alone in my oﬃce, not traveling, and then
I discovered foreigners working together and discussing together.

It was a new world for me, more appropriate to my life concept. E.Tandberg-Hanssen
has been the main actor to open to me the NASA laboratories in US (GSFC, MSFC)
and also to make strong contacts in Norway. Later on, I was the advisor of Jun Elin
Wiik, a Norwegian student (thesis defense in 1993). And ﬁnally, because of the success
of Jun Elin Wiik, I got a part time professorship in Norway from 1996 to 2006 working
on ﬁlaments with Oddbjorn Engvold and his staﬀ, e.g., Jun Elin Wiik and Yong Lin
(PhD student). I was the second woman to teach physics at the University of Oslo
in Blindern. I appreciated very much all my stays in Oslo between the fjords and
the mountains with my colleagues: Oddbjorn Engvold, Olav Kjeldseth-Moe and Mats
Carlson who became a ”chevalier du test vin” in Burgundy due my sponsorship.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 6

Figure 4. Top left, my family: me, my husband Eric with our 3 children, the spouse of our son
and husbands of our two daughters and our 8 grand children in the garden at Faverdines, top
right: visit of the Forbidden City with my grand children Camille and Adrien during COSPAR
in 2006, bottom left, the eclipse in 2009 in Hangshou (China) with Wahab Uddin, me, Gr´egoire
and my husband, bottom right: the eclipse on August 21 in 2017 in Madras (Oregon, US) with
Sarah Gibson and Mark Miesh and their family seated on chairs, behind them, standing up,
my family: Capucine, Gr´egoire, Eric, Gautier and me (in red tee shirt).

All my research was oriented according to the collaborations that I managed through
bilateral research projects which brought me to visit many countries (US with Einar
Tandberg-Hanssen, Art Poland, Dave Rust, and Leon Golub, Japan with Hiroki Kurokawa
and Kazunari Shibata, Czech Republic with Petr Heinzel, Greece with Kostas Alissan-
drakis, Georgia Tsiropoula and Kostas Tziotziou, China with Fang Cheng, Argentina
with Marcos Machado and later with Cristina Mandrini, India with Venkatakrischnan
and now with Ramesh Chandra in ARIES, and recently in Korea with Tetsuya Magara
at Kyung Hee University and Young Deuk Park in KASI. All these researchers brought
and still bring to me a lot of knowledge in diﬀerent aspects of astrophysics.

I visited China for the ﬁrst time in 1991, I was invited by Xiaoma Gu for one month
in Kunming and again in 2004 (Figure 6 top left panel). There I also met Jun Lin
as a young student. In China at that time there was no xerox machine to copy the
rolling paper where ﬂare spectra of interest were recorded. I traced the spectra on a
paper and in Meudon I digitized them by using a machine overlying each curve with a
stiletto and published consequently a paper on post-ﬂare loops (Gu et al., 1992). Before
returning to France, I visited Beijing with Ai Guo Xian and Fu Qi Jun and Nanjing
with Cheng Fang (see his memoir - Fang, 2018) who could speak French ﬂuently after
his stay in France in 1987. I have a nice story about the arrival of Cheng Fang in our
laboratory. Jean-Claude H´enoux, our director at that time, received a letter asking
him if we would agree to have a Chinese visitor for 2 years. We said yes. After three

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 7

Figure 5. Top left, photo taken at the SMM Workshop in Airlie in 1987: Art Poland, Einar
Tandberg-Hanssen, Brigitte Schmieder (BS), Guy Simon, Jean-Marie Malherbe (PhD student),
top right, waiting for the eclipse in 1999 at Szombathely in Hungary: Spiro Antiochos with
his son and wife, BS, Pascal D´emoulin with his wife, Eric Schmieder, bottom left, Guo Yang
defended his thesis in Nanjing 2011 with the jury: Mingde Ding, Cheng Fang, BS, Hubert Baty,
bottom right, during the Aussois meeting in 1997, a concert was given by V´eronique Bommier,
Bernard Foing with his daughter, Petr Heinzel, Jean-Francois Mein and Pierre Mein.

months he received the same letter. He replied: Yes of course. In fact one was Cheng
Fang and the other one was Feng Cheng from Kunming. Finally both came for two
years. Later I visited China again, mainly for giving lectures to young students (Figure
6 right panels), and to attend meetings, e.g, the French-Chinese meetings in Xian and
Shanghai, the 36th COSPAR General Assembly in Beijing, the ﬁrst Chinese-European
meeting in Kunming in 2017. I was co-advisor of two Chinese PhD students: Yang Guo
(Figure 5 bottom left panel) and Jie Zhao who defended their theses in 2011 and 2014,
respectively.

I should also mention my numerous trips to India. I was ﬁrst invited in Nainital in
2005 by Wahab Uddin where I met Ramesh Chandra and Navin Joshi who are very
good observers. I got an oﬃcial collaboration (CEFIPRA) with Nainital, Udaipur, and
Oooty. This allowed me to work and have many exchanges with colleagues and their
students in India. I was invited to watch the eclipse in 2009 with Gr´egoire, my grandson
by W. Uddin and Siraj Hasan in Hangshou where we arrived after a long trip during
the night. They were still waiting for us. Siraj said, Brigitte did not cancel her trip, so
we have to wait for her all the night. And we were rewarded with clear skies (Figure 4
top bottom panel). I will refer later to our scientiﬁc results.

In addition, we had individual foreign visitors who also interacted strongly with our
team and our PhD students. I will refer to them later to this memoir. All my PhD
students (Jean-Marie Malherbe, Pascal D´emoulin, Guillaume Aulanier, and Etienne

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 8

Figure 6. Top left, Kunming in 2004: Kejun, Li, Xiaoma Gu, Xiaoyu Zhang and Brigitte
Schmieder (BS), top right, Huairou 1991: Fu Qi Jun, BS, Ai Guo Xian, bottom left: dinner by
Eijero Hiei (on the right) in Tokyo in 1993: Hong Qi Zhang, Cheng Fang, Tang, BS, bottom
right: after the 36th COSPAR 2006, during lectures in Beijing: ﬁrst row, Yuanyong Deng, BS,
Shibata, Yokoyama, second row: Hong Qi Zhang, Guiping Ruan, third row: Xinming Bao and
students.

Pariat) could work with them. That was an excellent training for my students and
we maintained good relationships and even friendships with all of the foreign visitors.
Our French team developed as an extended group with all these researchers without
frontiers. With this very friendly and active ambience, and due to their excellent skills,
all my French PhD students cited above got a permanent job at the Paris Observatory
and formed the roots and core of the present solar group.

2.2. Time of SMM and J.M.Malherbe -1980’s

Jean Claude Pecker encouraged Guy Simon to submit a proposal to the Guest Inves-
tigator program committee of the Ultra Violet Spectrometer (UVSP) on UV waves
after ﬂares. The proposal was successful and we got a few weeks of observing time
during several years. Guy Simon and I went to the building 7 or 21 at NASA/GSFC
in Greenbelt near Washington DC for planning our observations (Figure 5 top left).
Each morning we had a meeting to decide the target of the next day to determine
the pointing of the telescope. The members of the committee hated our proposal which
required to move away from the ﬂare site but E. Tandberg-Hanssen regularly reminded
them that they had accepted the proposal so it should run. On Sundays Guy Simon was
not allowed to enter the NASA compound because of his involvement in politics and I
had to discuss alone the target of the day. These observations were coordinated with
Meudon using the MSDP at the solar tower. Christian Coutard and Roland Hellier

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 9

Figure 7. Workshop on the Dynamics and structure of solar Prominences
in Palma de
Mallorca in November 1987, ﬁrst row, from left to right: Pierre Mein, Oddbjorn Engvold, Ulrich
Anzer, Brigitte Schmieder, Eric Priest, Marie Jos´e Martres, Guillermo Vizoso Miguel del Sola,
Art Poland, Horst Balthazar, Alan Hood, Bogdan Rompolt, second row, Jos´e Ballester, Eber-
hard Wiehr,Jean Marie Malherbe, V´eronique Bommier, Jean Louis Leroy, -, Pascal D´emoulin,
-, -, Fernando Moreno Insertis, Pierre Gouttebroze.

were our observers and they had to develop wrapping black and white ﬁlms in dark
rooms every day. Besides it was not easy for Pierre and Nicole Mein to receive the
coordinates of the target. In the 1980’s Internet communications were just starting. In
Meudon there was only one telephone-modem in the computer center with which we
could communicate with the operation center at NASA/GSFC.

The aim of the proposal was to study the propagation of waves in UV after ﬂares. It
was completely an unknown topic at that time, only the Moreton waves were observed.
We were really pioneers on this topic. To achieve our goal we requested that after the
ﬂare ﬂag we moved the center of the ﬁeld of view to the edge of the camera and wait
for the passage of the wave. With a Fourier transform code we tried to detect the
waves. After nights and nights spent on the computer no wave was detected, due to
the low cadence of the instrument. However the data that we obtained were generally
centered on ﬁlaments so we started to work on ﬁlaments. I met many scientists during
that period with whom we continued to work later, e.g, George Simnett, Art Poland
(Figure 5 top left). All became good friends and visited France frequently. Recently I
started to work again on these famous EUV waves that have been discovered with the
next satellite instruments in UV onboard SOHO /EIT and SDO/AIA (Delann´ee et al.,
2014; Chandra et al., 2018).

During all these years (1980’s) I was organizing coordinated campaigns observing
simultaneously on the ground with the MSDP either in Meudon or at Pic du Midi
with Pierre and Nicole Mein. With the MSDP we were observing mainly in the Hα

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 10

line jointly with the UVSP instruments in the EUV lines like C IV for Dopplershifts of
the plasma at 104 to 105 degrees. Diﬀerent topics were open to us: the understanding
of the dynamics of the cool plasma in prominences, cool jets or surges, and ﬂares. We
reported our results in many conferences, e.g, Airlie (US) in 1987 (Figure 5 top left),
in Palma de Majorca in 1987 (Figure 7), in Aussois in 1997 (Figure 5 bottom right),
in Hungary for the eclipse in 1999 (Figure 5 top right).

Jean-Marie Malherbe came in the group to start a thesis in the early 1980’s. He was
interested in instrumentation, physics, and computations. He worked with us on the
dynamics of prominence plasma condensations and on the dynamics of ﬂare ribbons. We
had a great chance to meet two bright theoreticians who visited us many times, Mike
Raadu and Terry Forbes. They brought innovative ideas during fruitful discussions. Our
measurements from the MSDP were quantitative and not only descriptive, therefore
they were interested to check their ideas or computations. A very intensive collaboration
with theoreticians started at that time. It was the seed for the birth of the Meudon
solar MHD group in the future. With the observations at Pic du Midi combined with
the C IV data of the UVSP provided by Einar Tandberg-Hanssen and Art Poland we
could measure the dynamics in ﬁne structures of ﬁlaments, up and down motions in the
feet and horizontal ﬂows along the axis of the ﬁlament, rotation along the ﬁlament axis
in case of disturbances, and oscillations in ﬁlaments (Martres et al., 1981; Malherbe,
Schmieder, and Mein, 1981; Malherbe et al., 1982; Mein et al., 1982; Malherbe et al.,
1983; Schmieder et al., 1984; Schmieder et al., 1985; Simon et al., 1986; Malherbe
et al., 1987). Mike Raadu proposed to us some simple models to explain the drainage
of cool matter when the loops passed through the photosphere, the empty basket model
(Raadu et al., 1987a), and also a destabilization model of a ﬁlament showing twisted
motions in a ﬂux rope which lifted up as in the torus instability advanced later on by
Tibor T¨or¨ok (see T¨or¨ok et al., 2011 and references therein). The cause of the ﬁlament
destabilization could be explained by photospheric motions (Raadu et al., 1987b; Raadu
et al., 1988).

With George Simnett and Einar Tandberg-Hanssen we understood that surges
formed of cool plasma observed in Hα, and jets of hot plasma visible in UV and X-
rays, were co-aligned and had similar velocities (Schmieder et al., 1982; Schmieder et al.,
1983; Schmieder et al., 1984; Schmieder et al., 1988a; Schmieder et al., 1988b; Schmieder
et al., 1993; Fontenla et al., 1994; Schmieder et al., 1996c). At the same time I worked
also on surges with American scientists who were visiting us: Leon Golub and Spiro
Antiochos (Schmieder, Golub, and Antiochos, 1994). Both of them became good friends
of the group and we could apply for post doc positions at NRL in Washington and visi-
torships at SAO at Harvard for our students for their training in MHD, e.g, Guillaume
Aulanier, Etienne Pariat, and Sophie Masson.

Detection of transverse oscillations in ﬁlaments in Hα was achieved by Bill Thomp-
son using MSDP observations (Thompson and Schmieder, 1991). The SMM mission
launched in 1980 was lost during a few years before a cosmonaut going out of the
Space Shuttle could recover it by using a Canadian robotic arm. It was an unbelievable
rescue for the spacecraft. Our group (Nicole Mein, Pierre Mein, Guy Simon, Jean-Marie
Malherbe, and I) could work with the data until 1989 with our friends of the UVSP
spectrometer. The Meudon solar tower was closed in the 1990’s and could re-open only
in 2003 when THEMIS, the French-Italian magnetograph, on Tenerife, the Canary
islands (opened in 1997) was fully operating and also after the ﬁlms recording was
replaced by J.M.Malherbe with a CCD camera, more convenient for the observations.
J.M. Malherbe was a very fast thinking student and it is always interesting to work and
discuss with him and Thierry Roudier in Toulouse the horizontal ﬂows below ﬁlaments
(Roudier et al., 2008; Schmieder et al., 2014b; Roudier et al., 2018).

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 11

Our work with Terry Forbes concerned mainly ﬂares. He and Jean-Marie Malherbe
developed an MHD model (using the code SHASTA) to explain reconnection in the
corona and the cooling of the plasma inside the reconnected loops (Forbes and Mal-
herbe, 1986). The observations of the ﬂare ribbons that I had obtained in Meudon
followed exactly their predictions. It was the discovery of the evaporation of the chro-
mosphere with two phases: the impulsive phase and the gentle evaporation phase in
post-ﬂare loops (Schmieder et al., 1988c; Schmieder et al., 1990). I had the chance to
meet again Terry Forbes in New Hampshire and during conferences, e.g, in Romania in
conferences organized by Cristiana Dumitrache (Figure 8 bottom right panel). In the
2000’s we could conﬁrm the predictions of Forbes and Malherbe simulations concerning
the chromospheric evaporation by using NLTE (non local thermodynamic equilibrium)
radiative transfer computations and data of SOHO/CDS with Arek Berlicki and Guilio
DelZanna (Berlicki et al., 2005; del Zanna et al., 2006). In the 1980’s we were pioneers
in this ﬁeld of research.

Other interesting topics involved collaborations with our Greek colleagues. While
working on sunspots the Evershed eﬀect was found to reverse in the chromosphere
compared to the direction observed in the photosphere (Alissandrakis et al., 1988; Dere,
Schmieder, and Alissandrakis, 1990). With Georgia Tsiropoula we analyzed carefully
the MSDP data concerning the chromospheric ﬁne structure to understand if mottles
on the disk were the same as spicules visible at the limb and had fruitful discussions
with Petr Heinzel who was not always in agreement with our results (Tsiropoula,
Alissandrakis, and Schmieder, 1993; Tsiropoula, Alissandrakis, and Schmieder, 1994;
Tsiropoula and Schmieder, 1997; Heinzel, Schmieder, and Mein, 1992).

From 1990 to 1996, I was elected as vice president of the European Solar Physics
Meeting (ESPM) organization. As ESPM vice president I organized two meetings with
president George Simnett in Catania (1993), and in Thessaloniki (1996). In 1992 I was
also elected as president of the Joint Organization of Solar Observations (JOSO) in
Europe until 2002. JOSO had been created to develop collaborations between the solar
observatories in Europe. Therefore I organized each year a meeting, e.g, Trieste in 1994
(Figure 9 top left and bottom right panels), Potsdam in 1999 (Figure 8 top right panel).
Because the attendance increased to more than 150 participants, I wrote proposals to
European Union to be sponsored. I get two successful EU contracts during my JOSO
presidency to organize successively two series of European conferences: three of them
on ”Advances in Solar Physics” in Tenerife (1996), Preveza (1997), and Catania (1998)
published in PASP journals and two of them on ”Solar cycle and Space Weather”
(SOLSPA) in Tenerife (2000) and in Vico Equenze near Napoli (2001) published by
ESA publications.

The main objective of JOSO was to involve the solar physicists of all the European
countries to create a data-base of solar observations, and to deﬁne the characteristics
of a future large European telescope. Now this objective is pursued by the European
Association for Solar Telescopes (EAST) consortium, which has been charged to build
the European Solar Telescope (EST) (4m mirror). Today the plan is to start construc-
tion in 2021 and to achieve the ﬁrst light in 2027. Let us see what will the future of
EST be.

Between 1980 and 1992, I was the public outreach manager of the Observatoire of
Paris. I was in charge of press releases and the organization of visits to the Observatoire
de Paris in Meudon of students and the general public. I organized night shows for
journalists, lectures for teachers on Wednesdays and also open doors for the public
once a year. People appreciated these initiatives and it happened that we had more
than one visit of 30 persons each day. Particularly memorable the open house in May
1985 when 10 000 persons visited the observatory during the weekend (Figure 10). I

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 12

Figure 8. Left, Hokaido in Sapporo Island visit of the Inuits after S-Ramp meeting in 2000
organized by the SCOSTEP to summarize the results of the STEP program, ﬁrst row, Lidia van
Driel, Stefaan Poedts, second row, Ed Cliver, Dave Webb, Brigitte Schmieder, top right Berlin,
during a JOSO meeting in Potsdam in 1999: Lidia van Driel, BS, Pascal D´emoulin, Cristina
Mandrini, bottom right, after the Space Weather meeting in Bucharest in 2008: Stefaan Poedts,
BS, Terry Forbes.

got funding from the Ministry of the Culture for renovating the big dome (over the
Meudon castle) and the refractor built by Jules Janssen.

But after the tornado in Paris in December 1999 the dome lost part of its coverage
and despite some ministry funding, it is still under rehabilitation and no visits are
possible anymore.

2.3. Time of Yohkoh and P. D´emoulin - 1990’s

My work all along my career was guided by the new solar missions launched to resolve
the problem of coronal heating. It is still an up-to-date topic as we heard on TV on
August 12, 2018 when the Parker Solar Probe was launched to approach the Sun, the
main goals being to understand the heating of the corona, and to measure in situ the
solar wind for future journeys of humans to Mars or the Moon.

After SMM, Yohkoh, the Japanese-American mission was launched in 1991 with
several instruments. I was mainly involved with the Soft X-ray Telescope (SXT). During
that time period TRACE (1998) was dedicated to observe the Sun in UV. Both SXT
and TRACE observed partial ﬁelds-of-view and we needed to select the targets. I
was guest investigator for both missions and organized multi-wavelength campaigns;
Yohkoh was open to foreigners only after 1993. I went to the Institute of Space and
Astronomical Science in Fuchinobe several times learning how to process the data. It
was the beginning of the solar software (SSW).

I met many scientists again: Bob Bentley (Figure 9 bottom right), Jim Lemen, Lidia
van Driel (Figure 8 left) and by chance a few Japanese in Mitaka: Tadashi Hirayama,

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 13

Figure 9. JOSO group visiting the radio telescope in Trieste in October 1994: from left
to right we can recognize some scientists: Bojan Vrˇsnak, Mauro Messerotti, Paolo Zlobec
and behind Axel Hofmann, Peter Brandt, Edith Muller -former president of JOSO-, behind,
Richard Muller, Thierry Roudier and BS (president of JOSO), Janusz Sylwester, Pierre Mein,
Lucas Vlahos , top right: BS and Nicole Mein working in Meudon observatory, bottom right,
dinner during a JOSO meeting in Trieste in 1994: Costas Alissandrakis, BS, Paul Brekke,
Greek scientist, Bob Bentley, -, Philippa Browning, David Alexander, Bernard Fleck, behind
Meir Semel and Peter Brandt, bottom left: Lidia van Driel, George Simnett, BS during the
Preveza Euroconference in 1997 on Advances in solar Physics visiting Dodone.

Eijero Hiei (Figure 6 bottom left), Takashi Sakurai, Hiroki Kurokawa and Kazunari
Shibata (Figure 11) (see the paper on surges by Schmieder et al., 1995b) and those on
X-ray bright points (van Driel-Gesztelyi et al., Mandrini et al., 1996, 1996). The main
topic that we worked on was ﬂare-loop formation. For the coordinated campaign with
Yohkoh we (myself, J.M. Malherbe, and P. Mein) were observing with the MSDP at the
”spectro tourelle” at the Pic du Midi in the 1990’s. We obtained very ﬁne observations
of ﬂare loops with the MSDP in June 26, 1992 to compare with the Yohkoh loops. These
observations led to more than six papers with Jun Elin Wiik, Jean Marie Malherbe,
Lidia van Driel, and Petr Heinzel (Schmieder et al., 1995a; Schmieder et al., 1996b; Wiik
et al., 1996; Wiik et al., 1997; Malherbe et al., 1997; van Driel-Gesztelyi et al., 1997). I
had already started with Petr Heinzel to work on plasma conditions in post ﬂare loops
(Heinzel, Schmieder, and Mein, 1992). We continued and computed the theoretical
times to cool the X-ray loops to Hα temperature by radiative cooling and conduction
(Schmieder et al., 1995a) and could conﬁrm what the model of Terry Forbes predicted,
that the hot loops visible after reconnection in X-rays with Yohkoh were cooled down
to 104 K after a certain time and observed in Hα. Other papers appeared later on post
ﬂare loops visible after the impulsive phase of ﬂares (Gu et al., 1997; Schmieder, Fang,
and Harra-Murnion, 1998).

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 14

Figure 10. Left, poster for the open house on 11 and 12 May 1985 in Meudon (drawn by
Andr´e Mangeney), right, poster for the IAU S300 symposium in Paris dedicated to Einar
Tandberg-Hanssen (drawn by Sylvain Cnude).

Figure 11. St. Andrews 2007, ﬁrst Flux Emergence Workshop, in front of the house of Eric
Priest, from left to right, ﬁrst row: Isobe Hiroaki, Fernando Moreno Insertis, BS, Shibata
Kazanari, Eric Priest, Gael the wife of Dave Rust, Clare the wife of Eric, second row: David
Hughes, Dave Rust, Laur`ene Jouve, Evy Kersale, Clare Parnel, Etienne Pariat, Alan Hood,
Dana Longcope, Sacha Brun, Klaus Galsgaard.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 15

Design S. Cnudde @          (LESIA 2012) - sun picture: © AIA/Solar Dynamics Observatory, NASAIAUS300Nature of prominences and their role in Space WeatherSymposium dedicated to Einar Tandberg-Hanssen10-14 June 2013, Paris (France)iaus300.sciencesconf.orgSOC:B. Schmieder, S.T. Wu, J. Chae, S. Dasso, L. van Driel-Gesztelyi, H. Gilbert, N. Gopalswamy, P. Heinzel, M. Jardine, D. MacKay,  V. Martínez Pillet, N. Srivastava, D. F. Webb, Y. YanInstitut national des sciences de l'UniversINSUKLSA/CASHowever during the loss of SMM and before the launch of SOHO (1996), the space
data were not easy to access and it was the period when Jean Heyvaerts, who was the
responsible professor assigning the PhD students in diﬀerent laboratories proposed to
me to be an advisor of PhD students. Heyvaerts appreciated the way that I was training
students on solar observations with an open view. In the ﬁrst year, I got a very bright
Chinese student Z.S. She (She, Malherbe, and Raadu, 1986) but he wanted to work
only on turbulence so after one year he moved to Nice with Uriel Frish. The next year
I got Pascal D´emoulin and Heyvaerts told me that I should be able to teach him to
explain all the ”zoo of solar physics: ﬂares, sunspots, plages, surges and eruptions”. It
is with Pascal that our solar MHD group was born ﬁnally. For his PhD I had to ﬁnd
a theoretical group which could give to him a proper theoretical background. I had
good relationship with theoreticians in Florence, e.g., Georgio Einaudi, Franca and
Claudio Chuideri. Pascal was very enthusiastic to interact with them. However after
one year no paper has emerged. My famous question ”Where is the paper” was asked.
At that point he had only one but very impressive paper with me and Mike Raadu
on the role of parallel and perpendicular conduction in the stability of ﬁlament ﬁne
structures (D´emoulin et al., 1987). Because I knew that he had to publish if he wanted
a permanent position, I asked Eric Priest if Pascal could visit him in St. Andrews. Eric
Priest reported in his memoirs: ”It was a real pleasure to work with him, since he is so
bright and couples a superb physical understanding with great technical skills” (Priest,
2014). And this is how and why a solar MHD group developed in Meudon. Pascal and
myself were invited to many meetings, e.g., in Potsdam for the JOSO meeting in 1999
(Figure 8 top right panel) and in Hungary for the 2009 eclipse (Figures 5 top right
panel).

As a PhD student, P. D´emoulin began to work with the general topic of prominence
equilibria, the formation of dips and their support and loss of equilibrium or instability
in a force-free ﬁeld (D´emoulin and Priest, 1988; D´emoulin, Malherbe, and Priest, 1989;
D´emoulin and Raadu, 1992; D´emoulin and Priest, 1993). These ideas were further
developed by Guillaume Aulanier in his thesis (Aulanier and D´emoulin, 1998; Aulanier
et al., 1998a; Aulanier et al., 1999; Aulanier and Schmieder, 2002). And so later on
Pascal D´emoulin kept contributing intensively to the theoretical training of my other
PhD students. By that time (1990’s) P. D´emoulin was also interested in the topology of
the ﬂaring active regions and pioneered research on reconnection without null points,
along the quasi-separatrix layers (QSL) (D´emoulin et al., 1996; D´emoulin et al., 1997).
This theory was applied to many observations, by the successive scientists of our group,
e.g., Guillaume Aulanier, Etienne Pariat, Kevin Dalmasse, and also in Argentina, China
and India (Deng et al., 1999; Mandrini et al., 1996; Schmieder et al., 1997; Moore et al.,
1997; Mandrini et al., 1997; Berlicki et al., 2004; Mandrini et al., 2006; Schmieder et al.,
2007b). This work continues to be developed by the Argentinian group, still with linear
force-free ﬁeld extrapolations. By comparing the similarity of the locations of QSLs for
a few case-studies using linear and non-linear force-free ﬁeld approach, the robustness
of the QSLs, regions of intense electric currents before ﬂares has been demonstrated
(Mandrini et al., 2014; Chandra et al., 2011; Dalmasse et al., 2015; Joshi et al., 2019).
In the 2000’s P. D´emoulin applied the theory of the conservation of magnetic helicity
to active regions and showed that the excess of magnetic helicity in twisted ﬂux ropes
can be expelled by coronal mass ejections (CME). This created a stream of various
papers in our group (see the Pariat papers in his thesis, Chandra et al., 2009, Zhao
et al., 2014) and more recently papers by Kevin Dalmasse (Dalmasse et al., 2018). It
is still a hot topic in the group with our new PhD student Luis Linan..

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 16

Figure 12. Left, launch of the Flare Genesis Experiment hung below a balloon in MacMurdo
(Antarctica ) in 2000, right: Brigitte Schmieder and Dave Rust adjusting the coelostat in the
barn before the launch.

2.4. Flux emergence - Flare Genesis Experiment- E. Pariat - 2000’s

The Flare Genesis Experiment (FGE) was a balloon-borne telescope that made a
journey of 17 days around the South Pole at 36 km altitude in the sky (Figure 12).
This experiment was a precursor of the recent SUNRISE instrument. FGE was a
Fabry Perrot instrument with which we could observe the chromosphere in the Hα
line and a magnetograph which registered the Stokes parameters. Dave Rust was the
PI of the diﬀerent ﬂights of this experiment. In 1998 the balloon came down in the
French territory ”Terre Ad´elie” in Antarctica just a few days before the closing of
the base. Dave Rust did not have the oﬃcial contacts between NASA and the CNES
needed for the telescope to be be retrieved. Finally he phoned me on a Sunday asking
me if I could help. I called Roger Gendrin in Brest and everything went smoothly.
The observations were recovered and send back to MacMurdo by using a small French
airplane. In 2000 Dave proposed to me to participate in the second ﬂight of FGE in
case similar problems with the French territory arose. I spent a month at MacMurdo
base helping to adjust the instruments, and, after the launch, to deﬁne the targets for
FGE, jointly with observations obtained with TRACE and Yohkoh. Dave Rust was a
fantastic manager and organized our stay (only six persons at the base) very smoothly.
I thank him very much to give me the opportunity to go Antarctica.

We were lucky to observe newly emerging magnetic ﬂux during this ﬂight. With my
new PhD student Etienne Pariat, we could, for the ﬁrst time, derive the undulatory
behavior of the ﬂux tubes as they emerged through the photosphere, by analyzing the
magnetic vectors and constructing the magnetic ﬁeld in the corona using linear force-
free extrapolation. We also located the heating points where magnetic reconnection

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 17

Figure 13. Flare Genesis Experiment results: (a) magnetic ﬁeld in the photosphere, (b)
electric currents in the photosphere, (c) Ellerman bombs in Hα and joint observations obtained
with (d) TRACE intensity of the transition region (e) Yohoh/SXT in the corona, (f) and SXT
observations of very hot loops in the corona (Pariat et al 2004,Schmieder et al 2004).

occurs and the cooling and heating loops at diﬀerent temperatures over the emerging
ﬂux region (Georgoulis et al., 2002; Pariat et al., 2004; Schmieder et al., 2004a) (Figure
13). Now with SDO/AIA and HMI it is possible to see all the UV bursts over the
full disk produced by ﬂux emergence. My more recent PhD students, e.g., Zhao Jie
and Michalina Grubecka continued this work as a part of their theses to determine
where the reconnection really occurs, in the photosphere or higher up, based on non-
linear force-free extrapolation as well as with the NLTE modelling of Ellerman bombs
(EBs) provided by Arek Berlicki and Petr Heinzel (Pariat et al., 2007; Zhao et al.,
2017; Grubecka et al., 2016).
We summarized the main results of these works in a review on emerging ﬂux (Schmieder,
Archontis, and Pariat, 2014) and a review on UV bursts (Young et al., 2018). The ﬁrst
workshop on ﬂux emergence (FEW) has been organized in St. Andrews to celebrate
the success of Flare Genesis Experiment around Dave Rust in 2007 (Figure 11) and
since that time a FEW is organized every two or 3 years. In 2019 it held in Japan
without Dave who passed away during the winter of 2019.

2.5. Prominence studies - Jun Elin Wiik - Petr Heinzel - from 1990 to now

In the early 1990’s Einar Tandberg-Hanssen asked me to be the advisor for the thesis of
Jun Elin Wiik, a Norwegian student of Eberhart Jensen in Oslo. He recommended that
we worked on the fascinating structures called prominences which have a long history
since their discovery by Secchi (1875-1877 Le Soleil) and the successive classiﬁcations
existing on material protruding over the limb (Tandberg-Hanssen, 1995). Jun Elin
started to work on the characteristics of prominence plasma by deriving the electron

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 18

density (Wiik, Heinzel, and Schmieder, 1992). Then she studied the dynamics in ﬁla-
ments using observations made with the MSDP at the ”spectro tourelle” at Pic du Midi.
We discovered ﬂows in both directions along ﬁlament threads, that would be called
”counter streaming” ﬂows seven years later (Schmieder, Raadu, and Wiik, 1991). Using
the UV data of the rocket-launched High Resolution Telescope Spectrometer (HRTS),
she computed the diﬀerential emission measure in prominences and uncovered their
multiple sub-resolution thread morphology (15 to 30 threads per pixel) (Wiik, Dere,
and Schmieder, 1993). This former result has been, more than ten years later, the basis
of the development of multi-thread models (Gun´ar et al., 2007).

After her thesis defense in 1993 Jun Elin Wiik got a post-doc in Norway and I
obtained a part time professor fellowship in Oslo in 1996. It was the time when SOHO
was just launched. SOHO is a fantastic mission; its coronagraph LASCO is still working
in 2018. However I was more interested in the spectroscopy data obtained with SUMER.
I spent a lot of time during my stays in Norway processing the data by using the soft-
ware developed by the Norwegian group, e.g., Mats Carlson, Oddbjorn Engvold, and
Olav Kjeldseth-Moe. The SUMER data were obtained during coordinated campaigns
focused on ﬁlaments and prominences with the Swedish solar telescope (SST) at La
Palma, the MSDP at Pic du Midi, and the space instrument TRACE.

At the same time we invited Petr Heinzel to Meudon. After working on prominences
and post-ﬂare loops with Jun Elin Wiik (see Section 2.3), he oriented his research
towards developing his NLTE radiative-transfer codes to interpret the SUMER spectra.
With SUMER we could observe all the hydrogen Lyman series lines and derive the
plasma conditions in ﬁlaments, prominences and chromospheric ﬁbrils. Lyman lines
obtained with SUMER were a good diagnostics for determining the characteristics of
the plasma (Wiik et al., 1997; Wiik et al., 1999; Schmieder et al., 1999). Many inter-
esting results were obtained on eruptive prominence, multi-threads and ﬁne threads in
prominences (Schmieder et al., 2004c). In particular we showed that ﬁlament absorption
ﬁne structures observed in Hα with SST corresponded exactly to the darker ﬁne threads
observed at 195 ˚A by TRACE in the ﬁlament channel.

Petr Heinzel developed his MALI codes to adapt them to many diﬀerent cases and
structures. It was and it still is a real pleasure to discuss with him. He is a hard worker
and always ﬁnds a solution. I have always fun to be invited for a barbecue in his place
during my visit sin Ondˇrejov (Figure 14 bottom right panel). We published thirty pa-
pers on prominences from 1998 up to now. For ten of them he is the ﬁrst author, mainly
concerning theoretical aspects, for ten other papers on observations I am the ﬁrst
author. The observations are limiting conditions of theoretical models for prominence
formation and mass loading for coronal mass ejections during ﬁlament eruptions. Let us
quote some of them: (Schmieder et al., 1999; Heinzel et al., 2000; Heinzel, Schmieder,
and Tziotziou, 2001; Schmieder, Tziotziou, and Heinzel, 2003; Heinzel, Anzer, and
Schmieder, 2003; Schmieder et al., 2004b; Schmieder et al., 2007b; Heinzel et al., 2008).
The other ten papers from the thirty papers were led by scientists of his group in
Ondˇrejov, e.g., Pavel Schwartz, Arek Berlicki, Stano Gun`ar, Jaro Dudik (Schwartz
et al., 2004; Schwartz et al., 2006; Gun´ar et al., 2010; Berlicki et al., 2011; Parenti
et al., 2012; Gun´ar et al., 2018). In particular S. Gun`ar adapted the MALI 2D-code of
radiative transfer to multi-thread structures which could be applied to the SUMER and
MSDP observations (Gun´ar et al., 2007; Gun´ar et al., 2008; Gun´ar et al., 2012). The
asymmetry in the Lyman line proﬁles could be explained by multi-structures having
diﬀerent velocities along the line of sight.

With Hinode, a Japanese solar mission, high resolution observations were obtained
in the optical range with the SOT. They allowed us to see ﬁne structures of prominences
and their high dynamic nature in Ca II and Hα lines. Many intriguing structures were

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 19

Figure 14. Top left, THEMIS in Tenerife in 2008, top right: visit of the observatory in T´enerife
during the EU meeting in 1996: Guillaume Aulanier, Guillaume Molodij, Arturo Lopez Ariste,
bottom left, ISSI meeting in Bern on Paradoxes in solar physics: atypical dynamic promi-
nences, ﬁrst row: Stano Gun´ar, Jack Jenkins, Manuel Luna, Terry Kucera, Arturo Lopez Ariste,
Nicola Labrosse (PI), second row: Petr Heinzel, Maciej Zapi´or, Sonja Jejˇciˇc, T.Rees-Crockford,
Andrew Rodger, Duncan Mackay, BS, bottom right: Dinner in the garden of Petr Heinzel, from
left to right BS, Petr Heinzel, Pavol Schwartz, the wife of P.Heinzel, Arek Berlicki in 2009.

discovered, e.g., rising bubbles, plumes, vertical threads. I started to discuss with my
MHD group how we could reconcile the MHD model of horizontal ﬁeld lines with dips
developed in the Aulanier’s thesis (Aulanier et al., 1998b) with such observations. We
invited Jaro Dudik to model these structures and we concluded that the quasi-vertical
threads were just pile-up of dips in horizontal magnetic ﬁeld lines and the bubble
was a magnetized volume surrounded by a separatrix and a null point (Dud´ık et al.,
2008; Dud´ık et al., 2012). We demonstrated that the bubbles were not hotter than the
surrounding corona (Gun´ar et al., 2014). Reconnection at the null point could initiate
the dynamics of the plasma and the direction change of the dips to form a plume.

With the new UV spectrograph, Interface Region Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS),
launched by NASA in 2013, we continued to organize multi-wavelength observations
during coordinated campaign with THEMIS in Tenerife and the MSDP at the Meudon
solar tower in the years 2013 - 2016 (Figure 16). I was observing with Arturo Lopez
Ariste, then resident astronomer at THEMIS, our French magnetograph in Canary
Islands (Figure 14 top panels). It was a great experience for all of our team as they
joined us successively (Nicolas Labrosse, Peter Levens (PhD student of Nicolas), Stano
Gun´ar). We observed more than 138 prominences and we conﬁrmed the old results
of V´eronique Bommier, Sylvie Sahal, and Jean Louis Leroy that the magnetic ﬁeld in
prominences is mainly horizontal (Lopez Ariste, 2014).

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 20

Figure 15. IAU S300 Symposium on the Nature of prominences and their role in Space
Weather in Paris in June 2013 in memoriam of Einar Tandberg-Hanssen: the participants in
”Ecole de Chimie” in Paris.

The high spatial resolution of IRIS allowed us to measure Dopplershifts. Even in
quiescent prominences ﬂows could reach 60 to 70 km s−1 (Schmieder et al., 2013;
Schmieder et al., 2014a). The thesis of Peter Levens in Glasgow was based on these
campaigns of observation and focused on the existence of ”solar tornadoes” (Levens
et al., 2016a; Levens et al., 2016b; Levens et al., 2017).

Many ﬁlaments approaching the limb looked like tornadoes when observed in SDO/AIA

movies. They appeared to rotate around their axes like tornadoes on Earth. Therefore
they were named tornadoes. However, we found their rotation to be very suspicious
and that these tornadoes would be better interpreted as the legs of prominences ob-
served from a certain perspective as they cross the limb as demonstrated by a 3D
reconstruction of the magnetic ﬁeld lines for a helical prominence (Schmieder et al.,
2017b; Schmieder et al., 2017a). This topic led to press releases at the Observatoire de
Paris (1), at IRAP, and at the University of Glasgow in April 2018. In these papers Ar-
turo Lopez Ariste processed the data of THEMIS and concluded that the magnetic ﬁeld
was not vertical as it looks to be in tornadoes. We continued our collaboration with Petr
Heinzel working on the Mg II line proﬁles observed with IRIS (Heinzel et al., 2015).
We obtained new data in 2017 with the MSDP at the solar tower jointly with
IRIS spectra. These lines give strong constraints on radiative-transfer models in
1D and 2D (Ruan et al., 2018).

1https://www.obspm.fr/les-tornades-solaires-ne-sont.html?lang=fr

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 21

Figure 16. Prominence observed during a campaign of observations with IRIS, top left with
SDO/AIA 193 ˚A, top right AIA 304 ˚A, bottom left in Hα with the Meudon solar tower,
bottom right the Doppler shift in the prominence and in the tornado (Schmieder et al 2014a,
Schmieder et al 2017a).

J.M. Malherbe, S.T. Wu, and myself, organized in Paris an IAU symposium
on ’The nature of prominences and their role in space weather”, IAU S300, in
June 2013, dedicated to Einar Tanberg-Hanssen who died in 2011 (Figure 10
and 15). Together we published a book (Schmieder, Malherbe, and Wu, 2014).
After intensive Team Meetings in Bern, at ISSI, we wrote two important reviews
on prominences (Labrosse et al., 2010; Mackay et al., 2010). More recently we
got a new ISSI Team project on tornadoes (Figure 14 bottom left panel). We
are currently writing a review on tornadoes which should be published soon
(Labrosse et al 2019, in preparation).

2.6. Flares and CMEs - THEMIS - 2000 - 2020

Since SMM we observed ﬂares during all our multi-wavelength campaigns with
the MSDP, either at the Meudon solar tower (1980’s), or at Pic du Midi (1990’s),
and ﬁnally with THEMIS after 2000 (Figure 14 top left). I spent nearly two weeks
per year on these campaigns with Pierre and Nicole Mein. Always a student ac-
companied us, e.g., Jean-Marie Malherbe, Pascal D´emoulin, Guillaume Aulanier,
Yang Guo, Petr Levens. It was very exiting to observe at THEMIS on the top
of the mountain (Figure 14 top panels). We were accommodated at the summit
and beneﬁted from beautiful sunsets. THEMIS, designed by Jean Rayrole with
his two post-focal instruments, the MTR and the MSDP, was built well after the
ﬁrst designs were made and ﬁnally their promotors died or retired before it was

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 22

Figure 17. Left, Eruptive sigmoidal loop in the corona observed by SDO/AIA at 94 ˚A,
middle: reconstruction of the magnetic loop by a non-linear force free extrapolation, right:
electric current measured in the photosphere using SDO/HMI data (Zhao et al 2016).

fully operational. Therefore the young generation never completely invested its
eﬀort in the instrument and many of them left the ﬁeld. The present director of
THEMIS, Bernard Gelly, is still convinced of the necessity of THEMIS which is
presently the only magnetograph working on the ground, i.e. for prominences.
Gelly is working on the installation of adaptive optics for THEMIS which reopens
in 2019. We hope that THEMIS will soon get a second life.

Coming back to the end of the 1990’s, I had the pleasure to have Guillaume
Aulanier as a PhD student. For his thesis (1998) G. Aulanier developed a linear
force-free extrapolation code for ﬁlament support. Using his code we showed
that the diﬀerential shear above the inversion line in an active region induced
the formation of a ﬁlament low down and that the magnetic ﬁeld progressively
becomes more potential with increasing altitude in the corona (Schmieder et al.,
1996a). By the way the importance of 3D magnetic conﬁgurations to support
prominences and to understand their destabilization were fully demonstrated
(Schmieder et al., 1999; Kucera et al., 1999; Aulanier and Schmieder, 2002; Dud´ık
et al., 2008; Dud´ık et al., 2012).

With the observations obtained with Yohkoh and the MSDP at Pic du Midi, G.
Aulanier and I worked on ﬂare ribbons and ﬂare loops to understand how recon-
nection in ﬂares can occur (Schmieder et al., 1997). Later joint THEMIS/MSDP
observations with SDO allowed us to investigate the physical conditions of the
ﬂaring active regions including their magnetic topology (Aulanier, Janvier, and
Schmieder, 2012; Dalmasse et al., 2015; Joshi et al., 2016; Joshi et al., 2019; Zhao
et al., 2016) (Figure 17).

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 23

In ﬂares the role of bald patch (Schmieder et al., 1997; Aulanier et al., 1998c;
L´opez Ariste et al., 2006), null point (Li et al., 2006; Schmieder et al., 2007a),
magnetic twist in ﬂux rope (van Driel-Gesztelyi et al., 2000; Canou et al., 2009;
T¨or¨ok et al., 2009; Guo et al., 2010; Schmieder et al., 2013), emerging ﬂux (Tang
et al., 2000; Pariat et al., 2004; Schmieder et al., 2006; Chandra et al., 2009),
slipping reconnection (Dud´ık et al., 2016), ﬂux rope reconnection (T¨or¨ok et al.,
2011) was intensively analysed in the group.

After working on so many case-studies, G. Aulanier wrote his own MHD
simulation code (the Observationally driven High-order scheme Magnetohydro-
dynamic code - OHM), which allowed him to develop a 3D extension of the ﬂare
standard model (Aulanier, D´emoulin, and Grappin, 2005; Aulanier et al., 2010).
He found in his 3D models innovative solutions to explain diﬀerent signatures
of the ﬂares, e.g., ﬂare ribbons, post ﬂare loops, vortex (Aulanier, Janvier,
and Schmieder, 2012; Aulanier et al., 2013; Janvier et al., 2014; Zhao et al.,
2016; Zuccarello et al., 2017; Dud´ık et al., 2017) and the causes of ﬂares-CMEs
(Schmieder and Aulanier, 2012). We approached the topic of electric currents,
observations and theory by using OHM to see if there is a net current before
ﬂares (Schmieder and Aulanier, 2018).

The intuitive sense in physics and fast thinking of G. Aulanier are very impor-
tant in the group. He is still interested in all observations made on the ground
with THEMIS, as well as in space (from Yohkoh to SDO). His high level of
knowledge leads him to ﬁnd unexpected solutions to explain the causes of ﬂares,
bright points and eruptions. Therefore he is involved in many collaborations.

Up to now P. D’emoulin, G. Aulanier and me make a very good team to lead
PhD students and post docs in Meudon. I can count nearly 50 papers where we
are associated during 20 years. Diﬀerent observational and theoretical aspects
of ﬁlaments and ﬂares have been treated. I can quote the PhD students that
we supervised, e.g., Arek Berlicki, Etienne Pariat, Yang Guo, Kelvin Dalmasse
on the magnetic topology of ﬂaring active regions. We had and still have today
intensive and very productive collaborations with foreign countries, e.g., China
(Cheng Fang C., Y. Tang, Li Hui,Yang Guo, Guiping Ruan), India (Gosain
Sanjay, Chandra Ramesh, Navin), Argentina (Cristina Mandrini), UK (Lidia van
Driel), and the Czech Republic (Petr Heinzel, Jaro Dudik, Stano Gunar, Maciej
Zapior) and more recently with individual post docs, e.g., Stuart Gilchrist, Jie
Zhao, Miho Janvier and Francesco Zuccarello.

Our ideas on physical mechanisms for ﬂares, eruptions, and CMEs are sum-
marized in three reviews (Schmieder, D´emoulin, and Aulanier, 2013; Janvier,
Aulanier, and D´emoulin, 2015; Schmieder, Aulanier, and Vrˇsnak, 2015).

3. Space Weather

Beyond the corona in the heliosphere the solar wind is blowing with a velocity
of more than 400 km s−1 where coronal mass ejections and accelerated particles
are traveling toward the Earth. The new problem which arises at the beginning
of the 21st century is the analysis of their eﬀects on Earth. We have identiﬁed

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 24

aurora borealis, disruptions to the electric power grid, disturbances in telecom-
munications. We should be able to predict them in case of extreme events like
those observed on other stars.

My ﬁrst major steps towards Space Weather research were to organize as
JOSO president the two SOLSPA conferences in 2000 and 2001 (see Section
2.2) and to be vice president of SCOSTEP from 2007 to 2011. I became vice
president of SCOSTEP after serving as IAU representative at the SCOSTEP
bureau during ten years (1996-2006). I participated in the organization of several
General Assemblies, e.g., Longmont, Berlin, Melbourne and in meetings, like in
Hokaido during the S-Ramp meeting for the end of the STEP program where
I met Ed Cliver and Dave Webb, specialists of extreme events (Figure 8 left
panel).

In 2004 the SCOSTEP bureau asked me to form a group with Bob Vincent
to deﬁne the future program of SCOSTEP and we proposed the Climate and
Space Weather of the Sun Earth System (CAWSES) program which was running
for eight years (from 2008 to 2016). I discovered that in France we were really
pioneers to have such program on the national level , i.e. the PNST (”Pro-
gramme National Soleil Terre”). I get an award for my services as SCOSTEP
vice president in June 2015.

Working on the organization of the science I was also interested to see by
myself the causes of magnetospheric disturbances produced by interplanetary
coronal mass ejections (ICMEs). I worked in two groups: a French group gath-
ering scientists of diﬀerent communities and in Bern (ISSI Teams) a group
with Belgian scientists, e.g., Luciano Rodriguez, Stefaan Poedts, Argentinian
scientists, e.g., Cristina Mandrini, Sergio Dasso, Hebe Cremades and with the
Spanish group of Consuelo Cid. This work was very interesting. It showed to me
how diﬃcult is to ﬁnd the causes of magnetospheric disturbances. With diﬀerent
techniques there is still an uncertainty of more than ten hours to be able to
predict the arrival of ICMEs to the Earth (Dasso et al., 2009; Rodriguez et al.,
2009; Cid et al., 2012; Cremades et al., 2015; Bocchialini et al., 2018).

Extreme solar events causing strong disturbances on the Earth became a hot
topic because the satellite Kepler registered extreme events on stars similar to the
Sun as discovered by the Shibata group (Shibata et al., 2013). Could that happen
with the Sun? Guillaume Aulanier used his OHM simulation and the historical
frames of the Sun since 1909 kept in the Meudon archives to demonstrate that it
could not happen with the present Sun (Aulanier et al., 2013; Schmieder, 2018).

4. Conclusion

Extensive progress on the understanding of our Sun has been made during the
last 50 years. I realized that our group has been pioneers of many new ideas in
diﬀerent domains. Let us quote some of them, the heating of the corona not by
the acoustic waves existing in the photosphere, the evaporation in solar ﬂares
explaining bright ﬂare ribbons, the dynamics of prominences (counter streaming,
multi-threads, tornadoes), the ﬁlament eruption mass loading of coronal mass
ejections, Ellerman bombs and the sea serpentine ﬂux tube as it is crossing

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 25

Figure 18. top left, Award to Brigitte Schmieder (BS) (Oﬃcier de la L´egion d’Honneur)
on June 13 2012 at the Observatoire de Paris given by Jean Claude Pecker. Our solar team:
Pascal D´emoulin, Guillaume Aulanier, Miho Janvier, BS, Leon Golub, Etienne Pariat, Kevin
Dalmasse, Pierre Mein, top right: BS picture projected on the facade of the Pantheon (1000
best researchers in France), bottom left: ESPM meeting in Sorrento 2009, champagne for
the CNRS position of Etienne Pariat at the Observatory of Paris, BS, Daniel Muller, Stefaan
Poedts, bottom right: champagne again in Meudon with my two former PhD students: Etienne
Pariat and Guillaume Aulanier for his HDR thesis.

the solar surface. Our pioneer ideas are often rediscovered ten years later by
other groups when the topic becomes fashionable. My list of publications in
peer reviews reaches 280 papers today.

This has been possible because of my concept of research including observa-
tions and theory. I created a solar MHD group in Meudon with my previous
PhD students. Now we are training many post docs or students from here and
abroad. I am personally invited to many countries to give lectures and advice
for students. My life was always turned to others: what can I bring to him/her,
what can I learn from him or her. It was a continuous exchange and it is why I
am traveling to so many countries. During all these years many instruments were
developed, in space (SMM, Yohkoh, SOHO, TRACE, Hinode, RHESSI, SDO,
IRIS) and on the ground, the French and Italians built a telescope in Tenerife,
called THEMIS with a multi-line magnetograph (MTR) and the Multi-Channel
Substrative Double Pass (MSDP) spectrograph. Every one of these instruments
brought to us new discoveries. THEMIS (1996-2016) was a very successful in-
strument giving speciﬁc results that no other instruments can provide, e.g.,
measuring the magnetic ﬁeld in prominences. Now the instrument is upgraded
with new adaptive optics, let us hope a new life for it.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 26

Figure 19. In front of the solar tower of Meudon, the solar group in September 2016: Gehardo
Valori, Guillaume Aulanier, Rositsa Miteva, BS, Pascal D´emoulin, Kevin Dalmasse, Monique
Pick, Marc Linton, Hamish Reid, Etienne Pariat, top right, top of the solar tower with the
coelostat in 2015: Eoin Carley, Peter Levens, BS, Francesco Zuccarrello, Stuart Gilchrist,
bottom left, in Meudon 2015: Sophie Musset, Monique Pick, F.Zuccarello, BS, G.Aulanier, E.
Carley, Stuart Gilchrist, Carolina Malas-Matamoros, Etienne Pariat, Sophie Masson, bottom
right, 2018 Meudon cafeteria, from left to right, Stano Gunar, Miho Janvier, Krysztof Bar-
czynski, F.Zuccarello, Jaro Dudik, N.Vilmer, G.Aulanier, S. Masson, E.Pariat, -, Luis Linan,
Guiping Ruan, BS.

For the future, in the horizon of the 2020’s, we saw already the launch of the
Parker Solar Probe to the Sun, we will have soon the departure of Solar Orbiter
going also towards the Sun, the ﬁrst light in the US DKIST solar telescope, and
perhaps the construction of EST, the European Solar Telescope, on the ground.
I hope that they will bring also important discoveries on the solar wind, its
origin and the processes of acceleration of particles. Our solar group should get
involved in these instruments.

Nowadays international collaborations are even more important than before
because astrophysics is such a complex topic, mixing many diﬀerent physical
processes. The new system of post-docs leaving the group after two or three
years increases our potential of research but is not as eﬃcient as collaborations
with permanent researchers in other countries who can continue to collaborate.
My career was fantastic and is still very lively. I met a lot of friends and worked
in wonderful conditions. I was selected in 2010 among 1000 French scientists to
be honored by having projected my photo on the Pantheon during the Science
Days in Paris (Figure 18 top right panel).

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 27

I got the awards of ”Chevalier and Oﬃcier des Palmes acad´emiques” in 2010
and the awards of ”Chevalier and Oﬃcier de la L´egion d’Honneur” in 2012 for
my involvement in education and research (Figure 18 top left panel).

I have educated many students (master and PhD) and post-docs in solar
physics. We celebrated successes with champagne each time (Figure 18 bottom
panels). I apologize that I could not quote all of them. I want to thank all
my colleagues from the past and those of today. The ambience is still very
friendly and I try to communicate my enthusiasm of the research to my younger
colleagues from all over the world (Figure 19). During my thesis research, I have
to deﬁne the problems to resolve. It was a white page on my desk every day
and I have to think during all the day what to compute and write. Now I have
so many questions in solar physics to answer that I have not enough time and
people around me to achieve the task.

I have many other scientiﬁc activities as referee of many scientiﬁc papers and
many proposals (EU, Australian, Belgium FWO). I am member of the SAF
committee (Soci´et´e Astronomique de France) and animated public events such
as eclipses, and the passage of Mercury in front of the Sun. I also like dancing,
music, listening operas, nature, I like to go to seashore when it is summer time,
play the piano, grow ﬂowers and enjoy their beauty.

The salary of astronomer is not so high and it was not easy to travel with kids
at home but I thank my family for accepting my life as it was. I have fantastic
grandchildren that many of my colleagues know because they accompany me in
meetings in diﬀerent countries (Camille, Adrien, Gr´egoire, Gautier, Capucine,
Baptiste). They are interested in watching the solar eclipses, observing Jupiter
and Saturn with a large telescope. The two youngest grandchildren (Cl´ementine
and Margot) hope that it will be soon their turn.

References

Alissandrakis, C.E., Dialetis, D., Mein, P., Schmieder, B., Simon, G.: 1988, The Evershed
ﬂow in the solar photosphere, chromosphere and chromosphere-corona transition region.
Astron. Astrophys. 201, 339 – 349.

Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P.: 1998, 3-D magnetic conﬁgurations supporting prominences. I. The

natural presence of lateral feet. Astron. Astrophys. 329, 1125 – 1137.

Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B.: 2002, The magnetic nature of wide EUV ﬁlament channels
and their role in the mass loading of CMEs. Astron. Astrophys. 386, 1106 – 1122.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20020179.

Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P., Grappin, R.: 2005, Equilibrium and observational properties
of line-tied twisted ﬂux tubes. Astron. Astrophys. 430, 1067 – 1087. doi:10.1051/0004-
6361:20041519.

Aulanier, G., Janvier, M., Schmieder, B.: 2012, The standard ﬂare model in three dimensions.
I. Strong-to-weak shear transition in post-ﬂare loops. Astron. Astrophys. 543, A110.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201219311.

Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Mein, P., Deforest, C.: 1998a, 3-D magnetic
conﬁgurations supporting prominences. II. The lateral feet as a perturbation of a twisted
ﬂux-tube. Astron. Astrophys. 335, 309 – 322.

Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P., Schmieder, B., Fang, C., Tang, Y.H.: 1998b, Magnetohydrostatic
Model of a Bald-Patch Flare. Solar Phys. 183, 369 – 388. doi:10.1023/A:1005003426798.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 28

Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P., Schmieder, B., Fang, C., Tang, Y.H.: 1998c, Magnetohydrostatic
Model of a Bald-Patch Flare. Solar Phys. 183, 369 – 388. doi:10.1023/A:1005003426798.
Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P., Mein, N., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Mein, P., Schmieder, B.: 1999,
3-D magnetic conﬁgurations supporting prominences. III. Evolution of ﬁne structures
observed in a ﬁlament channel. Astron. Astrophys. 342, 867 – 880.

Aulanier, G., T¨or¨ok, T., D´emoulin, P., DeLuca, E.E.: 2010, Formation of Torus-Unstable
Flux Ropes and Electric Currents in Erupting Sigmoids. Astrophys. J. 708, 314 – 333.
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/708/1/314.

Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P., Schrijver, C.J., Janvier, M., Pariat, E., Schmieder, B.: 2013, The
standard ﬂare model in three dimensions. II. Upper limit on solar ﬂare energy. Astron.
Astrophys. 549, A66. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201220406.

Berlicki, A., Schmieder, B., Vilmer, N., Aulanier, G., Del Zanna, G.: 2004, Evolution and
magnetic topology of the M 1.0 ﬂare of October 22, 2002. Astron. Astrophys. 423, 1119 –
1131. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20040259.

Berlicki, A., Heinzel, P., Schmieder, B., Mein, P., Mein, N.: 2005, Non-LTE diagnostics of
velocity ﬁelds during the gradual phase of a solar ﬂare. Astron. Astrophys. 430, 679 – 689.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20041293.

Berlicki, A., Gunar, S., Heinzel, P., Schmieder, B., Schwartz, P.: 2011, 2D radiative-
magnetohydrostatic model of a prominence observed by Hinode, SoHO/SUMER and
Meudon/MSDP. Astron. Astrophys. 530, A143. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201015896.
Bocchialini, K., Grison, B., Menvielle, M., Chambodut, A., Cornilleau-Wehrlin, N., Fontaine,
D., Marchaudon, A., Pick, M., Pitout, F., Schmieder, B., R´egnier, S., Zouganelis, I.: 2018,
Statistical Analysis of Solar Events Associated with Storm Sudden Commencements over
One Year of Solar Maximum During Cycle 23: Propagation from the Sun to the Earth and
Eﬀects. Solar Phys. 293, 75. doi:10.1007/s11207-018-1278-5.

Canou, A., Amari, T., Bommier, V., Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G., Li, H.: 2009, Evidence for a
Pre-Eruptive Twisted Flux Rope Using the Themis Vector Magnetograph. Astrophys. J.
Lett. 693, L27 – L30. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/693/1/L27.

Chandra, R., Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G., Malherbe, J.M.: 2009, Evidence of Magnetic Helicity
in Emerging Flux and Associated Flare. Solar Phys. 258, 53 – 67. doi:10.1007/s11207-009-
9392-z.

Chandra, R., Schmieder, B., Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P., Pariat, E., T¨or¨ok, T., Uddin, W.:
2011, Homologous Flares and Magnetic Field Topology in Active Region NOAA 10501 on
20 November 2003. Solar Phys. 269, 83 – 104. doi:10.1007/s11207-010-9670-9.

Chandra, R., Chen, P.F., Joshi, R., Joshi, B., Schmieder, B.: 2018, Observations of
Two Successive EUV Waves and Their Mode Conversion. Astrophys. J. 863, 101.
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aad097.

Cid, C., Cremades, H., Aran, A., Mandrini, C., Sanahuja, B., Schmieder, B., Menvielle, M.,
Rodriguez, L., Saiz, E., Cerrato, Y., Dasso, S., Jacobs, C., Lathuillere, C., Zhukov, A.:
2012, Can a halo CME from the limb be geoeﬀective? Journal of Geophysical Research
(Space Physics) 117, A11102. doi:10.1029/2012JA017536.

Cremades, H., Mandrini, C.H., Schmieder, B., Crescitelli, A.M.: 2015, Coronal Mass Ejections
from the Same Active Region Cluster: Two Diﬀerent Perspectives. Solar Phys. 290, 1671 –
1686. doi:10.1007/s11207-015-0717-9.

Dalmasse, K., Chandra, R., Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G.: 2015, Can we explain atypical solar

ﬂares? Astron. Astrophys. 574, A37. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201323206.

Dalmasse, K., Pariat, ´E., Valori, G., Jing, J., D´emoulin, P.: 2018, Studying the Transfer
of Magnetic Helicity in Solar Active Regions with the Connectivity-based Helicity Flux
Density Method. Astrophys. J. 852, 141. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aaa1e1.

Dasso, S., Mandrini, C.H., Schmieder, B., Cremades, H., Cid, C., Cerrato, Y., Saiz, E.,
D´emoulin, P., Zhukov, A.N., Rodriguez, L., Aran, A., Menvielle, M., Poedts, S.: 2009,
Linking two consecutive nonmerging magnetic clouds with their solar sources. Journal of
Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 114, A02109. doi:10.1029/2008JA013102.

del Zanna, G., Schmieder, B., Mason, H., Berlicki, A., Bradshaw, S.: 2006, The Gradual Phase
of the X17 Flare on October 28, 2003. Solar Phys. 239, 173 – 191. doi:10.1007/s11207-006-
0184-4.

Delann´ee, C., Artzner, G., Schmieder, B., Parenti, S.: 2014, Time Evolution of the Altitude of
an Observed Coronal Wave. Solar Phys. 289, 2565 – 2585. doi:10.1007/s11207-014-0488-8.
D´emoulin, P., Priest, E.R.: 1988, Instability of a prominence supported in a linear force-free

ﬁeld. Astron. Astrophys. 206, 336 – 347.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 29

D´emoulin, P., Priest, E.R.: 1993, A model for an inverse-polarity prominence supported in a

dip of a quadrupolar region. Solar Phys. 144, 283 – 305. doi:10.1007/BF00627594.

D´emoulin, P., Raadu, M.A.: 1992, Helical

solar promi-
computed from observable magnetic ﬁelds. Solar Phys. 142, 291 – 311.

structures around quiescent

nences
doi:10.1007/BF00151455.

D´emoulin, P., Malherbe, J.M., Priest, E.R.: 1989, The magnetic ﬁeld around quiescent solar
prominences computed from observational boundary conditions. Astron. Astrophys. 211,
428 – 440.

D´emoulin, P., Malherbe, J.M., Schmieder, B., Raadu, M.A.: 1987, Fine structures in solar
ﬁlaments. I - Observations and thermal stability. Astron. Astrophys. 183, 142 – 150.
D´emoulin, P., Henoux, J.C., Priest, E.R., Mandrini, C.H.: 1996, Quasi-Separatrix layers in

solar ﬂares. I. Method. Astron. Astrophys. 308, 643 – 655.

D´emoulin, P., Bagala, L.G., Mandrini, C.H., Henoux, J.C., Rovira, M.G.: 1997, Quasi-
separatrix layers in solar ﬂares. II. Observed magnetic conﬁgurations. Astron. Astrophys.
325, 305 – 317.

Deng, Y.Y., Schmieder, B., Mandrini, C.H., Khan, J.I., D´emoulin, P., Rudawy, P.: 1999, The
evolution from birth to decay of a short-lived active region. Astron. Astrophys. 349,
927 – 940.

Dere, K.P., Schmieder, B., Alissandrakis, C.E.: 1990, Flow patterns in a sunspot region ob-
served in the photosphere, chromosphere and transition region. Astron. Astrophys. 233,
207 – 219.

Dud´ık, J., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., Bommier, V., Roudier, T.: 2008, Topological Departures
from Translational Invariance along a Filament Observed by THEMIS. Solar Phys. 248,
29 – 50. doi:10.1007/s11207-008-9155-2.

Dud´ık, J., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., Zapi´or, M., Heinzel, P.: 2012, Magnetic Topology of
Bubbles in Quiescent Prominences. Astrophys. J. 761, 9. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/761/1/9.
Dud´ık, J., Polito, V., Janvier, M., Mulay, S.M., Karlick´y, M., Aulanier, G., Del Zanna, G.,
Dzifˇc´akov´a, E., Mason, H.E., Schmieder, B.: 2016, Slipping Magnetic Reconnection, Chro-
mospheric Evaporation, Implosion, and Precursors in the 2014 September 10 X1.6-Class
Solar Flare. Astrophys. J. 823, 41. doi:10.3847/0004-637X/823/1/41.

Dud´ık, J., Zuccarello, F.P., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., D´emoulin, P.: 2017, Expanding and
Contracting Coronal Loops as Evidence of Vortex Flows Induced by Solar Eruptions.
Astrophys. J. 844, 54. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aa7aab.

Fang, C.: 2018, Sixty-Year Career in Solar Physics. Solar Phys. 293, 72. doi:10.1007/s11207-

018-1291-8.

Fontenla, J., Schmieder, B., Simnett, G.M., Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1994, Time evolution of
a miniﬂare as seen in H-alpha, UV lines, and X-rays. Astrophys. J. 424, 1022 – 1031.
doi:10.1086/173953.

Forbes, T.G., Malherbe, J.M.: 1986, A shock condensation mechanism for loop prominences.

Astrophys. J. Lett. 302, L67 – L70. doi:10.1086/184639.

Georgoulis, M.K., Rust, D.M., Bernasconi, P.N., Schmieder, B.: 2002, Statistics, Morphology,
and Energetics of Ellerman Bombs. Astrophys. J. 575, 506 – 528. doi:10.1086/341195.
Grubecka, M., Schmieder, B., Berlicki, A., Heinzel, P., Dalmasse, K., Mein, P.: 2016, Height
formation of bright points observed by IRIS in Mg II line wings during ﬂux emergence.
Astron. Astrophys. 593, A32. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201527358.

Gu, X.-M., Lin, J., Luan, T., Schmieder, B.: 1992, Time evolution of a two-ribbon ﬂare -

Characteristics of post-ﬂare loops. Astron. Astrophys. 259, 649 – 662.

Gu, X.-M., Ding, Y.-J., Luo, Z., Schmieder, B.: 1997, Post-ﬂare loops of May 16, 1981. Spectral

analysis. Astron. Astrophys. 324, 289 – 297.

Gun´ar, S., Heinzel, P., Schmieder, B., Schwartz, P., Anzer, U.: 2007, Properties of promi-
nence ﬁne-structure threads derived from SOHO/SUMER hydrogen Lyman lines. Astron.
Astrophys. 472, 929 – 936. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20077785.

Gun´ar, S., Heinzel, P., Anzer, U., Schmieder, B.: 2008, On Lyman-line asymmetries in quiescent

prominences. Astron. Astrophys. 490, 307 – 313. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:200810127.

Gun´ar, S., Schwartz, P., Schmieder, B., Heinzel, P., Anzer, U.: 2010, Statistical comparison of
the observed and synthetic hydrogen Lyman line proﬁles in solar prominences. Astron.
Astrophys. 514, A43. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/200913411.

Gun´ar, S., Mein, P., Schmieder, B., Heinzel, P., Mein, N.: 2012, Dynamics of quiescent promi-
nence ﬁne structures analyzed by 2D non-LTE modelling of the Hα line. Astron. Astrophys.
543, A93. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201218940.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 30

Gun´ar, S., Schwartz, P., Dud´ık, J., Schmieder, B., Heinzel, P., Jurˇc´ak, J.: 2014, Magnetic ﬁeld
and radiative transfer modelling of a quiescent prominence. Astron. Astrophys. 567, A123.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201322777.

Gun´ar, S., Dud´ık, J., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., Heinzel, P.: 2018, Importance of the
Hα Visibility and Projection Eﬀects for the Interpretation of Prominence Fine-structure
Observations. Astrophys. J. 867, 115. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aae4e1.

Guo, Y., Ding, M.D., Schmieder, B., Li, H., T¨or¨ok, T., Wiegelmann, T.: 2010, Driving Mech-
anism and Onset Condition of a Conﬁned Eruption. Astrophys. J. Lett. 725, L38 – L42.
doi:10.1088/2041-8205/725/1/L38.

Heinzel, P., Anzer, U., Schmieder, B.: 2003, A Spectroscopic Model of euv Filaments. Solar

Phys. 216, 159 – 171. doi:10.1023/A:1026130028966.

Heinzel, P., Schmieder, B., Mein, P.: 1992, Structure and dynamics of cool ﬂare loops. Solar

Phys. 139, 81 – 104. doi:10.1007/BF00147883.

Heinzel, P., Schmieder, B., Tziotziou, K.: 2001, Why Are Solar Filaments More Ex-
tended in Extreme-Ultraviolet Lines than in Hα? Astrophys. J. Lett. 561, L223 – L227.
doi:10.1086/324755.

Heinzel, P., Schmieder, B., Vial, J.C., Rudawy, P.: 2000, Solar Prominences Observed by
Soho (SUMER, CDS, EIT) and Ground-Based Observatories (GBO). Advances in Space
Research 25, 1777 – 1780. doi:10.1016/S0273-1177(99)00626-2.

Heinzel, P., Schmieder, B., F´arn´ık, F., Schwartz, P., Labrosse, N., Kotrˇc, P., Anzer, U., Molodij,
G., Berlicki, A., DeLuca, E.E., Golub, L., Watanabe, T., Berger, T.: 2008, Hinode, TRACE,
SOHO, and Ground-based Observations of a Quiescent Prominence. Astrophys. J. 686,
1383 – 1396. doi:10.1086/591018.

Heinzel, P., Schmieder, B., Mein, N., Gun´ar, S.: 2015, Understanding the Mg II and Hα Spectra
in a Highly Dynamical Solar Prominence. Astrophys. J. Lett. 800, L13. doi:10.1088/2041-
8205/800/1/L13.

Janvier, M., Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P.: 2015, From Coronal Observations to MHD Simula-
tions, the Building Blocks for 3D Models of Solar Flares (Invited Review). Solar Phys.
290, 3425 – 3456. doi:10.1007/s11207-015-0710-3.

Janvier, M., Aulanier, G., Bommier, V., Schmieder, B., D´emoulin, P., Pariat, E.: 2014, Elec-
tric Currents in Flare Ribbons: Observations and Three-dimensional Standard Model.
Astrophys. J. 788, 60. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/788/1/60.

Joshi, N.C., Schmieder, B., Magara, T., Guo, Y., Aulanier, G.: 2016, Chain Reconnec-
tions Observed in Sympathetic Eruptions. Astrophys. J. 820, 126. doi:10.3847/0004-
637X/820/2/126.

Joshi, N.C., Zhu, X., Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G., Janvier, M., Joshi, B., Magara, T., Chandra,
R., Inoue, S.: 2019, Generalization of the Magnetic Field Conﬁguration of Typical and
Atypical Conﬁned Flares. Astrophys. J. 871, 165. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aaf3b5.

Kucera, T.A., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., Mein, N., Vial, J.-C.: 1999, Filament channel
structures in a SI IV line related to a 3d magnetic model. Solar Phys. 186, 259 – 280.
doi:10.1023/A:1005163226096.

Labrosse, N., Heinzel, P., Vial, J.-C., Kucera, T., Parenti, S., Gun´ar, S., Schmieder, B., Kilper,
G.: 2010, Physics of Solar Prominences: I. Spectral Diagnostics and Non-LTE Modelling.
Space Sci. Rev. 151, 243 – 332. doi:10.1007/s11214-010-9630-6.

Levens, P.J., Schmieder, B., L´opez Ariste, A., Labrosse, N., Dalmasse, K., Gelly, B.: 2016a,
Magnetic Field in Atypical Prominence Structures: Bubble, Tornado, and Eruption.
Astrophys. J. 826, 164. doi:10.3847/0004-637X/826/2/164.

Levens, P.J., Schmieder, B., Labrosse, N., L´opez Ariste, A.: 2016b, Structure of Promi-
nence Legs: Plasma and Magnetic Field. Astrophys. J. 818, 31. doi:10.3847/0004-
637X/818/1/31.

Levens, P.J., Labrosse, N., Schmieder, B., L´opez Ariste, A., Fletcher, L.: 2017, Comparing
UV/EUV line parameters and magnetic ﬁeld in a quiescent prominence with tornadoes.
Astron. Astrophys. 607, A16. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201730808.

Li, H., Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G., Berlicki, A.: 2006, Is Pre-Eruptive Null Point Reconnection
Required for Triggering Eruptions? Solar Phys. 237, 85 – 100. doi:10.1007/s11207-006-
0173-7.

Lopez Ariste, A.L.: 2014, Instrument concepts for the observation of prominences with
future ground-based telescopes. In: Schmieder, B., Malherbe, J.-M., Wu, S.T. (eds.) Na-
ture of Prominences and their Role in Space Weather, IAU Symposium 300, 370 – 375.
doi:10.1017/S1743921313011216.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 31

L´opez Ariste, A., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., Sainz Dalda, A.: 2006, First observation of bald
patches in a ﬁlament channel and at a barb endpoint. Astron. Astrophys. 456, 725 – 735.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20064923.

Mackay, D.H., Karpen, J.T., Ballester, J.L., Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G.: 2010, Physics of
Solar Prominences: II. Magnetic Structure and Dynamics. Space Sci. Rev. 151, 333 – 399.
doi:10.1007/s11214-010-9628-0.

Malherbe, J.M., Schmieder, B., Mein, P.: 1981, Dynamics in the ﬁlaments. I - Oscillations in

a quiescent ﬁlament. Astron. Astrophys. 102, 124 – 128.

Malherbe, J.M., Simon, G., Mein, P., Mein, N., Schmieder, B., Vial, J.C.: 1982, Preﬂare heating
of ﬁlaments. Advances in Space Research 2, 53 – 56. doi:10.1016/0273-1177(82)90178-8.
Malherbe, J.M., Schmieder, B., Ribes, E., Mein, P.: 1983, Dynamics of solar ﬁlaments. II - Mass
motions in an active region ﬁlament from H-alpha center to limb observations. Astron.
Astrophys. 119, 197 – 206.

Malherbe, J.M., Schmieder, B., Simon, G., Mein, P., Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1987, Closed
magnetic structures in the chromosphere and in the transition region. Solar Phys. 112,
233 – 253. doi:10.1007/BF00148780.

Malherbe, J.-M., Tarbell, T., Wiik, J.E., Schmieder, B., Frank, Z., Shine, R.A., van Driel-
Gesztelyi, L.: 1997, The Postﬂare Loops and the Nearby Active Chromosphere of 1992
June 26. Astrophys. J. 482, 535 – 540. doi:10.1086/304141.

Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Schmieder, B., Cauzzi, G., Hofmann,
A.: 1996, 3D Magnetic Reconnection at an X-Ray Bright Point. Solar Phys. 168, 115 – 133.
doi:10.1007/BF00145829.

Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P., Bagala, L.G., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Henoux, J.C.,
Schmieder, B., Rovira, M.G.: 1997, Evidence of Magnetic Reconnection from Hα, Soft
X-Ray and Photospheric Magnetic Field Observations. Solar Phys. 174, 229 – 240.
doi:10.1023/A:1004950009970.

Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P., Schmieder, B., Deluca, E.E., Pariat, E., Uddin, W.: 2006,
Companion Event and Precursor of the X17 Flare on 28 October 2003. Solar Phys. 238,
293 – 312. doi:10.1007/s11207-006-0205-3.

Mandrini, C.H., Schmieder, B., D´emoulin, P., Guo, Y., Cristiani, G.D.: 2014, Topological
Analysis of Emerging Bipole Clusters Producing Violent Solar Events. Solar Phys. 289,
2041 – 2071. doi:10.1007/s11207-013-0458-6.

Martres, M.-J., Mein, P., Schmieder, B., Soru-Escaut, I.: 1981, Structure and evolution of
velocities in quiescent ﬁlaments. Solar Phys. 69, 301 – 312. doi:10.1007/BF00149996.
Mein, N., Schmieder, B.: 1981, Mechanical ﬂux in the solar chromosphere. III - Variation of

the mechanical ﬂux. Astron. Astrophys. 97, 310 – 316.

Mein, N., Schmieder, B., Simon, G., Tandberg-Hanssen, E., Wu, S.T.: 1982, Dynamics of the
eruptive prominence of 6 May 1980 and its relationship to the coronal transient. Astron.
Astrophys. 114, 192 – 199.

Moore, R.L., Schmieder, B., Hathaway, D.H., Tarbell, T.D.: 1997, 3-D Magnetic Field
Conﬁguration Late in a Large Two-Ribbon Flare. Solar Phys. 176, 153 – 169.
doi:10.1023/A:1004990817154.

Parenti, S., Schmieder, B., Heinzel, P., Golub, L.: 2012, On the Nature of Prominence Emission

Observed by SDO/AIA. Astrophys. J. 754, 66. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/754/1/66.

Pariat, E., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., Georgoulis, M.K., Rust, D.M., Bernasconi, P.N.:
2004, Resistive Emergence of Undulatory Flux Tubes. Astrophys. J. 614, 1099 – 1112.
doi:10.1086/423891.

Pariat, E., Schmieder, B., Berlicki, A., Deng, Y., Mein, N., L´opez Ariste, A., Wang, S.: 2007,
Spectrophotometric analysis of Ellerman bombs in the Ca II, Hα, and UV range. Astron.
Astrophys. 473, 279 – 289. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20067011.

Priest, E.R.: 2014, A Life of Fun Playing with Solar Magnetic Fields (Special Historical

Review). Solar Phys. 289, 3579 – 3615. doi:10.1007/s11207-014-0554-2.

Raadu, M.A., Malherbe, J.M., Schmieder, B., Mein, P.: 1987a, Material ejecta in a disturbed

solar ﬁlament. Solar Phys. 109, 59 – 79. doi:10.1007/BF00167399.

Raadu, M.A., Schmieder, B., Mein, N., Gesztelyi, L.: 1987b, Photospheric Induced Destabi-

lization and Ejection of Prominence Material. Hvar Observatory Bulletin 11, 105.

Raadu, M.A., Schmieder, B., Mein, N., Gesztelyi, L.: 1988, Photospheric-induced destabiliza-

tion and ejection of prominence material. Astron. Astrophys. 197, 289 – 296.

Rodriguez, L., Zhukov, A.N., Cid, C., Cerrato, Y., Saiz, E., Cremades, H., Dasso, S., Menvielle,
M., Aran, A., Mandrini, C., Poedts, S., Schmieder, B.: 2009, Three frontside full halo

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 32

coronal mass ejections with a nontypical geomagnetic response. Space Weather 7, S06003.
doi:10.1029/2008SW000453.

Roudier, T., ˇSvanda, M., Meunier, N., Keil, S., Rieutord, M., Malherbe, J.M., Rondi, S.,
Molodij, G., Bommier, V., Schmieder, B.: 2008, Large-scale horizontal ﬂows in the solar
photosphere. III. Eﬀects on ﬁlament destabilization. Astron. Astrophys. 480, 255 – 263.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20077973.

Roudier, T., Schmieder, B., Filippov, B., Chandra, R., Malherbe, J.M.: 2018, Horizon-
tal photospheric ﬂows trigger a ﬁlament eruption. Astron. Astrophys. 618, A43.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201832937.

Ruan, G., Schmieder, B., Mein, P., Mein, N., Labrosse, N., Gun´ar, S., Chen, Y.: 2018, On the
Dynamic Nature of a Quiescent Prominence Observed by IRIS and MSDP Spectrographs.
Astrophys. J. 865, 123. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aada08.

Schmieder, B.: 1972, Fluctuations of Temperature and Density in the Photosphere. Astron.

Astrophys. 16, 44.

Schmieder, B.: 1976, Wave propagation in the photosphere. Solar Phys. 47, 435 – 460.

doi:10.1007/BF00154756.

Schmieder, B.: 1977, Linear hydrodynamical equations coupled with radiative transfer in a non-
isothermal atmosphere. I - Method. Solar Phys. 54, 269 – 288. doi:10.1007/BF00159919.
Schmieder, B.: 1978, Linear hydrodynamical equations coupled with radiative transfer in a non-
isothermal atmosphere. II - Application to solar photospheric observations. Solar Phys. 57,
245 – 253. doi:10.1007/BF00160098.

Schmieder, B.: 1979, Waves in the low solar chromosphere. Astron. Astrophys. 74, 273 – 279.
Schmieder, B.: 2018, Extreme solar storms based on solar magnetic ﬁeld. Journal of

Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics 180, 46 – 51. doi:10.1016/j.jastp.2017.07.018.

Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G.: 2012, What are the physical mechanisms of eruptions and CMEs?

Advances in Space Research 49, 1598 – 1606. doi:10.1016/j.asr.2011.10.023.

Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G.: 2018, Solar Active Region Electric Currents Before and During
Eruptive Flares. In: Keiling, A., Marghitu, O., Wheatland, M. (eds.) Electric Currents
in Geospace and Beyond, Washington DC American Geophysical Union Geophysical
Monograph Series 235, 391 – 406. doi:10.1002/9781119324522.ch23.

Schmieder, B., Mein, N.: 1980, Mechanical ﬂux in the solar chromosphere. II - Determination

of the mechanical ﬂux. Astron. Astrophys. 84, 99 – 105.

Schmieder, B., Archontis, V., Pariat, E.: 2014, Magnetic Flux Emergence Along the Solar

Cycle. Space Sci. Rev. 186, 227 – 250. doi:10.1007/s11214-014-0088-9.

Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G., Vrˇsnak, B.: 2015, Flare-CME Models: An Observational Perspec-
tive (Invited Review). Solar Phys. 290, 3457 – 3486. doi:10.1007/s11207-015-0712-1.
Schmieder, B., D´emoulin, P., Aulanier, G.: 2013, Solar ﬁlament eruptions and their physical
role in triggering coronal mass ejections. Advances in Space Research 51, 1967 – 1980.
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2012.12.026.

Schmieder, B., Fang, C., Harra-Murnion, L.K.: 1998, Spectral Analysis of a Thermal Flare on

27 October 1993. Solar Phys. 182, 447 – 457. doi:10.1023/A:1005040821593.

Schmieder, B., Golub, L., Antiochos, S.K.: 1994, Comparison between cool and hot plasma

behaviors of surges. Astrophys. J. 425, 326 – 330. doi:10.1086/173987.

Schmieder, B., Malherbe, J.-M., Wu, S.T. (eds.): 2014, Nature of Prominences and their role

in Space Weather, IAU Symposium 300.

Schmieder, B., Raadu, M.A., Wiik, J.E.: 1991, Fine structure of solar ﬁlaments. II - Dynamics

of threads and footpoints. Astron. Astrophys. 252, 353 – 365.

Schmieder, B., Tziotziou, K., Heinzel, P.: 2003, Spectroscopic diagnostics of an Hα and
EUV ﬁlament observed with THEMIS and SOHO. Astron. Astrophys. 401, 361 – 375.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20030126.

Schmieder, B., Mein, P., Vial, J.C., Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1982, A surge observed in H alpha
and C IV. Advances in Space Research 2, 225 – 228. doi:10.1016/0273-1177(82)90203-4.
Schmieder, B., Mein, P., Vial, J.-C., Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1983, Dynamics of a surge observed

in the C IV and H alpha lines. Astron. Astrophys. 127, 337 – 344.

Schmieder, B., Simon, G., Martres, M.-J., Mein, P., Mein, N., Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1984,
Recurrent mass ejections observed in H-alpha and CIV. Advances in Space Research 4,
27 – 30. doi:10.1016/0273-1177(84)90154-6.

Schmieder, B., Malherbe, J.M., Simon, G., Poland, A.I.: 1985, Dynamics of solar ﬁlaments. IV

- Structure and mass ﬂow of an active region ﬁlament. Astron. Astrophys. 153, 64 – 70.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 33

Schmieder, B., Mein, P., Simnett, G.M., Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1988a, An example of the
association of X-ray and UV emission with H-alpha surges. Astron. Astrophys. 201, 327 –
338.

Schmieder, B., Mein, P., Malherbe, J.-M., Forbes, T.G.: 1988b, Post-ﬂare loops - Formation
and velocity. Advances in Space Research 8, 145 – 148. doi:10.1016/0273-1177(88)90309-2.
Schmieder, B., D´emoulin, P., Poland, A., Thompson, B.: 1988c, Some dynamical aspects of a

quiescent ﬁlament. Astron. Astrophys. 197, 281 – 288.

Schmieder, B., Malherbe, J.M., Simnett, G.M., Forbes, T.G., Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1990,
Evaporation in the transition region during the gradual phase of ﬂares. Astrophys. J.
356, 720 – 732. doi:10.1086/168879.

Schmieder, B., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Gerlei, O., Simnett, G.M.: 1993, A study of surges and

ﬂares within an active region. Solar Phys. 146, 163 – 176. doi:10.1007/BF00662177.

Schmieder, B., Shibata, K., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Freeland, S.: 1995a, H alpha surges and

associated soft X-ray loops. Solar Phys. 156, 245 – 264. doi:10.1007/BF00670226.

Schmieder, B., Heinzel, P., Wiik, J.E., Lemen, J., Anwar, B., Kotrc, P., Hiei, E.: 1995b, Relation
between cool and hot post-ﬂare loops of 26 June 1992 derived from optical and X-ray
(SXT-Yohkoh) observations. Solar Phys. 156, 337 – 361. doi:10.1007/BF00670231.

Schmieder, B., D´emoulin, P., Aulanier, G., Golub, L.: 1996a, Diﬀerential Magnetic Field Shear

in an Active Region. Astrophys. J. 467, 881. doi:10.1086/177662.

Schmieder, B., Heinzel, P., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Lemen, J.R.: 1996b, Post-Flare Loops of

26 June 1992, II. Solar Phys. 165, 303 – 328. doi:10.1007/BF00149716.

Schmieder, B., Rovira, M., Simnett, G.M., Fontenla, J.M., Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1996c, Sub-
ﬂares and surges in AR 2744 during the Solar Maximum Mission. Astron. Astrophys. 308,
957 – 969.

Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Roudier, T., Nitta, N.,
Cauzzi, G.: 1997, Magnetic reconnection driven by emergence of sheared magnetic ﬁeld.
Astron. Astrophys. 325, 1213 – 1225.

Schmieder, B., Heinzel, P., Vial, J.C., Rudawy, P.: 1999, SOHO/SUMER observations and
analysis of hydrogen Lyman lines in a quiescent prominence. Solar Phys. 189, 109 – 127.
doi:10.1023/A:1005233906192.

Schmieder, B., Rust, D.M., Georgoulis, M.K., D´emoulin, P., Bernasconi, P.N.: 2004a, Emerging
Flux and the Heating of Coronal Loops. Astrophys. J. 601, 530 – 545. doi:10.1086/380199.
Schmieder, B., Mein, N., Deng, Y., Dumitrache, C., Malherbe, J.-M., Staiger, J., Deluca, E.E.:
2004b, Magnetic changes observed in the formation of two ﬁlaments in a complex active
region: TRACE and MSDP observations. Solar Phys. 223, 119 – 141. doi:10.1007/s11207-
004-1107-x.
Schmieder, B.,

Lin, Y., Heinzel, P.,

Schwartz, P.:
Solar

2004c, Multi-wavelength
297 – 323.
Phys.

221,

study
doi:10.1023/B:SOLA.0000035059.50427.68.

high-latitude

of

a

EUV ﬁlament.

Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G., Mein, P., L´opez Ariste, A.: 2006, Evolving Photospheric
Flux Concentrations and Filament Dynamic Changes. Solar Phys. 238, 245 – 259.
doi:10.1007/s11207-006-0252-9.

Schmieder, B., Gun´ar, S., Heinzel, P., Anzer, U.: 2007a, Spectral Diagnostics of the Magnetic
Field Orientation in a Prominence Observed with SOHO/SUMER. Solar Phys. 241, 53 –
66. doi:10.1007/s11207-007-0251-5.

Schmieder, B., Mandrini, C.H., D´emoulin, P., Aulanier, G., Li, H., Berlicki, A.: 2007b, What is
the role of magnetic null points in large ﬂares? Advances in Space Research 39, 1840 – 1846.
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2007.03.058.

Schmieder, B., Guo, Y., Moreno-Insertis, F., Aulanier, G., Yelles Chaouche, L., Nishizuka,
N., Harra, L.K., Thalmann, J.K., Vargas Dominguez, S., Liu, Y.: 2013, Twisting solar
coronal jet launched at the boundary of an active region. Astron. Astrophys. 559, A1.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201322181.

Schmieder, B., Tian, H., Kucera, T., L´opez Ariste, A., Mein, N., Mein, P., Dalmasse, K.,
Golub, L.: 2014a, Open questions on prominences from coordinated observations by IRIS,
Hinode, SDO/AIA, THEMIS, and the Meudon/MSDP. Astron. Astrophys. 569, A85.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201423922.

Schmieder, B., Roudier, T., Mein, N., Mein, P., Malherbe, J.M., Chandra, R.: 2014b, Proper
horizontal photospheric ﬂows in a ﬁlament channel. Astron. Astrophys. 564, A104.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201322861.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 34

Schmieder, B., Mein, P., Mein, N., Levens, P.J., Labrosse, N., Ofman, L.: 2017a, Hα Doppler
shifts in a tornado in the solar corona. Astron. Astrophys. 597, A109. doi:10.1051/0004-
6361/201628771.

Schmieder, B., Zapi´or, M., L´opez Ariste, A., Levens, P., Labrosse, N., Gravet, R.: 2017b,
Reconstruction of a helical prominence in 3D from IRIS spectra and images. Astron.
Astrophys. 606, A30. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201730839.

Schwartz, P., Heinzel, P., Anzer, U., Schmieder, B.: 2004, Determination of the 3D structure
of an EUV-ﬁlament observed by SoHO/CDS, SoHO/SUMER and VTT/MSDP. Astron.
Astrophys. 421, 323 – 338. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20034199.

Schwartz, P., Heinzel, P., Schmieder, B., Anzer, U.: 2006, Study of an extended EUV ﬁlament
using SoHO/SUMER observations of the hydrogen Lyman lines. Astron. Astrophys. 459,
651 – 661. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20065619.

She, Z.S., Malherbe, J.M., Raadu, M.A.: 1986, Transition zone eﬀects on thermal non-
equilibrium and plasma condensation in solar coronal loops. Astron. Astrophys. 164,
364 – 372.

Shibata, K., Isobe, H., Hillier, A., Choudhuri, A.R., Maehara, H., Ishii, T.T., Shibayama, T.,
Notsu, S., Notsu, Y., Nagao, T., Honda, S., Nogami, D.: 2013, Can Superﬂares Occur on
Our Sun? Pub. Astron. Soc. Japan 65, 49. doi:10.1093/pasj/65.3.49.

Simon, G., Schmieder, B., D´emoulin, P., Poland, A.I.: 1986, Dynamics of solar ﬁlaments. VI
- Center-to-limb study of H-alpha and C IV velocities in a quiescent ﬁlament. Astron.
Astrophys. 166, 319 – 325.

Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 1995, Books-Received - the Nature of Solar Prominences. Science 269,

111.

Tandberg-Hanssen, E.: 2011, Solar Prominences - An Intriguing Phenomenon. Solar Phys.

269, 237 – 251. doi:10.1007/s11207-010-9704-3.

Tang, Y.H., Li, Y.N., Fang, C., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., D´emoulin, P., Sakurai, T.: 2000,
Hα and Soft X-Ray Brightening Events Caused by Emerging Flux. Astrophys. J. 534,
482 – 489. doi:10.1086/308715.

Thompson, W.T., Schmieder, B.: 1991, Oscillations in H-alpha ﬁlaments - Center-to-limb

study. Astron. Astrophys. 243, 501 – 511.

T¨or¨ok, T., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., Reeves, K.K., Golub, L.: 2009, Fan-Spine Topology For-
mation Through Two-Step Reconnection Driven by Twisted Flux Emergence. Astrophys.
J. 704, 485 – 495. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/704/1/485.

T¨or¨ok, T., Chandra, R., Pariat, E., D´emoulin, P., Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G., Linton,
M.G., Mandrini, C.H.: 2011, Filament Interaction Modeled by Flux Rope Reconnection.
Astrophys. J. 728, 65. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/728/1/65.

Tsiropoula, G., Schmieder, B.: 1997, Determination of physical parameters in dark mottles.

Astron. Astrophys. 324, 1183 – 1189.

Tsiropoula, G., Alissandrakis, C.E., Schmieder, B.: 1993, The ﬁne structure of a chromospheric

rosette. Astron. Astrophys. 271, 574.

Tsiropoula, G., Alissandrakis, C.E., Schmieder, B.: 1994, Time evolution of ﬁne structures in

the solar chromosphere. Astron. Astrophys. 290, 285 – 294.

van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Schmieder, B., Cauzzi, G., Mein, N., Hofmann, A., Nitta, N., Kurokawa,
H., Mein, P., Staiger, J.: 1996, X-Ray Bright Point Flares Due to Magnetic Reconnection.
Solar Phys. 163, 145 – 170. doi:10.1007/BF00165462.

van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Csepura, G., Schmieder, B., Malherbe, J.-M., Metcalf, T.: 1997,
Evolution of a Delta Group in the Photosphere and Corona. Solar Phys. 172, 151 – 160.
doi:10.1023/A:1004975212949.

van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Manoharan, P.K., D´emoulin, P., Aulanier, G., Mandrini, C.H., Lopez-
Fuentes, M., Schmieder, B., Orlando, S., Thompson, B., Plunkett, S.: 2000, Initiation of
CMEs: the role of magnetic twist. Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics
62, 1437 – 1448. doi:10.1016/S1364-6826(00)00087-0.

Wiik, J.E., Dere, K., Schmieder, B.: 1993, UV prominences observed with the HRTS: structure

and physical properties. Astron. Astrophys. 273, 267.

Wiik, J.E., Heinzel, P., Schmieder, B.: 1992, Determination of plasma parameters in a quiescent

prominence. Astron. Astrophys. 260, 419 – 430.

Wiik, J.E., Schmieder, B., Heinzel, P., Roudier, T.: 1996, Post-Flare Loops of 26 June 1992,

III. Solar Phys. 166, 89 – 106. doi:10.1007/BF00179357.

Wiik, J.E., van Driel-Gesztely, L., Schmieder, B., Heinzel, P.: 1997, Dynamics and evolu-
tion of the post-ﬂare loops of June 1992. Advances in Space Research 20, 2345 – 2349.
doi:10.1016/S0273-1177(97)00907-1.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 35

Wiik, J.E., Dammasch, I.E., Schmieder, B., Wilhelm, K.: 1999, Multiple-Thread Model of
a Prominence Observed by SUMER and EIT on SOHO. Solar Phys. 187, 405 – 426.
doi:10.1023/A:1005151015043.

Young, P.R., Tian, H., Peter, H., Rutten, R.J., Nelson, C.J., Huang, Z., Schmieder, B., Vis-
sers, G.J.M., Toriumi, S., Rouppe van der Voort, L.H.M., Madjarska, M.S., Danilovic, S.,
Berlicki, A., Chitta, L.P., Cheung, M.C.M., Madsen, C., Reardon, K.P., Katsukawa, Y.,
Heinzel, P.: 2018, Solar Ultraviolet Bursts. Space Sci. Rev. 214, 120. doi:10.1007/s11214-
018-0551-0.

Zhao, J., Li, H., Pariat, E., Schmieder, B., Guo, Y., Wiegelmann, T.: 2014, Temporal Evolution
of the Magnetic Topology of the NOAA Active Region 11158. Astrophys. J. 787, 88.
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/787/1/88.

Zhao, J., Gilchrist, S.A., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., Pariat, E., Li, H.: 2016, Hooked Flare
Ribbons and Flux-rope-related QSL Footprints. Astrophys. J. 823, 62. doi:10.3847/0004-
637X/823/1/62.

Zhao, J., Schmieder, B., Li, H., Pariat, E., Zhu, X., Feng, L., Grubecka, M.: 2017, Observational
Evidence of Magnetic Reconnection for Brightenings and Transition Region Arcades in
IRIS Observations. Astrophys. J. 836, 52. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/836/1/52.

Zuccarello, F.P., Chandra, R., Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G., Joshi, R.: 2017, Transition from
eruptive to conﬁned ﬂares in the same active region. Astron. Astrophys. 601, A26.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201629836.

SOLA: Memoir_Schmieder_6_ARXIV.tex; 12 March 2019; 0:46; p. 36

