Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. paper
April 30, 2019

c(cid:13)ESO 2019

Letter to the Editor

Data-driven model of the solar corona above an active region

J. Warnecke1 and H. Peter1

Max-Planck-Institut für Sonnensystemforschung, Justus-von-Liebig-Weg 3, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany
e-mail: warnecke@mps.mpg.de

Received 1 March 2019 / Accepted 27 March 2019

ABSTRACT

Aims. We aim to reproduce the structure of the corona above a solar active region as seen in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) using a
three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic (3D MHD) model.
Methods. The 3D MHD data-driven model solves the induction equation and the mass, momentum, and energy balance. To drive
the system, we feed the observed evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld in the photosphere of the active region AR 12139 into the bottom
boundary. This creates a hot corona above the cool photosphere in a self-consistent way. We synthesize the coronal EUV emission
from the densities and temperatures in the model and compare this to the actual coronal observations.
Results. We are able to reproduce the overall appearance and key features of the corona in this active region on a qualitative level.
The model shows long loops, fan loops, compact loops, and diﬀuse emission forming at the same locations and at similar times as in
the observation. Furthermore, the low-intensity contrast of the model loops in EUV matches the observations.
Conclusions. In our model the energy input into the corona is similar as in the scenarios of ﬁeldline-braiding or ﬂux-tube tectonics,
that is, energy is transported to the corona through the driving of the vertical magnetic ﬁeld by horizontal photospheric motions. The
success of our model shows the central role that this process plays for the structure, dynamics, and heating of the corona.

Key words. Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) – Sun: magnetic ﬁelds – Sun: corona – methods: numerical

1. Introduction

When observed in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV), the corona of
the Sun above an active region is dominated by plasma loops
over a range of temperatures from just below one million to sev-
eral million Kelvin. The magnetic ﬁeld in the corona channels
the plasma and guides the energy ﬂux. A one-dimensional (1D)
model can capture the distribution and variation of intensities
and ﬂows along a loop, at least if the variation in energy input is
correctly prescribed. It cannot account for the spatial complexity
of the real corona, however.

A 3D model can account for not only the complex interac-
tion of the various magnetic features, but also self-consistently
provides the spatial and temporal distribution of the energy in-
put (with all its limitations; Peter 2015). The ﬁrst of these 3D
models (Gudiksen & Nordlund 2002, 2005b,a) created a loop-
dominated corona; this conﬁrmed the ﬁeld-line braiding (Parker
1988) or ﬂux-tube tectonics scenarios (Priest et al. 2002). One
main question was then and still is now whether such a model
can recreate the actually observed corona, if the model is driven
by the observed changing magnetic ﬁeld in the photosphere.

So far, such models have been compared to observations in a
generic sense and with good success. For example, results have
been compared with respect to average quantities such as emis-
sion line Doppler shifts (Peter et al. 2004, 2006; Hansteen et al.
2010). Alternatively, individual features in the models have been
picked out that resemble actually observed structures. This pro-
vided interesting matches in terms of the width of coronal loops
(Peter & Bingert 2012) or transient UV bursts (Hansteen et al.
2017).

The driving of the magnetic ﬁeld in the photosphere in these
models is prescribed by a photospheric velocity driver that mim-

ics the solar granulation (Bingert & Peter 2011, 2013). Alterna-
tively, magnetoconvection models are directly included in the
model (Gudiksen et al. 2011; Rempel 2017) or are fed in through
the boundary condition (Chen et al. 2014). Using a ﬂux emer-
gence model motivated by observations for the photospheric in-
put, Cheung et al. (2018) were able to reproduce the emission
signature of a C-class ﬂare. Bourdin et al. (2013, 2014) used an
observed magnetogram to drive the coronal evolution, but this
was limited to an active region that was just slightly larger than
an X-ray bright point.

Magneto-frictional models have been used to recreate the
corona driven by the changing observed photospheric magnetic
ﬁeld, but by design, these models do not provide information
on temperature and density (Cheung & DeRosa 2012). They can
instead only derive proxies for the coronal emission that is ex-
pected. In these models, the currents are furthermore essen-
tially almost (anti-) parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld; this assump-
tion is not fully valid above active regions (Peter et al. 2015;
Warnecke et al. 2017).

Here we use a data-driven 3D magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) model in which the observed (variable) magnetic ﬁeld
of an active region in the photosphere is considered as a lower
boundary condition. Most importantly, the model allows synthe-
sizing the coronal emission. A direct comparison can therefore
be made between the model and the observed coronal emission
from the exact time of the driving magnetogram.

2. Data-driven 3D MHD model

We numerically solved the 3D resistive MHD equations, that is,
the induction equation together with the mass, momentum, and
energy balance, from the surface of the Sun into the corona. For

Article number, page 1 of 5

9
1
0
2

r
p
A
9
2

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

3
v
5
5
4
0
0
.
3
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
A&Aproofs: manuscript no. paper

The central ingredient of our model is the implementation
of the bottom boundary for the magnetic ﬁeld. Here, we fed a
time series of observed values for the (vertical) magnetic ﬁeld
and thus drove the evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld in the photo-
sphere so that it matched the observed evolution. Because the
time cadence of the magnetograms is much slower than the
time step of the simulation, we interpolated between the mag-
netograms that were closest in time for every time step of the
numerical model. Photospheric velocities also act on the mag-
netic ﬁeld at the bottom boundary and alter it. To ensure that the
magnetic ﬁeld at the bottom boundary continued to evolve ac-
cording to the observations, we employed a relaxation scheme.
This smoothly forces the ﬁeld at the bottom boundary to fol-
low as prescribed by observations. We chose a timescale of 10
min for this relaxation, motivated by the general timescale of
the granular magnetic ﬁelds. This approach allowed us to gen-
erate upward-directed Poynting ﬂux and simultaneously ensured
that we remained close to the observed state (see Bingert & Peter
2011, 2013; Warnecke & Bingert 2018, for details).

To feed the simulation, we used a time series of line-of-sight
magnetic ﬁeld measurements of active region AR 12139 from
the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI; Schou et al. 2012)
that begin on 16 August 2014, start at 23:14:53 UT, and have a
cadence of 45 s (Fig. 1). The region was very close to disk cen-
ter, and we therefore used the line-of-sight magnetic ﬁeld for
the vertical component in our simulation. The grid spacing of
the model (366 km) is the same as the plate scale of the HMI
observation (0.5′′per pixel). We adjusted the edges of the mag-
netograms to ensure that ethey fulﬁlled the horizontally periodic
boundary conditions. We ﬁrst ran the simulation with the mag-
netic ﬁeld from the ﬁrst snapshot of the time series to let the
temperature and density reach a quasi-stationary state. This took
about four solar hours. We then began to feed the time series of
the changing magnetic ﬁeld into the bottom boundary; this drives
the evolution in the computational domain. The simulation then
evolved for another half hour. We focus our analysis below on
the snapshot at 16.5 min.

3. Comparison with observations

The main goal of this study comparing real observations to the
coronal emission as synthesized from our 3D MHD active re-
gion model, which is driven by a time series of actually ob-
served magnetograms. For this we derived EUV emission as
it would be observed by the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly
(AIA; Lemen et al. 2012). Based on the temperature and den-
sity in the model, we used the temperature response kernel
(Boerner et al. 2012)2 of the 171 Å channel. This channel is
dominated by emission from Fe x that originates from just be-
low 1 MK.

Overall, the numerical model reproduces the dipole-like
structure of the active region. In Fig. 2 we show the compari-
son of the model as viewed from straight above (left) and the
observations near disk center (right) at the same time, that is, the
model was evolved using the time-dependent observed magne-
tograms to the same time as the observations shown here (16.5
mins). The peak emission from the observations and the simula-
tion diﬀers by a factor lower than six, which corresponds to dif-
ferences in density smaller than a factor of 2.5; see Sect. 5 for a
detailed discussion. Despite this quantitative diﬀerence, we ﬁnd
an overall qualitative agreement, in particular for the following
four features (numbers as in Fig. 2).

Fig. 1. Observed photospheric magnetic ﬁeld that drives our simula-
tion. We show the line-of-sight magnetogram from 16 August 2014 at
23:30:48 UT of active region AR 12139 observed with HMI on board
of SDO. The temporal evolution of this magnetogram is used as input
for the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld in the simulation, see Sect. 2. The
small square indicates a region of interested where a compact loop is
observed, see Sects. 3 and 4.

this we used the Pencil Code1 with its special module to ac-
count for the physics of the corona (Bingert & Peter 2011, 2013).
This solves for the vector potential A, the velocity u, the den-
sity ρ, and the temperature T in a fully self-consistent and time-
dependent way.

One key element of a coronal model is the inclusion of
(Spitzer) heat conductivity along the magnetic ﬁeld that depends
on temperature as T 5/2. We used non-Fourier heat ﬂux evo-
lution and semi-relativistic Boris correction (e.g., Boris 1970;
Rempel 2017), both newly implemented into the Pencil Code
to speed up the simulation signiﬁcantly (see Chatterjee 2018;
Warnecke & Bingert 2018, for details). The plasma was cooled
by optically thin radiative cooling calculated from a prescribed
radiative loss function. The details of the model are presented in
Bingert & Peter (2011, 2013) and Warnecke & Bingert (2018)
and are not repeated here. We used a magnetic diﬀusivity of
η=5×109 m2 s−1, ensuring a mesh Reynolds number of around
unity, and a viscosity of ν=1010 m2 s−1, similar to the Spitzer
value at coronal temperatures and densities.

Our computational domain was a Cartesian box with 1024 ×
1024 × 512 grid points, representing 374 × 374 × 80 Mm3 on the
Sun. This is large enough to host a typical active region. We used
periodic boundary conditions in the horizontal x and y directions.
At the top boundary, the box was closed for all thermodynamic
quantities, and we applied a potential ﬁeld condition for the mag-
netic ﬁeld. At the bottom boundary (z=0), which represents the
solar surface, the temperature and density were ﬁxed. Here, we
prescribed the photospheric velocities using a granulation driver
that mimics the distribution of ﬂows in time and space compa-
rable to the observed motions. We followed the original descrip-
tion by Gudiksen & Nordlund (2005b) for this.

1 https://github.com/pencil-code/

2 Implemented in SolarSoft (http://www.lmsal.com/solarsoft/).

Article number, page 2 of 5

Warnecke & Peter: Data-driven model of the solar corona above an active region

Fig. 2. Comparison of the observed emission and the emission as synthesized from model. The left panel shows the emission of the AIA 171 Å
channel of AR 12139 on 16 August 2014 at 23:30:48 UT near disk center. The right panel shows the synthesized emission of the same channel
from the simulation as viewed from the top of the computation box. For better visibility, we use a non-linear scaling of the images (power of
0.7 for the observation, and power of 0.4 for the synthesized emission). The color bars reﬂect this. The peak count value in the observations
(corresponding to 1.00) is 3500 DN/pixel; this is a factor of six lower for the model. This diﬀerence corresponds to a factor of 2.5 in density (see
Sect. 5). The inlay shows a zoom-in of the region indicated by the white square. It shows a compact small loop. The color scaling is linear here.
The observations and the model cover the same physical space on the Sun with a ﬁeld of view of (515.9′′)2 corresponding to (374.4 Mm)2. The
numbers indicate the features discussed in Sect. 3. The blue dashed rectangle indicates the zoom-in used in Fig. 3.

(1) Long loops. We ﬁnd that loops with lengths of 100 Mm to
200 Mm connect opposite polarities at the edges of the active re-
gion in the northern (top) and southern areas. These loops are as-
sociated with the large-scale potential-like magnetic ﬁeld of the
active region. The model loops appear to be less strongly helical
than the observed loops, probably because the observed magne-
tograms also lack strong magnetic helicity (see Sect. 5). Like in
the observations, the model shows quite a few distinct long loops
in the southern part. Some even lie at roughly the same location
(1a). The observations show a more complex broad bundle of
loops in the northern part, where the model only shows a single
long loop (1b). The long model loop in the north still shows a
rather broad structure with a clear loop in the middle.

(2) Fan loops. In our model we ﬁnd fan loops, in particu-
lar, on the western (right) side of the active region. They appear
at the same locations as very similar features that are visible in
the observations. Several thinner structures quickly diverge and
form a funnel-type structure in which the thinner strands are em-
bedded (2a). Our model even reproduces a smaller feature of this
type outside of the main part of the active region (2b) in an area
of enhanced magnetic ﬁeld strength (cf. Fig. 1). The fan loops in
this setup also appear because of the horizontal periodic domain;
see the discussion in Sect. 5.

(3) Diﬀuse emission. Loops in the corona have a rather
low contrast, they often stick out of a diﬀuse non-resolved
background by only 10% to 30% (Del Zanna & Mason 2003;
Peter et al. 2013). We see this general pattern in our model as
well. Most of the thin loops are embedded in much thicker struc-
tures of diﬀuse emission. In our model this is due to the high

magnetic resistivity, but it might well reﬂect the situation on the
real Sun (for a discussion of the resistivity in MHD models, see
Peter 2015).

(4) Compact loops. In the core of an active region, obser-
vations show an abundance of small transient features, which
may be low-lying loops that are related to small-scale magnetic
patches in the photosphere (Peter et al. 2013). In the model we
see only a few of these, probably because of the limited spatial
resolution (see Sect. 5). The example shown in the inset of Fig. 2
only exists for less than 10 min in the simulation and is indeed a
low-lying loop (cf. Sect. 4) that is rooted in two small opposite-
polarity patches that evolve quickly.

4. Energy deposition in the corona

The coronal structures that appear in the model do so because
energy is deposited along ﬁeld lines that are at their footpoints
driven by horizontal motions. Here, we brieﬂy discuss the rela-
tion of the loops that appear to the energy input per particle. In
Fig. 3 we display the distribution of the energy input at the same
time as the snapshot of the emission shown in Fig. 2, but inte-
grated in time for the 120 s leading up to that time. This accounts
for the Alfvén transit time through the coronal structure so that
disturbances of the magnetic ﬁeld have time to spread.

When we integrate the energy input per particle vertically,
loop features become visible that are similar to those seen in
emission (compare Fig. 3 to the emission in the blue dashed rect-
angle in Fig. 2). We see more spatial variation along the ﬁeld
lines in the energy input than in coronal intensity. The reason

Article number, page 3 of 5

A&Aproofs: manuscript no. paper

However, the small compact loops only appear when we use a
time-dependent photospheric ﬁeld for driving. The time evolu-
tion of the magnetic ﬁeld deposits more energy into the corona
on smaller scales.

5. Limitations of the model

This model is generally successful in reproducing the observed
corona of the active region, but several limitations need to be
kept in mind. The main limitation probably is the moderate spa-
tial resolution that does not allow us to properly resolve the
small-scale magnetic features on granular scales of 1000 km and
smaller. Most of the shortcomings of our model might be traced
to this limitation.

A higher spatial resolution would reveal smaller features of
the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld that drives the model. These
small magnetic patches would give rise to a higher (transient)
energy input that would cause more small-scale hot structures at
low heights to appear as compact transient loops. Observation-
ally, there are clear indications that such small-scale opposite
polarities cause heating of coronal structures (Chitta et al. 2017,
2019). With the current setup, we need observations of the pho-
tospheric magnetic ﬁeld of the whole active region, and such data
are available only at a moderate spatial resolution of about 1′′,
such as those provided by HMI that we use here. High-resolution
observations would provide only an insuﬃcient ﬁeld of view that
does not cover the whole active region.

Our model does not produce regions at high temperature of
5 MK or above at suﬃciently high density to give rise to X-ray
loops in the core of the active region. Again, this could be due
to the lack of resolution, which prevents opposite polarities from
canceling and from providing high-energy ﬂuxes into the corona
(cf. observations by Chitta et al. 2018). In a model with a smaller
computational domain, Archontis & Hansteen (2014) indeed re-
ported that plasma was heated to ﬂare-like temperatures in com-
pact (few Mm) structures. In general, we would therefore expect
a higher energy input into the upper atmosphere if we were able
to feed the model with magnetic ﬁeld data at signiﬁcantly higher
spatial resolution.

As a consequence of the possibly too low energy ﬂux in the
model, the model density might be too low as well. According
to the scaling laws of Rosner et al. (1978), the coronal density
scales roughly with the heat input to the power of 4/7. The densi-
ties in our model, and consequently, the count rates, might there-
fore be lower than in the observed active region. The count rates
in the model are too low by about a factor of six, which means
that the density is too low by about a factor of 2.5. This probably
also aﬀects the density distribution along the loop and is the rea-
son that we scaled our model emission nonlinearly with a power
of 0.4 in Fig. 2 (while the observations are scaled closer to linear
with a power of 0.7).

The loops in our model corona look more like those in a
potential ﬁeld than like the loops in the observations. In our
model we only prescribed the vertical component of the mag-
netic ﬁeld, but not the horizontal component (which is not avail-
able at 45 s cadence and for this large ﬁeld of view with HMI).
We would therefore miss any helical component of the magnetic
ﬁeld, which would lead to a more twisted appearance of the mag-
netic ﬁeld. Moreover, this would increase the energy input into
the system and thus help alleviate the problem described above,
at least to some extent.

Finally, we assume periodic boundary conditions in our
model (as do most other 3D MHD models of the solar atmo-
sphere). This implies that the ﬁeld lines of the fan loops on the

Fig. 3. Energy deposition in terms of Ohmic heating rate per particle
µ0η j2/n. Panel a shows the top view of an average over 2 min (14.5 to
16.5 min) and in the vertical direction from z =0 to 30 Mm. Panel b
shows an average over a stripe with y =160 to 183 Mm, as indicated in
panel a (also averaged over 2 min). The white square shows the region
of interest with the compact small loop (indicated by arrows in both
panels); compare with Fig. 2.

is that the energy is eﬃciently redistributed through (Spitzer)
heat conduction parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld. Heat conduction
quickly evens out temperature inhomogeneities and leads to a
comparably constant temperature along a ﬁeld line and thus a
comparably constant coronal emission along the loop. The ap-
pearance of the EUV loops is directly linked to the energy input
into the corona (Peter & Bingert 2012) and is (in our model) a di-
rect consequence of the energy injection near the loop footpoints
(at the height where plasma-β is about unity; cf. Chen et al.
2014).

While the model evolves, that is, while the changing photo-
spheric ﬁeld drives the system, compact coronal loops appear in
a transient fashion. One of these short loops is highlighted by the
white squares in all the ﬁgures. It clearly connects opposite mag-
netic polarities (Fig. 1), and the photospheric motions lead to the
strong heating (per particle) in what then appears as the short
EUV loop (inset of Fig. 2). The greater heating is clearly visible
when the computational box is viewed from the top and from the
side (arrows in Fig. 3). These small features might be related to
the miniature loops that were found in observations (Peter et al.
2013). Here the loop is showing up transiently because at low
heights and high densities, radiative cooling apparently is eﬃ-
cient and thus the lifetime of the structure is short. The overall
large-scale loop structure including the long loops, fan loops,
and diﬀusive emission is even visible before we evolve the mag-
netic ﬁeld at the bottom boundary according to the observations.

Article number, page 4 of 5

Warnecke & Peter: Data-driven model of the solar corona above an active region

western (right) side of the active region leave the box on that side
and enter the box again on the other side. In the model, the fan
loops therefore connect to an active region (diﬀerent from the
ﬁrst). On the real Sun, such a connected active region would be
far away, at a distance that is far larger than the size of an active
region. We tried to account for this in the model by surrounding
the active region by enough quiet Sun, so that the appearance of
the fan loops is hopefully realistic.

None of the above limitations are expected to alter the main
conclusion of our study: our data-driven model can account for
the structures seen on the real Sun. Future models will have to
address these remaining problems step by step, however.

6. Conclusions

We showed that we can reproduce many aspects of the corona
above an active region using a data-driven 3D MHD model. The
emission that we synthesized from the model qualitatively repro-
duces the observed coronal features of this active region: long
loops, fan-like loops, and small transient loops in the active re-
gion core. We also showed that these model features are embed-
ded in a diﬀuse background of coronal emission, as is the case
on the real Sun, where a typical loop has a low contrast of only
10% to 30% to the background.

Our data-driven model shows that the structure of the ob-
served photospheric magnetic ﬁeld and its temporal evolution
fully govern the appearance of the corona in an active region.
Driving the magnetic ﬁeld at the surface induces currents in the
corona at just the correct places: here the plasma is heated and
forms EUV loops in the model at exactly the same place where
they also appear in the real observations. The energy input in our
model is solely based on the driving of the magnetic ﬁeld and is
thus very similar to the scenarios of ﬁeld-line braiding (Parker
1988) and ﬂux-tube tectonics scenarios (Priest et al. 2002). The
success of our model therefore supports these heating scenarios.
The main shortcoming of our work is the lack of spatial res-
olution of the photospheric ﬁeld: to cover a full active region,
observational data are available only at a moderate resolution of
about 1′′. However, we can expect smaller magnetic patches to
play a signiﬁcant role in energizing the corona. This could lead
to a higher energy input, and in particular, also to a higher struc-
turing of the corona in the core of the active region. Likewise,
if we included the horizontal component of the magnetic ﬁeld,
the energy input would increase, and would in particular lead to
a more strongly twisted appearance of the coronal loops in the
model. This would bring them closer to the actual observations.
Our data-driven 3D MHD model does reproduce the overall
appearance of the corona in an active region despite the limita-
tions outlined in Sect. 5. This ﬁrst look at the results shows that
the driving of the corona by the observed magnetic ﬁeld at the
surface level indeed gives rise to coronal structures that appear
in the model at (roughly) the same time and location as in the
observations of the real Sun.

Acknowledgements. We thank Lakshmi Pradeep Chitta and Sven Bingert for dis-
cussion leading to this work. Simulations have been carried out on supercomput-
ers at GWDG, on the Max Planck supercomputer at RZG in Garching, in the
facilities hosted by the CSC—IT Center for Science in Espoo, Finland, which
are ﬁnanced by the Finnish ministry of education. J. W. acknowledges funding
by the Max-Planck/Princeton Center for Plasma Physics and from the People
Programme (Marie Curie Actions) of the European Union’s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under REA grant agreement No. 623609.

References

Archontis, V. & Hansteen, V. 2014, The Astrophysical Journal, 788, L2
Bingert, S. & Peter, H. 2011, A&A, 530, A112
Bingert, S. & Peter, H. 2013, A&A, 550, A30
Boerner, P., Edwards, C., Lemen, J., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 41
Boris, J. P. 1970, NRL Memorandum Report, 2167
Bourdin, P.-A., Bingert, S., & Peter, H. 2013, A&A, 555, A123
Bourdin, P.-A., Bingert, S., & Peter, H. 2014, PASJ, 66, S7
Chatterjee,

2018, Geophys. Astrophys.

Fluid Dyn.,

P.
[arXiv:1806.08166]

submitted

Chen, F., Peter, H., Bingert, S., & Cheung, M. C. M. 2014, A&A, 564, A12
Cheung, M. C. M. & DeRosa, M. L. 2012, ApJ, 757, 147
Cheung, M. C. M., Rempel, M., Chintzoglou, G., et al. 2018, Nature Astronomy,

3, 160

Chitta, L. P., Peter, H., & Solanki, S. K. 2018, A&A, 615, L9
Chitta, L. P., Peter, H., Solanki, S. K., et al. 2017, ApJS, 229, 4
Chitta, L. P., Sukarmadji, A. R. C., Rouppe van der Voort, L., & Peter, H. 2019,

A&A, 623, A176

Del Zanna, G. & Mason, H. E. 2003, A&A, 406, 1089
Gudiksen, B. V., Carlsson, M., Hansteen, V. H., et al. 2011, A&A, 531, A154
Gudiksen, B. V. & Nordlund, Å. 2002, ApJ, 572, L113
Gudiksen, B. V. & Nordlund, Å. 2005a, ApJ, 618, 1031
Gudiksen, B. V. & Nordlund, Å. 2005b, ApJ, 618, 1020
Hansteen, V. H., Archontis, V., Pereira, T. M. D., et al. 2017, ApJ, 839, 22
Hansteen, V. H., Hara, H., De Pontieu, B., & Carlsson, M. 2010, ApJ, 718, 1070
Lemen, J. R., Title, A. M., Akin, D. J., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 17
Parker, E. N. 1988, ApJ, 330, 474
Peter, H. 2015, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series

A, 373, 20150055

Peter, H. & Bingert, S. 2012, A&A, 548, A1
Peter, H., Bingert, S., Klimchuk, J. A., et al. 2013, A&A, 556, A104
Peter, H., Gudiksen, B. V., & Nordlund, Å. 2004, ApJ, 617, L85
Peter, H., Gudiksen, B. V., & Nordlund, Å. 2006, ApJ, 638, 1086
Peter, H., Warnecke, J., Chitta, L. P., & Cameron, R. H. 2015, A&A, 584, A68
Priest, E. R., Heyvaerts, J. F., & Title, A. M. 2002, ApJ, 576, 533
Rempel, M. 2017, ApJ, 834, 10
Rosner, R., Tucker, W. H., & Vaiana, G. S. 1978, ApJ, 220, 643
Schou, J., Scherrer, P. H., Bush, R. I., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 229
Warnecke, J. & Bingert, S. 2018, Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid Dyn., submitted

[arXiv:1811.01572]

Warnecke, J., Chen, F., Bingert, S., & Peter, H. 2017, A&A, 607, A53

Article number, page 5 of 5

