New exotic beams from the SPIRAL 1 upgrade  
P. Delahayea,1, M. Duboisa, L. Maunourya, J. Angotb, O. Bajeata, B. Blankc, J. C. Camd, 
P. Chauveaua,e, R. Frigota, B. Jacquota, P. Jardina, P. Lecomtea, S. Hormigosa, O. 
Kamaloua, V. Kuchia, B. Osmonda, B. M. Retailleaua, A. Savallea, T. Storaf, V. 
Toivanena, J. C. Thomasa, E. Traykovg, P. Ujica, R. Vondrasekh 

aGANIL, bd Henri Becquerel, 14000 Caen, France 

bLPSC, avenue des martyrs, 38026 Grenoble, France 

cCENBG, 19 chemin du Solarium, 33175 Gradignan, France 

dLPC Caen, Bd Maréchal Juin, 14000 Caen, France 

eCSNSM, bat. 101, Domaine de l'Université de Paris Sud, 91400 Orsay 

fISOLDE, CERN, route de Meyrin, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland 

gIPHC, Batiment 27, 23 Rue du Loess, 67200 Strasbourg 

hANL, 9700 Cass Avenue, Lemont, IL 60439, United States 

Abstract 

Since 2001, the SPIRAL 1 facility has been one of the pioneering facilities in ISOL techniques for reaccelerating radioactive 
ion beams: the fragmentation of the heavy ion beams of GANIL on graphite targets and subsequent ionization in the Nanogan 
ECR ion source has permitted to deliver beams of gaseous elements (He, N, O, F, Ne, Ar, Kr) to numerous experiments. Thanks 
to the CIME cyclotron, energies up to 20  AMeV could be obtained. In 2014, the facility  was stopped to undertake a major 
upgrade, with the aim to extend the production capabilities of SPIRAL 1 to a number of new elements. This upgrade, which is 
presently under commissioning, consists in the integration of an ECR booster in the SPIRAL 1 beam line to charge breed the 
beam of different 1+ sources. A FEBIAD source (the so-called VADIS from ISOLDE) was chosen to be the future workhorse 
for producing many  metallic ion beams.  This source was coupled to the SPIRAL 1 graphite targets and tested on-line with 
different beams at GANIL. The charge breeder is an upgraded version of the Phoenix booster which was previously tested in 
ISOLDE. It was lately commissioned at LPSC and more recently in the SPIRAL 1 beam lines with stable beams. The upgrade 
additionally permits the use of other target material than graphite. In particular, the use of fragmentation targets will permit to 
produce higher intensities than from projectile fragmentation, and thin targets of high Z will be used for producing beams by 
fusion-evaporation. The performances of the aforementioned ingredients of the upgrade (targets, 1+ source and charge breeder) 
have  been  and  are  still being optimized  in  the  frame  of  different European projects  (EMILIE,  ENSAR  and  ENSAR2).  The 
upgraded SPIRAL 1 facility will provide soon its first new beams for physics and further beam development are undertaken to 
prepare  for  the  next  AGATA  campaign.  The  results  obtained  during  the  on-line  commissioning  period  permit  to  evaluate 
intensities for new beams from the upgraded facility. 

Keywords: Radioactive Ion Beams; Ion Sources   

——— 
1Corresponding author. e-mail: pierre.delahaye@ganil.fr. 

 
 
2 

1. Scientific motivations 

During the past decades, the SPIRAL 1 facility at 
GANIL has been delivering radioactive ion beams of 
unique  intensity  and  purity  for  physics  experiments. 
SPIRAL  1  makes  use  of  the  so-called  “Isotope 
Separation On Line” (ISOL) technique [1]. Ionized in 
ion sources, ISOL beams have an optical quality which 
is  comparable  to  this  of  the  stable  ion  beams.  In 
particular, the energies accessible at SPIRAL, from a 
few  keV  to  20  AMeV  for  the  lightest  nuclides 
accelerated  by  CIME,  allow  for  a  unique  variety  of 
studies  using 
techniques  of  decay 
spectroscopy, Coulomb excitation, fusion, transfer and 
direct reactions. During the past decade a  number of 
interesting physics results were achieved at SPIRAL 1 
using these techniques, leading to published highlights 
addressing  questions  that  can  only  be  handled  with 
reaccelerated  radioactive  beams.  Despite  remarkable 
achievements  [2]  and  its  status  of  first  world-class 
facility, SPIRAL 1 has been technically limited to the 
production  of  radioactive  ion  beams  of  gaseous 
elements, thus limiting the physics opportunities of the 
facility.   

common 

the  facility 

 A  project  of  upgrade  was  started  in  2011  to 
complement  the  radioactive  ion  beam  production 
towards  condensable 
capabilities  of 
elements  (see  Sec.  2).  The  scientific  interest  of  the 
upgrade of SPIRAL 1 was sustained by different calls 
for letter of intents,  which gathered a large response 
from the international nuclear physics community. In 
total,  more  than  100  beams  were  discussed  during  a 
workshop dedicated to SPIRAL 1, 2/3rd of which are 
using a new Target Ion Source System (TISS), which 
couples the SPIRAL target with a FEBIAD ion source 
[3]. First experiments using the new TISS should run 
during  2019.  The  upgrade  opens  on  the  one  hand 
numerous opportunities with reaccelerated beams with 
innovative  setups  such  as  AGATA,  MUGAST  or 
ACTAR. On the other, it offers rich perspectives with 
low  energy  beams  for  weak  interaction  physics  and 
beta/rare decay studies, in which DESIR [4] will play 
a major role in the upcoming years. 

2. Upgrade layout 

Since 2001, SPIRAL 1 makes use of thick graphite 
targets, on which the high power heavy ion beams of 
GANIL impinge. The radioactive fragments diffuse as 
atoms  out  of  the  hot  target  and  effuse  via  a  transfer 
passage  to  the  ion  source.  Ionized  to  the  required 
charge  state  by  the  Nanogan  III  Electron  Cyclotron 
Resonance (ECR) ion source, the radioactive ions are 
then separated and accelerated in the Cyclotron d’Ions 
de Moyenne Energie (CIME) [1]. Fig. 1 presents the 
Target – Ion Source System (TISS) that was used so 
far at SPIRAL 1. The ionization technique prevents the 
ionization of condensable elements as the transfer tube 
and the ECR source is a cold assembly that stops the 
effusion  of  radioactive 
isotopes  of  condensable 
elements from the hot target to the ion source plasma. 
The  SPIRAL  upgrade  project  consisted 
the 
development  of  a  1+  to  n+  charge  breeding  system, 
permitting  the  use  of  versatile  1+  sources  for 

in 

Figure 1: Target –ion source system used at SPIRAL 1 since 2001. 
It couples the Nanogan III ECR ion source with a graphite target 
via a cold transfer tube. 

 
Figure 2: elements produced by the different sources envisaged after the upgrade. The FEBIAD source is a universal technique to produce 1+ 
beam of all elements that exhibit a melting point below 2000°C, and is therefore capable to ionize the same elements than the ECR ion 
sources and surface ionizers. Some of the elements that could be produced by fusion evaporation beyond Z=41 are shown by a star. 

extending  the  range  of  elements  available  for  post-
acceleration to condensable elements.  

2.2. New targets 

2.1. A FEBIAD source as workhorse for the upgrade 

Compared  to  rare  gases,  radioactive  atoms  of 
condensable elements produced by the ISOL method 
suffer  from  comparatively  longer  sticking  times  on 
surfaces  that  they  encounter  during  their  transport 
from  the  target  to  the  ion  source  volume.  As  high 
temperature reduces the sticking time, the condensable 
elements  are  traditionally  produced  using  hot  target 
and  ion  source  assemblies  [5].  Typical  ion  sources 
used  in  this  case  are  hot  surface  sources,  such  as 
surface  ionization  sources,  Forced  Electron  Beam 
Induced Arc Discharge sources (FEBIAD sources also 
called “hot plasma” sources), and Resonant Ionization 
Laser  Ion  Source  (RILIS).  An  alternative  to  this 
scenario was tested at GANIL in the past by coupling 
directly ECR sources to targets at the SIRa test bench 
[6,7]. Due to the diversity of the beams requested in 
the  letters  of  intent,  a  FEBIAD  source  recently 
improved  at  ISOLDE,  the  so-called  VADIS  [8]  was 
found to be the ion source of condensable elements to 
be  coupled in priority  with  the SPIRAL targets. The 
FEBIAD  source  can  deliver  a  number  of  beams  in 
addition  to  those  traditionally  produced  by  surface 
ionization and ECR ion sources, as can be seen on Fig. 
2. It is a first step towards a universal beam production 
that  the  more  sophisticated,  but  cleaner  RILIS  could 
complement at a later stage.  

and 

beams 

targets.  The 

The  upgrade  was  also  aiming  at  extending  the 
safety authorizations for a number of combinations of 
primary 
previous 
authorizations were limited to projectile fragmentation 
on graphite targets. In the frame of the upgrade, these 
authorizations were extended to other target materials 
for  fragmentation  and  fusion  evaporation  reactions. 
The following primary beam – target combinations are 
now authorized:  

• 

12C  (up  to  95  MeV/A)  to  238U  (up  to  8 
MeV/A)  impinging  on  thick  graphite  targets,  as  it 
previously was  

• 

12C  (2.1013 pps)  at  95  MeV/A  impinging  on 

thick targets of Z up to 41 (Nb) 
12C  (95  MeV/A@2.1013pps)  to  238U  (8 
• 
MeV/A@Imax.) on thin targets without restriction on 
Z 
A  Nb  target  and  fusion  evaporation  targets  are 
presently being developed [9,10] and should be tested 
in  the  coming  years.  The  fusion  evaporation  target 
benefits from a collaboration with IPN Orsay [10]. 

2.3. ECR charge breeding 

At  reacceleration  facilities,  charge  breeding  is  a 
technique consisting in the injection of a 1+ beam into 
the plasma of an Electron Beam Ion Source (EBIS) or 
Electron  Cyclotron  Resonance  Ion  Source  (ECRIS) 
and of its subsequent multi-ionization for reaching the 
charge state required by the post-accelerator [11]. The 
charge  breeding  is  a  competitive  and  cost  effective 

 
 
 
4 

research  and 

solution  compared  to  the  stripping  foil  technique.  It 
has  benefited  from  multiple  studies  within  the 
European 
technical  development 
programs FP5 and FP6, and from the development of 
facilities using this technique at ISOLDE, TRIUMF or 
more recently ANL. Because of the continuous mode 
of operation and of the intrinsic resolving power of the 
cyclotron  CIME,  an  ECR  charge  breeder  has  been 
found  better  suited  than  a  pulsed  EBIS.  The  ECR 
charge  breeder  of  the  SPIRAL  upgrade  is  a  Phoenix 
booster donated  by  the  Daresbury  Laboratory.  It  has 
been tested at ISOLDE from 2003 to 2008 [12,13] and 
upgraded  since  to  reach  the  best  performances  with 
this device. 

3. New beams from the FEBIAD TISS 

3.1. TISS development 

these 

The  FEBIAD  TISS  couples  standard  SPIRAL  1 
1200W C targets to the VADIS via an ohmic heated 
tantalum  transfer  tube  (Fig.  3).  The  TISS  was 
developed  in  a  staged  approach.  The  early  versions 
were  first  tested  online  in  2011  using  the  SIRa  test 
bench  at  modest  primary  beam  power.  They 
demonstrated  the  efficient  ionization  of  radioactive 
isotopes of 8 new elements: the alkali Na, K, metallic 
Mg,  Al,  Fe,  Cu,  Mn  and  halogen  Cl  elements.  The 
TISS  lifetime  was  however  limited  due  to  various 
issues related to the dilatation of the transfer tube. In 
2013, 
issues  were  fixed  by  enabling  a 
displacement  of  the  ion  source  along  the  axis  of  the 
secondary  ion  beam  extraction  (Fig.  3)  [14].    The 
modified  TISS  was  then  tested  at  nominal  power 
(1200W of 36Ar at 95 AMeV) in the SPIRAL 1 beam 
lines in December 2013, leading to the first scientific 
results obtained at SPIRAL 1 with a FEBIAD source 
[15,16].  These  on-line  tests  at  SPIRAL  1  gave 
generally even better secondary beam intensities than 
expected  from  the  measurements  at  SIRa,  showing 
that the  yields do not scale linearly with the primary 
beam  power.  The  intensities  shown  in  Fig.  4  were 
published  in  [17].  At  the  very  end  of  the  tests,  the 
anode  entered in short circuit  with the cathode. This 
failure  was  attributed  to  the  slow  dissociation  and 
metallization  during  operation  of  BeO  insulators  

ions  were  visible 

supporting the anode of the FEBIAD (see Fig. 3), as 
Be+ 
in  high  amount  (1µA), 
dominating  the  ion  source  spectrum.  In  order  to 
increase  the  reliability  of  the  target  ion  source,  a 
program  of  test  was  rigorously  followed  on  the 
SPIRAL 1 off-line test bench with the aim to select the 
best insulator, which could stand operation under high 
temperature.  The  results  of  these  tests  permitted  to 
show  that  on  the  test  bench  boron  nitride  (BN) 
insulators permitted a stable operation over a period of 
about  3  weeks.  These  tests  were  realized  with  an 
important number of heating and cooling cycles, as the 
ion source was switched on in the morning and off in 
the evening for half of the tests period. The nominal 
and reproducible efficiencies for stable rare gases were 
determined  (Sec.  3.3).  At  this  stage,  the  target  ion 
source  was  considered  as  ready  for  operation.  2016 
and 2017 were used to provision the  FEBIAD target 

Figure 3: FEBIAD TISS. The bottom insets is a zoom on the ion 
source critical parts. See text for details. 

the  SPIRAL  1  upgraded 

ion sources for the startup of the upgrade and diverse 
characterizations  detailed  below.  In  April  and  May 
2018, 
facility  was 
commissioned for radioactive ion beam production. A 
beam  of  95  AMeV  of  20Ne  first  impinged  on  the 
SPIRAL 1 target for the production of a  17F beam for 

 
 
the E750 experiment. Unexpectedly, the anode entered 
again into a shortcut with the cathode very rapidly (6-
8h)  after  the  beam  was  tuned  on  target.  Again,  the 
anode insulators were identified as the probable cause 
for  the  FEBIAD  breakdown,  contrasting  with  the 
observations done on the test bench without beam on 
target. During discussions with a panel of experts from 
ISOLDE  and  TRIUMF,  the  possible  explanations 
mentioned for the different behavior of the source on-
line  and  off-line  were  the  different  heating  /thermal 
conditioning  of  the  target  ion  source  as  well  as  the 
possible  deposition  of  direct  C  vapors  on  different 
parts of the source, including the insulators. In order to 
fix  these  issues,  a  new  FEBIAD  ion  source  was 
conditioned  with  a  different  configuration  of  heat 
shields  permitting  to  cool  down  the  insulators.  A 
helical chicane was inserted in the transfer tube to stop 
the direct C vapor from the irradiated target (Fig. 5).  
With  these  modifications,  the  FEBIAD  target  ion 
source could be run with first a low power (100-200W) 
40Ca  beam  and  finally  a  high  power  (>800W)  36Ar 
beam,  both  at  95  AMeV  without  failure.  The 
secondary beam intensities measured for the latest test 
are shown  in Fig.  6. As it clearly appeared  later, the 
diagnostic used to center the  primary beam on target 
was malfunctioning during the commissioning tests of 
2018.  The  wrong  steering  caused  lower  yields  than 
expected.  As  it  was  observed  later  with  a  Nanogan 
TISS delivering 14O to the E744 experiment, a factor 
of  50  to  100  improvement  of  the  production  yield 
could be obtained at the SPIRAL identification station 
[18] by tuning the primary beam steerers to correct for 
the faulty diagnostic. The wrong steering might even 
have been a possible cause for the early failure of the 
FEBIAD TISS with 20Ne. 

In  addition 

running  period. 

The  FEBIAD  target  ion  source  is  being  presently 
further  consolidated  for  final  adjustment  on  the  test 
bench,  before  being  recommissioned  online  in  the 
upcoming 
the 
aforementioned modifications,  a few adjustments are 
the  poles 
tested.  In  particular 
supporting the fragile insulators, originally in Mo, are 
replaced by Re (see inset of Fig. 3), which has a lower 
thermal  conductivity.  These  Re  poles  will  permit  to 
further protect the insulators from the hottest parts of 
the ion source. With these adjustments, it is believed 

the  material  of 

to 

that  the  FEBIAD  target  ion  source,  will  have  most 
chances to behave very well online.  

Figure 4: Secondary intensities measured with the SPIRAL 1 
FEBIAD TISS with 36Ar at nominal power (~1200W) in 2013. 

3.2. Secondary beam intensities  

The 1+ beam intensities measured in 2013 and 2018 
from the FEBIAD TISS at high power with a beam of 
36Ar at 95 AMeV are shown in Fig. 4 and 6. The yields 

Figure 5: photograph of the transfer tube and associated helical 
chicane. 

measured in 2018 are considered as very conservative, 
as  it  was  understood  later  that  the  primary  beam 

Figure 6: Secondary intensities measured with the SPIRAL 1 
FEBIAD TISS with 36Ar at nominal power (800 - 1200W) in 
2018. A wrong steering of the primary beam is invoked as the 
reason for the lower yields as compared to 2013.  

 
 
 
6 

positioning  was  not  controlled  during  the  on-line 
commissioning,  resulting  in  degraded  production 
conditions. 

An analysis of the data  measured in 2013, briefly 
presented  in  [17],  permitted  to  deduce  from  the 
measured  intensities  the  typical  release  times  and 
ionization  efficiencies  for  the  different  elements 
observed  with  a  Ge  detector  at  the  1+  beam 
identification station. This analysis bases itself on the 
empirical release parametrization used in [19] for the 
ISOLDE  yields.  From  the  ionization,  transport  and 
release  efficiencies  deduced  from  this  analysis,  and 
the  EPAX  V2  parametrization  [20]  for 
using 

Figure 9: Projections for secondary intensities for radioactive isotopes 
produced by the FEBIAD TISS for the “day 1” experiments. 

fragmentation cross sections, projections can be made 
for the isotopes of the different elements produced so 
far  with  the  FEBIAD  TISS.  The  results  of  these 
projections are shown in Fig. 7, making an optimized 
use  of  different  primary  beams  available  at  GANIL. 
These projections were used as guideline for “day 1” 
beams,  available  for  the  first  call  for  proposals  of 
experiments with the SPIRAL 1 upgraded facility. For 
experiments using reaccelerated beams, these 1+ beam 
intensities have to be folded with charge breeding (~5-
10%, see Sec. 4) and acceleration efficiencies (~20%), 
so  that  the  resulting  accelerated  beam  intensities  are 
typically a factor 100 lower.  

More speculative extrapolations have been done for 
the  production  of  radioactive  isotopes  for  other 
elements  typically  produced  by  FEBIAD  sources,  as 
for instance observed at ISOLDE. For these elements, 
the release efficiencies have been estimated from the 
parameterization of on-line data obtained at ISOLDE 
[19],  PARNNE  [21],  and  if  not  available  from 
diffusion – effusion coefficients found in the literature, 

using  the  parametrization  of  diffusion  and  effusion 
described by Kirchner in [22]. The FEBIAD ionization 
efficiencies are extrapolated from measured data with 
noble  gases.  The  results  of  such  extrapolations  are 

Figure 8: Extrapolation of secondary beam intensities (before 
post-acceleration) for the fragmentation of different stable beams 
available at GANIL  [24]. 

Figure 7: Extrapolation of secondary beam intensities (before post-
acceleration) for the fragmentation of different targets and fusion 
evaporation. See text for more explanations. 

shown  for  the  fragmentation  of  the  different  stable 
beams  available  at  GANIL  and  using  new  target 
materials for fragmentation and fusion evaporation in 
Fig. 8 and 9 respectively. The following fragmentation 
targets  were considered: SiC, CaO, NiO, Nb using a 
12C  beam  at  95  AMeV  and  at  the  highest  power 

 
 
 
 
available at GANIL (3.6 kW).The fusion-evaporation 
cross sections have been estimated using the procedure 
described  in  [23]  for  a  number  of  target  material  – 
stable  beam  combinations.  The  plot  shows  only  the 
best combination. The same release efficiencies as for 
the fragmentation targets have been assumed, which is 
a  priori  conservative  as  for  this  reaction  mechanism 
many  tricks  can  be  used  in  order  to  speed  up  the 
transport of radioactive atoms to the ion source [9]. A 
list  of  secondary  beam  intensities  as  obtained  using 
these different estimates are available on the GANIL 
– SPIRAL 2 website [24]. 

3.3. Ongoing investigations 

During the conditioning of the various versions of 
the  TISS,  the  ionization  efficiencies  of  the  FEBIAD 
have  been  repeatedly  monitored  on  the  off-line  test 
bench  with  stable  rare  gases.  These  ionization 
efficiencies are generally reproducing the efficiencies 
of the traditional MK5 of ISOLDE, which are a factor 
of  ~4  lower  than  the  VADIS  ones  quoted  in  [8]. 
ISOLDE  equally 
lower 
efficiencies  are  regularly  obtained  on-line  with  the 
VADIS.  Nevertheless,  it  is  remarkable  that  the 

that  similarly 

reports 

the  latest  manifestation  of  this  particular  regime 
happened  during  the  injection  of  a  tiny  leak  of  Xe 
(Fig.10),  whose  flow  rate  enabled  the  control  of  the 
ionization  efficiency,  switching  gradually  from  the 
standard  low  ionization  regime  to  the  enhanced 
ionization  regime  and  vice-versa,  for  a  couple  of 
hours.  

The  energy  profile  of  the  1+  beam  from  the 
FEBIAD  source  is  of  high  interest  for  the  charge 
breeding performances. The energy acceptance of the 
ECR  charge  breeder  is  defined  by  the  width  of  its 
“V”  curve;  the  n+  extracted  ion  beam  current  as  a 
function of the  difference of  voltage  between the 1+ 
source  and  ECR  charge  breeder.  The  acceptance  of 
ECR charge breeders is typically of 5 to 10 eV FWHM 
for condensable elements. The energy profiles of the 
FEBIAD  and  Nanogan  III  could  lately  be  measured 
and compared thanks to an analyzer manufactured by 
LPC  Caen  (Fig.  11).  The  energy  dispersion  of  the 
FEBIAD  ion  source  is  of  the  order  of  Ey1.5eV, 
which  is  well  within  the  acceptance  range  measured 
with  the  SPIRAL  1  charge  breeder  [25].  It  is  also 
remarkable that the plasma potentials of the Nanogan 
and  FEBIAD  source  differ  considerably.  The  origin 
for the voltage shown in Fig. 11 is somewhat arbitrary, 
because of the lack of calibration of our test bench HV 
power  supplies.  It  corresponds  to  the  1+  source  HV 
voltage  within  20-30  V  error  bar.  Latest  simulations 
show that the FEBIAD can have plasma potentials as 
low as -70V, with an electron beam current as high as 
300 mA. This result was experimentally corroborated 
by  the  first  charge  breeding  of  a  radioactive  ion 
performed at SPIRAL 1 as described in Sec. 4. 

Figure 11: Ionization efficiencies measured at ISOLDE and 
GANIL with the different FEBIAD sources and in different 
ionization regimes. See text for more explanations.  

efficiencies quoted in [8] could be sometimes obtained 
during the conditioning of the TISS at the SPIRAL 1 
test bench, over periods of a few hours. The conditions 
for  stabilizing  this  enhanced  ionization  regime  have 
not yet been found, and are being investigated. One of 

Figure 10: energy profiles of the Nanogan and FEBIAD ion 
sources.  

 
 
 
 
 
8 

In order to identify the most important mechanisms 
that  governs  the  ionization  performances  of  the 
the  SIMION 
FEBIAD,  simulations  combining 
software  for  calculating  the  trajectory  of  charged 
particles (electrons and ions) in fields, and FEMM 4.2 
for  accounting  for  space  charge  effects,  are  being 
undertaken.  At  present,  these  simulations  reproduce 
the  plasma  potential  reasonably  well,  as  the  latter 
defines  the  energy  profile  of  the  1+  beam  (mean 
energy and dispersion) of the extracted beam. Possible 
ionization  regimes  by  pure  electron  impact  or  in  a 
plasma will have then to be investigated to attempt to 
reproduce  the  order  of  magnitudes  of  the  measured 
efficiencies. 

4. ECR charge breeder performances 

Based  on  an  early  version  of  the  Phoenix  charge 
breeder used  at ISOLDE for charge breeding studies 
[12,13],  the  SPIRAL  1  charge  breeder  has  been 
upgraded in the frame of the EMILIE project [26] to 
benefit  from  the  latest  advances  in  the  field  [27,28]. 
The  upgraded  charge  breeder  is  using  ultra-high 
vacuum  compliant  components,  including  an  Al 
plasma chamber. It is capable of 2 frequency heating, 
although only a single 14 GHz frequency heating was 
used  so  far.  At  injection,  an  iron  plug  has  been 
symmetrized.  The  injection  optics  now  include  an 
electrostatic  triplet  and  a  mobile  injection  electrode. 
The puller is also mobile. The gas injection system is 
directly feeding the plasma chamber.  

Fig.  12  presents  the  charge  breeding  efficiencies 
obtained on the off-line LPSC test bench [25] and in 
2018 at SPIRAL 1 [29] for Na, K and Rb alkali ions, 
with He as support gas. The efficiencies are a factor 2 
to  5  higher  than  those  recorded  at  ISOLDE  [12,13]. 
The charge breeding performances for Na were lately 
benefiting from the work carried out at LPSC [30]: by 
fine tuning the magnetic field with iron rings and the 
extraction  electrode  position,  the  efficiency  was 
improved by a factor about 2-3 compared to what was 
previously measured at SPIRAL 1 [29]. 

During the radioactive ion beam commissioning in 
May 2018, the charge breeding of  37K1+ to 37K9+ was 
successfully  demonstrated.  The  secondary  intensities 
of the 1+ FEBIAD TISS beams and charge bred beams 

Figure 12: Charge breeder efficiencies obtained at LPSC and  
SPIRAL 1 with the upgraded Phoenix charge breeder. 

were  successively  transported  to  the  identification 
station.  An  efficiency  of  5.3%  was  obtained  after  a 
very short period of beam tuning (couple of hours) by 
monitoring  the  activity  of  the  rather  short-lived 
(1.225s)  37K  isotopes  at  the  SPIRAL  identification 
station.  For  such  short  tuning  time,  the  tuning  only 
concerned the 1+ beam optics and voltage difference 
between the ECR charge breeder and FEBIAD anode 
(V).  With  an  unusually  high  electron  beam  current 
(300  mA)  emitted  from  the  FEBIAD  cathode,  the 
optimized V was of the order of 80V. Compared to 
usual optimized V observed with surface ionization 
sources  used  for  the  off-line  commissioning  of  the 
charge breeder (7-12V) [25,29], this value pinpoints a 
FEBIAD  plasma  potential  of  the  order  of  70V.  Just 
prior to the injection of the radioactive ion beam, an 
efficiency  of  10%  was  recorded  for  the  charge 
breeding of a stable 40Ar1+ beam from the FEBIAD to 
40Ar8+, which is a factor of ~2 below the efficiencies 
measured with a properly tuned charge breeder. With 
optimized  RF  power,  gas  flow  and  magnetic 
confinement,  it  is  quite  likely  that  the  37K  charge 
breeding  efficiency  would  have  attained  a  similar 
value  as  those  measured  with  the  off-line  surface 
ionization source at LPSC and SPIRAL 1.  

5. Conclusions 

The  on-line  commissioning  of  the  SPIRAL  1 
upgraded facility has started. As there was no charge 

 
 
 
breeder 

[30],  and 

and  CIME.  The 

breeding and subsequent acceleration of a radioactive 
ion beam delivered to an experiment, the full operation 
of  the  upgraded  facility  has  not  yet  been  fully 
demonstrated.  Nevertheless,  and  despite  early 
technical  difficulties,  the  individual  elements  and 
combinations,  which  are  required  for  the  upgraded 
facility,  are  all  operational.  Beams  have  been 
successfully delivered from the FEBIAD TISS alone, 
from the FEBIAD TISS and charge breeder, from the 
charge 
ultimate 
commissioning  step,  consisting  in  the  successful 
delivery  of  beam  to  an  on-line  experiment,  is  being 
prepared.  Final  adjustments  with  the  FEBIAD  TISS 
are being undertaken on the off-line test bench. Charge 
breeding  R&D  is  being  pursued,  with  the  aim  of 
further improving the charge breeding efficiencies of 
the  critical 
light  beams 
parameters  on  which  the  charge  breeding  time 
depends. The combination of FEBIAD TISS with an 
ECR  charge  breeder  is  a  rather  unusual  one  for 
reacceleration  facilities.  Experience  will  be  gained 
over the years with this peculiar system. As seen with 
the operation of Nanogan for many years, the  CIME 
cyclotron intrinsic resolving  power permits to purify 
in  many  cases  the  light  (A<20)  beams.  For  heavier 
masses, a case – by – case study has to be done. The 
test  of  different  stripping  foils  behind  CIME  to 
separate  masses  around  56Ni  delivered  from  the 
FEBIAD TISS and reaccelerated by CIME to energies 
of  10-12  AMeV  will  be  undertaken  in  the  coming 
months.  For low energy beams, the  High Resolution 
Separator  [31]  and  the  different  beam  purification 
techniques  in  ion  traps  such  as  PIPERADE  [32],  all 
present  at  DESIR,  will  be  essential  elements  for  the 
success of the associated experimental program. 

investigate 

References 

[1]  A. C. C. Villari et al., Nuc. Phys. A 787 (2007) 126c-133c, 

and references therein. 

[2]  A. Navin, F. De Oliveira Santos, P. Roussel-Chomaz and O. 
Sorlin, Jour. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 38 (2011) 24004. 

[3]  https://indico.in2p3.fr/event/12296/ 
[4]  B. Blank, B. Pramana - J Phys (2010) 75: 343. 
[5]  R. Kirchner, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. B 204 (2003) 179. 
[6]  N. Lecesne, Etude de la production d'ions radioactifs 

multichargés en ligne, PhD Thesis, Université de Caen 
(1997). 

[7]  P. Jardin et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 75 (2004)1619. 
[8]  L. Penescu, R. Catherall, J. Lettry, and T. Stora , Rev. Sci. 

Instrum. 81(2010) 02A906.  

[9]  V. Kuchi et al., to appear in these proceedings. 
[10] P. Jardin et al., to appear in these proceedings. 
[11] P. Delahaye, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 317 (2013) 389. 
[12] P. Delahaye et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum.  77 (2006) 03B105 . 
[13] M. Marie-Jeanne, PhD thesis, Université Joseph Fourier, 

2009. 

[14] O. Bajeat et al, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. B 317 (2013) 411. 
[15] J. Grinyer et al., Phys. Rev. C92 (2015) 045503 
[16] J. Grinyer et al., Phys. Rev. C 91 (2015) 032501(R) 
[17] P. Chauveau et al, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 376 (2016) 35. 
[18] G. F. Grinyer et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A741 (2014) 18 
[19] S. Lukic et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res. A 565 (2006) 

784. 

[20] K. Sümmerer and B. Blank, Nucl. Phys. A 701 (2002) 161. 
[21] B. Roussière et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. B 246 (2006) 288. 
[22] R. Kirchner, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 70 (186) 1992. 
[23] B. Blank, G. Canchel, F. Seis and P. Delahaye, Nucl. Instrum. 

Meth. B, 416 (2018) 41. 

[24] https://u.ganil-spiral2.eu/chartbeams/ 
[25] L. Maunoury et al., Rev. Scient. Instrum. 87 (2016) 02B508. 
[26] P. Delahaye et al.,  Rev. Scient. Instrum. 87 (2016) 02B510. 
[27] R. Vondrasek et al., Rev. Scient. Instrum. 83 (2012) 113303. 
[28] P. Delahaye, L. Maunoury and R. Vondrasek, Nucl. Instrum. 

Meth. A 693(2012)104. 

[29] L. Maunoury et al., 2018 JINST 13 C12022. 
[30] J. Angot et al., Recherche et développement sur le Booster de 
charges Phoenix au LPSC, Journée des accélérateurs de 
Roscoff, 2017. 

[31] T. Kurtukian Nieto et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 317 (2013) 

Acknowledgments 

284 

This  project  has  received  funding  from 
the 
European  Union’s  Horizon  2020  research  and 
innovation  programme  under  grant  agreement  No 
654002. 

[32] E. Minaya Ramirez et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 376 (2016) 

298 

[33] P. Ascher et al., EPJ Web of Conf. 66 (2014) 11029 

 
 
 
