Characterization of a triple-GEM position sensitive detector for X-ray
ﬂuorescence imaging

Geovane G. A. de Souza∗, Hugo Natal da Luz

Instituto de Física, Universidade de São Paulo
Rua do Matão 1371, 05508-090 Cidade Universitária, São Paulo, Brasil

9
1
0
2

r
p
A
7
1

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
6
6
4
8
0
.
4
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

In this work we characterized a X-ray position sensitive gaseous detector based in a triple stack of gas

electron multipliers (GEM). The readout circuit is divided in 256 strips for each dimension and using a

resistive chain interconnecting the strips, we are able to reconstruct the radiation interaction points by

resistive charge division. The detector achieved gains above 104, energy resolution of 15.28 % (FWHM)
for 5.9 keV X-rays, and position resolution of 1.2 mm, while operating in Ar/CO2(90/10) at atmospheric
pressure.

1. Introduction

X-ray ﬂuorescence is an important technique on

elemental analysis whenever a non-invasive and

non-destructive method is required. New detectors

that are able not only to identify material compo-

sition, but also their spatial distribution, improve

this technique that can be applied on cultural her-

itage studies, archaeology and geology. This re-

quires the ability to determine the position of inter-

action, while measuring the X-ray energy deposited

in the detector.

The Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM) is a propor-

tional counter, introduced in 1997 [1, 2]. This Mi-

5 µm copper layers. The foil is perforated with

bi-conical holes (50 µm and 70 µm diameter in the

kapton and in the copper, respectively) etched in

a hexagonal pattern. By applying an appropriate

potential diﬀerence between the two sides of the

GEM, a very large electric ﬁeld is created inside

the holes. This results in a focusing of the electric

ﬁeld lines towards the holes, provided that a weak

uniform electric ﬁeld is deﬁned above the top elec-

trode. With the GEM immersed in an adequate

gas mixture, Townsend avalanches occur inside the

holes, amplifying the charge created by a primary

ionization in the gas.

cropattern Gaseous Detector (MPGD) is composed

With this type of detector, it is possible to build

of 50 µm thick kapton foil coated on both sides with

large detection areas with fair position and energy

∗Corresponding author
Email address: geovane.souza@usp.br (Geovane G. A.

de Souza)

resolution even at high counting rates. These prop-

erties have included GEMs among the preferred

choices for High Energy Physics experiments (for

April 19, 2019

 
 
 
 
 
 
example [3]–[6]). It is possible to use such technol-

ogy not only to detect charged particles on these

experiments but also γ and X-ray radiation making

these detectors good candidates for full-ﬁeld XRF

imaging [7]. It is well known that the energy resolu-

tion of gaseous detectors has limitations when com-

pared to solid state detectors, due to the smaller

number of electrons produced in each interaction,

leading to higher statistical ﬂuctuations in the pri-

Figure 1: Full detector setup

mary cloud. Discussions about this are abundant in

the literature and can be found, for example in [8].

However, gaseous detectors become an interesting

tool when large areas must be studied, without the

need of sample scans thanks to the simultaneous

measurement of the position of the radiation inter-

action and its energy over areas of hundreds of cm2.

2. Experimental setup

The detector consists on a cascade of GEMs im-

mersed in a mixture of Ar/CO2 (90/10) at atmo-
spheric pressure. Two diﬀerent geometries were

used in this study: a cascade of two GEM foils

used for this prototype and can easily be changed

by others that will attenuate the intensity of lower

energy X-rays by a smaller amount. The readout

system is segmented in 256 strips in each dimen-

sion (ﬁg.2), which are interconnected through resis-

tive chains. The strips are 100 µm wide with a pitch

of 400 µm. By collecting the the charge at both

ends of each resistive chain, it is possible to calcu-

late the projection of the primary X-ray ionization

on the X–Y plane for each coordinate through a

trivial ‘center of mass’ algorithm (eq. 1).

x = l

XL − XR
A

,

y = l

YL − YR
A

(1)

with a pitch of 140 µm between the holes (this is

where:

the standard — S — pitch); and a cascade of three

GEM foils, where the ﬁrst GEM (the one on the

top) had a pitch of 90 µm (the small pitch — SP

— GEM). The ﬁnal triple-GEM geometry can be

• XL, XR, YL and YR are the signal amplitudes
for the left and right ends of the X and Y re-

sistive chains according to ﬁgure 2;

seen in ﬁgure 1, where the dimensions and typical

• l is the length/width of the detector and

electric ﬁelds and voltages are also depicted. The

total active area of the detector is 10 × 10 cm2.

The detector window is a 50 µm kapton foil and

the cathode is the same type of foil, but coated with

a 5 µm thick copper layer. The space between the

• A is given either by the sum of the amplitudes

of all four channels, or by the amplitude of the

signal collected from the bottom electrode of

the last GEM.

two surfaces is around 5 mm. These materials were

The signal from the bottom electrode of the GEM

2

also served as the global trigger of the electronic

We are also using a 55Fe radioactive source, which

system.

The resistive chains were composed of SMD re-

sistors on a printed circuit board designed to inter-

decays into manganese by electron capture emit-

ting 5.9 keV (Kα) and 6.4 keV (Kβ) characteristic
X-rays (with relative probabilities of 100 and 20,

connect all the readout strips when plugged to the

respectively) [9] for energy calibration and to cal-

standard 128-pin connectors of the readout board.

culate energy resolution. In general, the counting

The charge collected from each electronic channel

rates for these measurements were kept at around

is integrated by a standard charge sensitive pre-

800 Hz. The counting rate of the detector is not

ampliﬁer and shaped by a shaping ampliﬁer. Af-

limited by the GEM, which can stand rates of the

ter application of simple logic, it is sampled by a

order of several MHz per cm2 [2] (and references

12 bit ADC. All the electronic devices are standard

therein), but by the resistor chain, which does not

oﬀ-the-shelf nuclear instrumentation modules.

allow the collection of two diﬀerent simultaneous

hits in the detector surface. Taking into account

a shaping time of 1 µs in the ampliﬁer for a cor-

rect determination of the pulse amplitude over the

whole area of the detector, the estimated maximum

counting rate is around 10 kHz cm−2.

A framework for data processing,

image re-

construction and analysis was developed using

ROOT [10] and other C++ libraries.

Figure 2: Scheme of the segmented readout system using

resistive chains.

As X-ray source we are using the Amptek Mini-

3. Results

X with a silver target, operating at a high voltage

The detector energy calibration and characteri-

of typically 15 kV and current around 15 µA. This

zation in terms of energy resolution has been done

results in an energy distribution in the detector be-

using the 55Fe source. The energy resolution was

tween around 2 keV and 15 keV. The low energy

optimized by tuning the drift and transfer ﬁelds of

limit is due to the detector window and cathode,

the GEM stack, achieving 15.28% full width at half

which result in 100 µm thickness kapton and to the

maximum (FWHM) for the energy of 5.9 keV, ir-

amount of air between the X-ray source and the

radiating an area of around 1 cm2 of the detector,

detector. At the higher energies, the absorption ef-

working at a gain in charge above 104 (ﬁg. 3), opti-

ﬁciency of the 8 mm thick absorption layer makes

mizing the position and energy resolution. Because

the detected spectrum drop sharply for higher en-

of the resistive division and the electronics used, it

ergies. The X-ray spectrum as collected in the de-

is expected that for high X-ray rates, eﬀects of pile-

tector has a maximum intensity at around 7 keV.

up will impair the energy resolution. To avoid this,

3

the counting rate was kept low, allowing the cor-

of the energy resolution throughout the whole sen-

rect measurement of the intrinsic energy resolution

sitive area of the detector can be seen in ﬁgures 4

of the detector. The main peak is a convolution

and 5. The energy resolution has a standard devia-

of the two manganese K-lines and the peak around

tion of 0.7% for all the 225 regions, with the worst

3 keV is the argon escape peak, resulting from ﬂu-

value below 19%

orescence X-rays escaping the detector absorption

region. GEM detectors have slight gain variations

throughout their active area, degrading the energy

resolution when the whole area is irradiated. There

are plans to apply adequate gain corrections that

will allow to reconstruct the energy spectrum, such

as shown in other works (see for example [11]). This

spectrum is not inﬂuenced by the resistive charge

division because it is collected from the bottom elec-

trode of the last GEM, completely decoupled from

the resistor chains.

Figure 4: Energy resolution for each region of the detector

measured using 55Fe radioactive source.

Figure 5: Energy resolution distribution for the 225 regions.

Figure 3: Energy spectrum for the iron radioactive source,

55Fe. The spectrum was obtained irradiating a small area of

As an imaging system, the detector was char-

the detector, around 1 cm2

acterized by measuring its position resolution and

contrast. The position resolution is deﬁned by the

To study the deviation of the energy resolution

width of its Point Spread Function (PSF) which

across the detector’s eﬀective area, the whole de-

would be the width of the image of an inﬁnitely

tector was irradiated using the 55Fe source and in

small point. If one is considering only one dimen-

the analyses, the total area was divided into 225

sion, the Line Spread Function (LSF — the width

squares. For each one of these regions, the en-

of the image of an inﬁnitely thin slit) can also be

ergy resolution was determined. The distribution

considered. Due to the practical impossibility of

4

imaging such small objects, other more realistic

approaches can be used to derive these functions.

References [12, 13] contain detailed descriptions of

these concepts for characterization of imaging sys-

tems.

Three diﬀerent methods were applied. In the ﬁrst

one, a 1 mm thick stainless steel plate with two thin

slits was placed directly above the detector’s win-

dow.

If the width of the slits is slightly smaller

than the position resolution, the width of their im-

age will give an approximate idea of the width of

the LSF. The ﬁnal result was above 1 mm, as will be

shown and described below. Therefore, the width

of the slits chosen was 1 mm. They were separated

by 20 mm to allow for position calibration, and con-

version between pixels and length units, and con-

sequent determination of the width of their image.

The detector was irradiated for one hour with the

X-ray tube. To calculate the spatial resolution, two

Gaussian curves were ﬁtted, one to each slit proﬁle

Figure 6: Double slits method. The area deﬁned by the green

rectangle is the selected data to create the proﬁle shown

(ﬁg. 6). The resolution is the average of the full

below.

width at half maximum of both ﬁts. The spatial

resolution obtained by this method using the whole

sure the spatial resolution, it does not give any in-

energy spectrum, collected from the Amptek Mini-

formation of the image contrast. The contrast dis-

X source, is 1.79 mm, as shown in ﬁgure 6. Position

crimination is important to evaluate how well an

resolution measurements were also performed for

imaging system can distinguish diﬀerences in lumi-

the y-direction. The position resolution was slightly

worse and can be due to noisier electronic chan-

nosity [12]. In order to measure both contrast and

resolution for the same image, we used two other

nels, defective resistive chains or problems in the

methods.

readout. There are no reasons to believe that the

The second one was the analysis of an image of a

triple-GEM setup would have a noticeable diﬀer-

sharp edge placed above the detector window. The

ence in performance for the diﬀerent coordinates.

image obtained is the Edge Spread Function (ESF)

The position resolution as a function of the energy

of the detector. The proﬁle of the image is a

for diﬀerent setups is discussed in section 4.

step function and by calculating its ﬁrst derivative

Although this double slit method is good to mea-

by numerical methods, we obtain the Line Spread

5

Function (LSF), which is an indicator of the detec-

The diﬀerent intensities in the image of ﬁg. 7

tor resolution in one dimension, as explained before.

are reﬂected in the X-proﬁle. The darker regions

To use this method, a square opening of 2.5 ×

in the image are due to small defects in the foils

2.5 cm2 was imaged. The two edges at known dis-

caused by sparks that create less sensitive zones

tance were used to calibrate the image, as seen in

and the higher intensity regions can be related to

ﬁg. 7 and the one inside of the green rectangle was

non-uniformities in the construction of the resistive

used as the ESF as shown in ﬁg. 8.

chains. These two eﬀects can easily be mitigated in

future prototypes.

This measurement has the advantage of exploit-

ing the range of spacial frequencies of the detector.

For a realistic spatial resolution, even if two ob-

jects very close to each other are distinguishable,

they have less contrast. A smaller decrease in the

contrast for objects very close to each other means

a better imaging system. The Fourier transform of

the LSF results in the contrast as a function of the

spacial frequency. This is deﬁned as the Modula-

tion Transfer Function (MTF). Using the MTF we

are able to evaluate the variation of the contrast

with the spatial frequency, which is related to the

position resolution [12, 13].

Figure 9 shows the MTF resulting from the

Fourier Transform of the LSF from ﬁg. 8 (black cir-

cles), where the red curve serves to guide the eye.

The contrast drops as expected for higher frequen-

cies. The frequencie at contrast of 10 % is marked

in the ﬁgure and the value obtained is 0.56 lp/mm

(line pairs per millimeter), which is consistent with

the width of the LSF and the width of the image of

the slits from ﬁg. 6.

The third method measures directly both con-

trast and resolution using a resolution pattern. The

pattern consists of sets of slits with speciﬁc widths

and at speciﬁc distances, corresponding to speciﬁc

spatial frequencies. The diﬀerence between illumi-

Figure 7: The proﬁle of a 2.5 × 2.5 cm2 window for both

dimension axis. The red square indicates the selected data.

Figure 8: The derivative of the ESF indicates the spatial

resolution.

6

nated and dark regions is related to the contrast for

each spacial frequency (ﬁg. 10).

In ﬁgure 9, the normalized contrast measured di-

rectly from the resolution pattern was also plotted

for the total energy spectrum and the energy inter-

val from 8 to 9 keV. The contrast in each group of

slits was determined by subtracting the average of

the valleys from the average of the peaks and divid-

ing by their sum, according to Michelson [14]. The

determination of the MTF from the edge spread

function seems to underestimate the performance

of the detector for larger objects. The contrast for

the energy range from 8 to 9 keV is higher because it

is the optimal range of the detector (see discussion

below).

Figure 10: Above: Resolution pattern used to measure the

contrast. The area limited by the green rectangle is the data

selected for the analysis. Below: The intensity proﬁle of

the green rectangle marked in the image. The contrast is

calculated by the Michelson contrast deﬁnition [14]

Figure 9: The circles represent the Fourier coeﬃcients of the

LSF. The black triangles are contrast points calculated using

portant for the lower energies due to the smaller

the resolution pattern of ﬁg. 10 for the shown X-ray image.

amplitude of the signals, for higher energies the

4. Discussion

range of the photo-electrons ejected from the argon

atoms increases. Since the resistive charge division

determines the center of mass of the primary cloud,

The performance of this type of detector as imag-

which is shifted from the point of interaction, its

ing system, when using the resistive charge divi-

size increases the uncertainty.

sion varies throughout the energy spectrum. There

Figure 11 shows the position resolution achieved

are two factors that inﬂuence the position resolu-

with the method of the two slits for diﬀerent X-ray

tion: the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and the photo-

energies. The diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀer-

electron range. While the SNR becomes more im-

ent experimental setups. The inverted magenta tri-

7

angles represent the data for a double-GEM system,

ferent energy ranges the detector can improve the

with a poorer resolution due to the impossibility to

position resolution with respect to the one obtained

reach very high charge gains. The blue triangles

when the whole energy spectrum is used. The

and the red circles represent triple-GEM assembly

using resistive lines with 30(3) Ω resistors between

spatial resolution achieved for Ar/CO2 (90/10) was
1.2 mm at the range of 8 to 9 keV, consistent with

each strip and 60.00(6) Ω, respectively (note the

the points measured with the resolution pattern at

precision of 10 % and 0.1 % of the values). From

this energy range and plotted in ﬁg. 9.

literature [15] it is known that for systems using

charge division principle on strips, increasing the re-

sistance value and decreasing resistance deviations

between resistors in the same chain, the position

resolution can be improved. This plot shows a slight

improvement for energies above 6 keV. For compari-

son, published simulated data of the resolution limit

due to the photoelectron range expected for pure

argon in a 10 mm thick detector is also plotted [16]

(green squares). The diﬀerence for a thickness of

8 mm is very small given the photoelectron range at

The position resolution of the detector was mea-

sured mostly in central areas of the detector. Fig-

ure 12 shows the image of an array of 1 mm holes

drilled with a pitch of 1 cm in a 1 mm thick stainless

steel plate, spanning a great part of its active area.

The X-rays tube was places 1.5 m away from the

detector window and a 1 mm collimator was used,

resulting in an image that was more intense in the

center than at the borders.

It gives a qualitative

idea of the behaviour of the detector also near the

edges, where the shape of the holes does not change

these energies, which is much smaller than the de-

signiﬁcantly.

tector. The position resolution of the y-coordinate

is also shown. It is poorer due to the higher noise

in these electronic channels, as explained before.

Figure 11: Spatial resolution as a function of the photon

energy. The green line indicates the pure Argon resolution

limit as simulated in [16].

Figure 12: Image of an array of holes drilled in a stainless

steel plate. The holes have a pitch of 10 mm and span most

For energies above 6 keV the resolution curve is

of the area of the detector..

very close to the expected limit. By selecting dif-

8

5. Conclusion and Future Work

chip is able to sample data from 32 diﬀerent chan-

nels, which means that 8 chips will be enough to

A triple-GEM X-ray detector has been tested for

read discrete data from all the 512 readout strips,

imaging purposes with resistive charge division us-

dramatically increasing the counting rate of the

ing ﬁve electronic channels.

It achieves a gain in

imaging system, while also improving the position

charge well above 104, which results in an energy

resolution for lower energies.

resolution of 15.28 % for 5.9 keV X-rays and posi-

tion resolution around 1.2 mm for energies between

8 and 9 keV.

Acknowledgments

By increasing the detector gain in charge, work-

This work was supported by grants 2016/05282-

ing at higher potentials across the GEM plates, bet-

2 and 2017/00426-9 from Fundação de Amparo à

ter position resolution could be achieved at lower

Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo, Brasil.

energies, but this would also increase the discharge

probability.

References

The system performance was described in trans-

mission mode, but the plan is to make ﬂuorescence

[1] F. Sauli, Gem: A new concept for electron amplication

in gas detectors, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A, vol. 386, p. 531-

imaging in the future using a pinhole. Deeper stud-

534, 1997.

ies are in progress, namely the variations of the po-

sition resolution as a function of the position in the

detector, the quantiﬁcation of the image distortions

[2] F. Sauli, The gas electron multiplier (GEM): Operating

principles and applications, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A, vol.

805, p.2-24, 2016.

[3] The ALICE Collaboration, Technical Design Report

due to imperfections of the resistive chains and the

for the Upgrade of

the ALICE Time Projection

possibilities to correct for these eﬀects.

The gain across the detector’s sensitive area is

Chamber,CERN-LHCC-2013-020 2014.

[4] A. Colaleo, A. Safonov, A. Sharma and M. Tytgat,

CMS Technical Design Report for the Muon End-

not completely uniform. This is caused mainly due

cap GEM Upgrade, Tech. Rep. CERN-LHCC-2015-012.

to irregularities on the GEM construction process

CMS-TDR-013, CERN LHC; CMS, Jun, 2015.

and detector drift, transfer and induction regions.

Therefore, improvements in the reconstruction and

[5] Alessandro Cardini, Giovanni Bencivenni and Patrizia

De Simone, The Operational Experience of the Triple-

GEM Detectors of the LHCb Muon System: Summary

analysis framework are in progress to normalize and

of 2 Years of Data Taking, IEEE NSS/MIC Proceed-

correct the gain over the whole sensitive area of the

ings, 759, 2012

detector, improving the energy resolution.

[6] C. Altunbas et al., Construction, test and commis-

sioning of the triple-gem tracking detector for compass,

Future plans include the integration of the new

Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 490 2002 177

ASIC SAMPA [17], which was developed to work as

[7] W. Dąbrowski et al., Application of GEM-based de-

a front end for the Time Projection Chamber and

the Muon Chamber of the ALICE experiment at

tectors in full-ﬁeld XRF imaging, JINTS, vol. 11,

p.C12025, 2016.

[8] Glenn F. Knoll, Radiation detection and measurement

CERN after the upgrades for Run 3. The SAMPA

— third edition, Wiley, 1999

9

[9] Pengra, J.G., Genz, H., Renier, J.P., Fink, R.W.,

Orbital-electron-capture ratios in the decay of Fe55,

Phys. Rev. C, vol. 5, 6 1972 2007

[10] Rene Brun and Fons Rademakers, ROOT - An Object

Oriented Data Analysis Framework, Proceedings AI-

HENP’96 Workshop, Lausanne, Sep. 1996, Nucl. Inst.

Meth. A 389 81-86 1997

[11] J.F.C.A. Veloso et al., Energy resolved X-ray ﬂuores-

cence imaging based on a micropattern gas detector,

Spec. Acta B, 65 2010 241.

[12] W.R. Hendee, E.R. Ritenour, Medical imaging physics,

New York: Wiley-Liss, 2002

[13] J.T. Bushberg et al., The essential physics of medi-

cal imaging — second edition, Lippincott Williams &

Wilkins, 2001

[14] A. A. Michelson, Studies in optics, University of

Chicago, 1927

[15] J.P. Cussonneau et al., 2D localization using resistive

strips associated to the Micromegas structure, Nucl. In-

str. Meth. A 492, p. 24-34, 2002

[16] C.D.R. Azevedo, S. Biagi, R. Veenhof, P.M. Correia,

A.L.M. Silva, L.F.N.D. Carramate, J.F.C.A. Veloso,

Position resolution limits in pure noble gaseous detec-

tors for X-ray energies from 1 to 60 keV, Physics Let-

ters B 741, p. 272-275 2015

[17] J. Adolfsson et al 2017 JINST 12 C04008, SAMPA

Chip: the New 32 Channels ASIC for the ALICE TPC

and MCH Upgrades

10

