0
2
0
2

n
a
J

9
2

]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[

4
v
3
3
8
2
0
.
6
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Progress and Simulations for Intranuclear Neutron–Antineutron

Transformations in 40

18Ar

Joshua L. Barrow∗
The University of Tennessee at Knoxville, Department of Physics
and Astronomy, 1408 Circle Drive, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA†

Elena S. Golubeva‡ and Eduard Paryev§
Institute for Nuclear Research, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Prospekt 60-letiya Oktyabrya 7a, Moscow, 117312, Russia

Jean-Marc Richard¶
Institut de Physique des 2 Inﬁnis de Lyon, Universit´e de Lyon,
CNRS-IN2P3–UCBL, 4 rue Enrico Fermi, Villeurbanne, France
(Dated: January 30, 2020)

With the imminent construction of the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) and
Hyper-Kamiokande, nucleon decay searches as a means to constrain beyond Standard Model (BSM)
extensions are once again at the forefront of fundamental physics. Abundant neutrons within these
large experimental volumes, along with future high-intensity neutron beams such as the European
Spallation Source, oﬀer a powerful, high-precision portal onto this physics through searches for
B and B − L violating processes such as neutron–antineutron transformations (n → ¯n), a key
prediction of compelling theories of baryogenesis. With this in mind, this paper discusses a novel
and self-consistent intranuclear simulation of this process within 40
18Ar, which plays the role of both
detector and target within DUNE’s gigantic liquid argon time projection chambers. An accurate
and independent simulation of the resulting intranuclear annihilation respecting important physical
correlations and cascade dynamics for this large nucleus is necessary to understand the viability
of such rare searches when contrasted against background sources such as atmospheric neutrinos.
Recent theoretical improvements to our model, such as the ﬁrst calculations of the 40
18Ar intranuclear
radial annihilation probability distribution and the inclusion of a realistic ¯nA potential, are discussed.
A Monte Carlo simulation comparison to another publicly available n → ¯n generator within GENIE
is shown in some detail. The ﬁrst calculation of 40
18Ar’s n → ¯n-intranuclear suppression factor, an
R ∼ 5.6 × 1022 s−1.
important quantity for future searches at DUNE, is also completed, ﬁnding T Ar

I.

INTRODUCTION

A. Theoretical Background

Baryon number (B) violation is the only remaining
component of the Sakharov conditions [1] which has yet
to be conﬁrmed experimentally, an innate requirement
for proper baryogenesis. While it was shown [2] that B
itself is not an exact symmetry of the Standard Model
(SM) and is only inﬁnitesimally violated via B − L-
conserving non-pertubative electroweak instanton pro-
cesses, this marginal infraction does not appear to nat-
urally explain the observed excess of matter over anti-
matter. Thus, it is possible that not only must B be
violated, but that B − L must too be broken via some
beyond Standard Model (BSM) mechanism.

Such explicit B violating extensions can be constructed
as particular types of (di)nucleon decays, mainly within

the structures of dimension d = 6 and d = 9 opera-
tors. While it is believed that many d = 6 operators
(governing things such as proton decay) may be heav-
ily (or altogether) suppressed [3, 4], this may not be
the case for d = 9 operators with the basic structure
c· qqq ¯q ¯q ¯q/M 5, where the high-mass scale M can be rather
low at perhaps ∼ 100 TeV. These operators allow for
modes of dinucleon processes of disappearance or oscil-
lation, a most important member of which is neutron–
antineutron transformation (n → ¯n). Popular (modern
and minimal) BSM extensions [5–8] permitting such a
process can dynamically create a proper baryon abun-
dance in the early universe, even while predicting a rea-
sonable and possibly observable upper limit on the mean
transformation time in vacuum, allowing the theory to
be well constrained if not eventually entirely eliminated
experimentally. This prospect seems stronger than ever
given new studies from lattice quantum chromodynam-
ics calculations [9] and other interesting, highly general
recent works [8, 10–12].

∗ jbarrow3@vols.utk.edu
† Also at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
‡ golubeva@inr.ru
§ paryev@inr.ru
¶ j-m.richard@ipnl.in2p3.fr

 
 
 
 
 
 
B. DUNE and Intranuclear n → ¯n in 40

18Ar

The Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE)
will be the future heart of American particle physics. It
will contain 40 kt of liquid argon (40
18Ar) inside its ﬁducial
mass, acting both as prospective neutrino target and ion-
ization detection medium within a set of four gargantuan
time projection chambers. While its main goals of study
are eponymous, some nuclear and particle physicists see
DUNE as the next large-scale step toward answering
arguably more fundamental and controversial questions
about the nature of matter and the laws which govern
it and its origins. Of course, BSM physics searches like
n → ¯n ﬁt within this program well.

This oscillatory or transformational process can be
best encapsulated within a single value: the mean vac-
uum (free) transformation period, τn→¯n. Taking account
of the bound nature of the intranuclear n, the inclusion
of a so called intranuclear suppression factor TR converts
this free transformation time into a bound transforma-
tion time T = TR τ 2
n→¯n , where TR is quite large. Some
details of this derivation, along with the ﬁrst calculation
of this factor for the 40
18Ar nucleus, will be described in
some detail in later sections.

Previous searches for n → ¯n have been carried out us-
ing both free [13] and bound [14–20] n’s. The most suc-
cessful thus far has been Super-Kamiokande’s [18] bound
water-Cherenkov n → ¯n search within 16
8O, which, given
24 candidate events and an expected background of 24.1
atmospheric neutrino events over ∼ 4 years within 22.5
kT of ﬁducial mass, set a limit on the intranuclear n life-
time of 1.9 × 1032 years, which, when converted to a free
transformation time, became ≥ 2.7 × 108s. The best free
n search occurred at the Institut Laue-Langevin [13], and
puts a lower limit at roughly the same order of magnitude
with no apparent backgrounds.

C. Past Intranuclear n → ¯n Simulation Work

It is critical to recognize the interdependency of
the computational modeling of BSM signals and back-
grounds in the estimation of detector eﬃciencies and
background rates within the context of large modern ex-
periments. Thus, it becomes crucially important that
one should take care to model BSM signals and back-
grounds as completely, consistently, and rigorously as
necessary by employing limited approximations which
attempt to preserve as much physics as possible. This
is especially true given nontrivial automated triggering
schemes planned for future rare event searches. Unfortu-
nately, in the case of many previous n → ¯n studies, this
has not altogether been the case.
While previous work in 40

18Ar by Hewes [21] and oth-
ers from the DUNE Nucleon Decay Working Group us-
ing newly-constructed modules within the GENIE [22]
Monte Carlo (MC) event generator has made excel-
lent progress and developed technically fantastic analysis

2

schemes using convolutional neural networks and boosted
decision trees, many of the underlying physics assump-
tions of a hypothesized n → ¯n signal within the GENIE
default model are not entirely correct. Some approximate
notions include:

1. The assumption that the annihilation occurs along
the nuclear density distribution of the nucleus, as
discussed in [21] and other works, even while the
outcomes of [23] are referenced openly and often
used; this ignores the surface dominance of the
transformation and subsequent annihilation, a key
prediction of [23, 24]. Using two models (including
a more holistic quantum-mechanical one similar in
spirit to [23]), these two assumptions are tested,
showing moderate disagreement.

2. Employing a single nucleon momentum distribution
described by a nonlocal, relativistic Bodek-Ritchie
[22, 25] Fermi gas (the radial dependence of the
annihilating (anti)nucleons’ momenta are ignored).

3. Only ∼ 10 annihilation channels (a la [18]) are as-
sumed to be necessary to describe the annihilation
products. This seems low, as ∼ 100 are known,
many of them containing heavier resonances; these
heavier species can be responsible for ∼ 40% of all
pion (π0,±) production.

4. A true cascade model has not yet been employed,
and instead has been approximated as a single ef-
fective interaction (GENIE’s Intranuke hA2015 [22]
was used for previous results)

5. There also exists no de-excitation model(s) (nu-
cleon evaporation, etc.) within current publicly
available builds of GENIE for 40

18Ar

6. No comparison tests against antinucleon annihila-

tion data have yet been considered.

7. Only an rough estimation of the nuclear suppres-
18Ar has thus far been used to approx-

sion factor of 40
imate lower limits on the transformation period.

It is no doubt that some of these current technicalities
proceed directly from the secondary nature of the GENIE
n → ¯n module’s genesis, a consequence of GENIE’s top-
down structure and ﬁrst-and-foremost focus on neutrino
interactions. This being said, similar issues or inconsis-
tencies are known to exist in other work [26], and detailed
explanations of past simulation’s internal processes are
quite lacking [18, 27], but to individually contend these
here is not the goal of this article.

D. This Work

Instead, a new and antinucleon-data-tested model is
oﬀered here which does not ignore or grossly approxi-
mate these eﬀects. In this work, ﬁrst, the intranuclear

oscillation and subsequent annihilation of an ¯n is consid-
ered using the Sternheimer equation and a proper han-
dling of neutron wave functions. For each neutron shell
of 40
18Ar, we calculate the induced ¯n-component by solving
the Sternheimer equation with a realistic ¯nA interaction,
as done in previous works by Dover, Gal, and Richard.
From this, the shell-by-shell and average radial annihi-
lation probability distributions are derived, the ﬁrst cal-
culation of its kind for 40
18Ar and now an integral part
of the Monte Carlo simulations discussed later in this
work. As a consequence of this study, the ﬁrst calcula-
tion of the intranuclear n → ¯n transformation suppres-
sion factor for 40
18Ar has been completed, ﬁnding a value
of T Ar
R ∼ 5.6 × 1022 s−1, some ∼ 12% smaller than previ-
ous coarse estimates taken from 56Fe [21]. Secondly, the
ﬁrst discussion and implementation of novel annihilation
pair dynamics in the presence of a realistic ¯n potential
are completed, where mass defects and momentum mod-
iﬁcation have now been taken into account within these
simulations in a self-consistent way. Third, we consider
how changes to our model compare to experiment and
past simulation work in extranuclear ¯p12C annihilation at
rest [28] before moving on to consider extranuclear ¯nC,
and then intranuclear n → ¯n and ¯nN annihilation within
40
18Ar. Finally, we analyze our investigation and slight
perturbation of GENIE’s publicly available n → ¯n mod-
ule, attempting to understand the commonalities and dif-
ferences across both simulations; critically, a discussion is
begun as to how ignorance of some particularly physically
relevant correlations may aﬀect the eventual feasibility of
a true event’s observation in DUNE.

II. THE INTRANUCLEAR ¯n LIFETIME OF
DEUTERIUM AND 40Ar

A. Concepts and Pertinent Questions

Assuming that the n → ¯n transformation does occur
in a vacuum, an interesting question arises: what are
the consequences for a nucleus? Of course, if an intranu-
clear n becomes an ¯n, an annihilation will eventually take
place within the nucleus, releasing ∼ 2 GeV of rest-mass
energy, from which ∼ 4-5 mesons are emitted on average.
After this point, the wounded nucleus will evaporate sev-
eral nucleons and perhaps break into unstable daughter
nuclei. Several questions are immediately raised:

1. When a n tentatively becomes an ¯n, it ceases feeling
a smooth potential of (cid:46) 50 MeV and instead expe-
riences a (complex) potential whose magnitude is
(cid:38) 100 MeV. How much is such a transformation
suppressed by this change in potential?

2. A deep annihilation could produce multiple frag-
ments with the primary mesons ultimately being
absorbed. Alternatively, a peripheral annihilation
[24] would probably release a large fraction of the
primary mesons and at most rip out only a few

3

nucleons, albeit with a more asymmetric topology.
So, where, preferentially, does the annihilation take
place?

3. Many measurements were

accumulated

at
Brookhaven throughout the 1960-70s, and later at
CERN thanks to the LEAR facility (1982-1996),
which beneﬁted from a pure, intense, and cooled
antiproton (¯p) beam.
For a review, see, e.g.,
[29, 30]. However, LEAR was shared by many
experiments with various aims dealing with fun-
damental symmetries, strangeness physics, exotic
mesons, etc., and experiments providing knowledge
of vital systematics for ¯N N and ¯N A measurements
were not given top priority. With this in mind, is
our knowledge of antinucleon-nucleon ( ¯N N ) and
antinucleon-nucleus ( ¯N A) interactions suﬃcient
to carry out such an investigation?

4. Some concerns have been expressed about the reli-
ability of the estimate of the n → ¯n lifetime inside
nuclei within a straightforward nuclear-physics ap-
proach; see, e.g., [31, 32]. Can one face these crit-
icisms and demonstrate stable and consistent re-
sults?

In this section, a review of these questions is dis-
cussed with methods based on the Sternheimer equation
(see, e.g., [33], and refs. therein), as used by Dover et
al.Friedman et al. [23, 34–36] throughout past discus-
sions of these topics. Such methods are then applied to
the 40Ar isotope, which comprises the main component
of the DUNE detector. For completeness, the main steps
of these calculations are repeated.

B. Lifetime of the Deuteron

As a brief warm-up, consider a simpliﬁed deuteron,
consisting of a pure s-wave bound state of a proton (p)
and neutron (n). One may adopt the wave function by
Hulthen, which has been tuned to reproduce the correct
binding energy and spatial extension. It reads (see, e.g.,
[37, 38])

Ψn =

1
√
4 π

un(r)
r

,

(cid:90) ∞

0

un(r)2dr = 1 ,

(1)

un(r) = Nn [exp(−λ1 r) − exp(−λ2 r)] ,

where Nn is a normalizing factor, r is in GeV−1, λ1 =
0.2316 (cid:126)c and λ2 = 5.98 λ1. It has been checked that us-
ing another wave function does not change the following
results signiﬁcantly, provided it ﬁts the deuteron energy
and radius.

In the presence of n → ¯n transformations, the wave

function becomes

1
√
4 π

(cid:20) un(r)
r

|pn(cid:105) +

(cid:21)

|p¯n(cid:105)

.

w(r)
r

(2)

Assuming an arbitrary strength γ = 1/τ for the n → ¯n
transition, the induced ¯n component w is given by the
Sternheimer equation

−

w(cid:48)(cid:48)(r)
m

+ V w(r) − E w(r) = −γ un(r) .

(3)

This gives an exact estimate of the ﬁrst-order correction
to the wave function and, hence, of the second order cor-
rection to the energy without involving a summation over
the unperturbed states. Here, E is the unperturbed en-
ergy and V the antineutron-proton optical potential, re-
sulting in a width

(cid:90) ∞

Γ = − 2

|w(r)|2 Im V (r) dr

= − 2γ

0
(cid:90) ∞

0

un(r) Im w(r) dr .

(4)

(5)

This immediately implies the scaling law Γ ∝ γ2, or

for the lifetime T = Γ−1 of the deuteron

T = TR τ 2 ,

(6)

where TR, sometimes called the “intranuclear suppression
factor”, is actually a reduced lifetime. For the optical po-
tential V (r), there are some models that are tuned to
reproduce the main features of low-energy antinucleon-
nucleon scattering and have predicted the shift and
broadening of the low-lying levels of the protonium atom.
A method to solve Eq. (3) is discussed in [23], which is
similar to the one used in the earlier studies [34, 35],
and involves the matching of several independent solu-
tions corresponding to various limiting conditions. The
alternative below directly provides the desired solution.
First, to get the neutron wave function from the neutron
potential Vn(r), one should solve the radial equation

− un

(cid:48)(cid:48)/µ + Vn(r) un(r) = E un(r) ,

(7)

subject to un(0) = un(∞) = 0. A method adapted from
aircraft engineering [39] consists of the change of vari-
ables r = r0 x/(1 − x), where r0 is a typical distance,
and, for the wave function un(r) = ˜un(x), of an expan-
sion

˜un(x) =

N
(cid:88)

j=1

aj sin(j π x)

(8)

in which the coeﬃcients aj are closely related to the val-
ues of the function at the points xi = i /(N + 1), for
i = 1, 2, . . . N . This results in a N × N eigenvalue equa-
tion A Un = E Un, where A is the discretized Hamilto-
nian and Un is the vector of the (1 − xi) ˜un(xi). See, for
instance, [40], for an application to quarkonium in poten-
tial models. For the Sternheimer equation (3), one gets
a simple matrix equation

( ¯A − E 1) W = γ Un ,

(9)

4

where the N ×N matrix ¯A is the discretized Hamiltonian
for the ¯n, E the n energy, and W = {(1−xi) ˜w(xi)} is the
vector containing the ¯n wave function. This calculation
is fast and robust.

Besides the deuteron energy E0 = −0.0022 GeV and
wave function un, solving Eq. (3) requires a model for
the antineutron-proton potential V . As shown by Fermi
and Yang [41], the long-range part of the ¯N N potential in
isospin I is deduced from the N N interaction in isospin I
by the G-parity rule: if a meson (or set of mesons) with
G = +1 is exchanged, it gives the same contribution,
while under G = −1 exchange, the sign is ﬂipped. The
complex short-range part of V is ﬁtted as to reproduce
the low-energy data on ¯p scattering and protonium. The
so-called DR2 model [42, 43] has been adopted, and it
was checked that variants such as the Kohno-Weise po-
tential [44] produce very similar results. Of course, the
isospin I = 1 of the potential is used for the full calcula-
tion of the deuteron lifetime.

FIG. 1. The ¯n radial distribution (red), arbitrarily rescaled to
ﬁt the ﬁgure, as compared to the nominal neutron distribution
(blue) for the deuteron.

However, an annihilation requires both the presence of
a neighbor nucleon and an ¯n, so the annihilation must
take place at a slightly less peripheral site than the ¯n
density itself. For the deuteron, the reduced lifetime is
estimated to be about T D
R (cid:39) 3 × 1022 s−1. This result
shows great consistency with other recent calculations
such as [45]. A calculation by Oosterhof et al. [32], based
of chiral eﬀective ﬁeld theory, is in some disagreement,
but it has been revisited very recently by Haidenbauer
et al. [46] who found a perfect agreement with the old
estimate by Dover et al. [34].

This estimate is remarkably stable. For instance, in-
creasing the core of the ¯np interaction by a factor 10
results in only a 20% increase of TR. Even with a large
|V |, the ¯n transformation is more suppressed, but it ac-
tually annihilates more eﬃciently. Remarkably, there is
an almost exact cancellation between these two eﬀects.
It can also be seen that the calculation is sensitive mainly
to the value of V (r) near 0.8 − 1 fm. This is fortunate,

neutronantineutron51015r(fm)un2,|w|2as low-energy ¯p scattering on nucleons and the shift of
the antiprotonic hydrogen atom probes essentially this
region and so one cannot determine the interaction at
closer distances.1

In Ref. [34], it is shown that adding a realistic D-wave
component, and a Sternheimer equation attached to it,
does not modify the result signiﬁcantly.

C. Lifetime of the 40Ar nucleus

In Refs. [23, 34], there are estimates of the lifetime of
nuclei that were important to analyze some past under-
ground experiments, in particular 16O [18] and 56Fe [17].
In the present paper, we study the case of 40Ar which is
relevant for the DUNE experiment.

The detailed properties of atomic nuclei are well ac-
counted for by sophisticated Hartree-Fock calculations.
For many applications, it turns out to be rather conve-
nient to use ad-hoc shell-model wave functions that are
tuned to reproduce the main properties of the nuclei, in
particular the spatial distribution of p’s and n’s. This
was done in connection with the compilation of nuclear
data, see, e.g., [47]. In the present study, besides a more
eﬃcient handling of the Sternheimer equation, our vari-
ant consists in using the strategy outlined within and
neutron wave functions from [48]; these wave functions
correspond to a ﬁt of the main static properties of the nu-
cleus of interest. The p and n wave functions have been
calculated for us by Karim Bennaceur, in the so-called
“ﬁlling approximation”: the nucleus is supposed to be
spherical, implying that the states of each shell are pop-
ulated with the same (integer or fractional) occupation
number.

The second ingredient of our work is the ¯n-nucleus po-
tential. With the noticeable exception of the OBELIX
collaboration having studied antineutron scattering [49,
50], most data deals with the ¯p-nucleus interaction, ei-
ther via ¯p scattering or antiprotonic atom formation. The
question is whether one can reasonably assume that the
¯n- and ¯p-nucleus potentials are nearly equal.

The most striking feature of ¯N N cross-sections is the
smallness of the charge-exchange component, already
stressed by the team having discovered the antiproton
[51], and conﬁrmed in further measurements [30].
In-
deed, a one-pion-exchange alone would make the charge-
exchange the largest contribution to the total cross sec-
tion. This implies a large cancellation of the isospin I = 0
and I = 1 amplitudes, resulting in a somewhat isospin-
independent ¯N N interaction, and is conﬁrmed by the
available experimental data. If one compares the ¯pp and
¯np total cross sections, they almost coincide, and diﬀer
only in tentative extrapolations towards lower energies;
see [50, 52]. This is conﬁrmed by a comparison of the

1 JMR thanks Femke Oosterhof for discussions on this point.

5

angular distribution of ¯p scattering on the isostopes 16O
and 18O at the same energy by the PS184 collaboration,
with practically no diﬀerences [53].

Considering this, we shall soon see in the text which
follows that changes in the ¯n-nucleus interaction, such
as its departure from understood ¯p-nucleus interactions,
results in only very small modiﬁcations of the estimated
lifetimes. Of course, the ¯p-nucleus potential ﬁtting scat-
tering experiments and antiprotonic-atom data is the
strong-interaction part, and Coulomb eﬀects have been
adequately removed.

For each n shell, there is an induced ¯n wave function
governed by an equation analogous to (3), with a cen-
trifugal term for p, d and f states, where V is now the
¯n-39Ar potential, and m the corresponding reduced mass.
In Fig. 2, some details are given for one of the external
shells which contributes most to the instability, namely
1d5/2. It is seen that ¯n are produced in the tail of the n
distribution, with subsequent annihilation at the surface
of the matter distribution; the pattern is similar for all
other shells.

FIG. 2. The ¯n radial distribution (red), arbitrarily rescaled to
ﬁt the ﬁgure, as compared to the nominal neutron distribution
(blue), and the annihilation density of (5), also arbitrarily
rescaled (dashed black), for the 1d5/2 shell of 40

18Ar.

For comparison, the distribution of the 1f7/2 shell are
shown in Fig. 3: the peripheral character of the antineu-
tron component is even more pronounced, though still
decays exponentially as in all other shells.2 The result-
ing radial ¯n distributions for all shells are shown in Fig. 4.

If one now adds up the contributions of each neutron
to the width, calculates the average width per n, and
estimates the corresponding reduced lifetime, one gets a

2 Some questions have arisen from colleagues regarding the pos-
sibility of an annihilation occurring on another nucleus within
the larger (detector) medium; this is not permitted due to the
exponential decay of the ¯n density distribution over inter nuclear
distances, just as a n is not found inside another nucleus.

neutronantineutronannihilation2468r(fm)un2,|w|2|w|2ImV6

FIG. 3. Same as for Fig. 2, but for the 1f7/2 shell.

FIG. 5. The relative change to the width of the 1d5/2 shell is
shown when a factor fr is applied to the real potential, and
fi to the imaginary part.

the nucleus. Again, the example shown is 1d5/2, but the
other levels exhibit a similar behavior.

FIG. 4. Antineutron densities for the shells of 40

18Ar.

R ∼ 5.6 × 1022 s−1. As in the case of the
value of T Ar
deuteron, this value is remarkably stable against changes
in the parameters of the ¯n-nucleon interaction. Thus, a
similar uncertainty of ∼ 20 % is estimated.

This stability in the width can be understood: if one
increases the absorptive potential, the n → ¯n transition
is more suppressed, but, on the other hand, the antineu-
tron annihilates more eﬃciently. In Fig. 5 the factor γ is
shown, by which the width of the 1d5/2 level is modiﬁed
when the real ¯n-nucleus potential is multiplied by fr and
its imaginary part by fi. If one changes these values by
±20%, far beyond what can be admitted to keep a good
ﬁt to the antinucleon-nucleus data, modiﬁcations to the
width are less than 10%. The same pattern is observed
for the other levels. A consequence of this stability is
that the estimated suppression factor TR keeps the same
order of magnitude from one nucleus to the other, even
from the deuteron to 40

18Ar.

One can also illustrate how intranuclear n → ¯n trans-
formation and subsequent annihilation is a surface phe-
nomenon. In Fig. 6, the absorptive potential is modiﬁed
near r = rc by applying as a factor a “glitch” function
with the form 1 + 0.4 exp(−20 (r − rc)2), where rc is var-
ied. The width is seen to be modiﬁed only near the sur-
face, and is insensitive to what happens in the center of

FIG. 6. The factor γ multiplying the width of the 1d5/2 shell
when a factor 1 + 0.4 exp(−20(r − rc)) (r is in fm) is applied
to the absorptive potential.

To end this section, it is instructive to compare the
method based on an exact solution of the perturbation
equation (3) in the approximation where the n and ¯n spa-
tial distributions are not distinguished. If, furthermore,
the n- and ¯n-nucleus do not diﬀer too much in their real
part, then the width is given by (see, e.g., [54]):

Γ ≈ −2/ ¯W ,

¯W =

(cid:90) ∞

0

|un(r)|2 W (r) dr .

(10)

For the low-lying shells of 40Ar, the diﬀerence is small
with respect to our estimate. For the most external
shell, the width is overestimated by a factor of about
3.5, overemphasizing the suppression of the process.

neutronantineutronannihilation246810r(fm)un2,|w|2|w|2ImV1s2s1p3/21p1/21d5/21d3/21f7/2246810r(fm)|wnlj(r)|2123456rc(fm)0.940.960.981.01.02γIII.

INTRANUCLEAR ¯n DYNAMICS

A. The need for a more precise accounting of
nuclear eﬀects

As a rule, the Intranuclear Cascade (INC) model used
for simulations of inelastic interactions of particles within
the nucleus is assumed to hold at energies (cid:38) 30-40 MeV
(the conditions of applicability of the model are consid-
ered in detail in [28]). The inﬂuence of other intranuclear
nucleons on an incident particle is taken into account by
the introduction of some averaged potential U (r), and
so within the nucleus a cascade particle changes its en-
ergy by the amount of this potential. In the local Fermi
gas approximation used within the INC model, the in-
tranuclear nucleons are bound in the nucleus by a nuclear
potential VN (r) = −TF (r) − (cid:15)N , where TF is the Fermi
energy of the nucleon, and (cid:15)N the average binding energy
per nucleon. Since the energies of the particles partici-
pating in the cascade are suﬃciently large, a simpliﬁed
account of the inﬂuence of the nuclear environment is
justiﬁed and does not lead to distortion of the simulation
results

However, after modeling the interaction of a very slow
¯n with a 12C nucleus [28], some questions arose about the
legitimacy of particular physical approximations which
could no longer be ignored, requiring that a more cor-
rect accounting of the nuclear environment be attained
in both cases of an extranuclear and intranuclear trans-
formation and subsequent annihilation. We now discuss
these pertinent changes in our model, which have been
incorporated into all extranuclear and intranuclear sim-
ulations.

B. The ¯n-nucleus intranuclear potential and how ¯n
modiﬁes the nuclear medium

The inﬂuence of the nuclear environment on an incom-
ing extranuclear (in the case of ESS using 12C [28]) or
intranuclear ¯n leads to the modiﬁcation of the ¯n’s vac-
uum four-momentum ˜p¯n = (E¯n, p¯n) (˜p2
¯n =
m2
¯n) inside the target nucleus due to an eﬀective
scalar attractive nuclear potential of the form [56]

¯n = E2

n = m2

¯n − p2

U¯n(r) = V0

ρ(r)
ρ0

,

(11)

where ρ(r) the local nucleon density normalized to the
atomic mass number A of the nucleus, ρ0 is the saturation
density, V0 is the ¯n potential depth at this density, and
r is the distance between the ¯n and the center of the
nucleus.

Using inferences from Fig. 5, one may assume that the
¯nA and ¯pA nuclear potentials are eﬀectively the same.
With this potential, a parameter of the model, the total
¯n energy E(cid:48)
¯n in the nuclear interior of ordinary nuclei can

7

be expressed in terms of its in-medium mass m∗
as [56, 57] 3)

¯n, deﬁned

m∗

¯n(r) = m¯n + U¯n(r)

(12)

and its in-medium three-momentum p(cid:48)
particle case, is [57]

¯n, as in the free

(cid:113)

E(cid:48)

¯n =

m∗2

¯n + p(cid:48)2
¯n .

(13)

Analysis [57] of ¯p production in proton–nucleus and
nucleus–nucleus collisions at kinetic energies of a several
GeV showed that the ¯p potential at normal nuclear mat-
ter density is in the range of −100 to −150 MeV for outgo-
ing ¯p momenta below 2.5 GeV/c. Studies of ¯p production
at AGS energies [59, 60] suggest ¯p potentials of (cid:39) −250
MeV and (cid:39) −170 MeV at density ρ0 for ¯p annihilation
events at rest with respect to the nuclear matter and for ¯p
with momentum of 1 GeV/c, respectively. The real parts
of an ¯p optical potential in the center of the nucleus of
−(150 ± 30) MeV and of −(220 ± 70) MeV were extracted
in [61] from the data on ¯p absorption cross sections on
nuclei and on the annihilation spectra of π+’s and p’s,
correspondingly. Combined analysis [62] of data on an-
tiprotonic X-rays and of radiochemical data showed that
at the center of the nucleus the ¯p potential is approxi-
mately −110 MeV in depth. So, in spite of various at-
tempts to ﬁx this potential, its depth at density ρ0 still
remains rather uncertain presently. For the sake of deﬁ-
niteness, in the subsequent calculations, a realistic value
of V0 = −150 MeV will be used within Eq. (11).

The in-medium momentum p(cid:48)

¯n is related to the vacuum

momentum p¯n by the following expression:

E(cid:48)

¯n =

(cid:113)

m∗2

¯n + p(cid:48)2

¯n =

(cid:113)

m2

¯n + p2

¯n = E¯n.

(14)

For example, with V0 = −150 MeV, this shows that for
¯n annihilation at rest, i.e. when p¯n = 0, the ¯n momentum
|p(cid:48)
¯n| in the center of the nucleus and at its periphery,
corresponding to 10% of the central density, is equal to
510 and 167 MeV/c, respectively.

Within the non-interacting local Fermi gas model4
used in our MC simulations [28], for the bound target

3 )The potential U¯n is the eﬀective ¯nA scalar potential. The
value of this potential in the center of the nucleus, V0, is ac-
tually a free parameter of the model. This determines the total
in-medium ¯n energy through the “free space” dispersion rela-
tion 13 and is not the usual Lorentz scalar potential U ¯N
S , de-
termining along with the Lorentz vector potential U ¯N
V , the total
in-medium antinucleon energy E(cid:48)
via the dispersion relation
¯N
− U ¯N
V [58].
4 The usual model of a degenerate Fermi gas is one of free nucleons
enclosed within a spherical potential well with a sharp border.
The intranuclear nucleons ﬁll all energy levels of this well and
have momentum from 0 to the boundary value PF N , which is
itself a function of the nuclear density.
In this case, the mo-
mentum of the nucleon does not depend on its position in the

(mN − U ¯N

S )2 + p(cid:48)2
¯N

E(cid:48)
¯N

(cid:113)

=

nucleon total energy E(cid:48)
tion point r the formula [63, 64]

N in the medium at the annihila-

IV. MONTE CARLO SIMULATION METHODS

8

E(cid:48)

N =

(cid:113)

m2

N + p(cid:48)2

N +VN (r) ≈ mN +

p(cid:48)2
N
2mN

+VN (r), (15)

is used, where for every ith concentric zone of a spherical
nucleus we have

with

V i
N (r) = −

2(r)

P i
F N
2mN

− (cid:15)N ,

F N (r) = (cid:2)3π2ρ(r)/2(cid:3)1/3
P i

.

(16)

(17)

Here, p(cid:48)
N is the momentum of the nucleon N (N =
{p, n}) in the Fermi sea, PF N (r) is the boundary Fermi
momentum at the local point r, and the quantity (cid:15)N ≈
7 MeV is the average binding energy per nucleon; at this
point, 0 ≤ |p(cid:48)
N | ≤ PF N (r). Within the representation
of Eqs. (13)–(15), the invariant collision energy s for the
interaction of an ¯n with a nucleon bound in the nucleus
at the point r is
s = (E(cid:48)
¯n +E(cid:48)

N )2.
(18)
N entering into the
second relation of Eq. (18) in the non-relativistic limit
appropriate to our case can be calculated as

The total collision energy E¯n + E(cid:48)

N )2 = (E¯n +E(cid:48)

N )2 −(p(cid:48)

N )2 −(p(cid:48)

¯n +p(cid:48)

¯n +p(cid:48)

+

E¯n + E(cid:48)

N = m¯n + mN +

p2
¯n
2m¯n
Contrary to the on-shell interaction, for ¯n annihilation
at rest, from Eq. (19) it is seen that this energy is always
less than mn + mN and its maximum value is mn + mN −
(cid:15)N .

p(cid:48)2
N
2mN

+ VN (r).

(19)

If a bound target n is transformed into an ¯n (for the
n, deﬁned
¯n of the ¯n, determined by

40
18Ar case), we assume that its total energy E(cid:48)
by Eq. (15), is equal to that E(cid:48)
Eq. (13) above. Namely:

(cid:113)

m∗2

n + p(cid:48)2

¯n + p(cid:48)2

¯n = E(cid:48)
¯n.

n + VN (r) =

n = (cid:112)m2
E(cid:48)
It is interesting to note that, for pF (0) = 250 MeV/c,
Eq. (20) gives for the ¯n momentum |p(cid:48)
¯n| the values of
430 and 40 MeV/c if the transition n → ¯n of the tar-
get n at rest occurs in the center of the nucleus and at
its periphery, respectively (corresponding to 10% of the
central density).

(20)

The value of s for the intranuclear 40

18Ar case is given

by the ﬁrst relation of formula (18).

In the preceding sections, we have attempted to sum-
marize new theoretical additions to the dynamics of our
MC simulation. We will now review the stages of our
generator, accompanied by some discussion of other re-
cent changes given new antinucleon annihilation data,
and show some diﬀerences from previously published out-
puts [28].

A. Fundamentals

Most all of the background concerning our MC gener-
ator can be found in our recent work [28], however, we
will mention some improvements which have been imple-
mented here. We can brieﬂy summarize the content of
the model as follows:

1. Unlike the optical approach used in our previous
work [28] to calculate the radial annihilation posi-
tion distribution of a slow external antineutron an-
nihilating on 12C, in this work, an intranuclear an-
nihilation point is taken from a corresponding prob-
ability distribution shown later for 40
18Ar in Fig. 12.
This point lies within a particular zone of a set
of eight concentric spherical shells representing the
volume of the nucleus. Each shell has its own
uniform nuclear density and each their own single
nucleon momentum distribution, thus acting as a
zoned local Fermi gas.

2. The annihilation occurs, producing π’s and higher
mass resonances such as η, ω, and ρ’s, according
to tabulated channels with branching ratios taken
from [28]. After the decay of all resonances, on
average ∼ 4-5 mesons are produced from the initial
annihilation process.

3. The annihilation products are then transported
through the nuclear environment quasi-classically
using a full intranuclear cascade model (a local
nuclear density decrease is also included). Meson
resonances are decayed according to their individ-
ual lifetimes inside and outside the nucleus, though
particularly long-lived species are treated as stable
inside the nucleus.

4. The products are ejected from the nucleus and the
nuclear remnant(s) is allowed to de-excite, evapo-
rating nucleons and fragments of higher mass.

nucleus, and so we are thus considering a nonlocal (degenerate)
Fermi gas model. Usually, in order to take better account of
the inﬂuence of the diﬀuse nuclear boundary, the nucleus is di-
vided into concentric layers (zones), each with a constant density
and each with boundary values P i
F N . Thus, there now exists a
correlation between the position of the nucleon in the nucleus
and its momentum, and so we are now considering a local or
zoned (degenerate) Fermi gas model. Ample description of this
is contained in [28].

B.

Improvements from OBELIX and Crystal

Barrel Data

The annihilation model was created in 1992 [68], orig-
inally using experimental branching ratios obtained be-
fore this time. Later analysis of experimental data from

¯pp annihilation at rest obtained from the LEAR (CERN)
¯p beam by the OBELIX [69] and Crystal Barrel [70] col-
laborations are now integrated into the internal annihila-
tion model. Note that all tables in all proceeding sections
are outputted from samples of 10,000 events. In Table I
we see the absolute changes in the branching fractions of
individual annihilation channels in accordance with this
newer experimental data. The ﬁrst column shows the
annihilation channel, the second column shows the value

of this channel’s branching fraction in the corresponding
table in [28], while the third shows the new branching
fraction of this channel changed in accordance with the
experimental data [69, 70]. Once summed, all channels
are then renormalized to unity with these new fractions
taken into account. A comparison of the elementary pro-
cesses for ¯pp annihilation was carried out taking into ac-
count experimental data [69, 70] and annihilation simu-
lations from our recent work [28].

9

TABLE I. A list of several ¯pp annihilation products and their respective old [28] and new branching fractions with inclusion of
data from [69, 70].

Channel
¯pp → π+π+π−π−
¯pp → π0π0
¯pp → ηη
¯pp → π0ω
¯pp → ηω
¯pp → π0π0π0
¯pp → π0π0η
¯pp → ωω
¯pp → π0π0ω
¯pp → ηπ0ω
¯pp → π0ωω
¯pp → π0π0π0ω

Probability (%) from [28]
2.74
0.02
0.01
0.58
0.34
1.12
0.54
1.57
0.79
0.30
0.37
0.40

Probability (%) Used for This Work
3.64 [69] a
0.154 [70]
0.0312 [70]
0.460 [70]
0.960 [70]
0.610 [70]
0.514 [70]
0.358 [70]
1.53 [70]
0.60 [70]
0.344 [70]
1.24 [70]

a OBELIX gives data for ¯pp → π+π+π−π− with a branching ratio of BR(¯pp → π+π+π−π−) = 6.4 ± 0.09% (a gas target). This value

includes both resonant and independent production of these four charged π’s. To avoid double counting, we have subtracted from this
value all the fractions of all of the channels that give rise to π+π+π−π− in the ﬁnal state. Thus, in the ¯pp annihilation table contained
in [28], we have experimental data showing BR(¯pp → ρ0ρ0) = 0.67%, BR(¯pp → π+π−ρ0) = 2.02%, and importantly
BR(¯pp → π+π−ω) = 3.03%, whose contribution to the full channel of ¯pp → π+π+π−π− (including BR(ω → π+π−) = 2.3% is
3.03 × 0.023 = 0.07. From all of these considerations, we introduce the ﬁnal ratio to the table as 6.4 − 0.67 − 2.02 − 0.07 = 3.64%.

Table II shows the average multiplicities of mesons
produced in ¯pp annihilation at rest. The ﬁrst column
re-presents the simulation results from Table IV in [28],
while the second column presents the results of model-
ing when taking into account data from [69, 70]. The
third column also re-presents the experimental data itself
[28, 71–74] for ease of comparison. It follows from Table

II that the average multiplicities of annihilation mesons
with changes in the branching ratios of some individual
channels do not change signiﬁcantly and the diﬀerence
between the two calculation options is within the uncer-
tainty of the experimental data. Nevertheless, in this
and all future simulations, this new table will be used for
modeling all ¯pp annihilations.

TABLE II. Meson multiplicity comparisons from previous work [28] and the new generator as described here, which include
experimental integration of more recent OBELIX [69] and Crystal Barrel [70] data sets.

M (π)
M (π±)
M (π0)
M (η)
M (ω)
M (ρ+)
M (ρ−)
M (ρ0)

¯pp Simulation from [28]
4.91
3.11
1.80
0.09
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.19

¯pp Simulation with New Model
4.95
3.09
1.86
0.09
0.27
0.19
0.18
0.18

¯pp Experiment
4.98 ± 0.35 [71], 4.94 ± 0.14 [72]
3.14 ± 0.28 [71], 3.05 ± 0.04 [71], 3.04 ± 0.08 [72]
1.83 ± 0.21 [71], 1.93 ± 0.12 [71], 1.90 ± 0.12 [72]
0.10 ± 0.09 [73], 0.07 ± 0.01 [71]
0.28 ± 0.16 [73], 0.22 ± 0.01 [74]
—–
—–
0.26 ± 0.01 [74]

C. Model modiﬁcations and a new comparison
with experimental ¯pC annihilation at rest

recently discussed in [28]. Now, let’s analyze how these

The branching fraction modiﬁcations shown in Table I
were implemented into the optical-cascade model, most

changes eﬀect the description of experimental data for ¯pC
annihilation at rest. The ﬁrst line of Table III presents
the experimental multiplicities of the emitted π’s and the
energy carried away by those π’s and γ’s. The second line
of the table shows the results of a calculation with our
original optical-cascade model from [28] before any mod-
iﬁcations. The third line (Calculation #1) presents the

results of a simulation taking into account the changes
in the annihilation table described above. The last line
(Calculation #2) presents the results of a simulation ac-
counting for both the changes in the annihilation table
and modiﬁcations related to the nuclear environment. In
both cases, an antinucleon potential of 150 MeV in the
center of the nucleus, and varying in accordance with
the nuclear density, is included.

10

TABLE III. A list of updated multiplicities from experimental data, our original work concerning 12
6C [28], and two new
calculations taking into account the newest versions of ¯p annihilation branching ratios while also considering a new intranuclear
antinucleon potential with an associated nuclear medium response.

¯pC Experiment
¯pC Old Calculation
¯pC Calculation #1
¯pC Calculation #2

M (π)
4.57 ± 0.15
4.56
4.56
4.60

M (π+)
1.25 ± 0.06
1.21
1.21
1.22

M (π−)
1.59 ± 0.09
1.63
1.63
1.65

M (π0)
1.73 ± 0.10
1.72
1.72
1.73

Etot (MeV)
1758 ± 59
1736
1738
1762

M (p)
—–
1.14
1.11
0.96

M (n)
—–
1.21
1.20
1.03

From analysis of the table, it follows that the aver-
age multiplicities vary slightly with the modiﬁcation of
the annihilation table and dynamics. Multiplicities of
π’s increase slightly with the modiﬁcations associated
with the inﬂuence of the nuclear environment, and ev-
erywhere are within the experimental error. At the
same time, the multiplicity of p’s and n’s emitted dur-
ing the cascade development and emitted in the process
of de-excitation was signiﬁcantly reduced in the Calcu-
lation #2. This suggests that the dynamics of meson-
nuclear interactions and energy dissipation in the resid-
ual nucleus change somewhat with the introduction of
the inﬂuence of the environment. Clariﬁcation of this is-
sue requires data on proton and neutron emission from
¯pA annihilation experiments, along with further detailed
Since the present work is devoted to experi-
study.
ments to search for transformations that are planned to
be registered through the observation of predominately
spherically symmetric, multipionic topologies (so-called
π-stars), we will focus on the characteristics of these
topologies and their associated quantities.

Fig. 7 shows the spectrum of π+ emitted during ¯pC
annihilation at rest in comparison to experimental data
from [72] (green triangles), and [55] (blue squares). Just
as in the average multiplicities shown in Table III, there
are no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the spectrum for these
two variants of calculation, though a comparison to the
old calculation reveals a slightly better ﬁt to the data in
the region around 250 MeV (the ∆-resonance).

In our proceeding simulations for the 40

18Ar nucleus to
be discussed in later sections, we will use a model anal-
ogous to Calculation #2 that includes eﬀects related to
the inﬂuence of the nuclear environment.

FIG. 7. The momentum distribution for π+ emitted from
¯pC annihilation at rest. The dashed red histogram shows
the distribution generated from Calculation #1 mentioned in
Table III, while the solid black shows Calculation #2. All
points are taken from experimental data in [55, 72].

V. NEW RESULTS FOR SIMULATIONS OF ¯nA
ANNIHILATION

A. Changes in extranuclear ¯nC annihilation
simulations

Despite the absence of signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the de-
scription of available ¯pC experimental data, there are
certain aspects of the two variants of the models where
diﬀerences are very noticeable. The changes discussed
above lead to some rather important diﬀerences in an-
nihilation stages as compared to previous work in [28],
examples of which can be seen in Figs. 8–11. These can

make possible diﬀerent observable ﬁnal states after the
intranuclear cascade which are important for experiments
planning to utilize smaller nuclei (such as the NNBar
Collaboration at the European Spallation Source). Note
that all plots in all proceeding sections are outputted
from samples of 10,000 events.

For the intranuclear cascade, the operating energy con-
servation law for the annihilation process of an extranu-
clear neutron is written as

11

Eann + E∗ = E

(cid:48)

¯n + E

(cid:48)

N ,

(21)

(cid:48)

where E
¯n is the total energy of the ¯n inside the nucleus
at the point of annihilation, E
N is the total energy of the
nucleon annihilation partner at the same point, and E∗
is the excitation energy of the nucleus after the annihila-
tion. In the degenerate Fermi gas model, this is deﬁned
as

(cid:48)

E∗ = T i

F N − T i
N ,

(22)

varying from 0 to T i
F N , where i is the zone number in
which the annihilation takes place, T i
F N is the boundary
Fermi energy of the i-th zone, and T i
N is the Fermi energy
of the annihilation partner in the same zone. If one takes
into account relations (14)–(16) and (19) from Sec. III,
it follows that

Eann + E∗ = m¯n + mN − (cid:15)N ,

(23)

where (cid:15)N = 7 MeV/nucleon.

In Fig. 8, we see the distributions (old and new) of
the initial amount of total energy carried by the two an-
nihilating nucleons. Due to the fact that the previous
iteration of our calculations did not include a true ¯n-
potential or consider intranuclear nucleons to be oﬀ-shell,
the skew of this distribution was always greater than the
available rest-mass energy of an annihilating pair; this
was discounted as a kind of virtual intranuclear eﬀect,
which later disappeared and showed conservation of en-
ergy and momentum once entering the ﬁnal state. This
is now changed and made internally consistent, showing
a proper distribution less than the combined free rest
masses of the pair of annihilating nucleons. Secondarily,
the strength of the ¯n-potential can be seen to smooth out
the zoned structure present in the previous calculation.
The dynamical (position-correlated) momentum of the
initial annihilation pair (and, by conservation, their an-
nihilation products) can be studied in Fig. 9.
In the
old variant of the model, the ¯n was assumed to come
from a transformation down-range of a cold n source with
a mean energy of only ∼meV, ignoring the ¯n-potential.
Thus, the original momentum distribution of the anni-
hilation products (dashed line) was eﬀectively a direct
observation of the non-interacting zoned local Fermi gas
single nucleon momentum distribution folded with the
radial annihilation probability distribution. In the new
variant of the model described above, shown in the solid
histogram, the mass of the ¯n is deﬁned by expression (12)

FIG. 8. The new (solid line) and old (dashed line) total en-
ergy available to annihilating (anti)nucleons (and generated
mesons) is plotted.

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

¯n + P

and the momentum of the ¯n follows from (14). The direc-
tion of the momentum of the nucleons are isotropically
distributed, and thus the total momentum of the annihi-
N |
lation products varies in absolute value from |P
N |, smoothing and spreading out the struc-
to |P
ture associated with the presence of zones in the target
nucleus. The peak in the histogram in the region just be-
low 100 MeV/c corresponds to annihilations on the out-
side of the nucleus (within the diﬀuse eighth zone), where
the ¯n-potential is taken to be 0 while no oﬀ-shell mass is
accounted for, and so the momentum of the annihilating
pairs is equal to the momentum of the nucleon partner
within the seventh zone.

¯n − P

FIG. 9. The old (dashed line) and new (solid line) total ¯nN
pair (or generated meson) momentum is plotted.

The most impressive new ﬁgures in consideration of

thetical experimental eﬃciencies for future experiments.

12

¯nC extranuclear annihilation are most likely Figs. 10
and 11. Here we see the total available initial and ﬁ-
nal mesonic/pionic and photonic parameter space for an
n → ¯n signal, most commonly shown via total momen-
tum versus invariant mass plots (similar to Fig. 2 in [18])
at the annihilation point before any nuclear transport is
completed. The results of new modeling are shown at
top, and the old version of the model is shown below.
In Figs. 10, the eﬀect of the antineutron potential and
oﬀ-shell nature of nucleon masses are clearly seen in the
top plot, while the bottom plot shows a small momentum
range due to the absence of the antineutron momentum;
the right-ward inclination of the old parameter space is
a consequence of the on-shell mass’ eﬀects on the over-
all kinematics of the annihilation. Thus, we have sig-
niﬁcantly diﬀerent initial conditions for the transport of
annihilation mesons through the nucleus.

The new (top) and old (bottom)

total
FIG. 11.
mesonic/pionic/photonic ﬁnal state parameter space is shown
for extranuclear ¯nC annihilation.

B.

Intranuclear ¯nAr annihilation simulations

As mentioned previously, there now exist multiple gen-
erators for n → ¯n within the particle physics community,
notably developed in [21] using GENIE [22]. While we
believe that the demonstration of our independent gener-
ator’s capabilities [28] in the reproduction of antinucleon
data is well-established for 12C [28], such a complete set
of physical observables does not readily exist to constrain
the model for larger nuclei, especially not for 40
18Ar. Thus,
out of a need for ample comparisons, we endeavor to
show the commonalities and diﬀerences between each of
these n → ¯n generators for intranuclear ¯n 39Ar annihila-
tion useful to DUNE. We do this by attempting to make
some of the same assumptions (roughly) as GENIE, and
vice-versa. For instance, we can and do generate events
by simulating the annihilation position sourced from a
Woods-Saxon distribution within our generator (along-
side the more modern version as developed in Sec. II);
similarly, with little work, we have perturbed the de-

FIG. 10. The new (top) and old (bottom) total mesonic initial
parameter space is shown for extranuclear ¯nC annihilation.

Figs. 11 show the same variables after transport, but
re-scattering, ∆-resonance, and absorption of annihila-
tion mesons leads to an overall decrease in the observed
invariant mass, lessening the apparent ﬁnal state diﬀer-
ences between the two simulation variants. Overall, the
new parameter space is slightly more spatially if not sta-
tistically constrained, which could lead to higher hypo-

fault settings of the GENIE n → ¯n generator module to
utilize a noninteracting local Fermi gas nuclear model
along with a full intranuclear cascade. The inclusion
of an ¯n-potential within GENIE has not yet been in-
vestigated; implementation of the modern annihilation
position probability distribution (Sec. II C) is currently
underway. While none of these comparisons across gen-
erators are ever to be exact, their approximately equiva-
lent formalism can serve to inform us as to the stability
of quantities which characterize the possible ﬁnal state
topologies of a true n → ¯n signal event with respect to
their associated backgrounds. This stability across mod-
els, and their interplay with model detector reconstruc-
tion, will be studied in detail in future work with DUNE
collaborators.

Two of the probability distributions of intranuclear ra-
dial position upon annihilation for these generators are
shown in Fig. 12 in orange and blue, and are surprisingly
similar even with quite diﬀerent physical assumptions.
The quantum mechanical, shell-by-shell distributions dis-
cussed in Fig. 4 are all taken in a weighted average to cre-
ate the ﬁnal orange curve, from which our generator can
source its initial annihilation positions in a binned fash-
ion; this position is thrown, a nearest neighbor nucleon
found within a given zone (and then ”moved” to the anni-
hilation position), a Fermi momentum computed for each
of the pair given their initial positions, and then a total
phase space calculated. All GENIEv3.0.6 events source
their annihilation positions from a smooth Woods-Saxon
(nuclear density) distribution [22] incredibly similar to
our own continuous parameterization for the nuclear den-
sity, from which we derive our local zone densities:

ρAr
W S = (1 + exp(

r − 3.6894
0.5227

))−1;

(24)

GENIE also similarly throws momenta from (non)local
single nucleon momentum distributions. When this curve
is multiplied by r2, one generates the blue annihilation
probability distribution. These curves eﬀectively demon-
strate how even the most simple of assumptions, some
only quasi-classical, can lead to quite good approxima-
tions; however, we note the preponderance of events even
further toward or beyond the surface of the nucleus using
a quantum-mechanical formalism. The increased likeli-
hood of such surface annihilations, along with their asso-
ciated correlation with lower momenta and higher ﬁnal
state meson multiplicity, will be shown in the coming ﬁg-
ures to be an arguably critical part in the proper evalua-
tion of future experimental eﬃciencies and possible lower
limits on mean intranuclear n → ¯n transformation time;
the interplay of these quantities and any changes in the
ﬁnal state π-star topology observable in the DUNE de-
tectors has not yet been completely investigated. For
similar plots and discussions, see [28, 65–68].

Some of the diﬀerences between this work and GE-
NIEv3.0.6’s generator pertain to the initial dynamics of
the intranuclear annihilation. An example of this can be
seen in Fig. 13, showing the initial annihilation mesons’

13

FIG. 12. Two plots are shown for various generator assump-
tions.
In blue, we see the naive intranuclear radial posi-
tion of annihilation probability distribution generated by a
Woods-Saxon (abbreviated “WS”), as presented in GENIE.
In orange, we see the modern, quantum-mechanically derived,
shell-averaged, true intranuclear radial position of annihila-
tion probability distribution as developed in Sec. II, present
in our generator. Probability distributions are normalized to
the same arbitrary integral for a direct comparison, and the
scale is arbitrary.

total energy for this work (using the orange curve in
Fig. 12) and GENIE (using the blue curve in Fig. 12),
each using a version of a local Fermi gas nuclear model.
Like the extranuclear ¯n annihilation described on 12C
above, energy balance in the annihilation point is given
as Eann + E∗ = E
N ; taking into account that we
¯n = E
have E

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

¯n + E
n, and that
E∗ = T i

F n − T i

F n + T i

F N − T i
N

(25)

we have the total energy

Eann + E∗ = m¯n + mN − 2(cid:15) = 1.866 GeV .

(26)

It can be seen in Fig. 13 that our distribution of en-
ergies available to an annihilation is always less than
1.866 GeV. GENIE’s distribution (which assumes a sim-
ilar binding energy per nucleon as our model) can be ex-
plained simply by considering the minimum/maximum
potential magnitudes of annihilation pair momentum
(corresponding to an anti/co-parallel intranuclear colli-
sion) while assuming an approximately constant intranu-
clear defect nucleon mass of ∼ 910 MeV/c2. The sharp
rise of the GENIE distribution around 1.82 GeV can be
seen to correspond to the addition of momentum distri-
bution shapes around zero momentum (see Fig. 14).

One can see the diﬀerent initial single nucleon mo-
mentum assumptions in Figs. 14. The GENIE nonlocal
Bodek-Ritchie or local Fermi gas nuclear models men-
tioned here serve eﬀectively as a set of initial conditions
which enable certain nucleon momentum and radial posi-
tion correlations (or lack thereof). The nonlocal Bodek-
Ritchie has been considered the default operating model

14

FIG. 13. The distributions of total initial annihilation meson
energy are shown for this work (solid line) and GENIEv3.0.6
(dashed line) using local Fermi gas models. Via conservation,
each of these is equivalent to the distributions of the annihi-
lating ¯nN pair.

for n → ¯n simulations; however, for most of the rest of
this article, we will compare local Fermi gas models to
each other for a succinct simplicity. Note the diﬀerent
characteristic ranges of momenta; in general, the shapes
and ranges of each nucleon local Fermi gas model (solid
lines, top and bottom ﬁgure) are incredibly similar, while
the nonlocal Bodek-Ritchie is quite unique (dashed lines),
especially with its phenomenological, short-range “corre-
lation” tail. For GENIE, we see that the shapes of all
distributions are identical: pf (¯n) = pf (n) ≈ pf (p); this is
not the case for our model, where pf (¯n) (cid:54)= pf (n) ≈ pf (p)
due to the ¯n-potential. 5

The most important aspect of correlated behavior
which has been previously unaccounted for in GENIE-
aﬃliated work on n → ¯n is that of initial (anti)nucleon
momentum and radius. In Figs. 15, we show compar-
isons between our and GENIE’s local Fermi gas nuclear
models, which by deﬁnition preserves these correlations,
alongside the inherently nonlocal Bodek-Ritchie nuclear
model. All ﬁgures assume a (zoned or smooth) Woods-
Saxon-like annihilation position probability distribution
for easier direct comparisons; all outputs from our sim-
ulations using the modern annihilation probability dis-
tribution from Sec. II appear somewhat similar when
graphed in these coordinates, and so are not shown here
to conserve space. The ¯n-potential is apparent in the top
plot, which appears smoothed and lacking of any zoned

5 For simplicity, throughout this section we have labeled certain
plots with “Golubeva-Richard-Paryev” (for original work done
with the modern shell model-derived annihilation position prob-
ability distribution and modiﬁcation of the nuclear medium due
to ¯n interactions), “Golubeva-WS-Paryev” (for original work
done with a Woods-Saxon-derived annihilation position proba-
bility distribution and nuclear medium modiﬁcation), and then
the various GENIEv3.0.6 model identiﬁers [22].

FIG. 14. Top: This work, showing the initial (anti)nucleon
momentum distributions, using a zoned local Fermi gas model
with an additional ¯n potential. Bottom: the same for the GE-
NIEv3.0.6, showing a local Fermi gas model and the default
nonlocal Bodek-Ritchie model.

discontinuities due to the strength of the interaction (as
seen in the middle plot, showing correlations for ¯n an-
nihilation partners). All local models correctly predict
a falling-oﬀ of nucleon momentum at higher radii, a key
consideration for event reconstruction and background
rejection. This behavior is not present within GENIE
when using the default nonlocal Bodek-Ritchie nuclear
model, shown at the bottom; the asymmetry present in
this plot is due to the Fermi momentum cutoﬀ, above
which only phenomenologically ’short-range correlated’
¯n’s populate.

The initial annihilation meson total momentum dis-
tribution is seen for our and GENIE models in Fig. 16;
these distributions are equivalent to the initial two-body
annihilation pair momentum distributions by conserva-
tion. Each histogram shares a Gaussian-like shape due
to the randomized momentum selection from underly-
ing distributions, though our output shows much higher
available momentum due to the interaction of the ¯n with
the modiﬁed nuclear medium.

All of this leads us to consider the available initial
(and ﬁnal) mesonic parameter space, again `a la Fig. 2 of

15

FIG. 16. The distributions of total initial annihilation me-
son momentum are shown for this work (solid line) and GE-
NIEv3.0.6 (dashed line) using local Fermi gas models.

clear transport; thus, for GENIE, hA/hN2018 models
(see Secs. 2.5.4 and 2.5.5 of the GENIE v3.0 manual [22]
for full discussions) are at this stage equivalent. Due to
the non-dynamical oﬀ-shell masses of annihilation pairs,
GENIE predicts higher invariant masses, while our model
shows them decrease due to oﬀ-shell mass defects in cor-
relation with radial position. Overall, the space is quite
diﬀerently ﬁlled for each model, though considering this
is before the intranuclear cascade, one cannot necessarily
predict much about the ﬁnal state.

The follow-up to these ﬁgures can be studied in the
comparison of Figs. 18, where our and GENIE gener-
ated events proceed through a full intranuclear cascade
(hN2018 only is shown here). Note that our model in-
cludes photons in the ﬁnal state from high-mass reso-
nance decays, while GENIE does not. The disconnected
regions toward the left of the plots are signs of single π
emission after at least one or more meson absorptions.
While overall the distribution of events is rather consis-
tent, critically, the high density of events with large in-
variant mass and low momentum (bottom right of plots)
among these local Fermi gas models shows the impor-
tance of modeling correlations between position and mo-
mentum as they imply a comparatively large number of
escaping (and possibly visible) π’s in the ﬁnal state. It
is with these areas that one may hope to ﬁnd a signif-
icant rejection of background events, possibly allowing
for an actual observation of an n → ¯n event. A full char-
acterization of these eﬀects across many nuclear model
conﬁgurations within the DUNE detectors is forthcom-
ing within the DUNE Nucleon Decay Group.

We end the comparison of these generators with
Tab. IV and Figs. 19 and 20, which show many similar-
ities and some diﬀerences across them. Multiplicities in
Tab. IV are seen to be most diﬀerent between our model
and GENIE in the realm of outgoing nucleons (result-
ing from nucleon knock-out or evaporative de-excitation);
this should not be surprising, as GENIE does not cur-

FIG. 15. Two dimensional ¯n and n momentum-radius corre-
lation plots for this work (top two plots, using a zoned local
Fermi gas and zoned Woods-Saxon annihilation position dis-
tribution) alongside GENIEv3.0.6’s local Fermi gas and non-
local Bodek-Ritchie single (anti)nucleon momentum nuclear
models (bottom two plots, also with a smooth Woods-Saxon
initial ¯n annihilation position distribution).

[18]. As seen in Figs. 17, this serves as an initial condi-
tion of the annihilation-generated mesons before intranu-

16

FIG. 17. The initial mesonic parameter space (total momen-
tum versus invariant mass) is compared for multiple gener-
ators; top, this work; bottom, GENIEv3.0.6. The “no reso-
nances” phrase refers to a GENIE Mother particle status code
cut which removes virtual contributions to invariant mass.

FIG. 18. The ﬁnal state mesonic/pionic parameter space (to-
tal momentum versus invariant mass) after intranuclear trans-
port is compared for multiple generators; top, this work; mid-
dle and bottom, GENIEv3.0.6 local Fermi gas and nonlocal
Bodek-Ritchie, respectivley. Diﬀerences in these may lead to
diﬀerent detector signal eﬃciencies.

rently contain a public version of an evaporation model
within either its hN2018 (full intranuclear cascade) or
hA2018 (single eﬀective interaction) models. Exciting
work by GENIE developers in this regime is expected to
be completed soon, and we look forward to being able to
compare our results. Small diﬀerences can also be seen
in the π0,± multiplicities, which are partially due to the

fact that we predict more n → ¯n events toward or be-
yond the surface of the nucleus (see the blue and orange
radial annihilation position probability distributions of
Fig. 12), but there are also nontrivial dependencies given
the larger number of possible branching channels we sim-
ulate [28] compared to GENIE [22].

TABLE IV. Final state average stable particle multiplicities for several 10,000 event samples across multiple ¯nAr annihilation
MCs. Also included is the initial total annihilation energy. See [28] for a full description of the zoned local Fermi gas and the
intranuclear cascade used in this work. See the GENIE v3.0 manual [22] for discussions of nuclear models and intranuclear
cascades.

17

¯n39
¯n39
¯n39
¯n39
¯n39
¯n39

18Ar Golubeva-Richard-Paryev (Zoned Local Fermi Gas, INC)
18Ar Golubeva-Woods-Saxon-Paryev (Zoned Local Fermi Gas, INC) 3.781
18Ar GENIEv3.0.6 (Default Bodek-Ritchie, hA2018)
18Ar GENIEv3.0.6 (Default Bodek-Ritchie, hN2018)
18Ar GENIEv3.0.6 (Local Fermi Gas, hA2018)
18Ar GENIEv3.0.6 (Local Fermi Gas, hN2018)

M (π) M (π+) M (π−) M (π0) M (p) M (n) Etot
3.813 1.239
1.22
3.610 1.183
3.280 1.159
3.594 1.173
1.155
3.24

1.566 3.459 4.823
1.008
3.63 4.896
1.563
0.998
1.436 3.021 3.151
0.991
0.968
1.153 6.192 6.654
0.9776 1.444 3.045 3.174
1.129 6.269 6.718
0.956

1.846
1.845
1.925
1.922
1.908
1.905

o

(MeV)

To give a more complete context to Table IV, we plot
several (absolute magnitude) ﬁnal state momentum spec-
tra for π+ and p species, two key constituents in the even-
tual experimental search for n → ¯n in DUNE; note that
the π0,− distributions are quite similar. In Fig. 19, we
see that our models agree quite well with the full intranu-
clear cascade simulation from GENIE (using hN2018) in
both multiplicity and shape; there is some lack of struc-
ture around the ∆-resonance within the hA2018 simula-
tion (recall this models the cascade as a single eﬀective
interaction using tabulated reaction rates), a sign of the
competition between cross-sections (or rates) of processes
such as ∆ decay and pion absorption.

ucleon annihilation data. We will note, however, that if
one takes a more experimental viewpoint, these are not
actually so disparate; indeed, if we consider an approxi-
mate, conservative, minimum proton kinetic energy de-
18Ar to be (cid:38) 100 MeV (i.e.,
tectability threshold in liquid 40
(cid:38) 450 MeV/c) [76], we see that above this value much of
the shape and magnitude of all distributions are quite
similar. Thus, in some respect, we expect these mod-
els to appear rather degenerate for protons when taking
detector response into account.

FIG. 20. The outgoing p momentum spectrum is shown for
several local Fermi gas models.

FIG. 19. The outgoing π+ momentum spectrum is shown for
several local Fermi gas models.

In Fig. 20, we see the outgoing proton spectra. Here,
our model and GENIE diﬀer greatly (and GENIE even
among itself) across lower momenta. Though there is a
full intranuclear cascade model within GENIE (hN2018),
it can be directly seen that it does not yet include any
nucleon evaporation currently.
In some respect, these
diﬀerences should be expected due to the novel nature
of the phenomena we are modeling (transporting ∼ 4-5
mesons is no easy business), and the fact that our genera-
tor was comparatively purpose-built to reproduce antin-

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK

In this work, we have endeavored to give an update
to the community on recent developments in the model-
ing of ¯nA annihilation events in service of future BSM
n → ¯n searches. Critical among the ﬁndings of this pa-
per is the calculation of a new intranuclear suppression
R ∼ 5.6 × 1022 s−1, along with a new
factor for 40
and associated calculation of the 40
18Ar intranuclear ra-
dial annihilation probability distribution. Also, eﬀorts
have been made to implement this and other important

18Ar, T Ar

¯nN annihilation dynamics into an independently devel-
oped, antinucleon-data-driven MC generator to service
both the ESS NNBar Collaboration and DUNE. Sam-
ples of 100,000 events for both communities are now be-
ing prepared and will be made available upon reasonable
request to the authors. Comparisons and discussions of
diﬀerences and similarities have been made to data where
available, previous MC results, and other publicly avail-
able event generators such as GENIE.

Within this work, a kind of forward path has been il-
luminated for the (intranuclear) BSM (di)nucleon decay
community, showing the importance of some initial phys-
ical correlations in the modeling of BSM signals, most
importantly that of the event constituent’s momenta and
intranuclear position. However, the eﬀects of ﬁnal state
interactions cannot be understated. It is with these ﬁnd-
ings, and our associated event generator, that we hope to
empower future experiments to better understand prob-
able signal topologies for rare decays. Collaboration is
ongoing with DUNE community members within the Nu-
cleon Decay Working Group to study the implications of
this modeling work on possible eﬃciencies, atmospheric
neutrino background rejection rates, and lower limits on
the n → ¯n mean transformation time inside simulated
DUNE detector geometries.

Another future step elucidated by this work is the criti-
cal nature of current and future collaborations’ endeavors
to holistically evaluate and compare various ¯nA inter-
actions using common formalisms for the calculation of
(anti)nucleon wave functions, radial annihilation proba-
bility distributions, and intranuclear suppression factors

[1] A. D. Sakharov, Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 5, 32 (1967)
[JETP Lett. 5, 24 (1967)] [Sov. Phys. Usp. 34, no. 5,
[Usp. Fiz. Nauk 161, no. 5, 61 (1991)].
392 (1991)]
doi:10.1070/PU1991v034n05ABEH002497

[2] G.

’t Hooft, Phys. Rev. Lett. 37,

8

(1976).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.37.8

[3] S. Nussinov and R. Shrock, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88,
171601 (2002) doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.171601 [hep-
ph/0112337].

[4] J. M. Arnold, B. Fornal and M. B. Wise, Phys. Rev.
D 87, 075004 (2013) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.87.075004
[arXiv:1212.4556 [hep-ph]].

[5] V. A. Kuzmin, V. A. Rubakov and M. E. Shaposh-
nikov, Phys. Lett. 155B, 36 (1985). doi:10.1016/0370-
2693(85)91028-7

and S. Nasri,
(2006)

[6] K. S. Babu, R. N. Mohapatra

97,

Rev.

Lett.

Phys.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.131301 [hep-ph/0606144].
[7] K. S. Babu, P. S. Bhupal Dev, E. C. F. S. Fortes and
R. N. Mohapatra, Phys. Rev. D 87, no. 11, 115019 (2013)
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.87.115019 [arXiv:1303.6918 [hep-
ph]].

131301

[8] C. Grojean, B. Shakya, J. D. Wells and Z. Zhang,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 121,
(2018)
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.171801 [arXiv:1806.00011
[hep-ph]].

171801

no.

17,

18

for all pertinent nuclei. This is a rather monumental task,
but one which should be completed in the same way as
for other rare decay searches, such as within the 0νββ
community.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

JMR would like to thank Michael Bender and Karim
Bennaceur for useful advice about shell-model wave func-
tions, Joseph Cugnon for discussions, and Dario Auterio
and his collaborators for interesting discussions about the
DUNE experiment. JLB’s work is supported by the U.S.
Department of Energy, Oﬃce of Science, Oﬃce of Work-
force Development for Teachers and Scientists, Oﬃce of
Science Graduate Student Research (SCGSR) program.
The SCGSR program is administered by the Oak Ridge
Institute for Science and Education for the DOE under
contract number DESC0014664. JLB is grateful to the
US DOE SCGSR Program and Fermilab for their gener-
ous support of this and other work. ESG would like to
thank INR, Moscow, for the support of her travel. We all
wish to thank the organizers of the INT Neutron Oscil-
lations Workshop in Seattle during November 2017, the
ILL-LPSC PPNS Workshop at Grenoble in May 2018,
and the ESS Workshop at NORDITA in December 2018
for providing a stimulating environment where these top-
ics have been thoroughly discussed. We also wish to
thank Yuri Kamyshkov for his constant stimulus and in-
terests in this work, helping to drive us all along.

[9] E. Rinaldi, S. Syritsyn, M. L. Wagman, M. I. Buchoﬀ,
C. Schroeder and J. Wasem, arXiv:1809.00246 [hep-lat].
[10] A. Tureanu, Phys. Rev. D 98, 015019 (2018). doi:

10.1103/PhysRevD.98.015019

[11] V. V. Nesvizhevsky, V. Gudkov, K. V. Protasov,
W. M. Snow and A. Y. Voronin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, no.
22, 221802 (2019) doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.221802
[arXiv:1810.04988 [hep-ex]].

[12] Z. Berezhiani and A. Vainshtein, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 33,
no. 31, 1844016 (2018). doi:10.1142/S0217751X18440165
[13] M. Baldo-Ceolin et al., Z. Phys. C 63, 409 (1994).

doi:10.1007/BF01580321

[14] T. W. Jones et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 720 (1984).
[15] M. Takita et al., Phys. Rev. D 34, 902 (1986).
[16] C. Berger et al., Phys. Lett. B 240, 237 (1990).
[17] J. Chung et al., Phys. Rev. D 66, 032004 (2002).
[18] K. Abe et al., arXiv:1109.4227 [hep-ex] – PRD 91 072006.
[19] M. Bergevin, PhD Thesis, University of Guelph (2010).
[20] B. Aharmim et al. [SNO Collaboration], Phys. Rev. D 96,
no. 9, 092005 (2017) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.96.092005
[arXiv:1705.00696 [hep-ex]].

[21] J. E. T. Hewes, doi:10.2172/1426674
[22] C. Andreopoulos, C. Barry, S. Dytman, H. Gallagher,
T. Golan, R. Hatcher, G. Perdue and J. Yarba,
arXiv:1510.05494 [hep-ph], http://genie-mc.org.

[23] E. Friedman and A. Gal, Phys. Rev. D 78, 016002 (2008)

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.016002 [arXiv:0803.3696 [hep-
ph]].

[24] C. B. Dover, A. Gal and J. M. Richard, nucl-
th/9606007, Proceedings of the International Workshop
Future prospects of baryon instability search in p decay
and n → ¯n oscillation experiments, Oak Ridge, March
28-30, 1996, Eds. S.J. Ball and Y.A. Kamyshkov.

[50] F. Iazzi et al. [OBELIX Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B
475, 378 (2000). doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(00)00086-1
[51] O. Chamberlain, D.V. Keller, R. Mermod, E. Segr`e, E.,
H.M. Steiner,and T. Ypsilantis, T., Phys. Rev. 108, 1553
(1957).

[52] D. V. Bugg et al., Phys. Lett. B 194, 563 (1987).

doi:10.1016/0370-2693(87)90235-8

[25] A. Bodek and J. L. Ritchie, Phys. Rev. D 23, 1070 (1981).

[53] G. Bruge et al., Phys. Lett. 169B, 14 (1986).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.23.1070

doi:10.1016/0370-2693(86)90676-3

19

[26] J. D. Gustafson, PhD Thesis, Boston University (2016).
[27] D. Gibin, Proceedings of the International Workshop Fu-
ture prospects of baryon instability search in p decay and
n → ¯n oscillation experiments, Oak Ridge, March 28-30,
1996, Eds. S.J. Ball and Y.A. Kamyshkov, pp. 253-268.
[28] E. S. Golubeva, J. L. Barrow and C. G. Ladd,
(2019)
[arXiv:1804.10270

Phys. Rev. D 99,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.99.035002,
[hep-ex]].

035002

no.

3,

[29] C. Amsler and F. Myhrer, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 41,
219 (1991). doi:10.1146/annurev.ns.41.120191.001251
[30] E. Klempt, F. Bradamante, A. Martin and J.-M. Richard,
119. doi:10.1016/S0370-

Phys. Rept. 368 (2002)
1573(02)00144-8

[31] G. Costa and P. Kabir. Phys. Rev., D28:667–668, 1983.
[32] F. Oosterhof, B. Long, J. de Vries, R. G. E. Timmer-
mans and U. van Kolck, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, no.
17, 172501 (2019) doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.172501
[arXiv:1902.05342 [hep-ph]].

[33] R. M. Sternheimer. Phys. Rev. A, 1:321–327, 1970.
[34] C. B. Dover, A. Gal, and J.-M. Richard. Phys. Rev.,

D27:1090–1100, 1983.

[35] C. B. Dover, A. Gal, and J- M. Richard. Phys. Rev.,

C31:1423–1429, 1985.

[36] C. B. Dover, A. Gal, and J.-M. Richard. Phys. Lett.,

B344:433–435, 1995.

[37] L. Hulthen, J. P. Elliott, D. L. Hill, A. M. Lane, S. A.
Moszkowski, M. Sugawara, and M. Verde. Handbuch der
Physik. Springer, Berlin, 1957.

[38] Ronald J. Adler, T. K. Das, and Alvaro Ferraz Filho.

Phys. Rev., C16:1231, 1977.

[39] H. Multhopp Luftfahrtforschung 15, 153-166 (1938).
[40] J.-M. Richard,

Phys. Rept.
doi:10.1016/0370-1573(92)90078-E

212,

1

(1992).

[41] E. Fermi and C. N. Yang, Phys. Rev. 76, 1739 (1949).

doi:10.1103/PhysRev.76.1739

[54] K. G. Chetyrkin, M. V. Kazarnovsky, V. A. Kuzmin
and M. E. Shaposhnikov, Phys. Lett. 99B, 358 (1981).
doi:10.1016/0370-2693(81)90117-9

[55] P. L. Mcgaughey et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2156 (1986).

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.56.2156

[56] W. Cassing, Nucl. Phys. A 700 (2002) 618 .
[57] A. Sibirtsev et al., Nucl. Phys. A 632 (1998) 131 ;

W. Cassing and E. L. Bratkovskaya, Phys. Rep. 308
(1999) 67 .

[58] I. N. Mishustin et al., Phys. Rev. C 71 (2005) 035201 .
[59] V. Koch, G. E. Brown, and C. M. Ko, Phys. Lett. B 265

(1991) 29 .

[60] C. Spieles et al., Phys. Rev. C 53 (1996) 2011 .
[61] A. B. Larionov et al., Phys. Rev. C 80 (2009) 021601 .
[62] E. Friedman, A. Gal, and J. Mares, Nucl. Phys. A 761

(2005) 283 .

[63] V. K. Magas, L. Roca, and E. Oset, Phys. Rev. C 71

(2005) 065202 .

[64] S. V. Efremov and E. Ya. Paryev, Eur. Phys. J. A 1

(1998) 99 .

[65] E. S. Golubeva, A. S. Ilinov and L. A. Kondratyuk, “An-
tineutron annihilation event generator for n → ¯n search
experiment,” in Proc. Int. Workshop “Future prospects
of baryon instability search in p decay and n → ¯n os-
cillation experiments”, Oak Ridge, US, 28-30 March,
1996, ORNL-6910, p. 295-305, ed. S.J. Ball and Y.A.
Kamyshkov.

[66] E. S. Golubeva, A. S. Ilinov and L. A. Kondratyuk, Phys.
Atom. Nucl. 60, 2006 (1997) [Yad. Fiz. 60, 2188 (1997)].
[67] E. S. Golubeva and L. A. Kondratyuk, Nucl. Phys. Proc.
Suppl. 56, 103 (1997). doi:10.1016/S0920-5632(97)00260-
0

[68] E. S. Golubeva, A. S.

Ilinov, B. V. Krippa and
I. A. Pshenichnov, Nucl. Phys. A 537, 393 (1992).
doi:10.1016/0375-9474(92)90362-N

[69] P. Salvini et al. [OBELIX Collaboration], Eur. Phys. J.

[42] C. B. Dover and J. M. Richard, Phys. Rev. C 21, 1466

C 35, 21 (2004). doi:10.1140/epjc/s2004-01811-8

(1980). doi:10.1103/PhysRevC.21.1466

[43] J. M. Richard and M. E. Sainio, Phys. Lett. 110B, 349

(1982). doi:10.1016/0370-2693(82)91270-9

[44] M. Kohno and W. Weise, Nucl. Phys. A 454, 429 (1986).

doi:10.1016/0375-9474(86)90098-9

[45] V. Kopeliovich and I. Potashnikova, JETP Lett.
95, 1 (2012) [Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 95, 3 (2012)]
doi:10.1134/S0021364012010079 [arXiv:1112.3549 [hep-
ph]].

[70] C. Amsler

et al.

[Crystal Barrel Collaboration],
Nucl. Phys. A 720, 357 (2003). doi:10.1016/S0375-
9474(03)00912-6

[71] E. Klempt, C. Batty and J.-M. Richard, Phys. Rept.
413, 197 (2005) doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2005.03.002 [hep-
ex/0501020].

[72] E. D. Minor, T. A. Armstrong, R. Bishop, V. Harris,
R. A. Lewis and G. A. Smith, Z. Phys. A 336, 461 (1990).
[73] G. Levman, R. Singer and T. Fields, Phys. Rev. D 21, 1

[46] J. Haidenbauer and U. G. Meißner, arXiv:1910.14423

(1980). doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.21.1

[hep-ph].

[47] F. Ajzenberg-Selove, Nucl. Phys. A 281, 1 (1977).

doi:10.1016/0375-9474(77)90415-8
E. O. Fiset,

[48] M. Bolsterli,

J. L. Norton, Phys. Rev. C 5,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevC.5.1050

1050

J. R. Nix

and
(1972).

[74] R. Hamatsu et al. [Bombay-CERN-College de France-
Madrid Collaboration], Nucl. Phys. B 123, 189 (1977).
doi:10.1016/0550-3213(77)90458-8

[75] Kh. M. Beshtoev, Joint Institute for Nuclear Research
Preprints and Communications (in Russian), JINR P2-
5480, P2-6337, Dubna (1972).

[49] V. G. Ableev et al. [OBELIX Collaboration], Nuovo Cim.

[76] The MicroBooNE Collaboration, Fermilab Public Note

A 107, 943 (1994). doi:10.1007/BF02731106

1025, 2 (2017).

