9
1
0
2

g
u
A
2
1

]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

2
v
8
2
4
7
0
.
6
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

An electrostatic in-line charge-state puriﬁcation system for multicharged ions
in the kiloelectronvolt energy range

Daniel Schury,1, a) Ajit Kumar,1 Alain M´ery,2 Jean-Yves Chesnel,2 Anna L´evy,1 St´ephane Mac´e,1 Christophe
Prigent,1 Jean-Marc Ramillon,2 Jimmy Rangama,2 Patrick Rousseau,2 S´ebastien Steydli,1 Martino Trassinelli,1
Dominique Vernhet,1 and Emily Lamour1
1)Institut des Nanosciences de Paris, Sorbonne Universit´e, CNRS UMR 7588, 4 place Jussieu, 75252 Paris,
France
2)CIMAP, CEA/CNRS/ENSICAEN/Universit´e de Caen Normandie, 6 Boulevard du Mar´echal Juin 14050 Caen,
France

(Dated: 13 August 2019)

The performance of a newly built omega type electrostatic analyzer designed to act as an
in-line charge-state puriﬁcation system for ions in the keV energy range is reported. The
analyzer consists of a set of four consecutive electrostatic ° concentric cylindrical electrodes
enclosed by Matsuda electrodes. This setup was recently tested and validated using O5+,
Ar9+ and Xe20+ ion beams at an energy of  qkeV at the ARIBE facility. A resolving
power of . and a transmission of  % of the desired charge state are measured allowing
a good puriﬁcation of incoming ion beams with charge states up to 10+ and a fairly good
puriﬁcation for charge states at least up to 20+. In comparison with other in-line solutions
such as Wien ﬁlter, our system has the advantage of being purely electrostatic and therefore
lacking common drawbacks as for example hysteresis.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Charged particle beams are used in many diﬀerent
ﬁelds, ranging from fundamental research to applied in-
dustrial and even medical applications. Therefore, it is
essential to completely control the beam using ion optical
elements such as deﬂectors and lenses. While magneto-
optical elements (such as solenoids or quadrupoles) play
a dominant role for high energy beams, in the low to
mid energy range electrostatic elements have the advan-
tage of being easier to build and are additionally lack-
ing hysteresis. Electrostatic devices have the additional
advantage of separating ions by their energy per charge,
needing no reconﬁguration for ions with diﬀerent masses,
since, for a simple acceleration by an extraction volt-
age, the ion energy is mass independent. The most com-
mon electrostatic beam deﬂectors are parallel plate mir-
ror analyzers1, cylindrical mirror analyzers2, radial cylin-
drical analyzers3, spherical capacitors4 and quadrupole
deﬂectors5. While these deﬂectors are often used to sim-
ply change the ion trajectory, for example in order to
be directed onto a detector, they can also be used as
energy analyzers or monochromators for particles with
the same charge6, in which case the change of the prop-
agation axis can be an unwanted side eﬀect. Other ion
optical elements acting as energy ﬁlters like a Wien ﬁlter7
or quadrupole ion guides8 (with the latter restricted to
low energies) maintain the axis of translation but intro-
duce again more complex elements such as magnets and
high frequency voltage supplies. To preserve the simplic-
ity of a purely electrostatic system while simultaneously
keeping the axis of the incoming beam we adapt the de-
sign of four consecutive ° cylindrical deﬂectors9 with
Matsuda electrodes10 obtaining an adjustable double fo-
cusing in-line charge state puriﬁcation system. The ad-

a)Daniel.Schury@insp.upmc.fr

ditional Matsuda electrodes create an adjustable electric
ﬁeld which on the optical axis resembles that of a toroidal
deﬂector. This design allows focusing of the beam in both
transversal planes without requiring expensive toroidal
electrodes.

For many experiments dealing with slow multi-charged
ions interacting with matter, a good control of the charge
state upstream the collision is important. This is espe-
cially true in cases in which the charge state products are
measured in coincidence, for example in ion-surface/2D
material experiments11–13 or ion-ion studies in the low
energy domain14,15. This puriﬁcation is important in our
case, as ion-ion studies normally suﬀer already from a
low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the order of  × −
due to the low ion beam densities compared to the resid-
ual gas density16. Since the primary ion beam intensity
is normally up to ten orders of magnitudes higher than
the product beam intensity, even impurities of less than
 % can noticeably decrease the SNR further and should
be removed from the beam as close to the interaction
point as possible. The charge state puriﬁcation system
presented here is developed in the context of the F ast-
I on-S low-I on-C ollision project (FISIC17), which aims to
obtain absolute electronic cross sections for ion-ion colli-
sions between fast (M eV /u) and slow (keV /u) ions. In
this regime the ion stopping power (energy transfer) is
maximum, leading to the strongest eﬀects on material
modiﬁcations, including biological materials. Until to-
day, measurements and reliable theoretical predictions
are completely lacking in this speciﬁc collision regime.

or

similar

Former

experiments

either
performed
slow-ion/slow-ion14–16
fast-ion/plasma-discharge
collisions18–20. To be able to carry out crossed-beam
including the S3
experiments at diﬀerent facilities,
beamline at GANIL21,22 or
such as
CRYRING@ESR23
the upcoming FAIR
facility, a compact and versatile setup providing a pure
ion beam of highly charged low energy ions is needed. To

storage rings

located at

 
 
 
 
 
 
fully enclose the high energy ion beam envelope, a beam
spot size of not less than  mm in height is demanded.
As the two ion beams are crossed perpendicular, the
demands in horizontal focusing are less strict and mainly
deﬁned by the acceptance of the ion optical elements
further downstream. From our numerical simulations
we expect a horizontal width of less than  mm to be
suﬃcient.

In this work we ﬁrst discuss the basic principle of the
puriﬁcation device, describing the design and its diﬀerent
components. The dimensions are derived for an assumed
Gaussian shaped ion beam, about  cm in diameter with
an emittance of approximately  π mm mrad. These
are typical values we expect to be delivered from our
yet to be assembled and characterized ECR ion source.
It should be noted that in cases we want to emphasize
the fact that we provide the emittance (cid:15) obtained by the
area of the phase space ellipse A = π(cid:15), we give the emit-
tance in π mm mrad, eﬀectively stating the area A of
the phase space ellipse instead of the emittance itself, in
accordance with24. Furthermore, if not stated otherwise,
we provide the emittance of the phase space ellipse cov-
ering  % of the beam ensemble. Second, we describe
the experimental ﬁndings achieved during a beam time
at the ARIBE facility at GANIL/Caen, which will not be
the source of low energy ions we will use for the FISIC
experiment mentioned before, but delivering beams suit-
able for ﬁrst performance tests. Tests on transmission,
separation power and comparisons with numerical simu-
lations will be shown.

II. OPERATIONAL PRINCIPLE AND DESIGN

Even under good vacuum conditions, especially highly-
charged low-energetic ion beams undergo atomic reac-
tions with residual gas particles. In the inelastic regime
occurs mostly electron capture from the residual gas.
At residual gas pressures in the order of  × − mbar,
transport distances of a few meters and cross sections in
the order of a few  × − cm− the fraction of capture
products in the beam can be up to a few percent of the
primary beam and lead to a source of systematic error
in the experiment. For collisions with keV -beams the
momentum exchange onto the ion is small25,26 ((cid:28)  %)
and can be neglected in ﬁrst approximation. As a result
the ion does only change its charge state but not its ki-
netic energy. To clean the ion beam from these unwanted
products, we adapted the design of four consecutive °
cylindrical deﬂectors with Matsuda electrodes, which was
initially used for electron spectrometers9, to separate ions
with the same kinetic energy but diﬀerent charge states.

By equating the electrostatic and centrifugal force, we
can calculate the radius R of the trajectory for a particle
with the kinetic energy Ekin and the charge q which trav-
els inside a homogeneous electric ﬁeld F = U0
d , deﬁned
by the voltage diﬀerence U0 and the cathode gap d, as

R =

2Ekin
qF

(1)

2

FIG. 1: Side view and schematic cut through the pu-
riﬁcation system. The cylindrical deﬂectors are enclosed
between Matsuda electrodes. The polarity of the deﬂec-
tor electrodes for positive ion beams is indicated by plus
and minus signs. The black beam resembles the primary
ion beam which transits the structure at the eﬀective ra-
dius. Beams with lower (capture, dark orange) or higher
(ionization, light orange) charge state are sorted out by
hitting the wall of the deﬂector.

So as a result, ions originating from the same primary
beam and hence having the same kinetic energy Ekin but,
for example due to the aforementioned electron capture,
diﬀerent charge states q have diﬀerent radii in a cylindri-
cal deﬂector with ﬁxed F . Hence we specify the energy of
the ion beam in the unit of qkeV , to emphasize that par-
asitic ions, although having the same kinetic energy will
have diﬀerent trajectories due to their diﬀerent charge
state. Based on this principle we have constructed an
omega shaped analyzer to guide ions with the desired
charge state while blocking the undesired ones.

In Fig. 1 a schematic cut through the described pu-
riﬁcation system is shown. We designed the puriﬁcation
system with an inner radius of the cylindrical deﬂectors
of Ri =  mm and an outer radius of Ro =  mm,
resulting in an eﬀective radius of Re =  mm. Speci-
ﬁed are the outer radius of the inner plate and the inner
radius of the outer electrode, as these are the relevant
values which deﬁne the electric ﬁelds. The bending an-
gle is ° and the electrode height  mm. The omega
analyzer is mounted vertically in a cylindrical vacuum
chamber so that ions entering it are deﬂected downwards
ﬁrst. On the beam axis, a hole with  mm diameter
is included in the ﬁrst and last outer deﬂector electrode
(see Fig. 1) so that incoming ion beams can go straight
through the analyzer in case no voltages are applied on
the cylindrical electrodes. For this use-case, an addi-
tional movable intermediate Faraday cup can be posi-
tioned in the beam trajectory to measure the beam in-
tensity during initial beam alignment. It should be noted
that the operation of the omega analyzer is limited to
the transport of ions with kinetic energy not more than
 q keV as the cylindrical deﬂector electrodes are con-
nected to their high voltage power supplies with stan-

10 cmPrimaryCaptureIonization++++----einzel lenseinzel lenscentraldeﬂector(w/o voltages)Matsudaplates3

represented in Fig. 1 by curves of diﬀerent color (black,
dark orange and light orange). They only diﬀer in their
charge states: q0 (black curve) for the ion beam labeled
Primary, q0 − 1 (dark orange) for the ion beam labeled
Capture and q0+1 (light orange) for the ion beam labeled
Ionization. In accordance with Eq. 1 the electric ﬁeld F
is set so that the primary ion beam travels through the
setup on the designed eﬀective radius Re. The trajectory
radii of the two other beams (capture and ionization) do
not allow these beams to reach the exit of the setup due
to the greater (capture) or smaller (ionization) radius.

From simulations we expect the analyzing power of
the omega analyzer to be high enough to separate broad
(FWHM =  mm) beams with an emittance of (cid:15) % =
 mm mrad for charge states up to q0 ≈ 30. For nar-
rower (FWHM = . mm) beams with an emittance of
(cid:15) % =  mm mrad we expect to be able to separate
charge states up to bare xenon (q0 = 54).

In Fig. 3 the simulated beam emittances of a  qkeV
centered starting Gaussian Ar9+ ion beam with initial pa-
rameters at entering the ﬁrst einzel lens of . % energy
dispersion and a horizontal and vertical full width at half
maximum of  mm and an emittance of  π mm mrad
are shown. The analyzer is tuned in such a way that
the beam leaves the analyzer again centered with ap-
proximately the same Gaussian distribution. The beam
parameter are measured at the beginning of the Einzel
lens before and at the end of the Einzel lens after the
puriﬁcation system. A parallel incoming beam leaves the
analyzer divergent in the vertical and convergent in the
horizontal plane while keeping its size and shape. With
diﬀerent sets of voltages applied on the omega puriﬁca-
tion system, we are able to control the shape and the
horizontal and vertical focusing of the desired beam at
an interaction region located ≈  cm after the omega
structure.

III.

IMPLEMENTATION AND TEST

In the following tripartite section we describe a ﬁrst
experimental setup of the analyzer, its results and com-
pare the outcome with our numerical simulations.
In
section III A we describe the experimental setup at the
ARIBE facility at GANIL/Caen and give details about
the beams we used, which characteristics (emittance and
size) are close to the one expected from the FISIC project
and thus ﬁt with the technical limitations of our setup.
In section III B we give details on how one can use the
omega analyzer to conduct energy-charge-scans for ex-
tended information on the beam, especially regarding the
separation power of the device. Finally, we present in
section III C a comparison of the measured electron cap-
ture rates and the rates we expect from known charge
exchange cross sections. Additionally we compare the
measured and simulated energy-charge-scans.

FIG. 2: Cut view through the analyzer, showing the in-
ner (right) and outer (left) cylindrical electrodes as well
as the two Matsuda electrodes enclosing them on top and
bottom. Indicated are the equipotential lines of the elec-
tric potential which in the central region resembles that
of a spherical deﬂector. The z-axis indicates the common
axis of the cylindrical electrodes.

dard -kV -SHV-connectors. Higher energies would de-
mand voltages higher than the  kV . The relatively
large size of the analyzer is necessary in order to achieve
full transmission for high emittance ion beams up to at
least (cid:15) % =  mm mrad. Therefore, the dimensions
of the omega (aperture diameter, distances between the
electrodes, lens diameters) were optimized in order to
achieve the maximum transmission for large emittance
ion beams.

The use of Matsuda electrodes creates a ﬁeld in the
central part of the analyzer which resembles that of a
toroidal deﬂector10,27 as illustrated in Fig. 2. By chang-
ing the voltage on the electrodes, typically a few hundred
volt, the toroidal factor and hence the transversal beam
focusing both in the dispersive and non-dispersive plane
can be adjusted28,29. At the entrance and exit there is a
common three-element einzel lens30. In the center, a pair
of parallel electrodes is located between the second and
third section of the analyzer. They are used to create
an electrical correction ﬁeld to adjust the outgoing beam
direction in the vertical plane. This is especially impor-
tant for higher initial charge states where according to
Eq. 1 the separation between the trajectories of adjacent
In this case
charge states inside the analyzer is small.
often a correction of the beam axis is necessary. Typical
voltage diﬀerences between the electrodes are not higher
than  kV .

Design, optimization and analysis of the puriﬁcation
structure were done by carrying out ion trajectory cal-
culations with the SIMION 3D suite31. The trajectories
of three ion beams with the same kinetic energy Ekin are

UΩ1 < 0UΩ2 > 00 < UM < UΩ2UMZ0RiRoY4

TABLE I: Applied average voltage diﬀerences and mini-
mal/maximal variation between diﬀerent settings on the
omega electrodes, the Matsuda electrodes and the cen-
tral vertical deﬂector for which optimal transmission was
achieved are given for the three ion beams used. In case
of the omega electrodes the expected value according to
Eq. 1 and the values given in section III is . kV .

ion
O5+
Ar9+
Xe20+

∆Uomega (kV )
. ± .
. ± .
. ± .

Umatsuda (V ) ∆Udeﬂector (kV )


 ± 


. ± .
. ± .
. ± .

primary beam.

The schematic setup of the ARIBE facility and the lo-
cation of the omega analyzer at the end of the beamline
are shown in Fig. 4. Magnetic quadrupoles and steerers
allow guiding the ion beam while the intensity and proﬁle
are monitored by Faraday cups (FC) and  ×  wires
multi-wire beam proﬁlers (PR) which measure horizon-
tal and vertical beam proﬁles. Hence, the position, size
and intensity are measured upstream the omega (PR23,
PR41, PR42, FC42) and downstream (PRS2, FCS2).
Typical proﬁles for an argon ion beam are shown in Fig. 5
upstream (Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b) and downstream (Fig. 5c)
the omega.
In fact, by using the einzel lens just after
the omega, it is possible to focus the beam to a narrow
(≤ cm ×  cm) spot on the last proﬁler (PRS2).

Additionally, a series of three adjustable rectangular
slits (spaced  cm apart from each other) located before
the last magnetic dipole (D4) can be used to reduce the
emittance of the beam and in parallel its intensity and
size. This possibility was used only in the case of the
xenon ion beam. In Fig. 6 beam proﬁles of a xenon beam
are shown. In Fig. 6a the slits are fully open, in Fig. 6b
slits 1 and 3 are closed to  mm ×  mm. After closing
slits 1 and 3, slit 2 is closed only to the point that no
noticeable intensity drop is visible. This procedure gets
rid of the farthest outliers of the beam which contribute
most to a high beam emittance. In consideration of the

FIG. 4: Schematic overview of the ARIBE beamline
where the experiment took place. The elements are de-
scribed in the embedded legend. Important elements are
labeled accordingly.

FIG. 3: a) Vertical and b) horizontal phase spaces of a
simulated ion beam at the entrance of the ﬁrst einzel lens
(black dots) and the end of the second einzel lens (grey
squares) of the omega analyzer. Simulated is a centered
starting Gaussian Ar9+ ion beam with E0 =  qkeV ,
∆E = . %, FWHM =  mm and (cid:15) % =  mm mrad.
The analyzer is tuned in such a way that the beam leaves
the analyzer again centered with approximately the same
Gaussian distribution. As a guide to the eye, the  %
emittance ellipse is drawn.

A. Beam properties

Tests of the transmission and charge state separa-
tion abilities have been carried out at the ARIBE fa-
cility at GANIL32,33 with three diﬀerent primary ion
beams: O5+, Ar9+ and Xe20+ at  qkeV resulting in
total energies of  keV ,  keV and  keV with typi-
cal maximum intensities of  µA for O5+ and Ar9+ and
 µA for Xe20+. The ion beams were extracted from a
. GHz ion source and charge-to-mass separated by a
° dipole magnet. The residual gas pressure was about
 × − mbar without and  × − mbar with active

a)b)PR23PR41PR42Slits 1D3Slits 2Slits 3PRS2D2D4sourcceFaraday Cup (movable)Horizontal/Vertical SteererQuadrupoleBeam ProfilerHorizontal SteererSlitseinzel lensomegaeinzel lensFC13FC42FCS25

FIG. 6: Typical  keV Xe20+ beam proﬁles upstream
of the omega (PR42), with a) fully open slits (FWHMH =
 mm, FWHMV =  mm) and b)  mm ×  mm aper-
ture (FWHMH = . mm, FWHMV =  mm) which cut
the emittance by roughly a factor of 10.

potential on the central trajectory is not zero for sym-
metric voltage values, eﬀectively slowing down the ions
on entering and therefore requiring a slightly lower ﬁeld
as predicted by Eq. 1. The applied voltage diﬀerence
was quite symmetrically distributed between the inner
and outer electrode. The average diﬀerence between the
absolute voltage on the electrodes was . %, the max-
imum diﬀerence was . %. For oxygen and xenon a
medium voltage diﬀerence of around . kV was applied
on the central vertical deﬂectors, whereas for argon a
slightly lower value of . kV was used to compensate
and correct the trajectory, which in exchange deviated
more strongly between diﬀerent scans. The voltage on
the Matsuda electrodes was  V for the oxygen and
xenon beam. For the argon beam the applied voltage
was ( ± ) V .

B. Scans and resolving power

In the following we introduce an energy-scan proce-
dure, which allows us to experimentally determine the
resolving power and identify the presence of unwanted
charge states in the incoming primary beam. First, the
voltages of the puriﬁer are tuned to get optimal trans-
mission of  % within the experimental uncertainty.
These values are used as initial values E0 =  keV with
q0 ∈ {5, 9, 20}. Second, the transmitted energy and ac-

FIG. 5: Typical  keV Ar9+ beam proﬁles upstream
(a) PR41, FWHMH = . mm, FWHMV = . mm; b)
PR42, FWHMH =  mm, FWHMV = . mm) and
downstream the omega (c) PRS2, FWHMH = . mm,
FWHMV = . mm). The voltages on the omega were
set to have  % transmission. The slits before D4 were
completely open.

beam size change after closing the slit apertures (Fig. 6)
we estimate a reduction of the emittance of roughly a
factor of ten, while the ion beam intensity drops down to
 % of the initial value. This reduction in emittance and
intensity is observed upstream of the omega analyzer, on
the proﬁler PR42.

It should be noted that a transmission of the omega
analyzer of  % within the experimental uncertainty
integrated over all charge states and especially for the
primary charge state is reached in any case. The applied
voltage diﬀerences on the omega electrodes as given in
Tab. I deviate less than . % from the expected value,
also the tendency goes toward slightly lower values than
calculated. This deviation may be caused by alignment
errors, construction accuracy, fringe ﬁeld eﬀects or un-
certainty of the ion beam energy. Furthermore one has
to take into account that in a cylindrical deﬂector the

a)b)c)a)b)6

on the cylindrical electrodes, the Matsuda electrodes and
the central deﬂector electrodes are set according to Eq. 3.

The scans result in broad peaks with a plateau-like
maximum, where the intensity stays approximately con-
stant over a certain voltage range. The plateau of the
scan arises partly from the size of the Faraday cup
(FCS2), which with  mm diameter is larger than the
focused ion beam, partly from the design of the analyzer,
which was built to have a broad acceptance range. The
primary (q0) and ﬁrst capture (q0 − 1) peaks are ﬁtted
with the sum of two Gaussian normal distributions each
convoluted with a rectangular function to take into ac-
count the large acceptance.

We calculate the resolution of the analyzer similar as
in mass spectrometry34 as E/∆E, where ∆E is the full
width at half maximum (FWHM) of the measured peak.
By this method we obtain an energy resolution of approx-
imately . for all three ions, which is in accordance with
the resolution we expect from our simulations as shown
in Fig. 9. This means, following the canonical interpre-
tation of the resolution, q0 = 10 would be the highest
initial charge state for which a clear separation could be
achieved. However, separation can still be achieved for
such high charge states with q ≥  due to the fact that
the peaks in the energy scan are not Gaussian but rect-
angular shaped with a sharp cutoﬀ. This can be clearly
seen in the case of the xenon beam (Fig. 8) where the
neighboring charge states overlap in about half of their
width. Since the omega puriﬁcation system has a broad
acceptance range of voltages for which a beam is trans-
ported through the structure it is possible to transport
two neighboring charge states in parallel. So it becomes
necessary to carefully adjust and reassure the voltages
with the help of the energy scans to avoid charge state
contamination. By carefully adjusting the voltages to-
wards the edge of the scan we are able to use the outer
part of the peak, which even for Xe20+ is background free
while still at almost full intensity. This area is marked
in gray in Fig. 8b. It seems safe to state that the real re-
solving power is at least a factor of two higher by detun-
ing the electrode voltages towards lower energies, even
though due to the unfortunate shape of the scans it is
diﬃcult to derive a consistent analytical number repre-
senting the higher resolution of the device. Nevertheless,
the resolution is high enough to reduce the impurities in
the primary beam after the omega analyzer below the
mentioned required ten orders of magnitude, as can be
deducted from Fig. 7 and Fig. 8.

The importance of reducing the emittance for higher
charge states is demonstrated in comparison between the
energy scans for the xenon beam in Fig. 8, which were
carried out with slits either fully open (Fig. 8a) or closed
down to  mm ×  mm (Fig. 8b). While the diﬀerent
charge states are initially hard to distinguish, after clos-
ing the slits they become clearly diﬀerentiated. By insert-
ing the slits, we estimate the emittance after the slits to
be reduced by roughly a factor of ten while the intensity
dropped to  %.

FIG. 7: Energy scans of a) O5+ and b) Ar9+ primary
beams (solid black line). The dashed line is a ﬁt of the
primary charge state q0, the dot-dashed line of the single
electron capture charge state q0 − 1. Vertical dotted lines
represent the expected center of each charge state. The
energy scale is derived by Eq. 2.

cordingly the voltages U i are scaled as

Eq =

U i

q =

E0q0
q
U i
0q0
q

(2)

(3)

Hereby U i
0 represents the voltage on either the cylindrical
deﬂector electrodes, the Matsuda electrodes or the cen-
tral deﬂector electrodes for which optimal transmission
of a beam with energy E0 and charge state q0 is achieved.
U i
q hence corresponds to the voltage, for which a beam
with the same energy E0 but charge state q has optimal
transmission in the analyzer. To achieve scanning, at
least the voltages on the cylindrical deﬂector electrodes
have to be set following this scheme. We plot the mea-
sured current in the Faraday cup after the analyzer for
every voltage step as a function of the transmission en-
ergy Eq as calculated by Eq. 2. Then we remove a possi-
ble oﬀset by shifting it to center the ﬁrst peak at  keV
to obtain scans as shown in Fig. 7 to Fig. 9. The dotted
vertical lines mark the expected center for each observed
charge state. For each point in the scans the voltages

a)b)7

TABLE III: Comparison of the measured and expected
ratio of single capture products in the beams. Unit of
the charge exchange cross section (CEC) is − cm2.

ion
O5+
Ar9+
Xe20+

σCEC
.
.
.

rtheo
. × −
. × −
. × −

rexp
. × −
. × −
. × −

rexp/rtheo
.
.
.

energies and residual gas densities, no further ionization
is visible within the experimental sensitivity. The results
are presented in Tab. II. All product ions have a portion
of the primary beam of at most . ‰, with Xe19+ being
the only exception with a portion of about  %.

To validate the results, we compare them with the ex-
pected ratios for single capture utilizing literature values
for the charge exchange cross section (CEC)35,36. Since
the residual gas composition is not known, we use a sim-
pliﬁed model composed of  % H2, which should ac-
count for more than  % of the residual gas37 composi-
tion. By this choice the capture rate will be underesti-
mated, as we ignore the presence of heavier gas species
from whom electron capture has higher cross sections.
We calculate the ratio r as

r = 1 − e−σρl
pNA
RT

ρ =

(4)

(5)

with the CEC σ, the length of the interaction volume
l = . m, the vacuum pressure p =  × − mbar, the
Avogadro constant NA, the gas constant R and the tem-
perature T =  K. The obtained results are given in
Tab. III.

For oxygen and argon the calculated electron capture
rates are within a factor of two of the experimental ﬁnd-
ings, a good agreement for such a rough estimation. The
cross section for Xe20+ is unknown so that we had to
extrapolate it from known cross sections of lower charge
states up to q = . By this method we estimate a ratio
about an order of magnitude lower than measured. This
factor of ten is unlikely to be caused by the uncertain-
ties of our estimation, especially since for oxygen and
argon we overestimate the ratio, not underestimate it.
Most likely the second dipole magnet D4 had an insuf-
ﬁcient separation power to ﬁlter out the capture ions of
the higher charge states before the omega analyzer. By
failing so the actual capture distance would be approxi-
mately three times larger, shifting the result into the er-
ror range of our estimation. Another eﬀect which could
have ampliﬁed this ﬁnding could be an increased charge
exchange at the slit surfaces before D4, even though one
would expect mainly multiple capture in this case. Still
we can not satisfactorily explain the huge capture prob-
ability for the xenon beam.

In Fig. 9 a comparison of the measured scan and a
simulated one is shown. Simulated is a  qkeV centered
starting Gaussian Ar9+ ion beam with . % energy un-
certainty. A transversal emittance of  π mm mrad and
a horizontal and vertical full width at half maximum of
 mm is chosen, as it reproduced the measured data best.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 8: Energy scans of the Xe20+ beam a) before and b)
after the reduction of the emittance by about a factor of
ten, line scheme as in Fig. 7. The gray rectangle marks
the energy range of the scan for which no overlapping of
the peaks occurs.

C. Capture rates and simulations

We were able to deduce the electron capture probabil-
ity due to collisions with residual gas along the ARIBE
beamline by taking scans such as in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 and
by comparing the relative heights of the peaks of the dif-
ferent charge states. As expected for such low ion beam

TABLE II: Overview of the measured proportions of pri-
mary charge state and charge states originating from elec-
tron capture in the residual gas at a background pressure
of  × − mbar.

Oxygen

fraction
∼.
. × −

q
5
4

Argon

fraction
. × −
. × −
. × −
. × −

q
9
8
7
6

Xenon

fraction
. × −
. × −
. × −
. × −
. × −

q
20
19
18
17
16

a)b)The absolute height of the primary peak as well as the
relative heights of the product peaks are scaled according
to the values from Tab. II. Comparison between simula-
tions and measurements, by means of shape and relative
peak position, show good agreement. The plateau-like
maximum of the scan is narrower with broader edges in
the simulation, which results in a higher resolution of
about 12, while the peaks are actually broader at their
base. The comparison between experiment and simu-
lation shows that the commonly used deﬁnition for the
resolution has to be treated with care in our case, since as
already mentioned the shape of the scans is not Gaussian-
like as presumed for this deﬁnition of the resolution.

IV. CONCLUSION

A simple and compact electrostatic charge state puriﬁ-
cation system was simulated, built and tested. Its large
acceptance allows  % transmission of the primary
charge state within the experimental uncertainty for high
emittance (≤  π mm mrad) low energy (≤  q keV )
ion beams. By utilizing two additional einzel lenses and
Matsuda electrodes, we are able to deliver a narrow beam
at diﬀerent focal points. By altering the voltages on
the deﬂector electrodes, an energy scan of the incom-
ing mono-energetic beam can be carried out, eﬀectively
resulting in a scan of the charge state. Experiments were
performed with diﬀerent primary charge states at the
ARIBE facility at GANIL. The resolution of the puriﬁer
was measured to be .. Due to the non-Gaussian peak
shape in the energy scans separation is possible for higher
charge states than predicted by the measured resolution.
The measured results are in good qualitative agreement
with our expectations according to numerical beam tra-
jectory calculations. The achieved performance fully sat-
isﬁes the requirements17 of the FISIC experiments for ion
beams up to Ar18+.

FIG. 9: Comparison of a measured (solid) and a simu-
lated (dashed) energy scan of an Ar9+ ion beam. Vertical
dotted lines represent the expected center of each charge
state. An energy uncertainty of . %, an emittance of
 π mm mrad and a Gaussian shape with  mm FWHM
were simulated to best reproduce the experimental scan.

8

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We kindly acknowledge

funding by ANR un-
der Project-ID ANR-13-IS04-0007 and the LABEX
PLAS@PAR project, managed by the ANR, as part of
the “Programme d’Investissements d’Avenir”under the
reference ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02. We furthermore want
to thank L. Maunoury, V. Toivanen and C. Feierstein
for their support during the experiment at the ARIBE
facility.

1G. D. Yarnold and H. C. Bolton, J. Sci. Instrum. 26, 38 (1949).
2H. Z. Sar-el, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 38, 1210 (1967).
3A. L. Hughes and V. Rojansky, Phys. Rev. 34, 284 (1929).
4E. M. Purcell, Phys. Rev. 54, 818 (1938).
5H. D. Zeman, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 48, 1079 (1977).
6G. A. Harrower, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 26, 850 (1955).
7W. Wien, Ann. Phys. 301, 440 (1898).
8W. Paul and H. Steinwedel, Z. Naturforsch. A 8, 448 (1953).
9H. Rose, Optik 85, 95 (1990).
10H. Matsuda, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 32, 850 (1961).
11E. Gruber, L. Bergen, P. Salou, E. Lattouf, C. Grygiel, Y. Wang,
A. Benyagoub, D. Levavasseur, J. Rangama, H. Lebius, B. Ban-
d’Etat, M. Schleberger, and F. Aumayr, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 30, 285001 (2018).

12F. Aumayr, S. Facsko, A. S. El-Said, C. Trautmann,

and

M. Schleberger, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 23, 393001 (2011).
13R. A. Wilhelm, E. Gruber, J. Schwestka, R. Kozubek, T. I.
Madeira, J. P. Marques, J. Kobus, A. V. Krasheninnikov,
M. Schleberger, and F. Aumayr, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 103401
(2017).

14H. Br¨auning, R. Trassl, A. Theiß, A. Diehl, E. Salzborn,
M. Keim, A. Achenbach, H. J. L¨udde, and T. Kirchner, J. Phys.
B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys. 38, 2311 (2005).

15H. Br¨auning, A. Diehl, and E. Salzborn, J. Phys. B: At., Mol.

Opt. Phys. 39, 3255 (2006).

16S. Meuser, F. Melchert, S. Kr¨udener, A. Pfeiﬀer, K. von Diemar,

and E. Salzborn, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 67, 2752 (1996).

17E. Lamour and al., “First steps towards atomic physics of Fast
Ion – Slow Ion Collisions,” available at http://www.agence-
nationale-recherche.fr/Project-ANR-13-IS04-0007
(2013),
accessed Jan 08 2019.

18W. L. Fite, R. F. Stebbings, D. G. Hummer, and R. T. Brack-

mann, Phys. Rev. 119, 663 (1960).

19R. E. Olson and A. Salop, Phys. Rev. A 16, 531 (1977).
20W. Cayzac, A. Frank, A. Ortner, V. Bagnoud, M. M. Basko,
S. Bedacht, C. Bl¨aser, A. Blaˇzevi´c, S. Busold, O. Deppert,
J. Ding, M. Ehret, P. Fiala, S. Frydrych, D. O. Gericke,
L. Hallo, J. Helfrich, D. Jahn, E. Kjartansson, A. Knetsch,
D. Kraus, G. Malka, N. W. Neumann, K. P´epitone, D. Pepler,
S. Sander, G. Schaumann, T. Schlegel, N. Schroeter, D. Schu-
macher, M. Seibert, A. Tauschwitz, J. Vorberger, F. Wagner,
S. Weih, Y. Zobus, and M. Roth, Nat. Commun. 8, 15693 (2017).
21F. D´echery, , A. Drouart, H. Savajols, J. Nolen, M. Authier,
A. M. Amthor, D. Boutin, O. Delferri´ere, B. Gall, A. Hue,
B. Laune, F. L. Blanc, S. Manikonda, J. Payet, M. H. Stodel,
E. Traykov, and D. Uriot, Eur. Phys. J. B 51, 66 (2015).

22H. Savajols and al., “S3 – Super Separator Spectrometer,”
available at https://www.ganil-spiral2.eu/scientists/ganil-spiral-
2-facilities/experimental-areas/s3/ (2019), accessed Jan 08 2019.
23M. Lestinsky, V. Andrianov, B. Aurand, Bagnoud, D. Bern-
hardt, H. Beyer, S. Bishop, K. Blaum, A. Bleile, A. B. Jr.,
F. Bosch, C. Bostock, C. Brandau, A. Br¨auning-Demian, I. Bray,
T. Davinson, B. Ebinger, A. Echler, P. Egelhof, A. Ehres-
mann, M. Engstr¨om, C. Enss, N. Ferreira, D. Fischer, A. Fleis-
chmann, E. F¨orster, S. Fritzsche, R. Geithner, S. Geyer, J. Glo-
rius, K. G¨obel, O. Gorda, J. Goullon, P. Grabitz, R. Grisenti,
A. Gumberidze, S. Hagmann, M. Heil, A. Heinz, F. Herfurth,
R. Heß, P.-M. Hillenbrand, R. Hubele, P. Indelicato, A. K¨allberg,
O. Kester, O. Kiselev, A. Knie, C. Kozhuharov, S. Kraft-
Bermuth, T. K¨uhl, G. Lane, Y. Litvinov, D. Liesen, X. Ma,
R. M¨artin, R. Moshammer, A. M¨uller, S. Namba, P. Neumeyer,

9

T. Nilsson, W. N¨ortersh¨auser, G. Paulus, N. Petridis, M. Reed,
R. Reifarth, P. Reiß, J. Rothhardt, R. Sanchez, M. Sanjari,
S. Schippers, H. Schmidt, D. Schneider, P. Scholz, R. Schuch,
M. Schulz, V. Shabaev, A. Simonsson, J. Sj¨oholm, ¨O. Skeppstedt,
K. Sonnabend, U. Spillmann, K. Stiebing, M. Steck, T. St¨ohlker,
A. Surzhykov, S. Torilov, E. Tr¨abert, M. Trassinelli, S. Trot-
senko, X. Tu, I. Uschmann, P. Walker, G. Weber, D. Winters,
P. Woods, H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, and the CRYRING@ESR Re-
search Community, Eur. Phys. J Spec. Top. 225, 797.

24A. T. Forrester, Large ion beams : fundamentals of generation

and propagation (New York : Wiley, 1988).

25P. Roncin, M. Barat, H. Laurent, J. Pommier, S. Dousson, and

D. Hitz, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys. 17, L521 (1984).

26M. Barat, M. N. Gaboriaud, L. Guillemot, P. Roncin, H. Laurent,
and S. Andriamonje, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys. 20, 5771 (1987).
27H. Matsuda and Y. Fujita, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Phys. 16,

395 (1975).

28M. I. Yavor, in Electron-Beam Sources and Charged-Particle Op-

29M. Yavor, in Advances in Imaging and Electron Physics (Else-

vier, 1998) pp. 277–388.

30W. H. Aberth, R. Schnitzer, and F. C. Engesser, Rev. Sci. In-

strum. 45, 1289 (1974).

31D. A. Dahl, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 200, 3 (2000).
32V. Bernigaud, O. Kamalou, A. Lawicki, M. Capron, R. Maisonny,
B. Manil, L. Maunoury, J. Rangama, P. Rousseau, J.-Y. Chesnel,
L. Adoui, and B. A. Huber, Publ. Astron. Obs. Belgrade 84, 83
(2008).

33P. Rousseau, C. Feierstein-Plancq,

and al., “ARIBE,”
available at https://www.ganil-spiral2.eu/scientists/ganil-spiral-
2-facilities/experimental-areas/s3/ (2019), accessed Jan 08 2019.
34K. K. Murray, R. K. Boyd, M. N. Eberlin, G. J. Langley, L. Li,
and Y. Naito, Pure and Applied Chemistry 85, 1515 (2013).
35R. A. Phaneuf, R. K. Janev, and M. S. Pindzola, Atomic Data
For Fusion Volume V, Tech. Rep. (Oak Ridge National Labora-
tory, 1987).

36D. H. Crandall, R. A. Phaneuf, and F. W. Meyer, Phys. Rev. A

tics, edited by E. Munro and H. P. Freund (SPIE, 1995).

22, 379 (1980).

37W. Huber, N. M¨uller, and G. Rettinghaus, Vacuum 41, 2103

(1990).

