CP3-19-32

9
1
0
2

n
u
J

7
2

]
h
p
-
p
e
h
[

1
v
9
6
8
1
1
.
6
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

TESTABILITY OF LEPTOGENESIS WITH THREE RH-NEUTRINOS BELOW
THE ELECTROWEAK SCALE

MICHELE LUCENTE
Centre for Cosmology, Particle Physics and Phenomenology (CP3) Universit´e catholique de Louvain
Chemin du Cyclotron, 2 B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium

The Standard Model extended with right-handed neutrinos whose masses are below the elec-
troweak scale provides a simultaneous solution for the origin of neutrino masses and of the
baryon asymmetry of the Universe, that can be tested in current experiments. If three right-
handed neutrinos participate to the processes, their parameter space of solutions extends to
very large mixing angles, saturating the current experimental constraints. Solutions with
right-handed neutrino masses at the GeV scale can be probed in the decay of B mesons at
the LHC. For this channel the collision of isotopes of intermediate mass such as Ar provides
a better sensitivity per unit of running time compared to collisions with protons.

1 Introduction

Among the hints for the existence of new - yet undiscovered - physics, there are two seemingly
unrelated observations that cannot be accounted for in the Standard Model (SM) of particle
physics: i) neutrinos are massive (and leptons mix) and ii) the baryon asymmetry of the Universe
(BAU), deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the number densities of baryons and anti-baryons
(cid:1) /nγ = (6.13 ± 0.03) ×
normalised to the photon number density, has the value 1 η∆B = (cid:0)nb − nb
10−10. At the same time, by looking at the ﬁeld content of the SM, one can realise that there is
a certain asymmetry in it: all the fermionic ﬁelds appear in both states of chirality, left- (LH)
and right-handed (RH), with the exception of neutrinos, which only possess a LH component.
It is thus natural to ask what are the phenomenological consequences of extending the SM
ﬁeld content by including also RH-neutrino ﬁelds in it, and study if this minimal extension can
address the above mentioned observational problems of the SM.

1.1 Neutrino masses and leptogenesis

By including a number n of RH-neutrino ﬁelds NI in the SM ﬁeld content, the Lagrangian is ex-
tended by the inclusion of the following most-general gauge and Lorentz invariant renormalizable

 
 
 
 
 
 
operators:

L = LSM + iNI /∂NI −

(cid:18)

FαI (cid:96)α

Lεφ∗NI +

MIJ
2

(cid:19)

N c

I NJ + h.c.

,

(1)

where (cid:96)α
L are the LH SU(2) lepton doublets (α = e, µ, τ ), φ is the Higgs doublet, ε the total
antisymmetric bi-dimensional tensor. FαI are dimensionless Yukawa couplings, while M is an n-
dimensional symmetric matrix of Majorana mass terms. After electroweak symmetry breaking
(EWSB) the Higgs ﬁeld develops a vacuum expectation value, < φ > = v (cid:39) 174 GeV, and
the Lagrangian (1) generates a non-vanishing Majorana mass matrix mν for the left-handed
neutrinos,

mν = −ΘM ΘT + O (cid:0)Θ3(cid:1) (cid:39) −v2F M −1F T .
Here Θ = vF M −1 is the Seesaw expansion parameter, which must have perturbative values be-
cause of the phenomenological constraints 2 on the deviation from unitarity of the leptonic PMNS
mixing matrix, NPMNS = (cid:0)1 − ΘΘ†/2(cid:1) Uν + O (cid:0)Θ3(cid:1); Uν is the unitary matrix that diagonalises
mν and NPMNS the physical mixing matrix measured in neutrino oscillation experiments.

(2)

It is remarkable that the Lagrangian (1) provides, at the same time, all the necessary in-
gredients 3 for a successful baryogenesis via leptogenesis 4: the Yukawa matrix F is in general
complex, providing a new source of CP -violation, while the new degrees of freedom NI can devi-
ate from thermal equilibrium during their evolution in the early Universe. These features allow
to generate a lepton asymmetry, which is subsequently partially converted into a non-vanishing
baryon asymmetry by non-perturbative SM sphaleron transitions.

2 Sterile neutrino phenomenology

The Majorana mass matrix M in Eq. (1) sets the value of the new physics energy scale: as
long as its dynamical origin is not speciﬁed, phenomenological constraints from neutrino physics
impose loosely bounds on its value, and RH-neutrinos with masses between the MeV and the
GUT scale can equivalently account for the observed neutrino masses and lepton mixing. On
the other hand, the testability of the hypothesis in Eq. (1) strongly depends on the value of M :
after electroweak symmetry breaking, the mass spectrum of the model is generally characterised
by 3 light (mostly active) neutrinos with masses at the scale mν in Eq. (2), and by n heavy
(mostly sterile) neutrinos with masses at the scale M (up to O(Θ2) corrections); the coupling
of the sterile neutrinos with the SM gauge bosons is suppressed with respect to the active ones
by a factor of order Θ. If a sterile neutrino is lighter than the W boson, its decays are mediated
by oﬀ-shell gauge bosons, making it relatively long-lived, while its mass scale is accessible for
production in current collider experiments. Such a particle can be searched for by looking, for
instance, for displaced vertices in LHC events.

Concerning the early Universe evolution, RH-neutrinos in this mass range tend to equilibrate
at late times, around the electroweak phase transition temperature, TEW ≈ 140 GeV, due to
their feeble Yukawa couplings dictated by the relation (2). While they are generated from
the thermal plasma, their CP-violating scatterings, oscillations and decays generate a lepton
asymmetry; sphaleron transitions are only eﬀective at temperatures above TEW, so that the
washout processes due to the late equilibration of the RH-neutrinos do not aﬀect the generated
BAU below TEW. This is the so-called freeze-in (or low scale) leptogenesis mechanism 5.

3 Low-scale leptogenesis and testability

The phenomenology of sterile neutrinos at collider experiments primarily depends on two pa-
rameters: their masses Mi and their active-sterile mixing Uαi with the active ﬂavour α. For
masses below the electroweak scale and in the range of mixing values allowed by experimen-
tal constraints, these states are relatively long-lived, and can travel for observable macroscopic
displacements before decaying 6.

Figure 1 – Active-sterile mixing in the muon ﬂavour U 2
µi, as a function of the sterile neutrino mass Mi, for
viable solutions accounting for neutrino masses and mixings as well as BAU, for normal (left) and inverted (right)
ordering of the active neutrino mass spectrum. (Not) ﬁne-tuned solutions are represented in (blue) red, see 10 for
details. The grey area is excluded by direct experimental searches of sterile neutrinos, while the lines represent
the expected sensitivities of ongoing experiments; LHC experiments sensitivities are based on pp searches.

The minimal realisation of the Lagrangian (1) accounting for neutrino oscillation data re-
quires n = 2 RH-neutrinos 7: the resulting model exhibits a constrained ﬂavour pattern, in which
the ratios of couplings to diﬀerent SM ﬂavours, Uαi/Uβi, are bounded and no large hierarchies in
the ﬂavour structure are allowed 8. As a result, there exist an upper bound on the active-sterile
mixing for which leptogenesis is viable 9: the reason is that too large active-sterile couplings
enable the early equilibration of RH-neutrinos and thus a too large asymmetry washout. The
washout is a ﬂavour-dependent process, thus it is in principle possible to store the generated
asymmetry in a feebly coupled ﬂavour where it is protected from washout, while the other mix-
ings are kept large allowing for collider testability. However, the “democratic” ﬂavour structure
of the n = 2 model implies that the upper bound in the region viable for leptogenesis is smaller
than current experimental upper bounds on the active-sterile neutrino mixings.

The situation is diﬀerent in the model with n = 3, where a RH-neutrino is added for each
SM LH one: in this scenario the viable region for leptogenesis is enlarged 10. An obvious reason
for this is the extended number of free parameters, which for instance allows for very large
hierarchies in the ﬂavour couplings. But, beyond that, there exist dynamical mechanisms which
are peculiar to the n = 3 scenario - and that are not present in the n = 2 case - that enhance
the lepton asymmetry production. For instance, a new asymmetry source term (absent in the
case of n = 2) is present in the evolution equations; moreover, the interplay of 3 RH-neutrinos
can give rise to the resonant production of a lepton asymmetry. Remarkably, the structure of
the M and F matrices (see Eq. (1)) leading to a dynamical resonant enhancement of the lepton
asymmetry can result as a direct consequence of an underlying B − ¯L approximate symmetry
(diﬀerence between baryon B and a generalised lepton number 10 ¯L), which in turn allows for
solutions featuring sizeable active-sterile mixing values and no ﬁne-tuning, thus increasing the
testability perspectives a.

As a consequence of the above described phenomenology, the parameter space for low-scale
leptogenesis is extended in the n = 3 scenario: as reported in Fig. 1 the upper bound on the
viable active-sterile mixing simply results from the current experimental bounds from laboratory
searches. This implies that any future improvement on the current experimental constraints in
the mass range [0.1, 50] GeV will also translate into an experimental test of the leptogenesis
hypothesis in the SM extended with 3 RH-neutrinos.

aFurther aspects of the connection between an approximate B − ¯L symmetry and freeze-in leptogenesis have

been also previously addressed 11.

4 Testing leptogenesis with heavy ion collisions at the LHC

The sensitivity curves for LHC experiments reported in Fig. 1 assume standard proton-proton
(pp) collisions. Sterile neutrinos with masses below the EW scale are relatively light particles
compared to LHC energies, but they generally feature feeble couplings. We thus expect the
experimental sensitivity to this kind of particle to be more strongly related to the number
of accessible events (intensity frontier) than to the available collision energy (energy frontier).
In this perspective, an interesting channel to look for sterile neutrinos at the GeV scale is
represented by the collision of heavy ions at the LHC. Originally designed to study the dynamics
of the quark-gluon plasma (QGP), heavy ion runs can as well test the new physics hypothesis 12,
proﬁting from new production mechanisms induced by strong electromagnetic interactions or
by thermal processes in the QGP, or from the enhanced combinatorics in the number of parton
level interactions. The latter feature can be advantageous in the search of feebly coupled sterile
neutrinos: each nucleus A
Z N indeed contains A nucleons, and in central N N collisions the number
of parton level interactions is enhanced by a factor ≈ A2, which can amount to four orders
of magnitude in the case of the lead isotope 208
82Pb currently used at LHC. Long-lived and
feebly interacting sterile neutrinos produced in central collisions easily escape the noisy QGP
environment, which only extends to few femtometers. They then decay (semi-)leptonically, and
can be searched for by looking for events with displaced vertex signatures.

Heavy ion runs at LHC have both advantages and drawbacks compared to proton runs,
and their reach depends on the model under consideration 13. They feature a smaller collision
energy, due to the smaller charge to mass ratio compared to protons, and can deliver only a
much lower instantaneous luminosity, due to machine limitations and a faster decay of the beam
intensity. On the other hand the parton-level cross section is enhanced by a factor ≈ A2 in
central collisions, and the primary vertex mis-identiﬁcation is negligible in heavy ion runs, due
to the absence of pile-up. Finally, although heavy ion collisions are in general characterised by
a larger multiplicity of charged tracks per bunch crossing compared to protons, the diﬀerence is
expected to amount at most to a factor of 2 in the High-Luminosity LHC era, due to the large
pile-up the experiments will have to face in this LHC conﬁguration for pp collisions.

The lower instantaneous luminosity that characterises heavy ion runs can actually be ad-
vantageous for certain searches, since the smaller event rate enables the ATLAS and CMS
experiments to signiﬁcantly lower their trigger thresholds 13; this allows e.g. to search for sig-
natures with low transverse momentum, that characterise scenarios involving light mediators.
We quantify the improvement in sensitivity that can be achieved with heavy ion searches by
using the SM extended with RH-neutrinos as a benchmark model, and considering two diﬀerent
production mechanisms, namely sterile neutrinos produced in the decay of a W boson and of a
B meson. In our simulation, we look for signatures triggered by a primary muon produced in
the W or B decay (where the sterile neutrino is concurrently produced), and search for displaced
muons from secondary vertices (where the sterile neutrino decays) with a minimum displacement
of 5 mm. For the pp analysis we adopt a realistic CMS online trigger value on the transverse
momentum of the ﬁrst muon, asking for pT > 25 GeV, while for the heavy ion analysis we
adopt a lower trigger threshold, pT > 3 GeV, roughly corresponding to the minimal transverse
momentum allowing a charged particle to cross the CMS muon chambers. The results of the
analysis are reported in Fig. 2, for equal running time of protons, Pb and Ar isotopes: for the
W -mediated production, a large fraction of events has a transverse momentum pT larger than
25 GeV, due to the large mass of the W boson. Thus, there is not a signiﬁcant improvement
in lowering the trigger threshold, and proton collisions result to be more competitive. Never-
theless, relatively light ions such as Ar can allow to test the production and dynamics of sterile
neutrinos in a complementary environment as it is the QGP. The situation is very diﬀerent for
B meson-mediated sterile neutrinos: in such a case, due to the relatively small mass of the B
meson, the majority of muons are produced with a transverse momentum smaller than 25 GeV.
Lowering the trigger threshold thus allows to access an entirely new kinematical region, and Ar

Figure 2 – Sensitivity of the CMS detector to heavy neutrinos produced in the decay of W bosons (left) and B
mesons (right), from the collision of protons (dashed blue lines), Ar (hashed green bands) and Pb (continuous red
lines) with integrated luminosities corresponding roughly to one month of running. The green band takes into
account the current uncertainties on the performance of LHC with Ar isotopes, which aﬀect the achievable beam
intensity.

runs are in general more competitive than proton ones for this kind of searches 13.

5 Conclusion

The extension of the SM ﬁeld content by the addition of n RH-neutrinos can simultaneously
account for the massive nature of active neutrinos and for the observed value of the BAU. If the
RH-neutrino mass scale lies below the electroweak one, these particles can produce the BAU via
freeze-in leptogenesis, and can be searched for in collider experiments by looking for displaced
vertex signatures.
In the scenario with n = 2 there exists an upper bound on the value of
the active-sterile mixing for which leptogenesis is viable, while for n = 3 the upper bound is
determined by current experimental constraints.

Sterile neutrinos with masses at the GeV scale can be produced in B meson decays: in this
case their signatures at collider are characterised by a small transverse momentum, generally
smaller than the standard online trigger thresholds on pT . By using heavy ions at the LHC it is
possible to signiﬁcantly lower the trigger threshold, thanks to the lower instantaneous luminosity
that characterises heavy ion runs, while at the same time proﬁting from the parton-level cross
section enhancement ≈ A2 due to the A nucleons present in each nucleus. Lowering the trigger
threshold allows to access an entirely new kinematical region: as a result, intermediate mass
ions such as Ar provide, in the search for sterile neutrinos produced in B meson decays, a better
sensitivity per unit of running time compared to protons.

Acknowledgments

The results presented in this document have been derived in collaboration with A. Abada, G.
Arcadi, V. Domcke, M. Drewes, A. Giammanco, J. Hajer, J. Klaric and O. Mattelaer. This
project has received funding from the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 750627.

235102010-810-710-610-510-410-3Mi[GeV]Uμ2SignificanceIonsL52PbPb5/nbArAr0.5/pb5/pbpp50/fbNuTeVCHARMDELPHI(longlived)DELPHI(shortlived)CMS2.02.53.03.54.04.55.010-610-510-4Mi[GeV]Uμ2SignificanceIonsL52PbPb5/nbArAr0.5/pb5/pbpp50/fbNuTeVCHARMDELPHI(longlived)DELPHI(shortlived)References

1. N. Aghanim et al. [Planck Collaboration], arXiv:1807.06209 [astro-ph.CO].
2. M. Blennow, P. Coloma, E. Fernandez-Martinez, J. Hernandez-Garcia and J. Lopez-Pavon,

JHEP 1704 (2017) 153 [arXiv:1609.08637 [hep-ph]].

3. A. D. Sakharov, Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 5 (1967) 32 [JETP Lett. 5 (1967) 24] [Sov.

Phys. Usp. 34 (1991) no.5, 392] [Usp. Fiz. Nauk 161 (1991) no.5, 61].

4. M. Fukugita and T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 174 (1986) 45.
5. E. K. Akhmedov, V. A. Rubakov and A. Y. Smirnov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 1359;

T. Asaka and M. Shaposhnikov, Phys. Lett. B 620 (2005) 17.

6. M. Drewes and J. Hajer, arXiv:1903.06100 [hep-ph].
7. S. F. King, Nucl. Phys. B 576 (2000) 85; S. F. King, JHEP 0209 (2002) 011; P. H. Framp-
ton, S. L. Glashow and T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 548 (2002) 119; A. Donini, P. Hernan-
dez, J. Lopez-Pavon and M. Maltoni, JHEP 1107 (2011) 105.

8. A. Caputo, P. Hernandez, J. Lopez-Pavon and J. Salvado, JHEP 1706 (2017) 112;

M. Drewes, J. Hajer, J. Klaric and G. Lanfranchi, JHEP 1807 (2018) 105.

9. L. Canetti, M. Drewes, T. Frossard and M. Shaposhnikov, Phys. Rev. D 87 (2013)
093006; P. Hernandez, M. Kekic, J. Lopez-Pavon, J. Racker and J. Salvado, JHEP 1608
(2016) 157; S. Eijima, M. Shaposhnikov and I. Timiryasov, arXiv:1808.10833 [hep-ph];
I. Boiarska, K. Bondarenko, A. Boyarsky, S. Eijima, M. Ovchynnikov, O. Ruchayskiy and
I. Timiryasov, arXiv:1902.04535 [hep-ph].

10. A. Abada, G. Arcadi, V. Domcke, M. Drewes, J. Klaric and M. Lucente, JHEP 1901

(2019) 164.

11. M. Shaposhnikov, Nucl. Phys. B 763 (2007) 49; A. Abada, G. Arcadi, V. Domcke and
M. Lucente, JCAP 1511 (2015) no.11, 041; A. Abada, G. Arcadi, V. Domcke and M. Lu-
cente, JCAP 1712 (2017) no.12, 024.
12. R. Bruce et al., arXiv:1812.07688 [hep-ph].
13. M. Drewes, A. Giammanco, J. Hajer, M. Lucente and O. Mattelaer, arXiv:1810.09400
[hep-ph]; M. Drewes, A. Giammanco, J. Hajer and M. Lucente, arXiv:1905.09828 [hep-
ph].

