0
2
0
2

r
p
A
1
2

]
x
e
-
l
c
u
n
[

2
v
5
3
1
5
0
.
6
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Simultaneous Measurements of the Beta Neutrino Angular Correlation in 32Ar Pure
Fermi and Pure Gamow-Teller Transitions using Beta-Proton Coincidences

V. Araujo-Escalona,1 D. Atanasov,1, ∗ X. Fl´echard,2, † P. Alfaurt,3 P. Ascher,3 B. Blank,3
L. Daudin,3 M. Gerbaux,3 J. Giovinazzo,3 S. Gr´evy,3 T. Kurtukian-Nieto,3 E. Li´enard,2
G. Qu´em´ener,2 N. Severijns,1 S. Vanlangendonck,1 M. Versteegen,3 and D. Z´akouck´y4
1Instituut voor Kern- en Stralingsfysica, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium
2Normandie Univ, ENSICAEN, UNICAEN, CNRS/IN2P3, LPC Caen, 14000 Caen, France
3CENBG, UMR5797, Universit´e de Bordeaux, CNRS, F-33170 Gradignan, France
4Nuclear Physics Institute, Acad. Sci. Czech Rep., CZ-25068 Rez, Czech Republic
(Dated: April 22, 2020)

We report ﬁrst measurements of the beta-neutrino angular correlation based on the kinetic en-
ergy shift of protons emitted in parallel or anti-parallel directions with respect to the positron in
the beta decay of 32Ar. This proof of principle experiment performed at ISOLDE/CERN pro-
vided simultaneous measurements for both a superallowed 0+ → 0+ transition and a Gamow-Teller
transition followed by proton emission. The results, respectively ˜aβν = 1.007(32)stat(25)syst and
˜aβν = −0.222(86)stat(16)syst, are found in agreement with the Standard Model. The analysis of the
data shows that future measurements can reach a precision level of 10−3 for both pure Fermi and
pure Gamow-Teller decay channels, providing new constraints on exotic weak interactions.

INTRODUCTION

interference term. For pure F and pure GT transitions,
respectively, this Fierz term is given by

Precision measurements in nuclear and neutron beta
decays are competitive tools to search for new physics
and perform symmetry tests of the standard model (SM)
in the electroweak sector. For a collection of selected
transitions, they provide constraints that are complemen-
tary to high energy physics experiments [1]. In particu-
lar, the beta-neutrino angular correlation coeﬃcient aβν
gives direct access to possible contributions of scalar (S)
or tensor (T ) couplings, involving other bosons than the
W ± ones associated to the standard vector (V )−axial-
vector (A) couplings of the weak interaction. Assuming
maximal parity violation and no time-reversal symmetry
violation for the standard V − A components of the in-
teraction, the angular correlation coeﬃcient aβν can be
expressed as

aβνF ≈ 1 −

aβνGT ≈ −

(cid:104)
1 −

1
3

|CS|2 + |C
|CV |2
|CT |2 + |C
|CA|2

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

S|2

T |2

(cid:105)

(1)

(2)

for pure Fermi (F) transitions and for pure Gamow-
(cid:48)
Teller (GT) transitions, respectively, where Ci and C
i ,
(i = V, A, S, T ) are the fundamental weak coupling con-
stants. The beta-neutrino angular correlation is accessi-
ble through the decay rate of unpolarized nuclei [2]

w(Ee, Ωe, Ων) ∝ w0(Z, Ee)

(cid:16)

1 +

(cid:126)pe · (cid:126)pν
EeEν

aβν +

(cid:17)

(3)

me
Ee

b

where w0(Z, Ee) includes the phase space factor and the
Fermi function, pe,ν and Ee,ν are the momenta and en-
ergies of the beta particle (e) and of the neutrino (ν),
me is the rest mass of the electron and b is the Fierz

bF ≈ ±Re

(cid:16) CS + C
CV

(cid:48)
S

(cid:17)

bGT ≈ ±Re

(cid:16) CT + C

(cid:48)
T

(cid:17)

(4)

CA

(± sign referring to β± decays). As it is diﬃcult to
measure independently both aβν and b in Eq. (3), the
observable extracted from most experiments is ˜aβν ≈
aβν/(1 + αb), where the coeﬃcient α gives the sensitivity
to the Fierz term and can be determined by means of
simulations [3]. The constraints set on exotic couplings
originate then from the dependence of ˜aβν on both aβν
and b. Today, nuclear and neutron beta decay limits on S
and T couplings (relative to V and A couplings) involv-
S,T ) or left-handed
ing either right-handed (CS,T = −C
S,T ) neutrinos are at the 10−2 resp. 10−3 level,
(CS,T = C
requiring experimental precisions at the 10−3 level [1].

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

Due to momentum and energy conservation laws, the
angular correlation between the two leptons impacts the
momentum distribution of the recoiling nucleus. The
value of ˜aβν can thus be inferred either from a direct
measurement of the daughter nucleus recoil energy [4–8]
or by observing secondary particles emitted after the de-
cay [9–13]. Both techniques yield similar constraints on
exotic couplings with ∆˜aβν ∼ 5.10−3 for pure F transi-
tions [5, 11], and ∆˜aβν ∼ 3.10−3 for pure GT ones [4, 13].
Ongoing experimental programs aim today at precision
levels of 10−3 and below [14–20].

The present project targets a similar goal by improv-
ing by a factor 5 or more the most precise results pre-
viously obtained from the recoil energy broadening of
beta-delayed protons in the decay of 32Ar towards its
isobaric analogue state in 32Cl [11, 21, 22]. Fig. 1 shows
the simpliﬁed decay scheme of 32Ar where the 0+ → 0+
and the pure Gamow-Teller transitions of interest are

 
 
 
 
 
 
indicated.
Instead of a broadening, the present exper-
iment, called WISArD (Weak Interaction Studies with
32Ar Decay), measures the kinetic energy shift of pro-
tons emitted in parallel or anti-parallel directions with
respect to the positron. This beta-proton coincidence
technique drastically reduces the inﬂuence of the pro-
ton detector response function and of the intrinsic pro-
ton peak shape. It also increases the statistical sensitiv-
ity on ˜aβν: Monte Carlo simulations of the experiment
with the present setup show that the statistical uncer-
tainty on ˜aβν is reduced by a factor ∼ 2.5 when using the
proton peak energy shift technique instead of the peak
broadening technique. The eﬀective gain in sensitivity
should be even higher as this factor was obtained assum-
ing a perfectly known proton detector response function.
In real experiments, the uncertainty on the detector re-
sponse function would aﬀect signiﬁcantly the precision
for a broadening measurement, but not for a shift mea-
surement. Moreover, this new technique allows simulta-
neous measurements with beta-delayed protons resulting
from both pure F and pure GT transitions of the 32Ar
nucleus (Fig. 1). Note that a similar approach is cur-
rently undertaken by the TAMUTRAP experiment [16]
using a Penning trap to conﬁne radioactive ions.

2

positron detection. The 30 keV 32Ar+ ions from ISOLDE
are implanted on an about 7 µm thick φ = 15 mm my-
lar catcher at the center of the setup. Positrons emitted
in the upper hemisphere are conﬁned by a 4 T vertical
magnetic ﬁeld and guided towards the plastic scintilla-
tor with an eﬃciency close to 100%. For protons, the
total detection eﬃciency is about 8% due to the solid
angle. The four upper silicon detectors, labeled Si1U to
Si4U, are located 65.5 mm above the catcher and the four
lower ones, labeled Si1D to Si4D, are mounted in a mir-
rored conﬁguration below the catcher. For protons of a
few MeV, the energy resolution of the detectors ranges
from 25 keV to 45 keV (FWHM). All detectors, includ-
ing the scintillator, were read out by the FASTER data
acquisition system [24]. During an eﬀective beamtime of
35 hours, ∼ 105 proton-positron coincidences were col-
lected for the superallowed 0+ → 0+ transition, which
corresponds to an implantation rate of ∼ 100 pps. Ion
transmission in the beamline was only about 12% due
to the inadequate existing beam optics. 32Ar+ ions were
produced by a 1.4 GeV proton beam with a mean inten-
sity of 1.4 µA driven by the CERN Proton Synchrotron
Booster and impinging on a CaO target. Ions extracted
from the VADIS (Versatile Arc Discharge Ion Source) ion
source were then mass selected using the ISOLDE High
Resolution mass Separator. The average 32Ar+ produc-
tion yield was estimated to be ≈1700 pps, more than a
factor two below the ISOLDE standard capability [25].
With the nominal ion production yield and an improved
beam transmission, the present 32Ar+ implantation rate
can thus be increased by more than one order of magni-
tude in future experiments.

FIG. 1. (Color online) Simpliﬁed 32Ar decay scheme. Only
relevant transitions discussed in the present paper are indi-
cated.

EXPERIMENT

While a dedicated set-up for WISArD is still under de-
velopment, a proof of principle experiment was performed
at ISOLDE-CERN with equipment and detectors read-
ily available and the details of which will be published
separately [23]. The detection setup, shown in Fig. 2,
is installed in the vertical superconducting solenoid of
It comprises eight
the former WITCH experiment [8].
300 µm thick silicon detectors with eﬀective diameter
φ = 30 mm for protons and a φ = 20 mm, L = 50 mm
plastic scintillator coupled to a silicon photomultiplier for

FIG. 2. (Color online) Schematic of the detection setup (see
text for details). Only four silicon detectors are visible on
this sectional view. The energy diﬀerence between protons
emitted in the same hemisphere as the beta particle (red)
and those emitted in the opposite one (purple) is a function
of ˜aβν .

DATA ANALYSIS

The silicon detectors were calibrated using the six pro-
ton peak energies indicated in Fig. 3(a). The mean
proton energies and their associated uncertainties were
previously inferred from an independent experiment per-
formed at GANIL with a detector calibration based on
ﬁve accurate transition energies in 33Ar beta-delayed pro-
ton decay [26]. In the present experiment, the calibration
of the detectors accounts for proton energy loss in both
the silicon detector dead layer and the catcher. Mean
energy losses were determined using the pstar NIST ta-
bles [27]. For the four lower detectors, proton peaks
are not shifted by energy loss in the catcher. The de-
tectors dead layer contribution alone could thus be in-
ferred from a global ﬁt assuming linear calibration func-
tions and an identical dead layer thickness for all detec-
tors. The resulting value for the dead layer thickness,
(cid:15) = 430(300) nm, comes with a rather large uncertainty
due to the ﬁtting procedure. Note that this uncertainty
will be strongly reduced in future experiments by using
dedicated detectors with both a thinner and well-known
dead layer. The detector dead layer causes the small en-
ergy shifts (a few keV) of the proton peaks with respect
to the mean incident energies indicated by dashed lines
in Fig. 3(a). For the upper detectors (Fig. 3(b)), an addi-
tional energy loss in the 6.70(15) µm thick mylar catcher
foil was accounted for. The mylar thickness was inferred
from the energy diﬀerences between the main proton
peaks, shifted towards lower energy, and weaker back-
ground peaks visible at the same positions as in Fig. 3(a)
for 2123 keV and 3356 keV protons. These background
peaks result from protons emitted directly towards the
upper detectors by 32Ar ions implanted on the walls and
on the setup structure or by outgassing 32Ar atoms. For
all detectors, the relative uncertainty on the calibration
slope was found to be 0.2% and is dominated by the de-
tectors dead layer contribution.

The pure F and GT transitions leading to 3356 keV
and 2123 keV protons, respectively, were both studied
with the same analysis method. Two sets of events were
selected: one with events deﬁned as singles, i.e. without
condition on the beta particle, and one with only coinci-
dences, where both a positron and a proton are detected.
For each detector, singles provide a mean proton energy
reference independent of ˜aβν as only the shape and width
of the peaks are aﬀected by the daughter recoil. The
mean proton energy shift between coincidences and sin-
gles for upper and lower detectors is then a function of
the value of ˜aβν, of the beta energy distribution, and of
the beta-proton angular distribution. The selection of co-
incidences for the F transition is illustrated in Figs. 4(a)
and 4(b) where a cut was performed on the proton en-
ergy and on the trigger time diﬀerence Tdiﬀ = Tp − Tβ,
where Tp and Tβ are the trigger times of the proton and

3

FIG. 3. (Color online) Deposited proton energy for one lower
(a) and one upper (b) silicon detector. The mean proton
energies in the laboratory of the six proton peaks used for
the calibration are indicated by dashed lines. Proton energies
corresponding to the F and GT transitions of interest are
highlighted in orange and blue, respectively.

positron detectors. The time of ﬂight of the protons is
of the order of ∼ 3 ns and the Tdiﬀ distribution results
here primarily from the detector response functions. The
proton energy cut shown in Fig. 4(a) is a 100 keV win-
dow centered on the mean energy of the superallowed
delayed-proton peak and the Tdiﬀ selection of Fig. 4(b)
was set between 50 ns and 350 ns. Events with Tdiﬀ out-
side the time selection criteria were used to estimate the
contribution of false coincidences which turned out to be
less than 0.3% for the selected data. Their eﬀect on the
energy shift and the associated error on the correlation
measurement (see Table I) were determined by varying
the width of the Tdiﬀ window up to 1000 ns.

Figs. 4(c) and 4(d) show the resulting proton energy
peaks for singles and coincidences obtained for the F
transition for one of the upper and one of the lower detec-
tors. As only positrons emitted in the upper hemisphere
can be detected, the data obtained for singles was scaled
by a factor 0.5 on both ﬁgures to ease the comparison
with the coincidences. The energy shifts of coincidences
towards lower values for the upper detector and towards
higher values for the lower detector are clearly observed.
Peaks obtained for singles are also wider, due to the
larger kinetic energy broadening arising when all emis-
sion angles are allowed for the beta particle. For each
peak, the mean energies Ecoinc (for coincidences) and
Esingle (for singles) were determined using an iterative
procedure by selecting events within a 100 keV window
centered on the mean energy obtained in the previous
step. This method was favored compared to the use of
ﬁts as it does not require any knowledge of the exact
detector response function and does not depend on the

4

The mean kinetic energy shifts Eshif t = |Ecoinc −
Esingle| − δEupper/lower obtained for all detectors in the
superallowed transition are given in Fig. 5 (red circles),
with error bars corresponding to statistical uncertainties
only. The same analysis procedure was also applied to
the set of events from one of the pure GT transitions
of the 32Ar decay with 2123 keV proton emission (black
squares). The resulting weighted average energy shifts
are 4.49(3) keV and 3.05(9) keV for the F transition and
for the GT transition, respectively, with associated re-
duced χ2 and p-values showing a good compatibility of
the results obtained with eight diﬀerent detectors.

SIMULATIONS

Despite the relative simplicity of the setup, the rela-
tionship between the mean kinetic energy shift Eshif t
and the value of ˜aβν can only be precisely established
using Monte Carlo simulations. The decay kinematics
was simulated using the decay rate given by Eq. (3) and
for a maximum positron kinetic energy of 5065(2) keV
for the F transition and of 6339(2) keV for the GT
transition. Beside the Fermi function, theoretical cor-
rections described in Ref. [28] that may contribute up
to the 10−2 level were not yet included. The theoreti-
cal uncertainty due to such corrections will remain be-
In the simulations, 32Ar decay sources were
low 10−3.
set on the lower surface of the catcher foil using sev-
eral spatial distributions. Delayed protons were emitted
randomly in all directions by the 32Cl daughter nuclei,
taking into account the recoil-induced energy shift. Pro-
ton trajectories within the B = 4 T magnetic ﬁeld of the
setup were computed analytically, considering only en-
ergy losses in the catcher and detectors dead layer. Us-
ing the TRIM simulation toolkit [29], proton straggling
and backscattering in the catcher and in the detectors
dead layer were investigated on beforehand and found to
be negligible. Mean proton energy losses in dead lay-
ers obtained by using the pstar NIST tables and TRIM
were also compared and found to agree within less than
2.5%. To study systematic eﬀects associated with pro-
ton detection, the backscattering of the beta particles in
the catcher and in the plastic detector were in a ﬁrst
step fully neglected and all positrons emitted in the up-
per hemisphere were considered as detected. Simulations
with 107 coincidences were ran with ﬁve values of ˜aβν
ranging from -1 to 1 and considering b = 0. The rela-
tionship between ˜aβν and the proton energy shift Eshif t
was found to be perfectly linear for both transitions with
a slope d˜aβν/dEshif t = 0.9684(2) keV−1 for the Fermi
transition and d˜aβν/dEshif t = 0.9788(2) keV−1 for the
GT one. Systematic errors associated to imperfections
of the setup such as the B ﬁeld strength in both upper
and lower sections, the positions of the silicon detectors
and the distribution of the implanted ions on the catcher

FIG. 4. (Color online) (a): Proton energy spectrum versus
Tdiﬀ for one of the upper detectors. The energy selection
window is indicated by dashed lines. (b): Tdiﬀ spectrum for
the selected events of Fig. 4(a). The coincidence selection
window is given by the vertical dashed lines.
(c) and (d):
Proton energy of the superallowed transition for coincidences
(red) and singles (black) obtained for one upper and one lower
detector. The Gaussian ﬁts are to guide the eye.

shape of the intrinsic proton energy distribution in the
center of mass. To limit the inﬂuence of calibration im-
perfections, the mean energy shifts of coincidences were
determined individually for each detector using data from
singles as a reference. Since the energy loss in the detec-
tor dead layer and in the catcher depends on the incident
proton energy, it is slightly diﬀerent for coincidences and
singles. Measured energy shifts for the 3356 keV pro-
tons of the F transition were thus all corrected from a
small increase of δElower=0.007(5) keV (for lower detec-
tors) and of δEupper=0.099(7) keV (for upper detectors)
determined using the pstar NIST data base.

FIG. 5. (Color online) Proton mean kinetic energy shifts (ab-
solute values) and associated statistical errors obtained with
the upper and lower detectors for the 3356 keV protons from
F decay (red circles) and the 2123 keV protons from GT decay
(black squares). Weighted averages and statistical uncertain-
ties are indicated by solid and dashed lines, respectively.

were estimated to ﬁrst order approximation by scanning
each parameter individually. The sensitivity of the mea-
surement to these parameters and associated errors are
summarized in Table I. The dominant contributions for
proton detection are due to the uncertainty on the detec-
tor calibration slopes and on the dead layer thickness.

TABLE I. Sources of systematic error, uncertainties on the
source of error and associated uncertainties on ˜aβν (×10−3)
for the F and GT transitions. Two additional digits (not
displayed here) were accounted for in the calculation of the
quadratic sum provided as total systematic error.

background
proton

positron

total

Source
false coinc.
det. calibration
det. position
source position
source radius
B ﬁeld
silicon dead layer
mylar thickness
detector backscattering
catcher backscattering
threshold

Uncertainty ∆˜aF ∆˜aGT

8%
0.2%
1 mm
3 mm
3 mm
1%
0.3 µm
0.15 µm
15%
15%
12 keV

< 1
9
< 1
3
1

2
6
1
2
1

< 1 < 1

5
2
2
21
8
25

7
3
1
11
4
16

In a second step, the simulation package GEANT4 [30]
was used to account for positron backscattering in the
catcher foil and in the plastic scintillator. Figure 6(a)
shows for the F transition the deposited energy spectra
in the scintillator obtained experimentally and by simu-
lations with or without positron scattering. The detec-
tion threshold indicated in Fig. 6(b) was estimated to be
25(12) keV, with a conservative 12 keV uncertainty due
to low statistics and to a limited knowledge of the detec-
tor response function. As positrons are conﬁned by the
magnetic ﬁeld, some of their trajectories have grazing in-
cidences when reaching the plastic scintillator, which in-
creases backscattering from the detector with a reduced
deposited energy. The simulation shows that ∼ 36% of
the positrons escape from the detector volume with a re-
maining kinetic energy larger than 50 keV. This strong
yield of positron backscattering and the shortcomings of
GEANT4 lead to discrepancies between simulated (red)
and experimental (black) data at the level of 10-15%.
We thus considered a 15% relative uncertainty on the
backscattering correction provided by GEANT4, which
is larger than the typical discrepancies obtained in pre-
vious studies (see Ref. [31, 32] and references therein).

We must stress that the measurement of the energy of
the positrons does not play a direct role in the extraction
of ˜aβν which is inferred from the proton peak energy shift
alone. The contribution of positron backscattering arises

5

FIG. 6. (Color online) (a): Incident (blue line) and deposited
(red line) positron energy distributions given by the simu-
lation compared to experimental data (black line) for the F
transition. (b): Same as (a) with a zoom on the low energy
part. The 25 keV threshold is indicated by a dashed line.

only from the fact that this process can lead to the non-
detection of a fraction of the positrons initially emitted in
the upward direction. Such events are counted as singles
in the experimental data and must be accounted for in
the simulation.Thanks to a very low detection threshold
(25 keV for a maximum positron energy of more than
5 MeV), the fraction of positrons that are not detected
due to backscattering on the detector was found to be
3.1 × 10−3 for the F transition and 2.5 × 10−3 for the GT
one. The relative error of 15% on these values which were
obtained using GEANT4 leads to an uncertainty on ˜aβν
of 2.3 × 10−3 and 1.1 × 10−3 for the F and GT transitions
respectively, as provided in Table I. The systematic error
due to the limited knowledge of the detection threshold
is about four times larger. Positron backscattering on
the catcher is another source of systematic error as it
prevents the detection of positrons initially emitted up-
wards. For the F transition, a backscattering rate from
the catcher of 3.3(5)% was obtained using GEANT4. The
0.5% uncertainty on this rate arises from the 15% relative
uncertainty on the GEANT4 backscattering correction.
The associated uncertainties on ˜aβν for the F and GT
transitions in Table I are the dominant ones. This loss
due to backscattering in the catcher can also be indepen-
dently estimated from the experimental data by compar-
ing the number of coincidences and of singles detected in
the proton upper detectors. This experimental estimate
was found to be 3.5(4)%, in perfect agreement with the
GEANT4 simulation. With higher statistics, this mea-
surement of the experimental backscattering rate will be
a strong asset to validate the accuracy of GEANT4.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

of

The

results

experi-
this
ment based on proton-positron coincidences
are
˜aβν = 1.007(32)stat(25)syst for the Fermi transition and
the GT transition.
˜aβν = −0.222(86)stat(16)syst

proof-of-principle

for

Both values are found in agreement with the SM
predictions with deviations of 0.2 × σ and 1.3 × σ for
the F and GT transitions respectively when considering
statistical errors only. Despite the use of a rudimentary
setup and a very short beam time allocated for this
test, the collected data provides the third most precise
measurement of ˜aβν in a pure F transition.

The sensitivity to the Fierz interference term, b, was
also determined by assuming only left-handed neutrinos
and by running simulations with diﬀerent values of b
ranging from −0.1 to +0.1 (the value of aβν being mod-
iﬁed accordingly). This sensitivity to b is characterized
by the coeﬃcient α mentioned in the introduction. We
found α (cid:39) 0.35 and α (cid:39) −0.11 for the F and GT tran-
sitions, respectively. For the F transition, this is a gain
in sensitivity on bF of a factor (cid:39) 1.8 when compared to
the value α (cid:39) 0.19 obtained in Ref. [11]. Thanks to this
higher sensitivity, the constraints on scalar couplings for
left-handed neutrinos provided by this test experiment
are in fact only a factor of 3.5 less stringent than the
ones inferred from Ref.
[11]. Oppositely, the sensitivity
on bGT is very low: assuming the same uncertainty on
˜aF and ˜aGT in our experiment, the corresponding un-
certainty on bGT would be a factor ∼ 10 larger than on
bF . The technique is thus not well adapted to search for
exotic tensor couplings with left-handed neutrinos. The
simultaneous measurement of ˜aβν for the GT transition
with a high precision remains nevertheless very useful to
check systematic errors and the validity of the analysis.
The constraints on bGT provided in Table 8 of Ref.
[1],
with an uncertainty of 3.9 × 10−3, correspond to an un-
certainty of 1.4 × 10−4 on ˜aGT with the present setup.
A measurement of ˜aGT for a GT transition must thus
be in agreement with the SM at this level of precision of
∼ 10−4. As the sources of systematic errors are similar
for both the F and the GT transitions, such an agree-
ment will be mandatory to validate the results obtained
with the F transition.

PROSPECTS

A new measurement is planned at ISOLDE/CERN
soon after the restart of the CERN accelerators. Within a
two-week beam time, assuming nominal 32Ar production
from the ISOLDE target, a beam transmission increased
from 12% to 70% and a detection solid angle for protons
increased by a factor of three, the statistical error will be
reduced by more than a factor 20. The segmented silicon
detector designed for this future measurement will not
only provide a three times higher detection solid angle
but also a higher resolution (between 5 keV and 10 keV)
and a thinner dead layer (80(20) nm) [23]. With a resolu-
tion of 10 keV on the proton energy, which is rather con-
servative, the total gain factor expected on the statistical
error is close to 50. In addition, the improved resolution

6

will allow to measure ˜aGT for the GT transition leading
to the intense proton peak at 2424 keV which was not
fully resolved with the present setup. Under these condi-
tions, the expected statistical errors on ˜aF and ˜aGT are
0.7 × 10−3 and 1.1 × 10−3, respectively.

Reducing the systematic error at the 10−3 level will be
more challenging, but the present eﬀorts are focused on
this goal. The new setup under development will ensure
that all uncertainties of Table I that are due to a lim-
ited knowledge of the detection system (detector dead
layer, source and detector relative positions, magnetic
ﬁeld homogeneity) will be reduced by a factor ∼ 5. For
the catcher, we will use commercial 500 nm thick my-
lar foils that will readily reduce by a factor ∼ 13 the
eﬀect of positron backscattering. We plan to alternate
measurements with implantation on a 500 nm foil and
on a 10 µm foil serving as a catcher to estimate directly
(without relying on simulations) how the foil thickness
impacts the extraction of ˜aβν. The resulting extrapo-
lation will allow to limit the catcher contribution at the
level of the statistical error. Oﬀ line measurements of the
backscattering rate using a 90Sr source covered by diﬀer-
ent mylar thicknesses in place of the 32Ar will be per-
formed and compared to GEANT4 simulations. They
should provide an even higher precision on the catcher
contribution. A low intensity electron beam is also un-
der development to characterize the response function of
the positron detector in the 0-30 keV range. The goal
is to lower the positron energy threshold below 10 keV
and reduce the uncertainty on this threshold down to
1 keV. The systematic error on ˜aβν directly due to the
threshold will then be reduced down to 0.7 × 10−3. Low-
ering the threshold below 10 keV will allow to reduce the
contribution of positron backscattering on the detector
down to 0.9 × 10−3. In parallel, dedicated measurements
are ongoing with an electron spectrometer to characterize
more precisely beta particle backscattering in the scintil-
lator and further reduce this source of uncertainty. Last
but not least, the uncertainty due to the proton detec-
tor calibration slope must be improved by one order of
magnitude to reach the 10−3 precision level. As the dead
layer of the future proton detectors will have a negligible
contribution to the calibration uncertainty, an improve-
ment by a factor of ∼ 5 seems readily achievable by using
the 33Ar proton peaks energy provided in Ref. [26] as a
reference.

According to these projections, the next measurement
of ˜aβν in the pure F transition of 32Ar could reach a
precision of the order of 2 × 10−3 with an uncertainty
dominated by the contribution of the proton detector
calibration slope. The corresponding constraints on
scalar couplings are shown in Fig. 7 along with those
from Ref. [1], including present and future search at the
LHC, constraints provided by F t value measurements
in superallowed transitions and previous correlation
measurements. With this level of precision and thanks

7

[4] C. H. Johnson, F. Pleasonton, and T. A. Carlson, Phys.

Rev. 132, 1149 (1963).

[5] A. Gorelov, D. Melconian, W. P. Alford, D. Ashery, G.
Ball, J. A. Behr, P.G. Bricault, J. M. DAuria, J. Deutsch,
et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 142501 (2005).

[6] P. A. Vetter, J.R. Abo-Shaeer, S. J. Freedman, and R.

Maruyama, Phys. Rev. C 77, 035502 (2008).

[7] X. Fl´echard, Ph. Velten, E. Li´enard, A. M´ery, D.
Rodr´ıguez, G. Ban, D. Durand, F. Mauger, O. Naviliat-
Cuncic, and J. C. Thomas, J. Phys. G 38, 055101 (2011).
[8] P. Finlay, M. Breitenfeldt, T. Porobic, et al., Eur. Phys.

J. A 52, 206 (2016).

[9] E .T. H. Cliﬀord, E. Hagberg, J. C. Hardy, H. Schme-
ing, R.E. Azuma, H. C. Evans, V. T. Koslowsky, U. J.
Schrewe, K. S. Sharma and I. S. Towner, Nucl. Phys. A
493, 293 (1989).

[10] V. Egorov, Ch. Brian¸con, V. Brudanin, et al., Nucl. Phys.

A 621, 745 (1997).

[11] E. G. Adelberger, C. Ortiz, A. Garc´ıa, et al., Phys. Rev.

Lett. 83, 1299 (1999).

[12] V. Vorobel, Ch. Brian¸con, V. Brudanin, et al., Eur. Phys.

J. A 16, 139 (2003).

[13] M. G. Sternberg, R. Segel, N. D. Scielzo, G. Savard, J.
A. Clark, P. F. Bertone, F. Buchinger, M. Burkey, S.
Caldwell, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 182501 (2015).
[14] J.A. Behr, A. Gorelov, K. P. Jackson, et al., Hyperﬁne

Interact. 225, 115 (2014).

[15] A. Leredde, Y. Bagdasarova, K. Bailey et al., J. Phys.

Conf. Ser. 635, 052066 (2015).

[16] P. D. Shidling, V. S. Kolhinen, B. Schroeder, N. Morgan,
A Ozmetin and Dan Melconian, Hyperﬁne Interact. 240,
40 (2019).

[17] B. Blank, et al., CERN-INTC-2016 (2016).
[18] N. Severijns and B. Blank, J. Phys. G 44, 074002 (2017).
[19] I. Mukul, M. Hass,
al.,
[arXiv:1711.08299v1].

O. Heber,

et

[20] M. T. Burkey, G. Savard, A. Gallant, et al., Hyperﬁne

Interact. 240, 36 (2019).

[21] A. Garc´ıa, E. G. Adelberger, C. Ortiz, et al., Hyperﬁne

Interact. 129, 237 (2000).

[22] K. Blaum, G. Audi, D. Beck, G. Bollen, F. Herfurth,
A. Kellerbauer, H.-J. Kluge, E. Sauvan, and S. Schwarz,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 260801 (2003).
[23] D. Atanasov, et al., in preparation.
[24] Fast Acquisition

nuclEar Research,

System for

http://faster.in2p3.fr/

[25] ISOLDE

yields

web

page,

http://isoyields-

classic.web.cern.ch/

[26] N. Adimi, R. Dominguez-Reyes, M. Alcorta, et al., Phys.

Rev. C 81, 024311 (2010).

[27] https://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/Star/Text/PSTA-

R.html

[28] L. Hayen, N. Severijns, K. Bodek, D. Rozpedzik, and X.

Mougeot, Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 015008 (2018).

[29] http://www.srim.org/
[30] Version geant4.10.02.p03 with EmStandardPhysics-

option4 physics list.

(Color online) Present (plain lines) and expected
FIG. 7.
(dotted lines) constraints on scalar coupling constants ex-
tracted from Ref.
[1] (and references there in). Contours
labeled ’Gorelov 2005’ are calculated using the values of ˜aβν
and α provided in Ref. [33]. The expected constraints for the
next WISArD measurement with a 2 × 10−3 precision are in-
dicated by dashed red lines. All exclusion contours are given
for one standard deviation.

to a higher sensitivity to the Fierz interference term,
the future measurement will improve signiﬁcantly the
present constraints on exotic currents of the weak inter-
action inferred from correlation measurements in nuclear
beta decay and remain competitive with the search at
the LHC. Further improvements will be pursued after
the next experimental campaign with the aim to lower
the systematic uncertainty below 10−3.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the ISOLDE staﬀ for their technical sup-
port during the experiment and A. Garc´ıa for fruitful
discussions. This work was partly funded by the ANR-
18-CE31-0004-02, by the European Union’s 7th Frame-
work Programme, Contract No. 262010 (ENSAR), by
the Flemish Fund for Scientiﬁc Research FWO, and by
the Grant of the Ministry of Education of the Czech Re-
public LTT17018.

∗ Present address: CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
† ﬂechard@lpccaen.in2p3.fr

[1] M. Gonz´alez-Alonso, O. Naviliat-Cuncic, N. Severijns,

[31] G. Soti et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 728,

Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys 104, 165 (2019).

11 (2013).

[2] J. D. Jackson, S. B. Treiman and H. W. Wyld, Phys.

[32] P. Dondero et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B

Rev. 106, 517 (1957).

425, 18 (2018).

[3] M. Gonz´alez-Alonso and O. Naviliat-Cuncic, Phys. Rev.

[33] A. Gorelov (2008), doctoral Thesis, Simon Fraser Uni-

C 94, 035503 (2016).

versity (2008).

