Towards Markerless Grasp Capture

Samarth Brahmbhatt1, Charles C. Kemp1, and James Hays1,2
1Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines, Georgia Tech 2Argo AI
samarth.robo@gatech.edu, charlie.kemp@bme.gatech.edu, hays@gatech.edu

9
1
0
2

l
u
J

7
1

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
8
3
7
0
.
7
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Humans excel at grasping objects and manipulating
them. Capturing human grasps is important for understand-
ing grasping behavior and reconstructing it realistically in
Virtual Reality (VR). However, grasp capture – capturing
the pose of a hand grasping an object, and orienting it w.r.t.
the object – is difﬁcult because of the complexity and diver-
sity of the human hand, and occlusion. Reﬂective markers
and magnetic trackers traditionally used to mitigate this dif-
ﬁculty introduce undesirable artifacts in images and can in-
terfere with natural grasping behavior. We present prelimi-
nary work on a completely marker-less algorithm for grasp
capture from a video depicting a grasp. We show how re-
cent advances in 2D hand pose estimation can be used with
well-established optimization techniques. Uniquely, our al-
gorithm can also capture hand-object contact in detail and
integrate it in the grasp capture process. This is work in
progress, ﬁnd more details at https://contactdb.
cc.gatech.edu/grasp_capture.html.

1. Introduction

Humans, with their complex hands made of soft tissue
enveloping a rigid skeletal structure, excel at grasping and
manipulating objects. Capturing human grasps of house-
hold objects can enable a better understanding of grasp-
ing behavior, which can improve a wide variety of VR and
human-computer interaction applications. While hand- and
object-pose capture and estimation have been studied ex-
tensively in isolation, there is a lack of large-scale grasp
capture datasets and algorithms. We deﬁne grasp capture as
capture of both the hand and object pose in a scene depict-
ing grasping. Partial occlusion of the object by the hand and
vice versa make grasp capture and prediction difﬁcult. As
mentioned in Section 2, the only large scale dataset employs
wired magnetic trackers taped to the hand and object [5].
However, this method has the drawback of introducing un-
wanted artifacts in the RGB images and potentially interfer-
ing with natural grasping behavior.

In this paper we focus on capturing the hand pose

Figure 1: Grasp capture for a scene depicting a cellphone
being grasped. The multi-colored hand model shows the
estimated hand pose and the dark blue model shows the es-
timated object pose.

through the 6-DOF palm pose and 20 joint angles, and the 6-
DOF object pose. Since a single image is often not enough
to estimate both the hand and object pose, we record a video
of a human participant grasping a household object. The
participant rotates and translates their hand in 3D space to
present the grasp to an RGB-D camera from various per-
spectives (see Figure 1 for an example frame).

Hand-object contact is either ignored, or enforced with-
out any ground-truth contact observation in traditional grasp
capture pipelines. Observing ground truth contact has so far
been very difﬁcult, but recently Brahmbhatt et al [1] created
a large scale dataset of detailed hand-object contactmaps
through thermal imaging. Different from other grasp cap-
ture pipelines, ours can also capture such contactmaps and
utilize them improve capture accuracy.

2. Related Work

Hand pose estimation is a highly researched topic, and
many datasets are available publicly to train models for
hand pose estimation. Hand pose is captured through data
gloves [9, 7], manually annotated joint locations [15], mag-
netic trackers [20, 22], or ﬁtting a hand model to depth im-
ages after manual initialization [17]. These methods capture

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
only free hands rather than hands grasping objects.

However, as mentioned in Section 1, grasp capture also
involves capturing the object pose. Relatively few works
have addressed this problem. The First Person Hand Ac-
tion Benchmark [5] is the only large scale real-world dataset
capturing both hand and object pose. 3D joint locations
and object pose are captured through taped magnetic track-
ers. In addition to limited working volume (Hasson et al [6]
mention in Section 5.2 that the object poses are imprecise
and result in penetration of the hand inside the object by 1.1
cm on average), taping these long wired sensors to the hand
introduces artifacts in the RGB images and can potentially
interfere with natural grasping behavior.

2.1. Learning to Predict Aspects of Hand-Object

Interaction

A large number of works estimate the pose of non-
grasping hands in a model-based [18, 8] or model-free [21,
14, 11] manner. Garcia-Hernando et al [5] note that hand
pose estimation in images depicting grasping beneﬁts from
including such grasping images in the training dataset.
Tekin et al [16] predict both the hand and object pose by
predicting 3D hand joint and object bounding box locations.
Hasson et al [6] predict hand parameters and approximate
the object with a predicted genus-0 geometry. Relying on
predicted geometry reduces applicability to grasp capture
for creating datasets, where object geometry is known in
detail. In addition, it is not clear how accurate such algo-
rithms will be on images from a data collection location,
which can differ signiﬁcantly from their training datasets.

3. Grasp Capture

3.1. Data Collection Protocol

As mentioned in Section 1, our aim is to capture both the
hand pose (6-DOF palm pose and joint angles) and 6-DOF
object pose from a video of a human participant grasping
a household object. The objects in our experiments are 3D
printed at real-life scale using detailed mesh models down-
loaded from online repositories. Our data collection proto-
col builds on the protocol from ContactDB [1], in which
participants hold the object for 5 s and then place it on
a turntable, where it is scanned with a calibrated RGB-D-
Thermal camera rig. We propose to utilize the object hold-
ing time for grasp capture.

Stage 1: The object is ﬁrst placed on the turntable, where
its 6-DOF pose wTo is estimated using the depth camera
point-cloud and the known object 3D model.

Stage 2: The grasp video recording starts when the par-
ticipant reaches for the object. The participants are in-
structed to hold their joints steady after a transient phase
(termed grasp adjustment) in which they pick the object up
and settle into a comfortable grasp. Frames of the video af-

Figure 2: OpenPose [14] is used to detect 2D joint locations
in the grasp video frames.

Figure 3: Structure from Motion (SfM) is used to recover
3D joint locations (green dots connected by while lines),
and virtual camera poses (3D axes with blue pointing along
the camera axis). Green lines connect consecutive camera
poses.

ter this instant are used to detect 2D hand joints using the
OpenPose library [14] (Figure 2). These 2D detections x(i)
are treated as observations from a mobile virtual camera that
is observing a stationary hand (the problem is inverted; in
reality we have a stationary camera and a moving hand). A
Structure from Motion (SfM) problem is setup using these
2D detections, and optimized using the GTSAM library [3]
to recover the 3D joint locations X as well as virtual camera

poses

(cid:110)wT (i)

c

(cid:111)N

i=1

, with wT (1)

c

anchored to the origin (Fig-

(cid:104)wT (i)

(cid:105)−1

c

c

(cid:105)−1

Tadj

p =

o =

wTo, cT (i)

of the grasp video: cT (i)
(cid:104)wT (i)
wTp. Here, Tadj is the change in the object pose
during grasp adjustment mentioned in Stage 2. To summa-
rize, the proposed algorithm captures the hand- and object-
pose for all frames in a video depicting a grasp from various
perspectives, without requiring gloves, reﬂective markers or
magnetic trackers.

Figure 4: Fitting a hand model to the 3D joint locations.
Left: Hand transformed by the palm pose. Right: Hand
after inverse kinematics ﬁtting. Green dots: target 3D joint
locations (from SfM), Red dots: corresponding locations on
the hand model.

Figure 5: The contactmap for the grasp depicted in Figure 2,
captured using ContactDB [1].

ure 3). SfM minimizes the following re-projection error:

(cid:18)

L

X,

(cid:110)wT (i)

c

(cid:111)N

(cid:19)

i=1

=

N
(cid:88)

i=1

||x(i) − π

(cid:16)

X;w T (i)

c

, K

(cid:17)

||2
2

(1)

where π(·) is the camera projection function.

Stage 3: The hand pose is estimated by ﬁtting a hand
model (we use HumanHand20DOF from GraspIt! [10]) to
3D joint locations X, in two stages (Figure 4): 1) palm
pose wTp is recovered from the locations of the 6 rigid hand
points (wrist base + base of 5 ﬁngers) through the Umeyama
transform [19], which estimates a 3D similarity matrix, and
2) joint angles are recovered through inverse kinematics af-
ter the hand is transformed by wTp.

Stage 4: The participant places the object back on the
turntable, which starts rotating and the object is scanned by
the RGB-D-Thermal camera to construct the contact map
according to the ContactDB [1] protocol (Figure 5).

Stage 5: The contact map from Stage 4 can be used to
further reﬁne the grasp capture by enforcing the observed
attracting the closest hand segment
contact relation i.e.
to contacted points, repelling it away from non-contacted
points, and penalizing intersection of the hand and object
(Figure 1). We follow the grasp optimization stage of the
ContactGrasp algorithm [2] to perform this reﬁnement.

The virtual camera poses estimated in Stage 2 can be
used to propagate the object and palm pose to all frames

3.2. Caveats

Grasp adjustment (Stage 2), which involves in-hand ma-
nipulation [4], introduces an unknown change Tadj in the
object pose. We plan to estimate Tadj through ICP initial-
ized at wTo. Another caveat is that OpenPose requires a vis-
ible head and shoulder to initialize the hand detector. Since
it is not desirable to record the participants’ body and face
for privacy reasons, we plan to develop a hand detector by
skin color segmentation.

4. Future Work

We plan to improve the grasp capture algorithm de-

scribed in Section 3 in two aspects:

• Utilizing a more expressive hand model

(e.g.
MANO [13]) will allow a better ﬁt to individual hand
characteristics. Currently, the only identity-dependent
parameter in our algorithm the scale estimated during
palm ﬁtting (Stage 3). Research in hand modeling has
shown [13] that many more parameters are needed to
capture the diversity of human hands.

• Integrating hand-ﬁtting into the SfM problem (Eq. 1)
will reduce the number of stages in the pipeline and
make it less brittle. Denoting hand parameters by Φ,
we plan to recover hand pose and virtual camera poses
jointly by minimizing the following cost function:

(cid:18)

L

Φ,

(cid:110)wT (i)

c

(cid:111)N

(cid:19)

i=1

=

N
(cid:88)

i=1

(cid:16)

||x(i)−π

J (Φ) ;w T (i)

c

, K

(cid:17)

||2
2

(2)

where J (Φ) gives the 3D joint locations from Φ.

5. Conclusion

In summary, this paper presents preliminary work on a
completely markerless grasp capture algorithm that utilizes
well-established geometric optimization techniques and re-
cent advances in 2D hand keypoint detection. In addition
to the hand- and object-pose, our algorithm also captures
detailed hand-object contact, which is an important com-
ponent of grasping. We also discuss ways to improve the
proposed algorithm. Markerless grasp capture can enable a
better understanding of human grasping behavior, and can

ies together. ACM Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIG-
GRAPH Asia), 36(6), Nov. 2017. 3

[14] Tomas Simon, Hanbyul Joo, Iain Matthews, and Yaser
Sheikh. Hand keypoint detection in single images using mul-
tiview bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1145–
1153, 2017. 2

[15] Srinath Sridhar, Antti Oulasvirta, and Christian Theobalt. In-
teractive markerless articulated hand motion tracking using
rgb and depth data. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, pages 2456–2463, 2013. 1

[16] Bugra Tekin, Federica Bogo, and Marc Pollefeys. H+ o: Uni-
ﬁed egocentric recognition of 3d hand-object poses and in-
teractions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05349, 2019. 2
[17] Jonathan Tompson, Murphy Stein, Yann Lecun, and Ken
Perlin. Real-time continuous pose recovery of human hands
using convolutional networks. ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics, 33, August 2014. 1

[18] Dimitrios Tzionas, Luca Ballan, Abhilash Srikantha, Pablo
Aponte, Marc Pollefeys, and Juergen Gall. Capturing hands
in action using discriminative salient points and physics
International Journal of Computer Vision,
simulation.
118(2):172–193, 2016. 2

[19] Shinji Umeyama. Least-squares estimation of transformation
parameters between two point patterns. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence, (4):376–380,
1991. 3

[20] Aaron Wetzler, Ron Slossberg, and Ron Kimmel. Rule of
thumb: Deep derotation for improved ﬁngertip detection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.05726, 2015. 1

[21] Qi Ye, Shanxin Yuan, and Tae-Kyun Kim. Spatial atten-
tion deep net with partial pso for hierarchical hybrid hand
In European conference on computer vi-
pose estimation.
sion, pages 346–361. Springer, 2016. 2

[22] Shanxin Yuan, Qi Ye, Bjorn Stenger, Siddhant Jain, and Tae-
Kyun Kim. Bighand2.2m benchmark: Hand pose dataset and
state of the art analysis. 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jul 2017. 1

generate datasets for training models to predict various as-
pects of grasping like physically plausible hand pose, oc-
currence of contact at object and hand locations, and poten-
tially even locations and directions of forces being applied
to the object [12]. These models have applications in VR
and human-computer interaction.

References

[1] Samarth Brahmbhatt, Cusuh Ham, Charles C. Kemp, and
James Hays. ContactDB: Analyzing and predicting grasp
contact via thermal imaging. 2019 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jun 2019.
1, 2, 3

[2] Samarth Brahmbhatt, Ankur Handa, James Hays, and Dieter
Fox. ContactGrasp: Functional multi-ﬁnger grasp synthesis
from contact. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03754, 2019. 3
[3] Frank Dellaert. Factor graphs and gtsam: A hands-on intro-
duction. Technical report, Georgia Institute of Technology,
2012. 2

[4] Charlotte E Exner.

In-hand manipulation skills. Develop-

ment of hand skills in the child, pages 35–45, 1992. 3
[5] Guillermo Garcia-Hernando, Shanxin Yuan, Seungryul
Baek, and Tae-Kyun Kim. First-person hand action bench-
mark with rgb-d videos and 3d hand pose annotations.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 409–419, 2018. 1, 2

[6] Yana Hasson, G¨ul Varol, Dimitrios Tzionas, Igor Kale-
vatykh, Michael J. Black, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid.
Learning joint reconstruction of hands and manipulated ob-
jects. In CVPR, 2019. 2

[7] Guido Heumer, Heni Ben Amor, Matthias Weber, and Bern-
hard Jung. Grasp recognition with uncalibrated data gloves-a
comparison of classiﬁcation methods. In 2007 IEEE Virtual
Reality Conference, pages 19–26. IEEE, 2007. 1

[8] Nikolaos Kyriazis and Antonis Argyros. Physically plausible
3d scene tracking: The single actor hypothesis. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 9–16, 2013. 2

[9] Yun Lin and Yu Sun. Grasp planning based on strategy ex-
tracted from demonstration. In 2014 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 4458–
4463. IEEE, 2014. 1

[10] Andrew T Miller and Peter K Allen. Graspit! a versatile
simulator for robotic grasping. IEEE Robotics & Automation
Magazine, 11(4):110–122, 2004. 3

[11] Gyeongsik Moon, Ju Yong Chang, and Kyoung Mu Lee.
V2v-posenet: Voxel-to-voxel prediction network for accu-
rate 3d hand and human pose estimation from a single depth
map. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5079–5088, 2018. 2

[12] Gr´egory Rogez, James S Supancic, and Deva Ramanan. Un-
derstanding everyday hands in action from rgb-d images. In
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on com-
puter vision, pages 3889–3897, 2015. 4

[13] Javier Romero, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J. Black.
Embodied hands: Modeling and capturing hands and bod-

