9
1
0
2

l
u
J

9

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
5
3
4
0
.
7
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Prescription AR: A Fully-Customized
Prescription-Embedded Augmented Reality
Display

JUI-YI WU AND JONGHYUN KIM*

NVIDIA
*jonghyunk@nvidia.com

Abstract:
In this paper, we present a fully-customized AR display design that considers the
user’s prescription, interpupillary distance, and taste of fashion. A free-form image combiner
embedded inside the prescription lens provides augmented images onto the vision-corrected real
world. We establish a prescription-embedded AR display optical design method as well as the
customization method for individual users. Our design can cover myopia, hyperopia, astigmatism,
and presbyopia, and allows the eye-contact interaction with privacy protection. A 169g dynamic
prototype showed a 40◦ × 20 ◦ virtual image with a 23 cpd resolution at center ﬁeld and 6 mm ×
4 mm eye box, with the vision-correction and varifocal (0.5-3m) capability.

© 2019 Optical Society of America

1.

Introduction

Augmented Reality (AR) displays present virtual images at real-world scenes while preserving
the viewer’s natural vision. Numerous AR head mounted displays (HMDs) have been introduced
in both commercial prototypes [1–5] and research literature [6–10] since Google glass, but no
device has achieved wide adoption by consumers. In contrast to market expectations on AR
displays represented by "holographic" images, there is no viable optical structure meeting both
of the slim form factor and high visual standards including high-resolution, large ﬁeld-of-view
(FOV), large eye-box, and variable focus.

The diversity of human head shape and eye structure aggravates this challenge further. Every
user has diﬀerent interpupillary distance (IPD, 50 - 75 mm) [11] and nose shape, which raises
the bar on eye box and eye relief coverage beyond the requirement for a single user.
In
addition, since more than 40% of the population uses special aids for vision correction caused
by myopia, hyperopia, astigmatism, and presbyopia, AR display should consider the viewer’s
prescription [12–14]. AR display manufacturers produced either an eye-glasses compatible
design or an additional prescription-lens option, but both methods increase the weight and the
size of the system signiﬁcantly.

Several approaches have been introduced to include vision correction in an AR display
structure [7, 15–17]. The North AR demonstrated the most ergonomic eye-glasses like AR
displays by measuring customer’s prescription and IPD [15]. However, previous methods were
mostly based on the retinal projection display using holographic optical elements (HOEs) attached
to the rear surface of the prescription lens, which inherently causes limited FOV at given eye
relief and narrow eye box [17, 18]. Considerable dynamic eye box expansion methods have been
proposed [19,20], but they required additional a spatial light modulator or a linear actuator and are
not suitable for an eyeglasses form factor. Above all, we are not aware of any previous customized
AR display design which considers the observer’s prescription, IPD, and facial appearance.

In this paper, we propose a fully-customized, prescription-embedded AR display. We propose
an optical design that utilizes the prescription lens as a wave-guide for the AR display. A
free-form image combiner is inserted into the prescription lens, so one lens piece can deliver
virtual scenes and correct the vision of the real scene simultaneously. Based on a modiﬁed myopia

 
 
 
 
 
 
eye model, we ﬁrst design the shape of the prescription lens. Then the free-form image combiner,
in-coupling prism, and beam shaping lens are optimized for the individual prescription lens. In
addition, a customized ergonomic eye-glasses design is achieved by using a 3D facial scan. A
Prescription AR prototype with a 5-mm thick lens provides 1 diopter (1D) vision correction, 23
cycles per degree (CPD) angular resolution at center, 6 mm eye box, and varifocal (0.33D - 2D)
capability. The prototype is lightweight (169g for dynamic and 79g for static prototype), has
70% transparency, protects user’s privacy, and enables eye-contact interaction with surroundings.

2. Design

2.1. System overview

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of Prescription embedded AR display: (a) The side view and
the beam path of the AR image of the proposed system. The prescription lens works both
for vision-correction and for wave-guide of the AR image. Light rays from a micro display
(MD) refracted by a beam shaping lens (BSL) enter to the prescription lens (PL) through an
in-coupling prism (ICP) and create a magniﬁed virtual image located a distance di from the
eye. The focal image depth can be dynamically changed from 0D to 2D by moving MOLED
axially,∆a, in experimental results. (b) The Detailed diagram for geometric parameters in
the prescription embedded AR display. (c) The 3D diagram of optical components.

As its core, our prescription AR display optically corrects the user’s vision with a prescription
lens and utilizes that lens as a wave-guide in an AR display system. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the
top surface of the prescription lens of thickness tl is used as an entrance of the wave-guide. The
light rays from a micro display of size wd×hd and resolution Nx×Ny located in front of user’s

forehead with an angle θd are refracted by a bi-convex (Rl1, Rl2) beam shaping lens (refractive
index: n1, thickness: tBSL) located at a from the micro display with the tilted angle θl and
entered to the wave-guide through an in-coupling prism (refractive index: n1) located at dp
from the beam shaping lens with the tilted angle θ p. The in-coupling prism is composed by a
set of a plano-concave and a convex-plano cylindrical lens. Then, the rays are refracted by a
cylindrical lens (Rcy, refractive index: n2) located at tc from the prism surface with the tilted
angle θc and travel in the wave-guide (refractive index: n3, tilted angle: θw) located at tw from
the cylindrical surface as shown in Fig. 1(c). The light rays are total internal reﬂected (TIR)
twice by the frontal surface (Sf ) and the rear surface (Sr ) of the prescription lens, reﬂected by a
free-form half-mirror coated surface (Sf r ee, tilted angle: θ f ), and arrived at the pupil of the eye.
Note that the in-coupling prism, cylindrical lens, upper part of the prescription lens, and lower
part of the prescription lens are bonded by an optical adhesive, so the prototype consists of only
two lens pieces: the main lens and the beam shaping lens. The enlarged virtual image of size
wi×hi is located at distance di from the eye in the vision-corrected real scene. The virtual image
depth can be dynamically adjusted (∆di) by moving the micro display back and forth (∆a).

The optical design process is divided into two steps: the prescription lens design (Sf , Sr )
and the AR display path design (rest of all) using a commercial optics simulation tool, Zemax
OpticStudio. The overall optical path is infeasible to be investigated by an analytic form because of
the free-form surface and the multiple oﬀ-axis components. Nevertheless, we propose a universal
designing and optimization method which is valid for any kind of prescription including myopia,
astigmatism, hyperopia, and presbyopia. Figure 2 shows a ﬂow chart of the universal 2-step
optimization process in prescription AR, which is started from the user’s eyeglasses prescription
including spherical correction(SPH), cylinder correction(CYL), axis of astigmatism(AXIS), and
add power (ADD).

Fig. 2. Flow chart of the two-step optimization for Prescription AR: The frontal and rear
surfaces (Sf , Sr ) are optimized at given lens thickness tl in the ﬁrst step based on user’s
prescription. Other geometric parameters (Rl1, Rl2, Rcy, a, dp, tBSL, tc, tw, θd, θl, θ p, θc,
θw, and θ f ree) are optimized in the second step based on target foveated resolution and eye
relief range,de.

2.2. Prescription lens design from modiﬁed myopia eye model

The ﬁrst step is the optimization of the prescription lens, especially the frontal (Sf ) and rear (Sr )
surface proﬁle of the prescription lens [21, 22]. Figure 3 shows how to design the prescription
lens for myopic eye. Figures 3(a) and 3(b) show the principle of vision correction for myopic
eye. The normal vision whose amplitude of accommodation is 4D has a far point at 0D and
near point at 4D. The 1D myopic eye with the same amplitude of accommodation has a far point
at 1D and near point at 5D. The observer cannot perceive full-resolution image of the objects
located at 0.6D because the object is out of accommodation range, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The
prescription lens shifts the object at inﬁnity to the myopic eye’s far point, 1D location, so the
objects are imaged at 1.6D plane, inside the accommodation range of 1D myopic eye. Similarly,

Fig. 3. Principle of the Prescription AR: (a) A 1D myopic eye and its accommodation range
of 1D to 5D. The 1D myopic eye cannot resolve the real objects located at 0.6D. (b)The
prescription lens design for 1D myopic eye. The lens eﬀectively shifts the object from
inﬁnity (0D) to the myopia’s far point (1D). The object located at 0.6D is imaged at 1.6D
plane with the correct prescription lens. (c) The prescription AR design. The virtual image
plane should be located inside the accommodation range of the myopic eye. Note that the
depth of ﬁeld (DOF, accommodation range) of normal vision is from 0D to 4D and the DOF
of XD myopic eye is from XD to (X + 4)D.

the prescription AR display oﬀer the clear enlarged virtual image inside the accommodation
range of myopic eye. In additionally, the prescription lens compensates the astigmatism, by
adding inverse cylinder power to the given axis.

Instead of using the direct calculation of surface proﬁles from the SPH, CYL, AXIS, and
ADD values, we optimized both surfaces using a human eye model. This optimization method
can minimize the aberration at the given thickness tl, refractive index n3, and given eye relief
de. Previously, Atchison built human myopic eye model based on the measured data from 121
subjects [23]. And it is known that the total astigmatism is the sum of the corneal and internal
astigmatism [24]. However, there isn’t a general human eye model covering both myopia and
astigmatism. In this work, we assumed corneal astigmatism only and modiﬁed the corneal
surface property of the Atchison’s model. This simple assumption is valid in this case because
the prescription lens is only aﬀected by the sum of astigmatism, not the source. The cornea
surface proﬁle Crv and Crh are calculated from the cylindrical power, CYL, and AXIS value,
and the modiﬁed eye model is achieved with SPH value as shown in Table 1.

ry × (N d − 1)
(N d − 1) + CY L × ry
Based on this modiﬁed myopia eye model, we calculated Sf and Sr . Sf is set as a spherical
surface of radius rf while Sr is set as a bifocal surface of radii rro, rre and rotation angle θr , to
correct the myopia and the astigmatism. All the values were optimized iteratively with the merit

(1)

r ∗
x

=

Table 1. The modiﬁed myopia eye model based on Atchison’s model where the rx and ry are
the radius value of bifocal system in horizontal and vertical respectively, kx and ky are the
conic constant of bifocal system in horizontal and vertical respectively, Nd is the reﬂective
index of material, and Vd is the Abbe number of material. Note that the radius of cornea
surface, r∗
x, is calculated by adding the CYL power into another direction as Dx = Dy +
CYL, where the Dy = (Nd-1)/ry. The complete equation of rx is expressed as Eq. (1).

Surface

Type

Radius

Conic

Thickness

Material

Rotation

Cornea

biconic

r ∗
x = (Nd-1)/Dx
ry = 7.77+0.022SR

kx = -0.15
ky = -0.15

Aqueous

standard

Stop

standard

Anterior lens

gradient lens

Posterior lens

gradient lens

Vitrous

standard

6.40

inﬁnite

11.48

inﬁnite

-5.90

-0.275

-

-5.00

-

-2.00

Retina

biconic

rx = -12.91-0.094SR
ry = -12.72+0.004SR

kx = 0.7+0.026SR
ky = 0.225+0.017SR

0.55

3.05

0.1

1.44

2.16

Nd = 1.376
Vd = 55.468

Nd = 1.3337
Vd = 50.522

Nd = 1.337
Vd = 50.522

1.371+0.0652778Z
-0.0226659Z 2
-0.0020399(X 2+Y 2)

1.418-0.0100737Z 2
-0.0020399(X 2+Y 2)

16.28-0.299SR Nd = 1.336
Vd = 51.293

-

-

90-AXIS (◦)

-

-

-

-

-

-

function for the range of 12 to 20 mm eye relief, de, and 26◦ × 18◦ of the ﬁeld. The Fig. 4 shows
the spot diagram change axially around the retina plane of myopic astigmatism eye (SPH: -2,
CYL: -2, and AXIS: 30) without and with the prescription lens. Compared to the naked eye
focusing at inﬁnite object in Fig. 4(a), and the myopia-only correction lens in Fig. 4(b), the
designed prescription lens forms a smaller focal point at the retinal plane in Fig. 4(c).

Fig. 4. Analysis of the spot diagram on the retina through focus shifting: (a) the blurred spot
on the retina from the inﬁnite object without a prescription lens. (b)The focused spot on the
retina only optimized for SPH, and (c) optimized for SPH, CYL, and AXIS. Note that there
is serious astigmatism even the spherical optical power is compensated in (b).

2.3. Prescription-embedded AR display design

Based on the prescription lens design, all other geometric parameters (Rl1, Rl2, Rcy, a, dp,
tBSL, tc, tw, θd, θl, θ p, θc, θw, θ f ree, and Sf r ee) were optimized in the second step. Although
actual numbers are calculated by Zemax OpticStudio, the geometry of optics, the materials, the
constraints should be carefully considered at the design stage for the optimal performance [25].

2.3.1. Geometry creation and materials

There have been several research eﬀorts on free-form image combiner based AR displays [26–29]
and on general free-form optimization methodology [30, 31]. We designed a free-form image
combiner for the best imaging quality and the compensation of highly compact oﬀ-axis optical
design. Figure 1(b) shows the detailed diagram of the AR display path. In the wave-guide,
the light rays are reﬂected at the positive power surface (Sf ) ﬁrst, and at the negative power
surface (Sr ) second. So it is reasonable to choose positive power image combiner (Sf r ee) for
the free-form surface for the ﬂatter focal plane, symmetric power distribution, and less lens
aberration. The free-form surface can be characterized by an extended polynomial equation
including conic aspherical surfaces and extended polynomial terms as follows [25]:

z =

cr 2

1 + (cid:112)

1 − (1 + k)c2r 2)

N
(cid:213)

+

i

Ai Ei(x, y),

(2)

where c is the curvature for the base sphere, r is the normal radius expressed as r = (cid:112)x2 + y2, k
is the conic constant, N is the number of polynomial terms, and Ai is the coeﬃcient of the ith
extended polynomial terms [25]. In our optimization, up to 4th polynomials were considered (N
= 14).

The bi-convex beam shaping lens increases the system’s numerical aperture (NA) for higher
resolution and compactness of the shorter optical path. The in-coupling prism guides the light
rays into the wave-guide with the TIR condition. The y-axis only cylindrical surface (Rcy) inside
the in-coupling prism compensates some astigmatism and the tilted image plane, which are
caused by the oﬀ-axis folded path. The tilted angle of the beam shaping lens is identical to the
tilted angle of the micro-display for the symmetric magniﬁcation (θd = θl), but the angles of other
components were freely decided by the optimizer to maximize FOV and minimize the aberration.
The materials for the beam shaping lens and the upper part of the in-coupling prism (n1, v1),
the lower part of that (n2,v2), and the prescription lens (n3,v3), where n and v refer to index of
refraction and Abbe number respectively, were carefully chosen to minimize the thicknesses and
the chromatic aberration using the diﬀerent dispersion characteristics. The distances (a, dp, tBSL,
tc, tw) were calculated to some non-negative values based on the following constraints and the
priorities.

2.3.2. Physical Constraints

The optical conﬁguration for the AR system is limited by giving the constraints in the Merit function.
These constraints are determined by the comprehensive consideration of lens implementation,
distance from the forehead, total internal reﬂection condition, and boundary on display panel. In
detail, the center thickness of each lens, tBSL, tc, tw, and edge thickness must be over 1 mm for
manufacturability. The gaps between optical component, a and dp, should be longer than 0.2
mm to avoid overlapping. The sum of thicknesses a, dp, tBSL, tc, and tw are limited up to 8.5
mm to minimize the total thickness of AR system so the micro-display can be located in front of
the forehead. The light rays used in the optimization were started from the object and limited to
the size of the micro display as the ﬁnal surface.

Fig. 5. Design trade-oﬀ space for the Prescription AR. The micro display wd×hd = 10.08 ×
7.56 mm and pixel pitch 6.3 µm, virtual image plane di = (X + 1)D, and thickness tl = 5
mm correspond to the ones in the prototype (red circles), where X represents the diopter of
myopia. (a) Thickness vs. FOV and eye box. Both FOV and eye box are propotional to the tl.
(b) Eye Relief vs. FOV. Smaller eye relief provides larger FOV. (c) Focus cue change. The
virtual image plane, di, can be changed with the axial movement of the micro display, ∆a.

2.4. Design trade space

2.4.1. FOV vs Thickness and Eye box vs Thickness

The FOV and the thickness of the prescription lens has a trade-oﬀ relation as shown in Fig.
5(a). Especially, a thicker prescription lens allows a larger vertical FOV because of the larger
size of the free-form combiner. We chose 5 mm thickness in our design for a comparable FOV
with a slim and lightweight form factor. Similarly, the eye box is also decided by the thickness;
the thicker prescription lens the larger eye box. The coupling between thickness and display
characteristics is reasonable since the height of the micro display hd is limited by the thickness
of the prescription lens. Note that the horizontal FOV and horizontal eye box is determined by
the width of the micro display wd and can be enlarged by choosing long rectangular displays.

2.4.2. FOV vs Eye relief

Generally, the more extended eye relief causes the smaller FOV of the near-eye display. Due to
the embedded-prescription, the Prescription AR can provide a smaller eye relief (12∼20 mm)
compared to the commercially available AR displays, and a comparable FOV with a 0.6-inch
display. Since the minimum achievable eye relief might vary per user based on the facial structure,
we optimized the optics for 5 diﬀerent eye relief cases (12, 14, 16, 18 and 20 mm) using the
multi-conﬁguration function. The 5-mm thickness prototype can provide 20∼23 degrees vertical
FOV based on the user’s eye relief.

2.4.3. Focus cue change

In addition, Prescription AR provides focal cues. The virtual image plane can be changed by
moving the micro display back and forth. The neutral position of the micro display (a) was
optimized for a 1D focal plane in the vision-corrected scene, which is (X + 1)D in the real scene
for X Diopter myopia (Figure 5(c)). By axially shifting the micro display around the original
position (∆a), the virtual image plane can be controlled. Due to the compact optical structure,
the overall magniﬁcation is large and the depth range from 0D to 2.5D in the vision-corrected
scene can be covered with the 0.4 mm axial movement of the micro display. This varifocal
characteristic is similarly valid for diﬀerent myopia levels.

2.4.4. Resolution: foveated optimization

Because today’s micro display pixel numbers are not suﬃcient to provide 20/20 visual acuity (30
cpd) angular resolution over the full FOV, the foveated display was introduced which distributes

Fig. 6. Foveated optimization of angular resolution in Prescription AR: (a) Human visual
acuity over eccentricity (black dotted line), Prescription AR design results (for 1D myopia)
with the foveated optimization (blue line), and uniform optimization(red line). Note that
each component and the free-form image combiner was optimized for the human visual
acuity (ﬁxed foveation) to minimize the wasted information. (b) Angular resolution over
FOV in 1D myopia Prescription AR prototype.

the pixels in accordance with the human visual acuity [10, 32]. Since our display is customized
for each user which allows the precise alignment of the eye pupil and the display center, we
adopted the foveated optimization. Figure.6(a) shows a comparison between a psychophysical
visual acuity data and the angular resolution with the uniform and the foveated optimization as
a function of horizontal eccentricity [33]. Although uniform optimization can achieve higher
resolution in the peripheral region, the user cannot perceive most of the information due to the
bandwidth limit. The foveated optimization provides 20/20 visual acuity resolution at the center.
Since this system provides ﬁxed foveation, the foveal region and the highest resolution region
become misaligned as the eye rotates. Therefore, we sacriﬁced the resolution of the periphery
more and secured higher resolution around the fovea to cover some gaze angle change. The user
can perceive 20 cpd resolution image at the 5 degrees gaze angle. The optimized resolution over
the FOV is illustrated in Figure 6(b). The Angular resolution for the vertical eccentricity was
optimized at the slightly lower gaze because people tend to look down naturally.

2.4.5. Presbyopia and hyperopia

The presbyopia is usually corrected by a bi-focal lens or a progressive lens, which adds an optical
power to the lower gaze, for close distance. Since the Prescription AR design only utilizes the
upper half of the main lens as a display path, the bi-focal or progressive solution can be directly
applied to the current design. For hyperopia, we were not able to ﬁnd the proper hyperopia eye
model. So we directly calculated the prescription lens proﬁles (Sf , Sr ), and performed the same
optimization. The optimized result for 1D hyperopia is shown in Supplementary. The resultant
FOV was smaller in 1D hyperopia Prescription AR display because the prescription lens should
have a positive optical power and it is diﬃcult to maintain TIR condition. Other than that, the
Prescription AR display worked well also in the hyperopia case.

3. System Implementation

The Prescription AR can cover most of the myopia, astigmatism, presbyopia, hyperopia, and any
combinations of those. We designed Prescription AR for a normal vision case (0D), multiple
myopia cases (SPH = -1D, -2D, -3D, -4D, and -5D), a hyperopia case (SPH = 1D) and a myopic
astigmatism case (SPH = -2, CYL = -2, AXIS = 30) (see supplementary). Among those designs,
we manufactured one case, 1D myopia, for the veriﬁcation. Table 2 shows the geometric and
optical parameters of Prescription AR for 1D myopia. All the optical components including the
mold for the free-form image combiner, the in-coupling prism, and the beam shaping lens were

fabricated by ILLUCO. Then the glasses frames were customized for each user. The dynamic
and static prototypes were demonstrated. Table 3 shows the detailed speciﬁcations for 1D myopia
Prescription AR prototype.

Table 2. The 1D myopia prototype of prescription embedded AR display for the experiment

Items

Prescription

Lens thickness

Eye relief

Eye box

Units

Diopter

mm

mm

mm2

Image plane

m, in the corrected scene

Field of view

degrees

Values

-1

5

20

6 × 4

1

20 × 40

Resolution

cycles per degree (CPD)

23 at center

Table 3. The detail information of -1 SPH prescription AR display design, includes the
system parameter and the coeﬃcient of free-form combiner.

Prescription

a

θd

Rl1

Rl2

n1

-1SPH

0.97

66.67

-37.32

13.94

N-LASF31A

Prescription

c

-1SPH

-276.28

k

0

N

14

r

27.391

X 1

0

tBSL

3.25

Y 1

θl

dp

θ p

tc

Rcy

n2

θc

tw

n3

66.67

0.42

53.17

1.64

-8.86 N-BK7

61.92

2.27

COP

θw

62

θ f

di

60.92

485

X 2

X 1Y 1

Y 2

0.798

10.65

0

11.235

X 3

0

X 2Y 1

X 1Y 2

Y 3

X 4

X 3Y 1

X 2Y 2

X 1Y 3

Y 4

0

0

-1.275

-0.695

0

0

0

2.34

3.1. Hardware Implementation

3.1.1. Prescription-embedded free-form image combiner

Fig. 7. Free-from surface molding process: (a) the mold of free-form surface and waiting for
injecting the plastic material, (b) the complete prescription embedded free-form combiner,
and (c) the assembled and compact AR display engine.

The fabrication of the customized optical components includes the free-form image combiner
are the key for the optical performance. The free-form image combiner was made through the
molding processing by ILLUCO. The plastic material, Zeonex cyclo oleﬁn polymer (COP), was
used for the prescription lens. It is lightweight and supports the implementation of a free-form

surface for molding processing. Figure 7(a) shows one mold of two lenses since the free-form
image combiner separates the prescription lens into upper and bottom lens. The Fig. 7 (b) shows
the complete prescription-embedded free-from image combiner after the optics glues are applied
on two lenses. The assembled AR display engine is small and lightweight (Fig. 7(c)).

3.1.2. Personal Customization

Fig. 8. Customized prescription embedded AR display: (a) the scanned 3D model of a
user, (b) ﬁtting the glasses frame design with the scanned 3D model, and (c) the results of
customization for users.

Because every facial structural is unique, the ergonomic frame design is as important as the
optics design. Since we optimized the optics for the eye relief of 12 mm to 20 mm, the prototype
will work within that range. However, smaller eye relief can provide a larger FOV as Fig. 5(b)
and more comfortable ﬁt (closer center of mass). Further, the center of the pupil should be
aligned with the optical axis for the best foveated experience as Fig. 6. Therefore, the glasses
frame design should consider the user’s IPD too.

Figure 8 shows the customization process of the Prescription AR display. The facial structure
was 3D scanned with the Kinect [34, 35], and imported to the 3D rendering software, Fusion 360,
where the glasses frame was designed and optimized for each user. The glasses frame designs
were parameterized with the input of the IPD and the width of the head, followed by manual
ﬁtting for nose part. Figures 8(c) show the results of the customization for the diﬀerent users.

3.1.3. Prototypes

Fig. 9. Implemented prototypes of Prescription AR: (a) static prototype based on LVT ﬁlms
(79 g) and (b) dynamic prototype based on micro OLED. 164 g including the driving board.

Two Prescription AR prototypes were implemented: a dynamic prototype and a static prototype.

OLED-based dynamic prototype Figure 9(a) shows the dynamic prototype. All of the display
results were from this setup. Two 10.08×7.56 mm Sony micro OLED (ECX339A) displays were
used as binocular micro displays, where each display has 1600×1200 resolution, 6.3 µm pixel
pitch, and maximum brightness 1000 cd/m2. The free-form optics with the 70% transparency
for 1D myopia were fabricated by Illuco. 3D printed frame housed and aligned all of the optical
structures including the main lens attached with an in-coupling prism, beam shaping lens, micro
display, and driving board. A 3D printed gear was also applied to change the IPD. The weight of
the dynamic prototype including the driving board was 164 g.

LVT-based static prototype Figure 9(b) shows the static prototype. Two sets of a 10.08×7.56
mm, 3048 pixel per inch light valve technology (LVT) ﬁlm with an Electro-Luminescent (EL)
ﬁlm backlight were used for the static display. A CR-2032 coin cell powered both EL ﬁlms. A
3D printed housing aligned all of the optics, statics display modules, and the battery for wearable
eyeglasses form factor. The weight of the static prototype was 79g.

3.2. Software Implementation

We used a C++ open source innovation engine, called G3D, for rendering [36]. The binocular
images with 1200 × 1600 resolution were rendered in real-time. Over 100 binocular frames
were generated every second in a local personal computer with a NVIDIA RTX 2080Ti. The
FOV, DOF, IPD were selected carefully in accordance with the actual prototype. Since the
resolution was optimized with foveation, the foveated rendering can be considered. We did not
apply foveated rendering in this work, but it can be directly applied to the current prototype for
reduced computation.

4. Display Assessment

Fig. 10. Photograph of the experimental setup. (left) setup for the experimental results. Note
that both the real scene and the virtual image (resolution target) are clearly observed on the
phone screen in the normal light condition. (right) close-up photos at the top view and side
view.

To properly illustrate the performance of the prototypes of Prescription AR, the experimental
results are presented with photographs and videos by an iPhone X camera with the F-number of
2.4 and a 3024 x 4032 resolution. The detailed experimental setup with the camera is shown in
Fig. 10.

Fig. 11. Experimental results of the FOV and resolution measurement: (a) The AR image
covers 20◦ by 40◦ of the checking board in vertical and horizontal direction respectively. (b)
The analysis of slant-edge measurement at center ﬁeld. Note that the angular resolution of
23 CPD is realized in our prototype.

Field of view and angular resolution To measure the FOV, the entire display was illuminated
with a white image and was captured with the background FOV panel located at a 15 cm distance
as shown in Fig. 11(a). The measured FOV of the prototype was 40◦ × 20◦. The angular
resolution is measured from the slant-edge MTF method [37]. Figure 11(b) shows the measured
MTF graph and a close-up photo of a slanted edge. The normalized MTF of the Prescription
AR was greater than 0.5 at 23 cpd at the center, which was identical to the angular resolution
calculated from the pixel pitch (Table 2).

Fig. 12. Eye box measurement results: The 40◦ × 20◦ image captured at (a) the left-most,
(b) the center, (c) the right-most position. Note that the FOV panel was captured together to
show the FOV. The measured eye box was 6×4 mm2.

Eye-box Figure 12 shows the experimental results of the eye box. The full FOV image was
displayed and the camera was shifted at the pupil plane to measure the eye box. The prescription
AR prototype provided 6 mm of horizontal and 4 mm of vertical eye box while preserving the
40◦ × 20◦ FOV.

AR display results with the prescription Figure 13 shows the captured images without and
with the Prescription AR prototype to show the vision-correction results. The real objects were
located at diﬀerent depths: a car, a horse doll, and an eye chart were located at 0.5, 1, and 3 m
from the camera respectively in the real world. A ﬁxed focus camera mimicked a 1D myopia
eye: the camera was focused at 0.5 m (2D), which is the middle of the 1D myopic eye’s DOF.
Without the Prescription AR, the camera was focused at the car, was able to resolve some of
the details of the horse doll, and was not able to see the details of the eye chart. With the
prescription AR, the camera focus was shifted to the horse doll (1D), and was able to achieve
good resolution from both of the car and the eye chart. In the real myopic eye where the user can

Fig. 13. Experimental results of Prescription AR: (a) Captured image without Prescription
AR display. The myopic eye is mimicked as a 1D myopic eye with a ﬁxed focus camera and
(b) Captured image with the Prescription AR display. Note that the far object (eye chart)
looks sharper with the Prescription AR as well as the virtual image is observed.

Fig. 14. Experiment video results with the rendered augmented contents generated by
rendering software (see Visualization 1)

change accommodation, the observer can focus on all three objects with the Prescription AR.
The virtual image located at the 1 m distance was also clearly observed in Fig. 13(b). Figure
14 shows the video with the rendered augmented contents generated by our rendering software.
Note that the virtual image is ﬁxed-focus at the given micro display position.

Focus cue change The virtual image plane is adjustable by moving the micro display back
and forth (∆a). Figure 15 shows the experimental results of focus cue change. A car, a horse
coll, and a can were located at 0.5 (d1), 1 (d2), and 3 m(d3) respectively, as shown in Fig. 15(a).
The micro display was located accordingly to provide the focus cue. As shown in Fig. 15(b),
the in-focus virtual images were observed at 0.5, 1, and 3 m by moving the micro display. The
required traveling distance of the micro display was 0.27 mm to cover the depth range from 0.33D
to 2D, so the Prescription AR can be free from VAC issue with the submillimeter traveling of the
lightweight micro display (< 3g).

Brightness and transparency: Privacy and eye-contact interaction Another essential fea-
ture of the AR display is privacy and eye-contact interaction. The privacy is the ability to hide
the user’s AR contents from outside and the eye-contact interaction is the capability to observe
the user’s eye from outside while the user is watching AR contents. These issues are closely
related to brightness, transparency, and optical conﬁguration.

The transparency of the Prescription AR prototype was 70%, and the measured luminance at
the pupil plane was 40 cd/m2 while the display brightness was 200 cd/m2. By taking advantages
of high light eﬃciency of the system and the diverging light rays, Prescription AR allows
eye-contact interaction while preserving user’s privacy. Figure 16 shows the observed user’s face
while watching the resolution target contents. The contents were only directly observed from
the micro OLED, not through the main lens. Therefore, the user’s privacy can be protected by
covering the micro OLED region with the non-transparent frames. Furthermore, the user’s eye
was clearly observed from outside at the diﬀerent point of views, which enables the eye-contact
interaction.

5. Conclusion

As the internet of things becomes common, the objects around human are getting smarter and
interactive. However, unlike other everyday personal items, only the eyeglasses have remained a
passive, non-electronic device. Although recent AR display products provide nice augmented
experiences with reasonable form factors, they cannot upgrade/substitute eyeglasses without
vision-correction. Besides, since people’s taste of glasses is very individual, oﬀering a small
number pre-designed several options, as true with smartphones, is not a suitable approach for
smart glasses business.

In this paper, we showed a fully-customized AR display design approach that considers the
user’s prescription, IPD, facial structure, and taste of fashion. We established a prescription-
embedded AR display optical design method as well as the customization method for individual
users. This optical design can cover myopia, hyperopia, astigmatism, and presbyopia, and
allows the eye-contact interaction with privacy protection. The glasses and the frames were
ergonomically customized using a Kinect-based 3D scanning method. A 169g dynamic prototype
showed a 40◦ × 20 ◦ virtual image with a 23 cpd resolution at center ﬁeld and 6 mm × 4 mm eye
box, with the vision-correction and varifocal capability. We believe our work is a start of the
paradigm shift in AR display research: from universal design to personalized design.

Funding

Acknowledgments

We thank Peter Shirley, Kaan Akşit, Zander Majercik, Morgan McGuire, and David Luebke for
helpful discussions and advice.

References
1. Google, “Goole glass,” Online Document, https://www.google.com/glass/start/.
2. D. rubino, “Microsoft HoloLens - Here are the full processor, storage and RAM specs,” (2016). Online Document,
https://www.windowscentral.com/microsoft-hololens-processor-storage-and-ram.
“HoloLens2,” Online Document, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/hololens/

3. Microshoft,
hardware.

4. DigiLens, “ArHUD,” Online Document, https://www.digilens.com/products/arhud/.
5. Lumus, “OE Vision,” Online Document, https://lumusvision.com/products/oe-vision/.
6. K. Akşit, W. Lopes, J. Kim, P. Shirley, and D. Luebke, “Near-eye varifocal augmented reality display using see-through

screens,” ACM Transactions on Graph. (TOG) 36, 189 (2017).

7. A. Maimone, A. Georgiou, and J. S. Kollin, “Holographic near-eye displays for virtual and augmented reality,” ACM

Transactions on Graph. (TOG) 36, 85 (2017).

8. A. Maimone, D. Lanman, K. Rathinavel, K. Keller, D. Luebke, and H. Fuchs, “Pinlight displays: wide ﬁeld of view
augmented reality eyeglasses using defocused point light sources,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2014 Emerging Technologies,
(ACM, 2014), p. 20.

9. S. Lee, J. Cho, B. Lee, Y. Jo, C. Jang, D. Kim, and B. Lee, “Foveated retinal optimization for see-through near-eye

multi-layer displays,” IEEE Access 6, 2170–2180 (2017).

10. J. Kim, Y. Jeong, M. Stengel, K. Akşit, R. Albert, B. Boudaoud, T. Greer, W. Lopes, Z. Majercik, P. Shirley, J. Spjut,
M. McGuire, and D. Luebke, “Foveated ar: Dynamically-foveated augmented reality display,” ACM Transactions on
Graph. (TOG) 38, 99 (2019).

11. N. A. Dodgson, “Variation and extrema of human interpupillary distance,” in Stereoscopic Displays and Virtual

Reality Systems XI, vol. 5291 (International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2004), pp. 36–46.

12. B. A. Holden, T. R. Fricke, D. A. Wilson, M. Jong, K. S. Naidoo, P. Sankaridurg, T. Y. Wong, T. J. Naduvilath,
and S. Resnikoﬀ, “Global prevalence of myopia and high myopia and temporal trends from 2000 through 2050,”
Ophthalmology 123, 1036–1042 (2016).

13. C.-W. Pan, M. Dirani, C.-Y. Cheng, T.-Y. Wong, and S.-M. Saw, “The age-speciﬁc prevalence of myopia in asia: a

meta-analysis,” Optom. Vis. Sci. 92, 258–266 (2015).

14. H. Hashemi, A. Fotouhi, A. Yekta, R. Pakzad, H. Ostadimoghaddam, and M. Khabazkhoob, “Global and regional
estimates of prevalence of refractive errors: systematic review and meta-analysis,” J. current ophthalmology 30, 3–22
(2018).

15. North Incorporation, “Focals by north,” Online Document, https://www.bynorth.com/.
16. Y.-J. Wang, P.-J. Chen, X. Liang, and Y.-H. Lin, “Augmented reality with image registration, vision correction and

sunlight readability via liquid crystal devices,” Sci. reports 7, 433 (2017).

17. L. Zhou, C. P. Chen, Y. Wu, Z. Zhang, K. Wang, B. Yu, and Y. Li, “See-through near-eye displays enabling vision

correction,” Opt. express 25, 2130–2142 (2017).

“North’s

18. KarlG,
beam
tel
Document,
norths-focals-laser-beam-scanning-ar-glasses-color-intel-vaunt/.

in-
https://www.kguttag.com/2018/10/25/

focals
Online

scanning

vaunt",”

glasses

"color

laser

ar

-

19. C. Jang, K. Bang, G. Li, and B. Lee, “Holographic near-eye display with expanded eye-box,” in SIGGRAPH Asia

2018 Technical Papers, (ACM, 2018), p. 195.

20. C. Jang, K. Bang, S. Moon, J. Kim, S. Lee, and B. Lee, “Retinal 3d: augmented reality near-eye display via

pupil-tracked light ﬁeld projection on retina,” ACM Transactions on Graph. (TOG) 36, 190 (2017).

21. W.-S. Sun, C.-L. Tien, C.-C. Sun, M.-W. Chang, and H. Chang, “Ophthalmic lens design with the optimization of the

aspherical coeﬃecients,” Opt. Eng. 39, 978–989 (2000).

22. R. Watkins, “Ophthalmic lens design,” (2015). Online Document, https://customers.zemax.com/os/

resources/learn/knowledgebase/ophthalmic-lens-design.

23. D. A. Atchison, “Optical models for human myopic eyes,” Vis. research 46, 2236–2250 (2006).
24. P. C. Hoﬀmann and W. W. Hütz, “Analysis of biometry and prevalence data for corneal astigmatism in 23 239 eyes,”

J. Cataract. & Refract. Surg. 36, 1479–1485 (2010).

25. M. Nicholson, “How to design progressive lenses,” (2006). Online Document, https://customers.zemax.

com/os/resources/learn/knowledgebase/how-to-design-progressive-lenses.

26. H. Hua and B. Javidi, “A 3d integral imaging optical see-through head-mounted display,” Opt. express 22, 13484–13491

(2014).

27. D. Cheng, Y. Wang, H. Hua, and M. Talha, “Design of an optical see-through head-mounted display with a low

f-number and large ﬁeld of view using a freeform prism,” Appl. optics 48, 2655–2668 (2009).

28. D. Cheng, Y. Wang, H. Hua, and J. Sasian, “Design of a wide-angle, lightweight head-mounted display using

free-form optics tiling,” Opt. letters 36, 2098–2100 (2011).

29. A. Wilson and H. Hua, “Design and demonstration of a vari-focal optical see-through head-mounted display using

freeform alvarez lenses,” Opt. Express 27, 15627–15637 (2019).

“Design a head-mounted display(hmd)

for augmented reality system in zemax op-
30. N. Pastuszka,
(2015). Online Document, https://customers.zemax.com/os/resources/learn/
ticstudio,”
knowledgebase/designing-a-head-mounted-display-(hmd)-for-augment?lang=en-US.
31. A. Bauer, E. M. Schiesser, and J. P. Rolland, “Starting geometry creation and design method for freeform optics,”

Nat. communications 9, 1756 (2018).

32. A. Patney, M. Salvi, J. Kim, A. Kaplanyan, C. Wyman, N. Benty, D. Luebke, and A. Lefohn, “Towards foveated

rendering for gaze-tracked virtual reality,” ACM Transactions on Graph. (TOG) 35, 179 (2016).

33. S. M. Anstis, “A chart demonstrating variations in acuity with retinal position.” Vis. research 14, 589 (1974).
34. J. Tong, J. Zhou, L. Liu, Z. Pan, and H. Yan, “Scanning 3d full human bodies using kinects,” IEEE transactions on

visualization computer graphics 18, 643–650 (2012).

35. Microsoft, “3d scanning with windows 10,” Online Document, https://developer.microsoft.com/

en-us/windows/hardware/3d-print/scanning-with-kinect.

36. M. McGuire, M. Mara, and Z. Majercik, “The G3D innovation engine,” (2017). Online Document, https:

//casual-effects.com/g3d.

37. P. D. Burns et al., “Slanted-edge mtf for digital camera and scanner analysis,” in Is and Ts Pics Conference, (SOCIETY

FOR IMAGING SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 2000), pp. 135–138.

Fig. 15. Focus cue change results: (a)schematic diagram of the experimental setup. Three
objects were placed at 0.5 m, 1 m, and 3 m respectively which related to three virtual images
from the certain position of MD with 0.3 mm of shifting, ∆a. (b) the captured image with
camera focus at 0.5 m (top), 1 m(middle), and 3 m(bottom). The clear AR images were
perceived at 0.5 m (top), 1 m(middle), and 3 m(bottom) by corrected position of MD. The
prototype can cover from 0.5 m to 3 m by shifting the micro display for 0.4 mm.

Fig. 16. The captured image of the prototype with the human model. The eye was clearly
captured from diﬀerent at the top, bottom, center, right, and left viewpoint.

