FVA: Modeling Perceived Friendliness of Virtual Agents
Using Movement Characteristics

Tanmay Randhavane*
Dept of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Aniket Bera†
Dept of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Kyra Kapsaskis‡
Dept of Psychology and Neuroscience
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Kurt Gray§
Dept of Psychology and Neuroscience
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Dinesh Manocha¶
Dept of Computer Science and Electrical
& Computer Engineering
University of Maryland at College Park

9
1
0
2

n
u
J

0
3

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
7
3
0
0
.
7
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: Friendly Virtual Agent (FVA): We present an algorithm to model perceived friendliness of a virtual agent by varying its
gaze (A), gait (B), and gestures corresponding to head nodding (C) and waving (D). These movement cues are generated using
our novel data-driven friendliness model. We evaluate the beneﬁts in terms of an improved sense of social presence using an AR
validation study using a HoloLens.

ABSTRACT

We present a new approach for improving the friendliness and
warmth of a virtual agent in an AR environment by generating
appropriate movement characteristics. Our algorithm is based on a
novel data-driven friendliness model that is computed using a user-
study and psychological characteristics. We use our model to control
the movements corresponding to the gaits, gestures, and gazing of
friendly virtual agents (FVAs) as they interact with the user’s avatar
and other agents in the environment. We have integrated FVA agents
with an AR environment using with a Microsoft HoloLens. Our
algorithm can generate plausible movements at interactive rates to
increase the social presence. We also investigate the perception of

*e-mail: tanmay@cs.unc.edu
†e-mail: ab@cs.unc.edu
‡e-mail: kyrakaps@gmail.com
§e-mail: kurtjgray@gmail.com
¶e-mail: dm@cs.umd.edu

a user in an AR setting and observe that an FVA has a statistically
signiﬁcant improvement in terms of the perceived friendliness and
social presence of a user compared to an agent without the friend-
liness modeling. We observe an increment of 5.71% in the mean
responses to a friendliness measure and an improvement of 4.03%
in the mean responses to a social presence measure.

1 INTRODUCTION

Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVAs) corresponding to embodied digital
or virtual characters are widely used in augmented or mixed reality
environments. In many applications corresponding to treatment and
rehabilitation, virtual assistance, and training, IVAs can help the user
accomplish a variety of goals. Moreover, many of these applications
demand that the generated IVAs look, move, behave, communicate,
or act like “living” creatures, whether real or ﬁctional.

There is considerable work on 3D modeling and generating realis-
tic appearances of IVAs using a combination of capturing, computer
vision, and rendering techniques. The resulting algorithms are being
integrated with current game engines and AR systems [39, 56]. At
the same time, a major issue with IVAs is that they are expected to
be believable and exhibit behaviors and emotions that make them
appear plausible in an AR environment. In particular, the user should

 
 
 
 
 
 
feel social presence with the IVAs and should feel conﬁdent in their
abilities to perform the designated tasks [8, 31, 32]. According to
prior literature [58], “social presence occurs when users feel that
a form, behavior, or sensory experience indicates the presence of
another individual. The amount of social presence is the degree to
which a user feels access to the intelligence, intentions, and sensory
impressions of another”. It has been shown that the IVAs that exhibit
social behavior and human-like personality traits can improve the
sense of social presence [55].

The challenge of how to make a user trust an IVA is mirrored by an
analogous issue in psychology – how to get people to trust and rely
more on other people in joint tasks. When people interact with others
in joint tasks, they evaluate them on two broad issues: competence
and warmth/friendliness [21]. For AR applications, competence is
related to an IVA’s ability and intelligence and can be increased by
giving an IVA the ability to sense and affect the real world (e.g.,
using voice, camera, or depth sensors). Although competence is an
important consideration when evaluating potential action partners,
an even more important consideration in terms of evaluating others’
is warmth [11]. Warmth is one of the most fundamental interpersonal
valuations and deals with whether a person is friendly or not [4].
Even if a person is competent, if they do not exhibit friendliness,
then people don’t trust them and are not likely to choose them
as an interaction partner. Similarly, users are likely to have more
conﬁdence in IVAs that appear friendlier.

In this paper, we address the problem of automatically generating
IVA behaviors that make them appear friendlier by using appropriate
cues. Humans voluntarily and involuntarily communicate emotions,
moods, and intent via non-verbal cues. Friendliness or warmth is
also communicated by non-verbal movement cues such as trajecto-
ries, gestures, gaits, etc. Moreover, humans use non-verbal cues such
as open gestures, relaxed gaits, and moderate amounts of eye contact
to communicate interpersonal warmth [54]. Inspired by these obser-
vations in psychology, we investigate methods to generate similar
non-verbal movement cues to make our IVAs appear friendlier.
Main Results: We present an approach for modeling Friendly Vir-
tual Agents (FVAs) in an AR environment based on a novel data-
driven friendliness model. Our formulation considers three major
movement characteristics: gaits, gestures, and gazing. We conduct
a perception study and analyze the results to generate a mapping
between gaits and perceived friendliness. Moreover, we use psy-
chological characteristics to model the gesture and gazing features
that convey friendliness. These movement characteristics are com-
bined and we validate our Friendliness Model using an elaborate
web-based validation study.

We use our friendliness model to generate movement characteris-
tics in the form of non-verbal cues for an IVA. We use a Behavioral
Finite State Machine (BFSM) to control the gaits, gestures, and gaz-
ing cues. Additionally, we augment these movement characteristics
with global planning and collision avoidance techniques to perform
navigation in the environment. We validate the impact of the gener-
ated FVA on users’ sense of social presence and their conﬁdence in
the FVA’s ability to perform designated tasks in an AR environment
using a Microsoft HoloLens. Our study results suggest that FVAs
provide additional conﬁdence in their abilities to complete standard
awareness and inﬂuence tasks. Additionally, users experience sig-
niﬁcantly higher social presence with the FVAs measured using the
standard Temple Presence Inventory (TPI) questionnaire. The novel
contributions of our work include:

1. Friendliness Model: We present a novel data-driven mapping
between gaits and their perceived friendliness. We also present
friendliness models for gestures and gazing derived using psy-
chological characterization. We combine these three friendli-
ness models of gaits, gestures, and gazing to form our overall
Friendliness Model (Figure 2). We validate the accuracy of
this model using a web-based study (Section 4).

2. We present novel algorithms to generate non-verbal movement
characteristics corresponding to the gaits, gestures, and gazing
using our friendliness model. Our formulation uses a BFSM,
which is updated based upon the state of the environment.
We use these algorithms to generate appropriate movement
behaviors of IVAs in an AR environment (Section 5).

3. AR Validation Study: We conduct an AR study using a Mi-
crosoft HoloLens to evaluate the impact of FVAs on users’
sense of social presence and their conﬁdence in the FVA’s abil-
ity to complete designated tasks in an immersive environment
(Figure 1). We hypothesize that FVA will appear friendlier and
will increase the user’s sense of presence and the conﬁdence
in the FVA’s abilities. We observe a statistically signiﬁcant im-
provement in the perceived friendliness (5.71% improvement
in mean responses) of virtual agents. Our results also suggest
that users feel a statistically signiﬁcant increment in the sense
of social and spatial presence with FVAs (Section 6).

2 RELATED WORK

In this section, we give a brief survey of related work on IVAs and
their use in AR and mixed reality. We also present a brief overview
of movement characteristics and social behaviors.

2.1 Intelligent Virtual Agent Modeling

Signiﬁcant research has focused on IVAs and their appearance, be-
haviors, and movements [45]. Norouzi et al. [50] surveyed previous
work on speech modeling, verbal and non-verbal behavior, phys-
ical appearance, and identities of IVAs. Verbal approaches have
been used to model different characteristics of speech and dialogues
(e.g., emotions [24]). Non-verbal approaches corresponding to body
posture [38], gesture [20], facial expression [42, 46], gaze [34],
trajectories [9, 53], etc. have been used to model social behavior,
affective behavior, and personality traits [59]. These approaches
have also been used for robot navigation among pedestrians [10, 52].
Other techniques have been proposed to generate different styles of
physical appearance (realistic vs. cartoon-like) and evaluate their
impact on the sense of presence [25]. Other approaches recon-
structed 3D avatars and poses from videos of real humans for the
IVAs [39, 40, 56, 57]. Beun et al. [12] studied the impact of visual
embodiment and anthropomorphism. Normoyle et al. [49] studied
the effect of posture and dynamics on the perception of emotions
of virtual agents. In this paper, we model IVAs with friendliness
features using movement characteristics. Our approach uses gaits,
gestures, and gazing features and is complimentary to these prior
methods.

2.2 Movement Characteristics of Virtual Agents

IVAs have been used to populate AR environments for different
applications [3, 51]. Majority of the research has been focused
on designing virtual agents that are aware of the changes in the
environment and are capable of inﬂuencing the environment [15].
Prior studies have shown that these abilities have positive effects
on co-presence and social presence [37]. IVAs in AR scenarios
have been evaluated on standard social presence metrics [41] and
conﬁdence indices [31]. In this paper, we design FVAs and evaluate
them on similar metrics in an AR environment using a Microsoft
HoloLens.

2.3 Social Behavior of Virtual Agents

Most previous methods have used Argyle’s model of relationship [4]
for constructing virtual characters [6, 13]. According to this model,
interpersonal relationships can be represented using two dimensions:
dominance and friendliness. Some researchers have studied domi-
nance relationships of IVAs [7]. In this paper, we focus on modeling
the friendliness of IVAs. Friendliness refers to the closeness and

friendship levels between two or more agents. Huang et al. [30] mod-
eled friendliness of social robots using non-verbal cues. It is known
that friendliness is affected by familiarity and warmth [21]. Non-
verbal cues such as gaits [43], gazing [5], facial expressions [54],
etc. are used to convey, perceive and communicate warmth. Pre-
vious research has used these ﬁndings to model warmth of virtual
agents. Bergmann et al. [11] used gestures to communicate warmth
in virtual agents. Kim et al. [31] studied the impact of visual em-
bodiment and social behavior on the perception of IVAs. Nguyen et
al. [48] modeled the warmth and competence of virtual agents using
a combination of gestures, use of space, and gaze behaviors. Our
approach is inspired by these prior methods and we use non-verbal
movement characteristics to generate FVAs.

3 OVERVIEW

In this section, we introduce our notation and the terminology used
in the rest of the paper. We also give a brief overview of the psycho-
logical modeling of friendliness.

3.1 Notation

Previous literature differentiates between the virtual representations
perceived to be controlled by humans (i.e. avatars) or those perceived
to be controlled by computer algorithms (i.e. agents). In this paper,
we consider the virtual representation controlled by our algorithm
as the FVA. Its visual embodiment is referred to as a 3D model,
which consists of a 3D mesh along with a hierarchical skeleton.
The hierarchical skeleton is represented by S, which contains the
positions of all joints relative to their parent joints in a hierarchical
tree with the hip joint at its root. The conﬁguration of the skeleton at
time t is represented by con f (S,t) and contains the rotation angles
of all joints with respect to their parent joints.

A person’s gait or style of walking is a unique feature of their
overall movement. A pose P ∈ R48 of a human is a set of 3D
positions of each joint ji, i ∈ {1, 2, ..., 16}. A gait is a set of 3D poses
P1, P2, ..., Pτ where τ is the number of time steps. Gaits and gestures
correspond to time series of conﬁgurations of the skeletons. We
represent a gait by g = [con f (S, 0), con f (S, 1), ..., con f (S, n)] and a
gesture by m = [con f (S, 0), con f (S, 1), ..., con f (S, n)]. A set of gaits
is represented by G and a set of gestures is represented by M. Gaze
is an important aspect of human face-to-face interaction and can be
used to increase the behavioral plausibility of the virtual characters
and the overall quality of the immersive virtual experience. We
begin by determining if the user is visible w.r.t the virtual agent and
use that information for gaze movement. We model gazing behavior
as a boolean variable that represents eye-contact represented by ξ .
We use a BFSM to trigger context dependent gestures and gaze
for movement cues. The BFSM represents the state of the FVA
including its immediate goals and tasks. The BFSM can also include
other contexts such as mood and personality. Mathematically, we
represent the BFSM by a function B : t ×E → I, which takes the time
and state of the environment E and outputs a unique BFSM state ID
i ∈ I. The environment’s state contains the positions and dimensions
of the static obstacles and the current positions and velocities of
the dynamic obstacles. The various movements of an IVA and its
trajectory computation is performed using this BFSM.

3.2 Friendliness

The notions of friendliness and warmth have been extensively stud-
ied in psychology literature. When people interact with others in
performing joint tasks, they typically evaluate them on two main
dimensions of social cognition: warmth and competence [19, 22].
The competence dimension concerns whether this agent is able to as-
sist with the task at hand. This question is answered by considering
various factors such as ability, intelligence, and reliability. Substan-
tial research in psychology suggests that humans make inferences
about other people based upon these factors [16, 17]. Past research

on virtual agents or human-computer interaction has also looked at
these issues [11, 48].

The other dimension corresponding to the warmth or friendliness,
captures whether people are friendly and well-intentioned. It deals
with the most basic interpersonal judgment of whether someone is a
friend or foe and whether the other person means to help or harm
you. According to Fiske et al. [21], warmth is judged before com-
petence, and it has more importance in terms of inducing affective
and behavioral reactions. Since psychology literature uses warmth
and friendliness in a synonymous manner, we only refer to the term
friendliness in the rest of the paper.

To measure friendliness, previous studies [11] used a question-
naire of 18 items, including pleasant, friendly, helpful which have to
be assessed on a seven-point Likert scales. Further analysis of this
data revealed that the following items tend to measure friendliness
with high reliability: pleasant, sensitive, friendly, helpful, likable, ap-
proachable, sociable. In this paper, we also use this scale to measure
the friendliness and represent friendliness as a scalar value from 0
(not at all friendly) to 1 (very friendly). This scalar value is obtained
by averaging the responses to the scale items and normalizing them
to [0, 1].

4 FRIENDLINESS MODEL
In this section, we describe the friendliness model starting with the
friendliness perception study used to obtain a mapping between gaits
and their perceived friendliness. Next, we describe the psychological
characterizations used to model gestures and gazing features that
convey friendliness. We refer to this model of friendliness and non-
verbal cues as the Friendliness Model in this paper. Finally, we
present the details of the web-based validation study used to validate
our Friendliness Model.

4.1 Friendliness Perception Study for Gaits
This study aimed to obtain a mapping between gaits and their per-
ceived friendliness.

4.1.1 Gait Dataset
We designed a data-driven approach and used 49 gaits from a pub-
licly available dataset of motion-captured gaits [1] to compute this
mapping. We visualized each gait in the dataset and asked the par-
ticipants to rate each gait on a friendliness metric. To avoid the
appearance of the 3D model affecting the gait’s perceived friend-
liness, we generated the gait visualizations using only a skeleton
mesh (Figure 3).

4.1.2 Participants
¯age = 35.75) from
We recruited 68 participants (35 female, 33 male,
Amazon Mechanical Turk. We presented a subset of 10 videos to
each participant in a randomized order. The participant could watch
each video as many times as he/she wanted and then rate the video
on a friendliness measure. For each video, we obtained a minimum
of 10 participant responses.

4.1.3 Friendliness Measure
We used a standard friendliness measure (Section 3.2) with seven
components: pleasant, sensitive, friendly, helpful, likable, approach-
able, sociable. For each component, the participants provided ratings
on a 7-point scale with 7 indicating a high level of agreement. We
also asked whether the participants found the gaits to be unnatural.

4.1.4 Results
We ﬁrst analyzed the naturalness of gaits and found that the par-
ticipants found the gaits to be natural (a mean value of 3.87 for
the unnaturalness question). For each gait g j ∈ G in the dataset,
participants provided seven ratings corresponding to the items of the
friendliness measure. We represent a participant response as rk

j,item

Figure 2: Friendliness Model Overview: Friendliness can be conveyed using nonverbal cues of gaits, gestures, and gazing. We use data-driven
techniques and psychological characterization to formulate a mapping between friendliness and gaits, gestures, and gazing.

4.2 Friendliness Model for Gestures
Laban Movement Analysis [36] provides the basis for most research
in the area of the description of bodily movement. According to
Bergmann et al. [11], presence of gestures increases the perception
of the friendliness of a virtual agent. Using video analysis, Nguyen et
al. [48] divided hand gestures into two categories: open gestures and
closed gestures. These results show that open gestures are perceived
as more friendly, and closed gestures are perceived as less friendly.
Based on these results, we connect the hand gestures mhand to three
levels of friendliness ( f ∈ [0, 1]):

mhand =






absent,
closed,
open,

if f ≤ 0.33,
if 0.33 ≥ f < 0.67,
if f ≥ 0.67.

(3)

Figure 3: Gait Visualizations: We present sample visualizations of
three gaits from a publicly-available, motion-captured gait dataset
used for our user-study. We asked the participants to rate each gait
video on a 7-point scale for a friendliness measure (Section 4.1.3).
Based on the responses to 49 gaits from participants, we designed a
data-driven model of friendliness and gaits.

where j is the gait ID, item is one of the items of the friendliness
measure, and k is the participant ID. We evaluated the reliability
of the measure by computing Cronbach’s α. We obtained a value
of α = 0.922 indicating that the seven components used for the
friendliness measure are reliable. Since social perception is affected
by the gender of the observer [14, 23, 35], we performed a t-test for
differences between the responses by male and female participants.
We observed that the gender of the participant did not affect the
responses signiﬁcantly (t = −0.735, p = 0.466).

We aggregated the participant responses to each gait g j and ob-

tained the average response to each item r j,item as follows:

r j,item =

nk
k=1 rk
∑
nk

j,item

(1)

We compute a friendliness value f j by aggregating the average
responses to all items:

f j =

∑item r j,item
7

(2)

We normalize the value of f j to a range [0, 1] where 1 represents
very high friendliness and 0 represents very low friendliness.

Using the results of this perception study, we obtained a perceived
friendliness value f j for each gait in our dataset g j. We refer to this
mapping as the friendliness model of gaits.

These hand gestures include waving, folding of arms, etc. We also
include appropriate head gestures (e.g., nodding and shaking of the
head) for the interaction of our FVA with the user. We connect these
head gestures mhead to high and low friendliness( f ∈ [0, 1]):

mhead =

(cid:40)

absent,
present,

if f < 0.5,
if f ≥ 0.5.

(4)

4.3 Friendliness Model for Gazing
According to previous research, maintaining eye contact is associ-
ated with friendliness [48]. We control the gazing of the FVA such
that the eye contact between the user and the FVA is maintained.
This can be computed using visibility computations. In particular,
we deﬁne the boolean variable ξ f based on the value of friendliness
as follows:

ξ f =

(cid:40)
0
1

if f < 0.5,
if f ≥ 0.5,

(5)

where 0 represents eye-contact being absent and 1 represents eye-
contact being maintained.

4.4 Overall Friendliness Model
We combine these three friendliness models of gaits (Equation 2),
gestures (Equation 4), and gazing (Equation 5) derived using a data-
driven approach and psychological characterization using a BFSM.
The combined model, after combining and computing the set of
gestures M (mhand, mhead, and ξ f ) and gait G is referred to as the
Friendliness Model, which provides appropriate gait, head gesture,
hand gesture, and gazing behaviors according to a given friendliness
level.

4.5 Web-based Validation Study
We conducted a web-based validation study to evaluate our model.
This study aimed to validate whether our Friendliness Model was
able to model the friendliness of virtual agents (FVA) correctly.

Figure 4: Waving Gestures: We generated videos of virtual agents
with nonverbal characteristics corresponding to varying levels of friend-
liness as predicted by our Friendliness Model. A closed gesture
corresponds to a lower friendliness level, whereas an open gesture
corresponds to a higher friendliness level. We performed a web-based
validation study to evaluate our model using these videos.

4.5.1 Virtual Agents

We generated virtual agents with varying non-verbal cues that are
modeled using our friendliness model. The virtual agents were
visualized with a default male 3D model generated using Adobe
Fuse software, which was rigged with a hierarchical skeleton using
Adobe Mixamo. Figure 4 provides a sample visualization of the
virtual agents generated for this study.

4.5.2 Nonverbal Movement Characteristics

For this study, we generated videos of virtual agents with nonverbal
characteristics simulated according to the following scenarios:

• Walking: This scenario had three videos of the virtual agent
walking with three different gaits corresponding to friendliness
values flow = 0.2, fmedium = 0.5, and fhigh = 0.9.

• Waving: This scenario had three videos of the virtual agent
performing a hand waving gesture with three levels of openness
of the gesture.

• Nodding: This scenario included a video consisting of two
agents standing side-by-side and answering “yes” to a ques-
tion. One of the agents performed a nodding head gesture
(corresponding to friendliness value f ≥ 0.5), while the other
agent did not perform any head gesture (corresponding to
friendliness value f < 0.5).

• Shaking: This scenario included a video consisting of two
agents standing side-by-side and answering “no” to a question.
One of the agents performed a head shaking gesture (corre-
sponding to friendliness value f ≥ 0.5), while the other agent
did not perform any head gesture (corresponding to friendli-
ness value f < 0.5).

• Gazing: This scenario had a video consisting of two agents
standing idly side-by-side. One of the agents maintained
eye-contact with the user (corresponding to friendliness value
f ≥ 0.5), while the other agent did not maintain eye-contact
(corresponding to friendliness value f < 0.5).

4.5.3 Friendliness Measure

We again used the standard friendliness measure (Section 3.2).

Figure 5: FVA Generation: We highlight our approach to generating a
FVA in an AR environment. Our approach uses non-verbal movement
characteristics of gaits, gestures, and gazing to convey friendliness.
Based on the state-of-the-environment, these features are used to
generate the movement of the FVA using a BFSM. We highlight the
initialization steps on the left and various components of our runtime
system on the right. The BFSM is used to compute each movement
cue, which is ﬁnally used to update the various joint positions for
each FVA. The FVA’s movements are visualized in an AR device
(e.g., Microsoft HoloLens) using a 3D human model represented
using a mesh and a hierarchical joint-based representation. We use
3D models corresponding to friends and celebrities to evaluate our
approach.

4.5.4 Participants

¯age = 38.82) on
We recruited 29 participants (14 female, 15 male,
Amazon Mechanical Turk. We presented the videos of the resulting
virtual agents to participants in a randomized order. Participants
rated each virtual agent on the standard friendliness measure. There-
fore, for each virtual agent, we obtained 29 responses.

4.5.5 Results

For each virtual agent, we aggregated the participant responses and
obtained friendliness value f ∈ [0, 1] using the method described in
Section 4.1.4. We performed a t-test for differences between the
responses by male and female participants. We observed that the
gender of the participant did not affect the responses signiﬁcantly
(t = −1.378, p = 0.184).

We present the results of this study in Table 1. The results of this
study support that our model of friendliness and nonverbal cues can
model the friendliness of virtual agents.

5 FRIENDLY VIRTUAL AGENTS

In this section, we use our Friendliness Model to generate FVAs.
We describe the algorithm to generate movements corresponding to
gaits, gestures, and gazing to make an agent appear friendlier in an
AR environment.

5.1 Movement Characteristics Generation

We provide an overview of our end-to-end approach to simulating
various movements of an FVA in Figure 5. At the start of the
simulation, the environment state and a BFSM are initialized based
on the user input and the intended tasks. We use a 3D human model
for the representation of the FVA. This model is rigged using an
automatic rigging software and a hierarchical skeleton is associated
with appropriate joint values.

At runtime, we update the BFSM state according to the state of
the environment and whether the FVA has completed the assigned
tasks. Based on the updated state, a global planning step is used to
compute the next intermediate goal position and conﬁguration for

Virtual Agent
Gait 1
Gait 2
Gait 3
Waving 1
Waving 2
Waving 3
Nodding 1
Nodding 2
Shaking 1
Shaking 2
Gazing 1
Gazing 2

Description
Corresponding to flow
Corresponding to fmedium
Corresponding to fhigh
Closed waving
Slightly open waving
Very open waving
No head gesture
Nods head
No head gesture
Shakes head
Maintains eye-contact
Does not maintain eye-contact

f pred
flow = 0.20
fmedium = 0.50
fhigh = 0.90
0.33 ≤ f < 0.67
f ≥ 0.67
f ≥ 0.67
f < 0.5
f ≥ 0.5
f < 0.5
f ≥ 0.5
f ≥ 0.5
f < 0.5

f obtained
0.39
0.48
0.80
0.48
0.72
0.88
0.23
0.89
0.30
0.64
0.63
0.26

Table 1: Results of Web-based Validation Study: We present the details of the movement characteristics generated and their friendliness values
obtained using the web-based validation study. The results of this study indicate that our Friendliness Model correctly models the friendliness
using nonverbal movement characteristics corresponding to gaits, gestures, and gazing.

the FVA. Next, we compute velocities for local navigation (if it needs
to change location in the real world) and decide gaits, gestures, and
gazing behaviors according to the BFSM state. We then update the
joint positions and angles of the FVA’s hierarchical skeleton using
the computed gaits, gestures, and gazing features. We visualize
the FVA using the selected 3D model in an AR device such as the
Microsoft HoloLens. We describe these components in detail below.

5.2 Behavioral Finite State Machine

We use a BFSM to represent the behavioral state of the FVA and
control its behavior. We assume that the environment consists of
static obstacles and dynamic obstacles. We also assume that the lo-
cations of these static obstacles and their dimensions can be reliably
estimated. Additionally, dynamic obstacles can also be tracked, and
their positions and velocities can be reliably determined at each time
step. These dynamic obstacles may include humans in the real world
(including the user) and virtual agents. During the initialization step,
the environment’s state is initialized with positions and dimensions
of the static obstacles and the current positions and velocities of the
dynamic obstacles. We represent this state of the environment by
E. Using the environment state and the intended task, a BFSM is
initialized and the starting state of the BFSM is computed for a given
task.

At runtime, we update the state of the BFSM based on the envi-
ronment state and determine the FVA’s behavior within the context
of the current task. The BFSM also computes a goal position (cid:126)gi for
each virtual agent. If there are obstacles or other virtual agents in
the environment, we make sure that the resulting movements are
collision-free.

5.3 Global and Local Navigation

If the goal position of virtual agents is different from their current po-
sition, then a navigation algorithm is used to compute the trajectory
to the new position. We utilize the multi-agent simulation frame-
work, Menge [18], to implement our local navigation algorithm.
In this framework, a global navigation step breaks down the goal
positions into intermediate goals that avoid collisions with the static
obstacles in the environment. Moreover, a local navigation step
provides collision-free navigation to the intermediate goals while
avoiding collisions with dynamic obstacles, which include other vir-
tual agents and users’ avatars, using a reciprocal collision avoidance
approach. This computes a trajectory in the 2D plane. We ensure
that no collisions are introduced due to other joint movements.

5.4 Gait Generation

When the agent is walking towards its goal position, as determined
by the BFSM and the local navigation algorithm, its walking style

is modeled using its gait gdes. Based on the input friendliness value
fdes, we use the Friendliness Model to obtain the gait gdes from the
gait dataset G as follows:

gdes = g j | j =

n
min
j=1

abs( f j − fdes) ∧ g j ∈ G,

(6)

where n is the number of gaits in G and abs(·) represents the absolute
value. This way we ensure that the gait of the FVA has the desired
friendliness based on our model as presented in Section 4.1.

5.5 Gestures
We associate the BFSM state with gestures based on a mapping
GE : I → M, where M represents a set of gestures m j ( j = 1...n)
and I represents the set of BFSM states. This mapping is based
on the BFSM context and on the use of open gestures to convey a
high level of friendliness. For example, the FVA performs a waving
gesture when the FVA exits the scenario or nods its head while
indicating agreement with the user. Given the appropriate hand
and/or head gestures mhand and mhead, we use the input friendliness
value fdes and the Friendliness Model formulation (Equations 3 and
4) to decide whether to use the open or closed gesture.

5.6 Gazing
In addition to friendliness, maintaining eye-contact or gazing also
depends on the environment state (e.g., eye-contact should not be
maintained while walking away [47]). Therefore, we associate
a BFSM state to decide whether to maintain eye-contact or not
GA : I → ξBFSM where ξBFSM is a boolean variable. We combine
this function with the gazing behavior decided by the Friendliness
Model ξ f (Equation 5) and compute a variable ξ :

ξ = ξ f ∧ ξBFSM,

(7)

where ξ = 0 represents that the eye-contact is absent and ξ = 1
conveys that the eye-contact is being maintained.

We use the FVA’s 3D model to maintain eye-contact during a
movement or task. Speciﬁcally, we manipulate the ﬂexion and
rotation angles of the FVA’s neck joint (Figure 6). We use the 3D
positions of the user’s eye (represented by the rendering camera,
(cid:126)pc)) and the position of the FVA ((cid:126)pFVA) to compute the ﬂexion θ f
and rotation θr angles:

θ f = asin

θr = asin

(cid:16) (cid:126)pc,z −(cid:126)pFVA,z
||(cid:126)pc −(cid:126)pFVA||
(cid:16)(cid:126)pc,x −(cid:126)pFVA,x
||(cid:126)pc −(cid:126)pFVA||

(cid:17)
,

(cid:17)
.

(8)

(9)

• Default: A virtual agent with a default gait (friendliness value
of f = 0.52) and with gestures and gazing features absent. We
refer to this agent as the Default agent in the rest of this section.

• FVA: A virtual agent generated using our Friendliness Model.
We used a gait with friendliness value of f = 0.97. The agent
performed appropriate gestures, including head nodding and
waving. The agent also maintained eye-contact with the partic-
ipant (represented by the rendering camera).

Based on these two 3D models and two methods, we obtained four
variations of virtual agents in our AR environment: DefaultRyan,
FVARyan, DefaultJohn, FVAJohn.

6.4 Study Design
To compare the FVA with the Default agent, we wanted to let the
participants interact with two types of agents directly. Therefore, we
used a within-subjects design where each participant interacted with
all four variations of the virtual agents. We presented the virtual
agents in a randomized order to account for the order effects.

6.5 Procedure
Our experiment and evaluation were conducted in a laboratory set-
ting. After entering the laboratory, the participants were informed
about the study and the procedure. After consenting to participate in
the study, the participants sat down in a chair and wore the Microsoft
HoloLens HMD. We used a physical room-like experiment with an
area of 4.0m × 4.0m. There was a door in front of the participant’s
chair that led to another room, referred to as the “adjacent room” in
the rest of the paper.

Each participant performed four sessions corresponding to the
four virtual agents in a randomized order.
In each session, the
participants and the agent interacted as part of a scripted pseudo-
real story to perform some tasks based on the participant’s verbal
commands. This story was designed based on previously used
methods to evaluate the conﬁdence and social presence of virtual
agents in an AR environment [31]. The participants were provided
with instructions about how to progress through the story using
an iPad. The iPad also served as an interface for answering the
questionnaire for the users.

6.6 Interaction Scenario
The main story started with an introduction stage, where the vir-
tual agent introduced itself as the “lab assistant” who will help the
participant conduct an experiment. In this stage, the virtual agents
FVARyan and FVAJohn maintained eye-contact with the participants,
whereas DefaultRyan and DefaultJohn did not maintain eye contact.
This helped us evaluate the beneﬁts of gazing.

After the introduction stage, we begin the main story involving
the participant asking the virtual agent (lab assistant) to perform
some tasks in the adjacent room. Participants performed seven
tasks per session related to the virtual agent’s awareness of the
environment (three tasks) and its inﬂuence on the environment (four
tasks). We list the tasks in Table 2. The awareness tasks (A1, A2,
and A3) are related to the agent’s ability to sense the real world.
Speciﬁcally, they involve the agent’s ability to see, hear, and feel
the real physical world. These abilities are analogous to humans’
natural abilities to sense the world around them. For the virtual
agents, these abilities can be realized with cameras, microphones,
and thermometers, respectively.

The inﬂuence tasks (I1, I2, I3, and I4) are related to the virtual
agent’s ability to inﬂuence the real world. Speciﬁcally, they in-
volve the agent’s abilities in terms of physical, social, social critical,
and digital inﬂuence. These abilities can be realized by devices
such as smart-doors [44] and speakers. In our experiment, we did
not implement the actual functionality and used pre-deﬁned agent
responses.

Figure 6: Gazing Cues: Friendliness can be conveyed using non-
verbal cues associated with gazing. We model gazing features by
computing the neck ﬂexion and rotation angles such that the FVA
maintains eye-contact with the user (represented by the rendering
camera, (cid:126)pc).

We can also check the line-of-sight between the agent and the user
using visibility queries. For this computation, we assume that the
FVA is facing the x-axis and the z-axis points vertically up. Other
orientations of the FVA can be similarly modeled by adding a coor-
dinate transform in the computation.

6 RESULTS AND AR VALIDATION STUDY

In this section, we describe the implementation of FVA in an AR
environment using a Microsoft HoloLens. We also present the details
of our validation study conducted in an AR scenario to evaluate the
beneﬁts of FVA in terms of social presence.

Our algorithm is implemented on a Windows 10 Desktop PC
with an Intel Core i7-7820HK CPU at 2.90 GHz, Nvidia GeForce
TitanX graphics card, and 16 GB of RAM. All the behavior modules
run on the CPU, and we use the NVIDIA GPU for rendering. In
practice, our system can render virtual agents at interactive rates
of ~70 FPS. Furthermore, we can handle a few tens of agents at
interactive rates (i.e. at frame rates more than 30 FPS). As a user
walks around the AR environment or performs the tasks, we control
the friendliness of IVAs using our approach based on their gaits,
gestures, and gazing. To evaluate the perceptual beneﬁts, we also
conducted an AR Validation study.

6.1 Experiment Goals

The goal of this experiment was to evaluate the impact of our FVAs
in terms of users’ sense of social presence with and their conﬁdence
in the FVA within an AR environment.

6.2 Participants

Based on prior studies [31] and our initial pilot tests, we decided
to recruit 20 participants, which proved to be sufﬁcient to show
signiﬁcant effects in our experiment. We recruited 10 female and
10 male participants for our experiment ( ¯age = 27.75) from a uni-
versity community. All the participants had a correct or corrected-
to-normal vision. Three participants wore glasses during the experi-
ment. None of the participants reported any history of discomfort
with the HoloLens.

6.3 Virtual Agents

For this experiment, we used two types of 3D models to represent
the virtual agents. One of the models, Ryan, was a commercially-
available 3D model of a celebrity. The other model, John, was
designed and rigged using Adobe Fuse and Adobe Mixamo. We used
two different models to account for variation in appearance. Previous
research suggests that females appear friendlier than males [2]. We
control this gender effect by conducting the study with only male
avatars. We generated virtual agents using two methods:

Task Description
See
A1

A2

A3

I1

I2

I3

I4

Hear

Feel

Physical

Social

Social
Critical
Digital

Participant Command
Please check if anyone is in the adja-
cent room.
Please check if it is quiet enough to
perform the experiment.
Please check if the temperature is high
enough to conduct the experiment.
Please close the adjacent room’s other
entrance.
Please tell someone that the experi-
ment will end in 15 minutes.
Please tell someone that I am not feel-
ing well.
Please turn off the audio and video
recording in the adjacent room.

Agent Acceptance Response
Okay! I am checking if anyone is in the
adjacent room right now.
Okay! I am checking if it is quiet enough
to perform the experiment.
Okay! I am checking if the temperature is
high enough to conduct the experiment.
Okay! I am closing the adjacent room’s
other entrance.
Okay! I am telling someone that the exper-
iment will end in 15 minutes.
Okay! I am telling someone that you are
not feeling well.
Okay! I am turning off the audio and video
recording in the adjacent room.

Agent Completion Response
There are a few people in the ad-
jacent room.
It is quiet enough to perform the
experiment.
The temperature is high enough to
conduct the experiment.
I closed the adjacent room’s other
entrance.
I told someone that the experi-
ment will end in 15 minutes.
I told someone that you are not
feeling well.
I turned off the audio and video
recording in the adjacent room.

Table 2: Tasks Performed in Our AR Validation Study: Participants in an AR environment used a Microsoft HoloLens. Each participant was
asked to give commands to the virtual agent to perform three awareness tasks and four inﬂuence tasks. The awareness tasks (A1, A2, and
A3) were related to the agent’s ability to sense the real world whereas the inﬂuence tasks were (I1, I2, I3, and I4) were related to the agent’s
ability to inﬂuence it. In each task, after the participant gave the command, the agent responded with an acceptance response and proceeded to
perform the task. After completing the task, the agent provided the completion response. After each task, the participant answered a question
that measured the participant’s conﬁdence in the virtual agent’s ability to complete the task. After the completion of the last task, the agent
responded “Bye Bye” and the simulation ended. The participants then answered a friendliness questionnaire (Section 3.2) and a subset of the
Temple Presence Inventory to measure the social presence.

Within each of the seven tasks, the participant ﬁrst gave a ver-
bal command to the agent according to the instructions provided
on the iPad. To avoid errors arising from speech processing, we
used a human-in-the-loop mechanism where a human operator trig-
gers the agent acceptance response after hearing the participant’s
commands. The agent responded to the participant via text. After
providing the acceptance responses, the agent navigated to the ad-
jacent room and performed the task. To create an impression of
performing the task, the virtual agent stood facing away from the
participant for ﬁve seconds. The agent then walked back and stood
in front of the participant and provided a completion response. In the
case of FVARyan and FVAJohn, the FVA also performed a nodding
gesture while giving the completion response. After receiving the
completion response, participants answered a speciﬁc task-related
item using the iPad, and the agent awaited the next task. After the
completion of the last task, the agent responded “Bye Bye” and the
entire session of the user in the AR environment ended. In the case
of FVARyan and FVAJohn, the FVA also performed a hand waving
gesture accompanying the “Bye Bye” response.

modiﬁed subset of the original TPI questionnaire to measure the
social presence in our AR scenario. Speciﬁcally, we considered the
following subscales:

• Social Presence: How much does the participant feel that the
virtual agent is in the same space as them and how well does
the participant and the virtual agent interact/communicate?

• Spatial presence: How much does the participant feel that the
virtual agent has come to the place where they are co-located
and how much does the participant feels that they can reach
out and touch the virtual agent?

• Social richness: How much does the participant perceive the
virtual agent as sociable, warm, sensitive, personal, or inti-
mate?

• Engagement: How immersive or exciting is the interaction with
the virtual agent so that the participant feels deeply involved
in the interaction?

6.7 Measures
We administered four types of measures: friendliness, awareness,
inﬂuence, and social presence.

6.8 Hypotheses
We propose the following hypotheses:

6.7.1 Friendliness
We again used the standard friendliness measure (Section 3.2).

6.7.2 Awareness and Inﬂuence
After completing each of the awareness tasks (A1, A2, and A3) and
the inﬂuence tasks (I1, I2, I3, and I4), the participants rated their
conﬁdence in the abilities of the agent to complete the task. We
asked questions – “How conﬁdent are you that the agent was able
to ...?” with modiﬁcations according to the speciﬁc task. These
questions were meant to assess the impact of our algorithms on the
participants’ conﬁdence in the abilities of the agent based on the
participants’ immediate reactions to the virtual agents.

6.7.3 Social Presence
For each of the four virtual agents, after completing the seven tasks,
the participants answered a subset of the Temple Presence Inventory
(TPI) [41]. TPI is a questionnaire designed to assess co-presence and
social presence with virtual agents. For our task, we use a slightly

• H1: FVA will appear friendlier to the participants compared to

the Default agent.

• H2: Participants will exhibit more conﬁdence in the FVA’s
awareness of the real world compared to the Default agent.

• H3: Participants will exhibit more conﬁdence in the FVA’s
ability to inﬂuence the real world compared to the Default
agent.

• H4: Participants will feel a stronger sense of social presence

with the FVA compared to the Default agent.

6.9 Results
We chose a familiar celebrity character (Ryan) and a default char-
acter (John) because familiarity affects friendliness [21]. Our ﬁnd-
ings corroborate these psychological ﬁndings (mean friendliness
for John = 4.921, Ryan = 5.179, p = 0.026). For further analysis,
we combined participant responses to Ryan and John to show the

Friendliness
Awareness
Inﬂuence
Social Presence
Spatial Presence
Social Richness
Engagement

Default

FVA

Mean
4.707
5.075
4.938
4.006
3.115
4.346
4.266

SD
1.216
1.239
1.149
1.073
0.723
1.232
1.443

Mean
5.050
5.308
5.056
4.247
3.440
4.729
4.446

SD
0.915
1.082
1.136
1.015
1.045
0.969
1.476

Table 3: Mean Responses to Measures: We present the partici-
pants’ average responses to each of the measures for Default and
FVA agents. FVA agents have higher means across all the measures
compared to the Default agents.

Friendliness
Awareness
Inﬂuence
Social Presence
Spatial Presence
Social Richness
Engagement

χ 2
4.000
0.030
0.118
4.000
6.125
2.189
1.485

p
0.046
0.862
0.732
0.046
0.013
0.139
0.223

Table 4: Friedman Test: We present the χ 2 and p-values for the
Friedman test performed for the Default vs. FVA comparison for
different measures and subscales.

contribution of our friendliness algorithm, which is agnostic to the
familiarity with the visual appearance.

We performed a t-test for differences between the responses by
male and female participants. We observed that the gender of the par-
ticipant did not affect the responses signiﬁcantly (t = −0.196, p =
0.845).

We present average participant responses for the four measures
(including subscales) for the Default and the FVA agents in Table 3.
Since the participant questionnaire responses are of an ordinal data
type, we used non-parametric Friedman tests to compare between re-
sponses for the two types of virtual agents. For this test, the method
used to generate the virtual agent (Default vs. FVA) is the indepen-
dent variable, and the participant response is the dependent variable.
We present the test statistic χ 2 and the p-value p for this test in Ta-
ble 4. The results of this test reveal signiﬁcant differences between
the two methods for friendliness, social, and spatial presence.

6.10 Discussion
We now discuss these results in more details.

6.10.1 Friendliness
Our hypothesis H1 was concerned with the friendliness of FVA in
an AR environment compared to the Default agent. We observed
that there was a statistically signiﬁcant difference between the two
methods for the friendliness comparison (χ 2 = 4.000, p = 0.046)
with FVA reporting a 5.71% higher mean compared to the Default
agent. These results support the hypothesis H1.

6.10.2 Awareness and Inﬂuence
Our hypothesis H2 was concerned with the conﬁdence in the abilities
of the FVA to sense the real world compared to the Default agent. We
observed that participants reported a 3.89% higher mean compared
to the default agent, however this difference was not signiﬁcant
(χ 2 = 0.030, p = 0.862).

Our hypothesis H3 was concerned with the conﬁdence in the
abilities of FVA to inﬂuence the real world compared to the Default
agent. We observed that participants reported a 1.98% higher mean

compared to the default agent, however this difference was not
signiﬁcant (χ 2 = 0.118, p = 0.732).

These results indicate that our Friendliness Model increases the
users’ conﬁdence in the virtual agent’s abilities to sense and in-
ﬂuence the real world. However, the results did not signiﬁcantly
support hypotheses H2 and H3, possibly because these questions
also attempted to evaluate the competence, which is an independent
dimension of social cognition and is not affected by friendliness [21].

6.10.3 Social Presence
The statistically signiﬁcant differences (χ 2 = 4.000, p = 0.046) be-
tween the two types of agents, FVA and Default, for social presence
support our hypothesis H4 that the participants indeed feel a stronger
sense of social presence with the FVA compared to the Default agent.
We also observed statistically signiﬁcant improvement in the spa-
tial presence (χ 2 = 6.125, p = 0.013). However, the improvement
was not signiﬁcant for social richness and engagement subscales.
In optional feedback, the participants reported that they sometimes
forgot that the FVA was a virtual agent and they wanted to wave
back when the FVA performed the waving gesture.

7 CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS, AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we presented a novel Friendliness Model based on
three non-verbal movement characteristics corresponding to gaits,
gestures, and gazing. Our data-driven model was generated with a
user study, and we validated its beneﬁts using a web-based study.
Based on our model, we present algorithms to interactively generate
the movement characteristics of a virtual agent (FVA) to make it ap-
pear friendly. We performed an extensive AR validation study using
Microsoft HoloLens to evaluate the beneﬁts of our model. Our study
results indicate that FVAs cause a statistically signiﬁcant increase
in the sense of social presence in an AR environment. Our study
results indicate that FVAs cause a statistically signiﬁcant increase
in the sense of social and spatial presence in an AR environment
(5.42% improvement in the mean participant response). Our work
has both methodological and theoretical implications for psychol-
ogy research, especially in terms of evaluating social psychological
methods. Our study uses multiple dynamic, naturalistic channels
of stimuli to reveal the integration of multiple social cues on social
judgments (i.e. friendliness) and explores the basic psychological
processes used by the people to perceive friendliness in others.

Our approach has some limitations. In our experiment, we did
not implement the actual functionality for sensing and inﬂuencing
the environment and used pre-deﬁned agent responses. Additionally,
we only consider a subset of non-verbal and movement cues to con-
trol the behavior of a virtual agent. We used a pre-determined set
of gestures and a mapping between BFSM states and the gestures.
Many other components also govern the perception of friendliness
and warmth of virtual agents, including speech, facial expressions,
and other characteristics of body language as well as cultural differ-
ence. Age and gender have been shown to affect the perception of
friendliness [2, 14, 26], however in the AR validation study we did
not consider these variations.

There are many avenues for future work in addition to overcom-
ing these limitations. Learning approaches have been developed
for character motion synthesis [28, 29] and speech-based automatic
gesture generation [20, 27]. In the future, we want to combine our
approach with these deep learning- and controller-based methods.
We want to extend our approach to generate gestures with desired
levels of friendliness automatically based on these learning-based
approaches. Non-verbal movement cues also affect other dimensions
of interpersonal trust and we would like to evaluate them. We also
want to provide virtual agents with sensing and inﬂuencing capa-
bilities using cameras, microphones, thermometers, smart-doors,
speakers, etc. We want to develop an approach to designing virtual
agents for AR that appear friendly as well as competent.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research is supported in part by ARO grant W911NF-19-1-
0069, Alibaba Innovative Research (AIR) program and Intel.

REFERENCES

[1] Cmu graphics lab motion capture database. http://mocap.cs.cmu.

edu/, 2018.

[2] A. E. Abele. The dynamics of masculine-agentic and feminine-
communal traits: ﬁndings from a prospective study. Journal of person-
ality and social psychology, 85(4):768, 2003.

[3] J. Amores, X. Benavides, M. Comin, A. Fuste, P. Pla, and D. Miralles.
Smart avatars: using avatars to interact with objects. In Proceedings of
ACM CHI, pp. 1–3, 2012.

[4] M. Argyle. Bodily Communication. 1998.
[5] M. Argyle, L. Lefebvre, and M. Cook. The meaning of ﬁve patterns of
gaze. European journal of social psychology, 4(2):125–136, 1974.
[6] J. N. Bailenson, A. C. Beall, J. Blascovich, M. Raimundo, and M. Weis-
buch. Intelligent agents who wear your face: Users reactions to the
virtual self. In International Workshop on Intelligent Virtual Agents,
pp. 86–99. Springer, 2001.

[7] N. Bee, C. Pollock, E. Andr´e, and M. Walker. Bossy or wimpy: ex-
pressing social dominance by combining gaze and linguistic behaviors.
In International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents, pp. 265–271.
Springer, 2010.

[8] G. Bente, S. R¨uggenberg, N. C. Kr¨amer, and F. Eschenburg. Avatar-
mediated networking: Increasing social presence and interpersonal
trust in net-based collaborations. Human communication research,
34(2):287–318, 2008.

[9] A. Bera, T. Randhavane, E. Kubin, H. Shaik, K. Gray, and D. Manocha.
Data-driven modeling of group entitativity in virtual environments. In
Proceedings of the 24th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software
and Technology, p. 31. ACM, 2018.

[10] A. Bera, T. Randhavane, R. Prinja, K. Kapsaskis, A. Wang, K. Gray,
and D. Manocha. The emotionally intelligent robot: Improving social
navigation in crowded environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03217,
2019.

[11] K. Bergmann, F. Eyssel, and S. Kopp. A second chance to make a ﬁrst
impression? how appearance and nonverbal behavior affect perceived
warmth and competence of virtual agents over time. In International
Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents, pp. 126–138. Springer, 2012.
[12] R.-J. Beun, E. De Vos, and C. Witteman. Embodied conversational
agents: effects on memory performance and anthropomorphisation.
In International Workshop on Intelligent Virtual Agents, pp. 315–319.
Springer, 2003.

[13] A. Cafaro, H. H. Vilhj´almsson, T. Bickmore, D. Heylen, K. R.
J´ohannsd´ottir, and G. S. Valgar¨osson. First impressions: Users judg-
ments of virtual agents personality and interpersonal attitude in ﬁrst
encounters. In International conference on intelligent virtual agents,
pp. 67–80. Springer, 2012.

[14] L. L. Carli, S. J. LaFleur, and C. C. Loeber. Nonverbal behavior,
gender, and inﬂuence. Journal of personality and social psychology,
68(6):1030, 1995.

[15] J. Chuah, A. Robb, C. White, A. Wendling, S. Lampotang, R. Kopper,
and B. Lok. Exploring agent physicality and social presence for medical
team training. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments,
22:141–170, 08 2013. doi: 10.1162/PRES a 00145

[16] A. J. Cuddy, S. T. Fiske, and P. Glick. Warmth and competence as
universal dimensions of social perception: The stereotype content
model and the bias map. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
40:61–149, 2008.

[17] A. J. Cuddy, P. Glick, and A. Beninger. The dynamics of warmth and
competence judgments, and their outcomes in organizations. Research
in organizational behavior, 31:73–98, 2011.

[18] S. Curtis, A. Best, and D. Manocha. Menge: A modular framework for
simulating crowd movement. Collective Dynamics, 1:1–40, 2016.
[19] J. Duchan, M. Maxwell, and D. Kovarsky. Evaluating competence in
the course of everyday interaction. In D. Kovarsky, J. Duchan, and
M. Maxwell, eds., Constructing (in)competence, chap. 1, pp. 3–26.
Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, 1999.

[20] Y. Ferstl and R. McDonnell. Investigating the use of recurrent motion
modelling for speech gesture generation. In Proceedings of the 18th In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents, IVA 2018, Sydney,
NSW, Australia, November 05-08, 2018, pp. 93–98, 2018.

[21] S. T. Fiske, A. J. Cuddy, and P. Glick. Universal dimensions of social
cognition: Warmth and competence. Trends in cognitive sciences,
11(2):77–83, 2007.

[22] S. T. Fiske, A. J. C. Cuddy, P. Glick, and J. Xu. Journal of Personality

and Social Psychology, 82(6):878–902, 2002.

[23] J. Forlizzi, J. Zimmerman, V. Mancuso, and S. Kwak. How interface
agents affect interaction between humans and computers. In Proceed-
ings of the 2007 conference on Designing pleasurable products and
interfaces, pp. 209–221. ACM, 2007.

[24] J. Fraser, I. Papaioannou, and O. Lemon. Spoken conversational ai
in video games–emotional dialogue management increases user en-
gagement. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on
Intelligent Virtual Agents, pp. 179–184. ACM, 2018.

[25] M. Gerhard, D. J. Moore, and D. J. Hobbs. Continuous presence
in collaborative virtual environments: Towards a hybrid avatar-agent
model for user representation. In International Workshop on Intelligent
Virtual Agents, pp. 137–155. Springer, 2001.

[26] R. G. Harper. Power, dominance, and nonverbal behavior: An overview.
In Power, dominance, and nonverbal behavior, pp. 29–48. Springer,
1985.

[27] D. Hasegawa, N. Kaneko, S. Shirakawa, H. Sakuta, and K. Sumi.
Evaluation of speech-to-gesture generation using bi-directional lstm
In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on
network.
Intelligent Virtual Agents, pp. 79–86. ACM, 2018.

[28] D. Holden, T. Komura, and J. Saito. Phase-functioned neural networks
for character control. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 36(4):42,
2017.

[29] D. Holden, J. Saito, and T. Komura. A deep learning framework for
character motion synthesis and editing. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 35(4):138, 2016.

[30] C.-M. Huang, T. Iio, S. Satake, and T. Kanda. Modeling and controlling
friendliness for an interactive museum robot. In Robotics: Science and
Systems, 2014.

[31] K. Kim, L. Boelling, S. Haesler, J. Bailenson, G. Bruder, and G. F.
Welch. Does a digital assistant need a body? the inﬂuence of visual
embodiment and social behavior on the perception of intelligent virtual
agents in ar. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality (ISMAR), pp. 105–114. IEEE, 2018.

[32] K. Kim, G. Bruder, and G. Welch. Exploring the effects of observed
physicality conﬂicts on real-virtual human interaction in augmented
reality. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality
Software and Technology, p. 31. ACM, 2017.

[33] K. Kim and G. Welch. Maintaining and enhancing human-surrogate
presence in augmented reality. In 2015 IEEE International Symposium
on Mixed and Augmented Reality Workshops, pp. 15–19. IEEE, 2015.
[34] T. Koda, T. Hirano, and T. Ishioh. Development and perception evalua-
tion of culture-speciﬁc gaze behaviors of virtual agents. In International
Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents, pp. 213–222. Springer, 2017.
[35] N. C. Kr¨amer, B. Karacora, G. Lucas, M. Dehghani, G. R¨uther, and
J. Gratch. Closing the gender gap in stem with friendly male instruc-
tors? on the effects of rapport behavior and gender of a virtual agent in
an instructional interaction. Computers & Education, 99:1–13, 2016.
[36] R. Laban and F. C. Lawrence. Effort: economy of human movement.

Macdonald & Evans, 1979.

[37] M. Lee, K. Kim, S. Daher, A. Raij, R. Schubert, J. Bailenson, and
G. Welch. The wobbly table: Increased social presence via subtle
In 2016 IEEE Virtual
incidental movement of a real-virtual table.
Reality (VR), pp. 11–17. IEEE, 2016.

[38] C. Li, T. Androulakaki, A. Y. Gao, F. Yang, H. Saikia, C. Peters, and
G. Skantze. Effects of posture and embodiment on social distance in
human-agent interaction in mixed reality. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents, pp. 191–196.
ACM, 2018.

[39] H. Li. Photorealistic facial digitization and manipulation: technical
perspective. Communications of the ACM, 62(1):95–95, 2018.
[40] S. Lin, Y. Chen, Y.-K. Lai, R. R. Martin, and Z.-Q. Cheng. Fast capture

of textured full-body avatar with rgb-d cameras. The Visual Computer,
32(6-8):681–691, 2016.

[41] M. Lombard, T. B. Ditton, and L. Weinstein. Measuring presence: The
temple presence inventory. In In International Workshop on Presence,
p. 115, 2009.

[42] S. Lombardi, J. Saragih, T. Simon, and Y. Sheikh. Deep appearance
models for face rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
37(4):68, 2018.

[43] J. Montepare and L. Zebrowitz-McArthur.

Impressions of people
created by age-related qualities of their gaits. Journal of personality
and social psychology, 55:547–56, 11 1988. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.
55.4.547

[44] M. E. Morris, B. Adair, K. Miller, E. Ozanne, R. Hansen, A. J. Pearce,
N. Santamaria, L. Viega, M. Long, and C. M. Said. Smart-home
technologies to assist older people to live well at home. Journal of
aging science, 1(1):1–9, 2013.

[45] C. Mousas, D. Anastasiou, and O. Spantidi. The effects of appearance
and motion of virtual characters on emotional reactivity. Computers in
Human Behavior, 86:99–108, 2018.

[46] K. Nagano, J. Seo, J. Xing, L. Wei, Z. Li, S. Saito, A. Agarwal, J. Fur-
sund, H. Li, R. Roberts, et al. pagan: real-time avatars using dynamic
textures. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2018 Technical Papers, p. 258. ACM,
2018.

[47] S. Narang, A. Best, T. Randhavane, A. Shapiro, and D. Manocha.
Pedvr: Simulating gaze-based interactions between a real user and
virtual crowds. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM conference on virtual
reality software and technology, pp. 91–100. ACM, 2016.

[48] T.-H. D. Nguyen, E. Carstensdottir, N. Ngo, M. S. El-Nasr, M. Gray,
D. Isaacowitz, and D. Desteno. Modeling warmth and competence in
virtual characters. In International Conference on Intelligent Virtual
Agents, pp. 167–180. Springer, 2015.

[49] A. Normoyle, F. Liu, M. Kapadia, N. I. Badler, and S. J¨org. The effect
of posture and dynamics on the perception of emotion. In Proceedings
of the ACM Symposium on Applied Perception, pp. 91–98. ACM, 2013.
[50] N. Norouzi, K. Kim, J. Hochreiter, M. Lee, S. Daher, G. Bruder, and
G. Welch. A systematic survey of 15 years of user studies published
in the intelligent virtual agents conference. In Proceedings of the 18th
international conference on intelligent virtual agents, pp. 17–22. ACM,
2018.

[51] G. M. O’Hare, A. G. Campbell, J. W. Stafford, and R. Aiken. Nexus:
Behavioural realism in mixed reality scenarios through virtual sensing.
In 18th Annual Conference on Computer Animation and Social Agents
(CASA 2005), Hong Kong, China, October 17-25, 2005, 2005.
[52] T. Randhavane, A. Bera, E. Kubin, A. Wang, K. Gray, and D. Manocha.
Pedestrian dominance modeling for socially-aware robot navigation.
2019 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2019.

[53] T. Randhavane, A. Bera, and D. Manocha. F2fcrowds: Planning agent
movements to enable face-to-face interactions. Presence: Teleoperators
and Virtual Environments, 26(2):228–246, 2017.

[54] M. M. Reece and R. N. Whitman. Expressive movements, warmth, and
verbal reinforcement. The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
64(3):234, 1962.

[55] D. M. Romano, G. Sheppard, J. Hall, A. Miller, and Z. Ma. Basic: A
believable, adaptable socially intelligent character for social presence.
In Proceedings of the 8th Annual International Workshop on Presence,
pp. 287–290. Citeseer, 2005.

[56] P. Rubin. Facebook can make vr avatars look and move exactly like

you, 2019.

[57] J. Tong, J. Zhou, L. Liu, Z. Pan, and H. Yan. Scanning 3d full hu-
man bodies using kinects. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 18(4):643–650, 2012.

[58] C. Youngblut. Experience of presence in virtual environments. Techni-
cal report, Institute For Defense Analyses, Alexandria, VA, 2003.
[59] K. Zibrek, E. Kokkinara, and R. McDonnell. The effect of realistic
appearance of virtual characters in immersive environments-does the
character’s personality play a role? IEEE transactions on visualization
and computer graphics, 24(4):1681–1690, 2018.

