Cometary Chemistry and the Origin of Icy Solar System Bodies, the 
view after Rosetta  

Kathrin Altwegg1, Hans Balsiger1 and Stephen A. Fuselier2,3  

1Space Research and Planetary Sciences, University of Bern, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland 

2

 Space Science Directorate, Space Science and Engineering Division, Southwest Research Institute, 
San Antonio, TX 78238, USA 

3University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA 

Email: altwegg@space.unibe.ch; hans.balsiger@space.unibe.ch; sfuselier@swri.edu  

ORCID Altwegg: 0000-0002-2677-8238 
ORCID Fuselier: 0000-0003-4101-7901 

Keywords : astrochemistry, cometary molecules, interstellar molecules, isotopologues,  
comet 67P/Curyumov-Gerasimenko 

Abstract 

In situ research on cometary chemistry began when measurements from the Giotto mission at comet 
1P/Halley revealed the presence of complex organics in the coma. New telescopes and space 
missions have provided detailed remote and in situ measurements of the composition of cometary 
volatiles. Recently, the Rosetta mission to comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko more than doubled 
the number of parent species and the number of isotopic ratios known in comets. 39 of the 66 parent 
species have also been detected in pre- and proto-stellar clouds, making the similarities of cometary 
ices with pre-stellar material very intriguing. Most isotopic ratios are non-solar. The variations in D/H 
in water between different comets indicate a large range in the protoplanetary disk where comets 
formed. All of these results point to a non-homogeneized protoplanetary disk where comets received 
their material. This diverse origin is in contrast to the Sun, who received its material from the bulk of 
the collapsing cloud. Detection of N2 and Ar in the coma of 67P and the presence of very volatile S2 
point to low formation temperature of 20-30 K of the comet. The xenon isotopic ratios measured in 
67P can explain the long standing question about the origin of the terrestrial atmospheric xenon. 
While we can exclude comets as being the source of the bulk terrestrial water due to their generally 
high D/H, the noble gases in the Earth’ atmosphere are compatible with a cometary delivery. This 
means that the amount of organics delivered by comets may be highly significant. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
1 

Introduction  

Questions about the origin of the matter that makes up our solar system, the formation of planets, 
and finally the emergence of life on Earth are some of the big topics in astrochemistry. By now we 
probably understand the cycle from the diffuse interstellar material to dark molecular clouds and star 
forming regions and finally to protoplanetary disks and planetary systems like our own (see fig. 1). 
The basis of the observable material in the interstellar medium originates from remnants of stars, 
supernovae and neutron star mergers, and gas and dust. This material still preserves the signature of 
its origin through different isotopic ratios of the elements. Already at this stage, chemistry sets in, 
although densities and temperatures are very low. Once the densities become higher in dark clouds, 
chemistry becomes more important, especially chemistry on dust grain surfaces. Thanks to 
observatories like the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) we are now at the stage 
where ongoing formation of protostars and young protoplanetary disks are regularly observed in 
detail. These observations include dust and some of their chemical molecular inventory. ALMA has 
enabled the study of many complex molecules in clouds and disks, revealing an extremely rich 
chemical inventory. At the other end of stellar system evolution, we are making progress in exploring 
the make-up of planets and moons in our own solar system. The questions, however, remain: how 
much of the material we see in our solar system has been inherited from the pre-solar stage, how 
much chemistry was ongoing during the protosolar and protoplanetary disk phase, and how well is 
the material preserved in some of the most primitive bodies in our solar system since their 
formation. Comets are an important link between the planets and moons of today and pre-solar and 
protoplanetary chemistry in clouds and disks.  

In 1950 Fred Whipple (Whipple, 1950) postulated the “dirty snowball”, the idea that comets consist 
of ice and dust. At the same time, Oort (1950) postulated the idea that the comet reservoir is an 
isotropic cloud around, but very far from the Sun. This led to the notion that comets represent some 
of the most primitive material in our solar system, conserving their material from 4.6 billion years 
ago. This notion is still correct, although we now know more about cometary reservoirs, not just Oort 
cloud, but also Kuiper belt / scattered disk and we no longer look at comets as dirty snowballs but 
rather icy dirtballs.  

+ , N2

Research on cometary chemistry started more than 100 years ago with the detection of the optical 
line of CN in the tail of comet 1P/Halley in 1910. By 1986, before the encounters of the Russian VEGA 
spacecraft and the European Giotto mission with comet 1P/Halley, several other species were known 
to exist, mostly radicals and ions like CO+, CN, CH, CO2
+ and NH. The water molecule as such had 
not yet been detected, but the presence of water was inferred from OH. The appearance of comet 
Halley in 1985/86 triggered a huge effort to observe coma composition (refractories and gas) from 
several space missions as well as from ground-based observatories. As expected, water was detected 
by several instruments on Giotto (e.g. Krankowsky, 1986) as well as for the first time from the ground 
(Mumma, 1986). However, it became very clear that the chemistry in comets is much more complex 
than anticipated. Measurements of the Picca sensor on Giotto revealed the existence of molecules 
up to at least mass 100 da (Korth et al., 1986). One of the most intriguing measurements was the D/H 
ratio in water. Two separate measurements from the Giotto mission, one from the Ion Mass 
Spectrometer (IMS, Balsiger et al., 1995), and the other one from the Neutral Mass Spectrometer 
(NMS, Eberhardt et al., 1995) gave almost identical results. Their combined value of ~(3.1 ±0.4)×10-4  
is twice the terrestrial value. This result alone showed clearly that comets must have formed at low 
temperatures and must have conserved their original composition. 

In the subsequent decades, cometary chemistry was pushed forward by a) bigger telescopes and 
space missions (e.g. IRAM30m and Herschel) which opened up new frequency bands with enhanced 
sensitivity and b) the arrival of two bright comets, C/1996 B2 (Hyakutake) and C/1995 O1 (Hale-

2 

 
Bopp). These advances increased the number of detected parent molecules to 27 (e.g. Bockelée-
Morvan et al., 2000; Biver et al., 2002). With the large number of molecules, comparison between 
comets and comet families became feasible. Comets were classified according to their chemical 
diversity (Mumma & Charnley, 2011; Dello Russo et al., 2016). Meanwhile, advances in astrochemical 
modelling and in radio observations of the interstellar material in molecular clouds and star forming 
regions revealed similar molecular abundances for several complex molecules to those of cometary 
coma, hinting at a similar origin (Bockelée-Morvan et al., 2000; Schöier et al., 2002).  

While remote sensing enables comparison of different comets, the observations are biased by the 
presence / absence of molecular transition lines in the frequency bands available and biased by the 
brightness of the comet. Therefore, many more observations exist for Oort cloud comets (OCC’s) 
than for Jupiter family comets (JFC’s), because OCC’s are generally larger and brighter. For example, 
IR observations have determined the chemical composition of 30 comets, but only 9 of these are 
JFC’s (dello Russo et al., 2016). In addition, most observations are done close to perihelion. Except for 
a few very bright comets, it is not possible to observe the coma composition during an extended part 
of the cometary orbit.  

Several space missions encountered comets after Giotto, but all of them were flybys where the 
observation time is very short (Stardust, Deep Impact, EPOXI). None of them had any in situ 
capabilities to explore the cometary coma. With the exception of Stardust which brought back 
refractory material from comet 81P/Wild 2, all of them provided only a snapshot of the cometary 
coma at the time of encounter. Rosetta was the first mission to accompany a comet for a large part 
of its journey around the Sun, measuring the release of gas and dust during the different phases.  As 
a result of this unique mission concept, all major and many minor species including their 
isotopologues were measured as a function of heliocentric distance and as a function of 
latitude/longitude of the comet nucleus.  

Rosetta was able to characterize many features of 67P during its orbit around the Sun. It more than 
doubled the known cometary parent species and added many more isotopic ratios to the cometary 
inventory. Furthermore, these measurements were made with higher precision than previous, 
limited observations, which makes it possible to draw more stringent conclusions about the origin of 
cometary ices and the formation of these icy bodies. That means we have currently quite a number 
of comets where the main and major minor species in the coma are characterized and we have one 
comet where we know the composition in great detail. For 67P, we know all major species, minor 
species down to relative abundances of 10-7  and isotopes, sublimation characteristics, 
heterogeneities in the coma and variations along the orbit of the comet.  

In this paper we focus on the volatile inventory of the cometary ices, as volatiles are most affected by 
chemistry. By analyzing the coma of comets and comparing the findings from Rosetta and previous 
comet observations with observations of the ISM, of pre-solar nebula, star forming regions and 
protoplanetary disks, we try to follow the chemical and physical processes which took place from the 
ISM to comets and finally to the Earth and life. This review is a post-Rosetta update on earlier reviews 
on cometary chemistry ( Mumma & Charnley, 2011; Cochran et al., 2015; Bockelée-Morvan et al., 
2015). 

In the next chapter we give a short overview on the Rosetta mission as many results in the following 
chapters originate from Rosetta/ROSINA measurements.  

2  The Rosetta mission 

Recognizing the importance of comets for the history of our solar system, the European Space 
Agency ESA started planning a big cometary mission already before the launch of Giotto in 1985. As 

3 

 
part of the Horizon 2000 program the cometary mission Rosetta was selected for flight in 1995 
(Glassmeier et al.,2007). The mission goals were  

  Global characterization of the nucleus, determination of dynamic properties, surface 

morphology and composition 

  Chemical, mineralogical and isotopic compositions of volatiles and refractories in a cometary 

nucleus 

  Physical properties and interrelation of volatiles and refractories in a cometary nucleus: 
  Study the development of cometary activity and the processes in the surface layer of the 

nucleus and in the inner coma (dust-gas interaction) 

  Origin of comets, relationship between cometary and interstellar material. Implications for 

the origin of the solar system 

The payload consisted of 11 instruments and a lander, which itself had a payload of 9 miniature 
instruments. Several of the instruments were designed to explore the composition of the nucleus and 
coma, among them specifically the Rosetta Orbiter Sensor for Ion and Neutral Analysis (ROSINA) 
(Balsiger et al., 2007). The scientific goals of ROSINA consisted of determining the elemental, isotopic, 
and molecular composition of the comet’s atmosphere and ionosphere, as well as the temperature 
and bulk velocity of the gas and the homogenous and inhomogeneous reactions of the gas and ions 
in the dusty cometary atmosphere and ionosphere. The target comet after eight years of cruise was 
comet 46P/Wirtanen, a small JFC with just about 1 km diameter However, an Ariane V launch failure 
shortly before the scheduled launch of Rosetta made a launch in January 2003 impossible and 46P 
could no longer be reached. The new target, 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko needed a March 2004 
launch and 3 instead of only 2 Earth flybys, making the mission longer. After passing by Mars and the 
two asteroids Steins and Lutetia, Rosetta finally reached its target in early August 2014 at a 
heliocentric distance of 3.8 au (see figure 2 for the orbit). After a three-month period of close 
inspection of the comet down to 10 km from the surface, the lander Philae was released on 
November 12, 2014. Unfortunately, the harpoons of the lander failed to anchor Philae on the 
nucleus. This led to extended hopping and a final landing on the winter hemisphere. While not all 
science goals of Philae could be achieved due to its unfavorable location and attitude, Philae 
nevertheless worked for 60h sending back invaluable observations.  

Rosetta meanwhile continued to orbit the comet at different distances from the nucleus. As the 
comet became more active closer to the Sun, Rosetta had to draw back to safer distances due to 
interference of cometary dust with the star trackers. At perihelion the Rosetta –nucleus distance was 
~300 km. On the post-perihelion part of the orbit, with heliocentric distances increasing from 1.25 to 
4 au, Rosetta slowly went closer to the comet surface. It reached just a few kilometers from the 
comet in May 2016, and even closer in the last part of the mission, where the minimum distance 
between the spacecraft and the nucleus surface was <2 km. On Sept. 30, 2016, at almost 4 au from 
the Sun, Rosetta finally soft-landed on the nucleus, ending the mission as communication was no 
longer possible. 

2.1  Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko  
The target comet of the Rosetta mission, comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko is a Jupiter family 
comet with a period of 6.45 y, an aphelion distance of 5.6829 au and a perihelion distance of 
1.2432 au. It was detected in 1969 by S. Gerasimenko and K. Churyumov. It acquired its current orbit 
in 1959 after a close encounter with Jupiter, but is believed to have been in the inner solar system 
with a perihelion distance < 5 au for several thousand years (Maquet, 2015). However, due to many 
close encounters with Jupiter its history was chaotic, that means no firm orbital parameters exist 
before 1923 when it had an earlier encounter with Jupiter. 

4 

 
 
 
A picture of 67P is shown in fig. 3. Its largest dimension is 4.1 km. The gravitational point mass is GM 
= 666.2 ± 0.2 m3s-2, with a mass m = (9982 ± 3) × 109 kg upon arrival at the comet. The average bulk 
density of the nucleus is 533 ± 6 kgm-3 (Pätzold et al., 2016). The nucleus has a porosity of 70-80%. 
The bi-lobed shape could be a relatively recent feature (Jutzi et al., 2017) whereby the structure can 
be explained by low-velocity collisions, but there are also authors who claim that the shape and 
morphology of 67P are compatible with a primordial rubble pile (Davidsson et al., 2016). The bi-lobed 
shape and the low albedo of 5.9 ± 0.2% at 550 nm (Sierks et al., 2015) are quite typical for the comets 
which have been visited previously by spacecraft.  
The rotation axis is tilted by 52° with a right ascension of 69.3° and a declination of 64.1° (Sierks et 
al., 2015). Due to non-gravitational forces, its spin period changed. It was 12.4h on arrival of Rosetta 
and was just above 12h at the end of the mission two years later.  
The peculiar shape coupled with the tilted spin axis makes for two very different hemispheres and 
complicated insolation and dynamics. The northern hemisphere experiences a long (~5.5 y), but cold 
summer through aphelion, while the southern hemisphere has a short (~10 months), but hot summer 
through perihelion. The orbit is not symmetric about perihelion, with the inbound equinox in May 
2015 at ~1.7 au and the outbound equinox in March 2016 at 2.7 au. The two hemispheres show very 
different morphology. While the north is dust covered with a rough morphology, the fine dust is 
mostly lacking in the south. The southern hemisphere can lose up to 10 m per orbit in active areas 
due to sublimation while the north contributes only about 1/3 to the total mass loss. Self-illumination 
in concave regions enhances the energy input and hence erosion. The early activity observed from 
the neck are probably due to this self-illumination and to material which was transported during the 
previous perihelion passage from the south to the north (Keller et al., 2015).  

2.2  The highly variable coma between 3.8 au inbound through perihelion and 

outbound to 3.8 au 

Volatiles: Not only does the nucleus show morphological heterogeneity, but the coma as well. On 
arrival at the comet in fall 2014, outside of 3 au from the Sun, the coma was quite heterogeneous, 
with water coming mostly from the northern, illuminated hemisphere, while the abundance of CO2 
was much higher over the southern, at that time winter hemisphere (Hässig et al., 2015). CO followed 
neither water nor CO2, but was much more evenly distributed over the nucleus surface (Läuter et al, 
2018). The ratio of most of the observed species in the coma relative to water was higher over the 
southern hemisphere (Le Roy et al., 2015). A similar behavior for water and CO2 has been observed 
for comet Hartley 2 with the EPOXI mission (A’Hearn et al., 2011). Like 67P, Hartley 2 was also bi-
lobed. For Hartley 2, CO2 was responsible for the ejection of dust from the short end of the comet, 
water, which was attributed to water ice grains and fallback material, was coming from the neck. 

The outgassing of 67P was monitored constantly by the ROSINA suite, and very regularly by the 
infrared sensor VIRTIS (Coradini et al., 2007) and the microwave instrument MIRO (Gulkis et al., 
2007). While ROSINA measured local density at the location of the spacecraft, the other two 
instruments derived column densities mostly above the limb. In both cases models are necessary to 
derive production rates. Figure 4 shows some typical periods for the measured local density for the 
four main volatile species in the coma, corrected for the comet – Rosetta distance (1/r2).  
In the first few months of the mission, the activity of the comet increased only slowly although the 
heliocentric distance decreased from 3.8 au to 2.2 au by March 2015. The main species is clearly 
water. The time modulations over a few days are due to the spacecraft position above the nucleus 
(winter vs. summer). A diurnal variation (~12h) is also observed, which is due to the irregular shape 
of the comet as the area facing Rosetta changes with the rotation of the comet. A comparison of the 
production rates derived by the different instruments is found in Hansen et al. (2016). Global 
production rates derived from different instruments (in situ mass spectrometry, infrared, microwave, 
and plasma sensors) agree quite well outside of the perihelion, while during perihelion there is more 

5 

 
 
 
 
scatter of up to a factor 4. This is due to the fact that Rosetta was close to the comet and no 
instrument was observing the entire coma. This therefore needs a lot of modelling. Measurements of 
the water production rate from the LAICA camera on board the micro spacecraft PROCYON using Ly-
Alpha (Shinnaka et al., 2017), which encompass the whole coma, are at the upper limit derived from 
in situ measurements, but still compatible with ROSINA derived production rates. While most of the 
outgassing is explained by illumination driven sublimation, which means that the whole nucleus is 
active, some variations in activity over the nucleus are needed to explain observations (Fougere et 
al., 2016; Kramer et al., 2017).  
After the first equinox in May 2015, water and CO2 were released from the same regions in the south 
of the comet and all species were correlated. By the end of June 2015, the comet started to show 
frequent short lived (<1h) outbursts (Vincent et al., 2016). The active spots identified from modeling 
of ROSINA data coincide with the foot points of many of the observed outbursts (Kramer et al., 2017). 
The driving gas for these outbursts was CO2. After the second equinox in March 2016, the water 
activity followed the subsolar latitude while CO2 remained active (see the third panel of fig. 4).  
From Figure 4 it should be apparent that, depending on the heliocentric distance, pre- or post-
perihelion, depending on the spacecraft position over the nucleus, relative abundances of species 
have considerable variation. This abundance of information makes the question “what is the nucleus 
bulk abundance” hard to answer. While ROSINA was able to observe the most abundant species like 
H2O, CO, CO2 over the entire mission, for less abundant species this was not the case. It was found 
that the period of May-June 2015 is probably the most representative period for the nucleus bulk 
abundances. The reason is that the comet was inside of 2 au, with all species including water coming 
predominantly from the southern hemisphere (summer hemisphere). During this time, species 
correlate quite well independent on the spacecraft position. Closer to perihelion, the frequent 
outbursts changed relative abundances significantly as they seem to have been driven by CO2 and not 
water. This is seen in figure 4 by the strong CO2 peak around perihelion. After the peak activity near 
the end August 2015, water steeply decreased, while CO2 and CO had a much shallower slope. By 
spring 2016, CO2 was the dominant species in the coma. Selection criteria for choosing the period for 
bulk abundance measurements are discussed in detail in Calmonte et al. (2016). 

3  From nucleus composition to coma composition and 

vice versa 

In order to explore cometary chemistry and comet origin, the best way would be to look deep into 
the nucleus interior, measure composition and its heterogeneity, physical parameters like 
temperature, tensile strength, porosity, mineralogy of dust and its structure. The lander on Rosetta 
was equipped with a drill and some measurement capabilities to at least explore the near subsurface 
material. Due to the unforeseen attitude of Philae at its final landing spot, it was not able to drill and 
bring up material from the subsurface for analysis. This affected mostly the two mass spectrometers 
COSAC and Ptolemy. The only material these two instruments could analyze was dust from the first 
landing site raised by the feet of Philae. Therefore, there are, thus far, no direct measurements of 
true original nucleus material.  

An attempt was made by Deep Impact to look at the nucleus interior by impacting a projectile into 
comet Temple 1. All parent and daughter fragments observed except ethane were found to be in the 
same proportions relative to water as in the ambient outgassing, so that fractionation by 
sublimation, if existing at all, has to be small (A’Hearn, 2011). 
All measurements by ROSINA and all measurements for other comets concerning composition of ices 
were made in the comae. In order to derive nucleus bulk abundances from coma measurements, 
several different processes have to be taken into account. In the case of 67P, the gas was very 
tenuous during the entire mission, even during perihelion. The water production rate reached 
~4×1028 molecules/s. For larger and much more active comets like 1P/Halley or Hale-Bopp, 

6 

 
production rates are at least two orders of magnitude higher. Collisions of molecules and therefore 
chemistry in the coma in the case of 67P are insignificant most of the time. For other comets, 
especially in the case of the very active Hale-Bopp and Hyakutake, this is no longer true and 
chemistry in the coma has to be taken into account. The gas escaping from the nucleus has a velocity 
between 400-900 m/s (Tzou et al., 2019). As Rosetta was almost always close to the nucleus (<300 
km), photodissociation and chemical reaction rates  (e.g. Heays et al. 2017, A&A) also do not play a 
major role. Rates for most of the observed species at these distances from the Sun are much longer 
than the time needed for the gas to reach Rosetta. Therefore, we expect little difference between 
nucleus composition and coma composition. This is especially true if we look at isotopic ratios. In 
contrast to in situ observations, remote sensing observations were very often done over a large 
radial distance from the nucleus and photodissociation and chemistry has to be taken into account 
because molecules may have been released long before they are measured. 

It is known that some species show a distributed source (e.g. Cottin & Fray, 2008). These species are 
not directly released from the nucleus, but rather from dust grains. Once in the coma, dust grains can 
become very hot (Kolokolova et al., 2004). This makes sublimation possible of species that have 
sublimation temperatures higher than e.g. water. Such distributed sources were detected by the 
neutral mass spectrometer NMS on Giotto for formaldehyde (Eberhardt, 1999) and subsequently by 
remote sensing for several species like e.g. CH2O, CN, NH3 (for a summary see dello Russo et al. 
(2016) and references therein). With Rosetta it was hard to detect distributed sources because the 
spacecraft did not change its radial distance from the comet over short periods of time. One example 
where it was possible to observe this effect, was during a fast flyby end of March 2015 with a high 
amount of dust present. This allowed to follow the glycine abundance, where the density with 
cometocentric distance r did not follow a 1/r2 law (Altwegg et al., 2016). However, ROSINA-COPS 
(COmetary Pressure Sensor) detected sometimes rapid density increases due to volatile and semi-
volatile species sublimating from dust grains (Tzou et al.,2019). Some species could only be observed 
when the COPS dust counts were high, showing a clear correlation between these species (e.g. S3) 
with dust. 

4 

Isotopologues  

Isotopologues are the best link between comets and presolar material. Isotopic ratios directly reflect 
the source of the material in the ISM. They are the fingerprints of supernovae, AGB stars, neutron 
star mergers, etc. While their overall isotopic ratios cannot be changed by chemistry, their specific 
ratios in molecules can well depend on chemical formation pathways. Isotope fractionation can also 
occur in cold interstellar clouds, driven by the difference in zero-point vibrational energy of the 
isotopologues. This difference is largest for light elements like hydrogen / deuterium, where the 
relative mass difference is highest. Thus, isotopologues of different molecules also tell us about 
physical and chemical boundary conditions during the formation of the respective molecules. 

17,18O) 

4.1  Water and its isotopologues  (HDO, D2O, H2
4.1.1  HDO 
One of the most important result of the Giotto mission to comet Halley in 1986 were the 
measurements of D/H in water by two independent instruments, the Neutral Mass Spectrometer 
(Eberhardt et al., 1995) and the Ion Mass Spectrometer (Balsiger et al., 1995). Both results yielded 
D/H ~ (3.2±0.4) × 10-4, a value which is twice the terrestrial value (Vienna Standard Mean Ocean 
Water (VSMOW)). Results from remote sensing for the bright OCC’s in the 1990 gave very similar 
values. This made models for a cometary delivery of the terrestrial bulk water from comets, very 
unlikely. However, in 2011 Hartogh et al. (2011) reported a terrestrial value for D/H in the first 
measurements from a JFC, Hartley 2. This revived the idea that JFC’s could be the source of terrestrial 

7 

 
water. At that time, dynamical models stated that JFC’s had been formed further from the Sun, in the 
vicinity of Neptune’s current orbit, while OCC’s were formed closer to the Sun. Models predicted 
higher D/H values with increasing distance from the Sun due to colder temperatures. These models 
had to be revised following the Hartley 2 result. There exist several different explanations for this 
inverse behavior of the D/H ratio with distance. One explanation was high temperature gas-phase 
chemistry in the inner disk (Thi et al. 2010. Another explanation was related to transport of material 
between the inner and outer Solar System (Walsh et al., 2011). In more recent years, with more 
cometary D/H values available, it became clear that D/H varies considerably among comets. 
Measurements of D/H in 67P by ROSINA yielded a very high value of (5.3±0.7) × 10-4 (Altwegg et al., 
2014). This first value, measured early in the mission outside of 3 au was later confirmed (Altwegg et 
al., 2017) for post-perihelion periods. This high value rules out fractionation during sublimation 
because the comet lost several meters of its surface during its orbit, revealing pristine material. 
Meanwhile, two more D/H values were measured in OCC’s, namely in comet C/2012 F6 (Lemmon) 
and C/2014 Q2 (Lovejoy) (Biver et al., 2016). While comet Lemmon has an even higher D/H value 
than 67P, comet Lovejoy seems to have an almost terrestrial D/H. The latter result however is 
disputed by a different measurement (Paganini et al., 2017).  

Figure 5 shows an overview of the D/H values in cometary water that are known to date. In Figure 5, 
it is clear that variations among comets are large. No differentiation between comet families is seen. 
The lack of variation probably rules out the notion that Oort cloud and Jupiter family comets 
originated from different places in the protoplanetary disk. Comets probably formed over wide range 
of radial distances from the young Sun. Their reservoirs (Oort cloud or scattered disk) are the result 
of their dynamical history, of how they were scattered by the giant planets. Their D/H in water may 
still represent their place of origin, which would mean that e.g. Hartley 2 formed closer to the Sun 
than 67P, although they both ended up in the scattered disk. 

The average D/H in water of all 10 comets measured so far is 3.6 × 10-4. This is more than twice the 
terrestrial value and is a clear indication that the Earth acquired its bulk water neither from OCC’s nor 
from JFC’s. This leaves planetesimals in the early phase of solar system formation as source of the 
terrestrial water. These bodies have a D/H much closer to our terrestrial standard mean ocean water 
(SMOW, 1.5× 10-4) which, combined with a late veneer of asteroids (Morbidelli et al., 2000), could 
explain the terrestrial water. Late veneer here defines the last stage of Earth accretion from 
planetesimals with carbonaceous chondrite-like material which then did not equilibrate with the 
Earth metallic core and is thought to be about 1% of the total Earth mass (Morbidelli & Wood, 2014).  
Carbonaceous chondrites (CI and CM) have a mean D/H ratio in their hydroxylated minerals similar to 
the Earth and are quite water rich of up to 15 wt-% (O’Brien et al., 2014; Robert, 2003). It could also 
mean that the Earth has preserved enough water in its mantle to replenish dried-out oceans after 
e.g. the Moon forming impact (e.g. Hirschmann, 2006).  

4.1.2  D2O 
D/H in cometary water is clearly compatible with values measured in star forming regions and the 
ISM (see Figure 5) although D/H in these interstellar sources varies from 3x10-4 to several % , with 
some very high values associated to cold gas-phase chemistry.  The mechanism for D/H values in 
water of several times 10-4, i.e. enhanced compared with the ISM, is based on dust grain chemistry 
and has been modeled by Cazaux et al. (2011), Taquet et al. (2014) and Furuya et al. (2016; 2017). 
Furuya et al. show that H2O is primarily formed in the early, low density stages of molecular clouds 
whereas HDO and D2O production is more effective in the later, very cold high density phase  (Fig. 1). 
Furuya et al. followed the HDO/H2O ratio from the pre-solar stage through the collapse of the cloud 
and formation of the disk and concluded that this ratio (starting value ~9 x 10-4) was mostly 
preserved. One result of this modeling was a high D2O/HDO ratio (4.9×10-3) in pre-solar water ice. 
This high value is within a factor of 2 of the observationally derived values toward the Class 0 

8 

 
protostar NGC 1333-IRAS 2A (Coutens et al., 2014). The high D/H in cometary water alone does not 
mean that pre-solar water survived the solar system formation without changes. Even though the 
bulk of the water ice is delivered without alteration, modeling shows that some fraction of ice is 
affected en route from cloud to disk but that upon sublimation and dissociation and reformation / 
recondensation, the HDO / H2O is mostly preserved.  

ROSINA was able to measure D2O during several phases of the mission (Altwegg et al., 2017). The 
ratio D2O / HDO = (1.80 ± 0.9) × 10−2 and therefore f ~ 17. This high value means that most of the 
cometary water in 67P was probably inherited as ice from the pre-solar stage. Cometary ice of 67P 
therefore never was inside the water-snow line in the protoplanetary disk. Thus, it is very likely that 
minor species that were embedded in water ice also never sublimated and thus preserved their pre-
solar abundances. Other observations from ROSINA (discussed below) are also consistent with this 
cometary ice formation beyond the water-snow line. 

18O 

4.1.3  H2
Oxygen is an abundant element, in volatile species as well as in refractories. It is a light element, 
so  that  its  three  stable  isotopes  are  subject  to  mass  dependent  fractionation  effects.  Also,  it 
undergoes  chemical  reactions  in  which  non-mass-dependent  isotope  fractionations  occur.  Its 
cosmic  abundance  causes  it  to  occur  simultaneously  in  two  cosmochemical  reservoirs:  as  gas 
composed  mostly  of  H2O  and  CO  /  CO2  and  as  solid  (oxides  and  silicates).  As  part  of  the 
refractories, it mostly avoided isotopic homogenization in the interstellar medium and in the early 
solar system.  

Oxygen  isotopic  composition  of  our  solar  system  seems  then  to  be  the  result  from  mixing  two 
isotopically distinct nebular reservoirs, one 16O-rich and the other 17,18O-rich (Sakamoto et al., 2007). 
The 16O- rich reservoir is mainly preserved in chondrites which are within a few per mil of the terrestrial 
SMOW standard.  The largest bulk anomalies for the 16O- rich reservoir are seen in CI chondrites. These 
anomalies are 10 ‰/amu, along the terrestrial mass fractionation line (see Hoppe et al. (2018) and 
references therein). Larger anomalies of up to 60 ‰ enrichment in 16O along a line with slope 1 are 
seen in CAI’s and hibonite grains, which therefore represent the high 16O, low 17,18O – end members of 
the  fractionation  line.  These  16O  enrichments  are  compatible  with  measurements  for  the  Sun  (Mc 
Keegan et al., 2011).  

The low 16O, high 17,18O  end-member of this terrestrial fractionation line is COS, cosmic symplectite, a 
material  consisting  of  aggregates  of  nanocrystalline  iron  sulfide  and  magnetite,  identified  in  the 
ungrouped carbonaceous chondrite Acfer 094. This seems to represent the 17,18O-rich reservoir, with 
large enrichments of about 200 ‰ in 17O and 18O (Sakamoto et al. 2007). This material is believed to 
have formed by oxidation of Fe, Ni metal and sulfides by primordial 16O-poor water in the Solar System. 
So far, this reservoir represents the best proxy for primordial water (Hoppe et al. 2018). The high 17,18O 
enrichment is explained by self-shielding during the ultraviolet photodissociation of CO (Bally & Langer 
1982; van Dishoeck & Black 1988) which leads to an enrichment in 17,18O relative to 16O atoms, used to 
form water. According to leading self-shielding models (Sakamoto et al. 2007; Yurimoto & Kuramoto 
2004),  primordial  water  is  predicted  to  be  enriched in  17,18O  by  5%  to 20%  compared  to  terrestrial 
water.  

Measurements  in  Stardust  samples  from  comet  Wild  2  yielded  a  16O/18O  value  very  close  to  the 
terrestrial fractionation line for large dust grains (>2m) and quite diverse values for smaller grains 
(Ogliore et al., 2015) with 18O enrichment. They interpreted this result as large grains coming from the 
inner solar system, exhibiting an equilibrated oxygen isotopic ratio, whereas smaller grains, coming 
from the outer solar system, preserved their interstellar diversity. 

9 

 
 
Looking at the entire data set from ROSINA where the signal was high enough to detect H2
18OH and correcting for all known systematic uncertainties, the H2
error) (Schroeder et al., 2018). The terrestrial value is 498.7 ± 0.1 measured by Baertschi (1976), 
while the solar value measured in the solar wind by McKeegan et al. (2011), has a 16O/18O ratio of 530 
± 2. The cometary value is more than 1 outside of the terrestrial value, and more than 2outside 
16O, the relative enrichment in 17O is on the order of 17 % compared 
of the solar value. For H2
to the terrestrial value (Schroeder et al., 2019).  

18O derived is 445 ± 35 (1  

17O/H2

16O/H2

18O and 

The measurements of 67P with an enrichment of ~12 % in 18O and ~17 % for 17O are fully compatible 
with primordial 16O-poor water as inferred from COS. Values from other comets (Table 1) are partly 
compatible with terrestrial or even solar isotopic ratios, whereas others are compatible with 
primordial water (see table 1). So far, most oxygen isotopic ratios in comets suffer from relatively 
high uncertainties and cover a wide range between 300 and 530. Thus, clear correlation between D/H 
and 16O/18O cannot be derived. 

ROSINA was also able to measure C18O16O on m/z = 46 (Hässig et al., 2017). Contrary to water, CO2 
showed a 16O/18O ratio of 494 ± 8, fully compatible with the terrestrial value. This value is predicted by 
the self-shielding models as CO2 is derived from CO, which is left 16O rich. Unfortunately, the value for 
C18O measured by ROSINA has a high uncertainty due to overlap with NO and in addition is partially a 
fragment of CO2. However, within the uncertainty, the value is compatible with the terrestrial value as 
well (Rubin et al., 2017). For the dust, an oxygen isotopic ratio  16O/18O of 500 ± 30 was determined 
(Paquette et al., 2018), compatible with terrestrial as well as with solar values. 

All these results are fully compatible with self-shielding in the cloud, leaving cometary water rich in 
17,18O while not affecting CO2 and refractories and confirms a cloud origin of cometary water. 

4.2  Deuteration in other molecules  
Apart from D/H in water, the only D/H measurement in another molecule before Rosetta is D/H in 
HCN in Hale-Bopp (Meier et al., 1998) with a value of (2.3 ± 0.4) x 10-3. This is higher than in water by 
a factor > 4. It supports the interstellar origin of cometary ices. The authors conclude that the 
observed value of D/H in HCN implies a kinetic temperature ≥30 ± 10 K in the fragment of interstellar 
cloud that formed the solar system. With in situ mass spectrometry, this value cannot be confirmed 
for 67P due to overlap of several species on m/z = 28. However, it was possible to get D/H in H2S and 
NH3. The D/H ratio in H2S is very similar to that in water ((0.6 ± 0.3) x 10-3) while D/H in NH3 is higher 
((1.1 ± 0.2) x 10−3) (Altwegg et al., 2017; Wampfler et al., 2018).  There exists just one value for HDS in 
a solar type protostar IRAS16293 with D/H = 0.1 (van Dishoeck et al., 1995), but several for hot cores:  
G10.47+0.03 with D/H = 1.4 x 10−3, G31.41+0.31 with D/H = 4.9 x 10−3 and G34.26+0.15 with D/H = 
2.0 x 10−3 (Hatchell &Millar, 1999).  
The high D/H in H2S is consistent with hot cores. A high D/H in H2S is explained by formation of H2S in 
hot core ices at a temperature of 60–80 K (Hatchell & Millar, 1999). D/H in H2S in comets is therefore 
compatible with dust grain chemistry processes in the pre-solar cloud. 
For NH3 there exist quite a few measurements in protostellar cores in low–mass star formation and 
quiescent regions in the Galaxy. Generally, D/H values, at least in the gas phase are quite high, 
between 0.007 and 0.1 (Shah et al., 2011). There might, however, be a gas-phase fractionation effect 
and the values may therefore not be representative of the ice. Chemical models predict such high 
values (Roueff et al., 2005). The relatively low value for 67P may point to additional gas phase 
chemistry in the protoplanetary disk, diluting deuterated NH3. It may also reflect ice chemistry in pre- 
and protostellar clouds. Depending on which part of the cloud is probed ices can have lower 
deuterated values than gas (see also Taquet et al. 2014). 

10 

 
 
4.3  Carbon and Nitrogen isotopologues 
 Carbon and nitrogen are very similar in mass, but not in their chemistry. This may be the reason why 
carbon isotopes and nitrogen isotopes behave very differently in comets and in meteorites. Carbon 
isotopic anomalies are generally small, whereas nitrogen anomalies can be very substantial. 
Observations of volatiles in local and galactic molecular clouds hint at a strong diversity in the 15N 
abundance, extending from a factor 2 depleted to a factor 2 enhanced with respect to the terrestrial 
ratio (Füri and Marty 2015). Even our Earth has a significantly different 14N/15N from the Sun (297 and 
440, respectively).  

For comets, there exist remote sensing results of the 12C/13C ratio in C2, CN, and HCN. The values 
obtained are within a few percent compatible with the terrestrial standard of 89, however with a few 
small depletions in 13C (Bockelée-Morvan et al. 2015, and references therein).  

For comet 67P, ROSINA was able to measure 12C/13C = 84±4 in CO2 with a good precision (Hässig et al., 
2017)  and  in  CO  (86±9)  and  C2H5  (84±12)  with  limited  precision  (Rubin  et  al.,  2017).  CO2,  which  is 
probably  a product  of a reaction of  CO,  is slightly enriched in  13C  (60 ‰  relative to the terrestrial 
standard and 140 ‰ relative to the Sun (Hässig et al. 2017)). In the ISM, this ratio varies between 25 
to >100, depending on the distance from the galactic center (Wilson 1999), with a local value of 68 ± 
15 (Milam et al. 2005).  

The main nitrogen bearing molecules in the cometary coma are NH3, HCN and N2. The isotopologues 
of HCN and NH2, which is most probably a daughter species of NH3, have been measured in several 
comets. Surprisingly, the 14N/15N ratio (~140) is very constant over all measured comets. For 14N/15N in 
HCN, CN, and NH2 there are large enrichments in 15N (up to a factor of 3) relative to solar (Bockelée-
Morvan  et  al.  2015,  and  references  therein).  This  is  explained  by  two  different  reservoirs,  one  for 
atomic nitrogen and the other for molecular nitrogen (Hily-Blant et al., 2017). N2 has so far only been 
+ in a few other comets (e.g. Cochran 
detected in the coma of 67P/CG (Rubin et al. 2015) and as ion N2
& McKay, 2018, 2018a). Looking at data from very late in the mission, Wampfler et al. 2018 were able 
to get a 14N/15N value for N2 from m/z = 14 and 15, because at that time most of the other nitrogen 
bearing molecules were no longer sublimating due to the large heliocentric distance. Quite surprisingly, 
the value in N2 is compatible to all the other cometary 14N/15N values which rules out the theory of two 
N-reservoirs at least for comets. Thus, the high enrichment of 15N is still unexplained. 

4.4  Sulfur isotopologues of CS2, SO2 and H2S  

Due to the higher mass of sulfur bearing molecules, there is little expected isotopic fractionation due 
to mass dependent or mass independent fractionation. Indeed, meteorites are mostly compatible 
with the standard VCDT (Vienna-Canyon Diablo Troilite) isotopic ratios for sulfur, at least considering 
their bulk abundances. However, SiC grains from supernovae exhibit relatively large negative 33S and 
34S compared to the standard value (see fig. 6). In Wild 2, several grains could be analyzed for their 
sulfur isotopes. Most of them are also within the standard value, for 33S as well as for 34S (Heck et al., 
2012). There is one exception, a grain with a negative anomaly of 33S = -57 ± 17 ‰, and 34S = -41 ± 
17 ‰. This could indeed be a fingerprint of pre-solar grains. The COSIMA instrument (Paquette et al., 
2017) reported a value of 32S/34S compatible with the VCDT standard. For cometary volatiles, several 
measurements of 34S / 32S ratios existed before Rosetta. No values for the ratio 33S / 32S could be 
derived for cometary volatiles before Rosetta.  

ROSINA obtained values for the 33Sand34S with lower uncertainties in three species, namely H2S, 
OCS and CS2 (Calmonte et al., 2017). All values are negative, meaning that 32S is enriched relative to 
the heavier isotopes (see figure 6). The bulk values, the weighted means of the three most abundant 

11 

 
 
species are 33S = -51 ± 23 ‰and34S = -41 ± 17 ‰.  The values are not compatible with the 
standard VCDT, but are similar to what has been observed in SiC-C grains from supernovae (for an 
overview see Hoppe et al., 2018 and references therein) and similar to observations of the ISM 
(Mauersberger et al. 2004). Within 1uncertainties, previously measured values in comets Halley, 
Hale-Bopp, Lovejoy and Lemmon are compatible with 67P, but also with the standard VCDT due to 
their much larger uncertainties.  

Non-solar isotopic ratios for volatile molecules and values compatible to solar values for the 
refractories in 67P point to a non-homogeneized protoplanetary disk from which comets formed. 
This conclusion is fully compatible with the 16O poor water of 67P.  

4.5  Halogene isotopologues (HCl, BrCl) 
For the halogens, generally isotopic ratios for Cl and Br are quite constant in chondrites, Vesta, the 
Earth and the Moon, the Sun and for the protostellar core value in present-day molecular clouds in 
the local galactic environment (Kama et al., 2015). This constancy seems also to hold for 67P, where 
the isotopologues of HCl and HBr were detected (Dhooghe et al., 2017). This is not surprising because 
halogens do not undergo much chemistry and their masses are quite high, such that mass 
fractionation may not play a big role. 

4.6  Silicon isotopes 
Silicon isotope anomalies are generally small (<1 ‰) for chondrites (Poitrasson 2017) except pre-
solar grains, especially SiC grains. 90% of these grains are enriched in heavy isotopes and are believed 
to be the result of AGB stars of about solar metallicity (Lugaro et al. 2003).  SiC grains from SNe, the X 
and C grains, which make up 1-2 % of all pre-solar SiC grains show large depletion in heavy isotopes 
(Zinner 2014). For a thorough discussion on Si isotopes in meteorites see Hoppe et al. (2018). There 
are only a few measurements of Si isotopes in the ISM and they match solar values, but with large 
error bars (e.g., Tercero et al. 2011; Wilson and Rood 1994). 

Isotopic composition of dust in comets has been measured in samples from the Stardust mission to 
comet Wild 2, as well as in situ during the Giotto mission to comet Halley in 1986 and by COSIMA for 
67P. However, none of these measurements targeted Si isotopes for various reasons. Early in the 
Rosetta mission, when the activity of the comet was still quite low, the solar wind impacted the 
surface of the comet, sputtering dust. ROSINA measured some refractory components like K, Mg and 
Si (Wurz et al., 2015). ROSINA determined three Si isotopes: 28Si, 29Si and 30Si. The isotopic ratios were 
28Si / 29Si = 23.0 ± 2.6 and 28Si / 30Si = 38.0 ± 5.6. These values are higher than the solar values (19.68 
and 30.77, respectively) and can only be explained by a strong supernova contribution to the 
protoplanetary disk (Hoppe et al. 2018). 

4.7  Noble gas isotopes 
The Rosetta mission provided the first ever possibility to measure the abundance of the three noble 
gases Ar, Kr, and Xe in a cometary coma, as well as their isotopic ratios. As noble gases undergo very 
little to no chemistry, the isotopic ratios therefore have to reflect their nucleosynthetic origin, 
modulated at most by some mass fractionation. All three noble gases studied have relatively high 
masses, therefore the mass fractionation effects are estimated to be small.  

For Ar the measured isotopic ratio is 38Ar / 36Ar = 5.4 ± 1.4 (Earth: 5.3; solar wind: 5.5) (Balsiger et al., 
2015). Unfortunately the precision of this measurement, due to overlapping species at mass 38 and 
36, is not sufficient to rule out any deviation from terrestrial, from solar argon or from any of the 

12 

 
 
specific components found in meteorites. No 40Ar was detected, which is not surprising as this 
isotope is not primordial. 

Kr has five stable isotopes, 80Kr, 82Kr, 83Kr, 84Kr and 86Kr. All of them were clearly seen in the mass 
spectra of ROSINA in May 2016, when the spacecraft was ~7 km from the nucleus center (Rubin et al. 
2018). 80Kr, however, has a large error bar due to overlap with C34S2. All Kr isotopes, relative to the 
most abundant 84Kr, are solar within the error limits, with the exception of a slight depletion of 83Kr 
(see table 2).  

Xenon has nine stable isotopes, 124Xe, 126Xe, 128Xe, 129Xe, 130Xe, 131Xe, 132Xe, 134Xe and 136Xe. All of them 
except the two lightest ones could be observed in the same measurement sequence with Kr and its 
isotopes (Marty et al., 2017). Normalized to 132Xe, there is an enrichment in 129Xe, which can be 
attributed to the radioactive decay of 129I. Therefore, more 129I was available when icy grains formed 
than at the start of the solar system formation when meteorites formed. The higher mass 134Xe and 
136X are clearly depleted relative to 132Xe by 35 % and 60 %, respectively. This depletion cannot be 
explained by mass dependent fractionation and has to be a nucleosynthetic effect.  

Meteorites contain trapped noble gases and those produced in situ by spallation or radioactive 
decay. For a review see Ott (2014). The trapped planetary noble gases are classified into different 
components according to their distinct isotopic patterns (Q, P3, HL, P6, G, N). Except Q, all 
components are believed to have a presolar origin and are the products of a mixture of different 
progenitor stars with their specific history of nucleosynthesis. The Xe-isotopic pattern of 67P/CG 
differs from the patterns of the trapped planetary noble gas components. It is neither similar to the Q 
component nor to the components associated with pre-solar grains. However, the Xe pattern 
corresponds quite well to a mixture of s-process Xe and two r-process end-member compositions 
identified by Gilmour and Turner (2007). The Kr isotopic ratios were near solar with the exception of 
83Kr (slightly depleted). 

To explain the quasi-solar Kr isotopic ratios and the clearly non-solar Xe isotopic ratios, a mixing 
scenario of a “normal” component N-type Kr and N-type Xe with an exotic, s-process rich component 
called G-type Kr and G-type Xe, respectively can be used (Rubin et al., 2018). However, this scenario 
would mean that the G-component is much more prominent in Xe than in Kr. Studies of pre-solar 
material have shown that indeed Xe is commonly enriched relative to Kr in s-process end-members. 
This enrichment is attributed to chemical fractionation like differences in the behaviors of Xe and Kr 
during expulsion from stellar envelopes, preferential ionization of Xe relative to Kr, and/or selective 
implantation of Xe into dust.  
What is interesting is that by mixing (22 ±5) % of cometary Xe with chondritic Q-Xe it is possible to 
recreate the primordial atmospheric U-Xe component on Earth, postulated 40 years ago by Pepin 
(Pepin & Phinney, 1978; Pepin, 2000). This allows to estimate the amount of water delivered to the 
Earth by comets which is on the order of < 1% (Marty et al., 2017). This also gives us a handle on the 
importance of cometary delivery of organics to the early Earth (see below). 

4.8  What can we learn from isotopes  
Table 2 gives a summary of what we know about isotopologues in cometary ice based on the 
subchapters in this chapter. Measured values in 67P and, if available, average values in other comets 
are compared to solar values or, if not available, standard values from meteorites.  

Isotopes on one hand give a fingerprint of the precursor stars that fed the protoplanetary disk. This is 
especially true for species like noble gases that do not undergo chemical reactions. On the other 
hand species that undergo chemical reactions in cold interstellar clouds are subject to chemical 

13 

 
 
 
 
fractionation. Chemical fractionation depends on the physical parameters like temperature, density, 
time available, UV radiation and cosmic rays.  

Looking at the isotopic ratios of the noble gases, it is clear that 67P did not acquire the same 
complement of isotopes as the Sun. The enrichment of 129Xe may be due to an excess in 129I at the 
location the cometary ice formed. The depletion in 134,136Xe points to a different mixture of nearby 
remnants of stars at the location of comet formation than the average of the solar nebula. Comet 
impacts during the late veneer / late heavy bombardment may then have brought this xenon 
component to the early Earth. It most probably means that the protosolar nebula was not well 
mixed. The Si isotopic ratios as well as the sulfur isotopic ratios support this conjecture. 

From deuterated species, especially the abundant D2O, we conclude that water ice formed in the pre-
solar cloud and survived the collapse of the solar nebula as ice. We also conclude that the notion that 
different comet families formed at different distances from the Sun is probably not correct. The large 
differences in D/H in cometary water, independent of the comet family points more to a scenario 
where comets formed over a relatively large region in the protoplanetary nebula and were later 
scattered either in an Oort cloud orbit or ended up in the scattered disk. 

Looking at 67P and comparing it with other comets, we find little differences, except in the already 
mentioned D/H. Most isotopic ratios measured in comets are compatible within uncertainties with 
the measurements in 67P, although uncertainties from remote sensing are generally higher.  

The mystery of a constant 14N/15N in comets over all molecules including N2 remains yet to be solved. 

Other isotopic ratios like sulfur seem to be correlated with ice chemistry, again pointing to a pre-solar 
origin of the molecules. Oxygen isotopes in water and CO2 are well in line with self-shielding models 
in the pre-solar nebula, again pointing to pre-solar chemistry. Overall, isotopic ratios in 67P are in line 
with what has been measured in star forming regions and hot cores, strengthening the link between 
comets and the ISM.  

5  Molecular composition 

In this section we look at molecular abundances of species found in cometary comae, especially in 
67P. As shown in figure 1, the material that finally makes up comets has passed through several 
stages, each with its own physical characteristics. These characteristics determine what species are 
formed or changed at which stage. Molecular clouds prior to their collapse have low densities and 
cold temperatures. Star forming regions have higher densities and higher temperatures close to their 
protostar. Protoplanetary disks have diverse conditions. In the mid-plane, there are low cosmic rays 
and UV, whereas out of the midplane, UV dissociation and ionization sets in. The amount of radial 
and vertical mixing in the protoplanetary disk is still under debate. An overview of the processes in 
star forming regions through the collapse and the formation of planetesimals is given in e.g. van 
Dishoeck & Blake (1998) and Johansen et al. (2007). By comparing what is found in comets and what 
is found in star forming regions, some of the processes in the protoplanetary disks are better 
constrained. A list of detected molecules in comets is found in table 4. 

5.1  Highly volatile species: CO, CO2, N2, CH4, and O2 
Looking at highly volatile species indicates the formation temperatures of comets as well as their 
evolution in the last 4.6 billion years. CO and CO2 are regularly observed in comets with remote 
sensing. Fig. 4 clearly shows that in 67P the ratio between water, CO2 and CO is highly variable. While 

14 

 
 
 
outside of 3 au inbound, water seemed to be anti-correlated with CO2, being high over the northern 
(summer) hemisphere, CO showed little variation with latitude. Around the highest activity at the end 
of August 2015, all three species had higher densities over the southern hemisphere, at that time in 
summer, but still, CO2 showed larger variations than H2O or CO.  Outbound, outside of 3 au, H2O 
followed the subsolar latitude, which was at that time around 5° north, while CO and CO2 were very 
well correlated and still came from the south. When comparing comets, these intrinsic variations of 
relative abundances, which are related to the shape and rotation axis of the comet, to fallback 
material (Keller et al., 2015), and the heliocentric distance have to be taken into account. The 
probably best values for the nucleus bulk relative abundances are from May / June 2015, with the 
southern hemisphere being the summer hemisphere, well inside of 2 au and before the onset of the 
summer firework (Vincent et al., 2017), describing frequent short lived outbursts of the comet (see 
also chapter 3.8) 

67P, with a relative abundance of CO/H2O ~ 1.7 %, compares well with the average abundance of 1.6  
± 0.7 % for other JFC’s (dello Russo et al., 2016). 67P does not compare well with the average 
abundance of 6.1 ± 1.6 % for OCC’s (dello Russo et al., 2016).  CO2 is difficult to measure with remote 
sensing. Therefore 67P is the first JFC where it has been measured. With an abundance of ~4.5 % it is 
rather typical for comets, which have a CO2/H2O ratio between 2.5 and 12% (Mumma & Charnley, 
2011).  

CH4 /H2O is 0.34 % (Schuhmann et al., 2018), which again is at the low end of the range seen in other 
comets, but compatible with measurements in two JFC’s, P/Encke (0.34%) and Temple 9 (0.54%).  
The average abundance for Oort cloud comets is almost a factor 3 higher than for JFC’s (dello Russo, 
2016 and references therein).  

N2 was detected for the first time in a comet by ROSINA (Rubin et al., 2015). The abundance for N2 is 
(8.9 ± 2.4) × 10-4 relative to water. This abundance is not enough to solve the problem of the N-
deficiency in comets already noted by Geiss et al. (1988) for comet Halley. The explanation for the 
deficiency in N at that time was that formation temperatures of comets were too high to freeze out 
N2 or that comets have lost their N2 along the way from the Oort cloud to the inner solar system. 
With the detected N2 we can at least conclude that some N2 was implemented in comets and not all 
of it was lost, which points to a formation temperature of the comet <50 K (Rubin et al., 2015).  

O2: Probably the most surprising result of the ROSINA instrument at 67P was the detection of 
abundant O2 (Bieler et al., 2015). O2 is the third or fourth most abundant species in the coma (see fig 
4), very close to CO. Although O2 is very volatile, it follows much more H2O and not CO or CO2 over 
the entire mission with an abundance of (1.8 ± 0.4) % relative to water.  This value is somewhat lower 
than the value derived by Bieler, reflecting a larger dataset used in Läuter et al., 2018. This detection 
triggered a re-analysis of the data from the Neutral Mass Spectrometer NMS on Giotto. Indeed, 
Rubin et al. (2015b) found strong indications that also comet 1P/Halley showed O2 in its coma, with a 
very similar abundance relative to water as 67P. Several explanations on the formation of O2 have 
been published since its detection. Interstellar O2 gas is difficult to detect as the transition lines are 
weak, but nevertheless low observational upper limits exist. So far, a very deep search of  O2 has 
been made in only one potential precursor of a solar-like system protostar, NGC 1333–IRAS 4A (O2/H2 
< 6 × 10−9; Yildiz et al. 2013). The most plausible formation scenario is by Taquet et al. (2016; 2017), 
who postulate gas-grain chemistry in the dark cloud. This scenario requires a slightly warmer cloud 
than normal (~20K) in order to also avoid overproducing HO2 and H2O2. These authors rule out 
chemistry during formation of the protosolar disk or due to luminosity outbursts in the disk. Disk 
models cannot explain the strong correlation between O2 and H2O in comet 67P/C-G together with 
the weak correlation between other volatiles and H2O. However, primordial O2 ice can survive 

15 

 
transport into the comet-forming regions of the protoplanetary nebula, if water ice never sublimates, 
which is in agreement with the isotopologues of water. 

Another explanation is given by Mousis et al., 2016. This explanation is based on radiolysis of water 
ice in the pre-solar ice grains. Radiolysis means dissociation of molecules by ionizing radiation, e.g. 
electrons, cosmic rays, etc.. This process cannot happen in the protoplanetary disc as cosmic rays are 
not abundant enough. Both mechanisms, but especially radiolysis, produce abundant O3 and H2O2, 
which has not been detected by ROSINA. However, O3 might not survive in ice long enough to be 
detected.  

Dulieu et al. (2017) suggested formation of O2 during water ice desorption through dismutation of 
H2O2. This process would produce abundant H2O2, about 4 orders of magnitude higher than observed 
by ROSINA. Another proposed mechanism is an Eley-Rideal process (Yao et al., 2017), whereby pick-
up water ions hit the cometary surface and produce O2. This process is not consistent with 
observations from the plasma instruments, as O2 is anti-correlated with H2O+ (Heritier et al., 2018).  

Recent attempts to quantify O2 in solar-type protostar IRAS 16293—2422 (Taquet et al., 2018) 
yielded an upper limit, lower than the value measured in 67P, which may be due to the colder 
temperatures of the cloud out of which this protostar formed compared with that of our protosun. It 
appears that the presence of abundant O2 in 67P can only be explained by pre-solar processes, either 
gas-grain chemistry in the dark cloud or radiolysis in pre-solar ice grains. In the second case the lack 
of abundant H2O2 remains to be explained. In order to maintain the correlation with water ice, water 
ice cannot have sublimated before accretion in the comet.  

67P seems generally to be depleted in the highly volatile species (CH4, CO, N2) compared to Oort 
cloud comets. The low values for CH4 and CO in 67P are in line with other Jupiter family comets (Dello 
Russo et al., 2016). If we follow the argumentation in chapter 4.1.1. that the D/H ratios in water are 
variable but do not fundamentally differ between the two comet families, the difference in the 
abundance of highly volatiles may therefore be a consequence of their dynamical history, rather than 
of their place of origin. Comets originating in the scattered disk to become Jupiter family comets 
normally reach the inner solar system by first becoming Centaurs at heliocentric distances between 5 
and 50 au. This stage can easily last 106 y. Thermal models show a temperature increase of up to 60 K 
in the outer few 100 m of Centaurs, leading to potential diffusion and release of highly volatiles 
(Guilbert-Lepoutre, 2016). On the other hand, 67P is eroding several meters per orbit once in the 
inner solar system and it is therefore not clear if the depleted layer has already been eroded in the 
last few 1000 y.   

5.2  Abundances of noble gases 
Before Rosetta, no clear detection of noble gases in a comet was possible. ROSINA was able to detect 
Ar, Kr and Xe including most of their isotopes (Marti et al., 2017; Rubin et al., 2018) and an upper 
limit for Ne (Rubin et al., 2018). The noble gases correlate well with N2, somewhat less with CO2 and 
not very well with water. They could only be observed very close to the comet, which made their 
detection during perihelion not feasible. Assuming that the correlation with N2 also holds for the 
perihelion passage, where the coma composition was probably closest to the bulk nucleus 
composition, Rubin et al. (2018) obtained the following abundances: Ar/H2O = (5.8 ± 2.2) × 10−6; 
Kr/H2O = (4.9 ± 2.2) × 10−7; Xe/H2O = (2.4 ± 1.1) × 10−7; Ne/H2O <5 × 10−8 using N2/H2O = (8.9 ± 2.4) × 
10−4  and 36Ar/N2 = (5.5 ± 1.5) × 10−3.  

Assuming water ice to be amorphous these abundances would point to relatively high trapping 
temperature (≥70 K) as deduced from laboratory experiments (BarNun et al., 2012). This then, 
however, contradicts  e.g. the CO/N2 ratio which requires temperatures ≤50 K (Rubin et al., 2015). 

16 

 
These authors have also speculated that water ice is forming clathrates. Models for clathrates yield 
higher Xe/Ar abundances than observed. For clathrates or crystalline ice , no applicable lab 
experiments exist. 

There are several facts that affect the relative abundances: lab measurements are done usually for 
pure amorphous water ice only. The application of these lab results to real cometary ice has been 
questioned by e.g. Kouchi &Yamamoto (1995) and Greenberg et al. (2017). Addition of CO2 can 
change the trapping efficiency quite radically, but there are so far no measurements on how this 
affects the different noble gases. The fact that noble gases correlate much better with CO2 than with 
H2O indeed supports the need for more laboratory work with mixed ices. The volatility of Ar is very 
high compared to Xe, which is quite sticky. This would also favor large ratios of Kr/Ar and Xe/Ar as 
the upper layers of the comet probably experienced temperatures up to 60K during its transfer from 
the Kuiper belt to becoming a JFC. This is in line with the depletion for JFC’s for CH4 and CO relative to 
OCC’s.  

5.3  Sulfur bearing species  
Sulfur is the 10th most abundant element in the Universe. Its cosmic abundance relative to oxygen is 
2.7%. Organic sulfur chemistry resembles oxygen chemistry. Many molecules are very similar, just 
exchanging oxygen with sulfur like e.g. formaldehyde (H2CO) and thioformaldehyde (H2CS). However, 
sulfur can form many allotropes, second only to carbon, able to exist from polar H2S to stable, 
refractory ring molecule S8.  

Measurements of sulfur in the diffuse interstellar medium actually confirm the cosmic value (Savage 
& Sembach 1996; García-Rojas et al. 2006; Howk, Sembach & Savage 2006; Jenkins 2009) which also 
means that most of the sulfur is in gaseous form. On the other hand, in dense clouds and star-
forming regions, sulfur seems to be highly depleted by about a factor of 1000 relative to its cosmic 
abundance (Penzias et al. 1971; Tieftrunk et al. 1994).  

While dense clouds lack sulfur, our solar system, especially the planets and their moons, show quite 
abundant volatile sulfur species. SO2 (Toon, Pollack & Whitten 1982) and Sn (n=1-8) (Esposito, Winick 
& Stewart 1979) are responsible for the reddish color to Venus’ fumes. The Jupiter moon Io also shed 
sulfur from its volcanoes in the form mostly of SO2 (Pearl et al. 1979) as on Earth. Some of the 
reddish color on Jupiter may originate from S8. For sulfur/hydrogen, the enrichment in Jupiter is up to 
a factor 2.5  compared to solar values (Atreya et al. 2003). 

This puzzle is explained by grain surface chemistry starting with H2S formed by hydrogenation (e.g. 
Woods et al., 2015 and references therein). However, H2S is not detected in the ice in clouds, with an 
upper limit of H2S/H2O of as low as 0.2 % (Jiménez-Escobar & Muñoz Caro, 2011). This led to the 
hypothesis that H2S is destroyed in water-rich grain mantles by UV photons, X-rays or cosmic rays. Ice 
processing experiments have shown that H2S can be transformed into OCS and S2. By further 
photolysis or radiolysis S-polymers up to S8 can be obtained as well as organo-sulfurs (e.g. Ferrante et 
al., 2008; Jiménez-Escobar & Muñoz Caro, 2011). OCS could also be formed by low-temperature 
surface reactions of CO with S without the need for photolysis or radiolysis. 

Many sulfur species have been detected in comets. H2S, SO and CS are regularly observed with 
remote sensing, with H2S being by far the most abundant (fig. 7). In 67P, the second most abundant 
species is surprisingly atomic sulfur (Calmonte et al., 2016). This cannot be attributed to fragments of 
observed molecules. An excess of atomic sulfur has also been found from UV observations of several 
comets (Meier et al., 1997). CS is much easier to detect by remote sensing than CS2; however, in situ 
CS at 67P is clearly a fragment of CS2 and no direct release of CS is observed. S2 in 67P was detected 
outside of 3 au where the coma was very tenuous. This detection early in the mission rules out 

17 

 
formation of S2 by coma chemistry as suggested by A’Hearn et al. (1983) or Saxena et al. (2003). In 
addition, Rodgers & Charnley (2006) showed that coma chemistry is unlikely to form the relatively 
high amount of S2 seen in cometary coma. In 67P, closer to perihelion, the relative abundance 
between H2S and S2 changes significantly. It increased from the stable 0.1% over much of the time of 
the mission to several % with large variations during the perihelion passage. This increase suggests 
that S2 has two sources: a direct release from the ice as S2 and a refractory component related to the 
polymer Sn. Coincidentally, perihelion was also the time when dust impacts on the spacecraft  
occurred and S3 and S4 were clearly detected by ROSINA (Calmonte et al., 2016). The abundance ratio 
at this time was S3/S2 ≈ 3 and S4/S2 ≈ 1, although with rather large uncertainties. The detection of S3 
and S4 confirms the photolysis / radiolysis pathway proposed previously (Woods et al., 2015).  

S2 has a very short lifetime in the gas phase and is destroyed by UV at 283 nm within 250 s at 1 au (De 
Almeida & Singh; 1986). Heays et al. (2017) give an even shorter lifetime of 130s. Even in the dark 
midplane, S2 gas would not survive long. This implies that the ice arrived in solid form directly from 
the interstellar medium in accordance with the doubly deuterated water and the abundant O2. 
Furthermore, that the ice did not sublimate and re-condense in the protoplanetary nebula. 

H2CS has been detected in the low-mass protostar IRAS 16293−2422 (Schöier et al. 2002). Majumdar 
et al. (2016) and Drozdovskaya et al. (2018) detected CH3SH for the same source. This molecule has 
also been detected in massive star-forming regions such as SgrB2 close to the galactic center (Linke, 
Frerking & Thaddeus 1979; Müller et al. 2016), in the massive hot core G327.3−6 (Gibb et al. 2000a) 
and in Orion KL (Kolesniková et al. 2014). The abundance relative to H2S can be estimated by taking 
the abundance of H2S (compared to H2) of 9 × 10−8 reported by Schöier et al. (2002) which gives a 
ratio CH3SH/H2S = 4.4 × 10−2 for IRAS 16293−2422, comparable to that of 67P which is (1.4 ± 0.4) × 
10−2.  

C2H6S, together with CH3SH, was detected in Orion KL by Kolesniková et al. (2014). Their estimated 
CH3SH/C2H6S ratio is ~5 which is similar to 11 ± 4 found for 67P (Calmonte et al., 2016). The two ratios 
are surprisingly close, even though Orion KL is a high-mass star-forming region. This similarity is in 
accordance with a common process at work, namely grain surface chemistry in the pre-stellar clouds.  

Comparison of 67P sulfur with ALMA Band 7 data for IRAS 16293–2422 B showed that OCS in 67P 
relative to H2S is depleted, whereas the ratios of SO/SO2 and CH3SH/H2CS are very similar 
(Drozdovskaya et al., 2018). The differences in sulfur bearing species could be due to the levels of UV 
radiation during the initial collapse of the systems. These levels may have varied and potentially may 
have been higher for IRAS 16293-2422 B due to its binary nature, enhancing radiolysis of H2S.  

If we look at the overall sulfur abundance in comets and use the partitioning of sulfur between dust 
and gas derived in comet 1P/Halley, sulfur in comets relative to oxygen is compatible with the  
cosmic abundance of S/O = 2.7%(Calmonte et al., 2016). The depletion seen in pre-stellar clouds may 
therefore just be due to the bias of remote sensing as sulfur on dust grains or in the ice is not 
accessible. The James Webb Telescope may help to shed more light on the missing sulfur in clouds.  

5.4  Halides and phosphorous  
Halides have been detected in the ISM in the form of HCl (Blake et al., 1985) and HF (Neufeld et al., 
1997). Ligterink & Kama (2018) searched for HBr and HBr+ in the Orion KL Hot Core. They deduced an 
upper limit on HBr/H2O which is a factor 10 below the ratio measured in comet 67P. However, using 
a chemical network, they conclude that this result is compatible with cometary bromine as most HBr 
is not in the gas-phase. Cometary HBr is predominantly formed in icy grain mantles not accessible to 
remote sensing. A search for HCl and HF in comets 103P/Hartley 2 and C/2009 P1 (Garradd) by 
Bockelée-Morvan et al. (2012) with Herschel resulted in no detection for HCl and marginal detection 

18 

 
for HF in comet C/2009 P1.  For 67P HF, HCl and HBr and the isotopologues of HCl and HBr were all 
measured by ROSINA (Dhooghe et al., 2017).  Their ratios relative to water are not constant over the 
mission. De Keyser et al. (2017) explain this by release from halogen-containing water ice mantles on 
refractory grains. At least for HCl and most probably also for HBr there is strong indication that they 
could be stored as ammonium chloride (NH4Cl and NH4Br, respectively) on cometary grains (Altwegg 
et al., 2019). Table 3 shows the relative abundances for the halides in the coma of 67P, in the Sun and 
the Earth. While Cl and F are comparable to the solar values from Lodders (2010), the Earth is lacking 
halogens. All of the halogens in 67P are in line with what is known from chondrites. This similarity 
probably also confirms that halides correlate with dust grains. 

Recently, a study with ALMA of the gas surrounding the low-mass protostar IRAS 16293-2422 has 
yielded the detection of the first organo-chloride, CH3Cl (Fayolle et al., 2017). This molecule was 
thought to be a biomarker as it is abundantly produced on Earth by biological activity. CH3Cl was 
revealed in 67P, although only during very dusty periods when HCl was at its highest abundance. This 
detection yielded a relative abundance CH3Cl/HCl = (4 ± 2) x 10-3. Comparing the ALMA detection and 
the value in 67P the ratio CH3Cl/CH3OH for the star forming region of ~ 7x10-5 and for 67P of (0.007 to 
6) x 10-4 are very similar (Fayolle et al., 2017). This result is a clear indication that CH3Cl is not 
necessarily related to biological activities. 

Phosphorous is both scarce and ubiquitous in the universe. It is an essential ingredient for life as we 
know it. Its cosmic abundance is much smaller than that of nitrogen ([P]/[N] = 4x10-3), which is in the 
same valence group. This is due to the complex nucleosynthesis of the P nuclide in the cores of 
massive stars, leading to a wide distribution of this element through the ISM. A general tendency 
towards more oxidized phosphorus compounds with chemical evolution proceeds from ISM to clouds 
to protoplanetary condensed matter phases. Several phosphorous bearing molecules have been 
detected in the ISM and in clouds: e.g.  PN in clouds (Ziurys, 1987), PO in the envelope of the oxygen-
rich supergiant star VY Canis Majoris (Tenenbaum et al., 2007), CP (Guélin et al. 1990) and HCP 
(Agúndez et al., 2007) in the AGB star envelope IRC +10 216. In the solar system, phosphorous is very 
often in the form of phosphate (PO4), except in the atmosphere of Jupiter where phosphine PH3 has 
been detected. In meteorites, P is the 13th most abundant element, although it ranks 18th in cosmic 
abundance. Thus, it is enriched in meteorites as well as in the Earth mantle. In comets, phosphorous 
is quite elusive. Before the Rosetta mission, there were no detections, neither in the gas nor in the 
dust. A clear signature on the exact mass of P was detected in the coma of 67P (Altwegg et al., 2016). 
At that time it was not clear which molecule was responsible for the P in the spectrum. A careful 
analysis recently revealed that the most probable parent is PO (Rivilla et al., in preparation). The peak 
in the mass spectra at m/z = 46.969 is not unique as it could belong to C35Cl as well as PO. However, 
this peak correlates well with the peak at m/z = 30.974 (P) over time, but not with 35Cl. Also there is 
no peak at the corresponding mass for C37Cl. For PH3, there is only an upper limit of PH3 / PO < 30% 
due to overlapping masses of H2S, 16O18O and H2O2. For CP/PO the upper limit is at < 3% and for 
PN/PO at < 10%. No higher oxidation states were found.  
These findings are compatible with gas phase chemistry of phosphorous in a cold environment. P+ 
does not react in the gas phase with H2 nor does PH+ (Thorne et al., 1984). P+ can react with O2, CO2 
and H2O to form the very stable PO+ and with NH3 to form PN, which makes PO and PN the most 
plausible phosphorous bearing molecules in dark clouds and pre-solar nebula (Millar, 1991) for gas 
phase chemistry. However, gas-grain chemistry would probably freeze out and hydrogenate 
phosphorous as PH3. A model by Charnley and Millar (1994) shows that PH3, released in hot cores 
from grains has a lifetime of <105 y before being converted mostly into PO and PN. This may explain 
why no PH3 is detected in hot cores / star forming regions.  The detection of PO and the non-
detection of PH3 in 67P may therefore be the result of gas phase chemistry or the result of gas-grain 
chemistry and subsequent destruction of PH3. 

19 

 
 
Inorganic nitrogen bearing species 

5.5 
Contrary to phosphorous, nitrogen readily hydrogenates to form NH3. Ammonia is the most 
abundant nitrogen-bearing molecule in comets, with a relative abundance compared to water of 0.8 
%. It is readily observed through the daughter products NH and NH2. An overview of all measured 
cometary values is given in dello Russo et al. (2016). What is interesting about ammonia is that it 
seems to have a higher abundance for comets coming close to the Sun, showing a distributed source, 
with ammonia being released from grains in the coma. For 67P, NH3 followed H2O through the entire 
mission, similar to O2 (Gasc et al., 2017), although NH3 is much more volatile. It seems to be very well 
embedded in water ice or be present in a less volatile form than pure ammonia, e.g. as ammonium 
salt. During dust impacts, ammonia could become two orders of magnitudes higher than the 
“normal” value, also pointing to a less volatile form of NH3 correlated with dust grains. Work on 
ammonia is ongoing (Altwegg et al., 2019).  

The other inorganic nitrogen-bearing molecule is NO, which was also found in 67P. The release of this 
molecule is correlated more with CO2 than with H2O. No NOx with x>1 was found. This is similar to the 
case of PO. The relative abundance NO/H2O is ~2x10-4 (Wampfler et al. 2018).  

5.6  Saturated organics  
One of the big surprises from the Giotto mission more than 30 years ago was the amount of heavy 
species detected in the cometary coma (Korth et al., 1986). These species were clearly attributed to 
organics. In the ensuing 30 years, many complex organic molecules have been found by remote 
sensing in comets (e.g., ethanol, ethylene glycol, formamide and glycolaldehyde in comet C/2014 Q2 
(Lovejoy) and C/2012 F6 (Lemmon), respectively (Biver et al., 2014; 2015). Due to the high sensitivity 
of the ROSINA instrument and the long period of observation, this list of detected organic molecules 
has now almost doubled.  

5.6.1  Aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons  
Comets contain quite a lot of pure hydrocarbons like methane, ethane, ethylene, etc. They are, 
however, not easy to detect by remote sensing, because they have zero dipole moments. With mass 
spectrometry, they are relatively easy to identify, as their mass compared to the integer mass is large 
due to the many hydrogens attached. Fig. 8 shows the hydrocarbons in 67P (Schuhmann et al., 2018; 
LeRoy et al., 2015) at ~1.4 au. What is striking is that the abundances of these hydrocarbons up to 
propane are very similar during the preperihelion part in May-June 2015, which we consider to be 
the best proxy for the nucleus bulk abundance (see 2.2). However, the relative abundances, 
especially between C2H6 and CH4 vary by several orders of magnitude over the mission, C2H6 being 
much more abundant than CH4 at large heliocentric distances. This is difficult to explain, but is 
probably related to how these species are embedded in the dust-ice matrix in the comet. Clearly 
more work is needed on the desorption processes. Butane and pentane are only seen in conjunction 
with dust. This may be due to their higher sublimation temperatures. ROSINA clearly detected 
benzene and the more abundant toluene, a molecule that tentatively has also been detected by 
Ptolemy on the lander (Altwegg et al., 2017). During dust events, there are also tentative detections 
of octane, xylene and naphthalene in the mass spectra of ROSINA. This, however, is still work in 
progress.  

5.6.2  Other organics 
An overview of identified organics by ROSINA is given in table 4b (Altwegg et al., 2017; Schuhmann et 
al. in preparation). With mass spectrometry, it is not always possible to separate isomers, as they 
have the exact same mass and differ only in their fragmentation pattern upon electron impact 
ionization. Species that could be an isomer and species where the detection is tentative are marked.  

20 

 
CnHmO bearing molecules are as abundant in the ROSINA mass spectra as pure hydrocarbons 
(Altwegg et al., 2017). These are mostly alcohols up to pentanol (5 carbon). In addition there are also 
aldehydes and acetone. Again there is a clear correlation between dust impacts and higher mass 
oxygen bearing hydrocarbons. The more dust is registered by COPS the more heavy molecules can be 
detected. Molecules with two oxygen atoms are on a 10% level comparable to the CnHmO1 organics 
and are made up of acids and ethylene glycol. Benzoic acid is an aromatic ring molecule. CHN-
compounds are at a similar level as the CHO2-compounds. Amines are clearly identified as well as 
hydrogen cyanide and acetonitrile. The amides make up the group of CHNO, together with iso-cyanic 
acid and glycine, the only amino acid detected. CHS- and CHOS- compounds are quite abundant, 
probably because sulfur and nitrogen have similar chemistry (see above). More work is needed to 
distinguish between organics embedded in ice and therefore presenting a nucleus source or organics 
being sublimating from dust grains in the coma presenting a distributed source. 

The detection of glycine (Altwegg et al., 2016) was not completely surprising as glycine was also 
detected in Stardust samples (Elsila et al., 2009). It was, however, unclear if glycine exists in a volatile 
phase. Glycine was first detected during a close flyby of the S/C at the nucleus. This facilitated the 
investigation of the link between glycine and grains. Indeed, glycine seems to behave differently with 
cometocentric distance than the overall density in the coma, which makes a distributed (grain) 
source likely. Together with glycine methylamine was also found, which opens a possible pathway for 
the formation of amino acid without liquid water. Methylamine is only present together with glycine. 
Formation of glycine without liquid water can be made by photochemistry of methylamine and CO2 
ice (Bossa et al., 2010). This is consistent with chemistry in interstellar icy dust mantles (Garrod, 
2013) or ultraviolet irradiation of ice (Bossa et al., 2010) and subsequent accretion in the comet.  

5.7  Unsaturated organics  
Saturated complex hydrocarbons, which in an astrochemical sense are hydrocarbons containing more 
than 5 atoms, evade detection in the ISM, clouds or star forming regions, mostly because of their 
small dipole moments. In contrast, quite a large number of unsaturated hydrocarbons have been 
detected (Herbst & van Dishoeck, 2009). Among them are predominantly CxH, x=2…8.  

From the ROSINA measurements, it is evident that unsaturated molecules also play an important role 
in comets. Schuhmann et al., (2018) estimate that the total amount of saturated aliphatic and 
aromatic hydrocarbons is lower than the amount of the unsaturated species. The potential 
contribution of cycloalkanes is calculated to be almost negligible, which gives a ratio of saturated / 
unsaturated hydrocarbons = 44 / 56. The same trend is also seen for species containing oxygen 
and/or nitrogen. Unsaturated species can be the product of incomplete hydrogen addition or 
destruction of saturated species by UV / cosmic rays. The unsaturated hydrocarbons in the comet 
have generally more than one hydrogen, contrary to what has been observed in the ISM. It is difficult 
to say if this is due to a different composition / production mechanism or just a detection bias. Again, 
there is a clear correlation between the amount of detected molecules, their masses and the dust 
seen either by ROSINA-COPS and / or the star trackers of Rosetta. Heavier species appear only with 
dust and are mostly seen during the period of frequent outbursts of the comet near perihelion.  

The COSIMA instrument on Rosetta analyzed cometary refractories. One of the important findings is 
that organics make up almost 50% of the refractories by weight (Bardyn et al., 2017). Another 
important finding is that the carbon in dust particles emitted by comet 67P (Fray et al., 2016) is 
bound in very large macromolecular compounds. This is similar to the insoluble organic matter (IOM) 
found in the carbonaceous chondrite meteorites, although the macromolecular compounds are less 
modified before and/or after being incorporated into the comet than the IOM found in meteorites. 
As ROSINA has seen spurious peaks up to m/z =172, the end of its mass range, it is very likely that we 
have to revise our notion that there are volatiles in a comet on one hand and refractories on the 

21 

 
 
other hand. There is most likely a smooth transition from the very volatile species like CH4 to 
insoluble macromolecules in the refractory part.  

There were several attempts to classify comets according to their C2- and C3- abundances. Taxonomic 
classification of comets is based (in part) on their volatile composition by identifying a “typical” 
composition and then classifying the comets according to their enrichment/depletion. Systematic 
taxonomic classifications of comets have been done covering a number of radical species (C2, C3, CN, 
NH, NH2, OH, O(1D)), and the dust continuum measured as Af (a quantityconsisting of the dust 
albedo, the filling factor and the radius of the coma) describing the dust fluxas these quantities are 
accessible to remote sensing. (Cochran et al. 2012, 130 comets; A’Hearn et al. 1995, 85 comets; Fink 
2009, 50 comets; Langland-Shula & Smith 2011, 26 comets). 

Despite decades of trying to clearly identify the parent molecules of these radicals, there are only a 
few established facts. Generally, NH and NH2 radicals are attributed to NH3 photodissociation. HCN is 
probably the main parent of CN, but not the only one, although no alternative has been identified so 
far. C2 has been connected with parents such as C2H2 and C2H6 (Helbert et al. 2005) with mixed 
success. More recently, Weiler (2012) studied the chemistry of C2 and C3 in cometary comae and 
concluded that starting from C2H2, C2H6 and C3H4, the influence of ethane on the C2 production has to 
be very minor. Looking at the data from Rosetta, we conclude that there are most probably many 
parents for C2 as well as for C3. C3H4 is not the most abundant C3 component and is therefore 
probably not the only main contributor to C3. There are many saturated species containing 2 or more 
C atoms. However, there are even more unsaturated species which can easily be photo destructed in 
the coma to yield either C2 or C3. E.g it is known that the photo-destruction rate of benzene is rather 
high (1.1 x 10-3 s, Crovisier et al., 1994) and leads via C6H5 to the C3 radical. As the amount of heavier 
species (> C3) is connected to dust, the classification according to C2 and C3 may be heavily biased by 
the amount of dust released by the comet. For 67P, it has been found that depending of the 
hemisphere (southern vs. northern), the comet can be classified as being depleted or normal (Le Roy 
et al., 2015). This is due to the different evolution of the surfaces. Whether a comet is classified in 
one category or another may depend on when exactly it was observed, the specific geometry of the 
comet (spin axis), and the evolution of its surfaces, and not due to a fundamental different 
composition. 

Volatile organics represent in total mass about 1% of the volatiles. Organics in the refractories are 
almost 50% of the total mass of refractories. With the amount of water deduced from the Xe-
isotopes in chapter 4.7 which we estimate to be about 1% of the terrestrial surface water, we get a 
very substantial amount of carbon delivered to the early Earth. Even if most organics did not survive 
the impact into the Earth atmosphere and to the surface, the amount of organcis still represents a 
significant part of today’s total carbon inventory (Chyba et al., 1990).  

5.8  Summary of molecular composition 
Overall, cometary volatiles detected in 67P present a very rich chemistry, much more so than 
anticipated. Looking at table 4, 67P has more than doubled the number of parent species from 27 to 
66. 39 of the 66 parent species have also been detected in clouds of low and high mass stars. For the 
others, detection may be difficult due to weak transition lines (e.g., for aliphatic saturated 
hydrocarbons or noble gases) or the abundance might be too small (e.g., for HBr). However, the 
many unidentified lines in high-resolution spectra from ALMA may contain more “cometary” 
molecules. On the other hand, the analysis of the ROSINA data is by far not finished and more 
detections are likely to come. For many of the species, there are no relative abundances available yet 
due to time-consuming calibration efforts of the instruments. Once this calibration is available, more 
meaningful comparison with other comets and the ISM will be possible.  

22 

 
So many molecules are common to comets and to the pre-stellar stages and available molecular 
abundances are very similar to those in the ISM. Figure 9 shows a comparison of data from 67P and 
from dark clouds, high and low mass protostellar clouds, all normalized to methanol. A perfect match 
would be on the diagonal line. In general and considering the uncertainties of observations, they all 
follow the same trend. There are a few outliers, namely the cooler, less dense outer part of the 
envelope around the low mass protostar IRAS 16293–2422 (16293c) and the dark cloud L134N. This 
might be due to regions where molecules may only partly be in the gas phase, especially as for the 
warmer part of the low mass protostar region IRAS 16293-2422 (16293w) the correlation with 67P is 
quite good. Surprisingly, also high mass protostar regions have similar abundances for complex 
organics as 67P. More data, especially on low mass star formation regions become now available. An 
interesting cross-check will be a comparison between the results from the PILS survey by Jorgensen 
et al. (2016;2018) and 67P in the near future.  

These similarities suggest a common origin, as already deduced from the isotoplogues of water and 
other species. The presence of O2, S2, PO and others also clearly points to a pre-solar origin for these 
species at least.  

6  Elemental abundances  

Fig. 10, left panel shows a comparison of the main elemental abundances for dust and volatiles, 
extending the plot in Geiss et al. (1987) to 67P. Dust data used are from Bardyn et al. (2018). As the 
dust to ice ratio is still being debated for 67P, we show the values for a 1:1 and a 3:1 dust/ice ratio. 
For comparison, we also show values for the solar nebula, comet 1P/Halley with a dust/ice ratio of 
1:2, for carbonaceous chondrites and the Earth (mantle and crust). Apart from 67P, 1P/Halley is the 
only comet where we have knowledge about dust and volatiles. It is clear from this plot that 1P and 
67P are not fundamentally different, although they belong to different comet families. The 
differences can mostly be explained by the different dust/ice ratios assumed. Both comets have their 
full complement of C and O, but are deficient in N. This N-deficiency is still unclear and seems to be 
slightly more pronounced for 67P than for 1P.  

Especially the NH3 to water ratio is almost a factor 10 larger for comet 1P (1.5%, Meier et al. 1994) 
than for 67P. Dello Russo et al. (2016) have shown that comets coming close to the Sun generally 
have much higher NH3 abundances.  1P was encountered by Giotto at 0.9 au outbound whereas the 
data for 67P are between 1.7 and 1.4 au inbound. As discussed previously, NH3 seems to be, at least 
partly, in a more refractory phase, probably as ammonium salt (Altwegg et al., 2019) than as pure 
NH3 in H2O, which might even explain the apparent general N deficiency in comets. Assuming that the 
true NH3/H2O abundance in 67P is close to what is seen in comets with small perihelion distances 
(NH3/H2O ~3.5 %) and where therefore ammonium salts are efficiently released from dust (dello 
Russo et al., 2016), would bring the N-abundance of 67P and 1P almost to solar (see fig. 10, N*).  

Compared to meteorites, comets preserve much more of the volatile elements relative to silicon. This 
is not only due to the ices, which are missing in meteorites, but also due to the large amount of 
organics containing C and O in the dust (Bardyn et al., 2017). The comparison with meteorites clearly 
shows that the notion that comets represent the most pristine material in the solar system is correct 
not only for OCC’s but also for JFC’s.  

Fig. 10, right panel shows elemental abundances in 67P relative to oxygen. Comets do not condense 
H2 as they are not cold enough and not massive enough. Noble gases are deficient compared to solar, 
probably because they did not freeze out or have been lost in the Kuiper belt or the Centaur stage. 
The deficiency of 67P in some heavier elements like sulfur or chlorine relative to CI meteorites and 
solar is probably due to the fact that the cometary abundances given here represent only the ice of 

23 

 
the comet, and not the dust. For a complete picture we have to wait for more results from the dust 
analyzer COSIMA. 

7  From the ISM to comets 

Cometary volatiles are probably the best accessible proxies to pre-solar material. Looking again at fig. 
1 it is clear that cometary chemistry indeed reflects all of the stages from the ISM to life on Earth. 
Noble gas isotopes point to the nucleosynthesis at work feeding the ISM. The non-solar isotopic 
ratios, especially for xenon, are a clear indication of a poorly mixed cloud and proto-solar nebula. 
Traces of cloud chemistry are found in the sulfur species, especially the semi-volatile sulfur polymers, 
which have to be the result of photolysis or radiolysis of H2S on grain surfaces. O2 is most likely the 
result of gas-grain chemistry in a relatively warm dark cloud. The large overlap in molecules seen in 
67P and in clouds / star forming regions and their similar abundance ratios may point to a common 
origin. The high [D2O/HDO] vs [HDO/H2O] ratio can be explained by chemical models looking at the 
evolution from the pre-solar stage through the collapse of the disk.  The fact that this ratio is 
preserved in comets and the presence of a very volatile sulfur component S2 imply that the ice never 
sublimated in the protoplanetary nebula. This as well as maybe rapid grain growth limits the chemical 
processes to which cometary ices have been exposed in the protoplanetary disk. The environment in 
the disk midplane where comets may have formed does not allow for much chemistry due to low 
temperatures, and low UV and cosmic ray fluxes although the latter is still being debated (Eistrup et 
al., 2016; 2018). 

The many non-solar isotopic ratios detected in 67P’s volatiles suggest a protoplanetary disk which is 
not homogeneized. The fluffy dust detected in 67P (Rotundi et al., 2015), the high porosity of dust 
grains found by the COSIMA instrument (Langevin et al., 2016) and the high porosity of the overall 
comet (Paetzold et al., 2015) do not allow for fast collisions during accretion, but rather for a gentle 
accretion. This gentle accretion is probably in line with the so-called pressure bumps seen by ALMA in 
the dust continuum in several protoplanetary disks (e.g. Van der Marel et al., 2013).  

In the Stardust samples from Wild 2, high temperature refractories (CAI’s) have been detected, which 
indicate radial mixing in the disk. CAI’s are thought to be formed in the inner solar system, well inside 
the water snow line.  In 67P, there is only one tentative detection of such a grain (Paquette et al., 
2016). The large variation of D/H found in comets calls into question the notion that OCC’s and JFC’s 
have been formed at different locations in the protoplanetary nebula. The two families experienced 
different dynamical histories. It would be interesting to know if comets like Hartley 2, with a 
terrestrial D/H, contain a large abundance of CAI’s or if Wild 2 has a low D/H in water. Unfortunately, 
this information must wait for encounters with these comets.  

The mean D/H for comets of ~ 3.6 × 10-4 - although the sample may still be rather small – tells us that 
the Earth did not get its bulk surface water from comets. However, from the isotopic signature of 
xenon in our Earth atmosphere and the signature of xenon in 67P, we can deduce the amount of 
water (~1% of terrestrial surface water, Marti et al., 2017) and therefore of carbon / organics 
delivered by comets. While the amount of water is rather insignificant and does not dominate the 
terrestrial D/H ratio, the amount of carbon is an important contribution to the Earth’s surface carbon 
inventory. Together with the rich organic chemistry observed in comets, this may make the notion 
that comet impacts sparked life on Earth more probable.  

24 

 
 
 
As most of these molecules are probably pre-stellar, similar conditions as on Earth with impacting 
comets could exist elsewhere. However, the detection of many molecules in a comet, which were 
before classified as biomarkers, makes the detection of biological activity elsewhere much more 
complicated. Molecules like e.g. CH3Cl, if detected in a planetary atmosphere, may have an abiotic 
origin. Combinations of molecules like abundant O2 combined with CH4 were thought to be indicative 
of ongoing biology, but of course this is not so in comets. To rule out false detection of biological 
processes will therefore be a very major challenge when looking for life on exoplanets.  

8  Summary points 

  Comets are the most pristine bodies found in our solar system as demonstrated by their 

almost solar abundance of the light elements C, N and O. 

  Comets contain a very rich complement of organics with abundances similar to presolar 

material found in clouds and star forming regions. 

  Many isotopic ratios, e.g. Si, Xe and S in comets are non-solar, pointing to a not well-mixed 

protoplanetary disk. 

  The wide range of D/H values found in cometary water independent of the comet family 

point to a formation of comets over a large radial distance in the early solar disk. 

  The high [D2O/HDO] / [HDO/H2O] ratio found in comet 67P are indicative of presolar, never 

sublimated cometary water.  

  The high abundance of O2 is indicative of gas-grain chemistry. 
  The presence of sulfur polymers S2-S4 point to grain surface chemistry through photolysis / 

radiolysis.  

  Three noble gases, namely Ar, Kr and Xe have been detected in the coma of 67P, whereby Ar 
seems to be depleted relative to the other two, probably because JFC’s have lost highly 
volatiles on their way inwards from the Kuiper belt / Scattered disk. 

  The xenon isotopic ratios measured in 67P can explain the long standing question about the 
origin of the terrestrial atmospheric xenon. Together with the noble gases the amount of 
organics delivered by comets may be highly significant. 

 

9  Future issues for cometary science 

  The upcoming JWST mission will be able to directly observe ice in the interstellar medium as 
well as in comets. This will help to better understand the ongoing chemistry in clouds and 
star forming regions. Together with ALMA observations and future cometary missions, the 
different stages from the ISM to planets and maybe life can be followed studying and 
comparing their chemical compositions. 
In order to solve the problem of heterogeneity between comets, the next comet mission 
should target a comet as different from 67P as possible, e.g. Hartley 2 where we know that 
D/H is low. 

 

  Main belt comets in the asteroid belt may present an intermediate population between 

comets and asteroids. Exploring such a body from close up, especially looking at deuterated 
water, is an important step towards understanding the formation of these icy bodies.  

  Exploring other icy bodies, especially moons of Jupiter and Saturn with in situ 

instrumentation could also give clues on transport of matter and chemistry in the 
protoplanetary disk.  

25 

 
 
 
  Future cometary missions should carry /consist of a larger lander, being able to look at the 

interior of the comet to at least > 1m, hopefully much deeper. 

  Sample return of refractories opens the possibility to study mineralogy of the organics, which 

was largely missed by Stardust due to the high velocity impacts of dust grains. 

  Cryogenic sample return below 60K (sublimation of CO2) with a sample from the deep 

interior has to be the final goal of cometary science.  

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT 
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might 
be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review. 

Acknowledgment 
The authors would like to thank the following institutions and agencies, which supported this work: 
Work at University of Bern was funded by the State of Bern, the Swiss National Science Foundation 
and by the European Space Agency PRODEX Program.  ROSINA research at Southwest Research 
Institute is funded by NASA through the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.  All ROSINA data are the work of 
the international ROSINA team (scientists, engineers and technicians from Switzerland, France, 
Germany, Belgium and the US) over the past 25 years, which we herewith gratefully acknowledge. 
Rosetta is an ESA mission with contributions from its member states and NASA. We gratefully 
acknowledge the many useful inputs from the editor and referee, EF van Dishoeck, which helped to 
significantly improve the manuscript. 

Literature Cited 

Agúndez M, Cernicharo J & Guélin M 2007 Ap. J Letter  662(2):L91-94 
A’Hearn MF, Feldman PD, Schleicher DG 1983. Astrophys. J. 274:L99 – 103 
A'Hearn MF, Millis RC, Schleicher DO, Osip DJ & Birch PV. 1995. Icarus, 118(2):223-70. 
A’Hearn MF, Belton, MJ Delamere WA et al. 2011. Science, 332(6036):1396-400 
A'Hearn MF 2011. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 49:281-99 
Allègre C, Manhès G, Lewin E 2001. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 185: 49-69 
Altwegg K, Balsiger H, Bar-Nun A et al. 2014. Science, 1261952 
Altwegg K, Balsiger H, Bar-Nun A et al. 2016. Science Adv. 2(5): e1600285 
Altwegg K, Balsiger H, Berthelier JJ et al.  2017a. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, 375(2097) : 20160253  
Altwegg K, Balsiger H, Berthelier JJ et al. 2017b. MNRAS, 469 (Suppl_2), S130-41 
Altwegg K, Balsiger H, Berthelier JJ et al., 2019. in preparation 
Atreya SK, Mahaffy PR, Niemann HB, Wong MH & Owen TC 2003. Planet. Space Sci. 51(2), 105-12 
Bachiller R, Pérez Gutiérrez M 1997. ApJ 487, L93 
Bally J, Langer WD  1982. Astrophys. J. 255: 143-8 
Balsiger H, Altwegg, K, Geiss J. 1995. JGR: Space Physics, 100(A4): 5827-34 
Balsiger H, Altwegg K, Bochsler P et al. 2007. Space Sci. Rev. 128(1-4):745-801 
Balsiger H, Altwegg K, Bar-Nun A, Berthelier JJ, Bieler A. et al. 2015. Science adv.1(8): e1500377 
Bardyn A, Baklouti D, Cottin H et al. 2017. MNRAS 469(Suppl_2):S712-22 
Bar-Nun A, Laufer D, Rebolledo O et al. 2013. The Science of Solar System Ices, ed. MS Gudipati, J 
Castillo-Rogez, pp. 487-499. Springer, New York  
Baertschi, P. 1976. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 31(3), 341-4 
Bieler A, Altwegg K, Balsiger H, Bar-Nun A, Berthelier JJ, et al. 2015. Nature 526(7575): 678 
Biver N, Bockelée-Morvan D, Crovisier J et al. 2002. Earth Moon Planets 90(1-4): 323-33 
Biver N, Bockelée-Morvan D, Debout V, Crovisier J, Boissier J et al. 2014. Astron. Astrophys. 566 : L5  
Biver N, Bockelée-Morvan D, Moreno R, Crovisier J, Colom P, et al. 2015. Science Adv. 1(9) :e1500863 
Biver N, Moreno R, Bockelée-Morvan D et al. 2016. Astron. Astrophys.589: A78 
Blake GA, Keene J & Phillips TG 1985. Astrophys. J. 295:501–6  

26 

 
 
 
 
Bockelée-Morvan D, Lis DC, Wink JE et al. 2000. Astron. Astrophys. 353:1101-14 
Bockelée-Morvan D, Biver N, Swinyard B et al. 2012 Astron. Astrophys. 544:L15 
Bockelée-Morvan D, Calmonte U, Charnley S, Duprat J, Engrand C 2015. Space sci. Rev. 197(1-4):47-
83 
Bossa JB, Borget F, Duvernay F, Theulé P, Chiavassa T 2010. J. Phys. Org. Chem. 23:333–9 
Bullock ES, McKeegan KD, Gounelle M, Grady MM & Russell SS 2010. Meteor.&Planetary Sci. 45(5): 
885-98 
Calmonte U, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2016. MNRAS 462(Suppl_1):S253-73 
Calmonte U, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2017. MNRAS 469(Suppl_2):S787-803  
Cazaux S, Caselli P & Spaans M 2011. Ap. J.  741(2):L34 
Charnley SB & Millar TJ 1994. MNRAS 270(3), 570-4 
Chyba CF, Thomas PJ, Brookshaw L & Sagan C 1990. Science, 249(4967), 366-73 
Cochran AL, Barker ES & Gray CL 2012 Icarus, 218(1), 144-68 
Cochran AL, Levasseur-Regourd AC, Cordiner M et al. 2015. Space sci. Rev.  197(1-4): 9-46 
Cochran, AL & McKay AJ 2018. ApJL 854(1), L10 
Cochran, AL & McKay AJ 2018. ApJL  856(1), L20 
Coradini A, Capaccioni F, Drossart P, Arnold G, Ammannito E 2007. Space sci. Rev. 128(1-4):529-59 
Cottin H & Fray N 2008. Space sci. Rev. 138(1-4):179-97 
Coutens A, Jørgensen JK, Persson MV et al. 2014. Ap. J Letter 792(1):L5 
Crovisier J 1994. JGR: Planets 99(E2):3777-81 
Davidsson BJR, Sierks H, Guettler C et al. 2016. Astron. Astrophys. 592:A63 
De Almeida AA & Singh PD 1986. Earth Moon Planets 36:117 
Decock A 2014. Etude des produits de dissociation de H2O dans un échantillon de comètes d'origines 
variées, PhD thesis, Université de Liège, Liège, Belgium 
De Keyser J, Dhooghe F, Altwegg K et al. 2017. MNRAS, 469(Suppl_2):S695-711 
Dello Russo ND, Kawakita H, Vervack Jr RJ & Weaver HA 2016. Icarus 278:301-332 
Dhooghe F, De Keyser J, Altwegg K et al. 2017. MNRAS 472(2):1336-45 
Drozdovskaya MN, van Dishoeck EF, Jørgensen JK, Calmonte U, van der Wiel MH 2018. MNRAS 
476(4):4949-64 
Dulieu F, Minissale M & Bockelée-Morvan D 2017. Astron. Astrophys. 597:A56 
Eberhardt P, Reber M, Krankowsky D & Hodges RR 1995. Astron. Astrophys. 302:301 
Eberhardt P 1999. In Composition and Origin of Cometary Materials, pp. 45-52. Springer, Dordrecht 
Ehrenfreund P, Schutte WA 2000. In Astrochemistry: From Molecular Clouds to Planetary Systems, 
IAU Symposium 197, ed. YC Minh, EF van Dishoeck, pp. 135–46. Sogwipo: Astron. Soc. Pac. 
Eistrup C, Walsh C & Van Dishoeck EF 2016. Astron. Astrophys. 595, A83 
Eistrup C & Walsh C 2018. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.03329. 
Elsila JE, Glavin DP, Dworkin JP 2009. Meteorit. Planet. Sci 44:1323–30  
Esposito LW, Winick JR & Stewart AI 1979. GJR Letter, 6(7):601-4 
Fayolle EC, Öberg KI, Jørgensen JK, Altwegg K, Calcutt, H et al. 2017. Nature astr. 1(10):703 
Fink U 2009. Icarus, 201(1), 311-34 
Fougere N, Altwegg K, Berthelier JJ et al. 2016. MNRAS 462(Suppl_1):S156-69 
Fray N, Bardyn A, Cottin H, et al. 2016 Nature 538(7623):72 
Füri E & Marty  B 2015. Nature Geo., 8(7):515 
Gao X & Thiemens MH 1993a. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 57(13):3159-69 
Gao X & Thiemens MH 1993b. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 57(13):3171-76 
Ferrante RF, Moore MH, Spiliotis MM & Hudson RL 2008. Astrophys. J., 684(2), 1210 
Furuya K, Van Dishoeck EF & Aikawa Y 2016. Astron. Astrophys. 586:A127 
Furuya K,  Drozdovskaya MN, Visser R et al.  2017. Astron. Astrophys. 599, A40 
García-Rojas J, Esteban C, Peimbert M et al. 2006, MNRAS 368:253 
Garrod RT, 2013. Astrophys. J. 765:60  
Gasc S, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2017. MNRAS 469(Suppl_2):S108-17 
Geiss J 1988. In Exploration of Halley’s Comet, pp. 859-866. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg  
Gibb EL, Nummelin A, Bergman P, Irvine W, Whittet DCB, 2000a. BAAS 32:712 

27 

 
Gibb EL, Whittet DCB, Schutte WA et al. 2000b. Ap. J.  536(1):347 
Gilmour JD & Turner G 2007. Ap. J. 657(1):600 
Glassmeier KH, Boehnhardt H, Koschny D, Kührt E & Richter I 2007. Space Sci. Rev. 128(1-4):1-21 
Greenberg AN, Laufer D, Bar-Nun A T2017. MNRAS 469:S517–21  
Guélin M, Cernicharo J, Paubert G& Turner BE 1990. Astron. Astrophys. 230:L9-11 
Guilbert-Lepoutre A, Rosenberg ED, Prialnik D & Besse S 2016. MNRAS 462(Suppl_1):S146-S155 
Gulkis S, Frerking M, Crovisier J et al. 2007. Space Sci. Rev., 128(1-4):561-97 
Gyngard F, Zinner E, Nittler LR, Morgand A, Stadermann FJ & Hynes KM 2010. Ap. J. 717(1):107 
Hansen KC, Altwegg K, Berthelier JJ et al. 2016. MNRAS 462(Suppl_1):S491-506 
Hartogh P, Lis DC, Bockelée-Morvan D et al. 2011. Nature 478(7368):218 
Hässig M, Altwegg K, Balsiger H, et al. 2015. Science, 347(6220):aaa0276 
Hässig M, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2017. Astron. Astrophys. 605:A50 
Hatchell J, Thompson MA, Millar TJ, Macdonald GH, 1998a, Astron. Astrophys.338:713 
Hatchell J, Millar TJ, Rodgers SD, 1998b. Astron. Astrophys. 332:695 
Hatchell J, Thompson MA, Millar TJ, Macdonald GH 1998c, Astron. Astrophys. 133:29 
Hatchell J, Roberts H, Millar TJ. 1999. Astron. Astrophys. 346:227–32 
Heaton BD, Little LT, Bishop IS, 1989. Astron. Astrophys. 213:148 
Heays AN, Bosman AV & van Dishoeck EF 2017. Astron. Astrophys. 602, A105 
Heck PR, Hoppe P & Huth J 2012. Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 47(4):649-59 
Helbert J, Rauer H, Boice DC & Huebner WF 2005. Astron. Astrophys. 442(3): 1107-20 
Helmich F.P., van Dischoeck E.F., Jansen D.J., 1996, Astron. Astrophys. 313:657 
Helmich FP, van Dishoeck EF. 1997. Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 124:205–53 
Herbst E & Van Dishoeck EF 2009. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 47: 427-80 
Heritier KL, Altwegg K, Berthelier JJ et al. 2018. Nature com., 9(1):2580 
Hermsen W, Wilson TL, Walmsley CM & Henkel C 1988. Astron. Astrophys. 201:285-98 
Hily-Blant P, Magalhaes V, Kastner J et al. 2017. Astron. Astrophys 603, L6 
Hirschmann MM 2006. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. 34:629-53 
Hoppe P, Fujiya W & Zinner E 2012. Ap. J. Letter 745(2):L26 
Hoppe P, Rubin M & Altwegg K 2018. Space Sci.Rev., in print 
Howk JC, Sembach KR & Savage BD 2006. ApJ 637:333 
Hutsemekers D, Manfroid J, Jehin E, Zucconi JM & Arpigny C 2008. Astron. Astrophys. 490(3):L31-4 
Irvine WM, Dickens JE, Lovell AJ et al. 1999. Earth Moon Planets 78:29–35 
Jenkins EB 2009. ApJ 700:1299 
Jiménez-Escobar A & Caro GM 2011. Astronomy & Astrophysics, 536:A91 
Johansen A, Klahr H & Henning T 2011. Astron. Astrophys., 529, A62 
Jørgensen JK, Van der Wiel MHD, Coutens A et al. 2016. Astron. & Astrophys. 595, A117 
Jørgensen JK, Müller HSP, Calcutt Het al. 2018. Astron. Astrophys., in print 
Jutzi M, Benz W, Toliou A, Morbidelli A & Brasser R 2017. Astron. Astrophys. 597:A61 
Kama M, Caux E, López-Sepulcre A et al. 2015. Astron. Astrophys. 574:A107.7 
Keane JV, Tielens AGGM, Boogert ACA, Schutte WA & Whittet DCB 2001. Astron. Astrophys. 
376(1):254-70 
Keller HU, Mottola S, Davidsson B et al. 2015. Astron. Astrophys. 583:A34 
Kolesniková L, Tercero B, Cernicharo J et al.  2014. ApJ 784:L7 
Kolokolova L, Hanner MS, Levasseur-Regourd AC & Gustafson BÅ 2004. In Comets II, 577:184 
Korth A, Richter AK, Loidl A et al. 1986. Nature, 321(6067):335-6 
Kouchi A & Yamamoto T 1995. Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater. 30:83–107 
Kramer T, Läuter M, Rubin M & Altwegg K 2017. MNRAS 469(Suppl_2):S20-8 
Krankowsky D, Lämmerzahl P, Herrwerth I et al.1986. Nature, 321(6067):326-9 
LangevinY, Hilchenbach M, Ligier N,  et al. 2016. Icarus, 271, 76-97. 
Langland-Shula LE & Smith GH 2011. Icarus, 213(1):280-322 
Läuter M, Kramer T, Rubin M & Altwegg K 2018. Astron. Astrophys. submitted 
Le Roy L, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2015. Astron. Astrophys. 583:A1 
Lien DJ, (1990). Astrophys. J. 355, 680-692 (1990). 

28 

 
Ligterink NFW & Kama M 2018. Astron. Astrophy. 614, A112. 
Linke RA, Frerking MA & Thaddeus P 1979. ApJ 234:L139 
Liu N, Nittler LR, Alexander CMOD, Wang J, Pignatari M et al 2016 Astrophys. J. 820:140-53 
Lodders, K 2010. In Principles and perspectives in cosmochemistry, pp. 379-417. Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg. 
Lugaro M, Davis AM, Gallino R et al. 2003. Astrophys. J. 593:486-508  
Macdonald GH, Gibb AG, Habing RJ, Millar TJ 1996. . Astron. Astrophys. 119:333 
Majumdar L, Gratier P, Vidal T, Wakelam V, Loison JC, et al. 2016. MNRAS, 458:1859 
Maquet L 2015. Astron. Astrophys. 579:A78 
Marty B, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2017. Science 356(6342), 1069-72 
Mauersberger R, Ott U, Henkel C, Cernicharo J & Gallino R,  2004. Astron. Astrophys. 426:219-27 
McKeegan KD, Kallio APA, Heber VS et al. 2011. Science, 332(6037):1528-32 
Meier R, Eberhardt P, Krankowsky D & Hodges RR 1994. Astron. Astrophys. 287:268-78 
Meier R & A'Hearn MF 1997. Icarus, 125(1):164-94 
Meier R, Owen TC, Jewitt DC et al. 1998. Science 279(5357):1707-10 
Milam SN, Savage C, Brewster MA, Ziurys LM & Wyckoff S. 2005. Ap. J.  634(2): 1126 
Millar TJ 1991. Astron. Astrophys.242:241-6 
Millar TJ, Macdonald GH, Gibb AG, 1997. . Astron. Astrophys. 325:1163 
Morbidelli A, Chambers J, Lunine JI et al. 2000. Meteoritics & Planetary Science 35(6):1309-20 
Morbidelli A & Wood B J (2015). The Early Earth: Accretion and Differentiation, Geophysical 
Monograph, 212, 71-82 
Mousis O, Ronnet T, Brugger B  et al. 2016. Ap.J. Letter.  823(2):L41 
Müller HS, Belloche A, Xu LH et al. 2016. Astron. Astrophys.587:A92 
Müller HSP, Schlöder F, Stutzki J & Winnewisser G 2005. J. Mol. Struct. 742:215–227 
Müller HSP, Thorwirth S, Roth DA & Winnewisser G 2001. Astron. Astrophys. 370:L49-52 
Mumma MJ, Weaver HA, Larson HP, Davis DS & Williams M 1986. Science 232(4757):1523-8 
Mumma MJ & Charnley SB 2011. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 49:471-524   
Neufeld DA, Zmuidzinas J, Schilke P & Phillips TG 1997. Ap.J. Letter.  488(2):L141 
O’Brien DP, Izidoro A, Jacobson SA, Raymond SN & Rubie DC 2018. Space Science Reviews, 214(1), 47 
Ogliore RC, Nagashima K, Huss GR et al. 2015. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 166:74-91 
Ohishi M, Kaifu N. 1998. Faraday Discussion, 109:205–16 
Oort JH 1950. Bulletin of the Astronomical Institutes of the Netherlands, 11:91 
Ott U  2014. Chem. Erde 74, 519–44 
Paganini L, Mumma MJ, Gibb EL & Villanueva GL 2017. Ap.J. Letter. 836(2):L25 
Palme H, Lodders K & Jones A 2014. In Planets, Asteriods, Comets and The Solar System, Volume 2 of 
Treatise on Geochemistry (Second Edition), ed. AM Davis. pp 15-36. Elsevier  
Paquette JA, Engrand C, Stenzel O 2016. Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 51(7):1340-52 
Paquette JA, Engrand C, Hilchenbach M et al. 2018. MNRAS 477(3):3836-44 
Paquette JA, Hornung K, Stenzel OJ et al. 2017 MNRAS 469(Suppl_2):S230-7 
Pätzold M, Andert T, Hahn M et al. 2016 Nature, 530(7588):63 
Pearl J, Hanel R, Kunde V et al. 1979. Nature, 280:755-8 
Penzias AA, Solomon PM, Wilson RW & Jefferts KB 1971. ApJ  168:L53 
Pepin RO & Phinney D 1978. Space Science Center, University of Minnesota, 1. 
Pepin RO 2000. Space Sci. Rev. 92, 371–95 
Poitrasson F 2017. Rev. Min. Geo. 82:289-344  
Riva V, Drozdovskaya M, Altwegg K 2019. in preparation  
Robert F 2003. Space Sci. Rev. 106(1-4), 87-101 
Rodgers SD & Charnley SB 2006. Adv. Space Research, 38(9), 1928-31. 
Rotundi A, Sierks H, Della Corte V et al. 2015. Science, 347(6220):aaa3905 
Roueff E, Lis DC, Van der Tak FFS, Gerin M & Goldsmith PF 2005. Astron. Astrophys. 438(2):585-98 
Rubin M, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et  al. 2015a Science aaa6100 
Rubin M, Altwegg K, van Dishoeck EF & Schwehm G 2015b. ApJ 815:L11 
Rubin M, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2017. Astron. Astrophys. 601:A123 

29 

 
Rubin M, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2018. Science adv. 4(7) eaar6297 
Sakamoto N, Seto Y, Itoh S et al. 2007. Science 317(5835):231-3 
Savage BD, Sembach KR 1996. ApJ , 470:893 
Saxena PP, Singh M & Bhatnagar S 2003. Bull. Astron. Soc. of India, 31, 75-86. 
Schöier FL, Jørgensen JK, van Dishoeck EF & Blake GA 2002. Astron. Astrophys.390:1001 
Schroeder IRHG, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2018. Astron. Astrophys. in print 
Schroeder IRHG, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2019. In preparation 
Schuhmann M, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2018, Astron. Astrophys. in preparation 
Schutte WA. 1999. In Laboratory Astrophysics and Space Research, ed. P Ehrenfreund, K Krafft, H 
Kochan, V Pirronello, pp. 69–104. Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Shah RY & Wootten A 2001. Ap. J. 554(2):933 
Shinnaka Y, Fougere N, Kawakita H et al. 2017. Astron. J 153(2), 76 
Sierks H, Barbieri C, Lamy PL et al. 2015. Science 347(6220) aaa1044 
Sutton EC, Peng R, Danchi WC et al. 1995. Ap. J. Suppl. 97:455–96 
Taquet V, Charnley SB & Sipilä O (2014 Astrophys.J. 791(1), 1 
Taquet V, Furuya K, Walsh C & van Dishoeck EF 2016. MNRAS 462(Suppl_1):S99-115 
Taquet V, Furuya K, Walsh C & van Dishoeck EF 2017. arXiv:1711.02372 [astro-ph.EP] 
Taquet V, van Dishoeck EF, Swayne M et al. 2018. arXiv:1805.12492 [astro-ph.EP] 
Tenenbaum ED, Woolf NJ & Ziurys LM 2007 Ap.J. Letter.  666(1):L29 
Tercero B, Vincent L, Cernicharo J, Viti S, Marcelino N  2011. Astron. Astrophys. 528:A26 
Thi WF, Woitke P & Kamp I 2010. MNRAS 407:232–246  
Thorne LR, Anicich VG, Prasad SS & Huntress Jr WT 1984 Ap. J. 280:139-43 
Tieftrunk A, Pineau des Forets G, Schilke P, Walmsley CM 1994. Astron. Astrophys. 289:579 
Toon OB, Turco RP & Pollack JB 1982. Icarus, 51(2):358-73 
Tzou CY, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2019. Astron. Astrophys. in preparation 
Van der Marel N, Van Dishoeck EF, Bruderer S  et al. 2013. Science 340(6137):1199-202 
Van Dishoeck EF, Black JH 1988. Astrophys. J. 334:771-802 
Van Dishoeck EF, Blake GA, Jansen DJ, Groesbeck TD 1995. Astrophys. J. 447:760  
Van Dishoeck EF & Blake GA 1998. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36(1):317-68 
Vincent JB, A'Hearn MF, Lin ZY et al. 2016. MNRAS 462(Suppl_1):S184-94 
Walsh KJ & Morbidelli A 2011. Astron. Astrophys. 526:A126 
Wampfler S, Altwegg K, Balsiger H et al. 2019, in preparation 
Weiler M 2012. Astron. Astrophys. 538:A149 
Whipple FL 1950. Ap. J. 111:375-94 
Wilson TL & Rood RT 1994. Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 32:191-226  
Wilson TL 1999. Reports on Progress in Physics, 62(2):143 
Whittet DCB, Schutte WA, Tielens AGGM et al. 1996 Astron. Astrophys.  315:L357–60  
Woods PM, Occhiogrosso A, Viti S, Kaňuchová Z, Palumbo ME & Price SD 2015. MNRAS  450:1256 
Wurz P, Rubin M, Altwegg K et al. 2015. Astron. Astrophys. 583:A22 
Xu Y,  Zinner E, Gallino R, Heger A, Pignatari M & Lin Y 2015. Astrophys. J. 799:156 -78  
Yao Y & Giapis KP 2017. Nature com. 8:15298 
Yıldız UA, Acharyya K, Goldsmith PF et al. 2013. Astron. Astrophys. 558: A58 
Yurimoto H & Kuramoto K 2004. Science, 305(5691):1763-66 
Zinner E 2014. In: Meteorites and Cosmochemical Processes, ed. A.M. Davis, pp. 181-213 Vol. 1 Treatise 
on Geochemistry, 2nd Ed. (Exec. Eds. H.D. Holland and K.K. Turekian), Elsevier Elsevier, Oxford 
Ziurys LM 1987. Ap. J.  321:L81-5 

30 

 
 
 
Table 1: 16O/18O in cometary water 

16O/18O 

Comet 

Reference 

518 ± 45 

470 ± 40 

530 ± 60 

425 ± 55 

1P/Halley 

Balsiger et al. (1995)  

Eberhardt et al. (1995) 

4 comets 

Biver et al. (2007) 

C/2002 T7 

Hutsemékers et al. (2008) 

300 ± 150 

C/2012 F6 

Decock et al. (2014) 

523 ± 32 

C/2009 P1 

Bockelée-Morvan et al. (2012) 

Table 2: Overview of measured isotopic ratios in comets. For references see specific subchapters. 

Isotopic ratio 
Solar / standard 

Species / 
ratio in 67P 

Other 
comets 
(average) 

32S/34S 22.65 

H2S 23.8 ± 0.5 

SO2 24.3±1.2 

CS2 25.6±0.6 

D/H 1.5 10-5 
VSMOV 

12C/13C 89-98 

H2O (5.3±0.7) x 
10-4 
D2O/HDO ~ 1 % 
CO2 84±4 

32S/33S 126.95 
29Si /28Si5.08% 
30Si/28Si3.25% 
14N / 15N 440 

H2S 183±8.1 
Dust (4.3±0.5)% 
Dust (2.6±0.6)% 
NH3 118±25 

NH2D ~ 0.1 %  HDS ~ 0.06 %  H2O 3.4 x 

CO 86±9 

C2H5 84±12 

SO2 146±9 

CS2 175±13 

10-4 

C2, CN, 
HCN 95 
CS, S+, 
H2S 20.5 

NO ~120±25 

N2  ~ 130±30  HCN, CN, 
NH2 140 
H2O 461 

16O/18O 530 

H2O 445 ± 35 

CO2 494 ± 8 

35Cl/37Cl 3.127 
79Br / 81Br 1.077  HBr 1.05 ± 0.08 

HCl 3.4 ± 0.2 

36Ar/38Ar 5.3 
80Kr/84Kr 
82Kr/84Kr 
83Kr/84Kr 
86Kr / 84Kr 
128Xe/ 132Xe 
129Xe/ 132Xe 
130Xe/ 132Xe 
131Xe/ 132Xe 
134Xe/ 132Xe 
136Xe/ 132Xe 

5.4 ± 1.4 
0.036 ±  0.022 
0.206±  0.012 
0.187 ±  0.011 
0.287 ±  0.014 
0.08 ±  0.023 
1.463 ±  0.136 
0.199 ±  0.053 
0.888 ±  0.101 
0.212 ±  0.046 
0.113 ±  0.047 

Minor relative 
to major 
isotope 
relative to Sun 
enriched 

enriched 
Slightly 
enriched in CO2 
depleted 

depleted 
depleted 
depleted 
enriched 

enriched 
/normal 
normal 
normal 
normal 
normal except 
83Kr 

enriched in 
129Xe, depleted 
in 134,136Xe 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: relative abundances of halogens vs. oxygen in 67P, the Sun, chondrites and Earth.  

67P (x10-4)a 
Halogenes 
0.2 – 4 
F/O 
2 - 5 
Cl/O 
0.01-0.07 
Br/O 
a Coma of 67P from Dhooghe et al. (2017) 
b Early Sun from Lodders (2010). 
c Earth derived from Allègre, Manhès & Lewin (2001). 

Sun(x10-4)b 
0.51 ± 0.12 
3.29 ± 0.77 
0.0068 ± 0.0002 

Chondrites(x10-4)c 
1.1 ± 0.2 
6.8 ± 1.2 
0.014 ± 0.003 

Earth(x10-4)c 
0.16 ± 0.02 
0.31 ± 0.16 
0.012 ± 0.04 

Table 4. Parent species detected in the ROSINA DFMS mass spectra and comparison with the ISM  

a) 

Inorganics 

Chemical formula 
NH3 
CH4 
H2O 
HF 
CO 
N2 
NO 
O2 
H2S 
H2O2 

Name 
ammonia 
methane 
water 
hydrogen fluoride 
carbonmonoxide 
nitrogen 
nitrous monoxide 
oxygen 
Hydrogen sulfide 
Hydrogen peroxyde 

ISM1 
y 
y 
y 
y 
y 
n 
y 
y 
y 
n 

m/z 
16 
17 
18 
20 
28 
28 
30 
32 
34 
34 

Chemical formula 
Ar 
CO2 
PO 
SO 
S2 
SO2 
CS2 
HBr 
Kr 
S3, S4 

Name 
argon 
carbon dioxide 
phosphorous monoxide 
sulfur monoxide 
sulfur dimer 
sulfur dioxide 
carbonyl sulfide 
hydrogen bromide 
krypton 
Sulfur polymers 

HCl 

hydrogen chloride 

y1 

36 

Xe 

xenon 

* only the radical CS is observed  

b)  Organics 

Chemical formula 

Name 

ISM1 

m/z 

Chemical formula 

Name 

ISM 
n 
y 
y 
y 
n 
y 
y* 
n 
n 
n 

n 

m/z 
36 
44 
47 
48 
64 
64 
76 
80 
84 
96, 
128 
132 

Found 
in ISM 

m/z 

CH4 
C2H2 
C2H6 
C3H8 
C4H10 
C5H12 
C6H6 
C7H8 
C7H16 
C8H10 
C8H16 

C10H8 

HCN /HNC 
CH5N  
CH3CN 
C2H7N 
HC3N 
C3H9N 

COS 
CH4OS 
C2H6OS 
C3H6OS 

CH -compounds 
Methane 
Ethylene 
Ethane 
Propane 
Butane 
Pentane 
Benzene 
Toluene 
Heptane 
Xylene2 
Octane 2 

Naphthalene 2 
CHN-compounds 

Hydrogencyanide 
Methylamine 
Acetonitrile  
Ethylamine 
Cyanoacetylene 
Propylamine 
CHOS-compounds 
Carbonylsulfide 
5 

5 
5 

y 
y 
n 
n 
n 
n 
y 
n 
n 
n 
n 

n 

y 
y 
y 
n 
y 
n 

y 
y 
n 
n 

16 
26 
30 
44 
58 
72 
78 
92 
98 
106 
112 

128 

27 
31 
41 
45 
51 
59 

60 
64 
78 
90 

CH2O  
CH4O  
C2H4O  
C2H6O 
C3H6O 
C3H8O  
C4H10O 
C5H12O 

CH2O2  
C2H4O2  

CH2(OH)CH2(OH)  
C7H6O2 2 

CHNO  
CH3NO 
CH3CONH2  
C2H5NO2 

CH2S 
CH4S 
C2H6S 
(CH3)S(CH3) 

CH4S2 

CHO- compounds 
Formaldehyde 
Methanol  
Acetaldehyde  
Ethanol  
Acetone  
Propanol  
Butanol 
Pentanol 
CHO2-compounds 
Formic acid 
Acetic acid, 
Glycolaldehyde 
Ethylene glycol 
Benzoic acid 
CHON-compounds3 
Isocyanic acid 
Formamide 
Acetamide 
Glycine 
CHS-compounds 
Thioformaldehyde 
Methanethiol 
Ethanethiol 4 
Dimethylsulfide 4 
CHS2-compounds 
Methyl hydrogen 
disulfide 

y 
y 
y 
y 
y 
n 
n 
n 

y 
y 
y 
y 
n 

y 
y 
y 
n 

y 
y 
y 
y 

n 

30 
32 
44 
46 
58 
60 
74 
88 

46 
60 

62 
122 

43 
45 
59 
75 

46 
48 
62 
62 

80 

Species in italics have been detected also in other comets 
1 Müller et al., 2001; Müller et al., 2005; https://www.astro.uni-koeln.de/cdms/catalog (07/2018)).  
2Tentative detection 
3 hydrocarbons containing oxygen and nitrogen, not to be confused with CHON grains seen in comet 1P/Halley, consisting mostly of C, O, N 
and H atoms 
4 Isomers 
5 Unclear which isomer is responsible as there are several choices 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Different stages of the formation of planetary systems. 
Starting in the diffuse interstellar medium with material from 
dying stars and supernovae (stage 1) the atoms form molecules 
which undergo chemistry in giant molecular clouds containing 
many times the mass of the Sun. Part of the cloud can centrally 
condense to higher densities forming a dense core, sometimes 
also called a pre-stellar core (stage 2). This core can collapse to 
form a protostar with a young disk and an outflow that clears 
the surrounding cloud (stage 3).  When the young star emerges 
from its cocoon, it is surrounded by a protoplanetary disk, in 
which planet formation can occur. Its temperature and density 
decrease with radial distance from the star (stage 4).The 
protoplanetary disk that formed our own solar system is also 
called the protosolar nebula. After dissipation of the remaining 
dust and gas a star with planets evolves over billion years (stage 
5). Eventually, life may start on a planet (stage 6). At the end of 
the Sun’s lifetime, its material will be fed back into the 
interstellar medium. Comets contain material from all stages of 
this evolution (image 7).  
Scales given (within an order of magnitude) are typical for these 
different stages. Credit for pictures 1-4: European Southern 
Observatory; for 5-7: European Space Agency 

33 

 
 
 
Fig. 2: Orbit of 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko, 
Credit: ESA 

Fig. 3: 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. The blue 
arrow indicates Comet 67P/Churyumov–
Gerasimenko’s rotation axis, and the red and 
green arrows display its equatorial x- and y-axes, 
respectively. Its spin axis is tilted by 52º. 

Credits: ESA/Rosetta/MPS for OSIRIS Team 
MPS/UPD/LAM/IAA/SSO/INTA/UPM/ DASP/IDA 

34 

Arrival ofRosetta (Aug. 2014)End ofmission(Sept. 2016) 
 
 
 
Fig. 4: Comparison of CO, CO2 and H2O local 
densities multiplied by r2 for three different 
periods: a) > 3 au, inbound; b) around the 
highest activity of the comet at 1.25 au and c) 
> 3 au, outbound. Also plotted are the sub-S/C 
latitudes (dark green line) (>0: north; <0: 
south). It is evident that relative abundances 
vary with time and subspacecraft latitude 
(season). Evident is the fact that O2 follows 
water for most of the orbit. 

35 

60626466687072747678801E131E141E151E161E173703803904004101E161E171E181E196706726746766786806826846866886901E141E151E16-40-2002040latSC_degdensity x r2 (m-3 km2)H2OCO2COO2-80-60-40-20020406080latSC_degdays_since_20140801 H2O x r2 CO2 x r2 CO x r2 O2 x r2-80-60-40-20020406080latSC_deg 
 
 
Fig. 5 Overview of measured D/H in water and other cometary species. For 
comparison, we also show the giant planets, Titan and Enceladus and the 
protosolar nebula. Filled stars denote OCC’s. The black line denotes the 
Earth value. 01Q4: C/2001 Q4 (NEAT) ;8p: 8P/Tuttle; 02T7: C/2002 T7 
(LINEAR) ;H-B: Hale-Bopp; Hya: Hyakutake; CF6: C/2012 F6 (Lemmon); CQ2: 
C/2014 Q2 (Lovejoy). 67P: water and H2S: Altwegg et al. (2017); NH3: 
Wampfler et al. (2018). CQ2: Paganini et al. (2017); Biver et al. (2016); CF6: 
Biver et al. (2016). All other values from Bockelée-Morvan (2015) and 
references therein. 

36 

 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 Sulfur-isotopic compositions, given as permil deviation 
from the VCDT standard, of bulk carbonaceous and ordinary 
chondrites (CCs/OCs), residues in impact craters on Al foils from 
NASA’s Stardust mission to comet 81P/Wild 2, different 
molecules (as well as their weighted mean and dust) from 
comet 67P/CG, presolar SiC Type C grains from SN explosions. 
Data sources: chondrites: (Bullock et al. 2010; Gao and 
Thiemens 1993a,b); 81P/Wild 2: (Heck et al. 2012); 67P/CG: 
(Calmonte et al. 2017);  67P/CG dust : (Paquette et al., 2017) ; 
presolar SiC: (Gyngard et al. 2010; Hoppe et al. 2012; Liu et al. 
2016; Xu et al. 2015); ISM (Mauersberger et al. 2004).Results 
from 67P’s volatiles are clearly non-compatible with the 
meteoritic standard, but agree well with the local ISM value 
derived by Mauersberger et al. 2004). 

Figure 7: Sulphur bearing species detected in 
comets, including 67P (from Calmonte et al., 2016 
and references therein).  

37 

-400-20002004006008001P – HalleyC/1995 O1 – Hale–Bopp (CS)C/1995 O1 – Hale–Bopp (H2S)C/2014 Q2 – LovejoyC/2012 F6 – Lemmon67P, bulk67P, OCS67P, H2S67P, CS267P, dustWild 2Wild 2, specialCC's, OC'sISMSiC-C (SN)34SVCDT (o/oo)H2SSSO2SOOCSCS / CS2CH3SHS2H2CSC2H6S1E-61E-51E-41E-30.01 67P Hale-Bopp Lovejoy other cometsabundance relative to water 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Saturated aliphatic and aromatic 
hydrocarbons detected in the coma of 67P 
(Schuhmann et al., 2018) close to perihelion. 

38 

MethaneEthaneEthylenePropaneButanePentaneBenzeneToluene--1E-61E-51E-41E-30.01 67P all OCC JFCAbundance relative to water 
 
 
Fig. 9: Comparison of molecular abundances relative to methanol (red square) in clouds of high and low 
mass protostars with 67P.  1: H2O; 2: CO2; 3: CO; 4: H2S; 5: H2CO; 6: CH3OH; 7: HCN; 8: CH4; 9: C2H2; 10: SO2; 
11: NH3; 12: SO; 13: OCS; 14: HNCO; 15: HCOOH; 16: CH3CHO; 17: NH2CHO; 18: HCOOCH3; 19: CH3CN; 20: 
CS/CS2*; 21: HC3N; 22: CH3SH; 23: H2CS. Data: W33A from Gibb et al 2000b, Keane et al 2000, NGC7538:IRS9 
from Whittet et al 1996, Schutte 1999, Ehrenfreund & Schutte 2000, Keane et al 2000; Orion hot core from 
van Dishoeck & Blake (1998); Irvine et al (1999), Sutton et al. (1995); L134N from Ohishi et al. (1992), 
updated using values from (2000) for L134N pos. C; L1157 from Bachiller & Pérez Gutiérrez (1997) at 
position B2 assuming CO/H2 = 10−4. W3  from Helmich et al. (1996); Helmich&van Dishoeck (1997) ; 
Hermsen et al. (1988); G34.3+0.15 from Macdonald et al.(1996); Millar et al. (1997); Hatchell et al. (1998a) ;  
Hatchell et al. (1998b); Heaton et al. (1989); Hatchell et al. (1998c); Bockelee-Morvan et al., 2000. IRAS 
16293w: Abundance in warm and dense inner part of the envelope 150 AU in radius around IRAS 16293–
2422 from Schöier et al., 2002. IRAS16293c: Abundance in cooler, less dense outer part of the envelope 
around IRAS 16293–2422 from Schöier et al., 2002. Data for 67P from Le Roy et al., 2015; Calmonte et al., 
2017; Altwegg et al., 2017 ; Schuhmann et al., 2018.  
*Cometary data are for CS2 while the other data are for the radical CS.  

39 

 
 
 
 
Fig 10: Left: Comparison of elemental abundances (after Geiss et al., 1987) for the Sun, comets (dust and ice), 
carbonaceous chondrites and the Earth (mantle and crust).  For 67P, values are given for the case with dust/ice =1 
and dust/ice =3. Dust abundances for 67P are from Bardyn et al. (2018). The values for 1P/Halley are for 
dust/ice=1:2. N* denotes nitrogen abundance if we assume a NH3/H2O abundance of ~3.5 % as seen in comets 
with a very small perihelion distance (dello Russo et al., 2016). Values for the solar nebula, 1P/Halley, 
carbonaceous chondrites and the Earth are from Geiss et al. (1987) and references therein. Right: comparison of 
all volatile elements in 67P to CI meteorites (Palme et al., 2014), solar photosphere (Palme et al., 2014) and 
towards  Ophiuchus (Palme et al., 2014). Elements with asterisk contain only the volatile part for 67P as the 
refractory part is still unknown.  

40 

10-210-110010110210310410510-410-310-210-110010110210-410-310-210-1100101102OOOOOOOCCCCCCCNNNNNNCONabundances rel. to siliconhydrogen / siliconSun1P /C1, C267P1:1; 3:1C3EarthMeteoritesCometsN*N*HCNOF*P*S*Cl*Ar*Br*Kr*Xe*10-710-610-510-410-310-210-1100101102103abundances rel. to oxygen 67P CI Sun ISM 
 
 
 
