0
2
0
2

r
a

M
7
1

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

3
v
4
5
4
0
0
.
8
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species
Collisional Plasma Shocks

Tom Byvank,1, a) Samuel J. Langendorf,1, b) Carsten Thoma,2 and Scott C. Hsu1
1)Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545
2)Voss Scientiﬁc, Albuquerque, NM 87108

(Dated: 19 March 2020)

±

We observe shock-front separation and species-dependent shock widths in
multi-ion-species collisional plasma shocks, which are produced by obliquely
merging plasma jets of a He/Ar mixture (97% He and 3% Ar by initial num-
ber density) on the Plasma Liner Experiment [S. C. Hsu et al., IEEE Trans.
Plasma Sci. 46, 1951 (2018)]. Visible plasma emission near the He-I 587.6-
nm and Ar-II 476.5–514.5-nm lines are simultaneously recorded by splitting a
single visible image of the shock into two diﬀerent fast-framing cameras with
diﬀerent narrow bandpass ﬁlters (589
5 nm for observing the He-I line and
25 nm for the Ar-II lines). For conditions in these experiments (pre-shock
500
1014 cm−3, ion and electron temperatures of
ion and electron densities
2.2 eV, and relative plasma-merging speed of 22 km/s), the observation-
≈
ally inferred magnitude of He/Ar shock-front separation and the shock widths
themselves are < 1 cm, which correspond to
50 post-shock thermal ion–
ion mean free paths. These experimental lengths scales are in reasonable
qualitative and quantitative agreement with results from 1D multi-ﬂuid sim-
ulations using the chicago code. However, there are diﬀerences between the
experimentally-inferred and simulation-predicted ionization states and line
emission intensities, particularly in the post-shock region. Overall, the exper-
imental and simulation results are consistent with theoretical predictions that
the lighter He ions diﬀuse farther ahead within the overall shock front than
the heavier Ar ions.

±

∼

≈

×

5

I.

INTRODUCTION

Supersonic ﬂows generate shocks in astrophysics, aerodynamics, and high-energy-density
(HED) plasma experiments. Compared to hydrodynamic shocks in neutral gases, collisional
plasma shocks contain ion and electron species, arise due to Coulomb collisions, and are
inﬂuenced by electromagnetic ﬁelds1–4. A plasma shock front with multiple ion species
contains additional structure compared to a single ion plasma shock. Prior experiments,
simulations, and theoretical work explored multi-ion-species eﬀects in the context of inertial
conﬁnement fusion (ICF), for which species separation in the fusion fuel potentially leads
to neutron yield degradation5–18. Interspecies ion separation and velocity separation have
been experimentally observed19–23. Additional simulation and theoretical research on multi-
ion-species plasmas examined how ion species diﬀusion causes species separation24–30. The
present research reports direct observations of the spatial proﬁle of a multi-ion-species shock,
showing shock-front separation and species-dependent shock widths in collisional plasma
shocks. The experimental length scale results of the shock structure agree with 1D multi-
ﬂuid simulations using the chicago code31–33. However, particularly in the post-shock
region, there are diﬀerences between the experimentally-inferred and simulation-predicted
ionization states and line emission intensities. These experimental and simulation results
are both consistent with ion species diﬀusion theory. This experimental data can be used
to validate and benchmark numerical simulations of plasma environments with multi-ion-

a)tbyvank@lanl.gov
b)samuel.langendorf@lanl.gov

 
 
 
 
 
 
Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks

2

species collisional plasma shocks, especially in HED, magneto-inertial-fusion (MIF), and
ICF experiments.

The organization of this paper is as follows: Sec. II provides background on the ion
diﬀusion theory to which we compare our results, Sec. III describes the experimental setup
of colliding plasma jets to generate a shock, Sec. IV presents results from the experimentally
observed shock proﬁles, Sec. V overviews the relevant length scales in our experiments,
Sec. VI A discusses the agreement between the multi-ﬂuid simulations and the experiments,
Sec. VII gives estimates for the contributions from various diﬀusion mechanisms to describe
our observations, and Sec. VIII highlights our conclusions.

II. BACKGROUND ON ION DIFFUSION THEORY

Theory and simulations about interspecies ion diﬀusion predict that lighter ions diﬀuse
farther ahead within a collisional plasma shock (closer to the pre-shock region) than heavier
ions11,12,14–18,24–28,30. Following Kagan and Tang 24, in the center-of-mass frame of a multi-
ion-species ﬂuid element, the diﬀusion ﬂux ¯f1 of the lighter species 1 (in our case, He) equals
the negative ﬂux ¯f2 of the heavier species 2 (in our case, Ar),

¯f1 = ρ1¯vD1 =

¯f2 =

−

−

ρ2¯vD2,

(1)

with mass densities ρ1, ρ2, and diﬀusion velocities ¯vD1, ¯vD2. The diﬀusion ﬂux is related
to the species mass concentration time evolution (continuity equation),

ρ

∂cm1
∂t

+ ρ¯u

cm1 +

· ∇

∇ ·

¯f1 = 0,

(2)

with total mass density ρ, species 1 mass concentration cm1 = ρ1/ρ, and bulk ﬂuid velocity
¯u. The diﬀusion ﬂux of the lighter species can be written as

¯f1 =

ρD

ρD

ρD

−

−

−

cm1 −
∇
κT i
Ti ∇
eκe
Ti ∇

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

ρD

Ti +

Φ

,

(cid:19)

κp
Pi ∇
(cid:18)
κT e
Te ∇

Pi(cid:19)

Te(cid:19)

(3)

where the ﬁrst term is the classical diﬀusion ﬂux based on the mass concentration gradient,
the second term is the barodiﬀusion ﬂux based on the ion pressure gradient, the third
term is the thermodiﬀusion ﬂux based on the ion and electron temperature gradients, and
the fourth term is the electrodiﬀusion ﬂux based on the electric ﬁeld (negative gradient of
the electric potential). The new variables in Eq. (3) are the classical diﬀusion coeﬃcient
D, barodiﬀusion ratio κp, total ion pressure Pi, ion thermodiﬀusion ratio κT i, electron
thermodiﬀusion ratio κT e, ion temperature Ti (approximating as equal for each species),
electron temperature Te, electrodiﬀusion ratio κe, and electric potential Φ.

Within a shock front, the gradients of pressure, temperature, and electric potential point
in the direction from the pre-shock region toward the post-shock region3. Additionally,
for the He/Ar mixture in our experimental shocks, the various diﬀusion ﬂuxes have the
same sign except for the relatively small electron thermodiﬀusion, as described in Sec. VII.
We also assume no initial concentration separation. Therefore, in the center of mass frame,
Eqs. (1) and (3) predict that the lighter species diﬀusion velocity ¯vD1 points in the direction
from the post-shock region toward the pre-shock region, and the heavier species diﬀusion
velocity ¯vD2 points in the opposite direction. In the present research, we directly observe the
spatial proﬁle of a plasma shock front containing a He/Ar mixture, oﬀering the opportunity
to validate models of multi-ion-species shock evolution based on the theory.

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks

3

FIG. 1.
(Left) View 1: Projection of experimental setup, including approximate diagnostic views.
Plasma guns mounted on ports of the spherical vacuum chamber launch plasma jets toward the
chamber center in the direction shown by the red dashed lines. Due to expansion of the plasma
jets, the jet collision takes place well before the chamber center, in the region observed by the
interferometry and spectroscopy. The plasma guns are not shown in this View 1 for diagram
clarity.
out-of-page rotation of View 1,
adding a mounted plasma gun. Not to scale.

◦
(Right) View 2: Corresponding schematic with a 90

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

In order to experimentally observe shock-front separation in multi-ion-species collision
plasma shocks, we form the shocks by obliquely merging two supersonic plasma jets, and
we image the diﬀerent species within the shock proﬁles using distinct narrow bandpass
ﬁlters. In this section, we describe this experimental setup.

±

2.2+0.2

−0.67 for He and 1.15+0.23

We experimentally create multi-ion-species plasma shocks by colliding plasma jets gen-
erated from plasma guns in a 2.7-m-diameter spherical vacuum chamber34–40. Figure 1
depicts the experimental setup. Within the gun nozzle, a gas puﬀ is pre-ionized into a
plasma, and that plasma is accelerated by a 720 kA, 4.5 kV, 5 µs rise-time pulse.
Ini-
tially, the gas puﬀ atomic concentration, ca, is 97% He and 3% Ar, corresponding to a
mass concentration, cm, of 76.4% He and 23.6% Ar. As the plasma jets propagate toward
the chamber center, they expand in vacuum at approximately the sound speed. Well be-
fore reaching the chamber center, the two plasma jets merge at a half-angle of 11.6◦, with
5 km/s corresponding to 11 km/s in the direction normal to the shock and,
speeds of 55
therefore, a relative normal speed between the jets of vrel = 22 km/s. Before the shock
1014 cm−3, electron
formation, individual jets have electron number densities ne ≈
5
±
−0.5 eV, and inferred average ionization states ¯Z of
Ti ≈
and ion temperatures Te ≈
0.73+0.15
−0.16 for Ar. These parameters give pre-shock Mach numbers
M = vrel/[γ( ¯ZTe + Ti)/mi]1/2 of 1.7 for He ions, 5.1 for Ar ions, and an average M = 1.8,
where we assume γ = 5/3 and a minimum ion ¯Z = 1. The jets have characteristic scale
lengths of
10 cm. Since the interspecies mean free path is much smaller than this over-
all characteristic length scale (see Sec. V) and the thermal equilibration timescale is much
smaller than the characteristic hydrodynamic timescale, the He and Ar should act as a
single ﬂuid with Te ≈
The plasma parameters are measured with diagnostics including a photodiode array to
infer jet velocity via time-of-ﬂight, time-resolved interferometry for density41,42, and emis-
sion spectroscopy for temperature and ionization states. The photodiode array consists
of two photodiodes per gun spaced 2 cm apart along the jet propagation direction, and
jet speed is determined by looking at relative timing of the plasma emission intensity be-
tween the two photodiodes. The heterodyne interferometer measures time-resolved line-
integrated electron density by observing relative phase shifts of a laser passing through
the plasma compared to a reference path. We take the volumetric number density to be

Ti in the absence of gradients, i.e. pre-shock.

THe ≈

TAr ≈

×

∼

1

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks

4

TABLE I. Pre-shock and (simulation) post-shock parameters.

Pre-shock Post-shock
2.2

Parameter
Electron Temperature (eV)
Electron Density (×1014 cm−3) 5
He Temperature (eV)
Ar Temperature (eV)
He Average Ionization ¯Z
Ar Average Ionization ¯Z
He Atomic Concentration ca1
Ar Atomic Concentration ca2
He Mass Concentration cm1
Ar Mass Concentration cm2

2.2
2.2
0.73
1.15
97%
3%
76.4%
23.6%

2.4
21
4.6
5.5
0.89
1.47
95.8%
4.2%
69.6%
30.4%

equal to the line-integrated areal density divided by the path length, and the path length
is estimated based on the plasma emission length observed by visible camera images (not
shown) taken along a direction perpendicular to the interferometry. The density measure-
ment uncertainty is based upon these estimates of the path length. Spectroscopy data
for the optically thin jets and generated shocks are compared with prismspect non-local-
thermodynamic-equilibrium (non-LTE) atomic-modeling calculations43, as used in earlier
research34–40. Figure 2 displays the experimental temperature and density diagnostic re-
sults. As listed in Table I, the pre-shock, experimentally inferred parameters are used to
interpret the experimental observations and as input for simulations.

The shock proﬁles of the diﬀerent ion species are imaged using a beam splitter to aim
the plasma self-emission onto two intensiﬁed-charge-coupled-device (ICCD) cameras (10-ns
exposure) with narrow bandpass ﬁlters44,45. Singly ionized Ar-II line emission (near the
25-nm ﬁlter, and neutral He-I line
Ar-II 476.5–514.5-nm lines) is observed with a 500
5-nm ﬁlter46. A ﬁlter for
emission (near the He-I 587.6-nm line) is observed with a 589
singly ionized He-II line emission was not used due to the better ICCD camera sensitivity to
visible compared to ultraviolet wavelengths and the presence of other stronger lines (Ar-II
and/or He-I) near the visible He-II lines. Figure 3 illustrates how the distinct ﬁlters are
sensitive to the diﬀerent ion species, based on reference experiments using single-ion-species
plasma jet merging. For the 100%-Ar jet merging, the bright region in the Ar-II ﬁltered
image correlates to an increase in singly ionized Ar emission. For the 100%-He jet collision,
dark bands in the He-I ﬁltered image correlate to a reduction in neutral He emission and a
corresponding increase in He ionization. Thus, using these ﬁlters, we can separately image
the shock proﬁles of the diﬀerent ion species.

±

±

IV. EXPERIMENTAL SHOCK PROFILE RESULTS

By imaging the experimental shocks, we can infer spatial separation of the ions within
the shock proﬁles. Our spatially resolved shock proﬁles also allow us to observe diﬀerent
shock widths for the diﬀerent species.

The top 4 rows in Fig. 4 show the time evolution of the merging of multi-ion-species
plasma jets, observing the plasma self-emission using the Ar-II and He-I narrow bandpass
ﬁlters. The time sequence is composed of images from diﬀerent experimental shots, rather
than images from multiple times during a single experimental shot. The jets originate from
the top left and bottom left in the images, and they merge near the image center. The 0 µs
time is deﬁned as the time when we observe the jets ﬁrst starting to merge and form a shock
structure. Utilizing the interferometry data, we measure shot-to-shot timing variations of
< 0.5 µs. As the time sequence progresses, the individual jets continue to propagate at
11 km/s inward (toward image horizontal center) and
54 km/s parallel to the shock front
(toward the image right). We use the intensity minima and maxima to infer the shock
position. The plasma emission intensity is a function of electron temperature Te and ion
density ni, with larger temperatures and larger densities leading to higher ionization states

∼

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks

5

FIG. 2.
(Top 3 plots) Comparison of pre-shock experimental emission spectroscopy (black)
with prismspect atomic-modeling calculations (blue). (Row 4) Comparison of experimental time-
resolved interferometry electron-density measurements of one individual jet (green), which repre-
sents the pre-shock density for a collision, the central density (post-shock) of two jets merging
(blue), and the central density (post-shock) in the simulation of two jets merging (red). Times are
shifted such that t = 0 is the time at which the jets are ﬁrst starting to merge. (Bottom) Compar-
ison of post-shock experimental emission spectroscopy (black) with prismspect atomic-modeling
calculations (blue).

and correspondingly more emission. We expect the maximum intensity of the shock to be
located very near the locations of maximum temperature and density, but the maximum
temperature may not be located precisely at the maximum density position. The shock

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks

6

(Top) Plot of NIST strong emission lines (He-I, He-II, Ar-I, Ar-II)46 and the spectral
FIG. 3.
ﬁlter wavelengths. (Bottom 2 Rows) To establish a baseline, time-gated images (10-ns exposure) of
single-ion-species plasma jet merging using narrow bandpass ﬁlters are shown. The 100%-Ar (left
column) and 100%-He (right column) plasma shocks are much more prominently observed using
the Ar-II and He-I ﬁlters, respectively. Jet merging and shock generation occur near the centers
of the images. Red dashed arrows show the direction of individual plasma jet propagation toward
the chamber center (as in Fig. 1). In the bottom left image, dots correspond to the intersection
locations of the jet collision plane with the spectroscopy (purple) and interferometry (green) lines
of sight (as in Fig. 1). The listed counts are over the whole image, for which 4096 counts is fully
saturated.

generates sharp gradients in density and temperature that will create sharp gradients in
intensity. Although the intensity gradient does not map one-to-one with each parameter
across the shock, we examine the intensity gradient to indicate the shock gradient location
and length scale.

Qualitatively in the top 4 rows in Fig. 4, we see the jets merging to form two intensity
peaks originating a ﬁnite distance away from the image center. The experimental intensity
peaks illustrate an increase in Ar-II and decrease in He-I (corresponding to an increase in
He-II) within the shock. Then, near the center of the collision region, the amount of He-I
increases and Ar-II decreases. This double-peaked shock proﬁle has been observed in prior
work studying single-ion-species plasma jet collisions with a similar plasma gun setup35,36.
Although this double-peaked feature is not as clearly seen in the shock created from the
100% Ar jet collisions shown in Fig. 3, the purpose of those images in Fig. 3 was to check
the eﬀectiveness of our spectral ﬁlters, so we did not spend time to experimentally tune
the system in order to try to obtain better looking pictures. Compared to the 100% He
jet collision in Fig. 3, the 97% He and 3% Ar multi-ion-species jet collision in Fig. 4 shows
more emission using the Ar-II ﬁlter.

The bottom row in Fig. 4 displays the spatial proﬁle of the shock structure produced by
merging multi-ion-species plasma jets, which are directly imaged using the narrow band-

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks

7

FIG. 4.
(Top 4 rows) Multi-ion-species plasma jet merging time evolution images of plasma
self-emission using the Ar-II and He-I ﬁlters. Times deﬁned such that t = 0 is the time at which
the jets are ﬁrst starting to merge. (Bottom row) Lineouts from the 2 µs images (in top rows) for
the Ar-II (blue line) and He-I (red line) ﬁltered images; peak Ar-II intensity is at intensity of 1,
and peak He-II intensity is at intensity of 0. Horizontal bars show the shock widths: the distances
between the 50%–90% intensity values. Shaded regions show the standard deviation of distance
between peak ion intensities and the zero position.

pass ﬁlters for Ar-II and He-I line emission. Normal to the shock front, we take lineouts
1 cm). In the laboratory frame, the shock fronts are moving
with widths of 20 pixels (
away from the zero position. Across the emission spatial proﬁle, the lineout intensities are
scaled between 0 (lowest emission) and 1 (peak emission). For the Ar-II ﬁltered lineout, 0
corresponds to background (lowest emission of singly ionized Ar), and 1 corresponds to the
peak singly ionized Ar emission. For the He-I ﬁltered lineout, 1 corresponds to background
(peak emission of neutral He), and 0 corresponds to peak singly ionized He emission (lowest

∼

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks

8

emission of neutral He). Using these lineouts, we infer the shock-front separation between
the peak intensities of Ar and He ions, showing that the He has moved farther ahead of
the shock (closer to the pre-shock region) than the Ar. Additionally, we observe the shock
2 cm position), which we
width (horizontal bars in the bottom row of Fig. 4 near the
approximate by the transition distance between the middle and peak intensity, here taken
as 50%–90% of the peak value. The 50% and 90% values are chosen to reduce the inﬂuence
of varying background levels and spurious pixel intensities on the measurements. These
experimental results are obtained using the shock proﬁle at 2 µs after the beginning of the
plasma jet merging. This time is chosen by analyzing an image time sequence and correlat-
ing the density increase over time between the experimental time-resolved interferometry
and the simulation results; see row 4 of Fig. 2.

−

±

±
±

0.09 cm (37
0.11 cm (57

Using the shock proﬁle lineouts and plasma parameters, we compare the length scales of
our collisional plasma shocks. Taking statistics from 34 experimental shock-front proﬁles
at the 2 µs time, we ﬁnd a separation between the shock-front intensity peaks to be 0.68
±
9 post-shock He ion-ion mean free
0.17 cm, a He shock width of 0.36
±
paths), and an Ar shock width of 0.52
12 post-shock Ar ion-ion mean free
paths). Additionally, we ﬁnd the distance between the peak He ion intensity and the zero
0.33 cm, and the distance between the peak Ar ion intensity and the
position to be 2.01
zero position to be 1.33
0.17 cm; these distances are shown as the shaded regions in the
bottom row of Fig. 4. Lastly, we ﬁnd the ratio of the Ar shock width to He shock width
0.34. These experimental uncertainty values are the shot-to-shot standard
to be 1.52
deviations. The experimental shock widths are in reasonable agreement to the theoretical
prediction of >20 post-shock ion–ion mean free paths (for M < 2)3,17. Furthermore, similar
observations to our measurements of the ratios of shock widths for diﬀerent species have
been reported for neutral gas shocks, for which barodiﬀusion is present, and the lighter gas
species also diﬀuses farther ahead of the neutral gas shock front compared to the heavier
species4.

±

±

±

V. COMPARISON OF SHOCK LENGTH SCALES TO MEAN FREE PATH AND
INTERPENETRATION

Here, we compare the quantitative distances measured in the experiments to relevant
length scales for the process of shock formation. This comparison allows us to better
understand the physical picture.

Table II compares the characteristic length scale results for the multi-ion-species plasma
jet merging. Post-shock length scales are calculated based on the following plasma con-
ditions obtained from simulations (Sec. VI A) and listed in Table I: peak electron number
1015 cm−3, peak Te = 2.4 eV, peak Ti,He = 4.6 eV, peak Ti,Ar = 5.5 eV,
density ne = 2.1
and average ionization states ¯Z of 0.89 for He and 1.47 for Ar. The post-shock mean free
path for an ion (unprimed) colliding with multiple ion species (primed) is47,48

×

Lmf p,i =

vth,i
i′ ( ni′

ntot,i

)νi,i′

ǫ

P

(4)

′

with thermal velocity vth,i and energy loss collision rate νi,i
. Since we are not in the fast
ǫ
or slow limit, we use the full Coulomb collision-rate formula47. In this formula, because
we add contributions from individual ion species with discrete ionization states, Z, rather
than using an average ¯Z, the collision rate is weighted by the individual species number
density fraction ni′ /ntot,i. We compare the experimentally inferred shock width (as deﬁned
above in Sec. IV) to the ion–ion mean free path rather than to the electron–ion mean
free path because the density jump and ion temperature jump within a shock front is
predicted to occur over a distance of a few ion–ion mean free paths, while the electron
temperature jump is predicted to occur over a (longer) distance of a few electron–ion mean
free paths3. Furthermore, we calculate that the ion collision rates are dominant compared
0.3 nm is the approximate
with the neutral collision rates νn ≈

nvth,n, where dn ∼

nnπd2

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks

9

TABLE II. Plasma-jet-merging length scales (in centimeters).

He

Length scale (cm)
He-Ar shock-front separation (exp.)
He-Ar shock-front separation (sim.)
Shock width (exp.)
Shock width (sim.)
Post-shock mean free path (Eq. 4)
Jet characteristic size
Pre-shock interpenetration (Eq. 5) 0.058

0.36
0.44
0.0097
10

∆ Ar
0.68
0.50

0.52
0.57
0.0092
10
0.740

nnσCEvth,n, where σCE ≈

Van der Waals atomic diameter, and also with the neutral charge exchange collision rates
10−15 cm2 is the charge exchange cross section49,50.
νCE ≈
The ion–ion interpenetration length is the pre-shock slowing distance over which ions
from an individual jet (test particle, unprimed) will stream through the other jet (ﬁeld
particles, primed) before becoming collisional36,37,39,40,47,48,51,

×

3

Ls,i =

4

vrel
i′ ( ni′

ntot,i

,

)νi,i′

s

P

(5)

with relative velocity vrel and slowing-down collision rate νi,i
. Again, we use the entire
s
collision-rate formula47. In our parameter space, the ion–ion slowing dominates over ion–
electron slowing, and thus the latter is ignored. Because our jet size is much larger than the
interpenetration distance, the merging of the two supersonic plasma jets produces a shock.

′

VI. SIMULATION SHOCK PROFILE RESULTS

We now compare the shock proﬁle, length scales, and emission intensities obtained in the
experiment to simulation results. The shock proﬁle lengths in the simulations agree with
the experimental observations within uncertainty bars. There are disagreements between
the emission intensities in the post-processed simulations compared to the experiments,
particularly in the post-shock region.

A. Comparison of Simulation and Experimental Shock Length Scales

We have employed multi-ﬂuid simulations, using the chicago code31–33, in which each
plasma jet is modeled as a separate ion ﬂuid that can contain diﬀerent species, to model the
plasma collision35,39,40, including the interpenetration eﬀects described in Sec. V. chicago
is a hybrid particle-in-cell code with the capability to model both ions and electrons as
ﬂuid species31. The multi-ﬂuid simulation can model interpenetration eﬀects because each
jet is treated as a separate ﬂuid, and the jets can exchange momentum and energy via the
inter-ﬂuid collision models used in the code (see Eqs. 1 and 2 in Thoma et al., Physics
of Plasmas 18, 103507 (2011)31). The code may also be run in a magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) mode in which electron inertia is neglected. In the present research, the multi-ion
MHD approach was found to generate identical results as those of lengthier simulations with
electron inertia retained. For the 1D simulation presented in this work, the two jets are
given an initial density proﬁle, temperature, and velocity based on input from experimental
measurements. The simulation grid cell length is 0.06 cm, and the shock proﬁle results are
similar to results from a simulation with a 0.015 cm grid cell length. propaceos non-LTE
data are used for the ion equations of state and opacities43. Collisionality between ions and
electrons is determined by a Spitzer model. At initial temperatures below 2 eV, there was
no discernible interaction between the colliding jets because the low ionization states lead
to large interpenetration lengths. The simulation may need to be better tuned in these

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks 10

FIG. 5.
(Top) Simulated density lineouts for the He and Ar in jets coming from the left (dashed
lines) and right (solid lines). Total densities (dotted lines) are the sum of the left and right jets. Ar
density values are divided by 0.03 for visualization. (Bottom) Corresponding simulated temperature
lineouts. Times are at 2 µs after jets ﬁrst start to merge.

low ionization regimes and include neutral collision rates in order to obtain more physically
accurate results.

The chicago 1D multi-ﬂuid simulations agree with the experimental results, showing:
shock-front separation, He diﬀusing farther ahead of the shock (closer to the pre-shock
region) than Ar, and diﬀerent shock widths for diﬀerent ions. Figure 5 displays the simulated
densities and temperatures, respectively, for He and Ar in the individual plasma jets coming
from the left and right (dashed and solid lines) at 2 µs after the jets start to merge. We use
these individual jet shock proﬁles to obtain the following quantities. Simulations indicate
a separation between the shock-front density peaks to be 0.50
0.12 cm, a He shock width
12 post-shock He ion-ion mean free paths), and an Ar shock width
of 0.44
13 post-shock Ar ion-ion mean free paths). Additionally, we ﬁnd
of 0.57
0.06 cm,
the distance between the peak He density and the zero position to be 1.51
±
and the distance between the peak Ar density and the zero position to be 1.01
0.06 cm.
±
We also ﬁnd the ratio of the Ar shock width to He shock width to be 1.29
0.45. The
simulation uncertainty values are based upon the 0.06 cm simulation resolution. Except for
the distances between the peak intensities and the zero position, these simulation quantities
agree with the experimental data within uncertainty bars.

0.12 cm (45
0.12 cm (62

±
±

±
±

±

±

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks 11

(Top) Synthetic intensity lineouts of plasma self-emission using the Ar-II (500 ± 25 nm)
FIG. 6.
and He-I (589 ± 5 nm) ﬁlters with spect3D43. Inputs for these intensities are the simulation total
densities and temperatures shown in Fig. 5. Comparing with Fig. 4, the synthetic lineouts do
not depict the experimentally observed double-peaked intensity feature. (Bottom) The ionization
fractions of neutral He (He I), singly ionized He (He II), singly ionized Ar (Ar II), and doubly
ionized Ar (Ar III) corresponding to the above synthetic intensity lineouts. The average ionization
values for both He and Ar increase near the center post-shock region, despite the He-I ﬁlter intensity
remaining large.

B. Comparison of Simulation and Experimental Intensity Proﬁles

Through this point in the paper, the experiments and simulations have generally agreed.
Because the experimental results in Fig. 4 are emission intensity and the simulation results
in Fig. 5 are density and temperature, it is useful to directly compare the experiments
with synthetic emission intensities from the simulation. However, in the simulation post-
shock region, there are signiﬁcant disagreements to the experiment regarding the plasma
state: particularly the ionization state and emission intensity. The simulation post-shock
density prediction matches relatively well based on the experimental interferometry (see
Fig. 2). The simulation post-shock ion temperature predictions are reasonable based on
calculations converting 100% of the ion kinetic energy (at 11 km/s) into thermal energy
27.5 eV,
within the shock, which would generate post-shock THemax ≈
and we expect post-shock temperatures closer to the THemax value due to the relative
atomic concentrations of the species. Post-shock ion temperatures were also measured in
experiments for single ion species shocks, showing agreement with simulation results39,40.
Although the simulation post-shock density and temperature values, which inﬂuence the
intensity results, seem reasonable, the following paragraph will explore diﬀerences in the
simulation ionization states and synthetic emission intensities compared to the experiments.
While the experiments and simulations quantitatively agree within uncertainty bars re-
garding the magnitude of the shock-front separation and the He and Ar shock widths, the

4.7 eV and TArmax ≈

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks 12

simulations predict a single-peaked shock structure near the collision center rather than
the double-peaked and wider post-shock region observed in the experiments; see the dot-
ted lines in the top row of Fig. 5 compared to the bottom row of Fig. 4. This diﬀerence
correlates with the smaller distance between the center zero position and the ion density
peaks found in the simulation compared to the experiments. As shown in the top row of
Fig. 6, we use spect3D software43 to obtain synthetic intensity lineouts of the chicago
simulation density and temperature parameters. This synthetic intensity lineout does not
reproduce the experimentally observed double-peaked shock proﬁle or the decreases in rel-
ative intensity near the zero position for either Ar-II or He-I ﬁlter. Still, as shown in the
bottom row of Fig. 6, the average ionization values for both species are increasing in the
post-shock region near the center position of the plasma jet merging, as is expected. A 2D
Cartesian simulation of the jet merging process provides qualitatively similar results as the
1D simulation, also depicting a single-peaked shock structure.

These diﬀerences in the post-shock region between experiments and simulation will be
further assessed in future work. The disagreement seems to occur from the simulation pre-
dicting larger amounts of He-I (rather than He-II) in the shock compared to the experiment
and also not showing a region of decreased Ar-II near the center of the collision region.
Possible sources of this discrepancy include the models of collisionality and thermal con-
duction in the post-shock region used in the simulations for this plasma parameter regime.
Additionally, the simulation EOS and opacity models do not capture time-dependent eﬀects
of ionization and/or recombination during the transient process of shock formation, as is
present in the experiments. Ultimately, although the experimental and simulated emission
intensities disagree in the post-shock region, the separation of ion species within the shock
front agrees well between the simulations and experimental observations.

VII. DOMINANCE OF BARODIFFUSION IN THE PRESENT WORK

The shock-front separation results are consistent among the experiments, simulations,
and theoretical predictions of ion species diﬀusion. In this section, we quantitatively esti-
mate the expected species concentration change within the shock and calculate the relative
contributions of the diﬀerent diﬀusion mechanisms, showing that barodiﬀusion dominates
in the present research.

As stated earlier in Sec. II: within a shock front, theory predicts that the lighter ion
diﬀusion velocity (in the center of mass frame) points toward the pre-shock region, and the
heavier ion diﬀusion velocity points in the opposite direction. This prediction is consistent
with our experimental and simulation results for the He/Ar mixture. The interspecies
ion diﬀusion should change the relative species concentration. Experimentally, we did not
directly measure the species concentration along the shock proﬁle, but the simulations show
interspecies ion diﬀusion. Compared to the initial condition of 97% He and 3% Ar atomic
concentrations [76.4% He and 23.6% Ar mass concentrations], in the top row in Fig. 5
we ﬁnd a minimum He atomic concentration in the post-shock region (corresponding to
the zero position) of 95.8% [69.6% He mass concentration], and we ﬁnd a maximum He
atomic concentration at the shock front closer to the pre-shock region (corresponding to the

±

2.5 cm position) of 97.7% [80.7% He mass concentration].
We now quantitatively explore the eﬀects of diﬀerent diﬀusion ﬂux terms on the species
concentration. The diﬀusion terms depend upon the species concentration, masses, num-
ber densities, ionization states, and temperatures. The pre-shock and post-shock plasma
parameters are listed in Table I. The goal of the following calculations are to serve as
order-of-magnitude estimates to show consistency between the theory, experiments, and
simulations. First, assuming no initial concentration separation for simplicity, we take
cm1 = 0 in Eq. 2 and Eq. 3. We also approximate ∂t = 2 µs. Taking a characteristic
∇
= 1/LSW . Therefore, for a
length scale as the shock width LSW ≈
quantity Q in Eq. 3, we have (
Qpre−shock)/Qpre−shock.
Q)/Q
For our He/Ar mixture, we then calculate the diﬀusion coeﬃcients to be D = 600 cm2/s,
1, and κe = 1.324,28,52,53. See Appendix A for expressions for
κp = 1.3, κT i = 0.5, κT e ≈ −

(1/LSW )(Qpost−shock −

0.4 cm, we estimate

∇

∇

≈

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks 13

φ

∇

≈ ∇

Te/e54,55.
the diﬀusion coeﬃcients. We also estimate the ambipolar electric ﬁeld
Therefore, the relative contributions for each diﬀusion mechanism (the quantities in paren-
theses in Eq. 3) are 20.3 cm−1 for barodiﬀusion, 1.14 cm−1 for thermodiﬀusion (1.36 cm−1
for ion thermodiﬀusion and -0.23 cm−1 for electron thermodiﬀusion), and 0.30 cm−1 for
electrodiﬀusion. Starting with a He concentration cm1 = ρ1/ρ = 76.4%, in Eq. 1 we ob-
10−2 cm/µs, corresponding in Eq. 2 to a change in
tain a He diﬀusion speed vD1 = 1.7
concentration of ∂cm1 = 6.5%. This estimated calculation result is in agreement with the
simulation concentration change from the above paragraph. Furthermore, these estimates
show that barodiﬀusion is the dominant diﬀusion mechanism in the present research that
causes the shock-front separation. This result contrasts with prior ICF experiments, for
which the ion thermodiﬀusion mechanism dominated19,20. Additional experimental testing
and validation of the theory can be achieved by changing the species concentrations, which
inﬂuence the contributions of the various diﬀusion mechanisms.

×

VIII. CONCLUSION

Within a collisional multi-ion-species plasma shock front containing 97% He and 3% Ar,
we experimentally observe shock-front separation and species-dependent shock widths. Ex-
periments, 1D multi-ﬂuid plasma simulations, and theoretical predictions are all consistent
in showing that the lighter He ions diﬀuse farther ahead within the overall shock front than
the heavier Ar ions. The experimental shock proﬁles of diﬀerent ion species were directly
imaged using narrow bandpass visible wavelength ﬁlters. Multi-ﬂuid plasma simulations
allowed for reasonably accurate modeling of the plasma jet merging and multi-ion-species
eﬀects, though with disagreement on the emission intensities in the post-shock plasma. The
fundamental experimental data in the present work can be used to validate models and
benchmark numerical simulations of multi-ion-species collisional plasma shocks of relevance
to HED, MIF, and ICF experiments. These experimental data are a valuable start to the
process of benchmarking codes in this regime by demonstrating where there is agreement
and disagreement. Additional work can be performed to obtain species concentration mea-
surements at multiple points across the shock proﬁle during a single experimental shot.
These measurements will likely require a more detailed spectroscopic study of the emis-
sion line ratios in comparison with the prismspect atomic modeling calculations. More
experiments can be conducted in order to acquire data for other times during the shock
propagation, which can provide information about time-dependent eﬀects during the pro-
cess of shock formation including ionization, recombination, and kinetic (non-Maxwellian)
eﬀects.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge J. Dunn, K. C. Yates, S. Brockington, A. Case, E. Cruz, F. D. With-
erspoon, Y. C. F. Thio, D. Welch, P. Bellan, G. Kagan, and X.-Z. Tang for technical
support and/or useful discussions. This work was supported by the Oﬃce of Fusion Energy
Sciences and the Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy of the U.S. Department of
Energy under contract number DE-AC52-06NA25396.

Appendix A: Diﬀusion Coeﬃcient Calculations

For reference, we list the equations to determine the diﬀusion coeﬃcients24,28,52,53, where
subscript “1” refers to the lighter ion species with mass m1, and subscript “2” refers to the
heavier ion species with mass m2. The classical diﬀusion coeﬃcient, D, is

D =

ρTi

A12µ12n1ν12 ×

cm1(1

−
cm1m2 + (1

cm1)

cm1)m1

−

(A1)

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks 14

where the new variables are the transport coeﬃcient A12 (
1, here) and reduced mass
µ12 = m1m2/(m1 + m2). The collision frequency ν12 is the energy loss collision rate. Next,
the barodiﬀusion ratio, κp, is

∼

κp = cm1(1

cm1)(m2 −

−

m1)(

cm1
m1

1

+

cm1

−
m2

)

The electrodiﬀusion ratio, κe, is

κe = m1m2cm1(1

cm1)(

−

cm1
m1

1

+

cm1

−
m2

)(

Z1
m1 −

Z2
m2

)

The ion thermodiﬀusion ratio, κT i, is

κT i = m1m2(

cm1
m1

1

+

cm1

−
m2

)[

cm1B11
m1

(1

−

+

cm1)B12
m2

]

and the electron thermodiﬀusion ratio, κT e, is

κT e =m1m2(

1

+

cm1
−
m1
m2
cm1)B1e −

[(1

×

−

cm1B2e]

Te
Ti

cm1

)[

cm1Z1
m1

(1

+

−

cm1)Z2
m2

]

(A2)

(A3)

(A4)

(A5)

where B11, B12, B1e, and B2e are transport coeﬃcients that can be evaluated numerically.
The electron thermodiﬀusion ratio, κT e, can also be written as

κT e =

−

×

cm1)(cm1 +

(1

−

cm1)m1
m2

)

Z 2

1 cm1(1

−
Z 2
2
Z 2
1

(

m2
m1 −

)

Te
Ti

β0
Zef f

where the coeﬃcient β0 is

where Zef f is

β0 =

30Zef f (11Zef f + 15√2)

217Z 2

ef f + 604√2Zef f + 288

Zef f =

1 + n2Z 2
n1Z 2
2
n1Z1 + n2Z2

(A6)

(A7)

(A8)

a

a

of

of

of

of

in

D.

on

the

fully

wave

gas,”

shock

Jukes,

ionized

inﬂuence

structure

Structure

“VI. The

propagation

Shock-Wave

E. Center,

“Measurement

shock waves,”

1T. Cowling,
diﬀusion
The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 33, 61–67 (1942).
2J.
“The
Journal of Fluid Mechanics 3, 275–285 (1957).
3M. Y. Jaﬀrin and R. F. Probstein, “Structure of a Plasma Shock Wave,” Physics of Fluids 7, 1658 (1964).
4R.
in Helium-Argon Mixtures,”
Physics of Fluids 10, 1777 (1967).
5J. R. Rygg, J. A. Frenje, C. K. Li, F. H. S´eguin, R. D. Petrasso, J. A. Delettrez, V. Y. Gle-
bov, V. N. Goncharov, D. D. Meyerhofer, S. P. Regan, T. C. Sangster,
and C. Stoeckl, “Tests
of the hydrodynamic equivalence of direct-drive implosions with diﬀerent D2 and He3 mixtures,”
Physics of Plasmas 13, 052702 (2006).
6H. W. Herrmann, J. R. Langenbrunner, J. M. Mack, J. H. Cooley, D. C. Wilson, S. C. Evans, T. J. Sedillo,
G. A. Kyrala, S. E. Caldwell, C. S. Young, A. Nobile, J. Wermer, S. Paglieri, A. M. McEvoy, Y. Kim,
S. H. Batha, C. J. Horsﬁeld, D. Drew, W. Garbett, M. Rubery, V. Y. Glebov, S. Roberts, and J. A.
Frenje, “Anomalous yield reduction in direct-drive deuterium/tritium implosions due to H3e addition,”
Physics of Plasmas 16, 056312 (2009).
7D. T. Casey, J. A. Frenje, M. Gatu Johnson, M. J.-E. Manuel, H. G. Rinderknecht, N. Sinenian, F. H.
S´eguin, C. K. Li, R. D. Petrasso, P. B. Radha, J. A. Delettrez, V. Y. Glebov, D. D. Meyerhofer, T. C.
Sangster, D. P. McNabb, P. A. Amendt, R. N. Boyd, J. R. Rygg, H. W. Herrmann, Y. H. Kim, and
A. D. Bacher, “Evidence for Stratiﬁcation of Deuterium-Tritium Fuel in Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion
Implosions,” Physical Review Letters 108, 075002 (2012).

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks 15

8H. G. Rinderknecht, M. J. Rosenberg, C. K. Li, N. M. Hoﬀman, G. Kagan, A. B. Zylstra, H. Sio, J. A.
Frenje, M. Gatu Johnson, F. H. S´eguin, R. D. Petrasso, P. Amendt, C. Bellei, S. Wilks, J. Delettrez,
V. Y. Glebov, C. Stoeckl, T. C. Sangster, D. D. Meyerhofer, and A. Nikroo, “Ion Thermal Decoupling
and Species Separation in Shock-Driven Implosions,” Physical Review Letters 114, 025001 (2015).
9D. P. Higginson, J. S. Ross, D. D. Ryutov, F. Fiuza, S. C. Wilks, E. P. Hartouni, R. Hatarik, C. M.
Huntington, J. Kilkenny, B. Lahmann, C. K. Li, A. Link, R. D. Petrasso, B. B. Pollock, B. A. Rem-
ington, H. G. Rinderknecht, Y. Sakawa, H. Sio, G. F. Swadling, S. Weber, A. B. Zylstra, and H.-S.
Park, “Kinetic eﬀects on neutron generation in moderately collisional interpenetrating plasma ﬂows,”
Physics of Plasmas 26, 012113 (2019).

10H. Sio, J. A. Frenje, A. Le, S. Atzeni, T. J. T. Kwan, M. Gatu Johnson, G. Kagan, C. Stoeckl, C. K.
Li, C. E. Parker, C. J. Forrest, V. Glebov, N. V. Kabadi, A. Bose, H. G. Rinderknecht, P. Amendt,
D. T. Casey, R. Mancini, W. T. Taitano, B. Keenan, A. N. Simakov, L. Chac´on, S. P. Regan, T. C.
Sangster, E. M. Campbell, F. H. Seguin, and R. D. Petrasso, “Observations of Multiple Nuclear Reac-
tion Histories and Fuel-Ion Species Dynamics in Shock-Driven Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion Implosions,”
Physical Review Letters 122, 035001 (2019).

11O.

Larroche,

“Ion
Fokker-Planck
Physics of Plasmas 19, 122706 (2012).

simulation

of D-

3 He

gas

target

implosions,”

12C. Bellei, P. A. Amendt, S. C. Wilks, M. G. Haines, D. T. Casey, C. K. Li, R. Petrasso, and D. R. Welch,

“Species separation in inertial conﬁnement fusion fuels,” Physics of Plasmas 20, 012701 (2013).

13C. Bellei, H. Rinderknecht, A. Zylstra, M. Rosenberg, H. Sio, C. K. Li, R. Petrasso, S. C.
and P. A. Amendt, “Species separation and kinetic eﬀects in collisional plasma shocks,”

Wilks,
Physics of Plasmas 21, 056310 (2014).

14A. Inglebert, B. Canaud, and O. Larroche, “Species separation and modiﬁcation of neutron diagnostics

in inertial-conﬁnement fusion,” EPL (Europhysics Letters) 107, 65003 (2014).

15E. Vold, R. Rauenzahn, and A. N. Simakov, “Multi-species plasma transport in 1D direct-drive ICF

simulations,” Physics of Plasmas 26, 032706 (2019).

16P. Amendt, O. L. Landen, H. F. Robey, C. K. Li, and R. D. Petrasso, “Plasma Barodiﬀusion in Inertial-
Conﬁnement-Fusion Implosions: Application to Observed Yield Anomalies in Thermonuclear Fuel Mix-
tures,” Physical Review Letters 105, 115005 (2010).

17P. Amendt, S. C. Wilks, C. Bellei, C. K. Li, and R. D. Petrasso, “The potential role of electric ﬁelds and
plasma barodiﬀusion on the inertial conﬁnement fusion database,” Physics of Plasmas 18, 056308 (2011).
plasmas,”
“Thermo-diﬀusion

inertially

conﬁned

Kagan

Tang,

18G.

X.-Z.

and

in

Physics Letters A 378, 1531–1535 (2014).

19S. C. Hsu, T. R. Joshi, P. Hakel, E. L. Vold, M. J. Schmitt, N. M. Hoﬀman, R. M. Rauenzahn, G. Kagan,
X.-Z. Tang, R. C. Mancini, Y. Kim, and H. W. Herrmann, “Observation of interspecies ion separation
in inertial-conﬁnement-fusion implosions,” EPL (Europhysics Letters) 115, 65001 (2016).

20T. R. Joshi, P. Hakel, S. C. Hsu, E. L. Vold, M. J. Schmitt, N. M. Hoﬀman, R. M. Rauenzahn,
G. Kagan, X.-Z. Tang, R. C. Mancini, Y. Kim, and H. W. Herrmann, “Observation and modeling
of interspecies ion separation in inertial conﬁnement fusion implosions via imaging x-ray spectroscopy,”
Physics of Plasmas 24, 056305 (2017).

21H. G. Rinderknecht, H.-S. Park, J. S. Ross, P. A. Amendt, S. C. Wilks, J. Katz, N. M. Hoﬀman, G. Kagan,
E. L. Vold, B. D. Keenan, A. N. Simakov, and L. Chac´on, “Measurements of ion velocity separation and
ionization in multi-species plasma shocks,” Physics of Plasmas 25, 056312 (2018).

22H. G. Rinderknecht, H.-S. Park, J. S. Ross, P. A. Amendt, D. P. Higginson, S. C. Wilks,
D. Haberberger, J. Katz, D. H. Froula, N. M. Hoﬀman, G. Kagan, B. D. Keenan,
and
E. L. Vold, “Highly Resolved Measurements of a Developing Strong Collisional Plasma Shock,”
Physical Review Letters 120, 095001 (2018).

23T. R. Joshi, S. C. Hsu, P. Hakel, N. M. Hoﬀman, H. Sio, and R. C. Mancini, “Progress on observations
of interspecies ion separation in inertial-conﬁnement-fusion implosions via imaging x-ray spectroscopy,”
Phys. Plasmas 26, 062702 (2019).
and X.-Z. Tang,

“Electro-diﬀusion

24G. Kagan

plasma with

species,”

two

ion

in

a

Physics of Plasmas 19, 082709 (2012).

25C. Bellei and P. A. Amendt, “Asymptotic separation in multispecies collisional plasma shocks,”

Physical Review E 90, 013101 (2014).

26A. N. Simakov and K. Molvig, “Hydrodynamic description of an unmagnetized plasma with multiple ion

species. I. General formulation,” Physics of Plasmas 23, 032115 (2016).

27S. I. Glazyrin, A. S. Kuratov, and V. Y. Bychenkov, “Separation of ions on the front of a shock wave in

a multicomponent plasma,” JETP Letters 103, 238–243 (2016).

28A. N. Simakov, B. D. Keenan, W. T. Taitano, and L. Chac´on, “Plasma ion stratiﬁcation by weak planar

shocks,” Physics of Plasmas 24, 092702 (2017).

29B. D. Keenan, A. N. Simakov, L. Chac´on, and W. T. Taitano, “Deciphering the kinetic structure of

multi-ion plasma shocks,” Physical Review E 96, 053203 (2017).

30B. D. Keenan, A. N. Simakov, W. T. Taitano, and L. Chac´on, “Ion species stratiﬁcation within strong

shocks in two-ion plasmas,” Physics of Plasmas 25, 032103 (2018).

31C. Thoma, D. R. Welch, R. E. Clark, N. Bruner, J. J. MacFarlane,

and I. E. Golovkin,
“Two-ﬂuid electromagnetic simulations of plasma-jet acceleration with detailed equation-of-state,”
Physics of Plasmas 18, 103507 (2011).

Observation of Shock-Front Separation in Multi-Ion-Species Collisional Plasma Shocks 16

32C. Thoma, D. R. Welch, and S. C. Hsu, “Particle-in-cell simulations of collisionless shock formation via

head-on merging of two laboratory supersonic plasma jets,” Physics of Plasmas 20, 082128 (2013).

33C. Thoma, D. R. Welch, R. E. Clark, D. V. Rose,

and I. E. Golovkin, “Hybrid-PIC
laser-plasma interactions and hot electron generation in gold hohlraum walls,”

modeling of
Physics of Plasmas 24, 062707 (2017).

34S. C. Hsu, E. C. Merritt, A. L. Moser, T. J. Awe, S. J. E. Brockington, J. S. Davis, C. S. Adams,
A. Case, J. T. Cassibry, J. P. Dunn, M. A. Gilmore, A. G. Lynn, S. J. Messer, and F. D. Witherspoon,
“Experimental characterization of railgun-driven supersonic plasma jets motivated by high energy density
physics applications,” Physics of Plasmas 19, 123514 (2012).

35E. C. Merritt, A. L. Moser, S. C. Hsu, J. Loverich,

and M. Gilmore, “Experimental Char-
acterization of the Stagnation Layer between Two Obliquely Merging Supersonic Plasma Jets,”
Physical Review Letters 111, 085003 (2013).

36E. C. Merritt, A. L. Moser, S. C. Hsu, C. S. Adams, J. P. Dunn, A. Miguel Holgado, and M. A. Gilmore,
“Experimental evidence for collisional shock formation via two obliquely merging supersonic plasma jets,”
Phys. Plasmas 21, 055703 (2014).

37A. L. Moser and S. C. Hsu, “Experimental characterization of a transition from collisionless to collisional
interaction between head-on-merging supersonic plasma jetsa),” Physics of Plasmas 22, 055707 (2015).
38S. C. Hsu, S. J. Langendorf, K. C. Yates, J. P. Dunn, S. Brockington, A. Case, E. Cruz, F. D. Wither-
spoon, M. A. Gilmore, J. T. Cassibry, R. Samulyak, P. Stoltz, K. Schillo, W. Shih, K. Beckwith, and
Y. C. F. Thio, “Experiment to Form and Characterize a Section of a Spherically Imploding Plasma Liner,”
IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 46, 1951–1961 (2018).

39S. J. Langendorf, K. C. Yates, S. C. Hsu, C. Thoma,

and M. Gilmore, “Experimental Measure-
ments of Ion Heating in Collisional Plasma Shocks and Interpenetrating Supersonic Plasma Flows,”
Physical Review Letters 121, 185001 (2018).

40S. J. Langendorf, K. C. Yates, S. C. Hsu, C. Thoma, and M. Gilmore, “Experimental study of ion heating

in obliquely merging hypersonic plasma jets,” Physics of Plasmas 26, 082110 (2019).

41E. C. Merritt, A. G. Lynn, M. A. Gilmore, and S. C. Hsu, “Multi-chord ﬁber-coupled interferometer with

a long coherence length laser,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 83, 033506 (2012).

42E. C. Merritt, A. G. Lynn, M. A. Gilmore, C. Thoma,

Hsu,
Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 83, 10D523 (2012).

“Multi-chord

ﬁber-coupled

interferometry

of

supersonic

43Prism Computational Sciences, “http://www.prism-cs.com,” .
44E. V.

and P. M. Bellan,

Stenson

IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 36, 1206–1207 (2008).

“Dual-Species Plasmas

J. Loverich,
plasma

jets

and S. C.
(invited),”

Illustrate MHD Flows,”

45E. V. Stenson and P. M. Bellan, “Magnetically Driven Flows in Arched Plasma Structures,”

Physical Review Letters 109, 075001 (2012).

46National

Institute

of

Standards

and

Technology

Atomic

Spectra

Database,

“https://www.nist.gov/pml/atomic-spectra-database,” (2019).

47J. Huba, NRL Plasma Formulary (Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, 2016) p. 31.
48B. A. Trubnikov, “Particle Interactions in a Fully Ionized Plasma,” Reviews of Plasma Physics 1, 105

(1965).

49H. Helm, “The cross section for symmetric charge exchange of He + in He at energies between 0.3 and 8

eV,” Journal of Physics B: Atomic and Molecular Physics 10, 3683–3697 (1977).

50B. M. Smirnov, “Tables

Physica Scripta 61, 595–602 (2000).

for Cross Sections of

the Resonant Charge Exchange Process,”

51S. Messer, A. Case, L. Wu, S. Brockington, and F. D. Witherspoon, “Nonlinear compressions in merging

plasma jets,” Physics of Plasmas 20, 032306 (2013).

52G. Kagan and X.-Z. Tang, “Mathematica Code to Calculate Diﬀusion Ratios,” (2019).
53V.

Multicomponent

“Transport

Processes

Zhdanov,

M.

in

Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 44, 2283–2283 (2002).

Plasma,”

54P. A. Amendt,

and F. H.
S´eguin, “Electric ﬁeld and ionization-gradient eﬀects on inertial-conﬁnement-fusion implosions,”
Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 51, 124048 (2009).

J. L. Milovich, S. C. Wilks, C. K. Li, R. D. Petrasso,

55X.-Z. Tang, H. L. Berk, Z. Guo,

and C. J. McDevitt, “Reduced Fokker-Planck mod-
fast particle distribution across a transition layer of disparate plasma temperatures,”

for

els
Physics of Plasmas 21, 032707 (2014).

