Design, Assembly, Calibration, and Measurement of an Augmented
Reality Haploscope

Nate Phillips*
Mississippi State University

Kristen Massey†
Mississippi State University

Mohammed Safayet Areﬁn‡
Mississippi State University

J. Edward Swan II§
Mississippi State University

9
1
0
2

g
u
A
1
2

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
3
5
8
0
.
8
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: The Augmented Reality (AR) haploscope. (a) A front view of the AR haploscope with labeled components [10]. (b) A
user participating in perceptual experiments. (c) The user’s view through the haploscope. With ﬁnely adjusted parameters such as
brightness, binocular parallax, and focal demand, this object appears to have a deﬁnite spatial location.

ABSTRACT

A haploscope is an optical system which produces a carefully con-
trolled virtual image. Since the development of Wheatstone’s origi-
nal stereoscope in 1838, haploscopes have been used to measure per-
ceptual properties of human stereoscopic vision. This paper presents
an augmented reality (AR) haploscope, which allows the viewing
of virtual objects superimposed against the real world. Our lab has
used generations of this device to make a careful series of perceptual
measurements of AR phenomena, which have been described in
publications over the previous 8 years. This paper systematically
describes the design, assembly, calibration, and measurement of our
AR haploscope. These methods have been developed and improved
in our lab over the past 10 years. Despite the fact that 180 years
have elapsed since the original report of Wheatstone’s stereoscope,
we have not previously found a paper that describes these kinds of
details.

1 INTRODUCTION

Mixed reality has been an active ﬁeld of research for the past 50
years [17], but recent advances and interest have dramatically ac-
celerated developments in the ﬁeld. This has resulted, lately, in
an explosive increase in the development of virtual and augmented
reality (AR) display devices, such as the Vuzix STAR, Oculus Rift,
Google Glass, Microsoft HoloLens, HTC Vive, Meta 2, and Magic
Leap One. These displays have inspired consumer and business in-
terest, increased demand for VR and AR applications, and motivated
increased investment in VR and AR development and research [12].

*e-mail: Nathaniel.C.Phillips@ieee.org
†e-mail: kristenmassey@ieee.org
‡e-mail:areﬁn@acm.org
§e-mail: swan@acm.org

This investment and development is stymied by an incomplete
knowledge of key underlying research. Among this unﬁnished re-
search, our lab has focused on addressing questions of AR percep-
tion; in order to accomplish the ambitious goals of business and
industry, a deeper understanding of the perceptual phenomena under-
lying AR is needed [8]. All current commercial AR displays have
certain limitations, including ﬁxed focal distances, limited ﬁelds of
view, non-adjustable optical designs, and limited luminance ranges,
among others. These limitations hinder the ability of our ﬁeld to ask
certain research questions, especially in the area of AR perception.
Therefore, our lab has developed a custom AR display (Figure 1),
which we call the AR Haploscope, assembled from off-the-shelf
optical components. Our design, iterated through several generations
and research projects [2, 6, 13–16], is based on previous haploscope
research (e.g., [3, 22]), which has been widely used in the ﬁeld
of visual perception [20]. A haploscope is an optical system that
produces tightly-controlled virtual images, typically with controlled
accommodative demand, presented angle, brightness, divergence,
and image choice [2, 6, 14]. Such a system is highly controllable,
can be adjusted for different inter-pupillary distances, can be used in
a wide range of experiments, and can be reliably re-used.

The advantages of using a haploscope come with the additional
burden of calibration. Through our own experience, we have dis-
covered that the calibration of an AR haploscope is a non-trivial
task. There are several important factors to consider, as well as many
potential pitfalls [11]. The difﬁculty is compounded by a general
dearth of published research on the topic of haploscope calibration;
the authors have looked for, but not found, such a publication.

Therefore, this paper seeks to contribute a systematic description
and evaluation of the design, assembly, and calibration of an AR
haploscope system.

2 BACKGROUND

Since the discovery of perspective in the 14th century by Italian
Renaissance painters and architects, scholars and scientists have
been studying human stereo vision. In 1838, Wheatstone [21] gave

 
 
 
 
 
 
image is shrunk by the minimization lens, a -10 diopter concave lens,
producing a miniﬁed virtual image 5 cm in front of the lens. This
miniﬁed image, in turn, is collimated by the collimating lens, a 10
diopter convex lens, positioned 10 cm in front of the miniﬁed image.
Now, collimated light, deﬁnitionally, is broadcast out in purely
parallel rays of light, formed at optical inﬁnity. Once the collimated
image source nears the user’s eye, it is focused, by application of a
particular negative power concave lens, to the desired focal distance.
Finally, the output of this lens system is reﬂected into a user’s eye by
a beamsplitter, a partially reﬂective piece of glass. This beamsplitter
allows the user to see both the reﬂected virtual object and the real
world displayed beyond the beamsplitter [15].

However, even this is not enough to fully control all the cues that
a user needs to perceive an object. Most notably, users also need
to be able to converge appropriately to the visual target. During
vergence, a user’s eyes rotate inward or outward so that they can
center the viewed object in their vision. For objects at a speciﬁc
distance, this effect causes the eyes to rotate to a particular angle, α,
which can be readily calculated by the formula:

α = arctan

object distance
(IPD/2)

,

(1)

where IPD is the user’s interpupillary distance.

As such, this haploscope design needs to be able to accurately and
precisely rotate to a variety of vergence angles. With a haploscope,
like ours, that rotates about the modeled eye position, the system’s
optical axes can be rotated to be collinear with the user’s optical
axes, eliminating this additional distortion (Figure 2).

At this point, it may be instructive to brieﬂy discuss our assump-
tions about human vision. We assume that a human eye can be
accurately modeled as a simple schematic eye with a center of ro-
tation, a single nodal point, and a pupil, all of which are co-linear
with each other [7, 20]. This means, in practice, that human vision
takes place on the axis that includes the pupil, the nodal point (where
human visual perception originates), and the center of eye rotation.
This model turns out to be rather important, as it has particularly key
implications for how we set up the haploscope for a given user.

First, we measure user IPD at optical inﬁnity, when his or her gaze
vectors are essentially parallel. This distance is important primarily
because it is how far the center of a user’s eyes are from each other;
thus, adjusting the haploscope to this position allows us to align the
centers of rotation of a user’s eyes with the optical system.

Since the centers of the user’s eyes and the haploscope system’s
centers of rotation are coincident, the haploscope optical axes remain
aligned with the user’s optical axes, even as the eyes/haploscope
rails rotate. This means that each point on the user’s optical axes,
including the nodal point, is presented with the same optical stimuli,
regardless of rotation.

4 ASSEMBLY AND CALIBRATION
Haploscope calibration can be broken down into multiple, discrete
steps, listed here. For a more in-depth examination of each step,
please see Massey [10].

1. Ensure that the haploscope rests upon a ﬂat, level surface
and that each element of the haploscope is also ﬂat and level.
Further, ensure that the two rotating sides of the haploscope
are ﬂat, level, and parallel with each other (Figure 1).

2. Ensure that the monitors, and all optical components besides
the beamsplitters, are mounted such that they are centered
along the optical axis of their respective rotating component
(Figure 1).

3. Ensure that the collimation and minimization lenses are posi-
tioned on the rails such that they collimate the image from the
monitor (Figures 3 and 4).

Figure 2: An example of how the haploscope wings rotate to match
different focal distances, from Singh [13, Figure 4.7]. The displays
rotate inward as a user’s eyes rotate, ensuring that the user maintains
a view ﬁxed at the optical center where distortion is minimized.

the ﬁrst scientiﬁc description of the phenomena of stereopsis. He
also described the stereoscope—the seminal instrument for precisely
displaying a stereo pair of images. A haploscope is fundamentally a
stereoscope that has been adapted for laboratory use.

Historically, haploscopes are instruments that are used to observe
stereo vision and measure accommodation, vergence, and other
properties of human eyes, across many disparate research ﬁelds.
In 1959, Williams [22] designed and developed a haploscope to
study accommodation and convergence. NASA [3] developed the
Baylor Mark III Haploscope to measure, record and analyze the
binocular vision of astronauts during spaceﬂight. Ellis et al. [5], in
1994, produced a novel head-mounted haploscope system to study
the effects of interposition and occlusion on virtual images. Finally,
Rolland et al. [11] developed and used their own haploscope in
order to study the accuracy and precision of depth judgments. These
examples represent only a small sampling of historical haploscope
usage, but are largely representative of haploscopes in research.

In augmented reality in particular, haploscopes are useful for
investigating topics like IPD mismatch, accommodation-vergence
mismatch, depth perception, and various other important research
areas. In order to analyze near ﬁeld depth perception in AR, Singh
designed and built a haploscope with dynamic focus adjustment and
rotatable optics [13, 14, 18]. Another haploscope system was created
by Banks et al. [1] to examine binocular disparity and eye-position.
In addition, Domini [4, 19] created a haploscope setup in order to
analyze vergence angle effects.

3 HAPLOSCOPE DESIGN

A haploscope is an augmented reality tabletop apparatus that presents
images to users through a lens system (Figure 1). Our particular hap-
loscope, which is based on Singh’s design [13,15], presents an image
and then collimates it. After collimation, the accommodation lens
forms an image at any arbitrary distance. This apparatus also allows
free rotation about the modeled eye position of the user, allowing
α, sometimes also called the vergence angle or angle of binocular
parallax, to be adjusted without adding optical distortion [15].

It may be instructive to examine the workings of the haploscope,
outlined in brief above, in slightly more detail (Figure 3). At the
start, the haploscope monitor generates an image source. Then, that

Figure 3: Ray diagram of the side of the haploscope, based on Singh [13, Figure 4.4]. This diagram showcases the path of the virtual object
as it is generated by the monitor, shrunk by the minimization lens, collimated by the collimating lens, set to a speciﬁc focal distance by the
accommodation lens, and ﬁnally reﬂected directly into a user’s eye by the beamsplitter.

(a) Monitor adjustment

(b) Straight view

Figure 4: This ﬁgure shows an experimenter adjusting the minimiza-
tion and collimation lenses during dioptometer calibration. This
calibration step is important to eliminate focal blur and to verify that
the monitor image is appropriately collimated before entering the
rest of the lens system.

4. Ensure that the beam splitters are centered such that they are
directly in front of the pivot points of both rotating components.
Further, ensure that the beam splitters are angled, positioned,
and tilted so as to ensure that each rotating component’s optical
axis is reﬂected through the beamsplitter such that the reﬂected
ray is then parallel to each rail’s optical axis and passes through
the component pivot point (Figure 6).

5. Adjust the haploscope IPD for each new user. Finally, verify,
as much as is possible, that all previously checked conditions
remain true (Figure 5).

Note that introduced errors can be compounded in later steps.

(c) Calibration target adjustment

(d) Overall

Figure 5: IPD Calibration for the left wing, with varying areas
in focus: (a) monitor/laser level centering; (b) calibration target
centering; (c) an overview of the calibration system; and (d) fully
aligned optical axes centered with respect to the calibration target.
This alignment veriﬁes that both rails’ optical axes are coincident
with the optical axes of a user with a given IPD.

4.1 Step 1 - Tabletop Setup

The ﬁrst steps in building or calibrating an accurate haploscope
system are to ensure that the structure the haploscope is built on is
rigid and ﬂat, and that it is balanced with respect to gravity.

Next, a gravity-balanced laser level should be set up and adjusted
such that it is parallel to the haploscope table. With this laser level
and its autobalancing feature, we are able to use the ruled holes on
the haploscope table to generate a precise coordinate plane to use as
a ground truth during haploscope calibration. This coordinate plane

4.4 Step 4 - Beamsplitter Calibration
At this point, all optical components should be positioned appropri-
ately, and the rotating wings returned to inﬁnity vergence.

Next, the beamsplitters must be adjusted until they perfectly
match their respective rail’s optical axis with a user’s modeled optical
axis (Figure 3). This requires ﬁne-tuned adjustment of the position,
rotation, and tilt/yaw/roll of each beamsplitter. When this calibration
step is complete, the laser level deﬁning the coordinate system
should be able to connect the modeled eye position and the optical
axis for each rail (Figure 6), aligning a user’s theoretical optical axis
with the optical axis of the rail and optical elements.

4.5 Step 5 - IPD Calibration and Veriﬁcation
The ﬁnal step in calibrating the haploscope for a speciﬁc user is
adjusting the system for that user’s interpupillary distance (IPD)
(Figure 5). If the system is not adjusted based on IPD, the user’s
optical axis will not be aligned with each rail’s optical axis, causing
noticeable distortion, angular errors, and other problems [9].

One approach to adjusting the system IPD is to set up a calibration
target with a distance equal to a potential user’s IPD (Figure 5(b)). If
two laser levels, separated by the given IPD, can be aligned to either
side of the target while also going through the center of each side’s
optical axis and center of rotation, then the haploscope has been
successfully calibrated for that IPD. If not, the base will have to be
adjusted until both lasers bisect the calibration target, the appropriate
centerline, and their side’s center of rotation (Figure 5(d)).

This methodology also has the notable advantage of verifying the
optical element alignment and calibration, which is an important
step in guaranteeing an accurate haploscope calibration. The various
other calibration steps, where relevant, should also be re-examined
to ensure that they still hold true.

5 FUTURE WORK
At this point, the haploscope system has been calibrated, as ef-
fectively as we are currently able. However, there are still some
important bounds on haploscope accuracy. Refraction, tracking er-
rors, optical distortions, and measurement errors could all potentially
be detrimental to the accuracy of the ﬁnal calibrated haploscope;
minimizing these errors could represent important future work.

6 CONCLUSIONS
Haploscope-based experiments could range from research into basic
depth perception/cue interactions, to designing accommodation-
invariant modalities and software, to examining the effects of visual
ﬂow on perception, to considering the relationship between cue con-
ﬂicts and simulation sickness. Research like this could potentially
serve to increase our understanding of the ﬁeld of augmented reality
and advance AR applications. Better understanding of depth percep-
tion in AR, for example, might allow the development of previously
unimplementable medical applications; accommodation-invariant
display technology might improve AR system performance in far-
ﬁeld applications; and a better understanding of simulation sickness
could help improve the user experience in AR [2, 13]. These sorts
of perceptual experiments would certainly make use of the novel
affordances offered by haploscopes, and this research, in turn, could
help support, develop, and improve the ﬁeld of augmented reality.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the National Sci-
ence Foundation, under awards IIS-0713609, IIS-1018413, and IIS-
1320909, to J. E. Swan II. This work was conducted at the Institute
for Neurocognitive Science and Technology, and the Center for
Advanced Vehicular Systems, at Mississippi State University. We
acknowledge Gurjot Singh for the initial design and calibration
of the AR haploscope, and Chunya Hua for developing additional
calibration methods.

Figure 6: In beamsplitter calibration, the laser level passes through
all optical components and rests centered on the monitor crosshairs,
reducing optical distortion [10].

deﬁnes an accurate and precise baseline for evaluating haploscope
alignment, and so is an important component of calibration.

4.2 Step 2 - Optical Element Mounting

To mount the optical elements to the sides of the haploscope, it is
important that they all be centered on their respective rail, and, thus,
the corresponding optical axis, and that they be square with respect
to the optical axis. To do this, the laser level coordinate system and
a simple mounting block are used to align the center of each element
with the center of the haploscope rail.

Each rail is rotated outward 90 degrees and securely fastened. The
angle of each rail is veriﬁed by ensuring that the laser level is shining
straight down the center of the rail, as determined by the mounting
block center line. Once each side is secured, the monitors are placed
on the rail and centered by matching the monitor calibration crosshair
with the laser level crosshair.

At this point, three known quantities have been established: the
laser level deﬁnes a coordinate system based on the haploscope table;
each optical axis is collinear to this coordinate system; and, ﬁnally,
the screen crosshair is centered on each rail’s optical axis. With
these three known quantities, we can center each optical element
individually as we add it to the haploscope.

4.3 Step 3 - Collimating the Image Source

Next, it is important that the output from the monitor be collimated;
without collimation, it would be untenable to adjust the focal demand
of the presented image precisely and accurately, as is required.

To do this, the elements are positioned based on their back focal

distance and the well-known thin lens equation,

1
f

=

1
u

+

1
v

,

(2)

where f represents the focal demand, u represents the object distance,
and v represents the image distance (Figure 3). In essence, the
minimization lens, a planoconcave lens, takes the output from the
monitor and converts it into a smaller, virtual image. This image is
positioned at the planoconvex, or collimating, lens’ focal distance
and is thus displayed at optical inﬁnity.

To verify that the output of this lens system is correct, we use a
dioptometer, a device which allows us to determine if an image is
collimated (Figure 4).

for stereo-motion integration. Perception, 37(1):79–95, 2008. PMID:
18399249. doi: 10.1068/p5501

[20] G. Westheimer. Specifying and controlling the optical image on the
human retina. Progress in Retinal and Eye Research, 2006. doi: 10.
1016/j.preteyeres.2005.05.002

[21] C. Wheatstone. On Some Remarkable, and Hitherto Unobserved,
Phenomena of Binocular Vision. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, 128:371–394, 1838.

[22] M. I. Williams. Haploscope. Patent US 2890620A, United States

Patent Ofﬁce, 1959.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Banks. Visual space perception laboratory. http://bankslab.

berkeley.edu/, 2018. Accessed: 2018-07-01.

[2] T. Cook, N. Phillips, K. Massey, A. Plopski, C. Sandor, and J. Edward
Swan. User preference for sharpview-enhanced virtual text during
non-ﬁxated viewing. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and
3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 1–400, March 2018. doi: 10.1109/VR.
2018.8446058

[3] T. A. Decker, R. E. Williams, C. L. Kuether, N. D. Logar, and
D. Wyman-Cornsweet. The mark iii haploscope. Technical Report
NASA-CR-2584, Baylor Univ.; Dept. of Ophthalmology.; Houston,
TX, United States, 1975.

[4] F. Domini. 3d shape perception lab. http://www.cog.brown.edu/
research/3Dspl/research.html#cues, 2018. Accessed: 2018-
07-01.

[5] S. R. Ellis and U. J. Bucher. Distance perception of stereoscopically
presented virtual objects optically superimposed on physical objects
by a head-mounted see-through display. In Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 38, pp. 1300–
1304. SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 1994.

[6] C. Hua. The Effect of an Occluder on the Accuracy of Depth Per-
ception in Optical See-Through Augmented Reality. Master’s thesis,
Mississippi State University, Starkville, Mississippi, USA, 2014.
[7] J. A. Jones, D. Edewaard, R. A. Tyrrell, and L. F. Hodges. A schematic
eye for virtual environments. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on 3D User
Interfaces (3DUI), pp. 221–230, March 2016. doi: 10.1109/3DUI.2016
.7460055

[8] E. Kruijff, J. E. Swan II, and S. Feiner. Perceptual issues in augmented
reality revisited. In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International Sympo-
sium on Mixed and Augmented Reality 2010: Science and Technology,
ISMAR 2010, pp. 3 – 12, 11 2010.

[9] S. Lee and H. Hua. Effects of conﬁguration of optical combiner
on near-ﬁeld depth perception in optical see-through head-mounted
displays. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
22(4):1432–1441, 2016.

[10] K. Massey. Procedural Calibration of Haploscope Wings to Establish
Accurate Focal Vergence Depth. Master’s thesis, Mississippi State
University, Starkville, Mississippi, USA, 2018.

[11] J. Rolland, F. Biocca, F. Hamza-Lup, Y. Ha, and R. Martins. Develop-
ment of head-mounted projection displays for distributed, collaborative,
augmented reality applications. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 14(5):528–549, 2005.

[12] M. Shirer, T. Mainelli, and J. Ubrani. Demand for augmented real-
ity/virtual reality headsets expected to rebound in 2018, says IDC.
International Data Corporation, 19 March 2018. Retrieved from
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS43639318.

[13] G. Singh. Near-Field Depth Perception in Optical See-Though Aug-
mented Reality. PhD thesis, Mississippi State University, Starkville,
Mississippi, USA, 2013.

[14] G. Singh, S. R. Ellis, and J. E. Swan II. The effect of focal distance,
age, and brightness on near-ﬁeld augmented reality depth matching.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, pp. 1–1,
2018. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2869729

[15] G. Singh, S. R. Ellis, and J. E. Swan II. The effect of focal distance,
age, and brightness on near-ﬁeld augmented reality depth matching.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, PP, Sep
2018.

[16] G. Singh, J. E. Swan II, J. A. Jones, and S. R. Ellis. Depth judgment
measures and occluding surfaces in near-ﬁeld augmented reality. In
Proceedings of the 7th Symposium on Applied Perception in Graphics
and Visualization, pp. 149–156. ACM, 2010.

[17] I. E. Sutherland. A Head-Mounted Three Dimensional Display. In
Proceedings of the AFIPS Fall Joint Computer Conference, pp. 757–
764. Thompson Books, 1968.

[18] J. E. Swan II, G. Singh, and S. R. Ellis. Matching and reaching depth
judgments with real and augmented reality targets. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 21(11):1289–1298, 2015.
doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2015.2459895

[19] H. Tassinari, F. Domini, and C. Caudek. The intrinsic constraint model

